THE Feigned Curtizans, OR, A Nights Intrigue.

A COMEDY.

As it is Acted at the Dukes Theater.

Written by Mrs. A. BEHN.

Licensed Mar. 27. 1679. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Judges Head in Chancery Lane near
Fleet Street. 1679.

TO Mrs. ELLENGUIN.
Madam,
IT IS no wonder that hitherto I followed not the good example of the believing
Poets, since less faith and zeal then you alone can inspire, had wanted power
to have reduced me to the true worship: Your permission, Madam, has enlightened
me, and I with shame look back on my past Ignorance, which suffered me not to
pay an Adoration long since, where there was so very much due, yet even now
though secure in my opinion, I make this Sacrisice with infinite fear and
trembling, well knowing that so Excellent and perfect a Creature as your self
differs only from the Divine powers in this; the Offerings made to you ought to
be worthy of you, whilst they accept the will alone; and how Madam, would your
Altars be loaded, if like heaven you gave permission to all that had a will and
desire to approach 'em, who now at distance can only wish and admire, which all
mankind agree to do; as if Madam, you alone had the pattent from heaven to
ingross all hearts; and even those distant slaves whom you conquer with your
fame, pay an equal tribute to those that have the blessing of being wounded by
your Eyes, and boast the happiness of beholding you daily; insomuch that
succeeding ages who shall with joy survey your History shall Envy us who lived
in this, and saw those charming wonders which they can only read of, and whom
we ought in charity to pity, since all the Pictures, pens or pencills can draw,
will give give 'em but a faint Idea of what we h^ve the honor to see in such
absolute Perfection, they can only guess She was infinitely fair, witty, and
deserving, but to what Vast degrees in all, they can only Judge who lived to
Gaze and Listen; for besides Madam, all the Charms and attractions and powers
of your Sex, you have Beauties peculiar to your self, an eternal sweetness,
youth and air, which never dwelt in any face but yours, of which not one
unimitable Grace could be ever borrowed, or assumed, though with never so much
industry, to adorn another, they cannot steal a look or smile from you to
inhance their own beauties price, but all the world will know it yours; so
Natural and so fitted are all your Charms and Excellencies to one another, so
entirely designed and created to make up in you alone the most perfect lovely
thing in the world; you never appear but you glad the hearts of all that have
the happy fortune to see you, as if you were made on purpose to put the whole
world into good Humor, whenever you look abroad, and when you speak, men crowd
to listen with that awful reverence as to Holy Oracles or Divine Prophesies,
and bears away the precious words to tell at home to all the attentive family,
the Graceful things you uttered and cry, but oh she spoke with such an Air, so
gay, that half the beauty's lost in the repetition. It Is this that ought to
make your Sex vain enough to despise the malicious world that will ^llow a
woman no wit, and bless our selves for living in an Age that can produce so
wondrous an argument as your undeniable self, to sh^me those boasting talkers
who are Judges of nothing but faults.

But how much in vain Madam, I endeavor to tell you the sense of all mankind
with mine, since to the utmost Limits of the Universe your mighty. Conquests
are made known: And who can doubt the Power of that Illustrious Beauty, the
Charms of that tongue, and the greatness of that mind, who has subdued the
most powerful and Glorious Monarch of the world: And so well you bear the
honors your were born for, with a greatness so unaffected, an affabillity so
easy, an Humor so soft, so far from Pride or Vanity, that the most Envious and
most disaffected can find no cause or reason to wish you less, Nor can Heaven
give you more, who has expressed a particular care of you every way, and above
all in bestowing on the world and you, two noble Branches, who have all the
greatness and sweetness of their Royal and beautiful stock; and who give us too
a hopeful Prospect of what their future Braveries will perform, when they shall
shoot up and spread themselves to that degree, that all the lesser world may
find repose beneath their shades; and whom you have permitted to wear those
glorious Titles which you your self Generously neglected, well knowing with the
noble Poet; it is better far to merit Titles then to wear 'em.

Can you then blame my Ambition, Madam, that lays this at your feet, and begs a
Sanctuary where all pay so great a Veneration? 'twas Dedicated yours before it
had a being, and overbusy to render it worthy of the Honor, made it less
grateful; and Poetry like Lovers often fares the worse by taking, too much
pains to please; but under so Gracious an Influence my tender Lawrells may
thrive, till they become fit Wreaths to offer to the Rays that improve their
Growth: which Madam, I humbly implore, you still permit her ever to do, who is,

Madam, Your most humble; and Most Obedient Servant. A. Behn.

The PROLOGUE,
Spoken by Mrs. Currer. THe devil take this cursed plotting Age,
'T has ruined all our Plots upon the Stage;
Suspicions, New Elections, Jealousies,
Fresh Informations, New discoveries,
Do so employ the busy fearful Town,
Our honest calling here is useless grown;
Each fool turns Politician now, and wears
A formal face, and talks of State Affairs;
Makes Acts, Decrees, and a new Model draws
For regulation both of Church and Laws;
Tires out his empty noddle to invent
What rule and method's best in government;
But Wit as if 'twere Jesuiticall,
Is an abomination to ye all:
To what a wretched pass will poor Plays come,
This must be damned, the Plot is laid in Rome
It Is hard -- yet --
Not one amongst ye all I Will undertake,
Ere thought that we should suffer for Religions sake:
Who would have thought that would have been the occasion,
Of any contest in our hopeful Nation?
For my own principles, faith, let me tell yo^
I Am still of the Religion of my Cully,
And till these dangerous times they would none to fix on,
But now are something in mere contradiction,
And piously pretend, these are not days,
For keeping Mistresses and seeing Plays.
Who says this Age a Reformation wants,
When Betty Currer's Lovers all turn Saints?
In vain alas I flatter, swear, and vow,
You Will scarce do any thing for Charity now:
Yet I am handsome still, still young and mad,
Can w^eadle, lie, dissemble, jilt -- egad,
As well and artfully as^rd I did,
Yet not one Conquest can I gain or hope,
No Prentice, not a Foreman of a Shop,
So that I want extremely New Supplies;
Of my last. Coxcomb, faith, these were the Prize;
And by the tattered Ensigns you may know,
These spoils were of a Victory long ago:
Who would have thought such hellish times to have seen,
When I should be neglected at eighteen?
That Youth and Beauty should be quite undone,
A Pox upon the Whore of Babylon.
The Actors Names.
Italians.
Mr. Norris. Morisini. An Old Count Uncle to Julio. Mr. Crosby. Julio. His
Nephew, a young Count, contracted to Laura Lucretia. Mr. Gilloe. Octavio. A
young Count contracted to Marcella, deformed, revengeful. Crapine. Morisini's
man. Mr. Liegh. Petro. Supposed Pimp to the two Curtezans.

English.
Mr. Smith. Sir Harry Fillamour. In love with Marcella. Mr. Betterton. Mr.
Galliard. In love with Cornelia. Mr. Nokes. Sir Signal Buffoon. A fool. Mr.
Underhill. Mr. Tickletext, His Governor. Jack. Sir Signals man.

Women.
Mrs Lee. Laura Lucretia. A young Lady of Quallity, contracted to Julio, in
love with Galliard, and Sister to Octavio. Mrs Currer. Marcella. and Cornelia.
Sisters to Julio, and Nieces to Morisini, pass for Curtizans by the Names of
Euphemia and Silvianetta Mrs Barry. Mrs Norris. Phillipa, Their Woman. Mrs
Seymour. Sabina, Confident to Laura Lucretia.

Pages, Music, Footmen, and Bravo's.

SCENE, Rome.

THE Feign'dCurtizans, OR, A NIGHTS INTRIGUE.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Laura, Lucretia, and Silvio richly dressed; Antonio attending, Coming all
in in haste.
Silvio. MAdam, you need not make such haste away, the Stranger that followed
us from St. Peter's Church, pursues us no longer, and we have now lost sight of
him: Lord who would have thought the approach of a handsome Cavalier should
have possessed Dona Laura Lucretia with fear?


Lau. I do not fear my Silvio, but I would have this new Habitation which I Have
designed for love, known to none but him to whom I Have destined my heatt: -- ah
would he know the Conquest he has made, [Aside.] Nor went I this evening to
Church with any other Devotion, but that which warms my heart for my young
English Cavalier, whom I hoped to have seen there, and I must find some way to
let him know my passion which is too high for souls like mine to hide.


Silv. Madam, the Cavalier's in view again, and hot in the pursuit


Lau. Lets haste away then, and Silvio do you lag behind, 'twill give him an
opportunity of Enquiring, whilst I get out of sight, -- be sure you conceal my
Name and Quality, and tell him -- any thing but truth -- tell him I am La
Silvianetta the young Roman Curtizan, or what you please to hide me from his
knowledge.

[Exeunt Lau. Enter Julio and Page in Pursuit.
Jul. Boy fall you into discourse with that Page, and learn his Ladys Name --
whilst I pursue her farther.

[Exeunt Jul. Page salutes Silvio, who returns it, they go out as talking to
each other. Enter Sr Harry Fillamour and Galliard.
Fill. He follows her close, whoever they be: I see this trade of Love goes
forward still.


Gall. And will whilst there is difference in Sexes. But Harry the women, the
delicate Women I was speaking of?


Fill. Prithee tell me no more of thy fine Women, Frank, thou have not been in
Rome above a Month, and thou'ast been a Dozen times in Love as thou call'st it:
to me there is no pleasure like Constancy.


Gall. Constancy! and woudst thou have me one of those dull Lovers who believe
it their Duty to Love a Woman till her Hair and Eyes change Color for fear of
the Scandalous Name of an inconstant! No, my Passion like great Victors hates
the lazy stay, but having vanquished, prepares for new Conquests.


Fill. Which you gain as they do Towns by Fire, lose'em even in the taking,
thou wo't grow Penitent and weary of these Dangerous sollys.


Gall. But I am yet two young for both: Let old Age and infirmity bring
Repentance, -- there is her f^eble Province, and even then too we find no
Plague like being deprived of dear Woman-kinde.


Fill. I hate Playing about a Flame that will consume me.


Gall. Away with your Antiquated Notions, and let us once hear sense from thee:
Examine but the whole World Harry, and thou will sinde a Beautiful woman the
desire of the Noblest, and the reward of the Bravest.


Fill. And the common Prize of Coxcombs: times are altered now, Frank, why else
should the Virtuous be cornuted, the Coward be carest, the Villain role with
Six, and the Fool lie with her Ladyship.


Gall. Mere Accident Sir: and the kindness of Fortune, but a Pretty witty young
Creature, such as this Silvianetta, and Euphemia, is certainly the greatest
blessing this wicked World can afford us.


Fill. I believe the Lawful enjoyment of such a Woman, and honest too, would be
a blessing.


Gall. Lawful enjoyment! Prithee what is lawful enjoyment, but to enioy'em
according to the generous indulgent Law of Nature; enjoy'em as we do Meat,
Drink, Air and Light, and all the rest of her common blessings; -- therefore
prithee dear Knight, let me govern thee but for a day, and I will show thee
such a Signiora, such a Beauty, another manner of piece then your so admired
Vitterboan, Dona Marcella, of whom you boast so much.


Fill. And yet this rare piece is but a Curtizan, in course plain English, a
very Whore! --

Who filthily exposes all her Beautys to him can give her most, not Love her
best.


Gall. When faith, to thy comfort be it spoken, she does distribute her char^s
at that easy rate.


Fill. O^ (...) ^ast distance between an innocent passion, and a poor faithless
(...)


Gall. Innocent Passion at Rome! Oh it is not to be named but in some Northern
Climat: to be an Anchoret here, is to be an Epicure in Greenland;
impossibillities Harry!


Gall. Sure ^ou have been advising with Sir Signal Buffoons Governor! that
formal! piece of nonsense and Hipocrifie.


Fill. No faith, I brought the Humor along with me to Rome, and for your
Governor I have not seen him yet, though he lodge in this same House with us,
and you promised to bring me acquainted with long since.


Gall. I Will do it this very minute!


Fill. No, I Am obliged not to engage my self this Evening, (...) I expect the
arrival of Count Julio, whose last Letters assured me would be to night.


Gall. Julio! What the young Itallian Count you made me acquainted with last
Summer in England?


Fill. The same, the Ambasadors Nephew, a good youth and on^ I esteem.

Enter Julio.
Jul. I hope my Page will bring intelligence who this beauty is.


Fill. Hah, Julio! Welcome dear Friend.

[embraces him.
Jul. Sir Harry Fillamour! how glad am I to meet you in a Country where I have
power to repay you all those Friendships I received when I was a stranger to
yours.

Monsieur Galliard too, nay then I Am sure to want no diversion whilst I stay
in Rome.

[Salutes Galliard.
Fill. But pray, what made you leave England so soon?


Jul. E'ne the great business of Mankind, Matrimony, I have an Uncle here who
has provided me Fetters which I must put on, he says, they will be easy, I
liked the Character of my Mistress well enough, a brave Masculine Lady, a Roman
of Quality, Dona Laura Lucretia, till as luck would have it at my arrival this
Evening, stepping into S. Peter's Church, I saw a woman there that fired my
heart, and whom I followed to her house; but meeting none that could inform me
who she was, I left my Page to make the discovery, whilst I with equal
impatience came to look out you; whose sight I prefer even to a new Amor,
resolving not to visit home, to which I have been a stranger this seven years,
till I had kissed your hands, and gained your promise to accompany me to Vitterbo.


Fill. Vitterbo! is that your place of Residence?


Jul. Yes; it is a pretty Town, and many noble Familys inhabit there, stored too
with Beauties, at least, 'twas wont to be: have you not seen it?


Gall. Yes! and a Beauty there too lately for his repose, who has made him sigh
and look so like an Ass ever since he came to Rome.


Jul. I Am glad you have so powerful an argument to invite you back, I know
she must be rare, and of quality that could engage your heart.


Fill. She Is both, it most unluckily fell out, that I was recommended by a
Person of Quality in England to a Nobleman at Vitterbo, who being a man of a
temper frank and gallant, received me with less Ceremony then is usual in
Italy. I had the freedom of the House, one of the finest Villa's belonging to
Vitterbo, and the pleasure to see and converse at a distance, with one of the
loveliest persons in the World, a Niece of this old Counts.


Jul. Very well, and could you see her but at distance, Sir?


Fill. Oh, no, 'twas all I durst desire, or she durst give; I came too late to
hope; she being before promised in Marriage to a more happy man, the
Consummation of which waits only the arival of a Brother of hers, who is now at
the Court of France, and every day expected.

Enter Petro like a Barber.
Gall. Hah! Signior Petro:


Fill. Come Sir, we will take a turn in the in the gallery, for this pimp never
appears but Frances desires to be in private.


Gall. Thou wrong'st an honest ingenious fellow to call him pimp.


Pet. Ah Signior, what his worship pleases!


Gall. That thou art I Will be sworn, or what any man's worship pleases, for let
me tell ye Harry, he is capacitated to oblige in any quality; for Sir, he is
your brokering Jew, your Fencing, Dancing and Civillity-Master, your Linguist,
your Antiquary, your Bravo, your Pathick, your Whore, your Pimp, and a thousand
more Excellencies he has to supply the necessities of the wanting stranger. --
Well sirrah -- What design now upon Sir Signal and his wise Governor; -- What
do you represent now?


Pet. A Barber Sir.


Gall. And why a Barber, good Signior Petro?


Pet. Oh Sir, the sooner to take the heights of their judgments, it gives
handsome opportunities to commend their faces, for if they are pleased with
flattery, the certain sign of a fool's to be most tickled when most commended,
I conclude 'em the fitter for my purpose; they already put great confidence in
me, will have no Masters but of my recommending, all which I supply my self, by
the help of my several disguises; by which and my industry, I doubt not but to
pick up a good honest painful livelihood, by cheating these two Reverend
Coxcombs.


Gall. How the Devil got'st thou this credit with 'em?


Pet. Oh easily Sir, as knaves get estates, or fools employments.


Fill. I hope amongst all your good qualities you forgot not your more natural
one of pimping.


Pet. No, I assure you Sir, I have told Sir Signal Buffoon; that no Man lives
here without his Inamorata, which very word has so fired him, that he is
resolved to have an Inamorata, whatever it cost him, and as in all things else
I have in that too promised my assistance.


Gall. If you assist him no better then you have done me he may stay long
enough for his Inamorato.


Pet. Why faith Sir, I lie at my young Lady night and day, but she is so loath
to part with that same Maidenhead of hers yet -- but to morrow night Sir
there is hopes. --


Gall. To morrow night! Oh it is an Age in Love! desire knows no time but the
present, it is now I wish, and now I would enjoy, a new day ought to bring a new
desire.


Pet. Alas Sir I Am but an humble Bravo.


Gall. Yes you are a pimp, yet want the art to procure a longing lover the
woman he adores, though but a common Curtizan -- Oh confound her Maidenhead --
She understands her trade too well to have that badge of Innocence.


Pet. I offered her her price Sir --.


Gall. Double it, give any thing, for that is the best receipt I ever found to
soften women's hearts.


Pet. Well Sir, she will be this Evening in the Garden of Medices Villa, there
you may get an opportunity to advance your interest -- I must step and trim Mr.
Tickletext, and then am at your service!

[Exit Petro.
Jul. What is this Knight and his Governor who have the blessed fortune to be
managed by this Squire?


Fill. Certain fools Galliard makes use on when he has a mind to laugh: and
whom I never thought worth a visit since I came to Rome: and he is like to
profit much by his Travells, who keeps company with all the English, especially
the Fops.


Gall. Faith Sir, I came not abroad to return with the formallity of a Judge;
and these are such anditotes against Melancholy as would make thee fond of
fooling. -- Our Knights Father is even the first Gentleman of his House, a
fellow, who having the good Fortune to be much a fool and knave, had the
attendant blessing of getting an Estate of some eight thousand a year, with
this Coxcomb to inherit it; who (to agrandize the Name and Family of the
Buffoons) was made a Knight, but to refine throughout and make a complete Fop,
was sent abroad under the Government of one Mr. Tickletext his zealous Fathers
Chaplain, as errant a block-head as a man would wish to hear Preach: the Father
wisely foreseeing the eminent danger that young Travelers are in of being
perverted to Popery.


Jul. 'Twas well considered.


Gall. But for the young Spark there is no description can reach him; it is only
to be done by himself; let it suffice it is a pert, saucy, conceited Animal,
whom you shall just now go see, and admire, for he lodges in the house with us.


Jnl. With all my heart, I never longed more for a new acquaintance.


Fill. And in all probability shall sooner desire to be rid on it. aloone. --

[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
Draws off, and discovers Mr. Tickletext a Trimming, his hair under a Cap, a
cloth before him, and Petro Snaps his fingers, takes away the Basin, and goes
to wiping his face.
Tickletext and Petro.
Pet. Ah che Bella! Bella! I swear by these sparkling Eyes, and these soft
Plump dimpl'd cheeks, there is not a Signiora in all Rome, could she behold 'em,
were able to stand their Temptations, and for La Silvianetta, my life on it
she is your own.


Tick. Teze, teze, speak softly! -- but honest Barberacho, do I, do I indeed
look plump, and young, and fresh and -- hah!


Pet. Ay Sir, as the Rosy Morn, young, as old Time in his Infancy, and plump
as the Pale-fac't Moon.


Tick. He -- When this Traveling must needs improve a Man, -- When how admirably
well spoken your very Barbers are here, -- [Aside.] -- but Barberacho, did the
young Gentlewoman say she liked me? did she Rogue? did she?


Pet. A doated on you Signior, doated on you.


Tick. When, and that is strange now, in the Autumn of my Age too, when Nature
began to be impertinent, as a man may say, that a young Lady should fall in
love with me -- -- -- [Aside. -- -- When Barberacho, I do not conceive any great
matter of Sin only in visiting a Lady that loves a man, hah.


Pet. Sin Sir, it is a frequent thing now adays in Persons of your Complexion.


Tick. Especially here at Rome too, where it is no Scandal.


Pet. Ay Signior, where the Ladys are Priviledg'd, and Fornication Licenc't.


Tick. Right! and when it is Licensed it is Lawful, and when it is Lawful it can
be no Sin: besides Barberacho, I may chance to turn her, who knows!


Pet. Turn her Signior, Alas any way, which way you please.


Tick. He he he! There thou were knavish, I doubt -- but I mean Convert her --
Nothing else I profess Barberacho.


Pet. True Signior, true, she is a Lady of an easy Nature, and an Indifferent
Argument well handled will do it -- ha -- [combing out his Hair. here is your
head of Hair -- here is your Natural Frize! And such an Air it gives the Face!
-- So Signior -- Now you have the utmost my Art can do.

[takes away the cloth and bows.
Tick. Well Signior: -- and where is your looking-glass.


Pet. My looking-glass.


Tick. Yes Signior your Looking-glass! an English Barber would as soon have
forgotten to have snapt his fingers, made his leg, or taken his Money, as have
neglected his looking-glass.


Pet. Aye Signior, in your Country the Laiety have so little honesty, they are
not to be trusted with the taking off your Beard unless you see it done, -- but
here is a Glass, Sir,

[gives him the Glass. [Tick. Sets himself and smirks in the Glass, Pet.
standing behind him, making horns and grimaces, which Tick. sees in the Glass,
gravely rises, turns toward Petro.
Tick. When how now, Barberacho, what Monstrous faces are you making there?


Pet. Ah my Belly, my Belly, Signior: ah, this Wind-Collick! this Hypocondriach
does so torment me! ah --


Tick. Alas poor Knave; certo, I thought thou had been somewhat uncivil with
me, I profess I did;


Pet. Who I Sir, uncivil? -- I abuse my Patron? -- I that have almost made my
self a Pimp to serve you?


Tick. Teze teze, honest Barberacho! no, no, no, all is well, all is well: -- but
hark y' -- you will be discreet and secret in this business now, and above all
things conceal the knowledge of this Gentlewoman from Sir Signal and Mr.
Galliard.


Pet. The Rack Signior, the Rack shall not extort it.


Tick. Hold thy hand -- there is somewhat for thee, [gives him money. but shall
I Rogue -- shall I see her to night? -- --


Pet. To night Sir, meet me in the Piatza D'hispagnia, about 10 a Clock, --
I Will meet you there, -- but it is sit Signior -- that I should provide a
Collation, -- it is the Custom here Sir. -- --


Tick. Well, well, what will it come to, -- here is an Angel --


Pet. When Sir 'twill come to -- about -- for you would do it hansomely -- some
twenty Crowns. --


Tick. How man, twenty Crowns?


Pet. Ay Signior, thereabouts.


Tick. Twenty Crowns -- When it is a Sum, a Portion, a Revenue.


Pet. Alas Signior, it is nothing with her, -- she will look it out in an hour,
-- ah such an Eye! so sparkling, with an Amorous twire -- thus Sir -- then
she will kiss it out in a moment, -- such a Lip, so red, so round, and so plump,
so soft, and so --


Tick. Why has she, has she, Sirrah -- hah -- here, here, prithee take Money,
here, and make no words on it -- go, go your way, go -- but to entertain Sir
Signal with other matter, pray send his Masters to him; if thou can help him
to Masters, and me to Mistresses, thou shall be the good Genius of us both: but
see where he comes. --

Enter Sir Signal.
Sir Sig. Hah! Sigmor Illustrissimo Barberacho, let me hugg thee my little
Miphistophiloucho -- de ye see here, how fine your Brokering Jew has made me,
Segnior Rabbi Manaseth -- Ben-Nebiton, and so sorth; hah -- View me round -- --

[turns round.
Tick. I profess it is as sit as if it had been made for you.


Sir Sig. Made for me -- When Sir, he swore to me by the old Law, that 'twas
never worn but once, and that but by one high-German Prince -- I have sorgot
forgot his name -- for the Devil can never remember these damned Hogan-Mogan
Titles.

[a fart.
Tick. No matter, Sir.


Sir Sig. Ay, but I should be loath to be in any man's clothes, were he never so
high a German-Prince, except I knew his name tho.


Tick. Sir, I hold his Name unnecessary to be remembered, so long as 'twas a
Princely penniworth. -- Barberacho get you gone, and send the Masters.

[Ex. Petro.
Sir Sig. Why how now Governor! how now Signior Tickletext! prithee how came
thou so transmograsi'd, ha? when thou look like any new-fledg'd Cupid.


Tick. Do I, away you flatter, Do I?


Sir Sig. As I hope to breathe, your face shines through your powdered hairs
like you know what on a barn-door, in a frosty morning.


Tick. What a filthy comparison's there for a man of my coat.


Sir Sig. What, angry -- Corpo di me, I meant no harm, -- Come, shall's to a
Bonar^ba, where thou shall part with thy pusilage, and that of thy beard
together.


Tick. How mean you Sir, a Curtizan, and a Romish Curtizan?


Sir Sig. Now my Tuter's up, ha ha ha, -- and ever is when one names a whore;
be pacified man, be pacified, I know thou hat'st 'em worse then beads or
holy water.


Tick. Away you are such another Knight -- but leave this Naughty discourse,
and prepare for your Fencing and Civility-Masters, who are coming,


Sir Sig. Ay, when Governor, when; oh how I long for my Civility-Master, that
I may learn to out-complement all the dull Knights and Squires in Kent, with a
Servitore Hulichimo -- No signiora Bellissima, base le Mane, de vos signiora
scusamia Illustrissimo, caspeto de Bacco, and so I Will run on, hah Governor,
hah! will not this be pure?


Tick. Notably Ingenious, I profess!


Sir Sig. Well I Will send my Staffiera for him incontinente. -- he, Jack -- a --
Cazo, what a Damned English name is Jack? let me see -- I will call him --
Giovanni, which is as much as to say John! -- he Giovanni.

[Enter Jack.
Tick. Sir, by your favor his English Protestant-Name is John Pepper; and I Will
call him by never a Popish name in Christiandom.


Sir Sig. I Will call my own man Sir, by what name I please Sir; and let me tell
you Reverend Mr. Tickletext, I scorn to be served by any man who is name has not
an Acho, or an Oucho, or some Italliano at the end on it -- therefore Giovanni
Peperacho is the name by which you shall be distinguished and dignified
hereafter.


Tick. Sir Signal, Sir Signal, let me tell you, that to call a man out of his
name is unwarantable, for Peter is called Peter, and John, John, and I Will not
see the poor fellow wronged of his name for nere a Giovanni in Rome.


Sir Sig. Sir I tell you that one Itallian Name is worth any two English names
in Europe, and I Will be judged by my Civility-Master.


Tick. Who shall end the dispute, if he be of my Opinion.


Sir Sig Multo vollentiero, which is as much as to say, with all my heart.


Jack. But Sir, my Grandmother would never own me if I should change the cursen
name she gave me with her own hands, an't please your Worship.


Sir Sig. He Bestia! I Will have no more of your Worship, firrah, that old
English Sir Reverence, let me have you call me Signior Illustrissimo, or
Patrona Mea. -- or --


Tick. I, that I like well enough now: -- but hold, sure this is one of your
Masters.

Enter Petro dressed like a French Fencing Master.
Pet. Signior Barberacho has sent me to teach you de Art of Fencing.


Sir Sig. Illustrissimo Signior Monsicur, I am the Person who am to learn.


Tick. Stay Sir stay, -- let me ask him some few questions first, for Sir I
have played at Back-Sword and could have handled ye a weapon as well as any man
of my time in the University.


Sir Sig. Say you so Mr. Tickletext, and In Faith you shall have about with him.

[Tick. Gravely goes to Petro.
Tick. Hum -- hum -- Mr. Monsieur -- pray what are the Guards that you like
best?


Pet. Monsieur, eder de Quart or de Terse, dey be both French and Itallian; den
for your Parades, degagements, your advancements, your Eloynements, and
Retierments: dey be de same;


Tick. Cart and Horse, what new found inventions and words have we here, -- Sir
I would know, whether you like St. Georges Guard or not.


Pet. Alon -- Monsieur, Met vous en Guard! take de Flurette.


Sir Sig. Nay says and troth Governor thou shat have a Rubbers with him.

[Tick. Smiling refuses.
Tick. Nay certo Sir Signal, -- and yet you shall prevail; -- well Sir. come
your ways?

[Takes the fluret.
Pet. Set your right foot forward, turn up your hand so -- dat be de Quart --
Now turn it dus -- and dat be de Terse.


Tick. Hocus, Pocus, Hicksius, Doxius -- here be de Cart and here be de Horse
-- why what is all this for, hah Sir -- and where is your guard all this while?


Sir Sig. Ay Sir where is your Guard Sir, as my Governor says, Sir, hah?


Tick. Come, come, Sir, I must instruct you I see -- Come your ways Sir. --


Pet. A Tande a Tande non pew, -- trust de right hand and de right leg forward
together. --


Tick. I marry Sir, that is a good one indeed! what shall become of my head then
Sir, what Guard have I left for that good Mr. Monsieur. hah?


Pet. Ah Morblew, is not dis for every ting?


Tick. No marry is it not Sir, St. Georges Guard is the best for your head
whilst you live, -- -- as thus Sir. --


Pet. Dat Sir, ha ha -- dat be Guard for de Back-Sword.


Tick. Back-sword Sir, yes, Back-sword, what should it be else.


Pet. And dis be de Single-Rapier.


Tick. Single-Rapier with a vengeance, there is a weapon for a Gentleman indeed;
is all this stir about Single-Rapier?


Pet. Single-Rapier! What will you have for de Gentleman, de Cudgel for de
Gentleman?


Tick. No Sir, but I would have it for de Rascally Frenchman who comes to
abuse persons of Quality with Paltry Single-Rapier. -- Single Rapier! Come Sir,
come, -- put your self in your Cart and your Horse as you call it, and I Will
show you the difference.

Undresses himself till he appears in a Ridiculous Posture.
Pet. Ah Monsieur me sall run you two three times through de body, and den you
break a me head, what care I for dat: -- Pox on his ignorance!

[Aside.
Tick. Oh ho Sir, do your worst Sir, do your worst Sir.

They put themselves into several Guards, and Tick. beats Pet. about the Stage
-- Enter Gall. Fill. and Jul.
Pet. Ah Monsieur, Monsieur, will you kill a me?


Tick. Ah Monsieur where be your Carts now and your Horse, Mr. Monsieur, hah!
-- and your Single-Rapier Mr. Monsieur hah! --


Gall. Why how now Mr. Tickletext, what mortal wars are these? Ajax and Ulisses
contending for Achillis his Armor?


Pet. If I be not revenged on him, hang me:

[Aside.
Sir Sig. Ay, why who the Devil would have taken my Governor for so tall a man
of hands, but Corpo de me Mr. Galliard, I have not seen his Fellow.


Tick. Ah Sir, time was, I would have played ye a Match at Cudgells with e're a
Sophister in the College, but verily I have forgotten it, but here is an
impudent Frenchman that would have past Single-Rapier upon us.


Gall. How, nay a my word then he deserved to be chastis'd sor't. -- -- but now
all is at peace again; Pray know my kinsman, Sir Harry Fillamour.


Sir Sig. Yo baco les manos, Signior Illustrissimo Cavaliero, -- and yours
Signiors who are Multo bien Venito;


Tick. Oh Lord Sir, you take me Sir -- in such a posture Sir -- as I protest I
have not been seen in this many years.

[Dressing himself whilst he talks.
Fill. Exercise is good for health Sir.


Gall. Sir Signal, Yo^ are grown a perfect Itallian? Well Mr. Tickletext you
will carry him home a most accomplished Gentleman I see!


Tick. Hum, verily Sir though I say it, for a man that never traveled before,
I think I have done reasonably well; -- I Will tell you Sir -- it was by my
directions and advice, that he brought over with him, -- two English knives, a
thousand of English pins, four pair of Jersey stockings, and as many pair of
B^ck-skin Gloves.


Sir Sig. Ay Sir, for good Gloves you know are very scarce commodities in this
Country.


Jul. Here Sir at Rome, as you say, above all other places.


Tick. Certo mere hedging-Gloves Sir, and the clouterlest seams. --


Fill. Very right Sir, -- and now he talks of Rome, -- Pray Sir give me your
opinion of the place? -- are there not Noble buildings here? rare statues, and
admirable Fountains?


Tick. Your buildings are pretty buildings, but not comparable to our
University-buildings; your Fountains I confess are pretty Springs, -- and your
statues reasonably well carved -- but Sir, they are so ancient they are of no
vallue! then your Churches are the worst that ever I saw -- that ever I saw.


Gall. How Sir, the Churches, why I thought Rome had been famous throughout all
Europe for fine Churches.


Fill. What think you of St. Peter's Church Sir, Is it not a glorious structure?


Tick. St. Peter's Church Sir, you may as well call it St. Peter's Hall Sir; it
has neither Pew, Pullpit, Desk, Steeple, nor Ring of Bells, and call you this a
Church Sir? no Sir, I Will say that for little England, and a fig for it, for
Churches, easy ^ulpits [Sir Sig. speaks, and sleeping Pews,] they are as well
ordered as any Churches in Christiandom: and ^er Rings of Bells Sir, I Am sure
were never heard.


Jul. Oh Sir there is much in what you say.


Fill. But then Sir, your Rich Altars, and excellent Pictures of the greatest
Masters of the World, your delicate Music, and Voices, make some amends for
the other wants.


Tick. How Sir! tell me of your Rich Altars, your guegaws and trinkets, and
Popish Foperies! with a deal of sing-song -- when I say give me Sir five
hundred close changes rung by a set of good Ringers, and I Will not exchange 'em
for all the Anthens in Europe: and for the Pictures Sir, they are superstition,
Idolatrous, and flat Popery.


Fill. I Will convince you of that error that persuades you harmless Pictures
are Idolatrous.


Tick. How Sir, how Sir, convince me, talk to me of being convinced and that in
favor of Popery; No Sir, by your favor I shall not be convinced, convinced
quoth a -- No Sir far you well an you be for convincing, come away Sir Signal,
far you well Sir, far you well -- convin'ct.

[goes out.
Sir Sig. Ha, ha, ha, so now is my Governor gone in a Fustian-fume, well, he is
ever thus when one talks of whoring and Religion, but come Sir walk in, and
I Will undertake my Tutor shall beg your pardon and renoun^e his English ill-bred
opinion; Nay, his English Churches too -- all but his own Vicaridge.


Fill. I have better diversion Sir I thank you -- come Julio, are you for a
walk in the Garden of Medices Villa, it is hard by? --


Jul. I Will wait on you --

[Ex. Fill. and Julio.
Sir Sig. How in the Garden of Medices Villa -- but harkey Galliard, will the
Ladies be there, the Curtizans! the bona roba's, the inamorata's, and the Bell
ingrato's, hah?


Gall. Oh doubtless Sir;

[Ex. Gall.
Sir Sig. I Will ene bring my Governor thither to beg his Pardon, on purpose to
get an Opportunity to see the fine Women; it may be I may get a sight of my new
Mistress, Dona Silvianetta whom Petro is to bring me acquainted with.

[Exeunt.
ACT II. SCENE I.
Inter Murismi and Octavio.
Oct. BY Heaven I will not Eat, nor sleep, nor pray for any thing but swift and
sure Revenge, till I have found Marcella, that false deceiving Beauty or her
Lover, my hated Rival Fillamour! who wanton in the Arms of the fair Fugitive
laughs at my shameful easiness, and cries, these joys were never meant for tame
Octavio!

Enter Crapine.
Mur. How now Crapine! What no news, no news of my Neeces yet, Marcella nor
Cornelia?


Crap. None Sir.


Oct. That Is wondrous strange, Rome's a place of that general ^ntelligence,
methinks thou might have news of such Trivial things as women, amongst the
Cardinals ^ages; ^'le undertake to learn the Region de stato, and present
juncture of all affairs in Italy of a common Curtizan.


Mur. Sirrah sirrah, let be it your care to examine all the Nunnerys, for my
own part not a petticoat shall escape me. --


Oct. My task shall be for Fillam^re.

[Aside.
Mur. I Will only make a visit to your sister Dona Laura Lucretia, and deliver
her a Letter from my Nephew Julio, and return to you presently. --

[Going out, is stayed by Octavio.
Oct. Stay Sir, deser your visit to my sister Laura, she is not yet to know of
my being in Town, it is therefore I have taken a lodging in an obscure street,
and am resolved never to be my self again till I Have redeemed my Honor. Come
Sir, lets walk. --

Enter to them as they are going out, Marcella and Cornelia, dressed like
Curtizans, ^hilipa and attendance.
Mur. Stay stay, what women are these?


Oct. Whores Sir, and so it is ten to one are all the kind, only these differ
from the rest in this, they generously own their trade of sin, which others
deal by stealth in: they are Curtizans.

[Exeunt.
Mar. The Evenings soft and calm, as happy Lovers thoughts:
And here are Groves where the kind meeting Trees
Will hid^ us from the Amourous gazing crowd.

Cor. What should we do there, sigh till our wandering Breath,
Has raised a gentle gale amongst the boughs;
To whose dull melancholy Music, we
Laid on a Bed of Moss, and new fallen leaves,
Will read the dismal tale of Eccho's Love!
-- No, I can make better use of Famous Ovid!
[Snatches a little Book from her. And prithee what a pox have we to do with
Trees,
Flowers, Fountains, or naked statues?

Mar. But prithee mad Cornelia lets be grave and wise, at least enough to think
a little.


Cor. On what? your English Cavalier, Fillamour, of whom you tell so many dull
stories of his making Love! Oh how I hate a civil whining Coxcomb!


Mar. And so do I, I Will therefore think of him no more.


Cor. Good Lord! what a damnable wicked thing is a Virgin grown up to woman.


Mar. Why art thou such a fool, to think I love this Fillamour?


Cor. It may be not at Rome, but at Vitterbo, where men are scarce you did; and
did you follow him to Rome, to tell him you could Love no more?


Mar. A too forward Maid Cornelia, hurts her own fame, and that of all her sex.


Cor. Her Sex, a pretty consideration by my youth, an Oath I shall not violate
this dozen year, my sex should excuse me, if to preserve their same, they
expected I should ruin my own quiet: in choosing an ill favored Husband, such as
Octavio before a young handsome Lover, such as you say Fillamour is.


Mar. I would sain persuade my self to be of thy mind, -- but the World
Cornelia. --


Cor. Hang the malicious World --


Mar. And there is such charms, in wealth and Honor too!


Cor. None half so powerful as Love, in my opinion, 'life Si^ter thou art
beautiful, and have a Fortune too, which before I would lay out upon so
shameful a purchase as such a Bedsellow for life as Octavio; I would turn
errant keeping Curtizan, and buy my better fortune.


Mar. That word too startles me.


Cor. What Curtizan, why it is a Noble title and has more Votaries then
Religion, there is no Merchandise like ours, that of Love my sister! -- and can
you be frighted with the vizor, which you your self put on.


Mar. 'Twas the only disguise that could secure us from the search of my Uncle
and Octavio, our Brother Julio is by this too arrived, and I know they will all be
dilligent, -- and some honor I was content to sacricise to my eternal repose.


Cor. Spoke like my sister, a little impertinent Honor, we may chance to lose
it is true, but our right down honesty, I perceive you are resolved we shall
maintain through all the dangers of Love and Gallantry; -- though to say truth
I find enough to do, to defend my heart against some of those Members that
Nightly serinade us: and daily show themselves before our window, Gay as young
Bridegrooms and as full of expectation.


Mar. But is it not wondrous, that amongst all these crowds we should not once
see Fillamour, I thought the charms of a fair young Curtizan, might have
obliged him to some curiosity at least.


Cor. Ay! and an English Cavalier too, a Nation so sond of all new Faces.


Mar. Heaven, if I should never see him, and I frequent all public places to
meet him; or if he be gone from Rome, if he have forgot me, or some other
Beauty have employed his thoughts! --.


Cor. When if all these if's and or's come to pass, we have no more to do then
to advance in this same glorious Prosession, of which now we only seem to be:
-- in which to give it its due, there are a thousand satisfactions to be sound,
more then in a dull virtuous life! Oh the world of dark Lanthorn men we should
have; the Serinades, the Songs, the sighs, the Vows, the resents, the quarrels,
and all for a look or a smile, which you have been hitherto so cove^oas of,
that Petro swears our Lovers begins to suspect us for some honest gilts; which
by some is accounted much the lewder scandal of the two, -- therefore I think
faith we must ene be kind a little, to redeem our reputations.


Mar. However we may rally, certainly there is nothing so hard to woman, as to
expose her self to villainous Man.


Cor. Faith Sister, if 'twere but as easy to satisfy the nice scruples of
Religion, and Honor, I should find no great difficulty in the rest, --
besides another argument I have, our money's all gone, and without a Miracle
can hold out no longer honestly. --


Mar. Then we must sell our Jewels!


Cor. When they are gone, what Jewel will you part with next?


Mar. Then we must. --


Cor. What, go home to Vit^erbo, ask the Old Gentleman pardon, and be received
to Grace again, you to the embraces of the amiable Octavio; and I to St.
Teretia's, to whistle through a Grate like a Bird in a Cage, -- for I shall
have little heart to sing: -- but come let us leave this sad talk, here is men --
let us walk and gain new Conquest, I love it dearly. --

[Walk down the Garden. Enter Gall. Fill. and Jul. See the Women.
Gall. Women! and by their garbo for our purpose too -- they are Curtizans, lets
follow 'em.


Fill. What shall we get by gazing but disquiet, if they are fair and honest,
we look and perhaps may sigh in vain; if beautiful and loose, they are not
worth regarding.


Gall. Dear Notional Knight, leave your satirical Foperies, and be at least
good humored, and let us follow 'em.


Jul. I Will leave you in the pursuit, and take this opportunity, to write my
Uncle word of my arrival: and wait on you here anon.


Fill. Prithee do so: hah, whose that with such an equipage?

[Exit. Jul. Fill. and Gall. going after. Marcella and Cor. meet just entering,
Laura with her Equipage, dressed like a man.
Gall. Pox, let the Tradesmen ask, who cringe for such gay Customers, and
follow us the women!

[Exit Fill. and Gall. down the scene. Lau. looking after 'em.
Laur. It Is he, my Cavalier! my Conqueror: Antonio, let the Coaches wait! --
and stand at distance all! Now Silvio, on thy life forget my Sex and quality,
forget my useless Name of Laura Lucretia, and call me Count of --


Silv. What Madam?


Lau. Madam! ah foolish Boy? thy seminine courage will betray us all; -- but --
call me -- Count -- San's Gaeure; -- and tell me Silvio, How is it I appear!

How do thou like my shape -- my face and dress?

My Mien and Equipage, may I not pass for man?

Looks it en I rince, and Masculine,


Silv. Now as I live you look all over what you wish; and such, as will beget a
reverance and Envy in the men, and Passion in the women, but what is the cause
of all this transformation?


Lau. Love! Love! Dull boy, could thou not guess 'twas Love? that dear
Englese I must enjoy my Silvio.


Silv. What he that adores the fair young Curtizan.


Lau. That very he, my window joins to hers, and 'twas with charms
Which he'ad prepared for her, he took this heart,
Which met the welcome Arrows in their flight.
And saved her from their dangers,
Often I Have returned the vows he'as made to her
And sent him pleased away;
When through the Errors of the Night, and distance
He has mistook me for that happy wanton,
And gave me Language of so soft a Power,
As never was breathed in vain to listening Maids.

Silv. But with permission, Madam, how does this change of Petticote for
Britches, and shifting houses too, advance that Love?


Lau. This habit, besides many opportunities 'twill give me, of geting into his
acquaintance, secures me to from being known by any of my Relations in Rome;
then I have changed my house for one so near to that of Silvianettas, and so
like it too, that even you and I have ost mistook the entrance; by which means
Love, Fortune, or chance, may with my industry contrive some ^inde mistake that
may make me happyer then the rest of woman kind.


Silv. But what shall be reserved then for Co^nt Julio, whose last letters
promise his arrival within a day or two, and whom you're thea to Marry?


Lau. Reserved for him! a wife! a wife my Silvio,
That unconcerned Domestique Necessary,
Who rarely brings a heart, or takes it soon away:

Silv. But then your Brother Count Octavio, do you not fear his jealousy?


Lau. Octavio! Oh Nature has set his Soul and mine at odds,
And I can know no fear, but where I Love!

Silv. And then that thing that Ladys call their Honor --


Lau. Honor, That hated Idol, even by those
That set it up to worship: No,
I have a Soul my Boy, and that is all Love!
And I Will the Tallent which Heaven lent improve?
[Going out, meets Marcella and Cornelia followed by Gall. and Fill.
Sil. Here be the Curtizans, my Lord?


Lucr. Hah, Silvianetta and Euphemia! pursued too by my Cavalier,
I Will round the Garden, and mix my self amongst 'em,
[Exeunt with her train.
Mar. Prithee Sister let us retire into the grove, to avoid the pursuit of these
Cavaliers?


Cor. Not I, by these killing Eyes! I Will stand my ground were there a thousand,
all Armed with Conquering Beauty?


Mar. Hah -- Now on my Conscience yonder is Fillamour!


Cor. Ha! Fillamour!


Mar. My courage fails me at the sight of him -- I must retire.


Cor. And I Will too my Art of Love!

[Mar. retires and leans against a Tree, Cor. walks about reading.
Gall. It Is she, it is Silvianetta! Prithee advance that thou may behold her
and renounce all honest women: since in that one young sinner there are charms,
that would excuse even to thee all frailty;


Fill. The forms of Angels could not reconcile me
To women of her trade.

Gall. This is too happy an opportunity, to be lost in convincing thy
singularity, -- [Gall. g^es bowing by the si^e of Cornelia, Fill. walks about
in the Scene. -- If creatures so fair and charming, as your self had any need
of prayer, I should believe by your profound attention you were at your
Evenings Devotion.


Cor. That you may find your mistake, in the opinion of my charms, Pray
believe I am so, and ought not to be interrupted.


Gall. I hope a Man may have leave to make his Devotions by you, at least,
without danger or offense?


Cor. I know not that, I have reason to fear your devotion may be ominous, like
a Blazing Star, it comes but seldom, -- but ever threatens mischief, -- Pray
Heaven I snare not in the calamity:


Gall. When I confess Madam, my fit of zeal does not take me often, but when it
does, it is very harmless and wondrous hearty. --


Cor. You may begin then, I shall not be so wicked as to disturb your Orisons.


Gall. Would I could be well assured of that, for mine is devotion of great
necessity, and the blessing I pray infinitely for, conserves me; therefore in
Christian Charity keep down your eyes, and do not ruin a young man's good
intentions, unless they would agree to send kind looks, and save me the
expense of prayer.


Cor. Which would be better laid out you think upon some other blessing.


Gall. When faith it is good, to have a little bank upon occasion, though I hope
I shall have no great need hereafter, -- if the charming Silvianetta be but
kind, it is all I ask of Heaven.


Cor. You're very well acquainted with my Name I find!


Gall. Your Name! it is all I have to live on!
Like cheerful Birds, it is the first tune I sing,
To welcome in the day:
The Groves repeat it, and the Fountains Purle it,
And every pretty sound that fills my ear,
Turns all to Silvianetta!
[Fill. looks a while on Marcella.
Fill. Galliard, look there -- look on that lovely woman; it is Marcella! the
Beautiful Marcella!

[Offers to run to her, Gall. holds him.
Gall. Hold! Marcella! where?


Fill. That Lady there! did ever see her equal?


Gall. -- When faith as you say Harry, that Lady is beautiful -- and make us
thankful -- kind, when it is Euphemia Sir, the very Curtizan, I would have
showed you. --


Fill. Forbear, I am not fit for mirth.


Gall. Nor I in humor to make you merry;
I tell ye -- yonder woman -- is a Curtizan.

Fill. Do not profane nor rob Heaven of a Saint!


Gall. Nor you rob mankind of such a blessing, by giving it to Heaven before
its time. -- I tell thee it is a whore! a fine desirable expensive whore.


Fill. By Heaven it cannot be! I Will speak to her, and call her my Marcella, and
undeceive thy lend opinion.

[Offers to go, he holds him.
Gall. Do, salute her in good Company for an honest woman -- do -- and spoil
her markets: -- 'twill be a pretty civil spightful Complement, and no doubt
well taken; -- -- come I Will convince ye Sir, [Goes and pulls Philipa. -- Harkey
thou kind help-meet for man -- thou gentle child of Night -- What is the
price of a Night or two of pleasure, with yonder Lady -- Euphemia, I mean, that
Roman Curtizan. --


Fill. Oh Heavens! a Curtizan!


Phil. Sure you're a great stranger in Rome, that cannot tell her price.


Gall. I am so -- Name it prithee, here is a young English purchaser -- Come
forward man, and cheapen for your self, --

[Pulls him.
Phil. Oh spare your pains, she wants no customers. --

[flings away.
Fill. No No, it cannot, must not be, Marcella!
She has too much Divinity about her,
Not to defend her from all imputation,
Scandal would die to hear her name pronounced.

Phil. Believe me, Madam, he knows you not, I overheard all he said to that
Cavalier, and find he is much in Love!


Mar. Not know me, and in love! punish him Heaven for falsehood! but I Will
contribute to deceive him on, and ruin him with perjury.


Fill. I am not yet convinced, I Will try her farther! [Goes to her bowing. --
but, Madam, is that Heavenly beauty purchasable? I Will pay a heart rich with
such wounds, and flames. --


Gall. Not forgetting the Money too good lad, or your wounds and flames will be
of little use!

[Gall. goes to Cornelia.
Mar. He tells you truth, Sir, we are not like the Ladies of your Country, who
tire out their men with loving upon the square, heart for heart, till it
becomes as dull as Matrimony, to women of our profession there is no Rethorick
like ready Money, nor Billet-Doux like Bill of Exchange.


Fill. Oh! that Heaven should make two persons so resembling,
And yet such different souls -- --
[Looks on her. -- 'sdeath how she darts me through with every look,
But if she speak she heals the wound again:
Enters Octavio, with followers.
Octa. Hah, my Rival Fillamour here! fall on -- draw Sir, -- and say I gave you
one advantage more and fought thee fairly.

[Draws on Fill. Fill. fights him out; the Ladies run off: Gall. Falls on the
followers, with whom whilst he is engaged, Enters Julio, draws and assists him:
and Laura at the same time on the other side; Enter ^etro dressed like a
Civility-Master; Sir Signal and Tickletext, Sir Signal climbs a Tree; Tick.
runs his head in a bush, and lies on his hands and knees, Pet. assists Gall.
and fights out the Bravo's: Pet. Reenters.
Lau. Hah my Cavalier engaged amongst the slaves.


Pet. My Ladys Lovers! and set upon by Octavio! we must be dilligent in our
affairs! Sir Signal where are ye! Sign^or Tickletext! I hope they have not
miscarried in the fray?


Sir Sig. Oh vot Servitor vos Signoria, miscarried, no the fool has wit enough
to keep out of harms way.

[Comes down from the Tree.
Pet. Oh very discrectly done Signior. --

[Sees Tick. in a bush, pulls him out by the heels.
Sir Sig. When how now Governor what afraid of swords.


Tick. No Sir, I am not afraid of Swords, but I am afraid of danger.

[Enter Gall. embracing Laura! after'em, Jul. and Fill. Fill. looks about.
Gall. This bravery Sir was wondrous!


Lau. 'Twas only justice Sir you being oppressed with odds.


Fill. She Is gone! she is gone in Triumph with my Soul.


Jul. What was the matter Sir, how came this mischief?


Fill. Oh easily Sir; I did but look, and infinitely loved!


Jul. And therefore were you drawn upon, or was it some old Pique^


Fill. I know not Sir, Oh tell not me of quarrels.

The woman friend, the woman has undone me!


Gall. Oh a blessed hearing! I Am glad of the reformation Sir, you were so
squemi^h forsooth, that a whore would not down with ye! no, 'twou'd spoil your
Reputation. --


Fill. A whore! would I could be convine't she were so, 'twou'd call my Virtue
home and make me man again!


Gall. Thou lie -- you are as weak a Brother as the best on's, and believe me
Harry, these sort of Damsells are like witches, if they once get hold of a man,
he is their own till the charm be ended; you guess what that is Sir?


Fill. Oh Frank, had thou then felt how tenderly she pressed my hand in hers;
as if she would have kept there for ever, it would have made thee mad, stark
mad in Love! -- and nothing b^t Marcella could have charmed me;

[Aside.
Gall. Ay Gad, I Will warrant thee, -- well thou shall this night enjoy her.


Fill. How!


Gall. How, When faith Harry, ene the old way, I know no other. When thou shall
ly with her man! come let us to her.


Fill. Away, let us follow her instantly.

[Going out, stopped by Sir Signal. Enter Sir Sig. Tick. Petro.
Sir Sig. Signior, I have brought Mr. Tickletext, to beg your pardon -- Sir.


Fill. I Have other business Sir.

[Goes out.
Gall. Come let us follow him, and you my generous Cavalier, must give me leave
to beg the Honor of your friendship.


Lau. My inclinations Sir, have given you more -- pray let me wait on you to
your Lodgings, lest a farther insolence should be offered you.


Gall. Sir you oblige too fast;

[They go out.
Sir Sig. Ah che Deavilo Ails these hot-brained fellows, sure they are Drunk.


Pet, Oh fee Signior, Drunk, for a man of Quality -- it is intolerable.


Sir Sig. Ay: When how so Signior Morigoroso.


Pet. Imbriaco, had made it a fine speech indeed.


Sir Sig. When faith, and so it had, as thus, -- ach Deavito Ailes these
hot-brained fellows, sure they are imbriaco, -- now would not I be Drunk for a
thousand Crowns: imbriacho sounds Cinqa^t par ^ent better, -- Come Noble
Signior, let us Andiamo a Casa, which is as much as to say, let us amble home. --


Tick. In Troth, wondrous expert -- Certo Signior he is an apt Scholar


Sir Sig. Ah Sir, you shall see, when I come to my civillities --


'Pet. Where the first less'n you shall learn, is, how to ^ve, and how to
receive, with a Bon-Grace!


Tick. That receiving lesson I will learn my self;


'Pet. This unfrequented part of the Garden, Signior will (...) purpose as well
as your Lodgings, -- First then -- Signiors your address, [Puts himself in the
mid^le. [Petro bows on both sides, they do the like. -- Very well! that is at
the approach of any person of Quali^y after which you must take out your
Snuff Box.


Sir Sig. Snuff Box: when we take no snuff Signior.


Pet. Then Sir by all means you must learn: for besides the mode and gravity of
it, it inviveates the Peri^ramum! that is sapientiat's the brain, -- that is,
inspires wit, thought, invention, understanding, and the like -- you conceive
me Signiors --

[^owing.
Sir Sig. Most profoundly Signior. --

[Bowing.
Pet. -- Then Signiors, it keeps you in considance, and countinance! and whilst
you gravely seem to take a snush, you gain time to answer to the purpose, (and
in a politic posture -- as thus) -- to any intricate question.


Tick. Hum -- (...) I like that well; and 'twere admirable if a man were
allowed to take it when he is out in's Sermon.


Pet. Doubtless Signior you might, it helps the memory better then Rosemary,
therefore I have brought each of you a Snuff Box.


Sir Sig. By no means: Excuse me Signior.

[Refuses to take 'em.
Pet. Ah Bagatells Signior, Bagatells, and now Signiors, I Will teach you how to
take it, with a handsome Grace, Signior your hand; -- and yours Signior. [Lays
snuff on their bands. -- So now draw your hand to, and frow under your Noses,
and snuff it hard up: -- Excellent well,

[They dawb all their Noses, and make grimaces and sneeze.
Sir Sig. Methinks Signior, this snuff stinks most damnably: Pray what scent do
you call this?


Pet. Cackamarda Orangate, a rare perfume Ple assure ye, Sir.


Sir Sig. Cackamarda Orangate, and 'twere not for the Name of Cackamarda, and
so sorth, a man had as good have a Sir Reverence at his Nose.

[Sneezes, often he cries bonprovache.
Pet. Bonprovache -- Signior, you do not understand it yet, bonprovache.


Sir Sig. When Sir it is impossible to endure this same Cackamarda, When
Assassetteda is Odoriferous to it.

[Sneezing.
Pet. It Is your right Dulce Piquante, believe me: -- but come Signiors wipe
your Noses and proceed to your giving lesson.


Sir Sig. As how Signior


Pet. When -- present we with something -- that -- Diamond on your finger! to
show the manner of giving handsomely: [Sir Sig. gives it him. -- Oh fie, Signior
-- between your Finger and Thumb -- thus -- with your other Fingers at a
distance -- with a speech, and a bow. --


Sir Sig. Ilustrissimo Signior, the Manifold Obligations. --


Pet. Now a sine turn of your hand -- thus -- Oh that sets off the present, and
makes it sparkle in the eyes of the receiver. --

[Sir Sig. turns his hand.
Sir Sig. -- Which you have heap't upon me, --


Pet. There flourish again.

[He flourishes.
Sir Sig. Obliges me to beg, your acceptance of this small present, which will
receive a double Luster from your fair hand.

[Gives it him.
Pet. Now kiss your fingers ends, and retire back with a bow:


Tick. -- Most admirably performed.


Sir Sig. Nay Sir I have docity in me, though I say it: come Governor let us see
how you can outdo me in the Art of presenting.


Tick. Well Sir, come, your Snuff Box will serve instead of my Ring, will it
not?


Pet. By no means Sir, there is such a certain Relation between a Finger and a
Ring, that no present becomes either the giving or the receiving hand half so
well.


Sir Sig. When 'twill be restored again, it is but to practice by.


Pet. Ay Signior, the next thing you are to learn is to receive.


Tick. Most worthy Signior, I have so Exhausted the Cornucopia of your favors,
[Flourishes] -- and tasted so plenteously of the fulness of your Bounteous
Liberallity, that to retalliate with this small Jem -- is but to offer a spark,
where I have received a beam of superabundant sunshine. --

[Gives it.
Sir Sig. Most Rhetorically performed, as I hope to breath, Tropes and fugers
all over.


Tick. Oh Lord, Sir Signal.


Pet. Excellent -- Now let us see if you can refuse, as civilly as you gave,
which is by an Obstinate denial; stand both together, -- -- Ilustrious
Signiors, upon my honor my little merit has not entitled me to the Glory of
so splendid an offering; Trophes worthy to be laid only at your Magnanimous
feet.


Sir Sig. Ah Signior, No No,


Pet. Signior Tickletext.

[He offers, they refuse going backward.
Tick. Nay certo Signior! --


Pet. With what confidence can I receive so rich a present: Signior Tickletext,
ah -- Signior. --


Sir Sig. I vow Signior -- I Am ashamed you should offer it.


Tick. In verity, and lo am I.

[still going back, he follows.
Pet. ^ardio! Baccus, most incomparable. --


Tick. But when Signior are we to learn to receive again. --


Pet. Oh Sir that is always a lesson of it self: -- but now Signiors, I Will teach
you how to Act a story.


Sir Sig. How! how Signior to Act a story?


Pet. Ay Sir, No matter for words or sense, so the body perform its part well.


Sir Sig. How, tell a story without words, when this were an excellent devise
for Mr. Tickletext, when he is to hold forth to the Congregation, and has lost
his Sermon-Notes -- when this is wonderful. --


Pet. Oh Sir, I have taught it men born deaf, and blind, -- look ye stand
close together, and observe -- closer yet: [Gets betweem'em. -- a certain
Eclejastio, Plump, and Rich -- [Makes a sign of being fat. Riding along the
Rode, -- meets a [Galloping about the Stage. Paver strapiao, -- un Pavero
strapiao, Paure strapiao: -- strapiao -- strapiao -- strapiao: -- [Puts himself
into the Posture of a lean Beggar; his hands right ^own by his sides, -- and
picks both their Pockets. Elemosuna per un ^aure strapiao, par a Moure de
Dievos -- at last he begs a Julio -- Neinte! [Makes the fat Bishop] -- then the
Paure strapiao begs a Mezo Julio -- [lean] Neinte [fat] -- une bacio -- [lean]
-- Niente -- [fat] -- at last he begs his Blessing -- and see how willingly the
Eclesiastico gave his Benediction; [Opening his Arms hits them both in the
face. -- Scusa scusa mea Patrona's --

[Begs their pardon.
Sir Sig. Yes very willingly, which by the way he had never done had it been
worth a farthing.


Tick. Marry I would he had been a little sparing of that too, at this time, --
[sneezes] a shame on it, it has stur'd this same Cackamerda again most foully.


Pet. Your pardon Signior, -- but come Sir Signal -- let us see how you will
make this silent relation -- Come stand between us two --


Sir Sig. Nay let me alone for a memory -- come.


Pet. I think I have revenged my Backsword-beating.

[goes off.
Sir Sig. Un paureo strapado -- plump and rich -- no, no, the Ecclesiastico
meets un paureo strapado -- and begs a Julio.


Tick. Oh no Sir, the strapado begs the Julio.


Sir Sig. Ay, Ay, and the Eclesastico cries Niente -- [snaps his nail. un meze
Julio! -- Niente -- un Bacoi, Niente, your blessing then Signior Ecclesastico

[spreads out his arms to give his blessing -- and hits Tick
Tick. Adds me, you are all a little too liberal of this same benediction.


Sir Sig. Hah -- but where is Signior Morigoroso? what is he gone? -- but now I
think on it it is a point of good manners to go without taking leave.


Tick. It may be so, but I wish I had my Ring again, I do not like the giving
lesson without the taking one, when this is picking a man's pocket certo.


Sir Sig. Not so Governor, for then I had had a considerable loss: look ye
here, -- how -- [feelin^ in his Pocket] how -- [in another] how -- gone? gone
as I live! my money Governor! all the Gold Barberacho received of my Merchant
to day -- all gone. --


Tick. Hah -- and mine -- all my stock, the money which I thought to have made
a present to the Gentlewoman, Barberacho was to bring me too -- [aside] --
undone undone -- Villains, Cutpurses -- Cheats, oh run after him.


Sir Sig. A Pox of all silent stories: Rogue, Thief -- undone. --


ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Julio and his Page.
Jul. HOw! the Lady whom I followed from St. Peter's Church a Curtizan?


Page A Curtizan my Lord, fair as the Morning, and as young.


Jul. I know she is fair and young, but is she to be had boy?


Page My Lord she is -- her Footman told me, she was a Zittella.


Jul. How a Zittella! -- a Virgin, it is impossible.


Page I cannot swear it Sir, but so he told me? he said she had a world of
Lovers: her Name is Silvianetta Sir, and her Lodgings --


Jul. I know it, are on the Corso; a Curtizan! and a Zittella too? a pretty
contradiction! but I Will bate her the last, so I might enjoy her as the first,
what ere the price be, I Am resolved upon the adventure; and will this minute
prepare my self. [Going off, enters Mur. and Octa. -- hah -- does the light
deceive me, or is that indeed my Uncle, in earnest conference with a Cavalier:
-- it is he -- I Will step aside till he is past, lest he hinders this Nights
diversion:

[Goes aside
Mur. I say 'twas rashly done, to fight him unexamin'd.


Oct. I need not ask, my reason has informed me, and I Am convinced where ere
he has conceald her, that she is fled with Fillamour.


Jul. Who is it they speak of?


Mar. Well well, sure my Ancestors committed some horrid crime, against Nature,
that she sent this Pest of womankind into our Family, -- two Neeces for my
share, -- by Heaven a proportion sufficient to undo six Generations.


Jul. Hah! two Neeces, what of them?

[Aside.
Mur. I am like to give a blessed account of 'em to their Brother Julio my
Nephew, at his return, there is a new plague now, -- but my comfort is I shall
be mad and there is an end on it.

[Weeps.
Jul. My curiosity must be satisfied, -- have patience Noble Sir, --


Mur. Patience is a flatterer Sir, -- and an Ass Sir, and I Will have none on it
-- hah what art thou?


Jul. Has five or six years, made ye lose the remembrance of your Nephew --
Julio!


Mur. Julio! would I had met thee going to thy Grave.

[Weeps
Jul. Why so Sir?


Mur. Your sisters Sir, your sisters are both gone. --

[Weeps.
Jul. How gone Sir?


Mur. Run away Sir, flown Sir.


Jul. Heavens! which way?


Mur. Nay, who can tell the ways of fickle women, -- in short Sir, your sister
Marcella was to have been Married, to this Noble Gentleman, -- Nay was
contracted to him, fairly contracted in my own Chapel, but no sooner was his
back turned, -- but in a pernicious Moonlight Night she shows me a fair pair
of heels, with the young Baggage your other sister Cornelia, who was just come
from the Monastery where I bred her, to see her sister married.


Jul. A curse upon the Sex, why must man's honor
Depend upon their Frailty?
-- Come -- give me but any light which way they went,
And I will trace 'em with that careful Vengeance. --

Oct. Spoke like a man, that understands his Honor,
And I can guess how we may find the Fugitives.

Jul. Oh Name it quickly Sir!


Oct. There was a young Cavalier -- some time at Vitterbo,
Who I confess had charms, Heaven has denied to me
That trifle Beauty, which was made to please,
Vain foolish Woman, which the brave and wise,
Want leisure to design:

Jul. And what of him!


Oct. This fine gay thing came in your sisters way, and made that conquest
Nature meant such fools for: and Sir she is fled with him.


Jul. Oh show me the Man, the daring hardy Villain,
Bring me but in the view of my Revenge, -- and if I fail to take it,
Brand me with everlasting Infamy.

Oct. That we must leave to Fortune, and our Industry, -- Come Sir, lets walk
and think best what to do. --

[Going down the Scene, Enter Fill. and Gall.
Fill. Is not that Julio -- Boy run and call him back.

[Ex. Boy reenters with Jul.
Jul. Oh Fillamour, I Have heard such killing news since last I left thee.


Fill. What prithee?


Jul. I had a sister Friend -- dear as my life,
And bred with all the Virtues of her Sex;
No Vestals at the Holy fire employed themselves
In innocenter business then this Virgin;
Till Love! the Fatal Fever of her heart,
Betrayed her harmless hours:
And just upon the point of being Married,
The thief stole in, and Robbed us of this treasure:
She Is left her Husband, Parents, and her Honor,
And's fled with the base ruiner of her Virtue.

Fill. And lives the Villain durst affront ye thus?


Jul. He does!


Gall. Where, in what distant World?


Jul. I know not.


Fill. What is he called?


Jul. I know not neither, -- some God direct me to the Ravisher! And if he
escape my rage!

May Cowards point me out, for one of their tame herd.


Fill. In all your quarells I must join my sword.


Gall. And if you want, -- here is another Sir, -- that though it be not often
drawn in anger, nor cares to be, shall not be idle in good company.


Jul. I thank ye both, and if I have occasion, will borrow their assistance,
but I must leave you for a minute, I Will wait on you anon. --

[They all three walk as down the street talking, Enter Laura, with her
Equipage.
Lau. Beyond my wish, I Am got into his Friendship,
But oh how distant Friendship is from Love!
That Is all bestowed on the fair Prostitute!
-- Ah Silvio, when he took me in his Arms,
Pressing my willing Bosom to his breast,
Kissing my cheek, calling me Lovely youth,
And wondering how such Beauty, and such bravery,
Met in a Man so young! ah then my Boy!
Then in that happy minute,
How near was I to telling all my soul,
My blushes and my sighs, were all prepared
My Eyes cast down my trembling lips just parting, --
But still as I was ready to begin,
He cries out Silvianetta!
And to prevent mine, tells me all his Love!
-- But see -- he is here. --
[Fill. and Gall. coming up the scene.
Gall. Come lay by all sullen unresolves! for now the hour of the Berjeare
approaches, Night, that was made for Lovers! -- Hah! my dear Sans Caeur? my
life! my soul! my joy! Thou art of my opinion!


Lau. I Am sure I am what are it be!


Gall. When my Friend here, and I have sent and paid our Fine for a small
Tenement of pleasure, and I Am for taking present possession; -- but hold -- if
you should be a Rival after all!


Lau. Not in your Silvianetta! My Love has a Nice appetite,
And must be fed with high uncommon delicates,
I have a Mistress Sir, of quality!
Fair! as imagination, paints young Angels!
Wanton and gay as was the first Corina
That charmed our best of Poets,
Young as the Spring, and cheerful as the Birds
That welcome in the day!
Witty as fancy makes the Revelling Gods,
And equally as bounteous when she blesses!

Gall. Ah for a fine young whore, with all these charms! but that same quality
allays the joy, there is such a damned ado with the Obligation, that half the
pleasures lost in Ceremony, -- Here! for a thousand Crowns I reign alone,
Revell all day in Love without control. -- But come to our business, I have
given order for Music, Dark Lanthorns, and Pistolls.

[This while Fill. stands studying.
Fill. -- Death if it should not be Marcella now!

[Pausing aside.
Gall. Prithee no more considering, -- resolve and let us about it.


Fill. I would not tempt my heart again! for Love
What ere it may be in another breast,
In mine, 'twill turn to a Religious fire!
And so to burn for her! a common Mistress,
Would be an Infamy below her practice!

Gall. Oh if that be all, doubt not Harry but an hours conversation with
Euphemia, will convert it to as lewd a flame, as a man would wish.


Lau. What a coyles here about a Curtizan! what ado to persuade a man to a
blessing all Rome is languishing for in vain: -- Come Sir, we must deal with
him, as Physicians do with peevish children, force him to take what will cure
him!


Fill. And like those damned Physicians, kill me for want of method, no, I know
my own distemper best, and your applications will make ^e mad.


Gall Poxon't, that one cannot love a woman like a man, but one must love like
an Ass.


Lau. S'hart, I Will be bound to ly with all the women in Rome, with less ado
then you are brought to one.


Gall. Hear ye that Henry, god's death art not ashamed to be instructed by one so
young! -- but see -- the star there appears, -- the star that conduct thee to
the shore of bliss --

She comes let us feel thy

[Marcella and Cornelia above. Heart! she comes!

So breaks the day on the glad Eastern Hills!

Or the bright God of Rays from Thetis Lap: --

A Rapture now dear lad, and then fall too, for thou art

Old dog at a long Grace. --


Fill. Now I Am mere man again, with all his frailties, -- [Aside. -- Bright
lovely creature! --


Gall. Damn it, how like my Ladys Eldest Son was that.


Fill. May I hope my sacrifice! may be accepted by you? -- by Heaven it must be
she! still she appears more like. --

[Aside.
Mar. I ve only time to tell you Night approches,
And th^n I will expect you,
[Enter Crapine, gazes on the Ladys.
Crap. It Is the, Donna Marcella on my life, with the young wild (...)! -- hah
-- vonders the English Cavalier too; nay then by this hand I Will be paid for all
my fruitless jants: for this good news -- stay let me mark the House. --


Mar. Now to my disguise!

[Ex. Marcella.
Gall. And have you no kind message to send to my heart; cannot this good
Example, instruct you how to make me happy?


Cor. Faith stranger I must consider first, she is skillfull in the Mar^handize
of hearts, and has dealt in Love with so good success hitherto, she may lose on
venture, and never miss it in her stock, but this is my first, and should it
prove to be a bad bargain, I were undone for ever.


Gall. I dare secure the goods sound, --


Cor. And I believe will not ly long upon my hands.


Gall. Faith, that is according as you will dispose on it Madam, -- for let me tell
you -- gad a good handsome proper fellow, is as staple a commodity as any's in
the Nation, -- but I would be reserved for your own use! faith take a sample to
Night, and as you like it, the whole pecce, and that is fair and honest dealing
I think, or the Devils in it.


Cor. Ah stranger, -- you have been so over-liberal of those same samples of
yours, that I doubt they have spoild the sale of the rest, -- could you not
assord think ye, to throw in a little Love and constancy; to inch out that want
of honesty of yours.


Gall. Love! oh in abundance!
By those dear Eyes, by that soft smiling Mouth;
By ever secret grace, thou have about thee,
I love thee with a vigorous, eager passion,
-- Be kind dear Silvianetta -- prithee do,
Say you believe and make me blessed to Night?

Crap. Silvianetta! so, that is the Name she has rifl'd for Cornelia, I perceive.


Cor. If I should be so kind-hearted! what good use would you make of so
obliging an opportunity?


Gall. That which the happy Night was first ordained for.


Cor. Well Signior it is coming on, and then I Will try what courage the darkness
will inspire me with: -- till then -- farewell. --


Gall. Till then a thousand times adieu. --

[Blowing up kisses to her.
Phil. Ah Madam we are undone, -- yonder is Crapine your Uncles Vallet. --


Cor. Now a curse on him; shall we not have one Night with ou^ Cavaliers --
let us retire, and continue to out-wit him, or never more pretend to it, Adieu
Signior Cavalier -- remember Night. --


Gall. Or may I lose my sense to all Eternity.

[Kisses his fingers and bows, she returns it for a while.
Lau. Gods, that all this that looks at least like Love,
Should be dispenc^t to one insensible!
Whilst every syllable of that dear vallue,
Whispered to me, would make my soul all Ecstasy,
-- Oh spare that Treasure for a grateful purchase;
And buy that common ware with trading Gold,
Love! is too rich a price: -- I shall betray my self. --
[Aside.
Gall. Away, that is an hereticial opinion and which this (...)
Reason must convince thee of:
That Love is Love, where ever beauty is,
Nor can the Name of whore, make beauty less.
Enter Marcella like a Man, with a Cloak about her.
Mar. Signior, is your Name Fillamour?


Fill. It is, what would you Sir. --


Mar. I have a letter for you -- from Vitterbo, and your Marcella Sir.

[gives it him]
Fill. Hah -- Vitterbo! and Marcella!
It shocks me like the Ghost of some forsaken Mistress,
That met me in the way to happiness,
With some new longed for Beauty!
[Opens it, reads.
Mar. Now I shall try thy Virtue, and my Fate. --

[Aside.
Fill. What is it that checks the joy, that should surprise me at the receipt of
this!


Gall. How now! what is the cold fit coming on?

[Pawses.
Fill. I have no power to go -- where this -- invites me --
Which I prove, it is no increase of flame that warms my heart,
(...) a new fire just kindled from those -- eyes --
Whose rays I sinde more piercing then Marcella's.

Gall. -- Ay Gad a thousand times -- prithee what is the matter.


Mar. Oh this false -- souly man -- would I had leisure
To be revenged for this inconstancy!
[Aside
Fill. -- But still she want's that Virtue I admire!


Gall. Virtue! god's death thou art always fumbling, upon that dull string that
makes no Music: -- What Letters that? [reads.] If the first Confession I ever
made of Love be grateful to you, come armed to night with a friend or too; and
behind the Garden of the Fountains, you will receive -- hah Marcella! -- Oh
damn it, from your honest woman! -- Well I see the devil's never so busy with a
man, as when he has resolved upon any goodness! god's death what a rubs here in a
fair cast, -- how is it man-Alegremente! bear up, defy him and all is his works.


Fill. But I have sworn, sworn that I loved Marcella! and Honor Friend obliges
me to go, take her away and marry her, -- And I conjure thee to assist me too.


Gall. What to night, this Night, that I have given to Silvianetta! and you
have promised to the fair -- Euphemia!


Lau. If he should go, he ruins my design,
[Aside. -- Nay if your word Sir -- be already past. --

Fill. It Is true, I gave my promise to Euphemia! but that to women of her
trade, is easily absolved.


Gall. Men keep not Oaths for the sakes of the wise Magistrates, to whom
they are made, but their own Honor Harry: And is it not much a greater crime to
Rob a Gallant, hospitable man of his Niece, who has treated you with
Confidence, and Friendship, then to keep touch with a well meaning whore, my
Conscientious friend!


Lau. Infinite degrees Sir!


Gall. Besides, thou'st an hour or two good, between this and the time required
to meet Marcella.


Lau. Which an industrious Lover, would manage to the best advantage.


Gall. That were not given over to Virtue, and constancy -- two the best
excuses I know for idleness.


Fill. -- Yes -- I may see this woman.


Gall. When God a marcy lad!


Fill. -- And break my chains, -- if possible.


Gall. Thou will give a good essay to that I Will warrant thee,
Before she part with thee! come let us about it.
[They go out on either side of Fill. persuading him.
Mar. He Is gone! the Curtizan has got the day.
[Aside to Mar. Vice has the start of Virtue, every way,
And for one blessing honest wives obtain,
The happyer Mistress does a thousand gain!
I Will home -- and practice, all their Art to prove,
That nothing is so cheaply gained as Love!
[Exeunt.
Gall. Stay what farce is this, -- prithee let us see a little. [offering to go
[Enter Sir Signal, Mr. Tickletext, with his Cloak tied about him, a great
Ink-horn tied at his Girdle, and a great Folio under his Arm, Petro dressed like
an Antiquary. -- How Now Mr. Tickletext, what dressed as if you were going a
Pillgrimage to Jerusalem.


Tick. I make no such profane Journeys, Sir.


Gall. But where have you been Mr. Tickletext.


Sir Sig. When Sir, this most Reverend and Renowned Antiquary, has been showing
us Monimental Rarities and Antiquities.


Gall. It Is Petro that -- Rogue!


Fill. -- But what Folio have you gotten there Sir, Knox, or Car^wright?


Pet. Nay if he be got into that heap of Nonsense, I Will steal off and undress.

[Aside. [Ex. Petro. [Tick. Opening the Book,
Tick. A small Vollum Sir, into which I transcribe the most memorable and
remarkable transactions of the day.


Lau. That doubtless must be worth seeing.


Fill. [Reads] April the Twentieth, arose a very great storm of Wind, Thunder,
Lightning, and Rain, -- which was a shrewd sign of foul weather.


Fill. The 22th. 9 of our 12 chikens getting loose, flew over-bord, the other
three miraculous escaping, by being eaten by me, that Morning for breakfast.


Sir Sig Harkey Galliard -- thou art my Friend, and it is not like a man o^
^nour, to conceal any thing from on's Friend, -- know then I am the fortunate
Rascal, that ever broke bread, -- I am this Nigh^ (...) sir -- the finest,
the most delicious young Harlot, Mum -- (...) ^e Rose -- in all Rome! of
Barberacho's acquaintance.


Gall -- H^h -- my woman on my life! and will she be kind!


Sir Sig. Kind, hang kindness man, I Am resolved upon conquest by parley ^y
force.


Gall Spoke like a Roman of the first Race, when Noble Rapes not whin^g
Courtship, did the Lovers business.


Sir Sig. Sha Rapes man! I mean by force of money, pure dint of Co^ ^aith and
troth: for I have given 500 Crowns entrance already, and ^ar Dios Baccus it is
tropo Caro -- tropo Caro Mr. Galliard.


Gall. And what is this high prized Ladys Name Sir?


Sir Sig. La Silvianetta, -- and Lodges on the Corso, not far from St. James's
of the incurables -- very well situated in case disaster -- hah. --


Gall. Very well, -- and did not your wise worship know, this Silvianetta was
my Mistress?


Sir Sig. How! his Mistress! what a damned noddy was! to name her!


Gall. De ye hear fool! renounce me this (...) instantly, or I Will first
discover it to your Governor, and then c^t your throat Sir.


Sir Sig. Oh Doux M^nt -- dear Galliard -- Renounce her, -- Corpo d^ mi that I
will soul and (...) if she belong to thee man. --


Gall. No more -- look^, -- look you forget her Name -- or but to think of her
-- farewell --

[Nods at him.
Sir Sig. Fare well quoth ^e -- it is well I had the Art of dissembling after
all, here had been a ^eet Broyl upon the Coast else. --


Fill. Very well, I Will trouble my self to read no more, since I know you will be
so kind to the world to make it p^lique?


Tick. At my return Sir, for the good of the Nation, I will Print it, and I
think it will deserve it.


Lau. This is a precious Rogue, to make a Tutor of.


Fill. Yet these Mooncalss, dare pretend to the breeding of our youth, and the
time will come, I fear, when none shall be reputed to travel like a man of
quality, who has not the advantage of being imposed upon, by one of these
^edantique Novices, who instructs the young heir, in what himself is most
profoundly ignorant of.


Gall. Come, it is dark and time for our design, -- your servant Signiors.

[Exeunt Fill. Gall. and Lau.
Lau. I Will home, and watch the kind deceiving minute, that may conduct him by
mistake to me.

Enter Petro, like Barberacho, just as Tick. and Sir Sig. are going out.
Sir Sig. Oh Barberacho! we are undone! Oh the Diavillo take that Master you
sent me.


Pet. Master, what Master?


Sir Sig. When Signior Morigoroso!


Pet. Mor -- oso -- what should he be?


Sir Sig. A Civillity-Master he should have been, to have taught us good
manners, -- but the Cornuto cheated us most damnably, and by a willing mistake
taught us nothing in the world but wit.


Pet. Oh abominable knavery! when what a kind of man was he? --


Sir Sig, -- when -- much such another as your self: --


Tick. Higher, Signior, higher!


Sir Sig. Aye somewhat higher -- but just of his pitch.


Pet. Well Sir, and what of this man?


Sir Sig. Only picked our pockets, that is all.


Tick. Yes, and cozened us of our Rings.


Sir Sig. Ay, and gave us Cackamarda Orangata for snuff.


Tick. And his blessing to boot when he had done.


Sir Sig. A vengeance on it, I feel it still.


Pet. When this it is to do things of your own heads, for I sent no such Signior
Moroso -- but I Will see what I can do to retrive m -- I am now a little in
haste, farewell. --

[Offers to go. Tick. goes out by him and jogs him.
Tick. Remember to meet me -- farewell Barberacho.

[Goes out, Sir Sig. pulls him.
Sir Sig. Barberacho -- is the Lady ready?


Tick. Is your money ready?


Sir Sig. When now, tho I am threatened, and killed, and beaten, and kicked about,
this intrigue I must advance! [aside] -- but do think there is no danger?


Pet. What in a delicate young amorous Lady, Signior?


Sir Sig. No, No, mum, I don't much fear the Lady, but this same mad fellow
Galliard, I hear, has a kind of a hankering after her -- Now dare not I tell
him what a discovery I have made.

[Aside.
Pet. Let me alone to secure you, meet me in the Piatzo Despagnia, as soon as
you can get your self in order; where the two fools shall meet, and preven
eithers coming.

[Aside.
Sir Sig. Enough, -- here is a Bill for 500 Crowns more upon my Merchant, you
know him by a good token, I lost the last sum you received for me, a pox of
that handsell, away here is company. Ex. Pet. Enter Octavio. Now will I disguise
my self, according to the mode of the Roman Inamorato's; and deliver my self
upon the place appointed.

[Ex. Sir Sig.
Oct. On the Corso did thou see 'em?


Crap. On the Corso my Lord, in discourse with three Cavaliers, one of which
has given me many a Pistol, to let him into the Garden a Nights at Vitterbo: to
talk with Done Marcella, from her Chamber window, I think I should remember him.


Oct. Oh that thought fires me, with anger fit for my Revenge, [Aside. And
they are to Serinade 'em thou say.


Crap. I did my Lord! and if you can have patience till they come, you will
find your Rival in this very place, if he keep his word.


Oct. I do believe thee, and have prepared my Bravos to attack him: if I can
Act but my Revenge to Night, how shall I worship Fortune! keep out of sight,
and when I give the word be ready all. I hear some coming let us walk off a
little. --

[Enter Marcella in man's clothes, and Philipa as a woman, with a Lanthorn Oct.
and Crap. go off the other way.
Mar. Thou can never convince me, but if Crapine saw us, and gazed so long
upon us, he must know us too, and then what hinders but by a dilligent watch
about the House, they will surprise us, ere we have secured our selves from 'em.


Phil. And how will this, exposing your self to danger prevent 'em.


Mar. My design now is, to prevent Fillamours coming into danger, by hindering
his approach to this house: I would preserve the kind ingrate with any hazard
of my own: and it is better to dye then fall into the hands of Octavio. I Am
desperate with that thought, -- and fear no danger! however be you ready at the
door, and when I ring admit me. -- ha -- who comes here. --

[Enter Tickletext with a Periwig and Cravat of Sir Signals: A Sword by his
side, and a dark Lanthorn, she opens hers, looks on him and goes out.
Tick. A man! now am I though an old sinner, as timorous as a young thief, it is
a great inconvenience in these Popish Countries, that a man cannot have liberty
to steal to a wench without danger; not that I need fear who sees me except
Galliard, who suspecting my business, will go near to think I am wickedly
inclined, Sir Signal I have left hard at his study, and Sir Henry is no
Nocturnal Inamorato, unless like me he dissemble it, -- well Certo it is a
wonderful pleasure to deceive the World: And as a learned man well observed,
that the sin of wenching lay in the habit only: I having laid that aside,
Timothy Tickletext principal holder forth of the Covent Garden Conventicle,
Chaplain of Buffoon-Hall in the County of Kent, is free to recreate himself.

[Enter Gall. with a dark Lanthorn.
Gall. Where the devil is this Fillamour? And the Music: which way could he go
to lose me thus! [Looks toward the door. -- he is not yet come. --


Tick. Not yet come, -- that must be Barberacho -- where are ye honest
Barberacho where are ye?

[Groping toward Gall.
Gall. Hah! Barberacho? that name I am sure is used by none but Sir Signal and
his Coxcomb Tutor, it must be one of those -- where are ye Signior, where are
ye? [Goes toward him, and opens the Lanthorn -- and shuts it straight. -- Oh
it is the Knight, -- are you there Signior?


Tick. Oh art thou come, honest Rascal -- conduct me quickly, conduct me to the
Beautiful and fair Silvian^tta!

[Gives him his hand.
Gall. Yes, when your dogships damned, Silvianetta! God's Death is she a whore for
fools!

[Draws.
Tick. Hah Mr. Galliard, as the devil would have it: -- I Am undone if he sees
me!

[He retires hastily, Gall. gropes for him.
Gall. Where are you Fop: Buffoon! Knight! [Tickletext retiring hastily runs
against Octavio, who is just entering, almost beats him down, Oct. strikes him
a good blow, beats him back and draws: Tick. gets close up in a corner of the
stage, Oct. gropes for him as Gall. does, and both meet and fight with each
other. -- What dare you draw, -- you have the impudence to be valliant then in
the dark, [they pass] I would not kill the Rogue, -- death you can fight then,
when there is a woman ^n the case!


Oct. I hope it is Fillamour! [aside] you will find I can, and possibly may spoil
your making love to Night!


Gall. Egad sweet heart and t^t may be, one civil thrust will do it: -- And
'twere a damned rude thing to disappoint so fine a woman, -- therefore I Will
withdraw whilst I Am well.

[He slips out [Enter Sir Signal, with a Masquerad^g Coat over his clothes,
without a Wigg or Cravat, with a dark Lanthorn.
Sir Sig. Well I have most neatly escapt my Tutor; and in this disguise defy
the devil to claim his own, -- ah Caspeto de Deavilo! -- What Is that?

[Adva^ing softly, and groping with his hands, meets the point of Oct. sword,
as he is groping for Gall.
Oct. Traitor dare thou not stand my sword!


Sir Sig. Hah! swords! no Signior -- scusa mea Signior, --

[Hops to the door: And feeling for his way with his out-strecht Arms, runs his
Lanthorn in Julio's face who is just entering; finds he is opposed with a good
push backward, and slips aside into a corner over against Tickletext: Julio
meets Octavio and fights him, Oct. falls, Julio opens his Lanthorn and sees his
mistake.
Jul. Is it you Sir?


Oct. Julio! from what mistake grew all this violence?


Jul. That I should ask of you, who meet you armed against me.


Oct. I find the Night has equally deceived us; and you are fitly come! to
share with me the hopes of dear Revenge!

[Gropes for his Lanthorn which is dropped.
Jul. I Would rather have pursued my kinder passion! Love! and desire! that
brought me forth to Night!


Oct. I Have learnt where my false Rival is to be this Evening, And if you will join
your sword, you will find it well employed.


Jul. Lead on, I Am as impatient of Revenge as you. --


Oct. Come this way then, you will find more aids to serve us.

[Go out.
Tick. -- So! thanks be praised all is still again, this fright were enough to
mortify any Lover of less magnanimity then my self, -- well of all sins, this
itch of whoring is the most hardy, -- the most impudent in repulses; the most
vigilant in watching, most patient in waiting, most frequent in dangers: in all
disasters but disappointment, a Philosopher! yet if Barberacho come not
quickly, my Philosophy will be put to it certo.

[This while Sir Signal i^ venturing from his post, listening and slowly
advancing toward the middle of the stage.
Sir Sig. The coast is once more clear, and I may venture my carcass forth
again, -- though such a salutation as the last, would make me very unfit for
the matter in hand, -- the battoon I could bear with the Fortitude and courage
of Hero: But these dangerous sharps I never loved; what different rancounters
have I met withal to Night, Corpo de me; a man may more safely pass the gulf
of lions, then convoy himself into a Bawdy house in Rome, but I hope all is
past, and I will say with Alexander: -- Vivat Esperance en despetto del Fatto.

[advances a little.
Tick. Sure I heard a Noise, -- No 'twas only my surmise!

[They both advance softly, meeting just in the middle of the Stage, and coming
close up to each other! both cautiously start back: And stand a tipto in the
posture of fear, then gently feeling for each other, (after listening and
hearing no n^ise) draw back their hands at touching each others; and shrinking
up their shoulders, make grimases of more fear!
Tick. Que Equesto.


Sir Sig. Hah a man's voice! -- I Will try if I can fright him hence! [Aside. Una
Malladette Spirito Incarnate!

[In a horrible tone.
Tick. Hah, Spiritto Incarnate! that devils voice I should know!

[aside.
Sir Sig. See Signior! Una spirito! which is to say, un spiritalo, Imortallo
Inc^rporalla, Inanimate, Imaterialle, Philosophicale, Invisible -- Un
intelligible -- Diavillo!

[In the same tone.
Tick Ay ay, it is my hopeful pupil! upon the same design with me, my life
on it, -- Cunning young whoremaster! -- I Will cool your courage -- good Signior
Diavillo! if you be the Diavillo I have unacertaina Imaterialle Invisible
Conjuratione, that will so neatly lay your Inanimate unintelligible
Diavilloship. --

[Pulls out his wooden sword.
Sir Sig. How! he must needs be valliant indeed that dares fight with the
devil. [Endeavours to get away, Tick. beats him about the stage. -- Ah Signior
Signior Mia! ah -- Caspeto de Baccus, -- he cornuto, I am a damned silly devil
that have no dexterity in vanishing.

[Gropes and finds the door -- going out, meets just entering Fillamour Galliard
with all the Music -- he retires and stands close. -- Hah, -- what have we
here new mischief. --

[Tick. and he stands against each other, on either side of the stage.
Fill. Prithee how came we to lose ye?


Gall. I thought I had followed ye, -- but'tis well we are met again, come tune
your pipes, --

[They play a little, Enter Marcella as before.
Mar. This must be he.

[Goes up to 'em.
Gall. Come come, your Song boy your Song.

[Whilst'tis singing Enter Octavio, Julio, Crapine, and Bravo's!
The SONG.
Crudo Amore, Crudo Amore, bis.
Il mio Core non fa per te
Suffrir non vo tormenti
Senza may sperar mar ce
Belta che sia Tiranna,
Bolta che sia Tiranna
Dell meo offetto recetto non^
Il tuo rigor singunna
Se le pene
Le catene
Tenta auolgere al mio pi^
See see Crudel Amore bis.
Il mio Core non fa per te.
Lusinghiero, Lusinghier^, bis.
^ui non Credo alta tua fe
L'incendio del tuo foce
Nel mio Core pui viuo none
Belta che li die Luoce
Belta che li die Luoce
Ma il rigor L'Ardore s'bande
Io non sato tuo gioce
Ch'il Veleno
Del mio seno
Vergoroso faggito se n'e.
See see Crudel Amore bis.
Il mio Core non fa per te.
Oct. It Is they we look for, draw and be ready. -- --


Tick. Hah draw -- then there is no safty here certo.

[Aside. [Octavio Julio and their party draw, and fight with Fill. and Gall.
Marcella ingages on their si^e, all fight, the Music confusedly amongst 'em;
Gall. l^ses his sword, and in the hurry gets a Base Viol, and happens to strike
Tickletext, who is getting away -- his head breaks its way quite through, and
it hangs about his neck, they fight out. Enter Petro with a Lanthorn. Sir
Signal stands close still.
Tick. Oh undone, undone, where am I, where am I.


Pet. Hah -- that is the voice of my Amorous Ananias, -- or I am mistaken --
what the devil's the matter. [Opens his Lanthorn. -- Where are ye Sir, -- hah
cuts so -- what new found pillory have we here?


Tick. Oh honest Barberacho undo me, undo me quickly.


Pet. So I design Sir, as fast as I can -- or lose my aim -- there Sir there:
all is well -- I have set you free, come follow me the back way, into the house.

[Ex. Petro and Tickletext. Enter Fillamour and Marcella, with their swords
drawn Gall. after 'em.
Gall. A plague upon 'em, what a quarters here for a wench, as if there were no
more in the Nation, -- would I Would my sword again.

[Gropes for it.
Mar. Which way shall I direct him to be safer, -- how is it Sir, I hope you
are not hurt.


Fill. Not that I feel, what art thou asks't so kindly.


Mar. A servant to the Roman Curtizan, who sent me forth to wait your coming
Sir, but finding you in danger shared it with you, -- come let me lead you into
safety Sir. --


Fill. Thou'st been too kind to give me cause to doubt thee.


Mar. Follow me Sir, this key will give us entrance through the Garden.

[Exeunt. Enter Octavio with his sword in his hand.
Oct.! Oh what damned luck had I so poorly to be vanquished when all is hushed,
I know he will return, -- therefore I Will fix me here, till I become a furious
statue -- but I Will reach his heart.


Sir Sig. Oh lamentivolo fato -- What bloody Villains these Popish Itallians
are.

Enter Julio.
Oct. Hah -- I hear one coming this way -- -- hah -- the door opens too, -- and
he makes toward it -- pray Heaven he be the right: for this I Am sure's the
House? -- Now luck an't be thy will, --

[Follows Julio toward the door softly.
Jul. The Rogues are fled but how secure I know not, --
And I Will pursue my first design of Love,
And if this Silvianetta will be kind. --
[Enter Laura from the house in a Night gown.
Lau. Whi'st -- who is it Names Silvianetta?


Jul. A Lover and her slave. --

[She takes him by the hand.
Lau. Oh is it you, -- are you escapt unhurt?

Come to my bosom -- and be safe for ever. --


Jul. It Is Love that calls, and now Revenge must stay, -- this hour is thine
fond Boy, the next that is my own I Will give to anger. --


Oct. Oh ye pernicious pair, -- I Will quickly change the Scene of Love into a
ruff^r and more unexpected entertainment.

[She leads Julio in, -- Oct. follows close, they shut the door upon 'em. Sir
Sig. thrusts out his head to hearken, hears no body and advances.
Sir Sig. Sure the devil raigns to Night, would I were sheltered and let him
reign fire and Brimstone, for pass the streets I dare not -- this should be the
house -- or here abouts I Am sure it is, -- -- hah -- what is this -- a string --
of a Bell I hope -- I Will try to enter; and if I am mistaken it is but crying
conlicentia!

[Rings Enter Philipa.
Phil. Whose there?


Sir Sig. It Is I, it is I, let me in quickly. --


Phil. Who -- the English Cavalier.


Sir Sig. The same -- -- I am right -- I see I was expected.


Phil. I Am glad you're come, -- -- give me your hand. --


Sir Sig. I am fortunate at last, -- and therefore will say with the Famous
Poet.

-- No happiness ^ike that achiv'd with danger, Which once overcome -- I Will ly
at Rack and Manger.

[Exeunt.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Fillamour and Galliard, as in Silvianetta's apartment.
Fill. -- HOw s^ndidly these Common women live,
How rich is all we meet with in this Palace,
And rather seems the Apartment of some Prince,
Then a Receptickle for lust and shame.

Gall. You see Ha^y, all the keeping fools are not in our dominions but this
grave this wi^e people, are Mistress riden too.


Fill. (...) fear we have mistook the house, and the youth that brought us in
may have deceived us, on some other design, however whilst I Have this -- (...)
cannot fear. --

[Draws.
Gall. A good caution, and I Will stand upon my guard with this, but see --
here is one will put us out of doubt.

[Pulls a pistol out of his pocket.
Fill. Hah! the fair Inchantress!

[Enter Mar. richly and loosly dressed.
Mar. What on your guard my lovely Cavalier! lies there a danger
In this Face and Eyes, that needs that rough resistance?
-- Hide hide that mark of anger from my sight,
And if thou would be absolute conqueror here,
Put on soft looks with Eyes all languishing,
Words tender, gentle sighs, and kind desires.

Gall. Death! with what unconcern he hears all this? art thou possessed -- pox
why do not answer her?


Mar. I hope he will not yield, --
[Aside. -- He stands unmoved, --
Surely I was mistaken in this face,
And I believe in charms that have no power.

Gall. God's Death thou deservest not such a Noble creature, --
I Will have 'em both my self. --
[Aside.
Fill. -- Yes! thou have wondrous power,
And I have felt it long.
[Pawsingly.
Mar. How!


Gall. -- I Have often seen that face -- but 'twas in dreams:
And sleeping loved Extremely!
And waking -- sigh't to find it but a dream,
The lovely Phantom vanished with my slumbers,
But left a strong Idea on my heart;
Of what I find in perfect Beauty here,
-- But with this difference, she was Virtuous too!

Mar. What silly she was that!


Fill. She whom I dreamed I Loved.


Mar. You only dreamed that she was Virtuous too!
Virtue it self's a dream of so slight sorce,
The very ^uttering of Loves wings destroys it,
Ambition, or the meaner hope of interest, wakes it to nothing,
In men a feeble Beauty, shakes the dull slumber off, --

Gall. Egad she argues like an Angel Harry!


Fill. -- What have thou'st made, to damn thy self so young!
Have thou been long thus wicked? have thou sinned past Repentance,
Heaven may do much, to save so fair a Criminal,
Turn yet and be forgiven!

Gall. What a pox do thou mean by all this canting?


Mar. A very pretty Sermon, and from a priest so gay,
It cannot choose but edify.
Do Holy men of your Religion Signior, wear all this Habit,
Are they thus young, and lovely? sure if they are,
Your Congregation's all composed of Ladys,
The Layety must come abroad for Mistresses.

Fill. Oh that this charming woman were but honest!


Gall. 'Twere better thou were damned; honest!
Pox thou do come out with things so malapropo --

Mar. Come leave this Mask of foolish modesty,
And let us have where Love and Music call's;
Music! that heightens Love! and makes the soul,
Ready for soft impressions!

Gall. So, she will do his business with a Vengeance!


Fill. Plague of this tempting woman she will ruin me!
I find weak Virtue melt from round my heart,
To give her Tyrant Image a Possession:
So the warm Sun, thaws Rivers Icy tops,
Till in the stream he sees his own bright face!

Gall. Now he comes on apace, -- how is it my friend,
Thou stand st as thou would forgot thy business here!
-- The woman Harry! the fair Curtizan!
Can thou withstand her charms? I Have business of my own,
Prithee fall too -- and talk of Love to her.

Fill. Oh I could talk Eternity away,
In nothing else but Love! -- could thou be honest?

Mar. Honest! was it for that you sent two thousand Crowns.
Or did believe that trifling sum sufficient,
To buy me to the slavery of honesty.

Gall. Hold there my brave Virago.


Fill. No, I would sacrifice a Nobler Fortune,
To buy thy Virtue home!

Mar. What should it idling there!


Fill. When -- make thee constant to some happy man,
That would adore thee for it.

Mar. Unconscionable! constant at my years?
-- Oh it were to cheat a thousand!
Who between this and my dull Age of Constancy,
Expect the distribution of my Beauty.

Gall. It Is a brave wench, --

[Aside.
Fill. Yet charming as thou art, the time will come
When all that Beauty like declining flowers,
Will wither on the stalk, -- but with this difference,
The next kind Spring, brings youth to flowers again,
But faded Beauty never more can bloom,
-- If intrest make thee wicked, I can supply thy pride. --

Mar. Curse on your necessary trash! -- which I despise, but as it is useful to
advance our Love!


Fill. Is Love thy business, who is there born so high,
But Love and Beauty equals,
And thou may choose from all the wishing world?
This wealth together would enrich one man,
Which dealt to all would scarce be Charity.

Mar. Together! it is a Mas would Ransom King's!
Was all this Beauty given, for one poor petty Conquest;
-- I might have made a hundred hearts my slaves,
In this lost time of bringing one to Reason. --
Farewell thou dull Philosopher in Love;
When Age has made me wise, -- I Will send for you again.
[Offers to go Gall holds her.
Gall. By this good lighta Noble glorious Whore!


Fill. Oh stay, -- I must not let such Beauty fall,
-- A whore -- consider yet, the charms of Reputation:
The ease, the quiet and content of innocence,
The awful Reverence, all good men will pay thee,
Who as thou art will gaze without respect,
-- And cry -- what pity it is she is -- a whore --

Mar. O you may give it what course Name you please;
But all this youth and Beauty never was given,
Like Gold to Misers, to be kept from use.
[Going out.
Fill. Lost lost, -- past all Redemption.


Gall. Nay, Gad thou shall not lose her so, -- I Will fetch her back,
And thou shall ask her pardon.
[Runs out after her.
Fill. By Heaven 'twas all a dream! an Aerie dream!
The Visionary pleasure disappears, -- and I Am my self again,
-- 'le fly, before the drowsy fit ore'take me.
[Going out, Eeter Gall. and then Marcella.
Gall. Turn back -- she yields, she yields to pardon thee, -- gone --
Nay hang me if ye part.
[Runs after him, still his Pistol in his hand.
Mar. Gone -- I have no leisure now for more dissembling.

[Takes the Candle and goes in. Enter Petro, leading in Mr. Tickletext, as by
dark.
Pet. Remain here Signior whilst I step and fetch a light.


Tick. Do so, do so honest Barberacho! -- well my escape even now from Sir
Signal was Miraculous! thanks to my prudence and prowess, had he discovered me,
my dominion had ended; and my Authority been of non effect certo.

[Philipa at the door puts in Sir Signal.
Phil. Now Signior yo're out of danger, I Will fetch a Candle, and let ^y Lady
know of your being here!

[Ex. Phil. [Sir Sig. advances a little. Enter Petro with a light, goes between
'em and starts.
Tick. Sir Signal! --


Sir Sig. My Governor!


Pet. The two fools met! a pox of all ill luck: now shall I lose my credit with
both my wise Patrons, my Knight I could have put off, with a small Harlot of my
own, but my Levite having seen my Lady Cornelia that is La Silvianetta, -- None
but that Susanna would satisfy his Eldership: but now they have both saved me
the labor of a farther invention to dispatch 'em.


Sir Sig. I perceive my Governor's as much confounded as my self; -- I Will take
advantage by the forelock, be very impudent and put it upon him faith, -- Ah
Governor, will you never leave your whoring! never be stayed, sober and discreet
as I am


Tick. So so, undone undone, just my Documents to him. --

[Walks about, Sir Sig. follows.
Sir Sig. And must I neglect my precious studys, to follow you, in pure zeal
and tender care of your person! will you never consider where you are? in a
lewd Papish Country! amongst the Romish Heathens, -- and for you a Governor, a
Tutor, a director of unbridled youth, a Gown-man, a Politician, for you I say
to be taken at this unrighteous time of the Night, in a flaunting Cavaliero
dress, an unlawful weapon by your side, going the high way to Satan to a
Curtizan! and to a Romish Curtizan! Oh abomination, Oh Scandalum infiniti.


Tick. Paid in my own Coin!


Pet. So, I Will leave the devil to rebuke sin, and to my young Lady, for a
little of her assistance, in the management of this affair.

[Exit. Pet. Tick.
Tick. -- I do confess, -- I grant ye I am in the house of a Curtizan, and that
I came to visit a Curtizan, and do intend to visit each Night a several
Curtizan: -- till I have finished my work. --


Sir Sig. Every Night one! Oh glutton!


Tick. -- My great work of Conversion, -- upon the whole Nation, Generation,
and Vocation, of this wicked provoking sort of womankinde; called Curtizans: --
I will turn 'em -- yes I will turn 'em, -- for it is a shame that Man -- should
bow down to those that worship Idols! -- and now I think Sir, I have
sufficiently explained the business in hand, -- as honest Barberacho is my
witness! -- And for you -- to -- scandalize -- me -- with so naughty an
interpretation -- afflicts me wonderfully. --

[Pulls out his hankerchief and weeps.
Sir Sig. -- Alas poor Mr. Tickletext, now as I hope to be saved it grieves my
heart to see him weep, -- faith and troth now, I thought thou had some
Carnal assignation, -- but nere stir I beg thy pardon and think thee as
innocent as my self, that I do -- but see the Ladys, here -- s'life dry your
Eyes man!

[Enter Cornelia Phil. and Pet.
Cor. I could beat thee for being thus mistaken, -- and am resolved to flatter
him into some mischief, to be Revenged on 'em for this disappointment, go you
and watch for my Cavalier the while.


Tick. Is she come -- Nay then turn me loose to her. --


Cor. My Cavalier!

[Addressing to Sir Sig. Tick. pulls him by and speaks.
Tick. -- Lady. --


Sir Sig. You Sir, when who the devil made you a Cavalier, -- most Potentisimo
Signiora, I am the man of Title, by Name Sir Signal Buffoon, sole Son and heir
to Eight Thousan^ pound a year. --


Tick. Oh Sir, are you the man she looks for?


Sir Sig. I Sir, No Sir, I Would have ye to know Sir, I scorn any woman be she
never so fair, unless her design be honest and Honorable!


Cor. The man of all the World I Have chosen out, from all the wits and Beauties
I have seen; -- to have most finely beaten!


Sir Sig. How! in Love with me already, -- she is damnable handsome too, now
would my Tutor were hanged a little for an hour or two, out of the way.

[Aside.
Cor. Why fly you not into my Arms, [she approaching, he shuning These Arms that
were designed for soft embraces?


Sir Sig. Ay, and if my Tutor were not here, the devil take him that would
hinder'em, -- and I think that is civil egad!


Tick. When how now Barberacho, what am I cuz^nd then, and is Sir Signal the Man
in savor!

[Aside to ^tro.
Pet. Lord Signior, that so wise a man as you cannot perceive her meaning; for
the devil take me if I can, -- [Aside.] -- When this is done to take off all
suspicion from you -- and lay it on him; -- don't you conceive it Signior!


Tick. Yes honest Rogue, -- Oh the witty wagtail, -- I have a part to play too,
that shall confirm it -- young Gentlewoman. --


Cor. Ah bell ingrate, is it thus you recompense my suffering Love^? to fly this
beauty so adored by all, that slight the ready conquest of the world to trust a
heart with you, -- ah -- Traditor Cruella.


Sir Sig. Poor heart, it goes to the very soul of me to be so coy and scornsull
to her that it does, but a pox on it her over-fondness will discover all.


Tick. Fly, fly, young man! whilst yet thou have a spark of virtue shining in
thee, fly the temptations of this young hypocrite; the love that she pretends
with so much zeal and ardour, is indecent, unwarrantable, and unlawful! first
indecent as she is woman -- for thou art woman -- and beautiful woman -- yes,
very beautiful woman! on whom nature has showed her height of excellence in
the out-work, but, left the in unfinisht, imperfect and impure.


Cor Heavens, what have we here!


Sir Sig. A pox of my Sir Dominie, Now is he beside his Text, and will spoil
all.


Tick. Secondly, Unwarrantable; by what authority do thou seduce with the
allurements of thine eyes, and the conjurements of thy tongue, the wastings of
thy hands, and the tinklings of thy feet, the young men in the Villages?


Cor. Sirrah! how got this madman in? seize him, and take him hence.


Sir Sig. Corpo de mi my Governor tickles her notably i'saith -- but had he
let the care of my soul alone to night, and have let me taken care of my body,
'twould have been more material at this time.


Tick. Thirdly, Unlawful --


Cor. Quite distracted! in pity take him hence, and lead him into ^nesse,
'twill suit his madness best.


Tick. How, distracted! take him hence!


Pet. This wa^ l^cky -- I knew she would come again -- take him hence -- yes,
into her bedchamber -- pretty device to get you to herself Signior.


Tick. Why but is it -- nay, then I will facillitate my departure -- therefore
I say -- oh most beautiful and tempting woman --

[Beginning to pre^h again
Cor. Away with him, give him ^ern straw and darkness,
And cha^ him fast for fear of further mischief.

Pet. She means for fear of losing ye.


Tick. Ah baggage! as fast as she will in those pretty arms,

[Going to lead him off.
Sir Sig. Hold, hold man, Mad said ye -- ha, ha, ha -- mad! when we have a
thousand of these in England that go loose about the streets, and pass with us
for as sober di^creet religious persons -- As a man shall wish to talk nonsense
withal.


Pet. -- You are mistaken Signior, I say he is mad -- stark mad,


Sir Sig. Prithee Barberacho what do thou mean --


Pet. To rid him hence that the may be alone with you -- 'slife Sir, you're
madder then he -- don't you con^eive --


Sir Sig. Ay, ay! n^y, I confe^se, Ill^issima Signiora, my Governor has a Fit
that ta^es him now and then, a kind of a frenzy, -- a figary -- a whim^e -- a
m^ot that bites always at naming of Popery: -- so -- he is ^one. -- Bellissimo
Signiora, -- you have most artificially removed him -- and this extraordinary
proof of your affe^ on is a sign of some small kinden^se toward me, and
though I was something ^oy and reserved before my Governor, Excellentissimo
Signiora, let me te^l you, your love is not cast away.


Cor. Oh Sir you bless too fast! but will you ever love me --


Sir Sig. Love thee! I and li^ with thee too, Most Magnanimous Signiora, and
beget a whole Race of Roman Julius Caesa^s upon thee; nay, now we are alone,
turn me loose to impudence, i'saith.

[ruffles her, ^nter Philipa in haste, shutting the door after her
Phil. Oh Madam here is the young mad English Cavalier got into the house, and
will not be denied seeing you.


Cor. This was lucky!


Sir Sig. How the mad English Cavalier! If this should be our young Count
Galliard now -- I were in a sweet taking -- oh I know by my fears it is he; oh
prithee what kind of a manner of man is he?


Phil. A handsome -- resolute -- brave -- bold --


Sir Sig. Oh enough enough -- Madam -- I Will take my leave -- I see you are --
something busy at present, -- and I Will --


Cor. Not for the World, -- Philipa -- bring in the Cavalier -- that you may,
see there is none here fears him Signior.


Sir Sig. Oh hold hold, -- Madam you are mistaken in that point, for to tell
you the truth, I do fear, -- having -- a certain -- aversion or Antipathy, --
to -- Madam -- a Gentleman -- when Madam they are the very Monsters of the
Nation, they devour every day a Virgin. --


Cor. Good Heavens! and is he such a Fury!


Sir Sig. Oh and the veryest Beelzebub, -- besides Madam he vowed my Death, if
ever he catch me near this house, and he ever keeps his word in cases of this
Nature, -- Oh that is he, [Knocking at the door I know it by a certain trembling
instinct about me, -- Oh what shall I do. --


Cor. When -- I know not, -- can you leap a high window?


Sir Sig. -- He knocks again, -- I protest I Am the worst Vaulter in
Christendom, -- have ye no moderate danger, -- between the two extremes of the
window or the mad Count? no Closet, -- fear has dwindl'd me to the scantling of
a Mousehole.


Cor. -- Let me see, -- I have no leisure to pursue my Revenge farther, and
will rest satisfied with this, -- for this time -- [Aside. -- Give me the
Candle, -- and whilst Philipa is conducting the Cavalier to the Alcove by dark,
-- you may have an opportunity to slip out, -- perhaps there may be danger in
his being seen, -- [Aside. -- farewell fool. --

[Ex. Cornelia with the Candle, Phil. goes to the door, lets in Gall. takes him
by the hand.
Gall. Pox on it my Knights bound for Vitterbo, and there is no persuading him
into sase harbor again, -- he has given me but two hours to dispatch matters
here, -- and then I Am to imbark with him upon this new discovery of honorable
Love, as he calls it, whose adventurers are sools, and the returning Cargo,
that dead Commodity called a wife! a Voyage very suitable to my humor, -- who is
there? --


Phil. A Slave of Silvianetta's, Sir give me your hand. --

[Ex. Over the stage. Sir Sig. goes out softly. [The Scene changes to a Bed
Chamber Alcove, Petro leading in Tickletext.
Pet. Now Signior you're safe and happy; in the Bedchamber of your Mistress.
-- who will be here immediately I Am sure, I Will fetch a light and put you to
bed in the mean time. --


Tick. Not before supper I hope honest Barberacho!


Pet. Oh Signior that you shall do lying, after the manner of the Ancient
Romans.


Tick. Certo, and that was a marevllous good lazy custom.

[Ex. Pet. Enter Philipa with Galliard by dark. --
Phil. My Lady will be with you instantly. --

[goes out.
Tick. Hah, sure I heard some body come softly in at the door: I hope it is the
young Gentlewoman!

[He advances forward.
Gall. Silence! and Night! Love and dear opportunity!
[In a soft tone. Join all your aids to make my Silvia kind,
For I am filled with the expecting bliss,
[Tick. thrusts his head out to listen. And much delay, or disappointment kills
me.

Tick. Disappointment kills me, -- and me too certo. -- it is she. --

[Gropes abeut.
Gall. Oh haste my sair, haste to my longing Arms, --
Where are you dear and lovely st of your Sex?

Tick. That Is I, that is I, mi Alma! mea core mea vita! --

[Groping and speaking low.
Gall. Hah -- art thou come my life! my soul! my joy! -- [Goes to embrace,
Tick. they meet and kiss. -- God's Death what is this a bearded Mistress! Lights
lights there, quickly lights, -- Nay curse me if thou scap'st me. --

[Tick. struggles to get away, he holds him by the Cravat and Periwig, Enter
Petro with a Candle.
Gall. Barberacho, -- consound him it is the sool! whom I found this Evening
about the House, hovering to roost him here! -- hah -- what the devil have I
caught -- a Tarter? Escaped again! the devil's his confederate. --

[Groping. [Pet. puts out the Candle, comes to Tick. unties his Cravat behind,
and he slips his head out of the Periwig and gets away, leaving both in Gall.'s
hands.
Pet. Give me your hand, I Will lead you a back pair of stairs through the
Garden.


Tick. Oh any way to save my Reputation -- oh --


Gall. Let me but once more grasp thee, and thou shall find more safety in the
Devils clutches! none but my Mistress serve ye.

[Gropes out after him [Pet. with Tick. running over the stage, Gall. after'em,
with the Cravat and Perewig in one hand, his Pistol in the other. Enter Philipa
with a light.
Phil. Mercy upon us, what is the matter -- what noise is this -- hah a Pistol
-- what can this mean?

[A Pistol goes off. Enter Sir Signal. running.
Sir Sig. Oh save me, gentle devil, save me, the stairs are fortified witk
Canons and double Culverins; I Am pursued by a whole Regiment of armed men!
here is gold, gold in abundance! save me --


Phil. What Canons? what armed men?


Sir Sig. Finding my self pursued as I was groping my way through the Hall, and
not being able to find the door, I made toward the stairs again, at the foot
of which I was saluted with a great gaun -- a pox of the courtesy.


Gall. [Without] Where are ye Knight, buffoon, dog of Egypt?


Sir Sig. Thunder and Lightning? it is Galliards voice --


Phil. Here, step behind this hanging -- there is a Chimney which may shelter
ye till the storm be over, -- if you be not smothered before.

[Puts hi^ behind the Arras, -- Enter Gall. as before, and Corn. at the other
door.
Cor. Havens! what rude noise is this?


Gall. Where have you hid this fool, this lucky fool?
He whom blind chance, and more ill-judging woman
Has raised to that degree of happiness
That witty men must sigh and toil in vain for.

Cor. Wat sool, what happiness?


Gall. Cease cunning false one to excuse thy self,
See here the Trophies of your shameful choice,
And of my ruin, cruel -- fair -- deceiver!

Cor. Deceiver Sir, of whom -- in what despairing minute did I swear to be a
constant Mistress? to what dull whining Lover did I vow and had the heart to
break it.


Gall. Or if thou had, I know of no such dog as would believe thee; no, thou
art false to thy own charms, and have betray'd'em

To the possession of the vilest wretch
That ever Fortune cursed with happiness;
False to thy joys, false to thy wit and youth
All which thou'st damned with so much careful industry
To an eternal fool,
That all the arts of love can never redeem thee!

Sir Sig. Meaning me, meaning me:

[Peeping out of the Chimny his face blackt.
Cor. A sool, what indiscretion have you seen in me, should make ye think I
would choose a witty man for a lover, who perhaps loves out his month in pure
good husbandry, and in that time does more mischief then a hundred fools; ye
conquer without resistance, ye treat without pity, and triumph without mercy;
and when you're gone, the world cries -- she had not wit enough to keep him,
when indeed you are not sool enough to be kept! thus we forfeit both our
Liberties and discretion with you villainous witty men; for wisdom is but good
success in things, and those that fail are fools!


Gall. Most gloriously disputed!
You're grown a Machivillian in your Art.

Cor. Oh necessary Maxims only, and the first Politiques we learn from
observation -- I Have known a Curtezan grown infamous, despised, decayed, and
ruined, in the possession of you witty men, who when she had the luck to break
her chains, and cast her net for fools, has lived in state, finer then Brides
upon their wedding day, and more profuse then the young amorous Coxcomb that
set her up an idol.


Sir Sig. Well argued of my side, I see the Bagage loves me!

[Peeping out with a face more smutted.
Gall. And have thou! oh, but prithee Jilt me on,
And say thou have not, destined all thy charms,
To such a wicked use;
Is that dear Face and Mouth for slaves to kiss:
Shall those bright Eyes be gazed upon, and serve
But to reflect the Images of fools?

Sir Sig. That Is I still.

[Peeping more black.
Gall. Shall that soft tender bosom be approcht,
By one who wants a Soul, to breathe in languishment,
At every kiss that presses it.

Sir Sig. Soul, what a pox care I for Soul, -- as long as my person is so
Amiable. --


Gall. -- No, Renounce that dull discretion that undoes thee,
Cunning is cheaply to be wise, leave it to those that have
No other powers to gain a Conquest by,
It is below thy charms; --
-- Come swear, -- and be forsworn most damnably, --
Thou have not yielded yet; say 'twas intended only,
And though thou lie, by Heaven I must believe thee, --
-- Say, -- have thou -- given him -- all?

Cor. I Have done as bad, we have discourst th'affair,
And it is concluded on. --

Gall. As bad! by Heaven much worse! discoursed with him,
Were It thou so wretched, so deprived of sense,
To hold discourse with such an Animal?
Damn it! the sin is never to be forgiven!
-- Had thou been wanton to that lewd degree,
By dark he might have been conducted to thee;
Where silently he might have served thy purpose,
And thou had had some poor excuse for that!
But bartering words with fools admits of none.

Cor. I grant ye, -- had I talked ^nse to him, -- which had been enough to have
lost him for ever.


Sir Sig. Poor Devil, how fearful it is of losing me!

[Aside.
Gall. That Is some atonement for thy other sins, -- come break thy word and
wash it quite away.


Sir Sig. That cogging will not do my good friend, that will not do.


Gall. Thou shall be just and perjured, and pay my heart the debt of Love you
owe it.


Cor. And would you have the heart -- to make a whore of me?


Gall. With all my Soul, and the Devils in it if I can give thee a greater proof
of my passion.


Cor. I rather fear you would deboch me, into that dull slave called a wife:


Gall. A wife! have I no Conscience, no Honor in me!
Prithee believe I would not be so wicked, --
No, -- my desires are generous! and Noble,
To set thee up, that glorious insolent thing,
That makes mankind such slaves! almighty Curtizan!
-- Come! to thy private Chamber let us haste,
The sacred Temple of the God of Love!
And consecrate thy power!
[Offers to bear her off
Cor. Stay, do you take me then for what I seem!


Gall. I Am sure I do! and would not be mistaken for a Kingdom! But if thou
art not! I can soon mend that fault, And make thee so, -- come -- I Am
impatient to begin the Experiment

[Offers again to carry her off.
Cor. Nay then I am in carnest, -- hold mistaken stranger! -- I am of Noble
birth! and should I in one hapless loving minute, destroy the Honor of my
House, ruin my youth and Beauty! and all that virtuous Education, my hoping
parents gave me?


Gall. Pretty dissembled pride and innocence! and wounds no less then smiles!
-- come let us in, -- where I will give thee leave to frown and Jilt, such
pretty srauds advance the appetite.

[Offers again.
Cor. By all that is good I am a Maid of Quality! Blessed with a Fortune equal to
my Birth!


Gall. I do not credit thee, or if I did!
For once I would dispense with Quality,
And to express my Love! take thee with all these faults!

Cor. And being so, can you expect I Will yield?


Gall. The sooner for that Reason if you are wise;
The Quality will take away the scandal, --
Do not torment me longer. --
[Offers to lead her again.
Cor. Stay and be undeceived, -- I do conjure ye. --


Gall. Art thou no Curtizan?


Cor. Not, on my life nor do intend to be!


Gall. No prostitute! nor do intend to be?


Cor. By all that is good, I only feigned to be so!


Gall. No Curtizan! have thou deceived me then?
Tell me thou wicked -- honest couzening Beauty!
Why did thou draw me in, with such a fair pretense,
Why such a temping preface to invite,
And the whole piece so useless and unedifying?
-- Heavens! not a Curtizan!
Why from thy window did thou take my vows,
And make such kind returns? Oh damn your quality, what honest
Whore but would have scorned thy cunning.

Cor. I make ye kind returns!


Gall. -- Persuade me out of that too! 'twill be like thee!


Cor. By all my wishes I never held discourse with you -- but this Evening
since I first saw your face!


Gall. Oh the Impudence of Honesty and quallity in woman!
A plague upon 'em both, they have undone me,
Bear witness Oh thou gentle Queen of night,
Goddess of shades, adored by Lovers most;
How often under thy covert she has damned her self,
With feigned love to me!
[in passion.
Cor. Heavens! this is Impudence, that power I call to witness too how damnably
thou injur'st me;

[angry.
Gall. You never from your Window talked of love to me?


Cor. Never.


Gall. So, nor you're no Curtizan;


Cor. No by my life!


Gall. So, nor do intend to be, by all that is good;


Cor. By all that is good never.


Gall. So, -- and you are real honest, and of quallity?


Cor. Or may I still be wretched!


Gall. So, then farewell honesty and quallity! -- God's Death what a night, what
hopes, and what a Mistress; have I all lost for honesty and quallity!

[offers to go.
Cor. Stay. --


Gall. I will be wreck't first, -- let go thy hold!
[in fury. -- Unless thou would repent. --
[in a soft tone.
Cor. I cannot of my fixed resolves for Virtue!
-- But if you could but -- love me -- Honorably --
For I assumed this habit and this dress --

Gall. To cheat me of my heart the readyest way! And now like Gaming Rooks,
unwilling to give over till you have hook't in my last stake my body too, you
cousen me with honesty, -- oh Damn the dice -- Ple have no more on it I, the
game's too deep for me! unless you played upon the square, Or I could cheat
like you -- farewell Quallity! --

[goes out.
Cor. He Is gone, Phillipa run and fetch him back; I have but this short night
allowed for Liberty! Perhaps to morrow I may be a slave? [Ex. Phill. -- Now a
my Conscience there never came good of this troublesome virtue -- hanged I was
too serious, but a Devil on it he looks so Charmingly -- and was so very
pressing I durst trust my gay Humor and good Nature no farther!

[She walks about, Sir Signal peeps and then comes out.
Sir Sig. He Is gone! -- so -- ha ha ha -- as I hope to breath Madam, you have
most neatly dispatched him; poor fool -- to compare his wit and his person to
mine. --


Cor. Hah, the Coxcombe here still. --


Sir Sig. Well this Countenance of mine never failed me yet:


Cor. Ah --

[Looking about on him sees his face black squeeks and runs away.
Sir Sig. Ah, When what the Deavilo's that for, -- When it is I, it is I m^st
Serenissimo Signiora!

[Gall. returns and Philipa.
Gall. What noise is that, or is it some new design. To fetch me back again?


Sir Sig. How! Galliard returned!


Gall. Hah! what art thou? a ^ortall or a Devil?


Sir Sig. How! not know me? now might I pass upon him most daintily for a
Devil, but that I have been beaten out of one Devilship already, and dare
venture no more Conjurationing.


Gall. Dog, what art thou -- not speak! Nay then I Will inform my self, and try
if you be flesh and blood.

[Kicks him, he avoids.
Sir Sig. No matter for all this -- it is better to be kick't then discovered,
for then I shall be killed! -- and I can sacrifice a limb or two to my
reputation at any time!


Gall. Death, it is the fool, the fool for whom I am abused and jilted, it is
some revenge to disappoint her cunning, and drive the slave before me -- Dog!
were you her last reserve. --

[kicks him, he keeps in his cry.
Sir Sig. Still I say Mum!


Gall. The Ass will still appear through all disguises,
Nor can the Devils shape secure the fool --
[Kicks him he runs out as Cor. enters and holds Gall.
Cor. Hold Tyrant --


Gall. Oh Women! Women! fonder in your Appetites Then Beasts; and more
unnatural!

For they but couple with their kind, but you Promiscuously shuffle your
Brutes together

The sop of business with the lazy Gown-man -- the learned Ass with the
Illiterate wit. The empty coxcombe with the Pollititian, as Dull and
insignificant as he; from the gay fool made more a beast by fortune to all the
loathed infirmities of Age!

-- Farewell -- I scorn to crowd with the dull Herd! Or graze upon the common
where they batten --

[Goes out.
Fill. I know he loves, by this concern I know it,
And will not let him part disatisfy'd!
[Goes out.
Cor. -- By all that is good I love him more each [Enter Marcella. moment, and
know he is destined to be mine. --

-- What hopes Marcella, what is it we next shall do?


Mar. Fly to our last reserve, come let us haste and dress! in that disguise we
took our flight from Vitterbo in, -- and something -- I resolve!


Cor. My soul informs me what! -- I have it! a project worthy of us both -- Which
whilst we dress I Will tell thee, -- and by which My dear Marcella we will stand
or fall, It Is our last stake we fet; and have at all. --


ACT V. SCENE I.
Enter Petro, Tickletext, from the Garden.
Tick. HAste honest Barberacho, before the day discover us to the wicked world,
and that more wicked Galliard!


Pet. Well Signior, of a bad turn 'twas a good one, that he took you for Sir
Signal! the scandal lys at his door now Sir, -- so the Ladders fast, you may
now mount and away. --


Tick. Very well go your ways, and commend me honest Barberacho to the young
Gentlewomen! and let her kno^ as soon as I may be certain to run no hazard in
my Reputation, I Will visit her again!


Pet. I Will warrant ye Sigmor for the future!


Tick. So, now get you gone lest we be discovered!


Pet. Farewell Signior, a bon viage.

[Ex. Pet. Tick. descends.
Tick. It Is mavelous dark, and I have lost my Lanthorn in the fray! [Groping]
-- hah -- where abouts am I -- hum -- what have we here! -- ah help help help!
[stumbles at the Well, gets hold of the rope and slides down in the Bucket. I
shall be drowned, fire! fire, fire, for I have water enough! Oh for some house,
-- some street, nay would Rome it self were a second time in flames, that my
deliverance might be wrought by the necessity for water, -- but no human help
is nigh -- oh.

[Enter Sir Sig. as before.
Sir Sig. Did ever any Knight adventurer, run through so many disasters in one
Night! my worshipful carcass has been cudgel^d most plentifully, first banged
for a coward, which by the way was none of my fault, I cannot help Nature! then
clawd away for a Diavillo! there I was the fool! but who can help that too!
frighted with Gall's coming into an Ague, then chimney'd into a Feavor, where I
had a fine regale of soot, a perfume which nothing but my Cacamarda Orangate
could excel! and which I find by -- [snufs] my smelling has defaced Natures
mage, and a second time made me be suspected for a devil! -- let me see, --
[Opens his Lanthorn and looks on his hands -- it is so -- I am in a clenly
pickle! if my face be of the same piece, I am fit to scare away old Beelzebub
himself faith: [Wipes his face. -- Ay -- it is so -- like to like quoth the
devil to the Collier! well I Will home, scrub my self clean if possible, get me
to bed, devise a handsome lie to excuse my long stay to my Governor and all is
well, and the man has his Mare again! [shuts his Lanthorn and gropes away, runs
against the Well. -- que questo [feels gently.] make me thankful it is
substantial wood! by your leave -- [Opens his Lanthorn. how! a Well! sent by
providence that I may wash my self, lest people smoke me by the scent, and beat
me anew for stinking: [sets down his Lanthorn, pulls of his Masking coat, and
goes to draw water. It Is a damnable heavy Bucket, now do I fancy I shall look
when I am washing my self, like the sign of the Labor in vain.


Tick. So my cry is gone forth, and I am delivered by Miracle from this Dungeon
of death and darkness: this cold Element of destruction. --


Sir Sig. Hah -- sure I heard a dismal hollow voice. --

[Tick. appears in the Bucket, above the Well.
Tick. What art thou come in charity. --


Sir Sig. Ah le Diavillo! le Diavillo! le Diavillo. -- [Lets go the Bucket, and
is running frighted away. Enter Fillamour and Page, he returns. -- How a man!
was ever wretched wite so miserable, the devil at one hand, and a Roman
Night-walker at the other! which danger shall I choose! --

[Gets to the door of the house.
Tick. So, I am got up at last -- thanks to my Knight, for I am sure 'twas he!
hah he is here -- I Will hear his business.

[Goes near to Fillamour.
Fill. Confound this woman! this bewitching woman,
I cannot shake her from my sullen heart,
Spite of my Soul I linger here abouts;
And cannot to Vitterbo.

Tick. Very good! a dainty Rascal this!

Enter Galliard with a Lanthorn, as from Silvia's house, held by Philipa.
Fill. -- Hah who is this coming from her house, perhaps it is Galliard!


Gall. No Argument shall fetch me back by Heaven?


Fill. It Is the mad Rogue!


Tick. Oh Lord it is Galliard! and angry too, now could I but get off and leave
Sir Signal to be beaten, 'twere a rare project, -- but it is impossible without
discovery.


Fill. But will you hear her Signior!


Gall. That is, will I lose more time about her! plague on it I have thrown away
already such Songs, and sonets, such Madrigalls and ^osies, such Night walks,
sighs, and direful Lovers looks, as would have mollify'd any woman of
Conscience and Religion! and now to be popt 'ith mouth with Quality! well if
ever you catch me lying with any but honest well meaning Damzells hereafter
hang me: -- farewell old secret farewell! [Ex. Philipa. -- Now am I ashamed of
being cuzend so damnably, Fillamour that virtuous Rascal will so laugh at me!
s'heart could I but have debaucht him, we had been on equal terms, -- but I
must help my self with lying, and swear I have -- a --


Fill. You shall not need, I Will keep your counsel Sir!


Gall. Hah -- este vous la! --


Tick. How Fillamour all this while, some comfort yet, I am not the only
professor that dissembles! but how to get away. --


Gall. Oh Harry, the most damnably defeated!

[A noise of swords.
Fill. Hold! what noise is that! two men coming this way as from the house of
the Curtizans.

[Enter Julio backwards fighting Octavio and bravo'^!
Gall. Hah on retreating, -- sdeath I Have no sword!

Enter Julio and Octavio fighting.
Fill. Here Is one! I Will take my Pages!

[Takes the Boys sword.
Gall. Now am I mad for mischief, here hold my Lanthorn Boy!

[They fight on Julio's side, and fight Octavio out at the other side! Enter Laura
and Sabina! at the sore-door -- which is the same, where Sir Signal stands,
Tick. groping up that way! finds Sir Sig. just entering in: Lau. and Sab. pass
over the stage.
Sir Sig. Hah a door open! I care not who it belongs too, it is better dying
within doors like a man then in the street like a dog!

[Going in Tick. in great fear comes up and pulls him.
Tick. Signior! a gentle Signior, whoever ye are that owns this Mansion, I
beseech you to give protection to a wretched man! half dead with fear and
injury!


Sir Sig. Nay, I defy the devil to be more dead with fear then I! -- Signior
you may enter! perhaps it is some body that will make an excuse for us both, --
but hark they return!

[And both go in: just after Laura and Sabina enter.
Lau. He Is gone! he is gone! perhaps for ever gone, -- tell me thou silly
manager of Love! how got this Ruffian in, how was it possible without thy
knowledge, -- he could get admittance.


Sab. Now as I hope to live and learn I know not Madam! unless he followed you
when you let in the Cavalier, which being by dark he easily concealed himself;
no doubt some Lover of the Silvianetta's who mistaking you for her! took him
too for a Rival!


Lau. It Is likely, and my Fortune is too blame, my cursed Fortune
Who like Misers, deals her scanty bountys with so slow a hand,
That or we die before the blessing falls,
Or have it snatched ere we can call it ours!
[Raving.] To have him in my house, to have him kind!
Kind as young Lovers when they meet by stelth:
As fond as Age to Beauty! and as soft,
As Love and wit could make impatient youth,
Preventing even my wishes and desires,
-- Oh Gods! and then! even then to be defeated,
Then from my ore joy'd Arms to have hi^ snatched;
Then when our vows, had made our freedom lawful!
What Maid could suffer a surprise so cruel!
-- The day begins to break, -- go search the streets,
And bring me news he is safe or I am lost.
[Enter Gall. Fill. and Julio.
Fill. Galliard! where art thou!


Gall. Here safe and by thy side. --


Lau. It Is he!


Jul. Who ere he were, the Rogue fought like a fury, and but for your timely
aid I Would been in some danger!


Fill. But Galliard, thou were telling me thy adventure with Silvianetta! there
may be comfort in it.


Lau. So, now I shall hear with what concern he speaks of me.-

[aside.
Gall. Oh damn her, damn her!


Lau. Hah!

[Aside.
Gall. The very'st jilt that ever learnt the Art.


Lau. Heavens!


Gall. Death the whore took me, for some Amorous English Elder Brother! and was
for Matrimony in the devils name! thought me a loving fool, that nere had seen
so glorious a sight before! and would at any rate enjoy!


Lau. Oh Heavens! I am amazed! How much he differs from the thing he was, but a
few minutes since.

[Aside.
Gall. And to advance her price, set up for Quality! may swore she was a Maid!
and that she did but Act the Curtizan!


Lau. Which then he seemed to give a credit too, -- oh the forsworn dissembler.


Gall. But when I came to the matter then in debate, she was for Honorable
Love forsooth, and would not yield no marry would she, not under a License from
the Parson of the Parish.


Jul. Who was it prithee, 'twere a good deed to be so revenged on her!


Gall. Pox on her no, I Am sure she is a damned gypsy, for at the same time she
had her Lovers in reserve, lay hid in her Bedchamber.


Lau. 'Twas that he took unkindly.
And makes me guilty of that rude Address!

Fill. Another Lover had she!


Gall. Yes, our Coxcomb Knight Buffoon, laid by for a rellishing bit, in case I
proved not seasoned to her mind.


Lau. Hah! he knew him then!


Gall. But damn her, she passes with the Night, the day will bring new Objects.


Fill. Oh I do not doubt it Frank!


Lau. False and inconstant! Oh I shall rave Siilvio. --

[Aside to Silv. Enter Cornelia! in Man's Clothes with a Letter.
Cor. Here be the Cavaliers! give me kind Heaven but hold of him, and if I
keep him not, I here renounce my charms of wit and Beauty? -- Signiors, is
there a Cavalier amongst ye called Fillamour.


Fill. I own that name; what would you Sir.


Cor. Only deliver this Signior.

[Fill. goes aside opens his Lanthorn and reads, Jul. and Gall talk aside.
Fill. [Reads.] I Will only tell you I am Brother to that Marcella whom you have
injured; to oblige you to meet me an hour hence, in the Piazo Despagnia! I need
not say with your sword in your hand, since you will there meet, -- Julio
Sebastiano, Murisim: -- hah! her Brother sure -- returned from Travel, [Aside.
-- Signior -- I will not fail to answer it as he desires, [to Cornelia. I Will
take this opportunity to steal off undiscovered, [Aside going out.


Cor. So I Have done my sisters business, now for my own.


Gall. But my good friend, pray what adventure have you been on to Night.


Jul. Faith Sir, 'twas like to have proved a pleasant one, I came just now from
the Silvianetta, -- the fair young Curtizan.


Cor. Hah! what said the man -- came from me!

[Aside.
Gall. How Sir, you with Silvianetta! when?


Jul. Now, all the dear live long Night.


Cor. A pox take him, who can this be? --

[Aside.
Gall. This Night! this Night! that is not yet departed!


Jul. This very happy Night: -- I told you I saw a lovely woman at St. Peter's
Church.


Gall. You did so.


Jul. I told you too I followed her home, but could learn neither her Name nor
quality, but my Page getting ino the acquaintance of one of hers, brought me
news of both: her Name Silvianetta, her quality a Curtizan!


Cor. I at Church yesterday! Now hang me if I had any such devout thoughts
about me, when what a damned scandalous Rascal this.


Jul. Filled with hopes of success, at Night I made her a visit, and under her
window had a skirmish with some Rival, who was then serinading her:


Gall. Was It he that fought us then, -- [Aside] -- but it seems you were not
mistaken in the house, -- on with your story pray -- death I grow jealous now,
-- [Aside] you came at Night you said? --


Jul. Yes, and was received at the door, by the kind Silvianetta, who softly
whispered me, come to my bosom and be safe for ever! and doubtless took me for
some happier man.


Lau. Confusion on him, 'twas my very language!

[Aside raving.
Jul. Then led me by dark, into her Chamber!


Cor. Oh this damned lying Rascal! I do this?

[Aside.
Jul. But oh the things, the dear obliging things, the kind the fair young
charmer said and did.


Gall. To thee!


Jul. To me.


Gall. Did Silvianetta do this, Silvianetta the Curtizan.


Jul. That passes Sir for such, but is indeed of quality.


Cor. This stranger is the devil! how should he know that secret else.


Jul. She told me too 'twas for my sake alone, whom from the first minute she
saw, she Loved! she had assumed that Name and that disguise, the sooner to
invite me.


Lau. It Is plain, the things I uttered! -- oh my heart!


Gall. Curse on the public jilt, the very flattery she would have past on me.


Cor. Pox take him, I must draw on him, I cannot hold!

[Aside,
Gall. Was ever such a whore.


Lau. Oh that I knew this man, whom by mistake! [Aside, I lavisht all the
secrets of my soul too!

[Aside,
Jul. I pressed for something more then dear expressions,
And found her yield apace,
But sighing told me, of a fatal Contract,
She was obliged to make to one she never saw,
And yet if I would vow to Marry her, when she could prove to
Merit it, she would deny me nothing.

Lau. 'Twas I, by Heaven that heedless fool was I.


Jul. Which I with Lovers eager joy performed,
And on my knees uttered the hasty words,
Which she repeated ore and gave me back!

Gall. So, he has swallowed with a vengeance the very bait she had prepared for
me, or anybody that would bite.

[Aside,
Jul. But ere I could receive the dear reward of all my vows,
I was drawn upon, by a man that lay hid in her Chamber:
Whether by chance or design I know not, who fought me out,
And was the same you found me engaged with.

Cor. A pleasant Rascal this, as ere the devil taught his lesson too.


Gall. So, my comfort is she has jilted him too most damnably.


Cor. 'Slife I have anger enough to make me valiant, why should I not make use
on it, and beat this lying Villain whilst the sit holds.


Gall. And you design to keep these vows, though you're contracted to another
woman?


Jul. I neither thought of breaking those, or keeping these, My soul was all
employed another way.


Lau. -- It shall be so, -- Silvio -- I Have thought upon a way that must redeem
all, -- hark and observe me. --

[Takes Sil. and whispers to him.
Jul. But I Am impatient to pursue my adventure, Which I must endeavor to do,
before the light discover the mistake; -- Farewell Sir.

[Ex. Julio.
Gall. Go and be ruined quite, she has the knack of doing it.


Silv. I Will warrant ye Madam for my part.

[Ex. Laura!
Gall. -- I have a damned hankering after this woman, why could not I have put
the cheat on her, as Julio has, I stand as little on my word as he! a good
round Oath or two had done the business, -- but a pox on it I loved too well to
be so wise.

[Silvio comes up to him.
Sab. Conlicentia Signior! Is your name Galliard?


Gall. I am the man sweetheart, -- let me behold thee -- hah -- Sans Cour's!
Page.


Sab. A dews of his Lanthorn, what shall I say now? [Aside. -- Softly Signior,
I am that Page whose chiefest business is to attend my Lords Mistress Sir.


Cor. His Mistress: whose Mistress, what Mistress; s'life how that little word
has nettled me!

[Aside listening close.
Gall. Upon my life the woman that he boasted of. [Aside hugging himself. -- a
fair young Amorous -- Noble -- Wanton a -- And she would speak with me my
lovely boy?


Sab. You have prevented the commands I had! but should my Lord know of it; --


Gall. Thou were undone! I understand thee --
And will be as secret as a Confessor --
As lonely shades, or everlasting Night -- come lead the way. --

Cor. Where I will follow thee, though to the bed of her you are going too, and
even prevent thy very business there. --

[Aside. Exeunt. Enter Laura as before in a Nightgown. Scone, A Chamber.
Lau. Now for a power that never yet was known
To charm this stranger quickly into love,
Assist my eyes thou God of kind desires;
Inspire my language with a moving force
That may at once gain and secure the Victory.
Enter Sil.
Sab. Madam your Lovers here: your time's but short, consider too Count Julio
may arrive!


Lau. Let him arrive! having secured my self of what I love,
I Will leave him to complain his unknown loss
To careless winds as pittyless as I: Sabina see the Rooms
Be filled with lights! whilst I prepare my self to entertain him.
Darkness shall never deceive me more --
[Enter to Sil. Gall. gazing^ about him Cor. peeping at the door.
Gall. All Is wondrous rich, -- Gay as the Court of love, But still and silent
as the shades of death; -- Hah -- Music! and Excellent! [Soft Music whilst
they speak, Poxon't -- but where is the woman --! need no preparation. --


Cor. No you are always provided for such incounters and can fall too Sans
Ceremony, -- but I may spoil you stomach.

[A Song tuning
Gall. A voice too, by Heaven and it is a sweet one:
Grant she be young and I Will excuse the rest.
Yet vie for pleasure with the happyest Roman!
[The Song as by Laura, after which soft Music till she enters. The SONG By a
Person of Quality.
FArewell the World and mortal cares
The ravished Strephon cried,
As full of joy and tender tears
He lay by ^hillis side:
Let others toil for wealth and fame,
Whilst not one thought of mine,
At any other bliss shall aim,
But those dear arms, but those dear arms of thine.
Still let me gaze on thy bright eyes,
And hear thy charming tongue,
I nothing askt' increase my joys
But thus to feel'em long;
In close embraces let us lie,
And spend our lives to come,
Then let us both together dye
And be each others, be each others Tomb.
-- Death I am fired already with her voice. --

Cor. So, I am like to thrive, --

[Enter Julio.
Jul. What mean these lights in every room, as if to make the day without the
Sun: and quite destroy my hopes! -- hah Galliard here!


Cor. A man! grant it some Lover, or some Husband Heaven!
Or any thing that will but spoil the sport,
The Lady! oh blast her! how fair she is.
[Enter Laura with her Lute dressed in a careless rich dress, followed by Sabina
to whom she gives her Lute.
Jul. Hah! it is the same woman!

[Sees Julio and starts
Lau. A stranger here! what Art can help me now. --

[She pauses.
Gall. By all my joys a lovely woman it is,


Lau. Help me deceit, dissembling, all that is woman --

[She starts and gazes on Gall. pulling Silvio
Cor. Sure I should know that face. --


Lau. Ah look my Silvio! is it not he! -- it is!
That smile, that Air, that mien, that Bow is his!
It Is he by all my hopes, by all my wishes!

Gall. He, yes yes, I am a He, I thank my stars
And never blest'em half so much for being so,
As for the dear variety of woman!

Cor. Curse on her charms she will make him love in earnest.


Lau. It is my Brother! and report was false!

[Going toward him.
Gall. How her Brother! Gad I Am sorry we are so near akin with all My soul; for
I am damnably pleased with her!


Lau. Ah why do ye shun my Arms -- or are ye Air!
And not to be enclosed in human twines --
Perhaps you are the Ghost of that dead Lord!
That comes to whisper vengance to my soul.

Lau. Shart! a Ghost! this is an odd preparative to 'love.

(Aside.
Cor. It Is Laura! my Brother Julio's Mistress, and Sister to Octavio!


Gall. Death, Madam, do not scare away my love, with tales of Ghosts, and
fancies of the dead, I Will give ye proofs I Am living loving man, as errant an
Amorous a Mortal as heart can wish -- I hope she will not jilt me too.

[Aside
Cor. So! he is at his common proof for all Arguments If she should take him at
his word now, and she will be sure to do it.


Lau. Amiable stranger pardon the mistake!
And charge it on my passion for a Brother!
Devotion was not more retired then I,
Vestals, or widowed Matrons when they weep,
Till by a fatal chance I saw in you;
The dear resemblance of a Murdered Brother!
[Weeps.
Jul. What the devil can she mean by this.

[Aside.
Lau. I durst not trust my eyes, yet still I gazed,
And that increased my faith you were my Brother,
But since they erred, and he indeed is dead,
Oh give me leave to pay you all that love,
That tenderness and passion that was his!
[Weeping.
Cor. So, I knew she would bring matters about some way or other, oh mischief
mischief help me! 'slife I can be wicked enough when I have no use on it, and
now I have, I Am as harmless as a fool.

[As Gall. is earnestly talking to Lau. Julio pulls him by the sleeve.
Lau. Oh save me! save me from the Murderer!


Jul. Hah!


Gall. A Murderer where!


Lau. I faint, I dye with horror of the sight.


Gall. Hah -- my friend a Murderer! sure you mistake him Madam, he saw not Rome
till yesterday, -- an honest youth Madam and one that knows his distance upon
occasion! -- 'slife how came thou here -- prithee begone and leave us!


Jul. Why do you know this Lady Sir.


Gall. Know her! -- a -- ay ay -- man -- and all her Relations, she is of
quality, -- withdraw withdraw -- Madam -- a -- he is my friend and shall be
civil. --


Lau. I have an easy faith for all you say, -- but yet however innocent he be
or dear to you, I beg he woul'd depart -- he is so like my brothers Murderer,
that one look more would kill me --


Jul. A Murderer! charge me with cowardice, with Rapes or Treasons -- Gods a
Murderer!


Cor. A devil on her! she has robbed the sex of all their arts of cunning.


Gall. Pox on it you are rude! go, in good manners go --


Lau. I do conjure ye torture me no more,
If you would have me think you're not that Murderer.
Be gone -- and leave your Friend to calm my heart
Into some kinder thoughts!

Gall. Ay, ay, prithee go! I Will be sure to do thy business for thee;


Cor. Yes, yes, you will not fail to do a friendly part no doubt --


Jul. It Is but in vain to stay -- I see she did mistake her man last Night, and
'twas to chance I am in debt for that good fortune! -- I will retire to show my
obedience Madam!

[Ex. Jul. Gall. going to the door with him.
Lau. He Is gone and left me Mistress of my wish!
Descend ye little winged Gods of Love,
Descend and hover round our bower of bliss,
Play all in various forms about the youth;
[Aside. And empty all our quivers at his heart:
[Gall. returns, she takes him by the hand. -- Advance thou dearer to my soul
then kindred,
Thou more then Friend or Brother,
Let meaner Souls born base conceal the God!
Love owns his Monarchy within my heart,
So Kings that daign to visit humble roofs:
Enter disguised, but in a Noble Palace,
Own their great Power, and show themselves in glory.

Gall. I am all transport with this sudain bliss,
And want some kind allay to sit my Soul for recompense.

Cor. Yes, yes, my forward friend you shall have an allay, if all my Art can
do it, to damp thee even to disappointment.


Gall. My Souls all wonder now, let us retire,
And gaze till I have softend it to Love.
[Going out is ^ot by Cor.
Cor. Madam!


Lau. More interruption! -- hah. --

[Turns.
Cor. My Master the young Count Julio.


Lau. Julio!


Gall. What of him.

[Aside.
Cor. Being just now arrived at Rome!


Lau. Heavens! arrived!

[Aside.
Cor. Sent me to beg the Honor of waiting on you.


Lau. Sure stranger you mistake! --


Cor. If Madam you are Laura Lucretia! --


Gall. Laura Lucretia! by Heaven the very woman he is to marry.

[Aside.
Lau. This would surprise a Virgin less resolved,
But what have I to do with ought but Love!
[Aside. -- And can your Lord imagine this an hour,
To make a ceremonious visit in!

Gall. Ridles by Love! or is it some trick again.

[Aside.
Cor. Madam, where vows are past, the want of ceremony may be pardoned!


Lau. I do not use to have my will disputed,
Begone and let him know I Will be obeyed!

Cor. 'Slife she will out-wit me yet, --
[Aside. Madam I see this niceness is not general,
-- You can except some Lovers.

Gall. My pert young confident depart, and let your Master know he will find a
better welcome from the fair vain Curtizan, la Silvianetta! where he has past
the Night and given his vows.


Lau. Dearly devised and I must take the hint.

[Aside smiling.
Cor. He knows me sure, and says all this to plague me. [Aside. My Lord, my
Master with a Curtizan! he is but just now ariv'd.


Gall. A pretty focward saucy lying boy this! and may do well in time, -- Madam
believe him not, I saw his Master yesterday, -- converst with him, -- I know
him he is my friend! -- 'twas he that parted hence but now, -- he told me all
his passion for a Curtizan, scarce half an hour since.


Cor. So!


Lau. I do not doubt it, oh how I love him for this seasonable lie,
-- And can you think I Will see a perjured man,
[To Cor. Who gives my intrest in him to another,
-- Do I not help ye out most Artfully. --
[And laughing to Gall.
Cor. I see they are resolved to out face me.


Gall. Nay vowed to marry her!


Lau. Heavens to marry her!


Cor. To be conquered at my own weapon too, -- lying it is a hard case! --

[Aside.
Gall. Go boy you may be gone, you have your Answer child, And may depart --
come Madam let us leave him.


Cor. Gone! no help, death I Will quarrel with him, -- nay fight him, -- Damn
him, -- rather then loose him thus, -- stay Signior, [Pulls him. -- You call me
boy, -- but you may find your self mistaken Sir, -- And know -- I Have that
about me may convince ye, [Showing his sword. -- 'Thas done some Execution!


Gall. Prithee on whom or what? small Village curs! The barking of a Mastive
would unman thee.

[Offers to go.
Cor. Hold -- follow me from the refuge of her Arms!
As you are a man, I do conjure thee do it:
-- 'hope he will, I Will venture beating for it.
[Aside.
Gall. Yes, my brisk -- little Rascal -- I will -- a --


Lau. By all that is good you shall not stir from hence, ho who waits there,
Antonio, Silvio, Gaspero, [Enter all] -- take that firce youth and bear him
from my sight.


Cor. You shall not need, 'slife these rough Rogues will be too hard for me, --
've one prevention left, -- farewell, May thou supply her with as feable Art,
As I should do, were I to play thy part.

[Goes out with the rest.
Gall. He Is gone! Now lets redeem our blessed minutes lost. [Goin Scene changes
to the Street. -- Piazo Despagnia!

Enter Julio alone.
Jul. Now by this breaking daylight I could rave, I knew she mistook me last
Night which made me so eager to improve my luckey minutes, -- fure Galliard is
not the man, I long to know the mystery, -- hah -- who is here -- Fillamour.

[Enter Fillamour met by Marcella in Man's Clothes, they pass by each other --
cock and justle.
Mar. I take it -- you are he I look for Sir!


Fill. My Name is Fillamour.


Mar. Mine, -- Julio Sebastiano Murisini.


Jul. Hah, my Name by Heaven.

[Aside.
Fill. I doubt it not, since in that Lovely face,
I see the charming Image of Marcella!

Jul. Hah. --


Mar. You might, ere Travel rufled me to man,
-- I should return thy praise whilst I survey thee,
But that I came not here for Complement, -- draw. --
[Draws
Fill. Why cause you are like Marcella?


Mar. That were sufficient reason for thy hate,
But mine is because thou have betrayed her basely;
-- She told me all the story of her Love,
How well you meant, how honestly you swore,
And with a thousand tears employed my Aid:
To break the contract she was forced to make,
T'Octavio, and give her to your Arms.
I did, and brought you word of our design,
-- I need not tell ye what returns you made;
Let it suffice my Sister was neglected,
Neglected for a Curtizan, -- a whore!
I watched and saw each circumstance of falsehood,

Jul, Damnation! what means this?


Fill. I scorn to save my life by lies or flatterys,
But credit me, the Visit that I made,
I durst have sworn had been to my Marcella!
Her Face, her Eyes, her Beauty was the same,
Only the business of her Language differed,
And undeceived my hope.

Mar. In vain thou think to flatter me to faith, --
When thou would my Sisters Letter in thy hand, which ended that dispute
Even then I saw with what regret you read it:
What care you took to disobey it too, --
The shivering Maid, half dead with fears and terrors of the Night,
In vain expected a relief from Love or thee,
Draw that I may return her the glad news I have revenged her.

Jul. Hold much mistaken youth! it is I am Julio, thou Fillamour know my
Name, knows I ariv'd but yesterday at Rome, and heard the killing news of both
my Sisters flights, Marcella and Cornelia, -- and thou art some Imposture.

[To Marcella.
Mar. If this now should be true, I were in a fine condition. --


Fill. Fled! Marcella fled!


Jul. 'Twas she I told thee yesterday was lost,
But why art thou concerned, -- explain the Mystery!

Fill. I loved her more then life! nay even than Heaven!
And do thou question my concern for her,
Say how! and why! and whether is she fled!

Jul. Oh would I knew, that I might kill her in her Lovers Arms, Or if I found
her innocent, restore her to Octavio!


Fill. To Octavio! and is my friendship of so little worth, You cannot think I
merit her.


Jul. This is some trick between 'em! but I have sworn most solemnly, have
sworn by Heaven and my Honor to resign her, and I will do it or dye, --
therefore declare quickly, declare where she is, or I will leave thee dead upon
the place.

[To Marcella.
Mar. So, death or Octavio, a pretty hopeful choice this.


Fill. Hold! by Heaven you shall not touch a single hair, thus -- will I guard
the secret in his bosom.

[Puts himself between 'em draws.
Jul. It Is plain thoust injured me, -- and to my Honor I Will sacrifice my
friendship, follow me.

[Enter Petro and Cornelia.
Mar. Ah Petro, fly fly swist and rescue him. --

[Exiunt Pet. with his sword in his hand.
Cor. Oh have I found thee, fit for my purpose too. Come have along with me, --
thou must present my Brother Julio instantly, or I am lost, and my projects
lost, and my man's lost, and all is lost.

Enter Petro.
Pet. Victoria, Victoria, your Cavaliers and Conqueror! the other wounded in
his sword hand, was easily disarmed.


Mar. Then lets retire, if I am seen I Am lost, -- Petro stay here for the
Cavalier, and conduct him to me to this house; -- I must be speedy now. --


Cor. Remember this is Julio!

[Pointing to Marcella!
Pet. I know your design and warrant ye my part: -- hah Octavio.

Enter Octavio, Murisini, and Crapine.
Oct. Now cowardice that everlasting infamy, dwell ever on my face, that men
may point me out that hated Lover, that saw his Mistress false, stood tamely by
whilst she repeated vows! nay was so infamous so dully tame, to hear her swear
her hatred and aversion, yet still I calmly listend! thongh my sword were
ready, and did not cut his throat for it.


Mur. I thought, you would said you would fought.


Oct. Yes, I did rouse at last and waked my wrongs,
But like an Ass a patient fool of Honor,
I gave him friendly Notice I would kill him;
And fought like prizers not as angry Rivals.

Mur. Why that was hansome, -- I love fair play what would you else have done!


Oct. Have fallen upon him like a sudain storm, [Enter Pet. and Fill. quick
unexpected in his height of Love: -- see -- see yonder! or I Am mistaken by
this glimering day or that is Fillamour; now entering at her door, it is he by
my revenge: -- what say you Sir.


Mur. By the Mass I think it was he, --

Enter Julio.
Oct. Julio I Have caught the wantons in their toil,
I have 'em fast, thy sister and her Lover.
[Embraceshim.
Jul. Eternal shame light on me, if they escape then!


Oct. Follow me quick, -- whilst we can get admittance.


Jul. Where -- here!


Oct. Here, -- come all and see her shame and my Revenge.


Jul. And are you not mistaken in the house.


Oct. Mistaken! I saw the Ravisher enter just now, thy Uncle saw it too, oh my
Excessive joy, come if I lie -- say I Am a dog a Villain!

[Exeunt as into the House. Scene changes to a Chamber, Enter Sir Signal -- a
little groping.
Sir Sig. There Is no finding my way out, -- and now does fear make me fancy, --
this some Enchanted Castle. --

[Enter Tick. listening.
Tick. Hah an Enchanted Castle!


Sir Sig. Belonging to a monsterous Giant! who having spirited away the King of
Tropicipopicans Daughter, keeps her here enclosed, and that I wandering Knight
am by fickle Fortune sent to her deliverance.

[Tick. listens.
Tick. How Is that! spirited away the King of Tropicipopicans daughter! bless me
what unlawful wickedness is practiced, in this Romish Heathenish Countries!

[Aside.
Sir Sig. And yet the devil of any dwarf Squire or Damzel have I met with yet:
-- would I were clenlily off a this business, -- hah lights as I live! and
people coming this way! -- bless me from the Giant, -- Oh Lord what shall I do.
--

[Falls on his knees.
Tick. I fear no Giants, having justice on my side, but Reputation makes me
tender of my person! -- hah -- what is this a Curtain: I Will wind my self in
this, it may secure me!

[Winds himself in a window Curtain.
Sir Sig. -- They Are entering, what shall I do -- hah -- here is a corner!
defend me from a Chimney.

[Creeps to the corner of the Window, and feels a space between Tick. legs and
the corner, creeps in and stands up just behind Tickletext. Enter Gall. leading
Laura! Sab. with lights just after 'em! Jul. Oct. Mur. and Crap.
Oct. Just in the happy minute.


Gall. I Have sworn by every God! by every power divine! to Marry thee! and save
thee from the Tyranny of a forced Contract, -- Nay Gad if I loose a fine wench
for want of Oaths this bout the devil's in me.


Oct. What think ye now Sir.


Jul. Damnation on her, set my rage at liberty! [Mur. holds him. that I may
kill 'em both!


Mur. I see no cause for that, she may be virtuous yet.


Oct. De ye think as such to pass her off on me,
Or that I Will bear the infamy of your Family,
No I scorn her now, but can revenge my Honor on a Rival!

Mur. Nay then I Will see fair play, -- turn and defend thy life.

[goes to who turns.
Jul. Whilst I do justice on the Prostitute! -- hah -- Gall.

Defend me it is the woman that I Love.

[He gazes! she runs to Gall.
Lau. Octavio!


Oct. Laura! my sister! persidious shameful! --

[Offers to kill her.
Jul. Hold! thy sister this? that sister I Am to marry! (wretched.


Lau. Is this then Julio! and do all the powers conspire to make me


Oct. May I be dumb for ever!

[Holds his sword down and looks sadly, Jul. holds Lau. by one hand pleads with
Oct. with the other, Enter Fillamour and Pet.
Fill. -- Hah Galliard! in danger too!

[Draws. [steps to 'em! Mur. puts between.
Oct. Fillamour here, how now what is the matter friend.

[they talk whilst Enter Marcella and Cornelia.
Cor. Hah new broyls, sure the devil's broke loose to Night! -- my Uncle as I
live!

[Mur. pleads between Fill. and Octavio.
Mar. And Octavio! where shall we fly for safety!


Cor. I Will ene trust to my Breeches! it is too late to retreat! -- 'slife here
be our Cavaliers too, nay then nere fear falling into the Enemies hands!


Fill. (...), I fled with Marcella! had I been blessed with so much Love from
her, I would have boasted on it 'ith face of Heaven.


Mur. La ye Sir.

[To Octavio!
Fill. The lovely Maid, I own I have a passion for,
But by the powers above the flame was sacred,
And would no more have past the bounds of Honor,
Or hospitallity! then I would basely Murder! and were she free,
I would from all the World make her for ever mine.

Mur. Look ye Sir, a plain case this.


Gall. He tells ye simple truth Sir.


Oct. Was it not you, this scarce past Night I fought with here, in the house
by dark! just when you had exchanged your vows with her!


Lau. Heavens! was it he^?

[Aside.
Fill. This minute was the first I ever entered here!


Jul. 'Twas I Sir, was that interrupted Lover, -- and this the Lady!


Lau. And must ^yield at last.

[Aside.
Oct. Wonders and Ridles!


Gall. And was this the Silvianetta Sir, you told the story of!

[slyly.
Jul. The same whom inclination, friends and destiny, Conspire to make me blessed
with.


Gall. So many disappointments in one Night, would make a man turn honest in
spite of Nature!

[Sir Sig. peeps from behind.
Sir Sig. Some comfort yet, that I am not the only fool defeated! hah! Galliard.


Oct. I Am satisfied! [to Fill.] -- but what could move you Sir, -- [to Gall.]
to injure me! one of my Birth and Quality!


Gall. Faith Sir I never stand upon ceremony when there is a woman in the case,
-- nor knew I 'twas your Sister: Or if I had I should alik'd her nere the worse
for that, had she been kind.


Jul. It is my business to account with him,
And I am satisfied he has not injured me! he is my friend!

Gall. That Is frankly said! and uncompel'd I swear she is innocent!


Oct. If you're convinced! I too am satisfied!
And give her to you whilst that faith continues!
[Gives him her.
Lau. And must I, must I force my heart to yield!
[Aside. And yet his generous confidence Obliges me!
[Aside.
Oct. And here I vow! by all the sacred Powers, [Kneels.] that punish perjury,
never to set my heart on saithless woman! -- Never to Love nor Marry! [Rises.]
Travel shall be my business, -- thou my Heir!

[To Julio.
Sir Sig. So, poor soal, I warrant he has been deseated too!


Mar. Marcella Sir will take ye at your word!


Fill. Marcella!


Mar. Who owns with blushes truths should beconceal'd, but to prevent more
mischief, -- that I was yours Sir was against my will, [to Oct. my soul was
Fillamours ere you claim d a right in me; though I nere saw or held discourse
with him, but at an awful distance, -- nor knew he of my flight.


Oct. I do believe, and give thee back my claim, I scorn the brutal part of
Love! the noblest body where the heart is wanting.

[They all talk aside, Cornelia comes up to Galliard!
Cor. When how now Cavalier! how like a discarded favorite do you look now, who
whilst your Authority lasted laid about ye; domineerd huft and blusterd, as if
there had been no end on it, now a man may approach ye without terror! -- you
see the meats snatched out of your mouth Sir, the Lady's disposed on! who is
Friends and Relations you were so well acquainted with.


Gall. Peace boy, I shall be angry else. --


Cor. Have you never a cast Mistress that will take compassion on you: faith
what think you of the little Curtizan now!


Gall. As ill as ere I did! what is that to thee.


Cor. Much more then you're aware on Sir, -- and faith to tell you truth I Am
no servant to Count Julio! but ene a little michievous instrument she sent
hither to prevent your making Love to Dona Laura!


Gall. It Is she her self, -- how could that beauty hide it self so long from
being known! [Aside.] -- Malicious little dog in a Manger, that would neither
eat, nor suffer the hungry to feed themselves! what spiteful devil could move
thee to treat a Lover thus! but I am pretty well revenged on ye!


Cor. On me!


Gall. You think I did not know those pretty Eyes! that lovely Mouth I have so
often kissed in cold imagination


Cor. Softly tormentor!

[They talk aside.
Mar. In this difguse we parted from Vitterbo! atended only by Petro, and I hill
pa! at Rome we took the Title and habit of two Curtizans; both to shelter us
from knowledge, and to Oblige Fillamour to visit us, which we beliv'd he would
in curiosity, and yesterday it so fell out as we desired!


Fill. How ere my eyes might be imposed upon, you see my heart was firm to its
first object, can you forget and pardon the mistake!


Jul. She shall! and with Octavio's -- and my Uncles leave, -- thus make your
Title good. --

[Gives her to Fill.
Oct. It Is vain to strive with destiny!

[Gives her.
Mur. With all my heart, -- but where is Cornelia all this while!


Gall. Here Is the fair stragler Sir.

[Leads her to Mur. he holds his Cane up at her.
Mur. Why thou baggage, thou wicked contriver of mischief, what excuse had
thou for running away, thou had no Lover?


Cor. 'Twas therefore Sir I went to find one! and if I am not mistaken in the
mark, it is this Cavalier I pitch upon for that use and purpose.


Gall. Gad I thank ye for that, -- I hope you will ask my leave first, I Am finely
drawn in efaith! -- have I been dreaming all this Night, of the possession of a
new gotten Mistress, to wake and find my self nooz'd to a dull wise in the
morning.


Fill. Thou talkst like a man that never knew the pleasures thou dispisest;
faith try it Frank and thou will hate thy past loose way of living.


Cor. And to encourage a young setter up, I do here promise to be the most
Mistress like wise, -- you know Signior I have learnt the trade, though I had
not stock to practice, and will be as expensive, Insolent, vain Extravagant,
and Inconstant, as if you only had the keeping part, and another the Amorous
Asignations, what think ye Sir.


Fill. Faith she pleads well! and ought to carry the cause!


Gall. She speaks Reason! and I Am resolved to trust good Nature! -- give me
thy dear hand. --

[They all join to give it him, he kisses it.
Mur. And now you are both speed, pray give me leave to ask ye a civil
question! are you sure you have been honest, if you have I know not by what
Miracle you have lived.


Pet. Oh Sir as for that, I had a small stock of cash, in the hands of a cuple
of English Bankers, on Sir Signal Buffoon. --


Sir Sig. Sir Signal Buffoon! what a pox does he mean me trow.

[Peeping.
Pet. -- And one Mr. Tickletext!


Tick. How was that, -- certo my Name!

[Peeps out and both see each other their faces, being close together one at
one side the Curtain, and the other at the other.
Gall. and Fill. Ha ha ha!


Sir Sig. And have I caught you efaith Mr. Governor! Nay nere put in your head
for the matter, here is none but friends mun!


Gall. How now what have we here!


Sir Sig. Speak of the devil and he appears!

[Pulls his Governor forward.
Tick. I am nndone! -- but good Sir Signal do not cry whore first! as the old
proverb says!


Sir Sig. And good Mr. Governor, as another old proverb says, do not let the
kettle call the Pot black-ars! --


Fill. How came you hither Gentlemen!


Sir Sig. When! faith Sir divining of a wedding or two forward, I brought Mr.
Chaplain to give you a cast of his Office, as the saying is.


Fill. What without Book Mr. Tickletext.


Cor. How now! sure you mistake, these are two Lovers of mine.


Sir Sig. How Sir your Lovers! we are none of those Sir, we are Englishmen!


Gall. You mistake Sir Signal, this is Silvianetta!


Sir Sig. and Tick. How!

[Aside.
Gall. Here Is another spark of your acquaintance, -- do you know him.


Tick. How Barberacho! nay then all will out. --


Gall. Yes, and your fencing and Civility-Master.


Sir Sig. Ay, -- when what was it you that picked our pocket's then, -- and
cheated us!


Gall. Most damnably, -- but since 'twas for the supply of two fair Ladys, all
shall be restored again.


Tick. Some comfort that.


Fill. Come lets in and forgive all, 'twas but one Nights Intrigue, in which
all were a little faulty!


Sir Sig. And Governor, pray let me have no more dominering and Usurpation!
But, as we have hitherto been honest Brothers in iniquity, so let us wink
hereafter at each others frailties! Since Love and women easily betray man,
From the grave Gown-man to the busy Layman.


The EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Mr. Smith. SO hard the Times are, and so thin the Town,
Though but one Playhouse, that must too lie down;
And when we fail what will the Poets do?
They live by us as we are kept by you:
When we disband, they no more Plays will write,
But make Lampoons, and Libell ye in spite;
Discover each false heart that lies within,
Nor Man nor Woman shall in private sin;
The precise whoring Husbands haunts betray,
Which the demurer Lady to repay,
In his own coin does the just debt defray.
The brisk young Beauty linkt to Lands and Age,
Shuns the dull property, and strokes the youthful Page;
And if the stripling apprehend not soon,
Turns him aside and takes the brawny Groom,
Whilst the kind man so true a Husband proves,
To think all is well done by the thing he loves;
Knows he is a Cuckold, yet content to bear
What 'ere Heaven sends, or horns or lusty heir;
Fops of all sorts he draws more artfully,
Then ever on the Stage did Nokes or Leigh:
And Heaven be praised when these are scarce, each Brother
O'th pen, contrive to set on one another:
These are the effects of angry Poets rage,
Driven from their Winter Quarters on the Stage,
And when we go, our Women vanish too,
What will the well-fledg'd keeping Gallant do?
And where but here can he expect to find,
A gay young Dam'sell managed to his mind,
Who ruins him and yet seems wondrous kind.
One insolent and false, and what is worse,
Governs his heart and manages his purse;
Makes him whatever she would have him to believe,
Spends his Estate, then learns him how to live;
I hope these weighty considerations will
Move ye to keep us all together still;
To treat us equal to our great desert,
And pay your Tributes with a franker heart,
If not, th'aforesaid Ills will come, and we must part.
FINIS.

