THE FALSE COUNT, OR, A New Way to play AN OLD GAME. As it is Acted at the
Dukes Theater.

Written by Mrs. A. BEHN.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Jacob Tonson, at the Judge's-Head in
Chancery Lane, near Fleetstreet. 1682.

PROLOGUE
Spoken by Mr. Smith.

KNow all the Whiggs and Tories of the Pit,
(Ye furious Guelfs and Gibelines of Wit,
Who for the Cause, and crimes of Forty one
So furiously maintain the Quarrel on.)
Our Author as you will find it writ in story,
Has hitherto been a most wicked Tory;
But now to the joy of the Brethren be it spoken,
Our Sisters vain mistaking eyes are open;
And wisely valluing her dear interest now,
All powerful Whiggs, converted is to you.
'Twas long she did maintain the Royal Cause,
Argued, disputed, railed with great applause;
Writ Madrigals and Dogerel on the times,
And charged you all with your forefathers crimes;
Nay confidently swore no plot was true,
But that so slyly carried on by you.
Raised horrid scandals on you, hellish stories,
In Conventicles how you eat young Tories;
As Jew did heretofore eat Christian suckling;
And brought an Odium on your pious gutling:
When this is all malice it self can say,
You for the good old Cause devoutly eat and pray:
Though this one Text were able to convert ye,
Ye needy tribe of scriblers to the Party;
Yet there are more advantages than these,
For write, invent, and make what Plots you please,
The Wicked Party keeps your Witnesses;
Like frugal ^uckold-makers you beget
Bratts that, secured, by others fires shall sit.
Your Conventicling miracles out do
All that the Whore of Babylon ever knew:
By wondrous art you make Rogues honest men,
And when you please transform 'em Rogues again.
To day a Saint, if he but hang a Papist,
Peach a true Protestant, your Saint's turned Atheist:
And dying Sacraments do less prevail,
Than living ones though took in Lamb's-Wool-Ale.
Who would not then be for a Commonweal,
To have the Villain covered with his Zeal?
^ Zeal, which for convenience can dispense
With Plays, provided there is no wit nor sense;
For Wit's profane, and Iesuitical,
And Plotting's Popery, and the Devil and all.
We then have fitted you with one to day,
It Is writ as't were a recantation Play;
Renouncing all that has pretense to witty,
T'obl^ige the Reverend Brumighams of the City:
No smutty Scenes, no Jests to move your Laughters,
Nor Love that so debauches all your Daughters.
But should the Toryes now, who will desert me
Because they find no dry bobs on your Party,
Resolve to hiss as late did Popish Crew,
By Yea and Nay, she will throw her self on you,
The grand bequest of Whiggs, to whom she is true.
Then let 'em rail and hiss and damn their fill,
Your Verdict will be Ignoramus still.
Actors Names.
Mr. (...), Don Carlos, Governor of Cadez, young and rich, in love with Julia.
(...). (...), Antonio, A Merchant, young and rich, Friend to Carlos, in love
with Clara, promised to Isabella. Mr. Nok^s, Francisco, Old and rich, Husband
to Julia and Father to Isabella. Mr. Bright, Baltazer, Father to Julia and
Clara. Mr. Freeman, S^stian, Father to Antonio. Mr. (...) Guzman, Gentleman to
Carlos. Mr. Lee, Guiliom, A Chimney Sweeper; the False Count. Two overgrown
Pages to the False Count. Petro, Cashier to Antonio. Captain, Of a Gally. (...)
^eamen, Lopez, Servant to Baltazer. Several, Disguised like Turks. Women.
Mrs. Davis, Julia, Wife to Francisco; young and hansom, in love with Carlos.
Mrs. P^y, Clara, Sister to Julia, in love with Antonio. Mrs. Co^, Isabella,
Daughter to Francisco; proud, vain and foolish, despising all men under the
degree of Quality, and falls in love with Guiliom. Mrs. Osborn, Jacinta, Woman
to Julia.
Dancers, Singers, etc.
THE FALSE COUNT, OR, A New way to play AN OLD GAME.
ACT I.
SCENE I. The Street.
Enter Carlos, Antonio, and Guzman. Car. BY all that is good, I Am mad; stark
raving mad, to
have a Woman young, rich, beautyfull,
Just on the point of yiedling to my Love,
Snatched from my Arms by such a Beast as this;
An Old ridiculous Buffoon, past Pleasure,
Past Love, or any thing that tends that way;
Ill-favored, Ill-bread, and Ill-qualify'd,
With more Diseases than a Horse past Service;
And only blessed with Fortune and my Julia:
For him, I say, this Miser, to obtain her,
After my tedious nights and days of Love,
My midnight Watchings, Quarells, Wounds and Dangers;
-- My Person not unhansom too,
By Heaven, 'twas Wondrous strange!

Anto. And old Francisco, without the expense of an hours Courtship, a Billet
Doux, or scarce a Sight of her, could gain her in a day; and yet it is wonder,
your Fortune and your Quality, should be refused by Don Baltazer, her Father.


Car. A Pox upon it, I went the wrong way to work, and courted the Daughter, but
indeed my Father, the late Governor of Cadez, whose Estate and Honor I now
enjoy, was then living; and, fearing he would not consent to my Passion, I
endeavored to keep it secret, though sacred Vows had past between us two.


Anto. Did she not tell you of this Marriage with old Francisco?


Car. The night before, she did; but only by a Letter from her window dropped;
which when by the help of a dark Lantern, (...) had read, I was struck dead
with Grief.

[gives him the letter.
Anto. reads.] Expect to morrow night to hear I Am dead, since the next Sun will
guide me to a fatal Marriage with old Francisco. Your Julia.


Car. Judge, dear Antonio, my Surprise and Grief;
A while I stood unmoved, thoughtless, and silent,
But soon rage wak^d me to new Life again;
But what I said and did, I leave to raging Lovers,
Like disappointed me, to guess and judge;
She heard -- and only answered me in tears,
Nor could I beg one tender word from her,
She sight, and shut the window too, and vanished.

Ant. And she accordingly next day was married.


Car. She was, -- and I have since endeavored all the Arts and Ways I can, to
Cuckold him; it is now two months since the Wedding, and I hear he keeps her as
close as a Relict, jealous as Age and Impotence can make him. -- She hitherto
has been absent at Sivil, but Expectation of her Daughter-in-law's Wedding with
you has brought 'em hither, -- and, I ask your Pardon, Antonio, for rallying
your Father-in-law that shall be, old ^rancisco.


Anto. I hope you are mistaken, Sir.


Car. How, Are not you to marry his Daughter Isabella?


Anto. Not, if I can help it, Sir, -- the Honor you have done me in your
friendship to me, a Person so much above me in Title and Birth, makes me think
it my Duty to conceal no part of my Heart to you, -- Know then this Isabella,
daughter to old Francisco, and your Cuckold that shall be, I hope, is, though
fair most ridiculously proud, vain and fantastical; as all of her Birth and
Education, grown Rich, are;


Car. Prithee, What was her Birth?


Anto. Why, her Father, old Francisco, was in his youth an English Cordwinder,
that is to say, a Shoo-maker, Which he improved in time to a Merchant, and, the
Devil and his Knavery helping him to a considerable Estate, he set up for
Gentleman; and being naturally a stingey, hide bound Rascal, and in the Humor
of jealousy even out-doing the most rigid of us Spaniards, he came over into
Spain, to settle with his whole Family, where, his Wife dying, to heighten the
vice, marries this young Julia, your Mistress, Sir; -- and now this Daughter of
his having wholly forgot her original Dunghill, setts up for a Vicountess at
least, though her father has designed me the Blessing; but I have fixed my Heart
and Eyes elsewhere, Clara, the young Sister of your Mistress, Sir, commands my
Liberty.


Car. Clara, I Have seen her, she has Youth and Beauty capable to make a conquest
any where, -- but, Does she know your Love?


Anto. She does; and makes me think my Love returned.


Car. Then know, Antonio, I must be your Rival.


Anto. How, Sir!


Car. You said but now you were my Friend, Antonio,
If true, you must assist in my design.

Anto. I listen, Sir, impatiently.


Car. Then thus; Before I knew she was your Mistress, I had resolved upon
Adresses to her, in order to it, have treated with her Father about a Marriage.


Anto. How! and would the false, forsworn, receive your Vows!


Car. No; but with Tears implores her Father daily, when ever he speaks to her
about my Passion; nor can I undeceive her, for indeed I have but Feigned a
Love, (she living in the same house with Julia whilst here at Cadez) to get an
opportunity with that dear, charming Creature; for, coming as a Brother, sure
they will admit me kindly; nor will Francisco, who has heard of what has past
'twixt me and Julia, suspect me any more.


Anto. I knew I had a Rival, Sir, which Clara loved not; but nere could get it
from her who he was, for fear of mischief -- I have often the Liberty to see
her, under the name and pretense of Isabella's Lover.


Car. And I Visit her only to get a sight of Julia, which hitherto has been
impossible, though I have often indeavor'd it -- I beg you will not be jealous, for
this, by Heaven, is only my Design.


Anto. I Will trust my Life, my Honor and my Mistress, in so good hands at any
time.


Car. You obliege me; but though I find your Clara, cold and cruel, Isabella
would invite me to her Love, And makes so many kind advances to me. --


Anto. So would she for your Title were you deformed, and had no shape of man
about you; but me, because a little Citizen and Merchant -- she so reviles,
Calling me base Mechanic, Saucy Fellow; and wonders where I got the Impudence
to speak of Love to her, -- in fine I am resolved to be revenged on all her
Pride and Scorn; by Heaven, I will invent some dire Revenge; -- I Am bent
upon it, and will about it instantly.


Car. -- and would you do it home and hansomly -- and have a good occasion of
being disengaged from her, and make her self the Instrument?


Anto. Ay, such a Plot were worth the Prosecution.


Car. And such a one I have in my head, Guzman, my servant, knows a Fellow here
in Cadez, whom for his pleasant humor I have often observed, as I have past the
streets, but too mean to be converst with, by almost any humane thing, by
Trade, a Chimney Sweeper.


Anto. On, Sir, I beseech you.


Car. This Fellow's of a quick Wit and good Apprehension, though possibly he
cannot act the Don so well, yet that which makes up the best part of our young
Gallants, now a days, he shall not want; that is, good Clothes, Money, and an
Equipage, -- and a little Instruction will serve turn.


Anto. I Am ravished with the Fancy; -- let me see -- he shall be an English
Lord, or a French Count.


Car. Either, we'll furnish him with Bills on Seigniour Don Francisco, -- men
and bagage, and the business is done -- he shall make Love to her.


Anto. Most Excellent.


Car. Guzman, have you not observed this Fellow I am speaking off?


Guz. Observed him, Sir; I know him particulary, I Will fetch him to you now,
Sir; he always stands for new employment with the rest of his Gang under Saint
Jago's Church-wall.


Car. Bring him anon to my Lodgings, where we'll prepare him for the Adventure.


Anto. And if the Proud Isabella bite not at so gay a Bait, I Will be bound to
marry her.


Car. And if she do not, possibly that may be your Fate -- but, in return, you
must let Clara know the Design I have, and, undeceiving her opinion of my Love,
make her of our Party.


Anto. Trust my Friendship, Sir, and Management, I Will to her instantly, that
is, make a Visit to Isabella, and get an opportunity to speak with Clara.


Car. And I must write a Letter to Julia, to undeceive her Fears too, could I
but get it to her.


Guz. For that, let me alone --

[Exeunt severally bowing.
SCENE II. A Chamber.
Enter Julia and Jacinta. Jac. Lord, Madam, you are as melancholy as a sick
Parrot.


Juli. And can you blame me, Jacinta, have I not many Reasons to be sad; sirst,
have I not lost the only man on earth in Don Carlos, that I could love? and
worse than that, am married to a Thing, fit only for his Tomb; a Brute, who
wanting sense to Value me, treats me more like a Prisoner than a Wife, -- and
his Pretense is, because I should not see, nor hear from Don Carlos.


Jac. Would I were in your room, Madam, I Would cut him out work enough I Would warrant
him; and if he durst impose on me, in faith I Would transform both his Shape and his
manners; in short, I Would try what Woman-hood could do. And indeed, the revenge
would be so pleasant, I would not be without a jealous Husband for all the
world, and really, Madam, Don Carlos is so sweet a Gentleman.


Jul. Ay, but the Sin, Jacinta!


Jac. A' my Conscience Heaven would forgive it, for this match of yours, with
old Francisco, was never made there.


Jul. Then if I would, alas what oportunities have I, for I confess since his
first Vows made him mine. --


Jac. -- right -- that lying with old Francisco is flat Adultery.


Jul. I might, with some Excuse, give my self away to Carlos -- but oh, he is
false, he takes unjustly all the Vows he paid me, And gives 'em to my Sister
Clara now.


Jac. Indeed, that is something uncivil, Madam, if it be true.


Jul. True! my Father has with joy consented to it, and he has leave, to visit
her; and can I Live to see it? No, Mischief will ensue, my Love's too high, too
Nicely true to brook Affronts like that.


Jac. Yet you sirst broke with him.


Jul. Not I, be witness heaven with what reluctance I fore't my breaking heart;
and can I see, that charming Body in my Sisters Arms! that Mouth that has so
often sworn love to me, kissed by another Lips! no, Jacinta, that night that gives
him to another Woman, shall see him dead between the Charmers Arms. My life I
hate, and when I live no more for Carlos, I Will cease to be at all, it is
resolved.


Jac. Faith, Madam, I hope to live to see a more Comicall end of your Amors --
but see where your Amiable Spouse comes with Don Baltazer your Father!


Enter Francisco and Baltazer. Fran. So -- you two are damnable Close together,
it is for no goodness I Will warrant, you have your trade betimes.


Jac. Meaning me, Sir?


Fran. Yes you, one of my Wives evil Counselors, -- go, get you up both to
your respective Chambers, go --

[Ex. both.
Bal. Barring your Complyments, good Son, give me leave to speak.


Fran. Shaw, I know as well as your self what you would say now; you would
assure me I am Sole Master of your house, and may command; that you are
heartily glad to see me at Cadez, and that you desire I would resolve upon a
weeks stay, or so; that you will spare nothing for my entertainment, why I know
all this, and therefore pray take my word, good Father in-Law, without any more
ado.


Bal. Well Sir, pray answer me one Question, What drew you to Cadez?


Fran. Why, I Will tell you; in the first place, a Pox of all Lovers, I say; for
my Daughter Isabella is to be married, as you know, to Antonio, a young rich
merchant of this Town; in the second place, my Wife, with a Vengeance, must be
gading to visit you and her sister, whom we heard was also to be married to the
young Governor Don Carlos; it is shrewdly against my will, heaven knows, for my
wits are in an uprore already about this business -- your Gallant's, Father,
your young Gallant's, -- I wish my Wife were secure at home again.


Bal. Pray why so?


Fran. Alas, I see the Trick, Sir, a mere Trick put upon a man, a married man,
and a married man to a hansom young woman, -- you apprehend me.


Bal. Not I, Sir.


Fran. Not, you Sir; why look ye; your young Governor who now is, made most
desperate love to her who is now my Wife, do you mind me? -- but you, being a man
of an exact Judgment, to her great grief, gave her to me, who best deserved
her, both for my civil Behavior, and Comely Personage, do you understand me? but
now this Carlos, by his Fathers death being made Governor, do you see? is to
marry your other Daughter Clara, and to exasperate me, would never let me be at
quiet till he had got both of us hither to Cadez, to Grace his Wedding; a Pox
of his Invitation, was I so civil to invite him to mine?


Bal. If this be your Affliction, you may avoid it.


Fran. No, no, I Will try to sorce Nature a little, and be Civil, or so, but as
soon as the Ceremony's over, I Will steal out of Town, whip a way, presto,
in faith.


Bal. But sh'oud you do so rude a thing to your new Brother, your Wife would
think you were jealous of her. No, dissemble that Fault, I beseech you, 'twill
make you odious to her and all the world, when it is needless; it is natural for
women to hate what they fear.


Fran. Say you so, then I will hide it as much as I can in words, I can
dissemble too upon occasion.


Bal. Let her remain awhile amongst us.


Fran. The Devil a bit she shall, good Father mine, no, no, I have more years
than you, Sir Father, and understand what women are, especially when married to
ancient men, and have the Conversation of young men -- whose Eyes like
Basilisks destroy Modesty with looking on 'em; the very thought on it has raised
a Bump in my forehead already.


Bal. I am sorry you should suspect my Daughter's Virtue.


Fran. May be you are, Sir, -- but youth you know -- opportunity -- occasion --
or so -- there are Winks, and Nods, and Signs, and Twires -- and -- well in
short I am satisfied, and they that are not may go whistle, and so I Will to my
Wife, whom I have left too long alone, evil thoughts will grow upon her --
Wife, Love -- Duckling --

[Calls her.
Enter Julia and Jacinta. Bal. Would I had never married her to this Sott.


Jul. Your pleasure, Sir.


Fran. Only to see thee, Love.


Jul. I have a Suit to you.


Fran. What is it, my Chicken.


Jul. I Would go make a Visit to my Aunt, my sister Clara's there, and I Will go
setch her home.


Fran. Hum -- perhaps the Governor's there too?


Jul. What if he be? we ought to make him a Visit too who so kindly sent for us
to Cadez.


Fran. How! Make a Visit to the Governor? What have I to do with the Governor,
or what have you to do with the Governor? you are no Soldier, Love! as for a
Visit to your Aunt there is some reason in it, but for the Governor, think no
more upon him, I say no more.


Jul. Since he is to marry my Sister, why should you refuse him that Civility.


Fran. Your Sister, so much the worse.


Jul. So much the worse?


Fran. I, so much the worse, I tell you, for, mark me, you have been Lovers
lately; and old stories may arise that are not yet forgotten; and having under
the Cloak of a Husband both Sisters at command, one for a Wife, the other for a
Mistress, hoyte toyte, there will be mad work in faith; What a Mixture of
Brother by the Fathers side, and Uncle by the Mothers side there will be; Aunt
by the Mothers side, and Sister by the fathers side; a man may sind as good
kindred amongst a kenell of Beagles. -- No, no, no Visits to the Governor, I
beseech you, fair Madam.


Bal. So, you are at your jealousy again.


Fran. Come, come, I love plain dealing; besides, when she Named the Governor,
Flesh and Blood could not contain.


Jul. I spoke in reference to his Quality.


Fran. A Pox of your Civility; I tell you, I scorn my Wife should be Civil.
Why, what a Coyle's here about a Governor? I Will stand to it, a man had better
have a Mule to his Wife than a Woman, and 'twere easilyer governed.


Bal. But, hear reason, Son.


Fran. What, from a Woman, and a Wife? Lord, Lord, where are your Wits, good
Father-i'-law? Why, what, a Devil, shall I be made ridiculous, a Coxcombe,
Cuckold, to show my Wife? No, no, there is no Necessity of your Civility,
Mistress; Leave that to me who understand the due Punctillio's of it.


Bal. Harkey Son, harkey!


Fran. Father mine, every man to his business, I say, therefore say no more of
this; For I Will give my Mother's Soul to the Devil, when any Wife of mine ever
makes a Visit to the Governor; and there is an end on it. Was ever so horrid a
Plot Contrived against her own Lawful Husband? Visit the Governor, with a Pox.


Bal, It Is an honor due to all men of his Rank.


Fran. I care not for that, my opinion is, my Wife's my slave, and let him keep
his Rank to himself.


Enter Guzman. Fran. gets his Wife behind him, and fences her with his Cloak.
Guz. He Is here, and with his Wife; How shall I do to deliver my Letter to her?
-- Sir, by the order of my Master, Don Carlos, the Governor, I am commanded to
come hither, to the end that, going from hence, and returning to my Master, I
may be able to inform him --


Fran. -- That I am in health, -- very well, I was afraid he would have been
harping upon my Wife in the first place -- the Devil take her, she looks for it.

[Makes signs to have her gone.
Guz. Farther, Sir, he kisses your hand, with a more than ordinary Friendship.


Fran. A Pox of his complyments, --

[Aside.
Guz. But he charged me, Sir, most passionately to present his Service to your
Lady.


Fran. Yes, yes; I thought as much.


Guz. -- In a more particular manner.


Fran. Friend, my Wife, or Lady, has no need of his service in a more
particular manner, and so you may return it.


Jac. Indeed, but she has great need of his service in a very particular manner.


Guz. Sir, I meant no hurt, but it is all ways the fashion of your true bred
Courtier, to be more Ceremonious in his Civilities to Ladies than Men; -- and
he desires to know how she does.


Fran. How strong this Carlos smells of the Devil -- friend, tell your Master
she is very well, but since she was Married she has forgot her Gentile Civility
and good manners, and never returns any Complements to men.


Guz. -- How shall I get it to her? -- Sir, the Governor hopes he shall havethe
Honor of entertaining you both at his house. He Is impatient of your coming,
and waits at home on purpose.


Fran. Friend, let your Master know we are here in very good quarters already,
and he does us both too much Honor; and that if we have notice of the
Wedding Day; and I have nothing else to do, we'll Certainly wait on him, and
the next morning we intend to take our leaves, which I send him word of
beforehand to prevent surprise.


Guz. But Sir, --

Aproching him he puts his Wife further.
Fran. Go, Sir, and deliver your message.


Guz. But I have order, Sir, --


Fran. There Is no such thing in this world.


Guz. I Am resolved to Teaze him, if I can do nothing else, in revenge; -- But,
Sir, he most earnestly desires to entertain your fair Lady in his own house,


Fran. Yes, yes; I know he does; But I Will give him to the Devil first. --
Troth, Sir, this Cadez Air does not agree with my fair Lady, she has ventured
out but once, and has got an Ague already.


Guz. Agues, Sir, are kind diseases, they allow of Truces and Cessations.


Fran. No, no; She has no Cessation friend, her Ague takes her nigh^ and day,
it shakes her most unmercyfully, and it shall shake her till the Wedding Day.


Guz. Were this Fellow to be tried by a Jury of women, I would not be in's Coat
to lie with his Lady. -- What shall I do to deliver this Letter, -- Well Sir
since I see you are so averse to what the Governor desires, I Will return -- but,
Sir, I must tell you, as a friend, a Secret; that to a man of your temper may
concern you; -- Sir, -- he is -- resolved when he Comes next to Visit his
Mistress, to make another Visit to your Apartment, to your Lady too.

Goes to Whisper him, and gives Julia the Letter over his Shoulder.
Fran. Is he so, pray tell him he need not take that pains; there is no occasion
for it; besides 'twill be but in vain; for the Doctors have prescribed her
Silence and Lonelyness, -- it is good against the Fit; How this damned Fellow of
a Rival torments me; Honest Friend, adieu.


Guz. Now is this Fellow so afraid of being made a Cuckold that he fears his
own shadow, and dares not go into his Wive's Chamber if the Son do but shine
into the room. --

[Ex Guz.
Fran. So, your Mercury's gone; Lord, how, simply you look now, as if you knew
nothing of the matter!


Jul. Matter, what matter, I heard the Civil Message the Governor sent, and the
uncivil answer you returned back.


Fran. Very good; Did that grieve your heart, alas what pity 'twas I carried
you not in my hand, presented you to him my self, and begged him to favor me so
much to do my office a little for me, or the like; hah. --


Jul. And there is need enough, and the truth were known.


Jac. Well said, Madam.


Fran. Peace thou wicked Limb of Satan -- but for you, Gentle Woman, since you
are so tarmagant, that your own Natural Husband cannot please you; who though I
say it am as quiet a Bedfellow, and sleep as sweetly, for one of my years, as
any in Spain -- I Will keep you to hard meat in faith.


Jul. I find no fault with your Sleeping, it is the best quality you have a-Bed.


Fran. Why, so then, is the Devil in an unmercyfull woman? Come come, it is a
good Tenant that pays once a quarter.


Jac. Of an hour do ye mean Sir. --


Fran. Peace, I say, -- thou damnable Tormentor, this is the Doctrine you
preach to your Mistress, but you shall do it in private, for I am resolved to
lock ye both up, and carry the keys in my Pocket.


Jul. Well, I Am a wicked Creature to teaze thee so, Dear; but I Will do what
thou will; Come, come, be friends, I Vow, I care not for the Governor, not I,
no more then I do for my -- own soul.


Fran. Why so, this is something; Come, come your way's in, -- who have we here
a man, ad's my life away, away.


Jul. Yes, up to my Chamber, to write an answer to this dear Letter.

[Ex Julia
[Enter Isabella. Fran. No, it is not a man, but my daughter Isabella.


Jac. Now will I stay, and set her on to teaze the Doatard, would I could teaze
him to death, that my Mistiess might be rid of him.


Fran. How now, what makes you look so Scurvily to day? Sure the Devil rides
once a day through a woman, that she may be sure to be inspired with some Ill
qualities -- what would you have now?


Isa. Something.


Fran. Something; what thing; have I not provided you a Husband whom you are to
marry within a day or too?


Isa. There Is a Husband indeed, pray keep him to your self, if you please; I Will
marry none of him, I Will see him hanged first.


Fran. Hay-day; -- what is he not young and hansom enough forsooth?


Isa. Young and hansom; is there no more than that goes to the making up of a
Husband? -- Yes, there is Quality.


Fran. Quality; -- Why, is he not one of the richest Merchants of his standing
in all Cadez?


Isa. Merchant, a pretty Character, a Woman of my Beauty, and 5. Thousand pound,
marry a Merchant -- a little, pety, dirtyheeld Merchant; faugh I Would rather live
a Maid all days of my life, or be sent to a Nunnery, and that is Plague enough
I Am sure.


Jac. Have a care of a Nunnery, least he take you at your word.


Isa. I would not for the World, no, Jacinta, when ever thou (...) me in Holy
orders, the World will be at an end.


Fran. Merchant, why, What Husband do you expect!


Isa. A Cavalier at least, if not a Nobleman.


Fran. A Noble man, mar^y come-up; your Father, Huswife, meaning my self, was a
Leather-seller at first, till, growing rich, I set up for a Merchant, and left
that Mechanic trade; and since turned Gentleman; and heaven blessed my
endeavors so as I have an estate for a Spanish Grandee; and, Are you so proud,
forsooth, that a Merchant wont down with you, but you must be gaping after a
Cap and Feather, a silver Sword with a more dreadful Ribon at the hilt? Come,
come, I fear me, Huswife, you are one that pusss her up with pride thus; -- but
lay, thy hand upon thy Conscience now. --

[To Jacinta.
Jac. Who, I Sir; No no, Sir, I am for Marrying her out of hand to any
reasonable Husband, except a Merchant; for Maids will Long, and that is Probatum
est against the pervailing Distemper of Longing; Hitherto I dare answer for
her, but Batteries will be made, and I dare not be always responsable for
frail Mortality.


Fran. Well, I have provided her one that I like, but if she be so squemish,
let her fast, with a Murrain to her.


Isa. Dear Father.


Fran. Dear me no Deares: Would your old Mother were alive, she would a Strapt
your Iusticore, for puleing after Cavaliers and Noble men, in faith, that would
she; A Citizen's Daughter and would be a Madona, in good time.


Isa. Why, Father; the Gentry and Nobility now adays frequently marry
Citizen's Daughters.


Fran. Come, come, Mistress, I got by the City, and I love and honor the City;
I confess it is the fashion now adays, if a Citizen get but a little money, one
goes to building houses, and brick walls; another must buy an Office for his
Son; a third hoysts up his Daughter's Topsail, and flaunts it a way, much above
her Breeding; and these things make so many break, and Cause the decay of
Trading; but I Am for the honest Dutch way of breeding their Children, according
to their Fathers Calling.


Isa. That Is very hard, because you are a Laborious, Ill-bread Tradesman, I
must be bound to be a mean Citizen's Wife.


Fran. Why, what are you better then I, forsooth, that you must be a Lady, and
have your Peticoats laced four Stories high; wear your false Towers, and Cool
your self with your Spanish Fan? Come, come, Baggage, wear me your best Clothes
a Sundays, and brush 'em up a Monday Mornings, and follow your needle all the
week after, that was your good old Mother's way, and your Grand-mother's before
her; and as for the Husband, take no care about it, I have designed it,
Antonio, and Antonio you are like to wed, or beat the hoof, Gentle woman, or
turn poor Clare, and die a Begging-Nun, and there is an end on it -- see where he
comes -- I Will leave you to ponder upon the business.

[Ex. Francisco.
Enter Antonio. Isabella weeps. Anto. what, in Tears, Isabella, what is it can
force that tribute from your Eyes?


Isa. A Trifle, hardly worth the nam^ing, your self --


Anto. Do I, pray, for what sin of mine must your fair Eyes be punished?


Isa. For the sin of your Odious Addresses to me, I have told you my mind often
enough, methinks your Equals should be sitter for you, and suit more with your
Plebean Humor.


Anto. My Equals, It Is True, you're fair, but if there be any inequality in our
births, the advantage is on my side.


Isa. Saucy Impertinent, you show your City breeding, you understand what is
due to Ladys, you understand your Pen and Ink how to count your dirty money,
trudg to and fro chasfering of base commodities, and cuzening those you deal
with, till you sweat and stink again like an over heated Cook; faugh, I smell
him hither.


Anto. I must confess I Am not perfumed as you are, to stifle Stinks you
commonly have by Nature; but I have wholesome, ^lenly Linen on; and for my Habit,
wore I but a Sword, I see no difference between your Don and me, only,
perhaps, he knows less how to use it.


Isa. Ah, Name not a Don, the very sound from the mouth of a little Cit is
disagreeable -- Bargain and Sale, Bills, Money, Traffic, Trade, are words
become you better.


Jac. Well-said, use him scurvily, that Mrs. Clara may have him.

[Aside.
Anto. The best of those you think I should not name, dare hardly tell me this.


Isa. Good Lord, you think your self a very fine Fellow now, and finicall your
self up to be thought so, but there is as much difference between a Citizen and
a true bred Cavalier. --


Anto. As between you and a true bred Woman of Honor.


Isa. Oh, Sir, you rail, and you may, long enough, before you rail me out of my
Opinion, whilst there are Dons with Coaches and fine Lackey's, and I have
Youth and Beauty, with a Fortune able to merit one, so farewell Cit.

[Ex. Isabella.
Anto. Farewell, proud Fool.


Jac. Sir, be this evening at the door, Dona Clara has something to say to you.


Anto. Bless thee for this Tidings, dear Jacinta.

[Ex. Jacinta. -- I find let man be Brave, or good, or wise,
His Virtue gains no Smiels from Women's Eyes.
It Is the gay Fool alone that takes the Heart,
Foppery and Finery, still guide the Dart.
[Ex. Antonio.
ACT II.
SCENE I. A Chamber.
Enter Jacinta with a Light, and Julia. Jac. WELL, Madam, have you writ to Don
Carlos?


Jul. No, nor is it possible I should, this Devil haunts me so from room to
room, Like my evil Genius to prevent that good; oh, for an opportunity of one
kind Minute, to return Acknowledgments for this kind Letter he has sent me.


Jac. I Am glad you find me a Sybill; Madam, I ever proficy'd a happier end of
that Amor than your ill fortune has hitherto promised, -- but what said the
Lovely Cavalier?


Jul. All that a man inspired with Love could say, All that was soft and
Charming.


Jac. Nay, I believe his Art.


Jul. Judge then what my Heart Feels, who, like a fire but lightly covered over
with the cold Ashes of Despair, with the least blast, breaks out into a flame;
I burn, I burn, Jacinta, and only Charming Carlos can alay my Pain -- but how,
Ay there is the question?


Jac. Some way I will contrive to speak with him, for he has lost his old wont
if he traverse not the street where you live, but see Dona Clara. --

[Enter Clara.
Jul. Hah, my Sister, whom yet my jealous heart can scarce be reconciled to; so
deeply was my fear of Rivalship fixed there, -- so sad, my Sister, and so near
the happy day with Carlos?


Cla. It Is pity she that thinks it so, should want him; the Blessing's thrown
away on me, but we are both unhappy to be matched to those we cannot love;
Carlos, though young, gay, hansome, witty, rich; I hate as much as you the old
Francisco; for since I cannot Marry my Antonio, both Youth and Beauty are but
lost on me, And Age decrepid would be equal torment.


Jul. Would Carlos knew your heart, sure he would decline, for he has too much
Honor, to compel a Maid to yield that loves him not.


Cla. It Is true, he is above me every way, and the Honor my Father thinks to do
our Family by this Match, makes him resolve upon'^; but I have given my Vows to
young Antonio.


Jul. And young Antonio you are like to have, for any thing that Carlos cares;
for know, to thy eternal joy, my Clara, he has but feigned to thee, as much as
thy Antonio to Isabella.


Cla. But are you sure of this?


Jul. Most certain, this Night if you can let Antonio see you, he will tell you
all the Cheat, and beg your Pardon.


Cla. Which he will soon obtain, and in return, what Service I can render him,
in your behalf, he shall not want.


Jul. Antonio will engage you they are friends.


Cla. You amaze me.


Jac. I have appointed him this night to wait, and, if possible, I would get
him a Minutes time with you.


Cla, Dear Jacinta, thou art the kindest Maid. --


Jac. Hanged, why should we young Women pine and Languish for what our own
Natural invention may procure us; let us three lay our heads together, and if
Machavil, with all his Politics, can out-witt us, it is pity but we all lead
Apes in Hell, and died without the Jewish blessing of consolation.


Jul. No more, here comes the Dragon. --


Enter Francisco. Fran. So; together Consulting and Contriving. --


Jac. What, are you jealous of the Peticoat?


Fran. Peticoat, Come, come, Mistress Pert, I have known as Much danger hid
under a Peticoat, as a Pair of Breeches. I have heard of two Women that Married
each other -- oh abominable, as if there were so Prodigious a Scarcity of
Christian Man's Flesh.


Jac. No, the market's well enough stored, thanks be praised, might every woman
be afforded a reasonable Alowance.


Fran. Peace, I say, thou Imp of Lucifer; would thou had thy Bellyfull, that
I might be fairly rid of thee -- go get you up to your Chamber, and, do you hear,
stir not from thence, on pain of our severe displeasure, for I am sent for in
all haste to signior Don Sebastians, it is but hard by, I shall soon return; --
what are you here --

Enter Isabella. I have a high commendations of your fine behavior,
Gentlewoman, to Antonio; his Father has sent for me, and I shall know all anon,
this shall but hasten your Wedding, Huswife, I tell you that, and so Farewell
to you, --

[Ex. Isabella Crying.
Cla. Say you so, then it is time for me to look about me.


Jul. But will you go out so late Love! indeed, some hurt will come to thee.


Fran. No, look ye, I go Armed

Shows his Girdle round with Pistolls. Go get you to your Chambers.

[He goes out, they go in.
SCENE changes to the Street. Enter Carlos, Antonio. Car. I wonder where this
man of mine should be, whom I sent this evening with my letter to Julia, what
art thou?

Enter Guzman, runs against Carlos.
Guz. My Lord, it is I, your trusty Trojan, Guzman, -- what makes you here, Sir,
so near the door of your Mistress?


Car. To wait my doom; what Tidings have thou Guzman!


Guz. Why, Sir, I went as you directed me, to Don Baltazer's.


Car. And did thou deliver it?


Guz. And the first thing I met with was old Francisco.


Car. So.


Guz. To whom I civily adrest my self -- told him, you presen ted your Service
to him, -- sent to know how his Lady and he did. Which word Lady I no sooner
named, but I thought he would have saluted me with a Cudgel, -- in sine,
observing her behind him, whom he sheltered all he could with his Cloak, I,
taking an occa sion to wisper him, gave it her over his shoulder, whilst she
returned some smiles and looks of joy, -- but for an answer, 'twas impossible
to get the least sign of one.


Car. No matter, that joy was evident, she wished me one, and by the first
opportunity my diligent waiting will be recompensed; but, where have thou been
all this while?


Guz. Finding out the Chimney-sweeper, you spoke of Sir, and whom you ordered
me to bring this Evening.


Car. And have thou found him?


Guz. He Is here, at the corner of the Street, I Will call him.

[Ex. Guz.
Car. I have, Antonio, besides your particular Revenge, one of my own to Act by
this deceit, since all my Industry to see the charming Julia has hitherto been
vain, I have resolved upon a new project, if this False Count pass upon 'em, as
I doubt not but he will, and that he gets admittance into the House, I Will pass
for one of his Domestiques.


Enter Guzman and Guilion. Page holding his Lanthorn to his face. Guz. Here Is
the fellow, Sir.


Anto. Fellow, he may be the Devil's fellow by his countenance.


Car. Come nearer Friend; do think thou can manage a Plot well?


Guil. As any man in Cadez, Sir, with good instructions.


Car. That thou shall have, thou art apprehensive.


Guil. So, so, I have a pretty memory for mischief.


Anto. Have thou Assurance and Courage?


Guil. To kill the honestest man in Spain, if I be well paid.


Car. That thou shall be.


Guil. I ll do it, say no more, I Will do it.


Car. But can thou swear stoutly, and lie handsomely?


Guil. Prettily, by Nature Sir, but with good instructions I shall improve; I
thank Heaven I have Dossety, or so.


Car. Thou want not confidence.


Guil. No, nor impudence neither; how should a man live in this wicked world
without that Talent.


Anto. Then know our Design is only Comical, though if you manage not matters
well, it may prove Tragical to you; in fine do think thou can personate a
Lord?


Guil. A Lord, marry that is a hard question, but what sort of a Lord?


Car. Why any Lord.


Guil. That I cannot do, but I can do some sort of a Lord, as some Lords are
wiser than other-some; there is your witty Lord, -- him I defy; your wise
Lord, that is to say, your knavish Lord, him I renounce; then there is your
^olitique Lord, him I would have hanged; -- then th^re's your foolish Lord, let
him follow the Politician; then there is your (...), Pert, Noysey Lord, and such
a small insignificant (...) I care not if I am possessed with; I shall deal well
enough wi^h a Devil of his capacity.


Car. Very well, then there needs no more but that you go along with my man to
my house, my authority shall secure you from all the injuries that shall accrue
from a discovery, but I hope none will happen: Equipage, clothes and money
we'll furnish you with, -- go home with him and dress, and practice the Don,
till we come, who will give you ample instructions what to do.


Guil. And if I do not fit you with a Don better than Don De'll, Phobos, or Don
Quixote, let me be hanged up for the Sign of the Black Boy on my own Poles at a
Spanish Inn door.


Anto. We'll be with you presently.


Guil. And if you find me not en Cavalier, say Clothes, Garniture, Points and
Feathers have lost their Power of making one.

[Ex. Guz. and Page and Guil.
Enter, opening the Door, Jacinta. Car. Hah, the door opens, and surely it is a
Woman that advances, dear Antonio, wait a little farther; -- who is there?


Jac. Hah, if it should be old Francisco now.


Car. Let it be who it will, I Will tell my name, it cannot injure either; -- I Am
Carlos, who are you?


Jac. A thing that looks for him you name -- Jacinta; -- are you alone?


Car. Never since Julia did possess my heart; what news my dearest messenger of
Love? what may I hope? --


Enter Julia. Jul. All that the kindest Mistress can bestow,
If Carlos loves, and still will keep his Vows.

Car. Julia my Life, my Soul, what happy Stars
Conspired to give me this dear lucky minute?

Jul. Those that conducted old Francisco out,
And will too soon return him back again;
I dare not stay to hear thy love or chiding,
Both which have power to charm, since both proceed
From a kind heart, that is mine.

Car. Oh, take not this dear Body from my Arms,
For if you do, my Soul will follow it.

Jul. What would thou have me do?


Car. Be wondrous kind, be lavish of thy Heart,
Be generous in thy Love, and give me all.

Jul. Oh Heavens! what mean you? I shall dye with fear.


Car. Fear, let coward Lovers fear, who love by halves,
We that entirely Love are bold in passion,
Like Soldiers (...) with glory dread no danger.

Jul. But should we be unthrifty in our Loves,
And for one moment's joy give all away,
And be hereafter damned to pine at distance?

Car. Mistaken Miser, Love like Money put
Into good hands increases every day,
Still as you trust me, still the Sum amounts,
Put me not off with promise of to morrow,
To morrow will take care for new delights,
Why should that rob us of a present one?

Jul. Ah Carlos!
How sondly do I listen to thy words,
And fain would chide, and fain would boast my Virtue,
But mightier Love laughs at those poor delays;
And I should doubtless give you all your Julia,
Did not my fear prevent my kinder business;
-- And should Francisco come and find me absent,
Or take thee with me, we were lost, my Carlos.

Car. When then, my Julia shall we meet again?


Jul. You Spaniards are a jealous Nation, But in this English Sp^niard old
Francisco, That mad passion's doubled; wholly deprives him of his Sense, and
(...) his Nature Brute; would he but trust me only with my Woman, I would
contrive some way to see my Carlos.


Car. (...) certain, Julia, that thou must be mine.


Jul. (...) I must dye, my Carlos.

[Anto. listening advances.
(...). -- I Am sure it is Carlos's voice, and with a woman;
And though he be my Rival but in Jest,
I have a natural curiosity to see who it is he entertains.

Jul. Oh Heavens! Sir, here is Francisco; step aside
Least mischief should befall you.
[Runs in.
Car. Now Love and wild desire prompt me to kill this happy Rival, -- he is old,
and cannot be long in his arrears to Nature. -- What if I paid the debt?

[Draws half way. One single push would do it, and Julia's mine; -- but hanged
Adultery is a less sin than Murder, and I will wait my Fortune --


Anto. Where are you, -- Don Carlos?


Car. Who Is there, Antonio? I took thee for my Rival, and ten to one but I had
done thy business.


Anto. I heard ye talking, and believed you safe, and came in hopes to get a
little time to speak to Clara in; -- hah! -- Jacinta --


Jac. Who Is there, Antonio?

[Peeping of out the door.
Anto. The same; may I not speak with Clar^?


Jac. Come in, she is here. --


Car. And prithee, dear Jacinta, let me have one word with Julia more, she need
not fear surprise; just at the door let me but kiss her hand.

[Goes in.
Jac. I Will see if I can bring her. --


Enter Francisco. Fran. A proud ungracious Flurt, -- a Lord with a Pox, here is
a fine business in faith, that she should be her own Carver, -- well I Will home,
and thunder her together with a vengeance.


Car. Who Is here? sure this is he indeed; I Will step aside, least my being seen
give him an occasion of jealousy, and make him affront his Wife.

[Goes aside as Fran. was going in.
Enter Julia. Fran. Hum, what have we here, a woman?


Jul. Heavens! what, not gone yet, my Dear?


Fran. So, so, it is my confounded wife, who expecting some body would have me
gone now.


Jul. Are you not satisfied with all I Have said,
With all the vows I Have made,
Which here anew, in sight of Heaven, I breath?

Fran. Yes, yes, you can promise fair, but hang him that trusts ye.


Jul. Go, go, and pray be satisfied of my eternal love. --


Fran. How fain she would have me gone now; ah subtle Serpent, is not this plain
demonstration, -- I shall murder her, I ^ind the Devil great with me.

[aside still.
Jul. -- What is it thou pawsest on?


Fran. The wicked dissimulation of villainous woman.

aloud to her.
Jul. Francisco.


Fran. Oh thou monster of Ingratitude, have I caught thee? You Would have me gone,
would ye? ay, to Heaven, I believe, like a wicked woman as you are, so you were
rid of me. -- go, -- and be satisfied of my eternal love, -- ah, Gipsey, -- no,
Gentlewoman, I am a (...) bit, and will hold you tugging till your heart ache.


Jul. Why, was there such hurt in desireing you to go, that you might make have
back again, -- oh my fears!


Fran. That you might receive a lover, -- it is plain -- and my indignation's
high. --


Jul. Heaven knows I meant --


Fran. Only to Cuckold me a little, -- get you in, -- where I will swear thee
by Bell, Book and Candle, -- get you in, I say, -- go, go, -- I Will watch for
your Lover, and tell him how unkind he was to stay so long, I will. --

Ex. Julia, he stands just in the door, Carlos advances.
Car. I hear no noise, sure 'twas he, -- and he is gone in -- To reap those joys
he knows not how to value, And I must languish for; I Will stay a little --
perhaps Jacinta may return again, for any thing belonging to my Julia is dear,
even to my Soul.

[Goes just to the door, Fran. bolts out on him.
Fran. who is there? -- what would you have? -- who would you speak to? -- who
do you come from? -- and what is your business?


Car. Hah, it is the Sot himself; -- my name is Carlos.


Fran. Carlos, what father of Belzibub sent him hither, -- a plain case; --
I Will murder her out of hand.


Car. -- And I would speak to any body, Friend, that belongs to the fair Clara,
-- if you are any of this house.


Fran. Only the Cuckold of the house, that is all; -- my name, Sir, is
Francisco; but you, perhaps, are better acquainted with my Wife.


Car. Francisco, let me embrace you, my Noble Brother, And chide you, that you
would not Visit me.

Going to (...) him, he slies off.
Fran. And bring my Wife along with me.


Car. Both had been welcome -- and all I have, you should Command.


Fran. For my Wife's sake -- what if I should Pistol him now; -- and I am
damnably provokt to^t, had I but Courage to shoot off one.

[aside
Car. -- Methinks you make not so kind returns as my Friendship to you, and the
Alliance shall be between us, deserves.


Fran. I am something Ill-bred I confess, Sir; -- it is dark, and if I (...) do it
no body would know 'twas I.

[aside
Car. I fear there is some misunderstanding between us, pray let us go in a
while, I Will talk you from your error.

^.
Fran. Between us, Sir, oh Lord, not in the least, Sir, I love and Honor you,
so heartily -- I Would be content to give you to the Devil; but the noise of the
Pistol would discover the business.

aside
Car. -- Come let us in, and talk a while.


Fran. I Am sorry I cannot do it, Sir, we are something incommoded being not at
our own house.


Car. Brother, I am afraid you are a little inclined to be jealous, that will
destroy all friendship. --


Fran. So, how finely the Devil begins to insinuate?


Car. -- that makes a Hell of the Heaven of Love, and (...) very pains you
fear, are less tormenting than that fear; what say you, Brother, is it not so
with you?


Fran. -- I find you would have me turn a Husband of the Mode, a fine
convenient Tool, one of the Modern humor, a Civil person, that understands
Reason, or so; and I doubt not but you would be as Modish a Gallant.


Car. Ha, ha, ha.


Fran. What, do you Laugh, Sir?


Car. Who can choose; to hear your suspicions, your needless Fears. Come, come,
trust your Wives discretion, and Modesty -- and I doubt not but you will find
your self. --


Fran. -- In the Rode to Heaven, whither they say all Cuckolds go -- I thank
you for your advice; I perceive you would willingly help me onwards of my
Journey. --


Car. I Am glad I know you, Sir, -- farewell to you. --

[Goes out.
Fran. No matter for that, so you know not my Wife -- and so, farewell to you,
Sir, and, the Devil take all Cuckoldmakers.

[Ex.
SCENE The inside of the House. Enter Clara, Julia, Antonio, Jacinta running to
'em. Jac. He has seen Don Carlos, and they have been in great discourse
together, I could not hear one word, but you will have it at both ears anon, I Will
warrant you.

Ha, he is coming. --


Enter Francisco. Cla. Heavens, he must not see you here. --

[To Antonio.
Jac. Here, step in to Clara's Bedchamber. --

[He goes in.
Fran. So, the Plot's at last discovered, -- he was a Cavalier of his Parole.


Jul. Who speak you of?


Fran. Only the Governor, the fine young Governor, I delivered him the
message, told him my mind, and the like.


Jul. So kind to visit us, and have you sent him away already?


Fran. Ah, Witch; already, -- why, have I any lodging for him?


Jul. But I am glad you brought him not in, I being so unready.


Fran. But you are always ready for him, my dear victorious Manslayer.


Jac. What means he, sure he has a Gad-bee in his brain.


Fran. Satan's she Advocate -- peace I say; -- so, -- you look as innocently
now, as a little Devil of two years old, I Will warrant; -- come, come, -- look
me full in the face -- thus, -- turn your nose just to mine -- so -- now tell
me whose damnable Plot this was, to send your Gallant with his Eloquence,
Querks and Conundrums, to tutour me into better manners?


Jul. Send him; I Will answer no such idle questions. --


Fran. He has taken a world of pains about your particular Chapter, and no
doubt but he preached according to ^ons; -- what say you ^or your self, that
Judgment may not pass?


Jul. I say, you're an old jealous Fool; have I seen Don Carlos, or heard from
Don Carlos, or sent to Don Carlos? (...) a do indeed.


Fran. What made you at the door against my positive commands, -- the very
street door, -- in the ^ight, -- alone, -- and undrest, -- this is matter of
Fact, Gentlewoman; you hastened me away, -- a plain case, -- and presently after
Don Carlos comes to the door, -- positive proof, -- sees me and falls right
down upon my jealousy, -- clear conviction, -- 'twas pity but I had followed
his counsel, yes, when the Devil turns student in Divinity; -- but no matter,
I Will see your back fairly turned upon this Town to morrow; I Will marry my
Daughter in the morning to Antonio, and a fai^ wind or not, we'll home; the
Gally lies ready in the Harbor -- therefore prepare, pack up your tools, for
you are no woman of this world.


Anto. How? marry me to morrow to his daughter; -- and carry his Wife from my
friend; this misfortune must be prevented.

[Aside peeping.
Fran. And so, Mistress, come your ways to your Chamber.


Jul. And study how to prevent this cruel separation.

Aside, goes out with him and Jacinta.
Cla. Ah Antonio, I find by that sad look of yours, you have over heard our
hasty Doom.


Anto. I have, and am a little surprised at the suddainness of it; and I my
self am the unlucky occasion of it, -- to break it off; I told my father how
scurvily Isabella treated me, -- he thereupon sends for old Francisco, tells
him of my complaint, and instead of disingaging my self, I find my self more
undone.


Cla. What shall we do? I Am sure thou will not marry her, thou can not do it
and hope to go to Heaven.


Anto. No, I have one prevention left, and if that fail, I Will utterly refuse to
marry her, a thing so vainly proud; no Laws of Nature or Religion, sure, can
bind me to say yes; and for my Fortune, it is my own, no Father can command it.


Cla. I know thou will be true, and I Will not doubt it.


Enter Jacinta. Jac. Ah! Madam, the saddest news --


Cla. Hah! what?


Jac. Poor Gentleman, I pity you of all things in the world, -- you must be
forced -- how can I utter it, -- to the most lamentable torment that ever Lover
endured -- to remain all night in your Mistress's Chamber.


Anto. Alas, how shall I endure so great an affliction?


Cla. And I.


Jac. Ha, ha, ha, how I am grieved to think on it; ha, ha, ha, that you should
both be so hardly put to it; ha, ha, ha, for the old Gentle ^ man has locked all
the doors, and took the keys to bed to him, -- go get you in, -- ha, ha, ha, --


Anto. Oh, my dear Clara, this is a blessing, I could not hope.


Cla. So large a freedom shall my Virtue prove,
I Will trust my Honor with Antonio's Love.
[They go in. [Ex. Jacinta laughing.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Don Carlos, in his Nightgown, Antonio and Guzman with Clothes. Car. ALL
night with Clara say thou? that was lucky; but was she kind, my friend?


Anto. As I desired, or honor would permit her;
Nor would I press her farther.

Car. A very moderate Lover.


Anto. For some part of my Virtue, Sir, I owe to you, in midst of all my Love,
even in the kindest moments of delight, my joys were broken by concern for you.

-- Julia this day, or very suddenly, leaves Cadez.


Car. By Heaven, and so will Carlos then, for I Am so resolutely bent to possess
that dear creature,

That I will do it with hazard of my life,
Expense of Fortune, or what is dear to me.

Guz. And how would you reward that politic head, that should contrive the
means to bring this hansomly about; not for an hour, or a night, but even as
long as you please, with freedom; without the danger of venturing your
honorable neck, in showing feats of activitie three stories high, with a
Dagger in one hand and a Pistol in the other, like a Rope-dancer?


Car. But how? thou talkest of impossibilities.


Anto. Do think she will ever consent to quit her Husband?


Guz. No, Heaven forbid, I am too good a Christian to par: man and wife; but
being naturally inclined to works of Charity, I will with one project I have in
this noddle of mine, -- make old Francisco a Cuckold, accommodate my Lord and
Julia, serve you, Sir, -- and give our selves a good Scene of mirth.


Car. Thou amazests me.


Guz. If I do it not, send me to the Galleys, nay, and so far cure the
jealousy of the old Fellow, that from a rigid suspicious troublesome Fool, he
shall become so tame and gentle a Husband, -- that he shall desire you to
favor him so much as to lie with his dear Wife.


Car. By what strange Witchcraft shall this be brought to pass?


Guz. E'n honest invention, Sir, good Faith, listen and believe: -- -- When he
goes, he certainly (...) by Sea, to save the charges of Mules.


Anto. Right, I heard him say so; in the (...) that lies in the Port.


Guz. Good, there is a Galley also, in the Harbor, you lately took from the
Turks; habits too were taken in her enough to furnish out some forty or fifty
as convenient Turks as a man would wish at the Devil.


Car. Ah Rogue, I begin to apprehend already.


Guz. Our Turkish Galley thus manned, I Will put to Sea, and about a League from
Land, with a sham-fight, set on that of old Francisco, take it, make 'em all
slaves, clap the old Fellow under hatches, and then you may deal with the fair
slave his Wife, as Adam did with Eve.


Car. I Am ravished with the thought.


Anto. But what will be the event of this?


Car. I will not look so far, but stop at the dear Joys, and Fear no Fate
beyond 'em.


Guz. Nay, with a little Cudgelling this dull Brain of mine, I shall advance it
Farther for the Jest sake; -- as I take it, Seignior Don Antonio, you have a
fine Villa, within a Bow shot of this City belonging to your self.


Anto. I have, with pleasant Gardens, Grotto's, Waterworks. --


Car. A most admirable Scene for Love and our designs.


Anto. It Is yours, Sir.


Guz. Then, Sir, when we have taken this old Fool, on whom the grosest cheat
would pass, much more this, which shall carry so seeming a Truth in it, he being
clapped under hatches in the Dark, we'll wind round a league or two at Sea, turn
in, and Land at this Garden, Sir, of yours, which we'll pretend to be a
Seraglio belonging to the Grand Seignior; whither, in this hot part o'th year,
he goes to Regale himself with his She Slaves.


Car. But the Distance of Place and Time allow not such a Falacie.


Guz. Why, he never read in's life; knows neither Longitude nor Latitude, and
Constantinople may be in the midst of Spain for any thing he knows; besides,
his Fear will give him little Leisure for thinking.


Anto. But how shall we do with the Seamen of this other Gally?


Guz. There Is not above a Dozen, besides the Slaves that are chained to the
Oar, and those Dozen, a Pistol a piece would not only make 'em assist in the
Design, but betray it in earnest to the Grand Seignior; -- for them I Will
undertake, the Master of it being Pier de (...) your Fathers Old Servant, Sir.

[To Carlos.
Anto. But possibly his mind may alter upon the Arrival of this false Count of
ours?


Car. No matter, make sure of those Seamen however; that they may be ready upon
occasion.


Anto. It Is high time for me, that your Count were arrived, for this Morning is
destined the last of my Liberty.


Car. This Morning -- Come haste and dress me --

[To Guzman. -- Guzman, where is our Count?


Enter Guilion dressed fine, two great Pages and a little one following. Guz.
Coming to give you the good Morrow, Sir. And show you how well he looks the
Part.


Car. Good day to your Lordship --

[Bowing.
Guil. Morrow, morrow friend.


Anto. My Lord, your most humble servant.


Guil. Thank you friend, thank you; Page, Boy -- what'st a Clock Sirrah?


Page About Eight, my Lord.


Anto. Your Lordship's early up?


Guil. My stomach was up before me, friend; and I Am damnable hungry; it is
strange how a man's Appetite increases with his Greatness; I Will swinge it away
now I Am a Lord, -- then I will wench without mercy; I Am Resolved to spare
neither man, Woman, nor Child, not I; hey Rogues, Rascals, Boys, my Breakfast,
quickly Dogs -- let me see what shall I have now that is Rare?


Page What will your Honor please to have?


Guil. A small rasher of delicate Bacon, Sirrah -- of about a Pound, or two,
with a small Morcel of bread -- round the Loaf, do you hear, quickly Slaves.


Anto. That Is gross meat, Sir, a pair of Quails -- or --


Guil. I thank you for that in faith, take your Don again, an you, please, I Will
not be starved for nere a Don in Christiandom.


Anto. But you must study to refine your manners a little.


Guil. Manners, you shall pardon me for that, as if a Lord had not more
privilege to be more sawey, more rude, impertinent, slovenly and foolish than
the rest of his Neighbors, or mankind.


Car. Ay, ay it is great.


Guil. Your sawey Rudeness, in a Grandee, is Freedom; your Impertinence, Wit;
your Sloven, Careless; and your Fool, good Natured, at least they shall pass so
in me, I Will warrant ye.


Car. Well, you have your full instructions; your Baggage, Bills and Letters,
from Octavio the Sivilian Merchant.


Guz. All, all, Sir, are ready, and his Lordship's breakfast waits.


Car. Which ended, we advance,
Just, when Aurora rose from Thetis Bed,
Where he had wantoned a short Summer's night,
Harnest his bright hoov'd Horses to begin
(...) Gilded Course about the Firmament,
Out sallyed Don Guilelmo Roderigo de Chimeny swiperio, and so forth. Gad this
Adventure of ours will be worthy to b^ sung in Heroic Rhyme Dogerell; before
we have finnisht it, Come --
[Goes out
Guil. Hey Rogues, Rascals, Boys, follow me just behind.

[Exeum
SCENE II.
Enter Clara and Jacin^a. Jac. Nay I kn^w he would be Civil, Madam, or I would
have born you company, but neither my Mistress nor I, Could sleep one wink all
night, for fear of a Discovery in the Morning, and, to save the poor Gentleman
a tumbling Cast from the window, my Mistress, just at day break, feigned her
self wondrous sick, -- I was called, desired to go to Seignior Spadillio's the
Apothecary's, at Next door, for a Cordial; and so he slipped out; -- but the
Story of this False Count pleases me extremely, and, if it should take, Lord,
what mirth we shall have. Ha, ha, ha, I cannot forbear with the thoughts on it.


Cla. And to see the Governor his man?


Jac. Ah, what a Jest will that be too, -- Ha ha ha; but here Comes Isabella;
lets (...) up her Pride with Flatteries on her Beauty --


Enter Isabella looking in a Glass, and setting her Face. Isa. Ah, Heavens,
those Eyes, -- that Look; -- that pretty Lear, -- that my Father should be so
Doting an old Fool, to think these Beauties fit for a little Merchandize^ -- a
Marchioness would so much better become me.

[Looks again. -- ah what a smile's there -- and then that scornful look --
it is great -- heavens who is here? --

[Sees them.
Cla. Only those Friends that wish you better Fortune than this day promises.


Jac. Look on that Face; Are there not lines that foretell a world of
greatness, and promise much Honor?


Cla. Her Face, her Shape, her Mien, her every Part, declares her Lady -- or
something more. --


Isa. Why so, and yet this little creature of a Father, ridiculous and
unambitious, would spoil this Lady, to make up a simple Citizen's Wife -- in
good time.


Jac. That very look had some presageing Grandeur.


Isa. Do you think so, (...), Ha, ha, ha. --


Jac. That laugh again, oh heavens, how it Charms?


Cla. Ah how Graceful it is.


Jac. Ah, nothing but a great Gilt Coach will become it.


Cla. -- With Six Spanish Mares. --


Jac. -- And embroidered Trapings. --


Cla. -- With four Lackeys.


Jac. -- And a Page at the tail on it.


Cla. She Is evidently designed for a Person of quality.


Isa. Besides I have so Natural an inclination for a Don, that if my Father do
force me to marry this small Creature of a Merchant, I shall make an intreague
with some body of quality.


Cla. Could you but manage it well and keep it from Antonio.


Isa. Keep it from Antonio, -- is it think you for a little, silly Cit, to
complain^ when a Don does him the Honor to Visit his Lady! Marry that were
pretty.


Enter Francisco, and Lopez. Fran. How, a Count, to speak with me; With me, I
say, -- here at Cadez?


Lop. A Count, Sir, and to speak with you.


Fran. Art sure it is not the Governor? -- I Will go lock up my Wife.


Lop. Governor, Sir, No, no, it is a mear stranger, Sir, a rare Count whom I
never saw all days of my life before.


Fran. And, with me, would he speak? I hope he comes not to my Wife.


Enter Julia. Jul. Oh Husband, the delicatest sine Person of Quality, just
alight^d at the door, Husband.


Fran. What, have you seen him then, the Devil's in these Women, and there be
but a loop hole to peep out off they will spy a man, -- I Am resolved to see this
thing. -- go, retire you women, here is men coming up.


Isa. And will men eat us?


Fran. No, but they may do worse, they may look on ye, and Looking breeds
Likeing; and Likeing, Love; and Love, a damned thing, called Desire; and Desire
begets the Devil and all of Mischief to young wenches. -- G^t ye gone in, I say,
-- here is a Lord coming -- and Lords are plaguie things to women.


Isa. How, a Lord! oh, heavens! Jacinta, my Fan, and set my Hair in order, Oh
the Gods! I would not but see a Lord for all the world! how my Heart beats
already -- keep your Distance behind, Jacinta, -- Bless me, how I tremble -- a
little farther, Jacinta.


Fran. Come, come Husewife, you shall be Married anon, and then let your
Husband have the Plague of you -- but for my Gentlewoman, -- Oh Lord -- they are
here.


Enter Guilion, Carlos and Pages, etc. Guil. How now, Fellow, where is this old.
Don Francisco?


Fran. I Am the Person, Sir?


Isa. Heavens, what an Air he has?


Guil. Art thou he? Old Lad, how do thou do? Hah!


Fran. I don't know.


Guil. Thou know me not it seems, old Fellow, hah!


Fran. Know you -- no, nor desire to do, -- on what acquaintance pray?


Guil. By Instinct, such as you ought to know a Person of Quality, and pay your
Civilities naturally; in France, where I have traveled, so much good Manners
is used, your Citizen pulls of his hat, thus -- to every Horse of quality, and
every Coach of quality; and do you pay my proper Person, no more respect hah!


Isa. What a dishonour's this, to me, to have so Dull a Father, that needs to
be instructed in his Duty.


Guil. But, Sir, to open the eyes of your understanding -- here is a Letter to
you, from your Correspondant a Merchant of Sivil.

^
Fran. Cry Mercy, my Lord, and yet I would he were a thousand Leagues off.


Guil. I have bills of Exchange too, directed to thee, old Fellow, at Sivil;
but, finding thee not there, and, I (as most persons of my Quality are) being
something idle, and nev^r out of my way, came to this Town, to seek th^e,
Fellow, -- being recommended as thou see here, old Vermin, -- here. --

[Gives him Bills.
Isa. Ah what a graceful Mien he has? how sine his conversation? ah, the
difference between him and a filthy Citizen.


Jul. -- Clara has told me all. --

Jac. whispering to Jul.
Car. That Is she in the middle; stand looking on her languishingly, -- your
head a little a one side, -- so, -- fold your arms, -- good, -- now and then
heave your breast with a sigh, -- most (...). --

[He groans.
Fran. Bills (...) (...) (...) thousands.


Jac. He has you (...) his eye already. --


Isa. Ah, Jacinta thou flatterest me.


Jac. Return him some kind looks in pity.

[She sets her eyes (...) (...), etc.
Car. That other's my Mistress, -- (...) thou but keep this old Fellow in
discourse whilst I give her the sign to (...) a little. --


Guil. I Will warrant you I Will banter him till you have Cuckold him, If you
manage matters as well as I.


Fran. My Lord, I ask your pardon for my rudeness in not knowing you before,
which I ought to have done in good manners, I confess; -- who the Devil does he
stare at so? -- Wise, I command you to withdraw, upon pain of our high
displeasure. -- my Lord, I shall dispatch your affairs, -- he minds me not, --
Ay, -- it is my Wife, -- I say, Minion, begone, -- your Bills, my Lord, are good,
and I accept Julia goes to the other side to Carlos. em; -- why, what a Devil he
minds me not yet, -- and though I am not at my proper home -- I am where I can
command Money, -- hum, -- sure it is my daughter, -- Ay, ay, -- it is so, how
(...) he should be (...) now; the plaguie jade had sure the spirit of Prophecy
in her; it is so, -- it is she, -- my Lord. --


Guil. Prithee, old Fellow, peace, -- I am in Love. --


Fran. In Love, -- what, shall I be the Father of a Lord, would it become me,
think ye? -- he is mighty full of Cogitabund; -- my Lord, -- my Lord, -- sure
his Soul has left the Tenement of his Body, -- I have his Bills here, and care
not if it never return more.

[Looks over the Bills.
Car. Dear Julia, let us retire, our time's but short.


Jul. I dare not with you, the venture would be too bold in a young beginner in
the Thefts of Love.


Guil. -- Her Eyes are Suns, by Jove. --


Car. Oh, nothing is so ventrous as Love, if it be true.


Guil. -- Or else, two Morning Stars,
All other Beauties are but Soot to her.

Jul. But should my husband --


Car. He Is safe for one dear half hour, I Will warrant you, come.


Fran. Um -- my Wife here still, -- must I begin to thunder? --


Jul. Lord, and you be so froward, I Will be gone. --


Car. So, her Husband kind heart lest she should be cruel, has himself given me
the dear opportunity. --

[Aside. -- Be sure you keep the old Fellow in discourse a while.


Guil. Be you as sure to Cuckold him. --

[Ex. Car. and Jul. -- Old Fellow, -- prithee what person of quality's that?


Fran. Person of quality, -- alas, my Lord, it is a silly Citizen's daughter.


Guil. A Citizen's; what clod of earth could bring forth such a (...)?


Fran. Alas, my Lord, I am that clod of Earth, and to Earth if you call it so,
she must return again, for she is to be married to a Citizen this Morning.


Guil. Oh! I am doubly wounded, first with her harmonious eyes,

Who Have sir'd my heart to that degree,
No Chimney ever burnt like me.
Fair Lady, -- suffer the Broom of my Affection to sweep all other Lovers from
your heart.


Isa. Ah, my Lord, name it not, I Am this day to be married.


Guil. To day; -- name me the Man, Man, did I say, the Monster that dares lay
claim to her, I dain to love, -- none answer me, -- I Will make him smoke by
Vulcan -- and all the rest of the Goddesses.


Fran. Bless me, what a furious thing this Love is?


Guil. By this bright sword, that is so used to slaughter, he dies; old Fellow,
say -- the Poltroons name.

[Draws.
Fran. Oh fearful -- alas, dread Sir! --


Isa. Ah! sheath your Sword, and calm your generous Rage.


Guil. I cannot brook a Rival in my Love, the rustling Pole of my affection is
too strong to be resisted. --

Runs raging up and down the Stage with his Sword in his hand.
Isa. I cannot think, my Lord, so mean a Beauty, can so suddenly charm a heart
so great as yours.


Guil. Oh! you're mistaken, as soon as I cast my eyes upon the full moon of
your countenance, I was struck blind and dumb. --


Fran. Ay, and deaf too, I Will be sworn, he could neither hear, see nor
understand; this Love's a miraculous thing.


Guil. And that minute, the most renoun'd Don Guilelmo Roderigo de
Chimeny-swiperio, became your Galley slave, -- I say no more, (...) that I do
Love, -- and I will Love, and that if you are but half so willing as I, I will
dub you, Vicountess de Chimeny Swiperio.


Isa. I am in Heaven, ah! I dye, Jacinta.
How can I (...) this, that am so much unworthy?

Guil. I Will do it, say no more, I Will do it.


Fran. Do It, but my Lord, how, and with what face can I put off Signior
Antonio, hum?


Guil. Antonio, -- hay, Pages, give order that Antonio be instantly run through
the Lunges -- do you hear?


Fran. Oh, hold, hold, my Lord! run through the Lunges^


Page. It shall be done, my Lord, but, what Antonio?


Guil. Why any Antonio; all the Antonio's that you find in (...).


Fran. Oh, what bloody minded Monsters these Lords are! -- But, my Lord, I Will
never give you the trouble of killing him, I Will put him off with a handsome
compliment; as thus, -- Why, look ye, Friend Antonio, the business is this, my
Daughter Isabella may marry a Lord, and you may go fiddle. --


Guil. Ay, that is civil, -- and if he do not desist, I Will unpeople Spain but
I Will kill him; for, Madam, I Will tell you what happened to me in the Court of
France -- there was a Lady in the Court in love with me, -- she took a liking
to my Person which, -- I think, -- you will confess. --


Isa. To be the most accomplished in the World.


Guil. -- I had some sixscore Rivals, they all took snuff; that i^, were angry,
-- at which I smiled; -- they were incensed, at which I laughed, ha, ha, ha, --
in faith; they raged, I -- when I met '^m, -- Cockt, thus -- en passant --
justled (...) -- (...), --

[Overthrows Fran. They turned and frowned, -- thus, -- I -- drew. --


Fr^n. What, on all the sixscore, my Lord?


G^il. All, all; sa sa, quoth I, sa sa sa, sa sa sa.

[Fences him round the Stage.
Fr^n. Hold, hold, my Lord, I am none of the sixscore.


Guil. -- and run ^em all through the body --


Fran. Oh Heavens! and killed 'em all.


Guil. Not a man, -- only run 'em through the Body a little, that is all; my
two boys were by, my Pages here.


Isa. Is it the fashion, Sir, to be attended by Pages so big?


Guil. Pages of honor always; -- these were stinted at nurse, or they had been
good proper fellows.


Fran. I am so frighted with this relation, that I must up to my Wifes Chamber
for a little of that stong Cordial that recovered her this morning. --

[Going out Guil. stays him.
Guil. Why, I Will tell you, Sir, what an odd sort of a wound I received in a
duel the other day, -- nay, Ladies, I Will show it you; in a very odd place -- in
my back parts.

Goes to untuck his breeches, the Ladies squeak.
Isa. Ah!


Page Show a wound behind, Sir, the Ladies will think you are a Coward.


Guil. Peace Child, peace, the Ladies understand Dueling as little as my self;
-- but, since you are so tenderhearted, Ladies, I Will not show my wound; but
faith, it spoiled my dancing.

[Page comes in.
Page, My Lord, now you talk of dancing, here is your baggage brought from
a-board the Gally by your Seamen, who used to entertain you with their rustic
sports.


Guil. Very well; Sir, with your permission, I am resolved whether you will, or
no, to give the Ladies some divertisement, -- bid 'em come in; nay, Sir, you
stir not,

[Ex. Page. It Is for your delight, Sir, I do it; for, Sir, you must understand,
a man, if he have any thing in him, Sir, of Honor, for the case, Sir, lies
thus, it is not the business of an Army to droll upon an Enemy, -- truth is,
every man loves a whole skin; -- but, 'twas the fault of the best States^man in
Christendom to be loose in the hilts; -- you conceive me.


Fran. Very well, my Lord, I Will swear he is a rare spoken man; -- why, what a
Son-in-law shall I have? I have a little business my Lord, but I Will wait on you
presently.

[Going out.
Guil. -- Sir, there is nothing like your true Jest, a thing once well done, is
twice done, and I am the happiest man in the World in your alliance; -- for,
Sir, a Nobleman if he have any tolerable parts, -- is a thing above the
Vulgar; -- oh, -- here come the Dancers;

Enter Dancers. Come, sit down by me.


Fran. It Is my duty to stand, my Lord.


Guil. Nay, you shall sit. --

[They dance with Don.
Enter Antonio. Anto. Good day, Sir, I hope you will not chide my tardiness, I
have a little overslept my self, and am ashamed to see my lovely Bride, and all
this worthy company attend; -- But you, fair Creature. --

[To Isabella
Isa. No marrying to day, Sir.


Fran. No, Sir, no marrying to day. --


Anto. How, do I dream, or hear this from Fran^isco?


Guil. How now, Fellow, what art (...)?


Anto. The Husband of that proud disdainful Woman.


Guil. Another word like that, -- and thou art --


Anto. -- What, Sir? --


Fran. -- Oh, hold, hold, my Lord! Antonio, I must tell you, you're uncivil.


Guil. Do know, dull Mortal, that I am a Lord,
And Isabella my adopted Lady?

Anto. I beg your pardon, Sir, if it be so, poor Mortals can but grieve in
silence.


Guil. Alas poor Mortal!


Anto. But, for you, Francisco.


Fran. Ah, dear Antonio, I vow and swear I cannot choose but weep to lose thee;
but my Daughter was born for a Lady and none can help their destiny.


Anto. And is it possible thou can use me thus?

[To Isa.
Isa. Take away that little Fellow, in pity of your life, I dain to bid you
withdraw and be safe.


Guil. Do You hear, hah? -- this Lady has begged your life.


Anto. Begged my life.


Guil. Vile wretch, dare thou retort?

[Draws, the Women hold him.
Fran. Oh! hold, hold my noble son-in-law, he shall do any thing; -- dear
Antonio, consider, -- I was never Father to a Lord all days of my life before:
-- my Lord, be pacified, my Daughter shall be a Lady. --


Isa. For my sake, spare him, and be Friends with him, as far as you may dain
to be with a little Citizen.


Guil. Fellow, I forgive thee, -- here is my hand to kiss in sign and token I am
appeased

[Gives him his hand to kiss, it is all black.
Anto. A Pox of his honorable hand, 't had like to have spoiled all, -- well,
-- since it must be so, -- I am content --


Guil. So, now peace is concluded on, on all sides, what shall we do to day
besides eating and drinking in abundance; for to morrow I shall get my self in
order for my marriage?


Cla. What thinks your Honor of taking the air upon the Sea, in a Gally, a
League or two?


Guil. With Fiddles, Drums and Trumpets, West-Phalia hams and Pigeons and the
like: Hey Rogues, Scoundrels, Dogs.


Isa. Ah, how fine is every action of a great man!


Guil. Command a Gally to attend us presently,
-- you shall along, old Boy.

[To Fran. Fran. Alas, I must stay at home with my Wife, my Lord.


Guil. A Wife! have I a Mother-in-law too? -- she must along with us, and take
a frisk, -- no denial:

Enter Carlos. -- Oh, are you come?

[Aside.
Car. Yes and thank thee for the best moment of my life: -- have thou contrived
the Voyage then?


Guil. Take no care -- come haste on board -- our honor will not lose the
Fresco of the morning, -- Follow me -- Pages.


Page At your heels, my Lord, --

[Exeunt.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter, as a board the Ship, Guilion, Isabella, Francisco, Julia, Antonio,
Clara, Jacinta, Pedro and his Wife, Pages. Guil. Ladies and Gentlemen, you are
welcome aboard, -- Come, put off to sea, Rogues, Scoundrells, Tarpaulins, to
your business, and then, every man his Bottle, -- hey Page, Rogues, where are
my men? Come, spread the Table -- for we are very hungry.


Isa. Heavens, what a peculiar Grace there is in every word that comes from the
Mouth of a Cavalier!


Guil. By Mars, the God of Love!


Page By Cupid, Sir.

[Aside to him.
Guil. Cupid, Sirrah, I say, I Will have it Mars, there is more Thunder in the
sound! I say, by Mars, these Galleys are pretty neat convenient Teniments --
but a -- I see never a Chimney in 'em; -- Pox on it, what have I to do with a
Chimney now?


Isa. He is a delicate, fine person, Jacinta, but, methinks, he does not make
Love enough to me.


Jac. Oh, Madam, Persons of his Quality never make Love in words, the greatness
of their Actions show their Passion.


Jac. Ay, it is true all the little Fellows talk of love.


Guil. Come, Ladies, s^t; Come Isabella, you are Melancholy, -- Page -- Fill my
Lady a Beer-glass.


Isa. Ah, Heavens, a Beer-glass.


Guil. O your Vicountess never drinks under your Beer-glass, your Citizens
Wives simper and sip, and will be drunk without doing Credit to the Treater;
but in their Closets, they swinge it away, whole Slashes in faith, and egad,
when a woman drinks by her self, Glasses Come thick about? your Gentle woman,
or your little Lady, drinks half way, and thinks in point of good manners, she
must leave some at the bottom, but your true-bred Woman of Honor drinks all,
Supernaculum, by (...).


Isa. What a misfortune it was, that I should not know this before, but should
discover my want of so necessary a piece of grandeur.


(...). And nothing, but being Fudled, will redeem her Credit.


Guil. Come -- (...) to, old Boy, -- thou art not merry; what have we none that
can give us a song?


Anto. Oh, Sir, we have an Artist aboard I Will assure you; Seignior (...), shall
I beg the favor of you to show your Skill?


(...). Sir, my Wife and I Am at your service.


Guil. Friend, what Language can you Sing?


(...). Oh, Sir, your Singers speak all Languages.


Guil. Say thou so, prithee then let us have a touch of Heathen Greek.


Pet. That you shall, Sir, Sol la me fa sol, etc.


Fran. Hum, I think this is indeed Heathen Greek. I Am sure it is so to me.


Guil. Ay, that may be, but I understand every word on it.


Fran. Good lack, these Lords are very Learned men.


Pet. Now, Sir, you shall hear one of an other Language from my Wife and I.

[Sing a Dialogue in French.
Enter the Captain. Cap. Well Gentlemen though the news be something unpleasant
that I bring, yet to Noble minds it is sport and pastime.


Guil. Hah Fellow! What Is that that's sport and pastime to Noble minds?


Fran. Oh Lord, no goodness I Will warrant.


Capt. But, Gentlemen, pluck up your spirits, be bold and resolute.


Fran. Oh Lord, bold and resolute, why what is the matter, Captain?


Capt. You are old, Seignior, and we expect no good from you but prayers to
Heaven?


Fran. Oh Lord, Prayers to Heaven! Why I hope, Captain, we have no need to
think of Heaven.


Capt. At your own Peril be it then, Seignior, for the Turks are coming upon us.


Fran. Oh Lord, Turks, Turks!


Guil. Turks, oh, is that all?

[Falls to (...).
Fran. All -- why they will make Eunuchs of us, my Lord, Eunuchs of us poor men,
and ly with all our Wives!


Guil. Shaw, that is nothing, it is good for the Voice, -- how sweetly we shall
sing, ta, la, ta la la, ta la, etc.


Fran. Ay, 'twill make you sing another note, I ll warrant you.


Enter a Seaman. Sea. For Heavens sake, Sirs, do not stand Idle here;
Gentlemen, if you would save your lives, -- draw, and defend 'em.

[Ex.
Fran. Draw, I never drew any thing in my life, but my Purse, and that most
damnably against my will; oh, what shall I do?


Enter Captain. Cap. Ah, my Lord, they bear up briskly to us, with a Fresh Gale
and full Sails.


Fran. Oh, dear Captain, let us tack-about and go home again.


Cap. It Is impossible to escape, we must fight it out.


Fran. Fight it out, oh I Am not able to endure it, -- why, what the Devil made
me a ship^ board?

[Ex. Captain.
Guil. Why, where be these Turks! Set me to 'em, I Will make 'em smoke, dogs, to
dare attack a man of Quality.


Isa. Oh, the insolence of these Turks? do they know who is Aboard? For Heavens
sake, my Lord, do not expose your Noble Person.


Guil. What, not fight! -- Not fight! A Lord, and not fight? Shall I submit to
Fetters, and see my Mistress ravished by any great Turk in Christiandom, and not
fight?


Isa. I Would rather be ravished a thousand times, then you should Venture your
Person.

[Seamen (...) within.
Fran. Ay I dare swear.


Enter Seamen. Sea. Ah, Sirs, what mean you, come on the Deck for shame.


Anto. My Lord, let us not tamely fall, there is danger near.

[Draws.
Guil. Ay, Ay, there is never smoke but there is some fire -- come let us away --
ta la, tan ta la, la la, etc.

[(...). [Ex. singing, and Antonio, and Pet.
Fran. A Pox of all Lords, I say, you must be Janting in (...) (...)-name, and
Gods dry Ground would not serve your (...),

[Shoot (...). Oh how they Thunder! What shall I do -- oh for some Au^ hole to
thrust my Head into, for I could never (...) (...) Noise (...) Cannons, -- oh
it is insupportable, -- intoller. (...) and not to be (...).

[Runing as mad about the stage.
(...). Dear Father, be not so frighted!

[(...).
(...). Ah, Crocodile, would thou had wept thy Eyes out (...) a (...) that
thou had never seen this Count; then he (...) (...) lovd thee, and then we
had never been invited (...) (...).

[A noise of fighting.
(...) Guilion, Pet. and Antonio. Driven in fighting by Guzman and other Turks.
Anto. Ah, Sir, the Turks have boarded us, we re lost we re lost


Fran. Oh, I am slain, I Am slain.

[Falls down.
Guil. Hold, -- hold, I say, you are now in the presence of (...), and it is
uncivil to fight before Ladies.


Guz. Yield then, you are our slaves.


Guil. Slaves, no Sir, we are slaves to none but the Ladies. --

[Offers to fight.
Isa. Oh, hold, rude man -- Do You know whom you encounter?


Guz. What Is here -- one dead --

[Looking on Francisco.
Fran. Oh, Lord!


Guz. Or, if he be not, he is old, and past service, we'll kill the Christian
Dog out of the way.


Fran. Oh, hold, hold, I Am no Christian, Gentlemen; but as (...) a Heathen as
your selves.


Guz. Bind him Straight neck and (...), and Clap him under (...).


(...). Oh, (...) him, Sir, look on his (...) Age.


Guz. For your sake, Lady, much may be done, we have need (...) (...) women.

[Gives her to some Turks that are by.
Fran. (...), -- my Wife! My Wife Ravished -- oh I Am dead.


Jul. Fear not, my Dear, I Will rather dye than do thee wrong.


Fran. Would she would, quickly, -- then there is her honor saved, and her
ransom, which is better.


Guz. Down with the (...) Dog.

[He (...), -- And take the Ladies to several Cabins.

[The Turks take hold of the Men
Isa. Must we be parted then, -- ah, cruel (...)!

(...).
Guil. Alas! this separation's worse than death.


(...). You possibly may see some Turkish Ladies, that may ensnare your heart,
and make you faithless; -- (...) I, ah Heavens! if ever I change my Love, may I
become (...), and lose all hopes of Title or of Grandeur.


Guil. But thou would the (...) Signior behold thy Beauty, (...) would despise
thine own dear honey Vicount to be a Sultana.


Isa. A Sultana, what is that?


Guil. Why, it is a she great (...); a Queen of Turkey.


Isa. These dear expressions go to my heart. --

[Weeps And yet a Sultana is a tempting thing --

[Aside smiling. -- And you shall find your (...) true, -- though the Grand
Signior would lay his Crown at my (...), -- would he would try me though, --
Heavens! to be Queen of Turkey.

[Aside.
Guil. May I b^lieve thee, -- but when thou see the difference, alas, I am
but a Chimney -- hum, nothing to a great Turk.


Isa. Is he so (...) a thing -- oh that I (...) a (...) Great Turk.


Guz. Come, come, we cannot attend your (...) (...).

[(...) (...).
Jul. Alas, and what shall we poor women do?

[(...)
Isa. We must even have patience, Madam, and be (...).


(...). Ravished! Heavens forbid.


(...). An please the Lord, I Will let my nails grow against (...) direful day.


Isa. And so will I, for I Am resolved none shall ravish me but the Great Turk.


Guz. Come, Ladies, you are Dishes to be served up to the board of the Grand
Signior.


Isa. Why, will he eat us all?


Guz. A slice of each, perhaps, as he finds (...) (...) (...).


Isa. A slice, uncivil Fellow, -- as if this Beauty were for a bit and away; --
Sir, a word, -- if you will do me the favor to recommend me to be first served
up to the Grand Signior, I shall remember the civility when I am great.


G^. Lady, he is his own Carver, a good word by the by, or so, will do well,
and I am, -- a Favorite --


Isa. Are you so, here, take this Jew^, -- in earnest of (...) Favou^ --

[(...) him a Jewel. E^unt all.
SCENE II. A Garden.
Enter Don Carlos and Lopez. (...). But, why so near the Land? by Heaven I saw
each action (...) the Fight, from yonder grove of Jesemine, And doubtless all
beheld it from the Town.


(...). The Captain, Sir, designed it so, and at the Harbor (...) it out those
two Galleys were purposely prepared to entertain the Count and the Ladies with
the representation of a (...) lest the noise of the Guns should Alarm the Town,
and, taking (...) for a real Fight, shoud have sent out supplies, and so have
^in'd our designs.


C^r. Well, have we all things in readiness?


(...). All, Sir, al^


Enter Page. (...). My Lord, a Ba^ge from the Gally is just arrived at the
Garden Stairs.


Enter Guzman. (...). I Will ^tire then, and fit me for my part of this (...).


Guz. My Lord, you must retire, they are just bringing the old Gentleman a shore.


Car. (...) how does he take his Captivity?


Guz. Take it, Sir, he has cast himself into a fit, and has lain like one in a
Trance this half hour; it is impossible for him to ^ak Sense this fortnight; Ill
secure his Reason a play-day for (...) long at least; your servants, in Turkish
habits, are now his (...), who will keep him safe enough from hindering your
(...) ^ith (...).


Car. What ever you do have a care you do not overfright the Coxcomb, and make
a Tragedy of our Comedy.


Guz. I Will warrant you, Sir, mind you your Love affairs; -- he is coming in, --
retire, Sir. --

[Ex. Car. and Page and Lop.
Enter some Turks with the Body of Francisco in Chains, and lay him down on a
Bank. 1 Tu. Christian, so ho ho, Slave awake. --

[Rubbing and calling him.
Fran. -- Hah! -- where am I? -- my Wife, -- my Wife, -- where am I? -- hah! --
what are you? -- Ghosts, -- Devils, -- Mutes, -- no answer, -- hah, -- bound in
chains, -- Slaves, where am I?


1 Tu. They understand not your Language, but I, who am a Renigado Spaniard,
understand you when you speak civily, which I advise you to do.


Fran. Do you know me, Friend?


1 Tu. I know you to be a Slave, and the Great Turk's Slave too.


Fran. The Great Turk, -- the Great Devil, why where am I, Friend?


1 Tu. Within the Territories of the Grand Signior, and this, a Palace of
Pleasure, where he recreates himself with his Mistresses.


Fran. And how far is that from Cadez; -- but what care I, my Wife, Friend, my
own Wife.


1 Tu. Your own, -- a true (...) (...) have said ^o more; but take no care for
her, she s (...) for.


Fran. Is she dead, that would be some comfort, --


1 Tu. No, she is alive and in good hands.


Fran. And in good hands; oh, my head! and, oh, my heart! ten thousand tempests
burst the b^lly of this day wherein old Francisco ventured Life and Limb, --
Liberty and Wife to the mercy of these Heathen Turks.


1 Tu. Friend, you need not thus complain; -- a good round ransom redeems ye.


Fran. A round ransom, I Will rot in my chains first, (...) ^ll part with a round
ransom.


1 Tu. You have a fair Wife, and need not fear good usage if she knows how to
be kind; -- you apprehend me.


Fran. Patience, good Lord.


1 Tu. Perhaps the Grand Signior may like her, and to be favored by him is
such a Glory. --


Fran. As the Devil take me if I desire. --


1 Tu. -- And then you may in triumph laugh at all the rest of your Brother
Cuckolds.


Fran. Hum, -- and has the Devil served me thus, -- but no matter, I must be
gadding, like an old Coxcombe, to Cad^, -- and then, jan^ing to Sea, with a
Pox, to take pains to be a Cuckold, -- to bring my Wife into a strange Land,
amongst Unbelievers, with a vengeance, as if we had not honest Christian
Cuckold-makers enough at home; Sot that I was, not to consider how many
Merchants have been undone by trusting their Commodities out at Sea; -- why,
what a damned ransom will the Rogues exact from me, and more for my Wife
because she is hansome, and then, it is ten to one, I have her turn d upon my
hands the worse for wearing; oh, damned Infidels! -- no, it is resolved, I Will
live a slave here, rather than enrich them.


1 Tu. Friend, you will know your destiny presantly; -- for, it is the custom of
the Great Turk to view the Captives, and consider of their ransoms and
liberties according to his pleasure, -- see he is coming forth with the Vizer
Bassa;

Enter Carlos and Guzman as Turks with followers. Most mighty Emperor, behold
your Captive.


Fran. Is this the Great Turk?


1 Tu. Peace.


Fran. Bless me! as we at home describe him, I thought the Great Turk had been
twice as big, but, I shall find him Tyrant big enough, I Will warrant him.


Guz. Of what Nation art thou, Slave, speak to the Emperor he understands
thee, though he deign not to hold discourse to Christians, Dogs.


Fran. Oh fearful! -- Spain so please you, Sir.


Guz. By Mahomet, he will make a reverend Eunuch.


Fran. An Eunuch, -- oh, Lord! --


1 Tu. Ay, Sir, to guard his Mistresses, it is an honor.


Fran. Oh! Mercy, -- Sir, that honor you may spare, Age has done my business
as well already.


Guz. Fellow what art?


Fran. An't please your worship, I cannot tell.


Guz. How, not tell?


Fran. An't please your Lordship, my Fears have so ^form'd me, I cannot tell
whether I Am any thing or nothi^


Guz. Thy Name, Dull mortal, know thou not that?


Fran. An't please your Grace, now I remember me, (...) I do.


Guz. Dog, how art thou Called?


Fran. An't like your Excellence, men Called me Seignior Don Francisco but now
they will call me Coxcomb.


Guz. Of what Trade?


Fran. An't please your Highness, a Gentleman.


Guz. How much do thou get a day by that Trade? -- Hah!


Fran. An't like your Majesty, our Gentlemen never get but twice in all their
Lives; that is, when Fathers (...), they get good Estates; and when they Marry,
they g^t rich Wives; but I know what your Mightyness would get by going into
any Country and asking the Question.


Guz. What, Fool?


Fran. A good Cudgelling, an't please your Illustriousness.


Guz. Slave! To my Face! -- Take him away and let ^im have the Strapado.


Car. Baridama, (...).


Fran. Heavens, what says he?


1 Tu. He means to have you ^riated.


Fran. Castriated! Oh that s some dreadful thing I Will warrant -- Gracious
Great Turk, for M^homet's sake, excuse me; alas, I Have lost my wits.


Car. Galero Gardines?


Guz. The Emperor asks it thou art Marri^d, Fellow.


Fran. Ha^ -- Married -- I was ant like your Monsterousness, but, I doubt your
people have spoiled my Property.


Guz. His Wise, with other Ladies, in a Pavillion in (...) ^arden, attend your
Royal pleasure.


Car. Go, setch her hither presently --

[(...). Guzman.
1 Tu. This is no common honor, that the Great Turk degns to speak your
Language; it is a sign you ll (...).


(...). Yes, by the height of a pair of Horns.


Car. Is she hansom?


Fran. Oh, what an Ague shakes my heart, -- hansom, (...), no, d^ead Sir; what
should such a deformed Poulcat as I do (...) a hansom Wife?


(...). Is she young?


Fran. Young -- what should such an old doting Coxcomb as I do with a
young-Wife -- Pox on him for a Heathen Whor^ master.


Car. Old is she then?


Fran. (...), very old, an't please your Gloriousness.


(...). Is (...) not Capable of Love?


Fran. Hum, -- so so, like sire conceald in a Tinder-box, -- I shall run Mad.


(...). Is she witty?


Fran. I Am no Competent Judge, an't like your Holiness, -- this Catechism was
certainly of the D^vil's own making.

[Aside,
(...) Guzman, bringing in Julia, Clara, Isabella, Jacinta, Guilion, Antonio:
etc. Women veiled. Car. These, Sir, are all the Slaves of Note are taken.


Isa. Do think, Jacinta, he will choose me?


Jac. I Will warrant you, Madam, if he look with my Eyes.


Guz. Stand forth --

[To the men.
Guil. Stand sorth, Sir, why, so I can, Sir: I dare show my Face, Sir, before
any Great Turk in Christiandom.


C^r. What are you, Sir?


Guil. What am I, Sir? Why, I Am a Lord, a Lord.


Fran. Are you mad to own your quality, he will ask the Devil an all of a ransom.


Guil. No matter for that, I Will not lose an Inch of my Quality for a King's
Ra^som, disgrace my self before my fai^ Mistress.


Isa. That Is as the Great Turk and I shall agree.

[Scornfully
Car. What are you, Sir?


Anto. A Citizen of Cadez.


Car. Set 'em by, we'll Consider of their Ransoms -- now (...) the Ladies.

[Guzman unvails Jacinta.
Fran. Oh, dear Wife, now or never show thy Love, make a Damnable face upon the
silthy Ravisher, -- glout thy Eyes thus -- and thrust out thy upper lip, thus
--

[^uzman presents Jacinta.
Guil. Oh, dear Isabella, do thee look like a Dog too.


Isa. No, Sir, I Am resolved I Will not loose an Inch of my Beauty, to save so
trifling a thing as a Maiden head.


Car. Very agreeable, pretty and Cheerful -- a most divine Bud of Beauty --
all natures Excellence -- drawn to the life in Little, -- what are you, fair
one?


She is V^d and set by: (...) Cla ra is unveild. Cla. Sir, I Am a Maid.


Fran. So, I hope, he will pitch upon her.


Cla. Only, by promise, Sir, I Have given my self away.


Car. What happy man could claim a title in thee, And trust thee to such danger?


Isa. Heavens, shall I be defeated by this little Creature! What pity 'twas he
saw not me first?


Cla I dare not name him, Sir, least this small Beauty which you say adornes
me, should gain him your displeasure; he is in your Presence, Sir, and is your
slave.


Car. Such innocence this plain Confession shows, Name me the man, and I Will
r^sign thee back to him.


Fran. A Pox of his Civility.


Anto. This mercy makes me bold to claim my right.

[Kneels.
Car. Take (...), Young man, and with it both your Ransoms.


Guil. Hum -- hum -- very noble in faith, we'll even confess our loves too,
Isabella.


Isa. Slife he will spoil all, -- hold -- pray let your betters be served before
you.


Guil. How! Is the Honor of my Love despised? -- were not in the presence of
the Great Turk, for whom I have a reverence because he is a man of quality -- by
Jove I Would draw upon you.


Isa. Because you were my Lover once, when I am Queen I Will Pardon you; --


Guzman un^ her, and leads her to Carlos, she making (...) Actions of (...).
Car. What Akward -- fond -- Conceited Thing art thou? Veil her and take the
Taudry Creature hence.


Guil. Hum -- your Majesty's humble servant --

Putting off his hat, (...).
Fran. How! refuse my Daughter too; I see the Lot of a Cuckold will fall to my
share.


Guz. This is the Wife, Great Sir, of this old Slave.

[Vnveiles Julia.
Car. Hah! what do I see, by Mahomet, she is fair.


Fran. So, so, she is condemned, oh, damned Mahomet (...) (...) (...)! will
nothing but raw flesh serve his turn?


Car. I Will see no more, -- here I have fixed my heart.


Fran. Oh, Monster of a Grand Signior!


(...). Have you a mind to be (...), Sir?


Car. Receive my Handkerchief. --

[Throw, it to her.
Fran. His Handkerchief; bless me what does he mean?


Guz. To do her the honor to lie with her to night. --


(...). Oh, hold, most mighty Turk.

[Kneeling.
Guz. Slave, dare thou interrupt 'em, -- dye, Dog.


Fran. Hold, hold, I Am silent.


Car. I Love you fair one, and design to make you --


(...). A most notorious Strumpet, -- a Pox of his courtesy.


C^r. -- What Eyes you have like Heaven-blew and charming, a pretty Mouth,
Neck, round and white as polisht A^baster, and a complexion, beauteous as an
Angel, -- a ha^ sit to make Bonds to ensnare the God of Love, -- a sprightl^
Air, -- a hand like Lillies white, and Lips, no Roses opening in a Morning are
half so sweet and soft.


Fran. Oh, damned circumcifed Turk.


Car. You shall be called the bautifull Sultana,
And rule in my S^glio dressed with jewels.

Fran. Sure I shall bu^st with vengeance.


Jul. Sir, let your Virtue regulate your passions; For I can (...) love any but
my husband.


Fran. Ah, dis mbling Witch!


Jul. -- And would not break my marriage Vows to him, ^or all the honor you
can heap upon me.


(...). Say, and hold; but, Sultana and precious Stones, are (...) temptations,
-- besides, the Rogue's young and hansome, -- What a scornful look she casts
at me; would they (...) both hansomly at the Devil together.


Guz. Dog, -- do you mutter?


(...). Oh! nothing, nothing, but the Palsy shook my Lip a little.


Guz. Slave, go, and, on your knees, resign your Wife.


(...). She of years of discretion, -- and may dispose of (...) self; but I can
hold no longer, -- and, is this your Mohammedan Conscience, to take other men's
Wives, as if there were not single Harlots enough in the world?

[In rage.
Guz. Peace, thou diminutive Christian.


Fran. I say, peace, thou overgrown Turk,


Guz. Thou Spanish Cur.


Fran. Why, you're a Mohammedan Bitch, and you go to that.


Guz. Death, I Will dissect the bald pated Slave.


Fran. I defy thee, thou foul filthy Cabbage head, for I am mad, and will be
valiant.

[Guz. throws his Turbant at him.
Car. What Insolence is this? -- Mutes -- strangle him. --

[They put a Bow-string about his neck.
Jul. Mercy, dread Sir, I beg my Husband's life.


Car. No more, -- this fair one bids you live, -- hence forth, Francisco, I
pronounce you a Widower, and shall regard you, for the time to come, as the
deceased Husband of the Great Sultana, murmer not upon pain of being made an
Eunuch -- take him away --


Jul. Go, and be satisfied, I Will die before I Will vield.


Fran. Is this my going to Sea? -- the (...) of losing Battles light on thee.

When ill success shall make thee idle lie,
May thou in bed be impotent as I.

Car. Command our Slaves to give us some diversion; Dismiss his Chains, and use
him with respect, b^use he was the Husband of our beloved Sultana.


Fran. I see, your Cuckold might have a life good enough if he could be
contented --

[They pull oss his (...). [Carlos and Julia sit under an Vmbrello.
The SONG.
How strangely does my Passion grow,
Divided equally 'twixt two?
Damon had never subdued my Heart,
Had not Alexis took his part:
Nor, could Alexis powerful prove,
Without my Damon's aid, to gain my Love.
When my Alexis present is,
Then I for Damon sigh and mourn;
But, when Alexis I do miss,
Damon gains nothing but my scorn:
And, if it chance they both are by;
For both, alas! I languish, sigh, and die.
Cure then, thou mighty Winged God,
This raging Fever in my Blood.
One golden-pointed Dart take back;
But, which, O Cupid, will thou take?
If Damon's, all my hopes are crossed:
Or, that of my Alexis, I am lost.
Enter Dancers, which dance an Antique Car. Come, my dear Julia, let us retire
to Shades. [Aside to her.
Where only thou and I can find an entrance;
These dull, these necessary delays of ours
Have drawn my Love to an impatient height,
-- attend these Captives, -- at a respectfull distance.
[Ex. all but Isa. who st^ies Guil.
Guil. What wou^d the Great Sultana?


Isa. Ah! do not pierce my heart with this unkindness.


Guil. Ha, ha, ha, -- Pages, -- give order, I have Letters writ to Sivil, to my
Merchant, -- I will be ransomed instantly.


Isa. Ah, cruel Count!


Guil. Meaning me, Lady; ah, fie! no, I am a Scoundrel; I a Count, no, not I, a
Dog, a very Chim -- hum, -- a son of a Whore, I, not worthy your notice.


Isa. Oh, Heavens! must I lose you then? no, I Will die first.


Guil. Die, die, then, for, your betters must be served before you.


Isa. Oh! I shall rave; false and lovely, as you are, did you not swear to
marry me, and make me a Vicountess.


Guil. Ay, that was once when I was a Lover, but, now you are a Queen, --
you're too high in the mouth for me.


Isa. Ah! name it not; will you be still hard-hearted?


Guil. As a Flint, by Jove.


Isa. Have you forgot your Love?


Guil. I Have a bad memory.


Isa. And will you let me die?


Guil. I know nothing of the matter.


Isa. Oh, Heavens! and shall I be no Vicountess?


Guil. Not, for me, Fair Lady, by Jupiter, -- no, no, -- Queen's much better,
-- Death, affront a man of Honor, a Vicount tha^ would have took you to his
Bed, -- after half the Town had blown upon you, -- without examining either
Portion or Honesty, and would have took you for better for worse -- Death, I Will
untile houses, and demolish Chimneys, But I Will be revenged.

[Draws, and is going out.
Isa. Ah, hold! your anger's just, I must confess, yet pardon the frailty of my
Sexes vanity; behold my tears, that sue for pity to you.

[She weeps, he stands looking on her.
Guil. -- My Rage dissolves. --


Isa. I ask but death or pity.

[He weeps.
Guil. -- I cannot hold, -- but, if I should forgive, and marry you, you would
be gadding after honor still, longing to be a she Great Turk again. --


Isa. Break not my heart with such suspicions of me.


Guil. And, is it pure and tender Love for my Person, And not for my glorious
Titles?


Isa. Name not your Titles, it is your self I love,
Your amiable, sweet and charming self,
And, I could almost wish you were not great,
To let you see my Love.

Guil. I am confirmed --
It Is no respect of Honor makes her weep;
Her Love's the same should I cry -- Chimney Sweep.

ACT V.
SCENE I. A Garden.
Enter Francisco alone. Fran. NOW am I afraid to walk in this Garden, l^st I
shou^ spy my own natural Wife lying with the Great Turk in Fresco upon some of
these fine ^owry Banks, and learning how to make Cuckolds in Turkey.


Enter Guzman and Jacinta. (...). Nay, dear (...), cast an eye of pity on me.
What, deny the Vizer Bassa.


(...). When you are honest Guzman again, I Will tell you a pie^ of my mind.


(...). But, opportunity will not be so kind to Guzman, as to the Grand (...);
therefore, dear Rogue, let us retire into these kind shades, or, if foolish
Virtue be so squeamish, and needless R^ation so nice, that Mr. Vicar must say
Amen to the bargain, there is an old lousey Friar, belonging to this Villa,
that will give us a cast of his office, for I am a little impatient about this
business, Greatness, having infused a certain itch in my blood, which I f^lt
not, whilst a common man.


Fran. Um, Why, what have we here, (...) Mrs. (...), and the (...)? I hope the
Jade will be Turkey (...) with a vengeance, and have Circumcision in abundance;
and the Devil shall ransom her for old Fr^ncisco.


(...). Hah, the old Gentleman.


Fran. What? the Frolic is to go ^ound, I see, you women have a happy time
on it.


(...). Men that have kind Wives may be as happy; you will (...) the honor of
being made a Cuckold, Heaven be praised.


(...). Ay, Sir, I thank ye, -- pray under the Rose, how (...) my Wi^e please
his Grace the Great Turk?


(...). Murmuring again, thou Slave.


Fran. Who, I? O Lord, Sir! no, not I, why, what hurt (...) there in being a
Cuckold?


Guz. Hurt, Sirrah, you shall be swing'd into a belief, that it is an honor
for the Great Turk to borrow your wife.


Fran. But, for the Lender to pay Use-money, is somewhat severe; -- but, see,
he comes, -- bless me, how grim he looks!


Enter Carlos. Car. Come hither, Slave, -- why was it that I gave you Life
dismissed the fetters from your aged limbs?


Fran. For love of my Wife, and (...) please your Barbarousness.


Car. -- Gave you fr^ leave to range the Palace round, excepting my apartment
only?


Fran. Still, for my Wives sake, I say, and (...) like your Hideousness.


Car. And yet, this Wife, this most ungrateful Wife of (...) again would put
your chains on, expose your li^e to dangers and new torments by a too stubborn
virtue, she do^ refuse my courtship, and foolish is chaste.


Fran. Alas! what pity's that?


(...). I offered much, loved much, but all in vain;
Husband, and Honor, still, was the reply.

Fran. Good lack! that she should have no more Grace before her eyes.


Car. But, Slave, behold these Mutes; that fatal instrument of death behold
too, and in 'em read thy doom, if this coy Wi^ of yours be not made flexible to
my addresses.


Fran. Oh, Heavens! I make her.


Car. No more, thy Fate is fixed -- and, here attend, till he himself deliver
his willing Wife into my arms: (...), attend and see it, see it be (...) --

[To his Mu^, then to Guz. [Ex. Car.
Guz. Go, one of you, and fetch the fair slave hither.

[Ex. Turk.
Fran. I Pimp for my own Wife, I hold the door to my own Flesh and Blood, O
monstrum horrendum!


Guz. Nay, do it, and do it hansomly too, not with a snivelling countenance, as
if you were compelled to it; -- but, with the face of authority, and the awful
command of a Husband -- or -- thou dyest --


Enter Turk and Julia. Fran. My dear Julia, you are a Fool, my Love. --


Jul. For what, dear Husband?


Fran. I say, a silly Fool, to refuse the love of so Great a Turk; why, what a
Pox makes you so coy?

[Angrily.
Jul. How! this from you, Francisco.


Fran. -- Now does my heart begin to fail me; -- and yet, I shall never endure
strangling neither; -- why, am not I your Lord and Master, hah?


Jul. Heavens! Husband, what would you have me do?


Fran. Have you do; -- why, I would have ye -- do you see, -- twill not out; --
why, I would have ye -- lie with the Sultan, huswife; I wonder how, the Devil,
you have the face to refuse him, so hansom -- so young a Lover; come, come, let
me hear no more of your coyness, Mistress, for, if I do -- I shall be hanged;
--

[Aside. The Great Turk's a most worthy Gentleman, and therefore I advise you
to do as he advises you; and the Devil take ye both. --

[Aside.
Jul. This from my Husband, old Francisco! he advise me to part with my dear
Honor!


Fran. Rather than part with his dear Life, I thank ye. --

[Aside.
Jul. Have you considered the Virtue of a Wife?


Fran. No, but I have considered the neck of a Husband.

[Aside.
Jul. -- Which Virtue, before I Will lose, I Will die a thousand deaths.


Fran. So will not I, one; a Pox of her Virtue, -- these women are always
virtuous in the wrong place.

[Aside. -- I say, you shall be kind to the sweet Sultan.


Jul. And rob my Husband of his right!


Fran. Shaw, exchange is no robbery.


Jul. And forsake my Virtue, and make none Dear a Cuckold.


Fran. Shaw, most of the Heroes of the world were so; -- go prithee Honey go --
do me the favor to Cuckold me a little, if not for Love, for Charity. --


Jul. Are you in earnest? --


Fran. I am. --


Jul. And, would it not diplease you?


Fran. I say, no; -- had it been Aquinius his Case, to have saved the pinching
of his Gullet he would have been a Cuckold --

[Aside.
Jul. Fear has made you mad, o^ you're bewitched;
and I Will leave you to recover your Wits again.
[Going out.
Fran. Oh, Gracious Wife, leave me not in despair; I am not mad, no, nor no
mo^e bewitched than I have been these forty years; it is you're be witcht to
refuse so hansom -- so young, and so -- a Pox on him, she will never relish me
again, after him.

(...) to her (...) holds her. [Aside.
Jul. Since you have lost your honor with your wits, I Will try what mine will do.


Enter Carlos. Tu^ks. Fran. Oh! I am lost, -- I Am lost -- dear Wife, -- most
mighty Sir, I Have brought her finely to it; -- do not make me lose my credit with
his Mohammedan Grace, -- my wife has a monstrous affection for your (...), but,
she is something bashsull; but, when alone your (...) will find her a swinger.


Car. -- Fair (...) --


Jul. Do you believe my Husband, Sir, he is m^d.


Car. Dog. --

[Offers to kill him.
Fran. Hold mighty Emperor; as I hope to be saved it is but a copy of her
countenance -- inhumane Wife -- lead ^er to your apartment Sir; -- -- barbarous
honest woman, -- to your chamber, Sir, -- would I had (...) thee an errand
Strumpet; nay, to your Royal bed, Sir, I Will warrant you she gives you taunt for
taunt: try her, Sir, try her.

[Puts 'em out.
Jac. Ha^k you, Sir, are you possessed, or, is it real reformationin you? what
moved this kind fit?


Fran. Even Love to sweet Life; and, I shall think my self ever obliged, to my
dear Wife, for this kind Reprieve; -- had she been cruel -- I had been
strangled or hung in the Air like our Prophets Tomb.


Enter first Turk. 1 Tu. Sir, boast the honor of the news I bring you.


Fran. Oh, my head! how my brows (...)!


1 Tu. The mighty Sultan, to do you honor, has set your Daughter and her
Lover free, ransomless; -- and, this day, gives 'em liberty to solemnize the
Nuptials in the Court; -- but, Christian Ceremonies must be private; but you're
to ^e admitted, and, I Will conduct you to 'em.


Fran. Some comfort, I shall be Father to a Vicount, and for the rest --
Patience --

All Nations Cuckolds breed, but I deny
They had such need of Cuckolding as I.
[Goes out with the Tu^k.
Enter Antonio, and Clara to Jacinta. Jac. Madam, the rarest sport -- Ha ha ha.


Anto. You need not tell us, we have been witn^ss to all,

But to our own affairs, my dearest Clara.
Let us not lose this blessed opportunity,
Which Art nor Industry can give again if this be idly lost.

Cla. Nay, hang me if it be Antonio, Charge it to the Number of your own sins;
it shall not ly at my door.


Anto. It Is generously said, and take notice, my little dear (...), (...) has a
Priest ready to tie you to your word.


Cla. As fast us you please; hang her that ^ears the Conjuring knot for me: But
what will our Fathers say, -- mine, who Expects me to be the Governor's Lady;
and yours, who designs Isabella for a Daughter-in-law?


Anto. Mine will be glad of the Change, and, for yours, if he be not pleased,
let him keep his Portion to himself -- that is the greatest mischeife he can do
us: and for my friend, the Governor, he s above their anger.


Cla. Why do we lose precious time; I long to be at, -- (...) Clara, take thee
Antonio, -- the very ceremony will be tedious, so much I wish thee mine; and
each delay gives me a fea^ something will snatch me from thee.


Anto. No power of man can do it, thou art so Guarded; but now the Priest is
employed in Clapping up the honorable marrige between the False Count and
Isabella.


Jac. Lord, what a jest 'twill be to see 'em Coupled, ha, ha.


Cla. Unmercyfull Antonio, to drive the jest so far; it is too unconscionable!


Anto. By Heaven, I Am so proud I cannot think my Revenge sufficient (...)
affionts, nor does her Birth, her Breeding and her Vanity -- (...) a better
Fortune; besides, -- he has enough to set up for a Modern Spark -- the Fool has
just wit and goodmanners sufficient to pass for a Fop of fashion; and, where he
is not known, will gain the Reputation of a fine accomplished Gentleman, -- yet
I Am resolved she shall see him in his geers, in his original Filthiness, that
my Revenge may be home upon the foolish Gilt.


Cla. Cruel Antonio, -- come let us go give 'em joy.


Anto. And finish our asfair with Mr Vicar. --

Enter Isabella, her train born by the great Page; Guiliom, with the other
great Page, and Francisco, bare. -- Joy to my Noble Lord, and you, fair
Isabella!


Isa. Thank thee, Fellow, -- but, surely, I deserved my Titles from thee.


Cla. Your Honor, I hope, will Pardon him.


Isa. How now Clara --

[Nodding to her.
Jac. I give your Honor joy.


Isa. Thank thee, poor Creature. --


Fran. My Lord, -- this Honor you have done my Daughter is so signal, that
whereas, I d^sign'd her but Five Thousand pound, I will this happy day --
settle on her ten. --


Guil. Damn dirty trash your Beauty is sufficient -- hum -- Seignior Don
Antonio, get the Writings ready, -- Money -- hang money.


[Aside. Fran. How generous these Lords are; nay, my Lord, you must not refuse
a Fathers love -- if I may presume to call you son -- I shall find enough
besides for my (...), if the Tyrant be so unmercyfull to ask more than my Wife
pays him.


Guil. Nay, if you -- will force it upon me.


Isa. Ay, take it, the trifling some will serve to buy our Honor Pins.


Anto. Well, Sir, since you will force it on him, my Cashier shall draw the
Writings.


Guil. And have 'em signed by a public Notary, --

[Aside.]
Fran. With all my Soul, Sir, I Will go give him ord^r, and subscribe.

[Ex. Francisco.
Guil. Let him make 'em strong and sure -- you shall go halves.

[Aside.
Anto. No, you will deserve it dearly, who have the Plague of such a Wife with
it; -- but harkye, Count -- these goods of Fortune are not to be afforded you,
without conditions.


Guil. Shaw, conditions, any conditions, Noble Antonio.


Anto You must disrobe anon, and do'n your Native habiliaments -- and in the
Equipage give that fair Vicountess to understand the true quality of her
Husband.


Guil. Hum -- I Am afraid, it is a harder task to leap from a Lord to a Rogue,
then it is from a Rogue to a Lord.


Anto. Not at all, we have Examples of both daily.


Guil. Well, Sir, I Will show you my agility -- but, Sir, -- I desire -- I may
Consummate, do you see, -- Consummate, -- a little like Lord, to make the
marriage sure.


Anto. You have the Freedom to do so -- the Writings I Will provide. --


Guil. I Will about it then, the Priest waits within sor you, and Guzman for you
Jacinta, -- haste, for he is to arrive anon Ambassador from Cadez.


Jac. I know not, this noise of Weddings has set me a gog, and I Will even in,
and try what it is.

[Ex. Antonio, Clara, and Jacinta
Guil. Come, Madam, your Honor and I have something else to do -- before I
have fully dubbed you a Vicountess.


Isa. Ah Heavens, my Lord, what is that?


Guil. Why, a Certain Ceremony, which must be performed between a pair of
Sheets, -- but we'll let it a lone till Night.


Isa. Till night, no; whatever it be, I would not be without an Inch of that
Ceremony, that may Complete my Honor, for the World; no for Heavens sake let us
retire, and Dub me presently.


Guil. Time enough, time enough.


Isa. You love me not; that can deny me this.


Guil. Love -- no -- we are Married now, and people of our Quality never love
after Marriage it is not great. --


Isa. Nay, let us retire, and Complete my Quality, and you will find me Wife a
of the Mode I Will warrant you.


Guil. For once you have prevailed.


Enter Francisco. Fran. Whither away. --


Isa. Only to Consummate a little, pray keep your distance.

[She pulls of his hat.
Fran. Consummate. --


Isa. Ay, Sir, that is to make me an absolute Vicountess -- we cannot stay --
farewell --

[Guilion, Leads her out.
Fran. Hum -- this Turkey Air has a notable Faculty, where the women are all
plaguie kind. --


Enter Carlos, and Julia. Car. By Heaven each Moment makes me more your slave
--


Fran. The business is done.


Jul. My husband.

[Aside.
Car -- And all this constant love to old Francisco, has but engaged me more.


Fran. Ha, Love to me?

[Aside.
Jul. Sir, if this virtue, be but real in you, how happy I should be; but
you will relaps again and Tempt my virtue -- which if you do --


Fran. I Will warrant she would kill her self.

[Aside.
Jul. -- I should be sure to yield --

[In a soft tone to him.
Car. No, thou have made an absolute Conquest over me -- and if that Beauty
tempt me every hour, I shall be still the same I was the last.


Fran. Pray Heaven he be John.


Enter 1 Turk. 1 Turk. Most Mighty Emperor, a Messenger from Cadez has Letters
for your Highness.


Car. Conduct him in; in this retreat of ours we use no State.


Enter Guzman, as himself, gives Carlos Letters. Guz. Don Carlos, Governor of
Cadez greets your Highness.


Car. reads] High and Mighty,

For seven Christian Slaves, taken lately by a Gally of yours, we offer you
twice the Number of Mahometans taken from you by us, -- if this suffice not, --
propose your Ransoms, and they shall be paid by

Don Carlos Governor of Cadez. -- Know you this Carlos offers so fair for you?


Fran. Most Potent Lord, I do, and wonder at the Complement, -- and yet I am
not jealous -- I have so over act'd the Complesant Husband, that I shall never
fall into the other Extreme again.


Car. Go, let the Christian Governor understand his Request is granted.


Guz. The slaves are ready, Sir, and a Gally to carry (...) the Christians.


Jul. How shall we make this Governor amends?


Fran. I do even weep for joy; alas, I must leave it to (...) Love!


Jul. To me, Sir, do you mock me?


Fran. Mock thee, no; I know thy virtue, and will no (...) be jealous, believe
me Chickin I was an old Fool.


Car. Your Wife is Chaste -- she overcame my unruly passion with her Prayers
and Tears.


Enter (...), at one door; Clara, Antonio, Jacinta, at another; Isabellas Train
carried up. Fran. Rare News, -- we are all free and ransomed! All (...) well
and the man has his Mare again.


(...). You still forget your Duty and your distance.


Fran. A Pox of your troublesome Honor; a man cannot be overjoyed in quiet for it.


Enter Baltazer, and Sebastian. Seb. Sure I am not Mistaken, this is the House
of my Son Antonio.


Bal. Let it be whose house 'twill; I think the Devil's broke loose in it.


Seb. -- Or the Turks; for I have yet met with never a Christian thing in it.


Fran. Hah, -- Do I dream, or is that my Father-in-law, and Seignior Sebastian?


Anto. My Father here. --


Car. Baltazer --

[Aside.
Bal. Son, (...), why do you gaze on me so?


Fran. Bless me, Sir, are you taken by the great Turk too?


Bal. Taken, -- Great Turk, -- what do you mean!


Fran. Mean, Sir; why, how the Devil came you into Turkey?


Bal. Sure (...) has Cracked his Brains.


Fr^n. Crack me no Cracks, good Father mine; -- am not (...) a Slave in Turkey?
and is not this the Grand Seigniors Palace?


Car. So, -- all will come out, there is no prevention.

[Aside.
Seb. Some that are wiser answer us: You Son, -- are you infected too? -- was
not yesterday to abeen your Wedding day?


Anto. To day has done as well, Sir, I have only changed Isabella for Clara.


Seb. How, Francisco, have you juggled with me?


Fran. My Daughter's a Lady, Sir.


Bal. And you Mistress; you have Married Antonio, and (...) the Governor.


Cla. I thought him the fitter Match, Sir, and hope your Pardon.


Jul. We cannot escape.


Fran. But how came you hither, Gentlemen, and how durst you venture?


Seb. Whither, Sir, to my own Son's house; is there such danger in coming a
mile or two out of Cadez?


Fran. Is the Devil in you, or me, or both? Am not I in the Possession of Turks
and Insidels?


Bal. No, Sir; safe in Antonio Villa; within a League of Cadez.


Fran. Why, what a Pox, is not this the Great Turk himself?


Bal. This, Sir; -- cry mercy, my Lord -- it is Don Carlos, Sir, the Governor.


Fran. The Governor; the worst Great Turk of all; so, I am cozened, -- most
(...) cheated; why, what a horrid Plot's here carried o^, to (...) in Heretical
Cuckoldom?


Car. (...), Sir, si^ce you have found it out. I Will own my Passion.


Jul. (...), i^ I have been kind you (...) me (...), nay Begged on your knees,
to give my self away.


Fran. Guilty, guilty! I confess, -- but 'twas to the Great Turk, Mistress, not
Don Carlos.


Jul. And was the sin the greater?


Fran. No, but the Honor was less.


Bal. Oh, horrid! What, entreat his Wife to be a Whore?


Car. Sir, your mistaken, she was my Wife in (...) of Heaven before; and I but
Seized my own.


Fran. Oh, -- Sir, she is at your Service still.


Car. I thank you, Sir, and take her as my own.


Bal. Hold, my Honor's concerned.


Fran. Not at all, Father mine, she is my Wife, my Lumber now, and, I hope, I
may dispose of my Goods and Chattels: -- if he takes her we are upon equal
terms, for he makes himself my Cuckold, as he has already made me his; -- for,
if my memory fail me not, we did once upon a time consummate, as my Daughter
has it.


Enter Guilion in his own dress, crying ChimneySweep. Guil. Chimney-sweep, --
by your leave, Gentlemen.


Anto. Whither away, Sirrah?


Guil. What Is that to you, Sir? --


Anto. Not to me, Sirrah; -- who would you speak with?


Guil. What Is that to you, Sir? why, what a Pox may not a man speak with his
own Lady and Wife?


Cla. Heavens! his Wife! to look for his Wife amongst Persons of Quality!


Car. Kick out the Rascal.


Guil. As soon as you please, my Lord; but, let me take my Wife along with me.

[Takes Isa. by the hand.
(...) Faugh! -- what means the Devil?


Guil. Devil; -- 'twas not long since you found me a humane creature, within
there. --


Isa. Villain, Dog; help me to tear his eyes out.


Guil. What, those eyes, those lovely eyes, that wounded you so deeply?


Fran. What Is the meaning of all this? -- why, what, am I cozened? and is my
Daughter cozened?


Guil. Cozened! why? I Am a man, Sir. --


Fran. The Devil you are, Sir, how shall I know that?


Guil. Your Daughter does, Sir; and, that is all one.


Isa. Oh! I Am undone; am I no Vicountess then?


Guil. Hang Titles; 'twas my self you loved, my amiable sweet and charming
self: in sine, sweet heart, I am your Husband; no Vicount, but honest Guilion
the Chimney sweeper. -- I heard your Father designed to marry you to a
Tradesman, and you were for a Don; and to please you both, you see how well I
have managed matters.


Fran. I Will not give her a farthing.


Guil. No matter, her love's worth a million; and, that is so great, that I Am
sure she will be content to carry my Soot-basket after me.


Isa. Ah! I dye, I dye.


Guil. What, and I so kind?


Isa. Help; murder, murder!


Goes and kisses her, and blacks her face. Guil. Well, Gentlemen, I am
something a better fortune than you believe me, by some thousands.

[Shows Car. his writings.
Car. Substantial and good, faith, Sir, I know not where you will and a better
fortune for your Daughter as cases stand.

[To Fran.
Guil. And, for the Vicount, Sir; gay Cloths, Money and Confidence will set me
up for one, in any ground in Christiandom.


Car. Faith, Sir, he is in the right; take him home to Sivil, your neighbors
know him not, and he may pass for what you please to make him; the Fellow's
honest, witty and hansom.


Fran. -- Well, I have considered the matter; -- I was but a Leather-seller my
self, and am grown up to a Gentleman; and, who knows but he, being a
Chimney-sweeper, may, in time, grow up to a Lord; Faith, I Will trust to Fortune,
for once -- here -- take her, and rid me of one Plague, as you, I thank you,
Sir, have done of another. --

[To Carlos.
Guil. Prithee, be pacified, thou shall see me within this hour, as pretty a
fluttering Spark as any's in Town. -- my ^oble Lord, -- I give you thanks and
joy; for, you are happy too.


Car. As Love and Beauty can make me.


Fran. And I, as no damned Wife, proud Daughter or tormenting Chambermaid can
make me.


Anto. And I, as Heaven and Clara can.
-- You base born Beauties, whose Ill manne^d Pride,
The Industrious noble Citizens deride,
May you all meet with Isabella's Doom.

Guil. -- And, all such Husbands as the Count Guiliome.


FINIS.
EPILOGUE
Spoken by Mrs. Barry. Made by a Person of Quality.

I Come not a Petitioner to sue,
This Play the Author has writ down to you;
(...) a slight (...), sive days brought sorth with ease,
So very foolish that it needs must please;
For though each day good Judges take offense,
And (...) Arms in Comedy's defense,
You are still true to your J^ck Pudding Sense.
No (...) can miss your Approbation,
You love it as you do a new French Fashion:
^hus in true hate of Sense, and Wit's despite,
Bantring and Shamming is your dear deligh:
Thus among all the ^ollys here abounding,
None took like the new Ape-trick of Dumsounding.
(...) to make People laugh the business be,
You Sparks better Comedians are than we;
You (...) day out sool even Nokes and Lee.
(...) forced to stop and their own (...) quit,
(...) admire the Merr^ And^ of the Pit;
But if your mirth so grate the Critique's ear,
Your Love ^ill (...) more ^lequin appear.
-- You (...) (...) of the Boxes,
You (...) d Ruins of (...) Wine and Poxes;
(...) strange Green sickness do you hope in Women
(...) make 'em (...) old (...) in new point Linen;
The Race of Life you run off-hand too sast,
Your (...) (...) is too hot to last;
Your Fevers come so thick, your claps so plenty,
Most of you are threescore at five and twenty.
(...) town (...) I (...) know you (...) enough,
Your ^urting Women's like your taking Snuss;
(...) of mere Idleness you keep a (...),
You Have no more need of one than of the other.
(...) --
Would you be quit of their insipid noise,
And vain pretending, take a fool's advice;
Of the faux Braves (...) had some little trial,
There Is nothing gives 'em credit but denial:
As when a Coward will pretend to Hussing.
Offer to sight, away sneaks Bully-Russin.
So when these Sparks, whose business is addressing,
In Love pursuites grow troublesome and pressing.
When they affect to keep still in your eye,
When they send Grisons every where to spy,
And full of Coxcomb dress and Ogle high;
Seem to receive their Charge, and face about,
(...) pawn my life they never stand it out.
FINIS.

