Mr. Bee's Answer to Mr. Poole's Second Vindication of his Design for Printing
A Synopsis of Critical and other Commentators.
WEre it not that Mr. Be had received the Character of Mr. Poole, to be a
confident and restless man in his way, he should have very much wondered to have
found him publishing a new Vindication of his Design, etc. for Mr. Be really
believed the strength and reason of his former Paper, in Answer to what Mr.
Poole and all his Friends were able before to say, would have satisfied, and
once more silenced him, and saved both parties the farther trouble of
multiplying Replies upon the present Difference. But since Mr. Poole has again
gone about to abuse the World with a second Paper, which he calls by the same
name as he did his former, (and well he may so do, since it consists in so
great measure of mere vain and needless Repetitions of what he had formerly
written, and what Mr. Be had formerly as fully answered; the rest of it being
made up of notorious Falsities, Mistakes wilful or of Ignorance, something of
Absurdity, an impertinent Flash or two of Wit, and Confidence more then
sufficient through the whole) Mr. Be is resolved not to be behind-hand with
him in justifying his Right and Propriety, and therefore to Mr. Poole's Second
Vindication returns this Answer, (if at least any Sense and Reason will pass
with Mr. Poole for an Answer.)

1. For his first Clause, of consulting with able Lawyers, and receiving their
Judgment in favor of his Design; Mr. Be thinks he has sufficiently answered
that already; that one Story may be good till another be heard, that he has
also the Judgment of very able Lawyers against the Design, and that if Mr. Be
himself were fairly and fully to state the Case to those very Gentlemen named
by Mr. Poole, he nothing doubts but, upon a clear sight of the Pretensions and
Grounds on both sides, they would be ready to entertain favorable thoughts to
his Right in the Business controverted.

2. For Mr. Poole's Offer to refer all to Arbitration, etc. and Mr. Bee's
Refusal; Mr. Be has confessed it, and given a Reason for it sufficiently good
to satisfy any Rational man. For the grand Absurdity Mr. Be is guilty of,
neither Mr. Be nor any body else can tell where it lies. Mr. Poole says, It
was not to be referred whether the CRITICI SACRI were Mr. Bee's; but what Right
Mr. Be had in Mr. Poole's Collections out of them and many others. Mr. Be
answers, that Mr. Poole's Collections out of the CRITICS were Mr. Bee's just
Right, as being his Authors in part; and for his many others, they could be no
ground of any Reference, since he never laid Claim to them, nor had any thing
to say to them. So that Mr. Bee's Authors in part (which Mr. Poole calls his
Collections) were the thing to be referred, whether they were Mr. Poole's or
Mr. Bee's Right. And where now lies the Absurdity? Whereas Mr. Poole says he
offered an Equivalent, a greater proportion of Materials, and I know not how
much Care and Pains in contriving and digesting the whole: Mr. Be answers; for
his Pains he may thank himself, if he would be busier then he needed, and run
his Plow into another man's Ground upon his own head. What his Care was, Mr.
Be knows not; but when Mr. Be shall have knocked off Mr. Poole's fingers from
meddling at all with his CRITICS, and Mr. Poole shall have given his
Subscribers two or three more such Slurrs as he has done by quitting the Biblia
Maxima, one of his best Materials, which he formerly promised to bring in, but
^ow declares he will let alone, (so that they know not what they pay their
Money for) Mr. Be thinks by that time he may have his Labor for his Care and
Pains. For the rest of his Materials Mr. Be knows not what they are: but were
they of never so much worth and credit, when Mr. Be says he will have nothing
to do with them, and Mr. Poole's other collections are his own already, how
can Mr. Be or any man else look upon this as an Equivalent? So that Mr. Be
goes on to declare, that Mr. Poole may as well religiously Epitomize his Purse
upon the Highway, as go about by these crooked and sinister Artifices to
extort his unquestionable Right out of his hands, and all (as he pretends) for
the Glory of God. That Mr. Be never chose above one person to any Meeting, and
that one declared himself unsatisfied with Mr. Poole's Profer, Mr. Be again
affirms. And whereas Mr. Poole threatens never to offer the like Terms again;
Mr. Be cannot help it, but desires Mr. Poole not to trouble his head about
that, till such time as he shall send to him, and beg such a Favor of him.

3. For Mr. Bee's Unrighteousness, and his bringing down the Prices of Books to
the loss and prejudice of many Scholars, (if there be any so prejudiced) there
needs no new Answer. But whereas Mr. Poole says, If these Losses and Injuries
be expiated by the Serviceableness of Mr. Bee's Design to the public good, why
may not he have the benefit of the same Plea? Mr. Be answers, Because Mr.
Poole has not that true and just Title to the Copies he pretends to as himself
had. For Mr. Be meddled with no Authors that any Englishman could claim a
Right in, without first making them Satisfaction: But Mr. Poole declares to
take his principal Materials out of those Authors that Mr. Be has made
himself a Legal Title in, and that without his Leave or Consent, or any
Consideration for them. Let Mr. Poole but keep his own ground, and not trespass
upon the CRITICS, and let his Epitomizing bring down the prices of what
Authors he will.

4. To his fourth Clause, (which is most of it Crambe) concerning one man's
Epitomizing anothe(...) Copy without being questioned for it, (as Mr. Poole
says) Mr. Be gives his former Answer, That Mr. Poole will find no Book in
England, of one sort or other, (before the Parliament 1642) printed either in
whole or part, but either by the right Owner, or with his Consent and
Approbation; and the like in any foreign settled Kingdom, State, or
Principality. What things have been here since done to the contrary, have been
done beside Law and Reason. And if some men in those Arbitrary and Licencious
times have not been able to help themselves against Usurpers, their case was to
be pitied, rather then drawn into Example. But if any true Proprietors will in
these days either wink at other men while they pick their Pockets, or be
negligent of their own Interests, when they have the Law open to defend and
justify them, or think it not worth their while to sue a Beggar and catch
Vermin, or it may be have taken Composition underhand, (all which are at
least tacit Consents) why should this sway any thing with Mr. Be, who never
made over the least of his Right, nor any way allowed another to meddle with
it, but is resolved (by God's assistence) to try what the Law will do for him,
which as it is the great Discerner, so the Securer of all men's Proprieties? For
Marlorat's Epitome, Mr. Be again averrs, that it was printed at the Charge of
the same Booksellers that had the Propriety in the Authors he Epitomized, and
printed by the very same Printer. Mr. Poole says, he that looks on the
Title-pages of those Authors will find this a mere Fiction of Mr. Be. But let
Mr. Poole look on the Title-pages of the first Impressions of those Authors,
(not those after-Impressions in other Countries which lay out of the bounds of
their Privileges, and could no way be prevented, as Mr. Be cannot prevent a
Discourtesie of that nature to himself in Foreign parts, and therefore had need
to be secured by his Grant at home) Let Mr. Poole look on these, and he will
soon find Mr. Bee's Tale true, and the Fiction to lie at his own door. By that
time Mr. Poole has served an Apprenticeship to the Trade (as every Bookseller
should) he will learn to make this distinction: but at present he is but raw
and green in the way. That the Law-Patent-Case was determined by the Lord
Keeper the last Term, (by which Mr. Poole must mean Hilary Term, for this is
but the same Untruth repeated, which he formerly printed in his first Paper a
little after that Term) Mr. Be wonders with what face Mr. Poole can persist in
so gross and palpable a Falsity; when it is notoriously known that in that last
Term (as he calls it) there was nothing like a Determination, but it was only
referred to a future Hearing the ensuing Easter term, that in that Term it was
again heard, and again put off, and at this present Term continues undecided.
This all the Town can tell him. Now what eminent Lawyer it was that should so
abuse Mr. Poole, (if Mr. Poole does not rather abuse his Lawyer) as to assure
him he was present, and heard the Lord Keeper determine the Case, Mr. Be
cannot imagine, but takes the whole Story for a Castle built in the Air of Mr.
Poole's Fancy, as most of what he says besides seems to have had its first
hatching and production there.

5. Mr. Poole says, he does not pretend to Epitomize the whole CRITICS. Nor
does Mr. Be know how it can be done: for can a man Epitomize, and yet take the
whole? can he take but parts of a thing, and yet have all? However (as Mr. Be
said formerly) he takes all that he judges the best, and makes most for his
purpose; he takes the Kernel, and leaves the Shell to Mr. Be for his Fifteen
thousand pound. No, says Mr. Poole, there are many material things in them not
belonging to Exposition of Scripture, which are valuable another way. But what
if Mr. Poole should fall upon another Design hereafter, and then Collect out of
them all that he now leaves behind, by the same Law and Reason that he now
thinks to run away with so considerable a part of them? Mr. Be remembers the
Apologue of the old Fox and the young one. A sorry Fox Epitomized a Flock of
Geese, and brought home a couple of the fattest. The young ones laughed. At
dinner says one of them, Mother, they are excellent meat; but why did you
bring no more of them? Peace, you fool, says the old one, I have brought you
home two of the best, and when occasion serves I know where to find the rest of
them. So that Mr. Be has no Security for the Remainder, and all that he has to
thank Mr. Poole for is, his Reprieving the residue of his CRITICS till his
Lust and Stomach be as ready for them as his Conscience is.

6. His last Clause divides the Hoof, splits into two parts, and behold there
come forth Twins. The first part consists of a Tale of a Tub, the second, with
the Bottom out.

To the first Mr. Be says, that he understands not what Mr. Poole means, when
he says his Design can be no Loss of any present or certain Benefit to Mr.
Be. It Is true, what is certain and present Mr. Be is sure of. But this is
certain at present, that the noise of Mr. Poole's Project (with diverse that did
not well understand the true state of Businesses) has done him some manifest
Disservice abroad, which Mr. Be must bear as well as he can. And whereas Mr.
Poole is so rashly confident as to publish in print now a second time that
several of Mr. Bee's Partners declare they will not join with him in a second
Impression: why should they declare so, when Mr. Be had never proposed the
thing to them? But to stop Mr. Poole's mouth for this matter, and to spoil his
game here, let him but read the following few words as they voluntarily came
from Mr. Bee's Partners (now living) subscribed with their own hands.

We declare that we never refused to join with Mr. Be in re-printing the
CRITICS, as Mr. Poole falsely charge us in his Paper. Richard Royston.
William Wells. Sam. Thomson. William Morden.
The Original of this Mr. Be keeps by him, to satisfy Mr. Poole upon
occasion, or any of his scrupling Friends.

But (...). Poole goes on, and says it is generally believed by Scholars and
Booksellers, that it is not like to be printe (...)* He neither tells their
names, nor where they live. For the generality, Mr. Be knows it to be false:
and if there be any such that so believe, Mr. Be would know whether ever they
fingered Joseph's Divination Cup, or how they came to dive to the bottom of his
Thoughts and Intentions. And yet they are grossly wide in their Guesses, which
are directly besides Mr. Bee's Resolution, (if God permit) to go on as
vigorously as Mr. Poole, according to the Pattern exhibited to the World in his
late Specimen. But Mr. Poole says this Undertaking of Mr. Be is a work of
time, charge, and uncertainty. For the Uncertainty, Mr. Poole's Design is
equally subject to it; and more uncertain in this respect, that the Epitomizer
himself seems to be so uncertain, as not yet to be well resolved what to take
in to his Doing, and what to leave out; whereas Mr. Bee's whole Design is
completed and digested. For Accidents and Casualties they are common to both.
For the Charge of it, let it not trouble Mr. Poole, it shall never cost him a
farthing. For the Time, Mr. Be hopes to carry it on with that convenient
expedition, that possibly it may prevent Mr. Poole's, and make a younger
Brother of it, if it do not in the meanwhile prove Abortive, or stifled in the
Womb. And whereas Mr. Poole says he has a Privilege as well as Mr. Be, and
bears himself high upon that: Mr. Be wonders upon the account of what Merit he
procured it. But how-ever, he hopes Mr. Poole will consider he is his senior in
Privilege eight years, and that the Scene lies not in Kent, but in Middlesex,
where Gavel-kind-Law has no footing, but the Elder has the advantage and
priority of the rest, that is, the Privilege. Both Mr. Be and Mr. Poole cannot
have Right to the Estate. But if Mr. Bee's Privilege will not hold water, and
secure him from any attempt Mr. Poole can make upon his Propriety, what does
Mr. Poole think will become of his, if any man should go about in a mad humor
to Epitomize part or whole (as he phrases it) of his Design? If Mr. Bee's
Privilege will do no good, why should Mr. Poole trouble himself to procure
one, which may as well be undermined by another, and that by a third, and so
Mr. Poole be reduced to the same condition as he endeavors to bring Mr. Be
into, smart by his own Rod, and be gulled of his pretended Right after his own
Example?

To the second part; Whereas Mr. Poole instances in several Authors
Epitomized, as Baronius, Raleigh, etc. which yet bear good rates in the World,
and therefore Mr. Bee's Clamours are groundless, etc. Mr. Be answers, that
there are Epitomes which have been undertaken with so little discretion and
judgment in the Managery, that the Undertakers have been laughed at and hissed
off the Stage: and no wonder if those Authors at large have kept their
Advantage. But for others, Baronius for one, they have been manifestly
obstructed in their sales and rates, says the old Bookseller, whatever Mr.
Poole, (who is yet but a Pretender to the Trade) may say to the contrary. But
is there any Author so martyred as Mr. Poole threatens to serve Mr. Bee's, and
yet lives? He pretends to drain and suck all the marrow and heart-bloud out of
the CRITICS, all that tends any way to the understanding of difficult places
of Scripture, which is the whole Design and Life of Mr. Bee's nine Volumes? Mr.
Poole says, Mr. Be did formerly declare that such a synopsis as Mr. Poole's
would not prejudice his Work. If Mr. Poole means the Synopsis as he has now
contrived it, to consist two Volumes in three out of his Work, there is no man
can believe Mr. Be so senseless as to express himself to any such purpose. All
that he said was, if Mr. Poole meddled not with his CRITICS, or if his Design
were as he first represented it to Mr. Be, it would not be so prejudicial: but
since he has declared to take one whole Volume, and another time no less then
two, out of them, the case is altered, and Mr. Be must not be understood to
declare a thing so manifestly tending to his own ruin. Whereas Mr. Poole twits
Mr. Be with his conceit of imaginary Profit which may accrue to him, does not
Mr. Poole expect the like in his Undertaking? and what may Mr. Be think of
him, who has the real profit and advantage of his subscription-money for some
months at least, if his Design goes no farther on?

Having gone thus far, Mr. Poole proposes two smart Cases, which if Mr. Be
thought it worth the while he would answer. To the first of them he says only
this, That if Mr. Poole will bring his imaginary Reverend and Learned Doctor
out of the Clouds, where he supposes him to live, and procure a Meeting betwixt
Mr. Be and him, Mr. Be will give him a satisfactory Answer to the wild Quere
Mr. Poole makes on his behalf, (whether he may not print a Collection gathered
out of several other as well as Mr. Bee's Authors before he printed them,
(diverse of which latter neither Mr. Poole nor his learned Doctor had ever seen
or heard of, had not they found them in the CRITICS) print this Collection, I
say, which he made for his own private use:) but till then Mr. Be will give
neither him nor Mr. Poole leave to tamper with any thing that has so immediate
a relation to himself by way of Propriety.

The other, of Epitomizing Speed, etc. (which Mr. Poole says is exactly his
Case) is as shallow: But the main thing that Mr. Be observes by Mr. Poole's
ramble, from the CRITICS, to Law Books, from them to Dictionaries, to
Historians, to one thing after another, is this, that Mr. Poole's aim is for
the levelling of all Propriety in any sorts of Books whatsoever: and if he be
not well observed in his present motion, he (or some other of his Friends that
now lie fallow and have leisure enough) may ere long attempt farther in
subjects of another nature, especially if he once find himself of strength to
deal with Mr. Be in the present Dispute.

But the thing that does most of all sting and nettle Mr. Poole is Mr. Bee's
challenging him of breach of Promise before his going into Holland, which was,
that he would desist in his Design till Mr. Bee's return from thence. Here Mr.
Poole is sore and winces, and at last is so far carried as to say he is ready
to contradict Mr. Be with an Oath, (which it may be for all that he would not
do if he were put to it.) He says, had any such Promise been made, Mr. Be
would have put it in his First Paper. That Mr. Be spared him then, was out of
a respect he had to his Coat, (though Mr. Poole's were never perfectly black)
and the hope he had he should have no occasion to urge it. But (...) nothing
else would serve the turn, Mr. Be thought it f^^ to dally no longer, but to
let the world know how unworthily Mr. Poole had dealt by him. So that it was no
afternoon-dream, as Mr. Poole waggishly suggests, but a real Truth of some
weeks standing, though then first awaked by Mr. Be, to the confutation of Mr.
Poole's boast of his great Sincerity and Candor in this whole Transaction. But
let Mr. Poole have a care, that notwithstanding Mr. Bee's afternoon-dream, he
be not up time enough in the morning to meet him in the first full career of
his vigorous proceeding, and take the boldness to bid him Stand. For Mr. Bee's
good invention, let any man judge where the Invention lies, and who has the
best knack that way, by the several Weaknesses Mr. Poole has been trapp'd in
through this whole Paper hitherto. When Mr. Poole cites 2 Kings 9. 11. Mr. Be
is afraid he is beside the Text, and had turned down the wrong leaf, or that he
pricked with a Pin for it, as Boys do in a Lottery-Book; otherwise Mr. Be
thinks he might have as well cited the first verse in Genesis as that, for any
thing that either the one or the other concerns the present business. But
though Mr. Poole be a little obscure here, yet by and by Mr. Be questions not
but to make the World know the man and his communication. How much more
pertinent had it been for Mr. Poole to have turned to another Chapter? where he
should have found Ahab, a branded man for notorious impiety, yet making
Conscience in the case of another's Vineyard, which he would not seize upon
either in whole or part without first profering an equivalent Compensation? But
as to Mr. Poole's Promise in Jewin Street, Mr. Be is ready to swear, that it
was given, and for 3 months, with those circumstances which he has related in
his former Paper. And though it had the fortune to be a private and unwitnessed
Transaction, (as Mr. Poole says, who has otherwhile told Mr. Be, that if a
third man should at any time come amongst them, he would hold no discourse of
the business in difference betwixt them) yet Mr. Be has sufficient witness,
that after his Return from Holland, this Passage was betwixt Mr. Poole and him
in his Shop. Mr. Be there in discourse taxed Mr. Poole with faileur in his
Promise made before he went over. Mr. Poole then, as now, denied any such
Promise. What was it then, Mr. Poole, said Mr. Be, that you and I talked of so
long together in Jewin street? Was it not about my business? And was there
nothing of a Promise mentioned? Mr. Poole at last ingenuously confessed he
promised for three weeks. This was overheard and ready to be attested by one
then at a little distance from us. Now Mr. Be leaves it to others to judge,
the only ground of the Promise being his necessary occasion of absence in the
Low Countries about his Concerns, which he then told Mr. Poole would require
three months time; whether it were to any purpose for Mr. Poole to promise, or
Mr. Be to accept the Promise for three weeks, which was all one as if there
had been no Promise at all; and whether it be not probable (there being a
Promise made) it was rather for the whole term Mr. Bee's Occasions required;
who, had it not been that he had thought himself secure during his being abroad
upon Mr. Poole's word passed, had at least deferred his Voyage till some time
after. But Mr. Poole grows warm, and says he is ready to make Oath before a
Magistrate that he made no such Promise. Though Mr. Be is not a little pleased
to find Mr. Poole so far coming on, that at length he can persuade himself to
be willing to take some kind of Oath upon some occasion; yet for him, who,
after some boggling, at last refused and still stands out against a
Subscription tendered from the great Authority of the Nation, tending so much
to the preservation of the quiet and peace of the Nation, for him to make his
first Essay of Swearing in a Case tending to his own private profit and
advantage, to the manifest Detriment of his neighbor, and where Mr. Be is
confident the Truth stands against him; Mr. Be desires him to consider whether
there be not something of his own Gnat and Camel in the case.

For Mr. Bee's spreading a Report, that Mr. Poole's Work was stopped; Mr. Be
gives this short Answer in Mr. Poole's ear: It Is false. But if any employed by
Mr. Poole to disperse his Specimens should accidentally glean up such a story
in the Coffee-house, Mr. Be cannot help it, nor is he bound to answer what
people say in that prattling School. How could Mr. Be go about to raise such
a Report, when he knew in his Conscience he never had moved the least step
toward the stopping of it? For as long as Mr. Poole was but only words and
Preparations, Mr. Be never troubled himself to meddle with him, or by any
Application extraordinary to disturb him; neit^er is he a man of that temper,
to impound his neighbor's Cattle till he take them Damage-feasant. Now, is his
time to stop him; and it may be Mr. Poole may soon find it more then a Report.

But in the mean while, who raised the Report both in the City and
Universities, that Mr. Bee's friends need not make such a stir about Mr.
Poole's unjust and hard dealing with Mr. Be, for Mr. Be was well satisfied by
Mr. Poole in the business? Certainly this must be either Mr. Poole's doing,
(the story is so false) or Mr. Be knows not where to look the Author; it
being probable no uninterested person would concern himself to hammer out such
a notorious invention. It must therefore be at least a Sharer in the Synopsis
of Critical and other Commentators that first contrived it, as Mr. Be is well
assured it was first published and maintained in the abovenamed talking
Academy.

To conclude, let Mr. Poole rest content with what is his own, and leave Mr.
Be to dispose as he thinks good of what is his; let him leave out the
Critical, and retain his other Commentators: if then Mr. Poole have occasion to
cite here and there a passage out of Mr. Bee's Authors, (for confirmation of
the Subject he treats on, as he may a Text of Scripture in a Sermon, according
to the Judgment of one of his Lawyers) Mr. Be shall not be against it,
provided he do it civilly and modestly; for Mr. Be does not love he should
cite all his Book thus at a time. But if a Synopsis be a Beast of that nature,
to hook and fang in all that lies within its reach for its Master's advantage,
Mr. Be thinks it not fit to be endured in a Commonwealth where Meum and Tuum
are in fashion. It is yet in Mr. Poole's power for him and Mr. Be to part
friends, the fault is else at his door: but in case Mr. Poole proceeds in his
perverse humor, Mr. Be is resolved (with God's help) to make use of those
Remedies which are proper for the Disease, and to endeavor by the best Art he
can to put a stop to Mr. Poole in his unreasonable proceedings.

June 10. 1668.
An Advertisement concerning Mr. POOLE'S Synopsis, etc.
THere being some supernumerary Books printed in reference to foreign parts, and
diverse of our own Nation (who in reason should be first provided for) having
declared their Disappointments in their intended Subscriptions by diverse
accidents, and their desire to subscribe, if it were not too late; they may
hereby take notice, that if they speedily come or send to Mr. Cornelius Bee's
at the King's Arms in Little Britain in London, they shall be directed and
assisted to procure the First Volume at the same price with the former
Subscribers; viz. paying 50 s. in hand, and 15 s. more at the coming forth of
the Second Volume, and 15 s. more at the coming forth of the Third Volume; for
which they are to receive the First Volume in hand, and the Second and Third
Volumes when they shall be printed and published. And any person that shall
speedily subscribe or procure Subscriptions for Ten Books shall have one for
himself. And whereas there are some few Copies left of the Royal Paper, over
and above those that were disposed of to Benefactours, those that desire them,
paying the double price, (as the manner is in such cases,) may be furnished
with them. And such as desire an exchange of their ordinary Books for the other
of Royal Paper, shall be allowed what they paid for them: every Subscriber
paying 6 d. each Volume for incidentall Charges.

March 31. 1670. Matthew Poole. Cornelius Be.



