EMPEROR OF THE MOON: A FARCE.

As it is Acted by Their Majesty's Servants, AT THE QUEENS THEATER.

Written by Mrs. A. Behn.

LONDON: Printed by R. Holt, for Joseph Knight, and Francis Saunders, at the
Blew-Anchor in the lower Walk of the New Exchange, 1687.

TO THE Lord Marquess OF WORCESTER, etc.
MY LORD,
IT is a common Notion, that gathers as it goes, and is almost become a vulgar
Error, That Dedications in our Age, are only the effects of Flattery, a form of
Complement, and no more; so that the Great, to whom they are only due, decline
those Noble Patronages that were so generally allowed the Ancient Poets; since
the Awful Custom has been so scandalized by mistaken Addresses, and many a
worthy Piece is lost for want of some Honorable Protection, and sometimes many
indifferent ones traverse the World with that advantageous Pasport only.

This humble Offering, which I presume to lay at your Lordship's Feet, is of
that Critical Nature, that it does not only require the Patronage of a great
Title, but of a great Man too, and there is often times a vast difference
between those two great Things; and amongst all the most Elevated, there are
but very few in whom an illustrious Birth and equal Parts complete the Hero;
but among those, your Lordship bears the first Rank, from a just Claim, both of
the Glories of your Race and Virtues. Nor need we look back into long past
Ages, to bring down to ours the Magnanimous deeds of your Ancestors: We need no
more than to behold (what we have so often done with wonder) those of the Great
Duke of Beauford, your Illustrious Father, whose every single Action is a
glorious and lasting President to all the future Great; whose unshaken Loyalty,
and all other eminent Virtues, have rendered him to us, something more than Man,
and which alone, deserving a whole Volume, would be here but to lessen his
Fame, to mix his Grandeurs with those of any other; and while I am addressing
to the Son, who is only worthy of that Noble Blood he boasts, and who gives the
World a Prospect of those coming Gallantries that will Equal those of his
Glorious Father; already, My Lord, all you say and do is admired, and every
touch of your Pen reverenced; the Excellency and Quickness of your Wit, is the
Subject that fits the World most agreeably. For my own part, I never presume to
contemplate your Lordship, but my Soul bows with a perfect Veneration to your
mighty Mind; and while I have adored the delicate Effects of your uncommon Wit,
I have wished for nothing more than an Opportunity of expressing my infinite
Sense of it; and this Ambition, my Lord, was one Motive of my present
Presumption in the Dedicating this Farce to your Lordship.

I am sensible, my Lord, how far the Word Farce might have offended some, whose
Titles of Honor, a Knack in dressing, or his Art in writing a Billet Deux, had
been his chiefest Talent, and who, without considering the Intent, Character,
or Nature of the thing, would have cried out upon the Language, and have damned
it (because the Persons in it did not all talk like Hero's) as too debased and
vulgar to entertain a Man of Quality; but I am secure from this Censure, when
your Lordship shall be its Judge, whose refined Sense, and Delicacy of
Judgment, will, through all the humble Actions and trivialness of Business, find
Nature there, and that Diversion which was not meant for the Numbers, who
comprehend nothing beyond the Show and Buffoonry.

A very barren and thin hint of the Plot I had from the Italian, and which,
even as it was, was acted in France eighty odd times without intermission. It Is
now much altered, and adapted to our English Theater and Genius, who cannot
find an Entertainment at so cheap a Rate as the French will, who are content
with almost any Incoherences, howsoever shuffled together under the Name of a
Farce; which I have endeavored as much as the thing would bear, to bring
within the compass of Possibility and Nature, that I might as little impose
upon the Audience as I could; all the Words are wholly new, without one from
the Original. 'Twas calculated for His late Majesty of Sacred Memory, that
Great Patron of Noble Poetry, and the Stage, for whom the Muses must for ever
mourn, and whose Loss, only the Blessing of so Illustrious a Successor can ever
repair; and it is a great Pity to see that best and most useful Diversion of
Mankind, whose Magnificence of old, was the most certain sign of a flourishing
State, now quite undone by the Misapprehension of the-Ignorant, and
Mis-representings of the Envious, which evidently shows the World is improved
in nothing but Pride Ill Nature, and affected Nicety; and the only Diversion of
the Town now, is high Dispute, and public Controversies in Taverns,
Coffee-houses, etc. and those things which ought to be the greatest Mysteries
in Religion, and so rarely the Business of Discourse, are turned into Ridicule,
and look but like so many fanatical Stratagems to ruin the Pulpit as well as
the Stage. The Defense of the first is left to the Reverend Gown, but the
departing Stage can be no otherwise restored, but by some leading Spirits, so
Generous, so Public, and so Indefatigable as that of your Lordship, whose
Patronages are sufficient to support it, whose Wit and Judgment to defend it,
and whose Goodness and Quality to justify it; such Encouragement would inspire
the Poets with new Arts to please, and the Actors with Industry, 'Twas this
that occasioned so many Admirable Plays heretofore, as Shakespeare's,
Fletcher's, and Johnson's, and 'twas this alone that made the Town able to keep
so many Play Houses alive, who now cannot supply one. However, my Lord, I, for
my part, will no longer complain, if this Piece find but favor in your
Lordship's Eyes, and that it can be so happy to give your Lordship one hours
Diversion, which is the only Honor and Fame is wished to crown all the
Endeavors of,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble, and Most Obedient Servant, A. Behn.

PROLOGUE
Spoken by Mr. Jevern.
LOng, and at vast Expense the industrious Stage
Has strove to please a dull ungrateful Age:
With Hero's and with Gods we first began,
And thundered to you in Heroic Strain.
Some dying Lovesick Queen each Night you enjoyed,
And with Magnificence, at last were cloyed:
Our Drums and Trumpets frighted all the Women;
Our fighting scared the Beaux and Billet Deux Men.
So Spark in an Intrigue of Quality,
Grows weary of his splendid Drudgery;
Hates the Fatigue, and cries a Pox upon her,
What a damned bustle's here with Love and Honor.
In humbler Comedy, we next appear,
No Fop or Cuckold, but slap-dash we had him here;
We showed you all, but you malicious grown,
Friends Vices to expose, and hide your own;
Cry, Dam it -- This is such, or such a one.
Yet ^etled, Plague, What does the Scribler mean?
With his damned Characters, and Plot obscene.
No Woman without Vizard in the Nation,
Can see it twice, and keep her Reputation -- that is certain
Forgetting --
That he himself, in every gross Lampoon,
Her lewder Secrets spread about the Town;
Whilst their feigned Niceness is but cautious Fear,
Their own Intrigues should be unravel'd here.
Our next Recourse was dwindling down to Farce,
Then -- Zounds, what Stuff's here? it is all over my --
Well, Gentlemen, since none of these has sped,
'Gad, we have bought a share in the speaking Head.
So there you will save a Sice,
You love Good Husbandry in all but Vice;
Whoring and Drinking, only bears a Price.
The Head rises upon ^ twisted Post, on a Bench from under the (...) After
Jevern speaks to it^ (...)
Stentor Oh! -- Oh! -- Oh!
Oh! -- Oh! -- Oh!
After this it sings Sawny, Laughs, cries God bless the King in order.
Stentor Answers. Speak louder Jevern, if you would have me repeat;
Plague of this Rogue, he will betray the Cheat.
He speaks louder, it answers indirectly. -- Hum -- There it is again,
Pox of your Echo with a Northern Strain.
Well, -- -- This will be but a nine days wonder too;
There Is nothing lasting but the Puppets Show.
What Ladies heart so hard, but it would move,
To hear Philander and Irene's Love.
Those Sisters too, the scandalous Wits do say.
Two nameless, keeping Beaux, have made so gay;
But those Amors are perfect Sympathy,
Their Gallants being as mere Machines as they.
Oh! how the City Wife, with her nown Ninny,
Is charmed with, Come into my Coach -- Mis Jinny, Mis Jinny.
But overturning -- Fri^le cries -- Adznigs,
The jogling Rogue has murdered all his Kids.
The Men of War cry Pox on it, this is dull,
We are for rough Sports, -- Dog Hector, and the Bull.
Thus each in his degree, Diversion finds,
Your Sports are suited to your mighty Minds;
Whilst so much Judgment in your Choice you show,
The Puppets have more Sense than some of you.

Persons Names.
DOctor Baliardo. Mr. Underhill. Scaramouch, his Man. Mr. Lee. Pedro, his Boy.
Don Cinthio, Don Charmante, both Nephews to the Viceroy, and Lovers of Elaria
and Bellemante. Young Mr. Powel. Mr. Mumford. Harlequin, Cinthio's Man. Mr.
Jevern. Officer and Clark. Elaria, Daughter to the Doctor. Mrs. Cook.
Bellemante, Niece to the Doctor. Mrs. Mumford. Mopsophil Governante to the
young Ladies. Mrs. Cory. The Persons in the Moon, are Don Cinthio, Emperor; Don
Charmante, Prince of Thunderland. Their Attendants, Persons that represent the
Court Cards. Keeplair and Gallileus, two Philosophers. Twelve Persons
representing the Figures of the twelve Signs of the Zodiac. Negroes, and
Persons that Dance. Masick, Kettle-Drums, and Trumpets.
The SCENE, NAPLES.

FARCE.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A Chamber.
Enter Elaria and Mopsophil. I.
A Curse upon that faithless Maid,
Who first her Sexes, Liberty betrayed;
Born free as Man to Love and Range,
Till Nobler Nature did to Custom change.
Custom, that dull excuse for Fools,
Who think all Virtue to consist in Rules.
II.
From Love our Fetters never sprung,
That smiling God, all wanton Gay and Tongue,
Shows by his Wings he cannot be
Confined to a restless Slavery;
But here and there at random roves,
Not fixed to glittering Courts or shady Groves.
III.
Than she that Constancy Professed,
Was but a well dissembler at the best;
And that imaginary sway
She feigned to give, in seeming to obey,
Was but the height of Prudent Art,
To deal with greater Liberty her Heart.
[After the Song Elaria gives her Lute to Mopsophil.
Ela. This does not divert me:
Nor nothing will, till Scaramouch return,
And bring me News of Cinthio.

Mop. Truly I was so sleepy last Night, I know nothing of the adventure, for
which you are kept so close a Prisoner to Day, and more strictly guarded than
usual.


Ela. Cinthio came with Music last Night under my Window, which my Father
hearing sallyed out with his Mermidons upon him; and clashing of Swords I
heard, but what hurt was done, or whether Cinthio were discovered to him, I
know not; but the Billet I sent him now by Scaramouch, will occasion me soon
intelligence.


Mop: And see Madam where you trusty Roger comes.
Enter Scaramouch peeping on all sides before he enters. -- You may advance,
and fear none but your Friends.

Scar. Away and keep the door.

Ela. Oh dear Scaramouch! have thou been at the Viceroys!

Scar. Yes, yes. --
[In heat,
Ela. And have thou delivered my Letter, to his Nephew,
Don Cinthio?

Scar. Yes, Yes, what should I deliver else?

Ela. Well -- and how does he?
[Fanning himself with his Cap.
Scar. Lord, how should he do? Why, what a Laborious thing it is to be a Pimp?


Ela. Why, well he should do.

Scar. So he is, as well as a Night adventuring Lover can be, -- -- he has got
but one wound, Madam.


Ela. How! wounded say you? Oh Heavens! It Is not Mortal?


Scar. Why, I have no great skill, -- but they say it may be Dangerous.


Ela. I Dye with fear, where is he wounded?

Scar. Why, Madam, he is run -- quit thorough the -- heart, -- but the Man may
Live, if I please.


Ela. Thou please! Torment me not with Ridles.

Scar. Why, Madam, there is a certain cordial Balsam, called a fair Lady, which
outwardly applied to his Bosom, will prove a better cure than all your Weapon
or Sympathetick Powder, meaning your Ladyship.


Ela. Is Cinthio then not wounded?

Scar. No otherwise than by your fair Eyes, Madam; he got away unseen and
unknown.


Ela. Do know how precious time is, and do thou Fool it away thus? what
said he to my Letter?


Scar. What should he say?

Ela. Why a hundred dear soft things of Love, kiss it as often, and bless me
for my goodness.


Scar. Why so he did.

Ela. Ask thee a thousand question of my health after my last nights fright.


Scar. So he did.

Ela. Expressing all the kind concern Love could inspire, for the punishment my
Father has inflicted on me, for entertaining him at my Window last Night.


Scar. All this he did.

Ela. And for my being confined a Prisoner to my Apartment, without the hope or
almost possibility of seeing him any more.


Scar. There I think you are a little mistaken, for besides the Plot that I
have laid to bring you together all this Night, -- there are such Stratagems
abrewing, not only to bring you together, but with your Fathers consent too;
Such a Plot, Madam.


Ela. Ay that would be worthy of thy Brain; prithee what --


Scar. Such a device.

Ela. I Am impatient.

Scar. Such a Canundrum, -- well if there be wise Men and Conjurers in the
World, they are intriguing Lovers.


Ela. Out with it.

Scar. You must know, Madam, your Father, (my Master, the Doctor,) is a little
Whimsical, Romantic, or Don Quick-sottish, or so. --


Ela. Or rather Mad.

Scar. That were uncivil to be supposed by me; but Lunatic we may call him
without breaking the Decorum of good Manners; for he is always traveling to
the Moon.


Ela. And so Religiously believes there is a World there, that he discourses as
gravely of the People, their Government, Institutions, Laws, Manners, Religion
and Constitution, as if he had been bred a Machiavel there.


Scar. How came he thus infected first?

Ela. With reading foolish Books, Lucian's Dialogue of the Lofty Traveller, who
flew up to the Moon, and thence to Heaven; an Heroic business called, The Man
in the Moon, if you will believe a Spaniard, who was carried thither, upon an
Engine drawn by wild Geese; with another Philosophical Piece, A Discourse of
the World in the Moon; with a thousand other ridiculous Volumes too hard to
name.


Scar. Ay, this reading of Books is a pernicious thing. I was like to have run
Mad once, reading Sir John Mandivel; -- but to the business, -- I went, as you
know, to Don Cinthio's Lodgings, where I found him with his dear Friend
Charmante, laying their heads together for a Farce.


Ela. A Farce. --


Scar. Ay a Farce, which shall be called, -- the World in the Moon. Wherein
your Father shall be so imposed on, as shall bring matters most magnificently
about. --


Ela. I cannot conceive thee, but the design must be good since Cinthio and
Charmante own it.


Scar. In order to this, Charmante is dressing himself like one of the
Caballists of the Rosacrusian Order, and is coming to prepare my credulous
Master for the greater imposition. I have his trinckets here to play upon him,
which shall be ready.


Ela. But the Farce, where is It to be Acted?

Scar. Here, here, in this very House; I am to order the Decoration, adorn a
Stage, and place Scenes proper.


Ela. How can this be done without my Father's knowledge?


Scar. You know the old Apartment next the great Orchard, and the Worm-eaten
Gallery, that opens to the River; which place for several years no Body has
frequented, there all things shall be Acted proper for our purpose.

Enter Mopsa running.
Mopsa. Run, Run Scaramouch, my Masters Conjuring for you like Mad below, he
calls up all his little Devils with horrid Names, his Microscope, his
Horoscope, his Telescope, and all his Scopes.


Scar. Here, here, -- I had almost forgot the Letters; here is one for you, and
one for Mrs. Bellemante.

[runs out. Enter Bellemante with a Book.
Bell. Here, take my Prayer Book, Oh Matres cheer.
[Embraces her.
Ela. Thy Eyes are always laughing, Bellemante.

Bell. And so would yours had they been so well employed as mine, this Morning.
I have been at the Chapel; and seen so many Beaus, such a Number of Plumeys, I
could not tell which I should look on most, sometimes my heart was charmed with
the gay Blonding, then with the Melancholy Noire, annon the amiable brunet,
sometimes the bashful, then again the bold; the little now, anon the lovely
tall! In fine, my Dear, I was embarass'd on all sides, I did nothing but ideal
my heart tout au toore.


Ela. Oh there was then no danger, Cousin.

Bell. No but abundance of Pleasure.

Ela. Why, this is better than sighing for Charmante.

Bell. That Is when he is present only, and makes his Court to me; I can sigh to a
Lover, but will never sigh after him, -- but Oh the Beaus, the Beaus, Cousin,
that I saw at Church.


Ela. Oh you had great Devotion to Heaven then!

Bell. And so I had; for I did nothing but admire its handy work, but I could
not have prayed heartily if I had been dying; but a deuce on it, who should come
in and spoil all but my Lover Charmante, so dressed, so Gallant, that he drew
together all the scattered fragments of my heart, confined my wandering
thoughts, and fixed 'em all on him; Oh how he looked, how he was dressed!

Sings.
Chivalier, a Chevave Blond,
Plus de Mouche, Plus de Powdre
Pleus de Ribons et Cannous.
-- Oh what a dear ravishing thing is the beginning of an Amor?


Ela. You Are still in Tune, when will thou be tame, Bellemante?


Bell. When I am weary of loving, Elaria.

Ela. To keep up your Humor, here is a Letter from your Charmante.

Bell. reads. MAlicious Creature, when will thou cease to torment me, and either
appear less charming or more kind. I languish when from you, and am wounded
when I see you, and yet I am eternally Courting my Pain. Cinthio and I are
contriving how we shall see you to Night. Let us not toil in vain; we ask but
your consent; the pleasure will be all ours; it is therefore fit we suffer all
the fatigue. Grant this, and Love me, if you will save the Life of

Your Charmante.

-- Live then Charmante! Live, as long as Love can last!


Ela. Well, Cousin, Scaramouch tells me of a rare design's a hatching, to
relieve us from this Captivity; here are we mewed up to be espoused to two
Moon-calfs for ought I know; for the Devil of any Human thing is suffered to
come near us, without our Governante and Keeper, Mr. Scaramouch.


Bell. Who, if he had no more Honesty, and Conscience, than my Uncle, would let
us pine for want of Lovers; but thanks be praised the Generosity of our
Cavaliers has opened their obdurate Hearts with a Golden key, that let us 'em in
at all opportunities. Come, come, let us in, and answer their Billet Deux.

[Exeunt.
SCENE II. A Garden.
Enter Doctor, with all manner of Mathematical Instruments, hanging at his
Girdle; Scaramouch bearing a Telescope twenty (or more) Foot long.
Doct. SET down the Telescope. -- Let me see, what Hour is it?


Sca. About six a Clock, Sir.

Doct. Then it is about the Hour, that the great Monarch of the upper World
enters into his Closet; Mount, mount the Telescope.


Scar. What to do, Sir?

Doct. I understand, at certain moments Critical, one may be snatched of such a
mighty consequence to let the sight into the secret Closet.


Scar. How, Sir, Peep into the Kings Closet; under favor, Sir, that will be
something uncivil.


Doct. Uncivil, it were slat Trenson if it should be known, but thus unseen,
and as wise Politicians should, I take Survey of all: This is the States-man's
peeping-hole, through which he Steals the secrets of his King, and seems to wink
at distance.


Scar. The very keyhole, Sir, through which with half an Eye, he sees him even
at his Devotion, Sir.

[A knocking at the Garden Gate.
Doct. Take care none enter --
[Scar. goes to the Door.
Scar. Oh, Sir, Sir, here is some strange great Man come to wait on you.


Doct. Great Man! from whence?

Scar. Nay, from the Moon World, for ought I know, for he looks not like the
People of the lower Orb.


Doct. Ha! and that may be: wait on him in.
[Ex. Scar. Enter Scaramouch bare, bowing before Charmante, dressed in a strange
Fantastical Habit, with Harliquin Salutes the Doctor.
Char. Doctor Baliardo, most learned Sir, all Hail; Hail from the great Caballa
-- of Eutopia.


Doct. Most Reverend Bard, thrice welcome.
[Salutes him low.
Char. The Fame of your great Learning, Sir, and Virtue, is known with Joy to
the renowned Society.


Doct. Fame, Sir, has done me too much Honor, to bear my Name to the renowned
Caballa.


Char. You must not attribute it all to Fame, Sir, they are too learned and
wise to take up things from Fame, Sir; our intleligence is by ways more secret
and sublime, the Stars, and little Demons of the Air inform us all things,
past, present, and to come.


Doct. I must confess the Count of Gabalist, renders it plain, from Writ Divine
and Humane, there are such friendly and intleligent Demons.


Char. I hope you do not doubt that Doctrine, Sir, which holds that the Four
Elements are Peopled with Persons of a Form and Species more Divine than Vulgar
Mortals -- those of the fiery Regions we call the Salamanders, they beget Kings
and Heroes, with Spirits like their Deietical Sires the lovely Inhabitants of
the Water, we call Nymphs. Those of the Earth are Gnomes or Fayries. Those of
the Air are Silfs. These, Sir, when in Conjunction with Mortals, beget Immortal
Races. Such as the first born man, which had continued so, had the first Man
never doated on a Woman.


Doct. I am of that opinion, Sir, Man was not made for Woman.


Char. Most certain, Sir, Man was to have been Immortalliz'd by the Love and
Conversation of these Charming Silfs and Nymphs, and Woman by the Gnomes and
Salamanders, and to have stocked the World with Demi Gods, such as at this Day
inhabit the Empire of the Moon.


Doct. Most admirable Philosophy and Reason. -- But do these Silfs and Nymphs
appear in shapes?


Char. Of the most Beautiful of all the Sons and Daughters of the Universe:
Fancy, Imagination is not half so Charming: And then so soft, so kind! but none
but the Caballa and their Families are blessed with their Divine Addresses. Were
you but once admitted to that Society. --


Doct. Ay, Sir, what Virtues or what Merits can accomplish me for that' great
Honor?


Char. An absolute abstinence from carnal thought, devout and pure of Spirit;
free from Sin.


Doct. I dare not boast my Virtues, Sir; Is there no way to try my Purity?


Char. Are you very secret.

Doct. It Is my first Principle, Sir --

Char. And one, the most material in our Rosocrusian order.

Char. Please you to make a Trial.

Doct. As how, Sir, I beseech you? --

Char. If you be throwly purged from Vice, the opticles of your sight will be
so illuminated, that glancing through this Telescope, you may behold one of
these lovely Creatures, that people the vast Region of the Air.


Doct. Sir, you oblige profoundly.

Char. Kneel then, and try your strength of Virtue, Sir.
-- Keep your Eye fixed and open.
[He looks in the Telescope. [While he is looking, Charmante goes to the Door
to Scaramouch, who waited on purpose without, and takes a Glass with a Picture
of a Nympho on it, and a light behind it; that as he brings it, it shows to the
Audience. Goes to the end of the Telescope. -- Can you discern, Sir?

Doct. Methinks I see a kind of Glorious Cloud drawn up -- and now -- it is gone
again.


Char. Saw you no fuger?

Doct. None.

Char. Then make a short Prayer to Alikin, the Spirit of the East; shake off
all Earthly thoughts, and look again.

[He prays. Charmante puts the Glass into the Mouth of the Telescope.
Doct. -- Astonished, Ravished with delight, I see a Beauty young and Angel like,
leaning upon a Cloud --


Char. Seems she on a Bed, then she is reposing, and you must not gaze --


Doct. Now a Cloud Veils her from me.

Char. She saw you peeping then, and drew the Curtain of the Air between.


Doct. I am all Rapture, Sir, at this rare Vision -- is it possible, Sir, that I
may ever hope the Conversation of so Divine a Beauty?


Char. Most possible, Sir; they will Court you, their whole delight is to
Immortallize -- Alexander was begot by a Salamander, that visited his Mother in
the form of a Serpent, because he would not make King Philip Jealous, and that
famous Philosopher Merlin, was begotten on a Vestal Nun, a certain Kings
Daughter, by a most beautiful young Salamander; as indeed all the Heroes, and
men of mighty minds are.


Doct. Most excellent!

Char. The Nymph Egeria enamored on Nama Pompilius, came to him invisible to
all Eyes else, and gave him all his Wisdom and Philosophy. Zoriastes,
Trismegistus, Apuleius, Aquinius, Albertus Magnus, Socrates and Virgil had
their Zilphid, which foolish people called their Demon or Devil. But you are
wise, Sir. --


Doct. But do you imagine Sir, they will fall in Love with an old Mortal?


Char. They love not like the Vulgar, it is the Immortal Part they dote upon.


Doct. But Sir, I have a Niece and Daughter which I love equally, were it not
possible they might be Immortalliz'd?


Char. No doubt on it Sir, if they be Pure and Chaste.

Doct. I think they are, and I Will take care to keep 'em so; for I confess Sir,
I would fain have a Hero to my Grandson.


Char. You never saw the Emperor of the Moon, Sir, the mighty Iredonozar?


Doct. Never Sir; his Court I have, but 'twas confusedly too.

Char. Refine your Thoughts Sir, by a moments Pray, and try again.

[He prays. Char. claps the Glass with the Emperor on it, he looks in and sees
it.
Doct. It is too much, too much for mortal Eyes! I see a Monarch seated on a
Throne -- But seems most sad and pensive.


Char. Forbear then Sir, for now his Love-Fit's on, and then he would be
private.


Doct. His Love-Fit, Sir!

Char. Ay Sir, the Emperor's in Love with some fair Mortal.

Doct. And can he not command her?

Char. Yes, but her Quality being too mean, he struggles, though a King 'twixt
Love and Honor.


Doct. It were too much to know the Mortal, Sir?

Char. It Is yet unknown, Sir, to the Caballists, who now are using all their
Arts to find her, and serve his Majesty; but now my great Affair deprives me of
you: To morrow Sir, I Will wait on you again; and now I Have tried your Virtue,
tell you Wonders.


Doct. I humbly kiss your Hands, most Learned Sir.
[Charmante goes out. Doctor waits on him to the Door, and returns, to him
Scaramouch. All this while Harlequin was hid in the Hedges, peeping now and
then, and when his Master went out he was left behind.
Sca. So, so, Don Charmante has played his Part most exquisitely; I Will in and
see how it works in his Pericranium. -- Did you call Sir?


Doct. Scaramouch, I have, for thy singular Wit and Honesty, always had a
Tenderness for thee above that of a Master to a Servant.


Sca. I must confess it, Sir.

Doct. Thou have Virtue and Merit that deserves much.

Sca. Oh Lord, Sir!

Doct. And I may make thee great, -- all I require, is, that thou will double
thy diligent Care of my Daughter and my Niece, for there are mighty things
designed for them, if we can keep 'em from the sight of Man.


Sca. The sight of Man, Sir!

Doct. Ay, and the very Thoughts of Man.

Sca. What Antidote is there to be given to a young Wench, against the Disease
of Love and Longing?


Doct. Do you your Part, and because I know thee Discreet and very Secret, I
will hereafter discover Wonders to thee. -- On pain of Life, look to the Girls;
that is your Charge.


Sca. Doubt me not, Sir, and I hope your Reverence will reward my faithful
Service with Mopsophil, your Daughters Governante, who is Rich, and has long
had my Affection, Sir.

[Harlequ. Peeping, cries -- Oh Traitor!
Doct. Set not thy Heart on Transitories mortal, there is better things in store
-- besides, I have promised her to a Farmer for his Son. -- Come in with me,
and bring the Telescope.

[Ex. Doctor and Scaramouch. [Harlequin comes out on the Stage.
Har. My Mistress Mopsophil to marry a Farmers Son!

What, am I then forsaken, abandoned by the false fain One?

-- If I have Honor, I must die with Rage;

Reproaching gently, and complaining madly.

-- It is resolved, I Will hang my self -- No, -- When did I ever hear of a Hero
that hanged himself? no -- it is the Death of Rogues. What If I drown my self?
--

No, -- Useless Dogs and Puppies are drowned; a Pistol or a Caper on my own
Sword would look more nobly, but that I have a natural Aversion to Pain.
Besides, it is as Vulgar as Rats-bane, or the sliceing of the Weasand. No, I Will
die a Death uncommon, and leave behind me an eternal Fame. I have somewhere
read an Author, either Ancient or Modern, of a Man that laughed to death. -- I
am very Ticklish, and am resolved -- to dye that Death. -- Oh Mopsophil, my
cruel Mopsophil!

[Pulls off his Hat, Sword and Shoes. -- And now, farewell the World, fond
Love, and mortal Cares.

[He falls to tickle himself, his Head, his Ears, his Armpits, Hands, Sides,
and Soles of his Feet; making ridiculous Cries and Noises of Laughing several
ways, with Antic Leaps and Skips, at last falls down as dead. Enter
Scaramouch.
Sca. Harlequin was left in the Garden, I Will tell him the News of Mopsophil.

[Going forward, tumbles over him. Ha, what is here? Harlequin Dead! --

[Heaving him up, he flies into a Rage.
Har. Who is it that thus would rob me of my Honor?

Sca. Honor, why I thought thou would been dead.

Har. Why so I was, and the most agreeably dead. --

Sca. I came to bemoan with thee, the mutual loss of our Mistress.


Har. I know it Sir, I know it, and that you are as false as she: Was It not a
Covenant between us, that neither should take advantage of the other, but both
should have fair Play, and yet you basely went to undermine me, and ask her of
the Doctor; but since she is gone, I scorn to quarrel for her -- But let us like
loving Brothers, hand in hand, leap from some Precipice into the Sea.


Sca. What, and spoil all my Cloths? I thank you for that; no, I have a newer
way: you know I lodge four pair of Stairs high, let us ascend thither, and after
saying our Prayers --


Har. -- Prayers! I never heard of a dying Hero that ever prayed.


Sca. Well, I Will not stand with you for a Trifle -- Being come up, I Will open
the Casement, take you by the Heels, and fling you out into the Street, --
after which, you have no more to do, but to come up and throw me down in my
turn.


Har. The Atchievment's great and new; but now I think on it, I Am resolved to
hear my Sentence from the Mouth of the perfidious Trollop, for yet I cannot
credit it.

I Will to the Gypsy, though I venture banging,

To be undeceived, it is hardly worth the hanging.

[Exeunt.
SCENE II: The Chamber of Bellemante.
Enter Scaramouch groping.
Sca. SO, I have got rid of my Rival, and shall here got an Opportunity to
speak with Mopsophil, for hither she must come anon, to lay the young Ladies
Night-things in order; I Will hide my self in some Corner till she come.

[Goes on to the further side of the Stage. Enter Harlequin groping.
Har. So, I made my Rival believe I was gone, and hid my self, till I got this
Opportunity to steal to Mopsophil's Apartment, which must be hereabouts, for
from these Windows she used to entertain my Love.

[Advances.
Sca. Ha, I hear a soft Tread, -- if it were Mopsophil's, she would not come by
Dark.

[Har. advancing runs against a Table, and almost strikes himself backwards.
Har. What was that? -- a Table, -- There I may obscure my self. --

[Groping for the Table. -- What a Devil, is it vanished?


Sca. Devil, -- Vanished, -- What can this mean? It Is a Man's Voice. -- If it
should be my Master the Doctor, now I were a dead Man; -- he cannot see me, --
and I Will put my self into such a Posture, that if he feel me, he shall as soon
take me for a Church Spout as a Man.

[He puts himself into a Posture ridiculous, his Arms a-kimbo, his Knees wide
open, his Backside almost touching the Ground, his Mouth stretched wide, and
his Eyes stairing. Harl. groping, thrusts his Hand into his Mouth, he bites
him, the other dares not cry out.
Har. Ha, what is this? all Mouth, with twenty Rows of Teeth. -- Now dare not I
cry out, least the Doctor should come, find me here, and kill me. -- I Will try
if it be mortal. --

[Making damnable Faces and Signs of Pain, he draws a Dagger. Scar. feels the
Point of it, and shrinks back, letting go his Hand.
Scar. Who the Devil can this be? I felt a Poniard, and am glad I saved my Skin
from pinking.

[Steals out. [Harlequin groping about, finds the Table, on which there is a
Carpet, and creeps under it, listening. Enter Bellemante, with a Candle in one
Hand, and a Book in the other.
Bell. I am in a Belle Humor for Poetry to Night, -- I Will make some Boremes on
Love.

[She Writes and Studies. Out of a great Curiosity, -- A Shepherd did demand of
me. -- No, no, -- A Shepherd this implored of me. --

[Scratches out, and Writes a new. Ay, ay, so it shall go. -- Tell me, said he,
-- Can you Resign? -- Resign, ay, -- what shall Rhyme to Resign? -- Tell me,
said he, --

[She lays down the Tablets, and walks about. [Harlequin peeps from under the
Table, takes the Book, writes in it, and lays it up before she can turn.
[Reads.] Ay, Ay, -- So it shall be, -- Tell me, said he, my Bellemante; -- Will
you be kind to your Charmante?

[Reads those two Lines, and is amazed. -- Ha, -- Heavens! What Is this? I am
amazed!

-- And yet I Will venture once more. --

[Writes and studies. [Writes.] -- I blushed, and veiled my wishing Eyes.

[Lays down the Book, and walks as before. -- Wishing Eyes --

[Har. Writes as before. [Har. writes.] -- And answered only with my Sighs.

[She turns and takes the Tablet.
Bell. -- Ha, -- What is this? Witchcraft or some
Divinity of Love? some Cupid sure invisible. --
Once more I Will try the Charm. --
[Bell. writes.] -- Could I a better way my Love impart?
[Studies and walks. -- Impart --
[He writes as before. [Har. wri.] -- And without speaking, tell him all my
Heart.

Bell. -- It Is here again, but where is the Hand that writ it?
[Looks about. -- The little Deity that will be seen
But only in his Miracles. It cannot be a Devil,
For here is no Sin nor Mischief in all this.
Enter Charmante. She hides the Tablet, he steps to her, and snatches it from
her and Reads.
Char. Reads. Out of a great Curiosity,
A Shepherd this implored of me.
Tell me, said he, my Bellemante.
Will you be kind to your Charmante?
I blushed, and veiled my wishing Eyes,
And answered only with my Sighs.
Could I a better way my Love impart?
And without speaking, tell him all my Heart.

Char. Whose is this different Character?
[Looks angry.
Bell. It Is yours for ought I know.

Char. Away, my Name was put here for a blind.
What Rhiming Fop have you been clubbing Wit withal?

Bell. Ah, mon Dieu! -- Charmante Jealous!

Char. Have I not cause? -- Who writ these Boremes?

Bell. Some kind assisting Deity, for ought I know.

Char. Some kind assisting Coxcomb, that I know,
The Ink's yet wet, the Spark is near I find. --

Bell. Ah, Maluruse! How was I mistaken in this Man?

Char. Mistaken! What, did you take me for, an easy Fool to be imposed upon?
-- One that would be cuckolded by every feathered Fool; that you should call a
-- Beau un Gallant Huome. 'sdeath! Who would dote upon a fond She-Fop? -- A
vain conceited Amorous Cocquett.

[Goes out, she pulls him back. Enter Scaramouch, running.
Sca. Oh Madam! hide your Lover, or we are all undone.

Char. I will not hide, till I know the thing that made the Verses.

[The Doctor calling as on the Stairs.
Doct. Bellemante, Niece, -- Bellemante.

Scar. She Is coming Sir. -- Where, where shall I hide him? -- Oh, the Closet's
open!

[Thrusts him into the Closet by force.
Doct. Oh Niece! Ill Luck, Ill Luck, I must leave you to night; my Brother the
Advocate is sick, and has sent for me; it is three long Leagues, and dark as
it is, I must go. -- They say he is dying. [Pulls out his; Keys one falls down.
Here, take my Keys, and go into my Study, and look over all my Papers, and
bring me all those Marked with a Cross and Figure of Three, they concern my
Brother and I.

[She looks on Scaramouch, and makes pitiful Signs, and goes out. -- Come
Scaramouch, and get me ready for my Journey, and on your Life, let not a Door
be opened till my Return.

[Ex. Enter Mopsophil. Har. peeps from under the Table.
Har. Ha! Mopsophil, and alone!

Mop. Well, it is a delicious thing to be Rich; what a World of Lovers it
invites: I have one for every Hand, and the Favorite for my Lips.


Har. Ay, him would I be glad to know.
[And peeping.
Mop. But of all my Lovers, I am for the Farmers Son, because he keeps a Calash
-- and I Will swear a Coach is the most agreeable thing about a man.


Har. Ho, ho!

Mop. Ah me, -- What Is that?
[He answers in a shrill Voice.
Har. The Ghost of a poor Lover, dwindl'd into a Heyho.
[He rises from under the Table and falls at her Feet. Scaramouch enters. She
runs off squeaking.
Sca. Ha, my Rival and my Mistress! --
Is this done like a Man of Honor, Monsieur Harlequin,
To take Advantages to injure me?
[Draws.
Har. All Advantages are lawful in Love and War.

Scar. 'Twas contrary to our League and Covenant; therefore I defy thee as a
Traitor.


Har. I scorn to fight with thee, because I once called thee Brother.


Scar. Then you are a Paltroon, that is to say, a Coward.


Har. Coward, nay, then I am provoked, come on --

Scar. Pardon me, Sir, I gave the Coward, and you ought to strike.

[They go to sight ridiculously, and ever as Scaramouch passes, Harlequin leaps
aside, and skips so nimbly about, he cannot touch him for his Life; which after
a while endeavoring in vain, he lays down his Sword. -- If you be for dancing,
Sir, I have my Weapons for all occasions.

[Scar. pulls out a Fleut Deux, and falls to Playing. Har. throws down his, and
falls a Dancing; after the Dance, they shake Hands.
Har. He my Bone Ame -- Is not this better than Duelling?

Scar. But not altogether so Heroic, (...). Well, for the future, let us have
fair Play; no Tricks to undermine each other, but which of us is chosen to be
the happy Man, the other shall be content.

[Elaria within.
Ela. Cousin Bellemante, Cousin.

Scar. 'Slife, let us be gone, lest we be seen in the Ladies Apartment.

[Scar. slips Harlequin behind the Door. Enter Elaria.
Ela. How now, how came you here? --
[Signs to Har. to go out.
Scar. I came to tell you, Madam, my Master's just taking Mule to go his
Journey to Night, and that Don Cinthio is in the Street, for a lucky moment to
enter in.


Ela. But what if any one by my Fathers Order, or he himself, should by some
chance surprise us?


Scar. If we be, I have taken order against a Discovery. I Will go see if the old
Gentleman be gone, and return with your Lover.

[Goes out.
Ela. I tremble, but know not whether it is with Fear or Joy.

Enter Cinthio.
Cin. My dear Elaria --
[Runs to embrace her, she starts from him. -- Ha, -- shun my Arms, Elaria!

Ela. Heavens! Why did you come so soon?

Cin. Is it too soon, when ere it is safe, Elaria?

Ela. I die with fear -- Met you not Scaramouch?
He went to bid you wait a while; What shall I do?

Cin. Why this Concern? none of the House has seen me. I saw your Father taking
Horse.


Ela. Sure you mistake, methinks I hear his Voice.

Doct. below.] -- My Key -- The Key of my Laboratory. --
Why, Knave Scaramouch, where are you? --

Eld. Do you hear that, Sir? -- Oh, I Am undone! --
Where shall I hide you? -- He approaches --
[She searches where to hide him. -- Ha, -- my Cousins Closet's open, -- step
in a little. --
[He goes in, she puts out the Candle. Enter the Doctor. She gets round the
Chamber to the Door, and as he advances in, she steals out.
Doct. Here I must have dropped it; a Light, a Light -- there --

Enter Cinthio from the Closet, pulls Charmante out, they not knowing each
other.
Cin. Oh this perfidious Woman! no marvel she was so surprised and angry at my
Approach to Night. --


Cha. Who can this be? -- but I Will be prepared --
[Lays his Hand on his Sword.
Doct. Why Scaramouch, Knave, a Light!
[Turns to the Door to call. Enter Scaramouch with a Light, and seeing the two
Lovers there, runs against his Master, puts out the Candle, and flings him
down, and falls over him. At the entrance of the Candle, Charmante slipped from
Cinthio into the Closet. Cinthio gropes to find him; when Mopsophil and Elaria,
hearing a great Noise, enter with a Light. Cinthio finding he was discovered,
falls to acting a Mad Man. Scaramouch helps up the Doctor, and bows. -- Ha, --
a Man, -- and in my House, --
Oh dire Misfortune! -- Who are you, Sir?

Cin. Men call me Gog Magog, the Spirit of Power;
My Right Hand Riches holds, my Left Hand Honor.
Is there a City Wife would be a Lady? -- Bring her to me,
Her easy Cuckold shall be dubbed a Knight.

Ela. Oh Heavens! a mad Man, Sir.

Cin. Is there a Tawdry Fop would have a Title?
A rich Mechanic that would be an Alderman?
Bring 'em to me,
And I Will convert that Coxcomb, and that Block-head, into, Your Honor, and
Right Worshipful.

Doct. Mad, stark mad! Why Sirrah, Rogue -- Scaramouch -- How got this mad Man
in?

[While the Doctor turns to Scaramouch, Cinthio speaks softly to Elaria.
Cin. Oh, thou perfidious Maid! Who have thou hid in yonder conscious Closet?

[Aside to her.
Scar. Why Sir, he was brought in a Chair for your Advice, but how he rambl'd
from the Parlour to this Chamber, I know not.


Cin. Upon a winged Horse, Icliped Pegasus,
Swift as the fiery Racers of the Sun,
-- I fly -- I fly --
See how I mount, and cut the liquid Sky.
[Runs out.
Doct. Alas poor Gentleman, he is past all Cure -- But Sirrah, for the future,
take you care that no young mad Patients be brought into my House.


Scar. I shall Sir, -- and see -- here is your Key you looked for. --


Doct. That Is well; I must be gone -- Bar up the Doors, and upon Life or Death
let no man enter.

[Exit Doctor, and all with him, with the Eight. [Charmante peeps out -- and by
degrees comes all out, listing every step.
Char. Who the Devil could that be that pulled me from the Closet? but at last
I Am free, and the Doctors gone; I Will to Cinthio, and bring him to pass this
Night with our Mistrisses.

[Exit. As he is gone off, enter Cinthio groping.
Cin. Now for this lucky Rival, if his Stars will make this last part of his
Adventure such. I hid my self in the next Chamber, till I heard the Doctor go,
only to return to be revenged.

[He gropes his way into the Closet, with his Sword drawn. Enter Elaria with a
Light.
Ela. Scaramouch tells me Charmante is concealed in the Closet, whom Cinthio
surely has mistaken for some Lover of mine, and is jealous; but I Will send
Charmante after him, to make my peace and undeceive him.

[Goes to the Door. -- Sir, Sir, Where are you? they are all gone, you may
adventure out.

[Cinthio comes out. -- Ha, -- Cinthio here! --


Cin. Yes Madam, to your shame --
Now your Perfidiousness is plain -- False Woman,
It Is well your Lover had the Dexterity of escaping, I Would spoiled his making
Love else.
[Gets from her, she holds him.
Ela. Prithee hear me.

Cin. -- But since my Ignorance of his Person saves his Life, live and possess
him, till I can discover him.

[Goes out.
Ela. Go peevish Fool --
[Ex. Whose Jealousy believes me given to Change,
Let thy own Torments be my just Revenge.

The End of the first Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I. An Antic Dance.
After the Music has played. Enter Elaria to her Bellemante.
Elari. HEavens Bellemante! Where have you been?

Bell. Fatigued with the most disagreeable Affair, for a Person of my Humor,
in the World. Oh, how I hate Business, which I do no more mind, than a Spark
does the Sermon, who is ogling his Mistress at Church all the while: I have
been ruffling over twenty Reams of Paper for my Uncles Writings. --

Enter Scaramouch.
Scar. So, so, the Old Gentleman is departed this wicked World, and the House
is our own for this Night. -- Where are the Sparks? Where are the Sparks?


Ela. Nay, Heaven knows.

Bell. How! I hope not so; I left Charmante confined to my Closet, when my
Uncle had like to have surpised us together: Is he not here? --


Ela. No, he is escaped, but he has made sweet doings.

Bell. Heavens Cousin! What?

Ela. My Father was coming into the Chamber, and had like to have taken Cinthio
with me, when, to conceal him, I put him into your Closet, not knowing of
Charmante's being there, and which, in the Dark, he took for a Gallant of mine;
had not my Fathers Presence hindered, I believe there had been Murder
committed; how ever, they both escaped unknown.


Scar. Pshaw, is this all? Lovers Quarrels are soon adjusted; I Will to 'em,
unfold the Riddle, and bring 'em back -- take no care, but go in and dress you
for the Ball; Mopsophil has Habits which your Lovers sent to put on: the Fidles
Treat, and all are prepared. --

[Ex. Scara. Enter Mopsophil.
Mops. Madam, your Cousin Florinda, with a Lady, are come to visit you.


Bell. I Am glad on it, it is a good Wench, and we'll trust her with our Mirth and
Secret.

[They go out.
SCENE Changes. To the Street.
Enter Page with a Flambeaux, followed by Cinthio; passes over the Stage.
Scaramouch follows Cinthio in a Campaign Coat.
Scar. It Is Cinthio -- Don Cinthio --
[Calls, he turns. -- Well, what is the Quarrel? -- How fell ye out?

Cin. You may inform your self I believe, for these close Intrigues cannot be
carried on without your Knowledge.


Scar. What Intrigues Sir? be quick, for I Am in have.

Cin. Who was the Lover I surprised in the Closet?

Scar. Deceptio visus, Sir; the Error of the Eyes.

Cin. Thou Dog, -- I felt him too; but since the Rascal escaped me -- I Will be
Revenged on thee --

[Goes to beat him, he running away, runs against Harlequin, who is entering
with Charmante, and like to have thrown 'em both down.
Char. Ha, -- -- What Is the matter here? --

Scar. Seignior Don Charmante --
[Then he struts courageously in with 'em.
Char. What, Cinthio in a Rage!
Who Is the unlucky Object?

Cin. All Man and Woman Kind: Elaria's false.

Char. Elaria false! take heed, sure her nice Virtue is
Proof against the Vices of her Sex.
-- Say rather Bellemante.
She who by Nature's light and wavering.
The Town contains not such a false Impertinent.
This Evening I surprised her in her Chamber
Writing of Verses, and between her Lines,
Some Spark had newly penned his proper Stuff.
Curse of the Jilt, I Will be her Fool no more.

Har. I doubt you are mistaken in that, Sir, for 'twas
I was the Spark that writ the proper Stuff.
To do you Service --

Char. Thou!

Scar. Ay, we that spend our Lives and Fortunes here to serve you, -- to be
used like Pimps and Scowndrels. -- Come Sir, -- satisfy him who 'twas was hid
in the Closet, when he came in and found you.


Cin. Ha, -- is it possible? Was it Charmante?

Char. Was it you, Cinthio? Pox on it, what Fools are we, we could not know one
another by Instinct?


Scar. Well, well, dispute no more this clear Case, but lets hasten to your
Mistrisses.


Cin. I Am ashamed to appear before Elaria.

Char. And I to Bellemante.

Scar. Come, come, take Heart of Grace; pull your Hats down over your Eyes; put
your Arms across; sigh and look scurvily; your simple Looks are ever a Token of
Repentance; come -- come along.

[Exeunt Omnes.
SCENE changes to the Inside of the House. The Front of the Scene is only a
Curtain or Hangings to be drawn up at Pleasure.
Enter Elaria, Bellemante Mopsophil, and Ladies, dressed in Masking Habits.
Elaria. I Am extremely pleased with these Habits, Cousin.

Bell. They are A la Gothic and Uncomune.

Lady. Your Lovers have a very good Fancy, Cousin, I long to see 'em.


Ela. And so do I. I wonder Scaramouch stays so, and what Success he has.


Bell. you have no cause to doubt, you can so easily acquit your self; but I,
what shall I do? who can no more imagine who should write those Boremes, than
who I shall love next, if I break off with Charmante.


Lady. If he be a Man of Honor, Cousin, when a Maid protests her Innocence --
--


Bell. Ay, but he is a Man of Wit too, Cousin, and knows when Women protest
most, they likely lie most.


Ela. Most commonly, for Truth needs no asseveration.

Bell. That Is according to the Disposition of your Lover, for some believe you
most, when you most abuse and cheat 'em; some are so obstinate, they would damn
a Woman with protesting, before she can convince 'em.


Ela. Such a one is not worth convincing, I would not make the World wise at
the expense of a Virtue.


Bell. Nay, he shall even remain as Heaven made him for me, since there are Men
enough for all uses.

Enter Charmante and Cinthio, dressed in their Gothic Habits. Scaramouch,
Harlequin and Music. Charmante and Cinthio kneel.
Cin. Can you forgive us?
[Elaria takes him up.
Bell. That, Cinthio, you're convinced, I do not wonder; but how Charmante's
Goodness is inspired, I know not.

[Takes him up.
Char. Let it suffice, I Am satisfied, my Bellemante.

Ela. 'Pray' know my Cousin Florinda.
[They salute the Lady.
Bell. Come, let us not lose time, since we are all Friends.

Char. The best use we can make of it, is to talk of Love.

Bell. Oh! we shall have time enough for that hereafter; besides, you may make
Love in Dancing as well as in Sitting; you may Gaze, Sigh, -- and press the
Hand, and now and then receive a Kiss, what would you more?


Char. Yes, wish a little more.

Bell. We were unreasonable to sorbid you that cold Joy, nor shall you wish
long in vain, if you bring Matters so about, to get us with my Uncle's Consent.


Ela. Our Fortunes depending solely on his Pleasure, which is too considerable
to lose.


Cin. All things are ordered as I have written you at large; our Scenes and all
our Properties are ready; we have no more to do but to banter the old Gentleman
into a little more Faith, which the next Visit of our new Caballist Charmante
will complete.

[The Music plays. Enter some Anticks and dance. They all sit the while.
Ela. Your Dancers have performed well, but 'twere fit we knew who we have
trusted with this Evenings Intrigue.


Cin. Those, Madam, who are to assist us in carrying on a greater Intrigue, the
gaining of you. They are our Kinsmen.


Ela. Then they are doubly welcome.
[Here is a Song in Dialogue, with Fleut Deux and Harpsicals. Shepherd and
Sheperdess; which ended, they all dance a Figure Dance.
Cin. Hark, what Noise is that? sure it is in the next Room.

Doct. within.] Scaramouch, Scaramouch!

[Scar. runs to the Door and holds it fast.
Scar. Ha, -- the Devil in the likeness of my old Masters Voice, for it is
impossible it should be he himself.


Char. If it be he, how got he in? did you not secure the Doors?


Ela. He always has a Key to open 'em. Oh! what shall we do? there is no
escaping him; he is in the next Room, through which you are to pass.


Doct. Scaramouch, Knave, where are you?

Scar. It Is he, it is he, follow me all --

[He goes with all the Company behind the Front Curtain. Without Doctor.] I
tell you Sirrah, I heard the Noise of Fiddles.

Without Peter. No surely Sir, 'twas a Mistake.

[Knocking at the Door. [Scaramouch having placed them all in the Hanging, in
which they make the Figures, where they stand without Motion in Postures. He
comes out. He opens the Door with a Candle in his Hand. Enter the Doctor and
Peter with a Light.
Scar. Bless me, Sir! Is it you, -- or your Ghost.

Doct. 'Twere good for you, Sir, if I were a thing of Air; but as I am a
substantial Mortal, I will lay it on as substantially --

[Canes him. He cries.
Scar. What do you mean, Sir? what do you mean?

Doct. Sirrah, must I stand waiting your Leisure, while you are Rogueing here?
I will reward ye.

[Beats him.
Scar. Ay, and I shall deserve it richly, Sir, when you know all.


Doct. I guess all, Sirrah, and I heard all, and you shall be rewarded for all.
Where have you hid the Fiddles, you Rogue?


Scar. Fiddles, Sir! --

Doct. Ay, Fiddles, Knave.

Scar. Fiddles, Sir! -- Where?

Doct. Here, -- here I heard 'em, thou false Steward of thy Masters Treasure.

Scar. Fiddles, Sir! Sure 'twas Wind got into your Head, and whistled in your
Ears, riding so late, Sir.


Doct. Ay, thou false Varlot, there is another Debt I owe thee, for bringing me
so damnable a Lie: My Brother's well -- I met his Valet but a League from Town,
and found thy Rogury out.

[Beats him. He cries.
Scar. Is this the Reward I have for being so diligent since you went?


Doct. In what, thou Villain? in what?
[The Curtain is drawn up, and discovers the Hangings where all of them stand.
Scar. Why look you, Sir, I have, to surprise you with Pleasure, against you
came home, been putting up this Piece of Tapestry, the best in Italy, for the
Rareness of the Figures, Sir.


Doct. Ha -- Hum -- It is indeed a stately Piece of Work; how came I by 'em?


Scar. 'Twas sent your Reverence from the Vertuoso, or some of the Caballists.


Doct. I must confess, the Workmanship is excellent, -- but still I do insist I
heard the Music.


Scar. 'Twas then the tuning of the Spheres, some serinade, Sir, from the
Inhabitants of the Moon.


Doct. Hum, -- from the Moon, -- and that may be --


Scar. Lord, do you think I would deceive your Reverence?

Doct. From the Moon, a Serinade, -- I see no signs on it here, indeed it must
be so -- I Will think on it more at leisure. --

[Aside. -- Prithee what Story's this?

[Looks on the Hangings.
Scar. Why, Sir, -- It Is. --

Doct. Hold up the Candles higher, and nearer.
[Peter and Scaramouch hold Candles near. He takes a Perspective and looks
through it; and coming nearer, Harlequin, who is placed on a Tree in the
Hangings, hits him on the Head with his Trunchion. He starts, and looks about.
He sits still.
Scar. Sir. --

Doct. What was that struck me?

Scar. Struck you, Sir! Imagination.

Doct. Can my Imagination feel, Sirrah?

Scar. Oh, the most tenderly of any part about one, Sir!

Doct. Hum -- That may be --

Scar. Are you a great Philosopher, and know not that, Sir?

Doct. This Fellow has a glimpse of Profundity --
[Aside. Looks again. -- I like the Figures well.

Scar. You will, when you See 'em by Daylight, Sir.
[Har. hits him again. The Doctor sees him.
Doct. Ha, -- Is that Imagination too -- Betrayed, betrayed, undone; run for my
Pistols, call up my Servants Peter, a Plot upon my Daughter and my Niece.

[Runs out with Peter. [Scaramouch puts out the Candle, they come out of the
Hanging, which is drawn away. He places 'em in a Row just at the Entrance.
Scar. Here, here, fear nothing, hold by each other, that when I go out, all
may go; that is, slip out, when you hear the Doctor is come in again, which he
will certainly do, and all depart to your respective Lodgings.


Cin. And leave thee to bear the Brunt?

Sca. Take you no care for that, I Will put it into my Bill of Charges, and be
paid all together.

Enter the Doctor with Pistols, and Peter.
Doct. What, by dark? that shall not save you, Villains, Traitors to my Glory
and Repose. -- Peter, hold fast the Door, let none escape.

[They all slip out.
Pet. I Will warrant you, Sir.
[Doctor gropes about, then stamps and calls.
Doct. Lights there -- Lights -- I Am sure they could not escape.


Pet. Impossible, Sir.
Enter Scaramouch undressed in his Shirt, with a Light. Starts.
Scar. Bless me! -- what is here?

Doct. Ha, -- Who art thou?
[Amaz'd to see him enter so.
Sca. I, who the Devil are you, and you go to that.
[Rubs his Eyes, and brings the Candle nearer. Looks on him. -- Mercy upon us!
-- Why what is it you, Sir, returned so soon?

Doct. Returned!
[Looking sometimes on him, sometimes about.
Scar. Ay Sir, Did you not go out of Town last night, to your Brother the
Advocate?


Doct. Thou Villain, thou question'st me, as if thou knew'st not that I was
returned.


Scar. I know, Sir! how should I know? I Am sure I am but just waked from the
sweetest Dream --


Doct. You dream still, Sirrah, but I shall wake your Rogueship. -- Were you
not here but now, showing me a piece of Tapestry, you Villain? --


Scar. Tapestry! --
[Mopsophil listening all the while.
Doct. Yes Rogue, yes, for which I Will have thy Life --
[Offering a Pistol.
Scar. Are you stark mad, Sir? or do I dream still?

Doct. Tell me, and tell me quickly, Rogue, who were those Traitors that were
hid but now in the Disguise of a piece of Hangings.

[Holds the Pistol to his Breast.
Scar. Bless me! you amaze me, Sir. What conformity has every Word you say, to
my rare Dream: Pray let me feel you, Sir, -- Are you Humane?


Doct. You shall feel I am, Sirrah, if thou confess not.

Scar. Confess, Sir! What should I confess? -- I understand not your
Caballistical Language; but in mine, I confess that you have waked me from the
rarest Dream -- Where methought the Emperor of the Moon World was in our House,
Dancing and Revelling; and methoughts his Grace was fallen desperately in Love
with Mistress Elaria, and that his Brother, the Prince, Sir, of Thunderland,
was also in Love with Mistress Bellemante; and methoughts they descended to
court 'em in your Absence. -- And that at last you surprised 'em, and that they
transformed themselves into a Suit of Hangings to deceive you. But at last,
methought you grew angry at something, and they all sled to Heaven again; and
after a deal of Thunder and Lightning, I waked, Sir, and hearing Humane Voices
here, came to see what the Matter was.

[This while the Doctor lessens his signs of Rage by degrees, and at last
stands in deep Contemplation.
Doct. May I credit this?

Scar. Credit it! By all the Honor of your House, by my unseparable Veneration
for the Mathematics, it is true, Sir.


Doct. -- That famous Rosacrusian, who yesterday visited me, told me -- the
Emperor of the Moon was in Love with a fair Mortal -- This Dream is Inspiration
in this Fellow -- He must have wondrous Virtue in him, to be worthy of these
Divine Intelligences.

[Aside. -- But if that Mortal should be Elaria! but no more, I dare not yet
suppose it -- perhaps the thing was real and no Dream, for oftentimes the
grosser part is hurried away in Sleep, by the force of Imagination, and is
wonderfully agitated -- This Fellow might be present in his Sleep, -- of this
we have frequent Instances -- I Will to my Daughter and my Niece, and hear what
knowledge they may have of this.


Mop. Will you so? I Will secure you, the Frolic shall go round.


Doct. Scaramouch, If you have not deceived me in this Matter, time will
convince me farther; if it rest here, I shall believe you false --


Sca. Good Sir, suspend your Judgment and your Anger then.


Doct. I Will do it, go back to Bed --
[Ex. Doctor and Peter.
Scar. No, Sir, it is Morning now -- and I Am up for all day. -- This Madness is
a pretty sort of a pleasant Disease, when it tickles but in one Vein -- Why
here is my Master now, as great a Scholar, as grave and wise a Man, in all
Argument and Discourse, as can be met with, yet name but the Moon, and he runs
into Ridicule, and grows as mad as the Wind.

Well Doctor, if thou can be madder yet,

We'll find a Medicine that shall cure your Fit.

-- Better than all Gallanicus.

[Goes out. SCENE Draws off. Discovers Elaria, Bellemante, and Mopsophil in
Night-Gowns.
Mop. You have your Lessons, stand to it bravely, and the Town's our own, Madam.

[They put themselves in Postures of Sleeping, leaning on the Tabbe, Mopsophil
lying at their Feet. Enter Doctor, softly.
Doct. Ha, not in Bed! this gives me mortal Fears.

Bell. Ah, Prince --
[She speaks as in her Sleep.
Doct. Ha, Prince!
[Goes nearer and listens.
Bell. How little Faith I give to all your Courtship, who leaves our Orb so
soon.

[In a feigned Voice.
Doct. Ha, said she Orb?
[Goes nearer.
Bell. But since you are of a Celestial Race,
And easily can penetrate
Into the utmost limits of the Thought,
Why should I fear to tell you of your Conquest?
-- And thus implore your Aid.
[Rises and runs to the Doctor. Kneels, and holds him fast. He shows signs of
Joy.
Doct. I am Ravished!

Bell. Ah, Prince Divine, take Pity on a Mortal --

Doct. I am rapt!

Bell. And take me with you to the World above.

Doct. The Moon, the Moon she means, I am Transported, Overjoyed, and
Ecstacy'd.

[Leaping and jumping from her Hands, she seems to wake.
Bell. Ha, my Uncle come again to interrupt us!

Doct. Hide nothing from me, my dear Bellemante, since all already is
discovered to me -- and more. --


Ela. Oh, why have you waked me from the softest Dream that ever Maid was blessed
with?


Doct. What -- what my best Elaria?
[With over-joy.
Ela. Methought I entertained a Demi-God, one of the gay Inhabitants of the
Moon.


Bell. I Am sure mine was no Dream -- I waked, I heard, I saw, I spoke -- and
danced to the Music of the Spheres, and methought my glorious Lover tied a
Diamond Chain about my Arm -- -- and see it is all substantial.

[Shows her Arm.
Ela. And mine a Ring, of more than mortal Luster.

Doct. Heaven keep me moderate! least excess of Joy should make my Virtue less.

[Stifling his Joy. -- There is a wondrous Mystery in this.

A mighty Blessing does attend your Fates.

Go in, and pray to the chaste Powers above

To give you Virtue fit for such Rewards.

[They go in. -- How this agrees with what the learned Caballist informed me of
last Night! He said, that great Iredonozor, the Emperor of the Moon, was
enamored on a fair Mortal. It must be so -- and either he descended to Court
my Daughter Personally, which, for the Rareness of the Novelty, she takes to be
a, Dream; or else, what they and I beheld, was Visionary, by way of a sublime
Intelligence. -- And possibly -- it is only thus -- the People of that World
converse with Mortals. -- I must be satisfied in this main Point of deep
Philosophy.

I Will to my Study, -- for I cannot rest,

Till I this weighty Mystery have discussed.

[Ex. very gravely.
SCENE. The Garden.
Enter Scaramouch with a Ladder.
Scar. Though I am come off en Cavalier with my Master, I am not with my
Mistress, whom I promised to console this Night, and is but just I should make
good this Morning; 'twill be rude to surprise her Sleeping, and more Gallant to
wake her with a Serinade at her Window.

[Sets the Ladder to her Window, fetches his Lute, and goes up the Ladder. He
Plays and Sings this Song. When Maidens are young and in their Spring
Of Pleasure, of Pleasure, let 'em take their full Swing, full Swing, -- full
Swing, --
And Love, and Dance, and Play, and Sing.
For Silvia, believe it, when Youth is done,
There Is naught but hum drum, hum drum, hum drum;
There Is naught but hum drum, hum drum, hum drum.
Then Silvia be wise -- be wise -- be wise,
Though Painting and Dressing, for a while, are Supplies,
And may -- surprise --
But when the Fire's going out in your Eyes,
It twinkles, it twinkles, it twinkles, and dies.
And then to hear Love, to hear Love from you,
I Would as live hear an Owl cry -- Wit to woo,
Wit to woo, Wit to woo.
Enter Mopsophil above.
Mop. What woeful Ditty-making Mortal's this?
That ere the Lark her early Note has sung,
Does dolesul Love beneath my Casement thrum. --
-- Ah, Seignior Scaramouch, is it you?

Scar. Who should it be, that takes such pains to sue?

Mop. Ah, Lover most true Blew.
Enter Harlequin in Women's Cloths.
Har. If I can now but get admittance, I shall not only deliver the young
Ladies their Letters from their Lovers, but get some opportunity, in this
Disguise, to slip this Billet Deux into Mopsophil's Hand, and bob my Comrade
Scaramouch. -- Ha, -- What do I see? -- My Mistress at the Window, courting my
Rival! Ah Gypsy! --


Scar. -- But we lose precious time, since you design me a kind Hour in your
Chamber.


Har. Oh Traitor! --

Mop. You Will be sure to keep it from Harlequin.

Har. Ah yes, he, hang him Fool, he takes you for a Saint.

Scar. Harlequin! -- Hang him, shotten Herring.

Har. Ay, a Gully, a Noddy.

Mop. A mere Zany.

Har. Ah, hard hearted Turk.

Mop. Fit for nothing but a Cuckold.

Har. Monster of Ingratitude! How shall I be revenged?
[Scar. going over the Balcony. -- Hold, hold, thou perjured Traitor.
[Cryes out in a Woman's Voice.
Mop. Ha, -- Discovered! -- A Woman in the Garden!

Har. Come down, come down, thou false perfidious Wretch.

Scar. Who, in the Devils Name, art thou?
And to whom do thou speak?

Har. To thee, thou false Deceiver, that have broke thy
Vows, thy Lawful Vows of Wedlock --
[Bawling out. Oh, oh, that I should live to see the Day! --
[Crying.
Scar. Who mean you, Woman?

Har. Whom should I mean, but thou -- my lawful Spouse?

Mop. Oh Villain! -- Lawful Spouse! -- Let me come to her.
[Scar. comes down, as Mopsophil flings out of the Balcony.
Scar. The Woman's mad -- hark ye Jade -- how long have you been thus
distracted?


Har. E're since I loved and trusted thee, false Varlot.
-- See here, -- the Witness of my Love and Shame.
[Bawls, and points to her Belly. Just then Mopsophil enters.
Mop. How! with Child! -- -- Out Villain, was I made a Property?

Sca. Hear me.

Har. Oh, thou Heathen Christian! -- Was not one Woman enough?

Mop. Ay, Sirrah, answer to that.

Scar. I shall be sacrificed. --

Mop. I am resolved to marry to morrow -- either to the Apothecary or the
Farmer, men I never saw, to be revenged on thee, thou tarmagant Infidel.

Enter the Doctor.
Doct. What Noise, what Outcry, what Tumult's this?

Har. Ha, -- the Doctor! -- What shall I do? --
[Gets to the Door, Scar. pulls her in.
Doct. A Woman -- some Bawd I am sure --
Woman, what is your Business here? -- ha --

Har. I came, an't like your Seigniorship, to Madam the Governante here, to
serve her in the Quality of a Fille de Chamber, to the young Ladies.


Doct. A Fille de Chamber! it is so, a she Pimp, --

Har. Ah, Seignior --
[Makes his little dapper Leg instead of a Curtsie.
Doct. How now, what do you mock me?

Har. Oh Seignior! --
[Gets nearer the Door.
Mop. Stay, stay, Mistress, and what Service are you able to do the Seigniors
Daughters?


Har. Is this Seignior Doctor Baliardo, Madam?

Mop. Yes.

Har. Oh! He Is a very handsome Gentleman -- indeed --

Doct. Ay, ay, what Service can you do, Mistress?

Har. Why Seignior, I can tie a Cravat the best of any Person in Naples, and I
can comb a Periwig -- and I can --


Doct. Very proper Service for young Ladies; you, I believe, have been Fille de
Chamber to some young Cavaliers.


Har. Most true, Seignior, why should not the Cavaliers keep Filles de Chamber,
as well as great Ladies Vallets de Chamber?


Doct. Indeed it is equally reasonable. -- It Is a Bawd. --
[Aside. -- But have you never served Ladies?

Har. Oh yes! I served a Parsons Wife.

Doct. Is that a great Lady?

Har. I surely, Sir, what is she else? for she wore her Mantoes of Brokad de
or, Petticoats laced up to the Gathers, her Points, her Patches, Paints and
Perfumes, and sat in the uppermost Place in the Church to.


Mop. But have you never served Countesses and Dutchesses?

Har. Oh, yes, Madam! the last I served, was an Aldermans Wife in the City.


Mop. Was that a Countess or a Duchess?

Har. Ay, certainly -- for they have all the Money; and then for Cloths,
Jewels, and rich Furniture, and eating, they outdo the very Vice Reign her
self.


Doct. This is a very ignorant running Bawd, -- therefore first search her for
Bellets Deux, and then have her Pumped.


Har. Ah, Seignior, -- Seignior. --
[Scar. searches him, finds Leters.
Scar. -- Ha, -- to Elaria -- and Bellemante? --
[Reads the Outside, pops 'em into his Bosom. -- These are from their Lovers --
-- Ha, -- a Note to Mopsophil, -- Oh, Rogue! have I found you? --

Har. If you have, it is but Trick for your Trick, Seignior Scaramouch, and you
may spare the Pumping.


Scar. For once, Sirrah, I Will bring you off, and deliver your Letters. -- Sir,
do you not know who this is? -- Why it is a Rival of mine, who put on this
Disguise to cheat me of Mistress Mopsophil. -- See hear's a Billet to her. --


Doct. What is he?

Scar. A Mungrel Dancing Master; therefore, Sir, since all the Injury's mine,
I Will pardon him for a Dance, and let the Agility of his Heels save his Bones,
with your Permission, Sir.


Doct. With all my Heart, and am glad he comes off so comically.

[Harlequin Dances. [A knocking at the Gate. Scar. goes and returns.
Scar. Sir, Sir, here is the rare Philosopher who was here yesterday.

Doct. Give him Entrance, and all depart.
Enter Charmante.
Char. Blessed be those Stars! that first conducted me to so much Worth and
Virtue, you are their Darling, Sir, for whom they wear their brightest Luster.

Your Fortune is established, you are made, Sir.


Doct. Let me contain my Joy --
[Keeping in an impatient Joy. -- May I be worthy, Sir, to apprehend you?

Char. After long Searching, Watching, Fasting, Praying, and using all the
virtuous means in Nature, whereby we solely do attain the highest Knowledge in
Philosophy; it was resolved, by strong Intelligence -- you were the happy Sire
of that Bright Nymph, that had insascinated, charmed and conquered the mighty
Emperor Iredonozor -- the Monarch of the Moon.


Doct. I am-undone with Joy! ruined with Transport --
[Aside. -- -- Can it -- can it, Sir, -- be possible --
[Stifling his Joy, which breaks out.
Char. Receive the Blessing, Sir, with moderation.

Doct. I do, Sir, I do.

Char. This very Night, by their great Art, they find
He will descend, and show himself in Glory.
An Honor, Sir, no Mortal has received
This sixty hundred years.

Doct. Hum -- Say you so, Sir? no Emperor ever descend this Sixty hundred years?

[Looks sad. -- Was I deceived last night?

[Aside.
Char. Oh! Yes, Sir, often in disguise, in several Shapes and Forms, which did
of old occasion so many Fabulous Tales of all the Shapes of Jupiter -- -- but
never in their proper Glory, Sir, as Emperors. This is an Honor only designed
to you.


Doct. And will his Grace -- be here in Person, Sir?
[Joyful.
Char. In Person -- and with him, a Man of mighty Quality, Sir, -- it is thought
-- the Prince of Thunderland -- but that is but whispered, Sir, in the Cabal,
and that he loves your Niece.


Doct. Miraculous! how this agrees with all I Have seen and heard -- To Night,
say you, Sir?


Char. So it is conjectured, Sir, -- some of the Caballist -- are of opinion --
that last night there was some Sally from the Moon.


Doct. About what hour, Sir?

Char. The Meridian of the Night, Sir, about the hours of twelve or one, but
who descended, or in what Shape, is yet uncertain.


Doct. This I believe, Sir.

Char. Why, Sir?

Doct. May I communicate a Secret of that Nature?

Char. To any of the Caballist, but none else.

Doct. Then know -- last night, my Daughter and my
Niece were entertained by those illustrious Heroes.

Char. Who, Sir? the Emperor and Prince his Cousin.

Doct. Most certain, Sir.

But whether they appeared in solid Bodies, or Fantomical, is yet a Question,
for at my unlucky approach, they all transformed themselves into a Piece of
Hangings.


Char. It Is frequent, Sir, their Shapes are numerous, and it is also in their
Power to transform all they touch, by virtue of a certain Stone -- they call
the Ebula.


Doct. That wondrous Ebula, which Gonzales had?

Char. The same -- by Virtue of which, all weight was taken from him, and then
with ease the lofty Traveller flew from Parnassus Hill, and from Hymethus
Mount, and high Gerania, and Acrocorinthus, thence to Taygetus, so to Olympus
Top, from whence he had but one step to the Moon. Dizzy he grants he was.


Doct. No wonder, Sir, Oh happy great Gonzales!

Char. Your Virtue, Sir, will render you as happy -- but I must have -- this
Night prepare your Daughter and your Niece, and let your House be Dressed,
Perfumed, and Clean.


Doct. It shall be all performed, Sir.

Char. Be modest, Sir, and humble in your Elevation, for nothing shows the Wit
so poor, as Wonder, nor Birth so mean, as Pride.


Doct. I humbly thank your Admonition, Sir, and shall, in all I can, struggle
with Humane Frailty.

[Brings Char. to the Door bare. Exit. Enter Scaramouch peeping at the other
Door.
Scar. So, so, all things go gloriously forward, but my own Amor, and there is
no convincing this obstinate Woman, that 'twas that Rogue Harlequin in
Disguise, that claimed me; so that I cannot so much as come to deliver the
young Ladies their Letters from their Lovers. I must get in with this damned
Mistress of mine, or all our Plot will be spoiled for want of Intelligence.

-- Hum, -- The Devil does not use to sail me at a dead Lift. I must deliver
these Letters, and I must have this Wench -- though but to be revenged on her for
abusing me. -- Let me see -- she is resolved for the Apothecary or the Farmer.
Well, say no more honest Scaramouch, thou shall find a Friend at need of me --
and if I do not fit you with a Spouse, say that a Woman has outwitted me.


The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I. The Street, with the Town Gate, where an Officer stands with a Staff
like a London Constable.
Enter Harlequin riding in a Calash, comes through the Gate toward the Stage,
dressed like a Gentleman sitting in it. The Officer lays hold of his Horse.
Officer. HOld, hold, Sir, you, I suppose know the Customs that are due to this
City of Naples, from all Persons that pass the Gates in Coach, Chariot, Calash,
or Siege Voglant.


Har. I am not ignorant of the Custom, Sir, but what is that to me?


Off. Not to you, Sir! why, what Privilege have you above the rest?


Har. Privilege, for what, Sir?

Off. Why for passing, Sir, with any of the before named Carriages.


Har. Ar't mad? -- Do not see I am a plain Baker, and this my Cart, that
comes to carry Bread for the Viceroy's, and the Cities Use? -- ha --


Off. Are you mad, Sir, to think I cannot see a Gentleman Farmer and a Calash,
from a Baker and a Cart?


Har. Drunk by this Day -- and so early too? Oh you're a special Officer;
unhand my Horse, Sirrah, or you shall pay for all the Damage you do me.


Off. Hey day! here is a fine Cheat upon the Vice Roy;
Sir, pay me, or I Will seize your Horse. --
[Har. strikes him. They scuffle a little. -- Nay, and you be so brisk, I Will
call the Clerk from his Office.
Calls. -- Mr. Clerk, Mr. Clerk.
[Goes to the Entrance to call the Clerk, the mean time Har. whips a Frock over
himself, and puts down the hind part of the Chariot, and then it is a Cart.
Enter Clerk.
Cler. What Is the matter here? --

Off. Here Is a Fellow, Sir, will persuade me, his Calash is a Cart, and refuses
the Customs for passing the Gate.


Cler. A Calash -- Where? -- I see only a Carter and his Cart.

[The Officer looks on him.
Off. Ha, -- What a Devil, was I blind?

Har. Mr. Clerk, I am a Baker, that come with Bread to sell, and this Fellow
here has stopped me this hour, and made me lose the Sale of my Ware -- and being
Drunk, will outface me I am a Farmer, and this Cart a Calash. --


Cler. He Is in an Error Friend, pass on --

Har. No Sir, I Will have satisfaction first, or the Viceroy shall know how he is
served by drunken Officers, that Nuisance to a Civil Government.


Cler. What do you demand, Friend?

Har. Demand, -- I demand a Crown, Sir.

Off. This is very hard -- Mr. Clerk -- If ever I saw in my Life, I thought I
saw a Gentleman and a Calash.


Cler. Come, come, gratify him, and see better hereafter.

Off. Here Sir, -- If I must, I must --
[Gives him a Crown.
Cler. Pass on, Friend --
[Ex. Clerk. Har. unseen, puts up the Back of his Calash, and whips off his
Frock, and goes to drive on, The Officer looks on him, and stops him again.
Off. Hum, I Will swear it is a Calash -- Mr. Clerk,
Mr. Clerk, come back, come back --
[Runs out to call him. He changes as before. Enter Officer and Clerk. -- Come
Sir, let your own Eyes convince you, Sir. --

Cler. Convince me, of what, you Sott?

Off. That this is a Gentleman, and that a -- ha, --
[Looks about on Har.
Cler. Stark Drunk, Sirrah! if you trouble me at every Mistake of yours thus,
you shall quit your Office. --


Off. I beg your Pardon, Sir, I am a little in Drink I confess, a little Blind
and Mad -- Sir, -- This must be the Devil, that is certain.

[The Clerk goes out, Har. puts up his Calash again, and pulls off his Frock
and drives out. -- Well, now to my thinking, it is as plain a Calash again, as
ever I saw in my Life, and yet I Am satisfied it is nothing but a Cart.

[Exit.
SCENE changes to the Doctors House. The Hall.
Enter Scaramouch in a Chair, which set down and opened, on all sides, and on
the top represents an Apothecaries Shop, the Inside being painted with Shelves
and Rows of Pots and Bottles; Scaramouch sitting in it dressed in Black, with a
short black Cloak, a Ruff, and little Hat.
Scar. THe Devil's in it, if either the Doctor, my Master, or Mopsophil, know me
in this Disguise -- And thus I may not only gain my Mistress, and out-wit
Harlequin, but deliver the Ladies those Letters from their Lovers, which I took
out of his Pocket this Morning, and who would suspect an Apothecary for a Pimp.
-- Nor can the Jade Mopsophil, in Honor, refuse a Person of my Gravity, and so
well set up. --

[Pointing to his Shop. -- Hum, the Doctor here first, this is not so well, but
I Am prepared with Impudence for all Encounters.

Enter the Doctor. Scaramouch Salutes him gravely. -- Most Reverend Doctor
Baliardo. --

[Bows.
Doct. Seignior --
[Bows.
Scar. I might, through great Pusillanimity, blush -- to give you this Anxiety.
Did I not opine you were as Gracious as Communitive and Eminent; and though you
have no Cognizance of me, your Humble Servant, -- yet I have of you, -- you
being so greatly sam'd for your admirable Skill, both in Gallenical and
Paracelsian Phaenomena's, and other approved Felicities in Vulnerary Emeticks,
and purgative Experiences.


Doct. Seignior, -- your Opinion honors me -- a rare Man this.


Scar. And though I am at present busied in writing -- those few Observations I
have accumulated in my Peregrinations, Sir, yet the Ambition I aspired to, of
being an Ocular and Aurial Witness of your Singularity, made me trespass on
your sublimer Affairs.


Doct. Seignior. --

Scar. -- Besides a violent Inclination, Sir, of being initiated into the
Denomination of your Learned Family, by the Conjugal Circumference of a
Matrimonial Tie, with that singularly accomplished Person -- Madam, the
Governante of your Hostel.


Doct. Hum -- A sweetheart for Mopsophil!
[Aside.
Scar. And if I may obtain your Condescension to my Hymenaeal Propositions, I
doubt not my Operation with the Fair One.


Doct. Seignior, she is much honored in the Overture, and my Abilities shall
not be wanting to fix the Concord.

-- But have you been a Traveller, Sir?


Scar. Without Circumlocutions, Sir, I have seen all the Regions beneath the
Sun and Moon.


Doct. Moon, Sir! You never traveled thither, Sir?

Scar. Not in Propria Persona, Seignior, but by speculation, I have, and made
most considerable Remarques on that incomparable Terra Firma, of which I have
the compleatest Map in Christendom -- and which Gonzales himself omitted in his
Cosmographia of the Lunar Mundus.


Doct. A Map of the Lunar Mundus, Sir! May I crave the Honor of seeing it?


Scar. You shall, Sir, together with a Map of Terra Incognita, a great Rarety,
indeed, Sir.

Enter Bellemante.
Doct. Jewels, Sir, worth a Kings Ransom.

Bell. Ha, -- What Figure of a Thing have we here -- Bantering my Credulous
Uncle? -- This must be some Scout sent from our Forlorn Hope, to discover the
Enemy, and bring in fresh Intelligence. -- Hum, -- That Wink tipped me some
Tidings, and she deserves not a good Look, who understands not the Language of
the Eyes. -- Sir, Dinner's on the Table.


Doct. Let it wait, I am employed --
[She creeps to the other side of Scaramouch, who makes Signs with his Hand to
her.
Bell. Ha, -- it is so, -- This fellow has some Novel for us, some Letters or
Instructions, but how to get it --

[As Scar. talks to the Doctor, he takes the Letters by degrees out of his
Pocket, and unseen, gives 'em Bellemante behind him.
Doct. But this Map, Seignior; I protest you have filled me with Curiosity. Has
it signified all things so exactly say you?


Scar. Omitted nothing, Seignior, no City, Town, Village or Villa; no Castle,
River, Bridge, Lake, Spring or Mineral.


Doct. Are any, Sir, of those admirable Mineral Waters there, so frequent in
our World?


Scar. In abundance, Sir, the Famous Garamanteen, a young Italian, Sir, lately
come from thence, gives an account of an excellent Scaturigo, that has lately
made an Ebulation there, in great Reputation with the Lunary Ladies.


Doct. Indeed, Sir! be pleased, Seignior, to solve me some Queries that may
enode some apparences of the Virtue of the Water you speak of.


Scar. Pox upon him, what Questions he asks -- but I must on -- Why Sir, you
must know, -- the Tincture of this Water upon Stagnation, Ceruberates, and the
Crocus upon the Stones Flaveces; this he observes -- to be, Sir, the Indication
of a Generous Water.


Doct. Hum --
[Gravely Nodding.
Scar. Now, Sir, be pleased to observe the three Regions, if they be bright,
without doubt Mars is powerful; if the middle Region or Camera be palled, Filia
Solis is breeding.


Doct. Hum.

Scar. And then the third Region, if the Faeces be volatile, the Birth will soon
come in Balneo. This I observed also in the Laboratory of that Ingenious
Chemist Lysidono, and with much Pleasure animadverted that Mineral of the same
Zenith and Nader, of that now so famous Water in England, near that famous
Metropolis, called Islington.


Doct. Seignior --

Scar. For, Sir, upon the Infusion, the Crows Head immediately procures the
Seal of Hermes, and had not Lac Virginis been too soon sucked up, I believe we
might have seen the Consummation of Amalgena.

[Bellemante having got her Letters, goes off. She makes Signs to him to stay a
little. He Nods.
Doct. Most likely, Sir.

Scar. But, Sir, this Garamanteen relates the strangest Operation of a Mineral
in the Lunar World, that ever I heard of.


Doct. As how, I pray, Sir?

Scar. Why, Sir, a Water impregnated to a Circulation with Fema Materia; upon
my Honor, Sir, the strongest I ever drank of.


Doct. How, Sir! did you drink of it?

Scar. I only speak the words of Garamanteen, Sir.
-- Pox on him, I shall be trapt.
[Aside.
Doct. Cry Mercy, Sir. --
[Bows.
Scar. The Lunary Physicians, Sir, call it Urinam Vulcani, it Calibrates every
ones Excrements more or less according to the Gradus of the Natural Calor. --
To my Knowledge, Sir, a Smith of a very fiery Constitution, is grown very
Opulent by drinking these Waters.


Doct. How, Sir, grown Rich by drinking the Waters, and to your Knowledge?


Scar. The Devil's in my Tongue, to my Knowledge, Sir, for what a man of Honor
relates, I may safely affirm.


Doct. Excuse me, Seignior --
[Puts off his Hat again gravely.
Scar. For, Sir, conceive me how he grew Rich, since he drank those Waters he
never buys any Iron, but hammers it out of Stercus Proprius.

Enter Bellemante with a Billet.
Bell. Sir, it is three a Clock, and Dinner will be cold. --
[Goes behind Scaramouch, and gives him the Note, and goes out.
Doct. I come Sweetheart; but this is wonderful.

Scar. Ay, Sir, and if at any time Nature be too infirm, and he prove Costive,
he has no more to do, but to apply a Lodestone ad Anum.


Doct. Is It possible?

Scar. Most true, Sir, and that facilitates the Journey per Visera. -- But I
detain you, Sir, another time -- Sir, -- I will now only beg the Honor of a
Word or two with the Governante, before I go. --.


Doct. Sir, she shall wait on you, and I shall be proud of the Honor of your
Conversation. --

[They bow. Exit Doctor. Enter to him Harlequin, dressed like a Farmer, as
before.
Har. Hum -- What have we here, a Tailor or a Tumbler?

Scar. Ha -- Who Is this? -- Hum -- What if it should be the Farmer that the
Doctor has promised Mopsophil to? My Heart misgives me.

[They look at each other a while. Who would you speak with, Friend?


Har. This is, perhaps, my Rival, the Apothecary. -- Speak with, Sir, why,
what is that to you?


Scar. Have you Affairs with Seignior Doctor, Sir?

Har. It may be I have, it may be I have not. What then, Sir? --

While they seem in angry Dispute, Enter Mopsophil.
Mop. Seignior Doctor tells me I have a Lover waits me, sure it must be the
Farmer or the Apothecary. No matter which, so a Lover, that welcomest man
alive. I am resolved to take the first good Offer, though but in Revenge of
Harlequin and Scaramouch, for putting Tricks upon me. -- Ha, -- Two of them!


Scar. My Mistress here!
[They both Bow and Advance, both putting each other by.
Mop. Hold Gentlemen, -- do not worry me.
Which of you would speak with me?

Both. I, I, I, Madam --

Mop. Both of you?

Both. No, Madam, I, I.

Mop. If both Lovers, you are both welcome, but let us have fair Play, and take
your turns to speak.


Har. Ay, Seignior, it is most uncivil to interrupt me.

Scar. And disingenious, Sir, to intrude on me.
[Putting one another by.
Mop. Let me then speak first.

Har. I Am Dumb.

Scar. I Acquiesce.

Mop. I was informed there was a Person here had Propositions of Marriage to
make me.


Har. That Is I, that is I --
[Shoves Scar. away.
Scar. And I attend to that consequential Finis.
[Shoves Har. away.
Har. I know not what you mean by your Finis, Seignior, but I am come to offer
my self this Gentlewomans Servant, her Lover, her Husband, her Dog in a Halter,
or any thing.


Scar. Him I pronounce a Paltroon, and an Ignominious Utensil, that dares lay
claim to the Renowned Lady of my Primum Mobile; that is, my best Affections. --

[In Rage.
Har. I fear not your hard Words, Sir, but dare aloud pronounce, if Donna
Mopsophil like me, the Farmer, as well as I like her, it is a Match, and my
Chariot is ready at the Gate to bear her off, do you see. --


Mop. Ah, how that Chariot pleads. --
[Aside.
Scar. And I pronounce, that being intoxicated with the sweet Eyes of this
refulgent Lady, I come to tender her my noblest Particulars, being already most
advantageously set up with the circumstantial Implements of my Occupation.

[Points to the Shop.
Mop. A City Apothecary, a most Gentile Calling -- Which shall I choose? --
Seignior Apothecary, I Will not expostulate the Circumstantial Reasons that have
occasioned me this Honor. --


Scar. Incomparable Lady, the Elegancy of your Repertees most excellently
denote the Profundity of your Capacity.


Har. What the Devil's all this? Good Mr. Conjurer stand by -- and don't fright
the Gentlewoman with your Elegant Profondities.

[Puts him by.
Scar. How, a Conjurer! I will chastise thy vulgar Ignorance, that yelips a
Philosopher a Conjurer.

[In Rage.
Har. Losaphers! -- Prithee, if thou be'st a Man, speak like a Man -- then


Scar. Why, What do I speak like? What do I speak like?

Har. What do you speak like -- why you speak like a Wheel-Barrow.


Scar. How! --

Har. And how.
[They come up close together at half Sword Parry; stare on each other for a
while, then put up and bow to each other civilly.
Mop. That's well Gentlemen, let us have all Peace, while I survey you both, and
see which likes me best.

[She goes between 'em, and surveys 'em both, they making ridiculous Bows on
both sides, and Grimaces the while. -- ha, -- now on my Conscience, my two
foolish Lovers, -- Harlequin and Scaramouch; how are my Hopes defeated? -- but
Faith I Will fit you both.

[She views 'em both.
Scar. So, she is considering still, I shall be the happy Dog.

[Aside.
Har. She Is taking aim, she cannot choose but like me best.

[Aside.
Scar. Well, Madam, how does my Person propagate.
[Bowing and Smiling.
Mop. Faith Seignior, now I look better on you, I do not like your Phisnomy so
well as your Intellects; you discovering some Circumstantial Symptoms that ever
denote a Villainous Inconstancy.


Scar. Ah, you are pleased, Madam. --

Mop. You are mistaken, Seignior, I am displeased at your Gray Eyes, and Black
Eyebrows and Beard, I never knew a Man with those Signs, true to his Mistress
or his Friend. And I would sooner wed that Scoundrel Scaramouch, that very
civil Pimp, that mere pair of Chemical Bellows that blow the Doctors projecting
Fires, that Deputy-Urinal Shaker, that very Guzman of Salamanca, than a Fellow
of your infallible Signum Mallis.


Har. Ha, ha, ha, -- you have your Answer, Seignior Friskin -- and may shut up
your Shop and be gone. -- Ha, ha, ha. --


Sca. Hum, sure the Jade knows me --
[Aside.
Mop. And as for you, Seignior.

Har. Ha, Madam --
[Bowing and Smiling.
Mop. Those Lanthorn Jaws of yours, with that most villainous Sneer and Grin,
and a certain fierce Air of your Eyes, looks altogether most Fanatically --
which with your notorious Whey Beard, are certain Signs of Knavery and
Cowardice; therefore I Would rather wed that Spider Harlequin, that Sceliton
Buffoon, that Ape of Man, that Jack of Lent, that very Top, that is of no use,
but when it is whipped and lasht, that pitious Property I Would rather wed than thee.


Har. A very fair Declaration --

Mop. you understand me -- and so adieu sweet Glisterpipe, and Seignior dirty
Boots, Ha, ha, ha. --

[Runs out. [They stand looking simply on each other, without speaking a while.
Scar. That I should not know that Rogue Harlequin.
[Aside.
Har. That I should take this Fool for a Physician.

[Aside. -- How long have you commenced Apothecary, Seignior?


Scar. Ever since you turned Farmer. -- -- Are not you a damned Rogue to put
these Tricks upon me, and most dishonorably break all Articles between us?


Har. And are not you a damned Son of a -- -- something -- to break Articles
with me?


Scar. No more Words, Sir, no more words, I find it must come to Action, --
Draw. --

[Draws.
Har. Draw, -- so I can draw, Sir. -- --
[Draws. They make a ridiculous cowardly Fight. Enter the Doctor, which they
seeing, come on with more Courage. He runs between, and with his Cane beats the
Swords down.
Doct. Hold -- hold -- What mean you Gentlemen?

Scar. Let me go, Sir, I am provoked beyond measure, Sir.


Doct. You must excuse me, Seignior --
[Parlies with Harlequin.
Scar. I dare not discover the Fool for his Masters Sake, and it may spoil our
Intrigue anon; besides, he will then discover me, and I shall be discarded for
bantering the Doctor.

[Aside. -- A Man of Honor to be so basely affronted here. -- --

[The Doctor comes to appease Scaramouch.
Har. Should I discover this Rascal, he would tell the Old Gentleman I was the
same that attempted his House to day in Woman's Cloths, and I should be kicked
and beaten most unsatiably.


Scar. What, Seignior, for a man of Parts to be imposed upon, -- and whipped
through the Lungs here -- like a Mountebanks Zany for sham Cures -- Mr. Doctor,
I must tell you it is not Civil.


Doct. I am extremely sorry for it, Sir, -- and you shall see how I will have
this Fellow handled for the Affront to a Person of your Gravity, and in my
House -- Here Pedro, --

Enter Pedro. -- Take this Intruder, or bring some of your Fellows hither, and
toss him in a Blanket --

[Ex. Pedro. Har. going to creep away, Scar. holds him.
Har. Harkye, -- bring me off, or I Will discover all your Intrigue.

[Aside to him.
Scar. Let me alone --

Doct. I Will warrant you some Rogue that has some Plot on my Niece and Daughter.
--


Scar. No, no, Sir, he comes to impose the grossest Lie upon you, that ever was
heard of.

Enter Pedro with others, with a Blanket. They put Har. into it, and toss him.
Har. Hold, hold, -- I Will confess all, rather than endure it.

Doct. Hold, -- What will you confess, Sir.
[He comes out. Makes sick Faces.
Scar. -- That he is the greatest Impostor in Nature. Would you think it, Sir?
he pretends to be no less than an Ambassador from the Emperor of the Moon, Sir
--


Doct. Ha, -- Ambassador from the Emperor of the Moon --

[Pulls off his Hat.
Scar. Ay, Sir, thereupon I laughed, thereupon he grew angry, -- I laughed at
his Resentment, and thereupon we drew -- and this was the high Quarrel, Sir.


Doct. Hum, -- Ambassador from the Moon.
[Pauses.
Scar. I have brought you off, manage him as well as you can.


Har. Brought me off, yes, out of the Drying Pan into the Fire. Why, how the
Devil shall I act an Ambassador?

[Aside.
Doct. It must be so, for how should either of these know I expected that
Honor?

[He addresses him with profound Civility to Har. Sir, if the Figure you make,
approaching so near ours of this World, have made us commit any undecent
Indignity to your high Character, you ought to pardon the Frailty of our Mortal
Education and Ignorance, having never before been blessed with the Descention of
any from your World. --


Har. What the Devil shall I say now?

[Aside. -- I confess, I am as you see by my Garb, Sir, a little Incognito,
because the Public Message I bring, is very private -- which is, that the
mighty Iredonozor, Emperor of the Moon -- with his most worthy Brother, the
Prince of Thunderland, intend to Sup with you to Night -- Therefore be sure you
get good Wine. -- Though by the way let me tell you, it is for the Sake of your
Fair Daughter.


Scar. I Will leave the Rogue to his own Management. -- I presume, by your
whispering, Sir, you would be private, and humbly beging Pardon, take my Leave.

[Ex. Scaramouch.
Har. You have it Friend. Does your Niece and Daughter Drink, Sir?


Doct. Drink, Sir?

Har. Ay, Sir, Drink hard.

Doct. Do the Women of your World drink hard, Sir?

Har. According to their Quality, Sir, more or less; the greater the Quality,
the more Profuse the Quantity.


Doct. Why that is just as it is here; but your Men of Quality, your Statesmen,
Sir, I presume they are Sober, Learned and Wise.


Har. Faith, no, Sir, but they are, for the most part, what is as good, very
Proud, and promising, Sir, most liberal of their Word to every fauning Suitor,
to purchase the state of long Attendance, and cringing as they pass; but the
Devil of a Performance, without you get the Knack of bribing in the right Place
and Time; but yet they all defy it, Sir. --


Doct. Just, just as it is here.

-- But pray Sir, How do these Great Men live with their Wives.


Har. Most Nobly, Sir, my Lord keeps his Coach, my Lady, hers; my Lord his Bed,
my Lady hers; and very rarely see one another, unless they chance to meet in a
Visit, in the Park, the Mall, the Toore, or at the Basset-Table, where they
civilly Salute and part, he to his Mistress, she to play.


Doct. Good lack! just as it is here.

Har. -- Where, if she chance to lose her Money, rather than give out, she
borrows of the next Amorous Coxcomb, who, from that Minute, hopes, and is sure
to be paid again one way or other, the next kind Opportunity.


Doct. -- Just as it is here.

Har. As for the young Fellows that have Money, they have no Mercy upon their
own Persons, but wearing Nature off as fast as they can, Swear, and Whore and
Drink, and Borrow as long any Rooking Citizen will lend, till having dearly
purchased the Heroic Title of a Bully or a Sharper, they live pitied of their
Friends, and despised by their Whores, and depart this Transitory World,
diverse and sundry ways.


Doct. Just, just, as it is here!

Har. As for the Citizen, Sir, the Courtier lies with his Wife, he, in revenge,
cheats him of his Estate, till Rich enough to marry his Daughter to a Courtier,
again give him all -- unless his Wives Over-Gallantry break him; and thus the
World runs round. -- --


Doct. The very same it is here. -- Is there no preserment, Sir, for Men of
Parts and Merit?


Har. Parts and Merit! What Is that? a Livery, or the handsome tying a Cravat,
for the great Men prefer none but their Footmen and Vallets.


Doct. By my Troth, just as it is here.

-- Sir, I find you are a Person of most profound Intelligence -- under Favor,
Sir, -- Are you a Native of the Moon or this World. --


Har. The Devils in him for hard Questions.
-- I am a Naopolitan, Sir.

Doct. Sir, I Honor you; good luck, my Countryman!
How got you to the Region of the Moon, Sir?

Har. -- A plaguey inquisitive old Fool --

-- Why, Sir, -- Pox on it, what shall I say? -- I being -- one day in a musing
Melancholy, walking by the Seaside -- there arose, Sir, a great Mist, by the
Suns exhaling of the Vapors of the Earth, Sir.


Doct. Right, Sir.

Har. In this Fog or Mist, Sir, I was exhaled.

Doct. The Exalations of the Sun, draw you to the Moon, Sir?


Har. I am condemned to the Blanket again. -- I say, Sir, I was exhaled up, but
in my way -- being too heavy, was dropped into the Sea.


Doct. How, Sir, into the Sea?

Har. The Sea, Sir, where the Emperors Fisherman casting his Nets, drew me up,
and took me for a strange and monstrous Fish, Sir, -- and as such, presented me
to his Mightiness, -- who going to have me Spitchcock'd for his own eating. --


Doct. How, Sir, eating? --

Har. What did me I, Sir, (Life being sweet) but fall on my Knees, and besought
his Gloriousness not to eat me, for I was no Fish but a Man; he asked me of
what Country, I told him of Naples; whereupon the Emperor overjoyed asked me if
I knew that most Reverend and most Learned Doctor Baliardo, and his fair
Daughter. I told him I did: whereupon he made me his Bedfellow, and the
Confident to his Amor to Seigniora Elaria.


Doct. Bless me, Sir! how came the Emperor to know my Daughter?


Har. -- There he is again with his damned hard Questions. -- Knew her, Sir, --
Why -- you were walking abroad one day. --


Doct. My Daughter never goes abroad, Sir, farther than our Garden. --


Har. Ay, there it was indeed, Sir, -- and as his Highness was taking a Survey
of this lower World -- through a long Perspective, Sir, -- he saw you and your
Daughter and Niece, and from that very moment, fell most desperately in Love.
-- But hark -- the sound of Timbrils, Kettle-Drums and Trumpets. -- The
Emperor, Sir, is on his Way, -- prepare for his Reception.

[A strange Noise is heard of Brass Kettles, and Pans, and Bells, and many
tinkling things.
Doct. I Am in a Rapture -- How shall I pay my Gratitude for this great
Negotiation? -- but as I may, I humbly offer, Sir. --

[Presents him with a Rich Ring and a Purse of Gold.
Har. Sir, as an Honor done the Emperor, I take your Ring and Gold. I must go
meet his Highness. --

[Takes Leave. Enter to him Scaramouch, as himself.
Scar. Oh, Sir! we are astonished with the dreadful sound of the sweetest
Music that ever Mortal heard, but know not whence it comes. Have you not heard
it, Sir?


Doct. Heard it, yes, Fool, -- It Is the Music of the Spheres, the Emperor of
the Moon World is descending.


Scar. How, Sir, no marvel then, that looking toward the South, I saw such
splendid Glories in the Air.


Doct. Ha, -- saw thou ought descending in the Air?

Scar. Oh, yes, Sir, Wonders! haste to the old Gallery, whence, with the help
of your Telescope, you may discover all. --


Doct. I would not lose a moment for the lower Universe.

Enter Elaria, Bellemante, Mopsophil, dressed in rich Antic Habits.
Ela. Sir, we are dressed as you commanded us, What is your farther Pleasure?


Doct. -- It well becomes the Honor you're designed for, this Night to wed two
Princes -- come with me and know your happy Fates.

[Ex. Doctor and Scar.
Ela. Bless me! My Father, in all the rest of his Discourse, shows so much
Sense and Reason, I cannot think him mad, but feigns all this to try us.


Bell. Not Mad! Marry Heaven forbid, thou art always creating Fears to startle
one; why, if he be not mad, his want of Sleep this eight and forty hours, the
Noise of strange unheard of Instruments, with the Fantastic Splendour of the
unusual Sight, will so turn his Brain and dazzle him, that in Grace of Goodness,
he may be Mad: If he be not; -- come, let us after him to the Gallery, for I
long to see in what showing Equipage our Princely Lovers will address to us.

[Exeunt.
SCENE The Last. The Gallery richly adorned with Scenes and Lights.
Enter Doctor, Elaria, Bellemante, and Mopsophil. Soft Music is heard.
Bell. HA -- Heavens! what is here? -- what Palace is this? -- No part of our
House, I Am sure. --


Ela. It Is rather the Apartment of some Monarch.

Doct. I Am all amazement too, but must not show my Ignorance. -- Yes, Elaria,
this is prepared to entertain two Princes.


Bell. Are you sure on it, Sir? are we not, think you, in that World above, I
often heard you speak of? in the Moon, Sir?


Doct. How shall I resolve her? -- For ought I know, we are.
[Aside.
Ela. Sure, Sir, it is some Enchantment.

Doct Let not thy Female Ignorance profane the highest Mysteries of Natural
Philosophy: To Fools it seems Enchantment -- but I Have a Sense can reach it, --
sit and expect the Event. -- Hark -- I am amazed, but must conceal my Wonder --
that Joy of Fools -- and appear wise in Gravity.


Bell. Whence comes this charming Sound, Sir?

Doct. From the Spheres -- it is familiar to me.
The Scene in the Front draws off, and shows the Hill of Parnassus; a noble
large Walk of Trees leading to it, with eight or ten Negroes upon Pedestals,
ranged on each side of the Walks. Next Keplair and Gallileus descend on each
side, opposite to each other, in Chariots, with Perspectives in their Hands, as
viewing the Machine of the Zodiac. Soft Music plays still.
Doct. Methought I saw the Figure of two Men descend from yonder Cloud, on
yonder Hill.


Ela. I thought so too, but they are disappeared, and the winged Chariot's fled.

Enter Keplair and Gallileus.
Bell. See, Sir, they approach. --
[The Doctor rises and Bows.
Kep. Most Reverend Sir, we, from the upper World, thus low salute you. --
Keplair and Gallileus we are called, sent as Interpreters to Great Iredonozor,
the Emperor of the Moon, who is descending.


Doct. Most Reverend Bards -- profound Philosophers -- thus low I bow to pay my
humble Gratitude.


Kep. The Emperor, Sir, salutes you, and your fair Daughter.


Gall. And, Sir, the Prince of Thunderland salutes you, and your fair Niece.


Doct. Thus low I fall to thank their Royal Goodness.
[Kneels. They take him up.
Bell. Came you, most Reverend Bards, from the Moon World?


Kep. Most Lovely Maid, we did.

Doct. May I presume to ask the manner how?

Kep. By Cloud, Sir, through the Regions of the Air, down to the famed
Parnassus; thence by Water, along the River Helicon, the rest by Post, upon two
winged Eagles.


Doct. Sir, are there store of our World inhabiting the Moon?


Kep. Oh, of all Nations, Sir, that lie beneath it in the Emperors Train! Sir,
you will behold abundance; look up and see the Orbal World descending; observe
the Zodiac, Sir, with her twelve Signs.

[Next the Zodiac descends, a Symphony playing all the while; when it is
landed, it delivers the twelve Signs: Then the Song, the Persons of the Zodiac
being the Singers. After which, the Negroes Dance and mingle in the Chorus. A
Song for the Zodiac.
LET murmuring Lovers no longer Repine,
But their Hearts and their Voices advance;
Let the Nimphs and the Swains in the kind Chorus join,
And the Satyrs and Fauns in a Dance.
Let nature put on her Beauty of May,
And the Fields and the Meadows adorn;
Let the Woods and the Mountains resound with the Joy,
And the Echoes their Triumph return.
Chorus.
For since Love wore his Darts,
And Virgins grew Coy;
Since these wounded Hearts,
And those could destroy.
There never was more Cause for your Triumphs and Joy.
Hark, bark, the Music of the Spheres,
Some Wonder approaching declares;
Such, such, as has not blessed your Eyes and Ears
This thousand, thousand, thousand years.
See, see what the Force of Love can make,
Who rules in Heaven, in Earth and Sea;
Behold how he commands the Zodiac,
While the fixed Signs unhinging all obey.
Not one of which, but represents
The Attributes of Love,
Who governs all the Elements
In Harmony above.
Chorus.
For since Love wore his Darts,
And Virgins grew Coy;
Since these wounded Hearts,
And those could destroy,
There never was more Cause for your Triumphs and Joy.
The wanton Aries first descends,
To show the Vigor and the Play,
Beginning Love, beginning Love attends,
When the young Passion is all-over Joy,
He bleats his soft Pain to the fair curled Throng,
And he leaps, and he bounds, and Loves all the day long.
At once Loves Courage and his Slavery
In Taurus is expressed,
Though over the Plains he Conqueror be,
The Generous Beast
Does to the Yoke submit his Noble Breast,
While Gemini smiling and twining of Arms,
Shows Loves soft Indearments and Charms.
And Cancer's slow Motion the degrees do express,
Respectful Love arrives to Happiness.
Leo his Strength and Majesty,
Virgo his blushing Modesty,
And Libra all his Equity.
His Subtilty does Scorpio show,
And Sagittarius all his loose desire,
By Capricorn his forward Humor know,
And Aqua. Lovers Tears that raise his Fire,
While Pisces, which intwin'd do move,
Show the soft Play, and wanton Arts of Love.
Chorus.
For since Love wore his Darts,
And Virgins grew Coy;
Since these wounded Hearts,
And those could destroy,
There never was more Cause for Triumphs and Joy:
-- See how she turns, and sends her Signs to Earth. -- Behold the Ram -- Aries
-- see Taurus next descends; then Gemini -- see how the Boys embrace -- Next
Cancer, then Leo, then the Virgin; next to her Libra -- Scorpio, Sagittary,
Capricorn, Aquarius, -- Pisces. This eight thousand years no Emperor has
descended, but Incognito, but when he does, to make his Journey more
Magnificent, the Zodiac, Sir, attends him.


Doct. It Is all amazing, Sir.

Kep. Now, Sir, behold, the Globick World descends two thousand Leagues below
its wonted Station, to show Obedience to its proper Monarch.

[After which, the Globe of the Moon appears, first, like a new Moon; as it
moves forward it increases, till it comes to the Full. When it is descended, it
opens, and shows the Emperor and the Prince. They come forth with all their
Train, the Flutes playing a Symphony before him, which prepares the Song. Which
ended, the Dancers mingle as before. A SONG.
ALL Joy to Mortals, Joy and Mirth
Eternal IO'S sing;
The Gods of Love descend to Earth,
Their Darts have lost the Sting.
The Youth shall now complain no more
On Silvia's needless Scorn,
But she shall love, if he adore,
And melt when he shall burn.
The Nymph no longer shall be shy,
But leave the jilting Road;
And Daphne now no more shall fly
The wounded panting God;
But all shall be serene and fair,
No sad Complaints of Love
Shall fill the Gentle whispering Air,
No echoing Sighs the Grove.
Beneath the Shades young Strephon lies,
Of all his Wish possessed;
Gazing on Silvia's charming Eyes,
Whose Soul is there confessed.
All soft and sweet the Maid appears,
With Looks that know no Art,
And though she yields with trembling Fears,
She yields with all her Heart.
-- See, Sir, the Cloud of Foreigners appears, French, English, Spaniards,
Danes, Turks, Russians, Indians, and the nearer Climes of Christendom; and
lastly, Sir, behold the mighty Emperor. --

[A Chariot appears, made like a Half Moon, in which is Cinthio for the
Emperor, richly dressed and Charmante for the Prince, rich, with a good many
Heroes attending. Cinthio's Train born by four Cupids. The Song continues while
they descend and land. They address themselves to Elaria and Bellemante. --
Doctor fallson his Face, the rest bow very low as they pass. They make signs to
Keplair.
Kep. The Emperor would have you rise, Sir, he will expect no Ceremony from the
Father of his Mistress.

[Takes him up.
Doct. I cannot, Sir, behold his Mightiness -- the Splendour of his Majesty
confounds me --


Kep. You must be moderate, Sir, it is expected.
[The two Lovers make all the Signs of Love in dumb show to the Ladies, while
the soft Music plays again from the End of the Song. --
Doct. Shall I not have the Joy to hear their Heavenly Voices, Sir?


Kep. They never speak to any Subject, Sir, when they appear in Royalty, but by
Interpreters, and that by way of Stentraphon, in manner of the Delphick Oracles.


Doct. Any way, so I may hear the Sense of what they would say.


Kep. No doubt you will -- But see the Emperor commands by signs his Foreigners
to dance --

[Soft Music changes. [A very Antic Dance. The Dance ended, the Front Scene
draws off, and shows a Temple, with an Altar, one speaking thorugh a
Stentraphon from behind it. Soft Music plays the while.
Kep. Most Learned Sir, the Emperor now is going to declare himself, according
to his Custom, to his Subjects. Listen. --


Sten. Most Reverend Sir, whose Virtue did incite us,
Whose Daughters Charms did more invite us;
We come to grace her with that Honor,
That never Mortal yet had done her,
Once only, Jove was known in Story,
To visit Semele in Glory.
But fatal 'twas, he so enjoyed her,
Her own ambitious Flame destroyed her.
His Charms too fierce for Flesh and Blood,
She died embracing of her God.
We gentler marks of Passion give,
The Maid we love, shall love and live;
Whom visibly we thus will grace,
Above the rest of human Race.
Say, is it your Will that we should Wed her,
And nightly in Disguises Bed her.

Doct. The Glory is too great for Mortal Wife.
[Kneels with Transport.
Sten. What then remains, but that we consummate
This happy Marriage in our splendid State?

Doct. Thus low I kneel, in thanks for this great Blessing.
[Cinthio takes Elaria by the Hand; Charmante, Bellemante; two of the Singers
in white being Priests, they lead'em to the Altar, the whole Company dividing
one either side. Where, while a Hymeneal Song is sung, the Priest joins their
Hands. The Song ended, and they Married, they come forth; but before they come
forward, -- two Chariots descend, one on one side above, and the other on the
other side; in which, is Harlequin dressed like a Mock Hero, with others, and
Scaramouch in the other, dressed so in Helmets.
Scar. Stay mighty Emperor, and vouchsafe to be the Umpire of our Difference.

[Cinthio signs to Keplair.
Kep. What are you?

Scar. Two neighboring Princes to your vast Dominion.

Har. Knights of the Sun, our Honorable Titles.
And fight for that fair Mortal, Mopsophil.

Mop. Bless us! -- my two precious Lovers, I Will warrant; well, I had better
take up with one of them, than lie alone to Night.


Scar. Long as two Rivals we have Loved and Hoped,
Both equally endeavored, and both failed.
At last by joint Consent, we both agreed
To try our Titles by the Dint of Lance,
And chose your Mightiness for Arbitrator.

Kep. The Emperor gives Consent. --
[They both, all armed with gilded Lances and Shields of Black, with Golden
Suns painted. The Music plays a fighting Tune. They fight at Barriers, to the
Tune. -- Harlequin is often Foiled, but advances still; at last Scaramouch
throws him, and is Conqueror; all give Judgment for him.
Kep. The Emperor pronounces you are Victor. --
[To Scar.
Doct. Receive your Mistress, Sir, as the Reward of your undoubted Valor --

[Presents Mopsophil.
Scar. Your humble Servant, Sir, and Scaramouch, returns you humble Thanks. --

[Puts off his Helmet.
Doct. Ha, -- Scaramouch --

[Bawls out, and falls in a Chair. They all go to him. My Heart misgives me --
Oh, I am undone and cheated every way. --

[Bawling out.
Kep. Be patient, Sir, and call up all your Virtue,
You're only cured, Sir, of a Disease
That long has reigned over your Nobler Faculties.
Sir, I am your Physician, Friend and Counselor;
It was not in the Power of Herbs or Minerals,
Of Reason, common Sense, and right Religion,
To draw you from an Error that unmanned you.

Doct. I will be Patient, Gentlemen, and hear you.
-- Are not you Ferdinand?

Kep. I am, -- and these are Gentlemen of Quality,
That long have loved your Daughter and your Niece.
Don Cinthio this, and this Don Charmante,
The Viceroys Nephews, both. -- --
Who found as men -- 'twas impossible to enjoy 'em,
And therefore tried this Stratagem. --

Cin. Sir, I beseech you, mitigate your Grief,
Although indeed we are but mortal men,
Yet we shall Love you, -- Serve you, and obey you --

Doct. Are not you then the Emperor of the Moon?
And you the Prince of Thunderland?

Cin. There Is no such Person, Sir.
These Stories are the Fantoms of mad Brains,
To puzzle Fools withal -- the Wise laugh at 'em, --
-- Come Sir, you shall no longer be imposed upon.

Doct. No Emperor of the Moon, -- and no Moon World!

Char. Rediculous Inventions.
If we'd not loved you, you would been still imposed on;
We had brought a Scandal on your Learned Name,
And all succeeding Ages had despised it.
[He leaps up.
Doct. Burn all my Books, and let my Study Blaze,

Burn all to Ashes, and be sure the Wind

Scatter the vile Contagious Monstrous Leys.

-- Most Noble Youths -- you have honored me with your Alliance, and you, and
all your Friends, Assistances in this Glorious Miracle, I invite to Night to
revel with me. -- Come all and see my happy Recantation of all the Follies
Fables have inspired till now. Be pleasant to repeat your Story, to tell me by
what kind degrees you Cozened me --

I see there is nothing in Philosophy --

[Gravely to himself. Of all that writ, he was the wisest Bard, who spoke this
mighty Truth. -- He that knew all that ever Learning writ, Knew only this --
that he knew nothing yet.


EPILOGUE.
To be spoken by Mrs. Cook.
WIth our old Plays, as with dull Wife it fares,
To whom you have been married tedious years.
You Cry -- She Is wondrous good, it is confessed,
But still it is Chapon Bo^^lle at the best;
That constant Dish can never make a Feast:
Yet the palled Pleasure you must still purste,
You give so small encouragement for new;
And who would drudge for such a wretched Age?
Who want the Bravery, to support one Stage.
The wiser Wits have now new Measures set,
And taken up new Trades, that they may have,
No more your nice fantastic pleasures serve,
Your Pimps you pay, but let your Poets starve.
They long in vain, for better Usage hoped,
Till quite undone and tired, they dropped and dropped;
Not one is left will write for thin third day,
Like desperate Pickeroons, no Prize no Pay;
And when they have done their best, the Recompense,
Is, Dam the Sot, his Play wants common Sense.
Ill natured wits, who can so ill requite
The Drudging Slaves, who for your, Pleasure write.
Look back on flourishing Rome, ye proud Ingrates,
And see how she her thriving Poets treats:
Wisely she prized 'em at the noblest Rate,
As necessary Ministers of State,
And contributions raised to make 'em great.
They from the public Bank she did maintain,
And freed from want, they only writ for Fame;
And were as useful in a City held,
As formidable Armies in the Field.
They but a Conquest over Men pursued,
While these by gentler force the Soul subdued.
Not Rome in all her happiest Pomp could show
A greater Caesar than we boast of now;
Augustus Reigns, but Poets still are low.
May Caesar live, and while his Mighty Hand
Is Scattering Plenty over all the Land;
With God like Bounty recompencing all,
Some fruitful drops may on the Muses fall;
Since honest Pens do his just^ cause afford
Equal Advantage with the useful Sword.
FINIS.

