THE BEGINNING OF CIVIL-WARRES IN ENGLAND OR, A Skirmish between the Lord
Strange, and the Inhabitants of Manchester in Lancashire, July 4. With the
Number of the men that were slain and wounded ou both sides, and a Catalogue of
the Officers that were in this Skirmish.

The occasion whereof was through the Lord Stranges Resolution to take away
their Magazine by force, having received many forces from York.

Likewise a Letter which the Lord Strange sent to the Gentry of Manchester July
5. with their Answer to the said Letter, Together with the Parliaments
Declaration and Order concerning the aforesaid Lord.

Ordered that this be Printed and published.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl, D. Com.



LONDON: Printed for J. TOMPSON, July 9. 1642.

TERRIBLE NEWS FROM THE NORTH:
THe Malignant Party of this Kingdom has for a long time continued in their
wicked and damnable Designs; insomuch, that their impudency is grown to such a
height, that they are not ashamed to make their intentions publicly known to
the whole world, as may appear by this ensuing Relation.

Upon the 4. day of this instant month of July, 1642. the Lord Strange came
from York, and approached near the Town of Manchester with a great number of
Armed men, and coming near the Town he sent to the Inhabitants thereof to know
their minds whether they would agree to the Proposition which he had sent them
two or three days before, for the restoring of the Magazine which were in that
Town to his own^ Custody, threatening them, that if they would not, he would
send such a Messenger that should make them yield, and bring them to due
subjection.

The Inhabitants having received this Message, they resolved to send this
Answer unto him, which they did accordingly, that for the Magazine which was in
that Town, they would not restore it to him, it being the only safeguard and
defense they had.

And they likewise Declared, that if his Lordship did take any other course to
seize upon it violently, they would lose their dearest lives in defense
thereof, by reason the Country was in such a great distraction and perplexity,
that they did not know how soon they might be dispossessed of all they had, if so
be they had not Arms to defend themselves withal. The Lord Strange having
received this Answer, and hearing what their Resolution and Intention were, he
was much perplexed in mind, drawing all his Forces together, he marched against
the said town of Manchester, and shot off 3* or 4* Muskets against them, but
the Inhabitants seeing that he were come, and that He were resolved to take
the Magazine away by force, understanding his full intention by the Messengers
which came from him, they resolved every man to fight it out.

Whereupon each man stood upon His own guard, and about 9. of the clock in the
morning on the 5. day of this present month, the Lord Strange came with his
forces against the town, and would have entered, but that they kept him out by
force, but Captain Smith being in the Front, gave a sierce siring against the
Inhabitants of Manchester* but was answered with most puissant courage again,
and slew two of the Lords men.

Whereupon a great and furious skirmish did ensue; The Lord Strange having
besieged the Town, he began to give battle against them, but the Inhabitants
being true within themselves, ordered the business so well, that they drew
out, ten small Companies, and set them in a fair Battalion against them,
answering each other very furiously at the first: but after some two or three
hours skirmish, there was seven more of the Lord Stranges men slain, and two
of the Inhabitants of Manchester, only one Master Band was shot in the thigh.

After they had ceased two or three hours, they began again, each Company
striving for the day, and after the space of two hours, they ended the Battle
with the Sun of the day, the Lord Strange withdrawing his forces about two
miles from Manchester, having lost as is justly supposed 27. men, of the other
side, 11. Captain Band is very well recovered again praised be God.

We expect d^i^y when the L. Strange will visit us again, but I hope the Lord
will enable us against his coming.

They give out many threatening speeches against us, and it is thought here,
that he has sent for many more Forces toward York.

The Lord Rivers gives out many scandalous speeches against us, and striveth by
all means he possible can, to set the whole Country against us.

This is the beginning of Civil War, being the first stroke that has bin
struck, and the first Bullet that has bin shot, but GOD knows when the ending
will be, or when the troubles of this Kingdom will grow to a period.

Many thousands I doubt will lose their lives before that this Kingdom be
settled in peace and untity, as it has bin formerly, for no man knows the
Cruelt^ of war, but those that have felt and tried it for when that time
comes, many Child will be left Fatherless, and many a poor wife
Husbandlesse.

But God of his great mercy, stop the sword from going any further, and as it
is but a little way drawn, so Lord I beseech thee sheath it again, before that
it be drawn any further, that so by that means the Walls of Syon may not be
beaten down nor destroyed.

It is ordered, that the Lord Strange be required to deliver that part of the
Magazine of the County of Lancaster into the hands of the Deputy Lieuten^nts.

Ordered that this be printed and published. John Brown Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

