THE LADY's Looking-Glass, TO DRESS Herself by: OR, THE Whole ART OF CHARMING.

By Mrs. BEHN.

LONDON: Printed by W. Onley, for S. Briscoe. 1697.

THE Lady's Looking-Glass, TO DRESS Herself by: OR, THE ART of Charming.
HOW long, O charming Iris! shall I speak in vain of your adorable Beauty? You
have been just, and believe I love you with a Passion perfectly tender and
extreme; and yet you will not allow your Charms to be infinite. You must either
accuse my Flames to be unreasonable, and that my Eyes and Heart are false
Judges of Wit and Beauty; or allow, that you are the most perfect of your Sex.
But instead of that, you always accuse of me Flattery, when I speak of your
infinite Merit; and when I refer you to your Glass, you tell me, that flatters,
as well as Damon; though one would imagine, that should be a good Witness for
the Truth of what I say, and undeceive you of the Opinion of my Injustice. Look
-- and confirm yourself, that nothing can equal your Perfections. All the World
says it, and you must doubt it no longer. O Iris! Will you dispute against the
whole World?

But since you have so long distrusted your own Glass, I have here presented
you with one, which I know is very true; and having been made for you only, can
serve only you. All other Glasses present all Objects, but this reflects only
Iris; whenever you consult it, it will convince you; and tell you, how much
Right I have done you, when I told you, you were the fairest Person that ever
Nature made. When other Beauties look into it, it will speak to all the fair
Ones; but let 'em do what they will, 'twill say nothing to their Advantage.

Iris, to spare what you call flattery,
Consult your Glass each Hour of the Day:
'Twill tell you where your Charms and Beauties lie,
And where your little wanton Graces play:
Where Love does revel in your Face and Eyes;
What Look invites your Slaves, and what denies.
Where all the Loves adorn you with such Care,
Where dress your Smiles, where arm your lovely Eyes;
Where deck the flowing Tresses of your Hair:
How cause your Snowy Breasts to fall and rise:
How this severe Glance makes the Lover die;
How that, more soft, gives Immortality.
Where you shall see, what it is enslaves the Soul;
Where every Feature, every Look combines:
When the adorning Air, over all the whole,
To so much Wit, and so nice Virtue joins.
Where the Belle Taille and Motion still afford
Graces to be eternally adored.
But I will be silent now, and let your Glass speak.

THE Lady's Looking-Glass.
DAmon, (O charming Iris!) has given me to you, that you may sometimes give
your self the Trouble, and me the Honor of Consulting me in the great and
weighty Affairs of Beauty. I am, my adorable Mistress! a faithful Glass; and
you ought to believe all I say to you.

The Shape of IRIS.
I Must begin with your Shape, and tell you, without Flattery, it is the finest
in the World, and gives Love and Admiration to all that see you. Pray observe
how free and easy it is, without Constraint, Stiffness, or Affectation; those
mistaken Graces of the Fantastic, and the Formal; who give themselves Pain to
show their Will to please; and whose Dressing makes the greatest part of its
Fineness, when they are more obliged to the Tailor, than to Nature; who add, or
diminish, as occasion serves, to form a Grace, where Heaven never gave it: And
while they remain on this Wreck of Pride, they are eternally uneasy, without
pleasing any Body. Iris, I have seen a Woman of your Acquaintance, who, having
a greater Opinion of her own Person, than any Body else, has screwed her Body
into so sine a Form (as she calls it) that she dares no more stir a Hand, lift
up an Arm, or turn her Head aside, than if, for the Sin of such a Disorder, she
were to be turned into a Pillar of Salt; the less stiff and fixed Statue of the
two. Nay, she dares not speak or smile, lest she should put her Face out of
that order she had set it in her Glass, when she last looked on herself: And is
all over such a Lady Nice (excepting in her Conversation) that ever made a
ridiculous Figure. And there are many Ladies more, but too much tainted with
that nauseous Formality, that old-fashioned Vice: But Iris, the charming, the
all-perfect Iris, has nothing in her whole Form, that is not free, natural, and
easy; and whose every Motion cannot please extremely. and which has not given
Damon a thousand Rivals.

Damon. the Young, the Amorous, and the True;
Who sighs incessantly for you:
Whose whole Delight, now you are gone,
Is to retire to Shades alone,
And to the Eccho's make his Moan.
By purling Streams the wishing Youth is laid,
Still sighing Iris! lovely charming Maid!
See, in thy Absence, how thy Lover dies;
While to his Sighs, the Echo still replies.
Then with the Stream he holds Discourse:
O thou that bend'st thy liquid force
To lovely Tames! upon whose Shore
The Maid resides, whom I adore!
My Tears of Love upon thy Surface bear:
And if upon thy Banks thou see my Fair,
In all thy sostest Murmurs sing,
From Damon I this Present bring;
My every Curl contains a Tear!
Then at her Feet thy Tribute pay:
But haste, O happy Stream! away;
Lest charmed too much, thou shoud'st for ever stay.
And thou, O gentle, murmuring Breeze!
That plays in Air, and wantons with the Trees;
On thy young Wings, where gilded Sunbeams play,
To Iris my soft Sighs convey,
Still as they rise, each Minute of the Day:
But whisper gently in her Ear;
Let not the ruder Winds thy Message hear,
Nor ruffle one dear Curl of her bright Hair.
Oh! touch her Cheeks with sacred Reverence,
And stay not gazing on her lovely Eye!
But if thou bear her Rosy Breath from thence,
It Is Incense of that Excellence,
That as thou mount'st, 'twill perfume all the Skies.
IRIS 's Complexion.
SAY what you will, I am confident, if you will confess your Heart, you are,
every time you view yourself in me, surpised at the Beauty of your Complexion;
and will secretly own, you never saw any thing so fair. I am not the first
Glass, by a thousand, that has assured you of this. If you will not believe me,
ask Damon; he tells it you every Day, but that Truth from him offends you; and
because he loves too much, you think his Judgment too little; and since this is
so perfect, that must be defective. But it is most certain, your Complexion is
infinitely fine, your Skin soft and smooth, as polisht Wax, or Ivory, extremely
white and clear; though if any Body speaks but of your Beauty, an agreeable
Blush casts itself all over your Face, and gives you a thousand new Graces.

And then two Flowers, newly born,
Shine in your Heavenly Face:
The Rose, that blushes in the Morn,
Usurps the Lilly's place:
Sometimes the Lilly does prevail,
And makes the generous Crimson pale.
IRIS 's Hair.
OH, the beautiful Hair of Iris! It seems, as if Nature had crowned you with a
great Quantity of lovely fair brown Hair, to make us know, that you were born
to Rule; and to repair the Faults of Fortune, that has not given you a Diadem:
And do not bewail the Want of that (so much your Merit's due) since Heaven has
so gloriously recompensed you with what gains more admiring Slaves.

Heaven for Sovereignty, has made your form:
And you were more than for dull Empire born.
Over Hearts your Kingdom shall extend,
Your vast Dominion know no end.
Thither the Loves and Graces shall resort;
To Iris make their Homage, and their Court.
No envious Star, no common Fate,
Did on my Iris Birthday wait;
But all was happy, all was delicate.
Here Fortune would inconstant be in vain:
Iris, and Love, eternally shall reign.
Love does not make less use of your Hair for new Conquests, than of all the
rest of your Beauties that adorn you. If he takes our Hearts with your fine
Eyes, it ties 'em fast with your Hair; and if it weaves a Chain, not easily
broken. It is not of those sorts of Hair, whose harshness discovers ill Nature;
nor of those, whose Softness shows us the Weakness of the Mind: Not that either
of these are Arguments without Exception; but it is such as bears the Character
of a perfect Mind, and a delicate Wit; and for its Color, the most faithful,
discreet, and beautiful in the World; such as shows a Complexion and
Constitution, neither so cold, to be insensible; nor so hot, to have too much
Fire; that is, neither too white, nor too black; but such a mixture of the two
Colors, as makes it the most agreeable in the World.

It Is that which leads those captivated Hearts,
That bleeding at your Feet do lie.
It Is that the Obstinate converts,
That dare the Power of Love deny.
It Is that which Damon so admires;
Damon, who often tells you so.
If from your Eyes Love takes his Fires,
It Is with your Hair he strings his Bow:
Which touching but the feathered Da^^
It never mist the destined Heart.
IRIS 's Eyes.
I Believe, my fair Mistress, I shall dazzle you with the Luster of your own
Eyes. They are the finest Blue in the World: They have all the Sweetness, that
ever charmed the Heart; with a certain Languishment that is irresistible; and
never any looked on 'em, that did not sigh after 'em. Believe me, Iris, they
carry unavoidable Darts and Fires; and whoever expose themselves to their
Dangers, pay for their Imprudence.

Cold as my solid Crystal is,
Hard and impenetrable too;
Yet I am sensible of Bliss,
When your charming Eyes I view
Even by me, their Flames ^re felt;
And at each Glance, I fear to melt.
Ah, how pleasant are my Days!
How my glorious Fate I bless!
Mortals never knew my Joys,
Nor Monarchs guest my Happiness.
Every Look that is soft and gay,
Iris gives me every Day.
Spite of her Virtue, and her Pride,
Every Morning I am blessed
With what to Damon is denied;
To view her when she is undrest.
All her H^^ven of Beauty's shown
To triumphing Me -- alone.
Scarce the prying Beams of Light,
Or the impatient God of Day,
Are allowed so dear a Sight,
Or dare profane her with a Ray;
When she has appeared to me,
Like Venus rising from the Sea.
But Oh! I must those Charms conceal,
All too Divine for vulgar Eyes:
Should I my secret Joys reveal,
Of sacred Trust I break the Ties;
And Damon would with Envy die,
Who hopes, one Day, to be as blessed as I.
Extravagant with my Joys, I have strayed beyond my Limits; for I was telling
you of the wondrous Fineness of your Eyes; which no Mortal can resist, nor any
Heart stand the force of their Charms; and the most difficult Conquests they
gain, scarce cost'em the Expense of a Look. They are modest and tender, chaste
and languishing. There you may take a View of the whole Soul, and see Wit and
Good Nature (those two inseparable Virtues of the Mind) in an extraordinary
Measure. In fine, you see all that fair Eyes can produce, to make themselves
adored. And when they are angry, they strike an unresistable Awe upon the Soul:
And those Severities, Damon wishes, may perpetually accompany them, during
their Absence from him; for it is with such Eyes, he would have you receive all
his Rivals.

Keep, lovely Maid, the Softness in your Eyes;
To flatter Damon with another Day:
When at your Feet the ravished Lover lies,
Then put on all that is tender, all that is gay:
And for the Griefs your Absence makes him prove;
Give him the softest, dearest Looks of Love.
His trembling Heart with sweetest Smiles caress,
And in your Eyes, soft Wishes let him find;
That your Regret of Absence may confess,
In which, no Sense of Pleasure you could find:
And to restore him, let your faithful Eyes
Declare, that all his Rivals you despise.
The Mouth of IRIS.
I Perceive your Modesty would impose Silence on me: But, O fair Iris! Do not
think to present yourself before a Glass, if you would not have it tell you all
your Beauties: Content yourself, that I only speak of 'em, En Passant; for
should I speak what I would, I should dwell all Day upon each particular, and
still say something new. Give me Liberty then to speak of your fine Mouth: You
need only open it a little, and you will see the most delicate Teeth, that ever
you beheld; the whitest, and the best set. Your Lips are the finest in the
World; so round, so soft, so plump, so dimpled, and of the loveliest Color.
And when you smile, Oh! What Imagination can conceive how sweet it is, that has
not seen you Smiling? I cannot describe what I so admire; and it is in vain to
those, who have not seen Iris.

O Iris! boast that one peculiar Charm,
That has so many Conquests made;
So innocent, yet capable of harm;
So just itself, yet has so often betrayed
Where a thousand Graces dwell,
And wanton round in every Smile.
A thousand Loves do listen when you speak,
And catch each Accent as it flies:
Rich flowing Wit, when e're you Silence break,
Flows from your Tongue, and sparkles in your Eyes.
Whether you talk, or silent are;
Your Lips immortal Beauties were.
The Neck of IRIS.
ALL your Modesty, all your nice Care, cannot hide the ravishing Beauties of
your Neck; we must see it, Coy as you are; and see it the whitest, and finest
shaped, that ever was formed. Oh! Why will you cover it? You know, all handsome
things would be seen. And Oh! how often have you made your Lovers envy your
Scarf, or any thing that hides so fine an Object from their sight. Damon
himself complains of your too nice Severity. Pray do not hide it so carefully.
See how perfectly turned it is; with small blue Veins, wandering and ranging
here and there, like little Rivulets, that wanton over the flowery Meads. See
how the round white rising Breasts heave with every Breath, as if they
disdained to be confined to a Covering; and repel the malicious Cloud, that
would obscure their Brightness.

Fain I would have leave to tell
The Charms that on your Bosom dwell;
Describe it like some flowery Field,
That does ten thousand Pleasures yield;
A thousand gliding Springs and Groves;
All Receptacles for Loves.
But Oh! what Iris hides, must be
Ever sacred kept by m^.
The Arms and Hands of IRIS.
I Shall not be put to much trouble to show you your Hands and Arms, because
you may view them without my help; and you are very unjust, if you have not
admired 'em a Thousand times. The beautiful Color and Proportion of your Arm
is unimitable, and your Hand is dazzling, fine, small, and plump; long-pointed
Fingers, delicately turned; dimpl'd on the Snowy outside, but adorned within
with Rose, all over the soft Palm. O Iris! Nothing equals your fair Hand; that
Hand, of which Love so often makes such use to draw his Bow, when he would send
the Arrow home with more success; and which irresistibly wounds those, who
possibly, have not yet seen your Eyes: And when you have been veiled, that
lovely Hand has gained you a thousand Adorers. And I have heard Damon say,
Without the Aid of more Beauties, that alone had been sufficient to have made
an absolute Conquest over his Soul. And he has often vowed, It never touched
him, but it made his Blood run with little irregular Motions in his Veins; his
Breath beat short and double; his Blushes rise, and his very Soul dance.

Oh! how the Hand the Lover ought to prize,
'Bove any one peculiar Grace,
While he is dying for the Eyes,
And doting on the lovely Face.
The Unconsid'ring little knows,
How much he to this Beauty owes.
That when the Lover absent is,
Informs him of his Mistress Heart.
It Is that, which gives him all his Bliss,
When dear Love-Secrets 'twill impart.
That plights the Faith the Maid bestows:
And that confirms the timorous Vows.
It Is that betrays the Tenderness,
Which the too bashful Tongue denies.
It Is that, that does the Heart confess,
And spares the Language of the Eyes.
It Is that, which Treasures gives so vast:
Even Iris 'twill to Damon give at last.
The Grace and Air of IRIS.
IT IS I alone, O charming Maid! that can show you that noble part of your
Beauty: That generous Air, that adorns all your lovely Person, and renders
every Motion and Action perfectly adorable. With what a Grace you walk! -- How
free, how easy, and how unaffected! See how you move; -- for only here you can
see it. Damon has told you a thousand times, that never any Mortal had so
glorious an Air; but he could not half describe it, nor would you credit even
what he said; but with a careless Smile, pass it off for the Flattery of a
Lover. But here behold, and be convinced; and know, no part of your Beauty can
charm more than this. O Iris, confess, Love has adorned you with all his Art
and Care. Your Beauties are the Themes of all the Muses; who tell you in daily
Songs, that the Graces themselves have not more than Iris. And one may truly
say, that you alone know how to join the Ornaments and Dress, with Beauty; and
you are still adorned, as if that Shape and Air had a peculiar Art to make all
things appear gay and fine. Oh, how well dressed you are! How every thing becomes
you! Never singular, never gaudy; but always suiting with your Quality.

Oh, how that Negligence becomes your Air!
That careless flowing of your Hair,
That plays about with wanton Grace,
With every Motion of your Face:
Disdaining all that dull Formality,
That dares not move the Lip, or Eye;
But at some fancied Grace's cost;
And think, with it, at least, a Lover lost.
But the unlucky Minute to reclaim,
And ease the Coquet of her Pain,
The Pocket-Glass adjusts the Face again:
Re-sets the Mouth, and languishes the Eyes;
And thinks, the Spark that ogles that way -- dies.
Of Iris learn, O ye mistaken Fair!
To dress your Face, your Smiles, your Air.
Let easy Nature all the Business do;
She can the softer Graces show:
Which Art but turns to Ridicule;
And where there is none, serves but to show the Fool.
In Iris you all Graces find;
Charms without Art, a Motion unconfined;
Without Constraint, she smiles, she looks, she talks;
And without Affectation, moves and walks.
Beauties so perfect never were seen:
O ye mistaken Fair! Dress ye by Iris Mien.
The Discretion of IRIS.
BUT O Iris! The Beauties of the Body are imperfect, if the Beauties of the
Soul do not advance themselves to an equal height. But, O Iris! What Mortal is
there so damned to Malice, that does not, with Adoration, confess, that you (O
charming Maid!) have an equal Portion of all the Braveries and Virtues of the
Mind? And, who is it, that confesses your Beauty, that does not, at the same
time acknowledge and bow to your Wisdom? The whole World admires both in you;
and all, with impatience, ask, Which of the two is most surprising, your
Beauty, or your Discretion? But we dispute in vain on that excellent Subject;
for after all, it is determined, that the two Charms are equal. It Is none of
those idle Discretions that consists in Words alone, and ever takes the Shadow
of Reason for the Substance; and that makes use of all the little Artifices of
Subtilty, and florid Talking, to make the outside of the Argument appear fine,
and leave the inside wholly mis-understood: Who runs away with Words, and never
thinks of Sense. But you, O lovely Maid! never make use of these affected Arts;
but without being too brisk, or too severe; too silent, or too talkative; you
aspire in all your Hearers, a Joy, and a Respect. Your Soul is an Enemy to that
usual Vice of your Sex, of using little Arguments against the Fair; or by a
Word, or Jest, make your self and Hearers pleasant, at the Expense of the Fame
of others.

Your Heart is an Enemy to all Passions, but that of Love. And this is one of
your noble Maxims: That every one ought to love, in some part of his Life: And
that, in a Heart truly brave, Love is without Folly: That Wisdom is a Friend to
Love, and Love to perfect Wisdom. Since these Maxims are your own, do not, O
charming Iris! resist that noble Passion: And since Damon is the most tender of
all your Lovers, answer his Passion with a noble Ardour: Your Prudence never
fails in the Choice of your Friends; and in choosing so well your Lover, you
will stand an eternal President to all unreasonable fair Ones.

O thou that do excel in Wit and Youth!
Be still a President for Love and Truth.
Let the dull World say what it will,
A noble Flame's unblameable.
Where a fine Sent'ment, and soft Passion rules,
They scorn the Censure of the Fools.
Yield, Iris, then; Oh, yield to Love!
Redeem your dying Slave from pain:
The World your Conduct must approve:
Your Prudence never acts in vain.
The Goodness and Complaisance of Iris.
WHO but your Lovers (fair Iris!) doubts, but you are the most complaisant
Person in the World: And that with so much Sweetness you oblige all, that you
command in yielding; and as you gain the Heart of both Sexes, with the
Affability of your noble Temper; so all are proud and vain of obliging you. And
Iris, you may live assured, that your Empire is eternally established, by your
Beauty, and your Goodness: Your Power is confirmed, and you grow in Strength
every Minute: Your Goodness gets you Friends, and your Beauty Lovers.

This Goodness is not one of those, whose Folly renders it easy to every
Desirer; but a pure Effect of the Generosity of your Soul; such as Prudence
alone manages, according to the Merit of the Person, to whom it is extended;
and those whom you esteem, receive the sweet Marks of it; and only your Lovers
complain: Yet even then you charm. And though sometimes you can be a little
disturbed, yet through your Anger, your Goodness shines; and you are but too
much afraid, that that may bear a false Interpretation: For oftentimes Scandal
makes that pass for an Effect of Love, which is purely that of Complaisance.

Never had any Body more Tenderness for their Friends, than Iris: Their
Presence gives her Joy; their Absence, Trouble; and when she cannot see them,
the finds no Pleasure, like speaking of them obligingly. Friendship reigns in
your Heart, and Sincerity on your Tongue. Your Friendship is so strong, so
constant, and so tender, that it charms, pleases, and satisfies all, that are
not your Adorers. It Is therefore, Damon is excusable, if he be not contented
with your noble Friendship alone; for he is the most tender of that Number.

No! Give me all, the impatient Lover cries;
Without your Soul, I cannot live:
Dull Friendship cannot mine suffice,
That dies for all you have to give.
The Smiles, the Vows, the Heart must all be mine:
I cannot spare one Thought, or Wish of thine.
I sigh, I languish all the Day;
Each Minute ushers in my Groans:
To every God in vain I pray;
In every Grove repeat my Moans.
Still Iris Charms are all my Sorrows Themes!
They pain me Waking, and they wreck in Dreams.
Return, fair Iris! Oh, return!
Lest sighing long, your Slave destroys.
I wish, I rave, I faint, I burn;
Restore me quickly all my Joys:
Your Mercy else, will come too late.
Distance in Love more cruel is, than Hate.
The Wit of Iris.
YOU are deceived in me, fair Iris, if you take me for one of those ordinary
Glasses, that represent the Beauty only of the Body; I remark to you also the
Beauties of the Soul: And all about you declares yours the finest that ever was
formed; that you have a Wit that surprises, and is always new: It Is none of
those that loses its Luster, when one considers it; the more we examine yours,
the more adorable we find it. You say nothing, that is not at once agreeable
and solid; it is always quick and ready, without Impertinence, that little
Vanity of the Fair; who, when they know they have Wit, rarely manage it so, as
not to abound in Talking; and think, that all they say must please, because
luckily, they sometimes chance to do so. But Iris never speaks, but it is of
use; and gives a Pleasure to all that hears her. She has the perfect Art of
penetrating, even the most secret Thoughts. How often have you known, without
being told, all that has past in Damon's Heart? For all great Wits are Prophets
too:

Tell me; Oh, tell me! Charming Prophetess;
For you alone can tell my Love's Success.
The Lines in my dejected Face,
I fear, will lead you to no kind Result:
It is your own, that you must trace;
Those of your Heart you must consult.
It Is there, my Fortune I must learn,
And all that Damon does concern.
I tell you, that I love a Maid,
As bright as Heaven, of Angel-hue:
The softest, Nature ever made:
Whom I, with Sighs and Vows, pursue.
Oh, tell me, charming Prophetess!
Shall I this lovely Maid possess?
A thousand Rivals do obstruct my Way;
A thousand Fears they do create:
They throng about her all the Day,
Whilst I at awful Distance wait.
Say, will the lovely Maid so fickle prove,
To give my Rivals Hope, as well as Love?
She has a thousand Charms of Wit,
With all the Beauty Heaven e're gave:
Oh! Let her not make use of it,
To flatter me into the Slave.
Oh! Tell me Truth, to ease my Pain:
Say rather, I shall die by her Disdain.
The Modesty of Iris.
I Perceive, fair Iris, you have a Mind to tell me, I have entertained you too
long, with a Discourse on yourself. I know, your Modesty makes this Declaration
an offense, and you suffer me, with Pain, to unveil those Treasures you would
hide. Your Modesty, that so commendable a Virtue in the Fair, and so peculiar
to you, is here a little too severe: Did I flatter you, you should blush: Did I
seek, by praising you, to show an Art of Speaking finely, you might chide. But,
O Iris! I say nothing, but such plain Truths, as all the World can witness are
so. And so far I am from Flattery, that I seek no Ornament of Words. Why do you
take such Care to conceal your Virtues? They have too much Luster, not to be
seen, in spite of all your Modesty: Your Wit, your Youth, and Reason oppose
themselves, against this dull Obstructer of our Happiness. Abate, O Iris, a
little of this Virtue, since you have so many other, to defend yourself against
the Attacks of your Adorers.

You yourself have the least Opinion of your own Charms: And being the only
Person in the World, that is not in love with 'em, you hate to pass whole Hours
before your Looking-Glass; and to pass your time, like most of the idle Fair,
in dressing, and setting off those Beauties, which need so little Art. You,
more wise, disdain to give those Hours to the Fatigue of Dressing, which you
know so well how to employ a thousand Ways. The Muses have blessed you, above
your Sex; and you know how to gain a Conquest with your Pen, more absolutely,
than all the industrious Fair, who trust to Dress and Equipage.

I have a thousand things to tell you more, but willingly resign my place to
Damon, that faithful Lover; he will speak more ardently than I: For, let a
Glass use all its Force, yet, when it speaks its best, it speaks but coldly.

If my Glass, O charming Iris! have the good Fortune (which I could never
entirely boast) to be believed, 'twill serve, at least, to convince you, I have
not been so guilty of Flattery, as I have a thousand times been charged. Since
then my Passion is equal to your Beauty (without Comparison, or End) believe, O
lovely Maid! how I sigh in your Absence: And be persuaded to lessen my pain,
and restore me to my Joys; for there is no Torment so great, as the Absence of
a Lover from his Mistress; of which, this is the Idea.

The Effects of Absence from what we love.
Thou one continued Sigh! all over Pain!
Eternal Wish! but wish, alas, in vain!
Thou languishing, impatient Hoper on;
A busy Toiler, and yet still undone!
A breaking Glimpse of distant Day,
Enticing on, and leading more astray.
Thou Joy in Prospect, future Bliss extreme;
But never to be possessed; but in a Dream.
Thou fab'lous Goddess, which the ravished Boy,
In happy Slumbers proudly did enjoy:
But waking found an Airy Cloud he pressed;
His Arms came empty to his panting Breast.
Thou Shade, that only haunts the Soul by Night;
And when thou should inform, thou fly'st the Sight.
Thou false Idea of the thinking Brain,
That labors for the charming Form in vain;
Which if by Chance it catch, you are lost again.
The End of the Looking-Glass.

