ABDELAZER, OR THE Moor's Revenge. A TRAGEDY. As it is Acted at his Royal
Highness the DUKE'S THEATER.

Written by Mrs. A. Behn.

LONDON, Printed for I. Magnes and R. Bentley, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, near the Piazza's, 1677.

The Actors Names.
Mr. Harris, Ferdinand A young King of Spain, in Love with Florella. Mr. Smith,
Philip His Brother. Mr. Betterton, Abdelazer The Moor. Mr. Medburne, Mendozo
Prince Cardinal, in Love with the Queen. Mr. Crosbie, Alonzo A young Nobleman
of Spain, contracted to Leonora. Mr. Norris, Roderigo A Creature to the Moor.
Mr. John Lee, Antonio Sebastian Two Officers of Philips. Mr. Persivall, Mr.
Richards, Osmin Zarrack Moors, and Officers to Abdelazer.
Officers, Pages, and Attendants.
Mrs. Lee, Isabella Queen of Spain, Mother to Ferdinand and Philip, in Love
with Abdelazer. Mrs. Barrer, Leonora Her Daughter, Sister to Ferdinand and
Philip. Mrs. Betterton, Florella Wife of Abdelazer, and Sister to Alonzo. Mrs.
Osborne, Elvira Woman to the Queen.
Other Women, Attendants.
SCENE Spain, and in the Camp.
Some Books Printed (and in the Press) for J. Magnes and R. Bentley, that will
be Published this Michaelmas Term 1676.
French Novels.
L'heureux Esclave. Printed. La Princess de Monferrat. Printed. Le faux Comte
de Brion. Printed.
Plays.
Abdelazer, or the Moor's Revenge. Printed. The Town Fop, or Sir Timothy
Taudry. in the Press. No Fool like the Old Fool. in the Press.
The Happy Slave; a Novel of Monsieur Scaron. Made English. in the Press.
Essays Moral, in three Tomes: Translated from the French of the Messieurs of
the Port Royal. in the Press. A Sermon, Preached at the Funeral of Richard
Herbert Esquire by I. S. M. A. and Vicar of Bromfield. Printed.
ABDELAZER, OR THE Moor's Revenge.
ACT. I.
SCENE I. A Rich Chamber.
A Table with Lights, Abdelazer sullenly leaning his head on his hands; --
after a little while, still Music plays. SONG.
LOve in Phantastique Triumph sat,
Whilst Bleeding hearts about him flowed,
For whom fresh pays he did create,
And strange Tyrannick power he showed;
From thy bright Eyes he took his fires,
Which round about in sport he hurled;
But 'twas from mine he took desires,
Enough to undo the Amorous world.
From me he took his sighs and tears,
From thee his pride and cruelty;
From me his languishments and fears,
And every killing Dart from thee:
Thus thou, and I, the God have armed,
And set him up a Deity,
But my poor heart alone is harmed,
Whilst thine the Victor is, and free.
After which he rouzes, and gazes. Abd. ON me this Music lost? -- this sound
on me
That hates all softness? -- What ho, my Slaves!

Enter Osmin, Zarrack. Osm. My gracious Lord --
Enter Queen, Elvira.
Qu. My dearest Abdelazer --

Abd. Oh, are you there? -- Ye Dogs, how came she in?
Did I not charge you on your lives to watch,
That none disturb my privacy?

Qu. My gentle Abdelazer, it is thy Queen,
Who 'as laid aside the business of her State,
To wanton in the hinder joys of Love. --
Play all your sweetest Notes, such as inspire
To the Music; they play softly* The active Soul with new and soft desire,
Whilst we from Eyes -- thus -- dying, fan the fire.

[she sits down by him: Abd. Cease that ungrateful noise --

[Musick ceases. Qu. Can ought that I command displease my Moor?

Abd. Away, fond woman --

Qu. Nay, prithee be more kind. --

Abd. Nay, prithee good Queen, leave me, -- I am dull,
Unfit for dalliance now. --

Qu. Why do thou frown? -- to whom was that Curse sent?

Abd. To thee. --

Qu. To me! -- it cannot be; -- to me, sweet Moor! --
No, no, it cannot; -- prithee smile upon me; --
Smile whilst a thousand Cupids shall descend
And call thee Jove, and wait upon thy smiles,
Deck thy smooth brow with flowers;
Whilst in my Eyes, needing no other Glass,
Thou shall behold and wonder at thy beauty.

Abd. Away, away, be gone. --

Qu. Where have thou learnt this language, that can say
But those rude words, -- Away, away, be gone?
Am I grown ugly now?

Abd. Ugly as Hell. --

Qu. Did thou not love me once, and swore that Heaven
Dwelt in my face and eyes?

Abd. Thy face and eye! -- Bawd, fetch me here a Glass,
[ to Elvira. And thou shall see the balls of both those eyes
Burning with fire of Lust. --
That blood that dances in thy Cheeks so hot,
That have not I to cool it
Made an extraction even of my Soul,
Decayed my Youth, only to feed thy Lust!
And would thou still pursue me to my Grave?

Qu. All this to me, my Abdelazer!

Abd. I cannot ride through the Castilian Streets,
But thousand eyes
Throw killing looks at me; --
And cry, -- That Is he that does abuse our King; --
There goes the Minion of the Spanish Queen,
Who, on the lazy pleasures of his Love,
Spends the Revenues of the King of Spain: --
This many-headed-beast your Lust has armed,. --

Qu. How dare you, Sir, upbraid me with my Love?

Abd. I will not answer thee, nor hear thee speak.

Qu. Not hear me speak! -- Yes, and in thunder too;
Since all my passion, all my soft entreaties
Can do no good upon thee,
I Will see (since thou have banished all thy Love,
That Love, to which I Have sacrificed my Honor)
If thou have any sense of Gratitude,
For all the mighty graces I have done thee.

Abd. Do; -- and in thy story too, do not leave out
How dear those mighty graces I have purchased!
My blooming Youth, my healthful vigorous Youth,
Which Nature gave me for more Noble Actions
Then to lie fawning at a woman's feet,
And pass my hours in idleness and Love. --
If I could blush, I should through all this Cloud
Send forth my sense of shame into my Cheeks.

Qu. Ingrate!
Have I for this abused the best of men?
My noble Husband!
Depriving him of all the joys of Love,
To bring them all entirely to thy bed;
Neglected all my vows, and sworn 'em here anew,
Here, on thy lips; --
Exhausted Treasures that would purchase Crowns,
To buy thy smiles, -- to buy a gentle look; --
And when thou did repay me, -- blessed the Giver! --
Oh Abdelazer, more then this I Have done. --
This very hour, the last the King can live,
Urged by thy witchcraft I his life betrayed:
And is it thus -- my bounties are repaid?
What e're a crime so great deserves from Heaven,
By Abdelazer might have been forgiven. --
(weeps. But I will be revenged by penitence,
And e're the King dies, own my black offense. --
And yet that is not enough -- Elvira --
(pawses. Cry murder, murder, help, help. --

She and her woman cry aloud, he is surpised, the Queen falls, he draws a
Dagger at Elvira. Elv. Help, murder, murder. --

Abd. Hell, what is this! -- peace Bawd, -- 'sdeath,
They Will raise the Court upon me, and then I Am lost. --
My Queen, -- my Goddess, -- Oh raise your lovely eyes,
I have dissembled coldness all this while;
And that deceit was but to try thy Faith. --
takes her up, sets her in a Chair, then kneels. Look up, -- by Heaven 'twas
Jealousy, --
Pardon your Slave, -- pardon your poor Adorer.

Qu. Thou did upbraid me with my shameful passion.

Abd. I Will tear my tongue out for its profanation.

Qu. And when I wooed thee, but to smile upon me,
Thou crydst, -- Away, I Am dull, unfit for dalliance.

Abd. Call back the frighted blood into thy Cheeks,
And I Will obey the dictates of my Love,
And smile, and kiss, and dwell for ever here. --

Enter Osmin hastily. How now! -- why star'st thou so? --
Osm. My Lord, -- the King is dead.

Abd. The King dead! 'twas time then to dissemble.
(aside. What means this rudeness? --

(one knocks. Enter Zarrack. Zar. My Lord, -- the Cardinal enquiring for the
Queen,
The Court is in an uproar, none can find her.

Abd. Not find the Queen! and would they search her here!

Qu. What shall I do? I must not here be found.

Abd. Oh, do not fear, -- no Cardinal enters here;
No King, -- no God, that means to be secure. --
Slaves, guard the doors, and suffer none to enter,
Whilst I, my charming Queen, provide for your security: --
You know there is a Vault deep under ground,
Into the which the busy Sun never entered,
Bue all is dark, as are the shades of Hell;
Through which in dead of night I often have passed,
Guided by Love, to your Apartment, Madam. --
They knock again; -- thither, my lovely Mistress,
(knock. Suffer your self to be conducted. --
Osmin, attend the Queen, -- descend in haste,
Qu. Osm. and Elv. descend the Vault. My Lodgings are beset.

Zar. I cannot guard the Lodgings longer,
Don Ordonio, Sir, to seek the Queen.

Abd. How dare they seek her here?

Zar. My Lord, the King has swounded twice,
And being recovered, calls for her Majesty.

Abd. The King not dead! -- go Zarrack, and aloud
Tell Don Ordonio and the Cardinal,
He that dares enter here to seek the Queen,
Puts his hand to his sword. Had better snatch the She from the fierce side
Of a young Amorous Lion, and 'twere safer. --
Again, more knocking! --

[knocking. Zar. My gracious Lord, it is your Brother, Don Alonzo.

Abd. I will not have him enteer, -- I am disordered. --

Zar. My Lord, it is now too late.

Enter Alonzo. Alon. Saw you not the Queen, my Lord?

Abd. My Lord?

Alon. Was not the Queen here with you?

Abd. The Queen with me!
Because, Sir, I am married to your Sister,
You, like your Sister, must be jealous too:
The Queen with me! with me! a Moor! a Devil!
A Slave of Barbary! for so
Your gay young Courtiers christen me: -- but Don,
Although my skin be black, within my veins
Runs blood as red, and Royal as the best. --
Mr Father, Great Abdela, with his Life
Lost too his Crown: both most unjustly ravished
By Tyrant Philip; your old King I mean.
How many wounds his valiant breast received,
Ere he would yield to part with Life and Empire:
Methinks I see him covered over with blood,
Fainting amidst those numbers he had conquered;
I was but young, yet old enough to grieve,
Though not revenge, or to defy my Fetters;
For then began my Slavery: and e're since
Have seen that Diadem by this Tyrant worn,
Which Crowned the Sacred Temples of my Father.
And should adorn mine now; -- should! nay and must; --
Go tell him what I say, 'twill be but death: --
Go Sir, -- the Queen's not here. --

Alon. Do not mistake me, Sir; -- or if I would,
I Have no old King to tell, -- the King is dead; --
And I am answered, Sir, to what I came for,
And so good night. --

Exit. Abd. Now all that is brave and Villain seize my soul,
Reform each faculty that is not Ill,
And make it fit for Vengeance; noble Vengeance!
Oh glorious word! fit only for the Gods,
For which they formed their Thunder,
Till man usurpt their Power, and by Revenge
Swayed Destiny as well as they,
And took their trade of killing. --
And thou, almighty Love!
Dance in a thousand forms about my Person,
That this same Queen, this easy Spanish Dame
May be bewitched and dote upon me still:
Whilst I make use of the Insatiate flame
To set all Spain on fire. --
Mischief, erect thy Throne,
And sit on high; here, here upon my head;
Let Fools fear Fate, thus I my Stars defy,
points to his Sword. The influence of this -- must raise my glory high.

Exit. SCENE II.
Enter Fernando weeping, Ordonio bearing the Crown, followed by Alonzo leading
Leonora weeping; Florella, Roderigo, Mendozo, met by the Queen weeping; Elvira,
and women. Qu. What doleful cry was that, which like the voice
Of angry Heaven struck through my trembling soul!
Nothing but horrid shrieks, nothing but death;
Whilst I, bowing my knees to the cold Earth,
Drowning my Cheeks in Rivulets of tears,
Sending up prayers in sighs to implore from Heaven
Health for the Royal Majesty of Spain, --
All, cried the Majesty of Spain, is dead.
Whilst the sad sound flew through the ecchoing Air,
And reached my frighted soul -- Inform my fears,
Oh my Fernando, oh my gentle Son. --

(weeps. King. Madam, read here the truth, if looks can show
That which I cannot speak, and you would know:
The common Fate, in every face appears;
A Kings great loss, the public grief declares,
But it is a Fathers death that claims my tears.

Card. leads in the Qu. attended. Leon. Ah Sir!
If you thus grieve, who ascend by what you have lost
To all the greatness that a King can boast;
What tributes from my eyes and heart are due,
Who Have lost at once a King and Father too?

King. My Leonora, cannot think my grief
Can from those empty Glories find relief;
Nature within my soul has equal share,
And that and Love surmount my glory there.
Had Heaven continued Royal Philips life,
And given me bright Florella for a wife,
(bows to Flor. To Crowns and Scepters I had made no claim,
But owed my blessings only to my flame.
But Heaven well knew in giving thee away,
( to Flor. I had no business for another joy. --
(weeps. The King, Alonzo, with his dying breath,
turns to Alon. and Leon. To you my beauteous Sister did bequeath;
And I his generotsiy approve,
And think you worthy Leonora's love.

(Enter Card. and Qu. weeping. Alon. Too gloriously my services are paid,
In the possession of this Royal Maid,
To whom my guilty heart durst never aspire,
But rather chose to languish in its fire.

Enter Philip in a Rage, Antonio and Sebastian. Phil. I know he is not dead;
what envious powers
Durst snatch him hence? he was all great and good,
As fit to be adored as they above.
Where is the body of my Royal Father?
That body which inspired by's sacred soul,
Awed all the Universe with every frown,
And taugh 'em all obedience with his smiles.
Why stand you thus distracted? -- Mother -- Brother --
My Lords -- Prince Cardinal --
Has sorrow struck you dumb?
Is this my welcome from the toyls of War?
When in his bosom I should find repose,
To meet it cold and pale! -- Oh guide me to him,
And with my sighs I Will breath new life into it.

( Phil. goes out. King. There Is all that is left of Royal Philip now,
Pay all thy sorrow there; -- whilst mine alone
Are swollen too high to admit of lookers on.

(Exit King weeping. Philip returns weeping. Phil. His soul is flew to all
Eternity:
And yet methought it did inform his body
That I, his darling Philip was arrived
With Conquest on my Sword; and even in death
Sent me his Joy in smiles.

Qu. If souls can after death have any sense
Of humane things, his will be proud to know
That Philip is a Conqueror. --
( Enter Abdelazer. But do not drown thy Laurels thus in tears,
Such tributes leave to us, thou art a Soldier.

Phil. Gods! this should be my Mother. --

Men. It is, Great Sir, the Queen.

Phil. Oh she is too foul for one or the other title.

Qu. How Sir, do you not know me?

Phil. When you were just, I did, --
And with a reverence such as we pay Heaven,
I paid my awful duty; --
But as you have abused my Royal Father,
For such a sin the basest of your Slaves
Would blush to call you Mother.

Qu. What means my Son?

Phil. Son! by Heaven I scorn the title.

Qu. Oh insolence! -- out of my sight, rude Boy.

Phil. We must not part so, Madam;
I first must let you know your sin and shame: --
Nay, hear me calmly, -- for by Heaven you shall. --
My Father whilst he lived, tired his strong Arm
With numerous Battles against the Enemy,
Wasting his brains in Warlike stratagems,
To bring confusion on the faithless Moors,
Whilst you, lulled in soft peace at home, -- betrayed
His name to everlasting Infamy;
Suffered his Bed to be defiled with Lust,
Gave up your self, your honor, and your vows,
To wanton in yon Sooty Leacher's arms.

( points to Abd. Abd. Me do thou mean!

Phil. Yes, Villain, thee, thou Hell-begotten Fiend,
It Is thee I mean.

Qu. Oh most unnatural to dishonor me!

Phil. That Dog you mean, that has dishonored you,
Dishonored me, these Lords, nay and all Spain;
This Devil's he, that --

Abd. That -- what? -- Oh pardon me if I throw off
All ties of Duty: -- were thou ten Kings Sons,
And I as many souls as I have sins,
Thus -- I would hazard all --

draws, they all run between. Phil. Stand off, -- or I Will make way upon thy
Bosom. --

Abd. How got you, Sir, this daring? --

Phil. From injured Philips death,
Who, whilst he lived, unjustly cherisht thee,
And set thee up beyond the reach of Fate;
Blind with thy brutal valor, deaf with thy flatteries,
Discovered not the Treasons thou did act,
Nor none durst let him know 'em: -- but did he live,
I would aloud proclaim them in his ears.

Abd. You durst as well been damned. --

Phil. Hell seize me if I want revenge for this, --
Not dare!
Arise thou injured Ghost of my dead King,
And through thy dreadful paleness dart a horror,
May fright this pair of Vipers from their sins.

Abd. Oh insupportable! do hear me Boy!

Qu. Are ye all mute, and hear me thus upbraided?

(to the Lords. Phil. Dare ye detain me, whilst the Traitor braves me?

Men. Forbear, my Prince, keep in that noble heat,
That should be better used then on a Slave.

Abd. You politic Cheat --

Men. Abdelazer, --
By the Authority of my Government,
Which yet I hold over the King of Spain,
By warrant from a Council of the Peers,
And (as an Unbeliever) from the Church,
I utterly deprive thee of that Greatness,
Those Offices and Trusts you hold in Spain.

Abd. Cardinal, -- who lent thee this Commission?
Grandees of Spain, do you consent to this?

All. We do. --

Alon. What reason for it? let his Faith be tried.

Men. It needs no trial, the proofs are evident,
And his Religion was his veil for Treason.

Alon. Why should you question his Religion, Sir?
He does profess Christianity.

Men. Yes, witness his habit, which he still retains
In scorn to ours. --
His Principles too are as unalterable.

Abd. Is that the only Argument you bring? --
I tell thee, Cardinal, not thy Holy Gown
Covers a soul more sanctified
Than this Moorish Robe.

Phil. Damn his Religion, -- he has a thousand crimes
That will yet better justify your sentence.

Men. Come not within the Court, for if you do,
Worse mischief shall ensue: -- you have your sentence.

( Ex. Phil. and Men. Alon. My Brother banished! it is very sudden;
For thy sake, Sister, this must be recalled.

( to Flor. Qu. Alonzo, join with me, I Will to the King,
And check the pride of this insulting Cardinal.

(Exeunt all, except Manent Abdelazer, Florella. Abd. Banished! if I digest this
gall,
May Cowards pluck the wreath from off my brow,
Which I have purchased with so many wounds,
And all for Spain; for Spain! ungrateful Spain! --
Oh my Florella, all my Glory's vanished,
The Cardinal (Oh damn him!) would have me banished.

Flor. But Sir, I hope you will not tamely go.

Abd. Tamely! -- ha, ha, ha, -- yes by all means;
A very honest and Religious Cardinal!

Flor. I would not for the world you should be banished.

Abd. Not Spain you mean; -- for then she leaves the King.
(aside. What if I be? -- Fools! not to know -- All parts oth' world
Allow enough for Villainy, -- for I Will be brave no more.
It is a crime, -- and then I can live any where. --
But say I go from hence; -- I leave behind me
A Cardinal that will laugh; -- I leave behind me
A Philip that will clap his hands in sport: --
But the worst wound is this, -- I leave my wrongs,
Dishonours, and my Discontents, all unrevenged. --
Leave me, Florella, -- prithee do not weep;
I love thee, -- love thee wondrously; -- go, leave me, --
I am not now at leisure to be fond; --
Go to your Chamber, -- go. --

Flor. No, to the King I Will fly,
And beg him to revenge thy Infamy.

( Exit Flor. To him Alonzo. Alon. The Cardinal's made to have thee banished
Spain;
I Have left the Queen in angry contradiction,
But yet I fear the Cardinal's reasoning.

Abd. This Prince's hate proceeds from Love,
He Is jealous of the Queen, and fears my power.

(aside. Alon. Come, rouse thy wonted spirits, awake thy soul,
And arm thy Justice with a brave Revenge.

(Sullenly. Abd. I Will arm no Justice with a brave Revenge.

Alon. Shall they then triumph over thee, who were once
Proud to attend thy Conquering Chariot wheels?

Abd. I care not; -- I am a Dog, and can bear wrongs.

Alon. But Sir, my Honor is concerned with yours,
Since my loved Sister did become your Wife;
And if yours suffer, mine too is unsafe.

Abd. I cannot help it. --

Alon. What Ice has chil'd thy blood?
This patience was not wont to dwell with thee.

Abd. It Is true, but now the world is changed you see;
Thou art too brave to know what I resolve: --
(aside. No more, -- here comes the King with my Florella.
He loves her, and she swears to me she is chaste;
It Is well, if true; -- well too, if it be false:
I care not, it is Revenge --
That I must sacrifice my love and pleasure to.

(aside. Alon. and Abd. stand aside. Enter King, Lords, Guard passing over the
Stage, Florella in a suppliant posture weeping. King. Thou woo'st me to reverse
thy Husbands doom,
And I woo thee, for mercy on my self;
Why should thou sue to him for life and liberty
For any other, who himself lies dying,
Imploring from thy eyes a little pity.

Flor. Oh mighty King! in whose sole power, like Heaven,
The lives and safeties of your Slaves remain,
Hear and redress my Abdelazer's wrongs.

King. All lives and safeties in my power remain!
Mistaken charming creature, if my power
Be such, who kneel and bow to thee,
What must thine be,
Who have the Sovereign command over me and it.
Would thou give life? turn but thy lovely eyes
Upon the wretched thing that wants it,
And he will surely live, and live for ever.
Can thou do this, and come to beg of me?

Flor. Alas Sir, what I beg's what you alone can give,
My Abdelazer's pardon

King. Pardon! can any thing allied to thee offend?
Thou art so sacred and so innocent,
That but to know thee, and to look on thee,
Must change even vice to virtue.
Oh my Florella!
So perfectly thou do possess my soul,
That every wish of thine shall be obeyed:
Say, would thou have thy Husband share my Crown?
Do but submit to love me, and I yield it.

Flor. Such love as humble Subjects owe their King,
kneels, he takes her up. And such as I dare pay, I offer here.

King. I must confess it is a price too glorious:
But my Florella --

Abd. I Will interrupt your amorous discourse.

(aside. Abd. comes up to them. Flor. Sir, -- Abdelazer's here --

King. His presence never was less welcome to me; --
(aside. But Madam, durst the Cardinal use this insolence?
Where is your Noble Husband?

Abd. He sees me, yet enquires for me.

(aside. Flor. Sir, my Lord is here --

King. Abdelazer, I have heard with much surprise
Oth' injuries you have received, and mean to right you:
My Father loved you well, made you his General,
I think you worthy of that Honor still.

Abd. True, -- for my Wifes sake --

(aside. King. When my Coronation is solemnized,
Be present there, and reassume your wonted State and place;
And see how I will check the Insolent Cardinal.

Abd. I humbly thank my Sovereign --
kneels and kisses the Kings hand That he loves my Wife so well. --

(aside. Exeunt. Manent Abdelazer, Florella. Flor. Will thou not pay my service
with one smile?
Have I not acted well the Suppliants part?

Abd. Oh wonderfully! you have learnt the art to move;
Go, leave me. --

Flor. Still out of humor, thoughtful, and displeased!
And why at me, my Abdelazer, what have I done?

Abd. Rarely! you cannot do amiss you are so beautiful,
So very fair! -- Go, get you in, I say. --
(turns her in ruffly. She has the art of dallying with my soul,
Teaching it lazy softness from her looks. --
But now a nobler passion's entered there,
And blows it thus, -- to Air. -- Idol Ambition,
Florella must to thee a Victim fall:
Revenge, -- to thee -- a Cardinal and Prince:
And to my Love and Jealousy, a King. --
More yet, my mighty Deities, I Will do,
None that you e're inspired like me shall act;
That fawning servile crew shall follow next,
Who with the Cardinal cried banish Abdelazer:
Like Eastern Monarchs I Will adorn thy Fate,
And to the shades thou shall descend in state.

Exit. ACT. II.
SCENE I.
Enter the King Crowned, Philip, Mendozo, Queen, Leonora, Florella, Elvira,
Alonzo, Roderigo, Ordonio, Sebastian, Antonio, Officers and Guards; met by
Abdelazer, followed by Osmin, Zarrack, and Moors attending. He comes in with
Pride, staring on Philip and Mendozo, and takes his stand next the King. Phil.
WHy stares the Devil thus, as if he meant
From his infectious eyes to scatter Plagues,
And poison all the world; was he not banished? --
How dares the Traitor venture into the Presence? --
Guards, spurn the Villain forth.

Abd. Who spurns the Moor
Were better set his foot upon the Devil! --
Do, spurn me; and this hand thus justly armed,
Shall like a Thunderbolt, breaking the Clouds,
Divide his body from his soul; -- stand back! --
(to the Guards. Spurn Abdelazer! --

Phil. Death, shall we bear this Insolence!

Alon. Great Sir, I think his Sentence was unjust.

(to the King. Men. Sir, you're too partial to be Judge in this,
And shall not give your Voice.

Abd. Proud Cardinal, -- but he shall, -- and give it loud,
And who shall hinder him? --

Phil. This, -- and cut his Windpipe too,
(offers to draw. To spoil his whispering.

Abd. offers to draw, his Attend, do the same. King. What means this violence?
Forbear to draw your Swords, it is we command.

Abd. Sir, do me Justice, I demand no more,
kneels, and offers his Sword. And at your feet we lay our weapons down.

Men. Sir, Abdelazer has had Justice done,
And stands by me banished the Court of Spain.

King. How, Prince Cardinal!
From whence do you derive Authority
To banish him the Court without our leave?

Men. Sir, from my care unto your Royal Person,
As I Am your Governor; -- then, for the Kingdoms safety.

King. Because I was a Boy, must I be still so?
Time, Sir, has given me in that formal Ceremony,
And I am of an age to Rule alone;
And from henceforth, discharge you -- of your care.
We know your near relation to this Crown,
And wanting Heirs, that you must fill the Throne,
Till when, Sir, I am absolute Monarch here, --
And you must learn obedience.

Men. Pardon my zealous duty, which I hope
You will approve, and not recall his Banishment.

King. Sir, but I will; and who dares contradict it, is a Traitor.

Phil. I dare the first, yet do defy the last.

King. My hot-brained Sir, I Will talk to you anon.

Men. Sir, I am wronged, and will Appeal to Rome.

Phil. By Heaven I Will to the Camp; -- Brother, farewell,
When next I meet thee, it shall be in Arms;
If thou can get loose from thy Mistress Chains,
Where thou lie drowned in idle wanton Love.

Abd. Hah! -- his Mistress! -- who is it Prince Philip means?

Phil. Thy wife! thy wife! proud Moor, whom you are content
To sell (for Honor) to eternal Infamy. --
Does't make thee snarle! -- bite on, whilst thou shall see,
I go for Vengeance, and 'twill come with me.

(going out, turns and draws. Abd. Stay! for it is here already; -- turn, proud
Boy.

( Abd. draws. King. What mean you, Philip? --

(talks to him aside. Qu. Cease! cease your most impolitick Rage! --
(to Abd. Is this a time to shew't? -- Dear Son, you are a King,
And may allay this Tempest.

King. How dare you disobey my will and pleasure?

(to Abd. Abd. Shall I be calm, and hear my wife called Whore?
Were he great Jove, and armed with all his Lightning,
By Heaven I could not hold my just Resentment.

King talking to Phil. aside. Qu. 'Twas in his passion, noble Abdelazer: --
Imprudently thou do disarm thy Rage,
And giv'st the Foe a warning, e're thou strik'st;
When with thy smiles thou might securely kill, --
You know the Passion that the Cardinal bears me,
His power too over Philip, which well managed
Will serve to ruin both; -- put up your Sword, --
When next you draw it, teach it how to act.

Abd. You shame me, and command me.

Qu. Why all this Rage? -- does it become you, Sir?
to Men. aside. What is it you mean to do?

Men. You need not care, whilst Abdelazer's safe.

Qu. Jealousy upon my life; -- how gay it looks.

Men. Madam, you want that pitying regard
To value what I do, or what I am;
I Will therefore lay my Cardinals Hat aside,
And in bright Arms, demand my Honor back.

Qu. Is It thus, my Lord, you give me proofs of Love?
Have then my eyes lost all their wonted power?
And can you quit the hope of gaining me,
To follow your Revenge? -- go, -- go to fight,
Bear Arms against your Country, and your King,
All for a little worthless Honor lost.

Men. What is it, Madam, you would have me do?

Qu. Not side with Philip, as you hope my Grace. --
Now Sir, you know my pleasure, think on it well.

Men. Madam, you know your Power over your Slave,
And use it too tyrannically; -- but dispose
The Fate of him, whose Honor, and whose Life,
Lies at your mercy; --
I Will stay and dye, since it is your gracious pleasure.

King. Philip, upon your life,
Upon your strict Allegiance, I conjure you
To remain at Court, till I have reconciled you.

Phil. Never Sir, --
Nor can you bend my temper to that tameness.

King. It Is in my power to charge you as a Prisoner;
But you're my Brother: -- yet remember too
I am your King. -- No more. --

Phil. I will obey.

King. Abdelazer,
I beg you will forget your cause of hate
Against my Brother Philip, and the Cardinal;
He Is young, and rash, but will be better tempered.

Abd. Sir, I have done, and beg your Royal pardon,

King. Come Philip, give him your hand.

Phil. I can forgive without a Ceremony.

King. And to confirm ye Friends,
I invite you all to Night to Banquet with me,
Pray see you give Attendance: -- Come Brother,
You must along with us.

(Exeunt all but Abd. Queen, and Women. Qu. Leave me. --
(To the Women, who Ex. Now my dear Moor --

Abd. Madam. --

Qu. Why do thou answer with that cold Reserve? --
Is that a look, -- an action for a Lover?

Abd. Ah Madam. --

Qu. Have I not taken off thy Banishment?
Restored thee to thy former state and honors?
Nay, and heapt new ones too, too mighty for thy hopes;
And still to raise thee equal to this heart,
Where thou must ever Reign.

Abd. It Is true, my bounteous Mistress, all this you have done, --
But --

Qu. But what, my Abdelazer.

Abd. I will not call it to your memory.

Qu. What can thou mean?

Abd. Why was the King removed?

Qu. To make thy way more easy to my arms.

Abd. Was that all?

Qu. All! --

Abd. Not but it is a blessing, Gods would languish for; --
But as you have made it free, so make it just.

Qu. Thou meanst, and marry thee.

Abd. No, by the Gods! --
(aside. Not marry me, unless I were a King.

Qu. What signifies the Name, to him that Rules one?

Abd. What use has he of life, that cannot live
Wihout a Ruler?

Qu. Thou would not have me kill him.

Abd. Oh by no means, not for my wretched life!
What, kill a King! -- forbid it Heaven!
Angels stand like his Guards, about his Person.
The King!
Not for so many Worlds as there be Stars
Twinkling upon the embroidered Firmament!
The King!
He loves my wife Florella, should he dye --
I know none else durst love her.

Qu. And that is the reason you would send him hence.

Abd. I must confess, I would not bear a wrong,
But do not take me for a Villain, Madam;
He is my King, and may do what he pleases.

Qu. It Is well, Sir.

Abd. Again that frown, it renders thee more charming,
Than any other Dress thou could put on.

Qu. Away, you do not love me.

Abd. Now may thou hate me, if this be not pretty.

Qu. Oh you can flatter finely --

Abd. Not I, by Heaven!
Oh that this head were circled in a Crown,
And I were King, by Fortune, as by Birth!
And that I was, till by thy Husband's power
I was divested in my Infancy. --
Then you should see, I do not flatter ye.
But I, instead of that, must see my Crown
Bandy'd from head to head, and tamely see it;
And in this wretched state I live, it is true,
But with what joy, you, if you loved, might guess.

Qu. We need no Crowns; Love best contented is
In shadie Groves, and humble Cottages,
Where when 'twou'd sport, it safely may Retreat,
Free from the noise, and danger of the Great;
Where Victors are ambitious of no Bays,
But what their Nymphs bestow on Holy Days;
Nor Envy, can the amorous Shepherd move,
Unless against a Rival in his love.

Abd. Love and Ambition, are the same to me,
In either, I Will no Rivals brook.

Qu. Nor I;
And when the King you urge me to remove,
It may be from Ambition, not from Love.

Abd. Those scruples did not in your bosom dwell,
When you a King, did in a Husband kill.

Qu. How Sir! dare you upbraid me with that sin,
To which your Perjuries first drew me in?

Abd. You interrupt my sense, I only meant
A sacrifice, to Love, so well begun,
Should not Devotion want to finish it;
And if that stop to all our joys were gone,
The envying world would to our Power submit:
But Kings are Sacred, and the Gods alone
Their Crimes must judge, and punish too, or none. --
Yet he alone destroys our happiness.

Qu. There Is yet one more --

Abd. One more! give me his name,
And I will turn it to a Magic Spell,
To bind him ever fast.

Qu. Florella.

Abad. Florella! Oh I could gnaw my Chains,
That humble me so low as to adore her:
But the fond blaze must out, -- whilst I erect
aside. A nobler fire more fit for my Ambition.
-- Florella, dies, -- a Victim to your will.
I will not let you lose one single wish,
For a poor life, or two;
Though I must see my Glories made a prey,
And not demand 'em from the Ravisher,
Nor yet complain, -- because he is my King!
But Philip's brow, no Sacred Ointment Deifies,
If he do wrong, stands fair for the Revenger.

Qu. Philip! instruct me how to undo that Boy I hate;
The public Infamy I have received,
I will Revenge, with nothing less than death.

Abd. It Is well we can agree in our Resentments,
For I have vowed he shall not live a day,
He has an art to pry into our secrets:
To all besides, our love is either hid,
Or else they dare not see; -- but this Prince
Has a most dangerous spirit must be calmed.

Qu. I have resolved his death,
And now have waiting in my Cabinet
Engines to carry on this mighty work of my Revenge.

Abd. Leave that to me, who equally am injured;
You, like the Gods! need only but command,
And I will execute your sacred will. --
That done, there is none dare whisper what we do.

Qu. Nature be gone, I chase thee from my soul,
Who Love's Almighty Empire does control;
And she that will to thy dull Laws submit,
In spite of thee, betrays the Hypocrite.
No rigid Virtue shall my soul possess,
Let Gown-men preach against the wickedness;
Pleasures were made by Gods! and meant for us,
And not to enjoy 'em, were ridiculous.

Abd. Oh perfect, great and glorious of thy Sex!
Like thy great self 'twas spoke, resolved and brave! --
I must attend the King; -- where I will watch
All Philip's motions --

Qu. And -- after that -- if you will beg admittance,
I Will give you leave to visit me to night.

Abd. Madam, that blessing now must be deferred;
My wrongs and I will be retired to Night,
And bring forth Vengeance, with the Mornings light.

leads her to the door. Enter Osmin, Zarrack. Osm. My gracious Lord --

Abd. Come near -- and take a secret from my lips;
And he who keeps not silence, hears his death. --
This night the Prince, and Cardinal -- do you mark me --
Are murdered!

Osm. Where Sir! --

Abd. Here in the Court.

Osm. By whom, Great Sir!

Abd. By thee! -- I know thou dare. --

Osm. Whatever you command.

Abd. Good! -- then see it be performed.
-- Osmin, how goes the Night?

Osm. About the hour of Eight,
And you're expected at the Banquet, Sir:
Prince Philip storms, and swears you're with the Queen.

Abd. Let him storm on! the Tempest will be laid; --
Where Is my Wife? --

Osm. In the Presence, Sir, with the Princess and other Ladies.

Abd. She Is wondrous forward! -- what -- the King --
(I am not jealous though) -- but he makes Court to her;
-- hah, Osmin!
He throws out love from Eyes all languishing; --
Come tell me, -- he does sigh to her; -- no matter if he do: --
And fawns upon her hand, -- and -- kneels; -- tell me, Slave!

Osm. Sir, I saw nothing like to Love; he only treats her
Equal to her Quality.

Abd. Oh damn her Quality!

Zar. I came just now,
From waiting on his Person to the Banquet,
And heard him ask, if he might visit her to night,
Having something to impart to her, that concerned his life.

Abd. And so it shall, by Heaven!

(aside. Zar. But she denied, and he the more entreated, --
But all in vain, Sir.

Abd. Go Osmin, (you the Captain of my Guard of Moors)
Choose out the best affected Officers,
To keep the Watch to night: --
Let every Guard be doubled; -- you may be liberal too, --
And when I give the word, be ready all. --

Osm. What shall the word be?

Ex. Zarrack. Abd. Why -- Treason: -- mean time make it your business,
To watch the Prince's coming from the Banquet;
Heated with Wine, and fearless of his Person,
You Will find him easily to be attaqu'd.

Osm. Sir, do not doubt my management nor success.

Ex. Osmin. Abd. So, I thank thee Nature, that in making me
Thou did design me Villain!
Fitting each faculty for Active mischief: --
Thou skilful Artist, thank thee for my face,
It will discover naught that is hid within. --
Thus armed for ills,
Darkness! and Horror! I invoke your aid;
And thou, dread Night! shade all your busy Stars
In blackest Clouds,
And let my Daggers brightness only serve
To guide me to the mark, -- and guide it so,
It may undo a Kingdom at one blow.

Exit. SCENE II.
A Banquet; under a Canopy the King, Leonora, Florella, Ladies waiting; Philip,
Mendozo, Alonzo, Ordonio, Antonio, Sebastian, Lords and Attendants: as soon as
the Scene draws off, they all rise, and come forward. King. My Lords you're sad
to night; give us loud Music, --
I have a double cause to mourn;
And grief has taken up its dwelling here, --
Beyond the art of Love, or Wine to conquer. --
It Is true, my Father's dead, -- and possibly
It Is not so decent to appear thus gay;
But life, and death, are equal to the wretched, --
And whilst Florella frowns, it is in that number
( to Flor. I must account her Slave. -- Alonzo,
How came thy Father so bewitched to Valor,
(For Abdelazer has no other Virtue)
To recompense it with so fair a Creature?
Was this -- a Treasure to enrich the Devil with?

Alon. Sir, he has many Virtues, more than Courage,
Royally born, served well this King, and Country;
My Father brought him up to Martial toyls,
And taught him to be Brave; I hope, and Good; --
Beside, he was your Royal Father's Favorite.

King. No, Alonzo, 'twas not his love to Virtue,
But nice obedience to his King, and Master,
Who seeing my increase of Passion for her,
To kill my hopes, he gave her to this Moor.

Alon. She Is now a virtuous woman, Sir.

King. Politic Sir, who would have made her other? --
Against her will, he forced her to his arms,
Whilst all the world was wondering at his madness.

Alon. He did it with her Approbation, Sir.

King. With thine, Florella! could thou be so criminal!

Flor. Sir, I was ever taught Obedience;
My humble thoughts durst never aspire to you,
And next to that -- death, or the Moor, or any thing.

King. Oh God! had I then told my tale
So feebly, it could not gain belief!
Oh my Florella! this little faith of thine
Has quite undone thy King! -- Alonzo,
Why did not thou forbid this fatal Marriage,
She being thy only Sister?

Alon. Great Sir, I did oppose it, with what violence
My duty would permit; and would have died
In a just quarrel, of her dear defense:
And Sir, though I submitted to my Father,
The Moor, and I, stand on unequal terms.

Phil. Come, who dares drink Confusion to this Moor?

Ant. That, Sir, will I.

Sebast. And I.

Phil. Page, fill my Glass, I will begin the Round;
Ye all shall pledge it; -- Alonzo, first to thee.

(drinks. Alon. To me, Sir!

Phil. Why yes; thou love him, -- therefore --
Nay you shall drink it, though 'twere oth' Stygian Lake: --
Take it, -- by Heaven thou would Pimp for him to my Mother, --
Nay and after that, give him another Sister.

Alon. It Is well you are my Prince.

Phil. I Would rather be a Prince of Curs; -- come, pledge me --

Alon. Well Sir, I Will give you way --

(drinks. Phil. So would thou any, -- though they trod on thee.
So -- nay Prince Cardinal, though it be not decent
For one so sanctified to drink a Health;
Yet it is your Office, both to damn and bless: --
Come, drink and damn the Moor.

Men. Sir, I Am for no carousing.

Phil. I Am in an humor now to be obeyed,
And must not be denied: -- but see, the Moor
(Enter Abdelazer, gazes on them. Just come to pledge at last, -- Page, fill
again --

Abd. I Will do you reason, Prince, whatever it be.

(gives him the Glass. Phil. 'Twas kindly said; -- Confusion to the Moor.

Abd. Confusion to the Moor -- if this vain Boy,
See the next rising Sun.

Phil. Well done my Lad. --

King. Abdelazer, you have been missing long,
The Public good takes up your whole concern,
But we shall shortly ease you of that load. --
Come, let us have some Music; --
Ordonio, did I not call for Music?

Ord. You did, Sir.

Abd. Roderigo. --

Rod. My gracious Lord. --

(Roderigo whispers to Abd. Abd. No more, -- the Prince observes us.

Phil. There Is no good toward when you are whispering.

Ord. The Music you commanded, Sir, is ready.

SONG.
Nymph. MAke haste Amyntas, come away,
The Sun is up and will not stay,
And oh how very short's a Lovers day.
Make haste Amyntas, to this Grove,
Beneath whose shade so often I Have sat,
And heard my dear loved Swain repeat,
How much he Galatea loved;
Whilst all the listening Birds around,
Sung to the Music of the blessed sound.
Make haste Amyntas, come away,
The Sun is up and will not stay,
And oh how very short's a Lovers day.

Swain enters, with Shepherds and Shepherdesses, and Pipes. I hear thy charming
voice, my Fair,
And see bright Nymph, thy Swain is here;
Who his devotions had much earlier paid,
But that a Lamb of thine was strayed:
And I the little wanderer have brought,
That with one angry look from thy fair eyes,
Thou may the little Fugitive chastise;
Too great a punishment for any fault.
Come Galatea, haste away,
The Sun is up and will not stay,
And oh how very short's a Lovers day.
Dance. King. How likes Florella this?

Flor. Sir, all delight's so banished from my soul,
I Have lost the taste of every single joy.

Abd. Gods! this is fine! give me your Art of flattery,
Or something more of this, will ruin me. --
Though I Have resolved her death, yet whilst she is mine,
I would not have her blown by Summer Flies.

Phil. Mark how he snarles upon the King!
The Cur will bite anon.

Abd. Come my Florella, is it not Bedtime, Love?

Flor. I Will wait upon you, Sir.

(going out. Phil. The Moor has taken away, we may depart.

Abd. What has he taken away?

(turns about. Phil. The fine gay play-thing, that made us all so merry.

Abd. Was this your sport?

(to his Wife. King. Abdelazer, keep your way: -- Good night, fair Oreature!

Abd. I will obey, for once.

( Exit Abd. and Flor. King. Why this Resentment, Brother, and in public?

Phil. Because he gives me cause, and that in public.
And Sir, I was not born to bear with Insolence;
I saw him dart Revenge, from both his Eyes,
And bite his angry Lip between his teeth,
To keep his Jealousy from breaking forth;
Which when it does, -- stand fast my King.

King. But Philip, we will find a way to check him;
Till when we must dissemble; -- take my counsel, -- Good night.

Phil. I cannot, nor I will not; -- yet Good night.
Exit King, and all but Phil. Party Well Friends, I see the King will sleep
away his anger,
And tamely see us murdered by this Moor;
But I Will be Active, Boys. --
Therefore Antonio, you Command the Horse;
Get what more numbers to our Cause you can:
It Is a good Cause, and will advance our credit.
We will awake this King, out of his Lethargy of Love,
And make him absolute: -- Go to your Charge,
And early in the morning I Will be with you. --
(Ex. all but Phil. If all fail, Portugal shall be my Refuge,
Those whom so late I Conquered, shall Protect me. --
But this Alonzo, I should make an Interest in;
Could I but flatter, it is a Youth that is Brave.

Enter Cardinal in haste. Men. Fly, fly, my Prince, we are betrayed and lost
else.

Phil. Betrayed and lost! Dreams, idle Coward dreams.

Men. Sir, by my Holy Order, I Am in earnest,
And you must either quickly fly, or dye;
It Is so ordained: -- nor have I time to tell
By what strange miracle I learnt our Fate.

Phil. Nor care I, I will stay, and Brave it.

Men. That Sir you shall not, there is no safety here,
And it is the Army only can secure us.

Phil. Where had you this Intelligence?

Men. I Will tell you as we go to my Apartment;
Where we must put our selves in Holy dress,
For so the Guards are set in every place,
(And those all Moors, the Slaves of Abdelazer)
That it is impossible in any other Habit to escape.
Come, haste with me, and let us put 'em on.

Phil. I Would rather stay and kill, till I am weary; --
Let Us to the Queens Apartment, and seize this Moor;
I am sure there the Mongrel's Kennell'd.

Men. Sir, we lose time in talking, -- come with me.

Phil. Where be these Lousy Gaberdines?

Men. I will conduct you to 'em.

Phil. Mother, -- and Moor -- Farewell, --
I Will visit you again, and if I do,
My black Infernal, I will Conjure you.

Exeunt. ACT. III.
SCENE I.
Enter Abdelazer, and Zarrack. Zar. OSmin (my Lord) by this has done his task,
And Philip is no more among the living. --
Will you not rest to Night?

Abd. Is this a time for sleep and idleness? -- dull Slaves --

Zar. The business we have order, Sir, to do,
We can without your aid.

Enter Osmin. Abd. Osmin!
Thy ominous looks presage an ill success;
Thy Eyes no joyful news of Murders tell:
I thought I should have seen thee dressed in blood; --
Speak! Speak thy News! --
Say that he lives, and let it be thy last. --

Osm. Yes Sir, he lives --

Abd. Lives! thou lie, base Coward, -- lives! -- renounce thy Gods!
It were a sin less dangerous! -- speak again.

Osm. Sir, Philip lives.

Abd. Oh treacherous Slave!

Osm. Not by my fault, by Heaven!

Abd. By what cursed chance,
If not from thee, could he evade his Fate?

Osm. By some intelligence from his good Angel.

Abd. From his good Devil!
Gods! must the Earth another day at once
Bear him and me alive!

Osm. Another day! -- an Age for ought I know;
For Sir, the Prince is fled, the Cardinal too.

Abd. Fled! Fled! -- say thou?
Oh I could curse the Stars, that rule this Night:
It Is to the Camp they are fled; the only refuge
That Gods, or men could give 'em. --
Where got you this intelligence?

Osm. My Lord, enquiring for the Prince
At the Apartment of the Cardinal, (whither he went)
His Pages answered me, he was at his Devotions:
A lucky time (I thought) to do the deed;
And breaking in, found only their empty Habits,
And a poor sleeping Groom, who with much threatening,
Confessed that they were fled, in Holy Robes.

Abd. That case of Sanctity was first ordained,
To cheat the honest world:
'Twas an unlucky chance; -- but we are idle. --
Let Us see, how from this ill, we may advance a good: --
(pawses: It Is now dead time of Night, when Rapes, and Murders,
Are hid beneath the horrid Veil of darkness; --
I Will ring through all the Court, with doleful sound,
The sad alarms of Murder, -- Murder. -- Zarrack,
Take up thy standing yonder; -- Osmin, thou
At the Queens Apartment; -- cry out, Murder!
Whilst I, like his ill Genius, do awake the King.
Perhaps in this disorder I may kill him.
(aside. -- Treason -- Murder -- Murder -- Treason.

Enter Alonzo, and Courtiers. Alon. What dismal cries are these? --

Abd. Where is the King? -- Treason! -- Murder! --
Where is the sleeping Queen? -- arise! -- arise!

Osm. The Devil taught him all his arts of falsehood.

(aside. Enter King in a Nightgown, with Lights. King. Who frights our quiet
slumbers with this noise?

Enter Queen and Women, with Lights. Qu. Was it a dream, or did I hear the sound
Of Treason, call me from my silent griefs?

King. Who raised this rumor, Abdelazer, you?

Abd. I did, Great Sir.

King. Your Reasons.

Abd. Oh Sir, your Brother Philip, and the Cardinal,
Both animated by a sense of wrongs,
(And envying, Sir, the fortune of your Slave)
Had laid a Plot, this Night, to murder you;
And 'cause they knew it was my waiting Night,
They would have laid the Treason, Sir, on me.

King. The Cardinal, and my Brother! bring them forth,
Their lives shall answer it.

Abd. Sir, it is impossible;
For when they found their Villainy discovered,
They in two Friars Habits made escape.

King. That Cardinal is subtle, as Ambitious,
And from him Philip learnt his dangerous Principles.

Qu. The Ambition of the one, infects the other,
And they are both too dangerous to live. --
But might a Mothers counsel be obeyed,
I would advise you, send the valiant Moor
To fetch 'em back, e're they can reach the Camp:
For thither they are fled, -- where they will find
A welcome fatal to us all.

King. Madam, you counsel well; and Abdelazer,
Make it your care to fetch these Traitors back,
Not only for my safety, and the Kingdoms,
But for they are your Enemies; and the envious world
Will say, you made this story to undo 'em.

Abd. Sir, I Will obey; nor will I know repose,
Till I have justified this fatal truth.

( Abd. goes to the Queen, and talks to her. King. Mean time I will to my
Florella's Lodging,
aside. Silence, and Night, are the best Advocates
To plead a Lover's cause. -- Abdelazer, -- haste.
Madam, I Will wait on you to your Chamber.

Abd. Sir, that is my duty.

King. Madam, good night; -- Alonzo, to your rest.

(Ex. all but Qu. and Abd. Qu. Philip escaped!
Oh that I were upon some Desert shore,
Where I might only to the waves and winds
Breath out my sense of Rage for this defeat.

Abd. Oh it is no time for Rage, but Action, Madam.

Qu. Give me but any hopes of blessed Revenge,
And I will be as calm, as happy Lovers.

Abd: There is a way! and is but -- that alone;
But such a way, as never must be named.

Qu. How! not be named! Oh swear thou hat'st me rather,
It were a torment equal to thy silence.

Abd. I Will show my passion rather in that silence.

Qu. Kind Torturer, what mean thou?

Abd. To show you, Madam, I had rather live
Wronged and contemned by Philip,
Than have your dearer Name made Infamous.

Qu. Heavens! do thou mock my Rage! can any sin
I could commit, undo my Honor more
Than his late Insolence!
Oh name me something may revenge that shame!
I would encounter killing Plagues, or fire
To meet it. -- Come, oh quickly give me ease.

Abd. I dare no more reveal the guilty secret,
Then you dare execute it when it is told.

Qu. How little I am understood by thee: --
Come, tell me instantly, for I grow impatient;
You shall obey me, -- nay I do command you.

Abd. Durst you proclaim -- Philip a Bastard, Madam.

Qu. Hah! proclaim my self -- what he would have me thought!
What mean thou? --

Abd. Instruct you in the way to your Revenge.

Qu. Upon my self, thou mean. --

Abd. No; --
He Is now fled to the Camp, where he will be fortified
Beyond our power to hurt, but by this means;
Which takes away his hopes of being a King,
(For he would no other aim in taking Arms)
And leaves him open to the Peoples scorn;
Whom owned as King, numbers would assist him,
And then our lives he may dispose,
As he has done our Honors.

Qu. There Is reason in thy words but oh my Fame

Abd. Which I, by Heaven, am much more tender on,
Then my own life or Honor; and I Have a way
To save that too, which I Will at leisure tell you.
In the mean time, send for your Confessor,
And with a borrowed penitence confess,
Their Idol Philip is a Bastard;
And zealously pretend you're urged by Conscience:
A cheap pretense to cozen fools withal.

Qu. Revenge, although I court thee with my fatal ruin,
I must enjoy thee! there is no other way,
And I Am resolved upon the mighty pleasure;
He has profaned my purer flame for thee,
And merits to partake the Infamy. --

(he leads her out. Abd. Now have at my young King: --
I know he means to Cuckold me to night,
Whilst he believes, I Will tamely step aside, --
No, let Philip and the Cardinal gain the Camp,
I will not hinder 'em: --
I have a nobler Sacrifice to make
To my declining Honor; shall redeem it,
And pay it back with Interest: -- well, then in order to it,
I Will watch about the Lodgings of Florella,
And if I see this hot young Lover enter,
I Will save my Wife the trouble of allaying
The Amorous heat: -- this -- will more nimbly do it,
Snatches out his Dagger. And do it once for all. --

Enter Florella in her Night-cloaths. Flor. My Abdelazer, -- why in that fierce
posture,
As if thy thoughts were always bent on Death: --
Why is that Dagger out? -- against whom drawn?

Abd. Or stay, -- suppose I let him see Florella,
And when he is high with the expected bliss,
Then take him thus, -- Oh 'twere a fine surprise!

Flor. My Lord, -- dear Abdelazer --

Abd. Or say -- I made her kill him, -- that were yet
An action much more worthy of my vengeance.

Flor. Will you not speak to me? what have I done?

Abd. By Heaven it shall be so. --

Flor. What shall be so? --

Abd. Hah! --

Flor. Why do thou dress thy Eyes in such unusual wonder?
There Is nothing here that is a stranger to thee;
Or what is not entirely thine own.

Abd. Mine!

Flor. Thou can not doubt it.

Abd. No, -- and for a proof thou art so, -- take this Dagger.

Flor. Alas, Sir! -- what to do?

Abd. To stab a heart, Florella, a heart that loves thee. --

Flor. Heaven forbid!

Abd. No matter what Heaven will, I say it must --

Flor. What must --

Abd. That Dagger must enter the heart of him
That loves thee best, Florella; -- guess the man.

Flor. What means my Moor? --
Would thou have me kill thy self?

Abd. Yes, -- when I love thee better then the King.

Flor. Ah Sir! what mean you?

Abd. To have you kill this King,
When next he does pursue thee with his love; --
What do you weep? --
By Heaven they shall be bloody tears then. --

Flor. I shall deserve them, -- when I suffer love
That is not fit to hear; -- but for the King,
That which he pays me, is so innocent --

Abd. So innocent! -- damn thy dissembling tongue;
Did I not see, with what fierce wishing Eyes
He gazed upon thy face, whilst yours as wantonly
Returned, and understood the Amorous language.

Flor. Admit it true, that such his Passions were,
As (Haven's my witness) I Have no cause to fear;
Have not I Virtue to resist his flame,
Without a pointed Steel?

Abd. Your Virtue! -- Curse on the weak defense;
Your Virtue's equal to his Innocence. --
Here, -- take this Dagger, and if this Night he visit thee,
When he least thinks on it, -- send it to his heart.

Flor. If you suspect me, do not leave me, Sir.

Abd. Oh -- I Am dispatched away, -- to leave you free, --
About a wonderful affair: -- mean time,
I know you will be visited; -- but as you wish to live,
At my Return, let me behold him dead. --
Be sure you do it. it is for thy Honors safety. --
I love thee so, that I can take no rest,
Till thou have killed thy Image in his breast.
-- Adieu, my dear Florella --

Exit. Flor. Murder my King! -- the man that loves me too! --
What Fiend, what Fury such an act would do?
My trembling hand, would not the weapon bear,
And I should sooner strike it here, -- than there. --
(pointing to her breast. No! though of all I am, this hand alone
Is what thou can command, as being thy own;
Yet this has plighted no such cruel vow:
No Duty binds me to obey thee now.
To save my King's, my life I will expose,
No Martyr dies in a more Glorious Cause.

Exit. SCENE II.
Enter the Queen in an undress alone, with a Light. Qu. Thou grateful Night, to
whom all happy Lovers
Make their devout and humble Invocations;
Thou Court of Silence, where the God of Love,
Lays by the awful terror of a Deity,
And every harmfull Dart, and deals around
His kind desires; whilst thou, blessed Friend to joys,
Draw'st all thy Curtains made of gloomy shades,
To veil the blushes of soft yielding Maids;
Beneath the covert grant the Lovesick King,
May find admittance to Florella's arms;
And being there, keep back the busy day;
Maintain thy Empire till my Moor returns
Where in her Lodgings he shall find his Wife,
Amidst her Amorous dalliance with my Son. --
My watchful Spies are waiting for the knowledge;
Which when to me imparted, I Will improve,
Till my Revenge be equal to my Love.
Enter Elvira. -- Elvira, in thy looks I read success; --
What have thou learnt?

Elv. Madam, the King is gone as you imagined,
To fair Florella's Lodgings.

Qu. But art thou sure he gained Admittance?

Elv. Yes, Madam;
But what welcome he has found, to me's unknown,
But I believe it must be great, and kind.

Qu. I am of thy opinion. --
But now, Elvira, for a well-laid Plot,
To ruin this Florella; -- though she be innocent,
Yet she must dye; so hard a Destiny
My passion for her Husband does decree:
But it is the way, I stop at. --
His Jealousy already I have raised;
That Is not enough, his Honor must be touched:
This meeting 'twixt the King, and fair Florella,
Must then be rendered Public;
It Is the disgrace, not Action, must incense him: --
Go you to Don Alonzo's Lodging strait,
Exit Elvira. Whilst I prepare my story for his Ear. --
Assist me all that is ill in Womankind,
And furnish me with sighs, and feigned tears,
That may express a grief, for this discovery. --
My Son, be like thy Mother, hot and bold;
And like the Noble Ravisher of Rome,
Court her with Daggers, when thy Tongue grows faint,
Till thou have made a Conquest over her Virtue.
Exit Elvira. Enter Alonzo, Elvira. -- Oh Alonzo, I have strange News to tell
thee!

Alon. It must be strange indeed, that makes my Queen
Dress her fair eyes in sorrow.

Qu. It is a Dress that thou will be in love with,
When thou shall hear my story. --
You had a Sister once.

Alon. Had!

Qu. Yes, had -- whilst she was like thy self, all Virtue;
Till her bewitching Eyes kindled such flames,
As will undo us all.

Alon. My Sister, Madam! sure it cannot be: --
What eyes? what flames? -- inform me strait.

Qu. Alonzo, thou art honest, just, and brave,
And should I tell thee more --
(Knowing thy Loyalty's above all Nature)
It would oblige thee to commit an outrage,
Which baser Spirits will call cruelty.

Alon. Gods, Madam! do not praise my Virtue thus,
Which is so poor, it scarce affords me patience
To attend the end of what you would deliver. --
Come Madam, say my Sister -- is a Whore;
I know it is so you mean: and being so,
Where shall I kneel for Justice?
Since he that should afford it me,
Has made her Criminal. --
Pardon me, Madam, it is the King I mean.

Qu. I grieve to own, all thy Prophetic fears
Are true, Alonzo, it is indeed the King.

Alon. Then I Am disarmed,
For Heaven can only punish him.

Qu. But Alonzo,
Whilst that Religious patience dwells about thee,
All Spain must suffer; nay Ages that shall ensue,
Shall curse thy Name, and Family;
From whom a Race of Bastards shall proceed,
To wear that Crown.

Alon. No, Madam, not from mine,
My Sister's in my power, her Honor's mine;
I can command her life, though not my Kings.
Her Mother is a Saint, and should she now
Look down from Heaven upon a deed so foul,
I think even there, she would invent a Curse,
To thunder on her head. --
But Madam, whence was this intelligence?

Qu. Elvira saw the King enter her Lodgings,
With Lovers haste, and joy.

Alon. Her Lodgings! -- when?

Qu. Now, not an hour ago, --
Now, since the Moor departed.

Alon. Damnation on her! can she be thus false? --
Come, lead me to the Lodgings of this Strumpet,
And make me see this truth,
Or I will leave thee dead, for thus abusing me.

to Elvira. Qu. Nay dear Alonzo, do not go enraged,
Stay till your temper wears a calmer look;
That if, by chance, you should behold the Wantons,
In little harmless Dalliance, such as Lover*
(Aided with silence, and the shades of Night)
May possibly commit,
You may not do, that which you may repent of.

Alon. Gods! should I play the Pander!
And with my patience, aid the Amorous sin? --
No, I shall scarce have so much tameness left,
To mind me of my Duty to my King.
Ye Gods! behold the Sacrifice I make
To my lost Honor: behold, and aid my justice.

Exit Alonzo. Qu. It will concern me too, to see this wonder,
For yet I scarce can credit it.

Exeunt. SCENE III. Florella's Lodgings.
Enter the King, leading in Florella all in fear. Flor. Ah Sir, the Gods and
you would be more merciful,
If by a death less cruel than my fears,
You would preserve my Honor; begin it quickly,
And after that I will retain my Duty,
And at your feet breath thanks in dying sighs.

King. Where learnt you, Fairest, so much cruelty,
To charge me with the Power of injuring thee?
Not from my Eyes, where Love and languishment
Too sensibly inform thee of my heart.

Flor. Call it not injury, Sir, to free my soul
From fears which such a Visit must create,
In dead of Night, when naught but frightful Ghosts.
Of restless souls departed walk the Round.

King. That fleeting thing am I; whom all repose,
All joys, and every good of life abandoned,
That fatal hour thou gave thy self away;
And I was doomed to endless desperation:
Yet whilst I lived, all glorious with my hopes,
Some sacred Treasures in thy breast I hid,
And near thee still my greedy soul will hover.

Flor. Ah rather like a Ravisher you come,
With love and fierceness in your dangerous Eyes;
And both will equally be fatal to me.

King. Ah do not fear me, as the fair Lucretia
Did the fierce Roman Youth; I mean no Rapes,
Thou can not think that I would force those joys,
Which cease to be so, when compelled, Florella: --
No, I would sooner pierce this faithful heart,
Whose flame appears too Criminal for your mercy.

Flor. Why do you fright me* Sir? methinks your looks
All pale; your eyes thus fixed, and trembling hands,
The awful horror of the dark and silent night,
Strikes a cold terror round my fainting heart,
That does presage some fatal Accident.

King. It Is in your cruel Eyes the danger lies: --
Would you receive me with that usual tenderness
Which did express it self in everysmile,
I should dismiss this horror from my face,
And place again its Native calmness there;
And all my Veins shall reassume their heat,
And with a new, and grateful Ardour beat.

Flor. Sir, all my soul is taken up with fear,
And you advance your Fate, by staying here: --
Fly, fly, this place of death; -- if Abdelazer
Should find you here, -- all the Divinity
About your Sacred Person, could not Guard you.

King. Ah my Florella, cease thy needless fear,
And in thy soul let nothing reign but Love!
Love! that with soft desires may fill thy Eyes,
And save thy Tongue the pain t'instruct my heart,
In the most grateful knowledge Heaven can give me.

Flor. That knowledge, Sir, would make us both more wretched,
Since you, I know, would still be wishing on,
And I should grant, till we were both undone.
And Sir, how little she were worth your care,
Could part with all her honorable fame,
For an inglorious life, -- short and despised. --

King. Can thou believe a flame thy Eyes have kindled,
Can urge me to an infamous pursuit? --
No, my Florella, I adore thy Virtue,
And none profane those Shrines, to whom they offer;
-- Say but thou love, -- and I thus low will bow, --
(kneels. And sue to thee, to be my Sovereign Queen;
I Will circle thy bright Forehead with the Crowns
Of Castile, Portugal, and Aragon;
And all those petty Kingdoms, which do bow
Their Tributary knees to thy Adorer.

Flor. Ah Sir! have you forgot by Sacred vow
All that I am, is Abdelazers now.

King. By Heaven it was a Sacrilegious theft!
But I the Treasure from his breast will tear,
And reach his heart, though thou art seated there.

Flor. A deed like that, my Virtue would undo,
And leave a stain upon your Glories too;
A sin, that would my hate, not passion move;
I owe a Duty, where I cannot love.

King. Thou think it then no sin to kill thy King;
For I must dye, without thy love, Florella.

Flor. How tamely, Sir, you with the Serpent play,
Whose fatal Poison must your life betray;
And though a King, cannot Divine your Fate;
Kings only differ from the Gods in that. --
See, Sir, with this -- I am your Murderer made;
(holds up a Dagger. By those we love, we soonest are betrayed.

King. How! can that fair hand acquaint it self with death?
-- What will thou do, Florella?

Flor. Your Destiny divert,
And give my heart those wounds designed for yours.
-- If you advance, I Will give the deadly blow.

King. Hold! -- I command thee hold thy impious hand,
My heart dwells there, and if your strike -- I dye.

Enter Queen, Alonzo, and Elvira. Qu. Florella! armed against the King! --
Snatches the Dagger and stabs her; the King rises. Of Traitress! --

King. Hold! -- hold, inhuman Murdress;
What have thou done, most barbarous of thy Sex!

(takes Flor. in his arms. Qu. Destroyed thy Murdress, -- and my too fair Rival.

(aside. King. My Murdress! -- what Devil did inspire thee
With thoughts so black and sinful? could this fair Saint
Be guilty of a Murder! -- No, no, too cruel Mother,
With her Eyes, her charming lovely Eyes,
She might have killed; and her too virtuous cruelty.
-- Oh my Florella! Sacred lovely Creature!

Flor. My death was kind, since it prevented yours!
And by that hand, which saved mine from a guilt:
(points to the Queen. -- That Dagger, I received of Abdelazer,
To stab that heart -- he said, that loved me best;
But I designed to overcome your Passion,
And then to have vanquished Abdelazer's Jealousy:
But finding you too faithful to be happy,
I did resolve to dye, -- and have my wish.
-- Farewell -- my King, -- my soul begins its flight,
-- And now -- is hovering -- in eternal -- Night.

(dies. King. She Is gone, -- she is gone, -- her sacred soul is fled
To that Divinity, of which it is a part;
Too excellent to inhabit Earthly bodies.

Alon. Oh Sir, you grieve too much, for one so foul

King. What profane breath was that pronounced her foul!
Thy Mothers soul, though turned into a Cherubin,
Was black to hers: -- Oh she was all Divine.
-- Alonzo, -- was it thou? -- her Brother!

Alon. When she was good, I owned that title, Sir.

King. Good! -- by all the Gods she was as chaste as Vestals!
As Saints translated to Divine abodes.
-- I offered her to be my Queen, Alonzo!
To share the growing Glories of my Youth;
But uncorrupted she my Crown contemned,
And on her Virtues Guard stood thus defended.
(Alon. weeps. -- Oh my Florella! let me here lie fixed,
(kneels. And never rise, till I am cold and pale,
As thou fair Saint art now: -- but sure
She could not dye; -- that noble generous heart,
That armed with love and honor, did rebate
All the fierce sieges of my Amorous flame,
Might sure defend it self against those wounds
Given by a Woman's hand, -- or rather 'twas a Devils.
(rises. -- What do thou merit for this Treachery?
Thou vilest of thy Sex --
But you are a thing I have miscalled a Mother,
And therefore will not touch thee, -- live to suffer
By a more shameful way; -- but here the lies,
Whom I, though dead, must still adore as living.

Alon. Sir, pray retire, there is danger in your stay;
When I reflect upon this Nights disorder,
And the Queens Art to raise my Jealousy;
And after that my Sisters being murdered,
I must believe there is some deeper Plot,
Something designed against your Sacred Person.

King. Alonzo! raise the Court, I Will find it
( Exit Alonzo. Though 'twere hid within my Mothers soul.

Qu. My gentle Son, pardon my kind mistake,
I did believe her armed against thy life.

King. Peace Fury! Not ill-boding Raven shrieks,
Nor Midnight cries of murdered Ghosts, are more
Ungrateful, than thy faint and dull excuses.
-- Be gone! and trouble not the silent griefs,
Which will insensibly decay my life,
Till like a Marble Statue I am fixed,
kneels, and weeps at Flor.'s feet. Dropping continual tears upon her Tomb.

Abd. within. Guard all the Chamber doors! -- fire and confusion
Consume these Spanish Dogs! -- was I for this
Sent to fetch back a Philip, and a Cardinal,
To have my Wife abused?

Enter Abdelazer. Qu. Patience! dear Abdelazer!

Abd. Patience and I am Foes! where is my Florella? --
The King! and in Florella's Bedchamber!
-- Florella! dead too! --
Rise! thou Eternal Author of my shame;
Gay thing! -- to you I speak!
(King rises. And thus throw off Allegiance.

Qu. Oh stay your fury, generous Abdelazer!

Abd. Away! fond woman.

(throws her from him. King. Villain! to me this language!

Abd. To thee, young Amorous King!
How at this dead and silent time of Night,
Durst you approach the Lodgings of my Wife?

King. I scorn to answer thee.

Abd. I Will search it in thy heart then.

They fight, Qu. and Elv. run out crying Treason. King. The Devil's not yet
ready for his soul,
And will not claim his due: -- Oh I am wounded!

(falls. Abd. No doubt on it, Sir, these are no wounds of Love.

King. Whatever they be, you might have spared 'em now,
Since those Florella gave me were sufficient:
-- And yet a little longer -- fixing thus --
Thou Would seen me turn to Earth, without thy aid.
-- Florella! -- Florella! -- is thy soul fled so far
It cannot answer me, and call me on? --
And yet like dying Echoes in my Ears,
I hear thee cry, my Love! -- I come -- I come, fair Soul!
-- Thus at thy feet -- my heart shall -- bleeding -- lie,
Who since it lived for thee, -- for thee -- will -- dye.

(dies. Abd. So -- thou art gone; -- there was a King but now,
And now a senseless, dull, and breathless nothing.

[A noise of fighting without. Enter Queen running. Qu. Oh Heavens! my Son --
the King! the King is killed! --
Yet I must save his Murderer: -- Fly, my Moor;
Alonzo, Sir, assisted by some Friends,
Has set upon your Guards,
And with resistless fury is making hither.

Abd. Let him come on.
Enter Alonzo and others, led in by Osmin, Zarrack, and Moors. -- Oh are you
fast? --

(takes away their Swords. Alon. What mean thou, Villain!

Abd. To put your Swords to better uses, Sir,
Then to defend the cause of Ravishers.

Alon. Oh Heavens! the King is murdered!

Abd. Look on that Object, --
Thy Sister! and my Wife! who is doubly murdered,
First in her spotless Honor, then her life.

Alon. Heaven is more guilty then the King in this!

Qu. My Lords, be calm; and since your King is murdered,
Think of your own dear safeties; choose a new King
That may defend you from the Tyrants Rage.

Alon. Who should we choose? Prince Philip is our King.

Abd. By Heaven but Philip shall not be my King!
Philip's a Bastard, and Traitor to his Country:
He braves us with an Army at our-Walls,
Threatening the Kingdom with a fatal ruin.
And who shall lead you forth to Conquest now,
But Abdelazer, whose Sword reapt Victory,
As often as 'twas unsheathed; -- and all for Spain!
-- How many Laurels has this Head adorned?
Witness the many Battles I have won;
In which I Have emptied all my Youthful Veins,
And all for Spain! -- ungrateful of my favors!
-- I do not boast my Birth,
Nor will not urge to you my Kingdoms ruin;
But loss of blood, and numerous wounds received,
And still for Spain! --
And can you think, that after all my Toy's
I would be still a Slave! -- to Bastard Philip too!
That dangerous Foe! who with the Cardinal
Threatens with Fire and Sword. -- I Will quench those flames,
Such an esteem I still preserve for Spain. --

Alon. What means this long Harangue! what does it aim at?

Abd. To be Protector of the Crown of Spain,
Till we agree about a lawful Successor.

Alon. Oh Devil! --

Qu. We are betrayed, and round beset with horrors;
If we deny him this, -- the Power being his,
We Are all undone, and Slaves unto his mercy. --
Besides, -- Oh give me leave to blush when I declare,
That Philip is -- as he has rendered him. --
But I in love to you, love to my Spain,
Chose rather to proclaim my Infamy,
Than an Ambitious Bastard should be Crowned.

Alon. Here Is a fine Plot, --
What Devil reigns in Woman, when she doats!

(aside. Rod. My Lords, I see no remedy but he must be Protector.

Alon. Oh treachery! -- have you so soon forgot
The noble Philip, and his glorious Heir
The murdered Ferdinand! --
-- And Madam, you so soon forgot a Mothers name,
That you would give him Power that killed your Son!

Abd. The modesty wherewith I Will use that Power,
Shall let you see, I have no other Interest
But what is entirely Spains. -- Restore their Swords,
And he amongst you all who is dissatisfied, --
I set him free this minute.

Alon. I take thee at thy word, --
And instantly to Philips Camp will fly.

Exit. Abd. By all the Gods my Ancestors adored,
But that I scorn the envying World thou would think
I took delight in blood, -- I would not part so with you.
-- But you, my Lords, who value Spains Repose,
Must for it instantly with me take Arms: --
Prince Philip, and the Cardinal, now ride
Like Jove in Thunder; we in Storms must meet them:
To Arms! to Arms! and then to Victory,
Resolved to Conquer, or resolved to dye.

Exeunt. ACT. IV.
Enter Abdelazer, Osmin bearing his Helmet of Feathers, Zarrack with his Sword
and Truncheon. Abd. COme Osmin, Arm me quickly, for the day
Comes on apace; and the fierce Enemy
Will take advantages, by our delay.

Enter Queen and Elvira. Qu. Oh my dear Moor!
The rude, exclaiming, ill-affected Multitude.
(Tempestuous as the Sea) run up and down,
Some crying, kill the Bastard, -- some the Moor;
These for King Philip, -- those for Abdelazer.

Abd. Your fears are idle, -- blow 'em into air.
I rusht amongst the thickest of their Crowds,
And with the awful splendor of my Eyes,
Like the Imperious Sun, dispersed the Clouds.
But I must Combat now a fiercer Foe,
The hot-brained Philip, and a jealous Cardinal.

Qu. And must you go, before I make you mine?

Abd. That Is my misfortune; -- when I return with Victory,
And lay my wreaths of Laurel at your feet,
You shall exchange them, for your glorious Fetters.

Qu. How can thou hope for Victory, when their numbers
So far exceed thy Powers?

Abd. What Is wanting there, we must supply with Conduct.
I know you will not stop at any thing
That may advance our Interest, and enjoyment.

Qu. Look back on what I have already done,
And after that, look forward with Assurance.

Abd. You then (with only Women in your Train)
Must to the Camp, and to the Cardinal's Tent; --
Tell him, your Love to him has drawn you thither:
Then undermine his Soul, -- you know the way on it.
And sooth him into a belief, that the best way to gain your heart, is to leave
Philip's Interest; urge it is the Kingdoms safety, and your own; and use your
fiercest threats, to draw him to a Peace with me: not that you Love me, but for
the Kingdoms good: then in a Tent which I will pitch on purpose, get him to
meet me: he being drawn off, thousands of Begots (who think to cheat the world
into an opinion, that fighting for the Cardinal is a pious work) will (when he
leaves the Camp) desert it too.


Qu. I understand you, and more then I have time to be
Instructed in, I will perform, and possibly
Before you can begin, I Will end my Conquests.

Abd. 'Twill be a Victory worthy of your Beauty.
-- I must to Horse, farewell my generous Mistress.

Qu. Farewell! and may thy Arms as happy prove,
As shall my Art, when it dissembles Love.

Exeunt. SCENE, Philip's Tent.
Enter Philip, Alonzo, and Guards. Phil. It Is a sad story thou have told,
Alonzo;
Yet 'twill not make me shed one single tear:
They must be all of blood, that I will offer,
To my dear Brothers Ghost! --
But gallant Friend, this good his ills have done,
To turn thee over to our juster Interest,
For thou did love him once.

Alm. Whilst I believed him honest, and for my Sisters sake;
But (...) his Crimes have made a Convert of me.

Phil. Gods! is it possible the Queen should countenance
His horrid Villainies?

Alon. Nay worse then so, it is thought she will marry him!

Phil. Marry him! then here upon my knees I vow,
To shake all Duty from my soul,
And all that reverence Children owe a Parent,
Shall henceforth be converted into hate.
-- Damnation! marry him! Oh I could curse my Birth! --
This will confirm the world in their opinion,
That she is the worst of women;
That I am basely born too, (as she gives it out)
That thought alone, does a just Rage inspire,
And kindles round my heart an active fire.

(kneels. (rises* Alon. A disobedience, Sir, to such a Parent,
Heaven must forgive the sin, if this be one:
-- Yet do not, Sir, in words abate that fire,
Which will assist you a more effectual way.

Phil. Death! I could talk of it an Age;
And like a Woman, fret my anger high,
Till like my Rage, I have advanced a Courage
Able to sight the World against my Mother!

Alon. Our wrongs without a Rage, will make us fight,
Wrongs that would make a Coward resolute.

Phil. Come, Noble Youth,
Let us join both our several wrongs in one,
And from them make a solemn resolution,
Never to part our Interest, till this Moor,
This worse then Devil Moor be sent to Hell.

Alon. I do.

Phil. Hark, -- hark, -- the Charge is sounded, let us to Horse,
St. Jacques for the right of Spain and me.

Exeunt. SCENE, a Grove.
Drums and Trumpets a far off, with noise of fighting at a distance: after a
little while, enter Philip in Rage. Phil. Oh unjust powers! why do you protect
this Monster; --
And this damned Cardinal, that comes not up
With the Castilian Troops; curse on his formal Politiques; --
( Enter Alonzo. -- Alonzo, where is the Moor?

Alon. The Moor! -- a Devil! -- never did Fiend of Hell,
Compelled by some Magicians Charms,
Break through the Prison of the folded Earth
With more swift horror, then this Prince of Fate
Breaks through our Troops, in spite of opposition.

Phil. Death! it is not his single arm that works these wonders,
But our Cowardice; -- Oh this Dog Cardinal! --

Enter Antonio. Anton. Sound a Retreat, or else the day is lost.

Phil. 'Ple beat that Cur to death that sounds Retreat.

Enter Sebastian. Sebast. Sound a Retreat.

Phil. Who is it that tempts my Sword? -- continue the Alarm,
Fight on Pell mell, -- fight -- kill -- be damned -- do any thing
But sound Retreat: -- Oh this damned Coward Cardinal! --

Exeunt. The noise of fighting near, after a little while Enter Philip again.
Phil. Not yet, ye Gods! Oh this eternal Coward --

Enter Alonzo. Alon. Sir, bring up your Reserves, or all is lost;
Ambition plumes the Moor, and makes him act
Deeds of such wonder, that even you would envy them.

Phil. It Is well; -- I Will raise my Glories to that dazzling height
Shall darken his, or set in endless Night.

Exeunt. SCENE, a Grove.
Enter Cardinal and Queen; the noise of a Battle continuing a far off all the
Scene. Qu. By all thy Love, by all thy languishments,
By all those sighs and tears paid to my Cruelty,
By all thy vows, thy passionate Letters sent,
I do conjure thee, go not forth to fight:
Command your Troops not to engage with Philip,
Who aims at nothing but the Kingdoms ruin,
-- Fernando's killed, -- the Moor has gained the power,
A power that you nor Philip can withstand;
And is it not better he were lost, then Spain?
Since one must be a Sacrifice. --
Besides, -- if I durst tell it,
There Is something I could whisper to thy soul,
Would make thee blush at every single good
Thou'ast done that insolent Boy: -- but it is not now.
A time for stories of so strange a nature, --
Which when you know, you will conclude with me,
That every man that Arms for Philip's Cause,
Merits the name of Traitor. --
Be wise in time, and leave his shameful Interest,
An Interest thou will curse thy self for taking;
Be wise, and make Alliance with the Moor.

Card. And Madam, should I lay aside my wrongs,
Those public injuries I have received,
And make a mean and humble Peace with him?
-- No, let Spain be ruined by our Civil Swords,
Ere for its safety I forgo mine Honor. --

Enter an Officer. Offic. Advance Sir, with your Troops, or we are lost.

Card. Give order --

Qu. That they stir not on their lives;
Is this the Duty that you owe your Country?
Is this your Sanctity, -- and Love to me?
Is It thus you treat the Glory I have offered
To raise you to my Bed?
To rule a Kingdom, be a Nations safety,
To advance in Hostile manner to their Walls,
Walls that confine your Countrymen, and Friends,
And Queen, to whom you have vowed eternal Peace,
Eternal Love; and will you Court in Arms?
Such rude Addresses would but ill become you.
No, -- from this hour renounce all claims to me,
Or Philip's Interest; -- for let me tell you, -- Cardinal,
This Love -- and that Revenge -- are inconsistent.

Card. But Madam --

Qu. No more; -- disband your Rebel Troops,
And straight with me to Abdelazer's Tent,
Where all his Claims he shall resign to you
Both in my self, the Kingdom, and the Crown:
You being departed, thousands more will leave him,
And you're alone the Prop to his Rebellion.

Enter Sebastian. Sebast. Advance, advance, my Lord, with all your Force,
Or else the Prince and Victory is lost,
Which now depends upon his single Valor;
Who like some Ancient Hero, or some God,
Thunders amongst the thickest of his Enemies,
Destroying all before him in such numbers,
That Piles of dead obstruct his passage to the living. --
Relieve him straight, my Lord, with our last Cavalry and hopes.

Card. I Will follow instantly --

Ex. Seb. Qu. Sir, but you shall not, unless it be to death: --
Shall you preserve the only man I hate,
And hate with so much reason? -- let him fall
A Victim to an injured Mothers Honor.
-- Come, I will be obeyed, -- indeed I must. --

(sawns on him, Card. When you're thus soft, can I retain my anger? --
Oh look but ever thus -- in spite of injuries --
I shall become as tame and peaceable,
As are your charming Eyes, when dressed in Love,
Which melting down my Rage, leave me defenseless.
-- Ah Madam, have a generous care of me,
For I have now resigned my power to you.

(shout within. Qu. What shouts are these?

Enter Sebastian. Sebast. My Lord, the Enemy is giving ground,
And Philip's arm alone sustains the day;
Advance Sir, and complete the Victory. --

Exit. Qu. Give order straight that a Retreat be sounded;
And whilst they do so, by me conducted
We Will instantly to Abdelazer's Tent: --
Have, -- have, my Lord, whilst I attend you here.

Exeunt severally. Cardinal going cut, is met by Philip. Phil. Oh damn your
lazy Order, where have you been, Sir?
-- But it is no time for questions,
Move forward with your Reserves.

Card. I will not, Sir.

Phil. How, will not!

Card. Now to advance would be impolitique;
Already by your desperate attempts,
You Have lost the best part of our hopes.

Phil. Death! you lie.

Card. Lie, Sir!

Phil. Yes, lie Sir: -- therefore come on,
Follow the desperate Reer-Guard, which is mine,
And where I Will dye or Conquer; -- follow my Sword
The bloody way it leads, or else by Heaven
I Will give the Moor the Victory in spite,
And turn my force on thee; --
Plague of your Cowardice, -- Come, follow me.

Ex. Card. SCENE, the Grove.
As Philip is going off, he is overtook by Alonzo, Antonio, Sebastian, and
other Officers: At the other side some Moor, and others of Abdelazer's Party,
enter and fall on Philip and the rest; -- the Moors are beaten off; -- one left
dead on the Stage. -- Enter Abdelazer, with Roderigo and some others. Abd. Oh
for more work, -- more souls to send to Hell!
-- Ha ha ha, here is one going thither, -- Sirrah -- Slave --
Moor -- who killed thee? -- how he grins: -- this breast,
Had it been tempered and made proof like mine,
It never would have been a mark for Fools.

Abd. going out: Enter Philip, Alonzo, Sebastian, Antonio, and Officers, as
passing over the Stage. Phil. I Will wear my Sword to th'Hilt, but I will find
The subject of my Vengeance. --
Moor, it is for thee I seek, where art thou Slave? --

Abd. Here, Philip --

( Abd. turns. Phil. Fate and Revenge, I thank thee! --

Abd. Why -- thou art brave, whoever begot thee.

Phil. Villain, a King begot me.

Abd. I know not that,
But I Will be sworn thy Mother was a Queen;
And I will kill thee handsomely for her sake.

offer to fight, their Parties hinder them. Alon. Hold -- ho'd, my Prince.

Osm. Great Sir, what mean you
(to Abd. The Victory being yours, to give your life away
On one so mad and desperate.

(their Parties draw. Phil. Alonzo, hold,
We two will be the Fate of this great day.

Abd. And I Will forgo all I Have already won,
And claim no Conquest; though whole heaps of Bodies,
Which this right hand has slain, declare me Victor.

Phil. No matter who is the Victor; I have thee in my view,
And will not leave thee,
Till thou have Crowned those heaps, and made 'em all
The glorious Trophies of my Victory. -- Come on Sir --

Alon. You shall not fight thus single;
If you begin, by Heaven we will all fall on*

Phil. Do thou suspect my power!
Oh I am armed with more then complete Steel,
The justice of my Quarrel; when I look
Upon my Fathers wrongs, my Brothers wounds,
My Mothers infamy, Spains misery,
I am all fire; and yet I am too cold
To let out blood enough for my Revenge:
-- Therefore stir not a Sword on my side.

Abd. Nor on mine.

They fight; both their Parties engage on either side; the Scene draws off and
discover both the Armies, which all fall on and make the main Battle: Philip
prevails, the Moors give ground: then the Scene closes to the Grove. Enter some
Moors flying in disorder. SCENE changes to a Tent.
Enter Abdelazer, Roderigo, Osmin, Zarrack, and some others of his Party. Rod.
Oh fly, my Lord, fly, for the day is lost.

Abd. There are three hundred and odd days in the year,
And cannot we lose one? -- dismiss thy fears,
They Will make a Coward of thee.

Osm. Sir, all the Noble Spaniards have forsook you;
Your Soldiers faint are round beset with Enemies,
Nor can you shun your Fate, but by your flight.

Abd. I can, -- and must, -- in spite of Fate:
The wheel of War shall turn about again,
And dash the Current of his Victories. --
This is the Tent I Have pitched, at distance from the Armies,
To meet the Queen and Cardinal;
Charmed with the Magic of Dissimulation,
I know by this h'as furled his Ensigns up,
And is become a tame and coward Ass.
a Retreat is sounded. -- Hark -- hark it is done; Oh my enchanting Engine!
-- Do thou not hear Retreat sounded?

Rod. Sure it is impossible!

Abd. She has prevailed: -- a woman's tongue and eyes,
Are Forces stronger then Artilleries.
Enter Queen, Cardinal, Women, and Soldiers. -- We are betrayed --

Qu. What means this jealousy? lay by your weapons
And embrace; -- the sight of these begets suspicion:
-- Abdelazer, by my Birth he comes in Peace,
Lord Cardinal, on my Honor so comes he.

Abd. Let him withdraw his Troops then.

Qu. They Are Guards for all our safeties:
Give me your hand, Prince Cardinal; -- thine, Abdelazer; --
(she brings them together, they embrace. This blessed Accord I do behold with
joy.

Card. Abdelazer,
I at the Queens command have met you here,
To know what it is you will propose to us.

Abd. Peace and eternal Friendship 'twixt us two*
How much against my will I took up Arms,
Be witness Heaven; nor was it in Revenge to you,
But to let out the infected blood of Philip,
Whose sole aim
Is to be King, -- which Spain will never suffer;
Spain gave me Education, though not Birth,
Which has intitl'd it my Native home,
To which such reverence and esteem I bear,
I will preserve it from the Tyrants rage. --
The People who once loved him, now abhor him,
And it is your power alone that buoys him up;
And when you have lifted him into a Throne,
It Is time to shake you off.

Card. Whilst I behold him as my Native Prince,
My Honor and Religion bids me serve him;
Yet not when I Am convinced that whilst I do so,
I injure Spain.

Abd. If he were so, the Powers above forbid
We should not serve, adore, and fight for him;
But Philip is a Bastard: -- nay 'twill surprise ye,
But that it is truth, the Queen will satisfy you.

Qu. With one bold word he has undone my Honor:
(weeps. Too bluntly, Abdelazer, you repeat,
That which by flow degrees you should have uttered.

Abd. Pardon my roughness, Madam, I meant well.

Card. Philip a Bastard!
If by such Arts you would divide me from him,
I shall suspect you would betray us both.

Qu. Sir, he informs you truth; and I blush less
To own him so, then that he is a Traitor.

Card. Philip a Bastard! Oh it cannot be: --
Madam, take heed you do not for Revenge,
Barter your dearer Honor, and lose both.

Qu. I know what is due to Honor, and Revenge,
But better what I owe to Spain, and you. --
You are a Prince oth' Blood, and may put off
The Cardinal when you please, and be a Monarch.

Card. Though my Ambition's equal to my Passion,
Neither shall make me act against those Principles
My Honor ever taught me to obey.
-- And Madam --
It Is a less sin, not to believe you here,
Then it is to doubt your Virtue.

Qu. I wish it were untold, if it must forfeit
The least of your Esteem; -- but that it is truth,
Be witness Heaven, my shame, my sighs, and tears.

(weeps. Card. Why Madam was it so long concealed from me?

Qu. The Circumstances I shall at leisure tell you:
And for the present,
Let it suffice, he cannot rule in Spain,
Nor can you side with him, without being made
As much incapable to reign as he.

Card. Though Love and Honor I have always made
The business of my life;
My soul retains too, so much of Ambition,
As puts me still in mind of what I am,
A Prince! and Heir to Spain!
Nor shall my blinded zeal to Loyalty,
Make me that glorious Interest resign,
Since Philip's claims are not so great as mine.
-- Madam, though I Am convinced I Have done amiss
In taking Arms for Philip,
Yet 'twill be difficult to dis-ingage my self.

Abd. Most easily; --
Proclaim it in the head of all your Troops,
The justice of your Cause for leaving him;
And tell 'em, it is a work of Piety
To follow your example:
The giddy Rout are guided by Religion,
More then by Justice, Reason, or Allegiance.
-- The Crown which I as a good Husband keep,
I will lay down upon the empty Throne;
Marry you the Queen, and fill it; -- and for me,
I Will ever pay you duty as a Subject.

(bows low. Card. On these Conditions all I am is yours;
Philip we cannot fear, all he can do
Is to retire for refuge into Portugal.

Abd. That would be dangerous; --
Is there no arts to get him in our power?

Card. Perhaps by Policy, and seeming Friendship,
For we have reason yet to fear his Force;
And since I Am satisfied he is not my lawful Prince,
I cannot think it an impiety
To sacrifice him to the Peace of Spain,
And every Spirit that loves Liberty;
First we will our Forces join, and make 'em yours,
Then give me your Authority to Arrest him;
If so we can surprise him, we will spare the hazard
Of a second Battle.

Abd. My Lord, retire into my inner Tent,
And all things shall be instantly performed.

Exeunt all. SCENE, the Grove.
Enter some of Philip's Party running over the Stage, pursued by Philip:
Alonzo, Sebastian, Antonio, and some few Officers more. Alon. Do not pursue
'em, Sir, such Coward Slaves
Deserve not death from that illustriate hand.

Phil. Eternal Plagues consume 'em in their flight:
Oh this damned Coward Cardinal has betrayed us!
When all our Swords were nobly died in blood,
When with red sweat that trickled from our wounds
We'ad dearly ern'd the long-disputed Victory,
Then to lose all! then to sound base Retreat!
It swells my anger up to perfect madness.

Alon. Indeed 'twas wondrous strange.

Sebast. I Am glad Sir --

Phil. Art glad of it? art glad we are abandoned?
That I, and thou have lost the hopefull'st day --

Sebast. Great Sir, I Am glad that you came off alive.

Phil. Thou have a lean face -- and a carrion heart --
A Plague upon the Moor and thee; -- Oh Alonzo,
To run away! -- followed by all the Army!
Oh I could tear my hair, and curse my soul to Air!
-- Cardinal -- thou Traitor Judas, that would sell
Thy God again, as thou have done thy Prince.
-- But come -- we are yet a few,
And we will fight till there be left but one; --
If I prove him, I Will dye a glorious death.

Ant. Yes, but the Cardinal has took pious care
It shall be in our beds.

Sebast. We are as bad as one already, Sir, for all our Fellows are craul'd
home, some with never a Leg, others with never an Arm, some with their Brains
beat out, and glad they escaped so.


Phil. But my dear Countrymen, you will stick to me.

1 Sold. Aye, would I were well off. --

(aside. Phil. Speak stout Seeva, will thou not?

1 Sold. Sceva Sir, who is that?

Phil. A gallant Roman, that fought by Caesar's side,
Till all his Body covered over with Arrows,
Showed like a monstrous Porcupine.

1 Sold. And did he dye, Sir?

Phil. He would not but have died for Caesar's Empire.

1 Sold. Hah, -- why Sir I Am none of Sceva, but honest Diego, yet would as
willingly dye as he, but that I have a Wife and Children; and if I dye, they
beg.


Phil. For every drop of blood which thou shall lose,
I Will give thy Wife -- a Diadem.

1 Sold. Stark mad, as I Am valiant. --

Enter Cardinal, Officers and Soldiers: Philip offers to run on him, is held
by Alonzo. Phil. Oh Heaven! is not that the Cardinal?
Traitor, how dare thou tempt my rage and justice?

Card. Your Pardon, Sir, I come in humble love
To offer happy Peace.

Phil. Was that thy aim when base Retreat was sounded?
Oh thou false Cardinal! -- let me go, Alonzo, --
Death! offer happy Peace! -- no offer War,
Bring Fire and Sword; -- Hell and damnation -- Peace!
Oh damn your musty Peace: -- No, will you fight, and cry,
Down with the Moor! and then I Will dye in peace.
I have a heart, two arms, a soul, a head,
I Will hazard these, -- I can but hazard all. --
Come -- I will kneel to thee, -- and be thy Slave, --
(kneels. I Will let thee tread on me, do any thing,
So this damned Moor may fall.

Card. Yes Sir, he shall --

Phil. Gods! shall he! -- thy Noble hand upon it,
And for this promise, take my grateful heart.
(embraces him. -- Shall Abdelazer fall!

Card. Yes, upon thee --
Like the tall ruins of a falling Tower,
As they embrace, the Guards seize him and the rest. To crush thee into dust:
--
Traitor, and Bastard, I arrest thee of High Treason.

Phil. Hoh! -- Traitor! -- and Bastard! -- and from thee!

they hold Philip's hands. Card. Guards, to your hands the Prisoner is
committed,
There Is your warrant: -- Alonzo, you are free.

Ex. Card. Phil. Prithee lend me one hand -- to wipe my eyes,
And see who it is dares Authorize this Warrant:
-- The Devil and his Dam! the Moor! -- and Queen!
Their Warrant! -- Gods! Alonzo, must we obey it?
Villains, you cannot be my Jaylors; there is no Prison,
No Dungeon deep enough; no Gate so strong,
To keep a man confined -- so mad with wrong.
-- Oh do thou weep, Alonzo!

Alon. I would fain shed a tear,
But from my eyes so many showrs are gone,
They are too poor to pay your sorrows Tribute;
There Is now no remedy, we must to Prison*

Phil. Yes, and from thence to death: --
I thought I should have had a Tomb hung round
With tattered Ensigns, broken Spears and Javelins;
And that my body with a thousand wounds,
Should have been borne on some Triumphant Chariot,
With solemn Mourning Drums and Trumpets sounding;
Whilst all the wondering World with grief and envy,
Had wished my Glorious Destiny their own:
But now, Alonzo, -- like a Beast I fall,
And hardly Pity waits my Funeral.

Exeunt. ACT. V.
SCENE I. A Presence Chamber, with a Throne and Canopy.
Enter Abdelazer, Cardinal, Alonzo, Ordonio, Roderigo, and other Lords, one
bearing the Crown, which is laid on the Table on a Cushion; the Queen, Leonora,
and Ladies. They all seat themselves, leaving the Throne and Chair of State
empty. Abdelazer rises and bows, Roderigo kneeling presents him with the Crown.
Abd. GRandees of Spain, if in this Royal Presence
There breaths a man, who having laid his hold
So fast on such a Jewel, and dares wear it
In the contempt of Envy, as I dare;
Yet uncompell'd (as freely as the Gods
Bestow their blessings) would give such Wealth away,
Let such a man stand forth: -- Are ye all fixed?
No wonder, since a King's a Deity!
And who'd not be a God! --
This glorious Prospect when I first saw the Light,
Met with my Infant hopes; nor have those Fetters
(Which e're I grew toward man, Spain taught me how to wear)
Made me forget what is due to that Illustrious Birth:
-- Yet thus -- I cast aside the Rays of Majesty, --
kneels, and lays the Crown on the Table. And on my knee, do humbly offer up
This splendid Powerful thing, and ease your fears
Of Usurpation and of Tyranny.

Alon. What new device is this?

(aside. Card. This is an Action generous and just; --
Let us proceed to new Election.

Abd. Stay, Peers of Spain, --
If young Prince Philip be King Philip's Son,
Then is he Heir to Philip, and his Crown;
But if a Bastard, then he is a Rebel,
And as a Traitor to the Crown should bleed:
That dangerous Populas Spirit must be laid,
Or Spain must languish under Civil Swords;
And Portugal taking advantages in these disorders,
(Assisted by the Malcontents within,
If Philip live) will bring Confusion home.
-- Our remedy for this, is first to prove,
And then proclaim him Bastard.

(aside. Alon. That project would be worth your Politiques.
-- How should we prove him Bastard?

Abd. Her Majesty being lately urged Conscience,
And much above her Honor prizing Spain,
Declared this Secret, but has not named the Man;
If he be Noble, and a Spaniard born,
He shall repair her same, by marrying her.

Card. No; Spaniard* or Moor, the daring Slave shall dye.

Qu. Would I were covered with a Veil of Night,
(weeps. That I might hide the blushes on my Cheeks;
But when your safety comes into dispute,
My Honor, nor my Life, must come in competition.
-- I Will therefore hide my eyes, and blushing own,
That Philip's Father is in the Presence now.

Alon. In The Presence! name him.

Qu. The Cardinal --

(All rise in amazement. Card. How Is this, Madam!

Abd. How! the Cardinal!

Card. I Philip's Father, Madam!

Qu. Lover -- is not all this done for thee!
Do thou not see a Kingdom and my self,
By this Confession, thrown into thy arms?

Card. On terms so infamous I must despise it.

Qu. Have I thrown by all sense of modesty,
To render you the Master of my Bed,
To be refused? -- was there another way? --

Card. I cannot yield; this cruelty transcends
All you have ever done me: -- Heavens! what a contest
Of Love, and Honor, swells my rising heart.

Qu. By all my Love, if you refuse me now,
Now when I have removed all difficulties,
I Will be Revenged a thousand killing ways.

Card. Madam, I cannot own so false a thing,
My Conscience, and Religion will not suffer me.

Qu. Away with all this canting; Conscience, and Religion!
No, take advice from nothing but from Love.

Card It Is certain I Am bewitched; -- she has a Spell
Hid in those charming Lips.

Alon. Prince Cardinal, what say you to this?

Card. I cannot bring it forth --

Qu. Do It, or you are lost for ever.

Card. Death! what is a woman's power!
And yet I can resist it.

Qu. And dare you disobey me?

Card. Is It not enough I Have given you up my power,
Nay and resigned my life into your hands,
But you would damn me too? -- I will not yield. --
Oh now I find a very Hell within me:
How am I misguided by my passion!

Alon. Sir, we attend your Answer.

Qu. It Is now near twenty years, when newly married,
(And it is the Custom here to marry young)
King Philip made a War in Barbary,
Won Tunis, Conquered Fez, and hand to hand
Slew great Abdela, King of Fez, and Father
To this Barbarian Prince.

Abd. I was but young, and yet I well remember
My Fathers wounds, -- poor Barbary; -- but no more.

Qu. In absence of my King, I lived retired,
Shut up in my Apartment with my Women,
Suffering no Visits, but the Cardinals,
To whom the King had left me as his Charge;
But he unworthy of that Trust reposed,
Soon turned his business into Love.

Card. Heavens! how will this story end?

(aside. Qu. A tale, alas! unpleasant to my Ear,
And for the which I banished him my Presence*
But oh the power of Gold! he bribes my Women,
That they should tell me (as a secret too)
The King (whose Wars were finished) would return
Without acquainting any with the time;
He being as Jealous, as I was fair and young,
Meant to surprise me in the dead of Night:
This passed upon my Youth, which never knew Art.

Card. Gods! is there any Hell but Woman's falsehood!

(aside. Qu. The following Night, I hasted to my Bed,
To wait my expected Bliss; -- nor was it long
Before his gentle steps approached my Ears:
Undressed he came, and with a Vigorous haste
Flew to my yielding Arms; I called him King!
My dear loved Lord! and in return he breathed
Into my bosom in soft gentle whispers --
My Queen! my Angel! my loved Isabella!
And at that word -- I need not tell the rest.

Alon. What Is all this, Madam, to the Cardinal?

Qu. Ah Sir, the night too short for his Caresses,
Made room for day, day that betrayed my shame,
For in my guilty Arms, I found the Cardinal!

Alon. Madam, why did not you complain of this?

Qu. Alas, I was but young, and full of fears;
Bashful, and doubtful of a just belief,
Knowing King Philips rash and jealous temper;
But from your Justice I expect Revenge.

Rod. His crime, my Lords, is death, by all our Laws.

Card. Have you betrayed me by my too much Faith?
Oh shameless Creature, am I disarmed for this?
Had I but so much ease to be enraged,
Sure I should kill thee for this Treachery;
But I Am all shame, and grief. -- By all that is Holy,
My Lords, I never did commit this Crime.

Abd. It Is but in vain, Prince Cardinal, to deny it.

Qu. Do not believe him, Lords; --
Revenge -- let Sentence pass upon the Traitor.

Card. I own that name with horror, which you drew me to,
When I betrayed the best of Men, and Princes;
And it is but just you fit me for despairs,
That may instruct me how to follow him in death:
Yet as I Am Prince oth' Blood, and Cardinal too,
You cannot be my Judges.

Abd. You shall be tried, Sir, as becomes your Quality.
Osmin, we commit the Cardinal to your Charge.

Card. Heaven! should I live to that! no,
I have within me a Private shame,
That shall secure me from the Public one.

Alon. A pretty turn of State, -- we shall all follow, Sir.

Card. The Powers above are just, --
Thus I my Prince a Sacrifice first made,
And now my self am on the Altar laid.

Ex. Card. Guarded. Abd. Madam, retire, you have acted so Divinely,
You Have filled my soul with new admiring Passion; --
I Will wait on you in your Apartment instantly,
And at your feet pay all my thanks, and Love.

Qu. Make haste, my dearest Moor, whilst I retire,
And fit my soul, to meet thy kind desire.

Ex. Queen and her Train, Leonora advancing to follow is staid by Abd. Abd.
Stay, beauteous Maid, stay and receive that Crown,
leads her back. Which as your due Heaven and all Spain present you with.

Alon. But granting Philip is -- that thing you call him,
If we must grant him so, who then shall Reign?
Not that we do not know who ought to Reign,
But ask who it is you will permit to do so.

( to Abd. Abd. Who but bright Leonora! the Royal Offspring
Of Noble Philip, whose Innocence and Beauty,
Without the advantage of her Glorious Birth,
Merits all Adoration.

All. With joy we do salute her Queen.

Abd. Live Leonora! beauteous Queen of Spain!

(shout. Alon. From Abdelazer this! it cannot be,
At least not real.

(aside. Abd. My Lords,
Be it now your care magnificently to provide
Both for the Coronation, and the Marriage
Of the fair Queen;
Let nothing be omitted that may show,
How we can pay, where we so vastly owe.

(bows. Alon. I am much bound to Spain, and you, my Lords*
For this great Condescension.

Leon. My Lords, I thank ye all,
And most the gallant Moor* -- I am not well --
(turns to Alon. Something surrounds my heart so full of death,
I must retire to give my sorrow breath.

Ex. Leon. followed by all but Abd. and Roderigo, who looks on Abd. Rod. Sir,
-- what have you done?

Abd. What every man that loves like me should do;
Undone my self forever, to beget
One moments thought in her, that I adore her;
That she may know, none ever loved like me,
I Have thrown away the Diadem of Spain: --
-- It Is gone! and there is no more to set but this --
(My heart) at all, and at this one last cast
Sweep up my former losses, or be undone.

Rod. You Court at a vast rate, Sir.

Abd. Oh she is a Goddess! a Creature made by Heaven!
To make my prosperous Toyls, all sweet and charming!
She must be Queen, I, and the Gods decree it.

Rod. Sir, is she not designed Alonzo's Bride?

Abd. Yes, so her self, and he have ill agreed;
But Heaven and I, am of another mind,
And must be first obeyed.

Rod. Alonzo will not yield his Interest easily.

Abd. Would that were all my stop to happiness; --
But Roderigo, this fond Amorous Queen
Sits heavy on my heart.

Rod. She Is but a woman, nor has more lives than one

Abd. True, Roderigo, and thou have dealt in Murders,
And know the safest way to --

Rod. How Sir! --

Abd. Thou dare not sure pretend to any Virtue;
Had Hell inspired thee with less Excellency
Than Arts of killing Kings! thou would never been raised
To that exalted height to have known my secrets.

Rod. But Sir --

Abd. Slave, look back upon the wretchedness I took thee from,
What merits had thou to deserve my bounty?
But Vice, brave prosperous Vice!
You Are neither Wise, nor Valiant.

Rod. I own my self that Creature raised by you,
And live but to repay you, name the way.

Abd. My business is -- to have the Queen removed;
She does expect my coming this very hour,
And when she does so, it is her custom to be retired,
Dismissing all Attendance, but Elvira.

Rod. The rest, I need not be instructed in.

Exit Rod. Enter Osmin. Osm. The Cardinal, Sir, is close confined with Philip.

Abd. It Is well.

Osm. And do you think it fit, Sir, they should live?

Abd. No, this day they both must dye, some sort of death
That may be thought was given them by themselves:
I Am sure I give them cause. -- Osmin, view well this Ring,
Whoever brings this Token to your hands,
Without considering Sex, or Quality,
Let 'em be killed.

Osm. Your will shall be obeyed in every thing.

Exeunt severally. SCENE, a fine Chamber. A Table and Chair.
Enter Queen and Elvira. Qu. Elvira, have thou dressed my Lodgings up
Fit to receive my Moor?
Are they all gay, as Altars, when some Monarch
Is there to offer up rich Sacrifices?
Have thou strewn all the Floor his feet must press,
With the soft newborn Beauties of the Spring?

Elv. Madam, I Have done as you commanded me.

Qu. Let all the Chambers too be filled with Lights;
There Is a Solemnity methinks in Night,
That does insinuate Love into the soul!
And makes the bashful Lover more assured.

Elv. Madam,
You speak as if this were your first Enjoyment.

Qu. My first! Oh Elvira, his Power, like his Charms,
His Wit, or Bravery! every hour renews:
Love gathers sweets like Flowers, which grow more fragrant
The nearer they approach maturity.
(knock. -- Hark! it is my Moor, -- give him Admittance straight.
The thought comes over me like a gentle Gale,
Raising my blood into a thousand Curls.

Elv. Madam, it is a Priest --

Qu. A Priest! oh send him quickly hence;
I would not have so cold, and dull an Object,
Meet with my Nobler sense, it is mortifying.

Elv. Perhaps it is some Petition from the Cardinal.

Qu. Why what have I to do with Priest or Cardinal?
Let him not enter. --

Elv. goes out, and returns with Roderigo, dressed like a Friar. Elv. From
Abdelazer, Madam.

Qu. H'as named a word will make all places free.

Rod. Madam, be pleased to send your Woman hence,
I Have something to deliver from the Moor,
Which you alone must be acquainted with.

Qu. Well, your Formality shall be allowed; -- retire --
( to Elv. What have you to deliver to me now?

Rod. This --

shows a Dagger, and takes her roughly by the hands. Qu. Hah --

Rod. You must not call for help, unless to Heaven.

Qu. What daring thing art thou?

Rod. One that has now no time to answer thee.

stabs her, she struggles, her arm bleeds. Qu. Oh ho'd thy killing hand! I am
thy Queen.

Rod. Thou may be Devil too, for ought I know;
I Will try thy substance thus --

(stabs again. Qu. Oh Abdelazar --
Thou have well revenged me -- on my sins of Love; --
he seats her in the Chair. But shall I die thus tamely unrevenged? --
-- Help -- murder -- help --

(he offers to stab again. Enter Elvira, and other Women. Elv. Oh Heavens! the
Queen is murdered! -- help the Queen!

Rod. offers to stab Elv. Enter Abdelazer. Abd. Hah! the Queen! what
Sacrilegious hand,
Or heart so Brutal --
Durst thus profane the Shrine adored by me!
Guard well the Passages. --

Qu. Thou art that Sacrilegious -- Brutal thing, --
And false as are the Deities thou worship'st.

Abd. Gods! let me not understand that killing language!
-- Inform me quickly, how you came thus wounded,
Lest looking on that Sacred stream of blood,
I dye e're I Have revenged you, on your Murderer.

Qu. Haste then, and kill thy self; thou art my Murderer:
Nor had his hand, if not by thee instructed,
Aimed at a sin so dangerous. --

Abd. -- Surely she will live. -- ( aside) -- This! --
Can mischief dwell beneath this Reverend shape?
Confess who taught thee so much cruelty!
Confess! or I will kill thee. --

Rod. The Cardinal.

Qu. The Cardinal!

Abd. The Cardinal! -- Oh impious Traitor! --
How came I mentioned then?

Rod. To get Admittance.

Abd. But why do I delay thy punishment!
Dye, -- and be damned together. -- ( aside.)
(stabs him. -- But oh my Queen! -- Elvira, -- call for help!
Have I removed all that opposed our flame,
(kneels. To have it thus blown out? thus in a minute!
When I, all full of Youthful fire! all Love!
Had raised my soul with hopes of near delights,
-- To meet thee cold, -- and pale; -- to find those Eyes,
Those Charming Eyes thus dying; -- Oh ye Powers! --
Take all the prospect of my future joys,
And turn it to despair, -- since thou art gone. --

Qu. Cease -- cease -- your kind complaints, -- my struggling soul,
'Twixt Death -- and Love -- holds an uneasy contest;
This will not let it stay, -- nor that depart; --
And whilst I hear thy voice -- thus breathing Love,
It hovers still -- about -- the grateful -- sound.
-- My Eyes -- have took -- an everlasting leave --
Of all that blessed their sight, and now a gloomy darkness
Benights the wishing sense, -- that vainly strives --
To take another view; -- but it is too late, --
And life -- and Love -- must yield -- to death -- and -- Fate.

(dies. Abd. Farewell my greatest Plague --
(he rises with joy. Thou were a most impolitique loving thing,
And having done my business which thou were born for,
'Twas time thou should retire,
And leave me free to Love, and Reign alone.
Enter Leonora, Alonzo, Ordonio, and other men and women. -- Come all the
world, and pay your sorrows here,
Since all the world has Interest in this loss.

Alon. The Moor in tears! nay then the sin was his.

Leon. The Queen my Mother dead!
How many sorrows will my heart let in,
Ere it will break in pieces!

(weeps over her. Alon. I know the source of all this Villainy,
And need not ask you how the Queen came murdered.

Elv. My Lord, that Friar, from the Cardinal did it.

Alon. The Cardinal! --
It Is possible, -- for the injuries she did him
aside. Could be repaid with nothing less than death.
-- My Fair, your griefs have been so just of late,
I dare not beg that you would weep no more;
Though every tear those lovely Eyes let fall,
Give me a killing wound: -- remove the Body,
Guards remove the body. Ex. all but Alo. and Leo. Such objects suit not souls
so soft as thine.

Leon. With horrors I am grown of late familiar;
I saw my Father dye, and lived the while,
I saw my beauteous Friend, and thy loved Sister,
Florella, whilst her breast was bleeding fresh;
Nay and my Brothers too, all full of wounds!
The best and kindest Brother, that ever Maid was blessed with,
Poor Philip bound, and led like Victims for a Sacrifice:
All this I saw, and lived --
And can thou hope for pity from that heart,
Whose hardened sense is proof against all these miseries?
-- This Moor, Alonzo, is a subtle Villain,
Yet of such Power, we scarce dare think him such.

Alon. It Is true, my charming Fair, he is that Villain,
As ill, and powerful too; yet he has a heart
That may be reached with this, -- but it is, not time,
(points to his Sword. We must dissemble yet which is an Art
Too foul for souls so Innocent as thine.
Enter Abdelazer. -- The Moor!
Hell! will he not allow us sorrowing time.

Abd. Madam, I come to pay my humblest duty,
And know what service you command your Slave.

Leon. Alas, I Have no Commands, or if I had,
I am too wretched now to be obeyed.

Abd. Can one so fair, and great, ask any thing
Of Men, or Heaven, they would not grant with joy?

Leon. Heavens will I Am not permitted to dispute,
And may implore in vain; but it is in you
To grant me what may yet preserve my life.

Abd. In me! in me! the humblest of your Creatures!
By yon bright Sun, or your more splendid Eyes,
I would divest my soul of every hope,
To gratify one single wish of yours;
-- Name but the way. --

Leon. I Am so unhappy, that the only thing
I have to ask, is what you must deny;
-- The liberty of Philip. --

Abd. How! Philips liberty! -- and must I grant it!
I (in whose hands Fortune had put the Crown)
Had I not loved the good and Peace of Spain,
Might have disposed it to my own advantage;
And shall that Peace,
Which I Have preferred above my proper Glories,
Be lost again in him, in him a Bastard!

Alon. That he is a Bastard, is not Sir believed;
And she that could love you, might after that
Do any other sin, and 'twas the least
Of all the number to declare him Bastard.

Abd. How Sir! that could love me! what is there here --
Or in my soul, or Person, may not be beloved?

Alon. I spoke without reflection on your Person,
But of dishonest love, which was too plain,
From whence came all the Ills we have endured;
And now being warm in mischiefs,
Thou do pursue the Game, till all be thine.

Abd. Mine!

Alon. Yes, thine; --
The little humble Mask which you put on
Upon the face of Falsehood, and Ambition,
Is easily seen through; you gave a Crown!
But you will command the Kingly power still,
Arm, and disband, destroy or save at pleasure.

Abd. Vain Boy, (whose highest fame,
Is that thou art the great Alvare's Son)
Where learnt you so much daring, to upbraid
My generous Power thus falsely? -- do you know me?

Alon. Yes, Prince, and it is that knowledge makes me dare;
I know thy fame in Arms; I know in Battles
Thou have performed deeds much above thy years:
My Infant courage too,
(By the same Master taught) grew up to thine,
When thou in Age out-didst me, not in Bravery.
-- I know thou'st greater Power too, -- thank thy Treachery!

Abd. Do thou not fear that Power?

Alon. By Heaven not I,
Whilst I can this -- command.

(lays his hand on his Sword. Abd. I too command a Sword,
( Abd. lays his hand on his, and comes close up to him* But not to draw on
thee, Alonzo;
Since I can prove thy Accusations false
By ways more grateful: -- take this Ring, Alonzo,
The sight of it will break down Prison Gates,
And set all free, as was the first born man.

Alon. What means this turn?

Abd. To enlarge Philip; but on such Conditions,
As you think fit to make for my security:
And as you are Brave, deal with me as I merit.

Alon. Art thou in earnest? --

Abd. I am, by all that is Sacred.

Leon. Oh let me fall before you, and never rise.
Till I have made you know what Gratitude
Is fit for such a Bounty! --
Haste, my Alonzo, -- haste -- and treat with Philip;
Nor do I wish his freedom, but on such terms
As may be advantageous to the Moor.

Alon. Nor I, by Heaven! I know the Prince's soul,
Though it be fierce, 't has Gratitude and Honor!
And for a deed like this, will make returns,
Such as are worthy of the brave Obliger.

Exit Alon. Abd. Yes, if he be not gone to Heaven before you come.
(aside. -- What will become of Abdelazer now?
Who with his Power, has thrown away his Liberty.

Leon. Your Liberty! Oh Heaven forbid that you,
Who can so generously give Liberty,
Should be deprived of it!
It must not be whilst Leonora lives.

Abd. It Is she that takes it from me.

Leon. I! Alas, I would not for the world
Give you one minutes pain.

Abd. You cannot help it, it is against your will!
Your Eyes insensibly do wound and kill!

Leon. What can you mean? and yet I fear to know.

Abd. Most charming of your Sex! had Nature made
This clouded face, like to my heart, all Love,
It might have spared that language which you dread;
Whose rough harsh found, unfit for tender Ears,
Will ill express the business of my life.

Leon. Forbear it, if that business, Sir, be Love.

Abd. Gods!
Because I want the Art to tell my story
In that soft way, which those can do whose business
Is to be still so idly employed,
I must be silent, and endure my pain;
Which Heaven never gave me so much tameness for.
Love in my soul! is not that gentle thing
It is in other breasts; instead of Calms,
It ruffles mine into uneasy Storms.
-- I would not Love, if I could help it, Madam;
But since it is not to be resisted here --
You must permit it to approach your Ear.

Leon. Not when I cannot hear it, Sir, with Honor.

Abd. With Honor!
Nay I can talk in the defense of that:
By all that is Sacred, it is a flame as virtuous,
As every thought inhabits your fair soul,
And it shall learn to be as gentle too;
-- For I must merit you --

Leon I will not hear this language! merit me!

Abd. Yes. -- why not?
You're but the Daughter of the King of Spain,
And I am Heir to Great Abdela, Madam.
I can command this Kingdom you possess,
(Of which my Passion only made you Queen)
And reassume that which your Father took
From mine, -- a Crown as bright as that of Spain.

Leon. You said you would be gentle --

Abd. I will! this sullen heart shall learn to bow,
And keep it self within the bounds of Love;
Its language I Will deliver out in fighs,
Soft as the whispers of a yielding Virgin.
I could transform my soul to any shape;
Nay I could even teach my Eyes the Art
To change their natural fierceness into smiles.
-- What is it I would not do to gain that heart!

Leon. Which never can be yours! that and my vows,
Are to Alonzo given; which he lays claim to
By the most Sacred ties, Love and Obedience;
All Spain esteems him worthy of that Love.

Abd. More worthy it than I! it was a Woman,
A nice, vain, peevish Creature that pronounced it;
Had it been Man, 't had been his last transgression!
-- His Birth! his glorious Actions! are they like mine?

Leon. Perhaps his Birth wants those advantages,
Which Nature has laid out in Beauty on his Person.

Abd. Aye! there is your cause of hate! Cursed be my Birth,
And cursed be Nature, that has died my skin
With this ungrateful color! could not the Gods
Have given me equal Beauty with Alonzo!
-- Yet as I am, I Have been in vain Adored,
And Beauties great as thine have languish'd for me.
The Lights put out! thou in my naked arms
Wilt find me soft and smooth as polisht Ebony;
And all my kisses on thy balmy lips as sweet,
As are the Breezes, breathed amidst the Groves*
Or ripening Spices in the height of day:
As vigorous too,
As it each Night were the first happy moment
I laid thy panting body to my bosom.
On that transporting thought! --
See, -- I can bend as low, and sigh as often,
(kneels. And sue for blessings only you can grant,
As any fair and soft Alonzo can; --
If you could pity me as well. --
(rises with anger. But you are deaf, and in your Eyes I read
A scorn which animates my Love and Anger;
Nor know I which I should dismiss or cherish.

Leon. The last is much more welcome than the first;
Your Anger can but kill, but Sir your Love --
Will make me ever wretched, since it is impossible
I ever can return it.

Abd. Why kill me then! you must do one or the other,
(kneels. For thus -- I cannot live: -- why do thou weep?
Thy every tear's enough to drown my soul! --
How tame Love renders every seeble sense!
(rises. -- Gods! I shall turn Woman, and my Eyes inform me
The Transformation's near* -- death! I Will not endure it,
I Will fly before she has quite undone my soul. --
(offers to go. But it is not in my power, -- she holds it fast, --
And I can now command no single part. --
(returns. Tell me, bright Maid, -- if I were amiable,
And you were uningag'd, could you then love me?

Leon. No! I could dye first.

Abd. Hah! -- awake my soul from out this drowsy fit,
And with thy wonted Bravery, scorn thy Fetters.
-- By Heaven it is gone! and I am now my self: --
Be gone, my dull submission! my lazy flame
Grows sensible! and knows for what 'twas kindled.
-- Coy Mistress, you must yield, and quickly too:
Were you devout as Vestals, pure as their Fire,
Yet I would wanton in the rifled spoils
Of all that sacred Innocence and Beauty.
-- Oh my desires grow high!
Raging as Midnight flames let loose in Cities,
And like that too, will ruin where it lights.
-- Come, -- this Apartment was designed for pleasure,
And made thus silent, and thus gay for me;
There I Will convince that error, that vainly made thee think
I was not meant for Love. --

Leon. Am I betrayed! are all my Women gone!
And have I naught but Heaven for my defense!

Abd. None else, and that is too distant to befriend you.

Leon. Oh take my life, and spare my dearer Honor!
-- Help! help! -- ye Powers that favor innocence.

Enter Women. Just as the Moor is going to force in Leonora, Enters to him
Osmin in haste. Osm. My Lord, Alonzo --

Abd. What of him, you Slave, -- is he not secured?
Speak, dull Intruder, that know not times and seasons,
Or get thee hence.

Osm. Not till I Have done the business which I came for.

Abd. Slave! -- that -- thou came for.

(stabs him in the arm. Osm. No, 'twas to tell you, that Alonzo,
Finding himself betrayed, made brave resistance;
Some of your Slaves h'as killed, and some h'as wounded.

Abd. It Is time he were secured;
I must assist my Guards, or all is lost.

Exit. Leon. Sure Osmin from the Gods thou came,
To hinder my undoing; and if thou dy'st,
Heaven will almost forgive thy other sins,
For this one pious deed! --
But yet I hope thy wound's not mortal.

Osm. It Is only in my arm; -- and Madam for this pity,
I Will live to do you service.

Leon. What service can the Favorite of the Moor,
Trained up in blood and mischiefs, render me?

Osm. Why Madam, I command the Guard of Moors,
Who will all dye, when e're I give the word.
-- Madam, 'twas I caused Philip and the Cardinal
To fly to the Camp,
And gave 'em warning of approaching death.

Leon. Heaven bless thee for thy goodness.

Osm. And I am weary now of being a Tyrants Slave,
And bearing blows too; the rest I could have suffered.
-- Madam, I Will free the Prince!
But see, the Moor returns. --

Leon. That Monsters presence I must fly, as from a killing Plague.

Ex. with her Women Enter Abdelazer, with Zarrack and a Train of Moors. Abd. It
is Prodigious, that a single man
Should with such Bravery defend his life,
Amongst so many Swords; -- but he is safe.
Osmin, I am not used to sue for Pardon,
And when I do, you ought to grant it me.

Osm. I did not merit, Sir, so harsh a usage.

Abd. No more, I am ashamed to be upbraided,
And will repair the injury I did thee.

Osm. Acknowledgment from you is pay sufficient.

Abd. Yet Osmin, I should chide your negligence,
Since by it Philip lives still, and the Cardinal.

Osm. I had designed it, Sir, this Evenings Sacrifice.

Abd. Zarrack shall now perform it, -- and instantly:
Alonzo too must bear 'em company.

Zar. I Will show my Duty in my haste, my Lord.

Exit Zar. Osm. Death! I Am undone; -- I Will after him, and kill him.

(offers to go. Abd. Osmin, I Have business with you --

( Osm. comes back bowing. As they are going off, Enter Leonora, Ordonio, other
Lords, and Women. Leon. Oh Prince! for pity hear and grant my suit.

(kneels. Abd. When so much Beauty's prostrate at my feet,
What is it I can deny? -- rise, thou brightest Virgin
That ever Nature made;
Rise, and command my life, my soul, my honor!

Leon. No, let me hang for ever on your knees,
Unless you will grant Alonzo liberty.

Abd. Rise, I will grant it, though Alonzo, Madam,
Betrayed that Trust I had reposed in him.

Leon. I know there is some mistake; let me negotiate
Between my Brother, and the gallant Moor.
I cannot force your Guards,
There is no danger in a Woman's arm.

Abd. In your bright Eyes there is, that may corrupt 'em more,
Than all the Treasures of the Eastern Kings.
Yet Madam, here I do resign my Power,
Act as you please, dismiss Alonzo's Chains.
And since you are so generous, to despise
This Crown, which I have given you,
Philip shall owe his Greatness to your Bounty,
And whilst he makes me safe, shall Rule in Spain.
(whispers. -- Osmin --

Ord. And will you trust him, Madam!

Leon. If he deceive me, it is more happy far
To dye with them, than live where he inhabits.

Osm. It shall be done. --

Abd Go Osmin, wait upon the Queen: --
And when she is confined, I Will visit her,
Where if she yield, she reigns; if not, she dies.

aside. Ex. Abd. one way, Leon. Osm. and the rest another. SCENE, a Prison.
Discovers Philip chained to a Post, and over against him the Cardinal and
Alonzo in Chains. Phil. Oh all ye cruel Powers! is it not enough
I am deprived of Empire, and of Honor!
Have my bright Name stolen from me, with my Crown!
Divested of all Power! all Liberty!
And here am Chained, like the sad Andromede,
To wait destruction from the dreadful Monster!
Is not all this enough without being damned,
To have thee, Cardinal, in my full view!
If I could reach my Eyes, I Would be revenged
On the officious and accursed Lights,
For guiding so much torment to my soul.

Card. My much wronged Prince! you need not wish to kill
By ways more certain, than by upbraiding me
With my too credulous, shameful past misdeeds.

Phil. If that would kill, I Would weary out my tongue
With an eternal repetition of thy Treachery; --
Nay, and it should forget all other language,
But Traitor! Cardinal! which I would repeat,
Till I had made my self as raging mad,
As the wild Sea, when all the Winds are up!
And in that Storm, I might forget my grief.

Card. Would I could take the killing Object from your Eyes.

Phil. Oh Alonzo, to add to my distraction
Must I find thee a sharer in my Fate!

Alon. It is my duty, Sir, to dye with you. --
But Sir, my Princess
Has here -- a more than equal claim to grief;
And fear for her dear safety, will deprive me
Of this poor life, that should have been your Sacrifice.

Enter Zarrack with a Dagger; gazes on Philip. Phil. Kind Murderer, welcome!
quickly free my soul!
And I will kiss the Sooty hand that wounds me.

Zar. Oh, I see you can be humble.

Phil. Humble! I Will be as gentle as a Lovesick Youth,
When his dear Conqu'ress sighs a hope into him,
If thou will kill me! -- Pity me, and kill me.

Zar. I hope to see your own hand do that office.

Phil. Oh thou were brave indeed,
If thou would lend me but the use of one!

Zar. You Will want a Dagger then.

Phil. By Heaven no, I Would run it down my throat,
Or strike my pointed fingers through my breast.

Zar. Ha, ha, ha, what pity it is you want a hand.

Enter Osmin. Phil. Osmin! sure thou will be so kind to kill me!
Thou had a soul was humane.

Osm. Indeed I will not, Sir, you are my King!

(unbinds him. Phil. What mean thou?

Osm. To set you free, my Prince!

Phil. Thou art some Angel sure, in that dark Cloud.

Zar. What mean thou, Traitor!

Osm. Wait till your eyes inform you.

Card. Good Gods! what mean thou!

Osm. Sir, arm your hand with this.

Gives Phil. a Sword, goes to undo Alonzo. Zar. Thou art half damned for this!
I Will to my Prince! --

Phil. I Will stop you on your way, -- lie there; -- your tongue
(kills him. Shall tell no tales to day: -- Now Cardinal -- but hold,
I scorn to strike thee whilst thou art unarmed,
Yet so thou did to me;
For which I have not leisure now to kill thee.
-- Here, take thy liberty; -- nay do not thank me,
By Heaven! do not mean it as a grace.

Osm. My Lord, take this; --
to Alon. and the Card. And this -- to arm your Highness.

Alon. Thou do amaze me!

Osm. Keep in your wonder with your doubts, my Lord.

Phil. We cannot doubt, whilst we are thus fortified --
looking on his Sword. Come Osmin, let us fall upon the Guards.

Osm. There are no Guards, Great Sir, but what are yours;
And see -- your Friend l've brought to serve ye too.

(opens a back door. Enter Leonora and Women, Ordonio, Sebastian Antonio, etc.
Phil. My dearest Sister safe!

Leon. Whilst in your presence, Sir, and you thus Armed.

Osm. The Moor approaches, -- now be ready all.

Phil. That name I never heard with joy till now;
Let him come on, and armed with all his Powers,
Thus singly I defy him.

(draws. Enter Abdelazer. Osmin secures the door. Abd. Hah! betrayed! and by my
Slaves! by Osmin too!

Phil. Now thou damned Villain! true born Son of Hell!
Not one of thy Infernal Kin shall save thee.

Abd. Base Coward Prince!
Whom the admiring world mistakes for brave;
When all thy boasted Valor, fierce and hot
As was thy Mother in her height of Lust,
Can with the aid of all these -- treacherous Swords
Take but a single life! -- but such a life,
As amongst all their store the envying Gods
Has not another such to breath in man.

Phil. Vaunt on, thou monstrous Instrument of Hell!
For I Am so pleased to have thee in my power,
That I can hear thee number up thy sins,
And yet be calm, whilst thou art near damnation:

Abd. Thou lie, thou can not keep thy temper in;
For had thou so much bravery of mind,
Thou Would fight me singly; which thou dare not do.

Phil. Not dare!
By Heaven if thou were twenty Villians more,
And I had all thy weight of sins about me,
I durst thus venture on: -- forbear, Alonzo.

Alon. I will not, Sir.

Phil. I was indeed too rash; it is such a Villain,
As should receive his death from naught but Slaves.

Abd. Thou'st reason, Prince! nor can they wound my body,
More then I Have done thy Fame; for my first step
To my Revenge, I whor'd the Queen thy Mother.

Phil. Death! though this I knew before, yet the hard word
Runs harshly through my heart; --
If thou had murdered fifty Royal Ferdinands,
And with inglorious Chains as many years
Had loaded all my limbs, 't had been more pardonable
Then this Eternal stain upon my name:
-- Oh thou have breathed thy worst of venom now.

Abd. My next advance, was poisoning of thy Father.

Phil. My Father poisoned! and by thee! thou Dog,
Oh that thou had a thousand lives to lose,
Or that the world depended on thy single one,
That I might make a Victim
Worthy to offer up to his wronged Ghost. --
But stay, -- there is something in thy count of sins untold,
That I must know; not that I doubt, by Heaven,
That I am Philip's Son. --

Abd. Not for thy ease, but to declare my malice,
Know Prince, I made thy amorous Mother
Proclaim thee Bastard, when I missed of killing thee.

Phil. Gods! let me contain my rage!

Abd. I made her too, betray the credulous Cardinal,
And having then no farther use of her,
Satiated with her Lust,
I set Roderigo on to murder her:
Thy death had next succeeded; and thy Crown
I would have laid at Leonora's feet.

Alon. How! durst you love the Princess!

Abd. Fool, durst! had I been born a Slave,
I durst with this same Soul do any thing:
Yes! and the last sense that will remain about me,
Will be my Passion for that charming Maid,
Whom I Would enjoy e're now, but for thy Treachery.

( to Osmin. Phil. Dflowr'd my Sister! Heaven punish me Eternally
If thou out-liv'st the minute thou'st declared it.

Abd. I will, in spite of all that thou can do:
-- Stand off, Foolhardy Youth, if thou would be safe,
And do not draw thy certain ruin on,
Or think that e're this hand was armed in vain.

Phil. Poor angry Slave, how I contemn thee now.

Abd. As humble Huntsmen do the generous Lion;
Now thou dare see me lash my sides, and roar,
And bite my snare in vain; who with one look,
(Had I been free) had shrunk into the Earth
For shelter from my Rage:
And like that noble Beast, though thus betrayed,
I Have yet an awful fierceness in my looks,
Which makes thee fear to approach; and it is at distance
That thou dare kill me: for come but in my reach,
And with one grasp, I would confound thy hopes.

Phil. I Will let thee see how vain thy boastings are,
And unassisted by one single rage,
Thus -- make an easy passage to thy heart.
Runs on him, all the rest do the like in the same minute: Abd. aims at the
Prince, and kills Osmin: and falls dead himself. -- Dye with thy sins
unpardoned, and forgotten. --

(shout within. Alon. Great Sir, your Throne and Kingdom want you now;
Your People rude with joy do fill each Street,
And long to see their King, -- whom Heaven preserve.

(kneels. All. Long live Philip King of Spain: --

Phil I thank ye all; -- and now my dear Alonzo,
Receive the recompense of all thy sufferings,
Whilst I create thee Duke of Salamancha.

Alon. Thus low I take the bounty from your hands.

(kneels. Leon. Rise Sir, my Brother now has made us equal.

Card. And shall this joyful day, that has restored you
To all the Glories of your Birth and merits,
That has restored all Spain the greatest Treasure
That ever happy Monarchy possessed,
Leave only me unhappy? when, Sir, my crime
Was only too much Faith: -- thus low I fall,
And from that store of mercy Heaven has given you,
Implore you would dispense a little here.

Phil. Rise, (though with much a-do) I will forgive you.

Leon. Come, my dear Brother, to that glorious business
Our Birth and Fortunes call us, let us haste,
For here methinks we are in danger still.

Phil. So after Storms, the joyful Mariner
Beholds the distant wished for shore afar,
And longs to hring the rich-fraight Vessel in,
Fearing to trust the faithless Seas again.

The End of the Play.

