THE BEHAVIOR OF Mr. Will. Staley IN NEWGATE, After his Condemnation for
High Treason.

With the substance of his last SPEECH and DISCOURSES at the usual place of
Execution,

Whither being drawn on a Sledge, he was Hanged and Quartered there,

On Tuesday the 26th of this instant November. 1678.

LICENSED, 1678.

LONDON: Printed for R. G. 1678.

The Behavior OF Mr. Will. Staley IN NEWGATE After CONDEMNATION.
COncerning the Trial of this Person, Care has already been taken by
Authority, to have a full and satisfactory Account made public; whereby it
will appear, for what Horrid and Treasonable words against the Sacred Life and
Person of the Best of Kings, his Majesty, our most Gracious Sovereign; and upon
what full and clear Evidence, and fair Hearing, the Prisoner was Convicted, and
Condemned to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered. After which dreadful Sentence he
was carried back from Westminster Hall to Newgate, from whence he came, having
time allowed him from that Thursday to the Tuesday following, to fit and
prepare himself for that great and terrible Change. As his Education had been
in the Popish Profession, and (as it is said) amongst the most dangerous of that
Party, I mean the Jesuits beyond the Seas; so he did not stick to own himself
a Roman Catholic: However, Mr. Ordinary, according both to his Office and
Christian inclinations to take all opportunities for the good of Souls, went
several times to visit him, and offer his Ministerial Assistances; whom he
received with much respect, desiring him to come as often as he could; who
failed not therein, but used the most pressing Arguments, as well to bring him
to a sense of the detestable heinousness of the Crime for which he was to
suffer, and other his Sins; as also to take him off from the Errors and
Superstitions of the Popish Church; not to flatter himself with any previous
Dispensations, or subsequent Pardon from the Sea of Rome, or any of its
Priests, or of any Prayers or Offices that might be said for him after Death,
for that all those things would prove wholly vain and useless to his Soul, when
it should approach the Divine Tribunal, where nothing would stand him in stead,
but only the Merits of our Lord Jesus, and to be clothed with his
Righteousness: that he having but a few Minutes left to secure his Eternal
Condition, it therefore behoved him with all his might, to lay hold on that
Rock of Ages, by casting away all superstitious Conceits, and getting a true
and lively Faith, so as not to put any confidence in Men or Angels, but in
Christ alone. To come out from a people of Blood, and not suffer them to
destroy his Soul too by the in delusions, who had been the occasion of bringing
his Body to an ignominious destruction. To consider the excellency of true
Protestant Principles, as founded on the un-erring Word of God, and not on the
uncertain Traditions of Men, and incomparably beyond any others, most advancing
the grand designs of Christianity, viz. Glory to God, Peace on Earth, and Good
will toward Men. Whereas the Tenets which the Church of Rome has added, are
derogatory to Gods honor, Christ's merits, full of Superstition and Idolatry,
destructive to Government and Society, invented only to serve Ambition or
Covetousness, without any footsteps in Holy Scripture, and never owned in the
Primitive Church for several hundred years, etc. Such and the like pious
Exhortations (but much more at large and pathetically delivered) the Minister
urged to him: which he heard with a becoming attention; But returned not much
in answer, save only frequent Sighs, and sometimes short private ejaculations.

Indeed after his Condemnation, he was all along very reserved in words, and
abstemious as to Drink or Victuals, eating very little, and spent the last
night almost wholly at his Devotions.

On Tuesday the 26th instant, between Ten and Eleven of the Clock, he was
brought out and put upon the Sledge, drawn with four Horses, in which being
tied, he lay leaning on the straw with his back, and sometimes raised himself
and sat up. He had on a very good Black Suit, a becoming Perriwig, and Silk
Stockings; but his Hat he put not on. His Countenance was grave and composed,
expressing by the elevation of his Hands and Eyes, and motion of his Lips, very
frequent marks of Devotion. Through all the way he was attended with a very
extraordinary Guard; so many Constables, Watchmen, etc. as the like has not for
many years bin seen.

Being come to Tyburn the common place of Execution, he did not stand to make
any formal Speech; but in several discourses, though he did not absolutely deny
the words, seemed willing to have extenuated his Guilt, by alleging that he
had no Traitorous Intention, etc. However, he prayed very fervently, and
appeared to be attentive to the discourses of the Minister; and so begging very
heartily all good people to pray for him, he submitted to his Sentence, and was
H^ng'd and Quartered, many people pitying his person, but all acknowledging
the Justice of his punishment, and detesting his Traitorous Crime.

FINIS.

