A Caveat for Sinners, OR, A Warning for Swearers, Blasphemers, and Adulterers.
Showing, the Vengeance of the Almighty, inflicted upon several, whose habital
custom to the aforementioned and horrid Sins, rendered them the objects of
God's Wrath; as you may hear by the Sequel, Very Necessary to be placed up in
the Houses of every good Christian, that they may avoid the like Crimes.
Written by that Reverend Divine, Mr. R. B.
The Sin of Swearing forbidden by our Savior.


Our Savior commands to Bless them that Curse, Luke 28. Accustom not thy
Mouth to Swearing, for in it many falls; neither take up for a custom, the
naming of the Holy One, for thou shall not go unpunished for such things: The
Plague shall never depart from the house of the Swearer.

THou that these Lines do either read or hear,
Let Judgments fill thy heart with dread and fear;
For God is Just, do not thy self deceive,
The Fiends of Hell do all this Truth believe:
Then tremble when thou think upon the Rod
Of Great JEHOVAH, thine offended God,
Who does forbear, yet will not quite forgive,
Those who in these Transgressions daily live.
The Soul of Man is precious in God's sight,
In Man's well doing God does take delight;
And it does grieve his Spirit for to see
Man so delighting in Iniquity:
Vain Man, why will thou that great God offend,
Who only can make happy in the end,
And let thee live, where Saints and Angels dwell,
Or cast thee down into the Lake of Hell;
In scorching Flames for ever for to fry,
Where thou in vain shall often wish to dye?
But Wishes are in vain, for there shall be
No end of this thy endless Misery.
If Men believe the Words that God has spoke,
They would believe that Oaths do God provoke;
For by His Laws Divine he did decree,
That Swearers for their Crimes should punished be;
And he that does in Swearing spends his breath,
Is accessory to Eternal Death;
And Evil Tongues that boldly dare adventure,
To Curse and Swear, with Satan do Indenture,
And wrap their Souls into such misery,
Without Gods mercy, never will ended be.
Lewis, the King of France, he did declare,
Severe Imprisonments for those that Swear;
But if the second time again they Swore,
Their Tongues with Irons hot they through did bore;
And who the third time in that fault did fall,
Was bored through Tongue, through under-Lip and all.
Henry the Fifth of England, that good King,
Did in this Land a Godly Custom bring;
For every Oath a Duke was known to use,
He paid a Fine, and none could him excuse:
The Barrons also, after their Degree,
Did pay their Fine, the Poor could not go free:
And blessed sure, were all those Princely Peers,
Who made such Laws, to punish such as Swears.
Gods Judgment showed upon Blasphemers.


Two Ruffians in Italy, Blaspheming the Name of our Savior, were suddenly
surprised by Divine Justice, and immediately both their eyes dropped out of their
heads. Also, in Rome a Child of five years old, that Swore bitterly, was
suddenly and strangely fetched away by the Devil, and never after seen.

BLASPHEMY is a crying gross Offense,
Detestable to God's Omnipotence;
The very Heathens did this Crime abhor,
Which Christians here are seldom grieved for:
Their God's they Worshipped, ours we do Blaspheme,
That Heathens us excel, it strange does seem.
We that God's Laws pretend for to maintain,
If we Blaspheme his Everlasting Name,
Are worse then Infidels, who nothing know,
For if they did, they never would do so.
A Gracious God poor mortal men have found,
Yet every moment they his Sides do Wound:
Oh! is it not a sad and dreadful case,
That Men should Him Blaspheme unto his Face?
Who give us all things here that we enjoy,
Whilst daily we our Souls seek to destroy.
Oh! the Supernal patience of our God!
That still forbears to scourge us with his Rod;
Who in Iniquity do take delight,
Which is so hateful in his blessed sight!
Consider Man, thou have not long to stay,
Then make thy peace before thou go away;
For if Death comes before your peace is made,
Your Blossom's cropped, your Glories are decayed;
Into the Grave you must, your Bed of Clay,
And there remain until the Judgement-day;
But when before God's Bar you do appear,
How will your hearts surprised be with fear!
Then all your former joys will Torments seem,
Then will you mourn that e're you did Blaspheme;
Then will you wish your Tongue had silent been,
That so profusely used to boast of Sin:
But how can you expect God will you spare,
Who took delight to Curse, to Ban, and Swear?
How can you think that he will you forgive,
Who so Blasphemed his Name while you did live?
No, no, you will your selves Condemn, and say,
Your selves have cast your precious Souls away:
Then while you are in health your Sins repent,
Before a Judgment be from Heaven sent;
For God's Commandments do tell you plain,
He Guilty is that takes his Name in vain;
And unto me it does more plainly seem,
He is more Guilty that does Him Blaspheme.
The Sin of Adultery justly punished.


A Turkish History makes mention of one Garella Mulchassa, living in Adultery
with Amulla, at last Poisons him, and commits Adultery with Leonardo, whom she
endeavored to Stiffle, but he escaped and Staps her; She is Strangled by the
command of her Husband, and he fley'd alive.

ADULTERY it is a Crying Sin,
That Rich and Poor too many wallow in;
And though they know God does this Crime forbid,
Yet do it they will, and strive to keep it hid:
But His All-seeing Eye can plain discover,
The sweet Embraces of the Wanton Lover,
Who when the doors are fast as fast can be,
He thinks himself secure in secrecy:
But it is in vain for Man to think to hide
His fault from him who does in Heaven abide,
Who sees and knows the secrets of the heart,
Better than he who acts the Sinners part;
And blushing at the thoughts of what he did,
Endeavors what he can to keep it hid:
But all in vain, for the All-seeing eye,
Can all your Chamber-Sins plainly descry,
And bring to Punishment for his offense,
Those that offend his great Omnipotence.
How many hundreds for this very Sin,
Of God's just Wrath have sad Examples been!
What strange Prodigious deaths this Sin has wrought!
And unto misery Great Persons brought!
Yet this beloved Sin too much is used,
Man's Soul is wronged, and God himself abused;
While the poor Sinner little thinks upon
The pains that follow, if they will run on
Till Judgments overtake, and then too late
Perhaps they may repent their wretched State;
And when they are overwhelmed with fear and pain,
Of time misspent, perhaps they may complain:
Their Consciences in their faces then will fly,
Horror surprise them when they come to dye;
Their Charming Kisses turn to deadly frights,
And change to fearful pains, their chief Delights:
Oh then! what would they give for to be free?
And pardon gain for their Adultery.
Well then it is so, that all are born to dye,
Endeavor by all means from Sin to fly:
Abandon Wantonness immediately;
Repent you of your Sins while you have space,
Else are your Souls in a most dreadful case;
Repent, I say, lest Sin do you surprise,
And e're you are prepared, does close your eyes.
FINIS.
A short Exhortation to all those who wilfully commit the abovementioned
Crimes.
ALas! what will become of poor Sinners, that will boldly and audaciously
persist in their Iniquities! What can you expect from a God so justly offended
as yours is, but Everlasting misery! a heap of unquenchable Torments! the
noisome smells of Fire and Brimstone! the unwelcome company of Fiends and
Devils? Oh! consider, poor Sinners, are momentary Pleasures, or present sinful
Delights, to be prized at such a rate, as that you will run the hazard of an
Eternal overthrow, for an invalu'd enjoyment? Will you not believe what God
has said, That Swearers, Blasphemers, Adulterers, Whoremongers, Drunkards,
and many others, shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven?, This is a
dreadful Sentence, to be banished from Gods presence into utter darkness; where
is nothing but fearful Fiends to torment you for ever: but in Heaven, there you
shall be blessed with Saints and Angels singing Hallelujahs for ever; and that
we may partake of these Eternal joys, shall be the wish of your Friend

R. B.

LONDON, Printed for I. Deacon, at the sign of the Rainbow, a little above St.
Andrews Church, in Holborn: 1683.


