THE WHOLE DUTY OF MAN, In all his Stages, in a plain and familiar Heroic
Verse, with Variety of Cuts proper to the several Chapters thereof, etc.

By W. Beck, M. A.

Fitted for the Pleasure and Benefit of YOUTH.

London, Printed and Sold by J. Bradford in Little Britain.

ADVERTISEMENTS. BOOKS Printed and Sold by J. Bradford.
1. YOuth's Travels: Or, The Vanity of Man's Age. Represented in Seven several
Stages thereof, from his Birth to his Death. With variety of Pictures, exposing
the Vanities and Follies of this Age. By A. F. Price Twopence.

2. A Mirror for Atheists; wherein they may plainly see their Prodigious
Follies, Vast Extravagancies, Notorious Impieties and Absurdities: containing a
compendious account of the egregious vicious Life, and Eminently and Sincerely
Penitent Death of John Earl of Rochester: Wherein is briefly receited his
Disputes and Arguments against God and Religion, as the same were used at
several Meetings. Also, the manner of his wonderful Conversion, and his Godly
Expressions during his Last Sickness. Abstracted from the Remarks of the Right
Reverend Dr. Gilbert Burnet. Price Sticht in Blue Paper, Two Pence.

3. The Father's Blessing, Penned for the Instruction of his Children. With a
Paraphrase upon the Lord's Prayer. With Motives to Prayer. By William Jole,
Minister of Sarrat in Hartfordshire. Price Twopence.

4. A Choice Drop of Honey from the Rock Christ: Or a short Word of Advice to
all Christians; in order to a thorough Reformation. Price stitcht Two Pence.

5. The Triumph of Faith manifested to the World: Or, Abrah^m offering up his
Son Isaac, as a sweet Burning Sacrifice upon Mount Moriah to the Lord. Being a
Dialogue between Abraham, Isaac, and the Angel that staved his Hand from
Execution. With a large Cut to it. Price One Penny.

6. A Dialogue between a Blind Man and Death; By Richard Standfast, late
Minister of Christ-Church in the City of Bristol. Also the Great Assize; or
Christ's Certain and Sudden Appearance to Judgment. Price 1. d.

7. The Grand Question Resolved, What we must do to be Saved: Being
Instructions for a Holy Life. By Dr. Burnet. Price Sticht Two Pence.

THE Whole Duty OF MAN, In all his Stages, in a plain and Familiar Heroic
Verse; With Variety of Cuts proper to the several Chapters thereof.

With several Private Prayers and Thanksgivings annexed to it, both for the
Pleasure and Benefit of Youth.

By W. Beck, M. A.

Prove. 22.6. Train up a Child in the Way he should go, and when he is Old he
will not depart from it.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by J. Bradford, in Little Britain, the Corner House
right against the Pump, 1700.

A PREFACE. To the Good and Honorable, But more Particularly The Courteous
READER.
SInce this Renowned Book has been by some, in part impe^fectly turned into
Lyrick, or Jambeck Verse; so that I thought it necessary to give you it
complete i^ Heroic: And seeing every Body now adays ha^ an Inclination either
to Read or Write Verses, and some by an unhappy Skill that way, taking the
advantage of the general humor, have exercised their abused parts in the
recommending of Vice with all the flourish of Wit; adding to the natural
propensity to sin, the sweet taking Seducements of Poetry; but since the
Contagion rather spreads than decreases, and because it becomes me to hope,
that many rather love the Vice for the sake of the Verse, than the Verse for
the sake of Sin. Therefore I thought it not unworthy the Character of a
Christian, nor besides, my duty as such (for the Reformation of Manners in
Youth) to make, and humbly present you with this little Version of The Whole
Duty of Man, in a plain and familier dress, to be got by Heart by the Ignorant,
being divided into Thirteen Chapters, one quarter of which being learned every
Sunday; the Whole in one Year may be compassed: And it is measured out in Verse
only to make it go down the smoothlier, and stick the better upon the Memory:
for as Verse has been a great occasion of the breach of most Duties contained
herein, and a means of drawing too many from performance; so I hope this may
and will be as prevalent for the reclaiming as many, since according to the
Poet, A Verse may find him whom a Sermon flies,
And turn Delight into a Sacrifice.


So if all Dignity, and Renown, and Parts, and Understanding of Birth, and
Fortune, would but freely and conspicuously offer themselves for Patterns of
Education and Conversation, they must, and would undoubtedly entice and make
others to be good: and the Honor of our Religion would soon be retrieved and
brought again into Credit, and our Offspring be as promising and hopeful as
our deceased and much Lamented Duke. But since that there are too many Proud,
Covetous and Malicious Pluralists; and also incroaching and intruding
Vnnaturalized Foreigners, which having engrossed the Inheritance, being more
for the Fleece than the Flock, Lording over it. So that I as well as others in
this Iron Age, having nothing to support us but a feeble Quill, are almost
ready to be Interred in the Ruins of a low Fortune; yet being desirous of
giving a public Testimony of the value I have for all that are good, and more
particularly for you which soars above the rest, being unbyassed by the
Customary Opinion of the World, and so far from believing any to be
undeserving, because unfortunate, that their very Indigency in a great measure
entitules them to your Protection.

So humbly beseeching to accept of my weak Endeavors, Prayers, and Good
Wishes, in reliance ^n your Goodness, I assume the boldness to subscribe my
Self,

Your most Humble and Devoted Servant, Will. -- Beck.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Author (being Master of Arts of a long standing, now either at his
Lodgings at the King's Head, and Grammar School in Jermain-street, St. James's;
or at any ones own House, if desired) does, and will in a few Years exactly,
though not pedantickly, teach Young Ladies, and Gentlemen the Tongues and
Sciences; he having lately contrived and made a Compendious, yet exact English
Accidence, Grammar, and Rhetoric, etc. By which any of an ordinary capacity,
with the Author's assistance, without a Miracle, in a few Months may learn
(that which is so much wanting and desired to accomplish Ladies) viz. to Write
True English, and good Sense either with, or without the Latin Tongue. The
Accidence he promises (God willing) to publish the beginning of the New Year.
But the other will be dictated only to those that can write, to be got by Heart
against the next Day.

THE Whole Duty of Man, etc.
CHAPTER I.
(1.) The Necessity of caring for the Soul. (2.) The Worth of the Soul. (3.)
The Misery of the Soul. (4.) The danger of the Loss of the Soul.

woodcut of angel flying over flaming mouth

(1.)
THE chief Intent of this Book is to show,
Those things which each Person is now to do,
Being in as plain and familiar way,
That Old and Young should never go astray,
And in the end of all most happy be,
And from Eternal Burnings then set free.
So to be happy let all Mankind strive
To run the Race of Virtue whilst alive,
And practice only what is herein laid down,
That after Death he may receive the Crown
That Is glorious, and of immortal weight,
Which God does give to those that lives the height
Of this their Duty, and likewise do run
The Race before them that is now begun.
(2.)
How noble also is the Soul of Man,
He ought therefore to take what care he can
Of it, being so precious, and so dear,
Seeing God's lovely Image it does bear,
He breathing into Man the Breath of Life,
Which must endure in spite of Satan's Strife,
Being so good, so pure, and excellent,
It must remain when Ages all are spent.
So like to God it is, being made to be
Blessed with him to all Eternity.
Why do we then such noble Souls defile,
As with the splendour of this World beguile,
And with all foul, and sad polluted Sin,
Let even the dreadful'st Foes to enter in:
Pray then slight Worldly Wealth, and Honors too,
And Satan's gilded Baits, which will undo.
(3.)
How many Men now stand in greatest fear,
Of keeping, and of losing Treasure here,
Which will not spare to be at any Charges
To keep a float these their crazy Barges.
For if an Eye, or any part endure
Aching, or Pain, they straight seek for a Cure;
As first to know the Cause of the Disease,
And then what things can Cure; or give them ease;
But why should any take so great a car^
Of Body more than of his Soul most dear?
Which is of purer Essence, and by Birth
Innocent; but the other's from the Earth,
Base, and corrupt, whose Loss some more condole
Here then the better part their precious Soul
Which never can fade, perish, or decay,
Though Satan it invade, 'twill force its way:
But who can dwell in that Eternal Fire,
Where is not granted them the least Desire,
Either of asswaging present pain, or grief,
Or any to come to for their relief,
But there to languish, and therein to lie,
And burn in Flames to all Eternity:
And since we cannot one Spark of Fire endure,
Should on our tender Bodies lie, be sure
W'had better to our God betimes return,
Than evermore in scorching Flames to burn.
(4.)
The World, the Flesh, and Devil, all do strive
Poor Man of Happiness for to deprive.
Oh then let all call on that mighty Power
For Grace, and strength, against those which would devour
Their precious Souls, and let them always stand
Fast, whiles Breath, obeying God's just command:
For he has always promised to those
Which keep'm, and on Providence repose,
To give them that good thing which they have chose.
Then for your holy help, learn, and read over
This foll'wing Book, your Sins for to disco'er,
And practice to be happy for your part,
The whole which done, to others it impart;
For Verse may find him whom a Sermon flies,
And turn delight into a Sacrifice,
And make him open, though h' has shut his Eyes.
CHAP. II.
(1.) Of the Light of Nature; and (2.) by the Light of the Scriptures; wherein
three great Branches of our Duty's contained, (1.) To God, as the belief of his
Being. (2.) Of the Trinity. (3.) God's Attributes. (4.) The Immortality, and
Worth of the Soul. (5.) Of the Resurrection, and future state. (6.) Of God's
Commands. (7.) Faith in Christ. (8.) In the Holy Scriptures. (9.) In the
Threatenings and Promises there. (10.) The Duty of Love to God. (11.) Of Fear to
God. (12) Of trust in God. (13.) Of Care.

woodcut of woman sitting and reading

(1.)
THe Light of Nature does us plainly tell,
Not to do things which leads us down to Hell.
So let the Heathens now Examples be,
Which use the Moral Law, yea, more than we.
(2.)
But since the Light of Scripture does exceed
That Light, as Christians, we do always need;
Whose Precept's good, if they be well applied,
Will fill the Soul with Heavenly Food beside,
And it to Heaven will most surely guide.
Though Christ has to Mankind purchased
Heaven, and Happiness; yet there is need
Of something on our part still to be done,
Before that conquered Country be our own,
Or ever we can that highest Bliss attain,
And taste the Comforts there, and there remain;
For Prophets, and Apostles, do command
Us to live Godly, and to our Promise stand,
Our Duty to perform to God, and Man
To be as just, and right'ous as we can.
(1.)
Would we be saved? then we must believe
There is a God did all things being give,
That made the World, and stretched out the Sky,
That Is a Spirit, infinite, Almighty.
Though Persons Three, yet n'other God but one,
Since all Perfection is in him alone.
(2.)
Believe you must the blessed Trinity.
That in the Godhead there are Persons three,
The eternal, Son and Holy Ghost,
Who made, redeemed, saved what Sin had lost.
(3.)
That God's gracious, a Spirit, just and wise,
Too pure and holy for our mortal Eyes
To view, all things ruling by h's Providence,
Is every where, knowing the inmost sense
Of every Heart, and secret Thoughts of Men
Yea, more, and better than any of them.
(4.)
Believe you must a Soul within your Breast
There is, which will be miserable, or blessed,
That after this Life will for ever last,
Then endless Sorrows, or such Joys must taste
In the other World, while we are in this;
Nothing of more value we have than it is;
Therefore it is our Duty whilst we re here,
To make Salvation still our chiefest care.
(5.)
For why, our Bodies must not always rot
In this dull Earth, as things by God forgot;
No, no, be sure they all again must rise,
And see as Job says, with these very Eyes,
At the Last Judgment; then the trembling Soul
And Body shall be saved, or perish whole;
For from Hell's Furnace there'll be no return,
They which go there, must then for ever burn.
Now then, attend, consider well the case,
As to avoid the Torments of that place.
By Faith it must be done with fervent Love
To Christ, which by our Actions you must prove.
(6.)
If Happy you would be, there is no'ther way
Than to Love God, and his Commands obey,
And to do these, it is fitting that you know
What his W^ll is, which now remains to show.
Now the first Cause of all our Misery,
Was Adam's Sin, for which he was to dye,
And a^l his Offspring; but the exceeding love
Of Christ did interpose, and Death remove:
He on himself our Condemnation took,
Discharged all Debt, and crossed the fatal Book,
So now if you will Repent, and so but yield
Sin to forsake, you will have your Pardon sealed.
(7.)
If you be but sincere, and do rely
On Christ by Faith, who for all Sins did dye:
This do you must, or else that weighty guilt
Of Adam, all your own, and Christ's Blood spilt,
Will sink you but the lower into Hell,
In Everlasting Torments for to dwell;
For Christ's the only Person that can can save
Your Soul from the second Death, so as to have
A place, yea, far above the Starry Sky,
In Joys to live, which never was seen by Eye.
So now what Christ commands, you must obey,
Thanking Infinite Goodness, that you may
So happy be, Faith being the first Command
That is enjoined; see to it then you stand.
(8).
Behold Mankind, now posting down apace,
And can of nothing boast, but Love and Grace,
Which God has freely set before his Face;
So needs must he on his dear Word rely,
And willingly obey it till he dye:
If he would live the Life, he must believe
The Bible is God's Word, and must receive
It all for Truth, Testament Old and New;
God cannot lie, 'twas given us all for true:
Let Us then perform what is there enjoined throughout,
And not dispute, omit, nor yet to doubt,
But with such Sorrow for our Faults, Repent,
Bathing in Tears even till our Life is spent.
(9.)
For if we Sin, and after don't repent,
But at our black Ingratitude relent,
The Threatenings of God's Book do aim at all,
Which by Transgressions oftentimes do fall,
The Great shall have their due as well as Small;
God promising to those that do obey,
Glorious Rewards, and can you th^nk that they
Which disregard his Threatenings, shall be
Partakers of the same Felicity?
If the promise you expect then h^s Threats ^ear,
A Faith in both begets true Love and Fear;
For whilst with a firm Faith a Man believes
The Promises, and dreadful Threats he gives,
He will not dare to Sin, but rather choose
To hope in God, and Sin and Vice refuse.
(10.)
Love is an innate Duty, which we owe
To God, from whom all Goodness now do flow,
Being so good, so merciful, and kind,
So apt to pardon, ought he not to find
Returns of Love? He that with Love began,
Should he not have returns of Love from Man?
Yes, its a Duty which we ought to pay
With all our Hearts to him, and not say nay,
Making't our business, and our whole employ,
If that we would that blessed Place enjoy.
(11.)
A Second Duty which to him we owe,
Is filial Fear, which we must bestow;
Let this our daily care, lest we offend,
Be to commit no Sin at Man's command,
But let God's Fear the fear of Man withstand.
(12.)
You must rely on God, and in him trust,
Being both knowing, powerful, good, and just;
If Dangers threaten, or Temptations smile,
Hope still in him, and let them not beguile,
But to your utmost power their force resist,
Then God will with his Grace, and Strength resist,
And in all Troubles which you shall be in,
To be delivered, must not act one Sin.
(13.)
Endeavors use lawful in case of want;
If that woun't do, no doubt but God will grant
His Spirit to assist, if strength you want.
In all Affairs observe a moderate Care,
And second thy Endeavors still with Prayer,
And for support God will then nothing spare.
CHAP. III.
(1.) The Duty of Humility. (2.) The Fruits of it. (3.) The Duty of Honor to
God. (4.) Of Baptism. (5.) Of the Covenant.

woodcut of infant baptism

(1.)
HVmility, is another Duty,
Which is any Christians chiefest Beauty,
Without which Grace the greatest cannot be
So happy here, or in Eternity;
And that Humility is a true Sense
Of our own weakness, and God's Excellence.
(2.)
The thoughts of which should make us more submi^^,
And fearful how we act, or think amiss,
'Twill keep us from Conceit, both vain and proud,
Of our own Works, and not cry out aloud,
Making us patient till our God should please
To lay aside his Rod, and give us ease,
Making us thankful for his Chastisement,
And under every Providence content;
When it has these Effects, then all may be
Assured that they have true Humility,
For without it none can a Christian be,
As to partake of true Felicity.
(3.)
Honor to God with Tongue's an other due,
Which we must give with Hearts, and Hands most true,
At all times in his Church, and on his Day,
In every Time, and Act, and Place, and Way,
By Learning, Reading, following God's words,
And practicing the Rules which it affords,
By Catechizing of the Ignorant,
As Servants, Children, and all such as want,
Instructing them to live in the true fear
Of God; taking them with you, when you hear
Sermons, making them practice what they are taught,
That when they come from Church they be not naught.
(4.)
Inform your selves, be sure of the Intent,
Of Baptism, and the other Sacrament,
They being Covenants of God's free Grace
Between himself, and Adam's sinful Race,
Wherein he promises to pardon Sin,
And all the Trespasses we have been in,
To sanctify us, and at last to save
Our Souls from Hell, and raise us from the Grave;
And on condition to Eternal Life,
If Faith in Christ we use with holy strife,
With true Repentance, and all Submission,
Of three things promised to have Fruition,
If the Remnant of our Days we truly do
That we promised solemnly, and vow
At Baptism, to renounce Flesh, World, Devil,
The Articles to believe, to abstain from Evil
The days to come, and that with all our heart,
If we expect God to perform his part.
CHAP. IV.
(1.) Of the Lord's Supper. (2.) Examination before. (3.) Humility, Repentance
and Confession. (4.) Faith and Charity. (5.) Thanks.

woodcut of communion scene

(1.)
IT IS every Christians Duty to receive
The Sacrament, to strengthen his belief,
That oftentimes the Death of his dear Lord,
He calls to mind even that which 'tdoth afford,
That purchased, and also to renew
The Covenant between the Lord and you,
In Baptism by Proxies, but at Age
You promise for your self, so must engage
That Promise to perform, lest for fear
Even at the Lord's Supper you should appear
To come unworthily, with no intent
That Is good for to receive that Sacrament.
(2.)
Therefore before you 'proach the holy place,
Examine well your self, and know your case,
What Sins are unrepented of, and what
You have committed, or may have forgot.
(3.)
For there you must confess, both great and small,
And bending Knee, be sorry for 'em all,
With grief, for having forfeited your Word,
In all Humility before your Lord,
And then resolve a better Life to live
For time to come, and against Sin to strive.
(4.)
Having so done, you firmly may believe
Your Sins then pardoned, and so receive
The blessed Bread, and Wine, even with all Love,
To Men on Earth, and to your God Above,
That Bread and Wine are symbols of his Blood
And Body which he gave when here he stood,
These all must receive often, and not some,
And must be so doing even till he come,
Which is but the performing of his Will,
Which till his Coming, is our Duty still.
(5.)
Having received, let us thank God that permits
Us to partake of such rich benefits.
CHAP. V.
(1.) Honor to God's Name. (2.) Worship. (3) Prayer. (4.) Confession to him,
etc.

woodcut

(1.)
There Is always Honor due to God's great Name,
Which thou must not by Word or Thought profane,
By Swearing falsely, or by needless Oaths
His Name profane, and on Mankind impose:
When Passions boil, and Anger smarts, forbear
Both, if thou can even with thy Tongue not swear.
Such boiling of thy Soul's but empty froth,
Which God and all good Men do always loath;
It will no profit, or yet pleasure bring,
Nor Honor, when it in all Ears do ring,
But rather Horror, and a great Disgrace,
Both to the Person, and so to the Place.
It Is silly then for any to sin gratis,
As to profane God's Name, having satis.
Its Sin you know to quarrel with thy Fellow,
And greater much against thy God to Bellow
Such horrid Oaths, and Imprecations too,
As will thee here and afterward undo:
Therefore refrain that foul and ugly Sin,
By which the Devil often enters in,
And then the state of that Man's worse than first,
So his Damnation must be deemed just.
(2.)
Worship's next thing that is naturally due
In private, public to our God most true;
It must be paid with Body, and with Mind.
(3.)
By Prayers, Confessions, and our selves resigned
To his disposal, begging holy aid
To mend our Lives, and pardon what is said,
Or done, Praying with, or for others praise,
Giving for Blessings all, and quiet days,
Yea, for every benefit we receive,
Must sincere Thanks, and humble Praises give.
Its a small matter, I think twice a day,
To lay aside the World, fall down and Pray:
No Man I Am sure can better use his Time,
Than to implore a Pardon for his Crime.
CHAP. VI.
(1.) Man's Duty toward Himself. (2.) Humility in opposition to Pride. (3.)
Vainglory. (4.) Meekness. (5.) The Fruits of it. (6.) Consideration.

woodcut of man kneeling in front of book

(1.)
HUmble thou must be, having a low esteem,
Even of thy self, though others do thee deem
As little too as thou do think thy self,
Be not deceived, though thou abounds in self.
(2.)
For God hates Pride, and therefore will not love
Thee till thou do that hateful Sin remove.
What though thou art Hansome, Active, Strong, or Wise,
And thy clear Soul shine through thy sparkl ng Eyes,
Thou have no cause thy self for to disguise,
And make deformed what God made otherwise.
Such great Advantages even for to stain
And spoil by Pride, which is a cruel Bain:
To Happiness therefore, when it begins
To spring up in thy Mind, from gilded things,
Which thou have got, or done, sink down thy Knee,
And contradict it with Humility.
Quench thy vain Thoughts with Tears, expel with Prayer
The Wind of empty Praise, and swelling Air.
(3.)
For God will not accept those Deeds you do,
Out of Vainglory, and external show.
(4.)
Meekness also is our bounden Duty,
Which is a Christian's Excellence, and Beauty,
To have an even Calmness in ones Soul,
That can the Passions surly Wrath control.
(5.)
That Man, of Men and God, is the delight,
Submiss, and quiet both, does never Fight,
Nor ever Quarrels, nor yet hatches Strife;
But in a Knotless Thread spins out his Life;
Such a good Christian's like his blessed Lord,
Which never uttered an impatient Word.
(6.)
Consideration makes an other part
Of a good Christian Life to search the Heart,
And to consider of its present State,
Whether it does incline to Love, or Hate
Of Sin, that according as it is bent,
Whether to approve, or else in time repent.
Then every Night consider what you have thought
Or done in the Day past, which if it is naught,
Or any ill appear that has been wrought,
Strait ask God's pardon for the unwary Sin,
Before it wholly slips, or enters in,
And that before next Morning does begin.
CHAP. VII.
(1.) Contentedness. (2.) Chastity. (3.) Temperance. (1.) in Meat. (2.) in
Drink. (3.) in Sleep. (4.) in Recreations. (5.) in Clothes, etc.

woodcut of woman holding two snakes

IT is our Duty to be still Content
With Providence, and not for to Relent,
However bad, or harsh proves the Event.
Though thou be Sick, in Slavery, or Poor,
Yet never set thy Heart to covet more;
Do not by means unlawful in the least,
Your needy wishes practice: It Is a Feast
To be content with Raiment, and with Food,
Such Moderate Desires are always Good.
So set your Self with Industry to watch,
And Diligence, lest unawares you catch
A Fall; to avoid which, always employ
All Graces, and all Gifts you do enjoy.
(2.)
And keep thy self so pure, and always Chaste,
Thy Strength on Women be sure not to waste,
Nor give thy self that fatal Liberty,
To look at random with a glancing Eye;
Restrain thy Thoughts, thy Hands, thy guilty Words;
Take all the Helps that this wise World affords;
But above all, being pure, see that thou fly
Idleness and all Wanton Company.
(3.)
Be Temperate in every thing you Eat,
And make judicious choice of Harmless Meat.
(1.)
In Drinking also, see there ben't Excess,
To stain thy Mind by filthy Drunkenness,
Which is a Sin so loathsome to the sight
Of God, and Man, committed but by night,
At first so odious, murdering Reason,
Making the Body reel, or act some Treason,
Then is confined into some loathsome Cell,
Whose Soul at last is plunged into Hell.
Make no Man Drunk, for whatsoer's Sin,
Thou must not act thy self, nor draw Men in.
Be not concerned then when Sots thee upbraid,
If thou be Sober, be not then afraid
Of such Madmen, which can as little move
Thy Reason, as their Persons draw thy Love.
(2.)
Be moderate in Sleep, lest thou offend
Thy God, and quite destroy that Christian end.
(3.)
In Recreation be temperate also;
For though thou may divert, thou yet must know
Not to engage thy Heart in them most deep,
Neglecting God's Laws and Statutes to keep.
Play ^^t for Money, but for Exercise,
In one the Use, in the other the Mischief lies:
For by the Use of them, thou show to man
Which way thy Soul is biased, do what thou can.
(4.)
Be temperate also in the Clothes you wear,
Only in such as suits thy Rank appear;
If Rich, don't put a value on such Clothes;
If Poor, let not their Meanness discompose
Thee at no time, it is alike to be proud,
And Fret for want, as Strut for having good.
CHAP. VIII. Man's Duty toward his Neighbor.
(1.) Justice. (2.) Charity. (1.) Not to seduce him. (2.) Not to Murder. (3.)
Nor to Beat. (4.) Nor Slander. (5.) Nor to commit Adultry. (6.) Nor Spite. (7)
To do no Injustice. (8.) Not to Rob. (9.) But be Fair in Dealings. (10.) To
make Restitution, and how to make it.

woodcut of personification of Justice

(1.)
LET these two Duties to your Neighbors be.
(2.)
Strict Justice, with good natured Charity:
Not Spightful as to gall, or vex his Mind,
But with a Disposition always kind.
(1.)
Do still what Good you can, never begin
TO entice, nor yet provoke him unto Sin;
But if it has been your Misfortune sad,
To make him Err; yea, or to make him bad,
Strive all you can then him to Virtue win,
And to an Holy Life, or else you sin,
And answer must for his, as well as yours,
Which were contracted at such certain hours.
Since your Counsel and Practice made him Sin,
See Sorrow true with him you enter in.
(2.)
Be sure that Blows, and Murder thou forbear,
These always God, and sometimes Men do hear,
And makes them by a dismal Fate appear.
(3.)
What ever thy Neighbor feels, his very Sorrow
Will echo out thy Guilt even to Morrow.
(4.)
But if in Anger thou with Blows him treat,
Or bitter Slandering Words him worser greet;
If Hatred in thy Heart thou do conceive
Against him, thy Duties then to grieve,
And make amends for what thou'st done amiss,
Or else be sure God will thee never Bliss.
(5.)
See that Adultery thou never commit,
Nor with untamed Lust to burn; for it
Will Body unto ruin bring, and Mind,
The most part here, or else be sure to find
Them both reserved for a more dismal place,
Eternally to Burn in a sad case.
(6.)
Spoil not, nor Covet Goods of any Man,
For such Extortion, and Oppression can,
And will thee to that dismal Hell-pit damn.
(7.)
Much less may thou apply thy Hand to Steal,
Or keep back Servants Wages, they will appeal
To God for Justice; do not then withold
Another Right, but pay the Indebted Gold.
(8.)
Thou must not take by Violence, nor Rob
Thy Neighbor, though some think it is a good job:
It is Injustice what is not thine to take,
Or Stolen Goods to buy, or profit make
Of such you know, use no Deceit or Slight
In any Trust, in Measure, or in Weight.
(9.)
Sell not thy Bad for Good, nor over-rate
Thy Goods to Ignorants, but rather bate
Such silly Souls which know not how to buy,
Often deceived are by gainful Lie.
Of Necessity don't advantage make,
For what you get by that, will make you quake
At last; for always such unlawful ways
Will make you then for ever Curse the days.
(10.)
But if tho'art Guilty, be sure to restore
What Goods thou took unjustly heretofore,
Or else such unfair Deeds will prove much more
Intolerable, being put upon thy Score.
Granting the Person that you have wronged be dead,
What then! the Justice is not with him fled:
You are alive, and must the Wrong repair,
By making Restitution to his Heir.
But if t'a Multitude you have done wrong,
And cannot Recompense in such a throng,
Or Restitution to that Man so render,
Because you cannot justly it remember,
Who you have wronged this, or that man, therefore
In such a case as that you must restore
What was unjustly got, unto the Poor,
To the full value of what ever you took,
Or else for Pardon you in vain may look:
But if with Dives you your Conscience sell,
There will be no Repentance but in Hell.
Then all in vain the abundance, and the Pence,
Can not so much as ease for one poor Sense,
Procure for his loud Cries, were all in vain,
For to procure Relief, or end of Pain.
It Is true, the Man that is wronged, may, if he please,
Forgive, yea, and discharge you with much ease.
CHAP. IX.
(1.) Not to Defame. (2.) Not to bear False Witness. (3.) Nor despise. (4.) Nor
Censure. (5.) Nor bear Illwill. (6.) Nor Envy. (7.) How to make Reparation of
those Offenses. (8.) Nor Lie. (9.) What Behavior. (10.) Respect to Betters.
(11.) Duties to such as are in Want. (12.) Thankfulness to others.

woodcut

(1.)
YOu must not lessen any Man's good Name,
By False Reports, though h'may deserve the same,
Do not too hastily Credit give, nor blame,
And be not over-forward of the Fame,
Though ill of him, thou may for certain know,
Yet he as much of thee may hear: Be slow
Therefore to think him Guilty, or yet tell
His Failings, though thou know them never so well.
(2.)
Do not Backbite, Rail, or False Witness bear,
Though thou of him may Truth with Falsehood hear.
(3.)
Despise not any, though he is very Poor,
Deformed, or Foolish, Begging at thy Door;
Nor yet because he is perhaps Profane,
That Is not the way him then for to reclaim.
(4.)
Do no Man judge, for if you do, there is still
A Judgment just on you at last pass will.
(5.)
Wish not thy Brother evil in Estate,
Or Person, neither in thy Heart him Hate.
But if some Evil to them both befall,
Express no Satisfaction in it at all;
But if to him any such Harm do hap,
Then with Moses stand in, and stop the Gap.
(6.)
Nor thou by spightful Wishes ought more
To pine and envy't his abounding store.
(7.)
But if you Guilty be of some, or all,
By causing his Credit thereby to fall,
By Slander, Railing, or by ill report,
Unto the Injured Party then resort,
Begging his Pardon, if you can restore
To him the same Good Name he had before.
(8.)
The Truth profess, be sure to tell no Lie,
Though thou sure were to get the World thereby.
Use gentle Courtesy to all, and then
Thou shall be sure to have the Praise of Men.
(9.)
Rail not at Railers, nor seem Proud to be,
It Is odious both for God, and Man, to see
Such Quarrelers with Brawling to begin,
Nor in thy Heart curse, or revile thy King;
For Christ, and his Apostles, taught us all,
That we should for all Mankind mercy call.
So having taught, and likewise practiced thus,
Let Precept or Example work on us,
That we with them may always happy be,
In Joys so good to all Eternity.
(10.)
Your Betters reverence, of great Renown,
For Piety, whether in Cloak, or Gown,
Or Eminence, being of Sense, or Fame,
Of Learning, Wealth, do not spoil their good Name;
To all that want, afford a kind Supply,
According to thy best Ability.
If they want Knowledge, give them what thou have,
Thou may Communicate, and yet not waste
Thy Stock. If Comfort, give them what Relief
Thou can of hope t'asswage their present Grief:
If they want Reputation, try to clear
Their Credit, and to make the best appear;
If it is Money they ask, what thou can spare,
Bestow, they will pay thee back again in Prayer.
(12.)
To all that does thee good, thou thankful must
Be, by putting up Prayers to God the just,
For them which thee admonished has of Sin,
Which thou perhaps had Headlong fallen in,
Or which thee kind Advice, so often gave
Thy self to God and Man as to behave,
Upon thy dreadful Journey to the Grave.
Be thankful then, and ready to advise
Another who is than thy Self less wise.
CHAP. X.
(1.) To the King. (2.) To Ministers. (3.) To Natural Parents. (4.) Parents
Duty to their Children. (5.) Concerning Marriage, etc.

Moses with Ten Commandments

(1.)
Honor the King, obeying His Commands,
And Tribute due pay thou with thine own Hands,
But if he does command a Sinful Thing,
See God that thou obey, and not the King.
(2.)
Have for Good Ministers a due respect,
Namely those which the Church and State protect,
Contribute to their Maintenance what is fit,
Even all that is due, spare not to give one bit;
Pray for them, that they no False Doctrine may
Deliver, but God's just Commands obey,
Such as they teach you, follow in thy way:
Don't as they do, but do still as they say.
(3.)
Honor thy Parents with such tender Love,
Being Submissive when they thee Reprove;
With Reverence, and Thanks, take their Advice,
For by it unto Honor you may rise,
Though It be so common, yet regard and prize,
Since Disobedience is a great Vice;
If to Infirmity they are subject,
Covering their Failings, you may them protect;
And think not that because they are even so,
To them, no Observation you must owe,
Granting that thou art wiser than they are,
Yet if thou art so, then thou must not dare
To Mock at them, or Scoffingly despise
Their Persons, or Commands, God will those Eyes
And Tongues torment: But yet indeed if they
Through weakness, bid you Sin, refuse you may;
Nay, you incur the Guilt, if you obey.
Then with an humble Modesty; you must
Show that the Inconveniency is just,
And would be fatal in performing such,
Therefore refusing, is the better much,
If they are Needy, and thou can relieve,
Thou ought in that thou do repay, not give,
Tho they are Wicked, and even unkind,
Yet still thy Duty of Child does bind;
Let nothing then by thee be left behind.
(4.)
Since Parents are bound their's for to maintain
With things needful, Women should not abstain
From Nursing theirs themselves, its only Pride,
And Lust which makes them daily thus deride;
No wonder then Children are so perverse,
Sucking the Milk of such a peevish Nurse,
Instead of Blessings, needs must bring a Curse.
Take timely care for Baptism, and prepare
Their tender Minds for Piety and Prayer,
Instructing them by Catechizing, what
Their Duties are to God, and Man, and that
With a Mild Hand you them in time correct
Their Faults at first, but obstinate defect
Calls for more Strength; for as they grow in Years,
When their Mind's Inclination appears,
Then then is the time for training up your Son,
To pollish in him what has been begun,
Which may continue longer than the Sun.
If he be Good, give all Encouragement
To that your Child; If Bad, betimes prevent
The growing Ill, before it does obtain
An Habit, and is seated in the Brain,
Showing them Good Examples in your Lives,
Virtue by Imitation fastest thrives
For them provide against they to come to Age,
That no necessity their Minds engage
In evil Courses; and be sure take heed
That with no ill-got Goods you them do feed;
Such Wealth as that, often destroys the Line,
And leaves a Curse entailed on thee and thine.
Therefore let that Provision thou make, be
Goods well got with unstrain'd ability,
And then Prosperity thou may expect,
And that thy God will them and thee protect.
(5.)
Marry them not, unless in Love inclined
They be to such an one you have a mind
Also, as to adopt, and make your Child:
For if you force them, you may be beguiled,
Nay, the Child that is Married to much Pelf,
Is often tempted to destroy its Self.
It Is too true, being forced, an Ass to take,
No marvel then their Duty they forsake
To God, and Man, resolving for to stear
An other Course, where there Affections bear;
Therefore the rather yield to them to choose,
As they in Old time never did refuse
CHAP. XI.
(1.) Love, etc. (2.) Wive's Duty to her Husband. (3.) Husband's Duty to his
Wife. (4.) To a Friend. (5.) A Servant's Duty. (6.) A Master's Duty.

marriage scene with Ten Commandments in background

(1.)
KIndness, and Love, is to your Brethren due,
Both Natural, and Christian, so true,
The poorest Child is Servant of the Lord,
And thy Kinsman, with whom thou must accord,
And have regard to; being in Friendship near,
A Member just of Mind, and Body dear;
Then think him so, not letting an abuse
Awake thy Anger, or disturb thine House.
In every sort of Friendship do resign
Thy self in Temporals, and things Divine,
To God in Prayers, in one Commun'on meet,
And join your Praises it is an Offering sweet
To God, for he always delights to see
Brethren to live in Peace, and Unity.
If a weak Brother does commit a Sin,
Correct him mildly, till by Love you win
Him back to true Repentance, by which way
You save his Soul even from that evil Day.
(2.)
That in Woman is the chiefest Beauty
The Husband to obey, which is her Duty;
She must in nothing but in Sin deny,
With all Commands, besides, she must comply:
She must be faithful to him, and so use
Care at all times, and no wise refuse
That Duty due, not striving for that Rule,
Which being unnatural makes him a Fool,
And more than that a mere despised Tool,
But with a tender and peculiar Love,
Let her obey, and Household Joys improve;
Though perhaps by Labors, may be cross,
Or much perplexed at some unlucky Loss,
Yet ought she not to slack her Love; or Hate,
Nor any of her former Warmth abate,
Because she is bound to him her only Mate.
(3.)
Her Husband is to render Her the same
Dear Love, and only change the rugged Name,
Obedience, or else he is to blame,
Into that Faithfulness to her he owes,
And Love with due respect, which he well knows
He promiss'd only in her chaste embrace,
All foreign Joys for to detest, and face,
And he a due Maintenance to allow,
Instructing her in all good things, and how
To serve the Lord; and must together Pray,
By mutual Kindness wear their Lives away.
(4.)
Take not to Wife those which are near a Kin,
To thee, whether second or first Cousin,
Them then refuse, for that is an horrid Sin.
(5.)
Be to thy Friend faithful, his Secrets keep,
Him in distress supply now, lest he Weep,
And by despairing, take a deadly Sleep,
Through thy neglect: To be a real Friend,
Is sacred, and a Tie no Straits should rend.
(6.)
A Servant's Duty is for to obey,
And Love with diligence, and not say nay,
He must be Faithful, not inclined to waste
His Master's Goods, since Confidence is placed
In him, it is petty-Treason to betray
His Trust, by careless squandring them away.
With modest Carr'age, and respectful Grace,
He must discharge the Duty of his Place,
Attend to good Instruction, Pray, and Hear,
And Sins of every kind he must forbear.
(7.)
The Master also to his Servants must
Pay them their Wages, and always be just
To all them for discharging of their Trust,
From them withdrawing nothing that is due,
Doing by them as they have done by you,
Lest publicly they for their Wages sue.
He must admonish, and reprove their Vice,
Instructing them how they may best then rise
To most perfection in Goods, and Mind,
Not to enslave them, but be always kind,
Casting all Cruelty even behind.
Because if he to them no Mercy give,
From God he must then as little receive.
Masters discreetly should with Servant bear,
And without any Anger speak, and hear,
That will win on the Servant, and so make
Him do more than he bids him for your sake,
And then also the Master ought to give
A good Example how they ought to live:
For how can any Man expect to find
Dutiful Servants, if they do not mind,
To do their Duty to the King of Kings,
Doubtless they will be regardless of your things.
CHAP. XII.
(1.) Charity to Brethren. (2.) To Enemies. (3.) By the Example of Christ. (4.)
By his Command. (5.) Charity in Actions. (6.) To the Soul. (7.) To the Body.

Charity personified holding anchor

(1.)
NExt Charity, which urges us to love,
Of Christian Duties, is so far above
Them all, by wishing, and by being Kind,
By having Bad and Good still in our Mind,
For all Mankind, so as to do them good,
Praying, as to our very selves we would,
Wishing the welfare of the Souls of men,
Bearing a meek Deportment toward them,
To have a fellow-feeling of all you ken,
So as to mourn with those that mourn, and weep,
And to rejoice with them that Joy, and sleep;
Not apt to censure; apter to Believe
A good Report, not given to Deceive,
With sly Hypocrisy, and false Pretense,
But always speaking plain, and real Sense.
(2.)
An Enemy to such there cannot be,
Which Loves, and Prays, and Blesses as they see,
When they him brawl at, and likewise do Curse,
Yet cannot conquer, though they grow much worse,
The more they hate, the more is his desire
Them to reclaim, and quench the raging Fire:
He knows it is what his Lord has done before
For all, who loved till they could hate no more;
In doing which he does but imitate
His Lord, and also Saints which never did hate.
(3.)
Who in disdain of all the Scoffing Crew,
Does still his Duty, giving all their due,
In spite of Spite it self, and all that Jeered,
Though much despised, Heavenward he Stear'd
His Course with patience onwards still he goes,
Arriving there in spite of all his Foes.
(4.)
This Christ has done, and this he does command
All People that do List in his own Band,
That to their Promise first they always stand,
And in that order, and array to move,
All armed with Patience, and unfeigned Love,
Being assured of a Victory,
Against their Foes, whether they live or dye,
If in this World we do all here forgive,
As we in the next have always hopes to live;
Then by so doing we may get to Heaven,
If that our En'm'es be by us forgiven;
But if they be not as we daily pray
In our Lord's form, which we should often say,
Then we are Liars, and no Truth is in
Us, but in the very Prayer we daily sin.
(5.)
Besides all this, all Christians should be
Both kind, and good in all Sincerity,
And must be forward also to do good
To the Souls and Bodies of their Neighborhood.
(6.)
All should be ready for to cure the Grief,
To teach the Ignorant, and give Relief,
TO encourage Virtue, where they find it weak,
Letting their own Example chiefly speak.
(7.)
Are any Hungry, or else under Pain,
Naked, or Sick? Oh! let them not Complain,
But Feed, and Cloth, and Heal them, if so be
Thou can relieve them in such Misery;
If not, however let them never want
Those Prayers of thine, though they be mean and scant.
CHAP. XIII.
(1.) Almsgiving. (2.) How. (3.) The Time when. (4.) And to Whom. (5.) Of
Lending. (6.) Of Liberality. (7) Charity with respect to Credit. (8.) The Rule
of Charity. (9.) Of Peacemaking. (10.) Going to Law. (11.) Self-denial. (12.)
Pray for Grace to perform all Duties. (13.) The Danger of Neglecting those
Duties.

Charity personified holding children

(1.)
BY Charity is further understood,
Thy doing to thy Neighbor so much good,
As to promote his Interest, and Gain,
Or else your Love to God is but in vain;
Hence giving to the Poor is always just,
A Charity divine, which do you must,
For who will believe that Man does love his Mak'r,
Who will not let the Poor be a partak'r
Of what God gives him, and so not deny
To try his Faith, and prove his Charity,
Since some have Riches, others Poverty;
For what you give, you give not Man, but God;
It Is He that brings the Poor Man to the Rod.
The Beggar had been Rich, not made to try,
Had God not thus ordained a Charity.
(2.)
Therefore when ever thou giv'st here thy Alms,
Do it without Reluctance, or Qualms.
God loves an Hearty Giver, let then none
In giving his Good Things, him sore bemoan;
For giving much, God is Security,
And will reward him, since he cannot Lie:
Nor let him think, by Giving, he shall want,
No! God being just, and true, will not recant,
But on the contrary, so much increase
His Riches, Holiness, and present Peace.
(3.)
What ever thou giv'st, then give without delay,
And to the sore distressed do not say,
I Am busy now, I Will do it another Day.
Who knows if then thou will be in that mind,
Or he thy Soul may in the Body find,
For when one's asked, to Give is doubly kind,
Delays are dangerous, the Poor may be
Famished with a long-winded Charity.
(4.)
Make a good choice of those to whom you give,
Bestow on such as cannot work to live,
Or those oppressed with Families so great,
Which with their Labor cannot get to eat,
Much less to Cloth them, groaning then alone,
Few being so good, as him for to bemoan.
He! such as he your Charity does crave,
Begging your Hands to prop him from the Grave.
(5.)
Others perhaps may want, but not so much,
It Is mere Charity to Lend to such:
And when thou Lendest, lend it then so Free,
Intrest agrees not with True Charity,
But if thy Debtor cannot at present pay,
Do not him dun, but with some patience stay,
Till that he can: If able never he be,
Forgive him then as God will do to thee.
(6.)
In Giving Alms, be liberal and free,
Or else thou only Banters, and shall see
Thy Gift with Charity does not agree.
What now thou do not use, thou must bestow,
A Stream when more than full, does overflow,
And so should thou, keep just enough for Use;
If thou keeps more, thou do but that Abuse.
If that in Charity thy Gift's but small,
It Is not a little, since it is almost all.
(7.)
Of Charity there is an other sort,
That of thy Neighbor thou do well report,
His good Name injured, see with some Defense
Thou vindicate his Dove-like Innocence.
Do not the Tales (Ill Fame may tell) believe,
And if thou know him faulty, yet relieve
Him, and his Secrets see thou not reveal,
Though infamous, and public, them conceal;
Join not the Noisy Scandal with thy Voice,
But let an harmless Silence be thy Choice.
(8.)
The Golden Rule observe, and always do
Just as you would your self be done unto,
For to Receive, no doubt thou had a mind,
In thy Necessity, therefore be kind.
I doubt not neither but thou do thy Name
Desire to be preserved from Slander, Blame,
And all the Injuries of Cruel Fame.
Therefore all Men by thee as do thou would,
Even so to all thy Neighbors do thou should.
(9.)
Be always Peacemaker in any Strife,
It Is one of the best Offices of Life.
(10.)
Go not to Law with any, nor invade
His Properties; escape the wrangling Trade:
And if thy Cause must needs come to the Bar,
Be not in such a case as many are,
Mere Enemies, but very calmly hear
The Event, then whether you are cast, or clear,
Let none thy Boastings, or thy Murmurs hear.
It Is true, we cannot love them, nor forgive
Our Enemies, and wish them well to live,
Much less their Wants, then as we ought relieve.
(11.)
Strugle we must, and with a bitter trial,
To bear the Cross, and learn Self-denial;
And so we must deny, and must withstand
Our selves, if we'll obey our Lord's command,
As his Cross to take up, and bear the Shame,
Which he endured for his most Holy Name,
So we as Christians must do the same.
Wherefore rejoice when that comes to your turn
To suffer, better drown in Tears than burn
In Hell with the Rich Glutton, for to lie
Tormented there to all Eternity.
(12.)
Now then thy War begins subscribe the List,
Resolve to do thy Duty, and Resist
Thy own Corruptions, make incessant Prayer
To God, that he for Christ's sake thee would spare,
Grace sufficient to maintain the War,
Or else thy feeble Soul will quickly yield
To Satan cowardly; and quit the Field.
(13.)
Oh quickly, quickly then thy self apply
To thy whole Duty, lest Sinning thou dye.
And now thy self often to Prayer betake,
Imploring Mercy for thy Saviour' sake;
Use these short Forms, which are herein prescribed,
Be Earnest, and thou shall not be denied:
What monstrous Hazards do thou undergo,
Which ventures on in Sin, which will bring woe.
Therefore thy Duty know, and now begin,
Leave thy delight in Error, and in Sin;
Defer not thy whole Duty day by day,
But unto God, for Christ's sake, always Pray,
U^ing those Means prescribed in thy Way.
PRAYERS. (1.) For Pardon. (2.) For Grace. (3.) For Comfort. (4.) For several
Graces. (5.) The Lord's Prayer.
church service our Father.

(1.)
THou Lord of Mercy, to thee now I Pray,
Let my Request be heard; do not say Nay,
That all my griev'ous Sins be done away.
I am a Sinner, Lord, thou know full well,
And Duties owe to Thee, who does excel
In Goodness, and in Kindness evermore,
Though I am much behind, and in thy Score.
But if thou have such Mercy behind still
For me, then make me to fulfill thy Will;
And thou, O Lord, do all my Sins forget,
And let them not on my account be set,
Lest my Misdeeds at length should so prevail,
If them thou mark'st, then my Soul will fail,
And sink by that sad weight of its own Fate,
For ever banished from that blessed State,
Even from that blessed Company, and Place,
Unless thou do restore me by thy Grace.
Thy Mercies, Lord, are manifold, you are kind,
Let me, Oh! then one Branch but only find,
That I may, ever I sink, lay hold thereon,
On thy great Goodness, and Salvation.
(2.)
Now grant good God, I may both hear, and see,
To do all things well-pleasing unto thee,
Be pleased to give but to my weak Faith, Strength,
That I to Happiness may come at length.
Teach me good God, and so give me thy Grace
To walk aright, that I may see thy Face;
Take from me Clouds of Sin which do so blind
My Sight, by making clean my Heart and Mind,
Lest into that unfathomed Pit I fall,
And there for thy kind help in vain do call,
Where being stung with Vengeance of thy hate,
I call, and call, but yet alas too late:
Convert me then, O Lord, betimes, lest I
Be overtaken with thy Wrath, and dye:
I am a Stranger here on Earth, incline
My Heart to what is good, and so d vine,
That I with thee and others there may shine.
(.3)
Why, why, O Lord, do thou thy Face so h^de*
Making me row against the Wind and Tide?
In vain, in vain, my grief and labor's all,
If thou, dear Lord, do not return, and call
Me to thy self with longing in my Soul,
Letting no Sorrow ever me Control.
(4.)
Give me both Faith, and Hope, and also Love,
Humility, with Fear to thee Above,
Trust, Gratitude, Contrition, to be Mild,
Contrite, Chaste, Temperate, to be thy Child,
So Diligent, Just also, and Content,
With Perseverance, never for to Repent,
Of doing good to all, that I may be
Blessed with Angels to Eternity.
(5.)
These Six Petit'ons grant me, Lord, I pray,
Which I do put to thee even day by day,
1. First that thy Name may sanctified be.
2. Thy Kingdom come, when fitting thou do see.
3. Thy Will be done in Earth as Heaven is.
4. This Day our daily Bread give, and it bless.
5. Our Sins forgive, as we forgive all men,
6. And lead us not into Temptation then.
Thy Kingdom, Power for ever be; Amen.
(1.) Thanksgivings. (2.) For Deliverance in Trouble. (3.) Ejaculations for the
Lord's Supper. (4.) Before you Receive it. (5.) After Receiving.
(1.)
YES I will ever, O God, thy Name praise,
Proclaiming it on high, my Voice will raise,
Whilst I have Breath, I will still Speak, and Sing,
My Praises all unto my Lord, and King,
Wishing my self all Voice, and Tongue to have,
To sing thy Praises, and for me to crave
A Blessing which thou always do bestow
On humble Penitents here now below;
Oh that my Thanks could then but equal grow:
Blessed then for ever blessed be thy Name,
Thou Fountain from whence all our Blessing came.
(2.)
O God, for Mercy I on thee do call,
My Soul does trust alone in thee for all
True Shelter; to thy Wings, O Lord, I run,
O cover me, or else I am undone:
Thou art my Hope, and Refuge also still,
Deliver me, that I may do thy Will:
Preserve my Soul, for unto thee it flies,
O look upon me with thy Holy Eyes.
With mine I Will look up, till the Tears have wore
My Sight away, and I here be no no more.
O pity, pity my distressed Estate,
Leave me not wholly desolate, nor Hate
Me, for I have here no true Friend but thee;
O pity, whither, whither shall I flee?
(3.)
I am not worthy that under my Roof
Thou Lord should come; Can I bear thy Reproof?
For I have Sinned, if thou should now mind
With rigor to correct for what is behind,
Who could abide? But Mercy is in store
Reserved for me, and so for others more,
Through thy beloved Son; my Trust shall then
B' in Him that took away the Sins of Men.
Oh see and hear the Cry of his dear Blood,
Which I with others plunge into that Flood.
(4.)
The Symbols now which I m about to use,
Eternal Life by them do not refuse,
To give to me as promised I Will take,
(5.)
The Bread, and Cup, and so thy Passion make
Known unto all, thy Sitting on the Throne,
For ever blessed Thou great Three in One.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed and Sold by J. Bradford.
THE Complaint of English Subjects, delivered in Two Parts. The first, is the
Complaint of the Poor, Middle and Meanest sort of Subjects, concerning their
Bodily Assistance. The second is, The true Christians Complaint against Vice
and Wickedness, for the good of their Souls health. Wherein also is set forth
the Late prodigious Growth of Atheism, Errors and Vice. With a Call to
Repentance. As also how needful it is in these Times, for every one of us,
first of all, to look into our Hearts, and endeavor to Amend what is there
amiss. And lastly, a brief Discourse concerning our late Unfruitful and Cold
Summers. As also, what is the Real Cause of it, by way of Opposition to the
Opinion of Astrologers. By Richard Newnam of Tiverton in Devonshire. Price 6 d.

A Gold Chain of Four Links, to draw poor Souls to their desired Habitation: Or
the Four Last Things briefly discoursed of, viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven and
Hell. By the late Reverend Dr. Stevens. Price 2 d.

The Pathway to Perfection: Showing the Duty of Children to their Parents;
With the Promised Blessings which attend those that perform it, etc. To which
is added, A short Persuasive to the Duty of Prayer. By J. Stevens, D. D. Price
2 d.

The Pious Man's Kallender: Or, Christian Thoughts for every Day of the Week.
1. Of Faith. 2. Of the End for which Man was Created. 3. Of Death. 4. Of
Judgment. 5. Of Heaven. 6. Of Hell. 7. Of the Presence of GOD. Also, an
Instruction how to prepare to Dye. Concluded with a brief Paraphrase of the
Lord's Prayer, in Verse, suitable to the occasion. Published for the Benefit of
the Poor. By William Joy, Minister of Sarrat in Hartfordshire Price 2 d.

A brief Account of the most Remarkable Prodigies which happened at the Birth,
in the Life, and at the Death of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. As also, a
Lively Description of the Person of Christ. In a large broad Sheet. Price 2 d.


