THE COPPIE OF A LETTER SENT TO A GENTLEVVOMAN ONE OF THE SEPARATION IN
HOLLAND. In Answer to a Letter of Hers, written to her Sister, being a member
of one of those Societies, commonly (though falsely) called the new Anabaptists
in London.

Wherein are briefly set down their reasons against the baptizing of Infants:
together with the grounds of their denial, of sprinkling water upon the face
in any name whatsoever, to be Baptism: And them of the Separation justly
charged for not walking answerable to their own Principles.

By R. B.

LONDON; Printed in the year of liberty, 1642.

THE COPPIE OF A LETTER Sent to a Gentlewoman, one of the Separation in Holland:
Mistress M. B.
AND our friend in the common Faith, we wish grace and peace through the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be multiplied unto you, and unto all
that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity Amen.

We have understood dear friend, from your Sister and ours, that you desire
to have communicated unto you, the grounds of our now practice, which your
request we think reasonable, and our selves bound to satisfy you in. Our
houlding and practicing of a communion of Saints in Church fellowship,
separated from such as with whom the believer has no part: 2. Cor, 6.15. we
think you seek not a reason of it being that which you are convinced of as
well as we; nor do we think that you seek to be informed, that there is an
ordinance of God to be submitted unto, by believers, called Baptism: but your
inquiry is as we conceive, wherefore we who have (as we have been told) had
that done unto us in our Infancy, which is commonly called Baptism, should
notwithstanding repute our selves as unbaptized persons, and should become
baptized, as if we had (...) Baptism before, for which our practice, we
present you with these ground^^ only premising, that to be baptized is one of
the counsels of God which may not be rejected, Luke. 7.30.

First, infants are not the subjects of Baptism, or are not the persons whom
God has appointed to be baptized.

Secondly, the sprinkling water upon the face, which is all that we ever heard
of (that we had) is not Baptism.

Thirdly, that which we in our Infancy had, if sprinkling was Baptism, and
Infants the subjects yet by the Separations own grounds was not Gods Ordinance
seeing the Church was false, where, and the ministry by whom we had it, and
where there is neither true Church nor true Ministry, there can be no true
religious administration, and as well as Mr. Can, may manage separation from
the Nonconformists principles: may we manage our practice from the Principles
of yours, and Master Can, we think therein does well, it being the course
which the Lord takes with the Jews, and Paul with them of Corinth, 1 Cor. 7.
and Luke 13.15.

But to the first of these three. Infants are not the subjects of Baptism, as
appears to us by these reasons.

First, there is in all the word of God no command given to any person or
persons, officers, or persons out of office, to baptize them: Now if the word
of God be true, where it says; all Scripture is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable for Doctrine, reproof, correction, instruction, in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
every good work, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. the Scriptures giving no direction in the
doing of nor unto any to do that work, it can be no good work, and there are
of works, but good and bad, and our being so often called to the Law and to the
Testimonies, and our being bid to give heed unto that sure word of prophecy,
that shines as a light in a dark place, with an affirmation that if we give
heed thereunto we shall do well, cannot but imply at the least, that we shall
omit no duty, while we do but what is written: and the Baptizing of Infants
not being by God enjoined unto, or upon any, nor by his word recorded to have
been done by any, it can be as no good work, so no work of light; and the
Servants of God may not walk in darkness. Hence do we in one respect decline
that practice as an unwritten unverity.

Secondly, Infants have not in them those requisites that are necessary in that
service, which are, R^^^^tance from dead works, and faith toward God. Heb.
6.1. and Act. 8.36, 37. (...). 2.38. and we think that of the English common
Service Book, will be no objection of yours; saying, yes they do perform them
by their sureties?

If you object that though repentance and faith were requisites in persons of
years yet it follows not that those or either of them, are required of
Infants, who by reason of their tender years cannot perform them:

We give thereunto three Answers.

First, as little as we find in the Scriptures, of the requiring of faith and
repentance at the hands of Infants do we find of the Baptizing of Infants:
wherefore if the not requiring of Faith and repentance from Infants, be a
sufficient exemption to them, from demonstrating either; then in like manner by
the same proportion, will the not requiring of Infants to be Baptized, and the
not requiring of any to baptize them, be a sufficient exemption both to the
one, and to the other: That is our first answer.

Secondly, We find that in all Ordinances, whereunto both old and young
indefinitely had access, that which was a requisite in one person, was a
requisite in every person, and was found indefinitely both in old and young. To
eat the Passover, Circumcision was required, to precede, and that was all
that was required, Exodus 12.47 48, 49, 50. To Circumcision was required that
the persons were Males, borne in Abraham's house, of his Children or strangers,
or bought with his money of all the Heathen that were round about, Genesis
17.12.23.27. Exodus 12.44. these requisites we say, being all that were minded,
suited with the condition of every one, and for us to hold out access to
Christ in his Ordinances, to one by this way and to another by that, what is it
but to make the Scriptures to be of private interpretation, and to make Christ
who is one, and his way one, to become divided? this is to us likewise
considerable.

Lastly, that which will give admittance to one Ordinance, will give admittance
unto another of like nature: now if the Sacraments (as they are called) or the
new Covenant, be like the new Covenant, viz. spiritual, which who dares deny;

Then that which will give admittance unto Baptism, will give admittance to
the Lords Supper: and thus have we such as neither have faith, nor ever
professed to have any, admitted to the Church, and to all the Ordinances
thereof, and what is this but to make the new Covenant as carnal as the old,
and the subjects of the one as carnal as the subjects of the other: and the
blood of Christ to be of no more value, then the blood of Fulls and Goats,
that could not take away sin, Heb. 8.6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 11.27 28.

Thirdly, the faith of the persons (that ever have any) baptized in their
Infancy, in the use of their baptism when they come to years, can be built
but upon humane Testimony, commonly that of a Parish Clarke: and to have our
faith stand in the truth of men, is to have a foundation for it, like that of
the wisdom of men: which is opposed to the demonstration of the spirit and
power of God; 1 Cor. 2.3, 4, 5.

If you object their, being circumcised in their Infancy.

We answer, that it viz. Circumcision left a mark in their flesh, which they
could not but take notice of: and therefore their knowledge of their being
circumcised depended not upon the testimony of others.

Fourthly, they cannot rise with Christ in Baptism, for they being Insants are
only passive, and rising with Christ in Baptism, being a part of Baptism, or
being by Baptized persons done in Baptism, they cannot be baptized, the one
half of Baptism, being the act of the baptized seeing they cannot act, Col.
2.12. Like as they cannot partake of the Lords Supper that cannot eat, let the
administrator do unto them what he can.

And thus we come to the second head, viz. That sprinkling of water upon the
face of any person young or old is not Baptism, let it be done in what Name or
with what Ceremonies it will: which is proved to us by these reasons.

First because that the word which is translated into English, Baptize,
signifies to dipp into water, and as sprinkling water upon a thing, is not
dipping the thing into water, but the contrary: so is sprinkling water upon a
thing not Baptism, but contrary to it, Thatthe Greek word which is translated
baptize, so signifies viz. to dip into water, we have the Testimonies both of
the Translators of the Scriptures, of Paraphrases, Expositors, and others, we
will not here trouble you with many. Isaac Causaben in his notes upon Math.
3.6. they were baptized in Jordan, says thus, the manner of Baptism was to
plunge the person Baptized over head in water, and is that which the word
Baptising fully declares; and by and by, it was not for nothing that some have
disputed for the plunging of the whole body into water in Baptism, for they
urged the very word. Doctor Downame in his Book of Divinity has the same
words in effect. V^sinus, in his Catechism in the title of baptism
ingenuously confesses, that the East Churches did Baptize by dipping the whole
body into water, in the 409. Page of his Book, and this signification:
Ainsworth in his Annotations (...) Numb. ^^lvin^ In^ons. Chap. (...) 441.
11. Levit. 15. confesses that word to have, but had we not these and a
multitude of other Testimonies, the Scriptures in declaring the practices of
Gods servants, give us light enough, John 3.23. John baptized in Aenon, because
there was much water there: which argues a use of much water in baptism, else
that which is there rendered as a reason of his Baptizing in denon, cannot be
reasonably expounded, Math. 3.4 5 6, 7. Jesus came unto John to Iordain to be
baptized, and is said to come up out of the waters when he was Baptized, which
intimates, that he went into the water to be baptized, as the Eunuch and
Philip are both said to do, Acts 8.36, 37, 38. Besides these Testimonies and
practices, the correspondencie which the Apostle makes Baptism to hold with
burial, in 1 Cor. 15. and Romans 6. Col. 2. holds out the same thing.

And lastly the commission given to the Apostles, and Disciples of Christ, is
to make Disciples, and to baptize them, Math. 28.19.20. Now no rational person
will say there, that the face is the Disciple, no more then they will allow us
to say, the nose is the face, yet if the face was the Disciple, that is not so
much as Baptized, how much less the Disciple;

And we should ask these part baptizers, but that we cannot truly call it
baptizing, how they know the face should have that besprinkleing which they
use. If they say the face is the most honorable part:

We answer, that it is not our honor, but our cleansing from our filthiness
which is by Baptism set forth: and no person endued with reason to set out the
clensing nature of water, would take that to wash, which is free from filth,
and how know they that honor should sway us in this case, and whereas they say
that Baptism comes in the room of Circumcision, they will make it out by
their practices, for Circumcisions room was the privy parts, (if we mistake
not) which they in their sprinckling used instead of Baptism do decline. But
to sum up all this, if Baptism be a dipping of the whole body into water, as
is proved by Testimonies, both divine and humane, then where no part of the
body is dipped into water, there can be no part of Baptism, as there is not in
that besprinkling, which now adays is falsely called Baptism.

Come we now to the grounds, upon which they of the Separation do proceed,
they affirm, that the Covenant of which they hold baptism to be a seal, is
made but with believers and their seed; and that the seal is no seal where no
precedent Covenant has been: now the Parents of the most of them, by their
own confession, were ungodly and unbeleevers, as the children of the
Separation, notwithstanding their pretended Covenant commonly prove, and so had
no covenant made with them, nor with their seed, nor as they affirm, had their
seed, any Covenant made with them till they became believers.)

From which consideration we may frame this argument.

If where no Covenant has gone before, the Seal of the Covenant be set to, it
becomes no Seal, then where no Covenant has gone before, Baptism being the
Seal of the Covenant, if it be set to, becomes no Baptism.

But where no Covenant has gone before, the Seal of it be set to, becomes no
Seal.

Ergo, where no Covenant has gone before, Baptism being the Seal of the
Covenant, if it be set to, becomes no Baptism.

And thus are they quit of their Baptism, by their own grant: for they which
have no Baptism, but that which they had when they were without the Covenant,
have no Baptism at all.

Again they commonly affirm that Baptism upon the Baptizer is essentially
requisite, that the baptism administered by him may be in force for say they
baptism acted, by one unbaptized, unless he had a call like John the
Baptist, is a nullity: and thus if it be possible their baptism is Worse then
naught, they themselves being out of Covenant when they had it and having it
for the most part, by persons out of covenant, and by unpaptized ones, or at
the best by persons that successively have re^^^ved their Baptism from Rome,
where they say all administrations are Antichristian and void, for Baptism in
Rome by the most eminent of them, even by learned Ainsworth, is called an
Idol, and lying sign, and let all men judge whether the being under an Idol,
and lying sign, will enable persons to communicate true Baptism. Lastly the
Scriptures and Arguments produced by the Separation and others, for the
baptizing Infants, we shall briefly sum up and answer and then will leave o^^
grounds with our selves to your judicious censure.

The grand argument of theirs, in confidence of the strength of which they
insult like unto Goliath against the Armies of Israel, is, to all those that are
within the Covenant does the Seal belong: but all the children of believing
Parents are within the Covenant Ergo. Here we humbly ask, what covenant it is
they intend: if the old Covenant, to the old Covenants Seals we send them, if
they say they are all within the New Covenant, we must needs say they speak
falsely, if God be true, who is so; for Abraham Isaac, and Jacob were
believers, by the Scriptures own Testimony, and yet of their children God
testifies, though the number of them be as the sand, yet but a remnant of them
shall be saved, Romans 9.27. And of Isaacks children, God loved one, and hated
the other, Romans 9.13. And Gods New Covenant was not made with Ismael, Genesis
17.19.20. Now if the New Covenant be as Jeremiah reports, Ier. 31, 32, 33,
34. and as is expressed, Heb. 8.8. and 10.15, 16, 17. Then God who keeps
Covenant must needs (to be true in what he promises,) write his Laws in the
hearts of all believers children, they being within his Covenant, and except
that ^^thlesse doctrine may be allowed for truth, that men may fall from grace,
believers children must all be saved, which yet the Scripture denies, Romans
9.27 Isaiah. 1.9. and Romans 9.29.

They further affirm that the covenant made with Abraham and with his seed is
made with the faithful and their seed, to speak in their own words, in that
Abraham was but faithful, and they think so of themselves; foolishly erring
in not considering, that they (if they be within the Covenant) come in, not in
the place of Abraham, but in the place of his seed, and so are not Abraham's,
Fathers of the faithful, there being but one that ever had that Privilege;
now they being themselves but seed to Abraham, and the promise reaching but to
his seed, and not to his seeds seed, their Children are manifestly excluded the
promise or Covenant, unless they become Abraham's seed, and the Apostle
teaches us but one way by which the Gentiles do become the seed of Abraham.
Gal. 3. and if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and Heirs according
to the promise, so likewise Romans 9.8. and they that are Christ's have crucified
the flesh, with the passions and lusts: Gal. 5.24. and Luke 19.9.

Lastly, the Lord teaches us how to understand the seed of Abraham to whom the
promises were made, that were made to Abraham and to his seed, in Gal. 3.16.
now to Abraham and to his seed were the promises made, he says not, and to
seeds, as to many, but as of one, and to thy seed, which is Christ: wherefore
unless these persons would run into manifest wickedness, (we might say
Blasphemy against God) in making themselves Fathers of Christ, their greatest
honor lying in their being Children unto him, (if they be so) the promise
cannot descend through them unto any person: The promise being but to Abraham,
and to his seed, which is Christ, and to those that are Christ's seed, which to
be, is more then to be seed to them, Isa. 53.10. compared with Romans 9.8. and
Gal. 3. Vlt.

Their next hold is that of the Apostle, Act. 2.39. for the promise is to you
and to your Children, and to all that are a far off, even as many as the Lord
our God shall call, whence they conclude believers to be within the Covenant,
with their seed.

But we here likewise expostulate in three particulars.

First, What that promise is:

Secondly, who these people were (to whom it was proposed) (...) the proposal
of it.

Thirdly, what is the extent and Latitude of that promise: the promise as is
most plain in ver. 17. and 33. of that Chapter, is the guist of the holy
Spirit, which God at this time powered out upon the Disciples. and Peter in his
speech houlds out no more: Repent says he, and be baptized every one of you,
for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Secondly, it is no less plain and manifest that the persons to whom Peter so
speaks, were in his Judgment, as yet converts. For all that he heard from
them was what shall we do, and we find the Jailer went further in his
expressions, and yet Paul bids him believe in the Lord Jesus, intimating that
he not yet believed, though he had made a further inquiry after Salvation then
these men.

The last thing proposed, was the extent of that promise, what is might be; the
place it self we think in that particular is clear enough, for Peter's
exclamation must be considered, even to as many as the Lord our God shall call,
for to no more of them, nor of their children, nor of them a far off, then
the Lord our God shall call, does Peter in any wise apply that promise.

If you object that he applies the promise there to no more of them a far
off, then the Lord our God shall call: but he applies it to them and to their
Children, absolutely without the reservation of being called of God. etc.

We answer, that if we take these at this time, to be unbelievers as the truth
is, then who sees not the consequence? if we take them to be believers, then
all believers Children must have the Holy Ghost, though they never be called,
which who will own? Let them be believers or unbelievers, it matters not much
in the question in hand, for they were Jews, and therefore were in opposition
to the Gentiles, who are there by your own Judgment, spoken of as a far
off, and to those a far off, as the Objection yields, yea and that text
also, belongs not the promise, but upon being called, and thus are your
children by your own grant excluded the promise till they be called.

The next hold they have is in 1 Cor. 7.14 which many strike at: we wish you to
consider, that the same holiness of which the Child partaketh, is the
unbelieving wife during her Infidelity a partaker of, and whether that be
reasonably concluded that thence she may be Baptized, (which yet will hold as
well as the other) we leave to you: The opinions of those that deny election,
that hold free will and falling from grace, etc. We protest against and do
abhor: but because we write a letter, and not a Book, we must conclude as
we do, wishing peace to all that obey God only, Amen.

FINIS.

