THE Behavior, last Words, Non-Confession, And just EXECUTION OF Richard
Langhorne, Counselor at Law, For HIGH TREASON, AT TYBURN, On Monday the 14th
of July, 1679.
MR. Langhorne received his Trial on Friday the 13th of June; and being
Convicted, had Sentence of death passed upon him, together with Father
White-bread and the other four Jesuits since Executed on the 20th of the same
month; but he alleging multiplicity of other persons Concerns that lay in his
hands, did desire and obtained a respite of Execution, that he might have time
to settle those Affairs. There was good hopes he might have made an ingenuous
Discovery of this damnable Plot, being without doubt as able to do it as most
concerned therein, since as he had many years been the general Conveyancer for
settling Papists Estates, who contrive them so perplexedly, and with such
subtilty, that it is almost impossible to find out where, or in whom the
Propriety is vested; which is purposely done, to avoid the Penalties and
Forfeitures inflicted by Law for their Recusancy: So in particular he was a
Trustee, and managed Affairs for the Jesuits; of which Society he was too great
an Admirer, and so far influenced by them, as brought him to this Untimely End.
He pretended to declare what he knew concerning Estates by them purchased in
England, but with what sin^erity may easily be imagined.

As to the Crimes proved upon him, they were Treasons of the blackest die; that
he was so far interested in this horrid Plot, as to be designed.
Advocate-General of their Army; and in the mean time entrusted with Registring
all their Consults and Orders, and keeping their Commissions who were to have
Commands. His Hellish zeal was notorious, in that cursed expression, when
Wakeman refused to accept of 10000 l. to poison our Sacred Sovereign, as being
too little a Sum; this Gentleman said, He was a pitiful Narrow-soul'd
Physician, to stand upon Money in such a case, which any good Catholic would,
or ought to do gratis. But the exact Account of his Trial is abroad in Print;
and thereunto we refer the Reader for satisfaction, as to what was proved
against him.

He had abundance of people came to visit him in Newgate, during the time of
his Reprieve, and seemed to have been not a little desirous to live; but his
Party did so continually ply him with Lectures of perseverance, and the
goodness of the Cause for which he was to suffer, how much he would merit by
concealing, and how damnable a thing it would be for him to scandalize the
Church by making any Discovery, that at last he was prevailed with to stand it
out like the rest in obstinate denyals, and making big protestations of
innocence. Nay, that he might be sure not to confess his horrid Treasons, and
give glory to God before he went out of the world, there was a Declaration, (as
they called it) or Solemn Protest beforehand, published in his name, utterly
denying his Crimes, and (as it were) directing him what he should say when he
came to the place of Execution: so active and industrious are these Ghostly
Traitors, to hide that which God will have revealed, to stifle all noise of
this their detestable PLOT; as if impudent denyals, and threadbare pretenses
of being as innocent as the Child unborn, could make us dis-believe our Senses,
and never think such harmless Lambs as Roman Catholics guilty of any
Ill-meaning to us, till actually we find their hands embrew'd in our Blood, and
our Throats cut by their cruelties; as within our memory happened in Ireland, and
before that at Paris, and many other places.

He was certainly a man of good natural parts; and had he not been bewitched by
that pestilent Society which disturbs all Christendom, might have been a good
Subject. But they had got such an influence over him, that they led him to do
what they list: his Sons were bred amongst them in Spain, that they might
betimes be tinctured with Traitorous Principles; and one of them is now in
Newgate on the account of the PLOT.

As Mr. Langhorn was naturally a person of a Melancholy Temper, and a sober
discreet Behavior; so he deported himself, both during his Confinement, and in
his passage to Execution, with a great deal of gravity, often lifting up his
hands and eyes, and seeming to pronounce to himself certain Prayers and
Ejaculations.

He went from Newgate about half an hour after Nine, drawn in a Sled with four
horses, and a Boy riding on the foremost as a Postilion. He was in a decent
Black Suit, a modest Perriwig, and plain Band.

Being come to Tyburn, according to the Jesuits Directory, and usual form of
his Brethren, he resolutely denied the Fact he died for; pretended a great deal
of Loyalty; not forgetting to be as innocent as the unborn Babe; desired God to
forgive his Enemies, and several discourses to that purpose.

His Prayers were chiefly private, or with a very low voice, so that they could
not well be heard by the people at a distance: but those that stood near,
related, That they were in Latin; whence they were supposed to be Pater
Nosters and Ave's.

Thus suffered this unhappy man, hurried on to his own Ruin, and rather
choosing to cast away his Life, and venture his Soul, for the Airy conceit of
being enrolled one of Rome's Martyrs, than to preserve both by an honest
Christian Acknowledgement of his vile Traitorous Practices, and discovery of
his Accomplices therein.

He was suffered to hang till he was quite dead, and then cut down and
quartered according to the Sentence; but his Body was begged, so as not to be
exposed on the City-gates, but carried away by his Friends in order to a
private Interment.

FINIS.

