A NEW LIGHT-HOUSE AT MILFORD FOR The Great Pilots of England, for their
safety, as well to avoid the unremovable Rock Eliot from their door, HERE.

As to beware of the Bishop and his Clerks, near their Harbor THERE.



Printed for the AUTHOR. 1650.

To every Individual Member of Englands Supreme Authority.
Honored Sir,
IF I had thought it possible and convenient for one of my strength and
distance to have made a particular account of the ensuing RETURN to every
Member of your great Assembly, I would have sent it with their names to their
lodgings, because it does as nearly concern them as their rest and safety
there; but finding that Task too great, and my acquaintance so little with
any, but a few of them, I am bold to single but some Gentlemen, who do either
know me, or that have ever spoken a word in favor of a business so just, or
that have been abused to a belief of the contrary, or in whom I have observed
by some ocul^r experience, that they will countenance an honest cause, though
it be weak, and smitten to the ground. That they will plead for it in forma
pauperis, and that will lend their abilities of grace and nature, to extricate
and free the simplicity thereof from all the winding intricacies of subtle
adversaries, and the powerful secret knittings together of crafty men.

I am importunately bold to entreat you, Honored Sirs, for the Commonwealth of
Englands sake, and for the oppressed Commons sake, against all Eliotizing
monopolizers, and against such as do ingrosse great friends, and good causes,
to make sale of both again, that you would offer to Mr. Speaker these my
humble observations, and a few of my many sad experiences, together with the
sum of my SLOW RETURN, following next unto this my Address to you. As also
the mixture of my fears and s^g^s thereupon; That,

Recriminations among fellow servants, when they be loud, do claim to be taken
notice of by such Honorable Courts, and persons, as do prize their Honor at
any good rate, for when such attendants do throw foul aspersions upon each
other, and in their Masters presence in the Palace, or if it be cast abroad at
their doors, or in the L^^^y, some unseemly spots of those Aspersions do
usually fall upon the Parliament Robes of their Masters, both in the evil eye,
and by the biting tongue of such beholders as do malign (and to others it can
be no pleasing sight) and that do wish ill to the weal of that FAMILY;
especially if that FAMILY be political and great, not Oeconomicall and less,
or if that Family be a COMMONWEALTH as yours is, not a Kingdom as yours was,
there will be many evil eyes indeed, that will fountain out into streams ^f
laughing and rejoicing tears at such a sight, to observe so gross and
public a discovery of cross humors and dangerous diseases in your body
politic, your New Commonwealth; diseases that be so dangerously intricate,
and contrary to each other, that what does heal a less distemper, is the
heightning of a greater danger, if greater heed be not taken by MEN of greatest
skill.

There be notes taken, Honored Sirs, by such as do constantly pay you, and
the Commonwealths REPRESENTATIVE, greatest Tribute of duty and of sincere love
to their just proceedings, and by my self also who have a full note book, and
who have given up my life as freely, and is as nearly bound up with yours in
the public adventures (let Mr. Eliot libell) as any one man in England; and
from those notes thus taken, I do observe unto you (and I know the wisdom of
the STATE do more then strongly suspect it) that the Parliament have now a
more mixed number of w^iters then ever they had; some foolishly thinking that
the COMMONWEALTH is dying, and therefore do catch what they can (that is Mr.
Eliots case;) it is thought he would not have made such a simple bargain else,
in buying and selling 10000l. worth of suspected Debenters so easily, if he
were not of that dangerous opinion, having so much money, and having had so
good trading.

Others know, f^^se enough, if they be outed of their present employment, yet
they have learning and knowledge to give new intelligence to new visitors and
inquisitors, when times should alter; and they know too where, to be
entertained, though for the when, they are to seek.

Sir, I do beseech you to inquire whether Mr. Eliot did ever make a motion
against Judge Jenkins he has made many against those that were judged, and to
be judged to death by this Judge I do undertake Mr. Eliot may have ample
testimony of his good affection to the State from the Parliaments greatest
enemies in Wares, and from some that be fled into France too; for Sir, has he
turned so often for nothing? And has he been their Solicitor General for
nothing? And has he brought them off from their malignity for a bare Fee.
Indeed Gentlemen, he is not such a fool neither. He does not move (...)
nothing; a collop will not serve his turn, though he libels that it may serve
the (...) of others.

Sir, This pit is deep, and there be very few (as have wives and children) that
dare go thus far after him. I dare go thus far, and I would undertake to bring
it before the Sun (but that I cannot be at the charge) that Mr. Eliots good
affection to the State is (no simple, but) a very mixed and a compounded good
affection to the State, and that it has in it, more of revenge upon the
Parliaments friends for beating him, and his friends, when he was an active
enemy to them, then it has of entireness to the Parliament, by whose power he
was beaten; Revolters, or not Revolters, the case is all one with him; such as
would not stir from their loyalty, by the first part of his cunning, shall
starve for their loyalty in the height of his practice. And Sir, I can point
you out the pr^^batum est, or else let me be a libeller too, and be punished
for one, and let him escape, and be rewarded for all the good affection of us
both.

And Sir, there be other spectators that will be at your door too, let your
Wisdom do what it can to prevent them; and those have kindred, and friends,
and business to do there; and they can read, Print, and spy out the
differences between us, before any of YOU have leisure to read thus far; these
will speak loud enough what they see, and will speak worst of the best, and
ill of all, and of your GREAT ASSEMBLY too worst of all, when they get them out
of the Lobby, and they will have the boldnesses to do it in Mr. Eliots company
too.

O how will the game please your enemies, to see your wounded friends (be they
sound or rotten, it matters not) bleeding in the Press one against another!
their names putrefying in Print! their estates wasting by delays in judgment!
and no Physician or Chyrurgion provided to stench their wounds bleeding* nor
yet to wash away the blood tainting, nor yet to squeeze out the corruption
spreading and anoying; no, nor yet any Judge in readiness to punish the
offender in four or five years attending at their doors, O how many bleeding
Patients have swooned and sunk there, when but a touch would have cured them
of their evil! does not the strong man rejoice in his strength, that he is so
(...) to oppress? And will he not turn Atheist in one half turning more (if
he be not there already) seeing he can thrive so by turning, and falsehood? Must
not the weakest to the wall, and dye of his wounds? Alas, Honored Sir, who
shall pay for the cure of truth and loyalty thus wounded by treachery and
falsehood? Truly Sir, there are not a couple of such poor undone friendlesse
wretches in the Commonwealth of England as these be, viz. The truth of things,
and loyalty of persons. And what, Sir, if truth (as it is very bold) should be
so daring as to strike out the teeth, and slit the nose, and put out the very
eyes of falsehood by the weapon of a true discovery. Indeed, Sir, Falsehood is
rich ( speaking truth would make it dye a beggar, that it knows false enough)
and by the help of Truths Apes (glozing, and faining, and counterfeiting) it
has gotten mary friends, good men! great men! and does it not know the way to
get Ar^^s to put in Artificial eyes, the likeness of a nose, and another row
or rows of counterfeit teeth, and these they find will serve their turn for a
time, though truth and its discovery are resolute, not to give over until
these counterfeit Mock-truths be knocked off again, and for ever, or the will
lie by it for ever, until judgment relieve her, and send falsehood to its own
place, to the lower Gate House, to the lowest of all dark houses and
Gate-houses. In the mean time, I would to God, there were a standing Committee
to inquire speedily into things, whether they were natural or artificial, it
would not be a penny charge to the Commonwealth, to put the saddle upon the
right horse.

Sir, by all these hintings upon Mr. Eliots name, your Wisdom will soon find,
that there is such an unmannerly contest, as formerly there has been between
Mr. Eliot and others; so now there is such another between that Squire and my
self, a Minister in Hampshire, Mr. Eliot remembers the place in his late
Legend. I was bold not long since to wish well, that some truth of this Squires
great falsehood to the Commonwealth might be taken notice of by the STATE (and
it seems the man took cognizance of it in the same libell) because truly Sir, I
do know him and his ways (I wish I had but the tith of his acquaintance, and
credit to be believed in behalf of the State, though I had never a sheafe of
tithe more in the Country, nor yet a penny for it; yet I comfort my self with
this still, that many precious truths have been brought to light by men of no
credit, obscured men at first.

Sir, Indeed, I do know the man, as well as (if not better then) any man in
England, not excepting the woman that gave him suck; I have endured hard
travel, and have been at some cost to trace him. He again for my complaints
of him, libels against me, but it is to be understood, it is upon the plea of
se defendendo. Felons when they be pursued, do the same thing, though they
make not the same plea: Honest men, who will adventure to catch them for the
Collop of 10 li. given them by the State out of the Commonwealths Treasury, are
upon their peril upon that oft-bloody plea of se defendendo made and done upon
the prosecutor by the felon; by this and no other instinct (for Mr. Eliot was
quiet enough before, near five years together) This Gentleman does now take up
as much dirt as he can hold in both hands, and throws it at me; that I might
run in the other sid of the hedge, because he has taken the high ways,
where is dirt enough, and when he has stood with whips and wands (like some
notable great, rich, crafty beggar) these five years, whipping none but such as
whipped him most when he was a Rebel against the State, and of the Array to
keep Tyranny on foot still, and his dirt he keeps to throw on me, and such as
my self, because he could not have me quartered by the judgment of Judge
Jenkins, and Judge Turner, when the Earl of Carbery, (it was the spite of him
and others*) snatched me away from their cruel, civil, to his mild military
power, being then Commander in chief for his late Majesty. (Indeed the Earl
told me in his garden at Golden grove that he was Maligned much, for favoring
me so much, and could do it no longer for the cry that was against me, wherein
Mr. Eliot made not the least noise) so that it may be taken for a made
circumstance, (if it be admitted for a proof) that Mr. Eliots good affection
to the State, (the Lord free them from many more such good affections, as his
will appear to be, when the deepes be discovered) was not good affection, God
knows, but REVENGE on those that served the State, and had good affection
before him, as appears by the destruction he still works upon those that could
never be driven by all his strong breaths, and Ropes, and Gi^^es, unto Revolt,
by an unheard* of Treachery, and by many powerful Impulsives. But revolters
are served in their kind (did I plead for, or justify them? for shame (...))
but they have answered the Law you have for it, ONE was shot, M. Eliot knows
it. I am sorry he was principled no better. I did once suffer wrong by that man
(Mr. Eliot knows it) but it was upon Mr. Eliots Law-brothers report to wrong me
of what money I had laid out, chiefly by his letter. I with Mr. Eliot were
better swayed by better ends then the shot man was. I fear it much. O ye
depths, be you discovered! And bring ye, out of your treasures Mr Eliots
constant good affection to the State! And all his cordial ends for their
honor! ye must render these things at last, if ye do it not now, O ye depths!

Sir, I did say, Mr. Eliot did throw dirt upon me with both hands, yet this I
must say also of his Printed boldness, that it had many blushing and cleansing
Parentheses in it: He does a little hold down his head in these expressions of
his, HE DID HEAR SAY, and FOR OUGHT IT DID APPEAR, and HE IS CONFIDENT etc.
that these and these things were true of Beech. (For I have seen his legend
since the penning of that which follows next.

I could give you sir, a true Pedigrea, how that the REPORTS he speaks of were
Maggots of his own, and his uncertain Ally brothers blowings, in their several
and changeable postures, between the late King and the present Praliament. And
for what cause their breath became so strong, I can tell too, as little to
their credit as any thing that can be spoken of unthankfulness, and
unworthiness, and unfaithfulness: (only I shall say little of the dead) and I
need not go to Wales to prove it neither, it will be proved between
Westminster and Lambeth, besides the Hands and Testimonies, I have to show that
will pass the approbation of any Court or Committee, as an abstersive from his
dirt. That of my conjunction with Sir John Pennington will appear nonsense.
And then again, Mr. Armiger Warner (the States trusty Messenger) calls Mr.
Eliot Knave, because he has the original Warrants in his hands, which Mr.
Eliot calls counterfeits, and that Beech employed Mr Warner. And for the other
libelling business, in such a message at the Committee for complaints, Mr.
Eliot did not think (when he libelled) how filthily that will smell against
him, when I should be provided to stir it. This I affirm at present, He went
out of that Committee as red (near the matter) as the Scarlet cloak which he
had then upon him, Scarlet, that was most unsuitable for his discovered
unworthiness.

Sir, I am bold without any Ifs, or Ands, and without any ambiguous or shifting
Parentheses; and I do hereby accuse Mr* Eliot (in this Bill) of as much
falsehood to the State, as 8 or 10000li. and their honor amounts unto. And I
do know, that his longer stay at the Parliament door, is as dangerous to
particular men, as the ill success of al good friends and causes (within his
reach, and within the precincts of his unlimited Agency) comes unto, if it be
so, that these good men, and causes, do not strike sail to his courtesy, nor
yet prove Pander to his falsehood. He has a very blasting breath, and will be
worse then a North East wind would be to the multiplying of f^^^^, and growth
of Plants, both to them, and to their causes, if they will be stubborn and not
submit to him. Alderman Devereux Wyat does know it, with a witness poor
gentleman.

Sir, This is a Truth so well known to multitudes, that I could prove it as
clear as the day, but that I am crippled, and am forced to lay down. And
indeed, there will be no need of me to prove it, if you would enquire after
it. And if you would be so worthy, as (in behalf of the State and
Commonwealth,) to command Captain Grundy at his lodging at Mr. Rayments in
Gardiners law, if he be not marched with his Company to serve the State. Or
for Captain Wyat in the Marshalsees, or at the poor widow Hopkins house near
the Blew Boar in Tuttle street, undone by quartering the old Captain, whilst
he waited here. I blush to speak how much above the greatest part of a 1000li.
it has been my cost and detriment, since I was so lightheaded as to contend
with this Goliath. Friends and Enemies do know I am sober, and do speak within
compass.

I doubt men that do regard their families, and will not wound their
consciences, and names, by neglecting their charges, will not easily be
persuaded to tell the State of their wrongs and dishonours, men do begin to
know they may buy repemtance at a cheaper rate and stay at home.

Sir, I for my part do find it a very dirty employment, and the charge (though
great) is nothing to the dirtiness of the employment, to men that desire to
keep their Garments clean. Especially if they be men (as they say) of my
cloth and order. Mr. Eliot has a huge advantage, he can say so much truth, in
effect, but it is to cover the falsities of his libell, that a Minister should
be no striker, he presumes, he may strike, whom, and when, and where he
pleases.

Sir, the least speeks and Atoms of such businesses upon me, he knows, are
like the droppings of hot lime upon my cloak, making me unfit for any Company.
And sir, I am persuaded you may easily believe (as you know, or shall come to
know of my condition, and in what rank it pleased the Parliament, to s^t me by
their Honorable Committee for Plundered Ministers, that not one man of a
thousand would be hired for a greater sum (then the quantity of the Collop
which Mr. Eliot pleasantly talks of in his libell) to be made so dirty as his
own or a hired pen and pate has made me all along; if your wisdom should not
have cast it off, nor would I have done it, sir, but that life is sweet, And I
would seriously endeavor to preserve yours, and mine, from a violent drowning,
during the little moment of my natural life; I do know my life to be deeply
endangered in the bottom of your safety, and I do see M. Eliot boring hard,
with his shaddowed light in the bottom of the Vessel: I do note how he does
cleave out the strong Oak of your Justice (and it is that which must keep the
State from sinking) by the most firm and spiny wedges of their own limbs and
Members; And I do find that he does shake hands with Parliament haters, as
much as any one man in England, so near them, and more then is possible, for
any professed hater of them to do, for fear of being sequestered. And I do
apprehend the danger to be the greater by how much the more credit, he has
obtained of a well affected man, among so many of you.

Sir, I do wind up my desires in this Clew: Be pleased to move that Capt.
Wyat be sent for to his poor lodging, I have named the place: And move that he
may have speedy audience: And move that he may have a suit of Clothes, and some
refreshing victual after his weakening imprisonment: And if it stand with the
wisdom of the Parliament to put a Commission into his hand for a Command at
Sea: I do undertake, (and he has undertaken enough) that he will be the same
still; he will be faithful to his trust, and ^^ke an hundred ^imes, before he
yield once: Mr. Eliot knows it, and so does Judge Jenkins: For when those
Dons came upon a Spanish design, with a half Moon to the River of Milford,
the gallant old Captain would not strike Sail to them, but he would be, and
was one of the fiery ships that did help, scatter, and sink these Welsh
Spaniards, thou^h he consumed himself and his esate in the work. And does not
Don Eliot know, that though he himself took in his Spanish, and set up English
Colors: And albeit he the s^m^man had obtained the Command and good opinion of
a well-affected man, would the ol^ blade strike to him? no, he did scorn it,
though he sanke twice by him, once at Westminster, and after that into the
Marshalsces, because albeit he saw, that the man had the face of John Eliot
Esquire, yet he plainly discovered the bloody heart, and cruel hands of Don
Eliot the Spaniard.

Your bold but loyal servant, William Beech.

For my credit to be believed, I am bold to enter into these few degrees of
comparison with Mr. Eliot.
1 MR. Eliot is upon record at Westminster to have altered his opinion and
practice toward the Public four times, though there happened more
alterations; He does charge me but with one turning to Sir John Pennington,
which I have to show, is a Peace of Nonsense. 2 Mr. Eliot is an
Array-Committee man, and Commissione, and a Soliciter against the State, I am a
Minister, therefore must be no striker, that's his advantage, he may strike me,
he thinks, but I may not strike him. 3 Mr. Eliots estate is said to be worth
about 120 li. per annum in the Country, besides his practice in the City, the
bounty of the Parliament had made my yearly means equal with his, if I had
husbanded it so well as he. 4 Mr. Eliot was put into the Gatehouse lately for
wronging the Commonwealth 10000 li. in unlawful debenters. I have suffered
imprisonments too, but they were my wrongs and troubles for the Commonwealth. 5
When Mr. Eliot speaks or Prints his good affection to the State, he does it to
shift of his malignity, and fashood and to weaken the Parliaments friends, and
to divide them, and to scatter them, for which he thinks he may live to have
thanks; but my good wishes that way have been still published, not of revenge,
but of good will, and to unite the Parliaments friends, and to encourage the
Soldiers over to Ireland; witness, THE PLOT FROM EDOM, and LONDONS BLOWING UP
BY LONDONERS.
VV. B.

To the Right Honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker, etc. For the Right
Honorable the Parliament of England, in behalf of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
Being a slow Return made by William Beech Minister, now absent, and in the
Country, Unto a loose and lying Pamphlet, set forth by Squire Eliot still
present in the City. This was sent to London by Mr. Fifield April 15 1650, but
was not Printed before June 3. Mr. Eliot much beholding to miscarriages and
delays.
BLAZED
By the said Mr. Eliot to blemish the Testimony of such as have any knowledge,
to give light of his Falsehood to the State that have entrusted him, being
(yet) upon an old design of near 5 years practice to wrong the Parliament and
the Commonwealth of 8 or 10000l. more, which is as truly theirs, as their Mace.
WHerein the Accountant conceives he may not so far encourage the falsehood as
(he hears, but cannot see i^) is contained in Mr. Eliots scandalous Legend,
as to honor it with repetition ( the standing loyalty of the Gentlem (
libelled against) being so eminently beyond the strength of Mr. Eliots breath
to blast, by the test of his own hand writing, if it were worth any thing, by
the A short Answer to a long Legend
Testimony of the present Commissioners of Pembrookshire, and above all these,
the known clearness of the Truth) but is bold to disprove as much of it as
does reflect on himself, or that comes within this abstract, of the many
Testimonies given of him, and of his doings, and sufferings for the State of
England, during all the fix times of Mr. Eliots turning to and fro, which will
serve as much for discovery of Mr. Eliots falsehood, as for Beeches
Vindication.

It is certified by the Subscribers who have good report in this great
Unstained Testimony.
Assembly, to be men steadfast, and sincere, Honorers of your just Power, and by
such as will depose upon oath what they do subscribe unto, as being either
fellow sufferers, eyewitnesses, or otherwise very competent to testify what
they subscribe unto.

That this Accountant, did at the first appearing of friends for the Beech a
traveller at his own charge for the Parliament
Parliament in Pembrookeshire, go at his own charge (for ought they could ever
hear or can imagine) from Milford to Bristoll, to Col. Not: Fines, Sir William
Waller, the late Earl of Essex, and from Bristoll did post up and down, for
half a year (or thereabout) to Redding, London, back again to Bristoll, to
London again, and then back again in great hazard, as they heard and
understood by letters, and good reports from time to time, to procure the aid
of Ships, Men, and Ammunition, to put the said His good success
County and Harbor of Milford in a posture to serve the Parliament, That the
said place became accordingly very serviceable to the State, that this
Accountant did move first at the entreaty of some of the well affected Gentry
there, and having with him a message from Cap. Devereux Wyat, an Alderman of
Tenby, now prisoner for debt in the Marshallsces For C. Devereux Wyat a
forgotten friend of the Parliaments. Beech apprehended, and indicted of High
Treason for the Parliament. His Escape. His losses at Muncton Nangle. Beeches
flight by Sea. Taken Prisoner again by the enemy. Exchanged by M. G. Brown.
Beeches family do suffer for Beeches loyalty to the Parliament
which, Mr. Beech was apprehended (by warrant from Judge Jenkins) and indicted
of high Treason (as they heard) at S. Dogmarls, and they do well know that he
was sent prisoner from place to place, Haverfordwest, Tenby, Carmarthen, and
that he had, they believe, suffered the Execution, of a horrid death, if he had
not escaped out of their hands, (when one Mr. Freeman escaped) about the time
of a defeat given the enemy by the Parliaments forces there, That M. Beeches
said services, and imprisonments occasioned thereby, continued near two years,
and that he lost, they believe three years profit, save only a very little,
one of those years, worth in times of peace 150l. per annum, at Muncton, and
his augmentation at Nangle the two last years, as they are credibly informed,
that when Gerrard had scattered the Parliaments forces there, in the year 1645,
Mr. Beech was forced to fly, with his own, and diverse other distressed
families by Sea to London, That he has served your Honors since, at the
Seidges of Basing and Denington, and was 7 weeks prisoner, at Wallingford, as
they heard also, until he was exchanged by Maj. Genesis Brown, That he has
given diverse public Testimonies of his loyalty to the Parliament ever since,
That he has sustained several arrests and imprisonments in London, and at
Westminster to their knowledge, and as it appears to them, in relation to his
said services, and troubles, and debts occasioned thereby, and during his
attendance here, which has brought many sad inconveniences upon himself,
and, they believe, distress upon his family.

Mr. Beech had Commission and employment from his Excellency the late Earl of
Essex, and I have heard very much from persons worthy of credit, of his great
sufferings for that employment.

Tho: Cosen, Secretary (then) to the said Earl.

The sum of this Certificate he has with him, abundantly testified in
several parcells, and he would offer Mr. Eliots oath of his certain
knowledge in all the particulars, but he waves it, as uncertain, and stained,
and nothing worth.

Cap. Ralph Grundy, and Cap. Devereux Wyat have escaped the tongue Cap. Grundy,
Cap. Wyat.
of Mr. Eliot the best of any (though they have felt the utmost of his hands)
he does confess, even in his LEGEND, that they do both deserve something, and
that they did love the PARLIAMENT a little, but, he is of opinion, they have
been rewarded enough (seeing they escaped hanging and quartering before) and
only that they do favor Revolters, he suspects, because they do not favor
his ways. This being a large Testimony from an Enemy, whom they did help to
beat when he was an Arch Cabby, they having subscribed their names, and affixed
their Seals long since to this Testimonial.

Raphe Grundy, his fellow prisoner. Devereux Wyat his fellow sufferer.
The substance of other Testimonies signed by Cap. Robert Moulton, and Cap.
Milford haven. C. To. Moulton Admiral. C. Rich. Swanley Admiral.
Richard Swanley the successive Admiralls of a Squadron of Ships on the River
of Milford in the year, 1644, and 1645.

Wherein Cap. Moulton certifieth the credible report he has heard of Mr.
Beeches sufferings, and imprisonments by the enemy: And Cap, Swanley does not
only testify the same, but also how that Mr Beech (having escaped
imprisonment under the enemy) did come aboard the Leopard (with one Mr. Freeman
a Minister, and others) desiring the protection of the Parliaments ships, and
Capt. Swanley gave order for their passage accordingly in the ship Lewis.

From aboard the Lion, The Lion. The Leopard, An hundred hands more. Withered
hands laid by. Winchester.
From aboard the Leopard.
Your Accountant Beech does offer an hundred hands more, if need be, to
certify this known Truth, and he has more hands, and good hands at present,
but they are such as Mr. Eliot has either blown upon, or that are withered by
Revolt since, and that too, by strange and incredible ways and causes.

Civitas Winton,
We the Subscribers do certify that we have seen from time to time, near 5
years together, diverse public Testimonies of M. Beeches very good affection
to the Parliament, and unto this present Government, and we have heard very
much, from persons to be believed, of his services at the siedges of Basing,
and Dennington Castle, and of his imprisonment at Wallingford for the same.
Given under our hands this 28 of March, 1650. The Mayor Other Magistrates, etc.
The Ministers. Large accounts contracted. John Baggs.


John Woodman, John Brain, Humphy Ellis, Tho, Lambard. Edmond Riggs Mayor,
Tho. Musprat, To. Mason,


Your Accountant having drawn up this short account of his long sufferings, had
also prepared Ten other particulars to send after this by the Post, entitled,
The PRESUMPTIONS upon which M. Eliot does GROUND his Printed LIBELS, and
Painted FALSITIES, but that he was unwilling Dirty Servants. Malignants sport.
The Parliament slow to hear just complaints, attested, bewailed. Good causes
blown up by new friends, old enemies.
to gratify so many evil eyes that would soon have sight thereof, when they
come to Mr. Eliots hands, who would laugh to see your Honou^s attended upon by
such dirty Wayters. The sad experience that this Accountant has had of Mr.
Eliots cunning, and his admirable success at every Turning, and the slow
proceeds of Justice, has enforced him to a Resolve of Silence, who has sadly
found that he shall be more eased, and better able to express the Falsehood
of this man, by short Interjections, then by long Orations: O, how many good
friends and Causes (he is bold to speak truth) have been blown up by Mr.
Eliots digging under both, and by his LYING so long at your DOOR, it is high
time (with submission to your wisdom be it spoken) to dismiss him of his
Attendance. He has blown up as many men, as ever came yet in the way of his
Violence and Falsehood, or that ever were so bold as to Complain of him. He
begins to fall upon your Honorable Commit. for the Army, etc. taxing them of
injustice, and their Registers of desperate Mr. Eliot in the Gate House, Bayled
out. Bilot provided for all changes, an incomparable Doctor.
designs to ruin a well affected man, because he was committed by that
Honorable Power of yows (as is said) to the Gate House, for some foul
practices. He is observed to be very vigilant in skinning over the sore before
the corruption be out, but there is good hope your Honors will prove better
State Ar^^^s then so; the Cunning Man has a salve for every sore, to skin it
over at least, and is provided for all changes, as well for great friends as
good raiment, if the face of affairs should change oftener then it has done.

Your Accountant is quite tired, and not well in health (indeed he is Eliot
(yet) cunning, strong, Beech weak,
sick) and he is able no longer to countermine the cunning of Mr. Eliot, he
has a strong arm, and a subtle head, there is a spring in his purse, and it
comes secretly through the veins of a red earth; his friends be not few, and
those he has, be no fl^nchers, there is no visible prosecutor of his falsehood
of this kind, but such as are almost as weak in the arm as himself. He is
therefore lef^ unto your wisdom, that may find him; and to his own wit,
that may tail him; Eliot left to his own wit, and to providence.
and to providence that will foil him. In the interim, your wisdom will not
blame his fear, when spying the denger, and Eliot a boaring, and himself in
the bottom, he complains to the Pilots, and cry out to Him that steers (in
chief) at the Helm, Lord Have Mercy Upon Us.

Queries sent Mr. Eliot for his knowledge Queries for M. Eliot at the highest
Court.
to examine him upon, at or before the first sitting of the High Court of
Justice in Excelsis.
The Parliament of Saints glorified. Requiring his answer better then by
spinning out loose and lying Pamphlets and Papers. Saints Love No Lies.
Mr. Eliots Conscience upon Interrogatory.

1 COnscience! do not thou know the truth of all the forementioned Beech a
prisoner. Tho. Wyats house the head quarters of the enemy. Eliot no
wellaffected man.
Certificates concerning Beech, and did not thine eyes behold him a Prisoner to
the enemy at Haverfordwest, and at the house of Tho. Wyat, Mayor of Denby, (the
Headquarters of the Enemy.) And was thy Master Eliot a well-affected man then?
And was he never Commissioner of Array? And was it not once the honor of thy
neighbor Eliot to be thought the best friend that ever the late King had, for
action, in the whole Association there? speak out, fear not, he is thine
enemy too as well as Beeches.

2 Does not thy Neighbor Eliot hate this Querest since the year Eliot a
bloody Cavalier.
1644. when thou know he laid so hard at his life, to Judge Jenkins etc. and
for such treasonable practices (so termed then by him) as are mentioned in the
testimonies above specified? and had he no hand in Eliot notable to frame
Articles.
framing, nor giving instructions for drawing up the 19 Articles of high
treason against Beech for the same? neither to the Judges, nor to the Clerk
that drew them, when he was Commissioner of Array, or a little before, mind
him of it; ask, had he no good will to see the bloody execution of this Beech?

3 Conscience! ask thy master, if he does not know that Beech does Beech under
Judgment of the Law to Mr. To. Lort. Elict a subtle Tempter, presumed by
visible circumstances. Col. Poyer.
lie under Judgment for a Debt, and that execution must follow of course, the
first of the next term, upon the action of a Gentleman that calls thy master,
Uncle Eliot? and speak, was he not thy masters Bedfellow at Westminster when
the Suit (of Lort, contra Beech) began? and was it not do think, for Eliots
sake? nor yet by Eliots instigation, it being so contrary to the former temper
of the same Gentleman, who was more friendly to him in his behalf unto the
Enemy, when Eliot sought his life. And did^t thou not hear that the Debt
became due for a More, etc. used, and spent by Col. Poyer in the Parliaments
service.

4 Conscience! do not know how much thy master Eliot was ashamed Originals.
before the Honorable Committee for Examinations near five years since, when
Mr. Whittaker was present? and in the discovery of the same falsities, that he
is bold since to cast abroad in print; and were thou not then evinced of some
unworthy passages, that made thy Neighbors Long -- bold visage to blush then,
though it has lost the good behavior of blushing ever since? And would not he
have been the counterfeit beggar? and was not Beech the giver twenty pound cut
of his own purse?

5 Conscience! have thou ever heard that this Querist has besought Truths
confidence in her Trustees. Eliot excellent to speak for himself, witness
all, etc. Eliot suspected, committed, etc. Mr. Eliots worm. Mountebanke
Certificates. The Sun clouded ecclipsed by great Mr. Eliot. He is a great
Licenser. Elict near the Parliament.
the favor of one Member of this great Court toward himself, until there
might be a fair hearing, but has his neighbor Eliot neglected one hour? or
left one member (or how many has he left) unmolested, and unattempted to
believe him to be an honest man still, though they begin (very many of those
Honorable Gentlemen) to suspect him strongly? or else, it is thought they
would not have committed thy master Eliot to the Gate House, if they did
believe he had not abused the Commonwealth, and the honor of the Parliament.

6 Conscience! do thou not stir his thoughts in the night (when he is out
of company) that there are many horrid Guilts chargeable upon his subtilty to
bring about any evil thing by imposture, and misrepresentation? and by such
Mountebank Certificates as he can get and subscribe unto ( as Commissioner
himself) with the smooth name of John Eliot, subscribed in a linking Italian?
Can any truth be believed in any Court by his good will, where he has any
reputation? if it be as clear as the Sun, has he not the darkness to cloud
it, if not licensed by him? Has not falsehood got a great patron of him? Do
believe, that the most inveterate malignity ( foreign or domestiek) had ever
such a friend in England so near the Parliament as Mr. Eliot is known to be?
Cry aloud, O the nonsense of your good affections to the Parliament, Sir!
People are afraid of it, because by subtilty and daily temptings you hinder
their growth, and you cling about the soundest Oaks of England. Sir, you will
eat up their strength (their honor and safety) if you should be suffered to
grow about them long? Conscience Eliot, like I^y. Caines Dog.
fall upon him, be thou Caines Dog, not to tear him in pieces, but only
drive him out of the Lobby, and save the House, and smite him upon his face to
repentance. Conscience, prithee tell him, Conscience, save thy cruel Master.
this Querie is made, not to his cunning to excuse him, but to thee Conscience,
to condemn him. If thou be faithful, thou will build thine own ruined house,
and thy Mr. Eliots too; honest Conscience, be a friend to both, Beech does
entreat thee.

Conscience! tell thy master Eliot, that he is false, as well to the State; as
he is spightfull to Beech (but to the State most false, that had Mr Eliot the
States Prodigal, to bring down their Noble to nine pence. Eliot a quibl^r. Two
great Witnesses.
honored him so much) because he would bring down their Noble to nine-pence,
their 8000. li. to 500. li. and that in print.

Conscience! tell him of the well-affected Legacies, bid him look upon the Will
of Thomas Wyat explained; suffer him not to quibble again, and say, it is a
whelp of Beeches malice; say, thou know the birth of that truth, and that it
is no whelpe, but it is Truth, and mind him that the City of Bristol, and the
Town of Tenby, are witnesses to the true birth and being of it.

Conscience! shake him by the shoulder, mind him of Beeches accounts, Beeches
accounts stated, not Registered. In Wales, Tho. Williams, Sheriff, at
Hiverfordwest. Jo. Sounder, Tenby Bayl, Tho. Phillips Mayor, Carm. John Manner.
Wallingf. Collins, Marshall Wilton, old Abraham, Westminster. Bayliffe Rogers,
VVoodstr. 1 Norman, 2 North. Eliot another Alexander. Unconquerable.
Interjections.
so that he undervalue it not to nothing. Reckon to him, so much service in
England (first) so desperate, so dangerous, so chargeable, so many troubles,
imprisonments, losses, for that service; so many years in Wales before, in
Eliots Array ship, so many years in England since, in his Committee-ship;
Debts before his flight, and scandalous Debts since his flight, and these much
more scandalous; his imprisonment at Walling ford, one touch in Winchester, one
at Westminster, two Shakes by Bayliffes within three doors of Woodstreet
Counter, such a well-affected enemy as Mr. Eliot, such an Alexander in the
Lobby; Eliot a man so Be-freinded, that he will be brought off, right, or
wrong. Eliot so be-enemied, that they will take their money again, though he
robbed upon the Common Highway; enemies that will let him go gallant still:
What mortal power can throw this Man? Great men either will not, or cannot
do it? What can Beech do against this man?

Conscience! shake him again; tell him from Beech, O! how many sad occurrences
(since Beeches contest with your Worships falsehood) must Beech interre, and
bury in the vast pit of interjections?

Your strong breath, your dirty Pen, your false Tongue, your Forehead, your
Friends, your diligence to tempt, your dexterity in tempting, your credit to be
believed, your slipperinesse to get off, your Money to compound, your hired
White Pate, your Privy Signet, Black Pate, unfathomable deceit! these, at Mr.
Eliots quarters; Then, Beeches debts! Imprisonments! scandal for that! grief
of friends for that! joy of enemies for that! often Non-Residence from a
neglected Flock! often Non-presence with a dejected family! poverty upon plenty!
opening evil mouths! stopping good mouths! woundings within! woundings
without! And was not Mr. Eliots Falsehood a tempter to it? And would not Mr.
Eliots malice be (now) an Accuser for it? And will the man be so devilish, as
to be an accuser and a tempter both? If a man might presume any thing from the
Italian Character M. Eliots nature, in his name.
of Mr. Eliots handwriting, there is that cruelty and cunning both discernable
in his Name, the cruelty of his nature in the cunning of his name (Eliot) A
winding Serpent, linking up the Italian letter (T) First, creeping up
temptingly, then hissing forth terribly.

Now Conscience, say, is not thy Master a spiteful Accountant to Beech not
greedy by Mr. Eliots testimony. Eliot no well wisher to Beech. A Collop is but
5l out of M. Eliots starved flitch of 500l. Ruins within, seen by the walls
without. Beech a lose^ 400l. by Eliots falsehood. A Collop of 200l. more cut
out of Beech by the same art. Many more collops cut out of Beech in Engl. and
Wales by Eliot, and his Co-Arrayists. Beeches, Now or never. Eliot envious that
Beech should have any other season but winter. C. Wyat the States Postmast.
Beech their Post D^n. Eliot the Spaniard. His circuit, Eliots payment rugged
coin. Consciences sera nimis, etc.
tell the world in Print, that Beech is greedy? and yet that a Collop of the
concealed estate will serve his Turn? what would a collop be out of Mr. Eliots
thin Flitch? It would exceed the proportion of a collop, if it should be above
5l. of the 500l. that this avoucher, falsely speaks of, and it is sure, he does
wish it neither thick nor large, nor wholesome for Beeches sake: let him know,
that a collop (according to his deceitful proportion) will not repair a
fourth part of the Walls that be fallen down in Beeches Ruins (much less for
all other debts and delapidations that he knows of, false enough) that so by
any means the State might see what a servant they had gotten of him. Beech
would tell this false Avoucher, if he thought he would not be too merry, at
the conceit, that his best friends do manifest unto him (very condoleingly) how
he has lost, in the space of 3 or 4 years (since this contest) 3 or 400l. at
least, in underletting the profits, that the bounty of the Parliament had
bestowed upon him, besides the rich improvement he might have made, as well as
others, of such bounty. That he has expended besides that dis-advantage,
200li. (and a rich purse) in a multiplied journed, to discover these dark ways
of Mr. Eliots, that so he might no longer undermine their justice, and therein
their safety) who had dealt so well with him, and whose Power (next unto Gods)
did preserve his life from a cruel death, when Elyot would have destroyed that
life, as he has done, ever since, the livelihood of that life, as well in
England since, as in Wales before.

Conscience! say, O the unfathomeable cruelty of my Master, acted upon Beech.
Ask him, why should not the man hope to have his Ruins and Debts repaired, and
made up now that friends are Judges? Why will my neighbor be so envious now?
now that he is a well affected man, as he says, and Beech is so too, as he
says? And now that there is but a few of the kind? And now, that John Eliot is
a friend. And Don Eliot is no accuser of Beech to Ie^kings the Judge? Cruel
man! to hinder Beech such a precious season. Ask, was not old Wyat the States
Postmaster, and Beech their Post, and both on their own peril, and cost, when
he was a Spaniard? Ask him if Beech shall be paid, at his riding the next Welsh
Circuit, and bid him speak out, what shall be his pay? and what the coin of his
payment then? shall it be kindness or cruelty? would it be cruelly, and
cruelty? Don Eliot the Spaniard then? as it is Io. Eliot the Squire now? would
it not be so? Conscience! for Gods sake let not such a notable piece of deep
deceit be covered still, but out with it, it will be thy bane else, and thou will rue it with thy Master, in a place where repentance cannot be had for
tears.

All Conscience! Conscience! lay it home to thy Master Eliot, Consciences
season and her sera nimis. etc.
NOW or never for his good, or thou must do i^ for ever to his grief, and
thine too, Is not the sum of Beeches sufferings to be pittyed? Is not his
unhappiness every way (in the world) great? Is he not a madman indeed (as Mr.
Eliot libells) to part with two good flitches for one uncertain Two birds fast,
let go, for one in hope. Madness. Eliots legend. True divinity in a seeming
madness A libel cannot quite (...). Great men, good natures a^used. Waters of
Contradiction and tears. Mr. G. F. R. D. R. M. The unremoveable Rock. Eliot.
M. Eliot privy to an Execution against Beech. M Eliots addition of disgrace.
collop? two birds in the hand fast, for one bird in the bush hopping? Is he
not mad (as to this enterprise) to persuade such a shaver as Mr. Eliot to
procure him this collop? to catch him this Bird? has a Railing letter that
Rethoricke? Is not his Legend of words against Beech? a Legend of lies to patch
up Mr. Eliot? Conscience, tell thy master, there is some Divinity in this
work, sure, the reward of a collop, could not induce him to be so dirty, and
say that Beech has his sensus communis, though Mr. Eliot hopes he has not; a
Libell cannot deprive him of it. All Mr. Eliots great Friends shall not do it,
they would not do it neither, if they knew the truth of it, and the truth of
Eliots falsehood.

Tell him, Beech has no warming encouragements from without, but all the
colding waters of Contradiction that can be invented, cast on him to quench his
Resolves against Eliot, Dearest Wife, his loving father, his kindest friends,
do, every day cast water upon him, Water of tears, water of entreaties, water
of their counsels, that he would not desperately cast himself away, upon the
unremoveable ROCK Eliot, nor dash his dear children any longer upon this MAN.
Mr. Eliots Executions, and Bayliffes, and THREATS to throw more dirt and dirt
upon him still, can no whit affright this man. Sure, say, there is divinity in
the thing: His threatened Addition of Disgrace cannot stir Beech to fear the
least thing. Conscience, query this matter to thy Master (and Beech has done
with thee) Ask him of his design and of his meaning, in that Threat. He will
provide an Addition of Disgrace to any that shall speak any thing that is il of
his dear falsehood. Is it not, that he will scrible more Libells, and then to
the Press, and then scatter more of his lies in Print? Is not that his aim?
but tell him, alas! there is no life in a printed lie, Men do suspect the truth
of Printed things because of such wretched authors. No life in a printed lie.
Clean sheets.
Tell him Beech does intend not to strive much longer in this dirty kind of
weapon, any otherwise then to wipe off his bispatterings: He has given this
order to the Printer, that some sheets be reserved from this impression, and
kept clean from other uses for that purpose, until Mr. Eliot throw more dirt.
The sheets are intended as an hedge only Eliot in the High ways.
between Beech and him, now that Eliot has so long possessed the High Ways,
and Beech is forced to the other side of the Hedge, in the Country, this sheet
is to wipe off these Aspersion. And Mr. Eliot may know the sheet when he sees
it by this Title.

AN ABSTERSIVE FOR Mr. ELIOTS DIRT, UNTIL THE An Abstersive.
UNCERTAIN DAY OF A CERTAIN TRIAL.

The last Will and Testament of Thomas Wyat, late of Tenby in the County of
Pembrook Mercer, deceased.
EXPLAINED Explained.
To the right Honorable the Parliament of England, for the Commonwealth of
England, by Captain Devereux Wyat, elder Brother to the Testator.
Wherein is explained (also) Master Eliots falsehood to the State, as much as 8.
or 10000. li. amounts to, and their Honor.
I Thomas Wyat, late Mayor of Tenby, having nearly The Testater a great
Royalist. Protected by P. Rupert. Has a good memory.
escaped the Rebels of Pembrookshire, being forced to fly from thence, for my
loyalty to his sacred Majesty; and now enjoying the protection of his Highness
Prince Rupert in Bristol, though sick in body yet of perfect memory; That the
Kings Majesty is strong in the West, and the Parliament weak in the Field,
that my elder brother Devereux Wyat is in actual Arms against his Majesty,
and stands a declared Traitor and Rebel C. Devereux Wyat a proclaimed traitor
at Oxford. Much loss by much loyalty. A crime not to have been treacherous.
1500. li. offered as a reward of treachery, refused. Col. D^. Gwyn. Loyalty
stripped.
at Oxford for the same, whom I had in my former Wills made Executor of my
whole estate* but he has since made himself incapable thereof by his said
Rebellion, and did stubbornly refuse (to the ruin of himself and his nine
Children) to yield up his rebellious trust of the said Town when he had
command thereof by the Rebels, and might have done it as well as I had
adventured before him, and might have had 1500 li. to repair his losses by the
Dunkirk Pirates, which I did offer him by the mediation of Col. David Gwyn of
Hawksbery in the County of Carmarthen, but he would not do it.

I do therefore exclude the said Rebel Devereux my elder Brother from
enjoying any share or part of my Estate, giving him 5. li. to cut him off, etc.
And I do hereby revoke all former Children suffer for their fathers loyalty*
Loyalty called, obstinate rebellion.
Wills, which (in the time of my sicknesses before the War) I had made in
favor of him, and his many Children, making him Executor, if I had dyed before
he had Rebelled thus obstinately.

And for as much as Richard Wyat my younger Brother, has Rich. Wyat in arms
against the Parliam. maintains the war against them. The Parliament called,
the Rebels at Westminster. Rich. Wyat a counselor. Weighty considerations. His
prudence. His am^odexterity. He pays a Fine. He is become a welaffected man.
(...). He is cunning. He is a dangerous I^former against (...). C. Wyat very
angry with his Brother, for his Brothers treachery to the Parliaments Cause. C.
Wyat put out of his Executorship of 8 or 10000. li for serving the State. The
estate wholly personal. Carried out of Southwales to Bristol, when the
Testater fled. A gallant piece of service at Milford, 1644. The Testator
provident to keep his money, goods, etc. The Testator sickly feires
imprisonment. The Rogues increase The Testators guilt granted. Tenby stormed,
and took by force.
visited me in my sickness, and did stoutly Garrison and maintain the Church
and Steeple of Tenby against the Parliaments Forces there, in his own person;
and did also offer, before the whole Town assembled, five pounds, as a test of
his loyalty to his King, to begin a benevolence, for the better carrying on of
the war against the Rebels at Wistmonste, and was also of my chief counsel
to betray (as the Rebels call it) the Kings Town to him; for these and diverse
other considerations, as also for his Great Prudence, (though the Rebel
Devereux will call it slinesse, and subtilty, and treachery) that he has
wrought his (present) peace with the Parliaments Forces, by Sea, and Land, and
has paid a sum of money, (or Fine) which he intends shall go under the
notion of Loane-money to the State, and shall purchase him the name of a
well-affected man thereby, and has gotten a hand or two to certify so much
against a wet day, by which his said Prudence, he has obtained double Tickets
to pass between (and unto) both the said Garrisons, the Rebels Garrison at
Tenby, and the Kings Garrison at Bristol (while Devereux like a mad, fiery,
peevish old man was fighting for the Rebels) by which, the said Richard my
Executor became very comfortable unto me in my sickness, and was also so
provident for himself, and so faithful to me, as to Inform me how the Rebel
Devereux (our elder Brother, and to whom I intended so much good) did threaten
what strange things he would do, or cause to be do (...) me, if ever I
returned; and calls my loyalty treachery, because he does allege, I did swear,
and undertake to him, and to other the Parliaments Commanders there, that I
would keep the Town for the use of the said Rebels, which I did not, upon
better consideration, though I had sworn to do it.

I Do therefore Nominate And Appoint the said Richard Wyat to be the sole
Executor of my whole estate, worth, as I believe, at the time of my slight 8.
or 10000. li. which being wholly personal, and in money, wares, goods, debts
due by Bond, Bill, upon Book, which I made a shift to send, and bring with me
by Sea to Bristol from the prevayling power of the said Rebels there, soon
after they had most audaciously taken the Kings Fort at the Pill, and had made
many of the Kings good Subjects there their Prisoners in the year 1644.

And because I did fear the Rebels would either take me Prisoner, and seize
upon my money, goods, etc. for my pretended offense, or else force me to flight
in a time of greater danger; I did rather choose for my liberties sake, to fly
before the Seidge, and so preserve my estate too, because I found my body
declining; and I dread to think of their Ship (which the Rebels call, The
Rogues Increase) wherein they put their Prisoners, and which would soon have
made an end of me in respect of my infirmities if they should have taken me in
the Town (given up by me) which soon after my flight they stormed and took,
together with seven or eight hundred men, which I received in to serve the
King, as aforesaid. Richard Wyat, William Bowen, kind visitors, Informers. A
metamorphosis, Quadrata rotundis. The Testator sequesterd before his death A
strange piece of Justice. The Testator will be a turn coat no more.
Array-Committemen adjured to be kind to Malignants. Their new power exercised
for Malignants. The Testators welaffected Legacies. P. Ruperts a great Legacy
of 2500. li. The Parliaments estate shattered among Malignants.


And whereas I am given to understand, by my said Executor, and my servant
William Bowen, (who have been both with me often times in my sickness) that
Thomas Bowen Esquire (my singular great Debtor) and the Brothers in Law and kindred
of the said Thomas Bowen (who were lately Commissioners of Array, most of them,
and who persuaded me first to deliver up the Kings Town to himself) are now
become (many of them) of the Committee for the Parliament there, and have
Sequestered me (some of them) for the pretended Crime which they made me guilty
of, (if it were a Crime) and did engage their estates before the whole Town,
to save me harmless from, if I would freely deliver it up to the King; I do
profess, that I do still to the last of my life, retain my unstained loyalty
to his Majesty, and I do desire the said Thomas Bowen, and John Eliot
Esquires, their Brothers and Kindred (and I do adjure them by their Vows made
unto me for my Indemnity from that fact) to preserve my estate by their new
Power for my said new Executor, he allowing and paying these ensuing Legacies,
and Bequests to themselves, their friends, and kindred, and to the well-affected
Gentlemen here named.

Imprimis, To Prince Rupert 2500. li. which Mr. Eliot says in his legend the
Prince had of Thomas Wyat, but it is false, his Highness had but a Collop of
it, and that also for his Protection there, and it was to be paid him again
when the King came to his Crown.

Item, to I. W. a well-affected man of the same Garrison, a sum.

Item, to W. W. a sum, of the same Garrison, and to M. M. of the same Garrison,
another sum.

Item, to A. B. C. D. E. F. well-affected men and women to the Mr. Eliots
willaffected men.
ruin of the Parliament, of the same Garrison, and elsewhere, great sums, as
appears more at large by the original Will.

And I do appoint John Eliot, and Thomas Bowen Esquires, and Jo. Eliot and
other Commissioners of Array best overseers. The Testators bounty to them.
the other Gentlemen, mentioned in a Schedule with my said Executor (late
Commissioners of Array, as is said, now well-affected Committee men) to be
Overseers of this my Will; and it is my desire that the said Overseers should
keep in their hands for ever, so much of the said Debts which they do owe me
by specialty, and upon my Shop-looke, and remaining in the known hands of their
They were in his books before his decease. His bounty moderated and limited.
nearest kindred, friends, unckles, etc to the value aforesaid (which they do
duly owe unto me for wares they had at my shop, and for moneys lent them)
according to the discretion of my said Executor, and the need he shall have of
their assistance, to preserve the estate for him, and from the Rebel Devereux.

I do also (and in special) discharge John Eliot of Norbeth Jo. Eliot an
especial Legattee. His work is to solicit.
Esquire, and his Son John Eliot (my friends and neighbors, but especially the
eldest) of all debts, dues, demands, judgments, executions, extents, etc. to
solicit, and to retain counsel for my said Executor in the City, while he
gathers up the money owing me in the Country; and it is my desire that my said
Executor should allow any sum or sums of money, as he shall think fit to Mr.
Eliot, or any other, provided that he, and they, do stoutly, His augmentation.
Another task enjoined him. He must use his wits and friends to maintain
falsehood.
and confidently engage all his and their friends, and reputation at any time
(if the Rebels should ever overcome the Royal Party) and effectually persuade
that I my self, and my said Executor were well-affected men, and provided that
he and they do so employ their wits, that neither the State, nor any friend of
theirs may have any part of my estate of the value aforesaid.

I do acknowledge, that upon some conflict of mind upon my bed The Testators
conflict. Thoughts of his brother Devereux, makes his bowels yearne. Malignants
do harden him. Devereux Wyat a notorious rebel again. Fresh thoughts of his
age, humanity, many children, his loss by Pirates.
of sickness, and some yearning of my bowels toward the many children of my
brother Devereux, I did rashly join him in the Executorship with my said
brother Richard, few days since, before my servant Margaret Moody, but since I
have received counsel by such as love me, and the Kings friends, not to
mention the Rebel Devereux, lest it should bring a blemish upon my Will, and a
forfeiture of the estate, the Rebel Devereux being so notorious for his
Rebellion every where; I do therefore charge Richard Wyat my Executor to be
good however, to the old age, and to the humanity of our said elder brother,
and to his many children, in respect of his great losses at Sea, lately by
Dunkirk Pirates, before remembered, he, my said Executor having a good estate of
his own besides, and but one Daughter to provide for.

The Oath of Margaret Moody servant to Devereux Wyat joint Executor with
Richard Wyat.
Thomas Wyat deceased.
MArgaret Moody coming newly to Tenby (the Parliaments The Oath of the
Testators servant Maid.
Garrison) from Bristol (the Kings Quarters) being duly sworn before the
Governor of Tenby, She was not hired to swear.
among other things whereupon she was examined, deposes that Thomas Wyat, her
Master, dyed in Bristol last Sunday was fortnight, and that he left Devereux
Wyat, and Richard Wyat joint Executors.

Margaret Moody.

This Explanation being the natural sense of the Testators Will, without the
least wresting thereof, or addition thereto, but only what may serve to
enlighten it, and to give forth the plain meaning of the dying man.
THe explainer Devereux Wyat further manifests:

That the said unjust Will, according to this explanation, There is no
welaffectednesse in cozening the State. The Testator sequestered by his Debtors.
Array-Committee men, and Mr. Eliot, (concealers and debtors) be notable
shifters. The Testators personal estate carried out of South Wales, not
capable of pardon by the welsh mulct. A plain proof, how the Testator was
sequestered. This estate is the Parliaments, Mr. Eliot can no longer hide it.
Array Committeemen the grand concealers of the Commonwealth.
has been faithfully, yet treacherously, carried on, near five years
together by Mr. Eliot, and by the concealers of the Committee there, who did
sequester the delinquent Testator in his life time, as is said; and the evasion
whereby Mr. Eliot (the Agent-Leiger in the City) and the concealing-debtors of
the said Committee (resident in the Country) would shift of this sequestration,
is this, that Thomas Wyats said personal estate was conveyed to Bristol, when
the Concealers there did sequester him in Tenby, and they could not reach it;
howbeit, it is known to all the town of Tenby, that the concealing Committee
there did summon your Explainer Devereux Wyat and his Wife, Richard Wyat (the
pretended Executor) and William Bowen, late Apprentise to Thomas Wyat the
delinquent deceased, and diverse others, and did put them all to their Oaths,
to discover what part of Thomas Wyats estate was in their hands, and where they
knew any to be, and did declare it was all sequestered for the use of the State,
and did charge all the Deponents to keep the same, and be accountable to the
State for it, though there was nothing left behind him when he fled to Bristoll
but bed-steds, chaires, chests, stools, etc. save only certain great debts
owing him, which one of the Deponents his Apprentise William Bowen aforesaid,
that kept the shopbooke, did (upon Oath also) discover to be in their own
hands who did sequester his Master, and among their nearest friends and kindred
to the value of near 2000. li. and in the possession of others that were then
in Arms against the Parliament, which they could not come at neither, nor
would they, it appears, if they could, that they might preserve it (according
They be best overseers of Malignants Wills.
to the malignant will and desire of the delinquent Testator) for the pretended
Executor Richard Wyat, a delinquent too as aforesaid; because they might
presume he would not dare to demand any of the great sums in their own hands,
being of the Committee; nor would he, they might They lose nothing by it.
think (being a delinquent to their knowledge, and practice also) stand much
upon those sums owing by their nearest kindred, so he might have their
favorable protection to enjoy They will be favorable to birds of their own
feather. The glue knitting them together is, their common hatred of the first
Roundheads.
the rest quietly; and that which does knit them all the closer together is
this, that they were all alike equally enemies to the State, when the Explainer
did forget his own case and benefit, and safety, to serve you.

Now for as much as the truth of this explanation is clearly manifest by the
testimony of two great Witnesses, the City of Bristoll, and the Town of Tenby,
and that the substance of the whole is (and has been) a year since proved by
four Witnesses, at your Honorable Committee for advance, and how the
Commonwealth was thus wronged; and for that Mr. Eliot has confessed enough in
his printed papers, and It has been proved by four Witnesses to be so. Master
Eliot has confessed it in print, that he is false, plainly. Mr. Eliots
contradictions He does affirm things were and were not, in the same printed
paper. (...) Hall. He doubles. He is caught, and cries, quarter.
Libels to discover his own falsehood, corrupt ends, and his ill will to the
honor of your just proceedings, and has put his name John Eliot to many
printed Copies, presented to the Members of this honourab^e Assembly. That this
Mr. Eliot himself a Committee-man, did solicit, and retain counsel against
the State, that this cause of Richard Wyat, and his own was, and was not,
good; he acknowledges in the same printed paper; That Richard Wyat was his
neighbor, and an honest man, and a well-affected man, and so was Thomas Wyat
(his Creditor) deceased. This goes for current three years together, but when
it was proved at your said honorable Committee about 14. months since, that
neither of them were well-affected, nor yet Mr. Eliot honest, but all were
proved delinquents; then Mr. Eliot grants that indeed, it is true, they were not
so honest and so well-affected as they should be, nor himself neither, but that
they had all of them need of a purge, and therefore craves pardon by the But
doubles still.
welsh Mulct newly come forth, for himself first, and then shows a bill or two
under the Overseers hands in the Country what they had given Richard Wyat to
purge out the malignity of the two great estates, his own and his deceased
Brothers, which was the Parliaments long before; and they do in their said
Bill acknowledge that they did (not The Purge. Physicians and Patient both
purge together, yet both unsound still.
give, but) take 32. li. to cure Richard Wyat in question of his malignity for
both estates; for his own, and for that which was not his, nor in their power
to compound for, and thereby to make him and themselves sound too from all
their, and their friends scores, howbeit the pretended Executor, and his Agent,
Mr. Eliot, and the Overseers themselves are as unsound as ever they were, as
to this distemper. The estate is the Parliaments, (and so should they have been
in point of trust) and these men willnever be sound, nor at ease, nor yet will
ever Justice be satisfied until they be (all of them) The Arms of England.
Justice the best Doctor.
cleansed of every part and parcel of Thomas Wyats estate, and until the
Arms of England be stamped upon it; it will gnaw, and pain them at the very
bottom of their belly and stomach, and there is no Cure in England for it
without a Both must take a deep vomit, agency, and Executor. The State of
England the most able and conscientious Physician. Good hopes of the young
Doctors of Haberdashers Hall. Mountebanks cannot cure Malig^^^^.
deep vomit. Things are like to go justly at Haberdashers Hal, if the
Parliament should not find leisure to make it a Chancery business (for their
faithful Devereux Wyats sake) and if the Agency depend upon some Scottish
Mountebank to cure them, Montrolle may furnish them with some High landers, but
let them take heed, these may undertake the Cure, but they will pick their
purses, and do no good for them neither.

The Explainer would take no notice of Mr. Eliots foul falsities in his
Libelious sheet, touching himself and his friends that have been faithful,
and yet are so (faithful to the public, and friendly to him) and will be so
found when his rottenness is thoroughly discovered; it Mr Eliot an impudent
Libeller. Rottennes searched, discovers and preserves soundn^s, else both are
alike, if rottenness be left uncut. C. VVyats Debenter blowed upon by Eliot.
Though as sound as an Oak, yet burnt to ashes by Eliots falsehood, and quite
consumed (a year since) in this business for the S^^e. Malignity will have v^nt
out of the welaffect^d man. Old Remembrances. Mr Eliots spite that C. Wyat is
shot-free, and cannot revolt.
is his shift to talk and print Lies only, the Explainer does pray your
Honors to note what Mr. Eliot Libelleth of his Debenter; he faith, it is not
stated aright, and that it is (like his own false ones,) unsound; and that his
service was not so considerable, and he undertakes to tell you what a great
sum this Explainer had for his Debenter (although what ever he received for
it,) there is three times more then that wasted in prosecuting this deep
falsehood of his, and about this discovery for the Commonwealth; (blush if you
can Mr. Eliot:) And how satisfactory that sum received (he is ashamed to say
how little he was forced to take) might be for all he had done and suffered, he
does acknowledge something of his doings and sufferings, and how the Explainer
was but Captain of the Train Band, and therefore not capable of the pay of a
Soldier by the Ordinance, etc.

He does beseech you, to note the spirit from whence it proceeds, it is a
spirit of Malignity, because the Explainer was one of them that did help to
beat him by your power for his wretched Malignity (once,) he remembers it more
then twice, and has paid the Explainer home for it, who has been twice a
prisoner upon this account, and once in the Marshalsees, almost starved to
death, till your Act of Grace did relieve him within these few days. It is his
spite too, that all his guiles and subtle ways could not drive him to revolt
with wretched Revolters, and so that he might have him shot to death, (a
punishment due to Revolters) He is angry that your Explainer is (almost) the
only Officer of that County now attending on you, that served you from the
beginning without Revolt, and that C. Wyat never served but onemaster.
never served but one Master which was, and is your just Authority.

He does beseech you to look upon this little pattern of A little pattern of
a great piece of falsehood.
the large piece of Mr. Eliots falsehood; the false man pawnes his ragged
reputation, that your Explainer was no other but Captain of the Train Band of
the Town; and yet indeed, the Explainer has by him a Commission derived C.
Wyat a Field Captain as well as of the Train. He did keep Tenby, and in it 39
Seamen, and 180 Land men a long time. The State not charged by it one penny.
Mr. Eliot still greived.
from the late Earl of Essex (almost worn out by age and often looking upon) to
be a Field Captain; by which Commission, and power from the Ma. General
there, he did keep the Town of Tenby for your Honors, and did maintain and
keep thirty nine Seamen three months to manage the Ordnance, and the number
of 180. men (the List of whose names he has also with him) three years
together, who did accordingly Garrison and keep the Town safe for you, for
which he never put the State to a penny charge, nor yet any of his men; but (to
content his Soldiers at all times) he gave money out of his own purse, pawned
his plate, and made other hard shifts to please them; who did their duty, and
were contenied, as Mr, Eliot (to his grief then, and also now) well knew, and
does know.

But what are words? Mr. Eliot will find words too; He will to his old shift,
and deny, and Libell again; for if Mr. Eliot has words and shifts. Truth
would make himswel, and burst. His body used to falsehood from a false meaning.
Truth will make him poor again when cleared up.
he should confess one material truth for Truths sake (unless it were to
make a Bawd of it) it would be his bane, he is so used to falsheed that he
cannot live without it. Indeed Sirs, falsheed does feed him with the best, and
falsheed does cloth him with the finest; one dram of Truth would send him
packing, and make him as naked to the eyes of all honest men, as if he had no
shift at all to cover him, it would turn him out of the Lobby to the
Gate House again, or in the fairest way to the Country as he came, his Candle
out, and his dark Lantern brought to light:

Now this your Explainer does humbly bend both his weak knees to your Henours,
this fouth year, and nineth time of his kneeling before you in Print.

First, He bends one of them, by way of thanks for that Honorable One Knee bent
in thanks.
Act of your mercy toward poor Prisoners, by which you have begun to snatch
him from the oppression of Mr. Eliot, and freed him from a starving
Imprisonment and from his GROAN IN THE MARSHALSEES which Mr. Eliot laughs at
in his LIBELL, by which he has now the liberty that he may choose his place to
dye in.

Next he bends his other weak knee in supplication to your The other knee bent
inpetition.
Justice, beseeching you that the BUSINESS between Mr. Eliot, and himself: and
the matter touching the concealed Estate of Thomas Wyatt deceased (so much
petitioned about) may be examined. And because he fears the delay of a
report. in respect of the many great affairs now pressing on you, and his own
inability to continue long, unperished, without some just releife. Hunger being
no less sharp near the Blew (wila) Boar in Tuttle-street at Westminster,
then it was a Rasor near the White (fell) Lion at the Marshalsees in Southwarke.

He prays that your Honors would refer the Examination of the business,
touching this your concealed Estate, to the Committee at Haberdashers hall, or
Goldsmiths hall (if it stand Reference to the Committee at Haberdashers hall or
Goldsmiths hall. C. Wyat the lawful Executor. He offers 500li. to compound for
that which had now been his own, if he had hated the State.
with your Wisdom so to do, or else to excuse him, because he has no
Council to direct him what to do, or to take any other Course, as your
Wisdom shall direct you) and that you would empower either of your said
Committees to admit of him (the lawful Executor, if he had unlawfully fought
against you) to Compound for this Estate for 500li. (and the rather (something)
for the MOTIVES underneath) which sum Mr. Eliot says in Print also, he did
hear Richard VV^at (the Usurper or pretended Executor) say, it was worth no
more then 500li. clearly. Or else if your Honors will Admit him to
Composition, he will be faithful to you, and pay a third part of the whole
Estate (that shall be cleared unto him) for any public employment. He does not
desire to Compound for it, unless he shall He hates Hugger-Mugger, he would
have things proved. Mr. Eliot a false accountant.
clearly prove, (First) Thomas Wyat the Delinquent Testatours Will to be true,
according to the EXPLANATION, for the Matter of it: And Mr. Eliot very false
unto you in the concealing of it, and in undervaluing the Estate to 500li (it
is because he suspects it may be yours) though there is cause of fear and
doubt that there is a great deal of subtilty and intricacy in the shifting of
it The Testators estate in Hucksters handling
away, because the Delinquent Testatour left it in the Kings Garrison where he
dyed, with ill affected brothers and Cousens, etc. And where the Parliaments
Friends had but few that did wish them well, or that will give them
intelligence of the mystery* Besides the disadvantage your Honors will meet
with of a Malignant Executour, and so many Array Committee Men, Overseers, It
is in a consumption
and Concealers of this falsehood, and Confiding men too. This your Estate
Right Honorable must needs be in a Sic inconsumptum Titii, etc. Non perit ut
possit, etc.
deep Consumption, when the Talons of so many greedy Vulters have fastened on
it 5 years together, sure, it has not the renewing property of Titius Liver,
to fill up again as it is consumed. It is hoped that your Honors will employ
your skill, and take it again from these Vulters undigested, or else make it up
again by slising some collops from the Livers of those Vulters, and
Connaturalize it with the consumed Liver of Titius, your Estate will be
preserved if your Honors do put forth such timely skill, or else you will find
but one Lob, or little Lump of all that large Liver, and but one thin Collop of
that whole estate, as Mr. Eliot well knows.

He Prays, Therefore that the Whole Agency (the Overseers A remedy to recover
it of its consumption.
and Agent both, Mr. Eliot and the Agency may be accountable to the
Commonwealth for what shall appear to be Conveyed away from any possibility of
recovering, if Richard Wyat, the pretended Executour should do, as he said he
would do, before two Witnesses here at Westminster (who are ready to prove it
upon oath) that rather then the State should have any part of it, Cap. Wyats
humble suite for 50li. to fetch in 500li. of composition money.
he would sell all he had and fly into France.

And in the intrim, The Explayner does beseech you to let him have 50li. to buy
him Food and Clothes, and to follow this business for the Commonwealth, and
he does hereby promise, to repay that 50li. and ten times as much more, in
Composition money for the service of the Commonwealth again, because he
knows the case to be so clear (if there should be an hundred Clouds for one
Sun) if your Honors would but Refer it to an effectual way of Discovery. He
does assure you, that to his own clear and certain knowledge, your Business
can no more miscarry then the Sun can be always buried in a Grave of Clouds,
and darkness, His assurance of the cause. Justice a Phoenix will come out of
ashes.
before Doomesday, if men will be just, or if not, Justice will come out of the
Ashes of Injustice. It is sure enough Justice is a Phoenix, a Rare Bird, there
will be always one of that kind, MEN cannot hinder it, and just men will not
go about to stop the current.

The Explainers humble PERSWASIVES for a Composition.

1 THat it is hoped your Court is wise, and just, as it is Great, and
Honorable. 2 That the Estate in question had (now) been his own in possession,
(for a greater part then will easily be found out) if he had hated you, but,
now, it is clearly at your dispose. 3 That he has served you faithfully
without one Stagger or Turn, neither could Mr. Eliots Treachery, or his
subtle wiles tempt him to revolt. 4 That he refused 1500li. of his own
brothers ready money, and would not betray your Town of Tenby, betrusted with
him, for love nor money, 5 That the Delinquent Testatour (his younger brother)
dyed without Wife or child, and he, himself, and his nine children are next in
blood, and order of descent, or, at least, have an equallity of right to injo,
their part of the Estate. 6 He is 700li. in debt more then he is worth, by
Services, Losses, Burnings, Spoilings, and Layings out for your sakes. 7 He
has lost his Executorship of this great estate ( as well as the 1500li.) for
not betraying your Town. 8 He has nine motherlesse children that are spoiled,
scattered and unbred for their fathers Loyalty. 9 He has lost 1700li. by
Dankirk Pirates, commanded by one Bowden Sneacock, in the year 1640. 10 He
could obtain no Justice of the late Kings council against the Spanyard, for
this depredacion, though he had wasted a year, and a half, and had spent
150li. in prosecution, by means of some Spanish minded Lords and Bishops in
English Courts. 11 That he has as little Justice done him ( now) at the
Admiralty, as he had (of the King, Council before them, and) of their
Predecessors in that Office, though he has been at the like expense of time
and money, and although he has had reference upon reference from the COUNCIL
OF STATE to them. They give under their hands (now) that his case is sad, and
that the Spanyard has wronged him, but for right, they Turn him back again
to the COUNCIL OF STATE, and so he is like to be posted off till Doomes Day,
Besides he has no money. 12 He maintained 39 Seamen at his own charge 3 months,
and 180 land Soldiers 3 years in your service, beyond the rate of an ordinary
Captain, cost not the State one penny yet the men were all contented. ( Mr.
Eliot for shame!) 13 He is aged. 14 He has not a penny to buy him bread, and
is very ragged in Woollen and Linen. 15 That all this is true, and as true it
is, as it is true that the Parliament of England, do sit at Westminster, and as
generally known it is in the City of Bristol, and at the Town of Tenby (
according to the proportion of such a business) as that there is a Parliament
in England.
DEVEREUX WYAT.

The Accountant must now contract his desires which he had more enlargedly
provided, and does humbly lay them before this great Assembly in these Branches.
1 THat their Honors would refer the discovery of the Wyats Case, according
to Capt. Wyats Petition, mentioned in the close of his younger brother Thomas
Wyats Will explained for the Commonwealth, and for his releife from under a
great Wrong. 2 That their Honors would take up the Parsonage of Crawly into
the hands of their Honorable power for plundered Ministers. 3 That he himself
may be Stipendary, and the profits taken up by some honest me as shall be
presented to them, and that provision may be made for his wife and many
children after his decease, which he has cause to believe, may be soon,
because of his own knowledge of the perishing estate of some of his vitalls
within, though his heart be sound to the flourishing condition of the
Commonwealth of England without. 4 That the Farmers may enjoy what they have
paid for (before hand) till Sept. next, (being that time of year he was settled
there, stripped and in debt) to discharge fifths, Assesments, etc. before hand,
and which he did receive of them in money about this, smitten-downe, true
discovery, etc. 5 That some thoughts may lead their Honors to enable him to
pay his debts, that he does lie under, for his posting up and down, and many
other troubles for them, from the beginning of the Wars till the present time
of his great affliction, and for Mr. Eliots Cousens execution. 6 That Mr. Eliot
may be restrained from all his ill practices and libellings, and that he may be
dealt with according to Justice, and that they would regard their own honor
and safety therein, and that they would so much as suspect him only, if it
stand not with their wisdom to punish his great falsehood. 7 That their wisdom
might be seen in composing the unhappy differences in the County of Pembrooke,
between two eminent Families there, whose divisions were very intricate and
lamentable, and it is feared are such yet; and that the County of Pembrooke may
be thought upon for her Virgin love to their proceedings, and because the late
defilement there amongst some of them, was done by rape upon her, her hair
tied to the Stake, and great violence executed:
And he shall pray, etc. William Beech.


