PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY In XX. CANTO'S: Displaying the Intercourse Betwixt
CHRIST, and the SOUL.

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

S. Greg. Naz. in de Carminib. suis.

By JOSEPH BEAUMONT, Mr. in Arts and Ejected Fellow of S. Peter's College in
Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by John Dawson for George Boddington, and are to be sold at
his Shop in Chancery-lain near Serjants-lnn.

M. D. C. XL. VIII.

INTO THE MOST SACRED TREASURY OF THE Praise and Glory OF Incarnate GOD, The
Worlds most Merciful REDEEMER; THE Unworthiest of His Majesty's CREATURES, in
all possible Prostrate VENERATION, Beggs Leave to Cast This His DEDICATED MITE.

The AUTHOR to the READER.
THE Turbulence of these Times having deprived me of my wonted Accommodations
of Study; I deliberated, For the avoiding of mere Idleness, what Task I might
safelyest presume upon, without the Society of Books: And concluded upon
Composing this Poem. In which I endeavor to represent a Soul led by divine
Grace, and her Guardian Angel, (in fervent Devotion,) through the difficult
Temptations and Assaults of Lust, of Pride, of Heresy, of Persecution, and of
Spiritual Dereliction, to a holy and happy Departure from temporal Life, to
heavenly Felicity: Displaying by the way, the Magnalia Christi, his
Incarnation and Nativitie; his Flight into Egypt, his Fasting and Temptation,
his chief Miracles, his being Sold and Betrayed, his Institution of the Holy
Eucharist, his Passion, his Resurrection and Ascension; Which were his mighty
Testimonies of his Love, to the Soul.

I am not ignorant, that very few Men are competent Readers of Poems, the true
Genius of Poetry being little regarded, or rather not subject at all to common
Capacities: so that a discourse upon this Theme would be to small purpose. I
know also, how little Prefacing Apologies use to be credited: Wherefore, though
I had much (very much) to say, and justly, in this kind, I will venture to
cast my selfupon thy Ingenuitie, with this only Protestation, that If any
thing throughout this whole Poem, happen [against my intention] to prove Discord
to the Concent of Christ's Catholic Church, I here Recant it aforehand.

My Defire is, That this Book may prompt better Wits to believe, that a Divine
Theme is as capable and happy a Subject of Poetical Ornament, as any Pagan or
Humane Device whatsoever. Which if I can obtain,and (into the Bargain,) Charm
my Readers into any true degree of Devotion, I shall be bold to hope that I
have partly reached my proposed Mark, and not continued merely Idle.

J. B.

A Syllable of the CANTO'S.
1. The Preparative 2. Lust Conquered 3. The Girdle, or Love-token 4. The
Rebellion 5. The Pacification 6. The Humiliation 7. The Great Little one 8. The
Pilgrimage 9. The Temptation 10. The Marveils 11. The Traitor 12. The Banquet
13. The Death of Love 14. The Triumph of Love 15. The Poison 16. The Antidote
17. The Mortification 18. The Persecution 19. The Dereliction 20. The
Consummation.
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY, In XX. Canto's; CANTO 1. The Preparative.
ARGUMENT.
Enraged at Heaven and Psyche, Satan lay's
His plots how to beguile the tender Maid.
Phylax mean while a contrework does raise,
And mustereth Joseph's Legend to her aid;
That strengthened by this chaste example, she
To lusts Assaults impregnable might be.
1.
ETernal Love, of sweetest Poetry
The sweeter King, before thy gentle throne
Deign to behold prostrate Vow, and me:
No Muse, no Gods, but thy sweet power alone
I invocate; for both his heads full low
Parnassus to thy Paradise does bow.
2.
Thy Paradise, amongst whose Hills of Joy
Those Springs of everlasting Vigor run
Which makes souls drunk with heaven, clensing away
All earth from Dust, and angelizing men.
Great David and his Son, drenched in these streams,
With Poets wreaths did crown their Diadems.
3.
Defiance other Helicons! O may
These precious founts my Vow and heart refine!
Dear Love, thou art my task: If ever bay
Hereafter court my Muse, it shall be thine.
My soul untuned, unstrung does wait on thee
To teach her how to sing thy MYSTERY.
4.
A MYSTERY wrapped in so close a cloud
That the Soul.
Psyches young and well-acquainted eye
Staggers about it: yet more shades do crowd
And heap their night upon its secrisie:
Feirce Beelzebub, who does in blackness dwell,
Would fain have all things else as dark as Hell.
5.
For He the immortal Prince of equal spite
Abhorr's all Love in every name and kind;
But chiefly that which burn's with flames as bright
As his are dark, and which as long shall find
Their living fuel: These enrage Him so,
That all Hel's Furies must to council go.
6.
For as the wounded Lion in his Den
Roar's out his grief; so from his boiling heart
A hideous groan broke forth, which thundering in
His hollow Realm, bellowed to every Part
The frightfull summons: All the Peers below.
Their Kings voice by its sovereign stink did know.
7.
Nor dared they stay, by kembing to make neat
Their snarled Snakes, or draw their Tails huge trains
Into a knot, or trim their cloven feet
With iron shoes, or gather up their Chains:
Only their hands they fill with Rage, and bring
That common Subsidy unto their King.
8.
Hel's Court is built deep in a gloomie Vale,
High walled with strong Damnation, moated round
With flaming Brimstone: right against the Hall
Burn's a black bridge of brass; the yards abound
With all envenomed Herbs and Trees, more rank
And fruitless than on Asphaltite's bank.
9.
The Gate, where fire and smoke the Porters be,
Stands always open to them that be without:
Hither flocked all the states of misery,
As younger Snakes, though crawling far about,
When the old Serpent's hisses summon them,
Into her patent mouth of poison stream.
10.
The Hall was roof'd with everlasting Pride,
Deep paved with Despair, checkered with spite.
The Hangings were of Torments fair and wide:
The upper end presented to their sight
Great Satan's Arms, drawn in an iron shield,
A Crowned Dragon Gules in sable field.
11.
On his immortal throne of Death they see
Their mounted Lord, who in one hand did bear
His Globe, (for all the world He take's to be
By right his own,) and in the other wear
His Mace, on which ten thousand Serpents knit,
With restless madness, gnawed themselves and it.
12.
His awful Horns above his Crown did rise,
And made them shrink in theirs; his Forehead Was
Plated with triple Impudence; his Eyes
Were Hell reflected in a double Glass,
Two Comets stareing in their bloody stream;
Two Beacons boiling with their pitch and flame.
13.
His Mouth well-neer as wide's his Palace Door,
But much more black: his Cheeks which never could
Blush in their own, had raked the world for store,
And deeply died their guilt in humane Blood.
His griezly Beard all singed, did confess
What kind of Breath used through his lips to press.
14.
Which as he opened, the Center, on whose back
His Chair of ever-fretting Pain was set,
Frighted beside it self began to quake:
Throughout all Hell the barking Hydra's shut
Their awed mouths: The silent Peers in fear
Hung down their tails, and to their Lord gave ear.
15.
Three times he shak'd his Horns; three times his Mace
He brandished toward Heaven; three times he spewed
Live sulphur upward, which when on his face
It soused back, foul Blasphemy ensued,
So big, so loud, that his huge Mouth was split
To make a passage to his Rage and it.
16.
I yield not yet; Defiance Heaven, said He,
And though I cannot reach thee with my fire,
Or scepter, yet my Brain shall able be
To grapple with thee, nor can thou be higher
Than my brave spite: Know, though below I dwell,
Heaven has no stouter hearts than live in Hell.
17.
For all thy confident Promise to the Seed
Of Dust-begotten Man, my Head is here
Unbroken still: When thy proud foot did tread
Me down from my own spears, my Forehead there
Both met and scorned the Blow; and thou at first
(What ever thou talk to Man) did do thy worst.
18.
Courage my Lords; ye are the same who once
Ventured upon that high Design with me
Against the Tyrant, called Heavens righteous Prince,
What though Chance stole from us the Victory?
'Twas the first time we fought; and he being in
His own Dominion might more easily win.
19.
How often since have we met him mid way,
And in the indifferent World not vainly fought!
Witness those Prisons where our numerous Prey
Lie's chained up, which we from Earth have brought.
Are they not Men of the same flesh and blood,
With that same Christ, who needs would be a God?
20.
A pretty God, whom easily, I of late
Caused to be fairly hanged. Indeed he came
By stealth, and in the night broke open Hel's gate:
But snatched he any Captive hence, that Fame
Might speak him valiant? No, he knew too well
That I was King, and you the Peers of Hell.
21.
But yet to save his wretched credit, He
Hi'd him beyond that Gulf to Abraham's Den,
Who for his ready inhumanitie
Was dubbed the Father of all faithful Men:
How much less, Pilat, was thy crime I yet thou
(O righteous Heaven!) now yellest here below.
22.
His willing Captives thence He wun; (but how
Forlorn a Prize, by Lazarus you may see,
Who the late pity of vile Dogs, was now
A special Saint:) And this vain victory
Homeward He bore, with Banner proudly spread,
As if with his own Bloodt' had not been red.
23.
Me think's I could permit him to possess
That sneaking honor, so he strove not how
My Subjects from their loyalty to press,
And mortal Men to his obedience draw.
But, by my wrath I swear, I Will make him know
That of the Air I am the sovereign too,
24.
Was It not enough, against the righteous Law
Of Primogeniture, to throw Us down
From that bright home, which all the world does know
Was by confessed inheritance our own:
But, to our shame, Man, that vile worm, must dwell
In our fair Orbs, and Heaven with Vermin fill?
25.
Ten thousand tricks and charms and mystic arts,
With all the blandishments of his sweet things,
He does employ, to woe these silly hearts:
Doubtless much like a God his Powers he brings
Into the field to gain his victory;
Yet who, forsooth, the tempters are, but We?
26.
Psyche, a simple thing, I wot, and one
Whom I as deeply scorn, as Him I spite,
He seek's to make his Prize; Psyche alone
Take's up his amorous thoughts both day and night.
Were not our wrong, I could contented be
The King of Heaven had such a Spouse as She.
27.
But She is ours; I have designed a Place
That must be hers, amid'st you brimstone lake,
Which shall revenge whatever in her face
Does now her lusty God a wooer make.
He promised her that with the Angels she
Should live; and so she shall, but those are We,
28.
Lust, thou shall give the Onset: Quickly dress
Thy self with every bravery that my
Aerial kingdom yields, and subt'lie press
Our contreplot: Remember but how thy
Sweet powers did once a mighty King subvert,
However famed to be After God's heart.
29.
Then Philautie and Pride, her breast shall fill
With swelling poison, and make her disdain
Heavens narrow gate, whilst wealth it self does spill
Into her bosom in a golden rain,
That she may seem too rich to match with One
Of a poor Carpenter the poorer Son.
30.
If still demure and godly she will be;
Let Heresy teach her to grow too wise
To take up points on trust, and fooled be
By saucy Faith plainly against her eyes.
Then let despair, my dear despair, not fail
Her Soul with Hell aforehand to assail.
31.
Nor shall the service unrewarded be,
Checking my royal bounty, as grown poor;
The Feind who captive Psyche bring's to me,
Shall her sole torturer be, and twenty more
I Will to his jurisdiction add, that ye
May know your Sovereign scorn's in debt to be.
32.
Nay, for his greater honor, every night
Seven lashes he shall have at Cain's fell heart
And seven at Judas his; nor from my sight
Henceforth on any work shall he depart,
But here at my right hand shall seated be
For ever, and blaspheam the next to me.
33.
Go then, in god's name, but that god am I,
And may my blessing go along with you:
If we that wench can catch, our subtletie
Will torture Christ, though all Heavens joys do flow
About him, and we shall revenge this pain
In which the tyrant does all Us detain.
34.
This said: the Senate with an hideous Roar
Applaud their Prince, and the designed Feinds
Their snakey heads thrice bowing to the floor
Take their damned leave. With that a tempest rends
Hel's wide mouth wider open, that through the gate
Their cursed Progress they may make in state.
35.
Old Tellus wondered what the treason was
Which then tore up her bowels; for as from
The monstrous Canons thundering mouth of brass
A sudden cloud of rage, and death does foam,
So from beneath these hasty Furies broke;
Such was the flashing fire, and such the smoke.
36.
But greater was the stink: the flowers, they say,
Frighted from their own sweets, grew faint and di'd;
Stout trees which had endured many a day
The worst of blasts, could not this breath abide;
Only some venomous weeds, whose roots from hell
Suck in their deadly living, liked it well.
37.
Lust goes to work the first: a Spirit as foul
As he is ambitious beautiful to seem.
Uncleanesse keep's her Court amid'st his Soul,
And Poison at his mouth her breath does stream.
Black is the fire that burns in his eye,
Diseases thick in every member lie.
38.
But Circe's and Medea's arts he knew;
For he their tutor was The purest air
Which on mount Liban virgin sweetness blew
With magic nimblenes he does prepare,
And mould's it up so close, that it can take
The shape of any Lie he is pleased to make,
39.
And thus the Nymph which was so loose before,
And at the mercy of each busy blast,
Become's a stiff stout man: whose face to store
With beauties purest charm's, unto the East
The spirit flies, and in Aurora's cheeks
The best of oriental sweetness seek's.
40.
But knowing that his breath was rank, and spoke
The place from whence he came; he turn's his flight
Into Arabia's gardens, whence he took
The flower of every flower, and spice which might
Perfume his words, that from that double bed
Of his soft lips, he vocal Balm might shed.
41.
The silk worm's wealth, the dainty ermin's skin,
And every thing that makes young Princes fine,
Into one gorgeous suit he crowds; and in
Each seam and jag does gold and pearl in twine.
For in his passage, as through earth he broke,
Great store of these he from her bowels took.
42.
But for the fashion, he was fain to run
To Court, and see how gallants there were dressed,
Men of more various transformations, than
In Proteus wit and fiction ever expressed.
Thus at the last accoutred to his mind
He plots where Psyche he may safest sinde.
43.
Sheeall the morning was retired at home
Close in the sweets of his dear company
Who from her Lord, the King of Souls, was come
His restless but delicious suit to plye,
And, with exact attendance see the maid
Might to no sudden danger be betrayed.
44.
In his al-ravishing looks you might descry
More real sweets than Lust in his had feigned;
Heaven clearly looked out at either ey,
And in his cheeks ten thousand graces reigned;
As many little loves their nests had made
In the curled amber of his dainty head.
45.
He from the Rainbow, as he came that way,
Borrowed the best of all that gorgeous store
Which after gloominesse does make heaven gay,
And it about his mantles border wore:
A mantle spun of milkie down which from
The Birds of his own Paradise did come.
46.
Upon his lovely shoulders dwel't a pair
Of correspondent wings; the driven snow
On Scythian mountains does in vain compare
Its virgin plum's with these, which fear no thaw:
Less white, less soft are they, and will at last
In melting tears confess they are surpast.
47.
High is his great extraction, full as high
As is the loftiest and the purest sphere:
There dwells his father Prince of Majesty;
And millions of his Brethren are there,
Who all are Princes too: that land alone
Numberless Kingdoms does contain in one.
48.
When Psyche first was born, his wing he spread
With ready tenderness her to embrace,
That she might rest in that delicious Bed,
To which all other Feathers must give place:
Great was the Mother's care and love, but yet
The Infant was to The guardian Angel.
Phylax more in debt.
49.
That was his Name; and sure he made it good:
No tutor ever spent more learned care,
The stoutest Champion never bravelier stood
For those who under his protection were,
Than Phylax did for Psyche, being able
To prove himself as strong, as she was feeble.
50.
No Danger ever drew its forces near,
But he was nearer still, and did withstand
All plots of mischief that incounter'd her,
Arming her feebler Arm with his strong hand:
While she was weak and knew not how to go,
He flew about, her business to do.
51.
As she grew greater, so his care did grow:
Her weaning time being come, he spends his art
To make her quite disrellish things below,
Which likelier were to cheat and choke the heart,
Then make it live its proper life; for she
Was born to live unto eternity.
52.
When she had learned to build a word aright,
He taught her heavens high language, and the song
Which lately in the quire of sovereign light
Incessantly dwelt upon his own tongue;
Desiring virtue might be her first growth,
And Halalujah broach her holy mouth.
53.
But when she well could go, and well discern
The way she went; he spread before her eye
Ten goodly Paths; and these you needs must learn
Says he, to trace, as leading to the high
Gate of beatitude; God's own hand did
Draw all these tracts upon mount Sina's head.
54.
Lo here is room enough: the King's highway
Less kingly is then this; All Hero's who
Have climbed above the world, wished not to stray
Beyond these bounds: Be but content to go
Where Saints, and where thy Lord before has gone,
That thou may overtake him at his throne.
55.
Thus did he gently grave upon her heart
The Characters of bliss; thus every day
He reads some lecture, least the tempters art
Her young and pliant Soul should make his prey:
But they this morning being all alone,
She begged a story, and he told her one.
56.
My Dear, said he, there was a youth of old
Almost as young, and no less fair then thou;
Upon his head smiled a soft grove of gold,
Two small half-heav'ns were bent in either Brow;
Nor were those Hemisphears shamed by his eyes
Which the best stars above dared not despise.
57.
All Roses blushed when near his lips they came,
Whose purer crimson, and whose sweeter breath
They thought (and well they might) their double shame:
No Lily ever met him in his path,
But if his hand did touch it, straight in spite
'Twas pale to see it self out-vi'd in white.
58.
Fair was his stock, his sire great Jacob was,
Not by the wife whose blear and waterie eye
Did its dim self bewail, and was the glass
In which the world read her deformity;
But by that Queen of Sweets, whose price seven (...)
Doubled in service, was, yet seemed not dear.
59.
He Rachel's son, and her best beauties heir,
For her dear sake, and no less for his own,
Sat precious next his Fathers soul; whose Care
Was bent his own Delights in Him to crown.
He loved his children all, yet far above
The rest, his Joseph he did love to love.
60.
He hunts about the proudest world to buy
The choice of purest and of brightest cloth
Brisk in the Tyrian and Sidonian die,
With which he clothes his darling, being loath
That fewer colors should adorn his coat
Than all the world in him did beauties note.
61.
As when the gallant Peacock does display
His starry Train, the winged People all
In shame and discontent do sneak away
Letting their plumes (now all our-sparkled) fall:
So Joseph's Roab by which himself did seem
So fair, his Brethren clothes with wrath and shame.
62.
It Is true, said they, our Father, though he were
The puny Brother, yet he ssiely did
Incroach upon the Blessing which the Heir
Was doubtless borne unto: But yet He sped
Only by Craft: had Jsaac had his eyes
As Jacob now, he would have been more wise,
63.
But though the old Man lov's his luckie Cheat
So well, that he upon his younger Son
Throw's all his Heart: We hope, no want of meat
Shall force Us willingly to be undone.
Nor any Pottage that this Boy can make
From the least He of Us our Birthright take.
64.
Thus they repined; (not knowing there was writ
Upon Heavens adamantine leaves a Law
By which this scorned Youth at length should sit
In Reuben's senioritie, and grow
Like an Imperial Branch, whose teeming Root
Set's in a living Fount its blessed Foot.)
65.
Yet, in the sweetness of Simplicity,
Ingenuous he relates to them his Dream:
From of my bed light Fancy carried me
Into the field, where I with you did seem
To fall a reaping, and our sheaves bind up;
When lo, says he, to mine all yours did stoop.
66.
Proud Brat, cry they, know thou what stooping is?
How dares thy upstart Insolence but dream
That we thy Elders must bow down and kiss
Thy boyish foot, and tremble at thy Name?
Believe it Child, it is not thy gewgaw Coat
(Though too too princely for thy back,) can do it.
67.
But he, not knowing what their Anger meant,
Whose Breast was calm as is the upper Air,
His second Vision thus does represent:
Last night, when all the face of heaven was fair
And trimmed with every Star, on his soft wings
A softer Dream me thither gently brings.
68.
Quite through the storehouse of the Air I past,
Where choice of every kind of Weather lies;
Here Rains are bottled up, there Hail is cast
In mighty Heaps; here Banks of Snow do rise,
There furnaces of Lightning burn, and those
Long-bearded Stars which light Us to our Woes.
69.
Hence came I to a dainty World: the Air
Was sweet and calm, much like my Mothers Ey,
Whom if I might, I would have sought for there:
No more of Chanaan now could I descry;
The Earth was shrunk so small, me thought I read
By that due prospect, what it was indeed.
70.
But then approaching to an Orb whose flames
Like to a boundless Ocean flowed about,
Fool as I was, I quaked, until its beams
Gave me an harmless kiss: I little thought
Fire could have been so mild; but surely here
It rages cause we keep it from its sphere,
71.
It flamed, reverend Sire, but with as sweet
An ardency as in your noble Heart
That heavenly Zeal does burn, whose sacred heat
Make's you Heavens living Holocaust; no part
Of my Dream's tender Wing felt any harm,
Our journey, not the fire, did keep Us warm.
72.
But here my Guide, before I was aware,
On the Moon's lower Horn clapped her right hand,
And pulled me up into a place as fair
Above this World in Worth, as it does stand
In situation: liquid Crystal here
Is the tralucid matter of of each sphere.
73.
The Moon was kind, and as we passed by
Showed Us the Deed whereby the great Creator
Instated her in that large Monarchy
She holds over all the Ocean's Water;
To which a schedule was annexed, which all
Moist Bodies too under her power does call.
74.
Now complementall Mercury was come
As far as to the margin of his sphere,
And bid Us eloquent welcome to his Home:
Scarce could We pass, so great a crowd was there
Of Points and Lines; and nimble Wit beside
Upon the backs of thousand shapes did ride.
75.
Next, matchless Venus her sweet face did show,
(Bringing again my Mother to my mind,)
Which Us into her Region quickly drew:
This strewn with youth, and smiles, and love we find;
And those all chaste: it is this foul world below
Adulterates what from thence does spotless flow.
76.
Then into Phebu's Orb all paved with gold,
The rich reflection of his own fair Eye,
I was advanced; and feign I would have told
How many Crowns and scepters there did lie,
What Life, what Verdure, what Heroik Might,
What perly Spirits what sons of active Light:
77.
But I was hurried into Mars his sphere,
Where Envy (o how cursed was its face!)
And Jealousy, and Fear, and Wrath, and War,
Could scarcely well agree about their place:
Yea, Engines there to vomit Fire I saw,
Whose flame and thunder Earth at length must know.
78.
Welcome was Jupiter's Dominion, where
Illustrious Mildness round about did flow;
Religion had built her Temple there,
And Sacred Honors on its Walks did grow;
No Dignity Priests Heads shall ever crown
Which in those mysuck Gardens was not sown.
79.
At length we found old Saturn in his Bed;
(...) much I wondered how an He so dull
Could (...) thus high: His house was built of Lead,
Of dark and solitary corners full;
Where Discontent, and Sickness dwellers be,
Grim Melancholy, and dead Lethargy.
80.
Passing from hence into a boundless field,
Innumerable stars we Marshalled found
In fair at ray: This earth did never yield
Such choice of flowrie Pride, when she had crowned
The Plains of Shechem, though the gaudy Spring
Did all its smiling Beauties thither bring.
81.
A knot of Lights constellated into
A radiant Throne, on which my self was set.
When lo the Sun and Moon themselves did throw
Into submiss obeisance at my feet;
And then eleven great Stars thought it no shame
To come before me, and to do like them.
82.
But sure I thought it shame for me to take
Homage of them, who was but Dust and Clay;
Big with excuse I grew, and 'gan to speak,
But then my Dream took wing and fled away.
And fly thou after it, bold Dreamer cried
His Brethren, who in Dreams do mask thy Pride.
83.
Old Jacob, though he pondered every word
In's own prophetic Heart, and judged the Dream
Was not by Joseph framed, but by his Lord;
Thought it expedient something wroth to seem,
Having no other way that Rage to smother
He saw smoke from his Sons against their Brother.
84.
But Child, said he, where is that Blush of thine
Which used to paint meek Virtue on thy face?
How dare thou tell a Dream which does design
Unto thy punie self such Sovereign place?
Think thou thy Brethren and thy Parents too
Unto the younger son must homage do?
85.
Or dream no more, or else thy dream conceal
If any fancy rise which may offend:
On this condition I thy pardon seal,
And these thy Brethren shall their quarrel end.
Go you my sons, be careful of my sheep;
This Boy at home as meek as them I Will keep.
86.
And so he did: though with as bad success,
As his intention was sincere and good;
Take heed how thou thy Brethrens wrath do press
Said he, least it do squeaze out thine own blood.
I know their furies, and from whence they move:
O that their ground of Hate should be my Love!
87.
Have thou not marked how if a Flint we lay
Soft on a downie Bed, and gently smite,
Forth with its conquered stubbornness gives away;
But if we use it harshly, it will fight
Again, and spit its rage in fire, nor shall
The stoutest Hammer cool its Wrath at all.
88.
Surely thy Brethrens bosoms cannot be
More hard then Hardness, and the Flints stiff heart:
Or if my Charity deceives me,
Thy Mildness must be tempered with such art
As may the softness of that Down exceed
Which on the Cygnet's dainty neck does breed.
89.
When they begin to bluster, give them way;
'T has often cost the boldest Cedar dear
To grapple with a storm; whilst Flowrs which lay
Themselves full low in trembling and in fear,
Waiting the leisure of the Wind, again
Rise up unbruised, and in peace remain.
90.
Thus I of late thy furious Uncle met,
One who had vowed to tear his Birthright back
And my poor life with it: I Presents set
Thick in his way, gently to him I spoke,
And by submission grew superior so
That from the jaws of Wrath in peace I go.
91.
And now because thy Brethren have been gone
Abroad these many days, least they surmise
I take no pleasure but in thee alone;
Feasting mine own on thy all-lovely eyes,
To morrow thou unto their folds shall go,
And in their Fathers name see how they do.
92.
Long ever the Morn her ey-lids had withdrawn
And opened the East into its hopes of Day,
Joseph was up and dre'st, and by his own
Fair eyes being lighted, well on in his way.
A thousand gentle phrases, as he went,
He studied how his Brethren to content.
93.
But by the various beauties of his Coat
Discerning him from far, behold said they
The saucie Dreamer comes; now we have got
So fair an opportunity to slay
Our foe, it is wisdom to prevent in time
That tyranny to which his Pride does climb.
94.
O no, cries Ruben, one within whose heart
More genuine drops of Jacob's blood did thrill,
He is a Child, and acts but his own part:
Dreams are but flitting toies, but if we spill
His harmless blood, the spot upon our head
Will be no Dream, beleeve't, but Guilt indeed.
95.
O rather cast him into yonder pit
That he from you may only have his grave;
Let any other wrath that think's it fit
Give him his Death, and bury in that Cave
Your less offense: doubtless nostars will bow
To him whom from the sight of heaven you throw.
96.
As hungry Wolves upon the helpless Lamb,
So they on Joseph fall: in vain had he
Studied the sweetest Blandishments to frame
Of gentlest words, and meekest modesty:
With loud revilings all his prayers they drown
And stripped into the deep Pit throw him down.
97.
When lo, a troop of Merchants passing by,
They money of their richer Brother make;
The thrifty Ismaelites admired why
For such rich ware they would so little take:
No new-dug Pearl so fair did ever look
As he, when him up from the Pit they took.
98.
Yet twenty silver pieces was the price,
Which soon they paid; and now were sure they bore
To Memphi's Mart more precious Merchandise
Than all their swelling Packs of Midian store.
And thus a Slave to strangers Joseph is,
As were his Brethren unto Avarice.
99.
But yet his Coat they kept: with this, said they
Jacob vexed us, and we will vex him again.
A Kid they take, as innocent a prey
As Joseph was, and with its Blood they stain
The Roab; which they unto their Father sent
Blushing for them whose own shame all was spent.
100.
And well he knew't. O me the good Man cries,
It is my Ioseph's Coat, all torn and rent,
And bloody too: Be free my weeping eyes,
Y' have nothing now to do but to lament.
That only day which joy'd and blessed your sight,
My darlings face, lies buried in night.
101.
Dear Coat, behold I rend mine own with thee,
Which is less worthy to be whole than thou.
Sure some wild Beast thy Master tore, and me
Together with him, though I felt not how.
(It did indeed, for it was spite, a Beast
Of all inhumane things the salvagest.)
102.
Sweet Child, I hoped to have prevented thee
In seeing Rachel thy departed Mother:
But surely long behind I will not be,
Thy death brings grief enough my life to smother;
I Will come as fast as an old Man can do,
And see you Both: Peace friends, it must be so.
103.
But Joseph now was into Egypt brought
And set to sale: One Potiphar, by place
Captain of Pharaoh's guard, the strippling bought;
And reading plain in his ingenuous face
Pure characters of worth, he doubted not
Some more than common trust in him to put.
104.
Nor did the issue ever flag below
His expectation; for fidelity,
For care, for prudence, his example now
The only Rule unto the rest must be:
No task was set, but every servant bid
To mind his several Charge as Joseph did.
105.
But how could they keep pace with him who was
Both led and hastened on by Heaven's high hand,
And made through all Successe's Paths to pass;
Which when his Master 'gan to understand
With pious wisdom, thus concluded he:
My servant has some greater Lord than me.
106.
Wherefore contented only with the name
Of Master, him he trust's with every Key
Of highest care and charge, and bids him frame
As he thought best all his Economy.
Thus did this unknown slave the Lord become
Though not of his own Lord, yet, of his Home.
107.
But whilst this honored Steward does allure.
All other eyes to reverentiall Love;
His Mistresse's grew sick of an impure
And black disease; which did it self improve
Unto that strength, that now abroad it fly's
Like Basilisk's beams, to poison neighbor eyes.
108.
At first it slept in that envenomed lake
Which in Hell's bottom stink's; from whence a feind
It in a red hot vial up did take,
And flying thither, b^ soft degrees did blend
It with Potiphera's blood, whose tainted veins
Were strait made Channels of Lust's boiling pains.
109.
Though Ioseph's Uirtue might aforehand be
Assurance of denial, yet her flame
With such impatient fury burnt, that she
All amorous enchantments tries, to tame
His rigid heart. (and Lust too often we see
In point of wit's too hard for Chastity.)
110.
What ever Word is spoke to Ioseph's praise
Her echo doubles it, and does supply
Some more pathetike and transcendent phrase
To raise his merit to a pitch so high,
That He obliged in modesty might seem
To render back that honor done to him.
111.
If any Bit were choice, she thought it due
To Ioseph's palate more than to her own;
The rarest flower which in her garden grew
Must be culled out, and wreathed into a Crown,
Or some quaint posie which her self invents,
And every Morning unto him presents.
112.
If he be well, she dares not but be so;
If he be sick, she scorneth to be well,
And yet about him will be busy too
To hold his head, or hand, his cup to fill,
His meat to dress, yea and his bed to warm,
And watch all night that Joseph takes no harm.
113.
Whate'r she sees or sweet, or rich, or rare,
She something in his Body finds still
To which those precious things she may compare:
With his own praises she his ears does fill,
And often cries, How blessed should I be,
If Potiphar were such an one as Thee.
114.
He kend that crafty Language for a while
No more than does the Lark the fowlers Pipe:
But when he 'gan to smell her dangerous Wile,
Whose own stink did betray't; He strove to wipe
Away those praises she so thick did strew,
And by his own Blush reach her what to do.
115.
Often would he take occasion to proclaim
How sweet, how brave a man his Master was;
And never fail to bless Potiphera's Name
And praise her fortunes, who for husband has
Virtue's own Spouse: But most he loved to tell
How for his Chastity he did excel.
116.
This Word of all the rest, most deeply stung
Her unchaste heart: She now resolv's no more
To rack her self within, but plainly bring
To light her darksome torment, and before
Ioseph's own face her wounded bosom open
That so the wound in pity he might stop.
117.
Sweet Sir, said she, (when both alone they were,)
In our Egyptian Hieroglyphics You
Seem to be little studied; wherefore here
I Am come to be your Tutoresse, and bestow
My dearest skill, being greived much to see
You in the best of Arts unlearned should be.
118.
The language of that Love, and of that praise
I showred thick upon you day by day,
You understood not, though ten thousand ways
I tried to write it plain: And what I pray,
Meant all that sweet ado, but only this,
Potiphera in love with Joseph is?
119.
Nay start not at the Word, but hear how I
With solid arguments can make it good:
It Is sacrilege to let Divinity
Pass by unlov'd: you' banks of Nilu's flood
Never saw Serapis half so God-like, as
Thou in this garden up and down do pass.
120.
Thou passest up and down, and in thy way
The choicest flowers instructest with thine eye
How to look brisk and brave, how to display
Some pretty beam of amorous Majesty.
Thou passest up and down, and with thy feet
Teach the beds of Spices to grow sweet.
121.
When on yon' crystal fountain thou do look
The Nymph cannot but smile to think that she
Is by thy self each Evening made the book
Where thy sweet face thou printest. Woe is me
Why was I not a fountain too, that thou
Thy dear impression might on me bestow!
122.
The (...) betimes repaireth to thine eye
And asks what weather Heaven shall have that day:
In vain the Clouds combine to damp the sky
If thou thy beams with freedom do display:
If thou but lowr'st, in vain the foolish Air
Forces her self to smile and to look fair,
123.
What fools are our Egyptians to spend
Their time and brains upon the stars above,
To find what kind of seasons they will send?
It Is Heresy, say I, but to remove
Above the Orb of thine illustrious eye.
The fairest book of best Astronomy.
124.
As from Arabia winds this way do blow,
From thy fair mouth they suatch thy balmie breath
Into their own; and as they forward fly
With gallant odours they perfume their path:
The world admires whence such rich blasts should file,
But none the sweet Original know but I.
125.
For strange unto thy self thou need's wilt be,
And take no notice of all excellence
Which in thy heart does hold its Monarchy.
I tell thee sweet, it is but a fond pretense
Which thou call'st modesty, and might undo thee
If Providence had not sent me unto thee.
126.
Can thou imagine nature ever meant
To plant the best of all her store in thee
There to lie hid and die, and not be spent
In the free course of natural charity?
Let those be chaste who can no love invite,
'Twere sin in thee, who art made for delight.
127.
Indeed the other Phoenix having none
Of his own feathered kind, is fain to spend
His virgin love upon himself alone,
And 'gin his life again by its strange end:
His amorous flames kill and revive him so
That to himself he is Son and Father too.
128.
But thou, as rich and fair a thing as he,
Have other fuel for thy fire: lo here
I ready dried am with thirst to be
Its Sacrifice: I will thy bed prepare
With such abundant sweets as shall contest
With all the spices of the Phoenix nest.
129.
Why stay we then? The good man's now from home
As he is from my heart; which both are thine.
No matter for this Day, I Will make Night come,
(If thou will go,) and cloud up our design:
Close are my curtains, and no tales they tell:
Come then my dearer self, all shall be well.
130.
No haste, cries he; but if thou love me so,
Hear me a little as I thee have done;
Haste very seldom with success does go,
But does all fortune but the bad outrun.
How then can headlong Lust a good end find
When both it self and its fond God are blind?
131.
Were they not so, how could thou me invite
To those strange joys which must lie sneaking in
Thy guilty curtains, and avoid the light
As one too fair a witness for a sin
So foul and black! By this, aforehand thou
Ashamed art of what thou fain would do.
132.
I was a Slave unto my Master brought,
And unto you, in him; but not to Lust:
Yet my desert, or his mistake has wrought
So great a change, that he puts me in trust
Withal the care of his large family,
Whereof he Father, I must Ruler be.
133.
Thus did He give me fredome from the bands
Of servitude, but not of Virtue too:
O no, this obligation stricter stands,
And Joseph must more hearty homage do
To Potiphar, than those who still do ly
Bound in the bottom of their slavery.
134.
Himself He never gave into my hand,
Therefore not Thee, who art all one with Him:
Nor could He do it: for so close a Band
Does cement you together, that no lim
Of his own body Natur's hand did join
Nearer unto himself, than is all thine.
135.
And though He be not here, God's round about
And in the midst between even Me and Thee;
His eye needs make no search to find Us out,
Which Us, before we were at all, did see.
I would not wrong my Master, but much less
Offend that God, who is my Lord and his.
136.
A Lord so pure that we may safelier gaze
Upon the burnished sun's meridian beams,
Than he can fix his eye upon God's face;
A face whence such excess of Luster streams,
That he in mercy casts on us below
A veil, which, though we cannot, he look's through.
137.
He looks through that, and through all Curtains too
Which we our selves upon our sins would draw.
Far be that fondnes then, that we should go
And seek some secret place to break his Law,
Exposing to his most refined eye
The foulest of all spotts, Adultery.
138.
A spot which would make me so black, that thou
Who now both love me and admirst' me so,
For mere deformity would never know
Me more, but scorned and hated let me go:
So would I do my self, and never stay
With Joseph, knew I how to run away,
139.
Ask or command me any thing beside:
If you will send me to the farthest Sea
To fetch you pearls, the Sun shall not out-ride
My restless course, nor any Jewels be
Treasured so deep in the profoundest Main,
But I will dig them thence, and come again.
140.
Or if you please I will revenge your wrong
Upon these sweets of my enchanting face,
Which have abused and tempted you so long:
These nails of mine shall all those Charms erase
And cut such ghastly wounds as soon shall cure
Those which my beauty made your heart endure,
141.
I will transform my self into a State
Which more your Pity, than your love, shall crave;
Or if this love of mine must reap your hate,
Somewhere or other I shall find a grave,
And there with greater comfort rest my head,
Than if I slept on your delicious bed,
142.
As when a mighty torrent hasting on,
Is by some sturdy bank forced back again,
The waters roar and foam and swell upon
Themselves for spite to see their strength was vain;
So did Potiphera's heart, whose lustful course
Unshaken Joseph back again did force.
143.
A thousand Passions boiling in her breast
Raise up a tempest of impatient flames.
Still night, which to all others seals rest,
Waken her cares; Her bed with torments streams
'Cause Joseph is not there. (O where may we
With heavenly love a Soul thus wounded see!)
144.
She has no relish of the daintiest meat,
But only on distracted thoughts she feeds;
The spiced wine to other palates sweet
Mocks hers alone, and odious loathing breeds:
Thick sighs and tears from her own mouth and eyes
Echo the storm which in her heart did rise.
145.
Often she renewed her suit, but su'd in vain:
At last grown faint and sick, she ask's him how
He would her Murder answer? Such a stain
Will ill become, said she, thy dainty brow;
In the unnatural furrows of whose frown
The seeds of my unhappy death are sown.
146.
But when this moved him not, who like a Rock
Stood firm upon his solid Chastity:
Her final resolution she awoke,
And all her strength with it, that she might be
Provided to correct her loves mishap
By valiant managing her plotted Rape.
147.
Watching her time she takes him all alone,
And harpy-like, one Tallon clapping fast
Upon his Clothes, least he away should run,
Her other Arm about his neck she cast:
Loose was her Coat, and showed her more full
Then he desir d to see, or I to tell.
148.
Thou art my prisoner now, said she, as I
Have long bin thine, though thou did scorn thy prize;
But I Am resolved of thy Captivity
To make some use: Thou shall no more despise
My prayers, for I command thee now to be
Whither thou will or no, happy with Me.
149.
Perhaps thy needles Maiden modesty
Stayed, by thy Lover to be ravished:
Then be it so; But if thou still deny
My loyal Love; I swear by thine own Head
(Which yet I only worship,) that no blood
But from, thy Heart shall these my Wrongs make good.
150.
I will exclaim, and tell the household how
With lustful force thou here surprised'st Me:
This monstrous Crime will cost thy life: for know
My Ly can soon outface thy Verity.
Had thou not better take thy pleasure here
Than be for nothing thought a Ravisher?
151.
Whilst thus Her lust foamed: Joseph makes all haste
How to escape; and loosning secretly
His upper garment, which she grasped so fast,
Leaves that to Her, and out himself does fly.
Wise Serpents thus their Ears against the Charm
Do stop, and cast their skins to escape the harm.
152.
Potiphera an hideous outcry (...);
Her Handmaid first, then the whole family
Scared with the noise, into her Chamber breaks;
Where on her Bed, hearing a woeful sigh,
Behold, said she, this garment: Which of you
Would think the Hebrew slave so bold should grow?
153.
He thought, because his Master was from home,
My faith had been so too: He thought that he
Might as his Lords Vicegerent, freely come
And challenge right unto my chastity.
'Twas time to cry: which I no sooner did,
But he, the guilty Hypocrite, was fled.
154.
He fled, but left for fearful haste, behind,
That Pledge of his unfort'nate impudence:
For, confident he me should willing find,
He gun to doff his Cloths: Come bear me hence
From this cursed place; but bring the Cloak with me
That Potiphar his Dailings Badge may see.
155.
When he came home she met him with this Lie
And threw the garment to Him for her proof.
He took no time the business to try,
But judged that argument more than enough.
Joseph's to Prison sent, a place less warm
To him, but sweeter than his Mistress arm.
156.
He lay not long oppressed with his Chain,
But even the Jailer He his Prisoner takes:
Such powerful sweetness does in Virtue reign
That all Spectators she her subjects makes.
Heaven would not suffer other Bonds to hold
Him whom Lust's Chains and Charms could not infold.
157.
The Keeper now keeps nothing but his name.
The Keys at Joseph's girdle hang, and He
Is in this closer Stewardship the same
He was in Potiphar's large family:
Yet has no Mistress which might make him be
As ill in Prison, as when He was free.
158.
At length the guerdon of his worth drew near,
And dreams which had occasioned his low state
Help him to climb up into glories sphere:
The great designs which uncontrolled Fate
Was into Egypt ready now to bring
Are in a mystic vision showed the King.
159.
Their curious brains the old Magitians beat
About the Riddle, but were all too weak
To pierce that mighty cloud wherein the great
Secret inshrined lay: The King must seek
Some wiser Head; and whod'yee think was he
But this young Hebrew? this the Man must be.
160.
He teaches Pharaoh what the Kine did mean
Heaven showed him feeding upon Nilu's shore;
Why sev'n were wondrous fat, and sev'n as Lean,
Which did portend the famine, Which the store,
What both the kinds of Corn foretold, what cares
Were requisite against the following years.
161.
First, thanks to Heaven cries Pharaoh, then to thee
In whom its Spirit I so plain descrie:
And who can better my assistant be,
Then he who holds all wisdom's Monarchy?
The throne and scepter shall continue mine,
But all the rest of Egypt shall be thine.
162.
Then his own Ring, his royal Love to seal,
On Joseph's hand he puts, and him invest's
With purest Linen: on his neck, which steel
Had lately galled, a golden chain he cast's;
And his own second Chariot to him gave,
Who lately into Egypt trudged a slave.
163.
Thus what he was to Potiphar before,
What to the Tailor, now he is to the King;
The sovereign Steward and the Governor
(Set but his Prince aside,) of every thing.
And here at length, to justify his dream,
His Father and his Brethren reverenced him.
164.
Thus Chastitie's pure King his Champion sees
Amply repaid, who having got Command
Of his own flesh and blood, can rule with ease
A Kingdoms reins in his unspotted Hand.
Take notice Psyche, and remember this:
The Case may once be thine, which here was His.
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO II. Lust Conquered.
ARGUMENT.
Lust, who in ambush lay, the Onset gives
To careless Psyche, as she gad's abroad:
Charis the over-powred Maid reliev's;
Phvlax unmask's the Feind: Her penitent flood
Psyche pour's out, and is encouraged by
An heavenly Dream to honor Chastity.
1.
NO foolish Tinder ever yet did catch
In its soft amorous Arms the straggling, spark,
And with such desperate zeal make haste to hatch
Its own destruction; as fond Man does mark
And treasure up those fair-fac'd Counsels which
With fatal Charm's his heedlesse heart bewitch.
2.
No wretched Adder ever sealed up
His wary ear with trustier Cement; than
With wretchlesse obstinacy He does stop
His memories unhappy Portalls, when
Wholesome Advise with sweetness woo's it, and
Long knocking for admission does stand.
3.
Or, if at length a wicket (...) he sets,
His slighted guest in some our-roome he lay's:
But when vain fancy or seduction beats
Summons upon his gates, He them display's,
And let us these strangers thrust quite out of door
The former, who were scarcely in before.
4.
For as the Honey of Heavens dainty Hives,
The summer Clouds, snugging in laps of flowers,
That correspondent Dwelling quickly leaves
To churlish drops of less deserving showers,
Or rankling Mil-dew, which such venom shed's
As soon deflow'reth all those Virgin Beds:
5.
So fared it now with Psyche's careless Breast
On which more dainties dropped from Phylax tongue
Than on Hyblean hills ever made its nest.
Abroad she will, and please her self among
The fields wide sweets, forgeting that some wind
Might steal upon, and blast her honyed mind.
6.
The sportfull Twins of heaven now 'gan to reign,
And brought a season fitting for their play;
Thick did they scatter upon every Plain
A flowery verdure and dishevell May
Round about Tellu's face, who now beguiles
Her Winters sadness with this month of smiles.
7.
Psyche would fain have wandered out alone,
But that Conscience.
Syneidesis her trusty Maid
Hunted out every step where she had gone;
And divine grace.
Charis an old friend of hers, afraid
What might befall the Virgin, followed too,
Yet in her company forbore to go.
8.
As pleasures paths she in the fields did trace,
It joy'd her much the tender lambs to see
Skipping in harmless sport from place to place;
And who would be so sad and dull, said she
To (...) at home, when thus abroad we may
Behold how sweetly Innocence does play.
9.
No smiling flower could meet her as she went,
But gathering it, she with a kiss would pay
The courteous price of that delicious scent
It had so freely pow'red in her way:
And still cries out, how poor a place is home
Which for such pleasure, can afford no room!
10.
Thus loosely tripping on, she came at last
Through pathlesse Paths unto a pleasant Grove;
The gentle Winds through the fair Trees made haste,
And in her face a gale of Odours drove.
Needs would she enter, and see whither this
Were not the Copy of old Paradise.
11.
The courteous Boughs laden with generous spice
Stooped to salute her as she entered in,
And bid her pluck what Fruit best pleased her eyes;
But there was none but did amazement win:
She looks about, yet know's not which to choose,
And in those sweets her sweeter self does loose.
12.
When on the sudden from a neighbor tree
Her ears were captived, as before her eyes:
The mystic Chains of purest Harmony
Did with a soft enchantment her surprise:
A winged Quire having new tuned their throats,
Were running over their exactest notes.
13.
Divided thus with Pleasures, she does look
Where she may sit her self to recollect:
Close by, she gliding spies a silver Brook
Whose gorgecus bank with golden flowers was decked.
There sitting down, once more, adieu, said she,
Dull home, which no such seat could spread for me.
14.
Syneidesis, her Mistress being set,
Pitched down behind her, and fell fast asleep.
Old * Charis kept aloof, resolved to let
The venturous Virgin some experience reap
Of her fond confidence, who needs would stray
Like some vain Child, so far from home, to play.
15.
When lo into the Grove a monstrous Boar
Wilder than was that place, did roaring come,
And brought more terror thither, than before
Appeared delight. Never did whiter foam
Smoke on the Oceans stormy face, than now
This hideous Beast about his own did throw.
16.
As are the Comet's, feirce with ominous light,
Such were his eyes composed of fire and blood:
His dreadful tusks, the engines of his spite,
Held forth their greedy heads, and ready stood
To tear their Prey; stern bristles hedged up high
His back, which did all wrath of thorns defy.
17.
Straight startled out of her unfortunate pleasure
Away flies Psyche on the wings of fear;
Whose steps the hungry Beast as fast did measure,
And swallowed up the way, to tear down her.
Loud were his roars, yet her shreeks did transcend,
Which heaven and earth and her own throat did rend.
18.
Phylax her ever trusty friend was near,
Flying from tree to tree still as she ran,
But was by heaven forbidden to appear
And reskew her who needs would be undone.
He was forbid to reskew her till she
Had deeper felt her dangerous vanity.
19.
Her long flight having now shortened her breath,
Which 'twixt her trembling lips lay struggling, she
Cries out, dear Phylax from these jaws of death
The monster opes so wide, deliver me.
Where is thy God and mine, which loves me so,
Where is he now? O what shall Psyche do!
20.
Here helpless fear and fainting threw her down
Unto the ready Beast an easy prey,
Whose hasty tusk had through her dainty gown
Unto her softer body tore its way:
When lo a sudden spear flew through his neck,
And frighted on the ground returned him back.
21.
A lusty gallant, the Spirit of Lust.
Aphrodisius hight,
Who in that luckie instant thither came,
Directed it; and straight, with equal might
Drew out his glittering blade; whose dreadful flame
A forehand struck the dazeled mouster dead,
Whose edge took from him both his prey and head.
22.
This done, he gently takes the virgin up;
Then with a courtly kiss he give's her joy
That she was safe. She scarce had power to open
Her eyes, sealed close with desperate dismay;
But when she saw the slaughtered Boar, and him
As sweet and fair, as that was foul and grim;
23.
I see there are more Phylaxes than one
Cries she: This life, dear sir, which heretofore
Was mine, your love has now made yours alone:
For my part, I had left it to that Boar,
And laid me down to measure out my grave;
Whence you to me this resurrection gave.
24.
Yet trust me sir, a life you have not given
To one who can forget by whom she lives:
Whether you come from earth, or rather heaven,
(For seldom earth such strange salvation gives,)
My soul, big with just thanks, would learn and see
Whether my debt divine or humane be.
25.
Lady, says Aphrodisius, first repose
Your self a while; a little way from hence,
(For well I know this place) a Current goes
Between two flowrie banks: there will I rinse
My bloody hands; there shall you sit and hear
A wounderous story, and due to your ear.
26.
It was the place where she before had been:
Thither they go; and thither Phylax flies,
Perching upon a neighbor tree unseen:
The gallant washed his hands; and she her eyes,
But in her own soft tears of joy, to think
How she had com from death's to that brook's brink.
27.
Then on the flowery Couch by her he sits,
And ushers in his talk with cunning sighs,
His feigned cheeks with lying tears he wets,
Three times he strikes his breast, three times his eyes
He casts up to wards heaven, three times he smiles,
And sigh's again, and her as often beguiles.
28.
At length: I am said he, a man who by
My birth as deep engaged to fortune stand
As any he that lives, if Majesty
Crown not his head, and Scepter load his hand.
My stock's the noblest in this land but one,
Nor bears it any branch but me alone.
29.
This made my loving Lord and Father spare
No pains or cost which might his Son adorn:
From learned Athens tutors hired were
Whom first the wings of fame had hither born:
Athens they left, but brought with them to me
From thence the truer Universitie.
30.
Thus did the curious wit of Greece become
A member of our private family,
And I with all the world conversed at home;
Yea in their dialects too, as fast as I
Could my young breath transform: nor was it long
Ever many sat upon my single tongue.
31.
A quick survey of all those steps I took
By which Philosophers have Nature traced;
Then Mathematics were my busy books;
A thousand lines I placed and displaced:
To Heaven upon the Artists Staff I went,
And studied round about the firmament.
32.
Of Optic lines and rays the powers I saw;
In Musicks mystic sweets unwearied Pains
I spent long nights and days, and strove to know
What reason married concording strains,
What divorced discords: never, I confess,
Did any knot so pose my brains, as this.
33.
The treasures of Antiquity, laid up
In old Historick leav's I opened:
How Kingdoms sprung, and how they made their stop
I well observed; with what brave Spirits did,
How they their honors managed, and what
The beams of their nobility did blot.
34.
My recreations were those which some
Made their whole work, and it was noble too:
When weary from my (...) I was come,
To practice martial feats I went, and so
In both her brave professions I strove
To follow Pallas, whom I most did love.
35.
Often have I been abroad, and seen the field
With streaming ensigns goodly terror spread;
Where how much more I loved to die, than yield,
Upon my breast good witness you may read,
Even these sev'n wounds, whose mouths, once open wide,
In mine own blood my virtue testified.
36.
Often have I rode alone into the Wood
To find some wild Antagonist, some Bear,
Some Boar, some Lion, the accustomed food
Wherewith I diet this my hungry spear:
You well may gather by the certain Blow
I gave yon' Beast, I am no Learner now.
37.
And will you think Pride speaks the word, if here
I tell you that my Fame swelled great and high?
In (...), in City, Country, every where,
Reports of Aphrodisiu's Worth did fly:
No high strained Parallel was made, but thus,
As good, or brave, as Aphrodisius.
38.
To Court I never went, but fewer eyes
Paid homage to the King's, than unto Mine:
Devoutly did the Ladies sacrifice
Their Looks, and Sighs, and Languors, at my shrine;
Often has the Queen gone out alone, whilst they
Forgot to follow Her, if I did stay.
39.
How many a pretty Embasie have I
Received from them, which put me to my Wit
How not to understand! but by and by
Some Comment would come smiling after it.
But I had other thoughts to fill my head,
Books called Me up, and Books put Me to bed.
40.
This my Disease being known, a Lady sped
To me an handful of conceit, clothed in
So quaint a Cover, that on it I read
Full half an hour before I could begin
To open the book: and what did that contain,
But a discourse to prove all Learning vain.
41.
Bold Title, then said I, if thou can make
Thy Promise good, by learning thou must do it.
With that, I threw't aside: but could not slake
My curious fond desire to look into it.
I looked and read, and saw how finely wit
Had whipped it self: and then grew friends with it.
42.
Then summoned by Civility I went
To court the Giver, and my thanks repay.
Look not, said I, for polished complement,
I came not hither Madame to gainsay,
But thank you for your book: if learning be
So vain a thing, Wit would prove foolerie.
43.
Between a blush and smile, she welcome gave
To her new Convert. But, sweet sir, said she,
I sent another book, in which you have
More of my mind than in those leaves can be;
A faire-writ book, if you it please to prove,
In rubric lines, and characters of love.
44.
I gave not that: O no, it was a Debt
Which I did to all sweetness pay in you.
How could I choose? for had I more than it,
They would be more than due: but having now
But only one poor heart, your praise must be
Not to disdain my helpless poverty.
45.
I would not for a thousand Worlds receive
It back again: How delicate a Nest
In your all-lovely bosom shall it have,
If by that favor you will make it blessed!
If thence you cast it, take it who will, for Me,
Ine'r shall love what hated is by thee.
46.
Yet give Me leave to ask what Lady it is
Thou will exalt to sit Queen in thy Heart:
Whether her face more graceful be than this
Which blusheth here in pleading its own part:
Whether her Stock or her Estate afford
More arguments than mine, to woo my Lord.
47.
If not: then by these loyal Tears I shed
Before thy feet, this my bold Truth forgive;
Thy love is due to me. Heaven never did
Make such a Man, for nothing but to Live.
Thou ow'st an Offspring to the World which may
With Hero's furnish it another day.
48.
As when the Prisoner at the Bar has done
His (...) story; he does fix his eye
Upon the Judge, and from his mouth alone
In hopes and fears expects his Destiny:
So looked the Lady, with prepared eyes
To see her Joys, or weep her Obsequies.
49.
Full loath was I to speak; but lother by
Inhumane lingering Silence to torment
Her most suspended soul, and make her die
Without her Sentence. Many a sigh I sent
Before, to tell what Words were coming out;
At last, this laboring Answer forth I brought.
50.
How wretched is his Bliss, upon whose Heart
Whilst diverse Ladies of choice Worth attend
With Loyal passion; He must either part,
And so destroy, his own; or empty send
Them all away but One, and thus be fain
By many a loss, to make one single Gain!
51.
Had I as many bosoms as I owe
To such sweet Creditors as Thou, with speed
I would discharge my scores; but first, I vow
To thee, dear Lady, in whose Worth I read
Such sweet Attraction, that were I to choose
My Heaven, for Thee I would all other loose.
52.
But now my choice is made, and long ago
Unto another I affianc'd was:
But who is that Lady, is a secret so
Divine, that from these Lips it never did pass:
My reverend Mother often with tears has sought,
But never could prevail to wring it out.
53.
Yet I thy noble Bosom honor so,
That I dare trust it there: only be sure
To keep this Jewel close, as thou would do
My Heart, a thing less precious and less pure.
Yet give me leave to cast this Charm about,
For fear thou lett'st it and my Life slip out.
54.
So may thy Heart Strings hold thy Heart, as Thou
This Mystery of mine: so may thy Love
Be true to Thee, and to thy Wishes bow,
As to my secret Thou shall trusty prove:
So may thine Angel hugg thy soul, and keep
It close, as in thy Breast this Thing shall sleep:
55.
A Thing which mine own Guardian Angel did
Acquaint and bless Me with. When through mine Eyes
Love first began his amorous beams to shed
And with his soft Desires my Heart surprise;
This winged Friend of mine looked through a frown,
And told me that my Heart was not mine own.
56.
It is, said he, thy privilege (and see
Thou thank Heaven for it,) not to run and spend
Thy Youth upon this wanton Mystery:
Let Others study how to Walk, to Bend,
To Vault, to Dance, to Kiss, to Woo; For thee
More sweet and generous Arts reserved be.
57.
Go court thy Books, and gain such Treasure there
As may inhance thy worth, and make thee be
A fitting Match for Her whom Heavens prepare
To be thy Spouse: whose face when thou shall see,
The reading on that fair-writ Book of Love,
For all thy studies ample Pay will prove.
58.
Yet to yon' southern Grove thou every Day
Must Pilgrim go, where thou thy Saint shall meet,
And of a Monsters make her thine own Prey;
That with no other Word she thee may greet
But plain Confession that thine is her Life:
Thus Heaven contriv's that thou shall win thy Wife.
59.
These are my Fortunes, Madam, yet unknown
Even by the sweeter Half unto my Self:
And sure your hand would help to thrust me down
Into the bottom of all torments gulf,
Should Wantonness invite Me to despise
A Blessing higher than my Pride could rise.
60.
Then happy She, the Lady crie's, who ever
She be, that must hugg Happiness in you.
And yet permit mine Eye one other Tear:
It Is not of Envy; No: Dear Sir, Adieu.
It pitied me to see this gentle fashion
Of her sincere, but unsuccesfull Passion,
61.
We parting thus; I hasted to this Grove,
Amongst whose spicy trees I knew would grow
My sweeter Hopes. But Heaven it seems, would prove
The valor of my Patience, and throw
Procrastinations in my way, that I
Might earne its favor by my Constancy.
62.
How often came I, and with bended knee
On every flowrie Cushion of the Grove
Implored the speed of my Felicity!
How often in this sweet Temple has great Love
Received mine Heart an Offering all on Fire
With flames of soft but vehement desire!
63.
At length my Prayers were heard, and this dear day
Did in that blessed Moment send me hither,
Which showed me that my long expected Joy
Was now full grown and ripe enough to gather.
Had I not plucked it straight, the Monster had
Of all its Sweetness his foul Booty made.
64.
First then to Heaven my full-tide thanks I pay:
And next, to Thee my noble Guardian, who
Before my hopes no forged Bait did lay:
Each smallest Circumstance agrees so,
That this the Lady is, and none but She
Designed by Heaven to crown my joys, and Me.
65.
All Blessings on thy head my Psyche: that
I know for certain needs must be thy Name;
That Angel told me it, whose counsel put
Me on this blessed adventure, when I came
To save thy life both for thy self and me,
And make of thine my joint Felicity.
66.
Here then my Heart I give thee, and I seal
The Deed with this true Kiss: May Curses rain
Thick on my head, if ever I repeal
What I have done, or challenge back again
This gift of mine, whose fault is only this,
Of thy Desert it to unworthy is.
67.
The Seaman by some furious Tempest thrown
Into the seeming Depth of roaring Death,
If he by sudden Fortune back be blown
Into the gentle Harbor; wondereth
At his strange safety, and scarce trusts his eyes;
But doubts a long time whither he live's or die's:
68.
So Psyche snatched from Dangers desperate jaws
Into the Arms of this illustrious Lover,
The truth of her condition hardly knows,
But in suspensive thoughts a while does hover.
Deceive me not, says she, a frighted Maid,
To poor, great Sir, by you to be betrayed.
69.
If still I live, and all this be no Dream,
(For sure your story's such an heavn'ly thing,
That simple I, alas, unworthy seem
To be concerned in it.) Be pleased to bring
Some further proof: Where Miracles are done,
Faith must have open Helps to bring her on.
70.
Then be the first proof, Aphrodisius cries,
This Diamond Ring, in which thy self may see
The radiant Copy of thine own fair eyes:
The next this Jewel; what thou art to Me
Let that attest: yet pardon me, that I
Gave it that precious Name, now thou art by.
71.
The third that delicate Embrace shall be
For which all Loves are kindled: that which will
The sweetest of Assurance give to thee,
And my great Guardians Prophecy fulfill.
Come, I can give thee leave to blush; a Maid
Of what she loves most, must be most afraid.
72.
Were not our Case Divine, awhile I Would stay,
And by our Humane Ceremonies marry:
But we did Wed above; and what can they
Add to Heaven's Rites? O no: it is sin to tarry:
My Angel would have told me, (never fear,)
Had it been otherwise; Come then my Dear.
73.
Forgetful Psyche now enchanted quite
By these his glorious Wiles, set open her Breast
Unto the Fancies of unclean Delight;
Forthwith a Knot of unseen Serpents pressed
Into her heart, and set it so on fire,
That straight it flamed out with foul Desire.
74.
But Phylax instantly descried the flame,
And wakeing up Syneidesis, He cries,
Run run, and help to save your dying Dame:
Look how her funeral flames already rise.
Up gets the Maid, and instantly thrusts in
Between the Lovers and their ready sin.
75.
Psyche starts back, whil st shame so heavy sat
Upon her Eyes, that down it pressed them.
(...) Wretch, cries Aphrodifius, what
Has made thy Life so vile, that thou do come
To forfeit it to me? I prithee go,
Die somewhere else; I Would be no Woman's Foe.
76.
O then, says she, Forbear to stain my pure
And spotless Mistress. Fie, cries Psyche, fie,
I know her not: My Lord, will you endure
I should such saucie Servants own, as she?
Be it another proof of your strong Love,
From Me this troublesome Creature to remove.
77.
He, having sleeping in a Box of Jett
A blacker Liquor drawn from Lethe lake,
Upon Syneidesis straight emptied it.
She rubbed her eyes: but found her self too weak
To grapple with that stupor which did creep
Upon her Brow, and down she fell asleep.
78.
As when the Child first venturing on his feet,
Carelessly stumbles to some Precipice.
His tender Nurse, more grieved, than he, to see it,
Makes on amain, with most intentive Eyes
Not on her way, but Him, who now she knows
Is stepping into Deaths wide open Jaws:
79.
So watchful Charis, who did distance keep,
Till her Assistance might most useful be,
Now put on speed, and rowsing from her sleep
Syneidesis,, Be not dismayed, said she,
Come, you and I will try what We can do
To stop Her who so feign to Hell would go.
80.
With that, as Phoebus steals his subtle Ray
Through Virgin Crystal; so through Psyche's breast
She thrusts her hand, and strives to take away
That poysnous Brood which there had made its Nest,
Yet she flings back, and casts disloyal scorn
On Her who grieved to find her so forlorn.
81.
But Aphrodisius amazed now
To see a Beauty which straight damped his eyes,
A Beauty which on Psyche's face did throw
Unlovely blackness, and monopolize
All Heaven within it self: recoyled back
Some Counsel in his troubled Brain to take.
82.
Mean while Syneidesis aloud does cry
In Psyche's ear: Mistress, believe it now
I am a wake, and see your Misery:
But o how foul a sleep possesses you!
What monstrous Apparitions are these
Which your enchanted dreaming soul do please!
83.
Home, home, I pray: This Grove grows thick with Charms,
And will be witch you from your self, until
All Help proves tardie for your ripened Harms
Home soon will cure you, and your Bosom fill
With better Flames than these, which only be
Kindled to make an end of You and Me.
84.
Why stay We here! See see, your Lover's gone;
Perhaps to fetch more Poison for your Heart,
And double on you your Destruction.
This unexpected News made Psyche start:
She turned her head, and saw 'twas so indeed,
Charis had forced Him back, and He was fled.
85.
Yet after Him a heavy sigh she sent,
And more would have dispatched: But tugged by
Syneidesis, at last she homeward went
Her feet went homeward, but her Heart did fly
Much faster back, which Charis, as she came
Behind, did meet with, and brought safely home.
86.
But Aphrodisius could not make such hafte
As to outrun the Angels nimbler hand;
Halfway the cursed Grove he had not past,
But Phylax lighted down, and bid Him stand.
Stand Fiend, says He; Thy punishment shall be
Upon this sceen of thine own Treachery.
87.
Fair hideous sir, how has your wretched spite
Clouded your memory? Do you not know
How mine and my illustrious Brethrens Might
You and your fellow fiends to Hell did throw?
Did that fall bruise your Heart so little, that
It, and our Victory you have forgot?
88.
Was It not enough, that in your burning Home
Hot Blasphemies you day by day did spit
At Heaven and God: but you to Earth must come
And all your trains and sly delusions set
To ravish his own Spouse, for whose dear sake
I here his Leiger lie the Match to make?
89.
Poor harmless Psyche, how did She offend!
Did She incroach upon your Realms below?
Did She ever envy Hell to any Fiend,
Or strive to snatch Damnation from You?
Sure you have injured Her, yea Phylax too;
For She Is my Charge, and you shall find it so.
90.
With that, He from his holy Bosom drew
A golden Banner, in whose silken Lap
His Lords allmighty Name wide open flew,
Of hell-confounding Majesty made up:
The Fiend no sooner Jesus there did read,
But Shame pulled down his Eyes, and Fear his Head.
91.
For as the Lightning darts on Mortal Sight
Dazeling confusion: So the flashing Rays
Of this bright Name the Fury did affright:
When Phylax on his throat his left hand lays,
And draws him to the Tree whose shade did cover
The green stage where just now he played the Lover.
92.
So have I seen a leering Curr brought back
Unto the field where He did hunt the Lambs,
With guilty ears thrown flat upon his neck,
With woeful Tail sneaking between his hamms;
With grinning Chapps, whose whineing Dialect
Speaks both what He has done, and does expect.
93.
In vain He struggls: For the nearest Bough
Phylax with potent Art twines round about
Its own tough self, and teaches how to grow
Into a Band more obstinate and stout
(...) was his Prisoner; whom forthwith He ties
Fast to the Tree; and home to Psyche Flies
94.
Poor Psyche; who no sooner was come home
But Charis hasts her to her Closet, where
The holy Furniture which trimmed the Room
Wide open Prayer-books, and Bibles were.
But she so strange, an Eye now casts on them
As if her soul had never dwelt upon them.
95.
Her tainted soul grown squeamish now, no more
Such serious Acquaintance would embrace:
But loving Charis found a private door
Into her Heart, and from the usurped place
Cast out that knot of Serpents on the ground
Which round about her soul themselves had wound.
96.
And see, says she, the token that your Love
Has hung about your Heart, and judge, I pray,
What kind of Favors His were like to prove
Which by enchanting Poison open their way.
If Heaven with fouler things than these does fill
Your bosom, then love Aphrodisius still.
97.
The hissing Serpents rolled about the floor
Which, and their shamed selves, they gnawed for spite,
Amazed Psyche starts back to the door,
Afraid of what but now was her Delight:
Till Charis with her valiant hand did throw
Them, whence they came, home to their Hell below.
98.
And now the Virgin falling on her face
With lamentable Cry: Forbear, said she,
My shameful presence makes any place
Unworthy for such noble Company;
For bear dear Charis, let me blush alone,
Left fouler here, than those Snakes which are gone.
99.
And you, my reverend Books, your leaves shut up,
Where my Confusion frowns in every line.
When holy Eyes draw near, then freely open,
But o, you are too pure and chaste for mine:
Mine, which let out my soul, and in its place
Received all Hell, which close I did embrace.
100.
They nothing else can do but blurr you now
with those perpetual streams of bounden Tears
Which for my wilful Misery I owe.
O Eyes, if ever your salt spring forbears,
May you fail too: such is my state, that I
Unless you drown me, cannot choose but die.
101.
Shine not on Me fair Sun, although thy Ray
With safety can the foulest Dunghills Kiste:
I am a filthier thing than those, and may
Taint thy sweet Luster by my ouglinesse.
Black Night will tell no tales; O may she roll
Up in her veil my correspondent soul!
102.
What have vile I to do with noble Day
Which shows Us Heavens fair face? that face which I
Wantonly scorned, and cast my love away
Upon impostur'd Lusts foul Mystery,
O Me! was ever Heart so mad as mine,
Which would be divelish rather than divine.
103.
Surely I will revenge my self on Her:
I will a Tempest raise of Sighs and Groans,
To scourge that Gale which blew so soft and fair
To steal a shipwreck on Me: With rude stones
$$Work$$ make this harder Breast without appear
As black as 'twas within when Hell dwelt there
104.
I with my Howlings will these Ears torment
Which were intentive to the Cheaters Charms:
These Lips which loved his Kisses, shall be spent
In courting nasty Dust: these lustful Arms
Which hugged His Body, shall mine own chastise,
Which now I hate, more than I loved His.
105.
O all ye Griefs which ever fixed your sting
Upon a guilty treacherous Bosom, hear
Unhappie Psyche's earnest Prayers, and bring
Your stoutest Powers: my Heart has room to spare
For your full Train; (Adieu all Loves,) I now
Must only study to woo Hate, and You.
106.
Why was I born! (may Darkness choke that Day
Which lighted Me into the World.) Or why
When, in the Boars, my Death its mouth did lay
Upon my throat, had I not leave to die!
Why did I escape that Monster, to be thrown
To fouler ones, Hells Treason, and mine own.
107.
Why dwelt such flaming Beauties in mine Eye.
As might allure, and show to Lust its way!
Why smiled my face with such sweet Majesty
As bade false Love, be bold Me to betray.
Why rather was I not so vile, that in
Safe scorn I might have escaped the Gallant's sin.
108.
The universal Worlds Contempt could not
Have wronged or wounded Me so deep, nor thrown
Upon my Beauties such a fatal Blot,
As they upon themselves and Me have drawn.
I (...) not now been Heir to all Heavens scorn,
If in Earths Eye, I Had but been forlorn.
109.
O righteous Profit, of unrighteous Pleasure,
Whose Total summ's made up of desperate Loss,
How justly, when We trade away our Treasure,
Requit'st thou Us with rusty fretfull Dross!
For all the Gains that Wantonnesfe brings in,
Prove but a Bank of Vengeance on the sin.
110.
Still still I burn, my Fire but changed is,
And though my Lust be cooled my Guilt is hot,
And belks, and boils: for wroth Syneidesis
Blows up its more incensed Coals. O what
Can help my enigmatick sorrows, who
Thus on my self my execution do?
111.
As thus she lay lamenting on the floor,
Which with her Tears was slubber'd: Charis who
Had all this while but stepped behind the door,
Comes cheerly in, and cries, Break off thy Woe,
Dear Psyche, it is enough, thy hearty cry
Has pterc'd already, and appeased the sky.
112.
The Copies of thy Tears which there ly shed
Upon the ground, reflected high, and are
Already in Heavens Casket botteled.
Thy griefs now smile above, and have made clear
Gods lowering face: look up and see how Day
Shines friendly on thee, and does bid thee Joy.
113.
With that, she breathed into her Breast the Powers
Of unconceived Sweets; the thirsty ground
Never looked so cheerfully when Summer showers
The deep Pains of its gasping Drought had drowned;
As over-joyed Psyche, now she feels
Warm in her bosom Grace's gentle Gales.
114.
Gales, on whose dainty Wings Heavens Influence rides;
An Influence of such speedy Operation,
That though all Opposition's highest Tides
Roar in its way, through their proud Conjuration
With instant Might it flies, and every where
Finds Victory attending its Carrieer.
115.
To Heaven, to Charis, to Syneidesis
Her thanks she mustereth; but all arrayed
In scarlet from her cheeks: For still she is
Ashamed to have been lately so betrayed;
When Phylax flutters in, and, Come, said He
You to the Grove must back again with Me.
116.
As when the place of Robbery you name
The Thief in White or Red betrays his fear:
So conscious Psyche's Heart shot through with shame
At that unlooked for Word, makes it appear
In her apalled looks. Alas, said she
And come Thou to renew my Misery!
117.
Bid Me go find some desperate Rock from whence
I may plunge down into the deepest Maine:
Bid me post headlong to the Infernal Prince
And covenant with him for eternal Pain:
Nay bid me do it; Or bid me not do this,
Which is, to go where my far worse Hell is.
118.
I like thine Anger well, says Phylax; but
The Grove is not the same 'twas yesterday:
Another Visage I on it have put,
Both chaste and safe, and so thy self wilt say.
No Boar, no Lover's there: come let Us go,
Both Charis and thy Maid will with Us too.
119.
This high Assurance cheered her timorous Heart
Which stood in reverentiall awe of Him:
Besides, her faithful Consorts bore their Part
In this encouragement. Yet did there swim
About her breast some tender trembling Doubts
Which spread like Mist upon her cleerer Thoughts.
120.
Along they went, but coming near the Grove
Psyche began to quake, and closer cling
To Phylax, who reached out his shield of love,
The downie shelter of his heavenly Wing,
Under whose cheerly shadow her He led
Into the gloomy shades the Wood had spread.
121.
For now those flattering Beauties which of late
Had made that Place a Temple to Delight,
Were all unmasked; and Melancholy sat
Shrowding her (...) self in midday night.
The heavy nodding Trees all languished,
And every sleepy Bough hung down its Head.
122.
There Aphrodisius his best Teeth had tried
(And four of them lay broken on the ground,)
With spightfull restless gnawing to divide
The With by which He to his shame was bound
More than unto the Tree: which He so shook,
That all its frighted Leaves their Boughs forsook.
123.
But seeing that new Company, He bit
His Lips and Tongue, and spit them in their face:
See, Psyche, Phylax cries, the Gallant's Wit,
Who hopes to escape confessing his Disgrace:
But by and by, I Will make him find a tongue
To speak out his imposture and thy wrong.
124.
With that he snatched from Him all He had stolen
From Earth from Water or from Air before,
The beauteous Veil'no sooner off was fallen
But Aphrodisius appears no more:
It proves an hideous Fiend, and Psyche cries,
Running behind the Tree, God bless mine Eyes.
125.
Forthwith a poysnous stink seized on the Air;
But Phylax quickly blew it down to Hell:
And, Come, says He, come Psyche, there is no fear,
Behold the Monster, and observe him well:
There hung his cursed Periwig, but now
Two coal-black Horns is all his Head can show.
126.
The rest is Bald, or with soars overgrown,
With which his Forehead too rough-casted is;
Though over it He polished Flesh had drawn,
Too fair a Plaster for such Ouglinesse.
See how the Boils run down into his eye
To find him fitting Tears when He would cry.
127.
Like to some Ovens black Arch, so hang his Brows
Over the furnace of his Eyes, wherein
Delitious Flames did lately take up house,
But now the Fire's as dark as his own sin,
And being fed with sulphur, does confess
What is its work, and where it kindled was.
128.
A double Alablaster Conduit hung
Down from his Forehead, where is nothing now
But those two rotten Pipes, not to be wrung
Least with the Moisture down the Nose do flow:
That banefull Moisture, which it is hard to say
Whether it be more Poison than its Way.
129.
Two Rows of Roses on those Lips did grow,
To sweeten every word that passed by:
But now scorched black as Hel's own mouth, they show
What kind of Breath is wont through them to fly;
A Breath like that which from the Chimneys topp
Speaks it own stink by what it vomits up.
130.
His Cheeks which lifted up but yesterday
Two Hills of Spices, now are sunk so low
That like two hollow untilled valleys, they
With nothing else but Desolation grow.
Now grizly Hair has spoiled. his polished skin,
Showing what He to Satyrs is of kin.
131.
His lovely Hands are now two monstrous Paws
Whose Nail's much longer than their Fingers be.
Sure his Embrace is dainty, when he throws
Those Arms about his Love. But prithe see
What now behind the Gallants back does trail,
His courtly Sword's turned to a dangling Tail.
132.
Behold his goodly Feet, where one great Cleft
Davides two Toes, pointed with iron Claws.
The rest of his fine Body must be left,
Sealed up close by Modesties chaste Laws:
Yet may thou safely look into his Breast,
And see what Treasures there have made their Nest.
133.
Look where ten thousand Charms and kisses lie,
And Complements of every garb and kind,
With which He does on herdlesse Virgins fly,
And Correspondent Entertainment find:
Look where upon the Topp those Courtships be
By which He wooed and enchanted Thee.
134.
In that sly corner (and observe it well)
Lie various Shapes which always changing be,
Shapes trim and smooth, and fair without, but full
Of inward Poison, which industrious He
Subtlie improved and daily did devise
Handsome Impostures and well-favoured lies.
135.
See thou not there the model of the Beast,
That hideous Witchery which chased Thee;
With all the amorous Story fairly dressed
To Court and cheat thy credulous Chastity!
Never did Cozenage with more lovely Art
Or Face more honest, act its divelish Part.
136.
But there is something stranger yet behind:
See thou that Scroll? It is a full Commission
By which he made this Voyage, ready signed,
And strengthened by the broad Seal of Perdition.
Come, I Will untwine the knot of Snakes which tie
It up, and lay it open to thine Eye.
137.
Lo here a scheem of such confounding Letters,
And scrambling Lines, as never Conjurer writ:
His Forks, Hooks, Prongs, Racks, Gibbets, Gridirons, Fetters,
And other Tools of his infernal spite
Are Belzebub's mad Alphabet; But hear
How well I ken his mystic Character:
138.
Satan the great, by mine own Power alone
God of Hell Earth and Air: Immortal Foe
To Men, to Angels, to Heaven, and Heaven's Son;
Monarch of Pride, Rage, Blasphemy, and Woe:
Out of our royal grace, to our right vicious
And trusty friend and Cosen Aphrodisius:
139.
By these our Letters Patents We do give
Thee full Authority the Souleto seize
Of hated Psyche, that she may receive
What share of Pangs our royal Self shall please
Given at our flaming Court of Desperation
This sixth Age of our Sovereign Damnation.
140.
This being read: He folds it up again,
And thrusting it into the Furies breast;
Go home, says He, and ask thy Sovereign
A larger Patent: See thou art released.
But here I hang the With; if ever thou
Returnst this Way, thou may this token know,
141.
The loosned Fiend fetching a deep drawn Sigh,
And tearing his own breast with helpless wrath,
Flung down his Patent, and away did fly.
The Grove smoked as He went: in all his Path
No Tree did meet him, (though the place were full)
But down He tore it, and made have to Hell.
142.
This Spectacle so wrought on Psyche's Heart,
That filled brimme full of holy shame and Joy,
Her equal thanks and blushes she does part
Between he careful friends. Never may Day
Shine on this face, if I forget, says she,
Your Loves, and mine own reskew'd Chastity.
143.
Farewell fond Passions. Heaven above, I Am sure,
Is full as fair within, as it is without:
No Aphrodisius there; but all as pure
As is the spotless Crystal, or your thought
Dear Phylax, which from thence its pattern takes,
And a new Heaven in your sweet Bosom makes.
144.
There will I fix my Heart: there dwells my Love,
My Life, my Lord, much purer than his Home:
Whose Paradise shall be the only Grove
Henceforth, to which my soul shall strive to come.
Forbid it Jesu, any thing below
Be master of this Soul, whose Lord art thou.
145.
Thus sweetly breathing out her holy Passion,
To ease her high-swolln, heart she homeward goes
With her dear Consorts: yet at every station
Renews her thanks, and her pathetike Vows.
At length got home, She to her Closet hasts
Where all her Soul at her Loves feet she casts.
146.
What prayers were there, what thanks, what sighs, what tears,
What Languishments, what amorous ecstasies,
What confidence, what shame, what hopes, what fears,
What pains, what joys, what thoughts, what words! she dies
And yet she lives, and yet she dies again,
And would for ever live so to be slain.
147.
But fainting Nature (for 'twas midnight now,
And far sh' had traveled and wrought hard that day,)
Permitted sleep to grow upon her brow;
And, though unwilling, down at last she lay.
Sweet was that rest; but yet much sweeter was
The Dream which now before her Soul did pass.
148.
Imagination swiftly carried Her
Into a Garden where more Beauties smiled
Than did in Aphrodisiu's Grove appear,
And gentler Gales the air with odours filled.
Lillies alone on every bed did grow
Which scornd comparison with Northern Snow.
149.
The goodly Walks with Alablaster were
Paved all alone, whose smooth and spotless face
Laid fairlie open unto the silver sphere
Which rolled above, a comely looking glass.
Whither upward she or downward turned her Eye,
Still she (...) the same Heaven's Majesty.
150.
No Fountain bubled there, but fed with springs
Of purest Milk; upon whose dainty shore
Unsported Pigeons sat and washed their wings,
Though full as white and pure as it, before.
But thus one Candor powered upon another,
Does kindly kiste and sport it with his brother.
151.
High in the midst a princely Castle stands
Invincible for strength, and for delight,
Built all of Virgin-christall, and by Hands
As pure as the Materials were bright.
A cleerer Court was never by Poets brain
Built for Queen Thet is in her watery Main.
152.
Ten thousand Blushes stood before the Gate,
With Magnanimities all hand in hand:
As many Purities behind them sat;
And after those as many Beauties, and
Young smiling Graces: whose sweet task it was
To be the Guard of that delicious Place.
153.
As Psyche wondered at the stately sight,
She turns, and spies her Phylax standing by.
What Place is this, says she, so fair, so bright?
He smiling cries, My Dear, for Chastity
It was erected: Look and thou shall see
What kind of Princes here the Dwellers be.
154.
Lo there comes One: Observe his royal Gate;
Majestic, yet not proud; about his brows
A glittering Coronet wreaths his princely state,
As in his Hand a Palm his triumph shows.
Large is his Roabe, and after him below
A Train imperial on the ground does flow.
155.
This Pavement is less white, less sweet are those
Perfumed Lillies, than that roab of His
The Eternal Lamb from his own fleece did choose
The richest Wool where with to cloth and dress
His spotless friends, and fellow-lambs; for the
Go all invested with this bright Array.
156.
Those graceful Eyes in which Love's throne is set,
Are they which did Potiphera defy
(Thou know the story since I told thee it.)
This is that Joseph, though advanced high
In Pharaohs Realm, yet now more glorious grown,
And can a fairer Kingdom call his own.
157.
The next's a Female, in the same Array:
For Sexes here no outward difference show,
But all like Angels live, since noble they
Strove to forget their He and She below,
And (though then earthly Pilgrims,) overtake
That Purity which Us does equal make,
158.
Susanna is her Name: That radiant Face
Which none but chaste and holy beams did shed,
Two lustful Elders made their daily Glass,
And with the Antidote invenomed
Their shameless Hearts. So bold is Lust that she
Dares hope to find a Blot in Purity.
159.
Cancer then scorched the World, when tender she
Into her Garden went, there in a spring
Almost as clear as her own Chastity
To cool her self: But they straight issuing
Out of their ambush, in their Clothes express,
More shame than did Susanna's Nakedness.
160.
We too are hot, cry they; but none but thou
Can quench the fury of our mighty Flames:
Thou art the Fountain where all Sweets do flow,
And We must bathe and cool Us in thy streams:
Yield, as thou love thy Life; else We will swear
That in Adultery We caught thee here.
161.
Then welcome Death said she, thy face will be
Fairer than is the Countenance of this sin:
Here she cried out aloud; and instantly
Her startled Hand-mayds all rushed shreeking in,
Whom both the full-mouthed Elders hastened
To catch the Adulterer, who, said they, was sted.
162.
Then haling her unto the Bar, their own
Guilt upon her they throw, and she must die:
But straight a Miracle crowds in to crown
The truth of her unconquered Chastity;
And turn the Sentence on the Elders, who
Whilst she to Triumph, must to Stoning go.
163.
There comes the second Joseph, but as far
Before in honor as in time behind:
Little thought Men what kind of Carpenter
Was this, whose noble Art a way could find
To frame a life (and raise the building high,)
Both of Heroik Worth, and Poverty,
164.
Mine and my Brethrens Office (though it be
Both sweet and glorious, yet) must stoop to His,
Who was the Guardian of Divinity,
And of the Mother of all sweetnesses.
And yet no Angel envied him his place
Who ever looked upon his wondrous face.
165.
What Gravity sits there, and what Delight,
What Tenderness, and what Austerity!
How high and humble are his looks, how bright
And modest are his eyes! how sweetly He
Even in this Glory seems not to forget
That Cloud which upon Him in earth did sit!
166.
But look, and see thou start not at the sight,
Those Rays, though more than Sun-like, lovely be;
Here comes of Heaven and Earth the choice Delight,
The Queen of Softness, and of Purity.
Millions of Loves come tripping in Her way,
Flown from her Eye in a fore-running Ray.
167.
Behold Her face, and read all Paradise,
And more, in Flesh and Blood: In vain we seek
For flowers, for Gemms, for Stars, to equalize
The gallantry of Her illustrious Cheek,
At whose sweet Composition, every Grace
Came running in, for fear to loose its place.
168.
All Cherubs, and all Seraphs have I seen
In their high beauties on Heavens Holy Days,
But yet the gracious Glories of this Queen
Sweetly out-glitters their best tire of Rays.
What studied scorn would Pagan wits have thrown
Upon their Venus, if they this had known,
169.
This Mother of Divinest Love, as pure
As is that other putid! Noblest Tongues
When they triumphant are, and would be sure
With life and bliss and joy to grace their Songs,
First chant the Son, and then the Mother, He
Begins, and she makes up the Harmony.
170.
Her Crown is full Imperial, yet not decked
With oriental Diamonds, but thick set
With purer Jewels: for the most select
Virtues (because her own) do garnish it:
And yet all those but the faint Copies be
Of her rich Hearts Original Treasury.
171.
I need not tell thee Mary is her Name,
Who teaches Majesty to be so mild:
This cold dead Pavement lively does proclaim
Whose feet with newborn Lillies it have filled:
Whose but the Virgin-Mothers steps could bless
A Soil so barren with such Fertilnesse?
172.
Turn Psyche, and behold; Here comes the King
The King himself, of Royal Chastity.
She turned: But as He forth was issuing,
Intolerable Beams from His did fly
Upon her face: she started at the stroke,
And rubbed her dazeled eyes, and so awoke.
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO III. The Girdle, or Love-Token.
ARGUMENT.
HEr Spouse in Token of His royal Love
A Girdle unto Psyche sends: wherein
The accurate works Historik Beauty strove
The radiant Materials to outshine.
The Rich Embroiderie Phylax does expound,
And with the Token then the Maid surround.
1.
SHort Taste of Pleasures, how do thou torment
A liquorish Soul when once inflamed by Thee!
The edge of all Desire would soon be spent,
Did Thou not whett it to that keen degree
That nothing but complete Fruition will
The longing of its wakened stomach fill.
2.
The pined Man, on whom a thinner She
Insatiable Famine, long has fed;
Desires no Heaven or Paradise to see
But only what lies molded up in Bread.
One glimpse of this, bids Hope return, and light
Life in those Eyes which were bequeathed to Night,
3.
But if that Morn of Comfort damped be,
And his young Joys snatched from his Eyes again:
The fugitive Blessing mocks his Misery,
And by rebound exalts it to a strain
Of higher Punishment; his Fancy more
Does gnaw him now, than Hunger did before.
4.
So Psyche famished with strong Desire
Of her dear Spouse, no sooner fed her eyes
On his first Luster, but that mystic Fire
Turned all her Heart into Joys Sacrifice.
She 'gan to scorn all other Days but this
Whose Dawn had broached such golden Floods of Bliss.
5.
But when immensitie of Beams had cast
That cloud of Weakness on her Mortal Eye,
And she the longed-for light it self had lost
In too much light; her Longing swelled so high;
That did not sighs unload her Heart, and it,
The impatient Tumor would her bosom split.
6.
She sighs, and thinks; and then she sighs again:
For every thought which labored to comprise
What she had but half-seen, makes her complain
Her thoughts were dazeled, as before her Eyes.
Yet still she thinks, and still she loves to be
Puzzled in that delicious Misery.
7.
And, happy Ye, stout Eagles, happy Ye,
Crie's she, whose genuine Eyes are tempered
To (...) brave pitch, that the full Majesty
Of your beloved Sun can never shed
Such (...) extremities of Heaven, but you
Can (...) them in, as fast as they can flow.
8.
You perched on some safe Rock, can sit and see
When the young East unlocks his rubie gate,
How from the (...) bed of Roses he
Sweeter than it, does rise: what Robe of state
That Day He chooses, and what Tire of light
He on his Temples binds, there to grow bright.
9.
Into his Chariot of flaming Gold
You see him mount, and give his purple Steeds
Leave to draw out the Day: You see him rolled
Upon his diamond Wheels, whose Bounty breeds
That populous Family of Pearls which dwells
On eastern shoares close in their Mother-shells.
10.
You see him climb up to Heavens silver Hill,
And through cross Cancer make the Hours run right.
There with his widest Looks your own you fill,
And riot in that royal Feast of light,
Whilst to your eyes your souls fly up and gaze
On every beauty of his high-noon Face.
11.
You see him when into the steep-down West
He throws his course, and in the Atlantic Deep
Washes the sweat from his (...) Brow and Breast,
And cools his smoking (...), and goes to sleep
Among the waterie Nymphs. who in his rest
Waft him through bypath back into his East.
12.
Thus the kind Day makes all her hours attend
Your undisturbed Joys; But fainting Me
With one poor minute she will not befriend
That I my fairer, sweeter Sun may see.
Yet why blame I the Day? She Is clear and fair:
But you, adulterate Eyes, too cloudy are.
13.
Had you been constant, such had been my Bliss:
But you with faithless cowardice gave in.
Surely I Will be revenged on you for this,
Till you repent your Treachery in Brine.
Perhaps when Tears have washed you clean, the pure
And free face of my Spouse you may endure.
14.
These querulous sighs, by their tempestuous Blast
Drove on the Cloud, and now the Rain began;
Dropps great and numerous down her Cheeks made haste
For more and greater still came crowding on;
(...) either eyelid sprinkled in the Crowd,
A living Rainbow on its margin showed.
15.
But as the Storm swelled high in Phylax flies,
And much ado his yearning sweetness had
To bridle in his sympathetick eyes
Seeing how great a flood Phyche's had made:
Were not eternal Joys deep Printed on
Angelick Spirits, sure now his springs had run,
16.
But with his Wing he wiped her blubbered face,
And fanned fresh comfort on her fainting Mind:
Quairell not with thine Eyes, thy Vision was
Too visible, said he, and they, though blind,
Performed their duty, being clogged as yet
With lazy Dust, for sprightfull signts unfit.
17.
Have patience, till that Dust be put to bed
And mixed with the grave; then shall thine Eye
With ample vigorous Beams imbellished,
Open into a full capacity
Of viewing Him, whose lovely Princely look
Shall be thy safe and everlasting Book.
18.
Mean while, this Token He by me does send
Hoping Thou Wilt wear t for his sake next thine heart:
No Lover (...) wooed his adored Friend
With ticher Present; That thou never may start
From his affection; with this Girdie he
Desues to bind thee to Felicity.
19.
The Ground's a texture all of Turtles down
Which dares call Virgin-Snow both harsh and black:
For he himself deep died it in his own
River of Whiteness, which its Spring does take
From under His great throne, where once when He
But dipped his hand, the Fount proov'd Purity,
20.
Unto a Grace to spin He put it out,
That the fine thread might answer her neat hand:
Then in the Jewell-house of Heaven he sought
What Gems to Honor with this ground: The Strand
Of precious India no such Treasure shows;
Above, the Ocean of true Jewels flows.
21.
Ten thousand glittering things he turned over,
And wished Thee every one, Yet if, said He
I on my Darling throw this massy store,
'Twill to a Burden swell my Courtesy:
She Is tender, and I cannot but be so;
I wish her all, but these for all shall go.
22.
And those were Jaspers, Diamonds, Onyxes,
Topazes, Berylls, Rubies, Amethysts;
All ready fitted for imbroyderies,
But richer far than ever flamed on Priests
Or Princes Crown: which as he sending was
To set on work another curious Grace,
23.
His Snowie Mother, waiting all that while
At his right hand, melted down on her knee,
And sweetly begged that Office. In a smile,
(His usual visage toward her and Thee,)
He grants her kind request. Yet stay, says He,
And let thy Needle of my choosing be.
24.
A Twist of Glories o'r his shoulders thrown
About his back a sportfull Qniver rolled,
Of metal in this grosser World unknown,
The thrice-refined Quintessence of Gold.
Yet was the splendid House less pure and fine
Than were the sweet Inhabitants within.
25.
No sooner He unlocked the glorious Lid,
But a pure Cloud of living Joys and Smiles
Which in that merry Region had been bred,
Breaths out it self, and the Spectators fills
With vigorous Pleasures, and with fresh Desires
To view that Fountain whence such Bliss expires
26.
Innumerable arrows there do lie
Keeping each other warm with mutual flames;
For mystic Ardor is the metal they
Are made of, metal purer than those Beams
Which play about the stars, or those which flow
From Phebu's eyes, when they in High-noone glow.
27.
The finest Rays which darted purest light,
From his own crown great Love himself did cull
And these said He, shall be my Arms in fight;
With this Artillery I Will my Qaiver fill:
The Heaven's already bent from East to West,
And that is the Bow by which my darts I Will cast.
28.
There Is no such thing, believe it Psyche, there,
As leaden Arrows, steep't in Scorn and Hate:
Each Dart's a son of splendour, and does wear
A rich remembrance of its Masters fate,
For in his blood, the blood of Love, died deep,
Its tincture and its virtue it does keep.
29.
With these he wounds his best beloved Hearts,
And by the wound sets open to Life its way:
Life is the point of these mysterious Darts
Which with pure Joy and dainty Vigor slay.
They slay indeed, yet still reviving be;
They nothing murder but Mortality.
30.
The Hairs of softest Flax grow gross and course
When these draw near, so delicare are they:
Yet cruel steel strikes with less boisterous force,
And with less fatal certainty does slay.
Immortal Eyes alone can see them, but
Not fence the Blow, if they at them beshot.
31.
Love choosing one of these from its bright Nest,
Applies it toward his all-peircing eye,
From whose acute intention there pressed
A Ray so potent, that immediately
The yielding Dart does answer it, and now
Becomes a Needle, and its Eye can show.
32.
Then from his golden Locks, that curled Grove
Where thousand little Loves for ever play,
He plucked an Hair: and this, said He will prove
Sufficient Thread to finish all thy gay
Imbroyderie; 'twill stretch and always be
Longer and longer to Eternity.
33.
Here take thy Tools, and let the Invention be
Thine own Conceit: for who can better fit
The Emblematick gift of Chastity,
Than thou the Mother both of Me and it:
She bowing low, her thanks and Duty throws
Before his feet, and to her work she goes.
34.
Millions of Graces tripped after her,
The fair attendants on her (...) rain,
Unto that Tower of living Crystal where
Thy Vision lately Thee did entertain:
That Mi^^ie Way which down Heaven's Mountain flows
Its beauteous smoothnes to her footsteps ows.
35.
Often had she traced it; (for you see the Way
Is broad, and Heaven's fair amplitude does suit.)
Yet never with cheerlier Countenance than that Day,
(...) the decotum she did well compute,
Rejoicing that this Virgin-work should be
(...) to the Mother of Virginity.
36.
The Castle Gares did in a smile stand open
To see their Queen, and bid her welcome in.
She looks about her in that curious shop
Of Purities, uncertain where to 'gin.
Nothing dislikes Her, but she spends her care
Among so many Bests, which to prefer.
37.
The lofty Roof of the illustrious Hall
With Sighs and amorous Languishment was seel'd,
From whence upon the princely floor did fall
Full many an hearty Tear, which there did yield
A (...) Pavement, which the cool Grounds Kiss
Into chaste firmitude did chrystalize,
38.
The Twilights tears (...) in the Laps of flowers
Reflected not so (...) Heaven's rising Eye,
When Phoebus let in the diurnall Hours,
And trimmed his face upon the Morning sky,
As these reverberated that fair Look
Which from the Virgins entering face they took.
39.
The Walls impeopled were with all the stories
Of those whom Chastity had clothed in White,
From ancient Abels most unspotted Glories,
Unto the latest Beams of Virgin-light:
That Abel, who first to his (...) tied
Martyrdomes (...), in whose Bed he died,
40.
But at the upper end a Table hung
All of one sparkling Diamond, fair and high,
Whose brighter lines can by no Angels tongue
Be fully read. It was the History
Of Love himself, craved by art so divine
That every Word the Table did out shine.
41.
Long looked she on this pourtract, and forgot
By looking long, almost for what she came:
The Sight (...) her eyes that she had not
Her wonted power to be Queen of them.
At (...) she calls them home, and bids withal
Her heart come back, which out with them had stole.
42.
Then, o. cries she, that this unworthy Hand
Could draw those lines of Bliss, of Life, of Love!
A thousand years I d be content to stand
And practice here, so I at length might prove
Artist enough to form one Copy, which
With more than all Heaven would the Earth enrich.
43.
But my Almighty Lord and Son who did
React his stories on this diamond sceen
By his own finger, can be copied
Only by it: Though He would make a Queen
Of worthless Me, yet He was pleased still
In his poor Handmaid some defect should dwell.
44.
This Word straight summoned into the Cheek
Of all the Graces which about her pressed
An universal Blush, to see how meek
Their Empress was: And give us leave at least
Say they, to copy this Humility
More due to Us, than unto royal Thee.
45.
But, turning to the next her studious eye,
And reading in that Table fairly drawn
The sweet Exploits of her Virginity,
She blushed more than they, and of their own
Blush made them all ashamed, to see how far
It was out-blushed and out-grain'd by her.
46.
What help, cries she, for He is Lord and King,
What help if he be pleased to have it so!
If He my Memory next his own will bring,
And print it in a Book of Diamond too!
It Is not the picture of what I did merit,
But what his love has made me to inherit.
47.
With that the Graces all upon their knecs
In a conspiracy of reverend Love
Assault her thus: Seek no more stories; these
Of thine, the best imbroyderie will prove.
Degrade not what thy Son preferres, nor be
Because he loves thee, thine own Enemy.
48.
Nay gentle Sisters, sweetly she replies,
I, love my self too well to be so proud:
Let other Hands applaud my Victories,
But to mine own it must not be allowed,
Were that my Work, this Needle at each letter
Would prick my Heart, because I was no better.
49.
Lo in that Rubie Table there I see
A heavenly Story: well the Man I know,
A precious Friend both to my Lord and Me
When We with Him were Sojourners below.
Pure was his Life, pure was his Office too,
Cleansing the Way where Pureness was to go.
50.
Whilst on the noble Baptist thus her Eye
And Praises dwelt: a Grace had fill d in haste
Her lap with Lilies, and the maiden prize
Into a Chair of Alablaster cast.
The gentle Virgin smiled at first to see it,
Then down she sat, and made her Cushion sweet.
51.
Her diligent Maidens compass Her about,
And with a Jewel each one ready stands.
To her pure Work she falls; and as she wrought
A sweet Creation followed her Hands:
Upon her Knee apace the Table grew,
And every Figure to the Texture flew.
52.
As active Fancy in a Midnights Dream
With strange extemporall dexterity
What Sceens, what Throngs, what Worlds she lists, does frame,
Making the most divided things agree,
And most united quarrel; though one Cell
Be all the room for this vast spectacle:
53.
So wrought the nimble Artist, and admired
Her self, to see the Work go on so fast.
Sure the ambitious History desired
To this its own new honor to make haste,
And purchase to its single Rubie Beams
The various Lustres of ten thousand gems.
54.
The forward Figures crowded close, for all
Would needs come in, and rather chose to be
Justled and thronged, and nipp'd into a small
(Yet a well ordered) Epitomie,
Than in that little Dwelling loose their seat,
Where sweet Contraction would make them more great
55.
And now the Girdle proves a Multitude
Of sundry things made friends and tied in one:
But eminent among the rest is showed
The lovely Master of the business John,
One-different John, who, as the Work does rise,
Lives, preaches, washes, suffers prison, dies.
56.
The Imbroyderie finished thus: that with more speed
She might present it to her mighty Son,
She gives command her Birds be harnested:
Quick as the Word her ready Maidens run,
And from the milkie shore of the next spring
Five Pair of her immortal Pigeons bring.
57.
Her Coach was double gilt with that pure Light
Whose grosser part fills Phebu's face with glory:
Not glaring like his Eyes, but Mild and White,
Shining much like its Owners Virgin-storie.
Her Coursers take their place, and she the Reins
Almost as soft's the Hand which them contains.
58.
As through the whirling Orbs she faster flies,
The new Imbroyderie to the Stars she shows:
They twinckled all, ashamed of their own Eyes;
So was the splendid Zodiak which throws
His spangled Girdle round about the Spears
To keep in order and gird up the years.
59.
Orions Blush confessed how much this sight
Outvied all the glories he could show:
His yiedling Countenance fell, and to the bright
Triumphant Apparition did bow;
Three times he tried, and feign he would have (...)
How to unbuckle his out-shined Belt.
60.
But coming to the Sovereign Palace, she
Hasts in to her expecting Lord and lays
Her Face, and Work upon his Footstool; He
Her dainty pains with high Approofe repayes;
Yet, On this Ground had thine own Story grown,
The Girdle would, said he, have fairer shown.
61.
With that, unto his Cabinet he goes,
Where Spirits of purest Gemms extracted lie:
Out of which Heart of Richness he did choose
The softest Dropps, and in one Jewel tie
Such Rarities as my Tongue cannot tell:
But thy dear Soul their ravishments shall feel.
62.
For to the Girdle having linked it,
He deigned to grace Me who stood wondering by;
Take this, said he, and see how it will fit
Thy Psyche, but more mine: Be sure to tie
It close and straight, that by this Token she
May understand how near she is to Me.
63.
The second Houre's scarce entering since I took
It, and my leave: and here the Present is.
Come wipe thine Eyes, a purified Look
Is (...) due (...) where the sight is Bliss.
(...) Phylax opened the Girdle, whence such beams
Broke loose, as drowned Psyche in their streams.
64.
For as the rural Swain, whose courser Eyes
Never star'd on other beauteous things than what
Begay the simple Fields: when first he spies
A Princes Wardrobe open, straight is shot
Quite through with Wonder, and in fear does deem
The sight is too too glorious for Him:
65.
So mortal Psyche was at first dismayed
At the immortal Spectacle: When he
Cries out, What Error makes thee thus afraid:
This Zon's not torrid, though it flaming be;
Nor sent thy Spouse this Token to destroy
Thine Eyes, but diet them with sparkling Joy.
66.
See thou that Building there, which lifts high
Its shining Head, and scorns to pay the Sun
Homage for any beams, (for sanctity
Glitters about it, and 'twixt every stone
Lies thicker than the Cement,) know that this
Illustrious Pile, the Jewish Temple is.
67.
Many long years had run their Round, and spent
Their own upon Heavens lasting Orbs, before
This Fabric first grew to its Complement:
But here a moment raisd it, and to more
Magnificence than it at first could show;
Such potent Art from Mary's fingers flew,
68.
That reverend Senior whose high-mitered Head
Points out his princely Office, is the Priest.
You in his awful Countenance might have read
What his Attire proclaims: Were he undrest,
He still with Virtues would arrayed be,
Who now clothes holy Robes with Sanctity.
69.
His left Hand on his Sealed Mouth he lays,
Back to the Altar he his right does stretch:
His Eyes are full of talk, and try always
How they without a Tongue his Mind may preach,
At length that Throng of People there began
To guess the Sense, and what befell the Man.
70.
Whilst he did on the Incense Altar place
Its aromatic Fuel, and supply
What Heat or sweetness there deficient was
By many a fervent Vow, and precious Sigh:
His Clowd flew highest, for the Incense smoke
Soon fainted, but his sighs through all Heaven broke.
71.
And being there, upon their odorous Back
An Angel gets: whence posting down to Earth
Unto the Temple he his way does take:
Where standing by the Altar, he breaths forth
A sweet repayment unto Zachary
Of what his Soul had panted out so high.
72.
Behold, says he, thy Vows and Prayers are
Come back to fill thy bosom with Success:
I am no Messenger, great Saint, of Fear,
Trust Me, and trust thy privileged Bliss:
Thine Heart so fruitful in sublime Affection
Has for thy Body earned an high production.
73.
Thy dear Eliza, whom thy Piety
As near in Virtue as in Wedlock ties,
Shall have a son in whom thine Eyes shall see
The fruit of both those Knots; whom Heaven does prize
So high, that I aforehand must with thee
Bargain about his Name, John it must be.
74.
A Son of Smiles and Gladness he shall prove.
And make thine aged Heart young with Delight,
The Morning he is born, shall Joy and Love
Together spring, and take their blessed flight
To thousand Souls, where they shall sit and tell
What Hopes, what Wonders in thy John do dwell.
75.
Never did friendly Stars conspire to frame
So Fortunate a Birth for Noblest Kings:
In Gods own Eye, wherein the World does seem
Less than these Atoms on the Airs light wings,
Great shall thy Son appear: Let Doubting go,
Immensitie resolves to make him so.
76.
For whilst he nestls in the narrow Cell
Of thine Eliza's Womb, the Spirit of Heaven
(O how much vaster than all it!) shall fill
His breeding Heart: which, when it once is thriven
Unto a pitch mature, shall nobly prove
To Earth, how it by Heaven alone does move.
77.
No boisterous roaring Wine, or rampant Drink
Shall his sweet Lipp defloure: His cup must be
Filled at some Virgin-Fountains Crystal brink,
And teach his Palate too Virginity:
For in his sacred Veins no fire must flow
But what Heavens Spirit pleases there to blow.
78.
And with that fire He Israel must refine,
Israel o'r-grown with rust and filth; that so
He may make clean the Way where his divine
Redeemer means close after Him to go.
For braver Flames never warmed Elia's breast
Than in thy Sons shall make their gallant Nest.
79.
Alas, the Priest replies, decayed I
Want Blood enough to paint a Blush at this
Too worthy News: Can fifty Summers fly
Back, and with Youth my withered Spirits bless!
Frost in my Veins, and Snow upon my Head
Bid me already write More than half dead.
80.
Nor in Eliza does less deadness Live:
How then in two such Winters can there grow
A Spring whose sudden Vigorousnesse may give
New Lives to Us, and make them overflow
Into a third? Sweet Angel thy strange Word
May well some sign unto my Faith afford.
81.
Sure then thou know me not, the Angel cries:
For had thou known that Gabriel I am,
Who in the Presence Chamber of the skies
Give high attendance to God and the Lamb,
Thou might have well presumed no fraud could come
From purest Verities eternal Home,
82.
Yet shall thou have a sign, and I will fast
Seal't on thy faithless Tongue which asked it.
Henceforth thou shall be Mute; until thou have
Seen what thou would not credit: Then I Will let
Thy Tongue be loose again, that it may sing
A Benedictus to thy gracious King.
83.
The Angels Word full in the Priests face flew,
And fastened mystic Chains upon his Tongue.
He soon perceived how strong it was and true:
And with his Eyes and Heart fore-stall'd his Song.
He thinks and Looks his earnest Hymn, and pays
For his kind Censure correspondent Praise.
84.
This put Him in that posture there. But now
Behold that sober Matron in whose Eye
Sage Chastity her reverend looks does show.
Lo how the Promise in her Womb grows high,
And by its Silent swelling does confess
The same her Husbands mutnesse does express.
85.
Observe that gentle Stranger hither come
To see her pregnant Cosen: Her array
Is plain and poor; her Looks still seem at Home
Though she be stepped abroad, so closely they
Are shrouded in this Veil; and Modest she
Even in this Girdle would not veiwed be.
86.
It Is she whose Handiwork the Girdle is,
And who upon her self least cost bestows,
Whose sweet Salute, with ravishment did seize
Eliza's Heart. See how her Arms she throws
In wide amazement; See how fain would those
Perls which have ope'd her mouth, her words disclose.
87.
All Glories which our Female Tribe have crowned
Cried she, shrink in their da'zled Eyes to see
Those brighter Blessings which in thee abound
Thou Wonder of pregnant Virginity:
All happiness dwells in thy God, yet He
Has now his Mansion taken up in thee.
88.
For when thy Salutation through mine Ear
Stroke Heaven into my Heart: the Child which lay
Listening within me, proved that He did hear
And ken the Language too; nor would he stay
To act his triumph in some larger room,
But For his dancing house leaped in my Womb.
89.
He by thy sound knew what within thee was,
And understanding that his Lord was near,
Thought it high time to be at work, and as
He might, begin his active office here:
A true Forerunner, who does leap unborn;
Unto his Lords strange Day, a wondrous Morn.
90.
But mark that Knot of buisie Jewels there,
Whose cheerly Looks do some good News proclaim:
The Infant's born, and those his Kinstolks are,
At's Circumcision. But about his Name
A kind dispute arose what it should be:
All these will have it none but Zachary.
91.
His holy Fathers Name will sit most fair
Upon the Son, say they, who now does rise
The long expected and miraculous Heir,
From whom may flow a Brood of Zacharies.
Whence should a princely Eaglets title be
Drawn, but from his own noble Family.
92.
O no, the Mother cries, mis-call him not,
His Name, before himself, conceived was:
(...) wise Heaven best understands what
Title will fit its Gifts: For me, alas,
So much my Spouses Name I love, that none
I would prefer, But Heaven has chosen John,
93.
So hot the loving quarrel grew, that now
To Zacharies decision they run.
See where he writes: that golden leaf does show
The Oracles Resolve, His Name is John.
In what fair equipage those Letters stand!
For Mary's fingers here did guide his hand.
94.
No sooner had his Pen dropped that sweet Name
But his long-froazen Tongue again was thawn:
For Gabriel (though undiscerned) came
And loosed the chain which he on it had thrown.
The Prisoner glad of this Release, does dance,
And with inspired Lays his Joys advance.
95.
Behold his Friends in that admiring Throng,
Whose Eyes and Hands Amazement lifts so high,
To see at length his dead and burted Tongue
Revive, and yield a vocal Progente
Of holy Praise: thus strangely answering
That Birth which did from his (...) Body spring.
96.
That fethered, and parti-colored Thing
Who at her big-swolln Mouth a Trump does hold,
And hastens hence with ready stretched Wing,
Is noble Fame, which posteth to unfold
These Miracles in such commanding sound
As may both through all ears and hearts rebound.
97.
Look where she is perched now upon yonder Hill,
And from that lofty Pulpit round about
Does all the Quarters of Judea fill
With stranger News than thither ever was brought.
Thus John, who came to be a Voice, speaks high
First in his Flathers Tongue, then in Flames Cry.
98.
But there the sceen is changed, where Desolation
The sole Inhabitant is, except that one
Poor Ermite, who chose his tame Habitation
Amid'st its Wildness: that plain thing is John.
It Is strange how Mary Jewels taught to seem
So vile a Garb, as she has put on him.
99.
That Cincture stands but for a lethern Thong,
That Vestment for a Coat of Camells hair:
No other Wardrobe did to Him belong
But what upon his simple self he bare.
No other riches will I own, said he,
But only to be rich in Poverty.
100.
I Will rob no Ermyn of its dainty skin
To make mine own grow proud: No Cloth of gold
To me shall dangerous emulation win;
I live to live, I live not to be sold,
And therefore shall be fine enough if I
Be dressed but in the robes of Modesty.
101.
Let scarlets Blush the guilty Court array,
Let wanton silk smile on the Gallants back;
Let linen soft and pure as snow, go lay
Its own on those who other Witness lack;
My Bravery must be, an Eye to please
Which sees no beauty in such things as these.
102.
Let gaudy Fashion-mongers every day
Mis-shape themselves, and vex their giddy Brain
To see some novell Cut or Garb which they
Were never yet disfigured with: in vain
Striving to catch the Fashion, which is still
Like Phebe's face, but one day at the full.
103.
My Fashion constant as my Nature is,
Which taught me it: Nor is the Sun midway
His Race, ever I have traveled through my Dress,
That East does open mine Eyes, which opes the Day,
And I arrayed am as soon's the Sun
Who have none but my Bed-cloaths to put on.
104.
This hairie Covering is my only Bed,
My shirt, my cloak, my gown, my everything.
When over it these several Names I read,
His furniture I well can spare the King,
The tumult of whose store does scarce supply
All things so fit as my Epitomy.
105.
See thou that bubling Crystal Psyche, there?
That spring's the living Cellar of the Saint,
Thence daily does he draw his Virgin-beer,
And makes his Blood with those cool streams acquaint.
Cool streams indeed, yet such as best agree
With the most fervent Flames of Piety.
106.
His common Diet those poor Locusts are;
And when he feasts, his Mouth he lifts but up
And straight those courteous Trees, (...) mend his Fare,
Sincerest Honey into it do drop:
And dining thus, he holds not down his face,
Till he to Heaven has paid his sweeter Grace.
107.
Here with himself He did converse: a rare
And painful thing when Men in Crowds do dwell,
Where upon those who crowd them still they stare
Having no space to see themselves, until,
Well skilled in all their Neighbour-company,
But unacquainted with themselves, they die.
108.
The rest of his Acquaintance all were high,
Beyond his Eyes reach, but within his Hearts:
For with what speed the Lightning down does fly
Through every stage of Heaven this upward darts
Nor will its sprightfull journey bounded be
By any Rampart but Immensitie.
109.
At God it (...), nor ever fails to hit
Its blessed Mark, whither on Prayers Wings
Or Contemplation's it takes its flight:
And there with busy Angels ranked, it sings,
Admires, adores, and studies to forget
There is a Breast below which look's for it.
110.
How often has his fainting Body made
Complaint of his injurious Piety!
How often has it cried, I am betrayed,
My life and spirits all away do fly,
And smile in Heaven, whilst I below am left
To live this Death, of death and life bereft.
111.
That Cave his Palace was, both safe and strong
Because not kept by jealous Door nor Bar:
Those Groves his Gardens, where he walked among
The Family of Dread, yet knew no fear.
Fear's proper Region and Dominion is
A guilty Breast, more than a Wilderness.
112.
Those Bears, those Boars, those Wolves, whose irefull face
Strikes Terror into other Mortal Eyes,
With friendly Mildness upon him did gaze,
As on old Adam in calm Paradise.
They slandered are with Salvagenesse; No spleer
They owe to Man, but only unto Sin.
113.
So wild, so black, and so mis-shap'd a Beast
Is Sin, that other Monsters it do hate
As a more monstrous thing then they, and cast
About how to revenge it: But the Gate
And Looks of Purity so reverend are,
That dreadful Beasts wait upon it with fear.
114.
The beams of this Angelick Life at last
Broke out and summoned in the Admiration
Of all the Country: Man, that runder Beast,
Convinc d by these Examples, learned their fashion.
Behold that thronging Rout which hither flies;
See how they stare, and scarce believe their Eyes.
115.
These Deserts nothing less than such do seem,
Being crowded from themselves, and now become
Judea's Towns, and fair Jerusalem
Which hither have removed their populous Home.
What now has John lost by his private Cell,
To which whole Towns and Cities flock to dwell?
116.
And having now so fair an Auditory,
The noble Ermite is resolved to Preach
Behold, says, he, the Dawn of that great Glory
Which to behold, the Patriarks did reach
Their Necks and Eyes through many a shady thing
In your Horizon, now begins to spring,
117.
O fail ye not to meet his spotless Beams
With undefiled Hearts, for such is He,
And will Baptize you with refined streams
Of searching Fire. Then first be Washed by Me;
My Water for His Fire will you prepare,
As must your Tears for this my Water here.
118.
Observ'st thou Psyche, how that silver stream
Its limpid self does through the Girdle wind:
This Jordan is, look how the People seem
At strife who first should enter in, to find
A better Baptism in those floods, which may
Their fruitless Legal Washings wash away.
119.
But mark Who stands there: how sweet his Eye,
How delicate and how divine his Face
Embellished with heart-conquering Majesty!
Were thou to choose thy Spouse, would thou not place
Thy soul on Him? It Is He: o no, it is
As much of him as Jewels can express,
120.
To be Baptized, but not made clean, comes He
Who is more spotless than that living Light
Which gilds the Crest of Heavens Sublimity:
He comes to be Baptized, and wash white
Baptism it self, that it henceforth from Him
And his pure Touch, with Purity may swim.
121.
As when amongst a gross ignoble Crowd
Of Flints and Pebles, and such earth-bred Stones,
An heav'n-descended Diamond does shroud
Its Lustres brave ejaculations.
Although it scapes the test of Vulgar Eyes,
Yet a wise Jeweller the Gem descries:
122.
So John his Master straight discovered;
And Heaven forbid that worthless I, cries He,
Should wash a thing more bright then it, and shed
These less clean Waters upon mighty Thee.
Dear Lord, my great Pollutions bid Me fall
Prostrate, and unto thee for Baptism call.
123.
If I be Lord thy gentle Spouse replies,
Pay then thy Duty to my first Injunction,
It must be so. This Mandate did suffice
The Saint, and He submits to his high Function.
Cast but thine Eye a little up the stream,
Wading in Crystal there thou see them.
124.
Old Jordan smiled receiving such high Pay
For those small Pains obedient he had spent
Making his pliant Waves open a dry Way
When numerous Israel into Canaan went.
Nor does he envy now Pactolu's streams,
Nor Eastern Floods, whose Paths are paved with Gems.
125.
The Waves came crowding one upon another
Unto their Lord their chaste Salute to give:
Each one did chide and justle back his Brother,
And with contentious foaming murmur strive
To kiss its Maker, and more spotless grow
Than from its Virgin spring it first did flow.
126.
But those most happy Drops the Baptist cast
Upon his Saviors head, returned with Joy,
And to the Wealthy Ocean making haste,
Amazed the Treasures which there heaped lay.
The Deeps looked up, and opened their richest Breast
To make these Guests a correspondent Nest.
127.
See there thy Spouse is on the Bank, and more
Than Heaven come down, and pitched upon his Head:
That snowie Dove which perched heretofore
High on the all-illustrious Throne of God,
Has chose this seat, nor thinks it a Descent
Upon such terms to leave the Firmament.
128.
And Heaven well witnessed this strange truth, which at
That wondrous instant opened its mouth, and cried,
This is my Darling Son, in whom are set
All my Joys Jewels. O how far and wide
That Voice did fly, on which each Wind caught hold
And round about the World the Wonder told.
129.
This business done, to Court the Baptist goes,
Where lusty Sins, as well as Herod reign:
Long Sanctity had made him fit with those
Proud Enemies a Combat to maintain.
He who does nothing but his Maker fear,
Against all Monsters may proclaim a War.
130.
Behold how Pomp besots great Herod there:
O what impostumes of fond Majesty
Pride puffs into his face! Dares there appear
A Censor now a just Truth to apply
Home to the King, and tell him that his Eyes
Should rather swell with Tears, his Breast with sighs?
131.
Yes: there the Heav'n-embraved Baptist is,
Who fears not, but pittieth to see
A Prince made subject to vile Wickedness.
Great Sir, the Match unlawful is, cries He:
O far be it from Kings to break the Law
For whose Defense so strong their Scepters grow.
132.
Since to thine own Commands just duty Thou
Expect'st from these thy subjects; Let thy Neck
Not scorn to thine own Makers yoke to bow.
The Precedent may dangerous prove, and wrack
Thy Throne and Kingdom, if thy People read
Such stat and high Rebellion in their Head.
133.
Thy Brothers Wife to Him as near is ti'd,
As He himself: o tear Him not in sunder:
You murder Him alive if you divide
His Heart, all one with Hers: The worst of Plunder
Is Mercy if compared with this, which does
By tearing off one Half, unravell both.
134.
God, who has this Enclosure made, and Her
To Philip given, still has left to thee
And thy free choice, an open Champain, where
Millions of sweet and Virgin Beauties be.
Adorn thy Bed with any one beside,
Only thy Brothers must not be thy Bride,
135.
Must not! the Adulteress cried (for she was by)
Whither is Herod, or that Youngling King!
And shall the Acts of awful Majesty
Be flouted by this upstart prattling Thing?
O that my bodkin had his Tongue to bore!
I Would make it sure for preaching me a Whore.
136.
Be thou content, my Dear, the King replies,
I will reveng thy Wrong, for it is mine own.
Rebellions fiery Boils may likelier rise
From his envenomed Words, against my Crown,
Then from our spotless Match; which Heaven long bless!
Hale him to prison, he shall smart for this.
137.
(Unhappy Truth, how comes vain Flattery
To be more gracious at Court then thou,
Who might secure and prosper Majesty,
Whilst that does Lies, and Trapps, and Poisons strew!
Is it because sometimes thou rubb'st the sore,
Or, that thou naked art, and meek, and Poor?)
138.
Deep in the Cities Bottom sunk there was
A Goal where Darkness dwelt, and Desolation:
Through all the Towns proud Taunts enforced to pass
The Saint is thrust into this Habitation:
Where strait the noisome Mire does him begirt,
Much like a Gem, by Swine trod in the Dirt.
139.
Yet these dead Walls, with stones almost as hard
As that which for a Heart did serve the King,
Him only in a straiter Desert barred,
For his high Contemplation still did bring
Heavens latitude into those straits, and swell
With Angels and with God, that lesser Hell.
140.
This is his noble Company, and He
In his strict Goal more freedom does enjoy
Than follish Herod, though his Tetrarchie
To all his loose Desires wide opes a Way.
Sin is the foulest Prison, and in this
Not John, but Herod the close Prisoner is.
141.
Yet Herod thinks not so: (what pity it is
That Thought and Fancy thus the scale should sway.
And ponderous Reasons sober solidnesse
Cast as a light and frothie thing away!)
For rid of this same galling Preacher, He
Judges himself and all his Pleasures free,
142.
And in that freedom means to celebrate
That Day which Him released from Mothers Womb:
To crown the Meeting with majestic State,
His glistering Nobles all to Court must come,
That Men might in the splendour of each Guest
Read his magnificence who makes the Feast.
143.
Luxurious choice of every kind of Beast
Was hither brought: No Bird so dear and rare,
But it was fetched from its highest Nest,
To build in some quaint Pie or Platter here.
To Noah's Ark scarce came a thicker Crowd
For life, then to be slain there hither flowed.
144.
With Earth and Air, the Sea must help to trim
A more than Springtide superfluity:
Large shoals of wanton Fishes here must swim
In aromatic ponds of Spicerie;
That Herod's ominous Birthday forth may bring
Death unto almost every kind of Thing.
145.
Ambition was the Steward of the Feast.
The Cook and Cater both, was Luxury:
Lust tempered the gallant Sauce, and dressed
The choice inflaming Dainties of the Sea.
Lo there the King is with his Nobles set,
And all the crowded Table smokes with meat.
146.
Intemperance attended on the Board,
And crowned with sparkling Wine the foaming Cup.
The Kings Health first went round, which every Lord
Drowning his own in it, hasts to drink up;
And prays, He may behold as many years,
As Dishes on the Board, or in Heaven Stars.
147
The next's the Queens. But then Bowl after Bowl
They to their femall Idols poured down,
So monstrous were those Draughts, that the Wines Soul
Had now all theirs subdued, and was grown
King of them and their Prince: who, belching, cries,
Enough of this: Come now lets feast our Eyes.
148.
For he the young Herodias had spied;
Whose face no sooner dawned in the Hall,
But an enchanting meretricious Tide
Of Sweets and Graces overflowed them all.
Her beauteous Looks and Dress redoubled be,
Because her fond Spectators double see.
149.
No Siren ever on the waterie Stage
Did act so true a false but lovely part
The gazeing careless Seaman to engage
In the delicious shipwreck of his heart:
Nor e're was Sea so dangerous and deep
As in this Damsells treacherous Breast did sleep.
150.
Behold her there: What studied Neglect
Upon her shoulders pours her Tresses down:
How is her Breast with Gems allurements decked,
Yet winns more eyes and wishes by its own:
That speaking Nakedness, if self commends,
And lustful Fancies something further sends.
151.
The rest of her Attire, so thin and light,
With gorgeous hypocrisy does lay
More open what it would deny the sight,
And whilst it stopps, invites into, the way.
About she swimms; and by a courtly Dance,
Her other beauties price she does enhance.
152.
All eyes and hearts tripp'd after Her, as she
About the Hall her graceful motions measures.
No nimble Turn could in the (...) be
But Herod's brains turned too: who by these pleasures
Again grown drunk, unto his (...) does
Give ease, by vomiting a full-mouthed oath.
153.
By Heaven, and my own Majesty, he cries,
This Dance, sweet Daughter must not want reward:
For never Venus traversed the skies
With a more soule-commanding Galiard.
Let thy Demand be high; for though it be
Half of my throne, I hold it due to thee.
154.
But then the Queen, whose thirst not all the Wine
At that great Feast could quench, unless it were
Brewed with the Blood of John, (...) soon incline
Her Daughter to request this Boon for her.
I never shall think, said the, that Herod is
Mine, or his Kingdoms Head, whilst John wears his.
155.
Thou know my Wrongs, and with what pain I wear
The name of Whore, which He has on me pinned:
Help then my righteous Vengance on, and tear
Away this Grief which gnaws thy Mothers mind.
This was enough: back flies the Damsel, and
Thus sweetens o'r her barbarous Demand.
156.
O may the King for ever live, and reign,
And blessed be this undeserved Day
Wherein thine Handmaid does such favor gain,
That half thy Kingdom shall not say me nay;
For real is thy royal Word: But why
Should a poor Maids ambition tower so high?
157.
Indeed that Promise did become the King,
That like thy self thy Bounty might appear.
But Heaven forbid that I, so vile a thing,
Thy scepters Glories should in sunder tear,
And break mine Arm with half of that Command
Whose Total is too little for thy Hand,
158.
A slender Gift more equal Pay will be
To my Desert: Let me but have my Will
Over one wretched Worm, which gnaweth thee
And thy whole Stock: So let the King fulfill
His royal Word, by giving Me that Head
Whose Tongue deflour'd yours and my Mothers Bed.
159.
Alas, the King replies, what have I done!
O that my Kingdom might my Word recall!
How shall I help thee now, unhappy John,
Who in my Promise preached thy Funeral!
Thy careless Tongue at first thee Prisoner made,
And my rash lips have thee to death be trayd.
160.
O that to day my Lords had not been here
The solemn Witnesses of my great Vow!
Must Death intrude, and its sad Warrant bear
Date upon this my joyous Birthday! How
Shall Lun-snarle my Promise, and contrive
That both mine Honor and the Saint may live!
161.
Both cannot live, I see; O that I were
Some private Man, that so I might be free
Of my repute! but Princes Honors are
The Peoples too, and by Community
I should make all the Body perjured
If I my self prove so, who am their Head.
162.
And must John die? Bear witness All how loath
This Word does fall from my constrained Lip,
To recompense the too too hasty Oath
Which from Imprudence, not from Me, did slip.
Then take his Head: Yet never say that I
Issued this Warrant, but Necessity.
163.
Thus strove the Tyrant by a comely Lie
To veil the Visage of his hideous Hate,
For fear the Damsel by his privity
Might seem to have contrived the Baptists fate:
Whilst dreading his unlawful Vow to break,
Adultery He does with Murder back.
164.
Was it not plain that his outrageous Vow
Did prostitute but half his Realm? and why
Must the blood thirsty Hypocrite bestow
More than the Whole? What Prodigality
Is this, mad Herod? For John's Head alone
Is worth more than thy Kingdom, or thine own.
165.
Lo there the last Dish of great Herod's Feast,
The Martyrs Head in a fair Charger laid:
He smiles within, though clouds his face o'r-cast,
And feeds his soul on it. But the proud Maid
Knowing her Mother by this Death would live,
In triumph takes the Dish, and takes her leave.
166.
The Royal Beldame in suspense did wait
To reap her spightfull Stratagems event.
But when she saw the bloody Present, straight
Grown young with Salvage Joy, her high Content
She to her dancing Daughter does display
In her own tripping and lascivious way.
167.
Then much like some she-Bear, whose long-wish'd Prey
Is fallen at last into her hungry Paws:
She tears the sacred Lips, and rends a Way
Unto the reverend Tongue; which our she draws,
And then with peevish Wounds and scornful Jests
Her Womanish Revenge on it she Feasts.
168.
But mark that Convoy of illustrious Light
Which seems from this low World to make such haste:
The better part of John there takes its flight
Unto a greater Kings than Herod's Feast:
That Goal, his Body, and this World, were three
Prisons to Him, who now from all is free.
169.
The Patriarks and Prophets all gave way
When they this greater Saint approaching saw,
Who now his blessed Harbor does enjoy
For those fierce Storms he grappled with below;
And sweetlier rests in Abraham's bosom, then
In the adulterous Kings the lustful Queen.
170.
This is the Story which the Virgin Mother
Has round about thy Girdle made to live.
But mark this well, my Psyche, it is that other
Selected Jewel which thy Spouse did give
To crown the rest, and tie up all the story
In one divine Epitomie of glory.
171.
Divided 'twixt amazement and delight,
The Virgin read the strange Embroyderie:
But when on that last Gem she fixed her sight,
Immortal Joys so swelled her soul, that she
Runs over with delicious Tears, and cries,
Come Phylax come, gird me with Paradise.
172.
Content, said He, but then be sure to shrink
And hugg your self alone within your self:
The Girdle's wondrous strait, nor must you think
That any supernumerary Pelf
Can find a room in this rich mansion, where
The outward Walls of solid Jewels are.
173.
This said: before her self was well a ware,
He closely buckled it about her Heart.
Straight she complains: Oh, spare me Phylax spare
My squeased soul, least from her self she start.
O loose the Buckle! if the time be come
That I must die, at least afford me room.
174.
Must I be girt to death, and not have space
To fetch one parting sigh before I die?
O me, whose sins have made my Spouse embrace
Me with imbroidered Tortures, so that I
The riddle of unhappy Maids, must go
In travel with more than a Mothers Woe.
175.
And so she did indeed: Such matchless Throws
And Pangs did sting her in her straightened Heart;
Till at the length she brings forth, and shows
Her wondering self the reason of her smart,
Whilst from her laboring Breast she pressed sees
A shapelesse Lump of foul Deformities.
176.
Imperfect Embryo's, unformed Lust,
Pin-fethered Fancies, and halfe-shap'd Desires,
Dim Dawns of Fondness, doubtful seeds of Rust,
Glimmering Embers of corruptive Fires,
Scarce something, and yet more than Nothing, was
That mystic Chaos, that dead-living Mass.
177.
O how tormenting is the Parturition
Of tender souls, when they unload themselves
Of their blind night-conceiv'd Bratts of perdition!
How do the peevish and reluctant Elves
(Mad with their own birth,) viperously contend
The laboring bowels of the Heart to rend!
178.
This makes Faint-hearted Mortals often prefer
The sad Reversion of eternal Pain
Before this Conflicts Pangs: So they may hear
A quiet Truce with all their sins maintain,
They are content, though Hell must with their Grave
Set open its Mouth, and Them as sure receive.
179.
Psyche delivered of that monstrous Birth
Now finds her Girdle fit and easy grown,
Affording room for all the Train of Mirth,
With which her Bosom now was over-flown.
She viewed the Newborn Thing, and viewing smiled
Not out of love, but hate unto the Child.
180.
As one from blind Cimmeria newly come,
Beyond his own ambition, into
Arabia's blessed Fields, and finding room
Both for his eyes and joys, does wondering go
Over those spicely Paths, and thinks that he
Does now no less begin to live, then see.
181.
So overjoyed she admired now
The glorious Day new risen in her Breast,
Where carnal Clouds before would not allow
A constant beam to dwell; but over-cast
Her so, that laboring she had much ado
To spy her Heaven, and see which way to go.
182.
For now her soul was clearer than the face
Of fair Aurora washed in Eastern streams:
Unspotted Thoughts flocked in to take their place
In her pure Heart, which now a Garden seems
Of Lilies planted on warm Bedds of Snow,
Through which Gods Spirit does gales of Odours blow.
183.
All Sublunary Sweets she has forgot,
Nor thinks this bitter World can breed such things.
All Beauties to her Eye are but one Blot:
The Bees to her are nothing else but stings:
All Loves are Hate; all Dalliance, Vexation;
All Blandishments, but Poison in the Fashion.
184.
For by this Girdle she his Prisoner is
In whose alone she reads the Name of Love;
And in the Languishments of softest Bliss,
By dainty Torments does her patience prove,
Crying at every sigh, O Jesu when
Shall I have lived this Death, and Life begin!
185.
What further business have I here below
With flesh and Blood, whose joys I relish not!
Who is the Conqueror of my Heart, but thou?
And since thy love this Victory has got,
Why must thy Captive not permitted be
To wait on thy triumphant Coach, and thee?
186.
Though for thy Royal Scorn I fitting be,
Yet why will thou thine own Choice disallow?
If I had still neglected been by thee,
This Body had not seemed my Dungeon now:
But why's this taste of Heaven unto me deigned,
If still to this dull Earth I must be chained?
187.
O that some courteous Dove to me would lend
Its fethered oars, that I my soul might row
Unto the Port of my Desires, and blend
It with the Tide of Bliss which there does flow!
I never thought that Earth so low did lie,
Or that the Heavens till now were half so high.
188.
O why art thou so lovely, if poor I
Must still live Exile from thy dearest sight!
This Token, Jesu, makes me louder cry
For thee thy self, who art more sweet and bright:
O what will thy Supreme Embraces be,
If this small Cincture thus has ravished me.
189.
I yield, I yield, great Lord: Why must thy Dart
Be always killing Me, yet never slay
My ever-dying still-surviving Heart!
Why must thy Flames which on my Bosom prey,
Still burn, but not consume; O why must I
Too, be no Mortal here, but with them vie?
190.
O Absence, never was there Present Hell
So true as thou unto its dismal Name!
O cruel Hope, which only do reveal
A tempting glimpse of light, but hid'st the Fame;
That so the sweetly-mocked Eye may be
Assured by that short sight, she does not see.
191.
Intolerable Joys why smart you so,
Pricking on my impatient Desires!
O Sighs, what means your Breath my Flames to blow!
O Tears, why must your Waters quench my Fires!
Dear Girdle help Me: If thou should be slack,
Soon would my over-burdned Heart Strings crack.
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO IV. The Rebellion.
ARGUMENT.
Galled with severe Devotions constant Yoke
The Senses, and the Passions rebel:
Having the Spirit of Pride for General took,
By fair-tongu'd Treason they with Psyche deal.
Reason's surprised and into Prison thrown.
The Will revolts, and Psyche's left alone.
1.
PRosperity, how false art thou unto
Thy blessed Name, who with a comely Cheat
Unwary Hearts so potently do woo
That thine all-rotten Bottom they forget,
And think thy Foot sure on a Rock does stand,
Whilst thy Foundation is the fruitless sand.
2.
The Day which smiled so briskly in the Morn
And left no frown in all the face of Heaven,
Ever night has often been made the Prey and Scorn
(...) swarthy Clouds, so furiously driven,
That Phebu's stoutest help was all in vain
When he the gaudie sky strove to maintain.
3.
The Sea, in looks demure, and pleasant dress,
Has often bid the Mariner been bold:
When straight an unsuspected storm does press
Through the lamenting Air, till having rolled
Into a foaming Mount the monstrous Deep,
In brine it buries the presumptious ship.
4.
Eternal Change does wheel all Heaven about:
What Patent then can seal Security
To things below? How does proud Fortune flout
The gayest Confidence which foolish We
Are not afraid to build: but vainly trust
Our Hopes are firm, whilst we our selves are Dust.
5.
Weak Dust, on which the least Wind domineers
Which through this Clime of mortal Life does blow:
A life, which if not fortified by Fears
And wise suspicions, to all storms does bow:
A life so treacherous in its friendliest Hue,
That Saints themselves have found its falsensse true.
6.
Whilst Psyche feasteth her luxuriant Heart
With amorous Tortures, and does day by day
Riot and surfeit in delicious smart,
Which relish sweeter to her soul than they,
Who both their late and early studies spent
To cherrish Her with Natural Content.
7.
A knot of Friends with Her together born,
And under one soft Roof of the same skin
Tenderly nourished, stomack'd much the scorn
She heaped on them, who thought their only sin
Was too much love to her; a Crime which might
More pardon challenge than Revenge invite.
8.
It Is true, said they, that we her servants be:
And yet as truly are her sisters too:
Had our original Seniorite
Its native privilege, We all should go
Before, and she the Youngling, come behind:
Sure she should not have found Us so unkind.
9.
But now sh' has chanced to get the upper Hand,
She makes Us feel it in her Tyranny.
So Upstarts use to do where they command,
Being to weak to weild their Royalty.
Like paltrie Currents, which swollen high, do pour
More Rage than sober streams about the shore.
10.
We must not eat, nor drink, nor sleep, nor play,
But when she lists: and o how seldom's that!
Great business she pretends both night and day,
Employed about nor We nor She knows what.
It tickles Her, but hard on Us does grate,
She calls it Love, but we all find it Hate,
11.
Yet be it what it will, what is that to Us
Who are not bound Her humors to fulfill
With our own Ruin? Since Her stomach thus
Is wild and rampant, why should we sit still
With desperate Patience, till we be undone?
What need we fear Her? We are Five to One.
12.
As when the imprisoned Fire in earth below
Vexed with those straits, begins to move and swell,
Its dungeon first it shakes, then forth does blow
Its full-mouthed indignation, and fill
The World with Tumult, tearing down the Trees,
Dismounting Mountains, plowing up the Seas:
13.
So did their sullen murmur gather strength
Still day by day, by mutinous degrees,
Boiling to such impatience, that at length
By flat Rebellion they resolve to ease
Their overcharged stomachs; and one day
All met at Council, thus their Griefs display:
14.
'Twas in an upper Chamber, dark and close,
Arched with thin Ivorie: For their common seat
A white and soft and living Counch they chose,
And there the The Common Sense,
Master of the House entreat
To hear their public Case. Content, said he,
It Is just I to my Friends should friendly be.
15.
The large Supplies of all my store I owe
To your unwearied Care and Pains, which bring
Plenty of all Varieties that grow
In Heaven, or Earth, or Sea: the welthiest King
Could not outvie that furniture which You
To crown my Table daily did allow.
16.
But now, alas, I see my Tribut's thin:
Some Lazy sullen melancholic things
Do now and then come hither sneaking in;
But all your brisk and cheerly Offerings
Are intercepted; and it is well that you
Begin, else I had been the Plantiff now.
17.
They all were glad to hear their Censor speak
In their own discontented Dialect:
But straight their fond Ambitions did awake
A strife who should begin: In high neglect
Of all her Sisters, The Sense of Seeing
Opsis knits her brows
And darts of indignation on them throws.
18.
Who is your Queen but I, who sit, said she,
Exalted high upon my double Throne,
Whilst all your Motions regulated be
By my Imperial Direction:
Blind Fools, what could you do, were not for Me,
In setting on our brave Conspiracy?
19.
That proud Word from her Mouth no sooner flew,
But Of Smelling.
Osphresis in scorn did snuff it up:
Enraged Of Tasting
Geusis bit her lips, which grew
So big with boiling wrath, she scarce could stop
Her Tongue from railing Vengance: Of Hearing.
Acoe
Pricked up her ears, and looked as big as she.
20.
But irefull Of Touching
Haphe less could rule her pride,
Imperious Dame, cried she, how dare thou
Who in two little tender Cells are ti'd,
Such saucie scorn on all thy Sisters throw?
Do thou not plainly see my Empire spread
Through all the Body, even from Foot to Head?
21.
Do I not domineer in and about
Thy total self? would not this single Nail
Sufficient be to tear your Queenship out
From both your Thrones? Alas, should I assail
Thee with two wretched Motes, they would suffice
To damp that Day in which thou prid'st thine Eyes,
22.
Thus is Rebellion always Quarrelsome
Even with it self. Had not their Judge made haste
To stifle their Contention in the womb,
Flat War had been brought forth: But in he cast
His peremptory Sentence: Hold, said He,
I in my House must have you all agree.
23.
This is the Main, how small so ever it seems,:
Whether all your several winding Courses tend:
Here do you pour in your concurrent streams,
And in this Sea of Sense your Rivers blend:
A Sea where never storm arose as yet,
Far be it then, I now should suffer it.
24.
I love you All, and if it could but be,
Would wish that every One might be supreme.
It Is true what noble Haphe says, and she
Most like my self does Universal seem:
Yet she is of a courser mixture, and
As well as highest, does the lowest stand.
25.
But gallant Opsis sprightfull is, and bright,
The glass or Heaven above, and Heaven below.
Her seat's completely highest, and the Right
Of her Precedence her Beams do show.
She Is all your Candle, and before must go:
Even your own Interest requires it so.
26.
Condemned Haphe to this Sentence paid
Scornful obedience, vowing not to speak
At all, or be the last. But straight arrayed
In joyous Aspect, Opsis did awak
Her richest sweets, to let her sisters see
What cause she had to scorn their Poverty.
27.
Yet what means Joy to smile in these mine Eyes
Said she, so long as Psyche Domineers
And makes them worse than Blind? Could it suffice
Her now and then to set abroach my Tears,
'Twere tolerable: but alas poor I
Must in my sorrows always steeping lie.
28.
The Ocean with less Constancy does throw
Its Tide of Salt upon the troubled shore,
Than from my Springs the streams are forced to flow
And down my scalded Cheeks their Billows pour.
O why must here be everlasting Brine,
Whilst all Tides else do know an Ebb but mine!
29.
Yet were these Floods found needful to make clean
Mine Eyes and me, I would not think them dear:
But what Crime stains Us? Is It that we have seen
All Beauties round about the Hemispheer?
What were We made for else? Alas that we
For our Creations End must guilty be.
30.
More justly Psyche Articles might draw
Against that God on whom she fawneth so.
Is It not by His irrefragable Law,
That through all Visibility we go?
Bold Hypocrite who her own faults does thus
Reveng upon her God by torturing Us.
31.
Are not the Eyes those universal Glasses
In which the World does fairly copied lie?
Man for a Microcosme by favor passes,
But in a blind and duskie Mystery:
I am the only faithful Mirror, where
All things in their true colors painted are.
32.
Nay Psyche too, although her mixture be
Pure and spiritual, knows not how to hide
Her subtle self from my Discovery:
She by these Windows easily is descri'd,
Whether she wakes or sleeps, or rests or moves,
Whether she sighs or smiles, or hates or loves.
33.
Sure would proud she deign to observe how I
Am framed and seated, she could not despise
The manifest and secret Majesty
Which does both compass, and compose mine Eyes.
But she is angry, and does plainly prove
That Hate is also blind, as well as Love.
34.
Were it not so, she might discern this Brow,
The princely Arch which roofs my Habitation:
In which as resolute Disdain does grow
As she can dart at it: This is the fashion
Of the fair world above, whose radiant Eye
The upper Orbs have arched with Majesty.
35.
Those double Doors, whose hinges are my Will,
Both shut and open without pain and noise:
Else could they not catch tender Sleep, which still
Is coy and shie, and flies from every Voice.
These are my East and West; My Day by these
Does rise and set, as often as I please.
36.
At either Gate a double Guard of Pikes
With pressed attendance stands both night and day,
Which gives admission unto those it likes,
But to injurious Guests shuts up the way.
Right trusty Hairs; whose faithful Fear, to Me
Breeds no Dishonor, but Security.
37.
Full is my House of nimble Servants, who
Their diligent selves in all my Business stretch,
Which way soever I desire to go
With sweet activity they thither reach.
No Princes steeds with greater speed or ease
Devour their way, than I am rolled by these.
38.
Six precious Curtains close embrace my Bed
Where I in dainty state inshrined lie:
The Adnate Tunicle is outmost spread
Which does protection to the rest supply,
And in her bosom shroud both them and me
From hasty Motions importunity.
39.
The next, a Corneous Veil, both firm and bright;
My natural Lantern, whose diaphanous side
As it transmits, so it preserves the Light
By which the Body and my self I guide.
No Time can spend this Lamp, no boistrous storm
Can puff it out, or breath it any harm.
40.
The third of Grapes, soft polished Coat is made,
Yet with a gentle Roughness lined within,
Through which all kinds and tribes of Colors trade
And traffic with the inner Chrystalline:
The doubtful skin of Polypus did never
Slide through such various Looks as sport it here.
41.
This opes a Casement to the Pupil, which
My gaudy Iris round about does dress
With perfect beauties, shaming all those rich
Streaks of the Heaven above, which can express
Only the semi-glories of a Bow,
Mine does a fair and total Circle show.
42.
The fourth's that tender Membran which does kiss
And hugg the tenderer Pupil: when the Light
Looks with full court'sie on the Eye, then this
Opes wide to meet and drink it in: when Night
Does draw her sable Curtains over Heaven,
This does the Pupil shrink into its Even,
43.
The fifth of Crystal is, soft, warm, and thin,
Found no where but in my rich Treasury;
This is that noblest Glass of Life, wherein
Things living live again, and things which lie
Dead every where beside, enlivened be,
And trip about with brisk activity.
44.
The sixt's a Texture of so fine a thread
That neat Arachne did the Spinster seem,
Whose matchless Artifice so clear is read
In every Line, that thence it takes its name:
We called Aranea, a Net whereby
I catch the purest-winged Beams that fly.
45.
Besides, such precious Humors I contain
As me adorn with richer purity,
Than does the boundless jewell-paved Main
Its Empress Thetis: She in all her Sea
Is but of one salt-roy'led liquor Queen,
But I of three, all thrice-refin'd and clean.
46.
That which does outmost smile, is Waterie,
The spotless Cover of a purer thing,
For under it does liquid Crystal lie
Couched on a Bed almost as ravishing
As its illustrious Self, a molten Bed
Of gentle Glass, upon the bottom spread.
47.
And in the Mirror of this triple Spring
All sorts of sprightfull forms delight to play;
The mystic shapes of every kind of Thing
Close molded in a soft and unseen Ray
On Instant's posting wings do hither fly
And dive into these Deeps of Purity.
48.
Who knows not that great Love tak's from the Eye
His Ammunition, Qaiver, Bow, and Darts,
And winns by that soft-fierce Artillery
His mighty Principality of Hearts!
Had He himself had Eyes, what might He not
Have done who has such power by others got?
49.
These my domestike Beauties are But see
My outward equal Store: With that she bid
Her Princely Train march forth, When instantly
A silver Globe rolled in, embellished
With gilded stars, which round about did turn,
And wheel from Even through all the Night to Morn.
50.
This done: a dusky Veil she threw aside
And through a roseall East let open the Day:
The Sun gat up, and as the Globe did glide,
Speeded into the West his Golden way:
Where red and hot with his long journey, He
Entered the cool Bath of the Atlantic Sea.
51.
Then came the blustering Winds, and on their back
Brought laboring Clouds: some poured out Hail and Snow,
Some spit forth Lightning through a thundering Crack,
Some with more peaceful showers of Rain did flow,
Some dropped down monstrous Vermin, some a stood
Of not-desired Corn, some squeas'd out blood.
52.
But then the Spring came blooming in, arrayed
With fragrant Green, whose sweet Embroidery
Were Budds of Virgin smiles, which there displayed
A sceen of living Joys, all echoed by
Ten thousand Birds which perched on every Tree
Tuned their soft Pipes to Natures harmony.
53.
Yet underneath, with higher gallantry,
The Peacock strutted, whose expanded Train
Enammelled with gorgeous Majesty
Did Heavens bright Model represent again:
Yet that Bowls wincking Eyes could not express
So full a Proof of Heaven, as flamed in these.
54.
Summer came next with her own Riches crowned
A wreath of Flowers upon her goodly Head;
Full sheaves of golden store did her surround
And all her way with wholesome Plenty spread,
Where as she went, no Tree but reached his At
(For it was hot) to shade her Head from harm.
55.
Then followed Autumn, with her Bosom full
Of every Fruit which either tempts the Eye
Or charms the Taste: Here Wantonness might cull
And weary grow: Here wide-mouthed Luxury
Might gormandize her fill, and with far more
Ease her own Lust devour, than spend this store.
56.
At last came drooping Winter slowly on,
For Frost hung heavy on his heels; the Year
Looked old and pale in him, and almost gone.
He quaked and shivered through his triple Furr,
For still what way soever He did creep
He Is to the knees in Snow at every step.
57.
For snow was all things now: and in this White,
The wanton World which all this while made sport
In Autumus, Summers, and in Springs delight,
Must (girded up by Ice) do penance for it.
This cold chaste strait-lac'd Garb will best repel
The Faults which those hot Seasons taught to swell
58.
This Pageant being past: up leaped upon
The stage a City, whose high-lifted Head
Threatened the Clouds with interruption:
What Art was here to Riches married!
How thick the Marble Spires and Towers stood
Shading the Houses with a stoney Wood;
59.
But like an awful Crown to all the rest
The Princes Palace mounted fair and high
Proclaimed by its double gilded Crest
Its own and its great Owners Majesty:
Yet was this outward Pomp but a course skin
To those rare Wonders which did shine within,
60.
Here was the Jewell-house, where naked lay
Such store of Gemms as might enrich the Sea:
There in the Wardrobe, in well-wrought array
Their sparkling Brethren were taught to be
The clothing of those Cloths Embroyderers had
To pride the back of scornful Courtship made.
61.
Here stood the Chequer, that great Temple where
The Worlds dear Idol in huge heaps did lie:
There was a Storehouse of the choice and rare
Productions found by Optics Industry:
The school of Admiration, and the shop
Of Miracles in Glasses treasured up.
62.
Here Men and Beasts and Birds were all of kin,
Being extracted from one common Womb,
Of the brave Proconnesian Marble Mine:
And where the Statuary wanted room,
The Painters livelier Lies did woo the Sight
To sport in his less cumbersome Delight.
63.
But in the Presence-chambers Ocean met
The Confluence of every royal thing:
A golden Throne on silver floor was set,
Which took new luster from the gorgeous King,
Who with his glittering Court surrounded was
As Phoebus with the rays of his own face.
64.
The Queen, both of his Kingdom and his Heart,
Beauties bright Triumph showed at his right Hand,
And did her sweet exuberance impart
Unto that maiden Circle which did stand
To wait and gaze on her, whose goodly Face
Was Wonders fairer Heaven, and Pleasures Glass.
65.
When Opsis by this pompous sight had drawn
Admiring smiles from her Spectators: I
A thousand such, said she, could soon have shown,
Had I ripp'd up my total Treasury.
And these those Offerings are my scorned Eyes
To Psyche gave, who them and me defies.
66.
Unto some blurred Prayer Book she ties
My spotless sight with endless slavery:
Or makes me stare so long upon the skies
That with dull seeing I forget to see.
She some pretense or other still does find
In mere devotion to make me blind
67.
The other Sunn when He has looked his Day,
Can go to bed and rest himself in Night:
But I, forsooth, at Even must go to Pray,
And watch her Candle till the Morning light.
Some comfort 'twere if I might but obtain
By all those Prayers, relief for my own pain.
68.
But since nor She, nor Heaven will Pity take,
What could oppressed, dying Opsis do
But force her final gasping Sighs to break
Into these just Complaints, great Sir, to you?
To which may you be deaf, if I appear
A Rebel still, and not Defendant here,
69.
She ending thus, impatient Acoe
Who thought her Sisters speech was much to long,
Stepped back unto their common Treasury
Kep't by The Memory
Anamnesis, (where lay the Throng
Of all their wealth) and bad her ready make
Her richest Train, whilst She its Prologe spoke.
70.
Hear Me, said She; and be this my reward
For hearing all things else: though many a Sound
Upon mine Ears has most unkindly jarr'd
Yet courteous entertainment still it found:
The like I crave; and do not you repine,
The first was Opsi's place, the next is mine.
71.
My House is secret; cautious winding ways
And privy Galleries lead into it:
By which abstruse state I my fame do raise
Higher than if my palace open were set.
Thus Jewels dwell within the Cavitie
Of Mother-Perl, and thus dwells Acoe.
72.
The outward Room's oblique, that violent Sounds
May manners learn, and not rush in too fast;
And narrow too, so to protect my Bounds
Which by no stealing Uermin must be passed
Yet if they venture, I have lime-twiggs there
To make them sure, tenacious Wax and Hair.
73.
And at this Chambers end does stand my Drumm
Made of a Parchment soft and thin and dry,
And ready corded. But the second Room
Is of my active Tools the Treasury:
My Hammers and my Anvils place is there,
By which I Forge all sounds I please to hear.
74.
By them three little busy Bones do lie,
Which when my Drumm is beat, articulate
Each breeding Noise and Voice which that way fly,
Just as the Teeth at prattling Lingua's Gate.
Indeed she only would be thought to make
The shapes of Words, but Acoe too can speak.
75.
Behind these two, a Third is built, whose frame
So busy is, and dubious, and full
Of Labyrinths, that thence it takes its Name:
Six Semicircles there hook in and pull
The Sound to every corner, that it may
Grow well acquainted e're it pass away.
76.
Next unto that, my most reserved Cell
Wreaths up its pliant self in privacy:
Have you not seen the Periwinkle shell
Rolled up about it self? Such folds has my
Dark Closet: whence I by a private slit
To thee, grave Censor, all my News transmit.
77.
If Psyche would but well consider this,
Sure she would deign me some respect: Yet I
Want not an ample Troop of Witnesses
To prove my Worth, With that she turned her Eye,
When strait-way in a decent equipage
Her train Anamnesis brought on the stage.
78.
A sudden Grove sprung up, and every Tree
Impeopled was with Birds of softest throats;
With Boughs Qaires multiplied, and Melody
As various was, as were the singers Notes,
Till Philomel's diviner Anthems sound
The rest in a full sea of Music drowned.
79.
Beneath, a silver River stole, and by
Its gentle murmur did all Ears allure:
Amid'st whose streams, a swan, content to die,
And at that price their further Joys procure,
Tuned her long Pipe to such an height, that she
Sung out her soul in her own Elegy.
80.
Then came two golden Orators, the One
From Greece, from Rome the other, to lament
Her dainty Death: Demosthenes began,
And raped the Hearers with such full content,
That had not Tullie stretched his Tongue that day,
With Rhetoricks honor Greece had gone away.
81.
But Tubal rushed in: and Room, said He,
For my prerogative who first did teach
Scholars both deaf and dumb, such Harmony
As overtopp'd short-winded Natures reach:
Rude things, the Hammer and the Anvil I
Learned how to Forge soul-charming Melody.
82.
Behind Him slowed in delicious throngs.
Of learned Instruments: the Harp, the Lute,
The Organ (moderator of all Songs)
The Violl, Cymball, Sackbut, Cornet, Flute,
The Harpsichon, Theorboe, and Bandore,
The galiant Trumpet, and a thousand more.
83.
As they at this mute show stood wondering,
In came a goodly Man with graceful pace:
His Robe and Crown did plainly speak him King;
But his sweet Art betrayed what Prince he was.
Who snatching up the Harp, did it awake,
And made it for its silent Brethren speak.
84.
As to the Strings he whispered with his Finger,
They all told tales, and with conspiring Noise
Professed freely, This is Isreal's Singer.
Discovered thus, He joined with them his voice,
And as he sung, again the heavenly Bowl
Which Opsis thither brought, began to roll.
85.
But he leaped into it, and in the Spears
Withdrew himself. When lo an angry Sea
Comes foaming in, and on its proud waves bears
In dreadful triumph a wracked Man: but he
Caught up the Harp; a slender Bark, indeed,
Could Musicks powers not the storm's exceed.
86.
No sooner borrowed He the strings soft Cry,
But at the gentle Call a Dolphin came,
Which took him on his back and bore him high
Above the Wrath of the deluded stream.
Arion straight with all his fingers strove
To pay his fare and quit the Fishes love.
87.
The Waves grew calm and smiled in his face,
The cheerly Nymphs looked up, and joy'd to hear
Such charming Accents in that churlish place
Where only Tempests used to beat their Ear:
The Winds came stealing close about Him, and
Caught every Note that dropped from his Hand.
88.
The courteous Dolphin, who did all this while
Deeper in Pleasure swim than in the Sea,
And all the labor of his way beguile
By the Harp's sweet Discourse; was grieved to see
The period of his journey now at hand,
And wished that he might with Arion land.
89.
But on the shore a singing Troop appeared,
Where Pindar first took up a Lute and played;
All Ears were ravished which his Numbers heard,
And had not Flaccus, though at first afraid,
Fired by a furious bravery stretched his skill,
Pindar had been sole Lord of Lyricks still.
90.
Above upon a Mountain Homer sat,
And to a Trumpet tuned his nobler Lays:
Which Fame, who thither fluttered, having got,
Through all the wondering World she them displaies;
Till princely Maro with an equal strain
Embrav'd his voice, and echoed them again.
91.
Which at the second Bound reflected be
By Tasso's Muse, but in an holier Tune:
The Muse which taught her sober Tuscanie
The Greek and Roman Poetry to prune,
And rescued Godfree from Oblivion,
As he from Pagan Hands had Salem done.
92.
(Not far from whom, though in a lower clime,
Yet with a goodly Train does Colin sweep:
Though manacled in thick and peevish Rhyme,
A decent pace his painful Verse does keep.
Well limm'd and featured is his mystic Queen,
Yet, being masked, her beauties less are seen.)
93.
But o, how low all these do bow before
Nazianzum's, and the Worlds immortal Glory,
Him, whose Heav'n-tuned soul did sweetly soar
Unto the top of every stage and story
Of Poetry; through which, as he did pass,
He all the Muses made Urania's.
94.
And by this soul-attracting Pattern, Thou,
My only worthy self, thy Songs did frame:
Witness those polished Temple-Steps, which now
Whether thou will or no, this Truth proclaim,
And, spite of all thy Travels, make it appear
The art more in England, than when thou were here.
95.
More unto Others; but not so to Me
Of old acquainted with thy secret worth:
What half-lost I endure for want of Thee
The World will read in this misshapen Birth:
Fair had my Psyche been, had she at first
By thy kinde-censuring hand been dressed and nursed.
96.
Some distance thence, in floury wanton Groves
Luxurious Amoroso's sat, who by
The gentle key of Sports and Smiles and Loves
Did regulate their thrilling Melody.
Nimble Theocritus and Naso were
The chief: but thousands more beside were there.
97.
Whose Consort to complete, aforehand came
Marino's Genius, with a voice so high,
That straight the world rung with Adonis name
Unhappie man and Choice! o what would thy
Brave Muse have done in such a Theme as mine,
Which makes Profaneness almost seem Divine!
98.
These apparitions sweetly passing by
This vocal Honey, and much more than this,
Cried Acoe, to solace Psyche I
Would gladly dropp: but she so sullen is,
That what does make Rocks move, and Tempests rest,
In foul Disdain she in my face does cast.
99.
In hideous sighs she smothers up my Ears,
And with lank hollow Groans still diets Me.
Lived I a Subject in the Realm of Fears
Where raving Desperations chained be,
I would not murmur if the Monsters there
Did tender me with yelling Torments tear.
100.
But must proud Psyche here a Fury be
In spite of all the sweetest sweets I throw
Thick in her way? must her fell Tyranny
Such uncontrolled Injustice on Us throw?
For bid it righteous Sir, and lend some aid
Before to ruin We be all betrayed.
101.
The next place Ospheresis challenged as due
Unto her fair and eminent situation:
Yet stepping up into more open View,
She first her Countenance, then her speech did fashion,
Seeking for both no other Ornament,
But wrinkles of disdainful Discontent.
102.
My Wrongs, said she, although I third must speak
Too well deserved to have been told the first.
You all know where I dwell; my House does make
No gaudie show, indeed, yet at the worst
Dame Acoe, its structure is as fair
As your, however young, yet, wrinkled Ear.
103.
It like some Alabaster Propp sustains
The foreheads load, (yet does its firmness owe
Unto no Basis:) It within contains
Two Galleries, about whose Walls do grow
Quick watchful Hairs, which brush the entering Air
That to my Presence it may come more fair.
104.
In these opens a Back-doore whereby
I send cool gales to fan and cheer the Heart:
But by the Mammillar Processions I
Embrace the Pleasures which my Sweets impart
And then through them the Soul of odours strain
And with pure vigorous Spirits befriend the Brain.
105.
What kind of tribute I was wont to yield
Coy Psyche, let Anamnesis confess.
She had no sooner spoke, but a fair Field
Smiled upon the Stage, whose youthful Dress
Did all that Summer represent, and more,
Which Opsis had displayed there before.
106.
Thick Beds of Majoram, of Thyme, of Mirth,
Of Primroses, Violets, and Rosemary,
Of Saffron, Marigolds, and Lavender,
Of Iulie-flowers, Flower-gentles, Piony,
Of Hyssop, Balm, and Sage, of Roses, Lilies,
Of Honey succkles, and of Daffadillies.
107.
These were beset with many a spicy Tree,
Sweetly embraced by the Eglantine,
Who joying in their fragrant Company
Among their Odours did his own entwine.
And here the ravished Senses asked their Eyes
Whither this were Arabie or Paradise.
108.
Their Eyes in wonder looking up, espied
Upon a Cedar what more raped their sight,
A Phoenix Tomb and Cradle dignified
With richer sweets than was the Garden dight.
The flames rose up to kill and to revive
The Bird which sweetly teaches Death to live.
109.
And from the odorous Cloud which rolled there
They smelt such sprightfull powers of quickening Joy
That now they wonder not a Bird should dare
To die a death which could such life display.
And if the smoke alone, say they, can stream
With such refreshment, o what is the flame!
110.
Their ecstasy contented O sphresis
More than the sweets did them: And why, crid She,
Must I who pay such dainty rent as this,
By most ungrateful Psyche tortured be?
If she would slay Me quite, there were an end:
But cruel She my Murder does extend.
111.
For on the Rack She holds Me night and day
And ties Me Prisoner to a Dead Man's Skull,
On which whilst She does rest her Hands to pray,
The stink of Death does both my Nostrills fill;
Worse is my State than theirs who buried lie
In death, and smell not the Graves Misery.
112.
If We must die, it is reason We by some
Worthy Adventure merit that our Death:
Impartial Sir, what better can become
Your injured Senses, than by generous Wrath
To show their Sensibility belongs
As well's to all things else, to their own Wrongs?
113.
Geusis, whose mouth before stood ready open,
Rejoiced to hear her Sister end her speech.
And now, said she, my Tongue, enjoy thy scope,
And in thine own defense thy powers stretch.
Psyche regards not what I say: but you
Grave Judge will just Apologies allow.
114.
Then since it is proved the fashion to display
The several Beauties of our Habitation,
My words shall travel in this beaten Way:
Though for my House, it might be Commendation
Sufficient, what the whole world does express
By its ambition its Door to kiss.
115.
That Door is of two leaves, two Roses leaves,
Whose tenderness the in ward Guard supplies,
A strong and double Guard, which there receives
With sharp examination, and tries
The burliest Guests: which, if it finds them rude,
It sends into my Mill to be subdued.
116.
There are they pressed, and grown'd, and gentle made
And so upon my ruby Table set:
Where, with a Canopy of Purple spread
Over my Head, Prince-like alone I eat;
And dining with the Cream of all the Feast
I unto my Attendants leave the rest.
117.
They, in the Kitchen meeting at the Fire,
Sit down and pick what Pieces like them best:
Where every One stuffing his own Desire,
Grows fat and merry: Then the Scraps they cast
Into the sink, which by a private spout
Behind the House it self does empty out.
118.
Nor has Anamnesis a thinner show
Of Rarities which unto me belong
Than those my Sister's Pride displayed to you.
Consult your Eyes on that delicious throng
She ushers in: If any thing does want,
Say then, the World's, and not my store is scant.
119.
Straightway a golden Table marched in
All sweating under a far richer Feast:
A Feast which Heliogabalus might win
To loath his Empires Board, and here be Guest.
A Feast whose strange Variety and store
Dared call great Solomon's Provision Poor.
120.
The Vangard ranked by a skillful Hand
Was fruitful Summer fairly dish'd and dressed:
For Apples, Pears and Plums in order stand,
Choice Quinces, Wardens, Figgs, Dates, Grapes, the best
Pomgranats, Citrons, Oranges, and Cherries,
Apricots, Almonds, Straw-Rasp-Mirtle-berries.
121.
Besides selected Herbs, and Flowers, which might
Build up the Board with Sallads Pageantry,
And send a challenge to the Appetite
From those stout Troops which now were marching nie:
This was the second ranged Squadron, whither
All Nations of the Air were flocked together.
122.
The Pheasant, Partridge, Plover, Bustard, Quail,
The Wood cock, Capon, Cygnet, Chicken, Dove,
The Snipe, Lark, Godwit, Turkey, Peacock, Teal,
With thousand winged Dainties, which might move
Even Luxury her self, the Dieties
Now plain and course Ambrosia to despise.
123.
Next these, a large Brigade was marshelled,
The brawnie Boar did in the Front appear,
And then the Bull, the Veal, the Goat, the Kid,
The Sheep, the Lamb, the Coney and the Hare,
The Heart, and every wholesome thing that feeds
Upon the Hills, the Valleys or the Meads.
124.
But from the Sea and Rivers, in the Rear,
A finnie Ocean on the Board did stream,
The Smelt, the Perch, the Ruff, the Roche, the Dare,
The Carp, Pike, Tench, Lump, Gurnet, Hering, Bream,
The Mullet, Baible, Codfish, Conger, Trout,
Plaise, Salmon, Lamprey, Sturgeon, Sole, Elepout.
125.
The Turbet, Cuttle, Flounder, Mackerill,
The Lobster, Oyster, and all kind of Fishes
Which Lusts soft Fuel treasure in their shell;
Had left their troubled Deeps to swim in Dishes.
Earth never yet such store of Fish could show
But when the Flood on it the Sea did spew.
126.
But all this while the sparkling Bouls were crowned
With living Nectar round about the Table:
Such precious Liquor never yet was found
To drop from Poets Brain, a Liquor able
To make the Egyptian Queen disdain her Cup
In which her liquid Gem did courther Lip.
127.
For the Reserve, a Ladies dainty Hand,
The ambitious Cater of her own Delight,
Had curiously raised an antic Band
Of Banquet Powers, in which the wanton Might
Of confectory Art endeavored how
To charm all Tastes to their sweet Overthrow.
128.
These having feasted the Spectators Eyes,
Geusis but nodds, and all was taken away.
And is this Homage to be scorned, she cries,
Which copious I alone to Psyche pay?
Must the dry Supper of the simple Lamb
Of which she talks so much, these Dainties shame?
129.
These Dainties whose soft but victorious Bait
Has many a sturdy Stoic captive led:
And with whose various precious Deceit
The liquorish World aspireth to be fed,
Though crude Distempers, Surfets, Sickness, Pain,
And immature Death be its dreadful Train.
130.
Must I be fed with Hope? Or what is more
Jejune than that, vile Roots, and course dry Bread?
Must I be ravished from my natural store
Of sprightfull Wines, and forced to drink the dead
Could puddle Water, or the Tears which from
Her briney Springs to scald my Mouth do come?
131.
Must I endure my woeful Bellies cry,
And of self-murder guilty prove; whilst she
Labors her peevish self to Mortify
Without the least remorse of killing Me?
Must I be patient till my starved lank skin
Proves a white funeral sheet to wrap Me in?
132.
Though Justice, righteous Sir, might you persuade
To lend aid to our common Mutiny,
Yet Pity too on Geusi's part does plead
For necessary succoure'r I die.
O had these Teeth their Will. how they would tear
Psyche, and their own Wrongs revenge on Her!
133.
She closing here her Lips, and champing them,
Even in her Silence still spoke Spite and Rage.
When after a long pause proud Haphe came
And showed her sullen face upon the Stage.
With mute Disdain she did her Preface make,
And having looked Contempt, Contempt she spoke.
134.
It Is well you will deigne me leave to be the last:
Yet when I pray, proud Sisters when would you
Have felt those wrongs of yours, had I not past
Through all your Lodgings and informed you how!
It Is by my touch alone that you perceive
What Object does delight, and what does grieve.
135.
You to your proper Cells confined are,
And those too stand in my Dominions,
Whose limits are extended near and far
Through flesh and Blood and Skin: indeed some Bones
Are obstinate; but to thy teeth I tell
Thee Geusis, they my power sometimes do feel.
136.
What have Anamnesis? Yet I Am contented,
Bless their Eyes with my Treasures. At the Word
She on the Sceen her Tactile Sweets presented:
With curious Ermins stately Mantles furred,
Illustrious Robes of Satin and of Silk,
And wanton Lawns more soft and white than milk.
137.
Delicious Beds of Cygnets purest Down,
Cushions of Roses and of Violets,
Baths of perfumed Oil, Foot-paths thick strown
With budding Summers undefloured Sweets.
Stoves which could Autumn of cold Winter make,
Fountains, in Autumn to bring Winter back:
138.
Soft Ticklings, Courtings, Kisses, Dalliance,
Secret Embraces, which I must not tell:
For all the Company at their first glance
Started and turned from the bold Spectacle.
In good time, Haphe cried, is it shame to see
What All do covet to enjoy with Me?
139.
Yet though this feeling and substantial Joy
I can to Psyche yield, ungrateful She
Starts more than you, and barbarously coy
Makes War upon my solid Love, and Me.
The Clownish Rock thus does in pieces dash
The Streams which gently comes its sides to wash.
140.
On the cold ground whole Nights she makes Me lie,
There to corrupt my flesh, and suck Diseases,
And measure out my Grave before I die:
Some cloth of Hemp or Hair, or what she pleases,
Must those Furrs place usurp: I never do
Peep out of doors, yet Pilgrim-like must go.
141.
With churlish strokes upon my tender Breast
As on some Anvill she does daily beat,
And for her Hammer snatches mine own Fist.
She scorns, grave Sir, the service of my Feet,
And, dwelling always on my wearied Knee,
Remorsless Tyrant, lames her self and Me.
142.
And though my tedious Soreness now be spread
About Me round, she still regardless goes;
And will go on, till Force her spite forbid.
This has confederated Me with those
My injured Sisters, all resolved to try
The strength ofRight, against her Tyranny.
143.
The Plantiffs thus their several Cases spread
Open before their Common Censor: He
With serious Look shaking his thoughtfull Head
Allowed some pause unto his Gravity.
At length he cried, The Matter's foul I see,
And does include with Yours my Injury.
144.
Your Resolution's Just and Noble too:
Only be sure you never disagree,
Least you by partial Jelousie undo
The Nerves and Joints of your conspiracy.
An Army once grown mutinous, does yield
Before the Fight, unto its Foes the Field.
145.
But more Confederates were not amiss
The casier to dispatch your great Design:
About the Heart a lusty Troop their is
Which, well I know, will in your Plot combine:
My Sister Fancy is the trustiest Friend
Whom with the Business We can thither send.
146.
She all this while behind them sat, and as
Their several Complaints and shows came out,
Strait caught them Prisoners in her Crystal Glass,
And then their figures in her sampler wrought:
She needed no Instructions what to say,
But being asked to go, she flies away.
147.
For mounted on the nimble Wings of Thought
She strait arrived at the designed Place,
Where, in the Lodgings scattered round about
The Court of Psyche, she unveils her face.
The Passions flocked to Kiss her, and to know
Whither from abroad she any News could show.
148.
The News is this, said she, and and instantly
In fine aeriall Figures did present
All that was spoke, or she wed, or plotted by
The angry Senses; and for what intent
She thither posted. They awhile amazed,
Upon the guilefull Apparition gazed,
149.
Then taking fire, and being unable to
Bridle their flames, they belched their fury out:
Surely, said they, this Psyche will undo
Her trustiest Friends: We see'twas not for naught
That We our selves complained; it is certain now
She means to rage, and open Tyrant grow.
150.
If their great distance cannot Them remove
From her Injustice, then no wonder We
Who live more in her reach, so often prove
The Prey whereon she feasts her Cruelty.
We like the Plot against our common Foe,
We think it just to join; and tell them so.
151.
Let them be sure to watch their ports without,
And leave the business within for Us:
We are not now to learn how to be stout
And stomackfull and rude and mutinous.
Fancy smiled, and returned, glad to see
Success so quickly crown her Embassy.
152.
Whose Issue when she to the Senses told,
They all would in Devotion needs blaspheme,
Paying loud thanks to Heaven which did behold
Their Wrongs, and moved these friends to succor them.
And now with traitorous expectation swelled
They wait to see the Passions take the Field.
153.
But Hope, Love, Hatred, Anger, and the rest
Of that impatient Crew, had forthwith been
In open Arms, had cautious Fear not pressed
For some demurr. He Jelousie did win
To side with him; and then, it is best, said He,
That of some valiant Leader We agree.
154.
Psyche is strong and sober: If we fight
Without due Discipline, that Rashness will
Help her to put our foolish Powers to flight:
But if we make some expert Generall's skill
Our own by following it, the Victory
Will be ambitious on our side to be.
155.
That Word, a new confusion broached: for All
Reached at the Generall's place, excepting Fear
And Jelousie; yet these were loath to fall
Under the absolute power of any there.
At length, they vote to step abroad, and try
Who skilled best Feats of Activity.
156.
When lo (so well Hells plots were laid,) they met
A goodly person taller by the Head
Than any of themselves: Disdain did sit
High on his Brows, his awful Limbs were spread
To such extent of Gallantry, that there
Seemed ample room for every thing but Fear.
157.
His first glimpse all their wishes did concentre
Upon himself. Love forthwith is designed
To break unto the Knight their bold Adventure
And with her wily Sweetness sift his Mind.
She hastens to her Task: and bowing low,
Opes her Mouths fountain, whence this Charm did flow.
158.
Mights goodly Mirror, whosoe'r you be
Whom blessed Fortune shows Us here alone,
Surely such fair and ample Majesty
Deserves by thousands to be waited on:
And, if such honor you this Troop will deign,
We shall have found a Lord, and you a Train.
159.
A brave Design has fired Us now, which may
Your Might and Sovereign Command become:
Upon a War we have resolved to day
With Psyche; but good Chance has kept Us from
Choosing our General, and we hope our stay
Was but for You, whom Heaven puts in our way.
160.
Necessity made this Conspiracy
To break that Yoke which else our Necks would break:
Would Psyche suffer Us our Selves to be,
No mutiny of ours her Throne should shake:
But we, though Passions, calm and quiet must lie,
Whilst she proves Passionate even to Tyranny.
161.
We must not Hope, nor Fear, nor Love, nor Hate,
Nor nothing else, whilst she does all these things:
If fouler Slavery ever did violate
Free-Subjects Birthright, scorn our sufferings:
If not; O may the safety be ours,
Great Sir, by your stout Hand, the Glory Yours.
162.
Agenor glad such punctual success
Did on his own Design it self obtrude:
Swelling his Looks to bigger stateliness,
Three turns he stalked, three times he proudly viewed
The Company, three times he snuff'd, and then
Opening his Mouth at leisure, thus began:
163.
Now by my Might and Worth I know you all,
But silly Worms, I see you know not Me,
Whom to so vile a piece of Work you call
As brideling wretched Psyche's Tyranny.
Must I whom Lions, Tigres, Dragons fear,
Debase my strength, and stoop to conquer Her?
164.
If of the great Kind she a Monster were,
If she had made distressed Countries Fly
To the next Oracle on wings of Fear,
To summon to their help a Dietie;
If she could prove a Thirteenth Task for Him
Who Twelve performed, the work would me beseem.
165.
And yet because I your Oppression see,
I Will win so much of my high-practis'd Might
To make it bow to your delivery:
Yet never say Agenor came to fight;
I scorn the Match, this Finger will be strong
Enough to show my Pity of your Wrong.
166.
This said; He marched in more than warlike state
Unto the House where thought-full Psyche lay:
And thundering imperiously at the Gate
Unto the Rebels Rage burst open the way;
Filling her outward Court with Noise and Fear,
Whose echo revell'd in her frighted Ear.
167.
As when the Winds let loose upon the Sea
Tear up the Deeps and fling them at the Stars,
Chasing away unarmed Serenity
At the first blast of those unlooked for Wars,
Each startled Nymph her fearful (...) shrinks in,
And to the bottom of the World does run:
168.
So Psyche trembling at the furious Cry
Retreated to her inmost Fort; a place
High built and strong, and yiedling to her Eye
Full view of all the Rebels: Time it was
To call her Counselor, whom to the Rout
With these instructions she sends out:
169.
Run Logos run, and know what mad mistake
Has hurled my subjects into tumult: Try
(For well thou skill'st that gentle Might) to break
Their furies Torrent by the lenity
Of wise Persuasion: Pardon, of all Charms
The best, proclaim to them who lay down Arms.
170.
The News made Logos shake his Head: but yet
With pleasant Gravity to them He goes:
And, friends, said He, if you be in a fit
Of fighting, go in God's name, seek your Foes.
This is your peaceful Home; o be it far
From you to ruin your own Rest by War.
171.
If you had any reason to rebel,
Sure I should guess at it, but I know none:
What boots it you our Empress to expel,
Who needs must fall in her confusion!
What gains the Madman, who through jealous fears
Pulls his own house, and death, about his ears!
172.
What means sweet Love to rob her self of all
Her self, and unto Discord it impart?
Must the universal Glue which binds the Ball
Of the whole World so close, in pieces start?
Shall your dear Bands serve only now to tie
Confusion fast to your Conspiracy?
173.
Stern Hatred, could the copious World afford
No other food whereon to feast thy Spite,
But thou against thy self must draw thy Sword,
Whilst with thine Empress thou prepar'st to fight?
Hate whom thou will besides, but hate not her
Whose Love gives thee thy life and dwelling here.
174.
What strange Enchantments lured thee, fond Hope,
To this Design of Self-destruction? Who
Abused thy credulous Soul, and puffed thee up
With this vain fancy, that the Ladder to
Climb higher, must be Ruin? Thus art thou
Of Hope become plain Desperation now.
175.
Unhappy Fear, and what makes thee afraid
Longer to dwell with thine own Safety?
What monstrous Witcherie has here betrayed
Thy trembling Heart to this bold mutiny?
What hardneth thee, who quak'st at every frown
Of other Princes, to despise thine own?
176.
Brave Anger, shall the scoffing World at last
Have cause to mock thy Valor, which does make
Such earnest haste unto so mad a Jest
As Waging War against thine own Mistake?
What pity it is to see thou art so fair
And well-appointed, when no Fear is near!
177.
And You my Fellow Subjects all, whom I
Have often heard our gracious Sovereign praise,
For humble Duty and Fidelity:
O why must groundless Rashness now erase
Your noble Character, and print upon
Your Heads the foul Blot of Rebellion!
178.
By your Allegiance, and ingenerate Worth,
By your own dearest Lives and Safety,
By Psyche's royal head, by Heaven and Earth,
By every thing I you conjure to be
True to your Selves: The Queen desires but this,
Who by your peace and wealth counts her own Bliss.
179.
She is as ready to forget, as you
Can be your hasty Error to lay down:
She on your Necks, by Me her arms does throw,
And by my Tongue she calls you still her own:
Behold the Seal of her Embraces here,
A General Pardon, all your Doubts to clear.
180.
As when upon a raging Fire you throw
Soft oil, the fretfull Flames incensed by
Its gentleness, more fierce and rampant grow;
So here the unrelenting Mutinous Fry
Stormed at persuasive Logos, and to new
Impatience at his sweet Oration grew.
181.
He Is an Enchanter, Anger cried, and by
These Blandishments has often bewitched Us:
But now our just and ripe Conspiracy
Scorns to be Fooled and confuted thus:
It Is time to act our Resolutions now,
That Reasons may no longer Us undo.
182.
Then clapping her right Paw upon his Throat,
And stopping with her left his Mouth, she drew
Him to Agenor: And now we have got
Our subtlest Foe, Sir, let him have his due,
Cried she; We never shall our business do
If to the Tyrant back in peace He go.
183.
The other Passions all rebounded that
Rebellious Word: whose General glad to see
Their Madness compass, what his Pride could not,
Gave Order Logos should close Prisoner be:
They hallowed first, then in tumultuous haste
Two Chains upon his Mouth and Neck they cast.
184.
And here I challenge any Heart to read
This woe full Story, and forbear to sigh:
Seeing the Feet thus trample on the Head,
And common Slaves with insolent license Fly
Upon their Lord: O who secure can be
When Reason must be bound, and Passion free.
185.
Psyche, whom all this while Suspicion had
Held at the window of her lofty Tower,
When she descri'd from thence how fiercely mad
And confident of their outrageous power
The Rebels were; and that in foul disdain
Her Messenger they did in Bonds detain,
186.
She fetched a mighty sigh; and though with Him
Her self, and all her honor Prisoners were,
Between Dispairs and Hopes she long did swim,
Waiting if any Harbor would appear:
But her own Fancies to such tumults rose,
As almost copied out her mutinous Foes.
187.
Thus by that Noise without, and this within,
She summoned was unto the Top of fears:
Charis was stepped aside, and lay unseen,
And now her trusty Phylax disappears:
No Friend was left but Thelema, and she
Was thought but wavering in fidelity.
188.
But as the shipwrack'd Man tossed up and down
Between high and low Deaths amongst the Waves,
Clapps fast on any glimpse of help, and grown
Bold by Despair, nor hold nor comfort leaves
As long's his plank does float: So Psyche now
On Thelema her sinking Arms does throw.
189.
And, O, cried she, my only Refuge, I
Conjure thee well to mark thy Hap, and mine:
The Tempest of my Woes is swollen so high,
That now all Bridles it does scorn, but thine;
And it is thy Privilege that I to thee
Must owe my Life, for thy sake, dear to Me.
190.
At what a price would thou this Day have bought
Which can so deep engage thy Queen to thee!
Yet it had been thy sin, if thou had sought
This sad unnatural opportunity.
But now their Disobedience opes the way
For thy Desert, if thou will Me obey.
191.
Logos had proved himself both wise and strong
Had obstinate Madness not damm'd up their Ears:
But all his Powers fighting from his Tongue
Their deaf Rebellion his strength out-dares:
His Arguments confuted are with Chains.
And I in Fear, in Prison he remains.
192.
But thy brave Valor in thine Hand does dwell
And reign, incomparable Amazon;
Thine Acts are Conquests all: which who would tell,
Must call the World to count: Thy Nodd alone
Points out thy Victories: Fresh groves of Bays
And Palms thy Footsteps every, where do raise.
193.
By softness fain I would have conquered them,
No Blast of whose Rebellion could blow out
My royal Love which toward them did flame:
But now Necessity calls for a stout
And corsive Cure, thy Hand must do the deed,
And in their Wounds teach this my heart to bleed.
194.
Go then my faithful Champion, and may
Blessed Success go in thy company:
I from this Window will wait on thy way
By my observing and well-wishing Eye,
Which shall the Witness of thy Valor be,
And what reward it shall deserve from Me.
195.
But fail not to revenge the proud intrusion
Of yon' ignoble stranger, who may be
Perhaps, the Firebrand of all this Confusion
Which threatens to burn up both thee and me.
If his blood will suffice to quench his Fire,
Spare all the rest; they will no more conspire,
196.
Stout Thelema with this Commission goes,
And with imperious Looks builds up her brow.
At her commanding Presence, all her Foes
Their Eyes, and Arms, and Courage down did throw:
Only Agenor's stomach rose to see
Himself out-look'd in high-swoll'n Majesty.
197.
But knowing his own Weakness, and her Might,
And seeing all the Passions turned to Fear;
He thought it safest now to change the Fight
Of Arms to that of Wit: For in Love's ear
He whispered his device, and straightway she
At Thelema let fly this Fallacy.
198.
Illustrious Lady, you to day might spare
Those irefull looks, with which Mistake has plowd
Your awful face: How can you think We dare
So far forget what Might is, as with proud
Madness to whet our Sword and bend our Bow
To make War with Omnipotence, and You?
199.
But as your strength is great so is your love,
Whom we have always found our noble Friend:
But though with loyal Service we have strove
To win our Sovereigns favor, she will lend
No pity to our fainting Souls, but still
With lingering Death delights us to kill.
200.
Arms are our only (forced) Refuge now:
For though your brawnie Might knows how to beat
The Injuries she pours upon You;
Our Shoulders of a weaker Temper are:
Nor can you judge it guilt in Us, if We
Shrink more than you under her Tyranny.
201.
You know what constant Slavery she heaped
On our poor backs, who yet were all freeborn:
This noble Stranger, when He saw Us, wep'd,
And thought it Honors duty not to scorn
Our sad condition: How then can You,
Except a Friend should more than stranger grow?
202.
If We must perish, Let our Miseries
Beg but this woeful courtesy of You:
Return Us not to Psyche, who denies
Us brevity of Torments: Lo We throw
Our selves before your gentle feet, and pray
Our Lives and Griefs may see no other day,
203.
Nay doubt not, We dare die; but dare not think
Of living in our former Death again:
If from the fatal blow our Necks but shrink,
Then say, we truly wished not to be slain:
Here take our Swords; at least they in your Hand
Though not in ours, our Servitude may end.
204.
As when the cunning Reeds their heads do bow
In low submission to the boisterous Wind,
And with their whining Pipe complaints do blow
To every Blast, compassion to find;
Way to their Charm the generous Tempest gives,
And passing forward, Them their Pardon leaves:
205.
So portly Thelema allayed by
Their fawning Homage, bad them all arise:
They instantly unveiling Memory,
In fraudulent thanks, presented to her Eyes
The stately Pageant Fancy thither brought,
With their own Treasures amplier furnished out.
206.
She looked and wondered, and let through her Eye
The soft Deceit get stealing to her Heart:
She never yet did at one time descrie
So huge an Army of Delights, such Art
Of sweetness, such Magnificence of Pleasure,
Such equipage of Smiles, and Joys, and Leisure.
207.
Election who at her right hand did stand,
Was never at so dainty loss as here;
Ten thousand sweets her Eyes examined and
Stood gazing still, in doubt which to prefer:
So in the flowrie Mead fond Children loose
Their Eyes before they can resolve to choose.
208.
The Rebels, now their crafty Bait went down
Without the least suspicion of the Hook,
Bid Love drive home the Plot: She having thrown
Her self upon her knee, with flattering Look
And pliant Words, indeavored to make
Submission teach Rebellion how to speak.
209.
Right gentle Thelema, since this our store,
Which thy fair Eyes are pleased not to disdain,
From cruel Psyche can deserve no more
Respect, than glances of Contempt; again
We beg that We may never live to see
Such Sweets betrayed to new Slavery.
210.
The Heaven, thou see the Earth, the Air, the Sea,
By this their royal Contribution make
Our Treasury their own: And yet must We
From our Possession be beaten back,
And not enjoy what all the Worlds Consent
In this rich Mass heaps up for our Content.
211.
Now by thy Mighty Goodness We implore
Relief for our loud-crying Injuries:
So to thy Service this exuberant Store
We sacrifice; no despicable Price
Of thy Compassion, if the total gains
Of Natures wealth be worth thy smallest Pains.
212.
So thy Desires shall be the Laws whereby
Obliged We our Lives will regulate:
So great Agenor will unite in thy
Acquaintance, and this Morning consecrate
To peaceful smiles, whose ominous Dawn was red
With flashes of fierce War, and streaks of Blood.
213.
As when the Shepherd, loitering by the side
Of some soft-murmuring Current, lets his Ear
Drink the complaining story of the Tide;
That purling Language soon does domineer
Over his charmed Spirits, and down he lies
Both to the Noise, and Sleep an easy Prize:
214.
So Thelema, who lingered all this while
In Fond attendance on Loves Blandishments,
Was now subdued by her glozing Guile,
And to the Rebels fair-tongu'd Plot consents:
Her hankering Arms she with their Treasures fills,
Her foolish Heart with Joy, her Face with Smiles.
215.
And, Well I see, she cries, how righteous is
Your Cause and Quarrel: Heaven forbid that I
Unto your undeserved Miseries
The justice of Compassion should deny.
Yet Pity is not all that I can show,
You know this Hand has greater Worth than so.
216.
Alas, it is not Psyche, though she be
My Sovereign Mistress, that can make me bend:
(...) do I rush and range abroad, when she
Would lock me up; and often when she would send
Me forth, except my Pleasure be to stir,
I stay in spite of all her strength, and Her.
217.
'Twas I first taught your Prisoner Logos how
To bear a Chain: else you had strove in vain;
But I have long accustomed Him to bow
To my least Finger his strong-reaching Brain:
And though sometimes I let him wrangle, yet
Reason has no more power than I permit.
218.
The universal Strength of all you see
Throughout the wide-spred World look big and high,
Never yet made Combination which could be
Valid enough to bind my Potency:
Hence it is that stoutest Champions from their knee
By Prayers fight whene'r they deal with Me.
219.
They talk of Sampson, one I must confess
Fame has not quite belyed: Yet we see
A Wenche's sheers clipped off his Mightiness,
And trimmed him fit for his Captivity:
Alas poor Giant, all his strength hung loose
About his Ears; mine in my Heartlies close.
220.
Nay Heaven (without a Brag I speak't) does know
My strength so well, that it would never try
By force of Arms my (...) Neck to bow;
But by allurements strives to mollify
My hardy Heart. And well it is that Ye
Have took that gentle only course with Me.
221.
This said: Agenor by the hand she takes
And bids him welcome with a courtly Kiss:
He like a Soldier, proud repayment make's
In arrogant high-languag'd Promises,
And swears, By all his Conquests, she shall find,
That with a Man indeed sh'had now combined.
222.
Then leading Her to his Pavilion,
His Soldiers He to Council fummons: They
As proud's therr haughty General, thither run,
Rending, with Acclamations their Way,
And there contrive, by joint deliberation,
The rest of their Adventure how to fashion.
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO V. The Pacification.
ARGUMENT.
LOve on the Rebels part, with Psyche treats,
Whose fair Tale The Will.
Thelema and The Spirit of Pride.
Agenor back:
Deluded Psyche yeildeth to their Cheats,
And with her fawning Foes a League does make:
Then, on Synei 'esis a Veil she throws,
And wanton in her Pride, abroad she goes.
1.
WHat boots it Man, that Natures Courtesy
Has lift his awful Looks high toward Heaven,
And built his Temples up with Majesty,
And into's Hand imperial Power given?
What royal Nonsense is a Diadem
Abroad, for One who is not at Home supreme!
2.
How does the whole World mock Him, when it lays
Its universal Homage at His Feet;
Whom whilst the Air, the Earth, the Sea obeys,
A sauc e pack of (...) dare meet
With (...) Defiance, and presume to hope
His Empire shall go down, their Pleasures up!
3.
What Credit is it for Him to vaunt how He
On every Monstrous thing his Conquests builds;
That Tigres, Lions, Dragons forced be
By Him, to learn submission: That He weilds
Inanimate Mountains, and through widest Seas
Commands his Ships to reach what World he please:
4.
If his own Vessels helm unruely grow,
And into fatal Tempests hurrie Him;
If his domestic Slaves (...) to bow
Their worthless Necks, when He commands them,
And fill his Palace with more furious Beasts
Then are the desert Mountains salvage Guests!
5.
Alas poor Prince, whose Soveraigntie
Can be the Game and Scoff of vilest Things!
How much are Worms, who of themselves can be
Entire Commanders, more Substantial Kings!
Intestine Rebels never trouble Worms,
But Psyche's tossed and torn with civil storms.
6.
She from her Palace Window saw her Grief
Must'red in terrible Battalia:
In vain. within, she looked for Relief
Where naught but empty Desolation lay:
The Intellect.
Logos and Thelema were absent; He
To Violence Prisoner, to Enchantment She,
7.
Syneidesis indeed stayed still behind,
But by her stay, made Tortures do so too:
Full in the face of Psyche's wounded Mind
The guilt of this Rebellion she did throw.
Blame not the Passions, said the, if they
Revolt; Thou to their Treason op'dst the way.
8.
Had thou been careful how to weild thy Might,
And in due time approved thy self a Queen,
Strait had thou held the Reins, and driven right
Thy royal Chariot: Still your Beasts had been
Themselves, as loyal unto you and mild,
As now they salvage are become and wilde'
9.
When in a stealing Preface to the Flood
The first streams sliely creep; with ease may We
Divert their course into some other road.
But if We slight what seems so weak to be,
They grow upon Us strait, disdaining more
Our strength, than we their Weakness did before.
10.
You scorned the Passion's breeding Garboils: You
Forsooth, on Safetie's wings sat mounted high.
And, pray, what is that Rivulet come too now?
What wants it of a Sea's immensitie:
It is a Sea, which though perhaps it may
Not cleanse your Crime, can wash your Life away.
11.
And where is Charis, where is Phylax now!
O, you were too secure their aid to need,
You well could lend them to poor Heaven, I trow
A place which more did want their Help: Indeed
You Are a great Queen at Home, and can command;
Look how your Subjects your high will attend.
12.
Unhappy Psyche stung by these Reproaches,
Receiv's the wound full deep into her Heart;
Which with her blood, her Lamentations broaches,
And thus she streameth out her double smart:
Nay then I pardon them without, if thou
Upon my heavy Grief more load do throw.
13.
Cruel Syneidesis, why staidst thou here
To grind my dying Soul with nearer rage?
Why joyndst thou not with them who vex Me there
At distance? Must my bosom be the Stage
Of thy more dangerous undermining Wrath,
Which from my very Heart diggs out my Death?
14.
Are these thy thanks to Me, who always kept
Thee next my self, and hugged thee in my Breast?
How little dreamed I that a Viper slept
In this my nearest and my dearest Nest!
Yet be assured, by gnawing out thy way
That thou thy self, as well as Me shall slay.
15.
The Privilege of other Vipers, Thou
In vain expect'st, who art more Fell than they:
That decent Vengeance they their Damms do owe
Which by sage Natures righteous Law they pay.
But surely thou art of a kinder breed,
Thy Matricide all pardon must exceed.
16.
Yet what gain I by thy Destruction?
Who thee, and all those Rebels deerly love?
Unfortunate Me, who cannot die alone,
But in my single Death all yours must prove:
And, which is worse than Death, betrayed I,
By your mad rage, thus often at once must die.
17.
But stern Syneidesis, who knew full well
She on irrefragable Truth did lay
The ground of all her Actions, 'gan to swell
With confident Scorn: and yet awhile gave way
(Since She her Loyal Duties part had done,)
To see what Psyche meant: Who thus went on:
18.
O Charis! would not thou bid Me Adieu,
But by discourteous parting, leave poor Me
Unwarned and unarmed? Grant it true
That my deserts could no invitement be
To stay Thee here: My misery at least,
Might woo thy Charity to be my Guest.
19.
O Phylax! Why will thou forsake Me, who
'Twixt Me and Danger has so often spread
Thy Wings impenetrable shield? That Foe
Who in the Grove under thy Conquest bled,
Was but a single Feind: Why then shall thy
Brave Hand not reap this fairer Victory.
20.
How shall I grapple with this monstrous Crew
Confederate against my desolate Head,
Whom one Antagonist did then subdue?
What reason then soever made thee speed
Unto my Aid is multiplied now:
And how, how can thou less Releif allow?
21.
O Prince of this my consecrated Breast,
O thou whose Majesty did not disdain
To make suit unto Me, but often professed
By thy Ambassador thine amorous pain,
And sweet-tormenting Longings for my Love;
What makes thy tender Heart forgetful prove!
22.
Had thou for ever not remembered Me,
I had not been mocked with a taste of Bliss.
Why did not Aprodisiu's Treachery
Prevent the worse extremity of this?
That soft and single Death why died not I,
But am reserved a thousand times to die?
23.
What profit has to my soul's Treasury
Accrew'd, that I so often did Fast and Pray?
What brake the Bottle, wont of old to be
The trusty Storehouse of our Tears? What Pay
Have all my faithful amorous Groans and Sighs,
If I must prove mine own slaves Sacrifice?
24.
What meant this Token which did gird my Heart
So close to Thee, if Me you cast away?
Was this the Farewell you did Me impart
When you some other Love had chose, which may
Monopolize your constant favors, and
In banished Psyche's place for ever stand.
25.
No wonder if my Passions mutinous prove,
Breaking the Yoke which ti'd their faith to Me,
If blessed Jesus can forget his love
Knit in this spousall knot of Chastity.
How can I longer be displeased with them,
Unless I could and dared fall out with Him?
26.
O all my Joys, take Psyche's long Adieu;
Dwell somwhere else where you can find a Room:
My tumid Griefs have left no place for you,
But made my whole usurped Heart their Home:
And more than so; Far, far must you fly hence
To escape my Sorrows vast Circumference.
27.
And you, poor Hopes, your time why do you loose
In hankering here in my unhappy Breast?
Go, go, I give you leave, go forth and choose
In any place but this, a fortunate Nest.
Be confident, you cannot fail elsewhere,
For all Misfortunes are collected here.
28.
But o Disconsolations, be you free,
For I resign my self your total Prey:
Why should I not embrace my Misery,
When still to look, and look in vain, for Joy,
Doubles self-torment: Why should I alone,
When all things hate me else, my self bemaone?
29.
Whilst thus she feeds on desolate Vexations,
The Rebels at their Council busy were:
Where tired with hard and knotty Consultations
Which course was best to wreak their Wrath on Her,
Up rose Suspicion, and, first looking over
Each shoulder, thus did her Advice discover:
30.
Princely Agenor, and you Sisters all,
Great is the business We have now in hand,
And, Heaven forbid our Caution should be small;
Haste may be good, when once we understand
The way is clear: If otherwise; to run,
Is only with more speed to be undone.
31.
Anger's Advice were sound, if Psyche were
So weak a thing as her Opinion makes her:
But on what Rocks shall we our Vessel steer
By this untried Card, if she mistakes her?
Fear, would she speak, could show you such a List
Of Psyche's Powers, as soon would cool our Haste.
32.
Alas, how can we force the Queen, if she
Deny to yield when we our battery make?
Is not the Palace, and those Gates we see
All of immortal Metal? We may break
Our Engines, and our Plots, and Fury too,
And, sooner than those Walls our selves undo.
33.
A lingering Leaguer, what can that effect,
Unless we hope at length to starve her out?
But she long since all Dainties did neglect
With which the whole World had her Table fraught.
Her Prayers, and her Heaven, her diet were;
And now she is all alone, she best does fare.
34.
But as for Us, who at the Siege must lie,
We, fed with Hope of Victory, must starve
Before we get it: For what will supply
Us daily with Provision to serve
So many Mouths, which Psyche filled till now;
And, if she be shut up, so must they too.
35.
Besides; who knows but some of her Allies,
Phylax or Charis, or some such strong Friend,
May rush upon our backs, and by surprise
Both our Design and Us in pieces rend?
New is the Lesson in the Grove you read:
Can you forget how Aphrodisius sped?
36.
Nay, you have heard of Heavens immortal Son
In whose vast hand Omnipotence does reign:
That Hand, which when great Lucifer begun
To let his Eyes but glimmer with disdain;
Tumbled him headlong into Death and Hell:
I tell you Friends, this Christ loves Psyche well.
37.
We cannot be too careful: and for my
Own part, I judge the safest Way the best.
And this is by a present Embassy
With humble Lies, and Oaths, and Glozings dressed
To cheat her from her strength: So we may gain
Our Ends, and seem to escape Rebellions stain.
38.
But let a Vow of Perseverance first
Seal Us all sure to our Conspiracy,
That by her self that Passion may be cursed
Aforehand, who shall false or fearful be.
If one should chance to fail, why may not two?
If two, why may the Sum not higher go?
39.
This said: An eye of Doubt and Fear she cast
Upon Agenor to observe how He
Rellish'd her Words: But soon she saw their Taste
(...) welcome in his palate: Instantly,
I like her Counsel best. He cries, and You
Shall strengthen your Adventure, by this Vow,
40.
Thus shall my Might escape, what I did Fear,
The vile Encounter with a Woman; and
My Pity unto You no less declare,
Whilst in your Front my Majesty does stand
And strike such Terror, without any Blow,
Into your Queen, that she shall yield to you.
41.
Then calling for a Bacin and a Pin,
He pricked his annular Finger, and let fall
Three Drops of Blood: And what He did begin,
As solemnly reacted was by All
The Company: Which done, again He takes
The Bacin, and three Elevations makes.
42.
And, may that Blood which still remains behind
Be forced to follow these Three Drops, He cried,
If ever I unbend my resolute Mind,
Or from this Wars stout Prosecution slide.
May this my present Poison be, (and here
He dipped his Tongue,) if now I falsely swear.
43.
Then sprinkling on the back of his Right Hand
Another Drop: This Martial Mark, said He,
Shall for a Badge and Memorandum stand
Of our now sure and sacred Unity.
You see our Covenants Rites: Now every One
Do what your willing General has done.
44.
Never did Health more cheerly walk its Round
When lusty Wine and Mirth the Boule had filled,
Than did this bloody barbarous Bacin, crowned
With Rage and Madness. Their Rebellion sealed
Thus by this desperate Ceremony, They
To Psyche speed their Messenger away.
45.
And this was Love, upon whose Tongue although
Perpetual Sleights and Fallacies did dwell;
Yet with industrious Deceptions now,
And studied Flatteries she her Mouth did sill.
She knew the Queen was wise and strong, and would
With common known Delusions not be fooled,
46.
Thus to the Gate demurely come, She tried
It with a modest Knock, and paused a while:
Then strok again, a timorous Stroke; to hide
In this soft Preface her meek-insolent Guile.
The gentle Knock bad Psyche courage take
To come and see what it would further speak.
47.
No sooner had she opened a Casement, and
Reached out her doubtful Head the News to know,
But she beheld where Love did trembling stand
With weeping Eyes, and with dejected Brow.
She liked the Posture; yet demanded why
She thither came a false and fawning Spy?
48.
Love, by that Word warned to skrew up her Art,
Fell on her knees, and three times smote her breast,
And, Woe is Me, she cried, whose loyal Heart
Can find no milder Language from my best
And dearest Prince! What strange Mischance does throw
This Wrong on Me, and that Mistake on You?
49.
If to repair to You in humblest Guise
Who here immured d'well in Desolation,
If to discover where the Error lies
Whose secret Venom breeds this Perturbation
Of your whole Realm, deserve the Name of Spy,
I well can bear this glorious Infamy.
50.
But if Misprision so does cheat your Eyes,
That, looking with a jealous Glance on Me,
They in my Countenance read an Enemies:
I must beg leave to tell your Majesty,
(For it concerns my Essence,) you forget
Your Creature, and take Love it self for Hate.
51.
Yet your Mistake shall make no change in Me:
Use your vast Power in any thing but this.
I still am Love and so resolve to be,
Nor fear that false and envious Witnesses
Can swear Me from my self. Heaven cannot frame
What I had rather be, than what I am.
52.
Sure I, with that right genuine Love which You
Hugg next your Soul, have some Affinity:
Can that brave Passion adulterate grow,
And stain its spotless self with Treachery?
Can Odours stinking, Honey bitter be,
Silk harsh, Down hard, that thus you think of Me?
53.
O no; dear Sovereign, I am hither sent
The soft Ambassador of Peace to you:
Nor of my Office does it me repent
What wrath so e're stands bent in your stern brow.
And though I know not what will hence ensue,
I to my native sweetness must be true.
54.
I see you thought you' Company had bent
Some treacherous Plot against your royal Head.
And is it nor likely they would all consent
Their own Life and Heart blood in yours to shed?
Madame, beleeve't, Selfe's not a dearer Name
To noble You, than to the worst of them.
55.
It Is true, a piece of Discontent has put
Them in that posture of Defense: But by
Your Majesty I swear,, they brew no Plot
But what becomes a Subjects Modesty.
If Mischeife their intention were: what Charms
Could dead their hands, and damp their glittering Arms?
56.
If strong-embattel'd injured Patience be
A Sign of Treason, they are Traitors all.
But sure this loyal kind of Treachery
Does more for Thanks and Praise, than Anger, call.
O never be it said, that you alone
Could, in Armed Mecknesse, read Rebellion.
57.
By me their homage they present to you,
Beseeching that with it you would embrace
Their humble Suit; and to their long night show
Their only Day which rises from your race:
That you would deign to go and see how they
Their panting Souls before your Feet would lay.
58.
Here breaking off in a deceitful Sigh,
With cunning Tears she all her face bedewed.
Tossed too and fro in ambiguitie
Ten thousand several thoughts poor Psyche chewed.
Weeping at length, O that those Tears of thine
She cried, were as sinceer and true as mine!
59.
If those my Subjects now would Suitors be,
What mean proud Arms, and warlike Preparation?
Petitions should from the bended knee,
Not from the Bow be shot: This sullen fashion
Stout Rogues brought up, who begging with one Hand,
A stone bear in the other to command.
60.
In front why is that burly Stranger set
As General against your Sovereign?
One, whose heav'n-daring Looks bespeak Him fit
Not to Petition, but to disdain.
If I were longer to be trusted, why
Chose you His Banner for Security?
61.
Yet that the Progress of your Treason may
Want all Pretense, as its Beginning did:
I Will condescend to hear what you can say,
Provided you your selves in quiet spread
Before my Window. I must parley here:
You know how you have used my Messenger.
62.
Love stung by that last Word, and with fresh tears
Dissembling their true cause, took humble leave.
The News to her Confederates she bears,
Who it with doubtful Countenance receive,
And boulting every Circumstance, conclude
That still the same Device must be persu'd.
63.
Agenor straight resolved himself to show
Inall his Pomp, and more than was his own;
(...) (...) might those brave Temptations view
Which swelled so high only to throw her down.
But none of all the Passions knew from whence
He beckned in his strange Magnificence.
64.
The pompous Furniture in a full stream
Followed his Nod with like Facility
As in a dreaming Brain light Figures swim
Into a sudden Masque of Majesty.
Which Train He toward Psyche's Castle drew,
And there prepared for the Interview.
65.
At length six golden Trumpets did proclaim
Their Masters Highness was at hand to treat.
To her balconey startled Psyche came,
And soon perceived the sound was not so great
As the strange sight: She never though a Queen,
Such prodigality of State had seen.
66.
In open Tent appeared, whose Covering was
Sumptuously rugged with Embroydery
Of Perls and Jewels; in which orient Glass
The Sun, who needs would peep, had lost his Eye,
But yet ten thousand He received for one,
For every Perl did beat him back a Sun.
67.
A fearful Texture of strange Tapestrie
Paved the rich Floor with an historick Pride;
Where slaughtered Lions, Boars, and Bears did lie,
Confessing by whose (...) Hand they di'd.
For every one had great Agenors dart
Deep sticking in his head, or in his heart.
68.
The wall hung thick with War: the noblest Stories
Whose valiant Actors e're did honor Bays,
Were glistering there, not in unworthy Glories:
For all that Gold and Gems could do to raise
Them to their life again, was freely tried,
And Art as liberally her wealth supplied.
69.
The obedient Sun rein'd in his posting Hours
By Heavens steep side, at Joshua's Command,
Where to attend and to admire his Powers,
This glorious Witness with fixed Eye did stand.
The Moon keep'd in her Horns, and dared not
Push out the Night, till he the Day had got.
70.
Close by, five prostrate Kings the ground did gnaw,
Feeling upon their Necks his Captains Feet:
And in a stately-miserable Row
Were six and twenty other Princes set,
Whose Crowns before his Helmet broken lay,
Whose lopped Scepters to his sword gave way.
71.
There boistrous Sampson with his Asse's Jaw
(A wretched Weapon, could his sinews not
Amend his weak Tool by its potent Blow,)
A thousand Enemies devoureth: But
With statlier Might his brawnie shoulders here
Did Gaza's Gates up Hebron Mountain wear.
72.
But yet his last Exploit crowned all the rest,
When to the Princes fatal Sport he showed,
Turning their Banquet to their funeral Feast,
Where with their Wine all their own Blood he brewed,
As at the Pillars He did stand and pull,
The Hangings were with their own Ruins full.
73.
Next him, a young and ruddy Champion flings
Into Goliahs Brow a shameful Death,
There Isbibenob dread and terror brings
Upon the Sceen, shaking with monstrous Wrath
His barbarous Spear, till Abishai's brave Sword
Hewed down this Mount, whose fall made Gath afeard
74.
There Sibbechai on Saph's enormous Pride
Due vengance takes. There mighty Elbanan
Drowns stroming Lahmi in his own Bloods (...).
There the undaunted Blade of Jonathan
Prunes the six-finger'd Giant, and requites
The bold defiance He on Israel spits.
75.
An Army to himself, Adino there
Musters his Powers against eight hundred Foes:
Glad this brave Harvest He alone may shear,
About (...) daring Work the Champion goes,
Nor stops his Conquest until He has mown
This total field of matchless Honor down.
76.
There Dodo's Son; there Shammah keep their ground
Nor yield one inch to all Philistia's Host:
Shame spurred the Armies on; but still they found
They ventured only to their fatal cost:
For obstinate Victory attended here
On Shammah's sword, on Eleazr's there.
77.
Benajab from the Egyptian Hero here
Tears both his Spear and Life: There He divides
Destruction 'twixt a Lyon-faced Pair
Of Moabites: His Fauchion here he guides
Into a real Lions Heart, whose Cave
In which He found him, soon He made his Grave.
78.
To Bethleem there the danger-scorning Three
Through the Philistian Guards slash open their way,
Fired with a stronger thirst of Victory,
Than was their Kings of Water: And their Prey
They fail not to obtain, though through a flood
Going and coming, they must wade of blood.
79.
The other Work did only speak what He
Himself was pleased about himself to Lie.
How many gasping Giants might you see
Yiedling Agenor strange-form'd Victory!
How many Palms and Bays about Him throw
Themselves, ambitious of his Hand and Brow!
80.
Above, his Scutcheon hangs, In Azure field
A Lion Or, with Lightning in his Paw,
The Crest was Fame, with Cheeks and (...) swelled,
And wings displayed: His Throne was built below
Of Perle, whose Luster yet was conqaered
By those six steps which up to it did lead.
81.
The first was Riches.
Plutus, of substantial Price;
The next Nobility.
Eugenia, in fancy high:
Beauty.
Callos the third, the ravisher of Eyes;
The fourth Valor.
Andria full of Majesty;
The fifth Learning.
Pedia, fairer than the rest;
Piety.
Ensebia the sixth, of all the best.
82.
There sat 'the Gallant. One whole Diamond made
His radiant Helmet, and in wanton pride
A knot of gorgeous Plumes about it played,
Scorning all Winds that kissed them: Still afide
They waved their Heads when any Blast came near
And coyly seemed to ask, what make you here?
83.
A Mantle of Estate flowed round about
Down from his wide-spred shoulders to his feet,
And clothed Him with all splendors that are brought
From Eastern shores the Western Perles to meet,
And by, a rich Conspiracy of Beams
Epitomize the Worlds estate of Gems.
84.
His sword looked Lightning through its crystal sheath,
Whose round Hiltits Victorious blade did crown:
But yet his Scepter did more terrout breath,
Such Majesty about it he had thrown.
The Ball in's hand was swelled to that Degree,
As if it meant indeed the World to be.
85.
At his right Hand stood Scorn: turned was her Head
Over her shoulder: with contemptuous Eye
Through a thick frown her fullen mind she spread,
And seeing, scorned to see, the Company.
Nor did she mend, or mollify her Brow,
But when Agenor's growing rough she saw.
86.
At his left hand stood gaudie Philautie,
But dwelt more on a Crystal Glass she held
Eternally near her admiring Eye;
In which her foolish self she read, and smiled
On her fair lession, though the brittle Glass
Admonished her how vain her Beauty was.
87.
Before him, on a golden Pillar, at
Whose foot a Laurel and a Palm did grow,
Upon the back of triumph glory sat;
Whose dazeling Robes did with more luster flow
Than breaks from Phebu's furniture when He
Through Cancer rides in all June's gallantry.
88.
About Him round his whole Retinue was
Disposed in royal equipage: His own
Attendants had the credit of the place
Which glittered nearest his illustrious Throne:
Then stood the Passions, all admiring how
This Sceen of Wonders could so quickly grow.
89.
Crafty Agenor having paused a while
To give respect to his own State, and let
Psyche both bite and swallow down the Guile
About which He so fair a Bait had put:
By soft and proud degrees vouchsafed to stir,
And being risen, thus accosted Her.
90.
Did Pitties generous and Sovereign Law
All points of Ceremony not forbid,
Agenor must not have descended now
To stand at Psyche's Gate: But I am led
Below my self by Virtue, that my Might
May help these wronged Passions to their right.
91.
It Is Fortunes pleasure that casts me upon
These merciful Designs, and I Am content;
The Honor's Gain enough: this Pay alone
My Pains expect: Indeed the common Rent
By which my most renowned Self I keep,
Are the Revenues I from Glory reap.
92.
And for these silly Creatures sake, who thought
I had been but some single Errant Knight,
I let this glimpse of what I am break out,
To teach their Error my authentic Might
Needs no supplies from them: This Part of my
Ne'r-conquer'd Train dares Heaven and Earth defy.
93.
I was resolved by this Swords dread Flame
To sacrifice you to my Wrath: But now
You are a Female thing, I hold it shame
To make my Conquests honor stoop so low:
I Am loath the World should say Agenor drew
His Sword, and like a Man a Woman slew.
94.
In Woman's blood my Weapon never yet
Blushed for its base Exploit: nor will it now
Begin its shame, and a vile Victory get,
Unless enforced by Fortune, Fate, and You.
But I forget my self through Courtesy:
Precious are Princes Words, and few should be.
95.
Love knew her Cue; and, stepping gently forth,
Great Queen, said she, I chosen am to be
My suppliant Sisters Mouth: And may this Earth
Open hers to close up mine, if Falsitie
Break from my lips, or any Fraud conceal
What They, and Truth, and Justice, bid me tell.
96.
What Heaven has made Us, it is our Bliss to be,
And that is your Subjects: Though cross Error now
A confident Blot throws on our Loyalty,
The lest of treacherous Thoughts We disavow:
Alas what would the Members gain if they
Combine their Wit and Strength their Head to slay.
97.
Yet your wise Majesty full well does know
That, as your Self a Free Prince are, so We
Are Freeborn Subjects: Nature does allow
In our sweet Commonweal no Tyranny:
She knew this mutual Freedom best would bless
Both Prince and People with joint Happiness.
98.
But what broad Innovations rushed of late
Into our State, justling out Liberty,
O that we could not feel! Had it been (...)
Which thrust on Us this boistrous Misery,
We had been silent: But we know what Hand
Has stoll n our Freedom, and by whose Command.
99.
Nor I, nor any of my Sisters were
Suffered our Selves in quiet to possess:
We could not Love, nor Hate, nor Hope, nor Fear,
We could not Sorrow know, nor Joyfulnesse,
Nor any thing that pleased not Them who had
A Prey of all our Privileges made.
100.
Surely we had a legal Title to
What ours by reverend Natures bounty was.
Yet snatched from thence, we must be pressed to go
And serve abroad we knew not where, alas,
Nor ever shall know; for how should we comprise
Mysterious things, and Matters of the Skies?
101.
Nor is this sad Case only ours, who are
Inlanders here: Your Subjects too abroad
Who at your Cinque Ports with perpetual care
In gathering your royal Customs stood,
Are loaded with like Grievances: and they
Prayed Us, with our Complaints, theirs to display.
102.
They have not leave, (poor leave!) to Hear, or See,
Or Smell, or Taste, or Feel, what is their own;
But chained up in unnatural Slavery,
Of their starv d Lives and Selves are weary grown.
Yet this Grief more than all, their hearts does break,
That their Religion too lies at the Stake.
103.
They must a new Devotion learn, and be
Tortured with Watchings, Prayers, and Prostrations,
With Ceremonies of pale Piety,
With Fastings, and severe Mortifications:
And if this Superstition they refuse,
Some Mulct on the poor Confessors ensues.
104.
And by what Law must either They, or We
Under this Arbitrary Power lie?
Where is the Freeborn Subjects Liberty,
Who have no power at all, unless to Die?
And surely Death a greater Blessing were,
Than such a Life as We do groan in here.
105.
Mistake not gracious Sovereign, what I speak:
As if I charged the guilt of these our Woes
Upon your Soul: My heart strings first should crack
With their own Torments loud, ever I would loose
My Tongue in such a slander: you alas,
May with your Subjects for a Sufferer pass.
106.
A Sufferer in that which nearest lies
And dearest unto every Princes Heart:
Your royal Honor in our Miseries
Is racked and tortured and torn part from part.
Ask not by Whom; but recollect who were
They whose bold Charms in Court did domineer.
107.
Logos that wiley Fox Was never well
But when on you and Us, he made a prey.
Some hansome Tale or other He would tell
Whereby to your Mistake He might betray
Your unheard Subjects: From your Highness thus
He stole your Ear, onr Liberty from Us.
108.
His Majors, Minors, Maxims, Demonstrations,
With most profound Deceit He gravely dressed;
And by these sage and reverend Conjurations
Poured Cruelty into your Gentle Breast;
And made you count his Plots good sober Reason,
Which in the Passions must have gone for Treason.
109.
Hence issued those Commands, which day by day
Illegal Burdens on our Backs did heap,
And to this sad Necessity betray
Our loath Souls, that they could no longer sleep
In patient Silence. Though all Warrants came
From his fell Hand, they wore your gentle Name.
110.
Some woeful Comfort it had been if We
Had to one single Tyranny been damned:
But We at Home, in foreign slavery
Were held; A Grievance we would not have named,
In reverence to your Credit, could the thing
Have easy grown by our long suffering.
111.
What is that Charis unto Us, that she
In our Free State such arrogant sway must bear?
Or what made you so weak a Prince, that We
Must be Commanded by a Forreiner?
We grant She Is brave and Princely: Yet we know
We owe Allegiance to no Queen but You.
112.
She came from Heaven, if we her Word may take:
But what wooed Her from such a place as that,
To dwell in this ignoble World, and make
Her high Self stoop unto she knew not what?
I would be loath to wrong Her; Yet I fear
There Is something in it, why Heaven gatrid of Her
113.
And being here, what-was the Trade she drove
But how to barbarize your gentle Breast
With strange Austerity; and to remove
Us from your love with which We once were blessed?
Your smiles she all monopoliz'd, and left
Us quit of all things, but your Hate bereft,
114.
If this Devotion be, and heavenly Zeal,
What is Unnaturalness? Alas that We
None but destructive Piety must feel,
And by Religion consumed be!
Alas that Heaven and Godliness must thus
Be forced to suffer injury with Us!
115.
Nor is proud Phylax one who with less Art
Has conzen'd you into this Tyranny:
Soft are his Wings, but cruel is his Heart,
Sweets in his Looks, Gall in his Thoughts does lie:
Fair does He speak you, but the bait is cheap:
His streams run smoothest, where the chanell's deep.
116.
Were you a Youngling, and devoid of Friends
Whose riper Arms might help your tender Hand
To sway the Scepter: then, what he pretends
With tolerable Sense perhaps might stand:
But must your Nonage still go on, and He
For evermore the Lord Protector be?
117.
Now by your honor, mighty queen, it is time
For you no more to think your self a Child:
Know your own power, and loose it not in Him
Who has your credulous Love too long beguiled.
It Is no discredit for a Prince to throw
Away an Error, and with it a Foe.
118.
Your Confidence in Him which flames so high,
Was kindled by his service in the Grove:
Yet what if that were but a Mystery
Of deep deceir, and no exploit of Love?
If Phylax and not Aphrodisius were
In all that Sceen of Charms the Conjurer?
119.
Who but the noble Aphrodisius there
Bravely forgetful of his own life, from
Immediate Death wide-gaping in the Boar
Your helpless soul did reskew? And from whom
Did Phylax (...) you, but from his Embrace
Who your deliverer and your Lover was?
120.
And then enraged With shameless spite, to see
You to another your protection owe,
Upon the courteous strasngers Piety
The powers of magic Malice He did throw:
How much more Monster was you Phylax there,
Who made the goodly Knight so foul appear?
121.
Yet well it were, if he would only try
His Charms on Aphrodisius, and for bear
To exercise on Us his Witcherie:
But We, alas, so Metamorphoz'd are
With that Rough-cast of shapes He on Us cleaves,
That you in your own Subjects He deceives.
122.
We seem like Fiends (for Rebels sure are so)
And monstrous things in your abused Eye:
Although even Phylax in his Heart does know
Our Lives are not so dear as Loyalty
To honest-meaning Us: And whose was this
Desperate Enchantment if it were not his?
123.
It Is true, He talks of Love and needs will be
The Paranymphus of the heavenly spouse:
But surely I should ken as well as He
All Mysteries of Love: The whole world knows
That my Creation only aims at this:
And is my natural Art less mine than His?
124.
That the Etheriall Prince makes love to you
As to the dearest she that treads his Earth,
I easily grant, because so well I know
Your Majesty's incomparable Worth.
But Heaven forbid that I should Him esteem
So strange a Spouse as Phylax makes Him.
125.
Sure He is King of sweetness and Delight,
And with more zeal abhorrs all Tyranny,
Than Phylax loves it: Sure his gentle Might
Strives for a correspondent Victory:
Not all the world shall make Me think that He
Will ever woo his Spuose by Cruelty.
126.
Lents, Embers, Vigils, Groans, Humi-cubations,
Tears, Pensiveness, disconsolate Privacie,
Severest Arts of all Mortifications
Are not conditions required by
An earthly Suitor; and can Heavn'ly He
Imbitter thus his dear Suits Suavitie?
127.
Can He expect his tender spouse should prove
Her Loyalty pants with entire affection,
By nothing but self-hatred? can his Love
Find no Security but your Destruction?
Pardon my fear, great Queen, you love not Him
Whom such a spightfull Lover you can deem.
128.
But far be all such Omens hence: Had I
Or Nature any Glass which could present
Your total self to your considering Eye;
The gallant sight would make your heart repent
This dangerous Heresy, that Heavens gentle King
Would use so harshly such a lovely thing.
129.
What is there of Delight, of Love, of Joy,
Of Grace, of Beauty in this World below
Or that above, which did escape a way
From the Creator's fingers, when on you
Himself he wrote, and bade your Bosom be
The Vniverse's rich Epitomie?
130.
But Phylax brews this cruell-flattering Plot,
Because it is his Rack and Hell to see
That Fate or Fortune Psyche should allot
To any Spouse but Him: This makes Him be
So subtly active in his secret Art
How he may you and your great Suitor part.
131.
O then, first for your own illustrious sake,
And next, for Us wrapped up in you, beware
Of his Designs in time: Just courage (...)
In what deserves your speediest stoutest Care.
Nor you nor We can be secure winle He
Both from your Court and Favor (...) be.
132.
Nor can your Palace be a dwelling Place
For safety so long as Logos, or
Charis, thus revell in your Princely Grace:
One Edict may (...) them all, and far
From this their (...) of (...) Treachery
Pack them to that foul place where Trayters lie.
133.
So shall your royal self securely dwell,
And your (...) undeceived Hand
Sway its own Scepter: So shall We dispell
By pressed obedience unto your Command
That cause less Error, which upon our Head
The foul Blot or Rebellion has spread.
134.
So shall our reskew'd Liberries appear
In their own Looks: So We by Love shall do
More of your Will than disingenuous Fear
And lawless (...) ever haled Us to.
So you no more shall marked and dreaded be
For Rigor, but reign Queen of Clemency.
135.
So shall your sweetened Countenance proclaim
That you Lov's dear Adventure do profess:
So shall you court with your Eyes answering Flame
Your Spouse's beams: So shall His Tenderness
A soft capacity find in your Heart
Of his destroying, yet enlivening Dart.
136.
Here bowing low, Love sealed up her Lip
With a Kiss on the ground. But, all together
A thousand Doubts did rosse poor Psyche up
From one side of her thoughts unto another.
Three times she opened her mouth; but jealous Fears
Would suffer Her to speak by naught but Tears.
137.
Which when Arenor (...): he with his Eye
Gave (...) Commission to speak.
She, marching forth with port and majesty,
Loves (...) Deceit did somerhing greater make.
And, Well I know, great Queen, said she, that You
Much wonder I should come a Treater now.
138.
It Is true, you sent me with express Command
To force the headstrong Rebels back again,
And make them feel that your illustrious Hand
Is moderatrix of the (...) Rein.
And I indeed took them for Rehells too;
So much your Error upon me could do.
139.
But when I found their Lovalty as clear
As Slander feigned it blotted: I who was
Dispatched by You but as the Officer
Of Right and Justice, had no power to pass
My strict Commission: and what need I prove
What was so solidly confirmed by Love?
140.
I must confess, when I had marked that Store
Of honest Bravery, of which poor they
Were, with the Senses, robbed; I could no more
To their provoked Impatience, Treason lay,
Than unto Tellus, if in chinks she open
Her Mouth at Sirius who her flowers burns up.
141.
Yet they were generous, and unto Me
The choice of all their choicest Wealth did profer
That by my hand it might commended be
To wait on you: And here their Gift I offer
If it and them you scorn, yet must not I
Be guilty of such Inhumanity.
142.
Forth with she opened the Scene, whence streamed out.
The confluence of that gorgeous Fallacy
Which on her heedlesse Self before had wrought.
Straight, as the sweetly-rolling Tide grew high,
The Stream bore Psyche down; as sudden Light
Instead of day, seizes the Eyes with night.
143.
Agenor seeing she was dazeled by
The flash of those Varieties, arose,
And, while she rubbed and questioned her Eye,
To the Imposture adds this specious Close:
Wonder not Madame, but repent that you
Your Subjects goodly homage scorned till now.
144.
I am content the weakness of your Sex
Be your excuse, if now you can relent
To ease the yoke which gaulls your Subjects Necks,
And crown their just Demands with your Consent;
That Pity I unto their Wrongs did lend,
To your repented Error I Will extend
145.
The love which to mine own Queen feals my heart
Makes it unto all other Ladies kind:
For her dear sake I will to you impart
Rich testimonies of my tender Mind:
I know she will thank me when I come at home,
That in my Mercy I have made you room.
146.
Behold my Mine of wealth: From hence will I
This Peace with precious Tokens consecrate,
And will hereafter own your Majesty
As my Confederate: Though prevailing Fate
Makes me a Martial Prince, I Would rather win
By sweetness, than by churlish force, a Queen.
147.
Then open your Gates. Or if my Kindness be
A Price room an to buy our Acceptance,
Tell me but so: I can more easily
Force than Entreat: This warlike Preparation
Did with more pains win on it self to make
This Pause, than it will cost your Fort to take.
148.
What help for Psyche now, whom Power drives,
And Charms allure to her Destruction?
With heart-misgiving Thoughts a while she strives,
And struggles how she may not fear the One,
Nor love the other: But away at last
Her Resolution, and her self she cast.
149.
Vain Son of Dust pull down thy foolish Crest,
And in this Glass thy feeble Wormship see:
Who will commit unto thy wavering trust
Another thing, when by Self-treachery
Thou yeildest up thy wretched Heart a Prize
To them whose Power in thy Concession lies?
150.
I like the Terms, right noble Sir, she cries,
And must for ever in my high esteem
Inshrine and reverence these Courtesies
Which from your sweet Magnificence do stream.
Then to the Gate she hasts, and, to begin
Her thanks, flings it wide open, and calls them in.
151.
Agenor sheathed his mighty Sword, and bid
The Passions all perform what He had done.
(...) Order they first entered;
(...) with his swelling Train Himself drew on,
And seemed to cast a sirly Look aside
(...) the Castle Gate was not more wide.
152.
With Princely slownesse thus marched in at last.
Her royal Seal He Her desires to set
To those Conditions which before had past.
And in a gilded Scroll were ready writ.
She ran it over with a smiling Eye,
And straight set seal to her own Misery.
153.
Then unto Thelema the Instrument
She gave, with full Commission to shut
Her Ports when Charis or when Phylax bent
Their courses, or their projects thither. But
For Logos, she consented He should still
Remain a Prisoner at the Passions Will.
154.
With that: My seal to this Pacification
Agenor cries, this Friendly Kiss shall be:
Mean while the Passions with joint Acclamation
Salute their Sovereigns Ear, as courtly He
Her Lip: And fond she joy'd their Noise to hear
Which all her freedom did in pieces tear.
155.
By name she bad them welcome all: but on
Agenor dwelt her Thanks and Complement.
And, sure, said she, what you to day have done
Proves you to be of that sublime Descent
From which my Spouse was said alone to spring:
Who would not swear that you were Peace's King?
156.
Power reigns in both His Hands: the Armory
Of Heaven, where Thundering Ammunition lies
In dreadful Store, is His; yet gentle He
By sweetness loves to gain his Victories.
And so do you, who for His sake, to Me
The noblest Prince, and dearest are but He.
157.
Agenor smiled: And, Whosoe'r I be,
Replied, sweet Queen, I have no time to show
More than by this blessed peace, (...) what you see,
This (...) of my royal Love to You.
The World may need Me some where else, and I
Must not by loytering here, my help deny.
158.
Yet if my Aid you should hereafter want,
Send and enquire at any Prince's Court:
(And think not that Agenor now (...) vaunt,)
Unto such Inns I make my chief resort.
Nor fail I of due welcome, for the best
And Noblest Place is proud of Me its Guest.
159.
His Present was two Cabinets: which when
His Pages had set down, He took his leave
From her soft lipp; through which He breathed in
What her unwary Heart did not perceive,
Sly Spirits of Self-love, and Foolish Pride,
And many mystic swelling things beside.
160.
With earnest Courtesy she wooed his Stay,
But now his deep Defign was compassed, He
With all his gorgeous Train made haste away,
And leaves her more a Prisoner, than when she
Was in her Castle close barred up by Fear
Of them, who now all played the Tyrants there.
161.
Each Passion takes her swindge, and does appeal
To Thelema when any Doubts arise,
Boldly provoking to the Scroll and Seal
Which did this public Freedom authorize.
Thus Noise and Tumult every corner fills
Of Psyche's court, which all with Revells swells.
162.
So when fond Phoebus doting on his Son,
Resigned his Reins into his childish Hand,
The Impatient (...) cross the road did run,
And neither kept the way, nor his Command:
But in unbrideled Madness with their wheels
Drew on the Worlds Confusion at their heels.
163.
The Senses too, first sticklers in the Treason,
Their share of its licentious fruit did reap,
Perceiving quickly that imprisoned Reason
No more his rigid Discipline could keep:
And proudly smiling, what tame Fools were we
They cried, who did no sooner mutiny!
164.
How strange a Monster does a Kingdom grow
Where Laws and Sovereignty, the life and health
Of every heav'n-descended State, must bow
Unto (...) Wills! What Commonwealth
Can justify its Name, where Subjects may
Command, and Princes dare not but obey!
165.
No Hydra's shape so shapeless is as this,
Which throws the World back to its breeding Heap,
The hideous Chaos of Preposterousnesse,
That tumbles All things in one monstrous Deep,
And in despite of the well-form'd Creation,
Disjoynts and scatters it quite out of Fashion,
166.
Yet wretchlesse Psyche is content to see
This monstrous Soloecisme in her own Breast,
And thinks her Scepter and her Self more free,
Than when Obedience did her Subjects cast
Low at the Feet of her Commands, where they
With reverence and ready Service lay.
167.
The silly Rose delights thus to be
Dressed in her fairest Looks and best Attire,
When round about a churlish Company
Of Thorns against her Tenderness conspire:
Upon that Seige of Pikes She smiles does cast,
Not dreaming They will murder her at last.
168.
Psyche's as jolly, as the Passions wild,
And means her Joys with those Delights to feed
With which Agenor's Cabinets were filled:
Proud Expectation prompts Her there to read
The Lines of Fate against her self; For she
In opening them, broached her own Misery.
169.
(With such unfortunate Curiosity
The fatal Box rash Epimetheus opened:
The trembling Lid for-warn'd his Hand to be
Better advised; yet still the Fondling hoped
For mighty Matters: But the Prize he found,
Himself, and all the World, in Sorrows drowned.)
170.
The first was full of Bracelets, Net-works, Tires,
Rings, Earings, Tablets, Wimples, Hoods, Veils, Laces,
Lawns, Crisping-pins, Chains, Bonnets, golden Wires,
Vermilion, Pencills, Smiles, Youth, blooming Faces,
Gloves, Sandalls, Girdles, Busks, Suffumigations,
Powders, Perls, Coronets High-looks, and New-fashions.
171.
Silks, Sattens, Purples, Sables, Ermyns, Gold
And Silver by the Loom and Needle taught
To wed and dwell with Silk which feels no cold.
Besides all that lay in the bottom fraught
In ready Coin to pave and make the floor
Fit for the Feet of that ambitious Store.
172.
The next was nothing but th'inammeld Case
Of a large Mirror: Never Crystal did
Smile with such pureness; Never Ladies Glass
Its Owners face so sweetly flattered:
Narcissu's Fountain did with less Delight
Unto his fair Destruction Him invite.
173.
For He in that, and in self-love being drowned,
Agenor from him took his doting Eyes:
Proud Jezabells he also scattered found
Amongst her fragments, and made them his prize.
Goliahs stareing Bagins too he got,
Which He with Pharaoh's all together put.
174.
But these being not enough; from Phacton,
From (...), Joab, Nebuchadnezzer,
From Philip and his World-devouring Son,
From Scylla, Cataline, Cicero, Pompey, Caesar,
From Herod, Cleopatra, and Sejanus,
From Agrippina, and Domitianus,
175.
And many Stoiks: their high Eyes he pulled;
Whose proudest Crystal having drained out,
He blended it in a fair polished Mould;
Which He filled up with what from Heaven he brought,
An Extract of those Looks of Lucifer
In which against his God he breathed War.
176.
Then to the North, that glassie Kingdom, where
Established Frost and Ice for ever reign,
He sped his course, and meeting Boreas there,
Prayed Him this liquid Mixture to restrain.
When lo, as Boreas opened his Mouth, and blew
Forth his Command, the Humor solid grew.
177.
Thus was the Mirror made: and did contain
The vigor of those selfe-admiring Eyes
Agenors witchcraft into it did straign:
A dangeroud Juncture of proud Fallacies,
Which did so highly please its Authors Eye,
That Kissing it, he named it Philautie.
178.
Unhappy Psyche ravished was to see
The Glass her self upon her self reflect
With trebled Majesty. The Sun when He
As by Aurora's roseal Fingers decked,
Sees not his repercussed Self more fair
Upon the Eastern Main, then she did here.
179.
New Flames were kindled in her sprightfull Eye,
New Roses on her smiling Cheeks were spread,
New Graces and new Loves did gently fly
Down with her golden Tresses from her Head,
New Lilies beautified her dainty Hand,
New Goodliness her Person did commend.
180.
Her cheated Soul sprang through her Eye, and dwelt
So long upon the Glass that it grew New:
Such mighty Thoughts, till now, she never felt,
As up and down her high-swoll'n Fancy flew;
Which breaking from her Mouth, at length, she cries,
How long have I been strange to mine own Eyes?
181.
Am I that Worm, whom Phylax put in mind
So often of Dust and Vileness! Could this face
These Eyes, these Locks, these Hands, this Person find
No better credit? Surely now the Case
Is plain how Aphrodisius came to be
So hideous: Phylax makes the like of Me.
182.
Fool that I was, to dream it could be true
Which proud He daily preached to my Disgrace:
Who could believe that I should never veiw
Till now, the Wonders of mine own bright face!
That this ingenuous Glass should tell me more
Then Phylax, or then Charis did before!
183.
No marvel now if Heavens Apparent Heir
Disdains all Beauties that He finds above,
And, doing right to her that is most fair,
By stooping down to me exalts his Love:
I little thought I could so much have shown
Why this my Head should fit an heavenly Crown
184.
Pardon me, o my Eyes that ignorant I
With brieney Tears so often have soiled you;
Had not your Flames by their Divinity
Secured been, they had been quenched ever now.
And pardon Me, sweet Cheeks, I will no more
Blubber and scall'd your roses, as before.
185.
And you all-lovely Lips no more shall kiss
The Dust, which foolish I took for your Mother.
The Tribe of Oriental Rubies is
Your precious Kindred: nor must any other
Sip the soft Nectar which in you does live
But that dear Kiss my Spouse to me shall give.
186.
Nor shall rude Usage rob thee of thy due
My gentle Body; All Hair-cloths farewell,
My liberal Tresses Hair enough can show:
And by this Girdle Heaven did plainly tell
What other Furniture would suit me best
When with this Seige of Gems it girt my Waste.
187.
And since thy Cabinets Wardrobe Challenges
My proudest choice, I wish thy self were here
Royal Agenor, to behold how these
Fair Limbs of mine would quit themselves, and wear
In worthy Triumph thy best Jewels, which
Shall by my purer beams themselves enrich.
188.
This said: Love who stood fawning by her side,
Her delicate Service offered to dress
Her high-conceited Queen in equal Pride.
A purple Mantle, fringed with Stateliness,
Embroidered with Ambition, laced round
With Vanity she in the Cabinet found:
189.
About her this she casts; then for her neck
And wrists, three Bracelets of bright Gems she chose,
A sparkling Coronet her head to deck,
To trim her feet, a pair of silver shoes,
A Crisping-pin to multiply her hair,
Spruce Lawn to make her breast, though clothed, bare.
190.
Whilst she with these and other Rarities
Builds up her Pomp: The gaudy Queen delights
To see by what rich steps her Beauties rise;
For to the Glass whose multiplying sleights
Flattered her Error to so proud a pitch,
Her Joyous Folly still her Eyes did reach.
191.
Then rising slowly up, as she before
Had seen Agenor move from his high throne;
She traversed, but scorned to see, the floor,
Or any of the Passions who looked on.
Only she turned her vainglorious Head
Upon the Glass her walking Self to read.
192.
Which Lesson pleased Her so well, that she
Gat it by heart, and yet must read again,
Insatiably coveting to see
The Pomp in which her Looks and Clothes did reign:
And tickled with her self, she wished that now
Her Spouse would come and visit her below.
193.
The cunning Passions seeing her inhance
Her looks and gate, did in compliance bow,
And at the feet of her new Arrogance
Themselves and all their treacherous homage throw:
Which, though she liked, yet she scorned too,
And taught Acceptance with Disdain to go.
194.
But now her Home was grown too narrow to
Contein her Greatness; She abroad must ride,
That other Eyes to her may reverence do
Who now could prove her self Heavens worthy Bride,
And justly might display her beams in this
Low world, as in the upper He spreads His.
195.
An open Chariot she calls for: and
That with due state and speed her wheels might run,
Eight of her stoutest Passions does command
To bend their Necks, and put the Harness on.
They soon obeyed, wishing no less to be
Abroad, and trot about the World, than she.
196.
When lo Syneidesis, who all this while
Had in a silent Corner watched her Queen,
Accosts her in an unexpected Style,
And catching fast hold on her Arm, What mean
You by this haste? Here is another Glass
Said she, for you to view before you pass.
197.
Behold these Eyes of mine: a Mirror where
Dwells no Deceit, nor Charm, nor Flattery:
You are true Psyche here, and only here,
In this Reflection of Verity:
I never yet abused you; and why
Must that false Glass be trusted, and not I?
198.
With indignation Psyche turned her head,
And left Scorn for Syneidesis; but she
Who knew not to be daunted, followed
Her Eye with faithful Importunity;
And made her see, in spite of her Disdain,
How both It, and her self did strive in vain.
199.
The Passions wondered at her Boldness; But
She is a Witch, impatient Psyche cries,
And has the strength of all Enchantments set
Thick in the Glasses of her monstrous Eyes,
Which have such power on mine, that there is no gap
Where from their conjuring Circles I may escape.
200.
Behold how gross a Lie of Ougliness
They throw upon my Face, there to outface
The truth of all those beauteous lines which dress
My royal Looks with Prince-becoming Grace.
Surely my self I would revenge upon.
My Self, if I indeed were such a One.
201.
Was Eye ever frighted with so foul an Heap
Of angry Blisters, as those Starers make
O'r all my Skin! I challenge any Deep
Upon whose face the Winds most freedom take,
To show so many Billows, as in Me,
O no; as in this lying Shape you see.
202.
Improvident Witch, why could thou not as well
Have charmed my Touch, as thou have done mine Eyes?
Why did thou leave these Fingers Power to feel
And to convict thee of thy Forgeries?
Their Tumors are not yet so sore, but still
Thy Witchery they can restrain, and will.
203.
Upon her Throat forthwith her Left Hand flew,
Having with furious Vengeance armed her Right,
With which upon the Maidens Eyes she threw
The vehemence of Her intended Spite;
Hoping to break her Classes, that their Crack
Might let these Blisters out they seemed to make.
204.
But stout Syneidesis composed was
Of Metal as secure and brave as she;
And though her Eyes did wear the Looks of Glass
They borrowed nothing but its Purity:
Had they been brittle too, they had been broke;
But now they bore and smiled at the Stroke.
205.
This fetched a secret sigh from Psyche, who
Call d for a Veil as thick and black as Night.
And this at least; said she, the Deed shall do,
And bury those bold Monsters from my sight:
Then on Syneidesis she cast it, and
Ti'd it full fast by an hard-hearted Band.
206.
O miserable Privilege, that Man
Should able be to muffle up that Sight
Which shows Him to Himself, and only can
Through Rocks and Shelves point out his Course aright!
Unhappy strength! the feeblest Weakness is
Nothing so weak and faint a thing as this.
207.
Proud of this self-destroying Conquest, to
Her Chariot Psyche hasts: whose Coursers from
Her scornful Eyes their own inflamed so,
That they with correspondent Pride did foam:
With bended Necks, and sparkling Looks they ran,
Disdaining all the ground they trod upon.
208.
Thus swimming over Hills and Dales and Plains,
She came unto a simple Ermites Cell:
There she plucked in her fierce Teemes looser Reins,
To see what Worm in that poor hole did dwell:
When busy at his Roots and Herbs close by
An aged Homespun Man she did espy.
209.
To whom she cries, Alas vain wretched thing,
Is this a time for thee to cultivate?
What has thy Winter now to do with Spring,
Who art already bowing to thy Fate!
E'n delve no more for Roots: that labor save,
And for thy other foot go dig the grave.
210.
The honest Ermite when he well had viewed
Her scornful Pity, thus replied: I
For your Commiseration would have su'd,
Had I esteemed my labor, Misery:
But I can well spare you your Pomp and Ease,
Me Poverty and Pains do better please.
211.
A Coach once waited on my Idleness,
Being my House abroad, when Home I left:
But now I travel far enough on these
Old Feet, and fear no Fall: that stately shift
Of Borrowing Legs of Beasts, to Me is grown
Needless, since Nature fits Me with mine own.
212.
These Vanities, and all the rest, which are
Attendants on superfluous Wealth, I threw
A way, with it: and that in time, for fear
It would have served Me so; for well I knew
That Riches were but glorious Vexations,
Sins catching Fuel, Plunders Invitations.
213.
Then took I Sanctuary in that Cell,
Which has more room to spare for Heaven and God,
Than had my spacious Palace, which did swell
With secular burly Things. In this Abode
I find my Haven, where un-disturbed I
Far from the Worlds loud Storms, at anchor lie.
214.
This spot of Ground, the Scoff of your high Eyes,
By pleasant Pains I make restore to Me
What carelessenesse had lost, sweet Paradise:
No Bait smiles here on a forbidden Tree;
Nor in these Herbs does any Serpent sneak
Them to enyenome, or my Safety check.
215.
My serious Labors and my ridgid Fear
Fright hence the tender Sons of Luxury,
Distempers and Diseases; Guests which are
Fed at the Board of Superfluity.
In health and vigor I can night and day
Trade with my Maker, and my Prayers say.
216.
He, though no wanton Bathes have softened
My careless Skin, which tanned and rough you see;
Though all my weeds be of a rural Thread,
Spun by Neglect, and by Simplicity;
Esteems nor Me, nor my Condition poor,
Because I build my Hopes upon his Store.
217.
His royal Store, which (since this World below
So narrow was) fills Heavens vast Treasury:
And till the Sons of Dust and Ashes grow
As high as that, in vain they look to be
Enriched by it. But there is a Way by which
We Dwarfs to that Sublimity may reach.
218.
A strange Way, which does by Desentions Wings
Teach Us to soar: These Contrarieties
Into the field not only Nature brings,
But Grace with opposite Cures meets Maladies.
Pride threw Us down, when we were perched high,
Our ladder to get up's Humility.
219.
Humility, that Art enobled by
His own Profession whom all Heavens adore:
Himself He Lowest made, who was most High,
And of the Richest King, became most Poor;
By his Example teaching Us that We
Must only by Rebound exalted be.
220.
Psyche with great contention deigned to hear
Him hitherto, but could endure no more.
What Pitty'tis, said she, that now thy Beer
Has long stood waiting for thee at thy Door,
Thou art no Wiser yet! this sign does show
Thy Dotage is past Help; Poor wretch, adeiu.
221.
Then with relaxed Rein admonishing
Her smoking Steeds; They snatched her Coach away
With sparkling foaming fervor, copying
Her hasty indignation, until they
Drew near the City; where their pace they bate,
Marching in statelier slownesse to the Gate.
222.
The People gazed upon her as she past
And filled the Street with Wonder: Every Eye
Its foolish homage in her way did cast.
And by that Admiration raise more high
Her tumid Looks, who had the more to scorn,
The more Spectators did her way adorn.
223.
For whilst some praised the Coach, and some the Steeds,
And all her Person who rode Queen of them:
With careless Looks Contempt about she spreads
Both on their Admiration, and on them.
She loved the Honor, yet loved to despise
What in her own esteem was her best prize.
224.
So when a burly Tempest rolls his Pride
About the World though mighty Cedars bow,
Though Seas give way unto his greater Tide,
Though Mountains lay their proudest heads full low
Before his feet, yet still He roars amain,
And rusheth on in blustering Disdain.
225.
On many Palaces her Eye she cast,
But yet could not vouchsafe to view them long:
At last contemning all she saw, she pressed
With insolent fierceness through the gazing Throng,
Crying, These Cottages can afford no room
For Psyche's Entertainment: I must Home.
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO VI. The Humiliation.
ARGUMENT.
HEr heavenly Friends by soule-subduing Art
Recover Psyche from her shameful Glory:
And sure to seal upon her softened Heart
Religious Meekness, Phylax tells the Story
Of her immortal all-producing Spouse;
And then her own original Vileness shows.
1.
BUt what is Home unto unhappy Her
Whose only Castle is surrendered to
A Pack of Rebels who resolved were
To use the license of their Conquest so
That she should in her own Dominion
Have no power left her, but to be undone?
2.
She might have safelier called all Tempests in,
And to the loudest Winds fet open her Gate,
Or given her Key to Bears and Tigers; then
To those more dangerous Beasts, whose fair-tongu'd hate
Does work by this Prerogative, that they
By Honey poison, by Embraces slay.
3.
Flat Enemies are honest harmless Things
Because they tell Us what We have to fear:
But double-hearted Friends, whose Blandishings
Tickle our Ears, but sting our bosoms, are
Those dangerous Sirens, whose sweet maiden face
Is only mortal Treasons burnished Glass.
4.
These are the Pits whose mouths with flowers spread
Sweetly invite our Feet unto a Fall:
The golden Cups, whose Lips are sugeted
To the dissembled Poison ours to call:
The crafty Hooks, which in a dainty Bait
To catch the Liquorish Palate lie in wait.
5.
These are those flattering Pipes whose wily Tune
Enchants the silly Birds into the Net:
These are those fragrant Bedds of fair-look'd June
With smileing Roses and with Lilies set,
Where the unsuspecting Gardner to surprise
By fatal slight, perdu the Serpent lies.
6.
These are those Delilahs whose weeping Eye,
Whose sighs, whose Kisses, whose Embraces be
The truer Withs, and Ropes, and Web, where-by
They bind the stoutest Sampsons on their knee;
Where while they hope to rest, they polled are
At once both of their Liberty and Hair.
7.
These are the politic Hyena's who
Make bloody Thirst in humane Accents speak;
And with such sweet Hypocrisy can woo
The heedlesse Swain compassion to take,
That to his Foe his door he opens,
And in fond Pity lets in his Death,
8.
These are those Judas's, whose Lips can drop
The honey of a friendly Salutation,
And with a Kiss seal the soft bargain up;
Though in their Hearts a traiterous Conjuration
Lies rankilin, and they study how they may
In Looks and Words of Love, their God betray.
9.
And surely Psyche by this Treason had
Been cheated of her life and self, if He
Who in his Judas trial of it made,
Had lent no Pity to her Misery;
Had Jesu's tender Goodness not out-rid
His faithless Spouse who now from Him was fled.
10.
Charis and Phylax He a while withdrew,
That being left unto her self, she might
Of her own Weakness take convincing view
When she occasion had, and cause to fight.
But now He sends them back to help Her down
From the high Ruin where He saw her thrown.
11.
Make haste, said He; my Love, and Her Distress
Call for your speed (...) To you full power I give
To ease Her of that wretched Mightiness
Before it split her Heart; to undeceive
Her cheated Soul, and shrink it till it be
Little enougn to fit my Heaven and Me.
12.
They having thrice adored his Footstool, flew
Upon the wings of Thought through every Sphere:
No Lightning ever made more haste to view
The East and West at once, than this swift Pair
Of earnest Messengers; or with more Light
Did all Spectators startled Eyes afright.
13.
For when the Passrons saw them darting near,
Immediate Terror upon them did seize:
Down fell their changed Looks and Necks; though Fear
Was left at home, she present seemed in these,
The suddennesle made Psyche too afraid
And both her Courage and her Chariot stayed.
14.
But though the first Assault of Lightning be
Pointed with Dread and Awe; the second does
Break forth with more abated Majesty
And (in our Eyes at least,) some Brightness loose.
Custom, though young and breeding, yet can make
The dint and edge of any strangness slake.
15.
Both Psyche and her Steeds did soon recover
Some sense and spirits of their boiling Pride,
When the first glimpse of those new Beams was over;
But chiefly she swelled to so high a Tide
Of Confidence, as to presume Her Streams
Would now repulse the Torrent of their Beams.
16.
To both her reverend Friends she does dispense
Her frowns, and lowring-loathing Looks, and by
That silent Language of Impatience
Her changed Mind and sullen Thoughts descrie.
But when she saw them full resolved, she cries,
I thought you would have understood mine Eyes.
17.
Lo here my Tongue interprets them: You are
As much mistaken now in Psyche, as
She heretofore in You; I must and dare
Tell you your own: Your treacherous Counsel has
Too long bewitched my tender credulous Heart:
Henceforth you may for evermore depart.
18.
The saucy Coursers with ears pricked up high
Caught that proud Answer as from her it flew,
And neighing in tumultuous jollity,
With aggravation of Defiance threw
It in the faces of the heavenly Pair;
And then they kicked, and flung, and snuff'd the Air.
19.
But Phylax standing in Her Coache's way,
Lift up his Hand and Wing and kep't her back,
Crying much louder than her Steeds could neigh:
Yet ever you go vouchsafe to hear me speak;
Though I your Enemy be, you need not fear
Now you have learned that, my Words to hear.
20.
This netled Thelema, who Postillion was,
And had inflamed the Coursers all the way;
She bent her scornful Brow, and cried, Alas
Can Phylax think I will his Rub obey,
Who ride where ever I list, and never meet
With Mount, or World, which stops my Horses feet?
21.
With that she checked her Fiery courser [and
This Anger was, the most outrageous Steed,]
Who with curvets strait answered her Hand,
And aimed to snatch her way o'r Phylax's head.
Three times she leaped, as often falling back,
Till with her Bones she heard the Chariot Crack.
22.
For Phylax having thither reached a Ray
Of mystic power, seized on the Axel-tree,
Which with a splitting groan at length gave way,
And by the voice of its fragility
Admonish d all the Coach, that Ruin now
Meant to ride there, and Psyche out would throw
23.
And true the warning was: for either Wheel,
The Bars, the Pillars, Seat, Side, Back, and Head
Shattered forth with into confusion, feel
How (...) the Axels Fatal preface led
Them to their Tragedy, which now no more
Can own their several Names as heretofore.
24.
It Is all but one rude Heap: upon whose back
Lies Psyche something bruised with the Fall;
But wounded more to see who made that Crack,
And raised that Pile as for her funeral.
She scorns to take Him for an equal Foe,
But swells, and puffs, and knows not what to do.
25.
He, in her sullen Eye observing well
The troubled Motions of (...) smoking Heart,
And more than her own Tongue knew how to tell;
Pitti'd the sadness of her wilful Smart:
And, for compliance, her own course he took,
Speaking not by his Mouth, but by his Look.
26.
This is the Dialect of strongest Love,
Which, when the fruitless Tongue had said her Say,
With soule-commanding Power does plead, and prove
That Eloquence does reign in Eyes; that they
Who to the bottom of the Heart would speak,
In Looking Lines must their Orations make.
27.
His serious Aspect upon Her was bent
Composed of angry love, and mild disdain;
Expressive were the Glances which He sent,
And every Word that darted forth, was plain:
Some Rays grew hot and stoutly chid, but others
With melting Pity mollifi'd their Brothers.
28.
O what a long long Story ran He over
In this short ocular Discourse! how fast
Did He her bosom and his own discover,
And what of old, and what of late had past,
And what was dawning, if she still went on
With obstinate confidence to be undone.
29.
But she would not this language understand
Because the Speaker she before despised:
She proudly looked, and coyly waved her hand,
Telling him by those signs, she was advised
So well of what she did, that He might go
And somewhere else his scorned Pains bestow.
30.
Mean while, as Thelema, and her bruised Steed
Biteing their own lips, and the ground, did lie;
Charis her sweetest Powers had mustered
To force the Damsel from her Misery.
And, See, said she, when it was grown so tall,
How suddenly your Pride has caught a Fall.
31.
Yet this is not the Bottom, but a Step
Unto that Ruin whither you did ride.
O did you know how black and vast a Deep
Gapes in your Journeyes End, you would have di'd
A thousand other Deaths, much rather than
Have posted thus to plunge into that one.
32.
Here with her Wand she stroke upon the Earth:
Straight Tellus heard the Knock, and opened her Door;
When lo a Night of Smoke came stinking forth,
And then a duskie Day of Fire: the Roar
Of that great Crack made surly Thelema start,
And summoned Psyche too, to see her part.
33.
For though Dread shook their Souls, They deemed it
Scorn to confess their fear and run away.
Their adamantine stomach will not let
Their lives be longer precious: still they stay.
Not out of curious Desire to see,
But, to outface the hideous Prodigy.
34.
The monstrous Jaws of the wide-gaping Pit
With banefull soot were lined thick: Beneath
Incensed Sulphur flashing Wrath did spit,
From whence a Cloud of heavy Groans did breath
Forth sad confession Who below did dwell:
These Proofs authentik were to speak it Hell.
35.
Plunged in the gloomie Caverns Center were
A woeful Rout mingled with smoke and Fire;
Abiram, Corah, Dathan fried there,
With Peleths venturous Son, who did conspire
To raise that old Combustion, which now
Concluded is in their own Flames below.
36.
Their howling Wives and shreiking Children lay
Broiling about them, and desired in vain
One drop of Water after dying They
Had burned so long in their still-living Pain:
Their Tears dropped thick, but mocked them by their store,
And only scaled their Cheeks which flamed before.
37.
As The lema stood doubting at the sight,
Behold this last Preferment Charis cried,
To which Ambition does fond men invite:
Is it not petty that thou did not ride
Thy Journey out; and am not I thy Foe
Who down this fair Hill would not let thee go?
38
Thou see that arrogant Brood of Rebels there
Who were too high to stoop to heavenly law:
Yet to their wretchlesse Passions lent their Ear,
And rather then to God, to them would bow.
Moses and Aaron whom they kicked at there,
Nothing but Phylax are and Charis here.
39.
Moses and Aaron did usurp too much,
And bare their tyrannizing Heads too high.
And was not our Indictment only such,
When Love drew up our Charge! We were not by
I grant; but yet He was, whose Vengance now
Feeds on your proud Agenors heart below.
40.
Observe that Feind who holds fell Chorah's chain,
Himself bound in a greater: He knows why
He gathers up his Tails ashamed Train
And steals it round about his scaley Thigh.
Ask but his Looks, and they will tell you plain
What spot it is which them with Guilt does stain.
41.
This high-swoln mountain of Deformity
Once vie'd with Beauties self, by's borrowed Face:
But now uncased in his cursed stie,
His shape is correspondent to his place.
Here you see what without a Lie is His,
This your illustrious Agenor is.
42.
Hearing this Word, the tumid Feind did split
His overcharged mouth, and vomit out
A stream of brimstone, belching after it
More horrid Cries; which bellowed about
His hollow Home, but finding it too narrow,
Into the Air let loose his thundering Sorrow.
43.
It shak'd the Earth, as through her sides it broke,
And something startled Psyche who stood by,
But Thelema disdaind the Terrors stroke,
Coufuting it with her all-dareing Eye.
She knew her strength authentik was, and still
Resolved what ever it cost, to have her Will.
44.
Thus when a wilful Heir to age is come,
And in his own Hand feels the golden Rein
Of his long-wish'd Revenews; if by some
Well-practis'd spend-thrift he be taught to drein
His overflowing Bags, in vain his Friends
Show him how Poverties Ebb that Tide attends.
45.
But trusty Charis well remembering what
Her Masters love commanded, plies her part:
And, seeing Fears Darts were repulsed, she shot
The shafts of Love into the Virgins heart,
Which in a diamond Case from Heaven she brought,
With many other precious Powers fraught.
46.
Strong were the Blows, and opened themselves the way
Unto the bottom of their Mark, but sweet
Withal and silent. Thus the noble Ray
Shot from the Suns Eye, does no sooner beat
Upon the crystal Ball, but with soft force
Quite through and through it takes its harmless course.
47.
On Thelema's soul the gallant Arrows wrought
With blessed wounds of heav'n-begotten Joy:
Yet she with such perverse resistanee fought,
That had but Charis known how to be coy,
She would have spared her pains, and left the Maid
By her own stubborn Victory betrayed.
48.
But she as obstinate was in Patience,
And many a dear time shot and shot again:
Until at length the strokes begat some sense
Of a (...) and convincing pain;
With which pierced thorough, now I must, I see
Cried Thelema, by this Sweetness conquered be.
49.
I know I need not yield, except I will;
But this soul-plying Violence, which so
Severely sweet through all my wounds does thrill,
Enforces Me to force my self to go
With that she louted low, and on her knee
Beg d pardon for her Pertinacitie.
50.
O noble Virtue of immortal Grace!
How uncontrolled is its dainty Art,
Which can a Bosom of it self uncase,
And teaeh the Heart how to subdue the Heart.
Which gains unbloody Bays and Triumphs thus,
In delicately conquering Us by Us!
51.
So when into the Swains unwary Foot
The venomous earnest of a swelling Death
Is from the treacherous Tarantula shot,
Musicks sweet Accents wisely temperd, breath
A mystike Antidote, which by delight
Deceives the poison, and charms out its Might.
52.
But Psyche seeing Thelema relent,
Knew her own Stomachs power would swell in vain,
And judged it policy now to recant,
And her old potent Friends anew to gain.
Her useless Arrogance away she threw,
And after it three deep drawn sighs she blew.
53.
That thus ejected; Shame and Modesty,
Of their ingenuous Home took fresh possession,
And in (...) purple Cheek and gloomy E e
Displayed a (...) of penitent Confession:
Then, as her Pride had (...) her up before
Above her self, these cast her on the floor.
54.
'Twas easier now for her to weep than speak;
Yet striking stiffly on her guilty breast,
Unto her stiffling grief a way she broke,
And helped this Lamentation out at last:
O turn from shameful Psyche your pure Eye;
Leave Me alone to perish where I lie.
55.
Or let your Justice plunge Me down into
That mouth of Torment which gapes for Me there;
That I may to my loved Agenor go,
Whose Lies before your Truths I did prefer.
Sure Corah and his damned Company
Take not up all the room; there is some for Me.
56.
'Twas more than Death to Me to view the face
Of my too-late-beleev'd Synedesis,
Though she presented in her trusty Glass
The faithful Copy of my Hideousness.
But in your Lustres dint what shall I do!
No veil has night enough to smother you.
57.
O! that intolerable Purity
Of your celestial Looks I cannot bear:
Pride has so tainted my unhappy Eye
That all unspotted Spectacles I fear;
For they my Torments are, and burn Me so,
That to a cooler Hell I feign would go.
58.
This woeful Out-crie grated Charis Heart,
Wont not to bruise but heal the broken Reed:
She knew what Lenitives would tame that Smart,
Yet gave no more than for the present Need,
Leaving the perfect Cure awhile: For She
Knew well how wholesome longer Grief would be.
59.
Mean time the rampant Passions were strayed,
(...) in wild Madness roved all about:
When Thelema before by them betrayed,
Revenged that Treachery, and by a stout
Command, unto their Duties called them back.
The whole Field at the awful Voice did quake.
60.
They started all, and strait of one another
Did mutual Counsel ask with doubting Eye:
But after that first Call, out brake its Brother,
And thundered with imperious Majesty:
When looking back, they spied their Mistress's Hand
Lifted up high, which spoke a third Command.
61.
They knew these Summons did in earnest call,
And always had disdaind to be denied:
This forced their unwilling Crests to fall
And into slavish Trembling turned their Pride
When angry Thelema snatched up the Reins,
And thenceforth of their Harness made their Chains.
62.
So when the Master shakes his dreadful Rod
High in the view of his extravagant Boys,
Who trouanting were, and rambling all abroad;
Their loath Adieu they bid unto their Toies,
And trembling into School, expect when they
The price of their Extravagance should pay.
63.
But then she stoutly lashed her shivering Teem
Unto the Lip of that dread mouth of Hell,
Where their late General she showed them
Tearing his Fiendship He could not conceal.
Which Sight, them and all treacherous Itchings parted
And through their Souls immortal Terror darted.
64.
This Act performed: they all remove the Stage
To Psyche's house; in which their Passage she
Beheld the lately-scorned Ermitage
With reverent blushing: But when pious He
Who reigned King of Himself and It, espied
This blessed Change, He sat him down and cried.
65.
He cried for Joy, and answered Psyche's tears,
Which multiplied with every Step she took:
Himself had been acquainted many Years
With noble Charis; and in's heavenly Look
He read who Phylax was, for such a Friend
Did from his Birth till now on Him attend.
66.
What they had done, his Wisdom well could guess,
When he the surly Queen dejected saw:
Her frowns, her (...), her coach, her stateliness
Were vanished all, and she so Humble now
That by Agenor's and Heavens help she seems
In one day to have reached both Extreems.
67.
Full many a Blessing did the Good Man pour
On Charis and on Phylax as they went:
But to his loving Lord He pants out more,
Who them down to that great Exploit had sent:
Good Wishes after Psyche He did throw,
Following Her steps as farr's his Eye could go.
68.
Heroic Charity, how soon do thou
Subdue all Wrongs Contempt can shoot at thee:
And freely bless the Day which does bestow
Happy Success on thy proud Enemy!
Right noble is thy Valor, which alone
Can make thy Foes good Fortune be thine own,
69.
But they now to their Journey's period come,
Psyche with her stiff Sighs blew open the Gate;
And with a sad Eye viewing her fair Home,
Thought every Wall did chide for what of late
She trespassed there; and that at every Groan
The Echo cried, she had her self undone.
70.
Up to her Chamber she as loath did go
As Thief unto the Cell where He has hid
His wicked Goods: Yet they would have it so
Who from Self-theft had Her delivered.
But two deep Groans, as up the Stayrs they went
Summoned their Eyes to search whence they were sent.
71.
Close in the Stayr-case a sly Trap-doore was
Which kept its counsel with Bar, Lock, and Seal;
Where as they stood considering the place,
Two other Groans did to their Aid appeal:
When Thelema convinced by Shame and Fear,
Broke open the Door to show them who were there.
72.
Deep was the Dungeon, and as dark as Night
When neither Moon nor Star befriend the Sky:
But Charis looking in, an high-noon Light
Through all that Blackness streamed from her Eye.
When lo, Syneidesis, and Logos tied
Fast in the bottom of the Mire they spied.
73.
Down Phylax flies, and hovering over them
(For no Dirt may defloure his Virgin Wings,)
Unties their Cords; and by their Mantles Hem
Up to the Dungeons Mouth, them gently brings.
Full thick about them stuck the mire and clay;
Yet Psyche thought her self more foul then they
74.
And falling on them with a Shower of Tears,
These soon, said she, may wash your Spots away;
But my deep-grain'd Pollution out-dares
The power of Oceans: You besmeared lay
Only in others Stains, but hideous I
With mine own Blots all over blurred lie.
75.
O add no stings unto my Anguish by
Denying Pardon of my mad offense:
Saw you but half the Flames in which I fry,
The sight would thaw your breasts, and kindle sense
Of my sufficient Woe. But Charis here
Stepped in, and bad her those Complaints defer.
76.
Then She conducts her to her Chamber; where
No sooner entered, They the Mirror spy:
Which strait grew pale, and quaked for guilty fear
At the bright Dawn of genuine Purity.
So Phantoms and Night-fires away do sneak,
When from the East the gallant Day does break.
77.
Phylax unto the Sight drew Psyche nie,
But she quaked more then that, and started back:
When lo, said He, this Glass, though framed to lie,
Now of it self shall true confession make;
Urge it but with the Touch of any Gem
Whose Place is meanest in thy Girdles Hem.
78.
O noble Power of Heavenly Gifts! The Glass
Remembered quickly its original Eyes,
And weep'd to see how all its Beauty was
Disolv'd by one short Touch: its Fallacies
Flowd down apace, till all the floor did swim
With a prodigious Lake of loathsome slime.
79.
A slime which smelt so rank of Death, that had
Not Charis stepped twixt Psyche and the Harm,
'T had choked her heart: but that Assistance made
Her spirits cheer, and kept her Courage warm.
Secured thus, Take one more drop, she cried,
And spitting on the slime; she turned aside;
80.
Aside unto the other Cabinet,
And look, dear Friends, said she, for much I fear
Some foul Enchantment here does hatch its Plot,
And that these Treasures in false shapes appear,
They are Agenors Gifts: how can his Pelf
Be made of truer Beauties then himself!
81.
You know your Touchstone, Phylax cries, but lay
Your Girdle on it, and it will confess;
That Item she no sooner did obey,
But strait her Touch was answered with an Hiss:
The Chains and (...) started up, and now
No Nest of Jewels, but of snakes, did show.
82.
In the spruce Net-works woven was a Fry
Of younger Serpents which lay hampered there,
And shamed and vexed by this discovery
Whetted their peevish Teeth, and tried to tear
Open their Knots; but when they felt the Bite
Dig their own backs, they angry Poison spit.
83.
The Tires and Hoods shrunk into Horns: the Rings
Dilated into fetters; every Lace
Like scorched Thonges, or some such shrivel'd Things,
Acknowledged through what flame it used to pass.
The gaudy Bonnets, and the dainty Veils
Were nothing now but brass or iron scales.
84.
The Crisping-Pinns returned to Forks and Hooks,
And Tongs, and Prongs; the Lawns to Dragons Wings:
The golden Wires abjured their glorious looks,
And now were red hot Nails, or Darts, or stings:
The Busks were Gags; the Gloves were fiery Claws,
The Tablets, Boiles; the Sandales, Tigres Paws.
85.
The Perls were Coals; the Coronets, Wreaths of fire;
The brisk Vermilion was Blood or Ink;
The Pencills, Rods of ever-burning Wire;
The Powders, Brimstone; the Perfumes, a stink;
The Smiles were Frowns, the youth, and blooming cheeks
Were hideous Wrinckles, and stern Vultures beaks.
86.
The High-looks, were Dispairs and shames; the Fashions
Were several Inventions of spite,
And never-dying Tortures Variations;
The Silks and Sattens, skins of Asps; the bright
Purple, a Lions or a Panthers Hide
In innocent Blood of slaughtered Infants di'd.
87.
The Ermins and the Sables, were the skins
Which monstrous Cerberus casts thrice a year:
The rich embroideries were Rows of Pinns
Pointed with steely Torment and Despair;
The silver and the Gold that lay below
Were Rust and Cankers, which themselves did gnaw.
88.
These several dreadful Sights, stroke Psyche through
With full as many Fears; and back she ran.
But Phylax stopped her, and demanded how
She dared those gay Things trust which she had on?
They too, are of the same foul Breed, said He;
And will you still with Hell arrayed be?
89.
With that He snatched from Her whatever Pride
On her abused Body had obtruded,
She with sad indignation having eyed
The hell-bred Robes, cried out, O selfe-deluded
And justly wretched Soul, that mine own Fist
(And here she stroke) could pierce this treacherous breast.
90.
A noble Stroke it was; and broke its way,
Its happy Way, quite through unto her heart.
Forthwith a cole-black Stream, which swelling lay
And belking there, took warning to depart:
Out flew the Poison reaking on the ground,
Which splitting, to its Hell its way it found.
91.
Delivered of its monstrous Guest, the Wound
Closed gently up, and further Harm shut out.
But both her sides so loose and lank she found
That for her self within her self she sought,
And stood a while amazed, as if the Stroke
Had only some Dreams brittle Wonders broke.
92.
Confounded then with pious Shame, unto
Her former sober Weeds she turned aside:
Whose simple honest Looks rebuked her so
That straight she staggered back again, and cried,
Remembering how she them disdained, which now
Fairer then all Agenors Pomp did show.
93.
At length she came and with a doleful Voice,
Give leave, she said, my genuine Furniture
That once again I make my prudent choice,
Which henceforth shall for ever more endure.
Or, if again I scorn your Poverty,
From Hells soul Wardrobe may I clothed be.
94.
Come trusty Hair-cloths, you did never yet
Fool me out of my self by garish Pride:
Come honest Rope, thou never yet did let
Ambition blister me, but gird'st my side
Close to my heart, and left'st no Room between
For puffing strutting Thoughts to harbor in.
95.
So; now I Am dressed indeed: How shamelesly
Have I all naked wandered up and down!
No Nakedness to that in Heavens pure Eye
With which Sin clotheth Us: Thus overgrown
With Leprosy the Man more naked is,
Then when bare Nothing but his Skin was His.
96.
Yet can it be that jealous Heaven, and You,
O my provoked Friends, should not be just
What privilege have Rebellious I, that now
Vengance should sheath its dared Lightning! Must
Your Patience from my Crime its copy write,
That both may equally be Infinite!
97.
It must, said Charis; and be sure to pay
Thy Spouse due thanks for this Necessity.
Yet if henceforth thou needs wilt run astray,
Know that his Soul is not so sealed to thee,
But he can find out some more faithful Breast
Which will his Loves dear Violence not resist.
98.
She thus reformed into her lowly Tire,
Charis and Phylax gently her embrace;
Kissing into her Soul fresh Joys of Fire,
And Printing gracious Looks upon her Face.
Then sitting down together, Listen well
Said Phylax, unto what I now shall tell.
99.
The Story, Psyche, bends its aim at thee;
But I will fetch it from its bottom, that
Thou may a long and total Prospect see
Of thy Extraction and original State.
That Sight will teach thee that these simple Weeds
Are full as fine and gorgeous as needs.
100.
Especially when I withal have shown
Thee by the boundless Powers which flourish in
Thy Spouse's Hand and Word, how far thine own
Condition flaggs below his Worth; how mean
A Match thou art for Him, who nothing have
In dowry, but vile Vanity, and Dust.
101.
All things at first was God, who dwelt alone
Within his boundless Self: But bounteous He
Conceived the form of the Creation
That other things by Him might Happy be.
A way to ease its Streams his Goodness sought,
And at the last into a World burst out.
102.
This World at first 'was but one single step
From simple Nothing; yet that step was wide:
No power but His, or could, or yet can, leap
Over from Nothing's Bank, to Something's Side:
The East and West are one, the Poles do kiss,
If you their Distances compare with this.
103.
This Something, Son of Nothing, wallowing lay
In the vast Womb of its own Darksome Deep:
The foulest Monster never frighted Day
With such wild Shapes as struggled in this Heap:
Nor Hydra's Heads so snarl'd at one another,
As every Parcel quarreled with its Brother.
104.
The Deep climbed up, and tumbled down the Height,
And then fell headlong after it again.
Lightness was busy and forced lazy Weight
To change his Quarters and above remain.
The rude Tempestuous Winds blew all together,
And filled the World at once with every Weather.
105.
Heat, about place, could not with Cold agree,
This strove to frieze its Foe, and that to fry.
The Center in the Bottom scorned to be,
And forced Earth full in Heavens face to fly.
Winter took heat, and breaking open its way;
December flung into the heart of May.
106.
The Ocean stormed, and would no Shore allow,
But swallowed up the Sands, and rushing out
Whilst all things else were quarrelling, did throw
Her billowie Arms the Universe about,
Which in this civil Deluge drowned had been,
Had not the kind Creators Help come in.
107.
Forth flew the Eternal Dove, and tenderly
Over the Floods blind Tumult hovering,
Did secret Seeds of vital Warmth supply
By the sweet Virtue of his Sovereign Wing:
Much like the loving Hen, whose brooding Care
Does hatch her Eggs, and them for life prepare.
108.
When lo, a Voice (this was that supreme Word
Which you, and we, and all the World adore,)
Broke, from the Fathers Mouth with joint Accord
Of the undivided Three, and down did pour
It self upon the Deep, commanding Light
To cheer that universal face of Night.
109.
As when the gloomy Cloud in sunder parts
The nimble Lightning through the World does haste;
So from this Mass of Darkness, thousand Darts
Of orient Beams themselves about did cast,
With ready splendour answering that Call
Which summoned them to gild this groping Ball.
110.
The Shade's affrighted at the Looks of Light
Sneaked to blind holes their shamed heads to hide:
God pitti'd them, and hastening on their flight,
Gave them safe Lodging in the Worlds backside;
There slept dull Night: but Day was brave and bold,
And in the face of God displaid its Gold.
111.
The next Command called for the Firmament
To part the Waters which unruly grew.
Straight, in the midst of them, a Bow was bent
Of solid Substance and of Crystal Hue:
Pure are the Streams which on Heavens Back do flow,
Those gross and dull whose Weight sinks them below.
112.
And they the third Day, all collected were
Into the spacious Bosom of the Sea.
The Earth rejoiced it had leave to appear,
And looked up with brisk Aridity,
Lifting her Mountains high with comely Pride
Which now contemned the Water's proudest (...)
113.
But being naked, and not knowing whence
To cloth her self, God her Apparel made:
He spoke, and straight a flowrie Confluence
Her plains and Valleys with fragrant Robes arrayed;
And trimmed the Heads of all her Hills with Trees,
Earth's native Plumes and stateliest Braveries.
114.
The next Day on the Heaven was spent; which yet
Was like a Virgin-Scroll spread fair and wide,
But with no Characters of Beauty writ,
Till God's great Word engraved its radiant Pride:
But then the royal Sun came smiling forth
Inamouring the whole World at his Birth.
115.
Light which till now had flitted here and there
On the weak back of an ignoble Cloud,
No sooner saw his gallant Face appear,
But in his bosom she desired to shroud.
He courteous was, and to her wished Throne
Received her glorious Ambition.
116.
But being bounteous too; as He espied
The bashful Spangles peeping every where,
He freely dealt his Luster far and wide:
The Moon reached forth her Horns, and caught her share,
So did the Stars; and now all Heaven grew fine,
When He alone, or when all they did shine.
117.
The Hours before his foot came louting low
Begging a Room in his bright Family;
And so did cheerly Day devoted now
With him to wake and sleep, to live and die.
But shame-fac'd conscious Night durst not draw near,
And so she fell to spotted Luna's share.
118.
Then gorgeous Summer came, and spread his way
With Gales of gentle Air, and Clouds of Spice;
Whilst jolly Flora, in her best array,
As prodigal is of her Varieties.
But plainer Winter did more distance keep,
And far behind his burning Chariot creep.
119.
The Sea however surly the first Day,
No sooner heard her great Creator speak,
But her Rebellious Waves she flat did lay,
And opened her mighty Womb, from whence did break
The Winged Nation all Pair by Pair,
The Musical Inhabitants of Air.
120.
The other Germane Brood, whose moister Wings
Abhor the drying Winds, she kept at home,
Where through the Deeps they fly: strange-shaped things,
Which though brought forth, live in their Mothers womb:
A womb of wonders, whose dimensions can
Afford a full flight to Leviathan.
121.
Leviathan whose smoking Nostrills blow
The Sea of Fire which from his Mouth does break:
Whose dreadful sneesings by their flashes show
The brazen Scales which seal his mighty Back:
Whose Beacons dare outface the Mornings Eyes;
Whose Heart in hardness with the Millstone vies.
122.
Leviathan, who laughs at Him that shakes
The bugbear Spear, and (...) the idle Stone:
Who steely Darts for wretched Stubble takes;
Who to the Iron says, Vain Straw be gone;
Who makes the boiling Sea answer his Wrath;
Who where he goes, plows up his hoary Path.
123.
He at whose dismal generation, Fear
Fled far away, and nothing left behind
But Might and Boldness, which compounded were
Into the Metal of the Monsters Mind:
He who exalted in his thoughts does ride
The Sovereign Prince of all the Sons of Pride.
124.
But now the Sixth Day dawned: and Tellus is
Commanded to bring forth her People too:
She heard the Voice, and with strange Activenesse
Bids Beasts and Reptiles with her answer go.
They started up, and cried, Lo We are here,
Before the Words sound left their Mothers ear.
125.
Have thou not seen the gallant Horse, whose Eye
Is fed with living Lightning; whose high Neck
Is clothed with mighty Thunders Majesty;
Whose glorious Nostrills Terrors language speak;
Who never would believe the Trumpets sound;
But with proud nerceness swallows up the Ground;
126.
Who with Impatience does the Valleys paw
When he has smelt the Battle from afar;
Who mocks the Sword, and brave disdain does throw
Upon the Quver, and the glittering Spear;
Who both the Trumpet's and the Soldier's shout
With his more martial Ha ha does flout.
127.
Have thou not seen Behemoth, that vast Mount
Of flesh and bone, that Earths Leviathan;
Whose monstrous Thirst, though many a living Fount
And River, it has slain, still trusts it can
Through the profounder Channel of his throat
All Jordan (even in time of harvest) shoot:
128.
Whose Navell is a Knot of Power; whose Loins
The Mansion of Strength; whose massy Bones
Which to their sockets steely Grissells join,
Are Brass the less, the greater Iron ones;
Who mounts his mighty Tail so high, that He
Seems like the Hill, that like the Cedar Tree.
129.
These goodly Creatures, and ten thousand more,
Some great, some small, did Tellus then bring forth.
But who shall now reign Prince of all this Store,
And of the Oceans more numerous Birth?
This was so high a business, that the great
Creator will for it in Counsel sit.
130.
A Place there is retired far and high
In the bright Tower of eternal Rest,
Roof'd, paved, and walled with Immenfitie,
In at whose Door no Creature ever past:
The Infinite Three there by joint Consultation
Determine of the Work and of the Fashion.
131.
Then stepping down to Earth, this Triple One
Takes up the next Dust that lay at his feet;
Which he compacts and moulds and frames so soon,
That the quick shape did rather seem to meet
His Hand, than follow it, and every Part
As waked by's touch, up from the Dust to start.
132.
Then round about the Universe He reached
His mighty Arm, and culled from every Thing
The choicest Excellence what had enriched
Their Several Tribes, to trim their breeding King,
That they more willingly might Him obey
In whom their own and the Worlds Treasures lay.
133.
Fair was the Image; For its form was true
To that brave Model which the Eternal Son
Had for himself designed: And that which drew
Him to this Work, was that Design alone.
All things but wait upon this Mystery;
The World was made that God a Max might be.
134.
As yet this hopeful Fabric was no more
Than a mere Statue, fair, but cold and dead:
When lo, the kind Creators Breath did pour
Life's Flood into its Nostrills, whence it spread
By the Veins Channells into every Part,
But chose its Manour-house amid'st the Heart.
135.
That Breath immortal was, as flowing from
His Bosom whom Eternity calls Sirc:
And kindled by its Blast, so pure a Flame
As shall outlive Heavens stoutest fairest Fire.
It Is not the Crack and Ruin of the less
Or greater World, that can the Soul suppress.
136.
Thus Adam opened his Eyes; by which such beams
Of inbred Majesty did look abroad,
That now again the portly Creature seems
The royal Image of his mighty God:
Heavens Sovereignty does shine in God, and who
But Man looks like the King of all below?
137.
Nor are his Looks in vain: For in his Hand
Are put the Reins of Air, of Earth, of Sea;
And under his imperial Command
All kinds of Birds, of Beasts, of Fishes be:
Which, though you now so boistrous see, and wild,
Before their King at first were tame and mild.
138.
This Prince of the inferior World thus made,
God founds a Palace where He might reside:
When all the Earth his Eye examined had,
A dainty place which in the East he spied,
Won his best liking, where he builds the Seat
Of his new Viceroy, delicate and great.
139.
It was a Garden, if that Name can speak
The Worth of those illustrious Sweets which there
A brisk Conspiracy of Joys did make,
To prove Heaven dwelt not in the starry Sphere.
The Earth looked poor in all her other Soil,
Whose Meannesse served but for this Jewels foil.
140.
No Weed presumed to show its roytish face
In this Enclosure: Nettles, Thistles, Brakes,
Thorns, Briars, Cockle, Hemlock, rampant Grass
With all those Herbs the meager Wizard rakes
Into his deadly Boxes, either yet
Were not at all, or far from Eden set.
141.
The Yew, the Box, the Cypress, and the other
Trees which to Funerals consecrated be,
Had there no business; Nor Death nor her Mother
Being as yet conceived: No crook-back'd Tree
Disgraced the place, no foolish scrambling Shrub,
No wild and careless Bush, no clownish Stub.
142.
Rude Boreas and his Winter did forbear
To walk this way; so did Distempers, Cares;
Perplexities, Sighs, Melancholy, Fear,
Doubts, Jealousies, Seditions, Treasons, Wars,
Storms, Thunders, Lightnings, Earthquaks, Ruptures, Streins,
Wounds, Boils, Diseases, inward, outward Pains.
143.
For on the Gardens Margin ran a Wall
High built with Beauty which begirt it round:
Delight stood at the Gate, and let in all
Things like her self; But whensoe'r she found
A Blemish, Wrinckle, Frown, Mole, Scar, or Blot,
The inconsistent Stranger out she shut.
144.
Within, rose Hills of Spice, and Frankincense,
Which smiled upon the flowrie Vales below;
Where living Crystal rolled its influence,
Whose musical Impatience did flow
With endless chiding the pure Gems beneath;
Because no smoother they had paved its Path.
145.
The Nymphs which played about this Currents side,
Were milkie Thoughts, tralucid fair Desires,
Soft Turtles Kisses, Looks of Virgin-Brides,
Sweet Coolness which nor needs, nor fears Fires,
Snowie Embraces, cheerly-sober Eyes,
Gentilenesse, Mildness, Ingenuities.
146.
At full length on the Beds of flowers did lie
Smiling Content, Ease, Sweetness, Softness, Pleasure,
Whilst in the carpet-Walks there danced by
Calmeness, Long-days, Security, and Leisure.
Accomplished Growth, brisk Firmitude, and Health,
The only Jewel which makes wealthy Wealth.
147.
Your Roses here, would only spend their Blusn
On their own Ougliness, should they compare
With those pure Eyes, with which the Rosy Bush
Looks up and views its beauteous Neighbors there:
Nor are your Lilies white, if those were by,
Whose leaves are all fair-writ with Purity.
148.
Liban and Carmell must submit their Heads
To Paradise's foot: the Balm, Nard, Myrrh,
And every Odor of Arabia's Beds
Would beg to borrow richer Sweetness here.
Nor would Adoni's Garden scorn to be
Their fellow-suiter, for true Suavitie.
149.
The early Gales knocked gently at the door
Of every flower to bid the Odours wake,
Which taking in their softest Arms, they bore
About the Garden, and returned them back
To their own Beds, but doubled by the Blisses
They sipp'd from their delicious Brethrens Kisses.
150.
Upon the Wings of those inamouring Breaths,
Refreshment, Vigor, and new Spirits attended;
And wheresoe'r they flew, cheered up their Paths,
And with fresh Aires of Life all things befreinded:
For Heaven's all-sweetning Spirit its breath did join
To make the Powers of these Blasts divine.
151.
The goodly Trees their fertile Arms did bend
Under the nobler load of fruit they bore.
That Orchard which the Dragon did attend,
For all its Golden Boughs to this was poor:
As well the greater Serpent knew, who crept
Hither betimes, and here his cursed Watch kept.
152.
Of Fortitude there stood a goodly Row,
Here of Munificence a thick-set Grove,
Of Industry a Quick-set there did grow,
Here flourished a dainty Copps of Love,
There sprung up pleasant Twiggs of ready Wit,
Here a large Tree of Gravity was set.
153.
Here Temperance grew, and wide-spred Justice there,
Under whose moderate Shadow, Piety,
Devotion, Mildness, Friendship planted were;
Next stood Renown, with Head exalted high;
Then Peace, with Plenty, Fatness, Happiness:
O blessed Place where grew such things as these.
154.
Yet what are these, ifby Death's envious Hand
Or they, or their fruition blasted be?
This to prevent, at careful Heavens Command
Amidst the rest sprung up an helpful Tree,
Which nobly proved it self a Branch to be
Plucked from the grand stock of Eternity.
155.
Amidst them all it sprung: for well it knew
Its proper Seat, and chose the Gardens Heart:
What place could more than that to Life be due,
Whence Vigor round might flow, and reach each part.
Fresh Heat and Spirits hung about it thick,
The leav's did breath, and all its fruit was quick.
156.
By this the mighty Tree of Knowledge stood,
(For where should Wisdom dwell, but next the Heart?)
Its Leaves were written fair, but writ with blood,
Holding forth Learning, and capricious Art.
O fatal Tree! how wise had Adam grown,
If He thy woeful knowledge had not known!
157.
High in the shady Galleries sat a Quire
Well worthy such a Chapel; Birds of Praise,
Whose most harmonious Throats did all conspire
To pay for their sweet Home in sweeter Lays:
With whom soft Echo needs her skill would show,
And though she kept slow time, yet she sung true.
158.
This Mapp ofWonders, this Epitomie
Of all Heavens Pride, this Court ofRarities,
This Confluence ofblessed Gallantry,
Was that so much renowned Paradise.
Renowned; yet o how much higher than
The loftiest Praise it ever reaped from Men!
159.
The great Creator hither Adam brings
As to the Portall of Celestial Bliss:
And, See, said He, of these illustrious Things
I give thee free choice, bating only this
One Tree of Knowledge; all the rest are thine,
Eat what thou will; but let that still be mine.
160.
If thy presumptious Hand but touch that Tree
Thy liquorish Crime must cost thy Life, and thou
By Deaths immediate Tallons seized be:
Death, Adam, Death, hangs thick on every Bough.
Lo there the Tree of Life's as near as that:
Take heed thou di'st not for thou know not what.
161.
O Noble Master! whose vast Love did give
A world at once, and yet require no more
But that his Creature would have care to live,
And so in safety possess his Store;
Who ties Him to no homage, but to shun
Being by his own needless fault undone.
162.
After this easy Charge; upon a Throne
Built all of Power He his Lieutenant set,
To exercise his new Dominion
Upon his Subjects; for before his seat
By Heavens Command, the Beasts now marshell'd were
In modest equipage all Pair by Pair.
163.
When Adam fixed on them his awful Eye,
The Lion couched, the Horse let fall his crest,
Behemoths Tail, mounted before so high,
Melted down to the ground, the Bull deprest
His Horns, the Boar sucked in his foam, the Bear,
The Wolf, the Tiger, louted low for fear.
164.
Like reverence bowed down the other Crew
Flat on the ground, when from their Sovereigns Face
Such full beams of imperial Brightness flew
As spoke it plainly the Creators Glass:
Fair the Reflection was, which could command
The rudest Beasts the truth to understand.
165.
As these their duty did; the Eagle drew
Up every rank and file of winged Things:
Thither the Estrich, Vultur, Falcon, flew,
Thither a flock of every Bird that sings;
Thither the Peacock, but with train full low,
For down fell all its Stars, ecclipsed now.
166.
The most magnanimous Cock came strutting on
Disdaining Heaven and Earth, till he drew near
His mighty Sovereigns all-awing Throne,
From whence upon his surly neck flew Fear,
His wings flagg'd low, his fiery gullet grew
Languid and pale, his comb and forehead blue.
167.
Wise Adam marked them all, and sent his Eye
To scarch their bosoms Cabinets; where He read
The essential Lines and Characters which by
Natures late Hand were (...) fashioned;
Their Difference, their Kindred, and Relations,
Their Powers, their Properties, and Inclinations.
168.
Thus of their inward Selves informed, He thought
What Titles would most correspondent be
To their own Bosoms sense, and having wrought
Up in one Word each Natures Mystery.
He took Acquaintance of them all by Name;
Then with a Princely Nod dismissed them.
169.
They went, in loving Pairs: Which as He saw,
He fetched a gentle Sigh, to think that He
His nobler Life in Solitude should draw,
Whilst all things else enjoyed Society.
What boots it him that He raigns Sovereign Lord,
If all his World can Him no Queen afford.
170.
God heard the Sigh, and calling Pity forth,
Dispatched her on an errand to the Deep:
A nimble Nymph was she, and through the Earth
With penetrating sprightfulnesse did leap
Down to the dark Mouth of a silent Cave,
The sink of Discontents, of Cares the Grave.
171.
Before the Grate there stood a lazy Lake
Whose Waters never yet were known to stir;
Upon the bank Oblivion did make
Her sluggish Bed of Moss and caked Fur:
But Remora's and Cramp-fishes groping lay
About the bottom of the Mud and Clay.
172.
Up from the Water crept an heavy Cloud
Of duskie Vapors, on whose back did ride
Fat Drowfinesse, who rubbed her eyes, and bowed
Her gross and over-laden head aside.
About the swarthy shades which thick were spread,
Bats, Owls, and other Night-birds fluttered.
173.
Beyond the Lake Poppy and (...) grew,
Nodding unto their neighbor plump of Trees,
Which were the Willow, Cypress, Box and Yew,
Under whose Boughs lay Quietness and Ease;
And, nestling at their feet, an halt-dead Crowd
Of Dormise and of Bears, all (...) loud.
174.
By these passed Pity, and a gate of Jett
Espied whose Ringle covered was with Wool;
Silence for Porter stood, with finger put
Close to his mouth: Who when he saw her full
Of more than common business with his Queen,
He stole the bar aside, and let her in.
175.
There found she on a Bed of Ebonie
Sleep laid at length: the pillow for her head
Was Badgers Hair: Night and Security
Were the two Blankets on her body spread:
By the Bedside a leaden Pipe did drop;
A Swarm of Bees were humming on the top.
176.
But greater was the Swarm of Dreams, which round
About the room in shap less shapes did fly,
(With all Confusion, but without all sound,
Though some did talk, some sing, some laugh, some cry,)
Some want an head, a cheek, an eye, a nose,
Some want their legs, some feet, and some their toes.
177.
Some were gentile and fine, some rude and course,
Some wild, some terrible, some black, some white,
Some Men before, and yet behind an Horse,
Some Swan on one side, on the other Kite;
Some Love, some Hate, some Half-hope, and Half fear
Some Heaven, some Hell, some both; most Monsters are.
178.
But now the Nymph approaching to the Bed
Aloud her Message spoke, and jogged Sleep:
She shrugg'd, and yawn'd, and thrice lift up her head,
And with one Eye half-ope at length did peep,
And nodded Pity to a Box, whence she
Took what would for her purpose useful be.
179.
With this she posted back to Paradise;
Where she no sooner came in Adam's view,
But he began to rubb his heavy Eyes,
On which she straita sable Powder threw:
Down fell the Man upon a spicy Bed,
Proud of the grace to kiss his sweeter Head.
180.
His Senses sealed up in a dainty Night,
His Soul walked to his Brain to take a view
Of that (...) yet obscure Delight
Which his unwitting fancy there did show:
When lo a goodly Tree salutes his Eye,
Tall, wide, and full of flourishing Majesty.
181.
The Woods looked all that way, and bowed their head;
The Shrubbs crept low and due obcisance made;
The Plants and flowers their fragrant duties did,
Ambitious to be gilded by his shade:
Thus high exalted He alone remains
King of the Hills, the Vales, the Woods, the Plains.
182.
But from his own brave Root, out at his side
A Twigg sprung up, which grew as sair as He:
As high it reached its head, its arms as wide,
And flourished with equal Gallantry;
Their leaves did kiss, their boughs embraced each other
They lived, and lov d, and joy'd, and reigned together'
183.
Yet long their lovely Reign endured not,
For at their Root a desperate Canker grew,
Which gnawing it with restless Venom, got
The Victory, and down their Bodies threw:
The World groaned at their Fall; but Earth did open
Her Mouth, and shut them and their Ruins up.
184.
The (...) Root still held its sturdy hold
And kept its place: so did the Canker his.
New Sprouts took heart, and followed the old
With answerable Bulk and Haughtiness:
But still their fretfull Foe went on to gnaw,
And soon or late laid all their pride full low.
185.
Long held this Conflict: till at length a Sprout
Sprung from a new and unsuspected place;
For on that side the undisposed Root
In all the Worlds opinion arid was:
This only Branch escaped being tainted by
The inbred Canker's foul affinity.
186.
Yet escaped he not its Envy; for one day
The Monster took a Leap and Him a (...),
Whom when it saw shrinking and giving way,
It impudently hoped to have prevailed;
But he recoyl'd, and was content to die
Only to make sure of his Victory:
187.
For wisely ordering his brave Ruin, He
With his dead weight upon his Enemy fell:
Who crushed under this Calamity,
Paid for its Boldness, and sunk down to Hell:
When lo the conquered, yet victorious Tree
Starts up again in new Life's Bravery.
188.
And after Him those other Trees arose
Which had layn dead and rotten long before;
For 'twas his Pleasure to impart to those
His own vivacious overflowing store;
They every where leaped up to life, and stood
So thick, that now the Plain became a Wood.
189.
A royal Wood of everlasting Trees,
Whose radiant Arms through all the World reached Gold,
Whose Fruit were Gems, and Heaven-born Rarities,
Whose Heads themselves high in the Spears enrolled;
Yet all were Shrubs unto that Cedar who
Had called them from their Graves with him to go.
190.
Whilst Adam fettered lay in senseless Chains
Gazing and Musing on this wondrous show,
God opened his side, but mean while bid the Veins
Seal up their Mouths, and see no dropps did flow;
From thence he chose a single Rib, and then
The wicket closed, and all was whole again.
191.
That Bone he handled with such breeding Art
That it disolved into many more,
And yielded all Materials for each Part
Of an accomplished Body: What before
Was nothing but a Rib, is now alone
Blood, flesh, skin, entrails, sinews, muscles, bone.
192.
And that the work might answer its sweet shop,
In which was formed no Creature else but this,
The willing Gardens Beauties he did crop
This Paradise of Paradise to dress.
All sweets and Delicacies flowed thither,
And in one Eve were molded up together.
193.
Eve the Topstone of all the brave Creation,
The Bliss of Adam, and the crown of Nature;
Eve, who enjoys the most removed station
From the black Chaos; Eve that final Creature,
In whom the Almighty Lord set up his rest,
And only spared to say, Head done his best.
194.
Her spacious polished Fore head was the fair
And lovely Plain where gentle Majesty
Walked in delicicus state: Her Temples were
A piece of a Pomgranate, which did lie
In dainty ambush under their soft Cover
Of Amber Looks whose volumes curled over.
195.
The fuller stream of her Luxuriant Hair
Poured down it self upon her Ivory Back;
And in its Flood ten thousand Graces were
Sporting and dallying with every Lock;
Which when the inamor'd winds did kiss, you might
Have seen a ruffling Tempest of Delight.
196.
Two princely Arches of most equal measures
Held up the Canopy above her Eyes,
And opened to the Heavens far richer Treasures
Than with their Stars, or with their Sun did rise:
Their Beams can ravish but the Bodies sight,
These dazell stoutest Souls with mystic light.
197.
These were two Garrisons of all conquering Love;
Two Founts of life, of Spirit, of Joy, of Grace;
Two Easts of one fair Heaven, no more above,
But in the Hemisphear of her own face;
Two Thrones of Gallantry; two shops of Miracles;
Two shrines of Dieties; two silent Oracles.
198.
For here could Silence eloquently plead,
Here could the invisible Soul be clearly read;
Though Humors their mild composition made,
They were two Burning Glasses, wherce were shed
Those living Flames which with enlivening Darts
Shoot Deaths of Love into Spectators Hearts.
199.
'Twixt these an Alabaster Promontory
Slop'd gently down, parting each Cheek from other,
Where White and Red strove which should get the glory,
Blending in sweet confusion together.
The Rose and Lilie never joined were
In a diviner Marriage than there.
200.
Upon these precious Cushionets did lie
Ten thousand Beauties, and as many Smiles,
Chaste Blandishments, and genuine Courtesy,
Harmless Temptations, and honest Guiles.
For Heaven, though up betimes the maid to deck,
Never made Aurora's cheeks so fair and sleek.
201.
Neatness, and Pleasure, and inamoring Grace
About her Mouth in full Retinue stood:
For next the Eyes bright Glass, this is the place
In which the Soul delights to walk abroad.
But at her lips two scarlet Threads there lay,
Or two warm Coralls, to adorn the way;
202.
The precious Way, where, by her Breath, and Tongue,
Her Odours and her Honey out did flow:
Which thou would have judged to have been bred among
Arabian and Hyblean Hills; and so
They were indeed; the richer Arabie
And sweeter Hybla in her Mouth did lie.
203.
As crowned with a golden Chapter
A Column of white Marble you have seen;
So her round polished Neck her Head did bear,
Nor did the shining Pillar bend or lean:
Yet neither would this Marble hardness know,
Nor suffer Cold to dwell amongst its Snow.
204.
Her blessed Bosom moderately rose
With two soft Mounts of Lilies, whose fair Top
Two Cherrie Branches for their Station chose,
And there their living Crimson lifted up.
The milkie Countenance of the Hills confessed
What kind of Springs within had made their Nest.
205.
Fair Politure walked all her Body over,
And Symmetrie flew through every Part;
Soft and white Sweetness round about did hover;
From every Member Beauty shot its dart:
From Heaven to Earth, from head to foot, I mean,
No sign of Blemish or of Spot was seen.
206.
This was the first born Queen of Gallantry,
All Gems compounded into one rich Stone,
All Sweets knit into one Conspiracy,
A Constellation of all Stars in one:
Who when she was presented to the view
Of Paradise, the Place all dazeled grew.
207.
Proud Phoebus who in glorious Scorn did fly
About the World, no sooner spied her face,
But fain he would have lingered, from his sky
Upon this less but sweeter Heaven to gaze;
Till shame enforced him to lash on again,
And clearer wash him in the Western Main,
208.
The Air smiled round about, for joy that he
Had the prerogative of the Virgin kiss,
And did embrace with blessed Liberty
A Body soft and sweet and chaste as His.
All gentle Gales that had but strength to stir
Did thither flock to beg perfumes of Her.
209.
The Marigold forgot her garish Love,
And turned her duty to these fairer Eyes;
All Flowers looked up, and as they could, did move
Toward those ocular Spears, from whence did rise
Mild and unparching Beams, Beams which in stead
Of fire, soft joys irradiations spread.
210.
The sturdiest rudest Trees affected were
With her delightful Presence, and did melt
At their hard Pith: Whilst all the Birds which there
Were tossing Mirth about the Branches, felt
The influence of her Looks; For having let
Their Song fall down, their Eyes on Her they set.
211.
And o how soon their proudest plumes and wings
Followed their song! For in Her Person they
With fixed intention read more glorious things
Than all their feathers Bravery could display,
And were content no more the Name to wear
Of Birds of Paradise, while she was there.
212.
But when she moved her Feet, the joyful Earth
A waked her uttermost Fertility,
And by a brisk extemporary Birth
Of Myrrh, of Flowers, of Spice, did testify
What Carpets Pomp was requisite to make
The Passage fit, where Beauty was to walk.
213.
She walked; by that mild importunity
To break the Chains of sleep which bound her Spouse:
But he wakes more by powerful Sympathy
Which on the sudden in his Bosom glows:
At first he thought his Dream had still possessed him,
And with a fairer apparition blessed him.
214.
But by his wise and most discerning Eyes
Examining the graceful Object, He
Pries into all the Truth; and smiling cries,
This nothing but my other Self can be:
From Me she sprung, a Woman from a Man,
And is but Adam in reflection.
215.
How sweet a Confluence of Loves and Joys
Met here in their first Marriage Embrace;
Which was as pure and chaste, as when one Voice
In Musick's wedded to another Grace,
Where with concentrick Delicacies they
Hug and conspire in one soul-plying Lay.
216.
Adam beholds himself more sweet in Eve,
In Him She reads her self more high and grave;
Either from other does Themselves receive,
As fast returning what they taking gave,
Thus when two Currents meet, they loose each other
In the pellucid bosom of his brother.
217.
They naked were, if only skins, and hairs,
And excrements of Beasts Apparel be:
But who will tax the Sun, the Moon, the Stars,
The Diamond, Crystal, Coral, Ivorie,
Of Nakedness, because the Clothes they wear,
None but their native Beams and Beauties are.
218.
A Robe of Innocence and Purity
Down from their Head unto their foot did flow,
Transmitting their fair feature to the Eye,
But letting no unseemely shame peep through.
They Naked were of every borrowed Dress,
And Naked of what you count Nakedness.
219.
In this Condition did they live and love
And each with other enterchange their Heart;
Fairly transcribing our sweet Life above,
Where every Angels Eye his soul does dart
Into his Fellows breast, that all may be
In common blessed by one Felicity.
220.
How great a Feast, and earnest Invitation
Was this for Envy, whose ambitious Tooth
Disdains all fare but in the noblest fashion;
Who armed with Jaws of greedy Iron does
Dread no encounter, but with restless spite
Against the most confirmed Champions fight!
221.
Built is her Palace in the Heart of Hell,
Whose foul Materials Rust and Poison be:
Her cursed Throne is mounted on the fell
Bosom of Beelzebub, whom furious She
Stings with eternal Rage, and makes Him run
About the wild Work of Damnation.
222.
To Paradise He came, and brought his Hell
Into the earthly Heaven, where looking round
To view the Colonies which there did dwell,
A Creature spruce and delicate He found
Upon a Bank of flowrie Pleasures spread,
But far more sweet and beauteous then its bed!
223.
It was the Serpent, whose illustrious skin
Played with the Sun, and sent Him back his Beams
With glorious Use: that Wealth which glisters in
The bosom of the Oriental Streams
Salutes Aurora's Cheek with fewer Rays
Then this bright Robe in all Heaven's face displays.
224.
His sharpest Eyes sparkled with nimble flames,
The light by which his active Soul was read;
Wisdom and Art, with all their plots and frames
Made their close Nest in his judicious Head:
Above his Fellows on Crafts Wings he flew:
All Beasts but He, to that dull Name were true.
225.
This Agent Beelzebub approved; and as
He fed upon his Couch, mixed with his Meat,
And in that ambush through his lips did pass;
Where (having taught his Bane to relish sweet,)
He easily won the passage through his Throat,
And thence by stealth into his Heart he got.
226.
As when the Fire has through the Cauldrons side
Into its unsuspecting bowels stolen,
The Liquor frets and fumes, and to a Tide
Of working Wrath and hot impatience swollen,
With boiling Surges beats the Brass, and leaves
No way untr'd to vent its tortured Waves:
227.
So now the Serpent felt his Bosom swell
With peevish Rage and desperate Disdain;
A thousand Plots and fallacies did fill
The busy Corners of his belking Brain:
Sometimes he beats on that, sometimes on this,
Sometimes thinks neither, sometimes both amiss,
228.
He knew the vastness of his fell Design,
Which was to slay a World at one dread Stroke,
And reach Destruction in a poisoned Line
Unto the latest Twigg of Humane Stock;
And therefore mustered up the utmost Might
All Hell could send to back Him in the fight.
229.
But pondering then how Adams sober Breast
With Wisdoms Ammunition furnished was,
And strongly fortified with all the best
Of sin-defying Piety and Grace,
He shak'd his head, and thought the Match not even
To venture on a fight with Him and Heaven.
230.
For if he happened to be foild at first,
His following Onsets all would sweat in vain.
And his own poysnous Spite his Breast would burst
To see how Adam and his Race should reign
Safe and free Kings of earthly Paradise,
And flourish thence, to that above the skies.
231.
Yet, wholly to decline the Conflict, were
To let Man win those Realms without a Blow,
And freely to permit what he did fear
Perchance might be by his own Overthrow:
To a resolved Fight this spurred him on,
Who could loose Nothing, though he Nothing won.
232.
He wisely had observed soft-temper'd Eve;
And yet he feared the Metal of her Breast
Would prove so generous, that to Deceive
Would be an easier Task, then to Contest;
And, could she any way be overthrown,
He hoped her Fall would justle Adam down.
233.
Remembering then, what Engine did subdue
A wiser Head and stronger far than she,
And how impatient Ambition threw
Grand Lucifer from Heavens Sublimity;
He trusts that now the like successful End
Will on this tried way of fight attend.
234.
Advised thus: the mighty Quintessence
Of venturous ever-swelling Philautie,
Of Discontent, of Scorn, of Insolence,
Of towering Fancies, of Self-flattery,
And of the stoutest Heav'n-aspiring Pride
Together in one desperate Plot He ti'd.
235.
And, if this will not do the feat, yet I
Excused am, said He, and upon Hell
Be the foul shame, whose feeble Princes by
The shock of this Temptation headlong fell.
This said, He toward Eve did gently glide,
Whom straying from her Husband He espied.
236.
Unhappy Error that, which did invite
The jealous Tempter to be bold, since she
Had robbed her self of all her Spouses Might,
By starting from his holy Company!
But all the way the cunning Serpent went
He put on Looks of contrary Intent.
237.
For Love and Friendship smiled in his Eyes,
Upon his Face sat Tenderness and Care:
Thrice did he bow his flattering Neck, and thrice
His silent Homage he presented her:
And then, Fair Queen of Paradise, said he,
Why must the Prince be bound, and Subjects free?
238.
We crop our Pleasures wheresoe'r We please
From any flowrie, any spicie bed,
We pluck our dinner from the dangling Trees,
And all the Garden does our Table spread:
But royal You, and Adam nothing eat.
Have your own Wills, or God, this order set?
239.
Nay, courteous Serpent, Eve replied, We
Have large Commission, and our God is kind:
He gives Us leave to feast on every Tree,
And with all Paradise to please our Mind,
Bating that one of Knowledge, on whose Boughs
Inevitable Death He tells Us grows.
240.
O credulous Queen, the Serpent answers, who
Make your own prejudice by believing it!
What has a fatal Tree of Death to do,
Just at whose Elbow one of Life is set?
I to your self appeal: Judge you but whether
These two can grow like such good Friends together
241.
Death in a Tree! Flat contradiction lies
In the bare Word: How can Death be alive?
Sure Vegetation very ill complies
With saplesse Stupor. O do not deceive
Your Thoughts, nor teach the Tree of (...) how
To turn a Tree of Ignorance to you.
242.
Observe its goodly Apples: can you read
In their fair cheeks the ghastly Looks of Death?
Do any Boughs in all this Garden breed
A Fruit which more of Heavens sweet Countenance has?
Yet grant it Poison prove: Behold at hand
The Tree ofLife for Antidote does stand.
243.
Ask Me not whether Truth can tell a Lie;
Vain were the Question; for your God is True.
And yet it seems by a deep Fallacy
Of enigmatick Truth He cheateth You:
Indeed the Tree bears Death; but Death which will
Nothing but Wants and imperfections kill
244.
A Death of Life, which will destroy You so
That you no longer Creatures shall remain;
But by this Metamorphosis shall grow
Above your selves, and into Gods be slain,
With Eyes divine discerning Good from Evil,
From Heaven Hell, and an Angel from a Devil.
245.
Full well did God know this; and it is no Wonder
If He desires to reign a God alone:
And so He may, if he can keep You under
By the poor Rein of one Injunction;
If by an Apple thus He terrifies
The native Princes of fair Paradise.
246.
O how it stings my Soul, to think that You
My Sovereign should thus faint-hearted be!
For my part, did ten thousand Mandates grow
Thick in my Way, to bar Me from this Tree,
Through all I Would break, And so would You, if once
Your Heart were fired by my Experience.
247.
For yesterday, when I began to taste
The sprightfull Fruit, Flames kindled in mine Eyes;
My Soul a waked, and from my Bosom chas't
Those Mists of Ignorance, whose thick Disguise
Muffled my thoughts, and kept me down a Beast
As dark and dull as any of the rest.
248.
But now Serenity walks through my heart,
And yields me uncontrolled Prospect to
The Orbs of Knowledge, where from Part to Part
My nimbly piercing Eye about does go.
This is the Death I found: a Death which I
Mean ever day as long's I live to die.
249.
O then what vast advantage will arise
To your large Soul by this enlightening Tree!
My breast is shallow, narrow are mine Eyes,
But wide and brave is your Capacity:
So wide, that Wisdoms deepest Seas may find
Sufficient Channells in your Mighty Mind.
250.
And if this Knowledge, if Divinity
It self, may merit but the easy Pains
Of your Acceptance: O persuaded be
To suffer these inestimable Gains.
Shame burns my Cheeks, that I your Slave, should eat
This Bliss, and You my Queen be barred the Meat.
251.
And yet you are not barred: Behold but how
You are bid welcome by the courteous Tree,
Whose laden Arms their precious Offerings bow
To meet your Mouth, and seem to plead with Me:
Their postures Language asks, What make we here
If we alone by You contemned are?
252.
These Charms stole open the Door into the Heart
Of careless Eve, and thrust their poison in:
Besides, the smiling Apples played their part,
And her Affections with her Eye did win:
Capricious curious Pride did her invite
What ever it cost, to taste of that Delight.
253.
Three times she stepped to the enchanting Tree,
As often by Conscience plucked back again:
Yet still with fatal importunity
She struggled till she broke her Freedoms Chain;
Then with unchecked Madness on she goes
To win her wished Prize, and her Self to loose.
254.
Up went her desperate Hand, and reached away
All the Worlds Bliss whilst she the Apple took:
When lo, the Earth did move, the Heavens did stay,
Beasts and Birds shivered, absent Adam shook;
But none did know the reason of their Fear;
Only he ran to see what Eve did here
255.
O balefull sight! His precious Queen he saw
Enslaved by her soothing Subjects Craft.
She who was Beauties Center until now,
Is of her brave Prerogative bereft:
Bereft so wholly, that with wondering Doubt
For his late lovely Eve, in Eve He sought.
256.
Apparent Misery sat on her Face,
Before the goodly Throne of Pleasantness:
Her Cheeks, which bloomed till now with heavenly Grace
Sins black and dismal horror did confess;
Forth at her Eyes, of late Life's Windows, Death
Did look, and Rottenness flowed with her Breath.
257.
But greater was the Change within; for there
Her bold Transgression spread an hideous Night
Of Ignorance on her intellectual Sphere:
Her Will, which grew before so fair and straight,
Turned crooked and perverse: Each Passion
Scorned Her Commands, as the Her Gods had done.
258.
Her Heart till now soft as the Turtles Sighs,
Its heav'n-inamoring Tenderness forgets,
And with the stoutest Purian Marble vies:
Her Thoughts, before all Sons of Love, profess
No trade but Mischief now, and busy are
To propagate the Woes which stinged Her.
259.
Nor fears she now to play the Serpent too
In envy of her Husbands blessed State,
Whom with the beauteous Apples she does Woo
To taste of Hell, and swallow down his fate:
Fall to my Dear, said she; fear not the food,
I have thy Taster been, and find it good.
260.
But wiser Adam well the danger knew
Whose miserable Proof now wounds his eyes;
Nor could the poor Bait of an Apple show 1 Timothy 2. 14.

Him reason, Heaven and Virtue to despise.
Fair in his bosom written was the Law,
And reverent Terror kept his Soul in awe.
261.
In a we a while it kept it: But at last
Commiseration of his Spous's case.
Grew to such strength in his too-tender Breast
That Pity to himself it did displace.
Eve sat so near to his Uxorious Heart,
That rather he with Heaven, then Her will part.
262.
For part He must, unless He reconcile
That mighty Breach which she between them made.
O potent Sympathy! which can beguile
An Heart so pure and cleer-ey'd and degrade
Earths Monarch from his native Pinnacle
Of Innocence, as low as Death and Hell.
263.
He yields, and eats, and eating tears the great
Creators Law: yet tears not that alone,
But rends his Bliss, his Health, his Life, and that
Fair Robe of Purity (...) He had on,
Becoming Eves Companion no less
In nature, than in shameful Nakedness.
264.
And thus indeed they 'gan to judge between
Evil and Good, whilst they themselves did see,
Who until then no Evil thing had seen,
But now can witness their own Misery;
Which they with wrerched Aprons strive to heal,
As if the leaves the Apples would conceal.
265.
Alas, nor they, nor all the Trees that grow
In shady Paradise so thick and high
Could any shelter unto them allow
When he was pleased to search, who is all Eye.
Yet by degrees he finds them, that they might
With Deprecations salute his sight.
266.
Had he in Thunder and in Lightning spoke,
And of fierce Vengeance breathed a flaming stream,
Just had the Dialect been: But He did make
A foft enquiry of the Fault, and seem
To beg Confession, and to wait whilst they
Did with their Crime their Penitence display.
267.
But they with Shifts, and Excusations try
Not to excuse the Fact, but to defend,
And by that wretched Impudence defy
Mercy, which all this while did them attend.
This forced Justice, who came rushing in,
And did her Office upon saucy Sin.
268.
She first the Curse pronounced, which written was
In adamantine Tables, never to be
Reversed by Pity: Then she forth did chase
The proud Delinquents, and the Garden free
From its unworthy Guests, appointing Fate
To set a double Guard before the Gate.
269.
A Troop of Cherubs straight was marshalled
In dreadful Order at the Eastern Gate;
And then a flaming Fauchion brandished
Terror about the way, that none might at
That door of Happiness pass in, but who
By tried Purity through Fire could go.
270.
The Woeful Exiles were no sooner come:
Into the wide World, but poor Adam sees
The heavy Loss of his enclosed Home,
Finding in stead of blessed Flowers and Trees,
Thistles and Thorns all armed with pikes and pricks
Amongst whose Crowd he vexed and tattered sticks
271.
Long did He strive and toil ever He could make
The Ground give fertile answer to his sweat:
The righteous Earth did this due Vengeance take
On his Rebellion; so did the great
Cognation of Beasts and Birds, who broke
Off from their sullen Necks his regal Yoke.
272.
Those who were able, muster up their might,
And in their Makers Quarrel Him pursue:
The weaker, from his presence speed their flight,
Professing now they knew no homage due:
Thus by their fury Those, These by their Fear
Equally frightfull and vexatious were.
273.
No friend he had, but her who did betray
Him to that Misery, unhappy Eve:
And yet the reaping of his sweetest Joy,
Of what was sweeter, did them both deprive;
Their gains unable were to quit the cost,
For now their dear Virginity was lost.
274.
Eve through many nauseous Months did pass
Ever she could to her hardest travel come:
O who can tell the Pangs by which she was
Tortured and torn, when her unhappy Womb
It self unloaded! for the Curse was sure,
Nor could those Torments ever find a Cure.
275.
In sin conceiving, she brought forth in pain,
And with Pollution died her Progeny:
Through all Successions her anneiled stain
Did propagate its own Deformity,
And all her Heirs bind in an Obligation
Of Death, and what is deadlier, Damnation.
276.
Besides, the peevish and importunate (...)
Of restless Kicking at Heavens gentle Law,
Its fretfull Taint did in proud Triumph stretch
Through the whole Current of her Blood which now
In humane veins so madly boyls and flames,
That kindled at the fire of Hell it seems.
277.
Thus when black Venom has into the Spring
Infused Death, the Streams which from it run,
How far so ever they travel, still they bring
Along with them that first Contagion:
The furthest Drop knows not how to escape
The reach of that Original Mishap.
278.
Your Souls I grant, rise not from that foul Spring,
Nor did they ever swim in Adams veins:
Yet is the Body so unclean a thing,
That strait it does communicate its Stains:
Nor can the soul be pure which married is
To so contagious a Spouse as this.
279.
Yet call not God unjust, who does commit
So fair a Gemme unto so foul a Case,
Thereby infallibly engaging it
To be as black and cursed as its Place.
O no: He still is kind and knows a way
Through Wrath and Judgment, Mercy to display.
280.
No Plot of Satan's spite shall undermine
Or make a breach in the Creations frame:
Nature shall still proceed, and Heavens Design
Of Man's felicity persist the same:
God-like it is indeed, Fates Scales to turn,
And make them Blessed, who to a Curse were born,
281.
Whilst God makes pure Souls dive into this stream
Of Blackness, gracious He contriveth how
To wash and cleanse and re-imbellish them
Till they unto such powerful Beauty grow
That sweetly on their Bodies they can be
Revenged, infecting them with Purity,
282.
Such purging Might in Jesus Blood there flows,
That from the face of its least Drop do fly
This Stain which at the Root of Mankind grows,
And all those Blots which on the Branches lie,
And this dear Fountain, in Decree, was broached
Long ever the Soul by any Taint was touched.
283.
They who desire't may here refined be
Into a Claritude becoming that
High Paradise of whose felicity
Edens was only the faint Shadow: But
They who scorn such Bliss, would themselves have thrown
To Hell though Eve had never helped them down.
284.
And tell me Psyche what thou think now
Of thy Extraction, which from wretched Dust,
The Scumm of Earth, and game of Winds, does flow;
What of thy rotten Kindred, since thou must
Corruption for thy Mother own, and call
Each Worm thy Sister that in mire does crawl.
285.
Yet Worms are ly'ble to one only Death,
A Death which quickly will it self destroy:
But thy Composure in its bosom has
A Living Poison, that may find a way
To kill thee with surviving Death, by which
Thy torture to Eternity shall reach.
286.
Think well on this, and if thou can, be proud,
Who by the Pride of thy first Parents art
With this destructive Portion endowed,
And from thy Birth betrothed to endless Smart.
Think what vast distance lies 'twixt worthless thee
And the Almighty King of Majesty.
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO VII. The Great Little One.
ARGUMENT.
THe Angel convoys Psyche to the Sceen
Of Mercies grand Exploits, to show Her what
Dear Care Heaven took to wash her bosom clean
From the foul shame of every sinful Blot.
Betimes he 'gins, and from the morning Glory
Of Loves bright Birth, lights in the blessed Story.
1.
ILlustrious Spirits of Fire, who ever you be,
This Lesson will be no discredit to
Your towering Flames; nor must Heroic Ye
To School to Psyche's Legend scorn to go:
Such Sparks as you for all your glittering, be
In your Original, as dim as she.
2.
As other Fires at length to Ashes grow,
So must brave Ye: Yet they were lighted from
Some generous bright Original; but you
And your Extraction, did from Ashes come.
Whether forward you, or backward turn your eye,
Your Bounds are Vileness, Shame, and Misery.
3.
Examine Alexanders Monument,
Or Helens Tomb, and mark what there does lie:
Or if your Nostrills dread the banefull sent
Of their in-vain-embalmed Majesty;
Trust that strong Proof, which bidds you sadly think
That you, though great and fair, must end in stink.
4.
But trust not Pride, whose tumid Treachery
Did to that Rottenness all the World betray.
No Poison yet did ever swell so high,
Or to such certain Death prepare the way.
Steep headlong Danger on the Mountains reigns:
Let them who safe would walk, walk on the Plains.
5.
Plain are the Walks of mild Humility,
And know no Precipice, but planted are
With sweet Content, with pious Privacie,
With cheerful Hope, and with securing Fear.
An Humble Soul, which always dwells below,
Prevents that Ruin which on Hills does grow.
6.
The Tempest's aim is at those lofty Things
Which rise against it, and its strength defy.
This to the Pines and Oaks Destruction brings,
Whilst modest Shrubbs beneath in peace do lie.
Thus come proud Rocks to rue the angry Wind;
Which to the humble Vales is always kind.
7.
Humility is provident, and acquaints
Aforehand with her Ashes, which she knows
Must be her End: She in no flattering Paints
Her sober Judgment and her self will loose;
She dies betimes, how long so ever she lives,
And Death but as a long known Friend receives.
8.
She huggs her Hearse, and does her Grave embrace,
And pants and longs her final Even to see,
When in that cool and undisturbed Place
Her weary Head to rest may settled be:
Assured of a Friend, whose Care has found
For Her to Heaven a passage under ground.
9.
She strongly woo's the Worms to crawle apace;
She prays not slow Corruption to make haste:
Toward Death for life she runs, and thinks her Race
Is long because she yet lives: On as fast
She speeds, as Sighs of Love can blow Her, or
Fire of unquenchable Desire can spurr.
10.
O meek Ambition which correctest Pride
Into a Virtue, and make Venom grow
Plain Antidote! An heart which thou do guide
Struggles and reaches still to be more low;
And prides it self in nothing, but to be
From Prides Dominion entirely free.
11.
The Seeds of this fair Grace deep planted were
In Psyche's tender Heart by Charis hand:
Which as they sprouted up, with heavenly care
To weed, and dress them, Phylax by did stand:
And now, to make them flourish higher, she
Will with her liberal Tears their Waterer be.
12.
For Phylax had no sooner made an end,
But She begins, first by her showring Eyes;
Then by her Tongue, which with their Tears did blend
Its Lamentations: Woe is me, she cries,
What now should Psyche do who needs would be
Proud of her shame, and poisnous Misery?
13.
Your scorn, by wretched Me so deeply ern'd,
My wronged Friends, at length let me obtein:
O Charis, my all guilty Soul is burned
By those fair Flames which in thine Aspect reign.
How can such Night-birds as vile I endure
The holy Lightning of a Look so pure?
14.
And Yoa, dear Phylax, lose your Pains no more
Upon an undeserving hideous Thing.
Why should proud Psyche dwell, as heretofore,
Under the shelter of thy scorned Wing?
O let it free it self, and take its flight;
Why should black I defile an House so white!
15.
The odious Bat with more decorum will
Flutter about a Thing as dark as she;
And lend her sooty Wings to make a veil
For correspondent Ouglines in me.
The ominous Raven will fitter be to spread
Her swarthy Plumes on my polluted Head.
16.
Let me enjoy the sad Inheritance
Of my deep-stained Birth: Was I not born
Apparent Heir to an entayld Mischance?
Did not my wretched Beings lowry Morn
Dawn with eternal Night? Dwelt not Death in
The fatal Spring of my Parentall sin?
17.
Why must my breath defile the Virgin Air?
Why must I load the harmless Earth with Guilt?
Why must I stain the World, which would be fair
If I were gone? My Tomb is ready built
In any place where Filth, and Dunghils lie.
Let Justice have her course, and let me die.
18.
My due Home is where Arrogance, and bold
Rebellion dwell: O Let me thither go!
May worthy Eyes behold the Sunns fair Gold,
And view their way to Heaven: I have to do
With naught but Pitch and Darkness, which may hide
The equal Horror of my wilful Pride,
19.
My heavenly Spouse; (o why do I blaspheme!)
That Spouse who long desired to be mine;
Me thinks from Heaven does with a piercing Beam
Full on my face and faithless Bosom shine,
And by that Light read all that Treason I
Have wrought against his loving Majesty.
20.
O, it will scorch Me up I my Sinnews crack,
My Bones are burnt, and all my Marrow fries,
My Bosom melts, the Flame devoures my back,
My Heart flows down, and woeful Psyche dies.
I die; and yet I breath: My Death lives still:
No kind of Slaughter ever like this did kill.
21.
Surely the Flames which make all Hell so black,
Are cool and gentle, if compared with these:
Why go I not to take my Kinder Rack,
And in the infernal Torments find some Ease?
Have done fond fruitless Tears; you are too weak
The greater Torrent of this Fire to slake.
22.
Here Phylax here, lo I my self ungird;
This Token can no treacherous Heart befit:
Return it back to my abused Lord,
And beg my Pardon who have stained it.
What will it not unbuckle? Must I be
Still Prisoner to his wronged Courtesy?
23.
And must this Girdle now besiege Me round
With an indissoluble Check of my
Disloyalty? Must I thus close be bound
Up in my Self, and not have room to fly
From what I hate far more than Death and Hell,
The sinful Blots of which this Breast is full?
24.
So strait upon my griped Soul the Chains
Of deep Damnation can no Torments tie,
As this sweet Cincture binds me to the Pains
Of self-confusion. O Me! -- Here her Cry
Did with her Spirits faint; and down she fell
Griefs total Prey, and Pitties Spectacle.
25.
Pity was near; For Charis stood close by,
Whose yearning bowels all this while did move:
But roused more by herfall, she instantly
Obeyed the nimble Violence of Love;
Love moved her Heart, and that her Hand, by which
To fainting Psyche she relief did reach.
26.
She took her up, and with a sweet Embrace
Instilled gentle Warmth into her Breast,
Whose never-failing Virtue did displace
Griefs vast Plethora which had her oppressed,
And by delicious degrees restore
Her ship wracked Thoughts to their composed shore.
27.
So have I seen a wise Physician
New spirits to his swowning Patient give,
Who, though his Heart before were sunk and gone,
Does by the Potion it again receive,
Whilst in the cheerly salutiferous Cup
A draught of liquid Life he drinks up.
28.
Awakened Psyche, with amazed Eyes
Beheld her Friends; but wondered more to see
Her stout Disease made a tame Sacrifice
Unto that heavenly Cordial which she
Felt reigning in her breast, and which did seize
Her Heart both with Astonishment and Ease.
29.
Ambiguous Fancies tossed her up and down
Uncertain whether some Dreams Flattery
Into a vain Elysium had thrown
Her cheated Soul, or whether truly she
Was by some courteous Gale snatched from the Billows
And on the Bank laid safe on Peace's pillows
30.
Which Charis seeing; You may trust, said she
Your sudden Happiness, which wears no Cheat.
But see that you misplace no thanks on Me;
Which all are more than due unto your great
And constant Spouse, who though forgot by You,
Could not his Love away so quickly throw.
31.
Those life-renewing Sweets I brought you down,
Were none of mine: He sent both me and them:
He knew your Wants and counted them his own,
Who longs to have you be all one with him.
Then by these Comforts which have cured your Smart
Learn who it is that most deserv's your Heart,
32.
O'r-powred with unweildy Thanks and Praise,
At this vast Tide of her obtruding Bliss,
Here Psyche strove her laboring Breast to ease,
Yet neither Thanks nor Praise she could express:
For what she had conceived, was so great
She neither could contain, nor utter it.
33.
But Phylax seeing her sweet Agony,
Cried, it is enough, Heaven can hear mute Desires.
Come Psyche, you shall travel now with me
To find full fuel for your amorous Fires.
It will be worth your voyage when you see
What Balm did grow to heal your Misery.
34.
The God of Goodness by his powerful Eye
Reaching those Things which yet were short of Being,
Did in the Volumes of Eternity
Read all the future World: where clearly seeing
What mischief would be done by foolish Pride,
A potent Remedy He did provide.
35.
Indeed had no Redemption invited
Thy Spouse to Feast the World with his dear Blood,
Yet to Man's Nature he would have united
His own, that the Creation might have stood
Fast ti'd unto its Maker, and by this
Conjunction, been near sharer in his Bliss.
36.
But seeing by Hereditarie Stains
The Stream of Humane Blood runs foul and black,
It found work for the virtue of his Veins
The Poison of the tainted Flood to check:
Which nobly he performed, as thou shall see
When I have led thee through his History.
37.
As she now cheered her heart and countenance up,
A radiant Chariot caught her wondering Eye;
The winged Steeds foamed at that little stop,
And though their Wings were down, their thoughts did fly.
Speed was the Chariots Metal, and each Wheel
Composed was of never-tyring Zeal.
38.
Come Psyche, come, this Couch for haste does call,
Cried Phylax; fear not, it is no cheating one,
Nor, like thy last, will bear thee to thy Fall;
I mean to hold the Reigns: Come let us be one,
If you, sweet Sir, will have it so, content
Said she, and meekly blushing, in she went.
39.
Up flew Devotion, and Chastity
The gallant Steeds which did the Chariot draw,
Her native Albion soon began to be
Lost in a Sea of Air; and now she saw
The wealthy Fields of Gallia, which as fast
Behind her fled as she did forward post.
40.
Then climbing higher in her yiedling Way,
Eternal Banks of obstinate Frost and Snow
Which Winter on the Alps high back did lay,
Spite of the nearer Sun, she leaves below,
And through the tumult of the justling Clouds
Down into the Italian Heaven she crowds.
41.
From thence she launched into that Region
Which by the Adriatic Storms does frown,
And sped her course above that Ocean
About whose sides the Mid-land shores are thrown:
So well did Phylax steer, that to a Port
So far off, never was made a Cut so short.
42.
For having reached blessed Palestine, she flew
Over the grovelling Towns of Galile,
Until the Steeds, as if the place they knew,
At Nazareth brake off their Course; where she
Viewing the simple Village, wondered why
Her Convoy, thither took such pains to fly.
43.
But Phylax having led her by the Hand
To the unlikliest House; Behold, said he,
This precious Monument, which still does stand
To chide their Arrogance who needs will be
Immured in Cedar, and roof'd o'r with Gold:
O who would think poor Dust should be so bold!
44.
This silly Mansion, though it scarce would win
Even Poverty it self in it to dwell,
Was once the House and Home, where the bright Queen
Of Glories kept her Court; in this mean Cell
Dwelt She in whose illustrious Family
All Heaven desired a Sojourner to be.
45.
She, the transcendent Crown of Females, She
Great Jacobs Ladder, Aarons budding Rod,
The Crystal Princess of Virginity,
David's fair Tower, the Mother of her God,
Mary her self: O may that lovely Name
Be Blessings Nest, and the dear Theme of Fame.
46.
There her plain Cates she eat, or rather kept
Her healthful Rules of sober Abstinence:
There did she plie her Prayers, and there she slept
When midnight Zeal had tired her mortal Sense,
No Corner was in all this House, but she
Did dedicate it unto Piety.
47.
How many Temples in this narrow Room
Erected were by her Devotion,
Who taught all Virtues here to take their Home!
But if Sin knocked, She bid it straight be gone;
For at her Door Humility she set:
A Potter which would no such Guests admit.
48.
Here, on her pious knees, she wept, one day,
In wondering Meditation of that She
Whom God would choose to make the noble Way
Unto his own foretold Humanity,
O how she blessed that Soul, who ever was
To be advanced to that matchless Grace!
49.
Not for a thousand Worlds would she have thought
Her Self the long-designed She; but rather
Would with a thousand thousand more have bought
An Hand-mayds place to wait upon that Mother,
To kiss her blessed feet, or bear her Train,
In whom all Excellence rejoiced to reign.
50.
But whilst her meek admiring Fancy flies
Through this high Contemplation, which drew
Applauding joyous Crystal from her Eyes;
A bright and gallant Stranger hither flew;
One who from Heaven her sweet reflection brings,
Looking almost like Her, but for his Wings.
51.
Youth bloomed in his Face, the blessed Throne
Where purest Beauties in fair Triumph sat;
Their brisk and sparkling Combination
All ravishing Joys into his Eyes had put:
His Looks commanded Love, but did withal
By potent Purity all Lust fore-stall.
52.
His Head was crowned with its own golden Hair,
Which down his back its dainty Wealth did shed:
The Alabaster of his Neck was bare
Sweetly betraying what below was hid
In the green ambush of his Robe of Silk,
The Curtain drawn upon his Fleshie Milk.
53.
That Robe was guarded with the orient Lace
Which on Aurora's Virgin Coat you see.
Neglect seemed to have put it on; yet Grace
And Comeliness would not prevented be,
But did in every careless fold and pleit
To catch Spectators Wonder lie in wait.
54.
A silver Girdle did his Loins embrace
With the pressed fashion of Travelers:
Like Loves sweet Bow his left Arm bended was
Upon his Side, whilst high his Right Hand bears
A Lilly, which from thence received more
Sweetness and Whiteness than it had before.
55.
The Candor of his Wings was no such kind
Of glaring thing, as in the Alpine Snow,
Or on the purest Cygnets neck we find,
Or on the soft face of new Milk does flow:
But a celestial Tincture pure and bright,
Made not by scorching, but by whitening Light.
56.
He was an heavenly Citizen, and one
Whose place is in an higher form than mine;
In near attendance on his Makers Throne
He with his Archangelick beams does shine,
Whence he, when Heaven has greatest business here,
Dispatched is the choice Ambassador.
57.
But though his Eyes their education had
Amongst those Claritudes which gild the skies,
They never yet at Home did seem to read
So much of Heaven at large, as here he spies
Epitomized in the lovely Glass
Of Maryes modestly-illustrious face.
58.
And, Hail, said He, Thou dearest Favorite
Of our great King, in whose selected Breast
His Majesty with singular delight
Does take his private, and mysterious rest.
Hail thou the Crown of Females, on whose Head
Their best exuberance all Blessings shed.
59.
The humble Virgin started at the sight,
But much more at the Salutation:
The complementall Youth did her affright
Who used such charming Company to shun;
Until his Wings admonished her that he
One of her wonted heavenly Guests might be.
60.
But yet her lowly Soul could not digest
The tumor of that strange Hyperbole,
Which still she boulted in her thought-full Breast,
Being suspicious least some Flattery
Had borrowed an Angelike shape, by which
A Woman it more easily might bewitch.
61.
O strange, but nobly-pretious Jealonsie
Which only do in holy Bosoms rest:
Thou art the Bar which do access deny
To whatsoever might an Heart molest:
Pride, Usher to all Sins, comes not near thee,
So low thou lie, so high strutteth he.
62.
When Gabriel observed her doubtful Look,
Where Blushes, and where Palenesse mutually
Their fearful and their modest Stations took;
Mary, said He, thy meek Anxiety
May spare its pains; No Danger dares draw near
Her whom the Prince of Power does hold so dear.
63.
He who is Lord of Love, has sealed on thee
His amorous Heart: the choicest of his Graces,
The flower of all his Sweets, the Immensitie
Of his best Favors, and his Joys, he places
On thee alone, whom he exalts as high
As thou art sunk in thy Humility.
64.
Witness this Message I have now to tell,
How much too glorious for Me to bring!
The only Message which could parallel
The boundless Love of Heavens inamored King:
A Message which the World has long expected,
But fit to thee alone to be directed.
65.
Behold thy blessed Womb shall Fertile be
With a more blessed Son, whom at the due
And wonted Season of Maturity,
Thou to this Light, less fair than him, shall show:
Nor need'st thou study to contrive the frame
Of his due Title, JESUS is the Name.
66.
More reason shall that Name find in thy Son,
Than it of old did in Nuns warlike Heir,
More noble shall be that Salvation
By which his Israel he will repair,
Than that which from Beersheba unto Dan
Gave them no more but earthly Canaan.
67.
He shall be Great, as Great as Might and Worth
Can swell an Heroes; or as stoutest Fame
Can with her fairest widest Trump blow forth,
Which shall be stretched with his magnifick Name;
For to proclaim his Soveraignitie,
His Style shall run, The Son of the Most High.
68.
He who is Lord of Crowns, and supreme King
Of Scepters, shall establish him upon
His Seat from whose high lineage he shall spring,
His most renowned Father David's Throne:
Where he a King of nobler Peace shall sit
Than Solomon with all his Wealth and Wit.
69.
All Jacobs Seed to him shall homage do,
And governed be by his more gentle Law:
Yea Time it self shall be his Subject too,
And his long Sith unto his Scepter bow:
The Earth shall sink, the Heavens shall melt, but he
Shall reach his Kingdom to Eternity.
70.
And here the Angel paused: But trembling she,
Veild in the scarlet of her modest Cheek,
Replied, Bright Sir, it seems you know not Me
A worthless Maid, who for your high Mistake
Wear no pretense: nor may so great a King
From a vile Worms polluted Bowels spring,
71.
Yet though this Vileness be sufficient to
Excuse Me from such Exaltation:
Be pleased to know, I am that Mary, who
Finding my self too mean for any Son
Of Princely David's Progeny to wed,
Resolved to die upon my virgin Bed.
72.
So shall no sprouts from my unhappy Root
Clog the World with their fruitless Company;
So shall I escape Parentall Tasks, and not
With Childrens Education burdned be,
Who find such Work as poseth all my Art
In ordering mine own untoward Heart
73.
Though I to Joseph now espoused am,
It Is but to shelter my Virginity,
In whose defense he wears an Husbands Name,
And of my Weakness will Protector be.
My Word is past, that I to God will give
My Body back, as I did it receive.
74.
Alas, what other Sacrifice have I
To render Him for all his patient Love
Wherewith he has thus long sustained my
Rebellious Life, and mercifully strove
With my Demerits! O bid me not aspire
To what transcends my Reach, and my Desire.
75.
Miraculous Meekness! How would other Hearts
Have leap d to catch this matchless Dignity,
From which this most deserving Virgin starts!
O how would st thou thy self have joy'd to see
So high an offer! What would thou have said
Had thy Agenor Gabriels Promise made?
76.
Her Answer forced his Admiration higher,
And opened the Door to this sublime Reply:
Heaven is not ignorant of thy sweet Desire;
Thy gallant Vow stands registered on high
Upon a Table near as white and fair
As thine own Heart, and Resolutions are.
77.
Such Vows are Jewels, even in Heavens esteem,
Which is the pure Realm of Virginity:
For there the Eternal Father wears this Gem,
With whom the Son and Spirit, Virgins be:
After whose fair Example We aspire,
And copy it in all our Winged Quire.
78.
Through Mounts of Miracles God breaks open a way
To keep thee'still as pure as thy Desire:
When All Things in their first Confusion lay,
Being a shapeless grovelling Mass of Mire;
Who would have thought the Womb of that Abyss
Could have produced so fair a World as this?
79.
But then the Almighty Spirit spread his Wing
Upon those hopeless Volumes of the Deep;
And by his generative Warmth did bring
To light those Seeds which in that Night did sleep:
Thus all this populous Universe you see,
Sprung from the Bowels of Virginity.
80.
This Holy Spirit over Thee shall hover,
And with prolifick Virtue thee endow:
He who on Powers Top does reign, shall cover
Thee with his Might; a Might which will allow
Nature no leave nor possibility
To contradict a Virgin-pregnancie.
81.
This is one Cause, (and it is a noble one)
Why He who shall thy glorious Offspring be
Shall wear the Sovereign Title of the Son
Of God; for genuine Divinity
Shall be (...), but in a mystic fashion,
In the great Business of his Generation.
82.
Doubt not his Power, whose well-known Limits spread
Wide as his boundless Will: the whole World knows
How Sarahs dead Womb now does live in seed
Which past the shores of Numeration flows:
How the Priests Rod its sudden Almonds ought
Neither to Soil nor Seed, nor Sap nor Root.
83.
But I have mighty News to tell thee: She
Whose snowie Head confessed her Springs was past,
Thy Cosen both in Blood and Piety,
Cold, dry Elizabeth, has now at last
Conceived a Son; an argument to thee
How Nature can by Heaven corrected be.
84.
The World had stamped the Name of Barren on
Her sealed Womb, and damm'd the way to Hope
Of any Seed; yet five full Months are gone,
And now the Sixth succeeds, since Heaven did open
That froazen Seal: good cause have I to know
The Time, who was employed then, as now.
85.
I bare the Tidings to great Zachary,
And when his trembling jealous Soul would not
Credit my supernatural Embassy,
I on his Tongue a Lock of Silence put,
That he might know God could as easily open
His Spouses Womb, as I his Mouth could stop.
86.
His Silence bids thee trust these Words of mine;
And, since the Hopes of Heaven and Earth attend
With panting Expectation for thine
Assent, on which their noblest Joys depend:
For their sakes yield; and for thy Makers, who
By Me his best-beloved Spouse does woo.
87.
He ever since Times first Birth did wait for thee
And has endured a World of Sin below,
Stretching his strongly-patient Constancy
Through every Age of Wickedness till now;
Knowing that Time at length would bring forth thee
The sweet Reward of all his Lenity.
88.
And now thy mighty Hour is come; o why
Make thou a gentle Virtue prove so hard,
Why by thy rigorous Humility
Must ripened Joy and Happiness be barred
From all the Universe! O why will thou
Not let the golden Age have leave to grow?
89.
Why must the gloomy Shaddows which have now
Weighed their heavy Wings, in hopes to fly,
Return their Night upon Religion's Brow,
Which 'gan to clear up at the Dawn of thy
Long longed-for Birth; and would thou but give way
Would straight break open into Grace's Day.
90.
As when the Moisture which contented was
To dwell below, and nestle in the Earth,
Is by the powerful Sun enticed to pass
Unto an higher Home: it issues forth
With gentle Resignation, and does rise
In mere submission to dwell near the Skies:
91.
So now the lowly Virgin conquered by
The potent Pleasure of her loving Spouse,
Exceeds her old, by new Humility;
And with her self, her former Meekness throws
Before his feet, content to be whate'r
His most victorious Love would make of Her.
92.
Behold, said she, The Handmayd of the Lord,
(For he has given Me leave to use that Style,)
Since Heaven will have it so, may thy great Word
My worthless Bowels with Performance fill:
To Him who made Me, I my Self resign;
It Is fit His Pleasure, and not mine, be Mine;
93.
This blessed Word no sooner brake from her
Sweet Lips, but to the Top of Heaven it flew;
Where in the Mouths of all the winged Quire
It found its Echo, and was made a new
And precious Anthem; for the Spears that Day
Measured their high Dance by this only Lay.
94.
All Nature heard the Sound, which in her Ear
Spoke, Life, and Joy, and Restoration.
O blessed Music, which so cheared Her,
That her old Wrinkles into Smiles did run;
Fresh Fire she glowing felt in every Vein,
And briskly thought of growing young again.
95.
For now that Spirit which first quickened her
Returned again, and flew to Maryes breast.
O what Excess of Sweets and Joys did bear
Him company unto his Virgin Nest!
O what pure streams of Light, what glorious showrs
Of most enlivening, and prolifick Powers!
96.
With these flew down Enternities great Son
To be a Son of Time; and parting from
His Fathers Bosom, Glories sweetest Throne,
Chose Ashes for his House, Dust for his Home.
Having taught Exaltation to bow,
And of the Most High made Himself Most Low.
97.
In vain should I, or all the Angels strive
To reach at that impossible Eloquence
Which might a paralled Description weave
For that immense mysterious Confluence
Of purest Joys, with which in this Embrace
The most enobled Virgin ravished was.
98.
Only her spacious Soul, the blessed Sea
Where all those Floods of precious Things did meet,
Knew what it comprehended: Glorious She
Did taste the relish of each mystic Sweet
In one miraculous Instant, and did try
The various Dainties of Divinity,
99.
For though this Generation had been
The deepest Project of Eternity,
Yet were its Wonders all transacted in
Durations most concise Epitomie.
One single Moment crowned was with this
Exploit of most unbounded Power and Bliss.
100.
O mighty Moment! at whose feet, all Days
And Months, and Years, and Ages, homage pay:
Upon whose Head Time all its Glories lays,
Wishing that thou migt'st never slide away:
Eternity holds it self deep in debt
To thee, in whom its sweetest Wonders meet.
101.
This Universe for ever thou do tie
Close to its greater Maker: Thou do join
These Mortal Things to Immortality,
And in one Knot both Heaven and Earth combine:
Thou giv'st Fertility a newfound Home,
And bid'st it flourish in a Virgin-Womb.
102.
For Mary now the Mansion House became
Of her conceived God, who deigned to take
His Pattern from her reverend Bodies frame
And borrow part of Her, thereby to make
A Garment for himself, that he might be
As true and genuine Flesh and Blood as she.
103.
O Paradise how poor a Soil art Thou
To the rare Richnes of this Virgin Bed!
That Tree of Life which in thy Heart did grow,
It self but as the shade of this was spread:
Here is the Garden where the noble Tree
Of everlasting Life would planted be.
104.
Blush all ye Heavens; the gallant Virgins Womb
Has left no Looks but those of shame for You;
All Glories here have chose their dearer Home;
And fairer shine, because They make no show:
Here dwells a Sunn whose Count' nance is a Book
So bright; your Phoebus dares not on it look.
105.
The most resplendent equal Character,
The flaming Brightness of the Fathers Face,
Has now vouchsafed to exchange his Sphere,
And in this lesser Heaven to plant his Rays:
Which yet He has so sweetened and allayd,
That He consumes not the tender Maid.
106.
Thus, when to Moses He came down of old
Arrayed all in fire, and took his Seat
Upon a simple Bush; his flaming Gold
In mercy to the shrubb, reind in its Heat,
And all the leaves with harmless Brightness filled,
Which He was pleased not to Burn, but Gild.
107.
When Gabriell had seen this wondrous sight
He bowed his holy Head, first to adore
His new-conceived Lord, wishing he might
Have made his dwelling on this blessed Floor;
And then to take his reverent leave of Her,
Whom yet to Heaven He in his mind did bear.
108.
Whether as He mounted up, the News He tells
To every Orb and Star; but chiefly to
The inquisitive Spirits, whose ears and hearts he fills
With all the Wonders He had seen below,
Till with applause from every Angels Tongue
The precious Name or humble Mary rung.
109.
Thus Phylax spoke. When Psyche filled with Joy
And Admiration, cried Why may not I
Have leave in this dear Mansion to stay?
Where can I better live, or sweetlier die:
Humilities own Palace best will fit
Me who through Pride stand most in need of it.
110.
If that be thy Desire, thou strait shall see
Phylax replied, a fairer House than this,
Fairer in more transcendent Poverty,
And nobler far in higher Lowlines.
With that, into the Chariot again
He takes her up, and gently moves the Rein.
111.
The ready steeds no more Monition needed,
For through the Air they Snatched their greedy way,
And over the Galilean Regions speeded;
No Hills were high enough to bid them stay,
No winds out-ran them; but to Bethlehem
Well near as soon's their Drivers thought they came.
112.
There lighting down; Behold this Town, my Dear
The Guardian cried where Fame once loved to grow:
Jesse's illustrious Son was nurtured here;
Here reverend Samuel did prepare his Brow
For royal Honor, when upon his Head
The Crowns rich Ernest, holy Oil he shed.
113.
This chosen Root, in Kings was fertile, whose
Successive Hands through many Ages bore
The Jewish Scepter; till with other Foes
Sin, stronger than the rest, combined and tore,
It from its guilty Owners far from Home,
First unto Babylon and next to Rome.
114.
Rome holds it still; and makes this wretched Land
Pay that sad Debt its Wickedness contracted:
How often has an imperious Command
Heavy blood-squeazing Taxes here exacted!
Drowning in Gall this servile Country now
Which did of old with Milk and Honey flow.
115.
(Such miserable Gains fond wilful Men
Condemned are to reap, who needs will be
Driving the self-destoying Trade of sin:
To such heart-galling Bonds of Tyranny;
All those unhappy Nations make haste
Who from their Necks Heavens gentle Yoke do cast.)
116.
This golden Trick Augustus learned, and
Summoned the People to a general Tax:
The Warrants strait awak'ned all the Land,
And every One to pay his Homage packs
To his Parentall Town, the Register
Of Tribes and Kindreds being settled there.
117.
This cost good Joseph and his blessed Spouse
A tedious journey, for the Way was long,
But short the Days: in Winters inmost House
(Cold churlish Capricorn) the Sunn had clung
The Morning and the Even so close together,
That there was left no room for cheerly Wether.
118.
The holy Travelers through Cold and Frost
And Northern Blasts, took their unworthy way:
(What pious Heart would not have been at cost
Of its warm Sighs, that sharp Breath to allay!)
Yet slowly went, for Mary's time was come,
And God lay heavy in her tender Womb.
119.
Alas She to her Travel traveled,
And came at length all-weary to the Town:
Where the poor Court'sie of an hired Bed
To lay her weather-beaten Body down,
She hoped to find: But Winter now had cast
On Men, as well as on the Earth a Frost.
120.
The Men were Ice; so were their Doors; for both
Were frozen up against poor looking Guests;
Where ever they knocked, the surly Host was wroth,
And cried, my House is full. Indeed those Nests
Were only courteous (...), which barred out
All Birds but those which feathers for them brought.
121.
The Inns by silken and by purple Things
Were taken up; each Gallant must have room;
Room for his great Self; Room for those He brings
To make Him greater; Room for what does come
Swelling about Him, his fond State and Port,
Which in a Chamber must alone keep Court.
122.
Thus was the Universe's King shut out
Of his own World as He was entering in:
Long had the tired Pilgrims sought about,
And yet at no Door could Admission win:
And now Night crowded on apace, and drew
Their Curtains who as yet no Lodging knew.
123.
Amongst the other Beasts this made them call
For Pity, seeing none was left with Men:
Observe that Rock, which all along the Wall
Lifts up its Head to meet the Eastern Sun:
See thou the craggie Mouth it opens? That
Was then the Hospitable Stables gate.
124.
Come near and mark it well: This Caverne was
The homely Lodging of an honest Ox,
Whose Chamber-fellow was a simple Ass:
Neither the House nor Dwellers needed Locks
Or Bars, or Host, to keep the door, and make
Intruding despiceble Guests turn back.
125.
But to rejected Joseph and his Spouse
This Rock less stony proves, than all the Town;
The pair of courteous Beasts to them allows
Far more Humanity than They whose own
Nature engaged them to be Men, and kind
To those at least in whom Themselves they find.
126.
In went the blessed Travelers, and from
The Beasts, whose Hearts no Avarice had scared,
Borrowed a portion both of their Room
And of their Straw; and there their Bed prepared:
Where to a Temple having turned the Cave,
Themselves to Rest they after Vespers gave.
127.
But though sleep sealed up the Virgins Eye,
Her Heart was watchful and did Travel still;
It traveled through a Visions Mystery,
But of this Way no weariness did feel.
Her Womb seemed all on fire, whence issued out
A flash of Lightning and whirled round about.
128.
It whirled about the World, and in its way
Devoured every thing composed of Dross,
Of idle stubble or of fainting Hay:
The silver Creatures bear somelittle Loss;
But those of genuine Gold, grew only more
Illustrious and youthful than before.
129.
The World refined by this searching flame,
In every part grew radiant and brave;
No Blemish, or Capacity of Blame
Peeped out from East to West; but all things gave
A fair account of their own selves, and by
Their perfect Beauty satisfied Heavens Eye,
130.
Whilst on this splendid Reformation She
Her Wonder pour's; Dame Natures vigilant Clock
Discovering Midnight, roused her Piety
Unto its wonted Task: The earliest Cock
Had rarely crow'd ever she began to pray;
But here you know she faint and tired lay.
131.
Yet, to bring forth her Prayers, she rose: But now
A greater Birth was ripe; Nights silent Fear
With the grimme Powers of Darkness bold did grow,
And on the sleeping Worlds face domineer;
Little suspecting that an High-noone Day
From Mid-nights bosom could break out its way.
132.
When LO the Virgin brings forth her Son,
Who by the Glories of his own sweet Face
Commands the dusky Shaddows to be gone
And to his full-tide Day resign their place.
Her friends about Her, Sovereign Pleasures were,
Joy was the Midwife which assisted Her.
133.
No faintings chilled her Heart, no Pangs did tear
Her Privileged Bowels, nor no Cry her Throat:
Those sad Revenues all entailed were
Upon polluted (...): She whom no Blot
Of sinful pleasure could pretend to stain,
Advanced was beyond the Shot of Pain.
134.
No Circumstance of Shame, or Filth did blurre
The noble Birth the Work was pure and clean:
Shame on those Hearts whose Thoughts deflowred Her
Accomplished Purities unspotted Queen:
Shame on their slovenish (...), whose Brains
Raised nere a Fount to wash the Infants stains.
135.
Her dear Virginity remained the same
Unbroken Jewel that it was before:
As God into Her reverend Bowels came
Yet never stayed to open any door;
So He returned thence, that devoted She
Might still a Virgin, though a Mother be.
136.
Thus when the Virgin-Soul is big with Thought,
Without all Pangs, and Stains, and Ruptures, She
(...) of Her Burden is, and out
Her Offspring comes all clad in Purity.
Thus when the fire the beuteous flame brings forth'
As pure it keeps as 'twas before that Birth.
137.
Thus when Heavens Light does through the Window press,
It bears the Colors it found painted there,
Yet neither breaks nor robbs, nor blurrs the Glass,
But makes its Beauties more advanced and clear.
Thus when a Brood of (...) fills the Air,
Their Mother flowers still no less Virgins are.
138.
Thus though great Phoebus every Morning springs
From fair Aurora's lap, yet she a Maid
Remains, as pure as are those smiling Things,
Those Roseall Blushes at her portall laid;
Heaven being pleased to contrive this Way
To make Her Virgin Mother of the Day.
139.
But o, Aurora's Day is Night to this
Which in the Night from Mary's womb did Rise:
This was the Day of (...), of Love, of Bliss,
The Day of Jewels and of Rarities,
The Day of Miracles, the conquering Day
Which never shall to any Night give way,
140.
The Day which made Immensitie become
A Little One; which printed more than May
Upon Decembers face; which drew the Sum
Of Paradise into one Budde; the Day
Which shrunk (...) into a Span
Of Time, Heaven into Earth, God into Man.
141.
Heavens twinkling Lights shut up their dazeled Eyes,
And paid their blind Devotion to the Dawn
Of Jacob's Star: The Moon did sacrifice
Her silver Beams unto (...) golden Crown
Of Glories, which their royal Circle made
About the place where the bright Child was laid.
142.
His softest Feathers Winter thither sent
To be a (...) for the Infant's Head;
And sure no Harm the honest Season meant
When in the Cave his fluttering Snow He spread:
But at his Presence into Tears they fell,
Seeing a whiter chaster Spectacle.
143.
Fain would the most illustrious Host of Heaven,
Whose Wings were up, whose Thoughts already flew,
Have hither marched, and to their Sovereign given
A Volley of full Praise and Thanks: But due
To the dear Mother's brave Devotion
Was this great Grace, first to salute her Son.
144.
She therefore, (having with exuberant Joy
Beheld the Wonder which her self had bred;
And, opening through applauding Tears the way
To her exultant (...), offered
Her Self a prostrate Sacrifice before
His feet; and taught the World what to adore;)
145.
Cried, O my precious Son, and more than mine,
How shall thy worthless Mother and thy Maid
With due Attendauce wait on thy divine
Cradle, without thine own almighty Aid!
How shall my wretched Dust Great Thee embrace,
On whom the brightest Angels durst not gaze!
146.
These words waked pious Joseph: Who when he
Beheld the Infant, stayed not to ask
Whose, or whence was that blooming Majesty,
But straight bows down himself to his due Task.
Those Beams of such convincing Sweetness were,
That He concludes his God must needs be there.
147.
With lowly Adoration on the Floor
The dear example of his heavenly Spouse
He sweetly copied, and his Soul did pour
Forth in ecstatick Thanks, and Praise, and Vows:
For at the radiant Casement of those Eyes
God looking out, called for that Sacrifice.
148.
Those dainty Easts of gentle living Light,
Those diamond Quivers of divinest Love,
Those Wells of ever-springing Joys, those bright
Mirrours of purer Beauties than do move
About the silver Heavens when Night is fine,
Or when the Day in Cancer's height does shine.
149.
As the Doves Eyes thrice washed in milk, upon
The neighbor Rivers Crystal, move and play,
So on the Mother did this Spotless Son Cantic. 5. 19.

The Purity of his fair Looks display;
That by his Eye he might himself approve
Conceived by none but Heavens eternal Dove.
150.
His skin, the seat of softest White and Red,
Did that delicious Conjunction show
By which his Mothers Blush was married verse. 10.

Unto that lovely Doves all-Snowie Hue.
Ten thousand Ladies Pencills never could teach
A Skin so rich perfection to reach.
151.
His goodly Head is of refined Gold verse. 11.

Being it self unto it self a Crown.
O that the fond bewitched Worldlings would
Exchange their Avarice, and once fall down
To worship this diviner Metal, which
With surer Wealth their Coffins would enrich.
152.
The gentle Hillocks of his Cheek present verse. 13.

Two soft and living Beds of precious Spice,
With which their flowrie Neighbors blend their sent,
And in one fragrant Combination rise.
His Lips, like Lilies, whensoe'r thy stir,
Thick Blessing drop of odoriferous Myrrh.
153.
As Berylls marshalled in golden Rings, verse. 14

So in his richer Hands are Graces set:
As Ivory which prides the Throues of Kings
When Streaks of Saphirs Luster garnish it,
Such is his lovely Belly; only this
Thrills through its Beauty, Warmth, and Tenderness,
154.
As slender Pillars of white Marble, which verse. 15.

On Sockets of the finest Gold do stand,
So his fair Legs are builded on his rich
And graceful Feet. His Aspect does transcend
The loftiest Excellence of Cedars, when
They look from their Majestic Lebanon.
155.
His Mouth the Gate of Sweetness is, and he verse. 16.

Is round arrayed with nothing else but Love.
In this miraculous Epitomie
All choice Extremities of Glory strove
Which should be most Extreme, and in that fair
Contention, every One was Conqueror.
156.
As Joseph with these Wonders Feasts his Eye;
The reverent Mother on her Sons dear Feet
A consecrated Kiss presents; and by
That Taste encouraged unto a sweet
Audacity, she ventured to sip
The roseall Dainties of his heavenly Lip.
157.
O noble Kiss! which might a Seraph hire
His highest Orb to leave, his Mouth to wipe,
In hopes to drink in more delicious Fire
From this young Altar, than from all the ripe
Flames of the Empyreum; Fire which is
Fed with no fuel but pure Joy and Bliss.
158.
O Kiss, which fetched the Mothers joyous Heart
Into her lip, and sealed it on her Son;
Which he receiving did his own impart
In answer to her sweet Impression:
O Kiss, the sacred Complement between
Heavens highest King, and Earths most lowly (...).
159.
This done; her careful and most tender Hands
Begin their duty to the noble Child:
Whom having dressed in simple swaddling Bands
She to her Breast applies, whose Bottles filled
With Milk, but more with Joy and with Delight,
To his first Breakfast did their God invite.
160.
Then stepping to the Manger, on that Bed
(The only Bed except her own soft breast,)
Where Hay and Straw were for the Coverings spread,
She laid Him down to take his hardy Rest:
Forth with the Ox his Infant-Owner knew,
The wondering Ass his Masters Crib did view.
161.
They both due distance kept, and, as they could,
Adored Him who saves both Man and Beast,
Him who alone did nourish and uphold
Them from the Field with a perpetual Feast:
Their Manger Straw and Hay they well can spare
For his dear Service whose own Gifts they were.
162.
As there He lay, the holy Mothers Breast
Grew big with noble Contemplation:
Which as her Tongue brought forth, and sweetly dressed
In vocal graces, all the Cave begun
To imitate the Accents of her voice,
And in soft Echo's duplicate the Noise.
163.
Almighty Infant, who till now, said She,
Were round arrayed with celestial Flames,
Whose Mantle was eternal Majesty,
Whose Crown was Glories most unbounded Beams,
What condescent of mighty Love is this
Which of that supreme Pomp does thee undress!
164.
Could Clouts, and Rags have ever hoped to be
Exalted to this strange Prerogative,
That wretched They should unto naked Thee
The courtesy of their poor shelter give!
Surely henceforth all simple Weeds, which be
Of kin to these, shall precious be to Me.
165.
Let Silks, and Gold go puff up Prince's Pride,
Who for their Stains do need a beauteous Veil:
This homespun Raiment will a Body hide
When friezing Cold, or melting Heat assail.
Thou art contented to be but thus fine:
Then let who will, for Me, their God outshine.
166.
Thou art my God; this Vestures duskie Cloud
No such eclipse can on thy Glory throw,
But through its gloominesse my Faith can crowd
And see to whom I adoration owe.
Lo I adore Thee, who art still Most high,
Even in this Bottom of Humility.
167.
Fair was thy Throne when Thou did mounted sit
At the Right Hand of thine Imperial Father,
When all the Heavens were bowed to be thy great
Chair of Majestic state; when Earth did gather
It self up close, and ready stand, to be
A faithful Footstool to thy Sire and Thee.
168.
When the vast Volumes of Immensitie
Unto their utmost Bounds were stretched out
To spread a correspondent Canopie
Over thy glorious Head: When round about
Brightness and Power, to complete thy Port,
Filled the brave Circuit of thy mighty Court.
169.
But now the Sceen is changed; now this poor Cell,
This Manour-house of shame and scorn, must be
Thy native Palace; now thy Throne does swell
No wider than this Cratch; now Poverty
Has laid Hay for thy Pillow, faded Hay,
Which speaks what Weakness thou assum'st to day.
170.
Now all those flaming Hierarchies, which did
With Halalujhs fill thy royal Ear,
Are left at home; now thou art furnished
With these dull Waiters which stand silent here,
This Ox and Ass, the only Servants Thou
The Worlds great King did ready find below,
171.
Go great Retinues, gaudy Palaces,
Go Beds of down, of gold, of ivorie,
Go wait upon your dainty Prince's Ease
And help to countenance poor Majesty.
But yet lament your Prides dishonor, since
You are not owned now by Glories Prince.
172.
But Thou, o precious glorious Poverty,
Enobled by this Morns bright Miracle,
Shall my Delight, my Pomp, my kingdom be:
Thy Rags shall all Embroyderies excel,
Thy Cottages all Marble Towers outshine,
Thy Hardship pleasant be, thy Shame divine.
173.
And yet, dread Infant, give my Wonder leave
To gaze upon a greater Change than this:
Thou did from thy omnipotent Sire receive
Thy equal Self, and sweetly rest in His
Bright Bosom, where unbounded Pleasures swim,
Joying from all Eternity with Him.
174.
But now thou art a Son of Time become,
And of poor Me, a shorter thing than Time:
That Bosom thou exchangedst for my Womb,
Light's largest Heaven for a dark narrow Clime;
Where of Mortality thou did lay hold,
And up in Dust thy gallant Godhead mould.
175.
All my amazed Thoughts are swallowed quite
In this Abyss of thy Humility.
O vast Abyss! as deep as ever Height
It self was high: I yield, I yield, to be
In this miraculous Sea of Goodness drowned,
Which only Thou, the God of it, can sound.
176.
But o how far thine Handmayd is beneath
That noble Accusation Gabriel laid
Unto my charge! Thy Condescension has
Monopoliz'd all Meekness, and arrayed
The World in Prides due shame, which though it seek
Lower than dust to stoop, now is not meek.
177.
Whilst in this sweet ecstatick Passion
Of Piety, Her blessed Soul did flame;
A Flock of Shepherds, with an heavenly Tone
Fresh on their echoing Tongues, in triumph came
Unto the Cave, which to their eyes did yield
A fairer Sight than their late glorious Field.
178.
In Joseph they beheld the best of Men;
The flower of Females they in Mary saw;
The sweetness of all Infants in Her Son,
Who yet was far more beauteous than his show.
This Sight determined their Vows; which they
Before the Manger with due reverence pay.
179.
For with a prostrate Soul, and bended Knee
Each one upon that simple Altar lays
A tender Lamb: The Offering smiled to see
The innocent argument of its own Praise,
Beholding in the royal Babe how nigh
It was of kin to his meek Majesty.
180.
O sweet, and Mighty Little One, said they,
Deign thy Acceptance of these rural Things,
The Cream of our poor Flocks: which whilst they stray
About the Plains, may thy Protections Wings
Shelter both Them, and Us; to whom no (...)
Shall be a Diety, but Thou alone.
181.
Whene'r the hasty Wolf, the hideous Bear,
Or raging Lion challenges his Prey,
O let the Shield of thy Defense be near
The injustice of their Challenge to gainsay.
Alas, our Crooks are feeble Things, and We
As weak as they, repose our trust in thee.
182.
The venerable Mother joy'd to hear
Their humble Orison: And, What, said She,
My honest Friends, has called you from your Care
Thus to attend on this new Piety?
To Night and Dangers what has made you leave
Your other Lambs; and these why do you give?
183.
Fair Queen of Grace and Bliss, the Men replied,
Bowing themselves before her reverend Feet,
No Fears nor Dangers can our Flocks betide
Whilst We are come our newborn King to greet.
Heaven sent Us hither; and We need not fear
But Heaven is able to supply our Care.
184.
Whilst in the open Field our Watch we kep'd
Befriended by the Moon and Stars, that no
Peril might wake our tender Flocks, which slep'd
Together with their tenderer younglings: Lo
There rushed from Heaven a sudden mighty Light
Which out of all the wide field chased Night.
185.
The Frighted Moon and Stars flew all away,
With unexpected Gold the Sky grew bright:
We never yet beheld the entering Day
Break from the East with such commanding Light.
'Twas Glories Morning this, and in our eyes,
No Sun but Majesty did seem to rise.
186.
With that, and with Amazement blinded, we
Fell down, supposing Heaven had done so to.
And that the Beauties of Sublimitie
Came post on some grand Business below.
And here we see what fetched them down; thy Son
May well woo all Heaven after Him to run.
187.
But as poor Bats, and wretched Birds of Night
Surprised by a sudden-rushing Flame,
Are struck with horror at the glorious Sight,
Which seals their eyes, and open sets their shame:
So we by this strange Apparition were
Besieged no less with luster, than with Fear.
188.
When, as we trembling lay, a radiant Friend
Who gently hovered in the neighbor Air,
Did fan fresh comfort with his Wings, and lend
Our Hearts new Courage: It Is no Night of Fear
Said he, Look up, and view this Sceen of Joy
Set forth in Heavens most festival Array.
189.
We opened our Eyes, and round about beheld
How Smiles and Comforts had bedecked the Place,
Which seemed no more a common Country Field,
But Paradise's own delicious face:
And such we should have thought it still, had we
Not hither come, and seen thy Son, and Thee.
190.
But yet a Beauty next to yours we saw,
Almost as bright, as sweet, as mild, as grave,
That Angel which did upon Us bestow
That courteous Item; His Attire was brave,
His Looks, the Glass of Heaven, most sweet his Tongue;
From which these blessed Words of Comfort rung:
191.
BEHOLD, I bring you News of greater Joy
Than kindest Heaven till now did ever send;
Joy which through every Heart shall melt its way,
And with the Sun its equal Course extend:
Joy which shall know no Limits, but through all
The World display its gallant Festival.
192.
For unto you, and your grand Bliss, this Morn
In royal David's City, Christ the Lord
Of Him, and You, and this whole World is born:
A mighty King, who comes to afford
The often-promis'd long-desir'd Salvation
Unto his fainting, and decayed Creation.
193.
Stagger not at the News; but let this Sign
Assure your Faith, and banish needless Doubts:
You shall at Bethlehem find this divine
Infant wrapped up in simple swaddling Clouts,
And in a plain and correspondent Bed,
The Asses Manger, resting his sweet Head.
194.
As we for Joy at these strange Tidings started,
Behold, a sudden Globe of flaming Light
Into a stranger Apparition parted,
And to new Wonders summoned our sight:
For at a diamond Table fair and wide
A numerous Quire of Angels we descri'd.
195.
Soul-charming Melody amongst them sat,
At her left hand Applause, Joy at her right,
Behind her Glory, Praise before her, at
Her foot luxuriant, but pure Delight.
The Spectacle alone was ravishing;
But o what Raptures when they 'gan to sing!
196.
Glory to God in all Sublimity,
Peace upon Earth, and unto Men Good Will:
This was their Dittie; but their lofty Key
Did not our mortal reach alone excel,
But surely posed the Spears, though these, they say,
In sovereign Music spend both night and day.
197.
O how our pretty Lambs did leap and dance!
What Troops of merry Wolves came tripping in!
How were the Bears seized with a gentle Trance!
How did this Harmony the Lions win!
All Salvagnesse was quickly charmed asleep,
And every Beast was now a gentle Sheep.
198.
The Stones looked up and seemed to wish for feet,
The Trees were angry that they stuck so fast;
All Things desired the Melody to meet,
And, as they could, unto the Dance made haste.
With that, our silly oaten Pipes we broke,
And then our Parts with cheerly Nature took.
199.
And though our Feet never more nimbly flew
Than in their Answer to this Musicks Pleasure,
Doing their best endeavor to trip true
To every Turn, and Point, and Air, and Measure;
Yet in our joyous Breasts we felt our Hearts
With more Activity, dancing their Parts.
200.
The Anthem finished: That glorious Fire
About the Company its Arms did spread,
And homeward convoyed the illustrious Quire.
We saw how wide a Gate Heaven opened
To let them in: We saw it shut and yield
Back to the Stars their free etheriall Field.
201.
Thence came We hither, and the Promise found
As true and noble as our Expectation:
Which from this Cave shall by our Tongues rebound
To every Ear we meet: By this Narration
Our Hearts shall eased be, least by the Wonder
Of this Heav'n-crowned Morn they split in sunder.
202.
But when the Years fresh youth returns, to deck
The Bed of April in its vernall Hue;
The choysest sweets and Beauties We will pick,
And wreath a Chaplet for the fairer Brow
Of this our blooming Lord. Till when We place
Our Hopes of safety in his only Grace.
203.
Here, with three Adorations to the Son,
They of the Mother and good Joseph, take
Their humble leave. But she, when they were gone,
Deep in her Bosom prints what they had spoke,
The News, the Quire, the Song, the glorious Light,
Which duly she reads over Morn and Night.
204.
And well she dived into the Reason why
That glorious Host kept distance from the Cave,
And to these Creatures of Humility,
These simple honest Swains, the honor gave
Of being his first Visiters, who came
To be at once a Shepherd, and a Lamb.
205.
But when the Sun seav'n times himself had shown
To all the World, and bid it idolize
His Beams no more, but fall down to its own
Almighty Rising Phoebus, at whose eyes
His Flames were kindled: Janus opened the door,
And in her Arms Aurora New-year bore.
206.
And this was Circumcisions sacred Day;
Nor would the royal Infant spared be,
(...) under this sad bloody Yoke did lay
His tender Neck; that exemplary he
Who was through all Obedience to run,
His Race of Patience might betimes begin.
207.
There sat He on his yerning Mothers Knee,
Who with all tenderness the Work dispatched:
O how much (...) in her Heart did she
Receive the Knife, when it the Infant touched!
But yet she knew her Wound would greater prove,
If she had broke the Law by too much love.
208.
Down fell the precious purple Dew, and gave
The World sure earnest of what was behind.
For 'twas resolved it at length should have
The utmost Drop his deepest Vein could find:
Mean while, these few will serve to write the Bonds
By which he for the rest engaged stands.
209.
O liquid Jewels! happily have You
Be-sprinkled all the Forehead of the Year;
The Year, which now on his be-decked brow
More beauties then the face of Heaven does wear;
The Year, which sealed is by You to be
From Sins and Mischeifs Impositions free.
210.
Thus when the Paschal Lambs less worthy Blood
Bedewed the Egyptian Doors of Isreal's Sons,
Peace and Security for Porters stood,
And stav'd Destruction from their Mansions.
Had but this Blush on other Gates been seen,
Both Grace and Safety had dwelt within.
211.
Now Januaries Calends washed be
By these dear Drops, from all that guilty Gore
Which Heathenish most unholy Sanctity
In lavish Floods upon their face did pour;
Fair shines the Day, thus reskew'd and releast
From Pagan stains, to Pieties pure Feast.
212.
And now is printed on the Child that Name
Which sweetly sat upon bright Gabriels Tongue
When to his Mother with the News he came,
That Name which sweetens every Cherubs song;
That Name of Bowels, of omnipotent Love,
Of all the Joys that make Heaven be above.
213.
JESUS o what vast Treasures couched lie
In the rich bosom of this little Word!
A Word which spreads its mighty Majesty
Through Heaven, and Earth, and Hell; all which are stored
With reverend Awe when ever it sounds, and on
Their bended Knees adore the Virgins Son.
214.
JESUS! o Name of glorious Dainties, how
Unwilling are my Lips with thee to part!
Yet shall thy Music never cease to flow
In precious Echo's all about my Heart.
JESUS! o sweeter Name of Life! o Name
Which make famous even eternal Fame.
215.
These matchless Things, my Psyche happened here
This simple Place with noble worth to crown.
But yet these were not all. Has not thine ear
Been filled with Balaams infamous Renown,
Whose innocent Ass was fain to use her Tongue,
And check her sillier Master for her wrong.
216.
This Son of Avarice, and Heir of Hell
By frighted Balak hired to enchant
And heap his Curses upon Israel,
Was by thy Spouse enforced to recant
His dire intentions, and change his Tone
Against his Nature, as his Ass had done.
217.
Thy Spouse did thrust reverend Prophecy
Into his Mouth, of Jacobs rising Star:
Which he himfelf left as a Legacy
To all his Heirs, and charged them to have care
That no forgetfulness did blind their Eyes
From watching when that promised Light should rise.
218.
Amongst their mystic Notes these Words they laid
From Age to Age, and often read them o'r
With dread Devotion, being still afraid
The Star might chance to deep from Heaven before
They were a ware, and spy their souls asleep,
Whom Balaam had fore-warned their Watch to keep.
219.
No Comet on the World did ever look
But strait into their studies them it sent,
Where, after Counsel had with many a Book,
Through all its flaming Lineaments they went,
Examining the length of every Hair
By its own light, which Head or Beard did wear.
220.
But when Eternities sweet Day began
To rise not from the East, but this poor Cave;
A gallant Star into Arabia ran
And notice of the glorious Bus'nes gave
To Every Eye which was instructed how
To read the Characters of Heavens bright Brow.
221.
Three Venerable Men dwelt there, all Gray
As well within as they appeared without,
Kings of the Villages and Fields, where they
Reigned by their secret Wisdoms high Repute:
No Star but they knew well, for from the East
They had been long acquainted to the West.
222.
They, looking out that Night, their friends to view,
Espied Stranger dressed in bright Attire,
To which their wondering Contemplations flew,
And busy were about the radiant Fire.
The more they looked, the fairer room they found
Where on more Admitation to ground.
223.
Eyes which have gazed since the Star was set
Have read in it a flaming Child; upon
Whose golden shoulders a large Cross was put:
Such power has superstitious Fiction
To credit whatsoever it does epsy
In the blind Book of its own Fantasy.
224.
A Book which cunning Hell improves so high,
That it has often cost poor Truth full dear;
For Lies embroidered upon Verity,
Makes even the Groundwork fictious appear:
And when course Tares amongst pure Wheat creep up
They spoil the credit of the hopeful Crop.
225.
These sage Observers no such thing descri'd,
But only a miraculous Beauty read
In this unusual Star, whose Beams out-vi'd
All glories that bright Venu's face could plead;
And when the Day drew on, displayed far
More cause why this should be the Morning (...)
226.
For when from roseall Aurora's door
Fair Titan shak'd his locks, and marched out;
Nor any of the other Spangles, nor
Brisk Venus could approve her selfso stout
To stay in Heaven and view his Sovereign Light,
But slipped aside, and waited for the Night.
227.
But this brave Star stayed still, and to his face
Told Phoebus that he had as much to do
In Heaven as He; that his fire kindled was
To light a fairer Day than He could show;
A Day which sprung not from his vulgar East,
But chose its Morning where it pleased best.
228.
This Resolution of the Star did much
Amaze the Magi, who in all their old
Records of Wonders, could not meet with such
A venturous Apparition enrolled
And why, said they at length, may this not be
The Star which Ballam's quick-eyd Soul did see.
229.
Then throwing all their useless Books aside,
They to that God who Balaam did inspire
Address their Prayers to be satisfi,d
About the meaning of that wondrous Fire.
God kindly answered them, and taught them why
He checked the Sun by that fair Prodigy.
230.
Heavens mighty Love so, universal is,
That through the School of Magic Darkness it
Disdaineth not with gracious Beams to press;
Where in their black Profession it does meet
The Sonns of Night with radiant Mercy, and
Them to the Day of Life and Bliss does send.
231.
Their Sumptures now they in all have provide,
Though yet uncertain which way they should tend:
When lo, the Star deigned to become their Guide,
And with a moderate pace its course did bend
To Palestine, that it might not outrun
Their Dromedaries mortal Motion.
232.
Sweeet was their journey: O dear Star, said they
Who would not follow thy Direction!
What Error now can cheat Us of our Way
Who under Heavens illustrious Conduct run!
That fiery Pillar, which led Israel, We
Now envy not, who convoyed are by Thee.
233.
Thus traveling till Salems towrie Head
Had met their Eyes, they thither turned their way,
Presuming there to find the Princely Bed
Whereon the Newborn King of Salem lay.
But now the Star grew wroth, and hid its face,
To chide their doting Error on that Place.
234.
That chode in earnest: but mistaken They
Conceived its Office here expired was,
Having unto the period of their way
Now brought them safe. Into the Town they pass,
Swollen big with mighty Hopes forth with to see
Thy glorious Spouses Infant-Majesty.
235.
With their great Question every street they fill
Enquiring where the native Palace stood
Of Him who was born King of Israel:
By whose bright Star We from the East have rode
Said they, and come to represent our meet
And bounden Homage at his royal Feet.
236.
Much was the Boldness of the Men admired,
Who now within the reach of Herod's spite,
So stoutly for another King inquired
Plainly confuting his usurped Right.
But this the Valor was of Piety
Which does securely all the World defy.
237.
With fears and jealousies this News did pass
Through thousand ears, till it to Herod's came;
The guilty Tyrant stung and startled was
At the strange broaching of that dangerous Fame:
His Heart throbbs high his Scepter seems to quake,
His Throne to totter, and his Crown to crack.
238.
Yet, to elude those threatening Omens, He
Mustered up all his cruel Wit to lay
Some holie-looking Plot, whose subtlety
Both his young Rival, and his Fears might slay.
His rage He cloak'd, and in a Synod sought
How to resolve the noble Strangers Doubt.
239.
The Priests and Scribes their reverend Records bring
And by inspired Mica's Prophecy
About the mighty Point inform the King;
Who in his Privy Chamber did descrie
The bus'nes to the Pilgrims, and enquire
Each circumstance about their Leading Fire
240.
Which having heard at large: Go then, said He,
And may Success your brave Devotion crown,
Yet grant your friend this easy Courtesy,
That you will not engross Him as your own,
When you have found the Infant, let me know,
That I may Him adore as well as you.
241.
No tedious Entertainment now shall stay
Your pious zeal, although mine Honor be
Engaged, thus a while, to stop your Way:
But at your more convenient Leisure We
Shall take such royal course, that you shall find
Our Court cannot to Strangers be unkind.
242.
Here taking leave, in Bethleem Rode they went:
When lo the Star which scorned its beams to show
To cursed Herod, did again present
Their reconciled Convoy to their View:
Kindling fresh hopes and comfort in their Breast
To see themselves from their sad Night releast.
243.
For Day to them did wear no other face
But of black Night, till they espied this Light:
And Phoebus posting to another place,
Did with his useless beams but mock their sight:
Only this faithful Star directed them
Their Way, till to its period they came.
244.
But then it stayed (for all its Work was done,)
And pointing with a perpendicular Ray
Upon the Cave, bid them behold that Sun
Of which it self was but the shadow: They
Down from their Beasts with nimble gladness light
To bless their eyes with their desired sight.
245.
Their several Grooms the foaming Coursers took,
The Pages their Oblations ready made;
But wondering at the Stables simple Look
Which promised nothing less, than what it had
To show, the Princes turned their eyes to know
Of their bright Guide, if they were right, or no.
246.
But when they saw constant Assurance shed
It self down from the peremptory Star;
They marched in cheerly and no sooner had
Observed the humble Majesty which there
Did keep its Court, but down they fell, and in
Prostration their first Homage did begin.
247.
The Mothers Eyes called theirs to admiration,
As did the Infants unto Ecstacie:
For in the foft and balmie Habitation
Of Her dear bosom He enshrined did lie,
As in the precious and glistering breast
Of Mother-Perl the Jewel makes its Nest.
248.
They, having kissed the ground, cried out, Behold
Great King of all the World, unworthy We
Whom by thy Star Thou sendest for, are bold
To creep thus near thy gracious Majesty.
The Name of King, has flattered Us a while,
But We resign to thee that noble Style.
249.
The foolish World surnames Us Wise; but we
No more will that ambitious Title own,
Which now we understand most due to Thee,
And at thy Footstool here we throw it down:
Esteeming this our greater Wisdom, that
We by thy Grace this Lowliness have got.
250.
Thou art that King, the Hopes of whose bright Birth
Have many fainting Generations cheered;
Thou art that Jacobs Star, whose Breaking forth
The shades of Prophesies and Types has cleared,
Displaying to this grovelling World, which lay
Till now in Darkness, a Meridian Day.
251.
Thou art that Wisdom which contriy'dst at first
The Fabric of this universal Ball,
By thy Direction it from Nothing burst;
And in thy Counsels boundless Circle all
Motions of Heaven and Earth performed be;
Both Change and Chance are Certainties to Thee.
252.
Here each one having his Oblation
In his own Crown, which in his Hand he bore;
The first with triple Adoration'gan
Io tender up his Gift: And, Of this store
Which thou, dear Lord, said He to Me did give,
Vouchsafe this Tithe and Earnest to receive.
253.
It is the purest Gold my Care could get,
But yet beggs to be gilded by thine Eye:
Unless some Richness Thou will glance on it.
Alas, it has not worth enough to buy
The credit which belongs unto its Name:
O gently shine, and deck it with thy Flame.
254.
Then came the Second with like reverence, and
His Offering in his royal Censer brought:
Accept, sweet Babe from this my Worthless Hand
Said He, this Incense, which has now found our.
The next way to its God, and need not rise
In laboring Clouds to reach the lofty Skies.
255.
It is the noblest I could pick and cull
From the best spicey Beds of Arabie,
Which in their first fruits hither come to tell
That all that is left at home is due to Thee,
And craves thy leave to kiss thy gracious Feet
That from that Touch her Odours may grow sweet,
256.
These two fair Copies were transcribed by
The third, whose Present was delicious Myrih:
And this to wait on thy Humanity
O Thou Incarnate God do I prefer,
Said He; that Nature which till now, was poor
Ashes and Dust, in thee We must adore.
257.
The Babe looked up, and with a gentle Eye
Approved and praised their pious Sacrifice:
When lo, the Mother, with sweet Courtesy
Held forth his Hand unto the Kings to kiss.
O no, said they, Our foul lips are too mean,
May they but kiss his Clout's Hem, and be clean.
258.
They kissed it, and arose: But on the floor
Ambitiously they left their Crowns, that they
Might gain the Honor to be Foot-stools for
The royal Infant; whose illustrious Way
May well be paved with Diadems, since He
Raigns King of Kings, and Lord of Majesty.
259.
And now as much of Night as durst draw near
This Court of noblest Light, was thither come:
This made the Pilgrims a meek suit prefer,
Begging before the door their Lodging Room:
Forbid it loyal Reverence, they cried,
That the same Roof Us and our Lord should hide.
260.
Thus, having pitched their Tents without, and said
Their Prayers to their God they left within;
Themselves upon their beds to Rest they laid,
Which did no sooner on their Brows begin
To steal, but straight a Dream came close behind,
Which opened a Vision to their waking Mind.
261.
God in a mystic Voice, which well they knew
By its dear Relish in their Hearts, came down,
Timely discovering to their wondering View
What desperate Dangers in their Way were strown,
If they returned by Jerusalem
Set thick with bloody Herod's Traps for them.
262.
This Warning they when Morning had let in
The Flaming Giant to his daily Race,
With hasty Joy obeyed: Yet having 'gun
Their Journey, with as vehement a pace
Their Hearts recoyl'd, so did their Eyes, and in
The glorious Stable would again have been.
263.
Thus struggling homeward by a private Way,
Unreach'd by Harm they to Arabia came:
Where through the astonished Country they display
The noble Infants most miraculous Fame:
Returning richer Gold, and purer store
Of Sweets, than they from thence to Bethlehem bore.
264.
The precious Name of JESUS, would alone
Discharge that Debt, and purchase all the rest,
The Gold, Myrrh, Incense, which that Region
In all its richest Hills and Vales possessed:
That Name would make each Part of Arabie
Derive its surname from Felicity.
265.
These Wonders have enobled this rude Place,
And made it, Psyche, worth thy journey hither.
But Time's at hand, which will erect Disgrace
On this Foundation of Glory, whether
One King shall send as studied Scorn, as Three
Did bring exact and costly Piety.
266.
This Temple of Virginity will He
Deform into black Lusts unworthy Stie;
Where in that reverend Mangers place must be
Reared the cursed Altar of Impurity,
And Venu's and Adoni's Titles swell
JESU'S and Marye's mention to expel.
267.
O then, said Psyche, (for the Angel here
Closed his lips,) may I that time prevent,
And consecrate this Night unto this dear
Birthplace of Purity! What though I want
Gold, Incense, Myrrh? I have an Heart, which fain
Upon this Mangers Altar would be slain.
268.
It would be slain, that it a Life might find
Which will not give its noble Name the Lie:
For whilst I linger grovelling in this blind
Valley of Sin, by Living it does Die.
A Mortal Life, is but an handsome Fiction,
Nothing well dressed, a flattering Contradiction.
269.
Here kneeling down, with liberal Tears she dew'd
The holy Relic, having blown away
The Dust with Sighs; and as the place she viewed.
With sharp-ey'd Faith Him she discerned, who lay
Once in that Cradle; And wished she were worth
Ten thousand Hearts, that she might pour all forth,
270.
O what Contentions of Loves and Joys
And pious Languishments thronged in her breast!
How many violent sorts of amorous ways
Did her strong Soul try to be dispossessed
Of this dull clogging Body, that it might
Indeed lodge with her Spouse himself that Night!
271.
But tired by this mysterious Agony
Her Spirits yielded to the Powers of sleep;
Often had they quickened up themselves, and by
Stout Zeal chased back the Shaddows that did creep
About her Eyes; which yet at length were-closed,
Whilst on the Manger She her Head reposed.
272.
Her Eyes were closed; but wide open was her Heart,
And by clear Recollection did run through
The noble Story, reading every Part
And Circumstance, she knew not where nor how:
Whilst Phylax for her Canopie, did spread
His tender guardian Wing upon her Head.
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO VIII. The Pilgrimage.
ARGUMENT.
LOves Presentation solemnized: He
Through the sad Desert, into Egypt flies;
Where by the dint of true Divinity
He dasheth down the forged Dieties:
And thence, when (...) had the Infants slain,
And Justice Him; returns home again.
1.
O gentle Nature, how discrect art Thou
In marshalling those sober Courtesies
Which to thy laboring World thou do allow!
Thou lett'st Us feel the Want, to learn the price;
Thou checkerest every Thing with such wise Art,
That Ease proves constant Successor to Smart.
2.
After Nights soot the face of Heaven has smeared,
Days lovely Beauty all the Welkin gilds:
When Winters churlish Months have domineered,
The lively Spring with youth cheers up the fields:
When Clouds have weep'd their Bottles out, it is fair;
When Winds are out of breath, Thou still'st the Air.
3.
But yet the dearest of thy Blessings, is
Soft Sleep, which thou do to no Pains deny.
When Phoebus through all Heaven has speeded his
Long smoking Course, Thou giv'st Him leave to lie
Upon the Pillows of the watery Main,
Until Aurora wakens Him again.
4.
When Trees have all the Summer labored hard
Their blossoms, leaves, and fruit in bringing forth.
The night of Winter thou do them afford
And bid'st their Vigor go to Bed in Earth:
Down to the Root strait runs the weary Sap,
And sleeps close and secure in (...) lap.
5.
When Rivers many tedious Months have run
Through cragged Rocks, and crooked peevish ways,
Thou make stern Boreas pitiful, who on
Their necks a seasonable Bridle lays,
This binds them up in Glass, and makes them rest
Till they are waked by Summers Southern Blast,
6.
When Man has traveled with his Hand, or Mind,
(For this both toiles and sweats, as well as that:)
Thou in a tender mistie Veil do bind
His heavy Head, until his Eyes have shut
Out Grief and Pain, and Wearines; and He
Reposed in Sleeps all-downie Bosom be.
7.
Yet other Creatures little find in Sleep,
But the dull pleasure of a gloomy Rest,
Which they themselves perceive not when they reap:
Man only by this privilege is blessed,
That Sleep it self can be awake to Him,
And entertein Him with some courteous Dream.
8.
He, when his Touch, his Tongue, his Eye, his Ear,
His Nose, in Sleeps thick Night are muffled up,
Can feel, can taste, can smell, can see, can hear,
And in his quick Dispatches find less Stop
Than when He wakes: for now his Soul alone
Through all his mystic Business does run.
9.
O sweet Prerogative (...) by which we may
Upon our Pillows travel round about
The Universe, and turn our Work to Play;
Whilst every Journey is no more but Thought:
And every Thought does with as quick a pace
Run through its longest, as its shortest Race.
10.
Nor is the Body more befriended, then
The Soul, in its Digestion, by Sleep:
This is the undisturbed Season, when
The Mind has leisure to concoct that Heap
Of crude unsettled Notions. which fill
The weak Brains overcharged Ventricle.
11.
In this soft Calm, when all alone the Heart
Walks through the shades of its own silent (...),
Heaven takes delight to meet it, and impart
Those blessed Visions, which pose the best
Of waking Eyes, whose Beams turn all to Night
Before the Looks of a spiritual Sight.
12.
By this time Psyche having failed through
The Infant-Story, whilst her Dream did steer
Her Souls mysterious Bark: she felt her Brow
Eased of its cloudy Weight, and growing clear.
Strait Phylax spied her looking up, and cir, d,
It Is well thou have thy Spouses Lodging tried.
13.
How do thou think this Manger could agree
With the most tender Infants dainty Head!
But by this Copy He commends to thee
The scorn of Wantonesse's plumie Bed.
Thou see sweet Sleep is possible upon
A cold and churlish Couch of Board or stone.
14.
Learn then, that it is not any thing without
Which can with genuine softnes clothe thy Rest.
Down, proves but precious Thorns, (...) does slout
His hopes of quiet Sleep, whose treach (...) Breast
Though with external Unguents sleek, within
Is harsh and rugged, being lined with Sin.
15.
If Vice, and Vengeance had not Us prevented,
We to the Temple now our way should ache:
But they long since were there; and the lamented
Ruins too late their sad consession make.
Fire, and the Roman Rage on it have preyd,
And all its Glory in the Ashes laid.
16.
Whilst yet it stood; the Virgin Mother, when
The Law did cite her to Purification,
Hast's thither with her offerings, and her Son,
To pay obedience to that needless Fashion:
Needless to Her, who of no Humane Seed
Had ever been the spotted Soil and Bed.
17.
Can Ceremonies think themselves so clean,
As to presume to wash the Mornings face
When she has brought forth Glory's Sun, and been
New gilded by that Birth, with fairer grace!
How shall the Virgin Crystal purer grow!
What Legal Rites can purge and whiten Snow (...)
18.
Yet is the gallant Morn content to go,
So is the spottlesse Crystal, and the Snow,
And own Pollution, rather then not do
Their ready homage to the reverend Law,
Which by a stronger backed was; for She
Went, summoned by her own Humility.
19.
And there arrived; She unto the Shade
The Substance brought; and Truth unto the Type:
Broad Day She of a glimmering Twy-light made,
Long breeding and crude Hopes, She turned to ripe
Fruition, whilst She, with her Offerings,
A fairer Temple to the Temple brings.
20.
A Temple where not one, but every Gate
Was Beautiful: a Temple where each Room
Most Holy was: a Temple, where, though State
Shined not without, Heavens Prince did make his Home:
A Temple which had its foundation
Above; a Temple which was God and Man.
21.
When He drew near, the Walls and Pavement smiled,
The Roof would fain have bowed to kiss His feet;
The pious Incense smelt the sweeter Child
And changed its usual Path, with Him to meet:
It soared not up, but to the Door did stretch,
Finding that nearer way its Heaven to reach.
22.
The Cberubs which dwelt close behind the Veil,
Had much ado to keep themselves within,
Knowing that from their secret Oracle
The outward Temple did the Glory win,
In which was now a Higher Priest then He
For whom alone that yearly once was free.
23.
O how the second Temples Luster now
Dazells the first! That fabric reared by
David's wise Son, did long before hand bow
Unto this younger Temples Majesty,
And kiss the Dust, resigning up its place
To this, which Jesu's Presence was to grace.
24.
And now the Mother on her bended knee
Before the Priest, presents to Heaven her Son.
Was ever heard of such a Priest as She
Who offers God for an Oblation!
To Her the Eternal Father sent Him down,
And noble She returns Him back his own.
25.
When reverend Johazar received the Child
A secret Joy through all his bosom ran;
Much did he marvel how his Heart came filled
With more than usual Devotion;
Nor did He know that in his Arms much more
Than Paradise, or than all Heaven He bore.
26.
But then (being so admonished by the Law)
She pays five Shekells, and receives her Soune.
Were all the World her own, She would bestow
It, and her Self, for his Redemption:
But this poor Price served Her to ransom Him,
Who came Her and the whole world to redeem.
27.
Then two white Pigeons (her own Emblems) She
Presents, as Duties of Purification:
The gentle Birds a mourning fell, to see
That they must leave their dearer Habitation:
Less sweet they thought the Altar, and would feign
Be nestling in her Breast, or Lap again.
28.
But holy Simeon, whose stout Expectation
Grounded upon Heavens Credit, did sustein
His aged Life, by potent Inspiration
Forgot his leaden pace, and flew amain
Into the Temple; for the nimble Blast
Of Gods own Spirit lent him youthful haste.
29.
O how his greedy Soul did Work and Beat,
And think the time an Age, till He was come
Unto his Blisses Shore; where in the heat
Of hasty Zeal, He snatched his Savior home
Into his longing Arms, and Heart, which now
Broke from his Lips, and in these Words did flow.
30.
O Life, thou now art out of debt to my
Long-stretch'd Attendance, and can nothing show
Of further Worth, wherewith to charm mine Eye,
And make it still be hankering here below:
No; I have seen, what I did live to see,
The worlds Hopes, and mine own; and heer-they be.
31.
Dear Lord of Heaven, here is that hop'd-for He
In whom lie treasured up Power and Salvation,
Which now thy love exposed has to be
The blessed Theme of humane Contemplation,
All Eyes may see this Face, as well as I,
And clearly read their own Felicity,
32.
This noble Face; by whose Soule-piercing Rays
The (...), until now damm'd up in Night
Admonished are to understand their Ways,
And tread the open Paths of High-noone Light:
This Face, whose more than golden Beauties be
The glorious Crown of Jacobs Progeny.
33.
O Death, if thou dare draw near Life's great King
Come take possession of my willing Heart,
That I a swarthy and unworthy Thing
From his too radiant presence may depart:
I am too blessed to live, and cannot bear
The burden of this heavenly Luster here.
34.
The good Old man thus eased his pious Zeal;
And having sacrificed a Kiss upon
The Infants royal Foot, began to feel
His Prayers were heard, and that Death hasted on:
Which He to meet, went home, and order gave
With sweet and hasty Joy about his Grave.
35.
As Echo unto his Devotion, Lo
The venerable Matron Anna came;
She whose Prophetic Heart did bid her go
To wait upon, and to adore the same
Young Son of Wonders; that her Sex in Her,
As His in Him, its duty might prefer.
36.
And here she met a full reward of all
Those nights and days which in that place she spent:
Her Fastings now turn d to a Festival;
Her longing Prayers which unto Heaven she sent
To pull it down, now found it ready here,
For in the Infants Face it did appear.
37.
So clearly it appeared, that She could not
Restrain her Tongue from being Trumper to
The Dawne of its convincing Brightness, but
Through Salems longest thickest Streets did go,
Spreading her Proclamation to each Ear
And Heart, which longed that heavenly News to hear.
38.
This called so many wondering Eyes to gaze
Upon the Mother and her fairer Son;
That from the glory of that populous Place
To poor and private Nazaret she did run,
Where, in her humble House she hoped to hide
Her humbler Self from Honors growing Tide,
39.
But Honor loves to scorn the Zealous Chase
Of most ambitious eager Hunters; and
Pursues those modest Souls from place to place
By whom she sees her orient Presence shunned.
Nor is she ever outrun, or fails to raise
Their Names with Trophies, and their Brows with Bays.
40.
But when in Salem the great News grew hot
And flamed to Herod's Court: the Tyrants Breast
Swelled with new Rage; for much he feared that
This Fire might reach his Throne; which made Him cast
Deep desperate Counsels in his jealous Mind
How for this Danger he some Curb might find.
41.
Mean while, as holy Joseph sleeping lay
To gain new strength to work; his Winged Friend
Roused up his Soul by a Celestial Ray,
Bidding him his swift flight to Egypt rend,
For Herod now contrives to slay, said He,
The Child, and in Him, both thy Wife and Thee.
42.
O that my Wings might be his Chariot! But
This noble Favor Heaven reserves for thee.
Fly then: But see thy self thou trouble not
With thy Return; for when the Storm shall be
Clearly blown over, I will thither come,
And from thy Gods own Mouth recall thee Home,
43.
This said; his nearest way the Angel took
To Heaven and fluttered loud as He went up:
The noise made Joseph start; who straight awoke
And looked about; But He had gained the Top
Of heaven, and in the Spears enclosed was
Ever Joseph's mortal Eye could thither pass.
44.
Yet by the blessed influence He behind
Had left, the Saint did Him entirely Know:
The priviledg'd Eyes of his religious Mind
Had long acquainted been with him, and now
He doubts not but this was his Guardian, who
Had taught him often what He instraits should do,
45.
Whilst by her sable Curtains Night as yet
Muffled up Heaven, and kept the World in Bed,
Himself He dressed, and made all things fit
For his long journey: On the Ass He spread
His Coverlet, and his own Pillow (sweet
And cleanly Hay) he gave him for his meat.
46.
The Beast thus baited: He his Axe, his Saws,
His Planes, Rules, Mallets, and his other Store
Of busy honest Implements bestows
In his large Bag, the Treasury of his poor
Industricus subsistence; which he ties
Fast to his Staff, and on his Shoulders tries.
47.
Two Bottles then (all that the poor Man had)
Fresh filled at a neighbor Fountain, He
Puts on his Girdle, with three Loaves of bread
In a plain Pouch. Then stepping reverently
Unto the Bed where the great Mother lay,
Arise, said He, for Heaven calls Us away.
48.
When She the business heard, and saw how He
Had all things ready for their journey made:
Far be it, she replied, that I should be
At any hour to follow Heaven afraid:
Or that I for the Mornings light should tarry
Who in my Arms my fairer Day do carry.
49.
I can be no where lost, dear Babe, whilst I
Travel with Thee, who never can depart
From thine own Home: Wherever Thou do fly,
Thine own Land still will meet Thee, for thou art
By thine eternal Right, the Prince as well
Of Ham and Egypt, as of Israel.
50.
Arabia's Devotion has long since
Supplid thee with this sacred Treasure, to
Defray thy Charges: Thine own Providence
Thy Purveyer was; Thou knew'st we were to go,
And have laid in Provision, ever we
Could dream of any such Necessity,
51.
And yet Necessity is no such thing
To mighty Thee, whose all-commanding Hand
Does hold the Reins of Fate: the bloody King
Musters his Wrath in vain, would thou with-stand
His Spite in open Field: But thou know why
It will be now more glorious to File.
52.
This Journey's but a step to Thee, who from
The Pinnacle of all Sublimity
Thy Fathers bosom did a Pilgrim come
And take up thy abode in worthless Me:
Me, who from Heaven much further distant am,
Than Memphis is from fair Jerusalem.
53.
With that, She wrapped the Infant close, and took
The Asses back; whose bridle Joseph held,
And long before the drowsy Town awoke,
Led him far out into the quiet Field:
Darkness and Silence clinged round about,
Barning Discovery and Suspicion out.
54.
Thus did the Heir of Heaven betimes begin
To (...) out Patience to his World below,
To sanctify all Persecution,
And make it by his owning, glorious grow:
Who but new born, designed is to die,
And long ever He can go, is fain to fly
55.
Aurora now, the Porter of the Day,
Gat up, and opened the door unto the Sun;
Who peeping out with an abashed Ray,
Beheld how far these Travelers had gone
Ever He awoke, and doubted whether He
Should in that Days Horizon needed be.
56.
For He observed the Babe abroad, whose sight
Cost Him a deeper Blush than that which dies
His morning Cheeks: Yet He cheered up his light,
And venturing on, resolved to try his Eyes
Upon that Infant-face of full-grown Bliss
As Eaglets use to do their own at His.
57.
Now Love and Piety forbid, that thou
My Psyche should disdain to trace their way,
Since I so fair a Convoy thee allow
Which neither Dangers fears, nor Delay.
Thy God was glad to travel on an Ass,
But in this Chariot gives thee leave to pass.
58.
That leave too noble is, cried she, for Me,
A meaner thing than what He rode upon:
Might I on foot, or rather on my Knee
Crawle in his royal Path, no Princes Throne,
Should tempt Me from my greater Honor: -- It Is
Enough, said Phylax, now no more of this.
59.
And here He took her up, and shook the Reins:
That Item strait the greedy Coursers caught,
And, scouring through the soft aereall Plains,
Unto their View the Fields of Nazaret brought:
Psyche soon knew the Place again, and cried,
How much do these thy Steeds my Thoughts out-ride.
60.
Pity thy Lord then, said the Guardian, who
Though drove by Fear, was forced to use a pace
Below the Name of Speed: Joseph did go
Before on foot, and lead the laden Ass:
He led Him, and although He made no stay,
Alas his very Going was Delay.
61.
Besides, a thousand Cares more heavy lay
Upon his Heart, then on his back the Load
Of all his Tools: What Thoughts about the Way,
What studies how to escape the full-ey'd Road,
What Tenderness to keep the Mother warm,
What dainty Fears that God should take no Harm!
62.
See thou this private Path, which ever since
With Lilies and with Violets has smiled,
Which it received from the influence
Both of the passant Mother and the Child?
The Country wondered at the beauteous List,
But from what cause it sprung, they little wist.
63.
As to the Sea, the silver River through
A thousand by-pathes steals its secret Way;
So into Egypt this sweet Tract does flow,
Declining all things that its course might stay.
Doubt not the Windings, but securely ride,
For now the Way it self's thy fragrant Guide.
64.
Look how the Galilean Villages
Their distance keep, and give the Path free leave
To stretch it feit through all these Privacies:
Look how the friendly Trees do interweave
Their Arms, and offer their Protection to
Whoever here in Secrecy would go.
65.
There did the careful Mother light, to give
Her Son his Dinner from her blessed Breast;
Whom with fit Entertainment to receive,
Kind Earth that sweetly-swelling Cushion dressed:
Where ever you see the officious Flowers meet
In such a Junto; know it was her Seat.
66.
But yonder Stable which thou see shut
Quite out of Town, and standing all alone,
Did in its hospitable Litter let
The Pilgrims take their first nights station.
They with such Lodging long acquaintance had,
And thou know what thy Lord his Cradle made.
67.
Such Inns as this did careful Joseph choose
And escaped Observance all the way He went
Neither the Calileans, nor the Jews
Discovering his provident intent.
With painful Patience He his way did find,
And at the length Judea left behind.
68.
He left Judea; but first left by it,
Since now to find his Charge, the bloody Prince
Deeply consulted. Thus thy Spouse thought fit
To teach his future Exiles, that the sense
Of their sad Sufferings sat full near his Heart
Who in this Banishment bore so deep a Part.
69.
The freedom of the Reins here Phylax threw
Upon his Coursers Backs, who cheered by
That liberty, with sprightfull fervor flew
And scorned the Towns which far below did lie,
Flinging their gallant foam, and snuffing up
The Air, which seemd to them their Course to stop.
70.
The Clouds took notice of their resolute have,
And stepped aside to make their Passage clear;
Through which their smoking wheels did whirle as fast
As Phebu's down the hill of his glib sphere:
Which instantly so tired the Northern Wind,
That puffing he and lagging came behind.
71.
Thus having lost Judea in a Mist
Of farre-removed Air, they rushed into
The famous Deserts unperceived list,
Where their impatient Fire did spur them so
That Phylax checked them thrice, ever they would hear
His Hand, and stop their vehement career.
72.
And then: Consider Psyche, well, said he,
This squalid Sceen of churlish Desolation,
This proper Region of Perplexity,
This Soil all planted thick with Desperation,
This storehouse of a thousand Famins, this
Fountain of Droughts, this Realm of Wretchedness:
73.
This Country, which does by its Neighborhood
To Canaan (that wide-spread Channel, where
Honey and Milk conspired into a flood
Of costlesse, but incomparable Cheer,)
Advance the value of that blessed Soil,
And its own vileness aggravate the while.
74.
Thus sticks black Night as foil unto the Day,
And by its Blacknes lends it fairer Beams:
Thus Sorrows stings inhance the sweets of Joy;
Thus Floods of Gall commend the Honey streams;
Thus Darkness cleaved fast upon the backs
Of Looking-Glasses, them illustrious makes.
75.
Well knew wise Heaven Men would not understand
Its royal Favor in'affording them
The gentle Riches of a fertile Land,
Were they not tutored by some such Clime
Of Woes and Horrors, and forced to confess
A Gardens Blessing, by a Wilderness.
76.
Behold these needless Banks of Sand, which have
No Seas to bound, but this vast Ocean
Of Barrenness; where when the Winds conceive
High-swolln Displeasure, and to Battle run
Bandying their mutual Blasts a thousand ways
At once, a dry and parching storm they raise.
77.
For the wild Soil impatient to be plowed
At Eolu's pleasure, flies full in his face,
And climbing up into a Tawny Cloud
With smoking Rage torments its new-gained Place,
Whilst blinded Passengers amazed stand,
And all the Air is nothing else but Sand.
78.
This frighted gentler Nature far from hence,
Who in her bosom all (...) Blessings bore,
Her teeming Springs delicious Influence,
Her Summers Beauties, and her Autumns store:
And all the best of Winter too; for here
This sandy Mischief schorcheth all the year.
79.
The Trees, You see, are all dispersed and fled,
For fear of being only Fuel here,
And that before the Axe had summoned
Them to the Hearth. The cheerly Birds which were
The Inhabitants of their Bows, did them pursue,
Panting their sad lays all the way they flew.
80.
This most inhospitable Earth will keep
No Entertainment for tame honest Beasts,
Goats, Asses, Camels, Horses, Oxen, Sheep,
Can at her wretched Table be no Guests.
No; this is only Mischiefs cursed stage,
Where Beasts of Prey, and Monsters act their rage.
81.
Look where a pair of dreadful Tigres lie
Couching in Ambush to attend their prey;
How should a fainting Traveller get by
When two such hungry Deaths beset his way!
There runs a Lion, with his hideous Note
Tearing, for want of meat his greedy throat.
82.
At the same Business there is a female Bear
In meat and drink two days and nights behind,
Whose pined Whelps all yelling in her Ear
Chode her abroad some Sustenance to find.
There runs a Bore, and whitens all his Path
With foam, the scum of his intemperate Wrath.
83.
But mark that Cave, before whose nasty Door
An heap of excrementall Poisons lies,
Next which, a Quakemire of congealed Gore
Raild round about with naked Bones, descries
What part fell Fury there has played and who
Dwells in that House whose Porch is trimmed so.
84.
That gloomy Cloud which dams the Dens mouth up
Is but the Tenants breath which keeps within,
Who by our Talk is wakened unto hope
Of some near Prey: See now He does begin
To rouse Himself; the Fire he spits before
Is but the Porter to unlock his Door.
85.
Though Psyche now had cheered and wrought her Heart
Unto a more then female Valor; yet
She could not curb her (...), but began to start
At that all-flaming Dread the Monster spit:
When Phylax smiling on her horror, cried,
Fear not, for Heaven and I am at thy side.
86.
Of his own Coming, by his cruel Hiss
He warning gives; that stream of cole-black Blood
He spews so thick, his wonted Usher is.
Thus when some choice Feind breaks from Hell, a flood
Of stinking Sulphur paves his dismal way,
A bashing all the Air, and poisning Day.
87.
Behold his Eyes like two bright Firebrands placed
In Cakes of blood, their fatal beams display
So with long flakes of glaring Rays enchased,
Unto Heavens Anger Comets light the Way,
Pointing with every beam, to Cities, or
To Realms, and Countries, Famine, Plague, or War.
88.
His Mouth which Foams with Venom, is the Gate
Of helpless Misery: his Jaws the Mill
Of deplorable, and untimely Fate,
His tongue a Weapon, on whose Fork do dwell
A thousand Deaths; his throat, so black and broad,
To his unhappie Preys the beaten Road.
89.
His lethern Wings are those which lend its speed
Unto Destruction; his iron Paws
Are Spights and Rages Hands; his direful Head,
The Oracle whence Tyrants draw their Laws;
His scaly skin, the thick Embroydery
Of confident remorselesse Cruelty.
90.
His knotty Tail, pointed with stinging Fire,
Which on his back in sullen scorn he throws,
Is Deaths dread Chain; that unrelenting Ire
Which sits so high upon his craggie Brows,
Is an aforehand Sentence unto All
Beasts, Birds, or Men, that in his way do fall.
91.
Hark how the bruised Air complains, now He
Moves the huge flailes of his most boistrous Wings:
For the soft Nymph elsewhere was used to be
Beaten with Feathers, or melodious Strings:
Look in what state He through the Clouds does stream;
The smoke before him rolls, behind the Flame.
92.
As when the martial Griffen hovers near
The greedy Kite forgets his chased Prey,
And turning Partner in the Sparrows fear
With her into some Corner sneaks away:
So do all Monsters here acknowledge this
Their Sovereign in all Rage and Dreadfulnesse.
93.
Thou now see neither Lion, Boar, nor Bear,
This Dragons Presence chased them all away
Unto their closest Dens, and Caverns, where
They trembling lie, and durst not look on Day.
So do all other strange portentuous Things
Frighted hence by the Thunder of his Wings.
94.
For else, thou here had Troops of Centaurs seen,
A strange Composure of Horse-Infantry:
Else Sphinx, and her ambiguous Brood, had been
Abroad in all her forefront Braverie,
And with her polished Maiden face contended
Her grizely Lions Parts to have amended.
95.
Else had unsatiable Harpies, her
Near Cosen Portents in the Winged Crew
Boldly about this correspondent sphere
With Virgins Looks, and Vultures Tallons flew:
Else the salacious Fauns had here been skipping,
The Satyrs dallying, and the Silvans tripping.
96.
Else had that Riddle of Deformity,
That Combination of all foul Disgrace,
Who by the Belly of a Goat does tie
A Dragons Tail unto a Lions Face,
Ranged about these Sands, and sought what Prey
Its equall-monstrous Hunger might allay.
97.
Have thou not heard how when old Isreal's Race
Did through the Trials of this Wilderness
Unto the well-deserving Promise pass,
They fell a Murmuring, because Success
Posted not on as fast as their Desire,
And yiedling to the Way, began to tire?
98.
This made the Just Creator grant Commission
To Vengance, his most trusty Factresse, who
Mounting upon the back of Expedition
Down to the Bottom of the World did go,
Whose choicest Dens of Horror having eyed,
Unto Erynni's Grott she turned aside.
99.
The Fury started, and upon her head
Straight up, stood every Snake: She never till now
Had seen a sight so full of fatal Dread,
Though often she viewed the deepest Deeps, and though
She daily used for her Looking-glasses
Her correspondent Sisters Monstrous Faces.
100.
For in the Strangers furrowed Brows were sown
The Seeds of everlasting Indignation;
Her Eyes were constant Lightning, flashing down
Upon her fiery Cheeks, and with their Motion
Glancing a more than High-noon-day upon
The frighted Night of that black Region.
101.
Her sturdy Breast was made of burning Brass,
Her massy Arms composed of sparkling Steel;
Her adamantine Hands did sway a Mace
Of red-hot Iron; at her Back did dwell
A Quiver stuffed with forked Bolts of Thunder,
Well-skill'd in tearing Clouds and Rocks in sunder
102.
Fear, Anguish, Pain, Astonishment, Despair,
Dissension, Tumult, War, Plague, Famine, Drought,
Confusion, Poisonous and Tempestuous Air,
Eversion, Desolation Crying out,
Wringing of Hands, Gnashing of Teeth, Sighs, Groans,
Soule-gnawing Worms, were her Companions.
103.
So were Schism, Error, flintie Obduration,
With Pride, and Impudence in Villainy,
And She, who though her fairer Garb and fashion
Seen'd to suit more with lovely Company,
Was yet as rank a Curse as they, for She
Was zealous, but blind and false sanctity.
104.
But Vengeance spying her Erynnis quake,
Constreind her dreadful Aspect to remit
Part of its Awfulnesse; and tried to speak
As mild as She lookd fierce: yet when She set
Open her Mouths furnace, unto all the Cave
Loud Thunder notice of her speaking gave.
105.
Fear not, said She, I on an errand come
Which well will suit with thy revengfull thought:
The Sons of Jsrael thou know, with whom
My Sovereigns Patience long time has fought:
Indeed He leads them through a Barren Earth,
Bur yet He makes Heaven bring their Victuals forth.
106.
Yet Peevish murmuring they have forced Heaven to
Repent its Kindness: Wherefore thou must spare
Some of thy Locks, which I am sent to throw
About that Deserts now devoted Air;
Where they shall lash the Rebels, till they see
What it is to kick at God, and Waken Me.
107.
Me, whom soft Mercy long a-sleepe had kept
Upon a Bed which She her self had made:
Me, who for ever might in Peace have slept
Did Mortals not take pleasure in this Trade
Of sending up their shameless sins, to tear
By their bold cry, my most unwilling Ear.
108.
Me, who did never move this Hand in vain,
Nor knew what 'twas or Stroke or Aim to lose;
Me, who cannot be charmd a-sleep again
But by the dying Groans of my proud foes;
Me, whose sure Power it self full deep did seal
On Lucifer, and ramm'd him down to Hell.
109.
Erynnis glad to hear this Message, tore
Two handfulls of her Tresses from her Head:
Which Vengeance forth with to this Desert bore
And through the trembling Air their volumes spread;
First having breathed on them warlike fire
Which all their breasts filled with mischeivous Ire.
110.
No sooner were they tossed up, but they
Perceived themselves increased round about:
Their Tails reached out themselves an hideous way,
And from their sides a pair of Wings burst out;
Whose motion puffed and increased the flame
Which over all their monstrous Scales did stream.
111.
Their own Instinct taught them the readiest way
To the rebellious Camp of Israel:
Where seizing strait upon their helpless Prey,
Their fiery Poison they so thick did spill,
That all the Host had their Burnt-offring been,
Had seasonable Mercy not stepped in.
112.
Mercy stepped in, and by a Contre-plot
Rearing a Brazen Serpent up, did heal
All that were stung with fire, if they would put
Trust in the Medicine of that Spectacle
They gazed, and saw their Help, but could not pry
Into the bottom of that Mystery.
113.
That crucified Serpent did present
Thy Spouse, who reigning on his Cross, did by
His potent Dying gallantly prevent
The Plot of Death, which more than He, did dye;
And crush the old red Dragon, who had hurled
His monstrous Venom all about the World.
114.
And now thou know the Pedigree of this
Feirce Portent, which enflames and taints the Air,
His fiery Looks, and smoking flight confess
Of what Progenitors He is the Heir.
Think now how sweet a Pilgrimage it was
When thy young Lord did through such Monsters pass,
115.
Yet even this Passage, Psyche, shall appear
So precious unto future Saints, that They
Will seek their Harbor no where else but here,
And make these Sands the Shore where they will lay
Their Vessels safe from all those storms which rage
Upon a secular Life's unfaithful Stage.
116.
This Passage they will judge a Dedication
Of all this Tract, to holy Privacie,
Where they in undisturbed Contemplation
Of Heaven, shall sweetly live, and sweetlier die;
Fearing no longer other Monsters, when
They once have reskewed themselves from Men.
117.
Here will they build so strongly-mean a Cell
As shall no Tempest nor no Plunder fear:
Here they with Health and Industry will dwell,
With Pains and Providence, but not with Care:
Here they will importuned Earth entreat
With Herbs or Roots to recompense their Sweat.
118.
For neither stub born Flint, nor arid Sand
Their Barrennesses Privilege will dare
Strictly to urge against the painful Hand
Of pious Poverty: Those Charters are
Of Natures giving, and must needs give place
Unto the grand Prerogative of Grace.
119.
Here will their Eyes not interrupted be
With fond Allurements of the newest Fashions,
Whose Commendation speaks their Vanity,
It being only built upon Mutations.
Their simple Sackcloth in one cut and guise
To hide their Dust and Ashes will suffice.
120.
Here shall no noise of chincking Money be
Rebounded by their Hearts enchanted strings;
That Noise which with such charming Melody
Through all the Worlds unhappy Quarters rings,
And gains more Altars far for Mammon, than
Will unto Heaven allowed be by Men.
121.
Here shall no glancing Eye, no mincing Pace,
No sporting Locks,, no dainty Red and White,
No wanton Dress, no Tongues melodious Grace,
No bidding Coyness, no inviting Flight,
Prevail upon their manly Hearts, to brook
The tickling Slavery of a Woman's Yoke.
122.
Here no Ambition shall puff up their Breast,
And in their Soul a foolish dropsy raise,
Who by themselves are freely dispossessed
Of all those Gardens which can bring forth Bays,
And live upon a Soil which nothing bears
But Poverty, and Roots, and Sighs, and Tears.
123.
Here shall they by no care of Wife and Child
Be called away in Conscience from their Prayers,
But shall by Virtues daily Progrese build
Unto the Top of Heaven their mystic Stayers,
By which they once again the World shall leave,
Nobly rebounding upward from their grave.
124.
But now this long Discourss devoured had
The longer Way, and Egypt did draw near.
Thebai's Fields and Woods, and Towns, were glad
That to the Desert they next Neighbors were,
And to these Strangers might the first afford
Kind Entertainment, as once to their Lord.
125.
When, Lo, said Phylax, now the World grows tame,
And a mild hospitable Prospect yields,
These are the outmost skirts of populous Ham
Tufted with Woods, and laced with flowrie Fields:
A welcome Harbor to those Pilgrims, who
Have labored through this Deserts Sea of Woe.
126.
At the last Furrows end thus Rest does stand
And gently leads the Weary Plowman home:
So hangs the Garland at the Race's end,
Smiling upon the Runners as they come;
So Summer cheers the pined Earth, when she
Has run through Winters total Tyranny.
127.
Hither this Joseph came; and brought with Him
Far more Salvation, then the Other, though
From Famins Jaws he Egypt did redeem,
And fed seav'n starved years with Corn enough:
Hither He came, and brought with him the Bread
By which the World eternally is Fed.
128.
How glad was he to see his Charge was here
Arrived safe through all those perilous Ways!
Upon the Child he looked, but through a Tear
Of Love and Joy, and paid their Safeties Praise
To him whose Providence had in that wide
Region of Dangers, to his Guides been Guide.
129.
Then passing to that Town thou see there
Which from old Hermes borrowing its Fame,
The title of Hermopolis does wear,
Near unto that Religious Tree he came:
The Natives call it Persea, and with high
Esteem its Leaves and Apples magnify.
130.
Observe them well: Each Leaf presents the true
Shape of a Tongue, which talks its whispering part
To every Wind: The dangling Apples show
The perfect feature of a panting Heart.
O that the World would learn this of the ree,
That with the Tongue, the Heart should joined be!
131.
Blind Superstition had hallowed it
To Isi's honor; but the honest Tree
Made bold that fond Relation to forget
When thy great Spouse drew near: for instantly
With orthodox Devotion pliant grown
Unto the Earth her Head she bowed down:
132.
Where she with all her Hearts the Child adored,
And, as she could, with all her Tongues, did sound
His Praise who is of Hearts and Tongues sole Lord.
Then having with her Boughs sweep'd clean the Ground
She rose and gave Him way, yet out she stretched
Her Neck, and after him her Arms she reached.
133.
But when near to the City Gate he came,
Isis, of stupid Marble made, and there
Set up, and wisely fastened on a Frame
Full as divine a stone as she; with fear
And awe surprised was, and 'gan to quake
At first, and then to bend, and then to break.
134.
Poor Idol! which had never Sense till now,
And now feels only its own Ruin: Down
Tumbles the long adored Goddess Cow,
Resigning back that Worship to its own
True Lord, which she had long usurped by
The help of Egypts mad Idolatry.
135.
Her fair spread Horns are shattered off; her Brow
Bruised out of fashion; and quite broke her Neck:
The Dietie advanced to Rubbish now
Has Power to help the Country, if in thick
And mirey way disposed: which sure is more
Assistance than it ever gave before.
136.
Thus when the Reverend Ark of God was set
In Dagons Temple, down the Idol fell,
And making haste out at the Door to get,
Quite broke his Godship on the stronger Sell;
Where when his Servants entered, they found
The wretched Fish in its own Ruins drowned.
137.
But in the Cities (and the Peoples) Heart
Upon a golden Pillar mounted high
And decked with all the wit and Pride of Art
Serapis stood; the Ox of Majesty;
Whose Glory by a consecrated Crown
Wreathed about his mighty Horns was shown.
138.
As in that street the noble Pilgrims went
Enquiring for an Inn; the guilty Beast
His steely Knees, and brazen Body bent,
And by his massy Weight so strongly cast
Himself upon the ground, that to an heap
Of Fragments from his Godhead he did leap,
139.
The People wondered at the Prodigy:
But Joseph and his Virgin Consort knew
To what more powerful Divinity
The Idol did his due Obeisance show.
What by inspired Esays Pen had been
Pointed out long a-forehand, they had seen.
140.
He had foretold that into Egypt thy Isa. 19. 1.

Great Spouse should on a swift Cloud mounted ride
And that the Idols should be moved by
His potent Presence; And they soon descri'd
This Cloud to be his Mothers Bosom, where
He shrowed rode the fastest pace of fear.
141.
This made good Joseph travel up and down
To spread the Ruin of Idolatry
Through every populous superstitious Town
Which did the Horned Statues Deifie;
His righteous Soul being tortured, to see
That Men should more than Marble stupid be,
142.
And wheresoe'r upon Zeals Wings he flew
Equal Success still bore him company;
Still the infernal Spirits their Lodgings threw
In pieces, as thy mighty Lord drew nigh.
Thou shall no further go; but I will tell
Thee here, what Wonders afterward befell.
143.
The Heart of Egypt melted down its Breast,
As from their Pillars their vain Gods had done.
The Priests and sage Magitiaus broke their Rest
To find this Accidents Occasion:
And all one night resolved, at counsel met,
To spend their utmost spells and Charms on it,
144.
Jannes, a Man both of his Race and Name
Who Moses did oppose, the work began:
'Twas in a Vault, where Days looks never came,
Untroad as yet by any mortal Man
Who was not full as black as they, and made
Solemnly free of their accursed Trade.
145.
In this deep Temple of Infernal Arts
Lighting a Taper tempered with the Fat
That grew about his Predecessors Hearts,
It in a dead Man's mossie Skull he set:
The Mists and Stincks long wrestled with the flame,
But at the last the Taper overcame.
146.
Then gaping wide, both with his Mouth and Eyes,
He spewed seav'n solemn Curses on Daylight,
Which though it saw the broken Dieties,
Would not oetect what sacrilegious Might
Had thrown them down: And then those Gods he blessed
Whose luck it was in gloomy Holes to rest.
147.
For on a Shrine still standing there appeard
Serapis, Isis, and a smokie Rout
Of lester Gods: The Altar was besmeared
With thick and bloody Gore; and round about
In (...) fragments lay Cheeks, Noses, Eyes,
Hearts, Shoulders, LIvers, Legs, Arms, Bowels, Thighs.
148.
These hideous Dainties, was the Breakfast for
A Crocodile, which in the Corner lay:
But tain'd by strong Enchantments, durst not stir
When ever to their Magic Business they
Addressed themselves. No Monster, but compared
With them, a mild and gentle Thing appeared.
149.
The Walls with Leeks and Onyons garnished were,
For courteous Egypt had made Gods of these,
And from her well-dung'd Soil reaped every year
A worthy Crop of young fresh Dieties.
Upon the Reofe did painted Nilus flow,
That God whose bounty makes those other grow.
150.
Here Jannes, having thrice washed his left Hand,
And stained with it Cocytu's Streams, which he
Had in a Laver by: He takes his Wand,
That Wand which once lived on a Cypress Tree
Planted on Acheron's Bank, but now was made
The deadly Scepter of their Magic Trade.
151.
A Scepter unto which the Moon, the Sun,
The Stars, had often stooped, and Nature bowed:
Often had it turned the course of Phlegeton;
Often had it troubled Hell, and forced the proud
Tyrant, for all his Iron Mace, to be
Obedient to its monstrous Witchery,
152.
With that he draws a Circle on the Floor;
(Spread thick with Ashes of a funeral Pile,)
Which with strange Lines, and Hooks, and Forks, and Store
Of shapeless shapes and Figures he does fill,
Wild Heiroglyphicks, stark mad Characters,
Whilst each Draught with his Neighbor snarls and jarrs.
153.
Into this Hell of scratches in steps he,
(Almost as strange a thing as it,) and there
Three groans he gave, three times he bowed his Knee;
He thrice with blood besprinkled his Left Ear;
Three times he struck the ground, and mumbled o'r
The Monsters he had written there before.
154.
Then lifting up his hollow Voice, he cried,
By Jannes and by Jambres our great Sires;
By Pharaohs adamantine Soul, which tried
A fall with Isreal's God; By all those Fires
Which we have on your Altars laid, and them
Which in black Styx or Erebus do swim:
155.
By these profound mysterious Notes which I
Have figured here; by dread Tyfiphone,
By stern Alecto, and Megera; by
Huge Cerberns his Heads Triplicity;
By Hells wide open Gates; by the divine
Scepters of Pluto, and of Proserpine.
156.
By your own Heads, who only here have your
Safe Sanctuary found; I you conjure
Serapis, Isis, and each lesser Power,
No longer your dishononr to endure.
What boots it here to be a standing God,
If even the best of You falls down abroad:
157.
For from Hermopolis unfortunate Gate
Ruin set forth, and boldly made her Prey
On every public Dietie, whose fate
It was to stand in her devouring Way.
Whence comes this Downfall of Religion? What
Has spread amongst the Gods this deadly Rot?
158.
Let Me but know, and I will make Heaven bow
And kiss the feet of Hell: the Center I
Will in the face of scornful Phoebus throw,
And at high noon with Midnight choke the Sky:
But I will be revenged for you, and make
(Though they be all the World) your Enemies quake,
159.
Here the black foam stopped up his Mouth; and He
With griezly ghastly face, with staring Eyes,
With Breast tormented by Anxiety,
With languid Arms and Hands, with quivering Thighs,
Expect the Issue of his Charms to see,
And what his Oracles Reply would be.
160.
When lo, (for then thy Spouse was coming nigh
That very place) a hideous Groan did fill
The mourning Vault, which was rebounded by
So strong an Earthquake, that the Idols fell,
And by their prostrate fragments in the Cave
Did their own Temple turn into their Grave.
161.
Scarcely had Jannes and his frighted Crew
Time to escape the Rume of their Gods:
But being out, their Books away they threw
In indignation, and brake their Rods;
And having nothing else whereon to pour
Their Spite, their lips they bit, their hair they tore.
162.
His secret Vengance thus thy Little Lord
Sheathed in the Bowels of Idolatry,
Whilst puzzeld Egypt never saw the Sword,
Nor knew for whom it reaped this Victory.
The Angel thus of old their Firstborn slew,
When undiscerned through the Land He flew.
163.
Mean while fell Herod busy was about
The matchless Master-peice of Tyranny:
Which how it was Conceived, and how Brought
Forth, the dull Vulgar's Ey 's too dim to see,
For it was hatched as low as Hell: But I
To thee will open all the black Mystery.
164.
Mischievous were that Prince's Counsels: But
Proud Lucifer had deeper Plots than He
And feared his Crown more than did Herod, at
The newborn Kings high-fam'd Discovery;
For in his ears the Shepherds Story rung,
And the strange Music of the Christmas Song.
165.
The Mouth of Thunder never yet had spoke
Such Terror to his Soul, as those soft Notes,
Which tuned to Joy's and Peace's Key, had broke
From the sweet Nests of those bright Angels Throats.
Nor was this Omen all: for He had spied
That Eastern Star which did the Wisemen guide.
166.
No Light did ever fright Him so, but that
Whose Darts did throw him headlong from the Top
Of Heavens sublimest Pinnacle, and shut
Him up in deepest Night: where He keep'd shop
And every sort of sinful Wares did sell
To those who with their Souls will purchase Hell.
167.
For now he knew his Trade would never thrive,
And that few Chapmen would delight to buy;
So long as that great Infant was alive,
With whose more profitable Diety
Shepherds and Kings to traffic had begun,
And taught the World which way for Gains to run
168.
Ten thousand Spawns of his deep plotting Brain
He tumbles o'r, yet none could please his Eye:
Again he Thinks, and yet Dislikes again:
But Vow's at last, how ever, thy Spouse shall die.
He Vow's by his own Head, and seeks some Fiend
Who might dispatch the Business to his mind.
169.
A Rock there stands near to Cocytu's Bank
Which to the River opes its monstrous Jaws,
Sucking no other Breath, but what the rank
And Sulphury Vapor of that Water throws
Into its Mouth, which far more venomous makes
The steaming Poison that from thence it takes.
170.
In winding Holes, and ragged Corners there
Whole Families of Adders, Vipers, Snakes,
Asps, Basilisks, and Dragons dwelling are,
Whose constant and confounding Hissing makes
The Language of that Mouth, and plainly tells
What kind of Prodigy beyond them dwells.
171.
The Throat sticks thick with bones of Legs and Arms
Which ravenous Haste had there left by the Way;
With undigested Heaps the Stomach swarms
Which in that Sink and Den of Murder lay;
In whose immeasurable Bottom stood
A reeking Lake of young and guiltless Blood.
172.
But at the Cavern, where the Heart should lie,
Was hung a sevenfold Door of massy Brass,
Plated with Adamant, and conjured by
A thousand Bars and Locks, to let no cross
Mischance peep in; besides as many Seals
Treading on one another crowded heels.
173.
Above, a Watchtower was, erected high,
Windows full; where Linx stood night and day:
Before the Door an hundred Dogs did lie,
Upon whose ears no sleep did ever prey:
Next them, as many Cocks; and next to these
A vigilant Company of trusty Geese.
174.
Within were dark Meanders, dammed up
By frequent Doors, and by their Porters too,
Whose office never was to set them open,
But see that not so much as Thought should go
That way: They often put out their Lights, for fear
Some cunning Beam might spy a Cranny there.
175.
Before the inmost Gate, a mighty Moat
The Palace far from Dangers did divide:
No Bridge it knew, and but one single Boat,
In which no more than one at once could ride;
And this unto the shore fast Prisoner was
Under a Chain of Steel, and Lock of Brass.
176.
Upon that shore in due Array was set
With Weapons ready drawn, a treble Watch,
That no Disturbance might presume to put
Its finger forth, or touch the jealous Latch:
They with a loud alarm all roused were
If but the Image of a Noise came there.
177.
But in that House, so dark and so profound
That Hell it self seems there sunk down in Hell;
A Thing, o how much more than Monster, drowned
Yet deeper in torturings, did dwell.
One who had chose Disquiet for her Rest,
One who all Furies is to her own breast.
178.
Suspicion is her Name: Full is her Head
Of thoughtfull Eyes, which always learning seem,
And always wide open; for they know no Lid
Which might twixt Labor interpose and them.
They look on Sleep, as on a treacherous Thing
Who might bring Dangers under his black Wing.
179.
But chiefly upon One Another they,
Their jealous and misgiving Glances throw;
And 'cause they can no grounds of fear bewray,
Of the more deep-layd Dangers fearful grow:
And whilst they all thus mutually stare,
Each bids his brother of himself beware.
180.
Her large thin Ear stood always pricked upright
To catch each Sound and Whisper that came near:
Sometimes, as her own Fancy took its flight
But through her head, she thought some Noise was there,
Her hollow Cheeks had gaped long for meat,
But Doubts and Fears forbad her still to eat.
181.
In every Dish and Cup she seemed to see
Some Poysonsliely laid in Ambushment.
Alas, and could there any Venom be
So venomous as she, who might have lent
New power to Dragons stings; and mad each field
Of Thessaly, fairer Cropps of Poison yield.
182.
Her Garments were inpenetrable Steel,
Of the same Temper with great Satan's shield:
A brazen Buckler did her left Hand fill.
And in her right, a mighty Sword she held:
Weapons with which she never did entend
To fight, but only her own Head defend,
183.
Her Chair had forty iron Feet; which all
Where double nailed to the ground; Yet she
Believed not but still the Seat might fall
By sudden undermining Treachery:
This made her seldom sit; and when she did,
Over her shoulder still she turned her Head.
184.
No Morning passed, but some on Work she set
To make her new Keys; being jealous still
Her Foes might patterns of her old ones get.
Seav'n times a month she changed her broad Seal;
As her own Self she would have done, had she
Known how to alter her Deformity.
185.
With contradicting Thoughts her Breast did rise;
Which were no sooner liked, but rejected:
She boulted every Counsel twice or thrice,
And what did surest seem, she most suspected.
Often would she skip and fling about, and start.
Sometimes at the mere Motion of her Heart.
186.
An Oath of strict Allegiance thrice a day
She forced her numerous Family to take;
And changed their Offices as often, least they
Themselves too strong for her Commands might make.
Strange Officers, yet fitting to attend
Upon so true and Sovereign a (...)
187.
The first was tall and, big-bon'd Cowardice
Whose lazy Neck upon her shoulders lay,
And both her Hands upon her Head; her Eyes
Were always winking least the dint of Day
Should them surprise; between her legs she hid
Her Tail, which, as it touched them, shivered.
188.
Next Her, stood Cruelty, supported by
Advantage; in her Hands all Engines were
And fell Inventions of Tyranny:
What Hooks, what Forks, what Whips, what Racks were there,
What Insultation, what Wrath, what War,
What Wounds, what Salvagnesse, what Massacre!
189.
Close in the Corner stood pale Thoughtfulness,
Upon whose lips fast sealed Silence sat:
Her business was a thousand things to guess;
She stamped, her head she scratched, her breast she beat,
Her wearied Eyes she nailed on the ground,
And in her endless self, her self she drowned.
190.
About the Room ran furious Discontent,
And when all others did escape her War,
She waged it with her self; her Clothes she rent,
Her cheeks she gashed, and she tore her hair:
But Malice ssiely crept, and dealt her spite
Unto her Neighbors in a secret Fight.
191.
Yet slippery Guile was nimbler than the rest:
Her quaint Attire was of Chamelions skins;
She in two minutes could become at least
An hundred Virtues and as many Sins,
All Polypusse's feet she had, and was
Fortunes true Echo, Proteu's looking-glass.
192.
With Her, was complementall Flatery,
With silver Tongue, and more than golden Words:
Her hand she always kissed, and bent her knee,
But in her Mantle hid two poys'ned swords.
Of these, and thousand others like to them,
Did foul Suspicion her household frame.
193.
When Lucifer had raked many Dens
And found no Fury furious enough
To manage his Design; at last he runs
Down to this sinck; where as He 'gan to show
His sulphury face, the Porters quickly knew
Their Sultan, and the Gates wide open threw.
194.
The Boat flew from its chain to meet His feet
And wafted Him unto the Privy Watch;
Down fell their Swords; up went their Hands, to greet
Their Sovereigns Coming, and to draw the Latch:
Suspicion started as they opened the Door,
And wondered why her Dogs barked not before.
195.
But dread and Awe had stopped their Mouths, as now
They sealed Hers too, to see grand Lucifer:
She feared the worst; and thought that in his brow
She read some lines of Wrath and Spite to Her.
But He wiped from his Lips the Fire and Smoke,
And, with a Kisses Preface, thus He spoke.
196.
Madame, be not afraid, for well I know
And love my Friends, and thou art one of them;
Witness that mighty Trust which I will now
Treasure in Thee; it is my Diadem,
My Diadem is lost, if thou do not
Procure Destruction to Mary's Brat.
197.
Herod will do his best, (I know him well,)
If he be aided by thy Inspiration;
There Is not an Heart that lives, where more of Hell
Has taken up its earthly habitation:
Add but thy Power, and He will be complete,
And bravely venture on the barbarous Feat.
198.
Thy Handmayd Cruelty alone will be
Sufficient; take but Her along, and go.
When Thou that Baby-Gods Blood bring'st to Me,
I Will plant a Crown upon thy worthy Brow,
And set Thee on an ever-burning Throne,
Where thou shall reign Queen of Perdition.
199.
Glad was the Hag to hear the business, and
Promised her Lord her utmost Faith and Care;
Who laying on her head his sooty Hand,
Cried, Take Hells Blessing with Thee, o my Dear,
Success attend thy Loyalty, and may,
Heavens envious Tyrant not disturb thy way.
200.
Forthwith, through Asphaltite's odious Lake
She tore her Path, and in the midst boiled up:
The Sulphur started, and the Banks did shake,
Down to the Bottom fled the frighted Top;
That most victorious Stinck which there did dwell
Till now, could not endure Her stronger Smell.
201.
Horror on all the Elements did seize,
And taught the rest, as well as Earth, to quake.
Blasting deflour'd the Medows, and the Trees;
Her Noise a thousand Witche's Ghosts did wake,
And made the Night-ravens croke, the Scritchowles squeek
The Dogs houle, and the fatal Mandraks shriek.
202.
All Men and Beasts fled from her frightfull Face;
And Heaven it self would fain have run away,
Had it but known of any other Place
Besides its own, where to have turned that Day.
Yet Phoebus made a shift to lurk and crow'd
His Eye behind the Curtain of a Cloud.
203.
But when she marked how Nature shunned her sight,
She with Invisibility arrayed
Her self, and, unsuspected as the Light,
To He^ods Palace stole; where Care had laid
The Tyrant fast asleep; Into whose breast
Her Consort, and her Self the Fury thrust.
204.
As when a Viper squeas'd into his Bowl
By Treasons secret hand, a heedlesse King
Drinks down; the Poison in his Guts does roll,
And with a War of Pangs his Entrails wring:
So did this Monster with tempestuous Smart,
Rage in the Bowels of fell Herod's Heart.
205.
A thousand Fancies and selfe-thwarting Fears
Ran through his Soul, and chased Sleep from his Eyes:
When, starting up, his griezly Beard He tears,
And round about his Chamber cursing Flies:
He cursed Himself, and Heaven, and all its Stars,
But chiefly that which pointed out his fears.
206.
Have I, said He, thus long attended on
My petty Business, whilst my Crown and Head
Lie at the Stake! Have I let Treason run
And gather strength upon my life to tread!
Fie Herod, fie! Were thou that only He
Who did a Scepter count Felicity!
207.
What Madness made Thee suffer those bold Kings
Who blazed the Birth of the Jessean Prince,
To prate in Salem of such dangerous Things!
Had thou not fire and sword to chase them thence!
Could not thy flaming Steel have shined far
More potently than their enchanting Star?
208.
But all the Furies stings are due to thee,
For trusting their bare Word, for their Return.
Art thou that famous King of Policy
Who by thy Brain did for thy Temples earn
The Crown they wear! and can thou cosen'd be
By three old doting Men's poor subtilty?
209.
See now how for thy credulous Courtesy
Thou art repayd: Those Kings the News have spread
Through all the Regions of Arabie;
And by a joint consent have made an head
To tear fooled Herod from his Throne, and set
That Infant, as a wiser Prince, on it.
210.
Me thinks I smell the Battle drawing near,
And see the Vengeance of my careless Brain;
Me thinks the Thunder of their Arms I hear,
And see their Lightning flashing on the Plain:
Me thinks the Air about my Ears does ring
The shouted Name of Isreal's newborn King.
211.
The Superstitious Priests will all comply
With the new Powers against despised Me,
And triumph that their reverend Prophecy
In my dethroning They fulfilled see.
My Idumean Stock too well they know,
And much ado I had to make them bow.
212.
As for the giddy Multitude whom I
Have with an heavy Scepter pressed down,
All Change to them will seem Felicity,
Who all Conditions like before their own:
But when Religion calls to Innovation,
What Banks can curb a popular Inundation?
213.
My Nobles all will take the stronger side
In hopes to serve a gentler Prince than I:
Good store of Coin they have to loose, with wide
And fair possessions, which will closely tie
Them to the Eastern Powers, and make them run
With them to idolize the Rising Sun.
214.
Heaven is a Thing which owes Me no good Will,
Nor have I reason to expect its aid;
'Twas ever my Desire, and is so still,
To be mine own God: I confess I laid
Some Moneys out upon the Temple, but
To mine own Ends I dedicated it.
215.
None have I left to trust but only Thee,
O Thou my high and once Heroic Heart!
Why may not some exploit of Cruelty
Heightened beyond Example make Fate start?
Why may not Herod's Sword cut out that Leaf
Of Destiny which does enroll his Grief?
216.
It must and shall be so: I will not own
A Tyrants Name for Nothing: let the Head
Of Caesar wear the Worlds Imperial Crown
With love and gentleness embellished;
So I may safely reign, and show this Age
The King of Wrath, and Emperor of Rage.
217.
And let Heavens Sovereign thank himself, if I
Torment him with a stouter sin, than yet
In his scorned face from Earth did ever fly:
Who bid Him wake my Fears? Who bid Him set
An ominous Comet to out-stare my Rest,
And light Wars journey hither from the East?
218.
From two years old and under, every Child
That breaths in Bethleem, and the Quarters round
(That of my purpose I be not beguild)
Shall be my sacrifice: and if no Wound
Amongst all those can find my Rivalls Heart,
Then let Him escape; I shall have done my part.
219.
But sure it cannot miss: And then I wonder
What can the vain Arabian forces do:
If the foundation once be split in sunder,
On in their building they will never go;
If I their Infant in his Budde do crop,
Surely the dangerous flower will never grow up.
220.
This said. He nodds his special servant, (one
Who might have Engine been to Pluto, and
The deadliest business of all Hell have done,)
Who joying in his Sovereigns Command,
The black Commission writ, which was to be
In blood transcribed by the Souldierie.
221.
For Herod had an armed Crew, which He
With mighty Care and Cost had picked and chose
From Idumea, Scythia, Barbary;
Men ruder than their Countries; all sworn Foes
Unto Humanity; their Looks of Brass,
Their Hands of Steel, their Heart of Marble was.
222.
As practiced Tigres in the Theater
Let loose unto their keen and hungry spite,
With dreadful joy have to their wished War;
Where, with their looks the helpless slaves they fright
Out of their lives, and then their Bodies tear,
Slaying again what first they killed by fear.
223.
So did these Caytiffs unto Bethleem run
With Knives and Fauchions armed, and with their more
Inhumane Weapon, their Commission,
Counting Delay their Torment. With a Roar
They entered the Town, and could not choose
But signify all Hell was now broke loose.
224.
There they, in Herod's Name proclaim, that they
By Him were sent a punctual List to take
Of all the Infants which from such a Day
In Bethleem and its Coasts were born: for lack
Of every ones appearance, threatening to
The Infant Death, and to the Mother Woe.
225.
These Summons through the Town and Country flew,
And when the next Days Sun had reached its height,
Into the Market place all Mothers drew
Who in their Arms their tender Burdens brought:
A Sight which might all Beasts unbarbarize,
Yet drew no Pitry from these Soldiers Eyes.
226.
For they a Watch at every corner set,
And then with all Extremities of Rage
Their monstrous Charge in Execution put.
The Sun's Eye never yet beheld a Stage
So full of Tragedies, nor Hell spread forth
In such a salvage Pageant on the Earth.
227.
In vain the lamentable Mothers Cries
And Tears, and Prayers, and loud Expostulations
Mixed with their Infant Shrieks; although the Skies
They filled, and rent with their strong Exclamations:
For still the unrelenting Soldiers Ear
Nothing but Herod's fell Command would hear.
228.
Their Preys they by the Arm, or Leg, or Head
From their soft native Sanctuaries tore;
Whose blood as in that barbarous strife they shed,
They daubed the Mothers with the Childrens gore,
And then their Bowels in their faces threw:
Sure they had none, who thus could others show.
229.
The Townsmen who this Massacre beheld,
Could lend no Succor to the Infant's Cry;
By stiff Astonishment some being killed,
Others by cruel Fear enforced to fly,
Not knowing but the Soldiers dire Commission
Might add the Fathers to their Babes Perdition.
230.
Here Sarah kissed an Arm, Rebecca there
A Leg; all that was left of eithers Son:
Here Rachel Earth, and Air, and Heaven did tear
With her impatient Lamentation,
Having but two bemangled Hands to show
Of those sweet Tiwnns which sucked her breast but now.
231.
Thus this most harmless flock of tender Lambs
A woeful Heap of fragments did become,
Their milkie fleeces, and their whiter Names
Being dyed deep in rubie Martyrdom:
Thus (...) Rama, now made childeless (...),
Thus all the Market was to Shambles turned.
232.
One Nurse was there, who when the Soldier caught
Her Infant by the throat, cried out, Beware,
This is great Herod's Son; and if you doubt,
An hundred Witnesses here ready are.
She cried; but ever she had pronounced that Word,
The Intants Heart was bleeding on the Sword.
233.
Thus provident Vengeance met the Tyrant in
The forefront of his Crime, whilst blinded by
His hasty Fears, his Rage he does begin
At his own Bowels: Herod's Son must die,
And Heaven's escape the Sword, though He alone
Was the aim of this vast destruction.
234.
This, when the slaughter Fame at Rome had told,
And Cesars ear with just amazement filled
Made Him cry out: Were I to choose, I would
Be Herod's Hog much rather than his Child.
But Caesar knew not what the Babe did gain,
Nor that He now more than himself did reign.
235.
These roseall Budds of early Martyrdom
Transplanted were to Paradise, and there
Beyond the reach of Herod, did become
Flowers of eternal bliss, whose Temples are
Embraced with crowns of joy, whose hands with Palms
Whose eyes with beams, whose tongues are filled with psalms.
236.
But now the Bloodhounds back to Hered went
And brandished on their stained Swords the Sign
Of their own guilt. The sight gave high content
To their fell Sovereign, hoping the Divine
Infant was now destroyed, and that his Crown
In spite of all Arabia was his own.
237.
Yet to make sure (for in a Tyrants breast
Suspicion like the Vulture faind to gnaw
On Tytiu's Soul, makes its eternal feast,)
The Jews he summons by a rigid Law
Without the least exception, to swear
Allegiance unto Him, and to his Heir.
238.
Alas, He little thought his slaughterd Son
Was now become a stronger Foe, than those
Arabian Kings his own Suspicion
Had armed against himself; or that there rose
From the massacred Babes, a mighty Band
Which scornd the power both of his Head and (...)
239.
For now these Infants Blood to Heaven did send
A louder Cry than had their Mothers done:
Nor does the great Creators Justice lend
A readier Ear to any Plantiffs Moan,
Than unto this: although Mortality
Belongs to Man, Man's Blood can never (...)
240.
Next neighbor to the Dead Seas poisonous shore
There stands a gloomy Grove, where cheerly Day
Had never room to show her face, such store
Of Box, Yew, Cypress, dammed up her way;
Whose fatal Brows and Branches every where
With Owls, and Batts, and Ravens impeopled (...)
241.
Beside, a sturdie Mist of Stincks does stick
Upon the wretched Air, and her defloure
Unwholesome Vapors gathering black and thick
Drop morn and even into a venomous shour,
Where drunk up by the cursed Earth below
It makes the Hemlocks and the Poppy grow.
242.
Amidst these dismal shades, is sunk a Cave,
At whose black Door, uncessant Cries, and (...)
And Ejulations the Office have
Of never sleeping Porters: all the Stones
Hang thick with Tears, being moved to that Compassion
By the sad Genius of their Habitation,
243.
The Mistress of the House does always lie
Upon her weary Bed; which hedged in
By melancholic Curtains, does supply
The Graves dark Office, and aforehand 'gin
To teach her what her Coffin meant, and what
Her Hearse, which ready by her Couch were set.
244.
Her Pillows were of softest Down, but yet
On churlish Thorns and Stones she seemed to lie:
Often did she rosse and turn and tumble, but
Could never shift her sturdy Grief, which by
That Motion only wakened was, and did
But gather strength to roll about the Bed.
245.
Shootings, and Megrims raged in her Head,
A desperate squinsey dammed up her throat,
The tawny Jaundise in her Eyes was spread,
The Toothache of her Jaws full Power had got,
Stark-raving Madness sat upon her Tongue,
Ten thousand Cramps her shrivel'd Body wrung.
246.
The Fever, Colic, Griping, Strangury,
Gout, Apoplexy, Scurvy, Pestilence,
Stone, Rupture, Phthisis, Dropsy, Plurisie,
Flux, Surfeit, Asthma, and the confluence
Of all divided Deaths, united were
In one strange Mass, and learned to live in Her.
247.
The odious Scab, the ever-gnawing Itch,
The stinging Bile, the wasting Leprosy
The banefull Pocks, the Wolf and Canker (which
On her make fat their dreadful Luxury,)
Conspire with every sort of horrid Sore
To clothe her round with most infectious Gore.
248.
Pots, Papyrs, Glasses, sweet and stinking Things,
Were marshaled on a Cup-bord standing by,
Which Physic brought to ease those Pangs and Stings,
Or at the least cure her own Poverty.
Costly Additions unto Pain were these,
And only eased the Purses Plurisies.
249.
For though full many a dear Docter there
Talked words as strange as her Diseases; yet
Her pertinacious Torments would not hear
Either there Druggs of Nature or of Wit,
Nor mind their Stories, or regard at all
Their Oracles out of the Urinall.
250.
Her whining Kindred stood about the Bed,
And, though, alas, her case were too too plain,
With tedious Love, still asked Her, how she did.
Heaping that Crambe on her other Pain:
Their fond Remembrances would never let
Her any one of all her Pangs forget.
251.
Down to this Loathsome She, stern Justice came;
Tall was her Person and her Looks were high,
Strength in her martial Sinews made its home,
Darts of keen fire did stream from either Eye;
For she, what ever Men Fancy, Eyes can find;
Alas, Earths Justice, and not Heavens, is blind.
252.
Her right Hand held a Sword of two-edged flame,
Her left a Balance: in one Scale did lie
A mighty Mass inscribed with Herod's Name,
A Mass of Pride and bloody Tyranny,
Which pressed it down to Hell: Mean while the other
Filled with vain Wind, flew up and left its Brother,
253.
When Sickness (for that was the Furies Name)
Beheld her Sovereign Queen, she raised her Head,
And to obeisance did her Body frame:
Black Streams of poisonous Gore straight issued
From all her Sores, and with outrageous stinck
Ran down into her Beds contagious sink.
254.
Up up, said Justice, and be dressed apace;
I on an earnest errand thee must send:
Time was when thou a tedious Way did trace
At Hells and envious Lucifers Command;
Usurpers, which have no just power on thee;
It Is fit thou do as much for Heaven and Me.
255.
Unto the Land of Uz they made thee run,
And pour the bottom of thy whole despite;
Upon the reverend Body of a Man
Which was with matchless Purity bedight,
More fair and bright was Job in Heavens esteem,
Than thou to Earth did make him Horrid seem.
256.
He heaped this Scale as full of Virtue, as
Fell Herod has replenished it with Vice:
That empty one, so lightly hovering, was
His Score of faults, but mere Vacuities;
Thin as the Air, which though it dusky be
Sometimes with Clouds, regains its purity
257.
See now thou recompense that Injury
By righteous Vengance upon Herod: Lo
There unbridle thy Extremity,
And give thee leave in free carreer to go.
Go then, and fully use thy full Command;
His Body and his Life are in thy Hand.
258.
So spoke the Queen of everlasting Dread,
And in her Black Cloud mounted home again.
When Sickness leaping from her nasty Bed,
And in feirce haste forgetting her own Pain,
Furnished her self with every bitter sting
Which most might torture the Condemned King.
259.
Then to her gloomy Chariot she went,
Which of a poisnous Vapor framed was:
Her speed was headlong, so was her Intent,
And into Herod's Court she soon did press;
For she by no slow paced Coursers Drawn.
But by a pestilentiall Blast was blown.
260.
Unseen she came, and did so sliely guide
Her stealing Chariots silent Wheels, that she
Quite down the Tyrants cursed throat did glide
As does his unsuspected Breath, which he
Lets in to fan his heart: But this Blast came
Qute to blow out, and not to puff his flame,
261.
Yet ever it blew it out it strove to fry
His black Soul in the furnace of his Breast.
Torthwith his Entrails singed and scalded by
An hidden fire, frighted away his Rest:
He would have rise, but strait he felt his Pains
Had with their Fire-branes mixed heavy Chains.
262.
His Strength deceiv's him, and his Bed is now
His only throne, where he the King does reign
Of mighty Torments; all his Bowels (...)
Exulcerated with deep-gnawing Pain;
And Water swelling underneath his Skin
Adds scoffing torture to the fire within.
263.
His shamfull Parts are made more odious by
Right down Corruption, which grew fertile there
With monstrous Vermin, whose impatient fry
Their most unpittied Prey aforehand tear;
The leisure of his grave they scorned to stay,
But undermine his Heart, and eat their way.
264.
And yet a Worm far worse then those, was got
Thither before, which did his Conscience gnaw;
To stisle which, long did He labor; but
The trusty Torment still did stronger grow,
And wound about his guilty Soul so close,
That no Inventions power could get it loose.
265.
His Sinews shrunk, and all his Joints forgot
The ready service of their wonted motions.
The Air which He had long defiled would not
Wait on his Lungs, but frequent Suffocations
Forced him to die as many deaths, as He
Indebted stood for by long Tyranny.
266.
Often did he call his Friends; but neither they
Nor his Physicians durst come near his Bed:
For his hell-breathing stinck obstructs the way
To Physic and to Freindship. Never did
The Feinds below more loud for Pity cry,
Nor find less comfort for their Misery.
267.
The dismal scene of Bethlehem-slaughter now
Was open laid unto his burning Soul;
The running shreiking Mothers there he saw,
And all the Infants Blood; which seemed to roll
Into his Bosom in a violent stream;
Yet not to quench, but to augment the flame.
268.
An hundred Furies at hot contestation
Which first upon his bloody Heart should seize,
With Hells wide mouth, and the grand Preparation
To entertain him there; at large he sees:
And seems to hear all Ages pour a stream
Of cursing Detestations on his Name.
269.
To Heaven He would not, and he could not cry,
But let the reins loose to wild Desperation:
And now resolved once for all to die,
Contrives how He might his own murder fashion,
And by his never-daunted cruelty
Upon himself conclude his Tyranny.
270.
He thought of Poison: but He had no friend
Who would that cruel Courtesy supply:
Besides, he feared no Venom could contend
With his extreemly-posnous Malady.
At length by woeful Fortune, He (...)
His Fauchion hanging by his (...) side,
271.
Which as He snatched, a venturous Page ran in
And stopped the stroke: but could not stop his throat,
Which straight He opened to an equal Sin
And in the face of Heaven spewed out his hot
Impatient Blasphemies; next which, He threw
His Courses upon all the World he knew.
272.
Mean while, to prison, where his Son in Chains
He kept, the false News of his death was spread:
Which whilst Antipater gladly entertains,
His Smiles became the price of his own head.
Herod but heard he smiled, and now the Worms
Had eat his Bowels, at his Son he storms.
273.
Yet shall that Villan know that I, said He
Have Life and Rage enough Him to destroy.
Now by these final Spirits which pant in me
I swear, His Life shall answer for his Joy.
Fetch me his Heart, that with these Vermin here
Their fellow-trayter, I, all torn, may tear.
274.
Their fellow-trayter, and their Fellow-Son,
For from my Body sprung both He and They;
And both conspire in my destruction,
By Gnawing they, by smiling He. Away,
Fetch me his Heart, that having blessed mine Eye
With that dear sight, I may the cheerlyer die.
275.
Yet not content with this sole Sacrifice
To his vast fury; he contrives a way
How all his Nobles to his Obsequies
No less than all their Blood and lives might pay:
That Sighs and Tears might wait upon his Hearse,
If not for his own Death, at least for theirs
276.
But Heaven prevented this fell Plot; and He
Now having five days lived, and felt his Death,
No Prayers, but his wonted Blasphemy
Repeated, and blew out his final breath.
So an old Dragon when his Spirits flit,
Breaths his last Poison, and his Life with it.
277.
Hell had his Soul no sooner swallowed
But pious Joseph's Angel hither came;
And as the Saint lay on his sober Bed,
Painted the News unto Him in his Dream:
Bidding Him now return to Jewry, where
The storm was over, and the Coast grown clear.
278.
Thus did the Angel his own Word fulfull,
And justify the Prophets Vision;
For great Hosea did of old foretell
That out of Egypt God had called his Son.
Joseph awakes, and unto Mary shows
The long-expected, and now welcome News.
279.
His thrifty House-hold-stuffe then packing up,
And tenderly providing for his dear
And mighty Charge; He makes no doubt or stop,
(A pious Breast allows no room for fear
When ever Heaven summons it:) but cheerly sets
Onward his Way, before the Day permits.
280.
For now the Morn lay long before she rose,
And dull Aquarius would not wake the Sun
Till it was late. Thus did thy hardy Spouse
In the Years most disconsolate Portion
His journey take; and teach Thee what to do
At any time when Heaven shall bid Thee go.
281.
This the Ninthe Winter was, which sealed the Earth
With Ice, and covered his Seal with Snow,
Since by his own, to Wonders He gave Birth,
Who in a Soil most like to that did grow:
Bate but the cold and churlish Qualities,
And what is a Virgins Womb, but Snow and Ice?
282.
This Age had more enabled Him to bear
A speedy Journey, and did much allay
The scruples of his tender Parents Care;
Who now with greater haste devoured their way,
Than when to Egypt they did pick their Path;
And thus, in peace, reached their old Nazareth.
283.
Their Nazareth; for sacred Prophesies
By adamantine Bands are surely tied
To their Effects: The Fire shall sooner freeze,
All Mettalls in a Bank of Snow be tried,
The Sun because of Night, of Drought the Rain,
Then Falsehood any Prophets Tongue can stain.
284.
Those quick-ey'd Seers long ago had seen
His Habitation there; and had foretold
His humble Surname should be, Nazarene:
A Name of holy Dignity of old,
Which sat fair on all pious Heads, until
It was out-shined by the Christian Style.
285.
And, Psyche, what should We do longer here!
Come let Us follow their dear Steps, and see
Some further Marvells of thy Spouse, and where
He prosecuted Loves sweet Mystery.
This said: He gave his Steeds the Rains, and they
Together with the Wind snuff'd up their Way.
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO IX. The Temptation.
ARGUMENT.
IN the dead Desert, Love; Whom salvage Beasts
Acknowledged, by eager Famine is
Assailed, who forty Days upon Him feasts;
To her sharp Teeth, sly Satan joyneth his
Soft Tongue; yet both their utmost Powers, set
But open the way unto their own Defeat.
1.
WHat reach of Reason ever could Fadome, why
Slight Dust and Ashes, vile Corruptions Son,
The Heir apparent to the Misery
Which lives in Death, and blends Destruction
With all its Life, the Worms own uterine Brother,
The Model of all Blots and Spots together,
2.
Should so inamour Heaven, as to obtain
The Dignity of highest Favorite;
And in his Makers grace so freely reign,
That They should service do to Him, whose bright
Extraction no acquaintance knows with Earth,
Nor did Pollution ever defloure their Birth;
3.
Had not Almighty Love vouchsafed to take
This lump of Clay and mould Himself in it:
By which entire Conjunction He did make
The total Mass of worthless Vileness fit
To sit on Honors Throne, and there receive
The Service Angels blush not now to give.
4.
For now the Heavens are well content to spare
Part of their Quire to wait on Us below,
Knowing their Masters Brethren sojourne here,
Who by their very Dust that Kindred show:
Thus is our Badge of shame advanced to be
The stamp of our sublime Nobility.
5.
In love and reverence to Jesus, who
Upon the loftiest Crest of all Creation
Has fixed for ever our poor Nature, so
That under her high feet, full Adoration
Has room to kneel, their ready Service they
Even to the meanest of his Kins-folks pay.
6.
How little think vain Kings, who build their Pride
On the armed Protection of their numerous Guard,
The simplest of their Slaves are dignified
With Heavens illustrious Host, who watch and ward
Their several Charges, which though scorned things
Below, are yet above designed for Kings.
7.
With Arms displayed, and with open Breast
They stand to catch Us when we falling are
Into this hard and dangerous Life; and least
The Fall should hurt Us, with their softest Care
They stir their Feathers up, that in that Bed
Of Sweetness we may rest our infant Head,
8.
Alas our other Nurses help were vain,
So were our Mothers tenderest Care, did These
Dear Fosterers not help them to maintain
Their proper Parts: And though those chance to cease,
These still pursue Loves Task; Hard Mothers may
Forget their Sons, but that will never they.
9.
O no: These blessed Guardians are Things
Of tried and never-failing Tenderness;
Such as their everlasting Snowie Wings,
Such as the living Smiles and Joys which dress
The Court of Heaven, Such as the dainty Air
Which makes deer Paradise both soft and fair.
10.
Yet when just Cause awakes their noble Might,
No Scythian Rock stands half so stiff as they,
No Libian Lion marches to the fight
With higher Courage, nor afflicts his Prey
With deeper Terror, then these Champions, who
Into the Lists in certain Triumph go.
11.
Nor needless is this potent Aid; since We
Are by spiritual Foes impugned, and
The Powers of Darkness, and Artillery
Of Hell against Us in pitched Battle stand;
Whom Beelzebub their General, with Spite
And ever slaming Rage, fires to the Fight.
12.
What can poor Lambs against the Tygre do?
How shall the Partridge with the Griffen fight?
How shall a Cockboat to the Indies go
When Tempests Rise, and make Seas stand upright?
By Dust how shall the Serpent be withstood
When he gapes to devour his usual Food?
13.
Alas the feeble Dust is helpless; but
These Friends long since have with the Dragon fought,
And at the first so clear a Conquest got,
That ever since that heav'n-renowned Rout,
Wild Lucifer is in their presence tame,
And trembles like the burnt Child at the flame.
14.
He trembles; if the Boldness of our Sin
Adds not fresh courage to his failing heart;
For then on Us He by our selves does win;
Nor can our Guardians perform their part
With due Success, when by self-treason we
Our forces join with Hells conspiracy.
15.
When to mad Fancy Sleep does give the rein,
Unto polluted Dreams these stop the way,
That no high-fed and tickling Thoughts may stain
The clouded Soul: For, who, alas, can say
I always am my Self, and, though asleep,
The constant Watch of Chastity can keep?
16.
These lend Us Aid, when any Danger near
Our strait-beseiged Soul or Body draws;
These intercept all Hell; These by that clear
Luster which flows from their own blessed Brows
Show us the Way to Peace, and lend Us too
Their Wings, when we are faint, and cannot go.
17.
These fire a Soul, and make her tower above
These gross, yet empty things which flag below:
These steer Us through the Miracles of Love,
And teach Us in Heavens Ocean how to row:
These all are Brethren unto Phylax, who
What he for Psyche did, for Us will do.
18.
Their way his Steeds had now recovered,
And Palestine regained: When he aside
Sloped his Bridle, and his Journey sped
Into another Desert, wild and wide,
By whose intemperate Drought old Jordan was
Affrighted so, that he far off did pass.
19.
As Psyche wondered at the ruefull Place,
Amongst whose desolate Nothings strait she lost
Her questioning Eye; with a divine Embrace
Phylax encouraged Her; and, though thou do
Not yet behold, said He, the Price of thy
Long voyage, thou shall find it by and by.
20.
With that, He stayed his Coach; and thus went on
With his Discourse: O my thrice dearest Dear
(Because most precious to my Makers Son,
Who is my Maker too;) this Desert here
Is but another Sceen, where thy sweet Lord
More fuel for thy wonder did afford.
21.
It was reprieved from bearing other fruit,
That it in Miracles might fertile be;
In Miracles, whose high and glorious bruit
Shall fill the ears of Time as long as He
Has legs to run; and when He dropps into
His grave, in triumph o'r his Tomb shall go.
22.
When thirty times thy Spouse had seen the Sun
Change all his Inns, whose golden Signs are hung
Upon the Zodiaks Girdle: reverend John
Unto the World unlocked his holy Tongue,
And drew by heavenly Summons mighty Store
Of wondering People unto Jordans shore.
23.
Thy Spouse, hid in his own Humility,
Mixed with the Crow'd and to the Baptism came.
Thus in the Margin of the swelling Sea
Often times there roules in a tumultuous stream
Of Sand and Gravel, some rich Gem or other
Which in that press does its own luster smother.
24.
How there He was Baptized, how a Crown
Of Heavens best beams perched on his fairer head,
How his coaequall Spirit hovered down,
And what Applause his Father thundered,
I would relate, but that it hugs thy heart,
For with this Story now thou Girded art.
25.
But by that nimble Doves eternal Wings
He Is hither hastened from that Rivers shore,
And purity unto the Dry Land brings
As to the Water He had done before.
Yet nothing else he brought; nor Drink, nor Meat;
He hither came to Fight, and not to Eat.
26.
He came to Fight; and bravely to revenge
The whole Worlds Quarrel which subdued lay,
Ever since through Man's unwary Heart the strange
Bullet burst open its death-deriving way,
Which, as it smiling hung upon the Tree,
Fond he an harmless Apple took to be.
27.
He came to Fight; and soon his Foes He met
All-arm'd with Power, but much more with Rage:
Had he been less than what he was, those great
Antagonists had made this Place the Stage
Of his sad Tragedy, which proved at last
The Theater of his triumphant Fast.
28.
Before I tell thee who did first appear
In these strange Lists; observe that parched Hill.
That Throne of Barrennefle and Squallour; there
Against the hungry North thou see a Cell
Which long has gaped, but could never find
Any Relief as yet, but saplesse Wind.
29.
That Den's the Dwelling of that Champion who
First ventured on a Combat face to face
With God Incarnate; one as like to do
The Feat of Spite, as any of the Race
Of hell-begotten Fiends; yet proved to weak
To manage what she here did undertake.
30.
Our Noise now calls her forth; do thou not see
Her goodly Ushers? those seven horned Things
Though like to Nothing but themselves they be,
Must go for Kine: spermatick Nile, which brings
Forth choice of Monsters, in their birth alone
Has all his other Prodigies out-gone.
31.
Nile brought them forth, and showed them to the King,
Whom through Fates Closets a strange Dream did bring;
Pharaoh awoke affrighted at the Thing,
But knew not how its Characters to read,
Nor why those sharp-set Portents which had clean
Devoured seven fat Kine, still should grow more lean;
32.
Till Joseph cleared the mist, and taught him what
By those new Hieroglyphics Destiny
Decyphered had. But when the Beasts had got
Malgre those fair Banks of Fertility,
Their seven years Conquest; to this Cave they came
To serve a Monster near of kin to them.
33.
Behold their Hair is shrivelled up and dry;
Their hides aforehand tanned, but chapp'd withal;
Their sharp affrighted Bones stand staring high;
The Relics of their flesh as low do fall;
Their Bellies to their Backs full close are ti'd,
And one does kiss the other starved side.
34.
All Shape is shrunk to such Deformity
That did their horns not point them out, nor Thou,
Nor Pharaoh could have dreamed they should be
Descended from a Bull and honest Cow.
And yet well-favour'd Beasts are these to Her
Their dismal Sovereign who comes there.
35.
Just at the Word the Hagge appeared, with Look
More keen than Januaries breath, or than
The edge of Rasors; or the piercing stroke
Of barbarous North-begotten Boreas, when
He his most massy chains of Ice has hurled
O'r Sea and Land, and stupifi'd the World.
36.
The sudden Dint shot into Psyche's Heart
Such deep Dread and Amazement, that it slew
Her Spirits and Courage: But with Heavenly Art
Her ready Guardian strait did both renew,
And suppling her cold Breast with soft and warm
Comforts, proceeded thus, her Soul to arm.
37.
Do thou not see what makes the Furies Train?
Mark well, and read thine own Security,
How heavy at her heels she draws a Chain
Of Adamant, whose other End is by
That hand of Providence which does all things guide,
Unto thy mighty Spouse's Footstool ti'd.
38.
At first her self she fiercely darted out,
But now her curbed Pace is tame and slow;
She knows' her Compass, having often fought
In vain to break her Chain's Eternal Law.
So; be assured she now cannot come hither
No, she has stretched the utmost of her Tether.
39.
Thus when the greedy Mastiffe leapeth from
His kennell, all in hungry have and wrath,
The sullen chain, which will not go from home,
Checks his adventure and cuts off his Path;
At which the wretched Curre lets fall his Ears,
And tail, and spirit; and then he grinns and lears,
40.
Upon the Head of every wretched Fiend
Sure sits this curse, that they cannot forbear
Their spite and indignation to grind,
And in all fury for the fight prepare
When ever any Prey their Eyes have found;
Although mad fools they know their feet are bound.
41.
Look how her Eyes are fled into her head,
As if ashamed on her self to look;
For in that leaf, alas, what could she read,
But what would seem transcribed from Terror's book?
Her skin's the Paper (o how ghastly white!)
Where Pain and Horror their black Legends write.
42.
All upright staring stand her startled Hairs,
Of one another touch in jealous fear;
Two close shrunk knots of Gristles are her Ears;
Her forehead nothing but its skin does wear;
Her keeness fully is displayed in
Her pinched Nose, and her sharp-pointed Chinne.
43.
Like a deep Pit of Chalk is either Cheek;
Her sapless Lips are parched and shrivelled up,
Showing her Ivory Teeth, all white and sleek,
But long and hideous; These stand always open
That her dire Tongue may ever dangle out
To catch the Rain, and quench its burning Drought.
44.
Her starved and clung-up Neck, has much ado
To bear the slender burden of her head;
The Stalk quite famished and withered, so
Under its nodding flower does bend. Instead
Of Arms, She shows two Yards of Skin and Bone,
Oppressed and tired with their own Weight alone.
45.
Her fleshless Hands like feet of Vultures seem,
Nor are her nails so lately pruned, But they
May pass for Tallons: what she grasps in them
Is sentenced by that Touch to be her Prey.
Her Legs are two dry crazie stakes; her Feet
Already mouldering, their Grave do meet.
46.
That fatal bunch of Corn which fills her Hand.
(O no! which makes Vacuitie be there.)
Are those seav'n Ears which upon Nilus strand
To Pharaoh with those Oxen did appear;
And now becomes her Rod, for on it grows
No Grain, nor any other fruit, but Blows.
47.
Was ever such Contraction seen, as there,
About a Waste, whose Girdle Thinness is?
The strait-lac'd Insects slender Brood did never
Shrink up themselves into a scanter Dress.
Her Bellie's sunk and gone; and she could spare
It well, who nothing had to lay up there.
48.
See thou her Shoulders and her Thighs all gnawn?
Imagine not that any Beast but she
Her self was guilty of the Fact: her own
Keen Tuskes have engraved those lines of Cruelty,
And, when she wanted other Cates to eat,
Did prick her on to make her self her Meat.
49.
Little it was she from her self could tear;
But yet where Nothing else was to be had,
That Little seemed full and dainty Cheer,
And to she fell: But as she 'gan to feed,
Her Banquet failed between her Teeth, and she
In stead of Flesh, chewed mere Vacuitie.
50.
This raised that Storm which in her bosom reigns,
And, could thou hear, it would amaze thine ear.
Her Stomach roars, and tears, and pricks, and strains,
And all its Misery objects to Her:
So do her Bowels, bound in their own Chains,
And ti'd, and twisted up in Knots of Pains.
51.
Three Fiends of choicest Power and spite there are
Whom Vengeance does employ to lash the Earth;
The hidden Pestilence; wide open War;
And Famine, this fell Hag, whose Drought and Dearth
Burn with more Poison than the Plague, and wound
With sharper engines than in War are found.
52.
This is that living Death, by which poor Man
Is forced himself his funeral to begin,
Whilst wandering up and down all faint and wan,
Wrapped in the winding sheet of his pale skin,
He seeks his grave, that through that door He may
Unto a milder Death himself convey.
53.
This is that Tyrant, whose Impatience has
No Possibility her Prey to spare;
The foul Inneritrix of the Dregs of Wrath,
Of Torments Queen, the Empress of Despair;
An aonigmatick Foe, whose Ammunition
Is nothing else but Want of all Provision.
54.
Expect not to behold her Family,
Or what Retinue on her Court attends;
No servant ever yet so strong could be
To bear her Presence, much less her Commands;
Being assured They never could her Will
Unless her Belly to they did, fulfill.
55.
But yonder Table which is fixed high
Above her Caverns Door, will tell thee what
Were her Exploits. When Mercy passed by
This monitory Sign she set up, that
Poor Mortals might descrie what Fiend dwelt here
And not unto this Den of Death come near.
56.
Lo, what a smoking Hurliburlie's there
Of gallant Ruins tumbling on the ground:
These once high-built and goodly Cities were,
Which when Warr's mighty Ram could not confound
This Hag did with no Engine, but her own
Teeth, undermine the Walls and tear them down.
57.
See there she chaseth froggs, and Rats, and mice,
And other Vermin near as vile as she
Her self; by them desiring to suffice
The lowed Demands of her stout Boulimie.
Discreetly there the prudent Painter has
The Earth of Iron made, the Heaven of Brass,
58.
But there her Girdle and her shoes she eats
For that acquaintance which they had of old
With Beef and Mutton, and such classick Meats:
There She turns out the wretched useless Gold,
And clapping on its Poverty a Curse,
A savorie Meal she makes of her Purse.
59.
There She awakes the sleeping Mire, and by
A strict examination makes it tell
What hidden Treasures in its bosom lie;
Nor is she daunted by the unlikely shell,
But breaks it open, and finds the Gem within:
For she the Oyster first fished out for Men.
60.
The Dunghill there she rakes, to find some fresh
Strong-sented Excrement; and joys when she
Can by long search atcheive so rare a Dish,
Which needs, being ready hot, no Cookerie.
That Glass in which she drinks, and drinks up all.
No other is but her own Urinall.
61.
Against that huge stone-wall her Teeth she tried
When once she was immured in Straights; and see
How she compelled and tore Success: those wide
And ragged Holes, her stout Teeths breaches be.
Her hasty boistrous Stomach would not stay,
And wanting other Food, she eat her Way.
62.
That Heap of Bones is all that she has left
Of her own Parents, whose old flesh she made
Her barbarous Feast, and them of life bereft
By whom she lived; Such is the salvage trade
Of desperate Vipers, whose unnatural Wrath
Devours the Womb which them conceived has.
63.
And yet no Vipers venture to devour
Their proper Brood: it is Nature's strictest Law
That with Traduction Love should join her power,
And like the Rivers, downhill strongest flow:
Only this fiend all Vipers does outvie,
And feeds her self with her own Progeny.
64.
For those bemangled Limbs which scattered be
About the Picture, the said Ruins are
Of seav'n sweet, but unhappy Babes, which she
Feared not with her own Claws and Teeth to tear,
And back into her Bowels make them go;
If yet she any had who thus could do.
65.
This strange Epitomie of Prodigies,
This despicable, starved, but potent Fiend
Was the first Combatant which did arise
Against thy Spouse; yet durst not try to rend
And tear his Body, but contrived to slay
It, and his Soul in a mysterious Way.
66.
For though that Dread which in her face did reign,
Such deep affrightment round about had shed,
That not the boldest Beast of all the Plain
But from those direful Emanations fled;
Leaving the Desert more than doubled; where
Was nothing now but Earth, and Stones, and Air:
67.
Yet now discovering One who seems prepared
To entertain the worst of Dangers, she
Grew jealous of the Champion, and feared
Some wisely Stratageme might plotted be
Against her right-down force: This did incline
Her to (...) Him by a Contremine.
68.
For, sliely waiting oppotunity,
And being thin and subtle, with the Wind
She mixed herself, and in his face did fly;
Hoping to steal upon him by a blind
And unperceived assault. So Cowards fight,
Trusting advantage more than their own Might.
69.
But He who all her project clearly saw,
From her abstruse Career disdained to start:
He welcomed with brave Constancy the Blow,
Giving the Fury leave to use her Art;
Free leave He gave her her foul felf to shoot
Into his Stomach, through his yielding Throat.
70.
So when the Tempest marches in full Tide
Against its Caverns Mouth, the fearless Rock
Makes good its ground, and never stepps aside
To wave the peril of the violent Shock,
But lets the Storm come in and roar its sill
In all the Bowels of its resolute Cell.
71.
She entered thus, falls to her work apace
And seizes with immediate Usurpation
All the Reserve of Humors which that Place
Was strengthened with, in case of some Mutation;
And these she conquered without any stop,
For as she met them, strait she eat them up.
72.
The robbed Stomach thus made clear and free
Of all things but the Theife; She broacheth there
The Art of all that gnawing Cruelty
With which her pined Self she used to tear:
No Fire, Worm, Vinaiger, or Venom is
So corsive as her fretfull Bitterness.
73.
As when incensed by the furious flame
The Fornace'gins to rage; if you deny
The Cauldron Liquor which may help to tame
The insolent Heats excess, and mollify
Its rampant greedy Thirst; alas, the poor
Copper it self does boil, and burn, and roar.
74.
So fares it with the Entrails, where the fire
Which Nature kindled, if it wants its fuel
On what comes next to hand will spend its Ire,
And grow against the Stomachs substance cruel;
For all its Life consists in constant Meat,
And when it dies, it does but cease to Eat.
75.
And yet with Adamantine bravery
Thy Spouse against this Conspiracy of Pains
His Patience arms; and though his Breast did fry
In mutinous flames, He valiantly refrains
From all Complaints, and sighs and signs that he
Oppressed was by Hungers Tyranny.
76.
He by a med'cinall Fast resolved was
To cure the eating of that fatal Tree,
From whence the Curse and Death entailed did pass
On Ev's and Adams, wretched Progeny.
He freely what he might Receive, refused,
Because, what they Forbidden were, they used.
77.
(Thus must the Water wash away the Flame,
Thus must the Bands of Cold bind up the Heat,
Thus sober Weight must idle Lightness tame,
Thus wholesome Sour must mend luxurious Sweet,
Thus honest Day must chase out theevish Night,
Thus Contraries with Contraries must fight.)
78.
And by his venerable Practice He
Has Consecrated, and advanced this
Despised Thing to such an high degree
Of real honor, that now Fasting is
The Dainties of the Saints, to which they can
Invite their Hearts, and Feast the Inner Man.
79.
Where whilst they at their mystic Banquet sit,
The saucy Flesh learns to be meek and mild,
The boiling Blood grows cool, and every fit
Of wilful Lust forgets to be wild,
The Passions unto Reason crouching stand,
The Brain grows clear, and all its Clouds disband.
80.
Thus from that Slavery they redeemed are
Whose knots their Teeth had tied; thus they throw
Away their cloggs; thus on free wings they rear
Themselves into Themselves; being moved now
By Heavens brisk Fire which in their Bosoms flows,
And not by that which in the Kitchen glows.
81.
Nor does the Body only bear the Pain,
Whilst all the Pleasure to the Soul accrews;
But in its kind reap full as sweet a Gain,
Whilst its intirest Vigor it renewes,
And fresh and lively Feathers quit the cost
Of all those rotten moulting Plumes it lost,
82.
For when high-fed Distempers sneak away,
And the dark Seed of all Infirmities
Which in the Bodies furrows nestling lay,
Before its own Birth, unperceived dies;
Fasting the Physic gave: yet generous she
(O cheap Physician!) never takes a Fee.
83.
She Nothing takes; and would have Men do so,
For all her Recipe's ere only this:
She turns the Deep Complaint of bitterest Woe,
Into an high-strain'd Dialect of Bliss,
And for this Reason bidds the Sick be sure
They ease shall find, 'cause Nothing them can cure.
84.
O sovereign Nothing! upon which, so deep
In love He fell with it, thy Spouse did feed
Full forty Days and Nights: soft-creeping sleep
Perhaps might venture on his eyes, but did
Not once presume to touch, much less to fight
Against, the Paradox of his Appetite.
85.
The Fury did her best his strength to tire,
But fretted, gnawed, and labored in vain.
Have thou not heard how Moses, all on fire
With brave Devotion, did of old sustain
As many Nights and Days on Sina's head,
A Stranger all the while to Drink and Bread?
86.
If by access to God a Man could grow
So much above the temper of a Creature;
If by attendance on the Moral Law
He clearly could forget the Law of Nature,
What then might Jesus do, to whose fair face
Mose's though decked with beams, but duskie was!
87.
What might He do, who did not only draw
Near unto God, but who Himself was He!
'Twas but an Angel that pronounced the Law,
Though in the Name of the great Diety:
But Jesus was no Proxy; he alone
Undoubtedly was God and Man in one.
88.
He who to Salamanders power did give
Safely to scorn the siege of any Flame,
And in the Fornace's red bosom live,
Making the hostile Fire their food become;
Might well the burning Drought of Thirst subdue,
And turn its flames into refreshing Dew.
89.
He to whose bounty all Chamaelions owe
Their virgin privilege, whereby they may
Contemn all gross unweildy Meats, and grow
Fat upon saplesse Air; can find a way
As pure a Diet for himself to get,
And force the Winds to blow him in his Meat.
90.
Nay, seeing Bread it self is dull and dead,
And no assistance can to Life afford,
Unless it self be fortified and fed
By the prime Power of Gods almighty Word;
He well can spare its help, yet want no food,
Who is Himself the essential Word of God.
91.
Witness his Might: for from his Potent Heart
An Intimation of his Royal Will
He on the Gnawing Fury now did dart,
Commanding her not to disturb him, till
He gave her leave; for business had He
With other Beasts of better worth than She.
92.
Soon did the Hag perceive how she had thrown
Her heedlesse self into a conquering Net,
Where her Fell Teeth and Nails were not her own,
But His, whom she had thought to make her Meat.
Wherefore against her self she madly bent
Her spite, and her own Hair, and Heart Strings rent.
93.
But safe and unmolested He went on
To seek those Beasts which from the dreadful Cave
Of this intolerable Fiend had run
To shroud their trembling heads: For he does save
Not Man alone, but also Beast, and is
Willing to follow both, and make both His.
94.
Oxen and Asses he at length descri'd,
Which all one way in a strait Drove did pass.
He soon remembered what did him betide
When in their House he entertained was,
How Bethlehem Stable with the Hay and Manger
Received the newborn Men-rejected Stranger.
95.
A Flock of Sheep went bleating after Them,
Whose little Ones made Him reflect again
Upon himself, Gods everlasting Lamb,
Born, in proud Salems shambles to be slain.
He blessed them all, and promised them that they
Should ne't be destitute of Grass or Hay.
96.
Along with them unto a Pond He came,
The only Water which that Desert knows;
If yet that Pond defile not Waters name,
Which only with deep muddy Poison flows.
The banks were thronged with wild Beasts, which lay
Panting, and gasping, and forgot their Prey.
97.
For parching Thirst had now dried up their Ite,
And fighting with their Prey would but increase
The too prevailing fury of their fire,
Which only Waters influence might appease.
Yet though their Tongues lay frying on the
They durst not dip them in the Pond to drink.
98.
For yet the long expected Unicorn
Delayed his Coming; He who used by
The piercing Antidote of his fair Horn
To broach the wholesome Waters which did lie
Imprisoned in the Poisons Power, and then
An Health unto his Fellow-beasts begin.
99.
Not was it by chance He tardy came that Day,
The only Day in which he could be spared;
For now Salvations Horn, in whom there lay
That Sovereign Virtue which far more was feared
By every Poison, than what breaks from
The potent Unicorns; was thither come.
100.
Great was the Congregation; for there
The princely Lion was, the angry Dog,
The Mountainous Elephant, the shaggie Bear,
The hasty Wolf, the foaming Boar, the Hog,
His grumbling Wife, the roaring frowning Bull,
The Porcupine of ammunition full.
101.
The spotted Panther, stiff Rhinocerot,
Swift-footed Tigre; and a thousand more.
For all wild Beasts whom Thirst could drive, had got
Their several places ready on the shore;
Crowding as stoutly Water now to get,
As they to Noah thronged to escape from it.
102.
But when thine unexpected Spouse drew near,
With reverent amazement every Beast
Looked up, and in a deep but harmless Fear
Let fall their heads again, and so confessed
Who they beheld, and how unworthy They
Were to drink in his blessed Aspects Ray.
103.
Yet that mere Glance did such Refreshment dart,
That all the Forces of their Thirst it slew.
So when unto a long afflicted Heart
Joy her immediate Countenance does show,
The blessed Glimpse frights gloomy Grief away,
And thrusting out black Night, lets in fair Day.
104.
These Beasts were Heirs to them, who, when as yet
Time and the World were young, in Paradise
At Gods own summoning together met
To pay their Homage in all humble guise
To princely Adam who sat mounted high
Upon his Throne of native Monarchy.
105.
Well did they mark their Sovereigns Eyes and face.
And all his Persons lovely Majesty,
Which flowed forth on them with such potent Grace,
That they durst not Allegiance deny,
But conquered with sweet Violence, to his beck
Bowed down, and took his soft Yoke on their Neck.
106.
But when unhappy Adams Fall had spread
Guilts ougly Veil upon his beauteous Face,
The Beasts which met Him, gazed, and would have read
Their former Lesson of Majestic Grace;
But all was blotted out, and looked so black,
That them of Subjects it did Enemies make.
107.
Their Sons and Generations after them
Succeeded in their Hate to Humane Sin:
These present Beasts which to the Water came,
Had in that Quarrel born and nurtured been;
And whensoe'r they chanced to meet a Man,
To Him as their condemned Prey they ran.
108.
But when on JESUS face they tried their Eyes,
No blurr or sign of Guilt they could descry:
His Looks were purer than the Virgin Skies,
Polished with beauteous Serenity,
Arrayed with Princely stateliness, and dight
With Love, with Life, with Grace, and with Delight
109.
This waked the seeds of that deep Memory
Which prudent Nature in their Hearts had set;
And which by wise instinct did signify;
That their unspotted Monarch they had met.
They had indeed: for this was Adam too;
Alas, that Men less than the Beasts should know!
110.
Men knew Him not, but Beasts did plainly read
In Him the Protoplasts all graceful feature;
Such were the gallant Beauties of his Head,
Such was the princely measure of his Stature,
Such was the reverent Innocence which from
His lovely Eyes in Streams of Light did come
111.
Such secret A wfuiness Men fancy in
Th'apparent Heir of any Kingdom; that
They think the King of Beasts, by royal kin
To his Condition, grows courteous at
His Sight, and quite forgets his insolent sense
Of being Salvagenesses dreadful Prince.
112.
No wonder then, if thus it fared now
The mighty Heir of Heaven and Earth was here;
He for whose high and best-deserving Brow
Eternity was busied to prepare
That Heav'n-out-shining Crown which flaming is
Upon his Incarnations Lowliness.
113.
The princely Lion raised himself; but in
Less state than He before had used to do,
His never-daunted Tail till now, between
His legs he humbled, and did trembling go,
Confessing to the Beasts that made his Train,
That He was not their only Sovereign.
114.
When near He came, he couched to the ground,
And with ingenuous Devotion
Kissed JESU'S feet; rejoicing he had found
Juda's majestic Lion, who alone
Had in his Noble Looks fair writ the Name
Of Emperor of this created frame.
115.
By his devout Example all the rest
Their now engaged Duty learned, and did
What He had done: In order every Beast
In a meek kiss his Service offered;
And then they all before Him prostrate lay,
Humbly expecting what their Lord would say.
116.
He in a mystic Dialect, which they
Well understood, his royal Pleasure spoke:
For in that Language He at first did lay
His charge upon their Necks, which they did take
With due obeisance, and thenceforth rulfill
In all their natural Functions his high Will.
117.
Nay, not those Animals alone; but Trees,
Shrubbs, Plants, and Flours, and whatsoever grows,
The Earth, the Air, the Fire, the boistrous Seas,
The Winds, the Rains, the Hails, the Frosts, the Snows,
The Rocks, the Lightning and the Thunder, Hell,
And Heaven, and all Things ken his Language well.
118.
For being that Eternal Word, to whom
What ever Is, does owe it self, He knows
In what intelligible way to come
Unto his Creatures, and pronounce his Laws,
A Word of boundless Bounds and Potency.
May a (...) Dialect to All Things be.
119.
To All things? Yea and more than so, for He
On empty Nothing his Commands can lay,
A (...) even in (...) seeds they be
(...) things He (...); nor dare they
Plead ignorance of what he says, but by
Instant existence to his Call reply.
120.
What 'twas he spoke, they only understood,
Yet if Conjecture may presume of leave,
He charged them to abate their Thirst of Blood,
And for his sake, at least, thenceforth reprieve
Those Men whose Crimes were yet not swelled so high
As to confront and force the patient Sky.
121.
For now He came to open a gentler age
Unto the World than heertofore had run;
To banish Salvageness, and Spite, and Rage,
And to establish endless Peace's Throne:
He came dejected Man to re-invest
In his Dominion over every Beast.
122.
And to encourage their obedience, He
Told them their panting Expectation, and
Their longing Groans should satisfied be,
That He himself would have to break the Bond
In which Corruption kept them slaves, and them
With Heavens dear Heirs, to Liberty redeem.
123.
This done: His sacred Hand He lifted up,
And round about on his Devoto's dealt
His bounteous blessing. Strait they 'gan to Hop,
And Dance and Play, when in their Hearts they felt
The vigorous joyful influence which from
The blessed Fountain of his Hand did come.
124.
Then with the fairest Manners that they had,
Shaking their Tails and louting low their Heads
They took respectfull leave; all being glad
To find their Breasts new sown with gentle seeds,
And that their King which now commanded them
Appeared not more a Lion than a Lamb.
125.
But He now left alone, made noble use
Of this his private Opportunity
What better place could deep Devotion choose
Where she with freedom through all Heaven may fly?
What is the Desert but an Harbor which
No Storms of the tumultuous World can reach?
126.
Besides; his active Soul now lightened by
His Fast, and fairly poised on sprightfull Wings,
Was well appointed to tower up, and try
The Altitude of Heavens sublimest things.
Not that He needed this advantage, but
Vouchsafed this Copy unto Man to set.
127.
As when more Fuell's heaped upon the Hearth
Then well the Chimneyes stomach can digest;
The Flames disdain their wonted bounds, and forth
They rush about the Room, which now oppressed
With bright and dark billows of fire and Smoke,
In that dry sea's prodigious storm does choke.
128.
So when intemperate Man ingesteth more
Than corresponds with his Capacity;
With Flames and Vapors that superfluous Store
Riots about his Heart and Head; but He
Who feeds but light, or fasts; keeps his souls sphere
Free and unclouded; as did Jesus here.
129.
Through that unfadomable Treasury
Of Thoughts, and Counsels, and Degrees, which is
Built in the Palace of Eternity,
And safely locked up with three massy Keys,
Whereof himself by proper right keeps one,
With intellectual lightness He did run.
130.
There did he, to his Humane soul unveil
The flaming Wonders of Divinity;
A Sea through which no Angels eyes could sail,
So vast, so high, so deep those Secrets be.
( Gods nearest Friend, the Soul of Jesus is,
Whom He admits to all his Privacies.)
131.
There, by the hand of Goodness did he see
An adamantine Table fairly writ
With all his Incarnations Mystery,
The Reasons, Wonders, and the ways of it.
There did he run his Contemplation from
His scorned Cradle to his guarded Tomb.
132.
His Soul rejoiced all the way it ran,
And taught his Fast to be a glorious Feast:
Each Grief, each Pain, each Suffering he did scan,
And what the deepest was he liked best:
Not for a World would he have wanted one,
But could have wished a bitterer Passion.
133.
Thus did he spend his Day: and when the Night
Upon Heavens face her sable Mantle spread,
He other Work began; No leaden Weight
Of Sleep could heavy sit upon his Head:
His Fast now grew so strong, that no dull Cloud
Out of his Stomach to his Brain could crowd.
134.
Those silent Hours He spent in ardent Prayers,
His Evening and burnt Sacrifice; and by
The quick ascent of those mysterious Stayers
Climbed back again to Heavens sublimity;
Where more Ejaculations He did spread
Than Angels, or than Stars, are marshelled.
135.
There did he pray, the World might not disdain
The gentle Yoke he came on it to lay;
Nor force Heaven to come down to Earth in vain,
But unto its obtruded Bliss give way;
That now God stooped down to Humanity,
Man would endeavor like his God to be.
136.
And now no less then forty times the Sun
The Giant of the Day, had from the East
Pricked forth his golden trapped Steeds, and run
His never wearied Race into the West;
And watchful Vesper had as often light
The silver Tapers, and trimmed up the Night.
137.
When thy Wise Spouse, who all the seasons knew
Of Heavens mysterious Dispensations, gave
The bridled Monster leave on him to show
Her Teeths full power: And how profound and brave
This Counsel was, thou by and by shall see,
For He has me enjoined to teach it thee.
138.
As when the ravenous Dog who long has layn
Muzzel'd up in the presence of his meat,
Begins to feel the loosning of his Chain,
For all the time He lost he strives to eat,
Flying like Lightning on his Breakfast, which
He with his teeth and paws at once does catch:
139.
So Famine now released to her own Will,
Revenged her Restraint, with greedy spite;
And had it but been possible to kill
Life's unconsenting Lord sh' had done it strait,
For never with such fell remorfelesnesse
She raged in any Breast, as now in His.
140.
His empty Stomach roared, his Bowels clung,
The heavenly Graces of his Countnance fell,
Thirst parched his beauteous Lips and burnt his Tongue;
But all by his divine Consent; for well
He knew, that if he grew not faint and wan,
Hell needs must take Him to be more than Man,
141.
Hells jealous Prince knew all the Prophesies
Which pointed out a greater King then he;
A King which was from Jesse's Root to rise,
And promised, to quell his Tyranny.
Upon his Guard He stood, and watched to see
The dangerous time, and who that Man should be.
142.
The Angels Song which warbled to the Earth
Peace and Good Will, shot Terror through his Heart;
The Sheepherds story of the Infants Birth
No sooner struck his ear but made him start,
He Simeons Jubilation echoed by
A Groan, and Anna's Preaching by a Sigh.
143.
With deep mis-giving Thoughts he chewed upon
The Benedictus of old Zachary;
The eastern Star which unto Bethlehem ran
Did with amazement blind his fearful eye;
Guilty Suspicion his black soul did know
When He the Wise Men's Adoration saw.
144.
At length these fatal Items roused Him
To take some course this Danger to repress.
Forthwith he chose the Fauchion of grim
Herod; nor did He think He struck amiss.
Besides, now Thirty years could not discover
Any great fear, he hoped the worst was over.
145.
And much it cheered him to remember that
Messiah was to be a Virgins Son;
As for thy Lord, He termed him Joseph's Brat,
The silly Carpenters poor Urcheon;
Who likelier was some simple House to build,
Than raise a Kingdom, and a Scepter weild.
146.
Yea to that fond and shamlesse Boldness He
Hardened his Thoughts, as to imagine that
Great Daniels heaven inspired Prophecy
Was proved abortive; and He cared not what
The other Prophets talked, now he who set
Messia's Time, so foully failed in it.
147.
But when on Jordans Bank he heard and saw
The Testimony Heaven gave of its Son;
His sturdy Confidence began to thaw,
And Teiror through his cursed Bones to run.
Some time it was ever he could recollect
Himself, and study how his part to act.
148.
At length He hither traced Him, and set
That Fury Famine to begin the fight.
O with what anguish did he vex and fret
To see the vain contention of her spite
For forty days together! But at length
When she prevailed, His Pride renewed its strength.
149.
On Chance's vain Account he scor'd it up
That Jesus had sustained the fight till now;
As he had done, when from their Pillars top
Egyptian Idols lately down did bow,
Because since then he saw some new Ones able
To stand, and Memphis once more Isi's Stable.
150.
And now his Cue was come, to Hell he stepped,
And opened a Casket which by his Beds side
(For 'twas the dearest Thing he had,) he kepp'd:
There lay ten thousand quaint Delusions ti'd
All one within another; never Art
More cunningly than here did play her part.
151.
There lay smooth burnished Words, and quick Mutations,
Sleight-handed Tricks, (...) Courtesies,
Sweet Looks, delicious Shapes, and dainty Fashions,
False Loves, envenomed fawnings, holy Lies:
There lay the Crafts by which he did deceive
The credulous Heart of thy Grandmother Eve.
152.
And those by which He holy Aaron made
More silly than the Calfe that he erected;
Those which unconquered Samsons strength betrayed;
Those which the fort of Chastity dejected
In David's heart; and those whose witchery
Charmed his wise Son to fond Idolatry.
153.
This also was the cursed Nest of those
More wiley Wiles by which he did entise
The brave Inhabitants of Heaven to close
With his Conspiracy, when in the skies
He drew his Army up, and ventured on
Against the Thunders Mouth, and Gods own Son.
154.
And these he takes, and squeaseth into one
Conflux of more then quintessentiall Guiles;
With which insidious Extraction
His thirst he quenches, and his breast he fills,
And so returns into this Desert, well
Stuffed with the best, that is, the worst, of Hell.
155.
Imperial was his Retinue, for
A thousand gallant Peers of Phlegeton
Had robbed Air, Earth, and Sea, of their best store
Of braveries, and proudly put them on;
All which where echoed by the rich attires
Both of their haughty Horses and their Squires.
156.
But as the Cedar upon Libans head
Dishonours all the Shrubs that creep below;
As the displayed Peacocks Train does spread
Disgrace upon the Sparrow or the Crow:
So far Majestic Satan's port transcended
What ever in his Lords might be commended.
157.
Twelve sable Steeds, smug as the old Rav'ns wing
Of even stature and of equal Pride,
Sons of the Wind, or some such speedy thing,
Unto the Chariot all abreast were ti'd:
So Princes used to range their Steeds, that all
Their several Beauties in full view might fall.
158.
Perpetual sparks of Vigorousnesse they shot
From the two Founts of their prospective fire;
Their mighty Neighings easy Conquest got
Of every Noise, and made good Mars his Quire:
And thus through Clouds, almost as black as they,
Thunder and Lightning use to choose! their way.
159.
As ebon shining Boughs, so bended were
Their sinewie Necks; their Stomachs boiled over
In restless foaming Scum, which far and near
They flung about; their Pawing did discover
With what disdain upon the Earth thy trod,
And seemed to covet an etheriall Road.
160.
Their shoes were silver, and their bridles gold;
With perl their velvet trappings studded were;
Their copious Maines in curled volumes rolled
Down to the ground; their starting Ears did wear
Proserpines Favors with rich Jewels tipped;
The way their full Tails for their Sovereign swept.
161.
The wheels were Cedar clouted round about
With Golds more pretous Rival, Chrysolite:
The Charet Almug, covered throughout
With an embroidered Confluence of bright
Well ordered Gems: upon which princely seat
Prouder than it, sat Beelzebub the Great.
162.
What Pomp in Alexanders face did reign,
Or swelled upon Nebuchadnezzars Brow;
He had advanced to an higher strain,
And taught it in his own Aspect to grow,
Having compounded in one stately Lie
The universal Looks of Majesty.
163.
Disdain and Pride the chief Ingredients were,
And long ago He learned to manage Them:
Yet Grace and royal Mildness too were there,
If need should be some soft Deceit to frame.
With awful Gravity his Beard did flow,
And him some wise and ancient Monark show,
164.
A triple Crown of Diamond on his Head,
Wherein was graven Earth, and Air, and Seas,
His Empires Provinces decyphered:
For so his own Presumption does please
To make Man's Right his Prey, and write his style,
Ever since of Paradise he did him beguile.
165.
Down from his shoulders to his feet did flow
A Mantle of Estate with Ermyns lined.
But for the Texture, it so thick did grow
With oriental Gems, you could not find
What Web it was, it being clearly lost
In the magnificence of too much Cost.
166.
Three Troops of Pages on his Wheels did wait,
The first in Azure, and the next in Green,
The third in darkest Purple: the Conceit
Was only what upon his Crown was seen.
His dreadful Guard (ten thousand Curassiers)
Before Him trots, and all his Passage cleers.
167.
Of Sumptures and of Wagons a vast Sea
Flowed part before, their Prince, and part behind:
It seemed the I ransmigration to be
Of all the Earth at once; now bent to find
Some other World, whose larger Bounds might give
Leave to those straightened Swarms at large to live.
168.
In this magnifick State his progress He
Through his usurped World did pretend to take:
A well known Circuit, where incessantly
Some hellish business He himself did make:
Only He now a fiercer Lion was,
Than when He roaring up and down did pass,
169.
For though that roaring Voice loud Terror spoke,
Withal it gave Men warning to beware:
But when he with Majestic Grace does cloak
His theevish Enterprise; He charmeth Fear
Asleep; for who would Dream, a King in so
Great Pomp, a stealing would, and cheating, go!
170.
See Thou that ruefull Place, that Garden where
Eternal Barrenness deep-rooted grows;
Where unrelenting Flints and Pebles are
Both Soil and fruit? That Sceen thy Lord did choose
Wherein to wrestle with keen Famine, and
Give her free leave on her own ground to stand.
171.
And hither came great Satan with his Train:
Where finding Jesus, in whose fallen Cheeks
Hungers deep Characters were written plain;
With seeming Princely Pity off he breaks
His course, the Steeds in foaming Scorn to stay,
Their Bridles champ'd and stamped upon their way
172.
But He more gentle seemed, than They were wroth,
For when he on thy Lord had fixed his eyes,
Three times upon his Breast He beat with both
His hands, his Head he sadly shaked thrice,
And then as often to Heaven he looked up,
And cunning Tears He every time did drop.
173.
He hoped the pined Man would bend his Knee,
And from his pitying Hand some Succor crave
Whilst yet he could receive: He looked that He
Would open his Mouth, as well as did his Grave.
But He was yet to stout to buckle down;
He nobly held his Tongue, and held his own.
174.
With that, the royal Tempter thus began:
My Pity never was till now neglected
By any He that wore the face of Man;
Much less by such whom Famine had dejected
Almost below all Humane Looks. And yet
Perhaps some Mystery may be in it.
175.
That thou with Patience can endure to be
The miserable Prey of Famine, and
Forbear (if not disdain) to ask of Me,
Who with all courteous Succor ready stand;
Implies thy strength, what ever thy Face appear,
Higher to move than in an humane Sphere.
176.
Where ever she had it, Rumor sent of late
A strange Relation to my ear, which she
Professed she took both from the Leaves of Fate,
And, from experimental Verity:
'Twas that the Son of God had changed his Home,
And here to sojourn on the Earth was come.
177.
She added that his Garb was plain and mean
Because He was a stranger here below,
And rather came to see than to be seen,
As wisest Travelers are wont to do.
But more she told Me not; perhaps that I
And my good Fortune might the rest descry.
178.
For deep my Honor it concerns, and Me,
That ready Entertainment should attend
Such mighty strangers: And if thou be He
Take notice Thou have met a Royal Friend,
A Friend both able and resolved to prove
That thou all Glory have not left above.
179.
But yet these Deep-plowd Wrinkles ill would suit
My solemn Forehead, and this reverend Snow
My Head and Beard, if Rashness should confute
Those sage and sober Tokens, if I now
Who long ago have purchased the esteem
Of Grave, and Wise, should Light and Credulous seem.
180.
Then since my Credit calls upon me for
Some certain Proof, You must not that deny:
It Is reason you assure Me who you are,
Not can Assurance sealed be, but by
Some potent Demonstration, which may show
That Nature, and her Rules can bow to You.
181.
If you be He whom God does own for Son,
(And God forbid you such a Truth should hide.)
Let it suffice your Fast thus far has run,
And now a Breakfast for your self Provide.
Lo here a Board with Pebles ready spread,
Speak but the Word, and make them Loaves of Bread.
182.
The Tempter so. But Jesus wisely saw
How He suspended was in jealous Doubts,
And by this Artifice contrived how
To extricate his snarl'd perplexed Thoughts;
He therefore means, by heavenly Art, to cast
Upon his hellish Craft a darker Mist.
183.
For as a noble Champion when the Blow
Hastneth with deadly aim unto his Heart,
With wary Buckler back again does throw
The intercepted and deceived dart:
So did thy Spouse by Gods unconquered Word
His ready Shield against the Tempters Sword.
184.
It Is written that the Life of Man, said He,
Shall lean not only on the Staff of Bread,
But by a surer Prop supported be,
By the more wholesome Word of God being fed.
What need We Loaves our Hungers rage to still!
Out of Gods Mouth comes that which Man's will fill.
185.
O most impenetrable Buckler! how
Slender an Help is triple Steel to thee!
Seav'n-times-redoubled Adamant must bow
To thy less vulnerable Durity.
O Scripture! what vain shades and feathers were
Goliah's Arms, if they with thee compare!
186.
This Psyche, this, is that unconquered shield
Under whose sure Protection Thou may go,
Although all Hell pitched in a Martial Field,
Conspired has, and sworn thine Overthrow.
Thy Spouse has taught thee its great use, and He
Did fight with none but this Artillery.
187.
Yet as the greedy Wolf, once beaten back,
By that Repulse is but enraged to
A second Onset, and does fiercelier make
His fresh Encounter: Angry Satan so
Bruised by this Fall, and vexed at the pain,
Plucks up his Spirits, and ventures on again.
188.
Yet being forced to his sly shifts to run,
He plausibly pretends the sullen Place
To be the stage where Heavens illustrious Son
Should act his Greatness, too unworthy was:
And instantly resolves to change this mean
And despicable, to some gallant Sceen.
189.
For as a dainty Cloud came by that Way,
He, the usurping Prince of all the Air,
With a stern Look commanded it to stay,
And so gat up into his flying Chair,
Taking thy Lord with Him, who was content
To try what by this new Design he meant.
190.
Then bidding the next Wind upon Him wait,
He through the Welkin scoured, and quickly came
(For now his Way all open lay and straight)
Unto the Top of fair Jerusalem,
Where on the Temples highest Pinnacle
He Jesus set, and to his business Fell.
191.
Alone he fell to it: His numerous Train
Being left behind, and charged to attend
Their Kings Return; for much he did disdain,
In case he could not now atchieve his end,
His envious Elves again should witness how
A starved Man gave Hells Prince the Overthrow.
192.
He wisely pondered that the Arms whereby
He first Repulsed was, the mightiest were;
And therefore cunningly resolved to try
If he could Scripture bow to serve his War.
O Wit of deepest Hell, which makes a sword
Of Gods own Word to fight with God the Word.
193.
And then; I grant, said He, that thy Reply
Was true, but yet no Answer to my Doubt:
Lo here a Sceen, where Thou may satisfy
By one Experiment every scrupulous Thought:
If God thy Father be, throw thy self down,
For He for certain will preserve his own.
194.
Is it not Written, That He shall Command
His trusty Angels to attend on Thee,
And with a watchful ready stretched Hand
From the least touch of Danger keep Thee free,
That no rude Stone with churlish Shock shall meet
(So tender is He) thy secured feet.
195.
Mark Psyche, mark the Cheaters Craft, how he
Mangles the Text, and skips what likes him not.
In all thy Ways they shall Assistant be;
So ran the tenor of the Scripture; but
He knew full well that Precipices were
No Ways for Man; and therefore that did spare.
196.
Be sure it move thee not, if henceforth thou
See any of his Urcheons Scripture spit:
For they by his authentic Copy know
Both how to geld and to adulterate it;
Or at the least such peevish Glosses make,
As it against it self shall force to speak.
197.
But with another genuine Text thy Lord
Nobly confuted Him, and thus Replied:
This Lawe's enacted in the sacred Word,
Thou shall not tempt thy God: and Heaven forbid
That I should dare his Providence, and think
When I plunge down my self, I cannot sinck.
198.
Perhaps thy Wonder asks why Satan now
He on the Brink of Danger him had set,
Bridled his Fury, and forbore to throw
Him headlong thence: But thou must not forget
That He was jealous still, and feared least
His Foe at force of Arms might get the best.
199.
Alas the Chain of all his Power is short,
Believe it Psyche, there is no Mortal Wight
But if he would resolve to hold his Fort,
Might tire his Siege, and all his On-slates slight:
But silly Men unto his strength make way,
Whilst they by lazy Fears themselves betray.
200.
Satan at this Repulse, deep in his Heart
Stifled his Grief, and smothered his shame:
And now resolved to act another Part,
Leaped on that Cloud upon whose back he came.
With which He through the wondering Air did swim
Hurrying thy patient Lord along with Him.
201.
To his expecting Train He swumm, for now
Put to his last Reserve of Plots, he meant
To venture all at one great Cast; and though
Still both that they should see Him foild, he went
With desperate resolution to the fight:
Deer was his Credit, but more deer his Spite.
202.
Unto a Mount he marched, whose heavenly head
Despised Basan, Carmell, Libanus,
The Alps (where Winter all year keeps his bed,)
With Pendle, Calpe, Atlas, Caucasus,
And all the proudest Cliffs of Ararat
Where Noah's floating Ark first footing got.
203.
A Mount which on the highest Clouds looked down,
And saw all kinds of Weather far below;
A Mount which seemed to be Earths sovereign Crown,
Where never any Wind aspired to blow;
A Mount which bravely reached at Heaven, and made
Far distant Countries subject to its shade.
204.
Arrived there; with a new plate of Brass
His never-blushing Front he fortified,
Being now upon an Enterprise which was
Second to that in impudence and pride,
When armed with spightfull Fury and Disdain
He ventured to assail Heavens Sovereign.
205.
'Twas was the same Son of Heavens eternal Father
To whom his stomach then refused to yield
Obedience and homage, and chose rather
To try it with Him in a pitched Field.
Fool, who by his first Fall no warning took
For what He was the second fight to look.
206.
A massy Throne of beaten Gold stood there,
Whose luster round about the Region spread,
Placed on a Pavement glorious and clear
Refined Silver newly burnished.
Triumphant Arch's and Columns on each side
In laurel Wreaths hid and displayed their Pride.
207.
Here Satan pitched him down: when lo the Crew
Of his attending Elves in humble guise
Themselves before his radiant footstool threw,
Adoring Him with millions of lies;
Nor durst they from the Pavement stir until
His nod did intimate his gracious Will.
208.
Then stretching out his Hand, he gave the Sign
To that brave Apparition, which He
By sprightfull Art had taught how to combine
With his profound but glorious forgerie.
One Moment was sufficient; for the Sceen
Before his Hand was quite stretched out, came in.
209.
A mighty Globe came rolling up the Hill,
Which on an aerie Axell turned before
His stately Throne, and to that Bulk did swell,
That the full figure of the World it bore:
No Conjurations ever grew so strong
As this, of all Enchantments the huge Throng.
210.
There might You see the Eastsillustrious shore,
The Western Columns, and the Atlantic Sea;
Of Ice and snow a never thawing store
Both in the North and South Extremity;
The Dogstars Empire; The vast Libian strand
Where endless Summer boileth in the Sand.
211.
There gallant Indus washed up his Gemms,
There wealthy Tagus paved his shores with Gold,
There Thamisis poured out her silver streams,
There Ganges, Ister, and Pactolus roul'd,
Hydaspes, Tanais, Rhone, Rhene, Niger, Po,
Euphrates, Tigris, Nile, and Thousand more.
212.
There Palestine in Milk and Honey swumm,
There shaddow'd with her odoriferous Cloud
Arabia was, there China found her room,
There Scythia in her Furrs her self did shroud,
The Sea did there thine Albion divide
And set it like a better World aside.
213.
There dwelt all Countries which this Age does know,
And more than yet must to its knowledge come:
When Avarice to its full Age shall grow,
And think its thirsty Purse has more than room
For this scant World, another shall be (...)
Which yet the West in ignorance has drowned.
214.
But in this ample Pageant was displayed
That other World which Times to come shall see
By venturous Columbu's Art betrayed
To Christian Covetousnes and Cruelty.
(O why should Christians be such muck-worm fools
And Western Gold more dear than Western Souls!)
215.
No sooner had this Globe turned round about,
And every Kingdoms proudest Glory shown;
But from his Rome Tiberius stepped out,
And pulling off his own imperial Crown,
With fear and reverence his Approaches made
To Satan's footstool, where his face he laid.
216.
And having prefac'd by that lowly Kiss,
Behold, great Sir, my Diadem, said He
Bows to thy royal Footstool; and by this
The highest of Assurances, to Thee
I who am in thy Roman World thy great
Viceroy, my homage tender at thy Feet.
217.
Thou art that Prince by whose high power alone
The Assyrian Lion made the World his Prey;
By (...) the Persian Bear's Dominion
Through all the Forests of the Earth made way;
By thee the Grecian Leopard snatched all this,
And stoutly wished another World were His.
218.
By Thee the Iron-jaw'd, ten-horned Beast,
The Martial Roman Power, so dreadful grew
That clearly it devoured all the rest,
And with the Sun victoriously flew
About the World, which now sits safe, and sings
Under the Shadow of our Eagles Wings.
219.
By Thee great Julius did our Empire found,
By Thee Augustus second was to Him;
By Thee this third, this head of mine was crowned
With this, the shadow of thy Diadem:
O may thy Vassal with thy Favor, and
Thy Blessing, wear this Gift of thine own Hand!
220.
So with a thousand Holocausts will I
Make fast thine holy Altar Morn and Night;
So my imperial Yoke and Reins shall lie
Upon my Subjects Shoulders soft and light,
Whilst by thy Benedictions influence
I reign of Justice, and of Mildness Prince.
221.
Tiberius here some gentle Nod expected
As a Commission to resume his Crown:
But straight the wretched Flatterer detected
In surly Satan's face a cloudy Frown;
Nor was it long before that Cloud did break
Into a Storm, when thus to Him He spoke;
222.
Thou have condemned thy Self Tiberius, by
Acknowledging that I thy Sovereign am;
For how shall I entrust a World in thy
Luxuriant lazy Hand, who hither came
Upon no business but my Visitation,
Which bids the Earth now look for Reformation.
223.
My Name, my Honor, and my tender Care
Of my deer World, all summon Me to find
Some Hero's worthy Temples, which may wear
That Crown according to my princely Mind.
Nor fawn, nor whine, nor weep Tiberius, I
Provided am of one who here stands by.
224.
Then turning to thy Spouse, with gracious Eye,
I must my courteous Fortune thank, said He,
Who in my Progress did so luckily
To my (not poor) acquaintance offer Thee:
I little thought, till I this view did take
That I a new Lieutenant had to make.
225.
By him I see how Princes love to slide
Down the glib way of wretched Luxury:
And what should silly People do, whose Guide
Leads them the way to Ruin? Have not I
Just cause to choose some sober Man, whose Care
May stop that desperate vicious (...)
226.
Now whether Thou be Son to God, or no,
Surely Thou spring'st from some Heroic Race,
I see the noblest Sparks of Virtue so
Full writ in thy, though pined yet, princely Face.
Although thy modesty conceals thy Birth
And Parentage, it cannot cloud thy Worth.
227.
And yet even that is precious too; for well
I know that stomackfull Ambition threw
From Heavens high Crest down to profoundest Hell
Disdainful Lucifer and his swelling Crew.
Yet that which does my wonder Most advance
Is the strange Mircle of thy Temperance.
228.
That Virtue never yet alone did dwell
But is the fertile spring of all the rest
How easily a Temperate Prince may quell.
And crush all breeding Vices in their Nest.
Whilst all his Life is a perpetual Law,
Which sweetly drives, when Statutes cannot draw.
229.
And such a Prince, and none but such, can cure
The wide Contagion which rank Vice has spread
On this poor Age: Nor can my Love endure
Longer delay, since I am furnished
With Thee, that only He, whose merits call
To make thee Deputy of All this All.
230.
Nay more than so: Thou see how Age does grow
Upon my weary back; and I confess
That I am satisfied and tired now
With Glories Sweets, and Honors Weight, no less
Than with my Years, and could contented be
To end my days in quiet Privacy.
231.
Nor must it be in vain that I have found
An Hero, on whose shoulders safely I
May lay the Burden of my Cares, and ground
Just hopes of all my Worlds Felicity.
Wherefore this free and plenall Act I make
Before Heavens face, which I to Witness take:
232.
First, I bequeath to Thee Tiberiu's Crown
To which Imperial Romes vaft Power is ti'd;
And next, I to thine Head resign mine own
Fair Diadem; For thou henceforth shall ride
Upon my royal Charet, and alone
Govern this World, as I till now have done.
233.
These Glories which about this Globe do roll,
Are but the beams of that which shall be thine;
The Kingdoms which are spread from Pole to Pole
Shall in thy universal Realm combine;
And in requital of thy noble Fast,
The World shall join its Store to dress thy Feast.
234.
My Servants here shall swear, so shall my Peers,
(And I my self will tender Them the Oath,)
Allegiance unto Thee, and to thy Heirs,
Yea, to complete my grand Donation, both
My Shrines and Temples I to Thee resign,
Where no Name shall adored be but thine.
235.
Nor will I any constant homage tie
To this my Grant; for all that I shall ask
Is but one Token of thy Thanks, which I
Will take for ample Pay: Nor is the Task
I Will set Thee, hard, or long; Do but Fall down
And worship Me, and all the World's thine own.
236.
So spoke the King of Craft. But as the Sea
Which rolls above the Spears, when daring Men
Affronted God with to wring Villainy,
Forgot its ever-polish'd Smiles, and in
Tempestuous Violence breaking through the shore
Of heaven, a flood of Death on Earth did pour:
237.
So now thy noble Spouse, who never yet
Had suffered frowns to gather on his Brow,
An angry Look against the Tempter set,
And with disdainful Answer made him know
That all his Pageantry did not conceal
Nor Him, nor what he sought to hide, his Hell.
238.
Proud Satan, it is enough that I, said He,
Thus long have seen and born thine Insolence:
Lo I defy thy Promises, and Thee
Vainer than them: I charge thee get thee hence
Behind my back, and there thy shameless Pride
(If any thing may hide it,) learn to hide.]
239.
Does not the sacred Scripture plainly say,
Thine Adoration Thou to God shall give,
And unto Him alone thy Service pay?
All Heaven forbid that We should Him bereave
Of his due Homage, and embezill it
Upon the Prince of the infernal Pit.
240.
As when on Sodoms Impudence of old
Heaven poured its Fire to purge those lustful flames;
The wretched Town repented not, yet howled,
And mixed its tears amongst the Brimstone streams;
But all in vain, for straight the Houses burned,
And with their Dwellers into Ashes turned.
241.
So now at Jesu's Answer, which did fly
Like Lightning from his Lips, the Globe did melt,
And nothing of that Universal Lie
Remained, but Ashes, which so strongly smelt
That other Stincks compared with this, might seem
Perfumes, and Arabies breath, in Sodoms steam.
242.
Confounded Satan backward from his Throne
Fell down the Mount, and tumbled into Hell,
Whilst the loud Trumpet of his bellowing Groan
His dreadful Coming, to the Deeps did tell:
But as he fell; his Horns, and Tail, and Claws
Brake out, so did the Sulphur from his Jaws.
243.
His yelling Peers, and lamentable Crew
Of Pages, tumbled headlong after Him;
Presenting to thy Lords victorious View
A Copy of that Sight, when from the brim
Of highest Heaven them and their King He beat
Down to the bottom of their damned Seat.
244.
And now the Sceen is changed; and Satan to
The Lord his God his Adoration paid
Which to himself he wooed that God to do,
So, Jesu, may all Treasons be betrayed;
So may all Rebels find their cursed feet
Snarled for evermore in their own Net!
245.
Whilst these three Conflicts passed, Heaven set its Eye
On its divinest Champion, but forbore
All Help or Comfort, till the Victory
Was clearly gained: When lo triumphant Store
Of Angels hovering down, with high-straind Lays
Back to the spears returned the Victors praise.
246.
O Psyche, had thou heard that royal Song,
Thou would have learned how We above employ
Our blessed Time, where on each high-tun'd Tongue
Sit endless Raptures of excessive Joy,
Whilst every hearty Angel as he sings
Clapps his Applause with his exultant (...).
247.
Their Gratulation ended; on their Knees
A sumptuous Banquet They to Him present,
Wherein was choice of all Varieties
With which Heavens King could his dear Son content:
And He in whom all princely grace does reign,
Was pleased their ministry not to disdain,
248.
But when He thus had broke his mighty Fast,
The Fury which so long lay in his breast
(Impatient gnawing Famine) out he cast,
Returning her unto her odious Nest,
And bid an Angel tie her in that Chain
When he had drove her to her Den again.
249.
There must she dwell, and never be let loose,
But when his royal Pleasure thinks it fit
To pour his Wrath on his relentlesse Foes
Whom lusty Fatness makes too bold, and great
To be his Subjects, in whose Laws they hear.
Of Abssinence, a yoke they will not bear.
250.
And now by that Eternal Spirit, who
Brought Him into the lists of this great Fight,
He to the Coasts of Galilee does go;
Whither He could have flown by his own Might,
But Heaven was studious to attend Him, and
In his great Business joy'd to have an hand.
251.
Another World of Wonders will appear
When thither I shall carry Thee; but now
Thou shall repose thee here a while, and cheer
Thy Spirits to run that ravishing Race: I know
That thou, (so dear are thy Lords ways to Thee,)
Would longer Fast; but now it must not be,
252.
This said; He spread his wing (as he before
Had often done) and on that Table set
Out of his own unseen, but copious store,
Chaste and delicious Cates for her to eat.
She blessed her gracious Lord who fasted so
Long time before he eat, and then fell to.
253.
But whilst on those external Meats she fed,
Her soul sat at a secret feast, for she
Her Hearts fair Table fully furnished
With the rich Dainties of this History,
Knowing her Lord (and this advanced the Cheer)
Did Fast and fight, not for himself, but Her.
254.
And now, because the Sun made haste to rest
And smok'd already in the Western Deep;
Phylax his chariot curtains drew, and pressed
The Virgins Eyes to do as much by Sleep.
One Wing beneath, and one above her head
He laid, and turned her Board into her Bed.
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO X. The Marveils.
ARGUMENT.
LOve to convince the World in whom alone
It ought to treasure all its Confidence,
Affords a fair and full Probation
What undeniable Omnipotence
Dwelt in his Hand, which always sheltered
Those who unto its Sanctuary fled.
1.
IT is not Beauty, which its Blush does owe
Unto the Pixe and Pencill It Is no King
Who on the Stage does make a rusling show,
And thunder big imperious Words, which ring
With awful Noise about the Sceen, when He
By the next Exit must some Beggar be.
2.
All is not Gold that in a glistering Ray
Fairly conceals its foul hypocrisy.
The gareish Meteors, though they display
Good store of shining Proofs, will never be
Own d by the Stars for Bretneren, nor can
The Ape, with all his Tricks, be genuine Man.
3.
The heady Rebel, though all Texts he skrews
To force Truth to confession of a Lie;
Though at the Bar of Natures Laws he sues
To justify unnatural Liberty;
Though Conscience and Religion, the thigs
He overthrows, he for his groundwork brings;
4.
Though from Success (a firmer Argument
For the Odrysian Christian-hating Race,)
He pleads the Sanctity of his Intent,
And blasphemously makes Heaven own his Cause;
In vain strives to transform his hell-bred Sin,
Which still makes Him to Lucifer a kin.
5.
The staring Wizzard never yet could by
His mumbling Charms, his Herbs, his Lines, his Wand,
His hideous Sacrifices, form a Lie
Able against the face of Truth to stand,
Nor can his Master Satan though all Hell
He rends, or blends, effect a Miracle
6.
Often has he ventured and strove to tread
In those Almighty Steps of Heaven, but still
The Paces were so wide, that all He did
Was but the proving of his feeble Will:
His Wonders never reached above Deceits,
With which imprudent Eyes and Hearts he cheats.
7.
No: God alone is King of Nature, and
She her own Sovereign full well does know;
No sooner does her Ear drink his Command,
But (...) her knees, and heart and powers bow:
For, all things must be Natural, says she,
Which my Creators Voice injoyneth Me.
8.
That Voice the Fountain was whence first she rose,
And ever since has been the Rule whereby
She (...) her Course which way so ever she goes.
That Voice which did awake Vacuity
Into a full and mighty World, at ease
May change its Parts into what form it please.
9.
Yet seldom it unsheaths its Power, but when
Some high and singular Designe's in hand,
Some Mystery of mighty Love: and then
Should the fast Center in its Passage stand,
It must and will give way, and to the Top
Of Heaven it self, if need require, climb up.
10.
For what is the Centre's close-shrunk Knot; or what
All heaven and earth which round about it cling,
If in a righteous balance They be put
With Love, that little Word, but mighty Thing?
Themselves they only to Love's pleasure owe,
And cannot to His will refuse to bow.
11.
Full low They bowed to it, when from the Yoke
Of cruel Pharaoh Isreal's seed it drew:
Ten mighty Blows it gave, and every Stroke
Some part of Nature in proud Egypt slew
At length it rolled the Sea upon an heap,
And opened the Rebels Graves amidst the Deep.
12.
How fertile did it make the Wilderness
In Miracles! in what illustrious Flames
Renouned Sina's Temples did it dress!
How did it teach the Rock to melt in Streams,
Bidding the Desert flow, as it before
Had charged the Sea to start from either shore!
13.
This set the Heavens to rain down Angels Bread,
Who every Morning did betimes fulfill
Their wondrous Task, and all the Desert spread
With a thick candied Banquet; which lay till
The liquorish Sun delighted with the Taste,
On that Ambrosia daily broke his fast.
14.
This made the Wind turn Caterer, and blow
The People flesh: This did the Cloud command
By day to usher and before them go
With a cool shade: This built that walking, and
Bright-flaming Pillar, whose convoying Light
Commission had to banish Night from Night.
15.
Jordan forbid by This, presumed not to
Touch the Priests feet, though through his (...) they past:
This armed mere Sound against proud Jericho,
And stormed the City by poor Trumpets Blast;
Whilst the hugeBullwarks which all Ramms did scorn
Fell prostrate down, and yielded to the Horn.
16.
This put more Might into a feebler Sound,
When unto Joshua's Mortal Voice 'twas given
To domineer amidst the Starry Round,
And against Days Giant barracadoe Heaven.
This made the Clouds their gentle Drops forget,
And Storms of Stones on Isreal's Enemies spit.
17.
Yet all these Wonders but Preludiums were,
And glimmering Dawns of that illustrious Day
Which in Times plenitude was to appear
And the ripe Age of Miracles display.
For then the Word it self came down below
From the worse Egypt's Yoke his World to draw.
18.
Decorum did require this Time should be
The Crown of Times: Those Forgeries with which
The height of all Poetic Industry
Did coin the Golden Age, and it enrich
With Fancies Gallantry, could never rise
To match this more than Golden Ages price.
19.
Phylax, who knew all this, resolved to show
Psyche a glimpse of it: with whom, when she
Awoke, he in his willing Chariot flew
High through the yielding Clouds, and instantly
Reached Palestines designed Zenith, where
He curbed his Steeds on the commanded Air.
20.
Psyche admired to see the Chariot stand
Upon so thin a floor: But then, said he,
This Region is not only in the hand
Of Satan's power; No, our Authority
Is cleerer far than his, though he would here,
Usurper as he is, a Kings Name wear.
21.
Alas, time was, (as he remembers well)
When tumbled headlong from our lofty Home,
He could not stay himself, but helpless fell
Through all this Air, to his infernal Doom.
Indeed he often crawleth up this way,
Yet it is but like a Theife, to steal his prey.
22.
But from this Prospect Thou shall safely see
The Sceens on which thy Lord his Wonders did:
Not all; their number is too vast for thee
Within the volume of one Day to read:
And yet as many as shall amply prove
That all his business in this World, was Love.
23.
That tract is Galilee; you' little Town
The place where first his Might abroach He set;
Where he was pleased a Marriage Feast to crown
With his great Presence, and Approofe of it.
Although his Mother were a Virgin, He
Would not to Wedlock seem an Enemy.
24.
No: He himself at first ordained it
As a delicious and sacred Tie,
By which indissolubly He might knit
Two Bosoms in one Loves Conspiracy.
This is that reverend Knot by which alone
Two are no longer Two, but Both are One.
25.
A Knot which He himself does imitate,
Though in a puter and more mystic way;
Whilst with his Spouse he does concentricate,
Blending his heart with hers; that so Both may
Cleave in such unity as makes the Creature
Strangely Partaker of its Makers Nature.
26.
A blessed Knot, which ties Affection close
Betwixt the Branches and the Root, and binds
Up Families in peace; which hanging loose
By doubtful Lines, as often as waspish Minds
By Discontents proud itch were spurred on,
Would split, and be infallibly undone.
27.
Satan was well aware of this; For he
Bewitched grave Plato's high-esteemed Pen
To vent the Doctrine of Community,
As most conducing to the Weal of Men:
But when the moderate Pagans Project proved
In vain a desperate Christians Tongue he moved.
28.
For He in Antioch found a Monster, who
Dared spit plain Poison on this Mystery,
Avouching that all Nuptials did flow
From cursed Hells Invention: Hell, said He,
Was the black Shop where Belzebubs own Hands
Did forge and fashion Matrimonial Bands.
29.
Unhappy Saturninus how have thou
Proved thine own self an Urcheon of Damnation!
What gain'st Thou else by fetching from below
Thy Beings Root, which was of Heavens plantation!
O most adulterous Soul, who by thy vile
Crime, all the Worlds Beds do at once defile!
30.
Whilst Jesus now sat sweetly at the Feast,
And added a new Banquet to that Meat,
(For on his face the Eyes of every Guest
As in the richer Dainties, all were set,)
A fit Occasion Him beseech'd to join
To that Dry Banquet of his Face, some Wine.
31.
The Wine was out: When lo the Virgin Mother
In courteous Pity of the Bridgromes Want,
(Which she as careful was as he, to smother,)
Unto Her Son, the Fount of all Things, went,
And, in a blush more lovely than the Bride
Could show that Day, the business signified.
32.
But then her Son (who was not hers alone,
But also Heavens, and now resolved to show
A token of that high Extraction)
Began (for 'twas the first time,) to allow
No Name of Mother to Her: What says He,
O Woman, what have I to do with thee?
33.
This business Must not seem to flow from thy
Sole Motion; Heaven and I have plotted it;
Nor need'st thou lend us any Wings to fly
Who can make have enough, when Have is fit.
The Wheels of Time with speed enough do run,
But yet mine Hour they have not rolled on.
34.
Know Psyche, that his Hour is Mercies Cue;
And when Extremity of Need does call,
Then Mercy loves her gracious Power to show;
The want of wine was yet not known to all
The Company, whose Souls it did concern
By that, thy Lords wise Potencie to learn
35.
But yet no sooner did that Want appear,
(...) with ready Goodness gives Command;
(...) He spied standing there
(...) own Liquor should be filled, and
(...) for the Convives: When lo, at the Spout
The Miracle into the Boule gushed out.
36.
He who had Water taught by passing through
The Conduit of the Uine and of the Grape,
To turn to brisk and joyful Wine; did now
Teach it as much by running through the Tap.
The cool and Virgin Nymph drawn from the Pot
All over blushed, and grew sparkling hot.
37.
The Master of the Feast amazed at
Her sprightfull Sweetness, wonderd whence she came:
Never had his judicious Palate yet
Discovered such a brisk and sprightfull Dame.
Alas He knew not that His gift She was
From whom no Thing but what is Best, can pass.
38.
Look yonder flows the Sea of Galile,
Upon whose sandy shore, which He had set
To curb and bridle in its Waves, as He
Uouchsas d to walk, his Eyes an object met
Which moved their pity, and that moved Him
In a new Sea to bid the Fishers swim.
39.
Peter and Andrew in the tiresome Maine
Catching their Living with their Fish, he spied;
In whom he read the vainer Life of vain
And mudling Man, who in the briney Tide
Of this unstable World his Days does wast
And with his Net, himself into it Cast.
40.
So certainly Uncertainty upon
This Life's unfaithful Stage does domineer;
Proud Change in such confounding Sport does run
Here sometimes flowing, sometimes ebbing there;
That Earth it self may seem, no less than Sea,
At never settled Luna's beck to be.
41.
This made Him cry aloud, Come Follow Me,
And I will you imbark upon the Shore
In a more safe and profitable Sea,
Than you have ever fished in before.
Let those mute things alone, and I will make
You henceforth catch such Fishes as can speaks.
42.
The Shoale of Men which in this Ages Deep
Do scudd about, unto your Netts shall flow:
Those feeble tatterd Things you need not keep,
I upon You will nobler Netts bestow;
Immortal Nets, which know not how to break,
Netts which the Universal World shall take.
43.
As needless is your crazie Bark, for I
Intend to build a royal Ship, in which
You round about the Globe, being steered by
My watchful Providence, shall safely reach.
When Heaven fears being shipwrackt, then shall this
Uessell, which nothing but Heavens Kingdom is.
44.
Have Thou not heard how Sirens notes have drawn
The Fishers from their Boats into the Sea,
In whose sharp Brine their silley Preys they drown,
Drowned before in their soft Harmony?
Well then might this strong Charm those Men invite
To plunge into the Sea of safe Delight.
45.
Once more their Netts they Cast, but Cast away;
Meekly ambitious to be Fishes now,
And yield Themselves to Him a willing Prey
Who thus his Nett of Love about them rhrew.
Never Adventure did they make like this,
Where being caught Themselves, they Caught their Bliss.
46.
But yonder taken was an harder Prize:
There once erected stood Exactions Throne,
Where Levi sat, Lord of a strange Excise,
The heavy Mark of Romes Dominion,
A Knight he was, for none but such might be
Entrusted with that Cruel Dignity.
47.
That at the gracious Calling of thy Lord
Fishers were well content their own to leave,
Less ground to sober Wonder does afford:
Their cold, and wet, and dirtie Trade, might drive
Them to an easy faith their old Degree
Of life, by any new advanced would be.
48.
A Faith, which in the Dregs of Time, so far
Abused will be, that bold Mechanics, who
In poor and painful Trades engaged were,
When Sloth and Pride make them too worthy to
Buckle to work, their Tools away will throw,
And, by this Call, inspired Men-fishers grow.
49.
But what Charms can outvie the power of Gold,
An heavy strong and precious Chain, which now
In deer imprisonment did Levi hold,
And fast upon his Soul and Body grow;
Can a Poor Master such a Man persuade
To leave great Caesar, and his thriving Trade!
50.
A sturdy Mountain may more easily be
Commanded to resign his native place,
And heave his mouldering bulk into the Sea:
The Sun may sooner from his princely face
Tear all his golden Tire, and damp his light
In the vile pitch of an unnatural night.
51.
Yet as thy Lord (alas how mean and poor)
Passed by the Office, He this Word let fly,
Come follow Me: which forthwith over-bore
By most unconquerable Potencie
The startled Seat, the Profit, and the Man,
And turned into a Saint, the Publican.
52.
The Worlds Opinion Levi pondered not,
Nor how Tibereus this Affront might take,
He counted not what He should loose, or what
He should not gain, whilst he this Change did make:
He asks no Friends advice how he might keep
His fame, nor stays to Look before he leap.
53.
But as forth from its horrible Abyss
The World did at thy Spouses Call appear;
So from the blacker deeper Mass of his
Confused Mammon Levi mounteth here,
And bravely Follows Him without delay,
Who was Himself his Leader, and his Way,
54.
For Love like Lightning from the blessed Eyes
Of Jesus, shot it self quite through his Heart,
Where into its own instant Sacrifice
What ever it light upon it did convert:
So sublimate and so refining was
The Fire, that all the Gold it turned to Dross.
55.
Doubts, Fears and Cares and secular Relations
It quite burnt up, and in his flaming breast
Left nothing but the noble Exultations
Of valiant Zeal; which, should the World resist
Its course with all this Mass of Earth and Sea,
Would rend its way through all, and victor be.
56.
O Psyche, Love, Love is that potent Thing
To which all other Strength its head bows down:
The Universe's most Almighty King
Never chose to use Powers Title as his own,
But in this sweeter Name of higher might
(For God is Love) he takes his deer delight.
57.
Thy Lord his ordinary Chaplanes thus
Did choose, and twelve their mystic Number was;
For in this Zodiak He all-gloryous
Resolved through his Grace's Orb to pass
About his World; Nor does the other Sun
Through fewer Signs in his great voyage run.
58.
But I must tell Thee (for himself descri'd
The Secret first) One of the Twelve He chose
An Hell-hound was, and the false-hearted Guide
Unto his dearest Masters mortal Foes;
One who did prove in matchless height of evil
Against Incarnate God, Incarnate Devil.
59.
Yet, such was Jesu's most unbounded Love,
That He resolved to do his best, and try
How He from Juda's bosom might remove
Intruding Hells pernicious monarchy.
For Heaven forbid that Pitties Lord should fashioa
A way to plunge Him deeper in Damnation.
60.
O no! may those black Mouths for ever be
Damm'd up with Silence, and with Shame, which dare
Father the foulest deepest Tyranny
Upon the God of Love; And busy are
In pleading it from his own Word, although
By it they make Him Contradictious too.
61.
But all the rest were faithful Souls, who stood
True to their Lords Cause; which they strove to write
(As He in His had done) in their own blood;
And never started at the sharpest Fight,
But by their own Deaths studied, as they
Were able, His great Death how to repay.
62.
James was the first, old Zebedees elder Son,
To whom proud Herod's Sword the way cut open,
And gave Him leave that noble Race to run,
Which leads straight to Heavens illustrious Top.
How little dreamed the Tyrant, that He did
Put on his Crown, when He took off his Head!
63.
The next was Philip, who with noble Heat
Flew to the North, and hunted out the Ice
From those dull Hearts, which never with Heaven did beat,
But with congealed stupid Ignorance freeze;
For his large Sceen was snowie Scythia where
December takes his Walk through all the year.
64.
When He that Winter all on fire had set
With Christian Flames, He bent his Course into
A Clime which should have been much warmer, but
At his life's price He found it was not so:
For soon He saw that more than Scythias Ice
Bound up the Heart of Hierapolis.
65.
Joves Name had left no room for Jesus there;
And when He tells the People of the shame,
The Nails, the Cross his Lord for them did bear,
He his own Torments did aforehand name.
Enough of Jesus now, said They, for We
Will quickly make as good a God of Thee.
66.
Then with a thousand Taunts they pierce his ear,
And next with nails his sacred Hands and feet,
And so his Cross with acclamations rear:
Where like a Mark to fury being set,
Flints near as hard's themselves they pour upon Him,
And from their World thus into Heaven did stone Him.
67.
Thomas, whose Doubts did fix his Faith so Fast
That neither Life nor death could make it shake,
With Jesus in his Mouth through Parthia past,
And charmed what Rome could never pliant make.
The AEthiop's too did hear his Voice; but He
Resolved to reach the Worlds Extremity.
68.
He had observed how the greedy West
Into the East was drawn by thirst of Gold,
Which had the Suns and Natures Courses crossed,
And into Jndu's Mouth the Ocean rolled:
And will none go, a richer prize to win
Than that fair Ore, said He, the Souls of Men?
69.
Sure Indians Souls of purer Metal are
Than that which Avarice does so far adore,
Thomas will thither trade, though India were
More Worlds off than it is, from Jordans shore;
For in his Zealous Sails Gods Spirit blows,
And not to fetch, but carry Gold He goes:
70.
If Gold be not too poor a Name to set
Upon the forehead of his royal Wares;
Loves, Joys, Peace, Glory, Bliss, and every Sweet
Of sweetest Paradise He thither bears,
For these, and more than these inshrined be
In Jesu's Name, Heavens best Epitomie.
71.
With this He traded to make India rich,
And not Himself, who now could not be poor;
As having more than All, though not so much
As any thing laid up in provident Store:
He knew his Lord was Plenties King, and He
Did as his own account His Treasury.
72.
Close to his work, without all further care
He falls, and having opened his Merchandise,
Come Buy, says He: for though these Wares be far
Above your glittering Ore's adored price,
Yet you on Trust may go for all this Bliss;
Give but your Faith, and yours the Treasure is.
73.
The Brachmans wondered at the generous Man,
So did the sage Gymnosophists; until
A barbarous unmoved Faction
Passed a blind Act of Spite, to seize and kill
The noble Merchant; who as ready stood
To pour it forth, as they to suck his Blood.
74.
Armed with their Kings Consent, and with their spears,
Unto his Heart they open their cruel way;
Whilst He with sweet content their Madness bears,
And for his Doubting Hand returns this Pay;
This final Pay for that (now faithful) Hand
Which deep in debt to's Masters Side did stand.
75.
The younger James', whose noble Family
Advanced Him to be Brother to his Lord,
Much nearer grew of Kin by Piety:
No man with stouter fervor Him adored,
Nor with more resolute Constancy than He,
Witness his reverend Forehead, and his Knee.
76.
His Knee; all plated with Austerity,
Which on the Temples Pavement night and day
Did naked dwell, till it arrived to be
Hard as the Marble, which beneath it lay:
There never grew on painful Camels Knees
So stiff a Proof of Patience, as on His.
77.
His Forchead; which was sealed with the same
Stamp of Severity; for by Prostration
Its fleshie Tenderness he overcame.
O sacred Impudence of Humiliation!
Whilst wicked (...) armed were with Brass,
His prous Front in Brawn immured was.
78.
A Brawn which shall hereafter check their Pride
And foolish Superstition, who by new
Coined Devotion, will the Old deride,
And think no worship from the Body due;
But in pretense their Conscience tender is,
Maintain their dainty Fleshes Tenderness.
79.
His dearest Meat and drink was to fulfill
His Masters Pleasure: Never did dangerous Grape
Its blood on his abstemious Palate spill,
Nor stain his sacred Cup: for mean and cheap
His Liquor was; the virgin Fountains were
His only Cellars, and his only Beer.
80.
Never did the rampant flesh of Birds or Beasts
Reek in his Kitchen, nor sweat on his Board:
Chaste Moderation cooked all his Feasts,
And well she knew how to content her Lord;
His highest Fare were sober modest Fishes,
Where Water served for Beer, the aptest Dishes.
81.
Never did perfumed Oiles his Body dew
With their soft Flattery of delicious Sweat
Unmanly Bathes his skin did never brew,
Nor cheat his Vigor with effeminate Heat.
His Limbs in active Linen used to dwell,
Being never muffled up, and lost in Wool.
82.
Nor was that Linen, though full course and plain.
Contemned in the Peoples Eye, for they
On bended knees were Suitors to obtain
His leave, their offerings on its Hemm to lay;
That as he through the Streets was passing by,
Their Lips, and Kisses they might sanctify.
83.
O how imperious is meek Piety
Whether it will or no, commanding All
Spectators into Love and Reverence! he
Who counts Bliss by true Honor, must let fall
All other Plumes, and wisely learn to dress
Body and Soul in humble Holiness.
84.
Nay now the surly Priest, among the rest,
Of James his matchless Worth convinced is;
And finding him to be the holier Priest,
Grants him into the Oracle free Access;
Of which mysterious Place he had the glory,
(And none but he) to make his Oratory.
85.
He was the holier Priest indeed; for now
The ancient Priesthood with the Veil was rent:
The Diadem too was fallen from Juda's brow,
And famous Salems Regal Glory spent.
But James did there erect the sacred Throne
Of his Episcopal Dominion.
86.
Yet are the Northern Winds, and Irish Seas
More trusty than the Jews: The Jews to day
Can heap their Kisses, and their Courtesies
On him whom They to morrow will betray;
Jew's Mouths unto thy face can speak all good
This hour, and in the next will suck thy Blood.
87.
With Acclamations They this Saint had set
In state, upon their Temples Battlement:
Where he no sooner did assert the great
Name of his Lord, but with one mad consent
Of Rage, they throw him headlong down, and stain
The ground both with his blood and with his Brain.
88.
Zelotes, and Thaddaeus, that brave Pair,
When He in Egypt preached had, and He
In Mesopotamia; united were
To reap in Persia their felicity:
This was the Crown of Martyrdom, which in
The Quarrel of their Savior they did win.
89.
Peter the Leader of that glorious Train,
When he had fixed the Antiochean Seat,
For his more reverend Throne a place did gain
In Caesar's conquering City; where the great
Irradiations of his Fame did call
Romes noblest Strength, to try with Him a Fall.
90.
This Strength was Simon whose Apostacy
From Truth, in Deeps of Magic Him did drown,
But more in Lies, and desperate blaspemie,
For all Gods Rights He claimed as his own,
And left no Trinity in Heaven but taught
That He himself alone with it was fraught.
91.
The Father in Samaria, the Son
In Jewrie, and in all the world beside
The Spirit He preached Himself: And yet alone
Pretended not ability to guide
His own Creating Hand, but when He made
The Angels, granted He had Helens aid.
92.
This was the surest way he had to gain
His precious Whore, to set her on his Throrie,
And in his God head let her Partner reign.
Besides, to help on the production
Of Heresies and blasphemous Portents, Hell
Thought Females useful then, and always will.
93.
And so the World will say, when it has known
Priscilla, Maximilla, and the Pair
Of Philumena's with the double Spawn
Of lying Elkai: for her wretched share
In such Deceits, some Eve will still come in
As Helen here did into Simons Sin.
94.
He taught his Scholars in Himself and Her
To treasure up the hopes of their Salvation;
And heedless Souls the surer to ensnare,
He freely loosed the Reins to every Passion:
No matter how you live, or die, said He
So long's your Faith builds on my Grace and Me.
95.
This was that Champion, by whose Magic skill
Befooled Nero thought Him God indeed,
And prayed Him by some Signal Miracle
To dash those daring Wonders Peter did.
His Credit bid Him to that Motion yield,
And set the Day when He would fight the Field.
96.
The Day is come, and Simon boldly makes
The Challenge, which was unto Heaven to file:
With that, his Arms he weighs, and spreads, and takes
His unwing'd flight: but turns his scornful Eye
Down upon Peter, whom into the Hands
Of Justice, and of Death, He recommends.
97.
The Clouds had gathered thick about the Sky
To guard the fair Heaven from his soul intrusion
Yet their Battalia He broke, and by
His working Arms, unto his high Delusion
Forced open the way, The People, as he went,
Their Wonder, after Him, and Worship sent.
98.
But as the never-beaten Fencer lets
His bold capricious us Combatant grow high,
Before He strikes in carnest, and so getts
A later, but a nobler Victory:
So Peter letts his Foe alone, till He
High enough for a fatal Fall might be.
99.
Then posting after Him with mighty Prayers,
The Devils which bore Him up He forced away:
Forth with, down headlong his aeriall Stayrs
The Conjurer fell, and on the Pavement lay,
Where bruised, and batter d, all in gore imbrew'd
His black blood, and his blacker soul he spewed.
100.
Strait, in the Peoples Mouths the Devils cry,
Peter our God has by enchantment slain.
And so did this unreasonable Lie
Prevail, that He is first unto a Chain
Condemned, and afterward unto a Cross.
Unhappy Rome, which made thy Gain, thy Loss
101.
For Thou no sooner gain'st thy freedom from
That cursed Wizard; but Thou do betray
Thine own Deliverer: if Simon whom
Thou see confounded by the Power which lay
In Peter's Prayers, were a God; o why
Must Peter now not be a Deity?
102.
Yet He cries out: This Altar is too rich
For Me, so poor and vile a sacrifice:
Was not the Cross that glorious Place on which
My Master paid the Worlds eternal price!
Sure were some gallant Seraph hear to die,
This Engine would his Passion dignifie,
103.
Yet if I must thus high aspire; may I
At least obtain this leave of you, to show
That I desired not in this Pomp to die:
So Hang Me that my reverent Head below
May pay its final Kisses on the Feet
Of my most royal Savior's dying Seat.
104.
Nero to such Requests as these was free,
Full glad that He had learned a new-found-way
To cross and double Crucifixion; He
Commands his Sergeants not to disobey
The wretches wild Desire, but, so He died,
To let Him any way be crucified.
105.
The Saint thus fixed on the reversed Tree,
Now finds his Eyes turned from all things below,
As was his Heart before: And joyous He
In spite of all his obst'nate Nails, knows how
That Place to which his Feet did aim, to gain,
Which Footstool Simon reached at in vain.
106.
Andrew, his Brother both in Nature's and
In Zeale's and Pietie's (much straiter) Tie,
Through Thrace and Scythia traveled with the grand
Charge of appeased Heavens sweet Embassy.
The dark Barbarians wondered at the bright
Meridian Day amidst their Northern Night.
107.
The Day He brought was that which ows its East
Not to the East, but to the South, for there
(In priviledg'd Palestine) thy Lord was pleased
First unto his Horizon to appear.
It was thy Lords sweet, Day, on which depends
The High-noone of that Bliss which never ends.
108.
Thence into Greece the restless Preacher came,
Arrogant Greece, who though her own She makes
The opposite to the Barbarian Name,
Yet more inhumane salvage Courses takes
Than Thrace or Scythia: O that famous Arts
Should raise Men's Wits, yet stupifie their Hearts!
109.
Achaia smiled, and with disdainful Mirth
Patrae confuted all that Andrew said;
His Beggar-God's poor miserable Birth,
And viler Death They scoffingly upbraid:
Nor did AEgaeus, though Proconsul He,
Stop, but spur on the Peoples Villainy.
110.
A Cross they make Him of a newfound frame
(Whither his meek Desire, or their wise spite
Projected it,) which thenceforth bare its Name,
As it did Him that day: A Cross not right
Erected and transverse, but thwarted so
That it a X, more then a Cross did show.
111.
A X, the blessed Letter which began
His Masters dear Name and his own: His Cross
It self proclaims He dies a Christian;
And though the holy Omen to his gross
Though learned Foes were unperceived, He
Rejoiced in his Crosses Mystery.
112.
A Cross which shall ever long so glorious be,
Wearing his Name upon it crucified,
That it shall crown the Scottish Heraldrie
And in the Topp of all its Banners ride.
What Glories then shall Saints themselves obtain,
If in such state their Sufferings Badges reign.
113.
Nayld fast unto this Honor was the Saint,
Arrayed in Scarlet from his own rich Veins:
The Graecians took it for a torturing Paint,
And thought his Cross a Throne of Sovereign Pains:
But He his noble Pulpit made this Tree,
A Pulpit which did preach, as well as He.
114.
Long was his Sermon, for his last it was;
Two days it measured; and yet seemed but short.
What are two poor and flitting Days, alas,
To that which does Eternity import?
He preached Eternity, unto whose light
His hood-winkt Torturers He did invite.
115.
At length perceiving Death no have would make
With strong Desires he wooed it to come:
Not that his Pains his Patience did break,
But that his Heart did long to be at home.
He could be nothing but a Stranger, where
His Masters blessed face did not appear.
116.
And am I nailed in vain, deer Lord, said he,
Unto this Pillar of renouned Death?
Though not poor I, yet thou Deserve for Me,
That in this Honor I may yield my Breath.
These potent Words to Heaven with violence flew
Whence a fair light they for his Convoy drew.
117.
As in the bosom of his Chariots flames
Illustrious Phehus through the Spears does speed;
So resting in the Arms of these sweet Beams
The Saints brave Soul was thither carried.
Thus in her funeral Fire the Phaenix dies,
And by her Death, to fairer life does rise.
118.
On Zeals undaunted Wings great Bartholmew
To meet the Days Flame where it kindled is,
Unto the furthest brink of India flew;
And taught the East to bend their wakening Eyes
Upon a new Son who no Gold did need
To dress his Locks, and more than golden Head.
119.
Then having left His goodly Picture there
Which Matthews Pen had drawn fair in a Book;
He posted backward to Armenia, where
The same illustrious Work in hand he took.
But promising his Hearers Kings to make;
The King grew wroth, and thus his Fury spoke:
120.
Bold Wretch, who pratest of the idle Throne
Of thy vain Christ; I Will make thee know that I
In my Armenia will have but one,
And that is the Seat of my own Majesty.
If Jesus be a God, his Heaven will be
Realm large enough; He need not trench on Me.
121.
'Twere special Credit for Armenia's King
To entertain as a great Deity
A stable-born and manger-cradeled Thing;
Whose ignominious Death did justify
The vileness of his Birth, because a poor
Resolved doting Wretch does Him adore.
122.
O no! the Gods by whose great Blessing I
Possess my Crown, are Gods enough: Away
With shameful Jesu's useless Dietie.
Yet for some use Thou may be fitting: Say
Sergeants, will not this Carrion serve to flea?
Though He be naught, yet good his Skin may be.
123.
That only Word sufficient was to let
The Tygres loose; who straight the Saint undresse
Both of his Cloths, and Skin, which at the feet
Of their fell Lord they threw; for it was his
Due right the blessed Martyrs skin to keep
In token that He slew the harmless Sheep.
124.
But He now grown far fairer than before,
As when the Sun from Clouds unveiled is,
Did shine and sparkle in his glorious Gore,
Quite dazzling by his noble Nakedness
The Devils eyes, who could have wished the skin
(To hide his own shame) on the Saint agin.
125.
Yet 'twas in vain; for Bartholmew was now
Fit for the Roabs of Immortality,
Which Jesus hand -- ready was to throw
Upon his most deserving Back; for he
Might without Pains and Crouding now get in
At Heavens strait Gate, who first put off his skin,
126.
But Matthew into AEthiopia ran
Ventring upon a strange Design, for there
He strove to purge the Crow into a Swan,
To make Pitch Crystal, Ink Snow, Darkness clear,
Spots beauteous, Sables lucid, Shaddows bright,
I mean, to wash the Pagan Negro's white.
127.
And this by Baptisms searching Streams he did,
Which drowned their Hearts in Life and Purity:
Soon the full Torrent of his Name did spread,
And in the Channel of the Court grow high:
The Court soon caught the News, but little thought
That in the Newse's Net it self was caught.
128.
Caught was its dearest Gem, the Virgin Heart
Of Iphigenia, daughter to the King:
And now not all the flattering frowning Art
Of royal Hirtacus her Soul could bring
To leave her mystic Spouses love and wed
Himself who panted after her sweet Bed.
129.
O no! She cried; My Vow is past, and I
Unto my God my Body must restore
As I received it: My Virginity
Is now entirely His, and mine no more:
Matthew is witness, and it were in vain
For Me to call my Promise back again.
130.
O if you love me then, love what I am,
Love Love himself, and so you shall love me;
Be truly Royal, Love the Christian Name,
And let my Sacred Vow still Sacred be:
For I may to no Pagan Spouse be tied,
Who to an heavenly Bridgroom am affied.
131.
The Prince with Wrath, and Folly blinded, saw
Not how this Match, most matchless was, nor that
She had already chose a King: And though
The shame of mere Humanity would not
Permit his Rage to take its swindge on Her,
Yet He o'r Matthew let it domineer.
132.
His choicest Bloodhounds in all haste he sent
With correspondent charge against the Saint;
Whom finding busy at the Sacrament,
With His, and his Lords blood, the floor they paint;
And at the Altar thus the Martyr dies,
To Heaven a willing, and sweet Sacrifice.
133.
Matthias, whose heav'n-witness'd Faith commended
Him to supply the Traitor Juda's place,
To finish Matthews great Design contended
In AEthiopia; whence He turned his Race
To Jewry, where his blood he forth did pour
For Him who gave him all his own before.
134.
John was the last; but first and highest in
His dear Esteem who is Himself most High:
O blessed Saint, which did the Riches win
Of all Heavens sweetest fullest Treasury!
Jesus, indeed, does all Men love; but he
Not only loved, but was in love with Thee.
135.
He was in love with thy Virginity
Which with all blooming Graces was bedeckt;
Of all his Twelve choice privileged Chaplanes, He
Did for his amorous Favors Thee select:
He did select Thee his soft Spouse, in whose
Delicious Eyes He meant his own to loose.
136.
He was in love with the reflection
Of his own Sweetness shining in thy face;
With sympathetick Joy he dwelt upon
His iterated Self in that pure Glass,
Striving all Lovers Arts on it to prove:
O blessed Soul, with whom Love fell in love.
137.
From off the troubled Main he lured Thee
Into a deeper Sea of calmest Pleasures,
The bosom of supreme Serenity;
To which the Ocean is but poor in Treasures.
His own dear Breast to Thee he opened wide,
And let Thee in unto its fullest Tide.
138.
There did Thou lie, and learn thy Soul to glow
By the dear Copy of thy Pillows Heat;
A Pillow in whose soft Protection Thou
Put'st all thy Cares and Fears to rest: And yet
Slep'st not thy Self; for how could any Eye
Endure to close, when Jesus was so nigh?
139.
There did Thou lie, next to the Heart of Love,
Whose ravishing Embraces kept thee warm
With all the best of Heaven, no more above,
But folded up in his incircling Arm:
Which forced all wise Spectators to conclude,
Thou were aforehand with Beatitude.
140.
The loftiest Stories where pure Seraphs dwell
Exalted in Felicities bright Sphere,
Thy dainty Habitation did excel;
For at his Footstool They lie prostrate there
Amidst the Sweets of whose all-balmey Breast
Thine only Head makes its delicious Nest.
141.
What potent Joys, what mystical Delight
Wooed, and besieged thy Soul on every side,
Whilst thy inamoured Spouse spent all the Might
Of heavenly Tenderness on his dear Bride!
How many healing Wounds gave his Loves Dart,
How many living Deaths, to thy soft Heart!
142.
How did he study to epitomize
His Incarnation's amorous Design,
And try the best of Mercie's Mysteries
Upon thy single Soul! in which divine
Experiment, it was thine only Grace
To fill his universal Churches place.
143.
Thus while he lived, he sweetly lived in Thee:
And when he di'd, Thou saw him nailed fast
Unto his Death: Yet no Mortality
Could seize upon His love; for by his last
And tenderest Words, whilst he Himself did die,
To Thee he gave Loves living Legacy.
144.
Into his dearest Mothers Bosom he
Commended Thee, and bid her own her Son:
What Nature could not, Love contrived to be,
And Mary must be Mother unto John:
Jesus and John Love had so closely ti'd,
That in their Mother they must not divide.
145.
Mary no other Glass could find, where she
So fair an Image of her Son might read;
Nor John so pure a Mirror wherein He
His ever looking-longing Eyes might feed
On his dear Lord: Thus Love though dead and gone,
Sweetly leaves John, his Spouse; Mary, her Son.
146.
No wonder, gentlest Saint, that on thy Tongue
Love built his Hive, and dropped his Honey thence,
Whilst thy Soul-charming Words relish so strong
Of Heavens best Sweets, and choycest influence;
That Love from his own Wing lent Thee the Quill
Which all thy Lines with Charity does fill.
147.
No wonder Thou, brave Eagle soar'dst so high,
And div'dst so deep into the Suns bright face;
Where Thou did read the Words great Mystery,
By which thine Eye refined, not dazeled was:
No wonder that Thou did thy Gospeli fashion,
And Calculate by God's own Elevation.
148.
No wonder that Port Latin saw the Oil
Scalding in vain: Thou who did live by Fire,
And in whose breast such amorous streams did boil,
Could feel no other Flames. O no! some higher
Fervor of Love must melt thine own, and send
It to the flaming Bosom of thy Friend.
149.
The Languishments of never-faint Desire
Must crown thy Life with correspondent Death:
Though by sharp Pains thy Brethren did expire,
This dainty Martyrdom must end thy Breath:
So Heaven has privileged thy Piety,
Thou who did Live by Love, of Love must Die.
150.
Pardon me Psyche, I could not forbear
This dear Apostrophe: John was the Man
Whose virgin flaming Worth made Him be near
Of kin to our Angelick Tribe; and can
We mention him, and not salute him too,
Whom Honors Sovereign Lord has honored so?
151.
And pardon Me, that I have dwelt so long
On his Apostolic Brethren; the Glory
Of whose death-scorning Valor, does no wrong,
Nor interrupts their Masters royal Story:
He, and his heavenly Might, in them appeared,
And o'r the vanquished Earth his Banner reared
152.
Mark now that Mount which lifts its lofty Head
Near to Bethsaida, whence it takes a view
Of all the Countries round about it spread;
Nor Zebulon, nor Nephthali out-flew
Its Prospect; which through Trachonitis too.
And Ituraea did sublimely go.
153.
Yea, though far distant, it acquaintance took
With other Mountains; unto Hermon, (...),
And stately Libanus it reached a Look.
This was that noble Oratory where
Thy Lord so often retired, that the Place
Thenceforth the Mount of Christ (...) was.
154.
A Mount where liberal Nature did her best,
Witness the flowrie Beauties smiling there;
But Grace far more (...)
Than that bright Pomp which and of old prepare
For the Lawgivers feet the (...)
Of Sina, mixed with Thunder, Smoke, and Dread.
155.
For here no Trumpet spoke the Frightfull Mind
Of stern Imperiousness; no rigid Law
Backed with an everlasting Curse, enjoin d
The World to its hard Yoke their Necks to bow:
But Love himself upon his gentle Throne
Gave the soft Laws of Benediction.
156.
Eight Springs of Blessedness abroach he set,
And wooed the weary World to bathe in Them.
Their Cares and Fears he taught Them to transmit
And bury all Solicitude in Him:
He passed his Word Heaven should their Purveyor be
Who served in the Wars of Piety.
157.
His Evangelicall Oeconomie
He instituted here; and so improved
The highest Pitch of Legal Sanctity,
That though incumbering Burdens he removed,
Yet more Bonds of Perfection on he laid,
And wondrous strict his Mercies Candor made.
158.
His Reins were Silk, but yet he held them strait,
And drove amain; providing by that Art
That in their Passage no enchanting Bait
Might his Disciples lure and tempt to start
Out of the King of Heavens high Way, but to
His Kingdom safely and directly go.
159.
His blessed Rules, and none but His, are They
Which past the Purity of Gold refine
Gross Mortal Hearts, and sublimate poor Clay
Into a State Angelick and Divine,
Whilst by his Spirit He scours off sinful Rust,
And into Heaven blows up the purged Dust.
160.
But turn, and view those Desert Fields which lie
Next Neighbors to the Galilean Sea:
Into that hopeful quiet Privacie
Devotion had withdrawn thy Spouse: but He
Had given the People too much taste of his
Sweetness, to think He long could escape their Press.
161.
For as the busy Bees who once have found
(...) Garden, haunt it day by day,
(...) out every flower, and humming round
About the Tops of their delicious Prey:
So to that Garden (for thy Lord had by
His presence made it so,) did People fly.
162.
Jesus who bowed from Heaven poor Man to meet,
Could not refrain to entertain the Throng:
With gracious ready Welcome He did greet
Each Troop and Party as they came along,
Dealing his Courtesy to great and small,
Who came to be the Savior of All.
163.
Then as the wise Physician first takes care
That all the Vital Parts be sound within,
Before He spend his pains on any Soar
Which sinks into the Flesh, or on theSkin
Does swim: So did his Tenderness to those
His numerous Patients his art dispose.
164.
Their Hearts and Brains with long Distempers were
Into a desperate Condition brought,
Had they not met with His all-healing Care:
For from his Lips such Cordialls straight broke out,
Such Salves, such Balsams; that all Heaven did seem
Turned into Physic to recover Them.
165.
Heavens Kingdom was the Medicine He applied,
A Medicine which its Doctor did become;
A Medicine fit to slake and cure that Pride
Which made poor Man so sick; His Home from home
To find his lost Sheep, unto Earth He brings,
And is resolved to heal them into Kings,
166.
Sweet words of Wisdom, Power, Life, and Bliss,
Into their Ears He poured; and in their stream
So rarely He infused all Paradise
That what did nothing but a Sermon seem,
Was liquid Heaven. Thus the rich Gemme unseen
Swumm in the Boule of the Egyptian Queen.
167.
Never did Ethan the sage Ezrahite,
Never did Heman, Chalcol, Darda; who
On Wisdom's Wings exalted to the height
Of noble Fame, about the World did go:
Never did Trismegistus, never did
The deepest Reach of Zoroastes Head:
168.
Never did Solomon whose gallant Wit
High as the Heaven, and deep as was the Sea,
Unlocked and ransacked every Cabinet
Of darkest Nature; dive so far as He,
Or drop such Sentences and Parables,
As those with which his deep Discourse He fills,
169.
Yea even the Serpent, in whose wily Head
All Craft does reign, when He thy Grandame Eve
With his profoundest and most studied
Enchantments tried, of old, and did Deceive,
Less sweetly and less subtlie spoke, than now
The Sermon from thy Spouse's Lips did flow.
170.
The Serpents Preachment only was to steal
Eve into part of his own Misery;
Thy Spouse's end was only to reveal
The way unto his own Felicity:
And Heaven forbid, but Truth as strong should be
As undermining Lies and Flattery.
171.
It was as strong, by full Authority
Showing its own authentic Might and Worth;
And not in doubting sneaking Jelousie
Of laboring for an abortive Birth.
It Is the Scribes Chair which totters thus, not His
Which surer than the Worlds Heart fixed is.
172.
He as Amphion by his charming Song
Rude salvage Hearts did tame and civilize;
By the high Sweets of his more potent Tongue
Did all his Auditors with Heaven surprise.
The senseless Spears a ravishing Sound can make;
Much more his Voice from whom their tune they take
173.
This done: The tender God his Love extends
Unto their Bodies; Ears unto the Deaf,
Feet to the Lame, Eyes to the Blind He lends,
And finds more choice of sovereign Releif
Then they of Wants. O copious Savior, who
At once can heal both Soul and Body too!
174.
The Day grew now decrepit, and the Sun
Bowed to the West: when the Disciples pray
Their Lord to give the Crowd leave to be gone
And get their Suppers in the Towns which lay
About the Deserts verge: O no, said He,
They are my Friends, and they shall sup with Me.
175.
Alas, how will You entertain, eri'd They,
These numerous Mouths! Two hundred pence in Bread
Will not yield every one a bit; what way
Shall then this mighty Feast be furnished?
How shall thy Table stored be with Dishes?
Here Is nothing but five loaves, and two small Fishes.
176.
As yet, they knew not, Psyche, that their Lord
Was He who to the copious Rivers does
From a small Fountain all its Streams afford;
He by whose Providence from one Candle goes
That fertile Flame which lights a thousand more
Without diminishing its original Store;
177.
He by whose Power Elijah did command
The final Hand-full of the wasted Meal
To grow upon the pious Widdow's Hand;
Which strait did his Injunction fulfill,
And by a springing Harvest more than turn
The pined Barrel to a plenteous Barn.
178.
He, in obedience to whose Might, though at
Elisha's Word, the Pot of Oil a waked
Into a Spring, whose bubling ceased not
Till Want of Vessels its Abundance slaked;
But then grown wisely Thrifty, it represt
Its Bounty, that there might be Nothing lost.
179.
He whom the same Elisha did foreshew,
When He before an Hundred People set
That simple Pittance, which in Spending grew,
And being small at first, at last was great;
The Eaters Teeth unlocking but the Way
Unto the Store which in that Little lay.
180.
But now He taught Them; Go, said he, and make
My Guests by fifty on a row sit down.
This done: The Fishes and the Loaves he took
In his creating Hands; when to his own
Heaven lifting up his Eyes, and saying grace,
His Blessing in the Victuals swelled apace.
181.
He brake the Loaves, and every Piece he brake
Strait proved as great's the Whole; no Crum did fall,
But rose into a Loaf. Thus when you make
Division of the smallest Line, still all
Are Lines as well as it, although for ever
The new emergent Parts you should dissever.
182.
By strange Division the Fishes too
He taught to spawn a new and wondrous Fry;
Though dead, yet at his Touch they started so,
That Two usurped Multiplicitie,
No longer Two, but a large Shoal, which from
The Sea of Love out at his fingers swumm.
183.
Then his Disciples Service He commands
To set before his Friends this growing Feast.
Both Bread and Fish into the Peoples Hands
They strait distributed; and every Guest
Fell to, admiring how that simple Meat
Made them forget all Honey to be sweet.
184.
The Quails and Manna had been homely Fare,
Which Heaven did in the other Desert shoure
When hungry Israel was a Pilgrim there,
Had this been present then; The Wines brave power,
At Cana born, excelled the Grapes best Blood.
So did this Feast to Day, all other Food.
185.
Satietie at length, not nauseous,
But sweet and comfortable, put a close
Unto the Banquet: When thy generous,
Yet thrifty Lord, injoyns Them not to lose
His Bounties surplusage, nor scorn the Meat
Because he gave Them more than They could eat.
186.
Strait-way the Fragments all collected were
Which fifty hundred feasted Men had left:
When lo the Total was exceeded far
By those remaining Parts; the teeming Gift
Persu'd its strange Multiplication still,
And with the Relicts did twelve Baskets fill.
187.
Believe it, Psyche, thy wise Spouse did by
This Wonder, to a greater open the way;
The long designed and precious Mystery
Of his own Body, which He meant to lay
Upon all Christian Altars, there to be
The endless Feast of Catholic Piety.
188.
A Feast which shall increase upon its Guests
And be entire when Millions filled are;
A Feast of Miracles, a Feast of Feasts,
Not to a Desert ti'd, but every where
Dispersed abroad, yet every where complete,
That all World may freely come and eat.
189.
The feasted People were dismissed now,
And Jesus steps into that Mount to Pray:
Sure 'twas, that Bliss along with Them might go
Whom He so carefully had sent away,
That Night might not upon their Path incroach,
Nor Dangers Ambushment their footsteps touch;
190.
That by that Miracle which thus unto
Their Teeth had proved his Power Divine to be,
All other fruitless Helps they might forgo,
And build their Trust on His Divinity.
But His Disciples now, seeing their Lord
Would have it so, were gone before abord.
191.
That Sea, whose face Thou see all polished
With flattering Calmnesse, smiled just so on Them
When first they launched out: But Fraud lay hid
Under the glass of the alluring Stream:
Truth needs no smiles; it is only Treasons face
Which painted is with spruce but borrowed Grace.
192.
As when an envious Spirit can find no way
To vex the Masters Person, He does make
Either his Servants or his Friends his prey,
And at the second hand his Vengeance take;
So Satan now, too weak with Christ to fight,
On His Disciples vowed to ease his Spite.
193.
Deeply He pined to see the People fed,
And now resolved that He Himself would Feast:
Yet by the Seas vast Mouth he purposed
His Dainties to devour; and thus at least
Part of the Miracle revenge, and though
Not for the Loaves, quit for the Fishes grow.
194.
He from the Adriatic Main, and from
The Baltic Ocean, and the Irish Sea,
Summoned all unexpected Storms to come,
And here pour out their utmost Treachery.
He made each Wind pick Quarrel with his Brother,
And in a mad War tumbled Them together.
195.
The East was peevish; sharp, and grim the North,
The West impetuous, black and foul the South;
Each puffed and swelled, and in disdain shot forth
Their fury full in one another Mouth:
The bruised Clouds in floods their sorrows poured,
And all the weather-beaten Welkin roard.
196.
The tattered Sea against the shores was flung,
Which churlishly again repulsed it back;
The broken Waves with helpless Mourning rung,
And foamed with pain; The startled Deeps did quake,
And thinking to escape that dismal fray,
From their profoundest Bottoms ran away.
197.
And now the Sea within it self was lost,
Whilst the stern Tempest vehemently broke
Through her most hidden Bowels, which it tossed
In proud scorn through the Air, with hopes to choke
The Moon and Stars; which wild Confusion
Made both the Waters and the Winds, be one:
198.
And thus the Winds flowed, and the Waters blew;
The Thunders Cracks did with the Billows join;
The Lightning flashed, that misery to show
In which all Dread and Death seemed to combine:
'Twixt light and Darkness, hence grew such a fight,
That now, alas, 'twas neither Day nor Night.
199.
The woeful Ship flung up to Heaven in vain
Upon the back of an unfaithful Wave,
Immediately was hurried down again
Into the bottom of its gaping Grave;
Where yet it could not rest, but was spewed up.
With indignation to the Tempests Top.
200.
The Mast submitted to the Wind, and split;
The Sails forsook the Ship, and flew away;
The Pilot at the Helm in vain did sit,
Being in need of some kind Hand to stay
And steer himself: The Sea made bold to come
Abord, and take a view of every room.
201.
The Waves laughed at the Pumps, and crowded in
Faster than they could turn them out: Each Wind
Bandi'd the Bark, contending which should win
The credit of its Wrack: Thus may you find
In Tennis-courts a Ball banged to and fro
Until some Loss at length do let it go.
202.
Themselves to their Devotions All applied,
(For Danger wakes the dullest Piety.)
O where is Jesus now his scholars cried,
How is his promise washed away, since We
Whom for Men-fishers He designed had
Must unto Fishes now a Prey be made!
203.
Yet, as their Lamentations swelled, the Tide
Of louder Winds and Waves still drowned their Cry.
They once for all most gladly would have di'd,
But still they saw how Deaths did multiply,
And throw them and their Ship broken together
From one Destructions Mouth into another.
204.
Mean while the Gulf of Satan's boiling Breast
Wrought with as great a Tempest of Vexation,
To see a crazie Vessel thus resist
The Wind and Seas most eager Conjuration;
Puzzeld and grieved, he wonders what should make
A Bark so often broke, still refuse to break.
205.
At last, forth from a mighty Clowd there brake
Continued Lightning through the dazeled Air,
By which the Men spied on the Tempests back
One marching toward Them; and now new Fear
Stormed their Souls: O, the Disciples cried
By all these Deaths why might we not have di'd!
206.
Lo here the Spirit comes whose fatal Wrath
Raised this Tempestuous Preface to our Woe:
Hither he bends his prodigious Path,
And tramples all the Waves: What shall We do!
Behold, which way so ever he waves his Hand
The Clouds start back, and bow to his Command.
207.
Behold no Wind durst be so bold as to
Disturb his Way with any (...) Weather,
But all officiously behind Him go
Showing that on his Errand they came hither.
He comes, He comes! Sweet Sea o gape not thus
In vain, but from this Danger swallow Us.
208.
Forthwith their Lord who heard this desperate Cry,
His Comfort interposed: Why, said he,
Add you this Tempest to your Misery,
Rending your Hearts with Dread? Know you not Me?
I am your loving Lord and Master, and
What need you fear, now I am here at hand?
209.
As he whose trembling Neck does ready lie
Under the Axe, if some unlooked for Voice
Tells Him the Judge is pleased he shall not die,
Starteth and slowly understands the Noise
Of his Repreive, being already dead
In his own helpless Thoughts, and buried.
210.
So these Disciples drowned in their fears,
Scarce trust their Eyes which did their Savior see,
Scarce would they Credit give to their own Ears
Which heard Himself (...) that it was He:
Till forward Peter cried, O bid Me meet
If Thouour Master art, thy blessed feet.
211.
If thou deceiv'st Us not, each sirlie wave
At thy Command unto my steps will bow,
And with Security my Passage pave.
If other wise; Can I be worse then now?
The Sea into our Ship does crowd, and I
Must either here or there, in Water die.
212.
Christ bids Him come; and out he steps; When lo
As He went trembling on, a high-swolln Wave
Comes tumbling in his way, and frights him so
That all his Courage it does straight out-brave.
His Heart sunk first, and then his feet, and all
But's Tongue, which to his Lord for help did call.
213.
Had any other Lord but He been there,
With what indignant Scorn would He have let
His faithless Subject meet his Censure, where
He his unworthy Crime chose to commit:
Only Omnipotence is pleased to spare
Those who distrustful of its Power are.
214.
Jesus, who never could his Help deny
To suppliant Sinners, reached his blessed Hand,
(That Hand in which alone Security
Does dwell; that Hand which rules the, Ocean, and
Measures it in its Hollow,) and pulled out
Peter from the deep Sea, and deeper Doubt.
215.
And then, O thou of little Faith, said He,
Why did that weak Suspicion press thee down?
What made Thee so forgetful prove of Me
Who in their own Waves can all Tempests drown?
Come, thou shall see that Winds and Seas do know
The Power of their Maker more than Thou.
216.
Here, being got abord the Ship, His Eye
Upon the Storm he set, and signified
His royal Pleasure. Straight the Winds did spy
Their duty in that potent Glance, and hied
A way in such great haste and fear, that They
Lost all their Breath and Spirits by the way.
217.
The mutinous Billows saw his awful Look,
And hushed themselves all close into their Deep:
The Sea grew tame and smooth, the Thunder broke
Its Threatening off; (...) Lightning durst not peep
From its black Nest, being now out-shined by
The flashing Mandates of its Masters Eye.
218.
The Devils which all this while had tossed and rent
The Elements, perceived the final Wrack
Fall on their own Design, and homeward went
With yelling Cries, The Clouds in sunder brake,
And having cleared the Sceen of its loud Wars,
Left the fair Heaven all full of smiling Stars.
219.
Forthwith the Ship without or Sail or Tide
Kept its straight course, and flew unto the shore:
Where Jesus deigns to be the Vessels Guide,
There needs no help of time, Tide, Wind, or Oar;
He whose mere Look could make a Tempest clear
Could by his Eye the Bark both drive and steer.
220.
Mark yonder shore of populous Genaser,
Where from a Storm he once arrived before:
Great was the Wonder he atchived there,
Where no tempestuous Winds or Seas did roar,
But raging Fiends who had themselves possessed
Of an unhappy Man's usurped Breast.
221.
Those Tombs without the Town Thou see there,
These Devils made that Man's chief Habitation;
For to those Spirits such places dearest are
As most-invite to desolate Desperation.
But henceforth Christian Caemiteries shall
Revenge this boldness, and all Hell appall.
222.
Nor shall the Fiend which wears the famous Name
Of wise Apollo, dare not to confess
As much to Julian; though He cloak the shame
Of his enforced Silence: Babyla's
Mere Dust and Ashes shall have power to stop
His lying Mouth, and seal his Oracle up.
223.
Sometimes unto that neighbor Mountains Brow
They drove the wretched Man, in hopes that he
Out of his tiresome Life himself would throw
Into their Pit of deeper Misery.
A thousand Snakes about his heart they wound,
Whilst Rage and Madness did his Brain confound.
224.
The froth of which Confusion foamed out
At his unquiet Mouth: sometimes He roard,
Sometimes he sung; and when the Passion wrought
His Tongue to Blasphemy, he freely poured
It forth, and rayl'd on Heaven and God, whom yet
He thought not of in all his raving Fit.
225.
The Rocks and Tombs He filled with yelling Cries.
Which deeply frighted every Passenger:
Poetic Fancy never could devise
Such hideous Barking for fierce Scylla, or
Fell Cerberus: Indeed the Thunders Voice,
Though louder, yet makes a less dreadful Noise
226.
He hated all Men; but Himself much more
Than all the World; and yet he knew not why.
Alas, 'twas Hell which in his Soul did roar;
Hell, the sworn Foe of all Humanity;
Hell which with all the World maintains Wars,
Yet chiefly with it self for ever jarrs.
227.
And in his bosom it did boil so hot,
That he no Clothing would endure to wear:
( Satan of old this envious Trick had got,
To make Man's shame and nakedness appear.)
His clothes he rent, and then plucked of his Hair,
And star'd about for something else to tear.
228.
When any sharp stones in the Rocks he spied,
He culled them out as they some Gems had been;
With which his Vengance on Himself he tried,
And lined it out upon his launced skin;
And though they pained Him, yet still to spite
His Pains, He in his Wounds would take delight.
229.
Have Thou not seen a Bull led from the stake
Where ten keen Mastiffs had full play at Him,
With Gore and Gashes clothed? Thence may Thou take
Some aim how this bemangled Man to limm.
Yet could not all the Dogs of Albion
Bait any Bull, as He himself had done.
230.
His tattered Brows upon his eyes hung down,
His Mouth and Nose met in one rent, his Head
Was slashed, the bone upon his breast was shown,
His sides were gash'd, his Arms and Thighs were flead;
Till all his Wounds into one Confluence ran,
As Rivers loose themselves 'ith' Ocean.
231.
And wonder not that all this tedious while
The poor Man's Life could be so hardy as
To keep firm truce, and be confederate still
With his tormented Heart: The Fiends could pass
No further than their Chain, which though it reached.
His Body, could not to his Life be stretched.
232.
This added to their everboyling Spite
New fire, by which they drove and stung Him on
To wreak his Madness on each Mortal Wight
He met, as He upon himself had done.
Thus all about the Coast his Terror spread,
And Cares, and Fears, and Plots awakened.
233.
As when a Bear is from the Forest broke
Into some Shepherds Pastures, every Town
Which round about that Region lies, does look
Upon their Neighbors Danger as their own,
And all their country Arms and Dogs unite
Against the public Foe in common fight.
234.
So did the Gaderens combine their strength
The fury of this raving Man to tame;
Long did they grapple and contend; at length
By number, not by power, they over came,
And loading him with Chains and Fetters, thought
They now their Foe had in subjection brought.
235.
But He with irefull Smiles, disdained their Plot;
And tearing his vain Chains in sunder, threw
Them at their heads: Whatever Bands they got
(For they their Project often did renew)
Whether of Steel or Brass, they proved to him
But Engines, which He tore and flung at them.
236.
Being thus fierce and fell, thy Lord he spied,
Arrived on the shore, and to Him ran:
He never with more hideous bellowing cried,
Nor fiercelier beat, or cut himself, than when
He near to Jesus drew, whose pitying Eye,
More than all Chains and Fetters Him did tie.
237.
For straight His tender bowels yearn'd to see
Hell domineering in a poor Man's Breast,
Of which Himself and Heaven should only be
By his Desire, and by all Right possessed:
And by that Voice which lately chased away
The other Deeps Storms, He did these allay.
238.
Foul Fiend, He cried, usurp that Place no more,
The Man is mine, and I his Lord will be;
I charge Thee to come forth, and Him restore
Again unto Himself, and unto Me.
O mighty Voice! which rent the Devil more
Than He had done the woeful Man before,
239.
For as the Slave who gotten is by stealth
Into his Masters Closet, domineers
O'rall the Bags, taking his choice of wealth.
And all the Bonds he pleases, rends and tears;
Wishing more fuel for his peevish Rage;
And thus revenging his own Vassallage
240.
But if his Masters unexpected Eye
Happens to apprehend Him in his Sin,
Its glance, like Lightnings Dint, so peircingly
Afflicts his theevish guilty Soul, that in
Slavish and thankless meeknes down he falls,
And on his wretched face for pardon calls:
241.
So did the Feind: believe it Psyche, were
The whole Worlds dying Groans all joynd in one
Huge Gust of Horror; yet they would not tear
The skies with such an Ejulation
As this, which made the Tombs, and Rocks, and Sea,
In its impatient Echo all agree.
242.
Jesus, thou highest Son of God most High,
O what have I, he cried, to do with Thee!
And must I leave my Fort, and naked lie
Whilst Thou do trample, and triumph on Me!
Now by thy Fathers Name, I thee conjure
Thou damn Me not new torments to endure.
243.
But now thy Lord held Him sure on the Rack,
He charged the Traitor to confess his Name:
O how this Question did his heart strings crack,
Which snatched the Veil off from his ougliest shame,
And for one Serpent which alone seemed there
To nestle, made a Legion appear.
244.
No other Name he durst acknowledge now
But Legion; for so indeed they were.
Vile Cowards, what is Dust and Clay that you
So numerous an Army must prepare!
Why must so many Spirits in ambush watch
Only one single Mortal Man to catch?
245.
But o that Men whose mystic obligation.
Of mutual Membership, does them invite
To careful Tenderness and free Compassion.
With such confederate Zeal and stout Delight
Would help their Brethren up to heaven, as these
Labor to plunge them in Hells Miseries!
246.
Had Thou been there, my Dear, thou might have seen
In what a fearful lamentable Guise
These Devils to their Prayers fell, to win
Some Pity from their Lords imperious Eyes;
Which did the baseness of their spirit prove,
Who could beseech Him whom they scorned to love.
247.
Him They beseeched not to send Them home,
But in this Country let them longer stay;
They knew Hell would have been too hot for Them
If they had thither gone without their Prey;
For disappointed Satan on their head
Would all his boiling Wrath have emptied.
248.
Besides; this place alone in charge they had,
And might not safely to another go:
For Satan here his Provinces has made,
And all his Deputies disposed so
That no Commission jarreth with another,
Nor any Fiend incroacheth on his brother.
249.
And this He does in insolent emulation
Of Heavens fair Polity, which has ordained
That every Empire, Kingdom, Country, Nation
By some of its Angelick Host be rein'd,
And guided, and defended; as each Man
By his particular vigilant Guardian.
250.
What would Thou have Us do, they cried, Can We
Made all of active Metal, idle sit?
Are We not Devils; how then can We be
For any Thing but Rage and Fury fit?
Mischief's our proper Diet; why will Thou
Who All Things feed'st, not Us our food allow?
251.
If We must Be, We must be what we are;
Infernal Natures can no change admit;
For surely Thou will not forget that War
When We our selves in arms against Thee set;
Nor repossesse Us of our calmy state;
So that we now are Furious by Fate.
252.
Besides; we Subjects are (and thine own hand
Buckled that yoke on our Rebellious Necks,)
To that impatient Prince, whose dire Command
Backed with Hells universal Terrors, pricks
Us on to Rage; and we do nothing now
But what we unto Him in duty owe.
253.
As then Thou art a generous Conqueror,
Give reasonable Quarter to thy Foes:
Since we must yield this Fort; before we stir
Engage thy Promise that we shall not loose
Our Natural Properties, but have power still
(For it is no Crime in Us) to do some ill.
254.
An Herd of Swine there feeds on yonder Mount,
(And that is it, Psyche,) filthy Beasts, and such
As were unworthy in thine own Account
The meanest of thy Servants Boards to touch:
Yet what to Jews Thou made impure, shall be
Dainties to Us, if Thou but leave Us free.
259.
Free, to take our own swindge, and domineer
In those despised reprobated Things:
If ever Devils did to thee prefer
An humbler fairer suit, may all our Wings
And Snakes be clipped, our Tallons pruned, our stour
Horns lopped off, our iron Teeth dashed out.
260.
The Furies pleaded so; and with an Eye
Where Fear insulted over jealous Hope,
Beheld their Judge: He knew the reason why
They begged that strange boon; he knew their scope
Was to make Men conceive the Swine a Creature
Cursed and abandoned by the God of Nature.
261.
Yet He was pleased, whither to avenge
The Owners Avarice, or for some cause
Best known to his wise self; to grant this Change,
And give them leave into the Herd to pass:
For He to whom the whole World does belong
Can all Things do, and yet can do no wrong.
262.
As when in pregnant AEtna's laboring Womb
The smoking flaming and sulphurous Child
Unto its full maturitie is come,
The moved Bowels of the Mount are filled
With Pangs and Throws, till by a monstrous Birth
The stinking Prodigy is broken forth:
263.
So were the Soul and Body of this Man
Shak'd, stretched, and torn, when Hell burst out from thence,
No brimstone ever smelt so rank as then
The favor or that dismal Effluence:
Surely the Man had by that stink and Pain,
Had Life not looked on, been double slain.
264.
But never did Air put on, a calmer face
When every Wind to its own home was blown,
And Heaven of all its Storms delivered was;
Then He now once again become His Own:
The Feinds who until now his Heart did swell,
Left him himself within himself to dwell.
265.
And now, as startled from some frightfull Dream,
He wonders that Himself so safe he saw.
With speed he gets him Clothes to hide his shame,
Or rather theirs whose Treason made him throw
Them off before, and clothe his Body round
In one unnatural universal Wound.
266.
Distracting Fumes no more reek'd in his Head;
Clear as the upper Region was his Brain,
And with his Heart distinctly traffiqued,
Where now his Intellectual Powers did reign;
In his Souls Pulse his Thoughts beat gently, and
His Bliss he Perfectly did understand.
267.
He understood to whom his Thanks were due,
To Whom his Peace, his Life, his reskew'd Heart;
To his sweet Task of Gratitude He flew,
In which with faithful Zeal He played his Part;
And then at his divine Redeemers feet
Like a meek Scholar, begged, and took his Seat.
268.
Mean while the Devils to the Mountain made
Upon the Wings of Fury and Disdain,
They scorned the Swine, and yet because they had
No better Prey, could not from that refrain.
The feeding Herd strait felt their Bellies swell
With unknown stuffing, being stretched with Hell
269.
As at the Orgies, when the Priests are drowned
In their mad God, they grow as wild as He;
They stare, they roar, they rave, they tumble round,
And only in confounded strife agree:
So did the Swine break into raging Revels,
Being Drunk with a full Legion of Devils.
270.
They grunt, they squeak, they foam, they run, they leap,
They fall, they rise, and strait they fall again,
Their tusks in one another Blood they steep,
But oftenest in their own: The Dogs in vain
Did bark, in vain the Swinherds cry and swear,
The Herd no Clamor but their own could hear.
271.
At length, in one mad course, unto that Brow
Where the steep Hill into the Sea does peep,
They headlong run, and one another throw
In a tumultuous throng into the Deep.
And thus those Devils drowned their wretched prey,
Their own long Thirst of Mischief to allay.
272.
Observe that other shore: thy Spouses Fame
Shined with no less illustrious Glory there;
Witness Her Faith who from Phaenicia came
To take miraculous kind of Physic here:
She long had her Phaenician Doctors tried,
Who not her Bloods, but Purse's Issue dried.
273.
But here she found a strange Physician, whose
Sole Physic is his Sovereign Self, and who
Gratis on all his heavenly Art bestows:
Yet her unclean Diseases shame did so
Confute its Pain, that it She does conceal,
And seeks by pious Fraud her Cure to steal.
274.
Her meekly-faithfull Heart had caught fast hold
On Jesu's Garments Hemm; and o, said She,
Could but my Fingers do as much, I would
Not doubt to catch my safe Recovery.
This said, the pious Theif took Heart, and stepped
Into the Crowd, and there behind Him crept.
275.
There her most trembling most undoubting Hand
To the desired Hemm she gently put,
Which with a triple Kiss she reverenced, and
Her meek Soul on that humble Altar set:
But whilst her blushing Blood flushed in her face,
She felt its other Current dried was.
276.
For as on Aarons consecrated Head
The holy Unguent would not bridled be.
But on his Beard its precious Influence shed,
And reached unto his Roabs extremity:
So did the Virtue of this Higher Priest
His very Clothes with mystic Power invest.
277.
But Jesus, who could not permit that such
Heroik Faith should thus be smothered up;
Enquires what Hand his Vestures Skirt did touch,
And set the Issue of his Virtue open;
That Virtuous Issue, Psyche, which alone
Could wash away, and cure Her Bloody one.
278.
The humble Woman guilty of the high
And faithful Theft, fell trembling at his Feet,
Confessing all her blessed Crime, and why
She so had ventured to compass it:
But while she feared her Saviors anger, he
Applauds the Fact, and bids her cheerly be.
279.
Daughter. he cries, (for those His Children are
Whose holy Confidence on his Power relies,)
Henceforth for ever banish needless Fear;
Thy valiant Faith secures and fortifies
Thy now recovered Health: Go home, and be
Assured my peace shall sojourn there with Thee.
280.
Her zealous Thanks she paid, and home ward went;
But his dear Image in her heart she bare,
Resolved to fix it in a Monument
Of lasting Gratitude, which she did rear
Before her Door: and could Thou reach thine Eye
Unto Cesarea, Thou might it descry:
281.
Erected there in bright substantial Brass
Thy Spouses statue is: and so shall stand,
Till Julian with a more obdurate face
And Heart, than is that metal, shall command
The fair and reverend Image to bow down
And yield its stately Base unto his own.
282.
His own; which when on Heaven it 'gins to stare
Shall learn what Vengance dwells in Jesu's Hand,
From whence a speedy Bolt of Fire shall tear
The proud and sacrilegious Idol, and
Give dreadful Warning to its Owner, what
He must expect, if he repents not.
283.
But yonder, Psyche, holy Tabor is,
A Mount made famous by a brighter Story;
The Temples Mount bowed down its head to this,
And veiled its Legal to the Gospel Glory:
To this, the Hill where Beelzebub laid open
The Universe's Gallantrie, did stoop.
284.
Thither did Jesus once himself withdraw
With three Attendants, Peter, James, and John,
Leaving the rest, and all the World, below,
That undisturbed, his Devotion
He might perform; for his Design was now
To pray himself, and teach his Consorts how.
285.
To be retired from tumultuous Things,
And sublimated far above the Earth,
Two trusty Ladders are, which Wisdom brings
To help Devotion climb; two Ladders worth
All Climaxes which ever yet were set
Up by the loftiest strains of eloquent Wit.
286.
But as he Prayed, his flaming Soul did break
Forth at his Eyes, and flashed to his own Heaven;
The dazeled Sun immediately stepped back,
And for his dimmer face sought some new Even:
For Day now needed not his garish beams
Being gilded by his Makers purer Flames.
287.
Jesus, who in his Bodies Veil till now
The Rays of his Divinity had hid,
Was pleased here to give them leave to flow,
And roll about Him in a glistering Tide:
Thus when his key unlocks the Cloud, from thence
The Lightning poures its radiant Influence.
288.
But as the unexhausted Fount of light
Which dwells so deep in Phebu's splendid Eyes,
On all his royal Roabs does shed its bright
Effusions, and his Charet beautifies,
So that about Heavens Circuit He is rolled
Enthroned and clothed in nothing else but Gold.
289.
So from thy Spouses more than Sun-like face,
The Luster all about his Raiment darted;
A Luster whose divine and gentle Grace
It self with kind magnificence imparted
Unto the mortal Texture, which so pure
And piercing Brightness else could not endure.
290.
Thus when a dainty Fume in Summer Air
To Lambent Fire by Natures sporting turns,
And gently lights upon Men's Clothes or Hair;
With harmless Flames it plays, and never burns
Its habitation, but feeds upon
The delicates of its own Beams alone.
291.
As the Disciples wonderd at the Sight,
Which peeping through their fingers they beheld;
Two strangers they espied, in raiment bright,
Which Jesu's overflowing beams did gild:
They wistly looked upon them, musing who
The Men might be, and what they came to do.
292.
The first ware horned beams (though something dim
In this more radiant Presence,) on his face:
Full was his beard; his Countenance was grim.
Yet sweetened by a meek but royal Grace;
His roabs were large and princely; in his Hand
He held a mystic and imperious Wand.
293.
A golden Plate he ware upon his breast
In which the Ten great Words enammeld were;
A grave and goodly man he was, and dressed
In such attire, that they no longer are
In doubt about Him, but conclude that he
Could none but Moses the Lawgiver be.
294.
Grave was the other Stranger too in face,
But in his Raiment wondrous course and plain;
He seemd to want a Mantle, (that which was
Long since thrown off by him on Jordans plain:)
The serious beams which darted from his Eye,
Spoke Eremiticall Severitie.
295.
Behind him stood a flaming Chariot,
Whose Steeds were all of the same Element:
(...) was their fire more than their Courage hot,
And much ado they had to stand content.
When they had well observed this, they knew
Such Tokens could none but Elias show.
296.
These two grand Prophets, whom thy Lord gave leave
To wear some glorious beams though He were by,
A reverend Discourse did interweave
Of the great work of his Humanity;
With high ecstarick Words displaying how
At Salem He Deaths Powers should overthrow.
297.
A Doctrine which on the Disciples ear
(And this their Master knew) full hard would grate,
And therefore by these glorious Preachers here
With high Solemnity was witnessed, that
His Crosses and his Nayls mysterious shame
Thenceforth might not amaze or scandal them.
298.
Then Moses at his feet his Rod threw down,
In token that He had fulfilled his Law,
And came to give a better of his own,
To which not only Jacob's seed should bow,
But all the World, whose largest farthest Bound
With Jesus and his Gospel was to sound.
299.
That done; a Veil He drew upon his face,
And cried Bright Lord, this shade I used of old,
Because my countenance too illustrious was
For the blear eyes of Israel to behold;
But now mine own have need of it, to cover
Them with the splendour with which thine run over.
300.
Thine Eyes; a spectacle of fairer Bliss
Than I of old beheld from Nebo's Head:
How well was I, (reserved then for this
Days nobler privilege,) not suffered
To enter, and my Wonder feed upon
The far less wondrous Sweets of Chanan!
301.
But in a generous meek Expostulation
Elias argued with his glorious Lord:
And why, said He, in most triumphant fashion
Did thou whirle Me to Heaven, and not afford
Me leave to taste one Drop of Deaths cold Cup,
Since thou thy self resolv'st to drink it up.
302.
Must JESUS, and must not Elias die?
Must God, and not a Worm? Forbid it Thou
Who of all order art the Deity,
And Death unto Mortality allow:
(...) be contented with the last to stay,
(...) till Time dies, if then I also may,
303.
Yet for my self, or Heaven, I would not die;
O no; but glorious Lord, for Thee alone:
In thy dear Cause, and for thy Name, if I
The Roabs of Martyrdom may once put on,
My passage unto Heaven shall brighter be
Than when my flaming Coach transported Me.
304.
But here thy Spouse with a well-pleased Eye
Dismissed them both: Into his Chariot
Elias leaped, and back to Heaven did fly
As swift as Arrow by the Tartar shot:
And Mose's wrapped his Veil about his Head,
And home to Abraham's Bosom hastened
305.
When lo a beauteous Cloud rolled on, and spread
Its shady Curtains on the Mountains Top,
In which his own Voice God had treasured,;
And now it brake, no other Rain did drop
But this sweet Shoure: This is my Darling Son
Hear Him, in whom my Joys do dwell alone.
306.
The faint Disciples on their faces fell,
Amazed that Thunder could distinctly speak:
Mean while their Master did his Beams recall
And charged his Glories all to hasten back:
His Godhead needed now no more probation,
That Glimps being doubled by Heavens Attestation.
307.
Forthwith his Rays shrunk back into his breast,
And moderate Beauty repossest his face:
The orient Luster which his Clothes had dressed
Unto their native hue resigned its place;
And He returns to his Capacity
Of what He longed for, Shame and Misery.
308.
But turn thee now to Salem ward, and see
Yon' monument of thy Lords power and Love:
That hill is Sion, and that Pool where He
Does wet his foot, is Siloam; above
Its Bottom lies, for in the Mountains breast
Its Springs of living Silver make their Nest.
309.
Right honest are those Springs, and brake not out
By wanton Chance, but upon Business flowed:
What was the occasion, and how brought about,
Is not a Story known unto the Crowd:
But I, dear Psyche, will unlock to Thee
The Bowels of this ancient Mystery.
310.
When Hezekias here at Salem sat
On Juda's Throne, the Assyrian Power swelled high,
And turned sinful Israell's florid State
Into the worst of Woes, Captivity;
For Assure was become an Iron Rod
Which Vengeance put into the Hand of God.
311.
That first Success so puffed the Rod with Pride,
That it forgot the Hand which it did sway,
And now would needs it self become a Guide
Unto it self, and choose on what to prey:
Alas, the rash Rods project soon was crossed,
And near two hundred thousand, Twiggs it lost.
312.
Whilst Rabsheka the foul-mouthed General
With Horse, and Men, and Braggs, and Blasphemy
Lay against Salem, on the sudden all
Provision of Water 'gan to be
Short in the Town; excepting Tears, which now
They could be spared least, most high did flow.
313.
This venerable Esaias moved to try
What He with Mercy, and with Heaven could do:
He tuned his Prayer by the Peoples Cry,
Which with such Violence to the Spears did go,
That back it bounded unto Sions foot,
On which He kneeled, and made the Spring leap out.
314.
The thirsty People all came flocking in,
Their Mouths, their Bottles, and their Potts to fill:
The Assyrians wonderd what they meant; but when
They spied their business about the Well,
They made a Party out, resolved to stopp
The newborn Spring, or else quite drink it up.
315.
The Citizens, themselves to flight betook;
So did the Fountain too, and shrunk its Head
Into the Hill, and called back its Brook,
Commanding every Dropp to go to bed:
And not to prostitute themselves, and be
Deflowered by Assurs Lips impurity.
316.
The Streams obeyed, and swifter than the speed
Of the impatient Horsemen, homeward ran.
So when the prudent Dame has summoned
Her crawling Fry from the incursion
Of Violence, the nimble Serpents shoot
Themselves into their Mothers ready throat.
317.
The disappointed Soldiers raved and swore,
To see the Fountain mock and scorn them so;
And cried, these Jews have by some Magic Power
Broached this weily Spring from Hell, to do
Spite to Senacheribs strength, and show that We
Cannot so strong as wretched Water be.
318.
Thus they retired in Disdain and Wrath;
When straight the thirsty Jews came back again;
And lo, the Spring found out its former path.
And courteously met them on the Plain,
Kissing their feet, and smiling in their face,
For whose sole Service He so watchful was,
319.
Thus checkering his Work, he never fails
To fail his Foes, and to befriend his Friends;
Full often Assure tries, but never prevails;
The wary nimble Fountain always sends
Him empty back: And yet could not refuse
With liberal Streams to wait upon the Jews.
320.
Thus the Sabbatick Fount, which all the Week
Keeps close at home, and lets no Drop spurt out;
Exactly watches and attends the Break
Of the seav'nth Day; and then, as quick as thought
Poures out its Flood, and sacrifices all
Its Plenty to that holy Festival.
321.
A Man there was, who from his Mothers Womb,
Retired Natures dark and secret Shop,
Into the World, but not to light, had come,
Whose Birth did Him, and not his Eyes set open:
Compared with Him, cleer-sighted was the Owl,
So was the evening Batt, and earthed Moule.
322.
For on his brow sat an anneiled Night,
Which his Birthday could not confute: In vain
His Mother hired the Physicians Might
To war against that Shadow, and constrain
That imbred sturdy Blackness to relent;
In vain her money and her love she spent.
323.
Less thick the Darkness was which did revenge
The lustful glances of old Sodoms Eyes;
When the hot Lovers damped by a strange
Invasion of Pitch, with Oaths and Cries
Tumbled and tossed themselves from place to place,
And sought Lots Door in one another face.
324.
As Jesus spied this helpless Wight, (for He
Warch'd to surprise all Objects of Compassion,)
Speeded by his own heavenly Charity,
He to his Succor flies. Such is the fashion
Of generous Love, which never stays to be
Wooed, and importuned to a Courtesy.
325.
The simple Man perceiving one draw nigh,
Fell to the Beggars covetous Dialect,
Craving for Money. Friend, that is not my
Largise, thy Lord replied, which does infect
Those who desire it: Surely Thou would find
What Bane thou begg'st, were thou not double Blind.
326.
Money is that unhappy Dust which flies
Full in the face of undiscerning Man,
And heaps such Mists of Blindness on his eyes
That Heaven He cannot see: If thou did skan
Thy state aright, Thou might thy Blindness bless,
Who see not how monstrous money is.
327.
I Will make a thinner Clay than Money, which
Shall far exceed the Worth of Gold to Thee;
They are not moneys beams which do enrich
The World with Light and Glory; but from Me
Alone flow forth those clear and genuine Rays
Which bless the Age with sweet and golden Days.
328.
This said; three times He spit upon the ground
And tempered with his Hand a Sovereign Clay;
No Salve by deepest Art was ever found
Which could so sure all Maladies allay;
Should precious Balsame now prove sick and die,
This Ointment could work its Recovery.
329.
With this the Blind Man's Eyes He Oynted; yet
Was pleased not forthwith to give them sight:
First an experiment He meant to get
Whether his inner Eyes of Faith were bright;
Then with his Favor, to reward and grace
The Pool, which long before so pious was.
330.
Bethesda Waters swelled with full-tide Fame;
Wherefore, though apt Occasion Him invited,
Time was when He refused to honor Them:
But poured his royal love into this slighted
Though worthy Pool, which as his Partner He
In this his Miracle vouchsafed to be.
341.
To Siloam go, said He, and wash thine Eyes,
And thou shall see what I to thee have given:
The joyful Man with holy Credence hies
Him to the Place: No Heart was ever driven
By scalding Thirst more greedily unto
The Rivers, than He to this Spring did go.
342.
He went to drink, not with his Mouth, but Eyes,
Which as He washed, lo, they 'gan to open:
Out flew black Night, and all those duskie Ties
By which his Sense before was chained up,
Straight his released sparkling Pupills showed
Like sprightfull Lightning from the broken Cloud.
343.
And now he lives, and sees that he does live,
And Heaven and Earth more than by hearsay knows,
Now every Parcel of the World does give
Him a Remembrance unto whom He owes
His power of seeing it. O happy he,
Who must in every Thing his Savior see!
344.
Since from the Darkness of the first Abyss
The Universe was wakened unto light,
Never was atcheiv'd so strange a Cure as this
Which on condemned Eyes bestowed fight
In spite of Nature, who had put them out
Before she gave them leave to look about.
345.
Now Psyche turn thine Eye to yonder Town
Great Salems little Neighbor, Bethany;
A place of dear Remembrance to thine own
Beloved Lord: from Salems tumults He
Would often retire into that calmy place,
And still, as oft's He came, He welcome was.
346.
For there two Sisters dwelt, an holy Pair:
Industrious Martha, who the World did love,
Yet not so much but Jesus was more dear;
Although the practick Trade of Life she drove,
The Cream of her Solicitude she spent
To purchase more than secular Content:
347.
Pathetick Mary, one whom Mercy made
Her chosen triumph: This was (...) She
Who in the hottest Troop of Sinners had
A leading Place; such stout Impiety
Encouraged her Heart, that Hell could not
Put her on any Task but she would do it
348.
For seav'n foul Devils had themselves possessed
Of all her Soul, and with imperious Port
In the usurped Palace of her Breast
Their throne erected, and maintained their Court:
What Proclamations or Warrants They
So ever issued, she did straight obey.
349.
But Jesus who did square his Pity by
No Merit he in Mortal Man could read,
But for his Rule, took their Capacity
Of Succor; found how much this Heart did need
His potent Help, which He forthwith applied,
And made her Live, who now seav'n times had died.
350.
For from the bottom of Her poys'ned Breast
Seav'n hideous Deadly Sins she vomited;
And having thus disgorged Hell, which pressed
Her down so low, to Heaven she raise d her head,
Flaming with purest fire of Love, as she
Before had smoked in Lusts Impurity.
351.
Her brave Devotion she did measure now
By the Large Size of Mercy she had gained:
For as that Mercy did no limits know
So to Infinitude her Love she strained;
She strained hard, and would have reached the Top,
If Mortal Passion could so high climb up.
352.
O Psyche, had Thou but been by when She
Unto her Lord upon Loves Errand came,
Thou might have seen impatient Piety
Mount in the boldness of its noble Flame:
First at his Feet it 'gan, and then it spread
With fair and liberal Fullness to his Head.
353.
That fragrant Ointment which she used before
To her own lustful Skin to sacrifice,
She now on Jesu's sweeter Feet does pour,
And adds another shower from her own eyes:
Then wiping them with her late crisped Tresses,
She offers there her consecrated Kisses.
354.
She minds not what Spectators think or say;
Love is secnre and careless: She does mean
Ever from her Lovers Feet she go away,
To oint, or weep, or wipe, or kiss them clean;
And by this generous Zeal she Sanctifies
Her Locks, her Lips, her Ointment, and her Eyes.
355.
But as the sprightfull Flame disdains to stay
Below, and with undaunted Ardor strives
To reach its lofty Sphere: So she one Day
The Reins unto her gallant Passion gives,
And takes aim at the Top of Heaven; for this
I Am sure, said she, on Jesu's Temples is.
356.
She had a Box of Ointment of high price,
Yet not so precious as her loving Lord:
Could the Worlds wealth meet in one Sacrifice,
All this She freely could to him afford;
And now unbrideled Love such haste did make,
That straight the Box, or her own Heart must break.
357.
Indeed both brake; and both she poured on
His Head, who is of Sweets and Hearts the King:
Straight through both Heaven and Earth the Odours ran,
Which shall for ever with their Praises ring:
For now't has lost its Alabaster Cell,
The glorious Nard in all the World does dwell.
358.
Thrift grumbled at the Cost: but Jesus who
Excessive in his Love to Mary was,
Vouchsafed her generous Soul free leave to go
In the same princely and licentious pace:
He knows the heats of this unweildy Passion,
And will allow it brave Immoderation.
359.
All other Passions easily bounded are,
Because their Objects are in limits ti'd;
But Love alone with infinite carrieer
Still further everlastingly does ride,
Being loose at God himself, in whom
Immensity affords her boundless room.
360.
Now Psyche, thou may easily judge how dear
Was this Seraphick Woman to thy Lord.
She had one only Brother, who for her
Sake, and his own, was to his Love preferred:
He falling sick, she sent the News unto
Her Master, waiting what he pleased to do,
361.
He who had never yet his help delayed,
When loving Mary did his Mercy woe,
Till Phoebus twice the World had compassed, stay d
He stayed indeed: but 'twas that he might go
With advantageous Glory; and his stay
Might prove but ripened Love, and not Delay.
362.
Mean while his Sickness so prevailed upon
Good Lazarus, that his Soul it chased out:
Jesus, whose eyes through all things clearly ran,
Beheld it as it went, and saw it brought
On Angels Wings into the blessed Nest
Of naked Peace, and Quiet, Abraham's breast,
363.
Where when it was reposed: Lazarus
Our Friend, is fallen fast asleep, said He,
But I intend to wake Him: Come let Us
Delay no longer, but to Bethany.
And, Lord what needs it, his Disciples cried,
If Lazarus sleep, what harm can Him betide?
364.
It Is true, their Lord replied; for now he lies
Safe in the bosom of Serenity:
Yet what his Rest is, little you surmise,
Not knowing that in Death true sleep can be.
Alas, all other Rest compared with this,
Scarcely the shadow of true Quiet is.
365.
Death is that only sleep which puts an end
Unto this weary Worlds tempestuous Cares,
And pious Souls unto that Shore does send
Which knows no Dangers, Labors, Griefs, or Fears.
Our friend is dead: and glad I am that I
Was not at Bethany when He did die,
366.
Glad for your sakes, whose faith now dead, shall by
His Death revive. This said, He forward went,
And they with Him: But ever at Bethany
He did arrive, two other days were spent.
He could have taken coach upon the back
Of any Wind; but now chose to be slack.
367.
First busy Martha met Him, as He drew
Near to the Town, (for when he coming was,
The fame of his Approach before Him flew,
Which her sollicitous ears soon caught,) and as
She threw her self upon her knees, she cried,
Had thou been here, my Brother had not died,
368.
Dear Lord of Life, if thou had but been here,
Death would have his due distance kept, if not
For love of Thee, or Us, at least for fear
Of his own life. And yet thy Power is but
Deferred, not precluded; God will still
Each syllable of thy Requests fulfill,
369.
Nor weep nor doubt, dear Martha, Jesus cried,
Thy Brother shall again to life return.
I doubt it not, sweet Master, she replied,
But in the universal worlds new morn,
When all Things spring into fresh life, that He
Shall with his Body reinvested be.
370.
I am, said He, the Resurrection, and
The life; Whoever does believe in Me,
Although he be a Prisoner in the land
Of Death, shall unto life released be:
Nay he shall never taste of Death, who is
Living by Faith in Me: Beleev'st thou this?
371.
Here dazeled by his high Discourse, Great Lord
She cried, my Faith does take Thee for no less
Then Gods Almighty Son, who by his Word
Were promised, this cursed World to bless,
This said, three times she kissed the ground, and home
Made have, to bid her pensive Sister come.
372.
As when the powerful Loadstone's placed near,
The inamored Iron leaps, its love to kiss:
So Mary when she heard how Christ was there,
Speeded to meet her dearest Hapiness;
And, falling at her highest Throne, His Feet,
Martha's Complaint, She did again repeat.
373.
Short were her Words, but copious were her Tears,
Love-ravish'd Pleaders strongest Eloquence;
For in her Eyes those fertile springs she bears
Which by their ever-ready Influence
Confirm Her Queen of Weepers: Never was seen
A more bedewed Thing then Magdalene.
374.
For Love though valiant as the Lions Heart;
Is yet as soft as the mild Turtles Soul,
And mourns as much: knowing no other Art
By which to slake the mighty Flames which roll
About her Bosom, and would burn her up,
Did not her streams of Tears that Torrent stop.
375.
If when the Clouds lament, the hardest stone
Under their frequent Tears relenteth: How
Will Mary's thicker Showers prevail upon
The Heart of Jesus, which did never know
What Hardness meant! He straitway melts, and by
His Groans, does his Compassion testify.
376.
Then turning to the Grave, he broached his Eyes,
And vi'd with Mary's streams: whither it were
In Pity of Man's fatal Miseries,
Who did his own Destruction prepare;
(For neither Gods, nor Natures Hand, but he
Dug his own Grave, by his Impiety:)
377.
Or in deep grief his dearest Friends to see
Of his Omnipotence distrustful still;
Or in soft Sympathy with those whom He
Of Tears and Lamentations saw so full:
What ever the reason were, He showred down
Those streams for Man's sake, and not for his own,
378.
O Tears! you now are Perls indeed, since He
Who is the Gem of Heaven, has brought you Forth
Now you may worthy of Gods Bottles be
Who from Gods radiant Eyes derive your Worth:
All holy Drops which are of kin to you
By that Affinity must glorious grow.
379.
Let flintie Bosoms build their foolish Pride
On their own Hardness, and the Weeping Eye
As an effeminate childish Thing deride,
And inconsistent with the Braverie
Of Masculine Spirits: Yet truely-noble Hearts
With Jesus will not scorn to Weep their parts.
380.
But He, now from the Tomb commands the stone
To be removed, which sealed Lazarus up
Alas, an harder Marble lay upon
Poor Martha's Heart, which Faiths access did stop;
Corrupted was her Mind, which made Her think
And talk so much of Four Days, and the Stink.
381.
What are Four Days, that their poor intervention
Should able be to raise a scruple here,
And intercept his sovereign Intention
To whom Eternity does bow? A Year,
An Age, a World, is no stop unto Him
Upon whose Will depends the life of Time.
382.
Stinks and Corruptions no Retardments are
To his productive Power who does derive
Through Putrifactions Pipes, and there prepare
The life which to all Creatures he does give;
For by his Law, which knows no violation,
Corruption Mother is to Generation.
383.
The Stone removed, and the Cave laid open,
Jesus, the mighty King of Life and Death,
With awful Majesty his hand lift up,
And then his Voice, forming his royal breath
Into these high imperious Words, which Earth
And Heaven obeyed: Lazarus come forth.
384.
A mighty Voice indeed, which reached the Breast
Of Abraham, where the Soul in quiet lay,
But at these potent Summons made all haste
Back to its own: The Patriark, they say,
Kissed the sweet Spirit, and entreated it
To bear that Token unto Jesu's feet.
385.
But when it came into the Cave, it found
What there the Thunder of this Voice had done;
Shattered and scatter d all about the ground
Lay adamantine Chains, which Death had on
The Carcass heaped: broke was that Cloud of Lead
Which rolled cold night about the Eyes and Head.
386.
The Worms were scrambling all away apace;
(...) had into a corner got;
(...) Ghastlinesse had stole from off the face;
(...) froazen Numnesse frighted was, and shot
(...) from the Corpse; Death sat lamenting by
To sec that what He slew, must now not die.
387.
Heat, Vigor, Motion, hovered round about,
Attending when the Soul her place would take;
Which when She saw; as quick as her own Thought
Into the Heart she flew, and did awake
The sleeping Blood: When lo, whilst yet the sound
Of the great Voice did in the Cave rebound,
388.
Out Lazarus comes. O what Amazement now
On the Spectators seized! They start, they stare,
They gape, they doubt, they hope, they fear, they throw
Their Arms wide open, and divided are
'Twixt looking upon Lazarus, and on
Jesus by whom the Miracle was done.
389.
Out Lazarus comes, and yet he was fast tied
And, in his Grave-clothes snarl'd: for why should he
By these poor Ligaments be now denied
Free passage, whom the strong conspiracy
Of all Deaths massy Chains could not compel
A Prisoner in his Sepulcher to dwell.
390.
Out Lazarus comes: and full as fresh and fair
As Summer Flowers from their Winter Bed,
Which at their rising, through the purest air
A daintier breath of fragrant Odours shed:
Nice jealous Martha needs not doubt, for He
Is now as wholesome and as sweet as she.
391.
But ask Me not why Jesus would call back
His Friend, who lay composed in rest and peace,
To this tumultuous World, which Saints do take
But for the Sceen of all Unhappiness:
Whilst Jesus lives here, his Friends he warms
With sweeter Joys and Peace, than Abraham's Arms.
392.
Alas, 'twas Abraham's highest Wish, that He
Might but behold what Lazarus now did find:
How would He bless the Sight, if he might see
Him who imparteth Eyes unto the Blind,
Who on the Sickly Health, Peace on his Foes,
Life on the Dead, and Heaven on Earth bestows!
393.
These Psyche, were the usual Works whereby
Thy Lord did to his World himself declare:
But in so vast a multiplicity,
That if they all at large recorded were,
That Worlds whole Bounds would not sufficient be
To find those only Books a Library.
394.
And what meant these miraculous Dispensations,
But his Affection to proclaim entire?
Never with such illustrious Demonstrations
Did royal Suitor seal his true Desire
To his Queens Heart; as Jesus here did prove
How with all Humane Souls He was in love.
395.
Here Phylax closed his rubie Lips; and she
Who all this while upon his Tongue attended
Both with her ear and heart; was grieved to see
His high and sweet Discourse so quickly ended;
And yet, for what sh' had heard, her Modesty
Paid Him her Maiden Thanks upon her knee,
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO XI. The Traitor.
ARGUMENT.
IN sordid love of thick and rusting Clay
Prodigious Judas, LOVE himself does sell:
But for the Pains, besides the Highpriests Pay,
Receives a larger Salary of Hell,
Which met him upon earth, and through his own
Split Body, rent his wounded Spirit down.
1.
Envy, thou mortal bane of Quietuesse,
And of thy Self, what makes thy Rage so mad
To play the Canker in all kind of Bliss,
And on thine own Vexation live! A Rod
To thine own cursed back thou art, as well
As to the Worlds, and both thy Fury feel.
2.
In thy mischievous Womb was Discord bred,
The correspondent Brat of such a Dame;
A Brook which well becomes its Fountain head,
And does with equal genuine Poison stream;
A Brook which round about the hampered World
Its Arms pernicious Embrace has hurled.
3.
This is that fatal and destructive Jarr
Which frets and interrupts the Harmony
Wherein all Things concentricated were
By peaceful Natures sweet and sacred Tie:
That Jarr, which in Times youth did belk and beat,
Till to wild War the way wide open it set.
4.
War, the foul Comprehension of all
The worst of Hell: Fell Beelzebub at first
Begor the Monster of his own proud Gall,
From whence in Heaven unhappily it burst:
A Birthplace how unfit for such a Birth!
And well it was, that straight it cast it forth.
5.
Heaven cast it forth; but Hell received the Brat,
And hugged it close, and nursed, and kept it warm:
Fed there with Fire and Blood, it soon grew fat
And strong enough to raise a desperate Storm
In its black Nurserie, which it did fret,
And all the Devils in Confusion set.
6.
When Lucifer saw its Activitie,
With hellish Joy He kissed his genuine Son;
And as He kicked his Fathers Courtesy,
And scratched his kissing Lips; this Sign alone
Dear Child, cried He, sufficient is to prove
Thou art my Issue, and deserve my love.
7.
Then from his own vipereous Tresses He
Plucked a large handful of his longest Snakes,
Of which, with poisnous liberality,
A favor for his darling Child he makes,
Who ever since with Joy and Triumph wears
The hissing Discord all about his Ears.
8.
Thus dressed without, and furnished within
With desperate Injunctions, a Commission
To be sole General of every Sin,
Of all Confusion, and of all Perdition
He freely grants Him, and then sends Him forth
To try what Ruins he could work on Earth,
9.
(The cunning Serpent loved his Hole too well
To suffer desperate War to harbor there:
He knew that even in the Realm of Hell
Division would the Joints and Cement tear
Which in obedience to his Sovereign Pride
The Peers and Commons of Damnation ti'd.)
10.
As through the bowels of deep Tellus He
Rent open his Way, amazed Nature shook,
Affrighted Quiet, and Serenitie
Their sudden flight to Heaven for shelter took,
Leaving behind an universal Groan;
Through all the World such fatal Terror ran.
11.
But blustering on the Fury sought where he
Might entertainment for his Miseheif meet.
First to the Lions Dens he went, to see
Whither their mighty Mouths, and armed feet
Might not be taught to undertake a fight
In the fell Quarrel of intestine Spite.
12.
The noble Beasts with generous disdain
Looked on the Monster, and lay couchant still:
Seeming to say, Our Selves will hold the chain
Of our own Strength, and when We please to fill
Our Lust with Blood, Weel hunt it up and down
The Woods, but never riot in our own.
13.
Repulsed here, He made the like Address
To Dragons, Tigres, Panthers, Wolves, and Bears;
But they in their own Natural freindliness
Hugged one another, and (...) all Wars.
The Monster vexed, and (...) himself, to
That salvage Creatures would not disagree.
14.
At last, to Man he came: And who could dream
That (...) the softest and the gentlest Thing,
Which Heavens own careful Hand alone did frame;
Man, who could fight for Nothing, being King
Of all the World; Man, who unarmed was made,
Should turn Apprentice to the Warlike Trade.
15.
Yet Man, the Riddle of Unhappiness,
Unto the Monster entertainment gave.
Mad Man, for whom a thousand Maladies
Perpetually are digging up his grave,
Will needs go learn a surer speedier way
To cut that Life which posteth to Decay.
16.
For Cain (the original Curses firstborn Heir)
No sooner saw the Furies looks, but He
Fancied them lovely, and by far more fair
Then gentle Abels blessed Suavitie.
Unhappie fancy, whose mad violence
Murdered a Quarter of the World at once.
17.
And yet that dreadful Mark, which sealed so deep
His knawing Guilt on his dispairing face,
Form his all bloody Footsteps could not keep
Succeeding Generations; still they trace
The cursed Tract, regardlesse of the Cries
With which Blood wakens Vengeance, and the Skies.
18.
With unrelenting Steel they barbarize
Their tender Flesh, or clothe themselves with Brass;
They for Destruction proper Tools devise,
To hasten on the fate of fading Grass;
And unto Times not lazy Sith, their Arts
Of Death they add, Spears, Arrows, Swords, and Darts.
19.
And being loathe that any Stay should make
Them loose the credit of their madness, They
Trust not their own two feet, but mount the back
Of fiery Steeds, by whose fierce speed they may
Fly unto Mischief, and in full Carreer
And cruel Joy, their Brethrens bowels tear.
20.
Yea though the universal Deluge by
Washing away that bloody Torrent, and
Those who had broached it, warned Man to see
How little need he had to arm his hand
Against Himself; He madly proved, No flood
Of Water could aswage his thirst of Blood.
21.
O no! for He still more industrious grow's
In Barbarousnes; and with it taints the Heart
Of (...) Learning, which He daily draws
In all his bloodiest Plots to act its part;
Hence came those engines which so strangely spit
Death's multiplied, and deadlier made by Wit.
22.
Yet these at length He counts but spights delay,
Angry that Heavens Artillery does fly
(...) then His; and therefore seeks a way
To Shoot his Wrath, as does the enraged sky:
Thus from his Canons mouths the thunders roar,
The lightnings flash, sinoak, bullets, vengance, pour.
23.
No Furies can with more remorslesse spite
Rend one another Breasts, then Man does Man.
Wounds, shreiks, and gaspings, are his proud delight,
By (...) his Prowess he does scan;
In Humane Blood He strives to write his stories,
And by his Murders counts up his glories.
24.
Thus mild Humanity is thrown aside,
And Manhood takes from War its ominous name.
Alas, and was not Manhood known, till Pride
And envious Wrath, this salvagenes did frame;
Till Beasts upbraided Men, who entertained
The hellish Monster, which all they disdained?
25.
Were there not lusty sins, whose sturdy might
Could have (...) been to feed
The boldest valor of the bravest wight,
And yield a fairer Laurel to his Head,
Then those unhappy (...), which smeared are
In the thick gore of an unnaturail War!
26.
But ah! that blessed Combat is forgot
In this wild Trade of fighting: Sin does here
Command in chief, and from its (...) shut
Whatever does like Law and Right appear:
And in their rooms, by whole troops listed be
Rapes, rapine, rampant rage, and luxury.
27.
Shame on their Souls who love this barbarous trade,
And by this merciless Apostasy
Erase, and quite forget what Nature made
Them at the first: But their Impiety
Swells highest, Who the Name of Christian bear,
Yet stain it in the Blood of causeless war.
28.
O shameless boldness! which can in defense
Of meek Religion, put on Barbarousnes,
And make the Bond of Sweetness a pretense
To break all other yoakes; which dares profess
It fights to rescue that, whose highest praise
Injurious sufferings always used to raise.
29.
The noble Army of those Martyrs, who
To Heaven in Triumphs Chariot ascended,
Had never learned Christ and Religion so;
Both which they by a surer way defended,
Drowning all opposition in the flood
Not of their tyrants, but of their own blood.
30.
Nor did Heavens most propitious bottles e're
Bestow more fertile shoures on thirsty Earth;
Then streamed from those Hero's veins, to cheer
The new sown Churches seeds, and help them forth
Into that glorious crop, which quickly swelled
So high, that all the wondering World it filled.
31.
Can others blood, their tincture be, who are
Sworn servants to the glorious King of Peace?
That King, who is a Lamb, and who does wear
Of tenderness the white and dainty fleece?
That King whose only business and joy
It is to save, but never to destroy?
32.
Into this world his foot He would not set,
Till every sword return d into its sheath,
Till Janu's semple with a seal was shut,
Till Nature was restored to lead on Death,
Till Peace's calm had paved his passage plain,
And Men repented into Men again.
33.
Yet being Come, though Satan could not raise
An open tempest to disturb his course,
He tryes a thousand secret envious ways,
Patching with cunning his defect of force;
He lends fresh malice to the pevish Jews,
And in the Highpriests heads his Plots he brews.
34.
Annas and Caiaphas resolve to try
How they their glories may assert, which now
They more and more beheld eclipsed by
The reverend luster which from Christ did flow,
Upon whose flames, if nothing else will do,
Rather then fail, they his own blood will throw.
35.
Phylax thought fit a while to dwell upon
This story with his Pysche; wherefore He,
After convenient Refection,
Bids Her sit fast; and yielding then the free
And long desired reins to his hot Steeds,
Quick as the wind to Salem ward he speeds.
36.
There, over Sions head, he pulled back
The Bridle: strait his docile Coursers knew
The language of his Hand, and 'gan to slack
Their pace, and in a semicircle flew;
For by one wing they with the other fought,
And damped their course by wheeling thus about.
37.
Then lighting on the Hill, their mains they shaked,
Their heads they lifted high, and then their voice:
The bottomes at their mighty Neighings quaked,
And from their Caverns all flung back the noise:
But strait as Phylax 'gan to speak, the Steeds
Sealed up their Mouths, and humbled down their heads.
38.
Though, Psyche, thy dear Lord himself indear'd
To all this World by those sweet Miracles,
(And millions more than them) which thou have heard,
Said he, yet so importunate was Hels
Invidious clamor in the Jewish ears,
That all Heavens Words and Works it overbears.
39.
And now the thicker Wonders Jesus does
More Articles against himself he draws;
The shameless Judges turn his mortal foes,
Forgetting Right's, and urging Envies Laws;
And in black Envies impudent esteem
No crime so foul as Piety does seem.
40.
But how this Malice brought about her end,
And raised her self to that transcendent Pitch
Of monstrousness, which never any Feind
With all the wit of Hell, before could reach,
Is worth thy hearing: Come, sit down, and I
Will pump this Venom forth before thine eye.
41.
Before Hells yawning mouth, a Cave there is
(The little emblem of that greater Realm)
The native house and home of Avarice,
Who in her craving thoughts does overwhelm
The universe, and, whatsoever she gains
As lean and hungry as before remains,
42.
If any thing but Money coming be,
The door is always deaf; for its strange ears
Can apprehend no noise or harmony
But Moneys chinking; which as soon's it hears,
It flingeth open its mouth as wide, and fast
As Tigers, when their prey to them is cast,
43.
Six yellow springs before the threshold rise,
Infected by that Houses neighborhood;
Which creeping far through earths close cavities
Pour out their wealthy but most dangerous flood
On the condemned World, devouring there
More than in stormy Seas e're drowned were,
44.
Indus and Ganges rouled in the East,
Pactolus in the middle of the Earth;
But Tagus undertook to taint the West
And spewd in Spain his glistering poison forth.
Rich Hebrus chose something more North to be
And broke his way through Thracian Rhodope.
45.
Plate stole into the other World, that He
Might to some pains and cost put Covetousness;
But when her thirst grows hot, impatient she
Shall scorn the Atlantik Ocean, and press
Through unknow Monsters to find out that stream
Which yet shall not quench, but augment her flame.
46.
The structure of the House is mean and poor,
And calls with many a mouth fot Reparation:
The Clouds, when e're they weep, do freely pour
Through every rotten room an inundation;
The Winds come whistling at their pleasure in;
And every kind of Weather there will Inn,
47.
A thousand Stilts and Propps their shoulders set
Against the Walls; where many a Wisp and Rag
Into the weather-beaten Wounds were put:
Such is the Thrift of the old carking Hag,
Her Houses Fall she ventures, but to spare
The simple Cost even of a patched Repair.
48.
Within lie Trunks and Chests along the Walls
Pil'd to the roof on one another backs,
Guarded with iron hoops, and brazen nails,
And strongly fortified with triple Locks,
As if indeed some Treasurers shrines they were,
When only yellow Clay lay sleeping there.
49.
There lay all that the famous Lydian Prince
Had raked up by his numerous Victories:
Unhappy Craesus! who at such expense
Of pains and time, purchased so poor a prize,
Which, as a load, upon his Life was thrown,
And when He dyed, pressed him deeper down.
50.
There lay the Phrygian Kings unweildy Mass
Of wretched Gold, whose rich Wish made him Poor,
Whose wealthy Privilege his Confusion was,
And famished him amid'st his growing Store.
Sure for that Wish he more deserved those Ears
Which by the Poets quaint Revenge he wears.
51.
Next them, the other Phrygians Talents, who
By Pagans verdict is condemned to thirst
Amidst the streams which on his lips do flow.
Unfortunate Tantalus, how were thou cursed
In life with Treasures which Thou could not use
In death, with Dainties which thy Mouth abuse!
52.
The cursed Heaps of stern Callicrates
Were there, who by Exuctions Hand did rake
Them up, and make the Athenian Miseries
The Fountain of his Richnes; who did break
The Laws in lawless Urging Them, that He
Owner of what He could not keep might be.
53.
The stuffed Coffers of rich Cinyras
Which by his Cyprian Plenty He did fill,
Were there-congested in huge throngs; so was
The Wealth of Gyges, which so high did swell
That it alone sufficient might seem
To choke or burden Millions more with Him.
54.
The teeming Baggs which Pelops brooded o'r,
The Wealth which Crassus upon heaps did heap,
Dariu's brave inestimable Store,
Here in their several Sepulchers did sleep;
So did great Pharoabs, into whose vast Barn
A Crop of Gold was brought, for that of Corn.
55.
Whatever Rapine, Fraud, Oppression, Lies,
Distrustful Greediness, vexatious Care,
Had snatched, stole, poll'd, or scraped, to suffice
What could not filled be, was crowded there:
Little think Men that all such Riches will
Find their way home, and with their Plutus dwell,
56.
Nay here that vast accumulation lay,
Which dares call every other Treasure poor,
That Wealth which did the golden Age display
When Solomon the Crown of Israel wore,
He who disgraced Silver so, that it
Like vulgar stones was kicked about the street.
57.
Wise as He was, that King well understood
That amongst all those huge Vacuities
Which puff the World up with their froathy Flood,
Even massy Gold must counted be; which lies
Men in more fruitless Care than any Thing
That Fortune rouls in Vanities fine Ring.
58.
Alas as here in all its strength it lay
Immured in thousand Chests, it could not by
Its power or its value keep away
Vile Rust and Cankers, which eternaly
Did d well and feed upon it; nor could all
Those mighty Locks forbid their Festival.
59.
But howling round about the woeful Room
Were those unhappy Souls whose Thirst of Gold
Had plunged Them in this eternal Doom;
Souls which to their own Baggs themselves had sold,
And bought their Prison, from whose Misery
Their useless Store could no Redemption buy.
60.
His mystic Wand old wrinckled Balaam broke,
And flung his wretched charms about the floor,
Cursing the day when He to Balack took
His voyage for vile love of Money, more
Than Heaven and Truth; and crying often, Why was
I with my Wit, less Wise than my plain Ass!
61.
There wretched Achan roared, himself to see
So gorgeous in his Babylonish Cloak:
Besides, to make him rich in Misery,
Deep in his heart his golden Wedge was stuck;
And his two hundred silver shekels cast
Into a Clog, about his feet held fast.
62.
There cursed Ahab with eternal Fright
Seemed to see Naboths Ghost flash in his face;
Whose guiltless blood quite quenched that Delight
With which the Vine's should have enflamed his Glass:
Nay every causeless Stone which had been thrown
On Naboths head, rebounded on his own.
63.
Gehazie there, as white with Leprosy
As he with guilt was odious and black,
His double Change of Garments hates, which he
Can for his stinking Soars no Cover make,
And still he starts, and thinks his Masters eye
Does Him, and his two Syrian Talents spy.
64.
There Dives rends his purple Robes, and flings
Away the bitter Sweets of his old Feasts,
Cursing his own, but blessing his Dogs Tongues
Which were so courteous to the poorest Guests,
Kissing and Licking Lazaru's Soars, whilst He
With (...) Raylings grieved his Poverty.
65.
But this Room only was the Portall to
The Chapel, whose poor Architecture was
Of equal Vileness, had its Roof not so
Been skrew'd up, as to yield convenient space
For State and Majesty to stand upright,
And let the God appear in his own height.
66.
Have Thou not heard how upon Dura's Plain
Nebuchadnezzar made his Ovens wrath hot
At those who feared Hells Furnace, and the stain
With which Idolatry their Souls would blot,
When he erected sixty Cubits high
The Mountain of his golden Deity?
67.
The Copy of that Idol hence He took,
For in this Temple its Original stands;
Such is the massy Head, such is the Look,
Such are the Legs, the Breast, the Arms, the Hands,
Such is its monstrous bulk, and such the beams
With which its pure and burnished Metal flames.
68.
His Name is Mammon, and although he be
So dead a Lump, that aid he cannot lend
Unto himself; yet to his Deity
Almost all living Men do couch and bend:
Heavens King with all his Powers of Love and Bliss
Works upon Humane Hearts with less Success.
69.
Both those who see, and those who have no eyes,
Are by his splendour equaly invited;
For Both are Blind, when they begin to prize
His worthless Worth, and find their Souls delighted
With the bare contemplation of Money,
Which is their Thirsts Milk, and their Hungers Honey.
70.
Thrift, that most slandered Thing, pretended is
By almost every Age and Tribe of Men;
Who all inamor'd of this glistering Bliss,
After the Call of Moneys chincking run;
And tainted with the immedicable itch
Of heaping Riches, never think they are rich.
71.
Before the Image both the sick and well,
The Rich, and Poor, the Young, and Aged lay;
Active and hot was their Devotions Zeal
Disdaining any Respit Night or Day,
And mortifying with hard Penance what
Soever Mammons Laws allowed not.
72.
About its shaddowed feet grew a thick Crop
Of every kind of Sin which taints this Earth;
Fruits, which those fond Devoto's gathered up
As fast's the pois'ned Roots could bring them forth:
The Golden Crime this certain Privilege wins,
That it is always rich in other Sins.
73.
In other Sins; and in the righteous Curse
Which is by Vengeance ti'd eternaly
Unto the never-satisfied Purse:
For still those Cormorants are tortured by
Vexatious Cares, and Fears of Want, the more
They are encumbered with their growing Store.
74.
That Store, which with such tyrannizing Awe
In endless bondage holds their Souls, that they
With any of those golden Streams which flow
Upon their Lips, durst not their Thirst allay;
But rather antidate their Hell, and learn
Betimes in everlasting Drought to burn.
75.
The Priest which waits upon this Deity
Is full as ougly as its self is fair:
The raving wallowing Maenades would be
Spruce handsome Ladies, if compared with Her;
So would the rankest Witch that ever yet
Disfigured was in any Magic Fit.
76.
Age bends her looks toward that Earth, in which
Uncessantly to delve, is her delight:
As are the backs of bunched Camels, such
Is Hers, and full as well agrees with Weight;
All Load is light to Her, if but one Grain
Of intermixed Profit it contain.
77.
Her Face all over's plowed up with Care,
And long and deep the wretched furrows be;
Her hollow Eyes quite damped and dazell'd are
By glaring on her glistering Deity:
Her sallow Looks, and shrivelled parched Skin
Confess what Pains she takes about her Sin.
78.
Her Nails she never cut, but let them grow
Up with her Wealth, for Scraping was her Trade:
No greedy Vulture could such tallons show,
Such dreadful Claws no Harpie ever had:
These were the Engines with which she did break
Earths Bowels open, and the Center rake.
79.
A putrid Mantle ti'd about her Waste
Was all the Roabs she would her self allow,
Which she had found upon a Dunghill cast
A thousand years ago; and which was now
Nine hundred Times new Patched; yet would not She
At the least cost of a new old one be.
80.
Nine stuffed Pouches on a leathern Thong
Crowded about her miserable Loins;
With these, of massy Keys two Bunches hung,
The Memorandums of her treasured Mines.
Which Keys she twenty times a day would tell,
And reckon what under their Locks did dwell.
81.
Patrocles was to Her, a generous Knight,
And made his board the Sceen of Lavishnesse:
When she with Dainties would her self delight
Some old worm-eaten Root her Banquet was;
And when at most her Fare she did enlarge,
She would in Salt be at an whole Mites charge.
82.
But planted deep in her unhappy breast
Is the black Root of all her monstrous Cares,
Foul Infidelity, which bids her cast
About how to with-stand what her vain fears
Make terrible, and build her Trust upon
No Power or Providence, but her own alone.
83.
Besides the Idea's of her Gold which lay
Pill'd there in cursed heaps, did rusty grow:
This Rust, its dwelling turned into its Prey
And on her heart incessantly did know:
Yet was her Idol unto her so dear,
That for more Money, she more Rust would bear.
84.
This Hag was Avarice; whom Satan held
Almost as dear, as He thy Spouse did hate:
Upon her Power He alone did build
His final hopes to bring about his great
Design of Malice, for He knew that She
Could do much more with Men, than Heaven, or He.
85.
Unto her house himself in person came,
And, with all condescent of Courtesy,
Wiping aside the Sulphur and the Flame
In which his royal Lips did use to fry,
Saluted Her, who never until this
Occasion, from her King obtained a Kiss.
86.
This Favor ravished her so deep, that She
All his Injunctions did with Joy receive:
First taking her Commission, on her knee,
(Which thrice she kissed) and then her hasty leave,
To earth she posts; where she finds out a Cell
Almost as helish as her native Hell.
87.
For to Iscariots breast she took her way,
Which foolish He left open without a Guard:
With all her venom in she rushed, and lay
Close in the bottom of his heart; full hard
It was ever she intruded in, but now
No stone can such proofs of its Hardness show.
88.
Those Words of potent Sweetness which did drop
From Jesu's blessed Lips, could Winds, and Seas,
And Sicknesses, and Devils bridle up,
And every Storm, but Judas his appeas.
O that Man should that only Monster be
Which is too hard for Mercies Suavity.
89.
As He who boiling Lead has swallowed down
Feels himself all on fire, and thinks that though
A thousand Seas into his Cup were thrown
They could not quench his drought: So Judas now
Perceived his impois'ned bosom fry
In covetous Thirsts impatient Ardencle.
90.
Millions of Thoughts are raging in his breast,
And every one of them is all on fire:
He scorns, and hates the Poverty of Christ;
No other Bliss but Gold he does desire:
Talk not to Him of penniless Piety;
What ever it cost, he must have Gold, or die.
91.
But yet this only Poison did not swell
His heart; Another joined in the plot.
Deep in the very Sink of lowest Hell
Is situate a dreadful gloomy Grot;
A Grot which there in ambush seems to lie
Hatching the Eggs of all Conspiracy.
92.
And yet within, a goodly House is built
Muchlike the Palace of some Virgin Queen:
With quaint Designs the Frontispice was gilt,
And the whole Fabric looked like Beauties Sceen.
White Marble were the rich Materials,
And yet the Workmanship out-shin'd the Walls.
93.
What full Balconies, stately Terrasses,
(...) Anticks, fair Compartments, handsome Cants,
(...) Freezes, and neat Cornishes,
Brisk and well-order d Turrets! Nothing wants
That Art could give to make the Outside fine;
Yet still the House is gallanter within.
94.
The double Door with open lips invites
All Strangers to come in: The Porter there,
Well learned in all complementall Rites,
Bids them kind welcome with his vocal cheer;
He smiles, he bows, he fawns, he knows the Name
Of all the Guests, and in he ushers them.
95.
The Hall with silken Carpets all is spread
To court the Strangers feet with soft delight;
The dainty Roof is arched over head
With checkered Roses red, and Lilies white;
Delicious Odours roll about the room
Sweet entertainments unto all that come.
96.
But at the upper end, upon a Throne
Of moderate Height, sits crafty Treachery,
A Feind more old then Hell it self, and one
Whose face would of her age clear witness be
Had not Art intervened, and taught her how
To make false spring upon true Winter grow.
97.
Old Jezabells lank and wrinckled Cheeks were not
So out of shape as hers; yet she had found
A Paints hypocrisy for her faces Blot,
Which with a youthful verdure clothed it round:
No Valleys did appear, but either Cheek
With beauteous Politure was plump and sleek.
98.
And though a thousand envious Frowns lay hid,
Her outward Aspect wore a gentle Guise;
Loves, Joys, and Smiles, wear sweetly marshalled
About her Lips, her Forehead, and her Eyes:
Brave Judiths glances less alluring were
Which conquered her Countries Conqueror.
99.
Her Tresses, which indeed were Knots of Snakes,
She overlay'd with soft and dainty Hair;
Whose waving circling Net of Amber takes
Spectators Hearts, as well's the sporting Air,
And works as many valiant Wonders, as
The mighty Locks of Samson brought to pass.
100.
An olive Branch in her right Hand she hel'd,
And in her left a wreath of Roses, but
The wreath within was all with Nettles filled,
The smiling Branch with lurking shorns beset:
For this was she who could teach Peace to fall
To Massacres, and make Sweets flow with Gall,
101.
Her Robe of state flowed low beneath her Feet;
For, such they were esteemed while they lay hid:
But she had neither Feet nor Legs; a great
And knotty Tail was sweeping in their stead;
A tail which she about her round could wind,
And hug and kiss the sting she ware behind.
102.
The Siren thus above the Water is
As soft and smooth and clear a Nymph as she;
But her Catastrophe of Monstrousnes
Lurks un derneath with wise Hypocrisy:
For though not all the Sea can serve to wash
It off, each Wave can hide the ougly Fish.
103.
When ever she speaks, a flood of honey flows,
And with her breath, a cloud of Odours breaks;
Yet in her Mouth a Crop of Poison grows,
Under her Lips a Nest of Adders makes
Its cursed abode; her Tongu's a mortal Spear,
And all her Teeth invenomed Arrows are.
104.
But in her desperate bosom treasured lies
The fatal Pith and Marrow of all Hell;
Distractions, Tumults, Wars, Spights, Injuries,
Confusions, Tortures, Deaths. O who can tell
The Monsters of that black Abyss, wherein
There is full Room for the whole Sea of Sin!
105.
Her choice Attendants stood about her Throne,
Fair-faced Peace, and buxome Courtesy,
Free-hearted Friendship, mild Compassion,
Neat Complement, and golden Flattery,
Nimble Officiousness, large Promises,
Deep Oaths, false Truths, deceitful Faithfulness:
106.
Sweet angel-faced Things, restored Laws,
Reformed Religion, rescued Liberty:
For such the fondly-credulous World, which knows
Not what a Vizard means, takes Them to be,
Admiring for an heavenly Spirit of Light
The masked Monarch of Infernal Night.
107.
But at her back, behind a Veil, did lie
A (...) which she esteemed more than these;
Thefts, Rapines, Scoffs, Reviling, (...),
Plots, Poisons, Covenants, and Conspiracies,
Right-down Rebellion, Murdering of Kings,
And all that Ruin and Subversion brings.
108.
Beyond this Veil, an Iron Door did lead
Through a long Entry stuffed with fire and smoke,
Into a Dungeon replenished
With every Shape of Horror, whose fell Look
With everlasting fright tormented all
The Prisoners which into that Pit did fall.
109.
Grief lived in triumph there, and all the Pains
Professed Excess: the language of the Den
Was Signs, and Groans, and noise of tumbled Chains,
Cries, Yellings, Curses, Blasphemies of Men
And God, eternal Seizzing raised by
The Souls and Bodies which in it do fry.
110.
There might you see upon Cains guilty face
A deeper Mark than God upon it set,
His innocent Brothers Blood, which scallt the place
On which it lay: His treacherous breast He beat,
And now with truer Reason cried, my Pain
Is greater than my Patience can sustain.
111.
No longer now He feared to be slain,
But wished to meet another Lamech, who
Might rid him of this dying Life: In vain
He gnash'd his teeth; In vain he cursed his Woe,
And Him who chained Him in it: For his Grief
Sung now beneath the region of Relief.
112.
There (...) lay tearing off her Hair
To think of Samsons which her Falsehood cut:
The Withes and Ropes not half so sturdy were
As those which now her Treason on her put,
Those Chains, which bound her to her endless Rack,
Stronger than Samsons sinewie Arms could break.
113.
There lay fierce Joab, with his woeful hand
Upon his fifth Rib; for the treacherous Wound
He thought he sealed so sure on Abner, and
On Amasa, did on himself rebound:
Just David's legacy, and his Sons Command,
Sent him this Vengeance by Benaja's Hand.
114.
Insidious Rechab, and Baanah there
With everlasting Horror seemed to see
The righteous Head of Ishbosheth appear.
And check them with their traiterous Villainy:
How gladly would They, to buy off their Pain,
Give both their Heads, that His were on again!
115.
There hung rebellious Absalom by the Head
Not on an Oak, but on a fiery Tree,
Whose Boughs of Torture round about him spread,
And shadow d him with flaming Misery:
Three Darts stuck in his double Heart, and made
Way for the stinging Worm which there does feed.
116.
His Tongue its Popular Blandishments forgets,
by which it stole the Peoples Loyalty;
And nothing now but pois nous Curses spits:
This made great David, whose religious Eye
Descri'd his desperate State, be so extreme
In pitying and in lamenting Him.
117.
There Ziba detestation heaps upon
That fawning Lie by which He did obtain
Upright Mephibosheths Possession,
From which he reaps this crop of endless Pain:
There Shimei railes on his own Railing, who
Had poured his Curses on his Sove raigns Woe.
118.
The Pride of ready Wit Ahithophell
With all his Plots about his Halter ti'd,
Hangs there: and now the famous Oracle
No Answers gives, but hideous Roars, and wide
Yellings, that He who had betrayed his King
Himself more madly to these Flames did bring.
119.
There Zimri howled for grief that He was more
With Treason drunk, then Elah was with Wine,
And now more raging flaming Tortures bore,
Then when his Palace all one fire did shine.
For Zacharies death there Shallum waild in vain,
Who in his Sovereign, his own self had slain.
120.
These, and ten thousand Traitors more were there;
For deep and large the woeful Dungeon was,
Having for all their Heirs full Room to spare,
Choice Room, for Those to whom the highest place
Of most profound Damnation was due,
The Christian-seeming Traytorous-being Crew,
121.
That Crew, whose several Stalls were ready built
Of burning Brass, and all in order placed
(According to the merit of their Guilt)
About a Seat, whose Canopie was graced
With Flames of Sovereign Dreadfulnes, a Seat
Wide gaping for the Prince designd for it.
122.
For 'twas the Throne that was designd for Him
Whom Jesus would have crowned King above:
But Judas in an heavenly Diadem
Would nothing find which might oblige his Love;
Hell had aforehand seized his Heart, and He
Resolved was to (...) his Misery.
123.
For Satan now unto this Palace came
As to the Den of Avarice before;
When she beheld her Sovereign Lord, the Dame
Rose from her Throne and met him at the door,
Where falling on her face, she asked what
Brought his high Majesty to her low Grot.
124.
His red hot (...) Scepter Satan here
Reached fortn for her to kiss, in sign of pe ace;
Then siniling on her answering face, Most Dear
Of all my Feinds, said He, my buis'nes is
The greatest that I ever undertook;
Which if it fails, this Scepter must be broke.
125.
It Is true, time was, when I, and Thou, did make
A brave Adventure in the face of Heaven,
When at our Courage all the Spears did quake,
And God was to his utmost Thunder driven;
His Throne did tremble at our rival Might,
And, had our foot not slipped, all had gone right.
126.
But that Misfortune is too poor to break
The strength of our immortal Pride: Forbid
It, all my Hell, that Beelzebub should make
Truce with that Tyrant which disherited
Him of his starry Kingdom: No; I may
Perhaps be beaten, but will never Obey,
127.
I am resolved to find Him work as long
As He and his Eternity can last:
My Spirit never must forget that Wrong
Which Me into this Dungeon did cast:
He now has done his worst, and I can be
But still in Hell, should He still conquer Me.
128.
Full well I know his Spite: Had any place
Been worse then this, He would have damnd Us thither:
Yet He, forsooth, must be the God of Grace,
Of Pity and of Tenderness the Father:
And silly Men believe Him too; But We
No reason have befooled so to be.
129.
Yet be He what He will to Men; to Us
He is a sworn and everlasting Foe:
And is it not just, He who maligns Us thus,
Should find that Devils are (...) too?
I would not wrong Him; yet I must not by
Respect to His, clip mine own Majesty.
130.
No: my brave Will He never yet subdued,
And I am now too old to learn to bow.
Upon my youth his (...) strengh He she wed,
Yet tender as I was, himself does know,
Even then I yielded not: And shall this Arm
Now grown all brawnie, not revenge my Harm?
131.
It shall and must: my Considence beats high,
For now our fight on evener ground shall be;
He from his slippery Heaven is come, and I;
Will as sure footing have on Earth, as He:
Besides, should We miscarrv, We are there
Near to our Hell, and no deep Fall can fear.
132.
And yet to make all sure, I hold it best
By secret Treason to unlock the way
Unto our Conquest: Do but Thou assist
My Plot, and let Fate, if it can, say nay.
How often when Ramms in vain have pushed the wall,
Have cunning Underminings made it fall!
133.
Come let us away with hate to Christ, I burn
More than with all my Kingdoms Flames: I swear
By my bright Mother the unspotted Morn,
(A fairer Virgin then his Mary far,)
By both my Horns, my Scepter, and my Crown,
That I will win his Blood, or loose mine own.
134.
The cursed Souls within all heard Him swear,
And clapped their flaming hands with damned Joy,
Hoping that now some fresh Companions were
Designd for Them: The Gates of Hell gave way,
Earth split into a mighty Gap, and He
Ascended, with his Handmayd Treachery,
135.
Then having melted both Himself and her
Into the lap of the next Wind he met,
He shely flew to Juda's Bosom, where
In with his breath, he unperceived got.
Thus other Plagues infuled in the Air
Steal to the Heart, and breath their Poison there.
136.
As when a Tyrant has usurped a Crown,
The Arms and Ensigns of the rightful Heir
He blurs, and tears, and pulls his Statues down,
And does their places for his own prepare,
Leaving no Sign to make the People dream
Of any other Sovereign but Him:
137.
So Satan played his part in Juda's breast:
All characters which were engraven there
Of his liege Lord and only Sovereign Christ,
His mighty Miracles, his loving Care;
His heavenly life, and Doctrine, he defaces,
And every line of Piety erases.
138.
Then, by the help of those two Feinds which he
Had there confederated. ( Avarice
The Mother of all Mischeifs, Treachery
The ready Midwife,) He erecteth his
Black Standard in the Apostates wretched Heart,
And thence his Conquests spreads to every Part,
139.
And Judas now breaths nothing else but Hell
Whose fumes are tumbling all about his brain;
With plots of spite and rage his breast does swell,
And with Contrivances of cursed Gain.
No Fury ever hatched such Thoughts as He,
Nor brought forth such portentous Villainy.
140.
O Avarice, how flat Idolatry
Is thine, who do vile rusty Wealth prefer
Before the King of heavenly Majesty,
Whose beams then all thy Gold more golden are?
Who can adore what Cankers feed on, Who
Can hug base Silver, and let Jesus go!
141.
Judas, the Slave of Gain, resolves to sell
His most inestimable Lord; whom He
Should rather keep, his thirsty Soul to fill
With all the Riches of Eternity:
But Avarice his Heart does so bewitch,
That He will sell Heaven, only to be rich.
142.
His Chapmen are the Priests; for They who had
Betrayed the House of God to Merchandise,
Will make no scruple to extend their Trade,
And count God saleable: But in the Price
They thrifty are, and beat their market low;
But Thirty silver Pieces They Will bestow.
143.
Fie sordid Caiaphas, and Annas, fie;
Your Law cties shame of this unworthy Rate:
Consult your Books, and they will not deny Levit. 27. 3.

But even the meanest Man is valued at
No less then fifty Shekells: and will you
For God and Man, no more than thus allow?
144.
Does Jesu's Godhead make Him of less worth
Than is the vilest He that breaths your Air?
Bid but like Chapmen; bring your Treasures forth
And buy the precious Wares your Offer square.
O could you purchase Him indeed, the Prize
Would make You rich in all Felicities.
145.
But thou, improvident Judas, since Thou art
Resolved to sell a thing whose value is
Beyond the power of Arithmetic Art
To reckon up; proportionate thy price
In some more near degree: let thy Demand
Make Buyers, who this Christ is, understand.
146.
Ask all the gold that rolls on Indu's shore,
Ask all the treasures of the Eastern Sea,
Ask all the Earths yet undiscovered ore,
Ask all the gemms and Perls which purest be
Ask Herod's Checker, ask the Highpriests Crown,
Ask Cesars mighty Scepter, and his Throne.
147.
Ask all the Silver of the glistering Stars,
Ask all the Gold that flames in Phebu's eyes,
Ask all the Jewels of Aurora's Tears,
Ask all the Smiles and Beauties of the Skies,
Ask all that can by any Thing be given,
Ask Bliss, ask Life, ask Paradise, ask Heaven.
148.
Trade not with these, the worst of Chapmen, who
So foully under-rate thy Merchandise:
To John, to Peter, or to Andrew go,
Who better are acquainted with the price
Of their unvaluable Lord, and see
What They will for their own Bliss offer Thee.
149.
Try what the Virgin Mother will bestow
For Him whom She holds dearer than her Heart:
Proclaim thy Market unto Heaven, and know
Whether the Angels will not gladly part
With more than Thirty silver Pieces for
Him, whom with prostrate faces They adore.
150.
Alas, though every Sin be Blindness, yet
Hell knows no Crime so full of Pitch as this,
Nor does the Sun of humane Reason set
In any Night so black as Avarice:
A thicker than Egyptian Darkness now
On Juda's intellectual Eyes did grow.
151.
Urge Him no more with Sense and Reason; He
Resolves to traffic with the Priests; for now
No other God but Money he can see,
He nothing sees at all, and cares not how
He makes his Bargain with them, so he may
Have but this wretched Sum in ready Pay.
152.
Thus Jesu's Wisdom did contrive to show
The mighty Patience of his Goodness; who
Though from Heavens Glory his bright Self he threw
Into the Arms of Dust and Shame, that so
Man's cursed Seed He might Redeem to Bliss,
By false ungrateful Man betrayed is.
153.
And now the Chinck of his adored Coin
Sounds in his Purse, the Traitor hasts to be
As good's his wicked Word, and is in pain
Till He bring forth his hired Treachery:
He thinks it an unworthy odious Crime
To cheat the Priests, who thus had trusted Him.
154.
O aenigmatick Wickedness! That He
To whom his Heavenly Masters precious Love
Could seem no Bond of Faithfulness, should be
By this so vile obliedgment Bound, and prove
Faithful unto his Foes! This, Psyche, this
Even to thy Phylax a dark Riddle is.
155.
So strange a Thing is Man's mysterious Heart,
No Angels eyes can through its secrets run;
To sound this Bottom, is the Sovereign Art
And privilege of God himself alone:
A certain proof that the Hearts hidden frame
Only from his immediate Fingers came.
156.
The Caytiff therefore, least his Plot should fail,
And Hells long expectation be prevented,
Begged some Assistance, that he might assail
His Prey with surer Treason, and indented
For a full Band of Men: The Priests were glad
To see the Man so resolutely mad.
157.
A Troop they had all of Commanded Men,
Whose hearts were Iron, and their foreheads Brass:
No Boars or Tigers ever could outrun
Their fury, when their aim at Mischief was:
They might have passed for Sovereign Monsters, but
For their fell Masters; and Iscariot.
158.
Some armed were with churlish Clubs, and some
With keen and thirsty Swords, but all with Spite:
With these at's heels did Captain Judas come,
Resolved to slay, but yet afraid to fight:
Treason was evermore a Coward, and
By Number, not by Valor, does contend.
159.
The Ensigns which before the Troop did go,
Were wary Lanthorns, or bold Torches, which
Their glaring and unnatural Beams did throw
About the Midnight Air; whose shades by such
Unlooked for Apparitions frighted, fled
Behind the Hills and Trees to hide their head.
160.
Thus having marched over Cedron, They
To yonder Garden came, too sweet a place
To be this Mischiefs Sceen; but yet his Prey
The Serpent, as thou know, of old did chase
In sweetest Eden; and Iscariot, who
Followed his Steps, could none but this way go.
161.
Thy blessed Lord with his Disciples, there
Retired was, and set himself to Pray:
When lo, a Spectacle of greater fear
Marched full against his single Face, than They
Whose armed impatient Spite was drawing nigh
To sacrifice Him to all Cruelty.
162.
A black and laboring Cloud hung o'r his head,
In which his Father veild his gracious Eyes;
Yet through that Blackness his great Arm He spread
And reached it down to Earth; From angry Skies
The Lightning never with such terror broke
Nor Thunders Trump the hills and valleys shook.
163.
For in his Hand a mighty Cup He held
In which all Monstrous Things did boil and flame:
Up to the brimms vast circle it was filled
With all the Worlds excrementitious Stream,
Which Vengeance kindling with her fiery breath,
Had turned into the Ocean of Death.
164.
That universal Poison whose black flood
From Adams veins through all his Race did run,
Met in this Sink, and joined with the Brood
Of every singular Transgression:
All which, to fit the Cup, were blended in
The several Pains due to each several Sin.
165.
Had (...), had Phlegeton, had all that Wit
Has feigned, and all that Justice made in Hell,
Had all the Flames which Etna's mouth does spit,
Had all the Stincks which in the Dead Sea dwell,
Had all the Poison of each Serpents Tongue
Which Lybia breeds, into the Cup been wrung,
166.
T had been a Draught of Nectar, unto this:
Yet lo the monstrous Mixture to the lip
Of thy sweet Lord by Heavens Hand reached is.
O Psyche, how shall He digest this Cup,
Which, had all Adams Sons been forced to drink,
It would have drowned them in its fatal Sink.
167.
But well He knew the Hand which loved his Cheek
When in all Blisses Bosom He did lie:
And though so strange an Offer it did make,
'Twas still the same; and how can he deny
To entertain what that presents him, though
The Cup with Horror's own heart-blood did flow?
168.
Were it as wide, and deep, and full again,
This Thought alone commands it to be sweet;
And, till He drink its Pangs, He is in pain,
So large is his Obedience, and so great
His Love to Man, who otherwise must be
Drunk from this Bowl with endless Misery.
169.
But then this Thought was justled by another;
For He himself was passive Flesh and Blood;
His proper Natures Voice how shall He smother!
For She now pleads aloud for her own good,
And would not willingly choose to be hurled
Into that Gulf which would devour the World.
170.
O how he strugled in this mighty strait
Being Himself with his own Self to fight!
Had all the Centres most compacted Weight
Been pitched upon his Heart, it had been light
And easy unto this, which woeful He
Endured in this heroic Agony.
171.
The Contestation grew so hot within
That all his Bosom fell on flaming fire;
And from melting Furnace, through his Skin
Thick Proofs of that strong Fervor did transpire;
For at the Mouth of every laboring Pore
Not Watery Sweat, but Blood broke open its Door
172.
O matchless Combat! whose mysterious Power
Without the edge of Sword, or point of Dart,
Could cloth this Champion round about with Gore,
And wound Him from within; whilst every Part
Racked and transfixed with intestine Streins
In streams of purple Tears bewailed its Pains.
173.
Down to the Ground this sweating Torrent flows
To wash away the Curse which on it grew;
Whilst moated in his melted Self, thy Spouse
The noble fight does with fresh Strength renew:
His Mortal Nature three stout Onsets gave.
To his immortal Piety, and Love.
174.
Father, He cried, by that thy tender Name,
Commiserate thy most afflicted Son:
If thy Omnipotence a way can frame
How to exempt Me from my Passion,
O let thine Hand, which brings this Cup to Me,
Far hence remove, it, and my Misery.
175.
But straight, by most athletick Braverie
Above himself He gets, and nobly cries,
Although all Bitterness triumphant be
In this sad Cup, it amply does suffice
That from thy Hand it comes: Thy Will shall be,
And not mine own, the Rule and Rein to me.
176.
Thus reverend Abraham, when by Gods Command
He was to bath his Sword in Isaac's blood,
Divided was in his own bowels, and
With his brave Self in competition stood;
Till valourous Piety her Powers strained
And the hard Laurel of Selfe-conquest gained.
177.
But when thy mighty Lord achieved had
This triple Conquest; Judas and his Rout
Like furious Boars into the Garden made,
And for their Prey all ranged and roved about;
Not knowing He as ready was to be
Betrayed, as they to work their Treachery
178.
For like a most victorious Champion, who
Before his other Foes, has conquered Fear,
He meets their Fury; asking, Whom with so
Eager and strong a Chase they hunted there.
Their traytorous Spite, and whom it sought, He knew,
Yet this brave Challenge in their face he threw.
179.
Jesus of Nazareth We seek, said they,
Alas, Blind Souls, He came to seek out you,
And lead you safely in the Kings high way
Unto his Throne above, that on your brow
Heavens Crowns for ever might have shined; but ye
In nothing would be Found but Treachery.
180.
Nor they, nor Judas, Psyche, now did know
Thy Spouses face, which flamed heretofore
With gracious Beauty; but was clouded now
With his strong Agonies all bloody Gore.
Thus like some duskie Meteor Phoebus shows
When an Eclipse upon his Countenance grows.
181.
But He who would not be unknown to those
Who came to suck what Blood was left behind,
(Which burned in his Veins, till it got loose,
And flowed as largely as his liberal Mind,)
Revests his Look with graceful Majesty,
And makes this brave Profession, I am He.
182.
If ever Thou have seen what killing Dread
Does on base-hearted Traitors seize, when They
Are by their awful Prince discovered,
Whose Voice, and Looks, their spurious Courage slay;
Treble this Fright, and then conceive what Fear
Shot through the Souls of these vile Caytiffs here.
183.
A stream of Horror drove them trembling back,
And over whelmed Them flat upon the Ground:
And in the depth of this dismaying Wrack,
Their shivering Spirits had been surely drowned,
Had He not spread his Pity over Them,
Whose Swords, and Staves, and Spite all made at Him,
184.
O how will they endure his Dreadful Eyes,
Which all this World on flaming fire shall set,
When He in triumph sweeping through the skies,
Shall hither come, and mounted on his great
Tribunal, once again cry, I am He,
No more the Prey, but Judge of Treachery.
185.
When they no Lanthorns nor no Torches Light,
Nor Juda's Conduct any more shall need;
But by our Trumpets death-awakning fright
Be summoned up, and by our hands be led
Into the presence of Heavens glorious Son,
Whom then they would not find, but cannot (...)
186.
But now He brideled in his awful Rays;
And, on condition his Disciples may
Without disturbance go their several (...),
Offers himself unto his Foes, who lay
Quaking before Him: but took courage now,
Perceiving They again might (...) grow.
187.
As when a serpent bruised and beaten back,
Spies any way to reinforce her fight,
Her head she raises, and deep care does take
Her Wrath and Poison how to spit aright:
So did these Elves start up, and cheer their Head
(And this Iscariot was,) to do the Deed.
188.
Iscariot, that Prince of Treason, now,
Forgetful of his royal Masters Love,
And of the Dint of that majestic Blow
Which struck Him and his Army down; to prove
His cursed Self Earths Lucifer, led up
Against the Lord of Hosts his desperate Troop:
189.
And then, none but a golden Arrow shot
Burnished with fair and complementall grace,
Yet in as mortal Venom dipped, as that
Which Eve's Heart felt, when she saluted was
By faire-tongu'd Hell, and by the Tempter driven
With courteous Treason from her earthly Heaven.
190.
Hail Master, was the Word: What Ear could now
Disrellish such a suger'd Noise as this,
Or once suspect Discording Jarrs should grow
In such soul-plying Accents! Master is
The Phrase of Service; Hail, of Love: Yet He
Could make these honest Words, insidious be.
191.
And when his faithless Tongue her part had done,
His Lips succeeded in the Treachery:
With matchless Impudence He ventured on
Against the very face of Majesty;
And, to make sure his Project should not miss,
Sealed it upon his Master with a Kiss.
192.
O Wit of Treason! could no Sign but this,
The gentlest Token of soft Courtesy,
Be made the Mark of deepest Barbarousnesse!
Monstrous Iscariot, how do thou, by thy
Inhumane Kindness, both a Traitor prove
Of Loves great Master, and the Badge of Love!
193.
Is not a Kiss, the soft and yiedling Sign
Which clapps the Bargain of Affection up:
The sweet and joyous Marriage between
The tenderest Pair of Lovers, Lip, and Lip:
The closing Harmony, which when the Tongue
Has done its best, compleats the pleasing Song?
194.
Is not a Kiss the most delicious Seal
By which Friends Cement their concording Hearts!
Must this Betrayed be! Must faithless Hell
Poison this dainty Truth! Must Hatreds Arts
Be clothed in the softest sweetest Dress
Of courteous Peace, and amorous Tenderness!
195.
Must sweet Arabia's Beds breath out a Stinck,
And harbor all the Bane of Thessaly!
Must milkie Lilies stain their Leaves with Ink!
Must Roses Buds with Thorns all prickly be!
Must Silk and Down be harsh! Must Honey flow
With Gall! Must Summer Gales bring Ice and Snow.
196.
O what will Treason not presume to do,
Which more than all those strange Mutations makes
In this own venturous Fact of Judas; who
Even in this Tie of Love, all Friendship breaks;
Who biteth with his Lips, not with his Teeth,
And strives to Kiss his dearest Lord to death.
197.
But though Iscariot his own Love betrays,
His Lord triumphs beyond all Treachery,
And does against the Traitors Hatred raise,
A Counterwork of heavenly Lenity:
O Mystery of Love! though Jesus may
Betrayed be, no Plots his Grace betray!
198.
Who teaches all Succeeding Traitors how
To burnish over that foul rankling Brass
Of impudence which arms their sullen Brow;
To tip Rebellion with meek Lies; to grace
Their arrogant Treaties with submissive Words,
Whilst at their Sovereigns hearts they aim their Swords.
199.
He called no Lightning from the Clouds, or from
His potent Eyes to flash on Juda's face,
And throw on his bold Lips that flaming Doom
Which due unto their odious Treason was:
He charged not Earth her dreadful Mouth to open,
And on the hellish Kisser close it up.
200.
O no: With heavenly Tenderness He cries,
Friend, wherefore art Thou come? Strange Miracle
Of gentle Patience! Who can comprise
Thy blessed depth! Upon the face of Hell
Shall the sweet Name of Friend be printed by
Him who beholds, and feels its Treachery!
201.
Is foul Ingratitude, plain Apostacy,
Right down Rebellion, now become a friend?
Or rather, is not this Disciple by
His cursed Revolt, transformd into a Feind:
And will his wronged Lord by none but this
Dear Name revenge his most invenomed Kiss!
202.
O Psyche, Jesus tortured was to see
Judas, himself into all Torments throw;
And by this Charm of noblest Lenity
Back into Heaven indeavored him to draw:
He knew Loves Cords were strong, and from his Crime
By these he strives to hale and rescue Him.
203.
Why art thou come, thus to betray thy Friend?
Why art thou come, with Arms against a Lamb?
Why art thou come, all Bonds of Love to rend?
Why art thou come to fight for thine own shame?
Why art thou come with this strong Preparation
For thy Lords death, and for thine own Damnation?
204.
Thy Kiss I in its natural Language will
Kindly interpret, and make my Reply
In the same Dialect, if thou will still
Embrace my ever faithful Courtesy,
And yield that Bliss may in thy heart have room;
Say then, my Friend, say wherefore art Thou come.
205.
Thus did the Prince of sweetness plead and woo:
But the deaf Serpent stopped his cursed ear;
In's heart the Thirty Pieces chinked so
That He no other Harmony can hear.
When lo, the Soldiers, knowing now their Prey,
On Jesus fell, and haled Him away.
206.
For love of Thee, and all his other Brides
Thus, Psyche, was thy Lord content to be
Sold at so vile a Rate, and Mocked besides
Even by his own Disciples Treachery.
Shrink not, if thy near Friends abuse thy love,
Since Gods own Favorites so faithless prove.
207.
And let the World by this one Copy learn
That hell-bred Boldness is not strange, or new,
By which most Fostered Favored Creatures turn
Flat Enemies, and lead an armed Crew
Of Miscreanrs, with bloody Impudence
Against the Powers and Person of their Prince.
208.
But when no mercy could the Traitor win
To entertain his Pardon, Vengeance made
Haste to pour out her self upon his sin:
For Satan, who his heart possessed had,
His Treason in his proper Coin repayd,
And the Betrayer fatally betrayed,
209.
Into a Corner of the Garden, where
Thoughtfull disconsolate Night sat thick and black,
She crowded him alone; and having there
Prepared and fitted her infernal Rack,
With studied fury, not his Body, but,
His captivated Soul on it she put.
210.
For by the beams of their own hellish Light
Unto Iscariots intellectual Eyes
Herself She did display. Excessive Fright
The Traitors wretched Heart did strait surprise:
Each Joint and Member quaked and sweat, and He
Felt in this Garden too his Agony.
211.
He saw feirce Beizebubs sulphurous face
Flaming with swarthy fire; His Horns he saw
Mounted high on his head with dreadful grace,
Which his erected snakie Hair did know:
He saw his adamantine Nails and Paws,
His steely Teeth, his brazen gaping Jaws.
212.
He saw the Tempest of his flaming Breath
Which swarthy Volumes spread of stinking smoke:
He saw the windows of eternal Death
Flung open in his staring Eyes, whose Look
Slew him alive: He saw his Iron Mace,
His burning feet, and his enraged Pace.
213.
He saw his forked Tail in triumph thrown
Upon his shoulder, and his irefull Brow
With cruel scorn contracted in a frown:
Rampant Implacabilitie he saw
In every Gesture, and did plainly read
The full Description of Immortal Dread.
214.
When lo, stern Lucifer threw out his hand,
And by her Throat his woeful Conscience took:
And now, he cries, I Will make thee understand
What thou have chose, and what thou have forsook:
Look on this dainty Pair of Damsells here,
Who more than Heaven, and God, to thee were dear.
215.
Just at the word He opened to his view
The horrid Carkaise of foul Avarice;
And fouler Treachery, not in her hue
Of borrowed Smiles, and outside Comeliness,
But in her naked native Filth: and then
Shaking his Horns and Paws, He thus went on:
216.
Maddest of Fools; how many Hells do Thou
Deserve, who with such Hags could fall in love,
When Jesus wooed thy Heart? Well, take Them, now
The have paid so dearly for Them; They will prove
Sweet Brides, and pretiously adorn thy Bed
Which in the Bottom of my Realm is spread.
217.
If any Part at all there be in Them
Which is not horrid, may my Scepter break,
And may my royal Tongue no more Blaspheam:
For once, I tell Thee true, and Thou may take
The Devils Word; There are few Furies who
In monstrous Ouglinesse, thy Wives out-goe.
218.
And was thy Lord so vile a Thing, that He
Might not with these in Competition stand?
Did those unthankful Eyes of thine ever see
A face enriched with such pure Beauties, and
Majestic Graces, as in his did shine,
Making Humanity appear Divine?
219.
Most stupid Sot! How often have Thou seen
Divinity from His great Hand break out!
How often might plain Omnipotence have been
Read in the Miracles He daily wrought,
Casting forth all my stoutest Fiends! Yet Thou,
(And here He beat the Soul) to Me would bow.
220.
Nay never houle; it is but the Earnest, this,
Of what is to come: Thou needs would bow to Me:
To Me, of whom that Christ the Conqueror is:
He threw Me down from Heavens Sublimity
Into that Pit of Pangs, where I am now
The damned Sovereign of such as Thou.
221.
Had not as good have bowed unto Him,
Whose Yoke Thou would have lighter found than mine?
I tell thee Judas, I am but a grim
And rugged Lord; what Prizes once I win,
Infallibly for evermore shall fry
In Torments bottomless Extremity.
222.
And is my Hell, my everlasting Spite,
My unrelenting Fury, so much worth,
That Paradise, and Heaven, and Jesus might
Not find acceptance? Brings Damnation forth
Such strong Temptations? Can eternal Bliss
Not woo, and win as potently as this?
223.
Sure Hell and Death, are gallant Things, and I
Cannot allow Thee them, until Thou have
Through all Contempt, and Hate, and Infamy
Which Salem, or the World can yield thee, past:
That Preface shall, for that eternal Smart
Which gapes and longs for Thee, prepare thine Heart.
224.
Go then the Ages Blot and Monster, go,
Let every Mouth spit on thine hated Head,
Let every Tongue thick Curses on Thee strew,
Let every Hand be armed to strike Thee dead,
Let every Eye abhor thy balefull Sight,
Let all the World revenge thy Traytorous Spite.
225.
Let Heaven frown on Thee who betray'st its Son,
The Lord of Life, to Death, thy Savior to
Most sure most undeserved Destruction:
Into one Bolt let all Gods Thunders go,
And on thy cursed Heart his Justice throw,
Which scorned all the Mercy He could show.
226.
That Stroke will send Thee down into thy Place
Of Death, but yet of never-dying Pain,
Where melted with the flames of this my face
Thy thirty silver Pieces I will drain
Into thy Heart, that Thou may shreik and roat,
Whilst there they burn and boil for evermore.
227.
This said; the infulting Prince of Tyranny
In scornful Spite withdrew, being confident
Maturity would get her Wings and fly
To overtake his Plot: yet ever he went
Seav'n times he thresh'd the Conscience with the flaile
Of his enormous poyson-pointed Tail.
228.
As when the Deluge in great Noah's time,
Broke out upon the World, and with a Sea
Of universal Woe surpised the Crime
Of that impenitent Age; their Misery
To those unhappy Mortals opened their graves
In Desperation first, then in the Waves:
229.
So Judas, taken in this mighty flood
Of deepest Anguish, had no power to think
How to escape, or that his Saviors blood
Might drown that sea in which he feared to sink.
O no! the thought of that dear blood alone
Poured on his face Guilts blushing Ocean.
230.
Since long ago his Trust He rather built
On Money, than on God; he durst not hope
That Mercy now could reach his heightened guilt;
And thus by fear, to impudence set open
The way, for by this dread of goodness he
Gives flat defiance to its Lenity:
231.
And now sees vengance aiming at his head,
And his foul Treason flying in his face;
He sees the whole Worlds anger marshalled
Against his odious crime; He sees the place
Deep in the heart of Hell, where damned He
Designed is for evermore to be.
232.
With that, his Cloths, his Hair, his Flesh, he tore,
He roared, he raved, and thus to cursing fell:
May that unhappy day be read no more
In any Calendar, but that of Hell,
Which to this balefull Life did me betray;
A Life to living Death the dying way.
233.
Cursed be my Father, who did me beget;
Cursed be my Mother who did me conceive;
Cursed be my Nurse, because in every Bit
She mixed not Poison, which might Me repreive
From this most damned Night; And cursed be
All sicknesses which would not murder me.
234.
Cursed be this Hand of mine, which often has had
A Knife, and yet forbore my throat to cut;
Cursed be these Feet, which often their way have made
Over the brows of Precipices, yet
Would never stumble, that I might have fell
Then but to Earth, who tumble now to Hell.
235.
Cursed be that Day which me acquainted brought
With Jesus, and enrolled my ominous Name
Amongst his Chaplanes: Cursed be that thought
Which spurred me to the Priests to trade with them;
Cursed be the project which has cursed me so,
Cursed be the Bargain, and the Chapmen too.
236.
Cursed be this Garden; upon every bed
May fatal Hemlock, Woolfbane, Poppy, grow:
May Vipers, Adders, Basilisks be spread
In every corner; on each Tree and Bough
May Ravens and Scritchowls dwell, that something may
Resemble Judas here another day.
237.
Another day! o no! may thickest Night
Upon this Sceen of Treason ever dwell;
That neither Sun nor Star may reach their light
More unto this, than to the other Hell.
The bloody beams of Ghosts and Furies will
With fittest luster this black garden fill.
238.
But may the deepest of all Execrations
On you, my thirty silver torments, fall:
How shall I be revenged on your temptations
Which thus have drowned me in a Sea of Gall?
Is there no way, base, pale, and paltry Clay,
How I may you, as you did me betray?
239.
Shall I take you along with me to Hell,
And hold you fast amidst my endless flames?
Or send you back unto your former Cell,
The Highpriests wicked Bag? surely this seems
The blacker and the deeper Pit, and I
Thither again will damn you instantly.
240.
This said: Like that tormented Man, in whose
Possessed heart a Legion of Feinds
Did tyrannize; He to the City goes,
Where in the Temple he his Chapmen finds:
Unhappy Temple, which was now Possessed
With them, as was with Satan Juda's Breast.
241.
With hideous yelling he amongst them ran,
Flinging about his hands, his head, his eyes;
And having strein'd his ejulation
Wide as his throat could reach, O Me! he cries,
My sin burns in my breast, and domineers
Too high to hope for quenching from my tears.
242.
No Expiation does that Altar know
Which for my deep di'd guilt can satisfy
The stream of Jesu's blood so full does flow
On my unpardonable Soul, that I
Am drowned for ever in my deep offense,
Being Condemned by his Innocence,
243.
Take your vile Money and my Curse with it,
May all Heavens wrath your bloody Bargain crown
Here with indignant fury having spit
On Them first, on his Silver next, and thrown
It at their hated Heads; away He flung
Raving and Cursing as he ran along.
244.
For all the way he thought he struggled through
An Army of reviling Detestations:
Over his head he both his Arms did throw
To sh heild it from his own Imaginations,
Through which from heaven and earth such arrows flew
As wounded Him at every stop a new.
245.
For Melancholy, dark as is the Pitch
Which on the throat of Hell so thick does grow,
Chok'd every glimpse of Sense and Reason which
Offered to dawn in his Souls sphere, and show
Him by what torturing Mistakes he had
Himself unto Himself a Tyrant made.
246.
Thus came He to a secret silent Place
Without the Town, yet could not think it so;
For still he fancied all the City was
Hot in the chase of Him (...) Saviors Foe:
Each Bird or Fly that moved, made him start,
Each Wind that puffed, blew quite through his heart.
247.
His Eyes distracted were, first looking up
For fear least Heaven should fall upon his head;
Then down, least Earth her dread full Mouth should open
And snatch him to his grave ever he were dead;
Till tired with this fear, his breast he stroke,
And into right down Desperation broke.
248.
Adieu all hopes, he cries, and fears adieu:
Come Veng ance, come, my heart is ready here.
I see how vainly I my Money threw
Back to the Priests, whose burden still I bear;
The Rust sticks close and heavy still upon
My knawed Soul; and I must be undone.
249.
If Heaven be just, why does it yet delay
To pour its Wrath on my deserving head?
Am I not Judas, He who did betray
Its only Son? Is not my Conscience red
With his most innocent Blood; and yet must I
Be still endured to live, when He must die?
250.
At least, great Satan do not thou deny
Thy Servant Pay for this grand Work which He
Has compassed with unparalleld Treachery
In high obedience to thy Hell and Thee:
No Soul did ever more than I have done,
Nor ernd a gallanter Damnation.
251.
Did Thou not promise Me but even now
The dearest Torments of thy deepest Hell!
Deceive me not again: If ever thou
Were careful of thy Credit, now fulfill
Thy bounteous Word; or look no more to be
Served by Man, if thou reward'st not me.
252.
Come then; burn up these Lips, which learned of thee
Their killing Kiss: Dash out these Brains which thou
Taught'st how to project that fell Treachery;
Tear this cursed Carkase: which is wholly now
At thy disposal, that each Limb may feel
No portion, but the total Wrath of Hell.
253.
Take this dispairing Soul, and let it be
The Prey of thy eternal Furies: it is
No groundless Challenge, that, as due to Me,
I claim the utmost of thy Spite; unless
Thou have thine infinite Debt to Me forgot;
Jesus and Heaven into thine hands I put.
254.
Jesus and Heaven; Names which I now must hate
As having made them my eternal Foes:
O how I long to be in that free state
Where generous Blasphemy no Bridle knows;
Where I may Rage as loud's Heavens Thunders (...)
And, being cursed, curse for overmore.
255.
Here the full Tide of fury stopped his Throat;
Yet still He star'd and struggled with his Grief,
Still he tore off his hair, his Breast He smote,
And through Self-tortures hunted for Relief:
His Tongue He bit because it would not speak,
And stamped the Earth which would not open break.
256.
But as the Hair, the Fat, and Pitch, which were
Into the Dragons throat by Daniel cast,
Did burn, and boil, and rage, and tumble there,
Far more than in the Pot; until at last
With most impatient swelling Toiments They
(...) through his monstrous belly burst their way.
257.
So did this Mixture of Grief and Despair
Flame in Iscariots bosom, till it grew
So strong and big, that all his Entrails were
Conquered with Tortures, and in sunder flew;
His Body split, and through that cruel Wound
Poured his more barbarous Bowels on the Ground.
258.
Thus from this Prison his black Spirit ran
Into that blacker Jaile reserved for it,
Next to the Center of Damnation,
Where now it raves in chains at Satan's feet,
Ensore'd the poisonous flames he spews, to drink
O that all Traitors w old of Judas think!
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO XII. The Banquet.
ARGUMENT.
TO seal his dear Remembrance safe, and sure
On the soft hearts of his selected Sheep,
Love institutes his parting Feast, so pure
So sweet, so rich, that Psyche raped by deep
Desire at its Description, sues to be
A Sharer in that Bords Felicity.
1.
BUt o, how large a Name is Treason, which
Does in another fatal Channel run,
And from this Universe's Cradle reach
Down to its funeral Pile: No Ocean
Ever stretched its Arms so wide, or spread such store
Of shipwrack'd Mortals on its helpless shore.
2.
And this Selfe-treason is; an imbred Feind
Whose business is to undermine her Home;
Whose most unnatural Nature is, to rend
Her too too loving Dames unhappy Womb;
Who knaws her self, and with (...) Spite
Free Vengeance takes on Luxuries delight.
3.
For she her self is Luxury; a Weed
Which grew at first in an unlikely Place:
Who would suspect that such a cursed Seed
Should Paradise's blessed Plants disgrace!
Yet, as the Serpent in those Beds did lie,
So did this full as venomous Luxury.
4.
Under the beaureous Tree of (...) there,
(...) found her first, and saw her (...) up
With (...) Zeal and restless Pains, one (...)
But dangerous and forbidden Fruit to crop:
Fool as she was, she helped her up, and knew
Not that by it her self she downward threw.
5.
Yet She to Adam needs would her commend,
And He, unkindely courteous, could not
Deny to hugg his Spouses seeming friend,
Who Death and Hell strait through his bosom shot,
And now the Dainties of all Paradise.
Could not his foolish appetite suffice.
6.
No; He must taste of that which never was
Designed to bless the Palate: But the Sour
Revengefull Fruit was quit with Him; for as
It in his Teeth did stick, with all the power
Of stupefaction them on edge it set,
Proving his fatal Torment, not his Meat.
7.
Nor could He choose but leave his wretched Heirs
The inheritance of this enchanting Pain;
Which down through all his Generations stayers
Failed not its propagated Bane to drain:
This hankering itching liquorishnes did run
Hot through the Veins of his remotest Son.
8.
Which Fervor did betimes so furious grow
That the old World on fire with Lust it set:
A fire which with the heat of Hell did glow,
And was as stinking and as black as it;
A fire, which joynd with other sins, grew stout,
And found the Deluge work to quench it out.
9.
But then Earths face being washed clean and white,
She smiled on Heaven with a well-pleasing Grace;
And God vouchsafed humane Appetite
A full Commission over all the Race,
Of Birds, of Beasts, of Fish, that He might see
How abstinent Man would prove, now being free.
10.
For generous spirits then do most abstein,
When they are Lords of their own Liberty;
When Virtue is entrusted with the Rein,
And room is given for Self-victorie;
When high-straind Moderation may prove
No Act of Duty, but a Work of Love.
11.
Man's Appetite to every thing was free,
Bating the Blood, in which the Life does swimm:
Blood is the tincture in which Cruelty
Stains all her clothes; a tincture for the grimm
And salvage Tygres; not for Man, who is,
Or should, Professor be of Tenderness.
12.
Indeed good Noah, who both Worlds had seen,
The Old and New, and was more Worth than both,
Endeavored to keep himself as clean
As now the Earth was washed; And that no sloth
Might tempt and steal him into Luxury,
Buckled his Bones to painful Husbandry.
13.
And that the Pains He in his Vineyard took
Might be requited by the Fruit it bare,
He shed the Grapes into his Bowl; whose Look
Might well have been his Monitor to beware:
Its rubie die, had He but understood,
He would have shunned this Liquor too, as Blood.
14.
But, as it smiled and sparkled in his face,
And moved with generous fervor in the Cup,
The un-suspicious Saint invited was
With equal cheerfulness to drink it up.
So, untri'd Pleasures by their daintis skin
And sweet behavior, approbation win.
15.
The flattering Liquor, as it downward went,
Knocked at his Heart, and easy entrance got;
Where with his Spirits it did complement,
And soft delicious Fire amongst them put.
Noah rejoiced to feel his bosom glow,
And his old Ages Ice begin to thaw.
16.
This Bait drew down another: for, alas,
Good Man he little knew that Treachery
In his Soul-cheering Cup infused was;
Or that his Wine which sparkled, ever would be
Destructive flame: But Embers often rise
Into Combustion, when We least surmise.
17.
He freely takes a second Draught: and now
The Liquor gathered strength and grew more bold;
Impatient to be suppressed below,
Up to his Head it found a way, and rolled
About his Brains, wherein there 'gan to swimm
Such thickning Clouds, that Reasons Sun grew dim
18.
And then infected with the poisonous Sweet,
Alas no power was left him to abstein:
No more to quench his Thirst, but that New Heat
Which burnd his veins, He takes his Bowl again;
Which to the brim in careless haste he fills,
And part on the earth, part in his mouth he spills.
19.
But now He Drunk no more; the Wine Drunk Him,
His Sense, his Judgment, and his Soul, and all;
(For thus, when in their own wild Draughts they swim,
Our witty Language Men does Drunken call)
And did so thoroughly his Brain confound,
That Earth, as well as Heaven, He thinks turns round.
20.
The Wine now sparkles in his eyes no less
Than it did in the Bowl before: He stares
On every thing, and yet he nothing sees;
He trips, and staggers, but no fall he fears,
Nor feels it when he falls; for having let
His Bowl drop down, Himself fell after it.
21.
Thus he who in the universal Flood
Escaped the fury of the proudest Wave,
And on the Oceans back in triumph rode,
Seeing below the whole Worlds woeful Grave;
Alas, was drowned in a silly Cup
Which he himself unwittingly drunk up.
22.
No Ark above this Deluge Us can bear
But Temperance, which here the Saint forgot;
Who, as he fell, had neither thought nor care
Of keeping on his modest Mantle; but
Quite destitute of Clothes, and Senses lay,
And did his double Nakedness display.
23.
But as the Traitor who has slain the King
Speeds from the Court as soon's the Fact is done:
So now the treacherous Liquor back does fling,
And from the Murder it committed, run:
Besides, a Rout of other Humors follows,
And slaughtered Noah in his Vomit wallows.
24.
Slaughtered indeed; and now a Man no more;
For nothing is alive in Him but Beast,
Which speaks its kind by its loud Swinish Roar:
And thus he tumbling lies, until oppressed
With his most heavy Self, he falls asleep,
And in that nasty Rest his brains does steep,
25.
Thus, as one part of Luxury did grow
In Paradise, the other planted was
In Noah's Garden; that the World might know
Danger can breed and lurk in any place:
Alas, the holiest Ground too often breeds
As well as wholesome Flowers, invenomed Weeds.
26.
Heavens Bounty granted all Variety
Of Meats to feast the Sober Appetite;
And added brisk and cheerful Wine, to be
The active Soul of Moderate Delight:
But peevish Man abused by his gross
Ingratitude, Heavens Grace to Wantonness.
27.
Neither by Eve's Example He would take,
Nor Noah's, warning, though their Sanctity
Did them far more invulnerable make
Then common Mortals feeble Breasts could be:
Still He would needs go dive to the profound
Bottom of Pleasures, though himself he drowned.
28.
And from that Bottom he fetched up at last
Improved Fat and Full-grown Luxury,
Who never appeared unto Ages past
More than a tolerable Prodigy,
For she much cooler was, and tamer then,
And did not banish Men quite out of Men,
29.
But now she an unruly Monster grew,
Being encouraged by Wines rampant Flame;
And round about the World in Triumph flew,
All which she shipwrack'd in her Poisonous stream:
Raving and roaring Mad she was, and made
All so, who practiced her intemperate Trade.
30.
The Laws of God, of Man, of Nature were
Vain feeble Bridles, when-soever she
Resolved in her furious Carreer
To let the Circle of her Healths run free:
Often has she mingled with her Wines mad flood
Friends, Brothers, Parents, Masters, Princes blood
31.
Strange was her Shape, (if yet Deformity
May in Shapes Title share,) her parched Head
Burns up all hopes of Hair, and scorns to be
By any thing but Baldness covered:
Her humorish Eyes all red and putrid, seem
In her own overflowing Wine to swim.
32.
But yet her Nose more provident is, for there
The Wine is bottled up and runs not out:
Only the Bottle being thin and clear
Speaks what it holds; and studded round about
With fervent Rubies, serves her perhaps
For a dear Item of a Bunch of Grapes.
33.
Wroth fiery Knots are marshalled upon
Her Forehead and her Cheeks: Had Sicilie
Her Etna lost, this sulphurie Region
Would show it her in multiplicitie;
Only these Hills are something less then that,
Yet is their Horror and their Stink as great.
34.
Her Lips are always crannied and dry,
Though every day a thousand times made wet;
For still her burning breath in passing by
Makes them that Moisture instantly forget,
And by the Poison of its fulsome Stinks
Taints all the aromatic Wines she drinks.
35.
But the vast storehouse of her Belly makes
Her seem with Child of Mountains, for in this
The dainties which from all the World she rakes
In one prodigious Heap congested is:
Here Solomon's brazen Sea it self might swimm,
And its twelve Oxen too, and more with Them.
36.
This is the Sink, where Surfeit being bred,
Of all Diseases does the Parent grow;
Which She distributing from Foot to Head
Does undigested Pleasures turn to Woe.
Thus, though the Be does pleasing Honey bring,
She always ends in a poisonous Sting.
37.
Who knows not that Luxuriant Mortals eat
The copious fuel of their Sicknesses,
And force their honest, but abused Meat
Not to feed Nature, but her Maladies?
Who knows not that in Healths deceitful Name
They drink the Venom which destroieth Them?
38.
Themselves they diet thus with their own Death
And to a Weapon of Destruction turn
The Staff of Life: In vain Heavens Mercy has
So bounteous been; if Man himself can learn
To pick out (...) in it, and through
Its Sweetness, work his bitter Overthrow.
39.
If Bacchus must be made a God, and have
His larger and more constant Sacrifice
Than He who all their Vines to Mortals gave,
Whilst they the Gift more than the Giver prize;
If Ceres too a Goddess grow, and We
All sworn Devoto's to the Belly be.
40.
Alas I and had not bold Mortality
Commission large and full enough before
To work our Ruin! Was the Misery
Of Plagne, of Famine, and of War, so poor
And weak, that We our Selves the help must lend
Of Luxury, to hasten on our End!
41.
'Twas time, high time for God himself to come
And turn Physician in this desperate Case:
Our Madness swelled so wide, that now no room
For any Mortal helping Hand there was:
'Twas time to Come; and blessed be His Name
For his dear Coming, for in time He came,
42.
Jesus himself came down, and left the Feast
Of all Delights which He above enjoyed;
Into the Depth of Poverty He cast
His life, and taught the World how to avoid
Intemperanc's Baits, which thick are set
Only where Riches the dominion get.
43.
Then by his practik Abstinence He showed
Those who his royal steps would not disdain,
How dangerous Luxury might be subdued,
And healthful Temperance the Scepter gain:
Forty long days and nights at once he spent
In Consecrating of his Servants Lent.
44.
To this Example He his Doctrine joined
And for his frequent Text did Fasting take;
Proving that every Eye was worse then blind
Which no discovery in Her could make
Of richer Beauties, then those faint and thin
Graces which hover in a polished Skin.
45.
It Is true She Is pale; so is the Lilie too,
So is her heavenly Daughter Chastity;
So is the Milk so is the virgin Snow;
And yet when Modesty would dressed be
In her brave Scarlet, She does raise a Flood
Of Purple, and shine fair in Blushing Blood
46.
She is contented to be lank and lean,
As one who counts it Martial Policy
To keep her Ammunition close within,
The better to confront the Seige: for She
Laughs at those plump and boasting Gallants who
Can nothing but their swelling Outworks show.
47.
For whilst her Walls are less, she has less need
Of numerous Powers to maintain the fight:
But being Mistress of all active Heed
She stands upon her guard both day and night;
Being of creacherous ease, and sleep afraid,
By which fat lazy bulwarks are betrayed.
48.
She knows what ballast will her Bulk suffice
To keep her steady in this dangerous Sea,
And lays in but enough: The Merchandise
Which fraughts her stowage, precious virtues be;
And provident she, no bigger than her self,
Securely sails by every Rock and Shelf.
49.
Her Parts and Passions all their duties know,
And she as little fears a storm within,
As from without: her humble flesh does bow
To all Commands; no Officers repine
What course so ever she steers, but all conspire
To make their own still sail with her desire.
50.
Thus she does safely at that Port arrive
Which leads into the Continent of Bliss;
The Port at which her restless aim did drive;
The only Key and Gate of Paradise:
For Paradise's sweets her stomach she
Reserved, which there at length shall filled be.
51.
This difficult but advantageous Grace
Was that which Jesus strove on earth to sow;
But most ungrateful Earth so shameless was
As not to suffer the fair seed to grow:
Though a few honest beds did entertain it,
The most part of the Garden did disdain it.
52.
Those who unto the King of Abstinence
Have sworn Allegiance, blush not to enrole
Themselves the servants of Intemperance,
And the mad virtue of their Revelling Bowl
More sacred and obligatory count
Then the blessed Streams of the Baptismal Fount.
53.
Else how comes that abominable Trade
Of daily turning swine, to be professed
With most applans not where the Pagan shade
Upon prevented Reasons eyes has east
Blind irreligions night; but where the Rays
Of most revealed heaven, gild Christian days.
54.
Else how came thou, unhappy Britaih, which
Barr'st out all other Oceans by thy shore,
To let the Sea of Drunkenness with such
Unrulie fury in thy bowels roar!
O that thy feeble Sands should stronger be
Then is thy Reason, or thy Piety.
55.
How has this deluge drowned in Sottishness
Thy once renouned sense of Braverie,
Since in thy Helmeti, Swords, and Bucklers place
A cowardly succession we see
Of Pots and Glasses, and (o valors shame!)
(...) drinker turned into Credits name,
56.
How come those Bacchanalian wars so dear
In thy Repute, who prid'st thy self that thou
So well appointed art, as not to fear
Or Dutch, or Danish bowls; but know how
Foes and friends lives by the Grapes blood to shed,
And, though not strike, yet, surely drink them dead.
57.
How comes the Name of Cynik or of Clown,
To dwell on them who never learned the Arts
Of roaring Revels? How is goodness grown
No more by virtues standard, but by quarts
And Pottles to be measured, whilst, alas,
Carousers for the good companions pass?
58.
O how have thou forgot what sumptuous Care
Almighty Love has taken to requite
Thine Abstinence; what Soul refreshing fare
For Pieties untainted Appetite
His bounteous hand prepares, and proves how He
Excessive is in hospitality!
59.
Heaven stood amazed at the magnificence
Of that high banquet: nor could Phylax now
Longer conceal the brave ecstatik sense
He had of it; for heavenly bosoms glow
So hot with Loves sublime exploits, that they
Must split, did not their tongues their hearts display.
60.
The famous Traitors story being done,
And Psyche having her short supper eat,
The (...) Guardian thus again begun:
My Dear, this Evening seaion, and the (...)
Thou from thy Lords hand have received, be
The items of a greater feast to Me.
61.
He, the sweet Doctor of chaste Abstinence
Who taught his Servants not to clog their heart
With corruptible Viands; when from hence
Already Sold, he shortly was to part,
So great and rich a Banquet made, as may
The whole Worlds Temperance (...) then (...)
62.
A (...) not of gross and earthly cheer
Where Birds, or Beasts, or Fish might convives be.
But of immortal Delicates, so dear,
So sweet, so precious, that only He
The God in whom all Power and sweetness live
Could such Celestial entertainment give.
63.
'Twas now the solemn time among the (...)
Their memorable Passover to ear:
Nor would thine inoffensive Lord refuie
That grand solemnity to celebrate,
And honor it, which like the faithful (...)
On Him the Sun so long attended had.
64.
With his Disciples down the Master sat,
And in the spotless and unblemished Lamb
Beheld the Copy of his purer State,
In which no Critics eye found room for blame
Yet could not Innocence secure his life,
More than the Lamb it saved from the knife.
65.
The Lamb his tender fleece and skin had lost,
And naked to the fire exposed was.
Where all its harmless, helpless, flesh was roste:
And here he read atorehand his own case,
How to his Cross the Jewish fury tossed him,
And how the flaming wrath of Heaven did roast him.
66.
The sad attendance of that bitter sauce
Which sourest Herbs about the Meat had thrown,
The dark resemblance of those torments was
With which his Dish of deepest woe was strown,
The Weeds of humane sins, which far exceed
In bitterness, all Herbs that earth can breed.
67.
The Haste which quickened on this transient feasi,
Was not so winged as the noble speed
With which He posted in desire to rest
Upon the cruel Cross his tender Head:
A woeful resting place was that, and yet
To Love no Pillow seemed so soft as,
68.
But having (...) this (...)
And with due honor brought it (...) its geave,
He makes way for that tender (...)
Which as his final favor he did save
To print his dearest Memory most deep
In the soft Sonles of his beloved Sheep.
69.
He with a Towel, having laid aside
His Mantle, girds himself; for humble he
Would not the least impediment abide
Of his officious Activitie:
With water then filling a Basin full
Down at his own Disciples feet he fell.
70.
The Conscience of his own eternal worth,
And of his universal Soveraigntie,
The certain knowledge that He (...) forth
From his bright Fathers arms, and was to be (...)

There re-inthroned, could not hold him up:
All this he knew, and yet he down did stoop.
71.
Stoop then prood Mortals, whosoe'r ye be,
Who have no power alone to stand upright,
Stoop, now you see your Savior on his Knee,
Who does sustain your Being, by his might;
Stoop, now you see. Him to his Servants bow,
And the Most-high submit himself (...)
72.
To stand on foolish Terms of (...) now
Is but to found your glory on your shame:
Is it not more illustrious to bow
With Jesus, then with Lucifer to aim
Above your reach? O why will Dust forget
The place originally due to it!
73.
But what is Gods bus'nes at his Servants feet?
Even to Wash and Wipe them (...). O now
Stoop lower still, lower and lower yet,
For at the lowest you are not so (...)
As He the (...) King, who here
Has made himself a (...) Minister.
74.
When Jesus by his Water ciensed had
Her Servants seet, and by his Grace their (...),
(...) what Preparation must be made
By all who ever mean to have their Parts
In his pure (...); down he sits again,
And them with (...) does entertain.
75.
The Ends of sumptuous Banquets use to be
Crowned with most sovereign Varieties,
Which may the Convives learned Luxury
With deep and new found Ravishment surprise;
And Jesus would not have this Supper want
That costly Point of Princely Complement.
76.
Indeed the Supper which They now had eat
Into the Belly its direct way took,
Where in the Kitchen of poor Mortal Meat
It was committed unto Heat to Cook:
And Heats best skill could only dress it (...)
To feed the Body which contained it.
77.
But Christ's (...) Design was now
With such a royal Feast to bless the Board,
As might make Spirits fat and healthful grow,
And thriving Nutriment to Souls afford;
Such Nutriment as might full power give
Unto his Guests eternally to live.
78.
In his Almighty Hand he took the Bread;
And poured his plenall Blessing upon it:
Never on any but his own dear Head
Such potent Benediction did sit;
Indeed, it was that Blessings Echo, and
Bounded upon his Body in his Hand.
79.
For having broke that Bread He reached it
To his Disciples, saying, Take and eat
This is my Body broke for You; and let
My dear Remembrance live in this your Meat.
But Jesu's Feast must not be dry; for Wine
Equal to this high Dainties He does join.
80.
He takes the Cup, and Drink Ye all of this,
It is my Blood of the new Testument
Says He, which shed and freely given is
To wash the Sins of all that will repent?
As often as you of this Chalice drink
Of Me your liberal Redeemer think
81.
Sweet Jesu! o how can thy World forget
Their royal (...), and his (...), who
Upon their Tables his own Self has (...);
Who in their holy Cups fails not to flow,
And in their Dishes lie. Did ever Friend
So (...) a Token of his Love (...)?
82.
Infallibly there do Thou flow and lie;
Though Mortal Eyes discover no such thing;
Quick sighted Faith reads all the Mystery
And humble pious Souls does easily bring
Into the Wonders (...), and there
Makes all the (...) of this Truth (...),
83.
She generously dares on God rely
And trust his Word how strange soe'r it (...)
If Jesus once pronounces This is my
Body and Blood; Far far be it, cries She;
That I should think my dying Lord would (...)
(...) in his (...) of Drink and (...)
84.
(His Word is most Omnipotent, and He
Can do what ever He says; and more than I
Can or would understand What is it to me
If He (...) Humane Capacity?
Surely it well becomes Him so to do,
Nor were He God, if He could not do so
85.
Let Him say what He will, I must deny
Him to be God, or else Believe his Word
Me it concerns not to verify
What He proclaims; I only must afford
Meek Credit, and let Him alone to make
Good, whatsoever He is (...) to speak,)
86.
Gross and unworthy Spirits sure They be
Who of their Lord such mean Conceptions (...)
That parting from his dearest Consorts. He
No Token of his Love did leave with Them.
But simple Bread and Wine: a likely thing,
And well-becoming Heavens magnificent King,
87.
A likely Thing, that when the susty blood
Of Bulls and Goars cannot wash Sin away,
The Blood of Grapes should with a stronger Flood
(...) over whelm and drown the Worlds (...):
O no, such Virtue in no Blood can dwell
But that which through the Veins of God did thrill.
88.
Ask me not then, How can the thing be done,
(...) power of Sense or Reason can (...) it?
(...), is (...) are, what Demonstration
(...) as this My God (...)
(...) if you once can prove that He can lie,
(...), and (...) too, I (...).
89.
What thank is it that you can credit that
Which your own sense and Reasons eye reads plain?
Heaven's much to them beholden, who will not
Believe it higher is than they can strein;
Who jealous are of God, and will not be
Induce'd to trust him further than they see.
90.
And yet had you these modest eyes of mine,
You in this gloomie Cloud would see the Sun
That Sun, who wisely does disdain to shine
On Those who with bold Prying press upon
His secret Majesty, which plainly I
Because I make no anxious search, descrie.
91.
This is the valorous Resolution
Of Gallant Faith: and this will serve to be
The blessed Rule by which all those will run
Who are the Scholars of Humility.
Yet, I must tell thee Psyche, itching Pride
Will not hereafter thus be satisfied.
92.
A thousand waspish Syllogismes will
Be buzzing from the Mouths of those who build
Their ground works of Religion on the skill
Which they for granted take, their brains has filled;
Till Quaeries, Doubts, Distinctions, Niceties,
First grow to Schisms, and then to Heresies.
93.
Needs will they pry into the Manner how
This mystic Miracle to pass was brought,
And madly being not content to know
What Christ thought fit to teach them, study out
They know not what, and make this banquet prove
A Sacrament of war, and not of love.
94.
Some peep too near, and spy what is not there,
Some carelessly take what is there away:
Some will confess no Miracle, for fear
That should prove Consequential, which they
Would not have so, and that themselves should be
Forced to acknowledge more than they can see.
95.
Some sift Existence, Substance, Accidents,
And make the Laws of Aristotle be
The Umpiers in Religion. Thus the Rents
Which Art strives to sew up in Piety
By that unworthy clownish Needle are
Only made wider than before they were.
96.
O happy world, if all would once agree
In that which Jesus has so plainly taught!
If those short Words might but sincerely be
Embraced, and no more in question brought!
If for the Manner they would trust their Lord,
And for the Substance, take Him at his Word!
97.
For Heaven its faithful wheel shall sooner turn,
And backward hale the Sun into the East;
The Northern Polar Bear shall sooner burn,
And Siriu's mouth be sealed up with Frost;
The Earth into the Spears shall sooner leap,
And tumble down all Height into the Deep;
98.
Then any Syllable which droppeth from
The Lips of Jesus can be born away
Upon the Winds swift wings, and never come
Back with its full effect. And yet the day
Will come, when Men will be so mad in this
Clear point, as to dispute away their Bliss.
99.
It is in vain to tell these Wranglers how
Jesus could graft cold stones into the stock
Of Abraham, and make them Fertile grow
In Israelites; Or that the Bread He took
In's daily diet, was not wholly spent,
But part into his Bodies substance went.
100.
In vain to tell them, how, into his Blood
The Wine he drank was changed day by day:
For though such Speculations understood
With prudent reverence, might make easier way
Unto the Mystery; yet Wranglers will
Because they will be so, be Wranglers still,
101.
But as the sweetest Roses are beset
With a strict Seige of Thorns; whilst vulgar (...)
Which are not worth the Choking never meet
With armed Neighbors, whose infestive Powers
Might plant their Bane about them: so it fares
With this rich Bread invaded by the Tares.
102.
What heart can of the monstrous Gnostiks think
And not abhor their damned sacrifice, Vid. S. Epiphan. Hares. 26. 7.

The matchless, and the most blasphemous sink
Of odious impudent Impieties?
Psyche, Thou never yet heardst of so black
A sin, as they do their Religion make.
103.
But I in reverence to thy Blush, forbear
That deep Abominations Den to rake,
Whose rank Sent reaks up to the highest Sphere
And in Gods Nostrills stincks: Yet leave must take
To tell thee thine own Albion will not be
Afraid of Sacramental Villainy.
104.
For in the Dreggs of Time, when Wealth and Pride
Have fatned British Hearts fit to defy
All Sacred Discipline, and to the Tide
Of furious License and Impiety
Opened a vast Gap, unhallowed Hands will dare
From holy Priests this reverend Work to tear.
105.
Mechanic Zeal, inspired by Sottishness,
And by enthusiastic Ordination
Of Self-deluded Fancy Called to dress
This Mystic Feast in the reformed fashion,
Will purest Purity it self defile,
And by Heavens Gate find out a Way to Hell.
106.
But happy Thou who shall not live to see
Thine Eyes tormented by that cursed Sight,
Which shall both Acted, and Permitted be
By equal Sons of everlasting Night.
Come then, let our Discourse return and be
Spent on this Miracle of Purity
107.
Thy Lords great Feast was the high Consummation
Of Isreal's Passover; A Feast which did
With mystic power antidate his Passion,
And that long-long'd-for Word, It Is finished.
Right noble was that typick Passover,
But nobler this, because Substantial, here.
108.
How much more pure and precious is this Lamb
Who, though the Feast unto himself be sour,
Presents no Sauce of bitter herbs to them
Who are the Convives, but with all the power
Of Sweetness entertains their Palates, and
All Joys to wait upon them does command.
109.
This is that more renoun'd Viaticum
The Israel of God to fortify
When they from Pharaohs iron Bondage come,
And travel to their holy Liberty.
O Psyche, those old Stories plainlier are
Reacted in the Christian Hemisphear.
110.
Sin is that hateful Egypt, where does reign
A King how much more fierce than Pharaoh was,
The Tyrant Beelzebub who throws his Chain
About the World; and makes all Nations pass
Under a more unreasonable Law
Than making Brick, whilst They Are denied Straw.
111.
But pious Souls are by this Paschal Feast
Both strengthened and encouraged to throw
This servile Yoke away, and thither haste
Where everlasting Liberty does grow:
Although their hard obstructed Passage be
Thorough the Wilderness, and the Red Sea.
112.
This enigmatick Life of Misery
Can own both those repugnant Names: what are
Its Storms, and Broils, and Tumults, but a Sea
Red with Destruction? What is daily fear
With helpless Desolation, and Distress,
If not a squalid fatal Wilderness.
113.
But through this wretched Desert, and this Sea,
The Virtue of this Passover will lead
Believing Souls, until they safely be
Of blessed Canaan inherited,
That Canaan whose Milk and Honey is
The sweetness of exuberant Paradise,
114.
That Canaan where no Jebusites shall be
Thorns in the Sides of its accomplished Rest,
And whence no Babylonish Potency
Shall root Them out who there are once possessed;
A Canaan which alone makes good the grand
And glorious Title of The holy Land.
115.
This Sacramental Bread, and this alone
Is that supporting Staff of Life, by which
The stout and faithful Generation
Take their brave journey unto Heaven, and reach
The top of their Desires more surely far
Than by his Staff the Artist does the Star.
116.
By Bread, and Bread alone, Man now must live,
Even by this Bread which from Gods own Mouth came;
Christ's potent institution did give
This Virtue to it; and Himself proclaim
Aforehand, that Men must not hope or think
To Live; but by this Suppers Meat and Drink.
117.
All Delicacies molded up in one
Pure precious Composition are here:
Never did the Sybarit s Invention
Upon their Tables sacrifice such cheer
Unto their (...) which alone to them
The greatest of the Deities did seem.
118.
The Syracusian Bords did never sweat
Under such Dainties: Alexandrian Feasts
Did never with such princely sprightfull Meat
Ravish the Palates of their dearest Guests:
No Asiatick, nor no Medick Fare,
No Cates of Marseils may with these compare.
119.
Great Solomon's profoundest Industry
Which through all Nature did his Pleasures hunt,
Sifting and boulting every Suavitie,
To find what Sweets did flow with most Content,
Naught but unsa vorie Vanity could taste:
All Solid pleasures here alone are placed,
120.
Here, in this Bread, this rich Conspiracy
Of most substantial Delights; to which
That pure Angelick Cheer which bounteouslie
Heavens careful Hand did every morning reach
Unto his Israel, journying in the bare
And hungry desert, was course homely fare.
121.
Nor is the Dainties of the Cup less rich
Than that which in the noble Patin lies:
The Wine of Love, of Life, of Spirits, which
By new un-heard of heavenly properties
The heart of Man with such Delights does cheer
As never fears the worst assaults of fear.
122.
Heavens prudent Law had taken order that
No Creatures Blood the Lip of Man should stain:
O no: The Caution was just and fit,
That all those Mouths might be reserved clean
In reverence to the Blood of this great Lamb
Which was into beheving lips to stream.
123.
O blessed, bloody, peaceful Wine! O how
Divinely have thou satisfaction made
For that enflaming Poison which does flow
In other Wines! may Noah now be glad
Of his Invention, since his foul mishap
Is clean washed out by this all purging Grape.
124.
This is that Wine wherein dwells Verity
The Verity of Heaven: For Heaven in it
All melted is: Those noble Joies which we
Bathed in at home, are here together met
In sweet epitomie, and smiling swim
About the Chalices most reverend Brim.
125.
Let Luxury turn other wines into
The milk of Venus, and unto its Cupps
As to the Bottles of her bosom go,
Whence only furious uncleanness drops:
This is the purest Juice that can be pressed
From Chastities own most unspotted breast.
126.
Of this, mild Doves may drink, and never fear
An inflammation which might entrench
On their chaste Spirits: Devoted Virgins here
Their (...) and bashful Hearts may safely drench:
This Liquor breeds no flames but soft and cool,
Which though they burn, cannot infect the soul.
127.
Should Greek, Canarie, or Pannonian Wine,
Should Spanish, French, Italian, and the rest
Which crown the Bowls of Princes, all combine
In one Extraction, and be richly dressed
With Aromatic Helps; they would be all
If paralleld with this, but costly Gall.
128.
Ambitious Cleopatra's sumptuous Bowl
Where her Luxuriant Jewel learned to swim,
And its inestimable Riches roll
Melted and mixed with the gallant stream,
Compared with this Cup was full as vile
As any Bottle filled at her Nile.
129.
This makes those wines all blush for their own shame
Which in proud Belteshazzers Goblets smiled;
Which Holofernes to the beauteous Dame,
And yet more Masculine then Beauteous filled;
That Dame, who in her Nations quarrel durst
Less for his Wine than for his heart-blood thirst.
130.
Sardanapalus with his Cost and Care,
Such precious liquor never could obtain;
No Epicurean wishes ever were
Advanced unto so sublime a strain,
As to desire so rich a Draught as this,
Whose worthabove all Fancies Compass is.
131.
For where the Juice of other Grapes does reign,
Both Sense and Reason feel its Tyranny;
Which being drowned together with their Brain,
Forth with each Member, and each faculty
To beastly Madness is enslaved, and flies
On Murders, Rapines, Rapes, and Villainies.
132.
But where this Wine of Angels domineers
The Heart with noble Drunkenness it fills,
For all its Powers and Spirits it overbears
With a sweet stream of mystic Miracles,
Until intoxicated by this Flood
Of Love and Heaven, the Man is Drunk with God.
133.
Strange, Psyche, are this Drunkennesses Fits;
Often have I seen, and them as often admired:
The World has thought these Men besides their Wits,
When with this Liquors flame it saw them fired.
But We know what ecstatick Raptures mean,
And Zeals exploits, when it has got the Rein.
134.
Often have I seen brave Spirits, when they rose
From this great Banquet, filled with generous Rage,
Fly in the face of Sin; and nobly choose
The stoutest Foes whereon they might engage
Their heavenly Confidence, nor has their high
Adventure faild to reach down Victory.
135.
Often have I seen Them scorn the Frown of Death,
Often have I seen them hug the Cross and Spear,
Often have I heard them spend their final breath
In wooing greater Torments to come near,
Often have I seen them enter single fight
Both with the Peers, and with the Prince of Night.
136.
For well they know what Strength they have within,
And by tenacious Faith they hold it fast:
How can those Champions ever fail to win
Amidst whose Armor Heaven it self is placed?
What Battery can prevail against that Breast
Which is infallibly with God possessed?
137.
For to augment the Wonder, Psyche, this
Great Feast of Feasts, can never all be spent:
When Millions are filled, still it is
Entirely whole, and knows no detriment.
So, though the whole World drinks in Air, yet still
The undiminish'd Region is full.
138.
And yet not so: For here each One does eat
The total Feast, yet each One leaves it whole:
These antecedent Ages cannot cheat
Those which lagg on behind: whilst Heaven does roll,
And Earth stand still, this ever-teeming Board.
The same Delights will unto All afford.
139.
No Fount lives on such living Springs as dwell
In this pure Cup of Life, to which though all
The World do daily flock, to drink, yet still
It keeps its equal Plenitude, nor shall
The busy School, with all its Company
Of Doubts and Queries hope to draw it dry,
140.
Though all Heavens starry Tapers lighted be
At Phebu's eyes, his Rays are still entire;
Though in each River, Fountain, Lake, or Sea
His Image shines, yet his original Fire
Is only one, which does it self so wide
In its complete Similitude divide.
141.
Thus, and more really than thus, this Feast
Most absolutely One, it self does spread
Into the Mouth and Heart of every Guest,
And there far more celestial Splendour shed
Than when the Sun by his meridian Ray
Triumphs upon the highest Throne of Day,
142.
The Blessed Lord, not many years ago,
Had borrowed of the World Humanity,
And dressed Himself in Mary's bowels so
That He became completely Man: yet He
Though by this Condescent, new Rays He set
In Natures Crown, still thought Himself in debt.
143.
Right Generous as He was, He meant to pay
All back again which He received from Her:
His Body and his Blood He meant to lay
Upon the Cross, and make Requital there
To all his Creditors, and freely by
That Payment ransom Them from Misery,
144.
And yet, because his Humane Nature He
So dearly loved that He resolved to bear
It home in Triumph, and eternalie
Those Robes of boundless Love and Mercy Wear:
Ever He his journey took, He plotted how
It might Ascend, and yet Remain below,
145.
Remain below; and be as often Restored
As Man would please to take it: And the way
He Instituted was by this adored
Mysterious Banquet, which does day by day
Repay his Flesh and Blood, that Man may eat
And drink, and with his God incorporate.
146.
For, to complete his most excessive Love
Beyond the reach of any Parauel;
This (...) Pay He does so far improve,
That his (...) Godhead joins to swell
The royal Feast; for this can never be
Dissevered from his Humanity
147.
O Banquet! fit for His Magnificence
Who is the Universes Sovereign.
By this dear Project, Psyche, Mercies Prince
Collecteth in his more than golden Chain
His World unto Himself, and ties (...) close,
That no Disunion can interpose.
148.
The glorious Incarnation began
To tie this Knot; which now redoubled is:
There God vouchsas d to join Himself with Man
Here Man has leave to make the Juncture His,
And knit himself to his (...) O
What God stooped ever to his Creature so!
149.
By this sweet Combination Men do grow
(...) of their Singularities,
Their (...) Interests, their I and Thou,
Their Mine and (...) their grounds of Avarice,
Of Envy, of (...) any comply
In holy Peaces common Unity.
150.
This is the Cement, which together ties
The Stones which in the Churches Fabrik lie,
The common Ligature which does comprise
Each Joint and Member in the Mystery
Of Christ's spiritual Body, until He
The Shepherd, and his Sheep, in one agree.
151.
For as the Reasonable Soul does swimm.
Entirely one through all the Body; yet
In every Member, and in every Limm
In its Totality does single sit:
So by this Sacramental Union
Jesus is One to All, and All to One,
152.
Believe it Psyche, though thy Mortal Eye
Sees no such brave Attendance on this Board,
Yet thick the Waiters stand whose Dignity
Shines next the Glories of their royal Lord:
No Prince was on his Coronation Day
Ever honored by such Servitors as They.
153.
The gallant Cherubs, and the Seraphs here
With legions of fairest Angels meet,
And in all awful Reverence draw near,
Ravished at what you Mortals Drink and Eat;
Here royal Principalities attend,
Here Thrones bow down, and here Dominions bend,
154.
For when they are above in their bright sphere
The glorious Ocean of eternal Sweets,
Their blessed Eyes behold no richer Cheer
Than Mercy on this noble Table sets;
Nor did the Cherubs which kept Paradise
Find there such glorious Varieties.
155.
Pure are their Eyes, and they can easily pass
Through the thick Veil which on the Feast does lie,
A Veil which in profound Compassion was
Thrown on the Countenance of this Mystery,
Which darts more glories from its naked face
Than ever did great Mose's Temples grace.
156.
So long as mortal Grossness sticks upon
The Brows of Man, and cloggs his feeble Sight,
One glimpse of heavenly Majesty alone
Would seal his eyes up with eternal Night;
For what exceeds, does corrupt, their reach;
Transcendent Luster prov's as dark as Pitch.
157.
When Batts may venture to the Eagles Nest,
And full against the Suns, their own eyes set;
When blear-eyed Owls may leave their gloomie Roost
And with safe Looks the Face of High-noon met;
When Midnight dares throw off her sable Cloak;
And into bright Aurora's Wardrobe look.
158.
Then may dim-sighted Men with safety gaze
Upon their Lords unveiled Brightness; then
May they directly to his royal Face
Without a Perspectives Assistance run;
Then may they boldly scorn, their Eyes to shroud
Under the moderate Shadow of a Cloud.
159.
But Jesus who full well their Weakness knew,
Did in the Shelter of plain Wine and Bread
Accommodate his Goodness to their View;
That in Familiar Elements they might read
The hidden Mystery, and happy be
Above all that their Mortal eyes could see.
160.
The time shall come, when the dull Dust shall be
By the brisk Virtue of the Resurrection
Resin'd and raised to a Capacity
Of radiant and spiritual Perfection;
When faithful Souls in their celestial Rest
Shall at the Lambs unvciled Supper feast
161.
Mean while, it is their Privilege, that they
May freely in the Shade enjoy the Sun;
That in the Darkness they may meet the Day,
And in Hopes Region find Fruition.
But who, sweet Psyche, would believe, that hence
Man should draw reason of Irreverence!
162.
Alas, when Time shall old and doting grow,
And Christian Spirits sympathize with it;
(...) will be bold to make this Banquet know
That by its Outside They do square and fit
Their estimation of it; and that there
Their Faith admits no more than does appear.
163.
It must be Superstition, if they
Should think Gods Table holier than their own;
If of this Cup and Patin they bewray
An higher thought, than of those all the Town
Use in the public Inns, when ever they keep
Their free Communion of Good Fellow ship.
164.
Nor Jove nor Juno, nor the silliest He
Or She of all that Rabble, who were made
Gods by vain Man; found such impiety
In those their Makers, as to be betrayed
To slovenish Altars, and to (...) Rites
By fained Zeal's irreverent Deceits.
165.
Must Rudeness only be permitted to
Attend on Jesu's noblest (...)?
And must it for most pure (...) go
Because so gross and (...) Surely We
Are much too blanie in Heaven, who never knew
Such kind of (...) to our God was due.
166.
Is this the Thanks for keeping in his flames
Of most intolefable Majesty,
Which once unveild, by its immortal streams
Would them devour, and all their slovenrie?
Alas, that Love should thus neglected be,
And for no cause, but mighty Charity!
167.
But those brave Lovers, of whose generous breast
Jesus entire possession has took,
Are so inamored of this royal Feast,
That with all humble Reverence they look
Upon it, and in faithful pure desire,
After Angelick Complements aspire,
168.
Their Hearts beat high with that illustrious Zeal
Which fires our Breasts, and fain would stoop as low
As do the Seraphs, when this Miracle
Of Love invites their reverent knees to bow:
Fain would they have their passionate Piety
As infinite as is this Mystery.
169.
For infinite it is; and gladly I,
Would its Infinitude to Thee display;
No Theem with such delight could sit on my
Admiring Tongue: But Angels must give way
To ecstacies, in such vast Deeps, where Love
Himself the utmost of his Power does prove.
170.
Here Phylax ended, and observed how
The Bait would operate which He had cast
To Psyches heart: which being captived now
By his Discourses Charms, and chained fast
Unto the Tables foot which He set out,
This pious answer gently forth she brought:
171.
My Souls sweet Friend, what thanks can I repay
For all this honey which thy Tongue has shed
Into my ears and heart (...) Phylax may
He whom Thou praisedst, pour upon thy head
Thy full Requital: As for sunple Me,
What can the poor Worm Psyche give to Thee?
172.
She can give nothing, but (...) still
A beggar, (...) for further Favors sues;
Yet not for Cates my stomachs mouth to fill,
(...) No Famins Power could make me choose
My other Diet, if at this sweet (...)
Of Love and Heaven, my Soul may now be Guest.
173.
And if it be not so, I am undone;
Such Hunger knaws, such Thirst does burn my heart
That by that Banquets Comfort I alone
Can rescued be from this impatient Smart:
And it is thy courteous fault, dear Phylax, who
With its Description Me have ravished so.
174.
The sickly, what but Health can satisfy?
And what but Balsame can desired be
To stop the Wounds wide Mouth and bloody Cry?
What does the hunted Deer so pant to see,
But some cool Fount, or sovereign Ditany?
What can the Captive wish, but Liberty?
175.
My Health, my Balsame, and my Liberty,
My Dear (...), and my Fount of Bliss,
My only Nectur and Ambrosia lie
Treasured up in this Banquet: If I miss
Of this my Wish, alas, what shall I do,
What hope, what help for my increasing Woe?
176.
She fainted here. But Phylax reached his hand
Unto her Arm, and Comfort to her Heart.
I like, said He, thy noble Ardour, and
Its fuel (...) unto (...) Fire impart.
In yonder House there lives a reverend Priest
(...) for thy pious foul will dress this Feast.
177.
This said; He leads (...) Virgin thither, where
In (...) room a (...) of Faithful Hearts
(...) that great Business early did prepare;
For (...) forced them to all Arts
Of (...) and glad they were to choose
Such Temples as were hidden from their Foes.
178.
There in a Chalice and a Dish of Wood,
The (...) of (...) Poverty,
The wonder of their Saviors Flesh and Blood
With golden Hearts they waited on. But We
Alas in Patins and in Cups of Plate
With Hearts of Wood this Banquet celebrate.
179.
They in the Strangers Zeal-inflamed eye
Such genuine beams of Piety descrised
As soon dispelled all mists of Jealousy
Which serupulous Fear had raised; unknown untried
She is received: Besides, the holy Priest
By Heaven was warned to entertain this Guest.
180.
Phylax withdrew his nimble Self into
His Closet of Invisibility;
Yet still attended on his Psyche; who
Approached to the royal Mystery
With such brave fervor, that her hungry Haste
Almost as boundless seemed, as the Feast.
181.
O how her Soul into the Dish did leap,
And dive down to the Bottom of the Cup!
With what Inamorations did she weep!
What sighs of Joy did break her bosom open!
How did Fear strive with Love! How did she groan
Between Humility, and Ambition!
182.
O how She thinks her Lips and Heart impure!
And yet she cannot for a World refrain:
She knows not how this Life she should endure,
If from the Life of Life She must contain:
She knows not how her Iron should for beak
To meet the Loadstone now it was so near.
183.
Whilst in this dainty Agony she lay,
Into her Mouth the Priest gives her her Bliss.
Which to her Heart directly took its way
And drowned it in exuberant Sweetnesses:
She now no longer Psyche is, for she
Is all converted into Ecftafie.
184.
O most Miraculous Feast, how fain my Song
Would be Luxuriant in admiring Thee!
But neither mine, nor Phylax's high Tongue
Knows how to reach that lofty Harmony
Of all united Sweets and Joys which lie
In bounteous Loves protoundest Mystery.
185.
Yet may my pained Soul have leave to lay
At this Songs foot its just and heavy Sighs;
Which, never since mine Eyes first opened on Day
So deeply rellished Life's miseries:
The more my shame, whose mighty Sins for Me
Have earned this Heart-knawing Agony.
186.
Time was, when Heaven in this late happy (...)
Kept open house; when this Celestial Feast
Did freely woo all Hearts to come and fill
Their holy Appetites with all the best
Of antidated Bliss, and grow Divine
With this Spiritual mighty Bread and Wine.
187.
But now both Feast and Board devoured are
By a new Banquet, as jejune and dry
As barren Air; for all this Pulpit Cheer
Feeds but the itching Ears strange Boulimie:
Whilst still the Heart remains as lank and thin;
And nothing fatter grows, but lusty Sin.
188.
Sin fatter grows; so fat that now it dares
Kick both at Earth and Heaven, and scorns to be
Awed by those generous and ingenuous Fears
Which are the Reins of Virtuous Modesty;
It mocketh Vengeance and derideth Law,
Because their patient Sword they slowly draw.
189.
O how come Christian Souls so well content
To want the choicest Viands Heaven could give!
O how preposterously Abstinent
Are they who with all riotous Dainties strive
To fortisie the Belly, but can find
No Time to Victual and enforce the Mind!
190.
Surely those Hero's were more prudent far
Upon whose nearer hearts the warmer Blood
Of Jesus dropped: not once a Month, or year,
Ordivers Years, they with this holy Food
Cheered up their Souls; but every Morning fed,
And made the Lord of Life their Daily Bread.
191.
With Heaven this always kept their bosoms warm,
This made Them Eagle-like their strength renew;
With death-despising Courage this did arm
Their gentlest Spirits; By this they Masters grew
Of Earth and Hell, which having trampled down,
Heaven too by Violence They made their own.
192.
But o, my Heart, why art Thou stealing thus
From thine own Woes, thy Neighbors to deplore?
Time was, when (whilst thine unsledged Wickedness
Flew not at Heavens long patient face, nor tore
This Judgment thence,) I once a Week at least
Could at this Board of Blessings be a Guest.
193.
Then with sweet Comfort could I turn mine Eye
Back on the year, which with Delight did run;
Then could I count what Gains I reaped by
My constant Trading in Devotion;
Rejoicing in my satisfied Mind
That every Sunday I in Heaven had dined.
193.
But now the flaming Coursers of the Sun
Are drawing on the fourteenth Month, since I
Attended on the Celebration
Of this sweet life-enlivening Mystery;
Which yet I then was fain to steal, and so
A Thief that Day to Paradise did go.
194.
I went indeed, But a Forbidden Tree
Strait wooed my liquorish Hand, and foolish I
Believed the flattering Bait, and would not see
How treacherous an Hook beneath did lie.
Dear, wondrous dear, this heedlesse Fault did cost Me,
For all my heavenly Joys and Powers it lost Me,
195.
It lost Me all, and no Recruit was nie,
But I am lest aPrey to this long Fast:
O how the Palate of my Soul is dry,
What burning Drought does shrivell up and waste
The Bowels of my Heart! how is my Mind
With most uncomfortable Squalor pined!
196.
O how my Understandings Pinions tire,
And flag below when I aloft would soar!
What leaden Numnesse damps those hopes of Fire
With which my Fancie'gan to glow before!
What Languor cloggs my fainting Will, whilst!
On dark unworthy Earth thus grovelling lie!
197.
O how this dry and barren Verse attests
The heavy Truth of these my Lamentations!
O pity Me, all you whose gentle Breasts
Ever felt the Stings of Mystical Vexations!
Pity Me, o my candid Readers, now
What makes me tire your Patience, you know.
198.
Had I my wonted Share in that dear Feast
Which with celestial Spirits embraves the Heart;
A fairer Banquet I for You had dressed;
Who now can only by my pined Smart
Warn You to prize, and to embrace with (...)
Religious Tenderness, what I have lost.
199.
Lost hitherto: But must that Loss run on,
And can my Life mean while make good its Name?
Can Day maintain her Self, if once the Sun
Deny to feed her with his vital Flame?
Can Rivers keep their constant full-tide Course,
If once the living Spring does them divorce?
201.
O tender King of Love, whose sumptuous Care
For hungry Hearts that high Provision made,
Behold my starved Soul lies gasping here
For one dear Crumb of thy mysterious Bread,
And craves to cool its burning Tongue, one Drop
Of liquid Life from thy all-saving Cup.
202.
I know my Worthlessenesse, sweet Lord, and how
Unfit I am to look for any Share
In those peculiar Delicates, which Thou
For thine own genuine Children did prepare:
Yet to a Dog once more thy leave afford
To catch what falls from thy Childrens Board.
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO XIII. The Death of Love.
ARGUMENT.
LOve, having Lived for Man, is pleased to Die,
To make his purchase sure by Life and Death;
Through Earths profoundest Gulf of Tyranny,
And the vast Ocean of Heavens mighty Wrath
He nobly waded; and upon the Shore,
Having first spent his Blood, his Soul did pour.
1.
Soul of all Sweets, o Life, how dear art Thou
To all that ever had a Taste of Thee!
How much of Heaven it self infused does flow
Into the region of thy Suavity!
Indeed Heaven were not Heaven, did it not join
To make it Self, by Marrying Thee, divine,
2.
Thou in the Center of Divinity
Before the Birth of Ages had thy Spring,
Where thou did sweetly Smile amidst the Three
Most undivided One, and traversing
Those Heights and Depths of Blessedness, did through
Eternities immense Expansion flow
3.
Thence, when the World burst out from Nothing, thou
Did spare some Streams Created Hearts to cheer:
No Bosoms with that Influence did glow,
But of thy Sweets they straight enamored were,
Which, as their richest dearest Jewels, they
Close in the heart of their own Hearts did lay,
4.
Their Goods, their Parents, or their Children were
Not half so precious to Them, as Thou:
Their Joints, their Limbs, their Skin, they well could spare
Their tender Name and Fame, they could allow.
A Prey to Injury, so they by them
Might Thee, and thy Security (...)
5.
The vilest Worm, whom Thou do please to grace,
Forgets not that worth he gains by Thee:
He shoots his warey Self from place to place,
And, when oppressed, feeble though he be,
He turns again, and with the strongest Foe
Tries what for thy deer Rescue He can do.
6.
The wretched Serpent is content to feed
On basest Dust, rather than part with Thee;
Though Curses pour their Streams upon his head,
He makes his Body all one Helmet be
To sheltre it; and roules himself about
Himself, to keep all mortal violence out.
7.
Nay when the Sword or Wand its way has cut
Quite through his Circles, till his Body be
An heap of fragments; He himself does knit
Even by the Cement of his Wounds, till He
Grows One again; So loathe he is to die,
Though his damned life be but his Misery.
8.
What Voyages will silly Swallows take
Warm Seasons round about the World to chase!
What hard shift will the hunted Partridge make
To shun the greedy Griffens deadly face!
What Wings of Speed, what Tricks, and Sleights will fear
Of Death, soon teach the close-pursued Hare!
6.
In how great Sweat and Pains do Pismires spend
Their warmer Months, to reap and carry home
Their Cropp, which in the Cold, may them befreind
With Sustentation, and defend Them from
The fear of loosing that poor Life, which They,
In love of it, to endless Toil betray
10.
The most industrious never-tired Be
Flies through all Summer, knocking at the door
Of every likely Flower, where thoughtfull she
Can borrow ought toward her Winter Store;
And thus for love of Life, her honey trade
A bitter course of Painfulnes is made,
11.
Yea, even the simplest Weed, whose Life does but
Preserve that Stink with which She taints the air,
When Winter gins its chains of Frost to put
Upon the Earth, makes all her Spirits repair
Down to the Root: for rather than be dead,
Alive She chooses to be buried.
12.
But yet no Creature with such painful Pains
Does purchase Life's Security, as Man:
What Plots and Projects tumble in his brains,
What Cares and Labors make Him faint and wan
Earth open house to all things else does keep,
But He must sow before he looks to reap.
13.
A tedious Prentisehood He spends, to learn
How he may toil himself another Day,
And by his still-returning Labors ern
What will support his Strength, that still He may
Be grapling with his Work; for his own S weat
Must be the constant Sauce unto his Meat,
14.
To get a Living,'s a sufficient Charm
TO allure him through the most portentous Sea;
To make him scorn the most out ragious Storm
Though Death within three Inches of Him be;
To fire him unto all impieties,
Defying Vengeance, and the Thundering Skies.
15.
A Charm sufficient to make him List
Himself an Enemy to the life of Man;
Whilst he fears not to make his stoney breast
Harder, by martial Steel and Brass, and can
Without all blushing take his bloody Pay,
For his Endeavors daily to Destroy.
16.
O wondrous Riddle though eternal Death
Invitably be entaild upon
His monstrous Crimes; Yet He his present Breath
Esteems so deer, that still he dares run on
In any Deadly Wickedness, which may
Maintain that life which must (...) long (...).
17.
Indeed the Man whose swelling Coffers bring
Him forth free choice of all the dainty Store
Which Land or Sea can yield to cheer a King,
May find some feeling reason to adore
His Jollse Life: But what convincing Plea
Can Beggars move to this (...)
18.
Yet They who are so destitute within
And poor without, that equally they want
Both Food wherewith to fill their wretened Skin,
And Clothes to cover it; are well content
On these hard tenns to live, nor (...) They be
By any Death quit of this (...)
19.
The woeful Captive, whose dark Dungeon is
No other but his antidated Grave,
Though neither Light nor open air be his,
Yet huggs his Life, as dearly, as the brave
And lusty Gallant, who himself can please
With all the Fat of pleasure and of case.
20.
The Leper clothed in his winding sheet
By his disease, abhorrs the thought of death:
Life still is even in his dead Body sweet,
And full as precious He esteems his Breath
As does the Virgin whose fair Bodies dress
Of native Lilies, and of Roses is.
21.
He who does in a Fevers furnace fry,
Would yet not Cool himself within his Grave;
But hires Physicians costly Industry
To study out some way how He may save
His torturing Life: Notfor (...) World would He
By Death's, most (...) Physic eased be.
22.
The lamentable Gally-slave, who is
Fast chained to perpetual Misery,
Still toiles and rows through the tempestuous Seas,
Without all Hopes that any Port can be
An Haven of Rest to Him; and yet full deat
He holds that Life which holds him Prisoner there.
23.
She whom a Seige begins so close, that she
Is crowded up to naught but Bones and Skin,
Flies from the thought of gaining Liberty
By Deaths Assistance; and will rather win
Upon her Bowels to devour her child
Than be by Famine of her Life (...).
24.
The cursed Traitor who is chained alive
Unto his Chair of Death; though he be sure
It needs must be in vain for Life to strive;
Yet in strong Love of it, he will endure
To feed on his own Arms, that so He may
What ever it cost Him, Live one other day.
25.
He who disjoynted on the Rack does lie,
Although his Body now no more be his,
After a thousand (...), is to the to die,
And any Crime is willing to Confess.
He does Confess what needs must be his Death,
Only to gain a little longer breath,
26.
Thus all the Gall that sharpest Misery
Into the heart of Mortal Life can pour
Meets there such Powers of vital suavitie
As conquer all its Bitterness: Suct store
Of precious Delicates as dare despise
The keep force of all Calamities.
27.
Snatch what you will from Man, besides, and He
Will stoutly set his shoulders to sustein
His Loss; but if his Life required be,
In vain all Comforts fawn on Him; in vain
Are Crowns and Sceptres proffered Him, a price
Too poor to hire Him to his Obsequies.
28.
Since then the Life even of the meanest Wight
Scorns to be balanced with the richest Treasure;
O then what mighty Depth of Worth, or Height
Of purest Pretiousnesse can serve to measure
The value of the Life of Jesus, which
Does earth with all the best of Heaven enrich?
29.
A Life more worth than all the Breath which (...)
The panting Hearts of the whole World beside;
More worth than all the Tract of Ages, and
Old (...) himself: A Life which nobly vie'd
With vast (...), so sweet, immense,
And pure was its Miraculous Excellence.
30.
For whilst all Humane Life was by the Breath
Of the contagious Serpent tainted So,
That by the rankling Principles of Death
It from its Cradie was condemned unto
Its Hearse; He Is kept unsteind, and scorned all
The gaping Graves Pleas for his Funeral.
31.
Yet this dear Life of his he held less dear
Than worthless men; so generous was his Love
That He his own Hearts Blood could freely spare
To ransom theirs; desiring so to prove
Even by their own Souls Rule, that they to Him
More dear than his all precious Self did seem.
32.
They, and the worst of them; for he did not
Pick out some worthy Friends, for whose sweet sake
His Life (...) was content to offer; but
Even for his (...) that dear Oblation make.
(...) was Leves highest Gallantrie, and fit
For Him who was the Mighty King of it.
33.
This was the brave Exploit which Phylax now,
To ravish Psyche's Heart, meant to display.
For though the business she before did know,
Yet it was at Distance: Circumstances may
Make deep Impression, and the present Sceen
Of Miracles, more Admiration win.
34.
Besides, he knew her Soul was fired now
With noble vigor from the Heavenly Board,
And would delight to tower and travel through
The (...) wonders of her loving Lord.
This made him bring her from the sacred Cave,
When by the holy Kiss Sh'had took her leave,
35.
Then up he leads her unto Calvarie,
The Hill of Marveils, that that Prospect might
Yield her with uncontrolled Liberty
Of Loves chief stations an open sight:
And there arrived, Mark now, my Deer, said He,
What further Wonders Jesus did for thee.
36.
Were Thou enthroned on the proudest Hill
Which on the glorious Back of Heaven does rise,
Thou could not with a nobler spectacle
Feast the brave Hunger of thy wondering Eyes,
Than from this Mountains most renowned Head
Thou by my Finger, and my Tongue shall read.
37.
In yonder street of Ruins, once there stood
The High-preist Anna's House; but Caiaphas
Who was his Son by Marriage, not by Blood,
(Unless joint thirst of guiltless Blood may pass
For (...),) His Dwelling had
Where now thou see that Heap of rubbish made.
38.
Those Caytiffs, who had in the Garden seized
Upon thy Lord to Annas hull'd him first,
To see what Censure his grave spite was pleased
To pass on Him for whom it long did thirst:
But He, with cruel Favor Him dismissed
Unto his Son, the bolder bloodier Priest.
39.
Thus, through the (...), and Scorn, to (...)
Is Jesus sed: He smiled within, to see
With what success his Bargain crowned was,
And thought his Money well bestowed which He
To (...) gave: Yet in his Face, and Eye
He still maintained his Priestly (...).
40.
So have thou seen a Lion cast his Eye
Upon his harmless Prey with grave Disdain,
As if he could afford to pass it by;
Whilst He his greedy Paws can scarce contein,
Or with his Teeth bite in their own Des
Of Blood: so certain is his salvage Ire.
41.
Like one who jealous was of Peace, and Law,
He calls Him to account, and asks Him why
He strove Disciples after Him to draw,
And with his newfound Doctrine multiply
Sects in the Church, and (...) in the State;
Both which religious Loyalty must hate,
42.
(Such Impudence upon Sins face does reign
That whilst the Laws of Heaven and Earth she breaks;
She dares on Innocence throw her own stein,
And in high Zealloud exclamations make
Against all Innovations, which on Them
She charge, for whose blood her Thirst does flame.)
43.
Thy Lord well understood his vain Demand;
And, why, said He, requir'st Thou this of me?
Lo my Accusers crowd on either hand,
Who in their spite against Me, all agree.
My Doctrine public was; Hear then what (...)
Against Me, now I challenge Them, can say,
44.
Tin no Conventicles Cloisters did
Shroud any Lessons that I meant to preach:
The Synagogue and Temple witnessed,
And so did they Themselves, what I did teach.
My Gospel it concerned the World to know;
And from my Lips in public it did flow.
45.
This said. A (...) (...) who (...) by,
First bent his angry Brow, and (...) his (...),
With which at Jesu's Face his (...) (...),
Crying, Bold fellow, can Goas (...) (...)
(...) no (...) Answer? Now we see
What (...) of Manners grow (...) (...)
46.
Would (...)
The (...)?
For how (...)
(...) who though He (...)
This (...)
Can yet approve himself both? (...), and (...).
47.
But hear what from the Lambs Mouth Meekness spok:
If in my Answer any Crime there be,
Accuse Me Thou, and let the High Priest look
That legal Justice be performed on Me:
If not: before the face of Justice Seat,
Why do Thou mine injuriously beat?
48.
Soft was this Answer; but their Breasts were Stone
And beat it back: The unrelenting Priest
With all the Scribes and Elders joined in one
Conspiracy of Haste, their Projects cast
To hire False-witnesse, as before they bought
That Treason which Him Prisoner thither brought.
49.
Is this the reverend Sanhedrim, which here
Hunts for a Lie, that Truth may not escape?
Must gross Injustice poison Mose's Chair?
Must bloody Spite put on Religions shape?
No wonder if the People forward be
To tread their Leaders Stepps to Injury.
50.
Whole Troops of Witnesses came thronging in
With thicker Articles: When Rulers dare
Once egg the Vulgar on to act that sin
In which Themselves cannot for shame appear,
Bold Calumny thinks Law is on her side,
And with all furious Impudence does ride.
51.
But this rude Rout were younglins yet, and raw
Knights of the Post, and had not conn'd their Lie
With wary Art: As yet They did not know
What need they had of perfect Memory:
This made each one of Them accuse his Brother,
Whilst all their Stories jarr'd on One another.
52.
Yet They must not be chidden, whose Intent
Aimed only at the Public Good; least this
Should unto others prove Discouragement,
Who might urge Articles with more Success.
Alas, those Men were well-affected, but
Quite out of Countenance by the Court were put.
53.
Their honest Meaning by the Sanbedrim
Is kindly construed and with Thanks requited;
That others might with subtler Art to trim
Their fairer Accusations be invited;
For still the patient Court expects to see
Who will the next Calumniators be.
54.
But when the first Miscarriage did dismay
All other Liars: Satan, who stood by,
Quick as his Thought, snatched unto Hell his way
To fetch some help, leasts the Priests Villainy,
And his great Hopes, should intercepted be:
Such care to murder thy dear Spouse had He
55.
Deep in the bowels of eternal Night,
And neighbor to the black Court of Damnation,
A Den there is where Stinks with Stinks do fight,
And Ejulation roar at Ejulation;
Where Horrors Horrors fright, and where Despair
The face of Desperation does tear.
56.
Hither came He: When lo the Iron Door
Gaped like the thirsty Earth to drink him in,
Whilst from its joyful Mouth the Cave did pour
A Stream of flaming Sulphur, to begin
Its Sovereigns Welcome; whom that Complement
(Such was his princely Grace,) did well content.
57.
For in He went, and there his Daughter saw
Busy in pouring ever-flaming Lead
Upon her Captive Souls, whom Lies did throw
Into that boiling Curse. Upon her Bed
Of red-hot Iron, not yet cooled lay
Lusts Holocaust, Madame Potiphera.
58.
She lay and bit, and roared and bit again
Her slanderous Tongue, whence deadly Shafts she shot
At holy Joseph, when She had in vain
Spent all her eyes Artillery, and what
Soft Blandishments her Wit could muster up
To bring about her hot and lustful Hope.
59.
There lay that foul-mouthed Ten, whose envious (...)
Blasted the florid Sweets of Canaan,
Spreading a Dearth upon Fertility,
And spewing Gall where Milk and Honey ran:
They cursed amain, and still their Lie maintained
In spite of Death which in their Bosoms reigned.
60.
There lay that Pair of Venal Souls, who by
Their hired Lie effected Naboths death;
Acting themselves that foul Impiety
With which They slandered Him: With flaming breath
God and the King they curse, and wish all Hell
Melted into the Heart of Jezebell.
61.
The Assyrian Railer there his Throat did rend
With (...) assertion of his Blasphemy;
Avouching still that God himself did send
Him to extirpate all the Jews: And why
Fond Rabsheka, does He thus deep torment Thee?
For that bold Errand, if on it he sent Thee?
62.
There lay that slanderous Pair of Elders who
Susanna did so reverently belie.
At her their Accusations still they throw,
And swear they found her in Adultery;
Yet with more fury they on Daniel rail,
Crying, See how Injustice may prevail.
63.
These, and ten thousand more lay roaring there,
Whilst the remorselesse Mistress of the Den
Triumphed in their Tortures: Never Bear
With such intemperate Fierceness raged when
Her hungry Teeth were flinging open their way
Through the Bowels of her helpless Prey.
64.
Fell Calumny it was: a monstrous She;
Her Forehead was composed of seav'n-fold Brass;
An obstinate Swarthinesse which scorned to be
Pierced by any Blush, grew on her face;
Her hollow Eyes with peevish Spite were filled,
Her powting Lips with deadly Venom swelled.
65.
Her dreadful Jaws replenished Quivers were
Where Darts, and Spears, and Pikes, and Arrows stood
Prepared and sharpened all for mortal War:
Her mouth no Moisture knew, but blended Blood
Of Asps and Basilisks, which she sucked in
To spit sure Mischief upon guiltless Men.
66.
The Stings of Ten choice Dragons joined in one,
Was all the Tongue wherewith She had to speak:
This made her language pure Destruction,
For certain Death at every Word did break
Forth from her Lips, if not at their first Sound,
Yet most infallibly at their Rebound.
67.
Her Brain is that mischievous Shop in which
As every other Slander forged was:
So that which did all Parallels out-stretch,
And dared Omnipotence's sovereign Face,
Proclaiming that thy Lord not by his own,
But Belzebubs Power, did tread the Devils down.
68.
When ever any rankling Canker breeds
Kingdoms or Countries ruinous Overthrow,
Her viperous Trade it is, the fatal Seeds
Of restless Fears and Jealousies to sow
In Peoples Hearts, whilst She ten thousand Lies
To blast their Rulers Credit does devise.
69.
She spying now her royal Father there,
His Benediction begged upon her Knee:
Bless Me dear Sire, said She, and give Me here
Some new found Engine of fresh Cruelty:
These Souls are used too kindly; all their Pains
Grow stale and cold, familiar their Chains.
70.
Fear not; it shall be so, cried Satan; but
Sweet Child, another Work first craves our Care:
Him whom I deepliest hate, my Art has got
With Juda's help, fast in a fatal Snare;
I mean, that Galilean Beggar, who
Has Me and all my Fiends abused so,
71.
But now the Priests forsooth, are so demure
(And I Will remember't when I get them here,)
That though they in the Project did conjure,
And bought that Christ even at a Rate too dear,
Their Holinesses some pretense must have
How in Destroying Him, their Fame to save,
72.
Confusion on their Fame; who though they dread
Not what the Thundering Wrath of Heaven can do
In vindication of a guiltless Head;
Stand in base awe of the vile Vulgar so,
That they confess most Infamous Impiety
Whilst They the People make their only Deity.
73.
Base-hearted Hypocrites! Can they not be
Brave venturous Sinners, like to Me their Prince?
Yet since they needs will sneak to Hell; sure We
For once will help the Fools, to their Pretense:
They want False-witnesse for a Cloak, and Thou
This Livery can best on Them bestow.
74.
But see Thou mould'st up some Athletick Lie
Whose burly Bulk all Truth may over-bear.
Some petty sucking Knaves their best did try,
But straight their ill-shod Tales did enter-fer,
On Thee the Work depends. Come let us away,
The Highpriests Court, or rather Mine, does stay.
75.
This said: his Daughter by the hand He took,
And with more sprightfull speed then Indian Arrow
Cuts through the tender whineing Air, he broke
Earths sturdie obstacles, and posted thorough
The sullen clogging Mass, until He came
Back to his other Home, Jerusalem.
76.
There when he saw the Council at a stand
Gaping and staring one upon another,
He spied withal, two itching Rogues at hand
Scratching their heads, and beating them together:
He knew their meaning, and through both their hearts
Unfeen, unheard, his Daughter strait he darts
77.
As when the Bosom of the Delphick Priest
Began to boil with his desired Hell,
His Rapture by his Gestures he confessed,
Hastening to vent his belking Oracle;
So this accursed Pair, now kindled by
The Fury speeded to belch out their Lie.
78.
For straight each flung his hand above his head,
And cried, I have it sure; let us to the bar:
And when their Projects they examined,
They found that both in one Mould fashioned were:
At which they kissed, and shaked hands, and pressed
With full-mouthed Accusation to the Priest.
79.
Great Caiaphas, and ye the (...)
The holy Guardians of Heavens reverend Law,
Hear Us, said They, who will object to Him
No hearsay stories, but what we both saw
And beard; and may henceforth nor Eye nor Ear
If we speak what is false, or see, or Hear.
80.
We saw him strutting in the Temple, where
His most blasphemous Pride he broached, and cried,
I will destroy this house which Hands did rear,
And build another full as fair and wide
Without the Help of Hands; as if bold He
No Mortal were, but some great Deity.
81.
Nay to be sure his Blasphemy might want
No Complement of desperate Impudence,
Though six and forty years he knew were spent
In compassing that works Magnificence,
He blushed not to avouch that in three days
The Fabric to perfection he would raise.
82.
But Psyche, how shall Feeble Waves prevail
Against impenetrable Rocks! in vain
This wretched Lie endeavored to assail
Unshaken Truth which did in Jesus reign;
And split it self, could the blind Judges eye
Have seen its shivers, which about did fly.
83.
For grant this Article were full as true
As it is false; Why must it branded be
As Blasphemous in Him, who in the view
Ofample witness proved his Potencie
Sufficient was the Temple to restore,
When He from Death her Captive Lazarus tore.
84.
But strait a Murmur rolld about the Hall,
Which the Fond People tossed from one another:
The Council gravely shak'd their heads; and all
Mingled their jealous Whisperings together:
Till Caiaphas stood up, and asked thy Lord,
Why He no kind of Answer would afford.
85.
Jesus, who never spilt a word in vain,
For sweet and precious was his blessed Breath,
Would no Reply unto that witness deign
Which shameless Falsehood venteth; and which has
Its Answer in its self, to any Ear
But that which is resolved not to hear.
86.
Wherefore the Priest, advisd by Satan, now
Contests him deep, to try if He could make
Him prove his own Accuser: All Men know,
Said He, those towering Words of thine must speak
A more then Mortal Power; nor must thou hope
Thy silence now shall lock the Business up.
87.
For by the everliving God, whose Name
Too glorious is on Mortal Tongues to sit,
I here conjure Thee clearly to proclaim
Whither Thou be the Christ, whom Holy Writ
Has promised to the World, that Blessed One,
The Heir of Heaven, and Gods eternal Son.
88.
O who would think this Consecrated Tongue
Which with such reverentiall Awe does make
Mention of God; mean while should burn in strong
Thirst of most guiltless Blood! But Hell can break
Even into Heaven it self, and Satan dare
Before Gods Throne amongst his Sons appear.
89.
And He his Scholars teaches to begin
The foulest Crimes with Gods all-beauteous Name,
That so more easily He may usher in
What else by plain and necessary shame
Would be obstructed. Thus the Charmers Tongue
Distills his Poison through his dainty song.
90.
But he who came Truth's glorious Lamp to light,
Was pleased now to give a full Reply:
His Heaven, his Sire, Himself, did him excite
Himself, his Sire, his Heaven not to deny.
In Me, said He, fulfilled your Scriptures are,
I am God's Son, and Heavens apparent Heir.
91.
And though your Eyes now look such Scorn on Me,
Time comes when they shall melt in tears for this,
When on the Clouds high Chariot they shall see
My Majesty in Glories high Excess,
And at the first glimpse of my Power know
I have a Judgment Seat, as well as you.
92.
No sooner was this generous Truth professed,
But Caiaphas in deep dissimulation
His politic but bloody Malice dressed;
And starting from his seat in zealous Passion,
Tore his own Clothes, in token of his high
Distaste at that presumed Blasphemy.
93.
It Is true, his Law did clearly Him forbid
To rend his Clothes: but what cared He for Law,
Who now about Injustice beat his Head,
And only aimed how He the World might draw
Into opinion that the Prisoners Case
Beyond all possible holy Patience was.
94.
Vain Hypocrite, keep thy Clothes whole to hide
Thy shameless self, whom Thou one day shall tear
For setting forth this Emblem, which does bid
The People use the Prisoner at the Bar,
As Thou thy Robe: But they are dull, and yet
Read not what Thou commend'st to Them by it.
95.
They read it not. But, Psyche, bloody He
Awakes their drowsy cruelty, and cries,
What need we further Witnesses? for ye
Your selves have heard his wide-mouthed Blasphemies.
Speak what you think; the Case seems unto Me
So plain, that I dare let you Judges be.
96.
O Righteous Judge, and worthy of the Chair
Of reverend Moses, who does first invite
The People unto Blood, and then repair
Unto their Sentence! Whither Wrong or Right,
Speak what think ye, a Firebrand is, and will
Kindle the Fury of their Murdering Zeal.
97.
For when the Bloodhounds feel their feet are loose,
They straight pursue the Sent, and with joint Cry
Proclaim him guilty: And, say They, may Those
Not live, who think He is not fit to Die.
This roaring Sentence served the turn; and so
Abused Jesus for Condemned does go.
98.
What matter though the sacred Rolls can show
No Statute, which, as due, his Life demands?
This Popular extemporal Vote, is Law
Enough to yield Him into barbarous Hands,
And He, so foul and monstrous is his Cause,
Must die for breaking that which never was.
99.
Forthwith the busy Officers, and all
The insolent Servants take Him as their Prey;
And setting him amidst the smoakie Hall,
Make his unmoved Patience their Play.
Where, as a Preface to his deep disgrace,
Their odious Scorn they spit upon his Face.
100.
One at his Mouth, another at his Eyes,
One at his Nose, another at his Beard,
His Slaver aims, and impudently tries
To shoot his shame with Art. Was ever heard
Such putid Cruelty Where are, o Jews,
Your Eyes, and Face, that thus you His abuse;
101.
Have not all Beauties made their graceful seat
In this Majestic Look? Is Libanus,
Is Paradise, is Heaven, so fair and sweet?
Are Phebu's Eyes so purely glorious?
Is delicate Aurora's April Cheek
So roseal as this, so soft, so sleek?
102.
Cull out ten thousand of the fairest Faces
Where goodly Feature ever made her home,
And draw an Extract of their richest Graces;
Yet that bright Quincessence must (...) come
Into the presence of these Looks, to which
All Humane Beauties cannot hope to reach.
103.
For never did milder purer Loveliness,
Crowned with the best of Comlinesse's Joys.
Flourish upon so fair a Throne as His
Accomplished Countenance; in which the Choice
Jewels of most incomparable Grace
Had every one their goodly proper place.
104.
And must this blessed Face of Sweets alone
Be made the Sinck of your vile Excrement:
Much rather upon Caiapha's, or on
Great Cesar's Cheeks your Spittle might be spent,
Or on the Starts whose Fires all lighted were
At those bright Eyes your Filth becloudeth here.
105.
Is this the pay his Spittle must receive.
His Sovereign Spittle, which unto the Blind
His never known nor hop d for Sight did give,
That now Himself his own pure Eyes Must find
Drowned in the Scum of your foul Mouths! -- O stay
Dear Psyche, I have something more to say.
106.
Thy pious Tears are ready broached, I see
To wash this filth from off thy Spouses face;
But rein them in a while, that they may be
Officious unto His more deep Di grace.
The greatest Griefs are still behind; More great
Than thine, or then the whole Worlds Tears can wet
107.
These Varlets when their clotted Spittle had
Made his bedawbed Countenance so foul,
That They their own Works Sight abhorred; their Bad
They turn to Worse: for straight a Cloth they roll
About his patient Head; which should have been
Rather to Wipe, and gently make it clean.
108.
Thus having Blinded all the Worlds sweet Light;
Some with their Fists, some with their Cudgells fly
Upon his nead and shoulders; and their Spite
So gamesome is, that he must not deny
To make them sport, although his Bruises be
Of Groans more reason, than of Jollity.
109.
The petulant Caytiffs as they thresh Him, cry,
Great Sir, We know you are a Man of God,
And Pray you would be pleased to Prophecy
Whose Hand it is that strikes you, or whose Rod.
No matter though your Eyes that Towell bind,
Prophets are Seers, and cannot be blind
110.
No surer way could Peevishness contrive
Its most malicious Self to multiply;
For every Jeer they cast, and Stroke they give
Is now improved, and does double fly,
Whilst, by the Art of Sp ght, to over-bear him.
Each Jeer dos Strike Him, and each Stroke does Jeer Him.
111.
Ignoble Scorn, and sordid Insultation
Add Bitterness unto the Soul of Gall,
And lend new stings of torturing Vexation
To the most barbarous Racks, when ever they fall
On generous Spirits; O then with what profound
Grief did these Taunts thy Lords brave bosom wound!
112.
But on your Heads, bold Worms, your Mocks rebound,
And, though you little think it, Jesus sees
Your antic Cruelty, and the profound
Abysses of your foul Impieties,
Even your black Hearts, whose Secrets He one day
Open to the whole Worlds view, and hate, shall lay,
113.
You then shall need no Prophecy to declare
Who stroke the first, or who the second Blow;
Whose Stroks most hard, whose Jeers most bitter were
Who did the quaintest Wit of Malice show:
Your foul Exploits shall then be printed fair
Upon your Foreheads, and themselves declare.
114.
Whilst at this working Play they busy were,
Jesus never shrunk, or sought to shield his head;
But was as ready all their Spite to bear
As they to heap it on him: Never did
The patient Anvill more unmoved stand
Under the Laboring Smith his iron hand.
115.
For He himself resolved was to wade
Through the Red Sea of all Disgrace and Pain,
To bless and sanctify the noble Trade
Of Patience, and by his Example train
His faithful Martyrs; and instruct them how
Unto a noble Army they might grow.
116.
At length they with his Sufferance wearied,
In mere compassion of themselves give over,
And take the Clothe from his Victorious Head,
Which now to deeper Grief did Him discover;
For his Disciple straight he heard and saw
(...) him with a far more violent Blow.
117.
Peter, of late so brave and valiant, who
Had boasted that the grimmest face of Death
Should not out-look his Faith and Duty to
His Lord and Master; with the self-same breath
Had twice renounced his Allegiance, and
Now on the Brink of his third fall did stand.
118.
For as he lingered in the Hall to see
What would become of Jesus, One who was
A busy Actor in the Treachery
Under foul Juda's Conduct, cries, alas
In vain this Rogue himself strives to conceal,
His Galilaean Tongue does him reveal
119.
His hand then clapping on his Shoulder, I
Full well remember thy bald Pate, said He;
Nay never stare, nor study for a Lie,
For in the Garden I did meet with Thee.
And Sir, know that now I have you here,
I will revenge my Cosen Malchu's ear.
120.
Think not this lethern staring Pair of yours
Can pay the Debt you owe his single One:
We know the Witch your Lord, whose conjuring Powers
Can clapp them on again: But by the Throne
Of God I vow, that now I Will take a course
To make thee sure, spite of all Magic force,
121.
It is no running nor no squulking now;
Here are no Shades nor Trees to hide your Head;
D'y see your goodly Master yonder, how
With his foul Guilt oppressed and silenced,
Like a dumb Post he stands? Friend, you must go,
And in his Censure be his Follower too.
122.
As when the Waves came tumbling in his Way,
Faint-hearted Peter, though his Lord were by,
Did all his Confidence in Him betray,
And therefore sunk: so his Accusers Cry
Now storming in his ears, with faithless fear
He gives this Tempest leave to domineere.
123.
Yet there He craved his Saviors help; but now
He sinks so deep, that He despairs of that,
And with vile Cowardice contriveth how
To save his wretched Skin: He cares not what
He Swears, or how he Lies, so any Shift
Him from his Panick Gulf may serve to lift.
124.
O hearken all ye Confident Mortals, who
Presume your strength may scorn the Battery
Of any earthly or infernal Foe:
This Heart of late did beat with full as high
Resolves as yours; but now it melts away,
And all his Courage yeildeth to Dismay.
125.
By Heaven, he cries, and Him who Heaven did frame
By all the Temple and the sacred Law,
By the great Sanhedrim, by Pilates Name,
By Caesar's Head, by whatsoever I know
Divine or reverend, I freely swear
I have no knowledge of that Prisoner there
126.
If I were with him in the Garden, may
I never enter into Paradise;
In Abraham's Bosom may I never lay
My Head, if it did ever rest in His;
Nay, may all Egypts Plagues, and Sodoms Flame
Be mine, if till to day I knew his Name.
127.
Right lusty are thine Oaths, and generously
Thy daring Curses thou do thunder out,
Replied the Soldier; and why might not I
For once mistaken be? For without doubt
Thou never serv'dst that sheepish Master there
Who can so bravely Curse, and stoutly Swear,
128.
Thus did He gain his too dear Liberty
And lost Himself: But as He sneaked away,
A Crowing Cock awaked his Memory
Into the fair light of his Duties Day;
For his apostate Eyes did now repent,
And back to Jesus with Submission went.
129.
When lo, Mild He who could no Pity find
For his own most abused Innocence,
With ready Beams of heavenly kindness shined
Upon his Servants traytorous offense;
Forewarning Peter how to use his Sheep
When into any Error they should leap.
130.
Denied Jesus would not Him Deny;
But spoke his Pardon By his gracious Look
Yet so that He might easily descry
In the soft lines of that pathetick Book
What undeserved and deep engraved Smart
His falsehood made in his dear Saviors Heart.
131.
How powerful and how long a Sermon He
Preached in the Epitomie of this short Glance!
But with such speed all Wonders use to be
Atcheived whensoe'r Omnipotence
Is pleased to work: for here it showed its Art,
Witness the Miracle in Peter's heart.
132.
For this most Potent Glance subdued Him so,
That driven by holy Shame, He seeks where
To weep away his odious Crime, And lo,
His Tears now Bitterer than his Curses were.
Thus when the Sunn on sturdie Ice does look,
It strait repents into a running Brook.
133.
But now Aurora from the roseall East
Had newly dressed, and sent out the Day;
To finish his Design of Night, the Priest
To Pilate does dispatch thy Lord away:
Nor needs He teach his Miscreants what to do,
Who Spights fell Trade had better learned than so.
134.
For strait the boistrous Rout with Cords and Chains
Load JESU'S Hands and Feet, and hurrie him
To Pilat's Palace: All the Streets and Lanes
Sweat with tumultuous Crowds, who poured their stream
Of Scoffs, of Curses, and of Blasphemy
Upon his innocent Head, as He passed by.
135.
Have Thou not seen how in a silver Night
The mad-brain'd Doogs all gather in the Street,
Where with united Barkings at the Light
Of beuteous Phebe, Heaven and Earth they beat?
Such and so causeless were the Clamors which
Against thy Lord these railing Curs did stretch.
136.
Arrived thus at the Pretorium, They
In to the Governor the Prisoner send;
For this with them was a Religious Day,
And no unholy Place forsooth could stand
With their strict Piety, who cleansed were
To celebrate their reverend Passover.
137.
Shame on their foul Hypocrisy, who in
The midit of this their zealous Sanctity
With eager fury strive to act a Sin
To monstrous to be exprated by
Their greatest Sacrifices Power; and strain
By this Lambs blood their Paschall Lamb to stain.
138.
But when the Judge came forth, and asked them what
Offense exposed Jesu's Life to Law?
The surly Priests grew insolently hot,
And cried, We hoped the Governor ever now
Had understood that our grave Sanhedrim
No Malefactors makes without a Crime.
139.
Can it be thought that We would load a Lamb,
With chains, and send Him for a Wolf to Thee?
If so to Us his Censure and his Shame
Is due, and ours the Nails and Cross must be;
O then release that righteous Soul, and bid
The slanderous Sanbedrim be Crucified.
140.
To this bold Shift was Malice driven, to make
Mere Accusation for Conviction pass.
But then, replied the Judge, what made you take
This pains, since you have found the Prisoners Case
So foully gross? you might, and may do now,
Go sacrifice him unto your own Law.
141.
True, said the Priests; nor had our pious Zeal
Loiter'd thus long, did but out Law permit
Our righteous Indignation to deal
With such a Malefactor as is fit.
The Cross is his high due; and none but you
That decent Doom can upon Him bestow.
142.
The generous Roman shak'd his head to see
The Jews so shameless in their bloody Hate:
And yet to cool their mutinous Spirits, He
Commands the Prisoner to the Judgment Seat:
But first required Them fairly to display
What horrid Crimes they to his Charge could lay.
143.
Enforced here Themselves to shelter in
The Sanctuary of some strong-built Lie;
If We, said they, by his outrageous Sion
Were able but to mould and tune our Cry,
The Noise not only would amaze your Ear,
But rend all Heaven, and Vengeance downward tear.
144.
For know, just Sir, that in profound Despite
To Heaven, and that unspotted Truth which We
Received from thence, this hellish Brat of Night
Blushed not to broach his blasphemous Heresy.
But through the credulous Country Preaching ran
Tainting the honest Commons with his Bane.
145.
Yet well it were if Heaven alone had been
The Butt of his bold sin: but traytorous He
Endeavored to work his dangerous teen
On Earth, and its Imperial Majesty;
Great Caesar's Tribute he denied as due,
And his vile self he for a King did show.
146.
Thus roared the Priests. But when the Judge had well
The business weighed by grave Examination,
With Spite, and not with Truth he found it swell,
And therefore made this honest Protestation:
Had I your Eyes, I know not what might be,
But with mine own, no fault in Him I see.
147.
As when the Flames are by the Wind beat back,
With boiling Murmr they their Wrath increase,
And a more violent Combustion make,
Strengthening themselves against the stoutest Trees:
So the repulsed Priests more hot did grow,
And with full mouth these Exclamations blow:
148.
It Is strange wise Pilate should not clearly see
What all about our Nation is spread;
For all Samaria, and Judea He
Has with this Heresy envenomed;
Which first he broached in Galile, and thence
Extended its pestiferous influence.
149.
But this deferred their bloody Hopes; for now
The mention of Galile did put
Pilate upon a further Search to know
Whither the Prisoner did belong, or not,
To Antipas his power: which when he found,
Unto the Tetrarch He dispatched Him bound.
150.
Thus through new Streets, and new Revilings He
To surly Herod's Lodging hurried is.
Herod could not conceal his Joy to see
Him whom his unbeleeving Curiousness
Had long desired, since his Court did ring
With Jesu's Acts, which Fame did thither bring.
151.
And now he doubts not but the Prisoner will
In hopes to gain his Favor and good Word,
Strain to the utmost of his Power and skill,
And some Miraculous Spectacle afford.
But Herod knew not that this Man was He
Who scorned to buy his life with flattery.
152.
Thick were the Questions which He spurred to Him,
But Jesus would no idle Motions hear;
For with grave Silence still he answered them:
And though the Priests and Scribes all railed there,
He said as little to their shameless Lie,
As to the Tetrarchs Curiosity.
153.
Is this, said Herod (big with high disdain)
Great Caesar's Rival, who is only fit
As King of sheepish stupid Fools to reign?
Is this that Wonder-working He, who yet
Has neither Hand, nor Head, nor Power nor B^ain
Himself accused and scorned to maintain?
154.
Is all the wide-spread Glory of his Name,
Are all his Miracles shrunk in to this,
That he Himself with most ignoble shame
Should prove a Miracle of Sottishness?
Is this the King, to tear whose young heart out,
Through thousand Infants breasts my Father sought
155.
How my fond fancy wronged brave John, when I
Dreamed this was he, to life returned! But
Should it be John, his gross Stupidity
Assures Me Revived He is not.
Come Soldiers, use your antic Wits, that so
We may have sport at least, before he go.
156.
Glad were the Guard, and ready equally
To mock at Jesus, and to please their Lord:
About Him round They danced with hideous Cry,
And bid him still that Tempest with his Word;
And when He silent stood, conjured Him to
Cast that dumb Devil out which bound Him so.
157.
One limping comes, and Him entreats to heal
His withered Foot, with which he kicks Him strait.
Another cries, O make this Lame Hand well,
And then he beats Him with its brawnie weight.
A third desires Him to restore a dead
Dog unto Life, then throws it at his Head.
158.
But wearied with their scornful sports, at last,
Come dress Him Like a Prince, the Tesrarch cried,
And let the Jews return their King to taste
What Banquet Pilate will for Him provide:
His entertainment surely must be high
In Correspondence to his Royalty,
159.
Tell Him I thank Him for his Courtesy,
It made Me merry, as You all have seen:
I will not rob his Lordships Pleasures by
Keeping this Idiot from Him: When I mean
To play with Fools, I hope my Galile
With one such Sheeps-head more may furnish Me.
160.
Thus Jesus in a gorgious Robe is clad,
That more conspicuous his shame might be.
And so through fresh Disdains and Scoffings led
To be the Game of further Tyranny,
Pilate admired to see his splendid Hue,
Knowing what Garb was to Delinquents due.
161.
For Prisoners, when their Lives presumed were
Forfeit to Law and Death, were wont to be
In funeral Black arrayed, which might prepare
Them to the thoughts of their Catastrophe,
And intimate the Color of that Sin
Whose horrid Darkness clothed their Souls within.
162.
But so did Providence correct their Spite,
That He whose Breast was purer than the Day,
Did in his Vesture wear no guilty Night;
But by his Foes own Hands, in an Array
Of Glory was attired, and quitted when
They haled Him to his Condemnation.
163.
So oftentimes, when a Conspiracy
Of Winds their puffing laboring Wrath do blow
About the World, in hopes to damp the Sky
With swarthie Clouds and Storms; they only throw
All Vapors out, and with a full and fair
Serenity array the purged Air.
164.
But Pilate pondering what had happened now,
And feeling Moral Honesty beat high
Even in his Pagan Heart; could not allow
His Conscience to be Slave unto the Cry
Of the importunate Jews, who roaring stood,
And set their Mouths wide open for guiltless Blood.
165.
My duty I have fully done, said He;
Him and your Accusations, have I
Unto the bottom sifted: As for Me
I hope I never gave you reason why
You should presume that any Clamors may
Fright Pilate out from Justice's Highway.
166.
Neither your Temple nor your Altars be
More venerable unto you, than is
My most unspotted Judgment Seat to Me:
For all Hells yellings and impatient Cries
I trust Mine shall as valiantly resist
As Mino's, or as Rhadamanthu's Breast.
167.
What I to Caesar owe, and what to Right
I long have known, and must not now forget:
My Heart is Roman, and the dearest Light
Of Heaven is not so precious to it
As spotless Honor, which can never be
Cohabitant with Wrong and Tyranny.
168.
Mine own Heart-blood I rather would let flow,
And let your Thirst carouse in it, then I,
From any guiltless Veins their Streams will draw
To quench the loudest Importunity.
Mine is mine own; but what have I to do
To give Another Life, when Law, says, No.
169.
Law takes no hold of Jesus, nor must I
Nor did the Tetrarch; and why then will you?
He that he is a King does not deny;
But adds withal, His Kingdoms not below.
No harm to Caesar by this Man is done,
Who does his Kingdom fancy in the Moon,
170.
There let his Fancy rule and reign: But yet
It Is pity for his Folly He should Die.
It never yet was heard, that Want of Wit
Passed for a Capital Offense. Nay I
Have been informed, that in the Tribute He
Has witnessed sufficient Loyalty.
171.
For by his Doctrine He did it maintain,
And by his Practice too; though Calumny
Has your Belief abused, and cast a Stain
Upon his Innocence. Come, therefore I
Will, for your Credits, Him Chastise, and so
Give Him Dismission without more ado.
172.
And this the rather, since by Custom I
Engaged am to honor this your Feast
In granting some Offenders Liberty
Who in your Judgment shall deserve it best.
And who, can you think, less deserves Death,
Then He whose Innocence him acquitted has?
173.
Thus strove the Judge, that He might not condemn
Both Jesus, and himself. When lo the Priests
His gracious offer shamelesly contemn,
And spur the People (in whose fury rests
Their final Hope,) to beg with all the Strise
Of stoutest throats, none but Barabba's life.
174.
Prodigious Priests! is not Barabbas He
Whom all the Town knows guilty of the fact
You fain would fasten upon Jesus? ye
Your selves beheld what tumults he did act,
And how his desperate riot he pursued
Until in Murder he his hands imbrued.
175.
And is the Murderers life so dear, that He
Must live with you, whilst Innocence does die?
Does foul Barabbas his cursed Company
Suit better with your reverend Sanctity?
Or can you think both God and Man so blind
As not to see, and hate, your bloody mind?
176.
Strange, Psyche, strange it was, with what loud cries
The mad-brain'd vulgar heaven and earth did tear:
Barabba's Name through all their clamor flies,
And they for none but for Barabbas care:
He is their Darling, and they cannot live
If Pilate will not grant them his Reprieve.
177.
Thus hellish Hate opened Providence door
To heavenly Love, and made Barabba's be
The whole Worlds type, which from the fatal Power
Of endless Death, and equal Misery
Was to be snatched to day, whilst in its place
A Lamb all white and guiltless sentenced was.
178.
Mean while the Judges Lady sent her Page
In posting speed to pray her troubled Lord
Not to be mad because that Rout did rage,
Nor venture to profane the Roman sword
With innocent blood; for, certainly, said she,
Jesus is just, and they seditious be.
179.
For my good genius as I lay asleep
Appeared unto me hand in hand with thine;
Thine beat his Breast, and bitterly did weep,
And tolled the reason of his grief to mine:
He said (and deeply sighed, as he said)
Pilate with Jesus now will be betrayed.
180.
Pilate will be betrayed to take away
The Life of Jesus, and his own withal,
For Jesus blood will cry another day,
And unto Pilats veins and heart will call:
His veins and heart must answer that strong cry --
-- I started here; and out the Dream did fly.
181.
Thus heaven admonished Claudia strove to drive
Her husband from his Precipices brow,
And did withal miraculous witness give
What wrongs the Jews at Jesu's life did throw:
For Heaven was pleased that his integrity
By either sex should now asserted be.
182.
No sooner had the trembling Page delivered
His ominous Message; but the Judges heart
With fatal jealousy and horror shivered,
His joints unbuckled, and his eyes did start,
His hair stood staring up, his blood flew back
And left his lips, and all his visage black.
183.
But when the Scribes and Priests had learned this news
Behold, they cry, how He by Magic art
Has sent some (...) Spirit to abuse
The honest thoughts of noble Claudia's heart;
That by this trick the Judge might frighted be,
Our Truths made slanders, and himself set free,
184.
Then all the People with fresh clamors roard,
Thundering Barabbas in the Judges ear:
That violent storm quite blew away the Word
His Lady sent Him; and through sudden fear
Of insurrection He returns to treat
About the Business which himself did hate.
185.
Friends, ask your second thoughts, said He, and see
If they upon Barabbas needs will dote:
I would not that your too much haste should be
Your prejudice; 'twas haste made you so hot
Against your smothered reason: but free leave
To choose again, to all of you I give.
186.
For I would fain my (...) should be
True to its Name; which sure cannot be so,
If none but foul Barabbas must be He
Whom you will let me upon you bestow,
Consider well, and you will find it stand
More with your (...), Jesus to demand,
187.
Enraged at this Word, they all renew
Their former Clamor, and Barabbas roar:
For none but for Barabbas We do sue;
Grant now what thou have granted heretofore:
Our wonted Boon We ask: If you deny
Barabbas to Us, keep your Courtesy.
188.
Moved with their boistrous Madness, Pilate cries,
If the seditious Murderer alone
Can seem to you to be a worthy Prize,
Tell Me what must with Innocence be done;
Both cannot be Repreeved; therefore speak
What kind of course with Jesus I shall take.
189.
Well-pleased were they that He had given Them leave
To name the Way of their own Cruelty.
A (...) Exclamation they heave,
Crying, the Case is plain, Let Jesus die;
(...) Him but unto the Cross, and We
At charge of Executing Him will be.
190.
Then, as an Army with impatient Shout
Rends the wide Field, when most intaged They
Fly to their Work of Blood: So the whole Rout
(...) Pilates Ear; and all they say,
Up in this most (...) Word is tied:
Away with Him, let Him be Crucified.
191.
O more than hellish Impudence, and Spite!
Is this the People whose high Estimation
Of Jesus, did the Highpriests Plots affright
And force them to a secret Conjuration!
The People who some Prophet, at the least,
Forced by his mighty Miracles, Him confessed!
192.
The People, who to pave his welcome Way
Stripped the Trees Bodies, and their own, and spread
That princely entertainment to display
How even his Asses feet they honored!
The People, who did brave Hosanna cry!
A Word, o how unlike to Crucify!
193.
(How well sage Heads have fixed the odious Brand
Of Fickleness upon the Vulgars face!
For safeher may you on the Lybian Sand,
Or on the Adriatic Billows place
A Palaces Foundation, than rely
Upon the Peoples best Fidelity.)
194.
The horror of that Word made Pilate start,
Who stepping back, and holding up his Hands,
Cried out, O far, far be it from my Heart
To think of such Injustice I your Demands
Should not be Trapps; nor is it fit that I
Should Tyrant prove, your Wills to satisfy.
195.
Bears He the Stain of Murder or of Treason
To mark Him out for Death? Can any Eye
Barabbas find in Him? Or is it reason
That He, because He has no Crime, must Dye?
And can you choose no other Man, but Me
The Pander of your bloody Lust to be?
196.
Great Caesar thinks Me wise enough to hear
And judge of Cases; and why should not you?
Jesus I have examined; whom as clear
And pure I find, as is the Virgin Snow;
As clear of capital Crimes, for these alone
Come in the compass of this Question.
197.
Wherefore no Tongue shall ever have Cause to say
To the confusion of my Honor, that
Pilate bowed down his Conscience to obey
A lawless Motion, Henceforth urge Me not:
Some reasonable Castigation I
Will. lay on Jesus; but He must not die.
198.
As when a Knot of eager Hornets are
Repulsed by a wary Hand; they fly
About with doubled Rage, their Foe they dare
With irefull Buzzings, and more furiously
Give a fresh Onset. So in louder Cries
The Peoples Spite at this Repulse did rise.
199.
The Cataracts of Nile, or those which fall
Down headlong from the steepest Alps, make not
Such an intolerable Noise, as all
Their yelling Mouths, resolved no more to shut)
Till they can conquer by impetuousnesse:
And Crucify Him, still their Clamor is.
200.
The Palace trembled at the hideous Noise;
Whose fragor thence unto the Temple flew;
Nor could the Temple hold it, for the Voice
It self through all the startled City threw:
It shak'd the Judge, and almost turned him over,
Yet he his strength and spirits did recover.
201.
And wisely pondering that the Highpriest's spite
The coals of this combustion did blow;
And that they on the mad-braind vulgars might
Had built their Salvage hopes: He studies how
To frustrate their malicious design
By a severe, yet tender Countremina.
202.
For in he takes thy Lord, and yields Him to
The cruel whip, that by that cruelty
Way to his Pity he might make, and so
With blood the bloody people satisfy.
He hoped if once they saw him all in gore,
Their thirstiest malice would not wish for more.
203.
The surly Beadles fetched their strongest Tew,
And having stripped their patient prey of all
His raiment, with rude churlish twitches drew
Him to the stoutest Pillar of the Hall;
To which they bound him fast, for fear that He
Should sink down under their strokes cruelty,
204.
With iron whips then to their Work they fall,
And plow the dainty Garden of his back:
The furrows neither shallow were nor small,
But long and wide, and deep, which they did make:
Yet all were quickly filled by the flood.
Of their own most inestimable blood.
205.
For to the bottom of each tender (...)
The cruel engines dived, and toare from thence
The precious purple springs; which in disdain
They tossed about, till their mad violence
In too too precious colors painted thick
Upon the Pillar, and the floor did stick.
206.
The Pillar and the Floor now blushed to see
How those remorselesse blood-heunds knew no shame;
For still they prosecute their Tyranny,
Until their weariness prevails with them
(As lately with the servants of the Priest)
In mercy to their own selves, to desist.
207.
But then the Soldiers take their cruel cue,
And come to ven him with more witty spite:
A Crown of thorns, (the sharpest things they knew,
Yet things of delicacie and delight
If with their Hearts compared) they wreath, and it
On Jesu's tender Head with violence set.
208.
And thus the Curse which Heaven enjoined to grow
On sin-condemned Earth, removed is,
And deep engrafted into Jesu's Brow;
Whose Temples well contented wefe with this
Sharp Crown, and envied not their dainty Pride
Whose tresses were in roseal chaplets tied.
209.
Then on his back (for always with disdain
Their Rage was swelled) a Purple robe they throw:
Alas, how needless! now in richer grain
His native Scarlat does about him flow,
Whilst all his Body is arrayed round
In one expanded universal wound.
210.
And having put a Reed into his hand,
(A silly Scepter, and which well complied
With his vile Crown,) about him round they stand
To act their Pageantrie, and to deride
This patient and miserable thing,
Whom of contempt they had created King.
211.
May the great Sovereign of the jews, said they,
Ou-tlive the Hearts, the Ravens, the Eagles years;
May his victorious Engines He display
Throughout the World, affrighted at his wars:
Thus may He thresh all nations; and here
They beat him; and went to another jeer.
212.
May Heavens propitious eye for ever dwell
On him who best deserves its care: may all
The clouds which with the fattest blessings swell,
Upon his Head let their best riches fall
As freely as these drops rain down on it;
And at this Word they all upon Him spit.
213.
On the brave Roman Birds imperial wing
May thy illustrious Name and Glory ride;
And may Tiberius to this nobler King
Thus yield his mighty Throne: this said, a wide
And massy Chair full at his head they throw,
Which engraved its footsteps deep upon his brow.
214.
Then, after three low bowings, on his knee
One a Petition brings; and having prayed
Him to accept his suit, He instantly
Hings it upon his face: Another played
(...), and told Him what strange things
He had in charge to Him from (...) Kings
215.
Most excellent Sir, my Business is, said He,
Of such immediate consequence, that it
Can no delay digest; which urges Me
To this unwonted, and uncivil Fit
Of craving present Audience: and here
He boxed both his ears to make Him hear.
216.
A third came with a golden Goblet in,
Crying, My Liege, the Queen to you has sent
This Mornings Draught, and prays You to begin
That She may pledge your Highness: Here he bent
His cursed brows at Jesus, and threw out
Upon his face the Urine He had brought.
217.
A fourth his Reed did from him snatch, and cried,
Your Scepter, Sir, to heavy is, I fear;
Let not your Majecty your Servant chide
If he offend in too much loyal Care;
Your Self shall judge how grievous is its Weight;
Which said, Him with the sturdy Cane he beat.
218.
A fifth with ernest supplication su'd
But for the honor to support his Train:
Then snatching up his Robe behind, with rude
Unseemly Peevishness, he kicked amain,
Bruising thy Spouses naked Body, till
His weary Toe stayed his unwearied Will.
219.
A sixth came crying, Treason, Treason, Sir,
Treason against your sacred Majesty.
The Jews your Subjects, all Conspiring are
Against your Honor and your Life: O fly
And save your Royal Self. This made Them all
Seeing Him bound so fast, a laughing fall.
220.
O Psyche, I cannot describe how they
Did mock, and grin, and gurn, and sneer, and pout;
How they did wring their Mounthes; what antic play
They used their gentle Savior to flout.
Imagine all the worst thou can conceive,
And infinitely worse than that believe.
221.
This Sceen thus acted; Pilate brings him out
In this strange habit, to the Peoples view:
Telling them He had sifted Him, but naught
He could discover which did bear the show
Of capital Demerit: Yet, said He
Behold how his light faults revenged be.
222.
If this ridiculous Garb be not enough
With Shame to clothe Him, yet consider well
In what exuberunt Streams his Blood does flow,
And guess what favor I have showed Him: Tell,
Me if you think a new room may be found
In all his Body, but for one more Wound.
223.
Behold the Man, this torn and worried Thing
Is He, however Comely heretofore;
Sure he has for his foolish Name of King
Paid dear enough; and had not I had more
Regard unto your Credits than mine own,
Such proofs of Cruelty I had not shown.
224.
O Spectacle of most Commanding Sorrows!
How would all Hearts but Jewish melt to see
These ghastly Torrents, and these gasping Furrows
Upon the harmless Back of Purity!
How would a Tigers thirsty Wrath relent!
How would the Souls of hungry Bears repent!
225.
Had these unhappy Jews had any Eyes
But those of rancorous Malice, they might here
Have seen how their own Griefs and Miseries
To patient Jesus all transferred were,
And scor'd upon his Back: They might have found
A salve for all their Sores in every Wound.
226.
They might have seen his innocent Temples wear
That Malediction which to them was due:
The stinging Briars he was pleased to bear,
And leave the fragrant Flowers to them, which grew
Both in their mortal Gardens here, and which
With endless Sweets did Paradise enrich.
227.
At least that Lesson of Compassion They,
As well as Pilate, might have plainly read,
Which in red capital Letters written lay,
And to the Eyes of all Spectators spread
So fair a Challenge, that no generous Breast
Could their strange Importunity resist.
228.
But lo, the barbarous Priests, unsatisfied
With all that Blood which was already shed,
Because some more behind remained: Cried
O ease the Earth of that blasphemous Head,
Before Heaven vindicate it self, and We
Involved in the Flood of (...) be.
229.
It is no Boys Fault his, that you should deem
A (...) is sufficient Punishment:
O rather square your own by Heavens Esteem,
And join with ours, your righteous Consent;
A Cross, a Cross: Heav n cannot pleased be
Until this Monster Crucifi d it see.
230.
This most unreasonable Madness made
The Judge as loud as They: In vain, said He,
You hope by Roaring to make Me afraid:
The Man is guiltless (...) Eyes; if ye
Resolved are that Innocence must Die,
Go Murder Him your Selves, and cease your Cry.
231.
Harsh was this Word, and on their Plot did grate
So hard, that they enforced were to fly
Unto the Refuge which They most did hate,
As knowing it was an old-answered Lie:
That Law They now pretend, to which long since
The Prisoner justified his Innocence.
232.
Nay, They replied, it is not We, but Law;
Our Law, more dear to Us than are our lives,
Calls loud for Him to Death. Be pleased to know
That our great God no grace nor pardon gives
Unto the least Blaspheemers; and shall He
Who makes himself the Son of God, go free?
233.
If Thou Protector of our Laws wilt be,
Break not our greatest for this Varlets sake.
Should He intrude into the Family
Of Caesar, and his Sons great Title take,
Sure Thou would think a Cross his due: and is
Wrong to Heavens Emperor a less Crime than this?
234.
Blood-thirsty Hypocrites! For well they knew
How they their Law in urging it denied;
For though this Accusation had been true,
(...) must not Jesus by the Cross have dyed:
The Law an heap of Stones ordein'd to be
The Death, and Monument of Blasphemy.
235.
(...) this new Plea did startle Pilate so,
(...) again retires, and tries again
(...) Examination might do:
(...) he many Queries put, and fain
some Pretense have found, with them to join,
(...) all Slander did outshine.
236.
But when He tells the Multitude his Mind,
Only new Oil upon their Flames He threw;
For in their loudest Fury all combined,
Upon Him with this bold reply they flew:
If Jesus you dismiss, We must have leave
Great Caesar to acquaint with this Repreive.
237.
Did not the Traitors Head contrive to wear
A Crown of Gold, where now those Thorns are set?
And Who, We pray, more dangerous Enemies are
To Caesar's right, than They which thirst for it?
He says his Realm is not on Earth: And what
Should Traitors being Taken, plead but that?
238.
But were He free again, and had proud He
New Thousands at his Heels, which might assist
His Wills Carreir; Might his Design not be
True to our Fears? And must He be dismissed?
Dismiss Him If you will; yet know that We
Must hold you then for Caesar's Enemy.
239.
Pilate had with their Malice grappled long;
But now his Place and Credit lay at stake,
He who before was so upright and strong,
Degenerously turned Unjust and Weak:
Firm stood his Chair upon the Pavement, but
His Heart and Conscience soon fell flat on it.
240.
For as He'ginns to name their King again,
Away with him, they Cry, We have no King
But Caesar, Caesar over Us shall reign,
And He alone: As for this Cursed Thing,
It Is more than time that to his Cross He go;
And every one that is his Favourer too.
241.
Alas, this Blast did on his faint Breast did blow
So thick a Storm of Jealousy and Dread,
That now he fancied all the Town did draw
Their mutinous Swords against his single Head;
And that the Priests had with their specious Lie
Dispatched unto Rome an Embassy.
242.
Thus tossed and baited, by the Tempest, He
His Faith and Truth, the dearest Wares he had,
Throws over board, and to their Cruelty
Joins his Consent; which yet appear d so mad
And full of foul and odious horror, that
He calls for Water to wash off its Blott.
243.
Why do thou ravish, Foolish Hypocrite,
The virgin Nymph? What Water will thou get
To wash this clean, which cannot make Thee white,
But only is by this thy Touching it
For ever made impure: Should all the Sea
Flow on thy Hands, they still would Bloody be.
244.
The Leopards Spots, which fix their Feet so sure
Upon his skin, shall sooner melt away;
The AEthiop's Face shall sooner learn a Cure
And turn its swarthy Night to beauteous day;
The Ravens with Swans in White shall sooner vie,
Than thou be purged from thy ingrained die.
245.
Yet Pilate flattered by his own Device,
Will needs be dabbling in the Water; and
Behold, ye Priests and People all, he cries,
Of Iesu's Blood I wash my guiltless Hand:
Although my Tongue the sentence pass, yet ye
Extorted it, and yours the Act shall be.
246.
Content, said They; since you will have no share,
Ours let the Actions Glory wholly be:
Both Heaven and Earth will thank us for our Care,
And Caesar praise our zealous Loyalty.
So will your self, when you have weighed well
What kind of Monster you have sent to Hell.
247.
As for his Blood, which frights your timorous Hand,
It is to us the Brightest Paint of Gloxie,
And will to all Successions commend
Our pious Loyal Resolutions Story;
For our ambitious Wish it is, that It
May On Heads, and on our Children sit.
248.
Unhappy Wish! had this been rightly framed,
No Prayer had flamed with purer Piety,
Nor pulled more Blessings down, then would have streamd
In this rich Blood upon Them all But see
The fatal Power of Malice, which can thus
Make Zeals sweet Dialect turn venomous.
249.
For'twas not long ever Titus came to pour
This Blood upon Them, and their Wish fulfill:
Them and their Seed its Streams did then devour,
With such full Vengeance did the Torrent swell;
Their Town and Temple too this Deluge found
Which in their Wishes Surplusage were drowned.
250.
For never yet did War so riot in
The Blood of any helpless Wights, as here;
Nor fatal Misery hunt out any Sin
With so seveer a Quest as that: So (...)
They found their Wish and bloody Exclamation,
Which proved the funeral Knell to all their Nation.
251.
And now the Judge within whose Breast the fear
Of Men, vile Men, more than of God did reign,
Those Bonds of generous Right himself did tear
From which he wooed the People to refrain;
And gives his own unhappy tongue the Lie,
Judging the Lord of Innocence to die.
252.
O monstrous sentence! were the fell Decrees
Which ever yet from Tyrants Mouths did break,
With the Descriptions of their Cruelties,
All writ in one black Roll; they would not make
So hideous a show as this alone,
Of Barbarousnesse the dire Perfection.
253.
All Injuries in this triumphant are,
Being skrued to the highest pitch of Spite;
Injustice but a Suckling was, till here
She on the sudden grew to her full height:
Herod had nursed her well, but Pilate now
With the Jews help, taught her complete to grow.
254.
For could Hell mould so horrible a Doom
As might send every Infant who did see
Life's morning Light, strait from his Mothers Womb
To his Deaths Even; that Sentence yet would be
Less barbarous than this, which does at once
Condemn more than the whole Worlds Innocence.
255.
Alas, unfortunate Pilate, how have Thou
Condemned thy Self whilst Thou did sentence Him!
The time draws nie, when Caius will not know
Thee for a Friend of Caesar's; Thy Esteem
And Office too unto their Evening draw,
And four Years more will make Thee feel the Law.
256.
The Law of Bannishment; when France shall see
Thee to Vienna ti'd, that fatal place,
Where Hell shall to thy Soul displayed be,
And thy black Conscience war against thy face,
Mustring the Guilt of this unhappy Day
Before thine Eyes in terrible Array.
257.
There thy wives message shall again resound
And sting thine heart; thine own Professions there
Of Jesu's innocence shall all rebound
Upon thy breast, and thy foul bosom tear;
There shall that water bubble up, and boil
Upon thine Hands, which did its streams defile.
258.
There shall thy whips their lashes turn on thee,
There shall the thorns grow thick upon thy Head,
There shall the Buffettings and Mockings be
Unto (...) self in fail tale numbered;
There (...) prodigious sentence back shall fly,
And point out Pilate as one fit to die.
259.
Then shall the cruel Cross, the Nails, the Spear,
Walk through thy thoughts and murder thee alive;
Till Crucified by thine own fatal fear
Thine hand due vengeance to thy self shall give,
And from thy Hell above by cursed death
Send thy dispairing soul to Hell beneath.
260.
So shall thine hand thou thoughtst thou washst so white
(...) imbrued in thine own horrid gore,
(...) to all following Judges write
Of what sure vengeance righteous Heaven does pour
On them who warp Laws rule to Peoples lust,
And make the throne of Justice be unjust.
261.
But when the Lamb of Heaven was sentenced thus
Unto the Shambles: Streit upon their prey
The rampant Soldiers fly: His gorgeous
Attire they from him snatch, and him array
In his own simple fleece; yet suffer still
The torturing thorns upon his head to dwell.
262.
This rubbed, and wounded all those Wounds again
In which the clotted blood began to rest;
This opened the weary Mouth of every vein,
As if it would have had them now confessed
The utmost drop they knew: yet though this loss
Went deep, they kept enough to paint the Cross.
263.
(...) delay then unto Calvarie
(...) hurry Him; even though their Senates Law
(...) that no Execution be
(...), (...) by ten days Thoughts the Judge may know
(...) he has not in some passi nate haste
Without sufficient grounds his Sentence Past.
264.
The Priests had money, that commanding Spurr
Which fires all Soldiers with impatient Speed;
And Pilate now can cast in no Demurr;
The Jews assure him that he has no need:
But need, or not; his thoughts in vain do beat;
The Soldiers now were bought to do the Feat.
265.
But being Martial generous Spirits, they
Must not debase their armed Backs, to bear
The servile ignominious Cross: nor may
The Jews, who now all purified were
To celebrate their Paschall Supper, be
Stained by the Touch of that accursed Tree.
266.
On JESU'S Wounds his Death the Soldiers lay,
And He must ern his Crosses Service, by
Bearing its tedious Weight, before he may
Be born by it. Thus with a barbarous Cry
Of Tongues and Trumpets which the Welkin rent,
Through the cheifstreets this sad Procession went.
267.
But He whose Springs so drained were before
Both of their Blood and Spirits, now grew faint
In vain they kicked him, and in vain they tore
Him forward by his Hair; for no Constraint
Can make weak Nature her own Power exceed,
Nor find out Firmness in a broken Reed.
268.
What Heart but seared by the fire of Hell,
Could now Compassions courteous Tears forbear
But yet the Soldiers bosoms by the fell
Contagion of the Jewish Malice are
So deeply tainted, that what might invite
Tigres to Pity, does but whet their Spite.
269.
For merely in prevention of the Loss
Of that choice Sport they hoped for when He
Was once set fair and sure upon his Cross,
As the full Mark at which all Scoffs might be
Directly aimed; Him from this Load they spare,
And force Cyrenian Simon it to bear.
270.
Nay, Live you shall, say they till you may Die
As you deserve: mean while this Ernest take
Of that full Sum which We will by and by
On Golgotha without abatement make:
With this they beat Him, and so much the more
As with his Blood, he no Complaints would pour,
271.
Indeed the softer Sex, who upon Him
And on his Woes did wait with tenderer Eyes,
In his own Blood could not behold Him swim,
But with their Sympathetick Tears and Cries
Confessed that they had Bowels still, although
Remorseless Stone Men's hearts did overgrow.
272.
But Jesus who did all this grevious while
Encourage by his patient Silence, those
Most insolent Jeers and Blasphemies the vile
And spightfull Jews could frame: does now oppose
These Women's loving Tears, and upon them
With nobler Pity turn their pitying Stream.
273.
For 'twas his brave Ambition to engross
All Greifs and Sorrows to Himself to day;
Esteeming every Groan of theirs his Loss,
And all his Woes discredited, that they
Should seem to need Assistants, when stout He
To his own Shoulders wooed all Misery.
274.
Weep not ye Daughters of Jerusalem,
Weep not for Me who have set open my Breast
To every Grief which into it can stream,
And thither mean to welcome every Guest:
Weep not for Me said He, whose Sorrows are
Not to be quenched by a mortal Tear,
275.
If you will broach your Bottles, let them run
For your own selves, and your unhappy Seed;
For lo those fatal Days are posting on
Which all your Brine and more than all will need,
The Days when Blessing shall no longer spread
Its joyous Complement on Mothers Head.
276.
For then the Barren Womb shall praised be
As fertile in the choicest Happiness;
Then every Tongue those Papps ariditie
Which never brought up Babe to Woe, shall bless.
Then shall the dearest pledges of your Love
Your Sonns and Daughters, living Torments prove.
277.
Then in impatient longing for a Grave
Despairing Men shall to the Mountains call,
And every neighbor Hills Compassion crave
Beseeching them upon their Heads to fall,
And hide them, though in Death, from seeing how
Calamity about the World does flow
278.
For if in me a young and verdant Tres
The flames of Vengeance thus prevailing are.
What shall the Refuge, or Condition be
Of Stumps and Trunks, all withered and sear,
Which are already dried, and fit alone
For feuell for their own Combustion?
279.
In a fresh Cursing and Blaspheming fit
This set the mad-braind Rout; who asked Him why
When they of late so humbly begged it
He would not condescend to Prophecy?
And why, He who could others Woes so well
Discern, could nothing of his own foretell?
280.
And see, good Prophet, yonder Hill, said they;
Take your own Counsel now, before it prove
Too late: Come let Us hear what you can say
Both it and its Compassion to move.
Set out your Throat; if hard and loud you plead
Perhaps 'twill bow its own to hide your Head.
281.
Then having star'd a while upon Him, all
Whose Fists, or Toes, or Spittle him could reach,
With thick and peevish indignation fall
Upon his bruised bloody Body: Which
Triumphant scorns, He meekly vanquished by
His Silence, and marched up to Calvarie.
282.
Even to this Calvarie We stand on here,
This Mount which from a Scull has gained its Name;
For in this solemn Place the Sepulcher
Of reverend Adam stood; which careful Fame
Told to Posterity, and so the Hill
Wears in its Title that old Story still.
283.
With such Decorum did thy prudent Lord
Order his meritorious Passion, that
The second Adam might his help afford
Unto the First, where He lay chain d and shut
Up in Deaths Prison, the remorseless Grave,
Which to Corruption did Him enslave.
284.
Jesus on that dry Dust resolved to shed
His most enlivening purifying Blood;
That He might wash and cure the tainted Head
Of Mortals Misery, by the sovereign Flood
Of his own Life; that Life which only can
Restore true vital vigor unto Man.
285.
Here (...), here the Cross its foot did set
When it sustaind the Worlds Redeemer; here
Is that renouned Soil which once was wet
With richer Drops than ever shoured were
From kindest Heaven; for by that fertile Dew
Salvations Harvest to perfection grew.
286.
But yet this Hill wears not that only Name
Of Calvarie; 'twas called Moriah too
Of old, when zealous Abraham hither came
His most renouned Sacrifice to do;
And by unparalleld Obedience prove
The valourous Bravery of faithful Love.
287.
Brave Abraham hither came; his Altar here
He built, and prepossessed the Crosses place:
So Isaac did thy Lords a while; But there
An hamperd Ram strait substituted was:
Thus Isaac escaped; but now there was no Ram
Which might supply the place of heavens dear Lamb.
288.
Jesus himself must sacrificed be,
Not by, but to his Father: Psyche, now
That fatal Hour was come when Tyranny
Held the free Reins, and did its freedom know;
When purest Innocence was abandond quite
Unto the Luxury of proudest Spite.
289.
For lo the Soldiers thy torn Savior stretch
And fit Him unto his tormenting Tree:
His blessed Hands unto the Topp they reach,
(Those Hands whose workmanship all creatures be,)
His Feet unto the bottom; (those pure Feet
Which no Blood, but their own, did ever wet.)
290.
These Hands and Feet with cruel Nails they make
Sure to the Cross, and fasten Him unto
His Pains and Death. What heart strings would not crack
To see these tender Veins broke open so!
What Tears could keep at home, and not gush out
With those dear Streams which now flowd all about!
291.
Sure none who dare the Name of Christian wear,
Can with such stony Hearts this story read,
As not to feel these Nails their Bosoms tear,
And (...) their tender Contemplations bleed:
For how can living genuine Members be
Not wounded with their Heads calamity?
292.
But these inhumane Torturers shouting loud
In desperate applause of their own Sin,
Rear up the Crucifix; and then grow proud
To see this Trophe of their Rage. So when
Harpies on heaps have heaped their butchered Prey,
They smile, and clap their Wings with cursed Joy,
293.
Then on each hand a Theife they (...):
For when they on his Person no more shame
Could heap, they labor by this Company,
To make the World suppose Him one of Them;
Alas He knew no other Theft, but this,
To steal his Torturers to heavenly Bliss.
294.
For whilst between these Briars like the Rose,
Or like fair Virtue twixt her foul Extreems
He fastened is; He plots against his Foes,
And projects how to pay Them Diademes
For these his Tortures; unto Heaven he flies
On Loves stout wings, and to his Father cries
295.
Father! By all the Sweets of that dear Name
Regard the Prayer of thy Dying Son:
By this my Cross and all its noble Shame,
By these four Wounds which with full Current run,
By all these Thorns which grow upon my Head,
And those which in my Heart are fastened,
296.
Remember not the Sin of these poor Men
Who through blind Zeal perceive not what they do;
Though foolish, yet they are my Brethren;
O spare Them then! Let not their Error who
Occasion all the Worlds most Sovereign Bliss,
Make their own Souls their proper Portion miss.
297.
Thus for the rav'ning Wolves the Lamb does pray;
The Partridge for the Hawks. O mighty Love
Which all the Injuries of this cruel Day
Cannot supprefle! The more the Torturers strove
To wreak upon Him their elaborate Spite
The more his Mercy tries on Them its Might.
298.
Thus when Arabian Odours (...) be,
Their sweet revenge they on their (...) take
By pouring out to them (...)
Of pure Perfumes, whole (...) does (...) speak
Of Grief or Anger, but is (...)
In the kind language of (...) Sent,
299.
Thus when the tender Vine is nailed fast
Unto the Propp, and by the Pruning Knife
Robbed of her Branches; She takes no distaste
At all those deep entrenchments on her life,
But with a bounteous Vintage strives to cheer
The Heart of Him who thus had wounded Her.
300.
But what care salvage They who scorn to be
Softened by Kindness? Wax indeed may run
At the warm Touch of High-noon's Charity;
But for did Mud and Clay; although the Sun
Does with his kindest Rays about them flow,
Instead of Melting, only harder grow.
301.
They think that Jesus has more need to pray
For his own Self than them; and with disdain
(...) at his unask'd-for Kindness, They
(...) themselves how to divide their Gam;
This was his Clothes, the Lambs poor plundered Fleece,
The simple prize of their high Villainies.
302.
His other Garments they divide and share;
But finding that his seamlesse Vesture was
All of one Texture, they contented are
To offer the decision of the Case
To Fortunes Sentence, and conclude by Lot
To give that whole, they thought too good to Cut.
303.
Too good they thought this Common Web to be
Mangled and torn; yet with the self-same heart,
Abhorred not his precious Flesh to see
All gash'd and rent by Hatreds utmost Art.
The Butcher thus thinks fit the Skin to keep
Entire, although He quarter out the Sheep.
304.
Mean while, arrayed in his naked Gore
Sweet Jesus hangs betwixt the Heaven and Earth
Like one of Both rejected; and does pour
The Worlds red Price at four wide Floodgates forth
An Object of more Pity never yet
Was seen, nor one which reaped less of it.
305.
All Passengers without Regard went on
And turned their unkind backs upon his Woes.
Yet well it were if this Neglect alone
Made War against his Patience: but from those
Who to this pitch of Sorrows raised him, He
Feets new assaults of positive Misery.
306.
For not contented with their Nails and Thorns
To digg his precious Body, now they strive
To pierce his Soul with ignominious Scorns,
To wound his Meekness, and his Sufferings grieve;
As if his Pains and Cross would not suffice,
Unless he mocked, and reviled dies.
307.
They point their fingers, and their heads they shake,
And then their crueller Tongues, and thus they cry:
Remember what your Pride once pleased to speak:
You in three Days yon' Fabric could destroy,
And rear it up again; yet mighty Sir,
The Temple stands, and You are hanged here.
308.
For shame make good your boasted Power, and now
Command those Nails to leave your Hands and Feet,
Command your Cross before your face to bow,
Command your lost Blood to return and meet
Your gaping Wounds: Is It not high time to save
Your Self, if you resolve to escape your Grave?
309.
O no; the Elders, Scribes, and Priests reply,
Though many Seeming Wonders He has done.
Though he has cured many a Malady,
Though he has conjured up Salvation
For others; yet We know for certain He
Cannot unto himself a Savior be.
310.
No lying Prophet ever yet was known
Who once into the hands of Justice brought
Could by his power of Witchcraft reach his own
Deliverance, and work his Carcass out
Of Chains or Tortures; for if this might be,
How could we know Heavens Truth from Forgery?
311.
Now it appears by Whose Assistance He
Mixed with his bare Word that miraculous Strength
Which charm d the Peoples fond Credulity.
But Beelzebub is wise enough at length
To leave his Instrument to Justice, when
His utmost Mischief He has done to Men.
312.
Now it appears what small cause Pilate had
To shake his Head at our importunate Cry,
Had not our Zeal that (...) Onset made
On his abused Lordships Lenity,
This rank Impostor, then repreeved, might
Have still pass d for a Wonder-working Wight.
313.
Yet if the potent King of Israel now
Will but vouchsafe to Step down from this Tree
And to his Subjects doubtful Hearts allow
This Proof of his divine Supremacy;
For our parts We are ready here, and will
Believe his Power and his Commands fulfill.
314.
What can he more expect of Us, who here
Attend upon him in his deepest shame
Waiting till He will please Clouds to clear
Which damp the luster of his glorious Name?
So fain would We unto our King to day,
Would He assert Himself, our homage pay.
315.
But silly King, he cannot stir, you see,
No, though his Kingdom lies at the Stake:
He talked as if the Clouds his Coach should be,
And that he meant upon the Aires high back,
To show himself in State to Us; but now
His Cross is all the Chariot he can show.
316.
He often bragged that God was his great Sire,
How is it then his Father owns Him not?
Sure were He worth the owning, all the Quire
Of Heaven would hither Flock, to hide this Blot
Of his broad Shame with their pure Wings, and bear
Him hence in triumph to his native Sphere.
317.
Shame on your Blasphemies you shameless Rout
Of Priests and People! Jesus aims not
To save Himself, but You who sting and flout
His noble Patience: He has not forgot
That in his Sovereign Hands and Fingers still
The whole Train of Omnipotence does dwell.
318.
For those Almighty Hands he stretches out,
And busy is in working your Salvation.
He could Come down; but stays till he has wrought
That mighty Act of his victorious Passion.
He could come down, but stays till he may draw
Up after Him this grovelling World below.
319.
He could come down, did you not fix Him there
Not with your Nails, but with your stronger Sins:
He could come down, were his own Life as dear
To him, as yours: But on his Wrongs he winns,
And by all resolute Love strives to prevail
Against all Spite and Rage which him (...)
320.
O Psyche, cruel were those Scoffs; but yet
More stinging Scorn then this is still behind:
For now the very Thieves upon him spit
Their odious Taunts, and seem in Him to find
What their vile Souls amidst the Miseries
Of their own cursed Crosses, dare despise,
321.
Ink scorns the Snow, foul Night accuses Day,
The dirty Puddle mocks the virgin Spring,
Dark Shades contemn the Suns meridian Ray,
Black Night-ravens call the Swan a swarthy Thing,
Ignoble Bats revile the Eagles Eyes,
And Hell it self insults o'r Paradise.
322.
Art thou that mighty Christ, said they, and yet
Hang'st here the Game of all Contempt and Spite?
Can Heavens great Son his Self so far forget,
As rather to endure to Die, then fight?
Discredit not, by yiedling cowardly,
The Lord of Hosts, if he thy Father be,
323.
Come justify that royal Title there,
Which now but laughs at thine ignoble Head;
Approve thy Self King of the Jews, and fear
Not to redeem thy Fame and Life: But spread
Thy Favor too on Us, that under Thee
The Sovereign, We may glorious Nobles be.
324.
For since in these thy deep Misfortunes We
Of all thy World thy sole Companions are;
We well in your restored Prosperity
May promise our Desert the deepest share.
So spoke the Thieves; and then they roared for Pain;
But quickly fell to scoff and curse again.
325.
And shall not Heavens Artillery now attend
Its wronged King, and vindicate his Cause?
Can Earth hear this, and not in sunder rend
Snatching these Elves into her deepest Jaws?
No: Jesus now no Vengeance does approve
But that of patient and Silent Love,
326.
Sweet Vengeance! which so strongly wrought upon
One of this loud blaspheming Pair, that he
Converts his Curses to Devotion.
And prompts his Fellow unto Piety,
Rebuking sharply his malicious Tongue,
Which still persu'd his Lord with shameless Wrong.
327.
Then like a wise and sober Theif indeed;
He seeks to steal into his Saviors grace:
O King of Heaven he cries, I plainly read
Thy Majesty though in thy clounded Face.
Sure Thou have taught mine Eyes this skill; o then
Complete this Mercy which Thou have begun.
328.
When in thy Kingdom Thou shall mounted be
Upon thy Throne of Glory, o forger
Those Wrongs which ignorant I did pour on Thee,
On Thee, the God of Innocence: but yet
Forget not Me, who must for ever die
Unless repreived by thy Clemency.
329.
Jesus, whose Goodness never did disdain
(...) hear and answer a meek Sinners Cry,
Though his provoked Lips he did refrain
Amidst those thick Storms of loud Blasphemy,
With gracious Sweetness does Assurance give
Unto the Dying Theif, that he shall live.
330.
Fear not, said He, thy Death is drawing nie,
But it shall prove the Gate of Life to Thee;
My Word, the Pillar of all Certainty
I freely pass: Thou from that cursed Tree
Shall step this Day to Paradise, and there
Under the Bowers of Bliss with Me appear.
331.
The Priests and People laughed and scoffed to hear
Him talk of giving Bliss, who hung in Pain;
Blind Fools, who could not now discern how clear
His Power shined, which thus its Prize could gain
Out of Hells Mouth, and with Loves sweet constreint
Make of a Cursing Theif, a Praying Saint.
332.
By this deer Token He to every one
Of them aforehand did their Pardon seal,
If they would do what the meek Theif had done,
And to his Grace with penitent hearts appeal:
But most unhappy They this deep Design
Of Love, did obstinately countremine.
333.
Profoundly did this Scorn of Mercy tear
Thy Spouses most compassionate Breast: But He
Observing now his dearest Followers there,
The Mother of Him and Virginity,
With faithful John, a keen and double Dart
Of fresh Grief shot quite through his bleeding Heart.
334.
For in his Mothers tender Soul he saw
That cruel Sword stuck deep which Simeon
Foretold so long ago: The Virgin now,
Who at the first brought forth her blessed Son
Whithout all Pangs, does in hard Labor strein,
And pays her Debt of puerperiall Pain.
335.
O how the Bowels of her yearning Heart
Are tent and torn! her hands, her feet, her head,
All bear their proper Torments, and no Part
Can say, To me these Sorrows do not spread;
For from her Sons deer Body every Wound
Does on her sympathetik Self rebound.
336.
Her Temples are with thick-set Thorns hedged in,
Nailed unto Tortures are Her dainty Feet,
Tattered and mangled is Her tender Skin,
Her Flesh plowed up, Her veins wide open set,
And all her modest Body to the view
Exposed is of every shameless Jew.
337.
On Her those Jeers, and Taunts, and Blasphemies
Their venom pour, and swell with Grief her Breast;
That Breast which noble Love so straightly ties
And coments to her Sons, that not the least
Division can interpose, nor make
This Double One, themselves for single take.
338.
If She had in her other Self, if she
In Mary had been Crucified, the Cross
Had tolerable been; but thus to be
Destroyed in Jesus, is so vast a Loss
That Mari's swallowed up in it, and this
Calamity becomes both Hers, and His.
339.
Her Hope, her Joy, her Life, her Love, her Bliss,
Her Heaven, her Son, her God, all these She now
Beholds betrayed to her Enemies;
And what has Mary more? How shall she row
Through this vast Sea, which in each gaping Wave
Presents her o how much more than a Grave?
340.
As often as to the Cross she opes her Eyes,
Death rusheth in; Yet she as often does Die
As unto their Compassion she denies
That ruefull Spectacle. If Psyche, I
Or Thou, or any Seraph had been so
Beseig'd with Sovereign Griess, What could We do?
341.
What could we do but sink? Yet noble she
Struggling amidst a thousand Deaths, at last
Snatched from her mighty Losses, Victory;
Whilst at the feet of Gods great Will she cast
Her own; as gallant Abraham, when He
Preferred before his Isaac, Piety.
342.
Yet what was Isaac unto Jesus! o
With how much dearer Prize did Mary part!
Though Isaac precious was, He could no so
Profoundly be ingrav'd in Abraham's Heart,
As Jesus in his Mothers; yet is She
Content of her Hearts Heart deprived to be.
343.
O heavenly Mother, never Agony
Was more heroic than was this of thine;
Excepting that of thy great Son, when He
His humble Patience did prove Divine.
Decorum 'twas that Thou should tread alone
The hardest Steps of Glory next thy Son.
344.
But Psyche though this Amazon of Love
So stoutly fought; yet John who stood by her
Was of a weaker Metal far, and strove
With less Success the Passion to bear:
He strove a while; but at the last, poor Saint,
As Grief became outrageous, he grew faint.
345.
For when his loving Eyes beheld that Breast
Upon whose Sweets his Head was wont to lie,
And those dear Arms, which used to hug him fast
And chain him unto Bliss; The Tyranny
Which now possessed them, soon overthrew
His tender Heart, and all his Comforts slew.
346.
Jesus observed them Both, and saw how she
Although her Pain and Sorrow greater were,
Yet made them bow unto her Will; how He
Suffered his lesser Grief to domineer
Over his wounded Soul; and seeing this,
Felt what he saw in Both, for Both were His.
347.
He felt their Tortures; but with deeper sense
Then they themselves, and more Excess of Pain;
His Soul being tempered to all Excellence
Of dainty Softness, which did entertain
Even in its Bowels, every Torments Darts
He spied in any of his Spouses Hearts.
348.
Witness his bounteous Care, before he dies',
To cheer them by a precious Legacy:
His noble Mother, far above all price,
Even in that dearest of Relations, he
Bequeaths to John; and John to her again,
That in his stead, her Son he might remain.
349.
Sweet Legacy! where though the Mother be
The richer Gift, considered alone,
Yet is the Balance equaly
Now John's inhanced by the Name of Son:
For that high Name intitles him to be
No less than Jesu's priviledg'd Deputy.
350.
A long-long Hour had now run out, since by
His weeping Wounds the King of Mercy hung:
Yet all this while from the hard Peoples Eye
Not one drop of Compassion he had wrung.
This made the Sun, though on his high-noon Throne.
Fear his own Eyes had not their duty done.
351.
But looking wistly, He perceived how
Men had exiled all Humanity;
This Sight upon his face a Blush did throw
In shame and horror at the Prodigy;
He blushed and shut his royal Eyes, and hurld
More than Cimmeria all about the World.
352.
In mourning Weeds the heavenly Spears at last
Upon their dying Master will attend,
And with no gaudy Tire of Light be dressed
Now all the Powers of Hell and Darkness bend
Their uncontrolled spite, in Him, to damp.
All other Lights divine original Lamp.
353.
The Air was frighted at this monstrous Change
When Midnight seized upon highnoon Day,
Marching with Apparitions, and strange
Phantomes of duskie fire, in fierce array;
Whilst every hollow Wind which passed by
Bemoaned with sad Groans this Calamity.
354.
The lesser Sparks of Heaven all started as
Their sudden privilege, who now might view
The open face of Noon; not knowing what
Had thrown upon the Sun his Sable Hue;
With doubting twinkling Eyes on him they gaze;
Seeing him down, yet in his highest Place.
355.
Each gentle fair-condition'd Bird and Beast
Hi'd them unto their Nests and Dens for fear:
Only some ominous Ravens and Scritchowles pressed,
With Beasts of Prey and Night, through the black Air:
And fit Companions for these Jews they were
Who in all Horridness their Brethren are.
356.
Frights and Dismays walked not so thick upon
The face of Egypt, when 'twas buried
In a strange three-days Night, as now they run
Both there and here, for every where they spread,
Having as large a Circle as the Sun,
Who now from all the World at once was gone.
357.
The grave Astronomers, who with Phoebus were
Of old (...), and knew all his Gistes
His way, his Jnns, his Hosts, and whersoe're
His restles Coach in his bright path (...),
Wondered what sudden Monster did arise
And rob him of his Locks and of his Eyes.
358.
It Is plain the Moon was innocent, for She
Knew not the buis'nes, being far away;
No less than Half the Heavens Immensitie
Betwixt Hers, and Her Brothers Station lay,
For whilst He flourished in the perfect height
Of Day, She groveled in the Depth of Night.
359.
But grant by some portentuous Wheel She from
Her proper Place was whirled thus far away
Yet how could her poor Bulk usurp the Room
Of His vast flames, and damm up all the Day?
Sure Phoebus scorns that Her small Blot should rob
The total Beauty of his mighty Globe.
360.
O No (...) was a larger Blot than so,
A Blot in which all Blackness did combine,
A Blot which no Comparison does know,
A Blot made up of every foulest Sin,
A Blot as hideous, as profound, and wide
As Impudence could make; 'twas Deicide;
361.
No wonder now Heaven would no longer be
Beheld those who did its King destroy;
That Phoebus his less reverend Majesty
Denied to them whose only work and joy
Was to eclipse and quench that Sovereign Sunn
Whose open Eyes His durst not gaze upon.
362.
And yet this Darkness a faint Copy was
Of that more monstrous Pitch which stuck upon
The Eyes and Hearts of the blind Jews: Alas
This Prodigies stern Admonition
Could not awake their Thoughts, to search, and see
How Heaven was frighted at their Cruelty,
363.
The itching Wit of their immortal Spite
Draws every Thing into new B lasphemie:
Behold, say They, the most audacious Might
Of His insufferable Witcherie:
Whilst other Wizards only on the Moon
Or Stars, throw Darkness; He choaks up the Sun.
364.
But now the Ninth Hour of the Day drew on,
And brought the last Act of this Tragedy
Along with it; that Hour in which alone
More Horrors than (...) Agese'r did see
In one Consp (...) met,
And in Array themselves all armed set.
365.
His other (...) but faint Praeludiums were,
Which only gathering Clouns did overspred;
But now the Tempest in its full Carrieer
Broke down and sous'd directly on his head;
JESUS was now encompassed with the Stream
And even into his Soul the Waters came.
366.
The Waters of that dismal Cup which He
Both feared and loved; eschew'd and chose to Drink:
The fatal Dreggs of Wrath and Misery,
Of every black and dreadful Thing the Sink:
A Dead Sea unto which Gomorrha's Lake
Compared, would wholesome Milk and Honey speak:
367.
Heavens Justice, who had with a constant Eye
Observed all Tribes of Men, and noted down
Each little Slip, each broad Impiety,
With all the Trappings Time and Place had thrown
About them; hither made a journey, and
Full in thy Spouse's face took up her Stand.
368.
Less Terror from the Vulturs countenance breaks
When she her Tallons claps upon her Prey;
Less from the irefull High Priest when he takes
His Cursing Aim at Jesus; than to day
Flashed from this cruel Maid, in whose fell look
Her dismal throne accomplished Vengeance took.
369.
Immortal Dread star'd wide in either Eye;
Her forehead was plowed up with furrows deep,
Sown with the Seeds of all Severity;
(Which now for Jesus were grown fit to reap.)
Her Lips were Fire; her Cheeks were burning red,
And for a Tongue a flaming Sword she had.
370.
She never in such horrible Array
Appear d till now on Earth; not when she came
With Water armed to wash the World away;
Or unto Sodom with a Flood of Flame;
Or when her fiery Serpents she did bring
The Israelites Rebellion to sting.
371.
A Veil (so hideously black, that Night
Is a (...) beauteous thing to it,)
Over her head was spread, which, though Daylight
Were now at Liberty, would not permit
The stoutest Mortals sin-condemned Eyes
Ever to reach the Comfortable Skies.
372.
On either side, ten thousand Furies were,
With Millions of Pangs and Ejulations;
Woeful Eternity was also there
Hugging each Horror: Troops of Desperations
Raving and riotting in their own Blood
In the vast Armies Rear behind Her stood.
373.
But in her Hand a sable Book she held,
Which now She opened unto Jesu's eyes:
When lo each dreadful Page appeared filled
With more intolerable Prodigies
Than those transcendent Monstrous Shapes which were
Marshalled in her Hell-representing Rear.
374.
There that Rebellion painted was, which grew
In Paradise, so huge and rank a Weed
That it none but the Worlds own Limits knew,
For through all Generations its Seed
It scattered, and made each poisnous Birth
Bring full Assurance of its own Death forth.
375.
The Serpent which in Eden planted it
Wears not such fatal Horror in his Face,
Nor stings so deep, nor does his Venom spit
So far and wide, nor ever attended was
With such a numerous Fry of Devils, as this
Old Beldame Sin by young Ones followed is,
376.
This was the fearful Frontispice: But now
The cursed Leaves She opened one by one:
Pride had usurped the first, and there did show
Her swolln and blister'd Countenance, which did run
With banefull Matter, being bruised by
A Fall she caught as she was climbing high.
377.
The next was Spite, broad War, close Calumny;
Then Avarice besmeard with knawing Rust,
And putid Lying, and foul Treachery,
With sneaking Theft, and everstinging Lust,
Intemperance wallowing in a nastie Flood
Of Vomit, Murder in a Sea of Blood.
378.
That selfe-relying heav'n-distrusting Thing,
Foolish base-hearted Infidelity;
Grinding Extortion, and self-torturing
Because for ever jealous Tyranny;
Enchanting Error, venomous Heresy,
Idolatry, and right-down Blasphemy,
379.
But for their number, it exceeds the skill
Of Computation, and all Figures reach;
Not all the Sparks whose glistering Armies fill
The field of Heaven; not all the Atoms which
Traffic about the Summer Air, can tell
Their mighty Total how to parallel.
380.
For each dwarf Fault, and Giant Crime did stand
In martial rank and file arrayed there,
Which any Humane Tongue, or Heart, or Hand
Was ever stained with, since Eve gave Ear
Unto the charming Tempter, and let in
The fatal Torrent of contagious Sin.
381.
Nay more than so; for every Stain and Blot
Which through all Ages to the end of Time
Shall taint the World, Justice had thither got,
And in a black Appendix marshalled them.
Thy proud Revolt, and every Fault beside,
Psyche, were there displayed full and wide.
382.
And if the least of Crimes, as sure it is,
Be infinitely foul, imagine then
How strange a Mass of horridness was this
Whose bulk did swell with all the Sins of Men:
What store of black (...) were here
For bleeding Jesus wounded Back to beat!
383.
For Justice heaped them all upon his back,
That he who did no sin, might suffer all.
How would the Worlds establish d Pillars crack,
Should such a Load upon their shoulders fall!
How would the al-supporting center faint,
And strive to shrink into a smaller point!
384.
How would the joints of noblest Seraphs quake,
How would the Cherubs sinnews tremble, at
This Burden, which all Natures Bones would break,
And lay Heavens highest stoutest Powers flat!
This Burden which all humane Souls would press
Down to that bottom which is bottomless!
385.
Now Jesus groans, and feels his heart strings stretch,
For black upon his Soul the burden lies;
Those other torments he forgets which
The whips and nails, and Jewish blasphemies
Had multiplied on him: Thus rivers be
Quite lost, when swallowed by the bitter Sea.
386.
Should all the tortures that did ever yet
The Veins, and Joints, and Hearts of Martyrs tear,
In one fell Composition be knit,
And then enraged to their full carrieer;
Less furious would their fury be than that
Which now on Jesu's Soul in triumph sat.
387.
Some comfort it would be, if Heaven would now
Vouchsafe a gentle look upon its Son
Who spies no consolations glimpse below:
But o the spears are not eclipsed alone
By Phoebus absence; no another Night
Has thrown its Veil upon Heavens dearer Light.
388.
The Light which from his Fathers pleased eyes
His whole Soul used to drink, its streams did hide:
With earnest laboring looks, he pleads, and pries,
But is by sad obscurity denied.
O blackness, which no Parallel can know!
To thee all Ink as Milk, all Pitch is Snow.
389.
Long did he grapple which this mighty grief
In patient silence: But his Soul at length
Snatching at least the desolate relief
Of free complaining, with the woeful strength
Of his sad tongue, this outcry He did make:
My God, my God, why do thou me forsake!
390.
Am I not still that Son in whom alone
Thou were wel-pleas'd? Is not thy bosom still
The same where once my habitation
I did enjoy? Why do thou me expel
Who am the image of thy blessed face,
From the least sight of its all-sweetning grace?
391.
Had every outcry, every groan, and shreik,
With which the air of Bethlehem was rent
When Rachel saw how all the street did reek
With an unheard of flood of innocent
And infant blood, met in one ejulation,
Its fragor had not matched this exclamation.
392.
Never was such a Lamentable cry
Wrung from the mouth of Grief: nor ever was
Complaint more unregarded: Clemency
Was deaf, and Heaven as well as Earth did pass
By without any Bowels: Never day
Did such a Sceen of heavines display.
393.
Sorrow her self amazed at the sight,
Would have repented of her Tyranny:
But Jesus meant not to decline the fight,
Who could not conquered be, though He could die.
O no: He hugs his horrors, and although
His nature shrinks, his courage loves his woe.
394.
Thus gallant Souldiers' in the dreadful wars
With generous Pride their gushing blood behold,
Counting their glories only by their scars,
And judging all their dearest limbs well sold;
Yea and their Hearts and Lives, if so they may
Upon their Herses wear triumphant Bay.
395.
But now as in the Furnace of his Pain
This helpless Victor fries, he cries, I thirst;
For sure He longed to drink up and drain
The dregs of grief, that none of the accursed
And deadly draught he might behind him leave
His mortal Brethren evermore to grieve.
396.
Yet they unkindly on a Reed present
Him Vinagre, who broached the Wine for them,
The Wine of his dear Blood; all which He spent
To wash and cheer their hearts. Does he not seem
O salvage Jews, without the help of this
Your gift to have enough of bitterness?
397.
Is this your thanks to Him who every year
Your stream of harvest-pleasures poures on you;
Who to complete your Banquet, does prepare
Those sovereign dainties which in Eden grow;
And who, mean while has with his bounteous hand
Given you your milk and honcy slowing Land?
398.
Yet Jesus takes it kindly, Psyche; He
Knew well this knawing draught would best besit
The dying King of grief, whose misery
So dear and precious on his Soul did sit,
That He their wine aromatiz'd with Myrrh
Thought far less pleasant then this Vinagre.
399.
Besides, that Poison he remembered well
Which from the enchanting apples sweets did flow;
By wholesome Bitterness he means to heal
Ev's liquorish Luxury: His Palate now
Does expiate Hers, and nobly teaches it
That apples fatal relish to forget.
400.
And now the Tragedy began to draw
To its sad end; for Jesus having by
Immortal patience undergone the Law
And curse, and grappled with the monstrous fry
Of all the Worlds Transgressions: lifts his head
In triumphup, and cries, It Is finished.
401.
O that it were! said Mary, who stood by;
So should my Soul live still with my dear Lord.
If he has found a way how not to die,
Why does sweet Jesus not make good his Word
By coming down! So sighed pious she:
But he made haste to his Catastrophe.
402.
For Justice now had nothing more to say,
Since by the streams which down the Cross did slow
All her Objections were washed away,
And every Page of her black book did grow
As pure and fair as the serenest skies
When rescued from the gloomy clouds disguise.
403.
Wherefore she straight dismissed her horrid train,
And then withdrew her self. These being gone,
Jesus looked up into his Heaven again
And saw the veil which dwelt till now, upon
His Fathers face, removed. O (...) sight!
O cheerly morning after heavy night!
404.
He saw his everlasting Arms as wide
Stretched out, as his were on the Cross; He saw
His blessed bosom open, which seemed to bid
Him to his nest of bliss return, and grow
His happy self again; He saw his eye
Flaming in pitying Loves extremity,
405.
An everlasting Laurel in his hand
He saw, designed to confute the shame
Of his own thorny crown; He saw the grand
Cherubick quire ambitious to proclaim
His Conquests in their songs: And at the sight
Resolved to die, he cries with all his might;
406.
Father, into thine hands I here commit
My Spirit, which thou woo'st to come to thee,
Up flew that mighty word, and after it
Out brake his blessed Soul; for strait way he
Bowed down his Head, submitting sweetly to
That will he came by life and death to do,
407.
The holy Temple heard his dying cry,
And, as it could, its Clothes tore; for lo
Its veil in sunder rent, and seemed by
That ruptures mouth to say, I must let go
My privilege, and Jewish rites must be
Resigned unto Christianity.
408.
Earth heard it too, and quaked at the noise:
Her rocks did rend, her sepulchers did open,
And many sleeping Saints waked at the voice,
Russled their dust together, and gat up.
Natures commotion was so great and strange,
That in the guard it strait begot a Change.
409.
The bold Centurion with the Earth did quake,
(So did the Soldiers with the rocks,) and cry
Surely the World slept in a deep mistake
Whilst it perceived not Jesu's Deity:
His Father now has owned Him, and He
Did when himself was pleased in bliss to be,
410.
For still his vitals in their strength remain d,
And he had force enough a while to live;
Witness that final Blast for which he strained
When He that strong and thundering cry did give
These wretched theives we see still in their Pain,
(...) he in his own rest is gone to reign.
411.
Nay even on salvage and obdurate Jews
So far can guilty Fear prevail, that now
The danger-stricken People could not choose
But grant their Hearts did feel this Terrors Blow,
For though their sullen Tongue would not, their Fist
Confessed their fright upon their beaten Breast.
412.
Here, Psyche, whose soft Heart had come and gone
A thousand times, as he the Story told,
Now yielded unto Griefs Dominion,
And ever her Guardian spied it, down she rolled,
Joining her Passion to her Lords, and trying
To live with Him, who di'd for Her, by dying.
413.
But Phylax by his heavenly tender Art
Soon cheered, and raised her up, and told her She
Must (...) now unto the other Part
Which of this Sadness made a Comedy.
She looked, and sighed, and cried, All Joys are dead
When Jesus dies; and yet, dear Sir, proceed.
414.
Know then, said He, this Passion and Death
Has pu chased all the Joys that Heaven can breed,
And cancelled every fatal Bond of Wrath
Which Sin had drawn against old Adams Seed:
All Jesu's Wounds are Gates by which Man may
Take freely into Paradise his way.
415.
All sort of Pains and Shames and Sorrows he
With matchless valor did monopolize;
The spightfull Wit of all Hells Treachery
He vanquished by being made its Prize;
And yiedling up his meritorious Breath,
Blew down the Power even of prevailing Death.
416.
Which when fell Satan saw, it him repented
Of this great business he had brought about,
And at his Den in Paxis he lamented
His undermined Design, when Crying out
Great Pan is dead, he made confession how
He had projected his own Overthrow.
417.
For this was Pan indeed, the God of Sheep,
Who held his tender Flock so dear that He
From Wolves and Lions it secure to keep,
Exposed Himself to all Extremity,
And for the Fold found a sure Rampart out,
When with his Blood He moated it about.
418.
But now a Soldier, he whose only Heart
Was harder than those Rocks which Grief did burst,
Boldly took on him Cruelties last Part;
For into Jesu's side his Sphere he thrust.
Deep in his Heart the Iron dived, and brought
The final Stream of Blood and Water out.
419.
That Water which the Pericardium bound
About the Heart, that Blood which in it dwelt:
Thus all that in thy Savior was found
To feed and feast his Friends, He freely spilt.
The Pelican so with her dearest Blood
Diets and fattens up her dearer Brood.
420.
This done; the Sun unveild his Clouded Eye,
And joyed the Redeemed World to see:
Forthwith the monstrous Shades away did fly
Unto the bottom of Nights nideous Sea;
That now Sins Blackness chased was away,
Earth might behold a double glorious Day.
421.
But will no Pity on the Body look
Which now has born the utmost spite of spite?
Yes; Arimathean Joseph undertook
To pay unto it its Sepulchral Right,
And now with loving Loyalty does mean
To prove that he had a Disciple been.
422.
A true Disciple, though a Secret one;
Witness his Fear, to generous Courage grown;
For though his Master now were dead and gone,
His Faith revives, nor shall the Highpriests Frown
Or Peoples Fury, fright his Duty from
Yiedling his Savior his own costly Tomb.
423.
A Man of honorable Place was he,
And Pilate easily grants him his Request:
The Corpse resigned is unto his free
Disposal: which he straightway does invest
With daintiest Linen, that the Winding Sheet
Might Delicacie learn by Kissing it.
424.
Right well he Knew this solemn Paschal Feast.
For bad him all Pollution by the Dead:
And yet his pious Love durst not desist
Till he this votive Task had finished;
Being assured he could not stained be
By handling the dead Corpse of Purity.
425.
But is Ho busy was; another Friend
Came in, good Nicodemus, who by Night
On Jesus whilst He lived did attend,
To gain for his obscured Judgment, Light;
And in his blacker Night of Death does now
His grateful Piety upon Him bestow.
426.
Of precious aromatic Mixtures He
An hundred Weight does bring, to sacrifice
Unto this Bodies service, so to be
Enobled and enhanced in its price,
The O dours smiled as they kissed the Skin,
For by that Touch more Sweetness they did win,
427.
Mean while the Instruments of Death, for this
The manner was, were younder buried;
Where they shall sleep until a Queen shall rise
Out of thy Albion, from whose blessed Bed
A Prince shall spring, who shall exalt above
His Roman Eagles the meek Christian Dove.
428.
Their deer Discovery is reserved for none
But venerable Helen; who, when here
Hot in her passionate Devotion
Her Saviors Sufferings She her self shall bear,
Transfiguring her Miditating Heart
Into each several Torture, Wound, and Smart.
429.
Those noble Relicts shall revealed be
In recompense of her brave Love and Zeal:
There for the Jewels She shall Dig, and see
At length, the rude but glorious Spectacle:
The Cross, and Nail She there shall find,
Which her Lords Body pained, and her own Mind.
430.
Inestimable shall their Worth be held:
One of those Nails to Constantine shall seem
Illustrious enough his Head to gild,
And sit enthroned upon his Diadem;
Two in his Bridle shall triumph, when He
Rides through the World like King of Victory.
431.
The Fourth shall tame the Adriatik Man,
And nail it fast unto its bottom, so
That on its equal pacisied Plain
The unmolested Ships may safely go:
Then by this Gem shall that enriched Sea
More wealthy than the eastern Ocean be.
432.
But for the noble Cross; no Tongue can tell
The Wonders that shall spring from that dry Tree,
Which hewed out by Devotions Edge, shall fill
The zealous World, and quit that Injury
Which from the fatal Bough in Eden spread
Through all the (...) sown with humane Seed,
433.
Persia shall take it Captive, yet not dare
To look upon its Prisoner; Piety
Shall thence redeem it by a (...) War,
And then return it to its Calvarie
When great Heraclius his own royal Back
A willing Chariot for it shall make.
434.
But come my Dear, here on the Western side
Of this now holy Mountain, Thou may see
The precious Sepulcher of Him who di'd
And who was also Buried for Thee,
This Rock is it: Come lets's into the Cave,
No Temple is more holy than this Grave.
435.
Lo here good Joseph did the Body lay:
Here lay the blessed Head and here the Feet:
Hard was the Couche, and yet no Princes may
Compare their Beds with it, which was more sweet
Than Solomon's, although Arabia did
With all her sweetest Sweets go there to bed.
436.
The Phaeni'x balmie grave could never show
Such sovereign Riches of perfumes, as here
Did from thy blessed Saviors Body flow,
Who soon the truer Phoenix did appear.
O precious Place! No Mau (...)
Into comparison with this must come.
437.
What are the Monuments of Kings, but (...)
Memorials of their putid Rottenness,
Whilst odious Worms and Dust inshrined are
Iu specious Gold and Marble? But in this
Plain Sepulcher bold (...) found
Her Hands were more than the dead (...) bound.
438.
This is that Oratorie, Psyche, now
Whither the (...) Souls (...) to (...);
Themselves and their best (...) (...) they
Here all their Zealous (...)
With their (...) (...) they (...) (...),
And in this Air their warmest (...) they (...).
439.
Yet time's at hand, when bold Idolatry
Will venture to profane this sacred Place,
To turn this Paradise into a stie,
And holinesses beauty to deface,
To build Hels sovereign Monster, odious Jove
Upon this monument of divinest love.
440.
But all in vain; for Christian Eagles still
Will to the place of the dear carcass fly,
And their impatient devotions fill
By feasting on its precious memory.
Jove, though the most impure of things, is not
So foul, as this Toombs purity to blot.
441.
And here may thou, for I thy heats discover,
Sweet Psyche, stay and ease thy burning heart;
Thy Uows and Prayers here thou may run over,
And with the pious world take thy free part.
Do; riot in thy zeal; I will attend
And keep the door till thou have made an end.
442.
Psyche, who scarcely for this cue could wait,
Fell on her face and kissed the reveren'd floor;
Where her brave flames so melted her, that strait
Her armorous sighs and soul she forth did pour,
And by the strong embrace of Faith and Love
Seemed there to hug Him who was high above.
443.
Through all his pains, and all his wounds she went,
And on her own heart printed every one:
Her bowels with his woeful cry she rent,
And wished not (...) seeing he found none:
By bitter thoughts, his nails, his throns, his spear
She copied out, by tears his Vinagre.
444.
But coming to his death, she fetched a sigh
Up from the bottom of her soul, in hope
Her life would have flown in its company,
And made her passion too completely up;
Striving in meek ambitious love to have
The ready honor of her Saviors Grave.
445.
Desire lay boiling in her ardent breast,
With secret groans her Aspirations beat,
With restless panting she reached at that rest
To which her Lord was flown; and in the heat
Of this contention, she was towr'd so high,
That scarce her Body upon earth did lie.
446.
But when life held her on this dainty Rack,
In a full Ocean of Inamorations
And mighty Ecstasies she strove to wrack
Her laboring heart: And yet these perturabtions
And strong assaults of loves intestine war,
She by diviner loves assistance bare.
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO XIV. The Triumph of Love.
ARGUMENT.
LOve, binds, in his own Den the King of Hate,
Death and Corruption in the Grave subdues,
Turns back the mighty Stream of Mortal Fate,
Himself alive to his Disciples shows,
In Triumphs bright Excess Ascends upon
A Clowd, and mounts his everlasting Throne.
1.
VIcissitude, how does thy constant Change
Cheer up the World, which else would droop and faint!
Thou no strange Thing wilt suffer to be strange
Whilst with all Companies Thou do acquaint;
For thy Chamaeleons skin is made to fit
All Sorts of Colors that can meet with it.
2.
When Heavens wise Hand did mould these things We see
As Natures noble Sport and Recreation,
It constituted thy Uncertainty
For ever certain in its Variation;
That as God knows no Change, so all Things else
Might feel the Motion of Mutations Pulse.
3.
All things at first were Night; then Day burst forth,
But Night soon stole upon Days back again,
Yet in the Morning crept behind the Earth,
And suffered Light her full twelve Hours to reign;
Thus have all Ages only been the Play
Of inter woven checkered Night and Day.
4.
When peevish Winters churlish Breath does blow
His froazen Scythia all about the Earth,
Commanding Nature in a Bed of Snow
To lie and sleep, and let no Bud peep forth;
Who would imagine she could break again
From the captivity of her icey Chain?
5.
Yet when the Sun leaps in the lusty Ram,
Forthwith the spring takes heart, encouraged by
The neighborhood of his enlivening flame,
And clothes the World with fresh fertility,
Bidding the troublesome snow no more be seen,
And changing earths white mantle to a green.
6.
Sometimes the winds conspire upon the main
To plow the deeps, and throw them at the sky,
To let them thunder headlong down again,
And with new wrath return them up as high,
Till all the Sea be on a foaming sweat,
And Rocks, and Ships, and Sailers hearts be split.
7.
Yet when these Blasts their fury out have blown,
The Ocean becomes a polished plain,
Mildly presenting for each billowie frown
A gentle smile: The Sirens play again,
The Seamen hoise their sails, the Halcyon lays
Her Eggs, and gives her name to quiet days.
8.
When the laborious Plowman has by day
Worri'd himself, and Earth, and watered it
With his own sweat; cool night his head does lay
Safe on his Bed, and teach him to forget
His toilesome work; whilst soft and gentle sleep
Yields him a crop of pleasant dreams to reap.
9.
When tedious sickness by her rampant fits
Has in the Body her sad revels kept;
Health takes her happy cue, and cheerly sets
Her self to work, nor stops till she has swept
The veins and Stomach, and with lively fire
Cheered up the Spirits which began to tire.
10.
Though Grief sometimes, conspiring with the Night,
Disconsolations on an heart does throw;
Yet Comfort dawning with the morning light
Smootheth the sullen furrows of the brow,
And with its virgin beams of sweetness dryes
The briny moisture of the clouded eyes.
11.
But no vicissitude, in sweetness may
Compare with that which cures the worst of gall;
Whose beams can chase the shades of death away
And kindle comforts in a Funeral;
Which to a sepulcher can say, stand open,
And let thy Prisner into Life get up.
12.
Indeed some glimpses of this blessed Change
Had glanced on the World before; yet they
Were but faint shaddows of the bright and strange
Mutation which did shine on Easter Day;
For they effected were by borrowed Might,
This dawned and rose by none but its own light.
13.
Jesus alone was He, in whose brave Hand
Dwelt that authentic Power which knew how
To give his Mortal Fate a Countremand;
To force his stout Grave to repent; to throw
A side his winding Sheet, and clearly turn
His own Deaths Night into a living Morn.
14.
And, now the reverend Place did prompt him too
The glorious Story, Phylax means to paint
Its several Wonders unto Psyche, who
Under her holy Passion strove to faint.
He takes her up, and sweetly cries, My Dear,
Life's Monument, as well as Deaths, is here.
15.
And it is the same; this very grave does now
With open mouth proclaim the death of Death.
Come sit thee down, and I will tell thee how
By his own loss thy vanished Savior has
Victorious proved, and reaped such Palms as yet
No other Conqueror could ever get.
16.
When in this Cabinet good Joseph had
The precious Jewel laid; a massy stone
Unto the Monuments mouth he rolled, and made
It safe from injuries invasion,
Being still suspicious of the tyranny
Of the Highpriests, which with death could not (...).
17.
It could not die; and was resolved that He
Should neither live, nor seem to live again,
Whom their flagitious importunity
Had by faint-hearted Pilates sentence slain.
To Him they come afresh, and, fawning, cry,
Long live great Caesar and his Deputy.
18.
Sir, in our Gods, and in our Countries name
Full thanks We tender for that Justice you
Have done on Jesus, blotting out that shame
Which on our Temple His foul Mouth did throw:
Nor will you want even Caesar's praise, since he
Reigns by your care from dangerous tumults free.
19.
For what might this stout Conjurer have done
If He had Vengeance escaped, and lived still?
Who by the Magic of his Death alone
Jerusalem does with amazement fill:
How many Fondlings stroke their Breasts, and cried
Sure He Is the Son of God, even when He dyed!
20.
There Is Danger therefore, least this Serpents blood
Rankle the Air, and taint our credulous Nation;
Especialy since he himself thought good
To pave the Way to some such Perturbation,
Telling his Scholars he to them again
Would rise the third Day after he was slain.
21.
Now Sir, if sheltered by theevish Night
They from his Grave should steal Him, and proclaim
That He is Risen by his heavenly Might,
What Danger might attend on such a Fame!
How would the seeming Miracle entise
Seditious Multitudes with Him to Rise!
22.
Then would the Mischief swell to greater Height,
Then if the Traitor were indeed alive:
Against the power of that new Deceit
Alas both You and We in vain should strive;
For how shall We attache Him who is dead,
And yet into new Life's opinion sled!
23.
Say what we could, the mutinous Rabble still
By the Graves open Mouth would seal up ours,
Provoking Us unto that Miracle
By which They Will countenance their Rebellious Powr's;
And with outrageous Falsehood bear Us down,
Crying, They serve Him who to Heaven is flown.
24.
Pilate, whose Conscience griped Him for what
He had already done, no more would trade
In that uncomfortable Business; but
Them of their spightfull Project Masters made.
Ye have a Watch; Go make all sure, said He,
And satisfy your politic Jealousy.
25.
This was enough: Away go They, in haste
To make God sure for ever stirring more:
Annas and Caiaphas both their Seals set fast
Upon the Stone which dammed up the Door;
Charging a double Guard, appointed well
With Swords and Spears, to wait on either Seal.
26.
Fools as they are, their Plots and Counsels be
But only wise conspiracies to make
The Resurrections glorious Mystery
With more unanswerable Luster break
Forth in their Faces, since their Guard and Seal
Shall now bear witness to the Miracle.
27.
So when the envie-blinded Median Peers
Had got great Daniel in the sealed Den
Of hungry Death; their Jealousies and Fears
They confidently laid asleep: but when
The Day awaked, they found their fell Design
Proved his Deliverance the more Divine.
28.
Mean while the sacred Corpse lay sleeping here;
And jolly Death triumphed in the Grave,
Presuming that no Man her force could bear
Since she the deadly Wound to Jesus gave;
He was her only feared Champion, and
Lo now she saw him conquered by her Hand.
29.
Long had she vexed, and pined remembering how
Brave Enoch and Elias rescued were
From her Monarchik Cruelty: but now
That feebler Pair she is content to spare,
And gluts her bloody Heart with Joy to see
This Trophe of most matchless Victory.
30.
She never took such proud Delight to set
Her foot on Alexanders Toomb, or see
The Sons of Anak all in Ashes meet,
Or Josua's Dust with his own Grave agree,
Or steely Samson turn to rotten Clay,
Or vast Goliath mouldering away.
31.
She kissed her bloody Dart, and vowed to build
An Arc of triumph to its Victory;
With high Disdain she all the World beheld,
Which now had no pretense but it must Die;
Since Life's own Champion became her prey
And tame, and cold, and dead before her lay.
32.
There lay his Body; but his Soul mean time
Triumphed more than she; for down into
The Kingdom of the hidden World, the Chime
Of unsuspecting Darkness, it did go,
And took the Powers of Hell all napping in
The secret Cloisters of their gloomy Den.
33.
Hells Gates of sturdy Brass He flung in sunder.
Shaking the bottom of the monstrous Deep:
The Porter frighted at the Ruins thunder
Into the Gulf to hide his Head did leap:
But equal Horror there he met, for all
The Pit was startled when the Gates did fall
34.
So when the mighty Son of Manoah, who
Presumed was the Cities Prisner, tore
The Gates of Gaza, to make way unto
His conquering March; the Peoples dreadful Roar
Answered the Pillars boistrous Crack, whilst all
Thought their own Roofs about their Ears did fall.
35.
Imperial Luster streaming from the face
Of Jesue, in the eyes of hideous Night,
Upon the swarthy Flames of that foul (...)
(...) such an Ocean of immortal (...).
That into every hole they crept aside,
Seeking their (...) Shame to hide
36.
About the hollow Bowels of the Cave
An universal Groan it self did spread;
Whose Echo such an hideous Answer gave,
That all Hell gasping seemed on its Deaths-hed;
Straight followed such Yellings, Shreiks, and (...)
As truly spoke Damnations Miseries.
37.
Imagine what the blear-eyed Sons of Night
Ravens, Scritchowls, Bats, and such foul things would do
If they surprised were by High-noon Light
In their black Nests: o whether should they go
When their illustrious Enemy does reach
The very entrails of their closest Pitch.
38.
Incomparably more the Horror was
Which shot it self quite through the Heart of Hek;
For these commanding Rays did freely pass
Through the black Mass of every Obstacle
With such stout Brightness, that amidst the store
Of never-dying Fires, it kindled more.
39.
The Lakes of Sulphur boiled with new Heat,
And every Pang and Torment hotter grew;
Despair afreshat every Bosom beat,
Upon the next Fiends race each Fury fiew,
And every Devil scratched and tore his Brother;
Wreaking their Mannesse upon one another.
40.
The Snakes their Hisses and their Poison spit,
And in a thousand Knots ti'd, and unti'd
Their woeful selves again; The Gorgons split,
Their monstrous Throats with raving; and the wide
And fiery-mouthed Dragons howling loud,
Whole torrents of their flaming venom spewd.
41.
The Peers of Hell cursed their unhappy King
Whose Pride did to this Torment them betray:
They hoped the Light of Heaven would never spring
In their black Clime, to pour on them Dismay;
But now they saw't in Jesu's Eyes, it more
(...) them than when they fell from it before.
42.
Their belking bosoms heaved high, and fain
They would have belched out that working Loaa
(...) my which held their Souls in pain:
But mighty Terror stopped the sulphury road
Of their foul Throats, and forced their ready Sin
Only to split their hearts, and rage within,
43.
Black Avarice, with foul-mouthed Calumny,
And desperate Treachery, who their Heads had laid
Together in that fell Conspiracy
By which Life's King was unto Death betrayed,
With self-condemning Horror quaked to find
Their Mischiefs all against Themselves (...)
44.
Although Confusion always reigned here,
It never sat so high upon its Throne
As now, nor such Monarchik sway did bear
In all the Deep, whose strange Distraction
Outvi'd the Discords of that monstrous Mass
Which the rude hideous Womb of All Things was
45.
But the Red Dragon, red in innocent Blood,
Great Beelzebub, was more confounded than
All Hell besides: for well he understood
That now he deeplier conquered was, than when
Down from the Pinnacie of Heaven he fell
Into the Center and the sink of Hell.
46.
That Jesus, for whose Blood so long ago
A hunting unto Bethlehem he went
with Herod's pack of Hounds; that Jesus (...)
When in the Desert all his Craft he bent
To cheat Him into Sin, did contremine
With nobler Wisdom his profound Design.
47.
That Jesus whom He by the Wit of Scorn
Through Jews blasphemous Mouths had vilified;
Whom He by Treachery had Prisoner born
Unto his Mortal Enemies Bar, and tried
By the impetuous lawless Law of Cries,
Of Threats, broad Tumults, (...) Calumnies.
48.
Whom by the service of his Hell-bounds He
Had spit upon, had scourged, had busseted;
Whom through all Infamies Extremity
He to this Mountain of his 'Death had led;
Whom on the Trec of Shame and Pain He (...),
And then with further Blasphensies assailed.
49.
Whom of his blood he plundered, and at last
Of his dear life; Whom having murdered thus,
He in his Sepulcher gat sealed fast,
And clearly then was thought victorius;
This very Jesu's Soul He sees now
Marching with triumph in his Realm below.
50.
He sees his deep-lai'd Plots and Projects prove
But engines of their Masters overthrow;
He sees against himself he only strove
When unto Christ he gave the mortal blow;
That death by which he hoped to have suppressed
The Lord of Life, now lives in his own breast.
51.
He sees the Cross, in a full Banner spread,
And shining with imperial gallantrie;
That precious blood with which he made it red,
Gilds, and adorns it now with Majesty;
He sees it streaming in the swarthy air,
And at its awful motion, melts for fear.
52.
He sees the dreadful thorns, and feels them prick
His guilty Soul; He sees the nails, and thinks
That deep in his rebellious Heart they stick;
He winds about his woeful tail, He shrinks,
He starts, he finds that something more than Hell
Did now in his tormented bosom dwell.
53.
Three times He (...) his Pride upon the back,
And cheered his everlasting stomach up;
But strait his swelling Heart Strings began to crack,
And failed the courage of his insolent hope
Three times his Furic strove to chide his (...),
And yet this terror still did (...).
54.
But Jesus marching on in conquering might
Pitch d his brave foot upon the Monsters head:
All thunders thoats did never yet affright
The Air with such a Roar as bellowed
From Satan's mouth, when crushed by the load
Of that strong foot, he yielded to his God.
55.
For as the surly Lion wounded by
Some noble Hero's might, in his own den,
Rends all the cave with his impatient cry,
And makes his frighted neighbors further run;
So (...) loud shreik tore all his deep,
And forced the Elves into their holes to creep.
56.
Had the whole world been heaved upon his Head,
And thousands more upon the back of this;
A tolerable burden it had made:
But all the weight of weight, mere lightness (...)
To this inestimable load which now
Lay full and sure upon his squeased (...),
57.
His squeased Brow; for both his Horns were broke;
So was his Scull, from whence a Stream did burst
Of ranker Poisons than did ever look
Forth until now; a Stream of all accursed
Designs, of Blasphemy, of Rage, of Pride,
And every Quality of Hells King beside,
58.
Thus did the first and noblest promise prove
Completely good; thus did the woman's seed
The seed of blessed Mary, get above
The wiley Serpents most envenomed head,
And bruise it withfull vengeance for that (...)
With which he used the heel of Man to bite.
59.
This done: learn now, the mighty victor cried,
That as above, so I am King below.
What you have gained by your spite and (...),
Your own Elves now may read upon your Brow;
Deep-grav'd the lesson is; and yet I know
Not deep enough to mend or (...), or yen.
60.
For deeper printed is your desperate (...)
On your obdurate hearts; and though by me
Their head you might be warned not to (...).
Against my (...) yet were you left (...)
To your own (...), you all your (...) would (...)
To broach and (...) their (...), (...).
61.
With that, an adamantine Chain about
The Dragons neck the Conqueror did throw;
A Chain, which, though the Monster's Teeth be stout
As hardest Steel, yet He in vain does know:
Henceforth He lies fast prisoner, and can rove
Only where Jesus gives Him leave to move,
62.
Judas, who near this place did frying lie,
With unconceived anguish gnash'd his Teeth,
Being tormented at his Master's Eye
Whom He so wretchedly had sold to Death.
He sold his Master; but the Bargain on
Himself returned, and He did die alone.
63.
He looked the next Stepp on his woeful Head
With equal pressure surely fixed should be;
His Head, which next to crushed Satan's did
Deserve pre-eminence in Misery.
Yet the kind Conqueror meant not Him to burn
Even with his Eye, but it away did turn.
64.
Him He reserved to his other Day
Of Triumph, when both Caiaphas, and He,
And all that cruel Rout which made their Prey
Of his most innocent Humility,
Shall look on Him whom they have pierced with Thorns,
And Whips, and Spears, and Blasphemies, and Scorns.
65.
Yet He an uniuersal Prospect took
With princely Awfulness about the Deep;
The radiant Dint of which triumphant Look
Scorched all the feinds, and fires, which there did keep
With greater torment, than when He at first
Thorough their brazen Gates did thither burst.
66.
What glimpse of Hopes can cheer the Whelps when They
Have seen the Father Lion trampled down?
Alas, the head of every Devil lay
Bruised in Satan's; and they count their own,
No longer so, since He could not maintain
With all his Wit and Policy, his own Brain.
67.
But whilst themselves They with this Horror slew,
Jesus did for another Foe prepare;
In royal State He marched back, and flew
To a new Conquest in his Sepulcher;
Where shivering and couching close lay Death,
Astonished at the dismal noise beneath.
68.
She heard the ruin of the Brazen Door,
She heard the yelling of each frighted feind,
She heard opprested Satan's sovereign Roar,
And felt a sudden fatal Terror rend
Her late triumphant Heart, which suffered by
Its sympathy with Hells Calamity.
69.
Arrived here, this Monster He descri'd
With more than deadly Paleness in her face,
Striving her guilty Head in vain to hide
From the dread Brightness which surpised the place;
For now none of her wonted loved Shade
To muffle up her ghastly Self she had.
70.
Such streams of living Light from JESV'S eyes
Broke forth, as with more splendour stuffed the Toomb
Than dwells in Phoebu's globe; Death scalded flies
About the Cave, and hunts to find some room
Where she may escape that parching Lustres ire
Whose bus'nes seemed to light her funeral Fire.
71.
When lo thy Spouse his foot already red
With Hells best Blood, upon her Bosom set,
And cried, foul Monster, whom I never did,
Create, but Pride and Insolence begat,
It Is time thou feel that yet I have to do
With Thee,, both Mine and all my Subjects foe.
72.
Thy hideous most accursed Mother Sin
Due Vengeance from this righteous Hand has felt.
And thou Her Bratt, in vain do nestle in
This gloomy Rock, in hopes to hide thy Guilt:
The whole Worlds Graves which by thy Tyranny
Alone are filled, proclaim one due to thee.
73.
Even from thy Birth, Destruction was thy Trade.
And thou did traffik the whole Earth about;
All Generations thy prize were made,
And yet thy Stomach still new Booties sought,
Hell, which I plumm'd but now, less bottomiesie
Than that strange Gulf of thy lank belly is.
74.
The stoutest Kings no favor found with Thee,
But at thy stouter feet Thou made them bow;
Thy shameless Worms thou gav'st authority
On Prince's noble Breasts to crawle and know;
Saucie Corruption thou command'st to tread
And trample upon every laureat Head.
75.
My dearest Saints Thou mingled'st with thy prey,
And deep into their graves did trample them:
Had I not with mine own hand snatched away
That Pair which I too precious did esteem
To be devoured by thee, Elias now,
And Enoch had in dust been trodeu low,
76.
By this thine uncontrolled cruelty
Thou to the top of insolence did rise,
And ventured'st to throw thy Dart at me,
That Dart which in my slaugh tred body lies.
And if I die, shall thou exempted be?
Forbid it all my might and Majesty.
77.
At this the Monster fetched an hideous groan,
So great that all the dying cries which she
Throughout the world had caused, seemed in one
Huge ejulation molded up to be;
All deadly Agonies that ever were,
With just requital bounded now on her.
78.
But Jesus strait broke every fatal chain
In which she us d her conquered Preys to tie:
And now the Fates themselves seemed to complain
That their grand Law groand under injury;
That Law which Heaven it self enacted, and
Bid it in Paradises records stand.
79.
Their breeding murmur reached Jesu's ear,
(For nothing escaped him which he pleased to know,)
When (...), he looking up, such potent fear
Flew on all them, as bowed their Heads as low
As they were high before; for strait they saw
His royal will, and knew their sovereign Law.
80.
Then, as Death groaning lay, He drew the dart
From his own Bodies side, and to the head
With mighty vengeance stuck it in her heart.
The wound, though deep, made not the weapon red,
For all the Gore that at its mouth it spewed
Black as foul Styx's inkie puddle showed.
81.
Thrice did the Monster gasp; and then let fly
Her cursed Ghost, which stole its way to hell:
Her carcass stretched out on the ground did lie,
Her chap fell down, her tongue in which did dwell
All poisons (...), hung dangling out; Thus she
Who reigned o'r mortals, felt Mortality.
82.
But the brave Conqueror thus having slain
Her once, by killing her, resolved now
To slay her by restoring her again
To her accursed life; for from below
He beckned her pale Ghost, and bid it dwell
At home again, as in a fouler Hell.
83.
And now, said he, since thou have felt my might,
Remember my command, and live again;
Henceforth, thou with thy sting no more shall fight,
Nor on thy Prisners clap a slavish chain:
Yet use thy dart; for'tis my royal will
Though I forbid thy rage, to let thee Kill.
84.
Thou who before, the tyrant were, shall now
The servant to my mortal Brethren be,
And open the gate by which from Life below
Their Souls shall fly to live and reign with me;
But see their bodies in their quiet sleep
Until I call for them, thou safely keep,
85.
This double Conquest gained; He looked aside
And sneaking in a Corner of the Toomb
Corruption, with her Worms about her, spied,
Who crawled and wrought withal their might to come
And seize upon the Body; but as yet
Could not find strength enough to reach to it.
86.
He spied them there, and charged them to be gone:
At which great word they into nothing fled.
With that his sacred body he put on
As easily as he some Cloak had spread
Upon his shoulders, or his finger put
Into an Annulet exactly fit.
87.
Thus have thou seen a tried fencer from
His bloody Sceen of prowess, with the prize
His virtue purchased, returning home
There to enjoy his glorious victories;
But first he clothes his arms, and breast, and back,
Whose naked valor scorned the combats shock.
88.
His heart with life and joy strait began to leap,
His veins with new-recovered blood grew hot,
His blessed eyes threw off their (...) sleep
And their long leaden night of Rest forgot,
Afresh the Roses budded in his lip,
New smiles and graces in his checks did trip.
89.
Off fell the Napkin, and the Winding Sheet,
Not daring to conceal the Beauties which
In a strange Confluence of Glory met
All Parts of his pure Body to enrich,
Which, fairer than the Sons of Men before,
Out-shined now its former Graces store.
90.
For passing through the Seirce of Death, it there
Lost all the grossnes of Mortality,
And rises more illustrious and clear
Than silver Venus in the Evening Sky:
What was but course and animal till now,
Does most refined, and Spiritual grow.
91.
It does no longer like a Prison sit
Obscure and lumpish on the soul, but is
Made light and pliant, and completely fit
For her, and for her nimblest Bus'nesses:
And as our ready Wings do every where
Move with our, Wills so that can do with Her.
92.
For He who our brave Sprightfulnes could make
Of dull and sleepy Nothing, easily may
Teach heavy Flesh and Blood how to awake
Into Angelik Pureness, and array
It round with full as fair a robe of light
As makes the Cherubs or the Seraphs bright.
93.
But now the promised Time was come, and He
As early as the third Day meant to Rise:
Remarried to his Body instantly
Out of his Toomb He leaps; not in the guise
Of boistrous Lightning which does rend the Clouds,
But that which through unbroken Bodies crowds.
94.
Often have Thou seen the sprightfull Image fly
Completely through a Crystal Wall, which yet
Unbruis'd, uncrack'd it leaves: So did thy
Much purer Lord through the stout Marble get;
For still it kept the Tombs Mouth close, and still
Was trusty to the Priests unmoved Seal.
95.
Thus Psyche, ever the dull World was awake
Life Rose for it, and Deaths strong Gates set open,
That it aforehand might a Passage make
Unto all mortal Ashes to get up:
His Members Risen are in Him their Head,
Though yet in Death they never went to Bed.
96.
His Resurrection a sure Ernest is
Of theirs who ever dyed, or can die:
He buried was only the Grave to dress,
To purge, to sweeten, and to Sanctify:
That in that safe retiring Room his Friends
May take their Rest, until for Them He sends.
97.
Indeed all Joys seemd to be slain when He
Completing Bitternesses Tragedy,
Fetchd his last gasp upon the fatal Tree:
But this deer Morning they revived, and by
His rising Body so refined were,
That They like it, Spiritual appear.
98.
No wonder this sweet Day does sit so high
In pious Souls esteem, and bear away
The reverend glory and solemnity
Of the old consecrated Sabbath Day:
No wonder that upon the first Days head
The Sev'nths fair diadem is established.
99.
It Is true, on That, when God six days had wrough:
Fetching from Nothing Whatsoever We see,
And All this All unto perfection brought;
He stayed his Hand, and ordered it to be
To sacred Jollitie a constant Feast,
That all Things else might play, when He did rest.
100.
But on this Day, his Rest was far more great;
For all his life full hard He labored had,
He wept, He struggled, and his blood He Sweat,
His strength, his life, He spent, on Death He Trod:
And trampled Hell; and now Rose up again
In matchless (...) evermore to reign.
101.
O noble Sabbath! may all Glories swell
Each hour and minute of thy sacred light:
May Pieties best Exultations dwell
In thee alone: and cursed be the spite
Of any Heresy which ever shall dare
Thy festival Prerogative to impair.
102.
The other Sabbath was a Shade of Thee;
And Thou the Copy art of that which shall
Amidst the Triumphs of Immensitie
Be all Heavens everlasting Festival;
A Feast which shall no higher Title know
Than the Lords Day, and this brave Day art Thou.
103.
But zealous Magdalene could not rest in Bed:
O no; her Soul was here sealed in the Tomb,
And though the Sabbaths Law did her forbid
Until it self expired were, to come
And seek it here; yet now she could not stay
To be conducted by the mornings Ray.
104.
She, and another love-enflamed Friend
Borrowed Speeds Wings, and having purchased store
Of precious Ointment and of Spice, to spend
Upon the sacred Corpse, set forth before
The Sun gat out of bed; but as they came
Near to the Tomb, He peeped forth on Them.
105.
He peeped forth, and little thought that Day
Was up before, and had prevented Him.
This Day was Jesus his, and scornd to stay
And be beholden to the tardie beam
Of glaring Phoebus, since it of its own
Glories had ample store its head to crown.
106.
So had the Corpse of Sweets, had it lain still;
But this was gone: Yet shall religious They
Find something which will their Devotion fill
With Satisfaction, and in full repay
Their Odours Price; for in the Tomb they see
An Angel sitting in bright Majesty.
107.
This was that noble Spirit who in haste
Flew down from Heaven, just as thy Lord gat up,
And whose pressed bus'nes was, away to cast
That mighty stone which did the Tombs Mouth stop,
That these religious Visitants might there
See how their Saviors Words performed were.
108.
And gallantly his blessed Work he did,
For at his mighty coming Earth did quake;
The Seal was startled, and in pieces fled;
The trembling Stone was ready too to break,
And had in shivers fallen, had not he
Rolled it aside, and bid it quiet be.
109.
When lo the Watch which at the Sepulcher
Guarded the Highpriests Sin with Swords and Spears,
Forthwith beyond their own protection were,
Being arrested by prodigious Fears;
The Hills Commotion reached to their Hearts,
Which with the Seal split in a thousand parts.
110.
But chiefly at the Angels Presence They
Were seized with their intoletable Fright:
His shining Roabs were glorious as the Day,
And partners with the driven Snow in white;
For 'twas his Easter Suit, the Suit he had
To honor this bright Feast on purpose made.
111.
And yet the Luster which kept Holiday
Rejoicing in his delicate attire,
Could not such wealthy floods of rays display
As streamed from his aspects fairer fire,
For in the Majesty of his sweet face
A spring of living lightning bubling was.
112.
In this celestial bravery his threne
He took upon the stone he rolled thence,
Whence his illustrious terror he upon
The eyes of all the Soldiers did dispense;
At whose bright dint forthwith each man let fall
His sword, and tumbled down himself withal.
113.
They tumbled down, and where they tumbled, lay
For though they gladly would have farther fled,
Alas they had no Power to run away,
Pallid Amazement naild them there for dead.
Thus they who came to guard thy Saviors Tomb,
Into capacity of their own were come.
114.
When the two Mary's spied this Stranger there,
And all the Watch before Him slain with Dread.
They in their Passion began to share;
And had not Innocence its Protection spread
Over their hearts, this Apparition had
An equal Conquest on their Spirits made.
115.
But when the Angel saw them drawing near,
He sweetly intercepted further Fright:
You have, said he, no portion in this fear
Which on this Watch of Wickedness does light:
I know your errand well, (and here he smiled
And all his face with gentler luster filled.)
116.
You likewise Come to Watch the Corpse, but yet
To Pray withal: You Jesus come to find,
Although his Cross and Shame themselves do set
Full in your way to daunt your pious Mind;
You bravely Come, although a Guard stood here,
Your Spices and Devotions to prefer.
117.
You in courageous forgetfulness
Of your faint feeble sex, Come to attend
Upon his body who forsaken is
By his own Masculine Scholars; I commend
Your early valiant zeal; although it be
Arrived here too late your Hopes to see.
118.
For Jesus earlier was up than you,
And unto slaughtered death bequeathed his Tomb:
His royal Word long since He passed you know,
And this prefixed morning being come,
Impossible it was that longer He
In Deaths coldregion should froazen be.
119.
Doubt not this news I tell; Come in, and let
Your eyes convince your hearts; His empty bed
You see, with all the Clothes and Sheets of it;
This Bed from whence He nobly flourished
Into new life: a cold dead bed; but He
You know sprung first from dry virginity.
120.
The Angels Words the holy Women read
Plain in the Grave, and in the Grave-cloaths; yet
So deeply were their Souls astonished
At this (...) of wonders, which beset
Their unprovided thoughts, that they surmise
Some pleasing error flattered their eyes.
121.
Which He perceiving, sweetly chode their doubt,
Their jealous faintnes, and dejected eyes;
Demanding why they in Deaths Closet sought
For Him who thence to open life did rise?
He cheers them then, and tells them they shall be
The Angels of this news, as well as He.
122.
Make haste said he to the Disciples, who
As jealous of this business are as you;
Bid them be cheerly and to Galile go,
Where unto them their Lord himself will show:
And, gentle Souls, you to forestall their doubt,
May tell them you from me this message brought.
123.
Out went the pious Women in a sweet
Distraction of loving fear and joy;
The glorious Miracle did fear beget,
The blessed news, new comfort did display.
With doubtful certainty they trembling ran,
And told their sight to Peter, and to John.
124.
Deer Sirs, they cried, o what, what shall we do!
The only Relict of our Hope is gone;
But where our Lords sweet body is, or who
Has born it from the tomb, God knows alone:
We with these eyes the empty Grave beheld,
Which us with terrible amazement filled.
125.
Indeed an Angel, if our fancy did
Not cheat our ears, joy to our sorrow spoke,
And told us that our Savior from his Bed
Of death was rise, commanding us to make
You with the news acquainted: But whate'r
The matter is, our hearts still beat with fear.
126.
He bad us charge you and your Brethren all
To meet in Galile; For there, said he
Their risen Masters apparition shall
Requite the attendance of their Piety.
O that it might be so! though he had set
Even the Worlds furthest end for you to meet.
127.
So spoke the Women; but the standers by,
Shak'd their wise heads at the unlikely news;
And, see, said they, the wild credulity
Of female hearts, whom fancy does abuse!
How fine a story they can forge and fashion
Of no materials, but imagination!
128.
And yet for all this censure; wiser John
Fired at the news, thought not of Galile,
But in Loves loyal disobedience ran
Hither, the present Miracle to see.
The same spur pricked on Peter too, and He
Stoutly set forward in his company.
126.
Unto their Prey no Eagles ever did post
With heartier Speed; never did Ambition make
To Crowns and Scepters more impatient have;
No Spark to Heaven its course did ever take
With braver Zeal; than this religious Pair
Flew to observe the empty Sepulcher.
56.
But John, in whose soft Breast more flames did reign,
More flames of Youth, and more of gallant Love,
His fellow-traveller did soon out-strein,
And gat before: In vain old Peter strove;
For though his Tongue were always forward, yet
John had the quicker Heart, and nimbler Feet.
131.
He first came to the Tomb: but stricken there
With awful reverence, only sent his Eye
Into the bottom of the Cavern, where
The Resurrections Relicts He did spy,
The linen Clothes, which had the grace to kiss
The sacred Body of all Sweetnesses.
132.
But panting Peter there arrived, 'in
The wonted boldness of his fervid Zeal,
Entered the Cave: Which pattern straight did win
So much on John, that to the Spectacle
He followed Him, and with joint Wonder, there
Gazed and examined the Sepulcher.
133.
He gazed, and clearly found his Eye told true:
This roused his Faith, and made Her likewise open
Her Eyes the blessed Mystery to view:
She looked, and plainly saw Her Lord was up;
And needed now no Angels Tongue to seal
To Her the Truth of that grand Miracle.
134.
These two Disciples having seen their fill,
To feed upon the Wonder, home returned:
But Magdalene, who had thither followed, still
Stayed by the Tomb to quench her Heart which burned
With Griefs impatient Love: The Springs which kept
In both her Eyes, she Bravely broached and wept.
135.
She weep'd, and pitted her prevented Spice,
Which now breathed short, and panting lay, to see
It came too late to be a Sacrifice
Unto the Lord of Sweets: She weep'd that she
Her Tears Drink-offring could present no more
On his Feets blessed Altar, as before.
136.
Had she the plenitude of whatsoever
The idolatrous World' adores, she still would be
Poorer than Poverty it self, whilst here
She nothing finds but Vacuity;
The empty Tomb with open Mouth, alas,
Tells her her only Gem removed was.
137.
Removed, and quite lost, for ought she knew:
And how can Mary live without her Life!
Such lamentable Mourning never slew
The Turtles Joies in her disconsolate strife
Of Love and Grief, when her dear Mate is lost;
As this sad Storm of Weeping, Mary tossed.
138.
Thus having Weep'd for what she saw; again
She looked to read fresh cause of further Tears:
But in the Tomb she spied new Splendour reign,
Two Angels ready to outshine her Fears,
And dry her Cheeks with Comfort, there did sit,
One at the Monuments Head, one at the Feet,
139.
In festival Array they gorgeous were;
Being clothed in Joies Color, milkie White:
Woman, said They, what reason find you here
To cloud your brows in this fair Sceen of Light?
Alas, cried she, what Light mine Eyes can cheer,
Seeing my Lord is laid I know not where?
140.
Her Eyes here gushed a fresh, and back she turned
To give their crowding Streams full Liberty;
But Jesus Heart, which melted, as she mourned,
And answered ever Tear by Sympathy,
Could not endure her gentle Soul to see
Suspended longer in this Agony.
141.
For back unto his Sepulcher he stepped,
That his dear Weepens loyal Eyes might see
Their earned Spectacle: And, Why she wept,
Was his soft Question; but blubbered she
Blinded with Grief, could not discover Who
It was examined her about her Woe.
142.
She took Him for the Gardner of the place,
And meekly prayed him if he had Removed
The Body thence, to tell her where it was,
That she might go and wait on her Beloved:
And 'twas the Gardner, who did plant and dress
The World in goodly Braveries excess.
143.
The Gardner who betimes a Weeding fell,
Even in the virgin Spring of his Creation;
Those rank encroaching Weeds which on Heavens (...)
Aspired to over-grow the new Plantation,
Up by the roots he plucked in righteous ite
And threw them thence into eternal Fire,
144.
The Gardner who at length deigned to come down
Unto his Nurserie in Earths Valley, where
All Tares and Poisnous (...) that (...) had sown
He rooted up; and out of matchless care
To make the Soil be fertile, every Bed
With his own precious Blood he watered.
145.
The Gardner who contented was to let
The Thorns upon his Temples rather stand,
Than they should vex the Grafts which he had set
In his own Body by his tender hand.
The Gardner who indeed had born away
What in the Tomb until this morning lay.
146.
But pitying Magdalens gloomy sorrow, He
Whose single potent Word all Clouds can clear,
In Loves mild tone, the only music she
Could be delighted with, saluted her:
Yet his salute was near as short as sweet,
For only by her name He Her did greet.
147.
Mary, in Mary's ear no sooner sounded
From Jesu's lips, but to her breast it flew,
And with incomparable joy rebounded
Upon her wakened heart: She straitway knew
The blessed voice in her own Name, for this
With sweet significance did echo his.
148.
She knew 'twas Jesus; and her heart must now
Have split with swelling triumph had not she
Unlocked it strait, and let it freely flow
In a full torrent of high Piety.
Her Life, her Love, her Heaven, when least she thought,
Were all at once to her fruition brought.
149.
Surely a Breast so soft as hers, had by
This sudden onset of all joys been broke,
Had not her Lord with his own Potency
Assisted Her to bear the mighty stroke.
Master, she cried; but then could not go on;
Her ecstafie her other words out-ran.
150.
Down flat she fell, and aimed at those feet
Which pious she before did oint and kiss.
No Haste, dear Mary, Jesus cried; for yet
At ample distance my Ascension is;
But go and tell my Brethren I intend
Unto our common Father to ascend.
151.
At this injunction Marie needs must go,
Who on the Angels errand went before:
And yet her loyal Heart could not do so,
But still behind did linger, to adore
Her lost-found Lord; whom that she never again
Might loose, Her Soul she to his feet did chain.
152.
This Message startled the Disciples; but
The hubbub of the City moved them more;
For by the Watchmen now the news had got
Into the Town, and knocked at every door:
The Highpriests wakened at the summons call
A Common Council, and to Plotting fall.
153.
Their Heads they beat, and boulted every way
How they their now endangered fame might save,
How they might damp the Resurrections day,
And stop the open mouth of Jesu's Grave.
Long did they think, but could no trick contrive
How he who lived might not seem to live.
154.
For Beelzebub who used to have his Place
In all their Councils, tardy came that day;
His new-received wound, and deep disgrace
Upon his vanquished heart with terror lay:
Yet seeing them so forwards, loathe he was
The Priests in his own trade should him surpass.
155.
He raised his head, and wiped off the gore,
Three times he sighed, and three times he shook
His broken horns; and at the last, he swore
By his own might and realus, that though the stroke
Took him at unawars, yet Jesus had
How ever he braved it out, no Conquest made.
156.
And, had he been, said he, a generous foe,
He would have pitched the day, and pitched the field,
With trumpets sound he would have marched unto
The fight, and not his sly design concealed;
He would have called Heaven and Earth to be
Spectators of his noble Chevalrie.
157.
But having told his fellow-thief, that he
Would meet him strait in Paradise; by night
He hither stole, and by base Burglarie
Broke open my doors: though we with open might
In our brave battle gave him fairer play,
Marching full in the face of Heaven and Day.
158.
Then finding that his chain would reach unto
Jerusalem; Lo all my fiends, he cried,
You by this token suddenly shall know
How vain is all that Galileans pride;
The foolish Carpenter forgot his trade
When he this chain to bind great Satan made.
159.
This wretched Chain: which yet shall serve to be
The Instrument of my Revenge, for I
Will back to Salem, where my Victory
Attends my Coming; Never credit my
Cunning or Power, if I these Fetters lay
Not on his Subjects, and draw home my Prey.
160.
His gooly Doctrine it is that they must take
His Yoke upon their Necks; and for this once
I care not if I take the pains to make
Them learn their Lesson; that they may from hence
Be well informed, whether I, or He
Who said his Yoke was light, most Liar be.
161.
Hell cheered by its Kings fresh courage, peeped
Forth from its timorous holes, and took new Heart:
When He, to make good his bold Boasting, leaped
Up from his Denn, and through the Earth did dart:
But at his heels, befides his Tails long Train,
He drew the longer Volumes of his Chain.
162.
Then clothed in unsuspitious Air, into
The Sanhedrim he comes and takes his Seat
Next to the plotting Highpriests elbow; who
Strait felt his Brains with politic counsil beat.
He little knew his Prompter was so neet,
Nor heard Him when He whispered in his Ear,
163.
So well He liked the Plot he had conceived,
That looking cheerly up, Grave Sirs said He,
Think not that this Impostor has bereaved
Us of all Counsil, but give ear to me;
And if my Project fails, say Caiaphas
Less Power in Policy than Jesus has.
164.
Are We the Men, and these our Brains, which have
So tossd Him up and down; first to his Cross,
Then out of Life, and then into his Grave?
And should our wisdom now be at a Loss?
Or should ignoble Nazaret able seem
Even to outvie our learned Jerusalem?
165.
Full strange I grant, the Soldiers Story is,
As in their staring Eyes, and startled hair
Your Selves too evidently read: But this
Does only for our Policy prepare
More noble matter, such as may befit
The reverend Sanhedrims profoundest Wit.
166.
Indeed I hitherto believed that
Magicians Power with themselves had di'd;
But since this one Example tells Me what
I never head from all the World beside;
We must resolve e't it too rank be grown
This Conjuration to conjure down.
167.
I tell you sirs, should We no medicine find
To salve this soar, the Romans would deride
That violent zeal in which we all combined
To get this Galilean crucified;
And Pilate would triumph in earnest that
His hands he washed from this bloody (...),
168.
Nay our own Bandogs too, the wid-mouth'd Crew
Whose shameless bawling brought about our plot,
May turn their boistrous throats at us, who drew
Them to that Rage: sure they will never be got
To serve us with another roar, unless
We can maintain that they did well in this.
169.
My final Counsel therefore is, that We
By Moneys virtue try what may be done:
Believe it, Mony's of that Potencie
That no miraculous operation
Can counterveile it: You remember what
Poor thirty silver pieces for us got.
170.
And if that silly sum so wrought upon
His owu Disciples heart, judge you what may
By twice, or thrice as much, or more, be done
Upon this mercenary guard, since they
Have no Relation nor no Reason why
They should be tender to maintain a lis,
171.
I say A Lie; and if that scruple you,
Remember it is the way in which We went,
When Witness we suborned to overthrow
Him whom our selves knew to be Innocent.
Our Purpose then aimed to assert our Law;
And therefore good it was, and may be now.
172.
To you I speak who in our Sacred Writ
Well versed are: You know what Abraham did,
And Isaac too when Need required it,
In Gerar's Court; what David when He fled
To Nob and Gath: and if such Saints may Lie,
Who dares that Privilege to Us deny.
173.
Fear not, sage Brethren, God himself allows
This Dispensation; for otherwise
He in requital had not built an House
To shelter the Egyptian Midwives Lies.
Indeed to the People we preach Truth; for why,
Dull Souls, they know not when it is fit to Lie.
174.
Since then the Soldiers Mouths no less are open
Than Jesu's Grave, the surest Course will be
With that thick Clay called Money, them to stop,
This is the only Bung and Seal which we
Can clap upon them: and you need not doubt
That (...) will ever through this damm burst out.
175.
Weol bid them say, and, if need urge them, swear,
That whilst they with long Watching fell asleep
His bold Disciples who in ambush were,
Favored by Night, unto the Tomb did creep,
And taking thence their Masters Corpse by thest.
His winding Clothes in craft behind them left.
176.
Our promise likewise they shall have, that we
The bus nesse with the Governor fair will make,
And from his wrath give them Security.
It is but equity, that we should take
Some pains in Forgery so to defend
Those who do with their Lies our Cause befriend,
177.
When thus their lying Oracle had spoke,
His Counsel highly pleased, and every one
Into applause and acclamation broke
In glad presumption that the Feat was done:
In were the Soldiers called again, and told
What they must do; and forthwith showed the Gold.
178.
As when the Fouler has some Mirror set
Whose gaudy luster plays about the Air:
The silly Birds regardlesse of the Net,
Are suadenly inamor'd of that fair
But fataly insidious Bait, and fly
With crurping joy to their Captivity:
179.
So by the Golds enchanting Splendour they
So ravished were, that straignt they undertake
Their cursed Task; and having had their Pay,
Into the Streets with full-mouthd Lies they break,
Railing, and banning the Disciples for
Stenling their Master from his Sepulcher.
180.
It Was not a quarter of an hour, that we
Borrowed to ease our heavy eyes; and yet
So dextrous were they in their Theevery,
They caught that very cue to compass it:
Let All, they crsd, who long complete to be
In Theeving, go to Schole in Galilee.
181.
The credulons Vulgar, without more ado,
Snatched up this News, and spread it all abroad:
And from that day this Lie did current go
Amongst the Jews, who though unto their God
The God of Truth, they would no Credit give,
These hired liars readily believe.
182.
But as the timorous Disciples now
Themselves had in a private Lodging hid,
Their loving Master was resolved to show
How tenderly he them remembered:
In Galile he promised to appear,
But he cannot their Joy so long defer.
183.
An holy Pair he with his Company
Had at Emmaus entertained to day;
Where as he brake the Bread in pieces, he
Tore from their clouded eyes the veil away;
And with like favor now he hastes, to cheer
His sad and thoughtfull Friends assembled here.
184.
This very Even the Doors being made as fast
As locks, and bars, and fear, could make them be;
He whose pure Body through his Tomb had passed,
Entered the House with like facility.
They slandered were abroad for stealing Him:
But now he seemed to steal at home on Them.
185.
Yet, as excessive unexpected Bliss
Does swallow up Belief in Ravishment:
So the Disciples all amazed at this
Strange Apparition, mutualy bent
Then frighted eyes, and held their hands on high,
Confounded in a silent ecstasie.
186.
But he, the King of Comfort, opened his sweet
And gracious Lips, and Peace be to you, said:
Though I in love prevent my Promise, yet
You have no reason Friends, to be afraid;
Lo It is I your Lord; observe these wide
Tokens both in my Hands, and in my Side.
187.
Imagine not that you some Spirit see,
These Mouths proclaim as much as I profess:
You know a Spirit cannot wounded be,
Nor wear such Marks of humane Passivenesse:
Come handle Me, and be assured well
If not of what you see, of what you feel.
188.
This sweet Assurance was so full and clear,
That it exceeded their Capacity,
Who by its Torrent overwhelmed were,
And thrown into admiring Joies soft Sea:
Thus those who gaze on Phoebus, cannot see
Him, for his too much visibility.
189.
So strange a Thing is Joy if unawares
It be surprised by Fruition, that
In fond amblguous Jealousy it bars
Out what it does possess; and aiming at
Some proofs of what is absolutely clear,
Transfigureth it self from Joy to Fear.
190.
But Jesus their amazement to allay,
Grows more familiar, and calls for Meat:
A Fish and Honey-combe before him they
Present, and friendly he vouchsafes to eat;
Though Paradise its Sweets for him prepared,
He this plain Diet with his Friends preferred.
191.
Then in kind Anger he to Chiding fell
That they so long their Faith suspended, though
He of his Resurrections Miracle
Had by eyewitness sent them Proof enough:
He Chode; but with such sweet and dainty Art,
That every Wound he made, was with Loves Dart.
192.
This done; his Peace to them again he gave;
That Peace he purehas'd, when he trampled down
Hell into Hell, and Death into the Grave;
When he appeased his mighty Fathers Frown;
When Heaven and Earth, at enmity before,
To blessed Amity he did restore.
193.
Then breathing on them with that noble Breath
Which first inspired Life into Humane Heart;
The dearest Gift, said he, that ever has
To Man been given, I to you impart;
It is the holy Spirit of Heaven, which now
With blessed heat shall in your Bosoms glow.
194.
Hencesorth, whose Sins soever you remit,
By this great Patent, I my Self Forgive;
And whom you Bind to the infernal Pit,
Shall from your Sentence purchase no Reprieve.
As Me my Father sent, so send I you,
To by my potent Deputies below.
195.
This said: into Invisibility
Himself he shut, and so from them withdrew:
When They, who now no longer him could see,
On Joies and Loves, and Faiths Wings, after flew;
Pouring ten thousand Blessings on his Name,
Who with such Solace to their Sorrows came,
196.
But Thomas, who this while had absent been,
Returning now; They met him at the Door,
Shouting and telling him what they had seen;
Each Circumstance they showed him o'r and o'r,
Their Lords great Promises they did repeat,
And how he showed his Wounds, and how he eat.
197.
Thomas amazed at their Relation, stood
Silent a while, uncertain what to say,
Or how he should repulse that swelling Flood
Of most unanimous Confidence, which they
Streamed forth upon his Incredulity:
At last he stamped, and cried, It cannot be.
198.
I grant that Fancy may do much, and you
Perhaps imagine all is true you say:
But there is no reason my Belief should bow
To your Imaginations: You may
By probabilities persuade Me far;
But no such thing can I discover here.
199.
I am not so much wiser now at night
Than I was in the Morn, as to admit
What then to your own indgement seemed so (...),
That you, as well as I, rejected it:
Why must it real prove in you, which We
In Magdalene so fantastic took to be?
200.
When with these Eyes those Wounds I have descri'd,
And put my (...) where the (...) we (...)
When I have thrust my Hand into his (...),
And felt that no Imposture there does grow:
I of your mind may be: But mean time give
Me leave not at a venture to Believe.
201.
(Thus Heaven in Wisdom and in Love, thought fit
To let thick Clouds of Doubt objected be
Before the Resurrections Truth, that it
Might fairer break from that Obscurity,
And pierce all faithless Hearts obdurate Stone
As it the Marble of the Tembe had done.)
202.
Resolved in this imprudent Prudence, he
Eight Days continued; when their Lord again
The doors being bolted close, as formerly,
To his Disciples did his Presence deign;
Whose sprightfull Coming though it startled them,
Less strange and doubtful than at first did seem.
203.
But Thomas, unto whom the Sight was new,
Afflicted stood with quaking Joy and Fear;
His Masters blessed Looks he plainly knew,
And yet his Fancies something dubious were;
He blushed, and then grew pale, and blushed again
And to cross Passions gave at once the rein.
204.
When Jesus saw him tortured on this Rack,
With gracious gentleness, Come near, he said,
And thine own Satisfaction freely take;
Lo here my Wounds before thine Eyes displayed,
Come pierce thou them again; 'twill be less grief,
Than to be wounded by thine Unbelief.
205.
This Condescent so conquered Thoma's heart,
That with complete Assurance, on his knees
He falls, and cries, My God and Lord Thou art:
Not only by these wide-mouthed Witnesses
I find thee so to be, but also by
The heavenly Sweetness of thy Lenity,
206.
I find that thou eight days ago were here,
When foolish I so faithlesly was Wise;
Thou heardst how obstinately I did dare
The pregnant Witness of my Fellows eyes,
Thou heardst what bold Conditions I set,
Before my Faith their Story would admit.
207.
O I believe, dear Lord, and ready am
If need require, such Wounds as those to bear
In spreading forth the glories of thy Name
To any Nations, whether far or near.
Pardon my tardy Faith; it does suffice
That I have felt those Tokens with mine eye.
208.
Jesus replied: Thou build'st thy Faith upon
Thine eyes, (and happy it is that thou do so:
But in how full a Stream shall Blessings run
Into their soft and pliant Bosoms, who
Never saw these deep-writ Characters, and yet
Unto the Credit of their Truth submit!
209.
Here Jesus stepped into his Secrisie
And vanished from their wondering sight; but yet
He sundry times returned to their eye
As his divinely-wisest self thought fit:
Famous his presence was on Tabor, where
He to five hundred did at once appear
210.
Yet not transfigur'd, as before; for now
His proper Shape was radiant Majesty:
For from all Mortal Dross refined, you know
Out of his Tomb he sprang, no more to be
By any Cloud bedimm'd, nor had he need
That Heaven should open its Mouth his Worth to spread.
211.
This was that solemn Apparition he
On Easter Morn by Mary promised,
That the appointed Sceen might ready be
With plenty of Spectators furnished:
And so it was, for his Disciples thither
Had gathered all their trusty Friends together.
212.
When lo their Hopes they met upon the Mount,
And more than their Ambition too; for now
Jesus set open his Lips, and let the Fount,
The blessed Fount of potent Sweetness flow,
Which in the Chanel of these Words upon
The Heads and Hearts of his Disciples ran.
213.
The Nerves and Sinews of all Power and Might
Which spread through Heaven and Earth so far and wide
Here in this single Hand of mine unite,
And to my royal Will alone are ti'd;
By virtue of which Sovereignty, I
Commit to you complete Authority.
214.
Go take your Charge; whose Limits here I make
Coequall with the Worlds: My Gospel preach
To every living Soul, for whose dear sake
I on the bitter Cross my self did stretch,
That in as large a Circle as the Sun
The more illustrious Beams of Grace may run.
215.
He who despises your great News, and You,
Shall do it at his own Souls price, for he
Shall find his slaming Punishment below
In Desperations Eternity:
But he who to your faith his own does give,
As long's that other Dying is, shall live.
216.
Nor shall his Glory only future be;
Miraculous Power shall on him attend,
Upon the stoutest boldest Devils he
Shall invocate my Name, and make them bend;
From mortal Bosoms he shall them expel,
And sorce them howling home unto their Hell.
217.
Babels Confusion shall not him confound,
But every Language on his Tongue shall dwell,
That He my Gospel freely may resound,
And every Ear with its Salvation fill;
I who did it create, as easily can
With Words, as Meat, supply the Mouth of Man.
218.
In vain shall Scorpions bite him, and in vain
Shall Adders sting him; by my power he
Over all Serpents shall as surely gain
As over Hells foul Dragon, victory;
For those mysterious stings I did endure
Shall from their dint and danger Him secure,
219.
In vain shall Poison steal into his Cup,
And thence into his Bowels slide; for he
Although he should drink all Thessalia up;
Or Sodoms Lake, shall not invenomed be:
That Cup which on my Cross I drank, shall make
Wholesome to him all Draughts that he can take.
220.
More Virtue than in Trees and Plants does grow;
Much more than Balsame, in his hand shall dwell;
Those whom incurable Diseases throw
Upon their desperate Bedds, shall straight grow well
If touched by Him whose faith on Me relies,
The grand Physician of all Maladies.
221.
But his Initiation must be
By being washed in the potent Name
Of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that he
May know at whose sole Honor he must (...),
Remembering he by Baptism unto (...)
Was consecrated, but the Triple On.
222.
So spoke the mighty Lord: and then again
Withdrew himself, that they might feed upon
These heavenly Privileges he did deign
To earth, by faithful Meditation;
He knew his Presence was right dear, and yet
He by Withdrawing more endeared it.
223.
But now the signal Time was come, when He
Who cheered the Earth for forty days with his
Bright Apparitions, meant that Heaven should be
Embellished with his glorious Access,
That he might, as Himself he raised hither,
So also reach his Resurrection thither.
224.
His dear Companions now again he met,
(So dear, that loath he seemed with them to part,)
And walking Them along to Olivet,
Spun out the Time by Loves discursive art:
But on the Mountains Top arrived, he
Began in Tone and Aspect changed (...) be.
225.
Stir not, said he, from Salem, but attend
The Fathers Promise you have heard of Me,
It was a Baptism which does far transcend
John's poor and frigid institution; He
Baptized with Water, but your Baptism shall
In Heavens sweet Spirit of Fire immerge you all.
226.
Erected at this solemn Item, they
No less than Crowns and Sceptres fancied:
Yet still their Thoughts below the Promise lay,
Hankring in Earths dull sphere, for nothing did
They reach, but what too worthless was for Him
Their great Ascendent Lord to leave to them.
227.
We know, said they, that (...) Crown is (...)
Unto thine only Head, most fit for it:
Is this the Time dear Lord, that thou will show
And make thy Title good? Shall we now (...)
On our inferior Thrones before thy Feet,
And to the Tribes of (...) Judgment (...)
228.
Thus when wise (...) along (...)
They to (...),
And for their Maint nance (...):
But the (...)-(...) tall to (...)
(...) silly (...)
(...) delight, and (...) (...)
229.
Jesus, who at his Parting could not Chide,
This secular Grossenes of their Thoughts passed by,
And with all delicate Gentleness replied,
Those Times and Seasons which enshrined lie
In Gods own Cabinet, too mystic be
For you to dive into their privacie.
230.
Yet though this Mystery you may not know,
Ten thousand others you shall clearly see,
When the eternal Spirits Power shall flew
Down on your Heads: Your Glory then shall be
To go as Heralds, and my royal Name
Through every Quarter of my World proclaim.
231.
Have Thou not seen the glittering Spark Ascend
With natural Lightness to its proper Sphere?
So glorious Jesus, having made an end
Of all his sweet and blessed Bus'nes here,
Upon the Wings of his own Purity
Lifted himself up to his Native Sky.
232.
They started at the sight, and with their Eyes
And Heads, and Hands, all elevated high,
Labored to trace his Path, and to arise
After their to wring Master, who did fly
A way with all their Hearts: when lo a Cloud
Between their Ecstasie and Him did crowd.
233.
It crowded on apace, for fear to miss
That honor which would make it fairer be,
And dressed with more celestial Stateliness:
Than the brisk Forehead of Serenitie:
So fast it crowded, that the tired Wind
Which would have born it, puffing came behind.
234.
All other Clouds which its Prerogative saw,
Grew black with Grief, and melted into Tears:
When lo the Welkin clears her dainty brow,
And smiling Duy with open eyes prepares
Her Admiration to gaze upon
The Motion of a fairer sweeter Sun.
235.
This happy Cloud her delicate shoulders bent
And meekly stooped to her Makers Feet;
Her pliant Volumes gathered close, and went
Into the fashion of a Princely Seat,
That in a seemly Chariot Jesus might
Unto his Throne take his Triumphant Flight.
236.
The golden Coach, studded with eastern Gemms,
And burnished with living Fire, wherein
Great Phoebus in his brightest glory swimms
Through heavens high Channel, never yet could win,
Such credit as this noble Chariot, which
Gods own enshrined Beauties here, enrich.
237.
At the shrill whistle of each busy Wind
All other Clouds in this inferior sky.
Are feign to run about: But this does find
An undisturbed passage fair and high,
And strait to Heavens illustrious Roof does haste
Without the helping Wheels of any Blast.
238.
Earth was in debt unto those Clouds, till now,
Which op d Heavens Pantrie, and raind Manna down;
But this, full Payment does to Heaven allow,
Whilst to the Angels it bears home their own
Diviner Bread, and by restoring more
Than Earth received, does nobely quit the Score.
239.
That Israel-conducting Cloud which through
The tedious Wilderness of old did take
So patient a Pilgrimage, must bow
Its famous head to This: That did but make
Way to the earthly Canaan, but this
Unto the Heavenly the brave Convoy is.
240.
As Jesus thus soard through the Air, he saw
The Treasuries of every kind of Wether,
Of fair, of foul, of Rain, of Hail, of Snow,
Which did their homage unto Him as thither
His Coach arrived: He bad Them gently fall
Upon his Earth, and then He blessed them all.
241.
So did He too that sweet and loyal Quire
Of Larks, which with applauding Songs and Wings
In delicate attendance did aspire
After his mounting Train: Go gentle Things
Said He, and rest your weary pinions, I
My other Choristers approaching spy.
242.
Lo, at the Word, the Winged Legions, who
Flutter about the everlasting Sphere,
And on the great Creators bus'nes go
Throughout the World; appeared hovering there:
Great was their number; and their Glory great,
If they with Jesu's Luster had not met.
243.
Before his Feet their graceful Heads they bow,
(...) down with sweet Extremities of Joy
That they without a Veils Assistance now
On his dear Eyes may look, which till to day
Lay hid to them in too much light; but here
Dressed in Humane Mitigation were.
244.
For though some of our Quire had long before
Enjoyed the blessed Privilege to see
His the anthropick face; though All did pour
Their high Applause on his Nativity;
This was the time when Heavens Whole Host to fair
And plenall view of Him advanced were.
245.
A dainty and long-studied Song They had
Composed, and tuned to a ge ntle Key;
But this excessive Sight of Sweetness made
Their Acclamations correspondent be;
Their Wings and Hands aloud they clapped, and rent
With louder Paeans all the Element.
246.
But seeing then his bright Retinue, who
About Him shined like his reflected Rays;
They to their new Acquaintance smiling go,
And in their faces read their Sovereigns Praise;
For Gratitude had deep imprinted there
Their glorious Redemptions Character.
247.
These were those holy Souls, who long had layn
On the soft Pillows of great Abraham's breast,
Looking and longing when their Lord, would deign
To bring them to his sweeter nobler Rest;
To chase their Mists and Shades with his own Ray
And turn their doubtful Dawn to High-noon Day.
248.
Great Abraham himself was there with them,
And shined with a choice and leading Grace;
The Patriarchs, and Prophets next to Him,
Each in their proper Dignity and Place;
Then every pious Man, and Woman, who
Ventured in his hard Steps on earth to go.
249.
Their Charges many Guardian Angels saw,
And highly triumphed to behold them there.
So, when the Ship which long has labored through
The Seas proud Wrath, unto the haven draws near,
The Pilots Eyes and Heart with Joy are sill'd
No less than with the Wind the Sails are swelled.
250.
But all the Quire, beheld the blessed Supply
Of their own Companies, which robbed were
Of no small Part of their Fraternity
When sullen Pride upon Heavens face made war,
And many Empyraean (...) fell
From their fair Day, into the Night of Hell.
251.
But o what Torrents of divine Delight
Through these Saints Bosoms ran with full Carreer,
To see how near of kin unto the bright
And new apparent King of Heaven they were;
They envy not the Angels radiant Dresses,
Nor wish their silver Wings, or golden Tresses.
252.
And that their Triumph might be sweetened by
Harmonious Joy, before the Masculine Troop
David did with his learned Fingers fly
About his Harp, and beat those Accents up
Which with her Timbrel Miriam before
The Female Squadrons did to him restore.
253.
But Jesus now to his officious Cloud
Dismission gave; ambitious of whose Place
A Knot of gallant Seraphs came and bowed
Their youthful Shoulders, that their Lord might pass
To Heaven upon the best of Heaven, and be
Drawn to his Palace in due Majesty.
254.
Then Michael taking up the Standard, which
With the Heart-blood of Death and Hell was red
And charged with the glorious Cross, did stretch
It toward Heaven, and forward fluttered.
In this Array the Triumph marched on.
Abashing Day, and dazzelling the Sun.
255.
Thus He who lately that Procession went
Where Spite, and Shame, and Scorn did Him attend,
When He through Salems Steeets was kicked and rent,
And through a thousand Deaths led to his End,
Is now tequited by a March, whose Glory
Gilds the Disgraces of his Passions Story.
256.
As to the Confines of the Spears they drew,
David his Harp and Throat did strein (...) high
That ancient Song of Glory to renew
Which He had in Prophetik ecstasie
Tuned to a special and illustrious Lay,
And sung aforehand to this noble Day.
257.
Bright and eternal gates of heaven, lift up
Your cheerly Heads and know your (...)
As mine is now, so let your mouths be open
To entertain our universal joy:
It is the King of glory, who does come,
That, and the sweeter heaven now to bring home.
258.
It is the King of War whose matchless strength
Has trod down our and your fell enemy;
Read but his Banner, where are writ at length
The rubie tokens of his victory;
Open, open, as wide's your Heaven can give you leave,
And Him much greater (...) all it, receive
259.
The Crystal doors no sooner heard the song.
But in obedience, they echoed it;
Their everlasting bars aside they flung,
And their resplendent (...) open set;
Strait through the mighty gap a flood of gold
Soft as the locks of (...) downward rolled.
260.
With that, the Music of the spears burst out;
High were the streins, and delicate the lays;
And though a while sweet David's fingers fought,
His mortal strings to them He could not raise;
My harp must yield, He cried, but yet my heart
Shall in your loftiest accents bear her (...).
261.
Indeed those aires are so refined, and high,
Only the Hearts spiritual strings can stretch
To the full compass of their Harmony;
To whose pure chords, those Compositions which
You with the Name of Music honor here,
Are only learned gratings of the ear.
262.
Thus to the silver Orbs they came: When lo
The Stars all trip'd about, and danced for joy;
And as the Triumph through the sphere did go,
Phoebus unto his Lord resigned the day;
His brighter Lord, from whose original beam
He takes his light, as all the stars from him.
263.
But yet these beauteous stages only were
The fairly paved way and (...) which see
Unto that rairer larger Palace where
Dwells light, and life, and bliss, and Heaven indeed
And therefore Jesus through these made have,
And only blessed, and gilt them as he (...).
264.
When to the (...) of the (...) He
Was now arrived, and saw the world below:
The gate of Sovereign (...)
Before its King it self did open throw:
Of (...) glories straight appeared a (...)
(...) but pure (...)
265.
What joys, what smiles. what ravishments were here,
What delicate extremities of pleasures!
Injurious the unworthy Parallel were,
By (...) if we should measure
These (...) sweets, of whose (...)
All (...) not the (...) is.
266.
For never did the sharpest-pointed eye
Or of the body, or the Soul of Man.
Such (...) of pure delight desery
As all about these splendid Regions ran.
Chanting those (...) of (...) no mortal (...)
Has (...) to heat.
267.
Into these vast Expansions as He went,
Lo his Almighty Father came to meet him;
O Psyche had thou seen that Complement
Of supreme joy, with which he there did greet him,
The Spectacle for ever Thee had blessed,
And with (...) heaven replenished thy breast.
268.
Unfathomable streams of (...)
Attended on him and bare up his train
A flood of most excessive gratulation
Before him rolled: But o how sovereign
Was that infinitude of complacence
Which brake from his own eyes exuberance
269.
On his Sons neck his radiant arms He threw
And sealed his lips with an inamor'd kiss:
His noble Bosom then wide open flew,
( That home and Center of eternal bliss;)
To bid him welcome to that dearest bed
In which or old he us (...) to rest his head
270.
Come, Come, said he, no more to part from hence
My hignest will thou have completely done
And by perfection of obedience
Bravely approved thy self mine only (...)
(...) shall entertain thee, and
For thy ocat sake, those who about this (...)
271.
Hence forth I can look on my world below
With comfort, which till now displeased mine eye;
For all its blots, and stains, and horrors, thou
Have nobly turned into purity;
It shines now, washed by the liberal slood
Of thine illustrinus all-cleansing blood.
272.
I see thy wounds; and I beheld the shame
With which they were engrav'don thee; but now
With never-dying luster they shall flame,
(...) on their gravers one day terror throw,
When guilty they again shall see these scars
(...) purchased'st in Loves and Mercies wars.
273.
So spoke the Father: when the Holy Ghost,
Who hand in hand along with him was come,
Renewed his applauding joy, by most
Mysterious emanations, which from
The string of living bliss. his dainty breast,
In (...) Plenitude of sweetness pressed.
274.
Thus in the face of Heavens returned Son
He breathed a precious aromatic stream;
The surplusage of which effusion
Filled, and enobled all the hearts of them
Whom he in triumph thither brought, to be
For ever Captives to felicity.
275.
This salutation done: Heavens trumpets sounded,
Whose gallant noise, with equal Majesty
That Hill of all sublimitie rebounded;
To which in goodly equipage did fly
This reyal Company and strait gat up
Unto Beatitudes, and Glories Top.
276.
Three radiant Chairs of awful beauty there
Stand founded fast upon Eternity;
Which with such mystic art united are,
That it is entirely one, as well as three;
Three equal and distinguished seats, yet one
Essential and everlasting throne.
277.
Down in the midst the Father sat, and on
His left hand his all-quickning Spirit; but
He at his right enthroned his mighty Son,
And an eternal wreath of glories put
Upon his Temples to requite those Scorns,
And Pains, they here bore with their Crown of (...).
278.
The ignominy of his feeble Reed
With Dignities excess to recompense,
Into his right hand He delivered
A Scepter made all of Omnipotence;
And then erected just before his face,
His fairer Cross, upon a diamond Base.
279.
As Jesus thus sat upon Triumphs Crown,
The Peers of that illustrious Kingdom came,
And at his feet their Coronets threw down
In loyal homage, and themselves, with them,
Begging his leave that their unworthy tongues
Might with his royal name enrich their Songs,
280.
Forthwith, an Anthem of ecstatick praise
Broke from their lips, and on Heavens Roof did beat;
This brave example moved the Saints to raise
Their highest tunes, and mingle in that sweet
Deluge of triumphs, their applauses, which
Must flow as far's Eternity can reach.
281.
But the Disciples, Psyche, all this while
Followed Him with their eyes, and grieved were
To see the interposing Cloud beguile
Them of their Bliss: yet could they not forbear
Their Gazing still, in hopes their Sun might break
This Veil at length, and they free prospect take.
282.
When lo, two Angels all in snow arrayed,
A courteous Check unto their error, gave;
Ye Galileans, why is it, they said,
Your ignorant hopes stand gazing thus to have
A sight of him, now mounted higher far
Above the cloud, than you beneath it are?
283.
He on his Heavenly throne is see, and you
Must wait till He is pleased thence to rise;
For time will come when he again will show
To yours, and all the worlds, his blessed eyes;
And as from hence He did his journey take,
So, on the Shoulders of a cloud ride back.
284.
This said: the (...) posted home to share
In the new Festival above; And they
Convineed by that Item, ready were
Back to Jerusalem to take their way,
But as their eyes returned to the ground,
The final Footsteps of their Lord they found.
285.
And so may Thou, my Psyche, still, for lo,
The precious Characters do here remain;
The trusty Earth would never let them go,
Nor did desire to smooth her face again,
Which by these Prints was so embellished that
Her self to be the Worlds Base she forgot.
286.
These dear Impressions the Disciples kissed,
And took their leave, and so to Salem went;
Full little thinking that the simple Dust
In keeping them would prove so Diligent,
That neither Winds nor Storms could them deface,
Nor pious Pilgrims bear them from this place.
287.
A Thousand zealous Hands themselves have filled
With this most priviledg'd Earth, and held it more
Precious than all the golden Sand which swelled
The fame of Gange's or of Indu's shore;
Yet still the faithful Dust with nimble Care
Supplied and kept entire each Character
288.
Nay when the Time shall come, as come it will,
When Christian Piety shall courage take
And build a Temple on this sacred Hill;
These footsteps of their Worth full proof shall make;
Refusing to let go the Honor they
Were sealed with upon Ascension Day.
289.
They back into the Workmens face will throw
All his intrenthing stones, as often as He
A Pavement labors over them to draw,
And injure with his Earthly decency
Their heavenly Beauty; which He would disgrace,
Though He with Pearls and Gems should court the place.
290.
Nor shall He with his Roof hope to forbid
Their Prospect up ward, whether He is gone
Who stamped them here; their Eyes will know no Lid,
But make the Beams recoil, the Rafters run
Aside and suffer no Concameration
To damm the way of Jesu's Exaltation.
291.
Thus Psyche, have I made thee trace thy Lord
To his last footsteps through a thousand ways
All set with Mercy, and made good my Word.
Thou see how He a countermure does raise
Against Sins Battery, and thou needst not fear
Hells Spite, now Heaven for thee does take such care
392.
Nor durst I doubt, but thine own Heart will say
This thy long Pilgrimage is well requited,
Which has presented thee a full Display
Of that wherewith all Angels are delighted;
Whose Souls then with sublimest Joy do leap
When on these Mysteries of Love they peep.
293.
Their Harness here upon his Steeds he threw,
Who all this while were feeding on the Hill:
The meaning of that warning Psyche knew,
And on her knee, prayed him to tarry, till
She gave the Reins to her Devotion,
As other Pilgrims unto theirs had done.
294.
He smiled and stayed, But She, flat on her face
Innumerable Kisses heaped upon
The venerable Stepps; and long it was
Before her amorous Sighs and Tears had done:
At length, her Bosom with the Dust she filled,
And cried. Go thou, and my foul Body gild.
295.
Then casting up to Heaven her zealous Eye,
After her Spouse a thousand Thoughts she sent,
To whom her panting Soul strove hard to fly
Upon the Wings of her high Ravishment.
But when she felt her self stick still to Earth,
Fresh Tears at first, and then these Words brake forth.
296.
Why may my Heart not be, where most it is,
O Thou my dearest Life! o Jesu, why
Since Thou art mounted to the Topp of Bliss,
And leave Me Dead, have I not leave to Die?
Never was any Ghost, but I, till now,
In its own Body bound, and chaind below.
297.
I by thy Cross and Death was wholly slain;
And by thy Resurrections Life I grew
Alive, and safe, and vigorous again:
But thy Ascension does my Death renew,
Since nothing of my Life poor I can find
But these bare footsteps left Me here behind.
298.
Sweet Lord, by these thy Psyche cannot live,
Though for thy Sake, they precious are to Me:
O no! their Worth does but more reason give
To long for most inestimable Thee.
If any footstepp Me can satisfy,
It must be that which next thy foot does lie.
299.
Have Thou not said, that Earth thy Footstool is,
As well as Heaven thy Throne? O mighty Lord,
'T will be thy Handmaydes most accomplish d Bliss
If thou but unto Me make'st good that Word;
Lo I thy Dust, the Footstool crave to be
Of thy now Heav'n-enthroned Majesty.
300.
High my Petition is, and bold, I know;
And yet the worthless Dew must needs aspire
To Heaven it self, when once it, gins to glow
With Phoebu's sweet, and most attracting Fire;
Nor can the Spark in its dull Ashes lie,
But must have leave to venture at the Sky.
301.
Alas, what is this weary World to Me?
What are the silver Spears and golden Sun?
Could I reign Queen of every Thing I see,
At my sole Nod would all Earths Kindreds ran;
What were this Empire worth, now Thou art gone,
Whom Psyche must esteem her Crown alone?
302.
It Is not thy heavenly Paradise, that I
Ambitious am to see; it is not thy Court
Of Angels, though by Phylax's company
I guess their Worth; it is not the Pomp and Port
That flows about thy throne; Nor do I long
To dance unto thy Quires eternal Song.
303.
My Heart does pant for Thee, and only Thee;
And, could Thou be in Hell, I never more
Would loose a Looking up to Heaven, but be
Inamored of that Abyss, and pour
My Longings, and my Labors downward, till
I at thy Feet my Vows and Soul could spill.
304.
O why art Thou so infinitely sweet!
Or rather, Why must We that Sweetness know,
If Thou, deer Jesu, do not think it meet
Unto our Fires their (...) to allow?
Away Thou flyest, and Forsaken We
Even by thy sweets and Bliss tormented be.
305.
How can I help this my excessive Passion,
Or how can it deserve these Torments? Since,
Thine own Love does profess Immoderation
And guilty is of boundless influence:
In which soft Sea of Fire whilst drowned I am,
What can I do but burn with answering Flame.
306.
Blame Me not, blessed Lord; it is not I,
But Thou thy Self rebounding from my Heart,
Who beat'st Heaven with this Importunity,
And call'st for Ease for my mysterious Smart:
Had Thou by Love not stampd thy Self upon
My Soul, now Psyche had let Thee alone.
307.
Remembet Jesu, what it is to be
Forsaken; o remember thine own Cry
When in thy Desolation on the Tree
Thy Father Thou did challenge: May not I
Use thine own Words? My God, my God, why now
Do Thou thy desolate Psyche leave below?
308.
Upon this Olivet my Calvary
I find, and to my Cross am nailed here:
Ten thousand Torments in my Bosom lie,
And full as many Thorns as planted were
Upon thy Tempels, in my Heart do stick,
Where all the Bowels of my Soul they prick.
309.
O Love! why must thine only Tyranny
The Bounds of other Cruelties exceed?
Why will it not allow the Courtesy
Of Death, unto thy Vassals, who are Dead
By its reviving Slaughters, and desire
To be free Holocausts in thy sweet Fire?
310.
Her Passion here beyond expression grew:
Yet though She with her Tongue no more could speak;
With her resolved Eyes to Heaven she flew,
And there a long Oration did make;
Both long, and fluent, in the exuberance
Of Tears, the streams of strongest Eloquence.
311.
But Phylux having to Her tender Heart
Thus far indulged, thought fit to stop Her here
Psyche, said He, imagine not Thou art
Inamored more than the Disciples were
Of thy Ascended Lord: yet desolate They
Warned by the (...), meekly went away,
312.
I in their room, that Warning give to Thee:
On Heaven why do Thou nail thine eyes in vain?
Thy Savior is too high for Thee to see,
Till on a Cloud He posteth back again:
Then shall Thou look thy Fill of Bliss, and be
To all thy Loves Extremities let free.
313.
Mean while thine Adorations and Embraces
On his dear Name and Memory thou may pour.
Come lets away, that by these signal places
Of Mercies Triumphs, thy soft Heart no more
May tortured be. Here on her hand he laid
His own, and raised up the heavy Maid.
114.
Then in his Chariot gently, Her he set,
Who on the Footsteps kept her hankering eye;
But instantly he moved his reins, to let
His Coursers know he gave them liberty;
Forth with, their goodly mains, in answer, They
Shook in proud have, and gallopped away.
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO XV. The Poison.
ARGUMENT.
LEaving his Psyche, careful Phylax arms
With whole some sage Advice her tender breast;
Yet she the Venom of Heretic Charms,
And Spurious Reasons wiles could not resist.
Phylax returns, and in his Pupills eye
Rakes up the nastie sink of Heresy.
1.
ANd sits the Holy Land so dear and high
In pious Souls esteem? What tongue can then
Thunder sufficient Vengeance out, and cry
Against the lazy Baseness of those Men
With equal Indignation, who have let
Vile Pagan Powers from Christians ravish it.
2.
Could this prodigious shame endured be
By Roman hearts, when on their Empires thront
No other Prince was culminant but He
Whom all the best of Bays attended on,
Who like a bank against the torrent stood,
And turned the Giant into Saru's flood.
3.
Who with his own Hand sent Razates down
To his eternal Night: who from the brow
Of stern Cosrhoes shaked off his Crown,
Before Syrhoes cancell'd' Natures law,
That He with vengeance might concur, and by
Dire Parricide make the Tyrant double die.
4.
Who wiped the Romans ignominy out
When He three hundred Eagles, which had long
Been mewed up in Persian Cages, brought
In triumph back, and bad them fly among
Their fellow-ensignes, and as freely gaze
As any of the brood, on Phoebu's face.
5.
Who not these Banners only did redeem,
But the great Standard of Religion too;
Which was so precious in his esteem,
That he himself its Porter turned; and so
Made all his Empire stoop to that which he
Upon his Shoulders bore to Calvarie.
6.
Alas, Heraclius, how has Heresy
Attcheived what all Persia could not do!
How has it made thine Eagles Pinions be
Only of use to fly before thy Foe!
Whilst one of Christ's great Wills Thou take away,
How can Thou hope thine own Thou shall enjoy!
7.
Lo, the new Monster Mahomets bold Fry
Like numerous Locusts from the Pit of Night,
Crawle into Palestine, and there defy
The blasted Powers of the Monothelite:
Lo, they are to the Holy City come,
And Haumar robbs him of his Saviors Tomb.
8.
This raised in reverend Sophroniu's Breast
A mighty Storm of Agonies, to see
His venerable Salem now possessed
By Saracenical Impiety;
And James his sacred Seat become the Throne
For cursed Apostasy to reign upon.
9.
He sighed and weep'd, and finding no Relief
From Heaven or Earth for his loud Lamentation,
Resigned himself unto victorious Grief,
And drowned in his own Tears, fulfilled his Passion;
For why should I live longer here, said he,
Still to be slain by what mine Eyes must see!
10.
And now the Land of Milk and Honey lay
For more than four full Ages over-flown
With Mahumetick Poison; till a Ray
Of vigorous Christian Gallantry shot down
From Heaven, and by the Ermite Peter's breath
Blown to a Bonfire, slam'd with holy Wrath.
11.
With holy Wrath it slam'd in many a Breast,
But most in brave Bolonion Godfreys, who
In Steel, and stronger Resolution dressed
Burnt with Desire to meet his Pagan Foe:
His Lorain can no longer hold him, he
Resolves another kind of Duke to be.
12.
His Consecrated Legions he leads,
And in their Eyes their Quarrel does display;
Above their Heads the bloody Cross he spreads
Which streamed in his awful Standard: They
Smiled at its goodly Look, and cried We
Though in thy tincture, never will shrink from Thee,
13.
The Turkish Moon grew paler than before,
And in a cowardly Eclipse shrunk back,
When this bright Banner did its, Terror pour
Upon her face, and open passage make
To Victory; for she was always there,
And failed not to bring up Godfreys Rear,
14.
Thus lesser Asia from the Turkish Lore
To Christ's more gentle Yoke reduced is;
And there is nothing now but Salem more
For Godfreyes Sword to free from its Distress:
Thither he marched, and soon Redeemed the Place
Where the whole Worlds Redemption acted was.
15.
Right Christian Hero, o how due to thee
Was sacred Salems Crown, and more than that
How justly has thy pious Victory
Both Martial, and Poetic Laurel got,
Whilst thy illustrious Name and Glory reigns
In the Worlds Wonder, and great Tasso's streins
16.
But when by Death Heaven sent for Godfrey home;
Baldwin his Brother, both in Piety
And Christian Valor, took his royal Room:
Sidon and Ptolemais felt what he
And his brave Troops in a just Cause could do;
And so did Egypts mighty Caliph too,
17.
He to his Cosen Baldwin left his Throne
And his entailed Gallantry with it;
Witness the routed Turks Confusion,
And Antioch, which did to his Might submit:
And though a while he to the Persian bowed.
Upon Damascu's King his strength he showed.
18.
Then from his Turine Earldome Fulco role
To sway this Scepter; who transmitted it
Unto his Son, young Baldwin; over whose
Surprised Powers, stern Noradine did set
His insolent foot; but soon it ssipp'd, and he
Perforce restored his stolen Victory.
19.
His Death, his Brother Almerik did raise
Unto his Throne; a Prince of active Might,
Whose Sword was fertile in triumphant Bays,
And glittered with Glories awful Light;
All Ascalon beheld its noble flame,
When He from conquered Alexandria came.
20.
Baldwin his Son, took up his Scepter, and
Long sturdie War with Saladine maintained,
Till Leprosy seized on his Martial Hand
And unto Resignation it constrained;
And Guy of Joppa was the Friend whom He
Alone would trust to be his Deputy.
21.
Next Him, his Nephew Baldwin stepped into
The (...), in which He scarcely settled was,
But (...) undermined Him, and so
At (...) Guy crowded into his Place
(...) the Earl of Tripolis so deep
That (...) in desperate Plotts his Wrath did steep.
22.
With Suladine He deals, and winns so fart
On his proud Hopes, that He persuades Him to
Conjure against the Christians in a War
Which soon attcheiv'd their fatal Overthrow;
For Arms and Treason so prevailed, that Guy,
And Salem with him, did Subdued lie.
23.
Thus Barbarism afresh did domineer
In the Metropolis of Piety;
Which roused up the Western Emperous
On Pagani me the Power of Zeal to try
Surprised Syria at his Looks did quake,
And from his Conquests all the Turks flew back.
24.
But as this generous Frederik, in his Might
Rode bravely on, his Horses fatal Fall
Threw down the Conqueror into his Night
Of Death. When lo, his noble Son, by all
The Army chose for General, pursued
His Fathers Stepps, and, where he went, subdued.
25.
But what can Virtue do, when Fate withstands?
Upon this hopeful Son of Valor, who
Had no capacity to fear the Hands
Of Death from any Turk, or Pagan Foe,
The Plague did seize, and in his warlik Heart
Fixed its envenomed untimely Dart
26.
Then English Richard and French Philip came,
And with new Western Bravery made good
That mighty Loss; the Lightning of their Fame
Flashed before their Swords; and like a Flood
Encouraged by two Torrents meeting, They
Swallowed up all that dared oppose their Way.
27.
But cursed Discord, the eternal Foe
Of high Designs, sent Philip back again:
Yet Richard on to Salem meant to go,
Where He with Cyprus bought his right to reign;
And would, had Englands Jarrs not called him home,
Have forced Saladine to make him room.
28.
Yet Martial Germany her Nobles sent
By Saladines Decease invited thither:
Fierce Conquest with their Landing Armies went;
But strait their Sunshine turned to lowrie Weather,
For lo, the Austrian Duke and Saxon too,
Untimely Death would let no further go.
29.
And yet undaunted Montfort with his brave
Selected French, disdained back to start,
Till He good reason to the Pagans gave
To grow so same and kind, as to impart
Peace to the Christians, which, without annoy
In Prolemais and Tire they did enjoy,
30.
Mean while, a glorious Conspiracy
Of Western Princes to their Standards stream;
Henry Count of St. Paul, of Campanie
Theobald, of Flanders Baldwin, and of Breme
Gualter, with Henry Duke of Lovanes State,
And Boniface Marquess of Monferrate;
31.
These to the Holy Land their course did bend;
But by the Grecian Quarrels turned aside,
Their Martial Zeal on Ducas they did spend;
And finding then fit Feuel for their Pride,
Forgot the Butt of their devout Design,
And took no longer aim at Palestine.
32.
But Montforts Truce expired; Germany
Conjured again into the Holy War,
Of which stout Brennus had the Conduct, He
Whose comeing, through the Pagans shot such (...)
That they to buy it off, are willing to
Whate'r they held in Palestine, forgo.
33.
But vain Ambition lost this offered Prize;
And swelling Hope of conquering Egypt, throws
So thick a Mist before the Christian Eyes,
That unto Cair the blinded Army goes;
Where they with Nilu's floods besieged round,
Their sacred Enterprise untimely drowned.
34.
Yet Frederik his German Eagles spread
Again, and bravely into Syria flew;
Which in the Pagan Sultan raised such Dread
That all his Turkish Confidence it slew:
He hasts to yield, and freely does resign
Unto the Christians their deer Palestine.
35.
Thus when to his Imperial Diadem
This conquering Prince had joined Salems Crown,
He Raynold leaves to manage it for Him,
And brings his Triumph home: But strait the Frown
Of Fortune, or of Fate, did blast what He
Had nobly brought unto Maturitie.
36.
For when the Heavens had rolled five years about,
Lo Raynold dies, and Salems Fortune too:
The Templars Insolence such falsehood wrought
As generous Christians least of all should do:
Their breach of Truce did their own Selves deceive,
And Salem unto AEgypts Sultan give.
37.
Yet holy Lewis with his Frenchmen struck
Into the Pagans such deep Fright, that they
At his illustrious Oriflambes Look
Unto his Victories gave willing way,
Offering Him Salem, Palestine, and more
Than Christians owned in Syria long before.
38.
But he by fatal Counsel, it denied,
And then to Egypts Sultan proved a Prey:
The good King grieved; and in vain he tried
His new Adventures Strength, for by the way
A sudden and contagious Disease
Both on his Army, and on Him did seize.
39.
His quarrel Edward, Englands sprightfull Prince,
Took up, and lost none of the English Fame:
What Palms had this brave Hero plucked from thence,
Had his conjured Allies but timely came:
But whilst unworthily They lingered, he
Returned, and left behind Ripe (...).
40.
To gather which, Imperial Rodolph sent
Henry the Prince of Megalopo is;
A noble General he, and bravely bent;
But yet against the bold impetuousnesse
Of the stern Mameluhes too weak to stand,
He yields his Neck to wear a Captives Band.
41.
These unsuccessefull Expeditions Shame
A waked the Christians utmost Indignation,
Who in religious Throngs to Syria came.
High were their Hopes, and great their Preparation;
But both by banefull Pride invenomed were,
Which brought to pass, more than the Turks could dare.
42.
As when the Huntsmen going to the Chase
Wrangle and quarrel who shall bear away
The Lions Skin, until their strife increcse
To such Intemperance, that it does betray
Their whole Design, and make them readier to
Chase one another, than that Common Foe.
43.
So here the Christians who a hunting came
For Salems Crown; before they it obtain,
Divided are, and quarrel which of Them
Had fairest Right and Title their to reign:
All pleaded hard, and at the Septre caught,
As if it now had from the Turk been snatched
44.
The Kings, of England, Cyprus, Sicilie,
And France, the Pisans, Florentines, and Pope,
The Prince of Antioch, Count of Tripolie,
The Genouese, and the Venetians, hope.
So did the Hospitals, and Templars too,
That in the Diadem they had to do.
45.
Thus while this cursed War of Contestation
Protracts the Holy one; the (...) (who
Like their own Swords, grow (...))
Finding no Business now at all to do
But to be wicked, through each neighbor Town
Run (...) and (...) up and down.
46.
At these (...) Wrongs the (...) (...)
Both in their Rage and in their (...)
And (...) joined with their (...) and (...)
Upon their (...)
Till by a quick and general (...)
All (...) out of (...) beat.
47.
They beat them out of Syria, and (...)
Of all that nsuall Braveric whereby
Their frequent Armies they to Salem brought
With fresh Reeruits of Zealous Pietic:
Their Courage now lies dead and cold at home,
Which used to live about their (...).
48.
Yet not so dead, but it revives again
Into a Life much worse than Death; for they
Since that, with most unchristian (...) (...)
Their swords in one another blood, and (...)
The Turks among themselves, whom they were wont
More nobly from their (...) to hunt.
49.
The Cross must now against the (...) (...) spreo.
(Blush all ye Heavens at this!) and they who are
Under the King of Peace all marshalles.
Be bararized by a mutual War,
Tearing that precious gentle (...)
Their Lord bequeathed to their Custody.
50.
They who by mystic Union are knit
Under one Head, no other Foes do seel
But their (...) Members, and forge:
That whilst on them their Salvage spite they wreak
The tender Head feels every wouno and will
Score up drop which of His blood they (...).
51.
Weep all good eyes, which see this dreadful shame
Of Christians digging Christian Bowels up
Sure that of blood, deserv's your briney stream
Weep then, and let your Bottles never stop,
Till you have washed away this Purple stain,
Against which all powers, but those of Tears are vair
52.
Had but the thousand part of this dear blood
Adventured to be broached in Palestins
Quite overwhelmed by its exuberant (...)
Had Manomets wide spread contagion been
And woeful Greece had not ensiaved (...)
Under the burden or a Pagan Chain
53.
Or had that Power of Policy, or (...)
Of Arms of Horse, of Men, and stronger Gold
Which in our (...)-aestroying Britain (...)
Of late been livisn'd out, when Engiana (...)
Her (...) Misery, with provident
And pious zeal in Syria been spent
54.
Our guilty words had now not blushed in
(...) blood; nor had our Palms and Bays
With any English curse destoured been;
But Salem her sad Head 'gun to raise,
Feeling from her long pressed neck, the yoke
Of (...) broke.
55.
As (...) was (...) Salem to forsake.
As are our (...) thither to advance
Often She looked hack, and many a view did take
With weeping eyes, and blubbered countenance:
But when the Hills she could no longer spy,
Let (...) now, said she, look (...) mine eye.
56.
And with (...) potent (...) did she breath
That heart sigh, that it made Phylax start,
(...) the pallid characters of Death
Appeared in her face, and every Part
(...) cold and number, as if her (...) had (...)
Back to the place whence she was hurried.
57.
In application of his cordial Powers
Had not the tender Guardian nimble been,
His Psyche eyes now in their amorous showers
Had their own final deluge found, and seen
No more for ever: with such force does love
(Especialy in female Bosoms) move.
58.
And ask me not, what makes this Passion prove
So brave and potent in the softest hearts?
Thy self the (...) fect (...) if genuine love
On thee has tried his mysterious Darts.
If not: it is in vain to tell thee how
This softnes to such mighty strength does grow,
59.
But quick as is the infiuence of light,
New vigorous spirits He breaths into her breast
Which thriliing through her Veins, chased out the (...)
Of languic cold by which they were posiest
And (...) her blood, bidding it rise, and (...)
Her (...), and (...), and (...) snor
60.
(...) (...), but toward (...)
Her (...), and then (...)
Courage my Dear, said (...), be content
Saiern (...) nothing more for there (...)
^
^
61.
As when a Friend unwelcome Motions makes,
His other self (who has no power to be
Right-down displeased, at whatsoever breaks
From those beloved lips, which Faithful he
Holds dearer than his own, displays the smart
In his Eyes mirrours, of his wounded Heart:
62.
So the Sweet anguish of her loving look
Psyche a while lays open to Phylax view,
That He might read in that pathetick book
How by that Word of his her Joys He slew.
But when He seemed that language not to ken,
Her lips thus to interpret it began.
63.
Between two deaths, which shall poor Psyche choose
For death it is my Phylax to displease,
And death, religious Salems sweets to loose:
And I, alas, have but one life for these:
Yet had I more, my straits were still the same;
For all were due to thee, and all to them.
64.
O dear Pretector of my Joys, and Me,
Divide not now thy charge: Had I not been
Conducted hither by thy Piety,
Psyche Jerusalem had never seen,
Not been enchanted by the precious Graces
Which have endeer'd these consecrated places.
65.
And of these Jewels must I robbed be.
By none but dearest thee! Had open Foes
Thus all at once impoverished feeble Me,
I might have grappled with my single woes;
But now each grief and loss, by springing from
Thine Hand, on Me does more than doubled come.
66.
O what has Albion that can entertain
A Soul which is from Salem snatched away!
Salem which in the Worlds heart queen does reign,
Whil st Albions Clime her vileness does betray,
Whom Nature threw into the West, and sought
How from the Universe to kick her out.
67.
Arimathaean Joseph's tomb indeed
Is there, that something that poor Ilse might have;
But o, the sight of that, will only feed
That fire which burns me with his other Grave.
His other Grave, in which my Spouse did he
Far, far from Albion, whither thou would fly.
68.
When in the lofty air the fish can live,
When in the bottom of the Sea the Lark,
When Cancer can to Winter welcome give,
When High-noon can inhabit in the Dark,
When Albion can to Salem shipped be,
Then may it prove a fitting home for me.
69.
But until then, I only thither go
Bearing my woeful Corpse unto my Tomb,
Since thou sweet-bitter friend wilt have it so,
And not vouchsafe in Palestine a room
For poor distressed Psyche. Here a stream
Of Tears flowd down from Her, and softened him.
70.
Nay I am not so hard, says He, but I
Can yield to fewer tears of thine, than those:
Come wipe thine eyes, for thou shall instantly
Live in those joys, Thou holdst it death to loose.
With that He slop'd the Rein, and wheeled about,
And smiling Psyche back to Salem brought.
71.
She smiled; but sober He confessed no sign
Of jollitie at this Return; for He
By his profounder judement did divine
That Land, however Holy, would not be
A Sanctuary to his Psyche, since
His and her Masters summons called him thence.
72.
A little House He there prepared for Her,
And with all requisites replenished it.
But then, with awful looks He cried, my dear,
Thou see what order I have took to fit
Thy longing, and thy Lodging too; but now
I a more useful gift then these, bestow.
73.
It Is my Advice; of which Thou have more need
Than here to sojourn: yet thy being here
Does all that mystic mighty danger breed
Which by thy life I thee conjure to fear.
Thy life at Salem is in peril, which
Had been in Albion out of Dangers reach.
74.
Where Waters most do ^mile and (...) now,
The deepest Gulfes beneath in (...) lie;
Where in their briskest beauty Roses grow,
An armed Troop of dangerous Thorns stand by;
All Poisons then most active are and bold
When they are lodged in pompous Pearl and (...)
75.
Sweet Paradise was not so safe, but there
The worst of Serpents in its Sweets did dwell:
And though to thee Heaven seems descended here,
Yet even in Salem thou may meet with Hell.
I grant the Serpent here was slain, but yet
Their fragments Snakes know how again to knit.
76.
Trust not their glittering Skinns, though fair they be,
But fly their Looks; for thick Enchantments are
Enammell'd in their outside Bravery,
And holy Trapps, and Treacheries they wear;
With cunning Art they wind about, and glide,
And into unsuspecting Holes they slide.
77.
Trust not their Tongue (which is indeed a Sting,)
Though it be tipp'd with Golden Courtesy;
Though Heaven rolled up in Promises it bring,
And Wisdoms most inviting Sweetness: Ye
Shall be as Gods, discerning Good and Evil,
Was a brave Word, yet minted by the Devil.
78.
Remember here thy Spouse was once betrayed,
Remember that he here was thrice denied,
Remember that thou art a feeble Maid,
Remember thy Agenor, and thy Pride,
Remember the Rebellion of thy Passions,
Remember Aphrodisiu's Protestations.
79.
Remember what from Charis and from Me
Thou have received, and let no Sirens Song
Bewitch thine Ears with treacherous Harmony,
In which the blessed Tunes of Heaven have rung.
Take heed this humor of thy Zeal does not
Cast on its sober lines a wanton blot.
80.
Lock up these Counsels in thine Heart, and there
Let them lie safe for Me till I come back;
Thy Trust, and Love shall hence to me appear,
If of these Pawns thou faithful Care do take,
These Pawns, which will my Guardian Wings supply
Although from thee I far away do fly.
81.
I must away, for this Heavens pleasure is,
And therefore must be mine, and should be thine:
I business have abroad; but by this Kiss,
(And here he took his leave,) the truth of mine
Affection, Psyche, on thy Lip I seal;
Keep the Impression safe, and so Farewell.
82.
Away this Word, and He together flew:
For now the King of Souls thought fit to teach
Psyche how little of her Heart she knew,
Who thought it raised past Delusions reach.
To her own Strength she now was left, that she
How little it deserved that Name, might see.
83.
But when her Guardian now out-flew her View,
At his most unexpected Parting she
At first amazed and aflicted grew:
But straight revolving that her Heart was free
With all Jerusalem to satisfy
Its curious fervor, she left off to Sigh.
84.
Then in a modest Veil her face she hid,
Leaving her Eyes but room her way to see;
Zeal ti'd unto her feet the Wings of Speed,
And on she hasted toward Calvarie,
Her Saviors Pains afresh there to lament,
Not thinking that to her own Cross she went.
85.
Mean while, all pious Hearts eternal Foe
Who to entrap them keeps perpetual Watch,
Observing her without her Guardian go,
Judged this his only time his Prey to catch:
He posted to a special Fu^ies Den,
Who started all her Snakes as he came in,
86.
But as she in ten thousand Hisses spoke
Her Sovereigns Welcome; Peace my Child, said He,
Part of my Errand's Haste, and cannot brook
These Complements Delay: I have for Thee
A piece of Service which will better prove
How much thy Father Satan thou do love.
87.
Psyche, a Thing to Jesus wondrous dear,
(And therefore full as odious to Me,
Who by his Love am always pointed where
I am to shoot my Spite) is that coy she
Whom though I sundry Times have baited, yet
Back in my face the Poison still she spit.
88.
I Aphrodisius and Agenor sent,
And genuine Fiends they proved themselves to be;
About their hellish Work they wisely went,
And bravely acted all the Treachery;
And yet, good Devils, their far-driven Plot.
So crafty was that Wench, they finished not.
89.
Not that this Craft in her poor mortal Brain
Was bred and nursed: o no, abused We are;
And Heaven, though always We to it give plain
Defiance, underhand maintains this War.
There, drowned in Sulphur, Thou had Psyche seen,
Had it not for unlukie Phylax been.
90.
He, base unworthy Spirit as He is,
Not only stoops to Christ, ( which gallant We
Of old disdained, and still do no less,)
But with intolerable Flattery
Turns Page to dust and Ashes, and does bow
From Heaven, to wait on this vile Worm below.
91.
Had He not better nobly Fallen with Us,
And never have debased his Highborn Mind;
Then crouch, and sneak, and currie favor thus
Of the proud Tyrant? Can an Angel find
It worth Christ's Favor to be humbled down
Far more below himself, than We are thrown?
92.
For my part, if I freely were to choose,
I would accept the bottom of my Hell,
And hug Damnation; ever I would with those
Ignoble Sons of Earth a Servant d well.
Those Guardian Angels think We Cursed be;
Fools! who perceive not their own Misery.
93.
They boast Heavens King's their Sovereign; and I
Take the confessing Vassals at their Word:
But I Will maintain it greater Dignity
To have Him for my Foe, than for my Lord:
They brag that Heavens their own, and Blisse's Hill;
Why I have more than so; I have my Will.
94.
But now, my Daughter, Phylax is away,
His servile Diligence thou needst not fear;
Psyche is left unto her Self to day,
And therefore unto Us, if thou take Care
To lay thy Plots aright; for thine they be
On which I build my Hopes of Victory.
95.
She now is on her way to Calvary,
The Hill which more than Heaven it self I hate,
And have no mind in person to come nie
That cursed Place: It stands not with the State
And honor of Imperial Lucifer
To smell the (...) of Jesus Sepulcher.
96.
But for thy Fathers sake, and service, Thou
Shall stop thy Nose, and venture to go thither,
Where Thou a subtle Chain of Snakes shall throw
About that peevish Wench to hale her hither;
So at her, and her cheated Spouse, both I
And thou will laugh unto Eternity.
97.
His foaming Lips He closed here, and beat
The flood of flaming Sulphur back into
His monstrous Throat. Straitat his burning Feet
His damned Daughter took her leave to go,
And with stout Fury rushed through the Earth;
And mingled with the Air, as she brake forth.
98.
In this she flew above Suspicions Eye,
And undiscerned shot into the Breasts
Of diverse Mortals, where she formerly,
Had entertainment found: But now her Nests
She fethered anew with greater Store
Of viperous Powers, than she left there before.
99.
Such was her dangerous Policy, that she
For Psyche laid her Net in others Hearts,
Which she made lovely by the bravery
Of most refined sublimated Arts:
No fowler ever used such allureing Ways
To charm poor Birds by treacherous (...)
100.
For though she were the very Center, where
The Lines of all Deformities did meet;
The Looks of Beauty she knew how to wear,
And make her Horridness appear so sweet,
That she the wisest and most peircing Eyes
Had often blinded by her Fallacies.
101.
But now the Virgin at the doleful Mount
Arrived was; where in the reverend place
Of the deer Crosses Foot, she made account
To pour her Vows: But there before Her was
A youthful Man, who prepossessed her room,
And thither of her errand seemed to come.
102.
His Looks, though guilty of few years, were yet
Grown pale and old with pious Gravity;
His sober Garb was such as best might fit
Those who not spruce and brave but clothed would be;
His Body thin, but thick his (...); which grown
To its full length, did at his back flow down
103.
Upon the ground He lay and beat his Breast,
Which echoed back the Blows, with Sighs and groans:
At length, with iterated Knockings pressed,
It yielded forth these Ejulations:
O Geief and Pains, had you no other Heart
But His, to make the Sink of all your Smart!
104.
That Heart! which all of Sweetness molded was.
That Heart! where Heaven found its Epitomie.
That Heart! the fountain of all softest Grace.
That heart! where all the Worlds best Life did lie.
The heart of Jesus! here a boistrous Sigh
Came blusting out, and breaking off his Cry.
105.
But then, recovering his Tongue again;
Alas, said He, and why are you unjust?
Why from this Breast of mine do you abstein,
Which all your utmost stings does merit? Must
He who deserv's the best of Joys, alone
Inherit all the depth of Passion?
106.
Are there no Whipps, no Thorns, no Nails for Me?
May these my youthful shoulders bear no Cross?
Is there no Portion of Misery
Left for my high Desert? did He engrosse
What sinful I had better Title to
Sure this at least shall be my Grief and Woe.
107.
As when the hollow Winds have drove together
Black lagging Clouds, the gravid vapors break
With their own weight, and pour the rainey Wether
Down through the gloomy Air: So on his Cheek
His laboring Eyes their fertile streams let flow,
Which his tempestuous grief did thither blow.
108.
And now his Lips no more had power to speak,
In Zealous Kisses He does them employ;
He kissed the Soil, where once that Blood did reek,
Which all the Earths Redemption did pay:
And every Kiss did new Desire beget
Of more affectionate Embracing it.
109.
Psyche observing his sweet Passion swell
With such Devotion, soon forgot her own;
And with the Stranger in such love she fell
That at his feet her self she bowed down,
She bowed down, and little thought that then
She stooped to enter the forbidden Gin.
110.
But as the wary Seaman, when He spies
The amiable Mermaid floating nie,
Turns from the dangerous Bait his jealous Eyes,
Hoiseth his sail up, and his Oars does plie:
So this Devoto, seeing Psyche there,
Confessed and fortified his holy fear.
111.
For starting at the unexpected sight,
Shield me, my blessed Guardian, said He;
Satan, who does with everlasting spite
Disturb the Course of Zealous Piety,
Has to facilitate my molestation,
In this fair Damsel sent me my Temptation.
112.
But whosoe'r thou art, go seek thy Prey
Where rampant Lust in furious Bonfires reigns:
Thy Beauties Luster must not thaw its way
Through my tame, and now long-cooled veins.
How know I but thou art some fair dressed Feind
To make Me foul? and here Himself He signed.
113.
Ravished with this Religious Jealousy,
Sweet Sir, said Psyche, I was hither come
Upon that errand which your Piety
Has here dispatched; in that very room
I purposed my devoted sighs to blow,
And make mine Eyes their liquid Duty know.
114.
My bounteous Lord took my Intent, I see,
For actual Deed; and has rewarded it:
He knew no blessing would more welcome be
Unto my Heart, then this which here I met;
And this, art Thou, in whom I plainly read
The love of Him of whom my soul is Head.
115.
I heard thy holy Sighs, and hearty Groans,
As toward Heaven from thy Sweet Breast they flew,
I heard thy generous Lamentations;
And by those zealous Characters I knew
That Jesus had by his Soule-conquering Dart
Engraved Heavens best impression on thy Heart.
116.
I thank Thee, that thou were of Me afraid,
For much I reverence that pious fear:
Yet be assured thou have met a Maid
In whom no Embers of black fervor are:
No, no; my Heart will no such Guests allow,
For it too well does Aphrodisim know.
117.
Indeed I might have been what you suspected,
Foul Satan's Agent, and a feind of Hell,
Had our deer Lord the care of Me neglected,
And not sealed sure on mine, his blessed Will:
And so might Thou, had He not spread above
Thy helpless head, the Banner of his Love.
118.
That Love, which wheresoe'r I find it shine,
Does humble Reverence from my heart command;
Wonder not at my Case, but make it thine,
And think how thou could shun, or how withstand
Thy Charming Self: If I immodest be,
Like Love will pardon Loves Immodestie.
119.
Yet it is no Boldness to admire the Sunn,
To love the stars, and, what more lovely is,
Their Sovercign, and ours: what I have done
To Thee, great Jesus gave me leave to his
Own Self to do: Wherefore no more admire
That I grow warm now I come near thy fire.
120.
My Warmth is pure, as is its spring in thee;
I mixed it not at all with other fires:
And only on thy Zealous Piety
I feast the Hunger of my chaste Desires:
I am a stranger here, and hither come
On Loves deer business from my British Home.
121.
But in this Land of Holiness I meet
Such deer Remembrances of Heaven, that I
Desire my native Albion to forget,
And where my Savior did, both live and die.
Me thinks I here am nearest Him, who is
Whither I live or die, mine only Bliss.
122.
Yet some Acquaintance and Companion I
Would gladly gain, with whom my foul might live
In holy freindships sweet society,
And mutual Heats of Zeal from Him receive.
Heaven puts you in my way, and if you be
What you appear, you will be kind to Me.
123.
This said: sometimes to Him her pleading Eye,
Sometimes to Heaven She turned; and by that mute
But most mysterious Importunity,
Solicited her earnest bashful suit;
Urging by this her yielding silence, more
Strong Arguments than she had spoke before.
124.
Moved with her soft Expressions, and her Tears,
(For these flowed out as thick, and sweet as they,)
The Man gives credit unto both, and cheers
His clowded Looks, and cries, O happy Day
Which have discovered unto Me a Breast
Of Heavens pure dove the chaste unspotted Nest.
125.
Pardon dear Stranger, pardon my Mistake,
And be no longer in that Name to me.
What recompense I can, I vow to make
To thy misprised slandered Piety.
I at thy bounteous Offer catch, and will
Both thy Desire, and mine own Joys fulfill.
126.
Rare are those friends, as Birds of Paradise,
In this unworthy world but seldom seen,
Whose Hearts in one no other Cement ties
But heavenly Zeal and Love: and had I been
As good, as I am vile, thy Offer were
Worthy to be unto my Soul most deer.
127.
If by the royal Law of our great Lord,
Precious in our esteem our Foes must be;
O what Embraces must We then afford
To them who Us out vie in Charity!
Come gentle Soul, and this chaste Token take,
That to thy Wish my heart I pliant make.
128.
Here by an Holy Kiss (for that of old
The Symbol was of Christian Consent,)
He seal d his Words; then reverently took hold
Of her right Hand, and down the Mountain went,
Leading Her to his Dwelling; whither she
Went cheerly on, fearing no Treachery.
129.
Into the Vulturs Nest thus slies the Dove;
Thus to the smiling Shelfs the Ship does run;
The stranger thus to the enchanted Grove
Goes for delight; Thus to the fatal Den
Of the fair tongued Hyoena skips the Lamb;
The Child thus leaps into the playing flame,
130.
Come to his House; (...),
Authades, (for his Name
Was so) pray's Psyche not to take it ill,
That since she in a busy season came,
His sacred Office He did first fulfill,
Before on her He waited: But, said He,
The work, though great, will soon dispatched be,
131.
In his eighth journey Phoebus now did run
Since his firstborn Authades did enjoy,
Who by the rule of his Religion
Was bound to circumcise the Child that Day;
Which with a consecrated knife of stone
He did, and gave his own name to his Son.
132.
The Infants Wound, the softer heart did slay
Of Psyche, who strait wrep'd, and knocked her breast,
And then with indignation turned away.
But cunning He perceiving how his Guest
Dis-rellished her welcome, to her stepped,
And, (...) first, demanded why she weep'd.
133.
In sullen silence she made her Reply,
Composed of Frowns, and of complete disdain;
Till forced by his mild Importunity,
She gave her angry Tongue a liberal Rein:
Shame on my credulous Love, which thus, said she,
Bewithc'd me to the Den of Heresy.
134.
Are you the Man who crouched to the Place
Of Jesu's Cross, and him, your Lord, did call?
How come you now to wear a Jewish face,
And with your Circumcision tool, cut all
Your Christian Mask in pieces? Blind were I
As was your zeal. could I this crime not spy.
135.
Had you Believed that Jesu's blood was shed
To wash the stains of all the World away,
Your cruel; Heresy had not made red
Your Infant in his needles blood to day;
Who had been purer had you washed Him
In a much gentler flood, pure Baptisms stream.
136.
I see what reason my wise Guardian had
To be so jealous of my staying here;
Why He so solemnly appeared sad
When I was merry, and refused to fear;
He knew black Satan would himself array
In heavenly purity Me to betray.
137.
Here she was flinging out. But fawning He
By the great Cross of Christ, and geater Name,
Prayed, and conjured her pious Charity
His unexpected action not to blame,
But to defer her Censure, and to hear
With patience how He could his cause declare.
138.
Such power had that reverend contestation
On Psyche's tender heart, that she relents:
When (...) He, after long Commendation
Of her soft candor, tells Her He repents
That He his Declaration did not make
Ever He that solemn work did undertake.
139.
Then to a private Chamber Her He brought,
That no Disturbance might his ends prevent;
And by all Ceremonious service sought
To entertain her thoughts with kind content:
For on a silken Couch, when she was set,
With softer language, thus He began the feat.
140.
Sure now, dear stranger, thou art quit with me,
And have repaid me in my proper Coin:
I for (...) Instrument suspected thee,
Thou for an Heretic do me define:
But I recanted; and if thou do so,
Quit on the other side We may be too.
141.
If headlong jealousye for proof should pass,
What thing so perilo us were as Innocence?
What must we think of our great Saviors Case,
Who for a Devil slandered was? and whence
Shall We acquit his Wise Apostles, who
In the fond Worlds esteem for fools did go?
142.
Thou prov'dst not what my sudden fear did speak,
Nor am I such as thine did me present:
Truth can her self clear and transparent make,
And never failed to yield compieat content
To those whom Prejudicies poison had
Not first envenomed, and partial made.
143.
Know then, that I am one of those whose breasts
Are consecrated to that Lord whom thou
Alone adorest, and permit no Guests
To thrust in thither, who will not allow
That gentle Sovereign to domineer,
And reign without all contradiction there.
144.
That poor comtemptuous place, whence glorious He
Vouchaf'd to take his surname, is the same
Whence (...) his humility,
Our Common Title We his followers frame:
Too high for Us the Style of Chrastian is,
Plain Nazareen our Ambition does suffice.
145.
Unto the Dictates of his royal Law
With universal Meekness we submit:
Whilst others but by halfes will deign to bow,
As Makers they, not Subjects were to it:
All hard and costly Precepts, they refuse,
And leave that Burden for the slavish Jews.
146.
They tell the World how they a Patent have
Writ in the Style of Christian Liberty,
By which Heavens King to Them Commission gave
To break the Bonds of Legal Slavery:
And a wise King the while they make Him, who
Allows them, what his Law forbids, to do.
147.
And is not this a brave Religion, where
There is no room for any Charge or Pains?
Cunning and thrifty its Profeslors are,
Who in their own Hands moderate the Reins
Which on their Necks should lie; who as they please,
Dispose their Discipline to their own Ease.
148.
And yet 'twere well, would they their Charter show
Which makes them Free States, and vouchsafe but to
Declare what in the new-deliver'd Law
Does cross and disannull the old; that so
The World might Satisfaction gain, and we
Be made Partakers of their Liberty.
149.
For we know no such Thing: But this we know
That Jesus who is Author of the New,
Was Institutor of the ancient Law
And upon Sina's Head his Trumpet blew
To wake the World, and warn it to give ear
Unto the Precepts which he thundered there.
150.
And did he then Retract, what he before
Oreained had? Was Circumcision then
Commanded to be exercised no more
Upon the tender Infant-Sons of Men?
O no such Changings inconsistent be
With a wise Gods Immutability.
151.
Like his own Self his Laws eternal are,
And need no Reformation or Corrections:
Our inconsiderane Lawgivers here
Infect their Laws with their own Imperfections,
And both may mended be: But surely it is
Proud Blasphemy to say so of Him, or His.
152.
But his Example is full Explication
Of his own Laws: And what did righteous He
When fitted by his blessed Incarnation
He could, like Us, to them a Subject be?
Did not he set the Seal of his own Blood
To Circumcision, that this Law was good?
153.
His Presentation in the Temple shows
His clear submission to the Law which there
Professed was: Nor did he ever refuse
To solemnize the Festivals which were
Legaly Sacred; or, when he drew near
His End, forget to keep the Passover.
154.
Let others cast the blustering scare-crowe Name
Of Heresy upon our genuine Zeal;
We trust we never shall repute it shame
To tread His Steps to whom we all appeal
As to our only King: and surely he
Cannot but own those who his Followers be.
155.
The Gospel Laws Weequaly Embrace:
And though my Son I Circumcised, yet
I cut him not off from Baptismal Grace,
For in that Laver we our Children wet,
That in this double Sacramental Stream
Of Blood and Water, they to Christ may swim.
156.
We grant, that where the Circumcision (...)
Blusheth not to oppose and useless make
That venerable World-redeeming Blood
Which from the precious Veins of Jesus brake,
The Sacrament's Heretical: But we
Teach it more meek and mannerly to be.
157.
If now we of too Much Obedience seem
Guilty to thee, Convince Us of our Sin:
It Is plain thou have an hopeful pleasant Theme,
And easily upon our Hearts may win,
If Truth fight with Thee: for what Man is he
Who by just License would not conquered be?
158.
He ceased here. But as the loathing Vine,
Though in the Colewort she can plainly read
No hostile Quality, does yet decline
Her Touch, and any (...) Shrub or Weed
Will rather hug with all her Arms, then by
The least Embrace approve that Company.
159.
So Psyche, though she could not easily show
The venom of Authade's Sophistric;
Yet could her heart not possibly allow
What she could not confute: Much rather she
Would with fell Adders hisses fall in love,
Than the intent of his discourse approve.
160.
For Discontent still gathered up her Brow,
Still nauseous neglect streamed from her eye,
Still on her Guardians Words she thought; and now
The Serpent had his Poisnous suauity
Displayed, and his enchantment finished,
She waved her Hand, and turned aside her head.
161.
But Logos (who, with Thelema did lie
Close in her breast,) pricked up his ready ear,
And drunk in all the gorgeous fallacy
With such Delight, that He could not forbeat
Now Psyche seemed unsatisfied, to break
His itching mind; and thus He freely spoke.
162.
Madame, although the Jewish law to you
Expired seems, yet that of Courtesy
To be even yet in date you will allow,
And why must then your looks transgressors be?
Why with such Glances of Disdain must they
Your gentle entertainment here repay?
163.
For my part, if I ever understood
What firmper spicuous Probations meant,
What Reasons solid were, what Topics good,
What Demonstrations sound; I must consent
That he of none but such Materials here
The Fabric of his strong Discourse did rear.
164.
And, let me tell you, Reason is a Law
High and divine, engraved in every breast,
Which must no Change nor Antiquation know;
A Law, which whosoever dares resist
Rebels against Himself, whom He stamps under
His obstinate feet, and nature tears in sunder.
165.
O strive not then to be more Wise, than what
Is Wisdoms only Rule: Aathades now
By Reasons genuine Luster shows you that
He walks in High-noon light; and why will you
Be groaping still in Darkness, when you may
By his fair Pharu's Conduct sail to Day?
166.
Psyche stung by this Check began to groan:
When lo her Thelema took Courage, and
With a resolved Countenance fastened on
Logos his shoulders her imperious hand;
Which shak'd him from his boldness into fear,
And summond to her Words his humbler Ear.
167.
Pert sir, said she, does it to you belong
To hold the golden Reins of Psyche's heart?
That thus you stretch your Magisterial tongue
Usurping what would better suit my part:
Y' had best e'n take her Throne, and make both Me
And Her wait on your upstart Majesty.
168.
Though His soft Words tickle your wanton ear,
We use not to such easy Charms to yield;
Both Psyche's stomach is too weak to bear,
And so is mine, his gilded Dose, though filled
With sugared Blandishments. Yet ask not why
It is enough for us, but to deny.
169.
Authades seeing how his dainty bait
Disgusted was, to heaven lift up his eye,
And cried, Alas, that dangerous Deceit
Should be suspected in Truths arms to lie.
Yet Psyche, I do not disprove thy fear;
Always the wisest Souls most jealous are.
170.
And this thy pious jeulousie to me
So precious is, that it inflames my heart
With higher estimation of thee
Who in Faiths Business thus tender art:
Those who with headlong have such points receive.
To me seem but to fancy, not believe.
171.
I grant 'twas thy unhappines, that thou
Meet'st with so faint a Disputant as I:
And sure our Cause were weak if it could show
No better Pillars of its Verity
Than my Abilities, which I confess
Are full as feeble, as that solid is.
172.
Yet why should Truth for my unworthy sake
Fail to find welcome in thy precious Breast?
Why should thou pay so dearly for my lack
Of Eloquence or Logic, as to rest
In that unhappy Ignorance content,
Which though I cannot help, I must lament.
173.
That Word broke open the Fountains of his Eyes,
Which in deceitful Pity flowed down.
Yet knocking then his crafty Breast, He cries,
Why should I think just Heaven on you has thrown
The punishment of this my Weakness? and
Because I Am Dull, not let Thee understand?
174.
O no! would thou but deign to walk with Me
To a Friends house not far from hence; Thou there
The Looks of living Piety should see;
And from an Oracle Resolutions hear:
If Thou repent Thee of thy Pains, I am
Content for ever to endure thy Blame.
175.
This pressed Kindness, She who gentle was,
Knew not how to reject; and therefore goes
With her fair-tongu'd Companion: Alas
That facill Hearts should to themselves be Foes
When others they with Facilnes befriend!
That plyant Twigs should break because they bend!
176.
But at the house, they at his Prayers find
A Man whom Age had covered with Snow:
Yet noble Fervor in his pious mind
With more than youthful Vigor seemed to glow:
So strong was his Devotion, and so high
In all Espressions of Loves Bravery.
177.
Authades at his Back straight kneeled down;
And so did Psyche, much amazed to see
How far that old Devoto had out-flown
The flagging Pitch of her young Piety.
Such flaming Prayers she never heard before,
Nor such importunate Knocks at Heavens high Door
178.
She often looked that the Spears should open,
And to the longing Saint his Lord disclose;
She wondered that his Body flew not up
Seeing his Soul on such stout Pinions rose;
But most she marvell'd that his working Heart
Stretching so high, did not in sunder start.
179.
With secret Checks her languid Soul she chid
Which with such violence never yet did flame;
Her Eyes hung down; her Cheeks were overspread
With blushing (but with o how guiltless!) shame:
Nor ravish^d less was Thelema, who till now
No Good would in the Nazareens allow.
180.
O Looks, and Outside Things, how mighty are
And how substantial your Impostures, on
Unhappy Mortals, who their Judgment square
By Ear and Eye, and those vain Rules alone
They borrow from the Senses Schole, wherein
How many Beasts more learned are than Men!
181.
False Saint.
Pseudagius now three times his Head did bow
In humble Adoration, and arose
Up from the ground. Which when Authades saw,
He forward stepped, his business to disclose.
But Psyche plucked him by the Arm, and told
Him, forher sake He need not be so bold.
182.
Pardon Me Sir, said she; for now my Mind
Convinced by heavenly Satisfaction is;
In him I such commanding Goodness find,
That, though I would, yet I cannot do less
Than stoop to that Profession which he
Has authorized by such high Piety.
183.
The height of my Desires, (if yet it be
Not Pride to reach at such transcendent Bliss,)
Is, that I with his leave advanced may be
To his religious Acquaintance: This
Perhaps may Me enable to repay
The Debt your Love has laid on Me to day.
184.
Authades glad and proud that he had thus
This Conquest gained, bad her be secure:
Then bowing down before Pseudagius,
Regard, most holy Sir, said he, the pure
And pious Suit of a religious Maid,
Which modest she upon my Tongue has laid.
185.
Heavens Love has kindled in her pliant Breast
Full Approbation of whatever she
Beholds amongst Us Nazareens professed;
And now our Proselyte she resolves to be:
Only she beggs that you would not disdain
Her as you humble Friend to entertain.
186.
His solemn Eye to Heaven Pseudagius cast.
And cried, Forbid it blessed Jesu, I
Should not be kind to Any whom Thou past
With thine own Favor deigned to dignifie:
It Is Condescent indeed in Thee; but how
Can I thy Worm stoop, who crawl here below?
187.
This said; with reverend Pleasantnes He came
And grave Acquaintance took with Psyche's Lipp;
She bigg with humble Thanks, cried out, who am
Unworthy I, such holy Sweets to sipp!
Had Thou vouchsafed Me but thy Feet to Kiss,
That favor I had hugged as my Bliss.
188.
Thus cheated She, did her Mishap admire,
As does the silly fly the beauteous Flame;
Little surmising what outrageous Fire
Reigned in that Bait which looked so mild and tame:
Never did she stand on such a Brink as this,
And never feared less a Precipice.
189.
Pseudagius, whose faire-faced Piety
Complete possession of her Heart had wonn,
Now exercised his full Tyranny
Upon his tender yiedling Prey; and soon
Infused his Poisons with such holy Art,
That their Contagion ruled in every Part.
190.
Satan who lurked in Ambush to epsy
How his Design would take; rejoiced to see
That Psyche by this moderate Heresy
So easily charmed was; for crafty He
When but a little Leaven was cast in,
Had often the tainting of the whole Lump seen.
191.
He knew a little Gap, might quickly turn
A mighty Chasm: He knew one Spark might thrive
Into a full-grown Flame, and serve to burn
The strongest Fort: He knew one Wheel might drive
A thousand more; He knew a careless Slip
Might cause a Fall, as well's a desperate Skip.
192.
He knew that they who once a foot had set
In Errors Labrynth, would easily be
Allured further to proceed in it
By their own tickling (...);
He knew they soon might fall in love with Night
Whose Eyes once turned from Truths meridian Light.
193.
But yet to make all sure, he Logos filled
With foolish Pride, and Confidence, since He
Saw Thelema, and Psyche forced to yield
At last, to what He did at first agree;
And They abashed with unhappy shame,
His domineering Carriage durst not blame.
194.
By this unbrideled Insolence he grew
So vain and careless in his Work, that he
Presumed far more than all the World be knew
In Truths judicious Discovery.
Thus foolish Dreamers think they view the skies,
When duskie Sleep has sealed up their Eyes.
195.
For as one Morning Psyche walked out
Intending for her Saviors Sepulcher;
Full in her way the watchful Tempter brought
One who no common Mortal did appear:
Grave was his Garb, but graver far his Look,
And him for some deep-learned Man she took.
196.
Capricious Logos could not rest content
Till he had sounded what the Man could say;
Big with a spruce and eloquent Complement,
He brings it forth, and lays it in his way,
Bo wing down to the ground with it; which done,
(...)
Agyrtes stayed, and Logos thus went on:
197.
Sir, if your Head unto your Looks be true,
It is of Knowledge a vast Treasury;
And those Spiritual Riches never knew
What Loss or Diminution meant, when by
A liberal Impartment they were thrown
To others Breasts, yet not plucked from their (...).
198.
For though his radiant Largise on the Moon
And every Star, and all the World beside
He pours out; yet still the copious Sun
Does in his undiminish'd Glory ride.
Although a thousand Channels it does fill,
The teeming Fountain lives in Fullness still.
199.
A portion of your Streams, and of your Light,
Is that We beg; not to impoverish you,
But to enrich our Selves: Our ignorant Night
To knowing Day may by your Influence grow;
Our arid barren Intellect may be
By your Effusions taught Fertility.
200.
That natural Desire which did inflame
Your Industry to reach at Knowledge, is
Common to Us; nor will your Wisdom blame
Our free and bold Obedience unto this
Potent Instinct, by following which, you have
Attained that Blessing which of you We crave.
201.
When by a grave and graceful Pawse, the Man
More reverence had won, with friendly Eye
He first their Welcome looked: then thus began
To speak it out: Though Silence suits with my
Devout Profession, more than Words, yet now
To Courtesies strong Law my Tongue must bow,
202.
If I to strangers should not Kindness show,
I should affront that Lord who owned Me
A stranger unto Him. Yet please to know
That I profess not by my Industry
To have arived unto any pitch
In that wherein you take Me to be rich,
203.
Alas, Agyrtes had as sottish been
As is the vilest he that sees the light,
Had Heavens sweet Rays not deignd to interveen
Between my Heart, and Ignorances Night.
But Jesus who is King of Love, as well
As Wisdom, pleased with both my Breast to fill.
204.
Yet this no other Wisdom is, then what
Concerns Him, and his Heaven, wherefore if you
For any other look from me, but that,
You must go seek where Vanity does grow.
That, that, or none, sweet Sir, said Psyche; We
Would only in Heavens Wisdom learned be.
205.
This yiedling Answer made Him smile within,
And promise to his proud Heart, Victory:
Yet to make sure, and grace, his holy Sin,
To Heaven he turned his hell-directed Eye,
And lifting up his Hands, seemed thence to take
The Copy of what now he meant to speak.
206.
With that, upon the ready Grass, which there
Offered its gentle service, they sat down.
Then thus Agyrtes: Though you Strangers are,
Your holy Wish, thus far has made you known,
That I perceive you are not yet to be
Informed there is a Christ, and Piety.
207.
But as the noblest Things beseiged are
With greatest Difficulties, so is this:
Religion, and Truth yet never were
Enthroned so high, but saucie Wickedness
Would muster Errors round about them, and
Before their face in flat Defiance stand.
208.
Yet, if in great Cerinthu's Schole you were
Ever a Candidate, I need not strive
To open my Bottles to your Thirst, who there
All Fulness from the Fountain did receive.
My Schole, cried Psyche, gentle Sir, alas,
Only in blind and barbarous Albion was.
209.
Know then, said He, that when Heaven planted had
Its blessed Gospel in our World below,
Ten thousand Weeds a conjuration made
To choke it when it first began to grow;
The Blade no sooner peeped forth, but there
These poisonous Tyrants strait did domineer
210.
And surely all the Harvest Hopes had been
Slain in their Birth had Jesus tender Care
Into his Field not sent Cerinthus: Sin
The Crop even in the Spring began to shear,
And Truth her infant Head sought where to hide;
So rampant Error was, and spread so wide.
211.
But this brave Gardner with his prudent Hook
Cut those Intruders down, and cleerd the ground;
The Churches Soil strait like it self did look,
And reskew'd Truth full room to flourish found,
The mystic (...) began to be
From the insidious Serpents Dangers free.
212.
The reverend Law whose flaming Majesty
Flashed from Sina, now brake out again;
And chasing all licentious Mists, which by
Heretik Sloth had gained Religions Rein,
Mingled its Luster with the Gospels Ray,
And doubled fair Truths most unspotted Day.
213.
Blind Ignorance was grown so bold, that she
Sought to persuade the World it had no Eyes;
Making the Lazy Name of Mystery,
In stead of Demonstration suffice.
From this black Pit those monstrous Prodigies
Of hood-winked, and abused Faith did rise.
214.
Who can imagine Heaven would ever obtrude
Upon the Faith of Reasonable Men,
That which against all Reason does conclude,
And founded is on Contradiction?
Sure God so strange a Law did never give,
That Men must not be Men, if they Believe,
215.
No, 'twas not God, but Man, who made that Law,
And by enacting it, usurped more
Than God-like Power on those he won to bow
Their Superstitious Necks to this new Lore,
By which to brutish Sottishness they are
Enslaved, who free by Christian Title were.
216.
It Is not enough, forsooth, that We believe
Mary the Mother was to Jesus; but
Into the bargain too We must receive
That she a Virgin still remained. And what
More ready Way, her Sons Birth to deny,
Than by continuing her Virginity?
217.
If she a Mother be, she must be so
But if a Virgin, she a Virgin is:
And he that can in One tie up these (...)
May reconcile the Poles into a Kiss
May Midnight in the face of (...) throw,
May cement in one Center I and No,
218.
Yet well it were, had Mary been alone
The subject of this holy Nonsense; But
With greater impudence upon her Son
It ventured, and madly forging what
All Rational Creatures cannot but Detest,
This, as the sacred Rule of Faith professed.
219.
For though the Marvell-mongers grant that He
Was molded up but of a Mortal Metal,
And that his Substance was the same which we
Find in our Selves to be so weak and (...):
Yet an eternal God they make Him too,
And angry are that We will not do (...)
220.
( Thus the quaint Madnesie of a dreaming Brain
Holds the same Thing a Mountain, and a Mite;
Fancies the Sun, Lights royal Sovereign,
To look like swarthy, and ignoble Night;
Imagines wretched Worms, although it see
Them crawl in Dirt, illustrious Kings to be.)
221.
But Heaven forbid, that we should so (...)
And think our God as poor a Thing as We
How can Eternity be born in Time
How can Infinitude a Baby be?
Or how can Heaven and Earths almighty Lord
To Egypt fly for rear of Herod's Sword
222.
Can He be hungry who does All Things feed?
Can it become the King of Joy to weep?
Can He the God of Spirits, refreshment need?
Can He who is all Eye, ever fall asleep?
Can Man, the Prince of Power Crucify?
Can He, Life's everlasting Fountain, die?
223.
Such Gods as these indeed were Jupiter,
Mars, Saturn, Neptune, Mercury, Apollo,
And all that Rout to whom the Pagans rear
Their cursed Altars: And must we go follow
Such goodly Leaders, and our Pleasure take
Religion worse than Atheism to make?
224.
Sure God is much beholden unto them
Whose glorious Faith has been so careful to
Heap all those vile Indignities on Him
Which they Themselves abhor to undergo.
If God be such a wretched Thing, no more
Will I, (and it is no proud Word) Him adore.
225.
But He is as Impassible as They
Would make him weak and poor: He cannot bow
To yield his high almighty Self a Prey
To our Infirmities who crawl below:
His super-glorious most refined Nature
As far from Suffering is, as from a Creature.
226.
I know they strive to mince the Matter by
Distinguishing His Natures; for their Art
Being ashamed of no Absurdity,
Himself from his own Self presumes to part.
Yet we durst not admit a Deity,
Which must on a Distinction builded be.
227.
But how much more than mad their (...) (...)
And how transcending Pagan Blasphemy,
Who not content to make a God of this
Both (...), and mortal Jesus; try
To thrust him into one Substantial Knot
With his eternal Sire who him begot!
228.
Two, yet not Two, but One these Two must be,
Nay and a Third into the Knot they bring;
The Spirit must come in to make up Three,
And yet tnese Three be but One single Thing.
Thus fast and loose they play, or even and oda,
And we a juggling Trick must have for God
229.
If God be One; then let him be so still:
Why jumble We We know not what together?
Did all the World not know their God, until
This old Blind Age discovered Him? Did neither
The Patriarks Believe, nor Prophets See
Aright, because they took not One for Three?
230.
I and my Brethren are full well content
TO aspire unto no other Paradise
Than that to which those Holy Hero's went,
Whose Faith knew no such curious Prodigies.
No; Faith's a grave and sober Maid, and she
Loves neither Quirk, nor Trick, nor Forgerie.
231.
Let Love and Duty make of Christ as high
And glorious a Thing as Wit can reach,
Provided that against the Deity
No injury nor Sacrilege they preach;
If only on such Terms He loved may be,
Him to neglect is Piety, say We.
232.
But We neglect him not, who merits more
Of Us, than all our Reverence can pay:
Our Necks we bow unto his gentle Lore,
And his Commands ambitiously obey:
Love is his blessed Law; and hated be
Those who contemn so sweet a Lord as He.
233.
You see how freely our Profession We
Impart to Strangers; being confident
That honest Truth can never shamed be.
Yet whether you will bow down your consent
Unto our Doctrines, I uncertain am;
And therefore will no further lavish them.
234.
For if your Faith relies on Men, who are
Themselves but founded and built up of Dust;
If you by Reasons Rule disdain to square
Your Piety, and take your God on Trust,
(Which Heaven forbid;) you only are a Prize
Unto Imposters fair-tongu'd Fallacies.
235.
He ceased here. When Logos louting low
His fawning head to Psyche, gave her Joy
That she had met so grave a Doctor now,
Whose radiant Knowledge might light her the way
To genaine Truth through those thick Foggs which here
Make dim and black Religions Hemisphear.
236.
And take good heed said He, sweet Madame, that
You serve Him not as you Authades did:
O what substantial Arguments, and what
Religious Motives has he mustered
In this concise Discourse, whose depth might well
Be owned by the holiest Oracle.
237.
Psyche, whose tender Heart not long ago
Would have abhorr' d this venomous Language more
Than does the Lamb the Wolf, or Lion, who
Nothing but barbarous Death to it does roar;
Had now forgot her pious jealous fear,
And knew not what it meant to be aware,
238.
Haeretick Poison she already had
Sucked from Authades; which no sooner wun
Her fond Hearts Approbation, but it made
An open Chanel for more streams to run
Into Her Bosom: Thus an Army by
One little Breach poures in its Victory.
239.
She yields to swallow the Cerinthian Bait,
And thanks unto her Murderer strives to pay.
Dear Sir, said she, your solid Reasons Weight
Does on my Heart such sound Persuasion lay,
That needs it must submit, and study how
To be for ever grateful unto you.
240.
Scarce had she spoke, but lo her Doctor who
Espied Phylax flying thither, took
His hasty leave; but passed his Promise to
Meet her again, and bad her for him look
The next day there: Alas the Cheater was
Afraid the Angel might his Frand uncase.
241.
But as away he sneaked; Psyches' Friend
More swift than flies the Eagle to her Prey,
The whining Air with sprightfull Wings did rend,
And shot himself through the directest way
To his dear Charge, for whom his Heart did quake,
As knowing well what Tempests hers did shake.
242.
For by Loves faithful Sympathy (though he
About his other work far distant were,)
He still preserved a soft Vicinitie
With Psyche's Soul, and felt each wound which there
Sophistick Darts had made, though foolish she
Perceived not her sugered Misery.
243.
At his approach, for joy the Virgin wept,
Not thinking that those tears to shame were due.
Syneidesis still in her bosom slept,
And her unto her self forbore to show:
She to her own Breast was more stranger than
The Tartar to the Ethiopian.
244.
But Phylax almost out of breath for have,
Sucked in fresh spirits, and then demanded who
It was that gathered up his heels so fast,
And fled from his approach: If he had no
Cause of his flight, but me, it is meet that I,
Said he, suspect him for you Enemy.
245.
No sure, replied Psyche; for nor I
Nor Logos could discover ought but love:
He freely taught Us many a verity,
And what he undertook, did clearly prove.
Some sudden business snatched him hence, not fear
Of you, whom doubtless He does hold most dear.
246.
Phylax, who knew Him and Authades too,
The total matter gently sifted out,
And wrought upon his Pupils softnes so
That his design He subtly brought about;
For full confession from her charmed tongue
Of both her Doctors Principles he wrung.
247.
But then He groand, and smote his pitying Breast,
And fixed upon Hers his speaking eye,
By which the mixed language He expressed
Of Love and Wrath, of Hope, and Jealousy;
And by this Prologue setting open the door,
He from his Lips his troubled Mind did pour:
248.
Left I my charge, o Psyche, to the Wind,
When hence I took my journey, or to thee?
If in my dearest Cabinet, thy Mind,
I my advice deposed, why must it be
That the weak breath of any Charmer Thou
Do meet, that holy Pawn away may blow?
249.
My heart mis-gave me, when away I went,
Or rather when with thine I left it here;
Full well thou know what earnest pains I spent
To arm thy tender Soul with sacred fear:
O why, with foolish confidence would thou
Disarm thy self, and make room for the blow?
250.
That blow, which struck so deep into thy breast,
That if some sovereign Balsame makes not speed;
If strait thy wounded Bosom be not dressed;
If Heaven be not as quick, new life to shed
Into thy Soul, as Hell was to betray
It unto Death, this is thy fatal Day.
251.
Alas those Doctrines only Poisons were
Squeezed from the dregs of the infernal Pit;
Less Pestilential those Venoms are
Which desperate Basilisks and Vipers spit:
Nor Aphrodisiu's, nor Agenor's tongue
With such sure bane thy careless Bosom stung.
252.
Can thou o Psyche thus thy Lord repay
For all the Treasures of his Love which He
Into thy poor heart poured day by day?
Can thou rob Jesus of his Deity,
And tear Him from his Throne, whilst royal He
His heavenly Kingdom does prepare for thee?
253.
Pert Logos here no longer Patience had,
But setting up his insolent crest, he cried,
Good sir, and take you me for one so mad,
That in my proper road I cannot ride,
But both my Self and Way, I needs must loose,
And willingly deep Precipies choose?
254.
If Eyes of Colors sober Judges be;
If Tongues can censure what is sour and sweet;
If Ears can Discords know from Harmony;
If Touching may decide in Cold and Heat;
Why may not I presume that I am set
In Reasons Chair, and know the Powers of it?
255.
Unless I to my Essence give the Lie,
These Doctrines sure are built on Demonstration:
But if you only must be Psyche's eye,
Even pull me out, that I no perturbation
Thus in the way of your designs may throw;
So in your Conquest you complete shall grow.
256.
Psyche was glad to hear this Challenge beat
So high, and hoped that Phylax would relent:
And were Angelick Loves Heroic Heat
Less resolute than it is, just discontent
Had quenched Phyla'x flames, which now by this
Bold opposition did more stoutly rise.
257.
With secret instance he did Charis draw
Down from her Heaven, to join her Powers with his:
She, when the Virgins wounded Heart she saw,
Melted with Pity at her deep Distress;
And by victorious Sweetness opened a way
Into her Breast, and Thelema made her Prey.
258.
Which Phylax seeing: Logos strives in vain
Said He, to countermine my care of Thee:
Greater Affronts than these I can sustain,
Rather than Psyche should destroyed be.
All this, and more, I will forget, so Thou Will go, and see a Sight I have to show,
259.
Logos looked bigg, and struggled might and main;
But Thelema was tractable and tame,
And the bold Rebel quickly did constrain
Unto her pliant Mind his own to frame,
Poor Psyche sighed and wept, and half afraid,
Phylax with her to do his pleasure prayed.
260.
He well considering her Disease had need
Of nothing more than Haste in her Physician,
Staid not to parle, but made all loving speed
To snatch her from these Jaws of deep Perdition,
Whilst yet with Chari's soule-subduing Heat
Her melted and convicted Heart did beat.
261.
Ready at hand his well-known Chariot was,
In which he takes her up, and guides the Rein;
Forth with the sprightfull Steeds flung on apace
Through the fair Road of the aereal Plain,
Till they to Gitton in Samaria came,
Their journeyes Butt, where Phylax checked Them.
262.
Then lighting down, Come Psyche, come, said he,
This is thy newfound Doctors native Town;
Here thou their true Original shall see,
And from what kind of Nest they all are flown.
This House their Fathers was: Come we will in,
And view the Birthplace of Heretic Sin.
263.
Thus entered They: When lo the House they find
So full of Doors, and Rooms, and Galleries,
Which by quaint Turnings to and fro did wind,
That Psyche quickly lost her rouling Eyes,
As she had done her Se fe, had Phylax not
Of all the Labyrinth full knowledge got.
264.
Thorough a thousand strange Meanders He
Into a private Room conducted her
Where she a far more private Door did see,
But little thought what kind of Den was there
Lurking behind it, so alluring was
The holy Beauty of its cheating Face.
265.
A goodly Crucifix was there displayed,
Altars were reared, and many Bibles open,
By which majestic Liturgies were laid,
With lofty-tuned Anthems; on the Top
Art placed a Quire of Angels hovering,
And made the gorgeous Roof all seem to sing.
266.
There might you see Faith, with her Eagles Eye;
Hope with both Hands her Anchor holding fast;
And with her open Bosom, Charity;
Whose Looks such seeming current Beams did cast,
That those who were not well aware, might deem
She at Heavens genuine Fires had kindled them.
267.
With these; Religion stood, Zeal, Piety
Devotion, Meekness, Patience, Gentleness,
And whatsoever might advantageous be
The brave Imposture gallantly to dress:
Baits which might easily work a greater feat,
Then Psyche s soft Simplicity to cheat.
268.
What credit thou to these fair Looks may give,
Said Phylax, Thou shall see when I have shown
What monstrous Ouglinesse these Porters strive
To countenance: With that he bent his Frown
On the enchanting Company, and they
To his imperious Anger straight gave way.
269.
Aside They started; and so did the Door;
When lo an horrid Cave appeared beneath,
Which forth a Stream of (...) and Stink did pour,
Amazing Psyche with its dismal Breath;
Deep was the Pit, and full of darkest Fright,
Seeming the Bed chamber of sullen Night.
270.
But Phylax shot from his illustrious Fie
Such potent lightning as brake through that Cloud;
When lo about the Caverns sides, a Fry
Of frighted Toads into their Holes did crowd;
And thousand Spiders at the Sight aghast,
Into the centres of their Webbs made haste.
271.
But o what Man's, or Muses Tongue can tell
The other Monsters which were hissing there!
Huge Snakes, fierce Vipers, angry Adders, fell
And fiery Hydra's all discovered were,
With Cockatrices, Scorpions, Dragons, and
Of (...) Chimaera's a full marshalled Band.
272.
Yet these all fled before the Angels face,
And in their several Dens loud howling lay:
But He intended for a further place,
And with these lesser Monsters made no stay;
Forward unto another door He goes,
Where far more poisonous things He does disclose.
273.
Glozing Deceits, and handsome Lies stood there,
With gentle meek demure Hypocrisy;
And these in goodly state attended were
By treacherous Rhetoric and Phylosophie;
But their chief train with Syllogisms was filled,
Who in their hands three-forked Halberts held.
274.
Yet all their Might fell flat upon the ground,
And gave the mightier Angel leave to pass,
Who entering by that damned Pontal, found
To such a Porch a correspondent place:
The stinks He met before, pure odours were
To those which reek'd in every corner here.
275.
The Master of the House, grave Simon, who
Wore Magus for his cursed surname, sat
Full in the midst; whose poisned stomach so
Surcharged was with crude-opinions, that
Its pestilential Load which belched and wrought,
Into an ample Boule He spewed out.
276.
This the rude indigested Chaos was
Wherein all Heresies did jumbled lie;
The fertile Womb which their original Place
Did give to every kind of Blasphemy;
The Seed and Matter whence sins foul Creator
Produced every Monstrous-shaped nature.
277.
As smoking in the Boule this Vomit lay,
A Crowd of desperate Men thronged round about,
Whose most accursed thirst did them betray
To covet this foul Draught: The scalding drought
Of the persued Deer breeds less desire
In some cool spring to quench his raging fire.
278.
Menander gat the first Sup; He who by
That cankering liquor so infected grew,
That Simon He out-spit in Heresy,
And higher than his Spewing Father flew;
Much he disdained that God or Man should be
Nobler (at least in's own conceit) than He.
279.
Ceninthus next lapp'd up his share, and then
His hungry Younglings with the venom fed;
Amongst whom Agyrtes sucked his Part, whom when
Psyche beheld, Guilt di'd her Cheeks with red.
But Ebion thrusting in, took off her eye,
He Scriptures Mangler, foe of Purity.
280.
Yet Nicolas, who came next, was worse than He,
And drunk so deep, that of all foulest lust
He turned Professor, and deserved to be Apoc. 2. 7

The hate of God Behind him Elxai thrust,
And bold Jexeus, Brethren no less
In nature, than in lustful Putidness.
281.
Then Saturnine, whose draught so strangely wrought,
That he judgd Purity it self impure;
Chaste Matrimony He abhorred, as fraught
With shameful odiousnes; nor would endure
His lip should blush in any Creatures blood,
All which he held were never made for food.
282.
Yet strait Basilides from the same fount
Contrary poison drunk; All lust was clean,
Yea commendable too in his account.
And the same relish had the liquor in
Carpocrates his Mouth, and Valentins,
The Oracles of all libidinous sins.
283.
From these great Parents came that numerous Spawn
Of most portentous Gnostics, Antitacts,
Ptolemaits, Ophites, Cainites: Monsters known
By the Profession of such shameless Facts
As Hell would blush at; which yet unto them
Truths and Religions Purity did seem
284.
Next these, about the boules brim licking lay
The Nazareens, amongst whose sneaking fire
Were both Pseudagius and Authades; They
Who tainted Psyche with their Heresy.
No sooner she beheld them, but her breast
She smote, and by the stroke her fault confessed.
285.
But after these appeared the Marcosites
Epiphanes, Secundus, Isidore;
Bold Cordonists, and fond Heracleonites
Marcion, Apelles, with blasphemous store
Of their Disciples; Lucan, Luciun,
Photinus, Basiliscus, Hermogen.
286.
Then proud Montanus; with Quintilians,
Ascites, Pepuzians; and Artotyrites,
Priscillians, Pharisaik, Tatians,
Abstemious yet profane Severianites;
Archontiks, Adamites, Quartadecimans,
Fond Alogists, and Melchisedekians.
287.
Tertullianists, Arabiks, Symmachists,
Homousiasts, Elxites, Origenians,
Valesians, and presumptuous Catharists,
Hydroparastates, Patripassians.
Apostoliks, Angeliks, Chiliasts,
Samosatenian Paulianists.
288.
Mad Maniches, outrageous Donatists,
Cursed Arians, Colluthians, Audianites,
Shameless Photinians, Macedonianists,
Acrians, Acacians, Eustathites:
Eunomians, Messalians, Luciferians,
Hypsistarists, Agnoites, Apollinarians.
289.
Timotheans, Seleucians, Collyridians,
New coined Priscillians, with Proclianites:
Foul-mouthed Jovinianists, and black Helvidians;
Bonosians, Campensians, Agapites;
Pelagius, Nestorius, Eutyches,
Accompanied with all their Progenies.
290.
Innumerable more besides were there,
Whose several Poisons Nature Phylax read
Unto his Pupil, though they never were
As yet unto the world discovered:
But as these Petty Vermin She did view,
A mighty Prodigy its dread did show.
291.
Up starta Man of such commanding Look,
That all these awed Suckers gave Him way:
Three times his mighty Head and Locks He shook,
Three times He stooped, and seemed too proud to lay
His lips so low; yet bowing down at length,
Upon the Boule He showed his cursed Strength:
292.
For every Drop of the foul Vomit He
Straight swallowed up, and kicked the Bowl away
When lo the Venomes rampant potencie
Did in the desperate Man it self display;
Both in his eyes, and all about his face,
Insernall Horror freely took its place.
293.
A pair of Horns broke from his fiery Brow,
And from his mouth impatient Blasphemy;
Big with all rancorous Spite his Breast did grow,
His Soul was stretched with arrogant Majesty:
Nor was it wonder that He thus did swell,
Who had engorg'd and drunken was with Hell,
294.
With Mouth wide open He swore aloud that He
Would make the whole World to his pleasure bow;
He threatened all Heavens starrie Braverie
Down from their highest strongest Orbs to draw;
He vowed by his own Head, no God should be
Thenceforth believed, nor adored, but He.
295.
With that, his fists of burning Brass He bent,
And lifted up his more than Dragons Tail,
As if with this Artillery He meant
The Universe's Powers to assail;
Nor was his Insolence in vain, for He
From Heaven it self snatched down his Victory.
296.
From the Euangelick Heaven He boldly drew
Millions of Souls, whom He in sunder tore,
Or with his Breaths most murdering venom slew;
Bellowing his Triumph in a dismal Roar.
Straight the Heretic Fry began to quake,
Simon himself did start, and Psyche shake.
297.
But Phylax to allay her storm of fear,
Told her the Monsters Pride yet knew a Rein,
For mark, said He, He is a prisner here,
And cannot break that Adamantine Chain
Which Him and all his viperous Company
Though at some distance, fast to Hell does tie.
298.
She looked and saw her Guardian told her true:
She saw the Chain, which to a Pit did lead
Whence thich sulphurous eructations flew
And brought up mingled streams of boiling Lead
She frighted at the sight, fled back; but He
What in that Bottom lay, led her to see.
299.
Sheltred by his stout Wings Security,
And by his trusty Word encouraged,
Into the dismal Grott she sent her eye,
Which there a more prodigious Object read
Than She before had seen in the foul Book
Of hideous Antichrists portentous Look
300.
It was that Beldame Hagg from whose black Breast
Simon his rank unweildy Poison drew
Never was fury so completely dressed
In all the Bravery of Horrors hue;
All shapelesse shapes together tumbled were
To make up Shames Extremity in Her.
301.
Two Heads She had, which on her Leg^ did grow
Two faces, and two Mouths, but not one Eye,
Six rows of teeth which constantly did gnaw
All they could of her Carkaise reach: Her Thigh^
From an eternal Sore did poison drop
Into her throat, which thence again spewed up
302.
The Vermin which did all about Her swarn
Young Adders, Slow-worms Toads, and Spiders were,
Two lumps of black flesh hung for either Arm
An hundred Nails upon each hand did tear
Her dangling Duggs and when they weary grew
Them o'r her shoulders to her back they threw
303.
But from her Neck a twisted Tail did sprout
Armed with a thousand forked Stings which she
For her own torture used and round about
Her self its Lashes threw; Her bunched Knee^
Did backward bend; and for her feet below.
Out at her belly Seav'n short Paws did grow
304.
As Psyche trembled at this basefull sight
Behold, said Phylax, and consider well
Whither brisk Logo's judgment were to right.
Who has engaged thy poisned Heart to dwell
In this fine Ladies family. for she
Is Grandame to that monstrous Progeny
305.
Since Thou have made thy choice, and scorned Me
And my Advice; go take thy chosen place
Or in Pseudagius his Company
Or in Agyrte's: Nay do not disgrace
Thy learned Prudence so as to retract
Judicious Logos will not like the fact
306.
Poor Logos heard this Word; which through his Heart
Shot such deep Shame and Grief, that thenceforth He
Resolved never more to trust (...) Art
Where it with Phylax's mind did disagree.
But yet in Psyche's tender Breast, the Wound
More stinging was, more fataly profound.
307.
Prostrate before his face, in silence She
Grappled a while with her outrageous Grief;
But when She saw the woeful Victory
Growing upon her, and found no relief
In her own Soul; She mingles with her Sighs,
Her Declarations, and thus She cries:
308.
Alas, Pseudagiu's or Agyrte's place
Is too too happy and too high for Me
That dreadful Haggs prodigious Embrace
Is more than due to my Apostasy;
I fully have deserved that She should hugg
Me with her Tail, and feed Me with her Dugg
309.
For, Had Pseudagiu's or Agyrte's Heart
Like mine, been by a Phylax fortified,
No Mines nor (...) of Heretic Art
Had won their forts: But I by sottish Pride,
Disdained the potent Help of thy Supply,
And chose on my own Weakness to rely.
310.
I fain would pardon beg; but mighty Shame
Seals up my Mouth, and Guilt beats back my breath,
I fain would invocate His gracious Name
Who gave his Life to rescue Me from Death;
But Horror stifles my Endeavor, who
In spite of Him, to this my Death would go.
311.
But thou sweet Phylax never did displease
His Mighty Majesty, nor force his frown,
Sealed sure on Thee his endless favor is,
And thy Desires He with Success will crown
If Thou wist plead for Me, though not for mine
He will for thy dear Sake his Ear incline
312.
I know my Impudence is high, who dare,
Beg thus much favor of abused Thee;
But thy brave Charity delights to war
Against the most perverse Conspiracy
Or my Demerits; witness its divine
Battle against Agenors Pride and Mine
(...)
(...) from thy (...) I (...)
By hold and traitorous (...)
May I amongst these (...) have my part
Of my already-carned Misery;
And may thy Wing no more for me be (...).
No more thy (...)
314.
(...) her twixt trembling Hop. and (...)
(...) her (...).
(...) the rest by Looks that both his (...)
(...) she might engage. I his (...)
(...) (...) unto the (...) was.
(...) her up and had (...)
(...)
^
And with the illue trust my (...)
Into (...) paths you (...)
Who more (...) Eyes (...) I (...)
^
^
316.
Then by her Hand (...)
And (...) up the (...) by which He (...)
(...) the (...) The (...)
And (...) for joy that (...) was (...) by them;
(...) (...) from their (...) again
(...) after Him, and (...) and (...) (...)
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO XVI. The Antidote.
ARGUMENT.
To purge out that Heretic Bane, which now
Lay rankling in his Pupils cheated Breast,
Phylax Ecclesia's Court to her does show;
Where by Truth's delicate Embrace being blessed,
She soon perceived her Cure, and how the (...)
Of Catholic health in her sound Pulse did (...),
1.
(...) Man, why do thou tread
So proudly on the Worm which crawls (...)
(...) that on thy erected Head
Much more (...) (...) does (...)
Than ever made the (...) (...)
The footstool of Contempt to (...)
(...)
Are not the (...) (...)
Whence Thou do (...)
The foul and only (...) which (...) bring
Forth (...), her (...)
Though Flesh and (...)
^
3.
Sage nature at the Moment of thy Birth
Made Thee Lament, when yet Thou knewst not why,
Being with Pollution tumbled headlong forth
Into the Stage of thy Life's Tragedy,
With full assurance that thou there must be
First vexed, and then stain by Mortality.
4.
The meanest Creature that ever saw the light,
Was richer born, and stronger far than thou;
Completely shiftlesse was thy native Plight,
And did no manner of selfe-succor know:
Naked thou were of every Help beside,
As well's of Clothes thy woeful shame to hide.
5.
With Cares and Fears in thy young Education
Thy troubled Parent traveled again;
Her Bowels yearn'd with as true Perturbation,
As when they stretched with puerperial Pain:
It being but extension of thy Birth,
To Bring thee up, as she had Brought Thee forth.
6.
How cross, how way-ward, and how peevish were
Thy feeble Years, when thou could only fight
With thy rebellious Will, and vex the Care
Of thy deer Nurse with fullen froward Spite!
All other Twigs will freely bend; but Thou
Alone, though young, had rather Break, than Bow.
7.
The Rod drives Thee to Schole, and keeps thee there;
Where thou good Institution do Embrace
Not out of Love, but most ignoble Fear:
So the wild stubborn Coit is taught to pace,
When dreadful A we does force Him to submit
Not to the Rider, but his Whip, and Bit.
8.
But as the Tinder never fails to catch
The smallest Spark, although it certain be
To burn with it: So does thy Madness snatch
At every glistering Sin and Vanity,
And hug it close, although the treacherous Guest
Be sure to kindle Hellfire in thy Breast.
9.
When riper years to manly Acts invite
Thy well-grown Soul, I hou do its Strength employ.
In the soft trade of amorous Delight,
Of bitter Sweets, of delicate Annoy,
Of fawning Rhymes, of witty Fooleries,
Of dainty Perjuries, of smiling Lies.
10.
To Sheers and Needle Thou thy Self enslavest
And at the mercy art of each new Cut,
And upstart Garb: Yet when thou in thy bravest
Some most belaced Servitude do strut,
Some newer Fashion does usurp, and thou
Unto its antic Yoke durst not but bow.
11.
Thus through a thousand Shapes thou art content
To crowd thy Self, Her favor to obtain
Who is as Various as the Complement
Of thine uncertain Fashions; every plain
And right-down (...) thou shunst, and so does she;
Thy Body and Her Mind still changing be.
12.
Yet thou inshrin'st in thy devoted Breast
Her idolized Idea: Night and Day
Thou make thy thoughtfull Self her Zealous Priest,
And do thy foolish Sacrifices pay:
For every Lineament, and every Part
Of her, thou make divine in thy fond Heart.
13.
A Curle of silly feeble Hair, which is
The Sport and Scorn of every idle Wind,
Like to some adamantine Chain can seize
And captivate thy most unmanly Mind;
Which vain Captivity of thine alone
Makes Hair wear Locks denomination.
14.
Her. Motions, and her Gestures traversed are
By thy admiring Thoughts, and Thou dare vow
That silver Venus through her limpid Sphere
Swimms with less gagliardise, and knows not how
So well to justify her Style, and prove
Her Self the Queen of soft leggiadrous Love.
15.
Thy Soul Thou pour'st out as a free Oblation
On her smooth lip, thy Altar of delight,
Whence thou receiv'st with joyous adoration
The Blessings of her Kiss. Her calmy Sight
Thou think thy Heaven, and in her smiling Eye!
Readst all the Sweets of thy Fools Paradise.
16.
But if a coy Frown, or denying Glance
Becloud that Hemisphear of thy fond Bliss;
How are thy Comforts cast into a Trance
Of knawing Dread, and anxious Distress!
Happy, in earnest happy, Thou might prove
Could thou so much thy God or Fear, or Love.
17.
When thou in Matrimonial Bands art ti'd,
(Bands which will only by Deaths Sithe be cut,
Although they seem as soft as did thy Bride,)
From thine own Freedom thou do freely shut
Thy self, not knowing but that yoke to thee
May prove more heavy than Virginity.
18.
Thou saw but half thy Mistress, all those years
Thou drov'st so hot the Wooers blinded trade,
And had full power to Take or Leave: but Fears
And Doubts are now too late, since Thou have made
The bargain up; not all the World can ease thee;
Content thou must be, though she does not please thee.
19.
If she proves Barren, who is thus thy Spouse,
Alas, Such are thy Hopes and Joys; If she
With numerous issue fill thine eyes and house,
What warrant halt that these will Blessings be?
They (...) may be Bad, nor can thou tell
But thou have helped to impeople Hell.
20.
No Bed so thick with Thorns did ever grow,
As does the Nuptial: what large Crops of Cares
In every time and season does it show!
How fertile is it in perpetual Fears!
In Winter and in Summer it does bear,
And spreads it Harvest over all the year.
21.
But if Thou art content to be a dry
And Fruitless Tree, and do thy self contain
In the severe Bounds of Virginity;
Intestine War will in thy bosom reigh,
And Legions of Temptations always be
In Arms against thy single Chastity.
22.
Thy fair Estate will call loud for an Heir,
So will thy Name. and natural Philauty;
So will the thought of crazie Age, and Fear
Of wanting an unfeigned Friends supply
When years shall downward bow thee to thy grave,
And Cormorants gape for that which thou shall leave.
23.
The World will heap on thy Severitie
Bold Imputations, and judge that thou
Deal st underhand for what should purchased be
In open legal manner; Or will grow
Into (...), Pertinacitie
Does scorn all Females, or all Females thee.
24.
Would thou be Rich? through the tempestuous Seas
Within three Inches of thy Death must thou
Sail from thy quiet Home, and ever be
At the disposal of all Winds that blow;
Then must thou delue, and unto Hell draw near,
Before to thee thy Pluins will appear.
25.
Where though thou do thy largest Coffers fill,
Thy Heart's as poor, and empty as before:
The cursed thirst of Gold grows hotter still,
Although all Indus thou on it do pour.
The peevish Itch thus proves more fruitful when
Thou rubb'st and strivest with the tainted skin.
26.
And now thou who before could safely sleep,
For fear of Robbers break'st thy nightly rest;
About thy Bags thy thoughtfull heart does keep
Perpetual watch. Unhappy fool! at least.
Consider, though thy Gold thou holdst so fast,
Thy self thou can not, who must die at last.
27.
Die, die thou must, and an account give up
Of all the store which thou have hoarded here:
Those Bags on which thy heart did build its Hope
But rich and heavy Torments will appear;
And thou shall bless their Poverty who had
No Reckonings to make up when they were Dead.
28.
Is Poverty thy Lot? Then look to be
The helpless Butt of Wrong and of Disgrace:
Thy joints must buckle to hard Industry;
Continual Sweat must reak upon thy face;
Yet wanting what should fill, and hide thy skin,
Thou shall without be naked, and within.
29.
If thou to thy assistance Vice do call,
And by thy sins thy Fortunes hop'st to mend;
Thou digg st a Pit wherein thy Self must fall,
And to thy hellish Foes do Succor lend;
Thou spendst thine only stock, and hast'st to be
A woeful Bankrupt to Eternity.
30.
If thou a rich-descended Heir art born,
It Is ods, but that thy Birth does thee (...):
Such wealth its duty thinks it to scorn
In Industries laborious Paths to go:
It Is Worth enough, if a young Gallant can
Look big, Luxuriate, and write Gentleman.
31.
In Learnings Lists do thou Desire to try
Thy Strength? this makes all Ignorants thy Foes;
(And they well-neer are All.) yet could Thou fly
Their reach and Envy; still intestine Woes
Will drown thy learned Joys, which needs must be,
(Witness great Solomon) stinging Vanity.
32.
Dare Thou Scorn Arts? then dare Thou be a Beast;
Or rather more than so; Beasts Scorn them not.
Thy Scorn's Prides Daughter, and thou do resist
The course of thy Design, whilst thou do shut
Out Arts and Sciences, the Wings whereby
Proud Spirits, as well as Generous, soar high
33.
But if thou choosest Virtues craggie Way,
And dare despise whate'r Thou see beneath;
If thy dull Bodies Burden cannot sway
Thee downward; if this Life to thee be Death;
If high thine Aim, if heavenly be the Heat
Which does in thy Heroic Bosom beat;
34.
Right generous is thy Enterprise; but yet
Strong Difficulties throng about it thick;
Bold inbred Dangers will encounter it,
Whilst thy wild Passions all against it kick;
Nay thine own Heart, unless thy Care be great,
Will Traitor prove, and its own Plots defeat.
35.
Besides; All They whose Bosoms tainted be
With banefull Sins Contagion, will join
Their malice in a fell conspiracy
Thy single Piety to undermine;
For all thy Virtue checks and chides their Vice,
And Thy fair Glories shame their Villainies.
36.
Thou art their Scandal, and their Fame does call
Upon their deepest wariest Cares for aid
Against that Blot thy Beauty throwss on all
Those who of Virtues Hardship are afraid.
What Weapons will thou find to force back them!
How shall thy Vessel strive against the Stream!
37.
Yet through this rampant Sea of Opposition
Could Thou force open thy way: What would Thou do
Against those stouter Billows of Perdition
Which foam and roar wherever Thou do go?
Hell and its Prince, their utmost Powers combine
To terrify, and to enervate thine.
38.
And sure this Tempest would effect its Spite
On thy weak Bark, did not kind Heaven descend
In pare aforehand: did not Grace's light
With cordial Assistance Thee befriend,
Did she not steer thy course, and bid thee ride
Secure upon the most outrageous Tide.
39.
Thy Life is nothing but a Tragic Sceen
Of most inevitable Death, if she
By seasonable Help comes not between
Thy faint Soul and its dire Catastrophe:
Grace only does condemned Man reprieve
From fatal Woes, and teach his Life to live.
40.
It Was blessed Charis, who so fast did move
Phylax his Wings when He to Psyche flew,
And with the wholesome speed of heavenly Love
Her from the Jaws of the Cerinthians drew,
By showing her the horror of that Pit
Where Heresy. and all her Brood did sit
41.
But Phylax from that Grotreturned now,
His Chariot takes again, and her with it:
Straight Gitton and Samaria sunk below;
For warned by the motion of their Bit
The lusty Coursers took their sprightful wing,
And justling through the Clouds, away did fling.
42.
As Psyche wondered whether they would fly,
She found her Self rapt to a gentle Sphere:
No Wind durst ever venture up so high
Nor blow up any Tempests tumults there.
The only Gales which in this Orb did move
Were the delicious Breaths of Heaven and Love.
43.
The only Clouds which there did meet her Eye
Thick Volumes of religious Ineense were;
The only Noise which rooled through that sky
Were holy Echo's, that to her did bear
The sweet Resounds of those rich Anthems which
The Throats and Hearts of joyful Saints did stretch.
44.
She mused much to think what Creatures were
Inhabitants in that calm Sea of Bliss:
When lo a Troop of glistering Towers drew near
As her swift Chariot further on did press;
And straight a goodly Palace filled her Eye
With large and high-erected Majesty
45.
Directly thither, for they knew the way.
The Coursers speeded, neighing as they slew:
But Phylax plucked the Reins, to bid them stay
When near unto the outer Gate they drew
Then lighting with his Virgin-pupill; He
Warnd her to ponder well what She did see.
46.
Never, said he, my Dear, those Eyes of thine,
Though they have traveled through the World so far,
Were honored with Object so divine
As these with which they now saluted are;
No Pile ever swelled to such bright stateliness;
All Princes Courts are Cottages to this.
47.
That pompous Fabric which great David's Son
Built for a greater King, was poor and plain
If it be brought into comparison
With this Magnificence which here does reign:
As Shaddows do the Substance, so does that
But blindly intimate this Temples state.
48.
The Gold which shined, the Stones which sparkled there
Were all the ignoble Sons of dirty Earth;
But these substantial Glories flaming here
Owe to Heavens Womb their most illustrious Birth:
Nor was the Work atcheiv'd by Mortal Hand,
Which firm as Immortality does stand.
49.
Had Thou my Wings, and through the Spears could fly
Heavens most imperial Palace there to read;
That Spectacle would only feast thine Eye
With a more ample Copy, wider spread
And fuller drawn; a Copy, of what here
Is written in a smaller Character.
50.
Mark well its Situation: Caucasus,
The Alps, the Athlantick Mountains, Ararat,
Noble Olympus, nobler Lybanus,
Are in their highest exaltations not
Half so sublime as is this royal Hill
Which almost in both Worlds at once does dwell.
51.
Its Head thou see to Heaven next Neighbor is;
And upon Hell its Foot is surely set;
On Hell, which often has repined at this
Oppressing Burden, and often strove to get
Its neck from under it; but still in vain
The Powers of all that vexed Pit did strein.
52.
For lo the Mountain's all one solid Rock
Compacted in the Strength of Unity:
Though Hills of Brass should yield unto the shock
Of Violence; though Earths vast Base should be
Shouldred out of its place, this Mount would stand
And laugh to scorn them who against it band.
53.
So stands the craggie Promontory sure
With head erected high above the Storm,
When all the Winds against its Site conjure,
And thousand Waves with high-swolln fury arm:
It stands, and sees the Blasts blown out of breath,
And all the (...) shattered beneath.
54.
But mark the fabric of this outer Gate,
And tell me if thou ever saw a more
Unlikely Passage to a Court of State:
Strong the Materials are, but yet the Door
Is built so low, and so extreemly narrow,
That Worms, not Men, seem fit to scramble through
55.
And Worms indeed the Passengers must be,
Poor, thin, and humble Things, which enter here;
Big puffing Pride, must never hope that She
Shall through this Portal crowd; or Worldly Care
Swelld with Encumbrances, and lagg'd with Sin,
At this small mystic Needles Eye thrust in.
56.
He whose unhappy Bosome's stuffed with Gold,
Whilst all his Baggs lie heaped in his Heart;
He who in Fat and Ease himself does fold,
And never was shrunk up by any Smart;
Too burly is to enter here, and fit
Through Hells wide-gaping Jaws alone to get.
57.
All secular Impostumes, which do rise
From any Humors Superfluity,
From any Lusts, or any Vanities,
From inward or from outward Luxury,
Can at this humble Passage find no room,
But damm the Way to all that Laden come.
58.
This said: He led the (...) to the Gate;
Where though she shrunk and closely gatherd up
Her self within her Self, yet still to great
She found her bulk, that she was (...) to stoop,
And crowd, and struggle hard, ever she could win
Tenuity enough there to thrust in.
59.
But being entered, a large Court she saw,
And yet almost as strait as was the door,
Such Difficulties all about did grow,
Such high, such stony, craggie Paths, such store
Of troublesome Shrubs and Thorns, all which did threat
With wounds, snares, and obstructions, her feet.
60.
Yet by the Angels prudent Conduct she
Rubbed through, but with the cost of sweat and pain:
When lo with recreating suavitie
A second gale her eyes did entertain,
A gate as glorious, and as venerable,
As was the other poor and despicable.
61.
The Posts of milkie Alabaster were,
So was the Lintell; but the Leaf was all
Of purest Crystal, that those who drew near,
Before the Door was opened, might fall
In love with those interior beauties which
Themselves through that clear perspective did reach.
62.
But Psyche here observed a serious Maid
Who kept the Keys of that transparent Gate,
Upon the ground disconsolately laid,
Like one who felt and waild the wrath of Fate:
Held by her left hand was her heavy head,
And on her heavier heart her right was spread.
63.
Part of her Tresses Sorrow off had torn,
And scattered on the ground: what did remain,
Neglect dishevelled clotted and forlorn
About her ears: Her foreheads native Plain
Was plowd up by Self-indignation, and
Deep were the Furrows of that woeful Land.
64.
Her pensive Eyes so overladen were
With constant clouds, that downward to the earth
They always looked: The weather never was clear
With Her, but when one Tempest had broke forth,
Another crowded on; or rather one
Continual flood did from her Fountains run.
65.
The beauties of her Cheeks, this washed away,
And through their Hills two sallow Channels made;
This marshalled the soft Pearls in sad array
Upon her Clothes, which often rent she had;
This made the countenance of the neighbor ground
In the exuberant brine of hers be drowned,
66.
Of Whips, and Rods before her lay an heap
Red with the Vengeance on her body she
With them had taken: Far far thence was Sleep,
For palefac'd Watching, stern Austeritie,
Hollow cheek'd Fasting, pious Shame and Fear,
Had in a circle all besieged Her.
67.
In stead of Powders to perfume her Head,
Cold contemptible Ashes there were strown,
Which an untimely Hoarines did spread
Upon her Locks, and preach to Her her own
Beginning, and her End, that certain Dust
From whence she came, and unto which she must,
68.
As Psyche mused who this Maid should be,
Which like a woeful Prey to Grief did lie;
Howe'r she looks, said Phylax, this is she
Whom only Heaven intrusteth with the Key
Of this fair Palace; she, whose piteous look
Has writ her Worth so high in Gods own Book;
69.
Her Name is Penance, and with her must All
Who are ambitious here to get access,
Into familiar acquaintance fall,
And love her painful Life, and Wretchedness:
Though her embraces comfortless may seem
And cold, yet heavenly heats do glow in them.
70.
Delightful Ease lies nestling in her Smart,
Security in habits in her Fears,
Content keeps house in her disconsolate heart,
Pure Joy does bathe it self in all her Tears,
And in the frowning Furrows of her sadness
Are sown the seeds of everlasting gladness.
71.
This Word threw Psyche strait upon her knee,
To beg the favor of that mournful Maid;
Who raised her self with ready Courtesy,
And prayed the stranger not to be afraid;
Welcome, she cried, and sealed it with a Kiss,
And in her sober Arms she hugged her thrice.
72.
She bug'd her thrice; and every time she shot
Quite through her Soul griefs secret influence:
Whereby entire Possession she got
Of all her thoughts, in which she left no sense
Or relish of Terrestrial delight,
But fitted her to see this heavenly sight.
73.
Which done; upon his humble Head she spread
Part of her Tears, and of her Ashes part;
Then her unto the Door she kindly led;
Which, as she touched it, did wide open start:
Straitway a Gale of holy Pleasures flew
Forth at the Gate, and full on Psyche blew.
74.
Thus enterd in, she there espies a Well
Of cleerer Crystal far than was that Door;
And here, said Phylax, Purity does dwell,
Of limpid Life here lives the endless Store;
These Streams alone can conquer that deep Stain
Which in the tainted Universe does reign.
75.
No foolish Nymphs are dabbling in this Spring,
But Graces genuine, and numberless,
And all divine, are here inhabiting,
Who with their Beauties every Commer bless;
Faind Venus from her native Sea did rise
Less fair than those this Fountain purifies.
76.
For this is Baptisms holy Fountain, where
All They must wash the other World away,
Who in this Court of new Life would appear,
And of Nights Bratts turn Children of the Day;
Profane unwashen feet far hence must be,
This holy Ground belongs to Sanctity.
77.
But of such everlasting Virtue is
This sacred Liquor, that one Drenching will
Sufficient be; and it is Presumptuousness
A second time its noble Dropps to spill:
Thou who art washed already, have no need
Of further clensing; but may now proceed.
78.
This said: He leads her forward through a Way
Paved all with Softnes and sincere Delight,
Unto the Palace, which did now display
Its princely fullness unto their free Sight:
Magnifick was its Aspect, and upon
The Rock, looked like another Mount of Stone.
79.
A Mount of Marble polished and white,
But with such Architecture varied,
That Majesty was temperd with Delight.
Thus all the Countenance of Heaven is spread
With Awe, and Beauty, that Spectators may
Both Love and Reverence unto it pay,
80.
What goodly Pillars, Walls, and Towers were there!
What Rows of Lights in equidistant grace!
What learned Engravings lived every where,
Impeopling with quaint Anticks each spare place!
With what brave strife did cunning Art contend
How she the rich Materials might transcend.
81.
But now by Twelve fair stepps advanced into
The Hall they came; an Hall of Majesty;
Which all the outward Bravery did so
Exceed, that Psyche almost lost her Eye
In walking through the several Wonders which
Did every corner of the Room enrich.
82.
The Floor with glittering silver all was spread,
The Almug Walls with royal Arras dressed,
The Cedar Roof with Gold embellished,
With glorious Paint the Windows: Such a Feast
Of goodly Sights She never saw before,
Though She had viewed all Agenor's store,
83.
Yet this was but the handsome Case and Skin
Of that which did Majestic make the Place;
For round about upon the Walls were seen
Innumerable Spoils, which she, who was
Queen of the Palace, in her Wars had wonn,
And hung them here as Proofs what she had done,
84.
Here by their Horns Dilemma's hanging were,
And of bigg Syllogismes the empty Skinns.
Bold busy Wit hung tame and quiet here;
Here Rhetoric with all her cunning Ginns
About her own Neck wound; here all the Pride
Of secular Wisdom, was close Captive ti'd.
85.
Next-those that Insolent Severitie,
That humble Arrogance, which once did reign
In the admired Porch, hung dead and dry;
And chained Zeno knit his Brows in vain
To see that Doctrine which cost Him so deer,
By conquering Truth hung up in triumph here.
86.
And yet some comfort 'twas that He beheld
The Pythagorean Prudence hanging by,
And its great Master, though He would not yield
It fit for Men with Flesh to satisfy
Their hunger, forced by Madness now to eat
Himself, and make his chained Arms his Meat,
87.
Nor had the Epicurean Discipline
Better success, for it was Captive here;
Where both with shame and hunger it did (...)
Paying full dear for its luxuriant Cheer;
All lank and thin it hung, like nothing less
Than the full treasury of voluptuousnes
88.
Th^^ Egyptian learning, black, as blackest Hell,
Where it was bred and born, hung also here,
Nor could invent with all its Magic skill
Any mysterious Charm or Character
To conjure down it self from that disgrace
To which ^^rait Prisner here it fastened was.
89.
By these, the (...) snatched from the furthest Parts
Of the strange Indian (...) hung one by one:
The proud Gymnosophists, and Braehmans Arts,
(For noble Bartholomew did thither run,
And Thomas too, by Heavens direction sent,
Who spread their Conquests wheresoe'r they went,
90.
So did the Persians Astrologick skill,
And what in Balaams Midian Schole was taught
A mighty prize was this, as being full
With thousand Sects of various Learning fraught;
Yet none of these could Calculate that they
Should unto Catholic Truth become a Prey.
91.
Nor did the Academick Glory escape,
Although fage Plato raised it fair and high,
For here it hung in contemptible shape,
Appearing more like reverend foolery,
Than genuine Wisdom, and lamenting that
It reached so near to Truth, yet reached it not.
92.
Next this, the Oracles of the Stagirite,
(That God of Logical and wrangling Brains,
Hung all in wounded miserable plight,
Unable to confute their conquering Chains,
And wished that they their Masters fate had seen,
And with him drowned in Euripus had been.
93.
On one side of the Hall these marshalled were,
And on the other full as great a Crew:
For all the Sadducean Points hung there,
Too late lanenting what they found most true
That they from thence should no Redemption have
Who held no Resurrection from the Grave
94.
And in the same condition hanging was
Wicked (...), and woeful now;
Perceiving that to its distressed Cause
Its rotten Deity could no help allow;
That Herod proved no such kind of thing
As Christ, of Glory, and of Power King.
95.
(...) Prudence also had its share
Among the rest, in this Captivity;
Although its ways, and grounds, and doctrines, were
Nearest of kin to Truth and Firmitie:
Indeed she made the least resistance, and
Was therefore tied in the gentler band.
96.
But puffed with zealous Ignorance, and Pride,
The (...) Discipline held out
With bold defiance, and a good while tried
Whether she or this Champion were more stout;
And much she might have done, had truth not been
(...) (...) to bring her Prisner in
97.
Yet after Her innumerable fries
Of foul and desperate Vermin undertook
The War again, and by degrees did rise
From sucking sneaking Schisms, until they broke
Into the monstrous amplitude of those
Black Heresies whose depth Hell only knows.
98.
The Authors lately in their native Pit.
Psyche beheld; and here the Brood She sees;
The hideous Portents of malicious Wit,
And pretie-pretending Villainies,
Which now perforce did their own shame confess
All hanging in their odious Nakedness.
99.
They naked hung; yet clothed in their Gore,
Which Liverie too they gave unto the Wall,
Whilst they with rage their viperous Members tore,
And upon one another spit their Gall,
Stark mad their huge and warlike selves to see
The Subjects of eternal Triumph be.
100.
Heroic were these Spectacles: But yet
The upper end of this illustrious Hall
With gallanter Memorials was beset,
For all about upon the mighty Wall
Hung goodly Tables, offering to the Ey
A full account of larger Victory.
101.
The first, subdued Asia did display,
Where Conquest at Jerusalem begun
Her noble Progress, breaking open her way
Quite through the Heart of every Region,
Nor staid her Chariot, until it met
The ^ising Sun's, and fairer showed than it.
102.
The second, generous Europe did present,
The Queen of Arms and Arts, and yet too weak
And silly to confute or stop the dint
Of Christian genuine Luster, which did break
Through all her Quarters till both Rome and Grecce
Yielded, and su'd for Euangelick Peace.
103.
Hot sandy Africa boiled in the Third,
Where all its Monsters gentle grew and tame;
Not frighted by the lightning of the Sword,
But mollifi'd by Christ's all-conquering Name,
Which wun, (though with an Eunuch it began,)
At length the mightiest, and compleatest Man.
104.
The Fourth, was but prophetic yet, in which
Decyphered was a strange untutored World,
In golden Mines, and Veins of Silver rich,
But poor in every thing beside, and hurld
To the Backside of all these Parts which then
Were known unto this Universe's Men.
105.
Yet was the Church assured that she should through
The vast Atlantic reach her conquering Arm,
And on that Western Even her East bestow,
Which Pagan Hearts with heavenly Heats might warm;
She was assured her Baptism Streams upon
The wealthy Shore of noble Plate should run.
106.
When Psyche had her Admiration to
These splendid Marvells paid, which one by one
Phylax expounded; Her he hasts to go;
For goodlier Sights, said He, this Mansion
Does yet afford: These but the Preface be
(And poor enough) to what thou now shall see.
107.
With that, He up a princely Staircase brings
Her to the Presence Chamber of the Queen.
O what illustrious and celestial Things
Where in this Shrine of holy Glories seen!
Which whilst to Psyche Phylax Pointed, He
Was ravished well near as much as She.
108.
This precious Pavement first observe, said He,
Thy foot never trampled on such Worth as this;
The Floors no less than pure Humility
Which lies as smooth as Politures own Dress,
Yet softer than those Carpets are, whose sweet
And silken Kisses flatter Princes feet.
109.
The Walls are built of neither Wood nor Stone,
No nor of Brass, of Silver, or of Gold,
Or any Substance which Duration
Can make decrepite as it grows old:
O no; the rich Materials are such
As wretched Weakness must not dare to touch.
110.
For they of Strength and of Security
A mixture are and Correspondence keep
With their Foundation, which does fixed lie
Upon a Rock that scorns what all the Deep
Can do against it; And these Walls disdain
The stoutest Powers which in the Air do reign.
111.
The Roof whose patent Arch and azure Hue
Like Heavens Epitomie, above does flow,
With no Hypocrisy deludes the view,
Being conscious of more worth than it does show
Whate'r it seems unto thy mortal Sense,
It is no less than God's own Providence,
112.
Those middle Pillars which so stoutly set
Their lusty shoulders under it, are cast
Of sound substantial Faith; though Rocks should split.
Though Earths vast Grounsells which are ^amme'd fast
Unto the Center, should in pieces fly,
These still will hold their own Soliditie.
113.
That strange Soliditie, whose mystic Root
Cross unto all the world beside does grow;
For its profoundly-paradoxik foot
Implanted is above, and not below;
Whilst by Loves all uniting-strengthning Art,
The Roof it self the Pillars does support.
114.
Those spacious Windows there, which (...) Eye
Open its way to Heaven (...)
(The brittle Emblem of (...) Vanity
But of firm Hope, through which the Soul does pass.
And climb aforehand to tho^ Joves above
Which have monopoliz'd her loyal Love.
115.
That golden Chymney, and the Fire which there
With unconsuming Sweetness flames so high,
The Shop and fervent Operations are
Of strong and never-idle Charity;
Whose soft Extremities of fostering Heat
In the brave Pulse of pious Hearts does beat.
116.
But this resplendent Mount of Majesty,
Which in the middle of the Room does rise,
This Diamond Throne, whose Glory does outvie
The beams of Solomon's, erected is
For Her whose Beauties make the seat appear
But poor and dim, when it supporteth Her.
117.
Just as He spoke, from her retiring Room
Attended by her most majestic Train,
Unto that Throne the Queen her self did come,
And justify the Angels word: In vain
The Diamonds Sparkles were, which all gave way,
To Hers, as Stars to Phoebus, and his Day.
118.
In her sweet Looks, such blessed Gallantrie
Triumphant was, that Psyche judged Her
To be no Daughter of Mortality,
But sprung from heavenly Race; nor did she fear
Idolatry in worshipping that Face
Which of much more than Heaven the Mirror was.
119.
But as she for prostration did prepare,
Phylax advises her to satisfy
Her eyes profoundest Hunger with the Cheer,
The royal Cheer, whose superfluity
Was so excessive; And Thou then, said He,
Shall know who is this Queen of Sweets, from Me.
120.
This Item She obeyed: But as a Child
Into some Princes Garden brought, which He
Sees with innumerable Beauties filled;
Yields up himself to dainty ecstasie,
Not knowing where he should begin to gather,
Seeing every flower woo's Him from one another:
121.
So in delicious Confusion She
Among the Graces of this Empress lost,
Her wondering Self, nor could resolved be
Which Part deserved her admiration most;
She looked to find one better than the rest,
Yet saw at last, all in their kind were best.
122.
For from the head of the accomplished Queen
Unto her foot there was no room for Blame:
Sooner shall Pitch in Venu's Rays be seen,
Sooner shall Glories face be damped with Shame,
Sooner shall Christa! guilty be of Blots,
Than purer She can be accusd of Spots. Cant. 4. 7.

123.
As through the roseal Casements of the East 6. 10.

Aurora looks when fresh come out of Bed;
So is her briskly-blooming Aspect dressed
With all the Delicates of Blushing Red;
Yet though these Streams of Blushes overflow,
They keep firm truce still with their neighbor snow.
124.
As goodly Phoebe in the unclouded (...) (...)

Smiles with chaste Beauty, so does (...) She;
But yet more spotless, for Sols Majesty
Does with her virgin Mildness here agree,
The Moons sweet silver, and his stately Gold
Are in this faces sphere together rolled.
125.
Yet such its temper is, that if bold Eyes ibid:

Confront it, no less Terror flames in it
Than from a marshalled Army does surprise
Cold-harted Cowards, when the Standards get
Free leave to pour their awful Colors through
The Air, and the bright Banners open flow,
126.
This makes the Ladies precious feature be (...)

As pleasant as the graceful Structure is
Of beauteous Tirza; and her Majesty
As rich as Salems was in Comeliness
When her best Excellence had crowned her Queen
Of all things that below the Sun were seen.
127.
As the illustrious Tree of Victory, (...)

The verdant Palm, lifts her triumphant Head
Above the vulgar Shrubs; so flameing She
Her portly Stature. And it is fairly read
In the Halls noble Characters, how near
Of kin the Palm and She by Conquests are.
128.
Carmel which looks from his exalted Seat (...)

With state, upon the Vales that creep beneath,
And is so strong in high-grown Woods, so sweet
In fragrant Pastures, fairly copieth
Her princely Head, the Crown which there is set
TO enoble all the Members under it,
129.
As from steep Gilead the milkie Flocks 4. 1.

Of climbing Goats do gracefully appear;
Such is the beauty of her slaxen Locks,
Whilst like young Kids their Curles all sporting are.
And by their sport, though feeble Chains they be,
Do Captive take the King of Majesty. 7. 5.

130.
Under the dainty shelter of her Hair 4. 3.

Half-hid, half-ope her precious Temples lie,
Which like a rich Pomgranate lovely are,
And lovelier by that open secrisie;
For what is naked, speaks for what is hid,
And more desire does in Spectators breed.
131.
Who by Bethrabbim Gate has ever seen 7. 4.

The Pools of Heshbon (...) to the brim,
Where living Smiles inhabit, where sereen
And genuine Purity delights to swim,
Where both the Stars by Night, and Sun by Day
As in a softer Heaven rejoice to play;
132.
The Emblem of Her Eyes He has beheld;
Her Eyes, the limpid Mirror whence those beams
Which dart forth Loves and Joys, which sweetly gild
Spectators Hearts, pour out their dainty streams;
Her Eyes, the softest Nest of brightest Bliss,
The purest springs of mystic Paradise.
133.
That white and stately Tower of Marble which 7. 4.

Down from its Lebanon its Looks extended
Unto Damascus, did but only teach
What Princely Beauty Her fair Nose commended,
Whose Alabaster Prominence does by
Its situation gain that Majesty.
134.
Her Lips of Scarlet are a fine-spun Thread; 4. 3.

Yet not so fine or beauteous as is
The rare Effusion which through them is shed
Where that sweet spring of (...) does bless
(...) Auditors, when vocal Gold
Ana Honey, from the enclosed longue is rolled.
135.
No Sheep new shorn and even, and come but now 4. 2

From (...), all in (...) order, can
Afford the (...) more delightful show,
Than her two Ranges of (...), when
A (...), or some such sweet Occasion has
Displayed the equal (...) of her (...).
136.
As David's goodly Tower, the dwelling place 4. 4.

Of Beauty and of strength; such is her Neck;
A thousand mighty Sheilds that Fort do grace,
And full as many Jewels this do deck;
Or rather decked are by hanging there;
Their wealthy Place for them can luster spare.
137.
Two tender Roes. the Sons both of one Dame, 4. 5

And of one Birth, which in a little field
Are put to Pasture; in another Name
Are her two Breasts, with lovely softnes swelled,
Which in her Bosoms fragrant Carden feed
Amongst those whitest Sweets which there are bred.
138.
Her royal Roab was all of purest silk;
In softnes parallel to her own skin
Which it embraced, in whitenes to her Milk;
A cunning Needle over it had run,
And scattered pretty Hills and Valleys, where
Neat Flocks of Lambs feeding and sporting were.
139.
But as when Aprils gentle Breath does wake 4. 11.

The flowrie Eyes of Lebanon, or plays
Against his precious Boughs, the Odours take
The soft alarm, and their sweet Powers raise:
So this rich Vestures blessed smell replies
To the least Call of every Gale that flies.
140.
In either Hand she held a massy Key,
Which like two Scepters she did stoutly sway;
The one of beaten burnished Gold, which she
Hugged in her Right Hand; for the royal way
Through Heavens bright Gate is always locked up,
Except this priviledg'd Key does set it open.
141.
That in her Left, of swarthy Iron is;
A fatal dreadful Key, which locks the Door
Of everlasting Torments foul Abyss
Where Anathematized Souls do (...).
Proud Beelzebub, although he Sovereign be
Of Hell, yet keeps not his own Kingdoms Key.
142.
The Diadems of gareish Gold and Gems
Unto the (...) of mortal Kings she leaves
An heavenly flame about Her (...) (...),
And a full Crown of living glory (...),
Which Miter-like, and like the mystic (...)
Of Cloven-Tongnes of (...) (...), does (...)
143.
But for a Canopie above her head
No Babylonian Embroydery,
No Tyrian nor Phrygian Texture's spread,
No artificial Help of Majesty;
No State which cannot last, if by the aid
Of Pillars and of Cords it be not staid.
144.
A Dove, not hatched in sublunary Nest,
Nor hatched at all, but of eternal Breed.
Weighed on his equal Wings, takes up his rest
At near, but comely Distance o'r her Head.
Where by his wide-spred silver Feathers (...)
Becomes her Ornament, and (...).
145.
This was the Queen: on whom as Psyche gazed,
Thou have no canse, my Dear said (...), so
At her high Gallantry to be amazed.
If thou but know what is her Name, and who
The King her Spouse. O pity then, cried she,
Sweet Tutor, this my Ignorance and Me.
146.
He, by a speaking Smile at first, then by
These Words, his modest Pupil satisfied:
This Queen, Ecclesia is. unto the high
And mighty King of Kings the sovereign Bride:
Poor of her Self, and sprung from Mortal Race,
But thus advanced by his bounteous Grace.
147.
Those Princes whom the foolish World admire,
Are fain to make a tedious Search to find
Ladies whose florid Beauties may conspire
With the (...) of their lustful Mind,
And often for a Dowry hunt, that so
The Maid, and Money they may Marry too.
148.
But it becomes Heavens Emperor to make
Rather than seek a Spouse which him may please;
Nor can it with his Greatness stand to take
A Portion with his Bride, who Owner is
Of more than thine, or Phoebu's larger Eye
Could in his furthest Travells ever descry.
149.
She crooked was, alas, and black before,
A Throne on which Deformity did reign:
Such heaps of odious Blains, and Boils, such Store
Of Wrinkles and Distortions, such plain
Right-down Uncleanness could not any where
Be found in one Colluvies, but in Her.
150.
Indeed when first She in her Filth was born Ezech. 16. 4.

No friendly Hand came in to wash her clean,
Or cut her Navel; helpless and foriorn
In her foul Blood She lay till be sent in
His yearning Providence Relief to give,
Which on Deaths brink commanded her to live.
151.
She lived; but still so as her life confessed
By its Procession, what its Entrance was;
Yet when all other Lovers did detest
The thought of her most ougly vile Embrace,
Jesus stepps in, and cries, Why may nor she
Grow beauteous by my Superfluity?
152.
Then from (...) exuberant Store of his own Graces
Ten thousand rich and radiant Things he takes,
Which all about the wondering Maid he places,
And of a Worm, this Queen of Glory makes,
Who as thou (...) thus Embellished
Prepared was for his (...) Bea.
153.
And that his Empress might attended be
With a Retinue suitable unto
Her royal Self; that Train Magnificent He
Both furnished, and maintains for Her: Lo
With what pressed forwardness they waiting are
About her sparkling Throne, and fairer Her.
154.
The first Rank's of no less than threescore Queens,
Who yet can from her Service Honor take. Cantic 6. 8

The next's of fourscore goodly Concubines;
But they which do the outmost Orders make,
Where in a Number numberless thy flow,
Are Virgins all, both chaste and white as snow.
155.
These were the lesser Churches, which were spread
About the World so thick in ever Place;
Yet still their Strength and their Dependence had
From this most Catholic Majesty, which was
Diffus d as wide as they, and never found
That Land or Sea which could its Progress boun.
156.
These every Morn, and every Evening raise 6. 9,

Their homage in religious Anthems high,
Paying both Admiration and Praise
To Her, the Monarch of all Piety;
Since They to Her but Tributaries are,
For she alone the Sovereign Crown does wear.
157.
But mark that (...), whose Station is
Before the (...), Mayds of true (...), which
Enjoy the (...) this Queen to (...):
Their Hands alone adorn her with those rich
Embellishments which round about her shine
And make her look so heavenly and divine.
158.
That (...) Maid, is Unity,
Whose noble Office is to buckle on
Her (...) golden (...), and to see
That close and fast this (...) be done:
And how her Duty she performs, Thou
By the Queens small and dainty Waste may know.
159.
That sober Matrone, in whose stayed Eye
And venerable Face so fair are writ
The awful Lines of Heaven, is Sanctity;
Who every Morn before the Queen does set
Her Self to be the Glass where she may see
What Dress will best become her Majesty.
160.
The next, whose soft and yiedling Looks confess
The temper of her Heart, is Patience;
Her Empress she does deck with Tenderness,
And makes her slow and loath to take Offense,
That all her Subjects by her Softness may
Be charmed so kind a Princess to obey.
161.
But Magnanimity, that high-look'd She,
Joins to that Mildness, stout and active Fire:
This that Virago is, which scorrs to see
Any exploit of Gallantry outvie Her:
Ecclesia's brows with Bravery she does build,
And stoutly helps her both her Keys to weild.
162.
She whose wide-open Breasts so fairly swell,
And wears as large a Purse open by her side,
Who looks about to see where she may spill
Her teeming Charities everlasting Tide,
Is Bounty, Almner to the Queen, whom she
Does also dress with Smiles and Suavity.
163.
That other, whose even Look was never knit
Into a frown, nor loosed into a Smile;
Whose right Hand holds a Sword, whose left, a fit
And equal Balance, Justice is; who still
As Cases come, her Ladies Eyes does dress
Either with Anger, or with Friendlinesse.
164.
That amiable sweet complexion'd Maid
Is (...), which keeps the Queen so feir;
In all Distempers she with ready And
Her (...) Health and Beauty does repair,
Her Body sound, her Skin she makes sleek,
She with (...) Roses trimms her lovely Cheek.
165.
Those other Virtues also every one
Their several Office have But Psyche, now
Observe that neighbor Combination,
Who Virgins also are, that thou may know
By their great Worth how glorious is she
Whose household Servants they are proud to be.
166.
She who all over written is with Scarrs,
Laden with Palms, and clothed round in Blood,
Fcclesia s Champion is: ten thousand Wars
She waged has, and valiantly with-stood
Hells and Earths Opposition: her Name
Is Martyrdom; her Story, highest Fame,
167.
That plain looked Maid, whose course and simple Hue
Seems to discredit this illustrious Place,
Is Poverty, who though to outward view
She shines not with any courtly Grace,
Yet is within as gorgeous and as fair
As on their Outsides her Companions are,
168.
For Jesus, who the Heart of Things does see,
Was so enamored of her Beauties, that
He chose to dwell with her alone, when he
Entered upon his Theanthronick State;
And found her Worth so high, that he (...)
Her to Ecclesia when he hence Ascended.
169.
The next, her Sister is, Obedience;
Thou never saw a Twigg more (...) to bow,
Nor Wax more pliant, than unto her Prince
In all her Mandates she her Self does show:
A Will she had once of her own, (...)
Gave it her Queen, that so she (...).
170.
For prudent as she was, right well she knew
What an edged Tool is every (...),
Which often makes its enslaved (...)
Its (...) freedom; whose (...) to quell,
The (...) way she found, was (...)
It to a Wiser (...), and (...),
(...)
Lo there Virginity her (...): O who
Can count the Graces which (...),
Which all about her dainty Body (...),
In (...) and (...)
Heaven deeply tell (...) love with Her, and she
As truly is (...) as (...).
(...)
Indeed the old acquaintance We have (...)
With (...), makes Us what We are.
Unto (...) their (...)
She sets Us free from all (...)
And (...) Us leave to (...)
The business of (...).
(...)
The (...) which smilesh in her (...)
(...) with heroic (...)
For though bold (...) be (...)
A common Bridle, and (...)
That Hand he (...) which with (...) might
Is furnished and (...).
(...)
But there stand (...) far more noble yet (...)

Stars of the first and fairest (...) (...)

Stars unto which the whole Word is in (...)
For that Commanding (...) which has (...)
That (...) (...) which (...)
All Nations its (...) Prisners (...).
(...)
That awful Maid, (...) glorious (...)
Before whole look the World made haste to bow
And take the (...) upon
Its (...). Thou by that Mark (...) know.
Obrave (...) which have out (...)
The Course, (...) the Glories of the Sun
176.
This is the Lady (...). (...)
The faithful Hands or whose (...)
(...) precious store was put, that (...)
All pious (...) might be anured where
They should not (...) to (...)
And (...) (...) or their dear Lord
177.
But at her back (...) apparent Her
(...), when to (...)
Yet, (...) as (...) does (...)
The glory her great (...)
And (...) turns the (...)
I (...), to (...).
(...)
She in whose (...)
^
Is most (...) (...)
^
She whose quick-sighted (...) does wonders see
(...) an Age before they be.
(...)
The (...) in whose (...) does d well
A (...), sweet and (...) too
Which (...)
(...) is that (...) which at (...)
Not in (...), (...)
^
(...)
^
^
^
^
^
^
181.
The fifth the Mistrels of profounder (...)
Than (...) or (...) knew
She (...) no (...) nor Herbs to take her Part
Nor any (...) Plants does brew
But by her (...) or her commanding Breath
Knows how to (...) both (...) and Death.
182.
The sixth whose ready and officious Eyes
Her (...) does speak
Is she who on the (...) (...)
With reverent distance waits: she who does take
The care or those who did not Chartitie
Keep open house, would no where narboured (...)
183.
The (...), whose stature is so high, and fair,
Whose Snoulaers are to broad, whose breast to (...)
Whose joints wei-knit, whose bones well, (...)
But stronger (...) her Heart, may be (...)
by there (...) Marks to be no other but
brave (...) which in the (...) is set.
184.
See Thou the (...)
Can by (...)
And yet (...)
^
^
^
185.
She in their proper Dialects can trade
With all the World, and Heavens Wares set to sale;
No Sound to Sense a Dress was ever made,
But she with it does strait acquainted fall
And can discover whither it does sit
Upon that senses shoulders right and sit.
186.
Unhappy Babels Antidote is she
And cures the Wound which there did Tongues divide;
All Languages do in her Lips agree,
For to her single Tongue they all are ti'd;
So are their Virtues too, and Eloquence
Dwells there in all its kinds of Excellence.
187.
But now behold, where at the Queens right Hand
As best deserving that illustrious Place,
A (...) Virgin than all these does stand,
Who (...) Sovereigns Gallantrie does grace:
A Virgin (...) than her native Home,
(...) silver Spears, whence she did hither come.
188.
Lo, she from head to foot all naked is,
As are the Sun by day, and Stars by night:
Her Self she with her proper Beams does dress
As they with their Attire of natural Light:
True Beauty never outward help did lack;
It Is Shame alone which Clothes does useful make.
189.
Who ever thought the Rose or Lilie stood
(...) of course unhandsome Nakedness,
Because they never put on borrowed Hood,
Content with their own native Sweetnesses?
Or where shall Ornaments be found which may
In a new beauteous Garb such Things array.
190.
Believe it Psyche, She does but retain
Her Countries Fashion: They whose Bliss it is
In heaven above eternaly to reign,
Profess no other kind of Dress but this:
They Naked go of every thing which might
Hide those fair Beams which them all over dight.
191.
A Texture all of Glory, soft, and white
(...) Virgin Soul, does her surround
(...) can in the high-noon Face of Light,
(...) of ink in stoods of Milk be (...),
(...) may a Critic hope to spy in her
(...) Roab of Nakedness, a sound.
192.
That Nakedness, which though it breeds Desire
In All whose Hearts are not of obstinate Stone;
It kindles none but sweet and spottlesse Fire,
In whose pure Furnace brave Devotion
Learns with more sprightfull fervencie to glow,
And (...) it self refined does grow
193.
But o what generous Powers flame in her face,
Pouring her Conquests upon every Eye!
The hardiest he that ever on Her did gaze,
Yielded, and loved his sweet Captivity:
Error her self, though swelled with Pride and Hell,
In her sweet Presence willingly does (...)
194.
Her Name is Truth; and what her Love and Care,
Judge by the Tokens which her hands present:
That Volume which does in her left appear,
Is the original Old Testament;
That in her right, the New; which unto her
By Those who writ them first, committed (...),
195.
For every Leaf of them a Mirror is,
Where She does read her own unspotted Face.
No line is there; but truly does express
Some correspondent Lineament of Grace
In her sweet Body, whose all-lovely Looks
Are nothing but the Life of those dead Books,
196.
Bold Haeresie has often in that Glass
Presumed to look, and swore that there She (...)
The true and faithful Image of her Face:
But yet the shameless Est as oftenlyed;
That trusty Glass will no false Colors show.
But unto (...), and Truth alone, is true.
197.
But mark what clings about the Virgins (...):
A Knot of Things whose Luster bids (...) Eye
Be with a glimpse content, and not (...)
With that which blindes bold (...).
Faiths Mysteries they are, which by (...)
Excess of their own Beams, (...) and from (...),
198.
In vain Thou seekst these (...) to (...)
By any Beauty which e r (...) Eye
Soul, which in most (...) Worth (...),
Cannot (...) their (...),
But happy count (...), (...) they can (...)
^
199.
And happy Thou my Psyche, who art hither
By Heavens indulgence, and my Conduct brought,
If Thou that Happiness scornst not to gather
Which now is ripe, and woo's thee to reach out
Thy Hand and Heart, that both may filled be
At highest heav'nliest Wealths own Treasury.
200.
Thus Phylax spoke: but Psyche all the while
Raped with these several Glories of the Court,
Did with as many Satisfactions Fill
Her wondering Soul, and make Luxuriant sport
In her new Bliss, until Truths Contemplation
Monopolized all her Admiration.
201.
For as the noble Eaglet perched high
In a fair prospect to the naked Sun,
Does feast and not with her ravished Eye
In that bright Sea of Beauty, where alone
Her genuine Sight meets with its flaming Love,
And by his sovereign Beams its own does prove:
202.
So She with strong impatient Ardour here
Stood feeding upon Truths all-glorious Face;
Yet still with that most satisfying Cheer
Remained unsatisfi'd, cause such it was;
Till lost in amorous Greedines, she cries,
Sweet Guardian help Me, or thy Psyche dies.
203.
Phylax, who knew the Soul of that Complaint,
(For on his own it beat,) with tender Hand
Relev'd his Pupil as He saw her faint;
And well, said He, thy Grief I understand,
I understand it well, and love it too,
Thy Joys had did, had thou not Greived so.
204.
The Image of thy late Acquaintance, and
Newly ambibed Doctrines, in the Eye
Of thy now selfe-revenged Heart does stand.
Checking thy venturous Credulity,
Which durst embrace such Monsters, and dismiss
A Beauty so divinely Bright as this.
205.
Yet let not Sorrow quench thy Hopes, for She
All Injuries rejoices to forget,
And never yet laughed at the Misery
Of any Heart which would to her submit:
Revenge indeed, but soft and sweet she takes,
Her Foes to Liberty She Captives makes.
206.
This said; unto the Virgin Her He led;
Whom by their old Acquaintance He desired
Her favor on this begging (...) to spread,
Who with her luster was already fired:
Truth gently smiled at his sweet Request,
And by her Looks her forwardness confessed.
207.
Then stooping down where Psyche trembling lay
Pouring her Tears and Heart before her feet,
She mildly took her up, and gave her Joy
That She with Her so happily had met;
That word she closed with an Embrace, and this
With the deer Blessing of an heavenly Kiss.
208.
As when the courteous vernal Sun draw's near;
And with his tender Rays does Earth embrace;
Her cold and (...) Veins begin to cheer,
New Life and Verdure smile in all her Face;
Enriched and arrayd She gins to be
With her bie and with floury gailantrie:
209.
So Psyche hugged, and gently warmed by
The Arms and Lips of Truth, soon felt her breast
Before invelopp'd in Obscurity
Now by a pure and precious Light possessed;
She felt her inward mystic Day arise,
Which gently flourished through her wondering Eyes.
210.
Logos, who had so pert and busy been,
Was strangely startled at the sudden Sight;
And now to see his Blindness did begin,
By the sweet Dawn of this all-opening Light:
He saw his Blindness, and in seeing this
Descri'd withal a thousand Mysteries.
211.
And that so clearly, that He feared no more
What Mists Authades in his Way could throw:
Agyrtes Charms He scorned, which before
Into the paths of Darkness him did draw;
This happy Morn He blessed and kissed, which
His Eyes with Heavens fair Prospect did enrich.
212.
For here far more convincing Things He read
Than were his late-adored Demonstrations;
No brisk Distinction here durst show her Head,
Or hope to damp those glorious Probations
Which on Syneidesis her self did get
Such power, that unto Them her Seal she set
213.
Nor less on Thelema this Wonder wrought;
For with entire and free Submission she
Bowed down her mighty Neck, and low did lout
To every Thing which Logo's eye did see;
And then she hugged them fast within her Heart,
Resolved never more with them to part.
214.
With high and holy Joy replenished
Was humble Psyche at this happy Sight;
All Catholic Verities at large were spread
In her bright Soul, whence Scruples took their flight,
Resigning all that Region to be
Possessed by Satisfactions Clarity.
215.
Ten thousand Thanks to courteous Truth she paid,
And would as many times have paid them o'r;
But Phylax her excess of Passion staid;
Telling her she must now employ that Store
She here had gained, where need called for it, and
Study how to enrich her native Land.
216.
With that she Rose: but strait fell down again
Before the Throne to pay her Homage to
The Queen, who now high in her Heart did reign:
And then with sweeter Cheer prepared to go,
Having received a Benediction from
Ecclesia, for her dear Viaticum.
217.
But as she went, she blessed the blessed Place;
And, o how happy are the Souls, said she,
Who in this Holy Courts illustrious Face
May be Attendants, and these Glories see
With constant freedom, which all Heaven can dart
With one short glimpse on the Spectators Heart!
218.
O happy They, who in this Hall may live
Perpetualy these noble Spoils to read;
And Acclamations of Honor give
To Her who all these Monsters Blood did shed;
To Her whom all the World does yield to be
As large as is it Self, in Victory.
219.
O happy They, who have but leave to dwell
Here in this Praeface to that larger Bliss!
This noble Portch alone does far excel
The fullness of all other Palaces:
This is the Morning unto Glories Day,
The Brink of Joy, the Top of Heavens Highway.
220.
O happy They, who in this beauteous Court
May wait upon the Portch, and feed their Eyes,
And with their Eyes, their Hearts, in any Sort,
Upon this House and Home of Mysteries.
This Neighborhood to Bliss would serve to be
Sufficient Felicity for Me.
221.
O happy They, who may permitted be
Even in this Realm of Thorns, and craggie Ways,
This Field of Hardship and Perplexity,
This Maze of Fears and Snares, to spend their Days!
The Prospect to yon' Palace would suffice
To bless and sweeten all Anxieties.
222.
O happy They who may remain with Thee,
Disconsolate Maid, even at this outmost Gate!
The Comfort but of such Vicinity
To yon' fair Towers, would easily abate
The trouble of thy Sighs; and never would I
Repent of Panance's sad Company.
223.
With these sweet Plaints she measured her Return,
Till back unto the Chariot she came:
And well was Phylax pleass'd to hear her Mourn,
Judging by this how serious was the Flame
Of her Affection to that Holy Place
In which her Virgin Bosom fired was.
224.
Then mounting up, and gently seating her
At his right Hand, his mighty Reins he shook
And these could scarce before his Coursers stir,
For straight their leap into the Air they took,
Spreading their Wings wide Oars, by which They through
The Waves of that soft Ocean did row.
225.
For she remembering well what sad Event
Plagued her affected Stay in Palestine,
By dear-bought Wisdom learned to be content
To leave this reverend Place, though more divine
Temptations here invited her to stay,
Since wiser Phylax summoned her away.
226.
So when a Child, wooed by the sporting Flame,
Is once but scorched into a feeling Sense
Of the fair-faced Danger; Fear and Shame,
Bow him down to his Nurses 'Providence,
And make Him any (...) Luster shun
If but her Nodd commands Him to run.
227.
But he to entertain her by the way
With advantageous Discourse, begun
To reckon through what worthy Wonders They
In their (...) Pilgrimages Tract had run:
For Repetitions trusty hand does grave
A new Impression, and the old one save.
228.
This roused her Soul to recollect how she
Had by the Conduct of Heavens special Grace
Through thousand Dangers passed untouched, and free,
Though Hell and all its Wit engaged was,
In open field to cross, or undermine
By secret Wiliness her brave Design.
229.
A fresh her Mind did feast on every Sweet
And Wondrous Thing, which all the way she went
With rich Varieties her Eyes did meet;
So clear the Angels Tongue did them present.
Drawing All out in ample Stateliness
By the fair Help of Eloquence's Dress.
230.
Thus in a double Chariot did she ride;
But yet in this of his Discourse she fiew
With swifter speed, out-running even the tide
Of Time it Self; for still her Joies were new,
Cheating her Weariness as he along
Through all her Journeys traveled with his Tongue.
231.
This tuned her Tongue by her Hearts dainty String
To honest Gratitudes ingenuous Lays;
High was her Key and delicate the Song
Composed to the sweetest Air of Praise:
For ever may these Lips be sealed, said she,
When they suppress the Thanks I owe to Thee.
232.
To Thee, dear Pilot of my tender Bark,
Which many Rocks ever this had dashed in sunder,
Which often had wandered in the Deep and Dark,
Which many Storms proud feet had trodden under,
Which many Sands into its Grave long since
Had swallowed up, but for thy stout Defense.
233.
To Thee whom no Contempt of mine could drive
To just Disdam of a vile Worm; to Thee
By whose dear Care my better Life I live,
If yet I live at all, and rather be
Not dead and buried in those Sins which I
Prefert'd before the Life of Piety.
234.
Yet more I owe to Him, (and more must pay)
By whose Appointment I enjoyed Thee
My faithful Guide in this long perilous Way:
But thou must teach Me what those Thanks must be:
If they must be my Self, I ready am
This Sacrifice to offer to his Name.
235.
His Name, in whose dear Syllables alone
I read my Self, entirely such: For there
Lives the sweet Soul of that Redemption
Which snatched me from that (...) Bondage, where
(...) lay abandoned to the tyrannous Will
Of Error, Madness, wickedness, and Hell.
236.
His Name in which the Praise and Adoration
Of the Seraphick, and Cherubick Quire
Rejoice to meet: His Name, of every Nation
The dearest Joy and sovereign Desire:
His Name which o'r the whole Worlds vanquished Pride
Does in sublime, but gracious Triumph ride:
237.
His Name, the only Music which mine Ear
Can of no Jarrs accuse: that lovely Name
Which when Heavens most melodious Orbs do heat:
They throw aside their other Songs, and frame
Their Tunes by Jesu's Sweets. -- Here off she broke
Lovingly ravished by the Name she spoke.
238.
And here the Steeds, who all this while had flew
With stout but silent fervor, neigh'd aloud;
For now their Journey to its period drew,
And Albion her chalkie Forehead showed;
Which with erected Ears, and shaked Mains
They doubled strait, and scoured o'r the Plains.
239.
Forthwith, all clouded in their smoking Foam.
The Chariot they hurld to Psyche's door;
Where Phylax bid his Pupil welcome home,
Which She did on her Knee to Him restore;
And stroaking then her Steeds upon the Crest,
She for their faithful Pains her Thanks professed.
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO XVII. The Mortification.
ARGUMENT.
PSyche embrav'd by Chari's generous Flames
Strives in Devotions Furnace to refine
Her pious self, till with Perfections Beams
Her pure Spiritualized Life might shine.
Then Satan she defies, though crafly He
Came clothed in Angelick Claritie.
1.
PEace, gentle Queen of every Thing which makes
Sweets acceptable, Bliss delightful be;
What satal Conjuration of Mistakes
Inchanteth Mortal Hearts, that they will see
Thy Beauties not by their own Light, but by
The hideous Glass of Wars Deformity!
2.
They see the Sun is fair, by his own Beams;
Gems by their proper Luster them allure;
They taste the Fountains sweetness by the streams;
The Roses (...) Cheek does them assure
The Flower is beautiful: yet they will not
Thy Graces read, but by a Stain, and (...).
3.
Dear is this Learning, and sometimes too late:
O how much sooner, and much cheaper might
They all Wars tedious costly study bare,
If they to Thee would come to Schole, and write
From the Original of thy fair Eyes,
That Book, which dims the Volums of the (...)
4.
Thy Temper is all Music; never did
The least of Jars thy sweet (...) (...):
From thine, all Concords (...) were copied;
Nor would the Center on his (...)8 back
Agree to bear the World, did it Thou noc by
Thy (...) Chains the Burden (...).
5.
For at the first, when in the untuned Deep
Each Thing was wroth, and snarled with his Brother;
When Heaven and Earth tumbled in one blind Heap,
Struggled and strove to stifle one Another;
When All Things with their peevish selves fell out,
And in their own Hearts for their Enemies sought.
6.
Then Thou with seasonable Love did come,
And those wild Tumults sweetly chase away;
These boistrous Pangs of the Worlds traveling Womb
With happy Quietness thou did allay,
Making those Embroy's Friends, who never since
Have to that Knot of love done violence.
7.
All rest contented with the Stations Thou
Appointedst Them; and Earth is pleased as well
With her poor Habitation here below,
As any Stars which in Heavens Roof do dwell:
Nor will the Winds, though big they be and proud,
Desire above the middle Air to crowd.
8.
The sirly Sea, who in his boiling Wrath
Against the shore with mountainous Waves does make,
Dreads the poor List of feeble Sand, which has
No power that desperate Carreer to slake,
Because He reads in it thy potent Law,
Which back into his Deep does make him flow.
9.
All honest Beasts, and sociable, are
Made such by thy sweet Influence alone:
In vain the Oaten Pipe, and feeebler Care
Of Shepherds, up and down the feilds would run,
Did Thou not first persuade the Sheep to be
Best pleased with the Flocks Community.
10.
Men, whose discording Tempers them invite
To seek new Worlds their several Minds to please,
Are by thy (...) taught to take delight
In the kind Unions of Families;
One House will hold a Brood, when Thou do join
To build their Walls, and their Desires combine.
11.
No Cities ever could erected be,
Did not thine Hand the Architecture guide,
Were not the found Materials by Thee
For every street, and every Court supplied:
Their Firmitude to neither Wood nor Stone
They owe, but to thine Unity alone.
12.
Most distant Countries Thou do Neighbors make
By safe and friendly Traffic, which does bear
One World into another Lap, and take
The radiant East from its rich Home, that here
It may adorn the West, whose mutual Store
Of other Wealth requites that Golden Ore,
13.
Nations whose sundry Languages divide
Them from the hopes of joint Community,
Are in one Commonwealth securely ti'd
When Thou do knit the Knot, and make them see
That All want help of All, and they are best
Provided, who are of most friends possessed.
14.
A Sceptres mighty Load Thou light do make,
And wean'st from Weariness the Subjects necks,
But when They, by self-tyrannous Mistake,
See not thy Sweets, but their own Patience vex:
High-noon is dark to those that will not see,
And feathers, Lead, when Men will tired be.
15.
When Thou do domineer, all Laws do so,
And fair Astraea ventures down again;
Right all about the blessed Streets does go,
And awful Modesty fails not to chain
All Rudeness up, which once let loose by War,
Does no Extremities of Mischief spare.
16.
The coolest Veil could never yet secure
The bashful Virgin from Lusts rampant fire,
But when in sober Bounds Thou did immure
The youthful Violence of hot Desire:
Her only Safety lilie Chastity
To thy white Banner ow's, and purer Thee.
17.
The Gown does keep the thoughtfull Student warm
Yet not, but when by thy Embraces laced,
And girded sure by thy incircling Arm;
Else their poor Garb is presently outfaced
By Shields and Bucklers, and they forced to try
What Habit best will suit Them when they fly.
18.
All Arts which are of Age and grown complete,
That Happiness to thy Tuition owe;
No Honey ever would choose its dainty Seat
In Orators Mouths; no Laurele'r would grow
On Poets Temples; if Thou did not bless
All Learnings seasons with due fertilenesse.
19.
By thy sole Patent Heaven on Earth has room,
Churches have license to be what they are;
God is permitted here to have an Home,
And handsome too: Thou put in the Bar
Which bids Prohanesse keep its distance, and
Learn that there is more than one Holy Land.
20.
The Walls to their own Altars cannot yield
Protection, unless Thou joinst thine aid;
The Roof cannot the Rites nor Service shield
When by Heretic Storms they are assaid,
Except Thou help'st to clear the Air, and stop
The impious Rage of popular Torrents up.
21.
The Theme of everlasting Admiration
Miraculous Loves selected Mystery,
The Sacramental Work, to the usurpation
Of Lay unwashen Hands exposs'd does lie,
But where this impudent Community
From the Communion is barred by Thee,
22.
The sacred Priests, who never injurcd be.
By unrevenged Hand, are not secure,
Though all the reverence of Piety
In venerable Awe does them immure,
Unless thy patent Arm be stretched to keep
The Shepherds from the Mouths of their own Sheep
23.
Our holy Mother cannot safely hold
Her own Inheritance, so unnatural be
Her Sons, and sacrilegiously Bold,
Unless Thou curb'st their cursed Liberty:
The Church must quickly Bankrupt turn, if Thou
Her Patrimony do not safe bestow.
24.
Nay Princes, upon whose majestic Head
Gods Name was poured with the sacred Unction,
No sooner are by Thee abandoned;
But in despite to their most awful function,
Of the ungrateful and apostate Scum
Of their own Vassalls they the Scorn become.
25.
No Region, though before the Garden where
The Plenitude of Happiness did grow,
Forsaken is by Thee, but straight does wear
The woeful garb of Misery, and slow
With Streams of Tears, for those sweet Currents which
With Milk and Honey did its Meads enrich.
26.
But Plenties Horn in thy fait Arm does dwell,
Whence, wheresoe'r thy blessed foot does tread,
Thy Benisons thou liberaly do spill,
And all the Fields with smiling Fatness spread;
Whilst the blithe Hindes do pay Thee honest praise
Not in the Trumps Roar, but soft Oaten Lays.
27.
Away sneaks Vice, when Thou thy face do show,
And seeks blind Holes to hide its blacker Head;
Whose room Thou straight to Virtue do allow,
Cheering her up to take sure root and spread
Her Arms so wide, that all the Country may
Under her Shade calm Happiness enjoy.
28.
O blessed Maid! how long, how long, shall We
Number our Curses by the Days and Years,
The tedious Days and Years, which now We see
All black with sullen Clouds of fatal Fears,
Whilst Thou art fled, and leave our woeful Land,
In most unnatural Wars destroying Hand!
29.
How is unhappy Britain now become
The Isle of Sorrow, which was once of Joy!
How have all Monsters made these Fields their Home,
Where only harmless Sheep were wont to play!
How are the Gunns and Trumpets taught to Roar,
Where only Pipes of Reed were heard before!
30.
How have We stained Albions lilie hue
In bloody gore, and washed that Name away!
How has our Red-crosse been too truly true
Unto its tincture! How are We a Prey
Unto our Selves, whilst we have made a Sea
As well amidst Us, as about Us be.
31.
A Sea broke open from our own desperate Veins,
Which to the Crown and Mitre, Shipwreck threats;
A Sea, in which though some do fish for Gains,
Yet can they not at length escape their own Nets:
O no! there is Nothing to be gained bear,
But certain Loss; which makes the Trade too dear,
32.
How have We coined fond Names of Hate, which we
With Sword and Bullet to the Death pursue!
Are there no Turks! that thus the Unity
Gf the brave English Name does by a new
Portentuous Rent all mastacred appear
Into the Roundhead and the Cavalier!
33.
How have We strove our Lions Nails to pare,
Who was before the royal Dread and (...)
To all the neighbour-Beasts! How has our Fear
And Jealousy helped their own Cause to grow
To greater strength! How has our vast (...)
But opened our Purse till all be drained thence!
34.
Sweet Queen of Joys, o when, when will it be!
When will the blessed Dawn of thy fair Eyes
Cheer our benighted Hemisphear, that We
And all our wonted Bliss, with thee may (...)
O calm and gentle (...), when will thou please
Out Insland (...) to appear.
35.
When shall We cease with mighty Care and Cost
To raise the heap of our own Ruins high,
When shall We yield to be no longer toss
In Waves of self-affected Misery!
When shall We with our Pains no longer play!
When shall We do what We so often say.
36.
When shall we cease to make our selves the (...)
Of all that mock at Infelicitie!
When shall We judge our selves enough forlorn!
When shall We think our Woes deserving be
Of our own pity, that our Bowels may
Henceforth be torn none but that healing way.
37.
Prudent and tender Phylax, knew that He
In both those Titles, nothing could bestow
Upon his Pupil, which to Her might be
More fertile in Advantages, then now
To exile every troublous mist, and clear
The Countenance of her Habitations Sphere.
38.
He knew the worth of Peace, and long ago
When he had Psyche left in Palestine
He hither came, and orderd business so
That all things did into a Calm combine;
But none could tell it was to entertain
Psyche, now ready to return again.
39.
But she arrived at her ancient Home,
Wonderd to find Security made Queen
Of all that Region; vacant was no room
For Molestation to be buisie in;
Nor any Gap left open by which she might
Thrust in her head and Quietness affright
40.
Her Friends and Parents much advanced this wonder
When in their cheerly gratulations they
Told Her how Peace had trod all Perils under
Her blessed feet, and blown the storm away:
They told it o'r and o'r, and marvell'd why
She turned to (...) her mistrusting Eye.
41.
But He observing it, thus satisfied
Her questioning Soul: Suspect no false-hood here,
Thou (...) but what is true; I did provide
This Calm to bid thee welcome home, my (...);
Thy Voyage finish a is and in this Bay
And (...) of Rest, thy Bark may safely stay.
42.
But set Thou (...) it still, and keepst it trim,
For fear some storm hereafter should arise:
What Profit is it through dangerous seas to swim
And (...) empests Prize?
^
(...) sleeping Pilots overtakes.
43.
Complear (...) dwells in no Bay
But that above to which thine heart does sail;
For ever there thy Vessel thou may lay
In certain Peace: But here no Help can bail
Thee from the Winds arrest, if thou forget
To do thy part, and thine own (...) set.
44.
O set them then, and bravely antidate
The Rest that dwells in the Heavenly port;
It Is worth the price, and more; Atany Rate
It is not dear; then stick not to give for it
Thy earnest Wish, and daily Industry:
No Wealth so rich as genuine Rest can be.
45.
If thou repent Thee of thy Bargain, say
That with false Wares thy Phylax cheated thee,
And boldiy throw both them and Me away,
And call the Shore more treacherous than the Sea;
Conclude all things, but Vanity, are Vain,
And think Perdition the only Gain.
46.
But surely no such desperate Thought will (...)
Abuse the Pious Heart of Psyche: No,
My Hopes are greater of thy holy Care.
With which mine own shall be combined too
For as a guard upon thy Guard will I
My wonted Love and Watchfulnes employ
47.
Scarce had He spoke; but (as the heavenly (...)
Into Earths thirsty Mouth drops copious Joy
Celestial Charis into Psyche flew,
Doubling her Welcome home, and making way
Through her soft Bosom to her softer Heart,
To which a sweet Embrace She did impart.
48.
Nor was there need that She should use her Tongue,
Whose (...) our spoke aloud in Psyche's breast,
(...) by (...) plying secret language rung
(...) more than aerie Words could have expressed:
The Virgin understood its meaning well,
And (...) it close in Her Hearts inmost Cell.
49.
(That (...) wherein Her Life enshrined lay;
Which now (...) up in bounden reverence,
And to this roy (...) gave willing way:
For what is Grace s blessed Influence,
But Life's best Life? which well deserv's to be
Plac d highest in the vital Treasury.)
50.
So close She hugged it, that it there grew warm,
And glowed so hot, that strait it fell on fire:
The sudden flame sounded a smart Alarm
Through all Her Breast, and wakened brave Desire;
Desire the other Forces mustered up,
And now no Bar her high Design could stop.
51.
As when Heroic fervor does a wake
A Princes Heart to take a full survey
Of all his Realm, and Reformation make
Of what is swerved from the Laws Highway;
To his own King, the King of Heaven, He calls
For Aid, and then to his great Business falls.
52.
So prudent Psyche, prostrate on her face,
Begs Jesus help to speed her (...):
(For Phylax now by (...) admonished was
To snatch himself far from his Pupils eyes:
In pressed obedience to which Item, He
Fled strait into Invisibilitie.)
53.
Deer Lord, said She, who never do for sake
Thy Worms which to thy footstool crawle for aid,
O pity, pity on thy Hand (...) take,
That She by her Saint Self be not betrayed.
Thou who vouchsafll to Kindle my (...),
Assist Me, least it prove an useless (...).
54.
Well (...) thy wronged Majesty how I
The (...) Thou often gave Me did choke,
And sent up no Returns at all to thy
Most (...) Heaven but black and stinking Smoke,
Hels rank and proper Breath, which once was mine
When to Cerinthus Schole I ran from thine.
55.
O trust Me not alone; although my Will
Bravely enflamed and spurred on by Thee,
Aims at a lofty Mark, yet Psyche still
Is that unfortunate and feeble She
Who in her full Carreers proves out of breath,
And when She soars to Life, sinks down to Death.
56.
Not for my Credit, but thy Graces, and
Thine own, in this Design I crave Success;
Paid only to the Praise of thy high Hand
Shall be the Achievements Glory: Psyche is
Beneath Disgrace, but it in honor does
Concern thy (...)
57.
Up slew her Prayer, and knocked at Jesus (...)
So loud it knocked, that straight He let it in;
In, to his Favors Presence Chamber, where
His gracious Entertainment it did win:
Its Embassy was heard, and Jesus granted
What ever Psyche in this buisnesse wanted,
58.
This bred fresh Courage in her Heart, and She
With doubled Gallantrie adventured on
Her noble Work: Her ancient Royalty
Which bold Incroachment often had trod upon,
She meant to reskew, and assert her Crown;
Though for her Spouse s sake, more than her own.
59.
A general Court She calls, and summons all
Her Subjects in, to know her royal Mind:
Large the Appearance was; both Great and small
(...) slocking in; for none durst stay behind,
So (...) the (...) was, and they
(...) (...) did expect that Day.
60.
No sooner had this (...) till a the Hall
Of (...) palace, but in (...) State
Being ballas'd with her (...) and her (...)
She thither comes, and takes her (...):
Up stood the Company while She (...) down,
And bowed their Heads to (...) and to Her (...).
61.
How kindly She that general Homage took,
As Earnest of their several Duties, She
First certifi'd them by her gracious Look,
(With which she paused a while, for Majesty
Must not make haste,) then by her softer Tongue,
From whence her charming Honey thus She Wrung.
62.
My multiplied Self, sweet Company,
In whom as many and as sundry lives
I live, as you enjoy; how dear and high
Content to Me your loyal Presence gives,
I must not tell you now; it were too long
A Story, and would do the other Wrong;
63.
The other Story; which would more than fill
This Day, as having cost Me several years
To travel through it, should I try to tell
Its several Wonders: but against your Earer
I piot no Tyranny, nor aim to break
Them on a tedious Narrations Rack.
64.
Through many Climats I have whirled been
By the sweet Conduct of my Guardians Care:
The world clad in all fasbions I have seen,
And how their Clothes and Manners Mortals wear;
Fair Cities, foul Inhabitants; and poor
Hamlets, yet such as noble Spirits bore.
65.
I saw Men live in their Out sides alone,
Scarce thinking that within a Soul they had:
And yet, because it was the fashion,
Themselves a Cloak they of Religion made.
A Summer Cloak, so light and thin, that they
Felt it not when upon their backs it lay,
66.
I saw the World its fatal Bane embrace,
And loath the Antidote of Piety:
I saw Devotion loaded with Disgrace;
And humble zeal disdained by those high
And silken Things, who know no way to be
Gentile, but Pride, and sinful Liberty,
67.
Seveerly-holy-Soules exposed I saw
To lusty Gallants Scorn and Hatred, who
Upon their patient Heads the Check did throw
Of foolish Singularity, though no
Pretense there were, but that they down the Tide
Of deep Damnation would not with them ride.
68.
The holier Stories, whence the Holy Land
Derived its Name, I by their footsteps read;
For many still do deep imprinted stand,
To honest Pilgrims aim to give, and lead
Their Hearts on in that venerable Path
Which, for their sakes, Divine Love traced has.
69.
But by that Lesson of Humility
Both proud and confident I strangely grew;
My own poor waxen Wings I needs would try,
And willingly from those stout pinions flew
Which Phylax always for my service spread
When sturdie Dangers Me encountered.
70.
My Wings, alas, did only me commit
An helpless Booty to the Birds of Prey;
For Kites and Vultures straight did me beset,
Whose foul Heretic Tallons plucked away
My best and fairest Plumes, and did prepare
My blood and life away with them to tear.
71.
But Heaven and Phylax present pity took,
And snatched me from that fatal Company,
Unto a Palace whose illustrious Look
Revived mine, whose generous Courtesy
More royal Things bestowed on Me, than those
Plunders wild Law made forfeit to my foes.
72.
This was Ecclesias famous Court where I
Beheld the Miracles of Discipline:
No spectacle ever blessed Mortal Eye
With sights more venerable and divine:
Upon my Heart they engraved themselves so deep
That their Impression it must ever keep.
73.
So sweet a Calm of heavenly Peace was there
That no Disturbance could it self intrude;
Which made it genuine Paradise appear,
All over with harmonious Pleasures strewed.
His Duty to each Officer was known,
Who loved it best, because it was his own.
74.
And happy are those Courts, and only those,
Where in all Offices Content does dwell;
Where every Courtier, were He put to choose,
Would only be ambitious to excel
In his own Place, and covet to appear
Splendid in none but in his proper Sphere.
75.
Such genuine Beams as theirs, can only be
The comely Glory of a Princes Court:
Thus do the prudent Stars above agree
To swell and garnish Heavens Majestic Port.
Thus every Orb loves his own Way, and on
His mighty Journey does with Music run.
76.
Thus those more radiant Sparks which on the face
Of the pure Empyraeum glittering are,
The holy Angels, hug their proper Place,
And wish no nobler Work than meets them there.
And who can say Us Nay, if stoutly we
Resolve thus to adorn our Polity?
77.
Right glorious those Examples are by which
We are invited thus to Honors Way:
What Tongue would not unto its highest Pitch
Advance it Self, to consecrate a Lay
Of Praise to them? And why should we admire
That which does not spur Us unto Desire!
78.
All shame forbid our Spirits should flag so low
As not to pant and reach at Excellence.
What though it cost Us All a sweating Brow?
The Gain will more than cross out that Expense.
(...), Ease is the Rust of that brave Metal
Which strengthens noble Spirits for Virtues Battle.
79.
Come then; Henceforth let it Enacted be,
That All their Bows unto the utmost bend;
That generous and hardy Industry
Through all our Court its active Arms extend;
That every one do in his Office prove
How much my Credit, and their own they love.
80.
Though I be Queen, yet I my self submit,
And bend my Neck unto this Common Law;
The Yoke as well for Me, as you will fit,
And be assured I my part will draw:
If ever you see Me shrink, or Labor shun,
It shall be your Discharge from going on.
81.
But if you winch and kick, and will not be
Partners with Me in our propounded Prize;
I am no Young ling now, Maturity
Dwells in my Hand and Brain; will can I poise
My Scepter, and know easily how to make
Those who disdain to how, be fain to break.
82.
I paid an high price for that Learning I
Bought when Agenor made his Market here.
And who can blame my Prudence, if I try
To make the most of what cost me so Dear?
It must, and shall appear, How well I know
That Kindness makes but Rebels bolder grow.
83.
But o, I feel how ill upon my Tongue
This Threatening rellisheth; My Breath should I
More willingly expend upon a Song
In Commendation of your Loyalty:
Your Loyalty, which now, me thinks, I see
Already flaming to this Law, and Me.
84.
She ceased here. When lo, about the Hall
A musing Silence for a good while lay.
Diverse were there, who thought this Law would fall
Too soar and heavy on their Backs; yet they
For fear their Party should appear too weak
In Votes, durst not their Motions open make.
85.
Not with their Tongues: But with their Eyes about
The Room they walked, and questioned one another:
In every Look they met with Hope, and Doubt,
Which mutualy their trembling Selves did smother:
Their Shoulders some and some their Heads did shake,
Confessing what they were afraid to speak.
86.
At length presuming it the safer way
Their Vessels down the potent Stream to steer,
They with the rest, resolved to Obey
What they could not withstand. Thus thanklesse Fex
Of being broken by the Winds, does make
The lazy Clouds long voyages to take.
87.
The whole Assembly thrice bowed to the ground,
And (...) professed their Thanks unto their Prince,
Whose careful Wisdom such a way had found
To yoke her Subjects unto Excellence:
And may Rebellions Brand and Curse, said they
Mark and revenge all them that disobey.
88.
Thus passed the Act: which being fairly writ,
Upon the middle Pallat of the Hall,
Was hung by Psyche (...) Command, that it
Might of their Duties daily warn them all.
So is the Rod stuck up at Schole, whose look
Does awe the idle Children to their Book.
89.
But She to practice what was now Decreed,
Begins with Them who easiest were to tame;
That their Example afterward might breed
A strong and stinging Argument of shame
To lash those Servants who more manly were
If they, more weakly, should their Task forbear.
90.
Her Porters five, she called one by one,
Their several Instructions to take.
Opsis was first, to whom she thus begun:
Although thy Place and Nature Thee do make
In most Discoveries apt and quick, yet I
Further than thou, can into some things spy.
91.
Believe Me then, thou have most need to be
Jealous of what usurpeth Beauties face;
Danger is politic, and Treachery
Too wise to lodge in a suspected Place.
The richest Soil the rankest Weeds does bear;
The deepest Holes in silent Rivers are.
92.
That Apple which bewitched our Grandames Eyes,
Was in Pomona's goodliest Roab arrayed;
Its plump and ruddy Cheeks did fairly rise,
And seeming Smiles in all its Countenance played;
But yet such Venom in its Juice did lie,
As poured on all the World Mortality
93.
Fair were the Grapt unto good Noah's Eye,
Nor with less Pleasure faun'd they on his Taste;
His unsuspecting Heart was also by
Their sweet Enchantments ravished, till at last
His treacherous Guest tripp'd up his heels, and bore
Him over shamefully upon the Floor.
94.
Elisha's Servant saw no cause of Fear
In the Wild Vine, whose Gourds did him invite
To fill his Lap; so delicate they were,
And held such Correspondence with his sight:
Yet, cheated Man, He did he knew not what,
And shred abundant Death into the Pot.
95.
The wisest Prince, but Heavenly Wisdoms King,
To Folly was betrayed by his Eyes;
Which in his Queens bright Beauties rioting,
Prevailed with Him first to Idolize
Those Female Powers; and then fall down before
What he set up, and Stocks and Stones ad ore.
96.
When Juda's Eyes would needs enamored be
Of dangerous Moneys gaudy glistering face,
Those richer Beams they could no longer see
Whose pure Exuberance did his Masters grace:
But he, blind Traitor, to eternal Night
Betrayed himself in scorning Jesu's light.
97.
That gorgeous Fruit which dangled on the Trees
That shaded Asphaltite's cursed shore,
Out-vi'd in fragrant Gold the Hesperides
Renouned Boughs, and more Enticements wore
Upon its Cheeks; and yet this Stateliness
Was but of Ashes and of Stinks the Dress.
98.
Be wary then in time, for fear some Bait
Do ssiely steal an Hook into thine Eye;
For fear some sweet and beauteous Deceit
Pour Bitterness on thy Credulity.
Security delights in Fears meek Cell,
But scorns in Confidence's Towers to dwell.
99.
Thou never wilt repent thee of thy Cost
If thou Watch before thine Eyes do set;
Two nimble Lids thou always ready have,
Which, if thou will, all Dangers out can shut.
O let it not be said, that thou do keep
Those Curtains only to enclose thy sleep.
100.
When Dinah's Eyes would needs be gadding out,
And walk in Hamors Court; though honest she
Only to feed her curious Fancy sought,
Ensnared she was in Shechems Treachery,
And, silly Maiden, suddenly became
An Holocaust to Lusts unhappy Flame.
101.
Be prudent then, and never waste thy Look
On any Thing but what concerns thee:
Thy proper Business is the safest Book
On which thy Studies can employed be;
If thou on any other cast thine Eyes,
Thou only Errors readst and Heresies.
102.
Thou se'st what Task I set Thee, that thou may
Be safe and happy, as my Self would be.
So shall thy Tears be useless, when Thou have
No Crimes to wash; so shall the Bravery
Of thy sweet Beams for ever be entire,
And fear no mischief from Hells gloomy Fire.
103.
The time will surely come, and shortly too,
Which will this Abstinence of thine requite,
When thou shall rove and unrestreined go
Through all the Beauties which make Heaven so bright:
Discredit not with Earthly sights, those Eyes
Which are designed to read the glorious skies.
104.
The glorious skies; and what more glorious is,
The gallant Eyes of Jesus, whose divine
Irradiations of eternal Bliss
And royal sweetness upon them shall shine,
When they have done their duty here beneath,
And shall by Him awakened be from death.
105.
Which duty surely never will be done,
By dwelling on that Mirror in thine Hand;
That brittle Emblem of Corruption,
Which though a polished outside does commend,
Is yet welneer as slight a thing and vain
As is the Image that it does sustain.
106.
This Charge with anxious and dejected Look
Opsis received, and trembled at its weight:
That tremor threw her Mirror down, and broke
It on the ground: which she observing, strait
With many a foolish Tear its Death lamented,
And took her leave, unwillingly contented.
107.
The next was Acoe; who came dancing in,
And with her wanton fingers tripped o'r
Her tickled Lute; by which she hoped to win
The favor of her awful Sovereign; for
She felt the Pulse of every string, to see
Where d well'd the sweetest Soul of Melody.
108.
Psyche, until the Galiards Close, was mute:
But then, she said, now lend thy heed to me,
Who will requite thy Lays: I grant thy Lute
Cheerd and encouraged by Arts Braverie,
May pant thee Airs more sweet in thy esteem,
Than from my Lips into thine Ears can stream:
109.
But what is sweetest, is not always best,
And therefore not so sweet as is its Name:
Else the Inchanters Pipe must be confessed
To merit all the loudest Trumps of Fame,
Although its Tunes Hels dangerous Hisses be,
Skinn'd fairly over with false Harmony.
110.
Else should the warbling Siren be preferred
Before the Linet and the Nightingale,
Although no roaring Tempest ever were heard
Which with more certain Poril did assail
The Mariner, unless with timely Care
Against her Music He sealed up his Ear.
111.
Else the Hyaena, who with friendly tone
Knocks at the Door, unto the Lambs should be
As courteous as his Salutation,
Though all his meaning be but Treachery;
And that same Mouth which them bespake so fair,
Prepared be the silly Sheep to tear.
112.
Else should the Parasite, whose Trade it is
To feed and cloth Himself by praising Thee,
And stroaking all thy rankling Wickedness,
Be a more useful trusty Friend, than He
Who for thy breeding Cankers sure prevention
Applies the Corrosive of sound Reprehension.
113.
Remember Acoe, with what wiley Words
The Serpent ointed Eve's imprudent Ears:
Yet all the Syllables were two-edged swords,
Long-bearded Arrows, or envenomed Spears;
Which flew not only through Her careless Heart,
But to the End of all the World did dart.
114.
That Serpent seeing what himself had done;
Took wise and wary Warning ever since:
So did his cunning Generation
Who stop their Ears against the Influence
Of soft Enchantments. And it can be no
Disgrace to learn a Virtue of thy Foe.
115.
Had Delilahs tongue not been so Musical,
It never had ventured upon Sampsons might,
Nor in his Chamber conquered more than all
Philistia's Powers could do in open fight.
But when the strongest Bands were all in vain,
With her soft-language she did Him enchain.
116.
Puffed with Heav'n-daring Pride and Victory,
Great Holofernes feared no dint of Fear,
When walled in with his vast Army He
Vowed, the Jews stock up by the roots to tear:
Yet Judiths glozing Tongue made Him her Prey.
His Heart first, then his Head she stole away.
117.
O then let Prudence stop thy sober Ear
When any worldly Charm does tune its strings;
Much happier is it to be deaf, than hear
The Music of those faithless Flourishings,
Which sliely stealing to thine Heart, will there
With everlasting Jars thy Conscience tear.
118.
The Voice of Truth, though wondrous plain it be,
Flows with more Honey than all Tongues beside;
With Honey so sincere, that Purity
It self a long with all its Streams does glide:
Here may Thou be Luxuriant, yet thine Ear
No Surfeit from this Fullness needs to Fear.
119.
Let others slander't with the Name of Pride;
I Will style it Virtue in Thee to disdain
That empty Foam of Prattle, which does ride
Upon the idly-busy Tongues of vain
And shallow Men, who though they all the Day
Spin out their long Discourses, Nothing say.
120.
Have patience tickling Accents to forbear
A while, that Thou the best of them may gain:
Years post about apace; the Time draws near
When thou exalted on Heavens glistering Plain
With those rich Notes shall enterteined be
Whose Consort makes the Sphearik Melody.
121.
My Philax's blessed Voice there shall Thou hear,
And all the Winged Quire, whose dainty Tongues
The Triumphs and the Joys of Heaven do cheer
With the brisk Raptures of their lofty Songs:
Songs which no Ears must drink, but those which are
On purpose kept, and not enchanted here.
122.
On Acoe so hard this Lesson grated,
That in her Heart she wished she had been deaf:
Yet since their old Rebellion was defeated,
She feared the Senses could have no Releif
By standing out: And well she knew beside,
Who most should feel it when her Queen did chide.
123.
She Sighed, and let her Lute-strings down, as though
She loosned had with them those of her Heart
And then, O sweetest Womb of Pleasures, how
Shall Acoe live, said she, now I must part
With Thee! And here She fetched another Sigh,
And kissed her Lute, and gently laid it by.
124.
Next, Osphresis came in; who in one Hand
Courted a Civet Box, and in the other
A nest of Rose-budds built upon a wand
Of Juniper, and neatly set together.
Which Psyche seeing, Use it warily,
Roses wear Pricks, as well as Leaves, said She.
125.
Could all the Balm of Gilead, all the spice
Of happy Arabie, but inform Thee how
To counterplot those fatal Miseries
Whose certain seeds in thine own heart do grow,
I could approve such Helps: But They We know
Are frail and mortal Things, as well as Thou.
126.
Alas so deep Corruption rooted is
Even in the Center of thy fading Breast,
That O dours strive in vain to weed and dress
The tainted Soil. How largely it is confessed
By former Ages dead and rotten now,
How sure Mortality in Man does grow!
127.
And shall the Son and the Apparent Heir
Of Rottenness, mispend his Time upon
Unnecessary Sweets, by which the Air
Trimmed and enriched is, and that alone?
Sweets which each silly Wind which whisketh by
Snatcheth, and scatters in proud Mockery?
128.
Why should Thou take such Pains to make the Prey,
Of stinking Worms so sweet and dainty? why
Upon perfumed Pillows would Thou lay
Thine Head, when it to rot must only lie?
This Cost and Pains for nothing useful be
But doubling of Corruptions Victory.
129.
Were not a cheaper, and a wiser plot
Aforehand with displeasant Smells to be
Acquainted, that the brackish Grave may not
By being strange, be bitterer to Thee?
At least not to be tainted with the Sweet
Contagion which in Perfumes We meet?
130.
O Osphresis, that Thou did truly know
What Crops of Odours and what Beds of Spice;
What Hills of Sweets, what Plains of flowers grow
In the delicious Lap of Paradise;
Thou could not choose but generously disdain
These poor Perfumes of Earth to entertain.
131.
Yet all the purest Names of Odours are
Short of that everlasting Incense which
From Heavens high Altar does its volumes rear,
And Blessedness it self with sweets enrich.
Save than thy self for these which will one day
Thine Abstinence with Plenitude repay.
132.
And yet mean while I will to thee allow
Far richer sweets then those Thou throw'st away;
In virtue's Garden do but walk, and (...) hou
Shall meet such spicy Breaths of holy Joy,
As will compel thy ravished Soul to think
This Worlds Gentilest sent, but precious stink.
133.
Such Breaths as will perfume thy heart indeed,
And all thy Thoughts and Words aromatize,
Until their odorous Emanations breed
Delight in Gods own Nostrils, who does prize
The sweetness of all Incense by the sent
Of the meek sacrificers pure intent.
134.
Here Osphresis thrice on her Civet, and
Thrice on her smiling Posie smelt; but yet
At length she dropped them out of either Hand,
When she perceived Psyche's Countenance set
With a wfull Resolution, and strait
As Geusis enterd, meekly did retreat.
135.
Geusis brought in her Hand an Honey-combe,
Which prompted Psyche thus the Maid to greet:
What if that Nest of sweetness has no room
For any thing that is entirely Sweet?
What if the Be has in that Cabinet
More of her sting, than of her Honey set?
136.
Full hard it is to eat no more than may
True friend-ship keep twixt safety and delight,
The least Excess will Thee to Pangs betray,
And break thy Work by day, thy Rest by night.
Indeed a surfeit goes most sweetly down,
But strait with Gall the heart is overflown.
137.
The raging Sword's a keen and ravenous Thing,
Witness whole Armies swallowed up by it:
Yet Luxury does wear a sharper sting,
And wider open her hungry Throat is set.
No reeking steel thou ever yet did see
Blush in the guilt of so much Blood as She.
138.
Of his Sobrieties sage stayed weight
Had great Belshazzar not been cozened by
The cruel sweetness of her soft Deceit,
He had not in Heavens scale of Equity
Been found so light, as by Darius down
From his high Empires Zenith to be blown.
139.
Of Her in time had Dives taken heed,
When in each Dish for him She lay in wait,
When into every Boule her self she shed,
And made of each superfluous Bit, a Bait;
Beneath the wretched Gallant had not lain
Acting poor Lazarus his part in vain.
140.
His broiled Tongue had not so clamorous been
In lamentable Outcries to obtain
No crowned Cups of lusty foaming Wine,
But a few drops of Water, to restrain
Those free and jovial flames which now did try
On him another kind of Luxury.
141.
But Lazarus, whose meek ambition was
No more than with this gluttons Dogs to be
A Commoner; unto the sweet Embrace
Of Abraham, and of Felicity
Mounted on Angels Wings did ride, and there
Enjoyed a fuller Feast than Dives here.
142.
Wise Saint, his stomach he had saved, that he
With a full appetite might thither go
Where sumptuous dainties in their Kingdom be,
And purest Pleasures by whole Rivers flow:
And if thou after him would thither climb,
Be sure to trace his footsteps here in time.
143.
I know the Bords of many holy Souls
In fatnes often have been seen to shine,
On which their golden overflowing Boules
Foamd with the heat of aromatic Wine:
But can thou say that they themselves did so?
Surely their Looks and Lives will tell thee no.
144.
This constant Plenty did but keep them to
Their Temperances daily Exercise;
They into hardy Virtue's Lists did go
When to their Bords they went, to play the prize
Of Abstinence, and try their conquering might
On that arrayed Army of Delight.
145.
Heroic (...) were these, who hedged in by
A seige of superfluity could yet
Maintain brave Moderation; but thy
Metal and Tempet, Geusis, are not fit
To wage War with Temptations; No, it is well
If thou by flying can thy safety steal.
146.
To a spare Diet (...). There thou may eat
And drink thine Health; but never in Excess:
Excess makes Sickness reek in all thy Meat,
And with thy Liquor does full Surfets press
Into thy Boule; by which before thou art
Aware, thy Head is drowned, chok'd thy Heart
147.
But sovereign Fasting never fails to be
An happy Purge where these bad Humors reign;
Whilst other Physic drains thy Purse, not thee.
This never does Evacuate thy Coin.
Not operate on any thing but those
Who are thy Bodies or thy Spirits Foes.
148.
Thou know my meaning now: But know withal
I love thee better than to let thee be
Unpunished, if thou shall swerve or fall
From this fair Path unto Felicity,
And with such Ballast stuff thy self as will
It Heaven prevent not, lag thee down to Hell.
149.
Close all this while had Geusis held her Comb;
But the smart dint of this last Word did smite
It from her Hand, and spill it in the Room;
At which the sullen Maid began to bite
Her lips, but marking then stern Psyches Ey,
She bowed her head, and made her will comply.
150.
Scarce was she out, but mincing Haphe came,
Whose Hands were in a Muff of Sables drowned;
Her Body was disposed in a frame
Of wide and easy Clothes, courting her round
With silken flattering softnes; neither Pin
Nor Seam presumed to touch her dainty skin.
151.
Psyche smiled at the sight: And what, said she,
If that soft furniture grow thick with (...)?
If Hair or Sackcloth far more gentle be
Which close and strait on hardy Bodies sticks?
Alas the Wounas of (...) more dangerous far
Than those of sharpest Swords and Arrows are.
152.
Those Weapons wounds can never further sink
Then to the Bodies bottom; but a proud
Attixe does sadly soak the Soul, and drink
Its best blood up; nor knows she how to shrowed
Her self from this Mis-hap so long as she
(...) her Delight on outward Braverie.
153.
Potiphera was deepar wounded by
The delicacies of her soft Array,
Than holy Joseph who did clothed lie
With Chains, although the Iron made a way
Into his Soul: Her wounds did her destroy,
His cured their Earthly Pain with Heavenly Joy.
154.
Thou know in what a soft and curious dress
Madam Herodias danced down to Hell;
Whilst reverend John arrayed in simplenes.
All (...) offspring nobly did excel;
And though in Herod's Court despised, yet
Plain as he was, he into Heavens was let.
155.
Had thou beheld his homespun Camels hair,
And lethern-Thong which did his Loins embrace;
How would thy Lawns, thy Silks, thy Sables dare
To show their cowardly effeminate face?
How would thy worthless skin endure to see
It self in fairer Roabs than glorious He?
156.
Had thou beheld that course and rural suit
Which Gods own wisdom did for Adam make;
How would the sight thy gallantry confute
Who all the dainties of the World would rake
Thy vulgar Carcass to array, when he
The King of Earth, in Skins must clothed be!
157.
Gods Copy satisfied the Saints of old, ( (...) 11. 37

Who sought no further than the skins of sheep
And goats, in which their own they did enfold;
And from that rude and plain Plantation reap
A royal Harvest, now being clothed by
The glittering Roabs of Immortality.
158.
No Beds of wanton Down desired they 11. 38

Wherein to loose themselves, but were content
In Dens and Caves their manly Heads to lay;
Where they to Rest with suller Comfort (...)
Than pompous lusty Solomon, when he
Stepped up his Couch of stately Ivory.
159.
Nor was it ever known that Perl did lie
In any shells but wondrous course and plain;
That any Search could Gold and Silver spy
But nestled in some dark and dirty vein
Of Earth; that gallant Sparks of Fire could rest
But in some rude Flints black unlikely Breast.
160.
I grant Distinctions of Degrees require
Such Garbs as may their Dignities proclaim;
Not that they by their outside beams aspire
To gaudy foolish Glory; since their Aim
Is, or should only be, by this fine Art
Their Places proper honor to assert.
161.
Else the perversly-blear, and peevish Eye
Of rude and stubborn Mortals would not see
What awful Luster flames in Majesty;
Nor how the Sacerdotal Temples be
With venerable Privileges crowned,
Which from their sacred Office does redound.
162.
This made Heavens Ordination of old,
The consecrated Body of the Priest
With reverence-commanding Gems and Gold,
And finest Linens Purity invest.
But what is all this to thee, whose private State
All public Ornaments may well abate?
163.
My peremptory Pleasure therefore is
That thou the best Examples copy out;
Since thou delighted art with Tenderness,
Be Tender of thy Bliss; and never doubt
But that will softer prove, and warmer be
Than are thy Wishes, and that Muffe to thee.
164.
Almost as loath as the Beasts back which bred
That furtie Skin at first, did part with it,
Haphe, by this sweet Violence conquered,
Dropped down her Muffe, and did her head submit.
But yet she shrunk her Shoulders, and betrayed
She thought the Load sad which on them was laid.
165.
Psyche, her Cinque Ports being thus secured,
For The Tongue
Glossa called; who cheerfully came in,
And with a thousand Complements allured
The good opinion of her frowning Queen:
But thou mistaken art, said She, for I
By numerous Phrases count not Loyalty
166.
Truth's quickly said; for pure unspotted she
Delights in her own genuine Nakedness,
And scorns that ceremonious Bravery
Which Flatteries deformity does dress.
Dull Wood alone does Vernice need, but Gems
Are brave in their own native naked Beams.
167.
Much Talk is either stretched out by lies
Which poison all the Streams wherein they flow;
Or tricked up with handsorne Vanities,
Which like fond Ribands serve but for a show,
And rather catch Spectators Eyes, than tie
That unto which their false Knots they apply;
168.
The idle froth which plays upon the face
Of troubled Waters, swells not with Wind
So thin and faint and slight and empty, as
Is that which bubbles from a royled Mind,
When overflowing Wisdoms sober (...)
In drunken Prattle on the Lips it swimms.
169.
As thy next Neighbor Geusis soon may be
Luxurious by too much Taking in;
So thou must of an opposite Luxury
Be careful; for if once thy Lips begin
To give the Reins to Words, it is great chance
But they will drown thee in Intemperance.
170.
Silence, her Master never did undo
But o how guilty is Multiloquie
Of this unhappy Treason! Nature, who
The Danger spied by Providence eye,
Was studious this Mischief to prevent,
Whilst unto thee a double Guard she lent.
171.
The outer are thy Lips, which though they be
But soft and tender, yet their two-leav'd Door
So close they shut, that not the first Degree
Of Words, not Breath it self, has power to bore
Its way, but forced is to go about,
And through the Notes Sluices wrestle our.
172.
The inner are thoso Ranks of Ivory
Which strougly barracadoe up thy way;
No itching busy Bubble can get by
Except its Passage these to it betray.
It Is no hard task for thee to rest in peace,
Who strengthened art by two such (...)
173.
Before Thou speak, Thou art Queen alone
And have the free command of thine own Thought;
But unto foreign Jurisdiction
Thou yeeldest it when Words have blown it out,
For strait it is subject to the cruel Laws
Of every Auditors censorious Jaws.
174.
When thou giv'st leave to other Tongues to walk,
They travel for thy Gain; if Wise he be
Who speaks, thou learnest Wisdom by his Talk,
If Foolish, thou getst by his Vanity
A wholesome Warning: But when thine own Cock
Alone does run, thou spendest on the Stock.
175.
Fear no discredit by Pauciloquie;
All Jesu's footsteps high and noble are,
Never was humble Sheep more mute then He
Before those who his humane fleece did shear:
And if the Word himself was not ashamed
Of Silence, why should it in Thee be blamed?
176.
What will it boot thee to enhance the score
Of these Debts which to Heavens Judge thou do owe:
A strict Acconnt Thou must give up before
His dreadful Throne, of all the Words that flow
From thee in vain; why then will Thou to death
Be sentenced by thine own lavish Breath?
177.
Improve it rather in a holy Thrift,
And unto Heaven let it thy Prayers blow,
Or thy loud Hallelujahs thither lift;
And not, like wanton Winds, play here below.
But if Thou needs wilt idely prattle, I
Must deal in (...) with thy Vanity.
178.
No Word could Glossa unto this reply,
But looked demurely, and obeisance did:
Her conge to withdraw, in Psyche's Eye
And in her Nod, no sooner did she read,
But out She meekly went, and left the room
Unto the Passions who were thither come.
179.
As these in order stood before the Throne,
With serious Looks the Queen first awed Them;
Then thus She spoke: Now you are here alone,
I am content to tell you what esteem
I have of you, so long as you can be
What Heaven has made you, to your selves, and Me.
180.
Of all the Commons which Allegiance owe
To this my Crown, I you repute the best;
More quick and generous Service you can show
Than those whose utmost Faculties do rest
In gross exterior things, which only are
Laboring in Sensibilities dull Sphere.
181.
Upon your backs I can far higher slice,
And with more speed, than on the Senses Wings:
By you I welcome bid, or I defy
The Tributes which to Me their Service brings:
You are the lively Mirror which presents
My dispositions truest Lineaments.
182.
The inward Body of the Soul are you,
The Outside of the hidden Heart: All springs
Which peep up there, apparently do flow
In your free Channels; the abstrusest Things
Which in the Minds dark Temper nestling ly,
By you exposed are to every Eye.
183.
But as your natural Power and Worth is high,
So is the Guilt of your Extravagance:
Though Worms, the Sons of Dirts all nuzzling (...)
In their Dames bosom, they do not inhance
Their Baseness; but should Birds do so, in them
The Crime would foul and most unnatural seem.
184.
Be then but truly what you are; but fly
In your own Sphere; and you shall surely meet
Together with your own felicity
My Praise and Love: damp not that generous (...)
Whose embers in your Veins desire to flame
Into the luster of eternal fame.
185.
Love know thy Self, and own an holy Pride;
Thine Arms were never framed to embrace
Such low and worthless things as can abide
Beasts for their Owners: Never then disgrace
The gallantrie of thy illustrious Wings
By flagging here about vile earthly Things.
186.
Though to Humilities submissive Law
Thou a sworn subject art; thine Aim may be
At Excellencies fairest Top; for know
That Meeknes traceth Jesu's steps; and He,
Even through Contempts black Valley, did ascend
To Glories brightest Throne at Gods right Hand.
187.
Virtue, and Heaven (the soil whence it did spring)
Exposed are to Thee a noble Prey:
If rotten Earth can more allurements bring,
More Worth, more satisfaction, than They;
Pour Scorn upon Them, and thy Self apply
To hug the Pleasures of Mortality.
188.
The great Adventures of all Saints deride,
Who spent their lives those Prizes to obtein;
And bless those Spirits who swum down the Tide
Of (...) short Sweets, into that Gulf of Pain
Where endless Horrors boil, and where even Love
It self is changed, and does Hatred prove.
189.
Fear, be not Thou afraid to know thy Part:
It Is not to Quake at all the Powers which Hell
Or Earth can band against thy jealous Heart:
Those Tempests all are chained, and can swell
No highet than that Hand permits, which is
Stretch d out to shield Thee from their Boisterousnes.
190.
See Thou that single Hair which shivering lies
Upon thy Breast, and dreads the gentlest Wind?
Were all the Aerial Principalities
Into one Knot of Violence comb in'd,
'T would pose their Might and Wit to tear it thence,
If stopped by that Hand of Providence.
191.
Thy duty is to tremble at the Sight
Of that foul Monster which makes Hell so black;
Sins face alone is that which needs affright
Thy tender Eyes; a Face, whose Beams can make
The Basilisks fell Emanations yield
To them the glory of all Poisons field,
192.
Yet if thy wilful Eyes will not attend
Unto the Terrors of that dismal Look;
View but the Horrors of a Cursed End,
And make Eternal flames a while thy Book;
There shall Thou read what will deserve to be
With frightfull Quaking ente rtain'd by Thee,
193.
And in this shaking fit shall Thou admire
What Madness makes fond Men to tremble at
The frowns of Fortune, or a Princes Ire;
Yet never fear the Wrath of Vengeance, that
Enraged by Brimstone in the Burning Pit,
Gapes wide for All who, sleighting, merit it.
194.
But when with soft and gentle Tremor Thou
Wousd'st sweetly exercise thy Self, apply
Thy reverent Thoughts to Him upon whose Brow
Sits the bright Crown of highest Majesty:
God to wards thire will his own Eyes incline,
And on thy Heart with dainty Awe will shine.
195.
And thou, stern Hatred, as relentlesse be
As Rocks, or Souls of Tigres, in thy Spite;
But see the Dart of this thy Cruelty
Miss not its proper Butt; thine only fight
Must be with Wickedness, on which accursed
And dangerous Enemy, do all thy worst.
196.
All other Foes, how fell so ever, belong
Unto Loves Jurisdiction, for She
Knows how revenge to take on any Wrong
By drowning it in mighty Charity:
Thy Wrath is sharp, but Hers is gentle; Thou
With Steel do break but She with Warmth does thaw.
197.
Be wary then to guide thy Stroke aright,
For close the Sin and Sinner joined are;
Least when against the Crime Thou think to fight.
Unto the Person thou extend'st thy War:
The Person's Gods, who Nothing Hates which He
Has made, and therefore will not suffer Thee.
198.
Hope, lavish not thy fruitless Expectation
On any Birth which this World forth can bring;
Why should st Thou dance Attendance on Vexation:
On Wind, on Froth, on Shadows vanishing
In their original; and gape to be
Replenished with pure Vacuitie?
199.
On Fullness rather wait, and lift thine Eye,
Thy longing Eye, to Heaven, where it does dwell;
Far off indeed the Object is, but thy
Discerning Power at distance does excel:
Be brave, and confident, Thou can not miss
A Mark so ample, and so fair as this.
200.
Since Absence than is Nothing unto Thee
But its bare Name, (for to thy reaching Eye
The Thing is Present, though it hidden be
In the dark Bosom of Futuritie,)
O be Fruition; (...) thy (...).
And climb (...) into (...).
201.
But Thou, tart Anger, nev r gad abroad
To find Meat for thy washpish Appetite,
Home will supply Thee with sufficient food.
Food which would fatten Thee with true Delight:
What faults soever Thou espiest here,
Fall to, and make thee merry with the Cheer.
202.
This Item does no less belong to Thee
Pale thoughtfull Jealousy; Let no surmise
Of Others Bus nes breed Perplexity
In thine; but in ward turn thy prying Eyes,
And give the reins to thy Suspicion here
In any thing which is not fair and clear.
203.
I give thee leave, even not to spare thy Queen;
Be diligent, and if thou will seveer;
For such an One in time past had Thou been,
Immured safe in neversleeping fear
Psyche could not have layn subdued by
The Charms of Lust, and fouler Hercsy.
204.
Yet Sorrow, thou thy Tears may safely spend
On foreign and on public Mischiefs; Thou
May help Compassion freely to extend
Her reaching Bowels, and her Bounty show
In sympathetick Tenderness to All
Whom tyrannous Disasters hold in Thrall.
205.
Provided, all thy Store thou pour'st not forth
To quench thy Neighbors flames, but savest some
To wash away the stains which from thy Birth
Have daily multiplied here at Home.
These well deserve them; but no Drop shall Thou
On any Temporal Loss of mine bestow.
206.
O no! A Tear's nobler Thing than so,
Nor must be squandered in such vain Expense:
No Oriental Pearls, though married to
Some rich Embroydery, show such pretense
To Beauty; as the precious Beads, whose Mine
Lives in the fertile Womb of humane Eyn.
207.
Let wanton Fortune take her proud Delight
In trampling on what Error Goods does call;
That Title on their Back cannot sit right
Which at vain Changes beck must Rise and fall:
Let her insult; why should thy Tears flow down
For Fortunes fault, and not lament thine own?
208.
Joy, thou have heretofore too careless been
In distribution of thy lavish Smiles;
What is it to Thee, if fields abroad are green,
If Plenty with her Bliss thy Coffers fills,
If any thing without Thee prospers, when
Thou poor, and parched, and barren art within:
209.
If thou at Home can nothing worthy find
Of thy applauding Notice; no brave feat
Of resolute Virtue, no soule-plying Wind
Of Heav ns great Spirit, no adventarous Heat
Of holy Love; alas thy Merriment
Is but the Hypocrisy of Discontent.
210.
It Is but a Shaddowie Dreaming Pleasure which
Does float and play in thy fantastic Brain,
And cannot unto thy Hearts Region reach
Which still beclowded is with pensive Pain:
Yea even thy Laughter does with Wrinckles plow,
Thy face, and in thy Mirth, Cares Visage show.
211.
Wherefore in God, and what of Him in thy
Own bosom thou can see, fix thy Delight:
And then walk out; yet only to descry
What Hearts do pant like thine; that only sight
Abroad, deserves Thou should Spectator be;
All else with Grief suit better, than with Thee,
212.
And you the Rest, whose near attendance on
My royal Person does in you require
Exact and generous Duty; see you run
Not on the bus nesse of your own Desire,
But mine; which should be yours: and know, that I
Better than you your selves can you employ.
213.
So in this Realm of ours such Peace shall rest
As the intrusion of no storm shall fear:
So of your selves you all shall be possessed,
And reign in your own Bounds, as I do here:
So no Agenor henceforth shall entise
You to conspire to your own Miseries,
214.
But if you scorn to walk in Honors Way;
( Which way, is, Doing what becomes you best.)
Yet must not I permit you to betray
Your own Capacity of Welfare, least
In your Mishap I prove a Sharer: no,
Your Queen her Power better knows than so.
215.
She ending here: The Passions each on other
Cast their uncertain Eyes, and much ado
They had their itching way wardnes to smother,
These strict Injunctions did gripe them so:
Yet none so venturous was, as to lead up
Against the Queen, their Stomachs forlorn Hope.
216.
Thus vexed at one another Faintness, they
Hung down their sheepish looks, and bent their knees
In token they were ready to obey
What Laws soe'r her Majesty would please
On them to lay; and so went blushing out
That they into Subjections guilt were brought.
217.
For those whose Palats never yet did taste
The blessed Sweets of Holy Discipline,
By wilful Licenses mad Revels cast
Up their Accounts of Freedom, and repine
At any Chains, although they keep them in
From rushing to the slaverie of sin.
218.
Psyche observed how they this Regular Bit
Into their Mouths like sullen Horses took,
How peevishly they foamed and champ'd on it,
As loath such serious servitude to brook:
This made her instantly resolve to ride
Them hard, and weary out their lusty Pride.
219.
Nor theirs alone; but the loose Senc's too,
Whom their new Laws had almost Passions made,
So hard they grated on their Necks, and so
Straightly they tied them to a stricter trade
Than they before had practiced, or then was
Professed about the World where they did pass.
220.
She by a Peremptory brave Decree,
Enacted Scorn of every thing which here
Earth uses as a Bait, to Luxury,
Pride, Avarice, or any Crime which bear
Chief Rule in Mortal Hearts, whilst heedlesse they
Mark not the Hook, even when they are its Prey.
221.
A general Proclamation then she made,
That none who unto her did homage owe
In any Case presume abroad to gad,
Unless Necessity along did go
As their Companion, who might limits set
Both to their Walk, and what they did in it.
222.
As when an headstrong Torrent, wont to throw
His lawless Arms or every Mead where He
Listed to riot, is enjoined to slow
In a strait Channels Regularitie,
The Stream with belking indignation beats,
And foams agamst the Banks with murmuring threats.
223.
So with vexatious, and yet fearful, Wrath,
Her Subjects pent up in these narrow bounds,
In sighs and groans rebel against their Path,
And every one his fretfull grief expounds
In a long commentary of Complaint;
The only freedom of their new restraint,
224.
Were, other Subjects yoked so close as We,
Their Company would lighter make our yoke;
For Misery spread in Community
Abates the terror of her cruel look:
But how, said they, shall we endure alone
The total weight of her Dominion
225.
Were it the Fashion any where beside
For Sense and Passion thus in Chains to lie;
Our Souls it would not torture to be tied
At home in endless slavery: but why
Must all the World laugh at our woes, whilst we
The sole examples of this Bondage be?
226.
Psyche, who all their struggling Murmurs heard,
With awful Majesty enflamed her Eye;
And, Come, said she, if I must needs be Feared,
Who would much rather have been Loved by
All you my Subjects; be it so; for still
Keep you entirely such I must, and will.
227.
Yet since the Fashion's all your plea, and you
Of singularity tax this your state;
As far as Reason leads, I will allow
You your own Wish: But see you kick not at
My royal Love, not force me to the Fashion
Which Princes use in Rebels Insultation.
228.
Know then the Fashion I have put you in
Is that which made the Saints of old so sine,
That they the Eyes of Heaven it self could win,
And ravish all, but those to whom divine
And earth-despising Bravery does seem
Dimmer than is pale Gold and Silvers beam.
229.
Yea that illustrious Realm whose situation
Lies higher than the Stars, does not disdain
To own what you repute a servile Fashion,
But every Angel his own Will does chain
Close to his Sovereigns Law, and never flies
Abroad, but when great Business him imployes.
230.
Tell Me not then, what Garbs and Humors are
By the blind foolish World adored; but take
Your copy from those Patterns which out-dare
The Worth of any Parallel; and make
Those Men your Pity, who make you their Scorn;
Your Fashion gorgeous is, but theirs forlorn.
231.
These Words with such convincing Horror flew
Upon the faces of the mutinous Rout,
That all their Murmurs Blasts away they blew,
And stilled the thoughts which in their bosoms wrought
And since their Stomachs nothing had to Say,
They nothing had to Do, but to Obey.
232.
Thus from exterior Troubles sequestered,
Psyche at home close to her Business fell:
She, long before the Sun, was out of Bed,
And called it Morning, ever the East could tell
Aurora rising was; for I; said she,
Have fiercer Steeds to rule than Phoebu's be.
233.
Then, higher into Heaven than He does ride,
She took her leap; so stout and sinewie were
Her early Mattens, which her Soul did guide
Unto the Pinnacle of Glory, where
Her Praises, and her Prayers she before
The footstool of her mighty Spouse did pour.
234.
Her Hands then letting down, she set them to
Their early Task; and this was to prepare
Clothes for the Orphans and the Widows who
Now all by Charities Adoption were
Become her Children: thus did prudent she
Bravely make fruitful her Virginity.
235.
(And in this voluntary Offspring she
Took high delight: for those who Parents are
By Natures Work, too often engaged be
In an unnatural Broods vexatious care;
But she from hers no Discontent could find,
Being the chosen Children of her Mind.)
236.
Yet with her Work her Prayers she mingled so,
That she of both a goodly Checker made:
In whatsoever Business she did go,
Heaven interwoven was; for all her Trade
Was but a faithful Prentise-hood to Him
Whose royal Temples wear Heavens Diadem,
237.
So though the Mariner with busy care
Attends his Card, yet often he lifts his Eye
To take direction from that trusty Star
Which darteth on his Voyage Certainty;
And by this mixed study safely rides
Over the proudest and the furthest Tides.
238.
No idle Visits her abroad could draw:
Yet whenever the despised Poor
Were sick, she by the royal Gospel Law
Thought her self thither summoned, to restore
Unto her needy Lord the help which she
Had often received from his Benignity.
239.
For Him on all those fickly Beds she saw,
His pained broken Limbs, His parched Skin,
His burning Tumors, His black stripes, His raw
And gaping Wounds; which did so strongly win
On her Compassion, that her own they proved,
Whilst her soft Bowels them both felt and loved.
240.
The odious Sores which would have loathing bred
Even in the Surgions eyes, she gently viewed;
Her choicest Plasters tenderly she spread,
And all her Powders with delight she strewn;
Her Self of her own Clothes she robbed, to wind
About the Naked, and the Maimed bind.
241.
By the Diseases greatness she did measure
The worth of her distressed Company:
The foulest Lepers yielded choicest Pleasure
To her Attendance, who aspired to be
A Servant unto those whose Noisomeness
Both Parents Love and Childrens, did suppress.
242.
In vain her Senses turned back their head,
Since She what they abhorred, resolved to love;
In vain her daintier Passions murmured,
And to recall her from that Office strove;
Her Resolution she the more professed,
And ever Kissed the Sores which she had dressed.
243.
The coy-ey'd Ladies with a squeamish Look
Admired and loathed her lowly Complement;
Not for a World would their fine Fingers brook
The Touch of what her Kisses did resent
As soft and sweet: yet could not their Disdain
Her Zeal discourage, or her Lips restrain.
244.
Still She her Merciful Design persues,
And by divine Insinuation tries
How in her Potions she may Heaven infuse,
And reach the Souls mysterious Maladies.
Heart-startling Hints she sprinkles here and there,
And poures in heavenly Cordials every where.
245.
Nor by this paradoxick Zeal alone
Did she run counter to the Worlds carreer;
But valiant in her high Devotion,
Adventured further yet to domineer
Over her Flesh and Blood, whose lusty Heat
By rigid Abstinence she down did beat.
246.
She never by set and customary Time
Was summoned to unneceslary Meat;
But earnest Hunger always told the Chime
By which she was admonished to Eat;
And then her Meal she measured not by
Her Stomackfull, but bare Sufficiency.
247.
And thus her food she did her Servant make,
Whilst others Slaves to their own Tables are;
Thus did she relish every Bit, and take
The genuine Delight of all her Fare,
Whilst those whom Plenty always fat does keep,
Their Palats proper Joys can never reap.
248.
This Art so plucked her Bodies Plumes, that she
Could easily graspe and rule it with her Will;
For soon she snatched it from the Suavitie
Of all those Cates which pampered Skins do fill;
And if it winch'd and struggled, space to get,
Straiter and straiter still she grasped it.
249.
The Gardens roseal and lilie Store,
With all its Wealth of Spice and Odours, she
For being such, did shun: of Eastern Ore,
'Cause it was rich, she would no Hoarder be:
From Lute and Harp, because they pleasing were,
Beligiously she did abstein her Ear.
250.
(For yet Religions cheerly jovial Days
Encouraged not the Christian Hemisphear;
No Music yet mixed instrumental Lays
With the Liturgick Anthems, striving here
To echo that triumphant Melody
Which in the Angelick Quire is streind so high,
251.
For surely Psyches Soul must needs have leaped
At such Delights; and her sweet-tuned Heart
With its exultant Pulse, due time have keep'd
To all such pious Airs; which by the Art
Of charming Sanctity can steal upon
The coldest Bosom, hot Devotion.)
252.
Delicious Wine, because it guilty was
But of it self, exactly she eschued;
The Gallantrie of Clothes, she held Disgrace
In those whose Hearts had Vanity subdued:
By simple Natures Rules she strove to square
What she did Touch, or Taste, Smell, See, or Hear.
253.
To Heaven she caused on Fervors wings to ride
All those Affections which could traffic there.
To be her Factors, and her Stock provide,
Against her Death should thither send up her.
And those whose Business here below did lie.
She strictly to their proper Tasks did tie.
254.
By constant waiting on her Penitence,
Her Tears acquired so quick an Habit, that
No Tide with such perpetual Effluence
Its swelling Brine above the Chanel shot:
Her flood disdained all set hours to keep,
And day and night her Cheeks and Breast did steep.
255.
Etesian Winds could never hold so long
In breath, as did her Sighs unwearied Blast;
Nor could the common Gales blow half so strong
As these, or ever follow on so fast:
And none so fit for her, as such a Gale.
Who through the Ocean of Grief did sail.
256.
Indeed when Times of Euangelick Joy,
The reverend Feasts of holy Church, did dawn;
She laid aside her penitent Annoy,
And with the Catholic Triumph mixed her own:
Yet still her Sighs and Tears she could not choose,
At least for loving Joy, to interpose.
257.
As for her Bed, it was made every where,
Her sleep being only on the naked Ground:
Fore-casting as she was, her lodging there
She chose in time, that when she should be bound
To her last Couch, the Grave might not to her
Right hardy skin, strange and uncooth appear.
258.
And though this Bed did rude and churlish seem,
She felt it courteous in the best of Love;
Those lusty thoughts which in a soft-lay'd Dream
With hot uncleanesse through the fancy rove,
Were curbed by this sober Hard-ships Rein
Which cooled all mutinies in her chaste brain.
259.
For wanton Cogitations Cowards are,
Being the tender Sons of easy Rest:
They painful Virtues hardy lodging fear,
And only love an idle Downy Nest;
Soft are their Wings, and therefore warm and dry
They must be kept, and upon Feathers lie.
260.
When sparing Capricorn would not allow
As liberal space to Day, as unto Night;
She no advantage took, but studied how
To piece up curtailed Day with Candlelight;
And still was up, though Phoebus were in Bed,
Till she her purposed task had finished.
261.
But that of such extension was, that she
Was often overtaken, even by
The laziest Morn, before her Work could be
Drawn up unto its full Maturity:
Yet then unto her rest she went not, till
Her weary Head down on her Prayer Book fell.
262.
For Time, inestimable Time, was that
On which her only Avarice she fed;
Grieved that the World with such elaborate
And costly idleness had studied
A thousand courtly Pastimes out, since They
Alas pass not the Time, but Man, away.
263.
Madly-improvident Man; who though vain He
Be sure of nothing, but that He must Dye;
Though the next Moment in his Power be
No more than the next Age; yet labors by
The help of long-extended empty Sport
To make the too too posting hours seem short.
264.
Psyche never found so tedious a Day,
But still she thought Night crowded on too fast:
She knew, as hard and narrow, so the Way
To Heaven was long; and though she made all haste,
She feared Deaths darkness would rush on, ever she
Safe at her mighty Journe's end could be.
265.
Unwearied custom in this strictness made
The World unfavorie to her palate seem;
The Senses rellish'd not their wonted Trade;
The Passions all were tractable and tame;
The Body humbled and beat down so low,
That no rank weeds in its dry soil could grow.
266.
Her Roabs of flesh about her Soul did sit
So close and fit, that well they Her became;
A Maid more handsome delicate and neat
In Heavens judicious Eye she now did seem,
Than when she wore a larger bulk without her,
And her full Body ruffled more about her.
267.
So spruce and strait her feature was, that no
Distortions, or Distempers room could spy
Where to assail her; Health about did go
Through every Part, and brisk Activitie
Lived in her joints, although her yiedling (...)
Looked near as pale, as she was pure within.
268.
But yet her Mental Powers more lively were,
Being not hampered nor clogged by
Those Fumes and Clouds which from luxuriant (...)
Full at the face of heedlesse Reason fly,
And damp those Eyes with lazy dimnesse, which
Objects sublime intended were to reach.
269.
The Bow of all her sprightfull Faculties
At an high pitch stood always ready bent;
No sudden business ever could surprise
Her heart at unawares; she never meant
Concoctions leisure to attend, but still
As ready as her Work, she to it fell.
270.
Thus she at length perceived her troubled sky
Cleard of its gloomy frowns, and turned into
The cheerful beauty of Serenity;
She saw her rude unruly Servants, who
Disturbed her region, in one Calm united;
And at this sight of Peace, her Soul delighted.
271.
But as the gallant Spark is not content
To climb up to the top of Airs first Stage,
Since by the servor of its Natural Bent
Above the Third it aims, nor can aswage
The vehemence of that noble Spur, till it
Into Fires elemental Bosom get:
272.
So Psyche, who unto Perfections Sphere
Bent her brave course, now for a second flight
Her wings and Resolution did prepare;
Knowing a Third remained still, which might
Eas ly deterr her Courage, if in this
She coward turn d, and bowed to Weariness,
273.
No: generous as she was, she vowed to try
(...) of her strength; and feared not what
(...) (...) intercept her Bravery:
Though Chance's Wheel in her hand rolled not,
In Gods it did; and upon that would I
Rather than on mine own, said she, rely.
274.
Logos into her Closet She did call,
Where with grave Countnance thus she Him bespake:
Thou see with what exact Obedience all
My vulgar Subjects on their Necks do take
My heaviest Yokes; and far, far be it Thou
(...) loyal Love to Me than They, should show.
275.
If common Herbs and Grass can learn to give
Faithful Attendance on their Lord the Sun;
What Candor can the Marygold repreive
From Censure and from Shame, if she alone
Whom Nature joyneth unto Him so near,
Refuse her constant Duty to prefer?
276.
Could Thou have ever imagined that They
My other Servants could have found such dear
And full Content, when I on them did lay
Such loads as slew at first their Hearts with fear?
Yet now Tranquillity and Joy and Bliss
The fruit of my seveer Injunctions is.
277.
To Brutish Dullness being near of Kin
Their (...) Reasons sweetest Plea;
And hard it was for heavy them to win
Upon their carnal Selves, and bow to me:
But Thou art Reasons Secretary, and
Her Will (and that is mine,) do understand.
278.
Yea and thy Load is less than theirs; but far
Greater thy Strength: No Arrow with such speed
Snatcheth its shortest journey through the Air;
No Lightning with such nimble Wings does spread
Its self about the World; as Thou can Fly
Even to the Crest of all Sublimitie,
279.
Abuse not then that brave Activity
By hankering and flagging here below;
Stout-winged Eagles never were made to be
Companions unto Dunghill flies, O how
Will Thou thine own Worth answer, if thine aim
Thou take'st beneath thy self, and thy high Name I
280.
Alas these sublunary Matters be
So (...) of Emptiness, that wretched They
Will shrink and melt into mere Vanity
When thou beginst to grasp them: Never play
At such poor Game which will but mock thy pains;
So far are they from answering Thee with Gains.
281.
Learning, which looks so big, and nods (...)
Upon illiterate Swains, could never yet
Beyond that self-tormenting Wit attain
Of seeing clearly its own Want of Wit;
Whilst Simple Souls are never vexed by
Those stinging Checks of learn d Simplicity
282.
Yet no disdainful Knower ever can gain
That Admiration which ambitious He
Hunts for with studious and pale-fac d pain,
Unless his Auditors unlearned be:
Art wonders not at Art; but Ignorance
Alone the fame of Learning does advance.
283.
(What are the busy Schools, but a perplexed
And implicated Maze, in whose Meander
With thousand knotty scrupulous Bypath vexed
The ever-doubting Student's forc d to wander?
Learning her Self's a Circle, and the Soul
Can find no rest where it must always (...).)
284.
Had any Rest dwelt there, thou had not in
Ecclesia's glorious Hall (...) how all
The Patriarchs of (...) Wit did (...)
Upon the Chains which held them there in Thrall,
And roar in helpless (...)
That they had (...) so, to be (...),
285.
What Gains reap'dst thou thy Self, when thou did sow
In the Cerint hian or the Nazareen Soil;
When Heavens Instruction Thou away did throw
And with fond earthly Wisdom did beguile
Thy better Knowledge? In thy Blush I see
Confession of that costly Vanity,
286.
But ask thy Memory, and she will tell
Thee what thou undertookst when thou were freed
From fair-tongud Heresies foule-hearted Hell:
Did Thou not then entirely make a Deed
Of thy whole Self to Me? which still does stand
In force; I Am sure I cancelled not the Bond
287.
And now Performance I require, nor will
I bate a Tittle of the Obligation:
If this strict Course involved any Ill
To thee, I would admit thy Deprecation;
But thou art Bound to thine own Happiness
And Heaven forbid that I should Thee dismiss.
288.
What could Indulgence toward Thee be now
But most malicious Tyranny in Me?
Sooner among the Clouds shall Dolphins row,
And Eagles flutter through the de epest Sea,
Than I will accessory be to thy
Enslaving Freedom, and Selfe-felony.
289.
No: thy perpetual Task henceforth shall be
In the soft Air of Heaven thy Wings to stretch:
Say not they are too short; for Constancy
Of Exercise will quickly make them reach,
And Thee enable gallantly to rise
And sore amongst the Birds of Paradise.
290.
Amongst those Birds who on the royal Face
Of the eternal Sun of Majesty
In meek audacitie for ever gaze,
Reading his mighty Providential Eye,
And all those other Marvels gracious He
Will let created Contemplation see.
291.
These shall thou see, and fix thy study there;
But ever with this Caution, that thine Eye
Trust not its own Powers which are weak and bleat,
But on that never-erring Glass rely
Which in Ecclesia s Court to thee was given,
Truths mirror, and the Spectacles of Heaven
292.
Thy vast Capacity can only there
Meet with a Feast sufficient Thee to fill,
Where thou have free leave to fall to that Cheer,
Which would thou (...), the whole World could not sell;
That Cheer, whose Worth s above the World as far
As its Exuberance and Dwelling are.
293.
Leaps not thy Soul at this? If any where
Thou can discover a more worthy Prize,
I (...) not command thy Strength to wrestle here:
But since all other Treasures this outvies,
I must not suffer Scorn to say of thee:
Logos could Reason find a Fool to be.
294.
And that Anqmuesis thine Hand-mayd, may
Advance thy brave Adventure, upon Her
My strict and peremptory Charge I lay
To see no Trash pollute her Register;
For many a Toy which wears an harmless Look
Will easily defloure her virgin book.
295.
Wild Fancy would be tame did she not find
A thousand Shapes of vain and useless Things
Wandering about the Storehouse of the Mind.
Upon whose backs she gets, and madly flings
About the Region of the Brain, when Sleep
In her blind Arms does Thee a Prisoner keep.
296.
All fond Romances, and all wanton Songs,
With Idlenesses Bus nes, tickling News,
Which swarm so thick upon unwary Tongues,
And Man's sole Treasure, precious Time, abuse,
Must not that Bosom clog and pester where
Heaven is desired to be a Sojourner.
297.
No; Heaven is large, and our poor Hearts are narrow,
Heaven will our utmost Stowage fraught, and more;
The ample Breasts of Seraphs could We borrow,
Still in Capacity We should be poor;
Still by the full-tide Wealth of Piety
Our highest Banks would overflowed be.
298.
That Knowledge which does its due Tribute pay
To Sanctity, I will not Her forbid;
But her prime care and task shall be to lay
Up store of that pure heav n descended Bread,
Which Manna's famous Bounty does outgive
Teaching frail Men eternal Lives to live
299.
That Bread which flourished from the Mouth of Bliss,
Gods sacred Word, the reverend Scriptures, where
Wisdoms best Jewels, and the rich Excess
Of purest Knowledge all enshrined are;
That living Mine of Oracles, that spring
Of every sober-heart-contenting Thing.
300.
Such precious Eloquence never made its hive
On any Roman or Athenian Tongue,
As in this honey-shaming Book does live;
Such (...) Sweets were never wrung
From humane Poets love-oppressed Soul
As there in every Leaf and Line does roll.
301.
For what is every Leaf and every Line
But a fair Chanel through whose bosom glides
The soft and supple Soul of most divine,
Most satisfying Truth, whose generous Tides
Difdain all Ebbs, and with unwearied Store
Of royal Pleasures flow for evermore.
302.
Her prudent Bottles she at every one
Of these dear Streams must learn to fill; yet she
Shall with more constant ardent study run
To David's blessed Well, where Suavity
In three times fifty Springs does bubble up,
And liquid Heaven to thirsty Souls set open.
303.
And in the Song of Songs (that is, of Love,
Who there in sacred Wantonness does play,
Streining his strong enamored Notes above
The loftiest Spears most sublimated Lay,)
Her pious Revells she may keep, and run
O'r the best Riches of great Solomon.
304.
But at the Euangelick Fountains she
The Streams of purest Holiness shall draw;
Streams in whose more than Crystal Clarity
Innumerable Virgin Graces row;
Streams where Humility, who only has
All Virtues for her Handmayds, joys to bathe.
305.
All Mysteries arrayed in Sweetness there,
And no where else, She shall not fail to see;
There Gods own Motions in an Humane Sphere,
Accommodated to her Weakness, she
Shall safely read; and from the dropping Lip
Of Jesus, how much more than Nectar sip.
306.
And thus laid in, thy Stock so great will be
That thou may easily undertake to drive
That generous Trade which I enjoined Thee;
And never doubt but thou shall bravely thrive:
It Is (...) Wealth makes Bankrupts such, but thine
Estate shall be immortal and divine.
307.
Here Psyche ceased. But Logos scratched his head,
As something jealous that this Task would sit
Sad on his back: Yet when he pondered
The grounds which fortified and flanker'd it,
He found himself fore-stall'd of what to say,
And therefore to his Sovereigns Will gave way.
308.
She, glad on any terms, that Logos had
Buckled his Shoulders to receive the Yoke;
In all his Task a decent Method made,
That Time it self might call him to his Book,
And turn his Leaves, and show him every day
What Lesson ready for his Study lay.
309.
A noble Week of Attributes she chose
In the vast Treasures of the Deity;
And pressed her seav'n Days to attend on those
Each in his order; by which practice she
Knew how Time went, not by the posting (...)
But her own Contemplations Motion.
310.
That Morn which to the World did Sunday open,
(That Suns fair Day which did at Salem rise,)
Awaked her not, but found her ready up,
And busy at her Work; the reverent Eyes
Of Logos wide were open, and earnestly
Fixed on the Godheads wondrous Unity,
311.
Nothing is laced so close and strait into
It self, as this immeasurable Nature;
The Singularity which seems so
Complete in every Individual Creature.
Hangs loose about them, if they judged be
By the pure Rule of this (...)
312.
A dull Passivity does sneaking lie
About the center of the (...) Hearts,
Checking those Flames of their (...)
Which seem all Spirit: And (...) Parts.
Are found, although their (...)
Be close, the Whose's not absolutely One.
313.
O no: should God dissolve that secret Glue
Which in their own Subsistence up does knit
Angelick Natures; that which now does show
So strait and single, would in sunder split;
Their Wings would melt and moult, their Flames would by,
And they themselves from their own selves would fly
314.
Even Unity it self had never been
It self, unless it had been formed by
This Prototype; that Unity I mean
Which hugs and girteth up the Things which ly
Under the Foot of that eternal Throne
On which He reigns who is supreamly One.
315.
Yet not more truly One, than He is Three,
But knit in an high and mystic Knot
Of simple singular Triplicitie:
Which Psyche though she comprehended not,
Yet with admiring Eyes she dwelt upon,
As Eagles on the Light, the Flame, the Sun.
316.
There she beheld how infinitely Bold
And equaly besotted, was their Sin,
Who had in their Religions List enrolled
A Crowd of Gods: She now could easlyer win
Upon her Faith, to think that there were none
At all; then yield there could be more than One.
317.
O how she praised and adored that high
And burning Jelousy, which though she saw
Flaming with most resolved Ardency
Upon the Forehead of the ancient Law,
Till now, she knew not so profoundly why
Heavens deepest Hate was foul Idolatry.
318.
But then encouraged by Heroic Heat,
Nearer and nearer to this Knot she drew;
And prostrate at her mighty Makers Feet,
This panting Cry upon his Footstool threw:
Great Lord, why may not I with Thee be One,
Though not by Unity, by Union?
319.
O I am now a thousand Things a day!
But were I once to Thee entirely joined;
No Objects should thy Psyche steal away,
Whilst They into Themselves transform Her Mind:
Thy Self, and mine, I should behold in Thee,
And all Things else I could desire to see.
320.
The next Days Dawn, her Meditations drew
To feed upon the Truth of her dear Lord,
Truth so supreem and infinitely True,
As boundless Satisfaction did afford
Unto her Intellect, whose daintiest Feast
By Truth alone is furnished and dressed.
321.
Solid substantial Treasures here she saw,
To which all other Things but Shaddows are;
Compulsive Reason here she found to draw
That strange Conclusion to a Natural Ear,
That God is in such sovereign Certainty
Himself, that Nothing truly Is, but He.
322.
The Fulness of this Universe is founded
On Emptiness, and therefore cannot be
More real than its Bottom: What is grounded
On Frothy Bubbles, sticks to Vanity
Close by the Roots; and seeing All Things came
From Nothings Womb, they must be like their
Dame,
323.
When a quick-paced Intellect does trace
The Lines of any Creatures Being, though
At first it meets with what presents a face
Of solid Something; it will quickly grow
To its vain journies end; and stopped be
By the huge Gulf of mere Vacuitie.
324.
But when it launceth out into the Sea
Of increated Nature, it does sail
Through True and genuine Substantialtie,
Which never will its Contemplation fail,
By terminating Wants ignoble Shore,
But lets it drive its Course for evermore.
325.
And in this blessed Ocean Psyche met
Such vast Reality, that in disdain
She called the World, and all that swelled in it,
A mighty Lie, dressed up and trimmed with vain
Embellishments, whose outside Flatteries
Abuse but blear and unconsidering Eyes,
326.
Yet sweeter was her Third Days Work than this,
For then her Speculation fixed its Eye
Upon the Goodness of her Lord, which is
The Fountain of unbounded Suavity;
A Fountain which it self at home does fill,
And springs through all the Universe does thrill
327.
For as the Sun on (...) Star does pour
The bounty of his inexhausted Beams,
Making them rich with his illustrious store,
Who else could never have kindled their own flames;
So all the Rays of Goodness which make fine
Created Eyes, are Sparks of the Divine.
328.
Mere Sparks indeed, who of their weakness by
Their twinkling tremor plain Confession make:
But Gods supreme original Bonity
From its own Home does its Dimensions take;
It lives, and flames in his unbounded Breast,
And fills with sweetest fulness all its nest.
329.
Here The lema leaped in, who now had found
That God alone was absolutely good,
And fain she would her ravished self have drowned
In this delicious Attribute's deer flood:
But Psyche reind her in, whose life she meant
Should in another sacrifice be spent.
330.
Her fourth days Task was wondrous hard and high,
For now her thoughts adventured to look
On the vast Volumes of Immensitie;
Which were the sacred admirable Book
Of her great Makers face; a Book which made
All Heaven and Earth to less than Nothing fade.
331.
But as her Contemplations wandered here,
The further they went on, the further they
Were from their end; and in their boundless Spheat
Lost both themselves, and their increasing way.
Yet Psyche found her Heart filled with Delight
Thus to be lost from Morning unto Night.
332.
Often did she cry; What though by Loosing, I
Am fain to find; and by being Blind, to See?
What though I cannot Comprehend, but by
Granting mine own want of Capacity?
I am content, dear Lord, since I by this
Negation, thy Greatness do Confess.
333.
I see thou art Immense and Infinite;
Therefore I see thee not; yet see thee more
By this unable and denying sight,
Than they whose saucy Eyes dare by the poor
Comparison of whatsoever it be
Express the Measure of the Deity.
334.
But since thou art so great, o mighty Lord.
Whence is it, that Man's narrow Heart to thee
An acceptable dwelling can afford!
How is it, that thy Eave's Immensitie
Shrinks up thy Nature's! which is yet as great
As 'twas before; even in this little seat.
335.
The fifth day summond all her Might, to view
The matchless Power of the Deity.
Strait, in her face the whole Creation flew,
With witness of its Author's strength, which she
Read from the fairest Heavens sublimest Crest
Down to the gloomy Centre's lowest Nest.
336.
And though the universal Fabric were
The full Expansion of Magnificence;
Yet often she chose the smallest Character
Of close short-writ Epitomies, and thence
Observed Gods finger-worke in little flies.
As great, as was his Arms in widest skies,
337.
But Man took up her deepest Admiration,
Man, the rich extract of all things beside,
The wondrous Juncture of the whole Creation
By which the Heaven unto the Earth is tied;
Yea, more than Heaven, for God unto the Creature
Is married by none but Humane Nature.
338.
Yet not content thus at the second Hand
To feed her hungry Meditations, she
Gallantly made a further venture, and
Gazed on her Makers naked Potencie,
Where she discovered strength enough to build
More Worlds, than Atoms she in this beheld.
339.
No Bounds nor Bars she saw, which could forbid
The pleasure of his Hand, but only those
Which Contradiction had established:
Yet they were not his Power to enclose,
But to demonstrate that his noble Might
Could nothing do but what was True and Right.
340.
O how she pitied those Princes, who
Upon exterior helps misplace the Name
Of strength, and dread not what all foes can do
If they have once prevailed with vaunting Fame
To publish to the World their numerous Force
Of Castles, Ships, Arms, Money, Men, and Horse.
341.
For what are those swollen Names unto a King,
Whose Arms as short, whose Sinews are as weak
As are his meanest Servants; who can bring
No Legions into the field, nor wreak
His challenged fury on his ready foe,
Unless His, be his Subjects Pleasure too.
342.
Can his sole Word the Battle fight, and wrest
The Laurel from his struggling Enemies?
O no; his Power does in Others rest
More than himself; and if by Mutinies
Unhappy Spark, Rebellions flame breaks out,
By his own Strength his Overthrow is wrought.
343.
But Psyche saw how her Creators Might
Fast unto his own Will alone was cham'd;
Omnipotence, when ever he pleased to fight,
(...) all his Marches, for it reignd
In (...) vast Hand, which does support and stay
All other Arms from mouldering away.
344.
Yet though thus Potent, He is also (...),
And She as such the sixth Day Him admired:
Deeply she weighed how all Ages held
One Principle of Boldness, and conspired
Against their Patient God, as if his strong
Right Hand were bound, because He held his Tongue.
345.
Amazed she was, to see how He kept under
Incensed Justice, who would fain have thrown
His ready Vengeance dressed in dreadful Thunder,
In Wars, in Plagues, in Drought, in Famine, down
Upon the wretched Heads and Hearts of those
Who durst in spite of Mercy, be his Foes.
346.
Indeed she saw that Mercy fix her Eye
Upon the Rainbow; where she seemed to read
An Obligation of her Lenity,
Though Heav'n-defying Sin bore up its Head
Never so high: Yet by her own Consent
Yea and Desire, that Signal Bow was bent.
347.
The Bow was bent; yet not to shoot, but show
How Mercy bound her self to do her best
The World to shelter from a second Blow,
Which from the first her only Love releast:
Else had the Deluge not repented, and
To Earth made restitution of dry Land.
348.
This Speculation informed her how
Much more heroic is the Victory
When Sweetness wreaths the Bay about the Brow,
Than when plain force does snatch it thither: He
In whom both are supreme, takes more delight
In conquering by his Mercy than his Might.
349.
And o may I, said when Night at length
Warned this her Meditation to conclude.
Not by the Dint of thy all-conquering Strength,
Dear Lord, but by thy Mercy be subdued!
If on a Worm thy Power thou will try,
O let it be the Might of Lenity.
350.
But then the seavnth Day gave her Thoughts their cue
To trace the Wonders of his Glory, which
Did from the antecedent Week accrue,
And with transcendent Brightness Him enrich;
Brightness which gave Heavens Quire their task to sing
Eternal Hallelujahs to their King.
351.
And ravished here with mighty Joy and Love,
She needs would take with Them her Part of Praise:
With utmost Zeals intension she strove
Her Acclamations to their Key to raise:
And though she could not sing so high nor clear,
Yet did her Music please Heaven's candid ear.
352.
She Thought, and Sung, and then she Thought again,
For still new floods came rouling in upon Her;
God's other Attributes illustrious Train
Themselves in Homage pay unto his Honor,
In whose incomparable Vastness they
Can all their own Infinitudes display.
353.
What ever breaths, or lives, or has the least
Share of Existence, constant Tribute brings
Unto this Treasury, as well's the best
And brightest Cherub: yea even empty Things,
Defects and Sins, though not by Doing, yet
By Suffering what they merit, render it.
354.
And shall I only be a barren Tree
When all the World besides so fruitful is?
Forbid it mighty King of Souls, said she:
Let not thy Psyches Heart the glory miss
Of honoring Thee, although my life it cost;
That life's best saved which for Thee is lost.
355.
Much time in this Employment having spent,
She changed her Task, but not her Industry:
For, next, her Contemplations she sent
To wait upon her Spouses Majesty;
The Marvells of his mighty Love to read,
Which over her, and all the World was spread.
356.
And here with sympathetick Exultation
And amorous fervor she her Soul did melt;
For in the tract of every Speculation
His Acts and Passions in her Breast she felt,
Which always Sad or Cheerly was, as she
His Sorrows or his Joys in thought did see.
357.
A longer Pilgrimage she now did make,
And traveled all the way with more Delight,
Than when by Phylax's Conduct she did take
To holy Palestine her Zealous flight;
Longer she dwelt on every Monument
Of what her Lord for her had done, or spent.
358.
A thousand times she sighed and wondered why
Brisk generous Spirits who hunt noble Stories,
Through all Books else, should not be ravished by
The Luster of the Euangelick Glories,
But more exactly strave to know the List
Of Casars Acts, than what was done by Christ.
359.
She sighed, and wondered how a Christian Heart
Which did not give its blessed Name the lie,
Could possibly forbear to snatch its part
In its Redeemers noble History;
How Love could quit its loyal self, and yet
Not know whatever of its Spouse was writ.
360.
But all this while on Logo's Wings she flew;
(Though sometimes Thelema did flutter by,)
And these were much too short and weak, she knew,
To tower, and double that Sublimity
Which makes Perfections third, and highest Story,
The Crown of Saints, and all the Angels Glory.
361.
She therefore taking Thelema apart;
With all the winning Art of Courtesy
Devised first to charin her mighty Heart,
And make it plyant to the Plot, which she
Had laid to catch her into Blisle: And then
She gently grasped her hand, and thus began.
362.
O Thou the dearest of my Servants, who
Do wear the Keys of all that I possess;
Yea and of Me thy native Sovereign too,
Who have no power to stir abroad unless
Thou op'st the Door; How do I wish that I
Had more to trust with thy Fidelity!
363.
But since I neither am, nor have, no more;
Let this suffice to bind thine Heart to Me:
In gratitude thou can no less restore
Than pressed Compliance, though I ask of thee
Some hard and costly Matter, so to prove
The rate and value of my Steward's Love.
364.
But I my proper Interest can bate,
And by my Subjects Gains account mine own:
What ever advantage does inhance their State
I take it as Accrewment to my Crown;
They are my Riches, nor can I be poor,
So long as they increase their teeming Store.
365.
All I desire, shall only be, That thou
Would venture to embrace thy highest Bliss;
And now dull Sense and Passion valiant grow,
Now Logos through all Heaven so busy is,
Not Flinch alone, nor be content to stay
In any lower Region, than They.
366.
Remember that thy Wings of Strength are made
And that no Flight's too high or long for thee;
That nothing ever made thy Courage fade
Unless thy Self did timorously agree
To thy Defeat: Henceforth be brave and bold,
Thou can not fail, if thou but holdst thine Hold.
367.
Jesus the Sovereign Lord of Thee and Me,
Will give thee leave to make Himself thy Prey;
Reach then thine Arms of noble Love, that he
Imprisoned in thy Embraces, may
Thorough thy happy Heart his Sweetness thrill,
And with the best of Heaven thy bosom fill.
368.
If this Adventure thou esteem'st too high;
Throw down thy Self before His blessed Feet:
He cannot let thee there despised lie,
But with his ready favor thee will greet;
And for that Resignation of thing,
Hug and embrace thee till thou prov'st divine.
369.
This gallant Challenge wrought so strong upon
The generous Heart of Thelema, that she
The forwardness of her submission
Forthwith professed upon her bended Knee:
And, Heaven forbid, said she, I should deny
Your Pleasure, or mine own Felicity.
370.
Though not at Jesu's royal Feet, (o no,
I am too vile to aim my Pride so high,)
Yet, Madame, here at yours, my Self I throw
To be accepted, and disposed by
Your Love and Wisdom; Use Me as you please,
Lo I return you yours, and mine own Keys.
371.
Triumphant Joy straight flamed in Psyche's Breast
The Virgins ready Loyalty to see:
Whom she embraced thrice, and thrice she kissed,
And sweetly forced to rise from her Knee:
Then all her (...) she took, which to her side
(Weeping and Smiling,) in one Knot she ti'd.
372.
And now I feel my Self a Queen, said she,
A Queen indeed: Yet be assured thou
O faithful Maid, shall find thy Self more free
By this Subjection, than when thou did bow
To thine own Inclinations, which have
To Vanity full often made Thee a Slave.
373.
Exalated thus unto her own Desire,
Into her pious Oratory She
More cheerfully than ever did retire
To celebrate a new Solemnity;
An Holocaust she hastes to sacrifice,
For which her own brave Zeal the Fire supplies.
374.
Did golden Mountains tempt her now to stay;
Did Millions of Worlds made up in one
Inestimable Bait, lie in her way,
And woo her but to let one Minute run
Before She fell to work; not all the force
Of those strong Complements could stop her Course.
375.
No: She of joyous Love in travel is,
And feels the dainty Pangs of Parturition;
Till she brings (...) her mighty Sacrifice
It Is not all Heaven can ease her smart condition.
Speed, Speed alone, would useful be she knew;
Whose Wings she snatched, and to her Bus'nes flew.
376.
A Preface then of thousand Sighs and Tears
Before her brave Oblation she spread.
As many Groans unto her Sovereigns ears
Like Harbengers of her Design she sped.
Then prostrate on the ground her face she laid.
And of her humble Heart the Altar made.
377.
Upon this Altar, bound both Hands and Feet,
Her Thelema she for the Offering threw:
And bend thy gracious Eye said She, thou sweet
And gentle Lamb of Heaven, to Me, who sue
For thy acceptance of this Sacrifice
Which at the footstool of thy Mercy lies.
378.
Thy royal Bounty gave it unto Me;
But I, alas perceive my Self too weak
To manage such a great Estate; To thee
I therefore render it: O gently take
It home again, and govern it for Me
The feeble Handmayd of thy Majesty.
379.
Do with it what Thou will; so it be Thine,
I care not what betide it; for I know
Thy Pleasure, like thy Self, must be Divine.
O see, how it pants and heav's! if Thou Will not accept it, let it lie, for Me:
How can I love, what is despised by Thee?
380.
As when the Lightning flasheth from the Sky,
Down to the ground it flames without delay;
So did the fervor of this Prayer fly,
And snatched from earth to Heaven its sudden way;
Nor made it there a stop at any Sphere,
But scoured through all, and reached Jesus ear,
381.
Propitious He straight yielded his Consent,
And opening wide his blessed Arms, embraced
The dear Oblation with as high Content,
As if He, more than Psyche had been graced.
O King of Sweetest Love; who would not bring
To such a God as Thee, his Offering!
382.
But now, as zealous Psyche thought to send
Her Altar up, after her Sacrifice;
Behold a sudden Fullness did extend
Her bosom with such ravishing Rarities,
That she perplexed with unknown Sweets, (...)
With what strange Paradise she was inspired.
383.
At length examining her encroaching Bliss,
Another Thelema in her Heart she spied;
But in so lovely and majestic Dress,
That by her Looks she instantly descryed
From whence she came, and that she needs must be
One of her heavenly Spouse's family.
384.
His Will it was indeed: for Noble He
Disdaineth, not to give more than he takes:
No sooner Psyches Offering He did see,
But he this greater Present ready makes,
Then with innumerable Blessings dressed
Shoots it into her soft and pious Breast.
385.
This grasped her Soul so fast, and knit it so
Entirely to her Spouse's Heart, that she
Forthwith seemed to have nothing more to do
With what she was her self, since potent He
Was seized of her; and her Will being gone,
She to Loves Tyranny was left alone.
386.
Nor did Love loose his time, but domineered
In her subdued heart with full carreer;
And she as glad to be his Slave appeared
As he rejoiced to triumph on her;
For by his Conquests she did count her own,
Being by every fall far higher thrown.
387.
Thrown up into new stages of Delight,
And fresh Excess of those immortal things
Which never were debased to mortal sight,
Nor stooped to please the Ears of proudest Kings;
Things which, the Heart of Man does pant in vain
When it does stretch, and struggle to contain.
388.
And now her Soul, like a new weaned Child
Which wholly hangs upon its Nurses Will,
It self not by it self did move and weild,
But absolutely resting on the skill
And care of her dear Lord who tutored it,
Was carried wheresoever he thought fit.
389.
This made all Sweets and Dainties here below
(For with these names our fond mistakes do grace them)
Disrellish in her accurate Taste, and grow
Truly themselves; which was enough to chase them
From wise acceptance; for their borrowed shape
Is that alone which does our love entrap.
390.
On God, and only him her joys did feast,
His royal Pleasure was her precious Bliss:
So well did all his Laws and Statutes taste
To her Hearts palate, that the Pleasantness
Both of the Honey and the Honey-combe
Had in her approbation no room.
391.
What grated hard upon her Soul before,
Wrongs, Slanders, Pains, Distress, Calamities,
Mishaps, and Sickness; tortured her no more;
For on her Spouses Will she fixed her Eyes,
And still embraced as the best, what he
Did either order, or permit to be.
392.
This kindled such a Bonfire of Delight
Throughout her Breast, that had she been invited
Even by all Paradise, to yield her right
In this Possession, she would have slighted
The mighty Bait, and triumphed still to be
The Holocaust of Loves Extremity.
393.
Yet was her Passions wondrous violence
Sweetened with such divine serenitie,
That with less undisturbed influence
The Suns full Beams through all the World do fly
To light the day; then did these flames of Love
Through all her calm hearts blessed Regions move.
394.
In dainty silence she her Soul possessed,
With firm Adhaesion unto her Bliss:
Even all her Motions mingled were with rest,
Because they did concentricate with his
Whose Actions, though all infinite they be,
Their number is tied up in Unity.
395.
Indeed the World, whom her Austeritie
Seveerly chode and stung; by peevish scorn
Revenged themselves: for lo, said they, how she
By Melancholies blackness grown forlorn,
Esteems her self as fair as if the best
Of heavens bright beauties had her countenance (...)
396.
She from her self: by wilful Robbery,
Plunders those honest Sweets, which courteous heaven
To check Life's tide of infelicitie,
Has into Moderations Bosom given;
And taxes Gods own bounty by refusing,
What we cannot approve, but by our (...).
397.
Should any paltry Beggar serve Her so,
Sure she would not believe He did despise
Her Alms alone; but was contemptuous too
Against her self; Nor would his humble guise
Persuade her that his stomachs inward Pride
Was by Devotions fervor Mortified.
398.
Thus did the Ravens against the Swan inveigh:
But now no seeds of Discontent remaind
In Psyche's heart, she let them say their say,
And from their Envy a new Laurel gaind;
Her silent Patience answered all their scorn,
And to her Crown their Calumnies did turn.
399.
But as she rested in this mystic Peace,
Hers, and all pious Souls, eternal Foe,
Who counted his own trouble by her ease,
Tore his fell heart with studying what to do:
Atlength resolved, haste he makes to dress
In a fair vizard his foul wickedness.
400.
Time was, when he Precentor of that quire
Which all the Spears with Hallelujahs fill,
Arrayed was in glorious attire,
Whose gallantry did then become him well;
But when a monstrous Rebel He became,
The Crime invested him, with hideous shame.
401.
Yet He, remembering his original guise,
And being well skilled in Hypocrisy,
Patched up himself a coat of gorgeous Lies,
Wherein to shelter his Doformitie;
That though he were the King of blackest night,
He might an Angel seem of fairest light.
402.
His ragged Horns of steel He pulled in;
And on his rustie brazen looks he spread
A soft, a ruddy, and well polished skin;
His front, with envious wrinkles furrowed,
He planed over, sweetning all his face
With blooming youthfulnes, and smiling grace.
403.
Into a Knot he gathered up his Tail,
And tied it at his back: of every Toe
And Finger carefully he cut the Nail;
And then his Hands and Feet he painted so,
That what before was harsh and footie, now
Did cleanly, delicate, and beauteous grow.
404.
His bushie snarled Locks of fretfull Snakes
He shaved off; for which, to shade his Head,
Into the new-erected Tomb he breaks
Of an embalmed Virgin lately dead,
And stealing thence her fresh perfumed Tresses,
His Baldnes he with Curles of Amber dresses.
405.
An hundred Swans then having plundered;
Their fairest and their softest feathers he
In two brave Combinations marshalled,
And measured, and poised equalie;
Then to his shoulders them he fitted, and
A Pair of goodly Wings had at Command.
406.
A Roab he chose whose color scorned the Milk,
And with his wings did correspondence hold;
Its texture was of light and pliant Silk,
Belac'd and fringed with oriental Gold,
That both its Pureness and its Splendour might
Profess that down from Heaven he took his flight.
407.
Accouter'd thus: as Psyche wearied by
Her holy Vigils, yielded unto Sleep,
The sly Impostor silently did fly
Into her Chamber, and with cunning creep
Under the ey-lids of her heart, where he
Himself presented in feigned Claritie.
408.
But as the Virgins Soul began to start:
Fear not, said he, for Phylax is thy friend;
These Rays of mine did never terror dart,
But to thy Weakness, Strength and Comfort lend;
And Heaven forbid that I should prove unkind
Now thou my favor most deserve to find.
409.
The Gallantrie of thy Devotion I
Come to applaud, and to increase its Fire:
I grant thy zealous Wings have towred high,
But yet thy Spouse would have them labor higher,
And as immoderate in their answer prove
As is to thee the Challenge of his Love.
410.
The Watches frequent are, and long, which thou
In deer attendance upon Him do keep;
Yet oftener generous he, and longer too
To purchase rest for thee, did loose his sleep.
Be noble now; remembering thou shall have
Sufficient sleeping time in thy still Grave.
411.
Low have thou plucked thy Bodies Plumes; but He
Was rent and torn, and furrowed up with Lashes:
And can the Zeal of thy Austerity
More legibly appear than in such Gashes?
I know thou love not thy Skin, but yet
'T were not amiss thus much were writ on it.
412.
Severe and resolute thy Fastings be
If scanned by the faint Worlds vulgar fashion:
But Forty Days thy Spouse did Fast for thee,
And now expects thy faithful Imitation: (...)
As well He may, who an eternal Feast, (...)
To quit a few Days Fast, in Heaven has dressed.
413.
Since then He means that thou with Us shall reign,
Betimes it will become Thee to prepare
Thy Self for out Society, and strein
Out all the Dreggs thou have contracted here,
That raised to the Purity in which
We Angels shine, thou may our Region reach.
414.
By Moses, and Elias, who beheld
At such vast distance Jesu's glimmering face,
Shall Psyche be in Abstinence excelled!
Can she on whom the Euangelick Grace
With such full luster beats, by those whom blind
And shady Types invelop'd, be out-shin'd!
415.
O no; dear Pupil; since thy generous Breast
Dared wish to be enflamed by that fire
Whose Aime's Perfection, Let no lazy Rest
Clog the brave Wings of thy sublime Desire.
What though thy Death it hastens? Thou and I
Shall but the sooner to Life's Kingdom fly.
416.
Thus sought the wily Tempter to invite
The Virgin to a fatal Precipice.
But as the Lamb is taught by natural Fright
To fear and hate the Wolf, though in the Fleece,
The honest Fleece of the mild Sheep he be
Arrayed, and courts her with smooth Flattery:
417.
So Psyches Heart, [for heavenly Charis there
Close in the Center of her Soul did lie,]
Misgave her at the Sight, and quaked for fear
Of this fair-tongued Angels Courtesy;
For all his dainty Look, and Skin, yet She
Assured was, it could not Phylax be.
418.
None of those soft and blessed Heats, she felt
Which sweetly, when her Phylax used to speak,
Did all her Breast into Compliance melt,
And way to their own gentle Conquests make:
Besides, the Voice, though woudrous Sweet it were,
Yet something out of tune it seemed to her.
419.
Too high it seemed, and of too loud a Strein:
Still was the Music of her Spouse; and she
No Saints remembered that did ever complain
That Jesus called them to Extremity,
That Trumpets did the Gospel usher in,
And Wars Alarm the Calm of Peace begin.
420.
Had this great Message from her Spouse been sent.
She knew her Heart [which now did pant and move
By His sole Motions,] must needs relent,
And by Submission His Command approve:
But now she by reluctant Nausoousnesse
Felt, whosefoe'r it were, 'twas none of His.
421.
Awakning therefore all her Confidence,
And with three Invocations having sued,
Her Savior to engage in her Defense,
Upon her faithful Forehead she renewed
His potent Sign, and then with courage cried:
In Lights fair Looks why do thou Darkness hide
422.
Whate'r thy face does preach unto mine Eye;
The language of thy Tongue-unto mine Ear,
Sounds nothing less than Phylax: wherefore hie
Thee hence, false Fiend, and seek thy Booty where
A beauteous Countenance, and a snowie Pair
Of Wings, the full Proof of an Angel are.
423.
As when the Suns near Beams burst out upon
A waxen Idol, straight its goodly Face
Too weak to bear that glorious Dint, does run
Away in droiling Drops, and fowls the place
Which it before adorned: So here the Fiend
Melted as soon's this servent Answer shined.
424.
Off fell his Coat, his Periwig, his Wings,
His roseal Vizard, and his Milkie Skin:
And in the room of those usurped I hings
His proper shape of Horror did begin
To clothe him round: at which, indignant He,
Least Psyche should triumph his shame to see,
425.
Tore his Way down to Hell, that there in Night
He might his Head, and Ignominy hide;
A thousand Stinks behind him, at his flight,
He left: and being gotten home, he tried
Upon the Souls which in his Brimstone Lake
All yelling lay, his vexed Spite to wreak.
426.
Mean while, as Psyche those quaint Spoils admired
Which dropped from her beauteous-hideons Foe,
And with her Sacrifice of Thanks aspired
Unto the foot-stoool of her Savior, who
Had in that fight her faithful Champion been:
Her true and genuine Phylax fluttered in,
427.
O how her Heart leaped at the welcome sight,
And thus broke from her Lips! Thou, Thou art He,
I know thee at the dawning of thy Light
In which no Fawnings, no Impostures be:
Spare all Probations; Thou needst not tell
Me who thou art: I know my Phylax well.
428.
This said; Her self down at his feet she threw,
Which hugging fast, she welcomed with a Kiss.
He gave her Passion leave a while to show
The meek Impatience of this sweet Excess:
Then up he took her, and returned upon
Her Lip, what she unto his Feet had done.
429.
And, Joy, said he, my dearest Dear, of thy
Victorious-Encounter with thy Foe:
That goodly Furniture of Treason, I
As well as thou who art the Victor, know:
I saw the pilfering Traitor when he picked
It up, and when with it himself he tricked.
430.
Close at his heels I followed, when he
His forgerie advanced, and hither flew:
I was Spectator when he set on Thee,
And in Heavens Name his Hell against thee drew:
Unseen, I saw the dangerous Battle; and
By it I stood, but aided not thine Hand.
431.
No: thy dear Spouse, who never does forget
His humble faithful Servants, did supply
Abundant Power, and conveied it
By ever-ready Chari's Ministry.
I claim no share at all: thy Thanks to none
But Him, and Her are due, and must be done.
432.
Thou se'st how bountifully They repay
The Loyalty of thy Mortification,
And what thou against by giving Thelema
To Him who will not be in Debt. Thy Station
Is now Secure, unless thou back do start,
And fondly home again recall thine Heart.
433.
Surely thou never had so much thy Will,
As since thou had it not; for All things now
Throughout the Universe thy Mind fulfill,
And Netures Laws unto thy Pleasure bow:
(...) Pleasure, which is not thine own, but His
Who of Omnipotence the Sovereign is.
434.
The dainty Peace which thou did prize so high
Has now its Lodging taken in thy Breast;
Nor could the Tempter's potent Subtlety
Disturb thy Calm, or undermine thy Rest.
Be then Content for ever to possess,
By holding fast thine Hold, thine Happiness.
435.
For if thou let'st it slip, and weary be
Of blessed Ease, it soon will fly away:
In this low flitting World, no Certainty
Was ever yet Inhabitant; and they
Alone be out of Change's reach, who are
Infeof d above in endless Quiet's Sphere.
436.
It Is true, those everlasting Chains which tie
Heavens Destinations to their Ends, excel
All Adamantine Power, and can by
No opposition of Eartn or Hell
Be forced to betray their Hold: yet this
No ground of Confidence to Mortals is.
437.
For those Decrees profoundly treasured are
In that bright Bosom which no Angels Eye
Can peep into. This makes pious Fear,
Religious Awe, and holy Jealousy,
The only Anchors which Assurance can
Afford unto the tossed Heart of Man.
438.
And it is Heavens mighty Favor too; least He
Should bold and careless grow, if once he saw
The Patent of his own Felicity
Were signed and sealed so sure, that by the Law
Of absolute Necessity, he through
All Tempests, safely to his Port must row
439.
For then were He no better than a Slave
Unto that Bliss, whose Crown prepared is
For them who venture at it by the brave
Ambition of humble holiness.
Then, if He would, his mighty God might He
Disdain, and dare Him with his own Decree,
440.
O then with reverent dread march on, my dear,
In the design of thy high virtue; and
Think it sufficient happiness, if here
Thy Fear can Desperation countermand;
If thou by trembling can Victorious be,
And win at length supreme Felicity.
441.
As for these Spoils, the Trophies they shall be
Of what by Loves assistance Thou have done:
This Memorandum of thy Victory
May keep awake thy wise Devotion:
Lo, here I hang them up; and if agin
The Serpent hither creep, show Him his skin.
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO XVIII. The Persecution.
ARGUMENT.
SAtan makes war on Psyche's Constancy
Both by his own, and Persecution's Hand;
Yet still impregnably-resolved She
Their Ambushes and Onsets did withstand,
Until her Guardian by a Blessed Cheat
Enforced her to a glorious Retreat.
1.
THough Joies, and Loves, and Bliss, their Nest do make
In Peace's bosom; often times beneath
That surface of Security a Snake
His unsuspected Venomous spite does breathe.
For it is an everlasting statute, That
No genuine Rest can here below be got.
2.
The Creatures courteous Faithlesnes, who still
Shrink from our grasping Hands, and Cheat our Hope,
Admonish our desires themselves to fill
At those pure Spings of fullness, which stand open
In Heaven alone; and never fancy here
Complete Content's and Satisfaction's sphere.
3.
This makes brave and hardy Exercise
Dearer to Virtue than is lazy Quiet;
This makes her so highly Patience prize,
So constantly her self with Sufferings diet,
That this sharp Sauce may wholesomly repress
Of Peace's Sweets and Fat the Fulsomnesse.
4.
Affiction is the only Schole where she
In Magnanimities high Rules is taught;
The Theater on which her Gallantrie
Before the royal Eyes of Heaven is brought:
For both the Angels, and their Severaign there
Ernest Spectators of her Courage are.
5.
Full well she knows, that stealing Rust will creep
Upon the briskest Sword, if lazilie
In its blind quiet Scabberd it does sleep,
And be not rubbed, uor chafed, nor vexed by
Harsh Scouring, churlish Whetting, or kept bright
By its perpetual Bus'nes in the fight.
6.
That never Horse was made of so much Fire,
Nor tempered for so proud impatient speed;
(Though a true Pegasus had been his Sire,
Or He of Phoebu's Coursers had been bred,)
But, it he from his Manger never did move,
Would restie, lame, and illcondition'd prove.
7.
That when the Air by long tranquillity
Lies loytering in the Sun, it putrid grows:
But when it is startled and afllicted by
Thunder and Lightning; when it feels the Blows
Of boistrous Winds, its drowsy dull Disease
Wakes at the frightfull News, and vanishes
8.
That sluggish Lakes, which always sleeping lie
Upon their easy Beds of Mud, beget
Of Toads and Stinks a nasty Progeny:
But those brisk Rils which, though they be beset
With craggy Hindrances, still running be,
Preserve entire their Native Purity.
9.
That never Soil was so ingenuous yet,
But if it were not often dug and plowed,
Harrow'd and torn, and forced to be fit,
And Weeded oftener far than it was Sowed;
In stead of Herbs, and Flowers, and honest Corn,
With peevish Briars and Thorns would be forlorn.
10.
That never Tree was known so thrifty, as
To spare its stock of Juice, and use it right;
But to loose idle Twigs would let it pass,
Which only sery'd, and scarcely that, for Sight,
Till the strict Discipline of the Pruning Hook
Lopped off those Wantons, and reformed the Stock.
11.
That finest Roabs, when they did idle lie,
Would gather nasty Dust, and fertile prove
In an ungrateful ever-fretting Fry
Of Mothes, unless the Wands and Brushes strove
Against their laziness, and day by day
Those busy bold Incroachers whipped away.
12.
That Mariners who in the easy Bay
Did both their Winter and their Summer waste,
Would never learn to steet their Bark, till they
Were by some Tempest into Danger cast,
And had accustomed their venturous Minds
To ken the boystrous Language of the Winds
13.
That Soldiers listed are in vain, and wear
Steel by their Side, and Brass upon their head,
If in the pitched Field they never appear
To See the hostile Ranks, and Standards spread,
To meet the Shock, and bring away their Skars
As Letters Testimonial of their Wars.
14.
And though no Life scarce any Name does merit
But that of War, (so many Enemies
Poor Man does by his wtetched Birth inherit,
Since all the World did in Rebellion rise
Against unhappy Adam) yet no State
More than the Christian, is beseig'd with Hate.
15.
The Christian Life the furest Warfare is,
And though a thousand Victories it gains
Yen still more and more Armies on it press;
More Care, more Sweat, more Labor still remains.
Though Peace may an internal Calm beget,
Affliction still will Us without beset.
16.
Though all the stickling Senses and the Passions,
Which breed intestine Perturbations, be
Bowed to the Yoke; though all the (...)
Of Will and Reason, by the industry
Of the (...) Soul be tamed, yet still
There is a World without to work her ill.
17.
For by her Christian Course against the Tide
Of all the World she rows; and therefore by
Eternal Opposition is tri d
And hardened to victorious Constancy:
For had she floated down the willing stream,
No way was there Magnanimous to seem.
18.
But now her gallant Metal whetted is,
Her vain luxuriant Twigs are pruned away,
Her Clothes are brushed from Mothes and Dustinesse,
Her Soil is dug and dressed; the lazy Bay
She changes for the active manly Main,
And in pitched Field her Foes does entertain.
19.
Her Beasts unto their Pace are strictly kept,
And rid hard every Day; her wholesome Air
By (...) Tempests of loud Sighs is swept,
And all her Bosoms Region made more fair;
The Torrents of her Eyes continue clear,
Because perpetualy they flowing are,
20.
Thus, though Afflictions Looks be sad and sour,
Her Heart is Kind, and she the best of Friends;
Whilst Flattery does Poison gently pour,
Her Antidotes She most severely lends:
Her Physic smart and searching Corsives be,
But their Conclusion's always Lenity.
21.
And Psyche's Spouse, though dear to Him she were
As the bright Apple of his blessed Eye,
Unto Afflictions swindge abandoned her:
That as the Sun through the Conspiracy
Of blackest Clouds does break with fairest Rays,
So might her Virtue pluck from Briars Bays.
22.
As Satan from his late Repulse did fly
Stung with confounding Shame and fretfull Rage,
He in the Air spied a winged Company
To heaven returning in fair equipage,
Having their Embassies dispatched here
With which to Men they delegated were.
23.
This prompted him unto a new Device:
With sprightfuil Speed he played the Thief again,
And having stole a (...) of Gallantries,
After the Angel Troop he posts amain,
Trimming his cursed Feature as he flew,
Till like a Bird of that fair Brood he grew
24.
Something behind he lagg'd, least piercing They
His impudent Impossure should (...),
And intercept his Project by the Way
In just Disdam of his foul Company.
So at wise distance does the Traitor sneak
When he with Honest Men does entrance seek,
25.
But as he siutter'd through the Spears, he bit
His Lips to see the fatal Way whereby
He once was tumbled headlong down: and yet
Though they with Curses and fell Blasphemy
Were big, he durst not open them, knowing well
Heaven ill would bear the dialect of Hell.
26.
Arrived at the everlasting Gate
Of the imperial Palace of the Skies,
The Angels entered in triumphant State,
Account to tender of their Embassies:
But Satan siarted so, that he well near
Shok'd off his Vizard by his trembling fear.
27.
The mighty Luster of his Makers (...)
Flashed such Dread on his, that swarthy He
Who had been used to Nights black Prodigies,
Was dazzled at the naked Majesty
Of more than Day: Three times he winked, and there,
With both his Hands his spurious Eyes did screen.
28.
Such fright upon the ougly Batt does seize
When Highnoon's darts of Luster shoot her through.
The woeful Ghosts, who in Nights Shades do please
Their gloomy Thoughts, thus terrified grow
If fair Aurora's Curtains open be drawn,
And she her self gets up ever they be down,
29.
The gallant Spectacles which here he saw
Were greater Torments than he felt at home;
Each Glorie's Splendour which about did flow
Burnt him far more than his own tiery Doom
Each holy Joy a Torture was, and He
Fri'd in the midst of this (...),
30.
He fri'd and flamed, and straight his (...),
His polished Looks, his curled Grove of Hair,
His dainty Coat, and all his stolen Things
A Sacrifice unto the Lightning were
Of Jesu's Eyes, and in his (...)
He now appeared of (...).
31.
The Angels started from Him at the sight,
And standing in a Circle far away,
Gazed on the Portent; who tried all the Might
Of desperate Boldness, yet could not gainsay
The guilty shame which now did Him aslail:
Down hung his Head, his Tallons, and his Tail.
32.
Thus when the conscious Traitors hateful Face
Is in the Presence of the Prince descried,
And persecuted by the full disgrace
Of all the loyal Court; against that Tide
Of Ignominy He in vain contends;
Such Horror all his Impudence transcends.
33.
As Jesus saw the Feind a bashed so,
He charged Him to relate from whence He came:
Nor durst the thus commanded Monster, though
Lies were his only Trade, a Fiction frame:
Yet scorning to forget his peevish Pride,
With dogged sullenness He thus replied:
34.
Whence can I come, but from beneath? Unless
There be some higher Place than this your Heaven;
This Heaven, from whence by you, I must confess,
(But let all judge how justly,) I was driven.
From visiting the Earth I come, where I
Have far more Subjects than your Deity.
35.
But mine, said Jesus, (for He scorned to chide
The stomackfull Feind, since ever-damned He
Sufficiently pays for his endless Pride,)
Although so rare and few, yet precious be:
Vain Multitudes to thee their Homage pay;
Mine not by number, but by weight I weigh.
36.
Let one Example speak the praise of All,
My Handmaid Psyche: Has thy watchful Eye,
Which scoureth round about the terreen Ball,
Full notice taken of her Piety?
And how none live in all the World who be
Higher above it, than is Virtuous she?
37.
Is not her Heart entirely fixed here,
Preoccupating Heaven and endless Bliss?
Nor Earth nor Hell can strike her Soul with fear,
But He alone who her Creator is;
Of Him she always stands in dainty Aw,
For still she Loves, as much as Dreads His Law.
38.
But wheresoe'r she reads the open face,
Or can discover but a Limb or Claw
Of hideous sin, she flies the dangerous Place,
And into any hard shifts does withdraw,
Rather than hazard to be overrun
With a delicious Destruction.
39.
Is not the Temper of her wary Heart,
Admonished by wise instinct, afraid
Of every Bait which by the subtlest Art
Of Spite and Wickedness for her is laid?
Or is there any thing which she does more
Than thee, even in thy fairest looks, abhor?
40.
Stung by these Words, with strong intestine Pain
His heart strings stretched and torn the Monster felt;
Yet that he might not bear these Pangs in vain,
But be aforehand still in shameless guilt,
He reard his face of everlasting Brass,
And what He spoke, of the same metal was:
41.
Is not your mighty Providential Arm
Become that simple Maidens Hedge, said he,
Infallibly to shut out Fear and Harm,
And make her Prisoner to Security?
Is not brave Phylax forced to be her squire,
And dance attendance upon her desire?
42.
On all her Errands runs not servile He?
Has he not trotted from the furthest West
In duty to her Curiosity,
And spent his time in tracing of the East;
Where like a silly Pilgrim, up and down
Forsooth, the Angel went from town to town.
43.
Besides, your Daughter Charis, (and yet who
Would think her so, who her employment sees?)
As though in Heaven she nothing had to do,
Down to vile Earth is sent, and set to please
This Imp of dust, on whom her noble store
Of sweets, to win the Vrcheon, she does does pour.
44.
A proper purchase you have got; but I
For my part, would not buy a worm so deer:
If wretched Psyche's price must be so high,
Surely you need no other Chapmen fear:
Only by this proportion, I would know
To purchase Me, what rate you would allow.
45.
But as for Her, if I had leave to try,
I soon would show you of what kind of Clay
She molded is. Might Phylax but stand by,
And on her naked Shoulder let Me lay
This Hand of mine, no Touchstone you should see
Was ever nimbler at Discovery;
46.
Upon your pamperd Darling should Distress
With full and free Commission domineer
That Tongue which now your Praises does profess
(For to the Task it is hird, and hired full dear,)
Would change its Tune, and on your Face would spit
More Curses than my Self ever did on it.
47.
If Psyche's Breast do harbor any seed
Of such profound Ingratitude, replied
Almighty Jesus, it is no more than need
The ougly Embryo be in time descryed.
Go, use thy Skill; full Power to Thee I give,
Nor Phylax shall against thy Project strive.
48.
But yet thy Tether shall not reach so far
As to her Life; no, that belongs to Me;
For in my Hand the authentic Volumes are
Of mortal and immortal Destiny:
Nor could Thou thy Experiment take, unless
She Lives, to spit out her Unthank fullness.
49.
As when the Lyon's let loose to his prey,
With furious Joy he shakes his dreadful Crest,
He mounts his sirly Tail, and tears his way
Into the Theater: So Satan pressed
Down through the Spears, and thought his shame was cheap
He suffered there, since he his End did reap.
50.
At first he hoped he might have reached his Aim
By the fell Agents he dispatched from Hell:
But when without their Errand home they came,
Himself thus to the cursed Bus'nes fell,
Resolved whatever labor or Disgrace
It cost Him, Psyche should not escape his chase.
51.
Down through the Spears he pressed, and proudly threw
Scorn on the Stars which He could not possess,
Then through the Air imperiously He flew,
And by his Looks proclaimed that Realm was his:
The blackest Clouds which there did swimm, made haste
Away, till He more black than they, were past.
52.
His swarthy Wings lashed the soft Element
With violent speed, and made it roar aloud;
No Wind did ever with such furious Bent
Or hideous Noise through the mild Region crowd;
No Bolt of Thunder ever rent its path
With such impatient and tumultuous Wrath,
53.
Thus came the Monster to his dearest Place
On Earth, a Palace wondrous large and high;
For on seav'n Mountains it erected was,
All which it higher raised with Majesty;
Thus by its seav'n-fold Tumor copying
The number of the Horns which crowned its King
54.
Of dead Men's Bones were all the exterior Walls
Raised to a fair, but yet an hideous Height;
In answer to which strange Materials,
A Ditch dug wondrous deep and broad, did wait
Upon the Works, filled with a piteous flood
Of every soft of holy harmless Blood,
55.
Those awful Birds, whose Joy is ravenous War,
Strong-tallond Eagles, perched upon the head
Of every Turret, took their prospect far
And wide about the World, and questioned
Each Wind that came that way, to know if they
Could tell them news of any bloody Prey.
56.
The inner Bulwarks were of shineing Brass,
With Firmitude and Pride all Buttressed;
In at the Gate of polished Steel did pass
The whole Worlds Confluence, and offered
Their slavish Necks, to take the Yoke which there
That Places Tyrant did for Them prepare.
57.
But thick, within the Line, erected were
Innumerable Prisons, plated round
With massy Iron, and with jealous Fear;
In every one of which was a profound
And mirey Dungeon, where contagious Stink
Cold, Anguish, Horror, had their dismal sink
58.
In these, pressed down with Chains of fretting Braffe
Ten thousand innocent Lambs did bleatingly,
Whose woeful Groans, helped by the hollow Place
Summoned Compassion from the Passers by;
But every one they as relentlesse found
As was the Brass which them to Sorrow bound.
59.
For they designed for the Shambles were,
To feast the Tyrants greedy Cruelty,
Who could be pleased with no other Fare;
So barbarous was her constant Luxury:
Though other store she had for her repast,
She with an hundred Lives would break her fast.
60.
Vast were the Treasures of her House; yet she
Took pleasure in no other Furniture
But choicest tools of Inhumanitie,
Which might her bloody Ends to her assure:
This made her Palace thick with Engines ly,
And every Room become an Armory.
61.
Swords, Daggers, Bodkins, bearded Arrows, Spears,
Nails, Pinsers, Crosses, Gibbets, Hurdles, Ropes,
Tallons of Griffens, Paws and Teeth of Bears,
Tygres and Lions Mouths, hot-iron Hoops,
Racks, Wheels, Strappado's, brazen Cauldrons which
Boiled with oil, barrels of flaming Pitch:
62.
Yea things more barbarous yet than these were there;
Fairfaced Promises, but lined with spite;
High royal out side Courtesies, yet mere
Traps and Conspiracies, which with Delight
To heedlesse Men the worst of Poisons give,
And stealing to their Hearts, slay them alive.
63.
Satan arrived here, strait entered in;
(For well He knew the Place, and well was known,)
The fawning Courtiers all were proud to win
His gracious Look, and in his way fell down
To beg his Blessing, and his Hand to Kiss,
As in unto their Sovereign He did press.
64.
She then (for long within she could not stay)
Was marching out, her Chariot to take,
So loud her stomach barked for some new Prey:
But spying Beelzebub, she started back,
Being surprised with reverence to see
The presence of her only Deity.
65.
Then down she fell, and prayed him to ascend
Her throne imperial, which was standing there,
And thence his Pleasure unto her-commend,
Prepared with all Humility to hear
What business made her God vouchsafe to come
And visit worthless her in her poor home.
66.
But kindly He took up his loyal Creature
And in his scaley Arms did her embrace,
Enamored of her correspondent Feature
Which rendered Him his own Infernal Face.
Three times He Kissed and hugged her close, and round
About her Waste his royal tail He wound.
67.
And, I have no such leisure now, said He,
To climb thy throne, who must look to mine own;
I have discovered in my Britanie
The Seeds of dangerous Rebellion sown,
Which, if it grow unto an Harvest, may
Disturb mine Empire, and thine oversway.
68.
The Christian spreading Canker there has got
Deep footing in the Hearts of careless Men,
Who to the poor Mechanic God are not
Ashamed to pay their holiest Homage, when
With credit They might it to Me prefer,
Who am, I trow, more than a Carpenter.
69.
Me thinks my Scepter should as noble be
As Ax or Mallet; and as brave my Train
Of Heaven descended Sparks, the gallanty
Of whose high Souls did Gods own yoke disdain,
As those who leaping from their Fishing Boat,
Into the threadbare Court of Jesus got.
70.
They use to cast it in our Teeth, that We
By the black Powers of Spells and Incantations
Do both support and spread our Monarchy:
As if there were not stranger Conjurations
In this besotting Witchery which can
Make more than Beasts of Reasonable Man.
71.
For can thou pick out any Beasts among
The silliest Flocks, who would themselves commit,
To Him who leaves them free to any Wrong,
And tells them plainly they must suffer it
For his dear sake? Right dear, indeed, if they
Their lives unto His Memory must pay.
72.
Mad were the Sheep which would attendant be
Upon a Shepherd who did them assure
That for that only Cause the Tyranny
Of thousand Wolves and Bears they must endure
Nay Sheep would never be so sheepish; yet
Men to this Paradox themselves submit.
73.
Grant Heaven be in reversion their own;
What shall the fondlings get by being there,
Who must eternaly be crouching down
And paying Praise's tribute to His Ear
Who will requite them with a Chain which shall
Keep even their Wills in everlasting Thrall.
74.
Were not their Souls more generous, if they
The gallant freedom of our Hell would choose,
Which knows not what it means to Obey,
But lets full Blasphemy for ever loose?
Faint-hearted fools, who needs will Vassals be,
(For fear least I should make them truly free.
75.
Thou see this sin is crying, and for high
Revenge beats loud upon my royal Ear:
And should my Fury wake, and instantly
Those mad (...) all in pieces tear,
Surely my Justice I could well acquit;
However envious Heaven would rail at it.
76.
But I (for this does best become a King)
A better relish find in Lenity:
I know the Galileans Tongues do ring
With restless Clamours on my Tyranny,
Forgetting that their Lord did banish Me
From Heaven, against all Law and Equity.
77.
Yet shall not they Me so ignoble make
As to requite their Baseness in its kind:
No: let them henceforth Demonstration take
In what a pack of Forgeries combined
Unto my Charge they lay all Cruelties:
Judge all the World, who Father is of lies.
78.
For I resolved am at first to try
Them by my royal Mercy to reclaim:
Far rather would I win them thus, than by
Stern Vengeance utterly extirpate them.
The Peoples fault alas, is not so great
As His, whose Gospel Pipe charmed them to it.
79.
My pleasure therefore is, that thou make speed
To Britain, and divulge my Proclamation
Of Grace and Pardon unto every Head
Which strait abjures that dangerous Innovation,
And, penitent for his Christian Heresy,
With orthodox Devotion Bows to Me.
80.
But if my princely favor be despised,
Both Heaven and Earth must needs my Rage approve;
Denounce all Vengance that can be devised
By scorned, and therefore most indignant Love:
Make all the stupid stubborn Rebels feel
That Mary's Son cannot my Wrath repel.
81.
This said, The Fury, who had all this while
Smiled in hopes of her new Task, made haste
To take her Coach, and thought each step a Mile
As through the spacious House to it she past.
Then mounting at the Gate, they parted, He
Home to his Hell, and to wards Britain She.
82.
Forth with in terrible Magnificence
An hundred Trumpets sent their Voice before
To tell the People that their awful Prince
Her Progress now began: That stately Roar
Through every street imperiously flew,
And warned (...), this mighty sight to view.
83.
When lo the sweating throngs bespred her way
With admirations of her Pomp and Train:
Before the Chariot two road single, they
Suspicion were and Envy; both did rein
Their fitting Steeds, the one a Fox, the other
A Wolf, and forced them to march together,
84.
Next followed Pride upon a sirly Horse,
Whose stomach near as high as hers did swell;
Fire sparkled in his eyes, and martial force
In the bent Bow of his large neck did dwell;
About he flung his Foam, and champ'd his Bit,
For both his Rider he disdained, and it.
85.
But she an Ensign in her right Hand held,
Whose bosom she displayed to the Wind:
Forth with the Flag with stately fulness swelled,
Wherein the Tyrants golden Scutcheon shined,
A wide-spred Eagle, whose fair Pinions seemed
To bear her up still as the Colors streamed.
86.
Then came the Coach, which two strange Monsters drew,
For one a dreadful Lybian Dragon was,
Who from his Mouth did flaming Sulphur spew,
And poisned all the Way which he did pass:
The other an enormous Crocodile
The most accursed Son of happy Nile.
87.
On them two feirce Postillions mounted were;
Intolerable headstrong Anger, who
To lash her Dragon never did forbear
Though he with Furie's violent Feet did go;
And Cruelty, whose Heart was harder than
Her knotty (...) black iron Skin.
88.
Upon the Coachbox sat a Driver hight
Self-will, a mad-braind most outrageous He:
Who in impatient Speed does still delight:
Though thousand Perils in his Passage be:
Never could Hills or Dales, or Sea or Land,
Or desperate Precipices make Him stand.
89.
The Metal of the Chariot all was Brass,
Bright burning Brass, which upon either side
With sharp and cruel Hooks thick platted was,
To mow down All it met: In this did ride
The dreadful Queen, a Queen of mighty Fame;
Who has not heard of Persecutions Name
90.
Whatever makes the Tigres Faces be
Of ravenous Cruelty the hideous Book,
With indefatigable Industry
She had transcribed into her monstrous Look:
Heaven shield all pious Souls, and turn their Fears
To generous Faith when ever She appears.
91.
Her Coat is Steell, besmeared all with blood,
And in her Hand she holds a Twist of Snakes,
With which, though still her Coachman never stood,
Eternaly she threshes Him, and makes
His furious Speedmore speedy grow, that she
Might at her Prey as soons her Wishes be.
92.
Thus whirled she through the Popular Rout and flew
To her desired Isle the straitest way.
Behind the Coach her cursed Train, she drew
All glad to tread her cruel Steps, for they
No other were but her own hellish Brood
Whom she had nursed and fatned up with Blood.
93.
Upon a Goat, more stinking far than he,
Rode Ravishment, who threw his licorish Eyes.
And they black fire, on every Company
Of Females of what everage or guise:
The Chariots haste he cursed a thousand times
Which snatched Him from the fuel of his Crimes
94.
Perched on a Vultures back was (...), who
In length of (...) did that Bird exceed;
Starved with (...) though fat in Spoils, she so
(...) was, that still she wished more speed
Had hurried on the Coach, that ravenous she
Might sooner at her British Banquet be.
95.
Upon an Ostrich, more unnatural
Than was her barbarous Bird, rode Astorgie,
Vowing aloud to tear in sunder all
Those cords of love which did together tie
The Souls of Parents and of Children, and
Break the sweet Links of every Nuptial Band.
96.
Mounted upon an Hydra, Heresy
With more and stranger heads than had her Steed.
Rejoiced in hope that now contagious she
Her Poison to another World should spread,
And Albions Sands which brideled in the Sea
Should by her stouter Tide o'r-flowed be.
97.
On a black grizlie Dog rode Profanation;
She who never learned distinction of Place
Or Time or Things; who never yet could fashion
A modest Look, or paint upon her face
The least glimpse of a Blush; who would not hear
That Altars holyer then Dressers were.
98.
Bold Sacrilegde sat pertly on a Kite;
And though her Claws were burned, and singed her Wings,
Ever since she from the Altar took her flight,
(For vengefull Coals stuck to the Sacred Things,
Branding the saucy Theif,) yet shameless she
A robbing Heaven and God, again would be.
99.
Upon a Serpent bred in Hell beneath,
Which belched fire at every Step he took,
Which reached Heaven with his pestiferous breath.
Which fought with holy Incense by the Smoke
Of his foul Throat, rode fouler Blasphemy,
And dared all the way Divinity.
100.
But on an Heifer of Egyptian Race;
Right proud of his Extraction, (for he
The Heir of Apis and of Isis was,)
Sat full as gross a Brute, Idolatry:
And yet Devote's, grosser than her Beast,
Or she, about her with their Offerings pressed
101.
And this was (...) royal Train,
Which all the way she went, stroke mortal fright
Into the Countries, traveling in Pain,
As she in Triumph, till her speedy flight
Had born her past them, and gave them release
From their dark Dens and hollow Privacies.
102.
Poor Albion thrice started as she drew
Near to her shore, and would have further run
Into the Sea: but now the Tyrant flew
With cursed joy into possession
Of the unhappy Isle, where dreadful She
Took up her quarters in a Colonie.
103.
From thence she issued out her Proclamations
Of Pardon unto all that would come in;
But backed it with severest Denuntiations
To those who still continued in their Sin,
Who still would waste their Piety upon
The Carpenters poor Crucified Son.
104.
She summond all the Isle to Reformation,
That mighty Jove by whose high blessing she
Reigned Queen of all the World, in worthy fashion
And like his supreme Self, might Worshipped be;
That pleased He might rain his favors down,
And Albion with Peace and Plenty crown.
105.
For by her royal Declaration She
All blastings, mildews, droughts, plagues, earthquakes, wars,
Laid to the sole charge of Christianity:
Which impious Sect, said she, so boldly dares
The Wrath of all the Gods, that righteous They
Upon the Earth must needs this vengeance lay.
106.
Forthwith, all those whose bosoms tainted were
With the rank Venom of Idolatry,
Luxuriously joy'd the news to hear,
And with immediate Consluence did fly
To do their homage, and their thanks prefer
Even in the Name of succored Jove, to Her.
107.
Then They, who could have loved Pretty,
Yet none but faint and timorous Virtue knew,
They in whose Hearts the World and Self did ly,
As well as Jesus; They who would have drew
In the Euangelick yoke with patience, so
Mean while their secular Plough might also go;
108.
They who conceived for Wives and Childrens sake,
Who were depending upon their sole Care,
(So dream's the faithless fondlings) they might make
A little bold with God; And they who were
In hopes Heaven to their Prayers would courteous be
And wink at what flowed from (...),
109.
Came in the Rear like Men who Scarcely came,
For not so much as half their Minds were there;
Under the Evenings guilty veil their shame
They sheltered, for they Days Eyes did fear.
Unhappy Men, what aile you thus to go?
Your selves condemn your selves for what you do.
110.
But they whose loyalty was firm and sound,
They who to Love entirely had resigned
Themselves, such sweetness in his service found
As left the Baits of all the World behind:
Such sweetness as enforced to be sweet
That Gall which flow d in Persecutions Threat.
111.
Sooner will They be charmed by the Hiss
Of a fell Dragon, to his Den to go,
Than be persuaded to accept of this
So treacherous and destructive Pardon: no,
What ever They loose, they from their Loss will (...)
This noble Gain, that they Themselves will keep.
112.
Their Life, their Fame, Estate, and Liberty,
They can more easily than their Conscience spare:
They nothing count their Own, which cannot be
Without Impiety possessed; and are
Content with any Thing but God to part,
Who only can secure Them their own Heart.
113.
Psyche was one, and not the meanest One,
Of these brave Champions, who, since Phylax had
(Heaven having so disposed) left her alone,
Her meek Addresses to Uranius made;
An holy Priest was He, and unto Her
An Oracle in any Doubt or fear.
114.
To you, said She, my reverend Father,
Now Persecutions furious Storm does (...),
As to my wise and faithful Pilot fly,
Not to be steered where Calamities
May never reach my Uessel; but to know
The nearest way how I to them may row.
115.
Forbid it genuine Love, that I should fly
The noblest Testimony I can give
Of my, o how deserved, Loyalty
Unto my Spouse, for whom alone I live:
For him I live; and must that Truth deny,
If in his Quarrel I refuse to die.
116.
Was not His Life ten thousand times more dear
And precious than Mine? yet generous He
The utmost drop of his Heart-blood could spare
Even for the worst of Worms, vile sinful Me:
Loud cries the merit of this Blood, and I
Could I die often for Him, in debt should die.
117.
And, should I shrink from one poor Death, what Eye
Would not shoot Wrath at such Unthankfulness?
How should I hate my Self, and strive to die
For shame of Fearing Death? yet, I confess,
This Life so wretched is and poor, that we
By Martyrdom do Heaven no Courtesy.
118.
Mine all the Gains will be; nor know I how
To escape this Profit: which if I could shun,
My Death more Solace would to me allow,
And to the Stake I cheerlier should run.
But since that may not be; since Bliss is still
Ti'd to these Sufferings. let Love have his Will.
119.
Let Love assert his own Magnificence,
And make Us for our very Service be
Deeper in Debt to him: yet I will hence
Revenge me of His Liberality,
And do my best to run upon the Score
With this great Creditor forevermore.
120.
But sage Uranius, who was better read
In the cool Gospel Discipline replied,
The fire by which those flames of thine are bred
Is pure and genuine; but they blaze too wide:
Dear Daughter be content, and think that I
Can wish and dare, as well as you, to Die.
121.
Yet I am not so hasty to prevent
My Spouse's pleasure, who, for ought I know,
Desires Vranius should rest content
To wrestle still with Sorrows here below;
Still (...) be exiled from the blessed Sight
Of his dear Eyes, and grovell here in Night
122.
Besides, if I before His Call should run,
This hot Impatience might outstrip his Grace:
And how should feeble I, thus left alone,
Find courage to out-look the dreadful Face
Of Death, when dressed in martial Array
He gives the Onset to my Dust and Clay.
123.
What General will thank that Captain, who
Without Commission has presumed to fight?
Into the Lists of any Prisner go
With Tigres or with Bears to try his Might
E r He be called, what Eye will grieve to see
His torn Limbs pay for his Temeritie.
124.
It is enough if when We challenged are,
We flinch not from Professing his sweet Name,
Which in our Bosoms sits more near and dear
Than Life it self. Mean while think it no (...)
To balk the Tempest, which will easily (...)
Thy Haven, and Thee, if Jesus have a mind.
125.
As the young Soldier, who was more on fire
Than his fierce sparkling Steed, the Charge to give,
When by some old Commander his Desire
As rash and perilous, does a Curb receive,
Almost as hard he finds it to subdue
His single Self, as all his Hostile Crew.
126.
So Psyche crossed in her venturous Way
By the grave bulk of the sage Priests Advice;
Found it an heavy troublous Task to stay,
And shun the winning of her dearest Prize:
Yet knowing He was wiser far than She,
She bravely yields, and gains Selfe-victory.
127.
Uranius well remembered now how He,
Then young and shiftlesse: by his Parents was
Into a Nest of silent Privacie,
To which they through a Wilderness did pass,
Hurried by Night, when such a Storm as this
Into the Britain Hemisphear did press.
128.
Thither, when Even had muffled up the Eye
Of Heaven, and those of Earth, he Psyche led;
For by a Lanthorn which would not descry
More than he pleased, her way he governed;
And so arrived at the Cavern, where
Cheerly he bad the Maid be of good cheer.
129.
It is no new Adventure this, said he,
But practiced and well seasoned to our hand:
Moses, that Man of God, was glad to flee,
And wander up and down a forreing Land:
No Partridge on the Mountains ever was
More than good David, chased from place to place.
130.
Noble Elyah in the Desert hid
His persecuted head, when Jezebel,
Our Tyrants Type, her threatenings thundered
Against his Life: there he alone did dwell
Having no kind of Caterer or Cook
But a poor Raven, no Cellar but a Brook,
131.
Nay, even Jesus too himself did fly,
When bloody Herod drew his desperate Sword:
And never think it can discredit thy
Devotion to follow Him thy Lord
In any of his Steps, who only was
The Way by which We to Perfection pass.
132.
Whilst thus the good old Man encouraged her:
A Troop of furious Soldiers had by night
Beset their Houses, in presumption there
To find their helpless Prey; But when their flight
They understood, their frustrate Expectation
Flamed into most impatient Vexation.
133.
All rooms they ransacked, where what Goods 'they met
Were hungry Plunders instant Sacrifice:
Yet still their Rage unsatisfied, set
The Houses too on Fire, and with loud Cries
Threatened to serve the Owners so, when ever
Justice could make Discovery where they were.
134.
If any of the Neighbors, wounded by
The salvage Spectacle, but smote their Breast,
Or shak'd their Head, or mourned in a Sigh;
The bar barous Caytiffs took it for confessed
That to their Queen they ill affected were,
And instantly to Prison them did tear.
135.
Yet by the way, the cruel Courtesy
Of hungry Thieves they freely offered them
Who ready were their lives and liberty
With present sums of Money to redeem:
Their Queen is safe enough, so they can line
Their greedy Purses with Delinquents Coin.
136.
But through the Eastern Rubie Portals now
Aurora opened the Passage to the Day:
When lo an old and shaggie Lion, who
Had busy been all night about his Prey,
Came panting Home, and roaring loudly when
He drew near to the Entrance of his Den,
137.
This Den was that in which for shelter lay
The good Vranius and Psyche, who
Rouz d by the Noise, but having now no way
To fly the presence of their salvage Foe,
Their Hearts to Heaven with instant fervor sent,
Imploring Succor in this Perils dint.
138.
In came the Beast, whose dreadful Mouth and Paw
Still reeked with the Blood of his torn Prey:
But those unwonted Guests when there he saw,
Stroke with the awsull News, he made a stay,
And as he wistly looked, he smoothed his frown,
And by degrees his Crest and Tail let down.
139.
Uranius musing what the Lion meant
To melt so from himself, thus him bespake:
If He who is our Lord and thine, has sent
Thee hither with Commission to take
Our lives, by gentler Tyranny than that
From which We fled; lo we deny them not
140.
Much Solace it will be to Us, that we
Augment not by our Deaths the Guilt of Men;
This bloody Trade does better suit with Thee
Of salvagenes the dreadful Sovereign, than
With them, whose softer Constitutions be
Tempered and tuned fit for Clemency.
141.
Yet if thou do not on Heavens Errand come,
But the sole business of thy barbarous Thrist;
Unarmed though we be, no Peril from
Thy Paws or Jaws we dread; do all thy worst,
So faithful He: and so said Psyche too;
And waited what the Beast would dare to do.
142.
When lo, the trusty generous Lion, who
No Vengance ought to Men, but where he saw
The print of Guilt, and of Rebellion to
Their common Sovereign; did meekly throw
Himself before these Saints, in whom he read
The Lines of reverend Innocence fairly spread.
143.
Then having humbly licked their holy Feet,
And seemed to beg their blessings ever he went;
What universal Providence finds meet,
Uranius cried, (perceiving what he meant,
And useful for thee, may it given be
In due requital of thy Piety.
144.
Which said, the joyful Lion took his leave
With the best manners his rude Education
Could him afford. The sight made Psyche grieve
Reflecting with a sober Meditation
On those unmanly Men she fled from who
In Barbarousnes did wildest Beasts (...)
145.
And well she might: for now a trusty Friend
Both to the Priest and Her, who knew the Place
Of their abode, his way did thither rend
With Ashes on his head, grief in his Face
He being entered, silent stood a while,
For Groans his breast, and sighs his Mouth did fill,
146.
But having prefac'd thus, alas, he cried.
That I have lived to bring this woeful News
Your selves have by your flight escaped the tide
Of Salvagenes which all our Town embrues;
But nothing else; for what behind you left,
The Booty is of most outrageous Theft
147.
Your Houses, turned to their own funeral Pile,
Now in their Ashes lie -- vast sorrow here
Stifeled the rest But then, thy stories style
To Us is not so dreadful; never fear
That what remains will trouble us, replies
The Priest, who dare embrace our Miseries.
148.
What ever was ours, alas We never Made,
But by Donation did it Possess:
All that We had, We but as Stewards had;
Well may our Master call for what was His.
And Blessed be his Name, who Us from these
Encumbrances so freely does release.
149.
Chidden by this Heroic Braverie
The Messenger took heart, and thus went on:
Had furious Tyranny presumed to fly
No higher than at you, and yours, alone,
Tears might have reached that loss: but who can wail
Enough, when God himself it does assail
150.
The desperate (...) feared not to break
Into the sacted Oratorie, (where
Our Busnes We with Heaven dispatched, for lack
Of public safety for our Rites,) and there
Made desperate havoc, challenging, in spite,
God for his Temple and Himself to fight.
151.
The Sacred Bible they no sooner saw,
But in foul indignation they cried,
Behold these Galileans lawless Law,
Which does all other Statutes break beside
Whether of Caesar or of Jove: but We
Will try if this may now not broken be,
152.
With that, they in a thousand pieces tor't:
Then on Devotions Prop, the Liturgy,
They made their equaly malicious sport,
Crying, these are those leaves of Witcherie,
That Bulk of Conjurations and Charms.
Which have occasioned the whole Worlds Harms
153.
Next, all the Altars reverend Furniture
They snatched, and scrambled who should rifle most:
The sacerdotal Vestments, white and pure,
About the room at first in scorn they tossed,
Then with new Insolence put them on themselves;
So in meek Lamb-skins walk the murdering Wolves.
154.
Upon the Chalice when they had espied
The Shepherd bringing home the strayed Sheep,
Like roaring Hel-hounds with one voice they cried,
Look how these Christians set their God to keep
Their Wine: but fools they should have hired a friend?
Which might his Godship from our hands defend.
155.
Is not our Pan more like a God than this!
Pan, who does all the Tribe of Shepherds keep,
Whilst this poor servile Thing contented is
To spend his time on silly rotten Sheep;
But since He Is here of Silver, in our need
His Deity may stand Us in some stead.
156.
When in these Contumelies they their fill
Had wantonized; one a dead Dog brings,
Which, having stopped his Nose, (for the rank (...)
Revenged his Crimt,) He on the Altar (...),
And with blasphemous supphcation cries,
Accept o Christ, my bounden Sacrifice
157.
Then, said Another, We must not forget
Humbly to tender our Drink-offring too
With that, upon the Altar thrice he spit,
And having sill'd a putrified shoe
With his vile Urine, on his bended Knee
He poured out his foul Impiety.
158.
But then a third, to make their sin complete,
Yelling and railing, ser the Place on Fire;
For since, said he, this Josusis so great
A God, his Deity may well require
An (...): which Word, and Act, the Rout
Applauded with an universal Shout.
159.
No more, Uranius (...); dear Friend for bear,
Till We have poured out our due Tears for this,
That (...) and his Temple wronged are,
Our (...) and ours alone, the reason is.
(...) of his Commandments is the Gap
Which let into his house this foul Mishap.
160.
This said; the Reins unto loud Lamentation
Both He and Psyche liberaly gave.
When lo a strong and mixed Vociferation
Conquered their Cries, and triumphed in the Cave:
They thought some Huntsmen were abroad, and so
It proved: for hunting they for Men did go.
161.
It was that Rout, who when thy mis'd the Priest
At his own house, concluded he was fled,
And in the Desert sought some private Nest
Wherein to hide his Persecuted Head:
But They all bent and sworn to hunt him out
A Pack of Bloodhounds with them thither brought.
162.
As up and down they traced the Solitude,
A busy Cur unto the Cave drew near;
Who having found the wished Sent, persu'd
It close, and entered where those Weepers were
Whom spying, wide He opened, and hold,
Till he to all the Rabble Tales had told.
163.
This brought them (...) thither; where when they
Beheld Uranius, with a barbarous Cry
(...) Voice and Hands, to pull Dismay
(...) their Prisner; whom forthwith they tie
Unto (...) Hound which found him out, that he
Night (...) contempable Conducter be
164.
The holy Captive knew it was in vain
To ask their Madness why it used Him so;
Or what Offense of his had ern'd that Chain:
But in meek Silence ready was to go.
Thus harmless Lambs are in their Sufferings mute,
And never with the Butchers Knife dispute.
165.
As Psyche at his Back lamenting stood,
One who pretended to have something still
Of Man and Kindness, bad her stop that flood
Which poor seduced she amiss did spill,
And weep no more to see Him Prisner, who
Had by Enchantments her enslaved so,
166.
For this your lurking, and your wailing here,
Tell Us he has bewitched you to his
Rediculous Religion; yet were
That only such, said He, we would not press
The Law against Him; but the whole World knows
That with the worst of Wickedness if flows.
167.
Him, the Ringleader of the Crime will We
To Justice sacrifice: but as for you,
Whose Guilt, we hope, is but Simplicity,
To your less fault we pardon will allow:
And to your silly Servant here, if He
Henceforth will do his best, more Wise to be.
168.
Psyche with silent and with sad Disdain
Threw back his Courtesy into his face.
For though her heart at present did refrain
To speak it self, yet she resolved was;
Resolved not to leave her Friend that day,
Though Death and Devils did obstruct her way,
169.
And now the raging Caytiffs drew the Priest
Unto the Town with shameless Exclamations;
And all the way his Patience oppressed
With Kicks, and (...), and Taunts, and (...),
Which sad Procession (...) was
By the Tribunal, where the Saint they place,
170.
A Deputy of Perjecution there
Was ready on the Bench, and standing (...)
A fan and new erected (...) where
Prepaied Coals of fire did glowing (...),
Near which stood one with (...) in his Hand
To wait upon the (...),
171.
Uranius thus presented at the Bar;
The (...) begins an insolent Oration,
In which (...) taken had sufficient care
To blast and to blaspheme the Christian Nation,
Unto whose chage He boldly laid all
The Miseries which did that Age befall.
172.
Nor those alone, (which his Queens Declaration
Prompted Him with,) but all that Calumny
(...) possibly invent; the Combination
Of bloody and unclean Impiety
Which made the Gnostics Name so horrid, He
Avowed the Christian Discipline to be
173.
His Pagan Gods He praised to the skies,
(A place which they, alas, could never reach,)
But heaped on Christ all slanderous Injuries
Which Envy could suggest, or Hell could teach.
And at each Period the Peoples Roar
Poured proud Applause upon their Orator.
174.
But in the Close He gravely turned his Speech
With cruel Pity to Uranius,
Whom by his reverend Age He did beseech
No longer to be fooled and cheated thus
By silly Wickedness, but choose their ods,
And take for One, a multitude of Gods.
175.
He straightly Him conjured to prefer
The Deities the whole World did adore,
Before the single simple Carpenter
Who found no worship but amongst a poor
Few sneaking and despised Souls, which He
(Vain God) could not protect from Misery.
176.
And if He now refused to present
Incense to Jove, upon that Altar there,
He theatned him the utmost Punishment
Which mocked and scorned Mercy could prepare.
This said: He shrunk his fawning face into
A frown, and waited what the Priest would do.
177.
But He, right brave defiance did return
Upon the Judge for this his treacherous Love:
And, sooner I, said He, my Self will burn,
Then Incense to an Idol: Could you prove
Your favor would not surely me destroy,
I it would hug with humble Thanks and Joy.
178.
But Sir, I am not now to learn, that they
On whom you thrust the Name of Deities,
Are weaker far than We poor things of Clay;
And that the Carpenter you so despise,
Is He who framed both you and me, and all
The Fabric of this universal Ball.
179.
And His revenging Arm it is which now
Lasheth the World with those Calamities
Which to the charge of our Religion you
So freely lay: your own Idolatries
Force Him to Justice, who had rather be
Known unto all his World by Lenity.
180.
If he thinks fit to rescue Me, it is
Not all your Power, or your Queens, can stand
Against his Might. Yet though I must by His,
Permitted be to your tyrannick Hand,
His Pleasure dearer is than life to Me:
I durst Die, but dare not Apostate be.
181.
No Sea repulsed by a solid Rock
Ever swelled, and foamed, and roared, with more disdain;
Than now the Judge to hear the Prisner mock
His Gods and Him: His throat he wide did strain,
And cried, then let Him Burn; since He denies
To offer, make Him be, Joves Sacrifice.
182.
The Soldiers who where much afraid least He
Should have accepted of the Judges Grace,
Rejoiced and clapped their cursed Hands to see
That to their rage he now condemned was.
Away they hale him to the stake, and there
A Fort of Fagots round about him rear.
183.
Then, with a Brand, they from Joves Altar brought,
The Pile they kindle, and blow up the flame:
Which as it rose, they bellowed out a Shout,
And cried, May this Reward betide all them
Who scorn the Gods, and fondly trust in Him
Who from the Cross could not himself redeem.
184.
But mild Vranius, having kissed the stake,
And every Faggot which his Lips could reach;
Strong supplications unto Heaven did make
For pardon for his raging Murderers, which
Blinded with spite, and Superstition,
Perceived not at all what they had done.
185.
Then purer than the Flame, and brighter far
Which mounted from his Pile, his Soul did fly:
Higher than that it flew, and reached the Sphere
Not of the Stars, but of Felicity;
Where it was welcomed to its final Home
By the illustrious Crown of Martyrdom.
186.
So when brave Gold has by the Cruelty
Of the incensed Furnace been refined;
Its genuine Substance is allowed to be
With the Imperial Image fairly signed:
Free leave and full authority it has
Current through all its Sovereigns Realm to pass.
187.
Psyche, who with sweet Tenderness attended
(...) is holy Tragick-Comedie,
No (...) saw how gloriously it ended;
But, (...) with her pious Plaudit, she
Forgetful of the furious Standers by,
Thus eased her Souls exultant Ecstasie,
188.
Go valiant Saint, thy Conquest is complete;
Go, where immortal Laurel ready is
With endless Triumphs thy brave Head to meet;
Go and possess thy Masters Realm of Bliss:
Thy Name and Fame shall reverend be beneath
So long as Piety on earth shall breath.
189.
O may poor Psyche but obtain the Grace,
Though at the price of all the Worlds worst spite,
To kiss thy glorious Feet, and win a place
Where on thy Triumph I may wait: O might
I through thy hottest Flames climb after Thee,
And from this mortal Dross refined be.
190.
This pious Passion well beseemed Her,
And made good Music in all holy Ears:
But like flat Discord it did grate and jar
Upon the Soldiers, whose most studious Cares
Were how to tune their Curses to a Key
Of wild impetuous Importunity.
191.
And how intolerable unto Them
Was this her Note, they make her fully feel,
For running on her in a surious Stream,
With headlong haste they hurry her until
They come unto the Judge, in Hopes that He
Their bloody Hungers Caterer would be.
192.
Here they exclaim that this bold Woman was
As manly as the Priest in wickedness;
That she nor feared nor blushed to make his Case
Heavens Quarrel, and his cursed Death to bless:
That she must needs as guilty be as He
Of Sins Perfection, Christianity.
193.
Yea of the worst and foulest Part of it;
Witness the Sheltre of the Night, and Cave
In which they took them napping: which could fit
None but Lusts filthy Work. And now you have
Just Sir, said they, arreigned here before
Your Judgment Seat, a Christian and a Whore,
194.
But she, commanded by the Judge to make
Her own Apology, (which best, said he
Will be evinced, if you that (...) take,
And by your Offering, choke all Calumny;)
With elevated Eyes thanked Heaven for this
Occasion to aspire unto her Bliss.
195.
Then spreading all her face with gallant Joy,
Like a brave Champion ready for the fight,
Or like a Bride dressed on her wedding Day,
Or silver Venus smiling in the Night,
Or brisk Aurora garnishing the Morn,
Or goodly Ceres golden in her Corn,
196.
Or rather like that glorious Deacon who
First opened the rubie Gate of Martyrdom,
Whom sweet and princely Beams embellished so
That Heaven it self aforehand seemed to come
And pitch upon his Face, which to his Foes
An Angels Countenance did in Man's disclose,
197.
She thus began: No Confutation, I,
But Thanks alone to my Accusers owe,
Who charge on Me no vulgar Piety,
But rank me with Vranius, and allow
That simple I deserve no less than he
With Martyrdomes fair Crown adornd to be,
198.
Only I must take leave to tell my Foes,
Their Spite in one thing much mistaketh Me;
For if I freedom had my Flames to choose,
I rather would for ever schorched be
With all Hells burning Sulphur, than give way
That Lnsts black Fire should make my hearts its (...)
199.
But how have I demeaned my Self, that You
Wise Sir, should think this wretched Life to Me
Can be more precious, than the Faith I owe
To Him, who can from Deaths Captivity
Redeem his Subjects; and a Course will take
Uranius from his Ashes how to rake.
200.
If ever this Tongue of mine was known to spill
The least Consent or seeming Approbation
Of You or of your Gods, (which sure my Will
Was never privy to,) this Detestation
May wipe it off, and make my Guilt proceed
As high as my Accusers it did plead.
201.
Jove is no more, nay not so much, to Me,
As you, or as the meanest Wight that lives:
He to your Fancies ows his Deity,
And from your Superstition receives
His livelihood: and therefore well may you
Be bold with him, and what you please allow.
202.
Sometimes a Bull must serve, sometimes a Swan,
For King of Gods Men; sometimes a shoure
Of Gold, and when you kindest are, a Man;
But such a Man, as waste's his God-ships Power
In Lust and Luxury, that prudent Ye
May by your Gods Example wicked be.
203.
And must I offer Incense to perfume
His Name, the Name of Filth and Stinks? must I
Tempted by such a wretched Bait, presume
On Jesu's pure and mighty Majesty?
No: Him indeed I fear, but dread not you,
Which with my Life I ready am to show.
204.
Were I as foul as are your Thoughts of Me,
Were I the worst of horrid Things, a Whore;
I see not why your goodly Piety
Should not convince you forthwith to adore
My wickedness, and Me, unless you will
Deny your Venus is a Goddess still.
205.
What Perfica, Pertunda, Mutunns,
What Cyprian Rites, what Ithyphallies, mean,
What sacred sport old Baubo's glorious
Invention made to cheer up Harvests Queen,
You, and your Temples know: but pardon Me,
If I blush to declare such Villainy.
206.
No: it shall never stain this Tongue of mine,
This Tongue which does its utmost homage owe
To Jesu's Name; that Name of most divine
Unspotted Sweetness. Doubt not Sir; although
I am a feeble Female, His dear Sake
My Resolution Masculine can make.
207.
The Judge, stung by this valiant Reply,
And highly scorning to acknowledge in
A Woman such heroic Constancy,
With envious Cunning cried, Now I have seen
More than enough to quit Fame from a lie,
Which charged such Charms on Christianity.
208.
If ever silly Soul enchanted were
With fawning undermining Witchery;
This obstinate and retchlesse Woman here
Is captive to that cursed Impiety,
Being so monstrously Transformed, that to
The Gods, and to her Self, she is open Foe.
209.
But we must not be fierce, 'cause she is Mad:
Perhaps this Spell is of short date, and she
Tamed by a Prisons Hardship, may be glad
To turn into herself again, and be
Content (which may the Gods vouchsafe to grant!)
Her Blasphemy and Boldness to recant.
210.
Great Jove, who heard when she did him (...),
Forbore to fling his Lightning at her head;
And by that sweet and heavenly Lenity,
Of Patience to Us a Lecture read.
To Prison with her, and instruct her there
By Chains, to quit these Bands which captive her,
211.
Laden with Irons, but much more with Scorn,
Poor Psyche thus unto the Goal is led:
There in a Dungeon dark, deep, and forlorn,
That she might double be imprisoned,
She plunged was; where, as she 'gan to sink
Into the nastie Mire, she waked the Stink.
212.
A Stink which would have scorned what Arabie
And all its Odours could against it do;
An aged Stink which did a mellowing lie
In that foul Grot; for it was long ago
Since any Thing disquieted the Heap
Of poisnous Loathsomenesse which there did sleep
213.
Fast in this torment stuck, afflicted she
No succor could receive from any friend;
The Jailer barred out all their Piety
Who willing were some help to her to lend;
And only once a day her furnished
With puddle Water, and course moldy Bread,
214.
Yet harder than this Diet, was the Grace
He said to it: Repent unhappy Wretch,
Repent he cried: Why should this woeful Place
Be dearer to thee than the favor which
The (...) Judge does offer thee, if thou,
With Him, and our great Queen, to Jove wilt bow.
215.
This cursed Preachment grated sore upon
The Bowels of her tender Heart, who in
This (...) Leisure set her thoughts to run
Over the Ages most unhappy Sin,
Which now with zealous superstition rung
From her destructive Keepers pitying tongue.
216.
No Member ever with such soft Sympathy
The wounds of its fraternal Part did feel;
As She that most contagious Malady
Which now had tainted Albions Commonweal,
And, like the Plague indeed, into the Heart
Its desperate Poison did directly dart.
217.
Inestimable Souls, (for such the Price
Which Jesus paid, proved them to be)
Their own illustrious value did despise,
Selling themselves to poor Idolatry,
And at no higher Rate then to escape
Some wordly shame, and temporal mishap.
218.
Their dear Redeemers most transcendent Love
They kicked and scorned, and his Heaven with it;
And gave their service to ignoble Jove,
Although no Guerdon, but the lowest Pit
Of everflaming Torments did attend them,
Where even that Jove himself no help could lend them.
219.
This stung her Soul so deep, that she could give
Her life ten thousand times to death, if she
Might at that cost be able to reprieve
Her Friends and Foes, from this mad Misery.
But (...) this unfeasible, the sight
Redoubled her compassionate sorrows weight.
220.
This fair advantage envious Satan took
To work upon her rockie Constancy:
Trusting at length that He should her provoke
To kiss the Judge's offered Courtesy:
He hoped that Desolation, galled by Grief,
Would stoop at length, and not disdain (...).
221.
And yet her Charitable Meditation
Highly displeased Him: wherefore crafty He
Resolved perforce to knit her Contemplation
Close to her own new (...) Calamity:
For all her Body He with flames did fill,
Which into burning Perls and Boils did swell.
222.
Her skin which was so white and sleek before,
All rugged now with odious tumors is:
From head to foot one universal sore
Arrays her round in a tormenting dress:
Thus the renouned Prince of Uz, of old
Wore this sad raiment, for his Roabs of Gold.
223.
Yet on dry Ashes He had leave to sit,
And with a Pot-sheard scrape his scurfie skin,
A comfort which poor Psyche could not get,
Being a weak and helpelesse Captive in
The thick relentlesse Mire, where she is fain
To rub her torturing swellings with her Chain.
224.
And yet these Torments less tormenting were
Than those which now her Parents treacherous Love
Heaped on her wounded Soul: The Judge's ear,
And then his leave, they got, to come and prove
What their Persuasions with their Child could do,
And cunningly they did their busnes too.
225.
Upon the Dungeons brink their Lamentation
They poured first, and then this charming cry:
Psyche, o Psyche, if thy Tribulation
Be yet too weak to make thee bow to thy
Own rest and quiet; let thy Parents (...)
At least, by thy consent, obtain Relief,
226.
The staff of our decrepit years art Thou
Alone, dear daughter; all our joys in thee
Are fresh and young: O do not rob Us now
Of that by which we live, thy liberty:
Thy liberty, which we would rather choose
By any Hand, than by thine own to loose.
227.
The Judge would yield thee back to Us again:
And will Thou cruel be, when He is Kind?
By thee have We deserved to be slain,
Who from all others Love and Pity find?
Though thine own Life thou strangely scornest, yet
Abhor not ours to whom thou owe it.
228.
Surely thy Christ, if He as Gentle be
As thou did vaunt Him for, will never give
Thee thanks for this unnatural Piety
Which both thine own, and Parents Lives does strive
To undermine: O no! His Grace We know,
And honor His Compassion more than you.
229.
Our Faith in His abundant Mercy makes
(...) be blown away, Comply.
His (...) all Hearts its Prospect takes,
(...) ours pant still with loyalty
(...) and his dear Laws: and therefore He
Propitious to our Outside fault will be.
230.
And so, sweet Daughter will He be to thine:
O then accept of what thou (...) to Crave;
Enjoy the courteous Sun (...) it does shine,
And let this Dungeon not forestall thy grave:
Speak, speak; and bid Us live with thee; or by
Thy wilful silence, send Us home to die.
231.
So pleaded they. But Psyche with a Groan
Fetched deeper than the bottom of her Grot,
First vanquished their Lamentation;
Then, with this most athletick Answer, what
Artillery their crafty tongues had brought
From Pieties strong hold to force her out:
232.
I now no longer can the Jailer blame
Who tempted me my Liberty to gain
By being slave to Joves accursed Name,
And scorning him who on Heavens Throne does reign:
Why should I look that Pagan He should be
Kinder than you my Parents are to Me?
233.
My Christian Parents; if you yet dare own
That holy title, who invite me now
To kick at Christ. Alas that I am grown
So execrable in your Eyes, that you
[As if this Dungeon were not deep enough,]
Into Hels bottom Me should strive to throw.
234.
The sacred Law of Filial Duty I
Hold dearer than this World; for well I know
(Nor shall all Torments force me to deny
This truth.) that unto you my Life I ow;
Which in your service if I shun or fear
To spend, may I prove an Idolater.
235.
But that is the Life by which I Prisner am
In this unworthy World; A Life I have
Which truer is unto its active Name,
A Life to high and precious, that to save
It from the Jaws of endless Death, his own
The King of Heaven thought not much to lay down
236.
That Life I mean, by which my Soul does live;
A Life which from your Loins I never drew;
And therefore you do but your selves deceive
To think that this is to your Pleasures due.
God is my only Father here, and I
Entire to Him must keep my loyalty.
237.
As fast as in this Mire I stick, the way
Of His Commands I now am running; and
Though you your Prayers, or your Necks should lay
Full in my path my passage to withstand,
I would not hear my mortal duty plead,
But on your Necks and Prayers freely tread.
238.
Yet Heaven forbid I should be forced to take
This hard experiment of Piety.
O rather help to lead me to the stake,
And of my Combat there Spectators be:
You Will ne re repent you to have seen your own
Child climbing up to Martyrdomes fair Crown
239.
But since you know so well the vast extent
Of Jesus Mercy; know it not in vain:
Your own decrepit years bid you repent
With speediest speed: The foul and cankering stain
Of your Idolatrous Compliance dares
The utmost Power of your fullest Tears.
240.
Mispend not then those precious Beads on Me,
Your selves need all their Ornament: and I
This only favor crave, that you would be
But so courageous as yet to rely
On Heavens Protection: Speak, o speak, and ease
My throbbing hearts tormenting Jealousies.
241.
I burn, I burn in Anguish, till I hear
You by a brave Profession defy
Those Baits of secular ignoble fear
Which lured you to your Apostasy.
Speak then, and make my Life be sweet, in spite
Of all these Tortures which against it fight.
242.
So pious She. But feeble-hearted They,
Leaving no Answer but a faithless Sigh
Their Griefs and Fears to witness, went their way,
Confounded by their Daughters Constancy.
Yet by this foul Retreat They gave her more
Soule-piercing Wounds, then They had done before.
243.
For now her ominous Meditations threw
Her down into that Gulf of flaming Pain,
Which to Apostate Wickedness was due;
Where every Torment, every Rack and Chain
To which her Parents seemed now to go,
Poured on her tender Heart a Sea of Woe.
244.
But as She struggled to maintain this fight
Of mighty Charity, She began to faint.
When lo a sudden unexpected Light
(A Thing with which that Grot did never acquaint,)
The Place, and Her, with Glory did surprise,
Offering a radiant Stranger to her Eyes.
245.
For at her right Hand She beheld a Maid
On whose fair Head a diamond Crown did shine;
With gentle Majesty She was arrayd,
And all her Ornaments appeared divine:
Psyche amazed at the heavenly Sight,
Would fain have kneeled to do the Virgin right.
246.
But as her Soreness, Mire, and Chains forbad
That reverence, She fete'd a modest Sigh:
To which the Stranger this mild Answer made:
I see thy Mind in thy ingenous Eye;
Thy Courtesy by thy Desire is done,
And now my ear'nd Requital must comeon.
247.
This said, She hugged her with a strait Embrace;
Softrait, that closer than her Chains or Mire
It stuck, and deeplyer (...) was
Than her Disease, through which it did (...)
Into her Heart, and (...) it up so close
That now no Anguish there could interpose.
248.
As He who is some wager'd Race to run,
Having his Loins girt up, and being so
Collected and ti'd to Himself (...),
With lighter stouter Nimblenesse does go,
Than when his waste He loose about him ware,
And there for (...) had room to (...);
249.
Embraced Psyche thus perceived her (...)
Lace'd strait, and shrunk into Collections (...);
As first She wondered her (...) Guest
So much should press her (...) but it (...),
As that fresh Vigor glowed in her (...),
She knew She only (...) out her Smart.
250.
And now such Courage in her Soul did reign,
That She rejoiced She had so hard a Race:
Her gauntlet She dares give to any Pain,
And the most tedious Death look in the face;
Her Chains to her no more then Bracelets are
Her boiling Sores as Pearls indeed appear.
251.
Her Parents Case She to Heavens Sovereign Wilt
Can freely now resign; that Will which though
It bitter seem to worldly Tastes, yet still
Does unto uncorrupted Palats flow
With all the Soul of Sweetness, and can make
From springs of Galla flood of Honey break.
252.
She seems as yet not to have gained her share
Of Pangs and Sufferings, and fears not to pray
That He Who did such Strength for her prepare,
Would still more load upon her Shoulders lay;
More fuel still unto her tervour give,
Who now by nothing but by Pains could live.
253.
Nor was it wonder; for the Stranger here,
(Thenceforth a Stranger unto her no more)
Was sent from Heaven a special (...)
To heal her Heart, beginning to be sore
With her Weak Body: Willingly She (...)
And did her Work, for (...) was (...)
254.
The Eyes of Lambs never darred meeker Rays
Then streamed from hers; and yet the Lions face
With stouter Bravery did never raise
His royal Looks, nor with more Courage gaze
Upon, and challenge Terrors, than does She,
Though soft as honey, or as Oil She be.
255.
All over she was nothing else but skars
Wnt large and fair to testify what she
Had undergone in Heavens victorious Wars;
And yet these Characters her beauty be;
For with such silver light they smile, that they
Much like a Tire of Stars do her array
256.
Her business being thus dispatched, she
The cheered reso'ved Prisner leaves: when lo
The Judge's (...) to see
If Psyche yet were fully (...) or no:
And standing at the (...) mouth, he cries,
Learn wretched Maid, at length learn to be wise.
257.
The Judge, upon whose Will thy Fate depends,
In spite of thy (...) tender is;
And me on Mercies Errand hither sends
To offer to thee at an easy price
Thy Life and Liberty; and more than so,
If thou thy Irreligion wilt forgo.
258.
His noble Word, more sure than Bond or Seal,
He freely gives to change thy Poverty
Into a wealthy State; not shall thou feel
Henceforth what scorns and ignominies be;
But living in soft Peace and Psenteousnesse
His Favor, and the Worlds esteem possess
259.
But if you obstinately yet deny
To offer incense unto mighty Jove,
You dam the way unto all Clemency,
And a deserved Sacrifice must prove
To your own Madness: the Decree is past,
You must Vraniu's fate to morrow taste.
260.
As when the tossed Mariner descries
The Promontories of his native Soil,
Within whose craggie Hornis his Harbor lies;
He strait forgets his long Tempestuous toil,
And does his new-revived Bosom find
Swelled more with Joy, than are his sails with wind,
261.
So Psyche, hearing that her Doom was past
Which to her long-wish t Hav'n would her convey;
Her arms in triumph up to Heaven she cast,
With thanks and praises for that happy Day;
And in defiance of his offered grace,
Threw this stout answer at the Serjants face:
262.
My thanks unto the Judge go carry back:
High is his favor, and (...) embrace:
But sure your (...) you did much mistake,
Or foulie at the least, your Words misplace:
My Life and Liberty no favor is;
Death I accept with humble (...).
263.
As for your vain and wretched Jupiter
Were He but half so true a thing as you,
(...) respect would unto Him defer;
But unto Nothing what can I allow
But what it is? and though your Incense be
But Smoke, it is more substantial than He
264.
Deceive your foolish selves no longer, (...)
Am not enchantea, but all you are so:
What (...) should make you dream I fear to die,
Who through Deaths door shall to Life's Palace go?
A way, and pray your Master, it He be
An honest Man, to keep his Word with Me.
265.
This Answer, (which the Bearer fully did,)
Enraged the Judge to make his the eatuings good:
But all in vain his wrath he marsh alled;
Heavens mild, against his bloody Purpose stood;
Nor had fierce Beelzebub who set Him on,
Power to step further than he now had gone,
266.
Mean while such Joy in Psyche's bosom glow (...)
Through expectation of the fire and stake,
That all her Pains and Torments to it bowed,
And in sweet quiet she that Night did break
Her redious Vigils and permitted sleep
With its soft feet upon her eyes to creep.
267.
But Phylax, who had all this while withdrew,
(For Heaven so ordered it,) now gainted leave
His presence to his precious Charge to show,
And from the Tyrants rury her reprieve:
Down to the Dungeon he as gladly (...)
As ever he had towred to the Skies.
268.
Where finding her not only Prisner to
Her it on Chains, but in sleeps silken Bands
Tied as fast; He (...) his Work to do
Whilst she was yet at rest: His potent Hands
Upon her burning sores he gently laid,
Which quenched strait, as of his touch afraid.
269.
Her scursie Rough-cast scaled off, and all
Her Skin to fresh and tender Smoothness left:
So when of old the Syrian General
In Jordan did exchange his leprous shift,
His Flesh appeard as soft and pure, as were
The Virgin Streams which smiled and sported there.
270.
With like Facility he did but touch
The massy Chains which heavy on her lay.
And none of all their brazen Locks did grutch
To that strange virtual Key strait to give way,
But down they tumbled, clashing as they fell,
Which Noise to Psyche did their ruin tell.
271.
She startled up, and sought to understand
What that Sound meant, in hopes it had been Day,
And that the hasty Judge had sent Command
Unto the Stake to hurry her away,
That hungry He might other Charges save,
And Her for's Breakfast ready roasted have.
272.
When lo, her Self in Phylax's Arms she found
Chained by a soft and delicate Embrace;
Her other Gives she saw upon the ground,
Confuted all and shattered: Bnt she was
Amazed most, to find she had no Sore
To rub, for knawing her, as heretofore.
273.
But then, My Dear, said Phylax, We have now
No time to stay and look, but must away.
Three times she shak'd her head, and rubbed her Brow;
But when she saw these wondrous Sights would stay,
She yielded, fully to attend the Dream;
For unto her it nothing else did seem.
274.
Up from the Dungeon the Angel flew,
Proud of the Prize which in his Arms he bore.
The Bolts and Locks fled from his radiant View,
So did the Prisons seav'n-fold Brazen Door,
Yet durst not make the least Complaint, or bear
By any Noise, tales to the Jailers ear.
275.
Thus through the Town unseen unheard He past,
(...) his Pupil in an unknown Way:
Great was his Care of Her, and great his Haste
(...) He had brought her into Safeties Bay;
This was a Place which in the Desert He
For her immured had with Privacie.
276.
A Place removed far beyond the Sent
Of any Blood-hound, whither Man or Beast;
A Place well furnished with sweet Content,
And all Conveniences ready dressed:
Where, having brought her in, No more mistake
Thy Bliss, He cried, but know Thou art awake.
277.
Thy Spouse is pleased with this Experiment,
And does accept thy faithful Patience:
To free Thee from thy Chains and (...), he sent
Me hither, and from all that Violence
The furious Tyrant has prepar d to day
Upon thine undeserving Head to lay.
278.
Psyche appalled at this unlooked for Word
And well perceiving that she heard and saw;
Was with such hearty Indignation stirred
Against her Guardian; that had not the Law
Of virtuous Modesty dwelt in her Tongue,
Full in his Face Defiance she had flung.
279.
And yet thus far she ventured to ease
Her belking Heart: O Phylax, how art Thou
Known hitherto to Me by Courtesies,
Into mine Enemy transformed now?
How art Thou made more Tyrant unto Me,
Than He from whom thou now have set Me free?
280.
I by His Help, this Morning should have seen
That Day which from my Spouse's Eyes does rise;
Nor had I any longer troubled been
Upward to look, when I would read the Skies:
O no! Uranius now looks down when He
The region of the Sun and Stars would see.
281.
What is this Life of Banishment, to Me,
Who have no settled Home but that above?
What boots it that my Chains and Malady
Are shaken off, if Psyche still must prove
A Prisoner to this heavy Flesh and Bone,
Which more torments me than they could have done?
282.
Are the fair Palms, and ever-radiant Crown
Of Martyrdom, so poor and vile a prize;
Are Heaven and Jesu's Company now grown
Things so indifferent, that my longing Eyes
Should spare their Tears, when I am snatched away
From them, and fore'd on for did Earth to stay:
283.
O Phylax Thou have not repreived Me
From any of my Pains: I Am at the Stake,
I burn, I burn; nor will my Agony
But by my final Dissolution slake.
She fainted here -- But Phylax took her up,
And hasted thus her Sorrows Tide to stop.
284.
Courage, my Dear, and be assured I
Have not deceived thee of try Noble Aim:
Thy Spouse designs a Martyrdom whereby
To draw thee to himself, but not the same
By which he snatched (...): no; for thee
He treasured has a braven (...)
285.
(...) long, more strong, and (...) Pain
(...) be, than from the Spite
Of this, though (...), (...) (...)
Thou (...) for (...) Fight
Then (...) (...) fought; and this shall be,
The Theater of thy mighty (...)
286.
Here in this very Place shall thou maintain
(...) Combat, whilst thy Spouse and all
His (...) (...) on his royal Train
Will be Spectators: O do not forestall
Thy greater Fame by hasty Zeal, but stay
With patience for thy Coronation Day.
287.
This ample Answer such Refreshment blew
On Psyche s Heats, that meek and pliant she
Cooled her importunate Desires, and grew
Content to wait the full Maturity
Of her affected laurel, though as yet
She little knew how she must Gather (...)
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO XIX. The Dereliction,
ARGUMENT.
PSyche abandoned to the Solitude
Of Soul and Body, by the resolute Might
Of patient loyal Constancy, subdued
Hels Champion Despair, in single fight.
Yet in her Conquest no free Joy could have,
Because she still was Derelictions Slave.
1.
HOw grim, how cold, how comfortless soe'r
Thou look st, dear Solitude; sure in thy breast
Some worthy Sweets thou do (...) bear;
Witness that Vileness, and that high Request
By which betwixt the lazy earthly heart,
And Pious Soul thou so divided art.
2.
He who when ever his Conscience him does take
Alone, it (...) full on his guilty face;
A large Indictment does against thee make,
And on thee poures the bottom of Disgrace,
Calling thee Mother of vexatious Folly,
Of Horrors and dispaning Melancholy
3.
He no where but among his roaring Boys
Can meet a quire whose Music suits his Ear,
Whilst in the tumult of that boistrous noise
He drowns those thoughts which would his bosom tear;
And in the throng of Sinners cannot find
Free room to take a view of his own Mind.
4.
And thus, unhappy Man, he only lives
In his outside, and therefore lives not:
But when sure 'Death his woeful summons gives,
Strangely amazed, and not knowing what
To do or think, in vain for help he cries;
And to himself a wretched stranger dies.
5.
He dies; and leaves that Body which would not
Endure to be a little while alone,
In the Graves tedious Solitude to rot;
Whilst in the Tumult of Damnation
His now uncloysterd Soul is forced to dwell
Amongst the Roarers of eternal Hell.
6.
But he who dares his Bosom ransack, and
Take a survey of every thing within,
That he may always ready have at Hand
An Inventary of himself, and win
Time upon Death by prudent Preparation
To entertain and kiss his Consummation;
7.
He who both Leisure and Desire can find
To sequester Impertinences, that
His proper busnes he may only mind,
And by industrious Thrift mend his Estate.
So that though naked he goes to his grave,
An endless stock of riches he may have.
8.
He, He Is the Man whom all the Cities joys
And proud excess; the Countries hearty sport;
The License, endless Fashions, glittering Toies,
And all the Pomp and Glories of the Court
Cannot so far enchant, but sober he
Can of plain Solitude inamored be.
9.
He there more store of Company can meet,
And of more high and worthy quality,
Than in the thickest Theater does sweat,
Where Spectacles profess to court the Eye;
Such Presses justle out all Heaven, but He
Reads it at large in this Vacuitie.
10.
An undisturbed view he here can take
Of all its fairest and its loftiest stories;
His Contemplation here can freely break
Through all the Treasures of its boundless glories;
And in the Court where Bliss and Pleasures reign
With Saints and Angels brave Acquaintance gain.
11.
Here to the Universe's King can He
His free attendance pay from Morn to Night,
Whilst in the everlasting One and Three
He learns both to Divide and to Unite
His mystic Homage, as the Spirits Gale
Makes him through this Abyss of Wonders sail.
12.
Here he does always stand upon his Watch,
That when the roaring Lion, who does run
About the World his careless Preys to catch,
Hunteth that way, his Onset he may shun;
Or with awakened and prepared Might
Confront his Foe, and entertain the fight.
13.
Here from the saplesse Worlds enchanting Breast
Where nothing but the froth of Milk does spring,
Himself he weans; and studies how to feast
Upon some masculine substantial thing,
Which may not mock him with short false Content,
But to his Soul yield solid Nutriment.
14.
No Humor of the Times, no Garbs or Fashions,
Can here take up his Care; No boistrous News
Of public Woes, or fatal Alterations,
The Calm of this his Harbor can abuse
No storms can rage but in the open seas;
His private Bay the Cloister is of Ease.
15.
His righteous Soul is not afflicted here
To See and Hear how wretched Worms defy
Omnipotence's King, and scorn to fear
The Jaws of Hell, to which their Villainy
Makes them apparent Heirs; but take delight
The Love and Blood of Jesus to despite.
16.
Here past the reach of those bewitching Darts
Which flash with radiant Bane from wanton eyes,
And make both timorous and martial hearts
Yield to fantastic self-made Wounds, He lies
Secure and safe, and undisturbed may
Prepare for his eternal Nuptial Day.
17.
Here leave and leisure he enjoys to weed
And cultivate his Heart, in which he plants
Each Herb of Grace, and sows the blessed Seed
Of every Virtue which his bosom wants;
In certain hopes his labors will conclude
In a full Harvest of Beatitude.
18.
With prudent foresight here he does provide
An ample stock that he may ready be
To bear all Charges which may Him betide
In managing a public Life, if he
Be called from his private Nest, and made
Against the thronging stream of Sin to wade.
19.
More furnished with strength of Argument
From learned Athens never Student came,
Though He his nimblest years and Spirits had spent
The Engines of most active Wit to frame;
Then does this sagely-sprightfull Champion from
His private Schole of public Virtue come.
20.
For having learned their due Scorn to throw
Upon those Incerests and Baits which make
The biased Hearts of Men unmanly grow,
And cowardly Sins sneaking By paths take;
In spite of all the World which dares say No,
He in the King of Heavens Highway will go
21.
Thus in all Sorts of high Advantage this
Life of Retirement, does the Garland wear;
Which therefore only dear and precious is
To Them who Sons of Heaven and Wisdom are:
And which, insipid timorous Souls, as They
Cannot believe, so never can enjoy.
22.
Psyche, who now conducted was into
This solitary State, though fervent She
Did in Uraniu's Steps desire to go,
Yet since it might not on the sudden be,
Appeased the flames of her Impatience by
The streaming Comforts of her Privacy.
23.
If in the tumult of the World She still
Had mingled been, the Crowd had surely slain her;
For all Earths furniture and friendlyest Skill
Could not with any Solace entertain her:
Her Heart already was in Heaven, and She
Was best, where She could least behind it be.
24.
And that was here, where by no secular Care
Or Interruption She molested was;
But dwelling in a calmie Hemisphear,
Upon free Meditations Wings could Pass
Above the Moon and Sun, and Troops of fair
Stars, which upon Heavens Plains embatled are.
25.
But as at length She began to pant again
For that dear Day of final Conflict She
By Phyla'x Promise hoped to obtein,
And that alone; Lo, on the sudden He,
Call d thence by other Buisnesse, takes his leave
Yet telling her He would not her deceive.
26.
As She made haste to ask the reason; He
Took Wing, and instantly outfled her Eye:
A Sigh strait strove to follow Him, but She
Repulsed it with noble Constancy,
And cried, It must not, and it shall not grieve me;
Did Heaven not call Him, Phylax would not leave me.
27.
Then down upon her humble Knees She fell,
And casting up ward her most loyal Eyes,
So long as Thou as truly here do dwell
Sweet Lord, said She, as in the highest skies,
Though Phyla'x Wings now shelter not my head,
Yet thine are always o'r thine Handmayd spread.
28.
Though precious is His Company to Me,
Yet not so dear as is thy blessed Will;
Though here alone a feeble Thing I be,
I can and dare be more abandoned still,
If mighty Thou, who never wilt forsake Me,
With nearer Losses pleased art to rack Me.
29.
Fain would I quit the Debt in which to Thee,
And mine own Vows I stand; fain would I prove
By combating with any Misery
The Truth of my (how deep-obliged) love:
Thou bidd'st Us Follow with our Cross, and lo
I in thy bloodyest Steps desire to go.
30.
I would not to a Figures Courtesy
Beholden be in my Affliction, nor
To such a tender Cross condemned be
As must be helped by a Metaphor
To make its hard Name good; for that I Am sure
Was true and real which Thou did endure.
31.
No golden Plenty do I crave of Thee,
No soft Content, or silken Peace: Impart
Those favors unto whom Thou will, for Me;
Thy sharpest Blessings best will please my Heart:
My heart, which burns in profound desire
Of some Heroic and consuming fire.
32.
O do not slay Me by denying Death!
To suffer want of Sufferings, is to Me
The only Dregs which from thy deepest Wrath
Can squeazed be: from this one Misery
Which is the Pith of all, I beg repreive:
I die in torment if in ease I live.
33.
Jesus whose Ear is always open to them
Who speak Loves Dialect, straight heard her Cry:
Which made such welcome Music unto him
That her Petition he could not deny:
His sweetened Bitterness apace he sent,
And blessed her with her begged Punishment.
34.
Charis, accustomed open House to keep
In her free Heart, he there shut up so close
That now no nimble glimmering Ray could peep
Forth from that Nest of Light: Nor could she choose
But be suspicious that the Spring was dried
From whence no Emanations did glide.
35.
When lo, the Welkin, which before was clear,
And flowed with the Suns transparent Gold;
Started from its fair Looks with sudden fear,
And did in swarthy Beams it self enfold.
Day was abashed to see how boldly Night
Incroach'd upon her, and despised her Light.
36.
The Air presageing what outrageous Pain
Would tear her tender weatherbeaten Sides,
With hollow Groans and Mournings did complain
Aforehand of the Storm; which as she (...),
She but awakes, and so provokes to rage
With louder fury on the whole Earths Stage.
37.
Forthwith the Clouds came tumbling one upon
Another back, for fear to loose their Place
And Office in that blind Confusion
With which the Element now gravid was:
Close quaking in his Cave lay every Beast,
And every Bird lamenting in his Nest.
38.
Strange Phantoms dressed in a spurious Light,
Fed by foul Sulphur, flashed all about;
Fell griezly Ghosts arrayed all in Fright
Both with themselves and one another fought;
Whole Troops of ghastly Fiends and Furies rent
Their Snakes, as through the sable Air they went.
39.
The laboring Clouds at length with open Cry
Brought forth their Grief, and thundered their Complaint
The most obdurate Rocks could not deny
Their Pity, but straight trembled and grew faint:
So did the massy Earth, which quaked to hear
The woeful Outcrie of its Neighbor Sphere.
40.
Psyche alone, as yet refused to melt
By any tremor; only in her Heart
A kind of Numnesse creeping on she felt,
'Cause Charis there forbore her wonted Part:
When lo, an heavy black condensed Cloud
Down to the Ground before her face did crow'd.
41.
Where having opened its hideous Curtains wide,
Forth at the Gap a Stream of Lightning broke;
Whose sudden dazeling, though now harmless, Tide
The resolute Maid with some amazement stroke:
But straight an Hand reached out it Self and held
A mighty Cup, with greater Terrors filled.
42.
It held it to her Lip, and what before
Was Thunder, now proved an articulate Voice:
And bad her drink up all that dreadful Store,
Since she had been so venturous in her choice:
She nothing more than Pleasures feared, and here
Was nothing less than what her Heart did fear.
43.
Thus challenged by the Voice, whose Sound she knew,
And durst not disobey; She sent her Eye
Into the Cup to take a plenal View
Of the black Liquor which in it did ly.
Wherein such boiling Horrors she descried,
That down she prostrate fell, and thus she cried:
44.
Weak Woman as I was, how has my Pride,
My silly Pride, betrayed me to Woe!
On Confidence's Wings I needs would ride
Although I towr'd but to my Overthrow:
Had I remembered that a Worm I am,
I never had crawled so high to mine own Shame.
45.
How is it Jesu, that Griefs mighty Cup
Which thou did once unto the Bottom drink,
Is to its woeful Brim now filled up!
What has renu'd this more than deadly Sink,
Whose Sorrows though to thine they shallow be,
Yet are too deep for poor unhappy Me.
46.
Alas thy naked Anger here I see,
In which no glimpse of Favor mixed is:
What will become of weak abandoned Me
Who in thy Countenance read mine only Bliss,
If I be drowned in this Sea of Night,
And covered up from my dear Spouse's sight!
47.
Sweet was the Cup of which Uranius drunk;
For being swallowed up in Streams of Fire,
Thrice happy Saint, to Heaven he only sunk:
But I in this black Gulf of hideous Ire,
Must downward dive, and overwhelmed be
In Derelictions vast Profunditie.
48.
I would not fear the most appalling Face
Of any Sorrow, which did not preclude
The sight of Thine; but now Thine Eyes, alas,
By these of Mine no longer must be viewd;
How shall I steer through this vast Sea, who may
Not see the Stars which are to guide my way?
49.
Here having knocked her Breast, and turned her Eye,
Her generous Eye, three times unto the Cup;
She chid her Self profoundly with a Sigh,
And looking then with noble fervor up,
Yet why should I demur, she cried, since mine
Own Will is not mine own, but long since Thine?
50.
If any Title to my Self I had,
I might be tender of my Ease and Rest:
But since to Thee a Deed of Gift I made,
(Or rather of due Pay,) Thou art possessed
Entirely of Me; nor must I refuse
That Thou what is thine own should freely use.
51.
I am no further I, than thou will grant;
Propriety is no such Thing to Me:
And I who nothing have, can Nothing want
So long as I resigned am to Thee:
Thy Will in Sweetness always equal is
Though our false Taste do sometimes judge amiss.
52.
And now I know thy Will is mingled here
With this sad Potion, what soever be
The present Relish, Psyche does not fear
But it will end in purest Suavity.
I fear it not: and here she took the Cup,
And bravely to the Bottom drunk it up.
53.
As he who has in Poison quaffed deep,
And drowned Himself in what he swallowed down;
Quickly perceives the groping Mischief creep
About his Heart; where being Victor grown,
Its fatal Chains of cold and heavy Lead
Upon its fainting Prisner it does spread.
54.
So Psyche having poured down this sad
And horrid Draught, soon felt its woeful Force
Upon her Soul its Patterie it made,
Which proved to weak to stop its mighty Course:
The Deluge broke into her Heart, and there
With uncontrolled Power did domineer,
55.
Forth with the Clouds which had beset the Air
Broke up their gloomy Seige, the Phantomes fled,
Serenity made all the Welkin fair,
The Rocks left Quaking, Birds began to spread
Their cheerly Wings abroad, Beasts ventured out,
So did the Sun, and poured his Gold about,
56.
The World to every Thing grew fresh and clear,
But unto Psyche; for distressed she
Perceived no mutation which could cheer
The cloudy Region of her Agony:
The Brightness of the Day to her was more
Black than the Veil of Pitch She saw before,
57.
Thus cheerly Music is but Torment to
A pained Ear; Thus Neighbors Liberty
With stricter Chains does gripe the Prisners Woe;
Thus Candles to the Blind but Mockings be;
Thus Gales, though cool and gentle, nothing slake
The boiling Flames, but them more furious make,
58.
Alas her outward Self long since had she
Forgot, and knew not what such Comforts meant;
Above the Sphere of Sensibility
She had established her sole Content:
What is it to her that Phoebus shines fair
Upon her face, whose Joies above him were?
59.
This little glaring Thing, this mortal Sun,
Was not the King and Father of her Day:
Her Morning dawned with Jesu's eyes alone,
The glorious Fountains of her gallant Joy;
And how, how can she live, now she no more
Can feed upon that Bliss as heretofore?
60.
Her Soul looked up, alas, but looked in (...);
For on its Eyelids sat so thick a Night,
That from that happy Prospect it did chain
And keep close Prisner her unhappy Sight;
And less is Blind Men's Grief, than theirs (...)
Nothing at all, (...) their own Misery.
61.
For unto this, and this alone, her Eyes
Wide open were, yea though she shut then (...)
Still her importunate Calamities
And Desolations, would themselves expose
In full array unto her View, in spite
Of any Veil which could against them fight
62.
Tortured by this unsufferable Loss,
(For she had never been alone till now,)
Spreading to Heaven her woeful Hands (...)
To her Devotions she her Knees did bow
And in an helpless lamentable hue,
Thus to her (...) wonted (...) did sue
63.
My God, where ever Thou art, Why, Why will Thou
Who every where can thy great Selte display
Unto thine Handmaid not one glimpse allow
Who once enjoyed thy Favor Highnoon Day
Which had I never done, my present Pain
With such excessive Anguish would not reign.
64.
Has not thy boundless Sweetness taught my Heart
Complete Disrellish of all Things beside?
Where grows the Balsame then which for my Smart,
And Me, can any Lenitive provide;
So long as most abandoned I in this
Black Death the Life of thy sweet Aspect (...)
65.
Strong was this Cry; for all the Heavens it rent,
But yet it could not make them hear; and She
Who never until now had thither sent
Her Prayers in vain, amazed was to see
These which so loud about her Spouse resounded
Back to her Breast with Emptiness rebounded.
66.
Yet, as the noble Palm, though on her Head
A massy, churlish, sturdy Burden lies,
With valiant Patience still goes on to spreac
Her inderatigable Arms, and tries
How she may both her sad Affiiction bear,
And her ambitious Boughs still higher rear:
67.
So galiant Psyche, though now on her Back
This Load more ponderous than Mountains lay
Bravely resolved not to let it crack,
Nor her most loyal Patience betray:
She knew what Jesus underwent before,
And that his Love deserved thus much, and more
68.
Confirmed therefore to her Task she went,
And spurred up Logos to his daily Part;
Whom upon Contemplations Wings she sent
To fetch some Comfort for her pined Heart:
Unto Heavens Treasury she sent Him, where
(...) meet with high and holy Cheer.
69.
But every Night when he returned home.
Alas he nothing brought but saplesse Fare,
Lank dry Results, whose Bulk and Total Sum
She never saw amount to more than bare
And flashie Uselessenesse, resembling that
(...) thither lately shot
(...)
This sad Miscartiage fully did a wake
The fountains of her Eyes, which liberal were
In (...) Drops by that thick shower to slake,
Or empty out the Grief which flamed in her:
Yet all this woeful Brine she thus did pour
But only (...) Cheeks and (...) her more.
71.
Thus crossed and disappointed every way
Though she a fair and full Temptation had
No more to Mock her self, and waste the day
In fruitless Toil: Yet she this Statute made,
Unto her Self, Her Duty still to do,
Whether Heaven would regard her Pains, or (...)
72.
So when the unrelenting Storm has driven
The Mariner into the boiling Main,
And with thick Clouds so veild the face of Heaven
That he direction from no Star can gain;
He yeildeth not to all those Miseries,
But plies his Oars, whether He lives or dies,
73.
Her Tears she poured still, her Sighs she blew,
Her Hands she Lifted up, her Knees she bent,
She knocked her Breast, her Contemplations fiew
Their wonted flight, her Groans her Bosom rent,
Her Heart did pant with Languishments of Love
By Watching, Prayers, and Fasts, with God she (...)
74.
With God she strove, and with her self; for all
This while her Soul was out of tune and taste:
Those Exercises savoured now of Call,
Whose Sweetness pos d the Honey in times past
Yet she this tedious Gall would not forsake,
Nor (...) exchange the Dew of Hybla take
75.
Thus, when soul Humors have usurped, and reign
In his weak Stomach, still the hungry Man
Ingests his wholesome Diet, though in vain;
For every hour his Meat, do what he can,
Only misspent, and half-corrupted is,
And then regorg d with painful Nauseousnesse.
76.
Her heavy Breast was now become as cold
And dead, as if it never had been the Seat
Of (...) Fire, and Heaven: and He that would
Have paralleld her Souls and Bodies State,
(Though wondrous dry this was,) might soon have spyed
How that, far more than This was Mortified.
77.
And this scru d her Conditions Anguish high;
For still she neither thought she Watched nor Prayed,
Nor shed a Fear, nor heaved up a Sigh,
Nor managed her Contemplations Trade,
Nor Groand, nor Lovd; because she never felt
Her Heart in any of these Actions melt.
78.
What Man upon the thanklesse Rocks can plow,
Or found his Building on the faithless Sand,
Or in the stormy Oceans Furrows sow,
Or wash the tawny AEthiopians Hand,
And still be patient, though his Pains and Cost
A thousand times already have been lost?
79.
Where Is that stout He, who though He be employed
In business of Fire and Flames, and set
With sulphury fuel to keep up the Tide
Of iron Fornaces enraged Heat,
Can be content mean while Himself to be
Shrivelled and nipp'd up by Frosts Tyranny?
80.
Yet through these Riddles of Disconsolation
Brave Psyche waded, and bore up her Head
Aloft the Flood; whilst far above all Passion
Her Passion she embraced, and wearied
Her Self with no less Quiet, than if she
Down stream had sloated with facility.
81.
For patiently she (...) was, and sound
No Comfort in this (...) of her (...)
Yet though she every day and hour were (...)
(...) she (...), she (...) did (...)
The (...) and her (...) did give
(...) in this (...) (...).
82.
Long lived she in it: and although her Fasts
She duly kept, yet did she not forbear
When Nature challenged them, her spare Repasts,
She being stored by Phylax s loving Care:
Although she were ambitious to die,
She scorned to hasten on her Destiny.
83.
Long lived she in it, for her Spouse was now
Resolv d her Valonrs full Extent to try.
But envious Satan who ran prieing through
All Quarters of this lower World to spy
Where He might find new Booties for his spite,
Discovered her in this disconsolate Plight.
84.
But as a Coward who has often been beat,
Yet still on base revengefull Hope does feed,
Waits opportunity when He may meet
His brave Antagonist impoverished
In strength and Spirits by some other Fight,
And on that Weakness builds his stolen Might:
85.
So now base-hearted He the fight forbore
Till Psyches Courage He conceived spent;
And then, with prouder Hopes then ever before,
Unto his damned Home pufft up he went:
(Fool as He was; to let his Looks profess
His Triumph, ever the Victory was His.)
86.
Then having climbed his Throne, and from his face
Wiped off the coalblack Sweat, into a Smile
He forced it: The Feinds admired whar cause
Their Kings Austerity could so beguile;
Yet, in compliance every One begun
To shrivell up his Cheeks, and gently grin.
87.
When Satan thus: Hate and Defiance first
To Heaven, and then all Glory to my Self.
You know to what expense of Pains that (...)
And though most feeble, yet most peevish (...).
Jesus his Mistress, long has put Me, yet
Upon that Worm my Will I could not get.
88.
But now the feat is done, and (...)
Is by her goodly Spouse divore'd, and lies
To the just Vengance of our Majesty
A most abandoned and woeful Prize.
I saw her as she lay, but scorn d to bring
Her with Me No, it (...), (...) with a King.
89.
But thou Despair, (and here he turned aside.
For standing at his right Hand was the Feind,
Shall fetch her hither: Thou may find her hid
In that (...) deserts farthest closest end
Which lies next to that superstitious sink
Where Arimathean (...) bones do stink.
90.
The (...) Fury made no stay,
(For what so (...) is as Desperation?)
But posted upward, snatching by the way
Her dismal Engines in such furious Fashion
That all her Sisters (...) at her haste,
And (...) was glad when she by it was past.
91.
(...) the (...) the hilly Peak
(...) Way;
(...) impatience she did break.
(...) trembling lay,
(...) the dull sleeping (...)
Awaked for fear and (...) about its Bed.
92.
All Beasts which saw the (...), as she flew
Distracted at the horror of the sight,
Themselves down fatal Precipices threw;
All Birds unable to maintain their flight,
Let their Wings flag, and hung their Heads aside.
And having changed their tunes to shreikings, di'd.
93.
But still the frightfull Fury posted on,
Till she arrived at her desired Place:
Where finding sorrowful Psyche all alone.
She set her hideous self full in her face:
All shapes of horror which did ever fright
The (...) Eyes, must stoop unto this sight.
94.
Pale Ghastlines did in her Viiage reign;
Which yet self-Rage in part confuted had,
Black hideous Gore full many a woeful stain
Pumped from her own accursed Veins, had made:
For often her madness on her self she showed,
And her Cheeks valleys with her nails had plowed.
95.
Her Locks were half torn off, so was her Gown,
And most by careless Naftiness was she
Arrayed than by her Cloths: Her breasts hung down
All lank and torn, and flapp'd upon her knee,
Which gaped, and showed the naked shattered Bone
She (...) had dashed on a sharp stont.
96.
But every Part did handsome seem and fair.
Unto her hollow, and yet staring, Eyes;
In which such sovereign Terrors marshalled were
As no Description can equalize:
For (...) was like to nothing but the other,
And (...) which should outstare his Brother.
97.
These were the ominous Mirrours where each Wight
Whose Bosom was not innocent and clear,
No sooner looked, but in a fatal Plight
He saw himself and all his Crimes, which there
Appearing double, did affright him so
That from his cursed self he wished to go.
98.
The (...) Basilisks mischievous Eyes,
And those of fascinating Witches, be
Far (...) Glasses, than these Prodigies
Which (...) with Danger's worst extremity.
Heaven (...) the Man whose miserable Chance
(...) him into the (...) of their glance.
99.
Nor was the furniture of this foul Hag
Unanswerable to her hideous looks;
For in her starved sharp Arms she did lag
A load of rusty Swords, Knives, Daggers, Hooks,
With poisnous Cups and Boxes, all bound up
And hung in many a fatal With and Rope.
100.
Appointed thus, she stood a while and stared
On desolate Psyche; who at first was stroke
(For unexpectedly the Fiend appeared,
And with a sudden dint,) at her fell look:
And yet not so as to be beaten over;
For strait her strength, and self, she did recover.
101.
The Tower thus, which at the furious Blast
Of rushing Tempests yields a while to quake;
Forgets not withal to stand more fast
Than those proud Buildings which disdain to shake;
And therefore by an instant Ruin down
From their exalted Confidence are thrown.
102.
Despair percerving that her looks were vain,
Drew her more dangerous Weapon out; and this
Was her be witching tongur, which she did strain
Unto the highest Key of Crastines;
And casting down her luggage, thus assaid
To do as much upon the constant Maid:
103.
If I thy doubtful Countenance read aright,
Thou neither understandest who am I,
Nor who thy Self: But this thy (...) plight
So charms my Pity, that I must descrie
Both unto Thee; and if thou will befriend
Thy self thou may thy (...) state amend.
104.
I knew my (...) speaks nothing less,
Than (...). But Things which fairest be
Do often veil in their enchanting Dress
The (...) Stings of odious Treachery;
And soher Wisdom always does commend
(...) Friend.
105.
Were it not so, thy Self had never strove
Against the (...) Tide of Things below.
(...) sull always of the soothing Love
With which the Worlds inviting Smiles did slow,
Were it not so, what Price could be so high
To (...) Thee thus thy Self to Mortisic?
106.
Suspect not then my Looks, which needs must show
Like Terrors most abhorred Book to them
Whose vain deluded Bosoms overflow
With secular Pleasures frothy empty Stream:
These think each Wind, though it would blow them to
The Haven, will prove a Storm, and them undo.
107.
But thy Condition, if Thou weigh'st it right,
Will teach Thee better what concerns thy Bliss;
Remember then, that since Thou saw the Light
Thou never had st reason to be friends with this
Unhappy Life, which from thy Cradle to
This Hour, has swarmed with Nothing but thy woe.
108.
The dainty Budds of thy young Vigorous years
Served not trim a Gatland for Delight;
By Virtue's rigid and untimely Cares
They blasted were; and Thou even in despite
Of blooming Tenderness preventedst Time
And provedst old and withered in thy Prime.
109.
Whilst other Maydons (...) for (...) joy,
Gather d the sweetest (...) of cheerly (...),
Thou joyn'dst thy self in marriage to (...)
Living a (...) and Single (...)
And thus of Griefs a numerous (...)
Thou springing from thy virgin (...) (...),
110.
(...) from this Isle of Bliss, thy native Home,
Thy (...) Zeal drove Thee into the East;
Where Thou about (...) Palistine did rome
Both to the Place a (...), and to Rest:
What found'st thou there but thine own Loss, whilst Thou
(...) which the (...) did dow?
111.
Alas, the dear (...) of thy Lord
Which with thine hankering Eyes thou there did read,
Did but Assurance to thy Soul afford
That He, its only Joy, to Heav n was (...):
And surely here at home Thou were as near
The skies, as thou were in thine Exile there.
112.
Thus having wasted out thy Strength, and Time,
(And Credit too, with those who loved Thee best;)
Back were thou hurried to thy British Clime
Lake a (...) wearied Bird to her poor Nest:
Where when thou countedst up thy Journeys Gains
Thou only foundst thy Labor for thy Pains.
113.
Then fired by unhappy Piety,
Upon thy Self thou did the Tyrant play
Thy lamentable Body she weth by
Its ghastly Leanesse, how thou strov'st to slay
Thy guiltless Flesh, and what Pains thou did (...)
Languid and senseless every Sense to make.
114.
And for no other End, but to refine
Thy Self from this dull clogging Earth. unto
A State which might thy backward Spouse (...)
To love thy loyal Heart, which labored so
To trace his hardiest Steps, and cheerly toss
Upon her Shoulders his most heavy Cross.
115.
Yet when thou justly did thy Boon expect,
(Less due unto Uranius, than to Thee;)
Unto a Dungeon He did thee reject;
(A Place how far from (...) Liberty.)
Where thou who in the (...) long'dst to expire,
Were forced to lead a dying Life in (...).
116.
Remember what intolerable Chains
Into thy Soul their cruel (...) pressed,
What Heaps of boiling Sores, and (...) Pains
Were poured upon Thee, and (...);
Whence when the Roman (...) (...) prepared
(...) thee free, thy freedom (...).
117.
It was debarred by no other Hand
But that which rather should have lent thee Aid
What Phylax did, was by thy Lords Command,
When from that Jail he stole thee, and betrayed
Thy Hopes of Martyrdom, which now was grown
Mature, and offered (...) thine Head its Crown.
118.
I grant thy torturing Sores He healed, but
Deserved nor Pay nor Thanks for that his Cure,
Which did but thy repaired Body put
In a fit able posture to endure
This greater Load, whose mercilesle Excess
Does thy unpittied Shoulders (...)
119.
Shoulders unpittied by Him from whom
Thou had most reason to expect Relief
But in his cruel Ears there is no Room
To lodge and entertain the Suit of Grief:
Had there been any, surely He would not
Thy mighty Supplications out have shut.
120.
How has the Stroke of thy impetuous Cry
Taught this dumb Desert. Mournings Dialect;
Whilst all its Rocks and Caverns shaken by
Thy Groans and Lamentations, them reflect
To Heaven with doubled fervor, and agree
Fellow-Petitioners to be with Thee
121.
And yet thy grated Throat is not so dry,
As are thy now exhausted Eyes, from whence
Thy Spouse's cruel Heart to mollify
Thou freely pourdst thine utmost Influence:
But still the Stone which on his Breast does grow
Will not by all those Drops be pierced through
122.
O no! unkindly He does turn away
His Face, least any Glimpie should leap to Thee:
And thou long flattered by his Favors Day,
Art now betrayed to the Misery
Of blackest Night O may all Souls beware
How they Heavens wiley Prince do trust too far
123.
Alas, thy desolate Heart too well does know
That thy Condition I do not mistake;
And with secure Presumption, Psyche, Thou
May from my Art this sound Conclusion make
That I who can discover all thy Grief
May tell what physic will yield thee (...)
124.
Thy Phylax, once esteemed thy trustiest Friend,
Well understands the depth of thy Disease:
Yet finding all his skill too weak to lend
Thee any real Aid, himself he frees
From fruitless Trouble, and is fled away,
Ashamed now his weakness to betray
125.
I know not how, but always at a Pinch,
When great Extremities crave equal Aid,
Your common Comforters use still to flinch,
And cry, Heavens Will be done: But I afraid
Of nothing am, no not Heavens Destination
(...) along can feel no Desperation,
126.
I, I the only able Doctresse, who
In desperate Cases certain Physic give,
In pity of thy unregarded Woe,
Am hither come prepared to relceve
Thy helpless Heart: Nor do I ask a Fee:
My (...) Guerdon shall thy (...)
127.
Lo here store of Receipts: When noble Saul
The field, his Kingdom, and his God had lost;
No sooner on this Swords Point he did fall,
But all the Plot of his Mishaps he crossed,
And, maugre all Philistia's Powers, fell
Down to the Rest of holy Samuel.
128.
Disgraced by Hushai, and rejected by
Fond Absalom, profound (...)
Himself to teskue from this Misery
Consulted with his own deep Oracle,
And found no (...) way than by this Rope
His Breath his Lite, and his Contempt to stop.
129.
Great Annibal accustomed long to ride
In Triumphs Chariot, being overborn
By undeserved Misfortunes powerful Tide,
Least he should prove the Roman Song and (...),
Sipp'd but a little of that Poison there,
And went in glorious Peace unto his Beer,
130.
Renouned Cato, when by peevish Fate
Thrust into Straits too narrow to contain
His mighty Spirit; by a little hate
Of wretched Life, (...) Rest did gain;
There lies the Sword still with his brave blood (...)
By which he op d the Way, and freed his Soul
(...)
^
(...) gallant Antony to overthrow;
(...) that it ever should be said
That noble He, though conquered, would (...),
He with that Weapon cut the unhappy Thread
Of life, and laid him down in (...) Bed
132.
Say not that these were Men, and Female Thou
(...) manage (...)
Thy (...) high Exploits will not allow
(...) Yet could I cite to Thee
(...) thy most extreem Distress
(...) be thy Warrant for this Manlynesse.
133.
(...) rusty with the blood,
(...) Blood, of Female Lucrece; she
(...) to her Tears poor Womanish (...);
(...) her Directions from Me;
And with that Instrument broached from her Veins
(...), (...) wish the blackness of her Stains.
134.
(...), when her Disasters grew
(...) thick and cross that they had almost shut
The way to all Releif, found out a new
Road unto Death, and down her Throat she put
The Fire which made Her her own Sacrifice:
Part of the Coals still in that Casketlies.
135.
Although sweet Antony was wont to rest
In (...) s dainty Bosom; yet
When Losses her beseig'd, unto her breast,
Her lovely breast, an odious Aspe she set,
Which suckd out her sad Life: and in that round
Box lies the Serpent up in Circles wound.
136.
^
As (...) (...), thou have witness by
(...) who
^
(...) the (...) by whose vntue she
^
137.
^
^
^
^
^
^
(...)
^
^
^
^
^
^
(...)
But hate not thou thy Self, cause I am kind,
Nor scorn the Bounty of my Pity: Know.
It stands not with a truly (...) mind
To fear her own, more than another Blow.
If thou (...) (...); be Brave, and Die
The Life of Fame does reach Eternity,
140.
Come then, and since thy Spouse so cruel is,
Give Him his (...), and (...) Him to his face:
Come choose the Way unto by (...) Bliss,
And (...) send (...) Self unto the (...)
Where (...), who did this (...)
Safe in the Arms of (...) main.
141.
Thou have too long already waited on
The (...) of regardlesse Heaven, since thou
Art able by thy valiant Hand alone
To give thy Self what that will not allow:
A Martyrdome's thy Wish, and Thou may be
A Martyr unto thine own Bravery.
142.
So spoke Despair. But Psyche all the (...)
Stood firm and constant, us the resolute Rock
For well she understood her fatal Guile,
And therefore armed her Self against the Shock
Of this Assault, which, as she made can end,
She thus rebounded back upon the (...);
143.
^
^
^
^
^
^
(...)
^
^
^
^
^
^
145.
It Is true, my Spouse has hid his joyous face,
And sure I have deserved He should do so:
Yet never was Night so long, but did give place
At length to cheerly Day, but that which you
Groan in beneath; and therefore wondrous fain
Into that endless Darkness Me would gain.
146.
Let Jesus use his Pleasure on me, I
His Dust and Ashes am: and so go tell
Your envious father Beelzebub; for by
His delegation you are come from Hell:
Tell him, though Jesus kill Me, yet I must,
And in his Goodness will, repose my Trust.
147.
The Fury to this Word made no reply,
But by an hideous Shreik, which split the Air
And rent the earth, rebounding on the Sky
And Heart of Hell at once: all Thunders were
But murmurs to this fragor; and the Sea
But Whispers when her Billows loudest be.
148.
Then snatching up her Baggage with one Hand;
And with the other tearing off her Hair,
Her Skin, her flesh; She cursed Jesus, and
Ran bleeding to the gloomy Cavern, where
She shreik'd again, and shaked Hell before
She entered through the Gulf of its black Door.
149.
Great Satan started when the Feind he saw
Come thus lamenting home without her Prey:
Upon her throat he clapped his iron Paw,
And through it tore his Indignations Way;
For Pain She roared, so did He for Spite,
Whilst all Hell trembled at the dreadful sight.
150.
But Psyche, though her victory were great,
And might in other Hearts have Triumph bred;
No joy could relish in her glorious Feat,
For to all Comfort She was cold and dead,
And in her Conquest did remain as sad
As if her Self had been a Captive made.
151.
Her woeful Hands She wrung, and smote her Breast,
And cried, What is this good Success to Me?
So long as Heaven is deaf to my Request,
So long as I grope in Obscurity,
So long as from my Spouses Eyes the wide
Black Curtains of Disfavour mine do hide.
152.
Now now alas, by dear Experience I
Have learned that Sweets and Pleasures no where are
Truly themselves, but in the Treasury
Of Jesu's all-enamoring Countenance; there,
There are they lodged alone, and hid from Me
Who even in Joy find naught but Misery.
153.
As in the depth of this Disconsolation
She plunged lay, and saw no Way to Rise:
Phylax quite tired with his long sequestration
From his dear Charge, of whose Calamities
He jealous was; with importunity
Wrested from Heaven a License Her to see.
154.
No Wind its Wings more stoutly ever stretched,
Or flew with brisker nimblenesse than He:
But when his Speed this wished Place had reached,
Far from his Wishes He the Place did see;
Down fell his Plumes, and Eyes, back flew his Blood,
And He, o how unlike an Angel, stood!
155.
Such havoc Grief had made in Psyches face,
That in her Self, her Self He scarce could spy:
Besides the blessed Beams of heavenly Grace
Which used to sparkle in her holy Eye,
Were damped with deadish Dullness, and no sign
Peeped forth of any Thing within divine.
156.
This further spurred on his Search to see
What kind of Weather it was in her Breast;
Where finding thick and heavy Darkness, He
Would to the Center of her Heart have pressed;
But Charis there so close lay locked up,
That all his sweet Powers could not charm it open.
157.
At this Amazed, and amazed too
That She who with impatient Love had used
To bid Him welcome, and his feet to woe
With humble Kisses, stood like One amused,
And doubtful whither now it were not best
To throw Neglect on her unsent-for Guest.
158.
And yet, resolved to try the Strength of Love,
And not be dashed out of his sweet Intent,
He kindly her embraced, and gently strove
To warm and win her by that Complement:
He wrought with all his heavenly Heats to thaw
Her Soul, where frost He domineering saw.
159.
But what can tardy Salves and Balsams do
If Life the Member once has bid Adieu?
In vain does Phylax hug his Pupil, who
Beyond the reach of finite Comfort grew;
In vain he blew those Ashes, in whose heap
No Embers, nor no hopeful spark did sleep.
160.
This stroke into his heart so deep a Wound,
That he forgot with him he brought his Tongue;
And pitching sadly down upon the ground,
His anxious Thoughts and Eyes on her he hung,
Whil st Silence sat upon his Lips, and quite
Sealed them up for many a day and night.
161.
So when the desolate Idumean Prince
Not worth so much as his own skin was left;
(For by an universal Confluence
Of boiling Sores he was of it bereft;)
His dearest Friends sat by him on the ground
In silent Grief and stupifaction drowned.
162.
But then perceiving this long expectation
Bred no relenting in her stiff Disease,
Into the Dialect of Consolation
He opened his Mouth, and tried his best, by these
Most tender Lenitives to venture on
Her heart, and fight with its cold heavy stone.
163.
O Psyche, (if Thou yet remainest she,)
What means this strange averseness in thine Eye?
How have thou lost thy memory of Me
Who still am Phylax; and Calamity
Me thinks should make thee not forget my Name,
Who by my Office thy Protector am.
164.
If ever thou had found Me false, when thy
Distress has called for my helping hand:
Or if thy present heavy Misery
Does not in need of my Assistance stand,
Well might thou by this strange deportment dart
Disdain upon the Comforts I impart.
165.
It was no busnes of mine own which drew
Me from thy Company, most dear to me;
Witness the time when I so cheerly slew
To Palestine, and back again, with thee;
Forsaking all that while the sphere where I
In sovereign blessedness was wont to fly.
166.
But He who both my Master is, and thine,
Called me away; if yet it were away:
For my employment was not so much mine
As thine, for whose sweet sake thy Spouse did lay
That charge upon me: Then be of good Cheer,
And to the happy news I bring, give Ear.
167.
When I in Heaven had long attendance paid,
To Jesu's Sovereign pleasure; Gracious He
Hearing my sighs, in gentleness arrayed
His looks, and to his footstool beckned me:
Where having on my face adored him thrice,
He blessed Me as often, and bad Me rise.
168.
Then looking to his own right Hand, at which
His radiant Mother kneeled, who makes the light
Of heaven it self with her sweet Luster, rich;
Behold, said he to Me, my dearest sight;
Behold the Queen of all this joy and bliss
Which by my Regal title I possess.
169.
But her Retinue is not so complete
As she deserves, and I needs must grant;
Soft Snowie Followers, answering her sweet
And ever-virgin Self she still does want;
And from my Nurserie below must I
Her worthy Train with fitting Plants supply,
170.
And one of those is humble Psyche, she
Whose Watering and whose Pruning is thy Charge:
Her from unworthy Dusts Captivity
And all her other straits, I will enlarge
Ever long, when I have proved her to be
By Fires true Witness, fitting Gold for me.
171.
In that bright Station shall her dwelling be,
(And he to Mary's right hand pointed here,)
There shall the Clouds of her Humility
Break up into a Day of Glory; there
Her Sufferings all shall prove Divine; and go
And from my Mouth assure thy Pupil so.
172.
I prostrate fell and took my leave; and flew
More on Joys Wings than these, through the vast sea
Of glorious Blessedness; but as I drew
Near thine old Friend Uranius (For he
Reigns on a lower throne than thine,) he cried,
What fortune Phylax, does thy Charge betide?
173.
That shall you shortly see, said I; and so
Posted directly hither unto thee.
And if this News cannot outlook thy (...);
Tell me why thou disdain'st Felicity;
Why Phylax never less welcome was, then now
He of thine highest Hopes the Dawn does show:
174.
Why thou, against the meek ingenuous law
Of civil Gratitude, do not embrace
With joyous heart, and with unfurrowed brow,
This mighty token of Heavens royal Grace:
Why thou thine own Ambition contradictest,
Whilst, with his Promise thou thy Spouse rejectest.
175.
So spoke the Angel. But the heavy Maid
Grown deas to every Word that sounded Joy,
Her doleful hand upon her Bosom laid,
And, pressed with the Burden of Annoy,
Hung down her Head, replying by a flood
Of tears, how little him she understood.
176.
But when she saw he was unsatisfi'd
With that dumb Answer, first an heavy Groan
She helped forth, then flinging open wide
Her lamentable Arms, Let me alone
She (...), and to my domineering Grief
Afford, at least in Pity, this Relief.
177.
I know you were of old, and still would be
My faithful Friend; I well remember you
Are Phylax, and what blessed Suavitie
You constantly did to my heart allow;
But that was when my heart alive you found,
Which now in Desolation is drowned.
178.
What Comfort gains a Carkase cold and dead
By the warm Courtesy of Fomentations?
In vain are Tables sumptuously spread
And furnished with luxurious Preparations
To court a stomach, all whose Appetite
By Nauseousnesse is slain unto Delight.
179.
Blame me not Phylax, for I love you still,
And of your Presence fain the sweets would reap;
But now my greater joy is damped, my Will
Reaches her Arms to this in vain; you heap
But (...) on Me, whilst before my Face
You set those Pleasures I cannot embrace.
180.
Should I but strive to grasp them, envious they
Would shrink to emptiness, and mock my hand;
Or from their own sweet selves quite fly away,
Degenerating into Sorrows, and
Right-down (...), rather than impart
One Taste of Joy to my afflicted heart.
181.
For o what Relish can there be to Me
In any Dainties which you can provide,
So long's the Lord of my Felicity
From my devorced Eyes himself does hide!
If Phoebus once withdraws his Sovereign Ray,
What can poor Candles do to cheer up Day!
182.
Did but the wonted Beams of heavenly Grace
Vouchsafe to smile upon my (...);
They easily would out-look the sourest face
Of all the (...) which are frowning there:
But since sweet (...) is eclipsed to Me,
Phylax is Absent though he Present be.
183.
Surely your News had glorious been, and sweet
If carried unto any One but Me:
But I in Heavens and Blisse's Names can meet
No Melody at all, since Misery
Has sealed, and frozen up my Breast, and I
Unto my self alone abandoned ly.
184.
Though I were now perched on the Battlement
Of highest Glory, and beneath me saw
Each flaming Seraph; I should not resent
That Place as Glorious: still, still below
Should I esteem my self, so long as I
Am muffied up from seeing the most High.
185.
Yet now that Jesus, whose poor Worm I am,
Is pleased thus to leave Me to my Dust;
His Pleasure I must not presume to blame,
Which though it bitter seem, is surely Just.
His mighty Name I still adore and bless;
His heavy Rod which plows my Soul, I kiss.
186.
Here manly Sorrow stopped her Mouth, and she
From Phylax having turn d her ghastly Eye,
Folded her Arms about her breast: Which He
No sooner saw, but deeply pierced by
Her mighty Wound, He hung his sad eyes down,
And answer d all her Groanings, with his own.
PSYCHE: OR LOVES MYSTERY. CANTO XX. The Consummation.
ARGUMENT.
Restored to Grace's Light, and Ravished by
The Splendour of Beatitude, which shined
In her closed sleeping Eyes, Psyche with high
Desires Impatience feels her fervent Mind
Fall all on a light Fire; and thus she dies,
As she had lived before, LOVES Sacrifice.
1.
SWeet END, thou Sea of Satisfaction, which
The weary Streams into thy Bosom take;
The Spring unto the Spring Thou first do reach,
And by thy inexbausted Kindness make
It fall so deep in Love with Thee, that through
All Rocks and Mountains it to Thee does flow.
2.
Thou art the Center in whose close embrace
From the wide wild Cireumference each Line
Directly runs to find its resting Place.
Upon their swiftest Wings, to perch on thine
Enobling Breast, which is their only Butt,
The Arrows of all high Desires are shot.
3.
All Labors pant and languish after Thee,
Stretching their longest Arms to catch their Bliss;
Which in the Way, how sweet so ever it be,
They never find; but with all earnestness
Press further on, until they can pull down
Upon their stour Heads, Thee, their only Crown.
4.
The Plowman answers not the smiling Spring
With Smiles again, but jealous is until
Thy happy Season his long Hopes does bring
Unto their Ripeness with his Corn, and fill
His Barn with plenteous Sheaves, with Joy his (...),
For Thou, and only Thou, his Harvest art.
5.
The Traveller suspecteth every Way
Although they traced and fair-beaten be:
Nor is secure but that his Leader may
Perchance mistaken be, as well as He,
Or that his strength may fail Him; till he win
Possession of Thee, his wished Inn.
6.
Nobely besmeared with Olympik Dust
And hardy sweat, the Runner holds his pace
With obstinate Celeritie, in trust
That thou will wipe and glorify his face:
His Prize's soul art Thou, whose precious sake
Makes Him these mighty Pains with Pleasure take.
7.
The Mariner will trust no Wind, although
Upon his Sails it blows all Flattery;
The fawning Sea, when smoothest it does show,
Cannot allure him to Security;
He credits none but Thee. who art his Bay.
To which through Calmes and Storms He hunts his way.
8.
And so have I, cheerd up with Hopes at last
To double Thee, endured this tedious Sea;
Through the Times foaming Tempests I have past.
Through flattering Calms of private Suavity;
Through interrupting Companies thick Press;
Through the vast Deep of mine own Laziness;
9.
Through many Sirens Charms which me invited
To dance to Ease's Tunes, the Tunes in fashion;
Through many cross misgiving Thoughts, which frighted
My jealous Pen; and through the Conjuration
Of Ignorant and Envious Censures, which
Implacabley, against all Poems (...);
10.
But chiefly Those which venture in a Way
Unbeaten yet by any Muse's feet;
Which trust that Psyche, and her Jesus may
As well become a Verse, and look as sweet,
As Venus and her Son; that Truth can be
A nobler Theme than wanton (...).
11.
And seeing now I am in ken of Thee,
The Harbor which enfiamed my Desire,
And with this constant Patience steered Me
To bring my Bark to rest; I am on fire
Till I my Seife in thy sweet Arms do throw,
And on the Shore hang up my finished (...).
12.
Nor will thy Pleasantness less welcome be
To Patient Psyche who so long has saild
Through the deep Ocean of Calamity,
And over many a boystrous Storm prevaild;
Who through the Smiles and through the Frowns of Heaven
With equal Meekness has till now been driven.
13.
For still on Thee she fixed her longing Eye,
On Thee, who wilt unto her Soul afford
The plenitude of her Felicity,
The dear Enjoyment of her precious Lord,
And then exchange thy (...) Name, and be
No longer End, but firm Eternity.
14.
As she sat teaching Phylax how to greive,
Who faithfully her Sorrows copyed;
The Time approached when Heaven would her, re-preive
From this sad Duty, and upon her Head
Let fall the Crown which in this noble Fight
She bravely erned by her constant Might.
15.
With Joyeuse Horror on the sudden she
Started and trembled, and leaped from the ground;
The Angel wondered what the Cause might be,
Whose quick Effect did upon Him rebound;
For up he rose, and in suspense expected
What raised the Maid, so much before dejected.
16.
When lo, the Joy which kindled in her Breast,
Broke forth and flamed in her cheerful Eye
For blessed Charis, who so long suppressed
In the close Center of her Heart did lie,
Was now unlocked by Jesus, and had leave
To her sweet Influence the Reins to give.
17.
So when thick Clouds have dammed up the Day,
And doleful Blackness veild the Welkins face;
If Phoebus through those Curtains rends his way,
And bids the Darkness to his Beams give place,
The Air surprised by her sudden Bliss
At first with frightfull Gladness startled is.
18.
So when that unexpected virgin Light
Broke from the glorius Mouth of God, upon
The rude disconsolate Heap of firstborn Night;
That sudden Morn with cheerful Terror ran
About the universal Deep, which was
Amazed at the dint of Luster s face.
19.
With Pleasures strong Incursion Psyche thus
Being (...) and shaken; ever she leisure had
To tell her Gladness, sweet and bounteous
Charis a passage through her Bosom made,
And in the exuberance of Suavity
Her smiling Self presented to her Eye.
20.
But Humane Souls are in Capacity
So poor and dull while here they dwell below,
They know not how to bear even Courtesy,
Unless by slow Degrees on them it grow:
Delights, if rushing in a sudden Stream,
A Deluge prove of Torments unto Them.
21.
This Spectacle bred such Extremities
Of overflowing Joys in Psyche's Breast,
That she, alas, too narrow to comprise
This swelling Sea of which she was possessed,
Resign d her Self to it, and by a Sown
In its delicious Depths sunk gently down,
22.
But Charis being Mistress of the Tide,
So brideled in the pliant Floods, that they
Submitted to her Hand their dainty Pride,
And for her gentler Complement made way:
This was a soft Embrace, by which the Maid
She girded, and her fainting Passion stayed.
23.
Then with incomparable Sweetness she
Her Eyes upon her fixed, and thus began:
My Dear, and has Disuse such Potency
That it upon my cheerly Presence can
Disrellish cast; or are my Beams too strong
For thee, who have in Darkness grop'd so long?
24.
Henceforth take Courage, for no more will I
(And here Thou have in Pawn my royal Word,)
Leave thee to wade in gloomy Misery,
But trusty Light to all thy ways afford;
Full broad-day Light: for all this while I gave
Thee secret Beams which thou did not perceive.
25.
And had (...) done so; had I not (...)
Close at the bottom of thine Heart, to keep
Thy Souls foundation firm and sure; in (...)
Laborious Zeal had duly broke thy sleep,
In vain had all thy Signs and Tears been spent.
In vain thy Prayers had to Heaven been sent.
26.
Unto its dismal Name too truly true
Thy Dereliction had proved, had I
With never-sleeping Care not lain perdu
To watch the Motions of thy Enemy;
That Enemy whose fatal Company
Makes Desolation, Desolation be.
27.
When that infernal Hag, the damned Queen
Of Hideousness, advanced to the fight,
Armed both Hand and Tongue; had I not been
In thy main Fort (however out of Sight,)
Sure She had undermined it, and thou
Had by Despair been quite blown up ever now,
28.
Yet close I lurked, thy Courage so to try
When thou no Second did perceive at Hand:
This was the Plot of LOVE himself, and I
My Ambush placed but at his Command:
LOVE hid my face; and so he did his own;
But all that while he weaved for thee a Crown.
29.
The Crown which thy long loyal Patience
In the bright Realm of humble Saints shall wear;
And till Thou thither art translated hence,
I in thy Breast my Tent at large will rear;
That till the greater Heaven receives thee,
Thou may contain it in Epitomie,
30.
This said: She gathered up her Train of Light,
Which in an Orb was all about her spread,
And shrinking up her Self with heavenly Slight
Within her sprightfull Self, she entered
The Virgins Breast again; and there begun
To exercise her full Dominion.
31.
Forth with a Tumult boild in Psyche's Heart;
But boild and foamed in vain; for instantly
The Rout by Chari's most unconquered Art.
Was forced from that usurped Hold to fly:
Vain Dread was first which shrunk and turned (...)
And so these Cowards flying Army (...).
32.
For She, her Self no sooner (...) out,
But at her heels Lamenting Sorrow came
Tearing her hair and flinging it about;
Then leare-ey d (...), unworthy Shame,
Pale-faced Disconsolation, and (...),
With Indevotion's dead and (...) (...).
33.
But in the Rear rushed out Forgetfulness,
A dim and swarthy Thing; and hand in hand
Led her Compatriots and Associates: These
Were sluggish Mists, dull Night, thick Blackness, and
Whatever is of kin to them, whatever
Can block up heaven and Souls from light dissever.
34.
Compared with these, all Soot, and Ink, and Pitch,
Were Compositions of Milk and Snow;
So was the gross and triduan Darkness which
Did on the face of shameless Memphis grow;
Or that which locked up Sodom's Eylids more
Close than Lot's utmost Care had done his Door.
35.
Psyche admiring stood to see her Breast
So fertile in this hideous Progeny;
Which, as she veiwed them, directly pressed
Downward into the Womb of Earth, to be
Conveyed back unto their native Home;
For from beneath this gloomy (...) did come
36.
And now she found her Bosom full as clear
As when to Heaven she Thelema presented:
Now all her Passions unhamper'd were,
And every Bond to Liberty relented;
All things were sweet and fair within, and she
Released into complete Serenitie.
37.
Love, Anger, Hatred, Jelousie, and Fear
And all the rest of that swift-winged Crew,
With holy sprightfulnesse revived were,
And to their proper Objects nimbly flew:
They (...), and clashed not their Wings together
But kindly helped and cheered one another.
38.
Hope, which had grop'd and languished till now
In deplorable Mists; new courage took,
And challenged every Wind its worst to blow,
Since she perceived her Cable was not broke,
But that her trusty Anchor held its hold
Whilst Desolations Sea about her rolled.
39.
And Logos too, sad heretofore, and dry,
Felt cneerly Vigor flaming in his Heart;
Which spurred him on to beg her leave to try
Whether he could not now perform his part
With more successful strength, and from the Treasures
Of Heaven, fetch Contempletions solid Pleasure:
40.
His Motion she heard with joyus Ear,
And turned to Heaven her gladsome Ey, to see
Whether the way to it, Companion were
In her brisk Bosoms new Serenity:
She turned her Ey, and in Heavens volumes read
More than her own desires had coveted.
41.
For lo the sullen Clouds which heretofore
Had damm'd the way to her rejected sight,
Drowned in repentant Tears, themselves did pour,
And dash in sunder, to lay open a bright
And undisturbed Passage to that Spheat
Where Psyche's Jewels all ensh rined were
42.
In bounteous Beams of royal Influence
Her open Sun bestowed himself upon her:
And this awaked her long astonished sense
To find and feel the sweets of this dear Honor;
This swelled her Bosom with such Ravishment,
That through her lips she hast's to give it vent,
43.
And now, o my delicious Lord, said she,
I thank thee for that Famine I endured:
I little dreamed that this Felicity
Could by this torturing anguish be procured:
But in the Wisdom of thy Love did thou
Then make me Fast the more to Feast me now.
44.
Thou with that wholesome Tempest tossed'st me,
That I might thoroughly understand the bliss
Of this sweet Calm: by the Ariditie
Of cold and tedious Death did thou suppress
My secular Spirits, that revived I
Might live to thee, as to the World I die
45.
Now, now, I taste this life indeed; which I
Though I enjoyed it, did not know before:
Alas, We fools are best instructed by
Absence, and Loss, to prize the richest store:
These thanks I to my Dereliction ow,
That I can relish my Fruition now
46.
So deep I relish it, dear Jesu, that
I would not for the Cream of Paradise
But have been drowned in that desolate State,
Whence to the Bliss of mine own Bliss I rise.
For what were Paradise to me, unless
I feelingly perceived its Pleasantnes?
47.
O that more Thelema's I had, which I
Might sacrifice in witness of this Debt
Since thy revealed Countnance upon my
Unworthy Head this mighty Score has set:
Yet what do our poor Wills by being thine,
But only make Themselves, not Thee, divine?
48.
I now could covetous be, and wish that all
The Treasures both of Heaven and Earth were mine,
That with this Offering I might prostrate fall
And dedicate it at thy Favors shrine.
Yet what were all the World to that which I
Ow to thy Sovereign Benignity!
49.
Had I ten thousand Lives to spend on thee.
That (...) Expense would but my Gains augment.
How (...) where Gratitude her Self must be
(...), can poor I due Thanks present?
Sweet Lord informaud help my Soul, which fain
Would tender something back to thee again.
50.
She ceased here: And Phylax, who attended
The leisure of her fervent Exultation;
With equal Joy and Ardor, where she ended,
Began her Praises; and Congratulation:
Joy, joy, deer Pupil, of this Morn, said he,
Which has dispelled thy Night of Misery.
51.
I see what reason thou had to be sad,
Beyond my Comforts reach; because I see
The sweet Occasion which has made thee glad;
Such mighty Grief could only chased be
By that Meridian Almighty Ray,
Which drives the Life of Woe, even Death away.
52.
The high Excess of his (...) Joy
Would let him speak no more; but spuir'd him on
With Kisses and Embraces to allay
The dainty Wrath of his strong Passion.
Full close he chained her in the tender Bands
Of zealous Love, his blessed Arms and Hands.
53.
(...) Maid, who would not to this (...)
Belong in debt, thus, in a snnle, (...)
(...) begging of my (...) you (...)
But for my Thanks, they must (...)
(...) hence to be full and (...)
(...) best he (...)
54.
Surely the other Day you were the same
Which you are now, in every Ornament
Of gracious Sweetness, when you hither came
And your best Cordials did to Me present:
But clownish Senseless I could not embrace
You (...) landy r offered Grace.
55.
Had this Behavior quenched your Love to Me.
To none but my rude Self had Blame been due,
Yet you with faithful patient fervencie
More careful still, and still more render grew.
My Grief you to your Self assumed as you
Were able, (...) for Me with Tears did slow,
56.
Though Thy Heaven and Earth abandon was,
And psung'd into the Cull of Desolation;
To own Me in (...) despicable Case
You blushed not, but by, your high Narration
Of what Love (...) to relieve my mart,
Endeavored to cheer my drooping Heart,
57.
Well I remember how I then forgot
My self and you; how dead and cold I lay
Before that flaming News, which might have shot
Life into any Soul but mine; away
I turned my foolish head from that which through
A thousand Deaths would run after now.
58.
For o my indefatigable Friend,
I feel your sweetness thrilling in my Heart;
Which there with Charis Intluence does blend,
And a new Soul unto my Soul impart:
Forbid it Heav n, my Mind should ever forget
Thee, who have helped to raise and double it.
59.
When Earth denies her Vapors to repay
To Heaven whose Bounty sent her down the (...)
When Fountains bid their posting Curronts stay,
Whose Thanks were slowing to their mother (...)
When Building, scorn their freindly (...)
Will then neglect thy (...) and (...)
(...)
In this (...)
Then Words and Killes sweetly (...)
Till the (...)
Which common Mortals (...)
^
^
61.
And now her high and holy business she
Performed no more with cold and fruitless pains;
But mounting up with cheerly Fervencie,
Reaped, in the middle of her Work, its Gains;
For now she knew her Prayers welcomed were
Into her Spouse's ready open Ear.
62.
Phylax, mean while by Heavens appointment flew
To learn her Parents fortunes out: which He
No sooner full, sow, but fired with new
Excess of Joy, he back returned, when she
From her Devotions rose, and thus displayed
His blessed Message to the (...)
63.
News Psyche, happy News, for now I come
From holy Valors Sceen, that signal Place
Where thy Uranius his brave Martyrdom
Of late atcheiv'd, and finished his Race
That Race thou fear'dst had been too hard for thy
(...) Parents limping (...)
64.
But at the Stake I found them Both, where they
Before the face of Heaven and Earth to thy
Sole charge that Resolution did lay
Which fired them to contemn those Flames; for by
Our Daughters Zeal, said they, this sacred heat
In our old froazen fearful Veins does beat.
65.
That heavenly Answer from the Dungeon she
Gave to our cruel kindenes. though with shame
It sent Us weeping home; yet instantly
Those causeless tears it dried by this flame
Of Christian courage, whilst admonished by
Our second thoughts, our first we did defy.
66.
And Heaven require her wheresoe'r she be
Who, whilst we tempted her idolize,
Did nobley fright Us from Idolatry,
And reach Us how We safelier might (...)
Both Life and Death, than Jesus, who alone
Holds over both supreme Dominion.
67.
Then let Him show it now, the Solaiers (...)
Kindling the Pile, and shouting loud, that they
In spite or Darkness, thus could turn the Tide
Of Night, by Christian Bonfires, into Day,
O Blessed pair! said I, who in a new
Marriage thus joined are, and hither (...).
68.
So Phylax spoke. When Psyche ravished by
This unexpected Bliss, could not contain
The pious Fountain of her joyful Eye,
Nor her Tongues sweeter stronger streams restrain;
Abundant Tears she shed, yet larger far
Her thanks to Jesus, and her Praises were.
69.
But as she often had wearied been before
With heavinesses mighty Burden; so
Surcharged now with joys exuberant store
She laid her down in sweet submission to
This pleasing load, and sunk into the deep
But soft untroubled Gulf of do why sleep.
70.
When Charis, upon whose eternal Eye
No Slumber ever creeps, begun a new
And heavenly work; for with Activity
About Imaginations Orb she flew,
And culled and cropp'd those Fancies here and there
Which for her purpose serviceable were.
71.
Thus furnished with all Materials, she
In the fair Theater of Psyche's Breast
By orderly Degrees the Gallantrie
Of her incomparable Pageant dressed:
She first reard up a goodly Throne, which might
Outvie the Hyperborean Snow in White.
72.
Forthwith she placed on this royal Seat
A Prince who gave more Beauty unto it;
No Monark ever in more awful State
On his imperial Chair of Gold did sit:
Indeed all Potentates but shaddows be
To this authentic Sovereigns Majesty.
73.
His copious Robe down from his Shoulders flowed
Unto his Feet, with streams of gracefulness;
A Girdle of illustrious Gold, which owed
Its birth not unto Earth, but Heaven, did kiss
And closely hug his blessed Paps, which yet
In goodly Richnes far outshined it.
74.
No (...) labor ever made so white
The finest Wool, as was his daintier Hair,
Which poured down the (...) of its bright
And Silken Curles with curious careless Care
About his Alabaster Neck, which stood
Like a white Pillar in that Snowie (...).
75.
As in their venerable Sockets on
The sacred Altar glorious Tapers flame,
So looked his Eyes; whose reverend Beams alone
About the Temple of his Face did stream,
And made his Countnance like the Suns, when he
Is a wfull in his High-noon Claritie.
76.
The most resin'd Corinthian Brass, which in
The bosom of the slaming Furnace lies,
Does not with more illustrious l error shine,
Than from his burning Feet of Glory sties.
Thus was this radiant King from Foot to Head
With supreme Majesty embellished.
77.
Innumerable Angels then she brought
To furnish out his Court and fill his Train;
These all their Stations took as quick as Thought,
And with their golden Trumpets in a strein
Which through the roused Universe rebounded,
The glory of their mighty Sovereign founded.
78.
But his bright Standard to the open Air
She poured out, in which embroyderd stood
Most dreadfully illustrious and fair
His Arms imperial, stained all with Blood:
For 'twas his Cross, encompassed now with more
Notorious Honor, than with Shame before.
79.
As thus he sat triumphant on his Throne,
He lifted up his Face, and looked about:
Strait way the frighted Earth began to run
From his intolerable Eyes; the stout
And hardy Rocks felt their hearts split for Dread.
The proudest Hills and Mountains trembling fled.
80.
The Spears above his Aspects Power felt,
And breaking off their losty Harmony,
In Dissolutions Tears began to melt:
The Sun and Stars, abashed now to see
There was no need of them by Day or Night.
Fell headlong down, and choked their own Light.
81.
Yet in this (...) haste, the Sea and Land
Were inindefull of their Faith, and honestly
Resror'd the Pledges which into their Hand
Were put by Fate, Sin, and Mortality
Giving up punctually a true and just
Account of every Drain of Humanc (...)
82.
Forth with Corruption started from the Heap
Of Ashes, and fled after Earth and Sea;
When lo the Mass threw off its deadly sleep,
And waked into Life's Activitie:
Each Piece awaked, and nimbly rose, and showed
For one cold Heap, a vigorous Multitude.
83.
Adam and Eve, the Springs of all the rest,
Stood in the Front: on whom attended all
The Senior World. Then Noah forward pressed,
Who reimpeopled this whole shipwrackd Ball;
And after Him, the Tribes and Nations which
Their Colonies through all the Earth did reach.
84.
Not one was missing who did ever draw
The breath of Life, and see the Face of Light:
But now the proudest bore his head as low
As did the poorest and ignoblest wight:
This Day had rased such Distinctions out,
And all into one Size and Measure brought.
85.
Those whom their tedious Age had bowed down
Unto their brisker years were called back;
And those who in their Bud were crop'd, and thrown
Into untimely Graves, did nothing lack
Of fulgrown and accomplished vigor, which
Fixed all and every one in equal pitch.
86.
And yet so different their Conditions were,
That now the ready Angels, who attended
Their Sovereigns Beck, with quick unerring Care
Parted the crowd which was together blended;
With his right hand the harmless Sheep they graced,
But at his left the stinking Goats they placed.
87.
Psyche rejoye'd her Parents here to see
Ranked on the Dexter Wing: But fuller was
Her holy Exultation, when she
Perceived her own (...) had the grace
There to be marshalled; for though the sleep,
Her waking Soul at the sweet Omen leap.
88.
When lo, as thus her Hopes and Joys (...)
At this illustrious Spectacle; before
The Throne two Books of vast (...)
Were open flung: No volumes ever bore
So huge a bulk as these, which written be
With the where worlds (...)
89.
The one was black as Horrors darkest Face,
The Book of Death, writ with the Ink of Hell,
Wherein each Word some foul Transgression was
Scor'd upon their Accounts who did rebel
Against their Bliss, and needs would labor to
Attain Vexation, and Themselves undo.
90.
The other was as fair, as this was foul,
The (...) Book of Life, whose Words did shine
Clearer than those, bright Notes which make the Scroul
Of Heaven appear so glorious and divine;
For here each Line does part of God express
Charactered in his Servants Holiness,
91.
There blessed Leaves the King no sooner read,
But to the Right Hand Troop he turned his Eye.
Which with Majestic Sweetness prefaced
Unto there Words: Come Ye, whose Piety
Is by my (...) Benediction grown
Mature, and of full Age to wear its Crown:
92.
Come take your full Possession with Me
Of that fair Kingdom, whose Foundations were
Laid upon stable Perpetuity
Long ever the Earth sunk down beneath, long ever
The Air and Fire grew light and upward fled
Long ever the Curtains of the Heavens were; spread.
93.
For in this faithful Register I see
Your brave Deserts recorded full and fair:
When I exposed was to Misery
Your pious Charity made Me your Heir;
The Debt I here acknowledge, and to Day
The Principal and Use. I must repay.
94.
Then turning to the gloomy Book, and to
The other Company which stood aghast,
With frowns of killing Wrath He (...) Go
Ye cursed Brood, (...) Evidence has Cast
You all; these Leaves (...) Witness bear,
For all your (...) staring here.
95.
(...) Eyes no (...) would afford to Me
When (...), and Nakedness
Called for (...): and strict Equity
Now (...) up (...) (...) your due (...):
Go, (...) for, take
(...) Lake.
(...)
The (...)
With (...) Pride
Which flamed (...) fight
When (...) tried:
For you (...)
Have (...)
(...)
The Adamantine Sentence thus (...)
The courteous Angels with (...) Joy
Upon the Saints their dear Embrace (...)
(...) this their Coronation Day;
And joined then their Tongues with them to (...)
(...) to their gracious King.
98.
But as this Melody was sweet and (...):
So were the Yellings horrid, which (...)
The throats and bosoms of that Company
(...) were;
For thousand (...) (...) about them flew,
And in (...) threw.
99.
But dressed in more (...) Array
Than ever see infernal Hae deformed,
Their (...) (...) on them did lay
Their (...) of (...) Wrath, all (...)
With (...) their Breafts
And (...) did (...)
100.
When on the sudden the (...)
Opening its Mouth, and gaping for its Prey,
The first fruits of their flames on them old spit,
And warned the Fiends to hasten them away
To their full Harvest O what Tongue can tell
The Anguish which now on these Wretches fell!
101.
Upon their shreiking Throats, and frighted Hair
Damnations Sergeants clapped their flaming Paws:
Whilst other Officers, who furnished were
With Whips of (...) Snakes, and Harpies Claws
Lashed them so sore, that they made haste to Hell
In hopes that lesser Torments there did dwell.
102.
Down plunged this mixed (...), which almost (...)
The greedy (...) of the (...) Deep:
Loud was the Noise of this (...) Fall, but yet
Far (...) was (...)
Eternal (...) still (...) and
^
103.
The hasty Fire soon flew upon this Feast,
And with unbounded Riot gormandised;
Resolving thenceforth never more to Fast,
Nor yet with all this store to be sufficed;
But often it gaped and belched, whence upward broke
Black volumes of contagious stink and smoke
104.
About the Brink some Devils hankerd still;
So did two Monsters far more foul than they
Thin ghastly Death, and poisnous Sin; until
The King designed an Angel them to slay,
Who threw them headlong down the Pit; for this
And this alone, eternal Slaughter is.
105.
That done: the Sentence firm and sure to make,
Upon the Caves wide Mouth his Seal he set:
A Seal which no reluctance can break,
For his Omnipotence had temperd it
Of such a Mixture, that Eternity
It self, as soon as that, shall brittle be.
106.
The Saints and Angels seeing nothing now
But Joy, and Life, and Bliss, and Holiness;
Themselves before the Conquerours Throne did throw
Meekly ambitious jointly to express
Their Thanks and Praise in a triumphant Song,
Whence all the World with Hallelujahs rung.
107.
When lo, a Flood of new and gorgeous Light
Came sweetly pouring down, and changed the Sceen;
Which swallowed up the former Pageant quite,
For nothing now but Claritude was seen.
This fetched a sigh from Psyche, who had viewed
With hearty joy that holy Multitude.
108.
But Charis quickly her again did cheer,
For by her speedy skill she instantly
A wondrous City on the stage did rear,
Whose beauty so enamored Psyche's Ey,
That she was sad no longer for the Change,
But joy'd about the spectacle to range.
109.
Square was the City, for it was the Seat
Of everlasting Firmitude; and this
Substantial Figure which it self does meet
In every equal Angle, tied is
Sure to it self: but the Round rolling World
Alas, before, was into Nothing hurld
110.
The Fabric of the Wall was fair and high,
Much higher than the proudest Battlement
Of the old Heavens, whose lofty Majesty
Down unto Mortal Eyes such wonder sent:
For they were but the Type and shade of this,
Which Heaven of Heavens, and Crest of glory is.
111.
And correspondent was it mighty Base
Unto that Height, for upon twelve Foundations
All most unmoved, it erected was:
No wonder that it fears no Perturbations,
No wonder that this only City is
Of Peace and Quiet the Metropolis.
112.
The first Foundation is of Jasper green,
For Florid must this Building ever be:
The next of Sapphire, in whose face are seen
The proper Lines of heavenly Claritie;
Astone which does corroborate the Heart,
And friendly help to Chastity impart.
113.
The third of Star-like Chalcedonie, which
Upon the Sapphir's Region being set,
With Constellations does it enrich:
A cheerly Gem is this, and scorns to let
The tedious insulations of Fear,
Or of Disconsolation to draw near.
114.
The fourth of Emerald, of Lust the true
And constant Foe, and of all Poisons too:
The fifth of Sardonyx, of blushing hue;
The sixth of Sardie, antidore of Woe,
Quickner of Wit: The seav'nth of Chrysolite,
Which Melancholie's Mists away does fright.
115.
The eight of Berill, rich in modest grace;
The nineth of Topaz, full of flaming Gold
Which dares out-look black Night: Of Chrysoprase
The tenth, of kin unto the formers mould:
The next the cordial Jacinth, and the last
The sober and the healthful Amethyst.
116.
On these Foundations stood engraven fair
Twelve honored Names, the Names of them who spread.
The gentle Lambs Religion every where,
And stones to build this City gathered
From every Soil, and from the furthest Shores
On which the barbarous Ocean foams and roars.
117.
As Psyche reached her Wonder round about
This gallant Structure, she on every side
Three goodly Gates, of which each One was wrought
Out of a single massy Perl, espied:
With these did LOVE keep open House, and all
The East, and West, the North and South did call.
118.
Invited therefore thus, She entered in,
Where paved all with Gold she found the Street,
With Gold not of our earthly Metalls kin,
But of a purer nobler Breed, and meet
To kiss the Feet of Saints, it being as
Tralucid as the fairest virgin Glass.
119.
But straight a purer Thing than that she met,
A River all of living Crystal, which
Came smiling down the Street; and over it
A multiplying Tree its Arms did reach
From either side, whose Twigs though sound and strong,
Bowed with the blessed Fruit which on them hung.
120.
Twelve Sorts of Fruits it duly bore, and yet
Faild not each Month again to Bud and Blow;
Such endless Vigor reigned all over it,
That to its smallest Leaves it did allow
More Virtue than Arabia's Spices had,
Or all the famous Balm of Gilead.
121.
They never were applied to the Wound
Of any Nations, but forthwith from Pain
Released they were, and rendered whole and Sound,
When Humane Surgery had strove in vain.
O noble Tree! whose very Shadow is
The eternal Roof of sure substantial Bliss.
122.
Under these verdant Boughs, and on this shore
Of flowing Life, walked Psyche to descry
The Spring which was the Mother to such store
Of pure and ever-reeming Suavity:
When lo a glorious Throne she spied, from whence
Gushed out these vivid Blisse's Influence.
123.
A Throne of pure and solid Splendour framed,
On which the Sovereign of Immensity
With such intolerable Brightness flamed,
That none of all the purest Standers by
Could with Cherubick or Seraphick Eyes
His vast (...) comprise.
124.
But at his Right Hand, mitigated by
His Marriage with poor Flesh, did sit the Lamb,
Whose spotless Fleece was sweetened Majesty
Whose Scepter with Loves gentle Rays did stream,
Whose Hand to pour his Blessings forth, was spread,
Whose Crown was Honor wreathed about his head.
125.
From his fair Eyes flowed that eternal Day
Which all this new Jerusalem does gild;
No other Phoebus needed to display
Himself upon this Region, which was filled
With clear enlivening Fires that did (...)
And make even gross and mortal Eyes Divine.
126.
Here Psyche clearly saw those things which she
Before by Logos, her Embassader,
Descri'd at distance and imperfectly:
Gods naked Attributes were marshalled here,
Deep Mysteries in one another wove,
Infinitudes, and Miracles of Love.
127.
Here vast oraculous Profundities,
And wondrous Words from Wisdoms Lips she heard;
Such Words as taught her where the Reason lies
Why God himself does wear the Name of Word;
Words raised to so sovereign a Pitch
As mortal Tongues must never hope to reach.
128.
Here she beheld how from Divinity
Beatitude its glorious Self displaid,
And unto all the holy Company
Its unexhausted Influence conveyed;
For Millions of Millions at hand
With meek Attendance on the Lamb did stand.
129.
Right gallant was the Equipage in which
They were disposed: That symmetrious Grace
Which round about the World it self did reach,
To this far fairer ordered State gave place,
When, guilty only of it self, it slunk
Aside, and into Inanition sunk.
130.
Never was Grecian or Roman Court
(Though Fame had trumpetted their Praises high,
Contrived in such wise Majestic Sort
As this, Perfections own Polity,
Which by one universal Spirit does move,
And by no Laws is governed, but Love.
131.
All Saints and Angels knew their proper place,
And lov d it best because it was their own:
Among them all no difference there was
Of Inclinations, for each one had thrown
His Will down at his Sovereigns Footstool, and
Owned no Desires but only his Command.
132.
In him they lived, and loved, and joy'd, and by
That Resignation received were
Into some Portion of Divinity:
For Jesu's Fullness had enough to spare,
Nor was his Diadem diminsh'd, though
To all of Them their Crowns he did allow.
133.
They all were Crowned, and yet not flattered
With (...) and empty Sovereignty:
So wide the Circuit of this Glory spread,
That All with boundless Bounds it did supply;
This Reaim of Bliss, of Kingdoms was the Spring,
And every Subject made a mighty King.
134.
For what was proper unto every One,
Proved the Joy and Riches of the Rest:
That supreme Diadem which flamed upon
The Head of Jesus, fully was possessed
Of all this Multitude, for bounteous He
Did lay in Common all Propriety.
135.
Thus whatsoever Honor decks the Brow,
Or Consolation smileth in the Heart;
Its beams are not confined there, but flow
With Brotherly Affection to each Part,
That the whole Body may engaged be
To make a private Comfort, public Glee.
136.
And yet these so united Spirits were
By several Stations distinguished:
Nine blessed Orders were divided there,
Which in three Hierarchik Classe's did
Conjoin again, and by their single Three
Thrice imitate the eternal Trinity.
137.
With these the Saints did intermixed reign
And filled the Places of those Spirits who
Hoping against their Maker to maintain
Their sturdy Stomachs, into Arms did go;
But overwhelmed by his Almighty Tide,
Their Rume only gained by their Pride.
138.
By that proportion of Humility
And holy Love, they practiced here below,
The Measures of their Recompense, the high
And righteous King of Bounty did bestow:
Which, though they in degrees much difference showed,
Yet every One enjoyed Plenitude.
139.
So when a thousand Vessels, great and small,
Into the Sea are thrown, though some receive
More of the Ocean far than others, All
Are filled brim full; nor can the Lesser grieve
Their Brethrens fairer Amplitude to see,
Since they no fuller than the Smallest be.
140.
But how to blazon these bright Honors, how
To sound this boundless Sea of equal Pleasures,
How to compute this vast Account, and know
The Total Sum of perfect Blisse's Treasures,
Posed their highest strength and deepest Wit,
Who were infeofed and possessed of it.
141.
Yet all the Homage which they paid for this
Supremacy of Glory, was to Praise,
Admire, and Love, and Bless, and Chant out His
Eternal Name and Fame, who then did raise
To this Capacity of Exulation.
O blessed Life! whose Task is Acclamation.
142.
Through this illustrious Maze of Joy and Bliss
As Psyche labored, and seemed to be
In heaven afresh at every Step; by this
Unwearied Quires Heroic Peans she
Perceived the entertainment near as high
Which cheered her Ear, as that which filled her Eye.
143.
And now her Wonder could endure no Rein,
She sacrificed her Soul to Ecstasie;
When lo the Seraphs Pipes let fly a Strein
Of holy Triumph so exceeding high,
That starting at the mighty Song she shaked
Her precious Dream insunder, and awaked.
144.
As when unhappy Adam was expelled
Out of the Sceen of Bliss, sweet Paradise,
And on the sudden all the World beheld
Planted with desolate thorny Miseries;
Aghast He looked, his woeful Hands he wrung,
And sighed and sobb'd to think whence he was flung:
145.
So Psyche having lost this glorious Sight,
And ravishing Music, (which perplexed Her
In sweet confufion, for by this Delight
She tempted was to wish her self all Ear,
By that, entirely Eye; or else that she
Could teach her Eyes to Hear, her Ears to See,)
146.
Surprised was with lamentable Fright
To see the gross face of Mortality,
To see the glaring Beams of Natures Light,
To see her Self on her poor Pallet ly
So far removed from Blisse's royal Sphere,
That on dull Earth She still was grovelling here.
147.
Alas, She cried what injury have I
Done unto Sleep that it should mock me thus?
To have me up unto the glorious Sky
Why should my Dreams be so industrious,
If by so sudden a defection They
Me back unto this Deep meant to betray?
148.
Unhapp Life! which, whilst we are Awake:
With nothing else but Dreams do fill our Eyes:
The burly Show this Mortal World does make
Is but a puffed Bulk of Vanities,
Where whilst we hope substantial Worth to find,
We mocked are with foolish empty Wind.
149.
But when by Sleep We robbed are of more
Than half our Selves, and in Deaths Emblem ly,
Then only do thou suffer Us to sore
To solid Joys; which yet being carried by
Our Dreams faint Wings, by them betrayed be,
And soon forget their own Soliditie.
150.
Deceitful Sleep, which wear'st the Name of Rest,
Why will Thou never make it good to Me?
Why was I with thy highest Favors blessed,
If they must only torture Waking Me?
Why Slept I, if I needs must Wake, and miss
By setting open mine Eyes, my Sight of Bliss?
151.
Phylax, who all this while with piercing Eye
Dived through her Bosom, and Spectator was
How Charis ordered all that Pageantry
Which through his Pupills wondering Soul did pass,
Stopped with a Kiss that tide of Grief which ran
From her complaining Lips; then thus began:
152.
To Joy this Morning sacred is, my Dear:
If thine Eyes bottles Thou would rightly spend,
On Sorrow lavish not the Smallest Tear,
But all thy Streams to Exultation lend.
Thy Dream has not deceived Thee; all was true
Which it displaid to thine admiring View.
153.
It is enough that Heaven does condescend
To Act it Self aforehand unto Thee;
Nor can thou think thy Savior does entend
To put Thee off with this: No; royal He
Prepares thine Eyes by this short glimpse of Bliss
Henceforth to See its endless bright Excess.
154.
In patience then thine humble Soul possess;
For sure this prize is worth thine Expectation,
Although it should attended be till this
Firm World grows Weak, and stoops to Consummation:
Time at its utmost Tether cannot be
More than a Span unto Eternity.
155.
Eternity is that which shall enhance
Beatitude, and crown its Diademes:
In hopes of which, do thou thy Soul advance
And never troubled be to think that Dreams
Which on thin Fancy their Foundation lay
Are fickle fluid Things, and start away.
156.
Courageous Friend, the Maid to this replied,
Brave is the Metal of thy sprightfull Heart,
Which easily beats back all Misfortunes Tide,
And can the Streams of Grief to Joy convert:
Full well those cheerly Looks with thee do suit,
Who all my Loss can with a Smile confute.
157.
But I cannot do so; Mischances throw
Their own upon my Smiles, with high disdain;
My deep Passivity will not allow
Me any Art or Power to maintain
A fight with Sufferings so as not to feel
The Wound, when in my Heart I find the Steel.
158.
It is but lately since unhappy I
Was quite lost in the Mist of Desolation;
And heavy was that blind Calamity
Which did both muffle up my Contemplation,
And clip those Wings that had been used before
Unto the Pinnacles of Heaven to sore.
159.
But now her Eyes again unmaked are,
And unto their full length her Feathers grown;
No sooner I in Heavens illustrious Sphere
Or read, or fly, but I am tumbled down,
And by my journey (to complete my Cross)
No Profit reap, but Knowledge of My Loss.
160.
O I acquit my Dream from the least Guilt
Of fairfac'd Fraud; in every blessed Part
The genuine Pulse of Truth I clearly felt
Beating right time with my exultant Heart.
I would not have it false for Heaven, and yet
Its being true begets this regret.
161.
For had it not been the unfeined Sceen
Of brave Beatitude in full Display;
Without this stinging Torment that had been
Snatched from Me, or I from that, away:
But now what Comfort can breath Me Content,
When from my Heart, my Heart it self is rent!
162.
If Lucifer had never walked upon
Complete Felicities transcendent Stories,
If He had never viewed Heavens radiant Throne,
And sweet Eternities excessive Glories;
His Loss had finite been; he had not fell
So low as now, nor had his Hell been Hell.
163.
I might have dwelt contented in dull Night
Had I not known and seen Life's royal Day;
These rotten Rags of Dust and Ashes might
Have pleased Me, had not the bright Array
Which clothe's the Saints with Immortality
Been open thrown before my mortal Eye.
164.
Yon' Phoebus, who with Virgin Gold does gild
The Mornings cheeks, I might with some Delight
Have gazed on; if I had not beheld
The far more Sun-like Eyes of Jesus, bright
With Bliss, and Love, and Joy, and every Thing
Which can become the Looks of Glories King.
165.
Then since I fully understand my Loss;
O do not envy Me, sweet Guardian, leave
Not to be fondly stupid; do not cross
My course of Woe, who have such cause to grieve;
For Grief their Daughters only Dowry is,
Whilst my dear Parents reign in joyous Bliss.
166.
These Words with such commanding Passion she
On facil Phylax blew, that he gave way:
Yet, prudent as he was, and piercing, He
Observed how wisely Love his Plot did lay,
And that for his sweet Psyche he this kind
Of softest-hardest Martyrdom designed.
167.
But Charis, (who still in her Breast did lie,)
Although the blessed Dream had taken Wing,
Yet on the Tables of her Memory
Fairly transcribed and fastened every thing;
There shined the total Apparition still,
And all her Thoughts With Ravishment did fill,
168.
With Ravishment, which proved fuel to
Her ancient Fire of Love; a fire which now
Flashed resolutely out, and feasted so
On this vast Banquet, which did always flow
With fresh Infinitude upon it, that
The flames all Bridles and all Bounds forgot.
169.
Like Wax which flows before the Summers Sun;
So in the presence of this scorching Heat
Her Bowels melted, and her Heart did run
About her bosom, laboring to get
Releasment from this Furnace: but in vain;
Heaven still to her Sweet Torment her did chain.
170.
In dainty Agony She lay and fried,
Till from her Lips at last the Flame did break;
And unto Phylax thus aloud she cried:
O why to Persecutions gentler Stake
Was I not bound; why might I not expire
In the mild bosom of that courteous Fire!
171.
Tkat Fire would soon have drunk up all my Breath.
And into Ashes parched my Life; but this
Plays with my Pangs, and freshly Furnishes
My fainting Heart with passive vigorousnesse;
This, woeful Immortality does give,
Unto my Dust, and teaches Death to live.
172.
Nor Etna's, nor Vesuviu's bowels were
Ever gravid with such teeming Flames, as mine;
Should Humber, Thames and Severn, by thy Care
Their everflowing Mouths together join,
And empty out themselves upon my Heart,
Alas they could not quench my burning Smart.
173.
Nay flatter Me not with thy smiling Eye;
Compassion, is the utmost Thou can lend
He, he, alone can cure my Malady
Who did to Me this flaming Fever send.
If thou can hasten down His help, o do;
(...) tell Me when he will (...) my Woe
174.
The Angel, who her blessed Sickness knew,
Had now no longer power to pity Her
Into Invisibility He flew,
That her Seraphick pains might domineer,
And she, being left alone, might sooner prove
The (...) (...) of (...) (...)
175.
But yet her modest tender Jealousy
Could not interprest his Discession se;
She feared that by indecent Passion she
Had urged his Patience, and fore'd Him to
Withdraw, till hasty she grew Calm again,
And fir his (...) to entertain
176.
This made her cheek her boiling Fervor by
Deep Recollection of her Spouses Will
She knocked her Breast which first made its Renly
In sighs and groans, then in these words O still
This tumult of my Soul dear Lord whose (...)
Does all my Bosom in Combustion set
(...)
Although my longed-for Union with (...)
Be dearer than a thousand Lives; (...)
Desire and Languor all my Essence (...)
Till to (...) of thee I grow:
Yet since thy Will prolongs my Banishment
From Heaven and thee, (peace heart) I am conten.
178.
I am content: For All I Am. is Thine
The freedom of thy Pleasure use on Me
If I thine Arrows smartest Dint decline
Then sav I loved my self, but loved not Thee;
Upon this Heart pour all thine amorous (...)
And slay Me, if thou will, from Morn to (...)
179.
But it I still must live this Death, (...)
I live it unto Thee, and Thee (...)
O let some hard heroic Task (...)
This Fervors edge which thou have (...)
My ravished Soul, that being (...)
May less perceive the Flames in (...)
180.
Shall I to Perfecutions Court, and there
Erect thy Standard in the Tyrants Face?
Shall I her Racks and Arts of Torture dare?
Her Altars and her Gods down shall I raze?
Against her Proclamations shall I
(...) the Pleasure of thy (...)
181.
Shall all the Bruises, Wounds, Boils, Sores and Pains,
Shall every Grief, Distemper, Malady,
Shall all the Hungers, Thirsts, and Stripes, and Chains,
Which through the whole World the sad Portion be
Of thine abused patient Members, join
^
182.
Shall I he (...) the Hate of Man and Beast?
Shall I (...) and kicked round about
(...) shall I be pressed
^
Of (...) and Furies, and be dragged through
(...) where torments in their kingdom grow
183.
Surely (...) this, and more for thy dear sake
To whom I ow it, I could well sustain
Speak then o most deserving Soveraing, speak,
And by some sufferings mitigate my pain
Set Me my hardy Task. that I may prove
On (...) Terms how much I love thy Love
184.
Thus nanted loval she till tired by
Her Fervors high Intension. she descendea
Into her self again: But instantly
That strong Combustion she hoped was ended,
Met her amidst her Breast, and did conspire
As (...) as ever by enflamed Desire.
185.
By Resignation to her Spouse sne (...)
To quench it; but in vain: Still Day by Day
Her self (...) rouna in amorous (...) wasted,
And waking Night by Night, and longing lay
For whilit (...) from place to place, to win
Some ease, (...) bore her Torment (...) within
186.
^
^
^
^
^
^
187.
So did her testless Memerie to Her
The beauteous Wonders of her Dream object,
With all Beatitudes bright Furniture:
In vain her Eyes she studied to deflect,
Which were in every Corner crossed by this
(...) of strange importunate Bliss.
188.
When (...) Prayers she went, she could not Pray,
(...) and Amazement strait were crowding in:
When to her Book she went, she could not say.
(...) stopped her as she did begin:
When to her Psalms she went, she could not sing,
(...) in her Fars did ring.
189.
When (...) her Meat she went, she could not Eat,
The (...) of endless Life her thonghts took up;
When to the Fountain of her Drink, the sweet
(...) of Heaven her Course and Thirst did stop:
When to her sleep, she was disturbed by
The (...) Rest of Fternity.
190.
The dear Remembrance of her Soverdign Lord
Boild in her Soul, and would not slaked be:
So that while tortured she could not afford
Unto her Body, what Necessity
Crav dat her Hands, she faint and feeble grew,
And by Degrees her Mortal self she slew.
191.
She slew her Flesh, which pined and sunk away;
She slew the Vigor of her Senses, which
Like unbent Bows, all damped and useless lay:
But by these Slaughters she did but enrich
The Life of her afflicted Heart, which still
With stouter and more active Fire did swell.
192.
So high it swelled that what soe'r came near
The mighty Torrent, strait became its Prey:
Yea ev n the Bridles too subdned were
Which still she hoped and strove on it to lay,
Her Meditations all to Passion turned;
And whatso'er she Did, or (...), (...).
193.
^
^
In (...) unto such a (...),
^
The Sceptie of his (...) and (...)
^
194.
(...), be it of a Thing
But weak and mortal, and Dust's wretched Heir;
Does with immortal Pains and Wishes sting
And spur the Soul unto unwearied Care:
Discouragement in vain does muster up
All Troops of Obstacles (...) way to stop.
195.
No, no; the generous Lovers Heart disdains
Not to approve his Passion infinite;
With gallant Obstinacy he maintains
Against the Will of Heaven and Earth, the fight
(...) win his Idol; for whose sake, had he
Ten thousand (...), they all should ventured be
196.
For in her Image, which He has enshrined
High in the (...) of his loyal Breast,
Such Charms and strong Attractions He does find
As rob Him of all Power to resist:
He runs; and in such strange and furious wise,
That Love is slandered with want of Eyes,
197.
The whole World knows how Hamors royal Son
Scorned his Religion and his foreskin too,
When Dinah's Love had full possession
Of his subdued Soul: How David, who
Was Heavens choice Darling, durst Heavens Law despise
For what he read in Bathsheba's fair Eyes,
198.
Who has not heard what Power one Heart (...)
Upon two mighty Nations, both content
For love or her, to run so strangely mad
Upon a mortal War, whose fury rent
Up Ilium by the roots; which to the (...)
Of Lust, a woeful Holocaust became.
199.
No (...) then (...)
With such mtolerable (...),
Whose (...)
(...) Charms whose royal (...)
Draw with (...)
Outvi'd by (...)
(...)
^
^
^
^
^
^
201.
For all those Wounds bleed nothing else but Fire;
Fire, which remembering its original Flame,
With never-wearied struggling does aspire
Back to the radiant place from whence it came:
Its proper Element are Jesu's eyes,
And thither in heroic Zeal it flies.
202.
And what can tortured Psyche do, who by
This most unruly Heat, to Heaven is haled;
And yet by Mortal Life's repugnancy
Fast to her Body, and dull Earth, is sealed?
What can she do in this Extremity
Of raging Life and Death at once; but Cry?
203.
Hardy and bold she grows in her Complaint;
For lifting upward her enamored Eyes,
Although her sickly Voice were low and faint,
Yet full of sinews were her serious Cries:
Which thus she, suiting them unto her Passion,
Tuned by the stout Key of Expostulation.
204.
O Lord of Gentleness, o why do Thou
Make Love so cruel to tormented Me!
Why would thy bounteous Justice not allow
Me any other Rack, but Suavitie!
Why must my Gall be only Honey! why
Of nothing else but Life must Psyche die!
205.
Why did Thou not permit Me to decease
When thou had left Me to my Self alone?
So had thine Handmaid been reprieved from these
Extremities of Pangs; so had I gone
Whole to my Grave, who now must Melted be
By thine unsufferable Sweets, and Thee.
206.
And am I not a Worm, or worse than so?
Why do Thou build such Triumph then on Me?
Why do thou not pick out some Seraph, who
With this sublime and blessed Misery
Might bravely grapple? or why might Thou not
At Phylax's nobler Breast my Dart have shot?
207.
O be not angry! it is not I that speak,
But tortured Necessity: my Heart
A thousand times desired, but cannot break;
Else had my Lips not dared thus to part
And open themselves into Complaints: but now
Excuse together with my Fault does flow.
208.
Not for innumerable Worlds would I
Have been without that Apparition: but
Should full as many Worlds their Tyranny
Combine against my Soul; they could not put
Me unto any Torture so extreme,
As the Remembrance of my blessed Dream:
209.
In Sweetness why art thou so Infinite!
Or why must that Infinitude appear
Unto a Soul, to fire it with Delight,
If to the Fountain it must not draw near
To quench its burning Thirst? O Jesu be
Still what thou art; but then be so to Me.
210.
Be so to Me; and o, be so with Speed!
Death is not Death, compared with Delay.
Alas one Moment now does far exceed
All those long years which I till this sad Day
Have tediously measured; and now
I older by an Age, each Minute, grow.
211.
Fain fain would I Let thee alone, and be
Content to wait thy longest Leisure still:
But o, all-lovely Thou still urgest Me
And violently dragg'st my Conquered Will.
Thou dragg'st me; yet wilt not permit that I
Should follow home to my Felicity.
212.
If thou will Kill Me, lo I am Content:
But o, vouchsafe to let my Slaughter be
By Death, not by this breathing Banishment
From my best Life, most ameable Thee!
O pity, pity thy poor Handmaids Cry,
Whose Tongue cleaves to her Mouth, whose Throat is dry!
213.
Fain would she here have fainted; but her Pain,
Whose load so heavy on her Shoulders lay,
With courteous Cruelty helped to sustein
Her parched Vigor, that it still might prey
Upon her Patience, and consume her still.
O strange Disease, which does by Curing Kill:
214.
Phylax, mean while, unseen, perceived that she
Unto Heavens Suburbs was arrived now,
And that the Springs of her Mortality
By this high Stretch began to crack: for though
Her Self her Change's Dawn could not descry,
He saw her final Hour was drawing nigh.
215.
This roused his Love in due time to prepare
For his dear Pupills neverending End:
About her funeral he took decent Care,
Because himself could not stay to attend
Those Rites, when she had once Expired, for he
Her noble Paranymphus was to be.
216.
He was to be her Convoy when she flew
Unto her royal Spouses marriage Bed:
This made him dress his Count nance with a new
Festivity; his Wings this made him spread
With fresh and snowie Down, that his Lords Bride
In that soft Coach of triumph home might ride.
217.
And in this joyous Hue to her he came:
Yet his sweet Presence She regarded not,
For Burning in her more delicious flame,
She of all other Things the Sense forgot:
The Phaenix thus amidst her funeral fires,
See's nothing else, and nothing else desires.
218.
The double Fountain of her Tears was dry,
Her Groans were weary, and her Languishment
If felfe did languish: But her (...)
Outrageous grew, and, like a Gyam; bent
The mighty Bow of her Desires; by which
The Mark of all her Hopes She was to reach.
219.
Then, having bid unto the Earth adieu,
And firmly fixed her loving longing Eye
Upon the Heavens, to keep her Aim in view;
Her Flames triumphant Tempest swelled so high,
That She, unable to contain its Tide,
With a deep Sigh, cried out, O LOVE, and did.
(...)
FINIS.
Correct the Errors of the Press thus: Canto 11. read the 198. Stanza before
the 197.
Canto 1. Stanza. Line. Read, 34. 4 Take 122. 1 Morn. 143. 4 Waken's 152. 1
mak's 4 heaving Canto 2. 79. 2 Assistance 110. 3 wroth Canto 3. 69. 3 all ways
97. 6 Fathers Fames 178. 3 here 190. 4 Flame Canto 4. 25. 2 of an 54. 1 crowned
115 5 Guests Canto 5. 66. 2 An 215. 1 rigid fare Canto 6. 26. 2 has (...). 1
was 113. 4 vales 171. 1 Gate 184. 1 deep set 205. 2 thorough 226. 6 untrid 248.
6 every 258. 3 Parian 274. 1 thorough Canto 7. 213. 4 stirred Canto 8. 74. 3
Sorrow's 139. 3 more 157. 5 what 159. 5 Expects 173. 2 of windows 262. 3 grow
283. 5 be cause Canto 9. 16. 1 These lend 83. 2 are 97. 5 Brink 112. 3
bestdeserving 123. 2 Devoto's 147. 5 Some time 159. 1 Bows 201. 4 loath 220. 2
fat 225. 6 carreer 246. 3 where on Canto 10. 85. 1 holier 93. 4 Elxai 107. 5
thy 110. 3 his 118. 5 Sun 125. 3 hand as 160. 2 to Canto 11. 4. 1 the 45. 5
stream 47. 5 fall she 52. 4 Riches 83. 2 pil'd 144. 4 by 173. 2 it 196. 3 one
197. 2 Lord's Canto 12. 80. 4 dele (?) 157. 4. meet Canto 13 61. 5 dele (?)
211. 3 Ensigns 224. 3 gaping 301. 2 own 314. 3 please these 349. 3 poised 352.
1 least 428. 5 meditating 433. 3 War 442. 4 amorous Canto 14. 15. 4 vanquishd
73. 3 prize 78. 2 preys 92. 3 teach 170. 2 own 255. 5 requited 262. 3 his 263.
5 thorough 288. 2 When 304. 4 feuel Canto 15. 79. 2 Song 132. 2 wept 156. 1
Flood 163. 2 firm persp. 299. 6 Antichrists Canto 16. 36. 6 vessel 72. 1 her
90. 1 skill 112. 4 ramm'd 127. 3 so Canto 17. 59. 5 strict 131. 4 then 183. 3
dirt 311. 4 dele period 324. 1 launcheth Canto 18. 69. 3 Gallantry 87. 6
crocodiles 212. 4 was 273. 6 for Canto 19. 54. 4 too 135. 3 Crosses 146. 4 His
Canto 20. 101. 4. Harpies


