POEMS' DIVINE, AND HVMANE. BY THOMAS BEEDOME.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for John Sweeting, and are to be sold at his Shop, at
the sign of the Angel in Popes-Head-Alley, near Cornehill. 1641.

To the Reader.
Books are the pictures of men's lives delineated, first by fancy, and by
judgment drawn to the life. Such is this piece, the living Idea of him that
writ it, who though now dead, has a living Monument to his worth. His Book,
which despite of fire, can never con^ert to ashes, It Is Lentum Ilium, slow
Troy; that will not be easily consinned; he shall live in Paper, which shall
make him live in's Marble. And in this good Reader, his worth shall be
Emergent, he has don many things well, and nothing ill. Therefore receive him
as an absolute testimony of wit and fancy, or else deceive thy self, since his
works are as excellent, as singular.

HEN. GLAPTHORNE:
On the deceased Author, Master Thomas Beedom, and his Poems.
REader it grieves mee^ that I cannot bring,
A fresh Encomion, but am foro't to sing,
A withered Elegy, and only boast,
The wealth and treasure of a friend that is lost.
Beedom, I do admire thy verse; The sweet,
And gentle cadence of their ordered ^eet,
Whose couplets kiss, with so divine an Art,
As if the Sibills had about thy heart,
Laid their propheticke Spells and every line,
Dear Beedom, I do season with my brine,
Though there was salt enough in them before,
To keep thy bays still fresh: But I deplore,
As others do, for there thy Art is showen,
In stealing pity thus from every one.
For unless tribute of some sigh^ are paid.
Thy jealous Lover, and thy constant Maid,
Cannot be read, and these all sadly vie,
As true oblations, to thy obsequie.
But when I wander in thy other walks,
And see the flowers of poesy on their stalks,
Flourish in pride of fancy, I begin,
Almost to think Idolatry no sin.
For such a perfume breaks the yielding Ayr^,
I am urged to offer for thy soul a prayer,
And think in that sweet incense, may arise,
My love, and wishes, as a sacrifice.
Thou Wilt gain a ^trange advantage of thy fate,
That Is forced to value thee at equal rate,
With the s^le Phoenix; for from thy pure dust,
Thy fame takes wing, and perching on the trust
Of thy firm friend, (though round with envy hurled)
Dares with a broad eye look upon the world,
He being best known Beedom, to thy wit
Thou wisely made executor to it.
Who not defrauding of the world its due,
Presents thy work unto the wiser few.
Me thinks I hear from thy most grateful clay,
Soft murmurs break, and speaking seem to say,
Thanks my dear Wilbore, for thy love and care.
By this my Genius clames an ample share,
For by the Elixir of thy friendly art,
My memory, (which is my better part)
Shall live, which ages hence shall gladly see,
Wrought by the wonder of Loves chimistrie.
And such a Tomb Beedom, thy friend will make,
That all consuming time can never shake,
Let others build, I by that friend am sent,
To bring this first stone to his Monument.
Ed. May:
On the death and Poems, of his most dear friend, Master I homas Beedome.
Why did thy muse display her eaglets wing,
And ^ale a flight at heaven? why did she sing,
Like to the early Lark, when she begun,
Glad carolls in the ear of the listening Sun.
Till heavens inhabitants did even conspire,
To snatch thee as a chanter to their quire,
But glorious Beedome, ere he left the earth,
Did give to fame a Monument, a birth.
To such a living fancy, as in spite,
Of fate, shall like a precious ray of light,
Dwell 'bout his urne, where all the muses sit,
Wayling the loss of his emergent wit.
And weeping ore his ashes till their eyes,
Instead of tears, shed mournful El^gies.
Penei ^n Daphne, there her arms displayes,
As if she would intombe him in her bays.
And she who Phoebus hot pursuit did shun,
Embraces the old ashes of his son.
There a bright troop of Virgins that from far,
Appear, resembling every one a star,
Drowned in a see of pearl, do sadly rise,
From his loved true, each one without their eyes.
Wept out, or burning left there, as they would meant,
Those lights for tapers to his Monument.
Where shall we find at such a time a soul,
That could in flowing numbers even control,
Arts nimblest currents, and most swiftly glide,
Without least noise, admired before espide.
So have I seen a gentle stream, with sweet,
And fluent motion, softly have: to meet,
Its mother Ocean, and enrich her store,
With a more grateful tribute then before.
A thousand violent torrents p^id, whose waves,
Though louder, brought less music to their graves,
His life was all one harmony, and in's death,
Numerous, and full of sweetness was his breath,
Expanded like the Swans concluding lays,
In lasting accents, that shall speak his praise,
While Feather-footed time does swiftly pass,
Or has a sand left in his plenteores^ glass,
This is my vote, which to thy Book shall be,
A just applause^ to thee an Elegy.
Hen. Glapthorne.
On his deserving Friend, Master Thomas Beedom, and his Poems.
HOw fond is this age grown! 'twill fearce admit,
Distinction between ignorance and wit,
Each wears the others habit, neither's known,
By the wanted proper dress, that was its own.
And every day new Authors do appear,
As they the paper Merchants factors were,
And boast themselves the muses sons, when they,
Rhyme only for some life-preserving pay.
Expect here no such Author, if thou't look,
On the inside more then th'outside of the Book,
Put on thy judgments eyes, and thou shall find,
This Authors fancy rich, as was his mind.
W. C.
To his Friend the Author, Master Thomas Beedom before his death, on these his
Poems.
THis is the riming Age, no wonder now
To hear Thalia whisling at the plow.
All traffi^ke with the Muses, it is well known
The Scullers boat can touch at Helicon.
Who quass^s not there? do we not daily see,
Each guarded footboy belch out Poetry?
Who so illiterate now, that will r^fu^e,
For some slight Minion to invoke a muse?
Yet honored friend do not imagine I,
In the lest tax^ by great ability.
I know thee worthy of a ^etter fame,
Then my best study can afford thy name,
I only would thy reader this inform,
Such empty nothings are thy muses scorn.
Nor do I wish ^im slightly to o'relooke,
The big^borne fancy, of thy labored Book;
For he that scans the Poems that are thine,
Must call them raptures, sacred, and divine.
Thou darling of the muses, in whose qui^e,
Thou shall sing Peans, to Apollo's lyre,
And with his best loved Priests in equal state,
Sit justly crowned, a Poet ^aureate.
Em. D.
To the Memory of his Ingenious friend, Master Thomas Beedom, and on these his
Poems.
TH^^'s no just reason Friend that I should write,
Unless I ^ould in swelling sighs indite,
My pregnant grief, till every line appears,
A volumne of my sorrow writ in tears.
Each syllable, each accent should afford,
Plenteous expression, as the fullest word,
Of ^^ple and unforced laments, till all,
I write attend upon thy Funeral,
As Epice les, till every accen^ be
An Epitaph, each word an Elegy.
And were not for the life of this thy Book,
(Which gives me hopes, all life has not forsook.
Thy much loved Memory) I like thee should grow,
Ashes, and never henceforth strive to know,
^ifes painted glories, but to enjoy thee come;
^ith eager have into Elysium.
But this fair Offspring of thy fancy which,
Is great in j^^gement, in Invention rich,
Makes me behold thee glorious, and I view,
By intel^^ctuall eyes in it, thy true
Vns^ained Idea, from her spicie pile,
^^e n^w borne Phoenix rises to beguile,
^he amazed spectators, whose admiring frame,
^he old ones figure, and beleeve't the same.
^his difference 'twixt thy Book, and thee must b^e,
^hou di'dst with it, and now it lives for thee.
H. S.
Vie^ of thy shining and illustrious wit,
Where all the precious attributes are writ,
That might adorn thy youth, or add true grace,
To thy lamented Memory; the face,
Of the bright rising Sun, so fresh appears,
When strait it is drowned, in heavens or^estowing tears.
As did thy wit, which like a comet gave
A suddnime flash, then vanished to a grave,
Where we thy friends, and I among the rest,
As a chief mourner, in the Ensigns dressed
Of hearty sorrow, sadly, seek to pay,
This as a grateful tribute, to thy bay,
Which being watered with our briny dew,
Shall still spring up more, flourishing and new.
Till in thy Book, thy blessed memorial be,
As is thy soul, fraught with eternity.
And Beedom, shall survive in it with glory,
It being his own accomplished perfect story.
R. W.
On the Memory of his most Ingenious friend, Master Thomas Beedome, and his
Poems.
SO many great names fixed before thy Book,
It cannot Beedome now descend, to look,
For my more humble strains, but love in Art,
Is not comprised, its Mansion is the heart.
And a small grain of incense, which is given,
With a pure zeal, sure better pleases heaven,
Then a vast pile of rich Sabean gums,
Or Altars smoking with fat Hecatoms.
From feignd devotion, I must therefore say,
All that my infant Muse, now strives to pay,
Unto thy work, shall only boast to be
A sacrifice to thy loved memory.
Nor do I hope (as others) to adorn,
With my quaint lines thy Book, mine were but borne,
As subjects to thy worth, from whence they strive,
Their utmost fame, and glory to derive.
Their sole ambition being to attend
Thee, with the true devotions of a friend.
Though for thy death I grieve, for this I joy,
That thy fair issue lives, which to destroy,
Time is unable, for thy name shall have,
A glorious life, and triumph ore thy grave.
J. S.
Elegy, on his Ingenious friend, the deserving Author, Master Thomas Beedome.
HOw silent are the groves? No air does move,
To make the boughs each other kiss in love,
Nor do the leaves (as they had jealous fears)
Whisper into each others joining ears.
Upon the branches perch no airie quires,
Whose untaught music art it self admires,
And by an imitation of those notes,
Strained from the slender Organes of their throats,
Adds to it self perfection, and thereby,
Shows natur's weak to artfull industry.
The listening heard their quick sense do apply,
Not to the wonted use of ear or eye;
As when harmonious echoes do invite
Attention both to wonder and delight.
All creatures have their act'^e moti^n left,
As if an apoplexy bad beref^
Their Limbs of use, and time meant to conclude,
His being in a g^nerall solitude,
Such great effects great causes cannot miss,
And both are ^quall, both a^ke in this.
Not Winte^s Is^e band (the c^illy birth,
Of bl^^ke North-winds) h^ve gray'd the verdant earth,
Or shorn the trees eronnes m^king them look old,
Nor are the tunefull birds grown^ hoarse with cold.
But Beedome loss has won on their consent,
To share a voluntary punishment;
The Air in boistrous gusts^ the stout Oak bends,
And his large spreading arms from th'body r^nds.
That gro^ne for Beedome as they fall away,
Who in his bark carved many a learned lay,
The birds are voicelesse 'cause they cannot hear
The wonted music of his well-inn'd sphere.
Whence they derive our skill knowing na^u^e can
Less wonder show in them, then Art in man,
For him sense-grieved beasts, sad mourners be,
By an instinct or hidden Sympathy.
And had all-changing time heard Beedome sing,
He would have known no season but the Spring,
Nor would he sure have suffered death to be,
Judge in the cause of his mortality.
But have reprieved his loved parts from the Bar,
Till by translation they were made a Star.
Muses unite your tear^s, now he is gone,
With them creating a new Helicon.
Whose streams may the defect of yours supply,
Which Beedome whilst he lived, drank almost dry:
And by the power of his own active fire,
Sublimed to that your selves may well admire,
Which to his virtue j^yn'd conclude him thus,
Still l^ving through them, both to heaven and us;
Tho. Nabbes.
In obitum Lachrymabilem, Thomas Beedome, nuper defuncti, et in praeclara
ingenii sui Monumenta, jam primum edita.
SIccine crudeli cecidisti morte peremptus?
siccine in extremos, juslus es ire rogos?
Et vix ingressus teneros lanuginis annos;
Corruis ante diem, blande Bedome, tuum.
Quid iuvat, ut tremulis cecinisti docta Camae^is
^a^mina? Threiciae digna legenda lyrae?
Qui^ne quod auricomum cinxisset pennula frontem?
V^brass^^que tuas laurus amica g^nas;
Omnia cum nostri sint haec monumenta doloris:
Quantaque virtus erat, tantus eritque dolor.
Sic in E^lthreo pretiosam littore concham
Cum perdat; Lach^ymis prostruit Indus humum.
Si^q^e super tumulum plorantia lumina salsis
Opprimimus fluviis: noxque fit atradles;
(...) tamen irriguis guttas sol^amus o^ellis?
Curve sl^it gemitus noster ab ore citus,
Tene pe^ altithroni sequerentur gaudia luctus?
Tere pe^ astri^eram quaereret unda domum!
Non p^it assiduos sanctorum mansio planctus;
Convenit haud liquidis stamise^ ignis aquis.
Non opus interea est tantam destere ruinam
Opprimet et tantum multa runia virum
I nunc magni^icos jactato tyranne triumphos,
Mors, et depictis pende trophoea tholis,
Quam fragiles ictus contemptibilesque sagittae
Sunt, nec vulneribus laedis ut ante tiuis
Dulcisoquis volutans juvenis super aethera scriptis
Vivit in aurato nomen opusque libro.
Atque triumphales redimunt sua tempora vittae;
Victor adest mortis, fame perenn^s erit.
Vivit enim certi Immutato pectore amici
Nec potuit tumulo nobiliore frul.
Henry Glapthorne.
Elegy on the death of his ingenious friend, the deserving Author, Mast^r
Thom^s Beedome.
ONce I resolved a silence, was coment,
With the rare Fabric ^f thy Monument,
Viewed it complete, how every friend had strove,
T'exceed each other in a zealous love
To thy blessed memory, and I smil^d to see,
Thy name thus rap^in immortality,
Yet payd^the (...) tribute, tears let fall
As numerous drops at thy sad Funeral.
As did that friend whose pregnant Muse dares vie,
With grief it self to weep thy Ele^ie;
Yet durst not write, my jealousy was such,
It wisely prompt me, I should wrong too much
Thy greater merit^ had me rather mourn,
In grief loved silence ore thy quiet urne;
Which I had done, had I not seemed to hear,
(Once at the offering of a tribute tear.
To thy loved ashes) a strange murmuring breath,
Break forth from the still tenement of death,
Thy dismal grave, and in a Language full,
Of incensed anger, vow to disan^^ll
All former friendship, if I should deny,
Among other friends to write thy Elegy;
When thus ambiguous twixt my love and fears,
I vented this^ attended with my tears.
Strong course of Fate, could he whose generous quill
Bestowed a life on others, which else still,
Had Lain death's ruins, die himself; could he,
Whose powerful Art spite of stern destiny,
Broake up forgotten Monuments^ and made
The entombed Heroes live again, that swaide
Ore others Fates, yet could this halfe-god ^^eepe,
Into a grave, and in cold Marble sleep.
What tribe of Angels did invite thee hence,
Their glorious guest? If not, what cursed offense,
Has fond earth given thee? That thou needs must ^^tye,
So young from us, to heavens eternity.
Or did thy precious soul shake off its clay,
Cause naught below was worthy of her stay,
And being matchless here, did upward move,
There to be ranked with equal Saints above.
Sure thus it was, and undeserving we,
May tax our merit; not thy destiny,
Yet glorious Beedome, though each friend appears,
Almost thy Emblem, made so by his tears,
For thy lamented loss, yet when we look
On this immortal child of wit, thy book;
Smiles from our ^h^ekes, all suner all tears do drive,
Seeing in it thy fame shall ever live.
Time and thy Memory, which no fate can sever,
Shall last like ages, both conclude together.
Em. D.
On the Poems of the Author, his dear Brother, Master Thomas Beedom deceased.
SIlence would best become me, and I fear,
I spoil the consort by intrusion here.
It Is true, I need not add unto his praise,
Nor bring my sprig to complement his bays;
But that the neerenesse of our birth and name,
Calls me to stick my pinion to his fame.
Then Reader know, we have not used our brains,
To usher in absurd, uncivil strains;
Such as might pale the Paper, black the Ink,
And cause the ghost of our dead friend to shrink.
When judgments eye, his Poems shall dise^rne:
No no, it is otherwise here thou may learn
Thy moral duty, and it will appear,
M^yst please thy God, as well as please thine ear.
He needs must say, that will his worth commend,
He was an Academie in his friend.
And ready was (requested) to supply,
His need with soul, or bodies remedy.
Fran. Beedome.
THE JEALOUS LOVER, OR, THE CONSTANT MAID. Written by T. B.

-- Sat est pro laud Voluptas. -- LONDON: Printed by E. P. for John Sweeting,
and are to be sold at his Shop, at the sign of the Angel, in Popes-head-Alley,
near Cornhill. 1641.

THE AUTHOR, TO the READER.
WHen Johnson, Drayton, and those happier men
That can drop wonders from their fluent Pen:
Have with their miracles of Poetry
Feasted thy ears and satisfied thy eye;
Then turn aside, and amongst the vulgar things,
Place what my newborn Muse abruptly sings.
Which though it be but mean (as it is confessed)
'T has ventured hard to please thee, since it is pressed.
If thou smile on it, I shall think my brain
Has labored for this issue not in vain,
If otherwise thou do contemn my lays,
My pleasur's more to me, then all thy praise.
-- Sat est pro laud Voluptas. --
Vale. THOMAS BEEDOME.

THE IEALOVS LOVER, OR, THE CONSTANT MAID.
WHat time the noble Britain did resist,
And va^quish Roman Caesar with his host,
Who when he felt their fu^y did desist,
And fled from Albions white-wave-washed coast:
Where the stout Britains died with Roman blood,
The Sea-greene face of the tumultuous stood.
There dwelt an ancient honorable man,
Nere Sabrin's shore who was Cremillus hight,
In two fair twins his Off spring first began,
A son and daughter brought at once to light:
Whose beau^ies with their virtues vy'd in growth,
Which should most grace their infancy and youth.
His son Cherillus, but his fairer daughter,
He named Pandora: did you never view,
The liquid Ch^istall of a running water,
Stream through some gilded field, where all things new,
The spring had made, to such a place this Maid
Unhappily (now grown a great one) st^ai'd.
And while her eyes on the moist Element
Did cast their be^mes, another sh^pe she spied,
Far above hers, on whom such lives were spent,
In Troy, for whom so many Hero's died:
This shape the fairest sure, that er'e was shown,
Was but a mere reflection of her own.
While thus she gazed on her own shade, she thought,
Oh that I might leap in, and seize yon prize!
It were by death an easy purchase bought,
For who would live, if not in yonder eyes?
Narcissus so himself himself for sooke,
And died to see his shadow in a brook.
As yet the toy we call a Looking-glass,
Wherein our siner Dames behold their faces,
Did rest unknown, else t'had not com^ to pass,
That this bright Maid repleat with all the graces,
Had in an Ecstasy thus stood amazed,
While only on her lively self she gazed.
Still as she looked, she wish^ some gentle fish
Might now as once Arion it did, bear
Her on the friendly waves, but oh her wish
Could not implore an aid from any there.
For they stood wondering that the earth could show
A ^righter Nymph then Neptune could below.
One while she was resolved to assay the water,
And so salute the thing she thought alive:
But then she poised the danger that came after,
Lest she perhaps might never more survive:
Thus between joy and fear amazed she stood,
Viewing the wonders of the silver stood.
And as it chanced to shade her from the Sun,
Unto her brighter face she rai'd her hand,
She thought her shade did beckon her to come
To Theti^ A^bor, and fors^ke the Land:
Who had done so, had not a neigh ouring brier,
Seized her loved coat, and made her so retire.
Injurious weed (quoth she) why have thou staid
Me from a happiness I might have had?
Receive the just curse of a spotless Maid,
May thou be henceforth held a thing so bad,
So rough, that all may hate thee: thus having sed,
It since remains with prickles overspred.
By this, Cherillus, who had long time since
Followed stern Mars, in the black field of wars,
Was home returned from service of his Prince,
But wearing the true soldiers colors, scars:
And time, to do him now the greater grace,
Had grafted well-set hairs upon his face.
Who as he past along, and seeing her,
Whom he not knew, (such difference time had made)
^e took her to be Cupids messenger,
To teach him after war the woing trade:
He leanes his hand upon his p^m^ll straight,
And eased his ^^^^^er of its noble weight.
Fa^er then I can sp^^ke (thus he began)
Whose presence make^ th^^ place the Elisian fields,
Why have thou robbed all whiteness from the Swan,
And stole that color which the Coral yields?
Why from thy head flows such a golden train,
That thou alone are all thy Sexes stain?
Why (...)-halls thy breasts appear,
Whiter then Laeda; in her Vi^gin ^ew?
Why do thou (...) spring through all the year,
And by thy (...) the earth still new?
Why do those (...) thy eyes, exceed yo^ higher,
And Phoe^us thence draw all his ^ight and fire?
Why art thou all so ^xquisite, that art
Though joined with (...) height of ^kill,
Would draw son (...) formed in every part,
Not worth description from the meanest quill,
If bu^ compared with that rare so me of thine?
For thou can be no less then all divine.
Daigne Goddess, (for I know thou art no less)
TO immortelize me in thy heavenly love,
By thy (...) grant thy Deity express,
So thou shall make me happier then love:
Could make himself, when in a golden shower,
He pierced the roo^e of his loved Danacs Tower.
Thus as he spoke, he seized her ^illy hand,
Which s^em'd within his warming (...) to melt,
But with us s^owy touch h^ (...) stand,
As it had (...) into his bosom de^^:
Her modest face like the now dro^ping Rose,
Looked toward earth from whence is (...) a^ose.
And have you never seen the ty^ed Hare,
Stand trembling at the Hunters hollow cry,
Cha^'t by the Dogs, could no where now repair,
Where it conceived not certainly to dye:
Even so Pandora trembles while she hears
His words, which moved nothing but her feare^.
^he fears the st^angers heats, begot from lust,
And so might dare t'inf^inge her Virgins Zone,
And it is no small addition to mistrust,
To think how n^w they only are alone.
At such a time ^oule Tarquin ravishe thee,
Fair Lucrece, back^ by opportunity.
^hou need'st not fear fond Girl a wanton flame,
^ome live in him who is indeed no other,
Then the joint partener that with thee came,
(...) the rich womb of thy all virtuous mo^he^:
It Is (...) one spring should send forth various wa^e
He Is a chaste son, and thou as chaste a daughter.
Thus after many a pause, her panting spirit,
Which all this while lay secret and retired,
Gave leav^, ^s ears should now her breath inherir,
Then which, Cherillus nothing more desired:
Twice she began, still from her purpose brake,
At last she op't her Coral lips, and spoke.
Sir, you much injure others in the worth,
Which yo^'r misprizing judgment sets on me,
Since thousands more are every way set forth,
With richer beauties then you here can see.
It Is less then just, your Complement should raise
Me past the Center of a common praise.
If this were true, Philorus had small cause,
To fly from what herwisheth to embrace,
For still his love finds some reserved clause,
(Perhaps some strains in my less comely face)
Or else perhaps suspicion may move
His thoughts to run the jealous maze of love.
B^t as it will, know Sir, tha^ I have vowed,
My faith shall still lay anchor in his heart,
Nor other love shall ever be allowed,
To claim in me the meanest, smallest, part:
But only my Philorus, to whose eyes
My panting heart does offer sacrifice.
It Is not my aim to train you in a hope,
That you may conquer what I never will yield:
My leave is free, (...) your scope,
To win the honor of some other field:
My fort already summoned, did accord,
To be the captive of another Lord.
Therefore if you are noble, as you seem,
Surrender what you k^ep^ so fast, my hand:
No better then a thief we him esteem,
Who wrongfully keeps back another Land:
The crime's augmented, when it is clearly known,
That what he does detain, is not his own.
Look how ^ guilty p^isoner a^ the bar,
Is startled with the sentence of his death:
So poor Cherillus, or more fearful far,
Shakes at the so and of her condemning breath:
Her voice astonish'^ valot deep then,
Than ^ertofore an armed host of men.
Denial from some other might admit,
At least the party power to reply;
But in this ra^e posi^ion of her wit,
All adverse contradictions seem to dye.
For if Pandora once deny thee, know,
All negatives are bounded in her no.
He whose bold hand durst venture for a prize,
Against opposed Armies clad in steel,
Quakes like a coward, while her conquering eyes
Enforce his recreant courage backward reele.
Her powerful looks dart forth such awful charms,
As might subdue wars God, though in his arms.
Cupid, ^hy force is foi^^d, not all thy might
Can m^ke thy new-made Champion on to venture;
O if he durst, her frown in thy despite,
Would kill me youngster ere he once could enter:
There'^ not an arrow from thy bow does fly,
Can pierce, if (...) not poynted with her eye.
Leave off thy dolorous way of pricking hearts,
Why do thou put poor love ^s to such pain?
Why d^st thou spend thy stock to purchase dar^s?
Had thou thy sight, thou'st nere do so again.
Were there a world of Cupids, by her eyes
She Would bring to every one a several prize.
Cherillus thus by chaste Pandora taught
Nobly desists, from what he durst not claim;
Nor did he now so much as own a thought,
Of what before he m^de his greatest (...).
Only in pa^ting 'twas his chiefest bliss,
When words were useless, to obtain a kiss.
Which modestly was granted, for the name
Of (...) infringed, had the denied:
Hap'es^ I h^to us in the instant came
VV^o swe^'d (...) another man divide
H^ joys in h^^, who having this obtained
His thoughts possess him he might more have gained.
Wherefore (the other being gone) he said,
D^luding Siren, Angel, but (...) show;
Thou have in this thy slaming lust bet^ a^'d,
(...) in a hope that I should never know.
Yet frehe Go^s h^ve ^ustly six^ the time
That thy false lip^ gave seal unto my crime.
As if thy leave were li^^nst to abuse^
Thy friend, so he might satisfy by lust:
Oh tell me, what delasions did hou use
To work him to the mischie^e; son he durst
Naked as well have hugd a Scorpion
As thee, had thou not trained the tray^or on.
Oh! who durst sacrile giously steal
Ought from that heavenly temple of thy face,
Were thou not privy, did ^hou not reveal
How he might do to rob thee of thy grace?
And yet me thinks that face keeps still in store
Sufficient graces for a thousand more.
But oh it is too manifest! my eyes
Are able witnesses of the deceit,
And this yet more suspi^ion satisfies,
How at my onset he made his retreat
And it is the act of guilt to take its flight
When once it is discovered by our sight.
Accursed creator of thy lasting shame,
Why has thy last out-wo^n^ thy fleeting love?
Why do thou willing wound my bleeding fame
And afte^ all thy ^aches a recreant prove?
Gape earth, receive this Candid devil in,
Lest the infect more angels with her sin.
Oh! had thou been ambitious, to have tasted
Variety in pl^^sures then, oh then,
Thou might have st^died how to have them lasted,
By yielding up thy fame to several men:
And nere have falsely vowed thy faith to one,
Which impa^dence dare swear was me alone.
Speak, Traitor to thy honor and thy friend,
What plaster can thou make to heal this sore?
Or what excuse can on thy crime attend?
Oh see thy guile now blushes more and more!
As if that ^^^ne which thou worldst feign deny,
Were printed there before my reading eye.
Wherefore I now will study to be free,
My thralled heart shall stand no longer bound,
The despised servant of thy faith and thee,
I leave neglected what with joy I found.
This fatal m^nu^e shall our loves dissever,
So false Pandora, here farewell for ever.
This said, Philorus from ^he Virgin flies,
While the (poo^e hear^) was drowned in the flou^
Of ^eares, (...) like a sea sprung from her eyes,
And watered all the earth whereon she stood.
Who like poor stone-turn'd Niobe did stand,
A floating statue on the moving Land.
The neighboring river mourned to hear her fate,
The blustering winds did chide the hollow trees,
While they consulting to participate
Her grief, do all their verdant garments leese.
The bi^ds tell heaven, and heaven to show its pity.
Bid Philomela sing a mournful Ditty.
A Poet then imploring of the Nine,
To lend him aid her story to indite;
Melpomene said, no, this work is mine,
But grief deni^s me power how to write.
Thus she that can write buskin-deepe in blood,
Is drowned with our Pandora in this blood.
Oh grief, if ever mourning did become
Thy meager face, 'twas when Pandora ^ept;
She numbered up her sighs beyon^ ali sum,
And sorrows Court within her countenance kept,
She was composed of dolor, and in brief,
The liveliest Emblem of the perfectst grief.
Ah false Philorus, did thou see those tears,
Which thy chaste love poures forth in thy dislike;
The obj^ct would a f^right thy jealous fears,
And to thy heart an awful reverence strike.
^arth never bore a subject of more ru^h
Then this, who suffers only for her truth.
When the salt flood had drawn the fountain dry,
That scarce another tear could find a vent,
Nor was there hope of any new supply,
Since all her moisture was consumed and spent:
Sill to her grief fresh matter she affords,
As then in tears, so now she weeps in words.
Wherefore (quoth she) blind Love did thou enthrall
My faith so namely to Philorus soul?
On if thou can, my sealed pledge recall,
Since my Philorus thinks Pandora foul.
Yet witness heaven, I am as pure as Air,
Diana's not more chaste, although more fair.
The congealed snow upon the Alpin Mountain
Retains as much of her as my breast,
And in the cool spring of a Crystal fountain
As much desire, as in my heart does ^est.
Oh jealousy, why should Philorus think
The Candid paper blacker then the Ink?
What sin (good Gods) have wretched: committed,
That you should thunder vengeance on my head?
Yet all my sufferings of my Love unpittied:
Blush Sol, at this unjustice hide thy head:
For if thou spy my wrongs, they would require
Thou should in their revenge scourge earth by fire.
Why nature did thy choicer hand create
Me to a form by some (...) excellent?
Since what was purposed to my best of fate
Prepostrously turns to my detriment?
Oh who then me was ever more accursed,
Whose seeming best is changed to real worst
Oh had thou cheated me of some one limb,
De^orm'd my face, or robbed me of an eye,
I nere had been thought guilty of a sin,
Nor given occasion to this jealousy.
Those that are foul still unsuspected go,
While fair ones (though more chaste) are not thought so.
Happy are you in whose creation
Banished perfection was an absent stranger:
But think how much has beauty of temptation,
And then you will bless the Gods you are out of danger.
Where various flowers in the garden grow^e,
We pass the bramble, but pluck up the ^ose.
Yet grant that ^orme be thought a happiness
Which does against temptations batteries vie,
Beauty though it come off with good success,
(...) wounded straight by poisonous jealousy.
Thus like a Monster mischief does pursue it.
And no endeavors can at all eschew it.
Now sorrowful Pandora takes her way
Through the thick woods (which is a large procession
No matter where, grief cannot go ast^ay,
Since she h^th vowed perpetual progression
Till the may once more her P'bilorus spy,
Which but performed, it were a bliss to dye.
Death now were welcome, were Philorus pleased;
To dye ere that, were torture in the grave,
Lest angry he by jealousy diseased,
Should after death against her ashes rave,
Or lest her ghost which hourly must come see him,
He fright with frowns, and so enforce it slay him.
Here unfrequented, save with savage beasts,
She spends the ^^a^ous minutes of her age;
Her eyes upon the several sights she feasts,
While sorrow triumphs in her equipage:
The greedy earth cast off her covering grass,
To look upon her as she by did pass.
The savage Tiger when it came her near,
Stoop't to the splendour of her conquering eyes:
The tusked Bore that broke Adon^s sp ^are,
Croucht down to her, whose mercy bid it rise:
Who then in duty gently to her came,
And hence it is that some have since been tame.
The winged birds from heaven came down in qui^es,
Each one by turn did sing his ^ounde-lay,
Whose a^ery notes still up again aspires,
Which being ended each bird flies away,
To g^t n^w Songs: thus by their various lays,
Each steals a little sorrow from the days.
The ^ow-growne gentle Satyrs did invite
The wood Nymphs to compose a measured dance,
Each thing affords some matter of delight,
As glad her downe-cast look^s they might advance:
The little E^min can afford its skin,
From the cold Air to wrap her hands therein.
The trees did gladly spread their open a^mes,
To sh^de her roses from the blowing wind,
And lapt their leaves so close, no sco^ching harms
Could burn her lillies when Apollo shined.
The pitying ^ezor when it heard her groan,
Lest she should faint, bites out his Cordial stone.
By chance a pin her tender finger prick^,
At which there startled out a drop of blood,
The which as soon as from it she had lickt,
The trees wept balsam for her greater good.
Still as she sighed, the friendly Unicorn
Osters that precious Antidote, his horn.
The hunger-bitten Lion greedy came,
Thinking to seize her body for a pray,
But when he saw her, straight was turned tame,
And at her feet for mercy prostrate lay.
While his dumb reve^ence seemed to tell the Mai^,
He mourned to think how he made her afraid.
Thus like the Queen of earth she sat admired
By these, the senseless subjects of the wood,
Only the Monster-griefe had not retired,
But by its fury feasted on her blood.
While thus to give these notice of her wrong,
She vents her sorrow in this following Song.
The Song.
My Philorus is unkind
H^w should I choose b^^ g^ieve at that
What joy, what comfort can I have,
Save in a wisht-for, timelesse grave.
Since all my hop^s are dead in him^
He can giv^ ^ase to this my m^oan,
And bu^ in him I can have none.
Pity, pity, gentl^ Love,
For grief enough torm^nts my heart.
Why should tho ^ pity me since I
VVi^hout Philo^us living dye?
There is no hope I may revive,
For jealous thoughts possess his mind:
How should Philorus then be kind?
Answe^ heaven, is this just,
That he that ^^ves should jealous be?
Is there union with the Gods
That place in mortal souls such odds?
Mortality will curse the Fates.
Let all chaste Lovers weep with me,
And in these streams drown jealousy.
Overcomming so the siend
Love may knit our hearts in one;
Oh that the conquest now were won^
So were all my sorrows done,
Which must else for aye abide;
Then might I enjoy my love,
Whose neglect these passions move.
Otherwise it' the decreed^
That grief in love must end my life,
Let (gentle Gods) I hilorus know
Though thought unchaste, I am not so.
So when I sleep within my V^n^
'Twill be my comfort to have died,
Since his suspition's satisfied.
Some two yards hence a neighboring thicket grew,
Where languishing Philorus used to lie,
Who when he heard this Dirty, straightway knew,
Love-wrohg'd Pandora did complain thereby.
Wherefore once more to try her constant says,
Disguised he enters to her, and thus says.
Why darlng mortal, art thou bold to press
Nere these untroden kingdoms? in these Groves
Can savage creatures succor the distress
Of whining Virgins for their absent Loves?
Can senseles earth tell how to ease thy grief,
Or can the blust^^ing winds blow thee relief?
Where can thou house thy self, where will thou dwell?
When Hye^^ rages, whence will thou get fi^e?
In all these woods I know, save my one Cell,
No place where thou distressed can retire.
Can thou eat grass, or look' ^t thou to be fed
With le^^s ^or flesh, and rocks or stones for bread?
(...) love me ^^est, and by strength of arm
From the wild creatures I will rend their pray,
By sacred spells of my enchanting charm.
He force Pomona her sweet fruits to pay.
C^^e^ shall now study to make a birth
Of ripened corn in this untilled earth.
To gratify this Love young Ganimede,
When love's a (...) shall steal a ^ou^ny down:
And at thy gorgeous table when it is spread,
Shall thy full cups with heavenly Nectar crown.
Instead of Oaks round whom the Ivy twines,
Bacchus shall plant the Wine-begetting Vines.
Thou shall drink Lethe and forget thy love,
Since he so coldly m^eres thy zealous fires,
What reason is it thou should so constant prove,
To him that sees, and yet slights thy desires?
Fair Maid unlocke thy lips, and let me know
Thy instant grant, for (...) admit no ^o.
First then (quoth she) let death dispatch a d^^t,
And aim the fatal p^y^t against my breast,
Or else swell high my grief and split my heart,
So shall my virgin ghost in quiet rest,
Ah my Philorus, wherefoere thou be,
This woe's begotten from thy jealousy.
^ase man desist, or els^ w^a^ you style fair,
Your foming lust shall hideously ass^ight,
He hang my self within my flowing have,
Ere thou shall touch Philorus dear delight^
And after death my ghost shall ^ack^ thy sense,
There Is no worse plague then guilt of conscience
At this he backward moved his gentle pace,
And scarce his manly eyes from tears forbear,
His sor^ow now was w^^tten in his face,
The which he had least ^h^ might read it there.
His heart now (...) to see the mo^^ning Maid,
While thus unto himself he softly said.
Heavens milkie way may sooner be p^oph^^'d
By spurious ^eet, the Phoenix though but ^ne
Be found no virgin, and (...) is named,
Sacred, may suffer profanation,
The Sun forget his way into the West,
And drive his teame into the North to rest.
The Swan may change his whiteness with the Crow,
Diana be a common prostitute,
And dirt may wear a whiter face then snow,
Vesta may Vestas Temple now pollute.
Proposterous Nature may bring forth a birth
Of fishes swimming in the solid earth.
Fire and water may embrace each other,
And then u^i^ed both make up one flame.
And Jove may change his Thron with his black brother,
The Furies may obtain a milder name.
The Wolf and Lamb may from the selfsame dug
Draw milk, and then each other friendly hug:
The generous Lion may exchange his heart,
For the weak courage or the ^^morous Hate,
The fixed stairs may from their stations part,
And false-hood upon earth may become ra^e.
What ere is called impossible, may spring
To be as copious as the commonst thing.
Chastities self may yield to strong temptation,
Ice may be tickled with a wanton heat,
^he Ethiop changed to a milk white Nation,
and Manna may become the damneds meat:
E^e my Pandora can give up her name
To be the common place of public sham^.
(...) ^all Affections that are placed in man.
(...) is jealousy that makes him most accursed:
^^at makes a Raven of the snowye Swan,
^^d what is simply pure, that faineth worst.
Hence loathed suspicion thou no more shall find,
An easy welcome to my credulous mind.
^r if Pandora should decline from good,
and intertaine one single thought of sin,
should the least warmth dissolve her frozen blood,
(...) in one breath should she draw poison in,
Heavens finding spots in this rich pearl of theirs,
Would give me notice of it by their tears.
The glorious Sun who heretofore was proud
^n his swift course, to stand and gaze upon her,
Would frown, and wrap his beauty in a cloud,
To give me notice of her great dishonor.
Her crime though private, cannot escape my sense,
Since heaven-must needs give me intelligence.
With that he turning to her (fai^e^ quoth he,)
Could you forgive Philorus j^aloasie,
Did her repent? while straight replied she,
Else let me heaven without thy mercy die.
Lo then his perfect shape I here discover,
Who now grows proud of such a constant Lover^
Blessed Heaven! in what an amorous twine they twist,
As if both bodies were compact in o^^:
And while she wept, joyful Philorus kissed
The chastest lips that ere crea^ion
Could boast: else all these storms had driven
Her faith from him as far, as hell from heaven.
When love and wonder gave them leave to speak,
Each did ^ety their souls to the others breast,
Which knot suspicion shall want power to break,
Since he does now his former thoughts detest.
Now joy lends wings while both together fly
And tell her father all this history.
Which having heard, he pays heavens thanks in tears,
That had resto^'d the jewel which he lost,
And now acquitted all those dismal fears,
Which had so many we^ping minutes lost.
Blushing Cherillus now salutes his sister,
And ^hanks the God^ that he unknown had mist her.
All so^row now is wiped from every eye,
The^'s not a face that wears a mournful look.
Laughte triumphs, while meager grief does dye,
As if fate had displayed some ^o^und book^,
Which the bystanders reading, joy to see
How there their joy's writ for eternity.
Her father now (...) their equal fires,
Since Hymen pi^e of Fate did ^o command.
All union lived in their conjoynt desires,
Each soul lay pawnd in to' the^s plighted hand,
Where they rest happy; thus those Loves do thrive,
Whom Chastity through storms s^ill keeps alive.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
FINIS.
POEMS.
To his Mist^esse, when she was going into the Country.
YEs, yes, it must be so, but must there be,
When you depart, no memory had of me,
My soul being racked as large a distance too
To meet you there, as I must be from you,
While the glad spring for joy you shall be seen
Meet your approach, and cloth her self in green.
And the fresh morning to salute your rise,
Bedewes the ground from it is o'rejoyed eyes,
For joy like griese, we know, sometimes appears,
Writ on our cheeke^, with characters of tears.
Go and be happy, go, and when you see
The trusty Ivy claspe it is much loved tree,
And with it is amorous in twinings cover
The welcome waste of it is embraced lover:
Think it our Emblem then, and proved to be
The happy shadow of my love and me.
Go and be happy, and when some sweet brooks
(Calm as thy thoughts, and smooth as are thy looks)
Show thee thy face, thou let thy thoughts supply
And though I be not think that I am by;
For if^the hear^ b^ taken for whole ^an,
I must be by thee, be thou where thou can.
Go, and when pretty birds on some small spray,
Near to thy window welcome in the day:
Awake, and think, when their sweet notes you hear.
I was beforehand, and had sung them there.
Go, and whatever thou chance to hear or see,
Be it bird, or brook, or shade of tree;
If it delights thee, may my soul in it
Move thy true joys under that counterfeit.
So, ask not how I do when you are there,
For at your mercy well or ill I fare.
For now me thinks my heart so high does swell,
It must enforce a breath, farewell, farewell.
The Knell.
When the sad tolling of my bell you hear,
Think ^is some Angels trumpe, and Judgments near
Then if but to repent, you take the pain,
Your judgments past, lie down and sleep ag^ine.
The Perfume.
Not that I think thy breath less sweet than this,
Thy breath, in which no pleasant sweets I miss,
Not that I think thy while, than this less fair,
Thy white, to which all whites but blackness are:
Not that I think thy heart, than this less pure,
Thy heart, which ^o dull mixture can endure,
Send I this to th^^, but as gold well tried,
Admi^s allay when it is purified,
So by this foil I would to thee impart
What is thy breath, thy whiteness, and thy heart,
Thy breath, all perfumes, does as save out-goe,
As does thy whiteness, the descending, snow;
The snow descends, but by the winds being blown,
Thy sweeter breath, and whiter snows, thine own:
Thy heart less mixed than the sole Phoenix bed,
Proclaims thee mistress of a Maiden head,
And so there were no ashes after ^ire,
Would that were conquered in my love^ desire
But if there be, why can it not suffice?
That one being dead another Phoenix rise.
Thy maiden head being gone, we still shall prove,
Both being one unparalleled in love,
But I have riddl'd, let me now unfold,
What is the perfume, what the snow, what gold;
All this, and each of these, thou know^st thou art,
And I should know more, did I know thy heart.
To his Mistress on her scorn.
Resolve me dearest, why two hea^ts in one
Should know the sin of separation.
Must the sweet custom of our often stolen kiss,
Be lost, and we live empty of those blisses:
Or do the stownes of some old over seer
Nourish thy fear, or make thy love less freer?
Why did thou suffer me those sweets to steal,
Which but thine own, no tongue can e're reveal,
And prompt me to a daring, to believe,
That my sad heart should find no cause to grieve:
Yet now at last have mocked my hope so far,
That I have ^ot a cloud^ though meant a starre^
Well, take thy triumph, study but to be
True to thy self, as thou art false to me.
And thou shall meet a conquest, yet when I
Have groaned unto the world my Elegy,
And thy unjust disdain, perhaps I shall
Obtain this honor in my funeral.
Thy poisonous guilt mixed with thy purged breath,
May make thee with^^ with me unto death:
So shall I triumph in my Ashes too,
In that my innocence has conquered you,
And then my eye rejoice, in that I have
Thy scorn, to be a mourner at my grave.
The Question and Answer.
WHen the sad ^ines of that face
In it is own wrinkles buried lies,
And the stiff pride of all it is grace
By time undone, ^als ^lacke and dies:
Wilt not thou sigh, and wish in some vexed fit,
The it were now as when I courted it.
And when thy glass shall it present,
Without those smiles which once were there,
Showing like some stale monument,
A scalpe departed from it is hair,
At thy self frighted wilt not start and swea^e
That I believed thee, when I called thee fair?
Yes, yes, I know thou will, and so
Pity the weakness^ (...) (...)
That now has humbled thee to know,
Though fai^e it was, it is forlorn,
Loves sweetes, thy aged corpse, embalming not,
What marvel if thy carcass beauty ^ot.
Then shall I live, and live to be
Thy envy, thou my pity; say
When e're thou see me, or I thee,
(Being nighted from thy beauties day)
It Is he, and had my pride not withered me,
I had, perhaps, been still as fresh as he.
Then shall I smile, and answer (...) thy scorn
Left thee thus wrinkled, slack't, corrupt, ^orlorne.
The new Petition.
Apollo once disdained not to keep,
So he might keep, his love Admetu^ sheep.
The distaffe Hercules did exercise,
T'extract a smile from his dear Ladies eyes:
Olympicke Joane disdained not to take
A bull's effigies for Europus sake:
A chilles fitter far to deal with steel,
Did labor for his Mistress at the reele.
Love spared Leander his pledged says to save,
Died, hugging in his arms the murdering wave,
Whilst a new death his Hero does devise,
And drowned her self ith Ocean of her eyes.
By Pyramus, the world did understand
That love and life, lay linked hand in hand.
When one was lost in Thisbe, the other flew,
Through the peirc't po^tals of his wound, yet new;
Which when his Thisbe saw, it is hard to say,
Whose spirit posted fastest on the way.
Thus some dejection, others did invade
Great opposition, and have willingly laid,
Their lives at needless hazard, some have died,
And so have to the utmost satisfied
What tyrant love could force, and beyond this,
The great and true non ultra fixed is.
Yet happy this, since what so c're they tried,
Was on their Mistress part regratified.
Oh who would, when he saw an equal flame
Of love in her he loved, ow^ so much shame
As to (...) his life, if her least grief,
Did but invite his blood for her relief
But this lorenamed courteous Ghost; can bear
Me witness, I have shed full many a teate,
Spoke the best language, Rhetoric affords,
I ^mb^d out my heart even to the life in words,
Would, what they did, did like occasion proffer,
And till that, do I can no more, but offer.
And yet for all my sufferings, she that is,
If I (...) reach to call her so, my bli^se,
Slights all my sorrows; Oh what eye could now
Forbear to veeld a tea^e, when seeing how
I love, I am neglected; weep with me
All you the read my wrongs, so if you be
Comp^ssionate, perhaps your tears may move
The frozen Mercy of my ice-white love.
Which if they do, if you at any time
Shall (...) drop, I Will lend you some of mine.
Methinkes I see you weep dear Mistress then,
Behold a Noble sea of pitying men
Does waft me to your favor, if you daigne,
Yet now at last to ease me of my pain,
This glory shall unto your mercy rise,
That you have wiped all tears from lovers eyes.
Fools Paradise, or Reason Bewitched.
-- and apta
Spicula sent nobis puris --

Simple as are the Elements unmixt,
Steadfast as is the earth, whose footing's fixed
Untainted like the silver suite of Swan,
Alone like truth, well ordered like a man.
Like these in each of these was I, until
Upon a time, Reason fell foul with Will,
Who backed with sense, that it might battle move
Implored the aid of all commanding Love,
Love by his mother taught, does soon comply
To be an Actor in this treachery.
The battell's waged, and Reason flies the field,
While Sense and Will to Love the Conquest yield.
I now, loves subject, am enforced to do
What ever his designs commands me too.
See, see (quoth he) do you behold that maid,
Whose equal does not breathe; and there he staid
To draw fresh air. So quick was he to give
Me notice that I must no longer live
In my own self, but her whom when I spied,
Me thought I had been happy to have died.
Since I at once saw severally in one
What joined together made perfection.
Th^^ was Horella, that bright shining sta^^e,
Who might have caused a second Trojan war.
Were there a second Paris, for her face,
The world might strive, but then there sat a grace
So chaste, that might expel each spurious thought.
Such as soul Hellen to her Paris brought.
There I might read in my Florella's looks,
(Such are indeed beauties most perfect books)
Loves pleasant Lecture, where I might epsy
How Cupid once sought (...) at her eye,
Whom the repelled, like snow the chaste and cold
Could not (...) Sympathy to hold,
With his hot (...), but melting quite put out
That (...) which warmed her round about.
Cupid denied of this did backward start,
And ran for have to hide him in her heart,
Where he renewed fresh flames, and by delay,
So (...) his wings he could not fly away.
Thus force perforce in her my conquered breast
(...) the poor Inn of such a God-borne guest,
Whom while I harbor, it is hard to tell
Whether his presence be a Heaven or Hell.
Such pleasurable pain, such painful pleasure
Sometimes below, and sometimes above measure.
Mars on a time forsook his Venus bed,
Protesting he no longer would be led
To those embraces, which like Circ^s charm^,
Made him forget the Heroicke use of Arms.
Venus heard this, whiles half in anger she
Did thrust her darling Cupid off her knee.
Down fall, the youngster, and in falling so.
Broke all his Arrows, quiver and his bow,
His granda^^e Nature pitying the mischance,
Wipes the wagges eyes, told him she would advance
Him to his former office: (...) a dart
That should transfixe the most obdurate heart.
She would create an eye, and for a bow
She Would make a brow, whose art inclining so,
Should shoot such shafts, that diety should yield
Themselves glad prisoners in the maiden field,
When straight she made Florella, such a maid,
Who being named, need there ought else be said?
It Is not long since that I heard I overs whine
At those deep wounds, which from their Mistress ^yne
They bleeding had received, cause they could win
No mercy from them, whilst I thought some pin
Had s^^atch't their tender hands, till I too late
Grew sensible they were unfortunate
In their lost loves, cause when Florella s^ound,
She like a Commet struck me to the ground,
Till she was pleased to clear her glorious eyes,
Which summoned me from death to life to rise.
Wherefore you speedy Merchant; d^e y^u run
Beyond the bounds of the all-bounding Sun,
To seek for Rubies, Pearl, and Ivory,
Adventuring hazard both of Land and ^kie,
When my ^lorella can afford all this
Without your search in the tumultuous Seas.
Rubies and Pearl, her lips and teeth, her skin,
Like hollow Ivory, locks those g^ms within,
For which you sondly up and down do rome,
When you may better find this wealth at home,
What would the Northern Clim^te hold too dear
To purchase my Florella to live there?
That where the niggard sure denies to shine,
They might receive more luster from her eyne.
But that I know she loves Religion best,
She had long since, seen India the West,
But least those Pagans, who adore the rise
Of the bright Sun, should doat upon her eyes,
She was resolved to stay: woe had I bin
Had she gone thither to increase their sin.
East India nothing holds that is worth her view,
There Is nothing there, that she can take for new;
Their aire-perfuming spices, precious gum,
Their siagrant odors, pleasant, Cinamum.
All these and sweeter far, she breathes whose smell
Does all thing; but it self, highly excel:
Once to my friend I did these lines rehearse,
Who straight way smiled, and did applaud my verse.
But Al^! I fear 'twas my Florella's name
That (...) his tongue, so to belie my ^ame.
Once, and but once, I (...) to have the sight
Of my Florella, who makes darkness light:
When leaden Morph^us did her sense surprise,
In the locked casket of her closed eyes,
Fain^ would I steal a kit^^, but as I strove,
Those sear^^ Her lips.
Judges of my sleeping love
Did swell against my pride, and angry red,
Charged me stand back from her forbidden bed.
While they her precious breath did seem to smother,
Each privately did steal a touch from the other,
^ enviou^ at their new begotten bliss
Was bold on her soft lips to print a kiss.
At which she wak't: And have you ever seen
How ^aire Aurora, heaven^ illustrious Queen.
Shakes off her ^able Robe, and with a grace
Smiles in the front of a fair morning face.
Just so my love, as if night had been noone,
Discards the element of the useless moon:
And from her glorious tapers sent a ^i^e,
To light the darkest thoughts to quick de^i^e.
While thus from forth her to ^all gate she sent,
Breath formed in words, the marrow of content.
And have you Sir, at such a tempting time
Bet^ayd my honor, to this welcome crime,
By stealing pleasure from me, it was thy Love
I know, that did thee to this trespass move,
For I have proved thy faith, which since I find
The trusty Inmate of a loyal mind,
Of force I must accept it; and in part
Of recompense, afford thee all my heart,
Thus having ceaz'd my prize; I told her, sweet,
As by no fouler name we ere may greet,
So what is mine I tender, all, my self,
The poorest part of thy unvalued wealth.
Thou have won much in this, thy mercy shown,
That thus at last thou do receive thy own
Least they who after me like fate shall prove,
Should say: See what it is to be in Love.
I am in portu. Loves Apostasy to his friend M^. E.D.
Tut, let her go, can I endure all this,
Yet dye, to doat upon a Maidens kiss?
Is there such Magic in her looks, that can,
Into a fool, transfigurate a man?
Did thou not love her? true^ and she disdain
To meet thy virtue? let her meet her shame^
Were she as ^ane as she her self would be,
Adorned with all the cost of bravery:
Could she melt hearts of flint, and from her eye
Give her beholders power to live or die.
IN de rather beg she would pronounce my death,
Then behe^ scorn, though that preserved my breath.
Rise (...) and be not fooled: S'soote what a shame
Were it for thee to re-incense one flame
From the declining spa^ke? do thou not know
As she is a woman, her whole sex does owe
To thine all honor? her false heart and pride
Dare not oppose thy faith: then turn high tide,
And let her, since her scorn^ does so disease thee
By her repentance strive again to please thee.
The broken heart song.
Coun^ the sigh^, and count the tea^es,
Which have in (...) my budding years:
Comment on my wo^ull look,
Which i^ now black sorrows book.
Read how love is overcome,
Weep an ^ sigh, and then be dumb.
Say it was your charity
To help him wh^^^ eyes (...) dry.
Here paint my Cleora's name,
Then a (...), and then a flame,
Then mark how the heart does fry
When Cl^o^a is so nigh.
I hough the flame did do its part,
'T was the name that broke the hea^^
Peace, no more, no more you need
My sad history ^o read.
Fold the paper up again,
And report to other men
These complaints can justly prove
Hearts may break, that be in love.
Women are men's shadows.
1.
FOllow a shadow, it flies you,
Seem to fly it, it will pursue.
So court a Mistress, she denies you,
Let her alone, she will count you.
Say, are not women truly then
Styled but the shadows of us men?
2.
At morn and even, sl^des are longest,
At Noone they are, or short or none.
So men at weakest, they are strongest,
But grant us perfect the are not known.
Say are not women truly then
Styled but the shadows of us men.
Per Ben. Johnson.
Women are not men's shadows. E Contra.
1.
The sun absented, shadows then
Cease to put on the forms of men.
But wives, their husbands absent, may
Bear best their forms (they being away)
Say, are no^ women falsely then
Styled but the shadows of us men.
2.
Shadows at Morn and Even are strong,
At noone they are, or weak, or none:
Women at Noone are ever long,
At night so weak they ^all along.
Say, are not won ^n ^^^^ly then
Styled but the shadows of us men?
3.
As bodies are contracted, shadows so
Contract themselves to forms as bodies do:
Let men be bounded near so close: I wis^.
Women will rove and ^amble where they list.
Say, are not women falsely then
Styled but the shadows of us men?
To his worthy friend Mistress.
I charge thee by those eyes of thine,
Give me my heart:
Those eyes that stole it out of mine,
I felt the smart.
And least the the^t you should deny,
Look where you keep it in your eye.
And now I have espied it there,
Thinking to catch it,
You chain and wind it in your hair,
But still I watch it.
And so got loose from thence, it flies,
And sports again upon your eyes.
Though now to cozen me you seek
Thinking to hide
It in the dimple of your cheek
I have disery'd:
How now discovered it does skip
'Twixt the soft prison of each lip.
Yes, yes, I see it stealing, go
Least I should find it,
Through the long gallery of snow,
And still I mind it.
How you have shuffled it between
Your breasts, not thinking it is seen.
See, see, I see it creeping in
(near you I fear)
Through the small (...) of your skin
to shelter there.
As if that (...) could (...) me,
Alas, I know things I not see.
But if, nor eye, nor hair, nor cheek,
Nor lip, nor breast, nor heart it keep:
Give me them all, for every part
Thou have, has part of me; my heart
To Mistress.
While a the locks of time, and smoother fa^^e
Than sliding streams thy skin and ^^esses are,
Sweet a A^abian Odors, when in fire
Their struggling spirits upwards do expire,
(When as the courteous wind does court our sense.
And ra^ish it with sweet intelligence)
Is thy pure breath only this difference know,
That sent is (...), but thine is natural s^,
Soft as the plumie mos^e that over-spreads
The tender circle of young Turtles heads,
Are thy two breasts, which enviously do swell
To think that that should this, this that excel:
And yet ashamed such strife their pride has bred,
Both blush and tip themselves with bashful red.
Types, locks, streams, odors, down, nor blushes are
So red, so soft, so sweet, so smooth, so fair.
On a Lilly now withered in her bosom.
Blessed in thy happy bed fair Lilly lie
To shade thee from the Sun of her bright eye:
But do not in a wanton pride preferte
Thy self, as adding whiteness unto her.
Alas! what glory could in thee appear
So eminent, if not transplanted there?
But see, thou fadest already, poor, proud flower,
Whose fate is limited to one short hour:
And since thou would for such a beauty vie,
Thy conquered envy makes thee pale and dye.
Come sit thee down, and with a mislyn charm
Ceaze my incircled arm,
Till locked in fast, embraces we discover
In every eye a lover,
Then lost in that sweet extacy of blisses,
We Will speak our thoughts in kisses.
In which we will melt our souls, and mix them so,
That what is thine or mine, there is none shall know:
Rare mystery of love, and wonders too,
Which none but we can do:
Nor shall the leaden spirits of all those,
Who speak of love in tame prose:
Believe our joys: but dully censure us^
Only for loving thus.
Ah! how I smile, that doubtly blessed, we do
Enjoy our selves, and all their envy too.
The Choice.
WHat care I though she be (...)
Hair, snow-like hand, or Sun-like eye,
If in that beauty I not share,
Were she deformed, what care I.
What care I though she be foul,
Hair swa^thy hand, or sun burnt eye,
So long as I enjoy her soul,
Let her be so, why what care I.
Dim sight is cosened with a glass,
Of gaudy gown, or humerous hair,
Such gold in melting leave more dross
Than some unpolish't prices share,
Be she ^aire, or soul, or either,
Or made up of both together,
Be her heart mine, have, hand, or eye
Be what it will, why what care I.
EPITAPHS.
Epitaphium Regis Swedorum.
HEre sleeps he who was and is
The subject of eternal bliss.
Religion, and no other end,
Caused him his blood and means to spend.
He conquered all, only his breath,
He lost, by which he conquered death.
Now would thou know whom we deplore
It Is Sweaden, Reader, hushed no more:
^ est while thou read, thou and this stone
Be both alike, by death made one.
For death and grief are near of kin,
So thou might die, being grieved for him.
(...). Tho. ^eedome.
An Elegy on the death of the renowned, and victorious Gu^tav^s Adolphus King
of Sweathland.
Can the dry sound, He Is dead, no more affright
The world with ter^our, than had some mean knight,
Languish't to death in down? or can the sound,
That Sweaden has received a fatal wound
Pass by, and like the bullet, hurt no more
Than his stout breast, that felt the mortal sore?
Oh no! it rankles in each weak'ned part,
And strikes a chill amazement to the heart
Of feeble Christendom, that by his loss,
Puts on it is titles badge, The Christian Cross:
And 'twas a great one too, yet let none wonder
That heaven forbo^^ to ring his knell in thunder:
Or tha^ some angry Meteor did not stare,
And to the world their public loss declare.
No, no, some such Ambassador as this
Had been too merciful, land made us miss
Our just deserved punishment, ^or we
Knowing our sin begot this misery,
Might by a faign'd repentance have procured
A pardon for the Prince: but now assured
Of our own weakness, we with tears may say,
We are losers, though our army won the day.
His death begot his conquest, and his foes
Mourned at his fate, witness those death winged blows
Which heaven by means of his impressure steel,
Did make their bleeding carcasses to feel.
Then what remains? but that ou^ prayers gain
This be the latest loss we may sustain.
And that no more of Heavens great Champions fall
Through our default, to so sad funeral.
To the truly worthy, and his worthily honored friend Mris Judith Dyke, on the
death of her brother Mr John Dyke, obiit ult. Martii 1636.
TAmely, and soft as the Prophetique breath,
That pants, the ^atall passing bull of death
Move my sad soul, and to his happy hearse,
Pay the deserved tribute of thy verse:
And you blessed maid, whose grief has almost won
Death by your grief to make you both but one,
Cease your laments, for how can you be crossed
In this, since what God finds, can ne^r^ be lost?
And wisely think you may offend in this,
Love has its errors, and may do, amiss.
Death may look dreadful in an ill man's eye,
It Is no great thing to live, but less to die
To die indeed, as Common people do,
That with perplexed souls bid earth adieu,
And by necessity of late compeld,
Their struggling spirits to the Coffin yield,
Were matter worthy grief, and only they
Are like the houses that entombe them, clay:
But where the soul (like his) rapt with desire,
Disdaines dull earth, and aims at glories higher:
And by a bright Angelicke fire inflamed,
Mounts toward heaven, as o^t as hears it named;
Like a sweet odor upward as it goes,
It yields a persume to The Almighty's nose:
And hence ascended, it is 'not just that we
Lament at its exalted dignity.
And sure no matter if we must away,
Whether it be to morrow, or to day;
And if to day, at morn, or night, or noone,
So we die well, what need we care how soon.
I know the fertile soil of his pure heart
Gave warmth to every virtuous root of Ait:
And had the August of his age bin come
They had bin crowned with a blessed harvest home.
But now he is clouded from your eyes to show,
That none but Angels worthy are to know
What he shall aged be: Oh! it is a ^a^e
VVorth your best thanks; that day deserves it is date,
Be registered to Glory, when his Maker
Made him, of him and all his bliss partaker.
Now dare you loose a tear, unless it be,
Because you are not happy yet as he?
It Is charity to wish you so: but then
As you know how, yet God knows better when,
Death comes to call, yet not to call as one;
Though all men die, yet good men well alone.
The Sunne's not lost, but set, the approaching day
Shall make it is light more glorious by delay:
If then in death such differences consist,
Desire so to dissolve to be with Christ.
So prays for you, your true friend The. Beedome.
Encomium Poetarum ad fratrem Galiel Scot.
TWice I began, and twice my trembling hand
Startled from what my Genius did command,
Lest harmel^sse ^ should hazard all my fame,
And my attempt win nothing but self shame.
It deemed the praise of Poets worth the pen,
Rather of Angels, than of mortal men.
My bolder heart b^d on: for blind men may,
Although not see, yet know there is a day,
And said (perhaps) my credit I might save,
The proverb says, naught venture nothing have.
Then come, yea Muses were you nine times nine,
I could employ you in this work of mine.
Fill my wide ^ailes, that while you stand my friend,
I may swim safe unto my journey's end.
Since the first Mistique Chaos did entombe
The earths fair sabricke in confusions womb.
There is no art can plead antiquity
Before the heavenly birth of Poesy:
I speak of those arts which this day we call,
As witness to their nature: Liberal.
Next by th'ffect the worth of things is known,
They in respect of this seem to have none.
The end of verse is to preserve from death
What ever from a Poet took its breath:
Witness that golden age, whose fame lives still
By some few drops, from Naso's golden quill:
He rescued Satu^nes Godhead from the ground,
And by his lines his aged temples crowned.
He in a brasse-outlasting paper page,
Created thee, Great Jove, a silver age:
Apollo for his Daphne, to his Lays
Owes a rich wreath of thunder-scorning bays.
One petty blast from his immortal breath,
Preserved Diana's chastity from death:
Nor need Act^on take it much in scorn,
That Ovid did co^nute him with a horn.
Homer yet lives, whose pen for want of eyes,
Did point his name the way to kiss the skies.
Young scholars in the dark might grope like fools,
Were not he placed the lantern of the Schools.
The world had lost among it is Worthies, one Ale^dos.
Who had not Homer sung, had near been known.
Ulysses act had perished like a toy,
Had this blind guide not led him out of Troy,
And rapt his memory up so safe in rhyme,
That it shall equal, if not outlive time.
Maro, thy lines great Caesar has extold,
That paid each several verse a piece of gold,
Yet thought his purchase easy, and did more
Esteem thy wit, than all his wealth and store,
And justly too, since what thy labor spent
On him, lasts longer than his monument.
This (Rome being fired) is ashes, but his name
Lives Salamander-like, spite of the flame.
Did thou not snatch A^neas from that fire,
That up to Illions Turrets did aspire,
And bor'st his feeble father by thy pen
On his sons shoulders, through an host of men?
For which, thy self, great Virgill shall remain
To endless times, even till thou rise again.
No envious fire thy able skill shall burn,
Till fire and earth into one substance turn,
Yill when (that I may come to speak^ our days)
Daniel thou live circled with breath for bays.
Nor Spencer to whose verse the world does owe
Millions of thanks can unremembred go:
Nor thou great Johnson, who know how to write
Such lines as equal profit with delight,
Whilst thy untired readers wish each sheet
Had been a volume, it is so neat, so sweet.
Next, fame seems charily to spread her wings,
Over what the never dying Drayton sings,
Still lives the Muses Appollinean son,
The Phaenix of his age, rare Harrington,
Whose Epigrams when time shall be no more,
May die (perhaps) but never can before.
This cloud can witness that a Poet may
Bring darkness out of light, make night seem day.
These can make laws, and Kingdoms, alter States,
Make Prince; Gods, and poor men Potentates.
An amorous verse (^aire Ladies)^ innes your loves,
Sooner than busk points, ^arthingalls, or gloves:
A Poets quill does stand in greater stead,
Than all such ^oyes to gain a maiden head.
A line well writ, and by a Potent skill,
Charms the rapt soul with music of a quill
Whilst the by standers deem't a bliss to die,
Tickled to death by such sweet harmony.
Again, if thou deserve the Muses frown
(Wretch that thou art) a quill can hurl thee down,
To that abisse of ignomy, that fate,
Cannot condemn thee to a baser state,
I will make each finger point at thy disgrace,
And like a Monster each man sh^n thy face:
While thou thus branded, finding no relief,
With a strong halter choakest thy stronger grie^e
Thus Poets like sates factors here do hold
All power underneath their pens controld.
Lastly dear brother, think not I forgot,
Amongst this learned ^ile to rank my Scot:
Thy early Muse sings in so swee^e a strain,
As if Apollo had composed thy vain;
Superlatively taking, while each letter
Disdaines our Modern Poets should sing better.
Now saints my pen, and fainting fears that I
My self may perish, if wi^h clemency,
My reader censure not, yet hopes to raise
A memory to it self, though not of praise;
That I being earth, something may live of m^e
Perhaps this paper if approved by thee.
Against prejudicate opinion.
THe humble soul, the mind oppressed,
Shall find unto his conscience rest:
The clear in heart, the single eye,
Laughs at his neighbo^rs jealousy,
Then let men censu^e what they can,
The inside makes the honest man.
Who'ld think a clod of earth should hold
Within, a mass of splendent gold?
So silly woods have fragrant smells,
And Pearls are sound in sordid shells,
Base s^^bards hold approved swords;
And (...) covers golden words.
Dig up the earth, and burn the wood,
The gold, and smell will both be good;
Unsheath the blade, the book untye,
One takes your heart, to^her your eye,
Had these laid still they might have gone,
Thought hardly worth the looking on:
Then judge what folly there had been
To c^nsure any thing unseene.
-- Mors aequo pede pulsat Pauperum taber^as, Regumque turres.
Man's life's a game, each has his card in's hand,
And death a while a looker on does stand:
At last he shu^fles in a gamester too;
Then cuts, deals, rubbes, and winnes, and so adieu.
(The King like common creatures) in death must
Find no respect, nor reve^ence in the dust:
Their royalty put off, their state laid down,
There sits a clod o^ dirt, where once a Crown.
Their eyes like expired tapers drop, and fall,
And leave the^t Sockets empty; for the Ball,
Or golden Globe, which once their hands did keep,
A knot of worms does role about, and creep,
Who ^ast no difference 'twixt their flesh and those
Who fed less dainty, wore fatre course^ clothes.
In his dominion: Death impartial known,
The King and beggar there are all but one.
Rejoice then rich men, and your game pursue,
In death I Will be as good a man as you.
To the Noble Sr Francis Drake.
DRake, perreratinovit quem terminus orbis,
Et cujus faciem vidit uterque polus.
Si taceant bomines facient te Sydera notam,
Sol^escit conctis non memor essesui.
The Translation.
DRake, who the world have conquered like a scrole;
Who saw the Articke, and Antarticke Pole;
If men were silent, sta^res would make thee known,
Phoebus forgets not his companion.
To his friend Mr Em. D. on a rich vaporing sot, whom he styles Ignoramus.
Bless us! why here is a thing as like a man,
As Nature to our fancy fashion can.
Besh^ew me, but he has a pretty face,
And wears his tapier with indifferent grace.
Makes a neat congie, dances well, and swears:
And wears his Mistress pendant in (...) ears:
Has a nea^ foot as ever kissed the ground,
His shoes and roses cost at least five pound.
Those hose have not a peer, for by relation,
They Are cut a month at least since the last fashion.
He knows two Ladies that will vow there is none
At Court, a man of parts, but he alone.
And yet this ^op, scarce ever learned to know
The mixture of the dis-joyn'd Christ-crosse row.
Strip off his rags, and the poo^e thing is then
The just contempt of understanding men.
Being Fortunes minion, Nature thought it fit,
Since he had wealth enough, he should want wit.
To my matchless friend, my dearest William Scot, a New-yeares gift.
How shall I thank my fate that wrought this end
To my best wishes? that thou art my friend.
I may lose all (if I have any) wealth,
My sickness may bereave me of my health.
Bondage may steal my freedom, but my love,
Which is a sacred blessing from above
Can near be wanting, since it is locked in thee,
Who art true friendships safest treasury.
It joys me that my soul so well did light
To dwell with thine, thou that do speak, and write,
And think the same with me, as if my spirit,
Did nothing else but what is thine, inherit.
If e're (which heaven desend and still uphold)
Our league should break: Oh! horror to be told,
And that the knot of our strong amity,
Should be dissolved by any crime in me,
Then count me lighter than my fleeting breath,
Show by this paper, and I Will blush to death.
But I fear no such mischief, since ou^ love
So aptly in each others souls does move.
No Rhetoric can my zeal to thee impart,
So well I love thee, that thou have my heart;
And that my action may concord with time,
Be this thy New-yeares gift, and call me thine
Ever till death, T. B.
The Corner stone.
'TWas a fair stone, though it was abused,
And by the senseless builder was refused;
Alas their sin blind souls, and blinder eyes,
Sought by the pride of all their industries
To polish ma^tle, porphery, or that
On which proud folly set so high a Diamonds, or other precious stones.
rare,
And with such earth-bred trifles to refine
Material Temples to the power divine.
Whilst that bright stone from th'heavenly square taken,
Lies on the mountain by these fools forshaken.
Ah! had they known the value of this Jem,
It had not been so under prized by them.
Oh! when that Babell building of their sin
Shall ruined dash upon themselves agin:
And wanting props to under-set it shall
Upon the builders head with te^^our fall.
How will they wish this abject stone had been
By faith well laid, them and their sins between:
Then had it like a storme-contemning rock,
Secured their Mansions from their heavy shocke
Of wrath and judgment, both the which unjust,
Shall make them roar with woe: Oh! had I wist.
Lord be the Basts of my hopes high Throne,
And then I Will build on that strong Cornerstone.
The Royal Navy.
What Is breath? a vapor: glory? a vain chat:
What Is man? a span: what is life? shorter than that:
What Is death? a key: for what? to open heavens door,
Who keeps it? time: for whom? both rich and poor:
What Is heaven? a haven: what is ships anchor there?
Hope, faith, and love, with one small pinnace fear.
What are those? men of war, how fraught? with arms:
What burden? weighty, suiting their alarm?
Whose ships? the Kings: what colors? the red cross:
What ensigns? bloody from their Princes loss:
And whither bound? to earth: Oh! what is their strife?
To conquer breath, and glory, man and life.
Oh! I foresee the storm, Lord I confess,
Then vapor, or vain chat, or span I Am less,
Save a relenting ^oe; thy glories are
More excellent in peace, than death and war;
For to that time, that time his key shall lend,
And to thy tent my yielding spirit send:
I will strike sail to these, and strive to prove
Thy Captive, in my hope, faith, fea^e and love.
EPIGRAMS.
Epigram 1.
To my dear friend. William Harrington.

It Is true (my Will.) and I confess I owe
Thy friendship more than this: yet to be^^ow
A (...) upon a ^rend, has sometimes bin
A (...) worth th'acceptance of a ^ing,
Though my pen-seath^r'd Muse yet cannot teach
My feeble quill to that ^ap't height to reach,
'T will be no less content to me, if she
Be but well entertained (dear friend of thee)
Thou art a King in friendship: and I may,
Then thus to my no little comfort say,
That too good Wills my worthless Muse has won,
My Scot: and my no lesse-lov'd Harrington.
Thy friend Th. Beed.
Epigram 2.
Of one Mary Frail, who lay with Mr Reason.

MAry was long desirous for to marry,
And vowed that past fifteen she would not tarry;
I am su^e this vow of modesty did fail,
Alas yet pardon her for flesh is Frail.
No suitors came, nor could her longing eyes
Mee^e any that might seize her as his prize;
But making conscience not to break her vow,
She is (as then the promised) no maid now.
Though thou know not why she so young did sport,
I Would have thee think, Frail had some Reason ^or't.
Epigram 3.
On the same Mary a great lover of Mary-bones.

WHy she does Mary-^ones af^ect, would know?
I think the reason is not hard to show:
The bone she cannot ea^e that is hard as flin^,
Oh then I guess the cause! there is something in't^
Well what is that something? Oh my Muse there stick,
She that loves marrow likely loves a --
Epigram 4.
To the excellent Poets Mr George Withers^

I Never saw thee: but should grossly lie
To say I know thee not, for ^illy I,
Or one that is more stupid, well may guess
At what thou art by what tho^ do express.
Oh that blessed day when first my willing hand
Opt the remembrance of this Sinsicke land:
Trust me, I grieved to think that now my age,
Had sixteen summers acted on this stage:
Yet was a stranger to so ra^e a soul
As thine; whose heaven-bred boldness durst control
Without respect of persons, every sin.
That to thy knowledge had committed bin.
Then next thy Satyrs, and thy Motto, I
Made have to purchase, where I might espio,
How some too base for earth, not worth a name,
Sought by their mire and dirt to cl^y thy same.
And credit me, I hardly could forbear,
Upon these pitied lines to drop a tear.
But that I know virtue opposed by fate,
Looks greatest (like the Sun) in lowest stare:
When other wits, who have in some base time,
Employed of ^ate, that they might conquer time;
Shall like those paper toys, in which they trust,
Be eat by worms, or molded into dust,
And want a name: thou by thy virtues graced,
Shall live till earth by fire be imb^ac't
Thy unknown well-wisher Th.Beed.
Epigram 5.
By way of consolation to his dear friend William Scot, on the death of his
brother Gilman Scot.

SUffer me (dearest friend) to bring a verse,
Though uninvited to attend the hearse:
Of him whose memory death cannot blo^,
Since he yet lives in thee (my friendly Scot)
I know the ^ertile soil of his pure heart,
Gave warmth to every virtuous root of Art.
And had the August of his age bin come,
You Had seen him crowned with a rich harvest home.
But now he is clouded, from your eyes to show,
That none but angels worthy are to know
What he shall aged be: Oh! it is a fate
Worth your best thanks, that day deserves its date,
Be registered to glory, when heaven pleased
Him of his earthly flesh-encumbrance eased
Yet da^e you lose a tear? unless for joy,
That heaven in mercy gave him for the toy
Which we call breath, a life that shall outlive,
What e're dull earth, or all your love could give.
I know the fates have lop't off from your tree
Many fai^e branches: which I doubt not be
Again, sarre fairer than his muddy ^oyle,
Could suffer them to grow too: for the ^oyle
Of living was their trouble, but that care
They wisely did contemn, and so repair
To that blessed palace, which for pious men
The maker framed, and now is opt again
For this new entrance: do not then once more
Spend any useless tear, behold thy ^^ore
Of heavenly friends do seem to smile and say,
Will, thou must follow, we but lead the way.
Which that thou may, heaven fit thee with such grace,
As may prepare thee to that hallowed place,
Where thou with these shall never cease to cry,
Hosanna: Glory be to God on high.
Thine T. B.
Epigram 6.
To his friend Mr Thomas Beedom, of single life.

HAppy is he that leads a single life,
He Is not perplexed with the daily strife
Of c^pled bondage, not can tortured be
With Hymen's ague, the disparity
Of mind which bodies joynd, neither does know
What hell it is, hal^e of himself to owe
Unto a wi^e: thus happi's he alone,
Can ^ell himself that he is all his own.
Em.D.
Epigram 7.
Econtra, of Marriage.

MAn was not to himself bo^ne, nor can he
Subsist in death, but by posterity.
Women the wombe^ of men are, and that man
Might after death survive, when nothing can
K^epe him alive but issue: Nature gave
Woman to him, his vain name to save:
Happy the man then, who enjoyes a wife,
By whom he gives himself a second life.
per Th. Beedom.
Epigram 8.
Of good women.

Often have I wondered, but no more I shall,
Why women's wit sometimes saves men a fall.
Alas it is thus: I now the cause do scan,
They were the ribs, which is the strength of man.
Epigram 9.
E Contrario.

I Often admired have why women's mind
Is so perverse and crooked to mankind:
Man's rib at first to them a being gave,
And they like it a crooked nature have.
Epigram 10.
Being a Translation of this Latin verse, composed by Dr Hensloe.

Herode^ pro uno ^runcavit mill, nec unu^,
Quem petiit, cecidit, ^am been rem detegit.
The Translation.
HErod for one a thousand slew,
Yet of that one did sail,
For he from Herod's fury flew,
There Herod hit the nail.
Epigram 11.
To the worthy honored, Sir Henry Wootten Knight. IS there eternity? or is
there ^ame?
Rests there a glory to a virtuous name?
Is there a wreath for Poets? is there bliss
To a condign descent? yes, sure there is.
Can man (whose soul it is true, is active) rise
To such a height, not here, but when he dies?
Nay further is it in the might of man
To acquire all this? yes, by defect he can.
Then it is some joy to know it, but suppose
Some were so stupid that they durst oppose
This tener, nay, and further would imply,
That it is in posse for best wits to die.
How when thy clay shall sleep, shall thy just same
Brand these erroneous? and convince with shame
Their then grieved so^les, to think thy loss has lent
To their dull Tribe that dear experiment.
Whilst thou when Earth shall mourn to miss thee here,
Above to Monarchs, shall become a Peer,
And make the next age blush to think that she
Retains no equal to thy wit or thee.
Epigram 12.
To the same Knight being President of Eaton College. Why should men wonder
so, that Eaton Boy^^,
Do by their learning purchase same: not noise?
Does not that Male-Minarva Wootten grace
With pollilht Eloquence 'bove all, that Place?
Oh! if each College still had resident,
But half so rare a witted President^
'Twere to be hoped (like this) that grae't by them,
Each College might become an Accadem.
Yours in all service Th. Beed.
Epigram 13.
Of a fresh water Soldier.

DAnus was much in debt, and knew no way
A long forbearing creditor to pay;
And when he pressed him hard: Good Sir quoth he,
A while desist, I hope his majesty
Will in the Navy, when a place does ^all,
Make me a Captain, then I Will pay you all.
But mark, while he the honest man would gull
His new coined lie, scarce had he ended ^ull,
But him an Officer in the Kings name did greet,
And dubbed him Captain in the fre^h-water Fleet.
Epigram 14.
Being a meditation to my self.

WHy woulst thou live (fond soul) do thou not
know
From whence thou came, and whither thou must go?
Can walls of clay so much thy sense delight,
As to deba^re thee from that glorious slight,
Which thou ^houldst cove^? can thou idly prize
The ^ire, that loads thy wings unfit to rise?
Should thou still live, it were but still to see
Some new scene Acted of thy Tragidie:
Thou could but do to morrow, as this day
Commit fresh ^inne, sleep, eat, or drink, and play.
No matter then how soon thou dye: then come
Prepare thy self to wait thy Judges dombe
Thou cam^st from heaven, then labor to draw near
Thy quiet c^nte^, if thou once rest there,
Thy walls of clay, the mire that loads thy wings,
Shall be a Mansion for the King of Kings.
Thy Tragedy shall end, thy sin shall cease,
And thou rest ever in an endless peace;
Be It when thou please, good God, at morn or noone,
So I die well, no matter, Lord, how soon.
Epigram 15.
To himself of his Mistress.

What though thou merit not?why know there lies
Veiled in the Courteous candor of her eyes,
A saving mercy, that can lend a wing
For dull despair to monnt on, it is a thing
Beyond the common reach, to know how sweet
He lives, that does in death a pardon meet.
But thou art poor, true: but her better part,
Near looked upon the habit but the heart.
She that has virtue cannot doa^e on those
Whose best perfection is a suite of clothes.
Who Court the attracting beauties of the age
With some con'd stuff brought from the Cockpit stage,
Or gull their Mistress by some Poem shown
Which, 'cause they paid for, they dare call their own.
When, if their brains were ransackt you might know,
They nere Commenc't beyond their cri^s-cro^se row.
Then hope (poor heart) and strongly that she will
At last embrace thee, for she has the skill
To school the first with frowns; that so her ^avour
May, when she smiles, last with the sweeter ^avour.
Epigram 16.
To his Superlative Mistress.

COmpare the Bramble to the sta^ely Pine;
The fruit less Thistle, to the virtuous Vine.
Compare the Charcole to the Snow-white Down,
The wreath of Rushes to The Imperial Crown.
Compare the Raven to the Turtle Dove;
The Moors of India to the Queen of Love.
Compare the Candle to the splendent Moon
The ^ogges of nigh^, to Phoebus eye at ^^one.
Compare the Kite to sweet breathed Philomell,
The Lerman Lake to th'Helliconian Well.
If these admit comparison, then she
That can admit of no equalyty,
May find a parallel: but let some men
Rack their dull brains to praise their Mistress, when
The utmost of their language they have spent,
Let them sit down, and sigh, and be content:
Their Idols eyes to Sunbeames to compare
Or by the rose her blased lips declare.
My Mistress must beyond their Saints survive
In that unequalled height, superlative.
Epigram 17.
To his intim^te friend William Pearl.

'TWas not a slight acquaintance that could move,
This ^alutation to thy m^^ch less love.
I do not use to ground affection where
A complem^nt alone invites the ^a^e.
No, I have proved thee, and thy pre^ious name
Confirms thy nature to be like the same.
A glorious G^m, whose luster does out shine
All those poor merits that I dare call mine.
And I must prize thee, since thy wor^h is shown
Superl^^ive and far above mine own.
Suffice it that my friendship, and my Art
S^^^ves still to wear thee Pearl, upon my heart.
Epigram 18.
To the Heroical Captain Thomas Jam^s, of his discovery made by the Northwest
pass^ge toward the South Sea. 1631.

HEroicke soul, thy memory must live,
Beyond those stone built structures, that can give
Their earth an Ages talk; or can assure
The effigies of some money Gull shall dure,
Till spiders eat his memory: Oh poor glory,
T'inscrible a Marble with the tedious story
Of some stout Sir, whose virtue near was more
Than how to quarr^ll^ for (perhaps) a whore,
But thou (great James) have by thy Actions framed
A trophie, that hereafter thou being named,
Men shall rise up with ^everence, and keep
Thy ^ame from freezing, when thy Ashes sleep.
To the same Captain on his Courageous, and pious behavior in the said voyage.
MArchles^e Commander, when fierce winds did hurl
Water to air, and made the old waves curle
To mounts of solid liquor, when strong streams
Of moving marble did assault thee James.
Did not thy conquered courage, like the rest
Flag, and sit heavy on thy hopeless breast?
Did thou not faint to hear the Thunder roar,
And ^urious seas rebel against the Shore?
Did thou not quake at this? why then I see
Thy soul (though imprisoned in thy flesh) was free,
Thou werr above a man, thy zeal like fire
Dissolved the opposing Ice, and did aspi^e,
Through all the storms of dark condensed air,
Wrapped in a shee^e of storme-contemning prayer;
These were prevaili^g blows, and broke more Ice
At once, then all your hands at ten-times twice.
This manned your ship securely through the maine,
And stered you safely to your home again.
I. B.
Epigram 19.
A Complaint of his separation from his Mistress, caused by his friends
injunction.

Dear Heart, remember that sad hour,
When we were forced to part,
How on thy cheeks I wept a shower,
With sad and heavy heart;
About thy waste my Arms did twist,
Oh! then I sight, and then I kissed:
Ten thousand feats and joys in one,
Did such distraction frame,
As if the livelesse world would run
To Chaos back again,
Whilst my poor heart, amidst these fears;
Lay bath^d in my milk warm tears.
Ah then I thought, and thinking wept,
How friends and fate di^ower,
On thee I eander, how they kept
Thee from thy Heroes Tower,
While thunder gro^nd, and heaven did weep
To rock thy sense in silent sleep.
But fate must unresisted stand,
Oh who can it oppose?
Necessiti's a Tyrant, and
No mean in mischief knows;
Else might my fairer Love and I
Unsever'd live, till one did dye.
Just so the hungry In^ant from
His Mothe^s dugge is taken,
When his weak arme's yet spread along.
More dulcid milk to gain;
And nothing brings the babe to rest,
Until he sleep upon her breast.
Thus being banished from my Love,
And for^'t to leave her sight.
No thoughts but those of her can move
In me the least delight;
But like true steel my heart does pant,
To touch the longed-for Adamant.
Oh let no storm of discontent
Be clouded in your brows,
Dear friends that have my being l^nt,
Give being to my vowes^
I will much engage my heart, if when
I say she is mine, you' ^e say Amen.
Such kindness^ to our true love shown,
Shall bind u^doubly then your own.
Epigram 20.
To the memory of his honored friend Master John Done, an Eversary.

Blessed dust, and better soul, to you alone,
I raise this structure, not in Jet or Stone,
Whose ^^aile^y in its luster only can,
Tell us below, there lies a s^^ayler man.
But heigh^ned by those several glories which
Do ^qually your better self in rich,
In those ^ude lines, if such poor things can live,
I would a memory to your being give.
Burst open thy Cell, blessed shade, and ^ise, that we
May do some homage to thy excellency.
Or that thy g^^ar example may invite,
Us to a wish of everlas^ing night,
In which thy Sun of virtue shall appear,
S^ ^ull, as if earth had no darkness there.
Oh happy spring of thine, whose seed and flower
Was sowed and bloomed, and witherd in an hour,
For if long age be counted but a span,
Thy inch of time scarce measured half a man.
But sleep, sleep best of spirits, why should I
Disturb thy ashes? it is a misery,
To know thou were, and art not, for so men,
Mourn, Jewels they once had, but lost again,
So he, whose bitter fate is forced to prove,
The misery of a memorable Love.
Remembering what it was, and since no more
He may enjoy it as he did before,
Weeps the sad consequence, and prints thereby
His sorrows, offered to the Readers eye.
But I must leave thee thus, and think of thee,
To the mad world, a just Antipathy.
Thou were not of those men whose gown and hood,
Must plead a wisdom, though not understood.
Nor of the tribe of such as easily can,
Drop jests, or vapors upon any man.
These are the Indians, that do fr^ske and r^n,
To the false rays of each supposed Sun:
Simple Americans that do ingrosse
The ^oyes of every noble genius.
Nor were you such whose cunning had the ^kill,
To murder a friend closely, nor to kill
With a pretense of safety; your just Ends
Depended not on liking of your friends.
But if the opposites of vice may be,
Expressed by any contrariety,
Let all men know, what all men wish, which is
But a content on earth, and after bliss,
Which thou art crowned with, thus some stones are set
At greater rate, then some whole Cabinet,
When thy triumphant spirit once did inn,
At the poor cottage of thy ^rayler skin,
Though every thought was payment of a rent,
To high, and worthy such a tenement,
Yet as it had a knowledge did dispia^e,
Because thou would not ^arry longer there.
It droopes and ruinates it self, and ^alls,
In every glory o^ its principalls.
So Princes in a journey having been
The honored guests of some poor village Inn
Are mourned at their departure, and now more
Grieves the sad host, then he was glad before.
Come Virgins, you whose innocence can
Embalme the mem^ry of a divine man;
Y^u whose unspotted glories as your faces
Preserve your fame and multiply its graces:
Whose easy goodness never did affect
To wound obedient spirits with neglect,
No^ triumph in the fall of former loves,
Come, come, blessed Virgins bring your peaceful Doves,
And at the Al^a^ of his sacred ^hrine,
Present them and your zeal, as I do mine.
That to the world hereafter may be read,
Here innocence by Virgins wound lies dead.
An Elegy on the death of his loving friend. I: C:
WHy should the labor of my mournful Verse,
Find so sad subject as thy timelesse hearse?
My soul, which now is not, but where thou art,
Stays but to tell the world we will no^ part.
And the glad Casket which thy ashes bears,
Shall tide me after thee in mi^e own tears,
And then rejoice that we whose hearts were one,
In death shall celebrate Communion.
Wisdom of fate: that early did remove,
Thee hence, that I in heaven might seek my love,
And so assure me that time thou could dye,
No beauty but must taste mortality.
I know my bounded every Grace
In the strict limits of thy well built face,
And thought those principles of beauty there
Unchangable, as bodies in their sphere;
But I recant, and tell the world this truth,
There is no privilege in blood or youth
Else how could thou, whose every smile: or breath
Was a su^ficient antidote against death,
Have met a grave; and like a drooping flower,
Have wi^hered to nothing in an hour?
Sleep while some Angel with a peace^ull wing,
Courtaines thy ashes here, and hovering
Over thy innocuous breast by that display,
Informs me where my dust must take its way,
Then my infranchis'd spirit up shall fly,
To our just wedding for eternity,
And pity all those enmities below,
That did with hold us from uniting so,
And smile to know that all our envious friends,
Have lost their plot, and we obtained our ends:
But we will marry here in spite of those
That would our much wished meeting interpose;
Death shall be pressed, lie closer sweet, make room
That we may make our marriage bed thy Tomb.
My son give me thy heart.
ANd why my heart, since I have none,
Or if I have perhaps it is stone,
And rather than have such a one,
Better have none.
Lord can thou chu^e no other part^
The world alas has stole my hea^^
Pleasure intis't it by strange Art
From me to part.
One Angel lust, and all the rest
Possesses it, or else as bad a guest,
And in the amidst there is a neast
For sloth to rest.
Envy would have it all, but pride
Disdaining, any should divide
Possession there.
Enter and then, as tyrants who,
By blood are raised, their states undo,
Does dominee^e.
The Petition.
Heat me my God, and hear me soon,
Because my morning touches noone,
Nor can I look for their delight,
Because my noone lays hold on night:
I am all circle, my morn, night, and noone,
Are individable, then hear me soon.
Thou art all time my God, and I
Am part of that eternity:
Yet being made, I want that might
To be as thou art, Infinite:
As in thy flesh, so he thou Lord to me,
That is, both infinite, and eternity,
But I am dust, at most, but man,
That dust extended to a span:
A span indeed, ^or in thy hand,
Stretched or contracted, Lord, I stand,
Contract and stretch me too, that I may be
Straightned on earth, to be enlarged to thee.
But I am nothing, then how can,
I call my self, or dust, or man?
Yet thou from nothing all did frame,
That all things might exalt thy name,
Make me but something, then my God to thee,
Then shall thy praise be all in all to me.
When first of linne I took survey,
Sin that first wrought poor man's decay,
Me thought the seeming pleasures that it wore
Betrayed a face
So full of grace
That I desired it more and more.
As ra^^les babies, and such ^oyes,
Are the ^ull bundles of childhoods joys
I rested in appearance little knowing,
That such vain things,
Which sorrow bring,
An alteration in their growing.
As warning once descri'd from sarre,
Through some dark cloud a glimeting star,
That lead me on to seek its luster out;
He that makes all
Answered his call,
Had turned my er^or qui^e about.
Did thou not God, divide those 'seas,
Egypt and Isreal's death and ease,
When sepa^ated waves like Mountains sweld
On either side
To quench their pride
That against thy edict did ^ebell.
God, did not thou ^ebuke those seas:
Natures great burden and disease
When Peter's Faith, his failing strength did cherish:
When calling loud
In The watery cloud,
He cried, ^ave Master or I perish.
Thou did my God, and thou the world,
And sin my beaten Bark have h^l'd
In a more desperate storm, yet still I see,
And hear the say,
To thy poor clay,
Is any thing too hard ^or me.
The Inquisition.
1.
Where art tho^ God, or where is he
That can discover thee to me,
The worlds without thee sure, for here
Does domineere
Hell, flesh, and sin, thou art not there.
2.
Does Air thy blessed spirit hold,
And ^^om our eyes thy sight unsold,
Thou art not there my God, for here
Does domineere
Satan, aires Prince, thou art not there.
3.
Or does thy sac^ed essence keep
Court in the Chamber o^ the deep;
No sure my God, ^ not so, sor here
Does domineere
Leviathan, thou art not there.
4.
Does flames too subtle for our ^ence
So spy impaild thy excellence;
No sure my God, not so, for here
Does domineere
The fiery Prince, thou art not there:
In none of these confind, yet thou do scatter
Thy presence, through both, earth, air, fire; and wate^
5.
Each place contains thee God, yet thou
Art no where, no where do remain:
Though every place we thee allow,
No place we know can thee contain.
Then I have found thee now though here,
Nor here thou art not yet, thou art
Both there and here, be any where,
So thou be in my heart;
Where being Lord, let that thy closet be,
To keep thee safe in me, and me in thee:
A Proud man.
Vile worm of dust, vain clay how durst thou vente^:
To ^well thy self above the earth, thy center;
Vapors exhaled and lifted to the skies,
Or dissipare or else prove prodigies:
Why being nothing art thou Bold to d'on
The ingloriou^ itch of exaltation,
And by a pe^ulant pride disdainst to be
More heightn'd by a self humility,
As if the Babell of thy thoughts could shroud
Th'aspi^ing battlements within a cloud,
And so the mighty machin safely stand,
Whose weaker basis is but moss and sand,
Strange mystery of sin, that drives us on
As farie as heaven to ^ind perdition;
For were thou there, and proved to be so then.
Heaven would ^ast down a devil once again:
Yet thus perhaps thy pride might ^^^ed be,
The Prince of Devils, does but equal thee:
Change but the subject and some sins admit,
To h^mble minds a happy benefit.
To kill the man o^ sin, to cove^ grace,
To ^resse by violence to Gods holy place,
C^ntention for a Crown, for blessing strife,
Are sins that ^^ll mortalyty with life,
But to be proud, not to be proud adds more
Sin to that pride, than pride had sin before.
Meditation.
1.
MY God came down in thunder once, but then
The sons of men
Affrighted at the dreadful crack,
Sounded, fell back,
Desiring not his presence so again.
2.
My God came down in whirlewinds too, and flame,
But his great Name,
So blazoned, did astonish more
Than heretofore,
When pointed thunder his loud Herrald came.
3.
My God came down in flesh and blood, and then
The Sons of men,
To such familiar mercy call,
Their spleen and gall
To properate his have to heaven again.
4.
My God comes daily down, in bread and wine,
A feast divine:
But grounds, and oxen hinder some,
They cannot come;
Exclude them then, says God, they are not mine.
5.
My God comes down in each repentant tear
Which my sad fear,
Of his displeasure, and my sin exhales
It Is that which bales
My soul, for all the good she is in a^teare.
6.
Come to me still, my God, or else let me;
So thou assist my footsteps, go^ to thee.
I know the way, for if to thee I come,
Thou art as well the voyage as the home.
If thou to me, my soul no passage fears:
^y thunder whitle wind, flesh, or ^east, or tears.
T.B.
The Cross.
1.
THere is no bud, but has a good
Art finds for basest-weedes an use:
Bodies distempered with gross blood,
Find prese^vation from abuse.
For did not that enforce a breach,
Who'ld use incision, sweat, or leech?
2.
Did not my sin divine my ^all,
And by my weakness show my want:
Security would never call
To God, nor for his merry pa^^.
For where there is no sense of evil,
The soul benumbed admits the devil^
3.
The heaviest Cross had some ^enowne,
And sharpest thorns this balsome had:
That though they were my Saviors Crown,
They did produce a good from bad.
The cause most vile, the effect most good,
That was my sin, but this his blood.
4.
Though bad my sin, it saved my ^al',
My weakness too, my want did show:
These did awake me, made me call
And to my God for mercy go.
Happy this Larum of my evil,
My soul awakt defy the devil
5.
Then happy Cross and healing Thorn,
Light burden, and balsamicke flower:
Eased by that, by this untorne,
My new-erected soul has power,
To bless you both, whose good effects
Spurred up my stupid si^^es neglects:
And making gain from such a loss,
Unto a Crown transfer a Cross,
T. B.
The Resurrection.
IS no time certain when or how, yet m^st
Some certa^ne time det^rmine I am dust?
Must these full bones, and swelling ve^^es appear
^aplesse and dry, as when the ^alling year
Exhauste^ the humor from the ^erdant bough,
Which did green liveries to the leaves allow?
And must it be from my decay resolved,
That my whole fabric once must be dissolved?
It Is true my soul, it is so: yet let no care
Drive my anxious thought how thou shall feate,
There is a ^^ch preservative for thee,
Above all balsome, called fidelity,
And when my Mass of congregated clay,
Shall in Earth^ Vinevard labor out the day,
The penny shall be thine: and he that can
From Rocks and Stones, ^ai^e seed to Abraham,
Shall raise thy dissipated dust: and glue
Thee in coherence, with thy corpse anew.
Strange miracle! yet La^a^us can tell,
This Paradox in him, found parallel
I do bele^ve it Lord: Oh! let me be,
As happy to enjoy my faith as he,
T.B.
Conscience.
SEe the black clouds of my aspiring sin,
Whose noxious exhalations begin
To muffle up my hopes, and swelling high,
Terminate no where till they touch the sky:
Sh^ill clamma^ous Conscience, do thou think my God
Like Ba^ll, his chinne upon his breast does nod,
And waken^ not unless thy cry (which is
A thousand Lar^ms) added be to his?
Busy Recorder, know 'st thou not I find,
Through the wholl series of a sinful mind,
That it is enough to sin? the bu^^hen's more
When after-checks tell what I did before:
And gives ill relish to my sick condition.
To taste such Viands by a repetition^
Yet happy be (my soul) for stupid scence,
Might ^o relaxe the in^entive Conscience,
That from its prone ^ndeavour it might be
No less then guilty by indulgency.
Oh! prosecute (...) still, quick Conscience, do
And may I my repentance do^ so too;
That when my Judge does find thy judgment past
App^as'd he say, lost sheep come home at last.
T. B.
The Mercy Seat.
1.
PAssing along, as I o^t pass that way,
I heard one from the Sanctuary say,
Ho! ho! come in
All you that sin,
And I will take the burden clean away.
H^^ke soul said I, oh! hark, the Number's All,
The mercy and the cry both general.
2.
With ^h^ my soul and I, two that had bin
Long stale-companions in the sweetes of sin.
Approacht that place
Bright shine of grace,
And ask^ if such a mercy ^odg'd there in,
Oh yes! says one, before your Throne appear,
Take in your hear^ a sigh, your eye a tear.
3.
Then to a spotless Altar I was brough^,
Where God to Man is Cha^^acted in thought,
Upon which stood
A crimson blood.
Whose every drop a thou and souls had bought.
And there I kneeled, for oh! wh^^ gesture is
Or can be in this action too submisse?
4.
I ^ooke and ^asted from the field and vine,
Their two best Elements of bread and wine,
And my soul straight
Had lost the weight,
Which did before disease its rest and mine.
I sound the cause was this, that I ^ed,
My soul ^ooke in more God, then I did bread.
5.
Loud voice, large mercy, boundless ^^ood, sweet vine,
Proclaim, forgive, wash, cleanse this soul of mine,
That to thy glory
I may story,
Both work and subject of that mercy thine.
Thine? thine my God, ^istrue: Oh! let me be
As near that attribute, as that to thee.
T. B.
The Present.
What shall I do my God for thee?
Thee, that have done so much for me.
For when I opened first the womb to live
In this low soil
Of sweat and ^oyle,
Thou did the means and guidance give.
My age is but a span or two,
A twist, which death can soon undo:
A white, shot at by many an aiming dart,
A restless ball,
Banded by all,
Advers^ies that toss a heart.
Then search within me, and without,
Employ thy not ^e round about:
Survey me well, and find in which part lies.
A thing so fit,
That I may it
Prefer to thee for sacrifice.
Though some present thee gold; or some
Rich Eastern smells, Myrthe, ^ynamum,
Or some proclaim thee in a d^eper strain,
Which dies before,
It Is twice read over,
In its own womb, and ^ombe, their brain.
Let me bring thee, my God, a heart,
Entitled th^e in every part,
Next that, a Verse like this, on which mine
Be longer set,
Than ^o ^orge^,
That such a present thou should fine.
Let others, so with men their credites prove,
They show them wealth and wit; I thee my love,
T. B.
Ad punctum mo^tis.
IF this hou^e do the business of my age
For being borne I must resolve to dye,
With wh^t delight can I sup^ly the stage,
M^^h cannot ^uite well with a ^ragedy;
Leave me delight, and let my sorrows tell
Heaven is my joy, the joy of earth my Hell.
AEgypt's the way to Canaan, what though he^e
The Pharaoh's of the time did me oppose,
Yet thy deliverance shall protect me there,
The greatest discord have the sweetest close;
Let my assurance here my joys express,
That Is the good land, this but the Wilderness.
Onyons and Garlic, and the flesh-po^stoo,
Let them desire that have a list to eaten
My pallat cannot relish what they do,
Manna, my God, I know is Angels mea^e;
But if this place affords it not to me,
Take me to Canaan since it is with thee.
Art thou not beauty Lord, to whom the Sun,
At height of glory is so dark a blot,
That when tho^ did obscure thy blessed Son
The other had his wonted light forgot.
Yet in that blessed Eclipse, this turn d such light
That earth saw heaven, though heaven was hid in night
To the Angels.
1.
A Safe humility is wise,
Both to it self and others to,
I know there is stars, but use mine eyes
To find out what they cannot do,
For though they both partake of light
Both have not equal sense in ^ight,
2.
And is it safe you glor^ous lights,
That this dull glimering spark, my soul,
A^^ect to know those boundless heights,
Where your exal^ed spirits rule;
Or were my wisdom better spent
To ^each my heart at home content.
3.
Yet as in dungeons we behold,
Through some small chinke a glimering ray,
And thence assured we are bold,
To think without there is a day,
So you discover to our sense
Your excellence by your influence,
4.
Blessed Children, of a more bl^st Father.
I Will not discou^se your story,
For my affections had much rather,
Partake than speak your glory,
Speak your own glory, you that can,
Which no man ere shall know as man.
5.
And yet I care not I what Quite
Of Che^ub's, Seraphin's, or Thrones.
Or Angels, lower are or higher,
Since all I know are holy ones,
If I keep time with any Qui^e,
I like the seat, I Will with no higher.
6.
Farewell sweet Qui^e, farewell I say,
This glimpse at distance does confute
All my discourse, and makes me pray
To know you there without dispute.
And since I long to meet, least I shall stray,
Guide you your Lovet on upon his way.
T.B.
On AEternity.
GOod God! eternity, what can,
A^^onish more the faith of man?
When it shall please thee God that I
On my unfriendly sick bed lie,
And those about me shall descry,
In my pale face deaths livery.
When breath shall fleet, and leave for me
The relic of deaths victory,
A grim sad coarse, oh must my light,
Astonished ^o^le, then take her flight,
To that long home, where it shall see^
Or blessed, or cursed AEternity?
Shall she for ever, ever dwell,
Or Saint in heaven, or fiend in hell?
When ages numberless are gone,
Shal't be ^s if we had past none?
It Is so my God, which when I think;
My staggard reason 'gins to sink:
My brain turns giddy, and weak I
Am rapt in wonders ecstasy:
Forgive me Lord, that thus presume,
To question thy eternal doom.
And since our minute life must gain
Pleasures eternal, or such pain:
As^ist me so my God, that when
I shall for sake the sons of men,
My jocond soul may sainted be,
In heaven, and thy eternity.
Em.D.
On the death of Mris. M. T.
MIstaken virgins, do not drop a tear,
She is not dead beleev't, I Will make it appear:
That which you call a hearse, is naught beside
A heavenly charet, in it a glorious bride.
And that which you more fondly ^e^ne a grave,
Mysterious heaven, for her bride-bed gave
Thus you mistaken, to a ^unerall haste,
When you're invited to a marriage ^east:
Heaven was her lover, would not be denied,
The welcome promise of so fair a Bride.
Which long since having, he now thought it best
T'espouse, and take her to his happy rest.
And as we see great Princes, ere they take,
Their royal consorts, they by proxy make
The ceremonious marriage; so did he,
By proxy death, wed her immo^tally:
And now enthroned, she does ^it an^ sing^
Divinest Anthems to her Lord and King.
Amongst quires of Angels, she does fill the skies,
With sweet tuned notes of heavenly rapsidies.
Thus gloriously happy does she still live,
Whose death you ^ondly, and unkindly grieve.
Em.D.
FINIS.

