The REWARD OF OPPRESSION, TYRANNY and INJUSTICE, Committed by the late Kings
and Queens of England, and others; by the unlawful Entry, and unlawful Deteiner
of the Duchy Lands of LANCASTER.

Declared in the Case of Samuel Beck, an Infant, and Directed to his Highness
OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR of England, etc. and to the Right Honorable his PRIVY
COUNSEL; By MARGARET BECK widow late Wife of Nevil Beck, Mother and Guardian
to the Infant

London Printed Ann. Dom. MDCLVI.

TO HIS HIGHNESS OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR Of ENGLAND, etc.
May it pleas your Highness Lancaster.

It has pleased God, that the power of Justice is now devolved on your
Highness, and the most honorable Privy Counsel. And you are now the fountain
thereof.

KIng Ed. 4. and his Counsel, heard the Cause of the Masters and poor Brethren
of the Hospital of St. Leonard's in York, complaining that Sir Hugh Hastings,
John Wombel, and others, withdrew from them a great part of their Living, which
consisted chiefly upon the having of a Thrave of Corn of each Plough-land in
the Counties of York, Westmorland, Cumberland, and Lancashire, and for which
they, being very poor men, were not able to sue for at the Common Law: Rotulo
pat. de An. 8. E. 4. part 3. memb. 14. and yet they had for that Hospital a
special Act of Parliament, made for them, to give them action in that very
case: 2. Hen. Cap* 2.

That there are many Presidents in the like case, where the single person and
his privy Counsel heard and determined causes for the poor against oppression

She make's bold to offer this to your Highness with confidence, because
heretofore you knew her poor Husband, and have pitied his case, and have been a
friend to him out of your bounty and goodness.

May it pleas your Highness, she is so poor, that she is fain by her Needle
to maintain her self and poor Child, hardly.

Therefore her humble petition is, that your Highness will be pleased to order
her a hearing in the behalf of her child, before your Highness, and your privy
Counsel, in this case; and to assign her Counsel, and in the mean time out of
your bounty and goodness to allow her for the present maintenance for her
Child; A petition as it has pleased your Highness graciously to afford to
others; and the prayers of the Widow and Fatherless will be for your Highness
happiness, etc,

To the Right Honorable the Lord's of his Highnes's most Honorable Privy
Counsel,
The humble Petition of Margaret Beck widow Humbly shows, THat in all ages
extraordinary causes were heard and determined before the single person and his
privy Counsel, as in the case of Bogo de Clare, notwithstanding he was dismissed
out of Parliament for Error in the complaint; yet the King commanded him by Writ
ad faciendum and recipiendum quod per Regem and concilium fuerit faciendum: and
so proceed to a Reexamination of the whole Cause 18. E. 1.

And in the case of Elizabeth the widow of Nicolas Audley against James Audley
concerning her dowry, 4^. E. 3.

Also in the case of William Goddard against Hugh Straule for diverse Manors in
the Isle of Tannet, 6. E. 5.

Also in the case of Robert Danvers a Counselor against William Brocket a
Clark of the Exchequer, 21. H. 6.

Another concerning the innocence of the Lord Ralph Cromwell Chamberlain to H.
6. concerning the villainous accusation of one Robert Colindona Priest for
suspicion of treason, 31. H. 6. also.

In the case of the Abbot of S. Edmond's-Bury against Walter Thurston and
others, 20. E. 4. also

In the case of Fardinando de Sanciago a Spaniard H. 7. with many more
presidents in those and other Kings raigns, and in the book of orders by the
privy Counscel in the Minority of H 6. in the ^ Article that all bills
terminable at the Common Law, shall be remitted thither, unless the discretion
of the Counsel feel too great might on the one party, and unmight on the
other, or cause reasonable to move them; and in the 14 article that the Clerk of
the Counsel shall be swo^n that each day of sitting he shall call the bills
of the poorest suitors to be first read and answered, so near as he can ask
and inquire, and the Kings sergeant to be sworn to give Counsel without fee to
such as shall be accepted upon pain to be discharged of their offices which
were the very words of the articles.

Therefore her humble petition is, that you would be pleased to look upon the
following case, and to assign her counsel, videl.

Sergeant Maynard, Mr Lach, and Mr Freeman etc.

And to order that she may have Coppie of such records as concern the Duchy
of Lancaster and that her Counsel and Agent may search for the same without
Fees, she being miserably poor; and that those who have entered on the Lands
of the said Duchy may be summoned to answer to her Bill in the behalf af the
Infant: and she shall daily pray. etc.

HENRY the 4. after his Coronation, created Thomas Beaufort Earl of Dorset, and
gave him 20 l. per An. out of the Exchequer, for maintaining the King's Title
to the Crown, both at home and abroad; and also made a Charter of the Dukedom
of Lancaster, to the second House of Lancaster in expectancie, which then was
Tho. Earl of Dorset, who after the deceas of H. 4. by virtue of the Charter did
enter into the Dukedom, and did enjoy the same nine years in the reign of H-
5. and six years in the reign of H. 6. and being lawfully thereof seized, died
without issue; after whose deceas the said Dukedom descended to the next heir
at the common Law, which was Joan Countess of Westmorland his Sister, who had
issue George Nevil Lord Latimer, who had Sir Henry Nevil, who had issue Richard
Lord Latimer, and Thomas Nevil twins, Richard died without issue; Thomas had
issue Elizabeth his only daughter and heir, who intermarried with Will. Beck
Esquire. who had issue Sam. Beck, whohad issue Nevil Beck, who had issue Sam. Beck,
an Infant now living.

H. 6. Contrary to the Charter made by H. 4. entered by intrusion, for which
the quarrel began between the Houses of York and Lancaster.

E. 4. conquered H. 6. and entered upon all his Lands as escheted, because he
found the Lands of the Dukedom of Lancaster in his possession, he kept that
also for his better strength and security, and died; who had issue Edward and
Richard Infants, murdered in their Infancy by Richard 3. who usurped both the
Crown and Lands of the Dukedom of Lancaster.

H. 7. who had been banished, came into England with forces only to claim the
Earldom of Richmond, and fought with, and killed R. 3. and took upon him the
Crown, and also entered upon the Dukedom of Lancaster, taking his president
from R. 3. E. 4. and H. 6. and kept it all his time, and left it to H. 8.

In the first year of Mary an office was found, after the death of Elizabeth,
daughter of Tho. Lord Latimer and wife of William Beck, whereby Samuel Beck
grandfather to this Infant was found heir to the Dukedom of Lancaster, as heir
to his Mother who had been lamentably persecuted, and constrained to fly from
place to place, for fear of being burnt for Heresy (as they called it) by
that Cruel woman Queen Mary.

This office was prosecuted and found by one Heath, Father in law to Samuel
Beck the Grandfather; He being an Infant, and at School at Westminster, and
in the 3 year of Philip and Mary, Samuel Beck being under nine years of age,
was seized by Warrant, and delivered to Rixam a Romish Priest to be bred up in
the Romish Religion, (the Queen then pretending love to him being her Kinsman)
and he must be carriried away from all his honorable Kindred, and there must
be called Heath after his Father in Law's name, hoping by this cheat to
defraud the Office, and that he was not that party found heir in the Office.

When that Queen died, Heath found out the child, and bred him at Oxford, and
matriculated him by the right name of Beck: and when he came to be capable of
the Ministry, Queen Elizabeth gave him two great benefices in Devonshire and
Cornwall, with which preferment he contented himself until much importuned by
many of his noble Kindred, and especially the then Earl of Worcester, to
challenge his right to the Dukedom of Lancaster; whereupon he made his
application to Queen Elizabeth by Petition, who answered, that the Dukedom was
cast upon her without her means or procurement, and that she desired to have
him advanced to his right and dignity, he being so near allied to her; and
ordered, that no more grant of the Duchy lands should pass until it was
tried in Parliament, and also offered him great honor and dignity in the Church
of England; but before it was determined in Parliament, the Queen died.

Then he petitioned King James for a hearing in Parliament, and to assign him
Counsel, who did ( viz.) Sergeant Harris, Sergeant Jones, Mr Dyett, and Mr
George Crook, and then contrary to Law committed him close prisoner, without
Ink or Paper, and so kept him in prison until a little before his death, that
the King intended to call a Parliament; and being fearful that the horrible
piece of tyranny would be questioned, he released him, and promised him
fair, (as he knew well enough how to dissemble, and called it nothing but
King-craft) but performed nothing during his life. And after his death, it
being told, King James, that the Duke of Lancaster was dead, he answered, God
have mercy on Charles and his Issue, for he had don the Duke of Lancaster
mickle wrong, and that he (meaning Mr Beck) had left a heavy curs behind him;
which were King James his own words; for it was Mr Beck's custom when he spoke
with the King, to desire God to deal by the King and his, as the King had dealt
with him. Shortly after King James dyed,

Then Nevil Beck being in his travels beyond the seas came back to claim his
right to the Dukedom of Lancaster of King Charles, who delayed him, and would
not consent to a hearing; whereupon Nevil Beck desired 400l. per An. for his
maintenance for the present; but the King answered, that, if he gave him that,
it would enable Nevil Beck to make a case of it, and so go to Law with him:
whereupon some high words of discontent passed from Nevil Beck in relation to
his wrong, that the King in fury caused him to be put out of the Court Gates,
and gave order that the Porters should not suffer him to com in at any time
after, which caused Nevil Beck to use these words to the Kings servants, I do
believ I shall live to see him turned out, and that neither he nor his shall
have any thing to do with this house, meaning Whitehall.

Then Nevil Beck petitioned the Lord's and Commons of the late long Parliament
to hear his case, who deferred the hearing of it, telling him that he must
first get an allowance from the King, who was then at Oxford in open hostlity
against the Parliament; and unless that were first don they could not give
allowance to his Bill, which how impossible that was to be don, let the world
judge; and after the King's execution they answered him, that they had pulled
down the house of York, and abolished Kingship, and therefore it would be
dangerous to set up the house of Lancaster; but issued out to him some small
sums at several times, which kept him only from starving, and also forbad
the sale of the Duchy Lands, and after his death issued out 20 l. to the use
of his Son Samuel Beck the Infant by way of acknowledgment*

The Duchy Lands were unfold until the assembly after at Westminster, (who
voted themselves a Parliament) ordained the sale of the Duchy Lands.

The answer of his HIGHNESS most honorable privy Counsel, to the Case of
Samuel Beck, as follows.
JOhn of Gaunt had the Dukedom of Lancaster by his first wife, heir of Henry,
Duke of Lancaster. page 326.

By that first wife he had H. 4. and Philip marrried to John King of Portugal,
and Elizabeth married to John Holland Duke of Exeter, and afterward to Sir
John Cornwall.

But Thomas Earl of Dorset came from Katharine Swinford the third wife, so did
Joan Beaufort married to the Earl of Westmerland, from whom Beck claims page
327.

And page 328. it is said that H. 4. united the Ductchie to the Crown which
himself held, and H. 5. and H. 6. which are true heirs to it.

Neither is it likely that H. 4. would pass it to a female descended from
Katharine Swinford, who had diverse sons himself page 992. Joan Beufort, sister
of Tho. Beufort of Dorset, was second wife of Ralph Nevil Earl of Westmorland,
and this Earl had a son called Richard Nevil Earl of Salisbury, in right of his
wife, and he had issue first Richard Nevil the King-maker, and six daughters,
from whom came the Earl of Derby, Earl of Arundel, the Lord Beuchamp, the Earl
of Huntingdon, the Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery, he had also a ninth son
called William Nevil, Lord Falconberg after Earl of Kent, whose three daughters
married Coyners Strange ways, and Bedbaring, and a twelvth was George Nevil,
Lord Latimer (whom the printed paper cites) which Barony his Father purchased
with the Lands of Latimer, and bestowed them on his son George, Lord Latimer
from whom Beck claims in the paper.

But how can any thing descend on the daughter of this Lord Latimer from John
Beufort, when all the families before mentioned, Derby, Arundell, etc. descend
from the elder son of Joan Beufort, by marriage with his daught^rs, and George
Latimer was the twelvth son of that eldest son.

The reply of Margaret Beck widow, Mother and Guardian to the Infant.
IT is true, that John of Gaunt had the Dukedom of Lancaster by his first wife,
and that he had H. 4. and two daughters by the first wife as is expressed in
the paper.

And that Thomas Earl of Dorset, and Joan de Beufart came of the body of
Katharine Swinford his third wife.

As to page 328. the paper faith, it is said that H. 4. united the Dukedom of
Lancaster to the Crown, which proves nothing, but it will be prooved that H.
4. was so far from uniting of it to the Crown, that he made a Charter of the
Dukedom, and confirmed it by act of Parl^ment to Thomas de Beufort in
expectancy after his death, and that after his death Thomas did enter, and did
enjoy it all the time of H. 5. and six years in the time of H. 6. and in all
that time let Lease, and granted Estates.

And for that it was unlikely that H. 4. would pass it to a female, which is no
proof; for Beck's case is not that H. 4. passed it to a female, but that Thomas
dying without issue, Joan was his next heir at the common Law,

And it does appear by the grants made by H. 4. to Thomas de Beufort, that he
esteemed him above all others of his family, for in the grants it is for
maintaining his Title to the Crown both at home and abroad, and so might very
well trust him to keep up his Childrens Title to the Crown after his deceas.

Also it appears by Record that H. 4. created him Earl of Dorset, and
afterward Duke of Exeter, and after that this grant of the Reversion of the
Dukedom of Lancaster thereby the more to enable him to maintain his Children's
Title to the Crown.

It does not appear that Ralph Nevil had any more Children by Joan de Beufert
his second wife, then George Nevil Lord Latimer, and Cicilia, afterward
married to Richard Plantagenet Duke of York, from whom the Stewards family
descended, but it must needs be, that the Children of Ralph Nevil were of his
first wife, otherwise how could it be found in the office after the death of
Latimer, and wife of Beck, that her Child was heir to Jone Countess of
Westmerland, and so to Thomas Earl of Dorset, and Duke of Lancaster. All this
appeared by the coppies of the Records allowed by King James taken out of the
Tower, Court of wards, and Heralds office, when King James assigned the Child's
grandfather Counsel.

Notwithstanding all this the mother and guardian of the Child do submit to
the Lord Protector and his privy Counsel, to deal with her and her poor Child
as they shall pleas, whereupon the Child was sent to Eaton College to be bred
there at School, to eat the bread given by H. 6. who first intruded on the
Duchy Lands; but the privy Counsel would not hear any further in the case.

OBSERVATIONS.
HENRY 6. entered first by intrusion on the Duchy Lands of Lancaster after
the death of Tho. de Beufort Earl of Dorset, and Duke of Lancaster and Exeter,
and was afterward conquered by E. 4. taken prisoner, and murdered in prison,
and so lost the Duchy Lands, Crown, and Life: Also E. 4. kept it by wrong all
his life, who was wicked in murders, and adultery; he caused his Brother
George Duke of Clarence to be drowned in a Butt of Malmsey, his adultery with
Jane shore and others, and had wars all his time, with those who took part with
the house of Lancaster, his two sons after his death murdered in the Tower by
R. 3. The Children are paid for the sins of the Father.

R. 3 would not part with it until H. 7. killed him at Bosworth field, where
his body was disgracefully drawn to Lecester, and there buried basely.

H. 7. entered upon the Duchy Lands and sold much of it, and made abundance
of money by that and unlawful taxes upon the people, as a most wicked Tyrant,
and left it to his son H. 8. who as wickedly spent it as his Father got it, and
left E. 6. his son, who died an Instant, and Mary his eldest daughter, who
wickedly persecuted her sister Elizabeth. She reigned all her time in a bloody
persecution, and died; all three Children of H. 8. reigning successively one
after the other, and dying Childless, a curs upon that line.

King James entered upon the Lands of the Dukedom left unsold and kept it by
oppression, died unnaturally by poison, as has been apparently prooved; and
left King Charles, who refused to restore the Lands or give any satisfaction:
His end most miserable, arraigned, condemned, and executed at his own door, his
wife and Children constrained to live on Alms, in strange Countries: And for
the members of the late long Parliament, they were disgracefully turned out of
that power: And lastly, for the Assembly who called themselves a Parliament,
brake up themselves in confusion, oppression and injustice, visibly punished in
this very case.

It is observed by good Historians, that from the body of John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster have descended lineally one Empress, 32 Christian Kings and Queens,
2 Cardinals, 10 Princes and Princesses, and 49 Dukes and Dutchesses, etc. as
from another Abraham, whereof this Infant Samuel Beck is the last only heir of
that line left in England. The Stewards family is also descended from the
second house of Lancaster, in expectancie from Joan Countess of Westmorland, the
daughter of John of Gaunt; but their descent is by her youngest daughter the
Lady Cecilia, who intermarried with Richard Plantagenet Duke of York, who had
E. 4. and R. 3. but Samuel Beck is lineally descended from George the son of
John Countess of Westmorland, who was B^^^her of the whole blood to Cecilia
Duchess of York, the issue of the Son, in right of his Mother, is to be
answered before the issue of the daughter, which clear's the case for Samuel
Beck the Inffant.

FINIS.

