THE Dutch Lover: A COMEDY, ACTED AT THE DVKES THEATER.

Written by Mrs. A. Bhen.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Dring, at the Sign of the Harrow at Chancery Lane
end, over against the Inner Temple Gate in Fleet Street. 1673.

Good, Sweet, Honey, Sugar-candied READER.
WHich I think is more than any one has called you yet.) I must have a word or
two with you before you do advance into the Treatis^; but it is not to beg your
pardon for diverting you from your affairs, by such an idle Pamphlet as this
is, for I presume you have not much to do, and therefore are to be obliged to
me for keeping you from worse employment, and if you have a better, you may get
you gone about your business: but if you will mispend your time, pray lay the
fault upon your self; for I have dealt pretty fairly in the matter, and told
you in the Title ^age what you are to expect within. Indeed, had I hung out a
sign of the Immortality of the Soul, of the Mystery of Godliness, or of
Ecclesiastical Policy, and then had treated you with Indiscerpibility, and
Essential Spissitude (words, which though ^ am no competent Judge of, for want
of Languages, yet I fancy strongly ought to mean just nothing) with a company
of Apocryphal midnight tales culled out of the choicest insignificant Authors;
If I had only proved in Folio that Apollonius was a naughty Knave, or had
presented you with two or three of the worst principles transcribed out of the
peremptory and ill natured, (though prettily ingenious) Doctor of Mal^sbury
undigest^d, and ill managed by a silly, saucy, ignorant, imp^rtinent, ill
educated Chaplain, I were then indeed sufficiently in fault; but having
inscribed Comedy on the beginning of my Book, you may guess pretty near what
peny-worths you are like to have, and ware your money and your time accordingly.

I would not yet be understood to lessen the dignity of Plays, for surely they
deserve a place among the middle, if not the better sort of Books; for I have
heard that most of that which bears the name of Learning, and which has abused
such quantities of Ink and Paper, and continually imploys so many ignorant,
unhappy souls for ten, twelve, twenty years in the University (who yet poor
wretches think they are doing something all the while) as Logic, etc. and
several other things (that shall be nameless, lest I should mispel them) are
much more absolutely nothing than the errantest Play that e're was writ. Take
notice, Reader, I do not assert this purely upon my own knowledge; but I think
I have known it very fully proved, both sides being fairly heard, and seen some
ingenious opposers of it most abominably baff^ed in the Argument: Some of which
I have got so perfectly by rote, that if this were a proper place for it, I am
apt to think my self could almost make it clear; and as I would not undervalue
Poetry, so neither am I altogether of their judgment, who believe no wisdom in
the world beyond it. I have often heard indeed (and read) how much the World
was anciently obliged to it for most of that which they called Science, which
my want of letters ^akes me less assured of than others happily may be: but I
have heard some wise men say, that no considerable part of useful knowledge was
this way communicated, and on the other way, that it has served to propagate
so many idle superstitions, as all the benefits it has or can be guilty of,
can never make sufficient amends for, which unaided by the unluckey charms of
Poetry, could never have possessed a thinking Creature such as man. However true
this is, I am my self well able to affirm that none of all o^r English Poets,
and least the Dramatique (so I think you call them) can be justly charged with
too great reformation of men's minds or mann^rs, and for that I may appeal to
general experiment, if th^se who are the most ^ssiduous Disciples of the Stage,
do not make the f^ndest and the lewdest crew about this Town; for if you should
unhappily converse them through the year, you will not find one dram of sense
amongst a Club of them, unless you will allow for such a little Link-Bays
Ribaldry, thick larded with unseasonable ^aths, and impudent defiance of God,
and all things serious; and that at such a senceless damned unthinking rate,
as, if 'twere well distributed, would spoil near half the Apothecaries trade,
and save the sober people of the Town the charge of Vomits; And it was smartly
said, (how prudently I cannot t^ll) by a late learned Doctor, who, though
himself no great asserter of a Deity, (as you will believe by that which follows)
yet was observed to be continually persuading of this sort of men (if I for
once may call them so) of the necessity and truth of our Religion; and being
asked how he came to bestir himself so much this way, made answer, that it was
because their ignorance and indiscreet debauch made them a scandal to the
profession of Atheism. And for their wisdom and design, I never knew it reach
beyond the invention of some notable expedient, for the speedier ridding them
of their estate, (a devilish ^l^g to Wit and Parts) than other grouling Mortal^
know, or battering half a dozen fair new Windows in a Morning after their
debauch, whils^ the dull unj^nt^e R^seal they belong to is fast asleep. But I Will
proceed no farther in their chara^ter, because that miracle of Wit (in spite
of Academick frippery) the mighty Echard has already done it to my
satisfaction; and who^ver undertakes a Suppliment to any thing he has
discourst, had better for their reputation be doing nothing.

Besides, this Theme is worn too threa^-bare by the whiffling would-be Wits of
the Town, and of both the stone-blind-eyes of the Kingdom. And therefore to
return to that which I before was speaking of, I will have leave to say that in
my judgment the increasing number of our latter Plays have not done much more
toward the amending of men's Morals, or their Wit, than ^ath the frequent
Preaching, which this last age has been pestered with, (indeed without all
Controversy they have done less har^) nor can I once imagine what temptation
any one can have to expect it from them: for, sure I am, no Play was ever writ
with that design. If you consider Tragedy, you will find their best of characters
unlikely patterns for a wise man to pursue: For he that is the Knight of the
Play, no sublunary feats must serve his Dulcinea; for if he cannot bestrid the
Moon, he will never make good his business to the end, and if he chance to be
offended, he must without considering right or wrong confound all things he
meets, and put you half a score likely tall fellows into each pocket; and truly
if he come not something near this pitch, I think the Tragedies not worth a
farthing; for Plays were certainly intended for the exercising of men's
passions, not their understandings, and he is infinitely far from wise, that
will bestow one moments private meditation on such things: And as for Comedy,
the finest folks you meet with there, are still unfitter for your imitation,
for though within a leaf or two of the Prologue, you are told that they are
people of Wit, good H^mour, good Manners, and all that: yet if the Authors did
not kindly add their proper names, you would never know them by their characters;
for whatsoe'er's the matter, it has happened so spightfully in several Plays,
which have been pretty well received of late, that ev^n th^se persons that
were meant to be the ingenious Censors of the Play, have either proved the most
debauched, or most un^ittie people in the Company: nor is this error very
lamentable, since as I take it Comedy was never meant, either for a converting
or confirming Ordinance: In short, I think a Play the best divertisement that
wise men have; but I do also think them nothing so, who do discourse as
formallie about the rules of it, as if 'twere the grand affair of humane life.
This being my opinion of Plays, I studied only to make this as entertaining as
I could, which whether I have been successful in, my gentle Reader, you may for
your shilling judge. To ^ell you my thoughts of it, were to little purpose, for
were they very ill, you may be sure I would not have exp^s'd it; nor did I so
till I had first consulted most of those who have a reputation for judgment of
this kind; who were at least so civil (if not kind) to it as did encourage me
to venture it upon the Stage, and in the Press: Nor did I take their single
word for it, but used their reasons as a confirmation of my own.

Indeed that day 'twas Acted first, there comes me into the Pit, a long,
lither, phlegmatic, ^hite, ill-favored, wretched Fop, an officer in
Masquerade newly transported with a Scarf and Feather out of France, a sorry
Animal that has naught else to shield it from the uttermost contempt of all
mankind, but that respect which ^e afford to Rats and Toads, which though we do
not well allow to live, yet when considered as a part of Gods Creation, we make
honorable mention of them. A thing, Reader -- but no more of such a Smelt:
This thing, I tell ye, opening that which serves it for a mouth, out issued
such a noise as this to those that sat about it, that they were to expect a
woeful Play, God damn him, for it was a woman's. Now how this came about I am not
sure, but I suppose he brought it piping hot from some, who had with him the
reputation of a villainous Wit: for Creatures of his size of sense talk without
all imagination, such scraps as they pick up from other folks. I would not for
a world be taken arguing with such a property as this, but if I thought there
were a man of any tolerable parts, who could upon mature deliberation
disting^sh well his right hand from his left, and justly state the difference
between the number of sixteen and two, yet had this prejudice upon him; I would
take a little pains to make him know how much he errs. For waving the
examination, ^hy women having equal education with men, were not as capable of
knowledge, of whatever sort as well as they: I Will only say as I have touched
before, that Plays have no great room for that which is men's great advantage
over women, that is Learning: We all well know that the immortal Shakespears
Plays (who was not guilty of much more of this than often falls to women's
share) have better pleased the World than Johnsons works, though by the way
it is said that Benjamin was no such Rabbi neither, for I am informed his
Learning was but Grammar high; (sufficient indeed to rob poor Salust of his
best Orations) and it has been observed, that they are apt to admire him most
confoundedly, who have just such a scantling of it^ as he had; and I have seen
a man the most severe of Johnsons Sect, sit with his Hat removed less than a
hairs breadth from one sullen posture for almost three hours at the Al^hymist;
who at that excellent Play of Harry the Fourth (which yet I hope is far enough
from Farce) has very hardly kept his Doublet whole; but affectation has
always had a greater share both in the actions and discourse of men than truth
and judgment have: and for our Modern ones, except our most unimitable
Laureat, I dare to say I know of none that write at such a formidable rate, but
that a woman may well hope to reach their great^st hights. Then for their musty
rules of Unity, and God knows what besides, if they meant any thing, they are
enough intelligable, and as practible by a woman; but really methinks they that
disturb their heads with any other rules of Plays besides the making them
pleasant, and avoiding of scurrility, might much better be employed in studying
how to improve men's too too imperfect knowledge of that ancient English Game;
which hight long Laurence: And if Comedy should be the Picture of ridiculous
mankind, I wonder any one should think it such a sturdy task, whilst we are
furnished with such precious Originals as him, I lately told you of; if at
least that Character do not dwindle into Farce, and so become too mean an
entertainment for th^se persons who are used to think. Reader, I have a
complaint or two to make to you, and I have done; Know then this Play was
hugely injured in the Acting, for 'twas done so imperfectly as never any was
before, which did more harm to this than it could have done to any of another
sort; the Plot being busy (though I think not intricate) and so requiring a
continual attention, which being in^errupted by the intolerable negligence of
some that acted in it, must needs much spoil the beauty on it. My Dutch Lover
spoke but little of what I intended for him, but supplied it with a deal of
idle stuff, which I was wholly unacquainted with, till I had heard it first
from him; so that Jack pudding ever used to do: which though I knew before, I
gave him yet the part, because I knew him so acceptable to most of the lighter
^eriwigs about the Town, and he indeed did vex me so, I could almost be
angry(...) Yet, but Reader, you remember, I suppose, a fusty piece of Latin
that has past from hand to hand this thousand years they say (and how much
longer I cannot tell) in favor of the dead* I intended him a habit much more
notably ridiculous, which if^ it can ever be important was so here, for many of
the Scenes in the three last Acts depended upon the mistakes of the Colonel for
Haunce, which the ill-favored likeness of their Habits is supposed to cause.
Lastly, my Epilogue was promised me by a Person who had surely made it good, if
any, but he failing of his word, deputed one, who has made it as you see, and
to make out your penyworth you have it here. The Prologue is by misfortune
lost. Now, Reader, I have eased my mind of all I had to say, and so sans
farther complyment, Adieu.

The Actors Names.
AM^rosio, A Nobleman of Spain. Marcel, His Son. Silvio, Supposed bastard Son
to Ambrosio. Antonio, A German that has debauched Hippolyta. Alonzo, A
Flaunders Colonel contracted to Hippolyta. and newly arrived at Madrid. Lovis,
His friend. Carlo, Father to Lovis, and Euphemia. Haunce van Ezel, A Dutch Fop
contracted to Euphemia, newly arrived at Madrid. Gload, His Cash-keeper. Pedro,
An old servant to Alonzo. Euphemia, In love with Alonzo. Daughters to Ambrosio.
Hippolyta, In love with Antonio Cleonte, In love with Silvio
Clarinda, Sister unknown to Alonzo in love with Marcel. Dormida, Her
Governess. Francisca, Woman to Cleonte. Two Maids to Euphemia.
Olinda, Dorice,

The Scene Madrid. THE Dutch Lover.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Alonzo and Lovis in traveling habits, attended by Pedro and Gload. Lov.
DEar Alonzo! I shall love a Church the better this month for giving me a sight
of thee, whom I so little expected in this part of the World, and less in so
sanctified a place. What affair could be powerful enough to draw thee from the
kind obliging Ladies of B^abant?


Alon. First the sudden orders of my Prince Don John, and next a fair Lady.


Lov. A Lady! can any of this Country relish with a man that has been used to
the freedom of those of Bruxels, from whence I suppose you are now arrived?


Alon. This morning landed, from such a storm, as set us all to making vows of
conversion, (upon good conditions) and that indeed brought me to Church.


Lov. In that very storm I landed too, but with less sen^e of danger than you,
being diverted with a pleasant fellow that came along with me, and who is
defign'd to marry a sister of mine against my will -- And now I think of him,
Gload, where have thou left this Master of thine?


Glo. At the Inn, Sir, in as lamentable a pickle, as if he were still in the
storm; recruiting his emptyed stomach with Brandy, and railing against all
women-kind for your sisters sake, who has made him undertake this voyage.


Lov. Well, I Will come to him, go home before.


Exit Gload. Alon. Prithee what thing is this?


Lov. Why, it is the Cashier to this Squire I spoke of, a man of business, and
as wise as his Master, but the graver Coxcomb of the two. But this Lady,
Alonzo, who is this Lady thou speak of? shall not I know her? we were wont
to divide the spoils of Beauty, as well as those of war between us.


Alon. O but this is no such prise, thou would hardly share this with the
danger, there is Matrimony in the case.


Lov. Nay, then keep her to thy self, only let me know who it is that can
debauch thee to that scandalous way of life; is she fair? will she recompense
the folly?


Alon. Faith I know not, I never saw her yet, but it is the sister of Marcell,
whom we both knew last Summer in Flandens, and where he and I contracted such a
friendship, that without other consideration he promised me Hippolyta, for
that is his sisters name.


Lov. But wo't thou really marry her?


Alon. I consider my advantage in being allied to so considerable a man as
Ambrosio, her father; I being now so unhappy as not to know my Birth or Parents.


Lov. I have often heard of some such thing, but durst not ask the truth of it.


Alon. It Is so, all that I know of myself is, that a Spanish Soldier, who
brought me up in the Army, dying, confessed I was not his son, (which till then I
believed) and a^ the age of twelve left me to shift for my self; the fortune he
inricht me with was his Horse and Arms, with a few documents how to use them,
as I had seen him do with good success: This servant, and a Crucifix of value.
[Poi^t^ to Pedro. And from one degre^ to another, I arrived to what you knew
me, Colonel of the Princes Regiment, and the glory of his favor*


Lov. Honor is the Child of Virtue, and finds an owner every where.


Alon. Oh, Sir, you are a Courtier, and have much the odds of a Soldier in
parlies of this nature: But hither I am come --


Lov. To be undone; faith thou lookst ill upon^t.


Alon. I confess I am not altogether so brisk as I should have been upon
another occasion; you know Lovis I have been used to Christian liberty, and
hate this formal courtship. Pox on it, would 'twere over.


Lov. Where all parties are agreed, there is little need of that; and the Ladies
of Spain, whatever gravity they assume, are as ready as any you ever met withal.


Alon. But there is a damned custom that does not at all agree with men so frank
and gay as thou and I; there is a deal of danger in the achievement, which some
say hightens the pleasure, but I am of another opinion.


Ped. Sir, there is a female in a vail has followed us ever since we came from
Church.


Alon. Some amorous adventure: See she [ Enter Olinda. advances: Prithee
retire, there may be danger in it.


[P^ts Lovis back. Lov. Oh then, I must by no means leave you.


[Lovis ^dvances. Olin. Which of these two shall I choose?

[She look on both. Sir, you appear a stranger.


[To Lovis. Alon. We are both so Lady.


Olin. I shall spoil all, and bring [She looks again on both. the wrong. Sir,
you should be a Cavalier, that --


Alon. Would gladly obey your orders.


Lov. Nay, I find it is all one to you, which you choose, so you have one of us;
but would not both do better?


Olin. No, Sir, my commission's but to one.


Alon. Fix and proceed then, let me be the man.


Olin. What shall I do? they are both well: [Aside. but I Will even choose, as
'twere, for my self; and hang me if I know which that shall be. [Looks on
both.] Sir, there is a Lady of quality and beauty, who guessing you to be men
of honor, has sent me to one of you.


Alon. Me I am sure.


Lov. Me, me, he is engaged already.


Alon. That Is foul play Lovis.


Olin. Well, I must have but one, and therefore I Will wink and choose.


Lov. I Will not trust blind fortune.


Alon. Prithee Lovis let thee and I agree upon the matter, and I find the Lady
will be reasonable; cross or pile who shall go.


Lov. Go, Sir, whither?


Alon. To the Lady that --


Lov. Sent for neither of us that I can hear of yet.


Olin. You will not hear me out, but I Will end the difference by choosing you,
Sir; and if you will follow me [ To Alonzo. at a distance, I will conduct you
where this Lady is.


Alon. Fair guide march on, I Will follow thee.


[Offers to go. Lov. You are not mad, Sir, it is some abuse, and dangerous.


[Pulls him back. Alon. Be not envious of my happiness: Forbear a wench, for
fear of danger!


Lov. Have a care, it is some plot. [Holds him.] Where did this Lady see us, we
are both strangers in the City?


Alon. No matter where.


Olin. At Church, Sir, just now.


Alon. I, I at Church, at Church, enough.


Lov. What Is her name?


Alon. Away, thou art fuller of questions than a Fortune Tellers: Come let us be
gone.


Lov. Sure you do not mean to keep your word, Sir?


Alon. Not keep my word, Lovis! What wicked life have thou known me lead,
should make thee suspect I should not. When I have made an interest in her, and
find her worth communicating, I will be just upon honor. -- Go, go.


Lov. Well, go your ways, if marriage do not tame you, you are past all hopes:
but pray, Sir, let me see you at my lodgings, the Golden Fleece here at the
gate.


Alon. I Will attend thee there, and tell thee my adventure: Farewell. [ Exit
Lovis.] Pedro, go you and inquire for the house of Don Ambrosio, and tell him I
will wait on him in the evening, by that time I shall get my self in order.


[ Exeunt Alonzo and Olinda: Pedro the other way. SCENE II.
[House of Ambrosio. Enter Silvio, melancholy. Silv. I Must remove Marcell, for
his nice honor
Will never permit that I should court my Sister;
My passion will admit of no restraint,
It Is grown so violent; and fair Cleonte's charms
Each day increase to such a killing number,
That I must speak or dye.

Enter Francisca. Franc. What, still with folded arms and down-cast looks?

Silv. Oh Francisca!
My brothers presence now afflicts me more
Than all my fears of cruelty from Cleonte,
She is the best, the sweetest, kindest sister --

Franc. I, Sir, but she will never make the kindest Mistress.

Silv. At least she should permit me to adore her,
Were but Marcell away.
Have thou no stratagem to get him absent?
For I can think of nothing but my sister.

[Sighs. Franc. I know of none, nor other remedy for you than loving less.


Silv. Oh it is impossible,
Thou know I Have tried all ways, made my addresses
To all the fairest Virgins in Madrid;
Nay, and at last fell to the worst debauchery,
That of frequenting every common house:
But souls that feed so high on love as mine
Must nauseate courser diet:
No, I must still love on, and tell her so,
Or I must live no longer.

Franc. That methinks you might do even in the presence of Marcell. A brother
is allowed to love a sister.


Silv. But I shall do it in such a way Francisca,
Be so transported, and so passionate,
I shall betray what he will never endure.
And since our other sister loose Hippolyta was lost,
He does so guard and watch the fair Cleonte.

Franc. Why, quarrel with him, Sir, you know you are so much dearer to my Lord
your Father than he is, that should he perceive a difference between ye, he
would soon dismiss him the house; and 'twere but reason, Sir, for I am sure Don
Marcel loves you not.


Silv. That I excuse, since he the lawful heir to all my Fathers Fortunes, sees
it every day ready to be sacrificed to me, who can pretend no title to it, but
the unaccountable love my Father bears me.


Franc. Can you dissemble, Sir?


Silv. The worst of any man, but would endeavor it, if it could any ways
advance my love.


Franc. Which I must find some way to ruin.
[Aside. Then court his Mistress.

Silv. The rich Flavia?

Franc. That would not incense him, for her he is to marry; but it is the fair
Clarinda has his heart.


Silv. To act a feigned love, and hide a real one,
Is what I have already tried in vain.
Even fair Clarinda I have courted too,
In hope that way to banish from my soul
The hopeless flame Cleonte kindled there;
But 'twas a shame to see how ill I did dissemble.

Franc. Stay, Sir, here comes Marcell. I Will leave you.
[Exit Francisca.
Enter Marcell with a letter open in his hand which he kisses. Mar. Kind
Messenger of love! thus, thus a thousand times
I bid thee welcome from my fair Clarinda.
Thus joyful Bridegrooms after long despairs
Possess the yielding treasure in their arms;
Only thus much the happier lover I,
Who gather all the sweets of this fair Maid
Without the ceremonious tie of Marriage;
That tie that does but nauseate the delight,
Be far from happy Lovers; we will embrace
As unconfined and free as whispering Air
That mingles wantonly with spreading flowers.

Silv. What Is all this?

Mar. Silvio, the victory's won.
The heart that nicely stood it out so long;
Now yields upon conditions.

Silv. What victory? or what heart?

Mar. I am all rapture, cannot speak it out;
My senses have carous'd too much of joy;
And like young drunkards, proud of their new tried strength,
Have made my pleasure less by the excess.

Silv. This is wondrous.
Impart some of your over-charge to me,
The burden lightened will be more supportable.

Mar. Read here, and change thy wonders when thou know
How happy man can be.

[Gives him a letter. [ Silvio reads.] Marcel,
DOrmida will have ^e tell you what effects your vows have made, and how easily
they have drawn from me a consent to see you, as you desired this night in my
chamber: you have sworn to marry me, and love will have me credit you, and then
methinks I ought not to deny you any thing, nor question your Virtue. Dormida
will wait to throw you down the key, when all are in bed, that will conduct you
to

Your Clarinda*


Silv. Damn her for a dissembler*
Is this the chaste, the excell^nt Clarinda,
Whom whilst I courted was as cold and nice,
As a young Nun the day she is invested.

Mar. How now brother, what displeased with it?

[Takes the Letter. Silv. A little, Sir, to see another happiness*
Whilst I where ere I pay my vows and sighs
Get nothing but disdain, and yet this shape
And face I never thought unhandsome.

Mar. These be the least approaches to a heart;
It Is not dull looking well will do the feat,
There is a knack in Love, a critical minute:
And women must be watched as witches are
Ere they confess, and then they yield a pace.

Enter a Boy. Boy. Sir, there is without a servant of Don Alonzo 's, who says
his Master will be here to night.


[ Marcell is surpised. Mar. Alonzo! now I begin to wake
From Love; like one from some delightful dream,
To reassume my wonted cares and shame.
-- I will not speak with him.
[Exit Boy. Oh Hippolyta! thou poor lost thing Hippolyta!
How art thou fallen from Honor, and from Virtue,
And live in whoredom, with an impious villain?
Who in revenge to me has thus betrayed thee.
Keep thy self closer than thou'st done thy sin;
For if I find thee out, by all that is good,
Thou had more mercy on thy slaughtered honor,
Than I will have for thee.
And thou Antonio that have betrayed her,
Who till profaned by thee, was chaste as shrines,
And pure as are the vows are offered there,
That rape which thou'st committed on her innocence,
I will revenge as shall become her Brother.

[Offers to go out in rage. Silv. Stay Marcell,
I can inform you where these Lovers are.

Mar. Oh tell me quickly then,
That I may take them in their foul embraces,
And send their souls to Hell.

Silv. Last night I made a youthful sally to
One of those houses where love and pleasure
Are sold at dearest rates.

Mar. A Bordello; forwards pray.


Silv. Yes, at the corner of St. Iero^s; where after seeing many faces which
pleased me not, I would have took my leave; but the Matron of the house, a ki^d
obliging Lady, seeing me so nice, and of quality (though disguised) told me she
had a beauty, such an one, as had Count D^ Oliveris in his height of power
seen, he would have purchased at any rate. I grew impatient to see this fine
thing, and promised largly; then leading me into a room as gay, and as perfumed
as an Altar upon a Holy Day, I saw seated upon a Couch of state --


Mar. Hippolyta?

Silv. Hippolyta our sister dressed like a Venice Courtizan,
With all the charms of a loose wanton,
Singing and playing to her ravished Lover,
Who I perceived assisted to expose her.

Mar. Well, Sir, what followed?

Silv. Surprised at sight of this, I did withdraw
And left them laughing at my little confidence.

Mar. How! left them? and left them living too?

Silv. If a young wench will be gadding,
Who can help it?

Mar. 'Sdeath, you should, were you that half her brother,
[Inrag'd. Which my Father too doatingly believes you.

Silv. How! do you question his belief, Marcel?

Mar. I never considered it; be gone and leave me.

Silv. Am I a dog that thus you bid me vanish?
[Aside. What mean you by this language?
[Comes up to hi^. And how dare you upbraid me with my birth,
Which know, Marcel, is more illustrious far
Than thine, being begot when love was in his reign*
With all his youth and heat about him?
I like birds of bravest kind was hatched
In the hot Sunshine of delight, whilst
Thou Marcel were poorly brooded
In the cold nest of Wed-lock.

Mar. Thy Mother was some base notorious strumpet,
And by her witchcraft, reduced may Fathers soul,
And in return she paid him with a b^sta^d,
Which* was thou.

Silv. Marcel, thou lie.

[strikes him. Mar. Though 'twere no point of valor but of rashness
To fight thee, yet I Will do it.

Silv. By Heaven I will not put this injury up.

[They fight, Silvio is wounded. Fight again. Enter Ambrosio* and Cleonte
between; Silvio falls into the arms of Cleonte. Amb. Hold! I command you hold*
Ah Traitor to my blood, what have thou done?

[To Marcel, who kneels and lays his sword at his feet. Silv. In fair Cleontes
Arms!
O I could kiss the hand that gives me death,
So I might thus expire.

Mar. Pray hear me, Sir, before you do condemn me.

Amb. I will hear nothing but thy death pronounced,
Since thou have wounded him, if it be mortal.
Have I not charged thee on thy life, Marcel,
Thou should not hold discourse with him of any kind?

Mar. I did foresee my fate, but could not shun it.

[Takes his sword and goes out. Amb. What ho! Biscay, Surgeon; on your lives a
Surgeon: where be these rascals?

[Goes out.
Silv. I would not have a Surgeon search my wound,
With rude and heavy hands;
Yours, fair Cleonte, can apply the Balsom
Far more successfully.
For they are soft and white as down of Swans*
And every touch is sovereign.

Cleo. But I should dye with looking on your wounds*

Silv. And I shall dye unless you cure them, sister.

Cleo. With the expense of mine to save your life,
Is both my wish and duty.

Silv. I thank ye pretty innocence.

[Leads him in. SCENE III.
[A Grove. Discovers Euphemia ^ail'd alone walking. E^phe, OLinda stays long, I
hope she has over-took the Cavalier, Lord how I am concerned! if this should be
love now, I were in a fine condition, at least if he be married, or a lover: Oh
that fear! hang me, if it has not disordered me all over. But see, where she
comes with him too.


Enter Olinda an^ Alonzo. Olin. Here he is, Madam, I hope it is the right man.


Alon. Madam, you see what haste I make to obey your kind commands.


Euph. 'Twas as kindly done, Sir; but I fear when you know to what end it is,
you will repent your haste.


Alon. It Is very likely; but if I do, you are not the first of your sex that
has put me to repentance: but lift up your vail, and if your face be good --


[Offers to lift up her vail. Euph. Stay you're too hasty.


Alon. Nay, let us have fair play on both sides, I Will hide nothing from you.


[Offers again. Euph. I have a question or two to ask you first,


Alon. I can promise nothing till I see my reward. I am a base barterer, here is
one for the other; you saw your man and liked him, and if I like you when I see
you --


[Offers again. Euph. But if you do not, must all my liking be cast away?


Alon. As for that, trust to my good nature; a frank wench has hitherto taken
me as much as beauty. And one proof you have already given of that, in this
kind invitation; come, come do not loose my little new-gotten good opinion of
thee, by being coy and peevish.


[Offers again. Euph. You are strangely impatient, Sir.


Alon. O you should like me the better for that, it is a sign of youth and fire.


Euph. But, Sir, before I let you see my face --


Alon. I hope I must not promise you to like it.


Euph. No, that were too unreasonable; but I must know whether you are a lover.


Alon. What an idle question's that to a brisk young fellow? a Lover, yes, and
that as often as I see a new face.


Euph. That I Will allow.


Alon. That Is kindly said; and now do I find I shall be in love with thine, a^
soon as I see it, for I am half so with thy humor already.


Euph. Are you not married, Sir?


Alon. Married!


Euph. Now I dread his answer. [Aside.] Yes, married.


Alon. Why I hope you make no scruple of conscience to be kind to a married man.


Euph. Now do I find, you hope I am a Curtizan that come to bargain for a night
or two; but if I possess you it must be for ever.


Alon. For ever let it be then, come let us begin on any terms.


Euph. I cannot blame you, Sir, for this mistake, since what I Have rashly done,
has given you cause to think I am not virtuous.


Alon. Faith, Madam, man is a strange ungoverned thing; yet I in the whole
course of my life have taken the best care I could to make as few mistakes as
possible, and treating all women-kind alike we seldom err; for where we find
one as you profess to be, we happily light on a hundred of the sociable and
reasonable sort.


Euph. But sure you are so much a Gentleman that you may be convinced.


Alon. Faith if I be mistaken, I cannot devise what other use you can make of
me.


Euph. In short this; I must leave you instantly; and will only tell you I am
the sole Daughter of a rich Parent, young, and as I am told not unhandsome; I
am contracted to a man I never saw, nor I am sure shall not like when I do see,
he having more vice and folly than his fortune will excuse, though a great one:
and I had rather dye than marry him.


Alon. I understand you, and you would have me dispatch this man.


Euph. I am not yet so wicked. The Church is the only* place I am allowed to go
to, and till now could never see the man that was perfectly agreeably to me:
Thus veiled, I Will venture to tell you so.


Alon. What the devil will this come too? her mien and shape are strangely
graceful, and her discourse is free and natural: What a damned defeat is this,
that she should be honest now? [Aside.


Euph. Well, Sir, what answer? I see he is uneasy [Aside.


Alon. Why, as I was saying, Madam, I am a stranger.


Euph. I like you the better for that*


Alon. But, Madam, I am a man unknown, unown'd in the world; and much unworthy
the honor you do me. -- Would I were well rid of her, and yet I find a
damnable inclination to stay too.

[Aside. Will nothing but Matrimony serve your turn, Madam? pray use a young
Lover as kindly as you can.


Euph. Nothing but that will do, and that must be done.


Alon. Must! 'slife this is the first of her sex that ever was beforehand with
me, and yet that I should be forced to deny her too. [Aside.


Euph. I fear his answer, Olinda.

[Aside.
Olin. At least it is but making a discovery of your beauty, and then you have
him sure.


Alon. Madam, it is a matter of moment, and requires deliberation; besides I
have made a kind of promise --


Euph. Never to marry?


Alon. No faith, it is not so well: but since now I find we are both in haste, I
am to be married.


Euph. This I am sure is an excuse; but I Will fit him for it. [Aside. To be
married said you? that word has killed me, Oh I feel it drill,

Through the deep wound his eyes have lately made:
'Twas much unkind to make me hope so long.

She leans on Olinda, as if she sounded, who pulls off her vail: he stands^
gazing at a^ distance. Olin. Sure she does but counterfeit, and now I Will play my
part. Madam, Madam!


Alon. What wondrous thing is that! I should not look upon it, it changes
nature in me.


Olin. Have you no pity, Sir? come nearer pray.


Alon. Sure there is witchcraft in that face, it never could have seized me thus
else, I have loved a thousand times, yet never felt such joyful pains before.


Olin. She does it rarely. What mean you, Sir?

Alon. I never was a captive till this hour.
If in her death such certain wounds she give,
What mischiefs she would do, if she should live!
Yet she must live, and live that I may prove
Whether this strange disorder here be love.
[To his heart. Divine, divinest Maid.

[Kneels. Olind. Come nearer, Sir, you will do a Lady no good at that distance.
Speak to her, Sir.


[He rises and comes to her gazing still. Alon. I know not what to say,
I am unused to this soft kind of language;
But if there be a charm in words, and such
As may conjure her to return again;
Prithee instruct me in them, I Will say any thing, do any thing, and suffer all
the wounds her eyes can give.


Euph. Sure he is real.
[Aside. Alas! I am discovered, how came my vail off?

[She pretends to recover, and wonder that her vail is off. Alon. That you have
let me see that lovely face,
May move your pity, not your anger, Madam*
Pity the wounds't has made, pity the slave,
Who till this moment boasted of his freedom.

Euph. May I believe all this? for that we easily do in things we wish.


Alon. Command me things impossible* to all sense but a Lovers, I will do it: to
show the truth of this, I could even give you the last proof of it, and take
you at your word, to marry you.


Euph. O wondrous reformation! marry me!


[Laughs. Alon. How do you mock my grief!


Euph. What a strange dissembling thing is man! to put me off too, you were to
be married.


Alon. Hah, I had forgot Hip^olyta.


[He starts. Euph. See Olinda, the miracle increases, he can be serious too.
How do you, Sir?


Alon. ^Tis you h^ve robbed me of my native humor,
I never could think till now.

Euph. And to what purpose was it now?

Alo^* Why, Love and Honor were at odds within me,
And I was making peace between them.

Euph. How fell that out, Sir?

Alon. About a pair of beauties; women,
That set the whole world at odds.
She that is Honors choice I never saw,
And Love has ^aught me new obedience here.

Euph. What means he? I fear he is in earnest.

[Aside.
Olin. It Is nothing but his aversion to marriage, which most young men dread
nowadays.


Euph. I must have this stranger, or I must dye; for whatever face I put
upon it, I am far gone in love, but I must hide it.

[Aside. Well, since I have mist my aim, you shall never boast my death; I Will
cast my self away upon the next handsome young fellow I meet, though I dye
for it; and so farewell to you loving, Sir.


[Offers to go. Alon. Stay, do not marry, as you esteem the life of him that
shall possess you.


Euph. Sure you will not kill him.


Alon. By Heaven I will.


Euph. O I Will trust you, Sir: Farewell, farewell.


Alon. You shall not go in triumph thus,
Unless you take me with you.

Euph. Well, Since you are so resolved (and so in love) I Will give you leave to
see me once more at a house at the corner of St. Ieroms, where this Maid shall
give you entrance.


Alon. Why, that is generously said.


Euph. As soon as it is dark you may venture.


Alon. Till then will be an age, farewell fair Saint,
To thee and all my quiet till we meet.

[Exeunt. The end of the first Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
[The street. Enter Marcel in a Cl^ak, alone. Mar. THe night comes on, and
offers me two pleasures,
The least of which would make another blessed;
Love and revenge, but I whilst I dispute
Which happiness to choose, neglect them both.
The greatest bliss that mankind can possess,
Persuades me this way, to my fair Clarinda:
But tyrannick Honor
Presents the credit of my house before me,
And bids me first redeem its fading glory,
By sacrificing that false woman's heart
That has undone its fame.
But stay, Oh conscience, when I look within,
And lay my anger by, I find that sin
Which I would punish in Antonio's soul,
Lie nourished up in mine without control.
To fair Clarinda such a siege I lay,
As did that traitor to Hippolyta;
Only Hippolyta a brother has,
Clarinda none to punish her disgrace:
And it is more glory the defenc'd to win,
Than it is to take unguarded virtue in.
I either must my shameful love resign,
Or my more brave and just revenge decline.

Enter Alonzo dressed, with Lovis. [Marcel stays. Alon. But to be thus in love,
is it not a wonder Lovis?


Lov. No, Sir, it had been much a greater, if you had stayed a night in Town
without being so; and I shall see this wonder as often as you see a new face of
a pretty woman.


Alon. I do not say that I shall lose all passion, for the fair sex hereafter;
but on my conscience this amiable stranger has given me a deeper wound than
ever I received from any before.


Lov. Well, you remember the bargain.


Alon. What bargain?


Lov. To communicate; you understand.


Alon. There Is the Devil on it, she is not such a prise: Oh were she not honest!
friend.


[Hugs him. Lov. Is it so to do? what, you pretend to be a lover, and she
honest, now only to deprive me of my part, remember this Alonzo.


Mar. Did I not hear Alonzo named?

[Aside. Alon. By all that is good I am in earnest, friend,
Nay thy own eyes shall convince thee
Of the power of hers.
Her vail fell off, and she appeared to me,
Like unexpected day from out a cloud;
The lost benighted traveller
Sees not the approach of next mornings Sun
With more transported joy,
Than I this ravishing and unknown beauty.

Lov. Hey day! what stuffs here? nay, now I see thou art quite gone indeed.


Alon. I fear it, Oh had she not been honest!
What joy! what heaven of joys she would distribute!
With such a face, and shape, a wit, and mien --
But as she is, I know not what to do.

Lov. You cannot marry her.


Alon. I would not willingly, though I think I Am free: For Pedro went to Marcel
to tell him I was arrived, and would wait on him; but was treated more like a
spy, than a messenger of love: they sent no answer back, which I tell you Lovis
angers me: 'twas not the entertainment I expected from my brave friend Marcel.
But now I am for the fair stranger, who by this expects me.


Mar. It Is Alonzo, Oh how he animates my rage! and turns me over to revenge,
upon Hippolyta and her^false lover. [Aside.


Lov. Who Is this that walks before us?


[They go out. Alon. No matter who.

Mar. I am followed.

[Enter again. Lov. See he stops.

[ Marcel looks back. Alon. Let him do what he please, we will out-go him.

[They go out. Lov. This man who ever he be still follows us.

Alon. I care not, nothing shall hinder my design, I Will go though I make my
passage through his heart.


[They enter at another door, he follows. Lov. See, he advances, pray stand by
a little.

[They stand by. Mar. Sure there is some trick in this, but I Will not fear it.
This is the street, and here about's the house.
[Looks about. This must be it, if I can get admittance now.

[Knocks. Enter Olinda with a light. Olin. O, Sir, are you come? my Lady grew
impatient.

[They go in. Mar. She takes me for some other: this is happy*
[Aside.
Alon. Gods! is not that the Maid that first conduct^d me to the fair thing
that robbed me of my heart?


Lov. I think it is.

Alon. She gives admittance to another man.
All women-kind are false, I Will in and tell her so.

[Offers to go. Lov. You are too rash, it is dangerous.

Alon. I do despise thy counsel, let me go.

Lov. If you're resolved, I Will run the hazard with you.

SCENE II.
They both go in, the Sc^ne changes to a chamber: Enter from one side Olinda,
lighting in Marcel muffled as before in his Cloak; from the other Antonio
leading in Euphemia veiled. Mar. BY Heavens it is she: Vile strumpet!


[Throws off his cloak, and snatches her from him. Euph. Alas, this is not he
whom I expected.


Anto. Marcel! I had rather have incounter'd my evil Angel than thee.


[Draws. Mar. I do believe thee, base ungenerous coward.


[Draws. They fight, Marcel disarms Antonio by ^ou^ding his hand. Enter Alonzo,
goes betwixt them, and with his sword drawn opposes Marcel, who is going to
kill Antonio; Lovis follows him. Alon. Take courage, Sir.

[To Antonio, who goes out mad. Mar. Prevented! who ever thou be'st,
It was unjustly done,
To save his life who merits death,
By a more shameful way.
But thanks ye gods she still remains to mee^
That punishment that is due to her foul lust.

[Offers to run a^ her, Alonzo goes betw^e^^* Alon. It Is this way you must make
your passage then.

Mar. What art thou, that thus a second time
Dare interpose between revenge and me?

Alon. It Is Marcel^ what can thi^ mean?
[Aside. Do thou not know me friend? look on me well.

Mar. Alonzo here! Ah I shall dye with shame.
[Aside. As you are my friend, remove from that bad woman,
Whose sins deserve no sanctuary.

Euph. What can ^e mean? I dare not show my fa^e.
[Aside.
Alon. I do believe this woman is a false one,
But still she is a woman, and a fai^ one*
And would not suffer thee to injure her,
Though I believe she has undone thy qui^t*
As she has lately mi^^*

Mar. Why do thou know it then?
Stand by, I shall forg^t thou art my friend else,
And through thy heart reach hers.

Alon. Nothing bu^ love could animate him thus*
He is my Rival*
[Aside. Marcel, I will not quit one inch of ground;
Do what thou dare, for know I do adore her,
And thus am bound by love to her defense*

[Offers to fight Marcel, who retires in wonder. Euph. Hold noble stranger,
hold.

Mar. Have you such pity on your lover, there?

[Offers to kill her, Alonzo sta^s (...). Euph. Help, help.

[Her vail falls off. Enter Hippolyta dressed like a Curtizan: Sees Marcel. Hip.
Oh Gods, my brother! in pity, Sir, defend me,
From the just rage of that incensed man.

Runs behind Lovis, whilst Marcel stands gazing on both with wonder. Lov. I
know not the meaning of all this, but
However I Will help the Lady in distress.
Madam, you are safe, whilst I am your protector.

[Leads her o^t. Mar. I Have lost the power of striking where I ought,
Since my misguided hand so lately erred.
Oh rage, dull senceless rage, how blind and
Rude it makes us.
Pardon fair creature my unruly passion*
And only blame your vail which hid that face,
Whose innocence and beauty had disarmed it:
I took you for the most perfidious woman,
The falsest loosest thing.

Alon. How! are you a stranger to her?

Mar. Yes I am, have you forgiven me Madam?

Euph. Sir, I have.

[ Marcel bows and offers to go out. Alon. Stay friend, and let me know your
quarrel.

Mar. Not for the world, Alonzo.

Alon. This is unfriendly, Sir.

Mar. Thou do delay me from the noblest deed,
On which the honor of my house depends,
A deed which thou will curse thy self for hindering.
Farewell.
[Goes out.
Alon. What can the meaning of this be?

Euph. Oh do not ask, but let us quickly leave this dangerous place.


Alon. Does't not belong to you?

Euph. No, but you would like me the better if it did: for,
Sir, it is a --

Alon. Upon my life a baudy-house.

Euph. So they call it.

Alon. You do amaze me.

Euph. Truth is, not daring to trust my friends or relations with a secret that
so nearly concerned me, as the meeting you, and hearing of a new come Curtizan
living in this house, I sent her word I would make her a visit, knowing she
would gladly receive it from a Maid of my quality: When I came, I told her my
business, and very frankly she offered me her house and service.

Perhaps you will like me the worse for this bold venture, but when you consider
my promised husband is every day expected, you will think it but just to secure
my self any way.


Alon. You could not give me a greater proof than this of what you say, you
bless me with your Love.


Euph. I will not question but you are in earnest; at least if any doubt
remain, these will resolve it.


[Gives him Letters. Alon. What are these, Madam?


Euph. Letters, Sir, I intercepted from the Father of my designed Husband out
of Flanders to mine.


Alon. What use can I make of them?


Euph. Only this: put your self into a equipage very ridiculous, and pretend
you are my foolish lover arrived from Flanders, call your self Ha^nce van Erel,
and give my Father these, as for the rest I Will trust your wit,


Alon. What shall I say or do now?
[Aside.
Euph. Come, come, no study, Sir, this must be done,
And quickly too* or you will lose me.

Alon. Two great evils, if I had but the grace to chu^e the least now, that is,
lo^^ her.

[Aside.
Euph. I Will give you but to night to consider it.


Alon. Short warning this: but I am damnably in love, and cannot withstand
temptation.


[Kisses her hand. Euph. I had forgot to tell you my name's Euph^^ia, my
Father's you will find on the Letters* and pray show your love in your haste.
Farewell.


Alon. Stay fair Euph^^ia, and let me pay my thanks, and tell you that I must
obey you.


Euph. I give a credit where I give a heart.
Go inquire my birth and fortune, as for you
I am content with what I see about you.

Alon. That Is bravely said, nor will I ask one question about you, not only to
return the bounty, but to avoid all things that look like the approaches to a
married life. If fortune will put us together, let her even provide for us.


Euph. I ^ust be gone: ^arewel, and pray make haste,


[Looks kindly on him. Alon. There Is no resisting those looks, Euphemia: One
more to fortify me well; For I shall have need of every aid in this case.


[Look at one another and go* SCENE III.
Enter Antonio in haste with Hippolyta; weeping, as passing over the stage.
Ant. COme let us has^e, I ^ear we are pursued.


Hip. Ah whither shall we fly?


Ant. We are near the gate, and must secure our selves with the darkness of the
night in St. Peter's Grove, we dare not venture into any house.


[Exe^^t. Enter Clarinda and Dormida above in the Balcony. Clar. Can thou
not see hi^ yet?


Dorm. Good lack-a-day what an impatient thing is a young Girl in love?


Clar. Nay, good Dormida, let not want of sleep make the^ testy.


Dorm. In good time are you ^y Governess, or I yours? that you are giving me
instructions, go get you in, or I shall lay down my office.


Clar. Nay, wait a little longer, I Am sure he will come.


Dorm. You are sure! you have wondrous skill indeed in the hu^ours of men: how
came you to ^e so well acquainted with them? you scarce ever saw any bu^ Do^
M^r^el, and him too but through a gra^e ^r window, (...) ^t Church, and yet you
are sure. I am a little the eld^^ of the two, and have managed as many
intrigues of this kin^ as any woman, and never found a constant just man, as
they ^ay, of a thous^nd, and yet you are sure.


Clar. Why is it possible Marcel should be ^alse?


Dorm. Marcel! no, no, sweetheart, he is that man of a thousand.


Clar. But if he should, you have undone me, by telling me so many pretty
things of him.


Dorm. Still you question my ability, which by no means I can endure; get you
in I say.


Clar. Do not speak so loud, you will wake my mother.


Dorm. At your instructions again; do you question my conduct and management of
this affair: go watch for him your self: I Will have no more to do with you ba^k
nor edge.


[Offers to go. Clar. Will you be so barbarous to leave me to my self, after
having made it your business this three months to solicit a heart which was but
too ready to yield before; after having sworn to me how honorable all his
inten^^ were; nay, made me write to him to come to night? And now when I have
done this, and am all trembling with fear and shame (and yet an infinite desire
to see him too) [Sigh^. thou will abandon me: go, when such as you oblige, it is
but to be insolent with the more fredom.


Dorm. What you are angry I Will warrant?


[Smi^es. Clar. I will punish my self to pay thee back, and will not see Marcel.


Dorm. What a pettish fool is a Maid in love at fifteen, how unmanageable? but
I Will forgive all, go ge^ you in, I Will watch for your lover; I would not have you
disoblige a man of his pretensions, and quality for all the world.


[ Clarinda goes in. Enter Alonzo below. Alon. Now do I want Lovis extremely,
to consult with him about this business: For I am afraid the devil, or love, or
both are so great with me, that I must ^arry this fair Inchantress, which is
very unluckily; but, since Ambrosio and Marcel refuse to see me, I hold my self
no longer engaged in hono^r to Hippolyta.


Dorm. above. Whist, whist, Sir, Sir.


Alon. Whose there?


Dor. It Is I, your servant, Sir; oh you are a fine spark, are you not, to make
so fair a creature wait so long for you? there, there is the key, open the door
softly and come in.


[Throws him down a key in a handkerchief. Alon. What Is this? but I Will ask no
questions: so fair a creature said she? Now if 'twere to save my life cannot I
forbear, I must go in: Should Euphemia know this, she would call it levity and
inconstance; but I plead necessity, and will be judged by the amorous men, and
not the jealous women: For certain this Lady, who e're she be, designs me a
more speedy favor than I can hope from Euphemia, and on easier terms too: this
is the door, that must conduct to the languishing Venus.


[Opens the door and goes in, leaving it unshut. Enter Marcel with his sword
drawn. Mar. Thus far I have pursued the fugitives,
Who by the help of hasty fear and night,
Are got beyond my power; unlucky-accident!
Had I but killed Antonio, or Hippolyta,
Either had made my shame supportable.
But though I have mist the pleasure of revenge,
I will not that of love.
One look from fair Clarinda will appease
The madness which this disappointment raised.
[Walks looking toward the window. None appears yet: Dormida was to throw me
down the key.
The door is open, left so to give me entrance.

[Goes to the door. SCENE IV.
[Changes to a dark hall. Discovers Alonzo groaping about in the hall. Alon.
NOw am I in a worse condition than before, can neither advance nor retreat; I
do not like this groping alone in the dark thus; whereabouts am I? I dare not
call: were this fair thing she spoke of but now, half so impatient as I, she
would bring a light and conduct me.


Enter Marcel. Mar. It Is wondrous dark.


Alon. Hah! a man's voice that way; that is not so well, it may be some Lover,
Husband or Brother; none of which are to be trusted in this case, therefore I Will
stand upon my guard.


Draws: Marcel coming toward justles him. Mar. Who Is there?

Alon. A man.

Mar. A man! none such inhabit here.
[Draws. Thy business?

Alon. This shall answer you, fince there is no other way.

They fight, Alonzo wounds Marcel, who fights him to the door; Alonzo goes out,
Marcel gropes to follow. Mar. This is not just ye gods to punish me, and let
the Traitor escape unknown too: Me thought 'twas Silvio's voice, or else a
sudden thought of jealousy come into my head, would make me think so.


Enter Clarinda and Dormida with light. Clar. I tell you I did hear the noise
of fighting.


Dor. Why, between whom should it be? I Will be sworn Marcel came in alone.


Clar. Marcel! and wounded too, oh I am lost.


[Sees him, weeps. Mar. Keep your false tears to bath your lovers wounds, For I
perhaps have given some -- Thou old assistant to her lust, whose greatest sin
is wishing, tell me who 'twas thou did procure for her.


[In rage to Dormida. Dorm. Alas! I cannot imagine who it should be, unless Don
Silvio, who has sometimes made addresses to her: But oh the house is up, Madam,
we are undone; let us fly for heavens sake.


Clar. Oh Marcel, can you believe --


[A noise. Dorm. Come, come, I Will not be undone for your fidle fadles, I Will lay
it all on you if I be taken.


[Pulls out Clarinda. Mar. Sot that I was, I could not guess at this to day, by
his anger at the Letter I foolishly showed him, he is my rival, and it is with
him she is fled; and I Will endeavor to pursu^ them.

[Offers to go. But oh my strength complys with their [Leaning on his sword.
design, and shamefully retires to give them leave to play their amorous game
out.


[Goes faintly out. SCENE V.
[Changes to the Street. Disovers Alonzo alone. Alon. THis Act of mine was
rash, and ill natured,
And I cannot leave the Street with a good conscience,
Till I know what mischief I have done.

Enter Dormida and Clarinda. Hah, Ladys from the same house! these are birds
that I have frighted from their nests I am sure: I Will profer my service to them.

Dor. Why do not you make more haste?

Clar. How can she go whose life is left behind?
Besides I know not whither we should go.
Ye powers that guard the innocent protect us.

Alon. These must be some whom I have injured.
Ladys -- you seem as in distress.

Dorm. Oh, Sir, as you are a Gentleman assist a pair of Virgins.


Alon. What Is this, a mumping Matron? I hope the others young, or I have
offered my service to little purpose.


Clar. Sir, if you will have the charity to assist us,
Do it speedily, we shall be very grateful to you.

Alon. Madam, I will, but know not where to carry ye; my lodging is an Inn, and
is neither safe nor honorable: but fortune fares no less than protect the
fair, and I Will venture my life in your protection and service.


[Exeunt. Enter Marcel faintly. Mar. Stay Traitor stay, oh they are out of
sight*
But may my curse overtake them in their flight.
[Exit*
SCENE VI.
[Chamber of Cleonte. She is discovered in her nightgown, at a Table, as
undressing Francisca by her. Cleo. FRancisca, thou art dull to night.


[Sighs. Franc. You will not give me leave to talk.


Cleo. Not thy way indeed, have thou no storys but of love, and of my Brother
Silvio?


Franc. None that you wish to hear: But I Will do what you please, so you will not
oblige me to ^igh for you.


Cleo. Then prithee sing to me.


Franc. What Song, a merry or a sad?


Cleo. Please thy own humor, for then thou wilt sing best.


Franc. Well, Madam, I Will obey you and please my self.

[SINGS.] A Myntas led me to a grove,
Where all the Trees did shade us:
The Sun it self, though it had strove,
Yet could not have betrayed us.
The place secure from humane eyes,
No other fear allows;
But when the winds that gently rise
Do kiss the yielding bo^ghs.
Down there we sat upon the Moss,
And did begin to play
A thousand wanton tricks, to pass
The heat of all the day.
A many kisses he did give,
And I returned the same:
Which made me willing to receive,
That which I dare not name.
His charming eyes no aid required,
To tell their amorous tale;
On her that was already fired,
'Twas easy to prevail.
He did but kiss, and clasp me round,
Whilst they his thoughts expressed,
And laid me gently on the ground;
Ah! who can guess the rest?

After the Song, enter Silvio all undrest, gazing wildly on Cleonte; his arm
tied up. Cle. My Brother Silvio, at this late hour, and in my lodgings too! How
do you, Sir? are you not well?


Sil. Oh why did nature give me being?
[Aside. Or why create me brother to Cleonte?
Or give her charms, and me the sense to adore 'em?

Cleo. Dear Brother --

[Goes to him. Sil. Ah Cleonte --

[Takes her by the hand and gazes. Cleo. What would you, Sir?

Sil. I am not -- well --

Cleo. Sleep, Sir, will give you ease.

Sil. I cannot sleep, my wounds do rage and burn so, as they put me past all
power of rest.


Cleo. We Will call your Surgeon, Sir.

Sil. He can contribute nothing to my cure,
But I must owe it all to thee, Cleonte.

Cleo. Instruct me in the way, give me your arm,
And I will bath it in a thousand tears,
[Goes to untye his arm. And breath so many sighs into your wound --

Sil. Let that slight hurt alone, and search this -- here.

[To his heart. Cleo. How! are you wounded there?
And would not let us know it all this while?

Sil. I durst not tell you, but designed to suffer,
Rather than trouble you with my complaints;
But now my pain is greater than my courage.

Franc. Oh, he will tell her, that he loves her sure.
[Aside.
Cleo. Sit down, and let me see it.

[He sits down, she puts her hand into his bosom. Franc. Oh foolish innocence
--
[Aside.
Cleo. You have deceived ^e brother, here is no wound.

Sil. Oh take away your hand --
It does increase my pain, and wounds me deeper.

Cleo. No, surely, Sir, my hand is very gentle.

Sil. Therefore it hurts me sister; the very thoughts
Of touches by so soft and fair a hand,
Playing about my heart are not to be
Endured with life.

[Rises in passion. Cleo. Alas, what means my Brother?

Sil. Can you not guess fair sister? have my eyes
So ill expressed my soul? or has your innocence
Not su^fer'd you to understa^d my sighs?
Have then a thousand tales which I have told you,
Of broken hearts and lovers languishments,
Not served to tell you, that I did adore you?

Cleo. Oh let me still remain in innocence,
Rather than sin so much to understand you.

Franc. I can endure no more --
[Goes out.
Sil. Can you believe it sia to love a Brother? it is not so* in nature.


Cleo. Not as a Brother, Sir; but otherwise
It is, by all the Laws of Men and Heaven.

Sil. Sister, so it is that we should do no murder,
And yet you daily kill, and I among the number
Of your victims, must charge you with the sin of
Killing me, a Lover, and a Brother.

Cleo. What would you have me do?

Sil. Why -- I would have thee do -- I know not what --
Still to be with me -- yet that will not satisfy;
To let me -- look upon thee -- still that is not enough.
I dare not say to ki^^ thee, and embrace thee;
That were to make me wish -- I dare not tell thee what --

Cleo. I must not hear this language from a Brother.

[She offers to go. Sil. What a vile thing's a brother?
Stay, take this dagger, and add one wound more
He kneels and offers her a dagger, and holds her by the coat. To those your
eyes have given, and after that
You Will find no trouble from my sighs and tears.

Enter Francisca. Franc. By this she understands him, curse on her innocence,
It Is fuel to his flame -- [Aside.] Madam, there is below a Lady who desires to
speak with the Mistress of the house.


Cleo. At this hour a Lady! who can it be?


Franc. I know not, but she seems of quality.


Cleo. Is she alone?


Franc. Attended by a Gentleman and an old woman.


Cleo. Perhaps some one that needs a kind assistance? my father is in bed, and
I Will venture to know their business: Bring her up.


Franc. 'Twere good you should retire, Sir.


[To Silvio, and Exit. Sil. I will, but have a care of me, Cleonte,

I fear I shall grow mad, and so undo thee:
Love me -- but do not let me know it too much.
[Goes out.
Enter Francisca with lights; followed by Alonzo, Clarinda, and Dormida: Alonzo
gazes on Cleonte a while. Cleo. Is It me you would command?


Clar. I know not what to say, I Am so disordered.

[Aside
Alon. What Troops of beauties she has! sufficient to take whole Cities in. --
Madam, I beg --


[Takes Clarinda by the hand, and approaches Cleonte. Cleo. What, Sir?


Alon. That you would receive into protection --


Cleo. What pray, Sir?


Alon. Would you would give me leave to say a heart, that your fair eyes have
lately made unfit for its old quarters.


Cleo. I rather think you m^^n ^^is Lady, Sir*


[ Alonzo looks with wonder on Clarinda Alon. She Is heavenly fair too, and
(...) surprised my heart, just as 'twas going to the others bosom, and robbed
her at least of one half o^ it.

[Aside.
Clar. Madam, I am a Virgin in distress,
And by misfortune forced to seek a san^tuary,
And humbly beg it here.

Cleo. Entreaties were not made for that ^air mouth,
Command and be obeyed.
But, Sir, to whom do you belong?

Alon. I belong to a very fair person,
But do not know her name.

Cleo. But what are you, pray, Sir?

Alon. Madam, a wanderer; a po^^ lost thing, that none will own or pity.


Cleo. That Is sad indeed; but who ever you are, since you belong to this fair
Maid, you^l find a welcome every where.


Alon. And if I do not, I am cashiered.
[Aside. Madam, if telling you I am her Brother,
Can make me more acceptable,
I shall be yet more (...) of the (...).

Cleo. What must I call your Sister, Sir, when I would pay my duty?


Alon. There I am routed again with another hard question.

[Aside.
Clar. Madam, ^y name's Clarinda.


Alon. Madam, I'^ take my leave, and wish the heart I leave with you to night,
may perswad^ yo^ ^o suffer my visits to morrow, till when I shall do nothing
b^t languish.


Cleo. I know not what los^ you have suffe^'d to night* but since your fair
Sisters p^esence with us allows it, you need not doub^ a w^lcome*


Alon. I humbly t^ank you, Madam.

[Kisses her hand, and looks amorously on Clarinda^* Franc. Madam, pray (...),
for Don Marcel is come into the house all bloody, enraged against somebody.


Clar. I Am troubled at his hurt, but cannot fear his rage. Good night, Sir.


[They go out. Alon. They are gone; now had I as much mind to have kissed the
others hand, but that 'twas not a ceremony due to a Sister: what the Devil came
into my head to say she was so? nothing but the natural itch of talking and
lying; they are very fair; but what is that to me, Euphemia surpasses both: but
a pox of her terms of marriage, I Will set that to her beauty, and then these get
the day, as far as natural necessity goes: but I Will home and sleep upon it, and
yield to what is most powerful in the morning.

To night these strangers do my heart possess,
But which the greatest share, I cannot guess:
My fate in love resembles that in war,
When the rich spoil falls to the common share.

[Goes out. SCENE VII.
[The Street. Enter Alonzo, as out of the house gazing upon it. Alon. SUre I
shall know this house again to morrow,


[To him Lovis. Lov. I wonder what should be become of Alonzo, I do not like
these night-works of his. -- Whose there?


Alon. Lovis!


Lov. Alonzo!


Alon. The same, where have thou been*


Lov. In search of you this two hours.


Alon O I have been taken up with new adventures, since I saw thee; but prithee
what became of thine? for me thought it was a likely woman.


Lov. Faith, Sir, I thought I had got a Prize; but a pox on it, when I came into
the Street, ever she had recovered breath to tell me who she was, the Cavalier
you rescued from Marcel laid claim to her; thanked me for her preservation and
vanished. I hope you had better luck with your Female, whose face I had not the
good fortune to see.


Alon. Not so good as I could have wish^, for she stands ^till on her
honorable terms.


Lov. Of Matrimony, ha, ha, a very Jilt, I Will warrant her; Come, come, you shall
see her no more.


Alon. Faith, I fear I must.


Lov. To what purpose?


Alon. To persuade her to reason.


Lov. That you will soon do, when she finds you will not bit^ at the other bait.


Alon. The worst is, if I see her again, it must be at her fathers house; and
so transformed from man to beast -- I must appear like a ridiculous lover* she
expects ou^ of Flanders.


Lov. A very cheat, a trick to draw thee in; be wise i^ time.


Alon. No on my conscience she is in earnest, she told me her name, and his I am
to represent.


Lov. What is it, I pray?


Alon. Haunce van Ezel*


Lov. Hah; her name too, I beseech you?


[I(...)* Alon. Euphemia! and such a creature it is --


Lov. 'Sdeath my Sister all this while: This has called up all that is Spaniard
in me, and makes me raging mad* [Aside. But do you love her, Sir?


Alon. Most desperately, beyond all senc^ or reason*


Lov. And could you be content to marry her?

Alon. Any thing but that -- But thou know, my (...) elsewhere; and I have
hope^ that yet she will be wi^^* and yield on more pleasant terms.


Lov. I could be angry now* (...) to blame him for this.

[Aside. Sir, I believe by your treatment from Ambrosio and (...), you may come
off there easily.


Alon. That will not satisfy (...) love; that I have (...) own inconstancy,
not theirs; besides this may (...) say.


Lov. But does Euphemia love you?


Alon. 'Faith, I think she has too much wit to dissem^^^, and too much b^auty
to need that Art.


Lov. Then you must marry her.


Alon. Not if I can avoid it.


Lov. I know this Lady, Sir, and know her to be worth your love; I have it in
my power too, to serve you, if you proceed suddenly, which you must do or lose
her; for this Flandrian Boor your Rival is already arrived, and designs to
^orrow to make his first address to Euphemia.


Alon. Oh he must not, shall not see her.


L^v. How will you hinder him?


Alon. With this.

[To his sword. Where is this Riual? tell me: Conduct me to him straight; I
find my love above the common ^ate, and cannot brook this Rival.


Lov. So, this blows the ^lame -- His life will be no hindrance to you in this
affair, if you design to love on.


Alon. Do know him?


Lov. Yes, he is a pleasant original for you to be copied by: (...) is the same
Fopp* I told you was to marry my Sister, and who came along with me to Madrid.


Alo^. How! Euphemia thy Sister?


Lov. Yen, isdend is she, and whom my Father de^igns to cast away upon this
half man, half fool; but I find she has wit to make a better choice; she yet
^nows nothing of my arrival, and till you resolve what to do, shall not; and my
(...) man does nothing without me.


Alon. If thou have the management of him, he is likely to ^hrive.


Lov. (...) no^ in his Amor, (...) you please: In short, Sir, if you do really
love my Sister, I am content to be so ungracious a child to contribute to the
cheating my Father of this same hopeful son he expects, and put you upon him*
bu^ what you do, must be speedily then.


Alon. I am obliged to thee for this frank offer, and will be instructed by
thee.


Lov. If you're resolved, I Will warrant you success.


Alon. I (...) I ^m ^^solv'd in spite of all ^y i^^linations to libertinism.


Lov. W^ll, Si^, I Will g^t you such a suit then, as that our Hero mak^^ his first
approach in, as ridiculously gay as his humor, which you must assume to^.


Alon* Content.


Lov. To night I must pay my duty to my Father, and will prepare your way, and
acquaint my sister with it: it is but a frolic if we succeed not.


Alon. God a mercy lad, let us ab^ut it then ever we sleep, lest I change my
resolution before morning.


[Exeunt. The end of the second ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
[ House of Car^o. Enter Alonzo, dressed ridiculously, meeting Lovis; they la^gh
(...) each other. Lov. VEry Haunce all over, the Tailor has played his part,
play but yours as well, and I Will warrant you the w^nch.


Alon. But pre^hee, why need I act the fool thus, sinc^ Haunce was never seen
here?


Lov. To make good the character I always gave of him to my Father; but here he
comes, pray be very rude, and very impertinent.


Alon. Lord, Lord, how shall I look thus damnably set out, and thus in lore*


Enter Don Carlo. Lov. This, Sir, is Monsieur Haunce, your son that must be.


Alon. ^e^o lo^ ^ano^ sig^^* I^ your name Don Carlo? and are you the gravity of
this House? and the Father of Dona Euphe^i^ (...) and are you --


Car. Sir, I guess by all these your demands at once;
Your name to be Mine here Haunce van Ezel.

Alon. Your judgement's good; but to my questions.

Car. In truth I have forgot them, there was so many.

Alon. Are you he who is to be my Father?

Car. It Is so negotiated -- and if all circumstances con^urr -- For, Sir, you
must conceive, the consequence of so grand a conjunction --


Alon. Less of your complyments, Sir, and more of your Daughter, I beseech you.
'Shart what a formal coxcomb it is!

[Aside.
Lov. Prithee give him way.

[Aside.
Alon. By this light I Will lose thy sister first? Why who can endure the grave
approaches to the matter? 'Dslise, I would have it as I would my fate, sudden
and unexpected.


Car. Pray how long have you been landed?


Alon. So, now shall I be plagued with nothing but wise questions, to which I
am able to make no answer.

[Asid^ Sir, it is your Daughter that I desire to see impatiently.

Car. Have you no letters from my very good friend your Father?


Alon. What if I have not? cannot I be admitted to your Daughter without a pass?


Car. O lack, Sir --


Alon. But to let you see I come with full power (though I am old enough to
recommend my self) here is my commission for what I do.


[Gi^es him Letters. Car. I remember amongst his other faults, my son writ me
word he had courage: if so, I shall consider what to do. [Reads. Sir, I find by
these your Father's letters, you are not yet arrived.


Alon. I know that, Sir, but I wa^ told I should express my love in my haste:
therefore outsailing the Packet, I was the welcome messenger my self; and
since I am so forward, I beseech you, Sir -- [ Carlo coming to embrace him. Now
dare not I proceed, he har so credulous a consenting face.


[Asid^. Car. Spare your words, I understand their meaning, a prudent man
speaks least, as the Spaniard has it; and since you are so forward, as you were
saying, I shall not be backward, but as your Father advises here, hasten the
uniting of our Families, with all celerity; for delay in these affairs, is but
to prolong time* as the wise man says*


Alon. You are much in the right, Sir. But my wife, I desire to be better
acquainted with her.


Car. She shall be forthcoming, Sir* Had you a good passage? for the seas and
winds regard no man's necessity.


Alon. No, no, a very ill one: your Daughter, Sir.


Car. Pray how long were you a^ sea?


Alon. Euphemia, Sir, Euphemia, your daughter. This Don's fuller of questions
than of proverbs, and that is a wonder.

[Aside.
Car. They say Flanders is a very fine Country, I never saw it; but --


Alon. Nor it is no matter, sir, if you never do, so I saw your Daughter. He Will
catechize me home to my Dutch Parents by and by, of which I can give him no
more account than --

[Aside.
Car. Are they as dissatisfied with their new Governor, as they were with Don
John? for they love change.


Alon. A po^ of their government, I tell you I love your Daughter.


Car. I fear it is so, he is valiant, and what a dangerous quality is that in
Spain? it is well he is rich.

[Aside.
Lov. Pray, Sir, keep him not long in discourse, the sea has made him unfit for
--


Alon. Any thing but seeing my Mistress.


Lov. I Will have mercy upon thee, and fetch her to thee.

[ Exit Lovis.
Car. Sir, you must know, that we suffer not our women in Spain to converse so
frequently with your sex, and that through a cautious -- well considered
prudent -- consideration.


Alon. But, Sir, do you consider what an impatient thing a young lover is, or
is it so long since you were one your self, you have forgot it? It Is well he
wanted words: But yonder is Euphemia, whose [ Enter Euphemia and Lovis. beauty
is sufficient to excuse every defect in the whole Family, though each were a
mortal sin: and now it is impossible to guard my self longer from those fair
eyes.

[Asides.
Car. I must not urge him to speak much before Euphe^ia* lest she discover he
wants wit by his much tongue: [Aside. There Is my daughter, Sir, go and salute
her.


Alon. Oh, I thank you for that, Sir.


[He stands ridiculously looking on her. Car. You must be bold, Sir.


Alon. Well, Sir, since you command me --


[Goes r^^ely to kiss her. Car. I did not ^ean kissing by saluting.


Alon. I cry you mercy, Sir, so I understood you.


Car. Fie upon it, that he should be no more a Master of civility.


Lov. I fear, Sir, my sister will never like this humor in her Lover; he wants
common conversation.


Car. Conversation -- ye foolish boy, he has money and needs none of your
conversation. And yet if I thought he were valiant --


This while Alonzo and Euphemia make signs of love with their eyes. Lov. I
hope, Sir, he does but boast of more of that than he really has.


Car. That fault I my self have been guilty of, and can excuse; but the thing
it self I shall never endure: you know I was forced to send you abroad, because
I thought you addicted to that. I shall never sleep ^in ^quiet -- Valiant!
that is such a thing to be rich or wise, and valiant.


[Goes to Euphemia. Lov. Colonel, pray to the business, for I fear you will
betray your self.


Car. But look upon his wealth Euphemia, and you will find those advantages
there which are wanting in his person: But I think the man's well.


Euph. I must not seem to yield too soon.
[Aside. Sir, there be many Spaniards born that are as rich (...) ^e, and have
wit too.


Car. She (...) ever very ave^se to this mar^^age. [Aside. This man (...)
Spaniard, his mother was o^e, and my first Mistress, and she I can tell you was
a great fortune --


Euph. I, Sir, but he is such a fool --


Car. You are a worse, to find sault with that in a husband.


Albn. Stand aside, sir, are you (...) your Daughter or I?


Car. I was inclining her --


Alon. You inclining her! an old man want's Rhetoric; set me to her.


[Goes to Euphemia. Car. This capricious humor was tolerable in him, whilst I
believed it the effects o^r folly, but now it is that of valor: Oh I tremble at
the sight of him.


Euph. Now I see you are a Cavalier of your word.


Alon. Faith Euphemia, you might have believed, and taken me upon better terms,
if you had so pleased* To marry you is but an ill-favored proof to give you of
my (...).


Euph. Do you repent it*


Alon. Would to God 'twere come but to that, I wa^ just upon the point of it
when you entered. But I know not what the Devil there is in that (...) of
yours, but it has debauched every ^ober thought about me. Faith, do not let us
marry yet.


Euph. If we had not proceeded too far to retreat, I should be content.


Alon. What shall I come to? all on the sudden to leave delicious whoring,
drinking and fighting, and be condemned to a dull honest Wife. Well, if it he
my ill fortune, may this curse light on thee that have brought me to it: may I
love thee even after we are married to that troublesome degree, that I may grow
most damnable jealous of thee, and keep thee from the fight of all mankind, but
thy own natural husband, that so thou may be deprived of the greatest
pleasure of this life* the blessing of change.


Euph. I am sorry to find so much ill nature in you, would you have the
c^nscience to tie me to harder cond^tions than I would you?


Alon. Nay, I do ^or think I shall be so wickedly loving; but I am resolved to
^arry thee and try*


Euph. My Father, Sir* on with your disguis^*


[ To them Carlo. Car. Well, Sir, how do you like my Daughter?


Alon. So, so, she will serve for a Wife.


Clar. But do you find he^ willing to be so?


Al^n. It Is not, a half^ penny matter for that, as long as my Father and you are
agreed upon the matter.


Car. Well Euphemia, setting all foolish modesty aside, how do you like this
man?


Euph. As one, whom in obedience to you, I am content to cast my self away upon.


Car. How seems his humor to you?


Euph. Indifferent, Sir, he is not very courtly, something rough and hasty.


Car. I fear she has found his ill quality of valor too, and since it is
certain it is so, why should it be said that I ruined a child to satisfy my
appetite of riches?

[Aside. Come Daughter, can you love him, or can you not? For I Will make but
short work on it; you are my Daughter, and have a fortune great enough to enrich
any man; and I Am resolved to put no force upon your inclinations.


Euph. How Is this! nay, then it is time I left dissembling. [Aside. Sir, this
bounty in you has strangely overcome me, and makes me ashamed to have withstood
your will so long.


Car. Do not dissemble with me, I say do not; for I am resolved you shall be
happy.


Euph. Sir, my obedience shall --


Car. No more of your ob^dience: I say again do not dissemble, for I Am not
pleased with your obedience.


Euph. This alteration is very strange and sudden; pray Heaven he have not
found the cheat.

[Aside. Love, Sir, they say will come after marriage; pray let me try it.


Car. Few have found it so; nor shall you experience (...) so dear a rate as
your ruin.


Euph. But, Sir, methinks I am grown to love him more since he spoke to me,
than before.


Clar. The effects of your obedience again.


Euph. This is a strange alteration, Sir; not all my tears and prayers before I
saw him could prevail with you. I beseech you, Sir, believe me.


Car. Nor should now, had I not another reason for it.


Euph. Oh, I fear. -- But, Sir --


Car. Go to, I Will be better satisfied ever I proceed farther; both of your
inclinations, and his courage.

[Aside.
Euph. Do you consider his wealth, Sir?


Car. That shall not now befriend him.


Alon. Sir, I bar whispering; it is not in my bargain nor civil: I Will have fair
play for my money.


Car. I am only knowing my Daughters pleasure, she is a little peevish, as
Virgins use in such cases, but would that were all, and I Would endeavor to
reconcile her.


Alon. I thank you, Sir; in the mean time I Will take a walk for an hour or two,
to get me a better stomach both to my Dinner and Mistress.


Car. Do so, Sir. Come Euphemia, I will give you a proof of my indulgence, thou
shall marry no valiant fools, valiant quoth ye. Come, come -- had he been
peaceable and rich -- Come, come --


[Ex. with Euphemia. Lov. Well, now I Will go look after my Dutchman, lest he
surprise us here, which must not be; where shall I find you?


Alon. I Will wait upon my Prince, and then on you here.


Lov. Do so, and carry on this humor.


Adieu. SCENE II.
[A flat Grove. Enter Haunce in a fantastical tr^velling habit with a bottle of
brandy in his hand, as sick: Gload marches after. Hau. AH, ah, a pox of all
Sea-voyages.
[Drinks. Here Gload, take thee the other soap and then let us home.
[Gload drinks. Ah, ha, a pox of all Sea-voyages.

Glo. Sir, if I may advise, take the other turn in the Grove, for I find by my
nose you want more airing.


Hau. How sirrah! by your nose? have a care, you know it is ill jesting with me
when I Am angry.


Glo. Which is as often as you are drunk, I find it has the same effects on me
too; but truly, Sir, I meant no other than that you smell a little of the
vessel, a certain sour remains of a storm about you.


Hau. Ah, ah, do not name a storm to me, unless thou will have the effects on it
in thy face.


[Drinks. Glo. Sha, sha, bear up, Sir, bear up.


Hau. Salerimente, a sea phrase too! why ye rascal, I tell you I can endure
nothing that puts me in mind of that element.


[Drinks. Glo. The sight of Donna Euphemia will --


[ Gload drinks between whiles too. Hau. Hold, hold, let me consider whether I
can endure to hear her named or not; for I think I am so thoroughly mortified, I
shall hardly relish womankind again this -- two hours.


[Drinks. Glo. You a man of courage, and talk thus?


Hau. Courage? why what do thou call courage? Hector himself would not have
changed his ten years siege for our ten days storm at Sea -- a storm -- a
hundred thousand fighting men are nothing to it; City's sacked by fire nothing;
it is a resistless coward that attaques a man at disadvantage; an unaccountable
magic that first conjures down a man's courage, and then plays the Devil over
him. And in fine, it is a storm --


Glo. Good lack that it should be all these terrible, things and yet that we
should outbrave it.


Hau. No god a mercy to our courages though, I tell you that now Gload; but
like an angry wench, when it had huft and bluster'd it self weary, it lay still
again.


[Drinks. Glo. Hold, hold, Sir, you know we are to make visits to Ladies, Sir;
and this replenishing of our spirits, as you call it, Sir, may put us out of
case.


Hau. Thou art a fool, I never made love so well as when I was drunk, it
improves my parts, and makes me witty; that is, it makes me say any thing that
comes next, which passes nowadays for wit; and when I Am very drunk, I Will home
and dress me, and the Devils in it, if she resist me so qualified, and so dressed.


Glo. Truly, Sir, those are things that do not properly belong to you.


Hau. Your reason, your reason, we shall have thee witty too in thy drink, hah?


[Laughs. Glo. Why, I say, Sir, none but a Cavalier ought to be soundly drunk,
or wear a sword and feather; and a cloak and band were fitter for a M^rchant.


Hau. Salerimente, I Will beat any Don in Spain that does but think he has more
right to any sort of debauchery, or gallantry than I, I tell you that now Gload.


Glo. Do you remember, Sir, how you were wont to go at home? when instead of a
Periwig, you wore a slink, greasy hair of your own, through which a pair of
large thin souses appeared, to support a formal hat, on end thus --


[Imitates him. Hau. Ha, ha, ha, the Rogue improves upon it.


[Gives him Brandy. Glo. A Collar in stead of a Cravat twelve inches high; with
a blew, stiff, starcht, lawn Band, set in print like your Whiskers; a Dublet
with small Skirts hookt to a pair of wide-kneed Briches, which dangled half way
over a leg, all to be dashed and durty'd as high as the gartering.


Hu. Ha, ha, ha, very well, proceed.


[Drinks. Glo. Your hands defiled with counting of damned durty money, never
made other use of gloves, than continually to draw them through -- thus -- till
they were dwindled into the scantling of a Cats-gut.


Ha. Ha, ha, ha, a pleasant rascal.


[Drinks. Glo. A cloak, half a yard shorter than the Breeches, not through
lined, but faced as far as 'twas turned back, with a pair of frugal butter
^ams, which was always managed -- thus --


Hau. Well, Sir, have you done, that I may show you this Merchant reversed?


Glo. Presently, Sir; only a little touch at your debauchery, which unless it
be in damned Brandy, you dare not go to the expense of. Perhaps at a wedding,
or some treat where your purse is not concerned, you would most insatiably
tipple, otherwise your two stivers Club is the highest you dare go, where you
will be condemned for a prodigal (even by your own conscience) if you add two
more extraordinary to the sum, and at home sit in the chi^ney corner, cursing
the face of Duke de Alva upon the Juggs, for laying an imposition on Beer: And
now, Sir, I have done.


Hau. And do thou not know when one of those thou have described, goes but
half a league out of Town, that he is so transformed from the Merchant to the
Gallant in all points, that his own Parents, nay, the Devil himself cannot know
him? Not a young English Squire, newly come to an estate, above the management
of his wit, has better horses, gayer clothes, swears, drinks, and does every
thing with a better grace than he: Damns the stingy Cabal of the two Stiver
Club, and puts the young King of Spain and his Mistress together in a Romer of
a Pottle, and in pure gallantry breaks the Glasses over his head, scorning to
drink twice in the same; and a thousand things full as heroic and brave I
could tell you of this same Holy Day Squire. But come, the other turn, and
the other soap, and then for Donna Euphemia. For I find I begin to be reconciled
to the sex.


Glo. But, Sir, if I might advise, let us even sleep first.


Hau. Away you fool, I hate the sober Spanish way of making love, that is
unattended with Wine and Music, give me a wench that will out-drink the Dutch,
out-dance the French, and out -- out -- kiss the English.


Glo. Sir, that is not the fashion in Spain.


Hau. Hang the fashion; I^l manage her that must be my wife as I please, or I Will
beat her into fashion.


Glo. What beat a woman, Sir?


Hau. Sha, all is one for that, if I am provoked, anger will have its effects on
whomsoe'er it lig^t; so said Van T^^mp, when he took his Mistress a cuff of the
ear for finding fault with an ill-fashion'd leg he made her; I liked his humor
well, therefore come thy ways.


[Exeunt. SCENE III.
Draws off, discovers Antonio sleeping on the ground; Hippolyta sitting by, who
sings. AH false Amyntas, can that hour
So soon forgotten be,
When first I yielded up my power
To be betrayed by thee?
God knows with how much innocenc^
I did my heart resign,
Unto thy faithless eloquence,
And gave thee what was mine.
I had not one reserve in store,
But at thy feet I laid
Those arms which conquered heretofore,
Though ^ow thy trophies made.
Thy eyes in silence told their tale,
Of love in such a way,
That 'twas as easy to prevail,
As after to betray.
[She comes forth, weeps. Hip. My grief's too great to be diverted this way.
[Pointing to Antonio. Why should this villain sleep, this treacherous man --
Who has for ever robbed me of my rest?
Had I but kept my innocence entire,
I had out-brav'd my fate, and broke my chains,
Which now I bear like a poor guilty slave,
Who sadly cries, If I were free from these,
I am not from my crimes; so still lives on,
And drags his loathed fetters after him.
Why should I fear to dye, or murder him?
It is but adding one sin more to the number.
This -- would soon do it -- but where is the hand to gui^e it?
[Draws a dagger, sighs. For (...) an act too horrid for a woman.
[Turns away. But yet thus sleeping I might take that soul,
[Turns to him. Which waking all the charms of Art and Nature
Had not the power to effect.
Oh were I brave, I could remember that,
And this way be the Mistress of his heart.
But mine forbids it should be that way won;
No, I must still love on, in spite of me,
And wake him quickly, lest one moments thought*
Upon my shame should urge me to undo him.
Antonio, Antonio.

He wakes, rises and looks amazedly to see the dagger in her hand. Ant. Vile
woman, why that dagger in thy hand?

Hip. To Have killed thee with;
But that my love o'ercame my juster passion,
And put it in thy power to save thy self,
Thank that, and not my reason for thy life.

Ant. She Is doubly Armed, with that and injury,
And I am wounded and defenseless.
[Aside. Hippolyta, why all this rage to me?

[Kindly smiles. Hip. Antonio, thou art perjured, false and base.

[In great rage. Ant. What said my fairest Mistress?

[Goes to her looking softly. Hip. I said that thou were perjured, false and
base.

[Less in rage. Ant. My dear Hippolyta, speak it again,
I do not understand thee.

[Takes her by the hand. Hip. I said that thou were perjured my Antonio.

[Sighs. Ant. Thou were to blame, but 'twas thy jealousy,
Which being a fault of love I will excuse.
Give me that mark of anger, prithee do,
It mis-becomes thy hand.

Hip. I Have nothing left but this I can command,
And do not ravish this too.

Ant. It is unkind thus to suspect my love;
Will you make no allowance for my humor?
I am by nature rough and cannot please
With eyes and words all soft as others can,
But I can love as truly my blunt way.

Hip. You were so soft, when first you conquered me,
[Sighs. That but the thoughts of that dear face and eyes,
So managed, and so set for conquest out,
Would make me kind even to another man;
Could I but thus embrace and hide my eyes,
And call him my Antonio.

[She leans on his bosom, he the while gets her dagger^. Ant. Stand off false
woman, I despise thy love,
Of which to every man I know thou deal'st
An equal share.

Hip. I do not wonder that I am deceived,
But that I should believe thee, after all thy treachery.
But prithee tell me why thou treat'st me thus?
Why did thou with the sacred vows of Marriage,
After a long and tedious courtship to me,
Ravish me from my Parents and my Husband?
For so the brave Alonzo was by promise.

Ant. Why I will tell thee; 'twas not love to thee,
But hatred to thy Brother Don Marcel,
Who made addresses to the fair Clarinda,
And by his quality destroyed my hopes.

Hip. And durst you not revenge your self on him?

Ant. His life alone could not appease my anger;
And after studying what I had to do --

Hip. The Devil taught thee this.

Ant. Yes, and you I chose,
Because you were contracted to Alonzo,
That the disgrace might be more eminent.

Hip. I do believe thee, for when I reflect
On all thy usage since thou have betrayed me,
I find thou have not paid me back one sigh
Or smile for all that I have given thee.

Ant. Hear me out.

Hip. Most calmly.

Ant. From Town to Town you know I did remove you,
Under pretense to shun your Brothers anger:
Bur 'twas indeed to spread your fame abroad.
But being not satisfied till in Madrid,
Here in your native Town I had proclaimed you.
The house from whence your Brothers fury chased us,
Was a Bordello, where 'twas given out
Thou were a Venice Curtizan to hire,
Whilst you believed it was your Nuptial Palace.

[Laughs. Hip. Do think I did not understand the plot?
Yes, and was mad till some young Lovers came.
But you had set a price too high upon me,
No brisk young man durst venture,
I had exposed my self at cheaper rates.

Ant. Your price, I pray young sinner?

[Pulls off his hat in scorn. Hip. Thy life; he that durst say Antonio lives no
more,
Should have possessed me gratis.

Ant. I would have taken care none should have don't;
To show, and offer you to sale, was equally as shameful.

Hip. Well, what have thou more to do? this is no
Place to inhabit in; nor shall thou force me further;
And back into the Town thou dare not go.

Ant. Perhaps I had been kinder to you,
Had you continued still to give me that --
Might have begot a passion in me.

Hip. I have too much repentance for that sin
To increase it, at the price of being beloved by thee.

Ant. Consider what you do, this place is silent,
And far from any thing that may assist you.
Come lead me to the covert of this Grove.

[Takes her rudely. Enter Haunce and Gload drunk; Haunce seeing them offers to
go out again. Glo. Hold, hold, Sir, why do you run away?

Hau. Thou fool, do not see the reason?

Glo. I see a man and a Lady, Sir.

Hau. Why you coxcomb they are Lovers;
Or some that are going to do the deed of love.

Ant. How! men here? Your business.

Hau. Prithee friend do not trouble your self with ours, but follow your own;
my man is a little saucy in his drink indeed, but I am sober enough to
understand how things go.


Ant. Leave us then.


Hau. Leave us then -- good words, good words, friend, for look ye I am in a
notable humor at present, and will be entreated.


Glo. Yes, Sir, we will be entreated.


Ant. Pray leave us then.


Hau. That Is something -- but hark ye friend, say a man had a mind to put in
for a share with you.


Ant. Rude slaves leave us.


Hau. Ha slaves!


Glo. Slaves said you, Sir? hah --


Hip. Oh, as you're a Gentleman assis me.


[ To Haunce. Hau. Assist thee? this fellow looks as he would not have his
abilities called in question; otherwise I am amorous enough to do thee a
kindness.


[Offers still to go, she holds him. Hip. Sir, you mistake me; this is a
ravisher --


Hau. A ravisher! ha, ha, ha, do like him the worse for that? no, no, I beg
your pardon, Madam.


Hup. Have you no manhood, Sir?


Glo. She is in earnest: now if I durst sta^, how I would domineer over my
Master; I never tried perhaps, I may be valiant thus inspired. Lady, I am your
champion, who dares ravish you o^ me either?


Ant. Rascal unhand her.


[He comes up to them, Gload puts the Lady before him. Hau. How, how Gload
ingag'd^ ^ay I scorn to be outdone by my man. Sirrah, march off with the
baggage; whilst I secure the enemy.


Ant. Rash man what mean you?


Hau. I say stand off, and let him go quietly away with the wench, or look you
--


Ant. Unmanner'd fool, I will chastise thy boldness. [Goes up to him with his
dagger.


Hau. How, how, have thou no other weapon?


Ant. No, if I had, thou durst not have incounter'd me.


Hau. I scorn thy words, and therefore there lies my sword; and since you dare
me at my own weapon, I tell you I am as good at snick a snee as the best Don of
you all --


[Draws a great Dutch knife. Ant. Can I endure this affront?


Glo. The best way to make a coward fight, is to leave him in danger -- Come
Lady --

[Goes out.
Ant. Thou base unmanner'd fool; how dare thou offer at a Gentleman, with so
despised a thing as that?


Hau. Despised a thing? talk not so contemptibly of this weapon: I say do not,
but come on if you dare.


Ant. I can endure no longer --
[Flies at him, Haunce cuts his face, and takes away (after a while) his
Dagger. Injustice! can such a dog, and such a weapon vanquish me?


Hau. Beg your life; for I scorn to stain my victory in blood -- that I learnt
out of Pharamond.

[Aside.
Ant. He does not merit life, could not defend it against so poor and base a
thing as thou: Had but Marcel left me my sword --


Hau. O then I perceive you are used to be vanquished, and therefore I scorn to
kill thee, live, live.


Ant. How the rascal triumphs over me.


Hau. And now like a generous enemy, I will conduct thee to my Tent, and have
thy wounds dressed --

That too I had out of Pharamond.

[Aside.
Ant. What if I take the offer of this sott? so I may ^ee ^ippalyta again. But
I forget --

[Aside.
Hau. Will you accept my offer?


Ant. For some reasons I dare not venture into the Town.


Hau. My lodging is at St. Peter's gate, hard by; and on the Parol of a man of
Prowess you shall be safe and free -- Pharamond again.

[Aside.
Ant. I Will trust him, for worse I cannot be.
[Aside. Lead on, I Will follow, Sir --

Hau. Not so, for though the captive ought to follow the victor, yet I Will not
trust my enemy at my backside.

Politics too --

[Aside.
Ant. you must command --

[Go out.
SCENE IV.
[The Garden. Enter Silvio and Francisca. Sil. WEll dear Francisca, will
Cleonte come,
And all alone into the Garden?

Franc. My Lord, she will, I have at last prevailed, to what intent she knows
not; this is an hour wherein you will scarce be interrupted: the amorous
entertainment you have prepared for her, will advance your design; such objects
heighten the desire: is all ready on your part?


Sil. It is, and I Am prepared for all the resistance she can make, and am
resolved to satisfy my insupportable flame, since there is no other hopes left
me.


Franc. She Is coming, Sir, retire.

[Exit Silvio into the Garden. Oh how he kills me: Well, at least this pleasure
I have whilst I am dying; that when he possesses the fair Cleonte, he for ever
r^ines his interest in her heart, and must find nothing but her mortal hate and
scorn.


Enter Cleonte. Cleo. Francisca, why art thou so earnest for my coming into the
Garden so early?


Franc. Because, Madam, here without interruption you may learn what the Lady
Clarinda has to tell you.


Cleo. Is that all? go wait upon her hither then.


Franc. Yes, when you are more pleasant affair is dispatched, I will --

[Aside. [ Exit Francisca.
Cleo. Can this be love I feel?
This strange unusual something in my ^oul,
That pleads so movingly for Silvio there;
And makes me wish him not allied to me.
A noise of Rural M^^ick is heard within the Tre^s, as Pipes, Flutes and
Voices. Hah! what pleasant noise is this? sure it is in the Air --
Bless me what strange things be these!

Enter Swains playing on Pipes, after them four Shephards with Garlands and
Flowers, and four Nymphs dancing an amorous Dance to that Music* wherein the
Shepherds make love to the Nymphs, and put the Garlands on their heads, and go
out; the Nymphs come and lay them at Cleonte's feet, and sing. 1. Nymp. HEre at
your feet, we tribute pay,
Of all the glories of the May.

2. Nymp. Such Trophies can be only due
To vitors so divine as you.

Both. Come, follow, follow, where love leads the way,
To pleasures that admit of no delay.

1. Nymp. Come follow to the amorous shade,
Covered with Roses and with Iessamine.

2. Nymp. Where the lovesick boy is laid,
Panting for Loves charming Queen.

Both. Come, follow, follow, where we lead the way
To pleasures that admit of no delay.

[Lead her out. The Scene changes to a fine Arbor, they leave her and vanish
Cleo. I am all wonder.

Enter Silvio in rapture, not yet seeing Cleonte. Sil. I Am all on fire, till I
enjoy my Sister;
Not all the Laws of Birth and Nature
Can hinder me from loving -- Nor is it just:
Why should the charm of fair Cleontes eyes,
Me, less than Aliens to her blood surprise?
And why (since I love beauty every where,
And that Cleonte has the greatest share)
Should I not be allowed to worship her?
The empty words of nature, and of blood,
Are such as lovers never understood.
Prudence in love, 'twere nonsense to approve,
And he loves most that gives a loose to love.

Cleo. Silvio here --

Sil. Hah -- yonder she is!
[Sees her. And now my passion knows no bounds nor laws.
Cleonte come! come satisfy my flame!
[Runs to her, and takes her passionately by the ^and. These private shades are
ours, no jealous eye
Can interrupt our heaven of joy!

Cleo. What mean you? do you know I am your sister?

Silv. Oh that accursed name -- why should it check me --
[He pauses. Would thou had rather been some mis-begotten Monster,
That might have startled nature at thy birth:
Or if the powers above would have thee fair,
Why were thou born my sister?
Oh if thou would preserve thy soul and mine,
Fly from this place and me; make haste away,
A strange wild Monster is broke in upon thee;
A thing that was a man, but now as mad,
As raging Love can make him.
Fly me, or thou art lost for ever.

Cleo. Remember Silvi^ that you are my brother,
And can you hurt your Sister?

[Weeps. Sil. Should thou repeat those ties a thousand times,
'Twill not redeem thee from the fate that threatens thee.
Be gone, whilst so much virtue does remain about me,
To wish thee out of danger.

Cleo. Sure Silvio this is but to try my virtue.

[Weeps still. Sil. No, look on my eyes Cleonte, and thou shall see them flame
with a strange wicked fire.

[Looks wildly on her. Yet do not look, thy eyes increase it,
-- Alas!
[Turns away, and hides his eyes. And I shall still forget I am thy brother:
Go, go, whilst I have power to take my eyes away;
For if they turn again it will be fatal.

Cleo. Pray hear me, Sir.

Sil. Oh do not speak, thy voice has charms
As tempting as thy face, but whilst thou art silent and unseen,
Perhaps my madness may be moderate;
For as it is, the best effects of it,
Will prompt me on to kill thee.

Cleo. To kill me?

Sil. Yes, for should thou live, adorned with so much beauty,
So much my passion is above my reason:
In some such fit as does possess me now
I should commit a rape, a rape upon thee;
Therefore be gone, and do not tempt despair,
That merciless rude thing, but save thy honor,
And thy life.

Cleo. I will obey you, Sir.

[Goes into the Garden. Sil. She Is gone -- and now [Walks and talks in
stopping. my hot fit abates -- she is my ^ister -- that is* my Fathers Daughter
-- but -- what if his Wife deceived him -- or perhaps -- (which is the likelier
thing) my Mother played the false one -- for 'twas her trade to do so -- and
I Am not son to Ambrosio -- Oh that she were in being to confess this truth, for
sure it is tr^th, then I might love and might enjoy Cleonte -- enjoy Cleonte!

[In transport. Oh that thought! what fire it kindles in my veins, and now my
cold fit's gone. -- I Will after her [Offers to go, b^t starts and returns. -- no,
let me pause a while --

For in this ague of my love and fear,
Both the extremes are mortal --

[Goes into the Garden. Enter Ambrosio and Marcel. Amb. I Am reconciled to you,
since your Brother Silvio would have it so.


Mar. My blood flows to my face, to hear him named.


Amb. Let there be no more differences between you: But Silvio has of late been
discontent, keeps home* and shuns the conversation, which youth delights in;
goes not to Court as he was wont: Prithee Marcel learn thou the cause of it.


Mar. I do believe I shall my Lord, -- too soon.

[Aside.
Amb. I Am now going to my Villa, and shall not return till night: by the way I
mean to visit your wife that was designed to be, the rich Flavia, and see if I
can again reconcile her to you; for your neglect has been great, and her anger
is just.


Mar. I rather wish it should continue, Sir, for I have yet no inclinations to
marry.


Amb. No more, I Will have it so, if I can.


Mar. I Am silent, Sir.


[ Exeunt Ambrosio and Marcel. Enter as from out of the Garden Cleonte,
Clarinda, Francisca, Dormida* from amongst the trees* sadly; Silvio, who starts
at sight of them. Cleo. I am satisfied you knew not of my Brothers being in the
Garden.


[ To Franc. Sil. Clarinda with my sister! and in our house! she is very fair --
and yet how dull and blasted all her Beautys seem, when they approach the fair
Cleontes -- I cannot shun a tedious compliment: to see the fair Clarinda [Goes
to Clarinda. here, is a happiness beyond my hope; I Am glad to see her kind to
the sister, who always treated the Brother with so much scorn and rigor.


Clar. Silvio! sure I Am betrayed.

[Aside.
[He talks to her. Enter Marcel, and is amazed. Mar. Hah! Silvio with Clarinda
in our house:
Oh daring villain, to make this place a sanctuary,
To all thy lusts and treachery.
Now I Am convinced, 'twas he that wounded me,
And he that fled last night with that false woman.

[Cleonte goes to Marcel. Sil. You need not fear me now, fair maid,
I Am disarmed of all my dangerous love.

Mar. It was by his contrivance that she came, [ To Cleonte* do not excuse him,
but send her quickly from you, les^ you become as infamous as she --


Cleo. Oh how I hate her now I know my Brother Silvi^ loves her.


Mar. How every gesture shows his passion, whilst she seems pleased to hear to
him. I can endure no more --


Cleo. What will you do?


[She goes to them. Mar. Nothing dear Sister.
But if I can be wise and angry too;
[Aside. For it is not safe t'attack him in the Garden.
How now Silvio -- under the name of Brother:
I see you dare too much.

[Snatches away his Sister and Clarinda. Sil. What mean you by this rude
address, Marcel?


Mar. I Will tell you, Sir, anon. Go get you in.


[To the women, who go in. Sil. Well, Sir, your business now?


Mar. It is not safe to tell you here, though I have hardly patience to stay
till thou meet me in St. Peter's Grove.


Sil. I will not fail you, Sir, an hour hence.


[Goes in after them. Mar. I dare not in this rage return to upbraid Clarinda,
lest I do things, that mis-become man.

[Goes out.
The end of the third ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
[House of Carlo. After a noise of Music without: Enter Haunce dressed as Alonzo
was, followed by Gload, in Masquerade. Hau. HOld, hold, I do not like the
salutation* I receive from all I meet in this house.


Glo. Why, Sir, methinks they are very familiar scabs all.


Hau. Salerimente, they all salute me as they were my old acquaintance, Your
servant Mine here Haunce, cries one; your servant Monsieur Haunce, cries another.


Enter Servant. Ser. Your servant, Sir, you come now indeed like a Bridegroom
all beset with dance and fiddle.


Hau. Bridegroom, ha, ha, ha, do hear Gload? it is true ^aith. But how the
Devil came he to know it, man, hah?


Ser. My Master, Sir, was just as king for you, he longs to speak with you.


Hau. Ha, ha, with me, Sir, why? ha, ha, who the pox am I?


Ser. You, Sir, why who should you be?


Hau. Who should I be? why who should I be?


Ser. Mine here Haunce van Ezel, Sir.


Hau. Ha, ha, ha, well guest, in faith now.


Glo. Why how should they guess otherwise, coming so attended with Music, as
prepared for a wedding.


Hau. Ha, ha, ha, says thou so? faith it is a good device to ^ave the charges of
the first complements: Hah, but hark ye, hark ye, friend, are you sure this is
the house of Don Carlo?


Ser. Why, Sir, have you forgot it?


Hau. Forgot it, ha, ha, do hear Gload? forgot it! why how the Devil should I
remember it?


Glo. Sir, I believe this is some new fashioned civilitie in Spain to know
every man before he sees him.


Hau. No, no, you fool, they never change their fashion in Spain, man.


Glo. I mean their manner of address, Sir.


Hau. It may be so, I Will see farther. Friend, is Don Carlo within?


Ser. He has not been out since, Sir.


Hau. Since ha, ha, ha, since when? hah.


Ser. Since you saw him, Sir.


Hau. Salerimente, will you make me mad? Why you damnable rascal, when did I
see him? hah.


Ser. Here comes my Master himself, Sir, [ Enter Carlo. let him inform you, if
you grow so hot upon the question.


Car. How now son, what angry? you have even tired your self with walking, and
are out of humor.


Hau. Look there again -- the old man's mad too: why how the pox should he know
I have been walking? -- indeed, Sir -- I have, as you say, been walking,
[Playing with his hat. -- and am -- as you say, out of humor -- But under
favor, Sir, who are you? sure it is the old [Surlily to him. Conjurer, and
those were his little imps I met.


Car. Sure son you should be a wit by the shortness of your memory.


Hau. By the goodness of yours, you should be none, ha, ha, ha. Did not I meet
with him there Gload, hah? But pray refresh my memory, and let me know you, I
come to seek a father amongst you here, one Don Carlo.


Car. Am not I the man, Sir?


Hau. How the Devil should I know that now, unless by instinct?


Glo. The old man is mad, and must be humored.


Hau. Cry you mercy, Sir, I vow I had quite forgot you* Sir I hope Donna
Euphemia --


Car. Oh, Sir, she is in much a better humor than when you saw her last,
complys with our desires more than I could hope or wish.


Hau. Why look here again -- I asked after her health, not her humor.


Car. I know not what arts you have made use of, but she is strangely taken with
your conversation and person.


Glo. Truly, Sir, you are mightily beholden to her, that she should have all
this good will to your person and conversation before she sees you.


Hau. I, so I am, therefore, Sir, I desire to see your Daughter, for I shall
hardly be so generous as she has been, and be quits with her before I see her.


Car. Why, Sir, I hope you liked her when you saw her last.


Hau. Stark mad -- I saw her last! why, what the Devil do you mean, I never saw
her in all my life, man. Stark mad, as I am true Dutch --

[Aside.
Car. A lover always thinks the time tedio^s: But here is my Daughter.


Enter Euphemia and Olinda. Hau. I, one of these must be she: but it is a wonder
I should not know which is she by instinct.

[Aside.
[Stands looking very simply on both. Euph. This is not Alonzo -- has he
betrayed me?

[Aside.
Car. Go, Sir, she expects you.


Hau. Your pardon, Sir, let her come to me, if she will, I Am sure she knows me
better than I do her.


Glo. How should she know you, Sir?


Hau. How? by instinct, you fool, as all the rest of the house does: Don't you
fair Mistress?


Euph. I know you --


Hau. Yes, you know me; you need not be so coy mun, the old man has told me all.


Euph. What has he told you? I am ruined.

[Aside.
Hau. Faith, much more than I believed, for he was very full of his new
fashioned Spanish civilitie, as they call it: but ha, ha, I hope, fair
Mistress, you do not take after him?


Euph. What if I do, Sir?


Hau. Why then I had as leeve marry a steeple with an perpetual ring of bells.


Glo. Let me advise you, Sir, methinks you might make a handsomer speech for
the first, to so pretty a Lady -- Fakes an I were to do it --


Hau. I had a rare speech for her thou know, and an entertainment besides,
that was, though I say it, unordinary: but a pox of this new way of civilitie
as thou call'st it, it has put me quite beside my part.


Glo. Though you are out of your complementing part, I am not out of my dancing
one, and therefore that part of your entertainment, I Will undertake for. 'Slife,
Sir, would you disappoint all our Ships company --


Hau. That Is according as I find this proud tit in humor*


Car. And why so coy? pray why all this di^^imulation? Come, come, I have told
him your mind* and do intend to make you both happy immediately.


Euph. How, Sir, immediately?


Car. Yes, indeed, nay, if you have deceived me, and dissembled with me, when I
was so kind, I Will show you trick for trick i says --


[Goes to Haunce. Euph. What shall we do Olinda?


Olin. Why marry Don Alonzo, Madam.


Euph. Do not rally, this is no time for mirth.


Olin. Fie upon it, Madam, that you should have so little courage; your Father
takes this fellow to be Alonzo.


Car. What counsel are you giving there, hah?


Olin. Only taking leave of our old acquaintance, since you talk of marrying us
so soon.


Car. What acquaintance pray?


Olin. Our Maiden-heads, Sir.


Hau. Ha, ha, ha, a pleasant wench faith now; I believe you would be content to
part with yours with less warning.


Olin. On easy terms perhaps, but this marrying I do not like; it is like going
a long voyage to Sea, where after a while, even the calms are distasteful, and
the storm's dangerous: one seldom sees a new object, it is still a deal of Sea,
Sea; Husband, Husband, every day -- till one's cloyed with it.


Car. A mad Girl this, son.


Hau. I, Sir, but I wish she had left out the simile, it made my stomach wamble.


Glo. Pray, Sir, let you the Maid alone as an utensil belonging to my place and
office, and meddle you with the Mistress*


Hau. Faith now thou have the better bargain of the two: my Mistress looks so
scurvily and civil, that I don't know what to say to her -- Lady -- hanged,
that look has put me quite out again.


Car. To her, son, to her --


Hau. Hark ye Lady -- Well what is next now? Oh pox quite out, quite out; tell
me whether the old man ly'd or no, when he told me you loved me.


Euph. I love you --


Hau. Look you there now how she looks again.


Car. She Is only bashful, Sir, before me, therefore if you please to take a
small collation, that has waited within for you this three hours


Hau. That Is strange now, that any thing should wait me, who was no more
expected here than Bethlehem Gaber: Faith now Lady, this Father of yours is
very simple.


Euph. To take you for his son.


Hau. I meant to have surpised you* I vow before you had dreamt of me, and
when I came you all knew me as well as if you had cast a Figure for me.


Car. Well son, you will follow.


Euph. You will not leave me alone, Sir, with a man?


Hau. Go your ways, go your ways -- I shall know more of your [ Gload makes
grimasses to Olinda of love. secrets before night yet, you little pouting
hypocrite you.


Euph. You know my secrets! why who are you?


Hau. Ha, ha, ha, that is a very good one faith now: who am I, quoth thou, why
there^s not a child* thus high in all your Fathers house would have asked me so
simple a question.


Olin. Madam, I find by his man, this is your expected lover, whom you must
flatter, or you are undone, it is Haunce van Ezel.


[ To Euphemia. Euph. The fopp himself.


Hau. Oh, do you know me now?


Euph. It Is impossible.


Hau. This is an extreme the other way now.

[Aside. Impossible, ha, ha, ha! No, no, poor thing do not doubt thy happiness:
for look ye, to confirm you, here are my Bills of Exchange with my own natural
name to them, if you can read written hand --


[Shows her p^pers. Glo. Not love you, I Will swear you lie now, you little Jade,
I am now in Masquerade, and you cannot judge of me; but I am Book-keeper and
Casheer to my Master, and my love will turn to account, I Will warrant you.


Olin. There may be use made of him,
[Aside. I shall think of it. But pray why are you thus accouter'd?

Glo. Fakes to entertain your Lady, we have brought the whole Ships company too
in Masquerade.


Olin. That indeed will be very proper at this time of the day, and the first
visit too.


Glo. Shaw, that is nothing, you little think what blades we are mun -- Sir, I Will
call in the fiddles and the company.


Hau. Well remembered, faith now I had even forgot it.


Euph. What Is the meaning of this?


[Fiddles strike up. Hau. To show you the difference between the damnable dull
gravity of the Spanish, and brisk gaiety of the Dutch. Come, come begin all.

Enter Dutch men and women Dancing. Nay, I Will show you what I can do too, come
Gload.

[They two dance. There Is for you now, and yet you have not seen half my good
qualities; I can sing the newest Ballad that has been made, so I can.


[Sings a Dutch Song. Euph. Be these your friends, Sir? they look as if you had
ransacked a Hoy for them.


Hau. How? look on them well, they are all States, or States-fellows, I tell
you that now, and they can bear witness who I am too.


Euph. Now I Am convinced, and am sorry I doubted my happiness so long: I had
such a Character of you.


Hau. Of me, oh Lord, I vow now -- as they say -- I don't know -- ha, ha, --


Euph. I heard you were the most incorrigible fool, the most intolerable fop*


Hau. Ha, ha, ha, do you hear Gload? -- who I a fop? I vow they were mistaken
in me, for I am counted as pretty a Merchant as any walks the change; can write
a very plain hand, and cast account as well as -- My man Gload -- cannot I,
sirrah?


Glo. Yes indeed, forsooth, can he.


Hau. Agad, a fool, a fop, quoth ye --


[Walks angry. Olin. By all means flatter him, Madam.


Euph. I Am satisfied, Sir.


Hau. I care not whether you are or no, for I shall have you whether you will
or no, mun.


Euph. It Is very likely; but there is a certain troublesome fellow in love with
me, that has made me vow when ever I marry to ask him leave.


Hau. How, ask his leave? I scorn to ask any bodies leave, I tell you that,
though 'twere my Mistress --


Euph. I cannot marry you then.


Hau. How not marry me? look here now [Ready to cry. Gload, cannot you marry,
and let no living soul know it?


Euph. Oh no, Sir, I love your life better, which would be endangered.


Hau. Why what a cursed ^ustom you have in Spain, a man can neither marry, nor
console his Neighbors Wife without having his throat cut? Why what if he will
not give you leave?


Euph. Why then you must fight him.


Hau. How! fight him, I fight him!


Glo. Why yes, Sir, you know you can fight, you tried but this very morning --


Hau. Softly you damned Rogue, not a word of my prowess aloud. Salerimente, I
shall be put to fight when I am sober, shall I, for your damned prating, ye
rascal?


Euph. I am glad you have that good quality.


[ Olinda speaking to Gload, pushes him to speak. Glo. I, Madam -- my Master --
has many more: But if you please to tell him his Rivals name.


Hau. I Will have your ears for this sirrah, the next time I Am soundly drunk, and
you know that will not be long. [Aside. Lord, Madam, my man knows not what he says.

Ye rascal say I have no courage -- or I will drink my self to the miracle of
valor, and exercise it all on thee.


Glo. I know what I do, Sir, you had courage this morning, is the fit over?


Hau. Have I not slept since you rogue, have I not?


Glo. I have a trick to save your honor, Sir, and therefore I will stand in it
you have courage.


Hau. A pox of your trick, the rogue knows I dare not chastise him now, for
fear they should think I have valor.


Glo. Madam, my Master's modest, but tell him who it is he must fight with --


Hau. Oh, for a Tun of Rhenish -- that I might abundantly beat thee --


Euph. Your Rival's name's Alonzo, Sir.


Hau. Oh the Devil, a thundering name too; but will this same -- Alonzo make no
allowance for necessity -- I vow it is pure necessity in me to marry you, the
old men being agreed upon the matter, I am but an instrument -- alas, not I,
[Crys. A very Tool, as they say, so I am.


Glo. Lord, Sir, why do you cry? I meant no harm.


Hau. No harm you rascal -- to say I am valiant.


Glo. Why yes, Sir, and if you would say so too, at worst 'twas but getting Don
Lovis to have fought for you; you know that is a small courtesy to a friend.


Hau. Faith now thou art in the right, he will do his business for him, I Will
warrant him.

[Wipes his eyes. Nay then, Madam, I have courage, and will to this Don -- this
Alonzo you speak of; and if he do not resign you, and consign you too, I Will make
him; yes, make him, do ye see -- If Lovis should refuse me now --

[Aside.
Glo. Shaw, Sir, he makes nothing to kill a man, ten or twenty.


Euph. Well, since you are so resolved, my Bro^her will tell you where to find
this Alonzo; and tell him I must marry you to day, for I am resolved not to lie
alone to night.


Hau. What would not a man do for so kind a Mistress?


Euph. Well, get you about it straight then, lest my Fathers coming prevent it.


[ Exeunt Euphemia and Olinda. Hau. I am gone -- But if Lovis should fail --


Glo. He would beat you, if he thought you doubted him.


Hau. I Will keep my fears then to my self.

[Go out.
SCENE II.
[The Street. Enter Hippolyta dressed like a man with a paper Hip. THus I dare
look abroad again:
Methinks I am not what I was,
My soul too is all man:
Where dwells no tenderness, no womanish passions.
I cannot sigh, nor weep, nor think of love,
But as a foolish dream that is gone and past.
Revenge has took possession of my soul,
And drove those shadows thence; and shows me now
Love, in so poor* so despicable a shape,
So quite divested of his Artful Beauty,
That I Am ashamed I ever^ was his votary.
Well, here is my Challenge to Antonio;
But how to get it to him is the question.
Base as he is he will not re^use to come,
And since he never saw the wronged Alonzo,
Sure I may pass for him. Who Is here --

Enter Haunce and Gload. She stands aside* Hau. Gload, if it 'twere possible I
could be sober and valiant at once, I should now be provoked to exercise it;
for I cannot find Lovis, and then how I shall come off, the Lord knows. And
then again, for leting the Lady go, whom I rescued in the Grove this morning.


Glo. Should I disobey a Lady, Sir? for she commanded me to let her go so soon
as she came into the gate. And, Sir, look here comes Don Lovis.


Enter Lovis and Alonzo. Hau. Oh Brother Lovis, where the Devil have you been
all this day, I stayed for you to go with me to your sisters, as long as flesh
and blood could forbear.


Lov. Why have you been there without me.


Hau. Yes marry have I, Sir.


Alon. I am undone then --

[Aside.
Hau. I needed no recommendations mun, for when I came they were all as well
acquainted with me -- I never saw them before, but by the way, they are all no
wiser than they should be; except your sister, who is the pretty'st, loving,
sweet rogue --


Alon. How Is this?


Lov. But have you seen my Sister?


Hau. Seen her, yes, and will marry her too mun before night, and she were a
thousand sisters -- But hark ye Lovis, the business is this -- you must know
that before I marry her, I am to seek out a certain fellow, they call -- they
call Alonzo, I, I, Alonzo -- a pox on him, a troublesome rascal they say he is,
and his leave, it seems, must be asked to marry your sister.


Lov. Well, Sir, and what if he will not give you leave?


Hau. Why then you must know I am to get him very well favour'dly beaten.


Alon. Sure this is the coxcomb himself.


Hau. Now for your sisters sake, who loves me, poor thing; I will not run the
danger of beating him my self, but must desire that small courtesy of thee.


Lov. How! I beat him?


Hau. You beat him, yes you; what a pox do you scruple such a kindness to a
friend; I know you make no more of killing a man next your heart in a morning,
than I do of eating a pickled Herring.


Lov. But she desired you to do it.


Hau. That Is all one so it be done mun: besides why should I run my self into
praemunire when I need not; your Father is bound by agreement to mine, to
deliver me the wares (that in his Daughter) safe and sound; and I have no more
to do, but to protest against him in case of nonperformance. 'Twill be a dear
comodity to me at this rate.


[Cryes. Lov. Well, Sir, I Will see what may be done.


Hau. Spoke like a friend now: well, you must about it instantly, for I must be
married to day.


Alon. Must you so, Sir? --


Hau. Yes marry must I, Sir, -- who the devils this now?


[ To Lovis. Alon. That same Alonzo whom you inquire for.


Hau. Are you so, Sir? -- Why what then, Sir? -- Lovis, Lovis.


[Runs behind Lovis. Alon. What then, Sir; then I tell you, I will not be
beaten.


Hau. Look ye here now -- Lovis.


Lov. Ha, ha, ha, can thou be angry with him?


[ To Alonzo. Hau. I, can you be angry with me?


Alon. I know not why an Ass should have more privilege than any other rude
beast.


Lov. Ha, ha, ha, this humour's so pleasant in thee, I wish thou would pursue
it a little -- Haunce, bear up to him, he is but a mere huff, ha, ha, ha.


[Claps him on the back, he goes fearfully forward. Glo. I, Sir, as long as Don
Lovis is here, you may say what you will.


Hau. May I so? -- and why, Sir? -- am I, Sir, -- an Ass, Sir?


[Runs behinds Lovis. Alon. 'Sdeath you rascal, do you question me?


Hau. Oh hold, Sir, hold, not I, God forbid I should question it, Lovis -- is
it indeed Alon^o, hah?


Lov. Yes indeed is it.


Hau. And will thou not do so much as to beat him for me a little?


Lov. Not I, I dare not, he is a terrible man.


Hau. Why look you here now you damned rogue, [ To Gload. have not you served
me finely, hah?


Glo. Why, Sir, it is but crying peccavi.


Hau. Peccavi, and be hanged to you -- Lord, Sir, [ To Alonzo. why are you so
angry, I came but to ask you a civil question, from my wife that must be?


Alon. You must ask me leave, first.


Hau. Yes, yes, Sir, so she said mun; for she must marry me to night.


Alon. Yes, you shall have it with this -- too


[Draws. Hau. Why look you [Haunce runs away Lovis st^ys him. here now, here is
damned doings. For my part I declare it here upon my deathbed, I am forced to
what I do, and you kill me against my will.


Alon. Do think we are not discovered in our design? I Would kill the dog if I
thought we were.


Lov. I believe not, and perceive by my Sisters message, that we are to come to
her, and prevent this fellows marrying her.


Alon. Well, Sir, I Will spare your life, and give your Mistress leave to marry to
night.


Hau. How, Sir, to night? -- But is he in earnest Lovis?


Lov. In very good earnest.


Hau. Tan, ta, ra, ra, ra -- hay boys, what a night we will have on it Gload; for
fiddles and dancing.


Alon. Tell your Mistress I will dispatch a little affairs and wait on her.


Glo. And pray* Sir, may I have leave to marry the Maid too.


Alon. We Will consider on it.


Hau. I am not such a fool to venture though, till I know the coast is clear,
for his very looks are terrible, but go you Gload and tell her what he says.
[Alonzo talks to Lovis.


Enter Hippolyta from aside. Hip. These be the men that rescued me this morning,
And are not to be employed in my affair.
But yonder stranger has a noble look,
And from him I^l entreat this favor -- Sir --

[ To Alonzo. Alon. With me, Sir?


Hip. Yes, please you to walk a little this way, Sir.


[Takes him aside. Hau. Well, make you sure of fiddles, for look ye, we will
appear to night like our selves.


Glo. It shall be done, Sir.


Hip. I am a stranger and a Gentleman* And have an humble suit to you.


Alon. You may command me any thing.


Hip* Sir, there is a Gentleman, if I may call him so, that dares do ill: h^s
put a base affront upon a Lady -- a Lady whom all brave men are bound to
vindicate: I Have writ him here a challenge, and only beg you will give it him, I
will attend you in St. Peter's Grove, where I desire the perfidious Antonio
(for that is his name, to whom this is directed) to meet me.


Alon. I Am pleased to see this gallantry in a man so young, and will serve you
in this, or whatever else you shall command. But where is this Antonio?


Hip. That I Will inquire of these. Sir, pray can you give any account of the
Cavalier [To Haunce, who starts as afraid. you fought with this morning in St.
Peter's Grove, that had a Lady with him?


Hau. So, now perhaps I shall be hanged for that.

[Aside. I fight, Sir, I never fought in my life, nor saw no man, not I.


Glo. Sha, you may confess it, Sir, there is no Law against killing in Spain.


Hip. How? have you murdered him?


[Takes hold of him. Hau. This rogue has a mind to have me dispatched, [Aside.
Hold, Sir, the man's as well and alive as you are, and is now at my lodgings;
look ye here is the dagger I disarmed him off -- but that I do not love to boast.


[Shows it. Hip. It is the same.


Alon. Sir, I shall not fail to wait on you with the Answer I receive --


Hip. I humbly thank you, Sir.


Alon. So prithee, dear Lovis, go make my excuse to your Sister for a moment,
and let her get all things ready against I come; let the Priest too wait, for I
see my destiny, which I can no longer prevent, draws on a pace.

[ Exit Lovis. Come, Sir, you must conduct me to Antonio.


[ Exeunt Alonzo, and Haunce, and Gload. Hip. So now the work's half done that
will redeem
All the lost credit of our Family*
To kill, or to be killed, I care not which,
[Weeps. So one or both expire; be strong my soul,
And let no feeble woman dwell about thee.
Hence fears and pity, such poor things as these
Cannot the storms of my revenge appease:
Those showers m^st from his treacherous heart proceed.
If I can live and see Antonio bleed.

[Sighs and exit. SCENE III.
[A deep Grove. Enter Marcel alone. Mar. THe hour is almost come which I
appointed,
And yet no Silvio appears, the time seems long to me;
But he that is circled in his Mistress arms,
Forgets the hasty hours,
And passes them as unregarded by,
As men do beggars who demand a charity.
Enter Hippolyta. Young man, have thou incounter'd none within this Grove?

Hip. Not any, Sir, -- Marcel! my injured Brother!

Mar. Why do thou turn away, and hide thy face?

Hip. It Is not my face I hide, but sorrow there.

[Weeps. Mar. Trust me thou weepst; would I could do so too,
That I might be less angry;
And silence best expresses grief:
But thine's a saw^y sorrow dares approach
A face so fair and young.

Hip. If the ingrate for whom I grieve had thought so
I might have spared my tears. Farewell, Sir.

Mar. Stay, have thou been a Lover?

Hip. A very, very passionate one.

Mar. And were thou not beloved?

Hip. At first to draw me in, the cunning Artist,
Made me believe I was.

Mar. Oh! I could kiss thee now for the alliance
Between thy grief and mine.
Had thou a loose and wanton Sister too?
Then thou were perfect wretched, as I am.
[Weeps. But prithee leave me, now I think of it:
For should thou stay, thou would rob me of my anger:
For since a youth like thee can be unhappy,
With such a shape, and so divine a face,
Methinks I should not quarrel with my star,
But bow to all my faithless Mistress scorns.
Hollowing within. So ho, ho, so ho, ho --

Mar. So ho, so ho, ho, ho -- It Is my false Rival.
Now leave me, Sir, to reassume my anger.

Hip. I will obey -- farewell --
My own despair makes me neglect his life.
[Goes out.
Enter Silvio. Mar. It Is Silvio.

Sil. You see I have obeyed you, Sir.

Mar. Come, Sir, your sword.

Sil. You are my Brother, and 'twere an impious action
To fight you unprovoked: give me a cause,
Nay, and a just one too, or I shall find it hard,
-- To wound Cleontes brother.
[Aside sighing.
Mar. Thou came prepared to talk, and not to fight.
I cannot blame thee, for were I Silvio,
Thus I would do to save a life beloved:
[ Offers to fight; Silvio steps back. But 'twill not serve you now.

Sil. Your reason, Sir, and I Am ready, if it be just.

Mar. Oh do not urge me to repeat my wrongs,
For if thou do, I hardly shall have man enough remain
To fight thee fairly.

[Offers still. Sil. Surely he knows my passion for Cleonte --
[Aside. I Urge the reason still.

Mar. Have thou forgot thy last nights treachery? how like a thief thou stol'st
into her lodging.


Sil. It Is so -- it is true Marcel, I rudely did intrude --

Mar. Oh quickly haste -- this looks like women's jangling.

[Offers to fight again. Sil. Oh is it bravely done Marcel to punish,
A passion which you ought to pity rather?
It Is what I cannot reconcile nor justify,
And so distracted it has made me too --
I will not fight in so unjust a cause
Kill me, and I Will embrace you whilst I dye;
A thousand wounds imprinted on this body,
Will bring less pain than that her eyes have caused.
Here strike -- Pity my pain and ease me.

[Opens his arms, and throws away his sword. Mar. I find thou have a charm
about the tongue,
And thou implor'st thy death in such away
I cannot hurt thee; and it gives me hopes
Thou art not yet so blessed to be beloved,
For then thou would not be thus desperate.

Sil. Oh yes, I am beloved.

Mar. Oh do not say thou art,
Nor take me from a calmness, that may spare thee.

Sil. Not say I am beloved! thou can not hire me
With life or fuller joy, to say I am not.
If there be truth, and love, in innocence, she loves me.

Mar. Yet, yet ye Gods I can endure -- say but thou art not,
For I would yet preserve thee.

Sil. Oh can thou wish that I should fall so low,
To save my life with lies; the poorest sin of all the number.

Mar. Then once again thou have debauched my pity.

[Takes to his sword. Sil. Her passion I will justify, but not my own;
Here Is as pure as prayers of penitence;
But mine -- I cannot give a name to.

[They fight: Enter Alonzo and parts them. Alon. How now, what is here to do
Marcel?

Mar. Alonzo! the only man I wish to shun.

Sil. I Am glad who ever thou be'^t thou have prevented us.

Alon. Thou have more wit than he then I find: Your quarrel, Sir, may a man
have leave to inqui^e into it.


Mar. This is that Silvio; that Noble Youth my Brother, whom thou have often
heard me name.


Alon. An excellant* character for an enemy, Noble and Brother: for shame put
up your swords, and I Will be judge betweeen ye.


Mar. The case is soon decided; I will not t^ll you with how tedious a
courtship I won the heart, as I thought, of a young beauty in this Town -- And
y^^terday received a Billet from her, to wait on her at night, to receive the
r^compence of all my pains and sufferings -- In this ecstasy of joy I showed
him the paper; and he getting thither before me, robbed me of my prize.


Sil. I am so pleased at this mistake of thine,
I can forgive it freely.

Mar. Not content with this, most treacherosly, hid in the shades of night, he
met me in the Hall of this false woman, and stabbed me, which did secure his
flight with her; and would thou have me put this injury up?


Alon. Faith you must, and your sword too,
Unless you mean to keep it drawn on me.
'Twas I that wounded you in the dark; and it was I
That robbed you of Clarinda

Mar. Thou?

Alon. I, am I so unlikely a man to do such a feat?

Mar. How dare you, Sir, do this?

Alon. I dare do any thing, but break my word, as thou have basely done with me
-- But I am now in haste, and should be glad to know where to meet you anon.


Mar. I Will wait on you at the farthe^ side of this Grove by the River.


Alon. I will not fail you --

[ Exit Alonzo.
Mar. Come, Sir, till I can better prove you are my Rival I will believe you
are my friend and brother.


Sil. When thou shall know my miserable story,
Thou will believe and pity me.

[Go out. Enter again Hippolyta from (...) of the wood. Hip. I wonder this
Cavalier stays so long.
Pray heaven he me^^ Antonio.
Enter Alonzo. Your Servant, Sir.

Alon. The Cavalier to whom you sent me, Sir,
Will wait upon you here.

Hip. I humbly thank you, Sir, and should be glad to know how I might pay my
gratitude.


Alon. My duty ends not here; I have a sword to serve you.


Hip. You shame me with this generosity, but, Sir, I hope my own will be
sufficient in so good a cause.


Alon. Though you are young, I question not your bravery,
But I must beg to stay and see fair play,
And offer you my service when you have done.

Hip. The enemy appears, Sir, -- and since you are so good, I beg you would
retire behind those trees; for if he see us both, since he is single, he will
suspect some treachery.


Alon. You Have reason, Sir, and I Will obey you.

[Goes aside. Enter Antonio reading a paper. SIR,
I Desire you to meet me in St. Peter's Grove, with your sword in your hand
about an hour hence; you will guess my business* when you know my name to be

Alonzo.


Alon. How Is that?
[Aside.
Ant. I wished had been another enemy,
Since from the justice of his cause, I fear
An ill success; would I had seen Hippolyta,
That ever I died I might have had her pardon.
This conscience -- it is ominous.
Sin never appears in any horrid shape,
'Till it approaches death --

Goe^ forward se^s Hippolyta, who justles him in passing by; he stops and
looks. Hip. You seem, Sir, to be he whom I expect.

Ant. I Am called Antonio, Sir --

Hip. And I Alonzo; the rest we need not ask,
For thou art well acquainted with my injuries,
And I with thy perfidiousness.

[Draws. Ant. I know of none you have received from me,
If on Hippolyta's account you fight,
She loved me, and believed, and what dull Lover
Would have refused a Maid so easil^ gain'^?

Hip. Ah Traitor, by how bas^ a way
Thou would evade thy fate?
Did thou not know she was my wi^e by promise?
Did not Marcel, Ambrosio, all consen^
To make her mine as soon as I arrived?

Alon. Who the Divel's tha^ young Bully that takes my name and my concerns upon
him?

[Aside.
Hip. But why should I expect a truth from thee,
Who after so much time, so many vows,
So many tears, despairs and sigh^, at last
Did gain a credit with this easy fool,
Then left her to her shames, and her despairs -- Come, Sir, --
Or I shall talk my self to calmness --
[Aside.
Ant. I Am ready, Sir, to justify the deed.

[They offer to fight, Alonzo steps forth. Alon. Hold! hold! fair thief that
robb'st me of my name,
And would my honor too
[Puts her by. If thou have wronged the fair Hippolyta,
[ To Antonio. No man but I has right to do her justice.
Or you are both my Rival^ -- tell me which,
Which of you is it I must kill -- or both?
I am Alonzo, who dares love Hippolyta?

Hip. Let not your friendship, Sir, proceed so far,
To take my name, to take my quarrel on you.

Alon. In this dispute none's more concerned than I,
And I will keep my ground in such a cause,
Though all the Rivals that her beauty makes me,
Were armed to take my life away.

Ant. Come, Sir, I care not which of you's Alonzo.

[They go to fight, she holds Alonzo. Hip. This gallantry's too much, brave
stranger.
Antonio hurt him not* I am the wronged Alonzo,
And this a perfect stranger to the business;
Who seeing me appear less man than he,
And unacquainted with my deeds abroad,
I^ Bounty takes my name and quarrel on him.

Alon. Take heed young man, and keep thy virtue in,
Lest thus misguided it become a crime.
But thou he says have wronged Hippolyt^,
[To Antonio And I am he must punish it.

Hip. Sure it is he indeed --
For such a miracle my brother rendered him.
[Aside. Hold, hold thou wonder of thy sex --

[They fight. Alon. Stand by, I shall be angry with thee else,
And that will be unsafe --

As Alonzo fights with one hand, he keeps her off with the other;, she presses
still forward on Antonio with her sword endeavoring to keep (...) Alonzo.
Enter to them Marcel. Mar. Sure I heard the noise of swords this way!
[Draws. Hah, two against one? courage, Sir.

[ To Antonio. They fight all four, Marcel with Hippolyta whom he wounds, and
Alonzo with Antonio, who is disarmed. Hip. Good Heaven! how just thou art!

Mar. What, do thou faint already? -- Hah, the pretty talking youth I saw but
now! [Runs to her, and holds her up. Alas, how do thou?


Hip. Well, since thy hand has wounded me.

Ant. My life is yours, nor would I ask the gift,
But to repair my injuries to Hippolyta.

Alon. I give it thee --

[Gives him his sword. Mar. How, Antonio! --
What unkind hand has robbed me of the justice,
Of killing thee?

Alon. His that was once thy friend Marcel.

Mar. Oh do thou know my shame?

[Turns away. Alon. I know thou are false to friendship,
And therefore do demand mine back again, thou'st used it scurvily.

Mar. Thou know too much to think I Have injured thee.

Alon. Not injured me! who was it promised me Hippolyta?
Who his alliance, and his friendship too?
And who has broke them all but thou perfidious?
Come it is Hippolyta that I demand,

Mar. By this he should not know my sisters shame.
[Aside. Oh, Sir, you must not have Hippolyta.

Alon. How! not have Hippolyta!
Though every step were guarded by a Brother:
Though she were circled round about with Rivals,
Ye should not all have power to keep her from me.
Not have Hippolyta! --
'Sdeath, Sir, because I do not know my birth,
And cannot boast a little empty title,
I must not have Hippolyta --
Now I will have her, and when you know I can,
You shall petition me to marry her,
And yet I will not do it. Come, Sir --

[Offers to fight* Hip. Hold, hold brave man, or turn your sword on me,
I am the unhappy cause of all your rage:
It Is I generous Alonzo that can tell you
What he is ashamed to own,
And thou will blush to hear.

Mar. Hippolyta! thou wretched wicked woman:
Thus I reward thy sins --

[Offers to kill her, Antonio steps between. Ant. Hold, Sir, and touch her no^
without my leave,
She is my wife; by sacred vows my wife.

Alon. I understand not ridling, but whoever thou be'st, man or woman, you are
worth our care. --

She faints -- come let us bear her hence.


[She faints, Antonio kneels to her. Ant. Oh stay Hippolyta, and take me with
thee,
For I have no use of life when thou art gone.
[Weeps. Here kill me brave Marcel; -- and yet you need not,
My own remorse and grief will be sufficient.

Mar. I credit thee, and leave thee to their mercy*

Hip. That goodness, Sir, has called me back to life,
To pay my humble thanks; could you have mercy too, to pardon me -- you might
redeem my soul.


Mar. Some pity I have yet, that may preserve thee too,
Provided this repentance be not faign'd.

Ant. My life, Sir, is security for both.

Mar. Doubt not, I Will take the forfeit, Sir -- Come Hippolyta*
Thy Fathers house shall once again receive thee.

Ant. Lean on my arm my dearest.

Mar. Sir, by the way, I Will let you know her story,
And then perhaps you will not blame my friendship.

Alon. And in return, I Will give you back Clarinda --
And beg your pardon for the wound I gave you.

[Exeunt leading Hippolyta. The end of the fourth ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
[A Garden. Enter Cleonte, Clarinda weeping, and Dormida, and Francisca. Cleo.
FEar not, I Will use my interest both with your Mother and my Father, to set your
heart at rest, Whose pain I feel by something in my own.


Clar. The Gods reward your bounty, fair Cleonte.


Dor. I, I, Madam, I beseech you make our peace with my good Lady her Mother,
what ever becomes of the rest, for she will even dye with grief --

[Weeps. She had but too fair pledges of her Nuptial Bed,
And both by cruel fate are ravished from her.
Manual a child was lost,
And this; not holy Relics were more strictly guarded,
Till false Marcel betrayed me to debauch her.

[Weeps aloud. Cleo. Alas, had you a brother once?

[ To Clarinda. Clar. Madam, I might have had: but he was lost ere I was born.


Cleo. Ah would my Silvio had been so.
[Aside. By what strange accident Clarinda?

Dorm. Madam, I can inform you best.

[Puts her self between. Cleo. Do then Dormida.

Dorm. Madam, you must know, my Lady Octavia, for that is her name, was in her
youth the very flower of Beauty and Virtue: Oh such a face and shape, had you
but seen her -- And though I say it, Madam, I thought my self too somebody then.


Clar. Thou art tedious: Madam, it is true my Mother had the reputation of both
those attractions, which gained her many Lovers: amongst the rest, Don Manual,
and Don Alonzo, were most worthy her esteem.


Dor. I, Madam, Don Alonzo, there was a man for you, so obliging and so
bountiful. -- Well, I Will give you an Argument of both to me: for you must know I
was a Beauty then, and worth obliging.

[Puts her self between. And he was the man my Lady loved, though Don Manual
were the richer: but to my own story --


Cleo. Forward Clarinda.


Clar. But as it most times happens,
We marry where our Parents like, not we;
My Mother was disposed of to Don Manual.

Dor. I, Madam; but had you seen Don Alonzo's rage, and how my Lady took this
disappointment -- But I who was very young, and very pretty as I told you
before --


Cleo. Forbear. Madam, it is true,
Alonzo was so far transported,
That often he did attempt to kill my Father;
But bravely though, and still he was prevented:
But when at the entreaties of my Mother,
The King confined my Father,
Alonzo then studied a new revenge,
And thinking that my Father's life depended
Upon a son he had scarce a year old;
He did design to steal him, and one evening,
When with his Nurse and Maid he took the Air,
This desperate Lover seized the smiling prize,
Which never since was heard of.

Cleo. I guess the grief the Parents must sustain.

Dor. It almost caused their deaths, nor did kind heaven
Supply them with another till long after,
Unhappy this was born.
Which just her father lived to see, and died.
[Weeps. Then she was, Daughter, Son, and Husband too,
To her afflicted Mother: But as I told you Madam, I was then in my prime --


Clar. Now, Madam, judge what her despair must be,
Who is deprived of all her joys in me.

[VVeeps. Cleo. Francisca, see who is that knocks so hastily.

[One knocks. Franc. Oh, Madam, it is Don Marcel leading a wounded man.

Cleo. Oh my fears, it is ^ilvi^.

Franc. It Is not Don Silvio.

Enter Marcel leading Hippolyta wounded, followed by Alonzo and Pedro. [Aside.
Cleo. Alas, what youth is this you lead all bleeding?

Mar. One that deserves your care; where is my Father?

Cleo. Not yet returned.

Mar. It Is well; and you, Sir, I must confine till I know
How to satisfy my honor, and that of my wronged Sister.

[ To Antonio. Ant. The holy man will soon decide our difference*
Pray send for one, and reconcile us all.

Hip. I fear Antonio still thou do dissemble.

Ant. So let me find forgiveness when I dye:
If any fear of death have wrought this change:
But a pure sense of all my wrongs to thee,
Knowing thy constant love, and virtue to me.

Mar. I will secure your fear -- Francisca, send for Father Joseph to me, and
conduct these Gentlemen to the Lodgings next the Garden.


[ Exeunt Francisca, Antonio and Hippolyta. Alon. Prithee Marcel, are thee and
I awake, or do we dream? thou, that thou art in thy Fathers House; and I, that
I see those two fair women there. Pray lovely fugitive, how come you hither?


[ To Clarinda. Mar. I thought thou were mistaken,
'Twas Silvio brought her hither, that false man.
But how came you to know her?

Alon. Know her! 'slife I question my sense.
Pray Lady are you flesh and blood?

[ To Cleonte. Cleo. Yes surely, Sir; for 'twere pity you should have bestowed
your heart on a shadow, and I well remember you gave it one of us last night.


Alon. A dream, a dream, but are you indeed the same fair person, and is this
the same house too?


Cleo. I am afraid your heart's not worth the keeping, since you took no better
notice where you disposed of it.


Alon. Faith, Madam, you wrong a poor Lover, who has languish'd in search of it
all this live-long day.


Cleo. Brother, I beseech you, receive the innocent Clarinda, who, I fear, will
have the greatest cause of complaint against you.


[ To Marcel. Gives him Clarinda* Alon. But pray, fair one, let you and I talk
a little about that same heart you put me in mind of just now.


[ To Cleonte, with whom he seems to talk. Ped. Surely that is my old Mistress
Dormida; twenty years has not made so great an alteration in that ill-favored
face of hers, but I can find a Lover there.


Goes to her, they seem to talk earnestly, and sometimes pleasantly, pointing
to Clarinda. Mar. Enough Clarinda: I Am too well convinced,
Would thou had still remained a criminal.
Now how can I reward thy faith and love?

Clar. I know Marcel, it is not in thy power,
Thy faithless story I Am acquinted with.

Mar. Do not reproach me with my shame Clarinda.
It Is true, to gain thee to consent to my desires,
I made an honorable pretense of loving.
Pardon a Lover, all the ways he takes
To gain a Mistress so beloved and fair.
But I have since repented of that sin,
And came last night for thy forgiveness too.

Ped. This is news indeed; it is fit I keep this secret no longer from my
Master. Don Manual being dead, my vow's exspir'd.

[Aside.]
[Pedro goes to Alonzo. Clar. And do you mean no more to love me then?

Mar. In spite of me above my sense or being.

Clar. And yet you will marry Flavia?

Mar. Against my will I must, or lose a Father.

Clar. Then I must dye, Marcel.

Mar. Do not unman my soul, it is too weak
To bear the weight of fair Clarinda's tears.

Alon. Why was this secret kept from me so long?

Ped. I was obliged by vow, Sir, to Don Alonzo my dead Master, not to restore
you till Don Manual's death; believing it a happiness too great for his Rival,
for so he was upon your Mothers score.


Alon. Have I a Mother living?


Ped. Here in Madrid, Sir, and that fair maid's your Sister.


[ Pointing to Clarinda. Alon. I scarce can credit thee, but that I know thee
honest.


Ped. To confirm that belief, Sir, here are the writings of twelve thousand
crowns a year, left you by your Foster [Gives him papers, he reads. Father, the
brave Alonzo, whose name he gave you too.


Alon. I am convinced -- How now Marcel, what all in tears? why who the Devil
would love in earnest? Come, come, make me judge between you.


Mar. You Will soon decide it then, my heart's Clarinda's;
But my forced vows are given to another.

Alon. Vows! do think the Gods regard the vows of Lovers? they are things
made in necessity, and ought not to be kept, nor punished when broken: if they
were -- Heaven have mercy on me poor sinner.


Enter Ambrosio. Mar. My Father returned!

[Bows and goes to him, and then leads Alonzo to him. Sir, this is the gallant
man that was desig^'d to be your son-in-Law.


Amb. And that you were not so, Sir, was my misfortune only.


Alon. I am glad to find it no slight to my person,
Or unknown quality that deprived me of that honor.

Mar. To convince you of that, Alonzo, I know my father will bestow this other
sister on you; more fair and young, and equally as rich.


[Ambrosio calls Marcel aside. Alon. How, his Sister! Fool, that I was, I could
not gues^ at this; and now have I been lying and swearing all this while how
much I loved her. Well, take one time with another, a man falls into more
danger by this amorous humor, than he gets good turns by it.


Mar. Pardon me, Sir, I knew not you had designed her elsewhere -- Dear Alonzo,
my Father --


Alon. I, Sir, I am much obliged to him. Oh Pox would I were well with Euphemia.


Mar. I protest I could wish --


Alon. I, so could I, Sir, that you had made a better judgment of my humor:
all must out, I have no other way to avoid this complement else. Why look ye
Marcel -- your Sister is -- Pox I am ill at dissimulation, and therefore in
plain terms, I am to be married this very evening to another.


Mar. This was happy, and has saved me an excuse. [Aside. But are you in
earnest, Sir? how is it possible, being so lately come into Madrid?


Alon. Destiny, destiny, Marcel, which there was no avoiding, though I mist of
Hippolyta.


Mar. Who is it prithee?


Alon. A woman I hope, of which indeed I would have been better assured; but
she was wilful. She Is called Euphemia.


Mar. Our next neighbor, the Daughter of old Carlo.


Alon. The same.


Mar. Thou art happy to make so good a progress in so short a time, but I am --


Alon. Not so miserable as you believe. Come, come, you shall marry Clarinda.


Mar. It Is impossible.


Alon. Where Is the hindrance.


Mar. Her want of fortune; that is enough, friend.


Alon. Stand by and expect the best. -- [ Goes to Ambrosio. Sir, I have an
humble suit to you.


Amb. I should be infinitely pleased you could ask me any thing in my power,
but, Sir, this daughter I had disposed of, before I knew you would have mist of
Hippolyta.


Alon. Luckyer than I expected. [Aside. Sir, that was an honor I could not
merit, and am contented with my fate: But my request is, that you would receive
into your family a Sister of mine, whom I would bestow on Don Marcel.


Mar. Hah, what mean you, Sir! a Sister of yours?


Alon. Yes, she will not be unwelcome* -- This is she.


Amb. This is the daughter to Octavia -- Her Mother was a Lady whom once I did
adore, and 'twas her fault she was not more happy with me, than with Don
Manual. Nor have I so wholly forgot that flame, but I might be inclined to your
proposal: But, Sir, she wants a fortune.


Alon. That I Will supply.


Mar. You supply, Sir? on what kind scorce, I pray?


Alon. That which you will suffer without being jealous,
When you shall know she is indeed my Sister.

Clar. How! this brave man my Brother?

Alon. So they tell me, and that my name is Manual*
Had you not such a Brother?

Dor. Oh ye gods, is this the little Manual?

Ped. Yes Dormida, and for a farther proof see this.

[Opens his masters bosom, and shows a Crucifix. Dor. This I remember well, it
is Don Manual:
Pray let me look upon you: Just like my Lord --
Now may the soul of Don Alonzo rest in peace,
For making so hopeful a man of you.

Alon. Amen. But, Sir, if you approve of my Sister,
I Will make her as worthy of Marcel, as Flavia.

Amb. I Have lost the hopes of her -- She Is not to be reconciled.
[Aside. Clarinda needs no more than to belong to you,
To make her valuable -- and I consent with joy.

[Gives her to Marcel. Mar. And I with joys beyound expression, Sir, receive
her.


Alon. Pedro, there rests no more than that you wait on my Mother, and let her
know all that has happend to my self and sister, and that I Will pay my duty to
her ere I sleep.


Dor. The very joy to find her Son again, will get my pardon too, and then
perhaps Pedro and I may renew our old amors.


Alon. Sir, I have another request to make.


Amb. You must command, Sir.


Alon. That is, that you will permit this fair company to honor me this
evening at my Father-in-laws Don Carlo.


Amb. How, has Don Carlo married the Lady Octavia?


Alon. No, Sir, but a worse matter than that, I am to marry his Daughter.


Amb. Oh, Sir, Euphemia has too much beauty and virtue to make you doubt your
happiness.


Alon. Well, Sir, I must venture that. But your company I Will expect, the Ladies
may clap on their Vizards, and make a Masquerading night on it: though such
freedoms are not very usual in Spain; we that have seen the world, may absolve
one another.


Amb. My Garden joins to that of Don Carlo* and that way we will wait on you,
as soon as I have dispatched a small affair.


Alon. Your humble Servant, Sir.


[Goes out. Ambrosio the other way. Mar. Sister, go you and prepare my Father
to receive Hippolyta, whilst I go see them married.


[ Exeunt Cleonte and Clarinda. Marcel passing over the garden, sees Silvio
enter in passion, followed by Francisca. Sil^. Do not Francisca -- do not blow
my flame,
The cure thou bringst is much the greater Hell.

[Offers to go, but stops. Mar. Hah, Silvio; unseen I Will hear their business.

[Goes aside. Sil. I would fain shun thee, but this impious weight
Of love upon my soul, hinders my flight:
I Am fixed -- like conscious guilt it keep me here,
And I am now insensible of fear.
Speak on! thou messenger of Sacred Love -- speak on!

Franc. The fair Cleonte, Sir, whose soul's inflamed
No less than yours; though with a Virgin modesty
She would conceal it, pitying now your pain
Has through my intercession --

Sil. Oh quickly speak! what happiness designed me?

Franc. To admit you, Sir, this night into her Chamber.

Mar. Death to my soul! what is this?
[Aside.
Sil. Her chamber! is that all? will that allay this fever
In my blood? -- No, no, Francisca.
It Is grown too high for amorous parleys only;
Her arms, her charming bosom, and her bed,
Must now receive me or I dye, Francisca.

Franc. I mean no other, Sir; why can you think
A Maid in love as much as you can be,
Assisted with the silence of the night;
(Which vail her blushes too) can say -- I dare not?
Or if she do, she will speak it faintly over,
And even whilst she so denis will yield.
Go, go prepare your self for this encounter,
And do not dally as you did to day,
And fright your pleasure with the name of sister --

Mar. Oh cursed witch!
[Aside.
Franc. What say you, Sir?

Sil. That name has checked my joy --
And makes it strangely silent and imperfect.

[Walks away. Franc. Why do you go, before you answer me?

[Follows him into the garden. Mar. I Will follow him, and kill them.
[Comes out with a Dagger. Oh who would be allied unto a woman,
Natur's loose handiwork? the slight imploys
Of all her wanton hours -- Oh I could rave now --
Abandon sense and nature.
Hence all considerate thoughts, and in their room,
Supply my soul with vengeance, that may prove
Too great to be allayed by nature, or by love.

[Goes into the Garden after th^^. Enter again Silvio melancholy followed by
Francisca. Franc. But will you loose this opportunity,
Her lodgings too being so near your own?

Sil. Hell take her for her wickedness.
Oh that ten thousand mountains stood between us,
And seas as vast and raging as her lust,
That we might never meet -- Oh perfect woman,
I find there is no safety in thy sex:
No trusting to thy innocence.
That being counterfeit, thy beauty's gone,
Dropped like a Rose over blown,
And left thee nothing but a withered root,
That never more can bloom.

Franc. Alas, I fear I have done ill in this.
[Aside.
Sil. I now should hate her; but there yet remains
Something within, so strangely kind to her;
That I Am resolved to give her one proof more,
Of what I have vowed her often, yes I Will kill her --

Franc. How kill her, Sir? Gods, what have I done!
[Aside.
Sil. Yes, can I let her live, and say I loved her?
No, she shall tempt no more vain yielding men* (...)

Franc. Consider, Sir, it is to save your life she does it.

Sil. My life!
'Twere better she and I were buried
[Enter Marcel from amongst the trees softly with his Dagger behind Silvio.]
Quick in one grave, than she should fall to this,
She has out-sinn'd even me in this consent.

Mar. Oh here they are. --

Franc. My Lord defend your self, you are undone else.

Sil. Hah, Marcel! --

[Draws. Franc. Help, help.

Mar. Hell take thy throat.

Enter Ambrosio, Clarinda, Cleonte, and the rest of the house. Amb. Hold
villain, hold!
How dare thou thus rebel -- ungrateful wretch?

Mar. This cause, Sir, is so just, that when you hear it,
You Will curse me, that I let him live thus long:
He loves my sister, Sir; and that lewd woman
Repays his lustful flame; and does this evening
Invite him to her bed; -- Oh let me kill him.

[Offers to go to him. Amb. That he should love Cleonte I Will allow,
And her returns too, whilst they are innocent.

Mar. But, Sir, he does not love her as a Sister.

Amb. If that be all his crime, I still forgive him.

Sil. Yes, Sir, it is true I do adore my Sister,
But am so far from that foul thing he named,
That could I think I had a secret thought
That tended that way, I would search it -- thus --

[Goes to stab himself. Cleo. What me an you by this desperation?

Sil. Oh take away this woman from my sight,
[Pointing to Cleonte. For she will finish what this has ill begun.

[Holds his Dagger up. Franc. Thus low, Sir, for your mercy I must kneel;
[Kneels. Which yet I must despair of when you know
How very very wicked I have been.
[Weeps. Cleonte, Sir, is chaste as Angels are.

Sil. My Sister innocent! how soon I do believe thee!

Franc. Yes, Sir, nor knows of that vile message which I brought you.


Sil. What Devil set thee on to tempt me then?

Franc. The worst of Devils, hopeless, raging love;
And you, my Lord, were the unhappy object.

Mar. Oh sinful woman, what was thy design?

Cleo. What means all this?
[Aside.
Franc. At least to have enjoyed him once; which done,
Thinking it had been the fair Cleonte,
It would have made him hate her.

Sil. Should all thy other sins be unrepented,
The piety of this confession saves thee.
Pardon, Cleonte, my rude thoughts of thee,
[Kneels, she takes him up. I had designed to have killed thee --
Had not this knowledge of thy innocence
Arrived before I Would seen thee next.
And, Sir, your pardon too I humbly beg;
[ To Ambrosio. With license to depart, I cannot live
Where I must only see my beauteous sister;
That torment is too great to be supported,
That still must last, and never hope a cure.

Amb. Since you are so resolved, I will unfold
A secret to you, that perhaps may please you.

Sil. Low at your feet I do implore it, Sir.

[Kneels. Amb. Your quality forbids this ceremony.

[Takes him up. Sil. How, Sir!

Amb. Your Father was the mighty favorite, the Conte De Olivaris; your Mother,
Spains celebrated Beauty, Donna Margarita Spiniola, by whom your Father had two
natural Sons, Don Lovis de Harro, and your self Don Roderigo. The story of his
disgrace you know with all the world; 'twas then he being banished from the
Court, he left you to my care then very young. I received you as my own, and as
more than such educated you, and as your Father obliged me to do, brought you
always up about their Majesty's -- For he hoped if you had beauty and merits,
you might inherit part of that glory he lost.


Mar. This is wondrous --


Amb. This truth you had not known ^o soon, had you not made as great an
interest at Court as any man so young ever did: and if I had not acquitted my
self in all points as became the friend of so great and brave a man, as Conte
de Olivaris, the Fortune he left you was two millions of Crowns.


Sil. Let me embrace your feet for this blessed news.
Is not the fair Cleonte then my sister?

Amb. No, Sir, but one whom long since I designed your wife, if you are pleased
to think her worthy of it.


[Offers her. Sil. Without her, Sir, I do despise my being: And do receive her
as a blessing, sent from heaven to make my whole life happy.


Amb. What ^ay you, Cleonte?


Cleo. Sir, I must own a joy greater than is fit for a Virgin to express.


Mar. Generous Don Roderigo, receive me as your friend, and pardon all the
fault you found in me as a brother.


[Imbraces him. Sil. Be ever dear unto my soul, Marcel.


Mar. Now is the time to present Hippolyta and Antonio to my Father, whilst his
humor is so good. And you, dear Brother, I must beg to join with us in so just
a cause.


Sil. You need not doubt my power, and less my will.


Mar. Do you prepare him then, whilst I bring them in: For by this I know my
Confessor has made them one.

[ Exit Marcel.
Sil. Sir, I Have a suit to you.

Amb. You cannot ask what I can deny.

Sil. Hippolyta, Sir, is married to Antonio,
And humbly begs your pardon for her past fault.

Amb. Antonio and Hippolyta! oh name them not.

Enter Antonio and Hippolyta, a Friar and Marcel. Mar. Pray, Sir, forgive them,
your honor being safe,
Since Don Antonio has by marrying her*
^epair'd the injury he did us all,
Without which I had killed him.

Amb. Thou art by nature more severe than I,
And if thou think our honor satisfied,
I will endeavor to forget their fa^lts.

Ant. We humbly thank you* Sir, and beg your blessing:
At least bestow it on Hippolyt^;
For she was ever chaste, and innocent,
And acted only what became her duty;
Since by a sacred vow she was my Wife.

Amb. How ca^'st thou then to treat her so inhumanely*

Ant. In pure revenge to Don Marcel her Brother:
And forced my nature to a stubbornness,
Which whilst I did put on, I blushed to own;
And still between thoughts so unjust, and action,
Her virtue would ri^e up and check my soul,
Which still secured her fame.

Hip. And I have seen in midst of all thy anger
Thou'st turned away and changed thy words to sighs;
Dropped now and then a tear as if ashamed
Not of thy injuries, but my little merit.

Amb. How weak and easy nature makes me -- Rise
I must forgive you both.
Come, Sir, I know you long to be secured
Of what you say you love so much, Cleonte --

Franc. But, Madam, have you fully pardoned me?

Sil. We will all join in your behalf, Francisca.

Cleo. I can forgive you, when you can repent.

[Exeunt. SCENE II.
[House of Carlo. Enter Olinda. Olin. BUt is the Bride-chamber dressed up, and
the bed made as it ought to be?


Dorm. As for the making, it is as it use to be, only the Velvet Furniture.


Olin. As it use to be? oh ignorance! I see these young wenches are not arrived
yet to bare imagination: Well, I must order it my self, I see that.


Dor. Why Olinda, I hope they will not go just to bed upon their marrying
without some signs of a wedding, as Fidles and Dancing, and so forth.


Olin. Good Lord, what joys you have found out for the first night of a young
Bride and Bridegroom. Fidles and Dancing, ha, ha, ha! they will be much merryer by
themselves that Fidles and Dancing can make them, you fool.

Enter Haunce and Gload. Bless me! what is it I see?


[Stares on Haunce. Hau. Why? what the Devil means she? Look about me Gload,
and see what I have that is so terrible.


Olin. Oh, I have no power to stir, it is a sprite.


Hau. What does she mean now Gload?


Glo. She desires to be satisfied whether we be flesh and blood, Sir, I believe.


Hau. Do see nothing that is divel-wise about me?


Glo. No indeed, Sir, not I.


Hau. Why then the wench is tippled, that is all, a small ^^ult.


Olin. In the name of goodness, Sir, what are you?


Glo. I, I, Sir, it is that she desires to know.


Olin. Who are you, Sir?


Hau. Why who should I be but he that is to be your Master anon?


Glo. Yes, who should he be but Mine here Haunce Van Ezel?


Olin. What, did you come in at the door?


Hau. Yes marry did I, what do you think I creep in like a ^apland witch
through the key holes?


Dorm. Nay, nay, this cannot be the Bridegroom.


Olin. No, for it is but a moment since we left him, you know in my Ladies
Chamber.


Hau. Very drunk by this good light.


Dorm. And therefore it cannot be My^^heer Haunce.


Hau. What a Devil will you persuade me out of my Christian name?


Olin. The Priest has yet scarce done his office, who is marrying him above to
my Lady.


Hau. Salerimente, here is brave doing, to marry me, and never give me notice;
or thou art damnable drunk, or very mad.


Glo* Yes, and I am married to you too, am I not?


[ To Olinda. Olin. You? we know neither of you.


Hau. Ha, ha ha, here is a turn for you.


Enter Carlo. Car. Why, Olinda, Dorice, Olinda, where be these mad Girls? it is
almost night, and nothing in order. Why what now? Who Is here?


Hau. So the old man's possessed too -- Why what a Devil ails you, Sir?


[Goes roughly to him. Car. From whence come you, Sir? and what are you?


Hau. Gload, let us be gone, for we shall be transmigra^ed into some strange
shapes anon, for all the house is enchanted. Who am I, quoth ye? before I came
you all knew me; and now you are very well acquainted with me, you have forgot
me.


Car. If you be my son Haunce, how* came you here?


Hau. If I be your son Haunce? where should I be else?


Car. Above with your Wife, not below amongst the Maids.


Hau. What wife? what wife? ha, ha, ha, do not provoke me, lest I take you a
slap in the face, I tell you that now.


Car. Oh I find by his humor this is he, and I am finely cheated and abused.
I Will up and know the truth.

[Goes out.
Hau. And so will I.


[Follows. Glo. Why, but Mistress Olinda, you have not indeed forgot me, have
you?


Olin. For my lover I have, but perhaps I may call you to mind as my servant
hereafter.


Glo. Since you are so proud and so fickle, you shall stand hereafter as a Cipher
with me: and I Will begin upon a new account with this pretty Maid, what say you
forsooth?


Dorm. I am willing enough to get a husband as young as I am.


Glo. Why, that is well said, give your hand upon the bargain -- God have mercy
with all my heart i'fais.


[Go in. Scene Draws off, discovers a chamber. Enter Alonzo, Euphemia and
Lovis: To them Carlo, Haunce, and the rest. Car. Oh I am cheated, undone,
abused.


Lov. How, Sir, and where?


Haunce sees Alonzo dressed like him, goes gazing about him, and on himself,
calling ^load to do the same. Car. Nay, I know not how, or where; but so I am;
and when I find it, I Will turn you all out of doors. Who are you, Sir? quickly
tell me.


Alon. If you be in such haste, take the shortest account* I am your son.


Car. I mean, Sir, what is your name, and which of you is Haunce van Ezel?


Hau. I, which of us is Haunce van Ezel, tell us that, Sir; we shall handle ye,
in faith, now --


Alon. He, Sir, can best inform you.


[Pointing to Haunce. Hau. Who, I! I know no more than the great Turk, not I,
which of us is me; my hat, my feather; my suit, and my Garniture all over faith
now; and I believe this is me, for I Will trust my eyes before any other sense
about me. What say thou now Gload? guess which of us is thy own natural
Master now if thou can.


Glo. Which, Sir? -- why -- let me see -- let me see, [Turns them both about.
^akes I cannot tell, Sir.


Car. Come, come, the cheat is plain, and I Will not be fob'd off, therefore tell
me who you are, Sir.


[ To Alonzo. Alon. One that was very unwilling to have put this trick upon
you, if I could have persuaded Euphemia to have been kind on any other terms,
but nothing would down with her but Matrimony.


Car. How long have you known her?


Alon. Faith, Sir, too long by at least an hour.


Car. I say again what are you, Sir?


Alon. A man I am, and they call me Alonzo.


Car. How! I hope not the great fighting Colonel, whom my son served as a
Voluntier in Fland^rs.


Alon. Even he, Sir.


Car. Worse and worse, I shall grow mad, to think that in spite of all my
care, Euphemia should marry with so notorious a man of war.


Hau. How! is this Alonzo, and am I cozened? pray tell me truly, are you not me
indeed?


Alon. All over, Sir, only the inside a little less fool.


Hau. So here is fine juggling -- are not you a rare Lady, hah? --


[To Euphemia^ Cries. Euph. I assure you, Sir, if this man had not past for you,
I had never had him.


Hau. Had him! O you are a flattering thing, I durst have sworn you could no
more have been without me, than a Barbers* Shop without a Fiddle, so I did: Oh
what a damnable voyage have I back again without a wife too. --


[Crys again. Lov. If that be all, we will get you one before you go: that shall
be my care.


Hau. A pox of your care; well, I will get my self most soundly drunk to night,
to be revenged of these two damnable Dons. Come Gload, let us about something
in order to it.

[Exit.
Euph. Pray, Sir, be persuaded, he is worth your owning.


Car. Tell not me of ^wning: what fortune has he?


Lov. His Horse and Arms, the favor of his Prince and his pay.


Car. His Horse and Arms I wholly dislike as impliments of war, and that same
Princely favor, as you call it, will buy no Lands, and his Pay he shall have
when he can get it.


Lov. But, Sir, his coming to Madrid was to take possession of a place the
Prince has promised him.


Car. Has promised him? what! I shall marry my Daughter to the promises of ere
a Prince in Christendom, shall I? No, no; promises, quoth ye?


Alon. Well, Sir, will this satisfy you?


[Gives him a parchment* Euph. If it should not, let us consider what next to
do.


Alon. No consideration Euphemia; not so much as that we are married, lest it
lesse^ our joys.


Car. 12000 Crowns a year! -- Sir, I cry you mercy, and wish you joy with my
Daughter*


Lov. So his courage will down with him now.


Alon. To satisfy you farther, Sir, read this.

[Gives him another paper. And now Euphemia prepare your self to receive some
gallant friends of mine, whom you must be acquainted with, and who design to
make a merry night on it.


Euph. A whole night Alonzo?


Alon. By no means Euphemia, for the first too, which if the thoughts of its
being part of my duty do not hinder, will be pleasant enough to me.


Car. So considerable an office at Court too! -- Let me embrace you, Sir; and
tell you how happy I am in so brave a Son-in-law.


Alon. With that assurance, Sir, I Will take a more than ordinary freedom with
you, and teach Euphemia a franker way of living, than what a native Spaniard
would have allowed her.


Car. She shall be what sort of wife you will have her.


Enter Servant: After a noise of Music. Alon. What Musi^k's that?


Serve. It waits upon some Ladies and Gentlemen who ask for you, Sir.


Alon. Wait them in, they are those f^iends of mine I told you off.


[He goes and brings them in. Enter Marcel and Clarinda, Silvio and Cleonte,
Antonio and Hippolyta, Dormida and Francisca, all salute Euphemia. E^ter
Haunce, and Gload in Masquer^de, to the company Olinda and Dorice masked. Hau.
Well, the Divel's in it if we shall not appear ridiculous enough, hah Gload?


Glo. I, Sir, the more ridiculous the better.


Hau. I was always of that mind. -- Ha, hay Boys, who be all these Dons and
Donna's? -- Harkye Lovis, I hope the Wife you promised me is amongst these fair
Ladies, for so I guess they are both, fair and Ladies.


Lov. You guess right, Sir.


Alon. Now Ladies and Gentlewomen command your Music, and do what likes you
best.


Lov. Here Is the Lady I recommend to you, take her, Sir, be thankful.


[Gives him Olinda. Olin. This is the fool that I am to manage.


Dor. And this my lot.


[ Takes Gload. [Musick plays, they all dance. Lov. There is within a young
Father ready to join your hands: take this opportunity, and make sure of a Wife.


Hau. I warrant you, Sir.


[Exeunt Haunce, Olinda, Gload and Dorice. Enter Pedro. Ped. Your Mother, Sir,
whom I found more dead than living for the loss of your Sister, was very near
dying outright with joy to hear of your arrival, and most impatiently expects
you.


Dor. And are we all forgiven Pedro?


Ped. Yes, you and I are like to be fellow Servants together again, Dormida.


Dor. And fellow Lovers too I hope, Pedro.


Ped. The Divel's in it if age have not allai'd flames of all sorts in thee: but
if you contribute to my allowance --


Dor. Thou know I could never keep any thing from thee Pedro.


Alon. Come Ladies, there is a small Banquet attends you in the next room.


Silv. We Will wait on you, Sir.


Enter Haunce, Gload, Olinda and Dorice. Hau. Hold, hold, and give me joy too,
for I am Married, if she has not mistaken her man again and I my woman.


Olin. No, you are the man I look for, and I no cheat, having all about me that
you look for too, but Money.


[Discovers her self. Alon. How Olinda!


Olin. Yes indeed, Sir, I served my Lady first, and then thought it no offense
to take the reward due to that service.


Hau. Here Is a Spanish trick for you now, to marry a Wife before one sees her.


Euph. What Dorice Married too?


Dor. After your example, Madam.


Glo. Yes indeed, forsooth, and I have made bold too after the example of my
Master.


Hau. Now do they all expect I should be dissatisfied; but, Gentlemen, in sign
and token that I am not, I Will have one more merry frisk before we part, it is a
witty wench; faith and troth after a month it is all one whose who; therefore
come on Gload.


[They dance* together. Alon. Monsieur Haunce, I see you are a man of
Gallantry. Come let us in, I know every man here desires to make this night his
own, and sacrifice it to pleasure.

The Ladies too in blushes do confess
Equal desires; which yet they will not confess
Their's, though less fierce, more constant will abide;
But ours less current grow the more they are tried.

EPILOGUE.
HIss 'em and cry 'em down, it is all in vain,
Incorrigible Scribles cannot abstain:
But impudently in the old sin engage;
Though doomed before, nay banished from the Stage.
Whilst sad experience our eyes convinces,
That damned their Plays which hanged the German Princess:
And we with ornament set off a Play
Like her dressed fine for Execution-day.
And faith I think with as small hopes to live;
Unless kind Gallants the same grace you would give
Our Comedy as Her; beg a Reprive.
Well what the other mist let our Scribe get
Apardon, for she swears she is the less cheat.
She never gulled you Gallants of the Town
Of sum, above four shillings or half a crown.
Nor does she as some late great Authors do,
Bubble the Audience and the Players too.
Her humble Muse soars not in the high-rode
Of Wit transverst, or Bawdy A-la-mode:
Yet hopes her plain and easy style is such,
As your high censures will disdain to touch.
Let her low sense creep safe from your Bravadoes,
Whilst R^tas and Cabals aim at Grenades.
FINIS*

