PSYOAIA, OR, THE SOULS CONFLICT, With the Sins Of Vain glory, Coldness in
professing Christ, Envy, Photinianism (of the last resurrection,) Ingratitude,
Unpreparednes to meet the Lord, Revenge, Forgetfulness of God.


Pourtrayed in Eight several SERMONS: Six whereof were delivered at St.
Mary's, and Christ-Church in Oxford, and Two at Sherborn in Gloucester shire.

By HENRY BEESLEY Minister of the Word at Swarford in Oxfordshire.

Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine; Neglect not the gift
that is in thee. 1 TIMOTHY 4.13, 14. Quis laborantibus opem tribuat, cum
improborum hominum violentiae etiam sacerdotes Domini non resistant? Nam aut
tacent plurimi eorum, aut similes sunt tacentibus, etiamsi loquantur, etc.
Salvian. de Gabern. Dei. lib. 5. London, Printed for P. Brown, 1656.

To the Right Worshipful JOHN DUTTON of Sherborn in Glocest. ESQUIRE.
SIR,
WHen almost every trifling Treatise that comes ab^oad, is for the upholding of
some interest, and partial design, I cannot be thought to run that course in
the publishing of these few Sermons, which being deliverd at that time when our
English earth was labii unius; Genesis 11.1.
(compared with that Babel of discord which has since been raised among us)
are besides, of that argument, as not to engage the Author of them in any
controversy, As being only against sin, the common enemy; To encounter which,
We have all reason to be united, being all the sons of Adam, and carrying about
us these fleshly lusts, 1 Pet. 2.11
which war against the soul.

And yet herein peradventure, I shall not escape the contradiction of some,
that will needs exempt themselves from the number of sinners; that have made of
late, new work for Preachers; even to defend their preaching against sin; as if
that were now forsooth, become a vain and needless labor.

The effects of which doctrine we have felt already, and and should do more,
were it not for the piety of some, that dare be good in evil times, and stand
in the gap, to stop the Sea from breaking in.

Among these few* I do not presume to intrude my self; save only to applaude,
and encourage the chief Builders in this work; or at most to supply them with
some materials in the building. For the perfecting whereof, every me^n
labourer may be serviceable in his degree; As they that brought but Goats hair,
Exodus 35.23.
and Badgers skins, to the furnishing of the Tabernacle.

And if in order hereunto, these ensuing discourses, by the blessing of God,
may contribute, though in the least; I have the aim intended by me, and more
then that, if choosing your Worship for my Patron, they may express in some
small measure the great obligation wherein I stand endebted to you, who were
pleased to admit me unto the tuition of (then) your Honorable charge, and
since, your Son in Law, the Earl of Down, unto whose virtuous education
(besides your sage precepts, and grave example) no cost, or care on your part
was wanting, Ordering your family with such discipline, as it might seem a
School of morality. Then transplanting him to the University, where he was
placed in one of the most eminent Christ-Church.
Colleges, and had the happiness of sitting daily in the midst of the
Doctors, both hearing them, and asking them questions.

When my attendance on his Honor expired, your generous bounty (that is wont
to remunerate faithful service beyond the contract of a yearly salarie, even
with a standing, and permanent largess) was pleased to settle me in a
competent Benefice, for the exercise and encouragement of my Ministry. Where
the Cure of my pastoral charge witholding me from waiting on you, and
presenting you so frequently with the fruits of my calling, as my duty and
wishes do prompt me thereunto; I adventure to supply that enforced defect with
the tender of these few Sermons. The first and last whereof may seem by spec
all interest, to relate unto you in the Dedication. The first entreating of the
infirmities of that great servant of the Lord (who made choice of so weak a
vessel to impart his grace unto the world) may represent as in a glass, your
bodily weakness; whom the same great God has strangely preserved beyond many
of abler constitution, both to magnify his strength in weakness, and to
commend the virtue of temperance, which has the blessing of the right hand,
length of days, attending on it. Prove. 3 16.


The last containing directions for youth, and delivered in your audience, may
serve to acquaint the world with the care that was taken by those instruments
appointed by you, for the culture of that noble plant: and withal, may
communicate these directions to others that are concerned in the ordering of
youth, that amidst their methods, and arts of instruction, this One thing
necessary, be not omitted, to bring them up in the nurture, Ephesians. 6.4.
admonition of the Lord,

For the rest, I will not presume to forestall your knowing judgment, which
(having by long experience proved, how great it is) I might justly fear,
(amidst so many excellent books, as you converse with) to present such poor
unfurnished papers unto so sharp, and discerning an eye, but that I well know
your Candor is such, as to take that favorably, which is well meant, and to
enlarge a mean oblation with the bounty of your kind and gracious acceptance,
Sic^t nec in victimis licet optimae sint auroque praefulgea^t, Deorum est
honos, sed pia ac recta voluntate venerantium. Sen. de benef. lib. 1. cap. 6.
therein resembling the divine property, which esteems not so much the costly
sacrifice, as the pious intention of the votarie.

In which confidence, I commend them, such as they are, unto your perusal, and
your self, with your nearest Relatives, unto the grace of Almighty God;
Beseeching him who is rich in mercy (which even the richest stand in need of)
to continue, and increase his blessings upon you, and your whole family, in
this life present, and to consummate them with glorious eternity in his
heavenly Kingdom.

SIR, Your most humble devoted Servant, HENRY BEESLEY.

To the Christian READER.
MAny years are passed, since some of these Sermons were delivered: The
Preacher was then among the younger Prophets, and Juvenes quibus calet,
vernatque sanguis, ut gestuosius incedunt, ita loquuntur exultantius ut quo
propius accedunt ad maturita ^em, hoc longius recedant ab illo aestu, fiuntq^e
placidi^res. Paschal. de opt. genesis elocut.
young men, abounding in hot, and spirited blood, as in deportment they are
more vi^lent, so in language more boystrous too, until age has abated that
vigorous strain into milder expressions.

But he that out of the mouths of Babes has perfected praise, is praised no
less by these in their order, and as well young Timothy, as Paul the aged, has
his part in the ministry.

The main exception that lies against them, will be this; that being now grown
to some maturity, I should give way to the publishing of them, that might
otherw^se have slept secure in their obscurity, and nev^r appeared to expose
their Author to the censure of a captious and quarrelsom world.

Unto which I answer, that having revised them Optimum emendandi genus, si
scripta in aliquod tempus reponantur, ut ad ea tanquam nova, and aliena
redeamus, ne nobis tanquam recentes foetus blandiantur. Quintil. lib. 10.
after so long time that they pass^d from me; when the indulgence that is
usually born toward tender issues is wholly slaked, and finding nothing therein
for doctrine incongruous to the faith of this Church, and my present judgment;
I was more inclinable to the motion of a worthy, and judicious friend* to let
them travail abroad in the world, and partly induced thereunto, by these
following considerations.

1. That having bestowed some pains in the penning of them, I was willing to
give account of my talent so employed, that I might not seem to have labored
in vain, by bestowing diverse months on that which was to vanish in the
hearing: fate that attends the best of Sermons, being committed to (...). Heb.
2.1. persiuere dicitur qui auditum sermonem non contin^t. B^za.
leaking cares, as water powered into a vessel full of chinks.

2. Considering the numberless swarms of abortive issues, wherewith the Press
has traveld of late, and glutted the world with spurious pamphlets, I thought
that mine might venture abroad among the rest, and not despair of the like
entertainment.

3. Beholding, and grieving to see the mystery of preaching so vilely profaned
into the trick of prating ex tempore, and the Spirit most pretended, where is
least premeditation, I judged it not amiss by somewhat more elaborate
(according to the grace that is given me) to vindicate this great work of the
Lord from being done negligently.

But the chief that prevailed with me is the seasonableness of the subjects
here propounded, each of them having the luck to encounter some sin now
reigning, and in fashion, as namely

1. The spirit of pride, and vain glory, which most abounds in worthless
minds; as empty vessels, and shallow brooks are known to yield the loudest
sound.

2. The spirit of worldly fear, that has no courage in professing the faith of
Christ, but makes use of religion as a politic design, to advance his secular
interests.

3. The spirit of base envy, that lying fallow, and untilled, without
improving his own talents; maligneth those in another; and having either no
mind or ability to reach unto his brothers excellency, strives by calumny to
depress it, and level it to his own unworthiness.

4. The Epicurean spirit, that abusing Christian liberty into Heathen
licentiousness, lives as if there were no other life to come after this, no
Resurrection to be expected, nay denies this expressly with the Sadduces; and
employs his utmost reason (...) the men that love their enemies, Romans 12.21 Non
solum jussa non facimus, sed contraid facimus quod jubemur Sal. ibid.
or do good to those that hate them, or overcome evil with good? certainly,
not to be found among such as do the contrary: In this case, England is become
U opia.

Lastly, The spirit of They profess that they know God, but in works theey
deny him. Tit. 1.1.16 V. Arn. de vero Christianism. l 1. c. 9. Psalm. 115.15,
16, 17. 1 Pet. 4 4.
practick Atheism, which forgets his Creator, lives as if there were no
God, or fancieth him to be such an one, as the heathen idols, that have eyes,
and see not, ears and hear not; An evil chargeable on every wilful, desperate
sinner; but most incident unto youth, which besides its native proneness to run
into all excess of riot, is furthered chiefly by a vicious education, which how
prevalent it is to dispose, and frame the whole life thereafter; if Rivius de
stult mortalium in procrast. Richer. obstet. anim. Charron of wisdom. Causin.
etc.
many great Authors had not sad^y affirmed it, no age has clearer proof than
ours, to evince this woeful truth; The effects whereof are felt already, and
will be deplored in succeeding generations.

These are some of those many spirits, that are gone forth into the world; 1
John. 4 1.
set on work by the God of this world, the old Dragon, 2 Co. 4.^. Re^. 12.9.
Verse 12.
who may seem to be n w come down in person, unto the Inhab ters of the earth,
having great wrath, b cause he knows that he has but a short time, an^
therefore the more bestirreth hims lf o gain m^re proselytes, for the enlarg ng
of his domini ns.

It is true indeed, H^c maio^es n s^ i^ qu st ^unt, h^c nos querimur* h c p
steri ^ue^e^to^, e^e so^ esse m^^es. egra^e ne ^ it^am etc. ^ 1.
as the wise heathen said long sn^e, This our Anc^stours complai ed of, this we
c mplain of, this posterity will complain of, that men's manners are depraved,
that iniquity bears sway, that human^ affairs are collapsed into the
extremity of wi^ked^esse. But gra^ting this; let all th ng be wei^^ed with
their due circumstances, It will be confess^d by any that a^e not ov r ly ssed
with p^rt a ity (...) th s ^^^ge s^ O^^o^ ^ield, O^ the Sanctity of the liv^s
of them that a^^ ^f ^h^ true ^h^^ch l^b. 3. ^. 52.
that co ruption in this last age is improved to that hei ht, as nothing hardly
can be added to fil^e^ the measure.

When some that profess the name of Christians, nay challenge a nearer
interest in Christ than ordinary professors, are implunged in those sins which
the Romans 1.29 compared with 2 Timothy 3. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Apostle reports of the Gent^les; and not only do the same, but have pleasure
in them that do them, which is, consummata nequitia; Imponit Paulus quasi
colophonem, addito eo scelere quo nullum est majus, etc. Beza ibid.

Cum scelera non solum d^lectant, sed etiam placent. Sen. epist. 39.


even an heathen being the Judge, when wickedn^sse is entertained with
complacency. But take the word (...), as it will very well bear the sense, and
as Beza fitly renders it, patrocinantur, and it will meet more nearely yet with
the vicious principles of some in these days, that strengthen the hands of the
wicked with lies, Ezech. 13.22.
and encourage them in their lewd practices, maintaining (with the very
libertines, as Adv libertinos, cap. 15. and deinceps.
Calvin paints them in their own colour^) Reported and confuted by Mr. Gattaker
in his Treatise of Gods eye upon his Isruel.
that albeit God in former ages did did see, and take notice of sin in
believers, yet in these days, he does noth not, he will not, he cannot so do;
That a child of God need not, nay ought not to ask pardon for sin, and that it
is no less than blasphemy for him so to do: That, let believers sin as fast as
they will, there is a Abusing that place of the Prophet. Zech. 13.1 1 Cor.
15.33.
fountain open for them to wash in. No wonder if these (...) (as the Apostle
terms them) evil Sermons, or communications corrupt good manners, not so
intended perchance by those that thought they could not amplify enough the
exceeding riches of free grace, Concionibus suis depravant, ii n. qui de venta
peccatorum propter Christum deque justitia in Christo multa praedicant, de
agenda vero ex Dei voluntate atque imitatione, vita, deque sanctificatione
spiritus, quo ad opera bona regeneramur, aut nihil admodum, aut perpauca.
Rivius in epist. ante lib. de stult. mortal.
unless they decryed the moral law: But yet occaisoned by their doctrine,
which talking much of the pardon of sin, and of righteousness in Christ, said
little or nothing of ordering our life according to the will and pattern of
God, or of sanctification through the Spirit, whereby we are regenerate, and
made new creatures to walk in good works: Ephesians. 2.10
And wrought accordingly in their disciples, who using liberty for an occasion
to the flesh, Gal. 5.13.
and turning the grace of God into wantonness, Jude v. 4.
See that excellent prefa^e in the F n^n translation of h de K. m^

F^^m Mr. ^hepherds Sincere Con^ert.


make Christ thereby, a cloak for their vices: or (with reverence be it
r^peated) no other then a dishclout, to wipe them clea^ from their impu i^ies.

For so it may be rightly judged by their f uit^, when (to borrow the ^h^r^e
from Salvian) Non sufficient enim multis c^nsuetud^^a^^i ^eat^s n n s fficiunt
^^es, ^apinae* cal^mniae, etc. nisi blasphem a fu^iosa^^^ mentium manus
in^iciant etiam in De m (...) de Gub. l. 4.
Many not or^^ent with customary sins, as st^ife, rapine, fraud, a^u^tery, etc
ar bold to strike at God himself, setting their mouths against the heavens, P
94. ve^^. 5, 6, 7.
and sayi^g with their blasphem^us leaders (suitab y to such horrid actions)
yet the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it: moreover,
Hoc enim ad crimina nost^a addimus, ut cum in omnibus ^ei simus, etiam bon^s
nos, and sanctos esse credamus, ac sic in nobis cumulentur imquitates offensae
etiam praesumptione justitiae. lib 3. maxima siquidem a^^^satrix est hominum
noxiorum usurpat^ix innocentiae arregantia lib. 4.
adding this to to their crimes, that being filled with all unrighteousness,
Romans 1.29. yet they repute themselves for Saints and godly persons, and so
accumulate their offenses with a presumption of sanctity: which makes their
Criminosior enim culpa est, homstior status-Nos qui Christiani Cath^lici dic
mur si simile aliquid Barbarorum impuritatibus sacimus gravius erramus;
Atro^ius enim sub sancti nominis professione peccamus* ubi sublimior est
p^aerogativa major est culpa. Ipsa enim errores nostros, religio quam
profitemur, accusat, etc. Ibid. -- (...), si post lavacrum niger effectus sum,
si eos qui nondum purgati sunt splendidiores cerno; Naz. Orat. 2^.
guilt so much the greater, that Ty^e, and Sidon, nay the Mahumetans (that are
m^re true to their fa^se Prophet, In nobis Christus patitur opprobrium, in
nobis patitur lex Christiana maledictu^, aestimari itaque de cultoribus suis
potest ille quic litur. Salv. l. 4.

-- Et ideo hoc ipso deteriores sunt, qui meliores esse deberent, non enim
probant quod fatentur, and impugnant professionem suam moribus suis, magis en^m
damnabilis est malitia, quam titulus bonitatis accusat, and reatus impti est
pium nomen. lib. 4.


than many Christians to their Savior) shall rise up in judgment against
these Christians, and shall condemn them that are so much worse than heathen, by
how much they should be better, as having known the way of righteousness, and
yet nevertheless by their vicious lives, stain the dignity of their
profession, cause the way of truth to be evil spoken of, and the name of God
to be blasphemed.

Against these floods of ungodliness, these torrents of Belial, (fit for the
tears of mourning Gildas) it is more difficult, now than ever, to m^ke
resistance; when those that should help to withstand the mischief, labor
rather to promote it: as to save a ship from the rage of a tempest, when the
Mariners are at difference among themselves, and assist unto its perishing.
Nazian. Orat. 32.
Neither am I so much a stranger unto, or a flatterer of my infirmities, as to
conceive any such possibility in these poor essays of mine; which though they
have already passed the critical ears of the Masters of Assemblies, Eccles.
12.11.
acknowledge themselves far insuffic^ent for a business of this nature, which
all the tongues of men, and Angels, are not able to effect; but only the voice
of that great God, who commands the wind, Mat. 8.27, 28.
and Sea; and they obey him: yet as sometimes Non tantus ego sum ut vos
alloquar, veruntamen and Gladiatores perfectissimos non tantum magistri, sed
etiam idiotae adhortantur de longinquo, ut saepe de ipso populo dictata
suggesto profuerint. Tertul. ad Mart.
skillful fencers may be admonished from the ignorant standers by, to award a
danger, so it may fall out by the grace of God, (whose strength is perfected in
weakness) that this my weak labor shall not be altogether in vain in the Lord,
though it be but to bring one bucket of water toward the quenching of this
flame. Or howeever, Sin autem id non provenerit, and hoc ipsum infructuosum
saltem non erit, quod prodesse tentavi; etc. Salvian. praefat.
if that succeed not, yet this will be some comfort to me, that (according to
my small talent) I endeavored to do good. The conscience whereof is recompense
enough for the utmost ambition of

Your poor Servant in the Lord Jesus, H. B.

The Titles and Texts of the several SERMONS.
SErmon 1. St. Paul's glorying in his infirmities. 2 COR. 11.30. If I must needs
glory, I w^ll glory of the things which concern m^ne infirmities. Sermon. 2. The
Rulers faintness in confessing Christ. JOHN 12.24. Neverthel^sse, among the
chief Rulers also many bel^eved on him, but, etc. Sermon. 3. The envious eye.
MAT. 20.15. Is th^ne eye ev^l because I am good? Sermon. 4. The last
Resurrection. 1 PHIL. 3.21. Who shall change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body. Sermon. 5. Thankfulness for Gods benefits.
PSALM. 116.12. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward
me? Sermon. 6. Preparation of Gods way. JOHN 1.23. He said, I am the voice of one
crying in the wilderness, make straight the way of the Lord. Sermon. 7. V^ctory
over evil. ROMANS 12.21. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.
Sermon. 8. Timely remembrance of God. ECCLES. 12.1. Remember now thy Creaatour in
the days of thy youth.
SERMON. I.
2 COR. 11.30. If I must needs glory, I will glory of the things which concern
mine infirmities.


NOthing is more unwelcome to an ingenuous nature, then to meet with a foolish
adversary; where silence may cause a suspicion of weakness, and contesting a
discredit from so unworthy a conflict; Answer a fool, and answer not a fool,
Prove. 26.4, 5.
were both the counsel of Solomon, and would require the advice of as wise as
he, to distinguish which one should follow. Of this unhappy condition were the
enemies that infested our Apostle, Men no less empty, then malicious; and as
they were conscious to no virtue in themselves, so condemning it in another.
When his integrity keeps him from offending, the offense is his integrity,
and when nothing lies in the way to be carpt at of his envious opposers, he
shall be accused of too much goodness; The chief Article of his enditement is
his humility, he was not stately enough to be an Apostle, and with a baseness
of presence, Chap. 10. v. 1. and 10.
and neglect of language, maintained not the garb of a Doctor. Eloquar, Virgil.
Aeneid lib. 3.
an sileam? should he confute their calumny, or labor to aggravate it? had he
not been thus guilty, he had been less innocent. It had well stood with Paul's
credit to have despised such poor accusations, and his best answer had been
with Alexander in Lucian unto Annibal, Luciani dialog.
(...), to answer nothing at all; but it stood not with his profession; the
Church was to be satisfied, that had a chief interest in his reputation; lest
his person might prejudice his doctrine, Eccles. 10.1
A little folly, (says Ecclesiastes) dis-seasons his fame, that is, in
reputation for wisdom and learning; and a suspicion of defect in an exemplary
person, denies his other virtues their desired acceptance; The Corinthians
easily believed it was a fault in their Apostle, Idola Hebr. appellantur
dolores, quia cruciant animum, vel quia superstitioso corporis cruciatu
colebantur. Idololatrae enim solebant se jejuniis conficere, and corpus
lanceolis confedere, and humi calore, etc. P. Mart. in 1 Samuel 31.
falsehood is more winning then sincerity, though accompanied with tyranny and
oppression; and with her courtly dresses finds ready entertainment, when naked
truth can get no admission; The Israelites that grumbled at the severity of
their true religion: could voluntarily endure that hell of Moloch, and when
they refused the voice of the melodious charmer, could exact the groans of
their dying children, in that direful sacrifice: The Turks in their salvage
ceremonies: The Papists in their costly fooleries, the precisions in their
painful niceness, how do they prove their zeal of misguiding, and superstition,
that to countenance their errors, afflict themselves with devotion, and make
Religion a torment: This was the Corinthians disease, and S. Paul tells them
so, ver. 20. For ye suffer if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour
you, if a man take of you, etc. when he that spent himself for their sakes,
Chap. 12.15
could not obtain the least favor from them, but (by a fatal requital of the
dearest affection) the more he loved them, the less he was loved: he now saw
the danger of his humility, and that to improve the benefit of his preaching,
he must raise himself into a loftier behavior; where besides the strange
tyranny of being compelled to be more stately, he must imitate their method
that despised him. The false Apostles by their plausiblenesse, and extolling
the graces of their endowments, had entwisted themselves into the good opinion
of the Corinthians, and by such gaudy inducements, too much promoted their
ambitious design. And he must display his own worthiness too, if he will gain
their approbation, and by a merciful flattery humor them to their edifying.
That the Preacher may be accepted, the man must be vindicated, and prove the
truth of his doctrine by the worth of himself. Had he failed in the varnish and
outward flourishes of account, the signs of an Apostle, were enough to evince
the dignity of his calling; those which he had wrought among them in all
patience, and wonders, and mighty deeds; Chap. 12.12.
but neither is he so defective in the trivial accomplishments of greatness,
but he can equal them in their utmost boasting: Are they Hebrews? Ver. 22.
so am I: are they Israelites? so am I: are they the seed of Abraham? so am I:
In this casual glory of nobility and highness of birth, he can suffer an
equality, to be even as they, but in that nobler birth of the soul,
regeneration in Christ Jesus; his courageous zeal cannot endure an equipage,
but in a holy ambition strives for precedencie: Verse 23.
Are they the Ministers of Christ? I am more: in labors more abundant, in
stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent: Now the prerogative of his
sufferings shall be the preferment of his Apostleship, and the large story of
his afflictions, the subject of his boasting; if I must needs glory, I will
glory of the things which concern mine infirmities,

You have heard the History of these words, and now the parts would be
considered, which are only two; an Hypothesis, and a Thesis; or an
inconvenience, and a resolution: Although he is constrained to glory, yet he
will not offend in that glory; it shall be of his infirmities: of which, whilst
I with my infirmities endeavor to make a brief discovery; God lend me his
assistance, and your charitable attention; and first, of the inconvenience, if
I must needs glory.

First part.
NOne are more unwilling to blazon their praises, then they that most deserve
to be commended: worthiness is silent in her own advancement, and had rather
have her excellencies suffer in concealment, then revive them with the breath
of her own applause; The secret assurance of goodness is sufficient recompense
for her ambition, and she accounts it reward enough of her greatest deserts to
have done them: Mark. 1.44
When by the sovereign touch of our Savior, the leaper was changed into
cleanness, his only prescription was, that he should say nothing; and in this
he was a Patient after the recovery: First, he bids him be whole, next, see
thou tell no man: as if his miracle would have been disgraced by publishing:
And it seems, Nature would be like her God in this, in whose worthiest
endeavors we may behold this emblem of modesty, whilst we find the amplest
bodies buisied in a speechless employment, Histor. Animal. lib. 4.
and usually the bigger note in the smaller creature; (...), says the great
Philosopher, and our ears bear witness to the truth of that observation; The
Fly, and the Gnat, what a noise they make, and with their loud alarmes delude
our attention: Ecclus. ^3.1. Seneca de benef. lib. 4.
when the Beauty of heaven with his various show, makes no sound at all: Quanta
rerum turba sub hoc silentio evagitur?

That living mountain Behemoth, though he can draw up Jordan in his mouth, Job.
40.15.23. Chap. 41.14.^9.
there is no mention of a voice, and though out of the door of Leviathans face
go burning lamps, and sparks of fire leap out, yet no voice is heard: and it
seems God would be like his nature in this, 1 King. 19 11.12. 1 Pet. 5.8.
who comes not in the acclamation of a tempest, but in a still and soft voice,
whereas by a cursed opposition, the devil is the roaring Lion: But without the
pardon of a metaphor, we have a more obvious instruction in man, where action
and language by a common repugnancie, seem not more to teach modesty, then
enforce it: If you will believe the criticism of Poets, though not the story,
Aenead. lib. 11.
it was the character of Virgil upon Drances, that he was melior lingua, sed
frigida bello dextra, a person of a voluble tongue, but of dull performance;
And Ajax in the Metamorphosis, Metam. lib. 13.
assuming to himself the praise of honorable exploits, could afford Ulysses
that other of language, Quantumque ego mart feroci, inque acie valeo, tantum
valet iste loquendo: Or if a more Catholic instance will better content your
observation, the mightiest Monarchy has bequeathed you an example: In the time
of Romes bravest adventures, Pasch de opt genere elocut.
(as Paschalius defines it) under the politic emulation of Consuls, what
rudeness of speech accompanied those noble achievements? Homines tacebant,
quia res loquebantur; whereas Greece, that scarce earnd an historian, Verulam
praes. in Org. novum.
in the plenty of language exceeded all nations, and had this property of
children, to be as busy in prating, as feeble in action; or without the
trouble of chivalrie, you may take notice of a more suitable instance in arts
and sciences, where you may perceive the profoundest truth attended with the
coursest expression, and the most flourishing eloquence coming nearest to
fiction; witness our Logic and Metaphysics, that to explain their nicest
notions, borrow almost a canting dialect, and by a barbarous subtilty of terms
at once purchase our laughter and apprehension; And you may no less observe in
divine Scripture, how the loftiest mysteries are disguised in a reverend
simplicity, and the most solemn businesses of Religion performed in the secrecy
of a Sanctuary, whence perchance the Nations by an apish devotion, Tertullian
adv Valentin.
so muffled their superstitious ceremonies, Solo secreto venerandas; that what
they wanted in real Majesty, they might make up in a mystical silence. But if
you will save this labor by a more familiar instruction, return we to our
selves, and S. James out of our own mouths will inform uS, that the least part
of our selves gives the loudest report; The tongue is a little member, Jam. 3.5.
and boasts great things; This is the instrument of glory, Quod hominis
dignitas and excellentia nulla alia re magis cognoscitur quam oratione Pet.
Martyr 2. page 4. Genesis 49.6. Psalm. 30.12 and 108.1, Psalm. 12.3. V. 4. Genesis
10.9. and 11.4.
and is so interest in the quality it expresses, that in the Original it is
taken for it, Cavod signifying both glory, and the tongue (by the authority of
no less Rabbines then Jacob and David,) as thereby intimating, that the
chiefest glory of man is in his tongue. If the soul be puffed up with
haughtiness, it is the tongue that speaks proud things, and when the
thoughts are conspiring in a mutiny, and close rebellion, at last they burst
out, With our tongue we will prevail, who is Lord over us? Neither do we find
it more forward in their fault, then peculiar in their punishment; when proud
Nimrod by the madness of ambition thought to reach heaven by his tower of
Babel, the confusion of tongues was his punishment, Quoniam dominatio
imperantis in lingua est, ibi damnata est, superbia, ut non intelligeretur
jubens homini, qui noluit intelligere, ut obediret Deo jubenti. Aug. de civ.
lib. 16. cap. 4. Luke 16.24. Greg. Moral. lib. 1. Citatus a Plutarcho.
that wherein he had before so vainly domineerd, he should not now be
understood; and the damned Rich man in the Gospel, as if his tongue had been
chief actor of his arrogance, complains most of that in the punishment. Send
Lazarus to cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame; And justly may it
be tormented in hell, that did so torment others here on earth; you will easily
admit the congruity of the judgment: if you consider how we are tortured with
any man's boasting, and if we cannot almost with the same patience endure our
own reproaches, as another self praises; (...), cries their fellow in
Menander; he kills me with bragging, (...), I grow lean in his company; And yet
it is not altogether unpunished in the very offense, whilst we argue every man
is most defective in that virtue, which he most atributeth to himself: and as
Plutarch speaks out of Demosthenes, (...), come away only more incredulous of
that worth, of which any man reports himself the owner. Even truth it self
could not be believed in giving a testimony of it self; If thou bear witness
of thy self, Joh. 8.13.
thy witness is not true; which though it were blasphemy to his divinity, yet
as he was masked in man, it might seem only a churlish discretion; and
therefore to one that upon the taking of an injury, B^et. de cons. lib. 2.
insultingly demanded, if he did not now think him a Philosopher, it was justly
replied, Intellexeram si tacuisses; I had so thought, if thou had said
nothing: his saying so, said he was not so; In Bibliotheca patr.
(...), said the reverend Monk Antiochus; The prudent man concealeth his
riches, and virtuous labors, and like Moses, puts a veil on his shining
graces, as it were blushing at his good deeds, and afraid to hear of them;
(...), imitates the Be, that what she extracteth from flowers abroad, carries
home with her into her hive, and makes honey within; is offended at nothing
more then smoke, which is the least hieroglyfick of human fame; (and it is to
be feared, that those who live upon this air, like those Astomi, the
mouth-lesse people in Solinus, Solini poly hist. cap. 55. Mat. 6 2.
have no mouths too, in the praises of God) Our Saviors caution was not in
vain* When thou do thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the
Hypocrites do; Ch^ysologus.
Talis eleemosyna hostilis est: to seek the glory of men by almsgiving, is to
make war with God for his glory: his prerogative royal, which he that is
afraid to do, must do that which is hard to be done, that is, be so far from
proclaiming his charity, Verse 3.
that he must not know it himself; the left hand must not know what the right
hand does: But to do it therefore that others may know it, we may note the
danger thereof by the penalty, denounced from the mouth of Christ against
these, Tertul.
Animalia gloriae; Verily I say unto you, they have their reward: which is no
more but a blast of vain praise, and when they have this, they have no more for
ever to receive, or look for besides: it is their last reward, their final
recompense: so bad a bargain do they make to sell their good deeds at so cheap
a market, and for the light breath of worldly praise, which is but for a
moment, to deprive themselves of a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory. 2 Cor. 4.17


No question, our Apostle was well acquainted with these and the like ill
consequences of boasting, that made him so backward in the attempt, and yet he
had in himself the true foundation and substance of glory: he was called to his
ministe^y by a new Ordination; not of men, Gal. 1.1.
nor by men, but by Jesus Christ: and by him not being in the days of his
flesh, when the rest were called, but in the full Majesty of his glory:
vouchsafing them, as to be the Preacher unto his conversion by an audible voice
from heaven; 1 Pet. 2.25 1 Timothy 2.7.
so to be the Great Bishop to ordain him a Preacher, and an Apostle, a teacher
of the Gentiles: and that no solemnity might be wanting here, instead of a
white robe, Acts 9.3. 2 Cor. 12.4
he is invested with a shining light: he was caught up to Paradise in the time
of his mortality, to be an eyewitness of the heavenly Canaan; Colos. 1.12
of the inheritance of the Saints in light, and obtained alone after Christ,
the authority of coming down from heaven; Videmus quanta majestas in ejus
scriptis extet, quanta altitudo emineat, quantum pondus subsit, quanta vis se
preferat; fulmina denique sunt, non verba; Calvin in 2 Cor. 11.6.
he was more learned then all the Apostles: what depth and sublimity in his
writings? what force and efficacy in his persuasions, where every line is an
argument, every sentence a victory? And to make up his pre-eminence, if we
believe Tertullian, he wanted not a prediction of the holy Ghost, Adv. Marcion.
lib. 5.
in that prophetic blessing of dying Jacob to his youngest son, Benjamin shall
ravin as a wolf, Genesis 49, 27
in the morning he shall devour the prey, and at night he shall divide the
spoil; Paul was of the tribe of Benjamin, in the morning, the forepart of his
age, worrying and devouring the flock of Christ, persecuting the Church; in the
evening, the declension of his life, dividing the word, a Doctor of the
Nations. 1 Timothy 2.7
And moreover, he was challenged to give an account of himself by the false
Apostles, which might not more encourage his boasting then excuse it, Then
besides too, the Corinthians who more regarded their reputation then their
edifying, must have something to glory of in his behalf, Chap. 5.12
for the outward appearance; so as now to hold his peace would be a scandal
unto his profession, and be interpreted not so much modesty as guiltiness:
Lastly, God was the Author of his singular endowments, and not to acknowledge
them to his glory were a kind of sacrilege, a crime little less then to deny
them: And yet all this would scarce rack out Apostle into the commending of
himself, Chap 12.7 O venenum quod non curatur nisi veneno! o antidotum, quasi
quod de serpente conficitur! etc. Aug. de verb. Ap. Ser. 3. Dicerat tot
pericula tormenta, and alia mala, nec dum tamen subigerat penitus superbiam:
imo adeo anceps illi certamen restabat, ut vincere non posset nisi colaphis
caesus Calv. Tacit. hist. lib. 4 vid. Lipsii notas Char. de sagess. lib. 1.
cap. 20. Tertul. de pallio reru^ cum in affectationem flabellatur, jam de
ince^dio gloriae ardor est.
although it were now so main a part of his function; Peradventure, the thorn
in his flesh, was that which so awed him with the remembrance; the messenger of
Satan that was sent to buffet him, lest he should be exalted out of measure;
vain glory was the last of his sinful enemies, that was to be destroyed; and
which after so many victories over the world and the flesh, nay after the
triumph over death and the grave, remained yet behind to be encountered; and so
doubtful was the contention with this sin, that had he not been beaten, he had
not conquered. Cupido gloriae etiam sapienti novissima exuitur; it is the last
affection that even a wise man's lays aside; and therefore Plato fitly styles
it, (...), the last garment which the soul puts off, or as Charron no less
fitly renders it, chemise de l'ame, the skirt of the soul, which like that of
Nessus bequeathed to Hercules, is hardly pulled off, till it fire and consume
us; Calor est omnis affectus, says the knotty Father in his riddle de pallio,
every passion is a kind of heat; but when it is once fanned, or kindled into
affectation, it breaks forth into the flame of glory; every passion is
violent, intractable to reason, but this by a certain excellency and
sovereignty in mischief, overmasters these passions, and possesses the
Monarchy in man. Even conquerours themselves that left nothing to be subdued,
were sola gloria minores, captives to ambition, and the greatest conquerors,
the greatest slaves: like an imperious wife to some impotent great man, nothing
can be done without her consent, and the miserable husband cannot choose but
obey her, how unreasonable soever; Bilblioth patrum: hom. de van glor.
(...); as Antiochus elegantly desciphers it; it beleaguers and undermines all
our actions, our words, our intentions; if it cannot allure us, (...), by the
proffer of honors, it far more prides us in contemning them, by a show of
equanimity, and taking pleasure in the repulse; if not to flaunt it in the
vanity of gorgeous apparel, it sets upon us by neglecting it; if not to
flourish in eloquence, it makes us proud of saying nothing, by conceiving our
selves wise in that silence, (...), etc. Herba Sar dinea si edulio fuerit,
vescentibus nervos contrahit, rictu ora diducit, ut qui mortem appetunt veluti
ridentium facie intereant Solini polyhist. cap. 10 Salvian. de Gub. lib 7.
Plautus.
In other sins and perturbations, we apply our selves to convenient remedies;
we fast, we grieve, we pray against them: But here we are contented to be
deluded, and tickled to our destruction, and like those that have eaten the
Sardonick herb, even hang our selves a dying: Nay ofttimes those very devotions
of fasting and prayer, become the fuel of this mischief, and like wholesome
cordials to some venomous creatures, are converted into the nature of its
poisonous constitution: Against such a perilous and intruding evil, who can
be wary enough; v^x cavet cum etiam cavet, the nicest caution may be
overtaken. And yet see the prudent industry of our Apostle, who having formerly
smarted for this fault, was acquainted with the danger, and labors to avoid
it: like a mindful Pilot, that having once split his vessel on some unknown
rock, from the doctrine of his losses has learned so much exper^ence, as to
prevent it in a second passage: So our Apostle being forced to commend himself,
rather then that commendation shall exalt him into a vain conceit of himself,
by a virtuous use of necessity, he will abase himself in his boasting; he will
not begin without many Prefaces of befooling himself, and if he do, it shall be
but (...), but a a little while, Chap. 11.16.
as though he assumed another man's person, and would straightway lay it aside:
and when he does, it shall be in his infirmities, where his very glorying is
humility: If I must needs glory, I will glory, etc.

Second Part.
THe shame of the worldling is the grace of a Christian, and what the natural
man scoffs at as foolishness, the believer wisely adores: Non pudet quia
pudendum est, was the pious obstinacy of Tertullian, to account the chiefest
glory in that which the world derided, when the Apostles are beaten before the
Council, Acts 5.40.
as if the punishment had been their felicity, by a new maxim of their Master,
they departed glad of their suffering, esteeming it honor sufficient for their
rejoicing, Verse 41.
that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name. Me thinks here the
hardy Stoic might almost persuade you he were a Christian, and with less
wonder be believed, that he is happy in his torments; were but his conscience
as good as his patience, and did he not seem more without reason, then passion,
And yet if you look more nearly into him, you shall find that courage of his
rather a resolution, then practice, and not so much his exercise, as his study;
and you shall find Paul as far exceed him in the agony of his sufferings, as in
the purpose and intention; Chap. 11. verse 27.
hunger, cold, thirst, nakedness, labors, watching; these are the arguments of
his Philosophy, and he maintains the truth of his profession, not so much by
disputing as suffering. 1 Cor. 15.9
So as if he deserved not to be called an Apostle, because he persecuted the
Church of God: by the pre-eminence of his afflictions, he deserved chiefly to
be called an Apostle, as being thus persecuted for the Church; It was the
cognizance Christ set on his disciples, that they should be hated for his name;
and without this, they could not obtain his signal blessing on the Mount;
Matthew. 5.11, 12.
even that which is presented with the greatest emphasis: Blessed are ye, when
men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil
against you falsely for my sake; rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is
your reward in heaven: Insomuch, as the false Apostles by opposing and
traducing him, unwittingly fulfilled the prophecy of our Savior, and became
themselves the arguments of his true Apostleship, and yet give them leave to
wonder at this strange induction; That he should prove the dignity of his
calling by mustring up his disgraces, and vindicate his reputation by laying on
greater aspersions; such a circle of calamities who would not rather interpret
the brands of an offender, then the marks of an innocent? and ascribe his
escape (rather then delivery) not so much to the divine protection, as the
infelicity of perishing? If to be rescued from such desperate hazards, should
be an evidence of his integrity; why not rather of his guiltiness to have so
often incursed them? Each flouting Pagan at least will tell him, he discredits
his God to make miseries the reward of devotion, Ecce pars vestrum and major
and melior ut dicitis, egetis, algetis opere, fame, laboratis, and Deus
patitur, dissimulat, non vult, aut non potest opitulari suis. Ita aut
invalidus, aut iniquus est. Min. Fell. Octav. Arist. rhet. lib 2 cap. 7.
and the guardon of Religion to be only more then ordinarily wretched; what
reserves he for his vengeance, that does this in his mercy? what for his
enemies, if thus to his friends? he either cannot, or will not succor them;
and is therefore impotent, or unjust. But the afflictions of the righteous in
all ages of the world, convince this stale Atheism, and by the custom of their
sufferings, have now made it a doctrine to be good, and unfortunate, so as it
might well appear by this character, that he was Gods beloved, to be thus
persecuted, and reviled, (...), says the great Philosopher; the divine Majesty
is wont to befriend, and favor those that suffer injuries. Nor does he
evermore exalt his saving mercy, then by the humility of his compassion, in
relieving the distressed: witness his own so many promises of deliverance in
troubles; and never any so eminently accomplished, at the expense of so many
miracles: And might not Paul glory in those infirmities that were supported by
omnipotence? That so weak a vessel, so cracked and bruised with afflictions,
should thus valiantly hold out against all the encounters of adversity? who
could be so impious as not to acknowledge the assistance of a deity? who so
rigid as to expect other proofs of his innocence beyond his life? Seneca.
Inter tot per^cula non servassent illum dii, nisi sibi servassent: The
heathens could construe such strange deliverances to be the immediate work of a
deity; Virgil. Aenead. lib. 1.
One of their own Poets did intimate no less, when bringing Aeneas into a
tempest, he could not deliver him without raising a god, Neptune must appear,
and gravely checks the rude winds into a civil submission: But if you will see
a danger indeed, beyond the fiction of a Poet. Behold our Apostle in that
navigation, exactly pourtrayed by an Evangelist; Acts 27.9.
Acts 27. When the time of failing was already past, and the Sea lightened of
her burdens, had now as it were license to be outrageous; Their first lanching
forth was in despair, the winds were contrary; V. 14.
and tempestuous Euroclydon by the order of that Season, had the tyranny of
those unruly dominions; unto whose usurping violence, the Pilot is forced to
surrender his office, V. 15.
and loseing his art in astonishment, commits all to the merciless billows;
The companions of this voyage were a great part of the calamity, V. 42.
soldiers and prisoners; No place of doubting here was left, save in the
variety of perishing; either to be split on the rocks, or ingulphed in the
quicksands. V. 17.
Their only refuge was to undo themselves, V. 18.
by lightning the Ship of her lading, so as they left nothing to be cast away
but themselves; Their munition too being now grown dangerous, V. 19.
and their tackling only able to profit them, in being thrown away. And yet
they did but begin to be lost in the damage of their goods; V. 20.
for (...) (says the divine Historian) all hope of their safety was taken
away. Exodus 10.21.
Only a three days darkness was enough for the seventh plague of Egypt,
which though the least of these evils, V. 20.
is exceeded here too; No Sun or star in many days appearing, nor affording
this lamentable comfort to know the place of their perishing: Verse 30.
To paint out the peril in its lively extremity, the Mariners were afraid,
those leaguers with death, and play-fellowes with danger; and under color of
casting Anchor, would have stole away in the boat: All this while too, that
they might not only be afraid, they tormented their bodies with a fourteen
days abstinence, Verse 33.
as if in the expectance of death, they had forgotten to live. Verse 22.
In the middle of this extremity, our Apostle dares prophecy a deliverance;
but see how it is accomplished: Their safety must be contrived by a shipwreck,
Verse 41.
and the breaking of their vessel by a lucky disaster, is the only method of
their escape; for on boards, Verse 44.
and broken pieces of the ship, they escaped all safe to land: Quis neget diis
cura esse, propter quem fuit innocens, ruina? Martial. 2 Cor. 1.
And who can deny now that Paul is Gods charge, to whom ruin it self becomes a
preservation! Had he remained unshaken in prosperity, how had he known, or the
world by him, the mystery of the divine protection? which appears not so
cleanly in a settled tranquillity, as when we are pressed out of measure, and
despair even of life: Then is the time for him, with whom all things are
possible to work a d^liverance befitting himself, that he alone may have the
glory. And to this end, you may please to observe, how the Father Almighty
takes pleasure in the infirmities of his children, and humbles his Majesty to
the safeguard of those that are most destitute of meaner succor. When my
Father and mother forsake me (says the Psalmist) then the Lord cares for me:
Psalm. 27.10
as it he stayed for that opportunity of defection, to endear the favor of his
adoption: so in the minority of Abraham's posterity, he was familiar with his
people, when Israel was a child, then I loved him: Hos. 11.7. But being
multiplied and grown numerous, he withdrew his presence from them. So in the
infant state of the Gospel, miracles, visions, and revelations, maintained a
commerce between heaven and earth, whereas in the elder time, as wealth and
worldly pomp increased, those gifts and graces discontinued. So the young
ravens, Psalm. 147.9
and the hungry are filled with the riches of his bounty, when the rich (like
Midas with his golden penury) are sent empty away. Luke 1.53
But if you will awhile attend the greatest workman in the meanest of his
works; Minutiora quae maxmus artifex de industria ingeniis aut viribus
ampliavit, sic magnitud. in mediocritate probari docens quemadm. virtutem in
infirmitate. Tertul. lib. 1. adv. Marc.
with delightful wonder you may behold him, Maximum in minimis, no where more
admirable then in things of the smallest moment, and often times lodging rare
endowments in the most despicable creatures; as if from the very contempt of
their littleness, he would increase our admiration; For instances, the
Scripture will readily furnish us, that one place alone in the Proverbs will do
it, Chapter 30. where the wise man tells us, Prove. 30.24.
There be four things which be little upon earth, but they are exceeding wise;
so wise in the judgment of Tertullian, that he chooses some of them to
confound the proud wisdom of man, daring him to imitate, if he can, In his tam
parvis atque, tam nullis, quo ratio? quanta vis? quam inextricabilis perfectio?
Galin. lib. 11. cap. 2.
Apum aedificia, formicae stabula, araneae telas, bombycis stamina, the
architecture of the Be, the granary of ^he emet, the lawn of the spider, the
loom of the silkworm; whose curious industry may catechize any (not worse then
an Infidel) to give God the glory of such perfections shining in his darkest
creatures: But farther yet, you may behold them not only the objects of his
bounty and wisdom, but the instruments also of his power, and justice; Exodus
23.28.
when to plant the Israelites in Canaan, he provides them an army of Hornets
to marshall their way, and proud Pharaoh in his own dominions acknowledges an
overthrow from lice and frogs: Exodus 8.
The Ox goad, and the jaw bone are exalted into the activity of a conquest,
Josh. 6.20.
and but the sound of the Rams-horns is engine enough to call down the walls of
Jericho: So the scorn of man can triumph over man to the glory of God, and the
vilest creature armed with the divine justice, becomes the revenger of humane
rebellion. Thus has God chosen the weak things of the world to confound the
things which are mighty, 1 Cor. 2.27.28.
and base things of the world, and things which are despised has God chosen,
yea and things which are not to bring to naught things that are; Verse 29.
that no flesh should glory in his presence. So when he would make use of fit
messengers to declare his will, it became his omnipotence to make choice of the
most unlikely Agents: to put his treasure in earthen vessels, 2 Cor 4.7.
that the excellency of the power might be of God, and not of them. Slow
tongued Moses, rude Amos, simple Peter; unto these he vouchsafes his presence,
conference, revelations, and makes them fit for employment, by employing them;
lest more fashionable undertakers might rob him of his glory, by fixing the
peoples eye no higher then their own worthiness: Of which danger we have a
double example in S. Paul, who on a little more then ordinary manifestation of
his virtues among the Barbarians, was twice mistaken for a God. Acts 28.4
Once at Melita, for not falling down dead at the viper, as though to outlive
the sting of that Serpent, he must needs be immortal; Acts 14.11.
And before that at Lystra, where his eloquence accused him into Mercury; and
having easily persuaded them he was a God, could scarce make them to believe he
was a man: but their zealous idolatry will needs abuse him with sacrifice. And
he knew how dangerous it was, to rival with the Almighty in glory, by
accepting that horrible courtesy. It was the flattery of others, Acts 12.22
that made Herod guilty of blasphemy, in that overstrained complement, (The
voice of a God, and not of a man) and yet he is fain to recant it himself by
dying: the worms by a mortal demonstration soon confute his divinity, Verse 23.
and without the help of a Surgeon, present him an unfeigned skeleton before
the eyes of his kind murderers: So that you see this outward baseness and
infirmity was necessary in our Apostle, to raise the conceits of his beholders
unto the true Author of his miracles. But though God magnify his power in the
weakness of his creatures, would you believe that he should practice this
strange mystery on himself, and that he should magnify his power by his own
infirmity? And yet behold the eternal Son of God effecting the wonder of our
redemption in the form of a servant, Phil. 2.7.
and triumphing over Satan in the infirmities of our nature, Romans 8.3.
assuming the likeness of our sinful flesh, that he might condemn sin in the
flesh, and by tasting of death himself, Heb. 8.9. 1 Cor. 15.54. Eo de
honestamento corporis maxim laetatur: ut de Sertor. Salust. Gal. 6.17.
swallowing up death in victory. And might not Paul glory in his infirmities,
that were enabled by the sufferings of his Savior? To be like great personages
even in miseries is a graceful adversity. How proud is the soldier of that
wound that resembles him with his General? almost thanking his misfortune for
advancing him to so worthy a danger: And can he less exult in his sufferings,
that bears in his body the marks of the Lord Jesus? Besides, it may seem too
that God himself allows this honest ostentation in his servants; when by the
consent of Schoolmen, all the Martyrs shall appear in the Church triumphant,
bearing the signs of their Christian wounds about them, as if so many speaking
testimonies of their godly courage, that what here they endured in behalf of
their Savior, may be there an addition to their glory: And how eminently shall
his body then glister with skarres, that left here no place for a new wound?
that by a valiant emulation did not so much imitate, as repeat our Saviors
sufferings,! In stoning, in whipping, in watching, Verse 25.
in fasting, in perils of his own nation, in perils among the Gentiles, in
perils in the City, in perils in the wilderness; in being haled from one
Magistrate to another, from Lysias the chief Captain to Felix the Governor,
Acts 23.26 25.12
from Festus to Caesar: in being falsely accused, and pronounced innocent by
his Judges: nay to make up the resemblance, he wanted not a blow from the
High Priest, nor an Ecce homo! behold the man: so as he may be well applauded
with that elogie of Salvian, Salvian de Gub. lib. 3.
Singularis Domini praeclarus imitator! An excellent disciple of a singular
Master; that walking in the steps of his leader, has made him plainer as it
were, and more significant by his footing: and may well bespeak your imitation,
as he did sometimes the Corinthians; 1 Cor. 11.1 Application
Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ: By the example of his
sufferings, we are summoned to a warfare, and who would refuse to follow his
Captain in that way, which he has traced out by his own blood! Our fighting is
suffering, and who is so weak but can do this! nay weakness is our only
strength, for when we are weak, then are we strong: Chap. 12.10.
The mind is more able to endure the encounter, when its domestic enemy the
flesh, is brought into subjection; and by the discipline of a strict life, is
taught more readily to obey her injunctions. Aphor. Hippocr.
In bodily diseases when the sickness is in its vigor, (...), says the great
Physician, a sparing diet is mainly requisite, that the strength of nature may
be wholly employed on the malady; and it is no less important in the conflicts
of the soul, which becomes more vigorous by abstinence, as thereby uniting her
forces, Chrys^st.
and refining her self from the earthly contagion. (...) (says St. Chrysostom.)
This is a resplendent victory, this is the triumph of the Church, thus the
devil is vanquished whilst we are afflicted, and takes the foil by our
miseries: by our fasting he is made hungry, by our thirst he faints: chased he
is by our persecution, and disarmed by our nakedness. Thus is the Lord of Hosts
pleased to fight his battle by our infirmities: and from the victory of our
sufferings to erect a trophie to his glory. Even so Lord! evermore arm us with
thy self against all assaults of sin and Satan, that by the power of thy Cross
and Passion, we may advance thy glory here, against the kingdom of darkness;
until by the power of thy resurrection, we shall be advanced to thy Kingdom of
glory: For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever,

AMEN.
SERMON. II.
JOH. 12.42. Nevertheless among the chief rulers also, many believed on him;
but because of the Pharisees, they did not confess him, lest they should be
put out of the Synagogue.


NOthing is more incredible to the depraved nature of man, then the mysteries
of his salvation: He could easily believe the father of lies in the plot of his
captivity, but can hardly believe the God of truth in the counsel of his
deliverance: To persuade so strange a conceit, the Almighty must take pains
with his creatures; and that word which only spoke man's creation, must himself
become man to preach his Redemption: Luke 18.8
But shall the Son of man find faith on the earth? behold the barbarousnesse
of infidelity! Joh. 1.11.
He came unto his own, and his own received him not: and yet the main business
of his doctrine, was to exhort a belief, and that doctrine canonized with
miracles, the infallible testimonies of a deity: such miracles as were not so
much the labor, as the property and emanation of his person; Zanch. de trib.
Elohim. l. 3 c. 3
nor were wrought by the dispensation of a greater power, but by his own virtue
and auhority, which was common to the fellowship of the Trinity, in which he
was not the instrument but the partner, and differed from his Father not in
power, but in the order of working: which the devils by a sharper Philosophy
perceived to be above the contrivance of nature, Vid. Iud. viv. in 9. de Civ.
Dei. cap 21.
and as if by preaching the Gospel of our Savior, they would condemn the
stupid Jews, usurp S. Peter's very confession; Thou art Christ the Son of the
living God. Matthew. 16.16.
But this degenerating stock of Abraham, children of his flesh, Not his faith,
in a Sceptick madness, will neither credit their ears in the words of our
Savior, nor their eyes in his mighty deeds: which Isaiah in a prophetic
rapture foresaw and wondered at; Who will believe our report, Isai. 53.1.
and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? where, had they not bin punished
with dullness, the prediction of their unbelief might have taught them to
believe the Messiah; their unbeleef being there foretold as a token of the
present Messiah; But their voluntary obstinacy, that refused to apprehend their
Redeemer; Etiam hoc eorum voluntatem meruisse respondeo; sic enim eo excoecat,
sic obdurat, Deus deferendo, quod occulto judicio facere potest, iniquo non
potest. Augustine: in v. 40. Accidentale est verbo Dei quod homines excoecat;
verum id hominum malitiae imputandum est, quae vitam convertit in mortem.
Calvin. in eundem loc.
by the congruity of Gods justice, suffers the necessity of so untoward a
refusal, the perverseness of their understanding is revenged with the
impossibility of understanding: whilst, (as I may have leave to speak) by an
admirable impostume of the divine judgment, the light of the world appears
darkness to their souls; the bread of life yields the savor of death, and
the rock of salvation becomes a stumbling-stone to their ruin: Nevertheless
all were not tainted with senseless contagion, but many exempted, whose rare
preservation might publish at once, the power and compassion of their Redeemer,
being not only those of the vulgar rout, which out of a customary lightness are
apt to embrace any uncouth novelty, but men of a deeper reach and capacity, the
politic and reserved nobility, whose faith was as wonderful as the others
incredulity: Among the chief rulers also, many believed on him.

Part. 1.
Well might the Evangelist employ this emphatical rhetoric, to express so
strange an occurrent. Joh. 32.9.
Great men are not always wise, but less usually religious; the pomp and
splendor of their estates, being incompliable with the humility and
retiredness of devotion. Joh. 7.48.
Have any of the rulers or of the pharisees believed on him? was the insolent
demand of the Pharisees; accounting such rudeness and weakness of judgment,
only besetting the ignorant people: Neither has any age been so happy as to
contradict this wretched position; as it is easy to observe through the whole
course of the Gospel, where baseness and poverty are so much the portion of
christian professors, that the Apostle takes it for granted; J^m. 2.5. Mat.
11.26. 2 Samuel 1.21. vid Bernard s^per Cant. sermon. 54. Psalm. 104.10.
Has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the
Kingdom? even so, it seemed good in his sight, to hide those things from the
wise and prudent, and to reveal them unto babes: to leave the proud like the
Mountains of Gibeon, without any dew or ra^n upon them; and to send his springs
into the valleys, to fill the lowly with his blessings. Thus, we find the
simple shepherds early visited by the dayspring from on high, The Glory of the
Lord shone round about them, Luke 2.9.
as it were the morning beams of the Son of righteousness; and straightway they
in a pious gratitude make the report as large as their joy, rejoicing others,
as the Angel did them, with the good tidings of a Savior; whereas Herod the
King, Dum temporalis regni emulatur angustias, aeterni Regis ortu^ molitur
extinguere Chrysol. sermon. 152. Mar. 2.16. Chap. 7.47 Luke 15.1 Mar. 12.37. Luke
13.7 Joh. 7.40. Mat. 15.31 V. 12. and 18 Psalm. 2.2. Luke 7.30
vainly fearing a rival in his temporal Kingdom, with furious subtilty,
attempts to assassinate the King eternal, at his first appearing in flesh: and
how earnestly he intended it, the bleeding innocents are so many witnesses;
whose lives must be sacrificed to the rage of a tyrant, because they are near
in age and voisinage to Christ. To hold on the parallel, we find on the one
side, the despised people flowing to Christ from every quarter, Galileans,
Samaritans, Publicans, Fishermen; such are the men that hear him gladly, cry up
his miracles, admire his doctrine, celebrate his triumph with solemn
procession; when on the other side (...), the rulers are plotting together
against the Lord, and against his anointed, rejecting the counsel of God
against themselves, and hindering others that would embrace it: not suffering so
much as the little children to cry Hosannah in the temple, Mat. 21.15 Luke
19.40.
although the stones were ready to proclaim him, having given such evident
proof of his Godhead, in the raising of Lazarus from the dead; a miracle so
fully miraculous, as might have even softened hearts of stone, Vel lapidea corda
molire debue. rat. Call.
and did no less wonders in many of the inferior rank; whom of stones raised
up children to Abraham: but yet is so far from converting these Rulers, that
this alone does exasperate their utmost fury: so that now wholly losing their
patience, they cannot expect his doing any more good works, Chap 11.47.53.
to defer his passion; but from that day forth take counsel together, how they
may act the most horrid wickeness with the greatest solemnity. O the desperate
madness of hardened impiety, that emboldeneth poor flesh to confront the
Almighty, in the most signal acts of his power! so little regarding the power
of his wrath, as not fearing to provoke it by the murder of an innocent
person. But carnal policy startles at nothing that may promote her worldly
interests; and is not ashamed to profess it, in the face of a Council, where
Caiaphas the President* clearly resolves it; Chap. 11.50.
That the peace of a Nation is cheaply purchased by one man's destruction, be he
never so righteous; it matters not, that; if the Commonwealth cannot otherwise
be preserved. And in order hereunto, the life of Lazarus is put to the vote
too, because that by reason of him, Chap. 12.8 11.^.
many of the Jews went away and believed on Jesus. Unhappy Lazarus! that
having escaped one death already, (...). Mondus.
is now in danger of another from the Rulers; and for no other fault, but that
he received the benefit of living again by a miracle: which, how it sped with
him, as we cannot learn; so for Christ, as sure we are, the conspiracy ripened
into execution: wherein we find the Rulers still, are the principal agents; as
if by the privilege of their authority, claiming the precedencie in so
transcendent a wickedness; And that they might more then crucify him, they
aggravate his torments with ridiculous blasphemy; Mat. 27.42
If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the Cross, and we will
believe him; as if their envious dispositions suspecting the benefit of their
cruelty, would hinder the redemption of mankind by his blood, and could only
believe on him, when they have made him no Savior: And yet if their charity
can with patience behold them after so odious a fact, you shall find their
constant malice tormenting him after death, with barbarous indignities. They
defame him to Pilate by the term of Deceiver, as if his miracles were but so
much imposture, to delude the people; They secure his Sepulcher with Sealing
the stone, and setting a watch, verse 66. Mat. 28.12
double munition, impiously suggesting their own absurd phancie of his being
stolen away, thereby to discredit his professed doctrine of rising from death:
The truth whereof how they labor to stifle, appears by their practicing with
the soldiers, whom they prompt with large money to say he was stolen away,
against the evidence of their own senses. Lastly, to fill up the measure of
their spite; they persecute him afresh in his surviving disciples, Acts 4.17.
etc. Chap. 5 40 Chap. 4.4. 1 Cor. 2.8 (i ^.) Eoru^ qui inter homines vel
sapientia, vel opibus ac potentia caeteris praestant. Beza Anct.
whom they forbid with threatening and beating, to preach in his name, as if
they feared, lest after the rate of so many thousands as were converted at
Peter's one Sermon; themselves should shortly be left alone, as the monsters of
unbeleef. And for such in effect the Apostle reckons them, where he terms the
Gospel such a mystery, as none of the Princes of this world knew, that is, none
of those whom the world accounts eminent, either for wisdom, power, or riches,
were called to be partakers of it: But if it be true, that none of that quality
are admitted, how shall this of my text be verified; that among the chief
Rulers many believed? None, and many, are such (...) as can no more stand
together, then light and darkness; To reconcile this seeming repugnance, we
are by many to understand, but some greater number of believers, then could be
expected from men so dignified: As such, they were many, though few, if
compared to the residue of unbeleevers: and thus, it will be no hard matter to
accord the Evangelist with the Apostle, who intended not by his negative to
exclude all great ones from being converts, Piscator, observe. in 1 Cor. 1.26.
but only to imply; that so it was for the greater part, they were generally
such non-proficients in the School of Christ; that he holds it no wrong to
charge them all with common ignorance: So did our Savior in the like case,
where he says indefinitely, Mat, 11.25.
that mysteries are hidden from the wise and prudent, because so few attain
unto them; Ioh. 3.32.
and so the Baptist speaking of Christ, says, that no man received his
testimony, that is, no man after a sort, considering the number of those that
rejected it: Although some were known to receive it, and the next words evince
as much; affirming of him that has received it, that he has set to his seal,
that God is true; And that S. Paul had no other meaning, Cor. 1.6.
his words before do clearly manifest, where he wills the Corinthians to make
their calling, that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, and
noble, are called; if not many, then some he denies not; Acts 13.7. Acts 17.34.
or he should have spoken contrary to his own experience: The Deputy of Cyprus,
Sergius Paulus the Judge of Athens, Dionysius, diverse of the nobler sort at
Beraea, besides some others of Caesar's household; Phil. ^.22.
were as so many trophies of his powerful ministry: But however, give him
leave to complain of the rarity of noble Proselytes, that found among them such
ill success of his best endeavors, which in Felix the Governor wrought only
a trembling instead of belief; that is, Acts 24.25 Iam. 2.19.
no more then is in devils; and from his successor, Acts 26.24
the noble Festus obtained the censure of learned madness; and but almost
persuaded the King Agrippa to be a Christian. Ver. 28.
And yet these may pass for sober In fidels; compared to those in the ages
following; to wit, the Roman and Grecian Emperors, who being transported with
arrogant madness, practiced all the feats of cruelty during their tyranny, to
the suppression of religion, as Constantine most justly complains of his
ungodly predecessors; (...). Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 2 cap. 48.
the cruel Authors of that Decad of persecutions, which they wrote in such
bloody characters; that but to read them in the Church story is a kind of
martyrdom to those that have any bowels of compassion. And if the justice of
time had not canceld such dismal monuments of impiety, you might be yet more
distinctly informed by the wicked industry of Domitius; Domitius de officio
proconsulis, libris septem rescripto principum nefario collegit, ut doceret
quibus poenis affici oporteret eos, qui se cultores Dei confiterentur. Lactant.
Instit 5. cap. 12.
who (as Lactantius relates) heaped up seven volumes containing the salvage
edicts of Princes for the punishment of Christians: Since whom, the mightiest
Monarchs on earth, by the seducement of Satan and Mahomet, are to this day the
more professed enemies to the Gospel of Christ: you have heard enough of this
sad truth, the sum whereof amounts to this; that the Grandees of the world,
are commonly least in the Kingdom of heaven; which is an hard saying to flesh
and blood, and yet no more, then what our Savior so earnestly pressed, Mat.
19.24.
touching the difficulty of a rich man's entrance into heaven: which did so
exceedingly amaze the disciples, Verse 25.
that it put them to enquire of him, who could be saved on such terms? But that
which he answered in that case, may serve as well to resolve us here, Verse 16.
that though on man's part, the salvation of such amounts to an impossibility,
considering the weakness to resist such strong temptations, yet it is feisible
with God, whose grace is sufficient for them; And his grace is not in vain, for
in all ages many instances are to be found of Rich and Noble, that were
servants of Christ on earth; and are (we doubt not) entered into their Masters
joy. Mat. 25.21
But what if many stars of that magnitude, seem to come short of the glory of
God? Rom, 3.23
we are not therefore to question the justice of the Judge of all the earth;
Genesis 18.25.
who, as He is no respecter of persons, Acts 104.3
so high and low, rich and poor, are alike to him, not one preferred before the
other; but in every condition: He that fears him, and works righteousness,
is accepted with him: It is only the failing in the duties, that makes the
difference; which is not the fault of wealth or honor, but of the persons that
abuse them; and make that which should have been for their welfare, Psalm. 69.2^.
an occasion of falling.

As for instance, being taken up with the present luster of their worldly pomp
(which fills their eyes, as too near an object,) they cannot discern things
spiritual, and remote from the senses; or at least, esteem them little, Merc
Trismeg Pimander. cap. 4.
at so great a distance (...), as Trism^gist divinely observed: for the things
that we behold, too much content us in the certainty of possessing them;
whereas those that are absent, and invisible, beget a distrust in our
imaginations, whether they have any being or no, as having no sensible shape,
or figure, to commend them unto our capacities. And this seems to have been
the proper disease of the ruling Scribes and Pharisees; that being immersed in
earthly desires, and namely those which the scripture terms, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life, 1 Io. 2.16.
they were not in case to set their affections on things above; for touching
the former, the sin of covetousness, Col. 3.2.
that we may see how fitly our Savior compared it to thorns, Mat. 13.12.
that choke the seed of the word that is sown, and will not suffer it to grow
up, we have in these a clear example, that being present at the delivery of his
heavenly doctrine, concerning the sovereign use of riches, in being laid up
for another life, it is said expressly, that being covetous, they derided him:
Lu. 16.15.
were so far from receiving his counsel, that they despised him that gave it;
and this, because their hearts were forestalled with the worship of their
Mammon; which kept them from serving a better Master; And who can say then,
that God is unrighteous, who takes vengeance on such Idolaters, though he
suffer the God of this world to blind their eyes, Romans 3.5. 2 Cor. 4 4.
and least the light of the glorious gospel should shine unto them.

Then for the latter, that is, vain glory; how it reigned in them, we shall
need but to look how our Savior emblazons them; Math. 23. Mat. 23 5.
Accuratly displayed by B Andr. on the ^6. verse of Math. 6.
That all their works they did for to be seen of men; Their fasting, praying
and alms giving, all are levelled at this mark. The eyes of God will not
serve their turn; but like so many stage players, they play religion under the
mask of godliness; to entertain the eyes of men; get them attire for this
purpose, broader phylacteries then were usually worn, and larger borders on
their garments: as if that were to keep the law of God more exactly then
others, to have it embroydered on their apparel; more sumptuously then the
common people. And yet this hypocrisy, as gross as it was, might be fine
enough to deceive the more simple spectator; but that, to prevent this danger,
our Savior proceeds in the discovery; and lays down such marks, as none
could but see with what spirit they were acted: for to affect (as they did) the
uppermost rooms, and the chief seats; to be in love with public greetings,
and glorious titles: These made it appear, verse. 6.7.
what wind it was that filled their sails, and that they sought rather to be
honored of men, then to be approved of God. Now what an obstacle this vanity
is in the way of faith, he made it unquestionable by that demand, Io. 5.44.
chap. 5. How can ye believe, that receive honor one of another? being as they
were, such slaves of glory, it was not possible they should be the servants of
Christ, but they must part with that which was dearer to them then their
souls, that is, their esteem, and fame with the people; In pursuit whereof,
verse 44.
they seek not the honor that is from God only but make a blast of empty
praise their summum bonum, and mind no happiness beyond it. Nay rather then
fail of this wretched end, they seek the honor that is due to God only;
deprive him of his prime-Crown-Jewell; that which of all things, Isay 42.8.
he will not part with to another: For what less do they, that glorify
themselves, instead of God, by a proud confidence of their own excellencies;
which was the sin of these Lordly Pharisees; Who being ignorant of Gods
righteousness, Romans 10, 3
and seeking to stablish their own righteousness, did not submit themselves to
the righteousness of God. That ignorance was the effect of their pride, Rom,
9.32
because they sought to be justified not by faith, but as it were by the works
of the law. And therefore no marvel if they could not believe; when presuming
on their works, ipso suo tumore caecati (says St. Austin) that very
presumption did so blind them, as to make them stumble, at that stumbling
stone: (That stone is Christ, verse eod:
they may thank their pride for so transforming him.) For pride, as it is of a
swelling nature, so with the swelling, it darkneth the mind, that it cannot
discern the truth; you may hear it from St. Gregory: Tumor mentis dum inflat,
Moral. l. 23.
obnubilat: It is the high mountain that stands in Christ's way, and hinders
the influence of his grace; If he offer to heal such men as these, Mark. 2.17.
Revel. 3.17.
they are whole enough, and have no need of the Physician; if to relieve them,
they are rich, and abound in goods, and have need of nothing; if he speak of
freeing them from the bondage of sin, Valles pluvia rigan tur ad facundi
tatemquum interea summi altorum montium vertices sicci manent: vallis ergo fiat
qui celestem gratia pluviam vult suscipere. Calv. in 2 ad Corinth cap. 12.
Superbaedactus est dei contemptus, Aquin 2. 2ae. q. 162. ut 6.
they are Abraham's children, and were never in bondage to any man; they. That
well might St. Austin say, Superbis Pharisaeis, viluit Christus. The Pharisees
pride made Christ contemptible in their eyes. And then, it is most just with
God, to withhold his grace from them that so scornfully reject it; let even the
heathen man be Judge; Superbus miser indignus est misericordia: The disdainful
wretch deserves no mercy; and how much less, if he contemn the Author of it?
which is the formal act of pride, as the School defines it: for whereas other
sins turn from God through ignorance, or infirmity, or the desire of some
seeming good; pride departs from him eo nomine, that it will not be subject to
him, and his rule; that we may say of the proud, what St. Paul does of the
carnal mind, Romans 8.7.
It is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be; like the sin of Rebellion, which is such a turning away from the
Prince, that it turns upon him, and fights against him: Insomuch, that God is
said (...), to resist the proud, Jam. 4.6. Isay 42.1^. and v. 25:
As if these did p^ovoke him more then any; to stir up his jealousy, l^ke a man
of war: to power upon them the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle;
Psalm. 46.8.
It may well be so judged by the effects; if we consider the works of the Lord,
what desolations, because of this sin, he has made both in heaven, and earth;
thundering so dreadfully with his judgments against it, that the foundations of
the Mountains tremble withal; Aug. cont. lib. 10. c 36.
It is St. Austins high expression; Intonas super ambitiones seculi, and
contremiscunt fundamenta montium: The Angels in heaven, that would needs be
like the most high, by partaking of his glory, (as if in their devils ambition
they would devide the monarchy of heaven) were thrown like lightning from their
bright station, into the abyss of darkness, and misery; And following them,
our first parents in Paradise, Genesis 3.5. Cum de Originis loco exterminat
pellitus orbi, at metallo datur. Tertull de pallio.
enchanted with the charm of Eritis sicut dii, ye shall be as Gods, soon felt
the delusion in their banishment, being condemned to the world, as it were to
dig in the Mines: So jealous is God in securing his glory, though it be with
the ruin of his most glorious and excellent creatures. And on this account, we
find him conferring his graces so strangely, I might say, preposterously; that
is, on persons so ungratious, in the eye of man; Genesis 48.14.
that Jacobs crossing of his hands on the sons of Joseph, may seem to have been
an intended Emblem of this mystery: where God often lays the right hand of his
favor, on those that are lowest in the worlds esteem; raising the poor out of
the dust and exalting those of low degree, but scattering the proud, Psalm.
113.7. Luke 1.51.52. Genesis 11.8.
(like those that were building the tower of Babel) in the imaginations of
their hearts. Suitably hereunto, you may note from Pelusiot, Isid Pelus. Epist
394. lib. 3.
that in the heraldry of Gods attributes; over the high and mighty of the
earth, (...), he is styled in terms of distance, and imperiousness, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, when as to the poor and destitute, by more familiar,
and respective titles, he delights to be called the father of the fatherless,
Psalm. 68.5
and the Judge of widows, Neither is it improbable to avouch; that the Son of
God, our blessed Savior, would therefore appear in that despicable condition,
1 Cor. 2 8. Phil. 2.7.
(The Lord of glory in the form of a servant,) either to confound the proud
thoughts of the haughty in their scornful rejection, or to prostrate them in
embracing so humble a refuge: when during the course of his mortality, he
miraculously restrained the glory of his Godhead, that it should not flow out
into his Body; was not pleased to win the beholders by such ravishing majesty;
And but once permitting a glimpse of his divinity, in his transfiguration, he
communicates that heavenly show only to three chosen witnesses; M^t. 17 9,
who must not report the news of their vision, until he was risen from the
dead; whereas being to undergo the opprobrious death of the Cross, (as if he
would now task his disciples with an impudent faith) he offers up his
crucified person a common spectacle to all nations; L^k^ 23.38 In letters of
Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew. Jo. 19.19.
then flowing together like a springtide, to the feast of the Passover: And
least the ignorance of any should lessen his infamy, suffers an inscription in
the lowdest languages of the world; Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews: Nor
was his doctrine more agreeable to the arrogant spirits of the mighty: which
proposing poverty and patience as the principles of Christianity, so nullified
their prerogatives of honor, and insolence; that must now learn a new degree
to exaltation, by debasing themselves; and through the policy of infirmities,
aspire unto the kingdom of heaven.

But the raritie, and difficulty of their conversion does more illustrate the
faith of our rulers; that notwithstanding those impediments, could allow
themselves to be Christians; In whom, if you consider the act of their
believing, you may justly commend their humility; that renouncing the proud
opinion of their own abilities in performing the law, they would condescend to
the captivity of faith; that faith which the Graecians derided, as
foolishness; (...), says Clemens, terming it barbarous, and vain; and
wherewith Julian grieved the Christians, Clem. Strom. 2. Naziane (...).
that their wisdom was nothing but credulity. Then withal, no less their
resolute piety, that forsaking the ordinances of the Patriarks, and Prophets,
their reverend Ancestors, (together with the legal institutions, whereunto they
had been so long accustomed) they would thus adventure on a new way unto
salvation. Or if you consider the object of their belief, which was the Man God
Christ Jesus, you may justly admire the sharpness of their faith that could
discern his saving power, whom they beheld so obnoxious to humane infirmities,
so touch inferior to themselves in state, and deportment, and so unworthily
exposed to the contumelies of the scoffing multitude; Whose lineage, kindred,
and breeding they knew, and grew up with him, in the leasurely degrees of
maturity; and yet after all, without the suspicion of heathen idolatry, would
thus assent unto the worship of a visible God.

But howsoever, let not charitable admiration betray us into sacrilege, nor
our benevolence to these Rulers detract from the mercy of God: who being the
prime, and grand efficient in the work of their conversion, may justly exact
the solid glory of so great an achievement. It was the unsearchable council
of his will to ordain them unto life, that he might make known the riches of
his glory on these vessels of mercy; Rom:, 9: 23:
And having thus decreed the end, he therein included the means to attain it,
A^gustin: de buno pe^sev^ cap. ^4,
predestination being (as St. Austin speaks) the preparation of devine grace;
whereby their souls were organized for the infusion of faith, as their bodies
were for the infusion of their souls: and gave easy admission to those
speeches, and wonders, which were appointed as the outward motives of their
calling: having no ability of themselves, Alvares de Auxilis g^at^aeilib. 9,
either to meet with that which could affect their phancies, or to be affected
with that which they met with all; but wholly depending on a supernatural
assistance, as well for the proposal of such s^table inducements, as for
inclining their assent unto him: So then it was the language of our Savior
which exhorted them to believe, but it was the Spirit of our Savior which
interpreted that language, that they received it not as the words of a man, but
as indeed they were the words of a God: 1 These. 2.13.
His humanity administered to the operation of his miracles, but his divinity
enlivened them to apprehend those miracles, and thereby wrought in them a
greater miracle; to wit, their conversion; Not by the impotent device of
persuasion, but by the real efficiencie of inward virtue, victoriously taming
the repugnancie of their wills, and by courteous violence, determining them to
an actual belief: without which secret intelligence, many were present at the
same excitements, and were not moved to believe; John 2.11. Luke 16.31. 1. Cor.
3.7.
Auribus apertis surdi erant, videbant, et caeist abant. Their suspended senses
had not the power to acquaint their souls with the truth of those occurrents.
And as this spiritual direction, was diversely communicated, some were induced
to believe at one Sermon, nay, one saying of our Savior, and some only
beholding the least of his works, as the metamorphosis of water into wine, When
others like unto Dive's Brethren, would not be persuaded, though Lazarus arose
from the dead. So vain were the diligence of the Gardener in planting, and
watring, unless the Creator by his influence bestow the blessing of increase.
you have heard what benefits God has conferred on these Rulers, that by the
gift of illumination, more highly advanced them above their peers, then their
dignities advanced them above the people. But will ye hear, what these Rulers
return unto God? They are so far from the endeavor of requital, that they
will not acknowledge his favors, so far from the solemnity of thankfulness,
that fearing as it were, to be endited of their conversion, they dishonor this
his supreme mercy with speechless ingratitude: They received this Christ by the
hand of faith, But because of the Pharisees, they did not confess him: which
is the silence of these Rulers, and comes next to be published.

second part
If that distinction in Clemens be right, of a twofold confession, Heraclean
apud Clem. Alexand.
(...), The one in believing, the other in uttering, they had already confessed
him with their heart, and can their tongue then deny the natural duty of
confession? Speech is the delivery of the soul, and brings forth to the life
of knowledge those conceptions of the mind, which by concealment had either
perished in the womb, or swelled into an irksome timpany: Mat. 24.19, Isid.
Pelusi^^a Epist, lib* ^ 21^, Do generat A^im, lib, 1, ap* 8.
whose unhappy Bearers may fear in some sense that * Ve praegnantibus of our
Savior, so as Pelusiot expounds it, of those which are only big with good
notions, and cannot deliver them. But what Aristotle observes of other
Creatures (...); That the smallest are most fruitful, because the substance of
their growth is consumed in the supply of generation; The custom of mankind
has translated on themselves; among whom many times the least in dignity, more
abound in goodness, bestowing their vacancie from honors, in the practice of
virtue; when the great-ones like that Indian fig tree (in Athenaeus) which
though of fair and goodly dimensions, Athen. de ipnosoph lib 3. (...). Sup. v.
12.13.
yields little fruit, as rioting all its sap into blossoms, so they lavishing
out in luxury, and vain flourishes, prove barren in the works of piety.
Neither need we be troubled for an instance; If we look but a little back in
story, we find the unregarded multitude in a public procession going forth to
meet our Savior; and with trophies of palme-branches mystically preluding the
triumph of his resurrection, when these Pythagorean Rulers in a cowardly
dumbness, suppress their applause, and afford nothing to entertain him,
beyond a courteous opinion. Thus is he requited, that left the glory of heaven,
to take penance in flesh; the service of Angels, to be the servant of men; Not
to be acknowledged by those whom he came to redeem, by those who expected the
ransom of his blood, to satisfy for their guilty souls: the guiltiness
whereof, had they rightly considered, they would rather have been ashamed of
their sins, then their Savior, which debased him thus low in compassion, to
procure their expiation. Or had they rightly considered the worthiness of that
duty, which so unworthily they declined, they would not have needed any other
encouragement to embolden them: confession is the honor of a Christian;
whereby God makes man the witness of his truth, Calvini hom. 2. de ferenda
persecut.
and the patron of his cause; and in this vouchsafed excellence, preferres him
before the Angels in dignity. An honor that raised the Baptist so near to the
son of God, Io. 1.8. Math. 11.11.
as it is possible for the sons of men; witness that of the Evangelist. He was
not that light, but (which is next unto it) was sent to bear witness of that
light. In regard whereof, Christ was pleased to honor him with that high
testimony; That among them that were born of women, there arose not a greater
then John the Baptist. But certainly, had they duly weighed the necessity of
this duty, the whole world would have proved too weak an Orator to have
tempted them to so foul an omission: by which wilful defect of theirs, their
faith did but serve to aggravate their guilt; and in being enlightened
Christians, they became only more knowing offenders: No less severe is the
judgment of Prosper; Prosper.
that, not to confess truth is equally pernicious, as not to believe it. Tam
reprobi sunt qui verum quod credunt non loquuntur, quam qui verum quod
loquuntur, non credunt. And some men are so much offended at their silence; In
hoc ingressu fidei si proficerent etc. A^gustin in locum. Minut. Felix.
that they will not allow them a saving faith; Or if because of St. Austins
authority, they afford them a beginning of faith; they accuse them of stifling
it in the beginning; like cruel Parents, that fearing shame, or the like
inconvenience, paricidium faciunt, antequam pariunt; murder their issue before
the delivery; as no less cruelly do these with their faith. In whose hearts
had is lively resided, as it seemed only pictured in their brains, it could
not but yield some signs of life; at least breathe our into expression; for
our of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks; as spoke the mouth of
truth it self. Which natural correspondencie (Nature seems to have intended in
that elegant structure, Mat. 12.34.
by which the tongue of all visible parts) is rooted nearest unto the heart;
Charron de sag. lib. 1. cap. 11.
as if thence receiving the juice of knowledge, it should spring forth in the
fruit of utterance. Which the Symbolical Priests of Isis employed in their
doctrinall emblem, presenting each votarie with a branch of the Persean tree,
whose leaves, and fruit are said to resemble the heart, and tongue: (...), Plut
in Isi. de.
as Plutarch gives the moral of it: for man cannot be more divinely employed,
then in speech concerning God. But the Royal Prophet more clearly evinced it by
his practick Enthimem, Psalm. 116.10. Psalm. 39.3.
I believed, therefore have I spoken: concluding it necessary, that when his
heart was hot within him, and the fire of zeal enkindled in his breast, then
was the time, he should speak with his tongue. And could those Rulers believe
on a Savior, whom they would not confess; or rely on his divine promises,
which they durst not approve before impotent men? 1 John 5.4.
Could that faith whose victoriousnesse should vanquish the world, be thus
easily vanquished by the infirmities of fear, and ambition? By the same
weakness as they feared to acknowledge Christ, they would sooner have denied
him, by how much the presence of dangers does more affright us, then the
possibility of them: whose degenerous practice had others repeated by
imitation, how would Christianity have become abortive, and even been ruined in
its infancy? Calv. excusatio ad pseudo Nicodem.
Could they be so injurious to the providence of the Almighty, as to leave him
no other means of protection, but the dastardly stratagem of shrinking flesh?
Or so ungrateful to his bounty, as thus to smoother the riches of his grace in
shameful obscurity? Nay could they be so malicious unto their own goodness,
as by this absurd hypocrisy to make themselves suspected of that evil which
they inwardly detested; to seem opposers of that doctrine, which in conscience
they allowed. To counterfeit sin, is the Plague of fiction, which beyond a
single mischief, inveagles others into the society of perdition: Whereas on the
contrary, to personate virtue, however it does condemn the Actors, may yet by a
charitable cozenage, beguile the spectators to a serious goodness.

The courtesy of some would needs put such a religion on Seneca: that reserving
to himself a dissenting mind, Non quidem ageret fingentem scenicum in theatro
sed imitaretur in templo, eo damnabilius, quod illa qua mendaciter agebat, sic
ageret, ut eum populus veraciter agere existimaret: Scenicus autem ludendo
potius delectaret quam fallendo deciperet. Aug. de Civit. lib. 6. cap. 10.
he did but mock his heathen Idols with a mimical worship: But herein, their
charity does only render him a more impious Tragedian, thus to make the temple
his Theater, and consecrate his dissembling under a feigned idolatry: which
was so much more damnable here, then if he had acted it on the stage, as the
people were thereby deceived, mistaking his fiction for realitie. Nor are these
Rulers less worthy of blame, whose seeming judaisme, either hardened the
ignorant in their error, or offended the conscience of weaker converts. But
notwithstanding this heavy charge, others there be, that from a sense of humane
fraility, step in to the rescue of these Rulers, and bestow on them a true,
though a weak, and implicit faith, alleging for them, that as to have denied
their Savior after examination, had been solemn apostacy, so being not asked,
Corse^: Ph l: M^^:
to suppress him, was only infirmity, and might consist with the Infant faith
of the springing Gospel: when to avoid the tumult and danger of sudden
innovation, they could not so soon conform themselves to the public
profession of a new religion: whose nature it was to proceed rather by
insinuation, then by violence. Neither could these legal ceremonies (imprinted
by education) be hastily abolished; which must be suffered a while, to give
testimony unto their succeding truths, but were wholly discharged by the
fulness of faith; which was perfected at the ascending of our Savior, and
descending of the Holy Ghost. So that following ages are as far from the
privilege, as the necessity of this silence; nor can justly pretend the
weakness of these Rulers, to cloak them in their masked devotion. Though many
desiring rather to impute a fault to some patron, then to want a patron for
their fault, John 3, 2, and 19, 39. Calvini excusatio ad pres ^do Ni o:
present to themselves the example of Nicodemus; He that came to Jesus by
night; as if this might excuse them from coming by day, in the open profession
of his truth. But if they will turn their eyes from Nicodemus the Jew, Rev:
22.16. John 7.51. James 2.18.22. Joh. 19, 39.
to Nicodemus the Christian, and behold him enlightened with the bright morning
star, They shall find him in the midst of raging conspirators, the only
advocate in defense of Christ, and vouching the equity of their Law in his
vindication. And if they will accompany him to the funerals of Christ, They
shall find him manifesting his faith by his works; in his hundred pound of
sweet Odours; when the chief Rulers were now prosecuting the victory of their
malice on the scattred believers, and by a greater wickedness strive to blot
out the memory of their wickedness, in blotting out the memory of our Savior,
yet not wholly to deprive them of the favor of so great a protection, they may
perchance resemble him somewhat, in the burial of Christ, whom they carry
sepulchred in their stony hearts. although herein also they may note the
incongruity; that whereas he honorably enterr'd his Body with costly
ointments; They Bury his divinity in their rotten breasts; and with unexcusable
violation, entomb to themselves the Lord of Glory. Pharisees.


You have seen the subjects of this fear, and now if you please to reflect on
the Authors of it; to your just wonder, and commiseration, you shall find them
the learned, and zealous Pharisees; Eorum nomen Epiphan. (lib. 1. cap. 19:)
appositissime a separando deducit quod ve spontaena quada et superflua
religione, et ficta vitae morumque sanctitate a reliquis se seperarent: Corn:
Betram: de pol: Iud: Cap, 19:
Men so incapable of Christianity, that they disgrace, revile, and persecute
all that countenance, and embrace it. They were the Doctors of the Law, Chrysil
sermon: 15, 7. de St. Palo:
and from the direction of these mistick ceremonies, expected the
accomplishment of a Messiah; and would you think these so uncivil, as not to
welcome him in the flesh? nay so unskilful, as not to know him in the flesh?
whose life and preaching, daily unridling their types, and prophesies; They yet
accuse him not to fulfill the Law, but to destroy it: Adeo per zelum legis
impugnabant legem; et in Deum, dei amore peccabant. Thus, by a strange malady
of judgment, they abhorred the truth of that doctrine, which, they admired in
figures: and as if their heresy would make a schism in the Trinity, think
they did God good service in fighting against him. If you do but severely
examine the Chronicles of our Saviors warfare, you shall find this busy
faction his fiercest adversaries, and almost paralelling every action of his,
with unwearied opposition: Sometimes you may find them attempting to ensnare him
with subtle questions; as if they would entrap him in his own words, that knew
the wickedness of their thoughts. before ever they sounded in blasphemy.
Sometimes you may find them detracting from his applauded miracles, and rather
ascribing goodness to Beelzebub, than divinity to the Son of God. He casts
out devils by the prince of the devils: And sometimes you shall find them
repining at the success of his miracles; Behold, John 12.19, cap. 11.48.
Tertull: Apologet:
the world is gone after him, and if we let him thus alone, all men will believe
on him: Omnem sexum, aetatem, conditionem etiam dignitatem, transgredi adhoc
nomen, quasi detrimento moerent? Even bewailing the loss of Mankind, as if
revolting to Jesus of Nazareth, from the God of Israel: So improbable did it
seem unto their untamed reason, that Omnipotence should be shrouded in passible
flesh; neither could they out of an ungratious reverence, conceive an estate so
misbeseeming a deity. And yet (if the authority of Sixtus Senensis, and
learned Drusius can prevail against Chameron) they maintained that which was
more unlikely; Biblich. Sanc. l. 2. p. 123. pioru^ animas ab iuferis in hanc
vitam in nova corpora reverti.
a pilgrim-metamorphosis, and thereupon phancied that the body of Christ was
animated with the borrowed soul of Elias, Mat. 16.14. 2 These. 2.10, 11.
or John Baptist, or one of the Prophets, peradventure, because they received
not the love of the truth, that they might be saved, Matthew. 23.2.
God sending them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie. But their
sublime spirits, that dealt oracles out of Moses chair, would not stoop to the
rudiments of so poor a Master. Austin. de Civit. l. 13.
Ne commune illis cum vulgo vocabulum, etc. as Saint Augustine of the
Platonics, lest that the vulgar title of Christians should vilify their
profession into the likeness of the multitude; Matk 12.38.
from which they would be distinguished in purity and profoundnesse, though
indeed they only differed in Chald. Paraph. Ionathas in Amos 2.12. innuere
voluit Pharisaeos perpetuos quosdam esse Nazaraeos (1) ab institutis vulgi
separatos, and in lege occupatos, unde and authoritatem illam docendi sibi
arrogarint, qua etiam eos una cum simulata illa vita sanctitate omnibus maxim
eximios and illustres, reddiderit Betram.
long robes and austerity: The opinion of sanctity raised them into esteem with
the people; and thereby their politic zeal easily winning on the superstitious
rout, attained chief jurisdiction in the Common wealth; being confined to no
authority but by a kind of equivocall superintendency, interposing all, as well
in matters of Religion as Policy, whereby they became not only terrible to
their Inferiors, but to one another: Insomuch that our Rulers are afraid of
them, lest confessing Jesus to be the Christ, they should be put out of the
Synagogue.

Part. 3.
IT is the privilege of private persons to order their affairs with
conscience, whereas Princes (by a miserable bondage of state) must direct their
proceedings according to fame, and reputation: Chrisos^. ad Antioc Ebomil. 44.
Their dignity gives them command over others; But their ambition gives others
command over them; whilst every action must be composed for the service of
vulgar opinion: Their virtue only, and Religion are made use off, but as so
many pictures to adorn their greatness; and shall be employed, or neglected,
as will best suit with their advantage. Nay God himself, if he stand in
competition with their wealth, and honor, shall suffer many times the
execrable indignity of being rejected, and even weary his Infinite patience to
see the broken Cisterns of worldly vanities prefered to the fountain of living
waters. Iere. 2.13.
But if the primates of this age (that have better learned Christ) Ephesians, ^4
disclaim so preposterous a method; It is too apparent in our Jewish Rulers,
who affecting rather impious applause, than Innocent obscurity, valued their
interest in the Synagogue, above the owning of a Savior: which, how great a
sin it was, the Holy Ghost has plainly showed, by setting his Brand upon the
sinners, That they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God: verse
43.
declaring thereby, that it was not conscience, or superstition which kept them
from confessing Christ; but only the care of incurring disgrace, and hatred
with men: which idle phantasmes would have vanished like the smoke; if the fear
of God had been (as it ought) before their eyes, as they might have learned
from Moses, their great Master, who being the meekest on earth; yet seeing him
who is inv^sible, (...) says the Apostle, grew hard enough for any encounter,
not fearing the wrath of the King himself; Heb. 11.27. Prove. 19.12.
though it be (in Solomon's words) as the roaring of a lion.

And more from him they might have learned, to choose rather to suffer
afflictions with the people of God, than to enjoy the short pleasures of sin;
to esteem the reproach for Christ, greater riches than the treasures in Egypt.
Nay, Hermes, the heathen could have taught them this: (...) He that devoutly
serves God, will undergo any adversity, by a rare chimistry, converting that
which is grievous to others, into his delight and benefit: or if their faith
had been so qualified, Phil. 3.8. Gal. 5.6.
as it should be by that of Saint Paul, which works by love, they would (as
he did) have suffered the loss of all things for Christ, and now counted that
loss their greatest gain: such is the property of love, Max. Tyrius, sermon. 8.
(...); it hates nothing so mortally, as fear and necessity, as being of a
magnanimous nature, and more for liberty, than ever were the Lacedaemonians,
(...) it admireth not riches, Job 18.14:
neither fears tyrant, nor death it self, the King of terrors; They come very
far short of this that will leave the spouse of Christ to keep in with the
adulterous Synagogue; that Synagogue, Genesis 39.12.
which like Potiphars loose wife, laying hold on the garment, the Humanity of
Christ, let go his Divinity, not knowing him otherwise than after the flesh:
can this be love then, thus to take the members of Christ, and make them the
members of an harlot? 1 Cor. 6.15.
It had been too slow for love to have once demurred on a separation; or
however, their voluntary flight should have at least prevented the fear of
being expelled, and not expected the violence of others, to impeach the
forwardness of their departure. 1 Timothy 1.19
But these young Christians, more sensible of infamy than of sin, will rather
adventure a shipwreck of their faith, Duos facultates suoe velut compedes
ligaverunt etc. Cypr. ser. 5. de ^apsis. Seneca Epist. 22.
than of their authority, and ere they will relinquish their possessions of
honor, will retain them with guilt and impiery. Illa fuerunt remanentibus
vincula, illae catenae quibus, and virtus retardata est, and fides pressa; as
Saint Cyprian charge his lapsed auditors; these were the fetters which
shackled their faith, and restrained the courage of their zeal, these Arist.
rhetor.
mala magnifica, the precious impediments, that like too long garments (as
Socrates phrased it) (...), Sic veteres inquilinos indulgentia loci and
consuetudo inter injurias detinet, Seneca Ep. Hippo^r. Aphor.
intercepted their mind from proceeding in the way of virtue, and held them
grovelling in the embracement of earthly pleasures, so unhappily did they
verify that note of the Philosopher, (...): the smallest grievances affect our
senses, but the greatest evils are little perceived, (...); the presence of sin
is not troublesome unto us; so ancient inhabitants inured to a place are loath
to forsake it, though annoyed with encumbrances, reason that (...), etc. long
accustomed evils, are less grievous unto us than wholesome changes. But if at
last we examine the quality of that punishment, which they so fearfu^ly
declined, the physician, E^astu. contra Boza de excommun.
Erastus will boldly assure us, it was no spiritual Excommunication, (so
reasonably to affrighten them) but merely a local removal, or laick
discommoning, At Betramo (...) fieri, est excindi ex popalo suo, and in eo
amplius non ^enseri, Exempl. in Corinthio incests, 1 Co^. 5:3. Him. and Phileto
1 Timothy 2.20. de pol Jud. cap. 7.
or depriving them only of civil immunities; not of Ecclesiastical rites and
ceremonies: still under the covenant of some nice distance, they might come
into the Temple, and partake of the Sacraments, being as it were, transformed
out of natural Jews, into Proselites: So as, had not their ambition perverted
their judgment, they would have congratulated so convenient a mischief, which
happily banished them to a reformation, and the more free profession of the
Gospel; nay which so graciously delivered them from the inflicters of that
banishment, the unsociable Pharisees: who by this means rather Sicut de dione
ciracus dicitur, a quo missus in Exilium, dionysium in Exilium misit. Aelian.
de var hist. lib. 4.
banished themselves from the means of their Salvation, yet see the
fool-hardiness of vain glorious dispositions that can with more patience endure
the troubles of iniquity, than these for religion: the terrors of conscience
in betraying Christ, than the frowns of men, in confessing him: P. Bles. Epist.
14. de vita curialium, and ejus incommodis. 2 Cor. 11:
which stirred up the pity of Petrus Blesensis, to consider the Courtiers of
his time, suffering as many vexations for vanity, as good Christians for the
truth; weariness and painfulnesse, hunger, and thirst, cold and nakedness,
with all the catalogue of Paul's afflictions, in quibus gloriam martyrij
mererentur, whereby they might purchase the glory of Martyrdom, si haec pro
Christinomine sustinerent: if they suffered all this in the name of Christ,
Acts. 14.22.
that whereas the Righteous by many tribulations enter into the Kingdom of God,
these Martyrs of the world, by as many tribulations adventure for the Kingdom
of Satan.

I dare not pass so hard a sensure on these Rulers. They are gone long since,
to stand, Application.
or fall unto their own Master, and from him have received the reward of their
doings, whether good, or evil. It will be more wisdom for us that remain
(considering our selves, Gal. 9.1.
least we also be tempted) to excuse them all we may; and to cover their
imperfections in the remembrance of our own; who happily had we fallen on their
difficult times should likewise have fallen by the same infirmities; which yet
so faintly we withstand, although assisted with so many advantages: They
believed on Christ, in the nonage of the Gospel, being environed on every side
with affronts and discouragements: when we that are in a manner, borne
Christians, and learn more in our Catechism, then they could through the
course of their lives, 2 Pet. 3.18 Vt^ s^la ei immacula t^rum actuum puritat
and vitae incontam nabilis sanctitate plana^ ^s Salvian de ^^b. lib. 3.
yet so little exceed them in the practical knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ: we for whom all preceding ages endured a warfare against heresy,
that we might enjoy the easy inheritance of their victory, and bestow our
leisure from the trial of faith in the devout practice of it; we fear no
persecuting Pharisees to molest our lawful zeal; contentus est deus noster, ut
pax ei nostra serviat; our indulgent God is pleased to accept the service of
our peace, although the degenerous practice of some abuses others into
Pharisees, whose favor they think no otherwise to be gained, then by the
suppressing, or at least, the disgu^sing of the truth of Christ; fearing least
their open profession should betray them into contempt, and obscurity: thus for
the acquiring of some trifle in comparison, they hazard the richest jewel of
their soul; too evidently presaging, how they would undervalue their faith in
the defense of their dearer lives; should it please the Lord, as heretofore, to
examine their constancy by rack, Calvin. de vitand. superstit Opusc,
and tortures: If dissimulation might honestly save us from the rage and
displeasure of men, in vain did those primitive Martyrs so prodigally expend
their vital blood, when a close devotion might have secured them, and yet they
chose rather to expose their bodies unto all the Loddela corda; computeth 44.
several kinds of torments; wherewith they were tried. Adv. Sacr. Cap. 128.
variety of torments, then they would gratify the enemies of Christ by a
seeming compliance.

It Is happy for us, that Christ has no such enemies, here, no chief Rulers to
hinder his truth, but to promote it all they can, dictis, scriptis, precibus,
exemplis, but should it please God for our unthankfulness to permit such over
us, Vid. Epitaph. mag. antistitis; Lanc. Andr.
these souls of wax would be apt enough for any impression, though never so
monstrous.

It pretends little less, to see men tampering with the doctrine received;
quasi non caeleste dogmasit -- (to speak with primitive lirinensis) as though
it were no celestial ordinance, Vincent lirin. Commonitor
which were enough to be once revealed, but only some earthly or humane
invention, that could not otherwise be perfected, 1. Tim. 6.
than by continual changing, and mending; Not minding St. Paul's depositum
custodi, his charge unto Timothy, to keep that which was committed to his
trust; Rem non ingenij sed doctrina ut profectus sit ille fidei non permutatio.
not to broach new of his own devising: to teach only that which himself had
learned; the same for substance, though in other expressions, so as to be the
improving of faith, not the changing of it: as the natural body that is grown
in strengh, and manly dimensions, is still the same that it was in infancy,
though encreasd in stature, and proportion. It is true, we are bidden to prove
all things, 1. These. 5.21.
for they agree to the analogy of faith; but then withal too, there we are
charged to hold fast that which is good, If having found this, we seek ought
else, it may be feared to be that which is worse; The Heathen man could say as
much; Reperto quod est optimu^, Quintil. instit. Lib. 3.
qui quaeritaliud, pejus velit. Truth is Gods coin that has his Image and
superscription enstamped on it; and to alter it in the least, is no less than
high treason against the majesty of Heaven, nor were ever any known to escape
his vengeance, that attempted it.

Mat. 15.6.
The Scribes and Pharisees may be our example in this case; they making void the
law of God by their traditions; and for this cause, God gave them over to a
reprobate mind, confounded their wisdom into Jewish fables; Tit. 1.14.
as their Thalmud bears sad record to this day, Rudis indigestaque moles.
a rude, confused mass of nonsense, like Virgils Monstrum, horrendum, inform,
where the very light is darkness: And as they for the old Testament, so for
the New, the seven Asian Churches; Rev. c. 2. and 3. Mr. Hooker Eccl. pol. Lib.
5.
never quiet from heriticall impieties touching God, and the glorious Trinity,
till the deluge of misery (wherein now they are) overwhelmed them, viderint qui
Stoicum, Tertul de praescript. cap. 8.
and platonicum, and dialecticum Christianismum protulerint. It seems there
were such in Tertullians days, that framed Christianity by the rules of
Philosophy, B. Andr. on th worshipping of immaginations.
and thence have issued more swarms of Monsters, then ever Africa produced.

But the later times may serve sufficiently to warn us, by these ration all
heretics; the Socinians, on the one side, and those irrational, the
Anabaptists, on the other; how dangerous it is to affect speculations, besides
the warrant of Gods word, and that as Luther truly said, cum exardescit ira Dei
-- when the wrath of God is once inflamed, Sleid. Cammens: Lib. 10.
there is no error so absurd, and senseless, but Satan can make it to be
believed; as it is to be seen in that of Mahomet.

But, to let these pass: there is more to be said in favor of these Rulers.

1. 1 Timothy 3.16. 1. Pet. 1.12:
They were not catechized in the great mystery (as St. Paul terms it) God
manifested in the flesh: which is so profound; that St. Peter tells us; The
Angels desire to look into it; it is task enough for the blessed Spirits to
contemplate; they cannot be satisfied with the sight of it, but was not made
known to the Sons of men, in that first age, Ephe. 3.5.
as it was afterward by preaching of the Gospel.

2. Christ our passover was not yet Sacrificed; 1 Cor. 5.7.
by the example of his death to incite them to suffer with him, and by the
virtue of his death to work so powerfully to the mortifying of their earthly
affections.

Nor 3. was the Holy Ghost descended, Acts. 2:3.
so, as afterward he did in the likeness of fire, to quickcn the deadness of
their cold and dull affections. Mat. 13.12.


All is otherwise with us; vobis datum est, says our Savior, nobis datum est,
may we say unto us it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God,
the veil is long since laid aside, the Curtain drawn; that now is fulfilled
that Prophecy of Isaiahr, Isa, 11.9.
The knowledge of the Lord has fiilled the Ea th, as the waters cover the Sea.

1 Pet. 2.21. Gal. 3.1 John. 12.32. Romans 8.29.
2. Christ has suffered for us, leaving us an example to follow his steps, and
is daily before our eyes evidently set forth, crucified among us: and for the
virtue, it is magneticall, being lift up, to draw all unto him, to be conformed
unto the Image of his death.

Act. 2.17.
3. For the Spirit, it is the promise for these last days; that it should be
poured upon all flesh; 1 Cor. 10.1. Genesis 7.11.
not sprinkled by drops, as to these of old, that were under the cloud, but
showred down, as it was in the flood, when the windows of Heaven were opened.

R^m. 12.6.
Having then gifts so far beyond them; it will be required, that in duties, we
should be beyond them too, according to the grace that is given to us; and we
to hold our selves obliged, as more firmly to believe on Christ, so, more
zealously to confess him: this we should; but what we do, it would do well to
be considered.

1. Faith.
First, for believing; never was more pretending to it: which of us would not be
offended at any, that should make question of it? Luke ^8.8^
and yet it is that which our Savior questions whether he should find any such
thing at his coming; and as unquest onable as we make it, it is easy to be
mistaken in it; there is (...) (says St. Paul) a knowledge falsely so called;
1 Timothy 6.20.
and why not such a faith too; for faith is it self but a kind of knowledge.
Nay clear it is, we may be deceived in it, by the dead faith in St. James; Jam.
2.17. Mat. 13, 21.
not working by charity, by the temporary faith in the parable, that which
endures for a while; by the hypocritical faith in St. Paul, Ephesians. 4 20.
without repentance, or newness of life; and therefore the Apostle knew what
he did, in calling upon the Saints at Corinth to examine themselves, whether
they were in the faith, or no, 2. Cor. 13.5. (...).
to try their faith as it were on the touchstone, whether it were right, or
counterfeit, as gold, or silver is wont to be tried, (for so the word there
imports.

And no better touchstone then that of Philip to the Eunuch, Si credas toto
cord; Act. 8.37.
if our faith be the fruit of a sound heart, and not the blossom of the brain
only. The brain is that which the wise of the world do so much magnify; as the
imperial Throne of the Soul; the Oracle of reason, and understanding: But holy
Scripture sets more by the heart, making that the instrument of choosing,
judging, believing, and all; the reason whereof may very well be, because the
heart being the fountain of life, heat, Illyric. clavis. p. 1. in verb. Cor.
and vital Spirits, and having besides a powerful influence, into the
affections, it is to show, that God is chiefly for the practique, or active
knowledge: as that which is lively, fervent, and affectionate, that he
regards not so much the speculative notions, which are many times cold, and
heartlesse and may be in hypocrites nay in Devils, whose knowledge surmounts,
the profoundest Doctors, all the Sorbon are but Infants in comparison.

Ethic. Lib. 6. cap. 5. and 12.
As Aristotle notes of vicious persons, that they may be excellent in the
Mathematics, but are wholly disabled for moral virtues, and civil prudence;
(...) because that wickedness perverts the judgment, and makes it erroneous
in that which concerns practique duties: the like says Aquinas touching
proud persons; Aquin secundae, secunde q 162 citans Gregro.
that they may attain to the understanding of deepest mysteries, but can not
perceive the sweetness of of them; and si noverunt quomodo sunt, ignorunt
quomodo sapiunt, see they may, but can not taste how good the Lord is.

By faith with the heart then is understood, not only light, G. Paris. de fide
to show wbat is to be believed, but life, and spirit to act and move us to do
good works, and decline the contrary: It no sooner enters into the Soul, but
by its lively heat, and vigor, all obstructions, and impediments are removed
from the mind; depraved habits and corrupt desires like Sampsons cords are
burst asunder.

A dead faith, indeed, may move the understanding to apprehend and discourse of
an object laid before it: but not with a vital motion; it is but as the
trembling, or panting of the body, when the head is smitten off, but no
complete, and perfect motion; such as that of walking is; which is not found in
a Carkcase.

Nay a walking there may be too, or seem to be, to the eyes of men; and yet
proceed from no principle of life; but as the devil can borrow a body, Delrio
Magic. disquisit.
whose Soul is newly departed from it, and by the heat therein remaining, make
it seem to be alive, and to perform all the offices of life; So, many there be
of these walking Carkcases; Pharisees Hypocrites, as our Savior joins them,
Revel. 3.1. 2 Timothy 3.5.
that have a name that they live, and are dead; having (as the Apostle speaks)
a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof.

But then as these Corpses are soon discribed to be what they are, and within a
little while, Ficto cito adnaturam suam redeunt. Nemo persona^ diu far
potest. 1 P^t. 11.7.
relapse into their state of corruption; so here, the inconstancy, or
imperseverance at length discovers the imposture, and shows what metal their
faith is made of, sure, not of Gold, that is tried with fire, although it
glistres never so much in the eyes of men.

That ours is not of that allay, we shall best assure our selves, if we find
(...) (as St, 2. These. 1.11.
Paul terms it) the work of faith in our souls; whose work it is, as to
implant us into Christ; so to bring forth in us the fruits of his spirit; his
spirit can not be idle, or barren, but will still be doing somewhat toward the
forming of Christ within us; purifying the heart, Gal. 4.19. Act. 15.9. Ephesians.
4.23. Heb. 6.14 Gal. 5.24. Romans 8.19. juxta Crellium, in cap. 5. ad Galat.
renewing the spirit, purging the conscience, crucifying the flesh, with the
affections, and lusts. This one for all; If Christ be in us, the body is dead
as unto sin, has lost as it were, the power of tempting us to fulfill the lusts
thereof; but the spirit is life as unto righteousness; Our inward man is fresh
and lively to do the will of our heavenly Father.

To conclude this point, If Christ be rooted, and dwell in our hearts by a
lively faith; Ephesians. 3.17.
and do not only hover in the brain, by an aerie knowledge, we make him the
Center of our affections; fixing our love, hope, joy, desire in him; we live no
longer to our selves; but to him that died for us, 2 Cor. 5.15.
all our study is how to please him; we set our selves to obey his commands,
though never so harsh to our nature, or interest, offering our service with the
Apostle, Lord, What will thou have me to do? and ready with him, Acts. 9.6.21.13
not only to be bound; but also to die (if there be cause) for the Name of the
Lord Jesus.

Such was the effect of St. Paul's knowing Jesus Christ, and him crucified; and
there is hope it might produce somewhat at least, like in us, if we determined,
as he did, to make it the principle mark of our knowledge O si Jesus
crucifixus in cor nostrum veniret, Tho. de kempis. de imit. Chr^l. 1.
cito quam coito and sufficienter docti essemus? So resolved by one that
excelled in the practical science of Christianity; That if Christ were fixed in
our hearts, as he was to his Cross, we should become sufficiently learned in a
short time; This Book of the Lamb that was slain, would supply the reading of
many books; Revel. 5.9. and 13.8.
and teach such virtues as we can not meet with in all the Doctors of
morality; Io. arnd de vero Ch^istianismo. lib, 2. cap. 19. 2. Tim. 3.7. Esai.
55.2. Honesta col mus, quantum vacat Seneca.
And for want of studying this, it is no marvail if there be so very many non
proficients; Ever learning, and never coming to the knowledge of the truth,
spending their time, strength, and labor for that which can not satisfy the
soul; however it may please the phancie, and mean while neglecting the one
thing necessary, or intending it but on the by, when they can be at leisure
from other employments.

How defective men are in this kind, it is not more against our charity to
judge, then beyond our power to know, it is a secret belongs to God alone: If
our hearts condemn us not; he is greater then our hearts, and knows all
things; 1. Ioh 3.20 1 Co. 4.5.
The time comes, when the secrets of all hearts shall be revealed; such as we
could not know our selves, by reason of our hearts deceitfulness. Ierem. 17.9.


But if our faith be cordial indeed, or with the heart, it will not be
impris^ned there, 2 C^nfession.
but come forth at the mouth, there will be confession joined with it; the
other duty that we mentioned, which is then necessary unto salvation when the
glory of God, and our Neighbors edifying are concerned in it: Aquin. secunda
secunde ^. 3.
And for want thereof our Rulers are thought not to have had a lively faith;
which will not consist with the spirit of fear, or graceless bashfulnesse,
Romans 1.16.
so as to be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ.

But if this be it that proves good Christians, no fear on our part; we have
given our names to Christ in our Baptism, and are known to all the world by
the name of Christians; and if our faith be not spoken of too, (like that of
the Romans) through out the whole world; Romans 1.8.
it is not for lack of our not professing it, Mat 6.17.


Only here we should do well to take our Saviors direction along with us;
that is, (...) to discern the tree, Clem. Stromat lib. 3.
not by the leaves, and the blossoms, but the fruit: never indeed more leaves,
and blossoms to be seen; we are all become Gnostics; men of knowledge; that
the Heathen man might better have said it of this age; Sene^a Epist. 106.
literarum intemperantia laboramus* when most are for that which St. Paul
terms Oppositions of science; or the science of opposition, 1 Timothy 6.20.
and few for the conscience of Christian duties: to inform the head with
curious notions, not reform the life by true repentance; Divinity (for the
form thereof) is in every woman's mouth, to be arguing (or rather verse eodem.
babbling,) (the Apostles word) in the highest, and deepest mysteries; Gods
secret decrees can not escape them; they make but a shallow of that great deep,
and can found it to the bottom; but for the power of it, when all is done, it
is but talk, a zeal that vapors out in words; and thus Religion (in effect)
becomes a Comedy, or an art of pure dissembling; the discourse whereof has so
filled the world, Sir W Ralegh preface.
as it has well near driven the practice of it out of the world.

But if St. Cyprian may be heard, nihil prodest verbis proferre virtutem and
factis destruere veritatem, it avails nothing to build religion with our
tongues, and destroy it with our deeds; to profess a believing on Christ with
our mouths, but in works to deny him; So it may be done no less, Ioh A^nd, de
vero Christ. l. ^. c 9. 2 Pet. 2.22.
and such there were of whom the Apostle St. Peter and Jude do both complain,
ungodly men that turned the grace of God into wantonness, and so denied the
Lord that bought them: Nay such there be in this last age; the the lawless
libertine, that transformeth Christian liberty into carnal licentiousness, and
returns to his wallow, Z^ch. 13.1.
because of the fountain that Zechary mentions, opened for sin, and for
uncleanness, the presumptuous Predestinarian, that holds himself to be in
Christ, without feeling any change in himself, by repentance from dead works;
and that have he but faith, Heb. 6.1.
live how he list, he can not choose but be saved, Now what is this else, but
Ethnicum agere sub nomine Christiani, To walk as other Gentiles walk, Ephesians 4.18.
in the vanity of their minds, being alienated from the life of God! nay worse
then these if the judgment of Salvian may be credited; atrocius sub sancti
nominis professione peccamus: we offend more hainously, being invested with a
sacred Title, the higher our prerogative is, so much the greater is our fault;
for the very religion that we profess; helps to aggravate our sin, and to make
it much more sinful; there may be some excuse for ignorance; the chief of
sinners (as he calls himself) obtained mercy to nomine, because he sinned
ignorantly, and in unbelief; 1 Timothy 1.13.
but contempt, of wilful sin will not find such easy pardon; Scienti and non
facienti (says St. James Iam. ^.17.
) To him that knows to do good, and does it not, it is the increasing of his
sin, and consequenly of his punishment; to be seen by the Servant that knew his
Lords will, and did not accordingly,

Luke 2.47.
It is that which Nacianzen so passionately bewailed, under the person of such
wretches; (...), woe unto me that ever I was cleansed, if after my cleansing I
am fouled again; Orat. 24.
if I see those Heathen that are not baptized, cleaner, and purer than my self.

It is no more than St Peter warranteth It had been better for them, not to
have known the way of righteousness, 2 P^t. 2.21.
then after they have known it to tu ne away: Too many such Apostates there be
among us; that for every trifling circumstance are so ready to part with
Christ, for a momentany flash of sensual pleasure, for a little dust of
shining clay, G Parisiens. de Moribus cap. 4. Act. 3.14.
for a vain blast of popular praise; which is all one as with the Jews, to
dery the Holy one, and the just, and prefer a Barrabbas, any wicked lust
before him.

This is worse yet, then we can charge our Rulers withal, we can not blame
them for staining their profession with a vicious conversation: all their fault
was not confessing for fear of men, what they believed concerning Christ, not
that perchance they were utterly dumb, or speechless that way; but because
their confession was not free, and ingenious; the Evangelist brands them for
non professors, as a point of abatement in the praise of their faith. Calvin.
h c
Wherein had they been rightly grounded, at their first entrance thereinto,
Augustine. on the place.
they would have profited so well, as to have conquered the love of humane
praise to have fixed their glorying with St. Paul in the Cross of Christ, and
to esteem all the pomp of the world beneath it; Ad hoc enim et ipse dominus
Crucem suam ubi eum dementia superbae impietatis irrisit, in e^rum* qui in
illum crederent, frontibus fi^it; ubi est quo, dammodo seeds verecundior ^t de
nomine ejus fides non erubescat. Augustine ibidem.
for to this end our Lord was pleased (for the confounding of proud impiety to
consigne his Cross on the forehead of his servants; on that very part which is
as it were the seat of shame facednesse, in token that they should not be
ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under
his banner, against sin, the world, and the Devil.

And such was the zeal of the primitive Christians, the noble Army of Martyrs,
and Confessors, whose heart was warmed with the reaking blood of Christ, they
thought nothing to much to loose, or suffer for the Testimony of his truth,
Multo avidius t^nc mortyria gloriosis mortilus quaerebant, quam etc. Sulp. Sev.
lib. 2.
seeking more earnestly the glory of Martyrdom, then the most ambitious to
aspire unto the height of wordly glory,

It is that which may exercise our thoughts in wondering, how they should suffer
what they did, with so much cheerfulness, (...). Sozom. lib. 1. cap 1.
as though it had been in other bodies; considering they had no more to move
them thereunto, then what we reckon our selves to have, that is, a good Captain
to lead and encourage them; a righteous cause to prompt, and embolden them, a
gracious God to relieve, and succor them, and a glorious Heaven to receive,
and reward them.

But what shall we think then of these poor s ules, that wanting all these, yet
endured no less torments! such as we find in the Heathen Martyrologie, as
Zeno, Socrates, Anaxarchus, etc, that sealed such lean, and barren truths as
Philosophy taught them, with the expense of their dearest blood!

Hac non sine causa dominus in seculum admisit: so thought Tertullian;
Tertullian ad Marty^^s.
these examples God permitted to be in the world, not without some special
providence; but either to exhort us in this our day, or to confound us in the
great day, if we fear to suffer for saving truth, what they affected for lying
vanity,

But here there is some c^use to fear, that if our courage were to be laid with
theirs in the balance, it would be found much too light.

Indeed we have no present occasion to make experiment of our valor in this
kind; living under no Pagan Princes, or persecuting Tyrants, N^n ^nim sunt
Pagani principes, n^^ T^^anni persecutores, non sang ^ ^^^^lorum fundit ^r, nec
fides s ^^^^^i^s comp^obatur. Salvian de Gu^^ lib. 3.
such as might summon us to a bloody trial, to attest our faith, by suffering
for it: Nay on the contrary, not to confess Christ in some sort now, is all
the danger, lest we should suffer that which amounts, unto a putting out of
the Synagogue: but yet however, there is matter enough to exercise our
Christian fortitude; there be some things as odious to the men of this age, as
the name of Christian was, or could be two Jew, or Gentile, Mr. Her^us first
sermon on the Eunu^h ba^ti^ed. 1 P^^. 4 4.
as namely for a man to make conscience of his way^s, to walk more
circumspectly then the common sort, to be strict in those things, wherein
others take more liberty, and not to run with them into the same excess of
riot; this the Apostle expressly notes to be an occasion for the Christians to
be evil spoken of by the Gentiles, cap 3. v. 16.
having nothing else to accuse in them, but their good conversation in Christ,
and this has ever been cause enough for the righteous to be hated, sojourning
(as they do) in Mesech, Psalm ^10.95.
in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, esse jam inter nocentes
innoxium, crimen est, etc. Among vicious persons to be virtuous, is a crime
(says S. Cyprian Cyprian Epist secunda lib. 2. W sdom. 2.^5.
) not to imitate evil mem, is to offend them. They in Wisdom are not ashamed
to profess it; He is grievous unto us, even to behold him, for his life is not
like other ^ens, His ways are of another fashion; he upbraideth us with our
offending the law, Such an upbraiding is the good, verse. 12.
and innocent life to corrupt and depraved manners, Peccantium frontem, etsi
not verbis, tamen ipsa vita genere dissimi^i verberat; Cur en^m sint aliqui
intempestive boni, qui corruptis m^rib^s pu^licis, convitium bo^o vivendo
facia^t and^. lactantius lib. 5. cap. 9.
it is Lactantius: the pious man's life, though his tongue be silent, rebukes
the offender, not to have fellowship with the works of darkness, is to reprove
them; In regard hereof, Ephesians. 5, 1
the mocks and floutings of graceless persons may bear the name of
persecution, by the authority of St, Paul, so terming the carriage of Ismael
toward Isaac which though it were no more then mocking that we read of Genesis
21.9. The Apostle styles it persecution, G^l. ^.29.
and applies it to the state of the Christian Church, Nun quam deest
tribulatio persecutionis si nunquam deset observantia pietatis le^. s. 8. de
quad.
as then it was; Even so it is now, was so then, and will ever so be, so long
as there be any borne after the flesh, they will be presecuting those that be
borne after the spirit: there is no avoiding it. 2 Timothy 3.12.
All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, Vis
probare verum esse quod dictum est! incipe pie vivere in Christo. Aug. in ps.
5^.
more, or less, it is part of the Cross that Christ left to be the portion of
his Disciples: Rev. ^3.^0.
Here is the patience, and the faith of the Saints, if we that profess our
selves to be Christians, 1 Pet. 4.^6. and ^.17.
can be content to suffer as Christians, that is, for well doing, and glorify
God on this behalf: not regarding what we may loose in credit, favor, or
preferment, not reckoning of the reproach, V 14.
or scorn that can be cast on us for the name of Christ, this will testify that
we are Christians indeed, and not falsely so called. All which we promised, and
much more, at our first entrance into Christianity* cum ad hanc sectam utique
suscepta condition ejus, paecti venerimus, as says Tertullian, Tertullian ad
Scap.
when by solemn oath, and covenant, we engaged our selves upon this warfare, to
continue Christ's faithful Soldiers unto our lives end.

2. Tim. ^ 3.
Where is that (...) then, the Apostle speaks of, the enduring hardness as good
Soldiers of Jesus Christ, 2. Sam. 6^ 20. Acts 17.
when every small affront appalls us, the scorns of Michal, the Athenians
mocking, quenches the smoking flax of our zeal, makes us ashamed of our
forwardnes in the profession of religion; nay see the perverseness! The fore
head of brass in the acting of sin, is more tender then flesh in defense of
Christ: can suffer his name to be dishonored with horrid blasphemy, his body
all torn and mangled afresh with cursed oaths, his truth empaired with impious
absurdities, and never once open their mouths in his just vindication.

Toward these baptized Atheists, Clem strom. 6.
(...) (as Clemens speaks) unchristing our Savior (what lies in them,) and
unchristning our holy profession, we are (it must be confessed) too patient, In
zeal to the glory of God, Babylon has exceeded Sion; we want that decree of
Nebuchadnezzar: Mr. Hooker Eccl. pol. lib. 5. Dan. 3.29.
the fury of this his wicked brood has the reins too much at liberty: the
venom of their poisoned hearts breaks out at their mouths to the anoyance of
many others,

Now what is this else, but (as one says well) to show our selves Gods against
God, R^legh
and slaves toward men! to side with flesh, and its corruption against Christ;
and his spirit, and how shall we think to look him in the face, when he shall
come in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels; Mark. 8.38. Rev. 6.26.
but even call to the mountains to fall on us, and to hide us from the wrath
of the lamb.

Knowing therefore this terror of the Lord, we persuade men, 2 Cor. 5.11.
those that have reason to be persuaded, not to eclipse the bright Sunshine of
his truth with earthly affections, not to be ashamed of confessing that which
with all our study we endeavor to know, and in knowing whereof we account our
chief felicity. Not to make religion a cloak for the weather, to put off, and
on, upon occasion, as will best suit with our worldly ends, I but to count
Godliness our greatest gain, 1 Timothy 6.6.
what ever we loose by it in outward respects, P^^* 3.8.
to esteem all things else in the world but loss and dung for the excellency
of the knowledge of Jesus Christ: E^^. 1.14.
Not to be as children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every whifling
wind of doctrine, H ^. 1^ 23.
by the slight of men, but to hold fast the profession of our faith without
wavering; for he is faithful that has promised, M ^ ^.5.1^.1^.
a blessed reward to all that suffer for him, and his righteousness, even a
crown of glorious immortality.

Heb. 12.3.
And lest we be wearied, and faint in our minds, consider we him that endured
such contradiction of sinners against himself; and yet this notwithstanding,
gave not over to do the the work he had in hand, but as for this cause he came
into the world, that he might bear witness unto the truth, J ^ 1^.^7.
so when he was to leave the world, 1 T^^ 6.13.
he witnessed (as says the Apostle) before Pontius Pilate a good confession;
and confirmed the truth of his doctrine by a dolorous, (...) 9
and bloody death, Quantaflibet nobis anxietatem pateras vitae praesentis
propinet afflictio etc. as Sydonius, exp^esseth; let the world present us with
never so great a Cup of afflictions it is but little, if we remember how much
our Savior drank at the Cross, Nor should we need any other cordial to
refresh us in our sufferings, but that wherewith Peter is said (by Clemens Clem.
strom. 7.
) to comfort his wife, when he saw her led to martyrdom, (...) remember the
Lord; whose Disciples if we be, we must not think to speed better then our
master; No, he tells us, it is enough for the Disciple that he be as his
Master: Math. 10.25.
and we to hold our selves highly honored to drink of that cup, wherein he
has drank before us: nay, to rejoice in as much as we are partakers of the
sufferings of Christ, 1 Pe^. 4.^3.
that when his glory shall be revealed, we may be glad also with exceeding joy,
for if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him: If we follow him by the
way, 2. Tim. 2.12. Phil. 3.10.
of his Cross (being made conformable unto his death) it will bring us where he
is, to be partakers of his glory: But that is a vobis datum est, too, we cannot
have it of our selves, it must be given us, in the behalf of Christ, not only
to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. Phil. 1.29.
Unto him then to make our humble request.

O Blessed Jesus, Author and finisher of our faith, who have given us the grace
to believe on thee, Hebr. 12.2.
give us also the courage to confess thee, and as thou have enlightened our
minds with the knowledge of thy truth, so inflame our affections with the zeal
of it; that whether by life, or by death, we may glorify thy name; and nothing
be able to separate us from the love of thee, for thou only art Holy, Romans
8.35.
thou only art the Lord, thou only O Christ with the Holy Ghost, art most
high in the Glory of God the Father.

AMEN,
SERMON. III.
Matthew. 20.15. Is thine eye evil. because I am good


IT is pity that goodness should give an offense, or be troubled to justify
her worthy proceedings; and yet such is her fate with evil men, that make
(...). Perynd py^h. (...)
virtue the ground of their hatred, and disparage it (all rhey can) with foul
Menand
detraction: you have here the truth of this complaint represented in a
parable, the parable of an householder, that hired laborers into his Vineyard,
who for giving alike wages unto some that came last, is blamed by the first of
dealing unjustly, but innocence is never unprovided of reasons; either for the
defense of her self, or the conviction of gainsayers; It was his bargain (he
says) with them, he had agreed for so much, and so they could demand no more;
then besides, what he gave, was his own, and therefore why not as much to
these, as to themselves? and none to control him for it: and thus having
cleared himself from their false imputation, he now charged them with a fault
indeed, their envious repining, and this occasioned by his good deeds: there
eye was evil, because he was good.

In which words, he so reprehends their envy, as he seeks to amend it, and
this, by displaying unto them the state, and condition of that wicked passion.

Oculus, the Eye.

2. In the nature, and quality, of which it consists, Malus, Evil.

3. In the motive, and occasion, from which it proceeds; Quia ego bonas sum,
because I am good.

These parts ad oculum, the text presents; from thence we have the draught, or
portracture, as it were, of a picture laid before us; and that so accurate, as
none can presume to mend it: our labor is only to fill up each part, as the
grace of God shall enable us, desiring there be in none here present an Evil
Eye, Mat. 6.23.
to sensure the limners imperfections, but in all, a single eye, to make the
best use of them, for the amending of their own; I begin with the Organ, or
instrument of envy; that is, the Eye.

Part 1. The Instrument.
MAn at his creation was an uniform and entire, his creatur soul and body like
a well tuned instrument, sounded nothing but the praise of his maker, and his
own felicity: but being once subdued by sin, he fell at discord with himself
labored his own destruction. And as in the besieging of a City, those Forts
and Bulwarks that lately defended her, but now surprised by the Enemy, help to
better, and demolish her, (...) 122.3.
so in ruining of man (built once as a City that is at unity in it self) those
members and faculties that were the chief agents of his happiness, became now
the Engines of his misery. I will instance only in the eye, a member abounding
with so much excellency, and withal, so much iniquity, that I know not whether
it may more invite your admiration, or your sorrow. An Organ so divine, that
the mystical Egyptians could not find a fitter hieroglyphick to express the
divine all-seeing providence. C^rl. Rhod. lib. ^. cap. 28.
But the Stoics unable to satisfy their wondering without the help of
idolatry, entitled it a very God, as if to be sure of a present deity, they
would have their Heaven of Gods about them. But without such wild Hyperbole's,
it is praise enough, that which, may consist with piety; and for this, we find
an instance in St. Chrisostom, Chrysostom. ad Antioch h^^ 11.
who chose this part above the rest, to assert the power, and wisdom of God,
that from so vile a matter as earth which affords brick, and tiles, could
extract so goodly a piece, as is the eye, that for its majesty, strikes an
awfulnesse in the beholders, and besides, endued it with such virtue, as within
so narrow a compass to comprehend so many objects, as mountains, Forests,
Seas, and Heaven. God has so done this marvelous work, P^^ (...).
that it ought to be had in remembrance: giving the eye such a pre-eminence
above other parts in man; either 1. in regard of the eldership thereof before
the birth; a seniority (as we may call it) in the womb; where it is first
begun to be formed, before any other part; that as the light was the first
creature which God made in the greater world, Genesis 1.3. Mat. 6.22.
so this light of the body is the first thing too, that is made in man, the
lesser world. Or 2. in regard of its composition, with such manifold variety of
humors, and tunicles; as if this little globe were the model of nature, wherein
are comprised all her perfections: Or 3. in regard of the munition, being
fortifyed in a cave of bone, more artificial, and defensive, then the tent of
a diamond; as the jewel within it is far more precious; and besides too,
fenced above with a pentice of brows, and shuttings of lids, whose quick motion
comes nearest in nature to the rate of a moment, as if thereby to prevent
(beside other annoyances) the temptations of sin; Jerem. 9.
that death may not enter by these windoes; But you will cheerfuly give God the
praise of so rare a work, if you consider the singular use, and office thereof.

It is the Eye whereby we put our selves into our own protection; and then make
no doubt of our being in safety, when this sentinel tells us, Exodus 10.23.
we are not in danger, which the sight (by a kind of providence) can discover
before it approach, and needs not, as the other senses, to be warned in the
smart of it.

It is the Eye that makes us to be in the presence, each of other, which we
seem to acknowledge with bashfulnesse at the look of it: and wanting this, we
come somewhat near the Egyptians case in their plague of darkness, Exodus 10.23.
to account all the world but our dungeon or sepulcher.

It is the eye that assures our understanding by the most certain
demonstration, and turns our opinion into knowledge; John 20.27, 28.
as no less our infidelity into belief, that on the testimony of our sight, we
disclaim and renounce our reason, and are confident any thing may be so,
because we see that so it is.

It is the eye that enricheth us, by giving us the fruition of all Gods
creatures; and not only satisfies our curiosity, but assists our invention,
for the enquiry of arts and sciences.

It is the eye whereby we can travel, even while we sit still, by whose
celerity we can outrun the swiftest star, and be in an instant at the end of
that journey, which they must by leisure attain unto.

Nay, lastly, Cum spectamus totam hanc coelestem rempublicam, and in ea
singulorum quasi quaedam officia disposita ad summi Rectoris obsequium, etc.
Mou. Polym. c. 25. Acts 17.28.
by this we can make that better use of Astronomy, that beholding the
Commonwealth of those heavenly bodies, how regularly they observe their
courses, and conform unto the first mover, we should strive to imitate their
orderly Government, and frame our actions after the image of him in whom we
move, and have our being.

Thus have you seen the excellencices of the eye, and now be content to see the
iniquity, which the eye so abounds withal, that some Heathen Philosophers (as
Clemens reports) maintained it to be man's highest happiness to abstain from
the evils thereof; Nay, some Christians too we read of, that in an impious and
ignorant obedience to the literal advice of our Savior, Mat. 5.29.
finding their eyes to offend them, plucked them out, lest they should light
them to utter darkness. But without the help of madness to aggravate this
woeful truth, we may with grief enough confess, that there is scarce any sin
that is not promoted by the eye, which by reason of its activeness and
volubility, is apt to offend both with more frequency and facility, and that at
a distance too, without the company of the body: For if it look on food with
greediness, without the charging of the stomach, it commits the sin of
gluttony: Mat. 5.28.
and if it look on a woman with lust, with out the touch of carnal embraces, it
commits the sin of adultery; and if it look on riches with covetousnes, without
the seizure of the land, it commits the sin of robbery. Not that the eye
alone is guilty of producing these wicked acts, which flow originally from the
heart, as the fountain of evil things, Mark 7.21
and by name of the evil eye, as our Savior voucheth it, Mark 7.22.

The heart then, that corrupts the eye; and the eye betrays the heart, and
both have their respective interest in the service of iniquity. But however,
the eye is entitled to the fault; because it does not only yield to the heart,
but seduces it, and it is as the window to let in evil; as you may find in
viewing only the Records of sin; it was the eye that enticed Eve next to the
serpent; Genesis 3.6.
or rather tempted her beyond the tempter; When the woman saw that tht tree was
good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eye, she took of the fruit
thereof and did eat, and thence bequeathed the itch of curiosity to all her
posterity. And if you turn over to the next great sin of the world, (that could
not be purged without a deluge of waters) you shall find that all beginning
from the eye; Genesis 6.2.
The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and they took
them wives of all that they chose, by which wild polygamie, they replenished
the earth not so much with children, as transgressions; and yet this was but
the dull mischief of the eye, unacquainted as then with the art of sin; but if
you look into the elder age of the world, you shall see the studied and
elaborate malice of the eye, 1 Samuel 18.8.
bursting forth from Saul in envy against David; when being applauded with
songs of triumph for his victory on the Philistine, it follows thereupon, Saul
eyed David from that day and forward; confingebat oculos; so renders Tremelius;
darted his eyes on him, as it were sharpened or pointed with envy, that sure we
may be, he was full of rancour, which thus run over so high as his eyes. And
yet the eye is not sole instrument of envy, for blind men may be affected
therewith, and the Ear also can entertain envy, as the tongue can utter it; but
this notwithstanding, the eye is chief actour in this passion.

Because being of a more busy and inquisitive nature, it meets with many
occasions of envy, that come not unto the knowledge of the ear.

2. Besides, being of a quicker apprehension, it more deeply affects the mind
with such objects, as be presented unto it, than the ear can move her by the
most certain information; and therefore being infected with envy, it wounds
the soul with deeper impression of the object it maligneth, Livor tabificum
malis venenum. Virg
and makes the poison much more strong in operation.

3 As the eye is said to be animi index, the minds interpreter; so here it is
most truly verified; no tongue can so express the thoughts, as the eye
discovers the disposition of an envious soul; Ovid. Metam.
Nusquam recta acies; the look is never but awry, as was that of Saul toward
David; In his notes on the place.
limis intuebatur (says Junius) he looked askeue on him, as if dazzled with the
splendour of his virtue, he were not able to behold him aright.

Nay 4. Some are bold to affirm, that it can send forth the power of its
malignity, by hurting that object it beholds with envy; as if it were not
enough for the eye to be like those heavenly planets in figure and brightnese,
but it must resemble them in their worst quality, by casting a malign aspect;
and though Valesius under the title of his sacred Philosophy, Valesius de sacra
Philosoph. c. 68 fuse.
do deny this blasting property, yet Aquinas and Azorius as rationally maintain
the likelihood, and that without the danger of admitting any Platonicall
emission of Eye-beams: for when every passion of the soul has such dominion
over the spirits, that it can force them into any part of the body, agreeable
to its several property, and does manifest the same by some outward
alteration in the part so visited; why should we not allow the like effect unto
envy, whereby the spirits boiling up from the heart into the brain, and thence
driven into the eyes, may well flow out at those porie passages in poisonous
rays, which issuing into the eyes of those whom they eagerly behold, by
mediation of the infected air, do thence stream into the heart, as seeking a
place of like affection unto that from which they sprang; and tainting that
with the noisomnesse of their strange quality, at last, declare the contagion
thereof in the languishing of the outward parts. Basil. hom. de invidia,
Or if with St. Basil, we reject this opinion, as rather believed by the
vulgar, than allowed by the learned; yet thus much he gives us leave to
resolve, that (...); the devils, enemies to all that good is, if they find any
person inclined to maliciousness, as they have power to abuse their bodies, so
likewise their eyes to the executing of their wickedness; so that still it is
the guilt of the eye, that becomes thus a weapon of unrighteousness to the
Prince of darkness. And as if Nature would be revenged for so foul a
violation; you shall find no part infested with more diseases, nor sooner
decaying; as if she would make us to bewail the errors of our sight, in the
want of it; and you may observe, that the end suffers most in the agony of
death, by the cracking of its strings, and dissolution of spirits; nay and
after death too, bears the tokens of that deadly conquest, being flung wide
open in ghastly wise, as if justly then to ly open to injury, that was before
so injuriously open to all iniquity. But then you may withal observe the
carfulness of nature too, that in the same part whereby we offend, Ecclus
31.3.
has provided an expiation, that seeing (as Syracides speaks) nothing is more
wicked than the Eye, therefore it weepeth on every occasion; And (beloved) let
this pronenesse to weeping, be a motive unto us of godly sorrow, Lam. 3.48. v.
49. 2 Cor, 12.21.
and let us teach our eyes with Jeremie, if not to run down with rivers of
water, yet to trickle down at least with some few drops of penitent tears: to
bewail the sins that we have committed, Zelare quod bonum videas and invidere
melioribus, leve and modicum apud quisdam crimen videtur; dumque existimatur
leve esse, non timeretur, etc. Cyp. de livore.
and have not repented of, nay, scarce acknowledge them to be sins; as many
alas! too many do, until with the rich man in the Gospel, they lift up their
eyes being in torments: one precious drop of this water, now, now may quench
the glowing sparks of envy, which by our neglect might kindle into everlasting
fire. O let us be here then all Baptists to our selves, Mark 1.4.
and preach unto our eyes the Baptism of repentance for the remission of their
sins;

Here let us arise and bath them in the laver of their own compunction, and
with the tears of our eyes, wash away the evil of them, which in the sense of
my Text, is the nature and quality of envy, and comes next to be discovered.

Part 2 The nature
(...); It is Plato's apoththegme, words are the image of things, and represent
them as they be in nature unto our understanding: but behold here a vice beyond
the propriety of Expression! It is not enough for the envious eye to be called
by the name of Envious, but it must be paraphrased by the term of Evil, as if
it could not be otherwise sufficiently made known unto us; and if you will
bestow your attention on so vile a subject, you shall hear it abundantly make
good the style of evil, both in regard of the evil of sin, and the evil of
punishment.

First, for the evil of sin; we consider it in the general by the Parents
from which it descends; which are no less than two capital sins, pride and
covetousness, when making our own persons the God of our desires, and seeking
infinite contentment in the compass of our selves, we malign the prosperity
of others, as seeming to diminish our own felicity: which Ser. 2. de zelo and
livore.
Saint Cyprian and Post peccatum superbiae consecutum est in angelo peccante
malum invidiae, secundum quod de bono hominis doluit. Aquin. 1. 9. 63. a. 2.
Aquinas conceive to be the cause of Satan's banishment from heaven, as grieving
at the dignity of man, whom he beheld made after Gods own image, insomuch that
he would relinquish his own glory, to divest so noble a creature of perfection,
and rather be in hell himself than see Adam placed in Paradise. Wisd. 2.24.
But certainly after his fall it was the first practice of his wickedness on
earth, to envy man's innocence, and to implunge him with himself in the (...) of
sin, and misery: and it was envy too be made choice of, to be his engine of
perdition, Hinc Diabolus inter initia statim munda periit primus and perdidit.
Cypr. aliad. and Lactans. lib. 2.9. Deum zelotypia inductum exprobrat, and
consulto mandasse de arbore, ut in gradu inferiori hominem teneret Calv. in Genesis
possessing Eve with an envious thought of God, as if he forbad them the tree
of knowledge for no other end, but to debar them from the Society of his glory.
Neither is there any infection in man, that seems so properly to be the
infusion of that venomous Serpent: for whereas all the other passions were in
the soul in the state of innocence, Inter caeteros pestilentiae morbos quos
antiquissimus ille ac foetidissimus serpens gravissima laetiferae aemulationis
invidia, and teterrimo illo virosi oris spiritu inhalat. Calv. ad. Ecc. Cath
lib. 1.
(although in a pure and perfect condition) there was only no occasion for
envy; but this (like a cursed weed) sprouted immediately from the soil of
corrupted nature. Neither is there any vice arising in us from the bitter root
of original sin, Jam. 4 5.
that more enforces us to acknowledge our derived corruption; and that the
Scripture says not in vain, The spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy.
Est totum venenum antiqui serpentis. Paris de mor. 4.
The place of the Scripture that says this, St. James (that voucheth it) has
not told us; Genesis 6.5.
it is by most conceived to be, Genesis 6.5. where it is said, that God saw that
every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart was only evil continually. And
then, this parallel will confirm the sense of my Text, that envy and evil are
Synonyma, two words implying the self-same thing, and we thereby to be
admonished, that there is something more of evil in this passion then the rest,
or else, this expression might have been spared.

The evil whereof we come in the next place more distinctly to consider; First
in respect of the universality, and then of the malignity of it.

First for the universality; it is of such a diffusive nature, that like a
general inundation, it spreads almost over Vidi ego and expertus sum
zelantem puerum, nondum loquebatur, and intuebatur pallidus amaro aspectu
collactaneum suum. Aug. Confess. l. 1. c. 7.
all mankind, so as very few (like Noah and his family) are exempted from it;
though happily they may be free from other infirmities, (as Nazianzen
instanceth in Eusebius, a man (otherwise) victorious over his passions, and
endued with singular piety, as the troubles of these times abundantly
manifested; (...), only toward Basil he expressed somewhat of humane weakness
in the maligning of his eminent endowments; you may see the tincture of this
malignity in secular profession, as namely in the compilers of history, Major
historiae pars in rebus deterioribus moratur, etc. Tyr. Max. Sermon. 12.
whose Collection, (as Tyrius observes) are most employed in matter of a more
dismal nature, as tyranny, oppression, rebellion, murders, and the like sad
accidents; as if these things only could raise the authors observation, that
carrry in them the reproach of humane misery. So for Advocates, Orators and
Poets, it is the note of Charron, Qui sont lasches a reciter le bien, eloquens
au mal, etc. Charron de la foy lib. 1. cap. 39.
that being cold in the praise of goodness, they are eloquent in mischief: the
words, invention, figures to defame and flout, are more rich, more emphaticall,
and significant, then to commend or speak well: And so generally for the rest;
all are infected with the plague of envy, more or less, as it may appear,

1 By the credulity of men unto evil reports, either Eccle. 10.1
out of their own guiltiness, Isid. Pelus. Ep. 162. l. 3.
esteeming others by themselves; or else supposing their own faults lessened by
the aspersion of others, when like dead flies in precious ointment, one
senseless rumor shall cause the best name to send forth a stinking savor, and
disrelish all the sweetness of the most approved virtue.

Or 2. By the acuteness of men in discerning the imperfections of others,
though it be but a mote in their brothers eye, Mat. 7.3. Isid. Pelus. Ep. 237.
l. 3
and taking no notice of their virtues, like the Ravens, of which Pelusiet
speaks; (...), who passing by gardens and flowery fields, direct their flight
only to carcases; and as the nose can smell no water (says Hippocrates)
(...), unless it be corrupted; so neither can they perceive any action, that
is not leavened with some depravity. This for the universality.

We are apt to look upon the malignity, Nullum malum impugnat, sed solum and
omne bonum. Paris. de mor. 4.
which is more peculiar unto envy, than to any other vice; for whereas any
other vice is contrary but to some single virtue; as pride to humility, anger
to patience, and the like; This of envy is contrary to all, hating every thing
for which any one is commended: and as it is contrary to all virtue; so
especially unto charity, 1 Cor. 13.13.
the chief and greatest of Christian virtues: being grieved at that good for
which charity rejoices, and rejoicing at that evil, for which charity
lamenteth; (...), says Saint Chrysostom: Then only the envious man becomes a
friend, when he sees one weeping and bewailing his misfortunes, and he more
willingly condoles his misery then he could congratulate his prosperity.
Besides, Charity, as it extends unto all men in a courteous respect, so in a
nearer affection to those that are allied by some natural relation, or resemble
them in some like quality or action; but envy chiefly maligneth those that are
nearest, Arist. Rhetor. l. 2. c. 12.
(...), etc. either by country, or kindred, or age, and which are most like
them in riches or fame, or art, or the desire of the same things: then further,
1 John 4.8, 16.
as it is contrary to charity or love, so likewise is it to the God of love;
for whereas God freely communicates his goodness to his world of creatures, and
delights in the good which he imparteth unto others: the envious man would
rather be deprived of goodness himself, than that another should enjoy it, and
is more vexed at the welfare of his neighbor, than he would be at his own
calamity. And if you will descend in your thoughts by the several steps of
nature, you shall find it as far from the creatures, as they come nearer to
their Maker in perfection.

The blessed angels are so far from envy, that (as the Schoolmen do affirm)
they rejoice more in the happiness of their blessed associates, Francisc.
Victoria, and alii ab eo citati.
than these their selves do in their own happiness. The higher in glory are
more delighted in the felicity of those below them, than those below them are
delighted in their own felicity: because (as they argue) the accidentary
perfections, which followed happiness, being communicated according to the
copacity of the receivers, it must needs follow, that the superior having a
larger capacity, must conceive more happiness in apprehending the joy of their
inferiors, than the inferior conceive in apprehending their own joy. Psalm.
8.5.
Step we next unto him that was made a little lower than angels in dignity; it
is not to be found in the best of men, but always where it is, it is an
argument of a degenerous disposition, Semper minor est qui incedet. Plin.
Epist. Ego semper sensi, neminem alterius qui suae confideret virtuti invidere.
Philip. 10.
that confesses a minority to the person envyed: So that Cicero did not more
bravely then truly resolve, that no man also is confident of his own virtue,
does envy that of another. Nay, look on those creatures that are lower than
man, I mean the brute beasts; and Plutarch will tell us, it is not in them
neither, as having no apprehension of glory or prosperity, which are the main
provocations of envy. So that those fabulous contrivers of Man's Creation, that
would have each creature contrive an affection to the making up of his soul,
might here have failed of a creature to make up their invention; Nay, one
degree lower yet, look we down on those that have made themselves the lowest in
nature (if sin and misery can make them so) the very devils themselves; and
although we cannot deny it to be in them, yet we cannot deny neither, but it is
worse in men than in Devils; For Devils do not envy one another; and besides,
their envy arises from the want of that good which they have lost; whereas man
envies that good, which he may obtain, nay, ofttimes that which he has
already, envying Non ut aliquid boni sit ipsi qui invidet, sed quia illiis est
quibus invidetur. Aristotel.
not that himself wants good, but because another does not want it. This may
suffice for the evil of sin, our next prospect is that which attends it, the
evil of punishment; which may be considered either in regard of the
discommodity, or of the anguish, and torment of it.

First, for the discommodity; it is injurious to the Common wealth; Plato de
Rep.
for as Plato wisely blames the envious man, (...), etc. while by derogating
from others, he thinks to excel them, he proceeds not aright himself to
virtue, and hinders those that would proceed by unjust detraction; so that
damping the desire of attaining virtue in the City, he deprives it (what lies
in him) of worthy achievements; For though such spirits there may be, that
take pleasure in the envy of their adversaries, as a testimony of their
goodness, yet others of a softer temper choose rather to obscure their own
excellence, then to provoke another malignity. And as some Neque enim
Christianos quantumvis fortes ac singulari tolerantia praeditos, sui tantum
rationem habere oportet, sed persecutoribus quoque consulere, etc. Nazian.
Orat. 3. Perdit quaecunque omnes mercatores lucrantur. G. Paris.
Christians are said to have fled from the glory of martyrdom, to spare their
persecutors from the guilt of murder; so they will restrain their meriting
endeavors, for fear of endangering the innocence of their brethren.

Thus is envy unto others; but is much more injurious unto the envious person
himself, as defrauding him of that benefit, which he might enjoy by charity,
whereby he might make his joy as universal as the blessings of mankind; nay,
make all these blessings as it were his own, by rejoicing in them.

This is the first sort of punishment, Quid infelici viro praestat invidia,
quem in secretis conscientiae quibusdam ungulis liver ipse discerpit, and
alienam felicitatem tormentum illius facit. Aug. de temp. Sermon. 83.
but a worse is behind, that is, the Anguish and Vexation wherewith envy
requiteth those that entertain it, as if the divine justice had appointed this
sin to be the torment of it self. that could not likely have a worse torment
them: therefore rightly termed by Nazianzen, (...), the sting of an evil
spirit; and certainly he that lodges it in himself, does but nourish a snake
in his breast, to afflict and torture him: Velut quosdam pectori suo a admovere
carnifices, qui se intestinis cruciatibus lacerent, etc. Cypr.
For whereas every other sin has some pleasure to endure it, as lust,
intemperance, and the rest, only the envious man gives away his soul for
nothing but bitterness, and anxiety: a sin so painful, that God is wont to
make this the punishment of other sins; as appears by that which he
threatens to Eli, 1 Samuel 2.32, 33.
concerning the wickedness of his sons; videbis aemulum tuum in templo, Vide
P. Martyr. ibid. Excitaaemulum contra te qui oculos tuos perpetuo urat.
thou shall see thine enemy in my habitation, and the man of thine whom I shall
not cut off from mine altar, shall be to consume thine eyes, and to grieve
thine heart, that is, by seeing others in the Priesthood, from which they were
rejected. Nay, a plague reserved, to accomplish the pains of the damned, as our
Savior tells the Jews; Luke 13.28.
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God; as if it should
be a hell to them, but to behold the glory of heaven, and the extremity of
their damnation should be the sight of others salvation: Luke 16.24
An instance whereof you may see in Dives, begging of Abraham to send Lazarus
with the tip of his finger dipped in water, for the cooling of his tongue;
Certainly, this could no way ease him, being tormented in that flame; it rather
shows that being more inflamed with envy, than with hellfire, he made this
motion for nothing else, but that Lazarus so for a while might be deprived of
his happiness, and descend into hell out of Abraham's bosom. And well may it
be the pumishment of the damned, when it has in this life the property of the
damned, that is, incurablenesse: which therefore Cassianus supposes to be that
plague intimated by the Prophet Jeremie in the eighth of his Prophecy; Ier.
8.17.
Behold, I will send serpents, Cockatrices among you which shall not be
charmed, and they shall bite you. For as he that was first infected with this
poison, Zeli vulnera occulta sunt, nec remedium cura medentis admittunt, qui se
intra conscientiae latebras, caeco dolor clauserunt. Cypr.
I mean the Devil, was past the recovery of repentance: so they that are
thoroughly stung with this serpent, are beyond the cure of the charmer, charm he
never so wisely: you will yield the disease to be desperate, if you consider
the quality of it, which contrary to all other diseases, is increased by the
remedies: for the more one stirs to mitigate the unhappy patient, Hic est
ignis Graecus qui superfusione aquae accenditur, etc. Paris.
either by patience or humility, or munificence, the more is he exasperated
with the horn of envy; nor is any way to be cured thereof, but by the ruin and
destruction of him that he envyeth; (...) says St. Basil: Basil. hom. de
invidia.
This alone is the period of his hatred, if he see his rival become miserable,
and instead of being the glorious object of his envy, the wretched subject of
his pity.

Hitherto you have seen the nature of this evil, as well in respect of the sin,
as of the punishment, together with the particulars contained in either; in the
former the universality and malignity, in the later, the discommoditie, and
vexation; but yet you have not seen the ground of this evil; which is no other
than goodness it self; as it follows in the next words to be considered,
because I am good.

Th third part. The occasion. Eccles. 11.7.
THe light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the Sun,
and yet nothing is more unpleasant to a diseased sight, that is not able to
endure the brightness, and thus likewise it befalls the eye of the soul.

That good which is the delightsome object of the mind, while she is sound and
rightly ordered, is the occasion of her hatred being once depraved, and instead
of pleasing her becomes her loathing and detestation: and as to a corrupt
stomach (...), Hippocr. Aphor.
says the great Physician, the very nourishment becomes corruption, so to a
soul vitiated with envy, that goodness which should feed and cherish her,
increases her malady and perverseness; Romans 8.28.
that whereas evil things work for good unto the righteous, on the contrary,
good things work for evil unto the envious; who by the worst kind of Chimistry
turns the happiness of others into his own unhappiness, Non commodum aliquid
sibi quaerit, sed solo fraterno pascitur detrimento, Paris.
King Solomon in his time observed this wicked disposition, and complained of
it, Eccles. 4.4. I considered all travel, Eccles. 4.4
and every right work, that for this a man is envyed of his neighbor, but his
father David felt the experience thereof from his enemies, as he seems to imply
by that expression, Psalm. 118. Psalm. 118, 12.
They compassed me about like bees; for they would not have been so
troublesome, but that they perceived some sweetness in him more than ordinary,
and this we may safely affirm to be one main cause of the best men's persecution
in all ages of the world; and we may make it the ground of Scaligers
observation; Perquam pauci viri ex iis qui clari illustresque tum virtute tum
fortuna habiti sunt, quos non infelix exitus, etc. Scalig. Poet. l. 3. c. 15.
Alienam virtutem propriorum vitiorum exprobrationem existimantes, Joh. VVower
polymath.
that there have been scarce any personages accounted famous for virtue or
fortune, but some dismal death has pointed them out, for an example to
posterity: while the envious nature of man accounts such illustrious merits,
an upbraiding of their own defects, as if they were lighted unto infamy by the
splendor of virtues shining about them. The truth whereof will many ways
appear, if we consider the diversity of goodness, which envy opposes.

Genesis 4 8. 1 John 3.12. Tantum valuit ad consummationem sceleris aemulationis
furor, ut nec charitas fratris, etc. Cypr. de zelo.
It was righteousness in Abel, that enraged Cain to imbrue the earth with his
blood; the fury of envy so transported him, that neither could the love of a
brother, nor the fear of God, nor the punishment of sin deter him from so
horrid a wickedness; Romans 1.21. Gal. 5.21.
so that this may be one reason why the Apostle joins these two, Envy and
Murder more than once, to show how near they are allied each to other.

It was graciousnesse in Joseph, that made him envied of his brethren, Genesis
37.4.
because his father loved him more then all his brethren: so that Jacob was in
the right, Verse. 33.
when he told them (at the sight of his bloody garment) an evil beast has
devoured him. Omnium infernalium ferarum ferior, and a domesticatione
elongatior; G. Paris.


It was victoriousnesse in Gideon against the enemies of Gods people, Judges 8.
1 Invidebant Ephraitae Gideoni, quod magna gloria ex isto praelio ad eum
redierit. P. Mart. ibid.
that incensed the men of Ephraim to chide so fiercely and sharply with him, as
if they would encounter him afresh with envy, after his victory over the
Midianites; And therefore God furnished Abraham upon his Conquest of the four
Kings, with a protecting shield instead of a triumphant garland, fear not
Abraham, Genesis 15.1.
I am thy shield, as it were to defend him against the fiery darts of envy;
Macrobius Saturn. Bullae gestamen erat triumphantium quod prae se ferebant,
inclusis intra eam remediis, etc. lib. 1.
and in Rome it was usual for Captains in triumph, to wear in a golden ball or
bosse, certain charms against envy, which then they thought most enraged with
the fame of their noble actions.

It was vertuousnesse in David, that provoked Saul to malign him every day
more than other; and to requite his greatest benefits, with the greatest
injuries that were possible: as the one increased in grace and favor with God
and men; so the other no less in deadly hatred, and utmost practices to
destroy him; that if the Lord had not secured him by the saving strength of his
right hand, Psalm. 20.6. 1 Samuel 27.^
he had certainly perished by the hand of Saul, whose honor, state, life and
safety, were dearer unto him than his own.

It was repentance in the Ninivites, that so much distempered Jonah, as to envy
in a manner at the success of his own preaching: Jonah 3.10. chap. 4.1.
God repented him of the evil which he said he would do unto them; and this
seems evil in the eyes of the Prophet, verse 3.
who forgetting his own deliverance from the whale, repineth bitterly at the
deliverance of his auditors, and that mercy which he should have given his life
to obtain, he beseeches God to take away his life, because he sees it
obtained.

But if you will at once behold the unparallelled history of envyed goodness,
you may copiously read it in the Jews against our Savior; still increasing
their malignity, as he increased his good works; when even those miracles that
saved others, served only to destroy himself, and stirred up the people to
importune Pilate that he might be crucified, which the Roman governor clearly
perceived, and sought to release him, Ioh 19.12 Math. 27.18. Pyndarus Nem. ode.
8.
for he knew that for envy they had delivered him. Hi sunt invidiae mores, this
is ever the nature of envy, (...), it assaulteth the worthiest persons, those
that shine beyond the rest in glorious actions; (...), it meddles not with such
as be of a meaner quality, that in this respect it is a kind of misery to grow
eminent, when by obscurity one may avoid the grief or envy of being envyed.

Athletaru^ ^^exia quae ad summum plenit^dinis evasit periculosa; natura enim
sua statu manner non p^test, neque ociosa quiescere. Hippoc. Aphor. 3. Lib. 1.
And as it is with single persons, so with public bodies too; States, and
Kingdoms being once grown into wealth and greatness, have their (...) also,
like the natural body, such an exquisite state of health as is in danger to be
subverted by some malignant predominant humor; for the sins that are bred by
long peace, and plenty, God lets in the spirit of envy, which turns a
fruitful land into barrenness, Psa. 107.34.
for the wickedness of men that dwell therein.

And thus it fares with the Church too; when flourishing most in outward
prosperity, Christianorum (...), c^ntrariamque mutationem quaerens, licentiaque
et honor et saturitas, etc. Nazions. Orat. 2. Acts 20.30.
and having peace from enemies abroad, there arises a sort of men within her,
(like worms that breed in the fairest fruit) speaking perverse things, to draw
away disciples after them, by means whereof, the bond of Christian peace is
broken, Hinc dominicae vinculum pacis rumpitur etc. Cypr. de zelo.
charity violated, truth corrupted, unity rent into schisms and heresies; These
among others, St. Cyprian reckons to be the fruit of an envious spirit; But for
the season of these ill weeds, our Savior seems to have intimated in that
parrable of the Tares; Matthew. 13. where it is said expressly, Matthew. 13.26.
When the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares
also, that is, when the Church was grown to some ripeness, then was the time
for the enemy to annoy her, (...); Clem, Ale^ Strom. 7.
as Clemens gives the reason of it; because every excellent thing is attended
with malignity.

All this while, we have considered envyed goodness in reference only unto men
in whom it resideth; But then it would be as well considered in reference unto
him from whom it proceeds, Iam. 1:17.
that is, (as the Apostle says) The Father of lights, from whom comes down
every good and perfest gift. And in this respect, envy will prove to be a fowl
of an higher flight, a sin that strikes at God himself: and thus the text here
sets it forth. Our laborers in the vineyard seem displeased at the equal wages
of their fellows; but God who is meant there under the title of an householder,
takes the matter to himself, and interprets their repining to be a murmuring at
his own most just proceedings; an envious upbraiding of his goodness. So that
in short, to malign the gifts and blessings bestowed on our fellow servants, is
to offend the Donor of them. This were enough for a silcat caro, to stop the
mouths of all gain-layers, considering whose doing it is; Zech. 2.12. Psalm.
12.8.
when the vilest men men are exalted; And yet the world is full of such
murmurers, who are not satisfied with that which struck our laborers dumb, and
lest them nothing to reply: But think they have reason on their side to prefer
a bill of complaint, seeing some persons out of a stupid lethargick dullness (as
it were) awakened to preferment, or as the Related by Vlpian and Plutarch,
citante Rho digino. 9.18.
Ancients pictured Timotheus lying asleep, and Fortune by him holding a net,
with goodly Cities flowing into it without any care of his: so these rewarded
with a donative, that never labored in the vineyard, much less have born the
heat and burden of the day: when on the other side, others there be, like those
in the Gospel, that have toyled all the night, Luke 5.5.
and have taken nothing, that have employed their whole age in virtuous
industry, without any the least encouragement, save the conscience of their
good deserts, and are either referred over to another life for their
recompense, 2 Samuel 19.35.
or so unseasonably advanced, that like old Barzillai, they have not the time,
or the mind to enjoy it: Here, many think, they may be suffered to discharge
their indignation, and defend themselves with the examples of Job, David,
Jeremiah, Habakuck, whom the Scripture records to have done the like; and yet
we do not hear them blamed, for so doing. Nay, so far from being blamed, that
some great Doctors affirm it lawful for them, and others, Greg. de Valentia.
by the help of a distinction: as, that considering the advancement of unworthy
persons precisely according to humane distribution, we may be offended at such
a disproportion, as a defect in nature, but that considering it absolutely, as
it depends on the orderly disposition of divine providence; or as it is
opposed to spiritual things (in comparison whereof it is as nothing) we are not
allowed to murmr at it: But sure the Scripture scarce allows of this
difference in the dispensing of promotion; declaring clearly in this case,
Psalm. 75.7. Psalm. 37.1 and ver. 7.
that God is the Judge who puts down one and sets up another, and forbiding us
without any limitation, to fret our selves because of him that prospers in
his evil way: or to be envious against the workers of iniquity: Malderus
unto whom perchance God gives their heaven in this present life, even all the
heaven that ever they shall enjoy; and gives them riches, power, and honor,
for their greater punishment in the abuse of them. So that to murmr at their
prosperity, were to prejudice the wisdom of God, who imployes the hands of men,
as the instruments of his bounty, to dispense those benefits unto others, which
from him they have received.

Thus (according to my weakness) I have laid before you a Map of envy;
containing the instrument, the nature, the occasion thereof. But, as he were
but an ill Physician that would (...) (in St. Basils words) leave the patient
in his sickness, Homil de Inv.
without endeavoring to amend it: so having discovered thus much of the
disease, it is meet I should apply the remedies; which is the last exercise of
your patience.

Soc ates in Platonis Charmide.
we must not think to cure the eye without the head; nor the body without the
mind: and for this, he commends as the only physic, (...), the wholesome charms
of moral precepts. But for these, 1 Timothy 2.7. and 2 Timothy 1.11.
we need not go to any Gentile, having the teacher of the Gentiles (as he
styles himself) for our Physician in this kind, who prescribes two directions
for the redress of this dangerous affection; that is, a Caution and a Recipe,
an extirpation of vain glory which is the root of it, and an implanting of
charity, which is the cure of it.

The former we find Gal. 5. Gal. 5.26.
Let us not be desirous of vainglory, p^ovoking one another, envying one
another. It is the fruit of vainglory: for it cannot be, but that he who
strives to exalt himself, must envy the estare of those whom he thinks his
competitors in glory: and therefore the way not to envy another is to think
humbly of thy self; and by reflecting on thy infirmities, to esteem another
better than thy self; which is that the Apostle calls, Phil. 2.3. Romans 12.10.
ver. 3.
In honor preferring one another: But he that maligneth the praise of another,
as undeserving it, thinks more highly of himself then he ought to think, and
falls into the Pharisees sin of despising others: Luke 18.9.
and should God take him at this advantage, he would be so far from claiming an
inheritance with the Saints in light, Col. 1.12. Luke 12.46. Joh. 5.44.
that he might rather fear his portion with the hypocrites, and unbelievers;
for with their very sin our Savior charge him; How can ye bel^eve that
receive honor one of another? Col. 3.14. 1 Cor. 13.4


The other direction is, to put on charity, which envieth not; for it cannot
be, that he should envy another felicity, that is ready to impart his own
felicity unto another, as unto a member of that body whereof Christ is the
head; Col. 1.18. Ephesians. 5.29. 2 Cor. 12.26.
for no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it,
even as the Lord the Church; and if one member he honored, all the members
rejoice with it; Romans 12.5 Bnsil Hexam. Hom. 7.
Now we are all one body in Christ, and every one members one of another,
(...), says St. Basil, The Viper being to accompany with the Lamprey, is said
to empty himself of his poison for the love of that soul conjunction: How much
more should the spouse of Christ, cast away all her venomous rancour for the
reverence of so holy an union! This is a great mystery; Ephesians. 5.32.
but I speak concerning Christ and the Church.

To furnish you with particular remedies befitting the several kinds of your
diseases; If thou see thy neighbor advanced above thy self by favor,
Nazianz.
titles, or preferment, look on the Disciples of Christ, and there you find one
called a rock, another leaning on his Masters breast, without the indignation
of the other Disciples.

Or if thou see another abound in Learning, Judgment, or the like abilities,
be not so envious to thy self, as to be vexed at that which may better, or
inform thee, if thou would make a right use thereof; and if thou hear him
defend the truth with applause of others, let not a perverse emulation tempt
thee to maintain the contrary, 2 Timothy 2.14. Naz. (...). Eccles. 3.1.
to the subverting of the hearers: For there is (says a great Divine) (...); a
time even to be overcome, as to every thing beside: and it is better to be
honestly vanquished, than to obtain a wicked victory, Iam. 3.16.
with the shipwreck of thy Religion; For where envying and strife is, there is
confusion, and every evil work. 2 Pet. 1.5.6.


Or if thou see him endued with spiritual graces, as Virtue, Knowledge,
Temperance, Patience, and the rest commended by St. Peter to our Christian
practice; Here is matter for thy godly emulation, but not for thy bitter
envy^ng; Jam. 3.14.
thou should earnestly strive to match him in the exercise of holy duties;
but not to damp his alacrity by malicious detraction, according to our Saviors
precept; Matt. 5.26.
Our light is so to shine before men, that they seeing our good works, may
glorify our Father which is in Heaven. And shall thy envy be the cloud to dimn
the light of others works, and thereby hinder so much glory as might redound to
thy heavenly Father? Chrysostom.
Although such a man were thy enemy, yet because God by him is glorified, he
ought to be made thy friend; and now because that by him God is glorified,
shall he therefore be thine enemy? O remember whose business it is he is about!
and rather encourage his faint endeavors with the addition of thy service;
that so thou may help to effect what thou daily prayest for, that Gods will
may be done on earth by thee, and thy fellow servants, as it is in Heaven by
the glorious Angel.

Or lastly, If nothing here below can quench thine envy, where thou think
thy self to be scanted with the possession of others; look on those things that
are above, that eternal inheritance with the Saints in light, which is not
lessened, but enlarged by the number of possessors, who shall he sure of room
enough in those many Mansions: Joh. 14.2.
so many as shall be accounted worthy to enjoy them; But then here lies the
fear on thy part, Rev. 21.27
There shall in no wise enter any thing that defiles; Gal. 5.20.
and thus do all the works of the flesh; among which are named emulations,
strife, envyings; whereof the Apostle warns the Galatians with some vehemence,
that (...), they which practice such things, Crellius in hunc locum.
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: To inherit Gods Kingdom, is only for
those that be the Children of God; that is, such as be reformed after his
Image: which he comes short of, or abolisheth in himself whosoever does the
works of the flesh. The Corinthians are roundly told as much, 1 Cor. 3.3.
For whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions; are ye not
carnal, and walk as men? that is, as natural unregenerate men, who are
described by the Apostle to be full of envy, and malignity: and such were we
all by nature, Romans 1.29 2 Cor. 6.11 Romans 6.4.2.
but we are washed, but we are buried with Christ by baptism into death: and
how shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? 1 Pet. 4.3. Tit.
3.3.
The time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the
Gentiles, when we lived in malice, and envy, hateful, Romans 13 11 13.
and hating one another. It is now high time to awake out of sleep, and to walk
honestly as in the day, -- not in strife and envying: Si recesserunt de pectore
tuo tenebrae, etc. -- as St. Cyprian hence infers, If darkn^ss be dispel'd
from thy heart, if the beams of day have shined on thy soul, and thou art
become a child of the light, and of the day, follow the things which are of
Christ who is the light and the day. Quid in zeli tenebras ruis? Why do thou
rush into thine old Egyptian darkness, and enwrap thy self again in the night
of envy, and with the damp of that earthly passion extinguish the light of
peace and charity? 1 John 2.9.11.
St. John has showed the danger of it, He that says he is in the light, and
maligneth his brother, is in darkness even until now, and walks in darkness,
and knows not whither he goes, because that darkness has blinded his eyes.
Vadit enim nescius in Gehennam. Both St. Cyprian, and Austin are bold to say
it; for he goes blinfold the way to hell, and falls headlong on his ruin:
as having forsaken the light of Christ, Luke 1.79.
which should guide his feet into the way of peace.

To be secured from this danger, John 8.12.
there is no other way then to follow him who is the light of the world; and
that by observing what he did, and taught, who pressed nothing so much as
charity while he lived on earth; and dying, left us an example, 1 Pet. 2.21
that we should herein follow his steps: Were it not for this, he could have
saved us, Naz. Orat. 9.
(...) (as Nazianzen speaks) by His will alone, as He made the whole frame of
the world only by his commanding word; but that he would show how much he
loved us, and would thereby excite us to love one another.

This love of Christ should constrain us to walk in love, as he also loved us,
2 Co^. 5.14 Ephesians. 5.2.
and gave himself for us an offering to God for a sweet smelling savor. All
our bitterness should be allayed with the sweetness of what he has done, and
suffered for us; Exodus 15.25.
as the waters of Mara were made sweet by the tree that was cast into them.
Lignum crucis is of that virtue, that if we apply it as we should, Heb. 12, 15
no root of bitterness could ever spring up in our minds to trouble us; it
would prove the mortifying of our lusts and affections, the crucifying of this
body of sin.

Romans 6.5.
Now if we have been thus planted together in the likeness of his death, we
should be also in the likeness of his resurrection, 2 Pet. 1.11.
and so an entrance shall be ministered unto us into his everlasting Kingdom.

Romans 5.8. Col. 1.20.
Unto which, He bring us in his due time, that gave his Son for us when we were
enemies, to make our peace by the blood of his cross.

And in the mean time, -- O thou great householder of Heaven and Earth, that
have called us into thy vineyard, to work out our salvation by faith and love,
(...). 12.6.
according to the grace that is given unto us; give us evermore of that grace
to enable our souls and bodies, (...) 12.
to bear the burden and heat of the day; all the difficulties that shall
befall us by thy providence, during the course of this mortal life. And if it
shall please thee to impart any of thy special graces to our fellow laborers;
so content us with thy self, that we may not envy them, but glorify thee, O
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, One God eternal.

Amen.
SERMON. IIII.
PHIL. 3.21. Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto
his glorious body.


OUr Savior has got the victory over Hell, Hos. 13.14 with 1 Cor. 15.54.
(...). etc. Cypril. Cat. 14. Heb. 2.10. Acts 5.31. John 14.2. Dr. Donns
Devotions expostulat. 14. Ephesians. 2.19, with Heb. 12.22.
and the Grave, and well may we be at the solemnity of a Triumph: a Triumph of
joy, and exaltation, though not of glory and fruition; this we look for
hereafter. It was necessary, that the Captain and Prince of our salvation
should go before us into Heaven, both to prepare a place for us, and us also
for the place; we are not ready to go yet a while. It is not meet we should
come thither in our old cloths, these course and soiled bodies; this were to
lessen the glory of our Saviors triumph: they must be new fashioned and
refined ere we appear in his train; yet in the mean time we are Citizens of the
heavenly Jerusalem, and have our title and interest therein, if we do not
forfeit them by our own fault: (...) -- says the Apostle, Our Nos ut municipes
coelorum nos gerimus secundu^ Beza^ (...) municipium potius quam c^nversationem
significat. Gallice, la Borgefia, () Jus civitatis nostrae in coelo est, sea
cives sumus coeli, non terrae Zanch.
corporation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body.

A strange, and happy alteration, from misery unto felicity, to be taken out of
the dust, and crowned with celestial glory; and yet such shall be the honor of
our body at the last resurrection: it shall be raised out of humble corruption
into high and glorious immortality; of which blessed expectation, my text is
both the promise and assurance, wherein you may see comprised all the means to
effect this mavelous work; the exalting of our body: First, The Artificer
Christ, employed in this Relative, Qui? Who? Secondly, the miraculous manner of
his working, agreeable unto so powerful an Agent, transfigurabit, shall change.
Thirdly, the matter, or subject of this work, Corpus nostrum, Our body, and
that, though never so unlikely to appearance in being humile, a vile body,
Fourthly, the pattern, or ensample whereunto he will work, Ejus corpori
glorioso, his glorious body. Lastly, the project, or intent of this work, Vt
conform fiat, that it may be fashioned like unto it.


So, we have every thing requisite unto the performance of this work, the
Artificer, the Matter, the manner, the Pattern, the Project, that may now serve
to the raising of our faith, as hereafter to the raising of our bodies: while
we make each several circumstance the Object of our consideration, beginning
with the first, the Artificer, Qui? who?

First Part The Artificer.
It is not curiosity, but gratitude, to enquire after our Benefactor, and him
so great a One, as the Repairer of our bodies, whom we may find with as much
ease, as satisfaction, by reflecting on the last words before, where we have
displayed with accurare heraldry, the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ; verse 20.
And why in such plenty of Titles? But to intimate unto us both the might, and
mystery of our deliverer, God, and Man; who, as he began, will consummate our
Tali auxilio, et natura nostra indigebat, et causae, ut reparare humanum genus
nec sine majestate posset humilitas, nec sine humilitate majestas. Aug. de tem.
33.

Oratione 3. in resurrect. Auctor resurrectionis non alius statui potest, quam
Deus natura auctor; longissime enim exuperat omnem naturae virtutem. Voss. de
resur. these. 20. P. Mart. in 2. Reg. 4.


redemption in his twofold nature, both as Christ the Lord in his divine, and
as Jesus a Savior in his humane nature, showing in the one his hability, in
the other his propriety to raise us: But both ways the raising belongs unto
him, more eminently as he is God, for who fitter to repair the body then he
that made it? (...); as St. Gregory Nyssen speaks, He best knows how to mend
his own work that is ruined, and to restore it unto its former integrity. This
is the Act of his Wisdom, but it is the Act also of his Power, and that so
transcendent, as no power beside is able to effect it. Not Number. 4.
Plato's revolution of the Spheres, nor et 62.
Origens disposition in the dust, that might lie for ever dispersed, did not
God recall it into a body: So it is this way the Prerogative of the Deity, and
thus, it is common unto the whole Trinity; who Singulorum in trinitate opera
trinitas operatur; unicuiqne operanti cooperantibus duobus, conveniente in
tribus agendi concordia, non in uno deficiente efficacia peragendi. Aug de ver.
dom. sermon. 11.
as they are one in Essence and nature, so they are equal in working; But it
belongs more peculiarly unto Christ, as he is Man; for by man came also the
resurrection of the dead. 1 Cor. 15.21.

First, by the virtue of his humane nature united personally unto the Deity,
wherewith Caro suo ministerio divinitatis operibus inserviit, et humanitas
factae est organon per quod (...) suam operationem exercet. Athanas. in Aur.
ser. 4.
it concurreth as an instrument unto the raising of our bodies; being endued
with a quickening power, conducing to that work; which Power he manifested in
these essays of the resurrection, (those dead that he raised to life, in the
days of his mortal flesh) when he dispatched not the miracle by a Word alone
(as he made the World) but by touching the Bier, Luke 7.14.
to show us thereby (says Theophylact) that his flesh has a quickening virtue,
being married to the Word that quickneth all things. And he will manifest this
power more apparently at the general resurrection, Dan. 12.2.3. with John
5.28.29.
when by the voice of the Son of Man, all that sleep in the dust shall be
awakened, and start up unto Judgment.

In protrept. seu admonitione ad Gentes.
Then again, as by the Virtue, so by the Merits of his humane nature, in his
bitter and bloody passion, whereby He crucified death into life, (as Clemens
strains it (...)) and opened the Kingdom of Heaven unto all believers; That as
the death of the legal High Priest did (...) (as Isidor Pelusiot notes) restore
the casual manslayer unto the Land of his possession: Epist. 109. lib. 3. on
that place in Numbers chap. 35. v. 25.
so the death of our eternal High Priest, will restore us to our heavenly
Country; for having taken away sin, that was Christus per mortem suam peccatum
sustulit quod fuit causa mortis, nemini v. dubium est, quin causa remota
effectum auferatur. Pet. Mart.
the cause of death, life follows of it self, as we may see in the Articles
of our Creed, straight after the forgiveness of sins, comes in, The
resurrection of the body, that cannot long be imprisoned in the Grave, the
ransom once paid for its deliverance: or our Savior should loose thereby the
reward of his sufferings; who had not suffered so much in his body, but that
ours should enjoy the benefit. So that, Tertul. de resurr. carnis
Merito suscitaturus -- we may assume Tertullians confidence; well may he raise
the flesh, that himself was made, and from death, that himself suffered, and
from the grave where himself was laid. Nor need we make d^ubt, but what He has
begun in himself, He will accomplish likewise in us, and raise also our vile
body; the subject of this work. and our next particular.

Second part. The subject.
Had it been our innocent body, such as it was at the first making, it had been
no ordinary preferment; for flesh and blood, the spawn of earth, to inherit the
Kingdom of God. And yet, then it was in its purity, and had some nearer
affinity with Heaven; but for this vile and despicable body, so marred and
disordered by sin; for this to have the glory of a resurrection, is a miracle
as great as the resurrection: you will easily allow of the wondering, if you but
survey the story of its vileness; Tertul. de resur.
In its Original, Ex foecibus terrae, in in Tertullians language, from the
slime and dregs of the earth, no better then the dust we tread on; Nay, worse
since that, Job 14.4 secund. vulgat.
De immundo semine, in Jobs confession, conceived of unclean seed, such as we
even blush to think on; Then in its best estate obnoxious to all the variety of
miseries, as want, diseases, age, deformity, and whatever either injury can
inflict, or weakness suffer; and yet there were some excuse in its weakness,
but it has malignity also, opposing, and Wisd. 9.15.
depressing that which is divine in us with its earthly weight, and obscuring
the splendour of our heavenly spirit: that some Aliud esse inferos negaverunt
quam ipsa corpora, quibus inclusa anima carcerem foedum pa^iatur, etc. Vid.
Macrob somn. Scipionis, lib. 1.
Philosophers in a zealous blasphemy, pronounced it the only hell of the soul,
in which she did not so much live, as take penance; and some Martio Basilides,
Valentin. Manich.
Heretics by a bolder sacrilege, denied it to be Gods own making, and devised
another to be the Creator. But in a more sober detestation you may hear
Nazianzen accusing it by his own experience. Nazian. Orat. 16. de Paup. amore.
(...), that when it flourishes, vexes me with war, and when it languishes,
afflicts me with grief; which I love as a fellow servants, and loath as an
enemy, fly as an impediment, embrace as a companion; If I strive to oppress it,
I want its assistance in good actions, and if I deal friendly with it, I
endanger a rebellion. O wonderful Conjunction, and alienation! what I fear, I
cherish; what I love, I fear: we have here so much to look upon, that we may
forget to look any farther. Post totu^ ignobilitatis elogium, caducae in
originem terram, and cadaveris nomen, and de isto quoque nomine periturae in
nullum inde jam nomen, in omnis vocabuli mortem. Tertull.
And yet the greatest vileness is behind, in its frailty and dissolution: to see
it fall into earth, that earth crumble into dust, that dust vanish into air,
so that now we have nothing to see any further. Act. 17.32.
And can you then blame the Athenians for mocking at the news of a
resurrection? You cannot from the light of nature, but you may from the school
of Christ, which does teach us to our comfort, that our body is neither so
desperate, or ignoble, but it may rise again; Mat. 19.8.
All the vileness is from our selves, A principio non fuit ita; it was not so
from the Creation. It is Corpus nostrae humilitatis, in the text, not It is
Zanchies observation on the place.
the vileness of our body, but the body of our vileness: the vileness is more
ours then the body; The body is Gods, who created it honorable, till we
dishonored it by sin. And yet has it pleased the divine goodness that can
work good out of evil (as it brought light out of darkness) to make even this
vileness serve to our advantage: This weakness to humble us, Admiranda Dei
potentia, ac bonitas, quae illa quoque quae ad contumeliam, and destructionem
videntur tendere, ad suam gloria^, and ad hominum utilitatem convertit. Hyper.
meth. lib. 2. cap. 33.
that when the conceit of our excellency too much exalts us, the sense of our
infirmities may curb and restrain us. This malignity to exercise us, that
having our enemy still at hand to encounter us, we may still be addressed to a
spiritual warfare. This misery to excite us, Praeunte taeli corruptione,
corpora ad novas qualitates accipiendas redduntur idonea, etc. ibid Nam in
massa carnis nostrae qualis nunc est, excellentes illa corporum resuscitatorum
dotes induci, atque inhaerere minime possent: quamobrem morte confumi penitus,
and hac non aliter quam aurum igne purgatur, capacia novarum qualitatum fieri
necesse est; quod and eloquenti similitudine de semine scriptura ostendit. 1
Cor. 15.36.
that we may groan the more earnestly for our adoption, the redemption of our
body. Nay lastly, this corruption to purify us, that we may so become capable
of glorious endowments; when our body shall arise more glorious out of that
dust, in which it seemed to be abolished; for though it be hidden unto sense,
it is not loft unto nature: nor may we call that a perishing, which is only a
retyring. Habet and caro suos sinus interim, as Tertullian had the faith to
discern them. Cum in haec dissolvi videtur, velut in vasa transfunditur; si
etiam ipsa vasa defecerint in suam matricem terram resorbetur, ut rursus ex
illa repraesentetur, de resur. cap. 63.
The body has its receptacle as well as the soul, and though it be dispersed
among the four Elements, it is but laid up in so many vessels, that shall
faithfully restore it at the resurrection. Look but on its Creation, and we
need not doubt of its repairing: that was from the dust, and this is no more.
Pineda in Job.

Quid mirabilius quam in nostra origin and prima formatione ex terra imaginem
and memoria^ nostrae mortis constituisse Deum, rursus in ipsa nostra morte and
reditu in terra^ futurae per resur. nativitatis, and uitae solatiu^ osten^isse.
Greg. Nys. Orat. 3. de res. v.


Then did God prov^de us a type of the resurrection; and as by forming it out
of earth, he presented us with the memory of our death: so by its returning
into earth, he presents us with the hope of a new life. Or if we look on the
excellencies of its creation, we may there find hope of its repairing, the
deliberate Aquin. p. 1. q. 9. art. 4. Genesis 1.26.
contrivance of the Trinity, the divine curiosity of its workmanship, in making
it after the image of its maker, with the marks of sovereignty and dominion. It
is not likely they had been graced with so many prerogatives to lie for ever
abandoned in the grave. Absit ut Deus ingenii sui curam, adflatus sui vaginam,
molitionis suae reginam, liberalitatis suae haeredem. religionis suae
sacerdotem, testimonii sui militem, Christi sui sororem in aeternum distinet
inte itum Tertul. de resur. car.
And yet how little are these to those others in their regeneration? When it
pleases the Almighty to fashion them into weapons of righteousness, Romans 6.13.
1 Cor. 6.15 verse 19.
to incorporate them into members of his Christ, and to build them into Temples
of his spirit? Now can any imagine that these weapons should lie useless in the
grave, or these members divorced f om their body, or these Temples demolished
in the dust? Certainly God is to less jealous of his glory in heaven, then upon
earth; 1 Cor. 6.10.
and when here we glorify him in our bodies, Cum Deus sit Rex gloriae, necesse
est ut cives ejus Regni congruenter vestiantur, imperfectu^ (Psalm 6 verse 5.)
autem vestimentu^ in hominibus est gloria animarum, ^ c. Gal. Paris. de univ.
p. 2.
it is reason that there we should have bodies wherein to glorify him, or else,
he should loose a great part of his glory; for none give him thanks or praise
in the grave. And as God should lose so much of his glory, so we of our
happiness, if our souls only reign in bliss, without the fellowship of their
bodies, that are no less sensible of bliss, convenient unto them. Nay, our
souls being parts only of humane nature, we should be thereby Si enim non
redderentur ipsis corpora sua, non glorificarentur animae ipsae, sud essent
quasi mutilatae quantu^ ad res quaru^ operationes exercentur p r corpora, Gal.
Paris. de univers. p. 2 ca. 21.
no more then half blessed, nor appear so complete Saints, as we are men; but
more imperfect in the state of glory, then we were at the Creation. But let man
fail of his happiness, yet cannot God of his Haec est series and causa
justitiae, ut quoniam corporis animaeque communis est actus, quae animus
cogitavit, corpus effecit, utrumque in judicium veniat, utrum que aut poenae
dedatur, aut gloriae reservetur. Amb. de fide resur. Vt ex societate, and
clientela quam reddiderit animae caro, aliquid ei commodi proveniat. Cyp. de
resur. Et in quo convenientius incorruptibili corpore laetabuntur, quam in quo
corruptibili gemuerunt. Aug. de civ. 22.26.
justice; which rendering unto every one according to to his work, will not
suffer the body to be unrewarded, but as it has assisted the soul in her
labors, in watching and fasting, and praying, Corpus nostrum.
so to accompany the soul in her recompense, the joys of Heaven. And that not
any other, but Corpus nostrum, Our body. The same to reap the fruit, Sicut
aequum est, ut corpus quod fuit instrumentu^ Animae ad opera justitiae. sit
particeps beatitud. ipsius, ita congruum est, ut pars, n. oculus, per quem
sanctus la chrymas compunctionis effudit, etiam Christi visione fruatur. See
Job. 19.27. Suarez.
that sowed the hope of salvation. These eyes that have smarted with tears of
compunction, to be delighted with objects of joy; These hands that have been
open in charity, to be filled with plenteous blessings; These bowels that have
yearned in compassion, to be refreshed with cheerful pleasures, which otherwise
they had all done in vain, Acquiesce homo ipsum te futurum esse in carne tua,
ne tu ipse non sis, si in carne surrexeris aliena. Chrysol.

Si distincta sit materia quam informat, erit potius illa quaedam animae
transmigratio. Suarez.

Ad sananda infidelium cordium vulnera, clavorum and lanceae erant servata
vestigia etc. Leo de Ascens. Ser. 1.

Ipsa facit testimonia sui corporis, suae resurr. indicia, quae sue fuerant
contumelia passionis Chrysol. 76.


and so the bodies of Christians were of all men's most miserable; nor should
their souls be in much better condition, that by taking a strange body, should
set up another person, and by that means incur (poor souls) the
transmigration of Pythagoras. But our Savior has quit us of this fear, by
retaining the print of those wounds that he received at his passion; both to
show, that his body is the same that it was, and ours to be as his, at the
resurrection; the same that it was in reality, though mended in conditions, by
the power of Christ, who shall change them; The miraculous manner of his
working.

Third part. The Manner.
HE that has so much subtilty, as to divide a moment, might give you a
description of this change, allowing it a place between the resurrection and
glory. 1 Cor. 15.5. (...) (1) brevissimo tempore absolvenda. V. Voss. These. 27.
d^sp.
But when all shall be done in the twinkling of an eye, (be done in less space
then we say it now) Our best understanding thereof is to confound it with the
rest, making all three but one Act: The rising, changing, and glorifying of our
body. Yet, though we know not the doing of it, we must believe it to be done,
which is so requisite unto glory, that none can be glorified without it: V.
Aug. de Civit. lib. 20. cap. 20. Compendio mortis per demutationem expuncta
concurrent cum re surgentibus. Tertul. de resurr: cap. 41.
not those that shall be found alive at the last day, who shall rather escape
death, the condition of Mortals, then this changing, the condition of the
blessed: For though we shall not all sleep, yet we shall all be changed. 1 Cor.
chapter 15, V. Pet. Mar. M. 2. etc. 4 Number. 62 and Voss. These. 5. disp. 2. V. Greg.
Moral. lib. 14. cap. 29 V. Peltii Harmon. art. 22. paragr 3. and Besleri examen
physica Photin. Ser. 1. princip. 5.


All shall be changed: That is agreed on, but in what manner they shall be
changed, has divided opinions. Some imputing this change unto the substance of
our bodies, which (in disdain of this gross composition) they would promote
into an aerie, or celestial nature. An error once committed, and reclamed by
Eutychius; but resumed after him by the Socinians, that with the resurrection
of an old error, deny the resurrection of the old body, nay thereby make it no
body at all, but a mere spirit; or which is more prodigious, (...), a bodiless
body, no less fantastic, then the minds that conceive it.

Non possum dicere o tristes ineptias! ridicula sunt. Sen. epist. 114. V.P.
Mart. ibid.

Number. 64. Dan. 12.2.

Si materia corporis resurgentis non esset ejusdem specici, compositum ex illa
non solum non esset idem homo, verum nec homo, sed monstrum. Suarez.


Others as ridiculously, ascribed this change unto the figure of our body, that
in stead of this humane shape, it shall be round, and orbicular, not thinking
it enough to shine as the Stars, unless it be molded like unto them. (A
metaphor well befitting the Poet) But this were to rise Monsters rather then
men, and (to the infamy of heaven) to make us more deformed by glory.

We need go no farther for our direction herein, then that, V Gerhardi loc.
com. post Pet. Mart.
that was the occasion of their mistake; which is the word here, (...) that
signifies a change, not of the substance, or the figure, but of the
qualilities, such as be not worth the keeping; It is but (...) the habit only,
1 Cor. 15.53. Gloria superveniens naturae, ipsam non destruit sed illustrat. G.
Par. de tentat and resist.
not (...) the body, that shall thereby be changed; which our Apostle
expresses elsewhere, by a phrase of investing; This mortal shall put on
immortality; not as a flame to devour, but as a garment to cloth, and adorn
it. Glory, though it exalt, yet will not destroy nature, nor take away ought of
her entirenesse, but amend her imperfections. It shall be still the same body
in essence, though different in properties. As the iron that gloweth with fire,
Sicut lanasi color purpureo tingatur, manet quidem pristinae, sed est
pulchrior quam antea. Chrisost
is the same that it was before, and the wool no other that is stained with
purple. And since our Savior has demonstrated this truth in himself; it is
not boldness, but piety, to make him our Example who in the Mat. 17 2.
Splendore tali referebat speciem nostrae resurrectionis, and formam, quia
resurgentes per Christum, Christi mutantur in gloriam, Chrysolog. Ser. 74.
preluded heavenly glory of his transfiguration, when his face did shine as the
Sun, retained then the same feature, and lineaments, to be b known of Peter.
And in these many Epiphanies of himself, after his rising, it was but the usual
substance of of his body that he presented unto his disciples; which he proved
by the evidence of his flesh and bones, and exposed it unto the discussion of
their ablest senses. That we need not fear to loose any thing by our change, no
more then he did by his, as not doubt of the certainty of our change,
Transfigurabit in the future tense.
though so long after his, though his be in the time past, so many ages agone;
and ours be in the future, we know not when: Ille tertia die ab ariditate
mortis viruit; On that in Number. chapter 17. v. 8.
It is St. Gregory's allusion. He indeed like the rod of Aaron soon
reflourished into life, showing the power of his divinity, by the renewing of
his body. But we like those rods of the other tribes, must lie withered in the
grave, expecting until the last day, the spring of a resurrection. And good
reason we should so; if he as the 1 Cor. 15.20. V.P. Mart. in 2. Reg. 4 Number 32.
and Gerhardi loc. com.
first fruits is gone before us, that we as the residue, stay till the harvest,
that he in all things may have the pre-eminence, as in time, and order, so in
virtue, and dignity. His body that was all pure, and immaculate, had nothing at
all to hinder the rising; but ours that was born in sin, and has drunk
iniquity like water, must be content to lie in the grave, to extract its
impurity: there waiting all the days of its appointed time, until our change
come Job cha. 14. ver. 14.
: And come it will one day, with the coming of our Savior, who will recompense
the delay of his coming with the fullness of his bounty: changing this same
body of vileness, into a body full of glory, even after the likeness of his
glorious body; which is the pattern or ensample whereunto he will work; Ejus
corpori glorioso; his glorious body.

Fourth part. The pattern.
THen, a body he has in heaven; and did not leave it behind him, when he went
into glory. It was but a dreaming phancie of Non ergo in aliam naturam mutatum
est, sed mansit divina gloria plenum, and spargens lucis radios, cui sanctorum
corpora erunt conformia. Theod. dialog. 2.

Seleuciani ex Ps. 19.4. 2 Cor. 5.16.


some, that he had bequeathed it unto the Sun, because of that of the Psalmist,
in Sole posuit tabernaculum; as the vulgar reads it; He has set his tabernacle
in the Sun; Or that he had swallowed it up by his divinity, because of that of
the Apostle, We know Christ no more after the flesh: As if the flesh did
misbecome him in his glorious estate, and were therefore in their rigid
construction, to be excluded from entering heaven, which is a treason beyond
that of Judas; V Gerh. loc. com.
even to rob Christ of himself, by robbing him of that nature, which he made
himself. But it is as easy for our faith to restore, Resurrectio Domini non
finis carnis sed commutatio fuit, nec virtutis augmento consumpta substantia
est: Qualitas transiit, non natura defecit, and merito dicitur, Caro Christi in
eo statu, quo fuerit nota, nesciri, quia nihil in ea passibile, nihil remansit
in ea infirmum, ut et ipsa sit per essentiam, and non sit ipsa per gloriam. Leo
de res. Ser. 1.
what their impiety would violate, and more catholic to to avouch, that the
Body of our Lord is not ended, but refined with glory; nor has changed the
propriety, but the mortality into the state, and wonder of incorruption; By
means whereof it now appears in no less Excellency, then before in
humility, and is no more a dishonor, but a glory to our Savior; serving him
as a Trophy of that conquest which he won in his flesh, nay as a Triumph of
that conquest of that conquest which he won in weakness; Secura estore ca^o
and sanguis, usurpastis and coelu^ and regnum Dei in Christo. Tert. de resur.
carnis.
in weak flesh prevailing over the power of darkness. And as thus it serves to
his glory, so as much unto our benefit, to confirm in us the hope of a like
advancement: that having (as Tertullian styles it) depositum carnis, a pledge
of our flesh in heaven, we may expect our own to come after, Ita dubitandum
non est de consortio gloriae, sicut dubitandum non est de communione naturae.
L^o ce resur. Ser. 2.

Anima Christi a principio suae conceptionis fuit gloriosa per fruitionem
divinitatis perfectam; Est a. dispensative factum, ut ab ab animae gloria non
redundaret in corpus, etc. Aquin. and 3. q. 54. art. 3. v. Geth. loc. com.

Et Melch. Cani loc. theol. lib. 12. cap. 13.


not doubting of a fellowship in glory, as we doubt not of a communion in
nature; A communion still real in substance, as before time in misery, while
he conversed here on earth. For though his soul was originally glorious by the
fruition of the deity, yet for the work of our redemption he restrained that
glory from flowing out into his body: For who had bin accessory to his passion,
if his divinity had brightly shined through his flesh, as one time it did on
the Mount? But having once accomplished that mystery by his death, then
straight way his soul at his resurrection diffused her glory into the body,
although the body appeared not glorious unto the eyes of his disciples; (...),
ad astruendam carnis veritatem fidemque resurectionis. Jo. Damasc. lib. 4. cap.
1.

Quod manducavit, potestatis fuit, non egestatis. Aug. de temp. Sermon. 147.


as being unable to endure so bright a luster. But yet, then was his body
discharged of all mortal affections; For in that he took food, it was not out
of humane necessity, but divine dispensation, and done with like miracle, as he
fasted in the wilderness. Neither was it for the refreshment of an hungry body,
but for the proof of a true body; or (if you will) not to nourish his own
flesh, Cibo non indigebat corpus immortalitate donatum, sed cum viventium in
hac vita proprium sit edere, necssario Dominus carnis resurrect. per cibum, and
potum demanstravit dubitantibus de ejus veritate. Theod: dial: 2.

Sic voluit dubitantibus exhibere cicatrices vulnerum, ut sanant vulnus
incredulitatis. Aug: Ser: de temp. 147.

Non ex impotentia curandi, cicatrices servarit, sed ut in perpetuum victoriae
suae circumferret triumphum. Uener. Beda.

Mysterio redemptionis peracta statim Anima in resurrectione, gloriam in corpus
derivavit, and ita factum est corpus gloriosum. Aquin. 3. q. 53. art. 3.


but the faith of his disciples And to like purpose were his wounds, ad sananda
vulnera, (as St. Austin applies them) to cure the wounds of their unbeleif;
neither were they any tokens of his weakness, but rather ensigns of his glory,
in witness and remembrance of his noble victory. But being once ascended into
heaven, He no longer concealed his glory, but suffered it to stream forth into
his body in all glorious abundance; honoring it with all the graces that the
deified na ure can receive, and the divine nature bestow; Graces surpassing the
conceit of man, and how much more the expression! yet what he has discovered
that was caught up into the third Heaven, we may safely report; 1 Cor. 12.2
being the gifts of Christ's glorious body, wherein ours shall be fashioned like
unto it, which is the project, and intent of this work.

Fifth Part. The Project.
IT was the privilege of Man at the Creation to be made after Gods image; but
Communicatur homini Dei similitudo per modu^ imaginis secund. mente^ tantum.
secundum alias v. parts per modum vestigii (Ephesians. 4.23, 24.) Aquin. p. 1. q.
93. art. art. 6.
that was chiefly in his soul: His body had little share in that likeness, and
soon forfeited that little by sin, unto death, and corruption; yet see the rare
mercy of God! that for the repair of his workmanship, became an incarnate
Example, that so, the body as well as the soul might partake of the divine
similitude. Thus is the body more Per verbi hypostaticam unionem, (...). Greg.
de Dei imag.
honored at the repair, then it was at the creation, as the likeness
wherewith it is honored, is likewise more honorable. That was only by the
word, but this by the Deitas enim est ceu fons unde fluunt omnia bona, vita,
and salus, sed caro atque humanitas est quasi canalis per quem ad nos
derivantur. Z nch in Ephesians.
company of Christ, arising from the vision of his glorious body. That only
consisted in some fading resemblanblances, but this in permanent Dos est
perpetuus animae and corporis ornatus vitae sufficiens, in aeterna beatitudine
jugiter perseverans. Aquin. suppl. q. 95. art. 1.
endowments; and those so precious, that all the treasures and riches of Nature
are too poor to express them.

When the body shall be attired in these Veluti quibusda^ ornamentis Christus
Electorum suorum corpora ditabit.
ornaments, whereof St. Paul gives the sum, and Estius in 4. sent.
Schoolmen the terms; in 1 Cor. 15.^
impassibility, being Incorruption. v. 42. Romans 8.21. and 23.
delivered from the bonage of corruption into the freedom of inviolable
eternity. In Glory. ver. 43. shining forth as the Sun. Mat. 13.43.
clarity, so resplendently beautiful, as none but a glorified eye can behold
it. In Power, ibid. so as to meet Christ in the air. 1 These. 4, 17.
Agility, answering the soul in motion as easily as her own thoughts, and with
like expedition. Verse. 44. Vt sit simile spiritui, non vertatur in eum Aquin.
suptq. 83.
In spirituality, becoming so conformable unto the spirit, as if it were even
changed into it: when we shall be no no more subject to any bodily encumbrance,
Mat. 22.30
more then the blessed Angels, (but more wonderfully they) in the truth of a
body, be without the infirmities. O this were a transformation worth the study
of Lib. de restituenda juventute.
Paracelsus; though not to attempt it on earth, but to expect it in heaven. A
transfortation really effecting what he vainly pretended, the enfranchisement
of our bodies into youth, and immortality; In contemplation of these joys, how
may we anticipate heaven! and be tranported thither in our souls, by
meditating on the glory of our body, that it shall be not only fashioned into a
glorious body, but fashioned like unto Christ's glorious body, (...), Chrysostom.
in locum.
as that Chrysostom repeats it with astonishment, fashioned like unto that
body, that sits at the right hand of the Father, like unto that which is
adored by glorious Angels, and attended with heavenly Spirits: that which is
above all Principalities, Power, and Dominions! Then to consider the disparity
in the subject glorified; that it is (...), (...), and no other.
this vile body, and none other, that is enobled thus with glory. This weak and
impotent body so armed with impassibility; Revel. 21.4. and 7.6.

De Civit. 22.19. Partium congruentia cum coloris suavitate.

-- Iam ineffabili facilitate, ut sit ei gloriae, quod fuit sarcinae. Pet.
Lomb. lib. 4. did. 50.


that what was liable before to all evils, should now be liable unto none. This
dull, and heavy body so quickened w^^h agility, as to become as a wing to the
soul, that was here a burden! This poor and indigent body so enriched with
spirituality, as to bestow it self wholly in praise, De Civit. lib. 22. c 30.
In secula seculorum laudabunt te. Psalm. 8.4.
and thanksgiving. Here we may have leave to break out with the Psalmist, Lord!
whaet is man, Psalm. 8.4. and v. 5
that thou should be so mindful of him, that by a glorified body have made
him, not a little lower only, Humanam, non angelicam naturam, and eam stola
immortalitat. glorificans, vexit super omnes coelos, super omnes choros
Angelorum, super Cherubin, and Seraphin, collocans ad dextram suam, hanc
laudant Angeli adorant dominationes, and omnes virtutes coelorum tremunt super
se hominem Deum. Aug. medit. cap. 15.
but so much higher then the Angels, who shall not disdain, but reverence our
nature, which they behold thus crowned with d^gnity, thus preferred in its
worse part, the body, to be like unto Christ's glorious body; like unto it at
least in proportion, though not in Corpus noster conformabitur corpori Christi
in gloria secundum similitudinem, non secundum aequalitatem. Aquin. sup. q. 92.
art. 3.
equality, or in Theodorets distinction, like unto it (...), in the kind,
though not (...), in the degree of glory: wherein the body of our Savior shall
far differ from ours, as ours shall in some sort each from other; They shall
not all be alike glorious, in this glorious likeness. For as the Sun, though
with equal bounty he diffuse his beams on all sides, yet is more dimly, Ex
inaequalitate sanctificationis necessario inaequalis sanctorum dignitas
coelestis efficitur, non quidem ex merito operanti, sed ex benignitate
miserentis qui coronat munera sua, and gratiam pro gratia remunerabit. Morton.
Apologia.
or brightly represented according to the object that he enlightens; appearing
otherwise in Glass, and Crystal, and Diamond: So the Sun of glory, though he
impart his splendour alike unto all the blessed society, yet it is diversely
received among them, according to their several capacities; which proceeds
not from the merits of the receiver, but the favor of the Rewarder, who
gratifies those gifts that himself bestowed, and accumulates the grace of
sanctity, -- Sicut nunc non invident Archangelis Angeli caeteri, tanquam nolit
esse unusquisque quod non accepit. -- Sic itaque habebit donum alius alio
minus, ut hoc quoque donum habeat, ne velit amplius. Aug. de civit. l^b. 22.
cap. 30.
with the grace of glory. Nor shall this diversity be any motive of envy in
those glorious Inhabitants, when he that has less then another, shall have so
much, that he shall desire no more; not any that awaketh up after Christ's
likeness, but shall be satisfied therewith. That is Gods part, and so no fear
of the performance; but then something is required on our parts, to attain unto
this likeness: and that is by another likeness to conform our selves here
unto him, by the likeness of his life, in the practice of good works, Romans
6.5. Gal. 5.24. 1 John 3.3.
and by the likeness of his death, in the crucifying of our lusts, for every
one that has this hope, purifyeth himself, even as he is pure. 1 John 3. 2
Cor. 7.1.


Leaving therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of the flesh, and spirit, and prepare for this glorious
conformity, by an holy conversation; Remembering that they are those Every one
to receive the things done in his body. 2 Cor. 5.10.

Vt ab omnibus offensionibus resurgentes, ad illam incorruptib glorificandae
carnis resurpervenire mereamur in Christo Dom. Leo de resur. Ser. 1.


bodies, in which we are to receive the fruit of our labors; which being vile
by their native impurity, O let us not make them more vile, by our voluntary
transgressions, and so more unworthy of the glory that shall be revealed.
Neither consuming them with envy, nor defiling them with lust, nor corrupting
them with intemperance; but disposing them by religious discipline unto that
glorious alteration.

Iam renati in Ch isto, and vocati ab eo ad societat. immort. vitae, and
gloriae, totis viribus ad illam aspiremus, ac portemus imaginem Christi
coelestem, ut coelest. hic vitam ineamus, etc.
And as we have borne the image of the earthly Adam by the society of sinning;
so let us bear the image of the heavenly, in the imitation of his
righteousness: by fashioning our selves (so near as we may) like unto our
blessed Savior, like him in impassibility, by our hardiness amidst the
miseries of this world; like him in charity, by our good works shining before
men; like him in agility, by our readiness in holy actions; and like him in
spirituality, by mortifying the deeds of the body.

That so, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, 1 Cor. 3.18
we may may be changed into the same image, from glory to glory: when the King
of glory shall once more descend from heaven for the perfecting of our
redemption; and where as before, for the justifying of our souls, Creator
universitatis qui pro animabus justificandis, humilis ante venerat and
occultus, pro te glorificando, o misera caro, sublimis veniet, and manifestus,
etc. Ber. Ser. 6. sup. missus est.
he came obscured in humility, he shall then for the glorifying of our bodies,
appear in full majesty, coming in the clouds of heaven; when Angels shall be
his forerunners, that with the voice of a trumpet, 1 These. 4.17.
shall rowze this vile body out of the dust, to meet the Lord in the air, and
to follow him into his Kingdom.

Unto which exalt us O Jesu, by the virtue and merits of thy resurrection,
(...), unus occultus, qui est sicut pluvia in vellus, and alter illustris qui
est futurus. In primo adventu fasciis involutus est in praesepio, in altero
circumdabitur lumine sicut vestimento; In priore sustinuit pudoris crucem
contemptus, in altero veniet cum exercitu Angelorum gloriosus. Cyril. Catech.
that our bodies may communicate with our souls in the triumph of happiness;
to be the monuments of thy power, of thy mercy, of thy glory in heaven: That
our souls and bodies united in bliss, may be united in praising thee; even
thee, our Lord Jesus Christ, the Creator, Redeemer, and Glorifyer of our souls
and bodies.

Amen.
SERMON. V.
PSALM. 116.12. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward
me?


A Proposal very seasonable at what time soever; while men are receivers (and
such still they are) it is fit they should think of rendering, of rendering
somewhat for benifits received. And not only seasonable, but also necessary in
these times of ours, when more benefits are received, and yet less rendered now
then ever: for whereas men in all times have been charged with ingratitude,
When they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful. Romans
1.21. 2 Timothy 3.2.
the Jews in their time by the Prophets every where in their writings, the
Gentiles in their time by the Apostle, Rom 1.21. we Christians are beyond
either in our time; Our time is marked out by St. Paul for the very time of
ingratitude, 2 Timothy 3.2. In the last days (and they are these) Men shall be
(...) unthankeful; not only give no thanks, but have no thanks in them to give;
be altogether void of any mind thereunto, and therefore in these perilous times
(as the Apostle there calls them) it behooves every one to look unto himself,
and to consider with the Psalmist of Quid retribuam, What shall I render, etc.

David obtained, although from what danger, appears not in the Text, whether
from Saul his Father, or Absolon his Son, but one of them it was, and a great
one it was, even from the sorrows of death, and the power of hell, v. 3. And
accordingly was his gratitude. He will not rush hastily on a recompense, but
deliberates which were the best way, that he may more solemnly perform it: and
the more to increase his thankfulness for this one deliverance, he sets all
Gods benefits before him, Quid pro omnibus, etc.

The whole verse is vox onerati, Sum. Bernard. in Psalm. 91 Sermon. 15. Division.
(as St. Bernard terms it) the speech of one burdened with Gods blessings,
and troubled (as it were) in himself, that he had nothing to requite them; But
to view it more distinctly, at the first sight, it gives you the prospect of
two main parts; that is, David's gratitude, and Gods beneficence: That in the
first words, What shall I render. This in the latter, for all his benefits;
(although this that is last in order, is first in nature, Gods munificence is
the cause of David's thankfulness)

These two main parts divide themselves into several members, One as many as
the other; so as we see in the natural body the members answer each to other.

In the former we have 1. The consultation; Qui d what. 2. The Act, retribuam,
render. 3. The Receiver, I, that is, David. 4. The Donour, Domino, the Lord.


In the latter likewise the same number. 1. The motive, Benefits. 2. The
quality, Ejus, his benefits. 3. The quantity, Omnia, All. 4. The relation,
supra me, toward me, or upon me.


Then last, that we may find an head for these members; that our discourse be
not (...), like a body without an head, we shall sum up the whole in the duty
of our selves; and see what we also are to render for the benefits toward us.
I begin with the consultation, Quid, what?

quid of consultation, what he were best do. If he had gone with the world, no
need of consulting then: a few words of course would serve the turn well
enough, Luke 18 11
at most, that slight complement of the Pharisee, God I thank thee, and no
more: But David is of another mind, he makes it a business of meditation, calls
a Parliament within himself, musters up all the powers of his soul, that he
may do it to some purpose; in the mean time thinks it better to remain in Gods
debt, then to repay unworthily. It was his custom still at the receipt of a
new benefit, to study for a new praise, all his Psalms are so many monuments
of his deliberate thankfulness, that we may see it is not enough to thank God
ex tempore. Levit. 7.12
And it seems God intended no less by appointing a sacrifice of thanksgiving,
but that it should be done with solemnity, as sacrifices are wont to be, and it
may appear more expressly by his manner of appointing it. First for the rank of
it, it was one of the kind of peace offerings, whereof a vow was the other,
and so both ways does intimate unto us a deliberateness in the doing of it;
both as it is put under the one, and as it is joined with the other. 1, As it
is put under the title of peace offerings, that it should be done leisurely,
and maturely, as in time of peace things are done, not hastily, and
tumultuarily, as in time of war. 2. As it is joined with a vow, that it
should be performed with like heed, and foresight, as vows ought to be, not
rashly and inconsiderately, without regarding what we are about.

Then for the matter of the sacrifice, besides the Cakes and the Wafers, Verse
13.
it was to be of leavened bread, which required some time for the preparation;
could not be done of a sudden: and besides too, in leaven we know there is
salt, which was the seasoning of all sacrifices in the old Testament, but is a
tipe of wisdom, and discretion in the new.

And all this to teach us a due care and advisedness in our thanksgiving,
without which it is but insulsum sacrificium, a saltlesse or unsavory
sacrifice, Eccles. 5.1
no other in Solomon's verdict then a sacrifice of fools, who consider not that
they do evil; do evil even then when they think to please God, who is not
pleased with such sacrifices, but rather highly offended, that is all the thanks
they have for their thanksgiving. They are but so much the greater sinners, and
while they think to quit themselves of ingratitude, they fall into irreverence,
and profaneness. So that, Consulto opus, we see, great need there is of
consulting, to bethink us well of the sacrifice ere we offer it unto God: It is
that which makes way for the rendering. The Act, and our next particular.

Eccles. 5.2.
Deus in coelis (says Ecclesiastes) God is in heaven, and thou upon earth, and
so as much above the reach, as the need of thy recompense; But more difficult
yet, that we may be able to render, we must have something of our own, for we
cannot repay one with that which is his already: but alas! what have we of our
own but only our sins; and these no way meet to pay God: let us see how David
resolves this case, it follows in the verse, Verse 13.
I will take the cup of salvation. But is that to render, by taking more? St.
Austin is so bold to tell him if he speak yet further of taking, he is a debtor
in his very payment* a greater debtor certainly, and so we are all, the more we
pay unto God, Quanto quis amplius retribuerit Domino, and amplius solverit
gratitudinis debitum, tanto amplius ei debet, and amplius obligatur, O
admirabile gratitudiris vinculum! etc. Bradward. de gratitud. in Deum.
the more we are obliged unto him for his grace whereby we paid it, and so by a
strange knot of gratitude we are tied the faster by loosing.

And yet notwithstanding all this, God has left us the means of rendering, and
he is pleased to accept of it though never so little, according to that a man
has, though but a willing mind. 2 Cor. 8. so that none need to plead a
disability, of what condition soever be he; poor and indigent, he may do it
without cost; or weak and sickly, he may do it without pains, Qui grate
beneficium accepit primum ejus pensionem absolvit f^atim gratus est qui se
onerat. Sen. de ben. lib. 2.
have he only a thankful heart, humbly acknowledging Gods benefits, he has
rendered already; it will be taken for requital enough, but to confess, that he
is unable to requite them.

That Is enough for such as can do no more, but for such as can, not enough for
them; a more real performance is required at their hands: for so the word here
imports; not what shall I say, or wish, but render, a word of doing, so that
if God has enabled thee with greater faculties, then resolve with David, I
will not offer unto the Lord of that which costs me nothing, be at some charge
upon him, 2 Samuel 24.
in the repairing of his house, in the relief of his poor members, with the
like works of mercy.

And yet this not of courtesy neither, but of duty, not as free largess, but
as a due debt; It is not quid tribuam, what shall I give, but retribuam render,
by way of restoring, as Gods right, and so unlawful to withhold it: that when
all is done, 1 Chro. 29.
they must say with David, of thine own have we given thee, given thee, says
David, Cum totum suum sit quod ab eo accepimus, nostrum esse dicit ut demus, ut
quem devotio non illiceret ad largiendu^, neecssitas cogeret ad exolvendum.
Salvian. ad Eccles. Cathol. lib. 1.
but our Savior calls it rendering, Matthew. 22.21. (...) so the word is, render
unto God the things that be Gods, and both to good purpose, according as the
parties be from whom they come, given from them that do it willingly, it goes
for their gift, but render to such as be backward, it is a tax upon them; so
Salvian smartly enforces it, Da si vis, read si non vis, give if thou be
willing, if unwilling, restore, God exacts it at thy hands.

But it is the language of the world, Quid recipiam! what shall I receive? more
if you will, but no rendering any thing at any hand, or if they do, it is but
malum pro bono, (as the Psalmist speaks) evil for good. Psalm. 35.12
Nothing for Gods seed, and his rain, but the weeds and briars of sin, nothing
after his pains in planting, fencing, digging, Is. 5.
pruning, but wild, and sower grapes; those of murmuring and repining, Deuteronomy.
33.6
But, haeccine reddis Domino? it was Moses exprobration to the Israelites; do
ye thus requite the Lord? and I fear it may be said to us Christians, that are
as deep in Gods benefits as ever they were; but that so it may not be said, let
each of us endeavor for his part; and put in with David for a particular
thankfulness, that what he said in his own person, we may every one say in
ours, what shall I render? Our third particular.

David, and David in a threefold respect, 1, as a more beneficed man; 2. a
parricular man, 3. a righteous man; in each of these respects to be thankful,
and we in each

1. As a beneficed man, endowed with more favors and deliverances then others,
and so more engaged to thankfulness too; Gloria umbra virtutis est. Sen ep. 79.
for ever as the benefits are, so must the gratitude be, for as glory is said
to be the shadow of virtue, and this for one reason, that it increases as
virtue does, which is as the body that makes it; so thankfulness is the shadow
of bounty, and should grow in proportion, as the benefits do, that look how
great the one, so great should the other be also. Neither may any man here
think himself excused from a larger measure of thanks, because his outward
blessings are not so eminent as another; for not any of us all, but if we did
(...), etc. as St. Basil speaks, look down on that which is beneath us, and
compare our own good with that which is some way worse in others, we should
find great cause of thankfulness, and to say that of the Pharisee in a very
good sense, Lord I thank thee that I am not as this man, not hereby to magnify
our selves, but to glorify God in his blessings; which is by acknowledging
them: for, As Rigaltius reads it. Lib. de poenitentia.

Non verecundae, sed ingratae mentis indicium est beneficia tacere divina. Leo.
Ser. 1. Non est ista verecundia, sed inficiandi genus. Sen.


negat beneficum, qui beneficium non honorat, (It is Tertullian) he denies the
Giver that does not honor the gift; and, Ingratae mentis est -- says Leo, to
conceal Gods benefits, is not so much modesty, as ingratitude: a way with that
modesty, that prejudices Gods glory.

The second respect considers David, and with him every one beside, as he is
a particular man; who having received particular benefits, is obliged eo
nomine, unto a particular thankfulness: For besides those benefits in common,
whereof all do partake alike, every man has those by himself, for which, by
himself, he is to be thankful: which our Savior did intimate unto us after his
curing of the lepers, when but one of the ten returning to give thanks, Luke
17.17,
he enquireth after the rest; where be the nine? would excuse none from the
duty. Nor is this to be done in private only, with our selves, but in public
also, with the whole congregation, that God may reap no less of us then he did
of old in David's time, Psalm. 28.9.
that in his Temple every man speak of his honor. None must be dumb in this
Quire; Any ones silence does injure the consort, that the Music is not full:
Every one should lend a voice unto the Anthem of Gods praise, and all little
enough.

Every one should, but every one cannot, that is not as David in the third
respect, Basil in Psalm. 32.
that is, a righteous man, for so he tells us, Psalm. 32. praise is comely for
the upright; for none but them, and for them comely, will not fit well with a
perverse or crooked heart, no more then a straight shoe with a wry foot; and
it is as uncomely in their mouths too, Ecclus. 15.9.
says Ecclesiasticus, praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner, so, no
where comely for such as they, And hence it was, that when the devils would
have blazond our Savior, he straightly forbad them, Mark 1.25.34. Acts 16.18
would have none of their praises; And the like did St. Paul to the spirit of
divination, would not suffer the most high to be dishonored with such vile
commendations. And therefore Saint Basils advice would do well, (...), Basil.
ibid.
etc. let us be ambitiously careful to avoid all crookedness in our doings,
and rectify our souls as a straight rule, that becoming upright indeed, we
may be fit for the praise of God, for without that, no praising of him. Which
the Church most wisely considering, has taught us by prayer to prepare our
selves thereunto, both for the cleansing of our hearts to conceive Gods praise,
and for the opening of our mouths to utter it.

The former we have before the Commandments; cleanse the thoughts of our hearts
by the inspiration of thy holy Spirit, that we may worthily magnify thy holy
name. The latter, at the beginning of our service, (having David's warrant for
it) O Lord open thou our lips, Psalm. 51.15
and our mouth shall show forth thy praise. To the doing of both we receive his
assistance, and obtain that of himself which we offer unto him; who is the
object of our thankfulness, as he was of David's, Jehovae, to the Lord.

Qui molem istam verbo quo jussit, ratione qua disposuit, virtute qua potuit,
de nihilo expressit in ornamentum majestatis suae. Tertul. Apologet.
then to him that gave the benefits? who by his word commanding, by his wisdom
disposing, by his power effecting, brought the mafs of this world out of
nothing for the glory of his Majesty, and does continually from the treasures
of his bounty, sustein the whole family of heaven and earth, For being (...),
as St. Cyril styles him; the ever-flowing fountain of all goodness, and
beneficence, he never cease to defund on his world of creatures, Psalm. 19.
Psalm. 148.10.
and to refresh them with the streams of his mercy: whose glory not only the
heavens declare, but every creeping thing of the earth, be it it never so
despicable, and if men should hold their peace, the very stones would
immediately cry out against our ingratitude: And yet, strange it is to see, how
many have failed in this duty of praising the Lord, The Gentiles so much for
their part, that they praised any thing more then him, They changed (says St.
Paul) the glory of God into an image made like to beasts, Romans 1.23.
and Felis, Cunis, Lupus, pro Deo sunt adorati, and Leo voraeor hominum Anguis
and Dreco. Et (erubesco refer) jam etiam apud nonnullos coepae sum adoratae.
Cyril. Hiero. Cater. 6. and Clem. Alex. proto.
creeping things. A Cat, a Snake, the fire, nay the Onions in their Gardens
were more highly accounted of them, and obtained divine worship instead of God.
Of which horrid impieties should I speak with Cyril, (...)! O wonderful
blindness in men! to fall from such lofty Majesty, to such abject baseness; or
rather with that other Father, O stupendam Dei patientiam! O the admirable
patience of God! that could forbear to break the heavens, and revenge so foul
indignities. Now though heathenisme be dispelled by the Sunshine of the
Gospel, yet some clouds do still remain in the minds of many Christians, who
set up other Names together with the Lord, and unto them ascribe their
felicity, as those of fortune, and nature, words so riefe among us, which are
indeed but the attributes of God, though mistaken by men, for that which is
termed fortune here below, has the name of providence above, and is nothing
else but the will of God, from whom (as St. James speaks) Every good gift
descends. Jam. 1.17
Descends, says he, not, slippeth from him, that is, comes down by
appointment, not falls down by chance.

And as Fortune is the will of God; Naturam intelligimus ordinariam Dei
potestatem, sic^^i fortunam ejus voluntatem, etc. Scalg. Excicit. 188.
so nature is no other then the power of God, and what she does is by him, as
his Agent, or Commissary here below, only storing us with those blessings which
she receives from him; for though she reach out her hand, and give us plenty
of provision, it is God that fills her hand before, and then opens her hand
after, that she may rain down her showers upon us.

Another sort more directly injurious unto the divine honor, exalts Saints
(whom the God of Rome is pleased to admit) into the throne of God, and gives
that honor to the Creature; which belongs only unto the Creator, making
them the object of their praise and thanksgiving; Fully evinced by Dr. Th.
Iackson on the Cree^.
A sin of so foul a nature, that (let them mince it how they can) is no less
then plain sacrilege, or idolatry, choose they whether.

A third sort make idols of themselves, and impute what they have to their own
ability, like those of whom the Prophet complains, Hab. 1.16. of the
Chaldeans.
that sacrificed unto their nets, and burned incense unto their drag. It was
their own hand that wrought it; and their own brain that compassed it, and no
thanks to any other. Thus is the Lord on all sides robbed of his due, his due I
may call it, Psalm. 29.2.
for David does so, Psalm. 29.2. Give unto tbe Lord the glory due unto his name:
and if due, then, in no wise to be withholden; for so says the Apostle, Romans
13.7
render unto all their dues; of which, one of them there is, honor, to whom
honor; much more to God then; he to have more then all, as being more then all
to us; either King, Father, Benefactor, or what else we can name, and may well
therefore challenge this honor at our hands. This is all we can return him for
his infinite benefits; and this is all he requires of us for those benefits;
The nature whereof we now come to consider in the next place; The motive of
David's thankfulness, and our second General.

Synesius speaks) a kind of fellowship, Synes. epist.
and communion, each with other: a communion so near, that the heathen could
not distinguish them, but mistook Paul and Barnabas for very Gods in the
likeness of men, upon the healing of a creeple. Acts 14.11 Dr. Iackson on the
Creed.
And what ever other Gods they devised, as the Sun, Moon, Stars, nay the
vilest beast that was, it was merely for the opinion of some benefit received
from them. Whereby they seemed to acknowledge, that Benefits came all from God,
though they knew not the God from whom they came: from whom nothing but
goodness proceeds; no worse matter from him: (however some heads that are
giddy in the maze of Gods counsels imagine to themselves) for more possible it
is for darkness to come from the Sun, then evil from God, who being
essentially good, or goodness it self, can as soon cease to be God, as to do
good; (...), (It is St. Basils argument) if he be the Author of evil, he is
not good, Basil. hom Quod Deus non sit Author mali. Quid interest utrum Deos
neges, an infames? Sen. ep. 123.
and if not good, not God neither, they both go together.

But though not of the evil of sin, may he not be of the evil of punishment?
no, Melch. Cani loc. Thelog. lib. 2, c. 4.
not of that neither, as evil, not of losses, or sickness, or any tribulation
so: indeed of the punishment in the evil, he is Author; but then that is a
benefit; the very thing we have in hand, an Act of mercy from God that inflicts
it, and on man that suffers it, either for the exercise of his patience, or the
correction of his sin, and so as a benefit, look for Jobs benediction, Job 1.21.
to have the Lords name blessed for the ^^me; for these as well as for others,
that be all (His) benefits; which is the worth or quality of them, in the next
place to be considered.

G^atissima sunt beneficia parata facile occurrentia etc. Sen. de ben. ^. 2.
without any suit or desert of the receiver this gets them a welcome, none the
like: Now all these degrees are to be found here in these (His) benefits, and
that in the highest degrees that may be.

1. The Donour is God Almighty, supreme Monarch of Heaven, and Earth; unto whom
the mightiest Monarchs of the world are but Vice-Royes, and Deputies; and
derive that from him, which they impart unto others; now for such an one to
give us; what can be more?

2. The Benefits are such as make us to be our selves; and but for them, we
should not be at all, not only what we have, but also what we are; our souls,
and bodies, with all that sustain them, and what can be greater then these?

3. For the mannner of conferring them; it is graciously first, and then
continually. Planum est, quia nihil ante promeruit, qui penitus nihil fuit.
Bernard. sermon. 14. in Psalm. 91.
1. Graciously without our desert, as is manifest at our creation, when we
could deserve nothing at all, that were nothing at all; that had not so much as
a tongue to ask, nor an h^^rt to think of a prayer; and might still have been
left in our nothing, had it not pleased God to prevent us, as he did David,
Psalm. 21.3
with the blessings of goodness.

Graciously, so, without so much as a request, but graciously again, at the
first offer of a request, ere we can spend any time in a Petition: Adhuc illis
loquentibus ego audiam, Isai 65.24
is his own promise by his Prophet Isaiah; whi es they are yet speaking, I will
hear: O the main speed of his clemency! said Nazianzen; (...), Naz. Orat. 40.
in sanctum baptisma.
he desires to be desired; seems pleasur'd with a benefit, when he is asked one,
and gives more readily then others receive.

But how graciously soever he give once, if we need again, and dare not ask,
for fear of a check, or a denial, we are but in an ill case, Iam. 1.5.
but here is comfort for that too; he upbraideth not, Luke 16.25.
Iam. 1.5. sends us not away with a Fili recepisti, these, and these many good
things thou have received, and art thus much endebted already: Ne Deos quidem
immortales ab hac tam effusa liberalitate sacrilegi, negligentesque eorum
deterrent. Sen. de ben. lib. 1.
but is still ready with new benefits, like ware upon ware, to follow and
orewhelm the former: hits none in the teeth with their unworthines, but how
unworthy soever, makes them partakers of his favors; who makes his Sun to rise
on the evil, Matthew. 5. such as vex and offend him; nay, Mat. 5.45. Luke 6.35
is kind to the unthankefull; Luke 6. such as forget, or repine at him; nay
further yet, bestows gifts on his enemies; Psalm. 68. Psalm. 68.18
such as blaspheme and persecute him; On these gifts, a plurality of them, but
all upon David, and such as he, which is the Quantity of these benefits, and
comes next to be weighed.

No marvail if he stick at a quid retribuam, that sets all Gods benefits before
him; any one had been enough to puzzle his gratitude, and does he speak of
rendering for all? what worlds of David's could do this; nay, what heavens of
Angels, or any thing less then the Almighty.

Cast we but our eyes awhile on some of that All, and we may soon guess at the
difficulty of the attempt; Psalm. 139.14.
on these bodies of ours, so fearfully, and wonderfully made, so curiously
wrought by divine art, Corporis fabricam cum intueor tot invenio beneficia tua
quot membra, quot sensus, quot venae, quot fibrae, etc. Granatens.
as struck the very heathen into the confession, and wonder of a Deity: where
look how many members, so many benefits appear; Every nerve, and muscle about
us, is an instance of Gods singular bounty.

2. On our souls made after the divine Image; and Rodigin. Ant. lect. lib. 2.
cap. 17.
capable of all Arts, and Sciences; all virtues and graces, all natural, and
heavenly endowments, and which is more then all; of God himself, the Lord of
all.

3. On all about us, and what see we but a world of benefits? where among so
many millions, R^ymund. de Sab. liber Creat. tit. 98. and 99.

Basil Hexam.

Vt omnes rerum naturae pars tributum aliquod nobis conferret. Sen. de Ben.
lib. 4.


and millions of creatures, there is not one but serves us, either for our
necessity, or delight, or instruction. (...), as Saint Basil says; it is for
us that the Rivers flow, and the fountains spring, and the clouds yields rain;
The heavens with their host, and the earth with her fruits, they are all for
us; All nature in a manner is tributary unto man.

We cannot stay too look on that Sea of benefits, the manifold benefit of our
redemption; which Saint Ambrose thinks, David here chiefly intended, wherein
the Lord gave us himself for a benefit; and with himself the whole treasure of
his riches, and bounty.

Yet can we not but look with David on that other sort of benefits, his many
deliverances, Ver. 3.6, 8.
(one of which surely was the chief motive of his present gratitude) They are
benefits too, and as great as any; every deliverance from death is as much as a
new life, the keeping one alive, as much as the giving life; And though every
one be not thus delivered, their benefit is no whit the less; nay, rather the
more, that they were not in danger; In the state of our bodies, we all know, It
is better not to be sick, then to be recovered from sickness; And in the state
of our soul too, Saint Austin thought it better, August. Confess. Non est
peccatum tam grande quod unquam fecit homo, quod non possit facere alter homo,
si Creator desit a quo factus est. Quapropter omnium hominum peccata non
immerito mea appellabo beneficia, etc. Granatens.
non implicari, quam exui, not once to be entangled in sin, then to be released
from it. And so, not improperly in this respect I may call every man's sin my
benefit, there is none of them all that any man has committed, but I might
have committed the like (that am the same by nature) if Gods grace had not
prevented me: And I may call the punishments of all men my benefits too; There
is no man born blind, or lame, or distorted, but I might have been so; that am
made of the same clay that they were, if Gods mercy had not succored me.

After these, do but glance on those swarms of Benefits (like so many motes in
the Sun-beam^s) that are every day renewed upon upon us with the morning, Lam.
3.23.
which although for their custom, and frequencie, we cannot perceive, Psalm.
68.39
(and the more unthankful we) yet David did, as it seems, Psalm. 68.19. where
he blesses the Lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits: yea double loadeth
us, once by heaping on us the blessings of each day, and again, by taking from
us the sins of each day; Th^s unloading is a loading in Saint Bernards account;
In Psalm. 19. Sermon. 15.
Onerat beneficio, cum exonerat peccato, he loads us with benefits, when he
unloads us of sins: whole loads of benefits; and it is strange we feel them not,
who are each of us under them, that have not only all upon all of us, but all
upon every one, none bears off the weight from another: which David
acknowledged for his part, in his all upon me; the relation, and our last part.

David with benefits, and David loads himself with thankfulnse, setting all
those benefits on his own score, that were bestowed on all men, so it appears
by the words, if we read them according to the original, in a distinct
proposition; All his benefits are upon me: as counting all his own in regard of
the obligation, what was every man's in regard of the possession; Nor is it the
practice of David alone, but of every man else, that will be thankful (...), as
St. Chrysostom affirms, De compunctione cordis. lib. 2.
It is the good servants property, that what benefits his Lord gives in common
to all, he accounts given to himself, and himself engaged for all; as he
instanceth in Saint Paul; touching the death of our Savior, which though
undertaken it were for all believers, he applies unto himself, as if he only
were the receiver, for so he speaks, Gal. 2.20. Gal. 2.20.
I live by the faith of the Son of God, who gave himself for me: not that he
would hereby impropriate the exuberant merits of Christ, but as one that
reckoned himself obliged for all men beside. It was here his practice, and his
counsel elsewhere, that giving of thanks be made for all men; 1 Timothy 2.
as if the benefits of all belonged to every one. An envious nature would stand
off at this, and be ready to shuffle the thanks on others that be alike
interessed in the benefit, But as Ad Eccles. Cath. lib. 2.
Salvian well urges against them. The debt that is common unto All, is as much
every man's in peculiar; For as Christ did suffer for mankind, so withal, for
each single person, and totum se dedit universis, and totum singulis; And so
whatsoever he did by his passion, as all men owe the whole unto him, so
likewise does each man the same; if not (rather) each man more then all,
because he has received as much as All. Thus, he that thinks much to be
indebted for others, is as deeply in for his own particular: nay, deeper by
far, if he mark it well, not only for the benefits bestowed on mankind, but for
those on all creatures beside that serve man. David's (All upon me) will reach
out to that too, Raimund. de Sab. Tit. 96.97
what benefits are conferred on those creatures, are conferred on me, because
on them for my sake; They receive none of those benefits for themselves, but
only for me; and therefore, as the Master is beholding for those courtesies
which are done to his servant, so am I obliged for all theirs that are made to
serve me; and so, am to perform for every creature, that which every creature
owes unto God: Ours, I say, and cannot perform of themselves, for lack of those
faculties which I have. I have understanding to apprehend Gods benefits, and I
have a tongue to report them, which the other creatures have not, and therefore
I, as the public Orator, am bound to praise God in their behalf, that so they
also by my voice, may give God the glory.

David's behalf, now something in our own, to see what we on our parts, should
render unto the Lord: a matter very important to be considered, no less then
our welfare is worth, both for the keeping of those benefits we have, and for
the procuring of others; For as it was said of Trajan the Emperor, that the
way to obtain new favors at his hand, Efficacissimum pro candidato genus est
regandi, gratias agere. Plin. in P^neg.
was, by giving thanks for the former: so likewise with the King of heaven; no
means so effectual to continue his bounty, as our thanksgiving: whereas on
the other side, Ingratitude is ventus urens (as Bernard calls it) as it were a
red wind, that blights, Ingratitudo ventus urens siccans sibi fontem pietatis,
rorem misericordiae, fluenta gratiae: Super Cant. Sermon. 51.
or blasts the fruit of Gods mercy, and dries up the fountain of his graces
toward us; Deuteronomy. 28.23.
For what makes our prayers so uneffectuall, our labors so unprosperous; the
heaven brass over us, the earth Iron under us, the air infectious round about
us? All is, our unthankfulness to the Lord for his blessings, that renders us
unworthy of them: your iniquities says the Prophet) have turned away these
things; Ier. 5.25.
and your sins have withholden good things from you.

This shows enough the necessity of our duty in his kind, how much it
concerns us all to be thankful: which duty we shall the better perform, if
as David did, we consider of Gods benefits toward us; if, as the Prophet Esai
wills us, we do levare oculos in circuitu, Isai. 49.19.
lift up our eyes round about, and see how God has encompassed us on all sides
with benefits; that whithersoever we turn our selves, we are full of the sight
of them; and it will appear on the review, that we are not behind David in
benefits, not behind him in any, but before him in some.

First, for temporal benefits, we were born in peace, and tranquillity, which
David scarce obtained in his old age, and that after many years, and
persecutions, and these not from strangers only, but from his own subjects, nay
his children. Then, for spiritual benefits, we have the happiness to see that
performed, which David desired, and could not obtain, that is, 1 Cor. 13.12.
Gal. 3.1.
the coming of Christ in the flesh: what he saw darkly, by prophecy only, as
through a glass, we evidently in the Gospel, as before our eyes: what he by
figures, and obscure ceremonies, we by clear and perspicuous Sacraments. We
then, that are before David in benefits, not to be behind him in
thankfulness, but to offer unto God, 2 Cor. 9.12.
as he did (verse 15.) the sacrifice of thanksgiving. Of thanksgiving, by our
lives, that by our innocence, and good works, his Name may be praised, and so
(as Saint Paul speaks) the thanksgiving of many may redound to Gods glory.

Secondly, of our mouths, by making them full of Gods praises; rendering thanks
unto him, according to his benefits on, or toward us, for the plurality of his
benefits, a plurality of thanks, for the continualnesse of his benefits, the
continualnesse of our thanks, Psalm. 103.1
thank him manifoldly, and thank him continually. And that not faintly from the
lips alone, but from the heart and bowels; rowzing up our souls with David,
and all that is within us, to praise his Great, Isai 29.13.
and holy Name: remembering that it is to him, who pondereth the heart, and
despises the honor that is only from the lips; and therefore (as the Apostle
advises) to do it heartily as to the Lord, Colos. 3.23, 24.
knowing that of the Lord, we shall receive the reward; when for our rendering,
we shall be rendered unto, both the benefits of this life, and of that better
which is to come. Which the Lord grant unto us All, for the merits of Jesus
Christ; unto whom with the blessed Spirit, we desire to be rendered
Thanksgiving, Honor, Praise, and Glory, now and for ever.

AMEN.
SERMON. VI.
JOHN 1.23. He said, I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, make
straight the way of the Lord.


THe words are John Baptists, and are part of the Gospel appointed to be read
upon this day. So the Church in her wisdom thought it meet; that next before
the birth of our Savior, (the Feast of his coming in the flesh) his
forerunner should be heard with his warning sound, to make way for his coming;
It was the office chiefly for which he was born (as his Father Zachary spoke at
his birth) to go before the face of the Lord, Luke 1.76.
to prepare his way; to be the Harbinger unto Christ; Heb. 5.4.
He took not this honor unto himself; without a calling thereunto, Ier. 23.21.
as many do now adays, that run on Gods errand, without his Commission. He
was none of those (...) (as Nazianzen styles them) extemporal divines, Heri
prophani, hodie sacrorum Antistites, veteres vitio, pietate rudes. Nazianz.
Orat 21.
that start up like Mushroms, in one night, into great professors: He had good
warrant for what he did, a Commission granted long before from God himself, as
he voucheth authentical record for it: no less then one of Gods chief
Secretary's, the Prophet Esayas; He said, Isai 40.3.
I am the voice of one crying, etc.

To examine this testimony then aright, we are to take view of the Original
copy, and there we find at the fortieth Chapter, H. Grotius.
these words of my Text, first spoken (...), typewise, concerning a deliverance
of the Jews from the bondage of Babylon; by the means of Cyrus King of
Persia, unto whom this charge is therefore given to make all things ready, for
that deliverance. But (...), under that type is prefigured a greater
deliverance from the bondage of sin, and death, by the coming of Christ, whose
coming to make it appear more lively, his forerunner is appointed to make way
for the same; and that is John Baptist; he was intended chiefly thereby; so he
applies it unto himself, and with him concur the four Evangelists: All
agreeing in this, that in him this Scripture was truly fulfilled; he was the
vox clamantis indeed, that brought the glad tidings of a deliverance.

1. The Preface, I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness. 2. The
message, Make straight the way of the Lord.
In the Preface, we have these two particulars. 1. The quality of the
messenger, Vox clamantis, the voice of one crying. 2. The place where he cried,
in deserto, in the wilderness.
In the Message likewise, we may have as many. 1. The Subject, Viam Domini; The
way of the Lord. 2. The Act; Complanate Planas and aequabiles facite (quod
(...) significat) nam purgare viam proprie dicitur (inquit Ulpian) ad
libramentum proprium redigere, sublato eo quod superest. Th. Beza.
; make straight:
But these two relating so near each to other, we shall treat of them together:
Of the rest, in the order, and method propounded, by the assistance of him
whose way it is, that he would vouchsafe me to be his Harbinger unto your
souls; though I be but the Echo of Vox clamantis; the voice of one crying, my
first particular.

1. Part.
This is John's record of himself; when the Jews sent Priests and Levites to ask
him, Verse 19.
who art thou? It may seem somewhat strange they should doubt of that;
considering the parents of whom he came; his Father one of the chief Priests,
an eminent person at Jerusalem; his Mother, Luke 1.36.
she that was called barren, and so had the fame to bring forth at once, a Son,
and a miracle. But herein lay the ground of their error, they heard from Moses
of a Great Prophet that the Lord would raise up; Deuteronomy 18.17 Acts 3.34. Malac.
4.5.
they heard from Malachy, that Elias must come before the Messiah; and now
seeing John by his doctrine and deportment give tokens of a person more then
ordinary, they enquire of him, Verse. 12. Matthew. 11.9 14.
whether he be Elias, or that Prophet. He was both in some sort, as Christ bare
witness of him, and yet unto both his answer is negative; He was neither of
them in that sense as they imagined; M. Bucer.
A phancie there was at that time among them of a (...) or transmigration of
souls; and so, he denies himself to be such as they conceived him. He was
indeed that Elias who was to come, in regard of the Spirit and Power of Elias;
Luke 1.17. 2 King. 2.11.
but not that very Elias though, who was hurried to heaven in the fiery
Chariot; And a Prophet he was, yea, and more then a Prophet, as showing Christ
present to the eye of flesh, which the others did only to the eye of faith.
But yet he was none of the old Prophets newly raised to life, as their question
supposed: And therefore to put them out of doubt, he tells them plainly what he
is; Vox clamantis, whom Esayas spoke of so long before, there they might be
satisfied concerning him, and seek no farther.

But Vox clamantis is Vox aequivoca, and will bear a double acceptance, to be
meant either of the voice of God, speaking by John as his Minister, or secondly
of John's greater vehemence in the delivery of his doctrine: Both these senses
the Text will bear, and we in both to consider it,

Quod sc. Johannes tantum ministerium vocis praebeat, Ipse autem Deus per
Iohannem clamet. Chemnit. Luke 1.70.
In the former sense, Vox clamantis refers unto God, speaking by John as a
King by his Herald; so as he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets since the
world began; and as he will speak unto the worlds end, by his Ministers
appointed to declare his will: As we have his own word for it unto Esaiah; Isai
59.21.
My words which I have put Ostendit Deum sic nos alloqui, ut hominum ministerio
and opera uti velit. Calvin.
in thy mouth, shall not depart out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, from
henceforth, and for ever: which cannot be meant of those that were of the race
of Isaiah according to the flesh, but so as elsewhere some are termed the Non
quod juxta carnem ex illis prognati essent, sed quod sancta institutione ab
illis erudirentu^. P. Mart.
Sons of the Prophets; 2 Kings 2.3.
that is, such as were trained up in the Schools of the Prophets, for the
edifying of Gods people.

This course so established by God in the Old Testament, Christ re-established
in the New; by giving, as for the first time, Apostles, Prophets, and
Evangelists; so for the last, Pastors, Ephesians. 4.11.
and Teachers, to continue successively for the works of the ministry, unto
the worlds end.

Etiam hodie clamat Johannes exemplo and verbo, and vocis suo tonitruo deserta
nostrorum concutit peccatorum. Ambros.
The world has ever, will ever have need of those that bring the good tidings
of peace, not only for such as come out of darkness, to be converted from the
error of their ways, but the children of light too, otherwhiles have need to
hear of their sins being remitted, and themselves restored to the favor of
God, upon their repentance; and for this purpose (says the Apostle) God has
given to us the ministry of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19
to be Ambassadors for Christ, and in his stead to beseech and pray men to be
reconciled unto God: An Embassage of so high concernment, as could hardly be
believed, if it came only from the mouth of man; But that we have Christ's
warrant for it; He that hears you, Luke 10.^6
hears me: and, whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them. For
what he said unto his Apostles, in this kind, Id ad totum liturgorum nationem
refertur, it belongs to all the nation of Ministers; If Tertullian had not
said it, we have no reason to doubt thereof, but for those last words of the
Commission, M^t. 28. ult.
I am with you always, even unto the end of the world: whereby not only those
that were sent viva voce, to teach all nations; but all faithful Ministers
that ever should be in every age, are promised to have the presence of Christ;
that is, the assistance of his Spirit, unto the enlarging of his Church.

Such honor has God vouchsafed to men, (and many times, to the meanest of
them) to make them (...), 2 Cor. 6.1.
workers together with himself to the work of salvation; Posset quidem e coelo
ipso loqui, aut Angelos mittere, sed in eo magis nostri rationem habuit quod
per homines nostri similes compellat, ut eorum voce magis familiariter nos ad
se adjiciat. Calvin in Isai. Hyperius meth. theol. l. 3. c. 12.
not but that he can do it of himself, without Ministers, as he can work
without means either of word, or of Sacrament; This is confessed, that thus he
can do, and does many times, how and when to him seems good; and thus he can
speak immediately by himself, or can employ the tongues of Angels to make known
his pleasure, but that were not so expedient for us, as may be seen by the
Jews; who having once heard the voice of God, Ezod. 20.19. and Heb. 12.19.
entreated to hear no more of that; but that Moses the man of God might impart
his commands unto them. It is mercy in God then, to condescend so far unto us,
as to make choice of men like our selves to be his messengers, and to employ
them as his own mouth to speak unto his people: And it will be duty in us, H b.
12.25 2 Cor. 4.7.
not to refuse him that speaks (thus) from heaven, nor to esteem the treasure
less that is presented in earthen vessels; lest for our want of reverenee
herein, the heathen rise up in the day of judgment, and condemn us; Even Eglon
the Moabite, Judge. 3.20 See this f^lly asserted by Mr. Heron in the Preachers
plea in medio.
when he hears of a messenger from God, rises our of his throne; and that is
no other which is spoken in Gods name, agreeable to Scripture; the sound is
Man's: the substance and tenor thereof is Gods: and the Embassage is not his
that delivers it, but the Kings, or States in whose name it is spoken. And so
we to acknowledge the great King of heaven in his Vox clamantis, and to receive
it, 1 These. 2.13.
not as the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of God.

But a Caveat withal unto Gods Ministers, that they speak in their Sermons, 1
Pet. 4.11.
as the Oracles of God; that is, the sound wisdom of Gods word; not the fond
conceits of their own brains much less that which is repugnant to Scripture,
as schism, sacrilege, resisting of Magistrates: Certainly this is none of
Gods voice, it is Vox Rugientis, 1 Pet. 5.8.
the voice of the Roaring Lion rather; or the hissing of the Serpent; It was
his practice from the beginning to be a Preacher of disobedience. Our first
parents found it so by woeful experience, and we have felt the like sad effects
from his Ministers now, whereby there is heard nothing almost but Vox lugentis,
the voice of many a one, crying indeed in another sense: many a Rachel weeping
for her children; Ierem. 31.
Our Country is even become that Rachel.

2, This Vox clamantis relates unto the person of him that cries, Lucas
Brugensis.

Hic enim spiritu and virtute Eliae praeditus, fortissime impietatem insectatus
est, and constantissime Christi praeconem egit, ut nemo esset qui se excusare
posset, quod clamantem non audisset.


and so the Hebrew seems to favor it, kol^koreh in the Prophet, the crying
voice, implying the boldness and liberty of John, that he showed in his
preaching. That openly without fear of men, or respect of persons, he rebuked
the people, and proclaimed the Messiah; In discharge whereof he so behaved
himself, that he took for his title Vox clamantis, I am the voice of one
crying, as if he were nothing else but a voice, exciting to repentance, and
amendment of life; as indeed, every thing almost about him may seem to have
done somewhat that way: Tertullian de pallis.
Ipse habitus sonat; his apparel, diet, his place of abode were as so many
Sermons of mortification; even to look on him was to hear him preach, though he
opened not his mouth, he taught by his actions, the most effectual way of
preaching.

Again, in regard of those unto whom he cried, his crying implies their
spiritual deafness, and hardness of heart, that such they were as Stephen
after called them, Act. 7.51.
stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart; and ears; The world was ever, will
ever be sick of this disease; the voice of a Crier is no more then needs;
Against crying sins, we may be allowed to be Boanerges; Mark 3.17.
to come with the thunder of the law, when the soft voice of the Gospel will
not be heard. It was the way that God himself took to procure audience unto his
Son, speaking in so loud a voice, that the Auditors said it thundered; Ioh.
12.29.
And Gods true 1 King 21.27. Luke 3.20.
servants have never forborne to thunder in effect, against what is unlawful,
although it has cost them the punishment of John Baptist, Jer. 38.6.
to be cast into prison. But no reason for any (here) to complain, that their
mouths are stopped in this kind; Isai 58.1.
They may cry aloud and spare not, lift up their voice like a trumpet; they are
liked best, most cried up, that cry down sin, that show the people their
transgression: Amos 7.13
even in the Kings Chapel, and in the Kings Court; the meanest Prophet may
reprove, Acts 26.25
and not fear to be reproved for it, so he speaks the words of truth and
soberness.

And herein the Lord is gracious unto us; that though he has given us the
bread of adversity, Isaiah 30.20.
and the water of affliction, yet he has suffered this vox clamantis to be
heard amongst us; Only (under favor) it were to be wished, that some which
are ablest to cry in this kind, for their worth and parts, did not stop their
own mouths, now in this time of greatest need, when the Church and government,
are so cried down by the sons of thunder: We hear in the Prophet a Woe
denounced against Idol-shepherds, that is, Zachar. 12.17 Ps. 135.16.
such as have mouths and speak not; I shall say but this, that heed would be
taken, ne silentium clamet, that this silence be not a crying sin; This, for
the quality of the messenger, come we next to the place where he cried, In
deserto; in the wilderness.

Second Part.
THis was the School wherein John was bred, until his showing unto Israel, and
this was the Diocese wherein he preached: This may seem strange, that he
should preach in a wilderness, and loose his labor by speaking there, where
none was to hear him, but it was not so desolate altogether, Luke 3.3.
as to affoard no Inhabitants. Saint Luke calls it the Country about Jordan,
where though there were not many houses, yet some there were, and that of John's
Father among the rest; Tanta erat vis and virtus suae praedicationis, ut
deserto civitatem gentium concursu efficerci, etc. Stella.
But the fame of his preaching was such (it seems) that it changed the
wilderness into a populous City, for all Jerusalem went out to hear him, nay
all Judea, Mat: 3.5.
(says Saint Matthew) and all the Region round about Jordan. It might be out
of curiosity, to hear some new doctrine, (as people are wont to run violently
that way) but considering the soundness of the Preacher, we will call it their
zeal, and so I may ad erubescentiam vestram dicere; 1 Cor. 6 5. As Erasmus
renders it.
speak it to the blushing of many among us; that will scarce take the pains to
step out of their Chambers to worship God in the beauty of holiness; Psalm. 29
2.
when they thought not much to go into the wilderness to hear John preach.

But why must this be done in a wilderness? would not Jerusalem serve as well,
where the people might better be called together to hear a Sermon? The reasons
are diverse; and these among other.

Chap. 40.3
1. Esaias the Prophet had so foretold it; and so this Scripture must be
fulfilled; The Prophet thereby the term of a wilderness implies the desolate
estate of the Church in the bondage of Babylon, Allegorice Isaias desertum
vocat miseram Ecclesiae vastitatem.

Sed Dominum viam reperturum per invia. Calvin.


but assures them withal, that though there appeared no more escape then in a
wilderness; where the ways are obstructed with thorns and brakes, and other
encumbrances, yet God would make his way through all, for their deliverance;
The like does John the Baptist here, though the Church at that time seemed
barren and unfruitful, yet by the coming of the Messiah it should flourish,
Isai. 35.1.
and blossom as the Rose. Though nothing but beasts now seemed to range in it,
Mat. 3.7.
gen mina viperarum, as he terms them, a race of vipers, yet by the preaching
of the Gospel, those vipers should be changed into children of Abraham.

2. This preaching in a wilderness represents the liberty, and universality of
the Gospel, in comparison of the law; then the Church was hortus conclusus,
Cant. 4.12
(as Solomon pictures it) a Garden enclosed, a spring shut up, a fountain
sealed, Legis doctrina in angulum illum Iud. populi conclusa, Evangeliu^, autem
quod a Iohanne cepit praedicatur in vasto deserto: est enim doctrina liberrima
in publica, tam communis omnibus quam hoc coeli lumen. Luther.
so guarded with a Cherubin, and flaming sword, that no Gentile could enter
thereinto, but now it is become like a spacious wilderness; all may come into
it. The grace of God (...), Romans 5.15.
says Saint Paul, has broken forth (like the course of waters) unto all; and
so the gift which is by grace, is justly called by St. Jude, Jude ver. 3.
the common salvation.

3. This preaching in a wilderness directs the means whereby we may become
meet hearers of the Gospel, that is, by forsaking the pomp of the world, the
noise and tumult of Jerusalem, all our trust in earthly things, and to rely on
God alone, and his good pleasure: For so long as we trust unto our own
strength, and rely on worldly succor, we receive not John's doctrine of
repentance, nor admit the comfort of a Savior; Hos. 2.14.
I will bring her into the wilderness (says God of his Church) and speak
comfortably unto her, speak to her there, Deserta enim minus habent strepitus,
minus offensionum, quas mores, and vita ac gestus hominum in urbibus exhibent,
hinc Prophetae, etc. Christus secessit a turbis. Aretiu^.
where he may be heard with awful silence, without noise, or distraction.

Hereby is not meant, that we should become Hermites, and live secluse by our
selves out of humane society; but this is intended, an holy retirement (so often
as might be) from the noise of the world, 2 Pet. 3 9.
(...) in Saint Paul's term, to withdraw and sequester our selves otherwhiles,
that we may the better converse with God, Psalm. 4.4.
by holy meditations, and devout soliloquies, to commune with our heart in our
Chamber, and be still; that every one may say with David, Psalm. 85.8.
Audiam quid loquatur in me Deus: I will hear what God the Lord will speak.

Or if this privacie will not be had, (as never more hardly then at this time,
when every place is filled with clamor and confusion) yet, In turba and
conviviis faciat sibi cogitatio ipsa secretum. Quintil. Instit. lib. 10.
faciat sibi animus secretum; we may be alone even in company; having our
conversation in heaven, and fixing our thoughts on heavenly things: (...) (as
St. Basil speaks) in the closet of our hearts (if all be well there) we may be
retired from the world, and go no farther for a wilderness.

No lasie employments need hinder us from this; David, and Esther, for King,
and Queen; Joseph and Daniel, for Courtiers and Statesmen; they could all be at
leisure for the practice of piety; amidst all their pleasures, and engagements,
to converse nevertheless with the God of Spirits. Numb. 16.22.
I have done with the place, and come at last unto the message; Make straight
the way of the Lord.

Third Part.
WE could hardly expect to hear this from the wilderness, but that the
doctrine should be wild as the place; at least, something tending to
separation, or the like. By his preaching in woods, and forbearing the Temple,
he might seem to countenance that very way; and it is marvel that our
newfangled Teachers allege not John Baptist for their Founder, as well as
those of the Church of Rome do, for their monastic life.

But we need not to fear any such thing from John, whence he took his
Commission, he takes his message, and that is no more, but the point of
repentance, which was never known to raise tumults in a State, but to be the
only means to suppress them: To allow of the message then and weigh it aright,
it is presented unto us in the form of a metaphor, and this alluding unto a
Sicut fieri solet principibus solenni comitatu in urbem ingressuris. B^za in
Matthew. 3.3.
custom used by Kings, and Generals of Armies in their march, or military
expedition. They had certain H. Grotius citing Xenophon.
Officers ((...), or munitores) to level the way, that nothing might hinder
them in their journey. So at Titus Vespasian his coming to Jerusalem, (...),
(says Josephus) the valleys were filled, Joseph. de Bello Iud.
the hills abated, the woods cut down, along that coast, for his easier
passage. Answerable hereunto, This King of Kings (as he is styled Rev. 19.) in
his spiritual progress unto our souls has his (...), or forerunner to prepare
his way, that nothing may hinder him in his coming unto us; Acts 9.
Come (indeed) he can by his power, and nothing shall hinder him, as he came
unto Paul at his conversion; but that is not a way so easy for us; such a
coming God threatens to the Jews, Mal. 3.1. Mal. 3.1^
Behold he shall come (says the Lord of hosts) but who may abide the day of
his coming? Verse 2.
or who shall stand when he appears? for he is like a refiners fire; not to
be endured of such as are nothing but dross, unclean flesh is not metal for
such a furnace: unto such alone he will arise a Sun with healing in his wings,
Mal. 4.2.
that by godly fear, and pure affections, are prepared for his coming. Nor it
is not his usual way neither, we are not to expect he should come unto us
still, as once he came unto the Apostles, Acts 2.2.
in the sound of a mighty rushing wind: like that which Eliah someheard, 1
King. 9.11.
renting the mountains, and breaking the rocks: although sometimes he do come
this way, or make his way rather like that famous Annibal adhibito incendio,
and infuso aceto, scopulos fregit. ^. Livius. Dec. 3. l. 1.
General through the Alps, with fire, and vinegar, by the heat and sharpnes of
persecutions.

The ordinary way he is pleased to take, is to knock at the door of our hearts,
Rev. 3.20.
by his gracious inspirations; to exhort, and invite us, by his Word, and
Sacraments: But when we are raised by this means (as by the right hand of the
most high) and are stirred to repentance, Qui filii Dei sunt, aguntur ut agant,
non ut illi nihil agant. Aug. de cor. and gra. cap. 2. Sicut Cylindrum primo
motum, mox suo impetu volvitur, etc. A. Gell. noct. At. lib. 6.
then Acti agimus; we are to obey his grace so moving us: Our will is here in
the manner of a Bowl, that by virtue of vis impressa, (the force imparted from
the Agent) is set on rolling; yet so, as the aptness of the round form
conduces somewhat unto the motion.

It is our part not to resist his grace, and holy Spirit, not to stop our ears,
not to harden our hearts, nay more, to stir up the gift that is in us; by
pious incentives to enkindle that fire, that we receive not his grace in vain;
by devout invocation to pray with David, make thy way straight before my face:
Psalm. 5.8.
and with Solomon; The Lord God be with us, let him not leave us, nor forsake
us, that he may incline our hearts unto him, to walk in his ways: Lastly, by
repentance to remove these Opinio sc. proxima justitiae and persuasio
impunitatis, ut ita durae and aspera viae in leves faciles and expeditas
vertantur, etc. Chemn.
impediments, these stumbling blocks of sin that lie in Christ's way; who will
come as a Redeemer unto them (alone) that turn from transgression in Jacob;
Esaias. 59.20.
Otherwise he may and will come as a Judge, but not as a Savior, or Redeemer
unto them. So that vita recta is vita correcta, to amend our lives, is to make
a straight way; to suppress our lofty, and high swollen thoughts; these
mountains, and hills to be brought low by unfeighned humility, to reform our
depraved, Isai 40.4.
and perverse conditions, these crooked ways to be made straight according to
the rule of our heavenly Master: to moderate our fierce, and outrageous
passions, these rough ways to be made Quod sit, si salebrarum asperitas
conteratur (nam id (...) significant) ut quando terra contunditur, quae ad
doctrinam contritionis pulchre convenient, vult enim Deus habitare in fracto
and contrito Spiritu Isai 66.2.
smooth, by gentleness, meekness, and the like virtues. This is the way that
Christ himself trod in the days of his flesh, and by this way he would come
unto us; He stays but our leisure to make it ready for him: you may hear it
from his Prophet Isaiah, Expectat Dominus ut misereatur. Isai 30.18.
The Lord waits that he may be gracious unto us: Could we see what need we
have of his coming, by the sight of our sins, and our misery by sin, we should
not let him want for us, but sue unto him, and importune him with David's
passionate, earnest longing, Psalm. 101.2
Psalm. 101. O when will thou come unto me? And look what resolves he there
makes, to prepare himself for so great a Guest, the same should we, and ought
so to do; as we hope to obtain his presence among us.

But see the course of the world herein, and this may seem to be the least of
our care, as if the charge did run quite otherwise; make straight your own
ways, and not that of the Lord: The practice of men runs chiefly that way,
wholly to mind their own ways, to make them straight for the compassing of
their ends; and for Gods way, Ipse v^derit, let him see to that. It is thus
with the most of us, we follow each other like sheep in a track; not qua eundem
est, but qua itur; walking (as the Preacher notes) in the ways of our heart,
Eccles. 11.9
and in the sight of our eyes, and never set our selves about the way of the
Lord, to prepare for his coming: until we are going the way of all flesh, and
are even within the hemisphere of the other life.

Some inclinations we have perhaps, sometimes that way, but it is only as a
morning cloud; let a trifling pleasure, or some sorry profit come beside us (as
the golden balls to her in the fable) we are apt straightwayes to turn out of
the way, Heb. 12, 1.
and forget the race that is set before us, but (...) here, imports as much as
(...), a path so straight, as no turning aside unto any thing else, no turning
back to our former courses.

And rectas facite, meets with another disease of the world, that is, talking
much about the way of the Lord, great discoursing of Religion, but little or no
doing at all; as if it were rectas dicite only; some goodly words, and no more
to be thought on, a fair show of leaves, and no ftuit at all; but rectas facite
is the charge, not to be talkers of this way, but doers of it.

And yet (rectas) requires something more at our hands, a right intention we
are to proceed with, in the way of the Lord; that our obedience be not out of
fear, vain glory, covetousness, etc. but only for the Lord himself, and for
the glory of his Name. In 1. sent. did. 1.
It is one thing (say the Schools) to seek God for fruition, or to enjoy him;
another to seek him for commodity, or make use of him; One thing to seek him
only for conscience to know his will, and do thereafter, another to seek him
to serve our own turns, and make advantage by it; one thing to seek the face of
God, to take delight in the light of his countenance, another to seek the hand
of God, that it may be opened, and fill us with good: To seek him thus, is not
the right way; the Jews he blames for so seeking. Hoseah 7.14.
They have not cried unto me with their heart, when they howled upon their
beds, they assemble themselves for corn and wine: Seek him they did, after a
sort, when his chastening was upon them; but it was not with their heart, not
with a desire to regain his favor, It was for nothing but to have their empty
Barn, and Cellar supplied with Corn, and Wine, the want whereof made them howl
like beasts: To. 16.18.
and so by their crying, they served not God, but their own belly; which is
that, that God here complains of, and we to beware of doing the like: It is
true indeed in our coming to God, Heb. 11.6.
we are to believe that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him; and
we may with Moses have respect unto the recompense of the reward: Verse. 26.
But still, the principal end must be, the glory of God, this the mark we are
chiefly to aim at, in our seeking, and serving of him.

There is something yet behind in the Text, that calls for our speed in this
godly employment, (...) is in the present tense; allows us no time to put it
off, but out of hand to go about it: what ever our other businesses are, this
first to be done that most concerns us: And this is not all neither, (...) is
quickly; an adverb standing in the forefront of the verb, to excite and quicken
us (slow as we are in spiritual matters) not to let slip this opportunity,
which being once lost, can never be recovered. 2 Cor. 6.2.
Behold, now is the accepted time, behold, now is the day of salvation! to work
it out now while we have the light, Phil. 2.12.
before the night of death overtake us, before we be gone too far on that way,
from which there is no returning.

But this is a motive at large as we make it, it may serve all our lifetime;
There is somewhat more particular now, that the rod of Gods judgments is upon
us; even to drive us into the way of the Lord, when all ways below are
distracted, and full of danger.

To pursue our sinful pleasures still, were a strange kind of stupidnesse,
Isai 42.25.
when the fury of Gods anger has set us on fire round about; even while he is
storming us with his judgments, then to provoke his wrath against us. We laugh
at the Thr^ces dum tonat fulguratque, in coelum sagittas excutiunt, Deo minit
antes, quod nullum alium praeter suum esse arbitrantur. Herod. U^erpe.
Thracians for no better then mad, that when it thundered and lightened most,
shot their arrows against heaven in threatening wise, and what other do we by
our oaths, and blasphemies, but shoot arrows against heaven, and challenge
the Almighty! so long it will be in vain to complain with the Prophet Jeremy,
how long shall I see the standard, Ier. 4.21. Verse. 22.
and hear the sound of the trumpet? It is Gods answer there; For my people is
foolish, they have not known me, were never the wiser after all those
sufferings; and till that were done, his anger would not be turned away, but
his arm stretched out to inflict new punishments.

There is one motive yet that comes nearer then all, from time of Advent, and
from this day especially; the last of that name. Wherein by the Gospel of
Christ's forerunner, the Church would teach us to prepare for his coming in the
Feast approaching: that we keep the Birthday of so great a Prince in some
measure answerable. (...), Orat. 4: adversus Julian. 2.
as Nazianzen speaks, not in the magnificence of gorgeous apparel, and costly
fare, (indeed, our wants take an order for these, our exceeding that way)
(...), but in the purity of the inward man, in the joy of the spirit. This we
may all, and the more of this now, by how much shorter in the other: even to
make a virtue of necessity, Phil. 4.4. John 16.22.
and turn all our mirth to Gaudere in Domino: This joy none can take from us,
yet.

As we have time then, (now more then ever for this purpose) to bestow the more
in the decking of our souls, that we come not into the presence of Christ,
Augustine. Ser de temp. dom. 2. Adv.
vitiorum pannis involuti, (as St. Austin warns us) clothed in the rags of our
wonted corruptions; to search, and examine all the corners of our hearts, that
no sin lurk there to offend the eyes of his glorious majesty: to come furnished
with charity, meekness, humility, etc. as the trimmings of our faith, the
wedding garment.

Secundum quod unumquemque ornatum bonis moribus viderit, ita illi gratiam suae
misericordiae dispensabit. Aug. ibid.
As he sees us thus prepared, he will come the more furnished with gracious
largesses of his mercy; will not be behind earthly Princes, in munificence on
his Birthday.

Thus (as the Prophet Hosea speaks) after two days he will revive us; Hos. 6.2.
so many as shall be partakers of his feast at the holy table, Ioh. 6.51.
and in the third day we shall live in his sight, by eating of the living bread
that came down from heaven: and shall thereby receive all the benefits of his
merits: Remission of our sins for one, with the assurance of inward peace, the
peace of conscience. And who can tell but that this may be the pledge, and
earnest of outward peace, even that with our enemies! It was so unto Jerusalem;
The Prophet next before my Text, bids cry unto her, Isai 40.2.
that her warfare is accomplished, that her sin is pardoned; The forgiving of
the one, is the finishing of the other: It would the sooner be so with us, if
following the Prophets, and John Baptists counsel, we did make straight the way
of the Lord, that nothing might hinder him from coming to help us: Then would
he make a straight way for us, unto that peace so much desired: both filling
valleys, and flatting mountains, removing all obstacles that lie in our way,
which that he would do, we make our address to his throne of grace, in part of
the Collect of this day. Lord raise up thy power, and come among us, and with
great might succor us; that whereas through our sins and wickedness, we be
sore let and hindered, thy bountiful mercy may speedily deliver us; through the
satisfaction of thy Son, our Lord; to whom with thee, and the Holy Ghost, be
Honor, and Glory, world without end.

AMEN.
SERMON. VI.
ROMANS 12.21. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.


Militia est vita hominis super terram. Job. 7.1, Secund. vet.
THe life of man is a warfare upon earth, his enemies are those of own house;
his fleshly affections, a kind of viperous generation, that destroy the womb
that breeds them: we are the field in which they spring, and we are the field
in which they fight, and we are the enemies too, against whom they fight; they
fight in us, against us; It Is Saint Peter's metaphor; 1 Pet. 2.11.
(...); they war against the soul; and with too good success, do often gain the
victory over her. Sometimes pride and ambition swayes the Scepter within us;
then lust and covetousness, get the dominion: until Anger, and Revenge,
snatching the Empire from each of them, usurp the sole tyranny over us.
Affections more violent and outrageous then any of the other affections:
Caetera vitia impellunt animos, ira praecipitat. S n. de ira. l. 3.
Other affections do win the soul by assault; but these at once overrun her,
and like a mighty tempest, bear all down before them; minding nothing but the
dispatch of their fury, though with ruin and destruction. So that great need
we have to beware of this evil, and with our utmost strength to conquer it;
which is that, our Apostle advises every one in this precept; Deuteronomy. 30.15.
Be not overcome of evil, but etc.

Here is good and evil set before you this day, and it is at your liberty
whether you will choose, either to overcome with the one, or be overcome with
the other. (...). Damasc. l. 2. 24.

Homines igitur qui iracundia se permittunt, divino illo libertatis dono se
spoliant, and cum non agant, sed agantur, non inter homines, sed inter pecudes
sunt numerandi, Donzellinus: de ferendis injuriis, Remed.


No fatal decree or necessity compells you to either. If any such thing there
were, then were our preaching vain, and your labor also were vain; vain
striving to reverse what heaven has determined. It is (we see) the Apostles
counsel unto the Romans, whom he would not (certainly) have deluded with a
task impossible, nor have made them doubly miserable, by seeking to avoid a
misery unavoidable. It was their practice, not their destiny to be revengefull;
who being descended from warlike ancestors, thought it base, and degenerous,
to suffer the least injury to pass unrevenged. And hence (likely) it is, that
St. Paul disswadeth (them) more expressly from this sin, then any of those
other Nations unto whom he sent his Epistles, that he charge this doctrine
upon them with such variety of persuasion: as knowing how hard it is to
reclaim men from a vice of tradition. That summing up the whole charge in this
verse of my Text, he arrayeth it in the language of war, as best agreeable to
their military condition; as if thus he had said in plain terms; That shame it
was for them who had overcome Nations, to be themselves overcome of evil; the
vile passion of revenge. That after all these great victories obtained on
others, there was one yet far Nulla est tanta vis quae non ferro, ac viribus
debilitari frangique potest, at animam vincere, iracundiam cohibere, fortissimi
est, Lactant. Instit. l. 1.
greater remaining over themselves, by patience, and meekness, which is to
overcome evil with good.



The Dehortation in the former; Be not overcome of evil.

The Encouragement in the latter; But overcome evil with good.

In the treaty whereof while I am as the trumpet, Romans 10 1.
to excite you to the Battle, my hearts desire and prayer is, that it prove
not only a sound, but that it may more affect the hearts, then the ears, of
those that hear me. I begin with the Negative part, or dehoration; Ne vincitor
a malo. Be not overcome of evil.

First Part.
IT is a misery to be overcome, whereby we become subject to the scorn, and
insolence of the Conqueror: yet if our Adversary be noble, our sorrow is the
less, that he only overcame us, whose virtue (as it were) deserved a victory:
But where the unworthiness of the Conqueror meets together with the
overthrow, that makes the misery extreme indeed: Now both these mischiefs
befall every one in the act of revenge. He is overcome, and that by the worst
of enemies, evil it self; nor this by a single only, but a manifold evil;
three in one.

1. By his own anger, and impatience, that stirs him to revenge.

2. By the injury of his enemy, which he covets to revenge.

3. By the malice of Satan, who forwards the revenge; By all those he is
overcome, as may appear in each particular; have you but the patience to hear
the manner thereof, in the order proposed; and first, how he is overcome of
anger.

To be overcome is to suffer that which we are unwilling to undergo, and this,
does every one that is affected with anger. He suffers anguish and grief from
his adversary, and therefore betakes himself to revenge: which is no other but
the acknowledgment of his grief and vexation: And therefore Anger of all the
affections may best be termed (as St. Chrisostom notes) (...) a passion of the
soul; Chrysostom. ad Antiochen! Hom. 62.

Dolorem cum infer vult patitur, amara solicitudine ne non contingat ultio,
anxius. Val. Max. lib. 9. c. 3.


because he that is angry, is not so much agent, as patient rather, and suffers
a kind of agony in the fit of his anger: But you may see all the effects of an
overthrow; those that usually befall such as be overcome. First, in regard of
the body, which it ransacks as a City that is taken by the enemies, filling all
with tumult, and confusion; employing the members, some, as instruments of its
fury, the hand for striking, the tongue for reviling; Vultus minax, torvus
aspectus. pallor in facie, in labiis tremor, stridor in dentibus, verba rabida,
effrenata convitia, manus ad caedis violentiam prempta ^^si gladio int^rim
vacua odio tamen furiosae mentis armata Cypr. de Z lo. Qualem intra putas esse
animum, cujus imago extra tam foeda est. Sen. de ira. lib. 2.
others as the patients of it, as the eyes in flaming, the lips in trembling,
the teeth in gnashing. Nor be the colors here wanting neither, but set up to
the view, in token of victory, either a ghastly palenesse, like the guilt of
sin, or a bloody redness, like the rage that kindled it: And yet these are but
shadows of the disorder within; which could it appear, and shine through in its
true deformity, were enough to amaze, and startle the beholder.

Then secondly, you may see the effects of this overthrow in regard of the
soul, which it holds in captivity, dispoyling, and robbing her of all her
chief faculties, Qui eo morbo laborat neque cernere, neque audire recte
quidquam valet, sed rabie quadam efferatur, and rationis fit expers. Plato in
Tim.
that should lend their assistance: The reason, and memory can have no audience
in this garboyle. The senses become senseless, and loose their employment; So
as the party like a person possessed, neither hearing, or seeing any thing,
rusheth headlong, Sine id tempus veniat quo ipsi jubeamus, nunc ex imperio irae
loquimur. Sen. de ira. 3.
he knows not whither: does all ex imperio irae, from the command and violence
of passion. The man is expelled, and anger rules all: The Comoedian noted this
in his angry man, when he makes one bid him, Ad te redi, return unto thy self,
he was gone out of himself by anger, and had need to be recalled by friendly
admonition.

The last evil of an overthrow is death; nor is this wanting here, Stultum
interficit iracundia, Job 5.2.
says Eliphaz to Job, wrath kills the foolish man; it does so either way. He
that loves not his brother, abides in death. 1 John 3.14. Quam utique sibi
irrogarit, cum enim amor vitalis calor sit Anime, ejus extinctio mors est
spiritualis. Paris. de mor. cap. 4.
First with a spiritual death, depriving him of God his true life, and all the
comforts of his spirit; that he is no more but ambulans cadaver, a walking
carcass, being deprived of the true soul, that should quicken and enliven
him. Then oft-times too, with a bodily death, when inconsiderately rushing on
revenge, he lights on that mischief himself, which he intended to another;
or, but at best, does accompany him in the overthrow. An instance whereof we
have too often, in so many paires of duellists, the bravest Actors of revenge,
and such as the age most highly accounts of, where either party that engages,
is both sides in danger, if he have success in his rage by the death of his
Adversary, vincendo victus est, he is overcome conquering; The law, and his
conscience embitter the triumph, the one pursuing him with just revenge, the
other with the guilt of a slaughtred Christian. If he miscarry in the combat
(as victory is doubtful) his overthrow is here doubled with infamy, but in the
next world with -- (God knows what) worse: Purpuream vomit ille animam; he
pours out a bloody soul, even panting with threats, and dire revenge, and
what can he expect at the hands of God, but that he become the eternal
monument of his just vengeance! Thus you have seen him overcome by one evil
(and that were misery enough) but evil seldom comes alone, another follows
on the neck of this; he is victus ab injuria, overcome of that injury which he
seeks to revenge.

His very act of revenging does witness so much, for had he not been overcome,
he had not entered on revenge, unto which he now flies as the redress of his
injury, thinking by this means to mend himself, whereas it proves clean
contrary; for while he striveth to be revenged of some outward injury done by
man; he bring on his soul a far worse by sin, which tyrannizeth and insulteth
over her, and detaineth her in bondage more slavish then that of Egypt, or
Babylon. Besides, by revenging too, he becomes accessory to that evil which
he revengeth on his enemy; Non minus enim mali est refer injuriam quam
infer. Lactan. 6.18.
and thereby makes himself the greater offender of the twain: Quia duplicat
malum, says Tertullian De patientia cap. 8. Qui minorem etiam retorquet
injuriam, nequior eo qui prior inferendi author erat, quum injurii hominis
factum sequens, vituperationem in seipsum transfert. Tyr. Max. Ser. 2.
, because he doubles that evil which was but single before, and seconds the
fault of another by his own transgression. Thus by answering a fool according
to his folly, Prove. 26.4.
he becomes like unto him, nay, is a more fool then he, according to Solomon;
Chap. 14.29.
He that is hasty of spirit (that is, the angry person) exalts folly, is a
fool in the highest degree, that is thus improvident for himself. St. Cited by
Bapt. Nuz^. tract. de dilectione Inimicorum.
Hierome reports it for one of the Proverbs of Aristotle; Ignem gladio ne
confodias; do not stab the fire with a sword: giving his exposition therein;
that when an enemy like fire, incensed with malice, sparkles out in
reproachful speeches, a fool he were that would come with the sword of revenge
to increase the combustion, and not rather with the water of his tears to
allay the heat; he wailing the miserable state of him, that is thus on fire
with malice: but so far is the revenger from this, that like the moath to a
candle, he leaps into the flame himself, and endures a worse punishment, then
that he would inflict on his enemy. The worst he can do unto him, is but some
temporal mischiefs, in his body, or his goods, or his good name, but to
himself he procures a spiritual evil, even to the slaying of his soul; And
so becomes he as the Be, Nonne videtis Apem, quemadmodum moritur aculeo, per
illud nos animal docet Deus, ne proximos afficiamus tristitia, ipsi namque
prius mortem excipimus. Chrysostom. ad Antioch. hom. 68.
that by stinging acquireth her own death, and dies her self in the wound that
she gives another. So this is enough to show him twice overcome, and too much
for his misery, if rightly considered; but yet a third evil is behind, and the
worst of all three, he is victus a diabolo, overcome by the devil.

Although the soldiers win the battle, yet the victory is ascribed unto the
Captain, or General, that leads those forces; and such is the devil here, the
chief Agent in this conflict, that sets those instruments on work, so to win
more soldiers to his side: whereby (accordding to St. Ambrose's comparison) he
plays the part of a crafty fowler, Ambros. de offic. 1. Diabolus venator ille
est callidiss. qui per acceptam avem inclusam cavea aliam comprehendere
nititur, etc.
who takes one bird by another, and having caught thine enemy fast, in his
snare of malitousnesse, urges him to reproachful language, that so thou an
unwary bird answering him with the like note, may be taken likewise in the
same snare. And to this purpose it has been observed that the devil is called
(...) in the Gospel, Mat. 13.28
the hostile man; because he assaileth men by man, and makes one the Engine to
overthrow another. Basil. hom. 10. de ira.
Whereupon it is St. Basils advice, that when we see any man offending us, by
contumelious words, or actions, we should conceive him to be (...), etc. a
stone cast by the devil against us, and so place our anger aright on him that
sent it, and not on the party that is sent upon us, but rather to take
compassion on him, who for that time is not himself, but like one Vis tibi
demonstrem animam spumantem and immundam? Cogita irascentes, and ebrios ex ira,
etc. fuse Ch is. ad Ant. 30.
possessed with a devil, is violently borne unto those outrages, by the spirit
that is in him; so that to be like him in malice, is but to come over to the
devil, and to take his yoke upon us, who contriveth injuries as a stratagem to
provoke our impatience, and thereby to increase his cursed dominions.

And thus without more ado, we have brought the Revenger to his third
overthrow, and that is his highest, or superlative degree of misery, we can go
no further. Now meet it were, that we assay how to deliver him from this
plunge, and withal to defend our selves, from the like hereafter; Both which
we may do, by making use of convenient remedies: For that which is past, there
is no other way but only repentance; with showers of tears to quench those
raging flames of anger, and that fire of hell, which thine anger unrepented of,
has kindled against thee. Then, for the time to come, the prevention were
easy if we would our selves: if we did not maintain our enemy against us; But
we give way unto it our selves, we cherish the Serpent in our bosom, that
frets and corrodes us. For without our consent, not crosses, nor enemies, nor
all the powers of earth and hell could move us to anger: for as it was smartly
said of the Icon. Animorum. Quos graves nobis non ipsorum merita, sed nostra
delicta fecerunt. Leo. de Quad Ser. 1. -- Neque nos hostium foritudine, sed
sola vitiorum nostrum impuritate superari. Salv. de gub. lib. 7.
Turks, and their immense conquests; that they gained more, nostra ignavia
quam sua v^rtute; by the sloth of Christians, then by their own valor, so it
may be as truly of these temptations; that they more prevail by our
negligence, then by any strength that is in them: we never strive, nor take
arms against them, but like those weak Christians in St. Cyprians time, Ante
aciem multi victi, sine congressione prostrati etc. Cyp. de laps.
that revolted to idolatry, before any persecution once assailed them; so are
we in like manner ante aciem victi, overcome almost before the encounter; nay,
foiled and vanquished by anger, without so much as a thought to withstand it.

But no longer to detain you from the remedies, the means to prevent this
dangerous mischief are principally these.

Sicut qui expectant obsidionem contrahunt and in promptu collocant quibus est
opus, nihil spei collocantes in bis quae sunt extra civitatem. Ita nos oportet
adversus iracundiam, etc. Plut. de cohib. ira.
1. As against an enemy, stare in procinctu, to keep watch, and ward against it;
to meet the first motion thereof arising in our hearts: which we may easily
suppress and vanquish at the beginning; but if we suffer it to kindle with
delay, it will break forth into a flame, that will hardly be quenched.

Then secondly, to withdraw those forces whereby it takes advantage against us;
as namely, a too much love (...), etc. Basil.
of our selves, by means whereof every thing enrageth, and offends us, that
complies not with our humor, and disposition; whereas did we look Innocentem
quisquis se dicit, respiciens testem non conscientiam. Sen. de ira. 1.
impartially into our own bosoms, (...), quam sc. ex multis vitiis,
sceleribus, etc. compactus sis. Doncellin.
and there take a right survay of our faults, and obliquities, we should find
more then enough for our anger, to spend it on our sins, and not mind the
injuries of others against us, by thinking of our own more grievous against
God, our heavenly Father.

3. It may awaken our courage to consider the circumstances, that we are
overcome by a passion; that which was made to be the servant of the soul, which
is no less shameful and preposterous, Nescias utrum magis detestabile vitium
sit, an deforme. Sen. de ira. 1.
then for a King to be vanquished by a slave: nay, by the worst of passions;
such an one, as is not more loathsome and detestable, then ugly and deformed.

But chiefly consider the danger. First, in regard of our weak and frail
bodies, that may perish in the preparation of our revenge against others. And
then, See the Parable of the King, that punished him who showed no mercy to his
fellow. Matthew. 18.12.
Secondly, in regard of our souls, that depart in rage unto the Judgment Seat
of God; and what mercy can they look for there of him, that were here so
implacable toward their fellow servants.

Hitherto we have heard of the several overthrowes that accompany revenge,
with the miserable consequences arising from the same; which may serve as an
incentive to rouse up our courage, and to inflame us with a desire of
conquering that evil: To the conquest whereof we are incited by our second
General; which is the encouragement, or active part; vince bono malum, But
overcome evil with good.

It is not fuge, fly from evil, Second General. Quaeris quare te fuga ista
non adjuvet? tecum fugis. Sen. Ep. 28.
no flying from Anger, unless we could leave our selves behind us; Nobiscum
fugimus: we carry the enemy along with us: nor it is not resist, neither,
resist evil only, which is enough to foil the devil, Jam. 4.7.
as St. James informs us; resist the devil, and he will fly from you. But it
is vince, overcome, to assure us, that in this combat against anger, it is as
well the Christians case, as the Roman soldiers; aut vincere, aut emori;
either to overcome, or be slain; no other way besides that, to save us.

Overcome then we must; but what are the means, whereby we may obtain the
victory? why easy enough, and as certain too; for as there is no poison in
nature, but has its antidote; no disease in the body, but has its remedy: so
likewise in the spiritual state, each mischief is answered with a redress. The
evils (as we heard) were three, and right so many are the goods to amend them.
And as in physic, Ad morbos extremos, extrema exquisite remedia praestant.
Hip. Aph. lib. 1.6.
each disease is best cured by his contrary; so here in like sort, against each
evil, we have its contrary good, for remedy.

1. The good of patience against the evil of injury.

3. The supreme Good, God Almighty, against the devil, the Arch-evill, by
every of these we may get a victory; and first, vince patientia, overcome by
patience.

In Olympicis lex esi malefaciendo vincere; In stadio Christi, non eum qui
percutit, sed qui percutitur coronari decretum est. Chrysostom.
A new kind of victory, to overcome by enduring; and far different from the
custom of the world, where he has the prize, that by might, and force, subdues
his adversary: But it is otherwise in the lists of Christ; here, he that
receives the hurt, is crowned as Conqueror, and winnes the Field without
giving a blow: And therefore in the Armory of the Church described by Solomon.
Cant. 4. Cant. 4.4.
We hear of a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men; of bucklers, I say,
weapons of defense, and safeguard, but no mention of a sword, or spear, to
invade, or offend an enemy. And hereupon it is observable, 2 Cor. 12.12.
that St. Paul makes patience to he the first sign of an Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.
The signs of an Apostle were wrought among you in all patience: and
peradventure on this ground, 2 Timothy 2.
he exhorts Timothy to manifest his spiritual warfare, not so much by
fighting, as by suffe- (...), endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ; Heb. 2.10. Luke 24.26.
which hardness every one must endure, that will be like unto him our Captain,
who by suffering entered into glory. And by this way those Armies of Martyrs
fought the battles of the Lord; being armed with no other weapons but patience,
and meekness: whereby they triumphed over the malice, and torments of their
adversaries. But you may see the evidence of this victory in every true patient
man; Eodem exitu dispungetur quo telum aliquod in Petra constantiss duritiae
libratum and obtusum, etc. Tertull.
upon whom if an injury light, it is but as the blow of a sledge up- a steel
Anvile, that makes no dint or impression at all, but recoyles on the hand that
smote it. Ille velut rupes pelagi, etc, He stands firm, Virgil. Aeneid.
and unmoved, like a rock in the Sea, which though never so much beaten on by
the waters, yet it is no ways shaken thereby: but breaks the waves that
assault it: So he, as it were, Proprium est magnitudinis verae non se sentire
percussum. Sen. de ira,
divinely insensibly, either seems to perceive not, or neglects the injury,
conceives the doer not worthy of his anger, but rather of his pity, as some
frantic person that should assail him: you will easily yield this to be a
victory, if you look on his enemy, how he frets and vexes to see his malice
thus defeated, N. iccirco quis te laedit ut debeas quod cum fructum ejus
evertoris non dolendo, ipse debeat necesse est. Tertull. de pat.
and disappointed: and even acknowledges the overthrow, by his sorrow and
coffeehouse: neither need we for proof hereof, go beyond his own confession,
but come from that unto the next way of victory: vince benesiciis; overcomes
with kindness, or good turns.

A victory somewhat stranger yet, to overcome malice, with doing good, but
certainly, more effectual, then that by patience; Thy patience perchance may
make thine enemy to consider, (...). Termena apud Sophoclem.
but thy goodness will make him relent; for in so doing (says our Apostle in
the verse next before) thou shall heap coals of fire on his head: An
expression borrowed from Refiners of mettalls, that are wont to heap coals on
the head of the Crucille, or melting pot, for the more thorow-effecting of the
work; and signifying here, Ardorem charitatis (as Haymo expounds it) the fire
of charity, Luke 12.49.
which Christ came to send on the earth; the coals whereof thou heapest on
thine enemies head, when thou relievest his necessities; Non in maledictum,
etc. Non in maledictum, aut condemnationem, ut plerique existimant, sed in
correctionem, ut superatus beneficiis, odii frigore excocto igne charitatis
(nam hoc ordine legenda sint verba) Inimicus esse desinat. Hieron. lib. 1.
cont. Pelagian.
says Saint Jerome, not for his judgment, or condemnation, (as some
erroneously imagine) but for his correction, and reformation, that being
overcome with courtesies, he may cease to be thine enemy, having his enmity
purged away by the fire of charity. This will do it, if any thing will; let him
be of never so sullen metal, the coals of love, and friendly offices will
melt, and soften him; and transform his stubborn hatred, into compliances of
affection. We have an experiment hereof in Saul, a person of an obdurate
nature, that hardly we shall find a worse; and yet David mollified him with
good turns; insomuch, that 1. He drew tears from his eyes; 1 Samuel 24. Verse
17. Verse 19.
Saul lift up his voice, and wept, 2. A confession from his mouth, Thou have
rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil; nay, 3. A bllessing from
his heart; Cant. 8.6.
The Lord reward thee good, for that thou have done unto me this day. So that
the Spouse in the Canticles might very well say, (and so the Quia Hebraei
comparativo carent.
Original will warrant it) love is stronger then death; stronger certainly in
this way of victory, whereby David did more perfectly overcome Saul, then by
death he could have done: Thou shall love thy neighbor and hate thine enemy,
Mat. 5.43 Quod etiam in uno homine malo impleri potest. In ipso enim uno qui
malus est, and proximu^ habes, and inimicum. Aug. detem. Ser. 8.
For he that conquereth by death, does but overthrow the body, leaving the mind
wholly averse, and unconquered; but he that conquereth by love, overcomes the
whole man; destroying the enemy that hated him, and preserving the person, to
love and honor him.

This is Gods own way of victory, to overcom by mercy, and goodness, so, he
overcame David, with his murder and adultery; Peter with his threefold and
shameful denial, Paul with his blasphemy and persecution; Gal. 1.23.
who nevertheless obtained mercy, even to preach the faith, which once he
destroyed. And but for this way of victory, heaven had wanted many of her
Saints, and the earth been desolate of Inhabitants. Romans 5.20.
But this is mercy befitting his Majesty, that where sin abounded, grace did
much more abound: Isai 42.25.
abound toward those that did all they could, to provoke the fury of his anger
against them: Romans 11.3 with 1 King. 19.14.
for what greater provocation, then that which Elias complains of the Jews;
Lord, they have killed thy Prophets, and d^gged down thine altars; and yet
notwithstanding these indignities Vt sua sibi patientia detrahat. Tert. de pat.
, he plyes them still with continual blessings; nay, when their malicious
wickedness was come to the highest, that they had no more Prophets to kill;
after all, he sends unto them his Son, Cum majorem aggressi sunt impietatem
majoribus eos prosecutus est beneficiis, etc. Chrysostom. ad Antioc. hom. 31.
even then bestowing this highest of his favors, when they had committed their
utmost impieties.

And if we look on him that was sent, our blessed Savior, in him we may no
less behold the like wonder of mercy, when having in his all-torne body, Nec
remansit in eo nisi lingua, ut pro crucifigentibus oraret. Ger^. Medit. 2.
no part left whole, save only his tongue; he employeth this in praying for
those that crucified, and blasphemed him, which is (if we compare them right)
the greatest benefit, for the greatest injury; to pray for those that so
despightfully used him. And doubtless, no such powerful means to obtain their
pardon of his heavenly Father. The effect whereof we may plainly see in the
conversion of so many The number of the men about five thousand. Acts 4.4.
thousand at Peter's Sermon, which had not been so effectual, but for the
prayer of Christ on the Cross: which could not possibly but find audience in
the ears of a gracious Judge. When we see here below, nothing so prevails with
the Judge in behalf of the Malefactor, as when the party offended sues, and
intercedes for him; And yet this did Christ for his deadly enemies. Nay more
then this, Acts 2.23: and 3.15.
he died for those that by wicked hands (as Peter tells them) had crucified and
slain the Prince of life, and powered out his precious blood for their sakes
that spilt it: Vivificatur sanguine Christi, etiam qui effudit sang. Christi.
Cyp de bono patientiae.
making this extreme act of their malice, the only means of their salvation.

Here was overcoming indeed, of abundant evil, with exceeding abundant
goodness, Tit. 3.4.
as if the kindness, and humanity of God our Savior, would strive with the
perverseness of man, to outvie, and conquer it. And what is this but to teach
us the like way of victory, to contend with the malice and crossenesse of our
enemies, by our charity, and good deeds! nor need we doubt of the success,
having God himself for our example; nay more, for our assistance too, as it
follows in the last place, vince malum Deo, Thou have God of thy side, and
need not fear, what man, or devil can do against thee.

This is our last, and surest refuge, that if all other means should fail us,
here, we may be sure to overcome, if we commit the matter to him; if we do but
as the Apostle exhorts us in the nineteenth verse, dare locum irae, give place
unto the wrath of God, who (there) challenges revenge unto himself, as his
royal prerogative. Mihi vindicta, Revenge is mine, and assures us by his
promise, of the execution thereof; Ego rependam, I will recompense says the
Lord. So that to be forward in our own revenge, is to anticipate, and usurp the
office of God, and to assume that to our selves, which is his peculiar
jurisdiction; and so by consequence, to make God our enemy also; whereas to
refer the cause unto him, is to give him this right, Plus improbum illum caedis
sustinendo, ab eo enim vapulabit cujus gratia sustines. Tertul.
and will prove much more beneficial to us in the end: as bringing the
Almighty into our justice, and making him the Revenger of our quarrel, who
will not be wanting unto his own charge; but will either vindicate our cause by
some sensible token of his wrath on our adversaries, Patientes facit de
secutura ultione securitas. Cypr. cont. Demetrian.
or so arm, and fortify our minds with Christian constancy, and resolution,
that we shall find even pleasure and contentment in our sufferings; Or
howsoever, it shall one day prove our advantage, when The Lord shall reward
thee. Prove. 25.22.
God shall (...), wear us Garlands more glorious out of those injuries that we
have endured for righteousness sake: Mat. 5.10.
so that our short and light afff^ction shall work unto us a far more
exceeding, 2 Cor. 4.17.
and eternal weight of glory: which the righteous judge will give unto every
good soldier of Christ, that by patience and meekness following the Captain of
their salvation, are made perfect through sufferings. Heb. 2.10.
We have his own word for it. Revel. 3. Revel. 3.21
Vincenti: To him that overcomeh, will I grant to sit with me in my throne,
even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father on his throne. Let not
this trouble you; though (notwithstanding this glorious profer here made by
Christ) nothing were promised in effect, being to be had on such hard
conditions; by Mat. 20.22. Cypr. de Zelo.
drinking of his bitter cup. For, habet and pax coronas suas, besides
persecutions Crown of Martyrdom, even peace has her bowels too; wherewith to
crown the Christian Conqueror upon his victory of his adversaries; to subdue
incontinence is the prize of hostility: to overcome anger, and revenge, is the
triumph of patience; By these, and the like, 2 Timothy 2.5. 1 Cor. 9.25. 2 Pet.
5.4.
we may strive for masteries, and obtain a Crown incorruptible, a Crown of
glory, that fades not away.

intended not to dissuade them from repelling violence by lawful def^nce, or
to disarme the Christian Magistrate for the punishing of injustice: Ver. 1.3.4.
The Chapter following will clear this mist, commanding subjection to the
higher powers, and propounding Rulers as a terror from evil works; as bearing
the sword for that very end, and being Gods Ministers to execute wrath upon him
that does evil; His meaning is only here to repress the immoderate passions
of anger and revenge in private concernments; that we be so far from returning
evil for evil, as rather to forbear, and forgive one another, Colos. 3.13.
Ephesians. 4.32. 1 Cor. 11.23. M^t 7.28, 29.
if any man have a quarrel against any, even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven us. Nor is this any other but what he received of the Lord, who among
those astonishing doctrines which he taught as one having authority, inculcated
this beyond the rest, with more variety of expression. Love your ensmies,
bless them that curse you, Chap. 5.44.
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despightfully use you,
and persecute you. This is the grand result of the Gospel, the great duty that
Christ came to preach, and to exemplify by his life, and death, and yet Multum
a vero aberrant inepti quidam homines, qui hoc tantum Christianismi esse
aniunt, ut hosts diligantur, and negant in Veteri Testamento, ad id Hebraeos
fuisse adstrictos; non enim variata est lex Dei post Christi adventum, etc. P.
Mart. in 2 Reg. 6.22.
not so new, as some would fancy it, but that the Old Testament had much to
this purpose, both for precept, and practice.

1. For Precept, Thou shall not revenge, nor bear any grudge against the
children of thy people: Levit. 19.18. nay more then so; Thou shall not abhor
an Edomite, Inter omnes Gentes quas Judei poterant immicas reputare, erant
Aegyptii, a quibus omne injuriae genus, and crudelitatis monstra passi sunt. B.
Nuza, de inimicorum dilectione.
no not an Egyptian, Deuteronomy. 32.7. Those that the Jews might have reason to hate
beyond any other nation; from whom they had suffered all the miseri^s of a most
tedious, and cruel bondage. The same was intended by that injunction of
reducing, and relieving an enemies beast, Exodus 23.4. Isid. Pelus. Epist. lib.
3. Ex. 389.
thereby to mediate a reconcilement, when the party thus pleasured could not
choose but be wrought on by that courtesy. But expressly and clearly, Prove.
25.21. If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat, if he be thirsty give
him water to drink, for thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head; which
very place our Apostle here cites, for the pressing of Christian charity, Cum
grandi diligentia observandum est, ne dum hunc locum non been intelligimus, de
medicamentis nobis vulnera faciamus; solent enim nonnulli hoc praeceptum quasi
ad satiandum furorem suum assumere. Ser. de tem. 168.
and that is enough to make it appear, that Solomon meant it in a Gospel-sense,
not so, as some in Saint Austins time abused this precept, for the satisfying
of their revenge, feeding their enemy for no other end, but that he might burn
in eternal torments; Avertat Deus, Ad sanandum ergo talem phreneticum homines
sanctos, and charitatis igne succensos hortatur sp. sanct. dicens, Carbones,
etc.
says the Father; God withhold this sense from our minds, that any should do
good turns with this mind, to implunge the Receivers into endless punishment.
It is none of the Holy Ghosts meaning, this; who intends hereby not the bane,
but the cure, of him that is sick of the frenzy of malice, Cum enim inimico
tuo pio animo frequentius benefeceris, quam libet sit impius and crudelis,
tandem erubescet, and debet, and poenitere incipit quod admisit, etc.
and that is (by plying him with frequent benefits) as it were to surround him
with the fire of thy charity, which will move him at length, be he never so
barbarous, to blush, and grieve, and repent of his rancour against thee, and to
requite thee in stead of hatred, with hearty affection: This for precept.

Then for practice; it is no less evident, by sundry particulars; By the
kindness of Joseph toward his Brethren, Genesis 50.15.21. Exodus 32.32. and chap.
17.4. 2 King 6.22.23.
that deserved so ill at his hands. By the charity of Moses interceding so
passionately for the Jews, that were ready to stone him; By the courtesy of
Elisha in entertaining the Assyrian armies, that were sent to destroy him, by
the Evangelicall spirit of David, Psalm, 7.4.
who was so far from rewarding evil, that (to use his own words) he delivered
him that without a cause was his enemy.

But yet however, that which was barely propounded there, and rarely performed
by one among a thousand, is powerfully pressed in the Gospel, Mat. 5.44.
with an Ego dico vobis, an express Commandment to love our enemies, and to
express it with all the tokens of hearty affection, as blessing, relieving,
praying for them: And for examples to enforce it, there be such as none can be
greater; of God the Father giving his Son for us when we were enemies, Romans
6.8.10. Mat, 5.45* Heb. 12.3 Acts 10.38
and making his Son to shine on the wicked, and the unthankful. Of God the
Son, that notwithstanding the contradiction of sinners went about doing good,
all his lifetime here on earth; and dying, prayed for those that crucified him.

Of Christ's disciples, that followed their Master both in teaching, and in
practicing; as Stephen the first Martyr, Acts 7.60.
that spent his last breath in crying for mercy on those that stoned him: and
Paul the Apostle, with his fellow laborers, whose profession it was, 1 Cor.
4.12.
being reviled, we bless, persecuted, we suffer, being defamed, we entreat;
and how the next Christians in the Primitive times were affected this way,
(when the Spirit that descended in the likeness of fire, Acts 2.3.
enflamed their hearts) the ancient Writers have sufficiently witnessed, when
the heathen could say of them between envy and wonder, Tertull. Apologet.
Vide ut se invicem diligunt; see how these Christians love one another. And no
less for their carriage toward those without, how they powered forth Idem
ibidem.
prayers for tyrants, and persecutors, Eusebius. Eccl. hist. 5. cap. 5.
refreshed their armies in the time of drowth, lib. 9. cap. 8.
relieved such as were their worst enemies in grievous famine, and this they
did so much the more cordially, as they Cypr. cont. Demetrian. Et sic Deo plus
placemus, etc. Hoc nobis credimus expedire, ut vos diligamus, and in vos qui
odistis, omnia conferamus. Lact^nt. lib. 5. cap 12.
believed it was acceptable to God, that they should bestow all good things on
those that hated them.

In the Ages, succeeding how much they declined from the Primitive simplicity,
and child-like innocence, they increased in malitiousnes, every day more and
more, fulfilling that Prophecy of our blessed Savior, that because of
iniquity abounding, Mat. 24.12
the love of many should wax cold, we have seen the proof hereof, Nusquam
plane visum tantam hujusce pestis gravitatem, nusquam tam intolerandam, and
nunquam tamen senescentem diuturnitatem extitisset, etc. J. Sau^oman. ad princ.
Christi.
if ever, in these last times, when wars and dissensions are no where so
frequent, bloody, and continued, as among the professors of Christianity, as
if the God of peace and love had withdrawn his influence, and suffered the
devil, the Author of discord, to sow his tares of division among us: How have
we hereby given occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme! 2 Samuel 2.14.
Jam. 2.7.
to blaspheme (I say) that worthy name, by the which we are called: and when of
themselves they are (...) (as Nazianzen Orat. 33.
speaks in the like case) apt to defame us with forged scandals; how can we
think they should now forbear us, having filled their mouths with just
reproaches! In stead of that we mentioned erewhile, it may be their note of us
us now to the contrary; Vide, ut se invicem oderint! as if this were now become
the cognizance of Christ's disciples, to hate one another. Certainly, this is so
far from converting Turks, and Jews, unto out Religion, that it may rather
Lud. Vives de verit. fidei. lib. 3.
confirm and harden them in their infidelity. That this cannot be the expected
Messiah, of whose peaceable kingdom the Prophets have spoken such glorious
things. When men are so far from beating swords into plow-shares, that they
turn bells into murdering Jovis veluti fulminibus, horrifico quopiam tormento
oppetere, Sauroman. deerat adhuc vitiis nostris dignissima mundo Mach^^^, etc.
Inv. Bellica.
Canons: so far from not learning war any more, that many have learned nothing
else; it is become the only thriving profession. The wolf so far from dwelling
with the lamb, that the lamb is rather become a wolf, Domestica crudelitas non
modo id habet in se mali quod tot Cives atrocissime sustulit, verum etiam
hominibus lenissimis ademit misericordiam, consuetudine incommodorum. Cic. pro
Rosc. Orat. 2.
our intestine cruelty having not only this mischief in it, to bereave us of so
many Natives, but also to deprive the most gentle natures of all compassion, by
the continuance of our tumults. The Leoopard, the Lion, and the Bear, and what
other Beasts of prey, Isai 11.6.7
whereby the Scripture would set forth the salvages and wild conditions of men,
have each of them acted their parts of late in human shapes, Nulli rabies
acrior, caeterae animantia in suo genere probe degunt, congregari videmus, and
stare contra dissimilia, Leonum seritas inter se non dimicat, etc. at hercule
homini plurima ex homine sunt mala. Plin. hist. not. 7. prooem v. Call. Rhodig.
lib. 10. page 21. Scalig. Exercit. 33. and 189. 5.
and that with more cruelty, then any of those creatures have expressed in
their own nature; none of them having been found so cruel, each to other, nor
to have done so much hurt unto men, as men have done unto themselves; which may
be some color unto the scoffers in these last days, 2 Pet. 3.3.
to encourage them in their lewdness, and to say, where is the promise that
God repeated by his Prophet; Isa. 11.9. and 25.5.
They shall not hurt, nor destroy in all my holy mountain? when this alone has
been the scean where all the mischief has been acted, insomuch, as the
mountains of prey, the deserts of Lybia, Psalm. 76.4. Number. 35.
and Arabia, were Cities of refuge, in comparison.

But we need not so much wonder at this perverseness; Nimirum videri non
debet, quod tam multi adhuc ferociant, pauci enim sunt very incolae montis Dei.
for as Calvin gives the reason, There be few true Inhabitants of Gods mountain
(few (he means) so meetly qualified, as David describes a Citizen of Sion,
Psalm. 15. few entire and real converts, even among those that profess
themselves Christians, when the unregenerate part is yet so predominant in
them, it cannot be otherwise, but jarres, and conflicts must rage amongst them.
Jam. 4.1.
St. James has clearly so resolved it; from whence come wars, and fightings
among you? come they not hence, even of your lusts, that war in your members!
Vitia quae in nobis regnant, sunt quasi armati satellites ad pugnas
concitandas. Calvin. in locum.
The sins that reign in us are as so many armed Troopers, to embroyle us in
contentions. These must be subdued, as ever we hope to see peace established in
our borders; Psalm. 147.14,
It is not our presuming of the spirit within us, that will do this work, but
our conconforming unto the spirit, thereby to mortify the deeds of the flesh.
Rom 8.13
Now what our endeavors are in this kind, if it may be judged by our works,
there is small appearance of any such matter intended by us: when some whose
office should engage them to be peacemakers, Mat. 5.9. Romans 10.15.
as to preach the Gospel of peace, Illi ipsi sunt acerrimi turbarum Incensores,
(if we may have leave to complain with that devout Frenchman) even they are
the greatest Incendiaries of tumults, Caroli Paschal. Christianae preces. 53.
Iuctifici belli con^it^^es.
and the fomenters of a dismal war, Mare etiam positis flatibus inquietum.
Minut. Felix.
sounding alarmes from the Pulpit, and stirring up the giddy multitude, as the
winds do the Sea, which of its own nature is unquiet, though Eolus did spare
his lungs. Psalm. 55.21.64.3.
Others having war in their hearts, whet their tongues like a sword, and bend
their bows, to shoot their arrows, even bitter words: who is there almost
among us, Ecclus. 19.16. Iam. 3.2.
that offends not in this kind? whose language is not well nigh cursing?
Cujus non sermo maledictio est? etc. votis malis pro armis utimur. Salv. de
Gub. lib. 3.
The weapons of our anger are imprecations; what we have not the power to act,
we supply with destructive, bloody wishes, Acts 9, 1.
breaking out nothing but threatening, and slaughter, and doing more execution
this way, killing more thousands in a moment, In moment^ occidet 10000.
hominum, and hoc sola voluntate, etc. G. Parisiens. de morib. cap. 8. v. 5. v.
11.
then Armies of soldiers can do in the field; That if God should offer us our
choice, as to Solomon, to ask what he shall give us, 1 King. 3. it may be
justly feared, Drexel. sign. 9. Praedestinat. Sect. 4.
the life of our enemies would be our request; the main thing we should ask at
his hands.

But what we can do fos the promoting of our own interest, that be sure, shall
not be omitted, though never so much to the prejudice of others; well said the
heathen man, Sen. de ira. l. 2, c. 31. Vt licentiam sibi dari velit, in se
nolit.
Regis quisque intra se animum habet, every man has in him the mind of a King,
taking liberty to himself over others, but allowing none over himself; will not
do so unto men, as he would they should do unto him; although against the rule
of Christ: the Law, Mat. 7.17.
and the Prophets. In a word, so far we are from advancing the profit of
others with our own discommodity, Tantum abest, ut aliorum commodis aliquid cum
propria incommoditate praestemus, ut omnes vel maxim nostris commodis cum
aliorum incommodo consulamus. Salv. de Gub.

Assiduitate molestiarum sensum omnem humanitatis ex animis amittimus. Cic. pro
Vosc. Orat. 2.


that we rather pursue our own profit, with another discommodity; so far from
overcoming evil with good, that we return evil for good; come short herein of
the very Publicans: This we have gained by the length of our civil broils,
even to loose all sense of humanity, and civil respect.

I will not be Non sum ambitiosus in malis, etc. Quintil. lib. 6. pr.
ambitious in recounting evils, nor labor to aggravate matters of complaint;
But rather endeavor (if I could do any thing) to propound some expedients to
amend them: wherein I shall only touch on such motives, as will best suit with
the scope of my Text; lest otherwise I might let in such a Sea of matter, that
we should remediis laborare, Special motives for loving enemies.
to account the remedy in part of the disease. Our first consideration, 1. The
remembrance of our Christian profession.
then, shall be the remembrance of our Christian profession, which engages us
not only to patience, in the suffering of injuries, but to goodness also, by
overcoming them with love, and kindness. It is that which Saint Peter
intends by charging us not to render evil for evil, 1 Pet. 3.9.
or railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing, knowing that we are
thereunto called; Our calling calls for this duty at our hands; that we be
not herein out-gone by the heathen, that a Pericles; Socrates, Aristides, Vid.
Val. Max lib. 4. cap. 2. de reconciliatione, and lib. 5. cap. 1.
etc. rise not up in judgment against us, and condemn us; that cannot do by
the doctrine of Christ, and the strength of grace, what they they did by the
rules of Philosophy, and the light of nature.

But we have other gates Examples then these, to be our leaders in this kind;
one for all, 2. The example of our Lord and Master.
our blessed Savior, the Author, and Founder of our profession; who suffered
for us (says Saint Peter) leaving us an example, 1 Pet. 2.23.
that we should follow his steps, who when he was reviled, reviled not again,
Vnum nobis instar omnium coeli ac terrae fabricator ac Dominus, (...).
when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges
righteously. Let us be assaulted with the reproaches, affronts, indignities,
that malice and cruelty can charge upon us; (...)! Orat. 25.
to speak with Nazianzen, how small a part are these of the spitting,
buffeting, scorns, and blasphemies, that Christ endured! Cum ab ^improbo
quodam caesus esset, ac discissa terra ad tartara virum illum detradere
facillime posset, etc. Basil. Orat. cont. irac.
And though he could with less then a breath have dispatched the Offenders
quick into hell, he never so much as opened his mouth, save only to pray that
they might be forgiven: was so far from the least revenge, that being risen
from the dead, he gave special charge unto his Apostles, Luke 24.47
that repentance and remission of sins, should be preached in his Name, among
all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, where all the despite was done unto him:
And expressly by the mouth of Peter, Acts ^.38. and 3.19.
made tenders of mercy unto his murderers; whom he received upon their
submission, Interfectores suos non s lum ad indulgentiam ^rimmis, sed ad
praemium regni* caelestis admittit. Cypr. de pat.
not only to the pardon of their offense, but to the inheritance of his
heavenly kingdom; I know not how this Act of grace affects us, but it put
Saint Chrysostom into an ecstasie of admiration, Ad Antioch. hom. 52. ex
Matth^eo.
(...)! what more wonderful then this! even they that murdered the Son of
God are after this fact, admitted to be the sons of God; (...), says the
zealous Father, at the hea^ing of this, we may hide our faces; that are herein
so far from him, whom we are enjoined to imitate, so far, as even to make war
with those, for whom Christ laid down his life; and not to be in peace with
them, whose peace he made by the blood of his Cross. If all this will not move
us yet, 3. The danger of ^n^^^ing this duty.
At least, and lastly, let the danger be considered: Do we ever hope to see
heaven on these terms; or to be our selves forgiven? for this latter, we have
our Saviors warning-piece* Math. 6.15. If ye forgive not men their tresrasses,
nei her will your Father forgive your trespasses: Ad tam magnum tonitruum qui
non experg^scitur, non dormit* sed mortuus est August^i^.
at the voice of which thunder, he that is not awakened, is not asleep, but
dead in sin: And for the former, his oath to confirm it; Verily I say unto you,
whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not
enter thereinto; As a child, See Mr. Herons Sermon; The minority of the
Saints: 2. Doctrine.
not only in respect of humility, but in freedom from malitiousnesse; As our
Apostle expounds it Cor. 14.20.
elsewhere. And no question to be made of it. The unmortified passions of flesh
and blood, cannot inherit the kingdom of God, no more then corruption
incorruption; 1 Cor. 15.5^. Revel, 21* 27.
There shall in no w^se enter into it any thing that defiles: of which sort
are the works of the flesh; and among these are excluded by name, hatred,
variance, wrath, strife, of which the Galatians were forewarned more then once,
Gal. 5.21
thaet the doers of such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

He that shall well consider this; how much the eternal joys of heaven exceed
the delight of a little revenge for the present, Qui nondum om^em humanitatem
exuerunt, diligenter secum expendant, non ob leviculam voluptatem a tantis
bonis velint excidere, etc. Donz^llin.
will never consent to make such an unequal exchange, worse incomparably, then
that which the Homer. Iliad. de Glauc. ac Diomedis armorum permutatione.
Poe^ laughed at, (...), of gold for brass; to lose so rich, so glorious a
reward, for so poor, so vile, so shameful a pleasure; which though it may seem
Idem, ibidem.
(...), sweeter then honey to the taste, it will prove bitterness at the last;
as it is usual for sweet diet, to engender choleric humors in the body:
There is the like humor in the mind too; Anger is not termed (...) for naught;
Among other reasons which I pass, here it may do well to mind us, that we are
to take the like course for the care of this inward malady, as we do for the
other without; that is, abstaining from al^ such things as be apt to nourish
it, and by making use of such means, as will help to allay it, D. Cyprian. de
zel^ et livore^ in fine.


Among which, I commend for a close of all, the advice of that blessed Martyr;
Cogita coeleste regnum, ad quod non nisi concordes, atque unanimes Dominus
admittit; Think of that heavenly kingdom, unto which the Lord admits none,
but those that be of one heart, and affection. Think that they alone shall be
called the sons of God, who by a new birth, and holy life, answer the image of
their heavenly Father; Think that we stand in the presence of God, beholding,
and judging the course of our lives; and that then we shall come to see him; if
we now walk pleasing in his sight: which that we may do, beseech we him, who
works in us both to will, Phil. 2.13.
and to do, of his good pleasure; that we may have grace to put away from us
all bitterness, Ephesians. 4.31, 32.
and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking with all malice, and
that we may be kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even
as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us.

AMEN.
SERMON. VIII.
ECCLES. 12, 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.


A Remembrance needful for us all; not only for those of the younger sort,
unto whom it is expressly directed, but for these likewise of (...). Aeschy.
apud Stob.
elder years, be they never so aged; at least to remember them of that youth
they once had; and to recall unto their minds those days of vanity, wherein,
if (on strict enquiry) they find any thing amiss, as who alas shall not do
so? They may redeem that time misspent, by unfeigned repentance; Nor to defer
that work any longer, Vita hac misera est mors incerta, si subito obrepat
quomodo hinc exibimus? et ubi nobis discenda sunt quae hic negleximus? etc. non
potius hujus negligentiae supplicia luenda sunt? Aug. Cont. lib. 1. cap. 11.
but even now to take it in hand, before they be any elder. So, the precept
some way, concerns us all, and every one of us so to take it, as if spoken to
himself; Remember now thy Creator, etc.

Quid, and the Quando; The matter to be remembered, and the time wherein to be
remember it. The treaty whereof I shall briefly present unto your attention,
beginning with him who is the beginning, both of us, and of all things.

First Part.
AN admonition superfluous, one might think, to bid any one remember his
Creator, as if any one could be so unmindfull as to forget him, that has
bestowed ^o many memor^als of himself, all the Creatures that we see about us;
that has given us our selves, so full of eminent blessings, and wonders to be
the O admirabile, and divinum divinae sapientiae monumentum artificii
excellentia, and nobilitatis splendore, and majestate pulchritudinis
praestantissimum! Ant. Zara Anal^mia ingenior.
monuments of his divine bounty. Insomuch, that we cannot look any where, not
move, not breath, not live; but we have objects on all sides to remember him.
The Seneca de Benef. lib. ^. cap. 3.
Heathen Moralist prescribed this as the only remedy against the most
desperately ungrateful person, Beneficiis tuis illu^ cinge. so to encompasse
him with thy benefits; Quocunque se vertit. memoriam suam f^giens, ibi te
videat.
that which way soever he turns himself, from the memory thereof, he should
not choose but behold them. God has done thus for every man, even what the
Devil said of Job, made an hedge about him, and about his house, Job. 1.10.
and about all that he has on every side; that if he would never so ^ain, he
cannot avoid the sight thereof; and yet all this notwithstanding, it is
possible to forget him, nay Tum maxim Deus ex memoria hominum elabitur, cum
beneficiis e us fruentes honorem dare divinae indulgentiae deberent. Lactant
div. inst. l 2. c. 1.
then most of all, when he has given most tokens of his favor to be
remembered. It is that whereof he warnes the Jews; Deuteron. chapter 6. v. 10, 11,
12. Deuteronomy. 6.10.11, 12.
When the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into land which he swear unto
thy Fathers to give thee, Great, and goodly Cities which thou buildedst not,
and houses full of all good things, which thou filledst not, when thou shall
have eaten, and be full, then beware lest thou forget the Lord. A caveat it
seems, no more then needed, and not enough to secure them from the danger. It
is this, which God so much complains of by the mouth of all his Psalm. 78.42.
and 106.21. Isai. 51.13. Ier. 2.32. Ezech. 22.12.
prophets, that his people had forgotten him, who had done so great things for
them. For Ios. 8.14. etc. So it falls out many times, that whereas a greater
largess of his blessings should be the improving of our memory, it proves (as
we make it) the main obstruction thereunto; Bishop Andrews on Filirecordare.
Luke 16 35.
and as a full diet in the vessels of our bodies, so a plenteous receipt breeds
stoppings in the mind, and the vital parts of our souls. It is thus with the
best of us many times; and therefore no marvel, if the worst have need to be
rowzed with the Psalmists compellation, Hear this, O ye that forget God! Every
sinnner does certainly so, in an high degree. Psalm. 50.22.
The drunkard in his intemperate quaffing, Dan. 5.1. Isai. 5.11. Job 24.15.
Psalm. 94.7.
the adulterer in his lewd embraces, the oppressor in his cruel violence; who
would not dare to commit these impieties, did they remember God as they ought.

To remember him therefore as we ought, is not with a bare remembrance that
there is a God; Iam. 2.19. Ephesians. 2.4. Psalm. 119.137.
(The very devils do so, and tremble) but with serious, and deep consideration,
that he is such a God; a God both rich in his mercy, and also just in his
judgments, and thereafter to express the fruits of this remembrance in an holy
and reverent conversation.

First then, memento, and ama, Remember thy Creator by remembering his work of
thy Creation, that he made thee so exccellently; Little lower there the Angels,
Psalm. 8 5.
setting thee next to these glorious spirits, to partake with them in their
highest perfection, in bearing the image of thy Creator; Omnia quidem bona
opificia, (...). Cyril. Catech. 12.

In creaturis rationalibus, in quibus est intellectus, and voluntas, invenitur
representatio Trinitatis per modum imaginis, in quantum invenitur in eisverbum
conceptum, and amor procedens. Sed in creaturis omnibus per modum vestigii,
etc. Aquin. p. 1. q. 45. a. 7. and h 93. art. 2.


which is not vouchsafed any of the other creatures, remembering this, let it
enkindle his love in thy heart, that seeing nothing so like unto thee as thy
God (and Aquin. 1a. 2ae. h. 27. art. 3.
likeness ever begets affection) thou reflect thy whole love on him, and hold
him only worth thy loving; disdaining to bestow that Jewel of thy soul on any
other inferior object, Colos. 3.2.
by setting thine affections on earthly things; Sicut ineptissimum esset and
contra naturam conjungere mulierem cum Brutoita etiam contra naturam esset, si
voluntas noctra quae est de natura spirituali conjungatur per amorem cum re
primo amata naturae extraneae; ut cum auro, argento, and rebus mutis, and
irrationalibus. Raimund. de Sab. lib. Creat. tit. 136.

Si inferius est te quod amas, ad utendum ama, non ad illigandum; v.g. Aurum
amas; noli te alligare auro, quanto melior es quam aurum; Aurum enim terra est
fulgens; Tu autem ut illuminareris a Domino, ad imaginem Dei factus es, cum sit
aurum creatura Dei, non tamen fecit Deus aurum ad imaginem suum, sed te* Ergo
posuit sub te aurum, amor ergo iste contemnendus est, ad usum assumenda sunt
ista, non eis vinculo amoris quasi glutino haerendum est; non facias tibi
membra, quae cum coeperint praecidi, dolebis, atque cru^iaberis. Quid ergo?
assurge ab isto amore, quo amas inferiora quam tu es. August. hom. 37.


which were as incongruous as for a Prince brought up in scarlet, to embrace a
dunghill; Iam. 4.5. Psalm. 49.12.
Being created into so great honor, do not become like the beasts that perish;
nay Quando cogitatione percurrimas omnia Creaturarum genera, offert se in
singulis magna admiratione conspiciendus pulcherrimus ordo divinitus
constitutus, in solo homine in quo tanquam imagine Dei illustriora deberent
esse divinitatis vestigia, tam tetrae sunt conf^siones, etc. Ch^mnit. loci com.
de causa peccati.
worse then these, in swarving from the Rule and Order of thy Creator; Ne Dei
opus flagitio coinquina, non peccato perverte -- Tu es vas a Deo fictum, (...),
Greg. Ny^s. de hom creat. Sermon. 2. Quia sola vitia and peccata Dei injuriae
sunt, and contumeliae, qui diligit^ haec, est Dei inimicus. saltem facto: Gal.
P^ris. de virtut cap. 11.
Every act of love to a sin, is a violation of that duty which belongs to the
God of love, 2 Cor. 13 11. who having done v. Nieremberg: de art volunt. lib.
4. cap 62, 63. and seq.
all to endeere thy affection, as if he had made a Gul. Paris. de elect. div.
cap. 2.
fire about thee, to inflame thy heart with heavenly ardours, may justly
challenge Et quid enim non amaret opus Artificem, cum haberet unde id posset?
Bern. de dilig. Deo.
this tribute at thy hands; and it were sacrilege in thee, to withold it
from him.

Render it then, as a rent most due unto thy Great Landlord, and to make it
appear the better, that it lie not smoothered in thy breast, like the talent
hidden in the earth; Mat. 25.25.
in the next place, Memento and gratias age, Remember his gracious, constant
blessings wherein he daily remembers thee, which should he forget but only one
moment; Homo continue, and incessanter indiget conservari, and manu teneri ut
esset, quia de nihilo est, and in nihil rediret, si n^ a manu Dei
conservaretur; Ecce ergo quomodo homo sum ind get Deo; quia sine ipso, nullo
m^d^ potest esse, nec potest durare per unum m mentum. Reimund. tit. 107. and
supra tit ^7.

Hunc autem effectum ca^sat Deus in rebus, non solum quando primo incipiunt sed
quamdiu in esse c nservantur, sicut lumen causatur in aere a sole, quam liu aer
illuminatus manet* quamdiu igitur res habet esse, tamdiu oportet qu^d Deus
adsit ei secundum modum quo esse habet. Aquin. part. 1. q. 8 art. 1.


no other way there were with thee, but to fall back into thy original
nothing, Heb 1.3.
from which the same power of his word upholds thee, which once created thee;
Remembering this, Heb. 13.15.
offer (as the Apostle minds thee) the sacrifice of praise to God continually,
that i^, the fruit of thy lips, giving thanks to his name. This is Mr. H^okers
Ecclesiastic. pol. lib. 5. ser. 43.
all the requital we are able to make for his unspeakable mercies toward us;
a hearty, and sincere acknowledgement, how precious we esteem such benefits
received, and how infinite in goodness, the Father of lights from whom they
descend. Iam. 1.17.
D. Sandersons Sermon on 1 Timothy 4.4.
More then this in his mercy he will not desire; less then this in all reason
thou can not give; It were gross injustice, if Teneris illi regratiari, qui
tibi tantum dare voluit; unde omnis creatu^a clamat tibi, accipe, read; accipe
beneficium, read debitam, etc. Raim. t^t. 97.
receiving his good creatures, thou will not return him thanks for them.

Yet lest the remembrance of these blessing should exalt thee above measure, 2
Cor. 12.7
as it befell th blessed Apostle through the abandance of revelations, 3.
Memento, and humilis esto, R^member what Mr. Hookers Sermon of the nature of
pride, toward the end.

Vndique vilissimi sumus, ob id quod sumus, and ob id quod non sumus -- ob ea
q^ae Deus fecit pro nobis, etc ob ea quae non fecit in nobis, etc. N^eremberg:
de adorat. lib. 2. c. 16.

Eph^s. 2 3. Rev. 3.17. 1 Cor. 4.7.


thou art, or have of thy self; that is nothing whereof to glory, b^t to
humble, and abase thee; being by nature, as others are, wretched and miserable,
and poor, and naked; For who makes thee to differ from another? and what have
thou that thou did not receive? The more thou have, so much the more k
endebted thou art to his grace that gave it; and more Vero humilis omnia bona
quae a Deo recipit, sibi esse onera intelligit, quibus in quanto plura sunt, in
tanto se Deo strictius obligari veraciter conspicit. Guil. Par^s. Mat. 25.^5.
accountable for the talents committed unto thee; which if thou improvest not
in some measure according to the grace that is given thee; He that lent them
(finding thee like that Unto whom much is given, of them much will be required.
Luke ^2.48. Cum enim augentur do^a, rations etiam crescunt dono^um. Greg. hom.
9 Quanto enim maius abiquis beneficium accipit* tanto magis est obnoxious
poenae, ingratus existens, and neque honor melior effectas, etc. Chrysostom.

Piger ejicitur in tenebras exteriores; quod siis qui tantum non est usus,
quidei futurum qui fuerit abusus ad injuriam Dei? Lu^. de Pont. par. 5. med t.
58.


sloathfull servant) can take them from thee' and strip thee naked, as in the
day of thy nativity, Ezech. 16.4, 5. and therefore Humiliter confitentes
fragili^atem nostram illius mise^icordiam deprecemur, ut dignetur in nobi non
sol^m cust^dire, sed etiam auge^e beneficia, quae ipse dignatus est da^e.
August^n.
humbly confessing thy frailty, become a suitor unto his mercy, that prevented
thee with the blessing of goodness, that he would vouchsafe not only to keep,
but also to increase those benefits in thee, which he vouchsafed to bestow on
thee; All that thou have is from his bounty, and therefore Non ait simpliciter
quid gloriaris? quasi non acceperis, sed addit, ut adferat reprehensibilem, non
qui in habitis, sed qui tanquam in non acceptis gloriatur. B^rnard.
glory so in the having; as to be humbled in the receiving; giving all the
glory to him, from whom alone thou have received. 1 Cor. 4.7. Or if this be not
enough to work in thee a due regard of thy Creator; let this be the fourth
advice, Genesis 18.25
Memento and time, Remember that he is the Judge of all the earth; who is no
less sharp in discerning, then severe in punishing iniquity: having eyes so
piercing, that he beholds even the Heb. 4.12.1^. Haec ad (...) referri
possunt. Hensius.
the thoughts and intents of the heart; neither is there any creature that is
not manifest in his sight; but all things are naked, and opened unto the eyes
of him with whom we have to do; (or as the Syriack Cui reddunt rationem ut sit
sensus reddendam esse Deo omnium n strarum cogitationum and actorum rationem. B
z^.
reads this place) unto whom we must give an account of our inmost thoughs,
and actions: that if our hearts should be so false as not to condemn us, 1 John
3.10.
God is greater then our hearts, and knows all things; knows them better
then we do our selves; as being Quod sit in me, and intra me magis quam anima
in corpore, and intimius, per modum essentiae, praesertiae, potentiae: Lud. de
Ponte. p. 6. med. 14. Aquin. p. 1. q. 8. art. 3. Cu^li^et n. Creaturae realiter
illabitur, estque sibi intimus ratione suae immensitatis. Nich de Orbellis.
did. 37. Sent. 1. Tu enim altissimo, and proxime, secretissime, and
praesentissime, ubique totus es, and nusquam l^corum es. Aug. Cons. l. 6 c. 3.
nearer to our souls; then our souls are to our bodies; Nequaquam tales sunt
hominis gestus and actiones quando solus in domo sua, quales sunt cum versatur
coram magno aliquo Rege, quare quicunque elegit persectionem humanam, and in
rei veritate vir Dei esse cupit, expergiscatur a somno suo, sciatque Regem max.
perpetuo sibi adesse, and inhaerere, Regem inquam long majorem omnibus Regibus
mortalibus, etc. Ralt. Ma^mon. Nebochim. p. 3. cap. 52.
remembering then, this all-seeing presence; that fills heaven and earth with
his glory; be afraid to offend so dreadful a Majesty, or if thou have a mind
to sin, August. de verbis Domini: sermon. 46. Aut si peccare vis, quaere ubi te
non videat, and fac quod vis.
seek thee out some ret red corner where he may not see thee, and do what thou will. It were desperate madness in that malefactor, who x Deus qui sua adest
essentia, Judex est omnipotens and justus, quis audeat coram Judice, cui semper
praesto sunt satellites and carnifex ipse furtum, etc. admittere? Zanch. de
Na^. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 6.
should dare to commit any capital crime in the sight of his j^dge, that were
certain to to arraign him, and how much more, in presence of that Almighty
Judge, who observes thy closest actions; be they never so wittily stifled with
walls, Quos plerunque circumdatos nobis judicamus, non ut tutius vivamus, sed
ut peccemus occultius. Sen.
and darkness; so as he needs no witness to accuse thee; but shall his self be
both witness, and Judge, and lay all thy misdeeds before thee, when thou must
give an account of thy thoughts; thy loose and licentious thoughts; which
securely lodging within thee, O quam mirabiles and terribiles oculi quos neque
cogitatio prava praetervolat! Deus enim sicut videt actus, ita hominum
contemplatur affectus, nec opus est ut quis ei testimonium perhibeat de homine.
Pet. B^es. epist. 20^. Cui cor omne patet, and omnis loquitur voluntas. Gloss
in G^atiani deci.
as if none could see them there, made thy heart a cage of unclean birds, of
noisome lusts, and vile affections: an account of thy words, thy idle, and
impertinent words, all what ever thy tongue has rashly and vainly uttered; and
how much more then, Quod si de omni etioso verbo, Deo sunt reddituri rationem
in die judicii, quanto districtius de verbo mendaci, mordaci, etc. bern, sermon.
de 3. custod.
of thy profane and malicious words; whereby thy Creator has been
dishonored, and thy neighbor wounded! an account of thy gifts, thy manifold,
and several gifts; be they natural endowments, as wit, and memory, or
temporal commodities, as wealth, and honor, or bodily eminencies, as
strength, and beauty, or spiritual graces, as faith, and knowledge; And as in
all, or any of these, thou shall be found any ways delinquent, to receive thy
sentence at the mouth of God; Oh! th^s were enough to curb, and restrain thee
in the midst of thy sinful courses, when thou walk (as Solomon speaks) in
the ways of thy heart, Chap. 11. v. 9.
and in the sight of thine eyes, but then to remember, that for all these
things God will bring thee into judgment; a judgment from which there is no
appealing, Greg. Naz-Orat. 15.
(...); as the great divine expresses it, but it is the only, the supreme,
and dreadful judgment, and yet more just then dreadful, or to speak rightly,
because just, 2 Cor. 5.11.
the more dreadful; knowing therefore this terror of the Lord, let the
thought hereof, like a clap of thunder, awaken thy memory; And if hitherto,
thou have forgotten thy Creator, Quod homo qui primo amat seipsum, facit
seipsum tanquam Deum, and praeponi^ se Deo. Raimund. tit. 140.
by thinking too much, and making an Idol of thy self, yet now, (let me be thy
Remembrancer) begin to remember him; Thou that art grown old, and ruinous in
the neglect, let no more time escape thee, do it nost in the days of thine Et
damna aetatis male exemptae labor sarciat. Sen. not. quaest. l. 3.
age; And thou that enjoyest the prime of thy youth, Opt^mos vitae dies
efftuere prohibe. Sen. Hippol.
let no time escape thee, do it now in the days of thy youth; the Text
bespeaks thee more particularly, In diebus juventutis tuae; Now, in the days
of thy youth.

Second part.
NO time is unseasonable to remember our Creator; who deserves our continual
remembrance, as well in Childhood, and old age, as in youth, and yet youth more
then either, has need (it seems) to be remembered of this duty. Regenda magis
est fervida adolescentia Sen. in Octav.
It is hence that wickedness begins her reign, which but kindling as a spark
in infancy, does now break forth into a flame, catching hold of all about it.
Now is that (...), (as St. Epist 3. ad Olympiadem.
Chrysostom calls it,) the tempest of conc^piscence, which raising up waves,
and billows in the blood, endangers a shipwreck of the soul; Now those (...)
(as St. In Chap. 3. Isai.
Basil terms them) unruly motions, which like wild, and untamed horses, not
obeying the curb of reason, do carry the rider Confess. l. 2. c. 20.
per abrupta cupiditatum (as St. V. Tyr. Max. sermon. 22. par. 2.
Austin confessed of himself) through the precipices of sinful desires* Now is
that Lively expressed by Sinesi^s, lib. de provid. p. 1. under the fable of
Osi^is and Typhos.
war of the affections, which l^ke rebels cause sedition in the soul; that
we may say of them, as the Church did of her enemies; Saepe adversati sunt mihi
a pueritia mea, Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth; Psalm. 129.1.
although we cannot say on with the Psalmist: they have not prevailed against
me; too often, alas! they have prevailed, Jam mortua est adolescentia mea mala
and nefanda, and ibam in juventutem, quanto aetate major, tanto vanitate
turpior. Aug. ^onfes. l. 7. c. 1.
may the best of us complain, for besides this heat of youth, it is rash, and
inconsiderate too; and instead of quenching, increases this fire with the
fuel of riot and intemperance, addicts it self wholly to sports, and
pleasure, not thinking of the vitiousness that lies under; as being yet
unacquainted with the deceitfulness of sin: Heb. 3.13.
never so much as dream^ of repentance, but puts off that (with frugality)
(...). Arist. rhet. lib. 2^ cap. 14.
until old age, in hope of a long life to come; and in the mean time lets
loose the reins unto all excess of riot. 1 Pet. 4.4.
So that Job reckons it up for one of his bitter punishments, Job 13.26.
that God made him to possess the iniquities of his youth; and David craves
pardon especially for these, Remember not the sins of my youth: which are so
much more dangerous then the sins of riper age, as they are done with more
eagerness, and less remorse; Psalm. 25.7.
with so little remorse of conscience; that often times rather with delight, and
ostentation; libidine laudis, as it was with St. Praeceps ibam tanta coecitate,
ut inte^ coaetaneos meos puderet me minoris de^eco^us, quu^ audiebam e^s
jac^antes fla^itia s^d and tanto gloriantes magis, quanto magis tu pes essent,
and libebat facere, non solum libidine jacti, verum etiam lau^^s. Conf. 2.
Austin in his younger days, even glorying in those foul extravagancies, that
should be their shame and sorrow; Good reason therefore that this warning
should be addressed unto youth, as a bridle to withhold it from the course of
sin, by the remembrance of that great God, who shall one day examine them
before his dreadful Judgment Seat. And so, this may suffice for our first
reason, why this charge is given unto youth.

Animus dum tener est, ritu cerae quae formas impressas facili^^ recipit,
confestim ab ipso initio omni rerum bonarum un^^i eccercitatione debet quod
viz. ubi postea rationis vsus accesserit pie^ati jam ^b ineunte aetate
assurtus, cursu utatur facliore, etc. ^ ul.

Tum vel maxim formanda aetas cum simulandi nescia est and praecipientibus
facile cedit, frangas enim citius quam corrigas quae in malum induruerunt.


and ready to receive it; either, first, in regard of the memory, that is now
like soft wax, meet for any impression, and never likely lets go, what is
once committed to it. Or 2. in regard of the will, which in tender years is
plyant, and yielding unto the direction of teachers, and governors: whereas
being then left undisciplined; it will prove a difficult matter afterward. Just
as it fares with plants, or Ciens; which being young, or but newly set, are
apt to be bended any way, and to be ordered in a right posture; but let them
grow into trees of bulk, and hardly any reforming then; then you may sooner
break, than amend, that which is hardened by long custom. Deficit esse remedio
locus, ubi quae fuerant vitia, mores sunt. Sen. epist. ^9.

Natura ten acissimi sumus eorum quae rudibus annis percipimus, ut sapor quo
nova imbuas, durat, nec lanarum colores quibus simplex ille candor mutatus est
elui possunt, and deteriora pertinaciter haerent. Qu^n^.


(...), said the Philosopher; for custom becomes a kind of nature, and can no
more in some sort be altered, then nature it self. Now therefore good heed
would be taken unto what youth is accustomed; and as in the spring of the year
there is great care commonly had of the body, in dieting and purging it; for
likely as it is then disposed, it continues all the year after; so likewise in
youth, the spring of our life; no less care would be had of the soul, by
seasoning it with godly virtues; for it will ever after retain a tincture of
this first institution; -- Adeo a teneris assuescere multum est.
So that Solomon advises to very good purpose, Instrue puerum; Prove. 22.6.
Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old, he will not
depart from it, not depart from that way which he learned of a child: and great
pity it were then, but now he should learn it. Dicunt philosophi humanae
vitae cursum Y literae esse similem, quod unusquisque hominum cum primum
adolescentiae limen attigerit, and in eum locum venerit, parts ubi se
viafindit in ambas, haereat nutabundus, ac nesciat in quam se partem potius
inclinet; Si ducem nactus fuerit, qui dirigat ad meliora titubantem, etc.
Lactant. lib. 6. cap. 3.
He is now come to that place of his life, where the way parts in twain, and
he stands doubtful unto which he should incline: whether on the right side, to
virtue, and labor, or on the left, to vice, and pleasure? Good counsel would
do very well now. Now it concerns parents, and governors Pet. Bles. Epist.
cap. 51.

Richeri obstetr. Animorum cap. 3.

Montagnes Essaies lib. 1. cap. 26.

Charron de sagesse lib. 3. chap. 14.

Causins Holy Court. tom. 1. lib. 1. mot. 8. and l. 3. sect. 39.


chiefly to order them; to make use of this convenient season for discipline,
and instruction; to employ that violence of their affections on virtuous
courses; to sow that rank soil of their minds with the seeds of piety; which
would otherwise be overgrowne with the weeds and briers of sin; to nourish them
up in civility, modesty, temperance, meekness, and the like Christian virtues,
as to guard them no less from the contrary, insolence, impudence, pride,
debauchednesse, Malignus comes quamvis candido and simplici rubiginem suam
affricuit.

Pejora juvenes facile praecepta audiunt. Sen. trag.


and what vices soever; to prevent all occasions of these, and especially,
corrupt company, the plague, and bane of all goodness, whose poisonous leven
more infecteth, and sinketh deeper into the soul, then all the precepts of
virtue, and godliness can do on the contrary.

Lastly, to put them often in remembrance of these things, and to use all the
means and advantages to help their memories herein: As the Romans did wisely
for their parts, Nonnulli credunt ingenuis pueris attributum ut cordis figuram
in bulla ante pectus annecterent, quam inspicientes ita demum se homines
cogitarent, si cord praestarent, etc. Saturnal^^
in the apparelling of their youth, by ordaining them (first) a robe of
scarlet, or purple color, ut pudore suae nobilitatis (says Macrobius) that
for the reverence of their nobility, they might refrain from vicious actions;
and then 2. a golden boss on their breasts, in the shape of an heart, that so
beholding each other, they might then account themselves true Gentlemen, if
their hearts were honest, and virtuous; But here, parents themselves (too many
of them) had need to be remembered, who in this point (worse than the heathen)
are no where more supine, and negligent, than in this matter of education;
Mollis illa educatio quam indulgentiam vocamus, nervos omnes and mentis, and
corporis frangit. Quintil.

Verba ne Alexandrinis permittenda delitiis, risu and osculo excipimus.


that instead of breeding, do oftentimes corrupt their children, either (1)
with too much indulgence, and mildness toward them; never finding in their
hearts to chastise them, but rather cherish them in their faults; receiving all
their lewd words with applause and smiling, as the tokens of a pregnant nature;
which fond indulgence, as it is still pernicious to children, by unsinewing
their minds, and bodies, into all kind of luxury, so it proves many times (by
the divine justice) no less disastrous unto parents, If you leave them
unmanured, all overrun with thorns, and briers, you shall become answerable to
the justice of Almighty God, finding them one day nails, and lancets in your
sides, to transfix you even to the heart. Causin.
who are commonly most grieved with those whom they bred most wantonly; then
feeling the sad truth of Syracides his observation, Ecclesiast. 30. chap. (that
excellent Chapter of advice in this kind) verse 9 Cocker thy child, and he
shall make the^ afraid, play with him, and he will bring thee to heaviness. Or
(2ly) with their evi^ example, the most powerful motive unto sin, which
never enters so forcibly, as when it is armed with the authority of a parent:
Pet. Bles^: Epist. 74. acriter fit ex his consuetudo, deinde natura ^d scunt
haec miseri antequam sciunt vitia esse. Quint. Richeri Obstet cap. 3. and 4.
^gregie.
be it lying, swearing, drinking, or gaming, that usual, though dangerous
sport, which does not so much recreate, as infect them with all ill customs of
lying, and cozenage, and the like abominations: Or (3ly, and at best) all their
care is to instruct them in a thriving profession, whereby they may obtain
Boeth. de consol. lib. 2. prosa. 5. Vt in hoc seculo florerem Cons. t^. 9. cum
interea non satageret pater qualis crescerem tibi; lib. ^ cap 3.
inopes divitias the beggarly riches, and base glory of the world, not caring
how they thrive in religion, and the fear of God. And hence spring so many
defects both in Church, and Commonwealth; so many defects as we see in old
age, spring chiefly from an ill-bred youth; 1. A barren and ignorant old age,
Eccclus. 2^ 3.
from an idle and lazy youth, that neglected the Tuam in senectam condito
viaticum. Menand.
provision of knowledge against elder time: for Quomodo invenies, as Syracides
well demands; If thou have gathered nothing in thy youth, how can thou find
any thing in thine age? 2ly, a profane wicked old age, from a wild and
ungoverned youth; which then refusing the yoke of discipline, would never away
with it afterward: and therefore, Bonum a juventute, Lam 3.^7.
says Jeremy; It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth; for
after, he will not so well endure it; when his neck is grown stubborn and
unruly. 3ly, A diseased, and impotent old age, Libinosa ^ intemperans juventus
effoetum corpus tradit senectuti. Cic. de senect. -- Inde Coel. Rhodig. Ant.
lib. 19 cap. 20. Lod. Vives de verit, fidei lib 5. cap. antepenult.
from a dissolute, and intemperate youth, which bequeaths effoetum corpus (as
the Orator speaks) a decayed, and broken body unto age, abounding in nothing
so much as sin, whereof the bones shall be full, when they are empty of marrow:
by the witness of Zophar, one of Jobs miserable comforters; Job 20.11. Ossa
ejus implentur, -- His bones are full of the sin of his youth, which shall
lie down with him in the dust. The effect whereof is no other then a too late
repentance, as thou may hear from knowing Solomon, lively forewarning thee of
the misery; when thy flesh and thy body being consumed, thou shall take up that
woeful complaint, Prove. chapter 5. Verse. 11, 12, 13.
How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof, and have not
obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed
me! And all this, for lack of taking this opportunity of learning in the days
of youth; Our second reason.

Numb. 18.29. Numb. 18.29.
You shall offer unto the Lord of the best; and the best of our time is our
youth, in comparison of old age: For Quem admodum ex amph^^a primum quod est
sincerissimum effluit, etc. Se^.
even as out of a vessel the purest liquor comes first, and the thicker stays
behind, so in the course of our lives, the better days go before, and the
worse remain behind; therefore rightly here called by Solomon, Mali dies, Vnde
veteribus senectus mala aetas dicta est, ut pluribus ostendit N^n. Marc^llus
referente J^^io. (...). Ant. ap. Stob.
the evil days, that charge the mind more with vices, than the body with
infirmities: and for the body, disable that toward the performance of holy
duties, as watching, fasting, perseverance in prayer.

For true is that of St. Hierome, Cuncta quae per corpus exercentur, fracto
corpore minora fiunt, Every thing that is done by help of the body, is empaired
with the bodies decay. So unapt is old age for the service of God; nor is God
so favorable to old age, See old age and youih compared by Ch^rr^n of Wisd.
lib. 1. c 35. and Montagnes Essaies. lib. 3. cap 2.
as he is unto youth, as may appear by the difference of his favors imparted
unto them; those forementioned by the Prophet Joel, Chap. 2. of his prophecy,
and repeated by St. Peter, Acts 2. Your young men shall see visions, and your
old men shall dream dreams: So the youth is the worthier age, for that visions
are nearer apparitions of God then dreams: Fr. L^. Verulam, Advanc. of
Learning. lib. 1.
where the first shall have clear apparitions, and the latter only drowzy
fancies, no more to compare with the other, then a dream in the night with a
vision at noon day. He then that has spent his youth, the choicest of his
time, in service of the world, and the devil, and comes unto God in his old
age, with Non enim tantum minimum in imo, sed pessimum remanet, Sen. ep. 1.

Doctus Archimimus senex jam decrepitus quotitidie in capitolio mimum agebat
Aug. de Civit. 6. 10. Ex Seneca contr superstit.


the dregs and lees of his life, what acceptance can he look for then! that
then when he can sin no longer, comes to present himself a rotten, and unsavory
sacrifice: like that old decrepit Mimique, or Actor in Rome (reported by
Austin, out of Seneca) that being grown out of liking with the people, made his
recourse into the Capitol, and there fell a play ng before the Images, his
Heathen God; Quasi Dii libenter spectarent, quem homines desierant: as if the
Gods would accept, and take pleasure in that, which men had despised first.
Whereas he on the contrary, that has means, and occasions of sinning, as
youth, strength, beauty, etc. and n glects them Omnia ei qui me servavit d^no
dedi, opes. splendorem* val^^dinem sermon. ipsos (...), quod ea contemsi, ac
quaedam ^abu^ quibus Christum anteponerem N^z. Orat 1. apol^get.
all for his God, may be sure of kind acceptance. Amidst so many impediments,
and distractions to remember his Creator, this is thank-worthy indeed, no less
worthy than a spiritual martyrdom, Magnae virtutis est cum felicitate lucta
i^ ne corrumpat; magnae felicitatis est a felicitate n^n vinci. Aug. e d verb.
Them ser 13.
to debar himself of delights in the opportunity of enjoying them. Now then is
the acceptable time to draw nigh unto God, before the years draw nigh, Verse 2.
when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them; while the Sun of thy
prosperity is not darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain, V. Junii
notat. (...). Mi^^o^.
new causes of sorrow succeeding the former, that shall wholly indispose thee
to godly actions; when thy alacrity shall be dejected Nothing remaining but
these sorrows which grow up after our fast springing youth overtake it when it
is at a stand, and ove^top it utterly when it begins to wither. Sir W. Rauleigh
press.
with cares, thy devotion interrupted with aches, thy zeal even quenched (as
it were) with rheumes; and all the good motions of thy soul oppressed with
infirmities, when (diseases surprising thy senses) thou can neither speak,
nor hear words of comfort; not lift up thy hands, nor bow down thy knees in
prayer, and confession to God. Now therefore seek the Lord while he may be
found, Isai. 55.6.
while thy strength and abilities serve to seek after him: Optima quae que dies
miseris mortalibus aevi prima fugit, subeunt morbi, tristisque senectus, and
labor. -- Virg. Aenead. 10.
while the graces of youth may endeer thy service, and make thee to appear more
pleasing in his sight. And so we have done with our third reason of this charge
unto youth.

Ista res est quae multos occidit cum dicunt cras, cras, and subito ostium
clauditur. Aug. ser. 16.

Quis scit an adjiciant hodiernae crastina summa tempora dii superi! Hor. Od.
7. l. 4.


while it is in diebus, in the days of thy youth, not knowing whether thou
may live to do it any older, but that even this night thy soul may be
fetched from thee, and what becomes then of that conversion, which thou have so
improvidently deferred? He that has promised mercy at any time unto the
repentant, has not promised one day to the negligent, that refused to Amos. de
Consc. l. 2. c. 3.

Qui poenitenti veniam spospondit, peccanti diem rastinum non promisit. Grec
gor.

Luke 19 44. Psalm. 95.7. 2 Cor. 6.2.


know the time of his visitation. It is his admonition, hodie, to day if ye
will hear my voice, harden not your hearts; And his again, Ecce nunc est dies
salutis, Dies salutis utique (says Declam. in verba Petri. Matthew. 19.27.
Bernard) non voluptatis; It is not said the day of pleasure; and therefore
spend not that time on thy pleasure, which God has allowed thee to work out
thy salvation; Philip. 2.12. Ioh. 9.4. and 12.35.
work it out now, while thou have the day, ere the night overtake thee, when no
man can work, nor have any remembrance of a Creator, for in death (says the
Psalmist) there is no remembrance of him. Psalm. 6.5.
And how soon this may befall thee, who can tell, but the Father alone, that
has put the times and seasons in his power? Acts 1.7.
Thou that most flourishest in thy youth have no less reason to suspect it,
Nemo tam divos habuit faventes, crastinum ut possit sibi polliceri. Sen. in
Thyeste.

Inter casus ambulamus, si vitrei essemus, minus casus timeremus: quid
fragilius vase vitreo? and tamen servatur, and durat per secula; etsi enim
casus vitreo vasi timentur, senectus ei and febris non timetur, etc. Aug. de
ver. dom. ser. 1.


amidst so many dangers, and casualties, as daily beset thee, it may be so much
the nearer to thee, as thou art more secure, and less careful to avoid it: so
far from avoiding, as thou rather pursuest it, by thy riots and surfets, and
manifold distempers: in regard whereof, the Venice glass is not so brittle, nor
exposed to so many hazards; Or if no such chances happpen; at best, thy youth
is by nature but flitting, and transitory, and of very short continuance; much
like the vapor, whereunto the Apostle compares our life, that appears for a
little time, and then vanishes away. Iam. 4.14.
It is but in diebus juventutis, here, in the days of thy youth; a few days
only will conclude it. (...). The^gn.
But more briefly expressed above; at the last verse of the former Chapter, (as
Tremellius renders it) and ortus ipse est vanitas; The very beginning thereof
is vanity; that is, no sooner begins, but vanishes, Nascentes morimur,
finisque ab origin pende^. Manilius.
is ready to set at the first rising: Nay more briefly yet, if possible; As if
the Preacher made it nothing indeed: He affords it not so much as the least
description; whereas old age he sets out to the full, from the first, unto the
seventh verse of this Chapter. So short, and momentary is that state we so
highly account of, no better than a Festinat enim decurrere velox flosculus,
angusta, miseraeque brevissima vitae portio. Juven. 9.
flower of the field, that by growing decays, and perishes by increasing, as
thou that art now in thy lusty prime, shall shortly confess, by a remarkable
Heu quantum muratus ab illo! Virg. Aen.
change of thy self, when thy (...). Mimner apud Stob.
beauty shall be buried in wrinkles, thy activity shackled with stiffeness, and
a general damp of faintness shall seize on thy spirits; when this fleshly
building In senili corpore tanquam in putri aedificio omnis junctura didacitur.
Seneca Epist. 30.

According to the sense of Expositors.


(thy body) shall be out of repair, and grow ruinous all about thee, when thy
arms, the keepers of thy house shall tremble, and thy thighs, the strong men
shall bow themselves; when thy teeth (the grinders) shall cease because they
are few, and thine eyes that look out at the windows shall be darkened; when
the voice of the bird, and music, and all the Veris and autumni laedit amoena
dies, Cor. Gal. Mala aetas nulla delinimenta accipit. Afran. apud Nonium.
joys of the spring shall be a burden unto thee. O then it would stand thee in
stead to have God thy refuge, Psalm. 91.9.
thy refuge even then, when all things else fail thee. And the means to have
him so then, is now to make him so, by a religious, Psalm. ^1.9.
and godly youth; by casting off thy sins with repentance, and by cleaving fast
unto him in sincerity of heart. So may thou confidently rely on thy Creator,
who will never Omnes in aetate juvenili insurgent, sine ullo defectu, etc. Aug.
de Civ. 22. 15. Lomb. lib. 4. sent. did. 44. Aquin. sup. q. 82. art. 1.
forget thee in thine age, that did remember him in thy youth, but will
continually relieve and cherish thee in all thy neccisities, and at length
redress them in his heavenly kingdom, when thy age shall be renewed into The
dead shall be raised incorruptible, 1 Cor. 15.52 Flos resurrectionis
incorruptio est. Ambros. de fide resurret.
youth, a glorious, and unfading youth, that shall not wax older with time, but
flourish unto all eternity. Unto which, The King eternal bring us in his good
time, 1 Timothy 1.17. 1 Pet. 1.17. Heb. 12, 28 1 Pet. 4.19.
and for the time of our sojourning here, grant us his grace, to serve him
acceptably, with reverence, and godly fear, committing the keeing of our souls
to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

FINIS.
READER,
THese Errata, occasioned partly by the Correctors haste, and partly by the
difficulty of reading the Authors Copy, (it being no strange thing for good
Scholars, to be no good Scribes) you may please to correct with your Pen.

IN the Title page, for Swanford, read Swarford. page 12. line 19. for hang, r.
laugh. p. 17. l. 34. defection, r. desertion. p. 25. l. 33. impostume, r.
imposture. p. 26. l. 23. besetting. r. befitting. l. 34. Gibeon, r. Gilboa. p.
50. l. 13. metamorphosis, r. metempsychosis. p. 57, l. 21. pretends, r.
portends. p. 58. l. 6. f. for, r. how. p. 64. l. 26. cito quam cito, r. quam
cito. p. 78. l. 29. his creature, r. creature, his. p. 82. l. 21. land, r.
hand. p. 91. l. 3. end, r. eye. p. 88. l. 17. infection, r. affection. p. 91.
l. 3. apt, r. next. p. 92. l. 32. also, r. who. p. 93. l. 6. contrive. r.
contribute. p. 94. l. 34. l. 33. it self, omitted. p. 95. l. 5. endure, r.
endeare. p. 96. l. 23. horn, r. thorn. p. 129. l. 16. transfortation, r.
transformation. p. 131. l. 33. Leaving, r. Having. p. 149. l. 23. ware, r.
wave. p. 154. l. 12. Ours, r. Owes. p. 170. l. 18. lasie, r. busy. p. 177. l.
3. distracted, r. obstructed. p. 192. l. 25. add, anger. 2. The good of
beneficence against the evil of


