A VIEW OF ENGLANDS Present Distempers. Occasioned by the late Revolution of
Government in this Nation. WHEREIN (Amongst others) these following particulars
are asserted: ( Viz.) That the present powers are to be obeyed. That
Parliaments are the Powers of God. That the generality of Gods Enemies are the
Parliaments Enemies; Et contra. TOGETHER, With some Motives, Grounds, and
Instructions to the Soldiery; how, and wherefore, they ought to subdue by Arms
the Enemies of the Parliament in England, etc.

LONDON, Printed for William Raybould, at the Unicorne, near the little North
door in Paul's Churchyard, 1650.

To the Reader.
Good READER,
THat I seek no other Patron but thy ordinary favor, and give thee no greater
title then Reader, it is because no Name or Title is comparable to thy
ingenuity, if thou do but make up the Title with this Epithet, and prove an
ingenuous Reader. What ever thou art, deal not roughly with the lad, because
he was conceived in affliction and brought forth in a time of sorrow, and has
no will to distaste thee, if thou be not either tygrous Irish, or degenerate
English, a barbarous Redshanke, or cruel Barbarian. This I dare say, if thou
be but a favourer of true Religion, and a friend of Englands, thou can not
find a word to offend thee, if thou should be of the number of those that
fish for Carps.

Reader, I look on thee as an honest hearted English man, and as one that
would loathe to see thy dear country England made a place for wild beasts,
wild ^rish, or Pagan Red-shankes; as upon one whose soul would bare either to
be tributary or in vassalage to such rude and barbarous Masters, when thou
have the choice to be the subject of a Free State.

Reader, the Author suspects Demetrius and Diotrephes and Hymeneus too of much
unkindnes and enmity to this Essay. You know, Sir, by this craft we get our
gain; (says Demetrius) how many get great advantages by fishing in these
disturbed waters, and in kindness to us, carry away most of our goods to their
own houses (instead of the common fields) from the common burnings!

Nay I have known some people inhabiting near the shore of the Angry Irish
Seas who in times of greatest storm and shipwreck, when they had stripped the
dead bodies of Seamen, and passengers cast on shore, and had taken what the
merciles Seas had left, They have called it Gods great blessing to them, and
from thence came that proverb, It is an ill wind that blows no man good.

Diotrephes too, he is haughty and proud, and affects the pre-eminence, but
loves not the Brethren, and Hymeneus flies off from his first principles and
blasphemes, who is therefore excommunicated by Paul, that he may learn better
things: and this man what he lately affirmed, that he now denies, and it will
be hard to find him fixed or centred any where. This man, like an unsettled
wind, either runs before or keeps company with the Sun, and makes the Hay
and stubble of his faction while the Sun shines so hot; and it is very
dangerous lest such fiery spirits (who want humility and the fear of God to
guide them) should blow up and burn to ashes a rich and plentiful Island, the
Gallant ship (a ship of the first rate in Europe) the Commonwealth of England
cumbred now as well with tough and powder to preserve her from Water and
Pirates, as fraught with Riches for the Merchants and Islanders. And you that
are Masters* quench these coals of Juniper, and provide that all be safe under
deck, or we may come short of the harbor of Salem.

For these men, my wishes shall be other then his of Athens was for himself
(it was Damedes) he prayed he might have good trading; and what was his trade
think you? why he was a Coffin maker; for which the wise State there banished
him the City, as knowing that his own and the Commonweal of that people were
not consistent.

The very God of Love and Peace give us Peace always and by all good means.
And let the fear of that eye that sees in secret, keep us from all deeds of
darkness, all secret under minings, all Dark Lanthornes, and murder-plottings.

Reader, This is my Ben-oni, the son of my sorrow, it will be some ease to me,
if it prove thy joy, and inherit the blessing of Benjamin: I have charged him
(not upon mine but Gods blessing) to shun the wild children of rape and the
stubborn sons of Cruelty. For if he should not, but join with the daughters of
Heth, what good should my life do me. I shall say no more, lest I weary thee by
saying too much;

Thine in Love William Beech.

Imprimatur,

June 4. 1649. Joseph Caryll.

Errata.
p. 2.21. read genuine.

p. 34. l. 12. read Moab.

p. 43. l. 1. read Tantam quantam.

A Postscript to the Reader.
FRIEND,
WHen thou can not see the Sun for clouds, thou look for the hand of the
Dyall to tell thee what a clock it is; if thou be cumbred with occasions, and
can not tarry until it clear up; I have lent thee this or digit, being but a
finger of the hand in this Orthologue, to tell thee justly how the day goes,
especially the afternoon, for the Morn or Rising of my discourse, is doctrine
all, the latter part is distributive, and will afford a Table or Index large
enough for the greatest size of most men's patience in this sour age. Reader,
there are some litterall faults, and smaller escapes both in words and figures:
And though the Printer did something mistake, yet do not thou; And my dear
Benoni, if any throw dirt upon thee for thy fathers sake, be not afraid, it
will not stay, it cannot stain, It shall not hurt thee if thou have the wit to
tell him thy father will meet him any where but in a dark Cell, or upon an
Irish Bog.

The or TABLE.
THe Generality of Gods enemies, be the Parliaments enemies too. page 25.26.
The present Powers are to be obeyed. p. 100. Parliaments are the Powers of God.
p. 103. What a madness it is for us to divide upon Quidities, when a powerful
combination of enraged enemies are united to destroy us. p 69. Enemies be close
and deeply subtle. p. 87. Enemies like Ivy wind about our soundest Trees. p.
82. Sometimes the enemies by subtilty make the Parliament enemies to their good
Friends. p. 88. The Parliament put their Friends upon hard duties. p. 73. The
Parliament should not forget their services and sufferings. p. 75. The
Parliament should not put their Friends off to Lawyers. p. 77. The Parliament
should not shame their Friends. p. 78. The Parliaments Friends are very much
ashamed, and not only hated by their enemies openly, but by their Friends too,
according to some distinctions of hatred. p. 79. Soldiers, and such as have
hazarded their lives for the Parliament may speak boldly to them. p. 95, 96.
Grief and unkindnesse make men speak, and do what they would not. p. 99.
Motives, Grounds and Instructions to the Soldier, why and how he should subdue
by Arms the enemies of England and Ireland. p. 104, 105. A singular good
Motive unto the faithful Soldiers bound for Ireland. p. 62.
A Horrid Design in the Tabernacles of Edom, being the Headquarters of an
United Enemy of Ten Nations; Discovered to the Nation of England, and City of
London; and seriously commended to them as an Advertisment unto Love, and
brotherly Agreement among themselves.
Psalm. 83.8.9. Assure also is joynned with them, they have helped the children
of Lot.

Do unto them, as unto the Midianites.


I would not tire you by large introduction or prologue; it is my desire to
lead you by the hand into the parlour, rather then ^o stand complementing at
the door.

If I might therefore obtain but so much love of the Reader, as to be read, and
read over without prejudice, (in an age so impatient of both, and indeed so
scandalous for writing and scribbling fancies) I would promise to bound my self
within these ensuing limits, and I am persuaded I shall no ways discontent
those that be godly, peaceable, and truly wise, because the Truth I have here
brought them, is of that precious tendency to prevent the same.

First I shall point out unto you some leading observations, which arising in
the very East of the Psalm, may serve as well for the understanding of the text
to assure us of the truth thereof, as the star in the East was of use to guide
the wise men to find out Christ.

Secondly, my endeavors shall be to deal faithfully with you, in clearing the
text, and rendering such useful observations from thence, as you shall say is
genuitie and natural and free from the least violence offered to the true
meaning of the place; and to be contrary, as I am able to oppose my self, to
all the glozings, strainings, and corruptings of sacred truths in this
unhallowed age.

And herein also I shall humbly challenge and use this just freedom.

1 Mine own method, which has its use also to help the decays of Memory.

2 To be concise and short, and yet as abounding as I am able in fullness of
matter, and largeness of affection in so small a bulk of words.

3. To be perspicuous and plain, and plain dealing too, yet modest, and sober,
and as much avoiding bitterness and strife, in an age so unhappily degenerate
into strife.

4 Not to Meddle with parties, lest I prove rather a Pharez then a Barnabas,
rather a breach-maker, then a repairer of our breaches, and so grieve those
that be godly by widening, not curing their lamented sores.

From these I shall not crave any liberty to err, though I should pass
through fire and water that might either affright or discourage me:

The warrant which the text gives me being rather to unite Gods Israel against
such as are Enemies unto Isreal's God.

My first work then, according to promise, is, to show you some necessary
considerations that are couched in the words of the text, but expressly set
down in the foregoing verses, and these must be premised and seriously thought
upon, before any comfortable progress can be made in this prophetical
imprecation against the enemies of Gods Church, for their treacherous
Combinations, and bloody conspiracies against his people.

For here we may see, as in a glass, much of the confused and besmeared face
of our times; and in this Map of Isreal's troubles, you need go no further to
view Englands present fears and distempers, and again in Isreal's hope we may
gather Englands comfortable assurance, That God will do unto their enemies
also, as he did unto the Midianites.

1 For first, are not here preparations? and these mighty ones.

2 And are not here designs too? and these, be not they harsh and cruel?

Here is Malignity steeped in blood and dyed in Grain, like that in Ireland.

3 And is the punishment here easy, or avoydable, or is the Gibbet too near
the ground for these tall and lofty offenders? No, no, It is a destruction
fifty cubits high, parallel to that of Hamans for his bloody purposes against
the (then beloved) Jews, and like that of the Midianites here, a complete and
rare destruction, a well composed destruction, (as it were) in print, and
licenced by one of judgment: The Church desires no more in point of revenge,
on Gods and their implacable enemies, then this, that he would but eye this
pattern in his proceedings against them, and do no worse unto them then he did
unto the Midianites.

You will receive but little warmth from this scripture until the sun be
risen, and we look out for those observations spoken of, arising in the East of
this psalm, which are here either expressly set down, or necessarily employed,
and I may the more boldly take notice of them, as I pass on, because my text
includes them also in the Relatives, them, and them, and 2. in the pattern, The
Midianites, and 3. the petition or rather the repetition of his first suit do
unto them, etc. ( viz) punish them severely. And 4. in the Motive, Assure also
is joined with them.

The first observation is this,

That God does sometimes appear unto his people as one that is both deaf and
dumb, and as one that is regardlesse of their persons and prayers, even then
when they are most of all beset with fears, and have great need of help.

2. Observation.

2 That in this their beseiged Condition, it is below the brave spirits of Gods
children to be affrighted out of their grounded hopes into a consternation, or
an amazed dejection of mind, but rather their Heroic resolutions are
exceedingly hightened as in indignation and magnitude of mind against the
proud enemy, so are they lifted up in faith and greater affiance in God.

3. Observation.

That it is one main prop, that supports the courage of Gods people in shaking
times, when they consider that their enemies be Gods enemies too, when they can
interest him in their quarrel at home or abroad, as here, Lo thine enemies O
Lord, and they that hate thee.

And then comes in this fourth Doctrinall observation, very patly from the
express words of the text.

4. Obs. That these enemies be they never so numerous to devour us, so cunning
to divide us, so cruel to murder us, so proud to vaunt over us, yet they shall
be exactly punished, according to the pattern of Midian, as soon as Gods period
and theirs meet together, and are acccomplished, as theirs also was.

And first of the first.

God seems to leave his people to themselves, (though truly and really he does
not) in times of greatest danger and commotion, and to have but little care of
them.

This is evident from the first verse.

The Church complains, and wonders how he could be still while the enemy was
so busy; how he could be silent, while the Adversaries roar and make a
tumult; how he could find in his heart to hold his peace and lie down, while
these vaunt themselves so proudly, and lift up the head.

Many such complaints are made by the Church in the book of the Psalms, and
elsewhere abundantly, Quousque Domine? How long Lord? And, will the Lord absent
himself for ever? up Lord, why sleep thou?

Gods ends are excellent, and wise, and deep, and unfathomable.

1 And some of them belong to his secret purpose,

2 Others to his revealed will, and these are.

1. That which is nearest to him, his own Glory.

2. That which is dearest to him, his peoples good.

1. It was for the chief Rent of his own Glory, that he has farmed out the
world to man for Term of life; And when he strains upon all again for our
unthankfulness, has not he the great good of his own honor, out of the evil
of our dishonor and shame, by shaming us out of our ingratitude?

2. And what is their loss but gain? are they not winnowed, sifted, tried,
turned upside down? inside out? and what a number prove chafe and rottenness
upon trial, and will pay no Rent, because they think, the incomes of their
prayers be so little? Of all Gideons host, you shall find but 300. men that
upon trial, would bend the knee to lap up the water of such cold
discouragements: Gods people bend most, when he seems most stiff and
inexorable.

2. For their advantage too in respect of the Enemy; They lift up the head
says the Church here, but it is a fatal lifting of it up;

Tolluntur in altum,
Vt lapsu graviore ruant;
Like Hamans advancement: and they grow confident, like Sisera's wise Ladies,
Have they not gotten? have they not divided the spoil? presuming upon Sisera's
great Host, and iron Chariots; and are there not many such wise Ladies in
England? but it made way for their more doleful ruin, and the Churches
triumphant song: see how heartily she rejoices at the conceit, and jeers them
bitterly, that the valiant and renowned Sisera should be so cowed by a woman At
her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down, at her feet he bowed, he fell, where
he bowed, there he fell down dead Judge. 5.27.

And for use hereof, an Antidote and a Cordial is the best we can put it to.
1^. an Antidote to expel discontents, and mutinous thoughts arising in the
best Constitution of Churches. And secondly a cordial to quicken their
drooping spirits; it should skrew up their thoughts, and resolutions to this
note, Heb. 10.37. Adhuc tantillum, tantillum inquam, et qui venturus est,
veniet neque tardabit. Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come,
and will not tarry.

Oh how many mutinies would a due and seasonable Consideration of this truth
quiet in the minds of Gods dearest Israel!

Let me talk with thee (says Jeremy) wherefore does the way of the wicked
prosper? and why are they blessed that deal treacherously? Thou have planted
them, they have taken root, they grow up and bring forth fruit. See how Habakuk
fretts and chafes! how long shall I cry unto thee, and thou hear not? even
cry out of violence, and thou savest not? why do thou show me iniquity, and
cause me to behold grievance? for spoiling and violence are before me, and
there are that raise up strife and contention; the wicked does encompasse the
Righteous, etc.

Another sticks not to pronounce them happy that can work most wickedness, and
can tempt God most, because they are exalted, delivered etc. Others in the
third of Malachi are ready to take up Arms against the General for this very
thing; It is in vain say they, to serve God, and what profit is it that we have
been under his command? Malignants thrive best, and they that have shed our
blood are in highest favor, and they that have robbed us before by violence,
do now spoil and murder us by craft; and what they could not do in the field
by arms, they effect at home by subtilty.

It is confessed these be strong and violent distempers, and wounding
considerations, but yet a hearty draught of this preparative potion would
abundantly settle their spirits, and quiet them of much pelting and vexation at
this kind at carriage in God.

The next leading Consideration is this.

Consid. 2. That it is a thing unworthy the Heroic spirits of Gods people to
startle at this manner of Gods dealing with them, but rather it should kindle
in them much animosity of spirit, putting all the powers of the mind into
Battalia of Indignation against the blood-thirsty Enemy: and settle them in a
better posture of faith and affiance in God.

As here,

The Enemies roar, as if they meant to eat them up at a morsel; and they are
as loud as the Enemy. They threaten; these flinch not; They vow to root out the
name and nation of Israel; these do as it were bid them do their worst, and
remember their brother Midian; they scorn to give them an inch of the field,
but like Gallant experienced soldiers, take the wind and upper ground of
them. They go up to mount Zion by prayer, and from thence take faster hold on
God, while these remain in the valley of base and lewd affections, and self
confidence; and as their brother Midian did in the valley at the foot of Carmel
by the river Kishon which swept them away in dead carcases, so do these
presuming upon their numerous confederates, and foreign Alliances, until it
be done unto them, As unto the Midianites.

Use. 1. Go out for shame then, ye Enemies of Religion: and hang down your
heads ye haters of godliness. Is it Religion that makes men cowards? and is it
the spirit of godliness that pulls down the spirit of Magnanimity? Is it
possible that the spirit of God should be against it self? blush at this your
blasphemy; that spirit which is the spirit of holiness, is the spirit of zeal
and Christian courage also; No, no, Gods holy soldiers learn better things of
their General, the Lord of hosts; and their Martial Law in the Army of
Saints, as it has singular rewards for those that are valiant for the truth,
so it does little less then hang them up in Gibbits that do betray the goodness
of their cause by Apostacy, or do bring but a stain thereupon by their
Cowardice.

You shall read. 1 Kings 20.4. What a most indelible reproach it was to
fainthearted Ahab, and how careful the scripture is to record and file up such
a notorious piece of Cowardice, for the good of posterity to avoid the like,
There you find that when Benhadad king of Aram, sent messengers to him at the
siege of Samaria with this message, Thy silver and thy gold is mine, also thy
women and thy fair children are mine: very poorly and basely he yields at the
first summons, My Lord the King, according to thy saying, I am thine and all
that I have.

But here do but see the Heroic minds of Gods Soldiers; he seems in the one
side to neglect them, sends them in no supply, no provision at all; the Enemy
in the mean time, muster up their Forces, suspend their own differences, and
upon uniting their several Regiments or Brigades, they draw in Assure also to
their assistance, being the tenth in number that are upon their march against
Israel.

The Church by her scouts, or prospective, discovers first the Enemies
General, Duke Edom, and under him the Edomites; the Posterity of Esau, that
sold their birthright, (a most glorious liberty) for a mess of Pottage, to
the eternal Ignomy of him and his degenerate Posterity, here called the
Tabernacles of Edom, or the Edomites Tents.

The next upon the march, is Lieutenant General Ismael, and under him the
Ismaelites, a persecuting race that came by the By, that descended from Abraham
by Hagar the bondwoman; (the proper mother of all that are weary of their
Liberties, and desire to be in bondage still) she was banished out of Abraham's
Family, for persecuting Sarah the Freewoman: And so was her Son the Lieutenant
General here, who therefore in revenge and desperate Enmity against all the
children of the Freewoman, is in Commission of Array against them, to bring
them to Bondage; and now upon the march.

The next in order is Major General Moab; he it is that leads on the Brigade
of the Moabites, and these were the Incestuous brood of Lot, begotten on his
own daughter, in their Father Moab, Father of the Moabites.

But I will spend no more time in emblazoning their Arms nor yet to tell you
what the other Colonels and Commanders were, nor yet of the affinity and
neernesse of Isreal's relation to these Nations; it is enough to know that they
were Isreal's enemies, and to enquire out their design.

And what was it? They will cut off the Name and Nation of Israel, and commit
their memory to oblivion, they will do I know not what.

But what say they? do they fly back; or do they yield and give up all with
Ahab? No, no; it shall not go there; well may their words, and Names and
Nations affright children, but it shall not daunt them; the Enemy may set them
up for scarre Crows to fright away the birds, but it shall never drive them
out of the field.

And it works these two notable effects upon all those in whom there is any
thing of God to direct them, against such preparations, and such a people;

First, Greater dependence on him; They entitle God in all they have, and in
their quarrel too; Lo thine enemies, and they that hate thee! As if she had
said, Lord, we are ready every moment to be dashed in pieces; and while thou
sleep, we are in a storm, and every moment in danger of the loss of ship
and goods, and our lives too: But art not thou our Pilote, and Master, and
Captain? And have not thou a Great venture in the Churches Bottom? If thou
carest not that we perish, yet have respect to thine own name, honor, and
reputation; these must suffer shipwreck as well as thy people; unless thou
awake and show thy power and skill to stear this vessel, this ark, to some
safe harbor and landing place, and so work out our salvation; and then leaves
all to his guidance and ordering.

And secondly, it does much advance their magnitude of mind, in a holy
indignation against such a base degenerate Enemy.

This is observable: 1 From the manner of their imprecation. 2 From the matter
of their imprecation.


1. From the manner of it, they call upon God with much importunity, that he
would presently fall aboard the Enemy, or sink them, before they make his
people sink; calls upon him in a preposterous order to do execution upon them
before any induction of the crimes and causes: but these she takes as granted,
and proceeds to a zealous imprecation: Keep not silence, hold not thy peace, be
not still.

2. For the matter, the Church objects:

1 Their pride, they lift up the head. 2 Their hatred, they hate thee. 3 Their
cruelty, let us cut them off, etc. 4. Their cunning, They have taken crafty
counsel. 5. Their multitude, The Edomites, Ismaelites, etc.
And in testimony of the highth of her zeal against their treachery and
baseness, she spreads these complaints before the Lords, beseeching him to
bring down their pride, to recoile their hatred, to smother their cruelty, to
Countermine their cunning, and to scatter their multitudes, that they may be
ventorum ludibrium, at Sea; and Ecclesia triumphus a shore: and the Churches
merry song, as the Cananites were to Deborah and Barack, at her feet, he
bowed, he fell, and lay down, etc.

Use 2. The second and best Use we can put this truth unto, is, That we be
exhorted to the practice of the duty our selves. Was it laudable for Gods
people then? and is it not as commendable for us in such an age as this, to be
of such magnitude of spirit? were these valiant? and shall we be cowards? did
they trust God with events, and shall we suspect him, doubt him? could they
frame such a charge against their enemies? and have we nothing to say of ours?
or are ours less hurtful and dangerous then theirs were?

Come, come, take heart, ye beloved of the Lord of this divided Nation; never
had a people more matter of complaint, to frame a bill against a bloody
combination, then England has at this joincture of time against theirs, and
yet never had a people more cause to trust God for the future, then England
has at present.

You may draw up a charge against them according to the experience you have had
of their pride, insolency and bloodinesse.

Lord, how often have thou broken in pieces, and rent all to shivers the united
Forces of the Malignant Enemy of this Nation? and yet behold they unite again;
how often have thou befoold their cunning? yet they will still have a Iuncto; how
many of them have thou satiated with their own rage, and glutted with their own
goare? and yet still they thirst for more blood. How shamefully has their own
despite, hatred, murder, plunderings, (and yet it is but the scatterings of
them) recoiled upon their own estates, names, families, confederates? and yet
still they prepare their arrow to shoot at those that are perfect in the land:
How like a fierce man of War, have thou broken in upon their pride,
presumption, nobility, and have thrown them upon the very dunghill of shame and
dishonor, as things of no value, and useless? and yet their spirits be not
broken.

Lord, make our Edomites like their Edomites, our Princes like their Princes,
Oreb and Zeb: These forces that will war against England, like those Armies
that did war against Israel; and either fill their faces with shame, that they
may seek thy name, or else Do unto them as unto the Midianites.

And thus the extreme barbarism, odium, and filthy nastines of those Nations,
that do or shall at any time appear against England, will serve to prop, and
mainly to hold up the Churches confidence in the Lord of Hoasts, unto whom all
the recited abominations against his Israel are most hateful:

Which clearly leads me to the third Observation,

3. Obs. That it is no small pin or prop in supporting the faith of Gods people
in shaking times, to consider that their enemies be Gods enemies too.

See in this Psalm, how the faith of Gods people leanes upon this very
Consideration.

Why Lord! Thou that made the eye, do not thou see? thou that made the
ears, do not thou hear? thou that give man understanding, do not thou
consider? Why, they be thy enemies, as well as ours; they hate thee as well as
us: If they once root out our nation, they will soon destroy thy name, so that thy
worship, and thy people will be cut off and destroyed together; and if we lose
much by their cruelty, thou art like to lose more in thy honor, and thy name
amongst an ignorant and barbarous people. Alas Lord! their enimity will pay
thee home, though we have but little to lose; and all we have is but poor
stuff, in comparison of the rich precious pillage they will have of thee.

See, I say, how they rest themselves upon this leaning stock.

I will give you but one pregnant place for many, to prove the Churches
practice of this duty, Psalm. 2.2. The Kings of the Earth stand up* and the
Rulers take counsel tegether against the Lord and against his Christ That
which she leanes upon, is this, that they rose up against the Lord first, and
against his anointed next; And upon this consideration she sings this Requiem
to her self,

He that dwells in Heaven shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall have
them in derision.

So it is then, you see that the consideration of the despitefulnesse and
enmity of wicked men against God himself is a maine leaning stocks, or prop,
to support the faith of Gods people in shaking times.

Use 1. The life of Doctrine is in application; And the particular knowledge of
this truth would be of excellent use to cure our faith of much perplexity and
doubting, how it is possible we should extricate our selves from dangers, when
we are so closely and powerfully besieged and begirt about with whole Armies
and inundations of fears, and treacheries, within and without us. Truly some
thoughts of this consideration would hold us up, as it were by the hand, even
in out very sinkings.

Wherefore did thou doubt O thou of little faith? said Christ, to his beloved
Peter; he would not have had him to have doubted, no not then when he was
sinking.

But you will say perhaps as Peter might have pleaded for his doubting (and it
appears he did by his sinking) why Lord, The waters be deep, and the waves
roar, and rage horribly; how can a man be blamed then, being in the very
jaws of such a danger? so happily we may (nay we do too often) object to the
weakening of our faith, such despondencies.

O! the Enemy is deep in Council, and Legions for number, and burning for
rage, and well appointed for cruelty, and a very Lucifer in pride and
presumption upon all these.

But let us think, what are their Counsels to Gods decrees? and their
multitudes to his? and their rage to his Tophet?

What is the daring haughtines of a ridiculous Pigmee to the loftiness of an
infinite God, that rides upon the wings of the wind, and sits between the
Cherubines? and what is the Child's Pot-gun of man's hatred to the roaring Cannon
of Gods indignation? How whe^lesse and heavy are the Chariots of Pharohs bloody
purposes, to the devouring Red Sea of Gods mighty power?

Let this support thee; the Lord of Hosts is with thee, the God of Jacob is thy
refuge; And all that strength of his by Sea and Land, and the Stars too in
their order, are engaged with thee in the quarrel, if thou be an Israel its
indeed, and a member of Gods Church?

All the great noise of preparations, and foreign aids, if ever brought to
pass, will end in the honorable overthrow of the Pigmees, A generation of
people, that (as the story tells us (would needs be warring with the wind
until they were overwhelmed with the sand. Why then would they War with the
wind?

Use 2. We have matter very useful to contemplate upon in such stirring and
tumultuous times as these be, and from whence our Meditations may take their
flight into England, Scotland, Ireland, or any other places where England has
any enemies; to bring us tidings whether the generality and Randezvouz of Gods
enemies be with them or with us, here lies the great question, and here will be
the dispute, whether or no do they join themselves to such of any of these
Nations that have opposed themselves against us, or do they side with us
against them?

Believe it, this is a most material use, in such a time, and amongst such a
people, so mixed for judgment and opinion about this matter, and therefore I
could not omit it, though I be the shorter.

England! thou art to be examined upon these Queeres.

1 Quaere.

What say the most lewd of all people in the Land?

1 Answer.

Down with the Parliament.

2 Quaere.

How goes the Vote in all dark tippling houses?

2 Answer.

Out with the Parliament.

3 Quaere.

What say the lightest of all strumpets, who make a trade of prostituting
their bodies to uncleanesse?

3 Answer.

They trade for the Devil, and hate the Parliament.

4 Quaere.

How stand Thieves and Murderers in their affections to the proceedings of
these times.

4 Answer.

O they fear the justice of the Parliament.

5 Quaere.

What say Atheists, Papists, and the generality of scandalous men of every
degree and order?

5 Answer.

O they hate the name of a reforming Parliament.

Ireland, thou art to be examined upon these Interrogatories.

1 Inter.

A Parliament, or no Parliament in England?

An army, or no army sent over for Ireland?

1 Dep.

No Parliament but the Pope.

No Army but the Spanish Inquisition.

And no forces but those under Roe O Neal, or Ormond.

2 Inter.

Who were the greatest Murderers of all ages, and the brazen Bull of all
generations for torments?

2 Dep.

O Ireland! O wild Irish!

3 Inter.

Who reseued them from justice?

Dep.

O Irish English! and, English Irish?

4 Inter.

Who took their parts, and stood as Godfathers when they were named the Roman
Catholic Subjects in Ireland?

Dep.

O treacherous Courtiers! O bloody Juncto! O Malignant English!

5 Inter.

Who then be the Traitors, and Murderers, and king killers, and Parliament
dividers?

5 Dep.

I need not name them, their actions do denominate them, And it is apparent to
the view of all Nations in huge and mighty Capital Letters, written with the
blood of three Nations.

And be it known to all Countries People, and Languages that the Courtiers in
England poisoned their King, and the Malignants of Britain destroyed their
Sovereign.

For there are more ways then by Mercury to poison Kings, as there be ways of
iniquity that destroy their Government.

The mischief fall upon their own heads.

The iniquity descend upon their own pates.

The sins of the Nation enraged him against the Common Wealth, and the
cruelty of the Cavallry held him up to the stroke.

Let this be terror to our foes, more then the roaring of our Cannon, or the
terrible bursting asunder of the Granado; They are lost, they are gone, they
are spoild, if treacherous, bloody, proud, blasphemous, ignorant, heathenish,
nasty, unclean, idolatrous, people be not Gods enemies, I pray, who are? and
if these perish not without repentance, it will be concluded by unbelievers
there is no Hell, no law, no justice, no judge. And this again brings me to
the last Consideration.

4. Consideration.

That these, and all these, be they never so proud, and cruel, and cunning,
and numerous, yet they shall be exactly punished according to the pattern of
Midian, as soon as Gods period and theirs meet together and are accomplished,
as theirs also was.

I could branch this Doctrine into three parts, but I will contract them into
two.

1. That the numerous combinations of their adversaries, although their mutual
pride and hatred of one another divide them into parties and into a diversity
of false worships amongst themselves, and do often engage them in War one
against another, yet their divisions are so cemented with hellish cunning that
they have joined all their forces against the Church as one man for a time.

2. Let their craft be what it will be, God will out match them in their
craft, and outvie them in their cunning, and do unto them as he did unto the
Midianites, if they proceed.

1. Though they jarre amongst themselves, yet they can join against Israel;
you know of whom they learned that, viz. of the prince of darkness.

And Christ complains that his people are not so wise in their Generation as
these be.

It is evident to all that have been any thing read in the Scriptures, and
History of these Nations (mentioned in this Psalm) how different they were
from one another, in profession and practice, in affection and action; I will
not say in a variety of Religions, (there being but one only rightly so called)
but in a diversity of Paganism and Semi-paganisme, and other most profane and
idoratrous worship.

This is noted in the Book of the Judges, Judge. 6.3. As soon as Israel had
sown, the Midianites came up and the Amalakites, and the children of the East;
strange, that Amaleck, and Midian, and these should now join together that had
so much differed before, but so it was, they made a match to destroy the
increase of the earth, and to make Israel poor, etc.

This master piece of this craft is observed by the Apostles in their prayer,
Act. 4.25, 26, 27.

Why do the Heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? the Kings of
the earth stand up, and the Rulers take council together against the Lord and
against his Christ; for of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou have
anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and People of
Israel were gathered together.

It is a notable instance I shall give you out of the Acts, Acts. 17.18. There
you read, when the Apostle disputed against the idolatry of the Athenians,
certain Philosophers of the Epicurans and Stoickes, joined together* and would
have hissed him out of School: one would have thought that the rigid Stoickes
(who were ever strict in opinion, and conversation) would have been ashamed to
join with these loose Epicures that were so contrary to them.

But it is no wonder; our age will furnish us abundantly with instances of this
kind; we have men that cannot endure one another, hate the very names and
nations of each other; yet, like the wild Boars of the Forest, they can herd
together to root up Gods Vineyard, and to destroy the Vine which his own right
hand has planted: And these like Sampsons Foxes, Judges 25.4. though they look
several ways with their heads, yet they can join tail to tail to burn up Gods
Harvest, and to destroy a fruitful Land.

What may be the Ground of this their rage?

1. Fear, lest the prosperous rising of these should be the fatal ruin of
them; and Moses Observation proves this clearly to our hands; Exodus 1.9, 10.
Behold the people of the children of Israel are more and mightier then we; come
on, let us deal wisely with them, lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that
when there fall out any War, they join also unto our enemies, and fight against
us, and so get them out of the Land; therefore they did set over them
taskmasters to afflict them.

This was the exceeding great fear of Haman's wise men, and of Zerish his wife.
Hester 6.13. If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou have
begun to fall, thou shall not prevail against him, but shall surely fall before
him. It was the fear of such a fatal event, that had caused Haman to have the
Gibbet prepared for Mordecai, and this fear hurryed him on to get out that
bloody Edict against the Jews, as our Malignants hurryed on the late King to
take up Arms, and have made such a bloody issue as is running yet. So Mo^^* and
Midian use this as one effectual Argument to persuade Balaam with the more
eagerness to curse Israel; Number. 22.56. Behold, there is a people come out of
Egypt, which cover the face of the earth, they are stronger then we.

2. Hatred: The ancient Antipathy between the two seeds on their part put them
upon it; Ponam immicitiam, says God, I will put enmity between them. This
inveterate opposition between them proceeds from the first Antipathy: Blood,
and murder, and revenge, are propagated from loyn to loyn; and from Adams sin
it was surrendered to Cain, who did visibly demonstrate the truth of this
Antipathy, by showing hatred in the murder of his brother Abel, for nothing
else, but for being better then himself, and more holy, and more heavenly: And
it will be worth your pains to take notice what havoc Sin, and Hatred, and
Revenge (the top of Satan's kindred upon earth, and of the serpentine brood in
hell) have made in the world: For did not one of the brood (but now named)
destroy the fourth part of the world in the murder of Abel? And had not the
Church of God a great loss by losing such a Pillar as Abel was? It was upon
this account also that the whole world was drowned, but eight persons: Although
it were the Justice of Heaven, and the sin of the world that brought in the
deluge, and that fearful inundation of waters to wash such a filthy race from
off the earth, yet Satan, and the spite of hell, had a great hand in bringing
in those waters, by making men so foul and unclean in Gods sight by sin, that
he could do no less by his holiness, then rinse the earth of such a Generation.
The hatred of this hellish brood being such as either to make way for the
drowning of Gods Church with the world of the wicked, or seeing Gods Favor to
his Church prevented him in that design, it was some satisfaction to his rage,
that Gods people were penned up in such a narrow capacity as an Ark, and that it
must be long before it could spread again.

This very design, and hellish cruelty of Satan upon England, Scotland, and
Ireland, in point of destruction and cruelty, is next to Satan's hatred in the
Flood: For how many hundred thousand men, women and children, did this cursed
brood cut off in Ireland? How many in England and Scotland fell by the Sword,
and Famine, and Imprisonment, upon the same account of this enmity of the
serpentine race against the woman's seed? Hence it is that the Scriptures term
such Instruments (as Satan makes use of to effect all his designs of cruelty)
Lions, Wolves, Dragons, Serpents, Asps, Bulls, Dogs: For as Faith in God, and
love to the Brethren, do unite hearts together, that we may with one heart, and
one mouth glorify God the Father; so on the other side, where men are begotten
of this seed, and made of Satan's family, they must needs be haters of the
professors of godliness, as being in actual Arms against them. Use.

If it be so then that wicked men can suspend their differences, and whole
Nations make Leagues, yield unto Cessations to join against the Church; Alas,
wretched Papists, how are you deluded? Nay, how do you delude men, to teach
them, that your Unity is one of the Marks of the Church? Was not there a Unity
amongst the builders of Babel? And yet was there any Church, but a Babel, a
mere confusion amongst them? And did not the Scribes and the Pharisees, the
Rulers and the People, hold together to persecute and put to death the Lord of
Life? Is there not an Agreement between Thieves, Murderers, Conspirators,
Mutineers, Corah and his Accomplices? And can all or any of these make up a true
Church? Nay, is Satan divided against Satan? Or is there not an Agreement in
hell to enlarge the territories of hell, and to propagate the dominion of
darkness? And will you call such a Unity as yours is, a Mark of the Church? I
am sure it has all the resemblances and emblems of hell. Is not darkness and
ignorance there? Is not the Gospel locked up from the Laity in an unknown
Tongue? And are these people nearer unto the knowledge thereof (but what the
Priests tell them is Gospel,) then the damned in hell? Are not Englands
Divisions founded there? Irelands cruelty blown up there? O yes, you agree well
together in this: But this your Agreement is not to be called a Unity, but a
Conspiracy rather, and that a cruel one.

It was a wise saying of an ancient godly man, The name, says he, of Peace is
beautiful, and the opinion of Unity fair; but better diversity of judgment
about Discipline, then Unity in falsehood concerning Doctrine.

God will own this as a Divine and Military Maxim:

Better a just War, then a rotten, or an unjust Peace.

3. And is it true, that wicked men thus differing amongst themselves, can thus
agree together against Gods Israel? And is there still an Israel of God for all
that? Give me leave then to say to this little Island of Gods delivered ones,
as Joshua to Achan, (pardon the expression, I would to God we were less guilty
of Achans sin,) My Son, says he, confess, and give glory unto God. Ah England,
would it were the brand of the Enemy, and of those that hate thee to be
unthankful, and not thy reproach: Is it not an accursed thing to withhold that
from God, (his chief rent) for such eminent and strange deliverances from so
many powerful Combinations, so many treacheries, such underworkings, such
preparations as have been, and yet still are continued on foot against thee?
Shall an Enemy so numerous and strong, so cunning and politic, be subdued by
thee? by thee, a weak despised handful? And shall God have no share in the
glory of thy safety? Has thy weakness over-mastered their strength? Thy folly
baffled their sophistry? Thy Tradesmen brought down their Nobles? Thy
fishermen puzzled their Gamaliels? and yet art thou silent? Have thou not a
mind to conceive? a heart to endite? a tongue to utter praise to whom praise,
duty to whom duty, worship to whom worship belongs? Desire God to give thee
grace to correct thy Errors, to put down thy Errata's and Escapes in Characters
of bloody tears, that are passed over not in printing, but in living, and not
in living so much as in loving, or rather in not loving that God that has
wrought so wonderfully for thee.

And for the remainder of this Use, because I have more to do before I can
conclude, take this excellent Copy from David's own hand, who is singularly
exact in Uses of this nature.

Psalm 3.1, 2, 8. Lord, how are they increased that trouble me? Many there be
that rise up against me; Many a one there is that say of my soul, There is no
help for him in his God.

Then concludes sweetly;

Salvation belongs unto the Lord, and his blessing is upon his people.

Take one more.

Psalm 124. If the Lord had not been on our side, may Israel (may England) now
say, If it had not been for the Lord, who was on our side when men rose up
against us, they had swallowed us up quick, the waters had overwhelmed us, the
stream had gone over us, the proud waters had gone over our soul.

Then concludes:

Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us as a prey to their teeth; Our soul
is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowler: The snare is broken, and
we delivered: Our help stands in the Name of the Lord.

3 Use.

And are Englands Adversaries so wise as to join together? And is England so
foolish to divide, and fall asunder into pieces and parties? Shall Pagans, and
Turks, and Infidels, even in the Diversity of their false worships, combine
together for our extirpation? And shall we, with all our great profession, of
one God, one Faith, one Religion, one Livery, by our fearful Divisions, help on
what they aim at? Did Ireland, or France, or Spain, or Barbary, ever deserve so
well at our hands, that we should provide such a fruitful Island for them? such
stately houses? such pleasant dwellings? such dear relations as wives to be
deflowred by them, children to be enslaved by them? Consult the late Irish
Barbarism, the French Massacre, the Spanish Armado, and then say, how well they
deserve of Protestants.

Saevis inter se convenit Vrsis. What a thing is this? Shall Bears and Wolves
agree together to preserve their kind? And is there an agreement in hell to
propagate and enlarge the territories of Satan? And shall not we strive to keep
up England from sinking? Shall every creature be glued by natural affection to
their issue to preserve them from hurt? And shall we basely betray our
posterity to perpetual slavery? What will they then (yet unborn) say of us?
Will they not out of the very bitterness of their grieved spirits cry out
against us? Who were our Ancestors? and what kind of shape did they bear? were
they men or beasts? If men, were they Turks or Jews? If beasts, were they
Wolves, or Tygres, that could find in their hearts to let our Liberties and
happiness dye before them? and expose us thus to be a byword to all Nations,
and a proverb of reproach? Will they not say, Cursed be their memory, and
cursed be their covetousness, and cursed be their negligence, and cursed be
their unnaturalness, that might and would not save us, that had power, and
would not use it, to preserve us?

Is it not a shame that Christians should make such sad complaints against
Christians? O poor Church and distressed Spouse of Christ, says one, Pax ab
Extraneis, pax a Paganis, sed filii nequam, etc. Thou have Peace with Turks,
Peace with Pagans; but thine own ungracious children struggle in the womb of
Reformation (like Rebecca's twins) and are bitterly enraged one against another.

Another bemoans our great unhappiness in this kind:

Infelix populus Dei, non potest in bono tant^m habere concordiam, quant^m mali
habent in malo: The unlucky people of God (as he calls them) cannot so well
agree in that which is good, as the wicked can in that which is bad: To act a
mischief, they can lay their heads together, and reconcile different Nations to
annoy the Church and people of God, and yet, we, we must needs be divided,
rent, and torn in pieces.

Here is the shame of England, if you talk of shame.

The last Doctrinal Observation from the express words of the Text is this:

That these very enemies, notwithstanding what has been said, shall be exactly
punished in Gods good time, according to this pattern of Midian.

Object. But how can you ground this point from the words, seeing they are
rather like the Churches desire, what they would have done, then Gods purpose
what he would do.

I answer, That it is both a prayer, and a prophetical Imprecation, or
Prophecy. As it is a prayer, you have the Churches mind, as if she had said in
plainer terms thus: O Lord, we have heard of thee in times of old, how
graciously thou have dealt with our fathers, even in their greatest straits
against their Enemies. Even then, Lord, when they were in their greatest pride
and presumption; and namely how bare thou made thine arm then upon the
Midianites, when they lay at the foot of Carmel by the river Kishon for number
and multitude as the grasshoppers: How thou did exercise thy mighty power in
the overthrow of those innumerable multitudes, by such weak means as three
hundred simple men under thy servant Gideon, and did totally scatter them, so
that not a man was left: Nay Lord, how thou did magnify thy power, wisdom,
and goodness together, in delivering up the strength and multitude of the
Canaanites unto the weakness of a woman, even thy servant Deborah: Nay, that
thou did so provide for thy people, that the valiant and renowned Sisera
should fall at the feet of a weak woman, even Jael the wife of Heber the
Kenite. Now, O Lord, true it is, the Midianites are dead, Sisera and Jabin are
cut off, but more are risen up in their stead; Lo now the Tabernacles of the
Edomites, the Ismaelites, the Moabites, and the Hagarens, These are as cunning,
and cruel, and numerous* and proud, as ever those were, and thy Name is as
dear, and thy people as precious to thee now as ever; and therefore Do unto
them as unto the Midianites.

But we look upon the words as a Prophecy; for albeit they run in form of an
imprecation, yet it being considered what David was, a Prophet, we must needs
think, the ground of his speech was the certain knowledge he had touching the
future estate of Gods Church, and what would become of the enemies thereof: For
which cause he makes the desire of his Soul suitable to the purpose and
determination of God: For as David well knew, and had said, That burning coals
would fall upon the wicked, and that they should be cast into the fire, and
into the deep pit, that they rise not again, Psa. 140.10, 11. so here he
testifies the fullness of his assent and desire that it should be so: Do unto
them as unto the Midianites.

So then because the Prophet here tells us that God will proceed against the
Enemies of the Church, according to the pattern of Midian. It must be my work
to show you, 1. Who be Gods Enemies. And 2. What these Midianites were. And 3.
How they were punished. This, I say, must necessarily be unfolded, because the
ruin of these is made a pattern for the destruction of Gods Enemies.

1. Who be these Enemies?

In general terms, they are Gods Enemies that hate his Friends, as here, Lo
thine Enemies, and they that hate thee: How so? They have said, Let us cut them
off from being a Nation: They were Isreal's Enemies, and therefore Gods Enemies
by good consequence.

Thus Amalek was reputed one of the worst of Gods Enemies, because his hatred
was so desperate, and bent against his darling Israel, God is resolved to give
him no quarter, Exodus 17.8, 9. He swore he would have war with him from
generation to generation, because he was such an enemy to Israel.

God has Enemies of two sorts.

1. Professed ones, such as openly go about to extinguish the light of his
Truth in the day time; I mean, that is so manifestly seen, that all may
discover their meaning to be so, as if it were at noon day; such of old were
the Philistims, the Amorites, the Amalakites, the Midianites: These did oppose,
and hate Gods Israel then, as the Turks and others do now, to whom the very
name of a Christian is odious.

2. God has closer Enemies too, and these are such as do paint themselves with
the profession, and do shroud themselves under the name of the Church and of
Religion, but yet indeed are enemies to the Truth of Religion: Now some of
these profess a different kind of Religion, and do use another manner of
worshipping God then the true Church uses; such were the Samaritanes of old,
who after their rent from the Jews retained Circumcision, boasted of their
fathers, and expected the Messiah, yet were they not Gods people, but were
deadly Enemies to them, and therefore the Jews had no dealing with them, Joh.
4.9. Such are the Papists now, who though they retain some broken fragments of
Christian Religion, yet they do hate Protestants, and the powerful preaching of
Gods Word amongst us. I wish we had less familiarity with them; we have paid
well enough for it these eight years.

Other Enemies God has in the midst of us, of whom the old Complaint is
verified:

O miseros nos qui Christiani dicimur and Gentes agimus sub nomine Christi!

Wretches that we are! we will be called Christians, yet we play the Turk (and
worse) under the name of Christ.

2 Timothy 3.5. Such as deny the power of godliness, be his Enemies. Luke 19.27.
Such as will not submit unto Christ, and his gracious Government, these be
Enemies too.

But those mine enemies, that would not suffer me to reign over them, bring
hither, and slay them before me.

Such as hate and speak against the peaceful preaching of the Word, and seek,
with Elimas, by railing against such exercises, to turn others (as he would
have done the Deputy) from the Faith: What says the holy Ghost of such? Thou
wretch, thou son of perdition, thou child of the devil! (says he to Elymas)
and we may very well rank all the Romish Clergy amongst these who lock up the
word of says from the vulgar in an unknown tongue.

Here also are to be listed all such as do revile and reproach the footsteps,
of Gods people. These footsteps are their holy lives; and the several duties
and exercises of Religion performed by them, and they that revile them for
these footsteps, and call them Roundheads, Sectaries etc, are in the list of
Gods deadly Enemies. Psalm. 9.4.5. Such as hate to be reformed, and cry out with
Korah and the Malignants with him against the Reformers, yet take too much upon
you: and utterly despise Government, they be no better then Mutiners and
Murmurers: and if the sin bear proportion with the punishment; see what it is
Numb. 16.32.

They that will not be reclaimed from the error of their ways, but go on
still in any wicked course; if mercy will not melt them, nor judgments break
them; If Gods favor neither allure them, nor his frowns deter them from the
vain and profane courses of their lives, but Malignants will be Malignants
still, and swearers swearers still, and drunkards drunkards still, and Haters
of Reformation wilful still: see what David says, will become of them Psalm.
68.21. God will surely wound his Enemies, and the hairy scalp of such an one as
goes on still in his ungodliness. They are his Enemies, and God says he will
wound them for it: Now here falls in all the desperate and implacable Enemies
of this nation; once or twice beating will not serve their turn; put them under
deck, there is no trusting of them, they will sink the vessel they are so
desperate; give them liberty, they will run to Kent; fright them from thence,
they will go to Colchester; favor, the^ there, they will run to Scotland, or prove
worse then Red-shanks at home. But woe to the hairy scalp of these Ruffians
says David, who go on still in their ungodliness.

In brief, The covetous, the blasphemer, the Idolater, the blood-thirsty, and
here comes in the bloody Irish and their English Confederates: All these and
many more are on the file of Gods book, and there recorded for his Enemies.

These, these be they, and without repentance come within the List of this
prophesied destruction. Indeed my Text includes one as well as another; but yet
it is plain here from the pattern humbly offered unto God by his Church to
proceed against the Enemy, that it is a close, near, secret, insinuating Enemy,
that the Church aims at; some of these Nations now upon the march were of near
relation and allie to them; these by the neernesse of kin and contiguousnes of
dwelling had those advantages against Israel that others could not have; It was
that cursed advantage that Midian took to make them Idolaters before, which
strangers could not have had; and their punishment did bear aequi page with the
destruction they wrought upon Israel by that means, that the Church in this
place desires God to cut out the future punishments for the backs of his
Enemies according to this pattern.

2. What were the Midianites?

These were the posterity of Abraham by his Concubine Keturah 1 Chronicles. 1.32.
who being turned Idolaters drew Israel to sin in the wilderness (as I said
before) for which Moses revenged the Israelites of them by the slaughter of all
their males and their five Kings and a wonderful great spoil but afterward
recovering and oppressing Israel in his own land, were by Gideon and 300 men
vanquished when they lay in the valley like Grasshoppers for number. Judge. 6.

3. What was their offense?

1. They did invade Israel, and sought to drive them out of the Land, the
Inheritance which God gave them; that is all their language when they are once
enraged: let us cut them off, let us root them out, they can bid no lower then
ruin and murder and bloodshed: The Holy Ghost notes that in Saul, before he
became Paul, that he breathed out threatenings against the Churches of God no
less then this; either a stoning, or a strangling and oh the insatiablenesse
of Malice, the depth of Cruelty that is in the heart of Adams posterity!

What these did, or would have done to Israel, that the cruel Miscreants of
Ireland have done to the English, they made away their wives, their lives, they
invaded their possessions, their houses, which God gave them upon Irelands
Attainder of blood and cruelty upon the English long fince, who lived amongst
them, and though many of them were not of the best or scarce Civil themselves:
yet the generality of the Civil, and industrious carriage of the English
nation there among them, had brought them in part, out of their Native
rudeness and extreme Barbarism.

O how many Invaders has England had! as well as those poor souls, now under
the Altar crying, how long Lord? Have not the Irish invaded? and were not more
sent for to invade? and are they not called Roman Catholic Subjects, to
prepare them to be the better entertained by the disaffected Subjects here?
have not Scotland invaded? and the Welsh invaded? the Walloones invaded? and
what think you English men, did they come for your good? or for your goods? for
your cure? or for a curse? to save you? or to destroy you? Have they left no
ruinous heaps? no bloody footsteps? no scarres or characters yet visible? are
we cured? or are we bleeding still? Believe it, believe it, they came to drive
you out, not to settle you in your dwellings: not to add unto your strength,
but to take away your strength and your glory, to cut your locks, not to curl
them; and then with the Philistines to plow with your heifer, and make you a
scorn and derision to all nations: Give credit to none that plead for them, let
their pretenses be as plausible and pleasant as the light; Their aim. is
darkness and confusion, and woe to the Common wealth of England: if they follow
them they are a spurious brood, not a freeborn people that tell you otherwise.

Thus they are Invading Midianites, as well as the old Midianites were.

2. They are vexing Midianites, the troublers of our Israel: the old ones vexed
Israel twenty years; and how many years suppose ye have the young ones vexed
and troubled England? How many years has this intoxicating drink of Civil
wars been brewing? and now to what pass have they brought us? To divide the
head from the body first? the body politic, and then the Members of Christ's
body also from one another, the body mystical?

How truly may distressed England take up that of the Psalmist psalm. 129.1.2.3.
Many a time have they aefflicted me from my youth up (may England now say) yea
many a time have they afflicted me from my youth up; but they have not
prevailed against me, the plowers plowed upon my back, and made long their
furrows, but the righteous Lord will hew their snares asunder.

The old ones destroyed the fruit of the Earth, and left no sustenance for
Israel: And what have these done less? have they not destroyed where ever they
have been? Is there not a scarcity of provision every where? but especially in
the north? and what is the famine and the sword (yet devouring) but the print,
and direful footsteps of their Malignity?

So that though the Midianites be dead, and Moab and Ammon be cut off, yet
their malice does yet remain alive, and it is but vetus fabula per novos
histriones. An old Tragedy of Malignant Midian newly acted over by our
Malignant English and Irish.

3. They drew them to sin in the wilderness, which brought upon them much
misery and many judgments: and what a great lump has the Leaven of Popish
doctrine leavened in these three Dominions? what a deal of mischief has this
Toleration and Union with them, by Marriage and Co-habitation wrought upon this
nation? how are many countries pestred with these Locusts? how are they
overspread with them? here is sin right parallel to Midians sin, Idolatry as
gross and superstitious as ever theirs was, provocations as highly daring
heaven and vengegeance, as ever they were guilty of; And is our punishment
less? or our miseries fewer? or rather do not we exceed them in all in sin and
misery?

And woe be to them through whom the offense comes, for it will be done unto
them as unto the Midianites.

The punishment of these is described by 3 circumstances, 1 the time 2 the
means, 3 the manner of their de^truction.

1. For the time, It was in their height, jollity, confidence, they did not so
much as dream of a downfall, and it was the more sore and terrible because of
their strong presumption of victory, and of enjoying their lust upon Israel.

And was it not a stinging scourge upon the shoulders of Ahab, Who after he had
in his thoughts acquitted himself of all fear and danger of death, yet then to
be taken off, and cut in pieces? For a morning to be dark is portending some
storm; but no wonder if the evening be surprised by the powers of darkness.

The circumstance of time adds very much to the agravation of the punishment;
what? turned into Hell when a man is at Heaven gates? better for a man to go
from the Papists supposed Purgatory into Hell, then with Lucifer to be cast
from Heaven to Hell. O Lucifer son of the morning! the preciousnesse of the
morning season wherein Lucifer fell, does aggravate his punishment more then if
he had been the son of night, or of darkness.

This was old Midians great unhappiness, he made so sure of Israel, that his
mouth was ready opened to swallow him, then comes a log or bullet, and tears
the whistle; Midian falls and cannot swallow Israel; this is young Midians
case; but I am sorry I cannot run the parallel.

2. by means very weak, absurd, foolish; Units overcome Tens, Tens Hundreds,
and Hundreds Thousands. So it was then, so it is now:

By means I say absurd, foolish; Gideon and 300. men against so great a
multitude, and that the blowing of a Trumpet, and breaking earthen Pitchers
should affright and gall such a terrible Host of Martial men; What? Sisera
baffled by a company of Mechanics? How can you hold up your heads? Shall our
Tailors do more with their Needles, then you with Spears? And are our Masons
Trowels more keen then your Swords? And what rare Tinkers have we, that can so
artificially beat out, and make up what you have so miserably mangled?

Well then, this is one aggravation of their misery, that they are still beaten
by such as are no Gentlemen, but Cowards.

3. And for the manner of the punishment, it was irrecoverable; they were
utterly routed, taken prisoners, and slain, Oreb and Zeb Princes, Zeba and
Zaluma Princes, so that they lift up the head no more.

And have not our Young ones received a foil, and, we hope, an irrecoverable
one too, and though we cannot say they lift up their heads no more, or that
they were so overcome that they could not come together and do more mischief,
yet this we can say, that as they have lifted up their heads, so they have lost
them hitherto; and it may be said of Englands Conquest, as it was of Isreal's
Victory, Judge. 4.14. The hand of the children of Israel prospered and prevailed
against Iabin King of Canaan, until they had destroyed Iabin King of Canaan:
So, blessed be God, No weapon formed against our Forces did ever prosper
against us, since the fatal blow at Naseby, and our Armies are in a Prosperous
condition ever since. That's the third aggravation, the fatality of the blow
they received.

Such, and no other, says the Church, will be the punishment that God will
bring upon the succeeding Enemies of his succeeding Israel; and it shall
parallel to the life all these descriptions; And indeed God has abundantly
manifested the truth hereof to his people of this Nation; One blow he gives
them at Naesby; they rise again, he drives them to the West, there pays them
to some tune. Then like the Fox in the Fables, they seem to be dead, they stir
not, till they think the dangers past; Then up they rise again in the East,
and the North. Hitherto judgment rides post after them, and chops off some of
the chief heads, and discharges their own intended cruelty upon themselves;
and now judgment rests, and mercy waits to see whether they will be yet quiet,
and feign would the Gracious God rather fill their faces with shame, by beating
them, that he might beat them into obedience, then to be forced by their guilt
of more insurrections and bloodshed to do unto them as he did unto the
Midianites.

He is very unwilling that this Nation should be named in the Black Book of his
Churches Enemies, because his truth engages him to make good this Prophesied
destruction against such.

I need not go about to clear so known a truth, more then the Text has
already done unto our hands; yet I will give you one proof, for each one of
the three circumstances, in the punishment of Midian, besides our own
experience of it.

1. God will do this gallant seat upon them when they are most secure. I my
self have seen that, says David, Psalm. 37.35. I have seen the wicked in great
power, and flourishing like a green Bay Tree; yet he passed by, and lo he was
gone; I sought him, but his place could nowhere be found: O strange and
unexpected alteration!

2. By means too, very unlikely: It Is a common thing, says Paul, 1 Cor. 1.27.
God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God
has chosen the weak things of the World, to confound those that are mighty,
and things which are not to bring to naught, things which are. O it was a soul
scorn to the enemy, that the London Boys should stun their Chosen men; their
illiterate Tradesmen should chop Logic with these wise men, both in Counsels
and in Field-disputes* And that those things which were not, Gentlemen I mean
(for so they said they had all, and we had none) should bring to naught things
that are, Gentlemen and Gallants, Scholars and Soldiers, and to outstrip
them, Tam Mart quam Mercurio, both in Counsel and Courage.

3. And he will do it to the life too; It shall be complete and irrecoverable
when he sets about the work of scattering and destroying Nations, Esaias. 30.14.
And he shall break it like the breaking of a Potters pot, etc. A Potters pot,
you know, cannot be mended when it is broken; though they have made a sorry
shift to cement the shattered pieces of their broken forces, by the guilt of
all the innocent blood of three Nations, which were broken in shivers again,
to the loss of the Neck blood of some of their Nobles, by a small touch of a
little Army.

And will you have one example? 2 Pet. 2.6. He turned the Cities of Sodom and
Gomorah into ashes, condemned them with an overthrow, leaving them an example
to them that afterward should live ungodly.

And let this be the comfort of our Gallant English Army, designed for the
service of Ireland; their broken, mixed, miserable (I cannot call them Armies,
but a) confused heap of Tigers, hateful Turn-coats there, though painted over,
with a seeming agreement, (like the Apples of Sodom) will soon moulter into
ashes by a touch of an English hand free from the guilt of the blood of the
slain there. And the broken Forces so unnaturally glewed and forced together
against the natural temper of many a poor soul there, will soon fall in pieces
again with a touch, and all their bonds and ties will immediately be dissolved
and cut asunder by the Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon.

Will ye see some executions? You will find pillaging Achan, (the troubler of
Israel) and his whole family executed, Ios. 7.24. And of all Ahabs posterity
and persecuting house, there was not a man left to piss against the wall: And
of all that Court-Faction that conspired against Jeremy, The Lord says, Cast
them out of my sight, and let them go forth; such as are for death, to death;
and such as are for the Sword, to the Sword; and such as are for the famine, to
famine; and those for captivity, to captivity: And though Moses and Samuel
stood before me, says God, my mind should not be toward them, Jer. 15.1, 2.
See here, holy men may possibly become Mediators, to get off Malignants from
their Fines, and Sequestrations, and punishments, and imprisonments, and leave
their brethren and friends under all the ruins that these ill-affected persons
have brought upon them, without any restitution at all; but it shall not take
with God; but such as are for death, shall suffer death; and such as deserve
the punishment, punishment shall be dealt out accordingly and restitution
completely made to his justice: It is not so here in the world, nor can it be
(to perfection) while men are men.

Use 1. How then have your deceitful hearts gulled you bloody Irish? You
thought to destroy all and to make a full Massacre of the English; and see here
the sentence past upon you; You must yield your guilty selves to the stroke of
Justice: And to what pass has your Malignity brought you you degenerate
English, that act Irish designs in England? How miserably are you cosened of
your expectation? the advantages, preferments, and opportunities of revenge you
dreamt of, are all fallen to the ground, the wheels of your Chariots are off,
and your jaw bones broken; This Prophecy spoils you all, this is worse then
an Ordinance, or an Act of Parliament for the departure of Malignants out of
Town, for in such a case more stay then go; but here all go out, but none
return that continue so; and how can your knees forbear smiting one another,
when the writing is as clear upon the wall against you, as Belthazars was in
written Characters against him, for the loss of his glory and kingdom?

Tremble then and be dismayed, ye Tygrous Belialists; Ye Roman English, and
Irish Rome; You that have so miserably disjoynted the members of Church and
State, and have you no moderation in your Cruelty and rage? Will nothing serve
your turn but the utter desolation of our Eden? It appears your malice is far
fetched, and as deep as Hell, and because you could not undo us by your Spanish
Armadoe's, nor your Powder-plots, you have so enchanted a poor people, that
they do your intended work upon themselves, and have directed their swords
against their own breasts, to further your bloody designs, and to make way for
your tyranny, and another Mary-Martyrdome; well, Gods will be done on us. Yet
know, as soon as God has sufficiently scourged this Nation, by your Serpentine
rod, (as he did of old his own Israel by the Assyrian, cruel Ashur here) he
will burn the rod, and receive his people graciously, and when we have drunk
the top of this Cup, the Lees and Dregs shall be for your share, and we shall
be all made friends to your ruin, and the scattering all your Counsels in
England and Ireland.

How truly may England say of this your Conveyance and hidden treachery, as
Jacob did sometime of the fact of Simeon and Levi? Genesis 29.7. Cursed be their
wrath (says the old man) for it was fierce, and their rage for is was cruel;
so say I, Cursed be this devise of all inventions, cursed be this cruelty of
all butcheries. How much cause have England and Ireland and Scotland to say of
this your Horrid treason, and to take up that speech uttered by the Jews in
their Babylonish Captivity? Blessed shall he be, that takes thy children, and
dasheth them against the stones. No Nation has more reason to perform such a
cruel work upon the plotters and Acters of these bloody Massacres in Ireland
and here; and yet I would have it inferior to no Nation in acts of mercy, and
to separate the innocent from the guilty. But hear your sentence read before I
leave you; God will do unto you As he did unto the Midianites: Tremble then.

Use. Is it so that God has determined such an exact destruction for his own
and his peoples enemies? Then let us all, for our parts, show our zeal and
forwardness to help on the purpose and determination of God: But you will say,
help on Gods purpose? Has not God power himself to do it? O yes; says one,
speak Lord, speak to the fire, and with flashes it shall consume them; to the
Air, and with pestilent vapors it shall choke them; to the water, and with
deluges it shall overwhelme them; to the earth, and with yawning chops it shall
devour them. God will have his enemies destroyed, but it shall be by means;
His people shall sweat for it; The Philistines shall be destroyed, but Sampson
must work hip and thigh, Goliath shall sink, but little David must use his
Sling, Sisera must fall at Iaels feet, but the woman must drive a nail through
the Temples of his head first; It is determined that Midian shall receive an
irrecoverable overthrow, but yet Gideon must advance and encounter him, though
he Muster but three hundred men, in this sense that is very true, he that made
thee without thee, will not save thee without thee, he that made England
without England, will not save England without England; our utmost endeavors
must seasonably accompany outward deliverances.

Awake, awake, sleepy (though stirring) England, and be thou at last recovered
of thy sleepy Lethargy; for shame, and thine own safety too, unite hearts,
strike hands, be friends, and join together; and let not other Nations have
cause to clap their hands for joy, while we do wring our hands for grief. All
Nations are in arms for themselves, but England. France for France, Spain for
Spain, Barbary for Barbary, Ireland for Ireland, Hell for Hell; And now that
you have none to keep you in action, you have found out names and words, and
titles, and circumstances to fall asunder into parties. And now one is of Paul,
another of Apollo, a third likes Cephas best, but few follow Christ in the main
thing of that charge of his left his Disciples, To love one another. See that
it be not a trick of Rome and the devil; it did do the feat upon Germany, see
that it work not the same effect upon your own selves, your friends, and this
great City, as it did upon them.

Ah Countrymen, there is a naughty liberty taken by many of this present age,
who make a vast difference between the words, working, in English, and
operation a Latin Elegancy, and these hold a stiff argument that the same
thing may be hot in operation, which yet is cold, they say, in working; O but,
you will say, they understand themselves better then so. I willingly grant it,
and do much honor and reverence the excellency of Gods Grace that is in
multitudes of the Contenders about these things, but if they agree in words
that these are the same, why do they not agree in deeds, and in the maine? In
the duty of Love? A duty so set on by strength of argument and earnestness of
entreaty, in all the writings of holy men, who spoke as they were inspired? And
by the last Will and Testament of Christ, for whose kingdom you so contend? Why
then do you diversify the unity of the Spirit, and the bond of Peace, into such
a variety of hateful factions, and bitter disputings? O but the least truth is
precious; I, and so is the best of truths, to be honored and embraced, the God
of peace and love; There is no Gall in his Doves, and there ought to be no
snarling among his Sheep: Let Lions tear, Dogs and Bears fight, and Wolves
destroy, but let Gods people study to be quiet.

Believe it, be sure of it, your enemies will make no bones of your scruples,
no distinction of your varieties: and if they could but get the power into
their hands, which you contend for amongst your selves, They would Level all
your new names into one plain, and dig you all into one wast or Common, and
one complete destruction upon Church and State would serve their turn, for
all your fiery disputes, and mutual contendings.

Now the virtue of this last Doctrinall truth, is to exhort you all to be
Zealous for God, and for His Truth, and to unite all the powers of your Minds,
for the subduing of the Common-Enemy; And for the better Composing of this
Nation for this noble enterprise, we must first fall to Distribution, and
distribute the Exhortation.

1. And first to the supreme Authority thereof, and under them all orders and
sorts of men.

2. And next to you, those Martial and derivative powers, that manage matters
in the field, and to these in their rank and file.

1. And first to you, the Honorable and renowned Champions of this Nation, let
me be bold to beseech you, to accept of a part of this distribution, and so
far to condescend to the unworthiness of the Speaker, as to ascend so high
to the magnificence of the duty. Believe it, Worthy Senators, it is the top of
your dignity, and the most Honorable Flower in the Arms of England; it has
so pleased the Lord of Hosts, that you are above your enemies, and they that
hate you are not your masters, though they court you and abuse your Servants,
yet they are under you, and there kept. God expects at your hands now (and
looks for it earnestly) that you would disable his enemies too, and those that
hate him and his friends: Who has his sword but you? he has made you
Magistrates, and Magistrates of the firstrate in Europe, and can you bea^e the
sword in vain?

I will not be so presumptuous as to go about to direct you what you ought to
do, and far be it from me, either to prescribe or anticipate you in your
wiser Councels, I hope you are minded to do things that be just, and you will
be taught of God what to do, whose names and titles he has lent you to that
end.

I have said you are Gods. Gods will not be unjust, Gods will not be
forgetful. Forsake me not, says David, when I am old, when I am gray headed,
when my strength fails me.

David well knew that God would not deal so with his servants, as men usually
do with theirs; he knew he should not be put out of doors, now that he was
aged, and weak, and worn out in his service. No, no, he will be kind to the
kind, and just to the just, have they lost a limb? he will look out a
Surgeon for them, and provide a good pension in the interim, is their estate
wasted? it shall be made up an hundred fold, have they lost friends? he will
give them an hundred for one; if he make them not out in number, he will supply
them in their qualities; and if he fit them not with great Ones, he will
furnish them with good Ones, and that is all one, nay it is much better.

God puts men upon hard Duties, but gives them good Pay.

See their Commission and Debeuturs both, Mat. 10.

By their Commission, they must fight with Wolves, v. 16. Be tried by Councels,
v. 17. Betrayed by friends, v. 21. Be hated of all, v. 22. Endure the utmost,
v. 28. And yet neither fly, nor revolt, but be faithful, v. 28.

There Is their Commission.

Obj. But what shall be their Pay?

Ans. They shall be maintained, and saved harmless, by a more effectual and
speedy Power then the Committee of Indemnity; They shall save their lives by
losing them, they shall win their goods by spoiling them, (it is not so here.)
This they shall have at present; and in case they cannot be heard presently,
they shall be supplied in the mean time with words to answer, and patience to
endure whatever shall be laid upon them by the world, ver. 19.

But is this all? No, their great services shall be acknowledged before God,
(not forgotten) and their arrears discharged without any defalcation, with
better content then 3s. in the pound. O all you Noble Host, that will be
Christian Martyrs, Can you desire better pay?

Thus God will do, and thus ought you to do also that are called Gods; or else
you dishonor God in being called by his name, and entitled The supreme
Authority of the Nation. You are his highest Court on earth, You are his upper
Bench of Christian Magistrates.

You have given out as strict Commissions, and put men upon as hard and uncouth
duties as ever any Powers put subjects upon. For, 1. Have you not sent them as
sheep amongst Wolves too? and what would have become of the sheep, if the Lamb
had not got the conquest? For did you not engage them against the cruel Irish?
and are these less cruel then Wolves, then Tigers? And are not your friends
lives closely bound up with yours, in respect of the direful, revengeful, and
degenerate Cavalry of this and the neighbor Nations? What would become of
their lives, if you had sunk? Who labored in the storm but they, while many of
you and us (like Jonas) slept between decks? And now you are come into harbor,
can it be that you should forget them that saved you, and became the vertual
(next to God) and effectual interpreters of your dreams, that otherwise must
have vanished away as dreams? And the freedom of England in those honorable
thoughts of yours to rescue it from Tyranny, had been strangled in the birth,
and had never seen these few beams of our yet obstructed liberties.

There is such a thing in nature as forgetfulness. And what a stigme and note
of infamy does the Spirit of God leave upon Pharoahs chief Butler for it, Genesis
40.23. Yet did not the chief Butler remember Joseph, but forgot him. And oh
that all they that have guilt upon them in this kind, that do drink wine in
bowls, (the Butlers privilege to do it on free-cost) and never call to mind
the afflictions of Joseph, would do no less for their friends, then he did for
his Joseph, Genesis 41.9. I do remember my fault this day. Great men, and men of
place and public employments, are very obnoxious to these failings; and the
reason thereof is obvious: and oh that these also would remember their faults
this day!

I beseech you, Honorable Sirs, send speedily, and draw your friends out of
dungeons; raise them from their beds of sickness, and free them from their
discontented Landlords. Pharaoh did so for Joseph a stranger to him; he freed
him from the Ward and the Master of the Ward. Do you so too for your neighbors
and your friends, and speak comfortably to them; and do as well as speak too,
lest Pharaoh rise up in judgment against you.

They have been put upon hard duties; it lies in their bones and breasts, in
their heads and hearts, and upon their wives and children, and landlords and
creditors to this day.

2. But what talk I of hard Duty? To lie in the cold fields, and to fight with
bears and wolves, is but a sport and delight, to those bold, and unnatural
attempts and undertakings that your Commission has put men upon: It has
familiarly cut the knot of all relations, and put the son to discharge the
instrument of death toward his own father that gave him life; The tie of
brotherhood was of no value, to the tie of their loyalty to you; The
Marriage Bed has been divided since their Espousals to you; and the loving
husband could never return again to his beloved wife; Oh how many Widows, and
Orphans, and Cripples have your Commissions created, that God never made so! He
made men and women perfect; it was sin, and judgment, and the sword, that makes
criples, and orphans, and widows.

Has not the father disinherited the son? and does not the brother betray his
brother, and cause him to be put to death in your quarrel? or that is worse
then death, disinherits and shames him that was for the Cause; and for no other
fault, but for being so?

Obj. Is not the Law open? and are there not Committees for redress of such
grieveances?

Ans. O Caesar, said a Soldier to Augustus, when he would have put him off to
another that should go in his name to the Judges, whom he feared, but could not
(he said) go in person. O Emperor, said he, when thy life was in hazard, I
dealt not thus with thee, to put thee off to a Deputy; but received all these
scars and wounds to save thy life with these limbs; and will thou put me off to
Deputies? And will you put us off to Lawyers? Will ye put a lame man to walk to
Lincolns Inn, that never loved Law when he had legs?

Well then, you have put them upon harsh employments, it cannot be denied. What
shall be their pay? Let it not be shame, I beseeeh you, whatsoever you provide
for them: their hearts are full of reproach, and their purses are full of that
coin already.

You may think I have erred from my Scope, but I shall clear the passage; I am
now upon exhorting you, that seeing it is Gods purpose to bring down all the
implacable enemies of England, and seeing you are the Judges of his upper Bench
on earth, that you would put forth your Wisdom and Justice, in subduing these
enemies. And because the drift of my discourse, looks more upon your wisdom
then your Justice for the composing of our sad divisions; Wisdom being the
Queen-Regent in all Councels, and Justice but the daughter, yet so as that
wisdom can as well be without her right hand, as be without her.

I am now upon an humble and submissive agreement with your wisdoms, about
mulcts and oblivions; that those Canine and greedy Appetites; ( David was
warranted to style it the Greediness of Dogs,) seeing they have been so
familiar already at the table, as to snatch away the Meat from your Trencher,
which we supposed you had portioned, and cut out for your children, may be
shamed from your table, by holding to them the whole joint; sure if they be not
more impudent then that blushing creature is, at such a sight, they will be
ashamed and go out of doors, at such strange and unwonted kindness* and yet
receive kindnesses too.

Left therefore your Lenity should strangle her sister Justice, and stab her in
the fifth rib, in stead of kissing her. I am warranted to lay these two
restraints upon your indulgence. 1. Do not shame your friends. 2. Do not
embolden your enemies.
To this end I have minded you of your Commissions, and those hardships (which
are better groaned out then uttered) and the services you have put them upon,
to save you. I have a commission also to come nearer to you; and I may use
Ioabs words by way of persuasion as a Divine, which he boldly used by way of
charge unto David as a Soldier. I shall bring them to your doors by and by. 1.
Do not hate your friends, but love them. 2. Do not love your enemies, yet love
them.
I shall make it good sense; Destroy their enmity, but love your enemies.

1. Do not hate your friends. That Is the first restriction, I shall lay upon
your Lenity toward your enemies. Be pleased to remember this saying, Qui non
zelat non amat, Remisser love is hatred.

There are diverse distinctions of hatred amongst the learned; I will pick out
but two for this purpose. Hatred is either absolute, or comparative: There is
no fear that you will hate them absolutely; but it is comparative hatred they
suffer under, that is, when you do not love them so much as you ought; or when
you can find more time to bring off a Malignant, then you can find to preserve
a friend from ruin and death. And so the beloved wife and the hated are
distinguished in the Law. She is said to be hated, not that she was so
absolutely, but because she was not so well beloved as the other. Thus your
friends think they are deeply hated and wronged, according to this distinction;
because they are not looked upon as they ought to be, nor could they ever have
one dispatch for all their Loyalty, for an hundred that others have had for all
their treachery. Indeed there was this disadvantage to your friends: Your
enemies brought money, your friends had laid out all and more, and as much as
they could borrow besides: Your enemies were Gentlemen, and had good clothes to
put a glittering garnish of good oratory upon their hatred of you; your friends
had no Counsel to plead for them, but beggary and their old clothes, and broken
estates and cracked credits, and it may be a printed Petition or two;

And a Hospital is a more unwelcome sight then Goldsmiths-hall.

This is comparative hatred; when the Spittle is not so well beloved as the
Mint; when both were children of your own begetting. Ah sirs, let us see that
you be the fathers of our Country; if you will be fathers and indulgent ones,
sure your Cripples and those that have been lamed under the cart-wheel of your
pressures, shall have a more tender specialty of your provision for them, then
those rebellious children that have their limbs, but would nor work, or else
fled out into open Rebellion against you with Absalom. I pray think on it.

2. Hatred has another distinction for our use. It is either 1 formal, or 2
interpretative. By the former is meant such hatred as a man entertaines
wittingly and upon actual consideration; by the latter, such as by which
(though there be no intention so to do, yet) a man does the same things in
effect, as if he did purposely hate a thing. It was Wisdoms speech, Prove. 8.
He that sins against me, hates his own soul. Now no man yet ever hated his
own flesh, much less his soul.

He that spares the rod, hates his son.

The meaning is, that if he hated him indeed, he could not do him a worse turn.

Ah Gentlemen, your friends complain bitterly of this kind of hatred, that you
do that against them, that if you hated them indeed, you could not do them a
worse turn; if you should as seriously and intensively study their irreparable
overthrow, as they have stoutly fought for your safety and Preservation, you
could not go a nearer way to overturne them irrecoverably; your good words
invite them to wait on you; and God forbid you say, but they should be
relieved, and but that their Grievances should be redressed; your Declarations,
and public Acts concerning them, give them assurance you intend what you say
too; all this is well: who could imagine that these Words and Acts could be
effects of your hatred? he that would affirm such a truth were in danger to be
questioned.

They wait upon you a month; two, three; nay they tarry a year, two, three,
four; there arise great contention in the mean time, between them and their
Landlords, Landladies, the Cook, the Brewer must be paid, the Baker must have
money: the Cook cannot buy meat: much complaining and reasoning, excusing and
accusing there must needs be of course.

The Conclusion is, your friends be turned out of doors, and bid mischief take
them, and their masters that set them on work, and the devil pay them their
Arrears; O the language! you will understand it better then I can express it
with modesty.

But I had forgot, there is another degree of hatred, as well as comparative
and positive, and that is, there is a negative hatred; that is, when there is
no love at all. Truly your friends say they can make Affidavit of this too: it
is the property of love, wherever it is rooted, to command all the faculties
within, to be employed for the good of them we love.

Dies Noctesque, me ames, me sonnies, me desideres, de me cogites, etc. Believe
it, if you loved your friends, your eye would be upon them; if you loved them,
your souls would be with them; you would enquire whether they be alive or no;
they could not starve, while you feast; and you would not let them sigh, when
you sing.

Again, love is learned, and love is witty; If you had love, you could not be
ignorant what their services have been, what their sufferings are, and all for
you, these things you would know too; again, Love is witty, in devising means
for the good of them we love; you would find an hundred ways to enjoy your
Love; you would quickly resolve to which closet, to which chest you will go to
take out a pair of gloves, to single out the other bugle-purse of gold, to
convey into your Loves hands. Your friends complain they cannot see any seal
of your love; but now and then they receive a Letter of commendation, which
they fear is complemental, and though the Court be down, they meet with
Courtiers still But, Migremus hinc, There Is no tarrying for me here.

I pray Do not hate your Friends, but love them.

2. Do not love your Enemies, yet love them.

1. Do not love your Enemies, against themselves.

2. Do not love your Enemies, against your Friends.

Yet,

3. Subdue them by love, and Conquer them by kindness, as much as you can.

1. There are ways to love them against themselves. They have inherent
boldness and impudency, and shamelessness to speak and act uncivil things to
your faces. Witness CHEAP SIDE lately; there was boldness by wholesale;
there was insolency at your Triumph, there were scoffs at your Thanksgiving:
And will they be less impudent, when they deal out their Malignity by parcels,
and make up their Markets by retail at your several Courts and Committees? They
have all the advantage in the world, to add Art to Nature, and experiment to
experience; They have Cosens, and Uncles, and Allies, and Council, Friends, and
Language to make themselves upright and honest men. Remember old ^^li: How is
it that I hear this of you, my sons? Do so no more my sons. And then you
give them rope, till they destroy themselves; and let them proceed in their
lewdness, until with Hophni and Phinehas they break the neck of themselves,
and their Noble, or Ignoble families, and miserable relations of their own
making.

Do not love them thus, I pray you; you will love them against themselves: They
will take up Arms again, and then where can they compound for their lives? What
shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

2. Do not love them against your friends neither: They complain infinitely
that your Enemies did strip them naked, made them beggars, murdered their
friends, burnt their houses, laid their Country in heaps. After 3 or 4 years
complaining, their Petition is read, (it may be so) the offender brought up at
your friends charge. Against their coming there is carefully provided for them
a Mulct an Act of Grace; or if they cannot extricate themselves by that shift,
they have Money, and Council, and Friends; and then a Report must be made,
before relief can be given; and then your Friends trudge about with their
broken Credits, and fee whether they can patch it up for the loan of a Crown or
two shillings, and be at the cost to swear Witnesses again; At last, your
Enemies Compound at Coldsmiths-Hall, when the worst come to the worst; and then
where be your friends? Who shall pay the Messenger, and the Charges?

Obj. There is better provision made then so, And do we favor our enemies
against our friends?

Ans. We acknowledge you would not do it, if you did but hear and see passages
with your own eyes and ears; not will you do it jointly (as the Supreme Court)
by your good will: I know you hate it. But Treachery is always wrought covertly
and closely, and under the specious show of good affection and friendship to
your proceedings. But I lanch out into the deep, I forbear. I beseech you
pardon my boldness; Your wisdom is hereby touched, (but it is my zeal for
the honor of it) The LORD grant that it be deeper in Heavenly Prudence, then
the Hellish Craft of your Enemies, which is deep too, as deep as Hell.

But shall I be daunted? Wherefore? Have I not a Commission to speak? and shall
I turn my back now I am charging an Enemy, and now that I have been among
Soldiers? It is not against you Noble Senators, but it is for you that I
charge; I charge a subtle enemy, an enemy of near six thousand years standing.

In the Optics, though a man be quick-sighted, and has an Eagles eye, yet he
cannot see the perfection of a Picture at a neernesse, nothing so well as one
of dimmer sight may behold it at a greater distance. It is the excellency of
your nearness, Honorable Sirs, that you have power to make Acts, and to
command immediate Execution of them; Yours is a neernesse of Power: We have a
neernesse too, a neernesse of Conscience, and knowledge of Right or Wrong, and
the particular effects and successes of things, and some abuses done to the
honor of your good intentions. We, we, many of us I mean, that have a great
neernesse in many wrongs, have as great remoteness and distance of Right, as
we have of Power to right our selves but by your Authority, unto which we
submit.

There is this Cunning discernable in your enemies, and eminently seen, (to the
bleeding of the hearts of your friends) that when their Oratories and
Insolences are so notoriously debauched, that they dare not show their
grinning faces against your loyal friends, in your presence; yet they have this
masterpiece, to set on Tertullus the Orator (powerfully) to plead for them in
another guise, and to throw dirty aspersions: which (however the Oration be
puffed with lies and malice against your friends for being your friends, as
Hell is fraught with darkness) yet it will cast a stain upon your most
innocent Mordecay's that discovered their treason; and it may be such, if your
wisdom discern it not, that many Napkins (and alas, many of them want linen
next their backs, and cannot be at the charge of many napkins) yet the many
white Napkins of their innocence cannot wipe it off.

Do ye believe Paul was an honest man? O yes! not Paul? Will ye hear then what
a Charge Tertullus brought in against him to Felix? Truly, sirs, if you would
but look discerningly in this Glass, you might behold the blushing faces of
your friends, and the brazen foreheads of your enemies.

Speak, Tertullus; here is your Fee. Tertullus speaks, Act. 24. from the second
verse etc. Seeing that by thee we have obtained great quietness, and that many
worthy things are done to this Nation through thy providence, (Malignants love
quietness? do they wish worthy things to a Nation? O impudence! Well, proceed)
We accept it always, and in all places, most noble Felix, with all thanks. (O
treachery! I can scarce forbear) But that I be not tedious to thee, I pray
thee that thou would hear us (not hear me; Tertullus pleads for dangerous
Malignants, as you shall see; hear us, says he) of thy courtesy a few words.
Why, what is the matter, Tertullus? Certainly we have found this man (Paul he
means) a pestilent fellow, a mover of sedition, a chief maintainer of sects,
(it may be so, Tertullus, yet for all that, Paul may be an honest man; for
after this manner which you call heresy, sects, seditions, so worship we the
Living GOD. Well go on:) Who has gone about to destroy the Temple, (it was but
the pollutions of the Temple. But go on:) Whom we took, and would have judged
according to our Law, (that is right still) but that Lysias the chief Captain
with great violence took him out of our hands. That is the spite of your
enemies, and the very heartbreaking of them, that your friends were taken
violently out of their hands by Captain Lysias, by your Martial power. O the
rebellious General Lysias, that would be so bold as to take him out of their
hands! What a noise there is of this kind of violence, that your enemies in
three Kingdoms say you have done unto them, that they cannot judge us
according to their Law. This is the great mischief that your Army has done
them, that they cannot judge your Friends.

Surely ( Right Honorable) if Tertullus had lived in these days, (I am sorry
I commended him for his wit) he might have starved, for any employment he could
have had of the most stupid of Malignants in England, There is not the most
blockish Malignant in England, but can plead better for himself. Do but observe
his learned oration (well painted over with smooth words) and you will say he
was an Ass, and went the ready way to betray his Clients, if Felix had not
been Judge, and their better friend to keep Paul close prisoner still.

Do but mark: Whom we took and would have judged (says he, and we believe him)
according to our law.

Let me press you to note this passage. Tertullus plainly declares that he
proceeded against Paul for no other cause, but upon the grounds of hatred and
revenge. How so? He should have been judged according to their law. What was
that? I pray read it in the foregoing Chap. ver. 12. Certain Jews made an
assembly, and bound themselves with a curse, saying, that they would neither
eat nor drink till they had killed Paul. The old murderer Satan had given them
a Commission of Array to kill him; and the Law was only this, They had sworn
and bound themselves under a Curse (ver. 12.) that they would soon dispatch
him; and there were at the least forty Malignants that had listed themselves
to murder him. I know not what other Law they had against him, but this was all
the Commission of Oyr and Terminer that past the consent of both Houses, the
chief Priests and Elders, that they might kill him without any more dispute,
being the Ambassador of Christ; as your enemies did that Ambassador in Holland,
for being your Messenger. For they had said before, that Damn them they would
do it; as they here had bound themselves by oath to do the like feat. This was
the Law they meant to try him by; and the foolish Orator could not conceal it,
but tells Felix in plain terms that they had an intent to destroy him, if
Lysias had not rescued him. It is very likely he would have had Felix
understand him in a better sense, but that Lysias Letter to the most excellent
Governor Felix (as he styles him) discovered their bloody purpose before; that
he could not have him shot to death, nor sentenced to die, while Felix was
Judge.

O the treachery of your Enemies in this powder plot! and O the deep subtilty
of your seeming Friends, in this horrid treason against your true Friends! It
is better expressed by Interjections, then it can possibly be engraven in
stone, or cut out in wood; the narrow compass of words cannot enlighten you
into these dark Cells. I would, but I cannot be more large; I can, but I will
not be more tedious. I promised as much at the first, and I shall strive to pay
my debts.

I shall crave only so much patience, as to put up Joseph's request unto you;
that seeing the Almighty providence has restored unto you the Liberty that you
desired, and has made you the Keepers and Distributers of the Liberties of
England, and that you have the many Clusters of Grapes in your hands; that you
would be pleased to let some of the juice of those Grapes drop into the Cup of
your afflicted Joseph's. Remember him, and show him mercy, I pray you, now that
you are restored. And if ever you hear Tertullus charging your friends, (as
Joseph's Mistress did Joseph, because he could not be tempted to commit folly
with her) Remember (I pray) still, that it is Tertullus that pleads; not
Tertullus the novice, the fool, but Tertullus the Barrister, it may be
Tertullus the Sergeant, the Judge, the Committeeman, the Commissioner. It is
possible, I say, that such a thing may be. I beseech you, Sirs, suspect ever,
when you hear their reputation blemished, Is not the hand of Ioab in all this?
If they would have you believe that your friends be not your friends, but they
were self-ended, vicious, your enemies in intention, though eminently faithful
in action: Remember still that it is Tertullus, or one or more for him. And
what if these Instruments come hot from your Enemies forge? what if they have a
dark Lantern too, and are underminers of your honor and safety? I beseech
you sirs, suspect this evermore, and cast in your thoughts that such a thing
may be. You suspect your meat sometimes, and the safety of your persons and
houses; and why not as well the very being of your Honor and Safety?

2. Do not love your enemies: but love them. I have heard many bleeding
narrations, that the late Mulct so honorably intended by you to shame your
Enemies into obedience, is become an unspeakable snare and shame to your
friends, for being Roundheads; and it lies upon them chiefly, and upon the
least of your enemies. Their subtilty has (almost unavoidable) ways to cleave
and wind about your soundest trees, that like Ivy, will soon eat out the very
heart of their integrity, if not carefully cut at the root, or at least
prevented in their windings about, because there is such difficulty, if not
impossibility to find out the root, as being so deep, and intricate and
dangerous to be dug after; and costly, and ticklish, to discern it from
other roots like it; O the depths of subtilty! I am sure this heart-eating,
serpent-like vegitative, by winding, and turning, and creeping insinuations
does hinder the growth of the most sound trees, and the tallest Cedars, and the
strongest oaks in England; your friends find this in most Courts they have to
deal with, and by sad experience they can say there is very little growth of
public affection toward them that have served the public in two, three,
four years standing, for which time they have been sad Spectators here, and
see no growth. It Is a very dangerous thing for you thus to love your enemies.

Remember I pray the simple credulity and foolish pity of the well-meaning
Countryman, who seeing an Adder in the field; Frigore prope enecatu^, almost
dead with cold; alas poor creature, quoth he, brings it home in his bosom,
applies it to the fire, fosters it with the warmth thereof. The subtle
creature no sooner recollects his spirits again, but with all his venomous
activity annoys the whole house, affrights and stings the children and
servants; and O what a hissing does it make, you would be sorry ever to see
this woeful effect of your love; your children and servants feel it already;
they are mortally stung by these Serpents; they do hiss at your friends, and
jeere them to their faces for being for the Cause, and they tell them the devil
will serve all his servants so as you have served yours.

I beseech you, Honorable Sirs, do not love them so, as that your enemies
shall have cause to scoff at your friends, and deride their loyalty.

Yet love them too, the saying is, a man may love his house, and yet not ride
upon the ridge of it; his child, yet not always be muching of it; his wife,
and yet not still be fondling her upon his knee: Love them as the wise man
would have you love your children; There is folly bound up in the hearts of
your enemies too, as well as in the hearts of children, and the rod of
correction must bring it forth; if favor will not work upon them, this must.

Love them, but still let your eye be upon them; love them, but take heed they
climb not up again to break their necks or lose their heads upon some tower,
fort, house, etc. Love them, but let them have no capacity to wrong your
servants; Love them, but love your friends too; let the son of your mother be
a stranger to you, in comparison of that friend that saved your lives.

But do men in Authority love thus? nay, do they not rather prove unthankful
and unkind to those that have preserved them, and saved their lives, and propt
up their Greatness? O Relatives! Relations! Uncle! Cosen! Brother! why do you
hinder Justice?

Let Captain JOAB speak; I told you I would bring his words, and humbly lay
them at your door, You shall find him a very plain-dealer.

2 Samuel 19:5. Then Ioab came into the house of the King and said, -- Thou have
shamed this day the faces of all thy servants that saved thy life, and the
lives of thy sons and of thy daughters, and the lives of thy wives and the
lives of thy Concubines; in that thou love thine enemies, and hate thy
friends: For thou have declared this day, that thou regardest neither thy
Princes nor servants. I perceive that if Absalom had lived, and we all had dyed
this day, that then it would have pleased thee well.

Now therefore come out and speak comfortably to thy servants; for I swear by
the Lord, except thou come out, there will not tarry with thee one man this
night.

Soldiers are soldiers, and they will sometimes strain a point of Modesty,
when they speak to their General; And they are no more bold then welcome
neither, because they be faithful and valiant, and so found.

It shall be my care to take away so much of the acrimony of Joabs charge as I
can; yet would I not go about to betray you by silence, or dawbing: no, it is
hateful to God and man, it cannot please you.

There are this day in England and Ireland, such of your servants, Honorable
sirs, as have showed no less zeal and courage for your safety and
preservation, then this Soldier did of loyalty to the blood-Royall of the
Tribe of Judah; and men do speak aloud, and it rings in every corner of the
Nation, a^ though you had shamed your friends a^ much as David did his; nay,
and with little success, and less remedy then those people received upon
complains thereof. David rose up, and spoke comfortably to them; and you could
not show your friends more unkindnesse, if you had studied eight years to find
out some exact punishment, then you bring now upon them by delaying them i^
their Petitions in their 3 or 4 years tedious and miserable attendance here
upon you.

Believe it, Honorable Sirs, the faces of your friends that have saved your
lives are very blushingly ashamed. If Malignants now ask them for whom they
fought, they are utterly ashamed to tell them. Adam and Eve when they had
sinned, were not more ashamed of their nakedness then they are of your
service; They are put upon it (some of the weakest I mean) to say as your
enemies say, and complain of you to them, that they thought you had intended
them better things, but now they see, etc. O what meat and drink is this to
those that hate you! and this may make your friends Malignants too by that time
they come to receive their Arrears. Yet in the mean time, such as can stoop to
such an unworthy compliance with your enemies, to get them maintenance; their
Credit will go further upon that account, then upon any account of your
service, or for being for the Cause. A large repetition of their Cornish voyage
now, will be nothing near so pleasing to their minds, as Long-ditch is to their
nostrils, if they were in it.

The place is scarce known at Westminster, where they dare avouch you, or speak
of you, unless it be of your unkindnesses. And what unpleasing things they
shall be urged unto by the grievednesse of their spirits to utter concerning
you, they ought of course to receive pardon, seeing all their afflictions and
pressures could not force them from their loyalty, nor yet drive them to revolt
with the Revolters.

Ah Gentlemen, you little think what unworthy ways and shifts and Courses your
friends are forced to stoop unto, to keep them from the last and utmost of
extremities. Is it not a shame to an honest face, to be called upon every day
for money, and to be charged with breaking days, and words, and promises?
indeed for men regardlesse of their credits; and shifters to deal thus, there
is no impression of shame or regret; but for honest men to be called Knaves,
and for them to be unjust, it is a wounding consideration to men of honest
thoughts. I could show you some, that deserve singularly well at your hands,
that take many a wheeling step in the Revolution of a year, to shun the
provoked clamours, and importunities of those that have trusted them for meat,
drink, etc, during the years (not months) that they have waited here for the
Income of some of your many promises.

But now they blush, and are ashamed, and cry out, O Forgetful Parliament! O
unkind Masters!

Happy Enemy! Happier Neuter! most happy Betrayer! For had I been an enemy
(says one, and I know him too) I had been worth 3000.li. this day; If a
Neuter, 4000.l. If a Betrayer, what with my pay, and the reward of Treachery
offered me, I could not have been worth less then 6000.l. Note this.

But O wretched faithfulness! O fool-hardinesse! which men call constancy and
valor!

For you it is that I am now 600. li: worse then a Bankrupt, if I were sold and
my nine children; for your pleasure it was that I turned the words of Nero's
Mother into real deeds.

Occidar modo impe^et.
Me, me, let me be wrack't so they 'scape pain,
Here, here, take all I have, so they may reign.
These, these, be the Groans of your friends, Honorable Sirs; and these they
sigh into tears, and their tears they drink; for wine they can have none, but
only the Lees thereof turned into sharpest vinegar that frets them, and makes
many of them show sour faces toward you.

O do not shame your friends. Who will you have to subdue your enemies, if you
shame them? enemies will not help you.

Thus you have my distribution like Benjamins Mess, five times bigger then any
of your Brothers portion.

2. And for all other orders, and degrees of men, if such an unskilful hand as
mine (I will confess what I know will be objected,) should presume to
distribute this exhortation into several portions, were they so evenly cut out
and shared, yet I cannot hope to give full satisfaction to the precious
children of Gods own family, muchlesse to the rebellious children that are
contentious, and whom nothing will satisfy, but their own humors, which are
full of rage and envy; I shall here lay before them, Paul's distribution, Romans
13. it is a text wherewith Royalists think they strike all Arguments dumb and
dead, that make for us in our defensive war, and taking up of Arms for the
Supreme Authority of this Nation, against an usurped and inferior power of the
late King and his party. It was a Text that was laid before me when I was a
prisoner at Wallingford; and because they did abuse it, I will take it not from
theirs, but from S. Paul's own hand, and lay it before you. For we can never
effectually go about the work of subduing the common Enemy, until our own
proud hearts that love priority, be subdued and brought under.

Paul says, Let every soul be subject unto higher Powers. (...) Every soul.

He questions not whether we be for Episcopacie, or the Presbytery, or for
gathering Congregations, etc. But if we be reasonable creatures, and have
souls, we must be subject to these powers. Si omnis anima; and vestra, etc.
Active or Passive obedience is a duty we owe unto the Supreme Magistrate.

Obj. O strange! Why then did we not give unto the late Caesar this due? Why
did we take up Arms against the King; when all the licensed weapons in the
Primitive times (that might be used in such cases) were preces and lachrymae,
prayers and tears?

Ans. These must be our weapons still, and we should never have made use of any
other in England or Ireland, had not a greater Power been called to act
according to the Supreme Law of Nations. Salus populi, The good and safety of a
people, is that Sovereign Law that all Nations would be subjects unto, if they
knew what it were, and had any such way as England has had to rescue that Law
of Nature from the will of Princes, and the extreme corruption of Court and
Courtiers. O the Tyranny in France, Barbary! Believe it, Malignants themselves
have told me, it was extreme there.

Obj. But are our Powers the Supreme Powers? Paul, answer for thy self; Many,
many question thy doctrine, or thy meaning.

Ans. Paul. There is no power but of God, the Powers that be are ordained of
God. It is God that sets up, and throws down Emperors, Kings, etc. and it is
He again that enthrones Kings, and sets up Magistrates. There are no Potentates
in the whole Universe that have any settled peculiarity in their Chiefdom, but
all (whether with or against their wills, it matters not) give it up to GOD as
his Prerogative-royall, or He will take it; It is He that dethrones Saul, and
sets up David (a shepherd) to be King; It is no other but He that did throw
down the King and his Cavalry (Gallant Gentlemen) and set up the Parliament to
govern and to keep his sheep. Who but he put the Star Chamber out of
Commission, and settled the Council of State at Whitehall? It is of God, says
Paul.

Obj. Be these the powers of God? that is strange! We thought they had been the
powers of the Army.

Ans. I tell you, says Paul, the powers that are, be ordained of God, and they
that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.

I could lanch out again, but I am in haste, and therefore must wait another
opportunity. I shall therefore in the mean time turn all such as cavil at the
present Providence under which we are, unto Zophar in Job, who will satisfy
any wise man; It is sufficient to me, that the wisdom of God has so ordered
it.

Job 11.7. Can thou by searching find out God? can thou find out the
Almighty to perfection? it is as high as Heaven (for holiness) what can thou
do? as deep as Hell (for wisdom) what can thou know? Vain man would be
wise, etc.

2. This Exhortation has a strong force upon all the Military-members of the
Church Militant abroad at their several quarters; you, Gentlemen, you are the
instruments, and but the instruments, whom God has honored in bringing down
the pride of the Enemy of this Nation; you have done much this way, yet you
have not fully accomplished the work that God has designed you unto. Assure
also is joined with them, and they have helped the children of Lot; you must go
over sea, and make inquisition amongst the cruel Assyrians of that Nation, for
the blood of two hundred thousand Protestants, And your work is by Gods
blessing upon your endeavors, to subdue and scatter those herds of Tigers,
according to the pattern of Midian, or else they will not fear to send their
Wolves to worry and tear in pieces more of the scattered flocks of Englands
simple sheep; And what quarter is the Lamb like to have, when the Wolf is
Judge?

And because you affect not prolixity and length of words in your march, I
shall be bold to give you, 1. Some Grounds. 2. Some Motives. 3. Some
Instructions.
To inform, incite and direct you in the conscionable performance of a duty so
much required in the Text, and so seasonable for the times.

1. For Grounds, you have such as are indisputably just and warrantable; you
need not care what Malignants speak; a lawful cause makes the action lawful
and warrantable.

1. Gr. It is lawful for us to defend true Religion, against the opposers and
corrupters of the same; that this is matter of equity, may be gathered from the
words of Abijah to Jeroboam and all Israel, 2 Chronicles. 13.8. And now ye think to
withstand the kingdom of the Lord in the hands of the sons of David, and ye be
a great multitude, etc. What follows? Ye have made golden Calves, and have cast
cut the Priests of the Lord; but as for us, the Lord is our God, and we have
not forsaken him, he is our Captain (General) O ye children of Israel, fight
not against him, for ye shall not prosper: Begin when you will, you will have the
worst of it; for ye kick against the prick, ye foolish enemy.

Mark, I pray, though he might have an aim of recovering his own right
again, yet this very business of corrupting Gods worship, and making Calves to
Idolize, was the ground of this good Kings quarrel more then any thing else.
And is it not a thing as clear as the day, that the Judges of Israel did
always raise war to defend the people of God out of the hands of cruel
oppressors? This you may find plentifully in the history of the Judges. And
has England and her Judges done more against her oppressors, and invaders
then Isreal's Judges have done before? O the trumpery of Rome, that would soon
invade us, the ragged Crew that would destroy us! The cunning Machiavels that
would divide us! if the supreme Court of Englands Judges should not manage our
affairs against their cunning and tyranny, with Justice and prudence.

2. We may go to war for Common justice when it is denied us; Nay, if our
brethren, or kindred or nearest allies come with Tyrants to act injustice and
oppression upon a Nation, That People have very good ground to disarme them, or
to know why not; yea and to bring them to justice too. You may ground this from
the practice of the Israelites against their near friends and brethren the
Benjamites, because they rescued and kept from justice the sons of Belial, that
had ravished the Levites wife, Judge. 20.

Here Religion was not so much the matter in question as Common Justice, which
the Benjamites peremptorily deny the Isralites; hence the difference, Israel
takes up arms and encamps against Gibeah of Benjamin, and albeit Israel was
foiled at the first, very shamefully, to the loss of forty thousand men; yet
as soon as they took the right course, Phinehas the son of Eleazer moves the
question whether they might fight against Benjamen or no, ver. 28. Shall I go
up to battle against the children of Benjamin my brother, or shall I cease?
and the Lord said, go up, for to morrow I will deliver them up into thy hand;
where we see the Lord does both own and bless the enterprise, even against
Benjamin their brother.

But the quarrel we have in hand, is of a different nature; here Religion and
Liberties and the very being of our English Nation lie at stake, and our
posterity, yet unborn, lie a bleeding; and if we shall not now quit our selves
like free-born-English men, for our Kingdom and for our Religion, within less
then a few ages, the name of an Englishman, will sound as bad here in England,
as the name of a Jew in Christendom, or a Christian in Barbary, or as it is
now in Ireland, or among the Red-shanks.

3. The third cause that carries equity with it, is when men fight for the
necessary defense of the Commonwealth. And why is it called a Commonwealth,
but because every one of the Nation has a share, in the ill or welfare of it?
every one has his venture more or less embarked in the Bulk of it, which
should engage us altogether as one man to keep out invasions, and to defend our
rights, and hale, and tug, and pull, and hoyse up and pull down, let out, and
weigh up, though there be different tempers, and opinions, and countries, and
languages, yet seeing all have proprieties in the same ship, and the nearest of
all properties their lives, This makes them bussle and bestir themselves, and
use their best wits to preserve the same from the destruction threatened; why
should it not unite English hearts together in these greater tempests? why? And
if the old rule be still observed Commune incendium dissidentes conjungit. Why
should not we, though jarring now and then, in trivial matters, unite in-the
main to the suppressing of this great flame of Englands burning?

Ours is an unnatural fire, a wild fire: bring milk to appease it, though it
be costly: not oil to enrage it; the enemy will be at cost whatever it cost.
Is it not the Commonwealth that is afire, and art not thou a Commoner? Ours is
a fearful, a destructive fire; and have not thou a house? a being? and a free
being too? and if we burn to ashes, it is long of thy stubbornes, because thou will not have thine own, nor thy brothers, nor thy Cosens house pulled down to
prevent a farther harm; it is thy wilfulness and covetousness and
unnaturalness, that would continue the flames, not the masters of the city
that would prevent it; well then it is the public; it is the Magazine of the
Kingdom that is in danger; you may, you must, you ought to put your selves in
a posture to quench it; bring your tools then, your instruments, all men of all
orders and callings; you that have prayers, bring prayers; and you that have
water, bring water; and you that have ladders, bring ladders; and you that have
hooks, fasten them to the strongest holds; and either quench the rage, or pull
down that building, if the engine of your wisdom and moderation cannot allay
the same: only observe this as a rule, if possibly you can quench it, use no
other means of roughnes and rigor; for the strongest hooks of these, could not
do that which a little engine of sweetness, and winningnes, and clemency and
patience, have done effectually; but I digress, my scope is to prove that
which is generally received, that it is warrantable to quench a common flame;
and yet such is the malignity and nonsense or the times, I am put to prove the
lawfulness of it.

Object. O but you will say, let us alone and we will do it; for are not we as
skilful as you, and more in number? and are not our engines and tools as
cunningly framed as yours be?

Answ. Let you alone to quench the fire! let us alone? what you? you, that like
mad men set us in a flame? and you because such engineers? let your Engines be
broken; though they be cunningly contrived, yet they will not work, they are
stopped; they are naught; your water is mudy, your cause bad; The clear Engines
though plainest, are more fit for use, especially fot such public use, and you
because numerous and many? Why, a throng has ever proved (a hundred to one)
fatal to a burning; and a concourse of lazy lewd pilfering gazers on, always
does more hurt then good; for good they do none, unless shifting be good.

But now I think on it, it is in vain to maintain Argument with such sophisters
as go about to prove chalk to be cheese; in plain terms, we cannot trust you:
What, would you have us trust those to quench our flames, who first kindled
them? and have we any hopes that those envious men will now bring water to
appease the rage, that have ministered so much oil, to make it, if possible,
unmasterable? Well, Gentlemen, let Posterity judge (unto whom the story of this
Age will be handed and conveyed) how fit you were to be employed in such a
public piece of service, when the implacable rage of your Malignity could not
be quenched, u^^ill a row of such costly buildings as men's lives, estates, the
very honor and reputation of the English nation, had suffered eight years
consumption by fire and sword. It is well, the providence of God, and the
wisdom of your Guardians (the Trustees of this Nation) have provided so well
for your posterity, that they have seized upon so much of your destructive
fuel, and have sequestered some of your oil, and laid it aside in
Goldsmiths-hall, there to be barrell'd up or employed for better purposes, then
so to offend your poor neighbors, and the Kingdom, and the Church, and the
State, as you have done, and it is much suspected you would do it still, if you
were to live an hundred years, if not restrained.

I hope then you will grant it lawful; lawful to quench such unnatural
flames. Then, soldiers, this is better ground for you to fight, then any they
have; theirs are Irish bogs the best of them, yours is firm and sure ground;
here you may safely set your scaling ladders, either to take forts or quench
flames made by your enemy.

Object. But I have heard some objection made; What warrant have we to go for
Ireland? Did not the English there live in their houses, enjoy their lands? and
why should not they beat off injuries as well as we? the law of nature being
the same for them to do what they did, as for us to do what we do. I would not
have invented an objection, if I had not met with it more then once.

But (Soldier) I acquaint thee, not that I dare think thou have such a thought
or doubt, seeing thou have met with so many deadly enemies at a lesser distance.

Ans. Jepthah's Apology shall be my answer; and it was made to Ammon's charge
against Israel, Judge. 11.13. The Ammonites allege that to be the cause of
their quarrel against Israel (as the Irish made it theirs against the English)
because, says he, Israel took away my land when they came out of Egypt; now
therefore restore those lands to me peaceably. Now here the Irish go beyond all
monsters that ever were heard of since the creation; not, restore my land
peaceably, but we will take the lands violently, said the Irish, and make you
pay the arrears of more then two hundred thousand millions of money in their
cruel stamp, being the blood of two hundred thousand Protestants, in less and
greater pieces of the same coin, of every age and sex.

Now I pray mark, Jepthahs answer necessarily warranteth the taking up of Arms
for the defense of such a propriety, and so cleers the matter to them. ver. 14,
15. he shows them how that Israel did Ammon no wrong at all, but those lands
fell unto Israel by Ammon's attainder. The case is the same between England and
Ireland; and if England had met with nothing else to have taken her off, she
might long ere this have framed a large Bill of Attainder and complaint of the
most horrid murders, rapines, cruelty, blood. shed, as was ever named by
tongue, or conceived by Tyrant: But her heart has been too full of Irish
cruelties within her.

This last was not the first of Rebellions there. It is not beyond the memory
of some of this age to call to mind another piece of such Barbarism by that
cursed Nation.

You will grant then, that Ireland does by Ireland's attainder, be long unto
the Nation of England, and lies at their mercy, how far they will proceed
against them in severity of justice, when once brought to trial, God direct
them to deal with them better then they have used us.

2. And as you are upon safe Ground, so you have very good Motives to quicken
you in the duty, and to set you upon it.

1. You have Commission. GOD commands Moses, Moses again the Israelites;
Execute vengeance (says he) upon the Midianites. There Is your Commission. Why
so? because they drew Israel to sin. This sin brought down Gods judgments, and
these judgments cut off thousands.

Hence that command, Numb. 25.17. Vex the Midianites and smite them, for they
vex you with their wiles, wherewith they have beguiled you in the matter of
Peor.

How many of the simpler sort of this Nation have bin vexed in this kind, and
have been drawn to Popery and ignorance, and to believe as the Church believes?
what mischief has this ungodly mixture wrought amongst us? What it is, no man
can be ignorant of that will view the ruins of England.

2. You have a president to follow, God himself is said to have war with a
Nation, and he is therefore called a man of war, Exodus 15.3. God is a man of
war the Lord of Hosts is his name, He is a Gallant Soldier; and takes upon
him that title, to encourage us, when we have a dispatch from him, when he
sends us into the field and ownes us, he will be the Lord President over us,
and present with us, His name is Jehovah, He is a Soldier, a Swestone an
grammatized; He is Deus, a God, a mighty puissant Prince, a victorious
Conqueror.

3. We have Promise of Victory, when we fight his battles, and bear arms for
him, under him, against his enemies. When Joshua was to go up against Jericho,
which was shut up and enclosed because of the children of Israel; the Lord
said, Behold I have given into thy hands Jericho and the King thereof, and the
strong men of war. It is the very life of a Soldier, the hope of victory; it
is that which makes him commend his winter quarters in the open fields, and
delights to tell you the story how hearty a meal he has made upon a Cat, or a
piece of Horseflesh.

4. We have an answer of prayers to encourage us. Sun stand thou still, says
Ioshuah, and thou Moon in the valley of Ajalon, Ios. 10.12. And there was no
day like that day before it or after it, that the Lord heard the voice of a
man; for the Lord fought for Israel. Believe it, Prayers have been so prevalent
for you, that though the Sun did not stand still, nor the Moon wait upon your
Train of Artillery; yet they brought the Enemy to you before they would set,
and cooped them up in your pen several times, and saved you the labor of a
toylsome prosecution of them in following the slaughter.

Well then, the prayers of the Church are gone before you.

5. The spirit of God sets down the duty of such as manage matters in the
field, as of Captain, and Common-souldier; which he would never have done, if
the course were not good, (as some of the ancient Anabaptists held it was not)
when the Common-souldiers came unto John for instructions what they should do,
he tells them briefly what they ought to do. Master, and what shall we do? Do
violence to no man, said John. And what e^se? Accuse none falsely, said he. What
more? Do not mutiny, Be content with your wages.

Do but hold to these Rules, and it will prove a great addition to your
reputation in City and Country.

1. Do violence to no man; Be not greedy of the pillage, nor of private
revenge, because the sword is in thy hand: Forget that: It is below thee, now
that thou art a Commander, to retein such things, and to be overcome by
passion; Let that be the work of Cowards, not of Soldiers. This will bring a
very good repute upon your undertakeings in City and Country, and make you
honored, as well as feared amongst your Enemies.

2. Accuse none falsely, Do not make a man a Malignant for his horse or money; be
not rash to arraign, and accuse, and condemn, and execute all that be not of
your judgment in every point, till there be a fair hearing first. Carry a
good tongue in your heads; or else, a thousand to one, it will be abused to
false accusing.

3. Be content with your Pay; and do not mutiny, but stay till it can be
provided. Forbear to tell the Country People, that all they have is yours, and
that you won it by the sword. You have indeed won much, and you have won their
lands, and liberties, and lives from Tyrants; but it is for them, not for your
selves. Though they give you now and then an unkind word, remember they are
your pay-masters, and labor hard to pay you; and if some of them will not
acknowledge how you have adventured your lives for them, it is not for want of
ignorance and rudeness in many of them, and cannot you overcome rudeness with
kindness, as well as you have turned powerful armies into rude heaps of
Confusion? The greatest conquest is to conquer your selves in point of passion
and revenge; for what will it avail you to overcome a multitude of enemies, and
to be subdued with one lust? Be content Gentlemen, and put discontent and
impatience to the sword, and you win all upon the people by kindness; and
provision will be made for your Pay, and security will be given for the rest
(better then that from the Excise or at Goldsmiths-hall.) The recompense of
reward, the greatest part of Gods pay to his soldiers is reserved from
thieves, and rust, and defalcations, and casualties, in the strong tower of
Zion. Observe but good rules in the deportment of your selves toward your
Generals, your fellow soldiers, the City, the Country, in the Field, and at
your Quarters; And as your Cause is good, so you will bring a good report on
your selves and on those that do employ and command you.

And lest my Exhortation (by pressing it so earnestly) should leave the least
stain upon the many that deserve so well among you, in the strict observance of
these Orders: Take this just Testimony: Never did such an Army disarm so many
Malignant tongues of words against you, as you have done, to your reputation; I
could wish that all would write after your copy. Oh, how many Malignants would
lie in heaps before you, either by admiring at you, or bursting by you! They
would turn Roundheads, and be forced to say not mockingly (as is their guise)
but seriously, that you are -- An Army of Saints.

Thus you have all the Motives by way of Encouragement, as you can desire, to
add life to your undertakings of this kind.

And for direction. Though you, the renowned Commanders, have evidenced to the
world so much prudence and valor, that you need none of my Testimony, yet you
will give me leave to drop these directions in your Camp, as tending not to
mutiny, but obedience; and the rather because some have made but little
progress in observing good orders, as yet; and I know you that act honorably,
would have all (under you) act and go on upon the same Principles, and in their
Order also.

I know the carriage of such as are irregular and exorbitant, does much offend
you, and your proceedings against them; have showed your dislike and severity
against offenders of all kinds (punishable by you,) that come within your
cognizance; and me thinks the complaint that Jacob made of his two sons Simeon
and Levi, may be sometimes taken up by you, against such as talk and do beyond
their Commission, Genesis 34.30. You have troubled me to make me stink amongst the
inhabitants of the Land, and I being few in number, they shall gather
themselves together against me and slay me.

Such as these that act without Commission and against Articles, do much
dishonor upon their Chieftains.

I shall leave these directions and take post to a conclusion.

1. Be valiant. It was Hezekiah's charge to his Captains and Soldiers, 2 Chronicles.
32.7. Be strong and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid of Ashur; Ashur
is the enemy here in my text; and you have bloody Ashur again in Ireland; you
must not fear them: God tells you so: and you have been valiant.

There be three ingredients that makes up Christian-courage and Magnanimity,
fit for your wearing. It is confessed,

1. Knowledge of the Cause and quarrel in hand; the conscience must be informed
of the equity of it, as namely that it is for God and the People of God, our
wives, our sons, our daughters, our friends; this makes men as bold as Lions,
to trample death; it was this that set David upon Goliath, Luther upon Rome, and
our honored Cromwell upon Hamilton and Langdale in the North.

2. A Relying upon God for a gracious issue, when we go forth to fight the
enemy, with this assurance, that not a hair will fall from our heads, without
the All-ordering providence; O this helps on very well.

3. A serious acknowledgement that the issues of war are in Gods hand; as the
Battle is his, so is the Honor his too, and it is all one with him to save
with many or with few: O this is the very steelen-back of Christian courage;
tell not me says the Christian, what be their high words? what care I for Edom
and Moab and Ishmael, and a hundred more? Let Scott, and French, and Irish, and
Danes, and Pagans, come with thousands, I care not, The field is my Generals,
and the issue of war is his, and it is all one with him to save with many as
with few.

4. Get and use honest craft; the enemy is subtle, and he serves a
cunning-master; outvie him too in point of policy; Christ commands it, Be
wise as Serpents, nay, and blames those of his own that are not so, The
children of this Generation are wiser then the children of light.

I will give you but one example. Abraham intending to recover his nephew Lot
out of their hands that had taken him captive, did not fight them in the field,
but wisely divided his company and smore them by night. But yet for all your
wisdom, you must be faithful and use honest craft, and keep promise with the
Enemy: and though they prove base that way to us, we must not do so to them; we
must not promise to save them, and then destroy them; we must not agree to
receive them to protection* and then work their confusion; that is treachery,
not craft.

5. Be religious; Do not rail against and revile Religious men. It were well
if many of you had humility with your zeal, and would bridle your tongues when
you speak of those many godly men that jump not with your opinions in every
thing.

The saying was, inter arma silent leges. Though others take the liberty to
transgress all laws and rules of Christian carriage and common civility, in
unsavory words and rude actions; yet you are taught better things. Civility is
a common grace, very comely to behave your selves with toward an enemy, much
more toward your friends.

I am sorry I am taken off, that I cannot at present enlarge my mind to you. I
must set a period, and yield unto the birth, though it come before the time.
Good Reader, bestow the more of thy labor of love in cherishing it: God may
give strength, and vouchsafe his assistance to the parent to do something to
it, if thou preserve it in the mean time, till some present weaknesses and
distempers be over.

FINIS.

