CITY-HEIRESS: OR, Sir Timothy Treat-all. A COMEDY. As it is Acted At his Royal
Highness his THEATER.

Written by Mrs. A. Behn.

LONDON: Printed for D. Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple Bar;
and T. Benskin in St. Brides Churchyard; and H. Rhodes next door to the
Bear-Tavern near Bride-lane in Fleetstreet. 1682.

To the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Arundel, and Lord Mowbray.
MY LORD,
It Is long that I have with great impatience waited some opportunity to declare
my infinite Respect to your Lordship; coming, I may say, into the World with a
Veneration for your Illustrious Family, and being brought up with continual
Praises of the Renowned Actions of your glorious Ancestors, both in War and
Peace, so famous over the Christian World for their Virtue, Piety, and
Learning, their elevated Birth, and greatness of Courage, and of whom all our
English History are full of the Wonders of their Lives: A Family of so ancient
Nobility, and from whom so many Hero's have proceeded to bless and serve their
King and Country, that all Ages and all Nations mention 'em even with
Adoration. My self have been in this our Age an Eye and Ear-witness, with what
Transports of Joy, with what unusual Respect and Ceremony, above what we pay to
Mankind, the very Name of the Great Howards of Norfolk and Arundel, have been
celebrated on Foreign Shores! And when any one of your Illustrious Family have
passed the Streets, the People thronged to praise and bless him, as soon as his
Name has been made known to the glad Crowd. This I have seen with a Joy that
became a true English heart, (who truly venerate its brave Countrymen) and
joined my dutiful Respects and Praises with the most devout; but never had the
happiness yet of any opportunity to express particularly that Admiration I have
and ever had for your Lordship and your Great Family. Still, I say, I did
admire you, still I wished and prayed for you; 'twas all I could or durst: But
as my Esteem for your Lordship daily increased with my Judgment, so nothing
could bring it to a more absolute height and perfection, than to observe in
these troublesome times, this Age of Lying, Peaching, and Swearing, with what
noble Prudence, what steadiness of Mind, what Loyalty and Conduct you have
evaded the Snare, that 'twas to be feared was laid for all the Good, the Brave,
and Loyal, for all that truly loved our best of Kings and this distracted
Country. A thousand times I have wept for fear that Impudence and Malice would
extend so far as to stain your Noble and ever-Loyal Family with its unavoidable
Imputations; and as often for joy, to see how undauntedly both the Illustrious
Duke your Father, and your self, stem'd the raging Torrent that threatened, with
yours, the ruin of the King and Kingdom; all which had not power to shake your
Constancy or Loyalty: for which, may Heaven and Earth reward and bless you; the
noble Examples to thousands of failing hearts, who from so great a President of
Loyalty, became confirmed. May Heaven and Earth bless you for your pious and
resolute bravery of Mind, and heroic Honesty, when you cried, Not guilty; that
you durst, like your great self, speak Conscientious Truths in a Juncto so
vicious, when Truth and Innocence was criminal: and I doubt not but the Soul of
that great Sufferer bows down from Heaven in gratitude for that noble service
done it. All these and a thousand marks you give of daily growing Greatness;
every day produces to those like me, curious to learn the Story of your Life
and Actions, something that even adds a Luster to your great Name, which one
would think could be made no more splendid: some new Goodness, some new act of
Loyalty or Courage, comes out to cheer the World and those that admire you. Nor
would I be the last of those that daily congratulate and celebrate your rising
Glory; nor durst I any other way approach you with it, but this humble one,
which carries some Excuse along with it.

Proud of the opportunity then, I most humbly beg your Lordships Patronage of a
Comedy, which has nothing to defend it, but the Honor it begs; and nothing to
deserve that Honor, but its being in every part true Tory! Loyal all-over!
except one Knave, which I hope no body will take to himself; or if he do, I
must even say, with Hamlet, -- Then let the stricken Deer go weep -- It has the
luck to be well received in the Town; which (not from my Vanity) pleases me,
but that thereby I find Honesty begins to come in fashion again, when Loyalty
is approved, and Whigism becomes a Jest wherever it is met with. And no doubt
on it, so long as the Royal Cause has such Patrons as your Lordship, such
vigorous and noble Supporters, his Majesty will be great, secure and quiet, the
Nation flourishing and happy, and seditious Fools and Knaves that have so long
disturbed the Peace and Tranquillity of the World, will become the business and
sport of Comedy, and at last the scorn of that Rabble that fondly and blindly
worshipped 'em; and whom nothing can so well convince as plain Demonstration,
which is ever more powerful and prevailent than Precept, or even Preaching it
self. If this have edifi'd effectual, it is all I wish; and that your Lordship
will be pleased to accept the humble Offering, is all I beg, and the greatest
Glory I care should be done.

MY LORD, Your Lordships most Humble and most Obedient Servant, A. BEHN.

THE PROLOGUE, Written by Mr. Otway.
SPOKEN by Mrs. BARRY.
HOW vain have proved the Labors of the Stage,
In striving to reclaim a vicious Age!
Poets may write the Mischief to impeach,
You care as little what the Poets teach,
As you regard at Church what Parsons preach.
But where such Follies and such Vices reign,
What honest Pen has patience to refrain?
At Church, in Pews, ye most devoutly snore,
And here, got dully drunk, ye come to roar;
Ye go to Church to glout, and Ogle there,
And come to meet more lewd convenient here:
With equal Zeal ye honor either place,
And run so very evenly your Race,
Y' improve in Wit just as you do in Grace.
It must be so, some Demon has possessed
Our Land, and we have never since been blessed.
Y' have seen it all, or heard of its Renown,
In reverend shape it stalked about the Town,
Six Yeomen tall attending on its frown.
Sometimes with humble note and zealous lore,
'Twou'd play the Apostolic Function over:
But, Heaven have mercy on us when it swore.
Whenever it swore, to prove the Oaths were true,
Out of its mouth at random Halters flew
Round some unwary neck, by Magic thrown,
Though still the cunning Devil saved its own:
For when the Enchantment could no longer last,
The subtle Pug, most dexterously uncast,
Left awful form for one more seeming pious,
And in a moment varied to defy us:
From silken Doctor, homespun Ananias
Left the lewd Court, and did in City fix,
Where still by its old Arts it plays new Tricks,
And fills the heads of Fools with Politics.
This Demon lately drew in many a Guest,
To part with zealous Guinny for -- no Feast.
Who, but the most incorrigible Fops,
For ever doomed in dismal Cells, called Shops,
To cheat and damn themselves to get their Livings,
Would lay sweet Money out in Sham-Thanksgivings?
Sham-Plots you may have paid for over and over;
But who ere paid for a Sham-Treat before?
Had you not better sent your Offerings all,
Hither to us, than Sequestrators Hall?
I being your Steward, Justice had been done ye;
I could have entertained you worth your Money.
ACTORS NAMES.
Mr. Nokes, Sir Timothy Treat-all, An old seditious Knight that keeps open
house for Commonwealthsmen and true blue Protestants. -- He is Uncle to Tom
Wilding. Mr. Betterton, Tom Wilding, A Tory. -- His discarded Nephew. Mr. Lee,
Sir Anthony Meriwill, An old Tory Knight of Devonshire. Mr. Williams, Sir
Charles Meriwill, His Nephew, a Tory also, in love with Lady Galliard, and
Friend to Wilding. Mr. Boman, Dresswell, A young Gentleman, Friend to Wilding.
Mr. Jevon, Fopington, A Hanger on on Wilding. Iervice, Man to Sir Timothy.
Footmen, Music, etc. Mrs. Barry, Lady Galliard, A rich City-Widow in love with
Wilding. Mrs. Butler, Charlot, The City-Heiress, in love with Wilding. Mrs.
Corror, Diana, Mistress to Wilding, and kept by him. Mrs. Norice, Mrs. Clacket,
A City-Bawd and Puritan. Mrs. Lee, Mrs. Closet, Woman to La. Galliard.
SCENE, Within the Walls of London. THE CITY-HEIRESS: OR, Sir Timothy Treat-all.
ACT the First.
SCENE the First. The Street.
Enter Sir Timothy Treat-all, followed by Tom Wilding, bare, Sir Charles
Meriwill, F^^pington, and Footman with a Cloak. Sir Tim. TRouble me no more:
for I am resolved, deaf and obdurate, d^ see, and so forth.


Wild. I beseech ye, Uncle, hear me.


Sir Tim. No.


Wild. Dear Uncle --


Sir Tim. No.


Wild. You will be mortified --


Sir Tim. No.


Wild. At least hear me out, Sir.


Sir Tim. No, I have heard you out too often, Sir, till you have talked me out
of man a fair thousand; have had ye out of all the Bailiffs, Sergeants, and
Constables clutches bout Town, Sir; have brought ye out of all the Surgeons,
Apothecaries, and Po^ Doctors hands, that ever pretended to cure incurable
Diseases; and have crossed ye ou^ the Books of all the Mercers, Silk-men,
Exchange-men, Ta^lors, Shoemakers, and S^ strisses; with all the rest of the
unconscionable City-tribe of the long Bill, that had Faith enough to trust, and
thought me Fool enough to pay.


Sir Char. But, Sir, consider, he is your own Flesh and Blood.


Sir Tim. That Is more than I Will swear.


Sir Char. Your only Heir.


Sir Tim. That Is more than you or any of his wise Associates can t^ll, Sir.


Sir Char. Why his wise Associates? have you any exception to the Company he
keeps? This reflects on me and young Dresswell, Sir, men both of Birth and
Fortune.


Sir Tim. Why, good Sir Charles Meriwill, let me tell you, since you will have it
out, That you and young Dresswell are able to debauch, destroy, and confound
all the young imitating Fops in Town.


Sir Char. How, Sir!


Sir Tim. Nay, never huff, Sir; for I have six thousand pound a year, and value
no man: Neither do I speak so much for your particular, as for the Company you
keep, such Tarmagant Tories as these, [ to Foping.] who are the very Vermin of
a young Heir, and for one Tickling give him a thousand Bites.


Fop. Death! meaning me, Sir?


Sir Tim. Yes, you, Sir. Nay, never stare, Sir; I fear you not: no man's
hectoring sig^ifies this -- in the City, but the Constable's; no body dares be
saucy here, except it be in the Kings name.


Sir Char. Sir, I confess he was to blame.


Sir Tim. Sir Charles, thanks to Heaven, you may be lewd, you have a plentiful
Estate, may whore, drink, game, and play the Devil; your Uncle Sir Anthony
Meriwill intends to give you all his Estate too: But for such Sparks as this,
and my Fop in fashion here, why with what Face, Conscience, or Religion, can
they be lewd and vicious, keep their Wenches, Coaches, rich Liveries, and so
forth, who live upon Charity, and the Sins of he Nation?


Sir Char. If he have Youthful Vices, he has Virtues too.


Sir Tim. Yes, he had; but I know not, you have bewitched him amongst ye
[weeping.] before he fell to Toryism, he was a sober civil Youth, and had some
Religion in him, ^ou'd read ye Prayers night and morning with a laudable voice,
and cry Amen to 'em; would have done ones heart good to have heard him: -- Wore
decent Clothes; was ^unk but upon Fasting-nights, and swore but on Sundays and
Holy Days: and then I ^d hopes of him.


[Still weeping. Wild. Aye, Heaven forgive me.


Sir Char. But, Sir, he is now become a new man, is casting off all his Women,
is ^unk not above five or six times a week, swears not above once in a quarter
of an hour, ^r has not gam'd this two days. --


Sir Tim. 'Twas because the Devil was in's Pocket then.


Sir Char. -- Begins to take up at Coffee-houses, talks gravely in the City,
speaks indalous^y of the Government, and rails most abominably against the Pope
and the ench King.


Sir Tim. Aye, aye, this shall not wheedle me out of one English Guinny; and so
I told ^n yesterday.


Wild. You did so, Sir.


Sir Tim. Yes; by a good token you were witty upon me, and swore I loved and
ho^r'd the King nowhere but on his Coin.


Sir Char. Is it possible, Sir?


Wild. God forgive me, Sir; I confess I was a little overtaken.


Sir Tim. Aye, so it should seem: for he mistook his own Chamber, and went to
bed to Maids.


Sir Char. How! to bed to your Maids! Sure, Sir, it is scandal on him.


Sir Tim. No, no, he makes his brags on it, Sir. Oh that crying sin of Boasting!
Well fare, I say, the days of old Oliver; he by a wholesome Act, made it death
to boast; so that then a man might whore his heart out, and no body the wiser.


Sir Char. Right, Sir, and then the men passed for sober religious persons, and
the women for as demure Saints --


Sir Tim. Aye, then there was no scandal; but now they do not only boast what
they do, but what they do not.


Wild. I Will take care that fault shall be mended, Sir.


Sir Tim. Aye, so will I, if Poverty have any feats of Mortification; and so
farewell to you, Sir.


[going. Wild. Stay, Sir, are you resolved to be so cruel then, and ruin all
my Fortunes now depending?


Sir Tim. Most religiously --


Wild. You are?


Sir Tim. I am.


Wild. Death, I Will rob.


Sir Tim. Do and be hanged.


Wild. Nay, I Will turn Papist.


Sir Tim. Do and be damned.


Sir Char. Bless me, Sir, what a scandal would that be to the Family of the
Treatalls!


Sir Tim. Hum! I had rather indeed he turned Turk or Jew, for his own sake; but
as for scandalizing me, I defy it: my Integrity has been known ever since
Forty One; I bought three thousand a year in Bishops Lands, as it is well known,
and lost it at the Kings return; for which I Am honored by the City. But for
his farther satisfaction, consolation, and destruction, know, That I Sir
Timothy Treat-all, Knight and Alderman, do think my self young enough to marry,
do you see, and will wipe your Nose with a Son and Heir of my own begetting, and
so forth.


[going away. Wild. Death! marry!


Sir Char. Patience, dear Tom, or thou't spoil all.


Wild. Damn him, I Have lost all Patience, and can dissemble no longer, though I
lose all, -- Very good, Sir; hark ye, I hope she is young and handsome; or if
she be not, amongst the numerous lusty-stomacht Whigs that daily nose your
public Dinners, some may be found that either for Money, Charity, or
Gratitude, may requite your Treats. You keep open house to all the Party, not
for Mirth, Generosity, or good Nature, but for Roguery. You cram the Brethren,
the pious City-Gluttons, with good Cheer, good Wine, and Rebellion in
abundance, gormandizing all Comers and Goers, of all Sexes, Sorts, Opinions,
and Religions, young half-witted Fops, hotheaded Fools, and Malcontents: You
guttle and fawn on all, and all in hopes of debauching the Kings Liege-people
into Commonwealths-men; and rather than lose a Convert, you will pimp for him.
These are your nightly Debauches. -- Nay, rather than you shall want it, I Will
cuckold you my self in pure Revenge.


Sir Tim. How! Cuckold his own natural Uncle!


Sir Char. Oh, he cannot be so profane.


Wild. Profane! why he denied but now the having any share in me; and
therefore it is lawful. I am to live by my wits, you say, and your old rich
good-natured Cuckold is as sure a Revenue to a handsome young Cadet, as a
thousand pound a year. Your tolerable face and shape is an Estate in the City,
and a better Bank than your Six per Cent. at any time.


Sir Tim. Well, Sir, since Nature has furnished you so well, you need but up and
ride, show and be rich; and so your Servant, witty Mr. Wilding.


[Goes out, he looks after him. Sir Char. Whilst I am laboring another good,
I quite neglect my own. This cursed, proud, disdainful Lady Galliard, is ever
in my head; she is now at Church, I Am sure, not for Devotion, but to show her
Charms, and throw her Darts amongst the gazing Crowd, and grows more vain by
Conquest I Am near the Church, and must step in, though it cost me a new Wound.


[ Wild. stands pausing. Wild. I am resolved -- Well, dear Charles, let us sup
together to night, and contrive some way to be revenged of this wicked Uncle of
mine. I must leave thee now, for I have an assignation here at Church.


Sir Char. Hah! at Church!


Wild. Aye, Charles, with the dearest she-Saint, and I hope sinner.


Sir Char. What at Church? Pox, I shall be discovered now in my Amors. That Is
an odd place for Love-Intrigues.


Wild. Oh, I am to pass for a sober discreet person to the Relations; but for
my Mistress, she is made of no such sanctified Materials; she is a Widow,
Charles, young, rich, and beautiful.


Sir Char. Hah! if this should prove my Widow now!

[Aside.
Wild. And though at her own dispose, yet is much governed by Honor, and a
rigid Mother, who is ever preaching to her against the Vices of Youth, and
the other end of the Town Sparks; dreads nothing so much as her Daughters
marrying a villainous Tory: So the young one is forced to dissemble Religion,
the best Mask to hide a kind Mistress in.


Sir Char. This must be my Lady Galliard.

[Aside.
Wild. There is at present some ill understanding between us; some damned
Honorable ^op lays siege to her, which has made me ill received; and I having
a new Intrigue elsewhere, return her cold disdain, but now and then she crosses
my Heart too violently to resist her. In one of these hot fits I now am, and
must find some occasion to speak to her.


Sir Char. By Heaven, it must be she! -- I am studying now, amongst all our
she-Acquaintance, who this should be.


Wild. Oh, this is of quality to be concealed: but the dearest loveliest
Hypocrite, white as Lillies, smooth as Rushes, and plump as Grapes after
showers, haughty her Mien, her Eyes fu^l of disdain, and yet bewitching sweet;
but when she loves, soft, witty, wanton, all that charms a Soul, and but for
now and then a fit of Honor! Oh, damn the Nonsense, would be all my own.


Sir Char. It Is she, by Heaven! [aside.] Methinks this Widow should prove a
good Fortune to you, as things now stand between you and your* Uncle.


Wild. Ah, Charles, but I am otherways disposed of. There is the most charming
young thing in nature f^llen in love with this person of mine, a rich
City-Heiress, Charles; I have her in possession.


Sir Char. How can you love two at once? I Have been as wild, and as extravagant,
as Youth and Wealth could render me; but never arrived to that degree of
Lewdness, to deal my Heart about: my Hours I might, but Love should be entire.


Wild. Ah, Charles, two such bewitching Faces would give thy Heart the lie: --
But Love divides us, and I must into Church. Adieu till night.


Sir Char. And I must follow to resolve my heart in what it dreads to learn.
Here, my Cloak. [Takes his Cloak from his man, and puts it on.] Hah, Church is
done! See, they are coming forth! Enter People cross the Stage, as from Church;
amongst 'em Sir Anthony Meriwill, followed by Sir Tim. Treat-all. Hah, my
Uncle! He must not see me here.


[Throws his Cloak over his face. Sir Tim. What my old Friend and Acquaintance,
Sir Anthony Meriwill!


Sir Anth. Sir Timothy Treat-all!


Sir Tim. When! How long have you been in Town, Sir?


Sir Anth. About three days, Sir.


Sir Tim. Three days, and never came to dine with me! it is unpardonable! What,
you keep close to the Church, I see: You are for the Surplice still* old
Orthodox you: the Times cannot mend you, I see.


Sir Anth. No, nor shall they mar me, Sir.


Sir Char. They are discoursing; I Will pass by.

[Aside. Exit Sir Char.
Sir Anth. As I take it, you came from Church too.


Sir Tim. Aye, needs must, when the Devil drives. I go to save my Bacon, as
they say, once a month, and that too, after the Porrage is served up.


Sir Anth. Those that made it, Sir, are wiser than we. For my part, I love good
wholesome Doctrine, that teaches Obedience to my King and Superiors, without
railing at the Government, and quoting Scripture for Sedition, Mutiny, and
Rebellion. Why here was a jolly Fellow this morning made a notable Sermon. By
George, our Country-Vicars are mere Scholars to your Gentlemen Town-Parsons!
Hah, how he handled the Text, and run Divisions upon it! 'twou'd make a man sin
with moderation, to hear how he clawed away the Vices of the Town, Whoring,
Drinking, and Conventicling, with the rest of the deadly number.


Sir Tim. Good lack! an he were so good at Whoring and Drinking, you would best
carry your Nephew, Sir Charles Meriwill, to Church; he wants a little
Documentizing that way.


Sir Anth. Hum! You keep your old wont still; a man can begin no discourse to
you, be it of Prester John, but you still conclude with my Nephew.


Sir Tim. Good Lord! Sir Anthony, you need not be so purty; what I say, is the
Discourse of the whole City, how lavishly you let him live, and give ill
Examples to all young Heirs.


Sir Anth. The City! the City's a grumbling, lying, dissatisfied City, and no
wise or honest man regards what it says. Do you, or any of the City, stand
bound to his Scrivener or Tailor? He spends what I allow him, Sir, his own; and
you're a Fool or Knave, choose ye whether, to concern your self.


Sir Tim. Good lack! I speak but what wiser men discourse.


Sir Anth. Wiser men! wiser Coxcombs. What, they would have me train my Nephew
up, a hopeful Youth, to keep a Merchants Book, or send him to chop Logic in a
University, and have him return an ^rrant learned Ass, to simper, and look
demure, and start at Oaths and Wenches, whilst I fell his Woods, and grant
Leases; and lastly, to make good what I have cozened him of, force him to marry
Mrs. Crump, the ill-favored Daughter of some Right Worshipful. -- A Pox of all
such Guardians.


Sir Tim. Do, countenance Sin and Expenses, do.


Sir Anth. What sin, what expenses? He wears good Clothes, why Tradesmen get
the more-by him; he keeps his Coach, it is for his ease; a Mistress, it is for
his pleasure; he games, it is for his diversion: And where is the harm of this?
is there ought else you can accuse him with?


Sir Tim. Yes; -- a Pox upon him, he is my Rival too. [aside.] Why then I Will
tell you, Sir, he loves a Lady.


Sir Anth. If that be a sin, Heaven help the Wicked!


Sir Tim. But I mean honorably. --


Sir Anth. Honorably! Why do you know any Infirmity in him, why he should not
marry?


[Angrily. Sir Tim. Not I, Sir.


Sir Anth. Not you, Sir? why then you're an Ass, Sir. -- But is the Lady young
and handsome?


Sir Tim. A^e, and rich too, Sir.


Sir Anth. No matter for Money, so she love the Boy.


Sir Tim. Love him! no, Sir, she neither does, nor shall love him.


Sir Anth. How, Sir, nor shall love him! By George, but she shall, and lie with
him too, if I please, Sir.


Sir Tim. How, Sir! lie with a rich City-widow, and a Lady, and to be married
to a fine Reverend old Gentleman within a day or two?


Sir Anth. His name, Sir, his name; I Will dispatch him presently.


[Offers to draw. Sir Tim. How, Sir, dispatch him! -- Your Servant, Sir.


[Offers to go. Sir Anth. Hold, Sir! by this abrupt departure, I fancy you the
Boy's Rival: Come, draw.


[Draws. Sir Tim. How, draw, Sir!


Sir Anth. Aye draw, Sir: Not my Nephew have the Widow!


Sir Tim. With all my soul, Sir; I love and honor your Nephew. I his Rival!
alas, Sir, I Am not so fond of Cuckoldom. Pray, Sir, let me see you and Sir
Charles at my house, I may serve him in this business: and so I take my leave,
Sir. -- Draw quoth a! a Pox upon him for an old Tory-rory.

[Aside. Exit.
Enter as from Church, Lady Galliard, Closet, and Footman: Wilding passes
earelesly by her, Sir Charles Meriwill following wrapped in his Cloak. Sir Anth.
Who Is here? Charles muffled in a Cloak, peering after a woman? -- My own Boy to
a hair. She Is handsome too. I Will step aside: for I must see the meaning on it.


[Goes aside. L. Gall. Bless me! how unconcerned he passed!


Clos. He bowed low, Madam.


L. Gall. But 'twas in such a fashion, as expressed Indifferency, much worse than
Hate from Wilding.


Clos. Your Ladyship has used him ill of late; yet if your Ladyship please,
I Will call him back.


L. Gall. I Will die first. -- Hah, he is going! -- Yet now I think on it, I have a
Toy of his, which to express my scorn, I Will give him back now: -- this Ring.


Clos. Shall I carry it, Madam?


L. Gall. You Will not express disdain enough in the delivery; and you may call
him back.


[Clos. goes to Wild. Sir Char. By Heaven, she is fond of him.

[Aside.
Wild. Oh, Mrs. Closet! is it you? -- Madam, your Servant: By this disdain, I
fear your Woman, Madam, has mistaken her Man. Would your Ladyship speak with me?


L. Gall. Yes. -- But what? the God of Love instruct me.
[Aside.
Wild. Command me quickly, Madam: for I have business.

L. Gall. Nay, then I cannot be discreet in Love.
[Aside. -- Your business once was Love, nor had no idle hours
To throw away on any other thought.
You loved as if you would had no other Faculties,
As if you would meant to gain Eternal Bliss
By that Devotion only: And see how now you're changed.

Wild. Not I, by Heaven; it is you are only changed.
I thought you would love me too, curse on the dull mistake;
But when I begged to reap the mighty Joy
That Mutual Love affords,
You turned me off for Honor,
That nothing framed by some old sullen Maid,
That wanted Charms to kindle flames when young.

Sir Anth. By George, he is in the right.
[Aside.
Sir Char. Death! can she hear this Language?
[Aside.
L. Gall. How dare you name this to me any more?
Have you forgot my Fortune, and my Youth?
My Quality, and Fame?

Wild. No, by Heaven, all these increase my Flame.

L. Gall. Perhaps they might, but yet I wonder where
You got the boldness to approach me with it.

Wild. Faith, Madam, from your own encouragement.

L. Gall. From mine! Heavens, what contempt is this!

Wild. When first I paid my Vows, (good Heaven forgive me)
They were for Honor all;
But wiser you, thanks to your Mothers care too,
Knowing my Fortune an uncertain hope,
My Life of scandal, and my lewd Opinion,
Forbid my Wish that way: 'Twas kindly urged;
You could not then forbid my Passion too,
Nor did I ever from your Lips or Eyes,
Receive the cruel sentence of my Death.

Sir Anth. Gad, a fine fellow this!

L. Gall. To save my life, I would not marry thee.

Wild. That Is kindly said:
But to save mine, thou't do a kinder thing;
-- I know thou wo't.

L. Gall. What, yield my Honor up!
And after find it sacrificed anew,
And made the scorn of a triumphing Wife!

Sir Anth. Gad, she is in the right too; a noble Girl I Will warrant her.

L. Gall. But you disdain to satisfy those fears;
And like a proud and haughty Conqueror,
Demand the Town, without the least Conditions.

Sir Char. By Heaven, she yields apace.
[Aside.
Sir Anth. Pox on it, would I Would never seen her; now have I a Legend of small
Cupids at Hot-cockles in my heart.


Wild. Now am I pawsing on that word Conditions.
Thou say thou would not have me marry thee;
That is, as if I loved thee for thy Eyes,
And put 'em out to hate thee:
Or like our Stage-smitten Youth, who fall in love with a woman for-Acting
finely, and by taking her off the Stage, deprive her of the only Charm she had,

Then leave her to Ill Luck.

Sir Anth. Gad, he is in the right again too! A rare Fellow!

Wild. For, Widow, know, had thou more Beauty, yet not all of 'em were half
so great a Charm as thy not being mine.


Sir Anth. Hum! How will he make that out now?

Wild. The stealths of Love, the Midnight kind admittance,
The gloomy Bed, the soft-breath'd murmuring Passion;
Ah, who can guess at Joys thus snatched by parcels!
The difficulty makes us always wishing,
Whilst on thy part, Fear still makes some resistance;
And every Blessing seems a kind of Rape.

Sir Anth. H'as don't! -- A Divine Fellow this; just of my Religion. I am
studying now whether I was never acquainted with his Mother.


L. Gall. walks away, Wild. follows. L. Gall. Tempt me no more! What dull
unwary Flame
Possessed me all this while! Confusion on thee,
[In Rage. And all the Charms that dwell upon thy Tongue.
Diseases ruin that bewitching form,
That with thy soft feigned Vows debaucht my Heart.

Sir Char. Heavens! can I yet endure!
[Aside.
L. Gall. By all that is good, I Will marry instantly;
Marry, and save my last stake, Honor, yet,
Or thou will rook me out of all at last.

Wild. Marry! thou can not do a better thing:
There are a thousand Matrimonial Fops,
Fine Fools of Fortune,
Good-natured Blockheads too, and that is a wonder.

L. Gall. That will be managed by a man of Wit.

Wild. Right.

L. Gall. I have an eye upon a Friend of yours.

Wild. A Friend of mine! then he must be my Cuckold.

Sir Char. Very fine! can I endure yet more?
[Aside.
L. Gall. Perhaps it is your Uncle.

Wild. Hah, my Uncle!

[Sir Charles makes up to 'em. Sir Anth. Hah, my Charles! why well said
Charles, he bore up briskly to her.


Sir Char. Ah, Madam, may I presume to tell you --


Sir Anth. Ah, Pox, that was stark naught! he begins like a Foreman o^ the
Shop* to his Masters Daughter.


Wild. How, Charles Meriwill acquainted with my Widow!

Sir Anth. Why do you wear that scorn upon your face?
I Have naught but honest meaning in my Passion;
Whilst him you favor, so prophanes your Beauties,
In scorn of Marriage and religious Rites,
Attempts the ruin of your sacred Honor.

L. Gall. Hah, Wilding, boast my love!
[Aside.
Sir Anth. The Devil take him, my Nephew's quite spoiled!
Why what a Pox has he to do with Honor now?

L. Gall. Pray leave me, Sir.

Wild. Damn it, since he knows all, I Will boldly own my flame --
You take a liberty I never gave you, Sir.

Sir Char. How, this from thee! nay, then I must take more,
And ask you where you borrowed that Brutality,
T'approach that Lady with your saucy Passion.

Sir Anth. Gad, well done, Charles! here must be sport anon.

Wild. I will not answer every idle Question.

Sir Char. Death, you dare not.

Wild. How, dare not!

Sir Char. No, dare not: for if you did --

Wild. What durst you, if I did?

Sir Char. Death, cut your Throat, Sir.

[Taking hold on him roughly. Sir Anth. Hold, hold, let him have fair play, and
then curse him that parts ye.


Taking 'em asunder, they draw. L. Gall. Hold, I command ye, hold!

Sir Char. There rest my Sword to all Eternity.

[Lays his Sword at her feet. L. Gall. Now I conjure ye both, by all your
Honor,
If you were ever acquainted with that Virtue,
To see my face no more,
Who durst dispute your interest in me thus,
As for a common Mistress, in your Drink.

She goes out, and all but Wild. Sir Anth. and Sir Char. who stands sadly
looking after her. Sir Anth. A heavenly Girl! -- Well, now she is gone, by
George, I am for disputing your Title to her by dint of Sword.


Sir Char. I wo'not fight.


Wild. Another time we will decide it, Sir.


[ Wild* goes (...). Sir Anth. After your whining Prologue, Sir, who the Devil
would have expected such a Farce? -- Come, Charles, take up thy Sword, Charles;
-- and, do you hear, forget me this Woman. --


Sir Char. Forget her, Sir! there never was a thing so excellent!

Sir Anth. You lie, Sirrah, you lie, there are a thousand
As fair, as young, and kinder, by this day.
We'll into the Country, Charles, where every Grove
Affords us Rustic Beauties,
That know no Pride nor Painting,
And that will take it and be thankful, Charles;
Fine wholesome Girls that fall like ruddy Fruit,
Fit for the gathering, Charles.

Sir Char. Oh, Sir, I cannot relish the coarse Fare.
But what is all this, Sir, to my present Passion?

Sir Anth. Passion, Sir! you shall have no Passion, Sir.

Sir Char. No Passion, Sir! shall I have life and breath?

Sir Anth. It may be not, Sirrah, if it be my will and pleasure.
-- Why how now! saucy Boys be their own Carvers?

Sir Char. Sir, I am all Obedience.

[Bowing and sighing* Sir Anth. Obedience! Was ever such a Blockhead! Why then
if I command it, you will not love this Woman?


Sir Char. No, Sir.


Sir Anth. No, Sir! But I say, Yes, Sir, love her me; and love her me like a
man too, or I Will renounce ye, Sir.


Sir Char. I Have tried all ways to win upon her heart,
Presented, writ, watched, fought, prayed, kneeled, and weept.

Sir Anth. Why there is it now; I thought so: Kneeled and weept! a Pox upon thee
-- I took thee for a prettier fellow. --

You should a hufft and bluster'd at her door;
Been very impudent and saucy, Sir;
Lewd, ruffling, mad; courted at all hours and seasons;
Let her not rest, nor eat, nor sleep, nor visit.
Believe me, Charles, women love importunity.
Watch her close, watch her like a Witch, Boy,
Till she confess the Devil in her, -- Love.

Sir Char. I cannot, Sir.
Her Eyes strike such an awe into my Soul, --

Sir Anth. Strike such a Fiddlestick. -- Sirrah, I say, do it; what, you can
towse a Wench as handsomely -- You can be lewd enough upon occasion. I know not
the Lady, nor her Fortune; but I am resolved thou shall have her, with
practicing a little Courtship of my mode. -- Come --

Come my Boy Charles, since you must needs be doing,
I Will show thee how to go a Widow-wooing.

ACT the Second.
SCENE the First. A Room.
Enter Charlot, Fopington, and Clacket. Charl. ENough, I Have heard enough of
Wilding's Vices, to know I am undone. [weeps] -- Galliard his Mistress too? I
never saw her, but I have heard her famed for Beauty, Wit, and Fortune.

That Rival may be dangerous.

Fop. Yes, Madam, the fair, the young, the witty Lady Galliard, even in the
height of all his love to you; nay, even whilst his Uncle courts her for a
Wife, he designs himself for a Gallant.


Charl. Wondrous Inconstancy and Impudence!


Mrs. Clack. Nay, Madam, you may rely upon Mr. Fopington's Information:
therefore if you respect your Reputation, retreat in time.


Charl. Reputation! that I forfeited when I ran away with your Friend Mr.
Wilding.


Mrs. Clack. Ah, that ever I should live to see [weeps] the sole Daughter and
Heir of Sir Nicholas Gettall, run away with one of the lewdest Heathens about
town!


Charl. How! your Friend Mr. Wilding a Heathen; and with you too, Mrs. Clacket!
That Friend Mr. Wilding, who thought none so worthy as Mrs. Clacket, to trust
with so great a secret as his flight with me; he a Heathen!


Mrs. Clack. Aye, and a poor Heathen too, Madam. 'Slife, if you must marry a
man to buy him Breeches, marry an honest man, a religious man, a man that bears
a Conscience, and will do a woman some Reason. -- Why here is Mr. Fopington,
Madam; here is a Shape, here is a Face, a Back as straight as an Arrow, I Will
warrant.


Charl. How! buy him Breeches! Has Wilding then no Fortune?


Fop. Yes, Faith, Madam, pretty well; so, so, as the Dice run: and now and then
he lights upon a Squire, or so, and between fair and foul Play, he makes a
shift to pick a pretty Livelihood up.


Charl. How! does his Uncle allow him no present Maintenance?


Fop. No, nor future Hopes neither: Therefore, Madam, I hope you will see the
difference between him and a man of Parts, that adores you.


[Smiling and bowing. Charl. If I find all this true you tell me, I shall know
how to value my self and those that love me.

-- This may be yet a Rascal.

Enter Maid. Maid. Mistress, Mr. Wilding's below.

[Exit.
Fop. Below! Oh, Heavens, Madam, do not expose me to his lewd fury, for being
too zealous in your service.


[In great disorder. Charl. I will not let him know you told any thing, Sir.


Fop. Death! to be seen here, would expose my Life.


[ To Clacket. Mrs. Clack. Here, here, step out upon the Sair-case, and slip
into my Chamber.


Going out, returns in fright. Fop. 'Owns, he is here! lock the door fast; let
him not enter.


Mrs. Clack. Oh, Heavens, I have not the Key! hold it, hold it fast, sweet,
sweet Mr. Foping Oh, should there be Murder done, what a scandal would that be
to the house of a true Protestant!


[Knocks. Charl. Heavens! what will he say and think, to see me shut in with a
man?


Mrs. Clack. Oh, I Will say you're sick, asleep, or out of humor.


Charl. I Would give the world to see him. [Knocks.


Wild. [Without.] Charlot, Charlot! Am I denied an entrance? By Heaven, I Will
break the door.


[Knocks again; Fop. still holding it. Fop. Oh, I Am a dead man, dear Clacket!


[Knocking still. Mrs. Clack. Oh, hold, Sir, Mrs. Charlot is very sick.


Wild. How, sick, and I kept from her!


Mrs. Clack. She begs you will come again an hour hence.


Wild. Delayed, by Heaven I will have entrance.


Fop. Ruined! undone! for if he do not kill me, he may starve me.


Mrs. Clack. Oh, he will break in upon us! Hold, Sir, hold a little; Mrs.
Charlot is just-just-shifting her self, Sir: you will not be so uncivil as to
press in, I hope, at such a time.


Charl. I have a fine time on it between ye, to have him think I am stripping my
self before Mr. Fopington -- Let go, or I Will call out and tell him all.


Wild. breaks open the door and rushes in: Fop. stands close up at the
entrance till he is past him, then venturing to slip out, finds Wild. has made
fast the door; so he is forced to return again and stand close up behind Wild.
with signs of fear. Wild. How now, Charlot, what means this new unkindness?
What, not a word?


Charl. There is so little Music in my Voice, you do not care to hear it; you
have been better entertained, I find, mightily employed, no doubt.


Wild. Yes Faith, and so I have, Charlot: Damned Business, that Enemy to Love,
has made me rude.


Charl. Or that other Enemy to Love, damned Wenching.


Wild. Wenching! how ill have thou timed thy Jealousy!

What Banker, that to morrow is to pay a mighty sum, would venture out his
stock to day in little parcels, and lose his Credit by it?


Charl. You would, perfidious as you are, though all your Fortune, all your
future Health, depended on that Credit.


[Angry. Wild. So: Hark ye, Mrs. Clacket, you have been prating I find in my
absence, giving me a handsome character to Charlot. -- You hate any good thing
should go by your own Nose.


[Aside, to Clacket. Mrs. Clack. By my Nose, Mr. Wilding! I defy you: I Would have
you to know, I scorn any good thing should go by my Nose in an uncivil way.


Wild. I believe so.


Mrs. Clack. Have I been the Confident to all your secrets this three years, in
sickness and in health, for richer, for poorer; concealed the nature of your
wicked Diseases, under the honest name of Surfeits; called your filthy
Surgeons* Mr. Doctor, to keep up your Reputation; civily received your the other
end of the^ Town young Relations at all hours; --


Wild. High!


Mrs. Clack. Been up with you and down with you early and late, by night and by
day; let you in at all hours, drunk and sober, single and double, and civilly
withdrawn, and modestly shut the door after me?


Wild. Whir! The storm's up, and the Devil cannot lay it.


Mrs. Clack. And am I thus rewarded for my pain!


[Weeps. Wild. So Tempests are allayed by showers of Rain.


Mrs. Clack. That I should be charged with speaking ill of you, so honest, so
civil a Gentleman --


Charl. No, I have better witness of your falsehood.


Fop. Hah, 'sdeath, she will name me!


Wild. What mean you, my Charlot?
Do you not think I love you?

Charl. Go ask my Lady Galliard, she keeps the best account of all your Sighs
and Vows,

And robs me of my dearest softer hours.

[Kindly to him. Mrs. Clack. You cannot hold from being kind to him.

[Aside.
Wild. Galliard! How came she by that secret of my life? [aside.] Why Aye, it is
true, I am there sometimes about an Arbitration, about a Suit in Law, about my
Uncle.


Charl. Aye, that Uncle too --
You swore to me you were your Uncles Heir;
But you perhaps may chance to get him one,
If the Lady prove not cruel.

Wild. Death and the Devil, what Rascal has been prating to her!

[Aside.
Charl. Whilst I am reserved for a dead lift, if Fortune prove unkind, or
wicked Uncles refractory,

Yet I could love you, though you were a Slave,
[In a soft tone to him. And I were Queen of all the Universe.

Mrs. Clack. Aye, there you spoiled all again -- you forget your self.

Charl. And all the world, when he looks kindly on me.
But I Will take courage, and be very angry.
[Aside. Nor does your Perjuries rest here; you're equally as false to
Galliard, as to me; false for a little Mistress of the Town, whom you have set up
in spite to Quality.


[Angry. Mrs. Clack. So, that was home and handsome.

Wild. What damned Informer does she keep in Pension?

Charl. And can you think my Fortune and my Youth
Merits no better Treatment?
[Angry. How could you have the heart to use me so?
[Soft to him. I fall insensibly to Love and Fondness.
[Aside.
Wild. Ah, my dear Charlot! you who know my heart, can you believe me false?


Charl. In every Syllable, in every Look:
Your Vows, your Sighs, and Eyes, all counterfeit;
You said you loved me, where was then your truth?
You swore you were to be your Uncle's Heir:
Where was your confidence of me the while,
To think my Generosity so scanted,
To love you for your Fortune?
-- How every look betrays my yielding heart!
[Aside. No, since men are grown so cunning in their
Trade of Love, the necessary Vice I Will practice too*
And chaffer with Love-Merchants for my Heart.
Make it appear you are your Uncles Heir,
I Will marry ye tomorrow.
Of all thy Cheats, that was the most unkind,
Because you thought to conquer by that Lie.
-- To night I Will be resolved.

Wild. Hum! to night!

Charl. To night, or I will think you love me for my Fortune; which if you find
elsewhere to more advantage,

I may unpitied die -- and I should die,
If you should prove untrue.

[Tenderly to him. Mrs. Clack. There you have dashed all again.

Wild. I am resolved to keep my credit with her* -- Here Is my hand:
This night, Charlot, I Will let you see the Writings.
-- But how, a Pox of him that knows for Thomas.
[Aside.
Charl. Hah, that Hand without the Ring!
Nay, never study for a handsome Lie.

Wild. Ring! Oh, aye, I left it in my Dressing Room this morning.

Charl. See how thou have inured thy Tongue to Falsehood!
Did you not send it to a certain Creature
They call Diana,
From off that hand that plighted Faith to me?

Wild. By Heaven, it is Witchcraft all,
Unless this Villain Fopington betray me.
Those sort of Rascals will do any thing
For ready Meat and Wine. -- I Will kill the Fool -- Hah, here!

Fop. Here, Lord! Lord!
[Turns quick and sees him behind him. Where were thy Eyes, dear Wilding?

Wild. Where they have spied a Rascal.
Where was this Property concealed?

Fop. Concealed! What do thou mean, dear Tom? Why I stood as plain as the
Nose on thy Face, mun.


Wild. But it is the ungrateful quality of all your sort, to make such base
returns.
How got this Rogue admittance, and when in,
The Impudence to tell his treacherous Lies?

Fop. Admittance! Why you are stark mad: Did not I come in with you, that is,
followed you?


Wild. Whither?


Fop. Why into the house, up stairs, stood behind you when you swore you would
come in, and followed you in.


Wild. All this, and I not see!


Fop. Oh, Love's blind; but this Lady saw me, Mrs. Clack^^ saw (...) --
Admittance quotha!


Wild. Why did you not speak?


Fop. Speak! I was so amazed at what I heard, the villainous Scandals laid on
you by some pick-thank Rogue or other, I had no power.


Wild. Aye, thou know how I am wronged.


Fop. Oh, most damnably, Sir!


Wild. Abuse me to my Mistress too!


Fop. Oh, Villains! Dogs!


Charl. Do you think they have wronged him, Sir? for I Will believe you.


Fop. Do I think, Madam? Aye, I think him a Son of a Whore that said it; and
I Will cut's Throat.


Mrs. Clack. Well, this Impudence is a heavenly Virtue!

Wild. You see now, Madam, how Innocence may suffer.

Charl. In spite of all thy villainous dissembling,
I must believe, and love thee for my quiet.

Wild. That Is kind; and if before to morrow I do not show you I deserve your
Heart, kill me at once by quitting me. -- Farewell. -- [goes out with Fop.] I
know both where my Uncle's Will and other Writings lie, by which he made me
Heir to his whole Estate.

My craft will be in catching; which if past,
Her Love secures me the kind Wench at last.
[Aside.
Mrs. Clack. What if he should not chance to keep his word now?


Charl. How if he should not? by all that is good, if he should not, I am
resolved ^o marry him however. We two may make a pretty shift with three
thousand ^ound a year: yet I would fain be resolved how affairs stand between
the old Gen^leman and him. I would give the world to see that Widow too, that
Lady Galliard.


Mrs. Clack. If you're bent upon it* I Will tell you what we'll do, Madam: There Is
every day mighty Feasting here at his Uncles hard by, and you shall disguise
your ^elf as well as you can, and go for a Niece of mine I have coming out of
Scotland: ^here you will not fail of seeing my Lady Galliard, though I doubt,
not Mr. Wilding, ^ho is of late discarded.


Charl. Enough; I am resolved upon this design: Let Us in and and practice the
^orthern Dialect.


Exit, both. SCENE the Second. The Street.
Enter Wilding and Fopington. Wild. But then Diana took the Ring at last?


Fop. Greedl^y; but railed, and swore, ^ and ranted at your late unkindness,
and ^ou'd not be appeased.


Enter Dresswell. Wild. Dresswell, I was just going to see for thee.


Dress. I Am glad, dear Tom, I Am here to serve thee.


Wild. And now I Have found thee, thou must along with me.


Dress. Whither? But I Will not ask, but obey.


Wild. To a kind sinner, Frank.


Dress. Pox on 'em all: prithee turn out those petty Tyrants of thy Heart, and
fit it for a Monarch, Love, dear Widling, of which thou never knewst the
pleasure yet, or not above a day.


Wild. Not knew the pleasure! Death, the very Essence, the first draughts of
Love:

Ah, how pleas^^^^ is to drink when a man's adry!
The rest is all but dully ^ipping on.

Dress. And yet this Diana, for thither thou art going, thou have been constant
to this three or four years.


Wild. A constant Keeper thou meanst; which is indeed enough to get the scandal
of a Coxcomb: But I know not, those sort of Baggages have a kind of Fascination
so enticing -- and Faith, after the Fatigues of Formal Visits to a man's dull
Relations, or what is as bad, to women of Quality; after the busy Afflictions
of the Day, and the Debauches of the tedious Night, I tell thee, Frank, a man's
best Retirement is with a soft kind Wench. But to say truth, I have a farther
design in my Visit* now. Thou know how I stand past hope of Grace,
excommunicated the Kindness of my Uncle.


Dress. True.


Wild. My lewd Debauches, and being o'th wrong Party, as he calls it, is now
become an reconcilable Quarrel; so that I having many and hopeful Intrigues now
depending, especially these of my charming Widow, and my City-Heiress, which
can by no means be carried on without that damned Necessary called Ready Money,
I have stretched my Credit, as all young Heirs do, till it is quite broke. Now
Liveries, Coaches, and Clothes must be had, they must, my Friend.


Dress. Why do thou not in this Extremity clap up a Match with my Lady
Galliard? or this young Heiress you speak of?


Wild. But Marriage, Frank, is such a Bugbear! And this old Uncle of mine may
one day be gathered together, and sleep with his Fathers, and then I shall have
six thousand pound a year, and the wide World before me; and who the Devil
could relish these Blessings with the clog of a Wife behind him? -- But till
then, Money must be had, I say.


Fop. Aye, but how, Sir?


Wild. Why, from the old Fountain, Jack, my Uncle; he has himself decreed it:
he tells me I must live upon my Wits, and will, Frank.


Fop. Gad, I Am impatient to know how.


Wild. I believe thee, for thou art out at Elboes: and when I thrive, you show
i'^h' Pit, behind the Scenes, and Coffee-houses. Thy Breeches give a better
account of my Fortune, than Lilly with all his Schemes and Stars.


Fop. I own I thrive by your Influence, Sir.


Dress. Well; but to your Project, Friend: to which I Will set a helping Hand, a
Heart, a Sword, and Fortune.


Wild. You make good what my Soul conceives of you. Let Us to Diana then, and
there I Will tell thee all. [Going out, they meet Diana, who enters with her Maid
Betty, and Boy; looks angrily. -- Diana, I was just going to thy Lodgings!


Dian. Oh las, you are too much taken up with your rich City-Heiress.


Wild. That Is no cause of quarrel between you and I, Diana; you were wont to be
as impatient for my marrying, as I for the death of my Uncle: for your rich
Wife ever obliges her Husbands Mistress; and women of your sort, Diana, ever
thrive better by Adultery than Fornication.


Dian. Do, try to appease the easy Fool with these fine Expectations: -- No, I
have been too often flattered with the hopes of your marrying a rich Wife, and
then I was to have a Settlement; but instead of that, things go backward with
me, my Coach is vanished, my Servants dwindled into one necessary Woman and a
Boy, which to save Charges, is too small for any service; my twenty Guinnies a
week, into forty Shillings: a hopeful Reformation!


Wild. Patience, Diana, things will m^^d in time.


Dian. When, I wonder? Summer's come, yet I am still in my embroidered Manto,
when I Am dressed, lined with Velvet; 'twou'd give one a Feavor but to look at me:
yet still I am flamm'd off with hopes of a rich Wife, whose Fortune I am to
lavish. -- But I see you have neither Conscience nor Religion in you; I wonder
what a Devil will become of your Soul for thus deluding me!


[Weeps. Wild. By Heaven, I love thee!


Dian. Love me! what if you do? how far will that go at the Exchange for Point?
Will the Mercer take it for current Coin? -- But it is no matter, I must love a
Wit, with a Pox, when I might have had so many Fools of Fortune: But the Devil
take me, if you deceive me any longer.


[Weeping. Wild. You Will keep your word, no doubt, now you have sworn.


Dian. So I will. I never go abroad, but I gain new Conquest. Happy's the man
that can approach nearest the side-box where I sit at a Play, to look at me;
but if I daign to smile on him, Lord, how the o're-joy'd Creature returns it
with a bow low as the very Benches! Then rising, shakes his Ears, looks round,
with pride, to see who took notice how much he was in favor with charming Mrs.
Die.


Wild. No more: Come, let us be Friends, Diana; for you and I must manage an
Uncle of mine.


Dian. Damn your Projects, I Will have none of 'em.


Wild. Here, here is the best Softner of a woman's heart; it is ^^ld, two hundred
Pieces: Go, lay it on, till you shame Quality, into plain Silk and Fringe.


Dian. Lord, you have the strangest power of Persuasion! -- Nay, if you buy my
Peace, I can afford a penyworth.


Wild. So thou can of any thing about thee.


Dian. Well, your Project, my dear Tommy?


Wild. Thus then -- Thou, dear Frank, shall to my Uncle, ^tell him that Sir
Nicholas Gettall, as he knows, being dead, and having left, as he knows too,
one only Daughter his whole Executrix, Mrs. Charlot, I have by my civil and
modest behavior, so won upon her heart, that two nights since she left her
Fathers Countryhouse at Lusum in Kent, in spite of all her strict Guards, and
run away with me.


Dress. How, will thou tell him of it then?


Wild. Hear me -- That I have hitherto secured her at a Friends house here in
the City; but diligent search being now made, dare trust her there no longer.
And make it my humble Request by you, my Friend, (who are only privy to this
secret) that he would give me leave to bring her home to his house; whose very
Authority will defend her from being fought for there.


Dress. Aye, Sir, but what will come of this, I say?


Wild. Why a Settlement: You know he has already made me Heir to all he has,
after his decease; but for being a wicked Tory, as he calls me, he has, after
the Writings were made, signed, and sealed, refused to give 'em in trust. Now
when he secs I have made my self Master of so vast a Fortune, he will
immediately surrender, that reconciles all again.


Dress. Very likely; but wo't thou trust him with the woman, Thomas?


Wild. No; here is Diana, who as I shall bedizen, shall pass for as substantial
an Aldermans Heiress, as ever fell into wicked hands. He never knew the right
Charlot, nor indeed has any body ever seen her but an old Aunt and Nurse, she
was so kept up: -- And there, Diana, thou shall have a good opportunity to lie*
dissemble, and jilt in abundance, to keep thy hand in ure.

Prithee, dear Dresswell, haste with the News to him.

Dress. Faith, I like this well enough; this Project may take, and I Will about
it.


[Goes out. Wild. Go, get ye home, and trick and betawder your self up like a
right City-Lady, rich, but ill-fashion'd; on with all your Jewels, but not a
Patch, ye Gypsy, nor no Spanish Paint, do you hear.


Dian. I Will warrant you for my part.


Wild. Then before the old Gentleman, you must behave your self very soberly,
simple, and demure, and look as prew as at a Conventicle; and take heed you
drink not off your Glass at Table, nor rant, nor swear; one Oath confounds our
Plot, and betrays thee to be an errant Drab.


Dian. Doubt not my Art of Dissimulation.


Wild. Go, haste and dress --


[Exit Dian. Bet. and Boy. Enter L. Gall. and Closet above in the Balconey;
Wild. going out, sees them, stops, and reads a Paper. Wild. Hah, who is yonder,
the Widow! a Pox upon it, now have not I power to stir: she has a damned ^ank
upon my Heart, and nothing but right down lying with her, will dissolve the
Charm. She has forbid me seeing her, and therefore I am sure will the sooner
take notice of me.


[Reads. Clos. What will you put on to night, Madam? you know you are to sup at
Sir Timothy Treat-all's.


L. Gall. Time enough for that; prithee let us take a turn in this Balconey,
this City-garden, where we walk to take the fresh Air of the Sea-coal-smoak.
Did the Footman go back, as I ordered him, to see how Wilding and Sir Charles
parted?


Clos. He did, Madam; and nothing could provoke Sir Charles to fight after your
Ladyships strict Commands. Well, I Will swear he is the sweetest natured Gentleman
-- ^as all the advantages of Nature and Fortune: I wonder what Exception your
La^yship has to him*


L. Gall. Some small Exception to his whining humor; but I think my chiefest
dislike is, because my Relations wish it a Match between us.

It is not hate to him, but natural contradiction. Hah, is not that Wilding
yonder? he is reading of a Letter sure.


Wild. So, she sees me. Now for an Art to make her lure me up: for though I
have a greater mind than she, it shall be all her own; the Match she told me of
this morning with my Uncle, sticks plaguily upon my stomach; I must break the
neck on it, or break the Widows heart, that is certain. If I advance toward the
door now, she frowningly retires; if I pass on, it is likely she may call me.


[Advances. L. Gall. I think he is passing on,
Without so much as looking toward the window.

Clos. He Is glad of the excuse of being forbidden.

L. Gall. But, Closet, know thou not he has abused my fame,
And does he think to pass thus unupbraided?
Is there no Art to make him look this way?
No trick? -- Prithee faign to laugh.

[ Clos. laughs. Wild. So, I shall not answer to that Call.

L. Gall. He Is going! Ah, Closet, my Fan! -- [Lets fall her Fan just as he
passes by; he takes it up, and looks up.] Cry mercy, Sir, I Am sorry I must
trouble you to bring it.


Wild. Faith, so am I; and you may spare my pains, and send your Woman for it, I
am in haste.


L. Gall. Then the quickest way will be to bring it.


Goes out of the Belconey with Closet. Wild. I knew I should be drawn in one
way or other.


SCENE changes to a Chamber. Enter L. Gall. Closet to them; Wilding delivers
the Fan, and is retiring. L. Gall. Stay; I hear you're wondrous free of your
Tongue, when it is let loose on me.


Wild. Who I, Widow? I think of no such trifles.


L. Gall. Such Railers never think when they are abusive; but something you have
said, a Lie so infamous!


Wild. A Lie, and infamous of you! impossible!
What was it that I called you, Wise, or Honest?

L. Gall. How, can you accuse me for the want of either?


Wild. Yes, of both: Had you a grain of Honesty, or intended ever to be thought
so, would you have the impudence to marry an old Coxcomb, a Fellow that will
not so much as serve you for a Cloak, he is so visibly and undeniably impotent?


L. Gall. Your Uncle you mean.


Wild. I do; who has not known the joy of Fornication this thirty year, and now
the Devil and you have put it into his head to marry, forsooth. Oh the Felicity
of the Wedding-night!


L. Gall. Which you, with all your railing Rhetoric, shall not have power to
hinder.


Wild. Not if you can help it: for I perceive you are resolved to be a lewd
incorrigible sinner, and marryest this seditious doting fool my Uncle, only to
hang him out for the ^igne of the Cuckold, to give notice where Beauty is to be
purchased, for fear otherwise we should mistake, and think thee honest.


L. Gall. So much for my want of Honesty; my Wit is the Part of the Text you
are to handle next.


Wild. Let the World judge of that, by this one action: This Marriage
undisputably robs you both of your Reputation and Pleasure. Marry an old Fool,
because he is rich! when so many handsome proper younger Brothers would be glad
of you!


L. Gall. Of which hopeful number your self are one.


Wild. Who, I! Bear witness, Closet; take notice I Am upon my Marriage, Widow,
and such a Scandal on my Reputation might ruin me: therefore have a care what
you say.


L. Gall. Ha, ha, ha, Marriage! Yes, I hear you give it out, you are to be
married to me: for which Defamation, if I be not revenged, hang me.


Wild. Yes, you are revenged: I had the fame of vanquishing where-e're I laid
my Siege, till I knew thee, hard-hearted thee; had the honest Reputation of
lying with the Magistrates Wives, when their Reverend Husbands were employed in
the necessary Affairs of the Nation, ^editiously petitioning; and then I was
esteemed; but now they look on me as a monsterous thing, that makes honorable
Love to you; Oh hideous, a Husband-Lover! So that now I may protest, and swear,
and lie my heart out, I find neither Credit nor Kindness; but when I beg for
either, my Lady Galliard's thrown in my Dish: Then they laugh aloud, and cry,
Who would think it of gay, of fine Mr. Wilding! Thus the City She-wits are let
loose upon me, and all for you, sweet Widow; but I am resolved I will redeem my
Reputation again, if never seeing you nor writing to you more, will do it: And
so farewell, faithless and scandalous honest woman*


L. Gall. Stay, Tyrant.


Wild. I am engaged.


L. Gall. You are not.


Wild. I am, and am resolved to lose no more time on a peevish woman, who
values her Honor above her Lover.


[He goes out. L. Gall. Go; this is the noblest way of losing thee.


Clos. Must not I call him back?


L. Gall. No: If any honest Lover come, admit him; I will forget this Devil.
Fetch me some Jewels; the company to night at Sir Timothy's may divert me.


[She sits down before her Glass. Enter Boy. Boy. Madam, one Sir Anthony
Meriwill would speak with your Ladyship.


L. Gall. Admit him; sure it is Sir Charles his Uncle: if he come to treat a
Match with me for his Nephew, he takes me in the critical minute. Would he but
leave his whining, I might love him, if 'twere but in revenge.


Enter Sir Anthony Meriwill and Sir Charles. Sir Anth. So, I have tutored the
young Rogue, I hope he will learn in time. Good day to your Ladyship; Charles
[putting him forward] my Nephew here, Madam -- Sirrah -- notwithstanding your
Ladyships Commands -- Look how he stands now, being a mad young Raskal! -- Gad,
he would wait on your Ladyship -- A Devil on him, see if he will budge now -- For
he is a brisk Lover, Madam, when he once begins. A Pox on him, he will spoil all
yet.


L. Gall. Please you sit, Sir.


Sir Char. Madam, I beg your Pardon for my Rudeness.


L. Gall. Still whining? --


[Dressing her self carelessly. Sir Anth. Do You hear that, Sirrah? Oh damn it,
beg Pardon! The Rogue's quite out of 's part.


Sir Char. Madam, I fear my Visit is unseasonable.


Sir Anth. Unseasonable! Damned Rogue, unseasonable to a Widow! -- Quite out.


L. Gall. There are indeed some Ladies that would be angry at an untimely
Visit, before they have put on their best Faces; but I am none of those that
would be fair in spite of Nature, Sir. -- Put on this Jewel here.


[ To Clos. Sir Char. That Beauty needs no Ornament, Heaven has been too
bountiful.


Sir Anth. Heaven! Oh Lord, Heaven! a Puritanical Rogue, he courts her like her
Chaplain.


[Aside vexed. L. Gall. You are still so full of University-Complements --


Sir Anth. Do You hear that, Sirrah? -- Aye so he is, so he is indeed, Madam. --
To her like a man, ye Knave.


[Aside to him. Sir Char. Ah, Madam, I am come!


Sir Anth. To show your self a Coxcomb.


L. Gall. To tire me with discourses of your Passion. -- Fie, how this Curl
sits!


Looking in the Glass. Sir Char. No, you shall hear no more of that ungrateful
subject.


Sir Anth. Son of a Whore, hear no more of Love, damned Rogue! Madam, by George
he lies; he does come to speak of Love, and make Love, and to do Love, and all
for Love. -- Not come to speak of Love, with a Pox! 'Owns, Sir, behave your
self like a man; be impudent, be saucy, forward, bold, towzing, and lewd, do you
hear, or I Will beat thee before her. Why what a Pox!


[Aside to him, he minds it not. Sir Char. Finding my hopes quite lost in your
unequal Favors to young Wilding, I Am quitting of the Town.


L. Gall. You will do well to do so. -- Lay by that Necklace; I Will wear Pearl
to day.


[ To Clos. Sir Anth. Confounded Blockhead! -- By George, he lies again, Madam.
A Dog, I Will dis-inherit him. [aside.] He quit the Town, Madam! no, not whilst
your Ladyship is in it, to my knowledge. He Will live in the Town, nay, in the
Street where you live; nay, in the House; nay, in the very Bed, by George; I Have
heard him a thousand times swear it. Swear it now, Sirrah: Look, look, how he
stands now! Why dear Charles, good Boy, swear a little, ruffle her, and swear
Damn it, she shall have none but thee. [aside to him.] Why you little think,
Madam, that this Nephew of mine is one of the maddest Fellows in all Devonshire.


L. Gall. Would I could see it, Sir.


Sir Anth. See It! look ye there, ye Rogue. -- Why it is all his fault, Madam.
He Is seldom sober; then he has a dozen Wenches in pay, that he may with the
more Authority break their w^^dows. There Is never a Maid within forty miles of
Meriwill-hall to work a Miracle on, but all are Mothers. He Is a hopeful Youth,
I Will say that for him.


Sir Char. How I have loved you, my despairs shall witness: for I will die to
purchase your content.


[She rises. Sir Anth. Die, a damned Rogue! Aye, aye, I Will dis-inherit him: A
Dog, die, with a Pox! No, he will be hanged first, Madam.


Sir Char. And sure you will pity me when I am dead.


Sir Anth. A Curse on him; pity, with a Pox! I Will give him never a Souse.


L. Gall. Give me that Essence-bottle.


[ To Clos. Sir Char. But for a recompense of all my sufferings --


L. Gall. Sprinkle my Handkercher with Tuberuse.


[ To Clos. Sir Char. I beg a Favor you would afford a stranger.


L. Gall. Sooner perhaps. What Jewel's that?


[ To Clos. Clos. One Sir Charles Meriwill --


L. Gall. Sent, and you received without my order!
No wonder that he looks so scurvily.
Give him the Trifle back to mend his humor.

Sir Anth. I thank you, Madam, for that repromand. Look in that Glass, Sir, and
admire that sneaking Coxcomb's Countenance of yours: A Pox on him, he is past
Grace, lost, gone, not a Souse, not a Groat; good buy to you, Sir. Madam, I beg
your Pardon; the next time I come a wooing, it shall be for my self, Madam, and
I have something that will justify it too; but as for this fellow, if your
Ladyship have ever a small Page at leisure, I desire he may have order to kick
him down stairs. Adamn'd Rogue, to be civil now, when he should have behaved
himself handsomely! Not an Acre, not a Shilling, -- buy, Sir Softhead. [going
out, meets Wild. and returns.] Hah, who have we here, hum, the fine mad Fellow?
So, so, he will swindge him I hope; I Will stay to have the pleasure of seeing it
done.


Enter Wilding, brushes by Sir Charles. Wild. I was sure 'twas Meriwill's Coach
at door.

[Aside.
Sir Char. Hah, Wilding!


Sir Anth. Aye, now Sir, here is one will waken ye, Sir.


[To Sir Char. Wild. How now, Widow, you are always giving Audience to Lovers,
I see.


Sir Char. You're very free, Sir.


Wild. I Am always so in the widows Lodgings, Sir.


Sir Anth. A rare Fellow!


Sir Char. You will not do it elsewhere?


Wild. Not with so much Authority.


Sir Anth. An admirable Fellow! I must be acquainted with him.


Sir Char. Is this the Respect you pay women of her Quality?


Wild. The Widow knows I stand not much on Ceremonies.


Sir Anth. Gad, he shall be my Heir. [Aside still.


L. Gall. Pardon him, Sir, this is his Cambridge-breeding.


Sir Anth. Aye so it is, so it is; that two years there quite spoiled him.


L. Gall. Sir, if you have any farther business with me, speak it; if not, I Am
going forth.


Sir Char. Madam, in short --


Sir Anth. In short to a Widow, in short! quite lost.


Sir Char. I find you treat me ill for my Respect;
And when I court you next,
I will forget how very much I love you.

Sir Anth. Sir, I shall be proud of your farther acquaintance; for I like,
love, and honor you.


[(...) Wild. Wild. I Will study to deserve it, Sir.


Sir Anth. Madam, your Servant. A damned sneaking Dog to be civil and modest,
with a Pox!


[Exit Sir Char. and Sir Anth. L. Gall. See if my Coach be ready.


[ Exit Clos. Wild. Whither are you janting now?


L. Gall. Where you dare not wait on me; to your Uncles to Supper.


Wild. That Uncle of mine pimps for all the Sparks of his Party;
There they all meet and bargain without scandal:
Fops of all sorts and sizes you may choose.
Whig-land affords not such another Market.

Enter Closet. Clos. Madam, here is Sir Timothy Treat-all come to wait on your
Ladyship to Supper.


Wild. My Uncle! Oh, damn him, he was born to be my Plague: Not dis-inheriting
me had been so great a disappointment; and if he sees me here, I ruin all the
Plots I Have laid for him. Ha^ he is here!


Enter Sir Tim. Sir Tim. How, my Nephew Thomas here!

Wild. Madam, I find you can be cruel too,
Knowing my Uncle has abandoned me.

Sir Tim. How now, Sir, what is your business here?


Wild. I came to beg a Favor of my Lady Galliard, Sir, knowing her Power and
Quality here in the City.


Sir Tim. How, a Favor of my Lady Galliard! The Rogue said indeed he would
Cuckold me. [aside.] Why, Sir, I thought you had been taken up with your rich
Heiress?


Wild. That was my business now, Sir: Having in my possession the Daughter and
Heir of Sir Nicholas Gettall, I would have made use of the Authority of my Lady
Galliard's house to have secured her, till I got things in order for our
Marriage; but my Lady, to put me off, cries, I have an Uncle.


L. Gall. A well-contriv'd Lie.

[Aside.
Sir Tim. Well, I have heard of your good Fortune; and however a Reprobate thou
have been, I Will not show my self so undutiful an Uncle, as not to give the
Gentlewoman a little house-room: I heard indeed she was gone a week ago,

And, Sir, my house is at your service.

Wild. I humbly thank you, Sir. Madam, your Servant. A Pox upon him, and all
his Association.


[Goes out. Sir Tim. Come, Madam, my Coath waits below.

Exit.
ACT the Third.
SCENE the First. A Room.
Enter Sir Timothy Treat-all and Jervice. Sir Tim. HEre, take my Sword,
Iervice. What have you inquired as I directed you concerning the rich Heiress,
Sir Nicholas Gettall's Daugher?


Ier. Alas, Sir, inquired! why it is all the City-News, that she is run away with
one of the maddest Tories about Town.


Sir Tim. Good Lord! Aye, aye, it is so; the plaguie Rogue my Nephew has got
her. That Heaven should drop such Blessings in the mouths of the Wicked! Well'
Iervice, what Company have we in the house, Iervice?


Ier. Why truly, Sir, a fine deal, con^idering there is no Parliament.


Sir Tim. What Lords have we, Iervice?


Ier. Lords, Sir! truly none.


Sir Tim. None! what never a Lord! Some mishap will befall me, some dire
mischance: Never a Lord! ominous, ominous! our Party dwindles daily. What, nor
Earl, nor Marquess, nor Duke, nor never a Lord? Hum, my Wine will lie most
villanously upon my hands to night, Iervice. What, have we store of Knights and
Gentlemen?


Ier. I know not what Gentlemen there be, Sir; but there are Knights, Citizens,
their Wives and Daughters.


Sir Tim. Make us thankful for that; our Meat will not lie upon our hands then,
Iervice: I Will say that for our little Londoners, they are as tall fellows at a
well-charg'd Board as any in Christendom.


Ier. Then, Sir, there is Nonconformist-Parsons.


Sir Tim. Nay, then we shall have a clear Board: for your true Protestant
Appetite in a Lay-Elder, does a man's Table credit.


Ier. Then, Sir, there is Country-Justices and Grand-Jury-men.


Sir Tim. Well enough, well enough, Iervice.


Enter Mrs. Sensure. Sen. An't like your Worship, Mr. Wilding is come in with a
Lady richly dressed in Jewels, masked, in his hand, and will not be denied
speaking with your Worship.


Sir Tim. Hah, rich in Jewels! this must be she. My Sword again, Iervice. --
Bring 'em up, Sensure, -- Prithee how do I look to night, Iervice?


[Setting himself. Ier. Oh, most methodically, Sir.


Enter Wild. and Diana and Betty. Wild. Sir, I have brought into your kind
protection the richest Jewel all London can afford, fair Mrs. Charlot Gettall.


Sir Tim. Bless us, she is ravishing fair! Lady, I had the honor of being
intimate with your worthy Father. I think he has been dead --


Dian. If he chastize me much on that point, I shall spoil all. Alas, Sir, name
him not; for if you do, [weeping] I Am sure I cannot answer you one Question.

[Aside.
Wild. For Heaven sake, Sir, name not her Father to her; the bare remembrance
of him kills her.


[Aside to him. Sir Tim. Alas, poor Soul! Lady, I beg your Pardon. How
soft-hearted she is! I am in love; I find already a tickling kind of I know not
what, run frisking through my Veins.

[Aside.
Betty. Aye, Sir, the good Alderman has been dead this twelvemonth just, and
has lest his Daughter here, my Mistress, three thousand pound a year.


[Weeping. Sir Tim. Three thousand pound a year! Yes, yes, I am in love.

[Aside.
Bet. Besides Money, Plate, and Jewels.


Sir Tim. I Will marry her out of hand: [aside.] Alas, I could even weep too; but
it is in vain. Well, Nephew, you may be gone now: for it is not necessary you
should be seen here, do you see.


[Pushing him out. Wild. You see, Sir, now, what Heaven has done for me; and
you have often told me, Sir, when that was kind, you would be so. Those
Writings, Sir, by which you were so good to make me Heir to all your Estate,
you said you would put into my possession, whenever I made it appear to you I
could live without 'em, or bring you a Wife of Fortune home.


Sir Tim. And I will keep my word; it is time enough.


[Putting him out. Wild. I have, it is true, been wicked; but I shall now turn
from my evil ways, establish my self in the religious City, and enter into the
Association. There wants but these same Writings, Sir, and your good Character
of me.


Sir Tim. Thou shall have both; all in good time, man: Go, go thy ways, and
I Will warrant thee for a good Character; go.


Wild. Ay, Sir; but the Writings, because I told her, Sir, I was your Heir;
nay, forced to swear it too, before she would believe me.


Sir Tim. Alas, alas, how shrewdly thou were put to it!


Wild. I told her too, you would buy a Patent for me: for nothing wooes a
City-Fortune like the hopes of a Ladyship.


Sir Tim. I Am glad of that; that I can settle on her presently.

[Aside.
Wild. You may please to hint something to her of my Godly Life and
Conversation; that I frequent Conventicles, and am drunk nowhere but at your
true Protestant Consults and Clubs, and the like.


Sir Tim, Nay, if these will please her, I have her for certain. [aside.] Go,
go, fear not my good word.


Wild. But the Writings, Sir. --


Sir Tim. Am I a Jew, a Turk? Thou shall have any thing, now I find thee a Lad
of Parts, and one that can provide so well for thy Uncle.

[Aside.
Puts him out, and addresses himself to the Lady. Wild. Would they were hanged
that ^^^u^t you, that have but the Art of Lejerdemain, and can open the
Japan-Cabinet in your Bedchamber, where I know those Writings are kept. Death,
what a disappointment's here! I would a'sworn, this Sham had past upon him. --
But, Sir, shall I not have the Writings now?


Sir Tim. What not gone yet! for shame, away: Can thou distrust thy own
natural Uncle? Fie, away, Tom, away.


Wild. A Plague upon your damned Dissimulation, that never-failing (...) of all
your Party, there is always mischief at the bottom on it; I know ye all; and
Fortune be the Word. When next I see you, Uncle, it shall cost you dearer.

Exit.
Enter Jervice. Ier. An't please your Worship, Supper's almost over, and you
are asked for.


Sir Tim. They know I never sup: I shall come time enough to bid 'em welcome.


Exit Jer. Dian. I keep you, Sir, from Supper and better Company.

Sir Tim. Lady, were I a Glutton, I could be satisfied
With feeding on those two bright starry Eyes.

Dian. You are a Courtier, Sir; we City-maids do seldom hear such Language: in
which you show your kindness to your Nephew, more than your-thoughts of what my
Beauty merits.


Sir Tim. Lord, Lord, how innocent she is! [aside.] My Nephew, Madam? yes, yes,
I cannot choose but be wondrous kind upon his score.


Dian. Nay, he has often told me, you were the best of Uncles, and he deserves
your goodness; so hopeful a young Gentleman.


Sir Tim. Would I could see it.

[Aside.
Dian. So modest.

[Aside.
Sir Tim. Yes, ask my Maids.


Dian. So civil.


Sir Tim. Yes, to my Neighbors Wives. [aside.] But so, Madam, I find by this
high Commendations of my Nephew, your Ladyship has a very slender opinion of
your devoted Servant the while; or else, Madam, with this not disagreeable face
and shape of mine, six thousand pound a year, and other Virtues and Commodities
that shall be nameless, I see no reason why I should not beget an Heir of my
own Body, had I the helping hand of a certain victorious person in the world,
that shall be nameless.


[Bowing and smirking. Dian. Meaning me, I am sure: If I should marry him now,
and disappoint my dear Inconstant with an Heir of his own begetting, 'twou'd be
a most wicked Revenge for past Kindnesses.

[Aside.
Sir Tim. I know your Ladyship is studying now who this victorious person
should be, whom I dare not name; but let it suffice she is, Madam, within a
mile of an Oak.


Dian. No, Sir, I was considering, if what you say be true,
How unadvisedly I have loved your Nephew,
Who swore to me he was to be your Heir.

Sir Tim. My Heir, Madam! am I so visibly old to be so desperate?
No, I Am in my years of desires and discretion,
And I have thoughts, durst I but utter 'em;
But modestly say, Mum --

Dian. I took him for the hopefullest Gentleman --


Sir Tim. Let him hope on, so will I; and yet, Madam, in consideration of your
love to him, and because he is my Nephew, young, handsome, witty, and soforth,
I am content to be so much a Parent to him, as, if Heaven please, -- to see him
fairly hanged.


Dian. How, Sir!


[In a maze. Sir Tim. He has deserved it, Madam; First, for lampooning the
Reverend City, with its noble Government, with the Right Honorable Gown-men;
libelling some for Feasting, and some for Fasting, some for Cuckolds, and some
for Cuckold-makers; charging us with all the seven deadly sins, the sins, of
our Forefathers, adding seven score more to the number; the sins of Forty One
revived again in Eighty One, with Additions and Amendments: for which, though
the Writings were drawn by which I made him my whole Executor, I will
dis-inherit him. Secondly, Madam, he deserves hanging for seducing and most
feloniously bearing away a young City-Heiress.


Dian. Undone, undone! Oh with what face can I return again!
What man of Wealth or Reputation, now
Will think me worth the owning!

[Feigns to weep. Sir Tim. Yes, yes, Madam, there are honest, discreet,
religious and true Protestant Knights in the City, that would be proud to
dignifie and distinguish so worthy a Gentlewoman.


[Bowing and smiling. Bet. Look to your hits, and take fortune by the forelock,
Madam.
[Aside. -- Alas, Madam, no Knight, and poor too!

Sir Tim. As a Tory-Poet.


Bet. Well* Madam, take comfort; if the worst come to the worst, you have
Estate enough for both.


Dian. Aye, Betty, were he but honest, Betty.


[Weeping. Sir Tim. Honest! I think he will not steal; but for his Body, the
Lord have mercy upon it, for he has none.


Dian. It Is evident I am betrayed, abused;
H'as looked, and sighed, and talked away my Heart;
H'as sworn and vowed, and flattered me to ruin.

[Weeping. Sir Tim. A small fault with him; he has flattered and sworn me out
of many a fair thousand: Why he has no more Conscience than a Politician, nor
no more Truth than a Narrative (under the Rose.)


Dian. Is there no Truth nor Honesty in the World?


Sir Tim. Troth, very little, and that lies all in the City, amongst us sober
Magistrates.


Dian. Were I a man, how would I be revenged!


Sir Tim. Your Ladyship might do it better as you are, were I worthy to advise
you.


Dian. Name it.


Sir Tim. Why by marrying your Ladyships most assured Friend, and most humble
Servant, Timothy Treat-all of London, Alderman.


[Bowing. Bet. Aye, this is something, Mistress; here is Reason!


Dian. But I have given my Faith and Troth to Wilding, Betty.


Sir Tim. Faith and Troth! We stand upon neither Faith nor Troth in the City,
Lady. I have known an Heiress married and bedded, and yet with the advice of
the wiser Magistrates, has been unmarried and consummated anew with another, so
it stands with our Interest; it is Law by Magna Charta. Nay, had you married my
ungracious Nephew, we might by this our Magna Charta have hanged him for a Rape.


Dian. What, though he had my consent?


Sir Tim. That Is nothing, he had not ours.


Dian. Then should I marry you by stealth, the danger would be the same.


Sir Tim. No, no, Madam, we never accuse one another; it is the poor Rogues, the
Tory Rascals, we always hang. Let 'em accuse me if they please, alas, I come
off hand-smooth with Ignoramus.


Enter Jervice. Ier. Sir, there is such calling for your Worship! They are all
very merry, the Glasses go briskly about.


Sir Tim. Go, go, I Will come when all the Healths are past; I love no Healths.


Ier. They are all over, Sir, and the Ladies are for dancing; so they are all
adjourning from the Dining Room hither, as more commodious for that Exercise. I
think they are coming, Sir.


Sir Tim. Hah, coming! Call Sensure to wait on the Lady to her Apartment. --
And, Madam, I do most heartily recommend my most humble Address to your most
judicious consideration, hoping you will most vigorously, and with all your
might, maintain the Rights and Privil dges of the honorable City; and not
suffer the force or persuasion of any Arbitrary Lover whatsoever, to subvert
their Ancient and Fundamental Laws, by seducing and forcibly bearing away so
rich and so illustrious a Lady: and, Madam, we will unanimously stand by you
with our Lives and Fortunes. -- This I learnt from a Speech at the Election of
a Burgess.


Leads her to the door: she goes out with Betty and Sensure. Enter Music
playing, Sir Anthony Meriwill dancing with a Lady in his hand, Sir Charles with
Lady Galliard, several other women and men. Sir Auth. [singing.] Philander was
a jolly Swain,
And loved by every Lass;
Whom when he met upon the Plain,
He laid upon the Grass.
And here he kissed, and there he played
With this, and then the the other,
Till every wanton smiling Maid.
At last became a Mother.
And to her Swain, and to her Swain,
The Nymph begins to yield;
Ruffle, and breathe, then to it again,
You Are Master of the Field.

Clapping Sir Char. on the back. Sir Char. And if I keep it not, say I Am a
Coward, Uncle.

Sir Anth. More Wine there, Boys, I Will keep the Humor up.

[Enter Bottles and Glass^s. Sir Tim. How! young Meriwill so close ^o the
Widow! --
Madam --

[Addressing himself to her, Sir Char. puts him by. Sir Char. Sir Timothy, why
what a Pox do thou bring that damned Puritanical, Schismatical, Phanatical,
Small beer-face of thine into good Company? Give Him a full Glass to the
Widow's Health.


Sir Tim. O lack, Sir Charles, no Healths for me, I pray.


Sir Char. Hark ye, leave that couzening, canting, sanctin'd Sneer of yours
and drink ye me like a sober loyal Magistrate, all those Healths you are
behind, from his sacred Majesty, whom God long preserve, with the rest of the
Royal Family, even down to this wicked Widow, whom Heaven soon convert from her
lewd designs upon my Body.


[Pulling Sir Tim. to kneel. Sir Anth. A rare Boy! he shall have all my Estate.


Sir Tim. How, the Widow a lewd design upon his Body! Nay, then I am jealous.

[Aside.
L. Gall. I a lewd design upon your Body! for what, I wonder?


Sir Char. Why, for villainous Matrimony.


L. Gall. Who, I!


Sir Char. Who, you? yes, you.
Why are those Eyes dressed in inviting Love?
Those soft bewitching Smiles, those rising Breasts,
And all those Charms that make you so adorable,
Is It not to draw Fools into Matrimony?

Sir Anth. How Is that, how is that! Charles at his Adorables and Charms! He must
have the other Health, he will fall to his old Dog-trot again else. Come, come,
every man his Glass. Sir Timothy, you are six behind. Come, Charles, name 'em
all.


[Each take a Glass, and force Sir Tim. on his knees. Sir Char. -- Not ^ate ye
an Ace, Sir: Come, his Majesty's Health, and Confusion to his Enemies,


[They go to force his mouth open to drink. Sir Tim. Hold, Sir, hold, if I must
drink, I must; but this is very Arbitrary, methinks.


[Drinks. Sir Anth. And now, Sir, to the Royal Duke of Albany. Music, play a
Scotch Jig.


[Musick plays, they drink. Sir Tim. This is mere Tyranny.


Enter Jervice. Ier. Sir, there is just alighted at the Gate a Person of
Quality, as appears by his Train, who give him the Title of a Lord.


Sir Tim. How, a strange Lord! Conduct him up with Ceremony, Iervice. -- 'Ods
so, he is here!


Enter Wilding in disguise, Dresswell, and Footmen and Pages. Wild. Sir, by
your Reverend Aspect, you should be the Renowned Mester de Hotell?


Sir Tim. Meter de Otell! I have not the honor to know any of that name; I am
called Sir Timothy Treat-all.


[Bowing. Wild. The same, Sir: I have been bred abroad, and thought all Persons
of Quality had spoke French.


Sir Tim. Not City Persons of Quality, my Lord.


Wild. I Am glad on'^, Sir: for it is a Nation I hate, as indeed I do all
Monarchies.


Sir Tim. Hum! hate Monarchy! Your Lordship is most welcome.


[Bows. Wild. Unless Elective Monarchies, which so resemble a Commonwealth.


Sir Tim. Right, my Lord; where every man may hope to take his turn. -- Your
Lordship is most singularly welcome.


[Bows low. Wild. And though I am a stranger to your Person, I am not to your
Fame, amongst the sober Party of the Amsterdamians, all the French Hugonots
throughout Geneva; even to Hungary and Poland, fames trumpet sounds your
praise, making the Pope to fear, the rest admire you.


Sir Tim. I Am much obliged to the Renowned Mobily.


Wild. So you will say, when you shall hear my Embassy. The ^o^anders by me
salute you, Sir, and have in this next new Election, pricked ye down for their
succeeding King.


Sir Tim. How, my Lord, pricked me down for a King! Why this is wonderful!
Pricked me, unworthy me, down for a King! How could I merit this amazing Glory!


Wild. They know, he that can be so great a Patriot to his Native Country,
where but a private person, what must he be when Power is on his side?


Sir Tim. Aye, my Lord, my Country, my bleeding Country! there is the stop to
all my rising Greatness. Shall I be so ungrateful to disappoint this big
expecting Nation? defeat the sober Party, and my Neighbors, for any Polish
Crown? But yet, my Lord, I will consider on it: Mean time my House is yours.


Wild. I Have brought you, Sir, the measure of the Crown: Hah, it ^its you to a
hair. [Pulls out a Ribon and measures his head. You were by Heaven and Nature
framed that Monarch.


Sir Anth. Hah, at it again! [Sir Charles making sober love.] Come, we grow
dull, Charles: where stands the Glass? what, balk my Lady Galliard's Health!


They go to drink. Wild. Hah, Galliard -- and so sweet on Meriwill!

[Aside.
L. Gall. If it be your business, Sir, to drink, I Will withdraw.


Sir Char. Gad, and I Will withdraw with you, Widow. Hark ye, Lady Galliard, I
am damnably afraid you cannot bear your Liquor well, you are so forward to
leave good Company and a Bottle.


Sir Tim. Well, Gentlemen, since I have done what I never do, to oblige you, I
hope you will not refuse a Health of my Denomination.


Sir Anth. We scorn to be so uncivil.


[All take Glasses. Sir Tim. Why then here is a concealed Health that shall be
nameless, to his Grace the King of Poland.


Sir Char. King of Poland! Lord, Lord, how your thoughts ramble!


Sir Tim. Not so far as you imagine; I know what I say, Sir.


Sir Char. Away with it.


[Drink all. Wild. I see, Sir, you still keep up that English Hospitality that
so renowned our Ancestors in History.


[Looking on L. Gall. Sir Tim. Aye, my Lord, my noble Guests are my Wife and
Children.

[Aside.
Wild. Are you not married then? Death, she smiles on him!


Sir Tim. I had a Wife, but, rest her Soul, she is dead; and I have no Plague
left now, but an ungracious Nephew, perverted with Ill Customs,
Tantivie-Opinions, and Court-Notions.


Wild. Cannot your pious Examples convert him?
By Heaven, she is fond of him!
[Aside.
Sir Tim. Alas, I have ^^y'd all ways, fair and foul; ^ay, had settled the other
day my whole Estate upon him, and just as I had signed the Writings, out comes
me a damned Libel called, A Warning to all good Christians against the
City-Magistrates; and I doubt he had a hand in Absolon and Achitophel; a Rogue:
But some of our sober Party have clawed him home, in faith, and given him Rhyme
for his Reason.


Wild. Most visibly in love! -- Oh, Sir, Nature, Laws, and Religion, plead for
so near a Kinsman.


Sir Tim. Laws and Religion! Alas, my Lord, he deserves not the name of a
Patriot, who does not for the Public Good de^ie all Laws and Religion.


Wild. Death, I must interrupt 'em! -- Sir, pray what Lady's that?


[ Wild. salutes her. Sir Tim. I beseech your Lordship, know her, it is my Lady
Galliard: 'the rest are all my Friends and Neighbors, true Protestants all --
Well, my Lord, how do you like my method of doing the Business of the Nation,
and carrying on the Cause with Wine, Women, and soforth.


Wild. High feeding and smart Drinking, gains more to the Party, than your
smart Preaching.


Sir Tim. Your Lordship has hit it right: A rare man this!


Wild. But come, Sir, leave we serious affairs, and oblige these fair ones.


Addresses himself to Galliard, Sir Charles puts him by. Enter Charlot
disguised Clacket, and Fopington. Charl. Heavens, Clacket, yonder is my false
one, and that my lovely Rival.


Pointing to Wild. and L. Gall. Enter Diana and Sensure maskt, and Betty. Dian.
Dear Mrs. Sensure, this Favor has obliged me.


Sen. I hope you will not discover it to his Worship, Madam.


Wild. By her mien, this should be handsome. -- [ Goes to Diana.] Madam, I hope
you have not made a Resolution to deny me the honor of your hand.


Dian. Hah, Wilding! Love can discover thee through all disguise.


Wild. Hah, Diana! Would 'twere Felony to wear a Vizard. Gad, I Would rather meet
it on the Kings Highway with Stand and Deliver, than thus encounter it on the
Face of an old Mistress; and the Cheat were more excusable. -- But how --


Talks aside with her. Sir Char. Nay, never frown nor chide: for thus do I
intend to show my Authority, till I have made thee only fit for me.


Wild. Is It so, my precious Uncle! are you so great a Devil in Hypocrisy! Thus
had I been served, had I brought him the right woman.

[Aside.
Dian. But do not think, dear Tommy, I would have served thee so; married thy
Uncle, and have cozened thee of thy Birthright. -- But see, we are observed!


Charlot listening behind him all this while. Charl. By all that is good, it is
he! that Voice is his!


He going from Dian. turns upon Charlot and looks. Wild. Hah, what pretty
Creature's this, that has so much of Charlot in her face? But sure she durst
not venture: it is not her dress nor mien. Dear pretty stranger, I must dance
with you.


Charl. Gued deed, and see ye shall, Sir, ^en you please. Tho l's not dance,
Sir, I's tell ya that no.


Wild. Nor I: so we are well matched. By Heaven, she is wondrous like her.


Charl. By the Mass, not so kind, Sir: 'Twere gued that ene of us should dance
to guide the other weel.


Wild. How young, how innocent, and free she is?
And would you, fair one, be guided by me?

Charl. In any thing that gued is.


Wild. I love you extremely, and would teach you to love.


Charl. Ah, well aday!


[Sighs and smiles. Wild. A thing I know you do not understand.


Charl. Gued faith, and ya're in the right, Sir; yet it is a thing I's often hear
ya gay men talk of.


Wild. Yes, and no doubt have been told those pretty Eyes inspired it.


Charl. Gued deed, and so I have: Ya men make sa mickle ado aboot ens Eyes,
ways me, I's ene tired with sick-like Compliments.


Wild. Ah, if you give us Wounds, we must complain.


Charl. Ya may ene keep out a harms way then.


Wild. Oh, we cannot; or if we could, we would not.


Char. Marry and I's have ene a Song tol that tune, Sir.


Wild. Dear Creature, let me beg it.


Char. Gued faith, ya shall not, Sir, I's sing without entreaty.


SONG.
Ah, Jenny, gen your Eyes do kill,
You Will let me tell my pain;
Gued faith, I loved against my will,
But wad not break my Chain.
I ence was called a bonny Lad,
Till that fair face if yours
Betrayed the freedom ence I had,
And ad my bleether hours.
But no ways me, like Winter look^,
My gloomy showering Eyne,
And on the banks of shaded Brooks,
I pass my wearied time.
I call the Streem that gleedeth on,
To witness if it see,
On all the flowery Brink along,
A Swain so true as Iee.
Wild. This very Swain am I, so true and so forlorn, unless you pity me. This
is an excellently Charlot wants, at least I never heard her sing.

[Aside.
Sir Anth. Why Charles, where stands the woman, Charles? Fop. comes up to
Charlot.


Wild. I must speak to Galliard, though all my Fortunes depend on the discovery
of my self.

[Aside.
Sir Anth. Come, come, a cooling Glass about.

Wild. Dear Dresswell, entertain Charles Meriwill a little, whilst I speak to
Galliard.
The men go all to the Drinking-table. By Heaven, I die, I languish for a word!
-- Madam, I hope you have not made a Vow
To speak with none but that young Cavalier?
They say, the freedom English Ladies use,
Is as their Beauty, great.

L. Gall. Sir, we are none of those of so nice and delicate a Virtue as
Conversation can corrupt; we live in a cold Climate.


Wild. And think you're not so apt to be in love,
As where the Sun shines oftener.
But you too much partake of the Inconstancy of this your fickle Chmat^
Maliciously to her. One day all Sunshine, and the encouraged Lover
Decks himself up in glittering Robes of Hope;
And in the midst of all their boasted Finery
Comes a dark Cloud across his Mistress Brow,
Dashes the Fool, and spoils the gaudy show.

[L. Gall. observing him nearly. L. Gall. Hah, do no^ I know that railing
Tongue of yours?

Wild. It Is from your Guilt, not Judgment then.
I was resolved to be to night a Witness
Of that sworn Love you flattered me so often with.
By Heaven, I saw you playing with my Rival,
Sighed, and looked Babies in his gloating Eyes.
When is the Assignation? when the Hours?
For he is impatient as the raging Sea,
Loose as the Winds, and amorous as the Sun
That kisses all the Beauties of the Spring.

L. Gall. I take him for a soberer person, Sir.

Wild. Have I been the Companion of his Riots
In all the lewd course of our early Youth,
Where like unwearied Bees we gathered Flowers?
But no kind Blossom could oblige our stay,
We rifled and were gone.

L. Gall. Your Virtues I perceive are pretty equal;
Only his Love's the honester of the two.

Wild. Honester! that is, he would owe his good fortune to the Parson of the
Parish;

And I would be obliged to you alone.
He would have a License to boast he lies with you,
And I would do it with modesty and silence:
For Virtue's but a name kept free from Scandal,
Which the most base of women best preserve,
Since Gilting and Hypocrisy cheat the world best.
-- But we both love, and who shall blab the secret?

[In a soft tone. L. Gall. Oh, why were all the Charms of Speaking given to
that false Tongue that makes no better use of 'em?

-- I Will hear no more of your enchanting Reasons.

Wild. You must.

L. Gall. I will not.

Wild. Indeed you must.

L. Gall. By all the Powers above --

Wild. By all the powers of Love, you will break your Oath, unless you swear this
night to let me see you.


L. Gall. This night?

Wild. This very night.

L. Gall. I Would die first -- At what hour?

[First turns away, then ^ighs and looks on him. Wild. O^, name it; and if I
fail --

[With joy. L. Gall. I would not for the World --

Wild. That I should fail!

L. Gall. Not name the guilty hour.

Wild. Then I through eager haste shall come too soon,
And do your Honor wrong.

L. Gall. My Honor! Oh that word!

Wild. Which the Devil was in me for naming.
[Aside. -- At Twelve!

L. Gall. My Women and my Servants then are up.

Wild. At One, or Two.

L. Gall. So late! 'twill be so quickly day!

Wild. Aye, so it will:
That half our business will be left unfinisht.

L. Gall. Hah, what do you mean? what business?

Wild. A thousand tender things I have to say,
A thousand Vows of my eternal love.;
And now and then we'll kiss and --

L. Gall. Be extremely honest.

Wild. As you can wish.

L. Gall. Rather as I command: for should he know my wish, I were undone.
Aside.
Wild. The Sign. --

L. Gall. Oh, press me not; -- yet you may come at midnight under my
Chamber-window.

[Sir Char. seas 'em so close, ^omes to 'em. Sir Char. Hold, Sir, hold! Whi^st
I am listening to the relation of your French
Fortifications, Outworks, and Counterscarps, I perceive the Enemy in my
Quarters.
-- My Lord, by your leave.

[Puts him by, growing drunk. Charl. Persuade me not; I burst with Jealousy.

[Wild, turns, sees Clacket. Wild. Death and the Devil Clacket! then it is
Charlot, and I Am discovered to her.

Charl. Say, are not you a false dissembling thing?

[To Wild, in (...). Wild. What, my little Northern Lass translated into
English!
This it is to practice Art in spite of Nature.
^as, thy Virtue, Youth, and Innocence,
Were never made for Cunning.
I found ye out through all your forced Disguise.

Charl. ^ah, did you know me then?

Wild. At the first glance, and found you knew me too,
And talked to yonder Lady in revenge,
Whom my Uncle would have me marry. But to avoid all discourses of that nature,
I came to night in this disguise you see, to be concealed from her; that is all.

Charl. And is that all, on honor? is it, Dear?

Wild. What, no Belief, no Faith in villainous women?

Charl. Yes, when I see the Writings.

Wild. Go home; I die if you should be discovered;
And credit me, I Will bring you all you ask.
Clacket, you and I must have an odd Reckoning about this nights jant of yours.

Aside to Clacket. Sir Tim. Well, my Lord, how do you like our English Beauties?

Wild. Extremely, Sir; and was pressing ^is young Lady to give us a Song.

Here is an Italian Song in two parts. Sir Tim. I never saw this Lady before:
pray who may she be, Neighbor?

To Clacket. Mrs. Clack. A Niece of mine, newly come out of Scotland, Sir.

Sir Tim. Nay, then she dances by nature. Gentlemen and Ladies, please you to
sit, here is a young Neighbor of mine will honor us with a Dance.

They all sit; Charl. and Fop. dance. So, so; very well, very well. Gentlemen
and ladies, I am for Liberty of Conscience, and Moderation. There Is a Banquet
waits the Ladies, and my Cellars are open to the men; but for my self, I must
retire: first waiting on your Lordship to show you your Apartment, then leave
you to cher entire; and tomorrow, my Lord, you and I will settle the Nation,
and resolve on what return we will make to the noble Polanders.


Exeunt all but Wild. Dress. and Fop. Sir Char. leading out L. Gall. Sir Anth.
Well said, Charles, thou leavest her not, till she is thy own, Boy. -- And
Philander was a jolly Swain, etc.

Exit singing. Wild. All things succeed above my wish, dear Frank;
Fortune is kind; and more, Galliard is so:
This night crowns all my Wishes.
Laboir, are all things ready for our purpose?

To his Footman. Lab. Dark Lanthorns, Pistols, Habits and Vizards, Sir.

Fop. I have provided Portmantles to carry off the Treasure.

Dress. I perceive you are resolved to make a through-stitcht Robbery on it.

Fop. Faith, if it lie in our way, Sir, we had as good venture a Caper under the
Triple Tree for one as well as the other.

Wild. We will consider on it. it is now just struck Eleven: within this hour is
the dear Assignation with Galliard.


Dress. What, whether our affairs be finished or not?

Wild. It Is but at next door; I shall return time enough for that trivial
business.

Dress. A trivial business of some six thousand pound a year?

Wild. Trivial to a woman, Frank! no more do you make as if you w^nt to bed. --
Labo^^ do you feign to be drunk, and lie on the Hall-table; and when I give the
sign, let me softly in.


Dress. Death, Sir, will you venture at such a time!

Wild. My life and future hope -- I am resolved,
Let Politicians plot, let Rogues go on
In the old beaten Path of Forty One,
Let City-Knaves delight in Mutiny,
The Rabble bow to old Presbytery;
Let petty States be to confusion hurled,
Give me but Woman, I Will despise the World.

ACT the Fourth.
SCENE the First. A Dressing Room.
Lady Galliard is discovered in an undress at her Table, Glass, and Toilette,
Closet attending: As soon as the Scene draws off, she rises from the Table as
disturbed and out of humor. L. Gall. COme, leave your everlasting
Chamber-Maids Chat, your dull Road of
Slandering by rote, and lay that Paint aside. Thou art fuller of false
News, than an unlicens'd Mercury.

Clos. I have good proof, Madam, of what I say.

L. Gall. Proof of a thing impossible! -- Away.

Clos. Is it a thing so impossible, Madam, that a man of Mr. Wilding's parts
and person should get a City-Heiress?
Such a bonne Mine, and such a pleasant Wit!

L. Gall. Hold thy fluent Tattle, thou have Tongue
Enough to talk an Oyster-woman deaf; I say it cannot be. --
What means the panting of my troubled Heart!
Oh my presaging fears! should what she says prove true,
How wretched and how lost a thing am I!
[Aside.
Clos. Your Honor may say your pleasure; but I hope I have not lived to these
years to be impertinent: -- No, Madam, I am none of those that run up and down
the Town a Story-hunting, and a Lye-catching, and --


L. Gall. Eternal rattle, peace! --
Mrs. Charlot Gettall go away with Wilding!
A man of Wilding's extravagant life
Get a Fortune in the City!
Thou might as well have told me, a Holder forth were married to a Nun.
There are not two such Contraries in Nature;
It Is flamm, it is foolery, it is most impossible.

Clos. I beg your Ladyships pardon, if my discourse offend you; but all the
world knows Mrs. Clacket to be a person --


L. Gall. Who is a most devout Bawd, a precise Procurer;
Saint in the Spirit, and Whore in the Flesh;
A Doer of the Devils work in Gods Name.
Is she your Informer? nay, then the Lye's undoubted. --
I say once more, adone with your idle Tittle-tattle, --
And to divert me, bid Betty sing the Song which Wilding
Made to his last Mistress: we may judge by that
What little Haunts and what low Game he follows.
This is not like the description of a rich Citizens Daughter and Heir, but
some common
Hackney of the Suburbs.

Clos. I have heard him often swear she was a Gentlewoman, and lived with her
Friends.

L. Gall. Like enough; there are many of these Gentlewomen who live with their
Friends, as rank Prostitutes, as errant Jilts, as those who make open
profession of the
Trade -- almost as mercenary -- But come, the Song.

[Enter Betty. SONG.
In Phillis all vile Iilts are met,
Foolish, uncertain, false, Coquette.
Love is her constant welcome Guest,
And still the newest pleases best.
Quickly she likes, then leaves as soon;
Her life on Woman's a Lampoon.
Yet for the Plague of Humane Race,
This Devil has an Angels Face;
Such Youth, such Sweetness in her look,
Who can be man, and not be took?
What former Love, what Wit, what Art,
Can save a poor inclining heart?
In vain, a thousand times an hour,
Reason rebels against her power.
In vain I rail, I curse her Charms;
One look my feeble Rage disarms.
There is Enchantment in her Eyes;
Who sees 'em, can no more be wise.
Enter Wilding, who runs to embrace L. Gall. Wild. Twelve was the luckie minute
when we met:
Most charming of your Sex, and wisest of all Widows,
My Life, my Soul, my Heaven to come, and here!
Now I have lived to purpose, since at last -- Oh, killing Joy! --
Come, let me sold you, press you in my arms,
And kiss you thanks for this dear happy night.

L. Gall. You may spare your thanks, Sir, for those that will deserve 'em; I
shall give ye no occasion for 'em.


Wild. Nay, no Scruples now, dearest of Dears, no more*
It Is most unseasonable --
I bring a heart full freight with eager hopes,
Oppressed with a vast load of longing Love;
Let me unlade me in that soft white Bosom,
That Storehouse of rich Joys and lasting Pleasures,
And lay me down as on a Bed of Lillies.

[She breaks from him. L. Gall. You're wondrous full of Love and Rapture, Sir;
but certainly you mistake the person you address 'em to.


Wild. Why, are you not my Lady Galliard, that very Lady Galliard, who if one
may take her word for it, loves Wilding? Am I not come hither by your own
appointment; and can I have any other business here at this time of night, but
Love, and Rapture, and --


L. Gall. Scandalous and vain! by my appointment, and for so lewd a purpose!
guard me, ye good Angels.

If after an Affront so gross as this,
I ever suffer you to see me more,
Then think me what your Carriage calls me*
An Impudent, an open Prostitute,
Lost to all sense of Virtue, or of Honor.

Wild. What can this mean?
[Aside. Oh, now I understand the Mystery;
[Looking on Closet. Her Woman's here, that troublesome piece of Train.
-- I must remove her. Hark ve, Mrs. Closet, I had forgot to tell you; As I
came up I heard a Kinsman of yours very earnest with the Servants below, and in
great haste to speak with you.


Clos. A Kinsman! that is very likely indeed, and at this time of night.

Wild. Yes, a very near Kinsman he said he was, your Fathers own Mothers Uncles
Sisters Son; what do you call him?


Clos. Aye, what do you call him indeed; I should be glad to hear his name. Alas,
Sir, I have no near Relation living that I know of, the more's my misfortune,
poor helpless Orphan that I am.


[Weeps. Wild. Nay, but Mrs. Closet, pray take me right,
This Countryman of yours, as I was saying --

L. Gall. Changed already from a Kinsman to a Countryman! A plain contrivance
to get my Woman out of the Room. Closet, as you value, my service, stir not
from hence.


Wild. This Countryman of yours, I say, being left Executor by your Fathers
last will and Testament, is come -- Dull Waiting Woman, I would be alone with
your Lady; know your Que, and retire.


Clos. How, Sir!

Wild. Learn, I say, to understand Reason when you hear it. Leave us a while;
Love is not a Game for three to play at.

[Gives her Money. Clos. I must own to all the world, you have convinced me; I
ask a thousand Pardons for my dullness. Well, I Will be gone, I Will run; you're a
most powerful person, the very Spirit of Persuasion. -- I Will steal out. -- You
have such a taking way with you -- But I forget my self. Well, your most
obedient Servant: Whenever you have occasion, Sir, be pleased to use me fr^ely.


Wild. Nay, dear Impertinent, no more Complements, you see I Am busy now;
prithee be gone, you see I Am busy.


Clos. I Am all Obedience to you, Sir --
Your most obedient --

L. Gall. Whither are you ^isking and gigiting now?

Clos. Madam, I am going down, and will return immediately, immediately.
Exit Clos.
Wild. So, she is gone; Heaven and broad Gold be praised for the deliverance:
And now, dear Widow, let us lose no more precious time; we have fooled away too
much already.


L. Gall. This to me?


Wild. To you, yes, to whom else should it be? unless being sensible you have
not discretion enough to manage your own affairs your self, you resolve, like
other Widows, with all you're worth to buy a Governor, commonly called a
Husband. I ^ook ye to be wiser; but if that be your design, I shall do my best
to serve you -- though to deal freely with you --


L. Gall. Trouble not your self, Sir, to make Excu^^s; I Am not so fond of the
offer to take you at your word. Marry you! a Rakes^^^e, who have not esteem
enough for the Sex to believe your own Mother honest -- without Money or
Credit, without Land either in present or prospect; and half a dozen hungry
Vices, like so many bawling Brats at your back, perpetually craving, and more
chargeable to keep than twice the number of Children. Besides, I think you are
provided for; are you not married to Mrs. Charlot Gettall?


Wild. Married to her? do I know her, you should rather ask. What Fool has
forged this unlikely Lie? But suppose 'twere true, could you be jealous of a
woman I marry? do you take me for such an Ass, to suspect I shall love my own
Wise? On the other side, I have a great charge of Vices, as you well observe,
and I must not be so barbarous to let them starve. Every body in this Age takes
care to provide for their Vices, though they send their Children a begging; I
should be worse than an In^idel to neglect them. No, I must marry some stiff
a^kward thing or other with an ugly face and a handsome Estate, that is certain:
but whoever is ordained to make my Fortune, it is you only that can make me
happy. -- Come, do it then.


L. Gall. I never will.

Wild. Unkindly said, you must.

L. Gall. Unreasonable man! because you see
I have unusual regards for you,
Pleasure to hear, and trouble to deny you;
A ^atal yielding in my nature toward you,
Love bends my Soul that way. --
A weakness I never felt for any other;
And would you be so base? and could you have the heart
To take the advantage on'^ to ruin me,
To make me infamous, despised, loathed, pointed at?

Wild. You reason false. --
According to the strictest rules of Honor,
Beauty should still be the Reward of Love,
Not the vile Merchandise of Fortune,
Or the cheap Drug of a Church-Ceremony.
She Is only infamous, who to her Bed,
For interest, takes some nauseous Olown she hates:
And though a Jointure or a Vow in public
^e her price, that makes her but the dearer whore.

L. Gall. I understand not these new Morals.

Wild. Have patience, I say it is clear.
All the desires of mutual Love are virtuous.
Can Heaven or Man be angry that you please
Your self and me, when it does wrong to none?
Why rave you then on things that never can be?
Besides, are we not alone, and private? who can know it?

L. Gall. Heaven will know it; and I -- that that is enough:
But when you're weary of me, first your Friend, then his, then all the world.

Wild. Think not that t^^e will ever come.

L. Gall. Oh, it must, it will!

Wild. Or if it should, could I be such a Villain --
Ah Cruel! if you loved me as yo^ say,
You would not thus distrust me.

L. Gall. You do me wrong; I love you more than ere my Tongue,
Or all the Actions of my Life can tell you -- so well --
Your very faults, how gross soere, to me
Have something pleasing in 'em. To me you're all
That Man can praise, or Woman can desire;
All Charm without, and all Desert within:
But yet my Virtue is more lovely still;
That is a price too high to pay for you:
The love of Angels may be bought too dear,
If we bestow on them what is kept for Heaven.

Wild. Hell and the Devil! I Will hear no more
Of this Religious stuff, this Godly nonsense.
Death, Madam, do you bring me into your Chamber to preach Virtue to me?

L. Gall. I bring you hither! how can you say it?
I suffered you indeed to come, but not
For the base end you fancied, but to take
A last leave of you. Let my heart break with Love,
I cannot be that wretched thing you would have me:
Believe I still shall have a kindness for you,
Always your Friend, your Mistress now no more.

Wild. Cozened, abused, she loves some other man!
Dull Blockhead not to find it out before!
[Aside. -- Well, Madam, may I at last believe
This is your fixed and final Resolution?
And does your Tongue now truly speak your Heart,
That has so long belied it?

L. Gall. It does.

Wild. I Am glad on it. Good night: And when I visit you again,
May you again thus fool me.

[Offers to go. L. Gall. Stay but a moment.

Wild. For what? to praise your Night-dress, or make court to your little Dog?
No, no, Madam, send for Mr. Flamfull and Mr. Flutterbuz, Mr. Lapp-fool and Mr.
Love-all; they will do it better, and are more at leisure.


L. Gall. Hear me a little: You know I both despise, and hate those civil
Coxcombs, as much as Lesteem and love you. But why will you be gone so soon?
and why are you so cruel to urge me thus to part either with your good Opinion
or your Kindness? I would fain keep 'em both.


[In a soft tone. Wild. Then keep your word, Madam.

L. Gall. My word! And have I promised then to be
A Whore? A Whore! Oh let me think of that!
A man's Convenience, his leisure hours, his Bed of Ease,
To loll and tumble on at idle times;
The Slave, the Hackney of his lawless Lust!
A loathed Extinguisher of filthy flames,
Made use of, and thrown by. -- Oh infamous!

Wild. Come, come, you love me not, I see it plain;
That makes your scruples: that, that is the reason
You start at words, and run away from shadows.
Already some pert Fop, some Ribon-fool,
Some dancing Coxcomb, has supplanted me
In that unsteady treacherous woman's heart of yours.

L. Gall. Believe it if you will. Yes, let me be false, unjust, ungrateful, any
thing but a -- Whore --


Wild. Oh, Sex on purpose formed to plague Mankind!
All that you are, and that you do, 's a lie.
False are your Faces, false your floating Hearts;
False are your Quarrels, false your Reconcilements:
Enemies without Reason, and Dear without Kindness.
Your Friendship's false, but much more false your Love;
Your damned deceitful Love is all over false.

L. Gall. False rather are the Joys you are so fond of.
Be wise, and cease, Sir, to pursue 'em farther.

Wild. No, them I can never quit; but you most easily.
A woman changeable, and false as you.

L. Gall. Said you most easily? Oh, inhumane!
Your cruel words have waked a dismal thought;
I feel 'em cold and heavy at my heart,
And weakness steals upon my Soul apace;
I find I must be miserable. --
I would not be thought false.

[In a soft tone, coming near him. Wild. Nor would I think you so; give me not
cause.

L. Gall. What heart can bear distrust from what it loves?
Or who can always her own Wish deny?
[Aside. My Reason's weary of the unequal strise;
And Love and Nature will at last overcome.
-- Do you not then believe I love you?

[To him in a soft tone. Wild. How can I, while you still remain unkind?

L. Gall. How shall I speak my guilty thoughts? --
I have not power to part with you: conceal my shame I doubt I cannot, I fear I
would not any more deny you.


Wild. Oh, heavenly sound! Oh, charming Creature! speak that word again, again,
again! for ever let me hear it.


L. Gall. But did you not indeed? and will you never, never love Mrs. Charlot,
never?


Wild. Never, never.

L. Gall. Turn your face away, and give me leave
To hide my rising Blushes: I cannot look on you,
As this last Speech is speaking she sinks into his Arms by degrees. But you
must undo me if you will. --
Since I no other way my truth can prove,
-- You shall see I love.
Pity my Weakness, and admire my Love.

Wild. All Heaven is mine, I have it in my arms:
Nor can ill Fortune reach me any more.
Fate, I de^ie thee, and dull World, adieu.
In Loves kind Fever let me ever ly,
Drunk with Desire, and raving mad with Joy.

Exeunt into the Bedchamber, Wild. leading her with his arms about her. Enter
Sir Charles Meriwill and Sir Anthony, Sir Char. drunk. SCENE changes. Sir Anth.
A Dog, a Rogue, to leave her!

Sir Char. Why look ye, Uncle, what would you have a man do?
I brought her to her Coach. --

Sir Anth. To her Coach! to her Coach! Did not I put her into your hand,
followed you out, winkt, smiled, and nodded, cried, 'buy Charles, 'buy Rogue;
which was as much as to say, Go home with her, Charles, home to her Chamber,
Charles; nay, as much as to say, Home to her Bed, Charles* nay, as much as to
say -- Hum, hum, a Rogue, a Dog, and yet to be modest too! That I should bring
thee up with no more fear of God before my Eyes!


Sir Char. Nay, dear Uncle, don't break my heart now. Why I did proffer, and
press, and swear, and ly'd, and -- but a Pox on her, she has the damndest
wheedling way with her, as, Dear Charles, nay pri^hee, he, it is late, to
morrow, my Honor, which if you loved, you would preserve; and such obliging
Reasons.


Sir Anth. Reasons! Reason! a Lover, and talk of Reason! You lie, Sirrah, you
lie. Leave a woman for Reason, when you were so finely drunk too, a Rascal!


Sir Char. Why look ye, do you see, Uncle, I du^^t not trust my self alone with
her in this pickle, lest I should a fallen soul on her.


Sir Anth. Why there is it; it is that you should adone: I am mistaken if she be
not one of those Ladies that love to be ravished of a Kindness. Why, your
willing Rape is all the fashion, Charles.


Sir Char. But hark ye, Uncle.

Sir Anth. Why how now, Jack-sawce, what, capitulate?

Sir Char. Why do but hear me, Uncle: Lord you're so hasty! Why look ye, I am
a^ ready, do you see, as any man (...) these occasions.


Sir Anth. Are you so, Sir? and I Will make you willing, or try Toledo with you,
Sir. -- When, what, I shall have ye whining when you are sober again, traversing
your Chamber with Arms across, railing on Love and Women, and at last defeated,
turn whipping Tom, to revenge your self on the whole Sex.


Sir Char. My dear Uncle, come kiss me and be friends, I will be ruled

[Kisses him. Sir Anth. -- A most admirable good-natured Boy this! [aside.]
Well then, dear Charles, know, I have brought thee now hither to the Widows
house with a resolution to have thee order matters so, as before thou quits
her, she shall be thy own, Boy.


Sir Char. Gad, Uncle, you are a Che^^bin! Introduce me, do you see, and if I do
not so woo the Widow, and so do the Widow, that ^re morning she shall be
content to take me for better for worse. -- Renounce me! Egad, I Will make her
know the Lord God from Tom Bell, before I have done with her. Nay, ba^kt by my
noble Uncle, I Will venture on her, had she all Cupid's Arrows, Venus's Beauty,
and Ma^alina's Fire, do you see.


Sir Anth. A sweet Boy, a very sweet Boy! Hum, thou art damnable handsome to
night, Charles. -- Aye, thou will do it; I see a kind of a resistless Lewdness
about thee, a most triumphant Impudence, loose and wanton.


[Stands looking on him. Enter Closet. Clos. Heavens, Gentlemen, what makes you
here at this time of night?

Sir Char. Where Is your Lady?

Clos. Softly, dear Sir.

Sir Char. Why is she asleep? Come, come, I Will wake her.

Offers to force in as to the Bedchamber. Clos. Hold, hold, Sir: No, no, she is
a little busy, Sir.

Sir Char. I Will have no business done to night, Sweetheart.

Clos. Hold, hold, I beseech you, Sir, her Mother's with her: For Heavens sake,
Sir, be gone.

Sir Char. I Will not budge.

Sir Anth. No not a foot.

Clos. The City you know, Sir, is so (...) --

Sir Char. Damn the City.

Sir Anth. All the W^igs, Charles, all the Whigs.

Sir Char. In short, I am resolved, do you see, to go to the Wido^s Chamber.

Sir Anth. Hark ye, Mrs. Closet, I thought I had entirely engaged you this
evening.

Clos. I am perfectly yours, Sir; but now it happens so, her Mother being there
--
Yet if you would withdraw for half an hour, into my Chamber, till she were
gone --

Sir Anth. This is Reason, Charles. Here, here is two Pieces to buy thee a
Gorget.

Gives ^er Money. Sir Char. And here is my two, because (...) i^^^strious.

Giv^^ her Money^ and goes out with her. Enter Lady Galliard in rage, held by
Wilding. L. Gall. What have I done? Ah, whither shall I fly?

[Weeps. Wild. Why all these Tears? Ah, why this cruel Passion?

L. Gall. Undone, undone! Unhand me, false, sorsworn;
Be gone, and let me rage till I am dead.
What should I do with guilty Life about me?

Wild. Why, where is the harm of what we two have done?

L. Gall. Ah, leave me --
Leave me alone to sigh to flying Winds,
That the infection may be born aloft,
And reach no humane Ear.

Wild. Cease, lovely Charmer, cease to wound me more.

L. Gall. Shall I survive this shame! No, if I do,
Eternal Blushes dwell upon my Cheeks,
To tell the World my Crime.
-- Mischief and Hell, what Devil did possess me?

Wild. It was no Devil, but a Deity;
A little gay-wing'd God, harmless and innocent,
Young as Desire, wanton as Summer-breezes,
Soft as thy Smiles, resistless as thy Eyes.

L. Gall. Ah, what malicious God,
Sworn Enemy to feeble Womankind,
Taught thee the Art of Conquest with thy Tongue?
Thy false deluding Eyes were surely made
Of Stars that rule our Sexes Destiny:
And all thy Charms were by Enchantment wrought,
That first undo the heedless Gazers on,
Then show their natural deformity.

Wild. Ah, my Galliard, am I grown ugly then?
Has my increase of Passion lessened yours?

[In a soft tone. L. Gall. Peace tempter, Peace, who artfully betrayest me,
And then upbraidest the wretchedness thou'st made.
-- Ah, Fool, eternal Fool! to know my danger,
Yet venture on so evident a ruin.

Wild. Say, -- what one Grace is faded!
Is not thy Face as fair, thy Eyes as Killing?
By Heaven, much more: This charming change of Looks,
Raises my flame, and makes me wish t'invoke
The harmless God again.

[Embraces her. L. Gall. By Heaven, not all thy Art
Shall draw me to the tempting sin again.

Wild. Oh, I must, or dye.

L. Gall. By all the Powers, by --

Wild. Oh, do not swear, lest Love should take it ill
That Honor should pretend to give him Laws,
And make an Oath more powerful than his Godhead.
-- Say that you will half a long hour hence --

L. Gall. Hah?

Wild. Or say a tedious hour.

L. Gall. Death, never --

Wild. Or if you must -- promise me then to morrow.

L. Gall. No, hear my Vows.

Wild. Hold, see me die; if you resolve 'em fatal to my love, by Heaven I Will
do it.

Lays his hand on his Sword. L. Gall. Ah, what --

Wild. Revoke that fatal Never then.

L. Gall. I dare not.

Wild. Oh, say you will.

L. Gall. Alas, I dare not utter it.

Wild. Let Us in, and thou shall whisper it into my Bosom;
Or sighing, look it to me with thy Eyes.

L. Gall. Ah, Wilding --

[Sighs. Wild. It touched my Soul! Repeat that sigh again.

L. Gall. Ah, I confess I am but feeble woman.

[Leans on him. Sir Char. Good Mistress keep-door, stand by: for I must enter.

[Sir Char. without. L. Gall. Hah, young Meriwill's voice!

Clos. Pray, Sir Charles, let me go and give my Lady notice.
She enters and goes to Wild. -- For Heavens sake, Sir, withdraw, or my Lady's
Honor's lost.

Wild. What will you have me do?

[ To Galliard. L. Gall. Be gone, or you will ruin me for ever.

[In disorder. Wild. Nay, then I will obey.

L. Gall. Here, down the back-stairs. --
As you have Honor, go and cherish mine.
[Pulling him. -- He Is gone; and now methinks the shivering fit of Honor is
returned.

Enter Sir Charles, rudely pushing Closet aside, with Sir Anthony. Sir Char.
Denied an entrance! nay, then there is a Rival in the case, or so; and
I Am resolved to discover the Hellish Plot, do you see.

Just as he enters drunk at one door, Wild. returns at the other. L. Gall. Ha,
Wilding returned! shield me, ye Shades of Night.

Puts out the Candles, and goes to Wild. Wild. The back-stairs-door is locked.

L. Gall. Oh, I am lost! curse on this fatal night!
Art thou resolved on my undoing every way?

Clos. Nay, now we are by dark, let me alone to guide you, sir.

[To Wild. Sir Char. What, what, all in darkness? Do you make Love like Cats,
by Starlight?

[Reeling about. L. Gall. Ah, he knows he is here! -- Oh, what a pain is Guilt!
[Aside.
Wild. I would not be surpised.

As Closet takes him to lead him out, he takes out his Sword, and by dark,
pushes by Sir Charles, and almost overthrows Sir Anthony; at which they both
draw, whilst he goes out with Closet. Sir Char. Hah, Gad 'twas a Spark! --
What, vanished! hah --

Sir Anth. Nay, nay, Sir, I am for ye.

Sir Char. Are you so, Sir? and I am for the Widow, Sir, and --
Just as they are passing at each other, Closet enters with a Candle. -- Hah,
why what have we here, -- my none flesh and blood?

[Embracing his Uncle. Sir Anth. Cry mercy, Sir! Pray how fell we out?

Sir Char. Ou^, Sir! Pri^^^e where is my Rival? where is the Spark, the -- Gad, I
took thee for an errant Rival: Where, where is he?


[Searching about. L. Gall. Whom seek ye, Sir, a man, and in my Lodgings?

[Angrily. Clos. A man! merciful, what will this scandalous lying World come
to? Here Is no man.


Sir Char. Away, I say, thou damned Domestic Intelligence, that come out
every half hour with some fresh Sham. -- No man! -- What, 'twas an appointment
only, hum, -- which I shall now make bold to unappoint, render null, void, and
of none effect. And if I find him here [searches about] I shall very civilly
and accidentally, as it were, being in perfect friendship with him -- pray mark
that -- run him through the Lungs.


L. Gall. Oh, what a Coward's guilt! what mean you, Sir?

Sir Char. Mean! why I am obstinately bent to ravish thee, thou hypocritical
Widow, make thee mine by force, that so I may have no obligation to thee, and
consequently use thee scurvily with a good Conscience.


Sir Anth. A most delicate Boy! I Will warrant him as lewd as the best of 'em,
God grant him life and Health.

[Aside.
L. Gall. It Is late, and I entreat your absence, Sir: These are my hours of
prayer, which this unseasonable Visit has disturbed.


Sir Char. Prayer! no more of that, Sweetheart: for let me tell you, your
Prayers are heard. A Widow of your Youth and Complexion can be praying for
nothing so late, but a good Husband; and see, Heaven has sent him just in the
crit -- critical minute, to supply your occasions.


Sir Anth. A Wag, an arch Wag; he will learn to make Lampoons presently. I Will not
give sixpence from him, though to the Poor of the Parish.


Sir Char. Come, Widow, let us to bed.

[Pulls her, she is angry. L. Gall. Hold, Sir, you drive the Jest too far;
And I am in no humor now for mirth.

Sir Char. Jest! Gad ye lie, I was never in more earnest in all my life.

Sir Anth. He Is in a heavenly humor, thanks to good Wine, good Counsel, and
good Company.


[Getting nearer the door still. L. Gall. What mean you, Sir? what can my Woman
think to see me treated thus?


Sir Char. Well thought on! Nay, we'll do things decently, do you see --
Therefore, thou sometimes necessary Utensil, withdraw.

[Gives her to Sir Anth. Sir Anth. Aye, aye, let me alone to reach her her duty.

[Pushes her out, and goes out. L. Gall. Stay, Closet, I command ye.
-- What have you seen in me should move you to this rudeness?

[To Sir Char. Sir Char. No ^row^ing; for by this dear night, it is charity,
care of your Reputation, Widow: and therefore I am resolved nobody shall lie
with you but my self. You have dangerous (...) buzzing about your Hive, Widow
-- mark that -- [She flings from him.] Nay, no parting but upon terms, which in
short, do you see, are these: Down on your knees, and swear me heartily as G^d
shall judge your Soul, d^ye see, to marry me to morrow.


L. Gall. To morrow! Oh, I have urgent bu^iness then.

Sir Char. So have I. Nay Gad, an you be for the nearest way to wood, the sober
discreet way of loving, I am for you, look ye.


[He begins to undress. L. Gall. Hold, Sir, what mean you?

Sir Char. Only to go to bed, that is all.

[Still undressing. L. Gall. Hold, hold, or I Will call out.

Sir Char. Aye do, call up a Jury of your Female Neighbors; they will be for me,
do you see, bring in the Bill Ignoramus, though I am no very true blue Protestant
neither: Therefore dispatch, or --


L. Gall. Hold, are you mad? I cannot promise you to night.

Sir Char. Well, well, I Will be content with performance then to night, and
trust you for your promise till to morrow.


Sir Anth. [peeping.] Ah, Rogue! By George, he out-does my expectations of him.


L. Gall. What Imposition's this! I Will call for help.

Sir Char. You need not, you will do my business better alone.

[Pulls her. L. Gall. What shall I do! how shall I send him hence!
[Aside.
Sir Anth. He shall never drink small Beer more, that is po^itive: I Will burn
all is Books too, they have helped to spoil him; and sick or well, found or
unsound, Drinking shall be his Diet, and Whoring his Study.


[Aside. Peeping unseen. Sir Char. Come, come, no pausing; your promise, or
I Will to bed.


Offers to pull off his Breeches, having pulled off almost all the rest of his
Clothes. L. Gall. What shall I do, here is no Witness near! And to be rid of
him, I Will promise him: he will have forgot it in his sober Passion.

[aside. He fumbling to undo his Bree^ches. Hold, I do swear I will --


Sir Char. What?


L. Gall. Marry you.


Sir Char. When?


L. Gall. Nay, that is too much. -- Hold, hold, I will to morrow.
-- Now you are satisfied, you will withdraw?

Enter Sir Anth. and Closet. Sir Anth. Charles, Joy Charles, give ye Joy:
here is two substantial Witnesses.


Clos. I deny it, Sir; I heard no such thing.


Sir Anth. What, what, Mrs. Closet, a Waiting Woman of Honor, and ^^inch from
her Evidence! Gad, I Will damn thy Soul, if thou dare swear what thou say.


L. Gall. How, upon the catch, Sir! am I betrayed?
Base and unkind, is this your humble Love!
Is all your whining come to this, false man! By Heaven, I Will be revenged.

She goes out in rage, with Closet. Sir Char. Nay, Gad you're caught, struggle
and ^lounder as you please, Sweetheart, you will but entangle more; let me alone
to tickle your Gills, ^^aith.

[Looking after her. -- Uncle, get ye home about your business: I hope you will
give me the Goo^ morrow, as becomes me. -- I say no more -- A word to the Wise
--


Sir Anth. By George, you are a brave fellow; why I did not think it had been
in thee, man. Well, adieu: I Will give thee such a Good morrow, Charles -- the
Devil's in him! -- 'Buy, Charles -- a plaguie Rogue! -- 'Night, Boy -- a Divine
Youth!


Going and returning, as not able to leave him. Exit. Sir Char. Gad, I Will not
leave her now, till she is mine*
Then keep her so by constant consummation.
Let Man a God do his, I Will do my part,
In spite of all her ^ickleness and art;
There Is one sure way to fix a Widows heart.

ACT the Fifth.
SCENE the First. Sir Timothy's House.
Enter Dresswell, Fopington, and five or six more disguised with Vizards, and
dark Lanthorns. Fop. NOt yet! a Plague of this damned Widow: the Devil owed him
an unlucky Cast, and has thrown it him to night.

Enter Wild. in Rapture and Joy. -- Hah, dear Tom, art thou come?


Wild. I saw how at her length she lay!
I saw her rising Bosom bare!

Fop. A Pox of her rising Bosom: My Dear, let us dress and about our business.

Wild. Her loose thin Robes, through which appear
A Shape designed for Love and Play!

Dress. 'Sheart, Sir, is this a time for Rapture? it is almost day.

Wild. Ah, Frank, such a dear night!

Dress. A Pox of nights, Sir, think of this and the day to come* which I
perceive you were too well employed to remember.


Wild. The day to come!
Death, who could be so dull in such dear Joys,
To think of time to come, or ought beyond 'em!
And had I not been interrupted by Charles Meriwill, who getting drunk, had
courage enough to venture on an untimely Visit* I Would had no more power of
returning, than committing Treason: But that conjugal Lover, who will needs be
my Cuckold, made me then give him way, that he might give it me another time,
and so unseen I got off. But come -- my disguise.


[Dresses. Dress. All Is still and hush, as if Nature meant to favor our
design.


(...) It Is well: And hark ye, my Friends, I Will proscribe you no bounds, or
(...) for I have considered if we modestly take nothing but the Writings,
'twill be easy to suspect the Thief.


Fop. Right; and since it is for the securing our Necks, it is lawful prise. --
Sirrah, leave the Por^mantua here.


Exeunt as into the house. After a small time, Enter Jervice undrest, crying
out, pursued by some of the Thieves. Ier. Murder, Murder! Thieves, Murder!


Enter Wilding with his Sword drawn. Wild. A Plague upon his Throat; set a Gag
in's mouth and bind him, though he be my Uncle's chief Pimp. -- So --


[They bind and gag him. Enter Dresswell. Dress. Well, we have bound all within
hearing in their Beds, ere they could alarm their Fellows by crying out.


Wild. It Is well: come, follow me, like a kind Midnight-Ghost, I will conduct
ye to the rich buried heaps -- this door leads to my Uncles Apartment; I know
each secred nook contious of Treasure.


[All go in, leaving Jervice bound on the Stage. Enter Sensure running half
undrest as from Sir Timothy's Chamber, with his Velvetcoat on her shoulders.
Sen. Help, help! Murder! Murder!


[ Dress. Laboir, and others pursue her. Dress. What have we here, a Female
bolted from Mr. Aldermans Bed?


Holding his Lanthorn to her face. Sen. Ah mercy, Sir, alas, I am a Virgin.


Dress. A Virgin! Gad and that may be, for any great miracles the old Gentleman
can do.


Sen. Do! alas, Sir, I am none of the wicked.


Dress. That Is well. -- The sanctified Jilt professes Innocence, yet has the
Badge of her Occupation about her neck.


[Pulls off the Coat. Sen. Ah misfortune, I have mistook his Worships Coat for
my Gown.


A little Book drops out of her Bosom. Dress. What have we here? A Sermon
preached by Richard Baxter, Divine. Gad a mercy, Sweetheart, thou art a hopeful
Member of the true Protestant Cause.


Sen. Alack, how the Saints may be scandalized! I went but to tuck his Worship
in.


Dress. And comment upon the Text a little, which I suppose may be increase and
multiply. -- Here, gag and bind her.

[Exit Dress.
Sen. Hold, hold, I am with Child!


Lab. Then you will go near to miscarry of a Babe of Grace.


Enter Wild. Fop. and others, leading in Sir Timothy in his Nightgown and
Night-caps. Sir Tim. Gentlemen, why Gentlemen, I beseech you use a Conscience
in what you do, and have a feeling of what you go about. -- Pity my Age.


Wild. Damned beggarly Conscience, and needless Pity --


Sir Tim. Oh fearful! -- But, Gentlemen, what is it you design? is it a genera^
Massacar, pray, or am I the only person aimed at as a Sacrifice for the
Nation? know, and all the World knows, how many Plots have been laid against my
sel^ both by men, women, and children, the Diabolical Emissaries of the Pope.


Wild. How, Sirrah!


[Fiercely, he starts. Sir Tim. Nay, Gentlemen, not but I love and honor his
Holiness with all my Soul; and if his Grace did but know what I have done for
him, do you see --


Fop. You done for the Pope, Sirrah! why what have you done for the Pope?


Sir Tim. Why, Sir, an't like ye, I have done you great service, very great
service, for I have been, do you see, in a small Trial I had, the cause and
occasion of invalidating the Evidence to that degree, that I suppose no Jury in
Christendom will ever have the impudence to believe 'em hereafter, should they
swear against his Holiness himself, and all the Conclave of Cardinals.


Wild. And yet you plot on still, cabal, treat, and keep open debauch, for all
the Renegado-Tories and old Commonwealths-men to carry on the good Cause.


Sir Tim. Alas, what signifies that? You know, Gentlemen, that I have such a
strange and natural agility in turning, -- I shall whip about yet, and leave
'em all in the lurch.


Wild. It Is very likely; but at this time we shall not take your word for that.


Sir Tim. Bloody minded men, are you resolved to assassinate me then?


Wild. You trifle, Sir, and know our business better, than to think we come to
take your Life, which would not advantage a Dog, much less any Party or Person,
-- Come, come, your Keys, your Keys.


Fop. Aye, aye, discover, discover your Money, Sir, your ready --


Sir Tim. Money, Sir! good lack, is that all?

[Smiling on 'em. Why what a Beast was I, not knowing of your coming, to put
out all my Money last week to Alderman Draw-tooth! Alack, alack, what shift
shall I make now to accommodate you? -- But if you please to come again to
morrow --


Fop. A shamming Rogue; the right Sneer and Grin of a dissembling Whig. Come,
come, deliver, Sir; we are for no Rhetoric, but ready Money.


Aloud, and threatening. Sir Tim. Hold, I beseech you, Gentlemen, not so loud:
for there is a Lord, a most considerable person and a stranger, honors my
house to night; I would not for the world his Lordship should be disturbed.


Wild. Take no care for him, he is fast bound, and all his Retinue.


Sir Tim. How, bound! my Lord bound, and all his People! Undone, undone,
disgraced! What will the Polanders say, that I should expose their Ambassador
to this disrespect and affront?


Wild. Bind him, and take away his Keys.


They bind him hand and foot, and take his Keys out of his bosom. Exeunt all.
Sir Tim. Aye, aye, what you please, Gentlemen, since my Lord's bound. -- Oh
what Recompense can I make for so unhospitable usage? I am a most unfortunate
Magistrate! -- Hah, who is there, Iervice? Alas, art thou here too? What, can
not speak? But it is no matter and I were dumb too: for what Speech or Harangue
will serve to beg my pardon of my Lord? -- And then my Heiress, Iervice, aye,
my rich Heiress, why she will be ravished, oh Heavens, ravished! The young Rogues
will have no mercy, Iervice; nay, perhaps as thou say, they will carry her
away. -- Oh that thought! Gad I Would rather the City-Charter were lost. [Enter
some with bags of Money. -- Why Gentlemen, rob like Christians, Gentlemen.


(...) (...), do you mutter, Dog?


(...). Not in the least, Sir, not in the least; only a Conscience, Sir, in
all things does well. -- Barbarous Rogues! [They go out all again.] Here Is you
Arbitrary Power, Iervice; here is the rule of the Sword now for you: These are
your Tory Rogues, your Tantivie Roysters; but we shall cry quits with you,
Rascals, erelong: and if we do come to our old Trade of Plunder and
Sequestration, we will so handle ye -- (...) neither Prince, Peer, nor Prelate.
Oh, I long to have a ^^ice at your fat Churchmen, your Crape-Gown-orums.


Enter Wild. and the rest, with more Bags. Wild. A Prize, a Prize, my Lads, in
ready Guinies! Contribution, my Beloved.


Dress. Nay then it is lawful Prize, in spite of Ignoramus and all his Tribe.
-- What have thou there?


[To Fop. who enters with a bag full of Papers. Fop. A whole Bag of Knavery,
damned Sedition, Libels, Treason, Successions, Rights and Privileges, with a
new-fashion'd Oath of Abjuration, called the Association. -- Ah Rogue, what
will you say when these shall be made public?


Sir Tim. Say, Sir? why I Will deny it, Sir: for what Jury will believe so wise a
Magistrate as I, could communicate such Secrets to such as you? I Will say you
forged 'em, and put 'em in, -- or print ev^ry one of 'em, and own 'em, as long
as they were writ and published in London, Sir.) Come, come, the World is not so
bad yet, but a man may speak Treason within the Walls of London, thanks be to
God, and honest conscientious Jurymen. And as for the Money, Gentlemen, take
notice you rob the Party.


Wild. Come, come, carry off the Booty, and prithee remove that Rubbish of the
Nation out of the way. -- Your Servant, Sir. -- So, away with it to Dresswell's
Lodgings, his Coach is at the door ready to receive it.


They carry off Sir Timothy, and others take up the Bags, and go out with 'em.
Dress. Well, you are sure you have all you came for?


Wild. All Is safe, my Lads, the Writings all. --


Fop. Come, let us away then.


Wild. Away? what meanst thou? is there not a Lord to be found bound in his
bed, and all his People? Come, come, dispatch, and each man bind his fellow.


Fop. We had better follow the Baggage, Captain.


Wild. No, we have not done so ill, but we dare show our faces. Come, come, to
binding.


Fop. And who shall bind the last man?


Wild. Honest Laboir, do you hear, Sirrah? you got drunk and lay in your Clothes
under the Hall-table; do you conceive me? Look to it, ye Rascal, and carry things
discreetly, or you will all be hanged, that is certain.


[Exit Wild. and Dress. Fop. So; now will I in the morning to Charlot, and give
her such a character of her Lover, as if she have resentment, makes her mine.

[Exit Fop.
Sir Tim. [calls within.] Ho, Ienkin, Roger, Simon! where are these Rogues?
None left alive to come to my assistance? So ho, ho, ho! Rascals, Sluggards,
Drones! So ho, ho, ho!


Lab. So, now is my Que -- and stay, I am not yet sober.


Puts himself into a drunken posture. Sir Tim. Dogs, Rogues, none hear me?
Fire, fire, fire!


Lab. Water, water, I say: for I am damnable dry.


Sir Tim. Ha, who is there?


Lab. What doleful voice is that?


Sir Tim. What art thou, friend or foe?


[In a doleful tone. Lab. Very direful -- why what the Devil art thou?


Sir Tim. If you are a friend, approach, approach the wretched.


Lab. Wretched! What art thou, Ghost, Hobgobling, or walking Spirit?


Reeling in with a Lanthorn in's hand. Sir Tim. Oh, neither, neither, but mere
mortal Sir Timothy Treat-all, robbed and bound.


[Coming out led by Lab. Lab. How, our generous Host?


Sir Tim. How, one of my Lords Servants! Alas, alas, how came thou to escape?


Lab. Ene by Miracle, Sir, by being drunk and falling asleep under the
Hall-table with your Worships Dog Tory, till just now a Dream of Small-beer
wakt me; and crawling from my Kennel to secure the black Jack, I stumb'ed upon
this Lanthorn, which I took for one, till I found a Candle in it, which helps me
to serve your Worship.


[Goes to unbind his hands. Sir Tim. Hold, hold, I say; for I scorn to be so
uncivil to be unbound before his Lordship: therefore run, Friend, to his
Honors Chamber, for he, alas, is confined too.


Lab. What, and leave his worthy Friend in distress? by no means, Sir.


Sir Tim. Well then, come, let us to my Lord, whom if I be not ashamed to look
in the face, I am an errant Sarazan.


[Exit Sir Tim. and Lab. SCENE changes to Wilding's Chamber. He discovered
sitting in a Chair bound his Vallet bound by him; to them Sir Timothy and
Laboir. Wild. Peace, Sirrah, for sure I hear some coming. -- Villains, Rogues!
I care not for my self, but the good pious Alderman.


[Sir Tim. as listening. Sir Tim. Wonderful goodness, for me! alas, my Lord,
this sight will break my heart.


[Weeps. Wild. Sir Timothy safe! nay then I do forgive 'em.


Sir Tim. Alas, my Lord, I Have heard of your rigid fate.


Wild. It is my custom, Sir, to pray an hour or two in my Chamber, before I go
to bed; and having prayed that drowsy Slave asleep, the Thieves broke in upon
us unawares, I having laid my Sword aside.


Sir Tim. Oh, Heavens, at his Prayers! damned Ruffians, and would they not stay
till you had said your Prayers?


Wild. By no persuasion. -- Can you not guess who they should be, Sir?


Sir Tim. Oh, some damned Tory-rory Rogues, you may be sure, to rob a* man at
his Prayers! why what will this world come to?


Wild. Let us not talk, Sir, but pursue 'em.


[Offering to go. Sir Tim. Pursue 'em? alas, they are past our reach by this
time.


Wild. Oh, Sir, they are nearer than you imagine:

(...) each corner of your house, I Will warrant.


(...). Think ye so, my Lord? Aye, this comes of keeping Open House; which
makes so many shut up their doors at Dinnertime.


Enter Dresswell. Dress. Good morrow, Gentlemen! what was the Devil broke loose
to night?


Sir Tim. Only some of his Imps, Sir, saucy Varlets, insupportable Rascals. --
But well, my Lord, now I have seen your Lordship at liberty, I Will leave you to
your rest, and go see what harm this nights work has done.


Wild. I have a little business, Sir, and will take this time to dispatch it
in; my Servants shall to bed, though it is already day. -- I Will wait on you at
Dinner.


Sir Tim. Your time: my House and all I have is yours; and so I take my leave
of your Lordship.

[Exit Si^ Tim.
Wild. Now for my angry Maid, the young Charlot;
'Twill be a task to soften her to peace:
She is all new and gay, young as the Morn,
Blushing as tender Rose-buds on their stalks,
Pregnant with sweets, for the next Sun to ravish.
-- Come, thou shall along with me, I Will trust thy friendship.

Exeunt. SCENE changes to Diana's Chamber. She is discovered dressing, with
Betty. Dian. Methinks I Am up as early as if I had a mind to what I Am going to
do, marry this old rich Coxcomb.


Bet. And you do well to lose no time.


Dian. Ah, Betty, and could thy prudence prefer an old Husband, because rich,
before so young, so handsome, and so soft a Lover as Wilding?


Bet: I know not that, Madam; but I verily believe the way to keep your young
Lover, is to marry this old one: for what Youth and Beauty cannot purchase,
Money and Quality may.


Dian. Aye, but to be obliged to lie with such a Beast; aye, there is the Devil


Betty. Ah, when I find the difference of their Embraces,
The soft dear Arms of Wilding round my neck,
From those cold feeble ones of this old Dotard;
When I shall meet, instead of Tom's warm Kisses,
A hollow pair of thin blue withered Lips,
Trembling with Palsy, stinking with Disease,
By Age and Nature baracado'd up
With a kind Nose and Chin;
What fancy or what thought can make my hours supportable?

Bet. What? why six thousand pound a year, Mistri^s.
He Will quickly die and leave you rich, and then do what you please.

Dian. Die! no, he is too temperate. -- Sure these Whigs, Betty, believe there is
no Heaven, they take such care to live so long in this world. -- No, he will
outlive me.


[Sighs. Bet. In grace a God he may be hanged first, Mistress. -- Ha, one knoc
(...) lieve it is he.


[She goes to op(...) Dian. I cannot bring my heart to like this business;
One sight of my dear Tom would turn the scale.

Bet. Who Is there?


Enter Sir Tim. joyful; Dian. walks away. Sir Tim. It Is I, impatient I, who
with the Sun have welcomed in the day;
This happy day to be enrolled
In Rubrick-letters, and in Gold.
-- Hum, I am profoundly eloquent this morning.
[Aside. -- Fair Excellence, I approach --

[Going toward her. Dian. Like Physic in a morning next one's heart;
[Aside. Which though it is necessary, is most filthy loathsome.

[Going from him. Sir Tim. What, do you turn away, bright Sun of Beauty?
-- Hum, I Am much upon the Suns and Days this morning.
[Aside.
Dian. It will not down.

[Turning to him, looks on him, and turns away. Sir Tim. Alas, ye Gods, am I
dispis'd and scorned?
Did I for this, ponder upon the Question,
Whether I should be King or Alderman?

[Heroickly. Dian. If I must marry him, give him patience to endure the
Cuckolding, good Heaven.

[Aside.
Sir Tim. Heaven! did she name Heaven, Betty?


Bet. I think she did, Sir.


Sir Tim. I do not like that: What need has she to think of Heaven upon her
Wedding Day?


Dian. Marriage is a sort of hanging, Sir; and I was only making a short
Prayer before Execution.


Sir Tim. Oh, is that all? Come, come, we'll let that alone till we are abed,
that we have nothing else to do.


[Takes her hand. Dian. Not much, I dare swear.


Sir Tim. And let us, Fair one, haste; the Parson stays: besides, that heap of
Scandal may prevent us, -- I mean my Nephew.


Dian. A Pox upon him now for naming Wilding.


[Weeps. Sir Tim. How, weep at naming my ungracious Nephew? Nay, then I am
provokt -- Look on this Head, this wise and reverend Head; I Would have ye know, it
has been taken measure on to fit it to a Crown, do you see.


Dian. A Halter rather.

[Aside.
Sir Tim. Aye, and it fits it too: and am I slighted, I that shall receive
Billet Deux from Infantas? it is most uncivil and ^mpolitick.


Dian. I hope he is mad, and then I reign alone.
[Aside. Pardon me, Sir, that parting Tear I shed indeed at naming Wilding,
Of whom my foolish heart has now taken leave,
And from this moment is entirely yours.

Gives him her hand, they go out. SCENE changes to a Street. Enter Charlot, led
by Fopington, followed by Mrs. Clacket. Charl. Stay, my heart misgives me I
shall be undone. -- Ah, whither was I going?


[Pulls her hand from Fop. Fop. Do, stay till the news arrives that he is
married to her that had his company to night, my Lady Galliard.


Charl. Oh take heed, lest you sin doubly, Sir.


Fop. By Heaven, it is true, he past the night with her.


Charl. All night? what could they find to do?


Mrs. Clack. A very proper Question: I Will warrant you they were not idle, Madam.


Charl. Oh no; they looked and loved, and vowed and loved, and swore eternal
Friendship. -- Haste, haste, and lead me to the Church, the Altar; I Will put it
past my power to love him more.


Fop. Oh, how you charm me!


[Tak^s her by the ^and. Charl. Yet what art thou? a stranger to my heart.
Wherefore, ah why, on what occasion should I?

Mrs. Clack. Acquaintance, it is enough, I know him, Madam, and I hope my word
will be taken for a greater matter in the City: In troth you're beholding to the
Gentleman for marrying you; your Reputation's gone.


Charl. How, am I not honest then?


Mrs. Clack. Marry Heaven forbid! But who that knows you have been a single
hour in Wilding's hands, that would not swear you would lost your Maidenhead? And
back again I Am sure you dare not go unmarried; that would be a fine History to
be sung to your eternal fame in a Ballad.


Fop. Right; and you see Wilding has left you for the Widow, to whom perhaps
you will shortly hear he is married.


Charl. Oh, you trifle, Sir; lead on.


They going out, meet Sir Anthony with Music: they return. Sir Anth. Come,
come, Gentlemen, this is the House, and this the window belonging to my Ladies
Bedchamber: Come, come, let us have some neat, soft, brisk, languishing,
sprightly Air now.


Fop. Old Meriwill -- how shall I pass by him?


[Stand by. Sir Anth. So, here is Company too; it is very well -- Not have the
Boy? I Will warrant this does the business. -- Come, come, screw up your
Chitterling.

[They play. -- Hold, hold a little, -- Good morrow, my Lady Galliard,
-- Give your Ladyship joy.

Charl. What do I hear, my Lady Galliard joy'd?


Fop. How, married her already?


Charl. Oh, yes he has. Lovely and false, have thou deceived my Faith?


Mrs. Clack. Oh Heavens, Mr. ^opington, she faints -- ah me!


They hold her, Music plays. Enter Wilding and Dresswell disguised as before.
Wild. Ah, Music at Galliard's door!


Sir Anth. Good morrow, Sir Charles Meriwill; give your Worship and your fair
Lady joy.


Wild. Hah, Meriwill married the Widow?


Dress. No matter; prithee advance and mind thy own affairs.


Wild. Advance, and not inquire the meaning on it!
Bid me not eat, when Appetite invites me;
Not draw, when branded with the name of Coward;
Nor love, when Youth and Beauty meets my eyes. -- Hah! --

Sees Sir Charles come into the Belconey undrest. Sir Char. Good morrow, Uncle.
Gentlemen I thank ye: Here, drink the Kings Health, with my Royal Master's the
Duke.


[Gives 'em Money. Fid. Heaven bless your Honor, and your virtuous Bride.


Fop. Wilding! undone.


[Shelters Charlot that she may not see Wilding. Wild. Death and the Devil,
Meriwill above?


Sir Anth. Hah, the Boys Rival here! By George, here may be breathing this
morning. -- No matter, here is two to two; come, Gentlemen, you must in.


Thrusts the Music in, and goes in. Dress. Is It not what you expected? nay,
what you wished?


Wild. What then? it comes too suddenly upon me --
Ere my last kiss was cold upon her lips,
Before the pantings of her Breast were laid,
^ais'd by her Joys with me; Oh damned deluding Woman!

Dress. Be wise, and do not ruin where you love.

Wild. Nay, if thou come to reasoning, thou have lost me.

Breaks from him and runs in. Charl. I say 'twas Wilding's voice, and I will
follow it.

Fop. How, Madam, would you after him?

Charl. Nay, force me not: By Heaven I Will cry a Rape,
Unless you let me go. -- Not after him!
Yes to the infernal S^ades. -- Unhand me, Sir.

Fop. How, Madam, have you then designed my ruin?


Charl. Oh, trust me, Sir, I am a Maid of Honor.


[Runs in after Wild. Mrs. Clack. So; a Murrain of your Projects, we are all
undone now: For my part
I Will en'^ after her, and deny to have any hand in the business.

[Goes in. Fop. Damn all ill ^^ck, was ever man thus Fortune-bit, that he
should cross my hopes just in the nick? -- But shall I lose her thus? No Gad,
I Will after her; and come the worst, I have an Impudence shall outface a
Middlesex- Jury, and out-swear a Discoverer.


[Goes in. SCENE changes to a Chamber. Enter Lady Galliard pursued by Sir
Charles, and Footman. L. Gall. Sirrah, run to my Lord Mayors and require some
of his Officers to assist me instantly; and do you hear, Rascal, bar up my doors,
and let none of his mad Crew enter.


[To the Footman who is going. Sir Char. William, you may stay, William.


L. Gall. I say, obey me, Sirrah.

Sir Char. Sirrah, I say -- know your Lord and Master.

Will. I shall, Sir.

[Goes out. L. Gall. Was ever woman teased thus? pursue me not.

Sir Char. You are mistaken, I Am disobedient grown,
Since we became one Family; and when I Have used you thus a week or two, you
will grow weary of this peevish fooling.


L. Gall. Malicious thing, I wo'not, I am resolved I Will tire thee out merely in
spite to have the better of thee.


Sir Char. Gad I Am as resolved as you, and do your worst:
For I Am resolved never to quit thy house.

L. Gall. But Malice, there are Officers, Magistrates in the City, that will not
see me used thus, and will be here anon.


Sir Char. Magistrates! why they shall be welcome, if they be honest and loyal;
if not, they may be hanged in Heavens good time.


L. Gall. Are you resolved to be thus obstinate?
Fully resolved to make this way your Conquest?

Sir Char. Most certainly, I Will keep you honest to your word, my Dear, I Have
Witness --


L. Gall. You will?


Sir Char. You Will find it so.


L. Gall. Then know, if thou dare marry me, I will so plague thee, be so
revenged for all those tricks thou'st played me --

-- Do thou not dread the Vengeance Wives can take?

Sir Char. Not at all: I Will trust thy stock of Beauty with thy Wit.


L. Gall. Death, I will cuckold thee.


Sir Char. Why then I shall be free of the Reverend City.


L. Gall. Then I will game without cessation, till I Have undone thee.


Sir Char. Do, that all the Fops of empty heads and pockets, may know where to
be sure of a Cully; and may they rook ye till ye lose, and fret, and chafe, and
rail those youthful Eyes to sinking; watch your fair Face to pale and withered
leanness.


L. Gall. Then I will never let thee bed with me, but when I please.


Sir Char. For that, see who will petition first, and then I Will change for new
ones every night.


Enter William. Will. Madam, here is Mr. Wilding at the door, and will not be
denied (...)

L. Gall. Hah, Wilding! Oh my eternal shame! now thou have done thy (...)

Sir Char. Now for a struggle 'twixt your Love and Honor.
-- Yes, here is the Bar to all my Happiness,
You would be left to the wide World and Love,
To Infamy, to Scandal, and to Wilding;
But I have too much Honor in my Passion,
To let you loose to Ruin: Consider and be wise.

L. Gall. Oh, he has touched my heart too sensibly.
[Aside.
Sir Anth. [within.] As far as good Manners goes I Am yours;
But when you press indecently to Ladies Chambers, civil
Questions ought to be asked, I take it, Sir.

L. Gall. To find him here, will make him mad with Jealousy, and in the fit
he will utter all he knows; Oh, Guilt, what art thou?

[Aside.
Enter Sir Anth. Wild. and Dress. Dress. Prithee, dear Wilding, moderate thy
Passion.

Wild. By Heaven, I will; she shall not have the pleasure to see I am
concerned. -- Morrow, Widow; you are early up, you mean to thrive I see, you're
like a Mill that grinds with every Wind.


Sir Char. Hah, Wilding this, that past last night at Sir Timothy's for a man
of Quality? Oh, give him way, Wilding's my Friend, my Dear, and now I Am sure I
have the advantage of him in thy love. I can forgive a hasty word or two.


Wild. I thank thee, Charles -- What, you are married then?

L. Gall. I hope you have no exception to my choice.

[Scornfully. Wild. False woman, do thou glory in thy perfidy?
[To her aside angrily. -- Yes, Faith, I Have many exceptions to him --
[Aloud. Had you loved me, you would pitched upon a Blockhead,
Some spruce gay fool of Fortune, and no more,
Who would have taken so much care of his own ill-favored
Person, he should have had no time to have minded yours,
But left it to the care of some fond longing Lover.

L. Gall. Death, he will tell him all! [aside.] Oh, you are merry, Sir.

Wild. No, but thou art wondrous false,
False as the Love and Joys you feigned last night.

[In a soft tone aside to her. L. Gall. Oh, Sir, be tender of those treacherous
minutes.
[Softly to him. -- If this be all you have to say to me --

[Walking away, and speaking (...). Wild. Faith, Madam, you have used me
scurvily,
To marry and not give me notice.
[^loud. -- Curse on thee, did I only blow the Fire*
To warm another Lover?

[To her soft^ ^ aside. L. Gall. Perjured -- was it not by your advice I married?
-- Oh where was then your Love?

[Softly to him aside. Wild. So soon did I advise,
Did thou invite me to the Feast of Love,
To snatch away my Joys as soon as tasted;
(...) was then your Modesty and sense of Honor?

[Aside to her in a low to^e. (...) Aye, where indeed, when you so quickly
vanquished?
[Soft. (...) I find are come prepared to rail.

[Aloud. Wild. No, 'twas with thee to make my last effort against your scorn.
Shows her the Writings. And this I hoped, when all my Vows and Love,
When all my Languishments could naught prevail,
Had made ye mine for ever.

[Aloud. Enter Sir Anthony pulling in Sir Timothy and Diana. Sir Anth. 'Morrow,
Charles, 'Morrow to your Ladyship: Charles, bid Sir Timothy welcome; I met him
luckily at the door, and am resolved none of my Friends shall pass this joyful
day without giving thee Joy, Charles, and drinking my Ladies Health.


Wild. Hah, my Uncle here so early?

[Aside.
Sir Tim. What has your Ladyship served me so? How finely I had been mumpt now,
if I had not took heart a grace and showed your Ladyship trick for trick: for I
have been this morning about some such business of Life too, Gentlemen; I am
married to this fair Lady, the Daughter and Heiress of Sir Nicholas Gettall,
Knight and Alderman.


Wild. Hah, married to Diana!
How fickle is the Faith of common women?
[Aside.
Sir Tim. Hum, Who Is here, my Lord? What, I see you Lordship has found the way
already to the fair Ladies; but I hope your Lordship will do my Wedding-dinner
the honor to grace it with your presence.


Wild. I shall not fail, Sir.
A Pox upon him, he will discover all.
[Aside.
L. Gall. I must own, Sir Timothy, you have made the better choice.


Sir Tim. I could not hel^ my destiny; Marriages are made in Heaven, you know.


Ent^r Charlot weeping, and Clacket. Charl. Stand off, and let me loose as are
my Griefs, which can no more be bounded: Oh let me face the perjured, false,
forsworn!


L. Gall. Fair Creature, who is it that you seek with so much sorrow?


Charl. Thou, thou fatally fair Inchantress.


[Weeps. Wild. Charlot! Nay then I am discovered.


L. Gall. Alas, what would thou?


Charl. That which I cannot have, thy faithless Husband.
Be judge, ye everlasting Powers of Love,
Whether he more belongs to her or me.

Sir Anth. How, my Nephew claimed? Why how now, Sirrah, have you been dabling
here?


Sir Char. By Heaven, I know her not. -- Hark ye, Widow, this is some trick of
yours, and 'twas well laid: and Gad, she is so pretty, I could find in my heart
to take her at her word.


L. Gall. Vile man, this will not pass your falsehood off.
Sure it is some Art to make me jealous of him,
To find how much I value him.

Sir Char. Death, I Will have the forgery out;
-- Tell me, thou pretty weeping Hypocrite, who was it set thee on to lay (...)
me?


Charl. To you! Alas, who are you? for till this moment I never saw your (...)*


L. Gall. Mad as the Seas when all the Winds are raging.


Sir Tim. Aye, aye, Madam, stark mad! Poor Soul -- Neighbor, pray let her lie
in the dark, do you hear.


Sir Char. How came you, pretty one, to lose your Wits thus?


Charl. With loving, Sir, strongly, with too much loving.
-- Will you not let me see the lovely false one?
[To L. Gall. For I am told you have his heart in keeping.

L. Gall. Who is he? pray describe him.

Charl. A thing just like a Man, or rather Angel!
He speaks, and looks, and loves, like any God!
All fine and gay, all manly, and all sweet:
And when he swears he loves, you would swear too
That all his Oaths were true.

Sir Anth. Who is she? some one who knows her and is wiser, speak -- you,
Mistress.


[To Clacket. Mrs. Clack. Since I must speak, there comes the man of Mischief:
-- It Is you I mean, for all your learing, Sir.


[To Wild. Wild. So.


Sir Tim. What, my Lord!


Mrs. Clack. I never knew your Nephew was a Lord: Has his Honor made him
forget his Honesty?


[ Charl. runs and catches him in her Arms. Charl. I have thee, and I Will die
thus grasping thee:
Thou art my own, no Power shall take thee from me.

Wild. Never, thou truest of thy Sex, and dearest,
Thou soft, thou kind, thou constant Sufferer,
This moment end thy fears; for I am thine.

Charl. May I believe thou art not married then?

Wild. How can I, when I Am yours?
How could I, when I love thee more than Life?
-- Now, Madam, I Am revenged on all your scorn.
[To L. Gall. -- And, Uncle, all your cruelty.

Sir Tim. Why, what are you indeed my Nephew, Thomas?


Wild. I am Tom Wilding, Sir, that once bore some such Title, till you
discarded me, and left me to live upon my Wits.


Sir Tim. What, and are you no Polish Ambassador then incognito?


Wild. No, Sir, nor you no King Elect, but must even remain as you were ever,
Sir, a most seditious pestilent old Knave; one that deludes the Rabble with
your Politics, then leave 'em to be hanged, as they deserve, for silly
mutinous Rebels.


Sir Tim. I Will peach the Rogue, and then he will be hanged in course, because
he is a Tory. One comfort is, I have cozened him of his rich Heiress; for I am
married, Sir, to Mrs. Charlot.


Wild. Rather Diana, Sir; I wish you Joy: See here is Charlot! I was not such a
Fool to trust such Blessings with the Wicked.


(...) How Mrs. Die Ladyfi'd! This is an excellent way of disposing an old (...)*


(...) How, have I married a Strumpet then?


Dia^. You give your Nephews Mistress, Sir, too coarse a name: It Is true, I
loved him, only him, and was true to him.


Sir Tim. Undone, undone! I shall never make Guildhall-speech more; but he shall
hang for it, if there be ere a Witness to be had between this and Salamancha for
Money.


Wild. Do your worst, Sir; Witnesses are out of fashion now, Sir, thanks to
your Ignoramus Juries.


Sir Tim. Then I Am resolved to dis-inherit him.


Wild. See, Sir, that is past your skill too, thanks to my last nights
Ingenuity: they are [shews him the Writings] signed, sealed, and delivered in
the presence of, etc.


Sir Tim. Bear Witness, 'twas he that robbed me last night.


Sir Anth. We bear Witness, Sir, we know of no such matter we. I thank you for
that, Sir, would you make Witnesses of Gentlemen?


Sir Tim. No matter for that, I Will have him hanged, nay drawn and quartered.


Wild. What, for obeying your Commands, and living on my Wits?


Sir Anth. Nay, then it is a clear case you can neither hang him nor blame him.


Wild. I Will propose fairly now, if you will be generous and pardon all: I Will
render your Estate back during Life, and put the Writings in Sir Anthony
Meriwill's and Sir Charles^ his hands. --

I have a Fortune here that will maintain me,
Without so much as wishing for your death.

All. This is but Reason.


Sir Char. With this Proviso, that he makes not use on it to promote any
mischief to the King and Government.


All. Good and just.


[Sir Tim. pauses* Sir Tim. Hum, I Would as good quietly agree to it, as lose my
Credit by making a noise. -- Well, Tom, I pardon all, and will be Friends.


[Gives him his hand. Sir Char. See, my dear Creature, even this hard old man
is mollifi'd at last into good nature; yet you will still be cruel.


L. Gall. No, your unwearied Love at last has vanquished me. Here, be as happy
as a Wife can make ye -- One last look more, and then -- be gone fond Love.


Sighing and looking on Wilding, giving Sir Charles her hand. Sir Char. Come,
Sir, you must receive Diana too; she is a cheerful witty Girl, and handsome,
one that will be a Comfort to your Age, and bring no scandal home. Live
peaceably, and do not trouble your decrepid Age with business of State.

Let all things in their own due order move,
Let Caesar be the Kingdoms care and love:
Let the Hotheaded Mutineers petition,
And meddle in the Rights of Just Succession;
But may all honest hearts as one agree
To bless the King, and Royal Albanie.

THE END.
EPILOGUE, Written by a Person of Quality. SPOKEN by Mrs. BOTELER.
MY Part, I fear, will take with but a few,
A rich young Heiress to her first Love true!
It Is damned unnatural, and past enduring,
Against the fundamental Laws of Whoring.
Marrying's the Mask, which Modesty assures,
Helps to get new, and covers old Amors;
And Husband sounds so dull to a Town-Bride,
You nowadays condemn him ere he is tried;
Ere in his Office he is confirmed Possessor,
Like Trincaloes you choose him a Successor,
In the gay spring of Love, when free from doubts,
With early shoots his Velvet Forehead sprouts.
Like a poor Parson bound to hard Indentures,
You make him pay his First Fruits ere he enters.
But for short Carnivals of stolen good Cheer,
You're after forced to keep Lent all the Year;
Till brought at last to a starving Nuns condition,
You break into our Quarters for Provision:
Invade Fop-corner with your glaring Beauties,
And ^ice our Loyal Subjects from their Duties.
Pray, Ladies, ^ave that Province to our care;
A Fool is the Fee-simple of a Player,
In which we Women claim a double share.
(...) things the Men are Rulers made;
(...) Woodcocks is our proper Trade.
If by Stage-Fops they a poor Living get,
We can grow rich, thanks to our Mother Wit,
By the more natural Blockheads in the Pit.
Take then the Wits, and all their useless Prattles;
But as for Fools, they are our Goods and Chattels.
Return, Ingrates, to your first Haunt the Stage;
We taught your Youth, and helped your feeble Age.
What is it you see in Quality we want?
What can they give you which we cannot grant?
We have their Pride, their Frolicks, and their Paint.
We feel the same Youth dancing in our Blood;
Our dress as gay -- All underneath as good.
Most men have found us hitherto more true,
And, if we are not abused by some of you,
We^re full as fair -- perhaps as wholesome too.
But if at best our hopeful Sport and Trade is,
And nothing now will serve you but great Ladies;
May questioned Marriages your Fortune be,
And Lawyers drain your Pockets more than we:
May Judges puzzle a clear Case with Laws,
And Musquetoon at last decide the Cause.
FINIS.

