TYROCINIVM CHYMICVM: OR, Chemical Essays, Acquired from The Fountain of
Nature, AND Manual Experience.

By John Beguinus Almoner to the most Christian King of France.

LONDON: ^rinted for Thomas Passenger, at the three Bibles upon London brid^^
(...)

THE Author's Dedication,
I Dedicate, offer up, and bequeath, This Work, such as it is, as also my self,
and all that is called mine, To the only Wise GOD, Author of all Good: To whom
be all Praise, Virtue, and Power, ascribed, for ever and ever. AMEN.

Paracelsus in his Book of Tincture of Natural things, Chapter 1. says,
FIrst, you must Learn Digestions, Distillations, Sublimations, Reverberations,
Extractions, Solutions, Coagulations, Fermentations, and Fixations; and you
must also know what Instruments are required for use in this Work; as Glasses,
Cucurbits, Circulatory Vessels, Vessels of Hermes, Earthen Vessels, Balneums,
Wind Fornaces, Fornaces of Reverberation, and other such like: as also a
Marble, Mortars, Coals, etc. So may you at length proceed in the Work of
Alchimy, and Medicine.

But as long as you shall by Fantasy and Opinion adhere to feigned Books, you
will be apt for, and Predestined to none of these.

Epigramma Authoris ad Benevolum Lectorem.
Quisquis es, O Lector, nostro tu parce Labori,
Quae sunt dicta modo, dicta sucre prius:
Et quaecunque meo parvo sunt scripta Libello,
Ut mea, non measunt, sic tua, non tua sunt.
TO THE READER.
IT becomes every man, about to transcribe, or render the Works of another in
his own native Tongue, neither to add any thing of his own, nor to omit of the
Author's; least in so doing, he should maim the same by abstracting, or render
them monstrous by impertinent additions. Wherefore, avoiding these extremes, I
offer this Little work, (not gorgeously adorned with paintings of Rhetoric,
but plainly clothed in an English Habit) to the Searchers into the wondrous
Mysterys of Nature, by them to be viewed, and reviewed, to be approved, or
condemned (if any thing herein may justly be censured) as they shall think fit.
Yet, I would not have any Man to persuade himself, that I present This
Tyrocinium as a Guide to the most Experienced, but rather as a necessary
auxiliary to Pupils, and such as are desirous to enter upon the Praxis of this
Laudable Science, but hitherto, perhaps for want of Expert knowledge of the
Latin Tongue, or rather not finding experienced Masters, could not understand
how, or where to begin. For such only, this Book was written by the Author, and
to the same end it is now translated. Therefore if you find benefit by the
perusal hereof, extol not the Author, nor commend the Translator, but praise
God, who is the Giver of all good Gifts, and by whom all Sciences were
communicated to the Children of Adam.

The most Material ERRATA's are thus Corrected.
PAge 2. line 27. for sow, read snow. l. 35. for Philosophicks, r.
Philosophic. p. 7. l. 2. for Antimony, r. Anatomy. l. 16. for to boiled, r. to
be boiled. p. 8. l. 12. for forced r. feared. p. 30. l. 20. for Cinnen Cloth,
r. Linen Cloth. p. 47. l. 18. for enduring, r. inducing. p. 57. l. 22. for by
gradually, r. gradually. p. 70. l. 23. for Tincture, r. the Tincture. p. 72. l.
12. for upon Oil, r. upon the Oil. p. 75. l. 16. for Oriental Saffron ss. r.
Oriental Saffron, j. ss. l. 18. for Coltsfoot, r. Asarabacca. p. 88. l. 5. for
Crocus Martis Stellate, r. Regulus Martis Stellate. p. 95. l. 18. for Sols, r.
Sol. p. 109. l. 22. for Calcine in a Crucible, r. Calcine it in, etc. p. 129.
l. 19. for And much Coct, r. And as much Coct.

TYROCINIVM CHYMICVM, In three Books.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. Touching the definition of Alchymy.
Chemistry is the Art of dissolving natural mixed bodies, What Alchymy is.
and of coagulating the same when dissolved, and of reducing them into
salubrious, safe, and grateful Medicaments.

Chymia is a Greek word; The Etymology of the word Chymiae.
the Latins render it an Art making Liquor, or dissolving things solid into
Liquor: it is likewise called (...), because Chemistry teaches to dissolve
(that which is most difficult) and to coagulate.

If any one call it Alchimy, He, in the Arabian manner declares the excellency
thereof.

If the Spagyrick Art, he shows its principal Offices, viz. (...) and (...);
that is to say, Conjunction and Separation.

If the Hermetick Art, he demonstrates its Author, and Antiquity.

If the Distillatory Science, he shows its Authority and Function.

But since all Disciplines are either Theorical, or Practical; Chemistry not
acquiescing in the knowledge and contemplation of mixed bodies, as a natural
Science; but having regard (...), or (...) (that is) to the work or business,
viz. to Magisterys, Tinctures, Quintessences, and such like; unto it, is
worthily granted a place among practical Arts and Disciplines: although happily
some may be found, who, being contented with the Theory only, accidentally,
either for want of suitable Masters, or impeded by other more weighty
businesses, apply not themselves to the most pleasant labors in the practical
part thereof required.

Object. The Objection of this Art is, that the body is mixed and concrete; but
wherein it is moveable is not inspected, for this is the part of natural
consideration, viz. to observe how far a body is d^ssolvable and coagulable.
Bodies are eitheir imperfectly mixed, as Dew, Hail, Sow; or perfectly mixed, as
Plants, Fruits, Metals, Stones, Trees, and Animals of every kind. Whence it is
manifest, how egregiously they are deceived, who, hearing the name of an
Alchymist, presently conclude, that Man imploys himself in nothing else, than
the transmutation or Metamorphosing of Metals, and meditates on no other thing
than the wonderful Mystery of the Philosophicks Stone; Whereas,

The intention of this Artist, is to prepare most sweet, most wholesome, and
most safe Medicaments. And herein it is that our Art is distinguished from the
vulgar Pharmacopaea, which also confects Medicines, safe indeed, and wholesome,
but less grateful to the diseased. For as to sweetness, or pleasure in taking,
it must needs be granted, Chemical Medicines are helpful to the vulgar.
that the sick will sooner take Conserve of Roses, with which 4 grains of
Mercury, working by seidge, only are commixed, than many drams of
Diacatholicon: and will more willingly take one only of the blessed Pills of
Quercetanus, or two Pills of his Panchymagogon Electuary, than 10, or 15,
without them, of gilded and fetid Pills, or four grains of Mineral Bezoar, of
the most famous Dr. Hartmannus, or eight grains of Diaphoretick Antimony of
Crollius, than any other Sudorifick potion: And much rather a little of the
Cream or Magistery of Tartar, than an agonistick draught of Apozeme or Syrup of
any Magistrale, laboriously confected according to a description of I know not
how many foot long.

Yet in a sense the Potions and Vessels of vulgar Medicaments, do in odor far
exceed the Chemical; namely, when the Sick, only hearing of them before they
take then in their hands, with the nauseous imagination of their taste and
odor, being not provoked with any magnetic force, (...), purge upward, and
downward, which hitherto by Chemical Medicaments could not be performed.

They say, Spagyrick Artificers glory in the sweetness of their Remedies, but
Medicines prepared in the shops of Apothecarys, have obtained the praise of
salubrity and safeness of Curation. For, say they, your Remedies are not more
wholesome and more safe than ours, being not enough salubrious or safe: since
yours for the most part are venomous and plainly repugnant to humane Nature, as
being Metallic and taken from Minerals; and generally are more sharp, more
corrosive, and more hot than is convenient, and also very strongly smell of the
fire. These indeed are forcible weapons, and are ready to cast down the
strong-hold of Chemists, if they be not dexterously enervated with the Buckler
of Reason and Experience. It can scarcely be denied, but that most of our
Medicines are taken from out of the family of Minerals and Metals. But if the
Ancient and famous Physicians did not only use them, Chemical Medicines are not
venomous and repugnant to humane Nature although Metallic.
but crude and unprepared, as in the prescriptions of Galen, Dioscorides, and
in the Antidotory of Nicholas of Myrepsicum, and others is to this day to be
seen, and some most famous Physicians of late time, as Rondeletius used crude
Mercury in P^lls of Barbarossa, for expelling the Neapolitan disease: Crato the
most fortunate Physician of three Cesars used Cinnabar, for removing the
Vertigo; and others have used Antimony, as Cardanus, Julius, Alexandrinus and
Mathiolus: Vitriol was used by Gesnerus, Crocus Martis for the Jaundies, by
Fallopius; and for all affects of the Lights, Sulphur has generally been by
them used: Why then should it not be lawful for us to transfer the same things
rightly prepared, and perfectly freed from all venomous malignity to medicinal
use? especially since we have seen those, who, with vulgar Medicaments of the
Apothecarys, could not recover a perfect state of Health; yet at the persuasion
of the same Misochymists have removed themselves to Metallic Baths, or Mineral
fountains through the continued use of which, they have been perfectly cured.
Whence we indeed may rightly conjecture, that in Minerals and Metallicks of
this kind, there are concluded a certain fixed Balsom, and most potent Spirits,
not obnoxious to corruption. The same also in the use of Chyrurgical
Medicaments is conspicuous; for of their Remedys is scarce any of great virtue,
unless with it some Metal o^ Mineral be commixed. But far be it, that the same
crude and unprepared (according to the Custom of the Ancient, and some of the
Physicians of late times) should be by us thought fit to be rereceived inwardly
into the body.

The profitable must be separated from the unprofitable; The true Correction of
Malignant Medicines.
the venom from the salutary Mummy; and the Kernel and Marrow uncased from
Rindes, Shells, Husks, and Feces. So at length from thence may Remedies be
taken apt for the Cure of most deplorable diseases, quickly, safely, and
pleasantly, if they be adhibited by learned, expert, and circumspect
Physicians, and according to the prescribed Rules of Therapeia. The Viper, a
beast most venomous, being rightly prepared, is the Basis of Treacle, that
universal Alexipharmacon, approved by the Experience of so many Ages. So we see
daily, that from vulgar Serpents, they now commonly prepare a most certain
preventionary and curative Medicine against venoms of every kind. Likewise the
Sea-Dragon, which the French call Lavive, has in his back a Bone, which being
taken out, thence is made a most delicate food. In the same manner also things
dug out of the Earth, may plainly be reduced to that Nature of Mediocrity, the
whole being resolved into distinct parts, and the malignant and mortiferous
qualities removed; that most certainly, those, who rightly use such,
legitimately prepared, admit not a mortal enemy, but a friendly Guest, not a
poisonous venom, but an Alexapharmacon, and Antidote against all diseases into
the penetrales of their life. For if the venemosity of Metals and Minerals
depend upon their form; who sees not, if these by Chemical Artifice be resolved
into their three principles, that their deadly and destructive qualities are
removed? And if you shall conceive the malignity to be established in any of
the undivided parts, you will so much the easier understand, that when the
whole is divided into parts, that may be segregated. And in this manner is the
correction of mortiferous medicaments; which, how safe, and salubrious it is,
might be proved by infinite Examples, if we thought it were not sufficiently
known already.

Let therefore Misochymists forbear to abhor the use of Minerals and Metals, to
be exhibited internally into the humane body; and unadvisedly to fear I know
not what, (...), thence to proceed; but let them rather learn of Chemists the
true way of subduing the malignity of Remedies, which venerable Antiquity used
(as Antimony, Mercury, both kinds of Hellebore, all the Species of Tithymalus,
Pytyusa, Elaterium, Coloquintida, Euphorbium, Thapsia, Seammony, Thymelaea, the
Lazure and Armenian Stone, Scoria of Brass, Sandarack, etc.) which is done by
the Antimony of the heterogeneal body, into its proper parts; but not by the
wonted addition of Mastick, Dragacanth, Spike, Cinnamon, or such like. For he
that endeavors so to dissipate, and infringe the venomous qualities of
Simples, is not unlike to foolish and ignorant Cooks, who, when Carps are to be
scaled, and boweled, contend that if the choler or bag of the gall shall happen
to be broke, it is not to be washed out, or segregated, but with Honey or Sugar
to be corrected, and its evil savor so removed: or if they be to prepare the
intestines of Animals for man's food, shall foolishly judge that the sordid and
filthy excrements are not to be washed away, but that they are to boiled as
they are, with the addition of Amber, or odoriferous Oils poured upon them.

Spagyrick Remedies seem not to be wholesome and safe, because they are sharp
and corrosive, and by the violence of fire rendered more Costick, and because
they smell of the fire: but if they be (or while they are) sharp and corrosive,
they are not to be received into the body. Good GOD! how great a quantity of
Medicaments ought to be cast out from the vulgar Pharmacopoly's? How great is
the number of them to be expunged from their Antidotary's? And how many
Condiments are to be removed from their Kitchins? Cantharides by Galen are
numbered among dangerous Medicines, which by erosion kill; and they are to be
but sparingly taken; and unto these he grants it is behoveful they should be
commixed, (...), and with D^ureticks instead of a Vehicle. How corrosive
Vitriol is, is palpably known to all; and notwithstanding into Treacle the most
commendable Antidote, it is received. Garlic, Onions, Sinape, and Nasturcium,
how sharp are these? yet are we not afraid daily to use them in our Banquets.

The juices of Lemmons and Citrons dissove the most firm bodies of Pearls and
Corrals; yet in the Cardiack passion, and in extreme imbecility, and decay of
strength, a more ready and excellent remedy, is not vulgarly given. Therefore
the Acrimony and Costick force of Chemical Remedies is not to be forced,
especially, since many are outwardly corroding, which inwardly cannot exercise
their force, not only by reason of greater repugnancy of the intestines, and
the vegetate strength of the native heat; but also by reason of the noxious
humors residing in the Stomach. As we devour not whole handfuls of Salt, nor
use we certain pounds of it in broths, but, it may be, we dissolve of it one
pugil; and a little Vinegar and Spice we are wont to use for seasoning our
meats; so when necessity compels, spagyrick Physicians to the using of sharp
Medicaments, they exhibit some drops, or one grain or two, not alone, but mixed
with appropriate Liquors. Yea, the most sharp may be so well odulcorated, as
they may deposite all their acrimony; Chemical Medicines are not dangerous, by
reason of their sharpness contracted by fire.
which in Aqua fortis, and Aqua Regis is clearly evinced, if with them Salt of
Tartar be commixed.

Now as touching the Contagion of fire, which is by them objected, it is a
thing so vain and frivolous, as needs no refutation. Galen himself in the 18.
Chap. de Theriaca ad Pisonem, expressly writes, that the fire does meliorate
many things, and sometimes discovers the hidden nature of things, and some
things also it renders apt for use, according to our intention. Whence also the
same Element by Cicero, is not undeservedly honored with the Title of Master
of Arts, likewise Galen subjects sharp and biting Minerals to the Examen of
fire, that they may be rendered more gentle. He esteems Red Vitriol.
Chalcitis burnt, better than not burnt. Balanus Myrepsica, according to Mesue,
provokes vomiting, and also causes dejections by the inferior parts; but
being burnt, and the nauseous humidity thereof removed, the only force of
expelling humors by Seidge remains. So sublimate Mercury, which is most sharp,
abiding the violence of fire with Antimony, is reduced to a most gentle, and
most wholesome Alexipharmacon. Likewise Iron, when calcined into Crocus Martis,
with fire of reverberation sustaineth the extremest heat of flames, yet they
on it impress no acrimony to hinder the use thereof from being most profitable,
as it is most frequent in Haemorrhagia's, and other Fluxes. On the contrary,
how great sharpness do the Water and Oil of Cinnamon acquire in a Balneum of
vapor only? And in the same, how much is Wine made more acid? Whence is this?
Can you understand the Reason? You may, if you can comprehend why the Sun
hardens clay, and softens wax; and the same makes linen white, Whence is the
acrimony of Chemical Medicaments.
but blackens the face. You are therefore deceived, if you think Spirit of
Vitriol contracts acrimony from external heat: and so if you judge that Oil of
Salt from the fire of Reverberation is infected with the same; for if Salts
were not insited and mixed in these, you by the greatest violence of fire,
could never be able to inure such a sharpness. And contrariwise, should you use
the most moderate heat that could be in some things, yet you shall undoubtedly
render them more sharp, by reason of the force of present Salts. Moreover for
the Empyreuma of Chemical Medicines, Chemical Remedies smell not of the fire.
it is not of such moment, as under that name they should seem violent and
dangerous to practical Physicians: for if such a thing be inherent in those
Medicaments, it took its beginning either from a moderate or strong heat. If
from that, and therefore Chemical Remedies are censured for obnoxious; then can
neither our Meats, or Drinks, or vulgar Medicaments be safe and wholesome;
since, in preparing them, oftentimes a greater degree of fire is required than
for Spagyrick Remedies, which is manifest in the making of Beer or Ale, where
the Malt is first with strong fire dried, afterward boiled with greater. And
also in some Rhenish Wines, which by reason of their wholsomness, are used by
the Northern people in almost all diseases, instead of a Remedy; and yet to a
true maturity, they cannot be brought, but by the benefit of Elementary fite;
also in broiled fish, and smoke dried, roasted, and boiled flesh, with many
other such like. But if from this, The Empyreuma how it may be corrected.
viz. from violent fire, yet thence cannot any thing of peril happen to the
sick, since either with ablution or digestion it may be corrected; as is seen
in ashes, which water being poured on them, deposite the notes of their
calidity received from the fire in a Lixivium. Yea, ablution often repeated,
renders some purging Metallicks and Minerals Chymically prepared, inefficacious
for exhausting depraved humors. How by decoction all things are made sweet is
known, yet there seemed to be need of inducing an Ensample to prove the same.
If by an Empyrenma, you shall happen thus to understand; that when either the
potential heat, which is latent in the mixture, as it were under coals, is
produced into act by violent fire, and so freed from all impediment, exercises
more potent force; or when the heat, which therein was dispersed, is united by
the benefit of fire; for this cause, neither an Empyreuma, nor too much heat is
to be feared; since it is the office of a Physician rightly to use hot things
of this kind, as also others [less hot] which if imprudently adhibited, may
unavoidably infer detriment to the sick. But M^sochymists cease not to urge us
grievously, whilst they pretend our Medicaments are unprofitable, because they
are decayed, Preparation renders not Chemical Medicaments unprofitable.
and take their beginning from perished and corrupted mixed things, and are
destitute of primogeneal humidity, as they say. Now if the bodies of mixed
things be not to be dissolved, or (to use their odious terms) not to be
destroyed; Why do they trouble the Harmony of that mixtion? Why do they prepare
infusions, decoctions, and Syrups with violent fire? Why use they assations?
Why parchings? Why distillations? Why Diagridium, and not Scammony whole? Why
Trochus of Alhandal, and not Coloquintida it self? Why in extreme imbecility
of strength, when the sick are ready to expire, presume they to nourish them
with a destroyed Capon, viz. with the distilled water thereof, where certainly
all the (...).
Temperament and mixture of the whole perishes? Is it because in this part
they would imitate Nature? Who conveys not food undigested from the Stomach,
nor crude, or while it is whole, for nourishing the parts; but destroyed, that
is, separated from the unprofitable and more gross parts, and in the shop of
the Liver reduced, as it were, to a Quintessence, they say (if you please to
hear it) that if sucking Infants be purged with their Mothers Milk, having
Rubarb infused in it, which is often used for health-sake; the Concord,
Temperament, and Harmony of the whole Rubarb squeezed in the Mothers Milk, is
given to the Children; but will the form of this mixture passing from its own
substance into another, and again translated from this into another, and
suffering many mutations, remain whole and entire, and so exclude the depraved
humors from out of the body? Perhaps hence it is, that some M^sochymists abhor
the use of Cheese, and also Butter, not from any natural antipathy; but
because, by reason of the destroyed concord of the Milk, and the abolished form
and temperament thereof, they fear these, and such like are unfit for
nourishing the body. Again, while these call Chemical Remedies, Chemical
Remedies are not dead Carcases.
dead bodies or Carcases, and affi^m them to be despoliated of primogeneal
humidity; they partly contrary themselves, and partly speak inconsentaneous to
truth. For if they be so vile and inefficacious, why do they elsewhere affirm
them to act more potently, than the mediocrity of humane temperament permits?
Moreover, is it not necessary, that as well Animals as Vegetables, should be
deprived of that life whereby they live, that is, are nourished, grow, and
increase, that they may be rendered apt for the food, and use of man? For even
the barbarous Scythians, although they feed on flesh, either crude or heated by
hunting with the swift coursing of Horses, yet will they not take the beasts
alive into their Mouths, and tear their flesh, and eat it. So also it is
expedient, that Plants, Sprouts, and Fruits should die, that they may give
forth vital actions in the humane body; that is, they must be taken from their
Native Soil or Root, least thence they should still attract aliment for
conserving their life, that they may be made apt Remedies for conserving the
health of men, and expelling their diseases. And in like manner Herbs, and
other such things so mortified, especially, if a legitimate preparation of them
precede, happily and safely operate, if inwardly taken into the body. And (as
by experience, the most certain Judge of Verity, I shall evince) the life of
Vegetables is not destroyed by Chemical Operations, nor the primogeneal
humidity of mixed bodies by them consumed. It is certain, and very often proved,
that Salts of Herbs, especially hot, if seminated in a certain manner, as is
unto us known, do produce other herbs of their own Species. Not to mention
those stupendous and pertinent examples produced by Quercetanus, Chapter 23.
In his Answer to Anonynius for the verity of Hermetick Medicine. The Forest of
Arden in France.
In Arduenna, and many other desert, barren, and dry places, that the
Husbandmen in Summer might have somewhat to reap, they cut down their
Brambles, Broom, and Briars, which they burn on an heap, and scatter the ashes
here, and there, all over the fields, that the plowed Earth by the Salt
extracted from them by the benefit of the falling showers may be fatned, and
afterward from Seed cast thereinto, produce good and desirable Corn. For the
Salt of ashes of this kind, performs the office of dung, because fields could
never be impinguate, unless they were strewed with the Urines and Salt of brute
Animals. There is a wonderful Fatness in Salts, as Plutarch witnesses in
Symposiacis. lib. 1. Quest. the 9th.
Yet I will not flatly deny, but that some living things, and such as are not
as yet dead, may sometimes rightly be adhibited, as a Cock deplumate (about the
breech) for extracting the Venom from pestiferous Carbuncles. And a young
whelp externally applied to cherish a cold and weak Stomach by its benign and
temperate heat. In like manner I deny not, but that things whole may sometimes
exceed those that are broke, dissolved, or altered. Also they confess
themselves to use some things no less destroyed, Chemical Medicaments impress
not a depraved disposition on the principal Members of the Body.
than the Chemists do. There remains now one scruple, which very much troubles
the minds of many, and they have long been held in suspense thereabout, so as
they could not consent to the use of Hermetick Medicaments; and it is this,
that they especially, if they be Metallic or Mineral, dissipate the native
heat and Spirits suddenly, and leave in the principal parts polluted Relics,
a malignant ferment, and a depraved (...) [or] disposition; whence some by
accident are cured, and a little after suffering a relapse, are untimely
hurried out of this life.

But Remedies Spagyrically prepared, undeservedly suffer this Reproach; since
if such a thing by the use of them should chance to happen, it is not so much
to be imputed to the Remedies, as to the Artificers that prepared them, or to
the Physicians that exhibited them. For it is very well known how great a
number there are, who unworthily approach to this most noble Art, and having
learned, or supposedly found the use of this Science from Books only, and not
from their (...), or proper experience, unadvisedly prepare Stibium or
Hydrargyry, and so prepared, are not afraid to exhibit it inwardly, either for
conserving the health of Man, or for restoring the same when decayed. With such
precipitates of Chemists, it is no wonder if they that use them be precipited
into the Grave. If some improvident and prodigal of their own health follow
after their Mercurys of life, they follow not life, but death, which they
sometimes buy at a very great rate.

Then the blame of so grievous accidents, does not seldom redound to those also
who administer the said Medicaments, some of whom never saw the legitimate use
of them; others of them are plainly unlearned, stupid, and ignorant of the
whole method of Galen and Hyppocrates: Such are like to Jews and Patricides,
whose Religion is no other than after the manner of Thieves, to sport
themselves in others ruin. For like reason, the same is sometimes written of
vulgar Medicines, and such as are of most potent virtues, as the Scammoneate,
Helleborate, and such like; when by unskilful Apothecarys they are sinistrously
prepared, or by the expert, dexterously consected, but by Empyricks
preposterously used, although the same Medicaments may be of excellent use, if
well prepared, and methodically adhibited.

There is no reason therefore, that learned and prudent Physicians should
abstain any longer from the use of Chemical Remedies, since, if they be
confected by expert Artists (among whom in France, Nicholas Bonne is famous,
the Apothecary of the most illustrious Duke of Bullion in Arce Sedanensi, who
has a shop completely furnished with most choice Remedies, as well Galenical
as Spagyrical, especially Treacles, both the common and essensified, according
to the Rules of Quercetanus, most exquisitely and faithfully prepared;) all
malignity, if any be in their nature, is removed by the benefit of Vulcan; so
as it is impossible, if they be methodically used, that they should either
destroy the native heat and Spirits, (the individual guards of the Soul) or
infer on the principal parts a depraved disposition.

And thus hitherto is shown, how under a false pretext Chemical Remedies are as
it were dangerous, unprofitable, and pestiferous: and so the Cities right in
the Re-publique of Medicine is denied.

Now, that they are more wholesome, and more safe than the vulgar, is to be
proved; which indeed by what has been already said, is sufficiently
manifested; nevertheless, that all things may be the better judged of,
Spagyrick Medicaments are more wholesome, and more safe than the vulgar.
some few things to back our assertion seem to be needful. Remedies prepared by
the Spagyrick Art, are therefore more salubrious, and more safe than the
vulgar, or the same after the common and vulgar manner prepared; because in
them the pure is separated from the impure, the Alexipharmacon from the
malignity, the Corporeal from the Spiritual, and the unprofitable from the
commodious; and so with their bulkiness they oppress not the Stomach, nor do
they delay or defer their Operations, but immediately begin to assault the
Diseases, and speedily compel them to forsake their strongholds in humane
bodies. So Beer that has sufficiently purged, is better and more wholesome,
than what has not purged. Wine cleansed from its Tartar, is more safely drunk,
than Wine newly pressed from the Grape. So food, the Excrements secluded by
nature after many Coctions nourish all the members of our bodies. Sooner does
the water or Balsom of Cinnamon in swounings refresh the Spirits, than the
Cinnamon whole. Likewise some drops of Oil of Anise are more efficacious, than
whole Ounces of the same unprepared. But the vulgar mind despises all
preparations, and had rather use things whole, than dissolved into their
principles; wherefore he adhibits Medicines partly not sufficient or
convenient; whence it often happens, that the sick having devoured the noxious,
excrementitious, and venomous parts together, with the salubrious and
profitable, the Disease being overcome, they are soon after afflicted with
symptoms more grievous, and more dangerous than the disease it self.

Moreover, who knows not that Chemical waters retain the entire odor, and
taste of Vegetables, but the vulgar waters are no other than unprofitable
phlegm, and waters easily putrefying; and those will dure many years, but these
scarcely a Month or two. And as the vulgar waters of Pharmacopoly's acquire an
extreme malignity from the Leaden vessels; so their decoctions in Copper
vessels are no less contaminated, which are so much the worse also, because in
their preparation, the more subtle and better parts vanish into Air, and a
little after, through mouldiness contracted, they are corrupted and rendered
unprofitable.

Also their Restoratives and Cordials, which are prepared of Corals and Pearls
reduced to powder, and sifted, as also of foliate Gold; what other virtue do
they manifest in the humane body, than the incrusting of the Ventricle, and
otherwise rendering it more languished, and unapt to perform its office?
Whereas, on the contrary, Quintessences of Chemists and Magisterys by them
confected, as also Tinctures of Gold made without Corrosives, easily dissolved
in any Liquor; these so dissolved, being admitted into the body, renew decayed
strength, and restore to pristine vigor. Also vulgar Medicaments in Chronical
diseases, seldom produce the desired effects; being only taken from Vegetables,
with which they are unable totally to extirpate, and pluck up the settled Roots
of contumacious affects. But Chemical Remedies, especially those prepared of
Metals and Minerals, being of more potent force, and of great efficacy, do
thoroughly cure Distempers vulgarly uncureable, as the epilepsie, leprosy,
quartane fever, gout, Dropsy, etc. (...), that is, pleasantly, speedily, and
safely. We therefore thought what we have done, not impertinent to our purpose;
namely, in the Frontise-piece of our Book, to define Chemistry, and demonstrate
it to an Art of preparing the most grateful, salubrious and safe medicaments.

CHAP. II. Of Solution in Genere.
Chemical Solution is (...), What Solution is.
or an Operation wherein the natural mixed body by separation of the Hetrogeneal
parts, is deduced into its own three Principles, viz. Mercury, Sulphur, and
Salt, of which by Nature it was at first made.

As Aristotle of the Natural body has truly stated three principles, viz.
Matter, Form, and Privation; although they be rather Noetick, than truly
hypostatick, and as Galen the four Elements, viz. Fire, Air, The three Chemical
principles.
Water, and Earth, for principles, although they be remote, yet are they not
wholly by him unproperly cited: so the Chemist, the intelligent Artificer
affirms there are 3 sensible, and most near principles of sensible bodies, viz.
Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt: and in this part follows Aristotle, of the third
Heaven, Text 61. Which place Peter Ramus in the Acroamatick Schools, does over
strenuously oppose against the above alleged principles of the Philosopher,
and after him Kragius does vehemently contrary the Peripateticks. But by
Mercury, What by them is to be understood.
Sulphur, and Salt, it is not to be understood that Minerals of this kind can
by the benefit of Chemical resolution, be extracted from mixed and concrete
bodies; I mean, such as are vulgarly sold by Merchants. Yet it suffices, that
they are such, especially being in the family of Vegetables, and Animals, which
are analogous, and have affinity with Minerals, and do so far differ among
themselves in Essence, Property, and Actions as they are in their kind [more or
less] Mineral.

Mercury Mercury.
is that Acid, permeable, penetrable, Ethereal, and most pure Liquor, whence
is all nutrition, sense, motion, virtues, colors, and the retardation of over
hasty age. It is made of the Element of Air, and Water: and indeed to the
first, as far as it is altered by approaching heat, it vanishes into air; but
as to the other, so far as it is d fficultly bounded in its own proper limits,
it is easily contained in another Terminum

Sulphur Sulphur.
is a sweet, oleaginous, and viscid Balsom, conserving the native heat of the
parts, the instrument of all vegetation, increase, and transmutation, and the
fountain, and original of all odours grateful and ungrateful. It is assimilated
to fire, by reason of the flame which it easily conceives, as all other
resinous and oleaginous things.

And this peculiar property it has, The property of Sulphur.
viz. a power of pacifying and conglutinating extreme contrarys.

For as you can never make tenacious Luting of water and sand, unless with them
you commix Galx, or other glutinous matter: so neither can volatile Mercury,
and fixed Salt be tenaciously united into one substance, unless by the bond and
copulation of Sulphur, which participates of either principle. It contemperates
the dryness of Salt, and Liquidity of Mercury, by its own viscosity; the
density of Salt, and the permeability of Mercury by its own soft fluidness, and
the bitterness of Salt, and sharpness of Mercury, by its own sweetness.

Salt Salt.
is a dry body, saline, and defending mixed things from putrefaction, is endowed
with wonderful faculties of dissolving, coagulating, cleansing, and evacuating;
and from it is every solidity, determination, taste, and other infinite
virtues. It is analogious to the Earth; not as it is cold and dry, but as it is
an Element firm, fixed, and the subject of generation of all bodies.

But the said principles, to speak properly, Chemical Principles possess a
nature between Bodies, and Spirits.
are neither bodies, because they are plainly Spiritual, by reason of the
influx of celestial Seeds, with which they are impregnated; nor Spirits,
because corporeal, but they participate of either nature; and have been
insignized by Philosophers with various names, or at the least unto them they
have alluded these, as by the following Table will appear.

SALT. SULPHUR. MERCURY. Common Salt. Saltpeter. Salt armoniack. Unpleasant,
and bitter. Sweet. Acid. Body. Soul. Spirit. Matter. Form. Idea. Patient.
Agent. Informant, or movent. Art. Nature. Intelligence Sense. Judgment.
Intellect. Material. Spiritual. Glorious.

Moreover, every mixed body may be, and by us is resolved into these three
principles (so according to the Pythagoreans, every thing, and all things are
terminated in three) fixed in the sacred Ternary. Although this might be proved
by weighty reasons, yet ocular and evident inspection does far exceed all
these. Therefore, by examples taken from the various kind of mixed things, we
shall, for the benefit of young Beginners, delucidate every thing. We will
first begin with green Woods, which if you burn, there will come forth a
certain Wateriness, which is plainly unapt for taking flame; and if gathered
when converted into fume, it is resolved easily into water (and by the same
reason, to seek drink from a flame is not impossible) and this is called
Mercury: then there goes forth an oleaginous substance easily inflamable, which
resolved into vapors, if taken, will pass into Oil, and that is called
Sulphur: at length a dry and terrestrial substance remains, which from the
ashes, by the benefit of water is extracted, and in the humid and cold it is
dissolved, but in heat congealed, and it obtains the name of Salt. So Milk
contains a Sulphurous buttery substance, then Mercurial Whey, and at length
saline Cheese, or Curds. In Eggs, the White exhibits Mercury, the Yolk Sulphur,
the Skins and Shells Salt. In like manner from Linseed we draw Oil by
expression; Water by separation from the Oil; and Salt from the remaining
feces, by extraction. By like reason from Cloves a most famous Mercurial water,
a most excellent Sulphurous Oil, and from the feces a Salt is extracted. So
Nitre is divided into aquosity, fatness, and Salt. No otherwise of Sea Salt do
we produce Mercury (...), that is, bitter-sweet; Sweet Chrystals plainly of a
Sulphurous nature; and at length a most fixed Salt. Of Antimony a Regulus is
made, which is the Mercury thereof; then a Red Sulphur conceiving flame; and at
length a Salt, which is vomitive. And thus may you of all other things judge
the same.

But you are chiefly to note, that none of the aforesaid principles can be
found simple, No principle is plainly simple.
and alone, that does not participate with the other. For Mercury contains a
Sulphurous and saline substance; Sulphur a Salt and Mercurial substance: And
Salt an oleaginous and Mercurial substance.

It is also to be observed, that in the Spagyrick (...), The Caput-mortuum and
phlegm are not principles.
or separation of parts after solution, beside the former precited three
principles truly active, there are two other substances, which by Chemists are
not admitted into the number of principles, because they are only as it were
the Shells or Coverings of the said principles, and are destitute of all
Hyppocratick (...).
virtue; One of which is dry, a sandy Earth or lifeless ashes, and it is called
damnate Earth, and Caput-mortuum, endewed with no other virtue then, than
drying and emplastick, and it is easily converted into Glass. The other is
humid, and accidentally airy, viz. insipid and unsavory phlegm, which only
moistens, without any other (...).
Energy or Medicinal activity.

CHAP. III. Of Calcination.
THere are two kinds of Solution, viz. Calcination and Extraction.

Calcination Calcination.
is the Solution of the mixed body into a Calx.

It is defined by Geber; that pulverisation of a thing is made by fire, through
privation of the humidity, consolidating the parts. By Calx Chemists understand
every most subtle powder made by ablation of the superfluous humidity, Calx of
Chemists.
especially from Minerals. But when the powder or Calx is plainly rendered
impalpable, and most subtle as to sense, like the finest Flower, then do they
call it Read Alcohol.
Alcohol; the same appellation they properly give to the most subtle Spirit of
wine, rectifyed by often repeated distillations; which then they call Alcohol
of wine. Alcohol of wine.


Calcination is made by Corrosion or Ignition.

Corrosion is a Calcination of the body by things corrosive. This is done
diverse ways, but especially by four, viz. by Amalgamation, Precipitation,
Stratification, and Fumigation.

Amalgamation is the corrosion of a Metal by Mercury. Amalgamation.
And this is done when a Metal filed small, or beat out into very thin plates,
is commixed with eight parts of Mercury, or eight times its own weight of, that
it may be a Mass every where like unto it (and be as one body) for dissolving
the unity of that Metal: for the Hydrargyry being evaporated over a fire, the
Metal is left like unto a thin Calx.

Precipitation is a corrosion by strong and corrosive Waters, Precipitation.
and that is done when bodies are emerged in corrosive Liquor, and afterward
being corroded or dissolved, either by abstraction of the Water, or some other
way, they are repercussed into a Calx.

Stratification Stratification.
is a corrosion by corrosive powders.

It is thus made, viz. when a crucible or other convenient Earthen vessel is
filled with thin plates of Metal and corrosive powders, making S. S. S. or lay
upon lay, thus; first put some of the corrosive powder in the bottom of the
crucible, then lay in the thin plates of the Metallic body, upon which strew
more of the powder, then again lay in more of the plates, and so go on till the
vessel be full. Afterward put coals round about, or give it fire of
Reverberation, increasing the fire leisurely, as the matter requires. It is
also called -- Cementation, Cementation.
of affinity to which is -- Commixtion, Commixtion.
wherein the body to be corroded is mixed with corrosive powders, and by the
adhibition of fire is reduced to a Calx.

Fumigation Fumigation.
is a corrosion of Metal by sharp fume or vapor.

This is done diverse ways. In general let it suffice to know, that a Metallic
body reduced into thin plates, and to be calcined by fume, must be suspended
either over Aqua fortis, Vinegar, or the vapor of melted Lead, or Mercury, or
such like sharp things; as vulgarly they are wont to prepare Ceruse.

Ignition Ignition.
is calcination by fire.

And it is either Cinefaction or Reverberation.

Cinefaction Cinefaction.
is ignition, wherein Vegetable and Animal bodies are reduced to ashes by
violent fire.

Reverberation Reverberation.
is also ignition, wherein bodies by fire of flame in a furnace of
Reverberation, are calcined.

Hereunto also appertains Desiccation of the native humidity, Desiccation of
the native humidity.
as is wont to be in Salt, Vitriol, Allom, and such like.

CHAP. IV. Of Extraction.
EXtraction is a kind of Resolution, Extraction generally considered.
wherein the more subtle parts are separated from the more gross.

And is twofold, either generally, or specially, so called:

Generally, so called, is made duplicitly, as well by ascension and descension,
as by an intermedium.

And that is either dry or humid: the dry is Sublimation, the other is called
distillation.

Sublimation Sublimation.
is an extraction of the more subtle dry parts, by fire elevated aloft, and
adhering to the vessel.

It is made, when the matter to be sublimed is aptly prepared, as it ought to
be, viz. either by washing, or by calcination, parching, cocting, or the like;
and afterward either alone, or with other matter permixt, put into an Urinal
with a Spherick, or large and broad bottom, so as half part of the vessel only
may be filled, and that placed in an aludel [or pan] over a furnace quite above
the fire, and unto the vessel a Blind-head Luted on with good Luting, in the
Head must be a hole directly over the middle of the inferior vessel, that the
humid Spirits may exhale through the hole. Then must fire be gradually
adhibited, and when all the humidity has expired (which may be proved by a
piece of glass, or a smooth plate of Iron, when applied to the hole, if not at
all stained with the breathing) the hole of the Alembeck closed with Luting,
and the fire intended for forcing the Spirits upwards.

Therefore, according to Geber, Sublimation is the elevation of a dry matter by
fire, with adherency to the sides of the vessel; how madly are distillation and
calcination confounded, and waters which are distilled, faid to be sublimed.
Moreover it is observable, that this Chemical Operation is not a new invention,
but it was also known to the ancients. For so Cadmia or Brass-oar was
heretofore prepared, witness Galen, and Dioscorides; and likewise Pompholyx and
Spodium, by the same testimony.

Distillation Distillation.
is an extraction of the humid parts, extenuate and elevate into fume by heat.

What Aristole says, lib. 4. of Meteors; (...), that is, Art imitates nature,
is verified in this vulgar Operation of practical Chemistry. For as vapors by
the Solar rays are drawn up from the Earth into the middle Region of Air, and
there condensed by the coldness of that Celestial Sphere, fall down again upon
the Earth in showers. So the Chemical Artificer, from things exhaleable and
vapourable, by the ministry of fire, with separation of the thin Spirits from
the more gross parts, and elevation of them unto the cold concaveness of the
head, extracts their essence in form of Liquor. Likewise in the humane body
(...).
exhalations from the inferior parts are carried upward into the Airy Region of
the Microcosm, as into an Alembeck, and by the coldness thereof, are condensed
into a phlegmatic and mucose Excrement, whence afterward is made a continued
distillation and defluction thereof into the Nostrils, Palate, or other parts
of the body. Hence it is, that in dressing of Meats we close our Pots with
covers, that what vapors are converted into water, may after exhalation be
reverted into their own Original. So, when we would keep any prepared meats
warm, or being cold, heat them, we cover the dishes, in which they are with
others; whereby the vapors arising from them by their cold, incrassate
Antiperistasis, fall down again in drops.

Also Distillation, with respect to the diversity of vessels wherein it is made
(not to mention many other differences) is either right or oblique. It is made
by Alembeck, or per Vesicam, or else by Retort, especially in things containing
the more contumacious spirits.

Hereto appertains Rectification and Cohobation.

Rectification Rectification.
is a repeated distillation of Liquors, for their greater purification and
exhalation, yet this is also sometimes performed by Digestion.

Cohobation Cohobation.
is a reiteration of distillations, wherein the Liquor distilled is reverted
upon its own feces, and again thence distilled. But this is done with the feces
first ground, and leisurely imbibed with the humor, that they may be macerated.

Extraction generally so called, which is made by Descention, is twofold, viz.
either hot or cold.

The hot is that wherein the subtle parts are separated from the gross by
descension, Distillation by descension hot.
with the mediation of fire. Whence it is also called distillation by descent,
and is used in making of Pitch; when from the heap of Clefts of the Pitch-tree
piled together, and closed from any breathing places by fire kindled within,
Pitch flows out; as is to be seen in Pliny and M^thiolus, who have exactly
described this Operation.

The cold is that, which by descent without fire makes separation of the
subtle parts from the gross. Cold distillation by descent.


And it is either Filtration or Deliquium.

Filtration Filtration.
is, when the aqueous humors by a Separatory or brown-paper wrapped up round,
like (or put into) a Tunnel or Hyppocrates Sleeve, Linen Cloth, or some such
thing, is strained, leaving in the filter or vessel, the more gross parts.

Deliquium Deliquium.
is, when impure Calxes, Salts, and such like Liquables, either per se are put
upon a Marble or Glass Table inclined; or included in a bag are suspended; that
moistning by the humid Air, they may let go their pure juice. Yet sometimes it
so is, as per deliquium, there is no separation of parts made; as when Salts
purified, or such like are placed in a cold Cellar or other moist place, and by
external humidity, which easily enters into them, descend and fall into a
subjacent vessel in Liquor.

Extraction which is made by an intermedium, is when the more pure parts of
Liquids or dry things moistened, are separated from the impure without
distillation and sublimation.

Of this there are three kinds, viz. Digestion, Putrefaction, and Circulation.

Digestion Digestion.
is, when things with digestive heat, resembling the heat of natural digestion
in the Stomach are cocted or ripened.

For as the Stomach by its own moderate heat digesteth crude meats received,
and by cocting transmutes it into Chyle; that, the feces being secluded and
thrust out into the Intestines, from that substance by the Liver an extraction
of the more benign and more pure parts, may be made; so also by like temperate
heat of any other thing, digestion separates the subtle from the gross; what
are thick it breaks and attenuates, cocts the crude, mit^igates and edulcorates
the unsavory; and so elaborates all things, that from things digested, a more
plentiful Harvest of essence is always to be expected.

The administration thereof, is Learnedly described by Libavius in this manner.
The matter to be digested is included in a vessel like unto the Stomach, every
where firmly closed; unless when with digestion evaporation is conjoined, as
for correction of an Empyreuma or in coagulation, and such like; for then a
small hole in the cover or mouth of the vessel is left, and a just time
observed, that none of the substance perish. Whether it be mere juice or
Liquor, the matter is plain: but in Minutal of Herbs, and such like, either the
proper juice is to be left, or some analogous humor from without is to be
added; which notwithstanding is sometimes also in liquors of diverse kinds; as
when Oils are digested with Spirit of Wine, etc. where is a proneness to
putrefaction, and in adding the Menstruum, care enough can hardly be taken;
(for putrefaction must not be made when we would digest a thing, although
digestion may be the way to it) then Salt is to be added; and the vessel so
fitted, must be placed in a digestory furnace of competent heat, and there
permitted to stand unto the desired end, which is diverse, by reason of the
multiplicite use of digestion. As for example: Green Herbs moistened with their
own juice, from which, by distillation their Essence is to be extracted, are
macerated three days; but the dry moistened with Spirit of wine seven days.
Seeds and Aromaticks half a Month: Roots for a Month if they be dry: Minerals
for a philosophic month, A Philosophic Month.
which is forty days or longer, according to firmness, and the hability of the
Menstruum. Some are twice macerated, sprinkled with Greek-wine, as sometimes
Aromaticks, which, being moistened, are digested to a dryness; afterward
pulverisate, are the second time macerated by imbibition. So solidity and
rarity also have their difference of time. Distilled Waters set in digestion to
the Sun, are rectifyed in half a Month, the vessel being firmly closed, and
two parts of the vessel full, and the third empty; and sometimes a third part of
the glass is set in sand, which in cold things Artificers command to be done,
but with great caution. Yet hot waters and Oils are rectifyed in cold sand,
also a third part of the vessel buried in it, etc. in a Vapid or musty.
moist Cellar for a month; likewise the other humor to be added, must be such
as may help digestion without corruption of the substance.

And here if the humor be alienate, it is separated by the aforesaid hole; but
if otherwise, and it be familiar, or else alterable into the nature of the
digested, it ^s left. In Dense things it is more sharp, and sometimes
corrosive, as Vinegar, Spirit of wine, strong wine, etc. In others gentle, as
distilled Rainwater, Rose Water, etc. sometimes O^l of the same kind. In the
interim, what are of another Nature, and by digestion recede, are separated.

But digestion is not only accompanied with distillations or extractions, but
also with rectification, coagulation, fixation, edulcoration of Calxes prepared
by Aqua fortis; and is called Maceration: because it also has power of
penetrating, Maceration.
of opening the compactness of things, and of separating impurities.

Putrefaction Putrefaction.
is, when a mixed body through natural putridness, by humor overcoming dryness
and external heat operating more strongly than internaly, is resolved to an
Essence, apt to be extracted and segregated from its hetrogeneal parts.

The way of performing it is thus: What is to be putrefied, must be duly
prepared, and so put into a Cucurbit of glass, if it either be dry or abound
not with humidity sufficient for putrefaction, a certain (...), [that is, a
Vehicle] or Menstruum (so generally from the month of putrefaction, every
Liquor is called, which is used for extraction of things, if it either be of
its own kind, or to it analogous, or a Water) convenient must be poured on,
which by its own excess may take away the dryness of the mixed body, open the
mixture, draw the outgoing Essence to it self, and conserve it entire and
incorrupt, until it be all extracted: and least the heat with its own humidity
should expire, the vessel must be sealed with Hermes Seal: afterward in
Horse-dung, or like heat, it must be conserved, and that heat continued to the
end of the time prefixed.

The property of Putrefaction The property of putrefaction.
is, to change both the colors, odours, and tastes of things, and their old
nature being destroyed, to generate a new.

Circulation.
Circulation is of a Liquor depurated from Elements in a Pelican, by various
Circumvolutations or Rotations, by which the impurities settling downward are
removed, and so it is converted or exalted to a more excellent State.

It is thus performed: The Liquor to be exalted, is included in a Pelican or
Circulatory vessel, four or five parts thereof remaining empty; and so it is
placed in Balneum, or Dung, as deep as the Liquor rises within the Glass, or a
little lower, so as the superior empty parts of the vessel may stand in the
cold Air; that from the bottom and the sides, an attenuation may be made by
heat; but from the upper parts coagulation by cold; and so the said vessel must
be kept in moderate and continued heat, ^ntill the Artist come to his desired
end, and the f^ces totally reside in the bottom.

In this place it seems not improper to annex Fermentation; Fermentation.
although sometimes by it is not made so conspicuous a segregation of the
salubrious, from the more gross parts; as (rather) a disposition for extracting
the most noble Essence.

Yet it is the Exaltation of a thing in substance, by which, digestion
mediating, the Agent heat prevails, and turns the Patient into its own Nature.

Moreover, what are fermented, are either Liquid or Solid. What are Liquid, are
such simply, as Water and Wine, or thick and soft, as honey and Sapa.

Liquids which are simply such, if they be also hot, Wine boiled to a
consistency.
per se are fermented, as Wine, Perry, and Sider. But what are cold? as the
expressed juices of cold things, have need of the addition of some other
external, as feces of Wine, dregs of Beers or Ale, Salt, or any like acidness,
for accelerating ebullition and fermentation. The thick and soft may be in the
following manner fermented. For example: To ten pound of honey add fifty pound
of water; Let them stand in moderate heat for one day natural, Hydromel.
then with gentle fire boil the whole, and scum it; let a third part exhale, or
while the Liquor is hot put in a new-laid-egg, which, if it shall float above
the Liquor, is a sign of perfect decoction, Then the Liquor removed from the
fire must be strained hot through a double Cloth, and in a suitable Vessel
placed in the Sun; two drams of Salt of Tartar, or common Salt being added, or
j of any acidity put in. And so it must boil or ferment for forty days or
thereabout, until the Liquor be clear, and have an odor like Wine. Then must
the vessel be closed, and the Hydromel reserved in a Cellar for use.

What are solid and hard, as Seeds, Wheat, Fennel, Anise, Juniper-berrys,
Aromaticks, etc. must be bruised; and water be poured on them, and their proper
Salt, or what is to them analogous, or some acidity or feces of Beer or Wine;
so as to a hogs-head of the matter to be fermented, a pint of feces be added.

But what are most hard, as Stones, must first be calcined, and afterward
fermented; as in the following Treatise, touching Corals and Lead, shall be
spoken.

Extraction specially so called, Extraction specially so called.
is when from the mixed body, the more subtle, and more noble parts drawn but
by any Menstruum, are extracted from the Elementary grosness remaining in the
bottom; and by distillation or evaporation are coagulated to the consistency of
Syrup or Sapa. It is thus made: When a matter having Tincture is infused in a
convenient Menstruum, and the vessel close shut, placed in digestion: Afterward
the colored Menstruum, by inclination separated; and other fresh Menstruum
poured on, and the vessel closed, again set to digest, and the same labor so
often repeated, as till the Menstruum be no more tinged. Then are all the
evacuations filtred, circulated, and coagulated with the Menstruum, to an
oleaginous consistency, or else sometimes to a dryness, according to the nature
of the matter, or as the intended use shall require.

CHAP. V. Of Coagulation.
Hitherto we have spoke of Solution, and its Species, now follows Coagulation.

Coagulation Coagulation.
is another of the principal Operations of the Spagyrick Science; wherein soft
and Liquid things are forced by privation of humidity, from a thin and fluid
consistency into a solid.

This, although it almost inseparably adhere to the Species of Solution, as
Precipitation, Amalgamation, Sublimation, Distillation, etc. Yet is it
peculiarly.

First, by exhalation, wherein the humor expires from the coagulable matter.

Secondly, by decoction, wherein Liquid things are cocted to a certain solid
consistency.

Thirdly, by Congelation, as in Cellars, when Chrystals by cold are produced.

Fourthly, by Fixation, wherein things volatile and flying the fire, are taught
by use to remain fixed therein; which is done either by addition of a fixed
Medicine, or by mixtures or sublimations, Cements, and such like, according to
the nature of the matter.

CHAP. VI. Of Lutation.
NOw for order sake, it is expedient we should speak of Furnaces, Vessels, and
various Chemical Uutensils, as also their diverse Regimens of fire. But these
are rather learned by ocular inspection, than by precepts and rules. Therefore
for brevity sake, we shall omit them, and only speak a few things touching the
Lutaments and Conglutination of Sapient Artificers.

For building Furnaces.
Take fat Earth, of what color soever it be, and mix, and work it together
with sand, Horse-dung, and Salt Water.

For Coating Retorts.
(Although I am not wont to Coat either Glass or Earthen Retorts, whether I
distill by sand, or by a naked fire, or by a close Reverberatory, or by fire of
suppression.) Take Potters-clay, Horse-dung washed and dried, flour of Tiles,
and Scales of Iron, mix, and work these strongly together with common water.

Luting of Sapience for closing in the most Subtle Spirits.
Make Luting of Calx- vive, and the white of Eggs reduced to water, and
speedily apply the same, because it easily drys.

For consolidating cracked and broken Glasses.
Take Bole-armenack, Minium, Ceruse, of each equal parts, reduce them to a most
subtle powder, and temper it with Linseed Oil, or liquid Varnish.

For Luting Glasses together.
I unto this day have with good success used Hoggs or Ox-bladders, for luting
an Alembeck with its Cucurbit, as well in distillation of waters, as of sharp
and penetrating Spirits.

For Luting the nose of the Alembeck with the Recipient.
Take of Wax j. Rosin, Colophony, of each j. melt them together in an earthen
pan; unto these add a little Oil Olive, stirring them with a stick, that the
whole may be incorparated; then removing the pan from the fire, work the whole
well together with your hands.

For Luting Retorts with their Receivers, in distillation of sharp Spirits.
The Luting for coating Retorts work together with Salt water, or mix it with
Colophony pulverisate, and apply it moist.

The End of the First Book.
TYROCINIVM CHYMICVM: OR, CHEMICAL ESSAYS.
Book the Second.
THe former Book treats of Solution and Coagulation in general; Proemium.
now in the following Books we intend to treat of the effects of these
Operations. Although in Specie, how the compactness of all mixed bodies are to
be opened, ought to be declared; the same we should have endeavored to
perform, had we undertaken to write an entire System, and not a Tyrocinium of
Chemistry. There are effects, or, as by some they are called, Chemical Species
of Solution and Coagulation, which are either liquid, or soft, or hard. To the
liquid may be referred, the various kinds of Aqua fortis, Spirits, Vinegar,
Oils, and Liquid Tinctures, extracted from Flowers, Herbs, Roots, Rinds, Seeds,
Woods, etc. To the soft Balsoms, various Extracts, soft Tinctures. To the Hard,
Salts, Flores, Magisterys Calxes, dry Tinctures of Crocus.

CHAP. I. Before we come to speak of the forms of Liquors to be prepared, which
are, for the most part, made by distillation; certain general Rules seem
needful to be inserted, of which this is
The First.
VEssels in which distillation is made, Rules necessary for the Doctrine of
distillation.
must not be of Lead. For they infect Liquors with a malignant quality, render
them vomitive, change their native taste, and sometimes themselves are corroded
by sharp vapors expiring from the matter to be distilled. And if Galen, and
other wise Physicians, condemned the waters which flow through Leaden Pipes, by
reason of the malignity (much infesting the internal parts) which they thence
contract. What may be judged of waters distilled in Leaden Vessels? Since it is
often manifest (especially when distilled Liquors of this kind have stood
unmoved for certain days) that Ceruse of Lead rased off in distillation from
the Leaden Alembeck, is found in the bottom of the vessel; especially if to
prove the same, you shall pour in a drop or two of Spirit of Vitriol.

And what is said of Leaden vessels, for like reason must be understood of Tin,
Brass, and Iron; unless distillation be made in a Brass Vesica, where what are
distilled soon flow out.

The Second.
Glasses, by how much the higher they be, so much the better are they. For so
one distillation is better than three rectifications. Let the Cucurbits [or
Glass bodys] for the most part be two Cubits high.

The Third.
In every distillation, vessels must not be two full; you will more safely
operate, if Cucurbits be filled but one fourth part, Retorts about half; but
the Brass Vesica may be three parts full, and but one remaining empty.

The Fourth.
Things flatulent, as Wax, Rosin, and the like; as also those which easily
boil, must be put to distill in a less quantity, and in greater vessels, and
indeed must be mixed with Salt, Sand, or such like.

The Fifth.
Distillation by a Balneum, is proper for things not too strongly compacted.
Yet in Herbs, especially those that are hot, as in Wormwood, Sage, Rosemary,
etc. great heed must be taken, that we use not too gentle heat, least we draw
out not so much of the essence, as of the unprofitable phlegm. But in Lettice,
Endive, and such like of a more thin substance, a moderate heat must be
adhibited; and sometimes a Baln of dew [or vapor only] which neither
impresseth an Empyreuma, nor dissipates the more thin airy parts, may be
sufficient.

The Sixth.
Distillation by Ashes or Sand, agrees with things of a more solid consistency,
as Seeds, Woods, Roots, etc.

The Seventh.
By a Brass Vesica, things thin are not only distilled, but others also which
are more firmly compacted; yet in their Menstruum first macerated.

The Eighth.
Distillation by Retort, does not only extract the more weighty Spirits of
Minerals, but also things more soft, as Woods, Seeds, Roots, Gums, Rosins, etc.
Waters, and Oils.

The Ninth.
When fresh and juicy Herbs are to be distilled, they must be bruised, and the
juice expressed, and then by heat of Baln. distilled in a high Cucurbit.

The Tenth.
Herbs either of their own nature dry, or dried by time, must be bruised and
moistened with common water, or their own proper water, May-dew, or Wine. And of
the Menstruum must be so great a quantity, as may be sufficient for maceration;
but if more be poured on, the whole quantity must not be abstracted. Maceration
being made according to discretion, distillation must be made by a Baln. or if
you shall distill per Vesicam, add to every one pound of herbs, six pound of
water, and distill according to Art.

The Eleventh.
In the same manner per Vesicam, whatsoever is Aromatic, whether Roots, or
Rinds, Woods, Seeds, or Leaves, or Flowers are distilled, and Oil and water
come forth together.

The Twelfth.
There are some which require a vehement fire; yet such must not be too
violently urged, least, in so doing, their nature be wholly corrupted.

The Thirteenth.
Great care must be taken, that the Luting wherewith the distillatory vessels
are conglutinated, do no where admit of expiration, least the liquor be defiled
with an extraneous quality; especially when a more violent fire is to be
adhibited.

The Fourteenth.
The distillation of things Acid, has this property, that the more ignoble
part always comes forth first, and the more noble last. Wherefore in
Rectification of them, what first comes forth is to be separated, as phlegm.

The Fifteenth.
If waters smell of an Empyreuma, or shall be very much contaminated with a
certain fiery heat dispersed through their least parts; that is corrected if
the Glasses containing them, be set in a cold and moist place.

The Sixteenth.
When Liquors distilled per B. M. are to be rectified by Insolation; the
Glasses wherein they are put must be but half full, or three parrs filled at
most; and the Membranes, with which they are wont to be covered, must be
pricked with a needle; that through those Spiracles, the unprofitable phlegm may
exhale.

The Seventeenth.
Distillation must so long be continued, as until the Liquor come forth
without any savor of the matter imposited.

CHAP. II. Of Waters from Flowers, Herbs, Roots, Rinds, Seeds, Woods.
Water of Roses.
THis is prepared diverse ways. Some take of Roses a convenient quantity, and
these digested three days in Baln. they distill with the vapor of hot water.

Others, without preceding digestion draw forth a water from them put into an
Alembeck. Others also distill them by ashes; where there is need of the greatest
Caution and circumspection, least the distilled Liquor be infected with an
Empyreuma. And there are others, who for lucre of gain, more than intending the
health of Men, take the Roses whole as they are gathered, with a great quantity
of water, and distill them by a Brass Vesica: and from thirty pound of Roses,
they extract a hundred pound of saleable water, having an indifferent good
odor. Others distill the flowers bruised by gentle heat of Baln. without any
Menstruum, or at most, only so much as will serve to moisten them: and for the
more expeditious procuring of a cooling virtue, in one distillation they first
moisten them, either with common water, or old Rose Water; or else for enduring
a fragrant and comforting virtue, they use more infusions in distilled water.
Which way, we follow in preparing it; only distinguishing between the white,
and the flesh colored. For from them, that the greater cooling virtue may be
obtained; we beat them in a Marble Mortar, having first moistened them with a
little Rain water, then with a Press, express the juice, and so distill it. The
flesh colored, bruised, without any moistning, are put into a great glass
vessel set in a Cellar; and after three days, the juice is expressed and
distilled. This is the most fragrant water, and will keep the fragrancy of its
odor many years. Some upon the pressings of these, pour clean and pure water,
and so macerated for eight days, they distill it either in Baln. or a brass
Vesica; and this water so d^stilled in virtue and efficacy, is not inferior to
the common vendible Rose Water.

Burning Water of Roses.
As from all other things, especially such as are Alimentose, as flagrant and
fragrant water, by the benefit of fermentation, may be extracted; so also from
Roses, which, by common censure are cold.

Take Roses gathered in a serene time, when they are wholly destitute of any
dewy moisture; beat these most accurately, and put them in a glass Cucurbit,
which afterward being firmly closed, place in a Cellar. As soon as the Matter
seems to smell of any acidity, take of the same bruised flowers, what quantity
you please, and thence distill a Liquor per Baln. the water thence extracted,
pour upon another part of the Roses; and again distill it after the same manner,
proceeding until all the quantity of fermented Roses has passed by Alembeck;
the feces, which are wont to remain in the bottom, being every time separated.
Afterward, all the water drawn from the Roses, distill by Baln. and abstract
about a twelfth part at least, and it if you please rectify. So will you have
a most grateful, and most odoriferous water; and which will as readily take
flame, as Spirit of wine.

Water of Succory.
Take of the Herbs, and Roots of Succory gathered in the middle of May, twelve
pound, bruise them, or cut them very small, pour on them of common water twenty
pound, and having macerated them three days; by a Vesica distill at least eight
pound.

Fennel Water.
. Of Fennel-seeds grossly beaten four pound, of common water twenty four pound,
add of Salt of Tartar or common Salt j. macerate these in a hot place.
Afterward distill them by a Brass Vesica, with its Refrigeratory; So the water
with the Oil will pass out together, which from it must be separated.

Cinnamen Water.
. Of the best Cinnamon grossly bruised; on which pour of Rose Water, and of
White Wind, of each three pound, macerate them in heat congruous to the heat of
dung; then make distillation per Baln. separating the first water, which is the
best; and also receiving the second apart; and so likewise the third. The
second may be used instead of a Menstruum for maceration. The third is
unprofitable phlegm.

Acid Water of Oak, Juniper, Guaiacum, and Box.
. The sawings of Oak, or small splinters, or shavings of Juniper and Guaiacum,
or shavings of Box: distill them in a Retort unto a dryness: afterward separate
the Oil from the water through a brown paper. Rectify the water in sand upon
Colcothar, or Sea Salt, or its own proper ashes: then by distillation separate
the phlegm from the acid Liquor: Lastly, reserve a third part of the most pure
Liquor, or there about. It is useful in dissolving Corals and Pearls, and in
extracting their Tinctures.

Compounded Water of Cinnamon.
Macerate and distill Cinnamon, as above; adding the Roots of Dittany of Crete,
Angelica, of each ij. In this water dissolve as much white Sugar, as you can,
and digest the whole for one day natural: afterward segregate the superfluous
water by distillation; then add of Aqua vitae rectifyed ^j. and diligently mix
them. It is of admirable virtue in the Pest, and in a difficult Birth.

CHAP. III. Of sundry kinds of Aqua fortis.
STrong Waters, which are also called Caustic, Chrysulcae, Separatory, and
Stygian Waters, are confected by violent fire, of Atramentum, Sutorium, Salt
Nitre, Salt-armoniack, Stibium, sublimate Mercury, Allom, Cinnabar, etc. Of
which, that which obtains the greatest caustic, and corrosive force of all, is
called Aqua Stygia; but that which dissolves gold, Aqua Regia.

Common Aqua fortis.
. Vitriol dried two pound, Saltpeter purified one pound, grind them together,
and mix them; then put them into a Retort very well coated; which place in a
Furnace of Reverberation, and applying a capacious Receiver, distill by fire
gradually augmented, for twenty four hours. When white and cloudy Spirits are
dissipated in the Recipient, the distillation is ended; after which suffer all
to cool by degrees. The water taken out, clarify with Silver in this manner:
take a fourth part of the Liquor distilled, in which project of pure silver j.
and dissolve the same over a fire; pour out the Solution on the other three
parts, and they will wax milky; let the water settle, and pour off the clear.
If you would have it be Aqua Regia in iiij. of this common water, dissolve j.
of Salt Armoniack, or common Salt dried; and with it you may dissolve gold.

A perpetual Aqua fortis, and the way of making Cinnabar.
Dissolve Mercury in Aqua fortis, add of Sulphur an equal part; distill these by
Retort, and you will have a water more potent than before, and in the neck of
the Retort Cinnabar.

Philosophic Water, or Aqua Regia.
. Of Salt Nitre purified, and Salt armoniack, of each ij. grind, and mix them
well together; and in a large Retort, with a capacious Receiver annexed, the
junctures gently luted; make distillation in ashes, continuing the fire until
all the fumes with great violence be come forth; and no more drops will fall
from the Retort. Then take out the Retort while it is hot, and put in the same
quantity of the abovesaid matter, and mix it with the Caput-mortuum, distilling
it as above.

CHAP. IV. Of Spirits.
SPirits participate partly of water, and partly of fire; and as they are more
aqueous, or more oleaginous; so are they called either water or Oil. Yet such,
as are extracted from Minerals, are for the most part called Oils.

Among the Spirits of Animals, the spirit of humane blood excels; of
Vegetables, spirit of Wine; and of Minerals, spirit of Vitriol.

Spirit of Wine.
Digest Rich wine in dung, or like heat, in Circulatory vessels of an equal
largeness for eight or ten days; afterward the vessels cooled, pour it out into
high Cucurbits, on which set Alembecks, with Recipients annexed, the junctures
being firmly closed with Hogs or Ox-bladders, make distillation in Baln.
according to Art. First the spirit Spirit.
comes forth, which keep apart by changing the Receivers; then urge the phlegm
till the feces remain thick like liquid honey. The same feces distill by Retort,
administering fire gradually, and you shall receive a fat Oil. Oil.
Then from the Caput-mortuum, by reverting the phlegm upon it, and by
digesting, filtring, and coagulating, you may extract a Salt. Salt.
If you desire the spirit of wine more excellent, rectify it by often repeated
distillations.

Spirit of Tartar.
. Of pure white Tartar five pound, put it in a glass Retort, to which, when
placed in ashes with a large Receiver annexed, administer fire gradually; first
the spirit comes forth, afterward the Oil; both which must be rectifyed by
addition of Salt of Tartar, and afterward separated each from other.

It is a famous aperitive; wherefore in retention of the Menstrues, the
Paralysie, Jaundies, and such like affects, it is wonderfully efficacious. It
is also used in the Dropsy, with other hydragoge waters. In the Leprosy,
Indian disease, Pleurisy, and Quinsey, it is also exhibited. The dose from j.
to ij. in convenient Liquors.

Spirit of Turpentine.
. Of clear Turpentine, what quantity you please; put it into a Brass Vesica
(with its Refrigeratory) almost filled with water. So a spirit is drawn forth,
which will swim above the water; and by B. M. it may be rectifyed. Its use in
Medicine is manifold. The Cough, Phtisick it cures; pestilential venoms it
resists; it clears the stomach of sordid and viscous stoppages: it makes Urine
sweet as a Violet; it expels the Stone, and gravel, and heals the Strangury,
and Ulcers of the bladder: it opens, and comforts the nervous parts; heats the
Spermatick vessels, and excites Venus: dissolves coagulated blood, purifies the
womb, and in suffocation of the Matrix is exceeding profitable. Externally in
contusions, it is of admirable use, and exceeding beneficial.

Spirit of Sulphur.
Under a Glass Campane place an earthen vessel with Sulphur, which set on fire.
The inferior vessel must be so fitted to the Campane; that the ascending fumes
may not suffocate the flame, but carried freely upward into the head, may there
be condensed into Liquor, and so fall into a vessel apt to receive the same.
From one pound of Sulphur, may you have j. of spirit, of so great efficacy, as
Leonardus Fieravant said he could never sufficiently admire the virtue thereof,
inwardly exhibited into the body. It may be given with appropriate waters, or
Syrups to 4. 5. or 6. drops. And be mixed with Electuaries and Pills, as well
in hot as cold distempers. Externally also it is profitable for dealbation of
the Teeth: for Ulcers in Lues-venerea of the jaws; Warts and Fistula's of the
Fundament, and all other members. It is also called Oil, (...).
but improperly.

Spirit of Vitriol.
There are three kinds of Vitriol; the Green, White, and Blew, participating of
the nature of Salts, Alloms, and Sulphurs, some more, and some less. The first
indeed participates more of Salt, the second of Allom, and the third of
Sulphur; and they consist of an aqueous, earthy, and middle nature, the aqueous
and earthy, as Ripley witnesses in his Pupil of Alchimy, cannot be separated
from their extremities, but by the mediation of Mercury; which, as Geber
affirms, retains what is of its own nature, rejecting and exposing to the fire,
what is not so. The middle perspicuous substance exalted by sublimation, into a
Snow-like candor, occultly in it self contains a sulphurious seed, most Red,
like a small worm. Whence in Turba it is said, Philosophers have admired, that
a redness should be existant in so great whiteness. Of this Sulphur Gebar thus
speaks; in cap. 28. Sum. By the most high GOD, that thing illuminates and
rectifies all bodies, because it is Allom, and Tincture. This is that Aqua
vitae, the dry water which wetteth not the hands, the congealed water, the
animate Salt; touching which Raymund Lully after Alphidius says, salt is no
other than fire; nor fire any other than sulphur, nor sulphur other than
Argent- vive, reduced into that precious, celestial, incorruptible substance,
which we call our stone. Whence one to the Letters VITRIOLUM thus alludes.
Visitando Interiora Terrae Rectificando, Invenies Occultum Lapidem Veram
Medicinam: that is, visiting the interior parts of the earth, by rectifying
you may find the occult stone, the true Medicine.

Moreover, among Artists it is controverted, whether among the various kinds of
Vitriol, either that of Cyprus, the Roman, or Hungarick, be the better, and
more noble. The Cyprian and Roman may well enough be suspected, because they
are for the most part adulterate and sophisticate, being various, viz. of
diverse colors, forms, and virtues. And the Hungarick, such as by French and
German Merchants is brought unto us, is a certain blew, perspicuous, and
sometimes a greenish Vitriol, which they sell for genuine, and as brought from
Pannonia, but they lie impudently. For when I with great travel went to those
parts, with intention to go into the Mines of Gold and Silver, that I might by
(...).
proper experience have more perfect notice of Metals and Minerals; the
Illustrious and noble Lord of Bloenstain, general Prefect of the Mines, of that
Kingdom of Hungary, through his abundant cour^esie and humanity, did certainly
affirm to me, that there were two kinds of Vitriol there; whereof one was
white, and very aluminose, of which they make Chrysule-waters, but the other
blew, and far more excellent; yet the Minera of this, although much better than
the other, was not dug; because no Merchants judged it worth their time, to buy
such Vitriol, and transport it to other Lands. The same is likewise affirmed of
Antimony, Ungarick Antimony genuine, is seldom brought into other Regions.
which is found in abundance in the Gold Mines.

That Vitriol, of right, and deservedly, ought to be censured most excellent,
which by the benefit of water is made of Venus, and thence extracted, as is
mentioned hear-after. To this, the blew aforesaid is somewhat inferior; for
this contains in it self more of Sol; transmutes more of Mars into Venus; and
longer sustains the Examen of fire, before it gives forth its last spirits,
from what place soever it is brought.

Therefore of this Vitriol. twelve pound, calcine it in an earthen vessel with
moderate fire, until all its humidity recede. The vessel cooled, reduce the
Mass, which will be about seven pound, to powder very fine, and with one pound
or thereabouts of the same Test [where it was calcined] pulverisate, put it
into a Retort firmly coated; which must be so large, as at least a third part
thereof may be empty. Then place it in a Reverberatory furnace, apply a large
Recipient, with a short neck likewise coated, and diligently close the juncture
of the Retort with the Receiver, with Salt Luting. Then above the Retort place
a broad cover of earth of one foot high, and quadrangularly perforate in the
top [or upper part] being made exactly to close the mouth of the furnace, of
what form soever it be, whether square or round, exactly fitted in altitude
convenient, and to close or shut in the mouth of the furnace equally on every
side; that the vacant place between the Retort and the cover may be filled with
coals. Which being done, make a quadrangular draught with four pieces of Tile,
above the square hole of the cover, that the flame by help of such a vehicle,
may, when time serves, more freely ascend. The Orifice of the draught, as also
the furnace door and ash hole, must be so closed, as for the first four hours,
the coals in the furnace may but just burn, without being extinguished; by
which the Retort being leisurely and successively heated, then for the
following four hours, the heat may be increased, by gradually, and by little
and little every hour opening the holes above and below, until the flame begin
to break out in the superior part, and the Retort wax hot all over, the ash
hole and draught being altogether open, and no way stopped; the fire must be
intended eighteen or twenty hours, until all the spirits be come forth. After
two days, moisten the Salt Luting, wherewith the Retort and Recipient were
joined, with a wet cloth keept on for an hour, because it will be so very
hard, as without moistning it cannot be removed without endangering the
Glasses; then may you safely take off the Receiver. Which being done, by
distillation in Baln. or a gentle heat in ashes, separate the phlegm from the
spirit. There are some, who after separation of the phlegm, do rectify the
spirit in sand upon Corals beaten small.

This spirit, in burning Fevers mixed with appropriate waters, conveniently
cools; it quenches thirst, resists the putrefaction of humors; it operates by
Urine and Sweat, consumes phlegm, breaks tough and viscous homours, restores
languished appetite, and excellently tingeth juices of Roses, Violets, and
other flowers.

Spirit of Nitre.
Nitre or Saltpeter must be mixed with three parts of common Bolus, and
distilled by Retort, the space of ten or twelve hours. Of one pound of
Saltpeter, you may have a pound of Spirit, if you rightly operate.

This Spirit is the true Balsamic fire of nature, and in the Cholick,
Pleurisy, and Quinsey, is very beneficial.

Burning Spirit of Saturn.
Calx of Saturn or Minium, is infused in distilled Vinegar, or else the phlegm
thereof: afterward it is digested for one day natural, being often stirred,
that it Chrystallize not in the bottom of the vessel, the Menstruum is poured
off, and other Menstruum poured on, until all the Saltness be abstracted. The
evacuations are filtred, and two parts or thereabout vapoured away; the third
remaining part set in a cold place to Chrystallize; the Chrystals are
separated, and dissolved in fresh Vinegar; filtred, and often as above
coagulated, until they be sufficiently impregnated with the Salt of Vinegar,
Armoniack, as with proper ferment. They are digested for a Month with such
heat in Baln. as they may continually be resolved, like Oil into Liquor.
Afterward they are distilled by Retort in sand, observing degrees of fire, into
a large capacious Receiver annexed; which if not very exactly luted on with the
Retort, so great a fragrancy (filling the whole Laboratory) will be lost, as I
doubt not but if the odours of all odorate Vegetables were gathered together,
and mixed, it would far exceed them. After distillation, when all is cooled,
you will find a Caput-mortuum very black, and of no value. From the Liquor come
forth you shall separate a yellow Oil supernatant; and an Oil Red as blood
settling to the bottom. The phlegm by reiterated distillations, being separated
from the burning water, you shall keep the most fragrant spirit of Saturn, as a
most precious Balsom for various diseases, profitably to be exhibited, as well
internally, as externally.

Moreover, a fragrant Spirit of this kind may by Chemical Art be extracted, not
from Saturn only, but also from all other Metals, by mediation of that viscous
Mineral water, which, by the benefit of Vulcan only, without the addition of
any extraneous thing, in a most short space of time is prepared. Of which
Rhodianus, in the Treatise of three words, says, That fumous, aqueous, and
adustive Spirit, is changed into a most noble body, and flies not any more from
the fire, but flows like Oil, etc. For it receives all the qualities of that
Metal, with which, by the industry of a prudent Artificer, it is mixed, as also
the odor, color, and taste, with conservation of its vegetate faculty. And as
Rhasis says: As it is changed, it changes. Whence it is apparent, how basely,
ignorant, vulgar Misochymists are, who atribute, odours, tastes, and other
medicinal virtues to vegetables only, and esteem Metallicks as destructive to
the humane body, and worthy to be shunned, more than a Dog or Snake.

CHAP. V. Of Vinegar.
Distilled Vinegar.
VInegar without digestion, is distilled in the same manner, as Spirit of Wine:
only that the phlegm, as in all other sharp things, comes forth first, and the
spirit last. Oil, and Salt, by like reason as is said in Wine, are thence
extracted.

Vinegar Alkalisate.
Upon Vinegar distilled to the consistency of Liquid honey, pour so much common
water, as may stand above it six, seven, or eight inches, digest it in Balneum
for two days: then set it in a cold place to Chrystalize. Remove from them the
water by inclination, and pour on other until all the oleaginy recede. Then
must the Chrystals be often dissolved in boiling water, and coagulated in a
cold place, that they may be rendered altogether transparent, and on them poured
vinegar four times distilled, and purged from all its phlegm, so as to one
pound of Chrystals, be added four pound of Vinegar. Which being done the whole
must be distilled by Retort in sand, administering toward the end, a fire
sufficiently strong. The distillation finished, calcine the feces, and extract
a fixed Salt; then rectify the vinegar with its essential animate Salt,
distilling it with a strong fire from the fixed Salt, and repouring, what is
distilled off, upon the remaining Salt, until all the Salt shall have passed by
Alembeck. Then twice distill this vinegar impregnated with this its own Salt in
a boiling Baln. that being done, keep the vinegar, thus rendered most potent,
for calcining the most hard bodies of Stones and Chrystals.

CHAP. VI. Of Oils.
OIl expressed from Olives, is most properly so called, because it participates
of every exceeding quality; but others are only similitudinarily so named.

All Oils are between an airy and fiery nature: and by how much the more sharp
they are, so much the more fiery; and the loss sharp are said to be, the more
Ethereal and airy.

Oil of the Yolks of Eggs.
Fry the Yolks broke in a Drying Pan, with temperate heat, until they wax Red,
and send forth Oil; keeping them continually moving with a stick, that they
burn not. Then express the Oil hot, and with a great quantity of distilled
water, digest it for a Month in Baln. Some take the Yolks so fried, and
enclosing them in cloth moistened Oil of sweet Almonds, press out the Oil with
with a Press.

Mathiolus writing to Dioscorides, commends this Oil as useful for cleansing,
and removing roughness of the Skin, and clefts of the lips, hands, and feet;
and against dolours of Ulcers, of the joints, and all nervous places. It is
likewise profitable in scaldings or burnings by fire, and in membranes of the
Brain, malignant Ulcers it cicatriseth, and generates hairs.

Oil of Sage.
Take a great quantity of Sage, and set it in the shade two or three weeks;
afterward distill it by a Refrigeratory, and receive the water (which you may
rectify) and the Oil. Which is profitable in all diseases of the Nerves: in
the Paralysie, Apoplexy, Convulsion, and such like.

Oil of Wax.
Melt wax with a gentle fire, and let it stand so long melted, as till from it
no more bubles rise. Then removing it from the fire, mix it with double its own
weight of Salt decrepitate, and distill it by Retort with gentle heat. From one
pound of wax, you may extract xij. of Oil.

It resolves, attenuates, penetrates, mollifies, and discusses; wherefore it is
profitable in hard imposthums, and cold tumors. It heals chops in the paps of
women's breasts, and mitigates the dolours of them. Also it consolidates fresh
wounds, if therewith they be twice a day anointed. It is beneficial in burns,
if mixed with oil of eggs.

Oil of Turpentine.
. The thick substance remaining after distillation of spirit of Turpentine, and
distill it per se, by Retort in ashes. So when the oil is extracted, Colophony
will reside in the bottom of the Retort. If you shall digest it afterward in
Baln. as is said of the Oil of yolks of eggs, all its empyreuma will be removed.

It heats, softens, discusseth, opens, purges, and externally may be used
instead of true Balsom, in all wounds; malignant, fetid, and incurable Ulcers,
as Fistula's, the Wolf, and such like running soars; in the Parotides
fractures, and contractures, etc. But it does not always per se, if used alone,
prove so beneficial, as when it is conveniently mixed with other appropriates
for curing the affects.

Oil of Cloves.
. Of Cloves grossly beaten four pound, of fountain water forty pound, macerate
them in a hot place, as long as shall be convenient, add of Tartar ij.
afterward distill it by a brass Vesica with its Refrigeratory, and you will have
viij. of oil. In the same manner, Mace, Pepper, and the Seeds of Anise, and
Coriander, etc. may be distilled.

It helps in cold diseases of the Stomach, Liver, Heart, and the Diarrhaea from
a cold cause; it dissipates melancholy spirits, and clarifies the gross.
Externally it heals green wounds, and performs the office of true Balsom.

Oil of Sugar.
. Of white Sugar grossly beaten iiij. Aqua vitae, viij. Set fire of the Aqua
vitae in a silver or earthen dish glazed, into which cast the Sugar,
continually stirring it with a Spatula, until the flame cease; then add of
Rose Water ^j. mix them.

It corroborates, and by experience certainly helps those that labor with a
cough caused by coldness of the Lungs.

Oil of Tartar.
This oil, beside the way above delivered in preparing the spirit thereof, is
also made per deliquium, by putting Tartar calcined to a whiteness in a Cellar,
This oil is an admirable Remedy in the Measels, all Ulcers, especially
venereal, in the Tinea, Scab, and Warts. It makes the face smooth, and the skin
soft.
or other moist place, until it be resolved into oil, which must afterward be
filtred. Also it may be prepared: If Tartar, after calcination be dissolved in
common water, filtred and coagulated; and the coagulate placed in a cold moist
place, until it be resolved.

Oil of Amber.
Digest a pound of Amber beaten in one pound of white wine. Then add a handful
of prepared Salt, distill it by Retort, observing degrees of fire. By
distillation twice rectify it with Salt only.

This oil was once called Sacred, by reason of the admirable virtues it has,
being as well exhibited per se, as mixed with others; in the Epilepsie,
Appoplexy, Melancholy, Cramp, Vertigo, Pest, Stone, cold defluxions of the
Head, Palpitations of the Heart, deliquiums of the mind, difficulty of
breathings, difficulty of making water, difficult Birth, Strangulations of the
womb, retention of the Menses, white flux of the Matrix, Worms, and Fevers.

A compounded Oil for the Hemicrania.
. Of Rue one handful, boil it in one pound of oil Olive, in a new earthen pot
for half an hour. Then pour it it into a Retort, and to it add of Venice
Turpentine xij. of Colophony iiij. distill it in sand; the clear water, which
comes forth first, being of little value separate. Afterward gradually
increasing the fire, the oil will come forth, which receive apart.

In the time of the Fit, heat a little of it over a fire, and with Cotton
moistened in it, anoint the forehead and Temples, and the dolourous part also,
ordering the Patient to go to bed.

A compounded Oil for the Womb.
. Of the powder of Rue, a little dried, one ^ound Castor, ij. Olibanum, Myrrh,
of each iiij, ^il of Linum pound, digest them four days in ^orse dung, or like
heat; afterward distill them by ^etort in a close Reverberatory. With this
Liquor ^oint the Womb morning and evening.

Oil of Tiles.
Small pieces of Tiles or Flints (like Beans) make Red hot in a Crucible,
which, so fiery hot, cast into old oil Olive; close the vessel, and leave it
for a night. Afterward distill the small Stones with the oil by Retort. Rectify
the oil by distilling it the second, and third time with prepared Salt.

Oil of Sulphur.
. Of Sulphur beaten one pound, Calx-vive pound Mercurial Salt iiij. mix them,
and distill by Retort. For wounds and Ulcers, it is very profitable.

Oil of Salt.
Salt consists of diverse parts; earthy, The nature of Salt.
aqueous, and fiery. Its consistency and solidity, is from earth, its
Liquability from water, and its biting property from fire. It is sharp, (...).
bitter-sweet, cutting, subtle, penetrative, pure, fragrant, incombustible,
and preserves other bodies from corruption; perspicuous, as air, by reiterated
distillations; dissoluble in humid, and Liquable in fire like Metals. And it is
as the Soul in the body, according to Pliny, who after the Stoics, says, Salt
is given to Swines flesh, being as it were dead in its own nature, instead of a
Soul. For this, in manner of ^erment, where it has power of penetration,
converts the body, with which it is mixed into its own nature, by consuming the
humor obnoxious to putrefaction. Raymund Lully calls the salsuginous Liquor,
dispersed through the whole body, Urinal humor: Paracelsus, Mummy.

There are diverse ways invented by Artists, of extracting the oil of spirit of
Salt. Some distill Salt decrepitate per se, without addition of any external
thing. But since salt is of easy fusion; and when co-united in one, it retains
the most contumacious spirits: after distillation for twenty four hours, all
being cooled, they break the Retort, grind the Mass of salt, and put it in a
new Retort with the distilled Liquor; and this they repeat so often, as till
the whole salt be resolved into oil, which in the eighth or ninth distillation
is wont to be. This Operation is too tedious. Others dissolve calcined salt in
a Cellar, or with Rainwater, and impaste it with Potters Clay sifted, and
thence make small balls or pellets, which when dried, they put into a Retort,
and so extract the spirit.

But I am wont thus to prepare it. I take of Sea salt calcined, two pound, and
I mix it with six pound of flour of Tiles, Red Earth, or common Bolus: all
which I put into a firm and large Retort, so as at least a third part may
rema^n empty; and applying a capacious Recipient, into which I first pour one
pound of distilled water; then do I keep it distilling for thirty hours,
observing the same degrees of fire mentioned in distillation of spirit of
Vitriol. After separation of the water and phlegm, I receive xx. at least of
most sharp o l, which must be rectifyed. It is endued with most po^ent virtues;
whether it be used internally or externally. It renovates the whole Man, and
preserves from all diseases; if it be used in r^ch Wine, or Aqua vitae. Mixed
with salt of Wormwood, and taken either in Wine or water of Wormwood, it expels
the Dropsy. It cures the Epilepsie, Jaundies, Fevers, Stone, and Maw-worms. By
anointing it heals Members disjoynted, contracted, paralytick, and apostemated.
Also it mitigates dolours of the Gout, if mixed with oil of Turpentine, or of
Wax, or Camomil. Also it calcines all Metals, Stones, yea, Glass it self: the
most perfect work of Art.

Another way.
Dissolve common salt in humid per se, filter it so often, as till no feces be
left; then set it in horse dung for two Months, afterward with most strong
fire distill it, and separate the phlegm from the unctuous, salsug nous Liquor
by B. M. Whatsoever is most obnoxious to corruption, if imbibed with this
Liquor, it remains incorrupt for many Ages. It is believed, that that body of a
most beautiful Woman was embalmed with this Liquor; which, as Raphael
Volateranus relates, in the time of Pope Alexander the VI. was found about 117.
years before, or thereabouts, in an ancient Sepulcher near Albana, so entire,
and wholly free from any corruption, as if the Life had but that hour expired.
Whereas, by the Sculpture upon the Marble Tomb, it was witnessed to have lain
there buried above 1300. years.

Oil of Vitriol.
Dissolve the best Vitriol in common water; the Solution digest by gentle heat
of Baln. afterward fi^ter it; and by vapor of Baln. in a Glass vessel,
abstract ^he water till it contract a skinnyness. Then set the vessel in a cold
place to produce perspicuous Chrystals; which removed, the remaining water
evaporate until it contract a new skin, and produce new Chrystals in a cold
place. All which separated, dissolve, digest, and filter; and in a cold place
again set to Chrystallize; and as above, separate, repeating the same labor
the third time, until the Vitriol be freed from all Heterogeneal terrestriety.
This Vitriol put into an high Cucurbit, and in Baln. abstract the phlegm to a
dryness, reverting the humid so often upon its own earth, as till the dry shall
have imbibed all the humid. The Mass take out, and grind to a subtle powder,
which put into a firm Retort, with an eighth part of its own weight of Spirit
of wine perfectly rectified, and observing degrees of fire for three days,
distill off all the Spirits. The vessel being cooled, what shall be in the
Receiver, mix with other two pound of Colcothar, as above prepared; and again
for three days distill it. Then in an high Cucurbit separate the spirit of wine
by Baln. afterward distill the spirit of Vitriol by ashes. In which spirit, if
you shall dissolve Corals or Pearls, you will have a true Antepileptick. The
Oil, Red like blood, which adheres to the bottom, you may rectify by Retort in
sand, or by digestion only, and separate the earthy feces settling to the bottom
from the oil. Its use is rather in Metallicks, than in Medicine.

Oil of Antimony.
. Of crude Antimony and Sugar candid, of each iiij. of calcined Allom j. grind
and mix them together, distill them by Retort with a very moderate fire. So will
you have a Red oil, most apt for curing Ulcers.

CHAP. VII. Of Liquid Tinctures.
BY the word Tinctures, Chemists do not understand, as the vulgar think, simple
colors separated or exalted from a mixed body; but essential colors of things,
and such as are inherent in the formal qualities, extracted from the concrete
body. Wherefore Tinctures are sometimes called oils, sometimes spirits, and
sometimes Quintessence.

Tincture of dry Roses.
Put j. of Roses dried in the shade, in four pound of warm water, unto which
add ij. or thereabout of spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur. In three or four hours
the water will be deeply colored, which must be filtred. In which if you
dissolve xij of Sugar, you will have a true Refrigerative of the Liver.

Tincture of Violets.
Bruise the Flowers, and macerate them in their proper water, or in oil of
Sugar above described; afterward express them; the expression strain until
Tincture answer your desire. Or.

Put the flowers to the nose of an Alembeck, that the proper distilled water
gliding through them, may abstract the Tincture with them.

CHAP. VIII. Of Balsoms.
Chemical Balsoms are no other than compounded oils, and by the addition of
other things rendered more thick. They consist almost of a triplicit Liquor,
viz. spirituous, or aqueous, oleaginous, and thick like honey. With which
sometimes, as the nature of the matter requires, Musk, Amber, Civet, etc. are
wont to be added.

Balsom of Cinnamon.
This is compounded of the Tincture extracted by spirit of wine, and inspissate
with oil, and salt of the same as also with white wax dissolved, and well washed
in Rose water from all its acrimony, which gives a convenient consistency. Or
it is made of Deer suet, or suet of a Wether well cleansed and washed, every of
them per se; or one of them may be mixed with the wax, and afterward with the
extract oil, and Salt be reduced to a j^st consistency. So are prepared Balsoms
of Cloves, Juniper, Sage, Rosemary, Anise, and such like; which as well for
external anointing, as internal use, are most efficacious.

Balsom of Sulphur.
. Of flowers of Sulphur j. oil of Turpentine iij. mix them, and in a Glass
placed in sand, gently boil it for the space of eight hours, until it be as Red
as blood. Then pour upon it common water, and by Alembeck distill off the
superst^ous oil with the water. In the bottom, the Balsom of Sulphur will
remain; from which you may extract a Tincture with spirit of wine, and
coagulate it, which is given in water of Hysop, or Syrup of Liquorish, to those
that are afflicted with the Cough of the Lungs.

Balsom of Saturn.
Distill away two parts of Vinegar, impregnated with the salt of Saturn, that
only a third part may remain. Then take of oil of Roses iiij. of the
impregnated Vinegar viij. Of this pour drop by drop upon oil, mixing them
continually together in a brass Mortar, until it be like Unguent. Which helps
in Inflammations, and hot Gouts. If the same Vinegar impregnated with the salt
of Saturn, shall be mixed with an equal part of common water, and applied hot
with double Linen Clothes, upon contusions, in what part of the body soever,
it presently asswageth all dolor.

CHAP. IX. Of Extracts.
EXtracts, specially so called, are prepared of the Animal and Vegetable kind,
by the benefit of accommodated Dissolvents or Menstruums, such are spirit of
wine, of Juniper, Whey of Milk, Hydromel-vinose, water of redolent Apples,
fumitory, and the like, or waters of the same things, from whence you intend to
prepare the Extracts. From Animals, Flesh, Mumy, the Liver, Spleen, Lungs,
Testicles, and like parts, are chosen: Whence extracts of Cranium are famous,
for the Epilepsie; of Ox-spleen, for provoking the Menses; of the Liver of a
Calf, for the Dropsy, and hepatick Flux; of the Lungs of a Fox, for the
Asthma, and like diseases. From Vegetables, various extracts are made; as from
Herbs, Flowers, Roots, Juices, Berrys, Rinds, Woods, Aromaticks, Seeds, and
Fruits; as is manifest in Quercetanus his last Chapter, of restoring the
Pharmacepaea of Dogmaticks.

Moreover, for preparing purging extracts; many have hitherto used spirit of
wine, for a dissolvent; which because it does much infringe their Cathartick
force, is not to be promiscuously used in all. It may sometimes be used, as in
extract of Hellebore, Coloquintida, and Scamony; but in others, distilled
waters must be substituted; as in Rubarb, water of Endive is most commodious;
in Leaves of Oriental Sena, water of redolent apples, of Fumitory, and Fennel:
in Agarick, water of Cinnamon; and so in others, others. Now, could such an
Aqua vitae, deprived of its Salt armoniack, be obtained, as Dariotus (and after
him John du Val, Physician of Issoldunen, likewise Panotus in his Treatise of
the true preparation of Chemical Medicaments, in the Magistery of Tartar)
teaches, a more excellent could not be desired for preparing extracts of every
kind. Although Dn. Mayaud, a Man in the Chemical Art long experienced, and my
very good friend, did with me, according to prescript of the abovenamed
Doctors, attempt to prepare such a Menstruum; yet in this operation, we
sometimes lost both the oil, and our labor. Whence a Man may conject^re, that
when the good Panotus, in the above cited Magistery of Tartar, did admonish and
invite others to reverence GOD, and render him thanks for so rare a Secret; he
himself did not enough fear God, or render him praise, when he consecrated such
a Magistery to Posterity.

Extract of Sena.
Macerate the Leaves of Sena twenty four hours, in a sufficient quantity of
distilled water of redolent Apples; what is tinged, poured off, and filter; the
Leaves being first strongly expressed. In the mean while, from the feces extract
a salt according to Art, and commix it with the extract, which distill with
gentle heat of Baln. until but two parts remain; or in a glass Basin, exhale
the superfluous homor, by vapor of an hot Baln. to the consistency of an
extract. Note, the extraction of Tincture from the same Leaves of Sena, must
not be the second time repeated, least the extract admitted into the body,
excite grievous torments.

Extract of Rubarb.
Fresh Rubarb cut very small, digest in water of Endive, or other odoriferous
water, until it be colored; what is tinged pour off, and repour on fresh water
so often, as until it will no more be tinged. The evacuations filter, circulate,
and distill off the Menstruum to the consistency of an extract, by heat of Baln.
the salt from the feces being first added, as in the former preparation.

Panchymagogon.
. Pulp of Coloquintida, Black Hellebore, Diagridium, of each ij ss. Leaves of
oriental Sena iiij. Choice Rhei, iiij. Species of Diarrhodon Abbatis, j.
Hermodactils, Turbith, Agarick, Aloes of each j.
Make an extract with water of Cinnamon, according to Art, adding the salt from
the feces. Dose from j. to ss.

For the Quartane.
. Aloes iiij. Myrrh, Roots of Gentian, Round Aristolochy, of each iij. Oriental
Saffron, ss. Of the three kinds of Saunders of each j. Coltsfoot j. Leaves of
Sena cleansed j ss. The best Mithridate ss.
Pulverisate what are to be pulverised, and make a Mass with Syrup of
Scolopendrium, of which make an extract with water of Carduus benedictus,
adding the salt of the feces. Dose. From j. to ss. the day before the coming of
the fit in the morning, with j. of water of the extract.

Germain Treacle.
Fresh and ripe grains of Juniper are beaten in a Marble Mortar; to every one
pound of which, four pound of distilled Rainwater is poured, and for three
days they are digested in a hot place; afterward strained through a cloth,
and strongly expressed; the strained Liquor filtred, and exhaled to the
consistency of an extract. Dose j. It is given in the Cholick, Stone,
suffocation of the Matrix, suppression of the Menses, cold defluxions, and in
the Dropsy. It is also a specific Preservative against the Pest, and all
contagious air.

Laudanum, or (...).
Quovis Homerico praestantius.
A Narcotick extract is called Laudanum, that is to say, a Laudible Medicine,
viz. by reason of the famous effects thereof, Some call it Nepenthes.
which we very often find in the most grievous diseases, and dolours. For Homer
witnesses, that the Remedy of Hellen was insignized with such a name, whereby
all languishings of the heart, and sicknesses, are driven away, and pleasant
cheerfulness, and joy is induced.

. Tincture of Henbane, extracted according to art, with spirit of wine, made
sharp with spirit of Vi^riol or Sulphur j.

Extract of Opium, extracted as above, j. Extract of Oriental Saffron, j.
Mix these, and set them in a warm place for fifteen days, daily stirring them.
The days expired, draw off the spirit of wine by Baln. to the mass remaining in
the bottom; add extract of Castor ij.

The Tincture extracted, from ij. of Diamber, by spirit of Juniper Wine in a
vaporous Baln. together with the Dissolvent.

Let these stand in digestion for a Month, stirring them often, until all the
strong odor vanish. Then add, Tincture of Corals, Perlucid Amber prepared of
each j. Bone of the Stags-heart ss. Tincture of Gold, ss.


First beat what are to be beaten, then mix all these in a Marble Mortar, and
add Oil of Amber, Of Mace, Of Cinnamon, of each j.


Extract of Musk ss. but this in Women must be omitted: Put altogether mixed in
a temperate place, that the Mass may be dried, of it thence easily to form
pills. Dose from one grain to four.

CHAP. X. Of soft Tinctures.
ALthough Tinctures of this kind, by reason of the operations they perform, and
the consistency they have, may worthily be numbered with extracts; yet because
by Authors, they were endowed with the Title of tinctures; I thought it not
amiss to assign them a peculiar Chapter.

Tincture of Honey.
Mix honey with very clean sand, that it may be made a mass; then on it pour so
much spirit of wine, as may stand above it two fingers; digest it for five or
six hours; the colored spirit pour off, and pour on other, until it be no more
colored. The tinged spirit filter and coagulate. It helps the Pthisick in a
wonderful manner.

Tincture of Saffron.
This tincture is made with spirit of wine; which must so often be poured on,
as till all the tincture be extracted, and a whitish earth remain. The tincture
must be filtred, and the spirit of wine with gentle heat of Baln. abstracted.
It has various and egregious faculties: and especially it wonderfully
recreates and restores the spirits in swounings, if one only drop of it be
exhibited in a little broth or wine.

Tincture of Sugar.
. Of white Sugar pulverisate one pound, put it in a Cucurbit, or other
convenient vessel, with 2 spoonfuls of distilled Vinegar, digest it in hot
ashes for six hours. Then pour on of Aqua vitae, so much as will stand above it
two fingers; digest it until it be colored; afterward the tinged water pour
off, and pour on other often, until it be no more colored. Then remove the
Menstruum per Baln. and the tincture or Red essence will remain in the bottom,
which must be circulated with Cordial waters. It is profitable in the Syncopen,
and deliquiums of the mind, being exhibited with water of Cinnamon and Roses.

Tincture of Sulphur.
Melt Salt of Tartar in one vessel, and flowers of Sulphur in another;
afterward mix them together, then suffer them to cool. Afterward grind the
mass; on which pour so much spirit of wine, as will stand about it four
fingers. Digest it, until it be tinged with a most Red color; separate the
Menstruum by Baln. This tincture is the true Balsom of the Lungs.

Tincture of Coral.
Dissolve j. of Corals in one pound of juice of Lemons; digest it for eight
days, then filter the Solution: in this tincture dissolve of white Sugar viij.
Then digest it by evaporating to the consistency of a Syrup.

Dose one spoonful in every Hepatick flux, Dysentery, and flux of blood.

Another way.
. Of Coral beaten small, what quantity you will, infuse it in acid water, either
of Oak, or of Juniper, Guaiacum, or Box rectified; (as we have taught in the
Chapter of distilled waters) that the Menstruum may stand above the Coral three
or four fingers. Then place it to digest in horse-dung, or like heat for eight
days. What shall be dissolved pour off, and pour on other acid water; digest
and pour it off so often, as until the Corals be wholly dissolved: the
dissolutions filter, and distill to a dryness. To the matter remaining in the
bottom, pour the best spirit of wine. That will in eight days be tinged like
blood, being set in digestion: then separate the tinged Liquor from the feces;
repour on other spirit, digest, and pour it off, until you shall have extracted
all the tincture. Then filter the tinged spirit, and coagulate it to the
consistency of a Syrup. If you will, you may circulate it with Cordial water,
or add Sugar dissolved in Rose Water, and reduce it into a syrup.

Another way.
Corals are calcined with a like quantity of sulphur, and the tincture
extracted with distilled Vinegar, by digestion for five or six days.

Otherwise.
Corals beaten, are calcined with a like quantity of Saltpeter, for one hour
in a fire so moderate, as the Nitre may not melt. Afterward they are put hot
into a vessel, and spirit of wine is poured upon them, and with it they are
digested for twenty four hours. The tinged spirit is poured off, and other
spirit repoured on, until it shall have extracted all the tincture.

CHAP. XI. Of Calcination of Common Salt, Saltpeter, Vitriol, the Stone of the
Sponge, Crystal, and Marchasite of Silver.
Calcination of common Salt.
PUt common Salt in a crucible, or other earthen vessel, filling it full almost
to the top; then place the vessel covered between living coals, until it be
very hot all over, and the Salt cease crackling. Afterward dissolve it in
common water, filter the Solution, and coagulate it in a new glass dish.

Calcination of Saltpeter, or Mineral Crystal, or of Lapis Prunella.
Dissolve Saltpeter in common water, and filter it through brown paper, that
it may be purged from all its impurities. Then in a glass vessel boil it, and
scum it often before it be coagulated. When coagulate, and dry, grind it, and
in a clean earthen vessel placed in burning coals, liquefie the Salt. To every
pound of melted Salt, inject j. of flowers of Sulphur; yet not altogether at
one time, but at sundry times, until all the fatness be consumed in flame. But
the flame must studiously be avoided. This Solution, Filtration, Decoction,
Despumation, Coagulation, Eliquation, and Deflagration of the Salt, being
thrice repeated: the Salt is sufficiently prepared for medicinal use.

Of this Salt ss. dissolved in water of Roses, or Endive, is a principal
Arcanum in the Prunella, or soar throat, being gargled; for it takes away all
uncleanness of the mouth, and throat. And if a little of that water be
swallowed, it asswageth all internal heat, and is an admirable cooler of the
heart. It abateth the Cough, if taken with spirit of Wine: with water of Hysop,
it removes obstructions both of the Lungs, and Liver. Shortness of breath, it
cures. Hoarsness it helps, and restores lost speech, if ss. thereof be taken in
a morning fasting, with the yolk of an Egg moderately boiled. Moreover it is
useful in all diseases, both internal, and external, as John Tholdeus in his
Halography, and Bernard Penotus, in his book of the true preparation of
Chimical Medicaments amply teach.

Calcination of Vitriol.
Dry Vitriol to a whiteness, in an earthen vessel, not glazed, with moderate
fire: afterward increase the fire for a quarter of an hour, that the Vitriol
may wax red; then is it called Colcothar.

Calcination of the Sponge Stone.
Heat the Stone of the Sponge red hot often, and as often extinguish it in
distilled Vinegar, until it be resolved into a Calx. Its use in Calcination is
for extracting tincture.

Calcination of Crystal.
Crystal reverberated for six hours in a crucible, reduce to a subtle powder;
and mix it with an equal quantity of Saltpeter: and again reverberate it with
a vehement fire for eighteen hours. Pour it out while in flux, into clear
water; and what remains undissolved, dry, and reduce to an Alcohol. Then with
the same water boil it, until it be thickened like a Poultis; after which, lay
the Spissiude upon pieces of glass, to dry in heat; and again reduce it to an
Alcohol: and if you will, set it in a cold humid place to be resolved. If any
thing shall remain still undissolved, reiterate the Calcination with Nitre, and
the other labors, as above, that it may be Soluble.

Dose, three or four drops, with a like quantity of oil of Juniper: Against the
Stone of the Reins and bladder.

Another way.
Make clear and pondrous Crystal red hot often, and as often exstinguish it in
distilled Vinegar, until with the least touch it may be reduced to powder. Then
mix it with a like quantity of Saltpeter, and reverberate it for eighteen
hours. Then by many ablutions, extract a fixed Saltpeter, dry it, and reduce
into an Alcohol. It is profitable in the Stone, Falling sickness, Dysentery,
and Sterile Breasts. If any one would for the aforesaid affects, more
subtiliate this impalpable powder; let him digest it twenty four hours in
spirit of Wine, and by Retort distill it. What shall remain fixed, must be
reverberated as above; and so often digested and distilled, as until the
greater part shall ascend with the spirit of Wine. Then the spirit of wine
being separated by distillation, what remains in the bottom of the vessel, must
be set in a moist place, that it may be dissolved into a water or oil.

Calcination of Marchasite of Silver.
Weismouth or Marchasite must be dissolved in water made of Salts, unto a
sulphurous and Stiptick clearness. The solution being clear, pour upon it the
Nucleus.
essence of all liquid things; so in a moment it will be precipited into an
Alcohol, most white like snow, which must be freed from all acrimony, and
dried. Its use is for removing vices of the skin.

CHAP. XII. Of the various Calcination of Antimony.
Calcination of Antimony.
. Of choice Stibium four pound, of salt prepared five pound. These pulverised,
mix. And in a vessel of earth with a broad bottom placed over a furnace of
Reverberation, still them together, for the space of five or six hours, until
the fume cease, and the Stibium be made white, and somewhat yellow; (diligently
beware of Liquefaction, and the noxious fume.) Afterward grind it to powder,
from which, by affusion of hot water, and also of cold often, the salt must be
extracted; which dried and pulverised, sublime per se in a proper vessel for
ten or twelve hours. Have ng gathered the flores, grind the Catu-mortuum, and
reverberate it to a redness in a months space, the vessel being so closed, by
reason of the ashes, as the fire may not be impeded from due operation. After
calcination, draw forth the tincture with radicate Vinegar; and further
elaborate it by filtration, separation of the menstruum, and circulation with
Cordial water.

Another Calcination of Stibium, and Emetick Powder, or Mercurius Vitae.
. Of Antimony pulverised, ^iij.

Mercury sublimate, viij.

Mix them together, and distill them in ashes by a glass Retort, unto which
annex a Receptory half full of water. Afterward administer fire gradually,
until a gummose Liquor, like butter, adhere to the neck of the Retort, which
with a live coal, externally applied, cause to resolve, and it will be
precipited into the water in a white powder.

Then leisurely give fire of suppression, until a red Liquor come forth; which
beginning to appear, remove the Receiver, and apply another presently; and
intend the fire for an hour or two, until the Mercury joined with the sublimate
sulphur of Antimony, be sublimed to the neck of the Retort into Cinnabar. The
precipitate powder digest for one night, and separate the water (impregnated
with spirit of Vitriol) from the sublimate, and keep it for dissolving Corals
and Pearls. Then upon the precipitate powder, pour other water often, until all
its Acrimony be removed; afterward wash it with Cordial water, and dry it with
most gentle heat. Dose, in strong constitutions, is four or five grains, but in
the weak, two or three grains in a roasted Apple, or conserve of Roses.

It is beneficial in the Pest; diseases of the Head, Fevers, Lues-venerea,
Leprosy, Dropsy, and in Ulcers. But in exhibition hereof, Cautions in
exhibiting of Antimony to be observed.
those singular Cautions delivered by Crollius in his Basilica Chymica, are to
be observed; the first whereof is: That in the use of Antimony, care be taken,
that no constipations be, cholick dolours, nor one of the principal Members
hurt.

The second; nor that in those, to whom Antimony is given, a vein be cut either
before or after taking it.

The third; that it be not exhibited to choleric persons, nor such as
difficultly vomit, and who have otherwise but little strength; but unto those,
who are prone to vomit, having a strong stomach; a large and wide throat, and
who are otherwise accustomed with ease to vomit, and in whom the sickly matter
easily comes upward.

The fourth; where vomiting is needful, that a little pease broth gently
boiled, or fat broth of Hens, or warm beer be exh bited, and that certain times
if need be; that the sick may the more easily vomit, and the action of the
medicine be accelebrated.

Liver of Antimony, or Crocus of Metals.
. Of crude Antimony one pound, of Saltpeter, xij.

Mix these in an Iron mortar, where having first ground them well with a live
coal, set fire to the mixture; and it will presently be Liver of Antimony.
Afterward separate the Salt peter. Dose, from twelve to twenty grains, in
infusion of white wine, water of Carduus Benedictus, or other convenient
Liquors; especially in Pestilential Fevers.

Another Calcination of Stibium, working only by the inferior parts.
. Choice Antimony, and salt decrepitate, of each one pound, these ground
together, and well mixed, reverberate in a well luted crucible for twelve
hours, increasing the fire to it by degrees. The vessel cooled, wash the matter
so often with Aqua dulcis, as until all the acrimony be removed, then dry and
grind it. Dose, from twenty five, to thirty five grains.

Regulus of Antimony.
. Of Antimony, Saltpeter, and Tartar, of each one pound, mix these pulverised
well together, then set a crucible in the fire, that it may be hot. Which being
done, inject a spoonful of the powder, and presently close the vessel until the
fume cease; then removing the cover, inject more of the powders, and close it
again, so doing till all the powders be in; after which, give fire of fusion,
and shake the crucible, that the Regulus may settle to the bottom. The crucible
cooled, separate the Regulus from the feces, and keep it.

And from the Feces, a Sulphuraurate Diaphoretick, may in this manner be made.
. The feces of the Regulus, as above prepared, and reduce them to a Lexivium by
digestion or ebulition, then filter it hot through brown paper. To this
Lexivium when cold, add a little distilled Vinegar, and you will find the
Crocus edulcorated by many ablutions: Which dry, and keep apart. It will be an
admirable sudorifick and mundificative of the blood, most apt for expelling
many diseases. Dose from ss. to j.

Cr^^^s Martis Stellate.
. Of Horse nails pound, Antimony one pound, make the Mars hot in a crucible,
then add the Antimony beaten, and cover it, giving fire of fusion; afterward
inject at times ^j. of Nitre; and lastly, pour all out into a Cone. Again pour
the Regulus into the crucible, and add j. of Nitre at times, as above. Repeat
this Labor five or six times, until you have Regulus Martis Stellate.

Diaphoretick Antimony.
. Of Antimony, and Saltpeter, of each one pound, mix them, being pulverisate
together; then set a crucible in the fire, that it may be hot; when hot, inject
^j. or thereabout of this mixtion, and presently cover the crucible, until the
fume and noise cease. Afterward ^nject more of the powder, and close the vessel
as above, this do continually until all the mixture be put in, then administer
fire of L^quefaction for a quarter of an hour. Which being done, and the vessel
cold, take out the matter and grind it, mixing it as above, with an equal
quantity of Saltpeter, calcine it in the same manner as before. The matter
afterward being ground and edulcorated with ablutions, reverberate in an
earthen vessel closed, for the space of twenty four hours, until it be made a
candid powder, of which the Dose is fifteen grains.

Another.
. Of the venenate scum of the two Dragons once rectifyed, iiij. On which, when
resolved in heat, pour spirit of Balsamic salt, ^iij. from this mixture,
distill away the Liquor in sand to a dryness. The earth take out; and when very
well ground, on it repour its own distilled Liquor, with ^j. of fresh Balsamic
spirit, and distill as before.

Afterward to the powder ground as before, again pour on the distilled Liquor
anew, adding other ij. of spirit; and proceed again as at first. Then deliver
the dry and ground matter to be examined by Vulcan, for twenty four hours,
continually stirring it with a clean iron Instrument. At length from it often
abstract the Alcohol of wine, that a candid dry powder may remain. It is of
singular use in all pestilential affects, and malignant Fevers generally
infesting.

CHAP. XIII. Of Calcination, and preparation of Mercury.
MErcury is a Mineral body, compounded of subtle sulphurous earth and water
strongly commixed. The earthy substance thereof must be purged from its gross
sulphurous terrestreity, and its watery substance, from the superfluous
humidity in it contained. Mercury is twofold, natural and artificial.

The natural, active, Natural Mercury.
and well purifyed in Almagro near Calatrava, in the Kingdom of Castile, is
found living, per se, flowing, and coagulate into cinnabar which is extracted
by force of fire. This most ancient Minera, Pliny calls the continent of
eternal Liquor.

Like unto this is found in Idria, a Village of the County of Goritz in
Slavonia. But the Spanish excels in goodness, although Idria be more fertile.
But there is one thing remarkable, and worthy of admiration, viz. that although
the bordering Towns and people of Idria, are almost every year afflicted with a
Pestiferous Lues, yet from this evil they sometimes are wont to be wholly free,
which (I going to that place about eight years since) was confirmed to me by
the people, that a certain man of a very great age had observed it so in
himself, and had received like Information from his Ancestors. From whence, as
well as from other innumerable examples, it is found that Mercury is an
Alexipharmacon against all corruption, and putrefaction. Also no less
stupendous, and nigh to a prodigy, is that which I there noted: There was a
decrepit Old man, who, having spent the whole time of his Life in preparing
cinnabar, did perpetually tremble; and he did so dealbate gold coin, by
compressing it in his hand, as the native color thereof did wholly disappear.

There is also other Mercury found in the Mountain called Gimnavoda, six miles
distant from Cracovia in Poland, between Tarnava, Ribie, and Streletzky, which
at certain times of the year breaks out on the superficies of the earth,
especially in the Autumnal quarter. Yet about the Feast of John Baptist, I
there gathered many grains like Pease in the roots of green things. But this
Mercury is very aqueous, and far inferior to that of Sclavonia, as well as to
the Spanish. The natural is also found in many other places, and sometimes in
Gold and Silver Mines.

The Artificial, Artificial Mercury.
and its way of preparing is sufficiently known to Artists, viz. by
resusitative salts, as well from middle Minerals as Metals. Yet in this City, I
have known many credible persons, and of great Authority and Dignity, who
affirm, they have extracted living Mercury, not from Minerals only, but from
humane blood, first calcined, and from Plants also.

That Mercury is the best, The sign of the goodness of Mercury.
which if a dram of it be put into a very clean Silver spoon, and that set over
a fire, shall after evaporation leave a yellow or white spot. But what shall
blacken the spoon before it can be adhibited to medicinal use, must thus be
purged.

. Of Mercury, and of distilled Vinegar, of each one pound, put them in a strong
vessel with an handful of prepared salt, stir them very well together for a
quarter of an hour, that they may be mixed, and the Vinegar receive the
blackness of Mercury to it self. Then pour out the Vinegar with the Mercury
into a glass-bason, and so often wash it with warm water, as until all the
blackness and salsature be separated from it. When it is dried, put it in the
former vessel with Vinegar and salt as above, repeating the former Labor three
or four times, and at last pass it through a skin. But this is a vulgar and
imperfect purgation; a more perfect follows.

. Mercury precipitate, cinabarisate, or sublimate; mix it with two parts of its
own weight of calcined Tartar, or Calx-vive, distill it by a glass Retort in
fire of suppression, or in a close Reverberatory, applying a large Receiver
half full of water. So you will have Mercury purified better than in the
precedent manner.

Yet the most perfect way of purifying Mercury, than which a better cannot be
given, is the Amalgamation thereof with perfect bodies; distilling it certain
times by Retort, every time removing the earthy, sulphurous, and fetent feces,
and a new amalgamating it, and at length passing it through a skin.

A White Precipitate.
Mercury is dissolved in Aqua fortis, and by affusion of salt water precipited
into a white powder. The dissolvent is by inclination separated, and the
precipitate, by many ablutions, with digestion freed from all its saltness and
acrimony. Then is it dried and washed with Rose water, and again dried. Dose
internally, from eight grains to ten, chiefly in Venereal distempers. It
purges only by the inferior parts.

A Red Precipitate.
After dissolution of Mercury in Aqua fortis, evaporate it to a dryness with
violent fire, and to the bottom of the vessel a Red precipitate powder will
adhere; especially fit for venereal Ulcers.

Precipitate Mercury. From the best, the best is made.
. Of Mercury purifyed iiij. On which pour of oil of sulphur rectifyed viij.
digest it for two days in sand, then by Retort distill it, three times
cohobating, lastly with violent fire, that the Retort may be Red hot. Which
being done, take out the white mass, and grind it; and with hot water wash it
often, until you see the precipitate turned to a most yellow powder, upon
which, burn spirit of wine thrice. So may it be securely given into the body.
Dose, from three or four grains, to six, in purging Extracts, conserve of
Roses, or sugar of Roses. It helps in infirmities caused by putrefaction of
humors, and in deplorable diseases. It purifies the blood in the Gout,
Dropsy, and in all continued Fevers, it is a principal Arcanum.

Another Calcination, and Precipitation of Mercury.
Mercury distilled from Sol, or Luna, and purifyed as above, either per se, or
with an eighth part of Sol, or Luna, precipitate into a Red powder, in this
manner.

. A small vessel with a long neck, in which put iiij. of Mercury; place the
vessel upon an Iron plate in a furnace of sand, administering a continued fire,
for the space of forty days. The neck of the vessel must stand above the sand
six or eight thumbs breadth; and for the first ten or twelve days, the Mercury
that shall ascend to the neck of the vessel, must be certain times a day, every
day thrust down and precipited to the fiery bottom, with an Iron Rod, having a
Linen cloth bound to the end of it, as Geber teaches. This way of
precipiting Mercury, is not the method of the modern, but ancient Philosophers.
The days being expired, if any crude Mercury be found in the bottom, it must be
separated from the Red powder, which has wonderful faculties in medicine. For
it is a most excellent Cathartick in the Leprosy, so kindly loosning the
belly, as it may safely be given to Children, and Women with child: sharp
humors it mitigates; it purges out phlegm, and amends the hot and dry
constitution of the bowels. Dose six grains.

Another.
Dissolve Mercury in Aqua fortis, and precipitate it according to Art, by
exhalation of all its humidity, that the precipitate may be Red. When
pulverisate, put it into a strong vessel, pouring on it so much Vinegar three
times distilled as will stand above it five fingers; place the vessel in sand,
administering fire, that the vinegar may gently boil for the space of six hours,
and the precipitate be wholly dissolved.

Filter the solution, and upon it pour Liquor impregnated with the soul of the
world; and presently the Mercury will be separated from the Dissolvent, which
must be washed and dried, and so reserved for use. Dose, from four grains to
five.

Precipitation of Mercury in a moment.
Put the Red pulverisate matter in a crucible, exposing it to a violent fire
for four hours space, until it do in a manner begin to vitrifie, and adhere to
the sides of the crucible. Then remove it from the fire, and when cold, grind
it to a subtle powder, and put it into a glass vessel, pouring Aqua Regis
rectifyed upon it; then set it in digestion for twenty four hours, which time
elapsed, by inclination evacuate the tinged water; and pour on other water,
repeating the same Labor so often, as until it shall have extracted all the
Tincture. The evacuations distill to an Oleaginy. Of this oil. j. and pour it
upon iiij. of crude Mercury, and so it will be precipited in a moment. Nor will
the oil adhere to the Mercury, if it be distilled off with strong fire. After
exhalation of the oil, some of the Mercury will be sublimed, but the greater
part will remain fixed. Its use is in augmentation of Sols and most red
vitrification.

A Diaphoretick Precipitate.
Dissolve Mercury distilled from Sol, or Luna, and purged, as above in Aqua
fortis, which in a vessel with a long neck, and proportionate Alembeck annexed,
abstract by fire of the third degree with double cohobation, that the Mercury
may be made Red; which must afterward be edulcorated by calcining in a
crucible, placed in the fire, continually moving it with an Iron rod for a
quarter of an hour or thereabout: or else with the following water.. Of
distilled vinegar two pound, of the phlegm of Allom pound, of reverberated Calx
of Egg-shels vj. distill them together to a dryness. Of this water. three pound;
of the aforesaid precipitate Mercury, one pound; mix and digest them for one
day natural, afterward distill them by Alimbeck, with three cohobations, toward
the end increasing the fire, that the matter may be well dried; which circulate
for one day natural with spirit of wine. Then separate the spirit by
distillation; and again circulate and distill it. Repeating the same labor the
fourth time.

This is the true preparation of precipitate Mercury, for expelling infinite
diseases, and especially Lues Venerea, whether it be internally taken (for so
elaborated it only provokes sweat) or externally applied with Butter, or any
other medicament.

A Diaphoretick Precipitate of Cinnabar.
. Of vulgar cinnabar j. Of prepared salt ij. Grind and mix these together, and
in a convenient vessel, pour on them of oil of sulphur made per Campane iij.
digest these three days in ashes, afterward by violent fire, cause all the
humidity to evaporate. In the bottom a white mass will remain, which must be
edulcorated by frequent ablution. Dose, from six grains to ten, chiefly in
venereal distempers. It is given with conserve of Roses, and three or four
ounces of decoction of Sarsaparilla.

Diaphoretick Mercury of Venus.
. Of filings of Copper, j. Of Mercury meteorisate ij.

Mercurial salt, ij ss. Put these ground and mixed together in a strong vessel,
which place in sand, and administer fire until all be melted, as wax. Then take
the vessel hot as it is, and put it in cold [water] that it may break in
sunder, and the greenish Mercury flow out, which, when dried, put into a small
Retort, with spirit of sulphur or Vitriol, and in ashes set it in digestion for
one day natural. Which being done, distill it in sand, twice cohobating it; then
wash it twice, or thrice, and the last time with cordial water.

It is a most excellent Diaphoretick Bezoardick Remedy against the Pest; if two
hours after the first assault of the disease, it be taken in Liquor, it
preserves from death. Dose one, or two grains in appropriate water.

CHAP. XIV. Of Calcination of Saturn, and Jupiter.
SInce as Geber says, solution of bodies is imposible, the composition being
unknown: before we come to calcinations of Metals, to speak somewhat touching
the natures of them, will be in this place very suitable.

Rightly did Hermes, the Father of Philosophers understand, when he said; That
which is superior, ^s as that which is inferior. For by the same reason ^s
nature does produce Plants, and other Vegetables ^n the superficies of the
earth; so does she in subter^anean places generate metals, though more slowly
(...) in a longer space of time, of the humid unctuous ^pour of Argentvive, and
sulphur vitriolate by its own heat (containing properties in it self) decocting
Mercury. Whence Hydrargyry is said to be the Mother of metals, and sulphur the
Father. And in these are represented the four Elements, which are the remote
matter of all natural bodies. For Mercury, as Feminine cold, and humid, holds
the property of water, and air; and sulphur, as masculine, hot, and dry, bears
the representation of Fire and Earth. If any shall affirm, that as well of the
vapor, as juicyness [found in Mines] the matter of metals consists, I will not
gainsay it. For when I, the last Summer, in Hungaria, descended into the Silver
Mine in Schemnitz, about fifteen hundred Cubits deep; I Learned of the Miners,
(who, by reason of the exceeding heat of the Mine, did work without any
clothes, not having so much as a shirt upon their naked bodies) that Mineral
vapors did frequently arise from the center of the earth, and extinguish their
lights, and themselves also, if they did not make haste away: and that, some
time after, when they entered the Pit, they should find those damps or vapors
coagulated into a mass to the sides of the wall; which with a gentle touch,
would be fluid, as oil. Whence it may safely be inferred, that the vapor is
the more remote matter of Metal, but the sulphurous and mercurial juice, the
more near matter of the same. Also I have at present with me, mineral Stones
(from the same Mine, and others) which either the vapor, or such an unctuous
humid mineral juice has penetrated; and in some of them is plainly to be seen,
a crude matter, not sufficiently cocted; in others moderately cocted, from one
pound of which, vj. of pure silver may be taken, and about ss. of Gold. In
others is matter perfectly decocted, so as the silver is visible on the
superficies, and in one vein shootings of pure gold may be beheld. Although
there be some, who, by reason of certain frivolous reasons, deny Mercury and
sulphur to be the matter of metal; yet Philosophers, who have experience in
metals, believe the same, and that such a matter is found in all Mines and
veins of the earth, do with one consent witness. With whose opinion, the
judgment of all Miners, Melters, and tryers of Meals agree. Likewise Physicians
know, that all diseases of such as labor in Mines, arise from the admission of
crude, sulphurous, and mercurial spirits into the body: and that metals in
external affects, perform the same that Mercury does. Yea, that all metals,
with no great labor, may be reduced into Argentvive, and Argentvive into all
metals, is well known to Philosophers.

Calcination of Saturn.
Melt Lead in a vessel of earth or Iron, and purge it from its Scoria's. Then
increase the fire, that it may be red hot in the vessel, continually stir^ing
it with an Iron spatula, until it be reduced to a Calx, which if sifted, and
afterward longer reverberated, will be Minium.

Calcination of Jupiter.
. English Tin, not sophisticate (which you may know by its weight and
malleation) four pound, melt it in a pot with a flat bottom, and purge it from
its Scoria's. Then inject a little salt Armoniack; and increasing the fire til
the pot be red hot, cast in one pound and half of prepared salt, so long
stirring it with an Iron spatula, as until it be reduced to a Calx; which
afterward, by violent fire must be reduced to a body, and separated from the
impure and blackned salt.

Again mix it with one pound of prepared salt, and calcine it as above. Wash
the Calx from all its saltness, and reverberate it for eight days, that it may
be turned to an Alcohol: From which, by affusion of Alkalisate vinegar, a salt
is extracted, digestion for certain days being adhibited, and the matter
afterward filtred and coagulated.

Otherwise.
Jupiter may also be calcined, as Saturn, without any addition of salt. Or else
they may be calcined in a wooden Bowl well coated with clay; if they be first
melted in a crucible, and from thence poured into the said wooden vessel, and
there be stirred about very swiftly.

Diaphoretick Jupiter.
. Of English Tin filed, or as above calcined either in a vessel of wood, or
earth not glazed, ij. Of Mercury sublimed ^i^j. Mix them, and by Retort distill
them in fire of sand, applying a Receiver half full of water; and when it
begins to distill, give a moderate fire of suppression, until all the Liquor
shall be distilled, and precipited into the water. But what shall be sublimed
to the neck of the Retort, scrape off, and digest it with what is distilled for
one night. The water impregnated with spirit of vitriol, separate and keep it
for use: but dry the Cax; of which the dose is from four grains to six.

CHAP. XV. Of Calcination of Mars, and Venus.
Calcination of Mars.
. Of filings of Steel by Ventilation and Ablution, diligently cleansed from
filth two pound, of prepared salt three pound, mix them, and in a pot for one
day natural reverberate them. Then take out the mass, and grind it, afterward
dissolve it in hot water, and wash it so often as until it be freed from all
saltness and terrestreity. Which being done by grinding and sifting, reduce it
to a subtle powder. Then again reverberate it, for eight or ten days, until
the superficies be converted to a most red Crocus, and impalpable; which
removed, reverberate the remaining part so often, and so long, as till it be all
reduced to a Crocus.

Note, That the vessel containing the Limature, must have a cover, that no
coals or ashes may fall into the Crocus, yet the cover must be so placed, as
between it and the vessel, the flame may have free access.

Another way.
Crocus Martis is also prepared by putting small plates of Steel red hot, and
sparkling into rolls of sulphur, by the force of which they melt, and fall down
in small grains, into a subjacent vessel half full of cold water, or vinegar.
Dry the grains, and grind them to a most subtle powder, and if you will, you
may reverberate them to a Crocus in the space of six or eight hours.

It has virtue of expelling, opening, and attenuating; which filings of Steel
also acquire, being reduced to a most pure Alcohol, by the benefit of simple
water.

Otherwise.
Dissolve j. of filings of Iron in viij. of Aqua f^rtis, and distill off the
Aqua fortis by Alembick in sand. So you will have j ss. of most red Crocus.

Otherwise.
Reverberate filings of Mars, with a like quantity of beaten sulphur, for four
or five hours. It has an aperitive virtue; but it will have a greater, if it
be calcined for half an hour, or thereabout with double its own weight of
sulphur beaten small.

Another Calcination of Mars.
Digest filings of Iron or Steel in vinegar thrice distilled, until it be
colored. Pour off what is tinged, and pour on other fresh vinegar so often, as
until it shall have extracted all the Tincture. Filter the evacuations, and
distill them, and in the bottom will remain a red powder, which must be
reverberated for one day natural into an impalpable Crocus. It has virtue of
constringing.

Otherwise.
Crocus Martis is also made with oil of sulphur thus. Pour oil of sulphur and
spirit of wine, of each an equal part into an Iron spoon, and by gentle heat
evaporate it, till the humidity be consumed: afterward if it settle for certain
days, you will find a most subtle powder, which keep in a a Phial firmly
closed; that no air may enter, because it will resolve if exposed to the air.

If some grains of this be given in broth, or other convenient Liquor, it will
be a true Restorative of the Liver, helping in all diseases thence arising, as
the Dropsy, and such like.

Calcination of Venus.
Venus is dissolved in Aqua fortis, and by affusion of warm water, with a small
piece of Iron or Silver, it is precipited to the bottom of the vessel. Or else
plates of Copper are reverberated in a Potters furnace into burnt brass, which
with easy contrition is reduced to a Calx. Or small plates are put into a
crucible, with an equal part of sulphur beaten small; making S. S. S. that is,
lay upon lay, and so reverberated into Aes ustum.

CHAP. XVI. Of Calcination of Luna, and Sol.
Calcination of Luna.
DIssolve Luna in Aqua fortis, and by affusion of salt water, pre^^pit it into
a bright Calx (to the bottom of the vessel) which by frequent pouring on of
common water, must be edulcorated, and then dried.. Of this Calx j. of prepared
salt, ij. of Salt-armoniack ij. Mix these well in a glass mortar, and
reverberate the mixture, for eight days. Afterward extract a tincture with
spirit of wine Alkalisate, and circulate it. It is profitable in Mania, and
other diseases of the Brain.

Calcination of Sol.
Make Amalgamation of Sol, by purifyed cement, with six parts of Mercury, as
follows.. A thin plate of gold, and cut it into exceeding small pieces; which
put into a crucible placed in such an heat, as the gold may only be red hot;
then in another crucible make your Mercury hot, and presently pour it out upon
the gold, and mix them with a stick, that they may be incorporated. Then cool
it, and having admirably well washed the mass, pass it through a skin, and
press out the superfluous Mercury, that the mass may remain conveniently hard,
which must be long ground, with double its weight of prepared salt in a glass
mortar, so as nothing of the Amalgama appear. Put all this into a strong
crucible, covered, and luted, only a little hole left in the Luting, and
reverberate it for one day natural; taking great heed, that the gold melt not.
This being done, you will find your gold calcined, but the Mercury and salt
vanished. Then a new amalgamate your gold, and pass it through a skin as above;
and mix it with double its weight of sulphurvive, grinding them very well
together. After which, put the mixture into an earthen glazed pan, pour^ng on
it the best spirit of wine, unto which set fire, that it may burn upon it.
After the deflagration of which, and of the sulphur, you will find the gold
spungeous, and much attenuated, especially, if the same process be twice or
thrice repeated. Some grind the Amalgama with flowers of sulphur, and having
put it in a crucible placed in burning coals, they continually stir it with an
Iron rod, until the Mercury fly away in fume.

But before gold can be calcined with Philosophic calcination, it must be
cemented, as is said either with vulgar, or Regale cement. The vulgar cement,
is thus made.

. Of flour of Tiles, viij. Salt prepared, iiij.

White vitriol j. Saltpeter, and Aerugo, of each ss.

The Regale cement, which belongs only to most pure gold, is thus made.

. Of flour of Tiles, four parts. Salt-armoniack, Salt-gem, and common salt
prepared, of each one part. These commixed and united, must be moistened with
Urine.

Some make thin plates of gold red hot before they are compounded, and suffer
them to cool; that if any defilement adhere to the superficies, it may be
consumed, and leave more free access, and admittance for impression to the
sharpness of the medicines. All being duly prepared, sprinkle the powder
equally in the cementatory pot, that it may be a finger thick. Then put in your
thin plates of gold moistened with urine in such order, and so equally placed,
as one may not touch the other; least body cohering to body, the matter be
burnt, and by increase of heat, the edges be melted together. Having disposed
the first lay of plates in order as above, then on them sprinkle of the
medicine again, the thickness of one finger, and so proceed to lay in more
plates, and c^^er them; so doing, even to the brim of the (...), which must be
filled with the powder, the same thickness as was in the bottom, viz. the
thickness of a finger transversed. Lastly, put on the cover, without any
spiracle, if for vulgar cement: but if for the Regale, the cover must have a
small hole. The fire must be administered to it for twenty four hours, so as the
pot may be always red. The work ended, cleanse the plates with an Hares foot
from the powders adhering, and wash them in wine, and dry them.

The most perfect cement of all, is that which follows: Melt gold with double
its weight of most pure Copper, reduce them to plates or leaves, as thin as
paper; which cement for forty or fifty hours in a strong fire; making lay upon
lay, as in Regale cement is said with flour of Tiles, common salt, Colcothar,
Aerugo, and a little salt armoniack, mixed with strong vinegar. In this Examen,
all the Copper vanishes, the incombustible sulphur, and Tincture thereof
remaining in the substance of the gold; according as Geber, in Chap. 18. of
fornaces, witnesses; who says, that from Copper a most clean, tinging, and
fixed sulphur is extracted.

Metallic Bezoardick.
Dissolve of most pure gold in Philosophic water ij. to which add drop by drop
of gummose Liquor seven times rectifyed j. In mixing these will be great
ebulition. Place the vessel upon hot ashes for three or four hours. Then
precipitate the matter in common water, and wash it often; Lastly with cordial
water, and then dry it. And you will have a stone of wonderful virtue: of which
six grains egregiously provokes sweat.

Ceraunocryson Diaphoretick.
Dissolve most pure Sol in Phylosophick water, and digest it for one night in
sand. Then pour upon it oil of Tartar drop by drop, until the ebulition cease,
and the Calx of gold be precipited to the bottom; which must be edulcorated
with many ablutions, and with most gentle fire dried. Dose three or four grains.

Of this Diaphoretick, another more excellent may be prepared in this manner.

. Of this Ceraunocryson five or six grains, and put it in a small silver vessel,
and on it pour the best rectifyed spirit of wine, which set on fire, and hang a
Chrystaline glass with a sufficiently large Orifice over it. As soon as the
spirit of wine cease to burn, the Ceraunocryson performs its office, and a
certain earthy part will be sublimed to the sides of the glass. Repeat this
Labor four or five times, and wash the glass with spirit of wine, that the
C^lx may settle to the bottom, which must be dried. Dose one or two grains.

CHAP. XVII. Of Salts.
The way of extracting essential Salts from Herbs, without calcination.
. A Great quantity of Carduus benedictus, bruise it in a stone or wooden
mortar, afterward in a large vessel, with a great quantity of water boil it,
until half be consumed; then strongly express it, and strein the expression.
The Colature again boil to the thickness of Liquid honey. This juice of Carduus
benedictus put into a glass vessel, and set it in a cold place for certain
days; and in the bottom of the vessel, a christaline salt angular, like salt
gem, will be generated. From which pour off the juice, wash it with water of
Carduus benedictus, and when dried, diligently keep it. For it is a most
excellent Remedy in the Pest; if two grains more or less be exhibited in spirit
of Carduus benedictus, they abundantly provoke sweat. By the same reason, and
in like manner a salt may be extracted from other herbs, which shall in virtue
far exceed that which is made of the ashes of herbs.

Essential Salt, Cream, or Chrystals of Tartar.
. White Tartar of Montispeliensis, which is the best, reduce it to powder, and
in a large brass or iron Kettle boil it with a great quantity of water, until
half the water be consumed. Then remove it from the fire, and if you will pass
it through Hyppocrates sleeve or a Linen cloth, into a firm earthen vessel.
When it is cold, pour off the water by inclination: and the Salt adhering to
the sides of the vessel, by frequent affusion of water gather; being separated
from the feces.

And again as above, boil it, wash it, separate it from the feces, and dry it.
Then reduce it to powder; of which the Dose is j. in a little broth, or
appropriate medicine. It has virtue of breaking thick and tartarous humors,
and of opening obstructed passages.

Salt, or Askali of Imperatory.
Calcine the herb dried to a whiteness, extract the Salt with distilled water
of the same herb, or else with common water digesting it for one night.
Afterward pour off the water by inclination, taking heed you disturb not the
feces. Pour on other water the second and third time, digesting and evacuating,
without disturbing the feces as before. Then filter and coagulate the three
evacuations together, If the coagulum be not sufficiently white, calcine in a
crucible to a redness, taking heed it melt not, then resolve, filter, and
coagulate it.

Thus is Salt extracted from all herbs; but in such calcination, the volatile
or essential salt perishes; and the elemental salt only remains.

Salt of Tartar.
Strew or spread Tartar in an earthen unglazed vessel, with a flat bottom, the
thickness of one finger. Afterward reverberate it to a whiteness, for the space
of five or six hours, with a fire so moderate to prevent fusion, that the
vessel may be but just Red.

The Tartar thus calcined to a whiteness, pour out into common water, digest
it, then filter and coagulate.

Salt of Corals.
This is done by digesting Corals beaten small, in vinegar thrice distilled for
one night. Afterward the solution is filtred, and the vinegar evaporated to a
dryness. So the salt of Corals remains in the bottom of the vessel.

Its virtues are excellent; for it cleanses the blood throughout the whole
body, restores the pristine vigor of health; Fluxes of the Womb, and Belly,
and Hemroides it stops; It strengthens the heart, and stomach; removes
obstructions of the bowels, and dissolves congealed blood. It is profitable in
the Dropsy, Convulsions, Paralysie, Stone, Suffocation of the Matrix, if
exhibited with water convenient against preter-natural affects. Dose, from ten
grains, to j. or ij. with respect to age, and the vehemence of the disease.

Salt of Colcothar.
The Colcothar is put into Rain water, and the salt by digestion for one day or
night comes forth into the same, is filtred, and coagulated. If the remaining
redness be five or six times again calcined, and the saltness every time washed
out; it at length will be sweet, and is called sweetness of vitriol, which will
be the greater, if the Colcothar be prepared of vitriol of Venus, and it is a
present Remedy in malignant Ulcers.

Vomative Vitriol.
Dissolve white Vitriol in common water, filter and coagulate it; repeat the
same Labor the second time: After which, dissolve it in Rose water and
coagulate.

Otherwise.
Dissolve white Vitriol in distilled water, filter it, and in a glass vessel
exhale the water, until it contract a skinnyness. Then set the vessel in a cold
place, that it may be Crystallized. The Crystals separated, the remaining
humor evaporate, and again set to Crystallize as above; and this Labor repeat
the second time. Thirdly, dissolve the Chrystals in Rose water, and as before
exhale and Crystallize; then with gentle fire dry the Crystals.

Dose from j. to ss. in a draught of Wine or Beer, or with Conserve of Roses.
It happily operates in Fevers, Affects of the Ventricle, Catharrs, Maw-worms,
Pest, etc.

Salt, or Vitriol of Mars.
. Spirit of vitriol, or oil of sulphur per Campane, although not rectifyed j.
With this mix ij. of common water. Unto this mixtion, add j. of filings of
Iron; all which, in a close vessel, place in hot ashes, that it may boil very
gently, for the space of six hours. Afterward permit it to cool; and in the
vessel you will find vitriol generated green and splendid; which is dissolved
in hea^, and in cold coagulated.

Salt, or Vitriol of Venus.
Reduce calcined Copper, or scales of Copper to a subtle powder, which digest
in distilled vinegar for one day natural. The tinged vinegar by inclination
pour off, and repour on other, so often as til it be no more tinged. The
evacuations filter and evaporate, or distill off three parts; what remains in
the bottom of the vessel, set in a cold place; and so a green, obscure, shining
vitriol, will be generated.

Otherwise.
Plates of Copper, with a like quantity of sulphur beaten, as is said in
calcination of Venus, are reduced to a subtle powder; and in an earthen pot
with the beaten sulphur, are calcined; by a continued stirring the mixtion with
a rod of Copper, til all the sulphur be burnt. The Calx again is ground, and
with an eighth part of its own weight of sulphur beaten small, calcined. Then is
it again ground, as before, and project into hot water, being often stirred
with a stick or Copper rod, until the Calx be settled to the bottom, and the
water wax cold; which being filtred, is evaporated to a fourth part, and put in
a cold place to produce Azure Crystals, or else by evaporation coagulated.

Salt of Saturn.
Put the Calx of Saturn, or Minium, in distilled vinegar or the phlegm thereof;
digest it for one day natural, often stirring it: then evacuate the Menstruum
by inclination, and pour on other until all the Saltness of Saturn be
abstracted. Filter the evacuations, and in ashes or sand coagulate them. If
vinegar be the third time distilled from Salt of Saturn, with cohobations; and
afterward spirit of Wine be poured on, and thrice cohobated: the Salt acquires
so admirable a virtue in healing diverse Diseases; as if six grains be given in
white Wine in the Pest, it cures the sick in twenty four hours. In the Dropsy
three grains are given in white Wine four days together. In the Cholick six
grains with whitewine. In the Leprosy also six grains, in water of Fumitory,
continually for eighteen days together. This Sugar inwardly taken, by its
coldness, does also extinguish Venereal Lust; and is therefore profitable for
those who are devoted to a single and Virgin Life. Externally used, it
wonderously operates in malignant Ulcers, Corrosive, and Cancrous; Cancer,
Woolf, and such like. Also it is a most excellent Remedy against putridness of
the mouth, and Ring-worms, Blastings, Inflammations, Tumors, and red Pimples of
the face, if applied with convenient Oils or Waters.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Flowers.
Flowers of Benzoin.
GRind Benzoin, and put it into a round pot, which close with a double brown
paper, wrapped up in manner of Hyppocrates sleeve; and administer fire apt for
sublimation, gathering the snow like flores often.

These in the Asthma, and all diseases of the Lungs, are very profitable. Dose
ss. in convenient Liquors or Syrups. It is also a principal Remedy, for
bunches, and redness of the face.

Flowers of Sulphur.
These are prepared, by mixing equal parts of Sulphur and Colcothar perfectly
rubifyed and dried; and so mixed by subliming, as shall be taught in
sublimation of Antimony; (but this operation is performed in the space of eight
hours, nor is so much fire required, as in Antimony.) They must the second time
be sublimed with Sugar candid alone, that they may be more efficacious in the
Asthma, and other affects of the Lungs. Also this preparation of flowers, is
made by mixing one pound of the flowers of sulphur, with one pound and of flour
of Tiles. Or by adding to one pound of sulphur, of Colcothar, and salt
decrepitate, of each a pound. Or else per se, they are sublimed without any
other addition.

These flowers do powerfully resist putrefaction; and therefore in the Pest,
the weight of j. either in Carduus benedictus, Treacle, or Syrup of Citron, or
else in water of Melissa, is profitably used, as well for Preservation, as
Curation. They also preserve from Fevers, and Epilepsie. In Lues Venerea, they
provoke sweat: In all diseases needing exsiccation, they help; and are very
beneficial in all Affects of the Lights, the Asthma, the Cough, as well of long
continuance, as what is newly taken; Catarrhs flowing to the breast, Pleurisy,
Cholick, Imposthums, and Putrefactions of the body.

Flowers of Antimony.
Choice Stibium reduced to a subtle powder, and put into an earthen pot, with
a blind head super-pofited, in the top of which must be an hole, for exhaling
the humid spirits, and a moveable stoppel fitted to the hole; must be sublimed
according to Art, administering fire gradually for ten or twelve hours, for
receiving white flores; but for Citrine, twenty four hours, and for the red
flores, thirty six hours, continuing, and increasing the fire.

Sublimate Mercury.
. Mercury purged with prepared Salt and Vinegar, and passed through a skin.
Vitriol rubifyed. Prepared Salt, of each one pound. Salt Nitre iiij.

Grind and mix them together in a stone Mortar, with a little Vinegar, so long
as until the Mercury no more appear Living. All being well mixed, put into a
cucurbit Luted; with an Alembick, having a short neck annexed, with Recipient
adjoined; administering fire by degrees artificially, for eight or ten hours.
The Aqua fortis, which first comes forth keep. For the second sublimation, to
one pound of sublimate, add of Salt prepared xij. and of Vitriol iiij. If the
third time, sublime it with salt only.

A sweet Sublimate.
. Of Mercury purged as above, vj. Mercury sublimate, viij.
Grind and mix them together with one pound, of Colcothar, well and perfectly
rubifyed. Then sublime the mixture from a convenient vessel, placed in sand for
the space of five or six hours. The second time, sublime it with pound of
Colcothar. The third time, per se only. Instead of Colcothar, prepared Salt may
be used, if any one be so minded. The sublimations ended, reduce the mass into
a subtle powder, which wash with Rose water, and dry it. Dose, from twenty
grains, to thirty in Lues Venerea.

Otherwise.
. Of Mercury sublimate, vj. Silver foliate, ij.
By grinding mix these together, and sublime them in sand. The vessel cooled,
separate the volatile part; and grind what is fixed, and Crystaline; and mix it
with the feces residing in the bottom. The second and third time subliming as
above, and in the end washing the sublimate when dried, keep it for use. Dose,
from six grains, to eight or ten. It purges gently.

Manna of Mercury.
Dissolve Mercury in Aqua fortis. Afterward precipit it in Sea water; and from
a cucurbit placed in sand, distill it, toward the end increasing the fire, that
the Mercury may be sublimed to the sides of the vessel. The vessel cooled, and
the feces residing in the bottom of the vessel, removed, gather the sublimate
apart. And again in the same water dissolve and distill it, as above. So will
you have the Celestial Eagle, more white than snow, the use whereof is chiefly
in Venereal distempers. Dose, from ten to fifteen grains.

It purges only by the inferior parts.

CHAP. XIX. Of Magisterys.
A Magistery is, when the mixed body is so prepared by Chemical artifice without
extraction; as all its homogeneal parts are preserved, and deduced to a more
noble degree, either of substance or quality, the exteriours of impurity being
segregated.

Magistery of Tartar.
. Oil of Tartar, made of the resolved and purifyed Salt, iiij. Spirit of
Vitriol i. which instill upon the Oil of Tartar, into a large glass, drop by
drop; and it will be a most white Coagulum. The supernatant humidity remove by
gentle heat, unto the dryness of salt: upon which distill spirit of wine three
or four times. And so you will have a white fixed Vitriolate Tartar.

Its use is in all obstructions of the bowels; in the Stone, Nephritick dolor,
Jaundies, retention of the Menses, melancholy, hardness of the Spleen, Fevers,
and the Dropsy, if conveniently adhibited.

Dose, from ss. to j.

Magistery of Pearls, and Corals.
Dissolve Corals or Pearls beaten small, in water made very sharp with spirit of
vitriol. Digest it for one night, and upon the Solution, first filtred, inject
oil of Tartar drop by drop, til it be like milk. Then pour upon it common
water, and digest it; and so it will be precipited in bright powder to the
bottom of the vessel. The water must be separated, and other poured on three or
four times, until all the Acrimony be separated. Then dry the powder, and keep
it for use.

Margarits in temperament, and virtue, do very much emulate Gold; and therefore
do comfort the vital spirits of the heart; and remove palpitation of the heart,
deliquiums of the mind, and Vertigo's. And ought deservedly to be mixed with
all Cordial medicaments. They excite Venus, resist melancholy, dealbate the
Teeth, comfort the memory, and corroborate the young in the womb. They dry up
all depraved humors in the body; and preserve all parts of the humane body
from corruption. The virtues of Corals, are spoken of in the Salt of them.

Magistery, Milk, Cream, or Butter of Sulphur.
. Of flowers of Sulphur, j. Salt of Tartar, iij.
Mix them, and pour upon them of common water three pound, digest all in sand
for one day natural; with such heat, as toward the end the water may almost
boil: afterward filter it hot through brown paper, and upon it pour a
sufficient quantity of distilled vinegar; so the milky Cream of sulphur will by
little and little settle to the bottom. Separate the Dissolvent by inclination,
and with frequent ablutions edulcorate it. Lastly, digest it with Cordial
water, and dry it. And thus will you have a most white Milk, or Cream of
sulphur: Which, is the Balsom of the primogeneal humidity. It comforts the
natural vigor, purifies the blood, Diseases of the Lungs, as the Asthma,
Cough, and Ptysick it cures. In drying up Catarrhs, in removing windinesses of
the Stomach; in the Sciatica, and Gont, it is commended as exceeding
profitable. It also is an egregious preservative from the Apoplexy, Pest,
Leprosy, and Convulsions of the Nerves. In Hectic Fevers, by comforting it
profits. So much only of the powder, being mixed with specific waters, as
shall be sufficient for tinging them with a white color. One spoonful is given
in the morning, and before exhibition, accurately mixed with the humid vehicle.

Otherwise.
It is also made, by mixing sulphur beaten, with clean sand or glass beaten
small, of each equal parts: and by distilling by Retort in a moderate fire,
applying a Recipient containing distilled vinegar. And so the distilled
substance of the sulphur will be precipited into a white powder, which dry, and
keep for use.

This Antidote Prince Auraicus used against the Pest.

Otherwise.
Milk of sulphur is likewise made, by mixing sulphur and sand with Aqua vitae,
and distilling it in ashes by Retort. It is good against malignant Ulcers,
venereal Cancers, Measels, Warts, etc.

CHAP. XX. Of solid Tinctures, and Panacaea's.
Tincture of Antimony.
MAke a Lexivium of ashes of Hearts ease, Calx-vive, and common ashes, of each a
like quantity. In which dissolve Liver of Antimony, digesting it in such an
heat of sand for one night, as it may almost boil. Separate the Tincture, and
filter it. And, if you please, by vinegar, precipit it into a yellow powder,
and by many ablutions edulcorate it.

Panacaea of Vitriol.
Dissolve blew vitriol in hot distilled Rain water, which, being the third time
filtred, by gentle heat of Baln. evaporate to a skinnyness. Then pour the
remaining Liquor hot into a Leaden vessel, in which you must first place small
sticks transversed. And so leave it in a cold place for three days, that it may
produce green Crystals, which separate, evaporate the remaining Liquor, and put
it again into the same vessel to be Crystallized; repeating the same Labor so
often, as until all the Liquor shall be Crystallized.

This vitriol, of the color of an Emrauld, by these Solutions, and
Coagulations, perfectly purifyed, reduce to a powder very subtle; which in
heat, not exceeding the heat of Sol in the Summer season, dry in the space of
five or six days, until within, and without, it appear candid. Then dissolve it
in distilled water, filter it, what is undissolvible, cast away; coagulate it
in a Leaden vessel, and dry it to a whiteness in gentle heat, as above.
Repeating this operation unto the third time, or until in dissolution, nothing
remain undissolved. This candid vitriol put into a firm vessel, sealed with
Hermes Seal: which so place in gentle fire of ashes, as the heat may not exceed
the Summers heat. The tenth day, it will wax yellow; the twentieth day, it will
be reduced to an Alcohol, and be most red like blood. Break the vessel, and put
it into an high cucurbit, and upon it pour vinegar thrice distilled, so much as
may stand above it, at least four fingers. Apply a blind head, and digest it in
a warm Baln. for four days, every day stirring it with a clean wooden spatula.
The vessel cooled, what is tinged pour off, and pour on other vinegar,
digesting, stirring, and evacuating it as above; repeating the same Labor, til
the vinegar shall attract no more Tincture. What shall remain in the bottom,
reject as useless.

The ringed vinegar by gentle heat of Baln. distill to a dryness. In the bottom
will remain a Red powder, which also the third time in the same vinegar,
dissolve, digest, evacuate, distill, and dry. Then put your most Red powder into
a Retort, with a large Receiver annexed, administering fire gradually. First the
spirit comes forth yellow, afterward most red: continue the fire in that
degree, until the spirits appear white. Then cease distilling, and c^ol the
vessel; in the bottom of which, you will find a perspicuous, pure, and most
bright earth; which, with the above said spirits, imbibe by little and little,
digesting, and imbibing, until the spirit and soul be restored to their proper
body.

Then coct this blessed earth in a vessel Hermetically sealed, and placed in
heat of Athanor, for forty days, until it be fixed.

Dose, from three grains to five, especially in deplorate diseases.

A Solar Diaphoretick Panacaea. Stomachus Struthionis of Paracelsus.
. Of Phylosophick water, one pound. Mercury sublimate, ij.
Mix them, and in this water dissolve only so much Mercury as can well be
d^ssolved in it. The dissolution slowly proceeds, therefore is there need of
digestion. To the solution, add of Gummose Liquor ij. mix and distill them, and
that distillation reiterate twice or thrice, until after the distillation, no
feces be remaining.

In all these distillations, sublimate Mercury ascends, which every time re-put
into the water.

With this water, the Quintessence of Metals, Minerals, and Marcasites is
extracted.

Spirit of Wine Tartarisate.
Distill the dried feces of wine, after the manner as Aqua fortis is distilled.
The water and oil-sepaparate, and keep. In the mean while, calcine the feces to
a whiteness, which, with the above said oil, imbibe; and as before, distill and
calcine; repeating this Labor so often, as until the oil be clear as water,
and sweet, not savouring of adustion. So you will have a Tartarisate
Quintessence, which removes all corrosiveness from Metals.

Sublimation of Sol.
. Of Sol purged with Antimony, and cut into very thin plates, or instead
thereof Of foliate Sol, ij. Of Stomachus Struthionis, iiij.
Dissolve and distill by Alembick with strong fire toward the end, even to
sublimation, that the glass may be red hot. The vessel cooled, cohobate, and
distill it thrice, every time separating what shall be sublimed. The fourth time
distill away the phlegm gently, and anew pour on other iiij. and do as before,
until the whole water be consumed, and all the body shall be sublimed, unto the
whiteness of the exalted Eagle; that is, of sublimate Mercury. Then praise GOD.
Again reposit the whole sublimate with the phlegm, distilling away the phlegm,
without ascension of the spirit.

Mercurius Vitae.
This is made, as in the Archidoxes of Paracelsus in the Book of Secrets, with
one part of Antimony, and one part (or according to others, two parts) of
sublimate Mercury. Afterward it is rectifyed, and dissolved upon a Marble or
Table of glass; then it is congealed, by distilling away the phlegm, and a
little of the acidness; until drops falling in the phlegm, begin to be
precipited. Then the Receptory is removed, and another applied, and
distillation urged with moderate fire. This Labor must be four times repeated;
and the fourth time it will be a clear and white mass.

The Conjunction of sublimate Sol, and Mercurius Vitae.
. Of Sol sublimate, or the oil of the same aforesaid, without phlegm one part.
Of Mercurius Vitae clarifyed two parts.
Mix them together, and with gentle fire distill the spirit. What shall remain
coagulated, dissolve upon a Marble. Repeating the Solution, and Coagulation the
third time. Then upon this matter pour two parts of the Tartarisate
Quintessence, distilling it by Alembick to a dryness. Repour on other, and
distill it, doing this so often, as until the essence shall be distilled off
sweet, as when first poured on. Which being done, upon one part of this
medicine pour four parts of spirit of wine without phlegm; digesting it until
the spirit be consumed. So you will have the perfect conjunction of Sol, and
Mercurius Vitae. The Dose of which is four drops in white Wine. It is exceeding
profitable in desperate diseases, and in those whereof the cause is occult.

The End of the Second Book.
TYROCINIVM CHYMICVM: OR, CHEMICAL ESSAYS.
Book the Third.
CHAP. I. Of Quintessence.
Of the Quintessence of humane Blood.
THE denomination of Quintessence, is variously taken. Sometimes it signifies
any Chemical Species, which has put off the Elementary grosseness of matter,
and corpulent feces: and is opposed to a Magistery, in which almost the whole
bulk of its substance remains, only it is exalted, and purifyed. Sometimes
also, as we here take it, it denotes an Ethereal, Celestial, and most subtle
substance; taken from the three principles of any mixed body dissolved, freed by
various Chemical Operations from their Elementary, Sensible, Corruptible, and
Mortal quality, and coagulated either into one spiritual body, or a corporeal
spirit. It is by some called Medicine, (...); that is, by reason of its
eminency. By others Elixir, by reason of those famous virtues, it exercises in
preservation of the humane body, from sundry diseases. By others, Heaven, for a
double reason; First, because, as Heaven consists not of the four Elements, but
is made of a certain Ethereal matter, and as it were a fifth Element; and is
not obnoxious to corruption; so also the true Quintessence is separated from
all feces of Elements; and although it be not plainly incorruptible, yet it is
reduced to that subtility, tenuity, and spiritual simplicity, that it seems to
contain in it self nothing of heterogeneity, by which it should be corrupted.
Secondly, because, as Heaven powerfully acts on these sublunary things,
contributing Life to all, and conserving them: so also this Quintessence
conserves the health of the humane body, prolongs youth, retards Age, and
expels every disease.

The Quintessence of humane blood, is in this manner prepared.. A great
quantity of the blood of sound men in the flower of their Age. Put it in
Circulatory vessels of a convenient magnitude, which place in B. M. continually
boiling until the Dragon shall have devoured his own tail. The vessels cooled,
take out the matter, which will be like Liver, and cut it to pieces very small.
And in high Cucurbits, with the same heat of Baln. by distillation separate the
aqueous element or phlegm. The distilled Liquor repour upon its earth, and set
it in the former circulatory vessels, in a boiling Baln. for ten days as
before. Repeating the same process five times; and the last time keep all the
distilled phlegm. The vessels being cooled, take out the matter, and put it
into a large Retort, applying a capacious Receiver; in ashes distill off the air
by fire gradually increased. The small and thin clouds in the recipient
dissolving, intend the fire so, as the Element of fire may also come forth in
form of Red or Purple oil. Toward the end a little Salt armoniack will sublime
it self. The vessels being cold, separate the air or spirit from the fire or
oil; either by gentle distillation in Baln. or by a Separatory. The spirit with
the Salt armoniack, again pour upon the feces, digest them for three days, then
by a new Retort distill off the spirit, toward the end giving fire apt for
sublimation, that the whole spiritual salt, or at least the greater part
thereof may be sublimed, and mixed with the spirit in the Receptory. Again pour
new spirit upon the feces, digest and distill as above; so often, as until the
earth be deprived of its soul; which you shall know, if when put upon a burning
plate, it fume not.

Note, That before the spirit be animated, it must be seven times rectifyed,
every time separating the phlegm and feces: and part thereof reserved for
preparing the dissolvent, as afterward shall be spoken.

Calcine the black blacker than black in a reverberatory furnace with moderate
fire, in a vessel every where closed, for the space of five days, until the
blackness be turned to a yellowish whiteness, and so into a red color. Then
will the earth be apt for receiving its animate spirit. Digest it by Baln. as
long as shall be sufficient, afterward by gentle distillation separate the
insipid humidity. Which being done; revert upon the earth a ninth part of its
animate spirit, digest and distill as before. Then give it the eighth part of
the animate spirit; afterward the seventh, the sixth, the fifth, the fourth
part; so long with the fourth part imbibing it as til the earth be increased to
double of its own weight, before imbibition. And this is what Avicen says,
know, that the earth must be nourished, first with a little of its own water,
and afterward with more, as is seen in education of Infants. Therefore often
grind the earth, and leisurely imbibe the same, from eight days to eight days.
Decoct it, and afterward moderately calcine it in fire. And let not this Labor
seem tedious to thee, in so many reiterations; for the earth brings not forth
fruit, without frequent moistnings. Yet be wary least you too hastily imbibe
the earth, but do it leisurely, by little, and a little, and with long
contrition after the earth is dried. Wherefore in this the weight is diligently
to be observed, viz. least too much dryness or superfluous humidity corrupt the
work. And much coct it by assation, as by imbibing the dissolution requires.
Thus far Avicen. Whence also Geber says: Therefor from the multiplicit
reiteration of imbibition and assation, the greater part of its aqueousness is
taken away; and the residue by sublimation is removed.

Put the aforesaid earth into an high cucurbit, having an Alembick, and
receiver annexed; the junctures being very firmly closed, so as nothing may
respire; give to it fire of ashes for the space of three days, until the clean
and white fume ascend, and cleave to the sides of the cucurbit like Talck. This
is that which Clangor Buccina says, A Phylosophik book so called.
therefore as much as you can subtiliate that body, and coct it with clean
Mercury; and when the body shall have drawn, and concluded in it self some part
of the Mercury; subtiliate it with as quick and strong fire as you can, until
it shall ascend in the likeness of powder most white as snow, adhering to the
sides of the vessel. But the ashes remaining in the bottom, is the feces, and
vituperate Scoria to be cast away, having nothing of life in it.

Of the aforesaid Meteorisate Mercury. j. Mix it with vij. of the rectifyed
spirit not animate. Digest it for two days in B^^n. then distill it by ashes;
afterward by Baln. with repeated cohobations, until no feces be left. Then
circulate it for forty days. Its use is for extracting Tinctures of Me^als, and
stones. Of the same Mercury and its oil, is made an Elixir for expelling the
most desperate diseases; in this manner.. Of this Mercury j. unto which add an
eighth part of its own weight, of its proper oil rectifyed; decoct them in hea
of Athanor for eight days: afterward with a sixth part, and then with a fifth
part, reiterating the former labor so often, as until the matter become thick
as syrup, and by decoction will be no further hardened. After this digest it
forty days, and it will be a most red stone; of which the Dose is one grain or
two in appropriate Liquor.

CHAP. II. Of the Quintessence of Wine.
IN circulatory vessels of a just magnitude, digest a good quantity of rich
wine in horse dung for a month. Then in high cucurbits distill off the spirit,
in B. M. which afterward rectify seven times, each time separating all its
phlegmatic humor. Dist^lling it so, as in the seven times, from forty pound
of wine, you may separate one pound more spiritual ^an the other (for what is
distilled between the spirit and the phlegm, is Aqua ardens.) Keep the spirit
in a glass vessel (of such a magnitude as it may be ^alf full) firmly closed,
that noth^ng may respire in (...) cold place. In the mean while distill the
remain^ing phlegm to the consistency of Liquid honey. What is distilled off
revert upon the feces; and again by gentle heat of Baln. draw off three parts.
Then take out the cucurbit, and set it in a cold place, that the matter may
Crystalize; the Crystals washed from all filth, so often dissolve and
coagulate, as until they resemble the Ice of most pure water. Now, if you
desire by force of Art, to have a fat and combustible oil from wine, distill the
p^legm, separated from the Crystals in Baln. unto the thickness of Liquid
honey: afterward in a retort placed in sand, force it with strong fire. First
comes forth a water mixed with yellow oil, then a red oil; Lastly Rosin.

Unto the Crystals beaten very small, pour the spirit above reserved; digest
them in Baln. for three days, afterward distill off the spirit in sand:
repeating the same process so often, as until the spirit be perfectly
impregnated with its proper soul, and the ^ody made so very dry, as if put upon
a glowing ^late, it will yield no fume. Then on the body, ^^rst calcined
according to Art, revert an eighth ^^rt of its own weight of the animate
spirit, digest and dist^l it as before, then give it a sixth part of the
^^irit; afterward a fifth, and then a fourth, so often ^ontinuing the imbibition
with a fourth part, as un^^l the greater part of the body put upon a burning
^ate, shall vanish into air. Then is fulfilled that which Morienus says: This
also it behooves thee to know, that the soul soon has ingress into its own
body, which with another body, can by no means be conjoined. Having this sign,
cover the vessel, and to it placed in ashes, administer fire for the space of
two days, until the vegetable sulphur adhere to the sides of the vessel like
Talck. Of this sulphur. j. Of the pure spirit iij. Mix and digest them for one
day natural, then distill them in ashes, cohobating often, until the whole body
shall ascend. After which, twice distill it in a boiling Baln. and circulate it
for sixty days. And having separated the Hypestasis (which will adhere about
the bottom of the Pelican) keep the Quintessence of wine for curing infinite
diseases, to be used both internally and externally.

Also this Quintessence of wine may be perfected in a shorter space of time.
Yea when I did this, in the presence and sight of certain of my disciples, in
the space of five weeks I finished it: and with the same extracted a most red
Tincture of Gold. For, as Geber witnesses, there are many ways to the
accomplishing one effect, and one intent: But

In this place, I can never sufficiently admire, why French and Germane wine
circulated, have not that admirable odor, which Baptista Porta attributes to
Neapolitan wine, in these words. -- Then open the mouth of the vessel, and if
such an admirable fragrancy issue out, as with it nothing may be compared; know
that you are come to the desired end. But if the odor or color answer not,
close the vessel again; and re-place it to be circulated, until you shall have
the aforesaid sign. Nor is the Italian spirit of wine endued with such an
odor, as Rubens testifies. For he in the second Chap. of the second Sect. on
of his book of distillation, in this manner writes. I would that good Man, and
most excellen Physician, Eustachius Sancto Severinas, had now lived. For he
(not to speak of my own knowledge) could have evinced, by his experience most
diligently acquired, that Aqua ardens, if circulated, not only for a month,
but for two or three months; yea, for a whole year, as Raymund prescribes, can
never be deduced to that sweetness of odor, but rather will be found more hot,
and be rendered more acid; as who so will, may easily prove; and reason it self
by observation of the fire and motion, persuades the same. But Raymund did not
understand, or intend that of simple and pure Aqua ardens, as some of late have
thought; but of that, in which the metallic body was dissolved. For in the
second Canon of the first book, he thus writes: But this Quintessence so
circulated and rectifyed, will not possess such an odor, unless the body be
distilled in it. Whence it appears, that Porta drew not such a Quintessence of
wine from his Labor in the fire, but from the writings of Lully, and John de
Rupescissa, evilly understood.

CHAP. III. Of Quintessence of Corals.
FIrst a great quantity of most sharp vinegar, must be distilled with
separation of the phlegm, for this work wholly unprofitable. Distilling it nine
times upon the former feces, until you shall have about a hundred pound of
vinegar most perfectly rectifyed per Baln. Also you must have thirty pound of
red Corals, reduced to a most subtle powder; likewise many large vessels with
long necks, in every of which one pound of Corals must be put; unto them
pouring on of vinegar leisurely, and at times, to prevent ebulition, so much as
may stand above them four or five fingers: then they must with the vinegar be
digested in Baln. for one day natural, or until the vinegar wax sweet, and be
invested with a yellow color. Which being done, pour off the Menstruum, and
repour on fresh; repeating the same Labor, til what is dissolvible be
dissolved. Put the evacuations in high cucurbits, and abstract the Menstruum by
heat of Blan. then to every one pound of the salt, pour ij. of vinegar, and
distill it; which being done, again add iiij. after vj. and so leisurely, and at
times nourish^ng it, and at length diminishing the infurions from ounce to
ounce, until the vinegar be distilled off as sharp as it was when first poured
on. All the insipid distilled phlegm, must be kept. And the salts impregnated
with the salt armoniack of vinegar, must be fermented in vapor of an hot Baln.
and there left until a strong odor and black color appear, which are the
signs of true putrefaction. When these signs shall appear, put the resolved
salts while warm into retorts; because in cold, they will presently be
congealed: and by a vaporous B. or ashes, separate the phlegm, until white
vapors or fumes shall be seen to arise. Then cease the distillation there, and
continue it by sand in a close Reverberatory, until all the spirits shall be
come forth, and an oil red as blood shall issue out drop by drop. Reserve the
feces for the use hereafter mentioned. All the distilled Liquor being most
odorate, and like Aqua ardens easily conceiving flame, put into high cucurbits,
and by gentle heat of Baln. separate from the phlegm; and in a cold place in
glasses well closed, keep them. Afterward increase the fire, and urge the
phlegm, which separated from the oil, also set by for use. In the mean while
calcine the above reserved feces in fire of Athanor, for the space of five days
in a vessel very firmly closed, as Geber in the 50th. Chap. of the first Book,
etc. in the following words teaches. The way of calcination of spirits is,
that unto them being nigh to fixation, fire be successively administered, and
increased by degrees, that they fly not until they come to be able to abide the
greatest fire; and the vessel containing them, must be of glass, round in the
bottom, and indifferent thick, and well closed, that it melt not. And, as Lully
says, least inflammation be caused. Or according to Alphidius, least the
spirits vanish into air, and what is sought after, be not obtained. Afterward
the vessel being open, give fire to it by degrees, that the black feces may be
made of an Ash color. From which a salt with the former reserved phlegm, must
be extracted, which filter and coagulate. Afterward dissolve the same salt in
the latter reserved phlegm, until it be pure; then with moderate fire dry it.
Of this Salt. ij. digest it in Baln. for three days. Afterward, by gentle heat
of Baln. distill off the unsavory water, which keep apart. Reiterate the same
operation, until the salt shall with its proper salt armoniack be impregnated,
and augmented to double the weight it was before, or somewhat more; or until
the spirit shall be distil^ed off from the salt, as sharp and as strong as when
first poured on. Then put the salt in a convenient vessel to be sublimed in
ashes for two days space, ^dministring fire by degrees. So the matter will be
^ubl^med to the sides of the vessel, most white like ^ow: this is called the
true salt armoniack of Phy^^sophers.

Of this salt armoniack take j. Of the rectifyed spirit iiiij. Mix them
together, and digest them for two days. Afterward distill with cohobations,
unti^ the whole Milk shall ascend with the spirit. This triune matter must be
circulated until the exaltaiion shall answer your desire.

Thus you will have the Quintessence of Corals; a Celestial Substance, free
from all earthy feces: the Vegetable and Mineral Mercury; the most solid
Philosophic KEY, opening what bodies you will, for preparing them into
Medicines of admirable virtues; being only known to all true Philosophers.

FINIS.
The TABLE of the Precedent Work.
A
ALchimy defined Page 1 Alcohol defined Page 24 Amalgamation Page 25 Aqua
fortis, and the sorts Page 50
B
BAlsoms Of Cinnamon Of Sulphur Page 71 Of Saturn Page 72
^^z^ardick metallic. Page 106
C
Chemical Medicines m^st pleasing Page 3
Impress not a depraved disposition Page 15 ^^m^^ed with the vulgar Page 18
(...) ^ymist: ^^^nation Page 24 ^^^^nation. Of Common Salt Of Salt Peter Of
Mineral Crystal Page 81 Of Lapis Prunella Of Vitriol Of the Sponge Stone Of
Crystal Page 82 Of Silver Marchasite Of Antimony Page 84, 85, 87 Of Mercury
Page 89 Of Saturn Of Jupiter Page 99 Of Mars Page 101 Of Venus Page 103 Of Luna
ib. Of Sol Page 104
Crocus of Metals Page 86 Corrosion Page 25 Cementation Cinefaction Page 26
Cohobation Page 29 Circulation Page 34
D
DIstillation Page 28 by Descent by Deliquium Page 30
Digestion Page 31 Diaph^retick Antimony Page 88 Cinnabar Page 96 Ceraun^cryson
Page 107 of Venus Page 96 Jupiter Page 100

E
EMpyreuma how corrected Page 10 Extraction Page 27 Extracts Of Sena Of Rubarb
Page 74
Emetick powder Page 85 Essen^ial Salts Of Herbs Of Tartar Page 108

F
F^mi^ation Page 26 F^owers Of Benzoin Of Sulphur Page 114 Of Antimony Page 115

L
LUting for Glasses Page 39 Luting of Sapience Page 38 L^udanum Page 76 Liver
of Antimony Page 86
M
MAceration Page 33 Menstruum why so called Page 33, 34 Mercurius vitae Page
85, 124 Mercury precipited Page 93 and 97 Mann^ of Mercury Page 117 Magisterys
Of Pearls Of Corals Of Tartar Page 118 Of Sulphur Page 119

O
OIls of Eggs Page 61 Of Sage Of Wax Page 62 Of Turpentine Of Cloves Page 63 Of
Tartar per deliquium Of Amber Page 64 for the Hemi^rania for the Womb Page 65
Of Tiles Of Su^phur Of Salt Page 66 Of Vitriol Page 68 Of Antimony Page 69

P
THe three Princip^^ defined, and dem^^strated Page 20, 21, 22, 23
Precipitation Page 25 Putrefaction Page 34 Panchymagogon Page 75
Q
QUint essence Of Humane Blood Page 127 Of Wine Page 130 Of Corals Page 133

R
REverbera^ion Page 26 Rectification Page 29 Rules for distillation Page 42
Regulus of Antimony Page 87 Regulus of stellate Page 88
S
SOlution Page 19 Stratification Page 25 Sublimation Page 27 Sublimate Page 115
Su^limate Sol Page 123 Spirits Of Wine Page 52 Of Wine Tartarisate Page 123 Of
Tartar Of Turpentine Page 53 Of Sulphur Of Vitriol Page 54 Of Nitre Of Saturn
Page 58
^^l^s Of Tartar Page 109 Of Corals Of Colcothar Page 110 Of Saturn Page 113

T
TInctures Liquid Of dry Roses Of Violets Page 70
Treacle of Germany Page 75 Soft Tinctures Of Honey Of Saffron Of Sugar Page 78
Of Sulphur Of Coral Page 79
Solid Tinctures Of Antimony Page 120 Of Vitriol Page 121

V
VInegar distilled and Alkalisate Page 60 Vomative Vitriol Vitriol of Mars Page
111 Vitriol of Venus Page 112
W
WAters Of Roses Of Succory Page 48 Of Cinnamon Of Fennel Page 49 Of Oak Of Box
Of Juniper Of Guaiacum ib.

FINIS.
Books sold by Thomas Passenger at the three Bibles on London Bridge.
MArkham's Master Piece. 4 to. Dod on the Commandments. Academy of Complements
Pichard on Sanctification. The Spiritual Antidote, by Mr. Tho Doolitell. The
Wise Virgin, or a Narrative of the Life of Martha Hattfield. The Book of
Palmestry and Phisiognomy in octav. The Book of Knowledge in three parts,
containing Astrology, Physic, and Husbandry, full of variety, both for Profit
and Pleasure. The H^story of Valentine and Orson in 4 to. The Penitent
Prodigal, or a gracious Reproof to Pharisaical Saints.

