THE FORCED MARRIAGE, OR THE Jealous Bridegroom.

A TRAGI-COMEDY.

As it is Acted at His HIGHNESS THE DUKE OF YORKS Theater.

Written by A. BEHN.

Va mon enfant! prend ta fortune --
LONDON, Printed by H. L. and R. B. for James Magnus in Russel Street, near the
Piazza. 1671.

PROLOGUE.
GAllants, our Poets have of late sous'd ye,
In Play and Prologue too, so much abused ye.
That should we beg your aids, I justly fear,
You Are so incensed you would hardly lend it here.
But when against a common Foe we arm,
Each will assist to guard his own concern.
Women, those charming victors, in whose eyes,
Lay all their Arts, and their Artilleries;
Not being contened with the wounds they made,
Would by new Stratagems our Light invade.
Beauty alone goes now at too cheap rates;
And therefore they like Wise and Politic states,
Court a new power that may the old supply,
And keep as well as gain the victory.
They Will join the Force of Wit to B^auty no^,
And so maintain the right they have in you;
If the vain Sex this privilege should beast,
Past cure of a declining face we are lost.
You Will never know the bliss of change, this Art
Retrieves (when Beauty f^des), the wandering heart,
And though the Airy Spirits move no more,
Wit still invites as beauty did before.
To day one of their, par^y ventures out,
Not with design to Conquer, but to Scout:
Discourage but this first attempt, and then,
They Will hardly dare to sally out again.
The Poetess too, they say, has spies abroad.
Which have disposed themselves in every read,
In The upper Box, Pit, Gallerus, every face
You find disguised, in a black Velvet. -- Case.
My life on it is her Spy on purpose sent,
To hold you n^a wan^on Complemen^;
That so you may not censure what she is writ;
Which done, they le face you down 'twas full of wit.
Thus, while some common prize you hope to win
You let the Tyrant Victor enter in
I beg to day you would lay that humor by,
Till you rencou^ter at the Nursery;
Where they like Sentinels from Duty free,
May me^t and wanton with the Enemy.
How have thou labored to subvert in vain,
What one poor smile of ours calls-home again;
Can any see that glorious sight, and say, [Woman pointin to the Ladies.
A Woman shall'not Victor prove to day:
Who is it that to their Beauty would submit,
And yet refuse the Fetters of their Wit.
He tells you tales of Stratagems and Spies;
Can they need Art that have such powerful eyes?
Believe me, Gallants, he'as abused you all;
There Is not a Vizard in our whole Cabal:
Those are but Pickeroons that scour for prey,
And catch up all they meet with in their way;
Who can no Captives take, for all they do,
Is pillage ye, then gladly let you go;
Ours scorn the petty spoils, and do prefer,
The Glory, not the Interest of the War:
But yet our Forces shall obliging prove;
Imposing naught but constancy in love,
That Is all our Aim, and when we have it too,
We'll sacrifice it all to pleasure you.
EPILOGUE, by a Woman.
We charged you boldly in our first Advance,
And gave the Onset A la mode de France,
As each had been a (...) of Orleance.
Like them our Heat as soon abated too;
Alas, we could not vanquish with a show,
Much more then that goes to the conquering you.
The trial though, will recompense the pain,
It having wsely taught us how to reign:
It Is Beauty only can our Power maintain.
But yet as tributary Kings we own,
It is by you that we possess that Throne,
Where had we Victors been, w'^d reigned alone.
And we have promised what we could not ^o,
A fault, methinks, might be forgiven too,
Since it is but what we learn of some of you.
But we are upon equal treatment y^,
For neither Conquer, since we both submit;
You, to our Beauty, bow; We to your Wit.
Dramatis Personae.
Mr. Westwood. King. Mr. Smith. Philander his Son betrothed to Erminia. Mr.
Betterton. Alcippus Favorite, in love with Erminia. Mr. Norris. Orguilious,
late General father to Erminia. Mr. Young. Alcander, friend to the Prince, in
love with Aminta. Mr. Cademan. Pisauro, friend to the young General Alcippus.
Mr. Angel. Falatio, a Fantastic Courtier. La Bree, his man. Mr. Crosby.
Cleontius, Servant to the Prince, and Brother to Isillia. Mrs. Jennings.
Galatea, daughter to the King. Mrs. Betterton. Erminia, Daughter to Orguilious
espoused to the Prince. Mrs. Wright. Aminta, Sister to Pisauro in love with
Alcander. Mrs. Lee. Olinda, Sister to Alcander, Maid of Honor to the Princess.
Mrs. Clough. Isillia, Sister to Cleontius, woman to Erminia. Lysette woman to
Aminta. Pages and Attendants.

Scene within the Court of FRANCE.

THE FORCED MARRIAGE, OR THE Jealous Bridegroom.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter King, Phillander, Orgulious, Alcippus, Alcander, Pisauro, Cleontious,
Fallatius; And Officers. King. HOW shall I now divide my Gratitude;
Between a Son, and one that has obliged me,
Beyond the common duty of a subject:

Phi. Believe me, Sir, he merits all your Bounty;
I only took Example by his Actions;
And all the part o'th victory which I gained,
Was but derived from him.

Kin. Brave youth, whose Infant-years did bring us Conquests.
And as thou grew'st to man, thou grew'st in glory,
And had arrived to such a pitch of it;
As all the slothful youth that shall succeed thee,
Shall mete reproaches of thy early Actions;
When men shall say, thus did the brave Alcippus;
And that great Name shall every soul inspire,
With Emulation, to arrive at something,
That Is worthy thy Example.

Alcip. I must confess I had the Honor, Sir,
To lead on twenty thousand fighting men,
Whom Fortune gave the glory of the day to.
I only bade them fight, and they obeyed me;
But 'twas my Prince that taught them how to do so;

Kin. I do believe Phillander wants no courage;
But what he did was to preserve his own.
But thine the pure effects of highest valor;
For which, if ought below my Crown can recompense;
Name it, and take it, as the price of it,

Alcip. The Duty which we pay your Majesty
Ought to be such, as what we pay the Gods;
Which always bears its recompense about it.

Kin. Yet suffer me to make thee some return,
Though not for thee, yet to encourage Bravery.
I know thy soul is generous enough,
To think a glorious act rewards it self.
But those who understand not so much virtue,
Will call it my neglect and want of gratitude;
In this thy modesty will wrong thy King.

Alcip. By this pause you seem to doubt
My Power or Will, in both you are too blame.

Alcip. Your pardon Sir, I never had a thought
That could be guilty of so great a sin,
That I was capable to do you service,
Was the most grateful bounty Heaven allowed me,
And I no juster way could own that blessing,
Then to employ the guilt for your repose.

Kin. I shall grow angry, and believe your pride
Would put the guilt off on your modesty,
Which would refuse what that believes below it.

Phil. Your Majesty thinks too severely of him,
Permit me, Sir, to recompense his valor,
I saw the wonders on it, and thence may guess
In some degree, what may be worthy of it.

Kin. I like it well, and till thou have performed it,
I will divest my self of all my power,
And give it thee, till thou have made him great.

Phi. I humbly thank you Sir --
[Bows to the King, takes the Staff from Orgul. and gives to Alcip. who looks
amazedly. And here I do create him General.
You seem to wonder, as if I dispossess't
The brave Orgulious, but be pleased to know,
Such Reverence and respect I owe that Lord;
As had himself not made it his Petition,
I sooner should have parted with my Right,
Then have discharged my debt, by injuring him.

Kin. Orgulious, are you willing to resign it.

Org. With your permission, Sir, most willingly;
His vigorous youth is fitter for it then age,
Which now has rendered me incapable
Of what that can with more success perform;
My heart and wishes are the same they were,
But time has quite deprived me f'that power
That should assist a happy Conqueror.

Kin. Yet time has added little to your years
Since I restored you to this great Command,
And then you thought it not unfit for you.

Org. Sir, was it fit I should refuse your Grace:
That was your act of mercy: and I took it
To clear my innocence; and reform the errors
Which those received who did believe me guilty,
Or that my Crimes were greater then that mercy;
I took it, Sir, in scorn of those that hated me;
And now resign it to the Man you love.

King. We need not this proof to confirm thy Loyalty;
Nor am I yet so barren of rewards,
But I can find a way, without depriving
Thy Noble Head of its victorious wreathes,
To crown another Temples.

Org. I humbly beg your Majesty's consent to it;
If you believe Alcippus worthy of it;
The generous youth I have bred up to Battles;
Taught him to overcome, and use that Conquest;
As modestly as his submissive Captive,
His Melancholy, (but his easy setters;
To meet Deaths horrors with undaunted looks.
How to despise the hardships of a Siege;
To suffer, cold and hunger, want of sleep;
Nor knew he other rest then on his Horseback;
Where he would sit and take a hearty Nap;
And then too dreamed of fighting:
I could continue on a day in telling
The wonders of this Warrior.

Kin. I credit all, and do submit to you.
But yet Alcippus seems displeased with it.

Alcip. Ah Sir! too late I find my confidence
Has overcome m' unhappy bashfulness;
I had an humbler suit to approach you with;
But this unlook't for Honor,
Has so confounded all my lesser Aims;
As were they not essential to my Being,
I durst not name them after what y' have done.

King. It is not well to think my kindness limited;
This, from the Prince you hold, the next from me;
Be what it will, I here declare it thine.
-- Upon my life, designs upon a Lady;
I guess it from thy blushing.
-- Name her, and here thy King engages for her.

Phi. Oh Gods! -- What have I done? --
[aside,
Alcip. Er^inia, Sir. --
[Bows.
Phi. I Am ruined. --
[aside.
Kin. Alcippus, with her fathers leave, she is thine.

Org. Sir, It Is my Aim and Honor.

Phi. Alcippus, is it a time to think of Weddings;
When the disordered Troops require your presence:
You must to the Camp tomorrow.

Alcip. You need not urge that Duty to me, Sir.

Kin. A day or two will finish that Affair,
And then we'll consummate the happy day,
When all the Court shall celebrate your joy.
[They all go out but Alcan. Pisa. and Fall.
Pis. Falatio, you are a swift Horseman.
I believe you have a Mystress at Court,
You made such haste this Morning.

Fall. By Jove, Pisaro, I was enough weary of the
Campaigne; and till I had lost sight of it,
I clapped on all my spurs --
But what ails Alcander

Pis. What, displeased?

Alcand. It may be so, what then?

Pis. Then thou may be pleased again.

Alcan. Why the devil should I rejoice?
Because I see another raised above me;
Let him be great, and damned with all his greatness.

Pis. Thou mean Alcippus, whom I think merits it.

Alcan. What is it that thou call'st merit;
He fought, it is true, and so did you, and I,
And gained as much as he of the victory.
But he in the Triumphal Chariot rod^
Whilst we adored him like a Demi-god.
He with the Prince an equal welcome found,
Was with like Garlands, though less merit, crowned.

Fa. He Is in the right for that; by Jove,

Pis. Nay, now you wrong him.

Alcan. What Is he; I should not speak my sense of him?

Pis. He is our General.

Alcan. What then?
What is it that he can do, which I Will decline;
Has he more youth, more strength, or arms then I?
Can he preserve himself in the heat of battle?
Or can he singly fight a whole Brigade?
Can he receive a thousand wounds and live?

Fall. Can you or he do so?

Alcan, I do not say I can, but tell me then,
Where be the virtues of this mighty man,
That he should brave it over all the rest?

Pis. Faith he has many virtues, and much courage;
And merits it as well as you or I,
Orgulious was grown old.

Alcan. What then?

Pis. What then, he was unfit for it,
But that he had a Daughter who was young.

Alcan. Yes, he might have lain by like
Rusty Armor else,
Had she not brought him into play again;
The Devil take her for it.

Fall. By Jove, he is dissatisfied with every thing.

Alcan. She has undone my Prince,
And he has most unluckily disarmed himself,
And put the Sword into his Rivalls hand,
Who will return it to his grateful bosom.

Pis. Why you believe Alcippus honest --

Alcan. Yes, in your sense Pisaro,
But do not like the last demand he made,
'Twas but an ill return upon his Prince
To beg his Mistress, rather challenged her.

Pis. His Ignorance that she was so, may excuse him.

Alcan. The Devil 'twill, do think he knew it not.

Pis. Orgulious still designed him for Erminia,
And if the Prince be disobliged from this,
He only ought to take it ill from him.

Alcan. Too much Pisaro you excuse his pride,
But it is the office of a friend to do so.

Pis. It Is true I am not ignorant of this,
That he despises other recompense
For all his services, but fair Erminia,
I know it is long since he resigned his heart,
Without so much as telling her she conquered;
And yet she knew he loved; whilst she, ingrate,
Repaid his passion only with her scorn.

Alcan. In loving him she would more ungrateful prove
To her first vows, to reason and to love.

Pis. For that Alcander you know more then I.

Fall. Why sure Aminta will instruct her better,
She Is as inconstant as the Seas and Winds,
Which never are calm but to betray Adventurers.

Alcan. How came you by that knowledge Sir?

Fall. What a pox makes him ask me that question now.
[aside.
Pis. Prithee Alcander now we talk of her,
How go the Amors 'twixt you and my wild sister;
Can you speak yet, or do you tell your tale,
With eyes and sighs, as you were wont to do.

Alcan, Faith much at that old rate, Pisaro,
I yet have no encouragement from her
To make my Court in any other language.

Pis. You Will bring her to it, she must be over come,
And you are the fittest for her fickle humor.

Alcan. Pox on it, this change will spoil our making Love,
We must be sad and follow the Court Mode;
My life on it you will see desperate doings here;
The Eagle will not part so with his prey;
Erminia was not gained so easily
To be resigned so tamely: but come my Lord,
This will not satisfy our appetites,
Let Us in to dinner, and when warm with wine
We shall be fitter for a new design.
[They go out Fall. stays.
Fall. Now am I in a very fine condition,
A comfortable one as I take it;
I have ventured my life to some purpose now;
What confounded ^uck was this, that he of all men
Living, should happen to be my Rival.
Well, I Will go visit Aminta, and see how
She receives me. --
Why where a duce have thou disposed of
[Enter Labre. Thy self all this day, I will be bound to be
Hanged, if thou have not a hankering after
Some young wench; thou could never loyter
Thus else; but I Will forgive thee now, and prithee go to
My Lady Aminta's Lodgings: Kiss her hand
From me: and tell her I am just returned from
The Campaigne: mark that word, Sirrah.

Labre. I shall Sir; it is truth.

Fall. Well, that's all one; but if she should
Demand any thing concerning me; (for
Love's inquisitive) do hear: as to my valor, or so,
Thou understand'st me; tell her
I acted as became a man that pretend to the glory of
Serving her.

Lab. I warrant you, Sir, for a speech.

Fa. Nay, thou may speak as well too much
As too little, have a care of that, do hear?
And if she ask what wounds I have: do mind me?
Tell her I have many, very many.

La. But whereabouts, Sir?

Fa. Let me see -- let me see: I know not where
To place them -- I think in my face.

La. By no means, Sir, you had much better
Have them in your Posteriors: for then the Ladies
Can never disprove you: they will not look there.

Fa. The sooner, you fool, for the rarity on it.

La. Sir, the Novelty is not so great, I assure you.

Fa. Go to, you are wicked: but I will have them in my face.

La. With all my heart, Sir, but how?

Fa. I Will wear a patch or two there, and I Will
Warrant you for pretenses as much as any man,
And who, you fool, shall know the fallacy.

La. That; Sir, will all that know you, both in the Court and Camp.

Fa. Mark me, Labree, once for all, if thou t^kest
Delight continually thus to put me in mind of
My want of Courage, I shall undoubtedly
Fall foul on thee, and give thee most fatal proofs
Of more then thou expectest.

La. Nay Sir, I have done, and do believe it is only
I; dare say you are a man of prowess.

Fa. Leave thy simple fancies, and go about
Thy business.

La. I am gone, but hark my Lord,
If I should say your face were wounded,
The Ladies would fear you had lost your
Beauty.

Fa. O never trouble your head for that, Aminta
Is a wit, and your Wits care not how ill-favored
Their men be, the more ugly the better.

La. An't be so, you will fit them to a hair.

Fa. Thou art a Coxcomb, to think a man of my
Quality needs the advantage of handsomness:
A trifle, as insignificant as wit or valor: poor
Nothings, which Men of fortune ought to despise.

La. Why do you then keep such a stir to gain
The reputation of this thing you so despise.

Fa. To please the peevish humor of a woman.
Who in that point only is a fool.

La. You had a Mystress once, if you have not
Forgotten her, who would have taken you with
All these faults.

Fa. There was so: but she was poor, that is the
Devil, I could have loved her else:
-- But go thy ways; -- what do thou muse on?

La. Faith Sir, I am only fearfuly on will never
Pass with those patches you speak of.

La. Thou never to be reclaimed Ass; shall I never
Bring thee to apprehend as thou ought; I tell thee
I will pass and repass, where and how I please;
Know thou not the difference yet, between a
Man of money and Titles, and a man of only Parts,
As they call them; poor Devils, of no mean nor
Garb: Well, it is a fine and a frugal-thing,
This honor, it covers a multitude of faults;
Very redicule in one of us is A-la-mode,
But I detain thee; go have to Aminta.
[Exeunt severally.
ACT, I. SCEN. II.
Enter Gallatea, Aminta, and Olinda. Gall. Will Erminia come?

Oli. Madam, I thought she would been already here.

Gall. But prithee how does she support this news?

Oli. Madam, as those unreconciled to Heaven
Would bear the pangs of death.

Am. Time will convince her of that foolish error,
Of thinking a brisk young Husband a torment.

Gall. What young Husband? --

Am. The General, Madam.

Gall. Why, do thou think she will consent to it?

Am. Madam, I cannot tell, the World's inconstant.

Gall. I Aminta, in every thing but Love.
And sure they cannot be in that:
What say thou, Olinda?

Oli. Madam, my judgment's naught.
Love I have treated as a stranger guest,
Received him well, not lodged him in my breast.
I never durst give the unknown Tyrant room,
Lest he should make his resting place his home.

Gall. Then thou art happy; but if Erminia fail
I shall not live to reproach her.

Am. Nay, Madam, do not think of dying yet:
There is a way, if we could think of it.

Gall. Aminta, when will thou this humor lose?

Am. Faith never, if I might my humor choose.

Gall. Me thinks thou now should blush to bid me Live.

Am. Madam, it is the best counsel I can give.

Gall. Thy counsel! Prithee what do counsel now?

Am. What I would take my self I counsel you.

Gall. You must my wounds and my misfortunes bear
Before you can become my Counselor.
You cannot guess the torments I endure:
Not knowing the Disease you will miss the Cure.

Am. Physicians, Madam, can the Patient heal
Although the Malady they never did feel:
But your Disease is Epidemical,
Nor can I that evade that conquers all.
I loved, and never did like pleasure know,
Which passion did with time less vigorous grow.

Gall. Why have thou lost it?

Am. It, and half a score.

Gall. Losing the first sure thou could love no more.

Am. With more facility, then when the Dart
Armed with resistless fire seized my heart;
'Twas long then, e're the Boy could entrance get,
And make his little Victory complete;
But now he'as got the knack on it, it is with ease,
He domineers and enters when he please.

Gall. My heart, Aminta, is not like to thine.

Am. Faith Madam try; you will find it just like mine.
The first I loved was Philocles, and then
Made Protestations never to love again,
Yet after left him for a faithless crime;
But then I languisht even to death for him;
-- But Love who suffered me to take no rest,
New fireballs threw, the old scarce dispossessed;
And by the greater flame the lesser light,
Like Candles in the Sun, extinguished quite,
And left no power Alcander to resist,
Who took, and keeps possession of my breast.

Gall. Art thou a Lover then, and look so gay,
But thou have never a father to obey.

Am. Why, if I had I would obey him too.

Gall. And live.

Am. And live.

Gall. It Is more then I can do.
[Enter Erminia weeping. Gall. meets her, embraces her, and weeps. -- Thy Eyes,
Erminia, do declare thy heart,
Has nothing but despairs and death t'impart,
And I, alas, no comfort can apply,
But I, as well as you, can weep and die.

Er. I Will not reproach my fortune, since in you
Grief does the noblest of your Sex subdue;
When your great soul a sorrow can admit:
I ought to suffer from the sense of it;
Your cause of grief too much like mine appears,
Not to oblige my eyes to double tears;
And had my heart no sentiments at home,
My part in yours had doubtless filled the room.
But mine will no addition more receive,
Fate has bestowed the worst she had to give;
Your mighty-soul can all its rage oppose,
Whilst mine must perish by more feeble blows.

Gall. Indeed, I dare not say my cause of grief,
Does yours exceed, since both are past relief;
But if our Fates unequal do appear,
Erminia, it is my heart that odds must bear.

Er. Madam, it is just I should to you resign,
But here you challenge what is only mine:
My fate so cruel is, it will not give
Leave to Phillander (if I di) to live:
Might I but suffer all, twere some content,
But who can live and see his languishment,
You Madam do alone your sorrows ^ear,
Which would be less did but Alcippus share,
As Lovers we agree, I Will not deny
But thou art loved again, so am not I.

Er. Madam, that grief the better is sustained,
That Is for a loss that never yet was gained:
You only lose a man that does not know
How great the Honor is which you bestow:
Who dares not hope you love, or if he did,
Your greatness world his just return forbid;
His humbler thoughts du^st never to you aspire,
At most he would presume but to admire;
Or if fit chanced he durst more da^ing prove,
You still must languish in concealed love.

Gall. This which you argue lessens not my pain,
My grief's the same, were I beloved again.
The King my Father would his Promise keep,
And thou must him enjoy for whom I weep.

Er. Ah would I could that fatal gift deny,
Without him you; and with him, I must die;
My soul your Royal Brother does adore,
And I, all kindness but from him, abhor;
But if I must th'unsuit Alcippus wed,
I vow he never shall come into my Bed.

Gall. That Is bravely vowed, and now I love thee more,
Then e're I was obliged to do before;
-- But yet Erminia guard thee from his eyes;
Where so much love, and so much Beauty lies:
Those charms may conquer thee, which made me bow,
And make thee love as well as break this Vow.

Er. Madam, it is unkind, though but to fear,
Ought but Phillander can inhabit here.
[lays her hand on her heart.
Gall. Ah that Alcippus did not you approve;
We then might hope these mischiefs to remove;
The King my father might be moved by prayer,
And my too powerful Brothers sad despair,
To break his word, which kept will us undo:
And he will lose his dear Phillander too,
Who dies and can no remedies receive:
But vows it is for you alone he will live.

Er. Ah Madam, do not tell me how he dies,
I Have seen too much already in his eyes;
They did the sorrows of his soul betray,
Which need not be expressed another way:
'Twas there I found what my misfortune was,
Too sadly written in his lovely face.
But see, my father comes: Madam, withdraw a while,
And once again I Will try my interest with him.
[Exeunt.
ACT. I. SCEN. III.
Enter Orgulius, Erminia weeping, and Isillia. Er. Sir, does your fatal
resolution hold?

Org. Away, away, you are a foolish Girl,
And look with too much pride upon your Beauty;
Which like a gaudy flower that springs too soon,
Withers e're fully blown.
Your very tears already have betrayed
Its weak inconstant nature;
Alcippus, should he look upon thee now,
Would swear thou were not that fine thing he loved.

Er. Why should that blessing turn to my despair,
Curse on his faith that told him I was fair.

Org. It Is strange to me you should despise this fortune,
I always thought you well-inclin'd to love him.
I would not else have thus disposed of you.

Er. I humbly thank you, Sir, though it be too late,
And wish you yet would try to change my fate;
What to Alcippus you did love believe,
Was such a friendship as might well deceive;
'Twas what kind Sisters do to Brothers pay;
Alcippus I can love no other way.
-- Sir, lay the interest of a Father by,
And give me leave this Lover to deny.

Org. Erminia, thou art young and can not see
The advantage of the fortune offered thee;

Er. Alas, Sir, there is something yet behind.
[sighs.
Org. What is it Erminia, freely speak thy mind.

Er. Ah Sir, I dare not, you enraged will grow.

Org. Erminia, you have seldom found me so;
If no mean passion have thy soul possessed,
Be what it will I can forgive the rest.

Er. No Sir, it is no crime, or if it be,
Let Prince Phillander make the peace for me;
He 'twas that taught the sin, (if love be such.)

Or. Erminia, peace, he taught you then too much.

Er. Nay Sir, you promised me you would not blame
My early Love, if 'twere a noble flame.

Or. Then this a more unhappy could not be;
Destroy it, or expect to hear of me.
[offers to go out.
Er. Alas, I know 'twould anger you when known.
[she stays him
Org. Erminia, you are wondrous daring grown;
Where got you courage to admit his love,
Before the King or I did it approve?

Er. I borrowed Courage from my Innocence,
And my own virtue, Sir, was my defense.
Phillander never spoke but from a soul,
That all dishonest passions can control;
With flames as chaste as Vestals that did burn,
From whence I borrowed mine, to make return.

Org. Your love from folly, not from virtue, grew;
You never could believe, he would marry you.

Er. Upon my life no other thing he spoke,
But those from dictates of his Honor took.

Org. Though by his fondness led he were content
To marry thee, the King would never consent.
Cease then this fruitless passion and incline
Your will and reason to agree with mine.
Alcippus I disposed you to before,
And now I am inclined to it much more.
Some days I had designed t've given thee
To have prepared for this solemnity;
But now my second thoughts believe it fit,
You should this night to my desires submit.

Er. This night; Ah Sir, what is it you mean to do?

Org. Preserve my credit, and thy Honor too.

Er. By such resolves you me to ruin bring.

Org. That Is better then to disoblige my King.

Er. But if the King his liking do afford,
Would you not with Alcippus break your word;
Or would you not to serve your Princes life,
Permit your daughter to become his wife?

Org. His Wife Erminia; if I did believe
Thou could to such a thought a credit give;
I would the interest of a father quit,
And you, Erminia, have no need of it:
Without his Aid you can a Husband choose,
Gaining the Prince you may a Father lose.

Er. Ah Sir, these words are Punierds to my heart:
And half my love to duty does convert;
Alas Sir, I can be content to die,
But cannot suffer this severity:
[kneels. That care you had, dear Sir, continue still,
I cannot live and disobey your will.
[rises.
Org. This duty has regained me, and you will find
A just return: I shall be always kind;
-- Go -- reassume your Beauty: dry your eyes;
Remember it is a father does advise.
[goes out.
Er. Ungrateful duty: whose uncivil pride,
By Reason is not to be satisfyde;
Who even Loves Almighty Power or'ethrows,
Or do on it too rigorous Laws impose;
Who bindest up our virtue too too straight,
And on our Honor lays too great a weight.
Coward, whom nothing but thy power makes strong:
Whom Age and Malice bred t'affright the young;
Here thou do tyrannize to that degree,
That nothing but my death will set me free.

SCEN. IV.
Enter Phillander and Alcander. Phi. Urge it no more, your Reasons do displease
me:
I offered her a Crown, with her Phillander:
And she was once pleased to accept of it.
She loved me too, yes, and repaid my flame,
As kindly as I sacrificed to her:
The first Salute we gave were harmless love,
Our souls then met, and so grew up together,
Like sympathizing Twins.
And must she now be ravished from my Arms;
Will you Erminia suffer such a Race.
What though the King have said it shall be so,
It Is not his pleasure can become thy Law,
No, nor it shall not.
And though he were my God as well as King,
I would instruct thee how to disobey him;
Thou shall, Erminia, bravely say, I will not;
He cannot force thee to it against thy will:
-- Oh Gods, shall duty to a King and Father,
Make thee commit a Murder on thy self?
Thy sacred self, and me that do adore thee;
No, my Erminia, quit this vain devoyre;
And follow Love that may preserve us all:
-- Presumptuous Villain, bold ingratitude --
Had thou no other way to pay my favors;
By Heaven 'twas bravely bold, was it not Alcander.

Alcan. It was somewhat strange, Sir;
But yet perhaps he knew not that you loved her.

Phi. Not know it: yes as well as thou and I:
The World was full on it, and could he be ignorant:
Why was her father called from banishment,
And placed about the King, but for her sake:
What made him General, but my passion for her.
What gave him twenty thousand Crowns a year,
But that which made me Captive to Erminia.
Almighty Love, of which thou say he is ignorant:
How has he ordered his audacious flame,
That I could never perceive it all this while.

Alcan. Then 'twas a flame concealed from you alone,
To the whole Court besides 'twas visible.
He knew you would not suffer it to burn out:
And therefore waited till his services
Might give encouragement to's close design;
If that could do it he nobly has endeavored it,
But yet I think you need not yield her, Sir.

Phi. Alcippus, I confess, is brave enough,
And by such ways I Will make him quit his claim;
-- He shall to morrow to the Camp again,
-- And then I Will own my passion to the King;
-- He loves me well, and I may hope his pity,
Till then be calm my heart, for if that fail,
[points to his sword This is the argument that will prevail.
[Exeunt.
ACT II.
The REPRESENTATION of the WEDDING. The Curtain must be let down; and soft
Music must play: the Curtain being drawn up, discovers a Scene of a Temple:
The King sitting on a Throne, bowing down to join the Hands of Alcippus and
Erminia; who kneel on the steps of the Throne; the Officers of the Court and
the Clergy standing in order by, with Orgulious. This wit hin the Scene.
Without on the Stage, Phillander with his sword half-drawn, held by Gallatea;
who looks ever on Alcippus: Erminia still fixing her eyes on Phillander; Pisaro
passionately gazing on Gallatea: Aminth on Fallatio, and he on her; Alcander,
Isillia, Cleontius, in other several postures, with the rest; all remaining
without motion, whilst the Music softly plays, this continues a while till the
Curtain falls; and then the Music plays aloud till the Act begins. ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Phillander and Gallatea enraged. It Is done, it is done, the fatal Knot is
ti'de,
Erminia to Alcippus is a Bride;
Methinks I see the motions of her eyes,
And how her Virgin-brests do fall and rise:
Her bashful blush, her timorous desire,
Adding new flame to his too vigorous fire;
Whilst he the charming Beauty must embrace,
And shall I live to suffer this disgrace
Shall I stand tamely by, and he receive
That Heaven of bliss, defenseless she can give;
No Sister, no, renounce that Brothers name,
Suffers his patience to surmount his flame;
I Will reach the Victor's heart, and make him see,
That Prize he has obtained belongs to me.

Gal. Ah dear Phillander, do not threaten so,
Whilst him you wound, you kill a Sister too.

Phi. Though all the Gods were-rallyed on his side,
They should too feeble prove to guard his pride.
Justice and Honor on my Sword shall sit,
And my revenge shall guide the lucky hit.

Gal. Consider but the danger, and the crime,
And Sir remember that his life is mine.

Phi. Peace Sister, do not urge it as a sin,
Of which the Gods themselves have guilty been:
The Gods my Sister do approve revenge
By Thunder, which 'ith' almighty Ports unhinge,
Such is their lightning when poor mortals fear,
And Princes are the Gods inhabit here;
Revenge has charms that do as powerful prove
As those of Beauty, and as sweet as love,
The force of vengeance will not be withstood
Till it has bathed and cooled it self in blood.
Erminia, sweet Erminia; thou art lost
And he yet lives that does the conquest boast.

Gal. Brother that Captive you can never retrive
More by the Victors death then if he live,
For she in Honor cannot him prefer,
Who shall become her Husbands Murderer;
By safer ways you may that blessing gain
When venturing thus through blood, and death prove vain.

Phi. With hopes already that are vain as air,
You Have kept me from revenge, but not despair.
I had my self acquitted as became
Erminias wronged adorer, and my flame,
My Rival I had killed, and set her free,
Had not my Justice been disarmed by thee.
-- But for thy faithless hopes I Would murdered him,
Even when the holy Priest was marrying them,
And offered up the reeking sacrifice
To th'Gods he kneeled to, when he took my prize,
By all their Purity I would have don't,
But now I think I merit the affront:
He that his vengeance idly does defer,
His Safety more then his Success must fear:
I like that Coward did prolong my fate,
But brave revenge can never come too late.

Gall. Brother, if you can so inhumane prove
To me your Sister, reason, and to love:
I Will let you see that I have sentiments too,
Can love and be revenged as well as you,
That hour that shall a death to him impart,
Shall send this dagger to Erminia's heart.
[shews a Dagger,
Phi. -- Ah Coward, how these words have made thee pale,
And fear above thy courage does prevail:
Ye Gods, why did you such a way invent.

Gall. None else was left thy madness to prevent.

Phi. Ah cruel Sister, I am tame become,
And will reverse my happy Rivals doom:
Yes, he shall live, to triumph over my Tomb:
-- But yet what thou have said I need must blame,
For if, should my resolutions prove the same,
I now should kill thee, and my life renew,
But were it brave or just to murder you:
At worst I should an unkind Sister kill,
Thou would the sacred blood of friendship spill.
I kill a man that has undone my Fame,
Ravished my Mystress, and contemned my Name
And Sister, one who does not thee prefer:
But thou no reason have to injure her.
Such charms of Innocence her eyes do dress,
As would confound the cruell'st Murtheress:
And thou art soft, and can no horror see,
Such Actions, Sister, you must leave to me.

Gall. The highest love no reason will admit,
And passion is above my friendship yet.

Phi. Then since I cannot hope to alter thee,
Let me but beg that thou would set me free;
Free this poor soul that such a coile does keep;
'Twill neither let me wake in peace, nor sleep.
Comfort I find, a stranger to my heart,
Nor can thou ought of that but thus impart;
Thou should with joy a death to him procure,
Who by it leaves Alcippus life secure.

Gall. Dear brother, you outrun your patience still,
We'll neither die our selves, nor others kill;
Something I Will do that shall thy joys restore,
And bring thee back that health thou had before;
-- We Are now expected at the Banquet, where
I Would have thy eyes more Love then anger wear:
This night be cheerful, and on me depend,
On me, that am thy Sister and thy friend:
A little raise Alcippus jealousy,
And let the rest be carried on by me;
Nor would it be amiss, should you provide
A Serinade to entertain the Bride:
'Twill give him fears that may perhaps disprove
The fond opinion of his happy love.

Phi. Though Hope be faithless, yet I cannot choose,
Coming from thee, but credit the abuse.

Gall. Phillander, do not you Hopes power distrust,
It Is time enough to die, when that is, unjust.
[Exeunt.
ACT. II. SCEN. II.
Enter Aminta as passing over the Stage, is stayed by Olinda. Oli. Why so
hasty, Aminta.

Am. The time requires it, Olinda.

Oli. But I Have an humble suit to you.

Am. You shall command me any thing.

Oli. Pray Heaven you keep your word:

Am. That sad tone of thine Olinda has almost
Made me repent of my promise, but come; wist;

Oli. My Brother, Madam.

Am. Now fie upon thee, is that all thy business?
[offers to go
Oli. Stay Madam, he dies for you.

Am. He cannot do it for any woman living:
But well -- it seems he speaks of love to you;
To me he does appear a very Statue.

Oli. He naught but sighs and calls upon your Name,
And vows you are the cruell'st Maid that breaths.

Am. Thou can not be in earnest sure.

Oli. I Will swear I am, and so is he.

Am. Nay then thou have a hard task on it; to make
Vows to all the Women he makes love to;
Indeed I pity thee; ha, ha, ha.

Ol. You should not laugh at those you have undon:

Am. Aminta sings. Hang love, for I will never pine,
For any Man alive;
Nor shall this jolly heart of mine,
The thoughts of it receive;
I will not purchase slavery
At such a dangerous rate.
But glory at my liberty,
And laugh at love and fate.

Oli. You Will kill him by this cruelty.

Am. What is it thou call'st so,
For I have hitherto given no denials.
Nor has he given me cause;
I Have seen him wildely gaze upon me often,
And sometimes blush and smile, but seldom that;
And now and then found fault with my replies,
And wondered where the devil lay that wit;
Which he believed no Judge of it could find.

Oli. Faith Madam, that is his way of making love.

Am. I^ will not take with me, I love a man,
Can kneel, and swear, and cry, and look submiss,
As if he meant indeed to die my slave:
Thy Brother looks -- but too much like a Conqueror.
[sighs.
Oli. How Aminta, can you sigh in earnest.

Am. Yes Olinda, and you shall know its meaning,
I love Alcander -- and am not ashamed of the secret,
But prithee do not tell him what I say.
-- Oh he is a man made up of those perfections,
Which I have often liked in several men;
And wished united to complete some one,
Whom I might have the glory to overcome
-- His Mean and Person, but 'bove all his Humor,
That surly Pride, though even to me addressed,
Do strangely well become him.

Oli. May I believe this?

Am. Not if you mean to speak on it,
But I shall soon enough betray my self.
Enter Falatius [with a patch or two on his face. Falatius, Welcome from the Wars
I Am glad to see y've escaped the dangers of them.

Fa. Not so well escaped neither, Madam, but I
Have left still a few testimonies of their
Severity to me.
[points to his face.
Oli. That Is not so well, believe me.

Fa. Nor so ill, since they be such as render us no
Less acceptable to your fair eyes, Madam;
But had you seen me when I gained them, Ladies,
In that Heroic posture.

Am. What posture?

Fa. In that of fighting, Madam.
You would have called to mind that ancient story
Of the stout Giants that waged War with Heaven;
Just so I fought, and for as glorious prize,
Your excellent Ladyship.

Am. For me, was it for me you ran this hazard then?

Fa. Madam, I hope you do not question that,
Was it not all the faults you found with me,
The reputation of my want of Courage,
A thousand Furies are not like a Battle,
And but for you,
By Jove I would not fight it over again
For all the glory on it, and now do you doubt me:
Madam your heart is strangely fortified
That can resist the effects I Have made against it,
And bring to boot such marks of valor too.
Enter to them Alcander, who seeing them would turn back, but Olinda stays him.
Ol. Brother, come back.

Fa. Advance, advance, what Man, afraid of me?

Alc. How, can she hold discourse with that Fantastic
[aside.
Fa. Come forward and be complaisant
[pulls him again.
Alc. That Is most proper for your wit Falatius.

Fa. Why so angry?

Alc. Away, thou art deceav'd.

Am. You Have lost your sleep, which puts you out of humor.

Alc. He Is damned will lose a moment on it for you.

Am. Who is it that has displeased you?

Alc. You have, and took my whole repose away,
And more then that, which you can never restore;
I can do nothing as I did before.
When I would sleep, I cannot do it for you,
My Eyes and Fancy do that form pursue,
And when I sleep, you Revel in my dreams,
And all my life is nothing but extremes.
When I would tell my love, I seem most rude,
For that informs me how I am subdued.
Gods you are unjust to tyrannize o re me,
When thousands fitter for it then I go free.
[goes out
Fall. Why what the Devil has possessed Alcander.

Ol. How like you this Aminta?

Am. Better and better, he is a wondrous man.
[Am. and Ol. goes out
Fa. It Is the most unjanty humor that ever I saw;
I, I, he is my Rival,
No marvel an' he looked so big upon me,
He is damnable valiant, and as Jealous as
He is Valiant, how I shall behave my
Self to him, and these too idle humors of his
I cannot yet determine; the comfort is, he
Knows I am a Coward what ever face I set upon it.
Well, I must either resolve never to provoke
His jealousy, or be able to re'ncounter his
Other fury, his valor; that were a good
Resolve if I be not past all hope.
[Exeunt.
ACT. II. SCENE. III.
Enter Alcippus and Erminia, as in a Bedchamber. Alcip. But still methinks
Erminia you are sad
A heavyness appears in those fair eyes,
As if your soul were agitating something
Contrary to the pleasure of this night.

Er. You ought in Justice Sir t'excuse me here,
Prisoners when first committed are less gay,
Then when they are used to Fetters every day,
But yet in mine they will more easy grow.

Alcip. You strangely bless me in but saying so.

Er. Alcippus I Have an humble suit to you.

Alcip. All that I have is so entirely thine,
And such a Captive thou have made my will
Thou need'st not be at the expense of wishing
For what thou can desire that I may grant,
Why are thy eyes declined?

Er, To satisfy a little modest scruple
I beg you would permit me, Sir --

Alcip. To lie alone to night, is it not so?

Er. It is --

Alcip. That Is too severe, yet I will grant it thee,
But why Erminia must I grant it thee?

Er. The Princess Sir questions my power and says,
I cannot gain so much upon your goodness.

Alcip. I could have wished some other had obliged thee to it.

Er. You would not blame her if you knew her reason.

Alcip. Indeed I do not much, for I can guess
She takes the party of her Prince and Brother;
And this is only to delay those joys,
Which she perhaps believes belong to him.
-- But that Erminia, you can best resolve;
And it is not kindly done to hide a truth,
The Prince so clearly owned.

Er. What did he own?

Alcip. He said, Erminia, that you were his wife;
If so, no wonder you refuse my bed:
The Presence of the King hindered my knowledge,
Of what I willingly would learn from you;
-- Come never deny a truth that plain appears,
I see hypocrisy through all your tears.

Erm. You need not ask me to repeat again,
A knowledge which, you say, appears so plain:
The Prince his word methinks should credit get,
Which I Will confirm whene're you call for it:
My heart before you ask't it, was his prize,
And cannot twice become a sacrifice.

Alcip. Erminia, is this brave or just in you,
To pay his score of love with what is my due:
What Is your design to treat me in this sort,
Are sacred Vows of Marriage made your sport?
Regard me well, Erminia, what am I?

Er. Me Sir, with whom I am bound to live and die,
And one to whom by rigorous command,
I gave (without my heart) my unwilling hand.

Alcip. But why, Erminia, did you give it so?

Er. TO obey a King and cruel father too.
A friendship, Sir, I can on you bestow,
But that will hardly into passion grow;
And 'twill an Act below your virtue prove,
To force an heart you know can never love.

Alcip. Am I the mark to hide your blushes in,
I the contented fool to veil your sin;
Have you already learnt that trick at Court,
Both how to practice and secure your sport;
Brave Mystress of your Art, is this the way
My service and my passion to repay?
Will nothing but a Prince your pleasure ^t,
And could you think that I would wink at it?
Recall that folly, or by all that is good,
I Will free tho soul that wantons in thy blood.
[He in rage takes her by the arm, shows a Dagger.
Er. I see your love, your Reason has betrayed,
But I Will forgive the faults which love has made;
It Is true, I love, and do confess it too:
Which if a crime, I might have hid from you;
But such a passion it is, as does despise,
Whatever rage you threaten from your eyes.
-- Yes -- you may disapprove this flame in me,
But cannot hinder what the Gods decree;
-- Search here this truth; Alas, I cannot fear,
Your steel shall find a welcome entrance here.
[He holds her still, and gazes on her.
Alcip. Where do thou think thy ungrateful soul will go,
Loaded with wrongs to me, should I strike now.

Er. To some blessed place, where Lovers do reside,
Free from the noise of jealousy and pride;
Where we shall know no other power but love,
And where even thou will soft and gentle prove;
So gentle, that if I should meet thee there,
I should allow what I deny thee here.

Alcip. Thou -- have disarmed my rage, and in its room,
A world of shame and softer passions come,
Such as the first efforts of love inspired,
When by thy charming eyes my soul was fired.

Er. I must confess your fears are seeming just,
But here to free you from the least mistrust,
I swear; whilst I Am your wife I Will not allow
Birth to a thought that tends to injuring you.

Alcip. Not to believe thee, were a sin above
The Injuries I have done thee by my love.
-- Ah, my Erminia, might I hope at least
To share the pity of that lovely breast,
By slow degrees, I might approach that Throne,
Where now the blessed Phillander reigns alone:
Perhaps in time my passion might redeem,
That now too faithful heart you have given to him;
Do but forbear to hear his Amorous tales,
Nor from his moving eyes learn what he ails:
A fire that is kindled cannot long survive,
If one add naught to keep the flame alive.

Er. I will not promise; what I mean to do,
My Virtue only shall oblige me to.

Alcip. But Madam, what do you mean by this reserve,
To what intent does all this coldness serve;
Is there no pity to my sufferings due,
And will you still my languishments renew?
Come, come, recall what you have rashly said,
And own tomorrow that thou art no maid:
Thy blushes do betray thy willingness,
And in thy lovely eyes I read success.

Er. A double tie obliges me to be
Strict to my Vows, my Love and Amity:
For my own sake the first I Will never decline,
And I would gladly keep the last for thine.

Alcip. Madam, you strangely do improve my pain,
To give me Hopes you must recall again.

Er. Alcippus, you this language will forbear,
When you shall know how powerful you are;
For whilst you here endeavor to subdue,
The best of women languishes for you.

Alcip. Erminia, do not mock my misery,
For, though you cannot love, yet pity me;
That you allow my passion no return,
^s weight enough, you need not add your scorn,
In this your cruelty is too severe.

Er. Alcippus, you mistake me every where.

Alcip. To whom, Erminia, do I owe this fate.

Er. Tomorrow all her story I Will relate,
Till then the promise I the Princess made,
I beg you would permit might be obeyed.

Alcip. You mad: with so many charms assail,
You need not question but you shall prevail;
Thy power's not lessened in thy being mine,
But much augmented in my being thine,
The glory of my chains may raise me more,
But I am still that slave I was before.
[Exeunt severally.
ACT II. SCENE IV.
Enter Phillander and Alcander. [the Prince half undrest. Phi. What Is a Clock,
Alcander.

Alc. It Is midnight, Sir, will you not go to bed.

Phi. To bed, friend; what to do?

Alc. To sleep, Sir, as you were wont to do.

Phi. Sleep, and Erminia have abandoned me,
I Will never sleep again. --

Alc. This is an honor, Sir, you must forsake.

Phi. Never, never, oh Alcander.
Do know where my Erminia lies to night.

Alc. I guess, Sir.

Phi. Where, nay prithee speak,
Indeed I shall not be offended at it.

Alc. I know not why you should, Sir.
She Is where she ought, abed with young Alcippus.

Phi. Thou speak thy real thoughts.

Alc. Why should your Highness doubt it?

Phi. By Heaven there is no faith in Womankind,
Alcander, do thou know an honest woman?

Alc. Many Sir.

Phi. I do not think it; it is impossible;
Erminia, if it could have been, were she,
But she has broke her Vows which I held sacred,
And plays the Wanton in another Arms.

Alc. Sir, Do you think it just to wrong her so.

Phi. Oh would thou could persuade me that I did so;
Thou know the Oaths and Vows she made to me,
Never to marry other then my self,
And you Alcander wrought me to believe them.
But now her Vows to marry none but me,
Are given to Alcippus, and in his bosom breathed,
With balmey whispers whilst the ravished youth,
For every syllable returns a kiss,
And in the height of all his ecstasy,
Philander's dispossessed and quite forgotten.
Ah charming maid is this your love to me,
Yet now thou a^no maid, nor love not me.
And I the fool to let thee know my weakness.

Alc. Why do you thus proceed to vex your self,
To question what you list, and answer what you please,
Sir, this is not the way to be at ease.

Phi. Ah dear Alcander what would have me do?

Alc. Do that, which may preserve you;
Do that which every man in love would do,
Make it your business to possess the object.

Phi. What meanest thou, is she not married --

Alcan. What then, she'as all about her, that she had,
Of youth and Beauty she is mistress still,
And may dispose it how, and where she will.

Phi. Pray Heaven I do not think too well of thee,
What means all this discourse, art thou honest?

Alcan. As most men of my age.

Phi. And would thou counsel me to such a sin?
For -- I do understand -- thee.

Alcan. I know not what you term so.

Phi. I never thought thou would been so great a villain
To urge me to a crime would damn us all,
Why do thou smile, have thou done well in this?

Alcan. I thought so, or I Would kept it to my self.
Sir ere you grow in rage at what I Have said,
Do you think I love you, or believe my life
Were to be valued more then your repose?
You seem to think it is not.

Phi. Possibly I may.

Alc. The sin of what I have proposed to you
You only seem to hate; Sir is it so?
-- If such religious thoughts about you dwell,
Why is it that you thus perplex your self?
Self-murder sure, is much the greater sin.
Erminia too, you say has broke her vows,
She that will swear and lie, will do the rest.
And of these evils, this I think the least;
And as for me I never thought it sin.

Phi. And can thou have so poor a thought of her.

Alcan. I hope you will find her. Sir as willing to it
As I am to suppose it, nay believe't,
She Will look upon it as want of love and courage
Should you not now attempt it;
You know Sir there is no other remedy,
Take no denial but the Game pursue,
For what she will refuse, she wishes you.

Phi. With such pretentions -- she may angry grow.

Alc. I never heard of any that were so,
For though the will to do it, and power they want,
They love to hear, of what they cannot grant.

Phi. No more,
Is this your duty to your Prince Alcander?
You were not wont to council thus amiss,
It Is either disrespect or some design,
I could be wondrous angry with thee now,
But that my grief has such possession here,
'Twill make no room for rage.

Alcan. I cannot Sir repent of what I Have said,
Since all the errors which I have committed,
Are what my passion to your interest led me to,
But yet I beg your Highness would recall
That sense which would persuade you it is unjust.

Phi. Name it no more, and I Will forgive it thee.

Alc. I can obey you Sir.

Phi. What shall we do to night, I cannot sleep?

Alc. I Am good at watching, and doing any thing.

Phi. We Will Serinade the Ladies and the Bride.
-- The first we may disturb, but she I fear
Keeps watch with me to night, though not like me.

Enter a Page of the Princes. Phil. How now Boy,
Is the Music ready which I spoke for?

Page They wait your Highness^s command.

Phi. Bid them prepare, I Am coming.
[exeunt Page. Soft touches may allay the discords here
And sweeten, though not lessen my despair.

SCEN. V.
[The Court Gallery. Enter Pisaro alone. Pis. Ha! who is that, a Lover on my
Life,
This amorous malady reigns every where;
Nor can my Sister be an ignorant
Of what I saw this night in Gallatea:
I Will question her -- Sister, Aminta, Sister,
[Calls as at her Lodgings
Lyc. Who calls my Lady?
[Enter a maid.
Pis. Where Is my Sister?

Lyc. I cry your Lordships mercy,
My Lady lies not in her Lodgings to night,
The Princess sent for her,
Her Highness is not well.
[She goes in.
Pis. I do believe it, good night Lycet.
[Enter a Page. -- Who Is there,

Page Your Lordships Page.

Pis. Where have thou been? I wanted thee but now.

Page I fell asleep in the Lobby Sir, and had not wakened
Yet, but for the Music which plays at the Lodgings
Of my Lady Erminia,

Pis. Curse on them; will they not allow him nights
To himself; it is hard.

Pis. This night I Am wiser grown by observation,
My love and friendship taught me jealousy,
Which like a cunning Spy brought in intelligence,
From every eye less wary then its own;
That told me that the charming Gallatea,
In whom all power remains,
Is yet too feeble to encounter love;
I find she received the wanton God,
Maugre my fond opinion of her soul,
And it is my friend too that is become my Rival.
I saw her lovely eyes still turn on him,
As Flowers to th'Sun: and when he turned away
Like those, she bowed her charming head again.
-- On the other side the Prince with dying looks
Each motion watched of fair Erminias eyes,
Which she returned as greedily again,
And if one glance to Alcippus she directed,
He Would stare as if he meant to cut his throat for it.
Well friend thou have a sure defense of me
My Love is yet below my amity.
[Exeunt.
ACT. II. SCENE. VI.
Draws off, discovers Phillander and Alcander with Music at the Chamber door
of Erminia, to them Pisaro who listens whilst the Song is sung. The Song for
the Page to sing at Erminias chamber door.
Amyntas that true hearted Swain
Upon a Rivers bank was laid,
Where to the pitying streams he did complain
On Sylvia that false charming maid,
But she was still regardless of his pain:
Oh! faithless Silvia! would he cry
And what he said the Eccho's would reply.
Be kind, or else I dye, E. I dye.
Be kind or else I dye, E. I dye.
A shower of tears his eyes let fall,
Which in the River made impress,
Then sigh, and Sylvia false again would call,
A cruel faithless Shepherdess,
Is love with you become a criminal
Ah lay aside this needless scorn,
Allow your poor adorer some return,
Consider how I burn, E. I burn.
Consider, etc.
Those smiles and kisses which you give,
Remmember Silvia, are my due;
And all the joys my Rival does receive
He ravishes from me not you.
Ah Silvia, can I live and this believe?
Incensibles are touched to see
My languishments, and seem to pity me.
Which I demand of thee, E. of thee,
Which I demand, etc.
Pis. What Is all this?

Phi. Who Is there?

Pis. A man, a friend to the General.

Phi. Then you are an enemy to all good men.
Does the ungrateful Wretch hide his own head,
And send his Spies abroad?

Pis. He is too great to fear, and needs them not;
And him thou termest so scorns the office too.

Phi. What make thou here then when the whole World's
Be gone, there lies thy way (asleep?
Where e're thy business be.

Pis. It lies as free for thee, and here is my business.

Phi. Thou lie, Rude man.

Pis. Why, what art thou dare tell me so in the dark?
Day had betrayed thy blushes for this boldness.

Phi. Tell me who it is that dares capitulate?

Pis. One that dares make it good.

Phi. Draw then; and keep thy word.

Alcan. Stand by, and let me do that duty, Sir.
[He steps between them, they fight, Pisaro falls. -- Here Is thy reward who
e're thou art.

Phi. Have thou no hurt?

Alcan. I think not much, yet somewhere it is I bleed.

Pis. What a dull beast am I!
[Exeunt Prince and Alcan.
Page My Lord, is it you are fallen?
[Enter Page. Help, Murder, Murder.

Pis. Hold, Balling Dog.

Enters Alcippus in his Nightgown with a Sword in his hand, a Page with
Lights. Alcip. 'Twas here abouts -- who is this, Pisaro wounded!
[He looks up. How came thou thus? Come up-up into my arms.

Pis. 'Twas Jealousy, Alcippus, that wild Monstre,
Who never leaves us till it has thus betrayed us.
-- Pox on it, I am shamed to look upon thee.
I have disturbed you to no purpose, Sir.
I am not wounded, go to bed again.

Alci. I Will see thee to thy Lodgings first, Pisaro.

Pis. 'Twill be unkind both to your self and me.
[Exeunt.
ACT II. SCENE. VII.
Enter Phillander and Alcander with Light. Alcan. He Is gone whoever he be.

Phi. It could not be Alcippus.

Alcan. I rather fear Pisaro,
-- but we soon enough shall know: Who Is this?

Enter Erminia in her Nightgown, and Isillia with Lights. Er. Methought I
heard Alcippus and the Prince
Before the cry of Murder.
I die if those two Rivals have encountered.

Phi. Ah Madam, cease that fear; they both are safe
From all but from the wounds which you have given them.

Er. Oh Gods, what make you here, and where is Alcippus?

Phi. Where I had been had Heaven been bountiful.

Er. Alas Sir, what do you mean? what have you done?
And where have you bestowed him?

Phi. Why all this high concern, Erminia?
Has he so reconciled you to him since I saw you last?
This is not kind to me.

Er. Oh tell not me of kindness, where is Alcippus?

Alcan. Madam, of whom do you demand Alcippus?
Neither of us have seen him.

Phi. Go, You Are a woman, a vain peevish creature.

Er. Sir, it is but just you should excuse my fear,
Alcippus is my husband, and his safety
Ought to become my care.

Phi. How Erminia.
Can you so soon yield up my right to him,
And not blush, whilst you own your Perjurie?

Er. Now Sir, y' are much too blame,
I could have borne the rest, but this concerns me,
I fear I have but too well kept my Vows with you,
Since you are grown but to suspect I have not.

Phi. Pardon me, Dear, the errors of my passion;
It was a sin so natural,
That even thy unkindly taking it,
Approch'd too near it, not to gain my Pardon;
But tell me why you ask't me for Alcippus?

Er. Sir, e're I could dispose my eyes to sleep,
I heard the Music at my Chamber Door,
And such a Song as could be none but yours;
But that was finished in a noise less pleasant,
In that of Swords and quarrel;
And amongst which,
I thought I heard yours and Alcippus voice.
(For I have kept my word, and lay not with him,)
This brought me hither, but if I mistook,
Once more I beg your Pardon.

Phi. Thou have restored me to a world of joys,
By what thou now have said.

Enter Alcippus, his Sword in his hand, a Page with light, he stands awhile.
Alcip. Erminia! and the Prince! embracing too!
I dream, and know she could not be thus base,
Thus false and loose --
But hear, I am informed: it is no Vision;
-- This was designed before, I find it now;
[Lays his hand on his heart.
Er. Alcippus, oh my fears.
[goes to them, takes her by the hand.
Alcip. Yes, Madam:
Too soon arrived for his and your repose.

Phi. Alcippus, touch her not.

Alcip. Not touch her, by Heaven I will,
And who shall hinder me?
Who is it dares say I shall not touch my wife?

Phi. Villain thou li'st.

Alcip. That you are my Prince shall not defend you here,
Draw Sir, for I have laid respect aside.
Strikes, they fight a little, Alcippus is wounded, Alcander supports him.
Er. Oh Gods what mean you, hold Phillander, hold.

Phi. Life of my soul, retire,
I cannot hear that voice and disobey,
And you must needs esteem him at low rates,
Who sells thee and his Honor for a tear.

Er. Upon my knees I beg to be obeyed,
[she kneels. -- But if I must not, here discharge your-anger.

Phi. You are too great a Tyrant where you may.
[Exeunt Erminia and Alcippus.
Phi. Stay! shall I let her go? shall her Commands,
Though they have power to take my life away,
Have force to suffer me to injure her?
Shall she be made a prey, and I permit it?
Who only have the interest to forbid it?
-- No, let me be accursed then.
[offers to follow.
Alc. What mean you, Sir?

Phi. Force the bold Ravisher to resign my right.
Alcander, Is not she my wife, and I his Prince?

Alc. It Is true, Sir,
And you have both power and justice on your side;
And there be times to exercise 'em both.

Phi. Fitter then this, Alcander?

Alc. This night Erminia's promise may repose you.
Tomorrow is your own --.
Till then I beg y'de think your interest safe.

Phi. Alcander, thou have peace about thee, and can judge
Better then I, 'twixt what is just and fit,
[puts up his sword. I hitherto believed my flame was guided
By perfect Reason, so, we often find
Vessels conducted by a peaceful wind,
And meet no opposition in their way,
But a safe passage through the flattering Sea;
But when a storm the bounding vessel throws.
It does each wave with equal rage oppose;
For when the Seas are mad, could that be calm
Like me, it would be ruined in the storm.
[exeunt.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Alcippus and Pisaro. Pis. It Is much, my Lord, you will not be satisfied.

Alcip. Friendship's too near a kin to love Pisaro,
To leave me any peace, whilst in your eyes
I read Reserves, which it is not kind to hide;
-- Come prithee tell me what the quarrel was,
And who 'twas with, thou shall my dear Pisaro.

Pis. Nay, now you urge me to impossibilities,
Good faith, I cannot tell, but guess the Prince.

Alcip. It Is true, Pisaro, 'twas indeed the Prince.
But what was the occasion?

Pis. He called me Spy, and I returned the affront,
But took no notice that he was my Prince;
It was a folly I repented of;
But 'twas in a damned melancholy Mood.

Alcip. Was it a going in or coming out.

Pis. From whence?

Alcip. Erminia's Chamber, prithee let me know,
For I have fears that take away my sleep,
Fears that will make me mad, stark mad, Pisaro.

Pis. You do not well to fear without a cause.

Alcip. Oh friend, I saw what thou can never conceive;
Last night I saw it when I came from thee:
And if thou go about t'impose upon me,
I Will cast'thee from my soul; Come out with it,
I see thy breast heav^ with a generous ardour,
As if it scorned to harbor a reserve,
Which stood not with its Amity to me.
Could I but know my fate, I could despise it:
But when it is clad in Robes of innocence,
The devil cannot 'scape it:
Something was done last night that gnaws my heart strings;
And many things the Princess too let fall,
Which, Gods! I know not how to put together,
And prithee be not thou a Ridler too:
But if thou know of ought that may concern me,
Make me as wise as thou art.

Pis. Sir. you are of so strange a jealous Humor,
And so strangely jealous of your Honor,
That 'twixt us both we may make work enough,
But on my soul I know no wrong you have.

Alcip. I must believe thee, yet methinks thy face
Has put on an unwonted gravity.

Pis. That, Alcippus, you will not wonder at,
When you shall know you are my Rival.

Alcip. Nay, why should thou delay me thus with stories?
This shall not put me off.

Pis. Sir, I Am in earnest, you have gained that heart,
For which I Have received so many wounds,
Venturing for Trophies where none durst appear,
To gain at my Return one fingle smile:
Or that she would submit to hear my story:
And when sh' has said, 'twas bravely done, Pisaro,
I thought the glory recompensed the toil,
And sacrificed my Laurels at her feet.
Like those who pay their first fruits to the Gods,
To beg a blessing on the following crop.
And never made her other signs of love,
Nor knew I that I had that easy flame,
Till by her eyes I found that she was mortal,
And could love too, and that my friend is you.

Alcip. Thou have amazed me, prithee speak more clearly.

Pis. My Lord, the Princess has a passion for you,
Have I not reason now to be your enemy?

Alcip. Not till I make returns:
But now I Am past redemption miserable.
'Twas she Erminia told me died for me;
And I believed it but a slight of hers,
To put me from my Courtship.

Pis. No 'twas a fatal truth,
Alcippus had thou seen her, whilst the Priest
Was giving thee to fair Erminia
What languishment appeared upon her eyes?
(Which never were removed from thy loved face,)
Through which her melting soul in drops distilled,
As if she meant to wash away thy sin,
In giving up that right belonged to her,
Thou had without my aid found out this truth,
A sweet composure dwelt upon her looks
Like Infants who are smiling whilst they dye,
Nor knew she that she wept, so unconcerned
And freely did her soul a passage find,
Whilst I transported had almost forgot
The Reverence due t'her sacred self and place,
And every moment ready was to kneel
And with my lips gather the precious drops
And robbed the Holy Temple of a Relic,
Fit only there t'inhabit.

Alcip. I never thought thou would had this softness in thee,
How came thou friend to hide all this from me?

Pis. My Lord, I knew not that I was a lover;
I felt no flame, but a Religious ardour,
That did inspire my soul with adoration,
And so remote I was from ought but such
I knew not hope, nor what it was to wish
For other blessings then to gaze upon her,
Like Heaven I thought she was to be possess't,
Where carnal thoughts can no admittance find,
And had I not perceav'd her love to you,
I had not known the nature of my flame,
But then I found it out by jealousy,
And what I took for a Seraphick motion
I now decline as criminal and earthly.

Alcip. When she can love to a discovery,
Declares her passion eminent and high
-- But I am married -- to a maid that hates me;
What help for that Pisaro?
And thou have something too to say of her,
What was it; for now thou have undone me quite.

Pis. I have naught to say to her dishonor, Sir,
But something may be done may give you cause
To stand upon your Guard;
And if your Rage do not the Mastery get,
I cannot doubt but you will be happy yet.

Alcip. Without Erminia that can hardly be,
And yet I find a certain shame within
That will not suffer me to see the Princess,
I have a kind of war within my soul,
My Love against my Glory and my Honor,
And I could wish, -- Alas I know not what,
Prithee instruct me.

Pis. Sir take a resolution to be calm
And not like men in love abandon reason:
-- You may observe the actions of these lovers,
But be not passionate what ere you find.
That headstrong Devil will undo us all.
If you will be happy quit its company.

Alcip. I fain would take thy counsel --
[Pawses.
Pis. -- Come clear up my Lord, and do not hang the head
Like Flowers in storms; the Sun will shine again.
Set Gallateas charms before your eyes,
Think of the glory to divide a Kingdom.
And do not waste your Noble youth and time,
Upon a peevish heart you cannot gain.
This day you must to the Camp, and in your absence
I take upon me what I scorned last night,
The office of a Spy --
Believe me, Sir; for by the Gods I swear,
I never wished the glory of a Conquest
With half that zele as to compose these differences.

Alcip. I do believe thee, and will tell thee something
That past between the Prince and I last night,
And then thou will conclude me truly miserable.
[Exeunt.
ACT. III. SCEN. II.
Enter Falatius, Labree, as passing by meet Cleontius. Cle. Your Servant, my
Lord.
-- so coldly, stay -- your reason, Sir.
[Fal. puts off his hat a little, and passes on.
Fall. How mean you, Sir?

Cle. Do you not know me?

Fall. Yes I have seen you, and think you are Cleontius,
A Servant of the Princes; were i the Campania too,
If I mistake not.

Cle. Can you recall me by no better instances?

Fall. What need of any, pray?

Cle. I am a Gentleman.

Fall. Ha Labree, what means he now?
By Jove I do not question it, Cleontius:
What need this odd Punctilio?
I call thee to no account.

Cle. ^t's more then I can say to you, Sir.

Fall. I Will excuse you for that.

Cle. You shall not need; Sir: stay, I have a Sister.

Fall. Oh the Devil, now he begins.

Cle. A handsome Sister too, or you deceived her.

Labree. Bearup, Sir, be not huft.
[aside.
Fall. It may be so, but is she kind, Cleontius?
[Fal. bears up.
Cle. What mean you by that word?

Lab. Again Sir, here is too to one.
[aside.
Fa. Will she do reason, or so, you understand me.

Cle. I understand that you are an impudent fellow,
Whom I must cudgel into better manners.

Fa. Pox on it who bears up now Labree?

Cle. Beat till thou do confess thou art an ass.
And on thy knees confess it to Isillia,
Who after that shall scorn thee.

Lab. Rally with him Sir, it is your only way, and put it
Off with a jest, for he is in fury, but dares not
Strike in the Court.

Fa. But must you needs do this, needs fight Cleontius?

Cle. Yes, by all means, I find my self inclined to it.

Fa. You shall have your desire, Sir, farewell.

Cle. When, and where?

Fa. Faith very suddenly, for I think it will not be
Hard to find men of your trade
Men that will fight as long as you can do,
And men that love it much better then I,
Men that are poor, and damned, fine desperate Rogues,
Rascals that for a Pattacoone a man
Will fight their Fathers,
And kiss their Mothers into peace again.
Such Sir, I think will fit you?

Cle. Abusive Coward have thou no sense of honor.

Fall. Sense of honor, ha, ha, ha, poor Cleontius.

Enters Aminta and Olinda. Am. How now servant, why so joviall?

Fa. I was laughing Madam -- at --

Cle. At what thou thing of nothing --

Am. Cozen Cleontius you are angry.

Cle. Madam, it is unjustly then, for fools
Should rather move the spleen to mirth then anger.

Am. You Have too much wit to take ought ill from him,
Lets know your quarrel.

Fa. By Jove Labree I am undone again.

Cle. Madam, it was about --

Fa. Hold dear Cleontius, hold, and I Will do any thing.
[aside.
Cle. Just nothing --

Fa. He was a little too familiar with me --

Cle. Madam, my Sister Isillia --

Fa. A curse he will out with it --
[aside, pulls him by the arm.
Cle. Confess she is your Mistress.
[aside.
Fa. I call my mistress Madam.

Am. My Cozen Isillia your Mistress,
Upon my word you are a happy man.

Fa. By Jove if she be your Cozen, Madam,
I love her much the better for it.

Am. I am beholding to you,
But then it seems I Have lost a lover of you

Cle. Confess she has or I Will so handle you.
[Exit Labree.
Fa. That Is too much Cleontius -- but I will,
By Jove; Madam, I must not have a Mistress that
Has more wit then my self, they ever require
More then a man's able to give them.

Oli. Is this your way of Courtship to Isillia?
[Exit Cle.
Fa. By Jove, Ladies, you get no more of that from me,
It Is that has spoiled you all; I find Alcander can
Do more with a dumb show, then I with all my
Applications and address.

Oli. Why, my Brother can speak.

Fa. Yes, if any body durst hear him, by Jove if you
Be not kind to him, he will Hector you all; I Will get
The way on it too, it is the most prosperous one; I see no
Other reason you have to love Alcander
Better then I.

Am. Why should you think I do?

Fa. Devil I see it well enough by your continual
Quarrels with him.

Am. Is that so certain a proof?

Fa. Ever whilst you live, you treat me too
Well ever to hope.
Enter Alcander, kneels, offers his sword to Aminta. -- What new Masquerade's
this? by Jove, Alcander
Has more tricks then a dancing Bear.

Am. What mean you by this present?

Alc. Kill me.

Am. What have you done to merit it?

Alcan. Do not ask, but do it.

Am. I Will have a reason first.

Alcan. I think I Have killed Pisaro.

Am. My Brother dead!
[She falls into the arms of Olinda.
Fa. Madam look up, it is I that call.

Am. I care not who thou be, but if a man
Revenge me on Alcander.
[She goes out with Olin.
Fa. By Jove she has mistook her man.
This it is to be a lover now,
A man's never out of one broyle or other.
But I have more wit then Aminta this bout.
[offers to go.
Alcan. Come back and do your duty ere you go.
[pulls him.
Fa. I owe you much Alcander.

Alcan. Aminta said you should revenge her on me --

Fa. Her word's not law I hope.

Alcan. And I Will obey --

Fa. That may do much indeed.
[Fal. answers with great
Alcan. This if thou were a man she bad thee do signs of fear.
Why do thou shake?

Fa. No, no, Sir, I am not the man she meant.

Alcan. No matter thou will serve as well,
A Lover! and can disobey this Mistress?

Fa. I do disown her since she is so wicked
To bid me kill my friend,
Why you are my friend Alcander.

Alcan. I Will forgive thee that.

Fa. So will not His Majesty: I may be hanged for it.

Alcan. Thou should be damned ere disobey thy Mistress.

Fa. These be degrees of Love I am not yet arrived
At, when I am, I shall be as ready to be damned
In honor as any lover of you all.

Alcan. Owns Sir, d' ye rally with me?

Fa. Your pardon, sweet Alcander, I protest I a^
Not in so gay an humor.

Alcan. For well I had forgot my self.
[exit.
Fa. Stark mad, by Jove -- yet it may be not, for
Alcander has many unaccountable Humors;
Well, if this be agreeable to Aminta, she is e'ne as
Mad as he, and 'twere great pity to part them.

Enter Pisaro, Aminta and Olinda. Am. Well, have you killed him?

Fa. Some wiser then some, Madam.
-- My Lord -- what alive? --

Pis. Worth two dead men, you see.
[See Pisaro runs to him and embraces him.
Fa. That Is more then I could have said
Within this half hour.
Alcander's a very Orlando, by Jove, and gone to
Seek out one that is madder yet then himself, that will
Kill him.

Am. Oh, dear Falatius, run and fetch him back.

Fa. Madam, I have so lately 'scap'd a scouring,
That I wish you would take it for a mark
Of my passion to disobey you, for he is in a damned
Humor.

Am. He Is out of it by this, I warrant you;
But do not tell him that Pisaro lives.

Fa. That Is as I shall find occasion.
[Fal. exit.
Pis. Alcander is a worthy youth and brave,
I wish you would esteem him so;
It Is true, there is now some difference between us,
Our interest are disposed to several ways,
But time and management will join us all:
I Will leave you, but prithee make it thy business,
To get my Pardon for my last nights rudeness.

Am. I shall not fail.
[Exit.
Enter Alcander melancholy. Fa. Here, Madam, here he is.

Am. Tell me, Alcander, why you treat me thus?
You say you love me if I could believe you.

Aloan. Believe a man away, you have no ^t,
I Will say as much to every pretty woman.

Am. But I have given you no cause to wrong me.

Alcan. That was my fate, not fault, I knew him not:
But yet to make up my offense to you,
I offer you my life: for I Am undone.
If any faults of mine should make you sad.

Am. Here, take your sword again, my Brother's well.
[She gives him his Sword again.
Fa. Yes, by Jove, as I am: you had been finely
Served if I had killed you now.

Am. What sorry for the news, ha, ha, ha.

Alcan. No, sorry: you are a woman, a mere woman.

Am. Why did you ever take me for a man? ha, ha.

Alcan. Thy soul, I thought was all so; but I see
You have your weakness, can dissemble too;
-- I would have sworn that sorrow in your face,
Had been a real one:
Nay, you can die in jest: you can, false woman:
I hate thy Sex for this.

Fa. By Jove, there is no truth in them, that is slat.

Alcan. Why that repen^ant look, what new design?
[she looks sad. -- Come, now a tear or two to second that,
And I am soft again, a very Ass.
-- But yet that look would call a Saint from The Altar,
And make him quite forget his Ceremony,
Or take thee for his Deity:
-- But yet thou have a very Hell within,
Which those bewitching eyes draw souls into.

Fa. Here Is he that fits you, Ladies.

Am. Nay, now you are too unjust, and I will leave you.

Alcan. Ah, do not go, I know not by what Magic,
[holds her But as you move, my soul yields that way too.

Fa. The truth on it is, she has a strong Magnetic,
Power, that I find.

Alcan. But I will have none find it but my self,
No soul but mine shall sympathize with hers.

Fa. Nay, that you cannot help.

Alcan. Yes but I can, and take it from thee if I thought it did so.

Ol. No quarrels here I pray.

Fa. Madam, I owe a Reverence to the place.

Alcan. I Will scarce allow thee that;
Madam, I Will leave you to your Lover.

Am. I hate thee but for saying so.

Alcan. Quit him then.

Am. So I can and thee too.
[offers to go out.
Alcan. The devil take me if you 'scape me so.
[goes after her
Fall. And I Will not be outdone in importunity.
[goes after.
ACT III. SCENE III.
Enter Gallatea and Erminia. Er. And it is an Act below my Quality,
Which, Madam, will not suffer me to fly.

Gall. Erminia, ere you boast of what you are:
Since you're so high I Will tell you what you were;
Your Father was our General it is true,
That Title justly to his sword was due:
'Twas nobly gained, and worth his blood and toils,
Had he been satisfied with noble spoils;
But with that single Honor not content,
He needs must undermine the Government;
And 'cause h'ad gained the Army to his side,
Believed his Treason must be justified.
For this (and justly) he was banished,
Where whilst a low and unknown life he led,
Far from the hope and glory of a Throne,
In a poor humble Cottage you were born,
Your early Beauty did it self display,
Nor could no more conceal it self then day:
Your eyes did first Phillanders soul inspire,
And Fortune too conformed her to his fire.
That made your Father greater then before,
And what he justly lost that did restore.
'Twas that which first thy beauty did disclose;
Which else had withered like an unseen Rose;
'Twas that which brought thee to the Court, and there
Disposed thee next my self, in the highest sphere:
Alas obscurely else thould'st lived and did,
Not knowing thy own charms, nor yet this Pride.

Er. Madam in this your bounty is severe,
Be pleased to spare that repetition here.
I hope no Action of my life should be
So rude to charge your generosity:
But Madam do you think it just to pay
Your great obligements by so false a way?
Alcippus passion merits some return,
And should that prove but an ungrateful scorn;
Alas I am his wife, to disobey
My fame, as well as duty, I betray.

Gall. Persidious Maid, I might have thought thou would prove
False to thy Prince, and Rival in my Love.
I thought too justly he that conquered me
Had a sufficient power to captive thee;
Thou'st now revenged thy Fathers shame and thine
In taking thus Phillanders life and mine.
[Er. weeps
Er. Ah madam that you would believe my tears
Or from my vows but satisfy your fears.
By all the Gods Alcippus I do hate,
And would do any thing to change my fate;
Ought that were just and Noble I dare do.

Gall. Enough Erminia, faith I credit you,
And will no other proof of it require,
But that you will now submit to my desire;
Indeed Erminia, you must grant my suit,
Where Love and Honor calls make no dispute.
Pity a youth that never loved before,
Remember it is a Prince that does adore,
Who offers up a heart that never found,
It could receive, till from your eyes a wound.

Er. To your cominand should I submit to yield
Where could I from Alcippus be concealed?
What could defend me from his jealous rage.

Ga. Trust me, Erminia, I Will for that engage.

Er. And then my Honor by that flight's overthrown.

Ga. That being Phillanders, he will preserve his own,
And that Erminia, sure you will never distrust.

Er. Ah Madam, give me leave to fear the worst.

Enter Aminta. Am. Madam, Alcippus waits for your Commands,
He Is going to the Camp.

Gall. Admit him.

Enter Alcippus and Pisaro. Gall. Alcippus, it is too soon to leave Erminia.

Alcip. I wish she thought so, Madam,
Or could believe with what regret I do so;
She then would think the fault were much too small,
For such a Penance as my soul must suffer.

Am. No matter, Sir, you have the year before you.

Alcip. Yes Madam, so has every Galley-slave,
That knows his toil, but not his recompense;
Tomorrow I expect no more content,
Then this uneasy day afforded me;
And all before me is but one grand Piece
Of endless grief and madness:
-- You, Madam, taught Erminia to be cruel:
A Vice without your Aid she could have learned,
And now to exercise that new-taught Art,
She tries the whole experience on my heart.

Gall. If she do so, she learnt it not of me,
I love, and therefore know no cruelty:
Such outrage cannot well with love reside,
Which only is the mean effect of Pride:
-- I merit better thoughts from you, Alcippus.

Alcip. Pardon me, Madam, if my passion stray,
[he kneels. Beyond the limits of my high respect;
-- It Is a rude gust, and merits your reproaches:
But yet the saucy flame can never control
That Adoration which I owe my Princess:
That, with Religion took possession here.
And in my prayers I mix you with the Deities.

Gall. I Would rather you should treat me as a Mortal,
Rise and begin to do so.
[Rises and bows.
Alcip. Now, Madam, what must I expect from you.

Er. Alcippus, all that is to your Virtue due.

Alcip. In that but common justice you allow.

Er. That justice, Sir, is all I can bestow.

Alcip. In justice then you ought to me resign,
That which the Holy Priest entitled mine;
Yet that, without your heart, I do despise,
For uncompell'd I Would have that sacrifice:
-- Come ease me of that pain that presses here,
Give me but hope, that may secure my fear;
I Am not ashamed to own my soul possessed,
With jealonsie, that takes away my rest.
-- 'Tell me you will love, or that my suit is vain.
Do any thing to ease me of my pain.
Gods Madam, why do you keep me in suspense,
This cannot be the effects of innocence;
By Heaven I Will know the cause where're it lies,
Nor shall you fool me with your feigned disguise.

Pis. You do forget your promise, and this Presence.
[aside to Alci.
Alcip. (...) kindly urged, prithee be near me still,
And tell me of the faults that look unmanly.

Gall. Dear, if thou love me, flatter him a little.
[to Er. aside.
Er. It Is hard to do, yet I will try it, Madam.

Gall. I Will leave you that you may the better do so.
-- I hope Alcippus, you will revisit us,
With Lovers speed:
And whatsoever treatment now you find,
At your return you will find us much more kind.
[He bows, she goes out.
Alcip. Can you forgive the rashness of a man,
That knows no other Laws but those of passion.

Er. You are unkind to think I do not Sir,
-- Yes, and am grown so softened by my pity,
That I Am afraid I shall neglect my Vows.
And to return your passion, grow ingrate.

Alcip. A few more syllables expressed like these,
Will raise my soul up to the worst extreme,
They give me with your-scorn an equal torment.

Er. See what a power your language has upon me.
[weeps.
Alcip. Ah, do not weep, a tear or two's enough,
For the Completion of your Cruelty,
That, when it failed to exercise your will,
Sent those more powerful weapons from your eyes,
And what by your severity you miss^t of,
These (but a more obliging way) perform.
Gently, Erminia, pour the balsom in,
That I may live, and taste the sweets of love.
-- Ah should you still continue as you are,
Thus wondrous good, thus excellently fair.
I should retain my growing name in War,
And all the Glories I have ventured for,
And fight for Crowns to recompense thy bounty.
-- This can your smiles, but when those beams are clouded,
Alas, I freeze to very Cowardice,
And have not courage left to kill my self.

Er. A fate more glotious does that life attend,
And does preserve you for a Nobler end.

Alcip. Erminia, do not sooth my easy heart,
For thou my fate, and thou my Fortune art;
Whatever other blessings Heaven design,
Without my dear Erminia, I Will decline.
Yet, Madam, let me hope before I go,
In pity that you ought to let me do.
It Is all you shall allow m' impatient heart.

Er. That Is what against my will I must impart:
But wish it please the Gods, when next we meet,
We might as friends, and not as Lovers greet.
[Exeunt.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Galathea and Aminta met by Phillander and Alcander. Phi. SO hasty Sister!

Gall. Brother, I am glad to meet you.
Aminta has some welcome news for you.

Amin. My Lord!
Erminia yet is hardly brought to yield,
She wants but some encouragement from you,
That may assist her weakness to subdue,
And 'twas but faintly she denied to see you.

Phi. However, I will venture,
She can but chide, and that will soon be past:
A Lover's Anger is not long to last.

Amin. Isillia, I have won to give you entrance.

Phi. Love furnish me with powerful Arguments:
Direct my ^ngue that my disordered sense,
May speak my passion more then Eloquence.
[aside.
Gall. But is Alcippus gone?

Alcan. Madam, an hour since.

Phi. It Is well; and Sister,
Whilst I persuade Erminia to this flight;
Make it your business to persuade the King,
Hang on his neck, and kiss his willing cheek:
Tell him how much you love him, and then smile,
And mingle words with kisses; 'twill or'ecome him:
Thou have a thousand pretty flatteries.
Which have appeased his highest fits of passion:
A Song from thee has won him to that rest,
Which neither toil nor silence could dispose him to.
Thou know thy power, and now or never use it.

Gall. 'Twas thither I was going.

Phi. May thou be prosperous.
[Exeunt Phi. and Gal. Aminta and Alcander stay.
Am. What now Alcander?

Alcan. As 'twas Aminta.

Am. How Is that?

Alcan. Such a distracted lover as you left me.

Am. Such as I found you too, I fear, Alcander.

Alcan. Ah Madam do not wrong me so,
Till now I never knew the joys and sorrows
That do attend a soul in love like mine,
My passion only, fits the object now,
I hate to tell you so, it is a poor low means
To gain a Mistress by, of so much wit,
Aminta you're above that common rate
Of being won.
Mean beauties should be flattered into praise,
Whilst you need only sighs from every lover
To tell you who you conquer, and not how,
Nor to instruct you what attracts you have.

Am. This will not serve to convince me,
But you have loved before,

Alcan. And will you never quit that error madam?

Am. It Is what I Have reason to believe, Alcander
And you can give me none for loving me, for
I Am much unlike Lucinda whom you eyed,
I Am not so coy, nor so reserved as she;
Nor so designing as Florana your next Saint,
Who starved you up with hope, till you grew weary,
And then Ardelia did restore that Ioss,
The little soft Ardelia, kind and fair too.

Alcan. You think you're wondrous witty now, Aminta.
But hang me if you be.

Am. Indeed, Alcander no, it is simple truth,
Then for your bouncing Mistress, long Brunetta,
O that Majestic garb, it is strangely taking
That scornful look, and eyes that strike all dead that stand Beneath them,
Alcander, I have none of all these charms,
But well, you say you love me; could you be
Content to dismiss these pe^ty sha^s in your hea^
And give it all to me: on these conditions
I may do much.

Alcan. Aminta, more perhaps then I may like,

Am. Do not fear that Alcander.

Alc. Your jealousy incourages that fear.

Am. If I be so, I Am the fitter for your humor.

Alcan. That Is another reason for my fears, that is ill
Luck ows us a spite, and will be sure to pay us with
Loving one another, a thought I dread,
Farewell Aminta; when I can get loose from
Ardelia, I may chance wait on you, till then
Your own Pride be your companion,

Am. Nay, you shall not go Alcander.
[holds him.
Alcan. Fie on it, those looks have lost their wonted force.
I knew you would called me back to smile upon me,
And then you have me sure; no, no, Aminta,
I Will no more of that,
[goes out.
Am. I have too much betrayed my passion for him,
-- I must recall it, [if I can I must,
-- I will -- for should I yield, my power's orethrown,
And what is a woman when that glory's gone.
[Exeunt.
ACT. IV. SCEN. II.
Enters Alcippus and Pisaro. Pis. You seemed then to be pleased with what she
said.

Alcip. And then methought I was so,
But yet even then I heard she did dissemble
-- Gods, what is a man possess't with jealousy,

Pis. A strange wild thing, a lover without reason,
I once have proved the torture on it,
But as unlike to thine as good from evil;
Like fire in Limbecks, mine was soft and gentle,
Infusing kindly heat till it distilled
The spirits of the soul out at my eyes,
And so ended.
But thine's a raging fire which never ceases
Till it has quite destroyed the goodly Edifice
Where it first took beginning;
Faith strive Sir to suppress it.

Alcip. No I Will let it run to its extent
And see what then 'twill do.
Perhaps 'twill make me mad, or end my life,
Either of which will ease me.

Pis. Neither of these Alcippus,
It will unman you, make you too dispis'd;
And those that now admire will pity you.

Alcip. What would thou have me do?
Am I not tied a slave to follow love,
Whilst at my back freedom and honor waits,
And I have lost the power to welcome them?
Like those who meet a Devil in the night,
And all affrighted gaze upon the fury,
But dare not turn their backs to what they fear,
Though safety lie behind them.
Alas I would as willingly as those
Fly from this Devil Love.

Pis. You may like those affrighted, by degrees
Allay your sense of terror in the object,
And then its power will lessen with your fear,
And 'twill be easy to forego the fantasme.

Alcip. No, then like the damned Ghost it follows me.

Pis. Let reason then approach it, and examine it.

Alcip. Love is a surly and a lawless Devil
And will not answer reason.
I must encounter it some other way,
For I will lay the Fiend.

Pis. What would you have Alcippus?

Alcip. I Would have fair play Pisaro.
-- I find the cheat, and will not to the Camp;
-- Thou shall supply my place, and I Will return:
The night grows on, and something will be done
That I must be acquainted with.

Pis. Pardon me Sir, if I refuse you here:
I find you're growing up to jealousies,
Which I Will not trust alone with you.

Alcip. Thou know perhaps of something worthy it.

Pis. I must confess your passions give me cause,
If I had any secrets to conceal them,
But it is no time nor place to make disputes in:
Will you to horse?

Alcip. Will you not think it fit I should return then?
I can be calm.

Pis. What is it you mean by this return Alcippus?

Alcip. To see Erminia, is not that enough
To one in love, as I am?

Pis. But Sir, suppose you find Phillander there?

Alcip. Then I suppose I shall not much approve on it.

Pis. You would be at your last nights rage again.
Alcippus this will ruin you for ever,
Nor is it all the power you think you have
Can save you, if he once be disobliged.
Believe me 'twas the Princess's passion for you
Made up that breach last night.

Alcip. All this I know as well as you Pisaro,
But will not be abused; Alas I Am lost,
Could I recall these two last days are past,
Ah I should be my self again, Pisaro,
I would refuse these fetters which I wear,
And be a slave to nothing but to glory.

Pis. That were a resolution worthy of you.
-- But come it is late, what you resolve conclude.

Alcip. I am resolved I will not to the Camp,
A secret inclination does persuade me
To visit my Erminia to night.

Pis. Comes it from Love, or Jealousy?

Alcip. The first good, faith Pisaro; you are so fearful --
You shall to'th' Camp. before
And I Will be with you early in the morning.

Pis. Give me your hand, and promise to be calm.
[gives his hand.
Alc. By all our friendships, as the Western winds,
Nothing that is done shall e're inrage me more.
Honor's the Mistress I Will henceforth adore.
[Exit.
Pis. I will not trust you though.
[goes out another way.
ACT IV. SCENE. III.
The Court Gallery. Enter Phillander and Alcander in their Cloaks muff'd as in
the Dark. Alcan. Isillia?
[Calls at the lodgings of Erminia.
Isil. Who Is there?

Alcan. A friend.

Isil. My Lord Alcander?

Alcan. The same.

Is. Where Is the Prince?

Phi. Here Isilia,

Is. Give meyour hand my Lord, and follow me.

Phi. To such a Heaven as thou conduct'st me too,
Though thou should traverse Hell I Would follow thee.

Alcan. You Will come back in charity Isillia?

Is. Yes if I dare trust you alone with me.
[They go all in.
ACT IV. SCENE. IV.
Draws off, discovers Erminia sitting in a dishabit to her Phillander, who
falls at her feet on his knees. Er. My Lord the Prince, what makes your
Highness here?

Phi. Erminia, why do you ask that needless question?
'Twas Love, Love that is unsatisfied, which brought me hither.
[kneels.
Er. Rise Sir, this posture would become me better.

Phi. Permit me dear Erminia -- to remain thus.
It Is only by these signs I can express
What my confusion will not let me utter.
I know -- not what strange-power thou bear about thee,
But at thy sight or touch my sense forsakes me,
And that withal, I had designed to say,
Turns to a strange disordered rapture in me.
-- Oh Erminia --

Er. How do you Sir?

Phi. I am not well;
Too suddenly I pass from one extreme
To this of joy, more insupportable,
But I shall reassume my health anon
And tell thee all my story,

Er. Dear Sir, retire into this inner room,
And there repose a while.
Alas, I see disorder in your face.

Phi. This confidence of me, is generous in thee.
[They go into the Scene which draws over.
ACT IV. SCENE. V.
[The Court Gallery. Enter Alcippus. Alcip. The night is calm and silent as my
thoughts
Where nothing now but loves soft whispers dwell;
Who in as gentle terms upbraids my rage,
Which strove to dispossess the Monarch thence;
It tells me how dishonest all my fears are,
And how ungrateful all my jealousies,
And prettily persuades those Infidels
To be less rude and mutinous hereafter.
Ah that I could remain in this same state
And be contented with this Monarchy;
I would, if my wild multitude of passions
Could be appeased with it, but they are for liberty,
And nothing but a commonwealth within
Will satisfy their appetites of freedom.
-- Pride, Honor, Glory, and Ambition strjve
How to expel this Tyrant from my soul,
But all too weak though reason should assist them.
[he knocks. [Alcander looks out at the door.
Alcan. Who Is there?

Alcip. A friend --

Is. Oh Heavens it is my Lord Alcippus voice.

Alcan. Peace Isillia.

Alcip. I hear a man within -- open the door.
Now Love defend thy interest, or my jealousy
Will grow the mightier Devil of the two else.
[Alcand. comes out. -- Who Is this? one muffled in a Cloak:
What art thou, who at this dead time of night
Have took possession hear?
-- Speak or I Will kill thee.

Alcan. This were an opportunity indeed.
To do my Prince a service, but I dare not.

Alcip. What dare not do?

Alcan. Not kill thee.

Alc. Is that thy business then? have at the slave;
[runs at him I Will spoil your keeping doors.
They fight, and grapling Alcander gets the Sword of Alcippus.
Alcip. He'as got my Sword, however I lose no time:
It may be it is his office to detain me.
[He goes in.
Alcan. I Am wounded, yet I will not leave him so;
There may be mischief in him, though unarmed.
[goes in.
ACT. IV. SCENE VI.
a Bed Chamber. Discovers Erminia, Phillander sitting on the Bed, to them
Isillia, a Sword and Hat on the Table. Isi. Ah Madam, Alcippus.

Er. Alcippus where?

Isi. I left him in a quarrel with Alcander,
And hear him coming up.

Er. For Heavens sake, Sir, submit to be concealed.

Phi. Not for the world, Erminia.
My innocence shall'be my guard and thine.

Er. Upon my knees I beg you le be concealed.
[a noise. He comes, Phillander, for my safety go.

Phi. I never did obey with more regret.
He hides himself behind the bed, and in have leaves his Sword and hat on the
Table, Alcippus comes in.
Alcip. How now Erminia?
How comes it you are up so late?

Er. I found my self not much inclined to sleep;
I hope it is no offense
Why do you look so wildly round about you?

Alcip. Methinks Erminia you are much confused.

Er. Alas you cannot blame me;
Isillia tells me you were much enraged
Against a Lover she was entertaining.

Al. A Lover -- was that a time for Courtship?
Such actions Madam will reflect on you.
Isillia goes to take the hat and Sword and slide into her lap, which he sees,
calls to her. -- What have you there Isillia?
Come back and let me see what it is.
[he takes them from her. -- ha -- a Sword and Hat -- Erminia, whose be these?

Er. Why do you ask --

Alcip. To be informed, is that so great a wonder?

Er. They be my Fathers Sir --.

Alcip. Was that well said Erminia -- speak again.

Er. What is it you would know?

Alcip. The truth Erminia; 'twould become you best.
Do you think I take these things to be your fathers?
No treacherous woman, I have seen this sword
[draws the Sword. Worn by a man more vigorous then thy Father,
It had not else been here.
-- Where have you hid this mighty man of valor?
Have you exhausted so his stock of courage
He has not any left t'appear with all:

Phi. Yes, base Alcippus, I have still that courage,
The Effects of which thou have beheld with wonder,
And now being fortified by innocence,
Thou't find sufficient to chastise thy boldness,
Restore my Sword and prove the truth of this.

Alcip. I Have hardly so much calmness left to answer thee,
And tell thee Prince thou art deceav'd in me.
-- I know it is just I should restore thy Sword,
But thou have showed the basest of thy play,
And I Will return th'uncivil treachery,
You merit death for this base injury.
But you're my Prince, and that I own you so,
Is all remains in me of sense or justice;
The rest is rage, which if thou get'st not hence
Will eat up that small morsel too of reason,
And leave me nothing to preserve thy life with.

Phi. Gods, am I tame, and hear the Traitor brave me,
[offers to run into him. I have resentment left though nothing else.

Alcip. Stand off, by all that's good I Will kill thee else.
(Er. puts her self between
Er. Ah, hold Sir, hold, the Prince has no defense,
And you are more then armed,
What honor is it to let him Murrher you?
-- Nor would your fame be lessened by retreat.

Phi. Alas I dare not leave thee here with him.

Er. Trust me Sir, I can make him calm again.

Alcip. She counsels well, and I advise you take it.

Phi. I will, but not for fear of thee or death,
But from the assurance that her power's sufficient
To allay this unbecoming fury in thee,
And bring thee to repentance.
He gives him his Sword; Phillander goes out, Alcippus locks the door after
him.
Er. Alcippus, what do you mean?

Alcip. To know where 'twas you learned this impudence?
Which you are too cunning in,
Not to have been a stale practitioner.

Er. Alas, what will you do?

Alcip. Preserve thy soul if thou have any sense
Of future joys, after this damned action.

Er. Ah, what have I done?

Alcip. That which if I should let thee live, Erminia,
Would never suffer thee to look abroad again.
-- Thou'st made thy self and me --
-- Oh, I dare not name the Monsters --
But I Will destroy them whilst the Gods look down,
And smile upon my justice.
He strangles her with a Garter, which he snatches from his Leg, or smothers
her with a Pillow.
Er. Hold, hold, and hear my vows of innocence.

Alcip. Let me be damned as thou art if I do;
(throws her on a bed, he sits down in a Chair. -- So now my heart, I have
redeemed thee nobly,
Sit down and pause a while --
-- But why so still and tame, is one poor Murder
Enough to satisfy thy storm of passion,
If it were just; it ought not here to end
-- If not -- I Have done too much --
(One knocks, he rises after a little pause, and opens the door, enier Page,
Page. My Lord Pisaro --

Alcip. Pisaro -- Oh that name has wakened me
A name till now had never terror in it,
-- I will not speak with him.

Page. My Lord he is here --
[Page goes out, Enter Pisaro.
Pis. Not speak with me, nay, then I fear the worst.

Alcip Not for the world Pisaro --
[Hides his face with his hand, see Erminia.
Pis. Thy guilt is here too plain,
I need not read it in thy blushing face,
She Is dead, and pale, Ah, sweet Erminia.

Alcip. If she be dead the fitter she is for me,
She Will now be coy no more,
Nor cry I cannot love,
And frown and blush, when I but kiss her hand
Now I shall read no terror in her eyes,
And what is better yet, shall never be jealous.

Pis. Why did thou make such haste to be undone?
Had I detained thee but an hour longer,
Thou Would been the only happy of thy sex.
-- I know thou did dissemble when we parted,
And therefore durst not trust thee with thy passions,
I only stayed to gather from my Sister,
What news I might concerning your affairs,
Which I with joy came to impart to you,
But most unfortunately came too late,
Why did thou yield obedience to that sin
Which urged thee to destroy this innocent?

Alcip. Pisaro, do not err.
I found the Prince and she alone together,
He all disordered like a ravisher,
Loose and unbutton'd for the amorous play;
O that she had another life to lose.

Pis. You wrong her most inhumanely, you do
Her blood yet sensible of the injury
Flows to her face to upbraid thy cruelty.
-- Where do thou mean, bad man to hide thy head?
Vengeance and Justice will pursue thee close,
And hardly leave thee time for penitence.
-- What will the Princess say to this return
You Have made to all the offers she had sent
This night by Prince Phillande?

Alcip. Oh when you name the Prince's and Phillander,
Such different passions do at once possess me,
As sinks my over-laden soul to hell.
-- Alas why do I live? it is losing time,
For what is death, a pain that is sooner ended
Then what I felt from every frown of hers.
-- It was but now, that lovely thing had life,
Could speak and weep, and had a thousand charms
That had obliged Murder, and madness 'tself
To Have been her tame adorers.
Yet now should even her best beloved the Prince,
With all his youth, his beauties and desires,
Fall at her feet, and tell his tale of love,
She hardly would return his amorous smiles,
Or pay his meeting kisses back again;
Is not that fine Pisaro?

Pis. Sir, it is no time to talk in, come with me,
For here is no safety for a Murderer.

Alcip. I will not go, alas I seek no safety,

Pis. I will not now dispute that vain reply,
But force you to security.
Pisaro draws him out, the Scene closes.
ACT IV. SCENE. VII.
Enter Phillander, Alcander, Gallatea, Aminta, and Falatius. Fa. Ah fly, Sir,
fly, from what I have to tell you.

Alcan. What Is the news?

Fa. Ah Sir, the dismall'st heavy news that ere
Was told or heard.

Gall. No matter, out with it.

Fa. Erminia, Madam.

Phi. Erminia, What of her?

Fall. Is dead, Sir.

Alcan. What have thou lost thy wits?

Fa. I had them not about me, at the sight
I else had been undone: Alas Erminias dead,
Murdered and dead.

Alcan. It cannot be, thou lie.

Fa. By Jove, I do not Sir, I saw her dead,
Alas, I ran as I was wont to do,
Without demanding license to her chamber,
But found her not as I was wont to do,
[The women weep. In a gay humor; but stone dead, and cold.

Phi. Alcander, am I awake -- or being so,
Do not perceive this senseless flesh of mine
Harden into a cold benumbed statue.
-- Methinks -- it does -- support me -- or I fall
And so -- shall break to pieces --
[Falls into his arms.
Gall. Ah lovely maid, was this thy destiny?
Did Heaven create thy beauties to this end?
[he leads him out. -- I must distrust their bounties, who neglected
The best and fairest of their handiwork;
This will encourage sin, when innocence
Must perish thus, and meet with no defense.

Enter the King and Orgulius. Org. If murdered innocence do cry for justice,
Can you, great Sir, make a defense against it?

Kin. I think I cannot.

Org. Sir, as you are pious, as you are my King,
The Lover and Protector of your people,
Revenge Erminia's Murder on Alcippus.

Gall. If e're my Mother, Sir, were dear to you,
As from your tears I guest whene're you named her:
If the remembrance of those charms remain,
Whose weak resemblance you have found in me,
For which you often have said you loved me dearly;
Dispense your mercies, and preserve this Copy,
Which else must perish with the Original.

King. Why all this Conjuration, Gallatea.

Gall. To move you, Sir, to spare Alcippus life.

Kin. You are unjust, if you demand a life,
Must fall, a sacrifice to Erminia's Ghost,
That is a debt I have engaged to pay.

Gall. Sir, if that promise be already past,
And that your word be irrevocable.
I vow I will not live a moment after him.

Kin. How Gallatea! I Would rather hoped you would joined
Your prayers with his.

Gall. Ah Sir, the late Petition which I made you
Might have informed you why these knees are bowed,
'Twas but this night I did confess I loved him,
And you would have allowed that passion in me,
Had he not been Erminias,
And can you question now what this address meant.

Or. Remember Sir, Erminia was my Daughter.

Gall. And Sir, remember that I am your Daughter.

Or. And shall the Traitor live that murdered her?

Gall. And will you by his death Sir, murder me?
In dear Erminias death too much is done,
If you revenge that death, it is two for one.

Or. Ah Sir, to let him live's unjust in you.

Gall. And killing me, you more injustice do.

Or. Alcippus, Madam, merits not your love,
That could so cruel to Erminia prove.

Gall. If lovers could be ruled by reasons laws.
For this complaint on him, we'd had no cause.
'Twas Love that made him this rash act commit,
Had she been kind 't'had taught him to submit.
-- But might it not your present griefs augment,
I Would say that you deserve this punishment,
By forcing her to marry with the Genetall;
By which you have destroyed Phillander too,
And now you would Alcippus life undo.

Or. That was a fault of duty to your Majesty.

Kin. Though that were honest, 'twas not wisely done
For had I known the passion of my son,
And how essential 'twas to his content,
I willingly had granted my consent,
Her worth and beauty had sufficient been,
To Have raised her to the title of a Queen.
Did not my Glorious Father, Great General,
Marry the Daughter of his Admiral.
And I might to my Son have been as kind,
As then my Father did my Grandsire find.
You once believed that I had guilty been,
And had the punishment, but not the sin,
I suffered when 'twas thought I did aspire.

Kin. How did Phillander take Erminias death?

Gall. My own surprise and grief was so extreme,
I know not what effects it had in him,
But this account of him I Am forced to give,
Since she is dead, I know he cannot live.

Kin. I Will know Phillanders fate ere I proceed,
And if he dye, Alcippus too shall bleed.
[Exeunt.
ACT. IV. SCEN. VIII.
The Gallery. Enter Falatius and Labree. Fa. Were thou never valiant Labree?

La. Yes Sir, before I served you, and since too, I
Am provoked to give you proofs on it sometimes,
For when I am angry I am a very Hector.

Fa. I the Devil when a body's angry, but that is
Not the valor in mode; men fight now a days
Without that, and even embrace whilst they draw
Their swords on one another.

La. I Sir, those are men that despise their lives.

Fa. Why that's it Labree, that I would learn to do,
And, which I fear, nothing but poverty will make me do;
Jove defend me from that experiment.

Enter Erminia veiled with a thin Tiffany. Labree. What Is the matter, Sir,
Does the Fit take you now?

Fa. Save us, save us from the Fiend.

La. A ghost, a ghost, O, O, O!
[They fall, shaking on the ground.
Er. This was a happy mistake,
Now I may pass with safety.

Fa. Look up, Labree, if thou have any of that
[she goes out. Courage thou speak of but now:

La. I dare not, Sir, experience yours I pray.

Fa. Alas, alas, I fear we are both rank Cowards.

La. Rise Sir, it is gone.

Fa. This was worse then the fright Alcander put
Me into by much.
[They rise and go out.
ACT IV. SCENE. IX.
Enter Phillander and Cleontius. Phi. I know he is fled to th'Camp,
For there he only can secure himself.

Cle. I do not think it, Sir,
He Is too brave to justify an action
Which was the outrage only of his passion,
That soon will toil it self into a Calm,
And then will grow considerate again,
And hate the rashness which it prompt him too.

Phi. That shall not serve his turn -- go
Tell him I Will get his pardon of the King,
And set him free from other fears of justice,
But those which I intend to execute.
If he be brave he will not refuse this offer:
If not; I Will do as he has done by me,
And meet his hated soul by treachery.
[Cle. goes out. -- And then I Have nothing more to do but dye.
-- Ah how agreeable are the thoughts of death,
How kindly do they entertain my soul,
And tells it pretty tales
Of satisfaction in the other world,
That I shall dwell for ever with Erminia.
-- But stay.
That sacred spirit yet is unrevenged,
-- I Will send that Traitors soul to eternal night,
Then mine shall take its so desired flight,
[going out.
Enter Erminia, calls him. Er. Return Phillander, whether would thou fly?

Phi. What voice -- is that --
[Turns, sees her, and is frighted.
Er. It Is I my Prince, it is I.

Phi. Thou -- Gods -- what art thou -- in that lovely shape?

Er. A soul that from Elysium made escape
[as she comes toward him he goes back in great amaze. To visit thee, why do
thou steal away,
I Will not approach thee nearer then I may.

Phi. Why do I shake -- it is Erminias form --
And can that beauty ought that is -- ill adorn?
-- In every part Erminia does appear,
And -- sure no Devil -- can inhabit here.
[He comes on and kneels, one knocks, she steeles back in at a door.
Alcan. My Lord the Prince.

Phi. Ha --
-- Oh Gods, I charge thee not to vanish yet,
I charge thee by those powers thou do obey,
Not to deprive me of thy blessed sight.

Er. I will re-visit thee
[Enter Alcan.
Phi. I Am not content with that.
[Alcan. comes in. -- Stay, stay, my dear Erminia.

Alcan. What mean you Sir?
[He rises, and looks still affrighted.
Phi. Alcander, look, look, how she glides away,
Do thou not see it?

Alcan. Nothing Sir, not I.

Phi. No, now she is gone again.

Alcan. You are disordered, pray sit down a while.

Phi. No, not at all Alcander, I Am my self,
I was not in a dream, nor in a passion
When she appeared, her face a little pale,
But else my own Erminia, she her self,
I mean a thing as like, nay, it spoke too,
And I undaunted answered it again,
But when you knocked it vanished.

Alcan. 'Twas this Aminta would persuade me to,
And faith I laughed at her,
And wish I might have leave to do so now.

Phi. You do displease me with your unbelief.

Alcan. Why Sir, do you think there can indeed be Ghosts?

Phi. Pray do not urge my sense to lose its nature,

Er. It is Alcander, I may trust him too.
[She p^eps in on them and comes out
Phi. Look where she comes again, credit thy eyes,
Which did persuade thee that they saw her dead.

Alcan. By Heaven and so they did --
[both seem frighted. -- Gods -- this -- is wondrous -- strange; yet I can bear
it,
If 'twere the Devil himself in that fair shape.

Phi. And yet thou shakest --

Alcan. I do, but know not why.
-- Inform us lovely spirit what thou art,
A God -- or Devil, if either thou art welcome.

Er. You cannot think Alcander, there be Ghosts,
[She gives her hands to him and Phi. which they ^fuse to touch. No, give me
your hand and prove mine flesh and blood,
-- Sir, you were wont to credit what I said,
And I would still merit that kind opinion,

Phi. Erminia, soul of sweetness, is it you?
-- How do you ravish with excess of joys?

Er. Softly dear Sir, do not express that joy,
Lest you destroy it by your doing so.
I fly for sanctuary to your arms.
As yet none knows I live but poor Isillia,
Who bathing of my cold face with her tears,
Perceav'd some signs of life, and used what means
Her love and duty did instruct her in,
And in half an hour was so revived,
As I had sense of all was past and done,
And to prevent a death I yet might fear,
If mad Alcippus had returned again.
-- Alone I came to you, where I could find
Alone my safety too.

Phi. From Gods, and then Erminia thou art safe,
My best and blessed Erminia.

Er. Sir, in my coming hither I met Aminta,
Whom I may fear has alarmed all the Court;
She took me for a Ghost, and ran away,
Ere I could undeceive her.
-- Falatius too, affrighted even to death.

Alcan. Faith, that was lucky Madam.
-- Hark some body knocks, you would best retire a little.
[Lead^ her into the door,
Enter Gallatea and Aminta. lighted. Gal. Ah Brother, there is such news abroad.

Phi. What dear Sister, for I am here confined,
And cannot go to meet it?

Gall. Erminias Ghost is seen, and I Am so frighted.

Phi. You would not fear it though it should appear.

Gall. Oh do not say so;
For though the world had naught I held more dear,
I would not see her Ghost for all the world.

Alcan. But Madam, it is so like Erminia.

Am. Why have you seen it too?

Alcan. Yes Aminta.

Am. Then there be Ghosts Alcander?

Phi, Aminta we will convince him.
[Phi. leads out Er. who comes smiling to the Princess. -- But how dear
creature were thou thus preserved.

Phi. Another time for that, but now lets think
(Aminta embraces her. How to preserve her still,
Since all believe her dead, but who are present,
And that they may remain in that blessed error
I will consult with you; but you my dearest
Shall as the spirit of Exminia act,
And reap the glory of so good a part
It will advance the new design I have,
And Sister to your care
I must commit the treasure of my life.

Gall. It was not kind, she came not first to me.

Er. Madam, I feared the safety of my Prince,
And every moment that I found I lived,
Were more tormenting, then were those of death,
Till I had undeceived his apprehensions

Phi. 'Twas like thy self, generous and kind, my dear,
Thou might have come too late else.

Er. But Sir, pray where is my Murderer? for yet
A better name I cannot well afford him.

Gall. All that we know of him,
Pis^ro now informed him,
Who came just as he thought he would murdered thee,
And begged he would provide for his own safety.
But he who gave him sober promises,
No sooner found himself out of his arms,
But frantic and in the dark he got away.
But out of the Court he knows he cannot pass,
At this dead time of night;
But he believes he is in the Groves or Gardens.
And thither he is gone to find him out.

Alcan. This is no place to make a longer stay in,
The King has many spies about the Prince,
'Twere good you would retire to your apartment.

Gall. We Will take your Counsel, Sir.
-- Good night, Brother.

Phi. Erminia, may thy dreams be calm and sweet
As thou have made my soul,
May nothing of the cruelty that is past
Approach thee in a rude uneasy thought;
Remember it not so much as in thy prayers,
Let me alone to thank the Gods for thee,
To whom that blessing only was ordained;
And when I lose my gratitude to Heaven,
May they deprive me of the joys they have given.
Exeunt.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Enter Gallatea, Erminia, Pisaro, Aminta. Call. AND have thou found him? ease
my misery.

Pis. I have, and done as you commanded me.
I found him sitting by a fountain side,
Whose tears had power to swell the little tide,
Which from the Marble Statues breasts still flows:
As silent and as numberless were those.
I laid me down behind a Thicket near,
Where undiscovered I could see and hear:
The Moon the day supplied, and all below
Instructed, even as much as day could do.
I saw his postures, heard him rave and cry,
'Twas I that killed Erminia, yes 'twas I;
Then from his almost frantic head he would tear
Whole handfuls of his well-becoming hair:
Thus would he till his rage was almost spent,
And then in softer terms he would lament;
Then speak as if Erminia still did live,
And that belief made him forget to grieve.
-- The Marble Statue Venus, he mistook
For fair Erminia, and such things he spoke;
Such unheard passionate things as e'ne would move,
The Marble Statue's self to fall in love;
He Would kiss its breast, and say she kind was grown,
And never mind, alas, 'twas senseless stone;
He took its hand, and to his mouth had laid it,
But that it came not, and its stay betrayed it;
Then would he blush, and all ashamed become,
His head declining, for a while be dumb:
His Arms upon his breast across would lay,
Then sensibly and calmly walk away,
And in his walk a thousand things he said,
Which I forgot, yet something with me stayed,
He did consult the nature of the crime,
And still concluded that 'twas just in him;
He ran over all his life, and found no act
That was un-generous in him, but this fact.
From which the Justice took off the disgrace,
And might even for an act of virtue pass;
He did consult his glory and his pride,
And whilst he did so, laid his grief aside.
-- Then was as calm as e're he seemed to be.

Gall. And all this while did he never mention me?

Pis. Yes, Madam, and a thousand things he said,
By which much shame and passion he betrayed,
And then 'twas, Madam, I stepped in and gave
Counsels, I thought him fittest to receive;
I soothed him up, and told him that the crime,
I had committed, had the case been mine.
I all things said that might his griefs beguile.
And brought him to the sweetness of a smile.
-- To all I said he lent a willing ear,
And my reproaches too at last did hear.
With this insensibly I drew him on,
And with my flatteries, so upon him won
Such gentleness infused into his breast,
As has disposed his wearied soul to rest,
Sleeping upon a Couch I ve left him now,
And came to render this account to you.
[bows.
Gall. Pisaro, 'twas the office of a friend,
And thou'st performed it to a generous end:
Go on and prosper in this new design,
And when thou'st done, the glory shall be thine.
Exeunt.
ACT V. SCENE. II.
Draws off, discovers Alcippus rising from the Couch. Alcip. I cannot sleep, my
soul is now unfurnished
Of all that sweetness which allowed it rest.
-- It Is flown, it is flown, for ever from my breast.
And in its room eternal discords dwell,
Such as outdo the black intrigues of Hell --
-- Oh my fortune --
[weeps -- What Is here -- Alas, that which I dare not look on,
And yet, why should I shun that image here,
Which I continually about me bear,
But why, dear Picture, art thou still so gay,
Since she is gone, from whom these charms were borrowed,
Those eyes that gave this speaking life to thine,
Those lovely eyes are closed in endless darkness,
There Is not a star in all the face of Heaven,
But now out-shines those Suns.
Suns at noon day dispensed not kindlier influences:
And thou blessed mirror, that have often beheld
That face, which nature never made a fairer,
Thou that so often her beauties back reflected,
And made her know what wondrous power there lay
In every feature of that lovely face.
But she will smile no more! no more! no more!
-- Why, who shall hinder her? Death, cruel death,
-- 'Twas I that murdered her --
Thou lie -- thou durst as well be damned as touch her,
She was all sacred, and that impious hand
That had profanely touched her,
Had withered from the body.
-- I loved her -- I adored her, and could I,
Could I approach her with unhallowed thoughts.
-- No, no, I durst not. --
But as devoutest Pilgrims do the shrine,
-- If I had don't,
The Gods, who take the part of Innocence,
Had been revenged --
-- Why did not Thunder strike me in the Action?
Why, if the Gods be just, and I had don't,
Did they not suffer earth to swallow me
Quick -- quick into her bosom --
-- But yet I say again it was not I,
-- Let me behold this face,
That durst appear in such a Villainy.
[He looks in the Glass.
Enter Pisaro and Erminia dressed like an Angel with wings. Pis. Look, where he
is.

Erm. Alas, I tremble at the sight of him.

Pis. Fear nothing, Madam, I Will be near you still.

Er. Pray stay a little longer.

Alcip. -- My face has horror in it, pale and disfigured,
And lean as Envie's self --
My eyes all bloody, -- and my hanging lids,
Like Midnight's mischief, hide the guilty Balls,
-- And all about me calls me Murderer:
-- Oh horrid Murderer!
That very sound tears out my hated soul,
-- And to complete my ruin,
I Will still behold this face where Murder dwells.
He looks in the Glass, Erminia steals behind him, and looks into it over his
shoulder; he is frighted. Ha -- What does this Glass present me?
What art thou? -- speak, -- What art thou?
[turns by degrees toward it. -- Su^ I am fixed, what shall the Devil fright me?
-- Me, shall he fright --
Who stood the execution of a Murder --
-- But it is that shape, and not thy Nature frights me;
-- That calls -- the blood out of my panting heart,
-- That Traitor heart that did conspire thy death.

Er. Sit down and hear me --
[in a tone like a spirit, and points to a chair, safe Music begins to play,
which continues all this Scene. To disobey, thy punishment shall be:
To live in endless torments; but never die.

Alcip. Thou threat^ high^ (...) Rebel,

He sits within the Scene. Bows. Er. Alcippus, tell me what you see,
What is it that I appear to be?

Alcip. My blessed Erminia, Deifi'd --

Er. Alcippus, you inform me true,
I am thus D^ifi'd by you,
To you I owe this blessed abode,
For I am happy as a God;
I only come to tell thee so,
And by that ta^e to end thy woe;
Know, Mighty Sir, your Joy'^ begun,
From what last night to me was don;
In vain you rave, in vain you weep,
For what the Gods must ever keep.
In vain you mourn, in vain deplore,
A loss which tears can never restore:
The Gods their Mercies will dispense,
In a more glorious Recompense;
A World of Blessings they have in store,
A World of Honors, Vict'ries more;
Thou shall the Kingdoms Darling be,
And Kings shall Homage pay to thee:
Thy Sword no bounds to Conquest set,
And thy success that sword shall whet;
Princess thy Chariot-wheels shall grace,
Whilst thou in triumph bring'st home Peace.
This will the Gods, thy King yet more
Will give thee what those Gods adore;
And what they did create for thee;
Alcippus look, for that is she.

Enter the Princess, and goes over the Stage as a spirit, bows a little to
Alcippus, and goes off Alcip. The Princess!
[he offers to rise.
Er. Be still; it is she you must possess,
It Is she must make your happiness;
It Is she must lead you on to find
Those blessings Heaven has designed,
It Is she will conduct you where you will prove
The perfect joys of grateful love.
Enter Aminta like Glory, Alcander representing Honor. They pass over, and
bow, and go out. Glory and Honor, wait on her. Enter two more representing
Mars and Pallas, bow and go out. With Pallas and the God of war,
Fortune ano Love which never agree.
Enter Olinda like Fortune, a Page like Cupid, bow, and goes out. So now united
bow to thee.
-- Be wise, and of their bounties share,
For if Erminia still were here,
Still subject to the toils of life,
She never could have been thy wife.
Whereby the laws of men and Heaven
Was to another bosom given,
-- And what injustice thou have done,
Was only to thy Prince alone,
But he has mercy, can redeem,
Those ills which thou have done to him.
-- But see, they all return again.
All the disguised enter again and dance. with Love in the midst, to whom as
they dance, they in order make an offer of what they carry, which must be
something to represent them by; which Love refuses with Nods, still pointing to
Alcippus, the Dance done, they lay them at his feet, or seem to do so, and go
out. What think thou of thy destiny,
Is It not agreeable to thee,
Tell me Alcippus is it not brave,
Is it not better then a grave?
Cast off your tears, abandon grief,
And give what you have seen, belief.
Dress all your looks and be as gay,
As Virgins in the month of May,
Deck up that face where sorrow grows,
And let your smiles adorn your brows;
Recall your wonted sweetness home,
And let your eyes all Love become,
For which the Gods have willed and said.
Thou have no power ^o evade
What they decree, none can withstand,
You must obey what they command.
[She goes out, he remain^ immovable for a while.
Enter Pisaro Pis. How is it man -- what speechless?

Alcip. No --

Pis. I left thee on the bed, how came thou here?

Alcip. I know not.

Pis. Have you slept^

Alcip. Yes, ever since you left me.
And 'twas a kindness in thee now to wake me,
For sleep had almost flattered me to peace,
Which is a vile injustice.
-- Ah Pisaro, I had such a dream,
Such a fine flattering dream.

Pis. How was it pray?

Alcip. Nay, I will forget it,
I do not merit so much peace of mind,
As the relation of that dream will give me,
Oh 'twas so perfect too,
I hardly can persuade my self I slept,
Do thou believe there may be apparitions?

Pis. Doubtless, my Lord, there be.

Alcip. I never could believe it till this hour,
By Heavens I think I saw them too, Pisaro.

Pis. It Is very possible you're not deceived

Alcip. Erminia's spirit, in a glorious form.

Pis. I do believe you.

Alcip. Why, is it not strange?

Pis. It would have been, had I not heard already,
She has this night appeared to several persons,
In several shapes; the first was to the Prince,
And said so many pretty things for you.
As has persuaded him to pardon you.

Alcip. Oh Gods, what Fortune's mine^
I do believe the Prince is innocent
From all that thou have said.
-- But yet I wish he would dispose his bounties
On those that would return Acknowledgments:
I hate he should oblige me.

Pis. You are too obstinate, and must submit.

Alcip. It cannot be, and yet methinks I give
A strange and sudden credit to this spirit,
It beckned me into another room;
I Will follow it, and know its business there.
[aside.
Phi. Come Sir, I am a kind of Prophet.
And can interpret dreams too.
We'll walk a while, and you should tell me all,
And then I will advise you what to do.
[Exeunt.
ACT. V. SCEN. III.
Enter Phillander with the King. Kin. Thou'st entertained me with a pretty
story,
And called up so much Nature to thy Cause,
That I am half subjected to its Laws:
I find thy lovely Mother plead within too,
And bids me put no force upon thy will;
Tells me thy flame should be as unconfined,
As that we felt when our two souls combined:
Alas, Phillander, I am old and feeble,
And cannot long survive;
But thou have many Ages yet to number,
Of youth and vigor; and should all be wasted
In the Embraces of an unlov'd Maid:
No, my Phillander, if that after death,
Ought could remain to me of this worlds joys,
I should remember none with more delight,
Then those of having left thee truly happy.

Phi. This goodness, Sir, resembles that of Heaven,
Preserving what it made, and can be paid
Only with grateful praise as we do that.

Kin. Go, carry on your innocent design,
And when you have done, the last act shall be mine.
[Exeunt.
ACT V. SCENE IV.
Enter Aminta followed by Alcander, Erminia and Gallatea goes out, Enter
Alcander and stays Aminta. Alcan. Stay, dear Aminta, do not fly so fast.

Am. Methinks Alcander you should shun that maid,
Of whose too much of kindness you're afraid.
'Twas not long since you parted in such fewd,
And swore my treatment of you was too rude.
You vowed you found no beauty in my eyes,
And can you now pursue what you despise?
[offers to go.
Alcan. Nay do not leave me yet, for still your scorn
Much better then your absence may be born.

Am. Well Sir, your business, for mine requires have.

Alcan. Say, fair Aminta, shall I never find.
You Will cease this rigor and be kind?
Will that dear breast no tenderness admit,
And shall the pain you give no pity get?
Will you be never touched with what I say,
And shall my youth and vows be thrown away?
You know my passion and my humor too,
And how I dye, though do not tell you so.

Am. What arguments will you produce to prove
You love, for yet I Will not believe you love?

Alcan. Since, fair Aminta, I did thee adore,
Alas I am not what I was before.
My thoughts disordered from my heart do break,
And sighs destroy my language when I speak.
My liberty and my repose I gave,
To be admitted but your slave,
And can you question such a vi^ry:
^ust I suffer more to make i^ sure^
It needs not, since these languishments can be
Naught but the wounds which you alone can cure.

Am. Alcander, you so many vows have paid,
So many sighs and tears, to many a Maid,
That should I credit give to what you say,
I merit being undone as well as they.
-- No, no, Alcander, I Will no more of that.

Alcan. Farewell Aminta, may thou want a lover,
When I shall hate both thee and thy whole Sex;
I can endure your sober cruelty,
But do despise it clad in jollity.
Exeunt severally.
ACT. V. SCEN. V.
Discovers a room hung with Black, a Hearse standing in it with Tapers round
about it, Alcippus weeping at it, with Isillia, and either Women with long black
veiles round about the Hearse. Isi. I humbly beg, my Lord, you would forbear.

Alcip. Oh Isillia,
Thou know not what vast treasure this incloses,
This sacred Pile, is there no sorrow due to t^
Alas, I bad her not farewell at parting,
Nor did receive so much as one poor kiss,
-- Ah'wretched, wretched man.

Enter the Prince. Alcip. How, the Prince!
How suddenly my grief submits to rage.

Phi. Alcippus, why do thou gaze thus on me,
What horror have I in my looks that frights thee?

Alcip. Why Sir, what makes you here?
I Have no more wives, no more Erminia's,
Alas she is dead --
Will you not give her leave to rest in peace:
Is this the gratitude you pay my favors,
That gave thee life, after thy wrongs to me?
But 'twas my Sisters kindness that preserved thee,
And I preferred my vengeance to the Gods.

Alcip. Your Sister is a Saint I adore,
But I refuse a life that comes from you.

Isi. What mean you, Sir?

Alcip. To speak a truth as dying men should do.

Phi. Alcippus for my Sisters sake who loves you,
I can bear more then this -- you know my power, And I can make you fear.
[Offers to go out
Alcip. No, Prince, not whilst I am in love with dying.

Phi. Your love to that I see has made you impudent.

Isi. The storm comes on, your highness should avoid it.

Phi. Let him give place, I Will keep possession here.

Isi. It is the Princess pleasure Sir, you quit the presence.

Alcip. No, this I call my home,
And since Erminia's here that does entitle it so,
I will not quit the presence.

Phi. Gave thee a title to it, Alcippus?

Alcan. Me Phillander:
[They come to each others breast, and so draw.
Phi. Thee?

Alcip. Me, What dare you now?

Phi. I dare declare that I can hear no more,
Be witness Heaven how justly I Am compelled.

Alcip. Now Sir, you are brave, and love Erminia too.

The women run all away crying, they draw out some one way and some another,
leaving some their veiles behind them, some half off, half on. Phi. We are here
not safe, these women will betray us.

Alcip. Sir, it is a work that will be soon dispatched,
And this a place and time most proper for it.
[Fal. peeps in and runs away.
A pass or two Enter Pisaro, runs between. Pis. Hold Sir, are you grown
desperate?
What means your Highness?
[To the Prince. Aicippus, what is it you design in this?

Alcip. To fight Pisaro and be killed.

Pis. By Heaven you shall not fight, unless with me,
And you have so angered me with this rash action,
I could almost provoke you to it.

Enter Alcander. Alcan. Gods, Sir, That you should
Thus expose your self,
The Worlds great Heir, against a desperate mad man.

Pis. Have you forgot your apparition Sir?

Alcip. O^ 'twas an idle lying one Pisaro,
And came but to entrap me.
To them Gallatea, Aminta, and Olinda.
Gall. Ah Brother, why so cruel to your Sister?

Phi. Here Gallatea, punish my misfortune,
For yet I want the will to injure thee.
Heaven knows what provocations I received
Ere I would draw a Sword on him you loved.

Gall. Unjust Alcippus how dost-thou reward me?

Alcip. Ah Madam, I have too much shame to live.
Had Heaven preserved my innocence entire,
That I with confidence might have adored you,
Though I had been successless,
Yet I had lived and hoped, and aimed to merit you;
But since all hopes of that are taken from me,
My life is but too poor a acrifice
To make atonement for my sins to you.

Gall. I will not answer thee to what thou'st said,
But only beg thou will preserve thy life,
Without which mine will be of little use to me.

Alcip. Might I without a sin believe this blessing,
Sure I should be immortal.
Falatio peeps in again.
Fall. I think I may venture, the fury is past, and the great shot
Spent, the mad Captain General's wounded so, I hope 'twill
Let out some of his hot blood --

Enter the King, Cleontius, and Attendants. King. Thy love Alcippus is dispis'd
I see,
And you in lieu of that return you owe me
Endeavor to destroy me.
-- Is this an object for your rage to work on,
Behold him well, Alcipp^, it is your Prince.
-- Who dares gaze on him with irreverend eyes?
The good he does you ought to adore him for,
But all his evils it is the Gods must punish,
Who made no Laws for Princes.

Alcip. Sir, I confess I Am (...),
And were it not a sin equal to that
To doubt you could forgive me,
I durst not hope your mercy after it.

Kin. I think with all the tenderness I Am guilty of
I hardly shall be brought to pardon thee.

Phi. I humbly beg you will forgive him Sir,
I drew him to it against his will, I forced him,
And gave him language not to be endured
By any gallant man.

Kin. Whilst you entreat for him, who pleads for you
For you are much the guiltier of the two,
And need'st a greater interest to persuade me.

Alcip. It were not just to contradict my Prince,
A Prince to whom I Have been so late a Traitor.
But Sir, it is I alone an^ criminal,
And 'twas I,
Justly I thought provoked him to this hazard.
It Is I was rude, impatient, insolent,
Did like a mad man animate his anger,
Not like a generous enemy.
Sir, when you weigh my sorrows with this action,
You Will find no base design, no villainy there,
But being weary of a life I hated,
I strove to put it off, and missing that way
I come to make an offer of it here.

Kin. If I should take it 'twere no more then just,
Yet once again I will allow it thee,
That thou may owe me for it a second time,
Manage it better then the last I gave --
[Exit Kin.
Phi. -- Alcippus, may I credit what thou'st said,
Or do you feign repentance to deceive me^

Alcip. I never could dissemble (...),
And now methinks your highness should believe me,
When my dispaires, and little lov^ (...)
Makes me despise all ways that may preserve it.

Phi. If thou would h^ve m^ credit thee; Alcippus,
Thou should not (...) a lif^, which ought
To be preserved to give a pr^ that what^ thou say is ^ue,
And dispossess me of those fea^ I have,
That it is my life makes thine displeasing to thee.

Alcip. It Is a high proof to give you of my duty,
Yet that is more easy ^me, then (...)

Phi. Let me embrace and than (...) thee for his goodness
He offers to (...) but (...) shy, and keeps a little off. Why do receive me
coldly, I Am in (...)
And I love Honor, and (...) Generous,
I mean thee nothing but a perfect amity,
By all my hopes^ I Have no more (...) to thee,
All ends in this embrace; and to confirm it
I give thee here my Siste^ to thy wife.

Alcip. Your Pardon Sir,
I must refuse your bounty till I know,
By what strange turn of fate I came thus blessed,
To you my Prince, I Have done unheard of injuries,
And though your mercy do afford me life,
With this rich present too;
Till I could know I might deserve the^ both,
That life will prove a Plague, and this great gift
Turn to the ^nt of it.

Phi. Alcippus, it is not kind to doubt (...),
Is this a present for a man I hate?

Alcip. It Is true Sir, and your bou^ does (...) me,
Can I receive a blessing of this mag^
With hands, yet have not washed away the sin
Of your Erminia's murder, think of it, Sir,
For though to me it did appear most just,
Yet you must hate the man that has undone you

Gall. I see (...) still (...) your thoughts.

Alcip. I must confess my (...)
Of that fond passion which I had for her
But I protest before the Gods and you,
Did she still live, and I might still possess her,
I would refuse it, tho I were ignorant
Of what the Gods, and your fair self design me.

Phi. To doubt thee were a sin below my nature,
And to declare my faith above my fear,
Behold what I present thee with.
Goes out, and enters again with Erminia^
Alcip. Ha^ -- Erminia.
[He looks affrighted. -- It is the same -- appeared to me last night,
-- And my deluded Fancy,
Would have persuaded me 'twas but a dream.

Phi. Approach her, Sir, it is no (...).

Alcip. It Is she her self, Oh Gods, Erminia!
[She goes (...) little back (...) afraid he kneels. -- Ah Madam, do not fear
me in this posture^,
Which I will never quit till you have pardoned me
It was a fault the most excusable,
That ever wretched Lover did commit;
And that which (...) me from following thee,
Was that I could not well repent the Crime;
But like a surly sinner fa^ it out,
And said, I thought 'twas (...), fair Erminia
Had thou been mine, I would ^th face of Heaven,
Proclaim it just and brave revenge:
But, Madam, you were wife unto my Prince
And that was all my sin:
Alas, in vain I hoped for some ^turn,
And grew impatient of the ^kind delay,
And frantickly I then out (...) my happiness.

Er. Rise, I forgive thee, from my soul I do,
May thou be happier,
In thy more glorious passion for the Princess,
And all the Joys thou e're could hope from me,
May thou find there repeated.

Enter King, Orgulious, and the rest. Org. First, I Will keep my word with thee.
Receive the welcome Present which I promised.
[Gives him
Er. Can you forgive the griefs I Have made you suffer?
Er. she kneels.
Or. I can forgive thee, tho 'twas not kind
To let me languish in a desperate error;
Why was this Blessing hid from me alone?

Er. Ah Sir, so well I know you loved Alcippus,
That had you known it e're the Prince had owned me,
I fear you had restored me back again,
A (...) great to load your soul withal.

Org. My King already has forgiven that error,
And now I come to make my peace with thee,
And that I may with greatest speed obtain it.
-- To you, Sir, I resign her, with as much joy
[To the Prince. As when they undeceived me
Of my opinion of her being dead --

Phi. And I with greater joy receive your gift.
[bows and takes her.
Kin. My Lord Alcippus, are you pleased with this?

Alcip. Sir, I Am so pleased, so truly pleased with it,
That Heaven-without this blessing on my Prince
Had found but little trouble from my thanks,
For all they have showered on me;
'Twas all I wished next my Pretensions here.

Kin. Then to complete thy happiness,
Take Gallatea, since her passion merits thee,
As do thy Virtues her.
[Gives him Call they both bow.
Er. Sir, I Have an humble suit your Majesty.

Kin. Conclude it granted then.

Er. Falatius, Sir, has long made love to Isilia,
And now he 'as gained her heart, he flights the Conquest,
Yet all the fault he finds is that she is poor.

Kin. Isillia's Beauty can supply that want,
Falatius, what do you say to it?

Fa. By Jove, Sir, I Will agree to any thing; for I believe
A handsome young wife at Court may bring a man a
Greater Fortune then he can in conscience desire.
[take^ Isillia.
Er. Aminta, be persuaded.
[aside to Am.
Am. He Would use me scurvily then.

Alcan. That Is according as you behaved your self, Aminta

Am. I should dominier.

Alc. I then should make love elsewhere.

Am. Well, I find we shall not agree then.

Alc. Faith -- now we have disputed a point I never
Thought on before, I would willingly
Pursue it for the Humor on it: not that I think
I shall much approve on it.

Pis. Give him your hand, Aminta, and conclude,
It Is time this haughty humor were subdued
By your submission, whatsoever he seem,
In time you will make the greater slave of him.

Am. Well -- not from the hope of that, but from my love
His change of Humor I Am content to prove.
-- Here take me, Alcander;
Whilst to Inconstancy I bid adieu,
I find variety enough in you.
[He takes her and bows.
Kin. Come, my brave youths, we'll toil our selves with joys,
And when w're weary of the lazy play,
We'll search abroad to find new Conquests out,
And get fresh appetites to new delights;
It will redouble your vast stocks of courage,
And make th uneasy Humor light and gentle;
When you remember even in heat of Battle,
That after all your victories and spoil,
You Will meet calm peace at home in soft Embraces,
Thus may you number out your happy years,
Till Love and Glory no more proofs can give
Of what they can bestow, or you receive.

FINIS.

