Ante trisulca meam quam flamma cremaverat Arcem, Anteferenda Mihi* Fabrica
nulla fuit.
On St. PAVL's Cathedral represented by Mr DAN. KING.
Illustrious Pile, o that my Muse,
Amphion-like, could Life infuse
Into Thy Stones, and make them dance
In Order, till They might advance
Into their ancient Seats, and rise
In Spires to re-salute the Skies.
What though ye Worlds 7 Wonders have
In their own Rubbish found a Grave;
Consuming Time did scarce amiss
So long as He dispensed with This:
For whilst He PAUL'S upheld alone,
The S^ar'n re-flourisht in This One.
Hail, Sacred Ruins, which remain,
And still a Majesty retain
You in your mouldring Relics show
GOD's special Presence once below:
So as blessed Angels might admire
The Model of Their Own Great Quire.
Nor were it an Offense to call
Those Angels to Thy hastening Fall,
Who only can fit Poets be
To grace Thee with an Elegy
And to bewail a Silence there
Where Voices turned each Sense to Ear.
Religions Ark, a Trophy raised
By Zeal, where GOD was rightly praised
Cheered by Thy former Splendour must
We now be blinded with Thy Dust?
Ah that Thy Lead should fall to be
A Winding Sheet to Faith, and Thee!
To view Thee once more in Repair,
O Theater of ROYAL Care!
To re-exalt Thy glorious Name,
And wash out our Augaean Shame,
A Flood should issue from our Eyes
Which might Alpheus equalize.
Time that devours the World, and brings
A Change on all inferior Things,
May see an Age in greater Have
Re-build Thee, then this laid Thee wast;
And find a Holy Pleasure in,
Such an Atonement for This Sin.
However, let Us duly mourn
To view Thee wasting to Thy Urn,
And if Time should not Thee restore,
Thou liv'st in Figure, as before,
By ONE, Who joining Names, with Things,
Shares in Renown with Other KINGS.
Threnodia Adis PAVLINA De Seipsa.
ASPICE Qualis eram primo perfecta Decore,
Vertice sublimi visa ferire Polum;
Culinine nec tantum Coelo, sed proxima Cultu,
Coelicolae nostros dum stupuere Choros:
Dives Opum, sancta Ara Precum, Pietatis Asylum,
Florida Pace, Fide pura, dicata DEO.
Concipe Mente meum Decus esset quale secundum
Contractum Senio cum positura Situm;
Pyramid a Flammis cum surgeret icta Trisulcis,
Auxiliatrices REGE ferente Manus;
Propitio Sumptu renovata ut Matre, minorum
Natarum Series tota Venusta foret.
Illa Ego Quae quonclain sublimibus alta Columnis,
Arcuum adornatis concamerata Tholis,
In Coelum Spira coepi tendisse stupenda,
Atque Ministerijs aptior esse sacris;
Inde, Vetustatis devitatura Ruinas,
Cum Mundo poteram continuasse Dies.
Maxima Christicolae mansissem Gloria Mundi,
Invida and in nostras Roma fuisset Opes;
Ipsa Cathedrali superassem splendida Forma,
PETRE, tuamque Solo, MARCE, tuamque Salo;
Arque Reformatum tunc Relligione Nitorem
Nacta, Me summus conclecorasser Honos.
Sed mihi Seditio nocuit, quae Prodroma Lapsus,
Saevior ac ipso Tempore, Livor atrox:
Cum sint Arma Tibi tantum Coelestia, PAUL,
Militis Excubijs non eget Ista Domus:
Ante Decora fui, jam Squallida tota recumbo;
Est sacer Hinnitus quo Sacer Hymnus erat!
Si Fluvio Stabulum Iavit Tyrinthius Heroes,
Victor Aquis, quando Dextra negabat Opem;
Excordes Nati, cur nunc in Funere Matris
Conspicitis siccis Rudera nostra Genis?
O, si versa forent in salsum Lumina Rivum,
Elueret Sordes Rivus ut Iste meas!
Involvo Lodice mei Sacra omnia Plumbi!
Urna prius Magnis, jam rudis Urna Mihi!
Laetor at aeratis quod sim victura Figuris,
Ceu Volucris Syrijs quae reparata Rogis,
Illius Auxilio, Qui non REX Nomine tantum,
Sed Qui, par summis REGIBUS, edit Opus.
Quanto Ego Flebilior, tanto Praesentior audi,
Diruit, aedificat nam tua Dextra, DEUS!
TU miserere Mei, mea TU demortua Saxa,
Verus ut Amphion, mox animare potes:
Dicta Dies, Scriptis promissa fidelibus, adsit,
Cum Favor in charae Saxa SIONIS erit!
B1E2N3E8V6O5L4V7S9.

Ao. Dn^i 610 Ethelbert K. of Kent built this Church and dedicated it to St.
Paul.

Ao 670 Erkinwald the 4 Bishop increased it, Afterward K. Ethelsta^ and others
enlarged its Revenues.

In the time of W. ye Con. the old Fabric roofed with wood was burnt.

Ao 1094 Mauritius Bp. of London began to build it as it now is viz. the Body
of the Church and North and South Cross Isles

After Maur: the Building was continued and ye Steeple finished Ao 122^ The
Quire finished Ao. 1240.

Ao. 1257 St. Faiths begun to be builded

Ao 1315 The Spire was taken down and made new.

Ao. 1444 the Steeple burnt with Lightning. Ao 1462 it was repaired again.

Ao. 1561 the Steeple burnt down to ye upper Roof by Lightning Ao 1566 the
Roof repaired again.

A further Repair intended by K James Ao 1633 begun to be repaired within and
without as now it is by King Charles.

(...)
Your Merit in these ^^^s^^ and my Gratitude for ^^^r Civilities moved me (...)
j^yne your Picture (...) Piece. portrait of the illustrator Who would also
present all our other Cathedralls in this Form of encouraged by Such as your
honored SELF.

DAN. KING

depiction of the north side of old St. Paul's Cathedral without the spire The
North View of St Paul's Church.


depiction of the south side of old St. Paul's Cathedral with intact spire The
South View of St Paul's Church as it was when ye Spire was standing.


depiction of the south side of old St. Paul's Cathedral without the spire The
South View of St Paul's Church.


depiction of the west end of old St. Paul's Cathedral The Went end of St Paul's


depiction of the east end of old St. Paul's Cathedral The East end of St Paul's


view of the interior of old St. Paul's Cathedral, eastern part The prospect of
the Oriental part of the Church


view of the interior of old St. Paul's Cathedral, western part The interior
prospect of the Body of the Cathedral Church of St Paul's from West to the
quire.


a view of the interior of old St. Paul's Cathedral, choir The prospect of the
Quire of St Paul's Cathedral.


view of the interior of the Parish Church of St. Faith in the undercroft of
old St. Paul's Cathedral The prospect of the Parochial Church of St Faith from
West to East under St Paul's


depiction of a diagram of old St. Paul's Cathedral showing some of the graves
in S. Faith's Church in the undercroft, the chapel of Jesus, and the location
of the butresses on the east side, etc. (...)
The BODY OF St FAITHS CHVRCH

St John Bab^ Chapp

the Vest^arie

The Butreyes belonging to the Upper and Oriental part of the Cathedral
Church or quire of St Paul's.

Part of the same Church called the Chapel of Jesus



1 Will Lamb 2 H^^^ Ky^son ^ (...) 4 T^^ Hind ^ T^^ Dockwray ^ W^ll ^bam ^
(...) Huntte 8 Alin* Johnson. 9 Will West. 10 Will: Lilly. 11 John: Good. 12
John: Brewster. 13 Marg: Robinson 14 Georg: Whitgift. 15 John and Fran: Astley
16 Rich. Ironside.


These are ye nam^ of ye Several Tombs in S Faiths under St Paul's.

plan of old St. Paul's Cathedral The Planographie of the Cathedral Church of
St Paul's.
East

West

North

South

The Body of the Church

St Gregory's Ch

the quire

St Marys Chapp.



1 The porticue. 2 The W. door. 3 The Turret. 4 The Convocation house 5 The
Little North door. 6 The Little S door. 7 The great N door. 8 The great S door. 9
Tho: Kemps Chapp. Bp of London. Ao 65. 10 The Tomb of John Beauchamp 11 The
Chapter house. 12 The Stepes to the quire. 13 The quire door. 14 The Tomb of
Io: Done Deane of this Church. 15 The Mon: of Io: Callet Ao ^9 Deane of
Paul's. 16 The Mon: of Will. Hewet. Ao 1599. 17 The Mon: of Will Cokayn Eq:
aurat. 18 The Mo: of Nic: Bacon Eq aur 1^^^. 19 The Tomb of John Newcourt Ao
1425. 20 The To: of Valentin^ Carey Ao 16^^. 21 The Tom: of Brabazo^ de Od^y Ao
149^. 22 The To: of W: Rythy^ 23 The T: of Sym: Edolph 24 The T. of Ri:
Lichfield. 25 The T: of Io: Acton. 26 The Mo: of Christo: Hatton Knight of ye
Garter. 27 The To: of Eusta Fauconbridge L: Ep Ao 12^^ 28 The To: of Hen:
Wengham Bp Lo A 1^^8 29 The To: Hen: Lacie E of Lincoln Ao 1406 30 The T: of
Rob: Braybroke Bp of Lon. Ao 1404 31 The To: of S Erckenwald 32 The Mo: of
Alex^ Noell deane of this Ch: A 1621 33 The Mo: of Tho: Heneage Ep Aur Ao 1494
34 The To: of Raff Hengham 35 The To: of Sym: Barley K of y^ Garter. 36 The Mo:
of Io: of Gaunt 13^2 Duke of Lon: Ao 1399 37 The Mon: of Will: Herbert E: of
Penbro Ao 1569 38 The To: of Io: Molint. 39 The To: of Io: Chishull Bp of Lo.
40 The To: of Roff Niger Bp of Lon: Ao 1341 41 The Mo: of Io: Mason Ep aur Ao
1^66 42 The Mo: of Will Aubrey 43 The To: of Sebbe K: of ye Sax Ao 678 44 The
T: of Etheldred K: of ye Sax Ao 10^7 45 The Tom: of Tho: Ewre 46 The To: of
Will: Green 47 The To: of (...): son of Hugh Bp of Lon: 48 The High Alter 49 St
Gregory's Chapp 50 St Dunstans Chapp


view of London from the south side of the Thames with old St. Paul's Cathedral
visible LONDON
THAMESIS FLVVIVS

South work

D: King delin. et Excudit Ao 1658
D: Loggan fec:


1 St Paul's. 2 Whitehall. 3 Suffolk house. 4 ^^rk house. ^ Sauoy. 6 Somerset
house. 7 Arundel house. 8 St Clements. 9 St Dunstans. 10 The Temple. 11 St.
Brides. 12 St. Andrew 13 Baynards Castle. 14 Queen hith. 15 St Pulchers. 16
Three Cranes. 17 The Waterhouse. 1^ ^he Stillyard. 1^ ^owchurch. 20 Guild hall.
21 St Michaels. 2^ St Lawrence Poultney. 23 Fi^hmongers hall. 24 The Old Swan.
25 The Bridge. 26 Gray Church. 27 St Dunstan^ in ye East. 28 Billinsgate. 29
Custom house. 30 The Tower. 31 Tower wharfe. 32 St Katherines. 33 St Olaffe.
34 St Mary Overies. 35 Winchester house. 36 The Globe. 37 Bear Garden. 38 The
Swan. 39 Harrow on ye hill. 40 Hamsted. 41 Hygate. 42 Hackney. 43 ^outney. 44
Ell Ships. 45 Gally fustie. 46 Coal harbor.


TEMPLA sunt DEI Palatia, Bonitatis divinae Tribunalia, Misericordiae Aeraria,
Miserorum Asyla; ubi Sacra NVMINIS Celebratio, est Imitatio Angelorum. and
Aeternitatis Praeludium, Haec ergo temerare, temerarium, Mat. 21:13:.
The City of London (as some write) had its first Rise from Brute the
Grandchild of Aeneas, 70 years after ye Destruction of Troy, whence (say they)
it was called Troy nobant, or New-Troy, so called when Caesar entered into
Britain, 54 years before ye Birth of Christ. The name London derived (as some
say) from Lud a British King, who enlarged it: Others from Lihan-dian, or
Dianas Temple* because ye chief Temple therein was dedicated to Diana* on whose
Ruins St. Paul's was built by Ethelbert K. of Kent: It was walled 3 miles in
compass Ao. Chri. 306 by Helen the Mother of Constantine.

In the time of H. 3d. it had six fair Gates.

The Tower builded by W. the Conqueror Ano. 1078

At ye Dissolution of Monasteries it had 17. Religious houses within the
Walls, and 12 without.

The number of Churches in ye City of London with. in the Walls 99, in the
Suburbs 31. Anno J658.

This City has Longitude 24. 20. Lat: 51. 32.

Sold by John Ouerton at the White Horse without Newgate at the corner of the
little old Baly near the Fountain Tauern


