ESSAYS About the Poor, Manufactures, Trade, Plantations, and Immorality, And
of the EXCELLENCY and DIVINITY OF Inward Light Demonstrated from the Attributes
of God, and the Nature of Man's Soul, as well as from the Testimony of the Holy
Scriptures.

By John Bellers.

Psalm 41. 1. Blessed is he that considers the Poor, the Lord will deliver
him in the time of trouble.

2. The Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed
upon the Earth; and thou will not deliver him into the Will of his Enemies.

3. The Lord will strengthen him upon the Bed of Languishing: Thou will make
all his Bed in his Sickness.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street,
and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-street, 1699.

The King in his Speech to both Houses of Parliament, The 9th of December, School
said, My Lords and Gentlemen,

I Think it would be Happy, if some Effectual Expedient could be found for
Employing the Poor, which might tend to the great Increase of our Manufactures,
as well as remove a heavy Burden from the People.

I hope also You will employ Your Thoughts about some good Bills for the
Advancement of Trade, and for the further Discouraging of Uice and Profaueness.

The Lord Chief Justice Hale, in his Discourse for Employing the Poor, said,
The want of a due Provision for Education and Relief of the Poor, in a way of
Industry, is that which fills the Goals with Malefactors, and the Kingdom with
Idle Persons that consume the Stock of the Kingdom, without Improving it; and
that will daily increase, even to a Desolation in time.

Sir Josiah Child says, in his Discourse about the Poor, And if a whole
Session of Parliament were employed on this singular Concern, I think (says
he) it would be time spent as much to the Glory of God, and Good of this
Nation, as in any thing that Noble and worthy Patriots of their Country can be
engaged in.

Here is strong and pathetick Lines, in behalf of the Poor, by as Powerful a
King, as Honored a Judge, and as Rich a Merchant, as England ever had.

TO THE Lords and Commons IN Parliament Assembled.
IT was lamentable and frightful to behold the Tumult of Weavers, that in a
late Sessions, attended your Doors, and when the Scarcity of Corn has pinched
the Poor, how fearless have they appeared (to plunder against all Law) in many
Parts of this Kingdom? Now if the Needy of but one Trade of a City, shall,
through Penury, dare to brave You, that are as the Vitals to move, and Heads to
govern the Nation, and that have the Strength of it to support you: How much
more dismal would it be to have a poor starved Crowd attack single Gentlemen at
their own Home, and what Avantage may restless Spirits take to disturb the
public Peace with such Opportunities?

Foreign Wars wastes our Treasure, but Tumults at home are a Convulsion upon
our Nerves: And though Fines will Awe Men of Estates, and Corporal Pains Men in
Health: But (if Provision should fail) what can awe the Misery of Starving,
added to their increasing Immoralities, which will increase their Insolence?

To collect the Laws about the Poor, into one Act, will make them much the
better understood, and it would be of great Service, if all our Laws, upon each
Subject they Treat of, were so collected.

And to Incorporate Counties, Citys, and Towns, to erect Hospitals and
Workhouses, for employing the able, and providing for the impotent Poor, will
be a good Addition to the present Laws already made, if they will undertake it.

But considering that the late regulating of our Coin, increased the
Difficulties of doing it, and that a suitable Provision for our Poor will not
be of less Consequence to the Nation; and that many of the public Hospitals
hitherto raised, have more regarded the well Governing, and providing for a few
Impotent, than the profitable employing of the able Poor.

Therefore, with Submission, I humbly pray, that you will please, by Bill or
Clause, in some Bill, to incorporate any Persons (as well as Cities and
Parishes) that will raise a Stock for the employing of poor People; if it
invite no Undertakers, the Act can do no Hurt, and if it succeed, it may
produce (by the following, or some other Expedient) useful Experiments that
more public Corporations may learn by, at others Costs.

John Bellers.

To the Intelligent and Thinking Reader.
WItty Men, who think but once upon a Subject, are able to make a Jest upon it;
but Wise Men think twice, that will give a right Judgment upon things: And
these last are the Readers I address my self unto, who have Temper to receive a
good Proposition, and Sense to disprove a bad or weak one, by Proposing a
better: For that Physician that can advise nothing in a desparate Disease (as
the Condition of many of the Poor are now to England) but contradict others,
will have no great Cure to boast of.

What I have said of Trade, is rather to Anatomize, and look into the Nature of
it, than to find out the most Profitables, whilst I think Land is the
Foundation, and regular Labor is the great Raiser of Riches to a Nation, and
that Trade is the distributer of it, when it is raised: I would also persuade
to Mercy and Virtue, as what Crowns the Industry of any Country.

There are some too apt to reproach Virtue with ill Names, and under that
disguise, represent the most Industrious as the more dangerous; though
Immorallity in the Professors of any Religion makes them the greatest Enemies
and Ruin of that Religion which they profess: Whilst the Industry of the
Subject, as it makes their Riches the greater Support, so is it the best
Security to the Government (though they are divided into many different Opinions
of Religion) it being the Proud and Needy that are the most restless, and the
Idle that are most at leisure to be Mutinous.

Some may think me too short in Expression, I desire such, if they are at
leisure, to read this Tract twice, and it will be then more intelligible unto
them, and if they have not time for that, I conceive they would not have read a
larger Comment half through. And though short Sentences are most liable to be
mistaken, yet they are best to be remembered: And if I can strike them Sparks,
from whence others may set up bigger Lights, for the good of Mankind, I shall
not think my time Ill bestowed. My brevity may make me seem too positive, with
some, but I doing of it to prevent being tedious, and desiring no more Credit
than as I demonstrate what I writ, I hope my Reader (for my good Intention)
will excuse me in that seeming fault.

I will not answer for the exactness of my Computations, whether there is six,
seven or eight Millions of People (several ingenuous Political Arithmeticians
differing in that point) or whether we spend 50 or 70 Millions a Year; a
Million or two breaking no square in my Propositions, they being more to show
the greatness of the Loss, by our neglect of the Poor, and the greatness of the
Profit they are able to raise, rather than the exactness of either; which, I
think, my Reasons in them Computations fully proves.

John Bellers.

The CONTENTS.
1. SEveral Quotations. 2. To the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled. 3.
To the intelligent and thinking Reader. 4. A Scheme, by which the Poors wants
will be best supplied. 5. Essay, to show, that 500 Laborers are capable of
earning 3000l. a Year more than will keep them. 6. Essay, to show how 500
Thousand Poor are capable to add 43 Millions value to the Nation. 7. The
Increase of Regular Laboring People is the Kingdom's greatest Treasure,
Strength and Honor. 8. Of Manufactures. 9. The uncertainty of Fashions does
increase necessitious Poor. 10. Of Traders. 11. Of Foreign Trade. 12. Of Money.
13. A word to the Rich. 14. Essay for abating Immorallities. 15. Against
Punishing of Theft with Death. 16. The Excellency and Divinity of Inward Light
demonstrated. 17. Of Christian Virtue. 18. Of Divine Worship. 19. A Cloud of
Witnesses out of the Holy Scriptures to an inward Guide.
ESSAYS About the POOR, etc.
IT is affecting to consider that the Bodies of many poor, which might and
should be Temples for the Holy Ghost to dwell in, are the Receptacles so much
of Vice and Vermin.

To love God with all our Strength, and our Neighbor as our selves, is the
Substance and Perfection of the Law and Gospel: But as he that neglects Virtue,
loves not God; so he that, when Power and Opportunity is put into his Hands,
will not endeavor to relieve his fellow Creatures from their present Miseries,
will want a great Article in his Pasport, to recommend him to future Happiness.

That the Poor want to be better managed than they are* is plain, to every one
that has Sense or Charity, whilst their Way of living is not much less Loss to
the Nation, than our Wars, one being perpetual, and the other but accidental;
also the ill Morals and Miseries of the Poor, are scandalous to our Religion to
the last Degree, Charity and Virtue being the greatest Ornaments and
Excellencies of Christianity.

Now, in Order to cure these great Maladies, I propose three Things to be
considered.

First, Whether the Poor will be best employed by a public Stock, or by
particular Undertakers, with their own Stocks?

Secondly, Whether employing them upon one Sort of Manufacture, or all Sorts,
with the Addition of Husbandry, is best?

Thirdly, Whether the Poor will be best managed in Societies, or scattered each
at their own Homes?

To which offer the following Observations.

To the first, That public Stocks have generally been eat up, and will be so,
and the Poor are worse employed by them, Experience has hitherto showed us,
and that therefore private Stocks are better than public ones, for employing
the Poor, as being better husbanded, whilst the Interest of the Undertakers
will oblige them to more Care in managing the Stock, and employing the Poor;
and besides, constant Overseers will be much more capable for the Employment,
than Annual ones.

But Sick, Cripples, and other disabled Poor, as they are fittest tobe kept at
a public Charge; so consequently under the public Care, which will leave the
more Room for public Charities to such.

To the second, The more Variety of Manufactures the Poor are employed in, the
more Conveniences they will raise for themselves, and they will the less Clog
the Market, than if employed in one Manufacture only: But if they are employed
in Husbandry also, that they may raise themselves Food, they will then want
nothing; for two Men are able to raise Food and Clothing for four Men's
Subsistence: Whereas to increase our Manufactures, and not our Food, will
lessen the Misery of the present Poor, but by spreading of it among all the
People of the Kingdom: Which is like an unskilful Physician that removes the
Gout from the Foot, only by repelling of it upon the Vitals, which often
infects the whole Body.

It puts more People to Table, it is true, but it puts no more Food upon it;
where they all suffer, as they do at Sea (when Provision falls short) by
setting five Men to four Men's Allowance.

To the third, I say, Societies affords the best Government, and also most
Conveniences, with less Charge; and the Poor have very ill Qualities, and are
as ill Tutors, as well as evil Examples to their Children, and therefore it is
of absolute Necessity their Children should have better Instructors, and a more
industrious Education than their Parents will give them; the Happiness of the
next Age much depending upon the good Education of the Children of this.

And for Infants, sick and superannuated People, if they were put into
Nurseries and Hospitals; the fewer Nurses, Surgeons, and Physicians will serve
them, than if kept any where else, and they will be cheaper and better provided
for, than in little nasty Hovils at Home, which are too often the Seeds of
Infection.

And as Communities and Hospitals, will have most Conveniences at least Charge,
so they will breed up the best Surgeons and Physicians, where their Experience
in one Year, will be more than in seven Years without it; which, as it will be
greatly to the Comfort of the poor: So of no less Advantage and Comfort to the
Gentry of the Country, who will then know where to have able Physicians and
Surgeons, upon extraordinary Occasions (which in many Countries, now, is not
easy to be found) the lame Hospitals in London being the best Schools for
Surgeons in the Nation.

Prove. 29. v. 4. The Righteous considers the Cause of the Poor, but the
Wicked regards not to know it.

31. v. 9. Open thy Mouth, judge righteously, and plead the Cause of the Poor
and Needy.

How the Poors Wants will be best answered, and the Nations Strength and Riches
increased.
THE Evils and Wants that attends the poor of England are of four Sorts.

First, The Parents give their Children an evil Education.

Secondly, They want constant Employment for themselves and their Children.

Thirdly, They want constant Vent for what they do raise or make.

Fourthly, They want sufficient Food to feed them for their Labor.

The Scheme I offer, as Relief for these four great wants, is, by Colleges of
Industry (which I presented the Parliament with two Years ago) in which are
collected all sorts of Tradesmen and Husbandmen (in a due Proportion to the
Occasion there may be for each Trade among them) upon so much Land, that with
their Labor upon it, will raise them Materials needful for their Subsistence,
which I reckon is about three Acres to a Head: And that this Plaster will fully
cure these four Sores, I demonstrate.

First, That in such Collections of People, there may be all Conveniences for
Instruction and Oversight, both in Virtue and Industry.

Secondly, They cannot there want Work any Time of the Year, they having all
the Conveniences of Life to raise for themselves and their Founders.

Thirdly, They cannot there want Vent for what they raise more than they spend,
because the Founders will gladly receive it, it being all profit to them.

Fourthly, And as a proportionable part of them are employed upon the Land in
Husbandry, they will raise Food sufficient for the whole Society.

I do not propose forming all the Mechanics of England, that live well
otherwise, into Colleges, but such poor who are thrown into Want by an idle
Education; or such as being supernumery in the Trade they were bred in, who are
now accounted burdensome, for them to be gathered and formed into little
Bodies, and several Classes of needful Employments* as if going to plant a new
Country, which would be as gaining several new Provinces to the Kingdom; and
then those little Colonies will live as well as the rest of the Nation does,
without taking the Bread out of other peoples Mouths, because they raise their
own Food, and other Subsistence.

Such Colleges and Colonies will be an excellent Expedient to people the
Northern Countries, and the waste Lands of the Kingdom; and greatly increase
the Value of the Lands of the Nobility and Gentry of England.

Interest will encourage the Undertakers to settle People where Land (which is
the Foundation of Living) may be had cheap, and all Manufactures, as well as
Husbandry, being settled there, may make such Places as Populous, and the Land
as Valuable, as the Southern Counties are; and will prevent the loss of
Thousands of People, that by going to London drop there, now, as untimely
Fruit; this City being one tenth of the People of England, it is too numerous
in Proportion to the rest of the Kingdom; for what it has more than its
Proportion, they must live either by sharping or begging, or starve; because
the Nation can maintain but a Number of Tradesmen and Gentry, in proportion to
the Number of Laborers that are in the Nation, to work for them.

Now as standing Forces are in a Field, where Troops broken in Battle, can
retire to, and Rally: So would Colleges and Colonies of Industry be unto
broken Tradesmen, and ruined Manufacturers to go into, until they can see a
better way to live.

Essay, to show, That 500 Laborers, Regularly Employed, are Capable of Earning
3000 l. a Year more than will keep them.
IT is a certain Demonstration of the Illness of the Method the People are
employed in, if they cannot live by it; nothing being more plain, than that Men
in proper Labor and Employment are capable of Earning more than a Living; or
else Mankind had been extinguished in the first Age of the World; and it would
be impossible now, for any Shopkeeper or Merchant, to live in the Nation, or
Children be bred up, Land improved, Buildings raised, and Shiping and Trade
increased; if some Mechanics and Husbandmen (that are in a due Proportion to
each other) did not maintain the one, and increase the other, as well as
maintain themselves.

By Computation, there is not above two thirds of the People of Families of
England, that do raise all necessaries for themselves, and the rest of the
People by their Labor; and if the one third, which are not Laborers, did not
spend more than the two thirds which are Laborers, one half of the People or
Families Laboring could supply all the Nation.

Now considering that all the Poor may be Laborers, and as is before observed,
that half of them: are capable of raising Necessaries for all the rest to live
equal to themselves, or as well as other Mechanics and Laborers of the
Kingdom do live: And supposing that the Nation in general spends the value of
10 l. a Head Yearly in Victuals, Clothes, and other Necessaries; by which every
one's Years Work, that does Labor must be worth 20 l. to keep himself, and one
more.

Then accounting of 500 Laborers, that 250 of them earning 20 l. a Year each;
the whole comes to 5000 l. Out of which deducting for the Rent of 1500 Acres of
Land (which is 3 Acres to a Head) for them to dwell upon, at 10 s. an Acre a
Year, in all is 750 Pound.

Interest of 5000 l. Stock for the Land and Manufacturers is 250 l. a Year.

Allowing for Officers, Sick, Lame, and Infants Yearly 1000 l.

Which, in the whole, comes to be deducted Yearly 2000 l.

And there remains Profit for the Founders, besides Rent for their Land, and
Interest for their Stock 3000 l. a Year.

Object. But some will say by my Computation, A Labourer must earn 16 d. a day,
whereas many cannot now earn above 6 d. or 8 d. a day, with the greatest Toil.

Answ. It is so, but then the Shopkeeper or Jobber often gets the other 8 d.
or 10 d. for it commonly stands the User in double the Prince the Maker had.

And with many Commodities the Market is over-stocked, (and what is the best
Dinner worth to a full Stomach?) which is the great Unhappiness of many of our
Mechanics, that they make Commodities, when no Body wants them. And then they
pine or starve, whilst they are waiting for a Customer that will give Bread for
their Manufactures (or Money to buy Bread) whereas the same Labor in Husbandry
they used in making them Manufactures, would have raised much more Food than
the Money they get for their Manufactures will buy them.

Though I compute that 500 Laborers can Earn 3000 l. a Year, more than will keep
them, at the Rate the Poor of England now live; yet as less Profit may
sufficiently encourage the Founders, so they may allow the Laborers either to
work the fewer Hours in the Day, or else give them better Wages than they
generally have now, and the Founders get enough by them nevertheless.

Essay, to show how 500 Thousand Poor are capable to add 43 Millions value to
the Nation.
ACcording to the Computation of 500 People earning 3000 l. a Year more than
will keep them; and supposing there is 500 Thousand Poor in the Kingdom, which
want Employment (which is but 10 Thousand in a Country) they are able to earn
One Million and a half Yearly more than will keep them, and they will manage
One Million and a half of Acres of Land; which, considering how much Land we
have in the Kingdom now, not worth 12 d. an Acre, in the North, etc. and that
People settling upon it, would make it worth 10 s. an Acre a Year, which would
advance that Land to 675 Thousand Pounds a Year, which is now not worth above
75 Thousand Pounds a Year, which added to the one Million and half, the Poor
can earn Yearly more than they spend, makes the whole Yearly Profit to the
Kingdom 2 Millions 175 Thousand Pounds, with Pleasure, Safety, and Honor to
the Undertakers, and unspeakable Comfort to the Poor; where may also be had
reputable Posts, and comfortable Livings for many decayed Families (the
Miserablest of Poor) that now pine in distress.

Which Annual Profit, computed at 20 Years Purchase, it adds 43 Millions and a
half, Sterling, to the Stock and Value of the Kingdom, and but upon one sixth
part of the Waste Land of England neither, according to the Computation of the
Author of Ways and Means, who reckons there is 10 Millions of Acres of Waste
Land in the Kingdom.

Upon which Waste Land we might keep, if we had them, two Millions and a half
of People more than we have, and by them add 200 Millions Sterling, to the
value of the Kingdom: From whence may be seen that under the favor of God;
That,

The Increase of Regular Laboring People is the Kingdom's greatest Treasure,
Strength and Honor.
1. LAnd, Cattle, Houses, Goods and Money are but the Carcas of Riches, they
are dead without People; Men being the Life and Soul of them.

Double our Laboring People, and we shall be capable of having double the
Noblemen and Gentlemen that we have; or their Estates will be worth double what
they are now: But if it were possible to increase our Houses and Treasure (and
not our People) in such Excess, that the poorest Man in the Kingdom were worth
a Million of Money: There must be as many of those rich Men Hewers of Wood, and
Drawers of Water, Plowmen and Threshers, as we have of such Laborers now in
the Kingdom, or else we should be under Midas's Golden Curse, Starve for want
of Bread, though had our Hands filled with Gold.

To say Foreigners would supply us for Money: Yes, but it is their Laboring
People must do it; who also being subjects to Foreign Princes, may take their
turn to come and Plunder, as well as Feed us.

2. There are no increasing of rich Men, but as poor Laborers increase with
them; where there is no Servants, there can be no Masters: It Is Laboring
People must improve our Land, raise us plenty of Food, Clothing, and other
Necessaries, and by what they raise, increase our Trade at home and abroad;
acquire us Riches by raising more than we spend, for the Increase of Posterity,
and the Support of the Government. Prove. 14. 28. In the multitude of People is
the King's Honor: But in the want of the People is the Destruction of the
Prince.

Of Manufactures. Employing the Poor upon any one Manufacture constantly, will
run out the Stock they are employed with.
SUpposing that we have 100 Thousand Weavers in the Kingdom, and that 50
Thousand of them constantly employed are sufficient to supply our own People
and Foreign Markets.

The consequence of raising a stock to employ these 50 Thousand Supernumery
Weavers, in Weaving; will be, that it will raise double the Clothing we have or
want, and then half of it must lie Dead and Spoil, or else we must sell it at
half the Vallue and Cost, to encourage People to wear double the quantity of
Clothes they used to do; either way brings ruin to the Stock, if there is no
vent, the whole Stock is lost, and if sell it at half Price, then half the
Stock is lost at the first Sale, and so it will grow less and less every return
of the Stock, until it is all gone.

And what may be said of one Trade, being over Stocked, may be said of all
Manufactures; though the more variety the Poor are employed in, they will Subsist
the better or longer; but yet without a due proportion of Land and Husbandry or
Fishery, they, our Supernumery Mechanics, will be but Miserable for want of
Food sufficient for their Subsistence. Prove. 13. v. 23. Much food is in the
Tillage of the Poor.

The uncertainty of Fashions does increase Necessitous Poor.
IT has two great Mischiefs in it. 1 st. the Journey-men are Miserable in
Winter for want of Work, the Mercers and Master Weavers not daring to lay out
their Stocks to keep the Journey-men employed, before the Spring comes and they
know what the Fashion will then be. 2 dly. In the Spring the Journeymen are not
sufficient, but the Master Weavers must draw in many Prentices, that they may
supply the Trade of the Kingdom in a quarter or half a Year, which Robs the
Plow of Hands, drains the Country of Labouers, and in great part Stocks the
City with Beggars, and starves some in Winter that are ashamed to Beg.

Of Trade.
WIthout we increase our Husbandry (by improving our Land) we cannot increase
our Manufactures, by which we should increase our Trade.

Our Woollen Manufactures we cannot increase except we increase our Sheep,
because we have no Wool now to spare, Witness the late Glostershire Clothiers
complaint to the Parliament against the Woolcombers.

Therefore Foreign Manufactures is the most proffitable Labor, we can employ
our present Idle Poor upon, excepting Husbandry and the Fishery: for whatever
home Manufactures we employ them upon, we do but take that work from some other
Labouers in the Nation that will want it.

And so we may Transfer the present Trade from one City or County to another,
or from Cloth to Searges or Stuffs, by which we shall sometimes ruin the Poor
of one Country and sometimes the Poor of another, and for which our Legislators
must expect that, the losers will always be complaining, as the Button-makers
did against Cloth-Buttons.

Foreign Manufactures we can best raise by increasing our Husbandry and
Fishery, for the cheapest Workmen will always have the greatest Trade, whilst
dear Bread will make dear Manufactures, and ruin Trade, for whatever Strangers
can supply us withal Cheaper than we can supply our selves, to be sure they
will much easier supplant us with them Manufactures in any Foreign Market.

Of Traders.
MErchants and Tradesmen are to a Nation as Stewards, Bailiffs and Butlers are
to great Families; they Supply Counties and Countries with what they want, from
other places, and distribute them conveniences, which Laboring People raise;
their profit in Trade, being their Wages for their trouble.

And as a Nation without Government, immediately falls into confusion, so
Labor will not be regular where there is none to direct and manage the
Workmen, and Industry will fail where there is no prospect of attaining a
better State by it. But as Traders are useful in distributing, it is only the
Labor of the Poor that increases the Riches of a Nation, and though there
cannot be too many Laborers in a Nation, if their Employments are in a due
Proportion; Yet there may be too many Traders in a Country for the number of
Laborers, and then some must fall for want of Trade to support them, from
whence they become sharping or distressed not being used to work, and the Nation
the Poorer by the loss of their Labor.

Traders may grow Rich, whilst a Nation grows Poor through Extravagancy, for
when the Dealers may get 20 Thousand Pound by Claret, the Nation pays and
spends 100 Thousand Pound for it, and no Body grows Rich by Drinking it,
whatever the Seller does.

The difference in Trading (as the Dutch mostly do) as Carriers between Foreign
Nations, and a home Trade is, that what our Traders get in the first, it is from
Strangers, but what they get in the latter, it is by our own People, and in both
as they are useful Ministers and Officers of Trade, the profit in their
Employments is their Sallary.

Of Foreign Trade.
As Foreign Trade should be, either for the Public profit or convenience, so
what Trade we carry on between Foreign Countries, can only be reckoned
profitable to us; whilst what Trade we drive between our selves and Strangers,
is rather to help us to them things our own Country or Plantations cannot,
which are either Useful, Ornamental, or Delightful; but a Voluptuous Age may
easily fall into Excess, with dress and pleasure, by the two last, whilst
nothing can be strictly said to enrich a Nation, but what increases its
People, and with them, Supplies it with things that are lasting and necessary,
more than they Spend.

But how much of the Silks, Oils, Pickles, Fruits and Wine, we receive from
Turkey, Italy, Spain, and France, (and not exported again) as repasts to our
Tables, and Ornaments to our Clothes, and Furniture are an Equivalent and of
equal use to us, which the more lasting and needful Clothes and Provision we
send out for them would be, may be some question.

Supposing we send 400 Thousand Pound a Year of English Manufactures to them 4
Countries, and by the returns, the Merchants and Retailers may get 30 per Cent.
which makes 520 Thousand Pounds value Imported, to be spent in England: Now,
Quere, whether this 400 Thousand Pounds first sent out, is not rather the
Nations expense, than the 120 Thousand Pounds the Traders get, may be supposed
to add to the Nations Stock? and another Question is, what of it is Prudently
spent with comfort, and how much is extravagantly wasted, to the ruin of the
Bodies and Estates of the Spenders?

If we send 100 Thousand pound of Manufactures to Holland and Germany, we have
commonly some useful Manufactures for them; however, if we did employ our own
Idle Poor, upon them things, it is possible they would be able to raise most of
them Foreign Goods that we want.

But then our Woolen Manufactures that supply them Countries, would complain of
such new Manufactures; as some Lancashire Men lately Petitioned the Parliament,
that Flanders Lace should be allowed to come into England, that thereby they
might have better vent for their Cloth in Flanders.

And thus, whilst our Manufactures are disproportioned to our Husbandmen, we
are, and shall be like Limbs out of Joint, always complaining, lay us which way
you will.

For which reason several Laws, made for encouraging of Trade, does but raise
an intestine War among our Mechanics; because the advantage of one Trade is
often the ruin of another: Whereas, increase our Husbandmen and Fishermen,
which will lessen our Manufactures, and make Food plenty, and a quick Market
for Goods, and give the greatest Ease to our Mechanics Complaints.

Now, Supposing the 500 Thousand Pounds worth of Manufactures and Provision
sent to Turkey, Italy, Spain, France and Holland, were to have been used by our
own People at home, where we have enough and may have more to vend them,
(whilst the want of them hinders Thousands in England from Marrying) And if
these People were employed in a due Proportion to our wants, in Tilling our
Land, Building Houses, Breeding Cattle, catching Fish, and making of needful
Manufactures, which are lasting Riches that increases the Nations Stock, they
would add then a half Million Sterling Yearly to the Value of the Kingdom;
whilst (as in Page. 6.) a Man in a Years time, that spends 10 l. is able to
raise what is worth 20 Pound.

Quere; Whether we do not Depopulate our Country, by Pineing many at home for
want of them Manufacturers, and especially Food, which we send abroad, to
supply the Pride and Luxury of others by the returns? Amos 8. v. 4. Hear this O
ye that Swallow up the needy: even to make the Poor of the Land to fail.

Land and Labor are the Foundation of Riches, and the fewer Idle hands we
have, the faster we increase in value; and spending less than we raise, is a
much greater certainty of growing Rich, than any computation that can be made
from our Exportation and Importation, whilst 120 Thousand Pound Imported to be
spent at home for 100 Thousand Pound sent out, leaves the Public never the
Richer at the Years end.

Of Money.
LAnd, Stock upon it, Buildings, Manufactures, and Money, are the Body of our
Riches; and of all these, Money is of least use, until it is parted with; Land
and Live Stock increase by keeping, Buildings and Manufactures are useful
whilst kept, but Money neither increases, nor is useful, but when it is parted
with, and as Money is unprofitable to a private Person but as he disposes of
it, for something more valuable, so what Money is more than of absolute necessity
for a home Trade, is dead Stock to a Kingdom or Nation, and brings no profit to
that Country it is kept in; but as it is Transported in Trade, as well as
imported, for as Money increases in quantity, it decreaseth in Value in a
Country, except the People and Stock increase in proportion to the Money.

Money has two Qualities, it is a Pledge for what it is given for, and it is the
Measure and Scales by which we Measure and Value all other things, it being
portable and durable, and yet it has altered far more in Value to all things
than other things have among themselves, when there was but the one 20th part
of the Money in England, to what there is now; As good a Sheep was sold then for
one Shilling, as will now cost 20 Shillings; and when there will be 20 times
more Money in England than there is now, that Sheep which is now worth but one
Guinea, will then be worth 20 Guineas, except the People increase in Number and
Stock; for as we are now about 7 Millions of People, and 14 Millions of Money,
which is 40 Shillings for each Head in the Kingdom, so it may be reasonably
Reckoned, that if we increase in Money, to have 4 Pound a Head; all things will
double in price, and so in proportion; and if we increase in Money, to have 8
Pound a Head, things will be 4 times the Price they are, yet a Sheep; and a
Cow, and a Man's days Work, were always in Value in the same proportion as they
are now, as the same Number of Days work of a Man would pay for a Sheep or a
Cow, 300 Years ago as will now, and the same Labor will Plow an Acre of Land
now as would then.

Query, If we were as Populous, and Money were as little used, and Provision as
plentiful with us as it is in the East Indies: Whether it would be possible for
them Indians, to supplant us in Manufactures as they do now?

Of English Plantations.
THE English Plantations being ours, should be us; and the more, considering
the many Advantages they bring us, whilst the dividing of Countries in
interest, may be a preface to their future Troubles, English Men under the
English Government are (and should be accounted) in the interest of England in
any part of the World; the Romans were so sensible of this, that they
infranchised whole Cities and Provinces of Strangers, as best to secure their
Dominion and Peace.

The English Plantations, greatly add to the English Territories, and increase
her Subjects, and enlarge her Trade, that their Land adds to our Territories is
indisputable, and if we consider that many who would have lived without
Servants and have dyed without Posterity, if they had staid in England, have
got both in America, and also that all the Negroes and Indians under them are
Subjects to the Crown of England, who greatly improve our Trade, by supplying
of it with Furs, Fish, Oil, Tobacco, Sugar, Indigo, Cotton, etc. (as well as by
taking off our Supernumerary Manufactures) by which Commodities the English in
America add double to the revenues of the English Crown, of what they would
have done, if they had never gone there.

In short, if our Plantations were as Populous and as Large as China, England
would be the Richer by their Trade and Stronger by their Interest, whilst
English Blood would so Unite us as to make their Strength ours and our Enemies
theirs, (except we make our selves their Enemies) and the more numerous their
Shiping is, they will put England to the less charge to protect them, as well
as that they will be the more able to assist us, if we shall want their help.

A Word to the Rich.
THere is one thing I would observe to allay the uneasiness some are under in
their present Circumstances, and to stir them and others, to a consideration of
the great Stewardship they are in and must give an account of, whilst they
possess manifold more, than there is in Proportion for the Body of the Nation.

Supposing there is 7 Millions of People in England, and that there is 14
Millions of Money, which is but 40 s. a Head in Money, for every one that is in
the Nation. -- 02.00.00 Reckoning there is 10 Millions and a half of Pounds
Sterling a Year in England, in Land and Houses, and that is 30 s. a Year for
each Head; which, at 20 Years Purchase, comes to 30 l. -- 30.00.00 Accounting
that the Stock of Cattle, Manufactures, and other Goods and Materials are worth
5 times the Rent of the Land and Houses, and that comes to 7 l. 10 s. a Head
value in Cattle and Goods. -- 07.10.00 Which makes in the whole 39 l. 10 s.
Estate for every -- Head in the Kingdom. 39.10.00

Now whatever any enjoys more than 40 l. for every Head in his Family, whether
by descent from his Ancestors, or by his own Industry, as it is more
particularly the Bounty of Heaven, so the less reason to complain of want, when
it is so much above a level: And so much as Men by the greatness of their
Estates are excused from Labor to earn their Bread, so much are they the
greater Stewards by their Leisure, Opportunity and Interest, to direct the Poor
in their Labor, and to Influence and Instruct them to Virtue (and not to give
away their Estates to them) according to which computation, he that is worth
Ten Thousand Pound has the Estate and Tools which does employ 250 Persons.

Which as there is so many Persons in the Nation some where or other, that have
a dependence upon such a Stock, it may concern every Master of such an Estate,
to consider how far he shall be answerable for the Stewardship of it, and for
the present Comfort and future Happiness of all such Dependents, he in a degree
Rules over: For as Prove. 22. v. 7. The Rich rules over the Poor, and the
Borrower is Servant to the Lender.

Essay for abating Immoralities.
IF we improve our Land, multiply our People, increase our Treasure, and have
all the Rules (of Policy) for Government and of Trade in the greatest
Perfection, that we could live with half the Labor we do, and might seem
invincible in Strength, and abound with Plenty and Grandeur; If Virtue be not
encouraged, and Vice suppressed, it will make us but the more open Enemies to
Heaven, and bring us the Nearer Step to Ruin; for as the Plains of Sodom were
the richest Land of the Country, so it the sooner ripened their Pride, Idleness
and Lust that destroyed them.

Except the Lord keep the City, the Watchmen watch in vain, and how can we
expect God will be our Keeper, if we, through Rebellion, will run from, and not
belong to him?

What Principles are most acceptable with God, is disputable among Men, but
Profaneness and Debauchery all Mankind agree is disallowed by him: Now,
whatever is agreed universally among Men, to be the most certainest Way to
Hell, should be first hedged up by our Legislators.

Less than Parliament Authority will not do it (King David of old said, the
Sons of Zerviah were too hard for him) And if it were enacted, that profane
Swearing should disable a Man for any Place of Profit or Trust (tho but for six
or twelve Months) in Church or State, as much as not swearing at all does a
Quaker; then there will be as little profane swearing among our Officers and
Magistrates, as there is now of Quakerism, and when they are reformed, they
will, with greater Zeal, take care to reform the common People.

And if Immorality shall be made a Bar to Preferment, then many, that now will
not forbear one Vice to gain Heaven, will hide a whole Herd of them from
public View, to get or preserve a good Office on Earth.

For tho none but God can cleanse the Heart, yet it will be our Government's
Honor to prevent the Influences that evil Examples gives, and to suppress Vice
from public Scandal.

It is mournful to think what good Estates, fine Parts, and Time is wasted in
Gaming and Plays, which are some of the greatest Incentives to Immoralities in
the Nation, where Fraud, Luxury, and Obsenity is introduced and insinuated with
the greatest Art that Music, Poetry, Dress, Wit, and Air can give it: Whilst
it has been the great Labor of the Prophets, Christ and his Ministers in all
Ages of the World, to the spending of their Strength and Life it self, to draw
Men from Worldly Vanities.

If any think themselves in danger, by such a Law as shall enforce a Test of
Virtue, I would say, that next to the Love of God, and of Virtue, Interest and
Rewards are the best Preventions of Vice; and when Vice is less fashionable, it
will be less affecting than it is; and the fewer Evil Examples is seen, they
will be under the fewer Temptations; and if they can be cured, the Advantage
will be unexpressible, the Souls safety being of Infinite consequence; and
Virtue preserves the Body from many Malignant Invasions, and the Estate whole
to many Generations, and the Credit strong, as being fit for any Trust. Whereas
he that for Pleasure and Intemperance will forfeit his Interest with God, lies
under a suspicion he will betray his Trust with Men for less, when there is a
Market for it: And what Secrets is that Man's Breast fit for, which Wine or
Lude Women have the Command of? Or what good Counsel can he give to others, who
will not refrain from a vain Oath, to save or gain a Profitable Place to
himself.

Now for such who will not be Reformed, neither by the Laws of God, nor by the
Laws of Men, the Laws of Nature will conquer them; for Vicious Distempers will
shorten the Days of some, and Extravagancies will expel others out of their
Ancestors Estates, whilst Virtue and Industry will introduce new Purchasers
into them.

And I wish such Purchasers, by a Prudent Education, would secure Virtue, as
well as an Estate, to their Posterity; and then Debauchery would soon be
extinguished out of the World, by its not having Riches to support, nor
Countenance it: For it is an old Maxim, Sine Cecere (...) Baccho friget Venus.

Prove. 14 v. 34. Righteousness exalts a Nation: But Sin is a Reproach to any
People.

28. 2. For the Transgression of a Land, many are the Princes thereof; but by a
Man (or Men) of Understanding and Knowledge, the State thereof shall be
prolonged.

Some Reasons against putting of Fellons to Death.
I Having made some Essay to supply the Wants, and abate the Profaneness of the
Age; I would say something of Fellons, (most of whom rise from them two
Miserable Fountains) and of the stain their untimely Death is to Religion, and
of the loss it is unto the Kingdom.

There are several sorts of Distractions, which all Men pities, and takes care
of preserving from doing themselves or others harm; but Pellons are some of the
worst sort of mad Men, whom Charity therefore would oblige us to take some care
to prevent their mischievous way of Living, and deplorable Deaths.

The Idle and Profane Education of some, and the Necessities of others, brings
Habits almost invincible; for such to conquer of themselves, without the State,
take them into their prudent management: But to put them into Bridewell or
Newgate for a Month or two, and then turn them loose at their own Discressions
(who have none) no more reclaims them, than baiting a Horse well with Provender
makes him less able to Travel; they learn but more Skill in their Trade, under
the Tutors they meet with there.

The Scriptures says, Watch; for the Devil your Adversary goes about like a
roaring Lion, seeking which of you be may devour. What Consideration and
Compassion then should be had of those unthinking, unwatchful People, whose
Pride, Lust, or Necessities, with the Devils incitements of them, is their sole
Guide?

If a Man had a Child, or near Relation, that should fall into a capital Crime,
he would use all his interest to preserve his Life, how much soever he abhorred
his Fact, in hopes he might live to grow better, especially if he could have
such a power of Confinement upon him, as might prevent his acting such
Enormities for the future.

And this Child, and near Relation, is every one to the Public, whilst the
cutting off by untimely Death of one able Man, may be reckoned 200 Pound loss
out of the value of the Kingdom; for besides their Persons, they are commonly
prevented of the Posterity which they might have, (which is loss to all
Generations) and if but one in a Succession, they may be valued at 10 l. a
Year, which, at 20 Years Purchase, is 200 Hundred Pound.

How sincerely can we say the Lord's Prayer, Forgive us our Trespasses, as we
forgive them which Trespass against us; when for the loss, possible of less
than 20 Shillings, we Prosecute a Man to Death? Would it not be more natural
and agreeable with our Prayers to God, to have Compassion on our deluded Fellow
Creatures? We are but Men whom they offend, but God is Infinitely above us,
whom we have offended.

And therefore, as we should, by a timely and industrious Education, have the
greater care to prevent such Enormities, it would also very well agree with our
State before God, when any fall into such Crimes compassionately to keep them
from further Mischiefs, and save such to Repentance, rather than to destroy
them by sudden Death.

Mat. 18. 33. Should not thou also have had Compassion on thy fellow Servant,
even as I had pity on thee?

The Life of a Man is of greater value with God than many Pounds, and ought to
be so with Men: For, tho he that spills Man's Blood, by Man was his Blood to be
spilt; yet the Thief was to restore but four or five fold, by the Ancient Law
of God.

To make no difference between the Punishment of Theft and Murder, seem a great
deficiency in our present Law, and often times must melt the Heart of a
Compassionate Judge, to hear their Shreiks and Cries, when he (as the Mouth of
the Law) pronounces the Sentence of Death upon such forlorn Creatures.

The Goals wants regulating: For whilst the Keepers are allowed to sell strong
Liquors, it provokes their Prisoners to great Expense, and they often live
high, to be the more in the Goalers favor; a Lord sometimes, for cost and
variety, may Dine at some of their Tables: Which has two Evil Consequences.

First, It forces their Companions abroard to rob more frequent to keep the
Prisoners so high in Goal, to keep themselves from being discovered.

Secondly, It keeps the Prisoners Blood always boiling, and their Brains hot,
and without Sense of their Unhappiness in this World, they live so voluptuous,
and without sense of the other World, because they are so strongly diverted
from thinking of it.

Also the Licencing too many Alehouses gives Thieves the more cover; which,
with ill Women, etc. makes their necessities the more pressing.

Now upon the whole, there is reason to believe, that few of them are so
incourageable, but that restraint by Confinement with suitable Employment, and
Marriage, or Exportations to our Plantations, in time would alter their evil
habits, to a more honest one; which, as it would save their Bodies and
Posterities to the Commonwealth, it might be a means to save their Souls from
Eternal Ruin.

To this Discourse of Charity, Industry, Virtue and Mercy; I will add a few
Lines of that Religious Guide and Power, by which good Actions may be performed.

The Excellency and Divinity of inward Light, demonstrated from the Attributes
of God, and the Nature of Man's Soul: As well as from the Testimony of the holy
Scriptures.

Of God.
1 st. GOD is from Eternity to Eternity, without Beginning of Time, or End of
Life.

2 dly. He is infinite and omnipresent, whose Being is every where and
boundless.

3 dly. He is omnipotent in Power, being able to do all things.

4 thly. He is omniscient, and therefore he knows the least and privatest
Thoughts, as well as the greatest and most public Actions.

5 thly. His Being is invisible, immaterial Life and Spirit, Light and Glory,
and therefore he is not to be apprehended by any visible Creatures, tho all
things were created and are upheld by him, and do declare of his great Power
and Wisdom; to whom we owe all Obedience, Subjection, Reverence, Homage
Thanksgiving, Worship, and Praise, World without End:

Of Man's Soul.
THE Soul of Man is the most invisible, spiritual, and intellectual Part of
this Creation.

And therefore the Soul, beyond all other Creatures, is most capable of
apprehending the invisible and spiritual Manifestations of God.

Now as God is infinite and omnipresent, in all Places, he consequently is
within the Bodies of Men, as well as without them.

And God being the most invisible Light, Spirit, and Life, he penetrates all
Beings and Spirits, more thoroughly than the visible Light at Noonday does the
Air; the Sunbeams being but a Shadow to him, that Light discovering Bodies
only, but this inward Light discovers the most hidden Thoughts.

And as God only (who is Light) can penetrate Men's Souls, and beholds the most
inward Thoughts and Desires thereof, so he only is able, and does show them to
Men, whether they are good or evil: And as Men's Wills and Affections comes to
be subdued to the Will of God, he discovers to the Souls of Men. What is to be
known of him, the pure in Heart only seeing God.

For tho God is in all Places, and fills all things, yet all Beings have not
the same Degree of Sense of him, because they are not of the same Capacity of
knowing, or not equally prepared to apprehend and see so pure invisible and
intellectual a Spirit.

And it may be said of visible Bodies, as of Darkness it self, that tho God
shines in them, they comprehend or apprehend him not, for indeed they want all
Sense of Apprehension, as the greatest Light is unknown to the blind, and the
greatest Sounds to the deaf, so also the Souls of Men, which are given up unto
the Delights of sensual Objects (until they are born a new) they do want their
Faculties to be sufficiently spiritualized to behold the immaterial Glory of
God, tho his Light does show them their evil State, and his Spirit reproves
them, they do not see him: That Degree or Manifestation of Light which only
discovers a Man's unhappy State to him, appears far less glorious (though it is
divine) than that which gives Peace, and discovers the Glory of God, as Man
obeys it: Yet all divine Light which appears to Men, flows from the Father's
Glory, through the one Mediator, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who is full
of Glory in himself, whilst it is the Stupidity of Men only that makes them
unable to see the Glory of this Light.

Acts 17. v. 23. -- I -- beheld your Devotions -- To the unknown God, whom
therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you.

24. God that made the World -- dwells not in Temples made with Hands.

25. Neither is worshipped with Men's Hands, as tho he needed any thing, seeing
he gives to all, Life, and Breath, and all things.

27. That they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him, and
find him, tho he be not far from every one of Us.

28. For in him we live, and move, and have our Being, as certain also of your
own Poets have said. --

Amos. 4. v. 13. For lo, he that forms the Mountains, and creates the Wind,
and declares unto Man what is his Thought -- the Lord, the God of Hosts is his
Name.

Ephesians. 5. v. 13. But all things that are reproved, are made manifest by the
Light: For whatsoever does make manifest is Light.

1 John 1. v. 5. This then is the Message which we have heard of him, and
declare unto you, That God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all.

Therefore for any to say, that this inward Light is Man's Conscience, is no
better Divinity, than it would be good Philosophy and Sense for them to say;
That the Light of the Sun is a Man's Eye, when it is the Eye, that is
enlightened by it.

Of Christian Virtue.
REasons of State, Profit Health, Reputation, or Danger of Punishment was part
of the Motives given by the ancient Philosophers, to persuade Men from Vice;
which, as it is the least, it is the first Step toward Wisdom; Learning to do
well, through Love to Virtue, being a Degree higher, than ceasing to do evil
for fear of Sufferings.

Now, as none but God sees Men's Thoughts, so if they do resist every Appearance
of Evil, when he, through Christ, first discovers it to them in their Minds
(by his Light) that is to be virtuous for God's Sake, and it is a true Washing
the Inside, and a being truly religious at Heart: By which early Opposition to
Evil, Men will be enabled the more easily to overcome it, because a first
Thought or Representation to a watchful Man, has not that Power upon his
Affections, as it will have, after it has been entertained: And such a
Watchfulness will the more effectually prevent evil Actions, for whilst a Man
thinks no ill, to be sure he will do none.

This is putting on the Armor of Light, and walking in it, and a Warface (tho
not with carnal Weapons) mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong
Holds, casting down Imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the Knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity, every Thought to the
Obedience of Christ.

Of Divine Worship.
GOOD Morals, and inward Virtue is a constant Attendant to Divine Worship, for
he that regards Iniquity in his Heart, God will not regard or accept his
Prayers.

Good Actions are as the outward Court to a clean Mind, and a virtuous Soul is
as the Temple to the inward Tabernacle, where God is truly adored, in which
that Worship is the more acceptable, which keeps out, not only, evil Thoughts
(which are always to be avoided) but also such Thoughts, which at other times,
may be useful and needful to entertain.

For this divine Worship is the more Spiritual, as Men's Minds are more
sequestered and silenced from Creatures and Imaginations (not dull and sleepily,
but) vigorous, and earnestly seeking after, and praying for, a greater Purity
of Soul, and a farther Manifestation of God, through the Inspiration of inward
divine Light; every Increase of Light being one Degree farther toward Glory;
Glory it self being Light uncomprehensible.

John 4. v. 21. Jesus says unto her, Woman, believe me, the Hour comes, when
ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father.

23. But the Hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshipers shall worship
the Father in Spirit, and in Truth: For the Father seeks such to worship him.

24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and
in Truth.

A Cloud of Witnesses recorded in the Holy Scripture.
That the Three which bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and Holy
Spirit, which three are One (infinite immence Light, Life and Glory) do
manifest divine Light to Men. God being in Christ, reconciling the World unto
himself. And Christ is in us, the Hope of Glory. For the Grace of God, that
brings Salvation, has appeared unto all Men. A Manifestation of the Spirit,
being given to every Man to profit withal.

Of God's Manifestation in Men.
Isa. 2. 5. O House of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the Light of the
Lord.

60. v. 19. The Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting Light, and thy God thy
Glory.

1 Cor. 3. 16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God; and that the Spirit
of God dwells in you.

17. If any Man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy, for the Temple
of God is holy, which Temple ye are.

6. v. 19. What, know you not that your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost*
which is in you, which ye have of God? --

2 Cor. 6 16. -- For ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I
will dwell in them, and walk in them --

4. v. 6. -- For God who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has
shined in our Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God,
in the Face of Jesus Christ. v. 7. But we have this Treasure in earthen
Vessels, that the Excellency of the Power may be of God, and not of us.

1 Pet. 2. v. 9. -- Who has called you out of Darkness into his mavelous
Light.

Ephesians. 4. 6. One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and
in you all.

Ephesians. 5. 8. For ye were sometime Darkness, but now are ye Light in the Lord,
walk as Children of Light.

1 John 1. v. 7. If we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we have
Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses
us from all Sin.

Romans 1. 19. Because that which may be known of God, is manifest in them; for
God has showed it unto them.

Heb. 4. 12. For the Word of God is quick, and powerful; and sharper than any
two-edged Sword, piercing, even to the dividing assunder of Soul and Spirit, --
and is a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart.

Isa. 57. 15. For thus says the high and lofty One, that inhabiteth Eternity,
whose Name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy Place, with him also that is
of a contrite and humble Spirit; to revive the Spirit of the humble, and to
revive the Heart of the contrite ones. v. 16. For I will not contend for ever,
neither will I be always wrath: For the Spirit should fail before me, and the
Souls which I have made.

Prove. 20. 27. The Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord: Searching all the
inward Parts of the Belly.

Job. 3^. 8. But there is a Spirit in Man: and the Inspiration of the Almighty:
gives them Understanding.

Of Christ's Manifestation in Men.
John 1. V. 4. In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men.

8. v. 12. Then spoke Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the Light of the
World, he that follows me, shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the
Light of Life.

14. v. 16. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. v. 17. Even the Spirit of
Truth, whom the World cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows
him: But ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in you.

23. Jesus -- said -- If a Man love me, he will keep my words; and my Father
will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.

Rev. 3. v. 20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any Man hear my
Voice, and open the door, I will come into him, and will sup with him, and he
with me.

Luke 2. v. 30. For mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation. v. 31. Which thou have
prepared before the face of all People. v. 32. A Light to lighten the Gentiles,
and the Glory of thy People Israel.

1 Pet. 1. v. 11. Searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ,
which was in them did signify. --

Col. 1. v. 12. Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be
partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. v. 13. Who has delivered
us from the Power of Darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his
dear Son. 26. Even the mystery which has been hid from Ages, and from
Generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints. v. 27. To whom God would
make known what is the Riches of the Glory of this Mystery among the Gentiles,
which is Christ in you the Hope of Glory.

2 Cor. 13. v. 3. Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me -- v. 5.
Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith -- know ye not -- that Jesus
Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates.

Romans 8. v. 9. -- Now if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his.

Ephesians. 6. v. 14. Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from
the dead, and Christ shall give thee Light.

1 Thessalonians. 5. v. 5. Ye are all the Children of Light. --

Ephesians. 4. v. 7. But unto every one of us is given Grace, according to the
measure of the Gift of Christ. v. 8. Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on
high, he led Captivity captive, and gave Gifts unto Men. v. 9. Now that he
ascended what is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of
the Earth. v. 10. He that descended, is the same also that ascended up far
above all Heavens, that he might fill all things, 12. For the perfecting of the
Saints. -- v. 13. Till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the
Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the Measure of the
Stature of the fullness of Christ.

1 Cor. 3. v. 11. For other Foundation can no Man lay, that that is laid, which
is Jesus Christ.

Gal. 1. v. 12. For I neither received it of Man, neither was I taught it, but
by the Revelation of Jesus Christ.

Ephesians. 3. v. 19. And to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, that
ye might be filled with all the fullness of God.

Of the Holy Spirits Manifestation in Men.
EPHESIANS. 4. v. 30. And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed
unto the day of Redemption.

1 These. 5. v. 19. Quench not the Spirit.

John 14. v. 26. But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father
will send in my Name, he shall teach you all things. --

1 John 2. v. 20. But ye have an Unction from the Holy One, and ye know all
things. v. 27. But the Anointing, which ye have received of him, abides in
you; and ye need not that any Man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches
you of all things, and is Truth, and is no Lie. --

Romans 8. v. 11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead,
dwell in you; he that raised up Christ from the dead; shall also quicken your
mortal Bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in you.

1 John 4. v. 13. Hereby know we, that we dwell in him, and he in us, because
he has given us of his Spirit.

John 7. v. 38. He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his
Belly shall flow Rivers of living Water. v. 39. But this spoke he of the
Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive. --

Acts 2. v. 4. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost and began to speak
-- as the Spirit gave them utterance. v. 17. And it shall come to pass in the
last days (says God) I will pour out of my Spirit upon all Flesh. --

Romans 8. v. 15. -- But ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry
Abba Father. v. 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirits, that
we are the Children of God.

2 Cor. 3. v. 7. But if the Ministration of Death, written and engraven in
Stones was glorious.. v. 8. How shall not the Ministration of the Spirit be
rather glorious? v. 17. Now the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of
the Lord is, there is liberty. v. 18. But we all with open face, beholding as
in a glass, the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from Glory
to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.

5. v. 5. -- God, who also has given unto us the earnest of the Spirit.

Ephesians. 5. v. 18. -- Be filled with the Spirit.

2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 13. -- Because God has from the beginning chosen you to
Salvation, Through the Sanctification of the Spirit and Belief of the Truth.

Gal. 5. v. 16. -- Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the
Flesh v. 25. If we live in the Spirit, let us walk in the Spirit.

6. v. 8. For he that sows to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption:
But he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life Everlasting.

1 Cor. 2. v. 13. Which things also we speak, not in the words which Man's
wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches. --

12. v. 3. -- No man speaking by the Spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed; and
no Man can say, that Jesus in the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. v. 4. Now there
are diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit. v. 5. And there are differrences
of Administrations, but the same Lord. v. 6. And there are diversities of
Operations but it is the same God which works all in all. v. 13. For by one
Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, -- and have been all made to drink
into one Spirit.

As the Holy Scriptures are the best Creed, which with Practical Divinity, and
Inward Light, will give us the best Sense, what the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit is to us: So the Vnfathomable Highth and Depth of that great Mystery, is
not possibly to be comprehended by Men.

Some Considerations for them that reproach the Light.
JOB 24. 13. They are of those that rebel against the Light, they know not the
Ways thereof, nor abide in the Paths thereof.

John 3. 19. This is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and
Men loved Darkness rather than Light, because their deeds were evil. v. 20. For
every one that does evil, hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, left
his deeds should be reproved. v. 21. But he that does Truth, comes to the
Light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God.

2 Cor. 4. 3. But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. v. 4.
In whom the God of this World has blinded the Minds of them which believe not,
least the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God,
should shine unto them.

John 1. 5. And the Light shines in Darkness, and the Darkness comprehended it
not.

1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God,
for they are Foolishness unto him: Neither can be know them, because they are
spiritually discerned.

John 5. v. 38. Ye have not his word abiding in you: for whom he has sent, him
ye believe not. v. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have
Eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me. v. 40. And ye will not
come to me that ye might have Life. v. 41. I receive not Honor from Men. v.
42. But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you. v. 44. How can ye
believe, which receive Honor one of another, and seek not the Honor that
comes from God only? v. 46. -- Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed
me; for he wrote of me. v. 47. But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye
believe my words?

Jude 1. v. 4. -- Ungodly Men, turning the Grace of our God into
lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. v.
10. But these speak evil of those things which they know not. -- v. 11. Woe
unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the
error of Balaam, for reward. -- v. 16. These are -- complainers -- having Men's
Persons in admiration, because of advantage. v. 18. -- There should be mockers
in the last time. -- v. 19. These be they who separate themselves, sensual,
having not the Spirit.

2 Pet. 3. v. 3. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days,
Sooffers. -- v. 4. And saying, where is the promise of his coming? For since
the Fathers fell asleep; all things continue as they were from the beginning of
the Creation.

John Bellers.

FINIS.

