David and Saul: OR, His Majesty's CASE, AND His ENEMIES: PREACHED On the
Occasion of the ASSOCIATION.

By T. B. a Country Minister of the Church of England.

Psalm. 89. 22. The Enemy shall not exact upon him, nor the son of wickedness
afflict him.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and Sold by John Clark at the Bible and Crown
in the Old Change. 1696.

PSALM. 9. 16. The Lord is known by the Judgment which he executes, the wicked
is snared in the work of his own hand, Higgaion Selah.
THis Psalm contains matter both of Prayer and Praise: What might be the
Occasion of the composing of this Psalm, is not so clearly manifest. In
general, it appears that it was some great Deliverance, that he, and the Church
of God with him, had received; though from whom, and in what, is not particularly
expressed. However it were, his mouth is full of Praises, and the Fall of his
Enemies is that which ministered both Occasion and Matter for those Praises. And
this Text contains the ground from whence he gathers Matter of Thanksgiving to
God: In which Note,

1. The Persons described, who were his Enemies, viz. The wicked. It is very
probable that they might be Saul, and his officious Ministers of his sin, that
are here described, as diverse passages in the Psalm intimate.

2. The Condition they were fallen into, viz. They were snared in the work of
their own hand, and that which was designed against him fell upon them. It was
once advised, that he should be sent against the Philistines, that their hand
might be against him, 1 Samuel 18. 21.
and he might fall by their hand, whose hand Saul felt the weight of, when he
fell by them in Mount Gilboa. chapter 31. 8.


3. The Honor that redounded to God hereby, that he was made known to be a
righteous and a just God; and that though men carry on their Designs in disguise,
and in the dark, yet God openly manifests himself to be righteous.

4. The Cause of God's manifestation of his Justice, viz. The wicked Work they
had in design to execute. Had their Work been good, it had not snared them; had
it been righteous, it had not armed Justice against them; but being wicked, it
set the Holiness and Justice of God on work, to bring their violent dealing on
their own Heads.

Hence Note,

Prop.
That when wicked Men's works bring Judgments upon themselves, then is God
manifested to be a God of Justice, and gives cause of Praise to his People.

Taking it for granted that it was Saul, and his Instruments of evil, whose
Works and Reward are here mentioned, and in whose ruinous Fall God glorified
his Justice, I shall enquire, (1.) What were those evil Works they committed,
and which brought on Judgment. (2.) What colorable Pretenses they had for the
perpetrating such flagitious acts. (3.) How God manifested his Justice in their
Discovery and Punishment. (4.) What ground of Praise this is to the People of
God.

I. Let us enquire what are those wicked works which bring Judgment on the
Acters of them. And here we may possibly find something that matcheth our
present case.
1. The subverting and ruining Religion was one: A Crime so evidently
practiced, that not the All-seeing God only, but all the World might behold it.
God at the Institution of Monarchy, took care to secure Religion, and therefore
enjoins, That the Deuteronomy. 17 18, 19.
King should write himself a Copy of the Law, and meditate therein, that he
might remember to fear the Lord his God. It being imposible to imagine, that
God should delegate a power to any Man against himself, or give leave that
those who were his chief Trustees in the World should contemn him and his
Institutions: But we find that all this went for nothing in those days, but as
for Religion, it was either neglected, or profaned, or almost ruined.
Neglected it was sufficiently, when neither King, Courtiers, nor People so much
as enquired at the Ark, 1 Chronicles. 13. 3.
during that Reign, nor minded so much as to bring it to the Tabernacle at
Shiloh, but it must remain in the House of Abinadab, for them to enquire at
that 1 Samuel 7. 1.
had a mind to it: None sacrificed now before it, nor any waited on the Worship
of him whom it represented, and whose Name it bore; and herein Religion was
much abated. But had this been all, it had been but little, but worse follows,
Religion is also Profaned, and that in an high an enormous manner: As we hear
nothing of sacrificing on the Altar before the Ark, so we find an Invasion of
the Priests Office, and a Sacrifice offered by one of another Tribe; and this
without any Commission, or (for ought appears) any Altar; No, not so much as
one of whole stone, which was allowable in necessity; for Saul himself will
take that Office upon him, To offer a burnt-offering; 1 Samuel 13. 9.
and as great a Profanation as it was, he can justify it too, that He was
forced to it. But Ver. 12.
as one sin hardens a Man to the Commission of another, so we find in his rage
he will venture farther. Samuel had begun to settle the Priests in their 1
Chro. 9. 22.
set Office, which David after confirmed: Now the Priests being by Divine
Direction and Appointment fixed in their Office, they might not descend to
inferior Services, though about the Tabernacle. The Gibeonites having
forfeited their Liberty by their fraud, were given to the Priests, To be hewers
of wood, and drawers of water, for the use of the Tabernacle, that the
Sacrifices might be washed and offered, and that the Priests might wash
themselves and offer: But Saul will make a blow at Religion, and slay the
Gibeonites, and so necessitate 2 Samuel 21. 1, 2.
the Priests and Levites to break the Order that God had newly placed them in,
and do that Drudgery themselves, or else the Worship of God must stand
neglected. But still there is worse behind, a most desperate Act he will
commit, and murder a whole City of Priests at once, upon the single Evidence of
a Godless Informer: Doeg's Word must be taken, being Evidence for the King, 1 Samuel 22. 17, 18, 19.
against all the City of Nob, and the honest and just defense of the accused
must stand for nothing; yea, and rather then fail, he will empower a wretched
Edomite to butcher them; this was highly wicked; but when it was done, Nob and
its Suburbs might serve for a seminary of others, fitter for his turn. Now when
all this was done against Religion, and so fatal a blow given it, what wonder
if God's Jealousy waxed hot against him.

2. Profaneness and Irreligion was countenanced to the uttermost: It does not
appear that there were any who took care of maintaining true Religion, but
whosoever would might do in that as he listed. As for Profaneness, what it was,
and how great, may be collected by this, that the best were least esteemed, and
the worst most set by: Therefore if Honest and Religious Jonathan shall but
open his Mouth in the behalf of innocent David, presently he must bear reviling
Language for it, and have a javelin let fly at him, to kill him. As for 1 Samuel
20. 30, 33.
consulting any of God's own Prophets, little care was taken to consult them,
that he might be directed by them from the Mouth of God. If one come to him on
a Message from God, to send him on a Journey against his Enemies, His voice
must 1 Samuel 15. 18, 19.
not be obeyed: But if an Informing Company set him agog against his best
Subjects, He blesses them for it. And thus God stands neglected, his Enemies
Chapter 23. 19, 20. 21.
spared, his Servants hunted from post to pillar, and feretted out of all
lurking Places, in order to their utter ruin: No Crime is so great as theirs,
who get Esteem for their Fidelity to their God and Country, in vexing, routing
and slaying the Philistines; for though the Land fare the better for it, and
the People are secured, and Property more quietly enjoyed; yea, God's Honor
advanced in the destruction of Idolaters; yea, it vexes Saul at the heart,
that all this should be done by the hands of honest Men, and thereby a Value
for the honest Patriots of their Country increased: Doubtless the success
against the Lords Enemies, by the hands of those whose Hearts were right
toward God, would in time beget an high value for Religion, and set it above
the Disadvantages that the Neglect of it and Debauchery had brought it under.
This enrages Hell it self, and sets Satan to work to tempt Saul to suppress
them, least his Interest thereby do decline, and he be a Loser: To secure
therefore his Interest, he sets him on to neglect the Prophets of God, and also
to enquire at his Familiars, and so directly to adore and consult him, and he
succeeds 1 Samuel 28. 14.
accordingly. And this, added to the rest of his wicked and irreligious Life
and Practice, is so hainously provoking, that he dies for it. 1 Chronicles 10. 13.


3. The destroying of all just Property was another great and heinous sin that
was committed: The very Notion of Tribute implies Property, or else it could
not be paid; for those that pay it must have something to call their own, or
else they could not pay it, nor be supposed capable of paying it. Certainly in
the first peopling of the World, God gave the Earth and its Products to the
Children of Men: And however peaceable the first Planters were in making the
Division, and however contented they were with a competent portion, yet even
then the first possession created a Title, and it was gross Injury to any to be
an Incroacher upon his Neighbor. But in the possession of Canaan, the
Divisiion was made by Divine Direction, and the Lot determining the possession
of each Tribe, and the several Families must be supposed to come by their
portions and shares the same way: Therefore when God instituted Monarchy, he
set bounds to it, that The King should not greatly multiply silver and gold to
himself, Deuteronomy. 17. 17.
as his own peculiar part, by taking it arbitrarily from the people; and so
every Man's own was secured to him, the King having his Due of Tribute and
Custom, and the People theirs. But in Readiness Reign this was invaded, and what
the People had he would make his own at Will and Pleasure, Taking the best of
their fields, and of their Vineyards, etc. 1 Samuel 8. 14, 15.
and this was by him so ordinarily practiced, that he uses this as an Argument
to persuade his Followers to stedfastness, because if they should cleave to
David, his Reign would be so just, As that he would not give them other Men's
fields and vineyards, and 1 Samuel 22. 7.
make them Commanders as he did. It seems, it was not enough for him to take
what he would to himself, but to give away what was another to his Flatterers
and Informers, that were over obsequious to his boundless Inclinations: But how
much this profitted him, appears by this, that he whose illimited, insatiate
appetite, gaped for all, was quickly rejected, and lost all.

4. The enslaving of Men was another provoking sin: God that challenged the
Israelites to be his Servants, and therefore rescued them from being Pharaoh's
Slaves, was not willing to have them afterward Bondmen to any: So that if an
Hebrew, or an Hebrewess, had sold themselves to any, (through Poverty) they
were to serve but to the Sabbatical Year, and then to be set at liberty, and to
be liberally furnished also with all necessaries, that they might Deuteronomy. 15. 14.
set up for themselves upon a probable Fund, the product of which might
maintain them, so as not again to be Slaves. And for this reason, when the Jews
had made their Servants free, but compelled them again to be Servants, after
they were manumitted, God takes it so hainously, that he punishes their
Masters, By proclaiming liberty to them, to the Jer. 34. 17.
sword, to the famine, and to the pestilence, and to be slain by all the
Nations of the Earth. And so tender a point was this, that even Solomon when he
builded the Temple, would make none of the Israelites do any part of the
drudgery about it as Captives; but they 1 Kings 9. 22.
were employed in the more generous and liberal part of that work: So that
liberty, and a right to Life, Limb and Freedom, was not to be infringed by any
arbitrary pretense whatsoever. All this Saul was far from, and he would take
whom he pleased to be his Slaves and Drudges in his Business; even their Young
Men to ear his Ground, and dress his vineyards, and their Daughters to be Cooks
and Confectionaries, 1 Samuel 8. 11, 12, 13.
etc. and this it seems was familiar with him: But what this cost him, is
evident, he had made others slaves to him, and he makes himself a slave to his
own Passions; and when all failed, would even pay Homage to the Infernal
Spirit, for a little dreadful News of the Event of the Battle he was to fight,
and in which he was slain. This was the Reward of Tyranny.

5. Lastly, The laying snares for the Life of the Innocent, and shedding blood
without remorse or pity, is another very heinous sin that will bring on
Judgment: No man but has a right to life and limb, unless upon the breach of
some Law he forfeit them; therefore to mutilate, or execute with Death any man
unconvicted of the breach of the Law, is Cruelty and Tyranny. But this was
Readiness practice, David must be slain in an humor, when his melancholy Devil
instigates him, who in a lucid Interval is owned to have done nothing worthy of
Death, but in his Humors he must be Assassinated 1 Samuel 19. 11.
by Ruffians, without Trial or Conviction; Nay, even Jonathan, as near as he
was to him, and as upright and innocent as he was, must in a rage be slain for
speaking the truth, and sheltering an Innocent, whose Blood was hunted after:
No matter for a fair Trial, but give Sentence without proof or conviction,
execute first, and then try afterward. It must needs be a doleful case in any
state, when the best and honestest must hold their Lives at the Courtesy of
greedy Informers, who can swear thorough stitch, and are sure to be heard; but
if any for the accused produce any good Evidence to invalidate their Testimony,
they shall presently be secured for Subornation. Thus Saul could destroy a
whole Township upon a Foreign Slave's Testimony, who doubtless would have
severely handled any that should have attempted to invalidate his Testimony.
Thus of the sin that brought the Judgments.

II. Let us now enquire what might be the Pretenses that were used, and under
color of which they were drawn to proceed in their Wickedness.
1. A Claim to Arbitrary Power and absolute Prerogative, was one main pretense
to support this wickedness: There was this plausible Apology for their
notorious Crimes, that the People had chosen a King without Limitation, and
that there was no other tie, but that he come in, and go out before them, and
fight their battles: On these terms they presume to do what they list, and though
for a while Saul give a deference to Samuel, yet at last he shakes him off, and
rules at his own pleasure. Being thus broke loose from all Restraints and
Limitations on the Peoples part, and having no one who having been a Judge, and
neither dead nor deposed by God, might still arbitrate betwixt him and the
People, he runs a full career into all Excesses, and Innocence was now the
weakest shelter that might be. Indeed Flatterers of Princes, and Men of
Debauched and Irreligious, or Superstitious Consciences, will ring in their
Ears the Power they are invested with, to spur them on to be Tools to their
Profit or Revenge, that when Innocents fall they may gain by it.

2. Another pretense was, That the People were so tied to subjection and
obedience, as that on no pretense whatsoever they might withdraw it, or
deliberate about what was enjoined; but with all readiness submit to what was
enjoined, and obey all Precepts whatsoever, without reserve: And for this
unnatural Maxim there was this Color, that at the first erecting of the
Monarchy there was an absolute surrender of all to Will and Pleasure. However
this pretense carried it, both Prince and People should so mind God's
Institution, and have remembered, that when he instituted Monarchy, he reserved
Liberty as well as Religion and Property, and would not have the King so lifted
up in heart Deuteronomy. 17. 20.
by his Power, as to forget that the people were his brethren. And however Saul
and the Israelites might overlook this, yet when Liberty and Property were
surrendered, and no care taken for Religion by the People, God refuses to
stand to that Agreement, because, says he, They have rejected me, that I 1 Samuel 8. 7.
should not reign over them. Certainly there was a stipulation intended by God
for the security of these things, and if the People blindly gave them away, or
the Prince ambitiously and arbitarily assumed them, the People gave, and the
Prince took more than was by God allowed to either. God never so far gave away
his right to rule, as that Life, Liberty, Estate and Religion, should be held
at the Pleasure and Courtesy of any Monarch: Nay, rather his Aim was at
Public Good and Safety, that the Prince should with all tender justice carry
them as a Nursing Father does his sucking Numb. 11. 12.
Child in his bosom: But this being wholly neglected, God takes notice of it,
and rewards it. Thus of the false Pretenses, which drew on their wicked Works,
and under color of which they acted them.

III. Let us now see how God manifests his Justice, in the Discovery and
Punishment of these nefarious Crimes. The Methods are these:
1. God leaves them to themselves: They had some general Assistance and
Support, 'till Wickedness grew to that monstrous height, that Patience could
bear no longer: But when once they prided it in their wretchedness, and thought
forbearance to be an Approbation of their Wickedness, then he leaves them, and
is pleased no more providentially to concur with their Enterprises. If Nahash
invade and besiege Jubesh-gilead, he shall have so much help as to gain an
Honorable Victory, especially when he follows the Conduct and Advice of
Samuel, and Acts in conjunction with him: If the Philistines invade, and muster
all their Forces in the Valley of Elah, and referr the matter to single
Combatants to be decided, the Victory shall fall to him, whilst one that
relieth on the God of Israel is his Champion: But when Samuel is grieved and
alienated, and his Life sought for David's sake, 1 Samuel 19. 20.
but preserved by extraordinary providence; and David is hunted about, and good
Jonathan reviled and hated, then things prosper no longer: He has now cast off
God, and God leaves him to himself, nor will any more raise up any
extraordinary Prophet to direct and instruct him; he may at his peril try the
skill of his Wizards, Genethliacks, Astrologers, yet shall not their Schemes or
Specters boad him any thing that is good, but he must fall into that sore
Distress, as to tell the Infernal Spirit, That God has forsaken him, and
answers him 1 Samuel 28. 15.
no more: And this was an high expression of Divine Justice.

2. God shows his Justice in the frustration of their Purposes and Designs:
Great things were designed to be done, David must be assassinated, or if he
escape that, he shall never arrive at the Throne, and sit there in quiet and at
rest: It must be buzzed into the Ears of all the credulous and easy vulgar,
that he is but the King's Son-in-law, and has but a cracked Title to the
Throne, and this must be Argument good enough to engage all willing Desperadoes
to attempt his ruin. And to make them the more ready to comply with this
Design, a plausible Argument might have been fetched from the charge, that the
reparation of Religion, and the Defense of it, would amount to. If the Ark
remained where it was, and the Altar and Tabernacle were left still at Shiloh,
the matter would do well enough, these were the essentials of the Old Religion,
and might suffice well enough to Salvation; but if a Temple must be prepared
for it, it would cost many Millions, and the Land would pay dear for their New
Religion: A frightful Argument this would seem to them that loved Money more
than God or their Souls; but this shall not be successful. As to the Person of
David, such Arguments shall not prevail, the People shall own him, and obey
him, because Promotion comes not from the east, nor Psalm. 75. 6, 7.
from the west, nor from the south, but God pulls down one, and sets up
another. Nor shall it hinder the Reformation of Religion, for the People will
fetch up the Ark with joy, and fix it in a lawful Tabernacle, till a Temple can
be builded.

3. God shows his Justice in discovering their wickedness, and laying it open
before the Sun, that the horror of it may convince and deter all. While sins
are carried on in the dark, and disguises are found to cover them, Men sin
securely, and conclude, that because the World does not see, God will not. But
when their sins are discovered, and the hainousness of them laid before the
World, to their shame, then they find, That there is a God that judges Psalm.
58. 11.
in the earth: They may plot against the righteous, and gnash on them with
their teeth, but God shall laugh Psalm. 37. 12, 13.
at them, as foreseeing that their day is coming. Little thought Saul to hear
of his sparing idolatrous and persecuting Amalek by a Witches Familiar, but he
has it told him with a vengeance, and Satan could tell him too, that as little
as he thought of it, God would set David on the Throne, and establish him in
it. This was heavy Tidings, and the sense of God's being departed from him, and
refusing to answer him, and the reproach of Hell it self for his former
Enormities, strike him at the Heart, and he falls into a fainting swoon out of
mere anguish.

4. The Justice of God is seen, in being an Enemy to Wicked Workers, and
fighting against them: It is not to be expected that God should be an Enemy to
their Enemies, and an Adversary to their Adversaries, who forsake his
Commandments, and practice the contrary. Would Men have him on their side, they
must be steadfast on his; For God is 2 Chronicles. 15. 2.
with us whilst we are with him, but if we forsake him, he will cast us off for
ever: Whilst Saul acts by Samuel's Direction, matters go pretty well with him,
but when he stands upon his own Legs, he reels and totters, his Spirit is in
an hurry, betwixt anger and fear, and he is tossed with his own misgiving
Imaginations; no honorable Exploit adorns his Government, but all goes on
quite contrary, and at last he disgracefully falls upon his own Sword out of
mere Despair. Behold now the Anguish he is in! He has no Anchor-hold, nor any
Expectation of the favor of God, but a sad Indication of the contrary; the
sound of a shaking leaf terrifieth him, and though his Army on Gilboa are Men
resolved to fight, yet Many of them deserting, and going 1 Chro. 12. 20.
to David; and the rest having God against them, his Heart fails him, and a
detestable Amalekite, whose country he had partly spared, does him the last
desired Office, to let out his despairing Soul out of his dying Body. And thus
God manifested himself to be a God of Justice, and that so eminently that all
might see it. Perhaps some Pretenders to Religion may blind their own Eyes, and
when God's hand is lifted up will not see, Isa. 26. 10.
but God may so far convince them, as to make them see, and be ashamed for
their envy against his people, whom he delivers by their fall, whatever others
will do is no great matter, all good Men are bound to take Notice of his
Dealings, and to adore him accordingly. And this brings me to the last thing to
be enquired into.

IV. Let us now see, how God by his Justice on wicked Men, gives cause of
Praise to his faithful Servants. Now this is manifest these Ways,
1. By God's executing Justice on wicked Men, and by the return of their
Wickedness upon their own Heads, makes way for the peace and security of his
people, which is matter of Admiration and Praise. Upon the fall of Saul we hear
no more of the encouraging of Informers, nor any under an hazard for their
adherence to God and his Ways: There is now all possible Encouragement given to
those that will cleave to God, and none have any cause to complain of
Grievances for Religion's sake; only they who were Idolaters, or Apostates,
find small Encouragement; but as for them, if they will complain, because they
are straightened in their Desires, and fail of their Wishes, of having Idolatry
promoted, let them grumble on: If God will rescue his from the Iron Hands of
Persecutors, they have cause of Praise and Thansgiving to him. When
Constantinus Chlorus reigned, and gave ease to the Christians in this our
Nation, who lately suffered the most horrid torments under Dioclesian, how do
the delivered Christians rejoice, That they were not thought Criminals for
Religion, and that their Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 12.
Churches were not defaced, nor they themselves persecuted: But when his Son
Constantine the Great reigned, and slew both Maxentius and Licinius, then they
triumphed and rejoiced greatly; and that which administered cause of Joy, was,
that they were at liberty, Religion in safety, and that God had glorified his
Justice on the most bloody Persecutors.

2. It is matter of Joy, That now a way is made for the propagation of
Religion, and the further spreading of it in the world. When David was arrived
at the Throne, he had indeed many Foreign Enemies, and very bloody but
victorious Wars, but this made many become Proselytes to the Jews, and some
Foreign Potentates became his Confederates. And certainly those that did so,
did it not out of fear of his Conquering Arms, or to prevent being the next
Morsel to his Ambition, but to confederate with him as the Captain of God's
peculiar People: And that this is highly probable, Hiram's granting so much
Cedar, and so many Work men to the building of the Temple, because he was ever
a lover of David, is a clear demonstration. And others also were not wanting to
send him great Presents, which he dedicated toward 2 Samuel 10. 11.
the building of the Temple: So that Religion spread further and further, and
David's Government was an Enlargement to it. When Constantine the Great had
conquered the Pagan Emperors, then the Kingdoms of the Earth became the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ: Then was the Church farther
propagated, and Christianity was the Religion of the Empire; and though Satan
by Divisions, Ambition and Heresies, did much hinder its Purity and Progress,
yet it got above all, and spread farther still, 'till it had eaten out the
heart of Paganism it self. I cannot say what will be for the future, but that
the fall of wicked Men, and the Peace of Protestants, may be the Conviction of
its blind Adversaries, and the occasion of re-establishing the persecuted
Reformed Churches abroad, is my hearty and earnest Prayer.

And now I have dispatched these four Enquiries, what remains for me to do, but
to apply this to our present Occasion; which I shall do thus,

1. This requires us to give God the Glory of his Mercy to us: Of his Mercy, I
say, who has preserved our Dear and Dread Sovereign from Impending Mischief;
who has preserved our Religion, which was instituted by himelf, preserved by
his miraculous handiwork, confirmed by the Blood of Martyrs, conserved by the
stedfastness of its hearty followers, and beloved of all that fear God: Who
has kept us from being Slaves to the worst of Masters, and set us in a state
of Liberty, under the security of our own Laws: Who has kept us still (as for
many Ages we have been) an independent Kingdom, in which we are in bondage to
none, but may sit under our Vines and Figtrees in safety, under the Protection
of our own righteous Laws and Sovereign: Who has prevented our anxious care
for Posterity, and our fears, lest they should be enthralled by idolatrous and
cruel Lords: In a word, who has so far manifested himself to be our God, as
that all the World must needs own, That underneath are the everlasting Deuteronomy.
33. 27.
arms; though the Enemy has pushed sore at us, yet has he not prevailed; so
that we may say, The Lord of Psalm. 46. 7.
Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge.

2. Let us give Glory to God, who has so eminently discovered and brought to
light the hidden things of darkness, and has (as we hope and pray) brought the
wickedness of the wicked to an end: That the Wheel is turned upon our
Adversaries, and that the Mischief designed is fallen upon their own Heads.
Were it barely to triumph over the miserable, I would forbear what I have here
just cause to enlarge upon: But least they should seem innocent, because but
gently handled, and least silence in this case give them occasion to think
themselves in the right; and least the artificial Speech of one of the
Criminals (whither his own, or the composure of a Party, let the concerned
answer) should ensnare the compassionate or weak Mind of any, I will venture
beyond my first intention, to say something farther; God's Justice being
essential to him, and deserving our Observation and Praise for the
manifestation of it, has most eminently showed it self at this time, and in
this affair, of which there are these visible Footsteps.

1. In punishing The most unnatural Conspiracy that could be: Had this
succeeded, we had been an Aceldama, but by the prevention of it we enjoy all we
have. It was always held the highest Act of Perfidy, to betray whole Kingdoms,
and those who were Enemies to their Native Country were held the worst of
Monsters. That Foreigners should gape for our Good Land, and wish to partake
of its abundance, is no wonder; but that Natives, who have been nursed and bred
in it, and have been protected by its Laws, and preserved by its Arms and
Valor, should for an Humor betray it, is abhorred of all, even the most
barbarous. God has blessed Men that would show themselves valiant for their
Country; for even Joab, who was none of the best Men, yet playing the man 2 Samuel 10. 12.
for his People, and the Cities of his God, was blessed with an entire Victory.
But so hateful a sin is theirs, who would expose their Native Country to
slaughter or slavery, that God always curses it, and in his Justice exposes
such to be a public Victim to his Anger, that the whole may be preserved.

2. Their wickedness designed against Men's Souls, is highly detested and
punished: Had their Project succeeded, many Souls must have been exposed to the
Danger of Damnation. For, as for the Adult, they would have been put to the
Trial, whether they would have revolted to Idolatry or not; and for Infants,
and tender young ones, they must have been bred up in Ignorance and Idolatry,
without the true Knowledge of God: And if any had made a demurr for a time,
they would quickly have been cudgelled out of their Lives, or into Conformity:
The profane and loose Protestants (who own a Religion, whose Principles are
powerful enough to reform them) should have been exposed to Temptations too
strong for their Ability to resist, and meeting with a Religion which would
promise them Heaven, and a Life of Sin too, would soon have yielded; and thus a
Door must have been opened to let in the Devil, to try what his Rage or
Subtilty could do, and fair leave given him by these Men to take what Souls he
could catch, and themselves too, rather than fail of their Project: And all
this must be done on the score and pretense of Loyalty, as if Loyalty to Man
(when yet there was none) superseeded Duty to God, and gave leave to, yea,
consecrated a Devotion to Hell it self. Certainly a power to damn Souls, or to
expose them to Damnation, is frightful, and yet such would these Men, on the
pretense of their false Loyalty, set up, in defiance to God, and their
Allegiance to him: But Justice could not bear this, and therefore pity to the
endangered has secured them, and the wicked have drunk the Dreggs of the Cup
they mingled. I add,

3. Let us in Thankfulness to God unite together with Heart and Hand to serve
him, and to preserve the Nation and Government, and our selves from their
Attempts for the future. I am not ignorant what plausible Pretenses are on foot
at this day, to hinder our Union: But for you, (my Beloved Auditors) you know
that I have not been wanting on all fit Occasions, to confirm you against those
That think to withstand the Kingdom of the Lord, in the hands of the Sons of
David: 2 Chro 13 8.
That I shall not say any thing now on that account, nor do I need it: Only
because our present Union and Association is of so important consequence, and
because, if we should not unite, we give the Enemy the most desired Advantages;
and because some have Doubts cast in their way to stumble them, and others are
stunned with the Noise of a Victorious Monarch to terrify them, I will here
answer their Objections:

1. It is said, that the Allegiance sworn to the Late King is still Obligatory,
and so we cannot lawfully Associate: To this it may be truly said, that the
Design of that Oath was to assert an Independency in this Kingdom on any
Foreign Power, Civil or Ecclesiastical, and to abjure Popery in its
Foundation, viz. The Supremacy of the Pope, both which our Association designs
and intends; and so the end of imposing that Oath at the first is answered in
what we do now; and for the Person to whom it is said we made it, if the Oath
be personal, we all know that he discharged it, and would not have it imposed
for Popery's sake, and so disclaimed his own right in it: He subverted a
Fundamental Article of our Settlement in discharging it, and we prosecute the
greatest and best ends of it in what we do now. Nor can we by that Oath be
obliged to admit the late King again, who refused to rule us himself, but stepped
over to France to fetch Fetters thence, to enslave us to the boundless Tyranny
of that Monstrous Prince.

2. Others stumble at the term Revenge, used in this our Association: Upon what
reason they do it, whether out of mere Scruple of Conscience, or else to evade
the performance of what is there under our Hands stipulated, they must answer.
Certainly that term here used, neither means the usurping the Magistrate's
Power, nor the personal Revenge of malicious Men; but only that as Subjects of
the Government, and as Citizens of the Commonwealth, we will to our power do
all we can, to bring to Punishment all those Malefactors that shall labor to
destroy our present Settlement. We must expound that term from the occasion of
using it, viz. The greatest of Treasons, and worst of Conspiracies that was
ever plotted against this Government and Nation; and then we shall be easily
able to see, that this imports no more, than that we will lend our Hands to the
Magistrate, to suppress Traitors and Invaders, this being the way to deterr
them from attempting the like for the future; and all this the Law of God,
Nature, and the Nation binds us to, whether we Associate or not.

I will now add something to enforce our Union, and so conclude.

I say then, That none can stand bound in Conscience to any Prince, to comply
with a Religion contrary to the Bible; nor will any personal Oath bind us to
him who disclaims the very Oath it self, and by dispensing with it discharges
it. None is in Conscience engaged to enthrall his Country, or surrender it to
Foreign, Cruel Lords; none is obliged to enslave Posterity, and deliver them
up to perpetual Bondage, and for our uniting for common preservation and
sustaining our present Government, it is no more than what at this time is
highly necessary. The Example of the best Men in Scripture-times may well be
followed: And we read that though Saul was alive, and David but his Son-in-law,
yet because Saul had destroyed Religion, Liberty and Property, many thousands
associated and went to David; some when he was at Ziklag, a year at least
before Readiness Death; 1 Chronicles 12. 1. v. 8.
some when he was in the strong-hold in the Wilderness; and some when he
returned from Achish, before the Battle on Gilboa, as he was going to Ziklag;
v. 20.
and as they fell to him, so they associated with him against all his Enemies;
for thus they say, Thine are we, David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse;
peace, v. 18.
peace be unto thee, and peace be to thy Helpers, for thy God helps thee: And
if this were warrantable in them, our Circumstances will make it not only not
culpable, but necessary.

FINIS.

