THE SUMMARY OF WISDOM,

By Edward Benlowes Esquire

Love not the World, neither the things that are in the World; if any Man love
the World, the love of the FATHER is not in him: For all that is in the World,
the Lust of the Eyes, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life, is not of
the FATHER, but is of the World; and the World passes away, and the Lust
thereof. But He that does the Will of God abides for ever. 1 John 2. 15, 16,
17. IN DOMINO CONFIDO
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON,

Printed for Humphry Mosely, and are to be sold at the Princes Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1657.

THE SUMMARY OF WISDOM,
By the Author of THEOPHILA.
Love not the World, neither the Things that are in the World; if any man love
the World, the Love of the FATHER is not in him, etc. 1 John 2. 15, 16, 17.
1
WOrldlings we court not, envy not, nor fear;
May Friends to Virtue lend their Ear:
While Sinners split on shelves, Saints to
Heavens Harbor steer.
2
Earthlings! What Is Heap of Wealth?
What Is Honors Height?
What Is Pleasures May? can toys so slight
Bless Heav'n-descended Souls with Life's eternal Light?
3
Riches from most men, swift as Eagles, fly;
Honors on popular breath rely;
Pleasure's a flash; -- And All combind, but Vanity.
4
Why dot'st thou, WORLD, on these? we will not stay:
Iuggler, We know thy tempting Way;
Which is, by Charms to mock our Sense, and then betray.
5
Art toils to serve thee; Sables yield their Skins;
The Silkworm for thy Wardrobe spinnes;
The Rock with Jemmes, the Sea with Pearls, embosse thy Sins*
6
To bribe thy Palate, Lust draynes Earth, Air, Seas;
Whence Finny, Winged, hoof'd Droves must please
The Glutton, made thereby a Spittle of each Disease.
7
False World, Asps poison equals not thy Gall,
Imbittering Souls to Hell. Thus all
Thy Darlings thou delud'st with thy enchanting Call.
8
I wonder not unbridled fools run on;
Since all their Heaven's on earth alone;
Which, though thou seem to give, as soon as given, 't is gone.
9
Kiss, and betray, then Nero's Rage out-dare;
He, whom thou hugg'st, should most beware:
I shall un-mask thy Guiles, and thy fond Gulls un-snare.
10
Thy Smile is but a trap, thy frown a bubble,
Thy Praise a squib, thy beauty stubble;
Who know thee best, have found a Theater of Trouble:
11
Where Men and Devils meet; and Sense, compact
With Fraud, gild every vicious fact:
Where we must Evil hear, or suffer it, or act.
12
Thy Friends are thieves of Time; The chat they vent
(Light Airs please toyish ears*) is spent
On trash, which Minds seduce with cheating blandishment.
13
Thy gifted Sythemen have Religion mown,
Which, in their Meeting-barnes, is grown
From Best to All (like Corinths Schism) from All, to none.
14
Thy Shop vents brayded Ware of apish fashion;
Thy Gauds ( Wealth, Sport, Pride) breed Vexation;
Like Hoboyes, on Earths Stage, often ushering in -- Damnation.
15
Ah, while, like Larks, fools with vain feathers play,
Pleased with Sins glass, are snatched away,
In midst of their Excess, to Hells tormenting Bay!
16
World, thou soul-wracking Ocean! Flatteries blow
Thee up, thou blue with Spite do grow,
Brinish with Lust, like the Red Sea, with Blood do flow.
17
And, like the Basilisks prodigious eyes,
Thy first sight kills, but thy self dies
First seen: Quick-sighted Faith thy Darts prevents, and spies.
18
Had been less cruel, thou had been less kind;
Thy Gall, proved Medicine, heales my Mind:
Thus Hell may help to Heaven, the Fiend a Soul befriend.
19
The age-bow'd Earth groans under Sinners weight!
Justice, oppressed, to Heaven takes flight,
Vengeance her place supplies, which with keen Edge will smite.
20
False World! is Hell the Legacy to thy Friend?
Crawl with thy trifles to the Fiend:
We scorn thy Pack. -- thIs year May bVrnIng CLose thy enD*
For All that is in the World, The Lust of the Eyes, is not of the FATHER, but
is of the World, etc.
21.
MIdas, to the Bar; thou void of Grace, yet stored
With Gold, thy minted God, a dor'd:
Thou, and thine Idol, perish in thy wretched Hord.
22
Thy heart is locked up in thy shrined Chinck:
O, heavy Gold, bred near Hells brink!
Misgotten Elf, thou Heav'n-designed Souls do sink!
23
Whose Gain is Godliness, -- The Scripture he
Perverts: -- Days him with Interest fee,
Who Incest still commits with his Coins Progeny.
24
Thou have too much, yet still thou whin'st for more;
Thou, wishing, want; art, wanting, poor:
Thou would even plunder Hell for Cash to cramme thy Store.
25
While gripes of Famine mutiny within,
And tan, like hides, the shrivel'd skin
Of those thou have decoyed into thy tangling Ginne.
26
Whose skin, sear as the bark of saplesse wood,
Clings to their bones, for want of food;
Friendlesse, as are Sea Monsters thrown ashore by the Flood.
27
Though Fasts be all their Physic, their Corpse all
Their Earth, who for thy Pity call,
Yet art thou harder to them than their bed, the stall.
28
Penurious Churl, When shall I (says thine Heir)
Ransack thy Chests? so ease thy Care:
Purchase, instead of Ground, a Grave! -- Dye, Wretch, to spare!
29
Has treacherous Coin swelled by thy Curse? -- Live still
Lay-Elder: Soon thy Crimes fulfill:
The heaviest Curse on this side Hell's to thrive in Ill.
30
How cursed Love of Money does bewitch
The leprous Mind with pleasing Itch!
This Slave to his own Servant, never was poor, till rich!
31
Graves may be sooner cloyed, than craving eyes:
Bribes blanch Gehazi till he dies.
Thou, Fool, Death shall this night thy Dunghill Soul surprise.
32
Nor would this. City-Wolf lead Men to Snares,
Nor vex his Mind with carking Cares,
Viewed he himself in the Mirror which Despair prepares.
33
So wastefull, Usurer, as thy self, there is none;
Who part'st with three true Jemmes, for one
Brittle as glass; -- thy Fame, Rest, Soul for ever gone!
34
Who Nettles sow, shall Prickles reap; the train
To Hell is idolized Gain:
Unless thou Fiends can bribe, thou go to endless Pain!
35
His hide-bound-Conscience opens now. -- I Have run
On rocks (he howles) too late to shun!
Grace left, Wrath seized me! Gold, my God, has me undone!
36
Often to Hell in Dreams I headlong fall!
From Devils then I seem to crawl,
While Furies round about with whips my Soul appall!
37
Atheism our Root, for Boughs were Factions store,
Hypocrisy our Leaves gilt over,
Wrath, Treachery, and Extortion, were the Fruit we bore!
38
Like profane Esau have we sold our bliss,
For shine of Pelf, that nothing is!
This desperates our Rage, we still blaspheme at This!
39
Thus cursed Gripers restless Tortures feel,
Whose hearts seemed rocks, whose bowels steel.
I burn, (cries Dives) for one drop, denied, I kneel!
40
Fire each where broils me, Fire as black as Night!
Goblins mine Eyes, Ears Shrieks affright!
Sins Debt still paying; nere discharged, is Infinite!
For all that is in the World, The Lust of the Flesh, is not of the FATHER, but
is of World, etc.
41
Strew Flowers for Spend-thrift; Antemasks he might
Act before Apes, Spectators right:
Whose Dops, Shrugs, Puppet-playes, show best by Candlelight.
42
Hot shows the Season by his dusty head;
With fancied ribbands round bespread;
Modish, and maddish, all untrust, as going to bed.
43
Ho! First brisk Wine, next let a sparkling Dame
Fire our high Blood, then quench our Flame!
Blessed is the Son, whose Father's gone in the Devils Name.
44
Each pottle breeds a Ruby, Drawer, score 'um:
Cheeks died in Claret, seem of the Quorum,
When our Nose-Carbuncles, like Link-boyes, blaze before 'um.
45
Complete thy funetall-Pyle; should thou mark well
How down the Drunkards throat to Hell
Death smoothly glides; to swim so sadly would thee quell!
46
Spawns of Excess, Dropsies and Surfets are;
From Tenants Sweat's thy Bill of Fare:
Each Glutton digs with his teeth his Grave, whose Maw's his Care.
47
He Is sick, and staggers. Doctor, his Case state us;
His Cachexie results from Flatus
Hypochondrunkicus, ex Crapula Creatus.
48
Scarce Well, he swills what should the Needy store;
And grindes between his teeth the Poor,
Who beg dry crumnies, which they with Tears would moisten over.
49
He a sharp Reckoning shall, with Dives, pay;
Whose Feasts did hasten 'his Audit-day;
Death brought the Voider, and the Devil took away!
50
Enter his Courtesan, who fannes his Fire;
Her prattling Eyes teach loose Desire:
Fondlings to catch this art-fair Fly, like Trouts, aspire.
51
With Paint, false hair, and naked Breasts She jetts,
And Patches, (Lusts new Lime-twigs) sets;
Like Tickets on the Door, Her self (for Gold) She lets.
52
Her Basilisk-like Glances taint the Air
Of Virgin-Modesty, and snare
His tangling Thoughts in trammels of her ambush hair.
53
With her profusely he mispends his days
In Balls, and Dances, Treatments, Plays;
And in his Bosom this close-biting-Serpent lays.
54
Death, after Sickness, seize this Hellen must;
Whose radiant Eyes, now Orbs of Lust,
Shall sink, as falling Stars, which, jelly'd, turn to dust.
55
How wildly shows corrupted Natures Face,
Till decked by Reason, Learning, Grace?
Without which Politure the Noblest Stem is base!
56
Fools rifle out Times Lottery: Who mispend
The Souls rich Joys, alive descend,
And antedate with stings their never-ending End!
57
Thy Acts out-sin the Devil; Who Is never soyl'd
With Gluttony or Lust, never foiled
By Drink; nor in the Net of Slothfulness entoyl'd.
58
Therefore in Time beware; let not Sin-charms
Bewitch thee, till Wrath cries to Arms.
Sins first Face smiles, her second frowns, her third Alarms.
59
How blind mad Sinners are when they transgress!
All Woes are, than such Blindness, less!
That Wretch most wretched is who sleights his Wretchedness!
60
When Death shall quench thy Flames, and Fiends thee seize,
In brimstone-Torrents, without Ease,
Thou Wilt broyl midst blackest Fires, and roar midst burning Seas!
For all that is in the World, The Pride of Life, is not of the FATHER, but is
of the World; and the World passes away, and the Lusts thereof, etc.
61
USher Aspiro in with his Loomes of State,
To weave Frauds Web, and his own Fate;
Who, mounted up, throws down the steps him raised of late,
62
His posture is ambiguous, his Pace
Is stately high, who thinks it Grace,
If he casts forth a word, and deigns but half a face:
63
Nor minds he what he speaks; For by false Light,
Like to his Faith, he thrives; Whose Sight,
Clouded with Jealousy, can never judge aright.
64
By dubious Answers he is wont to guess
At Men's Dislikes; and fears no less
Feigned Quips, than just Reproofs: Fear haunts him in each Dress.
65
Ambition prompts to Precipices steep,
Which Envy gets, and Hate does keep;
His daily thoughts of climing break his nightly Sleep.
66
Could he with his foot spurn Empires into Air,
And sit in the Universal Chair
Of State; Were Pageants made for him, as the Worlds Mayor;
67
Those fond Disguisements could not long him fence,
But Crosses still would vex his Sense,
And leave him blessed but in the Preterperfect Tense.
68
Even That at which Prides towering Project flies,
If gained obliquely, sinks, and dies:
Earths Potentates! great Aims, Plots, Fears makes Tragedies*
69
Achitophel and Absalon prove This,
(Who of their Plots, not Plagues did miss)
To Matchiavels: That Ill worst to the Plotter is.
70
Pompey and Caesar so ambitious grow,
A Battle must be fought to show
Which of those Cocks of the Game over Rome at last should crow*
71
The World, as Great -- Cham, Turk, Mogul up-cryes,
Tuscans Great Duke, (all, no great prize)
Great Alexander: -- The Nine Worthy -- Ironies.
72
Even Scepters reel like reeds: Who had no Bound,
Is bounded in six foot of ground;
Here lies the Great -- Thou lie, here but his dust is found.
73
Who lately swelled to be his Lordships slave,
May trample now upon his grave,
That levells All. Best Lectures dust-seel'd Pulpits have.
74
Where Is now the Assyrian Lion? Persian Bear?
Greek Leopard? Romes spread-Eagle where?
Where now famed Troy, that did in old Time domineer?
75
Troy's gone, yet Simois stays. See Fates strange Play!
That which was fixed, is fled away;
And what was ever sliding, that does only stay!
76
Therefore, why gap'st thou thus for Shadows? who
Neglected lets the Substance go,
Led by false hope, he makes sad End in endless Woe!
77
The Mighty mighty Torments shall endure,
If impious: Hell admits no Cure:
Ambition's never safe, though often too secure.
78
If Pride on Wing could reach the Stars; yet shall,
Like Lucifer, its Carkase fall:
Pride mounted Babels Tower, and arched Satan's Hall.
79
In Center of the terrible Abyss,
Remotest from Supernall Bliss,
That hapless, hopeless, easelesse, endless Dungeon is!
80
Where Naught is heard, but Yelling! O, that I
Might once more live! or once more dye!
Cursing his Woes, he wooes GODS Curse Eternally!
But He that does the Will of GOD, abides for ever.
Lord, Teach us so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto
Wisdom. 81
LUst brings forth Sin; Sin Shame; Shame-cryes, Repent;
Repentance weeps; Tears Prayer do vent;
Prayer brings down Grace; Grace Faith; Faith Love; Love zeal up sent.
82
Who fears GOD, is, without Despondence, sad;
Timorous, without Despair; and glad,
Without wild freaks: Whereas the World's Knave, Fool, or Mad.
83
Part should the World what are in Man combined;
The Body melts to be refined;
Grace cheeres the Suffering, Glory crowns the conquering Mind.
84
Nor Chance, Change, Fraud, nor Force, the Just Man fright,
In greatest Pressures He stands right;
Ever the same, (While Sloth feels Want, Ambition Spite.)
85
From costly Bills of greedy Empyricks free;
From Plea of Ambidexters Fee;
From hypocritick Schism of Kirkish Tyranny.
86
He with Observance honors Virtues Friends;
And to their faithful Counsel bends;
But not on empty forms of Worldly gauds depends.
87
In praising GOD, above the Stars He climes;
And pitying Courts, with all their Crimes,
And Fawns, and Frowns, dares to be good in Worst of Times.
88
Joy, Little World, spite of the Greater, blessed;
Scanted abroad, within do feast,
Have CHRIST Himself for Cates, The Holy GHOST for Guest.
89
Thou walk'st in Groves of Myrrh, with CHRIST thy Guide,
(The best of Friends that e're was tried)
By Thee in Vale of Tears spiritual Joy's descried.
90
Knew but the World what glorious Joys still move
In Faiths bright Orb, 't would soar above
All Sense, and center in the Point of Heavenly Love!
91
O, Loves highest Height! Thou art the Wise man's Bliss!
TO enjoy Thee's Heaven, Hell Thee to miss!
The Earth, yea, Heaven has its Beatitude from This!
92
No Christian Kings win by each others Loss;
What One gets by Retail, in Gross
All lose; While still the Crescent gains upon the Cross.
93
As Children fight for toys; So Kings for clods:
Heavens Heir's more great, and rich by ods:
For All is His, and He is CHRIST'S, and CHRIST is GODS.
94
No Bank on Earth such Sums of Wealth can lend,
As Saints, who on Heavens Grace depend;
GODS Word their Law, His SPIRIT their Guide, The LAMB their Friend.
95
But, what is vain Man? what his earth-crawling Race?
That GOD should such a shadow grace,
And him Eternally in GLORIES Region place?
96
No Surfets Maw-worm's there, no itch of Lust,
No Tympany of Pride, no rust
Of Envy, no Wraths spleen, nor Obdurations crust.
97
But, there, though Bliss exceeds, It never cloyes;
For, sweet Fruitions Feast employes
Still new Desire; Where none can count his least of Joys!
98
The Soul there (throwing off her rags of clay,
Laid in Earths Wardrobe, till last Day)
Ever triumphs in every Beatifick Ray.
99
There, each Saint does an endless Kingdom own!
There each King has a starry Crown!
Each Scepter there of re-powers the Worlds, and Devils frown!
100
None blessed, but He who finds the JUDGE his Friend,
When the last Trump shall Summons send!
The End does crown, the Work, may JESUS crown
The END*
SUMMA SAPIENTIAE,
per Authorem THEOPHILAE.
Nolite diligere MUNDUM, neque ea quae sunt in MUNDO; si quis dilexerit MUNDUM,
Amor PATRIS non est in eo, etc. Johan. 2. 15, 16, 17.
1
AMbitionis, and Invidiae, and Formidinis expers,
Respuo Mundicolas; Faveant Virtutis Alumni:
Coelestis Statio His, aestu sorbente scelestos.
2
Terrigenae! quid acervus Opum? quid culmen Honorum?
Flora Voluptatum? possuntne rependere Menti
Coeligenae Vitam, quae sunt peritura, perennem?
3
Pluribus aufugiunt Gazae pernicibus alis;
Est Honor incerti demulcens aura Popelli;
Luxuriesque vapor; -- Complexim cunctaque vana.
4
Munde, quid haec fugiriva colis? Star, nolle morari:
Novimus, Impostor, quod es insidiosus Amicis;
Circaeo faciles illudis Carmine Sensus.
5
Ars tibi subservire studet; tibi Russica molles
Exuvias Mustela parat; tibi Serica Bombyx;
Gemmis Petra, Salum Baccis tua Crimina ditant*
6
Fert lautas tibi Luxus Opes Terrae, Aeris, Undae;
Unde Tuis properant Pinnae, Pennaeque, Feraeque;
Ex quibus innumeros sibi procreat Helluo Morbos.
7
Aspidis ira tuum non aequat, Munde, Venenum:
Inde venenatas protrudis ad Infera Mentes,
Praestigiis damnans Cultores, Leno, Gehennae.
8
Non fatuos laxis excurrere miror habenis;
In Mundo solum tuus expetit assecla Coelum;
Quod dare, Munde, licet videaris, ut unda recedit.
9
Oscula fige dolosa, Nerone neronior ipso;
Quo magis arrides, magis hinc sibi quisque caveret:
Denudabo Dolos, solvamque e compede plexos.
10
Perfidiosus Amor tuus est; tua, bullula, bilis,
Laus ignis fatuus, tua forma fugacior Euro;
Te been qui norunt miserum sensere Theatrum:
11
Demon ubi consors Homini; Sensusque, doloso
Ore, dat injustis injusta Encomia factis:
Hic audire, pative, Malumve patrare, necesse.
12
Sunt Socii fures pretiosi Temporis; istud
(Vana placent. Vanis) quodcunque loquendo refundunt,
Flectit ad* Illecebras sancto de Tramite Mentes.
13
Praetextu Lucis, Pessundant Sacra Profani;
Optima quae fuerant, Conventibus Omnia fiunt;
Omnia Nil Pariunt, nisi Schismata, (More Corinthi.)
14
Quisquilias, Animae pretio, proponis emendas;
Provenit ex Opibus, Ioculis, and Honoribus Angor;
Saepe Gehennali Praeludia splendida Busto!
15
Heu! dum Vanipetae Plumis, ut Alauda, jocantur,
Dumque favent Scelerum Speculis, -- in Criminis actu,
Horrida Tartareae raptantur ad Agmina Flammae!
16
Perdanimum tu, Munde, Fretum! turgescis in altum
Obsequio, palles Livore, Libidine falsus,
Sanguine profuso, Rubium velut Aequor, inundas.
17
Prodigiosa refers Basilisci* Lumina, primo
Destruis intuitu, visus prior, ipse necaris:
Teque, Tuumque Fides praevertit Acumine virus.
18
Si minus immittis, mitis minus inde fuisses;
Menti, fell tuo, Panacea probata paratur:
Itur ad Astra, per Orcum; Animae sic Dis fit Amicus.
19
Pondere Peccantum Tellus gibbosa gemiscit:
Astraea ad superum, violata, revertit Olympum;
Sera, at certa, Reos Vindicta severa prehendet.
20
An Styga, Munde, Tuis tua Testamenta resignant?
I tricis, Delire, tuis ad Daemona; Totum
Te dedignamur: -- sit ConfLagratIo MVnDI.
Nam Omnia quae sunt in Mundo, Libido Oculorum, non est ex PATRE, sed ex Mundo,
etc.
21
MIda, tend Manum; tibi Gratia rara, sed Auri
Satque, superque; tuum Nummum, quasi Numen adoras:
Tu, Numenque tuum Nummi pereatis in Area.
22
Aestuat angustae cor opertum in carcere Cistae:
Proli, Auri grave Pondus, Humi prope Viscera nati!
Coelipetas premis (heu!) male-partum, ad Tartara Mentes!
23
Cui Lucrum Pietas; -- Sanctae Sacra cuncta prophanat
Scripturae: -- Usuram Lux quaeque rependit Avaro,
Progeniem proprii postquam incesta verit Auri.
24
Inter Opes es inops, congesto es egenus in Auro;
Sic, cupiendo, cares; fulvumque, carendo, Metallum
Eripe res ipso, quo fias ditior, Orco.
25
Ilia dum stringunt Inopum Jejunia, tortum
Ut corium, rugosa Cutis flaccescit Eorum,
Subdola quos plexa illexisti in retia Fraud.
26
Est macilenta quibus pellis, velut arida cortex,
Deficiente cibo, vix ossibus haeret; Amicis
Destituuntur, Aquis ut nudae in Littora Phocae.
27
Pharmaca sint tenui licet His Jejunia victu,
Nilque habeant Terrae, nisi Corpora; Durior Illis
Es, quam, *ubi decumbunt, sunt dura cubilia Saxi.
28
Sordide, quando tuas (Haeres ita muslitat)* Arcas
Evacuabo? fores minus anxius inde; Sit ipsi
Pro Cumulo Tumulus! Moriendo, Miserrime, parcas!
29
Perfida MEROSIAE si auxere Stipendia DIRAE, Judge. 5. 23.

Vive, rapax Senior^; -- Subito tua Crimina, comple:
Prospera queis Peccata, quid infaelicius illis?
30
Auri sacra Fames, quali Incantamine Mentem
Fascinat! inducens placida Prurigine Lepram;
Servo Verna suo, crescente fit indigus Aere.
31
Ingluviem forsan possis satiare Sepulchri,
Haud Oculi; Morbo periit Gehasius isto:
Haec Nox est Animam, Stulte, ablatura lutosam!
32
Civicus iste Lupus Laqueos nec tenderet ullis,
Nec Curis esset, Mentem torquentibus, amens,
Cernere si posset quod Desperatio tendit.
33
Te, Danista furens, non est profusior ullus;
Qui perdis triplicem vitreo pro Munere Gemmam:
Te bona Fama, Quies, Anima and pretiosa relinquunt!
34
Qui serit Urticas, metet aspera. Numen Avari
Ignifluos Erebi ad Rivos deducit; adibis
Aeternas, mollire nequis si Daemona, Poenas!
35
Conscius ipse Mali, fremit. Ah, Miser (inquit) ad istos
Allisus pereo Scopulos! me Gratia liquit!
Me Furor invasit! Me cultum prodidit Aurum!
36
Tartara sunt media mihi saepe oblata Quiet!
Inde sugam videor moliri a Dite tremendo,
Undique dum Furiae tacito Tortore flagellant!
37
Pro Radice Atheismus erat; pro centupla Ramis
Factio; pro varia Simulatio Fronde; Furores,
Raptus, and Insidiae nostra pro Fruge fuerunt!
38
Iusensati, and Opum illecti fulgore, profanus
Sicut Esau, superam post terga reliquimus AULAM;
Hinc Rabies desperate, abhinc Blasphemia frendet!
39
Sic execrandi stimulis cruciantur Avari;
Quorum visa Petrae sunt Pectora, Viscera ferrum;
Uror, ait Dives, tamen unica gutta negatur!
40
Ignis adurit ubique, nigredine nigrior Ignis!
Spectra Oculo! Asp'ra Auri! semper sua Debita Poenis
Solvet, at exsolvet nunquam quae Debita Culpis!
Nam Omnia quae sunt in Mundo, Libido Carnis non est ex PATRE, sed ex Mundo,
etc.
41
INtrat Asotus ovans; Vario strue Flore Theatrum;
Simia quaeque aptus Spectator Cercopitheco est:
Sic Caput, and Collum, sic Crura, and Brachia torquet.
42
Pulvere conspersus, Lux est aestiva, Capillos;
Ornant, imo onerant curtas Redimicula Braccas;
Est, ac si Cubitum iturus, Thorace recincto.
43
Affer (ait) Vinum, scintillantemque Puellam,
Ut quam, Bacche, creas, extinguat Cypria Flammam!
Jupiter ascendens est retrogrado Saturno.
44
Amphora quaeque parit (signentur prome) Pyropum:
Ora Mero tinctus, ceu Purpura Iudicis, ardet,
Praemicet igniferi cum, pro Face, Pustula Nasi.
45
Conde tuam, moribunde, Pyrem: Si, Stulte, notares
Ut fluit Ebriaci cito Mors, per Gutturis Alveum,
Ad Phlegethonta natans, tam triste natare paveres!
46
Crapula prae nimio Luxu generatur, and Hydrops;
Fercula Ventricolae Sudore parantur Agrestum:
Helluo quisque fodit sibi dente vorace Sepulchrum.
47
Hunc Vertigo gravat. Dic unde Cachexia, Doctor,
I sta venit? Generatur (ait) Vertigo Cerebri
Flatu Hypochondriaco, quem Crapula crebra creavit.
48
Semivalens, Miseris quod prosit, Gutture sorbet;
Mendicique ejus sub dente teruntur; Egeno
Sicca negat, madidis quae frusta rigaret Ocellis.
49
Divitis Exemplo, Rationem reddet amaram;
Cujus Festa Necem festinavere; Canistrum
Mors tulit horrendum, mox abstulit Omnia Demon!
50
Luminibus jaculando Faces venit Aulica Siren,
Discat and ex Oculo lasciva Cupido loquaci:
Blandi hanc sollicitant, Muscam ceu Trutta venustam.
51
Picta Genas, variata Comas, nudata Papillas,
Affixae Malis Maculae (quasi Signa) notant quod
Copia sit Veneris, nisi desit Copia Solis.
52
Aspectu damnosa suo, Basiliscus ut atrox,
Virginei castos deturpat Honoris Amores,
Subdola crispato praetendens Retia Crine.
53
Cum Meretrice bonas Decoctor conterit Horas
Saltibus, and Choreis, Epulisque, Jocisque protervis;
Hancque fovet Gremio morsuram prodigus Anguem.
54
Post morbos Helenam prendent hanc Tormina Mortis;
Lumina nunc cujus radiosa, Libidinis Orbs,
In Sordes, Meteora velut, Cineresque revertent.
55
Quam rudis informi facie Natura videtur,
Donec eam Ratio, Doctrina, and Gratia forment?
Nobilis absque quibus vilescit Stemmatis Heroes!
56
Integra Vita perit Brutis: Praesentia si quis
Perpretiosa Animae disperdit Gaudia, vivus
Deperit, infanda semper stimulatus Erinni!
57
Daemona Flagitiis superant tua Facta nefandis;
Quem Gula nec faedat, lucrosa Libido nec angit,
Non Vino victus, non a Torpedine vinctus.
58
Dum licet, ergo cave; Scelerum ne Fascina Sensum
Incantent, donec Furor arripit Arma. Malorum
Prima placet Facies, fremit altera, tertia torquet.
59
O, quam sunt rabidi Peccantes Luminis Orbi!
Quaelibet Aerumnae tali sunt Nocte minores!
Nemo magis Miser est Misero haud miserante Seipsum!
60
Cum tuus effraenis sub Mortem elangueat Ardor,
Sulphuris in Stagnum raptus per Daemona, nigro
Igne perureris, Pelagoque flagrante ululabis!
Nam Omnia quae sunt in Mundo, Superbia Vitae, non est ex PATRE, sed ex Mundo;
and Mundus transit, and Libido ipsius, etc.
61
AMbitiosus adest, fallendi callidus Art,
Qua texat Fraudis telam, Fatumque sinistrum;
Dejicit ille Gradus, per quos modo scandit in Altum.
62
Se gerit ambigue, Gressusque elatior illi;
Qui satis ostensum reputat, de More, Favorem,
Vel tria, contorquens Vultum, si Verbula Spargat:
63
Verba nec illa Sinu profert; Nam Luce dolosa,
More suae fidei, lucratur; cernere recte
Non Oculus Valet Errorum caligine septus.
64
Si quis respondet dubie, putat inde cavendum
Esse sibi; and, quamvis sint ficta severa, veretur
Ac si vera: Reum Men's, undique conscia, terret.
65
Praecipiti levis Ambitio petit ardua Cursu,
Invidiam pariens, Odio comitata perenni;
Nocte Dieque tumens Requiem distorquet Erinnys.
66
Si cuncta expansum calcare per Era posset
Sceptra pede, and Mundi regeret si solus habenas,
Unicus Imperiis det ut omnia Jura subactis;
67
Non tamen Illa diu felicem reddere possent,
Undique sed Curis miser imperitantibus esset,
Seque fuisse sciat, non sentiat esse beatum.
68
Quae petit Icariis Fastus sublimior Alis,
Si male parta, ruunt subito: Quaecunque cruenta
Prodidit Ambitio sunt personata Theatris.
69
Hoc probat Achitophel, hoc degener Absalon ( Ausis
Defecere suis, Poena^s sed uterque dedere)
Matchiavelliacis: Quod Fraus pessundat Agentem.
70
Ambitione pari gliscunt in Praelia, diris
Pompeius, Caesar que Animis: Stat, nosse Duelli
Arbitrio, domitam cui Sors addixerit Urbem.
71
Magnificat Mundus Chammum, Turcamque, Magorque,
Hetruscumque Ducem (non sint licet omnia tanti)
Magnum and Alexandrnm. -- Ter Tres reor -- Ironias.
72
Sunt Sceptra, ut cannae: Cui non suffecerat Orbis,
Sarchophagus, licet angustus, comprendit. Inepte
Dicitui, Hic Magnus jacet -- Erro, quid hic nisi pulvis?
73
Dudum qui Satrapae servire tumebat ovanti;
Audet nunc imo positum calcare Sepulchro,
Quod Cunctos aequat. Documenta dat optima Marmor.
74
Dic ubi nunc Syrus est Leo? dic ubi Persicus Ursus?
Graecus ubi Leopardus abit? dispansa potentis
Romae ubi nunc Aquila est? ubi celsae Maenia Troiae?
75
Troia abiit, Simoisque manet. Legem aspice Fati!
Urbs quae fixa fuit, diffugit Mobilis; atque
Permanet in fluxu stabilis Constantia Rivi!
76
Ergo, quid assiduis inhias Conatibus Umbras?
Qui solidum amittit Corpus, spe ductus inani,
Tristia perpetuo concludit Fata Dolor!
77
Magnates, Vos magna manent Tormenta, Tyranni
Si sitis; Nulli parcit furialis Erinnys;
Saepius Ambitio secura est, tutaque nunquam.
78
Vertice si feriat pennata Superbia Stellas;
Cum Satana tamen est ruitura; Superbia struxit
Culmina Babelis, torvique Ergastula Ditis.
79
Terribilis dirae Centro stat Carcer Abyssi,
Sedibus a superis procul, ah, procul Aetheris Aula!
Quo spes nulla Boni, quo Meta nec ulla Malorum!
80
Ruget in Igne furens. O, si mihi vivere rursus
Fas soret extincto! Mortemve subire! Perennem
Execrando DEI damnatus acuminat Iram!
Sed Qui facit Voluntatem DEI, manet in Aeternum.
Domine, doce nos dies nostras ita enumerare, ut applicemus Sapientiae Corda
nostra. 81
TUrpe Libido parit; Pudor hinc; resipisce susurrat
Tunc Pudor; erumpunt Lachrymae; Precibusque revertit
Gratia; abinde Fides, and Amor, Zelusque resurgunt.
82
Qui timet OMNISCIUM, dolet absque Horrore; pavetque,
Sed non desperate; Scelerum sine turbine gaudet:
Cum Mundus Nequam, Fatuusve Furensve notetur.
83
Separet aetheream licet hic a Corpore Mentem;
Liquitur ut tantum deponat inania Corpus:
Gratia pugnantem, Vincentem Gloria cingit.
84
Non terrent Casus, Fraus, Vis, Mutatio Iustum;
Quo magis opprimitur, revirescit amoenior; Usque
Par Sibi (dum Timidusque caret, Tumidusque macrescit.)
85
Non Medicastrorum Sostris emungitur; Et non
Lucrosis Iuristae Ambagibus angitur; Et non
Presbyteri Hunc vexat, Scotos populata, Tyrannis.
86
Cultori eximios Virtutis praebet Honores;
Datque piis monitis Aurem; Sed Phasmata Mundi
Frivola contemnit, vacuis splendentia formis.
87
TRIN-UNI jubilando, corusca supervolat Astra;
Cumque suo miserans pomposa Palatia Fastu,
Astu, Aestu, esse bonus, Vitiis ringentibus, audet.
88
Munde minor, gaude, Majore fremente, beatus;
Orbus in Orb licet, Bellaria Mentis abundant,
SPIRITUS est Conviva Tibi, Convivia CHRISTUS.
89
Dirigis ad Myrrhae Lucos, Duce NUMINE, gressus;
(CHRISTUS enim Lateri fidissimus astat Achates)
Delicias Coeli Lachrymarum e Valle tueris.
90
Si sciret Mundus quae Gloria, Gaudia quanta
Arcessenda Fide, Sensum sublimibus Alis
Sperneret, immensoque DEI flagraret Amore!
91
O, Quis Amoris Honor! Felicibus unica Merces!
Te coluisse valet Coelum, caruisse Barathrum!
Hinc ornatur Humus, micat hinc Seraphinus Olympus!
92
Bellica Christiadum Discordia dira Regentum!
Uni quod Palma, est Reliquis Jactura; Per Orbem
Dum Vexilla Crucem debellant Turcica CHRISTI.
93
Pro nuce, ceu Pueri, confligunt undique Reges:
Ditior his Coeli, longeque potentior, Haeres;
Cuncta tenens, cum sit CHRISTI, CHRISTUS que DEI sit.
94
Totus, Munde, tuus Thesaurus deficit; atqui
Coelica pro solido satis est His Gratia Fulcro,
Queis Lex Jussa DEI, Dux SPIRITUS, AGNUS Amicus.
95
Sed, quid inanis Homo? terrae quid origo repentis?
Tantillae quod Tanta DEUS concederet umbrae?
Inque Beatorum suprema Sede locaret!
96
Non ibi Guttur hians, petulansve Libidinis Aestus,
Turgescens non Fastus ibi, livensve Rubigo,
Ira nec excrucians, aut Obduratio crustans.
97
Sed fluit Infinita, ut and insatiata Beatis,
Usque Potita licet, tamen usque Petita Voluptas!
Quarum quae minor est Animi transcendit Acumen!
98
Men's ibi (deposito terrenae Pondere Molis
Telluris Camera, summum expectante Tribunal,)
Iugiter Angelico suffusa Nitore triumphat.
99
Quisque ibi Sanctorum Regno sine Fine fruetur!
Quisque ibi stellato Rex est Diademate cinctus!
Quaeque ibi Sceptra premunt Mundi Satanaeque Furorem*
100
Faelix Nemo nisi cui JUDEX astat Amicus,
Buccina terribilis cum clanxerit ultima, Surge!
Meta coronat Opus, Metamque coronet JESUS!
FINIS.

