CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE.

Composed by the R. Father ROBERT BELLARMINE, of the Society of Jesus, and
CARDINAL.

Translated into better English than formerly.

device of Society of Jesus IHS



The Last Edition.

Printed for A.L. Anno Dom. 1676.

The A. B. C.
A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V U W X Y Z. A a b c d e f g h i k l m n
o p q r s s t v u w x y z. A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V V W X Y Z. a
b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t v u w x y z,
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
900 1000.

A BRIEF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE.
To be learned by heart.
Of the end of a Christian, and of the sign of the Holy Cross.
Master. A Are you a Christian?


Scholar. I am by the grace of God,


M, What mean you by a Christian?


S. Him that makes Profession of the Faith, and Law of Christ,


M, In what does the Faith of Christ chiefly consist?


S. In two principal mysteries, which are included in the sign of the Holy
Cross, that is, in the Unity and Trinity of God: and in the Incarnation and
Death of our Savior.


M, What means Unity, and Trinity of God?


S. It means, that in God there is one only Divinity, or, as we say, Essence,
and Divine Nature, which nevertheless is in three Divine Persons, that are
called Father, Sun, and Holy Ghost.


M, Wherefore, are these Divine Persons?


S. Because the Father has no beginning, nor proceeds from another Person. The
Son proceeds from the Father. And the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son.


M, Wherefore are these three Persons only one God?


S. Because they have one self Essence one self Power, one self wisdom, and one
sef-Goodness.


M. What means Incarnation, and Death of our Savior?


S. It means, that the Son of God, who is the second Person of the blessed
Trinity, became Man, and dyed upon the Cross to save us, M. How are these two
Mysteries included in the sign of the Cross?


S. Because we make the sign of the Cross by putting our righthand, first to
the head, saying, In the name of the Father; then under the breasts, saying,
and of the Son; finally to the left and right sholders saying and of the
Holy Ghost Amen.


M. How then is there showed the first Mystery of the most Blessed Trinity?


S. Because this word, In the name, signifies the Unity, the other words
signify the Trinity.


M. Show now the second.


S. The figure of the Cross does represent the death of our Savior, who after
he was made man, and had taught the way of Salvation, with Doctrine, with
Example, and with miracles, dyed upon the Holy Wood of the Cross.


A Declaration of the Creed.
M. WHich is the Rule of our Belief?


S. It is the Symbol of the Apostles, which we commonly call the Creed,


M. Say the Creed


S. 1. I believe in God, the Father-Almighty, Creator of Heaven and Earth.

2. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord.

3. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost: born of the Virgin Mary.

4. Suffered under Pontius Pilate was crucified, dead and buried.

5. Descended into Hell, the third day he rose again from the dead,

6. Ascended into Heaven, sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty.

7. from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

8. I believe in the Holy Ghost.

9. The holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.

10. Remission of sins.

11. Resurrection of the flesh.

12. Life everlasting. Amen.


M. Who made the Creed?


S. The twelve Apostles, and therefore there be twelve Articles.


M. What do these Articles contain in sum?


S. All that which principally and expressly we must believe of God and of the
Church his Spouse; because the eight first Articles pertain to God, the four
last to the Church


M. Declare the first Article.


S. I firmly believe in one only God, who is the natural Father of his only
begotten Son: and is also Father by the grace of all good Christians, who are
therefore called the Adopted Sons of God: finally, he is Father by Creation, of
all other things. And this God is Omnipotent because He can do all that he
will, and has created of nothing Heaven and Earth, with whatsoever is in them,
that is, the whole universal world.


M. Declare the second Article.


S. I believe also in JESUS CHRIST: who is the only begotten Son of God the
Father because he was begotten of the same Father Eternal, and is God Eternal,
Infinite, Omnipotent Creator and Lord of us and of all things, as he is the
Father.


M. Declare the Third.


S. I believe that Jesus Christ is not only true God, but also true Man;
because he has taken man's flesh of the immaculate Virgin Mary, by virtue of
the Holy Ghost and so was born on earth of Mother without Father, as in Heaven
he was born of Father without Mother.


M. Declare the Forth.


S. I believe, that Jesus Christ to redeem the world with his precious blood,
suffered under Pontius Pilate Governor of Jury, being scourged, crowned with
Thorns and put upon the Cross, on which he dyed; and being taken down from the
same was buried in a new Sepulcher.


M. Declare the Fifth.


S. I believe, that Jesus Christ as soon as he was dead, went with his soul to
Limbus, or the place of holy Fathers, and the third day which was the Sunday,
he rose glorious, and triumphant.


M, Declare the sixth.


S, I believe that Jesus Christ after he had forty days remained with the holy
Apostles, to prove with many apparitions his true Resurrection, mounted up to
the highest Heaven, and there sits above all the Quires of Angels, at the
right hand of the Father, that is, in glory equal to the Father, as Lord and
Governor of all Creatures.


M, Declare the seventh.


S, I believe that the same our Lord, in the end of the world shall come from
Heaven with most great power and glory, and shall judge all men, giving to
every man the reward, or punishment he has deserved.


M, Declare the eighth.


S. I believe in the Holy Ghost, who is the third Person of the most blessed
Trinity, and proceeds from the Father and the Son, and is in all and every
thing equal to the Father, and to the Son; that is, he is God, Eternal,
Infinite, Omnipotent, Creator, and Lord of all things, as the Father and the
Son.


M, Declare the ninth.


S. I believe also that there is a Church, which is the Congregation of all the
faithful Christians that are Baptized, and I do believe and confess the Faith
of Christ our Lord, and acknowledge the high Bishop of Rome for Vicar of the
same Church on Earth.


M, Why is this Church called Holy and Catholic?


S. Holy, Because it has the Head, which is Christ, Holy and for that it has
many holy members, the Faith and Law, and Sacraments holy; and it is called
Catholic, that is, Univesal.


M. What signifies the Communion of Saints?


S. It signifies the Participation of Prayers and good works that are done in
that Church; even as in a man's body, all the members are partakers of the good
of one member.


M. Declare the Tenth.


S. I believe, that in the holy Church there is true remission of sins, by
means of the holy Sacraments, Whereby men, of children of the Devil, and
condemned to death, become the Children of God, and Heirs of Paradise.


M. Declare the Eleventh,


S. I believe that in the end of the world all men shall rise, taking again the
same bodies which before they had, and this by the power of God, to whom
nothing is impossible.


M, Declare the last.


S. I believe, that for good Christians there is life everlasting, full of all
felicity, and free from all kind of evil; as contrariwise for Infidels and for
evil Christians, there is eternal death, replenished with all misery, and void
of all good.


M, What mean you by Amen?


S, I mean, so it is, or, So be it, in truth and verity.


A Declaration of the Pater Noster, and the Ave-Mary.
M. HAving spoken now of that which we must believe, let us see if you know
that, which we must hope for, and of whom we must have hope. Know ye the
Paternoster


S. I know it right well, for it was the first thing I learned, and I say it
every morning and evening, together with the Ave Mary, and with the Creed.


M, Say then the Pater Noster.


S. Our Father which art in Heaven.

1. Hollowed be thy Name.

2. Thy Kingdom come.

3. Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.

4. Give us this day our daily bread.

5. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.

6. And lead us not into Temptation.

7. But deliver us from evil Amen.


M. Who made this Prayer?


S. Christ our Savior made it, and therefore it is the most excellent of all
others.


M, What is briefly contained in this Prayer?


S. All that we can demand, and hope for of God; for there be seven Petitions.
In the first four we demand that he give us all good: in the three following,
that he deliver us from all evil. And concerning that which is good, we first
demand the glory of God. Secondly, our Greatest Good. Thirdly, Grace to obtain
it. Fourthly the means to get, and keep the said grace Touching that which is
evil, we demand that he deliver us from evil past.

Secondly from evils to come.

Thirdly, from evils present, and so from all evils.


M. Declare these words that go before the first Petition, that is, Our Father
which art in Heaven.


S. This is a little Preface, in which is given the reason, why we should have
courage to speak unto so our request. We say then, that God is our Father by
Creation and Adoption, and therefore as Children we have recoutse to Him and we
add, that he is in Heaven as Lord of the Univetsal world. And for this we know,
that he can grant our petitions, if it so please him, as we do hope he will,
seeing he is our Father


M. Declare the First Petition.


S. In the First Petition, we demand that God be known by all the world, and
his holy name be honored, and glorified by all, as is fitting.


M. Declare the second.


S. we demand in the second, that the Kingdom which he has promised us, come
speedily, that is to say, that, the battles which we have with the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh being ended, we may arrive to everlasting felicity, where
we shall reign with God, without any impediment.


M. Delare the third,


S. We demand in the third, the grace of God, with which we may perfectly obey
his holy Commandments, as the Angels always obey him in heaven. Because the
ladder to mount us up into Heaven, is obedience to his Commandments.


M. Declare the Fourth,


S. We demand in the fourth our daily bread, as well spiritual, that is the
word of God, and the Sacraments; as corporal, that is, Sustenance and Apparel:
for the word of God delivered to us by Preachers, and read by us in spiritual
Books, and the holy Sacraments) chiefly of confession and Communion) are most
efficatious means on their part (that is, if we our selves be not in fault) to
obtain and conserve the grace of God, of which we have spoken in the former
Petition. Sustenance and Apparel is necessary for us to maintain this life in
the service of God.


M. Declare the fifth.


S. We demand in the fifth, that God deliver us from evils past, that is, from
sins already committed, and of the pains which for them we have incurred. And
we add, As we forgive our debtors their debts, that is, as we pardon the
offenses of our enemies: for that it is not a reasonable thing, that God
forgive us our sins, which are most great offenses, if we will not pardon
injuries done unto us, which are offenses of small importance.


M. Declare the sixth.


S. We demand in the sixth, that God will deliver us from temptations, which
are evils to come, by not permitting us to be tempted, and giving us grace that
we be not overcome.


M. Declare the seventh.


S. We demand in the seventh, that God will deliver us from evils present, that
is from all affliction and misery, and from all vain prosperity, and temporal
advancement if he see that it be hurtful to our salvation.


M, Say now the Ave Mary.


S. Hail Mary full of grace, our Lord is with thee, blessed art thou amongst
Women; and blessed is the fruit of thy womb Jesus, Holy Mary, Mother of God,
pray for us sinners, now and in the hour of our death, Amen.


M. By whom were these words spoken?


S. Partly by the Archangel Gabriel, partly by S. Elizabeth, and partly by the
holy Church,


M. To what end do you say the Ave-Mary, after the Paternoster.


S. To the end, that by the intercession of the most B. Virgin, I may more
easily obtain that which I beg of God, because she is the Advocate of sinners,
full of mercy, and is seated in Heaven above all the Quires of Angels, and most
acceptable to God.


M. Have you no recourse also to other Saints?


S. Yea, to all the Saints, and in particular to the Saint of my name, and my
Angel-Guardian.


Of the Commandments of God.
M. LEt us come now to that, which we must do, To love God and our Neighbor.
Say you then the ten Commandments.


S. I am thy Lord thy God, 1 Thou shall have none other Gods before me 2. Thou
shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. 3. Remember that thou keep
holy the Saboath day. 4. Honor thy Father and Mother. 5. Thou shall not
Murder. 6. Thou shall not commit adultery. 7. Thou shall not steal. 8. Thou
shall not bear false witness, 9. Thou shall not desire thy Neighbor's Wife.
10. Thon shall not covet thy Neighbors Goods?



M. Who has given these Commandments,


S. God himself in the old Law, and afterward Christ our Lord has confirmed
them in the New.


M. What do these Commandments coutain, in brief?


S. All that which we must do, oo love God and our Neighbor. Because the first
three Commandments teach us how we ought to behave our selves toward God with
heart, with mouth, and with works. The other seven do learn us to do good to
our neighbor, and not hurt him in person, in his honor, in his goods, neither
in deeds nor in words, nor in thought. And so the end of all the Commandments
is the Commandment of Charity, which does command us to love God above all
things, and our Neighbors as our selves.


M. Declare the first Commandment.


S. In the beginning, God does admonish us that he is our true and supreme
Lord, and therefore we are obliged to obey him with all diligence. Next, he
commands us, that we must not acknowledge any other for God: wherein the
Infidels do sin, who do worship Creatures instead of the Creator: also Witches
and Inchanters, who worship the Devil for their God.


M. Declare the second Commandment,


S. The second Commandment forbids Blasphemies, which are most grievous
sins: false, or unnecessary Oaths: breaking vows: and all other dishonor that
is done to God with words.


M. Declare the third.


S. The third commands the keeping of Sunday, and other Feasts holy which
consists in abstaining from servile works, in considering the benefits of God,
visiting the Churches, praying, reading spiritual Books, hearing Divine
Service, and Sermons, and doing such other spiritual and holy works.


M. Declare the fourth.


S. The fourth ordains, that we honor our Father and Mother, not only with
reverence of words, or uncovering our head to them; But also with helping, and
succouring them in their necessities. And that which we say of Father or
Mother, we ought also to observe toward other our neighbors, although there
be not so great obligation as to Father and Mother, who have given us our Being
and brought us up with great pains.


M. Declare the fifth.


S. In the Fifth is commanded, that we kill no body unjustly, nor do them harm
in their Persons; I say unjustly, because Judges who condemn malefactors to
death, and Ministers of Justice, who put them to death, as also Solders in a
just War, do not sin whilst they wound and kill.


M. Declare the sixth.


S. The sixth, commands that we commit not Adultery, that is, sin with the wife
of another man: and it is also understood, that we commit not Fornication, nor
any other carnal sin.


M. Declare the seventh.


S. The seventh commands, that no man take away the goods of others secretly;
which is called Robbery, nor commit any deceit in selling, buying, and like
contracts; and finally, do no harm to his neighbor in his Goods.


M. Declare the eighth.


S. In the eighth is forbidden false witness, murmuring, detracting,
flattering, lying, and all other hurt, which is done to our Neighbor with the
Tongue.


M. Declare the two last.


S. God commanded in the two last Precepts, that none desire the wife or goods
of others, because he that sees our hearts, will have us holy and clean, not
only outwardly but also inwardly, so that we may be entirely and truly just.


Of the Commandments of the Church, and of Councils.
M. ADd to the Commandments. Of God, those few which the Church has added.


S. The Commandments of the holy Church are six.

1. To hear Mass upon the Sundays, and Holy Days of commandment.

2. To Fast Lent, Vigils commanded, and Ember-days, and not to eat Flesh on
Fridays or Saturdays.

3. To confess our sins at the least once a year.

4. To receive the B. Sacrament at the least at Easter.

^, To pay Tithes.

6, Not to celebrate Marriage in time forbidden, that is, from the first Sunday
of Advent, until Twelf-day, and from the first day of Lent till Low-Sunday
inclusive.


M, Besides the Commandments, which we are all bound to keep, be there any
Councels of perfection?


S, There be three Counsels by our Savior Christ, given to those that desire
to attain to perfection.


M, Which be these Counsels?


S, Voluntary Poverty perpetual Chastity, and obedience in every thing that is
not sin.


Of the Sacraments.
M, WE have already treated of that which we must believe, hope for, and do; it
remains that we speak of the Holy Sacraments, by means whereof we obtain the
grace of God.


M. Say therefore, how many Sacraments be there?


S. There be seven, [viz.] 1. Baptism, 2. Confirmation, 3 Eucharist, 4.
Penance, 5. Extreme Unction, 6. Order, 7. Matrimony


M. Who ordained them?


S. Christ Jesus our Lord.


M. What effect does Baptism work?


S. It makes a man become the Child of God, and Heir of Paradise: it blotteth
out all Sins, and fills the Soul with Grace, and spiritual gifts.


M, What effect does Confirmation work?


S. It fortifyeth a man that he be not afraid to confess the Faith of Christ
our Lord; and so it ma leth us become the Soldiers of our Savior.


M. What effect makes the Eucharist?


S. It nourishes Charity, which is the life of the Soul, and does daily
increase it more. And therefore it is given under the form of Bread though
truly it be not Bread, but the true body of our Lord: as likewise that which is
in the Chalice, is not Wine, albeit it seem Wine; but is the true blood of the
same Christ our Lord, under the form of Wine.


M. What effect works Penance?


S. It forgiveth sins committed after Baptism, and brings again to the
frienship of God, him who through sin was become his enemy


M. What must we do to receive this Sacrament?


S. We must first have sorrow for our own sins, with purpose never more to
commit them, Then we must confess them all to a Priest, approved by Superiors:
and finally we must do the penance that is enjoined by the Priest.


M, What effect does Extreme Unction work?


S, It blotteth out the relics of sin; gives joy and strength to the soul, to
fight against the Devil in the last hour; and also helps to recover bodily
health, if it be so expedient for the salvation of the soul.


M. What effect works the Sacrament of Order?


S. It gives Virtue and Grace to Priests, and other Ministers of the Church to
be able to do well their Duties.


M, What effect has the Sacrament of Matrimony?


S. It gives Virtue and Grace to those that be lawfully joined together, to
live in Matrimony with peace and charity, and to beget and bring up their
Children in the holy fear of God, to the end they may have joy in this life,
and glory in the other.


Of the Theological and Cardinal Virtues.
M. WE have now ended the four Principal parts of the Christian Doctrine, which
be the Creed, the Pater Noster, the Commandments, and the Sacraments. I will
now, that we talk of Virtues and Vices, and of some other things which do help
us much to live conformably to the will of God, Tell me therefore, How many
Principal Virtues be there?


S, There be seven: three Theological, and four Cardinal;


M, Which be the Theological?


S, Faith, Hope, and Charity,


M, Wherefore be they called Theological?


S, Because this word Theological signifies a thing that regards, or
appertains to God,


M, How does Faith then appertain to God


S. Because it makes us believe all that which God has revealed to his Holy
Church.


M. How does hope pertain to God?


S. Because it makes us put our trust in God, and hope for eternal life of him,
by means of our merits which yet do proceed from his grace.


M. Why does Charity pertain to God?


S. Because it makes us love God above all things, and our Neighbor as our
selves for the love of God.


M. Why are they called Cardinal?


S. Because they are Principal, and as it were the Fountains of all good works.


M. Which be the Cardinal Virtues?


S. Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance.


M. Declare unto me the office of these Virtues.


S. Prudence makes us considerat and wary in every thing, to the end we our
selves be not deceived, nor deceive others Justice makes us render to others,
that which is theirs. Temperance makes us bridle our inordinare desires.
Fortitude causes that we fear not any danger, nor even death it self for Gods
service.


Of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost.
M. HOw many are the Gifts of the Holy Ghost?


S. They be seven, 1. Wisdom. 2. Understanding. 3. Counsel, 4. Fortitude. 5.
Knowledge. 6. Piety. 7 Fear of God.


M. Whereto do these gifts serve?


S. They serve for the help of virtue, and to make us perfect in the way of
God, because through Fear, we abstain from Sin: through Piety we are devout and
obedient to God: through Knowledge we are taught to understand the will of God:
by Fortitude, we are helped to put the same in execution: through Councils we
are admonished of the deceits of the devil: through Understanding, we are
elevated to penetrate the mysteries of Faith: through wisdom we become perfect,
ordering all our life, and all our works to the glory of God; because the wise
man does know the last end, and direct every thing there unto.


Of the works of Mercy.
M, HOw many be the Works of Mercy, of which we shall be demanded account in
particular, at the day of Judgment?


S, They be seven, 1, To give Food to the Hungry, 2, To give Drink to the
Thirsty, 3, To cloth the naked, 4, To harbor the Pilgrims, 5, To visit the
Sick, 6, To visit the Imprisoned, 7, To bury the dead,



M, These be corporal works of Mercy: Be there any spiritual?

8, There be other seven; To wit, 1, To give counsel to the doubtful, 2, To
instruct the ignorant, 3, To admonish sinners, 4, To comfort the afflicted, 5,
To pardon offenses, 6, To endure patiently those that be troublesome, 7. To
pray to God for the living, and the dead,



Of Sins,
TO come now to sins, How many sorts be there of sins

S, Two, Original and Actual, which are afterward divided into Mortal and
Venial,


M, What is Original Sin?


S, It is that in which we are all born, and we have it as it were by
Inheritance from our first Father Adam.


M, How is this sin blotted out?


S. With holy Baptism: and therefore he that dies without Baptism goes to
Limbus, and is deprived for ever of the glory of Heaven.


M. What is Mortal sin?


S, It is that which we commit against the Charity of God, or of our neighbor;
and it is called mortal, because it depriveth the Soul of her spiritual life,
which is the grace of God.


M. How is this sin forgiven?


S. By holy Baptism when a man is Baptized in age, and has committed sin
actually before: or by the Sacrament of Penance, as has been said before. And
who dies in mortal sin, goes to the everlasting pains of Hell.


M. What is venial sin?


S. It is that which is not against Charity, and deprives not the Soul of
Grace, nor sends it to the Pains of Hell: yet nevertheless it displeases God,
because it is not conformable to his will: and it diminished the fervor of
Charity, and therefore it is needful it be purged in this World, or in
purgatory, which is in the other life.


M. How many are the Capital Sins and as it were the Fountains of all others?


S. They be Seven: and to every one is opposite a contrary Virtue. Capital Sins.
Pride Covetousness Luxury Anger Gluttony Envy Sloth
Opposite Virtues.
Humility Liberality Chastity Patience Abstinence Brotherly love Diligence.



M. How many are the Sins against the Holy Ghost?


S. They be Six. 1. Despair of salvation. 2. Presumption of God's Mercy. 3. To
impugn the known Truth. 4. Envy at another man's Good. 5. Obstinacy in sin. 6.
Final Impenitence.



M. How many are the sins that cry to Heaven for vengeance?


S. They are four. 1. Wilful Murder. 2. Carnal sin against Nature. 3.
Oppression of the Poor. 4. To defraud Workmen of their Wages.



Of the four last things: and of the ROSARY.
M. HOw many are the last things of man, which the scripture so calls, and
which being well considered, make us abstain from sins?


S. Four. 1. Death. 2. Judgment. 3. Hell. 4. Heaven.


M. What exercise have you to maintain your Devotion?


S. I say the Rosary of our Lady; and do meditate the 15 Mysteries of the same,
wherein is contained the Life of our Lord Jesus Christ.


M. Which are the Fifteen Mysteries of the Rosary?


S. There are five joyful. 1. The Annuntiation of the Angel. 2. The Visitation
of S. Elizabeth. 3. The Nativity of our Lord. 4. The Presentation in the
Temple. 5. The disputing of the Child Jesus with the Doctors.


Other five are sorrowful. 1. The Prayer in the Garden. 2. The whipping at the
Pillar. 3. The crowning with Thorns. 4. The carrying of the Cross. 5. The
Crucifying and Death of our Savior.


The five last are Glorious.

1. The Resurrection of our Lord.

2. His Ascension.

3. The coming of the Holy Ghost.

4. The Assumption of our B. Lady.

5. Her Coronation and Exaltation above all the Quires of Angels.


Live, Jesus, live, and let it be My life to dye for love of thee.
THE MANNER OF Serving a Priest at MASS.
The Clerk must kneel at his left hand, and answer him as follows.
P. INtroibo ad Altar Dei.


C. Ad Deum qui laetificat juventutem meam.


P. Judica me Deus, and discern causam meam, de gente non sancta, ab homine
iniquo and doloso erue me.


C. Quia tu es Deus fortitudo mea, quare me repulisti, and quare tristis incedo
dum affliget me inimicus?


P. Emitte lucem tuam, and veritatem tuam: ipsa me deduxerunt, and adduxerunt
in montem sanctum tuum, and in Tabernacula tua.


C. Et introibo ad altar Dei, ad Deum qui laetificat juventutem meam.


P. Confitebor tibi in cythara Deus, Deus meus: Quare tristis es anima mea, and
quare conturbas me?


C. Spera in Deo, quoniam adhuc confitebor illi: salutare vultus mei, and Deus
meus.


P. Gloria Patri, and Filio, and Spiritui Sancto.


C. Sicut erat Principio, and nunc, and semper, and in saecula saeculorum. Amen.


P. Introibo ad altar Dei.


C. Ad Deum qui laetificat juventutem meam.


P. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.


C. Qui fecit Coelum and Terram.


P. Confiteor Deo etc.


C. Misereatur tui omnipotentes Deus, and dimissis Peccatis tuis, perducat te
ad vitam aeternam.


P. Amen.


C. Confiteor Deo omnipotenti, B. Mariae semper Virgini, beato Michaeli
Archangelo, beato Joanni Baptista, S. Apostolis Petro and Paulo, omnibus
Sanctis, and tibi Pater, quia peccavi nimis cogitatione, verbo and opere,
(knock your breast, and say) Mea culpa, mea culpa, mea maxima culpa, Ideo
precor B. Mariam semper Virginem, B. Michaelem Archangelum, B. Joannem
Baptistam, Sanctos Apostolos Petrum and Paulum, omnes Sanctos and te Pater
orare pro me ad Dominum Deum nostrum.


P. Misereatur vestri, etc. C. Amen.


P. Indulgentiam, absolutione, etc.


C. Amen.


P. Deus tu conversus vivificabis nos


C. Et plebs tua laetabitur in te.


P. Ostende nobis Domine misericordiam tuam.


C. Et salutare tuum da nobis.


P. Domine exaudi orationem meam.


C. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.


P. Dominus vobiscum.


C. Et cum spiritu tuo.


P. Kyrie Eleison.


C. Kyrie Eleison.


P. Kyrie Eleison.


C. Christ Eleison.


P. Christ Eleison.


C. Christ Eleison.


P. Kyrie Eleison.


C. Kyrie Eleison.


P. Kyrie Eleison.


P. Dominus vobiscum, or, Flectamus genua.


C. Et cum Spiritu tuo, or, Levate.


P. Per omnia saecula saeculorum.


C. Amen.


At the end of the Epistle, say, Deo gratias; then remove the Mas-Book, and
ever kneel or stand on the contrary side to it. P. Sequentia Sancti Evangelii,
etc. Here make the sign of the Cross, and say: C. Gloria tibi Domine.


Then make reverence at the beginning and ending of the Gospel, and at the name
of Jesus, and at the end say, C. Laus tibi Christ.


P. Dominus vobiscum.


C. Et cum Spiritu tuo.


Here the Clerk is to give Wine and Water decently, prepare Water and Towel for
the Priest, and answer. P. Orate Fratres.


C. Suscipiat Dominus hoc sacrificium de manibus tuis; ad laudem and gloriam
nominis sui, ad utilitatem quoque nostram, totiusque Ecclesiae suae sanctae.


P. Per omnia saecula saeculorum.


C. Amen.


P. Dominus vobiscum.


C. Et cum Spiritu tuo.


P. Sursum corda.


C. Hebemus ad Dominum.


P. Gratias agamus Dom. Deo nostro


C. Dignum and justum est.


When the Priest spreads his hands over the Chalice, light the Candle; kneel,
and hold up the Priests Vestment, till the Elevation be past; that done, kiss
the Vestment, and so often as you pass before the Blessed Sacrament, adore on
your knees. P. Per omnia saecula saeculorum.


C. Amen.


P. Et ne nos inducas in tentationem.


C. Sed libera nos a malo.


P. Per omnia saecula saeculorum.


C. Amen.


P. Fax Domini sit semper vobiscum.


C. Et cum Spiritu tuo.

The Clerk must take the Pax, and kneeling, give it the Priest to kiss.


P. Pax tecum.


C. Et cum Spiritu tuo.

Pausing a little, rise, give the Pax to the audience, according to every ones
dignity, then give Wine and Water to the Priest, and if there be any
Communicants, provide Towel and Wine, and say Confiteor. After they have
Received, give them Wine, remove the Book, take away the Towel, and put out the
Candle.


P. Dominus vobiscum.


C. Et cum spiritu tuo.


P. Per omnia saecula saeculorum.


C. Amen.


P. Ite misfa est, or, Benedicamus Domino.


C. Deo gratias.

Note, that in the Mass for the dead, the Friest says not, Ite missa est, but,
P. Requiescant in Pace.


C. Amen.

Remove the Book, if he leave it open, kneel, and take the Priests blessing,
arise, and say at the beginning of the Gospel, Gloria tibi Domine.

At the end say, Deo gratias.


Put out the Candles, and lay up all handsomely, And if you have leisure,
meditate a while, and say the Prayers following. A devout Prayer to our Lord
Jesus Christ, to be said both Morning and Evening.
GLory, Honor, and Praise, be to our Lord Jesus Christ: may all the world adore
thee, blessed be thy holy Name, who for us sinners vouchsafest to be born of an
humble Virgin; and blessed be thine infinite goodness, who dyedst upon the
Cross for our Redemption.

O Jesu, Son of God, and Savior of mankind, have mercy upon us, and so dispose
our lives here by thy Grace, that we may hereafter rejoice with thee for ever
in thy heavenly Kingdom,

Amen.
The entertaining of good Thoughts.
Sunday.
O Repose! O glory everlasting! What is it to enjoy you; and what to be without
you!

Monday.
The hour of Death will come, then all will be past: What would I at that time
wish to have done? Let us now do it, O my Soul, let us now do it.

Tuesday.
Ah poor Soul, thou must come to judgment all alone, thy Works, thy Words, thy
Thoughts shall be seen of the Saints and Angels of God; and all shall there be
laid open! Oh, have therefore a special care of thine own good.

Wednesday.
To burn in hell fire, for all eternity, and that with Devils! O torment
greater than all torments!

Thursday.
He that loses his Soul, loses all: he that offends God, loses his Soul! O
sin, what a loss do thou bring unto us! I detest thee from the bottom of my
heart, most detestable sin.

Friday.
O sweet Jesus, to thee I consecrate my life, my desires, my Soul, For me wast
thou nailed on the Cross. For thee will I give my life, and dedicate my self
wholly to thee.

Saturday.
O Blessed Virgin Mary, how entirely did you love your Son Jesus! O cause me to
love and serve him, and that nothing in this world may ever separate me from
his Holy Grace.

The Application or practice of the foresaid good Thoughts.
EVery day, Morning and Evening, for the space of one Ave-Mary or two, in a
most serious and affectuous manner, think upon that which is set down for every
particular day before: And renew the same good thought every hour, which may
easily be done at all times, and upon every occasion, either sitting, standing,
walking, working, etc. And all sorts of people, though never so rude, may be
made capable hereof, Viz. Children, Laborers, Servants, yea, even amidst their
employments and businesses, be they never so great or serious.

The Blessing.
THe Blessing of God Almighty, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, descend upon us,
and dwell in our hearts for ever.

An Oblation to ALMIGHTY GOD.
To be made every Morning and Evening.
O My most merciful Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
to the great glory of thy most holy name, to the honor of the most blessed
Mother the Virgin Mary: To the honor of my Angel-keeper, and of S. Michael, S.
Gabriel, S. Raphael, and the S. S. N. and N. my holy Patrons and Patronesses,
and to all the holy Saints and Blessed Spirits in Heaven, to the increase of
their joy and glory.

Here I, a most wretched and miserable sinner, prostrate, adore, and worship
thee, offering up in all humility, immortal praise and thanksgivings for all
thy Blessings; especially for that unspeakable charity, wherein thou did send
down thy only begotten Son into the Vale of Tears, for the Work of our
Redemption.

Eternal love of Heaven and Earth, I praise and magnify thy ever glorious Name
for thy Sons most holy Incarnation and Nativity, for his poverty and innocent
conversation, for heavenly Doctrine and Miracles, for his Death and Passion;
for his Resurrection and Ascension.

I yield thee all due and possible thanks for that Divine Mystery of his
precious Body and Blood in the venerable Sacrament of the Eucharist, wherewith
we are nourished, cleansed and sanctified, and our Souls made partakers of all
Heavenly Graces, and Spiritual Benedictions.

I give thee most humble and hearty thanks, that of a handful of dust, and
nothing, thou have vouchsafed first to wash me with the Laver of Baptism, in
remission of that Original corruption, contracted in my first Parents; that
after in due and convenient time, thou have brought me to the exercises and
acts of a right Faith, not ceasing daily to increase the same in me, by the
Doctrine and Instruction of the Holy Ghost.

I most humbly thank thee also, that from my cradle thou have nourished and
clothed me, supplying all things necessary for the relief and maintenance of
this my feeble body.

I evermore extol and magnify thy holy Name, that in thy great mercy thou have
hitherto spared me, wantonly rioting in manifold excesses, and patiently
expected me, till by thy Grace I might be awaked from the sleep of sin, and
reclaimed from my vanities and wicked Courses. For had thou dealt with me
according to my demerits, my Soul long ere this (oppressed with innumerable
sins) had been plunged in Perdition; yea, the yawning gulf of hell had
swallowed me quick.

In respect of all which thy mercies and blessings, I most humbly desire that
my heart may be evermore enlarged, to render thee a more ample tribute of
Praise and Thanksgiving then heretofore it has done.

O my Lord, and most indulgent Father, never leave me to my self, but let the
bridle of thy holy fear be ever in my jaws to curb and keep me within the
compass of my obedience; that I may dread nothing so much in this world, as in
the least sort to offend thee: To which end, let thy holy love so temper all
trials and temptations which befall me, that I may profit my self by them; for
thou know how frail I am of my self, and how my strength is nothing.

Moreover (most merciful Father) even by the profound humility of thy Son Jesus
Christ, I beseech thee that thou would preserve me thy Servant from all Pride
of mind, all self-love and vainglory, all obstinacy and disobedience, all
craft and dissimulation. Cast down, I beseech thee, the Spirit of gluttony and
uncleaness, the Spirit of Sloth and heaviness, the Spirit of malice and envy,
the spirit of hatred and disdain; that I may never despise any of thy
Creatures, nor prefer my self before others, but ever seem little in my own
eyes, to think the best of others, and judge the worst of my self.

Invest me (most holy Father) with the weding-garment of thy beloved Son, the
supernatural virtue of heavenly Charity, that I may love thee, my Lord GOd,
with all my heart, with all my soul, and with all my strength; that neither life
nor death, prosperity nor adversity, nor any thing else may ever separate us
from thy love Grant that all inordinate affections to the transitory things of
this world, may daily decay in me, that thou alone may be acceptable to my
soul.

O my most gracious God, give thy servant an humble, contrite, and obedient
heart, and understanding always employed in honest and pious cogitations: A
will tractable, and ever prone to do good; affections always calm and moderate;
a watchful custody of my Senses, that by those Windows no sin may enter into my
soul, a perfect government of my tongue, that no corrupt or unseemly language
may proceed from my lips, that I may never slander or speak ill of any
whomsoever; that I may not busy my self in the faults and imperfections of
others, but wholly attend to the amendment of my own.

And finally (most loving Lord) so long as I am detained in this Prison of my
body, let this be my comfort, that being free from all secular cares, I may
wholly devote my self to thy Service, and only give entertainment to thy
Heavenly Doctrine, and to the good Motions and Inspirations of thy Holy Spirit.

In these sweet exercises let me pass the solitary hours of my tedious
confinement, with Patience expecting the shutting up of my days, and a happy
end of this my miserable life.

And grant, O Redeemer of mankind, my Lord and God, that when this my Earthly
Tabernacle shall be dissolved, through contrition, and the virtue of the
Sacraments of the Holy Church, I may be reckoned in the number of those blessed
souls, who through the Merits and Passion of thy dear Son, are held worthy to
reign with thee, and to enjoy the glorious presence of the blessed Trinity,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to whom by all Creatures in Heaven and Earth, be
rendered Praise and thanksgiving, world without end. Amen.

O Lord my God, O Lord my God, Possess my Soul, Possess my Soul, Possess my
Soul.

A Table of SINS. To help the Ignorant, and ill of Memory; wherein, when they
would be confessed, they may presently find out with little labor, the sundry
and manifold ways of offending God.
Of the Ten Commandments.
The First Commandment.
NOT loved God above all things. Born over much love to Creatures. Doubted or
staggered in matters of Faith. Ignorant of the Ten Commandments. Of the
Commandments of the Church. Of the Articles of Faith. Murmured against God in
adversity. Lack of Confidence in God. Presumption of his Goodness. Desperation
of his Mercy. Believed Dreams, or tellers of Fortunes. Gone to witches, or
cunning men for counsel. Read, or keep Heretical Books. Favored Heretics.
Conversed with them without necessity. Hindered any ones Conversion from Heresy
or Schism. Not recommended my self daily to God and his Saints. Not conformed
my Will in all things to the Divine Will.
The Second Commandment.
TAken the Name of God in vain: Blasphemed God. Forsworn my self. Sworn by the
Body, or Members of Christ. Cursed my self. Cursed the Creatures. Given my
self, or others to the Devil. Broken my Vows. Angered others so far, as to make
them Swear or Blaspheme God.
The Third Commandment.
NOt kept Holy the Sabbath day, and other days commanded. Bought or sold
things, not of necessity for that day. Done or commanded some servile work. Nor
heard Mass. Talked, gazed, or laughed in the Church. Not cared to hear
Catholic Sermons. Spent the day in dancing, drinking, dicing, or carding.
Omitted to say my Mattins, Even-song, or other Devotions.
The Fourth Commandment.
NOt Honored my Parents or Superiors. Despised them. Spoke evil of them.
Disobeyed them. Not succored them. Made them heavy. Cursed them. Murmured
against them. Not prayed for them. Not used due reverence to aged Persons.
Mocked or jested at them.
The Fifth Commandment.
DEsired the death of some one, or of my self. Born hatred. Oppressed my
Debtors. Desired Revenge. Not forgiven. Refused to speak. Given discourteous
Language. Threatened, or stricken others, not in your Charge.
The Sixth Commandment.
COmmitted Adultery. Procured pollution. Unclean thoughts, word, or deeds?
Jealous without cause. Unchaste looks. Lascivious dressing. Overcurious
beholding. Lewd company. Dishonest Books. Unchaste Songs. Love Letters. Showed
my Skin, or some naked part of my body to entice others. Eaten hot Meats, or
drunken hot Wines, to procure Lust.
The seventh Commandment.
STealth. Cozenage. Deceit in Gaming. In Reckoning. In Buying. In Selling. In
Wares, Prices, or Weights. Bought of such as could not Sell. Taken of such as
could not give. Wilfully endamaged another man's Goods. Negligently spoiled
them. Forged false Money. Clipped Money. Not paid my debts. Not fulfilled my
Promise.
The Eighth Commandment.
BOrn false witness. Called one filthy Names. Uttered another secret Sin.
Spoke evil of others. Dispraised others. Believed false Reports. Not defended
their good Names. Sowed Discord. Opened others Letters. Judged rashly. False
suspected. Too much distrusted. Listened to others talk. Concealed the truth, to
the detriment of a another.
The Ninth Commandment.
Coveted my Neighbors House.
The Tenth Commandment.
COveted his Wife. His Man Servant. His Maidservant. Or somewhat that is his.
Of the Seven deadly Sins.
The First of PRIDE.
PRide, Vainglory, Ambition, Superfluity Presumption, Vaunting, Hypocrisy,
Idolatry, Dissimulation, Obstinacy, Curiosity, Flouting, and Scoffing, Contempt
of others.
Of Covetousness
COvetusness. Niggardliness. Greediness Miserableness. Unprofitableness. Not
given Alms. Not lent to some in need. Non contented with my own Estate.
Of Luxury.
OF the Sins of Luxury, see the Sixth Commandment.
Of Anger.
ANger. Impatience. Hastiness. Rage or Fury. Disdainfulness. Waywardness,
Fretfulness. Discontentedness. Picking of Quarrels. Immoderate Grieving. Severe
Correcting.
Of Gluttony.
GLuttony. Drunkeness. Delicate Dishes. Eating more than one Meal on Fasting
days. Eaten Flesh on prohibited days. Banquited and Feasted above my ability.
Given to Dogs that which the Poor would have been glad off.
Of Envy.
ENvy. Grieved at another man's prosperity or gettings. Or to hear them well
spoken of. Rejoiced at their hurt. Dispraised their Merchandise. Interpreted
their Words or sayings in worser sort.
Of Sloth.
SLoth. Indevotion. Drowsiness or sleepiness. Idleness, or Laziness. Overmuch
seeking mine own ease. Inconstant in good purposes. Neglected things given me
in charge. Ingratitude to God for his benefits. Unthankful to my friends and
benefactors. Chosen rather to want, than to work or labor for my living. Not
prayed for the faithful Souls departed.
PRAYERS.
O God whose Property is always to have Mercy, and to spare, receive our
Petition, that the tender Mercy of thy Pity may mildly absolve us, and all thy
servants, whom the Chain of sin does bind.

HEar we beseech thee, O Lord, the Prayers of thy Supplicants, and pardon the
sins of them that confess to thee, that thou being to us Benign, may in like
manner give us Pardon and Peace.

Show with Clemency, O Lord thy unspeakable mercy unto us, that thou do
acquit us of our sins, and deliver us from the Pains which for them we deserve.

Prayers.
O God, who by sin art offended, and by Penance pacified, mercifully respect
the Prayers of thy supplicants, and turn away the scourges of thy anger, which
for our sins we deserve.

O Almighty and eternal God, have mercy upon thy Servant N. our chief Bishop,
and direct him according to thy clemency, in the way of everlasting Salvation;
that thou condescending, he may desire things agreeable to thy will, and with
all his Power may perfect them.

O God from whom all Holy Desires, righteous Counsels, and just Works proceed,
give unto thy servants that Peach which the World cannot give, that our hearts
being disposed to keep the Commandments, and the fear of our enemies taken
away, the times through thy Protection may be peaceable.

Inflame, O Lord, our reins and heart, with the holy fire of thy holy Spirit;
to the end we may serve thee with a chaste body and clean heart.

O God the Creator and Redeemer of all the Faithful, give the Souls of thy
Servants Men and Women, remission of their sins, that through godly
Supplications, they may obtain the Pardon they have always wished for.

PRevent, we beseech thee, O Lord our actions, by thy grace assisting, and in
helping forward prosecute them, that all our Prayers and works may begin always
from thee, and begun, may by thee be ended.

O Almighty and Eternal God, who have Power over the living, as also over the
dead, and have mercy on all those whom thou foreknowest shall be thine by Faith
and Works; we humbly beseech thee, that for whom we have determined to pour
forth our Prayers, and whom this present world as yet in Flesh retains, or the
world to come has taken unto it, now being delivered from the body, all thy
Saints making for them Intercession through the Clemency of thy pity, they may
obtain Pardon of all their sins, through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who
lives and reigns God with thee, in the Unity of the Holy Ghost, world
without end. Amen.

V. O Lord hear my Prayer.


R. And let my cry come unto thee.


V. Almighty and most merciful Lord, graciously hear us.


R. Amen.


V. And let the souls of the faithful through the mercy of God, rest in peace.


R. Amen.


Grace before Meat.
GOod Lord bless us, and these thy Gifts to us, which we receive of thy bounty,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Grace after Meat.
WE give thee thanks, Almighty God, for all thy benefits, who live and
reignest world without end, Amen.

Blessed be the Name of our Lord, from this time forth for ever, Amen.

Vouchsafe, we beseech thee, O Lord, to all our Benefactors, for thy names
sake, life everlasting, Amen.

And may the Souls of the Faithful departed, through the mercy of God, rest in
Peace,

Amen.
FINIS.

