THE LEGACY OF A DYING MOTHER To Her Mourning CHILDREN, Being the EXPERIENCES
OF Mrs. Susanna Bell, Who Died MARCH 13. 1672 With an EPISTLE DEDICATORY BY
THOMAS BROOKS Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by John Hancock Senior and Junior at the
three Bibles in Pope's Head Alley in Cornhill. 1673.

To his Honored Friends, Mr. T.B. I.B. S.B. I T. Merchants, and to their
Wives, and to the rest of the Children of Mrs. Susanna Bell deceased; The
Author wishes all Grace, Mercy and Peace.
Honored Friends,
MY Design in this Epistle is not to Complement you, but to benefit you; it is
not to tickle your ears, but to better your hearts; nor it is not to blazon her
name or fame to the World, whose Heaven-born-soul s now at rest with God, and
who is swallowed up in those ^ranscendent Enjoyments of that other World, which
are above the comprehensions of my mind, and the Expressions and Praises of my
Pen; but it is to a lure and draw you to a^ imitation of what was pr^ise-worthy
in her. Shall I hint at a few things?

First, imitate her in that sincerity and plain-heartedness which was
transparent in her. Sincerity is not a single grace, but the Source of all
graces, and the Interlineary that must run through every grace, for what is
faith if it be not unf^ined? and what is love i^ it be not without
dissimulation? and what is Repentance if it be not in truth? Sincerity is the
soul of all grace, it is the grace of all our graces; what advantage is it to
have the Breast Plate of Righteousness, the Shield of Faith, Ephesians. 6.13, 14, 15,
16, 17 7 Joh 1.4
the Helmet of Hope, if they be but painted things; it is the Girdle of
Sincerity that makes all the other parts of our Armor useful; Was she not a
true Nathaniel, a Person in whom there was no guile, I mean, no allowed
hypocrisy: and was not this that which carried her through the pangs of death
with a great d al of comfort, Isa. 38.3, 2. 2 Cor. 1.12.
as it had done Hezek^ah, Paul, and other Saints before. A sincere Christian is
like the Violet which grows low, and hides it self and its own sweetness, as
much as may be, with its own leaves: Or like Brut^s staff, gold within and
thorn without: Or like the Ark, gold within and Goats-hair without. The very
Heathen loved a candid and sincere spirit; as he that wished, That there was a
Glass-window in his breast, that all the World might see what was in his heart.
But

Secondly, imitate her in that Humility, 1 Pet. 5.5
which was a grace she was clothed withal: I ever found her low and little in
her own eyes; much in debasing her self upon all occasions, looking upon her
self as below the least of mercies with Jacob, and as dust and ashes, Genesis
32.10. Genesis 18.27. Ps. 22.6. Ephesians. 3.8
with Abraham; and as a poor worm, with David; and less then the least of all
Saints, with Paul. And commonly, the more high in spiritual worth, the more
humble in heart; God delights to pour in grace into humble souls, as men pour
in liquor into empty vessels. Humility makes a Person Peaceable among Brethren,
fruitf^l in well-doing, cheerful in suffering, and constant in holy walking.
Humility makes a man precious in the eyes of God; who is little in his own
account is always great in Gods esteem. It is well observed by some, That those
brave creatures the Eagle and the Lion were not offered in sacrifice unto God;
but the poor Lambs and Doves were; to note, that God regards not your brave,
high, lofty spirits; but poor, meek and contemptible spirits. Humility is a
rare grace. Many (says Augustine) can more easily give all they have to the
poor, then themselves become poor in spirit; be low in your own eyes, and be
content to be low in the eyes of others; and think not of your selves above
what is meet, as ever you would write after your Mothers Copy; Mat. 18.10.
and affect more to be amongst Gods little ones, then the great ones of this
world. Be humble Christians; as ever you would be holy be humble; Humility is
of the essence of the new creature: He is not a Christian that is not humble.
The more grace the more humble; those that have been most high in spiritual
worth, have always been most humble in heart. Ignatius could say of himself,
Non sum dign^s dici minimus, I am not worthy to be called the least. Lord, I am
Hell, but thou art Heaven, said blessed Hooper; I am a most hypocritical
wretch, not worthy that the earth should bare me, said holy Bradford. I have no
other name, says Luther then Sinner; Sinner is my name, S nner is my surname:
This is the name by which I shall be always known; I have sinned, I do sin, I
shall sin infin^tum. Ruth was the Daughter of the King of Moab, if we may give
credit to the general opinion of the Rabbines, or if that be not so probable,
yet she was one that we may well suppose to have been one of good quality in
her own country, as being Wife of Mahlon, the elder brother of the Family of
the Prince Naasson, yet she accounts her self scarce equal to one of the
Maidservants in the house of B^az. Ruth 2.13.
So Abigail the wit of the time, 1 Samuel 25.41. So El zabeth, though she was the
elder and the better woman for outward quality, Luke 1.43.
yet how confounded was she with Mary s visit, as being too great a weight of
honor for her to bear. So Mary, L^ke 1 38. If I were asked, said Austin, what
is the readiest way to attain true happiness, I would answer, the first, the
second, the third thing is Humility. Humility does not only entitle to
happiness, but to the highest degree of happiness. Mat. 18.4. Humility is that
Jacobs Ladder which reaches from Earth to Heaven.

Thirdly, imitate her in her charity and mercy toward suffering, needy, and
wanting ones; how seldom did you find her ear or hand shut against charitable
motions; she knew that those that did good to the poor and needy for
Christs-sake, God would do good to them for the Poors sake, most sure for his
Sons sake. She knew, that he who promised They should have that asked, had
first commanded such to give unto them that asked; she knew that unmercifulness
is a sin which least becomes, and worse beseems one that had so largely tasted
of the mercies of God, as she had done both in New and Old England She was much
made up of pity and mercy to the poor, the bellies of the hungry, and the back
of the naked, did often proclaim her pity and charity. Many Ministers, Widows
and fatherless ones, have tasted, not only of her husbands bounty, but of hers
also Vain persons when they give, they will cause their kindness to run in a
visible channel, Mat. 6.1, 2.
they will sound a Trumpet to be seen of men: but was she not a secret and
hidden Reliever of Gods distressed ones? Did she not refresh the bowels of many
with her hid treasures? Will you all learn to write after this Copy? Of Midus
it is Fabled, That whatever he torched he t^rned into Gol^; it is most sure,
That whatever the Hand of Charity touches, it turns it into Gold, be it but
a Cup of cold water, nay, Mat. 10.42.
into Heaven it self; cold water having not fuel to heat it, cold water which
costs not the charge of fire to warm it. Salvian says, that Christ is
Mendicorum maximus, the greatest Beggar in the world, as one that shareth in
all his Saints necessities, Heb. 6.10
and will never forget the charitable person, the merciful person. Cicero could
say, That to be rich is not to possess much but to use much; And Seneca could
rebuke them that so studied to increase their wealth, that they forgot to use
it. I have read of one Euagrius a rich man, that lying upon his Deathbed,
being importuned by Synesius a pious Bishop, to give something to charitable
uses, he yielded at last to give three hundred Pounds, but first took Bond of
the Bishop that is should be repayed him in another world before he had been
one day dead. He is said to have appeared to the Bishop, delivering in the Bond
cancelled, as thereby acknowledging what was promised was made good, according
to that promise, Matthew. 19.29 And every one that has forsaken houses, etc.

Fourthly, imitate her in keeping off from the sins and pollutions of the day
wherein you live; was she not one of Gods mourning ones for the abominations of
the time? Ezekiel. 9.4, 6. Jer. 9.1, 2. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8 Psalm. 119.53.136.158.
did not men's abomination in worship and practice vex, grieve, and wound her
poor soul? was it not her great work to live by no Rule, to walk by no Rule, to
worship God by no Rule, but by that which she dared to die by, and to stand by
in the great day of our Lord Jesus? she knew, John 4.23, 24. Phil 3.3, 2.
that worshipping of God in spirit and in truth was the great worship, the only
worship that God stood upon she did not, she durst not worship God according to
the Customs of the World, or the Traditions of the Elders, or the Examples of
great men; she knew that that Worship that is not according to the Word, is 1.
Worshipping of devils and not God. Those that depart from the true Worship of
God, and set upon false worship forbidden by God, do not serve God by it but
the devil, Re^. 9.2. 2 Chronicles. 11.15. Amos 5.25, 26. 1 Cor. 10.20. 1 Timothy 4.1.
Ezekiel. 8.3.
what boasting soever they make, as you may evidently see, by comparing the
Scriptures in the Margent together. She knew 2. That that worship that is not
according to the Word is an Image of Idolatry, which of all sins is most
provoking to a holy, jealous God. The Devil, says Synesius, is as glad to be
worshipped in an Idol, as he was by Israel in a Calf, Exodus 32 4.
there being nothing that provokes God to destroy poor sinners more then this.
The learned Jews have a saying, That no punishment ever happened to them in
which there was not an ounce of the golden Calf; grounding it on Exodus 32.34.
Nevertheless, I will remember to visit this sin upon them. The Egyptians
worshipped a pide Bull, and whereas some thought it strange, that when one died
they should have another of the same color. Austin thinks, that the devil, to
keep them in idolatry, might do with their Cowes, as Jacob did with the Ewes,
present to them when they conceived the likeness of such a Bull. Certainly
Satan will use all the Art he can to keep poor sinners in ways of false
worship, it being the most compendious way that can be to engage God to destroy
them. She knew 3. That that worship that is not according to the Word, has
destroyed the most flourishing Churches and Nations, witness the Church and
Nation of the Jews, See Hos. 8.5, 6.7. Rev. 9.20 Ezekiel. 10.2. 2 Chronicles. 7.20.
the seven Churches of Asia, and the whole Eastern parts of the Empire. She
knew 4. That that worship that is not according to the Word is a cursed
worship. It is the observation of one well skilled in the Jewish Learning, that
there is only one verse in the Prophecy of the Prophet Jeremy, which is written
in the Chaldee tongue, all the rest being in Hebrew, and that is Jer. 10.11. So
shall thou say, Cursed be the gods who made neither Heaven nor Earth; Weems
Christ. Synag.
and this so done by the Holy Ghost on purpose, that the Jews when they were in
captivity, and solicited by the Chaldeans to worship false gods, might be able
to answer them in their own language, Cursed be your gods, we will not worship
them, for they made neither Heaven nor Earth; That God that made Heaven and
Earth, is only to be worshipped according to his own Word; for he will own no
worship but what he will accept of, no worship but that; he will bless no
worship but that, nor he will reward no worship but that; Your glorified Mother
kept close to instituted worship when she had health and strength; in this it
will be your wisdom to write after her ^air Copy. But

Fifthly, imitate her in justifying of the Lord under the sharpest, bitterest,
and most afflictive Providence and ^ispensations; how often have I heard her
to justify the Lord, Joll 13.26.
even whilst he has been a writing bitter things against her; when Gall and
Wormwood has been put into her Cup, has she not said with Ezra, Ezra 9.13.
Neh 9.33.
God has punished us less then our iniquities deserve; and with Nehemiah,
Howbeit, thou art just in all that is brought upon us, for thou have done
right, but we have done wickedly; and with ob, Job 1.21
The Lord gives, and the Lord takes, and blessed be the Name of the Lord. And
with Daniel, Dan. 9.14.
The Lord our God is righteous in all his works which he does You know what
afflictive Providence she has been under, both in respect of her person, and
in the loss of her husband, and in those variety of weaknesses that attended
her body, and in the great losses that some of you have met with in this world:
Besides several other exercises; yet how has she commonly been taken up in
blessing of God, and in justifying of God, and also in admiring the goodness
of God, that it has been no worse with her; and here I am satisfied she would
not have exchanged her gains by afflictions for all the gains of this world.
Stars shine brightest in the darkest night; Torches are better for the beating;
Grapes come not to the proof till they come to the Press. Spices smell sweetest
when pounded: Young Trees root the faster for shaking; Vines are the better for
bleeding: Gold looks the brighter for scouring: Glow-wormes glister best in the
dark: Juniper smells sweetest in the fire: Pomander becomes most fragrant for
chafing: The Palm Tree proves the better for pressing. Camomil, the more you
tread it, the more you spread it: such is the condition of all Gods children,
they are the most triumphant when most distressed; most glorious when most
afflicted, as their conflicts so their conquests, as their tribulations so
their triumphs. Gods people are true Salamanders, that live best in the Furnace
of afflictions, so that heavy afflictions are the best Benefactors to heavenly
affections: when afflictions hang heaviest, then corruptions hangs loosest. And
grace that is hid in Nature, as sweet-water in Rose-leaves, is then most
fragrant when the fire of affliction is put under to distill it out. But

Sixthly, imitate her in the standing, bent and course of her life and
conversation. Vna actio non denominat.
No man is to judge of the soundness or sincerity of his spirit by some
particular acts, but by the constant frame and bent of his spirit, and by his
general conversation in this world; if particular actions might determine
whether a man had grace or no grace, whether he were in Christ or not in
Christ, whether he were a Saint or no Saint, whether he were sincere or
unsound, we should many times conclude, that those have no grace who indeed
have, and that they were not in Christ who indeed are, and that they are no
Saints who indeed are; and that they are not sincere, who certainly are true
Nathaniels: the best Saints on this side Heaven have had their extravagant
motions, and have very foully and sadly miscarried as to particular actions,
(even then when the constant course and bent of their spirits, and main of
their conversations have been God-wards, and Christ-wards, and Holiness-wards,
and Heaven-wards, etc.) witness David's Murder and Adultery, Noah's
Drunkenness, Lots Incest, Joseph's swearing, Job's cursing, Jonah s vexing,
Peter's denying, and Thoas his not believing; such twinklings do and will
accompany the highest and fairest stars. As he that foots it best may be
sometimes sound all along, and the neatest person may sometimes slip into a
slough. He that cannot endure to see a spot upon his clothes, may yet sometimes
fall into a Quagmire. So the holiest and exactest Christians may sometimes be
surprised with many infirmities and unevennesses, and sad miscarriages.
Certainly, particular sinnings are compatible with a gracious frame, though
none are with a glorified condition. Our best estate on earth is mixed, and not
absolute. Glory annihilates all sinful practices, but grace only weakens them.
The most sincere Christian is but an imperfect Christian, and has daily cause
to mourn over his infirmities, as well as he has cause to bless God for his
graces and mercies. Look as every particular stain does not blemish the
universal fineness of the Cloth. So neither does this or that particular Fact
disprove and deny the general bent of a persons heart or life Particulars may
not decide the estate either way; it is true, a man by a particular sinning is
denominated guilty, but by no one particular can a man's estate be challenged
either to be good or bad. He that shall judge of a Christians estate, by
particular acts, though very bad, will certainly condemn the Generation of the
Righteous; we must always distinguish betwixt some single good actions, and a
series of good actions; its not this or that particular good action, but a
continued course of holy actions that denominates a person holy. Certainly, as
there is no man so holy, but sometimes he falls into this or that particular
sin; so there is no man so wicked, but he falls in with this or that particular
duty: as you may see in Pharaoh, Balaan, Saul, the Ninevites, Felix, Herod,
Judas, yea, and the very Scribes and Pharisees. Now look as every sin which a
godly man falls into (through infirmity) does not presently denominate him
ungodly, so neither will a few good actions done by a wicked man prove him
godly. It Is what the course and tenor of the life is, that must be most
diligently and wisely observed, for every man is as his course is; if his
course be holy, the man is so; if his course be wicked, the man is so. There is
a Maxim in Logic, viz. That no general Rule can be established upon a
particular instance; and there is another Maxim in Logic, viz. That no
particular instance can overthrow a general Rule. We are never to make a
judgment of our estates and conditions by some particular actions, whether
they are good or evil; but we are still to make a judgment of our estates and
conditions by the general frame, bent and disposition of our hearts, and by the
constant tenor of our lives. Now I dare appeal to you and all others, that
have observed the constant tenor of her life and conversation, whether it has
not been such as becomes the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. Tit. 2.10 Genesis 6.9.
and as has adorned the Doctrine of God our Savior (humane infirmities
excepted) And O that this might be the mercy of all her children, to walk with
God as she has done, and then I should not doubt but that they would all mee^
in Heaven at last. But

Seventhly, imitate her in her love to the Saints, to all the Saints, in whom
she could discern aliquid Christi, any thing of Christ. Did she not love,
delight and take pleasure to see the graces of the holy Spirit sparkling and
shining in the hearts, 1 John 3.10, 14.
lives and lips of the Saints, secretly wishing in her self that her soul were
but in so noble a case. Were there any men in all the world, that were so
precious, so lovely, so comely, so excellent, and so honorable in her account
in her eye, (...) those that had the Image of God, of Christ, Ps. 15.1.4. Ps.
16.3. 1 John 5.1
of grace, of holiness, most clearly, most fairly, and most fully stamped upon
them. Did she not love Saints as Saints? Was it not the Image of God that drew
out her affection to the people of God? Many, like the Bohemian Curr, can fawn
upon a good suit; but grace was lovely in her eye, though clothed with Rags.
Many love godly men as they are Politicians, or potent, or learned, or of a
sweet nature, or affable, or related, or as they have been kind to them; but
all this is but natural love; 1 John 3.9 Ps. 45.13
but to love them because they are spiritually lovely, because of the seed of
God in them, because they are all glorious within, is to love them as becomes
Saints; it is to love them at a higher and nobler rate then any hypocrite in
the world can reach to. Did she not set the highest price, and the greatest
value and esteem upon those that were gracious? had she not an honor in her
heart for them that feared the Lord? Did she not value persons according to
their worth for another world, and not according to their worldly Greatness or
Grandeur? Pro. 12.26. Pro. 28.6.
Did she not prefer a holy Job upon the dunghill, before a wicked Ahab upon the
Throne? Luke 16.
did she not set a higher price upon a gracious Lazarus, though clothed with
Rags and full of sores, then upon a rich and wretched Dives, though he were
clothed gloriously, and fared sumptuously every day? was not her love to the
Saints universal? to one Christian as well as another, to all as well as any,
to poor Lazarus as well as to rich Abraham, Phil. 1.21. 1 Pet. 2.17.
to a despised Job as well as to an admired David, to an afflicted Joseph as
well as to a raised Jacob, to a despised disciple as well as to an exalted
Apostle? did she not love to see the Image and Picture of her heavenly Father,
though hung in never so poor a frame, and in never so mean a cottage; without
peradventure, he that loves one Saint for the Image of God that is stamped upon
him, he cannot but fall in love with every Saint that bears the lovely Image of
the Father upon him And O that this might be all your mercy to write after this
Copy that she has set before you. But

Eighthly, imitate her in her constancy in the ways of God, with a
notwithstanding all the hazards, storms, dangers and troubles that has
attended those ways, especially in these latter days of Apostasy, wherein God
had cast her lot. She was not a Reed shaken with every wind; she was
unchangeable in changeable times; whatever storms beat upon the ways of God,
or the people of God, she remained fixed, Psalm. 44. Ps 119.112.
firm and immovable in the ways of the Lord; and doubtless such souls as are
truly good, they will be good in the worst of times, and in the worst of
places, and amongst the worst of persons; Principles of grace and holiness, 1
John 3.9. Hos. 6.4.
they are lasting, yea, everlasting; they are not like the Morning-cloud, nor
the early dew. Let times, and places, and persons be what they will, a sincere
Christian will not dishonor his God, nor change his Master, nor quit his ways,
nor blemish his Profession, nor wound his conscience to sleep in a whole skin,
or to preserve his safety, or to secure his liberty; and was it not thus with
her in the most trying times? An upright man is a right man. So (...) Jashar is
rendered by the Septuagint, Judge. 17.6. Genesis 6.9, Rev. 14.4. Rev. 3.4. Job 17.9.
He is one that will not be bowed or bent by the sinful customs or examples of
the times and places where he lives. Let the times be never so dangerous,
licentious, superstitious, idolatrous and erroneous, yet a sincere
plain-hearted Christian will keep his ground, and hold on in his way, as might
be made evident by a cloud of witnesses. Heb. 12.1. Ps 125.1, 2.
The Laurel keeps its freshness and greenness in the Winter-season; a sincere
Christian is semper idem; let the wind, and the world, and the times turn which
way they will, a sincere soul for the main will still be the same. He will be
like Mount Sion which cannot be removed; he will stand his ground and hold his
own under all changes; he is like the Philosophers good man (Tetra-gones)
apiece, cast him where you will, like a Dye he falls always square and
sure; so ^^st a plain-hearted Christian where you will into what company you
will, and into what condition you will, yet still he will fall sure and square
for God and godliness; let the times be never so sad, nor never so bad, yet a
plain-hearted Christian will still keep close to God and his ways, and will
rather let all go then let his God go, or his Religion go, or his Integrity go,
or Ordinances go. Lapidaries tell us of the Chelydonian stone, that it will
retain its virtue and luster no longer then it is enclosed in Gold; a fit
Emblem of an unsound heart, who is only good while he is enclosed in golden
prosperity, safety and felicity. An unsound Christian, like green Timber,
shrinks when the Sun of Persecution shines hot upon him; the heat of fiery
trials cools the courage of unsound, Christians; but a sincere plain-hearted
Christian is like a massy vessel of Gold, that keeps its own shape and figure
at all times, in all places, and in all companies: when one of the Ancient
Martyrs was greatly threatened by his Persecutors he replied. There is nothing
(says he) of things visible, nothing of things invisible, that I fear; I will
stand to my Profession of the Name of Christ, and contend earnestly for the
faith once delivered to the Saints, come on it what will, in these evil days
wherein multitudes have turned aside into crooked paths. She kept close and
constant to the ways of the Lord, so long as her natural strength lasted. And O
that all you her children would make it your business in this as well as in
other things to write after your Mothers Copy; remembering, that if you are not
faithful unto death, you shall never receive a Crown of life, Rev. 2.10. And
that if you do not continue to the end (that is, in well-doing) you shall never
be saved, Matthew. 24.13. But

Ninthly, Imitate her in her high valuations of Jesus Christ, what low and
little things were her own graces, Phil. 3.8, 9, 10. Mat. 13.44.
duties, services and mercies, when she cast her eye upon Christ, when she fell
into discourses of Christ. Christ was her (Summum bonum) chiefest good. What
was all the world to a sight of Christ, to a day, yea, to an hours communion
with Christ. They are no believers that don't value Jesus Christ above all the
world, 1 Pet. 2.7
and all things in the world; for unto every one that believes he is precious;
most precious, only precious, and for ever precious. They value him 1 Above
their lusts, Gal. 5.24. They can pluck out right eyes for Christ, and cut off
right hands for Christ. 2. They value him above the world. Witness David, Psalm.
73.25. and Daniel, Dan. 6. and the disciples, Matthew. 19.27. and Moses, Heb.
11.25, 26. and the primitive Christians and the Martyrs of a later date 3. They
value him above their lives, Rev. 12.11. They loved not their lives unto the
death, So Paul, Acts 20.22, 23, 24. Acts 21.13. So the Martyrs. 4. They value
him above all their Relations: If all the World were a lump of Gold (said the
Dutch Martyr) and in my hands to dispose of, I would give it to live all my
days with my Wife and Children in a Prison, but Christ and his Truth is dearer
to me then all. You have thousands of such instances upon record. 5. They value
him above their goods, Heb. 10.34 Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your Goods.
So has many thousands since under sharp persecutions. 6 They value him above
all natural, spiritual and acquired excellencies, Phil 3.7, 8. In all my
serious Discourses with her about our Lord Jesus Christ, she would still set
the Crown upon Christ's head. She would lay her self low, very low, that he
alone might be exalted. The thoughts of Christ was precious to her, the
Discourses of Christ were precious to her, the Image of Christ was precious to
her, the Ordinances of Christ were precious to her, the Discoveries of Christ
were precious to her, the day of Christ was precious to her, the Offices of
Christ were precious to her, and the Rebukes of Christ (whilst she enjoyed his
Presence under them) was precious to her; but above all, the Person of Christ
was most precious to her; In her eye he was the chiefest of ten thousand,
fairer then the children of men, Cant. 5.10 Psalm. 45.1. Phil. 3.7, 8.
and all the riches, honors, pleasures and delights of this world were but
dung in comparison of him. O at what a rate has the Saints of old prized our
Lord Jesus. Mallem (said one) ruere cum Christo, quam regnare cum Caesare,
Luther had rather fall with Christ then stand with Caesar. The same Author
elsewhere says, that he had rather be ( Christianus R^stic^s then Ethnicus
Alexander,) a Christian-Clown then a Pagan-Emperour. Theodosius the Emperor
preferred the Title of Membrum Ecclesiae before that of Cap^t Imperii;
professing that he had rather be a Saint and no King, then a King and no Saint.
And godly Constantine rejoiced more in being the serv^^t of Christ, then in
being the Emperor of the World. Bernard says, That he had rather be in his
Chimney-Corner with Christ, then in Heaven without him. It was an excellent
Answer of one of the Martyrs when he was offered riches and honors if he would
recant, said, Do but offer me somewhat that is better then my Lord Jesus
Christ, and you shall see what I will say to you. It was a sweet Prayer of one,
Make thy Son dear, very dear, exceeding dear, only dear and precious, or not at
all. Another good man cried out, I had rather have one Christ then a thousand
worlds. I have read of Johannes Mollius, That whenever he spoke of the Name
of Jesus, his eyes dropped tears: And of another Reverend Divine, who being in a
deep muse after some discourse that passed of dear Jesus, and tears trickling
down his cheeks before he was aware, and being asked the reason of it, he
confessed ingenuously, It was because he could not draw his dull heart to prize
Jesus Christ at that rate he should and fain would Christ lay near your Mothers
heart, and O that he may lie near all your hearts, that so you may be safe and
saved for ever. But

Tenthly, Imitate her in the casting a Mantle of love over the infirmities and
weaknesses of poor, weak, miscarrying Christians, in the burying of Christians
weaknesses under their graces; much I know of this, but some know much more.
She was not for blazoning of others weaknesses, whether they were nearer to
her, or more remote from her. She commonly carried a Mantle of love about her
to cast over other men's sins; she seemed to live under the Power of that Word,
Pro. 10.12. Love covers all sins; and that 1 Pet. 9.8. Charity shall cover
the multitude of sins. By covering must be meant, 1. A favorable Construction
of all things, which in right reason might well be construed. 2. A passing by
smaller infirmities and private offenses. 3. Such a covering as might cure
also, for love is wise. Love has a large Mantle, and covers all sins, that is
all private sins, and all such sins as may be concealed with a good conscience,
both toward God and toward men. Again, it must be understood, not of our own
transgressions committed against God, but of other men's sins and transgressions
committed against us Love is not suspicious but interprets all things in the
best sense. Pro. 17.9
Love will not publish private injuries to the dishonor or shame of the party
offending Prove. 12.16. To observe and take notice of other men's faults, but not
of our own, is the easiest thing in the World, said Thales.
A prudent man covers shame. It is recorded to Vespasians honor, That he was
more ready to conceal the vices then the virtues of his friends, Such commonly
are best acquainted with other men's infirmities, who are least observant of
their own iniquities and irregularities. The nature of man is very apt, says
Seneca, (Vtimur perspicillis magis quam speculis) to use Spectacles to behold
other men's faults, rather then Looking-Glasses to behold their own. Erasmus
speaks of one who collected all the lame and defective verses in Homers Works,
but passed over all that was excellent. The Donatists of old were more glad to
find a fault then to see it amended; and to proclaim it then to cover it; to
carp at it then to cure it. If I should find a Bishop committing adultery
(says Constantine the Great) I would cover that foul Fact with mine Imperial
Robe, rather then it should come abroad to the scandal of the weak, and the
scorn of the wicked. Seneca unmasking the face of their corrupt State, has
this notable passage, The News from Rome take thus, the Walls are ruined, the
Temples are not visited, the Priests are fled, the Treasuries robbed, old men
are dead, young men are mad, Vices are Lords over all: The Dictator blames the
Consul, the Consul checks the Censor, the Censor chides the Praetor, the
Praetor falls foul upon the Aedile, and he casts all the fault upon the
Quaestor, and because no man will acknowled^e himself in fault we have no hopes
of better times. How applicable this is to our present times I shall leave
others to judge; but by the whole you see that all sorts and ranks of men, are
more apt to observe and quarrel at other men's faults, then with their own.
Observable is that of our blessed Savior, Luke 7.37. There was a woman in the
City which was a sinner: No wonder, what woman is not? we may guess both who
the woman was, and what the sin was, and which City it was: but he neither
names the City, nor the sin, nor the sinner. Seeing her Reformation, he
consults her Reputation. O that you would all labor to write after this Copy;
When Alexander was painted, the Painter laid his finger on his wart, and
Apelles covered Venus mole with her finger, that it might not be spied. As you
stand in a near relation one to another, so I could wish that you would lay
your fingers upon one another warts and moles, and not blazon one another
humane frailties and infirmities to the world, but love and live as brethren
and sisters, who are never without a mantle of love to cover infirmities, I
say, not enormities: to cover weaknesses, I say, not wickedness: to cover from
the world, I say, not from God, nor from one another. But

Eleventhly, Imitate her in her earnest desires and endeavors, that others,
especially that her nearest and dearest Relations might taste that the Lord is
gracious, that they might all be holy and happy, gracious and glorious; that
they might all have changed hearts, renewed natures, and sanctified souls: That
they might all be born again, adorned with grace, filled with the spirit, and
fitted for Heaven. You know, that upon her dying bed, she desired me, that when
she was asleep in Jesus, that I would, for the advantage of the living,
especially for your sakes (^ho lay nearest her heart) preach on that Psalm.
34.8. O taste and see that the Lord is good. 1 These. 4.14. The three Sermons
that I preached on Psalm. 37.8. I have been desired to Print, but could not
answer Friends expectations in that, because I had not the Notes by me, of what
I said upon that Text.
Which accordingly I did, once and again. Now what was her design in this, but
that every one of you might share with her in the same favor, love, spirit,
grace, merit, righteousness and goodness, that her soul had long tasted of.
There is not a soul that ever have had any saving taste of the Lord, and of his
goodness, but is mighty desirous that others should taste of the same grace and
goodness. O taste and see that the Lord is good. As if David should have said,
I for my part have seen, tasted, and experienced much of God and his goodness,
and never more then in my greatest streights. I am loath to eat these heavenly
viands, and soul-ravishing morsels of contentment alone. Come hither all you
that fear God, Ps. 66.16. the words are without a Copulative in the Hebrew,
venite, audite. Calv. Come, Heark^n. Like that Genesis 19.14. It not only imports
an Invitation, but the affection also of him that speaks.
and I will tell you what God has done for my soul. Come, O come poor souls,
taste and see with me how good the Lord is; how comfortable the embraces of
Christ are, and how sweet communion with Heaven is. We cannot advantage others,
more then by declaring and communicating unto them our soul-secrets, our
so^l-Experiments. All the Saints own it as their duty to glorify God in their
Generation, and wherein can they bring more glory to God then in helping souls
to Heaven? and how can they find out a readier way to effect this great
business, then by telling them what God has done for their souls; then by
making a faithful Narrative of their own conditions, by nature and by grace;
when and how the goodness of the Lord was made known unto them upon a saving
account. O tell poor wounded sinners what methods of mercy the Lord used to the
healing up of your wounds, and to the quieting of your consciences; that so
they may be encouraged to a serious use of all Gospel-means, and to a hope of
the same grace and goodness of the Lord toward them. Heb. 12.14. See my
Treatise on this Text. Acts 26.29. L^ke 5.29.
O labor more and more to convince others by your experiences, that grace is
the only way to glory; and that without holiness no man shall see the Lord;
Paul had tasted that the Lord was good, and he wished, that both Agrippa and
all that heard him were altogether such as be was, except his bonds. As soon as
Matthew had tasted that the Lord was good; he called together an huge multitude
of Publicans and others to meet at his house. As soon as Philip had tasted of
the sweetness of communion with Christ, John 1.45, 46.
he runs to Nathaniel to invite him to Christ, saying, Come and see No sooner
had the Woman of Samaria tasted of Christ's living waters, but she leaves her
water-pot, John 4.28.
and posts into the City to call out her friends and neighbors to see and
taste how good dear Jesus was. So those young Converts, Zech. 8.21. And the
inhabitants of one City shall go to another, Vide Pemble in loc. Isa. 2.2, 3, 4.
saying, let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of
Hosts I will go alse. Mic. 4.2. And many Nations shall come and say, Come and
let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, and to the House of the God of Jacob,
and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for the Law
shall go forth of Zion, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. These blessed
Converts would not come alone, but draw others along in company with them to
worship the Lord, which is lively expressed in a Mimesis or imitation of the
encouragements and invitations they should use one to another, I will go also:
every one was as forward for himself, as zealous for another. O blessed frame
of spirit! O my friends, it is the nature of true grace to be diffusive and
communicative; Grace can t be concealed; they that have tasted of divine
sweetness cannot choose but speak of it to others, their hearts like bottles of
new wine, would be ready to burst if they had not vent. Grace is like fire in
the bones, they that have it cannot hide it. All the faculties of the s^ul, and
all the members of the body, will still be a telling of others, that there is a
treasure of grace in the soul. The blind men that were cured were charged to be
silent, but they could not hold their peace. So here, Lilmor behammed, We
therefore learn that we may teach, is a Proverb among the Rabbis. And I do
therefore lay in and lay up (says the Heathen) that I may draw forth again,
and lay out for the good of many And shall not grace do as much as nature,
shall not grace do more then nature? Well friends, this I shall only say, that
the frequent counsels tha^ your glorified Mother have given you to taste of
divine goodness, and the experiences that she has communicated to you of her
taste of divine goodness, both in her health and sickness, both in her living
and dying, will certainly either be for you, or else be a dreadful witness
against you, in the great day of our Lord Jesus. O remember not only these
experiences of hers, that are now presented to your eyes; but those other
experiences of hers as to her inward man that has often sounded in your ears.
But

Lastly, labor to imitate her in her comfortable passage out of this world.
Those words were more worth then a world which she uttered a little before she
fell asleep in the Lord, viz. Lord, take my aching head, and lay it in thy
bosom. How often did she express her longings to be with Christ, that she
might sin nor sorrow no more; her outward man was full of pain, weakness and
trouble, yet how was her inward man refreshed and quieted in a way of
believing, according to that blessed Word, In all my visits of her, my hardest
task was still to work her into a willingness to stay in this world, till all
her doing and her suffering w^rk was over.
Isa. 26.3. Thou will keep him in perfect Peace. The Hebrew runs (...) Shalom,
Shalom, Peace, Peace: whose mind is stayed on thee: because he trusts in
thee. Never did the espoused Maid long more for the Marriage-day, nor the
Apprentice for his freedom, nor the Captive for his Ransom, nor the condemned
man for his Pardon, nor the Traveller for his Inn, nor the Mariner for his
Haven, nor the sick man for his health, nor the wounded man for his cure, nor
the hungry man for his bread, Phil 1.23.
nor the naked for clothes, then she did long to die and to be with Christ,
which for her was best of all. How often were those words in her mouth. Rev.
22.20.
Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. The face of none is so comely to the Saints
eye, the voice of none so lovely to his ears, the taste of none so pleasant in
his mouth as Jesus Christ The Name of Jesus has a thousand treasures of joy
and comfort in it, says Chrysostom, and is therefore used by Paul five
hundred times, as some have reckoned, The Name of a Savior (says one) is
Honey in the Mouth, Music in the Ear, Bernard
and a Jubilee in the heart: And how often was that blessed word in her mouth,
Remember, O Lord I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and
with a perfect heart, Isa. 38.3
and have done that which is good in thy sight; a serious sense of her
uprightness in the main of her walking with God, did yield her more then a
little sweetness and comfort when she was upon her bed of Pain; one of the last
speeches of a dying upright Christian was this, Satan may as well pl^ck God out
of Heaven, John 10.28, 29, 30. 2 Timothy 2.12.
as pl^ck my soul out of ^his keeping. She knew him in whom she had believed,
and was persuaded that he was able to keep that which she had committed to him
against that day. A child that has any precious Jewel given him, cannot better
secure it, then by putting it into his fathers hands to keep; so neither can we
better provide for our souls safety then by committing them to God: Keep that
which I have committed: that is, eith^r my precious soul, which I have
committed to his care and custody to bring it forth glorious at that day of his
appearing, or my eternal life, happiness and crown of glory, which I have as it
were deposited w th him by faith and hope; and thus it was with her. The
Apostle says, he committed to Gods Custody a Pawn or Pledge, but about this
Pawn or Pledge Interpreters differ; One says It is his soul; Another says, It
is himself; And a third says, It is his works: And a fourth says, It is his
s^fferings: And a fifth says, It is his salvation. In short, he committ^d to
God his soul, himself, his doings, his sufferings, to be rewarded with life and
salvation; and so did she who is now at rest in the Lord. Lord (says Austin) I
will die that I may enjoy thee. I w ll not live, but I will die, I desire to
die that I may see Christ, and refuse to live that I may live with Christ. The
broken Rings, Contracts and Espousals, contents not the true Lover, but he
longs for the Marriage-day, and so did she, who has now exchanged a sick bed
for a Royal Throne, and the company of poor Mortals, for the Presence of God,
Christ, Angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect. It was well said of
one, So far as we tremble at death, so far we want love; its sad when the
Cont^act is made between Christ and a Christian; to see a Christian afraid of
the making up of the Marriage: But your deceased Relation was no such
Christian; I know nothing in this world, that her heart was so much set upon,
as the completing of the Marriage between Christ and her soul. My eye is upon
that text, Isa. 57.1. The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart,
and (...) men are taken away, none considering that the righteous are taken
away from the evil to come. I have read of one Philo a Jew, and of another,
that when they came to any City or Town, and heard of the death of any godly
man, though never so poor, they would both of them mourn exceedingly, because
of the great loss that place had by the death of that godly man; and because it
was a warning-Piece from God of evil approaching: but ah, how many famous godly
Ministers, and how many ch^i^e Christians has the Lord of Hosts taken away
from us, and yet who lays it to heart. There is no greater Prognostic of an
approaching storm, th^n Gods calling home so many Worthies (of whom this world
was not worthy) as he has lately done. Now O that God would beautify all your
souls with all these 12 Jewels, with which your Mother wa^ adorned in life and
(...)

Sir, you having signified to me, that it was your Mothers mind, and your
desires, that her following Experiences should be printed. I did think it might
be somewhat seasonable to put you all in mind of such things as I had (among
many others) observed, and which should be all your ambition to imitate, as you
would give up your accounts at last with joy, and be happy with her for ever in
that other world.

Considering, that these Experiences may fall into other hands besides your
own. I thought it meet to let such Readers know, that these were ta^en from her
by one of you, when she was in a very weakly condition, and had little more
strength then to speak; and they are but some of those that lay most warm upon
her heart at that time. God began to work upon her in the Morning of her days;
and had there been a Collection of all her most close, inward, spiritual
Experiences, they would have been greatly multiplied beyond what is now
presented to the Readers eye; but that was a Task too hard for her under those
variety of weaknesses that she was every ^ay contending with. The Experienees
^f old disciples commonly rise high, but the Ingenious Reader may easily
discern by the twelve Jewels with which she was adorned, that she was a woman
both of choice and great Experiences. A^stin observes on Psalm. 16.2. Come and
hear all ye that fear God, and I will de^lare what he has done for my soul: He
does not call them (says he) to acquaint them with speculations, how wide the
Earth is, and how far the Heavens are streteh'd out, or what the number of the
stars are, or what is the course of the Sun; But come and I will tell you the
wonders of his grace, the faithfulness of his promises, and the riches of his
mercy to my soul. Now all Ministers and Christians that had any inward
acquain^ance with her soul-concernments, they do very well know, that she was
most taken up with the wonders of Gods free, rich, and sovereign grace, and
with the sweetness, the fullness, the freeness, the riches and the fai^hfulness
of his Promises, and with the riches of his mercy in Christ to her soul.

To draw to a close, it is observable, that even the holy Apostles in their
Canonical Epistles, have spent some good part of their holy lines in the ample
Commendations of those eminent Saints to to whom they wrote, as Paul in h^ to
Philemon, and John in that of (...) to an Honorable Lady: and the other to a
meaner person, viz. Gai^^ and that they went not behind the door (as we say) to
whisper; but (...) on the Housetop did proclaim t^^ Religious and pious
practices of tho^ more choice Christians to the ^mi^ati^on of others. And
further, when consider that which the Apostle speaks of, Demetrius a rare and
no^ ordinary Testimony; 3 Ep. of John 12.
Demetri^s ha^^ a good report of all men, and of t^^ Truth it self; and we also
bear Record, and we know that our Record (...) true: And yet further, when I
consider what is Recorded of Hezekia^ Thus did Hezekiah throughout all J^dah, 1
Chro. 31.20, 21.
and wrought what was good, an^ right, and true before his God An^ in every
work that he began in the service of the House of God, an^ in the Law and
Commandments, h^ did it with all his heart and pro^^pered. And when I consider
wh^^ high commendations the Apostle b^stows upon the Churches of Ma^^donia, 2
Cor. 8.1. to the eleven verse; And upon the Church of Thes^alonia, 1 Thessal.
1.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. And also 2 Thessal. 1.^, 4 5 And when I consider,
that ^t was the Holy Ghost who writ ^^e^^ad^^ Epitaph, 2 Chronicles. 24.16.
They buried him ^n the City of ^avid among the Kings, because he had done good
in Israel, ^^oth towar^s God and toward his horse. It is said also of ^osiah,
in ^his Commendations by the same Spirit, Like unto him there was no King, 2
King. 23.25.
Moses and Mord^^a^, Sarah, Debo^rah, Esther, E^^ abeth and others, after their
deaths have had their due praises. When I consider of these things I am very
well satisfied in what I have said concerning this deceased Sister and friend.
I do no ways doubt, but that we may v^ry safely say good of such, when dead,
whose ordinary course and practice it was to do good while they lived; but in
this censorious Age, No sooner is d^st cast upon some Christians head, but
there are those that will do what they can to throw dirt in their faces:
A^gustine does very fitly compare these to Dives his dog^, they lay licking and
sucking Lazarus his sores, but his sounder parts they never meddled with. To
trample upon the Reputation, and stain the glory of them that die in the Lord,
argues such Persons to be a kin to Fleas, who bite most when men are asleep. It
was one of Solons Laws, that none should dare to speak evil of the dead. And
Plutarch tells us, that that was highly commended and duly observed: But is it
so now? This I am sure, that it well becomes Christians not to dare to speak
evil (if they could) of those who for the main have lived holily, and died
graciously, as this deceased friend has done. Let this satisfy us, that she
is above the Praises and envies of men. It Is the good, the profit, the
advantage of all your souls, and theirs into whose hands this little Piece may
fall, that has drawn me out to write so large an Epistle. If I had had only the
dead in my eye, a few lines should have served the turn. I doubt not but that
you will kindly accept of my endeavors to be serviceable to your immortal
souls, and who can tell what fruit may grow upon this Tree? I shall improve all
the interest I have in Heaven, that both the Epistle and your glorified Mothers
Experiences may be blessed, to the furtherance of the internal and eternal
welfare of all your souls. The goodwill of him that dwelt in the Bush, rest
upon you and yours. So I Rest

Honored friends, Your Souls Servant THO, BROOKS.

A TRUE RELATION OF Some of the EXPERIENCES of Mrs. SUSANNA BELL, taken from
her own Mouth by a near Relation of hers, a little before her death. Left as a
LEGACY to her Mourning Children.
IT pleased the Lord to order it so, that in my young days I was cast into a
Family that feared the Lord. And going to hear Mr. White, preaching from those
words, Prove. 15.15 But he that is of a merry heart has a continual Feast. From
th^se words he did show, how happy a thing a good conscience was, and what a
sad thing it was with Judas to have a bad conscience; and what a blessed thing
it was to have a good conscience. From that of Hezekiah, Isa. 38.3. And he
said, Remember, now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which i^ good in thy sight.
This Sermon God made useful to me; and after this, it pleased the Lord to order
it so, that I changed my condition, and the Lord provided for me a good
Husband, one that feared him. And some troubles being here, many of the people
of God went for New England, and among them my Husband desired to go, but I and
my friends were very a verse unto it. I having one child, and being big with
another, thought it to be very difficult to cross the Seas with two small
children, some of my Neighbors advising me to the contrary, living so well as I
did. But I told them that what the Lord would have me to do, that I would
willingly do; and then it pleased the Lord to bring that Scripture to my mind,
Ephesians. 5.22. Wives submit your selves unto your own Husbands, as unto the Lord.
And then my heart was brought off to a quiet submission.

But after this, I being well delivered, and the Child well; It pleased the
Lord soon after to take my Child to himself: Now upon this, so far as it
pleased the Lord to help a poor wretch, I begged earnestly of him, to know why
he took away my Child, and it was given in to me, that it was because I would
not go to New England. Upon this the Lord took away all fears from my spirit,
and then I told my Husband I was willing to go with him. For the Lord had made
my way clear to me against any that should oppose. And then my husband went
presently upon the work to fit to go. And the Lord was pl^ased to carry us as
upon Eagles wings, according to that Deuteronomy. 32 10, 11. We were eight weeks in
our passage, and saw nothing but the Heavens and Waters. I knew that the Lord
was a great God upon the shore: But when I was upon the Sea, I did then see
more of his glorious power then ever I had done before, according to that of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 107.23, 24. And when the Lord was pleased to bring us in
safety on shore, his people gave us the best entertainment they could, and then
I thought I could never be thankful enough to the Lord for his goodness in
preserving us upon the Sea, I being big with Child, and my Husband-sick almost
all the Voyage. After this my Husband would have gone by water hi^her into the
Country. But I told him, the Lord having been so good in bringing us saf^
ashore amongst his people, I was not willing to go again to Sea. And it was a
good Providence of God we did not; for most of them that went were undone by
^t. The first Sermon that I heard after I came ashore was out of Ier. 2.13. For
my people have committed two evils; They have forsaken me the Fountain of
living waters, and hewed them out Cisterns; broken Cisterns that can hold no
water. Now the Minister did show, that whatever we did build on short of
Christ, would prove but a broken Cistern; and by that Sermon the Lord was
pleased to shake my foundation: but I being a poor ignorant creature, thought
if I could but get into the fellowship of the People of God, that that would
quiet my spirit, and answer all my Objections; And I did accordingly attempt to
join with the Church, but they were very faithful to the Lord, and my soul, and
asked me what Promise the Lord had made home in Power upon me. And I answered
them, Jer. 31.3. Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore
with loving kindness I have drawn thee. But they told me that that was a
general Promise; that I must look to get some particular Promise made home in
Power upon me, and persuaded me to wait a little longer to see what God would
further do for my poor soul, which accordingly I did. And going to hear Mr.
Cotton, who did preach out of Rev. 2.28. To him that over comes I will give
the Morning Star; from which words he did observe, that that Star was Christ.
And this he came to show, how a soul might know whether it had an interest in
Christ or no, and that was by the Lords giving out such precious Promises as
these to the poor soul, viz. That God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. and that John 16.2^. And your joy shall no man take from
you. And Isa. 54.22. I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions,
and as a cloud thy sins: and that Isa. 43.^5. which Promises afterward God
made sweet to my soul. After this I went to hear Mr. Shepherd, and he was
preaching out of the Parable of the ten Virgins; Matthew. 25.1, 13, In his
discourse he showed that all were Professors, but the foolish had nothing, but
Lamps without oil, a Profession without grace in their hearts: but that the
wise had got grace in their hearts, and so were ready prepared to meet the
Bridegroom when he came. Now, by that discourse of his the Lord was pleased to
convince me that I was a foolish Virgin, and that I made a Profession, but
wanted the oil of grace in my heart, and by this means I was brought into a
very sad condition* For I did not experimentally know what it was to have oil
in my Lamp, grace in my heart, nor what it was to have union with Christ, that
being a mystery to me: And then I did think my self guilty of breaking all the
Commandments of God except the sixth. For I thought I had neither desired,
wished or endeavored any man's death. But then the Lord showed me, that if I
were saved by Christ, my sins had murdered him, according to that Acts 3.15.
chap. 4.^0. And th^^ (...) greatly aggravate my sin the more unto m^. Now one
of my Neighbors observing that I was in a distressed condition, told me that
she had been a hearing, and that the Ministe^ she heard was a shew^ng, that the
Lord had more glory in the salvation then in the damnation of sinners. For in
their salvation, his Mercy and his Justice were both glorified, but in their
destruction only his Justice was glorified. Hearing of this, the Lord was
pleased to draw out my heart to plead with him. That if he might receive more
glory in my salvation then in my destruction, that then his Mercy might be
manifested to me. For I thought, although I had many worldly comforts, yet I
had no interest in Christ, and that if I should die presently, Hell would be my
portion; and in this sad and sore distress, the Lord was pleased to imprint
that Scripture upon my mind, Job 10.2. I will say unto God do not condemn me,
show me wherefore thou contendest with me? Job 40.2. Shall he that contendeth
with the Almighty, instruct him? he that reproves God, let him answer it; and
that word of the Apostle, Romans 9.^0, 21 N^y, but thou, O man, who art thou that
reply against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why
have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter power over the clay, of the same
lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor. After this, it
pleased God, that Mr. Elliott, and some other of the people of God, seeing me
in this sad condition, to^d me the Church would have me come in to be a Member
with them; but I did reply, that all Church Fellowship would do me no good.
Then Mr. Elliott asked me, What would do me good? and I told him, Nothing but
an interest in Christ. His Answer was, That I was already in the pangs of the
N^w Birth; and he did believe it would not be long before the Lord spoke peace
to my poor soul. After that, reading a book of Dr. Prestons, where he did show,
that when the Lord joined himself to a believer, he did first comprehend the
soul, and then enabling the soul by faith to apprehend him. Which double Act of
faith I then knew not. About fourteen days after, considering what a distressed
condition I was in, I was bemoaning my self before the Lord; and the Lord was
pleased to bring that Scripture to my remembrance in John 16. I will give you
that joy, that no man takes from you.

And then I thought with my self that it was Christ that I did want, and not
joy. But the Lord brought that Scripture to me, that Christ was tidings of
great joy, Luke 2.10, 11. And I thought how could this be to such a poor wretch
as I was, and the Lord was pleased to bring that Scripture to my mind, That he
looked not as man looked, 1 Samuel 16 7. And that he was God and not man, Hos.
11.9. And by this means he took aw^y all my fears. And then the Lord did help
me to discern that this was a mystery indeed, and did so quiet my heart, that
all the World seemed as nothing unto me. For I never heard such a voice before,
blessed be his Name.

And then the people of God would have me come into fellowship with them, And
soon after I was admitted a Babe in Christ among them: Afterward being to hear
Mr. Cotton, on 1 Pet. 2.2. As newborn Babes desire the sincere milk of the
Word, that you may grow thereby. And from thence he showed, that if it were a
living Babe it would cry out for nourishment, and that that soul that did once
really taste of Christ was never satisfied, but would still be crying out for
more and more of Christ; when such a soul came to any Ordinance, as Hearing,
Prayer, the Lords Supper, and did get nothing of Christ, they were all as lost
Ordinances to it.

It so fell out, that the next Lords day was the day of sitting down at the
Lords Table. And the Lord did put it into my thoughts, that if we received
nothing but a piece of bread and a sip of wine, it would be but a poor empty
thing, and so the Lord did help me to beg, that if what he had been pleased to
speak to my soul before were a true manif^station of himself, that he would be
pleased to speak again unto my soul, For a threefold cord is not easily broken,
Eccles. 4.12.

Being at the Ordinance, the bread and wine coming about, I was thus sighing
unto the Lord; what shall I have nothing but a bit of bread and a sip of wine
this day? And the Lord was pleased to bring that Scripture to my mind, John
6.55. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. And so the
Lord was pleased to give something more of himself to my poor soul at that
time. After this, a sad Providence attended one of my Neighbors, I was full of
fears that her condition might be mine. But the Lord brought that Scripture to
my mind, Jer. 29.11. For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says
the Lord, thoughts of Peace and not of evil, to give you an expected end. And
thereby the Lord stayed my heart in trusting upon himself, and giving me a safe
delivery. And being up again, I went to hear Mr. Cotton, and he was showing
what Assuranc^ was and how happy that soul was that could say as Job did, Job
19 25. And with David Psalm. ^^9 For ever Lord thy Word is settled in the
Heavens; and so the Lord was p^^ased to show me what a mercy I had that had
Assurance. Then I went to speak to Mr. Cotton, to ask him what he thought of
the work of God upon my poor soul. And (...) ^old me, that he was satisfied
that it was (...) real work of God. And he did council me to walk humbly and
thankfully, and to take heed of grieving that Spirit of God by which I was
sealed up to the day of Redemption, and to walk humbly toward those that God
had not revealed so much of himself to as he had to me. And then the Lord was
pleased by his Providence to call my Husband to come for England, and he did
tell me, that he should so order business that I should have less of the world
to trouble me; I was glad to hear it from him, and desired him to go. And then
the Lord was pleased to help me to consider whether I had not got a better
Husband; and the Lord did quiet my heart in himself, my soul being espoused to
him, 2 Cor. 11.2. After he was gone from me, we did hear of a War broke forth
in England, and friends told me my Husband would be in danger of his life if
taken. I told them the best I knew, and the worst I knew; and that if God
should take my Husband out of the world, I should have a Husband in Heaven,
which was best of all. And Mr. John Elliott did visit me in his (...) fence,
and asked me how the Lord did b^^ up my heart in my Husbands absence: And I did
tell him, that the Lord was as well able to bring him to me in safety, as he
did to carry him out. And he answered me, I believe the Lord will say unto thee
as he did to the Canaanitish woman, Matthew. 15.28. Be it unto thee according to
thy says. And the Lord was pleased to keep me and all that I had, and to
preserve him, and to bring him home in safety unto me. And then in stead of
having less of the world which I desired, the Lord did cast in more of it.
After this, my Husband told me, That he must go again to England, and I was
very unwilling to it; but he told me, if he did not the Name of God would
suffer. To prevent which, I consented, and it pleased God to bring him home in
safety to me. And in a few years after he brought me over to England and God
showed much of his goodness to me.

At my coming ashore he brought that Scripture to my Remembrance Deuteronomy. 33. 26,
27. There is none like unto thee, O God of Jeshurun, who rides upon the Heaven
in thy Help, and in his Excellency on the Sky, the Eternal God is thy Refuge,
and underneath are the everlasting arms.

After it had pleased God to bring me back to my Native Country. I was much
troubled that there was no better observation of the Lords day, it being our
Practice in New England to begin it at Sunne-set the Evening before, as it is
Recorded in Genesis, That the Evening and the Morning was the first day; and
that Scripture was brought to my Memory, Prove. 14.10. The heart knows its own
bitterness, but no man intermeddles with its joy: Many trials the Lord has
been pleased to exercise me with, but in the midst of all God has made that
Word sweet to my soul, Isa. 54.10. For the Mountains shall depart and the Hills
be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the
Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee.

It pleased the Lord after a year or two to exercise me with much weakness; but
then he made that Word sweet unto me, Isa 50.8. He is near that justifies me,
who will contend with me. And that word, Job 15.11. Are the consolations of God
small unto thee? After these things, when I was in a very great strait, upon
the apprehension of some public dangers that seemed to threaten us, the Lord
was pleased to bring to my mind that Scripture, Zach. 9.12. Turn to your strong
Holds you Prisoners of Hope. And since in the midst of my many bodily
infirmities God has made that word sweet to my soul, Psalm. 116.7 Return unto
thy rest. O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. And that
word, Psalm. 23.4. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I
will fear no evil, for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort
me. I still remain as a prison^r of hope, waiting for a fruition of that
happiness which the Lord Jesus Christ has prepared for me. For I know he that
has the Son has life, 1 John 5.12. And if the Son make us free, then are we
free indeed, John 8.36. And blessed is that people that knows the joyful found,
they shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance. I find the Lord
jesus very free in the tenders of his love to poor sinners. And that love has
in a great measure been manifest^d to my poor soul. After this it pleased the
Lord to visit one of my Daughters with a great sickness, upon which my heart
was drawn out to s^ek the Lord on her behalf, then that Scripture was brought
to my mind, John 11.21. Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if thou had been
here, my Brother had not died. But I know that now whatever thou will ask of
God, God will give it to thee. Jesus says unto her, thy Brother shall rise
again. Martha says unto him, I know that he shall rise again at the last day.
Jesus says unto her, I am the Resurrection and the Life, and he that believes
in me shall never die. And it pleased the Lord to give me her life as an Answer
of Prayer. It pleased the Lord after this to visit this Land with the
Pestilence, a severe stroke of his, that swept away many thousands; and under
that sad Providence of his the Lord did help me to rely alone upon himself,
from that Scripture, Psalm. 91.7. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten
thousand at thy rght hand, but it shall not come nigh thee. And according to my
says, it pleased the Lord to preserve both my self and all my Relations from
that sad stroke, though some of them were often in the midst of danger, blessed
be his Name The next year after the Lord did again (for our sins) visit us, and
that by a dreadful fire, which reduced to ashes many thousand houses, and yet
his love was then manifested to me in the preservation of my habitation, when
many better than my self were burnt out. Therefore unto my God shall I, (who am
less then the least of all his mercies) render that praise which is due unto
his Name.

Since that, whilst I was upon a languishing bed, and Death even knocking at
the door, it pleased the Lord once again to alarm me in that weak condition by
a dreadful fire which brake out very near us, and at that time it pleased my
good God to support and strengthen my spirit with that Scripture, Isa. 43.2.
When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the
Rivers, they shall not overflow, thee: when thou walk through the fire thou
shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. And that
Scripture, Isa 54.5 For thy Maker is thy Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his
Name, and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel, the God of the whole Earth shall
he be called. And this second time also the Lord was graciously pleased to
preserve me and my House from that amazing stroke which did so much threaten
us; And O that all these new and old Experiences might be high obligations upon
me and mine to holiness and fruitfulness all our days.

Whilst I remained in New England there happened a great Earthquake which did
shake all in the house, and my son being by me, asked me what it was, I told
him, our Neighbors were all amazed at it, and knew not but that the world
might then be at an end; and did run up and down very much affrighted at it;
but I sat still, and did think with my self what a Christ was worth to my poor
soul at that time. And then God made these Scriptures sweet refreshings,
supporting and quieting my soul.

Psalm. 18.46. The Lord lives, and blessed be my Rock, and let the God of my
Salvation be exalted.

Heb. 11.13. These all died in faith not having received the Promises but
having seen them afar off, and were perswad^d of them, and embraced them, and
confessed they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth.

Rev. 7.9. After this I beheld, and lo a great multitude, which no man could
number, of all Nations, and Kindred, and People, and Tongues, stood before the
Throne and before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes and Palms in their
hands, ver. 14. And he said to me, these are they which came out of great
tribulation, and have washed their Robes, and made them white in the blood of
the Lamb.

FINIS.
Bridges Remains, being Eight Sermons; viz 1 Of Man's Blessedness, etc. By Mr.
Bridges Preacher of the Word of God at Yarmouth. A Discourse of Christ's Coming.
By Theophilus Cale. The Nature and Principles of Love, as the End of the
Commandment, declared in some of the last Sermons of Mr. Joseph Caryl, with an
Epistle of Dr. Owen D.D.
All to be sold by John Hancock Sen. and Jun. at the Three Bibles in Cornhill.


