To the Honorable COMMITTEE OF KENT.
Gentlemen;
MY service (in all humillity) presented unto you. For Accommodating (so far,
as necessarily may be,) of your desires, I give you to wilt, That I have
seen, and perused a Printed sheet of Paper, with this Inscription; or Title,
(viz.) A Pair of Gold-weights, etc. And with this subscription, or Postscrip,
(viz.) This Appeal, and Demonstration, I commend to your Circumspect Perusal,
to mend, and Ratify in form, etc. with my name set at the foot of the
Postscript. There being some little varying therein from any Maniscript of mine.

And since our Savior does propound, to such as profess his Name, as well to
be wise as Scrpents, as innocent, as Doves; And since neither the Law of God,
the Law of Nations, nor the Law of Nature, does require, or exact from any, a
self Accusation; And being strongly persuaded, that it has not entered into
the thoughts of your hearts, or the hearts of any of you, to draw any thing
from me, either by word or writing, to be any ways prejudicial unto met.
Therefore, for the whole matter, in the Printed Paper contained, I shall
propose, neither Negatively* nor Affirmatively; But as Prosecution shall be
therein, I shall desire but the common benefit and privilege of a Native
Subject, in a vindicative, or defensive way, etc. As Occurrences shall Legally
present.

But, to satisfy your Expectations, touching my sense of the Scope, and extent
of what is contained in the said Printed Paper; I conceive, the first part
thereof wholly, as well as some other parts, and passages therein, in part,
concerns in special manner Mr. Dens Practices, and expressions at the
Sessions holden at the Castle of Canterbury, for the East Division of the
County of Kent, 15. July, 1645. Touching which, I shall desire (as occurrences
shall permit,) a Legal Liberty of Appeal; And not out of any prejudice to the
Person of him, or of any other man whatsoever; No^ that I make any scruple, or
difference, from whose hand, or by what Power, the Stroke of Persecution is
directed. But my ^peciall Aim, and purpose therein, is, by all lawful ways
to endeavor to unfold, and bring to a clear and Palpable discovery, to my
own, and the common Eye of the Subjects of this Kingdom; Whether my self, and
others, which have been Persecuted, (since the Repeal of those
Conscience-binding Laws, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, As in the
Preface to the Directory appears,) have been so persecuted by Law, or without
Law.

And if by Law, That then there may be an incessant endeavor, by Petitionary,
and Supplicatory way, to procure a further, and final Repeal of those, and
others of the same Affinity, if any such are yet in being; Put if Divine
Providence, have so disposed, that the stings of such Conscience-binding Laws,
be already plucked out; that then my self, and the whole Kingdom, may never be
wanting, to give God the Honor, and men their Respective dues therein.

If any Passage, or expression therein, shall be taken, as to Reflect upon any;
either Courts, Persons, or Person in particular, I conceive it is more then by
any ordinary Construction can be naturally drawn from any part, or Passage
therein, there being (to my remembrance, neither Court, Persons, Person, time,
nor practices, (other then as before mentioned, touching Mr. Den, the then
Judge,) specified therein.

Only, I shall with all due Respects unto you, Present to your Judicious
considerations these three Queries ensuing. (Viz.)

QUERE I. First, If a man be enjoined, to enter into Obligations of vast
sums, to conform himself to promiscuous, and illegal Restrictions of his
Birthright Privileges, And shall in Obedience thereunto, both confine and
conform himself, so far, that no color of advantage can be taken for
Nonconformity, And so of course, the Party discharged from such Obligations.
And notwithstanding, upon the discharge therefrom, there be Premonitions, and
threats from the Judge, for Nonconformity, (as before) to inflict the same
Punishments.

QUERE. II. Secondly, If a man Appeal to a Court, That if he have offended the
Law, he desires to be punished by Law; if otherwise, That by the justice of
the Court he may be acquitted, And notwithstanding Sentence be pronounced
against such a one, contrary to Law.

QUERE. III. Thirdly, If a wrong party, be Indicted and Arested, [for
exercising Religious Duties, etc.] committed to Prison, brought forth before a
Court of Judicature, claims the Privilege of a Subject, as in the same case
is due unto him: And notwithstanding the Court shall prosecute against,
sentence, and Re-imprison such a one.

What is any wise intimated touching the miscarriage of Transactors, It
appears to me to Reflect equally from both parties, now in contestation. And
as Arbitrary exactions cannot be Transubstantiated into Subjects Privileges by
mutation of Terms, and not things: So for my own part, It Is my hearty desire,
that they may rather, [by mutual Act of Oblivion,] be buried in the Land of
forgetfulness, then to be mustered up, to be exhibited [in their Numbers or
Natures,] to the Public view of the World.

For the Seventeen Digestions, or conditional Propositions, therein Inserted,
(I conceive,) What is Demonstrated in them, being seriously pondered, and
digested, may by Christian composition, produce wolsome Ingredients, to work
the Pulse of this Kingdom to a more complying Constitution, for the future
Peace, and Well-being thereof, then yet appears; as well as be found to be a
Sovereign Antidote against Foreign Attempts, and discontents.

And what in any of them may seem to have Referrence, to the Proof of things,
spoken or acted. I suppose, they would not have been inserted, without (I
fear,) but too manifest Evidence for the Proof of them. And I (humbly)
conceive, the only way and means, to prevent Uncoth Consequences of such
inconsiderate and Rash Practices, were by clipping the wings, by public
disavowing of them. I desire not to multiply words; I (humbly) commit you to
the Protection of the Almighty. And Rest,

Asheford, 28. Febr. 1645. At your service, where not in Active, there in
Passive Obedience. THO. BELKE.

To the Right Honorable the House of PEERS, With the Honorable House of
COMMONS: IN PARLIAMENT ASSEEMBLED.
Shows,
THat whereas you have mutually, by many former and latter Declarations, and
Manifestations, set forth your deep sense of the deplorable condition of this
languishing Kingdom, Thereby presenting unto us the Consideration thereof, to
bring us home (as we humbly conceive,) to a self Examination, duly to ponder
the large proportion that every one of our sins have contributed, not only
in the kindling, but likewise in the increasing, and aggravating the Prodigious
flames of our unnatural Divisions; and as upon mature deliberation, (weighing
and digesting our Condition,) we plainly behold the distemper of this divided
Kingdom, still yielding forth much combustable matter to consume it self: So
likewise, by the waves of our National and Domestic Distractions, (unless
God work a wonderful change both in things, and Persons, to quench the coals
of jealousy in our Spirits, and calm the now raging storms,) we can expect
no other Issue, But that the ship of all future happiness to this Kingdom,
will be Totally swallowed up (as in a Deluge,) by the Waves of our present
Commotions, and this not long since flourishing Kingdom, (having unnaturally
eaten out its own Bowels,) be left as a Golgatha, or field of blood. And
since you jointly profess, your Ardent desires are, Impartially to Render to
God, the things which are Gods, And to Caesar the things that are Caesar's. We
your humble Supplicants, [as not daring to cast a stone at the sins of the
times, By reason of the guilt which every one of our sins have contracted
therein: And as having a fellow-feeling of our Brethrens miseries, so being
ready, and desirous to cast in our mytes, to accommodate them, and to prevent
the like misery to our selves,] are imboldned humbly to Demonstrate unto you,
our apprehensions and desires ensuing; As fouded upon that Royal Law, of
Loving God above all, and our Neighbor as our selves. [ Viz.]

First, That we are heartily willing, to part with what proportion soever, of
our Estates, Real or Personal, with the rest of the Kingdom, [in an equal,
and proportionable manner,] for the defraying of the Vast detriments, and
expenses occasioned by our unhappy divisions.

Secondly, Touching the Militia, and Judicatory, and other weighty Affairs of
this Kingdom; That if there shall be such a satisfactory Ballancing of them.
[As Caesar may discern, an Equivalent Power, as invested in him to defend; and
the Subjects a like Equivalent Power, as invested in them to preserve, and each
subject being set upon levill ground touching Native Privileges,] we humbly
conceive, It might be as a Sovereign Antidote, to work the Pulse of this
gasping Kingdom, to beat more hopefully, and complyantly then now it does.

Thirdly, That as [wee humbly conceive,] the Holy One of Israel, is not to be
limmitted, either to the time, or manner of receiving into his Vineyard; but
reveals himself to his in such manner, and measure, and at such hour, As he
has in his foreknowledge ordained, [who being our Alone Lord and Master,
before whom we shall stand, or fall;] So as we dare not entrench upon Gods
Prerogative, to take Dominion over the Faith of our Brethren; Nevertheless,
we [humbly,] conceive it an unquestionable duty; And shall be ready at all
times, to the utmost of our Powers, to maintain and defend Authority, and all
that shall submitt, to what they shall tender in spiritual matters, in their
own enjoyments from Violation, and disturbance of All men whatsoever.

And, as we Recent, the frequent Alarmes, (sounded into our Ears, by your
DECLARATIONS, and Manifestations,) Are intended, as invitations, to put us upon
a serious inquiry of our Estates; So to quicken us in our duties, [as
Patients,] to make our Addresses to you, [as our Physicians next under God,] to
acquaint you, as with the grounds of the progress of our Mallady, and
distemper; So with our present Constitution and fears, which seem to surprise
us, Touching future inconveniences, and Enormities flowing in upon us.
Wherefore we are further imboldned, Humbly to present, to your serious
Considerations, These our Apprehensions, and desires ensuing. [ Viz.]

1. That you would be pleased, to set forth, A clear, and Genuine
satisfaction, how far, [as you conceive,] the Scripture does inright the
People, to a free, and common Voice, in the Election of their Ministers.

2. That by reason of the disproportion of Livings, we find it causes no
small trouble, in many Places, and not a little dejection to diverse people; In
regard that many Ministers, are so easily drawn away [by the Lodestone of
worldly Lucre,] Even as often as a greater Living presents it self, Which [wee
humbly conceive,] if more Equally divided, would in a great measure be
prevented.

3. That if Collectors were appointed in every Lath, or other division,
according to the Wisdom and discretion of such as should be thereunto
Assigned, and all the Livings brought into a Common Banck, or Treasury; And
there distributed, as in equity should be found most meet,] both for the
present maintenance of the Ministry; And likewise in some competent proportion,
[as occasioned,] for the comfortable livelihood of their Widows, and
Education of their Children; We humbly conceive, that as by that means; The
whole man might be the better taken up, in the work of the Ministry; So, many
Jarrings, and Discords, which are but too too frequent betwixt Ministers, and
People, would cease for present, and be prevented for Future.

The Subscribers to this Supplication, and Demonstration, [humbly] crave
permission for but only Twenty men of the County of (...) to present the same
to the King, and Parliament.

SIR,
THIS Supplication, etc. (As I have declared, for the satisfaction of the
Honorable Committee of KENT, or whomsoever it may concern,) was of my own
composing: and that many months since. Only thus much I shall acquaint you
with; That it was certified to the said Committee, that I had advanced it with
a great deal of Violence, in so much that Ten thousand hands were subscribed
to it. When (in Truth,) at that time, neither my own hand, was subscribed to
it, nor (to my knowledge, or belief, the hand of any man whatsoever. [I dare
not so much derogate from the Scoutmasters of the Black cloth, as not to
rank them amongst the chiefest Proficients in the Art of Multiplication.] It
makes my heart to tremble, to ponder the unhappy consequences of giving or edit
to naked Reports. I desire not to make further Applycation. But shall always
pray; That we may each one endeavor to amend one. That such a Reformation may
be effected, as we have so much spoken of, and so little Acted toward, And
Rest.

Yours, in all Christian Obligations, THOMAS BELKE

FINIS.

