TO (...) Poet BAVIUS; OCCASIONED BY HIS SATYR He Writ in his VERSES TO THE
KING, UPON THE QUEENS being Delivered OF A SON.

Permissu Superiorum.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, M DC LXXX VIII.

UPON THE POET BAVIUS.
A Laboring Muse, that full Nine Months had been First in Labor and then
Pregnant.

In Painful thro's Pregnant at last became.
Nine Months a Loyal Zeal had Fired my Breast, So long Loyal.

Which for Nine Muses could not be at rest.
Tell me, vain hardened Scribler, what Pretense
Have those two Lines, to Kindred, or to Sense?
The Luckey gingle of the Nine and Nine,
Produced 'em without Thinking or Design.
The first thy Loyalties short date Rehearses:
The next, how Damnably thou Pump'st for Verses.
But Duty did my desperate Ray Control: But for Duty. he (...) been enraged
at the Birth of the Princ^

It Is False, thy Muse was Tame, as is thy Soul:
Thou have no Rage, no Fire, no Spirit or Power,
But Feeble Rancor, for the Happy Hour.
Some could not Bridle their Officious Rhyme, No more could Bavius, who
proffered his Poem to Bently two Months before the Prince was born; but had not
the Courage to venture it till he saw indeed 'twas a Son

But must bestow an Heir before the Time.
While thou dull Faithless Scribbling Infidel,
Could not Believe till thou could See, and Feel:
We like the Joyful Patriarchs of Old,
Believed the good to Come, when but Fore told.
But thou, as scanted in thy Faith as Sense,
Wanted the Courage to Trust Providence.
It was enough, we saw a Pregnant Queen!
To Inspire our Muse, though we no more had seen.
Where each well-wisher Honestly intends,
Good will for Paltry Lines must make amends:
And why so sharp Squire Bavius on your Friends?
Thou who have been this Fifteen Years at least,
Through all the Town the most Notorious Jest;
E're (to Increase thy Foppery) thou had Writ:
The Scorn of the Boxes, Laughter of the Pit.
Famous in Julians Song, till Vile Lampoon
Discarded thee for a too dull Buffoon.
But once a Poet, our Diversion failed;
Thou fellest below, even being Redicul'd:
And had not thy Unlucky Rhiming Spirit,
Writ Satyr now, instead of Panygerick:
Vile Pointless Satyr, thou might still have been
A poor forgotten Drone without a Sting:
And without notice followed still the King.
His Couchees, and his Levies, wait, and get
As much, as by thy ever failing Wit.
While with Abortive Lines the Land you fill,
And make the Consort hear your Nonsense still. Then with Abortive Joy the
Nation fill, And make the Consort bear the burden still, Bavius Poem.

Such Saucy Puns, with an Irreverend, She --
And World of Does makes up thy Poetry:
Below thy Native Dullness sinks thy Rhimes,
And are a Woeful Libel on the Times.
Maces and Furrs, their Princes Favor gone, On the City

Neglected, look like Roses after June:
Or, like Fop Bavius Verse, quite out of Tune.
Why does the Trading City look so Blew? Query, he says the City looks Bleak.

Unless by Trusting Sharping Bavius like you.
And why, a Body that no Soul can Boast, He calls it a Body without a Soul, and
tells 'em they have lost the K's Favor.

Or why have they their Princes Favor lost?
The King no Thanks will give your Misplaced Zeal,
To judge his Sentiments t'th' Commonweal.
If Roses after June; are Roses still; Upon his simily of the Rose confuted.

Retain their Color, Beauty, and their Smell:
The Novelty begets 'em more Esteem,
Than if they Bloomed the common Month of June.
So while the City keeps her Loyalty,
She Is still in Favor; and deserves to be,
Inspight of all thy ill-timed Poetry.
And who, but Rhiming Bavius, could suppose
Maces, and Furrs, so very like a Rose.
Or think, because the Judges Chains is gone, His Jerk for the turned on
Judges.

The gaudy Triffle lost, the Man's undone:
Dull Fool, that never to Merit gave its due,
But thinks all Virtue to consist of Show:
As if the Man, once Worth his Prince's Grace,
Must with his short-lived Frown become an Ass.
A Prince's Favor, then, by the same Rule,
Should make him Loved, or Wise that is a Fool.
But now the bitter Robe; the Reverend Gown, Witty on the Bishop

Doomed by his Nations Scandal, must go down:
First tell us, that thou art a Renigade,
E're to thy Mother thou turn Retrograde:
If of the Primitive Roman Church thou be, He pretend^ to be of the Church of
England:

(Heaven guard her from so great an Infamy:)
Stick to that Point, and then we Pardon Thee.
But thou who still the Established Faith Professed,
Like an Ungrateful Bird, Bewrayst thy Nest:
Or like the Amphibious Batt, that shuns the Light,
With Beast can walk, and with the Fowls take flight.
The next high Jest, is the Discarded stusf; A ^ob for the Controlers, the are
^ut.

Now Bavius hand is in, he claws it off.
And like Almanzor when Enraged he grows,
Promiscuously he falls on Friends and Foes.
Though with Substantial Limbs, and brisk in Walking,
Without your Staff you are but Lame and Halting.
Oh Luckey hit! what strange Prodigious skill
Thou have in Clinching, Quibling, Doggeril,
The Colonels next; but by unhappy Chance, The (...) Colonels

No Puns the value of these Lines Advance:
But Dids, and Does, and a quant Simely,
Which must the Place of smarter Clinch supply.
He tells you here, That loss of a Commission,
Is very much like a Deathbed Contrition:
Nay, what is worse, so wretched is their Fate,
No Galloon-Coats their Levires now must wait;
In Bavius Sense, Wit, Honor, Virtue lies (...)

In the Lac'd-Coat and Gay-Embroaderies.
Nor is the Garter from his Rage exempt,
Turned off, he adds the weight of his Contempt:
Unhappy Peers, when once you're in Disgrace;
Your Ribban's Dirty, and your Stars are Brass:
Worse than Beau Bavius Belt all set with Glass.
The Suck-Blood Vermin of the Robe alone, Here he Civil (...)o of the R(...) in
Gener.

Can Smile to see Men every day undone.
If by Permissu Superiorum, this His Book s(...) Licensed.

Dull, Saucy Libel, through the Town must pass:
Where Reverend Bishops, Ravenous Wolves are deemed;
And all the Judges, Bloody Knaves esteemed:
White Staves, Blew Garters, all within his reach;
His Evidence Muse, must of some Crime Impeach.
Then farewell all good Manners, Sense, and Wit,
If Superiorums will such Stuff admit.
But this was slyly meant, like all the rest;
Upon the Reverend Fathers for a Jest.
No Order, Honor, or High Place, can be
From his Immortal Nonsense Satyr free.
Had thou not better in a few dull Lines,
Plain Honest Meeter -- tag'd with gingling Rhimes,
In thy Coronation Style, and usual Sense,
Hamer'd some Hearty welcome to the Prince:
Kept to thy Theme, and his just Praises Sung;
And not have took this time for public wrong
Lybel, this great Occasion, could not bear;
All Love, and Softness, was the Business here:
Malice should here be banished from thy Quill,
Then we'd excused thy barely writing ill;
And for bad Lines have taken thy good Will.
We are content thou should in Scoundrel Verse,
Put into French the Famous Hudebras;
Or Nobler Boilean into English turn,
And move at once our Laughter and our Scorn.
Thy dull Advice too, we with Patience Read,
Which tells us, how Young Monarchs should be Bred;
('It Is pity but thou were a Tutor made.)
And who that see the Politiques that shine,
Through all the Nonsense of each struggling Line: See Bavius.

Thy exact Grammar, and Coherence views,
With the good Nature of thy Railing Muse:
Thy Wit, thy Parts, thy Conduct, Mien and Grace,
Thy Presence, Cringes, and thy Court Grimarce;
But Swears Heaven meant thee for a perfect -- As --
FINIS.

