A JUSTIFICATION OF THE City Remonstrance AND ITS VINDICATION. OR, An Answer to
a Book written by Mr. I. P. Entitled, The City Remonstrance Remonstrated.
Wherein the frequent Falsifyings of the said Mr. I. P. are discovered, the many
Charges by him laid upon the Remonstrance and its Vindicator, disproved, and
the parity and agreement of the Remonstrance (especially in those particulars
so much condemned by him) with the Propositions, Declarations, Remonstrances,
and Votes, of both or either House of Parliament manifested.

By JOHN BELLAMIE.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1646.

To the Right Honorable Thomas Adams Lord Major, and to the Right Worshipful
the Aldermen, and the rest of the Common Council of the City, LONDON.
Right Honorable, Right Worshipful,
Upon the 14 of April last, you being in Court of Common Council assembled,
made choice of a Committee of Aldermen and Commoners to prepare a draught of A
Remonstrance and Petition to both Houses of Parliament, and to present it in
Court, to be there either approved or altered, as upon debate should be judged
meet.

In obedience thereunto, the said Committee upon the 20 of May following,
presented it in Common Council, where every branch thereof was taken apart and
by it self into serious Consideration, and after three days debating in open
Court, it was by consent and approbation of the Court finished, and upon the 26
of May, in the name of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council presented
to both Houses of Parliament. Since which time two Libells have been Printed
against the said Remonstrance, the one called, A moderate Reply to the City
Remonstrance, the other entitled, The Interest of England maintained; In one
of which it is charged to carry a full compliance with His Majesty's wonted
Declarations against the Parliament; and in the other, That a great part of the
main Sticklers in it, are such as were always backward to the Parliament, and
forced to pay their Fifth and twentieth part; with many other foolish, foul,
and false aspersions in them both: Whereupon, (though the unmeetest, because
the unablest of many others) I adventured the Vindication of it; In answer
whereof, and in further opposition to the said Remonstrance, one Mr. J. P. has
since published a Book named, The City Remonstrance Remonstrated, calling it a
hard-hearted Remonstrance, and a Remonstrance invective against the Parliament,
etc. And in Page 29. charges mee^ for saying s^mething (but instances in
nothing,) concerning the King, the Lords, and the power of the Commons, and
what my carriages have been not very long since in Common Council, etc. and
does thereby, as it were, in a tacit way, call the Court to testify against
me. All which, has occasioned me this second time to put pen t^ Paper, in a
further Justification of your Remonstrance, and also of its Vindication, and to
a clearing of my self from those many charges of mutation and change, which (to
beget a d^sesteem of what I have written in Vindication of the Remonstrance)
he has laid against me.

My intention in this my address unto your Lordship, to the worthy Aldermen,
and to all the rest of the Common Council, is, neither to exasperate you
against the person of my opposite, nor yet to seek protection from you for my
self or Books; for if what I have written be not co^cordable to Truth and true
Reason, let both me and them fall before my Antagonist.

But being thus publ^kely charged that I should (not very long since) speak
something (but what it is, he says not) in Common Council, etc. as if it
were cross or contrary to some passages in the Remonstrance, or to what I have
written in the Vindication thereof, for says he, It makes them that heard it,
and observe what your Carriages are now, stand with admiration and amazement at
your wheeling thus about.

I ^oe therefore humbly crave leave to present this my Justification of your
Remonstrance, and its Vindication to your Lordship, and to the whole Court of
Common Council, and do appeal to all of you in general, and to every one of
you in particular, t^ ^estifie against me, if at any time since I had that
undeserved honor and happiness to be a member of this Court, there ever fell
any one word from me, so much as savouring of such things, as by this Mr. J. P.
I am charged to speak in your presence, and I shall ever remain

Your Lordships, and this Cities servant JOHN BELLAMIE.

To my truly Loved and Honored FRIEND Mr. JOHN PRICE.
SIR,
I Have perused your Book, entitled, The City Remonstrance Remonstrated, or an
answer to my Vindication of the said Remonstrance, wherein I perceive you have
been very ready to receive whatever Reports, either true or false have been
broug^t unto you conc^rning my carriage in matters of Religion, even from the
day of my birth to the publishing of your Book, and taking them upon trust,
(for you have not the least knowledge of any one of the particular^, and many
of them relate, I think, to the time before you were born,) without ever
speaking one word to me about them, (though we are professed, and have been
long acquainted ^ntimate Friends, and to the best of my knowledge and
remembrance, not any time the least offensive word ever passed between us, and
now are so near neighbors that whenever you p^eased, in less then one quarter
of an hour you might freely have communicated to me whatever you h^d a desire
to be satisfied in) you have, as I con^eive, to weaken my esteem, and to
render what I have written to be the more invalid, divulged them to the world.

Two things I desire i^ love to represent unto you in this, First, if all that
you have written of me were true, the contrary whereof I shall easily prove
when I come to the particulars; yet I beseech you consider how irregular this
your proceeding against me is, and contrary to the rule given by our Savior
Christ, for you and me and all Gods people to walk by, in Mat^h. 18. 15, 16,
17. If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between
thee and him alone, if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy brother, etc.
and mind that of Solomon, Prove. 15. 18. A man that bears false witness
against his neighbor, is a maul, a sword, and a sharp arrow. Secondly, I pray
also remember how exceedingly your self, and all your friends the
Antipresbyters, have distasted, and by word of mouth often with much dislike,
blamed Mr. Edwards for meddling with personal matters, notwithstanding his way
of writing in this kind, is much different from this of yours, as being of
practices and matters within these few years, since they went into that way of
Independency, and as he conceives, flowing from their principles (and not as
you in this, of things raked up through the whole course of their lives) being
also professedly to discover the errors of the times (viz Here^ies,
Blasphemies, etc.) and thereby to preserve the people from the evil of them.

Now I pray you put this question seriously to your own soul, whether the same
act done in the same kind by Mr. Edwards against the Independents, etc. be a
vice and blame worthy, and yet being done by Mr. J. P. against a Presbyterian
or a Remonstrant, be a virtue, and worthy commendation; think seriously of it,
and then receive such an answer as your own heart shall dictate to you.

You know Mr. J. P. how careful I was of your good name, when about four
mone^hs since a report was brought unto me c^ncerning some opinions of yours
in matters of Religion (whether true or false I now argue not) that presently
by a godly intimate friend of yours and mine, viz. Mr. James Russell, I did
privately, without the least divulging them abroad, make you acquainted with
it: And that very morning after your Book came forth against me* the like
report was again publicly brought unto me in the presence of sundry
witnesses; but in s^ead of taking revenge of you (which God ha^th forbidden me,
Romans 12. 19. saying, Avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath,
for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will rep^y says the Lord) either by
spreading them by reports, or printing them to your d^sparagement, I did
p^esently, in the presence of Mr. James Story, who also heard them reported,
tell them to you, remembering that of Solomon, Prove. 1. 9. He that repeateth a
matter separateth very Friends; and desiring to follow our Saviors counsel,
Matthew. 7. 12. Whatsoever you would that men should do to you, do ye even so
to them; and I hope I shall ever make it a rule for me to walk by, viz. to do
as I would be done unto, and not as I am dealt with.

And therefore in the examination and answering of your Book, I will (though
much provoked by you, yet) by Gods grace endeavor to be as free from pasiion or
retaliation as possibly I can, well remembering that David, when Shimei cursed
and railed upon him, observed much good from God in Shimei his great evil, and
said, So let him curse, because the Lord has said unto him, curse David; who
shall then say, wherefore have thou done so? 2 Samuel 16. 10. So I heartily
desire, without the least reluctance of Spirit against you, as the instrument
seriously to observe, and truly to be sensible of, whatever is from God in all
that you have said, and to lay my self in the dust in giving God the glory,
both in the acknowledging of any error justly charged upon me, and of his
mercy in my recovery. And I trust that through the goodness of* God I shall yet
get much good out of that which perhaps you int^nded, and therefore divulged
for more evil, setting before me as a pattern in this to walk by the practice
of our Lord Christ, recorded for our example in 1 Pet. 2. 21, 23. Who when he
was reviled, reviled not again, but committed himself to him that judges
righteously; and with freedom of spirit I do heartily both praise the Lord,
and thank you for your plain deali^g with me in any thing wherein as you
profess, you really and singly intended my spiritua^^ good, and pray the Lord
to give you repentance, and to pardon you in every thing wherein in this
transaction you have done otherwise.

Thus with the real dem^nstration of ^y true love and affection to you, I
crave your leave to go on to the answearing of your Book, earnestly desiring
that if yet after all we cannot agree in judgment and opinion, we may still
close together in heart and affection, which (whatever the event shall prove)
shall always be the desire, prayer, and endeavor of

Your cordially loving and faithful Friend John Bellamie.

A JUSTIFICATION OF THE City Remonstrance, AND ITS VINDICATION.
THE first thing you quarrel withal, is the Title of the Book, A Vindic^tion,
etc. and this you continue to the latter end of your sixth Page, and (as in the
Moderate Reply, so here in this) you endeavor in general terms to lay low
the Remonstrance and its Vindication in the eyes of the people; As in your
first page by comparing them to a bad Cause and its Advocates, then to the
Kings Declarations, R^monstrances, and their Abettors, to Absaloms reb^llion
against his Father David, and Achitophels cunning counsel to draw the people
after hi^, to Demetrius his plea for Diana's greatness, and to Tertullu^ (...)
against St. Paul.

Ans^. ^^e pass by the parallel^ which here you make with the Vindicator of
the City Remonstrance, and leave it wholly to the (...) ^ensure of the
judicious Reader, whether there be any the least par^ty in the things and cases
by you compared, for I had much rather abide their test and trial, then in
this to be a pleader of my own cause, and so I come to your application of it
in these words: Viz.

As it was in the beginning, so it is now; witness the present case, A
moderate Reply to the City Remonstrance, in just^fication of the Parliaments
innocence from the prejudice raised against them by the said Remonstrance, as
(say you) shall be fully evidenced before we have d^ne.

Answ. Two things I observe in this: first, that you say, (and therein you lay
a charge upon the City) that the City Remonstrance has raiseda prejudice
against the Parliaments innocence: And secondly, you further say, that this
shall be fully evidenced before you have done; the first is expressed, as
usually you use to do, only in generals, which amount to nothing: But I pray
consider with your self, is not Mr. I. P. a Freeman and Citizen of London, one
who lives, under God, in and by the Trad^ of the City, and yet so far to
forget himself and his duty, as thus to asperse the City and its actions with
general, and yet unjust defamations, and all this under a specious show of a
justification of the Parliaments innocence, when as there are clouds of
witnesses, and many of them under the Parliaments own attestation, at all times
ready to be produced if required, of Londons fidelity, of Londons loyalty, of
Londons unparalled embowelling, and in a great measure emptying themselves,
not only of treasure, but of blood also, and all this unweariedly from time to
time, since the Parliament first fate, to this very day, yea always, with
alacrity and freedom both of heart^ and hands, for the honor, the defense,
the just and necessary occasions of Parliament; and has not the Honorable
Horse of Lords, (...) accepted and fully approved most of the particulars in
the said Remonstrance, yea, those in special, and by name, which you so much
oppose, viz. the suppressing of all Heresies and S^^ismes, etc. and promised to
take the other particulars into their serious and speedy consid^ration, as by
their answer to that Remonstrance presented to them it does appear? and has
not the Honorable House of Commons also received the said Remonstrance, and
promised to give an answer thereunto in due time, and not at any time since its
receiving into their Honorable House, by any p^bli^e act manifested to the
world the least dislike thereof? and yet must Lon^^^s Remonstrance by one of
its own members be charged with raising a prejudice against the Parliaments
innoceney?

I pray consider whether by this you do not first charge the House of Lords
for their being well satisfied with that, which yet you say, does raise a
prejudice against the Parliaments innocence. And secondly, whether you do not
prejudge the judgment of the House of Commons, and therein break the
Privilege of Parliament, in passing such a sentence, and laying such a charge
upon that, which yet lies under their consideration: I only offer these two
Quaeries to your after, or second consideration.

But for a ^ this, you say that this shall be fully evidenced before you have
done.

Answ. I pray remember what it is that in this you promise, and be sure that in
the particulars of it you make your Charge good, otherwise you must not be
offended, nor take it ill, if according to the common Proverb, you be judged
to be one of them, which will undertake more in an hour, then you can perform
in an age. I appeal to the Reader, whether as yet, either the Moderate reply,
or this your Remonstrance Remonstrated, has in any one instance, which either
of you have given, or in all that both of you have done, done any thing which
proves that the City Remonstrance has raised a prejudice against the
Parliaments innocence; and t^^ly you must needs bear with me in this, that I
cannot judge your bare word to be of that Authority, as to believe it because
you affirm it, especially considering the honorable House of Commons has not
as yet passed any the least displeasing sentence against it; and the honorable
House of Lords has declared, that they are well satisfied with the particulars
contained in it. And both House^ of Parliament, since their receiving of this
Remonstrance, have in the Propositions sent to his Majesty for a safe and w^l
grounded Peace^ even in terminis, proposed more to his Maje^ty for his R^oyall*
assent, as unto Reformation of Religion, then the Remonst^ant^ have desired in
their second, third, and fourth Petitidus, so much condemned by you; for the
drift of all that they desire, is (...) an equal conformity of all the
Subjects of England to the public dis^ipline and doctrine set forth, or to be
set forth by Authority of Parliament, as by reference to those three Petitions
will clearly show, but both Houses of Parliament in their great wisdom,
faithfulness, and care for the public safety and peace of the Kingdom, have
in the fifth and sixth Articles of the Propositions in these words thus
proposed; viz. Ar^ic. 5. That Reformation of Religion accordin^ to (...) by Act
of Parliame^^, in such manner as both Ho^ses have agreed, (...) agree upon,
after consultation had with the Assembly of (...). And Article 6 it thus
follows; For (...) much as ^ot^ Kingdome^ are (...) oblig^d by the same
Covm^n^ to indeavo^^ the ^^arest ^onjunction and unif^rmity in matters of
Religion, that such unity and (...) in Religi^n according to the Covenant as
after (...) Divines of b^t^ Kingdoms now assembled, (...) shall be (...)
agreed upon (...) Houses of Parliament of England, and by the Church and
Kingdom of Scotland, be (...) by Acts of Parliament of both Kingdoms
respectively. And therefore were I thought worthy to be of your Council, I
should advise you to be so inge^^ous, as in this to confess your error, and
not to imagine that you see more in the City Remonstran^e, then either one or
both Houses of Parliament can yet discern; and for after times, I wou^d
persuade you to forbear the thus unjust besm^a^ing and falsely acc^sing that
City wh^reof you are a member, (...) amongst whom under God you enjoy your
livelihood.

You g^e on and say, (...) Reply (...) with adversary upon adversary
representi^^ the Au^hor of the said ^ooke, a liar, because (...) tells (...) a
friend to the Parliament.

Ans^, Truly, these are fine (...) if they were true, to beget (...)
Remonstrance, and to ingratiate the opposer^ in the eyes of the people. But I
pray what do you (...), I must needs say you tread in the (...) Replyer (...),
and it is very (...) the book and the page if you (...), and tell us the truth
you have told, (...) you are called a Liar, and where you are (...) you are a
friend to the Parliame^^ (...) be taking with children (...).

The next thing you fall upon, is in your fourth page, and that is the word
Humble Remonstrance, and upon this you descant in some similitudes, as of Court
complements, and Cavaliers carriage, and then in plain terms you call it, a
Remonstrance invective against the Parliament.

Answ. You are full of charges, though never so false, and liberal in your
expressions, though you make nothing good; I conceive you think your self
safe and secure, and perhaps you are so from ever giving an account of these
your actions to any earthly authority: but yet methink^ the words of the ninth
Commandment should be of some authority to you, and bear some sway with you,
viz. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. If not against
a particular person, then sure not against a Corporation, a City whereof your
self are a member.

Then you are offended at these expressions, viz. Two late Libells, published
by two Anonymusses; and you ask why I call them Libells before I prove them so.

Answ. They were so in themselves before I named them so; neither called I them
Libells, for any of those reasons which you would have the world believe I did.
As first, because they are written by an Antipresbyter; nor yet because they
contain in them lies, falsities, untruths, though all these in several
instances are in the vindication made good against them, nor because they are
little Books, nor yet singly, because they are written against the City, or
because they are without the Authors Names, but for these two last reasons
jointly and together: A Libell I call that which is an untrue, and therefore an
unjust Charge upon or against a Person, a Corporation, a Court, without any
name annexed to make good what is there charged; and in this respect I appeal
to the Reader, whether I did not truly and justly call them Libells.

Lastly, before you come to the body of the Book, you have yet another fling
against the Title, A Vindication of the City Remonstrance, that is, (say you) a
Vindication of that which is invindicable: And therefore (say you) better it
would be that both the City Remonstrance, and the vindication thereof were
written in ashes with the finger of vanity, then in marble with the pen of a
(...), etc.

Answ. For ought I yet see, it is but one (...) opinion, and he none of the
gravest neither, that the City Remonstrance is invindicable, and what you have
said to prove it to be so, I desire the Reader to judge, for truly I cannot
dis^ern it. But of this I am confident, that it is app^oved by the Church of
Scotland, witness the Letter now in Print for all the Kingdom to see, which
was sent from the General Assembly (...) the Church of Scotland, to the Lord
Major, Alderme^, and (...) of London, June 18. 1646. manifesting their
approbation of it, and thankfulness for it. And sure I may say^ it is app^^ved
by the generality of the ablest, grave^, and (...) witness their Petition
subscribed by eight Thous^^^ (...) Hundred, thirty and four of their Hands
presented the twenty third of June, 1646. to the Court of Common Council,
giving them Thanks for it; testifying their approbation of ^t, and des^^ing
them to wait upon the House of Co^m^ns for their gracio^s answer to it, which
Petition is by Order of Co^^t since Printed. And me think^ you should not
forget that the same Remonstrance for the substance of it, was not only well
accepted, but also graciously answered by the House of Lords. And therefore
^urely in the judgment of all these, the City Remonstrance ^s not ^udged (...):
But perhaps you ar^e of the ^ind^ of (...) 6. 16. who was (...) reason. And I
make as little (...), yet it is and will be (...) all the Reformed Churches in
Europe, not one excep^^^. (...). Q^arrells (...) is you have to say against the
(...) whether in all probability the Reply, and not the Remonstrance h^th
raised those disturbances, for the Subject of the Remonstrance is an earnest
desire of the settlement of government, by one Uniforme Law, for all the
Subjects of England to submit equally and alike unto, which I am sure must
needs tend to peace and quietness, but the d^ift of the Reply is quite
contrary, and therefore without all peradventure it is this, and its abettors,
and not that and its promoters, which has desired and occasioned these
Divisions both in Church and State.

In page 9 you go about to show that the Common Council by their Remonstrance,
did act in a direct, evident, and obvious manner against the express Will and
Word of God; and for proof of this in page 11* you give us some Scriptures,
and some passages in the Remon^^rance, which you say, or at least would have
the world believe, is in a direct, evident, and obvious manner against the
express Will and Word of God; but you never tell the reader how, or wherein
they are so, but thus you deliver them.

LET US TRY THEN:
WORD OF GOD. CITY REMONSTRANCE. Romans 14. 5. Let ^very man be fully persuaded
in his own mind. That as we are Subjects of one Kingdom, so all may be
equally required (and here to delude the Reader, you insert, without making the
least change of the character, these following words, as if they also were in
the Remonstrance; viz. Be they persuaded in their own minds, or not persuaded)
to yield obedience to the government set forth, or to be set forth by the
Parliament.

Now I shall wholly all along in these your Parallels, leave it to the judgment
of the Reader to consider, whether there be such an antipathy between these
Scriptures, and those Petitions of the Remonstrance, as in the Remonstrance,
without your insertion, they are expressed; and crave your leave in the same way
of parallel, to set the same Scriptures with some branches of the Proposition^
sent by both Houses of Parliament to the King, and other pass^ges of Parliament
and then desire your judgment, whether they also (...) a direct, e^ident and
obvious manner against the express Will and Word of God.

WORD OF GOD. Propositions of both Houses of Parliament, Article the 5th. Romans
14. 5. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. That r^formation of
Religion according to the Covenant, be settled by Act of Parliament, in such
manner as both Houses have agreed, or shall agree upon, after consultation had
with the assembly of Divines. ^CITI REMONSTRANCE. Romans 14. 13. That no man put
a stumbling block or an occasion to fall, in his b^ others way. That all such
Sectaries as conform not to the public Discipline established, or to be
established (by Parliament, says the Remonstrance, but this you leave out,)
may be fully declared against, and some effectual course settled for proceeding
against such persons: Here, say you, is a stumbling block^ viz. a menace in a
brothers way.

Answ. But why do you leave out the beginning of that prayer, in the Petit^on
which you cite^ ^t tells you the meaning of the Remonstrants, by the words all
such Sectaries, ^iz. Those immediately before mentioned, as Anab^ptists,
Brownists, Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers; do you not by omitting the
mentioning of these, endeavor to del^de the Reader?

I pray put down that Petition wholly together, and let the Reader be fairly
dea^t with all, and have it, as in the Remonstrance it is expressed, an^ then see
how it is opposite to the Scripture by you set against it.

(...) (...)

I desire here also in a parallel way, to set down the Scriptu^^ by you
brought, and a passage or two of the Parliaments, and (...) desire your
judgment, whether they also be in a direct, evident and obvious manner,
against the express Will and Word of God.

WORD OF GOD. ^Parliaments Declaration upon his Majesty's Declaration after the
Ba^taile at Edgebill, Page 659. Rom^ 14. 13. That (...) put a (...) blo^k, or
an occasion to fall, in his brothers way. Had not his Majesty (seduced
thereunto by that Popish and Prelaticall faction) denied his consent to the Bil
for the Assembly, so often by both Houses presented to him, we had long since
manifested to the world by a well settled reformation, our (...) dislike of ^*
Brownisme and Anab^ptisme.Remonstrance of the State of the kingdom, page 19.We
do declare, that it is far from our purpose or desire, to let loose the golden
reins of discipline and government in the Church, to leave private persons, or
particular Congregations to take up what for me of Divine Service they please,
for we hold it requisite that there should be throughout the whole realm, a
conf^rmity to that Order which the Laws enjoyne, according to the Word of God.
M^t. 7 12. As you would that men should do unto you, so do unt^ them, for
this is the Law and the Propheis. Page 3. We will not receive impression of
any forced construction of the Covenant: compare this with Page 7.

Will you never leave fals^fying? where do you find any such expression in
the Remonstrance, either in Page 3, or 7. as this is, viz. we will not receive
impression of any forced construction of the Covenant? The House of Commons in
their late Declaration of the 17 of April, 1646. do say, We expect that the
people of England should not receive impressions of any forced construction of
that Covenant; and in obedience thereunto, the Remonstrants, do say in page 2
and 3 of the Remonstrance, that in pursuance of that Noble resolution of this
Honorable House, for the due observation of the Covenant, and their
expectation of conformity of the people of England thereunto, expressed in the
late Declaration, we do resolve by the grace of God not to receive impression
of any forced construction thereof; and is it now become an acting in a direct,
evident and obvious manne^ against the express Will and Word of God, for the
Common Council to profess their resolutions to yield obedience to the desires
and expectations of the House of Commons, in their not receiving impressions of
any forced constructions of the Covenant?

I desire your leave here also in a parallel way to set down the Scripture by
you here brought, and another branch of the Propositions sent by both House of
Parliament to the King; and to desire your judgment, whether that also be in a
direct, evident and obvious manne against the express Will and Word of God.

WORD OF GOD. Propositions of both Houses of Parliament, Article the 6th. Mat.
7. 12 A^ you would that m^n should do unto you, so do unto them, for this is
the Law and the Pro^hets. For as much as both Kingdoms are mutually obliged by
the same Covenant, to endeavor the nearest conjunction and uniformity in
matters of Religion: That such unity and uniformity in Religion according to
the Covenant, as after consultation had with the Divines of both kingdoms now
assembled, is, or shall be jointly agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament of
England, and by the Church and Ki^gdom of Scotland, be confirmed by Acts of
Parliament of both Kingdoms respectively. CITY REMONSTRANCE. Mat. 7. 1^. As
you would, that men should do unto you, so do unto them, for this is the Law
and the Pro^hets. The 4 Petition, That no person disaffected to Pre^byterian
government (says the Remonstrance, s^t forth, or to be set forth by the
Parliament, but according to your usual course, this to blind the reader you
sti^^ leav^ ou^) may be employed in any place of public trust; and the^ you
add, which is not at all in that Petition, those words: viz. But some effectual
course settled to proceed against such persons, as in the 3 Petition, where
there is not the shadow of a word tending to any such purpose.

I confess the words you^ cite are in the 2d. Petition, but not at all in the
least manner applied to persons only disaffected to Presbyterian government,
for there is no such word in that Petition, nor any thing looking that way;
neither does the Common Council, in any part of their Petitions so much as
desire that persons only disaffected to Presbyterian government, should by
some effectual course* settled, be proceeded against; and therefore methinks
you should have been a little more considerate, before you should thus falsely
and unjustly have charged the Common Council to act in a direct, evident, and
obvious manner against the express Will and Word of God. This I will grant
you, that in the second Petition the Common Council does desire, that all
Anabaptists, Brownists, He^etiques, Schismatics, Blasphemers, and all such
Sect^ries as conform not to the public Discipline established, or to be
established by Parliament, may be fully declared against, and some effectual
course settled for proceeding against such Persons, but is there no difference
between Anabaptists, Brownists, Heretics, ^chismaticks, Sectaries, and
persons but disaffected to Presbyterian government? I pray tell me your mind
plainly, would you have Heretics and Blasphemers, (...). such as deny the
Scriptures to be the Word of God, such as profess the Scriptures are writings
only probable to be believed as the Story of King Henry the eighth^ such as
deny the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of Essence, such as call the Trinity a
three headed Cerberus, ^uch as deny the Divinity of Christ, such as deny the
immortality of the Soul, and such as deny that there is a God, or say, if
there be a God, the Devil is a God, such as say God is the author of sin,
such who hold that all men shall be saved, yea, and the Devils too, such as
say that Christ's humane Nature is defiled with Original sin as well as ours,
such as hold that all R^ligions, Worships, Consciences, whether Paganish,
Jewish, Antichristian, etc. should be tolerated: would you have these
tolerated, or would you not have some effectual course settled for proceeding
against such Persons? or do you think these to be no more dangerous, if
permitted to broach these Here^ies and Blasphemies in the Kingdom, then to
permit persons otherwise every way peaceable, godly, and orthodox, because
merely disaffected to Presbyterian government?

I desire here also in a parallel way to set down the Scripture by you here
brought, and a Vote of the House of Commons of the 30 July, 1641. and to desire
your judgment, whether that also be in a direct, evident, and obvious manner
against the express Will and Word of God.

WORD OF GOD. Vote of the House of Commons, die V^neris 30 Iubii, 1641. Mat. 7.
12 As you would (...) men should do unto you, so do unto them; for this is
the Law and the Prophets. Resolved upon the Question. That this House does
conceive that the Protestation made by them, is sit to be taken by every person
that is well-affected in Religion, and to the good of the Commonwealth: And
therefore does ^eclar^, That what person soever shall not take the
Protestation, is unfit to bear Office in the Church o^ Commonwealth.

Thus having given you these Articles of the Propositions of both Houses of
Parliament sent to the King for a safe and well grounded Peace, and the other
passages of both or either House of Parliament, which I have placed after your
example, in a parallel way, against the Scriptures by you brought, and desired
your judgment whether these also do act (as you would have the world believe
the Petitio^s in the Remonstrance does) in a di^ect, evident, and obvious
manner against the express Will and Word of God. I pray you now also seriously
to consider of those Petitions in the Remonstrance, and compare them together,
with these Propositions for Peace, and the other passages of both or either
House of Parliament, and then tell me what the Remonstrants in those three (so
much by you condemned) Petitions, for the substance of them, did more desire of
the Parliament, then both Houses of Parliament have now proposed to the King,
or has been formerly by them in these passages of both or either House of
Parliament declared to the world.

The^ you say, Presbyteriall government is not in the Covenant, there^^re a^
(...), and this (say you) you enforce upon others, though you will receive no
forc^d con^^ruction of the same your selves.

Answ. Where did the Remonstrants say that Presbyteriall government was in the
Covenant? and if they never said it, as they never did, why do you here bring
it in as if they had said it* I hope that at last you will learn to forbear
falsifying. It is true, that in page 2 of the Remonstrance, they speak of
Ordinance^ for Presbyteriall government; and I think you will not deny but
there are such, if you do, I will produce them; but though Presbyteriall
government be not nominally, and in v^^bis in the Covenant, yet I hope without
offense, it may be said that it is concord^ble to the Covenant, as being
nearest to that government which the best reformed Churches do practice, and
that by our Covenant we are bound to endeavor the settlement of. And that
progress which both Houses of Parliament have already made, in, and toward
the settlement of Presbyteriall government, they have done it in pursuance of
the said Covenant, as by their own words in the Ordinance of the 14 of March,
1645. it does appear, Viz. The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament being
very sensible of the gr^^t duty which lies upon them to settle matters (...)
^eligion and the worship of Almighty God; and having continually before their
eyes the Covenant, which they have so solem^ly taken: for the performance
thereof, and the manifold motives and encouragements thereunto, which are given
them from God himself by a special hand of Providence, p^wring forth daily
mercies upon them; In discharge of their duty, and in purs^ance of the said
Covenant, and in thankfulness to God for all his Mercies, have diligently
applied themselves to that work of his Horse, by his grace and assistance they
have made some progress therein, notwithstanding the exigency of other
affairs, accompanied oftenti^es with great and imminen^ dangers. And
notwithstanding the great difficulty of the work it self in diverse respects,
and particularly in the right jointing of what was to be settled with the Laws
and Govern^^nt of the Kingdom, the want whereof has ^aused much trouble i^
this and other States; yet by the merciful assistance of God, having re^oved
the book of Common Prayer, with all its unnecessary and burdensome Ceremonies,
and established the Directory in the ^^ome thereof, and ^aving abolish^d the
Prelaticall Hierarchy, by Archbishops, Bishops, and their dependants, and in
stead thereof, laid the foundation of a Presbyteriall Government in every
Congregation, with sub^rdin^tion to Cla^^icall, Provinci^ll, and National
Assemblies, and of t^e^ all to the Parliament.

Why do you also wrong the Remonstrants, in saying, They force Presbyteriall
government upon others? do they any other thing then Petition the Parliament
to settle that government which in the words of this Ordinance both the Lords
and Commons do say, that in discharge of their duty, and in p^rs^ance of the
said Covenant, they have laid the foundation already, viz. of a Presbyteriall
government.

You have yet one parallel more:

WORD OF GOD. ^^ITY REMONSTRANCE. D^ut. 19. 15. At the mouth of two or three
witnesses shall every thing be established. That Quarterman may be brought to
some exemplary punishment for the affront done by him, etc. And then you say,
Though no such thing was ever proved by one witness or testimony, that what
he did was any aff^on^ done to the Privileges and Government of the City*
Hang him, hang him, what has ^e done?

Answ. You deny not the act of Quarterman presume it is not that which you say
was never proved by one witness or testimony, for the act was done at high
Exchange time, within the sight and hearing of many hund^eds; but I conceive
your meaning (for you do not express it, and therefore I can but guess at
it) is, that the act in entering the City, and making proclamation therein with
sound of Trumpet; without acquainting the Lord Major therewith, was not proved
by one witness or ^estimony to be any affront done to the Privileges or
Government of the City, there never was any the least exception taken against
the Order to proclaim, nor against the matter proclaimed, nor the time when,
nor the place where the Proclamation was made; if according to the constant and
uninterrupted course of transacting things of that nature, the Lord Major, who
is the chief Magistrate of the City had but been acquainted with it. Now I
appeal to the Reader, whether such an act done in such a manner in the sight
and hearing of many hundreds, without acquainting the Lord Major therewith, be
not an affront done to the privileges and government of the City.

In page 14. you tell the Reader, that I except against the replyer, for
saying, The Parliament has promised in several Declarations a gracious
respect to tender Consciences.

Answ. In page 9 of my Vindication, I cited out of the Replyer, page 2, these
following words, viz. That it is notoriously known that the Parliament did
promise in several declarations, a gracious respect to tender Consciences. I
did not except against him for so saying, but I told him then, and I tell you
now, that I will not say that this is false, left I should fall into that sin,
which I am forced so frequently to reprove you for; but (...) be any such
promises in former Declarations which I yet remember not, as I then said to
him, so I now say to you, you should have done well to have expressed the date
of those Declarations, and the words of the promises, that so the Reader might
see, that at least in something you, I say you, as well as the Replyer, desire
to deal fairly with them, for the Remonstrants they still laid a fair Copy
before you in the Remonstrance, so to have writ after them.

And now without showing any one Declaration more then the Replyer did, you go
on and say, It seems you are willing to hide your eyes from such observations
in the Parliaments Declarations, as though this were an abominatio^^ to you,
that they should ^a^e any respect to ten^er consciences.

Answ. I never knew before, that a desire to know the dates of the Parliaments
several Declarations, and to see the words of the promises which they therein
make, of a gracious respect to tender consciences, which the Replyer says, is
so notoriously known, (and which I must confess as then, so now, I remember
not,) had been a manifestation of a man's willingness to hide his eyes from
such observations in the Parliaments Declarations. And it is so far from
being an abomination to me, that the Parliament should have any respect to
tender Consciences, that I shall much rejoice both in the beholding of any true
tenderness of conscience in any man, and at all due respect which the
Parliament shall show unto them.

Yet can I not conceive that Heretics that deny there is a God, or that the
Scriptures are the Word of God, and that they are no more to be believed then
the Stories of Henry the 8the, etc. or Blasphemers, which call the Trinity of
Persons in the Unity of Essence, a three headed Cerberus, etc. that these, and
such as these, can properly be brought in under the notion of tender
consciences.

But th^n you ask me if I have forgotten the l^st Declaration of the 17 of
April, 1646, Answ. You know tha^ neither the Remonstrants, no^ yet my self
have forgotten that Declaration, for it is by the Remonstrants in their second
page, cited as a Noble resolution of this Honorable House for the due
observation of the Covenant: and their expectation of the conformity of the
people of England thereunto (...) in that Declaration, and it is by (...) in
the tenth page (...) my Vindication quoted as a justification of the
Remonstrants (who to answer the expectation of the House of Commons manifested
in that Declaration in these words, viz. We do^ expect that the people of
England, should not receive impressi^^s of any forced co^struction of that
Cov^nant) do profess that they do resolve by the grace of God not to receive
impressions of any forced construction thereof. But what is this one
Declaration to that the Replyer says, that it is notoriously known that the
Parliament did promise a gracious respect to tender Conscience^ in many
several De^larations, or what i^ it to that which you do say, viz. Were I as
well furnished with Books as your self, doubtless I could show you s^verall
other D^clarations, where they promise a Christian respect to tender
C^ns^iences.

Then you go on and say, I am so^ry Mr. Bellamie, you should be so apt now
adays to cast out of your memory the praise* ^orthy Acts ^f the Parliament.

Answ. I Will say no more in (...) Replyer or your self, but that I would desire
you not to take it (...), because I remember not that which yet (...) so
notoriously known, and that which you say, were I well furnished with books,
doubtless I could show (...) is while neither he, nor you, can, or at (...)
instance of any other (...) in^reat you at present to fo^beare your sorrow, and
for aftertimes not to be so censori^us as to charge me to be so apt now a days
(...) Parliament; (...) I shall be as ready to (...) without any ground charges
me to be so apt now a days to cast them out of my memory.

In your 16 page you thus go on, speaking to me, viz. In the next place you
begin with an interrogation, as if you had gotten a Com^ission to ins^'t; thus;
What? is Londons care to keep the Covenant* now become Lond^ns ruin, etc.
Doubtless these are Doctrines of a new date, and near a kin to those new
Lights, which so many now ad^yes d^e so much bo^st of. And th^n you say,
Whither now Mr. Bellamy? I profess my ^eart aches, and my hand trembles, shall
I write, or shall I forbear? I passed by your sc^ffing at new Lights once
before at page 10. and took no notice of it; but I meet with it again, yea,
with an additionall scoff, Doctrines of a new d^te, and new Lights, etc.

Answ. When I resolved to endeavor the Vindication of the City Remonstrance, I
resolved with my self, that I should mee^ with oppositions, and therefore
desired so to carry on the worke^ as not willingly to let a phrase fall from
me, that might justly give any cause of offense, and to that end, my care was
to weigh words as well as matter, well knowing that sweet and pleasing
langu^ge, with solid reason and st^ong a^guments, best conduce to the carrying
on of a controversy.

I confess, that as in p. 10. so here, I use the word new Lights, and
Doct^ines of a new date, but whether in the least appearance as a scoff or a
jeere, I freely leave to the Reader both to examine and censure; for as
scoffing and jeering are far from my disposition, so I can safely say, they
were as far in this from my intention. I desire the Reader to take a survey
of the passages immediately preceding these expressions, as they are
transcribed out of the Moderate Reply, and judge whether I had not just cause
to speak what ever is there spoken; the expressions are these, viz. That the
Remonstrants do discourage the Parliament, and that they press them in all
haste, unto a sudden enfeebling of their strength, by crushing a considerable
party of as cordial friends as ever they had since the W^rs began. And that,
because they will not swear a submission unto that Church Government, which
(say you) neither they, nor your selves ye^ understand, and to make so ill a
requital of their Winters w^rke. And then again, Shall the whole Kingdom,
that was almost re^dy (...) all its Quarters to congratulate with London for
all its love, now throw by these thoughts, and with sad ^earts, and pale faces,
t^ll their wives and children, friends, and neighbors, W^e and alas London
will ruin (...), London begins to decline the Parliament, London begins to
clos^ with the King, London is filled with Malignant language, London
remonstrates to the Parliaments prejudice, Londons City is Englands woe.

Now I pray consider whether these so many, so foul, and yet withal so false
charges shall be laid against London, and that for their performance of what
by Covenant they are sworn unto, does not justly occasion these
interrogations; and let the Reader judge whether my using of them gave you any
cause to say, that I begin with them, as if I had a Commission to insult, and
whether from these, and my calling them Doctrines of a new date, which* whether
they be so or no, the Reader will easily discern. And my saying that they are
near akin to those new Lights which so many now adays do so much boast of;
which I therefore did, because they which do now adays so much boast of their
new Lights, are the persons which do thus calumniate London for this their
Remonstrance, and are the prime men which vilify the Covenant, as in sundry
particular instances in my Vindication I made it good. I say, pray consider,
and let the Reader judge whether all or any of these things gave you any just
occasion thus to rake up, as you have done, reports against me, whether true
or false, and to publish them to the whole World, as in your 1617, 18, 19, 20,
and 21 pages of your Book, and so almost al along to the end you have thus
done, leaving the argument in difference between us, and falling upon some
personal things, which you say have been reported to you concerning my
carriage in matters of Religion: I Will come to the particulars; first, you tell
the Reader the place of my birth, and that I was borne a Son of the Church of
England under Episcopacy: Truly, if this be a fault or e^rour, I conceive Mr.
I. P. will not deny himself to be guilty of the same crime. Then you come to
the manner of my breeding, the time of my coming to London, and my being bound
an Apprentice to Mr. Nicholas Bourne, Citizen and Stationer of London: and you
tell the Reader how my carriage was for the time of my Apprentiship, which you
are pleased thus to express, Exercising such strictness and exactness in
keeping and preserving that rich jewel of a quiet and tender conscience, etc.

Answ. What is this either to the City Remonstrance, or to my Vindication
thereof? these are the things now in debate between you and me; but your thus
elevating me up in praises i^ this, and some such other passages in your Book,
is only to cast me down with the greater violence, so farr^ as you can, to my
defamation and destruction; but I pray consider (and let your own heart be
your own Judge, for I will not accuse you) whether your dealing with me in
this, be not just like the Devils with our Savior Christ, Matthew. 4 5, 6. who
took him up to the Pinnacle of the Temple, that so, if it were possible, he
might break his neck by throwing him down to the ground.

But say you, my tenderness of conscience appeared, In that I would not
personally sell such Books (as Prayer books) which were ordinarily sold by
other Stationers, and in my Masters Shop.

Ans. Mr. I. P. you and the Reader shall both see by this first particular,
what credit either you are to give to the reports you have heard of me, for
there is not any one thing that you deliver upon your knowledge, but all upon
hearsay; and you know the old Proverb^, Fam^est mendax, or what little regard
is to be had to what you all along in this, and in other particulars have
written of me; For as you have delivered them, I solemnly profess, that to
the best of my knowledge and remembrance there is not one of them true. I
confess that neither my self, nor any of my fellow Servants did sell any
Play-books, or other books in that nature; and our not selling these, was by my
Masters own order and direction, and that upon such good grounds, as I know
you neither will, nor can question. But for the particular which you instance
in, viz. Prayer-books, there is but one man living that I know of, that can
testify any thing upon knowledge concerning my practice in this particular,
and that is my Master Mr. Nicholas Bourne, who was concerned in it, and
therefore his testimony is the more considerable: I Will give it you in, as an
answer to what in this you have Printed upon the Credit of your reporters, and
that in his own words written to me in a Letter upon the sight of this passage
in your Book; it thus follows:

This 24. of July, 1646.
Mr. Bellamie,
This day there came to my hands, a Book called the City Remonstrance
Remonstrated, where in page 1^. I find you are accused, that when you were my
S^rvant you would not sell Prayer-books: To which I answer, to prove the
contrary, that I know you nev^r refused to sell any Prayer-books; and that I
printed a Prayer Book, called The Supplications of Saints, of which I do
believe you sold some hundreds: And this I test^fie under my Hand the day and
year^ above written.

P^r me Nicholas Bourne.


The next thing you fall upon, thinking thereby to defame me, is, That after I
set up Shop for my self, the business of Infants B^ptisme grew into deb^te;
and (say you) I then fell into the Opinion of the An^baptists, etc.

Answ. Mr. I. P. I am sorry you should so easily entertain reports without
ground, and so freely publish them to the World, knowing nothing of them; he
that told you this, if he knew what it was he said unto you, knows, that as
unto the point of time he told you an untruth. I confess, that many years
before this, even when I was not above 17 years of age, I did upon some
s^ruples put into me by an Anabaptist, entertain their opinion, but I bless
God, it was not above a months time before the Lord discovered my error to
me. It is now above 30 years since, and must this be raked up afresh by you,
and thrown in my face to blemish what you can that which I have written in
defense of the Remonstrance? Is this a carriage becoming a sober Christian?
one ^olid argument, or good reason, if you had them to give, against the
Remonstrance or its Vindication, would with wise men be more regarded, then
twenty such useless or vain reports.

Then you tell the Reader of my applying my self to a separate Coxgregation,
and of my continuance with them, and the manner of departing from them; and all
this you affirm, it seems, as upon your own knowledge, for you do not in all
this say as in others things, it is reported so, but positively affirm ^he
particulars to be so.

Ans. I am sure you know nothing more, nor less, of all that in this you have
written, for the time you relate to, was near twenty years before you and I
ever saw the faces one of another, but to show you your mistake, and to let it
appear how you are abused in receiving, and have abused me in divulging of of
th^se things, I Will give you and the world, (being as it were thus by you called
thereunto) a true account of them, It Is true, I did above thirty years since
apply my self to that Congregation, whereof Mr. Jacob was then Pastor, with
whom I continued in Communion all the time he continued in this Kingdom, and
some years after: but that this was then as you affirm a Separate
Congregation, I deny, and son proof of what I say, I appeal to the confession
of the faith of the said Congregation published in print, in Anno 1616. Which
was a little after the time applying my self, as you call it unto them, in
which it does appear that Separation was then witnessed against by that
Congregation, and the judgment of that Congregation then was that the pub^ique
Congregations in this Kingdom, was the true Churches of Christ, the Ministry
thereof as received by the people, a true Ministry, the Ordinances there
administered, both of Baptism, the Lords Supper, etc. the true Ordinances of
Jesus Christ, and that we not only might, but in some respect ought to join
in Communion with the said public Congregations in the said Ordinances, and
that not so to do was our sin. I Will give it you for your present satisfaction
in the very words of the printed confession of the Faith of that Congregation,
Article the eleventh, the latter end of it, thus it is. It being no evil, nor
any appearance of evil, justly in us to join to the Parish-Congregation and
Ministry in such respect, and so far fort^ only (...) is aforesaid, we
ought, (as we bel^eve) sometime on w^ight^ occasion so to join, and we sin
if we do not. This printed confession of Faith I have by me, and am very
ready for the clear and full confirmation of what in all this I write, to show
to you, or to any one that desires satisfaction in the truth of what I affirm.

And as it was then the judgment of that Congregation, so was it also then the
practice of the members thereof. And for the proof of this, I appeal first to
so many of the then members in general of that Congregation, who are now
living, and knew the Churches practice in this particular, and in special to
Mr. Sabine Staresmore, who, (I conceive, and that upon good grounds) has been
one maine instrument by mis-reports to have thus misled you, and therein abused
me: but if it be so, God give him grace to see his sin, and forgive it him,
or whoever it was; I trust, my heart shall never with consent, entertain so
much as the shadow of a thought to make the like requital; but I will study
and endeavor, and lay hold upon every opportunity which the Lord shall hold
forth unto me, to do all the good I can to him, to them, to you, for this
your evil done to me, remembering what our Savior Christ has taught me,
Matthew. 5. 44. Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you.
But I beseech you all seriously to consider, that if this be not persecution
with the tongue, then tell me what is. And I pray you considerately to ponder
and weigh well that of the Prophet Jeremy 20. 10. and make such use of it to
your own souls, as God shall direct you to do; the words are these, I heard
the defaming of many, fear on every sid, report, say they, and we will report
it, all my familiars watched for my halting, saying, Peradventure (...) will
be enti^^d, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our revenge
on him. But my comfort and stay in this I trust s^all be the same with the
Prophet, in that, manifested in the next verse, But the Lord is with me as a
mighty terrible one, therefore my persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not
prevail, they shall be greatly ashamed, for they shall not prosper.

I fu^ther appeal for proof of what I affirm, unto Mr. Henry Roborough, now
one of the Scribes of the Assembly of Divines, and Pastor of Leonards E^st
cheap London, whether he has not at that time observed that Mr. Jacob, and
other known members of that Congregation, did usually communicate in the
Ordin^nces of Christ in the public Congregations: And whether he has not
with his own hands, administered the Lords Supper to Mr. Jacob, and other then
known members of his Church. And that the members of this Congregation, did
then not only communicate in the public Assemblies in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, but also in the Sacrament of Baptism, yea, that they did b^ptize
their own children in the public Assemblies; I appeal for the truth of
this, unto the testimony of so many of them as be now living, and remember the
Churches practice in this particular at that time, and if there be none now
living that can remember, and will testify this, then in particular I appeal
to the Register Book of Andrew Hubbard London, whether upon the 7 of December,
1623. there was not then and there baptized, Susan the daughter of Robert
Lynell, and of Susan his Wife, both which was then Parishioners of that Parish
and members of this C^ngregation, and R^bert Lynell ^ Deacon of the Church. I
fu^ther appeal unto the Regi^^er-book of Saviors Southwarke, whether upon the
third of February, 1624. there was not then and there baptized, B^rshua^, the
daughter of Daniel Ray, who then was a Pa^ishioner of that Parish, and a member
of this Congregation. I could produce many others in the like kind, but these
may suffice to confirm the truth of what I affirm, neither would I have
printed this, but for the witness of this truth, viz. That that Congre^ation
did then ho^d it not only lawful, but of nec^ssity, upon pain of sin,
^e^rding to the Printed Confession of Faith, to c^mmunicate in the public
Ministry and Ordin^nces, and that b^th of Baptism and the Lord Supper.

Neither do I write this in the least measure, to reflect upon the present now
members of that Congregation, if in their judgments and practice they now walk
otherwise; provided, that by the warrant of the word of God they can clearly
justify their present walking; but I must crave your favor for my self still to
continue in the same judgment and practice I then was, and which is concordable
to the then Confession of the Faith of the Church, as unto communion in the
Parish Congregations, both in the Ministry and Ordinances of Baptism and the
Lords Supper, though you falsely charge me of mutation and change in so doing.
And thus I hope I have showed you your mistake in that you affirm, I applied my
self to a separate Congregation. I shall also endeavor to give you as ample an
account of the just reason (as I humbly conceive) of my leaving them.

Mr. Ia^ob leaving England, and going to Virginia, the Congregation was then
for a time, to the best of my remembrance, left without a Pastor: and then many
of the members of the said Congregation varying in their judgments from what
was in the Confession of the Faith of the Church formerly printed; and being
now both in judgment and practice against Communion in the Ordinances of
Christ in the public Congregations, which by the Confession of the Faith of
the Church, we were bound upon pain of sin to maintain, both in judgment and
practice; this occasioned many disputes, and some differences, a^ last the
point of Ordination of Ministers came under debate, which was the first, yea,
the only occasion that Put a thought into my breast about my departing from
that Congregation: And at that time Mr. John Lothrop, a learned, holy, humble,
and painful Preacher was the Pastor, then the Congregation ordered three of
their members to confer with me about that difference, I then did, now do,
and ever will acknowledge their great love, and tender respect to me in it,
but after ^undry Conferences, and we not agreeing, I thought it my duty, to
signify my mind in writing under my hand to the whole Congregation, which I
then did in these words:

To his dearly beloved Christian Friends Mr. John Lothrop, and all the rest of
the Congregation with him assembled, this publicly present.
Christian Friends, and dearly beloved in the Lord Jesus Christ, having by the
Congregations appointment had Conference with three of the Brethren, about a
point in controversy, which we cannot agree, I thought it my duty to signify
my mind in writing to the whole Congregation, which is, That after many
thoughts spent, and some pains taken in Conference, and examination of
Scriptures, and searching the judgments of Divines, both ancient and modern,
about the matter in controversy, viz. Ordination, or the complete investing of
persons chosen by the free consent of the Congregation into those Offices (for
Ministerial employments) unto which they are elected, I conceive for the
Reasons following, this to be the truth, viz. That it ought to be performed
actually by precedent Church Officers.

1. Because that the Apostles in Acts 6. finding the Church to be in want of
Officers, gave them direction for the performance of what was their duties,
tending to the obtaining of the aforesaid wants, which was to elect persons
qualified according to direction, which they, viz. the Congregation did, and
reserving the other of complete stating them into their Offices, unto
themselves, which they, viz. the Apostles effected: the texts for confirmation,
which with a single eye I desire to be considered of, are, Acts 6. v. 3. for
the precept injoyning the duty, and v. 5, and 6. for the duty in obedience to
the precept performed, the words are, Choose you out whom we may appoint, not
choose you and appoint.

2. That which the Apostles reserved in this place to themselves in their
precept to the Congregation, and accordingly after practiced, as in the first
appears, so also in other Congregations or Churches they did the like, as
Acts 14. 23, When they had (...) them Eld^rs in every Church, they, that is,
Paul and Barnabas, as appears v. 12, 14.

If it be objected, that this was done by Officers extraordinary, which had
their Calling and Commission immediately from God, and therefore is not fitly
brought so, as to require the like to be done by ordinary Officers: I desire
for answer to it, this third reason may be con^idered.

3. That which in this kind was done by the Apostles, which I grant were
extraordina^ily called by God, and gifted accordingly, the same was after done
by them which had their ordinatio^ by ordinary Officers in Churches, as Timothy
Titus, as appears, 1 Timothy 4. 14. where Timothy was ordained by the hands of
the Company of the Eldership, and he in particular, and not the Congregation in
general, is charged before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect
Angels, to lay hands suddenly on no m^n, 1 Timothy 5. 21, 22. which Scripture,
with submission to better judgments, I conceive teaches these two duties.

1. That Timothy an ordained Officer ought to lay on hands in Ordination, and
not any other but Officers ordained.

2. That they that do Ordain, ought to do it with advisement and great
deliberation, not preferring one before another partially.

And as Timothy, so Titus, as testifies the Apostle, 1 Titus v. 5. was left at
Creta to ordain Elders in every City: And for my part, I am ignorant of any
one example in all the new Testament, where Ordination was performed by any but
Church Officers; and for the clear and distinct understanding of the quality
and difference of Church Officers extraordinary and ordinary, that we may know
which is, which, I desire that this Scripture may be considered, Gal. 1. 1.
Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ; where the
Apostle to prove his Apostolical, or extraordinary Calling, affirm^th that he
was not an Apostle of men, neither by man, for then he had been but an
ordinary Minister, but by Jesus Christ; and so as his calling was
extraordinary, his O^^ice is the like; from whence follows this inference,
that such as is the calling, such is the Office, they that had their calling
immediately, was extraordinary Officers, such was the Apostles; and such as
have their calling mediately, or by means are ordinary, such was Timothy, as in
the fore-quoted Scripture may appear, and so are all such as have their
Ordination by preced^nt Church Offi^ers. This interpretation I so give, as upon
a better manifested, I shall desire to r^tract this.

4. If it had been in the power of the Congregations as to elect, so lawfully
and without sin to Ordain, the Apostle might have written from place to
place, Letters of direction according to which, Congregations might have
proceeded, and so of themselves effected it, and then the Apostles by that
might have had the more time for the publishing of the Gospel of Christ in
other places, where yet they had not been, and not have travailed so many miles
back again from place to place to Ordain Elders, which if lawfully it might
have been omitted, it would have spared them much pains, and much advanced the
publishing of the Gospel, for we see that when the Church omitted another
Ordinance, viz. Excommunication, the Apostle went not to them, but sent to them
to do it, 1 Cor. 5.

5. That which the holy Ghost makes two distinct Ordinances in Churches, and
commands them to be performed by persons of a twofold or distinct
consideration in Churches, that none ought to confound, or make them one
Ordinance, neither ought they to be performed by Churches otherwise th^n by the
persons in the said twofold or distinct considerations.

But the holy Ghost makes Election and Ordination two distinct Ordinances in
Churches, and commands them to be performed by persons of a twofold or distinct
considerations in Churches, viz. Election by the members, Ordination by the
Officers, Act. 6. 3.

Therefore none ought to confound, or make them one O^dinance, neither ought
they to be performed by Churches otherwise then by the Persons in the said
twofold or distinct considerations.

These things thus considered, prove this Conclusion, That that Church or
Churches which hold and enjoy their Church Officers any otherwise, then by the
Ordination of former Church officers hold and enjoy them not according to the
mind of Christ, and all the administrations of such Church Officers, their
manner of entrance into their Office, not being grounded on Scripture, are
unlawful, and not to be c^mmunicated with; and this is the ground of my
withdrawing my self from that Congregation with whom I formerly walked.

If it be objected, I formerly made question of this same particular, and yet
after that walked with the Congregation again. I answer, that it is true, and
that I did upon this ground, as to some it is evidently known.

After some question with the Congregation about it, one of the members, who
formerly also had doubt^d of the same thing, at last said, he was stayed for
the present upon this consideration; That if the Ordination of the Church
without Officers, were not of force to give a complete being by Ordination to a
Pastor, yet our Pastor having formerly been Ordained by a precedent Ministry,
in that respect his Ministry was true, and his Administrations lawful; unto
which, as willing to embrace any truth manifested, I assented, and upon that
ground, and no other, I received his Ministry, and partooke in, and
communicated with his Administrations, and this not secretly, but professedly.

But after that, I being in trouble, and in probability to be questioned about
my practice in this particular, I was, as some know, in mind much troubled, for
having withdrawn my self from the Public Assemblies, and yet enjoying in my
own judgment, and by my own confession, neither Ministry nor
Administrations, but what derivatively I had from them; and also professing
both the Public Congregations, and Ministry, and Ordinances, to be the true
Churches Ministry, and Ordinances of christ, and so far pure, as for me to
refuse communion with them, even by the public Confession of that Congregation
with whom I walked, was a sin: I could not then, neither can I now tell which
way, without a great deal of scandal, to take upon me, before authority in
these respects to clear my practice, or to reconcile this at least seeming
Paradox, the rather considering, that in this particular I was not only left
alone by the most and best of Orthodox Di^ines, Foraine and National, but even
by that Congregation also with whom I walked, who though it hold a necessity of
communicating in the Assemblies in some cases, and that as before the Churches
Ministry and Ordinances be true, yet hold not their Ministry in their own,
by virtue of Ordination from a precedent Ministry, but by the Ordination of
the Congregation, unto which, neither could I then, nor can I now, for the
Reasons fore-specified give my assent, bu^ must remain contrary minded till
the force of the Reasons and Argument, be taken away, or a beter ground be
manifested to me, which at all times, I shall desire to embrace. Thus desiring
what truth herein is contained may be received, and what error, if any, may be
showed, that all of us by leaving the evil, and doing the good, may obey our
God in whom I rest; desiring ever to be a true Friend and Brother to you all,
and to all others that love the Lord Christ.

John Bellamie.


After the sending of this Letter, I received an answer from the Congregation,
and returned them a Reply, a Copy of which Reply I have now by me, but upon
desire, I delivered back the Answer to one of the members, and would now have
obtained it again, and printed it with my Reply to it, but it would not be
granted me. I would not have printed these passages, but that I conceived it
requisite to satisfy you and the reader the grounds of my leaving that
Congregation. And after this, (what further passed in that Congregation
concerning my self) I know not. Now, if that Congregation with whom I then
walked, was afterward in their judgments and practice changed or altered,
from what the Confession of the Faith of the Church then was when I joined to
them, and the practice of the members thereof then was, while I walked with
them, as unto communion in the Ministry and Ordinances both of Baptism and
the Lords Supper, etc. in the Public Parish Congregations (for that is the
expression in the Confession,) and that not thus to communicate, in such
respect, and so far forth only as aforesaid, was our sin, even by our own
confession; then I pray you tell me (for I will not judge) whether is most
blame worthy, they or I, and in whom is most mutation to be found.

But if I may without offense speak it, methinkes you exceed the bounds of
Christian love and charity (yet will I not call it, a piece of your Independent
justice which we must expect, as in another case you call it, a piece of
Presbyteriall justice, which (say you) we are like to find from you when
power is in your hands, Page 4.) in presuming that revenge against this
Congregation and its members, has put me thus on work in the City
Remonstrance and its Vindic^tion, for the Lord that searches the hearts of all
men, knows my heart, and unto him I do appeal, that from that time to this
hour^, which I think is now near twenty years, I never had the least thought
of revenge in me, either against the whole, or any particular member of that
Congregation, but have according to my poor ability, been always ready and
willing to perform all offices of Christian love and respect unto any of them;
and I hope, as ^ccasion is offered, ever shall be; and though I cannot agree
with them in opinion and practice, yet I hope I shall ever love them as my own
soul.

In page 18. you speak of my meeting with a select company of Christians in a
cursory way; where you are pleased to say more then ever I deserved, or had
cause to think of, concerning my carriage amongst them to their comfort and
content.

An^w. Truly, I bless God, I have often met with sundry s^lect Companies of
godly Christians in holy duties, and been willing, according to the best of my
abilities, to do or receive any good to, or from them, but sure I dare not
think you judge this to be criminal; but yet you say, that with much grief of
soul they assert these things. What your meaning in this is, as you express it
not, so indeed I know it not; I hope, as I ever have done, so I ever shall
endeavor to do or to receive any spiritual goo^ from any company of
Christians with whom either purposely or occasionally I shall converse; and for
this you have my mind and judgment, which according to that talent God has
given me is, and ever shall be concordable to my practice; you may read it in
my Vindication, page 21. it is in an answer to a Querie of the Replyer, viz.
what the Remonstrants mean by private and separate Congregations; it is
answered negatively in these words, That the Remonstrants do not mean by
private and separate Congregations, the private meetings of Christian people
for Prayer, Exhortation, Repetition of Se^rmons, or any other laudable and
Christian family, or neighbourly duties amongst the Saints; as to these I am
assured all the Remonstrants will join with you in your desire, that abh^r'd
h^th by God and all good men, may all requests be that shall be made for the
suppres-pressing of th^se.

Next, you go about summarily to reckon up such things, as either lying fame
has told you, or your own fancy dictates to you, and for fear of failing, you
repeat them in several places; and therefore where you are pleased to lay them
down, I must undergo the pains to take them up, they are in p^ge 19, and
page 30. where you say, I have been for Bishops, and against Bishops; for
Separates, and against S^parates; a Sectary, and an A^ti-sectary; a
Schismatic, and an Anti-schismatick; and so you go ^urther on in many other
the like expressions according to your pleasure.

Answ. If all these were true which here you specify, and all the former
particulars before recited, yet what are all, or any of these to the City
Remonstrance or its Vindication? Truly, I must needs say, that it is a shrewd
sign of a bad Cause; and I think the Reader will be of the same mind with
me, when in stead of Arguments or Reasons to confute what is affirmed, you
must fall so foul upon the Person, and the suppo^ed miscarriages of him whom
you oppose; it seems you had little hope that your self by strengtst of
Argument should do any good, and therefore you call in for help, such as it
is, in this way of combating to cast me down, just like the Heathens against
the Christians in the Primitive ^imes, and the Papists against the Protestants
in these latter times; but I pray ^emember what you say of the Reply, in the 5
page of your Book, the latter end, That there may possibly be mistakes more
then enough in it, for the holy Scripture only excepted, where is thirt
writing without mistakes? May not the like be said, as of Books, so of men,
where is the man without his errors, without his miscariages? as I will not
accuse, so I believe you will not excuse Mr. I. P. himself from these. And
truly, for ^y self, I dare not to these plead my defense; for I know more by my
self, then you, or all your Reporters can accuse me of, and earnestly and
humbly I desire that God may be glorified both in my acknowledgement of them to
him, and his pardoning of them to me; but upon what ground you should thus
boldly break in upon me, knowing nothing of any thing that of the^e you
affirm, I can but wonder: I pray be pleased to make a second inquiry amongst
all your Reporters, and see if they can make it out for truth unto you, that
ever at any time, in any place, either by word or writing, any thing fell from
me, either for Bishops, for Separates, for Schismatics, or for Sectaries, and
if not, as confident I am nor you, nor they can, then why do you wrong your
self and your Cause, in thus going about to wrong me, by reporting and
divulging these untruths of me?

But I have tired out my self, and perhaps wearied the Reader too, in
following you so long upon these personal things, yet must I needs crave
favor to particularize one passage more, viz. in your 29 page in these words,
viz. Mr. John Bellamie, what kind of man are you? They that observe your
sayings what they have been formerly concerning the King, concerning the Lords,
concerning the power of the Commons* (whispering your thoughts in the ears of
many that now speak of it) what your carriages have been not very long since
in Common Council, or among your brethren the Stationer's, the Committee
appointed for the keeping up and maintaining the Expository Lectures, and what
your carriages are now, stand with admiration and amusement at your wheeling
thus about.

Answ. I desire the Reader to observe the many Charges which in this you lay
against me, at the least six, yet you particularize not any one; might I not
more justly then you, take your own words used in reference to Quarterman, in
your 12 page, and apply them to that which in this you spoke against me, viz.
Hang him, hang him, what has he done? And what I pray you may such as know me
not, be ready to judge of me? when they hear so many, and so great Charges in
the general laid against me, and seemingly confirmed by so many Witnesses, as
the whole Common Council, the Company of Stationers, the Committee for
Expository Lectures? was there ever the like passages printed against any man
by the worst of enemies that ever he had to charge him with something against
the King, as if that were Treason, something against the Lords and Commons, as
if that were either Treason, or at least Scandalum Magnatum, and this to be
whispered by me in the ears of many, that now speak of it again, and yet to
instance in nothing at all; and then furth^r to say, what your carriages have
been not very long since in Common Council, or among your Brethren the
Stationers, the Committee appointed for the keeping (...) maintaining the
Expository Lectures. Now I appeal to your own soul, whether this your dealing
can have any defense m^de for it. And I do appeal also to the worst of Enemies
that I have alive (as it seems I have a great many; for I thank you heartily
for it, you told me privately by word of mouth upon Saturday the 8 of this
August, that there is a Book of the History of my life, already drawn up, and
fitted for the Press, wherein are many heavy Charges laid against me in the
matters of my conversation:) to make any thing good against me in any of these
generals which here you sp^ak of, and in particular I appeal to the Court of
Common Council, to the Company of Stationers, and to the Committee a^pointed
for the keeping up and maintaining the Expository Lectures, (for all these you
seem to bring as witnesses against me,) whether ever I did or spoke any thing
at any time in any of the^e Assemblies, which in any thing was any way cross
or contrary either to the City Remonstrance, or to any thing in my Vindication
thereof; for you say, that they observing your now carriages, stand with
admiration and amasement at your wheeling thus about.

Mr I. P. I pray remember that Scripture, which in your 1^ page you set in a
parallel against a passage in the Remonstrance, to prove that the
Common Council does act in a direct, evident, and obvious manner against the
express Will and Word of God, and bring it hither, and set it likewise in
parallel against this your dealing with me, and then tell me who does act in a
direct, evident, and obvious manner, against the express Will and Word of God;
the Scripture you cite, is Matthew. 7. 12. As you would that men should do unto
you, so do unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. Mr. I. P. I
beseech you ask your own soul, whether you would that I, or any other man
should deal thus by you, as you have dealt by me, gathering up whatever you
could hear against me, whether true or false, in my carriages about matters
of Religion, and that for above 30 years together; and though you know nothing
of any one of them more or less, and there being not one of them true as you
relate them, yet without ever speaking one word to me about them, with such
boldness and confidence of truth to publish them to the world: And now tell
me, Whether you do as you would be done unto, and whether in this, your own
Conscience being your judge, you do not act in a direct evident, and obvious
manner against the express will and word of God.

But I must break off, yet with this resolution, that your endeavor thus to
blaz on my Name, and blast my Repute, shall by Gods grace quicken me up to a
more Christian watchfulness over all my ways, that I may walk more
inoffensively toward men, and more pleasingly before God; and I bless my God,
that my Name is neither in the power of your tongue, nor pen, nor yet of your
reporters neither, but only in the hand and power of my good God who is able
to keep that which I have committed to him; and I bless his Name, I am not in
any thing terrified by that which you or they have in this already done, in
thus seeking to defame me, nor yet, I hope, ever shall be at that History of
my Life, which you say is ready for the Press to be Printed against me.

Next, you come in your 22 page to that question wherein resides the Supreme
power of the Kingdom, and upon this Argument you continue near to the end of
your Book; and in page 23 you begin your Que^ies, and first, you ask what I
mean by three Estates, and yet in the same, and the foregoing pages you
transcribe my very words, where I told you, that by the three Estates I meant
(as all the Laws and Records of the Kingdom express it, and as all men
unquestionably have hitherto concluded it, and as the truth in it self is) the
King, the Lords, and the Commons. Your second Querie is, What I mean by
Fundamental; and then you tell the Reader, that I say the King, the Lords, and
Commons are the three Estates of which the Fundamental constitution of the
Kingdom is made up.

It Is true, I did, and do say so still, and you say little to contradict it,
only you ask another question (which, how wise a one it is, I desire the
Reader to observe, for I must not judge) viz. are there three Fundamentalls?
and you propose it, as if I had said or implied so much; and then you tell the
Reader, you ever thought there had been but one; and in this I agree with you,
but herein is our difference which you and I must leave to the judgment of the
reader to determine, I say this one Fundamental constitution of the Kingd^m, is
the three Estates of the King, Lords, and Commons, and this I still abide by;
but you say, this one Fundamental is the Commons, and that for two Reasons; 1.
Because the Commons made the King, and the King made the Lords, and so the
Commons are the prime ^ound^tion. 2. Because both the King and the Lords were
adv^nced for the benefit, quiet, and welfare of the Commons, and not the
Commons made for them: And you say, if you are deceived, the common Maxim of
Salus populi suprema Lex, deceived you.

Answ. First, the frame of the Government of this Kingdom, by the admired
wisdom of the Architects and Contrivers thereof, is so composed of these three
Estates, as may best preserve the whole, and keep either of those Estates from
any such exorbitancy as might destroy the other; for as they are the three
Estates in Parliament, I humbly conc^ive there is no subordination of the one
to the other, but a co-ordination of them all three together, by which the
Princes Sovereignty, and the peoples freedom and liberty are together
preserved and maintained, and herein is that common Maxim of Salus populi
suprema Lex, chiefly made good.

Secondly, the legislative Power of this Kingdom is not in any one Estate
distinct, but in all the three Estates conjunct, yea, the very root and essence
of this Legislative Power is compounded, and as it were, mixed together in the
three Estates of King, Lords, and Commons, and these three concurrent Estates
producing one supreme Act as con-Cause, cannot have a subordination among
themselves, it not being imaginable how a power can cause the supreme effect,
and yet be subordinate: thus the very being of our Common and Statute Laws
prove this truth, for they are not composed nor enacted by any one of the three
Estates divisim, but they are established by the sole authority of the three
Estates conjunctin, every act being enacted by the Kings most excellent
Majesty, and by the authority of the Lords and C^mmons assembled in Parliament.

Thirdly, I must needs dissent from you, in that you say, that both the King
and the Lords were advanced for the bene^^t, quiet, and welfare of the Commons,
if your meaning be, as indeed by your words it seems to be, exclusive,
excluding therein the benefit, quiet and welfare of the King and the Lords, for
I conceive the benefi^ quiet and welfare of the whole, viz. King, Lords, and
Comm^ns was equally and alike intended in the Fundamental constitution of the
Kingdom, and so the Commons were as well made for the King, as the King for the
Commons, yea the King, and the Lords, and the Commons were all alike made for
the benefit, quiet, and welfare each of others, and so of the whole together;
and this is that, which in my mind makes the Constitution of this Kingdom in
this state of a limited and mixed Monarchy far to surpass the Constitution
of any other Kingdom that I know; and I think, that in a good sense it may
truly be said of the several members of this thus constituted Po^itique body
of this Kingdom, as the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 21. speaks of the members of the
natural body, the eye c^nnot s^y to the b^nd, I have no need of thee, nor
again the ^ead to the feet, I have no need of you; for as every member in the
natural body is by God there set and placed, not alone for its own good, but
for the welfare of the whole, and accordingly it acts, and is serviceable
therein for the good of the whole, yea, such a natural necessity there is in
the body, of every member, that not any one member can be wanting, but the body
is thereby defective, and so the eye cannot say to the ^and, I have no need of
thee, nor again, the head to the feet, I h^v^ no need of you.

So in the body Politic of this Commonwealth, by the ancient and excellent
Constitution thereof, the three Estates, viz. King, Lords and Commons are so
set and placed, that in their several stations they should not act alone for
their own particular, but for the Common and Public good and welfare of the
whole; yea, I humbly conceive, that to the upholding and continuance of this so
excellent a Constitution, there is such a Politic necessity of every one of
the three Estates in this Commonwealth, for the preservation of the whole, that
the King cannot say to the Commons, I have no need of you, nor again the
Commons to the King, I have no need of thee, nor yet the King and ^he Commons
to the Lords, we have no need of you: For if any one Estate in this b^dy
Politic be cut off, the whole constitution is presently destroyed; and when I
seriously consider how by the Fundamental Constitution of this Kingdom, there
is such care taken for the preservation of the Sovereignty of the King, and yet
withal such provision made for the just Liberties and freedom of the people,
and how the one may be justly allayed, and yet consist without impeachment of
the other, I cannot but conceive it to be unparalleld for true policy in the
whole world: and thus much in answer to your two first Q^eries.

Your third Querie is, whether the King, and suppose the major part of the
Lord, which m^ke up two Estates, do^ agree together, suppose it be to set up
absolute prerogative, and the Commons will not assent hereunto, whether the
majo^ part of the Estates must not conclude the minor, the two conclude the
third, and so as for the Common, will they, nill they, sl^^es they must be, and
slaves they shall be.

Answ. To the making of a Law, there must be the concurrent consent of all the
three Estates, viz. King, Lords, and Commons; the King and the Lords, without
the consent of the Commons can make no Law valid, and in that case the major
part of the Estate^ do not conclude the minor, and so the Commons are thereby
pre^served from slavery; but in another case the major part of the E^states do
conclude the minor, viz. when the Lords and Common^ do agree upon a Law for
the good and safety of the Kingdom, then the King is concluded in that their
agreement, and ought t^ set his flat thereunto: For the Kings of England are
bound by their Oaths to grant such Laws which shall be for the good and safety
of the Kingdom, with the accord of their people in (...) presented to them, as
in the preamble of the Statute made in the 25 year of ^dward the Third,
entitled, The Statute of proviso^s of Benefices, made at W^stminster, in these
words it does appear:

Whereupon the said Commons have prayed our Sovereign Lord the King, that since
the Right of the Crown of England, and the Law of the said Realm is such,
that upon the mischiefs and damm^ges which ^appen to this Realm, He ought,
and is bound by His Oath, with the accord of His People in His Parliament
thereof, to make remedy and law.

And the King acknowledges this for a truth, and accordingly Acted, as in
these following words in the same Statute, it appears:

Our Sovereign Lord the King, seeing the mischiefs and damages before
mentione^, and having r^gard to the Statute made in the time of his
Grandf^ther, and by so much as He is bounden by Hi^ O^th to cause the (...) a
Law of His Realm, etc. by the assent of all the great Men and Comm^nalty of
^is said Re^lme, to the honor of God, and profit of the said Church of England,
and of all His Realm^, (...) Ord^ined and es^ablished, etc.

Thus far the words of that Preamble and Statute, upon which the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled say thus: Viz.

Here the Lords and Commons claim it directly as the right of the Crown of
England, and of the Law of the Land, tha^ the King is bound by his O^th, with
the (...) of his people in Parliament, to make remedy and (...) the mischiefs
and damm^g^s which happen to this Realm, and the King does not deny it,
C^llect of Declarations, p. 229. Let this suffice as answer to your third
Querie.

Your fourth Que^ie is this, Wheth^r ^ee (viz. the King) be present as a
distinct Estate, if so, if one distinct Estate may be present in power
quatenus, an Estate, and absent in person, may not a second Estat^ be so
present, though absent in body; yea, a third Estate s^ present, and yet absent
in body; and so we shall have the Estates in Parliament, and not a man amongst
them; this is a Riddle ind^ed Mr. Bellamie, I pray you unfold this also.

Answ. At your request ^e undertake the task; your own words grant, that ^s
well in Parliament, as in all his inferior Courts of Justice, the King is
present in his power; these are your words, viz. I know Sir, he is present in
power in all his inferior Cou^ts of Justice, as well as in the Parliament, 24.
Now in Parliament there is no power but the power of the three Estates, viz.
King, Lords, and Commons; and therefore all the Acts that are en^cted by the
power of Parliament are enacted by the power of the three Estates conjunction;
It is possible that the King may withdraw his person from the Parliament, as
now he has done, but he can never withdraw his power, no, not his power as a
distinct Estate, for in the making of every Act of Parliam^nt, there is present
in Parliament the power of all the three Estates, without all which conjunctim,
no act can be made. But there is an Act made this Parliament by the free
consent of all the three Estates in Parliament, that this Parliament shall not
be dissolved, prorogued, or adjourned without the consent of both Houses of
Parliament first had and obtained, viz. Anno 17 Caroli Regis, entitled, An Act
to prevent inconveniences which may happen by the untimely adjourning,
proroguing and dissolving of this present Parliament. In (...) Act are these
words, viz. Be it declared and enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, with
the assent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and
by the authority of the same, That this present Parliament now assembled, shall
not be dissolved, unless it be by Act of Parliament to be passed for that
purpose, nor shall b^e at any time or times during the Continuance thereof,
prorogued or adjourned, unl^sse it be by Act of Parliament to be likewise
passed for that purpose.

Now then thus I argue, if at the passing of this Act of Parliament, there was
present the power of all the three Estates in Parliament, viz. King, Lords, and
Commons, and by virtue of this Act of Parliament, the Parliament cannot be
dissolved, prorogued, or adjourned, unless it be by act of Parliament to be
passed for that purpose, then the power of all the three Estates, viz. King,
Lords and Commons must needs continue in Parliament, till by Act of Parliament
to be passed for that purpose this Parliament be dissolved, prorogued, or
adjourned.

But at the passing of this Act of Parliament, there was present the power of
all the three Estates in Parliament, viz. King, Lords and Commons, (vide the
Act (...) supra) and by virtue of this Act of Parliament, the Parliament cannot
be dissolved, prorogued, or adjourned, unless it be by Act of Parliament to be
passed for that purpose, vide also the Act (...) supra.

Therefore the Power of all the three Estates in Parliament, viz. King, Lords
and Commons must needs continue in Parliament till by Act of Parliament to be
passed for that purpose, this Parliament be dissolved, prorogued, or adjourned.

And thus the particular by me affirmed, is clearly proved, viz. That though
the person of the King be absent from the Parliament, yet the power of the
King, viz. as one of the three Estates in Parliament, is present with the
Parliament.

I now come briefly to the second part of your Querie, and will endeavor
herein, (as you call it) to unfold your Riddle* the other two Estates in
Parliament, viz. Lords, and Commons, cannot be absent from the Parliament,
neither in power, nor ye^ in person: thus far ^e grant you, that many of the
members of either House may be absent from either of their respective Houses,
and yet the two Estates of Parliament continue entire in Parliament, for there
must be at least three Lords present in the House of Lords to make it a House,
and so an Estate in Parliament; and forty Commons with the Speaker, in the
House of Commons to make it an House, and so an Estate in Parliament; and
therefore there cannot be, as you affirm, three Estates in Parliament, and
not a man amongst them; and this I give as an answer to your fourth Querie, and
if you please, you may also let it pass for the unfolding of your Riddle.

In the ^ifth place, in page 24. you have these words, viz. The Replyer
observing the Remonstran s^ascribing only a share of the supreme Power to the
House of Commons proposes this Question to them; Will not you allow so much
power to the Kingdom representative, in r^ference to the Kingdom, as to the
representative City, in reference to London? And then you come to your fifth
Querie in these following words, viz. And so do I Querie, will not the Commons
of London yield or ascribe unto the Commons of England, as the Commons of
London to themselves will ascribe?

Answ. I pray ma^k the terms of your Querie, for methinks it is a little
defective; you say the Commons of London, not the Common Council, but as you
propose your Querie, I answer affirmatively, that the Commons of London will
yield and ascribe unto the Commons of England, as the Commons of London to
themselves will ascribe; but I say again, observe your terms, you say the
Commons of London, not the Common Council; I shall pres^ntly show you the
difference, the Commons of London are not the City representative, but the
Common Council, (which does consist of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons)
is the City representative.

Then you go on in these words, viz. Therefore Mr. Bellamie to make your
absurdities the better appear, in your parallel between the Kingdom
representative, and the City representative, I come upon you thus;

First, you grant that the Common Council is the City representative, page 2
of your Vindication.

Answ. I grant it.

Secondly, you grant that the House of Commons in Parliament assembled, is the
Kingdom representative, in the same page.

Answ. I grant the House of Commons in Parliament assembled, to be the Kingdom
representative in that sense in which in page 2 of my Vindication, I said it
was, viz. as it is made up of and chosen by the Kingdom collective, viz. the
Commons of the Kingdom, whom in Parliament it only represents, and therefore
only can be the representative body of them, and accordingly in all their
addresses to the House of Lords, they go in their own names, and in the names
of all the Commons of England; and desiring the concurrence of the House of
Lords in any Act, they desire it in their own names, and in the names of all
the Commons of England, of whom they only are a representation, or whom they
do represent, and in that sense I expressed it in page 4, where I called the
Kingdom collective, the body of the Commons of England, not the body of the
Kingdom of England; And as this representative body, viz. the House of Commons,
is one of the three Estates in Parliament, so also in that page I called it the
House of Commons in Parliament assembled, but I called it not the Parliament;
so the Lords are called the House of Lords in Parliament assembled, but no man
calls tha^ House the Parliament. Likewise the Lords and Commons joining together
in any one Act, as, in the last Propositions sent to His Majesty, it is said to
be agreed by both Houses of Parliament, as in Article 1, 5, 6, 12, etc. it
appears, but it is not said to be agreed by Parliament, for it had been so
agreed, why then is the Kings assent to these Propositions prayed for by both
Hous^s of Parliament, as in the Proem to the said Propositions in these words
it does appear? Viz.

May it please your Majesty,

We the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England, in the name,
and on the behalf of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the
Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, in the name, and on the behalf of
the Kingdom of Scotland, Do humbly present unto your Majesty, the humble
desires and Propositions for a safe and wel-grounded Peace, agreed upon by the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms respectively, unto which we do pray your
Majesty's assent, and that they, and all such as shall be tendered to your
Majesty in pursuance of them, or any of them, may be established and enacted
for Statutes and Acts of Parliament by your Majesty's Royal assent in the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms respectively.

You might also have observed in the same page, that when I come to speak of
making Laws, which is the work of the Parliament, and not of any particular
Estate alone in Parliament; I there say in express terms, the Kingdom
representative, which is the Parliament.

And sure no man could possibly imagine that my expression should be taken in
any other consideration; for I did all along in the 14, 15, 1^, 17, 18 pages of
my Vindication also hold out this truth, that there was three distinct Estates
in Parliament, viz. the King, the Lords, and the Commons, and do you think
that it was probable or possible that I should mean, that one of the thee^
Estates in Parliament, should be a representation of all the three?

Thirdly, you say, the City representative has a power to make a Law for those
whom it represents.

Answ. I grant this too.

Then you thus go on, viz. Fourthly, I desire to know whether you allow the
Kingdom representative the same power to make a Law for those whom it
represents.

Answ. I crave your favor and patience before you go any further to present
you in this place with these two following considerations:

First, that the House of Commons, all the members thereof be^^ing chosen by
the collective body of the Kingdom, viz. the Commons, are in that respect, and
in that sense truly the representative body of the Kingdom, viz. of the
Commons of the Kingdom, and so have in them in this consideration, the full
Legislative power of the Commons of England.

Secondly, I pray also consider, that though the House of Commons have in them
the full Legislative power of the Commons of England, yet the whole Legislative
power of the Kingdom of England, is not concentred in the Commons of England,
but is, (as has before been fully proved) in the three Estates of the King,
the Lords, and the Commons of England conjunctim, and therefore no one Estate
alone, and by its self can make a Law; but to the making of every Law in the
Kingdom of England there must be the concurrent consent of all these three
Estates conjunctim.

And this as I humbly conceive, makes a clear way to give an answer to your
Querie, viz. Whether you allow the Kingdom representative (viz. the House of
Commons) the same power to make a Law for those whom i^ represents, and the
answer will be this; It has in it the full legislative power of the Commons
of England, whom in Parliament it does represent, but it has not in it the
full legislative power of the kingdom of England, it has in it all the power
of the Commons of England toward the making of a Law, but it must have the
concurrent consent of the other two Estates, viz. of the King, and of the Lords
to the full consummating of a Law, and making it obligatory to the Kingdom of
England.

And besides, that it is thus settled by the fundamental Constitution of the
Kingdom, I humbly also conceive that there is just reason for it too, and that
not only from the relation which these three Estates have one to another, but
also because of that interest which one Estate has in another.

The King being no otherwise King of England, but with relation to the subjects
of England, and so he has an interest in them, and they are his liege, that
is, his lawful Subjects, or, his Subjects according to the Law. And likewise
the Lords and Commons of England, are no otherwise Subjects of England, but
with relation to the King, as he is the King of England, in whom also they
have the like reciprocal interest, and so he is their liege, our lawful
Sovereign, or their King according to the Law, and thus runs the forms of our
Laws, viz. Be it enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, with the assent of
the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled. But the City of
London by the Charter of Edw. 3. in the 15 year of his Reign, has a power
granted to the Major, and Aldermen, and their successors, with the assent of
the Commonalty, to make laws for the common profit of the Citizens of the same
City; by virtue of which grant, the Lord, Major, Aldermen, and Commons in Court
of Common Council assembled, being therein as one entire Court, the
representative Body of the City, do to this day make Laws, which are always
binding to the Citizens of the same City. And there is no other consent
required to the consummation of these Laws, but the sole and only authority of
this Court, and therefore all our Acts of Common Council are made in the joint
names of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in the Court of Common Council
assembled, and by the authority thereof; and in the addition of any branch in
an act of Common council it is still thus expressed, It is by this Court further
Ordered, etc. Or this Court does further Order, etc. which does fully prove
that all the power of making or altering, or adding to the City laws, rests
wholly and alone in the body of that one Court of Common Council, or the
greater number of them, which does always consist of the Lord Major, Aldermen,
and Commons, but all the power of making or repealing, or adding to the laws
of the kingdom, does not rest wholly and alone in the House of Commons, but
the concurrent consent of the other two Estates, viz. the King, and the Lords,
is necessarily required to this of the Commons, for making or repealing of the
Laws of the Kingdom. And thus I hope I have answered your first head of
Queries arising from that question, viz. wherein resides the Supreme power of
the Kingdom.

I shall now likewise endeavor to give a solution to your Argument, and all
the satisfaction I can to the second head of your Queries.

For a foundation to build your Arguments upon, you produce an Argument of mine
out of my Book, entit^led, A Plea for the Commonalty of London, thus it is,
That Court which has a power to make a law, and by that law to confer a
power upon the Lord Major and Aldermen, which as Lord Major and Aldermen they
had not before, must needs be quoad hoe, as unto the making of a law, above
the Lord Major and Aldermen.

But this Court of Common Council has, etc. Ergo, this Court of
Common Council so far as to the making of a Law must needs be above the
Lord Major and Aldermen.

Answ. I own the Argument, and for confirmation of what I t^^re affirmed
concerning the power of the Court of Common Council, I made it good, and
proved it d^ facto, by an act of Common Counsel made in the sixth year of Hen.
7. upon the 15 of April, concerning the choice of the Chamberlain of London,
and the Bridge-masters of the City, as by reference to the said Book appears,
and I would willingly see what you have to say against it.

But upon this in your 25 page you thus argue:

That Court which has the power to make a law, and by that law, to confer a
power upon the King, and Lords, which as King and Lords they had not before,
must needs be quoad hoc unto the making of a law, above the King and Lord.

But the House of C^mmon^, which say you (speaking of me) is the kingdom
representative, even as the Common Council is the City representative upon
your suppos^tion, has a power, etc. Ergo, the House of Commons, so far as unto
the making of a law, must needs be above the King and Lords.

But I pray you tell me, is there no difference between the Court of
Common Council, and the Commons in Common Counsel? I told you even now in page
42 that the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council assembled
being therein one entire Court, are the representative body of the City, I
never said the Commons in that Court were so; and if you had been pleased to
have perused that Book of mine you cite to this purpose, and out of which you
take my argument, viz. The Ple^ for the Commonalty of London, in page 10. where
I instance in four several acts of that Court, viz. the removing of Deputy
Ald^n from the Court, Mr. John Wild from being Town Clerk, Mr. Tho. Wiseman
from being the City Remembrancer, and diverse Aldermens Deputies from their
places of Deputyship, you might there have found that I thus conclude it, viz.
And all this by the joint and concurrent power of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Commons in this Common Council assembled.

And what though the Court of Common Council, which always consists of the
Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons, have a power to confer upon the Lord Major
and Aldermen that power, which as Lord Major and Aldermen they had not before
(as I fully proved, and therefore without the least mutation am still of the
same mind) and in that respect, as unto the making of a Law are above the Lord
M^jor and Aldermen, as the whole is above a part^ But will it hence follow that
the Commons in Common Council alone and by themselves, have either this power
to confer a power upon the Lord Major and Aldermen, which as Lord Major and
Aldermen they had not before, or that they are above them* If you will argue
from my assertion, be sure you keep my terms, and then see how it will
advantage you for the confirmation of your argument.

I grounded this power of making City Laws from the Charter of Edw. 3. in the
15 year of his Reign. And in the same Book of mine, out of which you took my
argument, you might also have had my authority for it, it is in page 7 in these
words, We have granted further for us and our heirs, and by this our present
Charter confirmed to the Major and Aldermen of the City aforesaid, that if any
customs in the said City hitherto obtained and used, be in any part difficult
or defective, or any thing in the same newly happening, where before there was
no remedy ordained, and have need of amending, the same Major and Ald^rmen and
their successors, with the assent of the Commonalty of the same City, may add
and ordain a remedy meet, faithful, and consonant to reason, for the common
profit of the Citizens of the same City, as often, and at such time as to them
shall be thought expedient, which Charter was confi^med by act of Parliament 43
years after, in the 7 of Rich. 2* Now if you can produce the like authority
granted alone to the House of Commons by the Parliament, that they of
themselves, without the consent of the King and the Lords, have power to make
laws for the Kingdom, as by this Charter the Lord Major, Aldermen, and their
successors, with the assent of the Commons of London, have for the City, then
you hit the bu^ines a^ight indeed, but otherwise I think your argument is not
true: And therefore for after times, let me advise you, that if you will
imitate an argument in the words of it, be sure you imitate it also in the
proofs of it, and let them be as full and clear for the confirmation of what
you affirm; for it is not words, though never so smooth, that proves any thing
in matters of fact, as this is: And truly, should I have laid down that
argument to prove the power of the Court of Common Council, as unto the making
of City laws to be above the Lord Major, and Aldermen, and not have proved it
de facto, by the acts of the Court of Common Council, I should have thought it
at least to have been a scandalum Magnatum, against the Lord Major and
Aldermen, and very blameworthy in my self to have done it. But perhaps you
think the condition of the King, and the Lords to be such, as that whatever
you speak or publish concerning them, tending to the annihilating of their
legislative power and authority in Parliament, can neither be an offense to
them, nor a fault in you, or if it be, it seems you regard it not; but I hope
you will not take it amiss, if, as I did in that so I desire you in this,
either to produce a proof d^ facto, to make good that the House of Commons has
by an Act of that House alone conferred a power upon the King and Lords as King
and Lords they had not before, which are the very word^ of your argument, or
else in plain English to tell the Reader^ that though you can transcribe the
words of my argument, which a child of ten years old can do as well as you,
yet now upon second thoughts you must needs confess you come very short in a
parallel proof of it, there neither now being, nor never was any act of the
House of Commons that does prove that, that House alone and by it self did
ever make a law which did confer a power upon the King and Lords, which as King
and Lords they had not before, and without this proof, I persuade my self no
man will believe, that as unto the making of a law the House of Commons is
above the King and Lords, though Mr. I. P. affirms it to be so. And this I
give not only as a solution to this your argument, but also to the other
arguments which follow, viz. concerning the power of the House of Commons alone
without the King and Lords to repeal what laws they think meet, and to make
laws and rules for all the Courts and people in England to be steered and
acted by, and whereunto (say you) the King himself is bound by his Oath, and
therefore ought in duty to cons^ut; and likewise to that which you say will
follow from my logic, viz. that the Kingdom representative is inferior in
its power, in reference to the government of the Kingdom, then the City
representative is in reference to the government of the City, and to the other
Queries which you ground upon them, for they all alike hang upon this string,
and if in the opinion of the Reader, to whose judgment I refer it, this be
^ut asunder, I am sure they must all then needs fall to the ground, and
therefore I shall not need to trouble my self any more with them.

And now Mr. I. P. I have endeavored with all the candor and tenderness I
could to examine your Book, and have not I hope, let one word fall from me,
that in the least measure does reflect upon your person, for it is the matter
of your Book, and not any of your personal infirmities (for, alas the Lord
know^, I have work more then enough to meddle with, and to master my own) or
other your supposed errors in matters of Religion that I encounter with. And if
we cannot yet agree in this present difference and debate, my earnest desire
is, and I trust ^y endeavor shall for ^ver be answerable thereunto, that we
may manage the matter with that sweet moderation and temper of Spirit as
becomes Christians, for of this I am confident, that though through weakness
or error in judgment, perhaps mine, not yours, we cannot agree together to
live in one Church fellowship or communion here upon earth, yet we shall for
ever mutually enjoy communion and fellowship with God the Father, with Christ,
with the blessed Spirit, three Persons in one Essence, and with the holy
Angels, and the glorified Saints for ever in heaven. And therefore I beseech
you while we yet live here in this vale of tears, let us remember and obey
that counsel the Apostle gives us, Philip. 3. 15, 16. Let us therefore, as
many as be perfect be thus minded, and if in any thing you be otherwise
minded, God shall reveal even this unto you; nevertheless, whereunto we have
already attained let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing.

I shall gladly embrace and entertain any truth of God, which shall by you be
held forth unto me with the warrant of his Word, and as willingly leave and
forsake whatever either in opinion or practice I now hold or do that shall be
made apparent to be dissonant thereto; for I solemnly profess unto you, that I
labor not for Masteries, neither desire I to give the last blow, I esteem it
no shame to be conquered, when Christ proves the Victor, nor no loss to be
vanquished when the Truth prevails, for it is verity, not victory that shall be
my comfort.

A POSTSCRIPT.
I Have at this time no more to say, either to your self, or to your Book, but
in one word to let the Reader know, that my desire and endeavor to afford you
all the fair quarter that possibly I could in this our Conflict about this
Subject, was such, That I did upon Saturday the 8 of this instant August, in
the presence of Mr. Samuel Clarke Pastor of Bennet Fynck, London, and of Mr.
James Story, and Mr. Henry Overton, two of yours, and of my own acquaintance,
show you in Writing this my Justification of the City Remonstrance and its
Vindication, before ever I tendered it either to be Licensed, or Printed, and
desired you to peruse it, and if there was any thing in it either for matter of
Fact, or otherwise, that you could justly except against, I would expunge it,
and it should never see the light; And when you would not accept of that offer,
I then read some passages in the Epistle to you which I told you, that in my
apprehension, they were the things which most nearly concerned your Person;
this I did to manifest my unwillingnesse to let any thing pass from me, that
might be either prejudicial to the Truth, or justly distastefull to your
Person, and if it be possible, to overcome evil with good.

FINIS.
In the absence of the Author these following Errata's escaped in the printing
of the Vindication, which I pray thus Correct.
Page 2. line 23. for you will charge, read, you will not charge; p. 6. l. 30.
for and Sectaries, ^. of Sectaries; p. 7. l. 1. for till, r. the; p. 8. l.
last, for stated, r. sacred; p. 14. l 22 for find in, r. find it in; l. 24.
for these their words, r. these are their words, p. 23 l. 27. for elected, r,
erected; p. 26. l. 26. for ones Poesy, r Ovids Poesy.


