God only exalted in his own Work; OR, THE WORKS of GOD Praises him in SION;
OR, A Song of Deliverance from a great and sore Captivity, Thraldom, and
Bondage, under the King of Egyptian Darkness, the God of the World, where the
soul was fast bound as with strong Chains and Fetters; but now ransomed (by the
outstretched Arm of Gods Almighty power) and come to Sion with Songs of
everlasting joy upon thy head, and have obtained joy and gladness, and thy
sighing and mourning is fled away: witnessed unto, and experienced in that
Vessel, whose earthly Tabernacle bears the name of William Bennit.

Published in singleness and uprightness of heart (from a constraint of Gods
love) to all those who are yet groaning and panting after the Lord in truth and
sincerity, that they may meet with some refreshment and encouragement in their
journey and travels toward the Land of rest and peace.

Printed in the Year, 1664.

OH! oh! my soul, my soul, what has the Lord, even the Lord thy God done for
thee? oh! what has he done for thee, oh! my soul? oh! my soul, a little while
sit thee down in thy secret chamber of rest and quietness, and there, oh my
soul! a little meditate of the most excellent loving kindness of the Lord, thy
tender compassionate God of infinite bowels, which he has manifested to thee,
oh my soul! of things past, present, and to come; that so the perfect sense of
the love, mercy, pity, kindness, tenderness, and compassion of the Lord, thy
tender God, may always rest in and upon thee, oh my soul! That oh my soul!
through the sense, feeling, and true remembrance thereof, thou, may be, O
blessed God, praised, glorified, and magnified, reverenced, and honored, even
the holy, powerful, eternal, wonderful, everlasting Name of the Lord God
Almighty, who inhabiteth Eternity, who lives for ever and evermore; and bound
thereby to a bountiful, kind, loving, tender, pitiful, merciful, compassionate
God toward all souls: in the measure of God, thy God, who has abounded in
loving kindness toward thee, oh my soul!

Oh! oh! my soul, my soul, remember thou were once a prisoner in the
prisonhouse of darkness, strongly bound in chains and fetters, a slave and a
captive in the Land of Egypt, under the servitude and slavery of the Prince and
power of darkness, the God of the world, the King of Egypt: and through a
sense of thy hard bondage, and deplorable thraldom and miserable captivity, oh
my soul! thou were made in secret to cry and groan under thy burdens unto the
Lord thy tender God, whose bowels, whose tender bowels of infinite pity and
unfathomable compassion did (in mercy to thee) hover over thee, even in that
thy sad miserable, deplorable state; first made thee sensible of thy sad
captivity, and so in the sense thereof (and in the sense of thy own
helplessnesse) how did thou cry, cry unto the Lord God of pity for help, and
groan unto him for deliverance, oh my soul! and the Lord who opened thine eye,
and gave thee a glimpse of thy sad estate, did hear thy groanings, and thy
cries, and (for his own Seeds sake) set himself (by the outstretched arm of
his power) to deliver thee out of thy sad captivity, in which thou were,
without help of thy own, and there must abode, had not the Lord God of
everlasting unfathomable bowels of pity had mercy upon thee, oh my soul!

Oh! oh! oh! my soul, my soul, the remembrance of the tender love, the tender
pity, the tender mercy of thy tender pitiful God: how can it but even rend thy
bowels even from top to bottom, oh my soul, and remember, oh my soul! how the
Lord God Almighty, through his sore plagues and righteous judgments executed
upon Pharaoh the King of Egypt (under whom thou were a slave) by an
outstretched arm and a mighty power (by the slaying with the sword of his
vengeance the firstborn of Egypt) brought thee out of the prisonhouse, who
broke thy chains in pieces, and snapt thy bonds asunder, and brought thee out
of Egypt, and set thy face toward Canaan, the good Land that flows with milk
and honey. And remember, oh my soul! how wonderfully the Lord God, who by his
mighty power and outstretched arm brought thee out of Egypt, preserved thee
and upheld thee in thy long journey unto Canaan, thy tedious way and passage
through the sea and wilderness, how gently did he lead thee (as a tender
nursing father) and carried thee as in his arms, and bore with thee in his
mercy toward thee, when thou sometimes murmured against him, because of the
length and straightness of the way that he led thee in, and because of the
enemies thou had to encounter with by the way, insomuch that thou sometimes
backslided in thy heart toward Egypt, and lusted after the flesh pots thereof,
and murmured against the Lord, who so led thee about in such a cross knotty
way, (to that part, in the which through the cross, straightness and length
of the way, was to die, pine, and wither, and be worn away, and fall in the
wilderness, and not enter into the holy Land) and yet the Lord thy tender God,
who did correct thee through his righteous judgments; and as a tenderhearted
Father did chastise thee for thy pining, complainings, and murmurings against
him, and thy secret backsliding toward Egypt, did not destroy thee, but bear
with thy weaknesses and infirmities, and nourished thee and cherished thee day
by day, and as a tenderhearted Mother nurseth the only tender babe of her
womb; who led thee by a pillar of a cloud by day, (which was a shadow unto thee
from the heat) and a pillar of fire by night, which gave thee light by night,
when the Sun was under the earth: who when thou were an hungry, he gave thee
bread from heaven day by day, fresh Manna morning by morning compassed about
thy tent, and gave thee water out of the rock to satisfy thy thirst; yea, oh
my soul, great, greatly has the mercy, love, pity and compassion of the Lord
thy tender God been manifested toward thee: how did he fight for thee, and
subdue thy enemies before thee, and made way for thy passage! yea, remember,
remember oh my soul! oh my soul! how that after he had brought thee out of
Egypt by his outstretched arm, and mighty wonderful power, how mightily and
wonderfully did he appear for thee, to help thee in thy time of great need, and
extreme distress, and great trouble, even when Pharaoh and his great host
followed hard after thee, and pursued strongly to overtake thee, and bring thee
back again into Egypt under his slavery and servitude. And when Pharaoh and his
host followed so close after thee, and the Sea (the great Sea) was before thee,
and mountains on each side of thee, how great was the straight thou were in,
and the trouble and sorrow that compassed thee about, oh my soul! that thou
were even at thy wits end, scarce any hope of ever coming at the promised Land,
but rather murmuring against the Lord, saying in thy heart, Oh that thou had
stayed still in Egypt, and not come one step toward Canaan.

And oh! oh! my soul, my soul, in this time of thy greatest straight and
trouble (even when thou were without help of thy own) thou cried unto the Lord
thy God, who gave thee some glimpse of comfort, saying he would fight for thee,
and thou should be still and hold thy peace, and so he by his mighty power
made hard things to become easy unto thee, and that which appeared as a thing
unpossible unto thee, he (by his power) made it become possible unto thee.
Remember, oh my soul! how he made a way for thee to pass through the Sea, and
divided the waters thereof hither and thither, and by his mighty power carried
thee through the Sea, and Pharaoh and his host he utterly destroyed in his
wrath, and delivered thee oh, my soul! out of his hand, and destroyed them who
who would have destroyed thee, and gave thee dominion over them that had
dominion over thee, and thou saw them lie dead as by the Sea shore; glory,
glory, glory, ah! glory, glory, and pure praises, praises to God, to the Lord
God, even thy God, oh my soul! And now oh my soul! thou can sing a song of
deliverance, a song of victory and triumph, and go into the Sanctuary of God,
to the Altar of God, thy God, even God, thy exceeding joy; ah! and upon the
Harp thou can praise God, the Lord thy God, thy delight and joy.

Oh! oh! my soul, my soul, thou in the lowly fear and holy dread of the Lord
thy tender God, and in truth and righteousness livingly and experimentally
can say, the Lord my God is my strength and my song, he also is become my
salvation, he is my rock and strong tower, his work is perfect, a God, the God
of truth and righteousness, just and right he is, the holy one whose dwelling
is on high, in the holy place, and with him also who is of a poor, and a meek,
and a contrite spirit, and that trembles before his Holiness, and fears and
dread before his dreadful Name: ah! ah! thy right hand O Lord, thy right hand,
O Lord God of power, is become glorious in power, is become mighty in power,
thy right hand, O Lord God Almighty, has dashed in pieces mine enemies; by the
greatness, O Lord my God, by the greatness of thy wonderful excellency, thou
have O Lord confounded them that rose up against me; thou let forth thy
wrath and consumed them as stubble before a mighty fire, thou let forth the
breath of thy fury, and blew upon them and scattered them as chafe before a
mighty wind: Oh! oh! who can stand before thy indignation, thy dreadful
indignation? who can abide the extreme fierceness of thy anger? thy fury is
poured forth like fire, thou breakest the rocks in pieces, the mountains
tremble before thee, the mighty God; thou utterest thy voice and the Heathen
tremble, thou roarest, and the Kingdoms are moved, and the earth melts at
the appearance of thy presence, who comes with fire, and thy Chariots like a
whirlwind; thou renderest thy anger with fury, and thy rebukes with flames of
fire: thou have thy way in the whirlewinds, and the Clouds are as the dust of
thy feet. Thou art the mighty God, who can but fear before thee, and tremble at
thy eternal presence? thou roarest out of thy Sion, and utterest thy voice from
thy Jerusalem, and the Inhabitants of the earth tremble thereat; but still thou
art the hope of thy People, and the strength of thy ransomed ones, their strong
Tower, their present Helper in the time of their trouble.

Wherefore I Will not fear, though the Earth be removed and carried into the
midst of the Sea, and though the Sea roar and be terrible, and the Mountains
shake with the swellings thereof, and the Hills fly before it; though the tall
Cedars of Lebanon fall, and the strong Oaks of Rashan bend before it, yet I
will not fear. The Lord is with me, and he will not forsake me, but he will
help me, and that right early. Wherefore I will only fear before the Lord,
before the Lord my God, the mighty eternal God of mighty eternal Power, who
measures out the Heavens as with a span, and measures the waters of the Seas
in the hollow of his hand; who comprehends the dust of the Earth in a
measure, and weighs the Mountains as in scales, and the Hills as in a
balance; who takes up the Islands as a very little thing; before whose face
the Heavens and the Earth flee away, and behold there appears no more Sea.

Oh! who can but fear before thee, O Lord my God? the enemy said, I Will pursue,
I Will overtake, I Will not spare, my lusts shall he satisfied on him. But O Lord,
O Lord God, my God, thou were my God, near to help in the time of need, and in
the time of greatest need appeared, appeared in the greatest power of love. O
Lord, thou blew upon them, and the Sea covered them, and they sunk as Lead in
the bottom of the mighty Waters. O Lord, O Lord God, who is like unto thee? who
amongst the gods is like unto thee the only God, who art dreadful in holiness,
fearful in praises, doing wonders? Oh! let the people hear and be afraid, and
the Dukes of Edom be amazed, and let trembling take hold of the mighty men of
Moab; oh! who can but fear before thee, O Lord my God. Thou have redeemed me,
and led me forth in thy power, and guided me in, thy strength unto thy holy
habitation; thou will bring me in and plant me in the mountain of thy
Inheritance, in thy Sanctuary O Lord, which thy hands have established, wherein
I shall live with thee, O Lord my God for ever: Ah! glory, glory, glory unto
thee O Lord God my God. The Lord is a man of war, the Lord of Hosts is his
name; Pharaoh and his mighty men has he drowned in the Sea, but he has saved
thee, oh my soul! So Lord let thine enemies perish, but let them that hope in
thy mercy live for ever, to declare thy wonders, and magnify thy name in the
Land of the living. Ah! glory, glory, ah! glory, glory to God, the mighty God:
ah! praises, praises, honor and thanksgiving unto thee, O Lord my God, who
lives for ever and for evermore. Amen.

Oh! oh! what is this, what is this that the Lord thy tender God of infinite
bowels of pity has done for thee, oh my soul? thou were a slave in the Land of
Egypt, and the Lord has redeemed thee, oh my soul! thou were in darkness, and
the Lord has given thee light; and thou were under the region and shadow of
death, and he has brought thee forth into the Land of life. Thou were in the
prison, shut up in the prisonhouse, bound up with chains and fetters, in the
low dungeon of darkness, and he has broken thy chains, and snapt thy fetters
asunder, and loosed thy bonds, in broke up the prison door, and pulled down
the prison house, and set thee free oh my soul!

Oh my soul, my soul! thou were a captive in the Land of Babylon, estranged
from the Commonwealth of Israel, and an Alien from Sion, setting sorrowful and
solitary by the River of Babylon in the Land of Captivity, mourning when thou
thought upon Sion, for thou were a Captive in a strange Land, and sorrow
(through the sense of thy awful Captivity and Alienation from thy native Land)
compassed thee about, and trouble on every hand; tears was thy drink, daily
sorrow thy meat, and groans and sighs thy greatest joy; thou wentest bowed down
all the day long with an heart aching, and thine eyes dropping with tears,
because of the oppressions of thine enemies, and burdens of thine oppressors;
and at the remembrance of Sion (and in the sense of thy separation from her)
thou did pant, oh my soul! thou did pant after Sion, the Land of thy
nativity; Oh! as the Heart pants after the water brooks, crying in the anguish
of thy sorrow; how long Lord, how long should I be a captive in a strange Land?
with longing desires in thy heart after Sion: thinking in thy heart, oh! when
shall I walk with the ransomed of the Lord upon the Mountain of Sion, and
travel with the Lords redeemed in the streets of Jerusalem; and in that day, oh
my soul! the Lord for his own Seeds sake had regard unto thy cries, and thy
tears and sorrows was not hid from the view of his tender pitiful eye, and in
tender mercy and bowels of compassion toward thee: he, through his free love
unto thee brought thee forth out of Babylon the Land of thy captivity, and set
thy face toward Sion thy desired rest, oh! my soul.

But oh! oh! my soul, how often were thou bewildered in thy going, even after thy
face was turned toward Sion traveling thitherward, saying in thy heart, oh! I
will go join my self unto Sion in a perpetual Covenant which shall never be
broken, losing thy way, sometimes wandering as it were in the wilderness, in
the deserts and solitary places hungry and thirsty, my soul even fainting with
weakness, and then did thou cry unto the Lord in thy distress and he helped
thee out of all thy troubles, he took thee by the right hand, and brought thee
into the right way in which thou might come to thy desired rest, oh my soul!
And now, oh my soul! thou art come to Sion with songs and everlasting joy upon
thy head, and thou have obtained joy and gladness, and thy sighing and
mourning is fled away.

And now, oh my soul! thou that were in a desert does rejoice, and as a
wilderness art made glad, and as a solitary place does now blossom as a Rose,
as a dry heath, now as a fruitful valley, as the parched ground, now as the
moist mould that drinks in the rain that comes upon it. Now, oh my soul! thou
in truth can say the wilderness does rejoice, and the desert and solitary
place is made glad, and blossom as a Rose; water comes forth out of the
wilderness, and streams in the desert, the parched ground is become a poole,
and the dry heath springs of water; now the mourner rejoices, and the heavy
hearted is made glad, and beauty is given in stead of ashes, the oil of of joy
for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; now, oh my
soul! is thy horn exalted in the Lord in whom thy mouth is enlarged over thy
enemies: ah! the Lord makes rich, and he makes poor; he wounds, and he
makes whole; he kills, and he makes alive; he brings down, and he raises
up; he raises up the poor out of the dust, and the beggar from off the
dunghill, and sets them among Princes, and cause them to inherit the seat of
Glory. Yea, the full he emptieth, that they hire themselves out for bread, and
they that were hungry and empty he fills with good things: yea, the barren he
causes to bear seven, and she that has had many children is waxed feeble:
this is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in thy eyes, oh my soul!

Oh! my soul, my soul, thou can in truth say, thy winter is (in measure) over
and gone, and the stormy wind is fled away, and the cold parching frosts are
dissolved, and the spring and summer is come, and the Sun with its warm beams
breaks forth, and the gentle showers descends, and the time of the singing of
birds is come, and the turtle is heard in thy land, oh my soul! and the vine
puts forth her tender grapes, and the fig tree with her pleasant figs gives
a goodly smell. And now oh! my soul, thou can set under thy vine, and under
thy fig tree with thy beloved: and who shall make thee afraid, with whom thou
can walk into his pleasant garden of delights, among the beds of spices, and
feed among the lillies, and there solace thy self in the bosom of his love.

For oh my soul, oh my soul! there was a time when thou oh my soul! had lost
thy beloved, and thou soughtst him by night upon thy bed, and in the broad
ways, but thou foundest him not; and therefore sorrow compassed thee as a wall
about, and mourning covered thee as a garment, and thou could have no rest,
until thou had found thy beloved, crying fiercely in thy heart, saying in thy
ardent desires after him) oh! oh! thou art hid from me as in the clifts of the
rocks, and as in the secret places of the stairs: let me see thy countenance,
and let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is
comely; and when he did sometimes show himself unto thee behind the wall, or as
through a lattice, and put his fingers in by the hole of the door, thy bowels
were moved for him. But now oh my soul! thou do enjoy his presence which is
sweet and pleasant to thee, he is as a bundle of mirrhe, he is thy joy, thou
sits under his shadow with great delight; for he is a bower of spices unto
thee, and his fruit is sweet to thy taste, he has brought thee into his
banketting house, where his banner over thee is love, where he comfort thee
with the flaggons of his love he causes thee to drink of his spiced wine which
is as the liquor of life, and the juice of his pomegranates which is as honey
to thy taste.

Oh my soul! he fills thee with good things, that so thou might become as
a watered garden, and as a spring of water, whose water fails not; that thy
bones might flourish as an herb, and thy kidneyes be covered with fatness, and
thy belly become as an oily brook: thus has the Lord thy tender God, thy
merciful God, oh my soul! set thee free from the yoke of bondage. And now, oh
my soul! rejoice in fear and trembling, and dread and fear continually in the
holy presence of the Lord thy God, and watch, watch, watch, oh my soul!
diligently, watch in the lowly fear and godly jealousy over thy own heart,
trembling in thy bowels, lest thou, oh my soul! in the joy (the great joy) in
the sense of what the Lord has done for thee (and in a sight of thy good state
thou art advanced to) should be lifted up above what is meet, and thereby come
to loss and a fall; wherefore, oh my soul! to prevent such mishaps coming unto
thee unawares, keep thee watchful and low in fear, and humble, and contrite in
heart, and meek, and chaste in mind, tender and broken in bowels, poor and
needy in spirit, waiting and depending upon the mere preserving grace of the
merciful hand of thy merciful, pitiful, compassionate God of infinite loving
kindness; that whatever thou do or suffer (through his strength) for him, thou
may not be (in the least degree) exalted above him, but still keeping low in
him, dwelling beneath him at his footstool: and whatever thou receivest from
him, when he calls for it, return it back to him; and be nothing without him,
but what thou art in him alone, knowing that what thou art it is by him, and
what thou has it comes from him.

Therefore be nothing without him, and return his own to him, for he is worthy
that his own should praise him. And in the belly of a humble, lowly, broken,
contrite spirit dwell, oh my soul! where thou may serve God with thy tears,
dwelling in the sense of the freeness of his love and mercy in what he has
done for thee, that the remembrance thereof may rend thy bowels before him,
passing thy pilgrimage here in fear and trembling before the Lord thy God, unto
whom, unto whom, unto whom be glory, glory, glory, praises, praises, praises,
thanksgiving, honor, and eternal renown, be rendered unto his eternal name,
who is blessed, blessed, blessed for ever and ever. Amen, Amen. Halelujah in
the highest, Amen. glory, glory, ah glory; Halelujah in the highest. Amen,
Amen, says my soul.

Oh my soul! where did thou begin, but in the sense of Gods dear, tender,
precious, most excellent love stirring in thy heart, and there must thou end,
and rest satisfied, and lay thee down quiet in peace with Gods most dear babes,
and tender innocent lambs, unto whom thou cleavest as flesh to their bones,
toward whom thy bowels, thy bowels, thy tender bowels do unspeakably yearn
with secret pantings in thy inward parts, through the weight of love that
abides in and upon thee, oh my soul! my soul, my soul. WILLIAM BENNIT.

THE END.

