City Security STATED: IN A SERMON P^eached at St Paul's August. 11th 1661.
Before the Right Honorable THE LORD MAYOR.

By ^illia^ Bell B. D. late Fellow of St John Baptists College (...); and now
Chaplain to his Majesty in his Tower of LONDON.

LONDON, Printed for John Baker, at the Sign of the Peacock in St Paul's
Churchyard. 1661.

City Security.
PSALM 127. the latter part of the first Verse. Except the Lord keep the City,
the Watchman waketh but in vain.


THere is a natural necessitous humility lodged in persons of mean, and low
spirits; men of no parts, or no knowledge of their parts, or who have no just
esteem of them. And there is an artificial flagitious humility, when, like the
Hawk, men stoop for a quarry. 2 Samuel 15.5, 6.
Thus Absalom stole the hearts of his Fathers subjects out at their mouths, by
his treacherous kisses. And there is a penal calamitous humility, when God
trips up the heels of insolent persons; such was that of proud Nebuchadnezzar,
Dan. 4.33.
when divested of Empire, and Reason, Humiliatus erat, quid humilis non erat,
humbled, because not humble. And there is a Celestial gracious humility, when
men of eminent parts and place, own God as the fountain of all they have, and
are, that fills and feeds their Channells. A royal virtue indeed, when Kings
acknowledge their Thrones to be set upon Gods foot stool, and though in all
Causes, and over all Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, in their own
Dominions Supreme heads and Governors; yet pay their ho^ and fealty to the
King of Kings, in confessing they are all this under God and his Christ. It is
the method of proud men to compare themselves with their inferiors, and as the
Pharisee, to cry out, Lord! what am I not? like those that measure themselves
by the declining Sun, and so seem taller than they are: But the humble person
compares himself, his power, his wisdom, his holiness, his honor, with those
of God, and, as the Publican, cries out Lord! what am I? As those that measure
themselves by the Sun at noon, and their bedwarfd shadow, and are more than
they seem. It is Moses his Title of Honor to be styled Gods servant; And
David's chief ambition to be a Nethenim in the house of God; The threshold of
whose Temple was a step above his Throne, and he takes a degree to be a Porter
at it. Rev. 4.10.
The Elders cast down their Crowns at the feet of God. And, as all subordinate
Powers, give in at the presence of the King, as Stars return their light to the
Sun at his arising; so even Kings lower their Scepters, when God exalts his,
since the best of them are but the off-sets thereof. The most absolute
Monarchs, are thus far relative, that they subsist by God, there being no
independency in reference to him. There are no designs, be the means, or men,
that carry them on never so potent, that come not to naught, if blown upon by
God: Nor is any instrument so impotent, that with God is not efficacious. Phil.
4.13.
This is the ground of St Paul's omnipotency: I can do all things through Christ
which strengthens me. Proud Babel that was raised in Rebellion against God,
was razed in confusion by him: Zech. 4.6, 7.
But where not an Army, nor strength, but the Spirit of God builds, there even
the head stone is laid, and the shouting is grace, grace. God blessed the
Egyptian Midwives, Exodus 1.21.
by his building them houses, for their supporting the houses of the
Israelites. And he who blessed them for their work, blessed them in it: And as
he suited the reward to the work, so he suited the work to his own promise; for
he had pronounced that primitive blessing of Increase, Genesis 1.28.
and Multiply, on that people, and man cannot substract where God will multiply.

No, nor yet multiply where he will substract. He, who keeps the key of David,
opens the barren, Rev. 3.7.
and shuts up the fruitful Womb: And as from one Vine, one fertile Wife, Psalm.
128.3.
he can draw forth the blessing of Clusters of Children for him that fears
him; Verse 1. 1 Kings 11.3.
so from seven hundred Wives and three hundred Concubines, the product to
Solomon was but a single Rhehoboam, so far as Scripture undertakes the
Genealogy; but one Grape from so many Vines, and that too, but such an one as
men gather of Thorns, who, like Ivy, plucked down the house, he pretended to
support. Both the fruit of the common Womb, the earth, is Gods, for The earth
is the Lords, and the fulness thereof; Psalm. 24.1.
and that of every particular one too, of every Mother, as well as that
general one: Psalm. 12^.3.
for Children are the inheritance of the Lord, and the fruit of the Womb is his
reward. So that there is neither fertility, nor security; plenty nor safety
without God, for except he build the house, they labor in vain that build it:
Except he keep the City, etc.

Which words are, whether written by Solomon, Scope of the Text. Eccl. 8.4.
or by David, for Solomon (as is most probable) the words of a King, and there
is power, and truth in them; as they are a proof of the necessary concurrence
of divine providence to the undertakings of men: And the procedure of the
argument is a minore, ad majus, from the less, to the greater; that that
providence is so particular, as to extend to the Economy of every private
family, except the Lord build, etc. that is, Clarius. Castalio in loc.
nisi augeat rem familiarem and familiam, unless he improve the estate, and
household: haeredes, liberos, the heirs, the children, there can be no increase,
or improvement of either by any. And yet that providence is withal so
general, as to comprehend the polity of a whole City. Except the Lord keep the
City, etc.

The name of a family shall rot, unless God shall vouchsafe to preserve it by
a numerous, and perfume it by a gracious succession of generations; And the
City shall be buried in its own ruins, for all its fortifications of dead
earth, its Walls and Towers; and of living earth, its Militia and Magistrates,
unless God shall supervise and bless all. Except the Lord keep, etc.

mod^l Proposition. The Proposition, The Watchman waketh but in vain. The modus
or limitation. Except the Lord keep the City. I shall not mangle the words by
any more minute division of them: that I may not part God from the City; the
Watchman from God; vigilance from the Watchman; nor success from his
vigilance. But I shall speak to it by way of Explication, and Application.

1. By way of Explication, in unfolding these four particulars:

First, What is intended by the word Watchman.

Secondly, What is meant by the City.

Thirdly, What is the purport of this phrase of Gods keeping the City.

Fourthly, I shall insist on what is indeed the whole concernment of the Text,
that Except the Lord keep, etc. which I shall assert. 1. By Precedents, that so
it has been. 2. By Arguments, that so it must be.


1. Watchman what?
First, What is intended by the word watchman? It signifies a Centinell, or one
of a Guard appointed, and sent forth for the safeguard of some place, or
persons. It is applicable, 1. Ecclesiastical. Ezekiel. 3.17.
1. To Ministers, Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of
Israel, therefore hear the word at my mouth: both mission, I have made thee a
watchman, and commission from God, therefore bear the word at my mouth. But an
enlargement on this sense, in this place, at this time, is not pertinent. It
is, 2. Civil Governor. Ezekiel. 33 2.
2. Therefore put for the Civil Governors, and particularly for Magistrates
by Election. If the people of the Land take a man from among them, and make him
their watchman, etc. And the expression is significant, there is an Analogy, or
correspondence between the Magistrate, and Watchman in the unde, ubi, and quare
of their employments.

1. Taken from.
1. The Centinell or Watchman, is taken from his fellows, and only differenced
from them, in respect of his present charge; so is the Magistrate, who though
clothed with the Name and Image of God, in regard of his power above his
brethren, Yet must dye as a man, Psalm. 82.7.
and fall like one of the Princes. The Robes, and Dress distinguish him, but
the flesh and blood is the same; it is not the metal, but the superscription
of Caesar on him, that makes him differ in value.

2. The Watchman was set in a Tower. Isai. 21.5, 8.
The Magistrate is exalted above his brethren, 2. Preferred above.
his place is a place of eminence; anointed above his fellows, taller by the
Crown, by the head, than the rest.

3. For his fellows.
3. Though the Watchman be taken from, and preferred above his brethren, yet all
this is for them. As the Ecclesiastical, so also the Civil Ruler, Heb. 5.1.
is taken from among men, and ordained for men, for salus populi, the peoples
safety; it should be, suprema lex Magistratui, the Magistrates chief Law,
because it is, suprema ratio Magistratus, the final cause of Magistracy. Isai.
45.4.
For Jacob my servants sake, and Israel mine elect, I will even call thee by
thy name, and name thee, to wit, Cyrus, which neither descended of (...)
authority, or (which is a derivative of that) from (...) Lord, showed he had
that, and was this for Jacobs and Isreal's sake: But enough of this, whereof we
have had too much so lately.

Rulers necessary to the being.
Now Magistracy is necessary adesse to the being, and been esse, to the
w^ll-being of a people.

1. To their being, they cannot be a people without it: Could we have leave to
look through the Act of Indemnity, we should quickly take a prospect of those
confusions, an Usurping Government had involved us in; Hosea 1.4.
Anarchy would have been worse; by that we were Israel, a scattered people; by
this we should have been Loammi, not a people.

And well being of a City.
2. Magistracy is necessary to the well-being, to the strength and opulency of a
people; Bees taste the sweet of Government, who fill their Combs under their
King. And you cannot forget, for all an Act of Oblivion, under whom you crammed
your Coffers, and under whom you drained them: Who rendered you feared abroad
for your Powers, and envied for your Peace and plenty at home; and who made you
scorned or pitied, when like earthen Vessels, they had emptied and dashed you
to shivers against each other. But because the Magistrate here, under the
notion of a Watchman, is set rather for the preservation, than improvement of
his peoples peace, to keep the City, that is, to secure what they have, not to
acquire what they have not; we shall in three words consider our Magistrate, as
necessary to the being of his City, as a Watchman set out, or up.

Rulers Watchmen.
1. To prevent dangers, 1. To prevent.
And truly, as it is rather eligible to avoid sin, than censure; to be
innocent than pardoned. 1 Samuel 15 22.
Obedience being better than sacrifice, in this among many other respects,
since that prevents the guilt, which this but atones for; so is it more
commendable to intercept mischiefs, Prove. 22.3.
than to overcome them. It is the prudent man's Character, that he foreseeth the
plague. Now, to speak in my own sphere; he that prevents sins, preven^s
dangers, for sin is the harbinger of plagues For this cause many are sick, 1
Cor. 11.30.
and weak among us, and many are fallen asleep; for as intemperate diet in the
natural body breeds ill humors, and they engender death; so in the body
politic, ill manners beget public distempers, and they close in a general
confusion. Cant. 3.3.
Therefore as the Watchmen walk about the City to prevent the designs of
thieves, murderers, and incendiaries, so must the Magistrate; his eye must walk
the round of his limits, to obstruct sins in their spring, and outburst; a
finger may hinder there, and then, when brachia contra torrentem, when grown
large, and swift, and strong, those weak and contemned waters will bear down
all the banks and dams of Laws and Auctority. Magistrates are called shields;
and you know a shield is a defensive piece of Armor, Psalm. 47.9.
and its use is to ward off blows from the body: And better have a shield to
prevent a wound, than the ablest Chyrurgeon to cure it.

2. To discover.
2. The Magistrate is a Watchman to discover and intimate dangers; therefore is
the Watchman in the day on his Tower to foresee and forewarn, in the night with
his Lantern to descry. Ezekiel. 1.16, 18.
The Magistrates are those wheels mentioned by the Prophet, said to be full of
eyes; eyes to pry into sins, and like those of Tiberius, able to see in the
dark. Watchman, what of the night? Is. 21.11.
And they have motion, and weight, to track and overtake, thrash, grind, and
crush sinners to pieces. The Watchman or Centinell is to give the Alarm to
his Officers on the approach of the enemy: so must inferior Magistrates
discover to their superiors, those evils that are too strong for themselves to
grapple with. Ezeck. 33.3.
The Watchman when he sees the sword come upon the Land, must blow the
Trumpet, and warn the people. Neither of which, Isaiahs blind, Isaiah 56.10.
and dumb Watchman can do, nor see, nor warn.

3. To repel dangers.
3. The Magistrate is a Watchman to repel dangers; Therefore has the Watchman
his Bill, and the Magistrate his Sword, and neither of them are to bear them in
vain. If he cannot prevent them by caution and discovery, he must valiantly
attaque them; If as a shield he cannot repel them, as a Sword he must cut
through them. If as a breastwork he cannot bear off, as a Cannon he must beat
off the Assault. The Centinell who is the forlorn of every Corpse of Guard,
has not only eyes to foresee, and voice to intimate, but his Muskett at a
distance, and his Sword at hand, to resist the intrusion of an enemy. And
therefore is the Magistrate armed with a Commission, that where he cannot
hinder offenses from a being, he may obstruct their spreading, by
discountenancing vice in striking through the loins of offenders. And in these
senses, and for these ends the Magistrate is a Watchman or keeper, for security
of

2. City what?
The City, The second term we promised the Explication of: The word in the
large acceptance of it, signifies a Nation, or Nations united under one
Supreme Magistrate or Magistracy. In the restraind and usual sense of it, It
is a place encompassed with walls, where men convene, and cohabit for mutual
commerce, security, and society, having particular subordinate Officers,
Charters, and Laws of Government. The word has other figurative senses, but
not pertinent here. And THE City in every Nation signifies their Metropo^is, as
among the Ancient Grecians, Athens; with the latter, Byzantium, or
Constantinople; among the Romans, Rome; with us, this of London; and among the
Jews Jerusalem, suppposed to be the City intended in the Text. Though it is an
universal truth, and may be predicated of any whole Country or Kingdom, and
of every particular body politic, Corporation or City therein, that the
Watchman or Magistrate thereof watches or waketh therefore but in vain, Except

3. Lords keeping the City what?
The third expression needing Explication. It was an ancient superstition among
those who knew not God, Mr Gregor^^.
in the crowd of those th^^^^ thousand, they worshipped for God, 2 Samuel 5.6, 8.
The Lord keeps the City. to ascribe a Genius to every Nation and City; and
to build their Cities under the most propitious configuration of the Heavens,
which they called the Ascendent of the City. Under the influence of a second
constellation, they erected a Statue of brass, into which they called by
Magic (as the Devil made them believe) the Fortune of their City, which so
confined, they disposed in some recessefull and safe place of the City; and on
the preservation of that Statue, they supposed their own, and their Cities
depended. Such was the Trojan Palladium, and such were the blind and lame, 2 Samuel 5.6, 8.
mentioned in Samuel, wherewith the Jebusites did Garrison their Fort against
David. Not impotent persons (as some have too lamely and blindly asserted) set
in scorn as defendants good enough in a place so impregnable; for such David's
soul would have pitied rather than hated, as he is there said to do them. And
their natural or accidental defects would not have secluded them from Verse
8. (...)
his Palace, as those lame and blind, were, Id.
which was open to Mephibosheth, though conscious of one of those
imperfections. 2 Samuel 9:13.
It was congruous to the pride of Persian Monarchs, to forbid entrance into
their Courts to persons clothed in sackcloath, least they should cloud, Esther
4.2.
and damp their mirth, and luxury: But David, who was a man after Gods own
heart, (and the heart of God is compassion) could not therefore so distasse
them. But these were Images, the tutelary Gods of the place, which the
Jebusites call blind and lame, not as intimating their own esteem of them, but
repeating the Israelites upbraidings of them as such; suitable to the Character
David gives of them, They have eyes and see not, (blind, Psalm. 115.5, 7
) feet and walk-not, (lame.) And throughout that Psalm, (it is therefore worth
your perusal at leisure) the Penman thereof sets up the Lord in opposition to
all those false Gods. Luke 11.22.
Who by his binding that strong man armed in his own Palace, showed that the
Devils are subject to him, by their migremus hinc, their quitting possession,
when, and wherever his commands seal a Lease of Ejectment on them, and that
there is no sorcery against Jacob, Numb. 23.2^ Heb. 7.25.
nor divination against his Israel. He is able to save to the uttermost them
that rely on him; a sure repositary of his peoples confidence. In his hands no
danger, out of them no safety. No presuming then on Idols, that are not so much
as the Image of God, no nor yet on Magistrates, which are but so much: Not on
Idols, which are the work of our hands; nor on men, though they are the work of
his hands: For except the Lord keep, etc.

4. The Text proved.
Which is the fourth and last particular, and indeed the all of the Text, which
we promised to evidence by Precedents and Arguments.

1. By instances.
1. By Precedents, that so it has been. And truly History sacred, and
profane, domestic, and foreign, is full of instances. Take the word City in
its largest bounds, of Empires, Nations, and Commonwealths; against how many of
these, and how often, has God writ his Mean Mean Tekel Vpharsin, he has
numbered, Dan. 5.25, and
weighed, divided, and cass'd them. The four Monarchies Assyrian, Persian,
Grecian, Roman: The Histories of every Nation will assert this truth to their
Readers, in the many, and great changes they offer to view.

Take the word City in its limited and usual sense, for a place encompassed
with walls, and the time would fail me, should I insist on the particular
Tradegies of those only recorded in Sacred Writ, that have fallen under the
displeasure of the Lord: Babel, Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, the City
of Hamor for the rape of Dinah, Jericho, Ai, Tire and Sidon, Gibeah, Damascus,
Samaria, Babylon. Deuteronomy. 1.28.
The Cities of Canaan walled up to Heaven. 2 Chronicles. 14.14.
The Cities about Gerar of Aroer, Deuteronomy. 3.4.
the Cities of Og. All those of the 1 Chronicles. 20.3.
Ammonites and 2 King. 3 25.
Moabites, and Judge. 20.48.
Benjamin. Ashdod, Gath, and Ekron of the 1 Samuel 5.
Philistims; with those many that sunk under the weight of the Prophets heavy
burdens. And the doleful ruins of Jerusalem, we may take a view of through
the holy p^^spective of Jeremy's tears and Threnody: And its last irrecoverable
devastation described by Josephus, an eyewitness of the fulfilling of our
Saviors prediction on the Temple, and the enlargement thereof to almost the
whole City, whereof scarce one stone was left upon another. When God had
empounded the greater part of the Nation within those walls at the feast of the
Passover; where there was an account given in of two hundred fifty six
thousand five hundred Paschall Lambs slain, and at the rate of ten at least to
a Lamb, there was in the City then no less than two millions five hundred
sixty five thousand purifi^d male Jews: Jews besides strangers, and men besides
women and children, and purified besides the unclean; the captives ninety seven
thousand, slain, and died of the plague during the siege, an hundred thousand.
And the City lost, and razed through the factions of the seditious, and
zealous. They are Josephus his words. And indeed sedition, and blind zeal will
go far toward the destruction of a City. In grand Cairo Historians tell us,
there died in one year of the plague no less than eighteen hundred thousand
persons. And what havoc it made not long since in the Western parts, Rome,
Naples, Genoa, etc. your weekly News Books could inform you. To come nearer
home, how has God harassed these Lands by incursions of Romans, Scots, Picts,
Danes, Saxons, and Normans, by Civil dissentions betwixt King and Barons, York
and L^ncaster, when (as one wittily alludes) the red Rose blushed for the blood
it shed, and the white Rose grew pale through the blood it had lost. What
depopulation and waste has the plague made in several parts of the Nation, to
instance but in one at a distance, fifty seven thousand, and more in the City
of Norwich in six months, where now is scarce the fifth part of that number of
inhabitants. To come home to this City, in the year 1593, there died of the
plague seventeen thousand eight hundred and ninety, among which, the then Lord
Mayor, and three Aldermen In the year 1563, twenty one thousand five hundred
and thirty. In the year 1348, fifty thousand were buried in one Churchyard,
that of the Charter House The vast numbers of those that were hereby gathered
to their Fathers in the first of King James, and King Charles the first, is
within the memory of many of you, and therefore needs not my record.

And but gently to touch the yet green wounds of our last twenty years
contracting; how has this City been sindg'd in several limbs of it by fire,
and scared by triumphant enemies marching through the bowels of it, and some
Swords, and blood drawn in it. And there are, and have been, new diseases, new
fevers, gleaning, and reaping in it. And though the plague (God be thanked)
has not, yet War, and its daughter, poverty, has shut up many houses in it.
And though I am confident no City in the world is better constituted for the
Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military Polity of it; yet all these unquestionable
experiences will peremptorily convince us, that Except the Lord keep the City,
etc.

2. Reasons.
But 2. this truth may be, as experimentall^ so also rationally asserted.
Wherefore to back this strength of History, we shall bring up a reserve of six
Arguments: three whereof immediately refer to God, and the other three respect
the Magistrate, 1. From God.
or Watchm^n. Three Attributes of God especially, give in a valid testimony to
this truth; that Except the Lord keep, etc.

1. His Omniscience.
1. His Omniscience, God, and God only knows all the enemies of a City, and all
the designs of those enemies. All things are naked, and open before him, Heb.
4.13.
(...) anatomized, as every capil^^ry v^in to the Hawks eye of the accurate
Chyrurgion. Verse 12.
No such dissecting knife, as the wisdom of God, it pierces to the dividing
as^^n^er of soul, and spirit, and of the joints, and marrow, and is a discerner
of the thoughts, John 2.25.
and intents of the heart. He needs not that any should testify of man, for he
knows what is in him; better than the Artificer does the springs, and wheels of
any movement. One man cannot judge another heart, but by some overt ^ct: It
therefore is a very blasphemous expression to say, We know such an one as well
as he that made him. There are three Indexes, or discoverers of the mind; The
Countenance, the Tongue, the Hand: All these may, and have, Matthew. 6.16.
put a fallacy upon man. The Pharisees were (...) men of most mortified
countenances, but corrupt principles, and they caught the people in this net;
who could not see the graves for the painting. 1 Kings 13.18.
That lying Prophet by a smooth tongue, and a well couched story, betrayed the
man of God to a sudden and sad destruction. And the rough hands of Jacob
cheated the dim sight of Isaac. Genesis 27.22.
How often have these combined, and a well dressed lie, an innocent look, and
siding for a while with a party, let in a Spy, and Traitor into a Garrison,
past all the Guards to the ruin thereof? Thus Judith captivated the heart, and
then cut off the head of Holofernes. Judith 13.
And what walls are proof against a golden Ass, or the wooden horse of an
insinuating Sinon. The Philosoper conscious of his sincerity, wished he had a
window to his breast, that his very thoughts might be visible to all the world.
Man is diaphanous, or transparent to God who made the eye, without such a
window. The heart of man is deceitful above all things, to others, to himself;
Jerem. 17.9.
but he that framed it, knows every winding in that labyrinth, and can trace it
without a clue. The Watchman passes him that can give the word: But how many
have had the word in their mouths, who yet have betrayed the City? But there is
no word save that of Immanuel, God with us, that can preserve it. The Lords
all-seeing eye can pierce into a Spanish Council, a Romish Conclave, an Hellish
Vault; and discover, and scatter an insolent invasion, and Powder Treason He
knows all thoughts before they are; every embryo stratagem against a City, and
no ambush is hid from, nor is there any counsel against him. No such overseer
than as God, who is never overseen.

2. Omnipresence.
2. Except the Lord keep, etc. Because of his Omnipresence. Enter, praesenter
Deus est, and ubique potenter, present to all times, for this King indeed, and
personally never dies: and to all places, he fills Heaven and earth. Jer. 23.24.
Magistrates below are forced to delegate Officers under them; to see by the
perspective of others eyes, and hear by the Otacousticon of others ears, and
e^k out their short arms with others hands: To ape an omnipresence by
Lieutenants, Judges, Vice-royes, Deputies, Constables, and the like: And
treachery in one of these, may bring ruin on the whole body. The Governor of
a Garrison endeavors to be every where by his Council, Orders, Officers,
Main-guard, Ou^-guards, Reserves, Sentinels, Perdu's, Scouts, Spies, Pe^^ols,
Rounds, and Grand-rounds. But God is all these, and above them, and they are
all nothing without him; He is a Sentinel at every door, a Master, a Father in
every Family, in the City: Ma^^. 1.6. Ephesians. 3.15.
for except he build every particular house, they labor but in vain, that
would raise it. He is present to every person, and to every action of that
person. He is not as a Watchmaker, who having framed, and put together a piece
of Clock-work, winds up the springs, or draws up the weights, and is then an
idle spectator of its several motions: But as a skillful Musician, whose
fingers assist to every Note, and relish; as In him we live, and move, and
have our being. Acts 17.28.
Now since as in the body natural, so also in the body politic, death may be
let in, and life out at every pore, every little leak may sink the Vessel of
the Commonwealth; there can be no security, but in one, who is at hand to all
dangers, and such is our Omnipresent God.

3. Omnipotency.
But 3. That which renders the other two Attributes advantageous to us, is the
Omnipotency of God. Our Watchmen may be conscious of our afflictions, present
to them, ready, and willing to help, but impotent. They may see the fire
consuming, but unable to quench it: the plague ravageing but unable to stop it:
famine depopulating but unable to relieve from it. Milchama, war devouring but
unable to obstruct it. Matthew. 19.26.
But with God all things are possible. His breath that blows up the fire, can
blow it out. He can set limits of time, number, and place to the plague, and
fill your Bills of Mortality with empty Ciphers, as (blessed be his name for
it) he has done for above thirty years together. What does a Watchman, a
padlock, and a red cross at the door, dog-killers within the City, and
Pest-houses without, and all other very prudent Cautions of our Governors
signify, unless there be a Lord have mercy upon us too, to heal those
within, and secure those without? He only gives bread, Ezekiel. 16.49. Lev. 26.26.
and makes it plentiful. Even fulness of bread, and he gives the staff of
bread, and makes it nourishing, that it prove not gravel in the mouth; Prove.
20.17. Matthew. 7.9.
a stone instead of bread. He turns the edge of every Sword that is drawn
against you, and rebates the point of every Spear of war that is thrown among
you. You have found what advantage it is to have the General of a few thousands
for your friend. What prejudice, to have him for your enemy? What does it then
import to have the Lord of hosts for you, or against you? One Angel is Guardian
sufficient for the whole City of Samaria, 2 Kings 19.35.
and in one night dispatcheth one hundred eighty five thousand of its
besiegers. How secure are they then, who have him for their defender, who
commands more than twelve legions of such Conquerours? Matthew. 26.53.
We presume our Nation to be well fenced with a wall of water; And we thought
our City well munited with a wall of earth; But alas! how weak is water, and
how frail is earth to that God who is a wall of fire. The Roman Ram, Zech. 2.5.
an engine of battery with its iron horns pushed down the walls of many
Cities: But even the breath of a few ramms horns, Josh. 6.20.
when God inspires them, blows down the walls of Jericho. He works with, or
without, by weak, or contrary means. His power is so great none need to assist,
none can resist him. Rev. 6.2, etc.
Both the red horse of war, and the black horse of famine, and the pale horse
of pestilence belong to his Militia; And if he charge us with but one of these,
it is sufficient to rout us; What would all three do then, if he did not bind
their mouths with a bit, Psalm. 32.9.
and bridle, that they should not come near us? No Magistrate is then such a
shield, as God. No Tower so strong, as He. No Watchman has such knowledge to
detect, such an ubiquity to direct, and such power to protect. Therefore
except, etc.

2. Reasons concerning the Watchman.
And that will yet more evidently appear, if as you have considered how
necessary God is to the City, so secondly, if you perpend that he is of as
absolute necessity to the Watchman, to the Magistrate too, and that because

1. His abilities.
1. He has his endowments from God: such as are David's zeal for piety; and
Phineas his for justice; the wisdom of Solomon; the meekness and uprightness
of Moses; the valor, and conduct of Joshua; the strength of Sampson; an
unbribeable spirit as Samuel; a tender care of the spiritual and civil
concernments of Gods people, as Joseph, Nehemiah, and Mordecai; the
impartiality of Job: And (which comprehends all these) that vigilance, that
waking in the Text, to exert, and suit these to their proper objects. Now all
these are (...), from the father of lights, James 1.17.
who gives every good and perfect gift: Who as he is free to give Empire, so
also to qualify for it. And where God denies or withdraws any of these from
Governors, he so far, and so much exposes that Government to hazard. But
these are but the limnings, though rich ones, of a Magistrate: We must have a
facing to: these but adapt, they do not license for Government: they belong ad
posse, not adesse of Magistracy, simply considered: for with these our Watchman
watches but in vain, Except, etc.

2. Commission.
2. He has his deputation from God: from whom all must have their Commissions,
immediately as Kings, or mediately by and from Kings, as subordinate
Magistrates. The Prince is the fountain of honor, and power. But God is the
Sea of both, the bottomless, boundless Ocean of both honor, Romans 13.1. John
19.11.
and power. The powers that be are ordained of God. Thou could have no power
at all against me, says Christ to Pilate, except it were given thee from
above. All Magistrates from God, whether by succession as Kings, nomination as
Judges, or election, as Majors, Aldermen, Sheriffs, Common-council-men, etc.
though there is also herein much of the (...) the ordinance of man, 1 Peter
2.13.
St Peter speaks of, because proper for men, and discharged by men, and they
have their conge d'eslire, leave to choose from God. By whom Kings reign, Prove.
8.15.
and Princes decree justice. Now a Commission is a direction to the
Commissioned for the matter, manner, measure, and time (usually) of his work,
this, thus, and thus much, and thus long. So that Magistrates often cannot do
the good they have power to do, for want of authority: he that transgresses
lying under a praemunire. Psalm. 78.41.
The holy One of Israel, in himself, unlimited, ha h set bounds to all
dominion, every Magistrate being his Minister. Even Angels who are superior to
the best of men in their best condition, their state of innocence; wherein they
were made little lower than the Angels, Psalm. 8.5. Exodus 23.20.
are prescribed their orders, and circumscribed by God. He sends an Angel
before his Israel, to keep them in the way, and bring them into the place he
has prepared. Psalm. 91.11.
And he gives his Angels charge over us, to keep us in all our ways. There is
a great deal of difference between acting with, and without a Commission,
either fear palls, or despair fires the procedure of these, whereas he who
draws his Sword lawfully, can use it valiantly, and sheath it safely. It is
undeniable that there may be many not called to the helm of Government, as
pious, prudent, just, and valiant as those that are: But as they have a moral
aptitude to rule, parts, so they must have a civil aptitude, leave to exercise
those parts, before they can justly exert them as Rulers. He that has the
endowment without the employment, like Ephraim, is a cake, baked but on one
side. Hosea 7.8. 2 Samuel 18.23. Verse 29. 2 Timothy 2.24. compared with Romans 10.15.
An unsent Ahimaaz may make more haste than a Commissioned Cushi, and more
haste than good speed too, for when he comes his errand is, he knows not what.
To be apt to teach, apt to rule is not enough, for how shall they do either,
except they be sent? We have sadly felt the inconveniences of having the
Throne, the Bench, the Pulpit thus filled by Usurpers. The Ship cannot be safe,
when every Mariner will play the Pilot; nor the Army secure, when every
Soldier will set the watch without order. God keeps a City by his Providence,
such are health, peace, plenty, and the like; And by his Ordinances, whereof
Magistracy is one, and a considerable one, it can be no City without it. Now
the providence of God cannot be expected, where the Ordinances of God are
slighted. Then God will keep your City when you let him set his own Sentinels
and Watchmen over it, such as are not only parted, but also empowered by him,
adapted, and Commissioned by God, Authority being the embellishment of Dignity.
But yet this is not all that is necessary to the preservation of a City: For

3. Success from God.
3. Then God keeps the City when he blesses the endeavors of those that do
wake over it. The able, faithful, painful, lawful, may yet be an
unsuccessefull Magistrate, and Watchman: The last hand therefore of God is his
blessing upon their studies. And this is the main purport of the Text, as is
evident by the next Verse, the exegesis, or illustration thereof. It is vain
for you to rise up early, Psalm. 127.2.
to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows, for so he gives his beloved
sleep. We soundly, and safely sleep on beds of Down, when he renders the
councels of our vigilant Watchmen successful, whose Pillowes are stuffed with
thorns, public cares. What does a Typhis, a Palinurus at the Stern signify,
when God will not still the raging of the Sea? or a wise and just Prince in the
Throne, when he will not allay the madness of the people? A Court of Aldenmen,
Psalm. 89.9. Prove. 16.33.
or Common Council may debate and conclude, but as lots cast into the lap, God
will dispose of all their Resolves, they may deliberate, but he will determine,
and, when he pleases, use his Negative voice, against any of their orders.
Nay, Jer. 5.6.
when he purposes to chastise a City, he will do it by fasces and Swords of
their own Judges, and set Leopards to watch over them. Their keepers shall be
their Goalers. Instead of Nursing-fathers, Isai. 49.23.
their Magistrates shall prove Step-fathers: Their Ministers bout-feu's, and
bellows of Sedition: And their Militia an Iron yoke about the neck of their
liberty; A Wolf in the bosom that eats out the heart of its maintainer.
Separate the blessing of God from the brain of an Ahitophel, and the tongue of
an Herod, and that wise Counselor, 2 Samuel 16.23. Acts 12.22.
and this eloquent Orator shall dye with shame and horror, though he
counseled, and this spoke as the Oracles of God. Why does not the harvest
answer the seed time, 2 Cor. 9.6.
nor that promise of God, that he that sows plentifully shall reap so? Why
does not meat satisfy the hungry? 1 Hagg. 6.9.
nor drink the thirsty? nor clothes warm? nor the wages rest in the bag? the
ninth Verse tells the reason: The Lord did blow upon all. (And would you know
why God blowed thereon, peruse the whole Chapter at your leisure, and then
consider this ruined house of God, into a corner of which we are crep'd, and
your merit therefore of such a judgment, and apply the remedy; it is eccentrick
to my Text, Prove. 10.22.
and I cannot insist on it.) The blessing of God makes rich, and he adds no
sorrow with it. The blessing of God makes rich, the curse of God sometimes does
it, when he fills the bellies of the wicked with his hid treasure, Psalm. 17.14.
and entailes it, they have enough, and leave the rest of their substance to
their Babes. When men make haste to be rich, and therefore cannot be innocent.
Prove. 28.20. Psalm. 17.14.
When they have wealth from God, not as tokens, but portions, but then the
sting appears in the tail, Luke 16.25. Eccl. 7.6.
everlasting sorrow, Dives last course and sad voyder; here comforted, and but
for a time, their prosperity a fire of thorns; below tormented, and that for
ever, their punishment a fire of brimstone. Gods blessing is the best Charter
of the City, the ratification of all your coun^ell, when his fiat is to it.
When to you Optative he adds his Imperative Amen, 1 Kings 1.36.
and commands down the mercy you look up for. Then is your Militia so many
thousand effective, when the Lord of Hosts is their General, Prove. 11.14. Psalm.
82.1.
then in the multitude of your Counsello^^s there is safety, when God stan^eth
in your Assemblies, and judges among you. For Except he keep your City, the
Watchman Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military, watches but in v^in.

Application.
Now having proved the truth in the Text, it remains that we improve it. I find
three parties concerned in the words; The Watchman, the City, the Lord. My
Address shall be to each, with respect to the other two. To the Watchman for
the Lord and the City; and to the City for the Watchman and the Lord; and to
the Lord for both Watchman and City.

1. To Watchmen, to be
First, To the Watchmen: You who under God, and his Vicegerent, the King, have
any share in the Government of this Royal City; You have heard, that Except the
Lord keep your City, your vigilance cannot be successful in its preservation.
The best way then to wed your endeavors to success, is to interest God in
your endeavors, which is done principally in the exercise of piety and
justice, piety toward the Lord, and justice toward the City: the Jachin and
Boaz, the pillars of a Nation, 1 Kings 7.21.
these being uprightness and strength

1. Pious to Godward.
1. Piety: And it is fit God should be first served, first Give unto God the
things that are Gods. By the blessing of the upright the City is exalted. Prove.
11.11.
There is at this day a loud outcry against profaneness, (I hope they are no
hypocrites, that, like Lapwings, make it furthest from their own nests) and
certainty it is no causeless clamor. You have excellent Laws against sins
of all sorts, Let not those Lions sleep, if you would have your God wake for
you. But especially let your lives be a Law to your City: your people will be
more apt to copy out your practice than your Precepts. Then your commands have
authority in them, when they have that of your example for them. A religious
Josiah is attended by a pious Israel. 2 Chronicles. 34.33. Acts 10.7.
And a devout Centurion by Soldiers that fear the Lord. It is an usual
saying, that The world would be good, if every one would mend one; a
compendious way to effect it, is by Magistrates amending themselves. Many would
set their Watches by such regular Sun-dials. The good conversation of one
righteous Lot will check a whole City of Sodomites. Nobles are in the holy
language called white ones, and the Robes of Majesty are faced with white, to
put the wearers in mind, that they must be innocent, who condemn the guilty,
least the sentence reflect, Matthew. 7.3.
and the beam censure the mote. God has honored you, do you honor him; And
if you would have him continue to keep your City, let it be your resolution
with good Joshua, Josh. 24.15.
that you, and your household shall serve him. And let not your Religion be
suited to the factious humors of any party you would favor, or be favored
by, but to the Word of God, and those consonant, or not-repugnant Canons, and
Laws of the Church, and State you rule under. And do not as the Lacedaemonians,
who are said to dress their Gods according to the present mode, and garb of
their City. Magistratus indicat virum, wine, and power show what is in man. Let
men see, that as you are Gods, you can be good as well as great. Plato would
have the Palaces of Princes seated near Temples; and the Romans made the way to
the Temple of Honor through that of Virtue. Hic ^urus ^haeneus sto, nil
conscire m^li, Jerem. 15.20.
nulla p^llescere culpa. Integrity and piety will be a wall of brass to you,
and your City. You are subordinately custodes utriusque tabulae, keepers of
both Tables of Gods Law; be so by your example and authority. You use to say,
Keep your Shop, and your Shop will keep you; I may confidently say, keep your
God, and your God will keep you. Observe you his Commandments, and he will
preserve your Government.

2. Just to the City.
2. Remember that that God who alone can keep your City, is a just God, and be
you just as he is just. The Sword of justice duly drawn, and valiantly used,
will prevent unsheathing the Sword of War. And keep you from falling not only
into the hands of men, but those of God too, by fire, 2 Samuel 24.14. Numb. 25.
Psalm. 106.30. James 1 20.
famine, or pestilence; Which last Phineas diverts by an act of justice. He
executed judgment, and the plague was stayed. Thus though the wrath of man
works not the righteousness of God, yet the righteousness of men, diverteth
the wrath of God. All Controversies before you are about meum and tuum, what is
this, or that man's propriety. Now justice does suum cuique tribuere, give every
one their own: Reward to whom reward, and punishment to whom punishment is due.
And as piety and justice are the pillars of Magistracy; so reward and
punishment are the whole work of justice. And therein prudent.
And in the discharge of this duty, Job 29.16.
you must exe^cise many virtues, your prudence in searching out of causes, and
discerning the natural from the artificial white, the truth from that fucus,
and paint which Rhetoric and interest will dawb them with. And truly without
this prudence, justice will still be, as already it has too long been, all
Sword and no balance. 2 Chronicles. 1.10. Verse 12.
It was a worthy choice in Solomon to prefer wisdom to riches, long life, and
victory; for with that, he had these given as vantage, in measure, as a train
attending on that Queen, Psalm. 45.14 This qualified him for the Throne, and by
this he decided that intricate Controversy between the two harlots. 1 Kings 3.
And justice cannot be done without judgment. They are mistaken who think
piety alone qualifies for Magistracy. Matthew. 10.16.
The wisdom of the serpent must be joined to the innocence of the Dove. Then
Magistrates are Gods, when, as God their truth secures them from deceiving, and
their wisdom from being deceived. As impiety alone destroys not right of
Dominion: 1 Kings 18.8. Romans 13.1.
wicked Ahab continues Obadiah's Lord, and Christians ow^ subjection to impious
Nero. So piety alone establishes not a right, no, nor single, adapts for
Government. Wisdom is an excellent offensive weapon, Prove. 21.22. Eccl. 9.15. 2 Samuel 20.22.
A wise man scatters the City of the mighty: and defensive too; A little City
saved by a wise man. And a great City, a Mother in Israel, by a wise woman: And
that by a pi ce of justice, like that, for which the Dagger is become the Arms
of this City, the seasonable dispatching an insolent Rebel. (And when the
prudence, and prowess of your present Governor last year expressed, in timely
intercepting the repullulating head of sedition, shall be duly weighed, there
will be found not more room, than merit for another Dagger) Geese may save a
Capita^, but it is by chance. And courageous.
And you must annex courage to prudence in the execution of justice; and this
leads the Van, (and courage loves to do it) in Jethro's qualifications for
Magistrates, Exodus 18.21.
they must be men of courage, fearing God, dealing truly, and hating
covetousness. You must rescue the innocent Lamb from the Lion and the Bear,
Job 29.17. 1 King. 10.20.
and break their jaws too. Solomon's Throne was supported with Lions. Courage
will bear up your judgement-seats; and to this you must add impartiality; And
impartial.
not to be warped by the poor man's misery, Exodus 23.3.
(not countenance a poor man in his cause, if unjust) nor rich man's bounty, nor
great man's dignity, nor a friend's amity. God is no respecter of persons, and
you are no Gods if you be. You must let judgment run down like water, Amos
5.24.
and righteousness as a mighty stream; free as water from a spring, and not
forced by importunity, as water from a Pump. And free as your Conduit-water,
that fills the earthen pitcher, as well as the silver goblet. And free as your
Thames water that flows to all that will fetch it, and not as your
New-River-water, that is imparted to none but those that will pay for it. And
clear without mudding it by mixing self-interest. Public men must be public
spirited, and the private is included in that. Great persons that use their
place and power to fill their own Coffers, are like passengers in a Ship, that
tear up the planks of the Vessel to build their own Cabins. Remember you judge
for God, and shall be judged by him. It was a condescending expression of the
best of Princes to a late Parliament upon their Dissolution, that during their
Intervals, in all his public Resolves, he should propose to himself what a
Parliament would judge of them, and if his actions would not bear that test, it
should be for want of judgment in him: In every sentence you are to give,
remember the sentence you must receive; and so pronounce that, that you may not
dread to undergo this. Thus faithfully trading with the Talents of your piety,
Luke 19.17.
and justice, wisdom, courage, and integrity in the trust of the Government of
this City. God shall at last give you authority over many Cities.

2. To the Citizens.
2. To the City, that is, to the Citizens, by a Meta^^^y of the continent for
the contents, Acts 13.44.
the City, that is, the Inhabitants, came together to hear the word. And to
you, as therefore so convened, I shall speak a word for the Lord, and for the
Watchmen. There has been formerly among you a great cry for truth and peace,
so great a cry, that we lost both in the mist of that breath; They are two
Jewels, that when gone, are worth a siquis an enquiry; Let us call home these
banished too. Let righteousness and peace meet, and kiss each other. 2 Samuel
14.13. Psalm. 85.10. Matthew. 19.6. Gal. 5.12.
And cursed be they that part what God has put together. I wish they were even
cut off that trouble you in either. Let me therefore exhort you to the
prosecution of truth for the Lords, and peace for the Watchman's sake, and of
both for your own sakes, the safety of your City, being the result of both.

1. To get truth for Gods sake.
1. Truth, and if any shall put to me Pilate's question to Christ, what is
truth? and has more patience than he to stay for an answer, John 18.38.
that I shall give proper to our present purpose, is; that, by truth is mean'd
either the word of God, thus his Law and Commandments are truth; Psalm. 119.142,
151. 2 Peter 2.2.
or our conformity to that word, called the way of truth: That is truth of
Doctrine, this, of life and practice. Now, 2 Peter 2.2.
as the same Ocean takes various denominations from the several shores it runs
by, so truth in cogitation is sincerity, in communication veracity, in
conversation integrity: And for these truths contend in Gods name. Col. 3.16.
Let the word of truth dwell plentiously in you; not as a guest for a night, or
a servant for an Apprenticeship, or a child during nonage; but as the Master
of the house, even aeterno vestro, for life. Be frequent in searching these
evidences for your freehold of grace and glory, and so copy them out, that they
may be legible in your lives to him that runs. Psalm. 51.6. Ephesians. 4.25. Prove.
12.19. Dan. 4.37.
Let there be truth in the inward parts, truth in thoughts. And speak every one
the truth to his neighbor, truth in word, called the lip of truth. And let
your works be the works of truth, truth in deed. It God's Omnipotency, that he
cannot lie; Let it be yours, that you can do nothing against the truth, 2 Cor.
13.8.
but for it. Maxima, and summa est virtus neminem decipere. It is the greatest,
chiefest virtue to deceive none. Oh that all that hear me were thus, Prove. 23
23.
and always thus virtuous! Buy the truth, and sell it not, and never sell but
b^ it. Let it, as a thread in a neck-lac^ of Pearl, run through all your duties
to God and man: your worship, let it be suited to the God you serve, John 4.24.
He is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit, and in truth. He that would
not have the skin, requires the heart in sacrifice. And let your respect be to
all the Commandments of God, and all his Ordinances, to the truth, and all the
truth; and in the whole inward and outward man, and this is integrity, as it is
deduced from timber, that is strait without, and sound within. Take heed of
that malicious, proud sin, Luke 12.1.
that sour, and swelling leaven of the Pharisees, hypocrisy, that infectious,
Aguish vice, first it trembles, and then it burns; Prove. 26.23.
that potsheard covered with silver dross. And be true in your civil contracts
with men, and let not Turks and Infidels rise up in judgment against you Let
your Omer and Epha, your Shekel and Cubit agree with those of the Sanctuary.
Your weights, and measures correspond with those of the Standard^ The Heathen
used to chain their Gods in their Temples: Fasten God by truth of holiness to
your Churches, and truth of justice to your Shops, and you have him a sure
keeper of your City.

2. Peace for the Watchmans sake.
2. Having taken into your bosoms this Leah, this eldest daughter of grace,
truth (and it is fit she should have precedence, Genesis 29.26.
it being also not our custom, to give the younger before the first born) make
room too for the beautiful Rachel of peace, so beautiful that she reflects a
beauty on the feet of her messengers. Romans 10.15.
This bigamy is not only lawful but dutiful. In the old Law the Jews were
not to take a wife with her sister, Lev. 18.18.
to vex her: But you cannot vex these sisters, nor your selves, worse than by
parting them; He is a Jew that would do it. For truth without peace is a
constant persecution, and peace without truth is a wicked combination. Peace is
the walls, and truth the Guard of a City, and these are a mutual, a
counter-security to each other. Oh that this City like Jerusalem might be
called the City of truth! Zech. 8.3. Psalm. 122.3. Isai. 59.14.
And like Jerusalem, might be as a City at unity in it self! That truth might
not fall in the streets by guile, and extortion; nor peace be shut out, of your
Church, and City-gates by schism and faction! Weaken not the hands of your
Magistrates by your intestine divisions, and strife about words, and things
that profit not; 2 Timothy 2.14.
least you loose the substance of Religion. Love in your bitter altercations
about the dress and shadow of it, Indifferent Ceremonies. Committing an
undoubted sin, disobedience to the powers, in waving a scrupled duty,
submission to a prescribed Form of Worship; where liberty of Conscience is not
entrenched on, for the thing still remains indifferent there, though liberty of
practice be (as it may be) confined, for unities and (which is the hedge to
that) for uniformities sake. Let me therefore prevail with you, since God has
vouchsafed you a mercy as much above your expectation, as your merit, in giving
you Judges as at the first, Isai. 1.26.
and Councillors as at the beginning; that you would prove a City of
righteousness to that God, and a faithful City to these Judges. And that, as
you are taught from the Text, to think the Lord necessary to you, be they never
so able; so not to think them unnecessary, though God can keep your City
without them. He who watches over them, has appointed them to watch over you;
and though he needs them not, you do, and his will, and not his power, is the
rule of your duty. Would you set up a Throne to Christ, do it every one of you
in your own hearts, Open those everlasting doors, Psalm 24.7.
and let that King of Glory come in And think not to gratify him by wresting
the Scepter out of the hands of your lawful Prince, to crow'd i^ into his,
Luke 12.14. Matthew. 22.21. Chap. 17.27. John 18.36.
who by his renunciation of any such Government, of the office of a Ruler or
Judge, when solicited to it; by his precept and practice, in asserting the
rights of Caesar, has convinced the whole world, that his Kingdom is not of
it; and when ever (if ever, in the civil sense of the word) it shall be,
Matthew. 25.31 Rev. 5.11.
he who has promised to come with all his holy Angels, even ten thousand times
ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, cannot need a score or two of
Blunderbusses to get him possession. Since then it is both the Sword of the
Lord, Judge. 7.18.
and of Gideon: Let God have the glory, and your Magistrates th: fruit of your
subjection; Titus. 3.1. Romans 13.5.
And let me put you in mind to obey them, not for wrath, but conscience sake.
Submit to their Orders where they enterfere not with Gods, and pass no harsh
censures on their Councels, since you cannot fathom all the reasons of them.
Reverence their persons, let them have your hats and your hearts And honor
these Gods with part of your substance too. Prove. 3.9.
1 Samuel 10.27.
They are sons of Belial that despise their Prince, and bring him no presents.
And put some grains of charitable allowance into the scale, to weigh against
their frailties, whose temptations are greater; and, as their persons are more
eminent, so their faults are more visible than others, and themselves are but
men. And practice that love toward one another, John 13.23.
which St John, Who lay in the bosom of Christ, and learned there, so
frequently and cordially urges And manifest it in giving, forgiving, bearing,
forbearing. Convincing gainsayers by strong arguments in soft expressions:
Matthew. 5.9.
Reconciling differences lik^ blessed peacemakers, going between brethren of
opposite persuasions, as mortar to cement them, though you venture being
crushed by both for it, the lot of moderate spirits. So shall you allay all
violence, and strife in the City, and discover your legitimacy as the Children
of God, who will therefore, and thereby keep you and your City; and in his due
time translate you, and all your faithful Watchmen to be made Denizens of that
City that has foundations, Heb. 11.10.
whose builder, maker and keeper, himself immediately is; even that Jerusalem,
that is above the Mother of us all. Gal. 4.26.


3. To the Lord, for
Having finished my address to the Watchman for the Lord, and the City; and to
the City for the Lord, and the Watchmen; It remains that I bespeak the Lord for
both Watchmen and City. Now all Application to him being by way of Petition,
whereunto the more hands and hearts we can get, the more hope of success;
since he vouchsafes to be Isai. 45.11.
commanded, and Exodus 32.10, etc. Genesis 32.26.
captivated by Prayer, let us unanimously wrestle with him for a blessing on
both.

A Prayer.
1. Watchmen Civil,
O Lord our God, our strong Tower, our Wall of fire, our Sun, and our Shield:
By whom Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice; Who alone Qualifiest and
Commissionest for Government, and blessest the endeavors if our Governors
with success: We beseech thee bless the chief Magistrate of this City, and
all those in Authority under him, with wisdom to foresee, faithfulness to
discover, and courage to encounter every danger. Let them he Shields for the
safeguard of them that do well, and Swords for the terror, and punishment of
them that do evil: Men of courage, fearing thee, dealing truly, and hating
covetousness.

And, as by particular Relation, and Duty I stand bound, I implore thy most
gracious preservation of his Majesty's Royal Tower of London, and of St John
Robinson his Honorable, and Faithful Lieutenant thereof. Keep it from all
secret Conspiracy, and open Violence, that the Watchmen in it may not watch in
vain.

And Ecclesiastical.
Let all the Spiritual Watchmen of this City be clothed with righteousness:
Not ignorantly blind, nor negligently dumb, but rightly dividing thy Word of
Truth, and behaving themselves as workmen that need not be ashamed. Fill every
Candlestick with a burning, and shining Light, that may lead thy people by
Precept, and Practice into, and in the ways of Truth, Peace and Godliness.

2. For the City.
And keep the Commonalty of this most populous City from all superstition,
hypocrisy, and profaneness, schism, and faction, envy, hatred, malice, and
all uncharitableness; pride, drunkenness, gluttony, and idleness. Preserve
them from every evil of sin, and sorrow, from fire, famine, sword and
pestilence. Lead them by thy Spirit, Word and Ministers into every necessary
truth, and up to every duty. Teach them to keep Consciences void of offense
toward thee, and toward men: That they may give thee thy due in a respect to
all thy Commandments: And Caesar his, in their thoughts, words and deeds, in
their honor, customs and tribute, and in their cheerful subjection for
conscience sake, to all the lawful commands of their Magistrates: And their
fellow subjects their due in brotherly charity, and honesty in bargains and
sales: And their families theirs in all Christian care for them; and themselves
their own due in a sober provision for their bodies, and an earnest and
faithful endeavor after the salvation of their souls: owning, imploring, and
improving thy superintendency over all, Prince, Magistrates, Ministers, City,
Estates, Reputations, Families and Persons. Guide us by the hands of thy Moses
and Aarons, keep us by thy power, prosper us by thy blessing, sanctify us by
thy Spirit, and save us by thy Son: to both whom with thy self, a Trinity of
Persons, in Unity of Essence, be honor, and praise, now, and forever.

Amen, Amen.
FINIS.

