A COLLECTION OF CERTAIN Epistles and Testimonies Of Divine Consolation,
Experience and Doctrine, Written by that Faithful, Patient and Long-Suffering
Servant of Christ,

William Bennit.

Who Finished his Testimony the 23d day of the 4th Month 1684. In the County
Goal at Ipswich in Suffolk.

And I heard a voice from Heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the Dead
which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that they may
rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul at the Crooked-Billet in
Holloway-Lane, near Shoreditch, 1685.

THE CONTENTS
TO my dear Father and Mother, page 25. A Tender and Unfeigned Salutation of
Love and Good Will to Professors: Or a tender Invitation and Call unto all
People, in whose Hearts there has been, and still is, some true desiring, and
breathing after the Lord God; who has long been hunting abroad amongst the
many Forms and Liknesses, and have been running from one broken Cistern to
another, and have been long spending their Money for that which is not Bread,
and their Labor for that which has not rightly satisfied their Souls: For
them to retire inward unto that in their own Hearts, which is the Author of
the desiring in them after God, even the pure spiritual Light of Christ Jesus
in their own Consciences, which will lead and bring them (that do it follow and
obey) unto the wellspring of Life, the fountain of living Water, (where they
may drink abundantly, and be satisfied) unto the fold of everlasting Rest, unto
the fresh pastures of Life, where they may feed and lie down, and enjoy true
rest and satisfaction for their Souls, page 33. For Friends of Truth in the
Town of Yarmouth, page 59. God only Exalted in his own Work; or, the Works of
God Praises him in Sion. Or, a Song of Deliverance from a great and sore
Captivity, Thraldom and Bondage, under the King of Egyptian Darkness, the God
of the World, where the Soul was fast bound, as with strong Chains and Fetters;
but now Ransomed (by the outstretched Arm of Gods Almighty Power) and art come
to Sion with Songs of everlasting Joy upon thy Head, and have obtained Joy and
Gladness, and thy Sighing and Mourning is fled away, page 63. To Gods Lambs in
Prison Greeting, page 75. To Friends in the Love of Truth Greeting page 77. To
Friends of Truth, page 78. To Friends of Truth in Prison, page 79. To the
Suffering Lambs of the Lords Flock in Prison Greeting, page 81. This to go
among Friends of Truth, to be read among them when assembled together in the
pure fear and dread of the most high God, page 84. To Friends, page 90. To the
Magistrates of Edmonds-Bury page 92. To Friends of Truth in the Town of
Colchester, Greeting, page 100. Some Prison Meditations of an humble Heart,
page 108. This to go among Friends, to be read among them when assembled
together in the pure Fear and Wisdom of God, page 142. A Testimony to the true
Light that lightens every man that comes into the World, page 150. To Friends
in Edmonds-Bury Goal, page 157. To Friends Sufferers in Norwich-Castle, page
158. To Friends, Brethren and Sisters, etc. page 161. The Work and Mercy of God
conducing to his Praise; Or a Demonstration of the Visitation of Gods Love to
my Soul in the days of my Youth; Being a Testimony of the Light of Christ in
the Conscience which discovers and judges Sin; also (if loved and obeyed)
saves from Sin and redeemeth the Soul unto God, page 167. To those that are
young in Years, etc. page 179. To all People that live and delight in
Wickedness, page 181. To those that are seeking the Living God in the Dead
Forms, page 191. To those that are backslided from the Truth, page 194. To
those that profess the Truth, yet walk contrary thereto i^ Life and
Conversation, page 197. To all those that are convinced of the Truth, but still
remain in the Worlds ways, page 198. To those that are newly convinced of the
Truth* page 200. To the true Mourners in Sion, page 203. A General Sal^tation
of Love to the Children of Light, page 207. To Friends, page 211. A Loving
Exhortation and Warning to Seamen, and all others whom it does concern, page
214.


Edmond Cross HIS TESTIMONY For his Deceased Friend William Bennit.
THis Testimony lives in my Heart, and is upon me to bear for and concerning my
dear and well beloved Friend William Bennit, whom, with many more worthy Ones,
God Almighty, in his endless Love unto mankind, raised up and endued with power
from on high, to preach the Everlasting Gospel of Life and Salvation in our
Age; and forever blessed be the Lord who has caused his blessed Work to
prosper by them, to the gathering many Thousands to himself, notwithstanding
the great opposition they have meet with, both from the Enemy of mankind
within, and the Exercises, Hardships and cruel Persecutions from his
Instruments without; yet so powerfully did the Lord appear in them, that the
Inhabitants of the Earth was awakened, and Trembling took hold of many,
Judgment was laid to the Li^e, and Righteousness to the Plumit; yea, the sound
of the Gospel, by these worthy Messengers Preached, went through the Earth, and
many of its Inhabitance thereby came to learn Righteousness; amongst which
worthy Messengers this my dear Friend William Bennit was one, who labored in
the service of the Gospel for the gathering in the outcasts of Jacob, and the
disperced of Israel.

He was a man wholly given up both in Body and Mind to serve the Lord, and what
he did for God, he did it with all his Might; he spared no pains wherein he
might serve the Truth, which to do was his whole delight, his care was great
over the Church of Christ and whole Family of God, and when in Bonds for the
Gospel sake, he visited them with diverse good Epistle^, full of heavenly
Exhortations and Comfort, to the great refreshment of God's Children; oh, the
sense of the want of him does often make me sad, knowing how serviceable he was
in the Church, though I doubt not but the Lord can raise up some worthy Ones to
succeed him in the Work and Service whereunto he was called; oh, the many sweet
refreshments which I have had with him cannot be forgotten, what shall I say
for the want of him whose presence has often times been very comfortable to
me? I believe years to come will know the want of him.

I had inward acquaintance with him above many, and can testify he was endued
with many divine Seize, he had the true qualifications of an Elder and
Minister of Christ, and walked in Holiness, Meekness and Godly Fear toward all
men, he never exalted himself above any, but as a perfect example in Humility,
Self-Denial and Meekness he behaved himself toward the Meanest; his Zeal for
the Truth appeared to be very great, for though he was a very weak man, as to
his bodily strength, yet in preaching the Gospel he was carried forth with such
Fervency and Zeal for the Lord, being by the mighty Power of God upheld, that
at such times there appeared no Infirmness of Body in him, and notwithstanding
the weakness of his Body, he often Traveled in the service of the Gospel,
being freely given up to spend, and to be spent for its sake; his Ministry was
plain and prevalent, whereof he had a very good Gift, he was well acquainted
with the holy Scriptures of Truth, which he made much use of for the opening
the Understandings of People, which often proved very Effectual for the
convincing of many.

And as he was an incessant Labourer in the Gospel vvhereever he came, so
also, was he as Valiant in suffering for the same, when ever called
thereunto, as the many grievous Imprisonments, which he has met with for the
Gospel's sake does vvitness, for he has, for his Testimonies sake, been cast
into diverse Goals, as Yarmouth, Bliborough, Ipswich: and Melton several times,
and also at Edmonds-Bury, where he lay amongst the Fellons nigh eight years
together; and lastly, he was taken from a Meeting at Woodbridge, and committed
to Melton Prison, where he lay till the quarter Sessions held at Woodbridg,
unto which he was brought, and was by an order of Sessions removed from
thence to Ipswich Prison, being then in the Winter season, and though he was
very vveak at that time and not fit to be carried forth, the Weather being very
cold, and at that time it Snovved very much, yet was he in the midst of all
hurried away; I was then with him, and with grief of Heart beheld this
cruel Treatment, of this innocent Lamb, who then said, If it lay in his
freedom to go or not, although he might gain much as to the outward, he could
not go his weakness was such, yet for the Truths sake he was freely given up,
though it proved the dissolution of his Body; as indeed it so happened, for he
never got over it, but grew weaker, and weaker, till upon the 23 d day of the
4th month 1684, in the Prison House in Ipswich, the place of his Confinement,
he finished his Testimony, and laid down his Head in perfect Peace; thus was
this good man Persecuted unto Death, who freely forgave them that Persecuted
him; and oh, says my Soul, if it may stand with the will of God, that they
may find Repentance before they go hence, that his Blood may not be required at
their hands.

Well, he is now gone beyond the reach of all his Enemies, he has run the
blessed Race, he has fought the good Fight, has kept the Faith, and is now
Crowned with that Eternal weight of Glory which never ends; and though he be
removed from us, yet his Life remains with us, and his Name is a sweet memorial
unto us; yea, he shall be reckoned amongst the Generations of the Righteous,
and time shall never blot him out of their Remembrance, who served the Lord
withal his Heart, and loved not his Life unto Death for his Name sake.

Oh, the remembrance of this my dear Friend has often times been a refreshment
to me, and the many sweet and precious oppertunities I have had with him are at
this time fresh in my remembrance; I cannot forget those heavenly bedewings,
and sweet streams of divine Life, from the God of Life, who is the Fountain of
all our well-springs, which often times ran through his Vessel, as through a
Conduit Pipe, to the great refreshment of his Children.

Oh, when I consider his service in the Church of Christ, and how ready he was
to help the Weak, and encourage the Feeble; yea, to reach forth his helping
hand unto all, that none might be left behind, and that now at such a time as
this, wherein Trials and Exercises seem to abound upon us, it should please the
Lord to removed him from us; my Spirit is bowed before the Lord in the
consideration thereof, and for a ti^e my Soul was afflicted within me, being
deeply sensible of the great loss of him at this time of day.

But while I was Meditating in the consideration hereof, my Soul was revived in
the feeling of the Springs of Life to arise, which sprang up in this wise, God
is the same that ever he was, his Arm is not shortened that it cannot Save,
neither is his Ear heavy that it cannot hear the cries of his Children; but his
care is, and will be, over all those that put their trust in him, and against
such no Weapon howsoever formed shall Prosper, and that he has not removed his
Servant from us thereby to weaken us, but rather that we should wholly look
unto him only, from whom alone our Salvation comes; who will certainly take
care of all those who are faithful unto him in their Testimony for his Name,
and will supply such with whatsoever he sees is needful for them; yea, the same
Power that kept and preserved this our dear Friend through all his Trials and
Exercises, who has now finished his Course with Joy, will also preserve us, as
we are faithful thereunto; in which the Lord keep and preserve all his People,
through all their Trials and Exercises, to the end, is the breathing of my Soul.

OH thou my dear Friend who art now from us gone,
Unto thine everlasting Rest in the Eternal one,
Who now for all thy Labors in which thou did abound,
Rewarded art with endless Life, and art with Glory Crowned;
Oh worthy man of God, thy Name for ever shall,
Recorded be amongst the Rightous Gen'rations all,
Thou lovedst not thy Life to Death, but gave up all unto
The service of God*s Truth most pure, and for it did forg^
The World and all things else that unto thee was near,
That thou might be for evermore with thy Redeemer dear;
And though thy Body is gone, and Flesh consumed be,
Thy Spirit with thy God does live to all Eternity;
Where from thine Eyes all Tears are wiped, and Joy for e^e is found,
And Clothed now art with Garments pure, and Pleasures does abound;
And from thine Enemies reach, which did thee sore ann^y,
Who for the sake of Truth they sought thy Body to destroy;
Thou now exalted art over all Mortallity,
Where neither ravenous Beast, nor yet the voulterus Eye,
(...) ever thee molest, no nor disquiet thy peace,
Which as a River great does flow, and never more shall cease;
Ah thou Valiant, one indeed, who never turned aside,
But to thy God were faithful found, when ever thou were tried,
Great is our went of thee, for which my Soul does cry,
unto the Lord our God who only can supply;
Oh righteous God make up our loss, to thee I only pray,
That thou would please to raise up Children to him this day,
And fill them with thy Grace, and therein make them shine
Forth in thy most glorious Power, both heavenly and divine,
That so thy holy Truth for which he did engage,
May over all exalted be now in this latter age;
And though our loss of him be great, who still do here abide,
Yet in our God we are complete while we in Truth reside;
In which the living God preserve, and from the World defend
All those that put their trust in him, and keep them to the end,
That in the closur^ of our Da^s our Heads in peace may ly,
And fill*d our Mouths may be with Prayers unto the Lord on hy,
Who over all is worth, and only praised be he
That never ^axeth old, nor ever Changed can be.
Walton the 30th of the 8th Month 1684 Edmond Cross.

Six Verses writ by another Hand.
WAs ever Dust more Dignified
while it was a House of Clay,
For heavenly Life did there abide
its Virtue to display.
An Humble, Meek and Harmless Soul,
within this Dust did dwell,
Which all the Glory of this World
abundance did excel.
This Dust on Earth it had a Name
whilst it on Earth did move,
But that same Life which moved the same
theirs few do know or Love.
The Dust is left, the Soul is gone
in Life for ay to dwell,
From sight of every mortal one,
in Glory to excel.
Thy Dust within the Earth do ly,
my Dust shall ly by thine,
Our Souls in Life shall dwell on high,
our Fellowship divine.
And though by Death we leave our Dust,
our Souls remain forever,
And from the Spirits of the Just
no worldly Power can sever.
William Peart HIS TESTIMONY CONCERNING William Bennit.
Reader,
MAny has been the faithful Witnesses which God has raised in his day (blessed
be his holy Name) that has been truly honored with his Power and living
Presence, in which they have gone forth in his Work and Service, in order to
the gathering in of his numberless Number, which he is a gathering from the
ends of the Earth, to Inhabit in his new Jerusalem, that heavenly City come
down from God, the City of the Saints Solemnity, where the living Praises are
continually Sung to the God of Zion, the King of Saints, to whom be ascribed
all Honor and living Praises, as is due says my Soul, forever, Amen.

Now Friends, many of these Ambassadors and Agents for the King of Heaven, it
has pleased his heavenly Majesty to end their Commission, by calling them
home, to that place of rest prepared for the Faithful (where the oppression of
the Oppressor cease, and not so much as his voice heard, himself being
forever shut out) the Memorial of them is blessed, their Names will be
honorable in Ages yet to come, and the Children yet unborn will bless the Lord
on their behalfs; much might be writ in a general way, as to those worthy
Witnesses before mentioned; but that which is before, and chiefly at this time
upon me, is to leave a Testimony to Prosterity (that lives in my Heart)
concerning that faithful Servant of God, and of his People, and worthy Minister
of Christ Jesus, dear William Bennit, a man indeed of a meek Moses like Spirit,
in whom the Lord had in a large measure fulfilled his Promise (viz.) to make a
man more pure then fine Gold, yea then the golden Wedg of O^^er; for indeed the
Lord had tried him in the Furnice of Affliction, and had in a large measure
purified him from the Oar or earthly mixture, and made him a chosen Vessel,
fit for his own use, for says Solomon. When the Silver is refined from the
Dr^ss, there is a Vessel for the Refiner, as this good man was a Vessel of
honor fitted for that use whereunto the Lord had called him, which was, to
bear a living Testimony for his Name, in which he was found very faithful, not
in Word and Doctrine only, but i^ Life and Conversation also, in which he
shined as a Light upon a Candlestick, which gives a Light to all which be in
the Room; so was the godly Life of this ever blessedman, of which I am
Treating, it gave a Light easy to be discerned by all who are of the Family
and Household of Faith; nay, his and Truth's Enemies see it, and were made
oft-times to confess it, and say, that he was a man of an Honest, Godly and
Upright Life; such a Luster and Brightness did it cast, that Truth was greatly
honored by it, not only in the Town of Woodbridg where he dwelt, but where ever
he came or was known, his Life preached Truth, his Carriage was Innocent, his
Words were very Savoury, savouring of what his Heart and inward parts was
filled with, which ministered Grace to his Hearers.

And as to that Testimony that God had given him to bear for his Name in Word
and Doctrine, he was very faithful in it, and was oft-times drawn in the Love
of God to travel upon the account of it, in great Weakness and Infirmness of
Body, which for the most part possessed him, but great was the Strength and
Vigor of his inward man, which oft-times, as it were, swallowed up the weakness
of the outward man: I have often seen him go into a Meeting when it was thought
he had more need have been in Bed; such many times was his Weakness and
Illness, but strong was that Love in which he was drawn forth to serve the Lord
his God, which oft-times in the Assemblies of God's People flowed from him as
sweet streams from a pleasant Fountain, to the great refreshment of the right
Seed and nourishment of the true Birth, in the sense of which his Heart was
often filled with that strength of Life and heavenly Courage, that he would
appear like a Giant greatly refresht with new Wine, ready to run a Race, where
there was no appearance of the bodily weakness as before; but when his
Testimony has been ended, and Service for that time over, he has been like
on^ ready to give up the Ghost, his beforementioned weakness again
repossessing his earthly House of Clay, by which I have often observed, how in
a wonderful manner (as to the outward man) the mighty Power of God attended the
blessed Testimony, and acceptable Service of this Servant of Christ; he was a
worthy and honorable Instrument in the hand of the Lord, and many were turned
to the Lord by him; for the Lord of the Vinyard employed him therein, both to
Plant and Water, he being very well accomplished and fitted for both, being
thereunto educated by the Power of God in the School of Christ: He delightd
much in breaking up of untilled Ground, often having Meetings where there was
never any by Friends before, and the Lord very much blessed and prospered his
Labor in that very respect in adding to his Church thereby: He was indeed the
Father of many Children, who were begotten by him into the Faith of the Lord
Jesus Christ; God had given him a ready Utterance, his Tongue was as the Pen of
a ready Writer, often minding Friends of the day wherein they first received
the Truth, and to remember their first Love, that though they had known much,
and experienced much, and had witnessed a large increase in the Riches of God's
Kingdom, yet to remember that in which God first appeared (viz.) the measure of
Gods Gift (or Grace) in their Hearts, there to stay their Minds, often
mentioning the command of God to Jacob, who after many Trials, Travels and
Exercises, and after God had given him great increase of Riches, as Flocks and
Herds, Wives and Children, which he divided into three Bands (in order to meet
his Brother Esau) admiring the goodness of the God of his Fathers who had given
him all that Riches, who only with his Staff (did some time before) traveled
over Jordan; yet after all this, God commanded him to go to Bethel, the place
where the Lord at first appeared to him, when he fled from his Brother Esau,
there to dwell, and erect an Alter, and call upon his Name: He often had it
upon him to put Friends in mind of speaking the true Language, to say thee or
thou to a single Person, without respect of Persons, the contrary being false,
and so out of the Truth; it was likewise much upon him to exhort Friends to
feel the concern of Truth upon their Spirits, that in the true sense thereof
they might feel the drawing of the Love of God to Meet and Assemble themselves
together in his Name and Fear, and that they might truly know and understand
the end of their meeting, and what God therein requires of them, that they
might not go to Meetings as many People go to their Church (as they call it) to
be a little serious while they are there, and when they are gone thence let
their minds out, as if they had left their God behind them, such a coming to
meetings would not stand any one in stead in a time of Exercise, or a day of
Trial; much might be writ, as to the good Exhortations, Admonitions, Advice and
good-Counsel which oftentimes opened in his Heart in the Meetings and Assembles
of Friends, but I must refer my friendly Reader to the persual of his Cordial
and Soul refreshing Epistles (as in the Life they are Read, by which they were
given forth) for his or her further satisfaction; only I cannot pass by, as not
to mention his frequent wrestlings in Prayer with the Lord for the good of all,
but more especially for those of the Household of Faith, not forgetting the
Sufferers of all sorts, whether in Body or in Mind, particularly such as suffer
Imprisonment for the Testimony of a good Conscience; he often prayed that God
would be pleased to make the Prison as a Palace to them, through the incomes
of his heavenly Life and blessed Presence in and to their Souls; and such as
lay upon a Bed of Sickness, that God would be their Comfort; such as traveled
by Sea or Land in the Work or Service of the Lord, that he would be their
Support, and by his living Power and Presence them accompany that their Service
might be effectual, and they enabled with cheerfulness to undergo what it
should please God to permit or suffer to befall them for their Testimony sake;
he often interceeded with God for his very Enemies, (having learned that Lesson
to love Enemies) that it would please the Lord to turn their Hearts, and to
open their Eyes, that they may see against whom they are striving, and against
whom they are setting themselves in battle array, as Bayers and Thorns against
consuming Fire, that they might behold him whom with their Sins they had
Pierced, and whom in his Members they had Persecuted, that they might mourn
over him, and if it were the will of God Repent, Return, be Converted and
Healed; he often remembered this the Land of his Nativity in his Suplications to
God, that it would please him, if so it seemed good in his sight, to prevent
those impending Judgments (that hang over it, ready like a dreadful Tempest to
break, and fall upon it) by its speedy Repenting, and breaking off from those
great Sins and Evils that abound and superabound in it (which in Nature seem to
Equal, if not Exceed the Sins of Sodom) and that it would please God, if that
it seemed good in his sight, to frustrate, confound and bring to naught the
devices, contrivances and consultations of that wicked Spirit, and those wicked
Instruments that device, contrive and consult its Overthrow and Destruction.
Thus did the Love of God flow from the Heart of this Servant of his, not only
to Friends, but to Enemies, having so learned of his Master Christ Jesus, whom
he faithfully served in his Generation, and with whom he forever rests.

Now Friends, having hinted something of the Testimony this good man bore for
God in Life and Conversation, and also in Word and Doctrine, having a
dispensation of the Word of Life committed to him to declare to others, he
being an able Minister of the same; now it remains to speak something of his
Testimony he bore for God in Suffering; it was not only given him to Believe,
but to Suffer for the Name of Christ, in which, by the permission of God, he
had a large share, especially by Imprisonment, which many times was long and
tedious, had he not been supported by the Power of God, for whose Cause he
Suffered, and in whose Will he was truly contented to undergo what wicked men
were permitted to inflict upon him, for his Conscience sake toward God, eying
the Will of God in all, in which was his Peace and true lasting Satisfaction;
the principal places of his Imprisonment were at Yar^oth, Norwich-Castle,
Blibro, Melton, Ipswich and Edmonds-Bury; in the last of which he remained a
close Prisoner, scarce setting his Foot over the Threshold in five Years time;
he was several times a Prisoner in Melton Goal, as likewise in the County Goal
at Ipswich, where he breathed his last Breath, in which two places latterward
my self, with several of our Friends in and about Woodbridg, were Prisoners
with him, as particularly in this Persecution, which began five Years since by
Edmond Brume, Priest of Woodbridg, but committed by Justice Bacon, and Justice
Bohon, for refusing to take an Oath, where he remained Prisoner about half a
Year; but after some breathing space, our old Persecuting Adversary, Priest
Brume, began afresh to breath out his Threatenings, like the Persecutors of old,
and getting a Justice for his turn, began to stir up the Town Officers, and
disturb our Meeting (who of themselves might be unwilling) and upon the 12th
day of the 6th month 1683 there came to our Meeting the aforesaid Officers,
where our dear Friend William Bennit was upon his Knees in Prayer to God, from
which he was violently haled away, by one Robert Chapman, a Constable (being
put forward thereto by John Firman Church warden) and with several others of us
taken out of our peaceable Meeting at Woodbridg, and carried before Edmond
Jenny of Bredfeild Justice, who committed us to Melton Goal, for being at a
Quaker-Meeting (which is contrary to Law) as says the Mittimas; at which this
innocent man greatly rejoiced, that the Lord see it meet for him to bear his
Testimony in this suffering time, among his Friends and Brethren at home
(because it was reported he should be sent to Edmonds-Bury Goal) and in the
aforesaid Prison at Melton he was kept very close, and the next Sessions at
Woodbridg he was brought into the Court, where an Indictment was preferred
against him for being Riotously and Routously assembled, with many others, etc.
to which (after many sound Reasons and Arguments to prove our Meetings
Innocent, without any other design, but purely to Wait upon, and Worship the
Lord, as good experience has shown; and therefore no way Hurtful, or Dangerous
to the Government, etc.) he pleaded not Guilty; it was demanded whether or no
he would give Bail for his appearance the next quarter Sessions, and to be of
the good Behavior, which he refused to do, knowing he had not Mis-behaved
himself; so he was again returned to Prison, and kept very close, and when the
next Sessions came about, at Woodbridg, he was again brought into the Court,
where Christopher Melton of Ipswich was Chairman (as at the Sessions before)
where he with some other Friends was put on to Trial, and after a great deal of
arguing between the Prisoners and the Court, the Jury went out, and after a
considerable time returned, and being asked whether the Prisoners were Guilty
or not Guilty, the Foreman answered not Guilty, at which the Chairman was
highly displeased, and persuaded them, at the Bar, to alter their Verdict, that
they were guilty of an unlawful Assembly, a practice how just I shall leave to
the Judgment of the Impartial Reader; and as if this were not useage hard
enough, they devised another piece of Cruelty, which was to remove him to
Ipswich to be fined, and in a very cold day in the sharpest of this last Winter
(which for excess of Cold, the like cannot be remembered) when it was late, in
the latter part of the Day, Snowing very fast all the way he went, so that
before he got to the Prison it was late in the Evening, and being many of us
there, for want of Beds, and for want of timely notice to have made Provision,
among others of us, this tender man was forced to set up all Night in that wet
and cold Condition, and then he was called upon at that Sessions in Ispwich,
and fined twenty Pound (at which he was no ways dismayed) and so he was
returned to Prison till he should pay his Fine, where he meet with hard usage
from the Jayler, he not answering his unreasonable demands, and remained close
Prisoner until the next Sessions at Ipswich, where he was again called into the
Court, and nothing of the Fine spoken of, but Thomas Covel Clark of the Peace
told him, they had a particular order from the King to deal with him; then he
was profferred the Oath of Allegance, which he refusing, he was again returned
to Prison; after which, in some short time, it pleased the Lord to visit him
with more then ordinary Sickness, which more and more increased upon him, in
which time he desired to see several of his dear Friends, as he said, before he
dyed, thereby signifying his departure to be at hand; and so upon the twenty
third day of the fourth Month 1684; about three in the Morning, like an
innocent man, he laid down his Head in peace with God, and dyed a faithful
Sufferer for Christ Jesus, in a Testimony against the Persecutors of our Age;
and my desire is, that his innocent Blood may not be laid to the charge of them
that had a hand in his last Suffering, in which he sealed his Testimony with
his Life: And there is one thing yet with me, concerning my deceased Friend,
which is worthy of Observation; that is, when even Persecution was stirred up
among us, if he had happened to have been from home upon the public service of
Truth, when once he heard of it, he was not satisfied until he got home, to get
his Shoulder to the Work; such was his care and respect to his Testimony at
home, in a time of Suffering, the which makes our loss and want of him to be
very great, especially at such a time as this, when suffering for the Truth
abounds, in which he was a good Pattern; and indeed, time will discover the
want of him more then at present it is by some perceived (the Lord make up, and
restore our loss according to his own good will and pleasure) though his bodily
Presence be removed from us, yet his Life is felt to remain, blessed be the
Name of the Lord. As at the very hour of his departure, his dear Wife, with
several other Friends, sitting by the Corpse, the Life newly departed, very
sorrowful for their great loss, though his great gain; I say, as they thus
sat, in retiredn^ss of Mind, the Love and Life of God broke in upon them, in
an abundant manner, to their great Refreshment and Satisfaction, which
signified thus much, that though he had taken away his Servant from them, yet
his Life should remain; and it will remain with them that walk worthy of it,
for it is a never failing Treasure.

And thus Friends I have given you a brief account of the Life, Sufferings and
End of this Messenger of Christ, who has delivered his Message, and done the
Work of God in his Day; and Friends, that which remains to us is, tha^ we may
be found in our Day working the Work of God, in answering the Requirings of
God, that so we may come to finish our Course with Joy, and lay down our Heads
in Peace, as this Servant of God did, which is the desire of your Friend.

Woodbridge the 24th of the 5th Month 1684. William Peart.

A COLLECTION OF Certain Epistles OF Divine Consolation, etc.
Dear Father and Mother,
MY Indeared Love abounds toward you, and in that which has brought me into
true obedience to God and Man, do I salute you, and am present with you, as you
come to be gathered thereunto; even into the spirit of holiness, in which is
the unity of the Faithful, into which Spirit wait to feel your growth, and your
obedience therein more and more, which growth stands not in Words, but in
Life and in Power; and wait to feel your increase therein, and decrease in
Words which are out of the Power of God; many have grown rich in Words, and
accounted that their growth without the Life, and have feed upon the Knowledge
more then upon Life, and unto such the Famine is to come; therefore dear
Hearts, yea exceeding dear to me, oh keep to the measure of God in your own
Particulars, and be obedient to its operation, that you may come to witness
your translation into the ^^rth Im^ortal* which trans^ation stands not in
Words, but in Life and Power; therefore feel the operation of the Power of God
^^ work out and mortify that which is reproveable by it; oh, obedience to the
operation thereof is required by it of the Creature; for as it is to work upon
the Soul, so it works not without the Soul's yeil^ing obedience thereunto, so
far as to work its translation, yet not the Soul's work, but the work of God in
and upon the Soul; for though Christ is come a Light into the World, and is the
Salvation of God, yet they that believe, not in him he is their Condemnation,
and yet sufficient Salvation to them who believe in him, and obey him; for as
the Light manifests Evil, yet if the Creature yield not obedience thereunto,
he cannot have ^ower over the Evil; but if he yield obedience to the Light, it
gives him power over Evil, yet not the Creatures Power, but the Power of God,
which begets the Will and ^h^ (...) also; therefore perfect obedience to the
Light the Lord requires of every one, and daily to Watch and Wrestle against
that which is condemnable by the Light; for so long as the Creature knowingly
lives in that (whether in Words ^^ Deed^ that it sees to be reprovable by the
Light, it cannot enjoy perfect peace with God; for the peace of God is enjoyed
i^ the Light; and truly if that Condemn, surely the Lord does not Justify,
though many believe they are Justified in the sight of God, through Christ,
although the Witness of God le^s them see that they are yet in their Sins, and
condemns them for Sin, and this Faith (or rather Unbelief) which leads them to
believe that they, nor none else can be made free from all Sin on this side the
Grave, and yet they imagine that they are free from it in the sight of God; but
beware of that Faith, for it is accursed, and is not the true Faith which is
the gift of God, which through Christ saves from all Sin; for that Faith
admits of Sin, but the Faith of Gods Elect sets free from all Sin; for where
the Wicked one has seated this Faith or Persuasion in the Heart, it is hard
indeed for such a one to come to Live in the Life of Truth, which is holy; for
as the Light does let the Soul see it is in its Sins, and brings Trouble and
Condemnation upon the Mind for Sin, and begets a desire also in the Heart to be
freed from Sin, for it feels it lie as a weighty load upon its Conscience;
behold even then the Wicked one, who has begot this persuasion in the Creature
that it cannot be freed from all Sin here, though freed from Sin in the sight
of God; and this persuasion causes the Creature to do dispite to the Spirit of
Grace, and strive to quench its Reproofs, and so get at ease in that cursed
Faith, and in that wrong Believe, and sit down short of the Peace of God; so
that which begot desires in the Creature to be freed from Sin, comes to be
veiled and slain, and many Thousands are in this State, who are large Boasters,
who are boasting that they are Justified by Christ, and that Christ has done
all for them, and if they can believe it, that is sufficient, and yet still in
their Sins.

Now the Apostle Paul says, If while we seek to be Justi^^ed by Christ, we our
selves be found Sinners; Is Christ therefore the Minister of Sin? God forbid;
and he says, Shall we continue in Sin that Grace may abound? God forbid; for
how can we who are Dead to Sin Live any longer therein? and he said, They who
are Justified by Faith, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, which
Redemption is a redeeming out of Sin, and their Faith gave them power over the
World, and did not admit of Sin, as the Professors Faith does, who believe they
can never be free from all Sin in this Life.

Oh, in tender Love I beseech you to beware of that Delution and Persuasion of
the Wicked one, for it is very dangerous, and a broad way which the Creature is
prone to run into; now there is a great difference betwixt such who with the
Light sees much Sin (which they are addicted unto) yet to be subdued, and it
is their sore Burden, and they in the strength of the Light wrestle against it,
and so feel it daily decrease; and that Faith bego^, by which they see and
believe that they shall be made Conquerors over all, as they abide faithful to
the Light, which lets them see Sin: I say there is a great difference betwixt
such as are there in that State (traveling out of Sin, out of Egypt, where the
Bondage is, toward Sion, where the Freedom is) and such as are sat down
satisfied, in a false Confidence, and in a wrong Belief, continuing in their
Sins, and believe they shall not be free from it here, but you know otherwise;
therefore in the Life of what you know abide, for truly it is the Life that
must make alive, and keep alive to God, which Life is the Light of men, the
true Light which lights every one tha^ comes into the World, and is the
Salvation of God; and therein wait and feel your Minds exercised in its
operation for this changes the Mind, the Thoughts, the Affections and Desires;
for as they have been Earthly, so they become Heavenly, and it becomes the
Souls delight to answer the end of the Lord, and to endeavor to walk worthy of
his Love, and it becomes its Life to do the Will of God, and to follow the
Leadings of his Spirit, which leads out of Evil; but before this be witnessed
the strait and narrow Way must be known, felt and lived in, and there must be a
passing through the Fire, through the Water, through the one Baptizing, which
baptiseth into Death, and so translateth into Life, in which Life it will
become your Life to do the Will of God.

Oh, dear Father and Mother, keep, I beseech you, to the Gift of God in your
own particulars, and be obedient to its Leadings, and therein watch diligently,
continually, and with it try your Thoughts, and Words, and Intents, before you
bring them forth, and if they be reprovable give the^ up to the Light, the
Fire, to be consumed; dear Hearts, it is in unexpressible Love that I write
thus unto you; and be very wary of spaking things by contraries, which you are
addicted to, for there is no Lie of the Truth, and he that abides in the Truth
is preserved out of the Lie, he that loves the Light brings his Deeds to the
Light to try them, whether they be wrought in God; so be not forward to utter
Words, but feel the Light of Christ to guide and lead you, and bring your
Thoughts and Words to it, to try them, whether you may speak them yea or nay;
now if they be reprovable by the Light, then they are to dye, and not be
brought forth, for if they be, this grieveth the Righteous Spirit of God, and
breaks your Peace with the Lord, for if his Witness Condemn, he does not
Justify; so the Creature keeping low in the pure Fear and Dread of the Lord,
it dare not do that, whether in Thought, Word or Deed, which it sees to be
Vain and Evil, if it could gain the whole World by it; but truly the Professors
are out of this Condition, though they can talk of the Fear of the Lord, and
scarce one of a (...) is come ^here, into that state, but this is a hard (...)
is able to bear it? yet it is a true saying, though (...) believe it; oh, the
largest Talkers, and Declarers, and Knowers, even of the highest sort, are
farthest from the Life of Truth, which is holy; for truly such are settled on
their Lees, and have been building long, and very high, and have gathered much
Riches, and it is hard for these to loose all, and their Building to fall, and
not one Stone to be left upon another, but all to be thrown down; oh, the Lord
God of Compassion is a gathering many tender Hearts from amongst them, who
hunger and breath after him, and is not satisfied with the Husks, the Shadows
and Dead Forms, in which they dwell, and poor Hearts, they have been long
running from Mountain to Hill, and have sought after the Lord, even fervently,
Day after Day, Year after Year, and could not find him whom their Souls longed
for; but now such is the Lord a gathering into his Fold where they shall enjoy
their Shepherd, and their Souls shall not want.

So once more do I in tender Love direct you to the Gift of God in your own
particulars, and therein wait upon the Lord for Power, from the Lord, over that
which is contrary to the Lord, and condemnable by his Light in your own Hearts;
and keep in the fewness of Words, for too many Words becomes not those who
professes Godliness; but let your Words be few, and let them savor of the
Grace of God, which leads into a Meek, Sober, Modest, Chaste Lif^, that so
your upright sober Conversation may preach Righteousness, even to the
convincing of them who have been as Teachers over you, whom ye will come to
see, as you keep to the measure of God, and know them to be a People whose
Minds are at Liberty, and are at case in the Flesh, and know not a Stay to
their Minds, a Stop to their Thoughts, a Bridle to their Tongues, which if they
be not come to know, feel and abide therein, let their Knowledge never so
large, their Declarations never so high, their Words never so deep, yea and
true also; yet I say, and my saying is true, though hard to many to bear (that
if such come not, and keep not to that which is to be a Stay to the Mind, a
Stop to their Thoughts, a Brible to their Tongues, a Lanthorn to their F^^^, a
Light ^o their Steps) their Knowledge, their Declarations, their Works and
their Suffering, it is all in vain; and a Babe of the Heavenly Birth sees and
comprehends them, and their large Coverings are to narrow to hide them from
their Eye: Well, into the hand of the Lord do I commit you, for to come to be
gathered into, and preserved in the pure Fear of God, Watchful and Diligent in
the Light, and to War and Wrestle in the strength of it, against that which you
see is to be Mortified; so be willing to pass through the strait Gate, into the
narrow Way to walk, which few finds, and are made willing to walk therein;
But the First shall be Last, and the Last First, for many are Called, and but
few Chosen.

And dear Ones, one thing more I have to say unto you, beware and take heed of
Condemning one another for doing that Evil which you see your selves are
addicted unto, but first see it Subdued and Mortified in your selves, whether
it be in Word or Action, before you Condemn others for it, though they be
Profane People; and when you spoke a Word of Reproof to any, beware of doing
it in a light Frothy way, as many do, even in the light Airy Spirit, which
brings forth the same things in themselves; but let it be done in the Sober,
Solled, Seasoned, Savoury, Holy Spirit of the Lord God, that it may reach to
the VVitness of God in them unto whom you speak, and then is it profitable; so
the Lord God Almighty, Infinite and Wise, preserve me, and you, and all his
little Ones, in his holy Awe and Dread, and therein to pass the time of our
Pilgrimag^ here in Fear and Trembling, Farewell.

From your Son, who is come into the Heirship of Eternity, William Bennit.
Bliborough Goal the 5th Month 1661.
A tender and unfeigned Salutation of Love and Goodwill to Professors, etc.
THe Lord God Almighty, has, and is a looking down upon the Sons and Daughters
of Men; and has, and does behold many of them, even as poor scattered Sheep
without a Shepherd, wandering as in the Deserts and waste howling Wilderness,
wandering as upon the barren Mountains, and dry Heaths; hungry and thirsty,
their souls unsatisfied, seeking diligently for food upon the barren Mountains;
running from Mountain to Mountain, and from Hill to Hill, and cannot find that
Food that will truly satisfy their hungry Souls; and running from one broken
Cistern to another, and cannot find one drop of water that will truly refresh
their thirsty Souls; who are seeking the living God amongst the dead Forms, and
seeking Meat among the Shells, and the Substance among the Shadows, and cannot
find that which they seek after, nor enjoy him whom their Souls longs for;
seeking rest and can find no true Rest; desiring to know where the Lord God
(the good Shepherd of Israel) feeds his Sheep and Lambs, and where they lie
down in quietness and rest, free from the fear of Evil.

And this the Lord God of pity has seen, and in his Infinite tender bowels,
has been (and now is) moved with yearnings of pity and compassion toward
them, and for his own Seeds sake he has, and is (in Mercy to them) Ezekiel. 34.
11, etc
stretching forth the Hand of his loving kindness unto them; to gather (in one)
the scattered, to gather together (in one) the dispersed, to bring home the
wanderer, and the prodigal (that has long fed upon the husks among the Swine)
to the Fathers house of plenty, where there is bread enough, and water fails
not.

Yea, the Lord God Almighty, of Heaven and Earth, has, and is lifting up an
Ensign for the Nations, and has, and will assemble the outcasts of Jacob, and
the dispersed Judah, from the four corners of the Earth, and has, and will
return the Captivity of his People; and then Jacob shall be glad, and Israel
shall rejoice in him (the steam of Psalm. 14. 7.
Jesse) which does and shall stand for an Ensign for the people and unto him
does, and shall the Gentiles seek, and his rest is, and shall be sweet and
glorious to the poor, for whom he will Judge in Righteousness; and Reprove with
Equity, for the meek of the Earth; who will smite the Earth with the Rod of his
Mouth, and with the breath of his Lips will he slay the Wicked, and Rule the
Nations with his Iron Rod, and break the Heathen to pieces like a Potters Psalm.
2. 8. 9.
Vessel; who has Righteousness for the girdle of his Loins, and Faithfulness
the girdle of his Reins; who has on the Brestplate of Righteousness, and a
Helmet of Salvation on his Head; who has put on the Garment of Vengeance for
clothing, and is clad with Zeal as with a Cloak; who with the two-edged sword
that proceeds out of his mouth, makes War in Righteousness; who has on a
Vesture dipped in blood, and his Name is called the Word Rev. 19. 13 Isa. 42. 6,
7. and 4^. ^. Luke 2. 30, 31 32 Isa. 35. 5, 6, 7.
of God. This is he whom the Lord gives for a Covenant of the people, and for
a light of the Gentiles, to be his Salvation to the ends of the Earth, to open
the Blind eyes, to unstop the Deaf ears, to cause the tongue of the Dumb to
sing, and the Lame to leap as an Heart; to cause water to come forth of the
Desert, and streams in the Wilderness; the parched ground to become a pool, and
dry heaths springs of water; to make the Wilderness and the solitary place
glad, and the Desert to rejoice, and blossom as a Rose; who is anointed of God
to Preach glad Tidings to the poor, to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim
Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3.
Liberty to the poor Captive, and to comfort the the Mourners in Sion; to give
beauty for ashes, the oil of Joy for Mourning, the garment of Praise for the
Spirit of heaviness; that they may flourish as Trees of Righteousness of the
Lords own planting, bringing forth fruit unto him 1 Samuel 2. 4, 5 6, 7.
that he (in and through them) may be glorified. He brake the bows of the
Mighty, and that which is weak and feeble, he girds with Strength and Courage;
the Full and Rich, he causes to hire out for bread, and causes the hunger of
the hungry to cease; who causes the barren to bear seven, and she that has
had many children, to wax barren and feeble; he wounds and heals, he
kills and causes to live; he brings down, and raises up, even the poor he
raises out of the dust, and the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among the
Princes, and to inherit a Crown of Glory.

This is he, who makes all things a New, and Rev. 21. 1. 5 Isa. 65. 17.
causes all old things to pass away, who causes the old Heavens, and the old
Earth to pass away, and dries up the Sea; and creates a new Heaven, and a new
Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness; this is he which works the strange
work, the marvelous work, which causes the ears of those that hear thereof to
tingle: This is he who is the strong Arm of Gods Mighty Power, which is
stretched forth toward the helpless, to deliver the poor and needy out of the
hand of him who is too strong for them; Isa. 52 1^
The Arm of Gods Salvation, which he is making bare before the eyes of the
Captives, that they may see him, and come unto him who is Mighty, upon whom
help is laid to deliver them, and to save to the utmost them that come unto
him; this (as I said) is the hand of Gods loving kindness, which in mercy is
stretched forth toward you, who cannot be satisfied with the husks, shells,
and shadows, but thirst and desire after him the Substance, the living Bread
which the living Soul feeds upon and lives, and grows up thereby into Eternal
life.

Ah dear People! this is the Salvation of God whom I declare of, and Salvation
is not to be had in another besides him, who is the Immortal word Luk 2. 29, 30.
of Eternal life which abides for ever; which was in the beginning before the
visibles were, by whom all things were made, whether visible or invisible, and
without Joh. 1. 1 etc.
him was nothing made that was made; and in him (the Word) was life, and this
life is the light of men, and he is the true Light that lights every man that
comes into the world; and was in the world, and the world knew him not. He
came unto his own, and his own received him not, but unto them that received
him, he gave power to become the Sons of God. Who had a body prepared him, in
which he suffered the Will of him that sent him; who was born of the Virgin
Mary, whom King Herod sought to destroy, who was circumcised the eighth day,
and likewise baptized by John the Baptist, who likewise eat the Passover with
his Disciples, (for he came to fulfill all Righteousness) who was betrayed by
Judas, who was judged to die by Ponrius Pilate, who was Crucified without the
Gates of Jerusalem, who was laid in a Sepulcher, who rose again the third day
according to the Scriptures, who ascended up into Heaven, and sits at the
Right hand of God who is glorified with the same Glory that he had with the
Father before the world began; who came again unto his Disciples according to
his promise; who said unto them, I will not leave you comfortless, I will come
to you: I will send you a Comforter that shall abide with you for ever, even
the Spirit of Truth. I am Joh. 14 16, 18, 26.
the Truth (says Christ) whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him
not, neither knows him; but you know him, for he dwells with you, and shall
be (Mark) in you; yet a little while and the world sees me no more: (Mark this)
you who are so much gazing and looking for his coming without, (but still fail
of your expectation) that you know not his coming within you to be a Comforter.
But you see me, and because I live you shall live also, (says Christ to his
Disciples) and in that day you shall know that I am in the Father, and you in
me, and I (Mark) in ^ou; and he the Spirit of Truth, shall lead you into all
Truth, and shall teach you all things, and shall show you all things to come,
and bring all things to your remembrance that I have said unto you, and shall
reprove the world of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment: And his Disciples
according to his Luke 24. 29. Acts, 2. 4.
command, waited at Jerusalem until they were endued with power from on high,
and had received the promise of the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth, which
caused them to speak the wonderful things of God, as the Eternal Spirit of
Truth gave them utterance; and then they were come to witness his Word
fulfilled, when he said, He dewlleth with you, and shall be in ^ou; and this is
the immortal Word which was in the beginning which Paul (who witnessed Christ
the Son of God revealed in him, and was Gal. 1 15, 16.
by him the eternal Spirit, made an able Minister of him) Preached to wit)
Christ within, who said, Romans 19. 6, 7. 8.
None should need to ascend, that is, to bring Christ down from above, or to
descend, that is, to bring Christ from beneath, etc. but the word (to wit
Christ is nigh thee in the heart, and in the mouth, to be obeyed and done: and
this is the Word of Faith that Paul preached nigh in the heart, Even Christ in
them ^he living hope, that was as an Anchor to their Souls, sure and steadfast)
the hope of Glory.

And Paul exhorted the Corinthians to examine themselves, and to prove
themselves whether they were in the Faith; whether they knew not Christ to be
in 2 ^or 13. 5.
them, except they were Reprobates. And John in his writing to the Saints,
reminds them of that within, which they had heard from the beginning; and says
to them, Let that remain in you, (to wit, The word which was in the beginning)
which you have heard from the beginning, and if it shall remain in you, ye
shall continue in the Son and in the Father: and tells them, That they should
not need that any man should teach them, but as the anointing which they had
received of God abiding in them, should teach them, which was the Truth, (to
wit) Christ the Truth in them, the anointed, the ano^nting: And as he had, and
did teach them, so they were to abide in him; so they knew Christ in them, and
witnessed the Power of God within, the Truth wit^i^, the Word nigh in their
hearts, the Spirit of God in their inward parts, by which they were led,
guided, taught an^ instructed: For so many as are the Sons of God, (says Paul)
are led by the Spirit of God; and he that has not the Spirit of Christ is none
of his: and this gave them an understanding in the things of God, even the
Spirit of God; For no man knows the things of God, [saith Paul] but by the
Spirit ^f God, through which he was made anable Minister of the New 1 Cor. 2.
10, 11, 12
Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit which gives life. And he
Preached the everlasting Gospel, Christ the Power of God, the Word nigh in the
heart, and said, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid from them that are lost, in
whom, [Mark] in whom the God of the world [the Prince of the power of the Air,
that wicked spirit, that works in the hearts of the children of disobedience]
has blinded their minds, lest the light of the glorious Gospel [Christ Jesus]
should shine in, and unto them: But God, who commands light to shine out of
darkness, has shined [Mark] in our hearts, to give us the knowledge of the
Glory of God in the face of Jesus; and we have this treasure in the Earthen
vessel, that the glory may be of God, and not of us: so the Saints Preached up
Christ [the Word of Life, the Light, the Truth] within, and Rom 1. 19. 1 Cor.
12. 7. Tit. 2. 11.
said, That which is is to be known of God, is manifest in them: and Paul says,
That the manifestation of the Spirit, is given to every man to profit withal;
and the free Grace of God, says he [Mark] that brings Salvation, has
appeared to all men, teaching us, that we denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts, should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world.

And the Saints, they witnessed their reconciliation, and were born again; they
felt and knew that in themselves, of which they were born again even Christ 1
Pet. 23 24, 25.
in them, the Seed incorruptible the Word of God, which lives and abides for
ever, by which they were begotten again unto God, and quickened by the Word of
life, even they who were once as dead stones, were raised up as living Children
unto Abraham; and so they came to taste that the Lord was good and gracious; to
taste and handle of the Word of Life, and to seed upon the Bread 1 Cor. 12. 13.
of Life, and to drink of the Cup of Blessing, and so by one Spirit were
baptized into one body, and were made to drink into one Spirit, wherein they
worshipped and served the Lord God, and had Unity with the Lord, in and through
the Eternal Spirit, and Unity one with another, which united their Souls unto
each other, and unto the Lord God over all, blessed for ever.

Ah, dear people! you in whose hearts there is true desires, and secret
thirstings after the living God, wherever ye are scattered among the many
Sects and people, toward you does my soul, yea my tender soul yearn and stream
with love and good will; and for your sakes dear people, does my Soul travel in
the womb of Supplication, that you might come to enjoy that which you are
seeking after, and come to possess that you are thristing for, and for your
sakes mostly is this written, in tender bowels of unfeigned love and pity to
your souls.

And dear people, you that have true desires in you after the Lord, and has
been seeking of him, where you cannot find him; and has been running from
Mountain to Hill and from Hill to Mountain; from one broken Cistern to another,
from one dead Form to another, but still are unsatisfied, and are sensible,
that you still [notwithstanding your long profession and confession of God and
Christ in words, and notwithstanding your practicing some things that you read
of, which the Saints once performed in obedience of the Spirit of Truth which
led them thereunto] want the feeling enjoyment of the Love and sweet Peace of
God, and go groaning daily under the burden of the bondage of sin and
corruption, and desires to be set free therefrom. Oh, dear people! retire,
retire with your minds inward, you who have been seeking a God a far off, and
hunting after the Lord without, retire to within, and wait to know the Lord God
near you, to know his pure Truth in your inward parts, his pure Spirit in you,
to lead and guide you, to teach and instruct you; for God is a Spirit, and his
teachings are spiritual; he must be known in Spirit, worshipped in Spirit and
in Joh 4. 21, 22, 23, 24.
Truth, not at the Mountain, neither at Jerusalem, not in this set Form, nor in
the other Form, As lo here, and lo there, but in the Spirit is the Lord God
known and worshipped aright, by them who are born of the Spirit: And so the
spiritualized people, who are born o^ the Spirit, and lives in the Spirit, and
are taught and led by the Spirit of Truth, these are the peculiar people who
Worship the God of Truth [who is a Spirit] in the Spirit and in the Truth; and
these are acceptable Worshippers with the Lord, who own no Worship but his own
which he teaches his people by his Spirit; and they that is ignorant of the
Spirit of God, they are ignorant of the true Worship of God which is in the
Spirit; and although such may seem to Worship God, yet their Worship is not of
God, nor accepted with God. It is the purified Sons of Levy [who have passed
through Mal. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4.
the fire, that are purged even as gold is purged and tried, and as silver is
tried by him [the Light of Israel] who is as a Refiners Fire, and like Fullers
Sope] that can offer unto God an Offering in Righteousness, and their offerings
is pleasant unto the Lord; but the polluted Isa. 10 17.
Sacrifices, the halt, the blind, and the lame, is abomination unto the pure
God of purity, who is Blessed, Blessed for evermore.

And dear People, who have desires in you after the Lord, toward you does my
bowels yearn, where ever you are scattered among the many ^ects and heaps, this
is a tender invitation unto you that have been spending your money for that
which is not bread, and your labor for that which has not yet satisfied your
Souls, but still you are a thirsty for want of drink, and an hungry for want of
food. Oh, dear people! retire inward, retire inward, hunt no longer abroad, run
no longer from one broken Cistern to another; wait no longer at the Wells that
men have dug, draw no longer at them, for still you thirst again. But oh!
retire to within, tur^ your minds inward, and wait to find and feel that in
you, which you so carefully (with sorrow) has been seeking without you; even
to know Jacob's Well in you, which has been dammed up with Earth by the
uncircumcised, whilst you have been hunting abroad; therefore turn your minds
inward to feel the gift that Christ gives; the Water that he gives, says
Christ to the Woman of Samaria, The water which I will give thee, shall [Mark]
be in thee John 4. 14.
a Well of water springing up unto Eternal life. So the Water that Christ
gives, it is within; therefore turn inward to his pure gift in your own Hearts,
to his pure Light in your own Consciences, for that comes from him, and leads
unto him (them that do it love, follow, and obey) the Fountain of living Water,
who satisfies the thirst of the thirsty, and feeds the hungry with good
things.

Therefore retire inward in your minds, and come unto him, and learn of him who
is meek and low in Mae 11. 28, 29, 30. Isa. 55. 2, 3.
the heart, to wit, Christ in you, except ye be Reprobates: hearken diligently
unto him, and eat ye that which is good, (no longer feed upon the husks) and
let your souls delight themselves in fatness: come unto him, incline your ear,
hear and your Soul shall live, and enter into Covenant with him who will be
your God, and you shall be his people.

And so, dear people, it is not enough for any to have a profession, and a talk
of God and Christ in words, without the enjoyment and possession of him: It is
not enough to confess and believe that Christ died at Jerusalem for sinners,
and he has done all for you, etc. for the drunkard and the swearer will say as
much as this, and make a confession of Christ in words as many professors do,
who say, They are justified by Christ, and he has done all for them; and yet
they are still in their sins, in the pride, covetousness, vanity, pomp, and
vain glory of the world, in it is vain customs, inventions, and traditions,
seeking and loving it is honor and respect, seeking and loving the praise of
men more then the praise of God. But, dear people, it is not enough to confess
Christ without, and say you believe in him, etc. except you come to know him
made manifest in you to destroy the works of the Devil; for your professing and
confessing of Christ dying at Jerusalem, etc. does not cleanse your Hearts, nor
sanctify your Souls, nor purge your Consciences from dead works, to serve the
living God in newness of life; but still you see you are Bondslaves unto sin
and corruption, and led captive with the lusts and desires of your own hearts;
and it will be so dear people, until you turn your minds inward, to the pur^
light of Christ in you, that does discover the sin and corruption of your own
hearts; and as you come to believe in that, to love and follow that, you will
come to feel and find the working our of the old leaven of sin, iniquity and
corruption, and working you into its nature, and so come to see, and feel, and
witness, not only atalk of it, but your Regeneration wrought by Christ in you,
the Immortal Word, to be bor^ again of it, the Seed incorruptible, which must
be known within, to bruise the Serpents head, the god of the world, the wicked
spirit that leads man into sin, which has been exalted in the heart of man,
and has been Lord, Head, and King there; and the holy Seed, the pure life,
that has suffered, that has been oppressed, even as a Cart is oppressed with
sheaves, that has been pierced, wounded and crucified, the Just has suffered
for the Unjust; he has long been a man of sorrows, and largely acquainted with
grief; he has been smitten, and thou have esteemed him not; but oh! he has
been wounded for, and by thy transgressions; and bruised by, and for thy
iniquities; he has born thy iniquity, whilst thou like a sheep have gone
astray, and followed thy own way.

But oh! now return unto the good Shepherd, who lays down his life for his
Sheep, and gathers the scattered into the fold of Rest, where he feeds them,
and causes them to lie down in the fresh Pastures of life, where none can make
them afraid; and feed, and sup with him, who is their daily Bread, their Life,
their Rest, their Joy and Delight.

So dear poople, whose desires are after the Lord, but are she King for
Salvation, and after a God afar off, I beseech you to return inward (because I
fervently desire that your Souls might come to taste of the love and sweet
peace of my God, which is that which would satisfy your Souls) and to take
heed to that in your hearts, which as light shines in a dark place,
discovering unto you the deeds of darkness, and the works of the night to be
evil; and fear not that It will deceive ye, for it is the sure word of
Prophecy, 2 Pet. 1. 19.
unto which you do well to take heed, until the day dawn in your hearts, and
light shine out of darkness, and wholly extinguish the night; and give no heed
to them who speak evil of the way of the Lord, and count Truth to be error, and
Light darkness; even as the professing Jews, they boasted of Moses, and of the
Law, and of the Prophets, but when he whom Moses and the Prophets prophesied
of, whom the Law did figure out, who fulfills the Law, who was the life of
Moses and the Prophets, he came unto them, but they hated him, and said We Know
that God spoke by Moses, but as for this fellow. we know not whence he is; he
Mat. 9 29. the 8. 4, 8. the 12. 24 11 chapter 18, 16.
is a Gluttoner, a Wine-bibber, a friend to Publicans and Sinners; he through
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils does cast out Devils, etc, And truly I may say,
(not out of a prejudiced mind of Enmity toward any, for my Soul bears love and
good will toward all men) that it is (as it were) the same now with many of
the Professors in this age, who (as the Jews made a large boast and profession
of Moses, the Law, and the Prophets, and hated him the life of them) does make
a large boast of Christ in words, and of his dying at Jerusalem, (which I
believe he did, according as the Scripture testify) and that he has done all
for them, and if they can but believe it, that is enough, etc. And yet whilst
they are thus professing him in words, behold many of them are enemies to his
Life, and so enemies to him whom they boast of, who is the Word that was in the
beginning, in whom was life, and his life is the light of men: The true light,
says John, that lights every man that comes John 1 9.
into the world; which the Professors say is a natural light; that which
convinces wicked men of sin in their own hearts, and judges them for evil
doing; it is a natural light say the Professors, and so call the life of the
Word, which is the light of men natural; it is a natural conscience say some,
it is an insufficient light, it is a common grace, etc. so common it is indeed,
that (as Paul says) it has appeared unto Titus 2 11.
all men, even that grace that brings Salvation: nay, some blasphemously will
presume to say, it is a spirit of delusion, a spirit of error; and these are
under the vvo, who call the Truth error, and the Light Isa. 5. 20 and 23: 36.
darkness, and the Good evil; and these one day shall know their blasphemy,
and their words shall become their burden; and these are in great darkness and
ignorance indeed, thick darkness fills their habitation, even the darkness of
Egypt, that may be felt; and it is hard indeed for such to be brought into the
pure light and unchangable Truth of God; although with the Lord God Almighty
nothing is impossible; and these like the Scribes and Pharisees, who, although
they professed God in words, and said Mat. 23. 13.
they had one Father even God, sought to shut up the Kingdom of Heaven from
men, and would neither enter in themselves, nor suffer them that would: and
so these, while they profess Christ in words, they speak evil of his Light
and Truth, and will neither own it themselves, nor suffer (as much as in them
lie) them that would; but cries out, take heed, bevvare of the light the
Quakers prate of, it is darkness, say they, it will deceive you, and delude
you, and lead you into Error, etc. But let all people know, the light (which
the people of God, called Quakers, speak of, and in bowels of love direct
peoples minds unto) is the life of the Word, which is Immortal, Eternal,
Permanent, Divine, and Immutable, and not Natural. Joh. 1, and 2 3, 9.


Thou, whoever thou art, and whatever by men thou art accounted of, that does
make a large profession of God, Christ, and the Scriptures of Truth in words,
and does hate, and speak evil of the Light, the true Light, that lights every
man that comes into the world, thou art a hater of God and of Christ, and art
of Antichrist, against Christ; although thou professest him in words, and say
thou art saved by him, and justified by him, etc. yet if thou hate his light
in thy own Conscience, which does check thee for evil doing, and prick thee for
thy sins in secret, thou art in enmity to him, and condemned by the Light, and
not justified; and thy confession of Christ in words will not save thee from
his Righteous Condemnation, whilst thou hate his pure light in thy
Conscience, and thy profession is for the fire, and unto the Light thou must
come before thou can find true peace with the Lord God. Yea, whatever thou
art, who art climed, and a climing up in thy Imaginations, and a soaring up
aloft with the god of the world, (the Prince of the power of the Air) above the
Light (the Door into the fold) striving to enter into the fold, and not by the
Door, to wit) the Light, thou art the Thief John 10. 1, 8, 9.
and Robber, who runs before Christ, the Light, the Door into the Fold, and
thou must come down; come down, to that which appears a small thing in thy eye,
(who art swelled big in thy fleshly wisdom, from which the things of Gods
Kingdom is hid) even to that which thou counts a foolish thing, a weak, a poor
thing, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. and 19. 20, 21.
not worth the minding or heeding; but this is it (the foolish thing in thy eye
that is to confound thy wisdom, and turn it into foolishness, that so thou
beecoming a fool, may be made wise in it: This is the weak thing, in thy eye,
which is to confound thy strength, and make thee weak, that thou may be
strong in it, and the poor thing in thy eye, which is to rob thee of all thy
Riches, that thou becoming poor, in it may be made Rich; so where is the Wise,
the Rabbi, the Scribe, the Disputer of this world? Has not God made foolish
the Wisdom of this world? for the world by wisdom knows not God; and so the
boaster is excluded, that God may have the Glory, and all flesh abased, and
silent before him, who of God is made unto his Saints, that love his Light, and
are led by his Spirit, Wisdom, Strength, Power, Righteousness, Justification
and Redemption, who have the heavenly Treasure in the Earthen vessel, that the
glory may be of God, who is worthy of all Glory and Praise for ever.

So heed not (dear people, you who have any desire in you after the Lord) what
this man, or the other, says of the Light; but love the Light, and take heed
unto it, for that which judges and condems sin in you, which John 3. 20
is that which seperates you from the Lord, and hinders your peace with the
Lord, and is the cause of your burden and sorrow; this you shall not need to
fear will delude you; That is a spirit of delusion, that leads into sin and
evil, beware of that; but that which reproves you for evil in your own hearts,
and manifests the deeds of darkness, take heed unto it, for that is the Light
that does make manifest. Ephesians. 5. 13, 14.
darkness; that which is reprovable is made manifest by the Light; for whatever
makes manifest, is Light, and that will not only make manifest the sin and
evil, but as you come to turn your minds in, unto it, and love, and follow it,
it will save you from your sins, and redeem your minds and souls unto God; for
who receive his Light, his pure Grace in them, they receive power through it to
become the Sons of God; for through his Grace does he manifest his power in
them that believe in the Light, to the drawing of their hearts and minds out of
the ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to the teaching of them to live soberly,
and righteously, and godly in this present world; and thus the free Grace of
God brings Salvation to their Souls. And so dear people, thus you, who come
to believe in the Light, to love and obey the Light in your own Consciences,
will come to feel and witness the work of the Lord God in your hearts, the
working and opperation of the Word of Life, to the casting out of the Bondwoman
and her Son, which is not to inherit; to the binding of the strong man, and
casting of him out; yea, the Old man with his deeds is to be put off, and you
renewed in the spirit of your minds, and the new Man is to Ephesians. 4. 20, 21, 22,
23.
be put on, who after God, is created in Righteousness and true Holiness, to
put him on, and to bring him forth before all men, the only begotten Son of
God, who is full of Grace and Truth, Mercy and Love, Pity and Compassion,
Purity and Holiness, and Good Will toward all, who loves Enemies and does
good to them that hate him, etc.

So coming to the Light, Christ Jesus, you come to the Substance, to him, in
whom the Figures, Types, and Shaddows end in, and so come to witness him in
you, who fulfils all Righteousness; he who is the end of the Law for
^ighteousness sake, unto them that believe in him; and to be Circumcised in
him, with the Circumcision Col. 2. 11, 12.
made without hands* by the putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by
the Circumcision of Christ, which the outward Circumcision was a figure of; and
to witness the Baptism of Christ, which is with the Holy Ghost and fire, which
John's Baptism with water outward, was a true figure of; and he bore Testimony
unto Christ, the Light of the world, who said, I must decrease, but he must
increase. I indeed baptize you with water, but he (Christ Jesus, who was before
me) shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire; whose fan is in his
hand, and he shall thoroughly purge his floor; the Wheat he shall gather into
his Garner, but the chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire. So the
outward water was but a type, the outward washing a type of the inward washing,
and inward cleansing, and inward purging, and purifying by the Water of Life,
or the Blood of Jesus, that cleanses from all sin, which is felt thus to work
in them who believe in the Light, and walk in the Light; and they come to know
that begotten in them, that feeds upon the flesh of Christ, which is the living
Bread, upon which the living Soul seeds, and is the Substance which the Bread
and Wine outward did figure out; which the Manna (that God gave the Israel of
old in the Wilderness) was a pure type of the heavenly Manna, the living Bread,
which the birth that is born of God feeds upon, and lives thereby, and grows
up into Eternal life.

The day of gathering is come, wherein the Lord God of everlasting bowels of
Compassion is a gathering the despersed, and seeking that which was lost, and
bringing back that which was driven away, and healing that Ezekiel. 34. 12 13, 14,
9, 16.
which was sick, and binding up that which was broken; but the strong and the
fat he is feeding with Judgment. The Lord is a gathering people out of the
Forms, Shells, and Shadows, wherein many have long stuck, and is bringing of
them to the Substance and life it self, out of the many Sects, and heaps, and
diverse ways, into the one pure path, into the one way of Life, Light, Peace,
Truth, and Righteousness, who by the one Spirit, has, and is baptising them
who believe in the Light) 1 Cor. 12. 13
into the one body, wherein the unity, the oneness, and the fellowship is
witnessed; blessed be his Name.

The way of the Lord is pure and Righteous, and unchangable; I am the Way, the
Truth, and the Life, says Christ, John 14. 6. Romans 10. 8 John 12. 46. and 8.
12.
the immortal Word, which (says Paul) is nigh in the heart, to be obeyed and
done: This is he, the Light, the Salvation of God, the true Light, that
lights every man that comes into the world; who says, None can come unto
the Father, but by me: I am come a Light into the world, (says Christ) that
whosoever believe in me shall not abide in darkness, but shall have the light
of life. Therefore, dear people love the Light, and believe in the Light, while
ye have the Light, that so you may become children of the Light, and become
heirs of an Inheritance incorruptible, that will never fade away: There is no
obtaining the Crown but through the Cross, and this you will come to know, who
come to love the Light, and to be taught of him, and to learn of him who is
meek and low in heart, Mat 11. 29 and 6. 13. and and 10. 38.
and to follow him in the strait and narrow way that leads to life, which few
there be that find it, and walk therein: He that will be my Disciple, says
Christ, must deny himself, and take up his daily Cross and follow me. This you
will come to feel and witness, if you be followers of the Light, a daily
denying of self you will know, a denying of your own wills, your own desires,
your own thoughts, your own affections, your own words and works, your own
wisdom and righteousness, and a daily taking up the Cross, an hourly living in
the Cross; through which you must come to be crucified to the World, its
Vanity, its Pomp, Pastime and Pleasures, Sins and Iniquities, vain Words, Psalm.
6. 14
Works, Fashions Customs, Inventions and Traditions; so coming to be crucified
with Christ unto the world, and to be Baptized into death with him unto sin,
you will come to live with him unto God in the life of Righteousness; in whom
(then) you will find that Rest, Satisfaction, Joy, Comfort and Peace which no
man can give unto you.

So, dear people, who are seeking, and desiring after the Lord God, to find
peace and comfort to your souls, this I leave with you; flee not from that
which does judge you in your own hearts for sin and evil, and bring trouble upon
you, and sorrow upon you, and wounds and pierces you in secret, because of
Transgression: I say, love that flee not from it; for oh dear people! how many
is there, that when they have been judged by Gods pure light in their hearts
for their sins, when trouble, and sorrovv, and distress, has seized on them,
because of their sins, which Gods Witness has set in order before their eyes;
then have they run unto vain helps, and run unto man for help, even to those
that could not speak a word in season to them, but have daubed them up with
untempered Mortar, and have endeavored to heal their vvound deceitfully, and
have preached Peace to that which is for judgment, and so thereby they have
gotten some kind of satisfaction for a time, until the Lord vvounded them again
with the Sword of his Righteous Judgments, and then their seeming rest fled
away as smack before the wind, and sorrow and trouble took hold on them again,
as pain on a Woman in travel; and then they have run again unto that which
could not remove the very cause of their trouble and sorrow; they have run to
the Scriptures of Truth, and therein have found a promise, and this they have
applied to themselves, for to get peace and rest thereby; when, alas poor
hearts, they have not been in that state and condition which that promise
(which they applied to themselves) was unto, and so not for them; and then they
have read what the Saints once did and performed, and they set themselves to do
the like, and to imitate them; and so hereby for a time they have gotten some
satisfaction, some kind of rest and peace, until the Lord God did thunder again
with Dread, and uttered his Voice with Terror, which caused the Earth to
tremble, and their habitation to fall, and then dissolation came upon them
again, and their Fig-leave garment came to be rent, and their wound greater
then ever it was before; and thus they have run from Mountain to Hill, from one
Physician to another for healing, but they were unto them as Physicians of no
value; for none of them could rightly heal their wounds, until at last, they
said in their hearts, We will seek no more unto man, for vain is the help of
man: But we will return unto the Lord God who has wounded us, and he will heal
us; who has broken us in pieces, and he will bind us up; and so returning to
the light of Christ Jesus in their own hearts, (with which the Lord has
wounded them for their sins, and brought trouble and sorrow upon them for their
iniquities, waiting therein in patience upon the Lord God, in the way of his
Righteous Judgments, which was set up in their hearts) they came to feel,
through their believing in the Light, and loving the Light by which they were
wounded for sin, the cause of their sorrow, and trouble and wounds, taken away
by the Blood of Jesus, which is his life, which they came to feel i^ them,
cleansing of them from their sins, and washing of them away; and so the very
cause of their wound being taken away, and the corruption purged out; then he,
the tender, pitiful compassionate God of Mercy, that in mercy toward them had
wounded them, healed them with the sweet Oil of joy, peace, and gladness; and
now these that were mourners do rejoice; and they that were heavy hearted are
made glad; and beauty is given them for ashes, and the oil of joy for mourning;
the garment of praise, for the spirit of heaviness; and are become Trees of
Righteousness, the Lords own planting, bringing forth fruit to his glory and
praise, who has thus set them free from their sorrovv and trouble. These can
say, Good it is to wait upon the Lord God in the Isa. 26. 8. and 2^. 9.
way of his Judgments. Lo, this is the Lord whom we have waited for, this is
our God, we have waited for him; come let us rejoice in his Salvation wherewith
he has saved us; he has redeemed us out of the horrible Pit, out of the miry
clay has he brought us, and set our feet upon a Rock, and does establish our
goings; who fills our Souls with the fatness of his house, and causes us to
drink of the River of his Pleasure, and to suck and be satisfied with the
Consolation of the Breast, and to milk out, and be delighted in the abnundance
of the sweetness of its virtue. Oh what! what shall we render unto the Lord,
unto the Lord our God for his benefits? oh! what shall we render unto him for
his Mercies? what shall we render unto him for his loving kindness? Oh! let us
take the Cup of his Salvation, and drink thereof abundantly; and in the
strength of the vigor of its virtue, let us, in the meekness of our hearts,
and in the lowliness and contriteness of our Souls, praise, praise, the Name of
the Lord our God, who is worthy of all Glory and Praise, for ever, and for
evermore.

A few words more unto you, dear people, who desire more after the love and
peace of God, then the glory and pleasures of the world. Dear people, take heed
unto that which discovers unto you what are your thoughts, whether they be good
or evil; for that is it which must redeem your minds unto God; and wait to come
to know it to be a stay to your minds, and a stop to your thoughts, and a
bridle to your tongues, and to cause a watch before your mouth, and to raise a
holy fear in your hearts of offending the Righteous God of Righteousness, in
thought, in word, in deed.

And dear people, who have so much depended and relied upon man for teaching,
retire you with your minds inward, to the manifestation of the Spirit of God in
your own hearts, and wait in it to come to know the Lord God to be your
Teacher; that if you should be separated from those that have been your
Teachers, and put into a Hole, a Dungeon, or Cave of the Earth for your
Consciences toward God, and so be separated from all your teaching outward,
you may then feel, find and witness the Lord to teach you, to instruct you,
counsel and direct you, comfort and refresh you, even by his pure Eternal
Spirit in you; for all the children of the Lord, shall be taught of the Lord,
and established in Righteousness, and great shall be their peace in the God of
their Salvation, unto whom, unto whom be glory, glory, honor and praise for
ever, and evermore; for he is worthy, he is worthy, worthy says my soul,
unto whom be glory in the highest. Amen.

So, dear people, for your sakes mostly was these foregoing lines written, in
obedience to the tender spirit of love in my heart, which drew me thereunto;
and in tender unfeigned love, and pure good will to your souls, who have had,
and still have true desires in your hearts after the Lord, and have been, and
still are thirsting and hungering after the way of Truth and Righteousness,
and have been, and still are seeking and hunting among the husks, shells, and
shadows, for to find the substance, but still fail of your expectation, and
cannot find true and perfect satisfaction, but secretly in your hearts are
panting and thirsting after the living water, and are weary of feeding upon
the husks, and begin to say (within your selves) to each other, Come, we have
been long wandering abroad, hunting after the Lord afar off, seeking of him in
this Form, and in the other Form, running from Mountain to Hill, from one Man
to another, to enquire for him whom our Souls long for; but we still want
the true enjoyment of him: And although man has told us we should find him
there in this Way, and in the other Way; in this Form, and in the other Form;
in this Ordinance, and the other Ordinance; wherein we have been tossed about,
and turned from one broken Cistern to another, but still w^ want true
satisfaction for our souls, for we want the true enjoyment of the assurance of
the Love and Peace of God: wherefore, come let us no longer hunt abroad, nor
run any longer from one man to another. But oh! come let us retire our minds
inward, and in stillness and quietness, in sollidness and seriousness let us
wait upon the Lord, and he himself will teach us of his ways, and lead us into
the path of Righteousness, where we shall meet him whom our souls has long
panted after, even as the Heart pants after the water Brooks; wherefore let us
wait upon the Lord, for the Lord is good to the man that waits for him, to
the ^am 3 25 26.
Soul that seeks him. Therefore, come let us both hope, and quietly (without
hunting any more abroad) wait to find and feel in our selves the salvation of
the Lord, that so we may in truth come to find, and to say, He is come, he is
come, and made manifest in us, whom our souls longed after; and behold his
reward is with him, even joy, comfort, peace, rest, and satisfaction to our
souls. Lo, this is the Lord, we have waited for him: Lo, this is our God whom
we have vvaited for; now let us rejoice, and be glad in his salvation, and
praise his Eternal Name. I say, dear people, toward you is the opening and
yearning of my bowels, in the casting of this my Mite amongst you, in the
meekness and humility of my soul, and the God of Heaven (for his own Seed
sake) make it a service of good to you.

And then will the only end of my soul herein be ansvvered thereby* who am
your friend, and one who desires that you off the barren mountains may be
gathered, and brought down into the lovv valley, into the fresh pastures of
life, where you may feed with Gods Babes and Lambs, and lie down in the sold
of rest and peace, that you might find bread in your own houses, and water in
your cisterns, the oil in the Cruse that will not fail, but will satisfy
your souls in drought, and make fat your bones, that you might become like a
watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not.

Take this as a Salutation of the love and good-vvill of my soul to you, who
am a friend to all people; one that ovvns and desires to tender, nourish and
strengthen the least appearance of God in any; A lover of honesty and
uprightness in vvhomsoever I find it; but a hater of hypocrisy and deceit: A
Traveller in the womb of supplication for the restoring and gathering in of
the scattered sheep, and bringing home the dispierced of the Fold, that all may
know one sheepfold, and one shepherd.

From one of the least amongst many of the chosen Generation and peculiar
people of God, (called Quakers) whose earthen vessel is know by this Name,

WILLIAM BENNIT.

Postscript.
DEar People, you in whose hearts there is some tenderness and
conscienciousness toward the Lord God, if you, because of by-ends, and
self-interests, and through letting in (by your reasoning and consulting with
flesh and blood) the slavish fear of man (whose breath is in his Nostrils, and
can but (if by God permitted) kill the body) does consent, and condescend
thereby (for to save your selves from, or out of sufferings, either by body or
estate) to do and join with that which you are really persuaded in your hearts
is quite contrary to the mind and will of God, and so knows it to be evil, and
also contrary to your own Consciences; hereby, in so doing, you may engage the
Lord God against you, (in your fearing man more then God* and come to loose
your tenderness and conscienciousness to Godward, and so hardness of heart may
come upon you, and so you wholly die and wither away (as to all tenderness and
conscienciousness toward God) even as grass upon the house top. But you dear
people, in whom there is tenderness and conscienciousness toward the Lord God,
if you be faithful to the Lord in your not joining with, nor consenting to do
the thing (for any by-ends, or private interests whatsoever, although it be set
up and tolerated, and compelled to be done by a Law from man) which you are in
your hearts truly and really persuaded is evil, and contrary to the mind and
will of God, and also contrary to your own Consciences; but rather are willing
to expose your selves to suffer whatever the Lord God of Almighty power, and
everlasting strength, (before whose Etern^l Almightiness, and Everlasting
Powerfulness, all the strength, and power of the Arm of flesh, is even like a
puff of smoke before a mighty wind) shall suffer man, who to day is, and to
morrow is not) to inflict upon you; you hereby will even engage the Lord God of
everlasting bowels, of infinite compassion, (who is and will be a strength to
the poor, feeble, weak and need^, a shadow unto them from the heat, a refuge
unto them from the storm, when the blast of the terrible One come upon them
like an overflowing flood) to stand for you, and to help you in your need, and
in your greatest straights; when you (as Peter) are ready to cry, Help, Lord, I
sink; to appear to and for you in the greatest measure of his love, who right
well knows what you have need of, to minister strength unto you proportionable
to your trials: And hereby dear people ^our tenderness and conscientiousness
may daily increase, and you come to make conscience of that which you have not
made conscience of, and then you may come to find and witness that this day of
trials, sufferings and tribulations is a blessed day to you, and turns
*through the mercy and loving kindness of the Lord toward you) for your good,
so that you may come to bless and praise his name for it, unto whom be praise
and glory for evermore; But a woeful day to Hypocrites, who has gotten on a
garment of profession of God and Christ, etc* for a cloak to cover their
unrighteousness and deceit; an unwelcome day to them, a terrible day to them,
for it will stain their crowns, and mar their beauty, and subdue their
strength, and slay their power, and pull down their strong holds, rip off their
sheeps clothing, pull down their gay Tombs and painted Sepulchers, and their
rottenness stink, and nakedness will appear. So be it, so be it, Amen says my
soul.



For Friends of Truth in the Town of Yar^outh.
DEar Friends, whom the Lord God Almighty has visited in his endless
unchangeable Love; even in his making known, and manifesting in and unto your
souls his pure precious Truth, whereof he has in measure made you pertakers,
with his dear Children and Witnesses of, in your measures, blessed be his Name,
who has raised you up to bear a Testimony for him and his Truth which you
profess; who also has enabled you through the power of his Love thereunto, in
this the day of your trial in that great Town. And my dear Friends, my soul
earnestly desires that you all may dwell and abide, in the remembrance and
living sense of the loving kindness of the Lord toward you, in his freely
making known his Truth unto you, that indeed the sense of his Love, may bind
your hearts and souls to be faithful unto the Lord, and his truth which you
profess, in still bearing your Testimony for the same, in this the day of
trial, standing as noble faithful witnesses for the Truth, every one of you in
your measures, amongst that hard hearted and crooked Generation, in the midst
of whom my dear friends, you in the Light may shine as Lights, in the blamless
Life, and unreproveable Conversation, even to the praise of the Lord God, and
to the honor of his truth which you profess.

Now, dear friends, the Lord has caused you hitherto, to bear a testimony for
him, and against that wicked spirit of Persecution, which would limit the Lord
in his people; in this particular fix in your meeting and assembling your
selves together in his fear, to wait upon him, and to worship him in spirit and
in truth, though it has been though Sufferings. And dear friends, in the
meekness of love unfeigned; I Cry unto you, saying, oh, do not grow faint, nor
weary of bearing your testimony still for the truth and worship of God, in your
meeting together in his name; for dear Friends, wherein can we (in one
particular exercise of the spirit of truth) bear a larger testimony for the
truth, then in our meeting and assembling our selves together in the truth, to
worship the God of truth, in the spirit of truth, seeing that this is the thing
(above many) which the wicked spirit of persecution, does so eagerly, and so
highly oppose, and so eanestly seek, and so greatly endeavor, to deprive us
of, and confine us from; wherefore dear Friends, I cannot but in the Love and
Zeal of the truth, exhort you all, not to neglect meeting together in the fear
of God, so long as the Lord permit you Liberty so to do.

And oh, let not the smalness of your number (you little Flock, who are hated
and rejected by the world) be any discouragement to you in this matter; but oh,
rather be you encouraged thereby, in the strength of the Lord, in love to his
truth, to bear up your testimony, (in that great Town, in the midst of so many
Persecutors) faithfully in your measures, even to the honor of the Lord and
his truth. My dear friends, let me say again, neglect not meeting together,
through giving way to the sloth^ul careless spirit, or through letting in the
fear of man into your hearts, for indeed, my dear friends, although you be a
poor small Remnant, for whom my soul travelleth with the Lord for your
preservation, yet behold, as you keep your meetings in the fear and name of the
Lord, you will feel and enjoy his living presence in and amongst you, which
will make your meetings profitable unto you.

And dear Babes, in stillness, quietness, in peace, pati^nce, and contentedness
possess your souls, in the dominion of truth to reign over all those thoughts,
reasonings and consultings, which the Enemy of your souls would infuse into
your minds, whereby he would raise trouble and tumult in your hearts, and bring
faintness and weakness upon you. And dear Friends, lend not an ear to listen
after the rumors and reports of the world, nor heed not the boasting of the
wicked, neither regard the threatening of truths Enemies; but dear Babes,
continually lend an ear unto the Lord, and hearken you unto his Counsel, and
have continual regard unto him in your hearts, and wait to feel his presence
with you continually, and know your unity with him; and every particular one
feel and find in your selves, that the Lord God almighty is on your sides; and
then, my dear Friends, you need not matter who are against you, if the Lord be
for you; so dear Lambs, be faithful to the Lord, and to his truth in your
measures; and be not D^scouraged nor Danted, (through the sense of the rage,
wroth and bitterness of your Enemies, and through the feeling of your own
weakness and feebleness) but trust ye in the Lord, and hope ye in his tender
bowels, which are opened with groanings of compassion toward his poor
afflicted suffering people, who is, and yet will be, a strength to the poor and
needy, a refuge unto them from the storm, and a shadow unto them from the heat,
a helper in the time of need, a Deliverer out of trouble in the greatest
straits; who will appear to help his helpless ones, wh^ have no other helper
but the Lord.

So, the Lord God almighty be with you, and gird up your loins with Courage,
Boldness, Strength and Valor, and spread upon you the mantle of faithfulness,
and cause you to persevere on in the perpetual patience, and to abide in the
continual content, therein to run the race that is set before you, which you
have begun: And the Lord almighty of heaven and of earth, for his own seeds
sake, keep you from fainting by the way, and carry you through all whatever
either outwardly or inwardly you do, or may meet withal, and keep you, and
preserve you unto the end, that in the end, dear Lambs, we may lay down our
heads together, in the sweet bosom of the Lord God of everlasting rest, peace
and quietness, in whose sweet, meek, heavenly, humbling, melting love, my soul
dearly salutes you all, and commits you all unto the Lord God almighty.
Farewell, dear Friends, Dwell together in that love which thinks no evil,
therein forgiving and forbearing one another, even as the tender God of bowels
has forgiven you, and born with you day after day, and time after time; and
dwell all in the meek spirit of self-denial, keeping the unity in the spirit,
in the bond of peace.

Norwich-Castle the 3 d Month, 1664. Your tender Friend and Brother, WILLIAM
BENNIT.

God only Exalted in his own Work; OR, THE Works of God Praises him in Sion.
OR, A Song of Deliverance from a great and sore Captivity, Thraldom and
Bondage, under the King of Egyptian Darkness, the God of the World, where the
Soul was fast bound, as with strong Chains and Fetters; but now Ransomed (by
the outstretched Arm of Gods Almighty Power) and art come to Sion with Songs
of everlasting Joy upon thy head, and have obtained joy and gladness, and thy
sighing and mourning is fled away: witnessed unto, and experienced in that
Vessel, whose earthly Tabernacle bears the name of William Bennit.
Published in singleness and uprightness of heart (from a constraint of Gods
Love) to all those who are yet groaning and panting after the Lord in truth and
sincerity, that they may meet with some refreshment and encouragement in their
Journey and Travels toward the Land of Rest and Peace.

OH! oh my soul, my soul, what has the Lord, even the Lord thy God done for
thee? oh! what has he done for thee, oh my soul! oh my soul, a little while
sit down in thy secret Chamber of rest and quietness, and there oh my soul! a
little meditate of the most excellent loving kindness of the Lord, thy tender
compassionate God of infinite bowels, which he has manifested to thee, oh my
soul! of things past, present, and to come; that so the perfect sense of the
love, mercy, pity, kindness, tenderness, and compassion of the Lord, thy tender
God, may always rest in and upon thee, oh my soul! That oh my soul! through
the sense, feeling, and true remembrance thereof, thou may be, O blessed God,
praised, glorified, and magnified, reverenced, and honored, even the holy,
powerful, eternal, wonderful, everlasting Name of the Lord God Almighty, who
inhabiteth Eternity, who lives for ever and for evermore; and bound thereby to
a bountiful, kind, loving, tender, pitiful, merciful, compassionate God toward
all souls; in the measure of God, thy God, who has abounded in loving kindness
toward thee, oh my soul!

Oh! oh my soul, my soul, remember thou were once a prisoner in the prison
house of darkness, strongly bound in chains and fetters, a slave and a captive
in the Land of Egypt, under the servitude and slavery of the Prince and power
of darkness, the god of the world, the king of Egypt: and under thy hard
bondage, and deplorable thraldom and miserable captivity, oh my soul! thou were
made in secret to cry and groan, under thy burdens unto the Lord thy tender
God, whose bowels, whose tender bowels of infinite pity and unsathomable
compassion did (in mercy to thee) hover over thee, even in that thy sad
miserable deplorable state; first made thee sensible of thy sad captivity, and
so in the sense thereof, and in the sense of thy own helplessness, how dids^
thou cry, cry unto the Lord God of pity for help, and groan unto him for
deliverance, oh my soul! and the Lord who opened thine eye, and gave thee a
glimpse of thy sad estate, did hear thy groanings, and thy cries, and (for his
own Seeds sake) set himself, by the outstretched Arm of his power, to deliver
thee out of thy sad captivity, in which thou were, without help of thy own, and
there must abode, had not the Lord God of everlasting unfathomable bowels of
pity had mercy upon thee, oh my soul!

Oh, oh! oh my soul, my soul, the remembrance of the tender love, the tender
pity, the tender mercy, of thy tender pitiful God: how can it but even rend thy
bowels even from top to bottom, oh my soul; and remember, oh my soul! how the
Lord God Almighty, through his sore plagues and righteous judgments executed
upon Pharaoh the King of Egypt, under whom thou were a slave, by an
outstretched and a mighty power, by the slaying with the sword of his
vengeance the firstborn of Egypt, brought thee out of the prisonhouse, who
broke thy chains in pieces, and snapt thy bonds asunder, and brought thee out
of Egypt, and set thy face toward Canaan, the good Land that flows with milk
and honey. And remember, oh my soul! how wonderfully the Lord God, who by his
mighty power and outstretched arm brought thee out of Egypt, preserved thee
and upheld thee in thy long journey unto Canaan, thy tedious way and passage
through the sea and wilde^ness, how gently did he lead thee, as a tender
nursing Father, and carried thee as in his arms, and bore with thee in his
mercy toward thee, when thou sometimes murmured against him, because of the
length and straightness of the way that he led thee in, and because of the
enemies thou had to encounter with by the way, insomuch that thou sometimes
backslided in thy heart toward Egypt, and lusted after the fleshpots thereof,
and murmured against the Lord, who so led thee about in such a cross knotty
way, to that part, in the which through the cross, straightness and length of
the way, was to die, pine, and wither, and be worn away, and fall in the
wilderness, and not enter into the holy Land, and yet the Lord thy tende^ God,
who did corre^^ thee through his righteous (...); and as a tender, hea^^ed
Father did chas^ise thee for (...), complain^ngs, a^^ murmu^ings against him,
and (...) ba^^s^iding towar^^ Egypt, did not destroy thee, but bear with thy
weaknes^^^ and infirmities, and nourished thee and cherished thee day by day,
and as a tender hearted Mother nurseth the only tender babe of her womb; who
led thee by a pillar of a cloud by day, which was a shadow unto thee from the
heat, and a pillar of fire by night, which gave thee light by night, when the
Sun was under the earth: who when thou were an hungry, he gave thee bread from
heaven day by day, fresh Manna morning by morning compassed about thy tent, and
gave thee water out of the rock to satisfy thy thirst; yea, oh my soul great,
greatly has the mercy, love, pity and compassion of the Lord thy tender God
been manifested toward thee: how did he fight for thee, and subdue thy enemies
before thee, and made way for thy passage! yea, remember, remember oh my soul!
oh my soul! how that after he had brought thee out of Egypt by his
out-strctched arm, and mighty wonderful power, how mightily and wonderfully did
he appear for thee, to help thee in thy time of great need, and extreme
distress, and great trouble, even when Pharaoh and his great host followed hard
after thee, and pursued strongly to overtake thee, and bring thee back again
into Egypt under his slavery and servitude And when Pharaoh and his host
followed so close after thee and the Sea, the great Sea, was before thee, and
mountains on each side of thee, how great was the straight thou were in, and
the trouble and sorrow that compassed thee about, oh my soul! that thou were
even at thy wits end.

And oh! oh my soul, my soul, in this time of thy greatest straight and trouble
(^ven when thou were without help of thy own) thou criest unto the Lord thy
God, who gave thee some glimpse of comfort, saying, he would fight for thee,
and thou should be still, and hold thy peace; and so he by his mighty power
made hard things to become easy unto thee, and that which appeared as a thing
unpossible unto thee, he (by his power) made it become possible unto thee.
Remember, oh my soul, how he made a way for thee to pass through the Sea, and
divided the waters thereof hither and thither, and by his mighty power carried
thee through the Sea, and Pharaoh and his host he utterly destroyed in his
wrath, and delivered thee, oh my soul, out of his hand, and destroyed them who
would have destroyed thee, and gave thee dominion over them that had dominion
over thee, and thou saw them lie dead as by the Sea shore; glory, glory,
glory, ah! glory, glory, and pure praises, praises to God, to the Lord God,
even thy God, oh my soul! and now, oh my soul, thou can sing a song of
deliverance, a song of victory and triumph, and go into the Sanctuary of God,
to the Altar of God, thy God, even God, thy exceeding joy; ah! and upon the
Harp thou can praise God, the Lord thy God, thy delight and joy.

Oh! oh my soul, my soul, thou in the lowly fear and holy dread of the Lord thy
tender God, and in truth and righteousness livingly and experimentally can
say, the Lord my God is my strength and my song, he also is become my
salvation, he is my Rock and strong Tower, his work is perfect, a God, the God
of truth and righteousness, just and right he is, the holy one whose dwelling
is on high, in the holy place, and with him also who is of a poor, and a meek,
and a contrite spirit, and that trembles before his Holiness, and fears and
dreads before his dreadful Name: ah! ah thy right hand O Lord, thy right hand,
O Lord God of power, is become glorious in power, is become mighty in power,
thy right hand O Lord God Almighty, has dashed in pieces mine enemies by the
greatness, O Lord my God, by the greatness of thy; wonderful excellency, thou
have O Lord confounded them that rose up against me; thou let forth thy
wrath and consumed them as stubble before a mighty fire, thou let forth the
breath of thy fury, and blew upon them, and scattered them as chaff before a
mighty wind: Oh! oh who can stand before thy indignation, thy dreadful
indignation? who can abide the extreme fierceness of thy anger? thy fury is
poured forth like fire, thou breakest the r^cks in pieces, the mountains
tremble before thee the mighty God; thou utterest thy voice, and the Heathen
tremble, thou roarest, and the Kingdoms are moved, and the earth melts at the
appearance of thy presence, who comes with fire, and thy Chariots like a
whirlwind; thou renderest thy anger with fury, and thy rebukes with flames of
fire: thou have thy way in the whirle-winds, and the Clouds are as the dust of
thy feet. Thou art the mighty God, who can but fear before thee, and tremble at
thy eternal presence? thou roarest out of thy Sion, and utterest thy voice from
thy Jerusalem, and the Inhabitants of the earth tremble thereat; but still thou
art the hope of thy People, and the strength of thy ransomed ones, their strong
Tower, their present Helper in the time of trouble.

Wherefore, I Will not fear though the Earth be removed and carried into the
midst of the Sea, and though the Sea roar and be terrible, and the Mountains
shake with the swellings thereof, and the Hills fly before it; though the tall
Cedars of Lebanon fall, and the strong Oaks of Bashan bend before it, yet I
will not fear, the Lord is with me, and he will not forsake me, but he will
help me, and that right early. Wherefore I will only fear before the Lord,
before the Lord my God, the mighty eternal God of mighty eternal Power, who
measures out the Heavens as with a span, and measures the waters of the Seas
in the hollow of his hand; who comprehends the dust of the Earth in a
measure, and weighs the Mountains as in scales, and the Hills as in a
balance; who takes up the Islands as a very little thing; before whose face
the Heavens and the Earth flee away, and behold there appears no more Sea.

Oh! who can but fear before thee, O Lord my God? the enemy said, I Will pursue,
I Will overtake, I Will not spare, my lusts shall be satisfied on him. But O Lord,
O Lord God, my God, thou were my God, near to help in the time of need, and in
the time of greatest need appeared, appeared in the greatest power of love. O
Lord, thou blew upon them, and the Sea covered them, and they sunk as Lead in
the bottom of the mighty Waters. O Lord, O Lord God, who is like unto thee? who
amongst the gods is like unto thee the only God, who art dreadful in holiness,
fearful in praises, doing wonders? Oh! let the people hear and be afraid, and
the Dukes of Edom be amazed, and let trembling take hold of the mighty men of
Moab; oh! who can but fear before thee, O Lord my God. Thou have redeemed me,
and led me forth in thy power, and guided me in thy strength, unto thy holy
habitation; thou will bring me in, and plant me in the mountain of thy
Inheritance, in thy Sanctuary O Lord, which thy hands have established, wherein
I shall live with thee, O Lord my God for ever: Ah, glory, glory, glory unto
thee O Lord God my God. The Lord is a man of war, the Lord of Host is his name;
Pharaoh and his mighty men has he drowned in the Sea, but he has saved thee,
oh my soul! So Lord let thine enemies perish, but let them that hope in thy
mercy live for ever, to declare thy wonders, and magnify thy name in the land
of the living. Ah! glory, glory, ah glory, glory to God, the mighty God; ah!
praises, praises, honor and thanksgiving unto thee, O Lord my God, who lives
for ever and for evermore. Amen.

Oh! oh what is this what is this that the Lord thy tender God of infinite
bowels of pity has done for thee, oh my soul? thou were a slave in the Land of
Egypt, and the Lord has redeemed thee, oh my soul! thou were in darkness, and
the Lord has given thee light; and thou were under the region and shadow of
death, and he has brought thee forth in the to Land of life. Thou were in the
prison, shut up in the prisonhouse, bound up with chains and fetters, in the
low dungeon of darkness, and he has broken thy chains, and snapt thy fetters
asunder, and loosed thy bonds, and broke up the prison door, and pulled down
the prison house, and set thee free oh my soul!

Oh my soul, my soul! thou were a captive in the Land of Babylon, estranged
from the Commonwealth of Israel, and an Alien from Sion, sitting sorrowful and
solitary by the River of Babylon in the Land of Captivity, mourning when thou
thoughst upon Sion, for thou were a Captive in a strange Land, and sorrow
(through the sense of thy woeful Captivity and Alienation from thy native Land)
compassed thee about, and trouble on every hand; tears was thy drink, daily
sorrow thy meat, and groans and sighs thy greatest joy; thou wentest bowed down
all the day long with an heart aching, and thine eyes dropping with tears,
because of the oppressions of thine enemies, and burdens of thine oppressors;
and at the remembrance of Sion (and in the sense of thy separation from her)
thou did pant, oh my soul! thou did pant after Sion, the Land of thy
nativity; Oh! as the Heart pan^eth after the water brooks, crying in the anguish
of thy sorrow; how long Lord, how long shall I be a captive in a strange Land?
with longing d^sires in thy heart after Sion: thinking in thy heart, oh! when
shall I walk with the ransomed of the Lord upon the Mountain of Sion, and
travel with the Lords redeemed in the streets of Jerusalem; and in that day, oh
my soul! the Lord for his own Seeds sake had regard unto thy cries, and thy
tears and sorrows was not hid from the view of his tender pitiful eye, and in
tender mercy and bowels of compassion toward thee: he, through his free love
unto thee, brought thee forth out of Babylon, the Land of thy captivity, and
set thy face toward Sion thy desired rest, oh, my soul.

But oh! oh my soul, how often were thou bewildered in thy going, even after thy
face was turned toward Sion traveling thitherward; saying in thy heart, oh! I
will go join my self unto Sion in a perpetual Covenant which shall never be
broken, losing thy way, some times wandering as it were in the wilderness, in
the deserts and solitary places, hungry and thirsty, my soul even fainting with
weakness, and then did thou cry unto the Lord in thy distress, and he helped
thee out of all thy troubles, he took thee by the right hand, and brought thee
into the right way in which thou might come to thy desired rest, oh my soul!
And now, oh my soul, thou art come to Sion with songs and everlasting joy upon
thy head, and thou have obtained joy and gladness, and thy sighing and mourning
is fled away.

And now, oh my soul! thou that were in a desert does rejoice, and as a
wilderness are made glad, and as a solitary Place does blosom as a Rose, as a
dry heath, now as a fruitful valley, as the parched ground, now as the moist
mould that drinks in the rain that comes upon it. Now, oh my soul! thou in
truth can say the wilderness does rejoice; and the desert and solitary place
is made glad, and blossom as a Rose; water comes forth out of the wilderness,
and streams in the desert, the parched ground is become a pool, and the dry
heath springs of water; now the mourner rejoices, and the heavy hearted is made
glad, and beauty is giving in stead of ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the
garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; now, oh my soul! is thy horn
exalted in the Lord in whom thy mouth is enlarged over thy enemies: ah! the
Lord makes rich, and he makes poor; he wounds, and he makes whole; he
kills, and he makes alive; he brings down, and he raises up; he raises
up the poor out of the dust, and the beggar from off the dunghill, and sets
them among Princes, and causes them to inherit the seat of Glory. Yea, the
full he emptieth, that they hire themselves out for bread, and they that were
hungry and empty he fills with good things: yea, the barren he causes to
bear seven, and she that has had many children is waxed feeble: this is the
Lords doing, and it is morvellous in thy eyes, oh my soul!

Oh! my soul, my soul, thou can in truth say, thy winter is (in measure) over
and gone, and the stormy wind is fled away, and the cold parching frosts are
dissolved, and the spring and summer is come, and the Sun with its warm beams
breaks forth, and the gentle showers descends, and the time of the singing of
birds is come, and the turtle is heard in thy land, oh my soul* and the vine
puts forth her tender grapes, and the fig tree with her pleasant figs give a
goodly smell. And now oh! my soul, thou can set under thy vine, and under thy
fig tree with thy beloved: and who shall make thee afraid, with whom thou can
walk into his pleasant garden of delights, among t^^ beds of spices, and feed
among the lillies, and there solace thy self in the bosom of his love.

For, oh my soul, oh my soul! there was a time when thou oh my soul! had lost
thy beloved, and thou soughtst him by night upon thy bed, and in the broad
ways, but thou foundst him not; and therefore sorrow compassed thee as a wall
about, and mourning covered thee as a garment, and thou could have no rest,
until thou had found thy beloved, crying fiercely in thy heart, saying in thy
ardent desires after him, oh* oh thou art hid from me as in the clifts of the
rocks, and as in the secret places of the stairs: let me see thy countenance,
and let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is
comely; and when he did some^imes show himself unto thee behind the wall, or as
through a lattice, and put his fingers in by the hole of the door, thy bowels
were moved for him. But now, oh my soul! thou do enjoy his presence, which is
sweet and pleasant to thee, he is as a bundle of myrrh, he is thy joy, thou
sits under his shadow with great delight; for he is a bower of spices unto
thee, and his fruit is sweet to thy taste, he has brought thee into his
banketting house, where his banner over thee is love, where he comfort thee
with the flaggons of his love, he causes thee to drink of his spiced wine,
which is as the liquor of life, and the juice of his pomegranates, which is as
honey to thy taste.

Oh my soul! he fills thee with good things, that so thou might become as
a watered garden, and as a spring of water, whose water fails not; that thy
bones might flourish as an herb, and thy kidneys be covered with fatness and
thy belly become as an oily Brook: thus has the Lord thy tender God, thy
merciful God, oh my soul! set thee free from the yoke of bondage. And now, oh
my soul! rejoice in fear and trembling, and dread and fear continually in the
holy presence of the Lord thy God, and watch, watch, watch, oh my soul!
diligently watch in the lowly fear and godly jealousy over thy own heart,
trembling in thy bowels, lest thou, oh my soul! in the joy (the great joy) in
the sense of what the Lord has done for thee (and in a sight of thy good state
thou art advanced to) should be lifted up above what is meet, and thereby come
to lo^s and a fall; wherefore, oh my soul, to prevent such mishaps coming unto
thee unawares, keep thee watchful and low in fear, and humble and contrite in
heart, and meek and chaste in mind, tender and broken in bowels, poor and needy
in spirit, waiting and depending upon the mere preserving grace of the merciful
hand of thy merciful, piti^ul compa^^^onate God of infinite loving kindness;
that whatever thou do or suffers (through his strength) for him, thou may
not be (in the lest degree) exalted above him, but still keeping low in him,
dwelling beneath him, at his footstool: and whatever thou receivest from him,
when he calls for it, return it back to him; and be nothing without him but
what thou art in him alone, knowing that what thou art it is by him, and what
thou have it comes from him.

Therefore be nothing without him, and return his own to him, for he is worthy
that his own should praise him. And in the belly of a humble, lowly, broken,
contrite spirit dwell, oh my soul! where thou may serve God with thy tears,
dwelling in the sense of the freeness of his love and mercy in what he has
done for thee, that the remembrance thereof may rend thy bowels before him,
passing thy pilg^image here in fear and trembling before the Lord thy God, unto
whom, unto whom, unto whom be glory, glory, glory, praises, praises, praises,
thanksgiving, honor, and eternal renown, be rendered unto his eternal name,
who is blessed, blessed, blessed for ever and ever. Amen, Amen. Halelujah in
the highest, Amen. glory, glory, ah glory; Halelujah in the highest, Amen,
Amen, says my soul.

Oh my soul! where did thou begin, but in the sense of Gods dear, tender,
precious, most excellent love: stirring in thy heart, and there must thou end,
and rest satisfied, and lay thee down quiet in peace with Gods most dear Babes,
and tender innocent Lambs, unto whom thou cleavest as flesh to their bones,
toward whom thy bowels, thy bowels, thy tender bowels do unspeakably yearn,
with secret pantings in thy inward parts, through the weight of love that
abides in and upon thee, oh my soul, my soul, my soul.

William Bennit.

To Gods Lambs in Prison Greeting.
DEar Friends and suffering Lambs, shut up together in nasty holes; oh you dear
Suffering, Tribulated, Conscientious ones of the tender God of love, life and
power; I whom am your dear and tender Friend and Companion, in the pure
patience and long suffering of the Seed incorruptible, do most dearly greet
you, and entirely salute you, and sweetly embrace you, in the love of the Lord
your God, who has not only counted you worthy to believe in him the mighty
God; but dear ones, he has also counted you worthy to suffer for his holy name
sake, because of your Faithfulness, and for your Obedience unto his most sweet
excellent everlasting Truth; ah, dear Lambs, the witness hereof feel in your
selves, yea, I believe my dear Friends that you know, and feel the holy witness
of the holy God of holiness in your own hearts, bearing a true testimony to
your own souls; that your such confinment and sufferings is because of your
obedience to the Lord your compassionate God of infinite bowels; wherefore ye
Lambs, ye dear Lambs of the Lord God of power, in him be ye comforted in the
midst of your sufferings for him, and be refreshed in the midst of your
afflictions, and consolated in the midst of your tribulations, and be you
made glad, and rejoice in the midst of your trials; even in the midst of
all glorifying, praising and honoring your tender God, for his rich mercy
toward you, to be partakers of the sufferings of his seed: oh, my dear
Friends, my tender bowels, is at this time opened unto you, and my soul streams
with streams of love, of dear entire love toward you, which f^oweth forth in
the true sense and feeling, and simplicity that my soul has of your
sufferings: of which I partake in spirit, and in the sense of your
Faithfulness, my soul is refreshed, and bound thereby to praise your God, and
my God on your behalf.

Dear Lambs, I believe that the sweet comfortable presence of the Lord God
Almighty is with you, and does so accompany you, as that your cup of sufferings
is made sweet unto you, so as that you can drink it off with gladness; knowing
and seeing; that it is the will of the Lord to permit it to be given unto you,
whole will, and not your own, your innocent souls desire to do.

Ah, dearly beloved Friends; what shall I say unto you, that ye might thereby
be comforted, that my soul in the sense there of might be made glad; well dear
Babes; the fountain and fullness of everlasting joy and gladness, is the bosom
wherein you are to be wraped up, and to repose together for evermore, if you
keep the faith to the end. The streams whereof I know do often refresh your
souls, which overcomes you with its sweetness, and lifts you up above all your
sufferings, and even make hard things become easy unto you. ^lory, glory, and
pure praises (in spirit) be shouted out unto the mighty God of worm Jacob, the
everlasting Jehovah of Israel; unto whom dearly and beloved Friends, I commit
you all; most entirely and fervently desiring that he the only Lord, who is
your tender God, may for his own seeds sake minister to all your necessities,
and supply all your wants, and cause your strength, power, wisdom and love,
with pure patience, content and long suffering; in him to abound daily more and
more, Amen says my tender soul. So, dear ones, read and savor my love in the
Word, which is more precious then all words whatsoever; wherein dear Lambs,
repose together, and the milk thereof, dear Babes suck and be refreshed thereby.

Farewell dear Lambs, I am your dear Friend and Brother in the Lord. WILLIAM
BENIT.

To Friends in the Love of Truth Greeting.
MY dear and tender beloved Friends, in the love of God, and in his pure
precious everlasting Truth, whereof he has (in the freeness of his pure grace
and endless love) made us pertakers with the rest of his dear Babes and
Children; and whereof he has made us witnesses in our measures, in this his
blessed day spring from on high; which is come and coming, which is brook and
breaking forth in great glory: so that its brightness shall reach unto the
utmost dark corners of the Earth, even to the exstinguishing of the Night, and
to the expelling the darkness which has covered the Earth, and the gross
darkness which covered the People. Ah, dear hearts, the blessed beams of the
brightness of this blessed day spring from on high, has reached unto our
souls, which were once sealed up in the Darkness, under the shadow of the
Night; and has and does shine in our hearts, giving of us the true knowledge of
the true and living God, and thereby has guided our feet (out of the crooked
slippery paths of darkness wherein we once walked stumbling as the blind) into
the paths of peace, even into the path of the just, which as a shining light
shines more and more until the perfect day, for which the Lord, our dear and
tender God is worthy, worthy to receive pure living praises from the breath of
his own life in our souls; who is worthy that his own should praise him, for
its sacrifice is acceptable and pleasant unto him, who is God over all blessed
for evermore.

Dear hearts, in the true indearedness of the indeared love of the pure seed of
life eternal, does my soul dearly salute you, and embrace you in the bosom of
innocence; in the which ^he Lord (in measure has wrapped up my soul with ^our
souls, dear Lambs, and with the rest of his faithful Babes) as in a mantle;
wherein we are together, although absent from each other, and herein I rest and
repose with you, who am your real Friend and tender Brother, in the heavenly
relation which abides for ever.

William Bennit.

Dear Babes, dwell together in love, even in the pure innocent love of God
which thinks no evil, and therein bear with, and forbear, and forgive one
another; even in that which keeps in the lowly fear, and preserves in the true
humility, wherein none shall strive, except to be the most humblest and meekest
in mind, and herein is the unity of the faith, and the bond of peace known and
kept, which is exceeding comely amongst Brethren.


The 3 d month 1664.
To Friends of Truth.
MY dear Friends, in the pure tender bowels of the endless ^ternal fountain of
love, does my soul, dear Lambs, dearly and tendorly salute you all; most
indearedly and ferv^ntly desiring, that you may stand fast in the pure,
precious, everlasting truth of the Lord God; in it so to live, walk and abide,
as that you all keep your Garments clean and unspoted of the world, as pure
wise Virgins indeed, who follow the Lamb whither-soever he goes. Dear Babes,
hold fast your confidence in God, and let yout hope in him be steadfast and
constant, and in that Faith steadfastly abide; which has been, and is, and will
yet be your victory for ever, and crown of triumph eternally, if in it you
abide to the end.

Well, dear Lambs, I commend you unto the Lord God of everlasting strength and
power, by him to be upheld and supported and carried through whatsoever trials
and sufferings you do or may meet withal, either outwardly or inwardly; and by
his power to be preserved sincere, upright and faithful to him in your
measures, unto the end of your pilgrimage here; that so a noble, faithful,
clear Testimony, you may bear for the Lord in this his day, to the praise of
his glorious name, which is blessed for evermore. So the sweet, precious,
refreshing, consolating, inlivening, strengthening, quickening, pure presence of
the Lord God of Light, of Life, Love and Wisdom, be with you, in you, and among
you all; even to the daily glading of your hearts, and refreshing of your
souls, and to the girding up of your loins with courage, patience, strength
and boldness; in the God of your hope, to stand unto the end, Amen says my
soul. So dear Babes feel my love, in the innocent life of God; and therein
dwell together, and I am with you; and therein I rest and remain, your dear
Friend and tender Brother.

The 6th month 1664. William Bennit.

To Friends of Truth in Prison.
Dear Friends.

AH ye dear suffering Lambs, who are in outward bonds for the Lord, his Truth
and Namesake, shut up and separated from your dear Friends and nearest
Relations, because of your keeping your Consciences, void of offense toward
the Lord God: dear Hearts, your cause is good for which you suffer, and the
Lord God who is engaged for you, whom you love, and do manifest it unto the
world, through your willingness to suffer for him (rather then to do that which
you know is contrary unto his will; or forbear doing of that which he wills
you to do) well he will stand by you, and will not leave you in the time of
your need; of his helping upholding power, as you abide Faithful unto him, in
whose just cause you are engaged, and he will fully plead it, with his and your
Adversaries, in his own time, to your joy and their torment, except they
repent. Dear Lambs, my heart is even made glad, and my soul it does rejoice,
because of your Faithfulness to the Lord, in bearing your Testimony for his
Name: Ah, the Lord God Almighty keep you faithful unto the end, that so you may
not faint, nor grow weary, before your Testimony for the Lord be finished; that
so you may not fall short of the Crown, which is laid up for you if ye abide to
the end, even a full recompense of reward for all your sufferings and
afflictions, you do or may meet with for your faithfulness unto him the living
God; in whose pure bowels, of most indeared, entire, unfeigned love, does my
soul very dearly salute you, dear hearts; unto whom I commend you, whose pure,
quickening, holy, heavenly presence, I desire may be abundantly with you daily,
for the keeping of you all in pure patience and contentedness, and in a true
submission to his heavenly will, that his joy, comfort and consolation, and
sweet peace may abound in and unto your souls; to the bearing of you up above
all trials that you do meet withal, that you may not sink under them, and that
over the temptations of your Adversaries within and without, you may Reign and
be made more then Conquerers, through the Lord who has loved you, and counted
you worthy to believe in his Name and Truth, and to suffer for the same. Oh,
the Lord my God, even your dear and tender God, keep you low in his holy fear,
and very watchful and diligent in his pure Light, having your minds exercised
therein, and girded thereby unto the Lord; that so indeed, dear Hearts, you may
learn much by these your trials and sufferings, even to your comfort and joy in
God, feeling indeed that the Lord does cause these your sufferings to work
together for your good, that so you indeed, dear Lambs, may find cause thereby,
the more to praise and glorify the name of the Lord, and to make mention of
his goodness and mercies, and to magnify his name in the land of the living;
unto whom be glory and praise for ever and evermore.

Dear Lambs, receive these few lines, as a token of the true love of my soul to
you in the Lord; in whom my love is right dear unto all his faithful ones.

Farewell, dear Friends, in the Lord, in whose innocent life, I am your Friend
and Companion, in the patience and long suffering of the Lamb.

Norwich Castle the 7th month 1664. William Bennit.

To the s^ffering Lambs, of the Lords Flock in Prison Greeting.
DEar suffering tribulated Lambs of my Maker; ah dearly beloved Friends, the
tender unfeigned salutation of my soul reaches unto you, in the unchangable
Love, of the unchangable Truth, of the living unchangable God; whereof he has
made us pertakers, and of which he has made us witnesses, and for which he
has (through his love his constraining, overcoming, powerful Love) made us
willing to suffer, and to part with, and be separated from our dea^^st F^^ends
and near^st Relations; and to be willing to endure, and ^o pass through what
ever sufferings the Lord our God shall permit to be infflicted upon us, rather
then (for any by ^^ds and self-in^^^^st) to condecend to do that thing
willingly, which we know ^ould cause Gods Truth to suffer, his holy Name to be
dishonored, his holy Spirit to be grieved, and our Consciences to be defiled
thereby; ah in this frame of spirit and free given up state, the Lord God of
power keep us by his power (with the rest of his dear innocent suffering Lambs
elsewhere) for his own namesake, even unto the end, until our Testimony for
the Lord, which he in his beloved Son has counted us worthy to bear, in this
his day, be finished to the praise glory and renown of his holy powerful name,
and to the everlasting Joy, and eternal Peace of our immortal souls, Amen,
says my soul, which does fervently desire, dear suffering Lambs, that the holy
living presence of my God, may be in, with, and amongst you all, to your Joy
and Comfort, and that his power may uphold you, and that his strength may
support you, and keep up your heads above all your sufferings and trials; that
so none may grow weary nor faint in your minds, but you may be made strong in
the Lord, and be able in the power of his might, to resist, thresh, hammer and
beat down every thought, and all carnal reasonings and fleshly consultings,
that your Enemy and Adversary in your own hearts would infuse into your minds;
which indeed if entertained, how soon may they who are strong thereby become
weak, and they who witness freedom be brought again into bondage, and be again
caught in the Serpents snares, ho is exceeding busy within, as well as without
seeking daily whom he may devour and betray of the simplicity of truth, and
draw back again unto himself? Dear Lambs, you are in measure acquainted with
his subtilty, yea, blessed be the Lord who has opened your eyes, and you see
him and his temptations, and crafty allurements; and not only so, but you know
how to escape them, so as not to be overcome by t^em, but resist them, and
overcome him and his temptations, through the strength of the Lord, who has
called and redeemed you from under his power; yet not withstanding, my dear
Friends, let me say unto you, in the brotherly love, and tenderness of my soul,
watch and keep close unto the Lord in your own hearts, that unto him you may be
kept faithful unto the very end; who will make way for your deliverance, in his
own time and season, and he will plead your righteous cause with his and your
Adversaries, in his season, to your Joy, and their Sorrow.

Wh^^efore wholely commit your cause unto the Lord your God, who watches over
you, and cares for you, and will never leave you, but will stand by you, and
help you in the needful time; even all you whose trust and hope is in him
alone, and can use no other weapon to plead your cause with but the ^^rd of his
mouth.

So dear Lambs, in the pure patience and long suffering of the Lamb (our
Captain and Leader, and Example, that meek one, who says, love Enemies)
possess your souls, and rest in stilness and peace, and quietness and
contentedness in the Ark of safety, which the Lord has prepared for his
Family, to bear them up above the floods, until the waters abate, and dry land
appear.

So the Lord be with you all* and bundle you up together in his innocent love
which thinks no evil; therein to serve him with your whole hearts, and one an
other with all selfdenial; none to strive except to be most me^k^st and low^st
in mind, so that you all way be tender affectionated one toward another,
forgiving and f^rbearing one another in love; the st^o^g bear^ng with the
infirmities of the weak, that even as dear Children of one Father, you may
dwell together in peace, and in pure unity in the spirit of holiness, that a
Joy and a Comfort you may ^e to each other in the Lord, upon whom, dear Lambs,
wait together very diligently, that of his fullness, you may all receive, who is
ready bountifully to minister, that of himself unto all his tender Lambs and
breathing Babes, who wait upon him, which he sees is meet for them even to
their daily nourishment joy comfort and re^reshment.

So in the pure bowels, and tender everlasting love of the tender God of
compassion; does my soul dearly salute you all, who loves the Lord uprightly,
and who make mention of his name in sincerity and truth, and are willing to
suffer for the same, whether you be in bonds or out of bonds, my love reaches
unto all the upright in heart; Farewell dear Lambs.

From your Friend and Companion in the patience and long suffering of the Lamb,
who has, must and shall have the victory over all his Enemies, to Triumph and
Reign in Dominion Eternally.

Norwich Castle 29th of the 7th Month 1664. William Bennit.

This to go among Friends of Truth, to be read am^ng ^h^m when assembled
together in the pure fear and dread of the most H^gh God.
DEarly and tenderly beloved Friends, the dear and tender unfeigned salutation
of my tender soul, re^ch^^h unto you all, who loves the Lord and his T^u^h
with your whole hearts; and who make mention of his holy name in sincerity and
truth; even in the meek, render, lowly, holy seed of eternal life, made
manifest, quickened, and in measure raised up in my soul, even in this inn^cen^
seed of immortallity does the love of ^y soul extend toward you all; and I
very dearly desire your prosperity and ^ranquility therein, even as I do ^esire
for my own soul, and tha^ this lowly holy seed, and meek innocent life o^ Jesus
may daily spring grow up and flourish in every particular soul of you all; that
so, though it was once the lest of all Seeds in you (even as a little grain of
Musterd-Seed hid in the Earth) it may become the greatest the highest and
strongest of all things in you; over-povvering you and over-shadowing you, that
so unto you it may become a pleasant Bower of spices, and as a sweet smelling
savor, that you may even joy to sit under its shadow, even with great delight,
and its fruit be exceeding sweet to your taste.

Ah Babes, therein is Peace to be enjoyed, which is Eternal, which passes all
Understanding; therein is Joy unspeakable and full of glory to be enjoined;
therein is Blessedness, which is everlasting; Happiness, which is endless, to
be enjoyed, out of it there is none; Ah Lambs, therein is Power to be received,
whereby to overcome him who has the power of Death (to wit the Devil) and to
break his Head, and withstand all his Temptations, and strong Assaults, and
various Alurements, and many Inticements; and power therein to withstand,
thresh, hammer and beat down all those Thoughts, Reasonings and Carnal Fleshly
Consultations, which he (your greatest Enemy) would infuse into your Minds, and
raise up in your Hearts, whereby to disturb and break your Peace, and raise
Trouble, and Tumults, and Insurections in your Minds; that so Faintness and
Weariness might come upon you, and he (your subtle Enemy) might thereby gain
upon you, and get advantage of you, and obtain his purpose and desire, who
indeed (as a roaring, raging devouring Lion) very eagerly seeks (in this day of
great trial) whom he may Devour, and draw back again under his yoke of Bondage,
Thraldom, and Slavery.

Wherefore, dear tender Lambs, in the Seed, the Fold, out of which he is shut
forever, in which he has no part, daily dwell, and continually abide; then out
of the paw of the Devourer you shall be kept, by him that good Shepherd, who
lays down his Life for his Sheep, and leaves them not when the Woolf comes
to destroy them; but he preserves his Sheep and his Lambs, and hides them as
in the hollow of his hand.

Ah how Tender, how Careful, how Pitiful, how Merciful, how Kind, how Loving,
how Forbearing, how Forgiving, how Long-Suffering, how Patient, how Meek, how
Humble and Compassionate, is the Nature of the tender God of infi^ite bowels.

Ah dear Babes, let me say unto all, wait to feel and witness the nature of
Emanuel, even the meek Life of Jesus to rule and dwell in you daily, and you to
dwell and live daily in it.

Ah his pure leaven of Life Eternal, oh how does it work out the leaven of
Death and Darkness, Malice and Enmity, and purges out every hard thought, and
all evil surmisings, evil back-bitings and whisperings (which does proceed from
the old leaven, and are the fruits of that corrupt tree which is a^cursed by
the Lord, and is to be hewn down, and with all its fruits cast into the fire
forever to be consumed) and pu^te^^ out the Eye which would be watching for
Evil, and for the halting of others, and to spy out their weakness, and to
tel^ it abroad to their shame; oh how does it oppose and hammer down that mind
that would be great, and esteemed of by men, and would exercise Lordship over
others.

Oh how does it baptize self into the Death, and b^ing down the Haughty to the
Dust, and boweth down the Lofty, and ra^seth up and brings forth a Birth,
which striveth not for mastery, except to be most meekest and lowest in Heart
and Mind; and to abound in Pity, in Love, in Tenderness, in ^owels of
Compassion, in Patience, in Gentleness, in long-Suffering, in ^orbearing, and
in Brotherly Kindness, yea in all the virtuous Fruits of the nature of him who
is meek and low in Heart, who said, love Enemies; this Birth has a hand ready
to stretch forth unto the backward, to draw them forwards; it has an arm ready
to help to hold up the halting, and bosom open to carry the weak and faint ones
in; oh it would, I know, be a help to all who stand in need of help, it would
not that any should be left behind the Camp, who are willing to press forwards,
although they may linger behind, by reason of their Halting and Lameness; oh
how has it a garment ready to cover an others weakness, it never overchargeth
any, it judges not any thing before the time appointed, it is not Hasty nor
Rash, but Patient and Gentle, and it has a convincing restoring virtue with it
in all it does, so that it both Wounds and Heals, Kill and maks a Live, brings
down and raises up, lay desolate, build and restore, it is tender and gentle,
it breaks not the bruised Reed, neither does it quench the smoking Flax, it
never renders Evil for Evil, but overcomes the Evil with Good; its Patience
overcomes Fury, its Love quenches Enmity, its Gentleness overcomes Rashness,
and its Meekness overcomes Haughtiness; and in all it Suffers it seeks no
Revenge, but bears all things Patiently; committing its Cause unto him who
judges Rightly; it loves Enemies, it bears love and good will unto all men,
yet it has no uni^y with any Uncleanness, nor fellowship with the unfruitful
works of Darkness in any, but rather reproves them.

This is not the Birth born of Flesh, nor of Blood, nor of the will of man, but
the Birth born of God, and this Birth shall outlive all false Births and
likenesses, and unto it must all bow an^ become subject, this Birth God will
crown with Honor and Renown, and beautify with Glory and Praise; and although
it has been trodden under foot and despised by other false Births, yet unto it
they must all bow, and throw down their Crowns at thy feet, oh Zion.

Ah the Lord, thy Husband, thy Maker, the God of Host is his Name, has
determined that the days of thy Mourning shall pass away, and the night of thy
Sorrow shall for ever vanish, and thou shall no more be termed Desolate, and
Forsaken; oh thy Winter shall be over and gone, and thy Summer shall come, and
thy Fruitfulness shall appear; Oh Zion, thou shall appear as a Royal Diadim in
the hand of the Lord, and as a Crown of Glory in the hand of thy God; who will
make thee the Beauty of Nations, the Joy of Kingdoms, yea the Glory of the
whole Earth, and a Praise therein forever, amen says my soul. Oh hasten it,
hasten it, Lord God Almighty, that so the Mourners in thy Zion may be
Comforted, and the Hated be made right glad; that so even her waste places may
Rejoice, and her Deserts blosom as a Rose; that her Wilderness may become as
the Garden of Eden, and her Deserts as the Garden of the Lord; that so Joy and
Gladness may alone be found in her, Thanksgiving and the voice of Melody; that
so even Water may come forth of the Wilderness, and spring in the Desert; that
the parched Ground may even become a Pool, and dry Heaths streams of Water.

Ah, when the Lord has wholly gathered together in one the disperced of Judah,
and has brought into one, the scattered of Israel, and has thoroughly returned
the Captivity of his People; oh then surely Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel be
right glad, and glory in his God, who is blessed forever and evermore.

And so, dearly beloved Friends, my soul has daily a remembrance of you in and
unto the Lord, unto whom I leave you, dear Lambs, very dearly desiring that
unto him you all (who has in measure tasted of his Love, and of his pure
precious Truth are made partakers, and thereunto have born witness, in doing
and suffering for the same) may by him be kept faithful unto him, even unto the
very end; that so the Testimony which he has given you to bear for his Name
and Truth (in this his day of sifting, winowing, purging, purifying, and of
separating the Chaff from the Wheat, and of making up his precious Jewels, and
of manifesting the approved in his sight) you may through the strength and
mighty power of him the mighty God (who has c^lled you and raised you up to
war against Babylon, and no more to touch, but to bear witness against the
unclean thing) be enabled to finish your Testimony for him (although it be with
your Blood) even to the Praise, Glory and Renown of his eternal powerful Name,
and to your endless Joy, and everlasting Peace in him, your tender God, in
whose pure, tender and unseigned Love does my soul kiss you, embrace you, clasp
you about, saying in spirit, Oh the Lord, the mighty God, gird up your Loins
with Courage, Strength and Valor daily, and spead over you all the mantle of
Faithfulness, and keep you all in the pure patience, and sweet contentedness,
and in true submission to his holy heavenly will, which is your Sanctification,
whose will may be done in you all; that indeed the Power, the Glory, the
Kingdom, and Dominion may be his, and he alone may Reign in you, whose right of
due it is, who was Dead, and is a Live, and lives forever and evermore, unto
whom be glory in the highest for evermore, Amen

Oh, the holy living presence of the Living God of Holiness, be in, with and
among you all; in whose Love, Life and Truth, in my measure, my soul is united,
and closely cleaves to all the Children of the most high God, and they are
very dear unto the soul of him, who is your Friend, Brother and Companion, in
the innocent Love and Life of God, over all blessed for evermore; farewell dear
Lambs.

It Is 1665. William Bennit

Dear Friend,
IN that which is Eternal and unchangable, does the unfeigned Salutation and
tender Love of my Soul extend toward thee, who art often in the remembrance of
my Soul, which is in some measure sensible of the many Troubles, Crosses and
Trials, which thou have been in, and now art exercised with; and truly, dear
Heart, my soul desires that the Lord may enable thee to wade through them all,
in the pure Patience and true Contentedness, and that thou may find the
strong arm of Gods mighty power in the beating down, and keeping under that
part, which would complain and murmur against the Lord, and count him a hard
Master, and freet its self because the Wicked Flourish, and the Ungodly spread
themselves like a green ^ay-Tree, and the workers of Iniquity are set up, ^n^
^^e P^oud Lord it over the Meek of the Earth, and ^^ea^ upon the Righteous as
Di^t in the Streets, and Killed all the day (...) and Oppressed like a Cart
with Sheaves; I say needful it is to feel that part (which would freet it self
because of th^se things) chained down by the Meek, Lowly, Lamb like, Patient,
Peaceable Spirit of the patient, pitiful, long-suffe^ing God of Forbearance and
Mercy; and to feel it curting and beating all Prejudice and Enmity, that would
be springing up from the murmuring fretting part, against those who are
^^struments of Iniquity, and Servants to that Spirit, that Persecutes and
Oppress the Innocent, and behold this Spirit of meekness keeps in coolness,
gentleness and patience, and gi^^^h dominion over that Spirit which in haste
(yet as it th^n^s in a Zeal for God) cries for Fire to come down from Heav^n to
devour those who are Instruments of Cruelty, Iniquity, and Oppression; and
indeed this Spirit of Love inableth to love Enemies, to Bless and Curse not,
and seeks no Revenge, but makes willing to leave all to the Lord, unto whom,
dear Heart, let us commit our Cause, and sure I am, he will plead it with his
and our Enemies, in his own time even to their Destruction and Calamity, and to
our Joy and Comfort in the end; in the mean while, the Lord keep us in
contentedness, and in dominion over that Spirit that would limit God to man's
time, and counts that God is slack concerning his Promise, who indeed is not
slack, as that Siprit counts slackness, but is a God long suffering, desiring
not the Death nor Destruction of a Sinner, but that rather he may repent and
Live Oh that all those that profess his Name may be like-minded with him,
according to our measures, and growth in him the Living God, who is blessed
forevermore.

My dear tender hearted Friend, my Soul does likewise desire fervently that
thee and I, and all the rest of our heavenly Fathers Family, may be kept close
unto the measure of the free grace and love of the Lord God in our own hearts,
that by it we may continually be kep^ in the lowly fear, and pure aw of him,
who has called us out of Darkness into his marvelous Light, wherein let us
watch carefully over our Thoughts, Words and Works, lest in haste, through
carelessness, for want of watchfulness, we should speak or do any thing that may
grieve the holy Seed, and wound the Just one in our selves, and bring a burden
and load upon our own Souls; wherefore dear Heart, I cannot but desire, that I
with thee, and all who love Righteousness, may be kept watchful in the ^^wly
Fear, close unto the grace that keeps humble, out of the many words, in the
fewness of words, that so in sweet stilness, peace and quietness we may possess
our sou^^, and enjoy the sweet incomes of the sweet Love, and sweet pure
refreshing streams of the Fountain of Life according to our measures; that so
even in the midst of our Trials and Sufferings, our he^rts may be made glad in
the Lord, and our souls may rejoice in him over all the Rage and Cruelty of the
Wicked; that we may keep our standing on the Rock, against which Gog and Magog,
and the whole Host of the powers of Darkness is not able to prevail; and herein
the Lord keep us, says my soul, for evermore.

So dear Heart, I leave thee unto the Lord, in whom my Love is dear unto thee,
and my Soul simpathize with thee in thy Trials and Sufferings, and desire the
Lord may bear thee up above them all, in the bosom of his Love and Patience,
and minister daily unto thee what he knows is meet for thee, and keep thee in
a contentedness with his heavenly will, that so thou may say with thy whole
heart, Lord, not my will, but thy will be done, and submitted unto in all
things, whose will is our Sanctification.

So, dear tender Heart, in the innocent Love which drew me forth to write these
lines unto thee, I rest and remain thy dear Friend in the Truth. William Bennit.
1665.
To the Magistrates of Edmonds-Bury. Friends, I hope your Nobillity and
Moderation will be so far made manifest, as to read over these following Lines
with Patience; and I desire you may Seriously consider of them, and Sollidly to
weigh them in that equal Balance, the Light of Christ in your Consciences,
before you Judge of them.
WE whom the World in scorn call Quakers, are a People that lives in the pure
fear of the Lord God, and without boasting we can truly say, we are a People
who are led and guided by a peaceable Principle of Love, which we have received
of God, who is the Fountain of Love, by which Principle of Love we are made to
live peaceable with all men, as much as in us lies, and fervenly to desire and
seek the good and welfare of all People, even from him who sits upon the
earthly Throne, unto the most Inferior in the Kingdom, and by this Principle of
Love in our own hearts, which is of God, we are made to bear Love and Good will
toward all people, and by it we are taught to loy Enemies, to Bless and Curse
not, to Pray for them who De spitefully uses us, and to do Good to them that
Beats us* and not in the least to render Evil for Evil, but endeavor to,
overcome (in our selves and others) Evil with Good, and by it we are preserved
from joining with the spirit of Envy, and from being led by the spirit of
Revenge, which rules in many, and leads into secret Plottings, and evil
Contrivances, by way of Conspiring to raise Tumult and Insurrection, which
spirit (with all its fruits) we deny and judge, and all those who are led by it
to Contrive and Plot against any, or to seek the Destruction of any people,
though our Enemies; such we disown, and their actions we defy, the Lord is our
witness.

And by the Principle of Love in our hearts, are our Consciences made very
tender to Godward, insomuch as that we would not willingly and knowingly sin
against him, and are willing rather to suffer the loss of all External things,
yea even Life and all, then to break our peace with God, which we value more
then ten thousand Worlds; and because we endeavor (in the strength and power
of the principle of love in our hearts) to keep our Consciences void of offense
toward God; and because we dare not do those things (though they be set up by
men, and tolerated and compelled to be done by a Law) which we are persuaded
by the unerring spirit of Truth we ought not to do, neither join with any
therein; and because we dare not forbear doing those things (though prohibited
by the Laws of men there from) which we are persuaded by the spirit of Truth is
our duty (toward God) to do and perform; therefore are we a suffering People
this day, and for no other Cause, the Lord is our witness to the truth hereof.

And ever since the Lord our dear and tender God (who alone has been, and now
is our Helper, Strength and Refuge, and has stood by us, and supported, and
preserved us, or else we had not been a People at this day) did raise us up to
be a People, for to bear witness to his Way and Truth (and against the false
Ways, evil Works, false Worships, Idolatry, Sin and Wickedness of the World) we
have been a suffering People, and all along we have suffered by every Power
that has come up to Rule, and all along we have suffered for only our
Consciences toward God; and if our Enemies have had no Law in force against
us, neither could find any thing on our parts, whereby they might take a just
occasion against us; then have they (as Daniel's Persecutors did against him,
who sought his Destruction without a Cause given them by him) even made Laws on
purpose to Ensnare us, and Trappan us concerning our Conscience toward God,
for which we did suffer by the other Rulers, even many ways, viz. by Stocking,
Stoning, cruel Whipping, Railing, Reviling and cruel Abuses; even Imprisonment
until Death, and spoiling of Goods in a more abundant manner then I can relate;
and all has been for our Consciences to God, all which we have born, and waded
through in Patience, through the strength of the upholding merciful Arm of our
God, and by him have been kept from seeking Revenge upon our Enemies, but have
committed our Cause to God, who Judges Righteously, and Justifies those whom
men Condemn, unto whom alone Vengence belongs, and he will repay it, who will
render unto man according to his Works.

And even at this day, our Sufferings are greater then before, and now are we
even as Sheep appointed for the Slaughter* and all is because we endeavor to
keep our Consciences void of offense toward God; and because we dare not join
with that Idolatrous Worship which God abhors, but must, as moved of the Lord,
rather bear Testimony against Idolatrous Worships and Worshippers, whatever
we suffer.

And because we dare not Swore at all, knovving if we should Svvear at all,
we should then transgress the Commands of Christ, Matthew Chaper 5. Verse 34,
etc. James Chapter 5. Verse 5, etc.

And because we follovv the practices of the Primitive Christians, and dear
not forsake the Assembling of our selves together, but must as we are taught
of the Lord meet together, in the pure fear and dread of the Name of the
Almighty God, even for no other end (the Lord who knovveth the secrets of all
hearts is our vvitness) but to Wait upon the Lord, and to Pray to the Lord, and
to Build up, Strengthen and Edify one another in the Lord, and to Serve and
Worship God in Spirit and in Truth, wherein God, who is a Spirit, is only
Worshipped aright, by his Spirituallized people, who are born of the Spirit,
and guided and led by the Spirit of Truth into all Truth.

And it is not in Rebellion and Contempt to King Charles and his Laws, that
we meet together to worship God, neither do we do it in a Cross, Stubborn,
Self-vvill, as by some we are charged, the Lord is our vvitness, but even in a
Cross to our own wills, and in Obedience to the will of God; where fore we
have peace in the Lord, for whose sake we suffer and stand justified in the
sight of God, though by Men and their Laws counted Transgressors.

Now Friends, as your Moderation in measure has appeared (in this day of hot
Persecution and has been manifested heretofore, toward the Lords tender
Conscientious people in this Town, which I believe the Lord has taken notice
of, who has regard unto those who have respect to his people; and truly it is
my Souls desire, even for your own good, that your Moderation toward the
people of God called Quakers, or any other people whose Consciences are tender
to God-vvard, may continue still and increase more and more, so as that ye
might not in the lest degree have a hand any more in the Sufferings of the
Innocent, but might rather choose, as meek Moses did, to suffer Affliction with
the Suffering, Abused, Tribulated, Afflicted People of God, then to be found
Prosecutors of any unjust Law against them; for indeed, happy (in that
particular) is the man that has no hand in the sufferings of the Lords people,
for sure I am the Lord God has regard unto his people, though disregarded by
such as know not God nor his People; and though Hated and Persecuted by the
World, yet Loved of the Lord, and very dear unto him; and though Contemptible,
Ridiculous and Absurd in the eyes of the wisemen of this World, yet Beautiful,
Comely, Delectable and Precious in the eyes of the Lord; and what evil any do
to them because of their Consciences toward God, the Lord takes it as done
unto himself; and if one day it shall be said to those who did not Feed, Cloth
and Visit the Lords tender ones in Prison, Go ye Cursed into Hell Fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels; then surely sad will be the Sentence of
those who (through their Cruelty) go about to deprive them of Food and Raiment,
and instead of visiting them in Prison, does unjustly cast them into Prison,
and hinder them that would visit them.

Oh surely, the Lord God of Pity, of Mercy, of Compassion, and endless Love,
has seen the sufferings of his People in this Nation; and has taken
Cognizance of their sore Afflictions, and Tribulations, Burdens, and grievous
Oppressions, under which they have long Groaned, whose Groans are come up
before the Throne of the most high, and is entered into the Ears of their
Compassionate God, and he is moved with infinite bowels of Love toward his
suffering Seed, and he will plead the Cause of his own Elect which have long
Cried unto him; whose Cries he the Living God has heard, whose Cries he the
Almighty God will answer, and will revenge their Cause upon the head of their
Persecutors, and will Oppress the Oppressors, and Devour the Devourers of his
People, even as Stubble before the Fire fully dry; and they shall not be able
to escape the stroke of his Righteous Judgment, which he has now begun to
make manifest in the Earth, that the Inhabitants thereof might learn
Righteousness; and the Beesom of his Wrath is cleansing the Land of Evil Doers;
and many of those who desired, and endeavored, to have Banished the peoof the
Lord from their native Country and lawful Habitations; such the Lord has
^anished from their Houses, and they have fled from their Habitations, and run
from his Righteous Judgments, but whether can man fly to hide himself from the
Lord; and so that measure they meted out to others, is moted to them again, and
this is just with the Lord, who is equal in all his Doings, and just in all his
Ways, and he will not be mocked by any; but such as People Sow, such must they
Reap; and according to their Deeds, they must receive a reward.

Wherefore Friends, so far as ye have a hand in the Sufferings of the Innocent,
you have cause to Repent thereof, and to ease the Burdened, and to set the
Imprisoned and the Oppressed Free; and as you tender and respect the good of
your Souls, and desire to be tendered and respected by the Lord, so tender the
Lords tender people, and do not in any wise usurp authority over their
Consciences, for that is Christ's seat, and the Magistrates Sword is not to rule
there, but only Christ the power of God, who makes the Conscience, he alone is
to rule in and over the Conscience; and Friends to the Light in your own
Consciences, come and be obedient thereunto, and it will cause you to do unto
all men as you would be done unto, and in the Light you must come to believe,
hearked to it, follow and obey it, before your Souls can enjoy true peace with
the Lord; and by it be enabled to deny all Ungodliness and Worldly Lust; and by
it to be taught to Live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present World;
and to lay your Sword upon evil doers, and to be a praise to them that do well;
and rather to tolerate, such and to defend them in the exercise of their
Consciences toward God, in meeting together in his pure fear, to Serve and
Worship him, then to suppress them: And to exercise your power in breaking up
their meetings, who meet to Drink, Swear, Rant, Tear and Devour the good
Creatures of God upon their filthy ungodly Lust, even to the great dishonor of
the Lord, and to the grieving of his holy righteous Spirit; suppress such, for
that is the Magistrates work; but as for those who fears the Lord, and lives
Peaceably and Honestly with all men, let such have free liberty to serve the
Lord in his own Way, and worship him in his own Spirit, and not to be compelled
to a Dead, Dark, Invented, Superstitious Worship which is not of God; and then
will the blessings of the Lord my God, be powered down upon you, and a good
savor ye will be unto those that fear the Lord, from whom ye will be worthy of
double Honor.

And Friends, I understand that it is the desire, if not the intent of some of
ye Rulers in this Town, to proceed against me unto Banishment, who am an
innocent man and have done you no wrong, neither have I committed any thing
against you, or any just Law worthy of Bounds, much less of B^nishment; neither
have I, in this County, been thrice Convicted by your Law, as an offender; and
I would know whether those Records made by Justices, who are only
Commissionated, for Norfolk, be good evidence in Suffolk, where those Justices
themselves have no power, seeing the Law says, that all offenses (other then
Treason) shall be Inquired, Heard and Determined in the Shire, Division, Limit
and Liberty where such offenses happen, as was Inacted in the third year of
King James, see Chapter the fourth. Well I am not careful in this matter,
touching my own particular, only I would not have you hasty in what you intend
toward me, but seriously to weigh the matter, in that equal balance, the Word
of God; and take heed what you do, and hurt not your own Souls, and sin not
against the Lord, and then sure I am you cannot hurt me; Wherefore be wise, oh
ye Rulers, and be instructed ye Judges of the People; touch not the Lords
Anointed, neither do his Prophets any harm; and let not Envy and Prejudice
blind your Minds, nor cloud the nobility of your Understandings, and take heed
of engaging the Lord more and more against you and your Town; consider the Lord
has hitherto spared you and your Town, from the Woe, Sorrow, Misery, Distress,
and Calamity which is come upon many other places; and if you desire the Lord
should still spare you and your Town, then do you spare those who fear the Lord
in your Town, and free them from their causeless Imprisonments, and do not
Afflict them, lest thereby you hasten the just Judgments of the Lord God upon
you and your Town, which is even at hand. Well, my soul in the Lord is at rest
and in quietness, free from fearing the threatenings of men, who are not able to
Banish me from the presence of my God, who is with me, and with all who fears
his Name, who will work the deliverance of his people from their Sufferings,
Burdens and grievous Oppressions in his own time and season, and will so far
preserve them as that they shall be a People when the Egyptians shall he dead
upon the Seashore of his Righteous Judgments; the Lord has spoken it, in whom
is my Joy and Peace, Refreshment and Comfort in the midst of my Sufferings, who
will never leave me, if I leave not him, for whose Cause (for which I now
suffer by you) I count not my Life too dear to part with, for the Testimony of
my God, in whom is my Confidence, Trust and Hope, who has formed me for his
praise, whose I am, and unto you my Conscience I have cleared, and whether ye
will hear or forbear I am clear of your Blood, who am a Friend to your Souls
and Bodies, and desire the welfare of both, and am one who loves righteous
Government and Governors, who are for the punishment of evil doers and for the
praise of them that do well; and such Rulers I truly honor in my heart, though
not with the vain custom of the Hat, neither with the deceitful flattering
titles of this World.

This is from a true lover of your Souls, who des^reth your everlasting welfare
and tranquillity in the Lord, who is a Sufferer by you, but not for evil doing,
but for doing well; the Lord is his witness that this is true, whose Servant he
is, whatever he be (by you or any) accounted of.

Edmonds-Bury common Goal this 8th. Month 1665. William Bennit.

To Friends of Truth in the Town of Colehester Greeting.
DEarly beloved Friends and Brethren, who have tasted of the love and goodness
^f the Lord, and of the sweetness and pretiousness of his unchangable Truth,
the virtuous workings and powerful opperations whereof you have felt in your
hearts, whereby you witness and experience in measure your Souls set at liberty
from the bondage of Sin and Corruption, to serve the living God in holiness of
Life, to the praise of your God, who has raised you out of the dust by his
Power, and quickened you by his Life, and formed you by his own Wisdom, and
given you his good Spirit to guide and lead you, teach and counsel you, comfort
and refresh you, oh, he has given you a taste of the Word of Life, and power
of the World to come; oh, he has living Witnesses of his Name and Truth
whereof you are made partakers, and that which you have seen and known, felt
and tasted of, the same you have through the strength of the Lord born
Testimony unto, even by Word, by Deed, by Life and Conversation, and through
great Sufferings, manifold Tribulations and Afflictions, all which the Lord
your tender God has enabled you to wade through, and has kept you from
fainting unto this day; who has been with you in six Troubles, and in the
seventh, dear Babes, he has not left you, but in all your Afflictions for his
Namesake he has been afflicted with you, and the Angel of his presence has
been your defense on the right hand and on the left; oh, how has he carried
you in his tender Bosom, and born you up in his Arms, and lead you gently when
you were Weak, Young and Tender, and made the Crooked strait, and the Rough
smooth before you, and thrown down many a high Mountain before you, and removed
many a lofty Hill out of your way; who has made a way for you in the
Wilderness, and a path through many a Thickit, and has made the hard things
easy; he has been a Shelter to you from the Heat, and a Refuge to you from
the Storm, and many a time has been unto your Souls as the shadow of a Rook in
a weary Land; who has given you Bread when you were Hungry, and Water to
satisfy your Thirst; who Strengthened you when you were Weak, and Enriched you
when you were Poor; who Healed you when you were Wounded, and Bound you up when
you were broken to Pieces; who Comforted you in the midst of Sorrow, and has
Refreshed you when you have been heavy hearted, and lifted up your heads when
they were bowed down because of the Oppression of your Enemies: Oh, how
exceeding large is the love of the Lord your tender compassionate God of
endless bowels of tenderness; oh, your own experience of his Love, his Mercy,
his Pity, his Compassion, his Goodness, his Kindness and his Tender Fatherly
Care and Dealings toward you is much larger then what I can demonstrate with
words; oh, how can you then but still trust in his Name, rely upon his Arm, and
depend upon his saving Health, and hope in his tender Bowels, who is the same
yesterday to day and for evermore; who has been with you when Trouble has
compassed you round, to keep you from Despair; and with you in the midst of
Perplexity, to keep you from being Distressed; and with you in the midst of
Persecution, to Sucker and Cherish you, and refresh your hearts as with New
Wine; and oh surely, dear Babes, he is with you still, to Comfort you still, to
Refresh you still, to Feed and Nourish you still, to Strengthen you still, to
Uphold and Support you still, to Keep and Defend you; and surely he will never
leave you nor forsake you, if you forsake him not, but will cleave unto you, as
you cleave unto him, and will still be your God, and you shall be his People
still, and rest in him for ever when in this World you shall be no more.

Oh, dear Friends, my soul loves you, wherefore I cannot forget you, but often
remember you, especially since the Lord has been pleased to visit that place
with such fore Affliction, and to give it to drink so deeply of the Cup of his
Righteous Judgments, and oh my soul desires that the Lord may keep and hide
your Souls in the hollow of his hand, whatever Affliction he suffers to come
upon your Bodies; and oh that he may enable you to wade through all, and to
bear all with Patience and Contentedness, and think not any of you the Lord
cares not for you, or that he dis-regards you, ^ecau^e he does or may permit
the Beesom of his Righteous Ju^gements, (which he has sent forth to sweep away
the Wicked) to sweep away many of your Bodies from off the Earth, neither
murmur against the Lord, who may do what pleases him, and yet all his doings
are Equal and Righteous altogether; and how strange soever his doings appear to
the carnal reasoning fleshly part, yet assuredly he intends good in all his
deallings toward all the honest, simple, innocent upright hearted ones; and it
is inwardly well with such whatsoever outwardly the Lord suffers to befall
them, and it shall be well with their Souls eternally, whatever the Lord
permits to come upon their Bodies; and truly the sense of these things I know
does cause Joy to spring inwardly in the midst of outward Sorrows, and Comfort
in the midst of Heaviness, Rest in the time of Trouble, and Content and
Satisfaction in the midst of Affliction, and makes that soul to bear all with
patience, without murmuring against the Lord; and makes such to say, The will
of God be done; well it is the Lord that suffers it thus to be, and why
should I murmur against him, seeing he knows what is best for me, and will
not suffer any thing to besal me, but what through his Love and Mercy shall
work for my good, as I cleave to him, and am faithful unto him; though my
Earthen Vessel may be broken to pieces, and be turned to the dust, and be taken
away, as the Wicked are, who know not God; yet nevertheless I know it shall not
be with my soul as it shall be with the Wicked, for it shall go ill with them
that Die and be cut off in their Sins, but through the love of the Lord it is,
and shall be well with my soul, for that shall Live and never Die, whatever
comes upon my Earthen Vessel; wherefore I will not say in a murmuring way, Lord
why is it thus, that as to outward appearance thou take away the Righteous
with the Wicked, and cu^est off them that fear thy Name with them that fear
thee not, as if thou had no regard to thy people, nor respect to them that
call upon thy Name, nor care over those who serve thee with an upright Heart;
but I will be still, and know that the Lord he is God, and may do as seemerh
good in his Eye, whose workings are Mysterious, and his doings very Strange,
and his actings very Mavelous in the eyes of many; who is even to wonderful
for his people, unto whom he intends good altogether, for oh he loves them,
and they are dear unto him as the Apple of his Eye, they are his Portion which
he has chosen, and his Inheritance for ever, which he has purchased for
himself; who is God over all blessed for evermore.

Oh, dear Friends Brethren and Sisters, my dear unfeigned Love extends to you
all in the Truth of our God, wherein my soul salutes you who Love and Serve
the Lord with a sincere and upright Heart; and in Spirit I am with you,
though outwardly separated from you for the Seeds sake; and truly my soul
simpathiseth with you in your Trials and Afflictions, both inwardly and
outwardly; and oh that I could help you, says my soul; but well, I can cry
unto him who is able to help you, unto whom, dear Babes, I must leave you,
who knows how it is with ever one of you all, and is not wanting in his Love,
Mercy, Pity, Tenderness, Compassion and Care toward you who loves him, and
watches in his holy fear; whose tender bowels is more largely open toward his
tender innocent hearted ones, then their weakness is able to comprehend. Oh the
Lord Almighty be with you, and the Arm of his Power incompass you about, and
bear you up, and keep you from Fainting and Falling as some have done (to the
dishonor of the Lord, and grief of your Souls) and preserve you unto the end
of your Days, that you may finish your Course with Joy, and lay down your
Heads in Peace, and rest from all your Troubles, Sorrows, Trials, Sufferings
and Afflictions, and receive the reward laid up for the Faithful who abide to
the end; this is the desire and breathing o^ my soul to the Lord for you, who
is your Friend and Companion in the Faith, Patience and long Suffering of
Jesus; and one that wishes that Grace, Mercy and Peace, Joy, Comfort and
everlasting Refreshment, with Strentgh, Wisdom and Might, may be augmented unto
you all; and that the love of God may abound and super-abound in all your
Souls, and surpass all your Sufferings, that thereby your hearts may be kept
open toward God, and one to another, in a large manner, and that you continue
tender affectionated one to another in the Truth, and be as meet-helps one to
another, both outwardly and inwardly, to your Comfort, and to the Praise of the
Lord God Almighty; into whose hands I commit you, dear Babes, and the Lord be
with you, and Comfort the Mourners amongst you, and Refresh the heavy hearted
ones, and lift up the bowed down, and heal the Wounded, and comfort the
Languishing with love, and lift up the weak Hands, and confirm the feeble
Knees, and not suffer that which is Lame to be turned out of the way, but
rather heal it, that the Halting may go upright, and the Lame may leap as an
Heart, and the Tongue of the Dumb may sing of the goodness and loving kindness
of the Lord, and make mention of his Mercy, and declare of his Doings, and
magnify his Name in the the Land of the Living, Amen Halelujah.

From your Friend and Brother in the Truth, who has often had you in
remembrance, and also longed to visit you with a few Lines, but desirous to
wait the Lords time; read and feel my love in that which is more precious and
excellent then all Words whatsoever, wherein we are hid together; Farewell dear
Lambs. William Bennit
Edmonds-Bury Goal the 3th Month, 1666.
THE original of the foregoing Lines was chiefly write to Friends in the Town
of Colchester, but having freedom in the Lord, and even pressed thereunto by
his Love; I thought meet to send Copies thereof to go among Friends in Suffolk,
Norfolk, or elsewhere, as Friends have freedom to Communicate them one to
another.
And dear Friends, let this signify unto you that my soul loves you, and have
a remembrance of you, and a Brotherly care and affection toward you in the
Truth, wherein I desire your Prosperity, Tranquillity and Preservation, in this
day of Trial, in this hour and power of Darkness; even as I desire for my own
Soul, the Lord my God even your God is my Witness; desiring that I and you
(with all who love the Lord in Sincerity, and that make meation of his Name in
Truth and Righteousness) may all be kept close in Heart and Mind unto the Lord,
standing upon our watch in the Light, with the loins of our minds girded up
unto God, having on the Breast Plate of Righteousness, and the Helmet of
Salvation to guide, stear and order us aright, that we may not be Bewildred in
this day of Storms and Tempests, and especially to have and hold fast the
Shield of Faith, by which we may be able to quench and send off all the Fiery
Darts of the Wicked, within and without; yea to have on the whole Armor of
Light, being fitted for the Fiery Trials and Tribulat ons, that so nothing may
come upon us unawares, before we be fitted for it; oh that it might not be with
any of those who profess Righteousness, as i^ was with the People in the days
of Noah, who were Eating and Drinking, and Sporting themselves, Marrying and
giving in Marriage, and knew not till the Flood came and swept them away; but
oh that we may all stand upon our Watchtower, and all hold fast our Integrity
in the Lord, and keep close to our first Love, and none to deal unkindly
toward the Wife of his youth, by casting her off, and going after other
Lovers, but all be tender over her, and still love her with your whole Hearts,
and cleave unto her, for she is a Spotless Virgin, and never was Defiled with
the alluring man of Pleasure, she is very Beautiful, Amiable and Comely in the
Eyes of the pure in heart, and the Glory of the Lord God is her Dowry, and
blessed for evermore is the soul that is joined with her in a perpetual
Covenant, never to be broken.

We all in this Prison, who suffers upon Truth account are in a measure of
Health at present, through the Love and Goodness of our God, blessed and
praised be his Name for evermore; whose tender Compassion fails not toward
them who love him, therefore are his people not Consumed, but preserved as
Lambs in the midst of devouring Wolves, by him the good Shepherd of Israel; who
stopeth the Mouths of Lions, and chaineth up the Beast of Prey for his little
Flocks sake, whom he so dearly loves, that they may behold his Power, and
admire his Love, and trust in his Name, and return the Praise unto him whose
Mercies are over all his Works, glory to God in the highest; my Love salutes
you, all farewell dear Friends.

W. E.

SOME Prison Meditations OF AN Humble Heart:
Given forth from a Child in Israel, whose soul very dearly loves his Heavenly
Fathers Children, much desiring (and traveling in Spirit for) their Prosperity
in the Truth, even as for his own soul; and the Author hereof believing and
knowing that this following Treatise may (if the Lord will) be of service unto
many, of the tender, honest, simple, single, upright-hearted ones, who are
following on to know the Lord in the footsteps of Righteousness; and who
desires to pass over on to the end, in the strait way of Holiness; therefore,
even for their sakes, is this following Treatise Published from a constraint of
Gods love, in singleness and simplicity of Heart.

OH, Oh my Soul, be not unmindful of the large mercy and goodness of the Lord
showed toward thee, neither forget the exceeding loving kindness of the Holy
One manifested unto thee, oh my Soul; oh let the sense of what the Lord thy
dear, tender, pitiful, compassionate God has done for thee, continually be
fresh in and upon thee, oh my Soul; for the Lord thy God has freely done that
for thee, which none besides him the mighty one could do: Oh my Soul the Lord
has brought thee out of the Pit, even out of the horrible Pit, and out of the
Mire and Clay, wherein thou once stuck so fast, as that thou could never have
been able to have gotten out by all means possible thou could have invented,
but must have sunkdeeper and deeper therein, and so have perished for ever, had
not the Lord God of infinite mercy helped thee, who did cast his eye of pity
and compassion upon thee, and out of his mere mercy, love and free grace,
stretched out his hand to help thee, oh my soul, when none besides him could
help thee, and by his arm of his loving kindness lifted thee up out of the
horrible pit, out of the mire and clay, and has set thy feet upon a Rock which
stands sure, and can never be moved, and thereon he establishes thy goings,
praises, pure living righteous praises to the Lord thy God be rendered by thee,
oh my soul, even forever and for evermore.

Oh my Soul, remember thou wast once even like a poor filly Sheep without a
Shepherd, wandering upon the barren Mountains and dry Heaths in the Wilderness
and solitary places, full of Trouble, Sorrow and Perplexity, and knew not the
way to the Fold of Rest, oftentimes mourning and weeping alone, as a Dove
without her Mate, when no eye saw thy sorrow but the Lord alone; often saying
in thy heart, whose State and Condition is so miserable as mine? who so Poor
and Desolate as I? none knowing how it is with me but the Lord alone: And
indeed the Lord then saw thee and knew how it was with thee, oh my soul, and he
the tender God of unfathomable bowels of Compassion behold thee in that day,
when thou did eat thy bread Weeping, and mingled thy drink with Tears, and he
the compassionate one heard thy secret cries, and knew thy secret desires, and
thy sighing and groaning entered into his ears, and thy tears which thou dropped
upon his Alter laid open unto the view of the eye of thy tender merciful God,
and his tender bowels was moved with pity toward thee, and for his own Seeds
sake he had compassion upon thee, oh my soul, and helped thee in the day of thy
Trouble, and delivered thee out of Distress, who freely reached forth his Arm
unto thee, and took thee by the Hand, and brought thee out of the Wilderness
and desolate Places, and set thy feet in the right way which has led thee to a
City of Habitation, and to the Fold of Rest; and now the Lord (who both sought
thee, and found thee out, and brought thee out of the Wilderness, and from off
the barren Mountains) he is become thy Shepherd, oh my soul, and how can thou
want any good thing, he oftentimes feeds thee, and even causes thee to lie
down in green Pastures, and leads thee by the still Waters, even Shilc's
brook, which runs softly, and he spreads thy Table in the sight of thy
Enemies, and anointeth thy Head with the oil of Cladness, and causes thy Cup
to overflow with new Wine, and has brought thee to sit under thy own Vine, and
under thy Fig Tree, and none shall make thee afraid, oh my soul: Oh the
Goodness of the Lord, oh the Kindness of the Lord, oh the Mercy of the Lord, oh
the Pity of the Lord, oh the Compassion of the Lord God of tender Bowels is
even Unutterable, Unspeakable, Unfathomable and Incomprehensible; Oh the
Height, oh the Depth, oh the Length, oh the Breadth of the Love of the Lord:
Oh my soul! truly when thou meditatest of the goodness of the Lord, and
considerest of his loving kindness and mercy showed toward thee; oh, how can
but the sense thereof pitch thee even upon a stand of admiration: Oh surely,
surely when thou, oh my soul, look back into his Works, and considerest how
much he has wrought in thee, and for thee, thou can see no end of his
praises; oh praises, oh living praises, holy righteous praises unto the pure
holy righteous Lord God be ascribed by thee, oh my soul, for ever and for
evermore.

Oh my Soul as thou art kept in the fresh sense and remembrance of the great
Loving Kindness, the great Mercy, the great Pity and unspeakable Compassion of
the Lord thy tender God which he has, and daily does manifest unto thee, oh my
soul; oh, how can thou but in the sense of Gods unspeakable Love abound in
Love, in Pity, in Mercy, in Kindness, in Tenderness and Compassion toward all
People, but especially toward all Souls who are Seeking, Thirsting, Hungring,
Breathing, Crying and Painting after Righteousness, Peace, everlasting Rest and
eternal Happiness: Oh, my soul, the Lord thy God knows the frame of thy
Spirit, the Lord knows the tenderness of thy Bowels, and the openness of thy
Bosom toward all the Seekers after Righteousness, toward all the Travelers
to Sion, and toward all the Mourners therein: Oh, my soul, remember how that
at sometimes when the great Fountain, the great Deep has opened, and issued
forth of his fullness into thee, oh my soul; and when Joy has come into thy
heart as a River, and Gladness as a mighty Stream, Refreshings as showers in
the Spring, and Consolation as due upon the tender Plants, and when thou
could sing for joy of heart, and shout aloud even Praises and Halelujahs to
thy God, that then, even then thou, oh my soul, remembrest the Poor and Needy
in his own Eyes, and think thou hear his cry sounding in thy Ear, and his
soul saying in secret; Oh how many is there who Eats of the largest Loaves,
and Drinkest of the largest full Flagons; but oh, alas for me, I have scarce a
drop of Refreshment, hardly a crum of Consolation, but my Tears is my Meat and
Drink Day and Night, whilst my Enemy says unto me, where is thy God* Oh I go
bowed down all the day long, and none knoweh my Sorrow but the Lord alone; Oh,
I am even as an Owl in the Desert, and as the Pelican in the Wilderness, I am
as the alon^ Quail in the stubble Fields, and as the Dove mourning for the loss
of her Mate, and as the alone Sparrow upon the House top, and as a Woman
forsaken and grieved in Spirit; Oh, whose Condition is like mine! is there any
amongst the Sons and Daughters of Men like unto me? is there any so Poor as I?
oh, is there any so Needy as I? oh, is there any so Weak and Feeble as I? is
there any so Foolish as I? oh, is there any so Dry and Barren as I? oh, is
there any so Cold and Fruitless to Godward as I? is there any so Desolate as
I? Oh my leanness, oh my leanness, oh how long, how long shall it be thus with
me? oh how long, how long shall I sit mourning as by the River of Babylon with
my Harp laid aside? oh when, when shall I walk again in Sion, and travel in the
Streets of Jerusalem? with a new Song in my Mouth, and everlasting Joy upon my
Head, and living Praises in my Heart unto the Lord who dw^lleth in his Sion,
and his presence is great in his Jerusalem; but oh alas for me, I am as one
cast out of his sight, and one who walks dejected all the day long; Oh when
will the Lord cause the days of my Mourning to be over, and the nights of my
Sorrow to pass away, and my Sighings and Groanings to vanish, and all Tears to
b^ wiped from mine Eyes? oh when will the Lord give me Beauty instead of Ashes,
the Oil of Joy for Mourning, and the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of
Heaviness, that I (a Poor Dry Barren one) might become a Tree of Righteousness,
bringing forth Fruit of Holiness abundantly to the praise of the Lord God, that
he in and through me might be glorified? Oh when shall my Winter be over, and
the terrible Storms be gone? oh when shall the cold nipping Frosts be expelled,
and the Darkness and Gloominess be extinguished? oh when will the Sun of
Righteousness break forth unto me in his Glory, and his warm Beams refresh and
warm my poor cold Soul? oh when will the Spring come, when shall I know a
Springtime ^ the Lord? oh when will Summer come? oh when will the singing of
Birds come? oh when shall I hear the voice of the Turtle in my Land? oh when
will the Showers from on high fall down upon my Soul? oh when shall I receive
the early and latter Rain? oh when shall I come to sit under my own Vine, and
under my Fig Tree, and none to make me afraid? Oh how long shall my Beloved be
hid from me, as in the clifts of the Rocks, and as in the secret places of the
Stairs? sometimes indeed he shows himself unto me, as behind the Wall, and as
through a Lattis, and then my Bowels, my tender Bowels are moved for him: Oh
when, oh when shall I have a full enjoyment of him whom my soul loves? oh that
I could but plainly hear his Voice, and perfectly see his Face; for oh indeed
sweet is his Voice, and his Countenance is very comely; my soul desires him in
the Night season, and in the Morning I seek him early; but oh I cannot find him
whom my soul loves, for he has withdrawn himself from me, and (...) is the
cause of my Leanness, Coldness, Barrenness and Unfruitfulness to Godward,
which is the cause of my Sorrow, Tears, Sighing, Groaning, Mourning and walking
Dejected all the day long.

Oh, indeed there was a time once when my Beloved knocked at the Door of my
Heart, saying again and again, open, open, unto me; my Head is wet with Dew,
and my Locks filled with the Drops of the Night; open, open unto me, and let me
in; but oh wo's me, I was gotten into a Bed of false Ease and wrong Security,
and was loath to come out; but I made many excuses, and said, I have put off my
Coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my Feet how shall I defile them,
etc? and I lingered so long, as that my Beloved vvithdrew himself; and at last
I rose (in my own time, not when he called) to open to my Beloved, and he was
gone, and then I called him, but he did not answer me, I sought him, but did
not find him; and oh, my Bowels, my Bowels is even pained for him, and my Soul
pants after him, even as the Heart painteth after the water Brooks; Oh that I
could but find him whom ^y soul loves, oh I would hold him, I would hold him
fast, I would not let him go; he should lie all night in my Bosom, I would be
watchful and diligent that I grieve him not, and very fearful of displeasing of
him, and would take heed of giving him any cause whereby to leave me, and thus
to hide his Face from me; but oh, alas for me, when shall I find him, when
will he come I long for? Oh when, when shall I have my full enjoyment of him?
oh, when will he bring me into his Banqueting House, and his Love be even as a
Banner over me, his left hand under my Head, and his right Imbrasing of me,
staying me with Flagons, comforting me with Apples, making me Sick of Love,
giving me of his spiced Wine, and of the juce of his Pomgranets? oh, if thus I
could come to enjoy him whom my Soul Loves, then would all Tears be wiped away
from mine Eyes, and I forget my Sorrow, because of Joy and Gladness, and then
should I look no more Sorrowful, but should Rejoice, as Hannah did, and say; Oh
my Heart rejoices in the Lord, and my Horn is exalted in the Lord, and my
Mouth is enlarged over my Enemy (who said unto me, I shall be always Barren and
Unfruitful) because I rejoice in his Salvation, who has regarded my low
Estate; oh, now I the Barren shall bear Seven, and she who has had many
Children wax Feeble, now I the parched Ground become a Pool, and I the dry
Heath Springs of Water, now I the solitary place Rejoyee, and I the Desert
blossom as a Rose, I the Poor one made Rich, and I the Weak one made Strong, I
the Foolish one made Wise, I the Empty one overflow with Fullness; now the days
of my sore Mourning turned into Joy, and the nights of my Sorrow turned into
Pleasure, and the seasons of my seeking him whom my soul loves turned into
times of sweet reposes with him in his bed of solace* But oh, alas for me, I
may speak of these things, but oh, when, when will it be thus with me? oh how
long shall I wait, how long shall I seek, how long shall I call and utter my
voice weeping, saying, oh come away, come away unto me, thou whom I mourn for,
whom I long after, whom my soul loves; oh I have waited so long that I am
weary, and begin to be almost without hope of his coming any more unto me: Well
what shall I do, and whether shall I go? I will even lay me down in Sorrow, and
make it my Bed, and make Grief my Sheets, and Tears my Pillow, and Sighing and
Mourning my Sleep, until he come whom my soul loves; for verily I cannot, I
cannot be satisfied with another besides him.

Oh, who amongst the Son^ and Daughters of Men shall I make my moan unto? unto
whom shall I complain and ease my heart unto? where shall I find one who is
sensible of my condition, that can simpathize with me, and that can speak a
word in season unto my poor soul, oh, is it thus with any as it is with me?
Yes, yes, I believe there is many has been, and many now are in thy condition:
Oh, where may I find one of them, that I might ease my heart unto him, and
spread my condition before him? for, oh verily my Bowels is very open to those
who be in my condition; well, have patience, be quiet, and be still, and lend
an ear unto me, and I may speak a little how it is with me, and it may be (if
the Lord will) to thy comfort; for, oh truly my soul loves thee, oh my heart
is moved with compassion toward thee, oh my bowels, my bowels is open unto
thee, and my soul greatly simpathizeth with thy soul, and could even wish my
soul (for a time) in thy souls stead; oh, though indeed I am but a Child, yet
truly I am in some measure sensible of thy condition, and can read it by my
own; and oh how willingly would I help thee, according to my ability; oh, truly
methinks I would even be a help unto all who stand in need of help, but
especially unto thee thou poor soul; What art thou Poor? so am I; what art thou
Weak and Feeble? so am I oftentimes; what art thou Empty? so am I oftentimes;
what art thou Cold and Barren? so am I sometimes; what art thou as one Desolate
and Destitute? so am I sometimes; what do thou eat thy Bread Weeping, and
mingle thy Drink with thy Tears? it is so with me at sometimes, when I want the
enjoyment of him whom my soul loves, for t^uly it is with me sometimes as it
is with thee; for sometimes, I have not the enjoyment of my Beloved, as I have
at other times, but sometimes he seems to be withd-rawn and to hide his-Face
from me; oh then it is with me as it is with thee; oh then Sorrows take hold
upon me, and Trouble surroundeth me about as a Wall, and Mourning covers me as
a Garment, and none sees my Tears but the Lord; oh then my Leanness, my
Leanness, my Coldness and Barrenness is my greatest Burden, which causes me to
go bowed down in Spirit, saying in my heart, Oh, whether is my Beloved gone,
and what is the cause he has withdrawn himself from me? wherefore is it thus
with me, what is the matter, what shall I do, what will the Lord leave me, what
will my God forsake me, what will the Lord now cast me off who has done so
much for me? oh what is the cause that it is thus with me? wherefore is the
Windows of Heaven shut up, and the Shovvers of Refreshment from on high
withheld from me? oh once I could say the Lord is my Shepherd, and my soul
does not want; he causes me to seed, and even to lie down in green Pastures,
and leads me by the still Waters, and spreads my Table with Dainties, and
anointeth my Head with the Oil of Gladness, and causes my Cup to overslow with
new Wine: But oh, alas for me now, I am in a Dry and Thirsty Land where no
Water is; Oh, what has the Lord cast me off for ever? oh my Tears is my Meat
and Drink, whilst my Enemy says unto me, where is thy God, do thou think he
will ever appear again unto thee? why do thou thus Hunger, Thirst, Cry and
Paint after him? alas, it is in vain for thee to wait for him; once indeed thou
had the enjoyment of him, once thou wentst with a Multitude, with them to the
House of God, with the voice of Joy and Praise, with a Multitude that keep holy
day; but, alas thou must not look for such a day again: And thus the Adversary
of my soul endeavors to add Sorrow to my Sorrow, and to increase the weight
of my Burden, that so I might sink and never rise; But, oh the Lord my God is
near to help me, even in that time when I can scarce perceive him, and when I
am (as Peter was) ready to sink, then his invisible arm of Mercy is ready to
save me, and a secret hope the Lord preserves alive in me, which is as an
Anchor unto my soul, which keeps me from suffering Shipwreck, a hope that the
Lord will appear again to me to my Joy, whereby some encouragement I feel
stirring in me to wait upon the Lord patiently, and to trust in him, though I
do not see him; and to rely upon him and hope in his tender bowels, when he
seems to be far o^f me, and to roll my self upon him, and surely he will appear
again to thy Joy, oh my soul, who can not be satisfied without his presence,
even the presence of the Lord thy God, which thou desire more then all things
else whatsoever; wherefore the Lord seeing it is so with thee, that thou
desire his presence more then all other things; surely, surely he will not
cast thee off for ever, surely he will appear again to thy joy, wherefore, why
art thou so much cast down, oh my soul, and why art thou thus disquieted within
thee? oh hope, hope thou in thy God, for thou shall yet praise him, the Lord
will yet again command his loving kindness in the day time, and in the night
season, his song shall be with thee, even prai^^s to the God of thy Life; oh
wait patiently upon the Lord, and trust in the living God, whose compassions
fails not toward those who love him; oh, he will send out his Light and
Truth into thee again, and it shall bring thee unto his holy Hill, and to his
Tabernacle, and then shall thou go to the Altar of God, of God thy exceeding
joy, and upon thy Harp shall thou praise the Lord thy God, thy Delight and Joy,
oh, it is good for thee both to hope and quietly to vvait upon the Lord, for
the Lord is good to the Man that vvaits upon him, unto the Soul which seeks
him, and cannot be satisfied without him; oh, vvait patiently upon him even as
a Servant vvaiteth upon his Master, and as a Maiden at the hand of her
Mistress, so do thou vvait for the Lord, and even as the Husbandman who
sows his Seed in the Earth, has long patience for it until he receives the
early and latter Rain; so do thou vvait patiently upon the Lord, who will be
unto thee as the early and latter Rain in due season; wait upon him, he who is
to come, will come, and will not tarry, and his reward will be with him, even
fullness of Joy, Comfort, Peace, Rest and sweet Satisfaction unto thee; for
surely, surely, the Lord will never leave thee nor forsake thee, if thou
forsake him not; indeed he may seem to hide his Face from thee for a time, but
without doubt he will appear again to thy Comfort, who cannot live without him?
oh my soul, the Lord hears thee often saying in secret, alas, What is the
Glory of the World unto me? what is the Honor and Praise of the World unto me?
what is the Favors, Friendship and Estimation of the World to me? what is the
Vanities, vain Sports, Delights and Pleasures of the Sons and Daughters of Men
to me? oh, surely all these things are but as Drofs and Dung unto me, in
comparison of the Lord my God, who is the Fountain of everlasting Joy, Delight
and Pleasure; oh, if I enjoy him fully I have enough; he is the joy of my
Heart, the rejoicing and glading of my Spirit, the strength of my Reins, the
girdle of my Loins; wherefore, how can I live without him? oh my soul, the
Lord intends good unto thee by all his dealings with thee, if he withdraw for a
time, and hide his Face from thee for a season, it is thereby to let thee see
what thou art without him, how Poor, how Weak, how Feeble, how Foolish, how
Empty, how Dead, how Dry, how Cold, how Barren and Unfruitful art thou without
the Lord? that so thou being made truly sensible of thy own Weakness and
Inability, may be the more sensible of the needfulness of the supporting Power,
and upholding Arm, and saving Grace of the Lord thy God, and the more to rely
and depend upon the Lord; oh my soul, though the Lord withdraw his presence
from thee, thou come the more to know what the want of his presence is, and
come to learn to prize the sweet enjoyment of his presence the more, and to
hold him fast and cleave unto him, and to be very vigilent and careful thou
do not grieve him, nor do the thing that may cause him to withdraw himself
from thee, oh my soul. Oh my soul, thou must learn to know how to Want, and how
to Abound; how to be Full, and how to be Empty; how to be Rich, and how to be
Poor; and in every Condition to be content, and not to murmur against the Lord;
the Lord can open and none can shut, and he can shut and none can open; the
Lord ean open the windows of Heaven and shower down abundantly upon thee, oh my
soul, and even make a Plenty in thy Land, even cause thy Store to abound with
Corn, and thy Fats over flow with new Wine; and he can also shut up the windows
of Heaven for a time, and make a Famine in thy Land, if he pleases and thou
must not say unto him (in a murmuring way) why dealest thou thus with me? for
indeed he may do what he will do, and yet all his doings are Just and
Righteous altogether, and in all his dealings with thee, he thy dear, tender
nursing Father, intends good unto thee, oh my soul. Oh my soul, when the
Fountain opens, and the great Deep overflovveth, and fills thee with plenty
of all things needful for thee, even then, oh my soul, dread and fear thou
before the Lord, and take heed of being lifted up in Heart, of being puffed up
in Mind, of being exalted in Spirit, and bevvare of a false Ease, and vvrong
Liberty and false Security, which may soon steal upon thee at such a time, if
thou do not abide upon the Watch, and dread the Lord, and drink the draughts of
Joy in the pure fear and trembling, never departing therefrom, in what ever
thou enjoy of the Lord, or receive from the Lord, or do and suffer for the
Lord, keep lovv in Heart, meek in Mind, humble in Soul, tender in Bowels,
contrite in Spirit, and then, oh my soul, thou art in a safe condition; truly,
my soul, when thou appearest Wise, Strong, Rich and Full enough, even then
thou art rather in greater danger then when thou appearest Weak, Poor and
Empty in thy own eyes, although thou art not then without danger, but have
cause to fear and vvatch in all conditions; oh my soul, when thou appearest
Weak, Poor and Feeble in thy own eyes, even then take heed of distrust and
doubting, but hold fast thy Trust in the Lord, and let thy Confidence in his
Name be firm, and Hope in his tender Bowels be sure, and constantly rely and
depend upon him, and honor him in believing in him, and if he kill thee, yet
trust thou in him, and never leave him; for, alas whether should thou go, he
has the word of eternal Life, who is worthy to be Glorified, Magnified,
Honored and Praised, Feared, Served, Loved, and Obeyed forever, and for
evermore.

Oh my soul, thou dearly love thy Fathers Children; oh, the Lord knows how
near and dear his dear Babes and tender Lambs are unto thee, oh my soul; oh,
thou know them in the Spirit of Love, wherein thou delightest to Embrace
them (even those whom, outwardly, thou never saw) and (in spirit) to clasp them
about, and kiss them with a Kiss of Peace, and hug them in the Bosom of
Indearedness; ah, thy Bowels, thy Bowels is open unto them, and thy Love is
dear indeed toward them, as the Lord thy God knows; and oh that love might
abound in thee more and more, and in the hearts of all the Children of Light,
it may abound one toward another, as in Days past, and Years which are gone,
that it may appear to all we are of God who is Love, and that we all are true
Disciples of Christ in that we love one another, not only in Show and in Word,
but in Deed and in Truth, loving one another fervently with a pure heart.

Oh my soul, thou defirest to simpathize with thy Fathers Children, in their
Trials, Sufferings and Afflictions; and (in spirit) to bear a part with them
therein; oh, thou desire even to Mourn with them that Mourn, and to Weep
with them that Weep in secret; and to Rejoice with them that Rejoice, and to
Travel in Spirit with and for the Travelers to Sion, and with the Travelers
in Sion, and to watch with those Watchmen, which the Lord has set upon the
walls of Jerusalem, who for Sions sake cannot be still, and for Jerusalems sake
cannot hold their peace; who cease not to cry day and night to the Lord, and
can give him no rest until he establish Jerusalem, and make her a praise in the
whole Earth for evermore.

Oh my soul, be watchful and wary that thou do not in the least degree seek
Glory, Honor and Praise to thy self, and to be had in esteem by others; but,
oh wait to feel self wholly Baptized into Death, and made of no Reputation; and
take heed that thy left hand know not what thy right hand does, and do nothing
to be seen of men, or whereby to be accounted of by others; but in all thou
do, appeal unto him who sees imsecret, and he it is who will reward thee
openly* seek thou to be only known, and manifested, to the pure u^erring
Witness in all Consciences, and to stand justified and approved by it, and that
is enough, no Honor, no Glory, no Praise but to God alone; oh, strive not for
Lordship and Mastership over others, but rather strive to be most Meekest,
Lowest, Humblest, Tender and Contite in Mind and Spirit, condesending even to
the Lowest, and serving the Meanest in love; seeking Peace and Unity amongst
Brethren, with all self-denial, bearing, forbearing and forgiving for the Seeds
sake; bearing with the infirmities of the Weak and Feeble, watching for the
good in all, without respect of Persons; but not to watch for evil in any, for
that is abominable in the eyes of the Lord; and seek thou the glory of God
alone, the honor of his Name, exaltation and spreading forth of his Truth, the
freedom, growth and reign of the Seed of God in the hearts of all, the
prosperity of his tender Lambs; Babes and Children, that they may all stand in
this day of Trial, and be preserved in this hour of Darkness and Temptation,
and even to seek the good of all, yea the good of thy greatest Enemies, and
have nothing but love and good will toward thy greatest Persecutors, seeking
the Salvation of all people, but not the Destruction of any.

And, oh my soul, be circumspect; and vigilent, to walk so as becomes the
Gospel, and thee to be an adorning to the Truth of God, and to be as an holy
example and righteous pattern unto all people, wherever I come, that I may be
unto the Lord as a sweet smell and delectable savor, that the blessing of the
Lord my God may be pou^ed down upon me yet more and more, that I might become
fruitful unto the Lord my God, and be an instrument in his hand amongst the
Sons and Daughters of men, to the praise, glory, honor and renown of the Lord
Almighty, for evermore; oh my soul, watch and fear before the Lord, and take
heed thou do not that thing to please others which thou know is not
approved by the Lord; keep thy eye unto the Lord, and look not ou^ at others,
to walk by Imitation, and if thou see him or her, one or another (whatever
they be accounted of) do those things which the Lord allows thee not to do, do
not thee do them because another does them, but watch and keep close unto the
Lord, and take counsel of him.

Oh my soul, do not judge, or justify those things which thou have not a true
discerning in, because an other judges or justifies them, but rather be passive
in that matter, and stand still and wait upon the Lord for a perfect
understanding in all things.

Oh my soul, seek not Liberty to the Flesh, beware of that counted Freedom,
which is indeed Bondage, which has stolen upon many in their latter days; oh
my soul, endeavor to put off those things, which in their plac^ are said to be
Lawful, which are a means to hinder thy growth into the Eternal: And oh, walk
wisely before all men, giving no offense to the Jew nor Gentile, nor to the
Church in God, knowing that there is that which is Lawful, but not Expedient;
there is that which is Lawful, but it Edifies not; wherefore forbear what may
be forborne, and yet be not brought under the power of any thing below the life,
but seek after those things which make for Edification, Love, Peace and Unity;
for God is the author of Peace, and not the author of Confusion, Strife,
Contention and Debate: Oh my soul, thou do greatly desire that I might not
appear, in the sight of any of the Lords Lambs and little ones, to be more then
what I really am in and through the grace of God, by which I am what I am, and
his grace which he has freely bestowed upon me has nor been in vain, praises
to his Name forever; oh, I would not be accounted of by any little one to be
more then what ^ am in the Lord, but rather let me be hid, lest honor should
be ascribed unto that, unto which it does not belong; for indeed all honor
belongs to God alone; alas all Flesh is as Grass, and what is Man, he is but a
Vessel wherein God may ^ppear or disappear as he pleases, and indeed the Lord
is jealous of his Glory, and he will not give it unto another; wherefore my
soul seek the glory, honor and praise to God alone, unto whom only it is due
for ever and evermore. Oh my soul, thou do not want the love, the dear
unfeigned love of the Lords dear Babes, tender Lambs and Children, and oh thou
desire thou may not want their prayers for thee, oh my soul, that I may be
preserved in this day of trial, and be enabled by the Lord to finish my
Testimony for him, to his praise and my comfort, joy and peace for evermore.

Oh my soul, fear thou before the living God, and very diligently take heed
lest thou who stand'st should fall, as several has done, to their own vvoe,
and to the dishonor of God, and to the causing his unchangable Truth to be
evil spoken of, and many seekers after Righteousness to stumble, and the hands
of Sions Enemies thereby strengthened against the Faithful of the Lord, whose
hearts are made sad, whom the Lord has not made sad; even in the sense of the
sad condition of those who once in some measure were acquainted with the
Lord, once tasted of his Goodness and Graciousness, of his svveet unspeakable
Love and Peace, and even in some measure, tasted and handled of the word of
Life, and of the powers of the World to come; who were delivered out of
spiritual Egypt by an outstretched Arm and mighty Power, and by the same
Power carried through the spiritual Sea and Wilderness, and did in measure eat
of the spiritual Meat, and drink of the spritual Rock, which was made unto
them as a pillar of Fire by night, and a pillar of a Cloud by day, etc. and yet
behold they are drawn back again by the Enemy of their Soul, through their
yielding unto his Temptations, and receiving his P^o^fers, and are turned as
the Dog to his Vomit, and as the Sow that was washed to her wallowing again in
the mire; and has even mad^ Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, and are
proved treacherous Children, denying their Father who begat them, and casting
off their Mother who traveled in pain to bring them forth, and hating the Womb
that bore them, and the Paps which gave them suck, and this has come upon them
through Carelessness and Sloathfulness, and through Reasoning and Consulting
with the Enemy of their Souls, and through looking at the Trouble, Trial,
Sufferings, Streights and Difficulties which appeared in their way, and through
lusting after the Fleshpots of Egypt, through looking back into the Ease,
Pleasure, Riches and Honor of this World, which has carried them away captive
again into Egypt, into the house of Bondage again; wherefore, oh my soul,
watch, watch and stand fast in that Liberty which the true Christ the Power of
God has brought thee into, and take heed thou be not entangled again in the
yoke of Bondage.

Oh my soul, if there be some who once were in some measure Fresh, Green,
Tender, Living and Fruitful unto God, who now have lost their Freshness,
Greenness, Tenderness and Fruitfulness toward God, and now Coldness, Deadness
and Barrenness is come upon them to Godward, and their Love and Zeal for the
Lord waxed cold; oh my soul, if it has thus happened unto some, oh, how can
thou but fear before the Lord, least the same should happen unto thee also.

And if some there be whose minds are gotten into a full Liberty, and are at
ease in the Flesh, living above the Cross of Christ Jesus, which Crucifies to
the World, and grown Careless and Negligent, spending their time often with
vain Talking, foolish Jesting, and needless Communication; how ought all to
spend their time in waiting upon the Lord, in meditating and exercising
themselves in the things of God, being very watchful over their Thoughts,
Words, Works and Actions, having the pure fear of the Righteous God fresh in
their hearts, standing in awe of him always, least they should Sin against him
in Thought, Word and Deed, lying down and rising up in his pure fear, Eating
and Drinking and doing all things in the pure fear of the Lord, knowing a stay
to their Minds, a stop to their Thoughts, a bridle to their Tongues, a watch
before their Mouth, and a fearing in their Hearts, least they should not be
watchful enough over their Lives and Conversations, yea even over their very
Carriage and Gesture, their words being very few, sober and savoury, even
savouring of the grace of God in their hearts, they desiring and endeavoring
to walk so as that they might in Life, Carriage and Conversation be as holy
Patterns and righteous Examples of Love, of Peace, of Holiness and Purity, of
Meekness and Lowliness, of Tenderness and Pity, of Mercy and Compassion, of
Patience and long Suffering, of Sobriety and Gentleness etc. that so they might
walk as becomes Saints, B^a^eless and Harmless, as Sons of God, without
rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation, amongst whom to
shine as Lights to the adorning of the Truth of God professed by them, and to
the Glory, Honor and (...) of the Lord God, and to the Joy, Comfort,
Refreshment, Peace and Consolation of their own Souls: Oh this condition is
very sweet, blessed and happy; wherefore ^leave, cleave, and keep close unto
the Lord thy tender compassionate God, and then assuredly the Lord will cleave
unto thee, and will not leave thee, oh my soul; wherefore lift up thy head in
the strength of the Lord, and look up unto the holy one, whose dwelling is on
high in the holy place; and with thee, oh my soul, as thou art kept humble in
Heart, contrite in Spirit, meek in Mind and trembles at his Word; and look not
at thy own Weakness, Feebleness and Inability, but keep thy eye unto the Lord
and trust in his Name, rely and depend upon his Arm, and hope in his tender
Bowels, who makes the Poor Rich, the Weak Strong, the Simple Wise; wait thou
patiently upon him, and look not out at the greatness of others measures,
neither look thou at the smalness of thy own, least Faintness, Weariness and
Discouragement should thereby come in upon thee, and thou murmur because thy
measure is no greater, but be thou contented, and truly satisfied with thy
portion, and be faithful unto the Lord in thy measure, and being faithful in
the little, thou shall be made ruler over much, and enter into the joy of the
Lord; wait upon him, who has freely given in thee what thou have of him, and
he can give thee more; there was nothing in thee (that was of thee) which
induced the Lord to communicate that measure of his fullness unto thee, which he
has dispensed to thee, but of his own mere mercy, tender love and free grace,
who of his own free will has begotten thee again unto a living hope, so that
thou well know, that it is not he that wills, nor he that runs, but God
who shows mercy: Oh thou had not awakened out of the sleep of Sin and
Corruption, had not the mighty God thundered from his dwelling place upon thee,
and awakened thee; oh my soul, surely thou had never been raised out of the
dust of Sin, and grave of Iniquity, had not the Lord of his own free will
raised thee up, and brought thee forth by his own Almighty power: Oh my soul,
surely thou had never (as of thy self) turned unto the Lord, had not the Lord
of his own free will turned thee, and after thou wast turned thou Repentedst,
and after thou wast Afflicted thou smotest upon thy Thigh, yea thou wast
consounded, because thou borest the shame of thy youth; and surely, my soul,
after the Lord had turned thee in measure to him, thou had not followed him
in the narrow and strait Way, through the Cross in the Self-denial, had not the
Lord thy God drawn thee after him by the cords and woings of his tender Love;
and surely thou had turned back again from the Lord into the Mire and Dirt
again, and had never Stood until this Hour, but must have Fainted and Dyed
ere this Day, had not the Lord of his own free will Kept thee, Preserved thee,
Upheld thee, and Supported thee by his own almighty Power, whose Grace has
been sufficient for thee, both in the day of Prosperity, and in the day of
Adversity, in the time of Trial, in the hour of Temptation; and so let all
Flesh be silent in thee, oh my soul, and the Lord only Exalted, and the Boaster
for ever Excluded, and God alone have the Glory, and self wholly slain, and the
Lord alone Honored and Praised, and his unspeakable Love and free Grace,
Admired, and his holy Name Feared and Obeyed, by whose Grace thou art what thou
art, and his Grace bestowed upon thee has not been in vain; blessed, blessed
be the Lord, and pure holy praises to him, and glory and halleujah to him in
the highest, Amen says my soul. Oh, Lord, what was I and what was my Fathers
house? I was neither a Prophet nor a Prophets Son; what was I, that the King of
Glory should cast his eye upon me, even when I lay as among the Pits? what was
I that he should hold forth the Scepter unto me, and I should find favor in
his sight? who regarded my low Estate, and raised me out of the Dust, and
brought me from off the Dunghill to sit among Princes.

Oh my Soul, the Lord has done much for thee since the day he formed thee in
the Womb, and brought thee forth for his Praise; he has made the crooked
things strait before thee, and rough smooth, and Mountains he has laid low
before thee, and removed many a Hill out of thy way, and he has made a way for
thee in the Wilderness, and a path through many a Thicket, he has lopt the
Bough with terror, and the great one of stature has been hewn down; he did
cut up the Thicket of the Forest with Iron, and Lebanon did fall by a mighty
one; oh, he has made the hard things easy unto thee; oh, how has his Love
made thee willing to bow thy neck to the Yoke, and to take up the Cross, and
totally to despise the Shame, and to follow the Lamb through some Trials and
Tribulations, whose love has drawn thee after him, whose love has (as it
were) made thee to forget thy fathers House? Oh, how has his love caused me to
cast off other lovers, and to love the Lord my God, who is now become my
Treasure, and my heart is with him? so that if I be shut up in Prison, if I
enjoy him; oh, then Days, Months and Years may pass over my head, and Time is
not thought long, nor Sufferings hard, because of the enjoyment of the presence
of the Lord my Treasure, whom my soul loves, for whose sake I am willing to
suffer; whose pure sweet refreshing, comfortable Presence makes a Prison
delightsome to me; ^raises, pure living praises to my God for ever, who has
been with me in six Troubles, and in the seventh he has not lef^ me: he is my
Buckler, my Shield, my Strength, my Rock, my Safeguard, my strong Tower;
wherefore I Will not fear the threats of the Wicked, neither regard the cruelty
of the ungodly, nor heed the purposes of my Enemy, nor mind the determinations
of unrighteous Men; through the strength of my God I will not fear, though the
Earth be removed and carried into the midst of the Sea; and though the
Mountains shake, through the swelling thereof; though the Heathen rage, and the
People imagine vain things, and the Rulers take counsel against me, I Will not
fear what man can do unto me, for the Lord is with me, and I shall not be
moved, and the Lord will help me; and that right early; yet alas for me, poor,
poor worm, I am but a Child weak and feeble, but indeed having had great
experience of the love of my God, and of his tender Fatherly care over me, how
can I but confidently trust, hope, rely and depend upon my God, believing that
he, the mighty one, will enable me, the weak one, to wade through and endure
those trials he pleases to exercise me withal; who through his love and mercy
has caused my Trials to work for my good, praises to his name for evermore,
who has nine times delivered me out of the hands of unreasonable men, out of
their Prisons and Holes, where I have suffered for the Testimony of my God,
through his enabling of me, without murmuring against him; praises unto him
alone, no honor, no glory, but unto God, says my soul, who has kept me by
his power from bowing to the Beast, or drinking of the Whores Cup; pure praise
to my dear God for evermore, who will free me once again from Bonds in his own
time. I am willing to wait thy season, oh my God, who art with me; and oh let
me never depart from thee, O Lord, and then I know thou will never leave me,
but thou will be my God, to help me still, and to support me still, and to
comfort me still, and refresh me still, and quicken me still, and to feed me
still with Bread from Heaven, fresh Manna Morning by Morning, and give me to
drink of the River of thy Pleasure Daily; who wilt enable me to stand faithful
to thee unto the end of my days, that I may finish my Testimony for thee, thy
Name and Truth in this thy day, even with Joy, and lay down my Head in Peace,
in thy tender Bosom of endless Love, oh my tender God, and therein repose, with
thy dear Children for evermore, and have my full satisfaction of love in thee,
thou Fountain of Love, and therein fetch my full breath for evermore; oh let it
be so, oh let it be so, oh my dear God, for thy own Seed sake, to thy own
praise thou holy one, who is worthy, worthy of all glory, glory, honogr and
everlasting thanksgiving, and pure living praises for ever, and evermore, Amen,
Hallelujah, glory and eternal renown to the almighty one in the highest, Amen.

Oh my soul thou dearly loves the whole Flock of God wherever they are
scattered upon the face of the Earth; oh, thou greatly desires their
Prosperity and Tranquillity, and that the Lord may prosper and bless them withal
spiritual Blessings in Christ Jesus: Oh, the Lord God keep all his Children
every where in this hour and power of Darkness, and preserve his dear Babes and
tender Lambs in this day of great Trial and manifold Temptation; Oh the Lord
keep all those who make mention of his Name in Sincerity and Truth, from bowing
in the least degree unto the Beast, and from drinking the least drop of the
Whores Cup, although she should be permitted to drink their Blood; Oh, the Lord
God Almighty keep his Sheep and Lambs, who were once scattered abroad, in the
cloudy dark day, whom he has sought and found out, and gathered out of the
desert Places, and waste howling Wilderness, whom he has brought from off the
barren Mountains and dry Heaths, into the low, low, low fresh green Valley,
where the pure sweet refreshing consolating springs of Life Eternal
encompasseth them about; Oh, the Lord keep them still and quiet, minding their
Feeding, and not at all h^^^ he raging of the Sea, nor regard the unmerciful
Waves thereof, which often looks very high, as if they would quite o^^ flo^ the
Val^^y of the low Places, and drown all who flee not unto the Mountains for
Refuge and Safety; but oh let not the h^ep and Lambs, and little ones fear, nor
at all flee to the H^ll^ for Refuge, for behold the Lord the high and mighty
one, the holy one of Israel is their Shepherd, and he even continually watches
over them, and greatly cares for them, and he it is who has giving bounds to
the raging Sea, and he limits the proud Waves thereof, and shuts up her
Floods as he pleases; he can let forth the Wind, and suffer a Storm, and he
can make a Calm when he pleases, he can cause the Sea and the Wind to obey
him; and therefore the Children of God need not to fear none besides the Lord,
who will suffer nothing to besal them, but what shall work for good to all his
chosen fai^hful ones; wherefore it is good for all the Children of the Lord
confidently to trust in the Lord, and not at all fear, though their Enemies
pursue hard after them, and say in their hearts, Come, come, we will pursue
them, we will overtake them, our Lusts shall be satisfied upon them, we will
have the desire of our Hearts concerning them, we will draw our Swords, and our
Hands shall destroy them, and we will try whether their Gods (in whom they say
they trust) be able to deliver them from the stroke of our Hands; Well, let not
Israel heed the boasting and threatening of his Enemies, nor regard the p^rposes
of his Adversaries, though they pursue hard after him, and say, We will bring
them back again into Egypt, or else we will totally Destroy them; Yet let not
Israel fear, for the Lord his God is between him and his Enemies, and fights
for him against his Adversaries, and he in his Anger will look down upon them,
and trouble their Host, and take off their Chariot wheels, and will blow in his
Wrath upon them, and the Sea of his righteous Indignation shall cover them, and
they shall sink as Lead in the bottom of his righteous Judgments, and he will
get himself a Name through the destruction of Sion^ Enemies, and Honor and
Magnify himself through the deliverance of his Chosen, who will work wonders
for his Redeemed, insomuch as the Dukes of Edom shall be amazed, and even
trembling* shall take hold upon the mighty men of Moab, and all Nations shall
shiver and quake before the mighty God of Israel, who is dreadful in Holiness,
fearful in Praises, doing Wonders: Oh, let Israel honor his God in believing
in him, and in trusting in his Name, in relying and depending upon his Arm of
everlasting strength, and patiently without murmurings to wait upon the Lord,
for he that is to come will come, and will not tarry, whose work is before him,
and his reward is with him, even Joy for the Mourners in Sion, and Beauty for
Ashes, Gladness for the heavy hearted in Jerusalem, Freedom for Bondage,
Freedom from Weights, Burdens and grievous Oppressions.

Oh let all the Children of the Lord wait without fainting, upon the Lord, for
yet a little while and the voice will be heard, saying rejoice, and even sing
for joy ye Saints, Servants and Prophets of the most High, and triumph in the
Lord Almighty over the Beast and false Prophet, and over the Whore which has
corrupted the Earth, who has long sat as a Queen, and said in her heart she
should never see Sorrow, with whom the Nations of the Earth has committed
Fornication, and she has made Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People drunk with
the wine of her Fornication, who has long deceived the Nations with her golden
Cup, which has been filled with Abominations, and in her is found all the
Blood of the Martyrs, and Servants of Jesus, which has been shed upon the
Earth, and she has rid upon the Beast that rose out of the Sea, who received
his seat, great power and authority from the Dragon, who persecuted the true
woman that was clothed with the Sun, and had a Crown of twelve Stars upon her
head; who sought to devour her Manchild, and made war against the remnant of
her Seed who keep the Commands of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus; these
cannot worship the Beast nor his name, nor receive his mark, but these worship
God alone, and are followers of the Lamb through many tribulations, whose
garments are made white in his Blood, by whom they are redeemed from amongst
men; these the Beast and false Prophet have sought to Kill, Persecute and root
out from off the face of the Earth; but woe, woe, woe, to the Beast, false
Prophet, and the Whore, for the day of their Judgment is come, and Misery,
Calamity, Distress and Destruction is coming upon them; and she, the mother of
Harlots, the mother of Witchcrafts, the Abominations of the Earth shall utterly
be Destroyed, and totally Burnt with Fire; for strong is the Lord God Almighty
who Judges her; and now sing O Heavens, and rejoice ye who live therein, over
mystery Babylon the great, for it is fallen, it is fallen as a mighty Millstone
into the bottom of the Sea, never more to arise again, Amen, Hallelu^ah.

And the Lord will thunder from Heaven upon thy Enemies, oh Sion, and will
break thy Adversaries to pieces, and will give strength to thy King, and exhalt
the horn of his Anointed, and he shall Reign, and Rule, and Prosper, and
execute Justice and true Judgment in the Earth; in his days Judah shall be
saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and sit under his own Vine, and none
shall make him afraid; then shall it be said to Jerusalem fear not, and to Sion
let not thy hands be slack, the Lord in the midest of thee is mighty, he has
saved thee, he has set thee free from thy Trouble he will rejoice over thee
with Joy, he will joy over thee with Singing, then it shall be said, sing oh
Daughter of Sion, and shout oh Israel, and rejoice withal thy heart, oh
Daughter of Jerusalem, for the Lord has taken away thy Judgment, he has cast
out thy Enemies, and thy Warfare is acomplished, and thy great Travel is
finished, and now thou shall rest from thy Labor, and they who have Labored
and Mourned with thee, and for thee, shall rejoice for Joy with thee, and suck
and be satisfied with the sweet consolation of thy Breast, and milk out, and be
delighted in the abundance of thy Glory; oh the Lord thy Husband, thy maker
(the God of hosts is his Name) will extend Peace, Joy, Comfort, and everlasting
Refreshment as a mighty Stream, and endless Consolations as a River; oh then
shall they be Comforted in thee after their Sorrow, and be born up upon thy
Sides, and dandled upon thy Knees; for as a Woman comfort her only Son, so
will the Lord comfort Jerusalem; in the sense whereof her Children shall
rejoice, and their Souls be right glad, and flourish as an herb, and their
Spirits shall praise and sing glory unto him who is Lord and King of Heaven and
Eart^, who is worthy, worthy of all Glory, Praise and Honor for ever, and for
evermore, Amen says my soul.

The thing which the Lord has purposed must be accomplished in his season, and
the thing that he has determined must be fulfilled in despite of all the
powers of Darkness; Oh, that all thy Babes and Lambs may willingly wait thy
appointed time, O Lord God Almighty; oh dear God, keep all thy people retire in
thy Name, that so what ever thou suffers to befall their Bodies, their Souls may
be safe bundled up in the bundle of Life, wrapped therein for evermore, for a
terrible day is like to be upon all Flesh, and who can be able to abide it? Oh,
dear God, increase the Patience of thy People, strengthen the Faith of thy
Chosen; oh, support the Weak, and uphold the little Ones, which cannot go
alone; oh, that none of thy Flock may faint, nor grow weary; oh, that all thine
might stand in the day of Trial, and be kept in the hour of Temptation, and
born up under all Sufferings, that so in the end they may come forth as Gold
seven times refined in the Fire, that they may shine as Stars in the Firmament
of thy Power, making mention of thy Goodness, Graciousness and Kindness, O Lord
God Almighty, declaring of thy mighty Acts, and sing of thy Mercies and
wonderful doings, and Glorify, Magnify, Honor and Praise thee, thou mighty
everlasting and powerful one, who art from all Eternity to all Eternity, whose
Throne is established of old, whose Scepter bears sway in Righteousness,
whose Kingdom is Everlasting, glory and hallelujah to thee in the highest, for
ever and for evermore, yea praises, praises, pure living praises every minute,
be rendered unto the Lord Almighty, says the s^ul of

W. B.

OH arise, arise, thou holy righteous Seed of the Covenant of Life Eternal;
Arise, arise, thy Light is come, and the Glory of thy God is risen upon thee;
Oh thou lovely one, Nations shall come to thy Light, and Kings to the
brightness of thy Rising; Ah thou beautiful one, thy Sons shall come from far,
and thy Daughters from the ends of the Earth; Arise, arise thou beautiful one,
who art altogether lovely: Oh how sweet is thy Love, thou lovely one? oh how
excellent is thy Love, thou choice one? oh thy love, thy love is more precious
then Rubies, more sweeter then Honey, oh thy love is better then Wine; Oh how
has thy love overcome the hearts of many, and won them unto thee? oh thy love
draws many after thee; oh how does thy love cause many to cast off all their
other Lovers to follow thee, thou lovely one? oh thou art become unto many
Souls (who loves thee, thou lovely one) even the chiefest of ten thousands,
whose eyes are opened to see thy Beauty, and to behold thy Comeliness, thou
beautiful one; oh thou art hid from the Polluted, neither can the Unclean
behold thy excellent Beauty, the Vulture's eye cannot perceive thy Comeliness,
nor they who has eyes full of Adultery, and cannot cease from Sin, and have
hearts exercised with coveteous practices, and are gone a whoring after many
Lovers; oh from these thou art hid, thou lovely one, even as a Garden enclosed,
as a Spring shut up, as a Fountain sealed from them: Oh arise thou choice one,
and let thy Beauty appear unto those who have not seen thy Beauty; and let them
taste of thy Love, that so they may cast off all other Lovers, and follow thee;
cast off all, and cleave unto thee with their whole hearts. Oh arise, arise
thou beloved one, and shine forth in thy excellent Glory, that even the Nations
may be ravished with thy Beauty, and Kingdoms overcome with thy Love, and be
drawn after thee, that a blessing in thee they may obtain; Oh, arise and let
thy Fruitfulness appear, thou precious one, and let Joy and Gladness fill thy
heart, thou lovely one, for the days of thy rejoicing is come and coming, and
the days of thy mourning, oh Sion, is fleeing away; Oh thou beloved one, thou
have been even as a Woman forsaken and grieved in Spirit, and few or none of
the Sons or Daughters of Men has looked upon thee with an eye of pity; oh thou
have been as the Owl in the Desert, and as the alone Sparrow upon the house
top, and as the alone Quail in the stubble fields, and as a Dove mourning alone
without her Mate; who have set solitary alone as in the Wilderness, and none
among the Sons of Men to comfort thee; and oh thou beloved anointed one, thou
have been like unto a man of Sorrow, and very deeply acquainted with Grief;
often Smitten, often Grieved, often Afflicted, often Wounded, often Pierced and
Oppressed, even as a Cart that is pressed with Sheaves, and yet the Sons and
Daughters of Men has not esteemed thee; although indeed, thou patient one,
thou have been wounded by their Transgressions, and grieved, smitten and
pierced, and bruised by their Iniquities, and has born the weight of their
Sins, and the burden of their Transgressions, even while they like Sheep have
gone astray, every one following his own way, and Feasting themselves as for a
day of Slaughter, whilst thou have been Mourning because of the Iniquity of the
People; Eating and Drinking and rising up to Play, whilst thou have been
Weeping and Groaning in secret, because of the multitude of their
Transgressions, who has heaped Sin upon Sin, and Iniquity upon Iniquity, and
has loaded thee therewith, which has been as an impress of ten thousands upon
thee, thou tender one, and unto thee they had no regard, they took no notice of
thy Sorrow and Burdens: But oh thou beloved one, thy God, thy tender God, who
has loved thee with an everlasting Love, took notice of thy Sorrow, and he saw
thy Grief, and beheld thy sore Weights and Burdens, and took cognizance of thy
grievous Oppressions, and he heard the voice of thy Weeping, and thy Tears
which thou droppedst upon his Alter lay in the view of the eye of his pitiful
Soul, and he beheld thy great Travel, and thy Sighing and Groaning entered into
his Ears, and his tender, tender Bowels of infinite Love, Mercy, Pity and
everlasting Compassion, was and is moved toward thee, and he has determined
to comfort thee, with an everlasting Comfort, thou patient suffering one, and
the Nights of thy Sorrow, shall vanish away for ever, and the Days of thy
Mourning, shall be over.

Oh thou beloved one, lift up thy Head, lift up thy Head, in the strength of
thy God, and gird up thy Loins with Courage in the power of his Might, for thy
Winter is almost over and gone, and shall no more come, the Storms are
vanishing away and shall no more appear, the nipping Frosts are dissolving by
the Sun of Righteousness, who is arisen upon thee with healing in his wings;
Ah, lift up thy voice like the sound of a Trumpet, and shout like the voice of
a King, and sing for joy, thou beloved one; for thy Spring is come, thou lovely
one; thy Summer is come, thou lovely one; the singing of Birds is come, thou
beautiful one; and the voice of the Turtle is heard in thy Land, thou delicate
and choice one; let thy heart be filled with Melody, thou blessed one, who art
clothed with Chastity, and keeps thy Virginity in the Chamber of Purity; oh,
thy beloved is come, and into his Banqueting House he is bringing thee, where
his Banner over thee is Love, where he will stay thee with Flaggons, and
comfort thee with Apples, and cause thee to drink of his spiced Wine, and of
the juice of his Pomgranets; oh Sion, rejoice thou in his Love, for the days of
the glading of thy heart is come, thou tender one, who have been tossed with
tempest and not comforted; thou have been termed Desolate and Forsaken; thou
have been as one Barren and Unfruitful: but now arise, arise, lengthen thy
Cords, and strengthen thy Stakes, and enlarge the Curtains of thy Habitation;
for lo thou fruitful one, thou shall break forth on the right hand and on the
left, and thy Seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and thy Offspring the People;
the North shall give up, and the South shall not keep back; they shall come
from the East, and from the West, and flock unto thee as Doves to the Window;
thy Sons shall come from far, and thy Daughters be nursed at thy sides, thou
shall cause many wast places to be Builded, and many Buildings to fall, and
desolate plaees to be Inhabited, and Inhabited places to be laid desolate, and
barren Mountains to become fruitful Valleys, and fruitful Places to become
barren Mountains, and the Wilderness become a Vinyard of sweet Grapes, the
Forest as a City of Habitation, the parched Ground to become a Pool, and dry
Heaths springs of Water; oh arise, arise, thou beloved one, and let thy
Fruitfulness be manifested to the Nations, break forth in thy excellent Glory,
shine forth in thy glorious Beauty as clear as the Morning without Clouds, fair
as the Moon, and bright as the Sun, that thou may appear as a royal Diadem in
the hand of the Lord, and as a Crown of Glory in the hand of thy God, that far
off Nations may see thy Beauty, and remote Kings may see thy excellent Glory,
and be won by thy Love unto thee, that they who has Hated thee may Love thee,
bccause of thy Love that did extend to them, even whilst they hated and
rejected the woings of thy Love; oh, my soul loves thee in thy Love, thou
lovely one; oh kiss me, kiss me with the Kisses of thy M^uth, for thy Love is
better then Wine, oh thou beautiful one, thy Love overcomes my heart, thy Love
draws me after thee; oh thou art ple^sant unto me, thy presence is more
desirable then all things my heart can desire; oh; if thou hidst thy Face, thou
bountiful one, then am I bowed down, for the smiles of thy comely Countenance
is the rejoicing of my Heart, and the glading of my Soul, the refreshing of my
Spirit, as marrow to my Bones, and strength to my Reins; oh, thou art my Joy in
Sorrow, my Comfort in Mourning, my Help in Need, my Strength in Weakness, my
Riches in Poverty, my Bread in Hunger, my Water in Thirst, my Refuge from
Storms, my Shelter from Heat, and as the shadow of a Rock to me in a weary
Land; oh, how can I but love thee in thy Love, thou lovely one; oh, thou art my
Mother who has traveled in great pain to bring me forth, thou art the Womb
that bore me, and the Paps that gave me suck, the Cradle of my rest, and the
Bed of repose; oh can I forget thee? how can I forget thee who has done so
much for me even that which no man could do? oh, thou lovedst me first before I
loved thee, thou lovely one, and with thy Love thou woedst me, and by thy Love
thou overcamest my heart, and drew it after thee; and now thou amiable one, the
desire of my soul is unto thee, and unto the remembrance of thy Love; oh, my
Soul desires thee in the Night season, and in the Morning I will seek thee
early; thou art as a cluster of Campire, and as a bundle of Mirrh unto me, thou
shall lie all Night between my Breasts; oh thou lovely one, let me repose in
thy Bosom, and fold me in thy Arms; oh, thy Love, thy Love ovcrcomes my Heart,
thy Beauty even makes me sick of Love; oh, let me remember thy Love more then
Wine, it is the upright loves thee, and it is the pure in heart who sees thy
Beauty, and beholds thy excellent Comeliness; oh, let thy Love still draw me
after thee, oh, let me never leave thee, oh, that I may never forsake thee, nor
be unmindful of thy Love which I have known to be stronger then Death, and him
who has the power of Death; oh, thou art a Tree of Life to those who take hold
on thee, and blessed is every Soul that retains thee; Oh, thy ways are ways
of Pleasantness, and all thy paths are green and delightsom to those who love
thee; oh in thee is my rest, in thee is my peace, in thee is my joy, in thee is
my comfort, in thee obtain I blessing and happiness; thou art my Joy, and the
Crown of my Rejoicing for ever and for evermore; Oh, wherefore hold me, hold me
with thy Love, thou Lovely Blessed One, and let me never depart from thee, and
then I know thou will never depart from me; but I shall be thine, and thou
shall be mine in a perpetual Covenant, which never shall be broken; Oh thou
Comely Beautiful Choice One, thy Riches is durable, for the Glory, the glory,
the glory of the Lord thy God is thy Dowry for evermore: Unto whom be ascribed
all honor and glory, eternal praises and renown, and everlasting dominion for
evermore; so be it says my Soul, and Amen says my Spirit; Oh come Lord Jesus,
come quickly, and take unto thy self thy great power to Reign, for thou art
worthy, worthy says my Soul; glory to thee in the highest for evermore, Amen.

Written in Edmonds-Bury common Goal in the year 1665. William Bennit.

This to go among Friends to be Read among them when assembled together in the
pure Fear and Wisdom of God.
DEarly beloved Friends and Brethren, Sheep of the Lords Pasture, Lambs of the
Lords Flock, and Lillies of the Lords Field; the comely beautiful Garment of
Innocence, Meekness, Love, Truth and Righteousness which does cover many of
you, even affects my Heart, and induces my Soul dearly to love you, and
Spirit to travel for your Welfare, Tranquillity and Preservation even in every
particular respect, desiring the Lord God of Blessings may Bless and Prosper
you in Truth and Righteousness, and that his Grace and Love, Mercy and Peace,
with Joy and Consolation, Strength and Wisdom may be augmented and multiplied
in and unto all your Souls, that so the increase of him (the fullness of all
durable Riches) to your Souls you may witness, and that the Fountain of Life
(with whom is the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge) may be enlarged unto you,
that of his fullness you daily may receive, whereby your Hearts may be opened
and enlarged more and more unto the Lord, and one unto another, and that the
sense of his Goodness and loving Kindness, Mercy, Pity and Compassion shed
abroad and manifested toward you, may always be fresh in and upon your hearts*
that indeed the largness of his endless unchangable, unspeakable Love may be by
your Souls admired, and be an engagement and tie upon every particular one to
oblige your Hearts, and bind your Souls unto the Lord God, and unto his
immutable invinceable Truth; oh dear Friends, much has the Lord done for us,
and let his doings be still marvelous in our eyes, and let his own Works show
forth his Praise, whose Mercies endures for ever; dear Friends, the Lord God
of Compa^^^on sought and found us out, in the cloudy, dismal, dark Day, when we
were scattered upon the barren Mountains and dry Heaths, wandering as silly
Sheep without a Shepherd; but now has he gathered us together, and even made
us a Family like a Flock, and brought us down into the low Valley, and has
given us fresh and green Pasture to Feed in, and streams of living Water to
Drink of; and now the Lord (the Almighty Jehovah) is our Shepherd, and his
everlasting powerful Name our Fold, and therefore are we not Consumed, though
the Beasts of the Field have come forth against us, to destroy us, and the
roaring devouring Lions have been very greedy of their Prey, yet are we
preserved unto this day, because the Lord has been our defense on the right
hand, and on the left, who has and does Fight for mount Sion; and as the Hills
are round about Jerusalem, so has the Lord been, still is, and will be round
about his People, as the munition of Rocks for evermore, and their Bread shall
not fail, and their Water shall be sure; O let all that fear the Lord trust in
him whose Mercies are everlasting.

Oh dear Friends, the Lord once found us in a sollitary Place, and in a waste
howling Wilderness, Hungry and Thirsty; Naked and Desolate, our way hedged up
as with Briars and Thorns, and there must we have Perished, had not the tender
God of Bowels looked upon us with an eye of Pity and Compassion, and helped us
in the day of our Distress; how did he lop the Bough with Terror, and the
strong one of stature he hewed down; he did cut up the Thicket of the Forest,
as with Iron, and Lebanon did fall by a strong Arm, and made a way for us in
the Wilderness, and a path through the Thickets; he laid low the Mountains
before us, and removed away the Hills, and made the crooked Paths strait before
us, and was a Refuge to us from the Sto^m, and a Shelter to us from the Heat,
and as the shadow of a Rock unto us in a weary Land; and now has he brought us
into a right Way, which leads to a City of Habitation, to a quiet dwelling
Place, where the Lord feeds his Flock, and causes them to lie down at
Noonday; oh mavelous are the Works of the Lord, and the Living can sing of
his Mercies, his tender Compassion fails not toward the House of Jacob, he
is a Father unto Israel, and Ephraim is his first Born; let Judah show forth is
Praises, whose Mercy endures for ever.

Oh dear Children of my heavenly Father, remember we once sat as by the Rivers
of Babylon, and Weeping we thought upon Sion, Mourning in the sense of our
separation from her, even as a Woman Mourns for her only Son; and then we
could not sing* the Lords Song in a strange Land, but were as a Dove without
her Mate, and the alone Sparrow upon the House top; as the Pelican in the
Wilderness, and as the alone Quail in the stubble Field; as a Woman forsaken
and g^ieved in Spirit, asking the way to Sion with our Faces thither-ward,
saying in our hearts we would be joined again unto the Lord in a perpetual
Covenant never to be broken.

And how graciously has the Lord returned again our Captivity, as streams in
the South, and has brought us on the way to Sion, with Joy and Gladness, and
our Sighing and Mourning is in measure fled away; oh the Lord is worthy to be
Feared, and his holy Name is worthy to be Honored, and Magnified in the
Congregation of the Righteous, for his Mercies abids for ever.

Oh dear Babes, we who once did sit in Darkness, have seen a great and glorious
Light, and unto us who once sat under the Region and shadow of Death is the
Light of Life risen, and the blessed day sprung from on high shines in our
Habitat^on, and the Lord is unto us an everlasting Light, and let us for
evermore walk in his Light, as becomes Children of Light, shining (in our holy
Lives and blameless unspoted Conversations) as Lights in the World, to the
Praise and Glory of God whose Goodness and Mercy is without end.

Dear Babes, the Lord has brought us forth of the Prison House, and lifted us
up out of the dark miery Dungeon; h^ has raised us out of the Dust, and taken
us as from the Dunghill, to set us among Princes, and to inherit the seat of
Renown, which is the Chair of Humility.

Oh the Height and Depth, Length and Breadth of the Love, Goodness and Mercy of
the Lord, let our hearts be rent and broken before him, and humbled in his
Presence, and let us walk before his Holiness, and tremble at his Word, and bow
down unto his holy Name, and stand in awe of the Lord, for whom Praises waits
in Sion.

Now seeing the Lord has done so much for our Souls, let us wait upon him for
Strength and Power daily, thereby to endure, to answer the largness of his Love
in all Obedience and Faithfulness to him, who has broke our Bands asunder and
snapt our Cords in ^ieces; and now dear Friends, let us stand steadfast in that
Liberty whereinto the Lord by his Truth has brought us, and not be entangled
with the Yoke of Bondage as too to many are, who were once made Free by the
Lord; oh how have some for fear of Persecution started aside out of the narrow
Way, into the broad Way; and some for the Love, Favor and Honor of this World
are departed from the Faith, and have made Shipwreck of a good Conscience; and
some through the deceitfulness of Riches; and some through the Cares and
Cumbrances of this World, the Seed of God is Choked again, and the Earth is
come over it again, and the World has eaten up their Hearts, and their Minds
are become carnal again, and the Goodness of the Lord is forgotten by them, and
the Spirit of Slumber has shut them up; and for these does my Soul mourn in
secret, and travel for their Restoration, and in the sense of what is come upon
them, how can we but Fear and Dread the Lord, and Watch and Pray, and keep
close to the saving preserving power of his Grace which has kept us unto this
day, Praises to his Name for ever.

Oh Babes, we had need continually to stand upon our watch Tower having the
Loins of our Minds girded up unto God, with the Girdle of Truth, having on the
Breast Plate of Righteousness and the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation
and the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, that we may be able to send off
the Fiery Darts of the Ememy within, and be able to shun his Wiles, and to keep
out of his Snares, that we may never be betrayed of the simplicity and
innocence of Truth as it is in Jesus.

Oh how has he prevailled over some, and drawn them into a self separation,
and particularily from the Body which is joined unto Christ the Head, from whom
the Body receives Virtue, whereby every Member is Nourished, and all comes to
supply its Plaee and Office in the Body, and so is of service to the Body, as
it keeps its Order; and so every Member being in unity one with another, are as
meet helps one to another; and so the Strong in some things may help the Weak,
and the Weak in some things may help the Strong; so that the Hand cannot say
unto the Foot, I have no need of thee, but every Member to be as Servants one
to another, and all in Subjection to Christ the Head, that the increase of the
Body may be witnessed unto the Edifying of it self in Love.

Dear Friends, if some who under pretense of ceasing from Man, and Words, and
Forms, etc. does absent from the Assemblies of the Righteous, and withdraw from
the Meetings of the People of God, etc. yet I hope the Lord will preserve you
from that Spirit, and I hope the Love and Power of his Truth will stir up your
Hearts and constrain you to be very diligent and faithful in meeting together
in the holy Fear and Name of the Lord God, to wait diligently upon, him in the
measure of his Light, Life and Truth received, that so ye may daily receive
Teaching, Counsel and Instruction from the Lord, and receive of his heavenly
Dew and Virtue, whereby you may daily be Quickened, Warmed and Inlivened in the
inward man, and be kept alive unto God, Green and Fresh as the Willow by the
Rivers side, as the Lillies in the Valleys, and as a watered Garden, giving a
sweet smell and delectable savor, that the Blessings from on high may be
showred down upon you more and more, that your Fruit may increase to the praise
of his holy Name.

So dear Babes; I commit you unto the Preservation and Protection of the Lord
God, who in this the day of great Trials has mightily stopped the raging Sea,
and has limited the proud Waves thereof, and has shut up her Floods as he
has seen meet; oh let every poor little tender honest hearted one put their
trust in the Lord, if they be never so Poor, Weak and Feeble in their own Eyes,
let them cast their care upon the Lord, for he cares for them, and rely upon
the arm of his Mercy, and hope in his tender Bowels, and he will be Strength to
thee who (without him) art Weak; and he will be Riches to thee who (without
him) art Poor; believe and trust thou in him, and hearken not to the false
Accuser, neither join to the Consulter; but be still and know the Lord is God
all-sufficient for thee, and all those that lean upon him for Help, and that
depend upon him for power, he is able and ready to save in the hour of
Temptation, to support in the day of Trial, to uphold in the greatest Storm,
and to keep in Patience until it be over and gone, and a Calm comes again.

Dear Friends and Brothren, in that Love which is unspea^able does my Soul
dearly salute you and embrace you, simpathising with you in your Trials,
desiring to Mourn with all them that Mourn, and to Rejoice with them that
Rejoice, and unto him you are left, who is able to Comfort the Mourners among
you, and is ready to left up the Light of his refreshing Countenance upon the
heavy hearted, and bowed down under the burdens of the Righteous Seed, and to
strengthen the feeble Knees and to heal the Wounded, and bind up the broken in
heart, that they that has, or does sit in the solitary place of Mourning may
be filled with the Joy of the Lord, and that they that yet are bowed down with
the false Accuser of the Brethren, and lie mourning in the pit of Distrust,
Unbelief and Desparation, may mount upon the wings of Faith, unto the holy hill
of Zion, thereon to stand with the Lamb, and to sing the new Song which none
can sing but the Redeemed of the Lord, so be it says my Soul.

From your true Friend and Companion in the Faith and Patience, and long
Suffering of Jesus, who is often with you in Spirit, though in Body Separated
and Confined from you, being still close shut up in Prison, with several of the
Lords Lambs, whose good Pres^nce is with us, blessed be h^s Name, upon whom we
wait for Deliverance, believing that the Almighty God, who delivered Just Lot
from the Wicked Sodomits, whose Ungodliness vexed his Righteous Soul from day
to day; and who delivered his People of Old out of Egypt, and freed them out of
the Hands of oppressing Pharaoh; and who delivered David out of the Paw of the
Lion, out of the Paw of the Bear, and from the hands of the uncircumcised
Philistine; who delivered Jeremiah out of the low miery Dungeon, and Daniel out
of the Lions D^n; who delivered the three Children out of the Fiery Furnace,
and Paul and Sila^ out of the Prisonhouse (he the Living God, who changes
not, whose hand is not shortened that it cannot save) will at this day deliver
his People out of all their Sufferings, and free them of their Burdens, Weights
and grievous Oppressions in his own time, Blessed are all they that durst not
look out at time, as some have done to their one hurt, but wait pariently upon
the Lord, who can change Times and Seasons as he pleases; who dwells in the
Heavens, and also rules over the Kingdoms of men, and sets up and throws
down as he pleases; who sees all the Works of the Sons of men, and pondereth
all their doings; he is a God of Knowledge, and by him actions are weighed; he
excels in Strength, Power, Wisdom and Mercy, and his Throne is from
everlasting, and his Kingdom without end; who is God over all blessed for
evermore.

Let none get into a false security because of the present Calm, the Lord can
suffer a Storm, and make a Calm again, when he pleases; let all Watch and
Pray, and Fear before the Lord, and wait upon him to be fitted for-Tryals, that
so no Storm may come upon you before you are aware of it, and before you be
ready for it.

Dear Babes, Read and Feel my Love in the Truth, and therein let not your Love
be wanting one to another, but live in Love, Unity and Peace, and the God of
Love and Peace be with you, and his Blessings rest upon you, Farwell dear
Friends. William Bennit.
E^monds-Bury common Goal this 25th. of the first Month 1667.
A Testimony to the True Light that lightens every Man that comes into the
World.
The People that did sit in Darkness have seen a great and glorious Light, and
unto those that were under the Region and Shadow of Death is the Light of Life
arisen, and the Blessed Day sprung from on high, and shines in their
Tabernacles; and that which they have seen, heard, felt and tasted of, the same
they have and do bear Testimony unto, though few there be that have received
their Testimony.

For who has believed our Report, and unto whom is the Arm of the Lord
Revealed.

But come ye, O House of Israel, and let us walk in the Light of the Lord.

THE Light revealed within is the (narrow) Way to Life Eternal; and the Door
into the Fold of Everlasting Rest: The Light-is the Entrance into the fresh and
green Pasture wherein the Lord feeds his Elock, and causes them to lie down
in peace and quietness, out of the reach of the Beasts of prey: The Light leads
and draws those that obey it, out of Darkness, and from under the region and
shadow of Death into the Land of the Living, there to dwell under the region
and shadow of Light and Life: The Light breaks the Bonds of Sin in pieces, and
snappeth ^he Cords of Iniquity asunder, and sets the Soul free from the Bondage
of Corruption, to serve the Lo^d in the Life of Righteousness: The Light
draws and leads those that believe in it, and obey it, out of the
Alienation and Separation from God, into the Everlasting Covenant of Life and
Love, where the Soul is in unity with the Lord: The Light searches the Heart,
and operateth in the secrets of the Minds of those that obey it, and like unto
Leaven works the Heart and Mind into its own nature, frame and quality: The
Light is Pure, Holy and Undefiled, and has no unity with the least impure
Thought, Word or Work, but Judges and Condemns it: The Light is Meek,
Contrite, Lowly and Humble, and condemns that honor that is corrupt, and is
from below, and stands in respect of Persons; and it seeks the honor of
God only: The Light Baptizeth self into Death, slayes the Boaster, puts Flesh
to silence, that God may speak in his Temple, who is not to be denied the Mouth
to speak by: The Light is the heavenly Treasure in the earthen Vessel, that
brings honor and glory unto God: The Light has no fellowship with Darkness;
he that says he is in the Light, and has unity with the Light, and yet loves
and walks in Darkness, lies, and the Light has no room, place or
entertainment in his heart: The Light teaches those that love it to love
Enemies; its fruit is Love, no Envy, no Malice, no Hatred, no Bitterness, no
Enmity, no Prejudice, no Discord, no Backbiting, no Reviling, no evil
Whispering proceeds from the Light; the Light condemns it all, and that
ground from whence it springs: The Light has no unity with any unfruitful
works of Darkness, but reproves them: The Light teaches to render Good for
Evil, and to forgive Enemies, and to pray for Persecutors, and to have love and
good will to all People, and to seek and desire the Eternal good and welfare
of all Souls; he that hates and envies his Enemies abides not in the Light;
Envy is of the Evil-one; he that says he walks in the Light, and hates his
Brother, lies, and errs from the Truth: The Light teaches to love God with
thy whole heart, and thy Neighbor, or Brother, as thy self; He that says he
loves God and hates his Brother, is a Liar, he that loves him that begets,
does also love those that are begotten of him; Love thinks no Ill to Enemies,
much less to Brethren: The Light leads his Children into Love, Peace and
Unity with God, and one with another in the Life of Righteousness; oh the unity
the unity of Brethren in the Light, Love and Life of God is exceeding precious
and comely, its compared like to precious Oil, poured on the Head, that runs
down on the Beard, even Aarons Beard, that went down to the skirts of his
Garment, and like the dew of Hermon, and like the dew that descended upon the
Mountain of Sion, where the Blessing is, and where the Lord makes unto his
People a Feast of fat things: The Light teaches, and makes to be of one
Heart, of one Mind, of one Soul, and (in all those that walk in it) begets
one consent to serve and worship the only wise God, in the one Spirit and one
Truth: The Light gives a good Understanding, a clear Discerning, a sound
Judgment: The Light leads not into strife and contention, nor into rents*
divisions and parties, nor into a particularity and self-separation from the
Body, nor into self-conceitedness, nor into high airy notions, nor into a
climing up in imaginations after high discoveries; (and so slight the day of
small things, and neglect thy obedience to the present gift, through an
expectation of something greater to come yet unrevealed; and such, like
Lucifer, mounts high in their Conceits and Imaginations, but will fall to the
side of the Pit;) but the Light condemns all this, and judges that Spirit that
leads thereinto; which Spirit sows Discord among Brethren, which is
Abomination; and that Spirit leads some to speak evil of Dignities, and to
despise Dominion, and to rebel against the Order and Government of the Lamb:
The Light judges that Spirit that sets up, and keeps up (out of the comely
descent order of Truth) that thing that tends to strife and breaking unity
among Brethren: The Light teaches those that love it, to seek and endeavor
for Love, Peace and Unity among Brethren, with all Self-denial: The Light
teaches to take away the occasion of stumbling in thy Brothers way: The Light
teaches to be very wary and careful of giving Enemies advantage to strengthen
themselves against Truth, and the Wicked occasion to reproach it, and those
that live in it: The Light teaches to live and walk in a holy godly Life, and
blameless Conversation, as becomes the Gospel of Truth, and as becomes Saints
of the Most High: The Light, in those that love it, crucifieth the Flesh with
the lusts and affections thereof, and teaches those that love it, how to
possess their Vessels in Sanctification and Honor: The Light crucifieth the
Heart unto the World and worldly things, and redeemeth the Mind from the Earth
and earthly things: and teaches to use the World as if thou usedst it not: The
Light draws the Mind out of the many things (where all offend) into the one
thing needful, which gives not, nor receives an offense, but judges the
offenses, and that ground from whence they come: The Light is Supernatural, and
is to overruled the Naturals, and to keep them within the bonds of the
Government of Truth, and to limit the affectionate part from leading and
drawing the Heart and Mind into things below, into created Objects, and into
Bondage to the cares of this Life, and troubles and cumbrances of this World,
which does not profit but hinder to Godward: The Light is the Girdle of the
Loins, of the Mind, of those that love it, to gird up their Hearts and Minds
unto God, that in him their peace may be perfect: The Light is a stop to those
Thoughts which are reproveable by it: The Light is a Bridle to the Tongue, and
they that know it so to be, dare not say (in a self-will) our Tongues are our
own, and we will speak: The Light rules over the Souls and Bodies of those
that believe in, love, follow and obey it, and teaches and enableth such to
yield their Members Servants of Righteousness unto God, even as they have (when
they were Servants to Sin) yielded their Members Servants to Unrighteousness,
and of Iniquity unto Iniquity: The Light is the Author of the true and living
Faith, which gives victory over the World, and is a shield unto the Soul to
fend off the fiery darts of the Devil, and works by Love to the purifying of
the Heart: The Light is the Author to the true Hope, which is an Anchor unto
the Soul, sure and steadfast, and is held in a pure Conscience void of Offense
toward God and Man: The Light is the Author of true Patience, long Suffering,
Forbearance, Forgiveness and Contentedness; it teaches to be patient in all
Trials, Tribulations, Troubles Straits and Difficulties, and teaches in all
conditions to be contented, and not to murmur against the Lord whatsoever he
permit to come to pass: The Light teaches his Children to love one another
fervently, with a clean heart; oh, how good is God to Israel, to them that are
of a clean heart: The Light teaches to endeavor to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of Peace: The Light teaches the Younger to yield and submit
themselves to the Elder, in the Lord, and to hearken unto Counsel, Instruction
and Reproof; he teaches all his Children to be subject one to another; he
clothes them with Humility, ado^neth them with Meekness, and beautifies them
with lowliness of Spirit: The Light teaches the Strongest to condesend to the
Weakest, and to serve the Meanest in Love, to bear with the infirmities of the
Feeble, to help and hold up the Halting, and to draw forward the backward with
the Cords of Love, and to cast a Garment over thy Brothers Nakedness: The Light
in those that love it, puts out the eye that watches for evil, and condemns
that part that boasts it self, and rejoices at another fall, and
strengthens it self with prejudice against another through his failing, which
thing is as most abominable filth in the pure eye of the Light: The Light does
not countenance evil in any, but judges and discovers it, though hid under a
profession of Truth The Light is like unto the Touchstone that trys Silver from
Tin, it tries and discovers the Good from the Bad; it tries Motions,
Thoughts, Words, Works and Spirits: The Light is a Stone which God has laid in
Sion, Elect and Precious, which they that believe, shall not be ashamed, and
unto those that believe he is very Precious; but unto them that believe not, he
is as a Stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offense, at whom the seeming wise
Master Builders have, and do stumble; and he whom t^^ ^ise Professors of this
Age, and great Rabbis, and Learned Orators set at naught, the same is become
the Head and Chief Corner Stone in Gods House; by the virtue of which Stone
they that b^^ieve in him are quickened, and made living Stones; meet to be
joined unto him (the Light) in whom the Building being fitly framed together,
grows up unto an holy Temple in the Lord: The Light was in the beginning
before the Darkness was, and is now made manifest to extinguish the Darkness,
and to fill the dark corners of the Earth with the bright beams of his Glory;
he is the First and the Last; he was before Time, and will remain when that
which in time is passed away: The Light is the Beginning and the End, the
Foundation and Top-stone, the Root and Offspring of David, and the Bright
Morning Star, whose blessed Day Abraham saw, and was glad; he dwelt among the
seven golden Candlesticks, and was with the Church in the Wilderness, in the
days of old: He is the Light of the holy City, New-Jerusalem, which John (in
the Lords Day) saw coming down from God, prepared as a Bride adorned for her
Husband: The Light gives the Churches to know, that it is he that searches
the Heart, and tries the Reins, from whom no Hypocrite in Sio^ can be hid; who
said, I come quickly, and my Reward is with me, to give unto every one
according as his Work But who shall abide the Day of his Coming, (in which the
Heavens pass away with a great noise, and the Elements melt with fervent heat)
and who shall stand when he appears, who is like Refiners Fire, and like
Fullers Soap, purifying his Sanctuary, and cleansing his Temple in which he
delights to dwell? He is the Word that was in the beginning, by whom all things
were made that was made; and in him there is Life, and his Life is the Light of
men; and he is the true L^ght that lights every man that comes into the
World; he is the Express Image of his Fathers Glory, and is called the Son of
God, in whom dwells all fullness of Joy, Happiness and Eternal Felicity; who
is God over all, and above all, blessed, blessed for ever and evermore, Amen.

VV. B.

OH, happy and blessed are the People, who though they once were Darkness, yet
now are Light in the Lord; Oh, walk ye, oh, walk ye as Children of the Light
bearing the pure Image of the Father of Lights, in whom is no Darkness at all,
nor variableness or shadow of turning; but is the same yesterday, so to day,
and for evermore.

FRiends that are Sufferers upon Truths account in Edmonds-Bury Goal, are in a
measure of health (through the Love, Goodness and Mercy of the Lord, blessed
and magnified be his Name) this 7th day of the 10th Month 1667. and their dear
love in the precious Truth dearly reaches forth unto all faithful Friends every
where, and you are often in their remembrance, desiring the Lord may prosper
you, and bless you with all spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus our Lord, and
keep you with us, and the whole Israel of God, by his Almighty Power through
Faith in his Name, unto his Heavenly Kingdom, and enable us all to finish the
work the Lord has given us (by his Power) to do; that we may glorify him on
Earth, that he may glorify us with himself, with that glory he had before the
World began; even so be it; and Amen faith my Soul.

To Friends, Sufferers in Norwich-Castle.
DEar Suffering Lambs, whom the Wolves seek to Rend and Devour, in the tender
Love of the great Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls, is my heart opened to you,
to visit you with a few Lines, and in the name of my God and your God, my
Father and your Father, I say unto you, he whom you serve has seen your
Afflictions, and has beheld your Sufferings, and has took notice of your
Burdens, and cognizence of your grievous Oppressions, and has heard your
Groanings, and has beheld your Tears; he assuredly will in his own time rebuke
your Enemies, and plead your innocent Cause with your Oppressors, and ease you
of, and free you from your great Afflictions; therefore, dear suffering Lambs
of my heavenly Father, lift up your Heads in the Name of the Lord God, and take
Courage and be Strong in his Power and Truth which is in you, and with you, and
on your sides, and it is the Truth that shall prevail against all its Enemies,
and its Opposers shall be Confounded, and the Truth of our God shall Flourish
over all; therefore, dear Hearts, still cleave to the precious Truth of God
made known unto you, and let nothing separate you from it; oh, blessed be the
Lord that he has begotten such a Love in you to him and his Truth, that such
is your love thereunto, that you are willing to undergo Reproaches, Abuses and
spoiling of your Goods, Imprisonment, and to be separated from your Friends and
Relations for Truths sake; oh, dear Lambs, great is your Reward if you abide to
the end, and faint not in well doing; oh, my heart is open to you in the tender
Love and Bowels of Emanuel, and my soul is refreshed in your Faithfulness, and
though many of your Faces I never saw, yet I am one with you in your
Sufferings, wherein my soul simpathiseth with you, and has unity with your
Testimony for the Lord, and my spirit does praise the Lord, the God of your
Salvation, on your behalf, in that he has so mightily upheld you, and born you
up in his Arms, in the midst of your Trials; though you of your selves are
Weak, yet the Lord is Strong, whose Strength you know by experience is
manifested in Weakness; therefore trust hope and depend you upon the Lord
forever, who is and will be your exceeding great reward; cast your care upon
him, for he your God cares for you and yours; he is a Father to the
Fatherless, and a Husband to the Widow, he is the Comforter of the Comfortless,
and gladeth the heavy hearted.

Oh, be still, quiet, patient and contented in your Minds; and wait upon the
Lord, and be not at all terrifyed by your Adversaries; but in the lowly fear of
the Lord God rejoice in that he has counted you worthy, not only to believe,
but to suffer for his Name sake; oh, your Reward no man can take away, as you
continue faithful to the Lord; dear Lambs, my Bowels yearn toward you, and in
the Fathers love I salute you, desiring that Grace, Mercy and Peace may rest
upon you, and the blessing of the most High distill upon you as dew upon the
tender Herbs, that you, ye tender Plants, may grow and be like Willows by the
Water Courses, and as Cedars by the Rivers side, that your Leaf may not wither,
neither cease bearing Fruit; so dear suffering Lambs, as none is to be (through
Joy) Exalted above what is meet, so none (through Sorrow) is to be Dejected, or
cast down, but every one, in all Conditions, is to learn to be Contented with
the will of the Lord, and none to murmur against the Lord, because of the
Prosperity of the Wicked, and Advancement of Sions Enemies; for though they
seem to Fl^u^ish like a green Bay Tree, yet they will become like Grass upon
the House top, that withers before it is grown up.

So unto the Lord God I commit you, who cares for all his, and is a present
help in the time of need, and leaves not his Sheep and Lambs when the Wolves
come to Devour; but he the mighty God stands by his People, and sighteth for
mount Sion, and defends the Hills thereof, and will put to flight her Enemies,
and with the Breath of his Mouth expel and scatter the Clouds, Fogs and Mists
that arises out of the bottomless pit of Darkness; that then, oh Sion, thy
Glory may appear as the Morning without Clouds, and as the Sun in its
Brightness thy Beauty may shine forth, and thy Enemies be Astonished and
Confounded forever.

This is the salutation of my Love, who am your Fellow Sufferer and Companion,
in the Patience and Tribulation of Jesus, the Lord God be with you, and support
the weak and little ones among you, and keep you all Faithful to the end, and
preserve you in Love and Unity one with another, Amen, says my soul. Bury
Goal* 1669. William Bennit.

Dearly Beloved
FRiends, Brethren and Sisters in the Heavenly Spiritual Relation of the
Immortal Incorruptible Seed of Life Eternal, of which you are born again, and
become Heirs of an Inheritance that is Everlasting, by Faith in Christ Jesus,
in and from whom Joy and Peace, Mercy and Grace be multiplied in and unto all
your Souls, Amen.

Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who through his abundant
Mercy and free Grace has called us, and with the Arms of his Everlasting
Kindness has gathered us, and by his Almighty Power has raised us up, to be
unto him a People, to live unto him in his Life, and to walk before him in
Truth and Righteousness, and to Serve and Worship him in his own Way and
Spirit, and to bear Testimony thereunto, and against the contrary, in Word and
Doctrine, in Life and Conversation; and for our Testimonies sake the Nations
are angry with us, and the Earth is moved, and the Waters troubled, and swell
against us, as if we should be swollowed up, and wholly overwhelmed with the
Floods of the Wrath of the Dragon, who seeks to drown the blessed and glorious
appearance of the man Child; who is to rule the Nations in Justice, in Mercy,
in Judgment, in Righteousness and Truth; well, my dear Friends, though at this
day we are a suffering People, and as it were Killed all the day long, and
appointed Sheep for the Slaughter, and are set as a prey for the Beast of the
Field, and Lions of the Forest, and though the Jaws of Death, and Gates of
Hell seem to be opened wide against us, as if we should be swallowed up quick,
and be extinguished from being a People; yet notwithstanding we can rejoice in
the Lord our God, because our sufferings are infflicted upon us not for evil
doing, but for well doing, and our Enemies have found no just Cause given them
of us, thus to give us up to the Spoylers, and into the hands of Wicked,
Ungodly, Unreasonable men; but altogether without a Cause given of us, have
they taken an occasion against us (as Daniel's Persecutors did against him)
concerning the Law, Commands and Worship of our God, so that at this day our
God knows it, Angels and Men know it, and our Enemies one day shall be made to
know it to their sorrow, that we are a Suffering Persecuted People, singly for
our Conscience toward God, and for our Obedience and Faithfulness to him;
therefore, my dearly beloved Ones, rejoice in the Lord, and lift up your Heads
in his Name, over all the Wrath and Cruelty of the Ungodly, and think not
strange concerning the Fiery Trials that are come to try you, and to prove your
Love to God his Way and Truth, as though some strange thing had happened unto
you; but rejoice in the lowly fear of the Lord, inasmuch as you are made
partakers of the Sufferings of the Seed, that when its glory shall be more and
more revealed in and upon your Souls, you may rejoice with exceeding Joy, in
that you suffer on Gods account, not as Murderers and Evil doers; but as true
Christians, and Followers of Christ Jesus, and true Worshipers of the God of
Daniel in Spirit and in Truth.

And my dear Friends, if ye suffer the spoiling of your Goods, Bonds,
Banishment or Death for meeting together in the Fear and Name of the Lord, to
wait upon him, and for performing you Duty and Obedience unto him, and for
keeping of your Consciences void of offense toward him, truly the Cause is
good, and worth the suffering for, it is not our own Cause, but the Lords;
therefore let us commit it unto him unto whom we c^n make our Appeal, and
spread our Complaint before him, and pour forth our Cries unto him who se^th
our Troubles, and beholds the grievous Oppression, and manifold Burdens,
Afflictions and Sufferings of his Poor, Abused, Tribulated, Persecuted People,
whose innocent Cause he the Almighty Jevovah, of worm Jacob, will assuredly
plead for them, against their Enemies, and woe will be to the Oppressors and
Spoylers of Gods Heritage. Dear suffering Lambs, cast your Care upon the Lord,
he cares for you, and for your little ones, and hold fast Faith and a good
Conscience, whatever you suffer, hold fast the Truth you have received that
none may take your Crown of Joy, Comfort, Peace and Blessing from you, and keep
in the meekness, patience and long suffering of Jesus, suffering the spoiling
of your Goods Joyfully, glorifying the Lord in suffering, according to his
will, giving him Thanks and Praise, instead of Murmuring, that he has counted
you worthy not only to Believe, but also to Suffer for his blessed Name sake,
knowing in your selves you have in Heaven a far better enduring substance;
therefore cast not away your Faith, Hope and Confidence which has such great
Recompense of Reward; but truly Friends you have need to abide in the patient
long suffering Spirit of Jesus, that after you have done the will of God, and
suffered for the same, you may receive the Promise; if any man faint, and turn
back, he looses his reward of his sufferings; but I hope, my dear Friends, you
are not of the number of those that turn back unto Perdition, but of them that
believe, and receive the end of your hope, even the Salvation of your Souls.

And dear Friends; take Courage, and put on Strength, and lift up your Heads in
the Name of the Lord, who is with his People, and from them he will not go, he
is on our side, and takes our part, we know it, and our Enemies will feel it
to their sorrow, he will fight for us, let us hold our peace, and be still from
reasoning with Flesh and Blood, though he suffer us to be tried, as Gold is
tried in the Fire, yet not wholly to be Destroyed, after he has done such
great things for us, and appeared on our behalf, and has manifested himself to
be our God, and we to be his People, and after he has Blessed us, and
Prospered us, and Preserved us through all the Wrath and Cruelty of men
hitherto, and now has made us a Family like a Flock, and put his Jewels upon
us, and Clothed us with the Garment of Salvation, and Arrayed us with the Robe
of Righteousness, and Beautified us with his Comeliness, and Betrothed us unto
Himself, in Mercy, in Judgment, in Righteousness and in Truth; will he now
suffer us wholly to be extinguished from being a People? shall our Enemies have
their full desires of us, to root us out wholly from amongst them, that they
may blaspheme our God, and say he was not able to Deliver them out of our hand?
surely no, remember what Balack King of Moab had Consulted, and what Balaam Son
of Beor answered him, even from Shittim unto Gilgal, that you may know the
Righteousness of the Lord, who keeps Covenant with his People, neither does
his tender Compassions fail unto the House of Jacob; therefore let us trust in
the God of our hope; who delivered Just Lot from the vexation of the wicked
Sodomits, and his Poor Oppressed Israel out of the hand of cruel Pharaoh; who
delivered David from the paw of the Bear, and the paw of the Lion, and from the
hand of the uncircumcised Philistine; who delivered Daniel out of the
Lyons-Den, and the three Children out of the Fiery Furnace; good Jeremiah out
of the low miery Dungeon, and ^^ul and Silas out of the Prisonhouse; he the
Living God, whose Arm is not shortened, nor abated in Strength, Power and Might,
will assuredly deliver his oppressed People at this day, in his own time, when
he has tried them thoroughly, and has Purged his Gold, and refined his Silver,
and separated the Chaff from his Wheat, and made up his precious Jewels, and
manifested the approved in his sight, then will he arise, as in Mount Paron,
and be wrath, as in the Valley of Gideon; to bring to pass his Work, his
strange Work, at the hearing thereof, the Ears of many does and shall Tingle,
and the Heathen be Astonished and Confounded, and fall before the glorious
Majesty of the God of worm Jacob; then shall ^ion Rejoice, and Israel be right
Glad, and the Mourners be Comforted, and the heavy Hearts be Refreshed, and the
Oppressed Delivered from the Yoke. The Lord God Almighty hasten the
Accomplishment of his own Work, in his own time, to his own Glory and Renown,
Amen.

So my dearly beloved Friends, my heart is open to you, and my Soul simpathises
with you in your Sufferings, and my Cries and Prayers are to the Lord for you,
knowing that great and many are your Trials that does att^nd many of you; poor
hearts, how willingly could I help you. But unto the Lord the Great Shepherd
and Bishop of your Souls, the Keeper of the Flock of Israel, I must commit you,
and resign you up to him who cares for you, and watches over you, and intends
good unto you; for he loves you, though he suffers hard things to befall you,
which will work for your good, and bring many of you more nearer to the Lord,
and make you more and more like him; that though the Hills shall be removed,
and the Mountains depart, yet his Everlasting Kindness shall not be removed,
neither the Covenant of his Peace be taken from you his People, that keep
Covenant with him your God; so the Almighty be with you, in all your Trials and
Temptations, and his Arms of tender mercy bear up all the Weak and Little Ones
among you, whose desires are Upright before him, that none such may fall
through the Fury of the Adversary, and Temptations of the Enemy; but that you
all may be kept by the power of your God, through Faith in his Everlasting
Name, to the end, to finish your Testimony in Faithfulness, with Joy, to his
Glory, and your Endless Peace, Happiness and Filicity in him the God of your
Hope, Amen.

The God of Peace be with you, and Comfort you with his Love; oh, Lord God
Everlasting, keep all thy dear People in this hour and power of Darkness, hide
them in the hollow of thy Hand, and let the Banner of thy Love be over them,
dispose of them, O Lord, as seems good unto thee; only let not thy
Faithfulness to them, and their Faith to thee be wanting, and let them be
tendered by thee, as the first Fruits unto thee, after the long Night of
Apostasy, that eclipsed thy Glory from the face of the Earth: My dear love
remains with you; Farwell dear Friends.

Edmond^*Bury common Goal this 8th. of the fifth Month. From your true Friend
and Brother, in the Patient Suffering for the Testimony of Jesus. William
Bennit.

THE Work and Mercy of GOD Conducing to his Praise;
Or a Demonstration of the Visitation of God's Love to my Soul in the days of
my Youth;

Being a Testimony of the Light of Christ in the Conscience, which discovers
and judges Sin; also (if loved and obey^d) saves from Sin, and redemeeth the
Soul unto God.

Published in bowels of pity and love to all those that have desires after the
Way of Truth, and are yet seeking it abroad in their Imaginations, and are
mourning and groaning under the burden and weight of Sin; hoping and desiring
(that if the Lord will) such may meet with some encouragement and direction
hereby, for them to turn their minds into the Light of Christ in themselves,
and in it to believe, and wait for power over, and freedom from Sin, that true
lasting peace in God they may come to witness, to the true and full
satisfaction of their Souls.

All thiags that are reproved, are made manifest by the Light; for whatsoever
does make manifest is Light, etc. That which may be known of God is manifest in
them, etc. Wherewith shall a Young man cleanse hi^ way? by taking he^d
thereunto according to thy Word; thy Word I have hid in my Heart, etc. Ephesians. 5.
13, etc. Romans 1. 16. Psalm. 1. 19. 9, 11.

When I was but young in Years, the Lord God (of Light, Life and Power, of
tender Love, of infinite Compassion and everlasting bowels of Mercy) was
pleased then (in some measure) to visit me by or with his pure Light in my own
Conscience, which many a time did check and reprove me for my Sins, and brought
my Evil-doings to my remembrance, and judged me in my own Heart for Evil, and
sometimes brought trouble upon my Mind for my Sins, but I was not then sensible
that it was the Light of Christ Jesus (who is the true Light that lights
every man that comes into the World) which then in my own Conscience did
check, reprove and judge me for Evil, and sometimes broke my false ease and
rest in Sin; insomuch as I could not go on in Sin, Wildness and Vanity, without
being somewhat troubled, terrified and reproved for my Sin at one time or
other; though when I was among idle Children, voic of the fear of God, I ran
into Sin and Wickedness with them; and for the present time, I acted in Sin
with great Delight and Joy; but when I came to be still, quiet and alone in the
Fields, or elsewhere; then would the pure Witness of God arise in me with its
reproofs, and set my Sins in order before me, and brought my Evil Doings to my
remembrance, which I had acted out of the pure fear of the Lord God, and then
Trouble for a time took hold on me, and Sin became my burden; but I soon got
from under that Burden, at Ease and Liberty again, and ran into Sin and Vanity
again; and thus year after year I went on in rebellion against the Witness of
God in my own Conscience, taking delight and pleasure in those things I knew
were Evil; yet the Lord God (whose tender Bowels of Pity and Compassion did
then in Mercy hover over me for good to me in that day) did sometimes stop me
from speaking and acting that Evil I intended to speak or do, and preserved me
out of many gross Evils, which many others were addicted unto, and overcome
with. And in those days when I was alone in the Fields I cried and prayed unto
the Lord, and desires were stirring in me after the knowledge of him, his Way
and Truth; but I prayed to a God I knew not; I imagined a God afar off; and did
not then know it was the Lord that did search my Heart, and discovered unto me
my Thoughts, and judged me for Sin; I then knew not that that was the Light,
Way and Truth of God in my own Heart, which sometimes begot desires in me to
know the Truth, and to walk therein; but my mind was abroad (as it is with many
at this day, who have desires after Truth and Righteousness, but are seeking
abroad in Carnal Ordinances, Forms, Likenesses, Beggarly Elements, Rudiments of
the World, Ceremonies and Traditions of men) and knew not that that in me was
Truth, which sometimes stopped me from Lying and Swearing; and when I knowingly
told a Lie, it would accuse me, when no man could accuse me for it; and as I
grew in years, for I may truly say, there was something stirring in me (at
times) after the Lord ever since I was 6 or 7 years of Age, and when I came to
be about 14 years old, and to be a Prentize, and in outward Thraldom and
Bondage, it pleased the God of infinite lovingkindness, to visit me more then
formerly, by his pure Light and Spirit, which increased in striving with me
daily, that I scarce knowingly committed any Evil, but the Light would soon
judge me for it; yea, the Lord God with his pure Light and Gift did pursue me
hard, and followed me close, calling to me in my Heart, with his still Voice,
to come out of Sin, out of evil Words and Works; but I (like Samuel when he was
a Child) knew not that it was the Lord that did call; for he was (though near
me) as a Stranger to me; and I knew not his Voice, but went ast^ay as a
wandering Sheep, yet had I desires to know the way to the ^old, and to know
where the Lord feeds his Flook, and causes them to lie down in Peace,
Quietness and Rest, where none can make afraid; for indeed it was Rest my Soul
wanted, and true Peace in God my Soul many a time longed for, and panted after;
for, oh, I was oftentimes wounded, wounded, wounded because of Sin, and for
want of the enjoyment of the Love and Peace of God, I went many a time bowed
down in Spirit day after day, with an a king Mind, grieved Soul and wounded
Conscience, with my Eyes full of Tears, and my Heart full of Sighing, thinking
in my Heart there was few (if any) in my State and Condition; sometimes
wishing, and saying in my Heart, Oh, that I were in a desert solitary place
outwardly (for so was my condition inwardly) where no man inhabits, where I
might have Mourned and Wept out my fill, and have poured out my Tears unto the
tender God of tender Bowels of Mercy, and have spread my Complaints before him
whom my Soul did then sometimes, in measure, long, thirst and pant after, even
as the Heart pants after the water Brooks: And many a time I did get into a
solitary place to ease my Heart a little, in pouring out my Tears and
Complaints to the Lord; for in those days many were my Prayers and Tears, for
great was the burden and load which I oftentimes went under day after day,
which made me cry Night and Day to the Lord for Peace and Rest; yet I then, not
knowing that it was the Light of Christ in my Conscience, that did break my
Rest and Peace in Sin, neither knew it to be a stay to the Mind, and a bridle
to my Tongue; I many a time got into a false ease and liberty, in idleness and
wildness of Youth, but it was broke again, and Sorrow and Trouble would take
hold on my Mind, and true Desires would again be Renewed in me after the Lord,
and breathing and thirsting after Righteousness; and oh, my Heart and Soul was
many a time made tender and soft; and oh, pity, pity and tender bowels of
compassion was in me toward any that I thought was in my condition, and a
tender love was hid in my Heart toward those that I then thought were the
People of God; and I can truly say, my Bowels and Heart is open still, and
oftentimes Pity, Love, Compassion and Tenderness issues forth in me toward
those that now are in that condition I then was in; oh, my Soul, my Soul cannot
but in some measure simpathize with them, and in Spirit bear a part of their
Burdens and Sorrows in my Bosom, and that not without some secret cries in my
Heart unto the tender God of Bowels of Pity on their behalf; and partly for
their sakes is this published, hoping (that if the Lord will) it may be of
service unto some of them, and if the Lord order it so to be to them, or any,
then will my end herein be answered thereby.

And in those days I frequented the Meetings of the People called Independants
(viz.) William Bredges's Congregation in great Yarmouth, whom I then thought
were the People of God, and yet I then saw that many of their Lives and
Conversations, even some of the chief of them were not consistant with what
they professed in words; and when I have been amongst them in the time of their
singing Psalms, the pure Witness of God in my own Heart has (as it were)
stoped my Mouth that I could not Sing with them; but my Heart in the time of
their singing was broken into tenderness, and many were the tears of my Eyes;
and verily my outward ^an, or earthen Vessel, has quaked and trembled (this
was before I was by Scorners called a Quaker, or had seen any of those People)
and shaken like a Leaf that is shaken with the Wind (which might be a sign of
that shaking, which since the Lord has suffered to come upon
them, which has almost shattered and scattered them, who will shake all sandy
Foundations, and blast all Professions that are out of the Light and Power of
God) by the working of the Light and Power of God in my Heart, though I then
knew not that it was the Power of God that brought such a trembling upon me,
and that did in some measure let me see, that it was not then a time of singing
for me; for I was the^ in a strange Land, in the Land of Captivity, and could
not sing the Song of Sion, which I may truly say (not in the least enmity
toward the People; for my Soul bears love and good will toward all men, and
desire to tender and own the least true appearance of God in any) they were
ignorant of, who were then singing what others had prescribed and made ready
for them; I then wanted the enjoyment of the Love, Joy, Peace and sweet
Presence of God, which makes glad the Hearts of the Righteous, and causes the
lowly, meek and upright to sing (in the Spirit with understanding) for joy; not
that Song, or Songs, or Psalms which men have invented by their human Wisdom,
(from which Wisdom the Mysteries of God's Kingdom is obscured and concealed)
but the new and living Song, which the Dead cannot sing, but the Living that
are raised and redeemed out of, and from the Earth, and from amongst men, even
the ransomed of the Lord, that are returned from Babylon unto Mount Sion,
whereon they stand with the Lamb, whom they have followed through many
Tribulations; and have not loved their Lives unto Death; and have washed their
Garments, and made them white in his Blood, in and by whom they are become
Virgins; and have cast of all old Lovers, and are not defiled with the Woman
Jezabel; but through the Lamb have gotten Victory over the Whore, Beast and
false Prophet, and in the Heavenly Dominion of the Lamb (by whom they are made
more then Conquerors) do they stand on the Sea of Glass mingled with Fire, with
the Harps of God, and can sing a new Song of praise and thanksgiving unto him
that was dead, but is alive, and lives for evermore.

And in all the times of my trouble of mind, and travel of Spirit I never made
known how it was with me, nor declared my condition to any Creature, though
never so intimate with them, but kept it secret in my Heart, pouring out my
complaints to God, but not unto any man, yet I could gladly have had some to
have known how it was with me; but I was straightened in my self, and kept it in
obscurity; and in those days I knew not what it was that wrought and strove
with me, and did so frequently judge and reprove me for Sin, and gave me power
over many Evils which others were overcome withal, and raised strong desires in
me after the Lord, and discovered unto me the thoughts of my Heart, I say, I
knew not then what it was, I was then not sencible that it was the Light of
Christ Jesus, or a measure of the Spirit of Truth; neither did I then know I
should have taken heed thereunto, as unto a Light shining in a dark place,
until the Day had more and more dawned; and until Christ the Day Star had
arisen in my Heart, over all my Enemies; but my mind was still gazing abroad,
and imagining a God afar off, and he was very nigh me, but I knew him not, but
was hunting abroad in my Imaginations for that which was within me, the Pearl
of great Price was hid in my Heart, but I knew it not, the Kingdom of God was
at hand, but I was gazing for it abroad, whilst it (in measure) was working in
my Heart, like Leaven hid in three measures of Meal, etc. the Door into the
Fold, the Entrance into Rest was within, but I was seeking it abroad; my
Savior was nigh, but I imagined him afar off, and knew him not nigh; neither
did any man in those days direct my mind unto the Light and Gift of Christ in
my own Heart: And as for the Teachers of the People, even they in the highest
Profession of God in words, were ready (they being so ignorant and unsensible
of the Gift of God in themselves) to speak Blasphemy of the pure spiritual
Light of Christ within (as many Professors do at this day, yet notwithstanding
make a large Profession and Confession of Christ in Words, though in Works deny
him) and to say, that which troubles a man for his sins is a temptation of
Satan, and thereby instead of directing the mind to the Light, draw away the
mind more from the Light, and such are blind, and are under the woe, that call
Light Darkness, Good Evil, and are in that Spirit they were, who (though great
Professors) said concerning Christ, He is Mad, and has a Devil, why hear ye
him? but as some then replied, and said, Are these the works of him that has a
Devil? Can the Devil open the Eyes of the Blind? so I may say, Is it the Devils
work to discover Sin, and judge, condemn and trouble a man (in the unconverted
state) for Sin? or is it not his work to lull People a sleep in Sin, and to cry
peace to them in their Iniquities, and to keep them satisfied with a profession
of God without the possession of a holy undefiled Life? Is it his work to
destroy his own Kingdom, which is Sin? surely, no, that is only and alone the
Work of Christ, the Light of the World, made manifest within to destroy the
Devil and his works; he brings Trouble upon the Transgressor and ministers
Judgment against the Evil doer; he kindles a Fire in the earthly Heart, and
raises Trouble, Wars and great Tribulation within, before he be known to be
the Prince of Peace, the Sabbath, the everlasting Rest for the Soul. And now I
know infallibly that that which in those days did bring trouble upon me for my
Sins, and checked and judged for Evil, and begat good desires in me after the
Lord, was the pure Witness of God, the manifestation of his Spirit, the Light
of his Son Christ Jesus, a measure of his free Grace and Truth in my own Heart;
and if ten Thousand should assert or affirm the contrary, I know their
Testimony will be a Lie. But, oh, alas for me! after all this long Visitation
of the Love, Goodness and Mercy of the Lord to my Soul; and after all this
trouble of Mind, travel of Spirit, desiring and seeking after the Lord; I got,
oh, I got into a false ease in the fleshly Nature, and in a wrong liberty and
false security, (as it is with many Professors at this day, who once were low,
broken and tender in Heart, mourning under the load and burden of of Sin,
having sincere desires to serve God in holiness of Life, who are now gotten
into the form and likeness of that they then hungered and thirsted after, and
are therewith satisfied, and feeding themselves with others Words, and without
Knowledge, without Life, and so are gotten at ease in the Pride, Fashions and
Vanity of the World, and are at liberty in the Flesh, counting it their Freedom
to do those things that once was their Burden and Bondage) and I became
careless, and by disobedience I quenched the strivings of the Light of Christ
in me, insomuch as the Burden, Trouble and Sorrow which once lay heavy upon my
Mind, I felt little of, although the Original and real cause which occasioned
the Burden, Sorrow and Trouble (which was my sins) was not taken away, but
augmented, and I through Rebellion had almost murdered the just and holy one in
me, and had so grieved and wounded the Spirit of the Lord, that it had almost
ceased striving with me, though at sometimes it would bring former things to my
remembrance; and then some trouble and sorrow would seize upon me for a time;
but I soon got over it again, and turned from the Grace into Wantonness, and so
forgot the Lord, whom I had formerly desired and sought after, and my Heart ran
a whoreing after my old Lovers, with my Face turned back again to Egypt (the
Land of Darkness, Wickedness, the Bondage-House of Sin and Corruption) which
before was partly turned toward Canaan, the Land of Light, Life and Rest, and
so ran into such Evils as I had formerly been kept out of by a secret Power,
which I then knew not, and I grew wanton, careless and wicked, and my Mind and
Heart taken off seeking the Lord, and run into, and after the Vanity, Pleasures
and Idleness of the World, delighting much in Music and Dancing, Sporting and
Gaming, and so made merry over the pure Witness of God, by sinning and
rebelling against it, and by rejecting its reproof and strivings; Oh, oh, the
patience and long-suffering of the Lord was large toward me in that day, who
long waited to be Gracious to my Soul Day after Day, Year after Year, who in
his Justice might have cut me off in my Sins and Rebellion, and even have made
me an Example of his Wrath; but oh, his mercy, his mercy and long-suffering was
exceeding large to me, which by my Soul is not to be forgotten; but in and by
the Spirit of Truth (which brings former things to my remembrance, and shows
things to come) am I to be kept in a living sense and remembrance of the great
mercy, long-patience, long-forbearance and long-suffering of the Lord God of
Compassion toward me, and in the sense thereof he is worthy to be praised and
honored by my Soul, who would not that I should perish from his presence
forever: For after all this the Lord, the tender God of tender bowels of
compassion, was pleased to visit my poor Soul again, even for his pure Seeds
sake, which he had not forgotten; but he remembered the Poor and Needy, the
Captive exile, to deliver him out of the hand of him that was too strong for
him, and to loose him, that he might not wholly die in the Pit, and perish in
the miery Clay; and Gods precious Truth, and pure Way of Righteousness, and
everlasting Gospel of Light, Life and Peace I heard preached and declared by
his precious Servants (who were and are by scoffing Ishmael's Brood, in scorn
called Quakers, whom I now own in the Lord) and the pure Witness of God in my
own Heart bore Testimony to the Truth declared by them; but long it was after I
was in some measure convinced of the Truth, before I steely gave up my Heart to
obey the Truth; but the Lord in time did overcome my Heart by the Power of his
Love, his inspeakable Love, and made me willing to resign up my Heart in
obedience to him, and this Truth, and to bow down to the Yoke, and to take up
the daily Cross, which I learned by loving and taking heed to the Light, and to
despise the Shame, and to follow the Lord in that way (viz. the Light which
before had judged me for Sin, begat desires in m^ to know the Way) which I knew
not while my mind was abroad, and knew not the Lord nigh, who now teaches and
guides me by his Light and Spirit in the way of Truth and Righteousness,
wherein I have found Peace, Rest and true satisfaction for my Soul, and witness
my Teacher nigh, though it has been my portion, with many other Berthren,
sometimes to eat the Bread of Adversity, and to drink the Water of Affliction,
yet my Teacher and Comforter can none remove from me; but he is and has been
with me in the Prison house, and in the low Dungeon; so that which now keeps me
in Peace and Unity with the Lord, and in Fellowship with his People, the same
thing (and not another) was it that did formerly check, reprove and judge me
for Evil, and brought trouble upon me for my Sins, and that raised desires in
me after the Lord, as I have explicated in the foregoing Lines, though I deny
not but that I have now a greater measure of Light and Grace then I had then;
yet the Light (in quality and nature) is the same; for although the Light or
Seed of the Kingdom (which consists of Joy, Peace and Righteousness in the
Holy Ghost) be in the unbeliever and unconverted, even as the least of all
other Seeds, yet nevertheless, where or in vvhomsoever it be received in the
Faith, Love and Obedience of it, in such it grows and increases until it become
the greatest in them, and under its shadovv they come to sit with great
delight, and its Fruit becomes svveet to their taste; and as a little Leaven in
three measures of Meal, it works and operateth in the Hearts and Minds of
those that believe in the Light, until it has wrought out the old leaven of
Malice, Sin and Corruption, and leavened the Heart and Soul into its own
nature, frame and quality; so the same Light which did condemn me for Sin
when I was in disobedience to it, the sam^ has and does save me from Sin,
and now justifies me as I am kept in the Faith and Obedience of it, and now it
ministers Peace and Rest unto me, and before it ministered Trouble and
Condemnation: So this I assert and affirm experimentally for an unerrable
invincible Truth, (against all the Opposers, Gainsayers, Fighters and
Undervaluers of the Light) viz. that the Light of Christ (who is the true Light
that lights every one that comes into the World) even in the Conscience of
that man or woman that is in Unbelief, and in the Unconverted State, is one in
nature and quality with the Light in that man or woman that is in the belief of
it, and converted by it; and the Light of Christ in the Conscience of the
Drunkard and Swearer, that does check, judge and reprove him for his Sins, if it
be believed in, loved and obeyed, is able to save him from his Sins; but that
man or woman that loves Evil and hates the Light, and will not come to the
Light, but reject it, such do not feel nor witness the saving healing virtue,
and restoring redeeming power of the Light, but is only unto them a Judge and
Condemner; but they that receive it in the love and belief thereof, such in,
through and by the Light receive power to become the Sons of God, and joint
Heirs with Christ of the Kingdom of God which endures forever.

So blessed, blessed be the Lord my tender God, who is worthy, worthy to be
praised, praised by my Soul in the sense of his Love, Goodness and Grace, whose
Mercy has been, and is wonderful toward me, unto whom be honor, glory,
praise, thanksgiving and obedience for evermore.

And my Soul having obtained mercy of the Lord, and having tasted of his
Goodness and Graciousness, and experienced his Tender Fatherly Dealings with
and toward my Soul, my Heatt is opened with Love and Good will to all People,
Desiring their Good and Eternal Welfare in God.

To those that are young in Years, etc.
Mind thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, before the Evil day come, etc.
Eccles. 12. 1. etc.

ANd you who are yet young and tender in Years, mind the Light of Christ in
your Consciences which checketh and reproves for Evil, and idle words and
works, and it will learn you (if you love it) to fear and mind the Creator in
the days of your Youth, before the Evil days come, and the Years when ye
shall say, We have no pleasure in them: Oh say not any of you, We are young,
and have many Years yet to spend, wherefore we will take the pleas^re and
delights of our Youth, and seek the Lord afterward, and Repent when we are old,
etc. But remember the Lord God your Maker gives unto you Life, Breath and
Being, and how soon he may cut the thread of your lives, and take you away from
all your delights and vanities, you know not; for many he takes away in their
Youth: Wherefore trifle not away your precious time in Sin and Vanity, in vain
Sports and Gameings, or any Wickedness, lest your Hearts come to be hardened in
Ungodliness, and you grow old in Iniquity, and when it is too late you
diligently seek repentance, but you find it not; wherefore take warning, and
mind those things in time, before it be too late, that concern the eternal
Peace, Rest, and Happiness of your immortal Soul, and first seek the Kingdom of
God rather then the Riches, Glory and Honor of this World, which is all
passing away, and will not help in the day of Calamity, and hour of Distress
and Misery which will overtake the Wicked, and all those that forget God, as a
Thief in the Night; therefore mind and fear the Lord your Maker, and take heed
unto the Light in all your Consciences, which is pure and holy, and has no
unity with any evil thought, word or work, and love and believe in the Light,
that you may become Children of the Light; if you love the Light it will save
you from your Sins, and redeem you from a vain Conversation, and learn you to
take up a daily Cross to your own Wills, Desires, Lusts and Affections, and to
Yoke down the vain, wild, wanton corrupt Nature, that defiles and polluteth
your Hearts and Minds, Lives and Conversations; and so you will come to be
changed and born again of the Seed incorruptible, of the Word of God which is
nigh in the Heart to be obeyed and done; but if you delight in evil doing, and
hate the Light of Christ in your own Consciences, which judges you for Sin,
and will not come to the Light, but live and abide in Darkness, and will not
receive God's Counsel and Warnings, nor hearken unto his Reproofs, nor have
none of his Ways, but will follow your own ways, wills and works, and fulfill
the lusts and desires of your own Hearts, and vain devices and imaginations of
your own Minds, and will not that the Light should rule over you, to govern you
in the pure fear of the Lord, and to lead you into holiness of Life, to guide
you into the way of Truth and Righteousness, then will the Light be your
Condemnation, and leave you without excuse when the Lord renders unto you
according to your Works, and the wages of Sin is Death, but the gift of God is
Eternal Life through Jesus Christ: Therefore, dear People, love it and embrace
it whilst it is near you, even knocking at the Door of your Hearts; oh,
hearken to it, and let it have place in your Hearts, and refuse not the Love
and Mercy of the Lord tendered to you in the Light, nor harden not your Hearts
against the eternal good, peace and happiness of your own Souls, lest the Day
of your Visitation pass over, and the Night of everlasting Darkness, Sorrow,
Misery and Calamity overtake you, and shut you up forever,

To all People that live and delight in wickedness.
The show of their Countenance does witness against them, they declare their
Sin like Sodom, and hide it not. Because I have called, and ye refused, etc. Ye
have set at naught all my Counsel, and would have none of my Reproof, etc. I
will laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your Fear comes, etc. Behold the
day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and the Wicked, and they that do
wickedly shall be as Stubble, etc. Now consider this all you that forget God,
lest I tear you in Pieces, and there be none to deliver, Isa. 3. 9. Prove. 1.
24, 25, 26. Mal. 4. 1. Psalm. 50. 22.

AND you, oh People, that are void of the pure fear of the Lord God, and have
given up your Hearts to work Wickedness with Greediness, who rush into Sin and
Ungodliness, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle, and drinking up Iniquity, as
the Ox drinks in Water, taking pleasure in Unrighteousness, and delighting in
Uncleanness, and wallowing in the Mire of your own Filthiness and Corruption,
fulfilling the Lusts of your unclean Hearts, in Swearing, Lying, Drunkenness,
Whoredom, Pride, Couzening, Defrauding, and such like Wi^^edness, whereby you
grieve ^he Lord day after day, and wound, bruise, burden and oppress his
righteous Spirit, as a Cart is oppressed with sheaves; oh repent, repent, and
cease from the evil of your doings, and leave off your wicked ways, lest the
Lord God tear you in Pieces, and there be none to deliver: Oh, tremble ye
careless Ones before the Lord Almighty, who can consume you in a Moment; and
cut you off in the twinkling of an Eye; oh, dread the Lord God, and fear his
great and dreadful Name, for the hour of his Judgment is come; oh, stand in awe
of him who made the Heaven and the Earth, the Sea and Fountains of Waters; who
gives the Sun for a Light by Day, and the Ordinances of the Stars and Moon for
a Light by Night, who divided the Sea when the Waves thereof did roar, who has
his way in the Whirlwind and in the Storm, and the Clouds are as the dust of
his Feet, who meets out the Heavens with a span, and measures the Waters of
the Sea in the hollow of his Hand, he comprehends the Dust of the Earth* as
in a Measure, and weighs the Mountains as in Seals, and the Hills as in a
Balance, in comparison of whom all Nations are but as a drop of the Bucket,
and as the small dust of the Balance. Oh, will you not fear the Lord, and
dread his Majesty, and tremble before his Presence, who is a terrible one to
the Workers of Iniquity that will not Repent; who comes with Fire, and his
Chariot, like a Whirlvvind, to render his Anger (against the Wicked and
Ungodly) in Fury, and his Rebukes in flames of Fire; for by his Fire and by his
Svvord will he cut down the strongest Oaks and tallest Ceders, and will
plead with all Flesh, and the slain of the Lord shall be many; wherefore
repent, repent, and tremble, tremble before the Lord God; ye Workers of
Iniquity, for the day, the mighty, terrible, dreadful day of the Lord God
Almighty is come, and yet a coming, and vvo, vvo to the Briars and Thorns that
cumber the Earth, for the day shall burn as an Oven, and the Wicked, and they
that do wickedly, and will not take warning and repent, (but still harden
their Hearts against the Lord, and against his precious Servants that vvarn you
to repent, whose Souls mourn and lament over you in the sense of the Sadness,
Wretchedness, Miserableness and Deplorableness of your Conditions) shall be as
Stubble, and the Day will burn them up both Root and Branch, and the Fire
will burn up the Briars and Thorns, and cleanse the Earth, that Truth,
Righteousness, Justice and Mercy may spring and flourish therein, and the Mouth
of Iniquity be stopped forever: And the day of the Lord God will be upon every
one that is proud, and lifted up against the Lord and his anointed; and the
loftiness of the stoutest in Heart against the Lord shall be laid low, and the
haughtiness of Men shall be humbled, and the Lord God (holy, just and true)
shall be exalted in that day, when the Wicked shall flee to the Rocks, and hide
themselves as in the Caves of the Earth, for the fear of the Lord, and the
Glory of his Majesty, when he comes to shake terribly the Earth, and to
overthrow the Seat of Wickedness forever, and to punish the World for their
Sins, and the Wicked for their Iniquity, and cause the Arrogance of the Proud
to cease, and to lay low the Haughtiness of the Terrible: Wherefore, oh People,
prepare, prepare by true Repentance, with speed, to meet the Lord in the way of
his Judgments, before his dreadful Fury break forth against you, as devouring
Fire: Oh, bring forth Fruits worthy of Repentance and amendment of Life; oh,
why will you die and perish in your Iniquities forever? the Lord desires not
the destruction of a Sinner, but rather he should return in time, from his
Wickedness, and learn Righteousness and Live; yea, Let the Wicked forsake his
Wickedness, and the Ungodly man his Thoughts, and turn unto the Lord with his
whole Heart, and he will have mercy upon him; for with the Lord there is great
Mercy, and plentious Redemption; who also is just in all his Ways, and equal in
all his Doings, and righteous in all his Judgments, and he will not be mocked
by any, such as People sow such must they ^^ap, and the wages of Sin is Death.
Oh, how many have been the War^ings of the Lord to the People of this Nation
Time after Time, Year after Year, Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept? but how
few have ponderously weighed them, received them, and laid them to Heart? And
how has the Lord in part executed his righteous Judgments in and upon this
poor Nation? and how few have learned Righteousness thereby? but the greatest
part of thy Inhabitants, oh England, are still daily adding Sin unto Sin, and
heaping of Iniquity upon Iniquity, and so fitting themselves for a day of
Slaughter: And instead of being truly humbled under the hand of God, and to
mourn in Sackcloth and Ash^s, many are sporting themselves in Music and
Dancing, in ringing of Bells, Camping and Wrestling, and many other Games and
Vanities, as Bull-baiting and Bare-baiting, by which the Creatures are
oppressed to make them Sport; also their wi^ked Stage Plays and Games, which
are abomination to the Lord, and ashame to a Nation-professing Christianity. O!
how does Swearing and Drunkenness abound, and many take pleasure to overcome
one another in the Sin of Drunkenness, which is abomination to the Lord. And
you that are Tavern and Ale-House-keepers, put not your Guests upon spending
the good Creatures of God upon their Lust, for your own Gain and Interest sake;
but rather restrain them, lest you become guilty with them of their Sins, and
so partake with them of their Plagues. And all your observable Days and Times,
in which you take liberty to sport your selves in Games and Vanity, ought to be
left off, for your Customs are vain; you that observe a Time (as you pretend)
in honor of Christ, which you spend in excess of Eating and Drinking, Music
and Dancing, Gaming and Revelling; in these things you dishonor Christ, and
not honor him, but grieve his holy Spirit, and add Sin unto Sin; and the
greater will be the condemnation of such, except they Repent; and truly, a
great and sore Plague is come upon many People, ev^n hardness, hardness of
Heart: So that indeed; neither the Warnings nor W^ings, Mercies nor Judgments
of the Lord will take impression on them, to move them to Repentance; and in
the sense of this my Heart is grieved, and my Soul mourns in secret because
of the hardness of their Hearts, which does signify the^ to be as Vessels of
wrath fitted for Destruction. Oh, how does all manner of Wickedness abound, and
Ungodliness appear with open Face, and blush not at rebuke? oh, how does Pride
super-abound, and Peoples Hearts so puffed up therewith, that many scarc^ know
what to eat, drink or put on? oh, the ^ields are even white for the Harvest,
Sinners grown ripe for Vengance, Iniquity is coming to its-full height, the
Fats overflow with Wickedness; oh, how are the Proud counted happy, and the
Workers of Iniquity set up? but the Meek of the Earth are despised, and the
humble and contrite Ones are killed all the day long, and counted as Sheep for
the Slaughter, and they that reprove Sin in the Gate are Hated and Persecuted,
and he that departs from Iniquity, and learns Righteousness, makes himself a
Prey: Oh, the Lord has seen it, and it displeases and grieveth him, because
of the multitudes of the Transgressions and Abominations of the Sons of men,
and Violence and Cruelty that fills the Earth; but the Lord will arise as a
man of War, and ease himself of his Enemies, and aveng^ himself of his
Adversaries; for because Judgment is not speedily executed against an Evil
work, therefore the Heart^ of the Sons and Daughters of men are set in them to
do wickedly; but what will be the end thereof?

Oh England, oh England, how of^^n would the Lord in mercy have gathered thy
Inhabitants unto himself, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under ^e^ Wings, but
thou would not? therefore has the Lord in Judgment partly made thee
desolate: Oh, thy great City, thy great City, whose Abominations reached
Heaven, and her Sins came up before the Most High; how has the Lord God
(mighty in Power, and righteous in Judgment) laid her Glory in the Dust,
covered her Dignity with Ashes, and marred her Beauty with Burning! Oh, how
has he made of a City an Heap; of a defenced City, a Ruin; of a Palace of
Strangers, to become a ruinous Heap! And oh, how few of thy Inhabitants, oh
England, have weightily laid it to Heart, or have seriously, and diligently
taken notice of the cause of the Destruction thereof! the Lord Could have
destroyed the People with their Habitations; but the Lord in Mercy spared them,
that his Mercy might move them to Repentance! Oh, England, how has Judgment
after Judgment been executed upon thine Inhabitants? how has the Lord visited
thee with Plague, Fire and Sword, yet their Hearts are still stout against the
Lord and his People; their minds haughty, and they will not bow their Hearts to
the Lord, nor break off from their evil doings, and wicked ways; therefore is
his Hand stretched forth still, and they that will not take Warning and Repent,
must feel his heavy stroke. Oh, say not any of you in your Hearts, Tush, the
Lord has done his worst? oh, the Lord he has begun, and he can make a full
end, and who amongst you can stay his Hand, or escape his stroke when he
smites? or where can you hide your selves from the Lord? therefore bow, fear
and tremble before him, and submit your selves, and meet him by True and
Unfeigned Repentance, and that is the way for you to escape the Stroke of his
Fury.

The Lord is a God full of long-suffering, and full of patience and
forbearance; and long woeth Sinners, and waits day after day to be Gracious,
even to the Rebellious; but his patient forbearing will come to an end, toward
those that will by no means repent and be reclaimed from the evil of their
ways, and against such his Anger and Wrath will break forth as Fire, and they
like Stubble, ready dry, will be consumed therein: Therefore you that have not
yet wholly sinned out the day of your Visitation, prize, prize that littletime
you have, and make good use thereof, in diligently minding and seeking, after
those things that concern your eternal Peace, before you go hence and be no
more. Oh, dear People, every where, my love is to you, and pity and tender
compassion is in my Heart for you, and your good and welfare eternally I
desire, especially you, unto whom I am known in the Fe^^ even you my Neighbors
and Countrymen, whose resident is in Kirtly, Peakfield, Layestouff, and those
parts: Oh, my Soul tenders your eternal happiness, and desires the Salvation of
your Souls, yea, love and good will is in my Heart toward you, and to all
People; oh, that you your selves did tender, and seek after the Salvation of
your Souls more then you do: Remember when sometimes you have been in great
jepardy of your Lives at Sea, and the Lord has in Mercy delivered you, how
little have some of you Eyed the Mercy and delivering Hand of the Lord therein?
but have been ready to ascribe the honor of your deliverance to the Anchor,
Cable and Manhood, etc. More then to the Lord; and when you have been in great
danger of your Lives; and saw no way but you must perish; have you not then
cried to the Lord to deliver you (and the Guilt of your Iniquities being hung
upon your Consciences) have you not been ready to make Promises, in your
distress, to the Lord, that if he spared your Lives you would repent; and
return unto him, and fear and serve him, and forsake the Evil ways; and when
the Lord has answered your desires, and in mercy has given you your Lives for
a Prey, when you came to Land, have you then performed your Vows and Promises
to the Lord, or have you not gone on in Sin and Evil still? let Gods witness in
every Conscience speak; for unto that I make my appeal: Consider seriously how
it stands between God and your own Souls, and how greatly it concerns you
Seamen (and so it does all other People) to mind their latter and, and to be
ready for sudden death; it is a blessed thing to be fit to dye, and to feel
peace with God. Dear People, your Souls are immortal, and must hereafter be in
a sense and feeling of Joy, Peace and Rest; or else of Sorrow, Misery and
Torment, even to all Eternity; wherefore it concerns every particular one, to
mind above all other things, and seek-after the eternal peace and happiness of
your Souls in time, before it be too late; it is Sin, Wickedness, Unbelief, and
Hardness of Heart, that does separate People from the Lord, and that draws down
the wrath and curse of God upon them; wherefore people must first be separated
and cleansed from that to wit, Sin) which separates them from the Lord, and from
his Love, Peace and Blessing, before they can witness their Reconciliation unto
God in his Son, and enjoy his Love, Peace and Blessings. Oh, dear People, I
beseech you, do not deceive your own Souls, by being satisfied with a talk of
being saved and redeemed by Christ, etc, whilst you remain in your Sins, for
whom Christ saves he saves from their Sins, not in their Sins; and they that
witness Christ to be their Redeemer, are redeemed from a vain Conversation, and
have their Consciences purged from dead works, and their Hearts cleansed and
washed in his Blood (which is his Life and Light) from Sin and Corruption, that
so they might serve him in newness and holiness of Life: Therefore consider, be
still, serious and ponderous in Heart, and retire your minds inward to the pure
Light of Christ in your own Consciences, that true and faithful Witness of God,
which keeps a Record of the deeds done in the Body, and according to his Record
must every man be judged according to his works, so take heed unto the Light,
and it will show you your conditions, and how it stands with your poor Souls to
Godward; that will deal plainly with you, and will not deceive you; though
indeed, your Teachers (who preach for Hire, and divine for Money) have, and do
deceive you, by crying Peace to you, and lulled you asleep in your Sins, and
have (as it were) daubed you up with untempred Mortar, and (as it were) sewing
Pillows under your Arm-holes, so long as you put into their Mouths, and give
them hire, and help to maintain their God, which is their Belly: But woe to such
Teachers that feed with the Fat, and clothe with the Wool; and for filthy Lucre
and Gain from their Quarters will cry peace unto the Wicked, unto whom (while
they remain in their wicked state) there is no true peace, says the Living
God; oh, they are Blind Leaders of the Blind, and how many are fallen into the
Pit of Perdition, that have been led by them? Therefore, dear People, cease
from your Teachers, who have not profitted you at all, but keep you ever
learning, but never able to bring you to the knowledge of the Truth, which until
you do come to know freedom from the bondage of Sin and Corruption, you cannot
witness; therefore to the Light in all your Consciences come, for that is
Truth, and love it, and obey it, and you will by it receive power over Sin, and
be enabled to cast off the Yoke of Iniquity, and to take up the Yoke of Christ,
and embrace that Cross which crucifies to the World, and worldly things unto
the Lust and Wickedness thereof, and such are true Disciples of Jesus that
learn of him who is meek and low in their Hearts, and that do deny themselves,
and take up the daily Cross to their own Wills, Thoughts, Words, Works, Desires
and Affections, and follow him through many Tribulations, in the narrow way of
Holiness; for it is not he that calls Lord, Lord, but he that does the Will of
God that inheriteth the Kingdom of God; not the Sayers, or Knowers of the Will
of God are justified but the Doers of the Will are justified; not they that
only confess (with the Mouth, day after day, that they are miserable Sinners,
etc. (as both Priest and People do) and yet still Year after Year remain the
same, if not grow worse) shall find mercy; but they that (not only confess) but
forsake, and turn from the evil (in Heart Life and Conversation) unto that
which is good, shall find mercy and forgiveness, and remission of Sins. Oh,
mind the good thing in you which is grieved and burdened with the evil, and
turn in your minds to it, and it will let you see those things that are
reproveable: Drunkard turn in thy mind to the Light in thy own Conscience, and
it will show thee, judge and reprove thee for thy Drunkenness; Swearer turn
into the Light, and it will judge thee for Swearing, for Lying, Pride, Envy,
Malice, Reviling, Cheating, Defrauding, Covetousness, Fornication; yea, All
things that are reprovable are made manifest by the Light, and that which
makes manifest is Light; thou that hate the Light, and love thy Evil
deeds, and wilt not come to the Light, because it will reprove thee, there thou
have learned thy condemnation; For this is the condemnation of the World, that
Light is come into the World, and men love Darkness rather then the Light,
because their deeds are evil; but they that do good love the Light, and bring
their deeds to the Light, to try them whether they be wrought in God; and such
are justified by the Light: So while you have the Light, believe in the Light,
that you may become Children of the Light; so unto the Light (in all your
Consciences) I am made manifest, and in true unfeigned love, and bowels of pity,
tenderness and compassion to your immortal Souls have I cleared my Conscience,
in giving you warning to Repent and turn from the evil of your own ways unto
the Lord, while you have a time, before the door of Mercy be shut against you
forever, and time unto you be no more.

From one that tenders the Eternal happiness and good of your Immortal Souls, a
Sufferer in Bonds for the Testimony of a good Conscience William Bennit

To those that are seeking the Living God in the Dead Forms.
Having a Form of godliness but deny the Power thereof, from such turn away,
etc. Why seek ye the Living among the Dead* he is not here, but is risen, etc.
Know you not your selves, how that Christ Jesus is in you, except you be
Reprobates, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Luke 14. 5, 6. 2 Cor. 13. 5.

AND all dear People that are scatered among the many Sects and Heaps, who have
honest sincere desires and thirstings after the Lord; oh, love and compassion
is in my Heart toward you, and my Soul pities you; and the more, because you
are seeking the Living God among the Dead Forms, Shadows, Carnal Ordinances,
Beggarly (in comparison of the Life of Truth) Elements and Rudiments of the
World, but cannot there find true lasting peace, rest, comfort and satisfaction
for the immortal Souls: Oh, Christ is risen he is not there, his Appearance is
now more hidden, more invisible, more inward; therefore stay not in Shadows,
rest not in the Likeness without Life; pitch not your Tent in the Form, without
the Power; Come, come away, you thirsty Ones, from the Wells of man's digging,
which can hold no Water, that will rightly and kindly satisfy your thirsty
Souls, and wait to know the Spring opened in your own Hearts, which comes from
Christ, the Fountain of living Water, and drink thereof, and be satisfied, and
go no more forth to the broken Cisterns; but wait within, in the Light, for the
Springs of Life to refresh your thirsty Souls.

Oh! come out of the Shadows to the Substance, Christ (the Light) in you,
except you be Reprobates: Oh! the Spirit and the Bride says, Come; and he that
drinks says, Come; and let him that is athirst come, and drink of the Water
of Life freely; why do you spend your Time for that which is not Bread, and
your ^abour for that which does not truly satisfy your Souls? Oh! feed no
longer upon the Husk, upon Words without Life, upon Knowledge without Power;
for that will puff you up in your own Eyes, and elevate you in your own
Conceits, and shut you out from the Tree of Life; and though you may seem to
grow Rich and increase with Goods, and want nothing; yet when your Eyes come to
be opened, you will see your selves Poor, Blind and Naked; for he that covers
himself with a Covering of Words and Knowledge, and a Profession without Life,
his Covering is not the Fine Linen, whit^ and clean, which the Wife Virgins
that follow the Lamb are clothed with, who have Oil in their Vessels, the
Light, Life and Substance in themselves; but they that only get Words and
Knowledge into the Comprehension, and grow rich in the Brain, and have their
Religion in their Head, and know not the pure undefiled Religion in the Heart,
such are Foolish Virgins, that have Oil only in their Lamps; and though such
may blaze, and give a seeming great Light in Words, yet such one day will want
Oil, and their Lights will go out; the Lord will dry up all standing Waters
that have no Spring; he will blast all Professions out of the Light, all
Gatherings out of the Name and Power of God, the Lord will scatter; therefore
come away (from among them) you Unsatisfied and Thirsty Ones, whose Souls pant
after the Lord, and are weary of the Husks, and hunger after the Substance: And
deceive not your own Souls by creating to your selves a false Peace, by
applying the Promises to your selves, and acting Faith (as you say) upon a
Promise; but seriously consider in the Fear of the Lord, and examine your own
Hearts, with the Light of Christ in your own Consciences, whether you be in
that State and Condition that the Promises of Life Eternal are unto, yea or
nay: There is great Difference between man's applying the Promises, forcing him
to believe they belong to him; and God's applying them, and sealing them to the
Soul by his own Spirit: The Promises of God are Yea and Amen in Christ Jesus,
the Covenant of Light and Life; and those that are converted into him, partake
with him of the Promises of Life eternal; but he that is in Christ, is a New
Creature, the old things are passed away, and all things become new; and such
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, and so come to be Heirs with
Christ of that Kingdom that is without End. But for any to set themselves to
believe, that they are elected in Christ Jesus unto Life eternal, and so count
the Promises of God are theirs, when they are not become New Creatures in
Christ, but are in their Sin, such deceive their own Souls; for Unless a man
(said Christ) be born again, he cannot enter into God's Kingdom. So all you
hungry Souls, turn in your Minds to the Light of Christ Jesus in your
Consciences, and wait in it, to know Bread in your own Houses, Christ in you,
the Bread of Life, which the living Soul feeds on, and lives by, that you may
know the fresh and green Pasture, and with us feed therein, and drink of the
still Waters, and rest with us (in the Light) in the Fold; that so we may all
know and have one Shepherd, and be all of one Sheepfold.

To those that are backslided from the Truth.
Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and Repent, and do thy first
works, etc. Return, oh, backsliding Israel, etc. I will heal thy backsliding,
etc. But if you will not hear, my Soul shall weep in secret, etc. Because the
Lord's Flock is gone into Captivity, Rev. 2. 5. Jer. 3. 12. Hosea 14. 4. Jer
14. 17.

AND you who have tasted of the Power of an Endless Life, and were convinced of
the precious immutable Truth of God, and had in measure received it in the love
and obedience of it, and by it were in part set free from the bondage of Sin
and Corruption, and redeemed out of the pollutions of the World, but now are
Apostatized from the Lord, and have forsaken his precious Truth and People, and
like Demas embraced this present World again, and are turned like the Dog to
his Vomit, and like the Swine that were washed, to wallow in the Mire again,
and have made shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, and have proved
treacherous both to God and his People, and have denied the Womb that bore you,
and the Breast that gave you suck, and have turned from the Grace of God into
wantonness, and done dispite to the Spirit of Truth, and has trampled the
Blood of the Covenant (wherewith you were in measure sanctified) under your
Feet as an unholy thing, and have slain the Just, and crucified the Righteous
in your selves. Oh, poor, poor Hearts! my Soul pities you, and mourns in secret
over you, and cannot but lament the sadness and deplorableness of your
Conditions; oh, better you had never known the Truth, then after you have known
it to turn from it to your old Lovers again: Oh, whither will you go you
Backsliding ones? where, and in what will you hide your selves from the Lord,
now you are departed from him? if you go from Sea to Sea, he will find you out;
and what can defend you from his wrath? oh, where and in what can you find true
Peace, Rest and happiness for your Souls, seeing you have forsaken him in whom
alone it is to be enjoyed? Oh, are you not sensible that you want true Peace?
Oh, you that have forsaken the Father's House of plenty, and are gone out among
the Swine who feed upon the Husks; oh, poor Hearts! do you not sometimes a
little come to your selves, and then remember the Father's House? and do you
not then find some inclination and desire to return again? if you do return,
how know you but that he will have compassion on you, and receive you into his
House again? though you have been spending your Portion among Harlots, and have
deal so treacherously by him, and so much wounded and grieved him, and his
Children; yet notwithstanding if you can thoroughly return unto him with your
whole Hearts, he can and will receive you, and heal your Backslidings, and blot
out your Sins, and forgive you your Transgressions against him, and love you
freely. Therefore return, return you backsliding Ones, why, why will you die
and perish forever; oh, repent and do the first Works, turn your minds inward
to the pure and just One in your selves, which you have grieved, wounded and
oppressed, as a Cart is oppressed with Sheaves: Oh that you might look upon him
whom you have pierced, and behold him whom you have wounded, and even mourn and
lament over him: Oh, to the pure, holy, faithful Witness of God in your own
Consciences, which you were at first turned unto you must come, and the
righteous Judgment of the Lord you must own, and wait in; yea, a dreadful Cup
you must drink before you can enjoy true lasting peace in God: Oh that you
could be willing to drink it, and to pass again through the Fire and Sword,
yea, through Death, to come to eat again of the Tree of Life, and live forever:
Oh, that all you that are betrayed (like Sampson) of their strength by the
Adulterous mind, so as that the Philistine, the uncircumcised Nature has
prevailed over you, and put out your Eyes, that you are become Blind, and
cannot see that beauty and comeliness in the Lord and his Truth which you once
saw; oh that the Lord would be pleased to visit you again, that (like as the
Hair of Sampson grew again, his strength increased; so that he slew more of his
Enemies at his Death, then he did in all his Life) so the Seed of God may be
raised again in your Hearts, and the strength therein and thereby may be
renewed and grow, that by your dying again unto that which is contrary to the
Will of God, you may witness greater Victory in the Lord over your Enemies, and
know more of them slain then ever you did. Oh! you that find and are sensible
that the Lord has not wholly given you over, but is yet striving with you by
his pure Witness in you to return unto him, his Truth and People again; Oh!
return before it be too late, and before the Door of Mercy be forever shut
against you; for then, if you seek the Blessing with Tears, as Esau did, you
will not obtain it; and though you call, Lord, Lord open unto us, we have Eaten
and D^unk in thy Presence, and in thy Name we have cast out Devils, and have
had power over unclean Spirits, and have done many great Works; yet
notwithstanding he will say, Depart from me ye Workers of Iniquity, I know you
not: Therefore be sober and serious, and ponderously consider, and let these
things take deep Impression in your Hearts, which are wrote in true Love, Pity
and Bowels of Compassion to your Immortal Souls, by a Mourner over you, and a
Travailer in Spirit for your Restoration.

To those that profess the Truth, yet walk contrary to the Truth in Life and
Conversation.
For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now I tell you we^ping, that
they are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, etc. Phil. 3. 18, 19.

ANd all you who make a Profession of the Light and Truth in Words, but in
Works deny it, whose Conversations are loose and vain, and not consistant with
your Profession, nor answerable, but repugnant to Truth, you do not conduce to
the honor of Truth, but produce a dishonor thereunto by your loofe disorderly
walking, whereby you also give the Enemies of Truth advantage against the Truth
for them to reproach the Truth, and those that walk and live in the Truth, and
also you are a stumbling Block in the way of the simple-hearted, that has a
Love and Desire toward Truth, and a Grief and Burden to the Faithful that love
the Truth, and live in it, and seek the Glory and Honor thereof; and also you
deceive your own Souls, by being satisfied with a Profession of Truth, without
the possession thereof; and you have no true peace where you are, nor unity
with the Lord, nor fellowship with his People; for the unity and fellowship of
the Saints is in the Light and holy Life of God; and they that are out of the
Light (though they profess it) are out of the unity of Faith, and fellowship of
the Sons of God, and such are but gotten into the outward Court where the
Gentiles, the uncircumcised in Heart can come; but blessed are all they that do
the Will of God, and keep his Commandments, and have right to the Tree of Life,
and enter through the Gate into the City, where no unclean thing can come: So
all you that profess the Truth, and walk contrary to the Truth, come to be
faithful and obedient to the Truth, that in the Way of Truth and Righteousness
you may walk as becomes Truth; and that in the Light you may shine as Lights
in your holy Lives and blameless unspotted Conversations, to the praise and
glory of God, and to the peace, rest, comfort and happiness of your own Souls:
verily no Hypocrite in Sion can be hid from the Lord, who gives the Churches
to know that it is he that scarcheth the Heart and tries the Reins, who says,
I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to every one according as his
work shall be.

To all those that are Convinced of the Truth but still remain in the World's
Ways.
If you know these things, happy are you if you do them: He that knows the
Fathers Will, and does it not, is worthy of many stripes, John 13. 17.

AND all you that are convinced of the Truth and Way of God, but do not resign
up your Hearts in obedience to walk therein, but still remain in the broad way
of the World, partaking with them of their Sins, Idolatry and falfe Worship;
and though you see the Vanity and Evil thereof, yet (for by-ends and carnal
self-interests, to save your selves from Reproach and Suffering) you join with
them therein against the pure Witness of God in your own Consciences; and if
you continue partaking with them of their Sins, how can you but expect also to
partake of their Plagues, except you haste out from among them, and embrace and
receive the Truth in the Love and Obedience of it? Oh! come out, come out from
amongst them, and be you separated, and touch no more the Unclean Thing, that
the Lord may receive you unto himself, and become your God, and you become his
People. Oh! you that know the Fathers Will, and do it not, are you not worthy
of many Stripes? Oh, poor Hearts! shun not the Cross any longer, neither be
ashamed of the Reproach, nor ashamed of the Lord and his People before Men; but
give up your Hearts to obey the Lord and his precious Truth, and take up the
daily Cross, that crucifies unto the World and Worldly Things, unto the Sin;
Wickedness, Formal Worships, Vain Customs, Ceremonies, Pride and Vanity
thereof, and follow the Lamb in the narrow Way of Holiness; and be willing to
Suffer with Christ, and you shall Reign with him; and love not your Lives unto
Death, and you shall have a Crown of Life. Oh! how long has the Lord been
woing many of you day after day, if not year after year, and has long waited
(knocking at the Door of your Hearts) in his Grace to be Gracious unto you, who
desires not that you should perish in your Rebellion and Disobedience? Oh!
that the sense of his Goodness; Mercy and Patient forbearing toward you might
overcome your Hearts, and make you willing to resign up your selves to walk in
the Way of Truth, before the Lord cease striving with you (who has said, His
Spirit shall not always strive with Man) lest the Day of your Visitation pass
over your Heads. Therefore come forward you that halt and linger behind in the
Borders of Babylon, and Subburbs of Egypt; and come nigh you that stand afar
off gazing to see what will become of us; He that is not with me (said Christ)
is against me; he that gathers not with me, scatters abroad; none can serve
(two Masters) God and Mammon.

To those that are Newly Convinced of the Truth.
Ye were like Sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the Shepherd and
Bishop of your Souls: He shall gather his Lambs in his Arms, and carry them in
his Bosom, 1 Peter 2. 25. Isaiah 40 11.

AND all you who are newly convinced of the precious Truth and Way of God, and
have in measure received Truth in the love and belief of it, and have and daily
do give up your hearts to obey the Truth, and to walk in the Way of
Righteousness, and Path of Holiness: Dear Ones, unto you my Heart is open in
the tender Bowels of my heavenly Fathers Love; and happy and blessed of the
Lord God are you, if you do not faint, nor grow weary in your Minds, nor turn
back again, as some have done, but persevere on to the End. Oh! dear Babes,
whom the Lord, mighty in Power, has by his out stretched Arm brought out of
Egypt, the Land of Darkness and House of Bondage, and has set your Faces
toward Canaan, the good Land of Liberty, Light, Rest and Peace: Oh, travail
on, travail on ye weak Ones in the strength of the Lord, and drawings of his
Light, and look not back to Egypt again, remember Lot's Wife; and fear not (the
God of the World, the Prince of the Power of the airy mind, even that wicked
Spirit that once had dominion in and over you, and kept you Bondslaves in
darkness to Sin and Corruption) though he (the Enemy of your Souls Liberty,
Peace and Rest) may pursue hard after you with his whole Host of Temptations,
Snares and Allurements, both inward and outward; and also a Sea of Troubles,
Straits, Difficulties and Sufferings may appear in your Way, both within and
without, and Mountains of Fears, Doubts and carnal Reasonings on every side,
and also something in you ready to murmur, complain and say, Oh! that we had
tarried still in Egypt, and not set one step toward Canaan; for the Way is so
strait, and the Path so narrow, the Sufferings so hard, and the Difficulties
and Dangers so great and various, that we fear we shall perish by the way, and
not get to our desired Rest; therefore let us turn back again, before we go any
further. Oh! fear not, neither turn back, but stand still from reasoning
carnally, and look not at the Straits, Trials, Dangers, Sufferings and Losses
that may appear before you; neither look at your own Weakness, Feebleness and
Inability, nor at the Strength and Temptation of your Enemy; but look up (ye
little ones) unto the Lord, and trust you in the Strength of his Arm, for he is
God all-sufficient for you; therefore cast your care upon him, and he will make
a Way for you through the Sea, and divide the Waters of the great Deep, and
make a Way for you in the Wilderness, and a Path through the Thickets, and
make the Crooked Strait before you, and the Rough Smooth; he will throw down
the Mountains, and remove away the Hills, and lead you in a Way you know not,
and in a Path you never before trod in, and will make the hard things easy
unto the VVilling and Obedient, that turn not back again to their old Lovers,
but love Truth and Righteousness, and follow on to know the Lord in his Way;
all such he will give to drink of the Brook by the Way, and feed with Bread
from Heaven, whereby you shall be refreshed, and your Strength renewed daily,
in which Strength you shall be able to travail on without fainting, and to run
and not be weary, until you come to your desired Rest, and see the Travail of
your Souls, and be satisfied with the Enjoyment of that you have travailed
after. So the Lord be with you and keep your Eye single unto himself, that your
Hearts may be full of Light, that nothing may cause you to stumble and fall
into the Snares of the Enemy, who has hindered many that once begun to run
well; oh! mind and keep to that in your own Hearts which makes you truly
sensible of your particular States and Conditions, and in that sense daily wait
upon the Lord diligently and patiently for the sweet Refreshings from his
Presence, and for the distillings of his Heavenly Dew, that so the tender
Plants of Righteousness and Lilly of Holiness may grow and spring in all your
Hearts; that the little See^ of Life may become as a great Tree, and every one
of you may witness a sitting under your own Vine (Christ in you the Hope of
Glory) and none to make you afraid.

And dear Friends, look not out at others, but keep at home in the Light, the
Tent; Jacob shall dwell alone, and not be numbered among the Nations; Esau he
hunts abroad, and grows weary and faint, and then sells his Birthright for a
Mess of Pottage: What if some stumble, and fall from the Truth? let not that
shake you; Truth is the same still, and changes not; and if you see some turn
aside from us into a Self separation from the Body of Friends, and endeavor to
draw Disciples after them, let not that cause you to stumble and question the
Certainty of Truth; neither be you drawn away and tossed about like Children by
them; but keep to the Light, and in it follow the Footsteps of the Flock; but
follow not the Footsteps of the Wandering Sheep, that have left their Flock
and are gone astray, who are like to perish by the devouring Beast and Enemy of
their Souls, except in time they return again to the Fold: And if you see some
(amongst our selves) setting or keeping up that thing or practice which is out
of the comely desent Order of the Body, and not consistant with Truth's
Government, let not that beget an Occasion of stumbling in your Minds; but be
still, and keep your Eye single to the Lord, and walk as you have them for an
Example (that are over you in the Lord) who fully follow Christ Jesus: And as
for that which is only set up and ^eld up by Man, out of Truth's Order, it will
die and pass away, and Truth will outlive all.

So unto the Lord, who has called you out of Darkness into his mavelous
Light, do I commit you to be preserved unto himself unto the End; For, many are
called, but few chosen; he that abides to the End, the same shall be s^ved.

To the true Mourner in Sion.
To appoint to them that mourn in Sion, and to give them the Oil of Joy for
Mourning, etc. Blessed are you that mourn, for you shall be comforted. They
that sow in Tears shall reap in Joy, etc. Isaiah 61. 3. Matthew. 5. 4. Psalm. 126.
5, 6.

OH, lift up thy head thou bowed down, thou Mourner in Sion, who art as one
alone in a solitary place, and few sees thee, or knows thy Sorrow, or truly
sensible of thy Grief, or behold thy Tears, who art (in thine own Eye) as a
Woman forsaken and grieved in Spirit; as a Wife of Youth rejected, who appears
in thy own Eyes as it were Miserable and Wretched, mourning in the sense of thy
own (as thou think) Unworthiness, Failings, Inability, Emptiness and
Poverty, who art ready to say (with sorrow) Where is there any so Poor, Empty,
Barren and Unfruitful to God as I? Oh, I can do nothing for the Lord except
(like Mary) Weep behind him (thinking my self scarce worthy to see his Face)
and wash his Feet with my Tears* whilst others sit at the Table with him, and
eat of the Fatness of his House, and drink of the New-wine of his Kingdom; but
alas for me! my Tears are my Meat and Drink, because of the oppression of my
Enemy, who says to my Soul, Where is thy God? do thou think thou snalt ever
be worthy to behold his Face, to receive his Love, and to have the Smiles of
his Countenance? And thou (O mourning one) by hearkening to, and believing thy
Enemy, becomes (in thy own eye) like an alone Sparrow upon the Flouse-top; and
as the alone Quail in the Stubble-field; and as a Dove alone, mourning for the
loss of her Mate; and so thou layest thee down in Sorrow, and make it thy
Bed, and Grief thy Sheets, Tears thy Pillow, and Sighing and Mourning thy
Sleep. whilst thou believe thy Enemy, and entertainest those Fears, Doubtings
and Carnal Reasonings (which he infuseth into thy Heart) as thy Companion: But
arise I say unto thee (in the Name of my God, and thy God, of my Father, and
thy Father) arise out of thy Bed, for thy Beloved is at hand, and knocks at
the door of thy Heart; arise out of thy Bed of Sorrow, Fears and Doubtings and
by Faith let him in whom thy Soul loves; say not, I am not worthy of him, but
rather say, Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief, strengthn my Faith, make me
more worthy of thee: Oh, shut him out no longer by unbelief and doubtings, and
by reasoning with and hearkening unto the Enemy of thy Souls Joy, Peace and
Comfort, who would always keep thee from thy Beloved, and would daily add
Sorrow to thy Sorrow, and Affliction to thy Grief, and Weight to thy Burden,
that he might (if he could) wholly sink thee down into the Pit of Desparation
forever: Wherefore hearken no longer unto him, for he was a Liar from the
beginning; entertain him not, nor his false Instigations any longer (n^r by
unbelief keep not him out any longer whom thou love and much desire) but by
that small measure of Faith thou sometimes feel'st in God, though it be but as
a Grain of Mustard seed, endeavor to thrust and keep out the Enemy, and to
remove the Mountains of Fears and Doubtings out of the way, and by Faith
embrace him whom thy Soul desires more then Rubies or much fine Gold; that so
the N^gh^s of thy Sorrow and Mourning for him in thy Bed of Fears and Doubtings
may be turned into sweet reposes with him in his Bed of Solace; that thou may
say with gladness of heart, the False Accuser is cast out, and my Beloved is
come, is come, and his reward is with him; he has taken me from my mourning
state into his Banqueting House of Joy, Peace, Rest and true Satisfaction, and
his Banner over me is Love; and now my Sorrow is turned into Joy; and I that
once sat mourning in the Pit of doubtings and unbelief, has the Lord (upon
the wings of Faith) raised up to come to sing in the hight of Sion, and to flow
to the goodness of my God, who has exalted my Horn in him, and enlarged my
Mouth over my Enemy, whose Mouth was enlarged over me in the day I bowed under
him through unbelief and doubtings: Oh, then feebleness possessed my Loins,
weakness my Knees, and faintness my Heart; so that when I rose up to go
(toward my Beloved) I fell by doubtings and fears; but now, I that stumbled,
am (by Faith in the Power of my God) girt with Strength, and the Bow of the
mighty man (that prevailed against me broken in pieces, who so often wounded me
with his Darts, that I was like to poor Lazarus, full of Wounds, Bruises and
Sores; but the Great Physician of Souls has healed me with the Oil of Faith
and Salvation; and now I find that it is the Lord that binds up the broken in
heart, and heals all their wounds; Oh, blessed be the Lord who has exalted
my low Estate, and brought me from off the Dunghill, and given me a Mansion in
the Father's House, and a place at the Table with his Children; though I once,
by hearken to my Enemy, said, I was a Dog, and not worthy to eat of the
Childrens Bread; and so I kept good things from me by yiedling to my Adversary,
who would still have feed me with his food, even the dust of the Earth, that so
I might have continued always Weak, Lean, Barren and Feeble, and never to have
been able to overcome him; but the Lord my tender God (who thought upon me in
the day of my distress, when I was poor and needy) has rebuked him, and has
put him under my Feet, the mighty the Lord has brought down from his Seat, and
exalted him of low degree, he has delivered Jacob out of the hand of him that
was too strong for him, and though he was a Worm, and no Man, and the cry was,
How shall Jacob arise? yet the Arm of his God has raised him from the Earth,
and has set his Feet upon the Necks of his Enemies, and has given him power
to tread upon the Mighty as the Potter treads Clay; and this is the Lord's
doings and it is marvelous in the eyes of his Servants, blessed be his name for
ever, it is the Lord that lifts up the weak Hands that hung down, and
strengthens the feeble Knees, and m^kes strait their Paths, that that which is
Lame may not be turned out of the Way, but that rather it may be Healed, that
the Hal^ing may go upright, and the Lame may leap as an Heart, and the Tongue of
the Dumb might sing of the goodness of the Lord and the Mourner rejoice in him
whose Mercy endures forever. So believe, hope and trust you in the Lord all ye
that love him, and mourn and long for him, and in patience and contentedness
(without fainting in your minds) wait for him; for the Lord is good to the man
that waits upon him, to the Soul that seeks him; and it is good both to hope
and quietly to wait upon the Lord, more then he that wants and waits for
the Morning; for with the Lord there is great Mercy and plentious Redemption,
who redeemeth Jacob out of all his Trouble, and is with him in the Fire and in
the Water, and in all his Afflictions he forsook him not: Therefore trust you,
hope, rely and depend you upon the Lord, all you that love him, and cast your
care upon him, for he cares for you, whose tender compassion and faithfulness
will never fail to the House of Israel.

A General Salutation of Love to the Children of Light.
AND all dearly beloved Friends, everywhere, who are faithful to the Lord and
his Truth in your several measures and places, my very dear and unfeigned love
in the precious Truth of our God extends unto all the honest and upright in
Heart, who love and delight in Truth and Righteousness, and seek the Praise,
Honor and Glory of God alone, Grace and Love be with you, Mercy and Peace
attend you, Joy and Comfort fill you, and the Blessing of the Most High rest
upon and remain in and with you Day and Night, and the Lord keep you all in the
Faith of the Elect Seed, in which is your Victory over the World, in which
stand fast, and keep your Dominion in the Lord over the Earth and earthly
things, that the Earth may be the Footstool of your Minds, and Heaven your
Throne, and you to sit together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, and to
use the World as if you used it not, being loose in heart to that which
perishes with the using; oh, that all Friends that are free from, and void of
the Cares of this Life, and Cumbrances of this World may prize (and stand fast
in) their Freedom, and not be forward and hasty (in the affectionate part) to
run their selves into Bondage to those things that profit not, but hinders to
Godward, and prove as Briars and Thorns to the choking or quenching of the
growth of the Seed of Life in the Heart; there is a mind that hunts and desires
after (and is ready (if it be not limited) to form and create unto it self) a
Freedom that stands not in the Liberty of the Sons of God; the Liberty of the
Sons of God and Children of the Light stands in that which is a Yoke to the
World's Liberty, and their Freedom stands in that which is Bondage to the
carnal Mind, and crucifies unto the World and wordly things; also there is a
mind that is ready to endeavor and seek to put off, and to keep out of those
things (which in their proper place may be said to be lawful) that it sees it
hinders the growth into the Eternal, and endangereth the Souls standing to
God-wards; and truly that is the more purer mind that serves (one Master) God
alone; Indeed dear Friends, I am ready to desire that this mind (which was in
Christ Jesus) may have dominion in our Hearts more and more; that as Strangers
and Pilgrims we may be in and to the World and the love thereof, and the Lord
^lone become object of our Love, and his Truth the covering of our Eyes, that
so the desire of our Souls may be unto him, and unto the remembrance of his
Name, which is like precious Ointment poured forth, giving a pleasant smell,
and a sweet delect^ble savor, and therefore do the Virgins love him, and
remember his Love more then Wine; yea, more then Father, Mother, Husband, Wife,
Children, Silver, Gold, Houses, Lands; yea, he is the chiefest to them of ten
thousand, and the Upright love him, for he is altogether comely.

Oh! dearly beloved Friends, much has the Lord God of power done for us, since
the day he found us laid among the Pits, and raised us up from the Dunghill of
our own Corruption, and s^id unto us Live, who were dead in Sins and
Trespasses; oh, how greatly has he blessed and prospered us in despite of the
spirit that has so eagerly sought and endeavored to devour us, and extinguish
us from being a People, and has even made us a Family like a Flock; and though
Balak and Balaam's spirit (the Beast, Jezabel and false Prophets) have sought
Enchantments against us, to Curse us, yet the God of blessings has greatly
Blessed us in our Sufferings, Tribulations and Afflictions, and has made Joseph
as a fruitful Bough by the Wall, whose Branches grow over the Wall (that does
and will let until it be taken out of the way) though the Archers of Babylon
have shot at him, and grievously wounded him, yet his Bow (notwithstand his
great Affliction) has abode in Strength, and the Hands of his Arms have been
made strong by the hand of the mighty God of Jacob, who has blessed Joseph, and
unto the uttermost bounds of the everlasting Hills shall he be blessed
forevermore.

Oh, dear Friends, if any People now in being upon the Earth have cause to
speak well of the Lord, and to trust in his holy Name, we are the People; for
mightily and wonderfully has the mighty God done and wrought for us, though
the blind World sees it not: Oh! how have we been as Lambs among Lions, and yet
not devoured, but wonderfully preserved by the secret Power and invisible Arm
of the Lord our Shepherd, who has been our Defense when the Beasts of the
Forest have come forth to Devour, and the Wolves have been greedy of their
Prey, then has the Lord sought for Mount Sion, and defended the Hill thereof;
and though some said, We'll pursue, we'll overtake, our Lust shall be satisfied
on them; we'll draw our Swords, and our Hands shall destroy them; yet how has
the Lord blown in his Wrath upon them, the Sea of his Judgment has covered
them, and they are sunk as Lead in the bottom of the mighty Waters, and we yet
(through mercy) are alive, and have a being among the Living, to speak well of
the Lord, and to make mention of the Goodnes^ of our Good, and to declare of
his Kindness, and to praise him for his Works, which are marvelous in our Eyes:
Oh! his Love, his Mercy and tender fatherly care over and toward us, extends
beyond the demonstration of Words; and oh let the sense thereof be engraven
upon the table of our Hearts, that it may humble us, and keep us low before the
Lord, and be an Obligation upon every Soul of us, to bind and engage us unto
the Lord and his Truth forever.

How mightily has the Lord limited and quieted the raging Sea, and made a
Calm! oh, that all Friends might take notice of the great Mercy and Love of the
Lord to us in this particular, and mind the end of the Lord therein; and let us
all take heed we Sin not, because Grace and Mercy to us abounds, lest it
provoke the Lord to Anger, and be a moving cause to induce him to let forth the
Wind, and suffer a Storm again. Oh, that none might get into a false ease and
liberty and wrong security, because of the present Calm; but all to keep retire
in that which fitteth and makes ready for Trials when they come, in, by and
through which we have been upheld and preserved hitherto, even by the secret
Power and Arm of the Lord, which is not shortened that it cannot save, but is
the same that ever it was; and it has been our Helper in six Troubles, and in
the seventh has not been wanting to us, to help us when there has been none to
help, and to support and uphold us when there has been none to uphold, but
Loads, Burdens and Oppressions have been heaped upon us, and to comfort us,
when nothing but Sorrow and Trouble from the World compassed us about, and when
we have had nothing, as from men, but the Bread of Adversity and the Water of
Affliction; even then has the Lord our tender God been the Comforter of our
Hearts, the Refresher of our Souls, the Rejoycer of our Spirits, and the Lifter
up of our Hands when we have been bowed down with the Oppressions of our
Enemies; his ^resence has been with us in the Prisonhouse, and in the low
Dungeon, and has not left us to this day, and assuredly never, never, never
will leave us, if we leave not him, but will be with us until we have finished
our Course and fulfilled the days of our appointed Time, and our Change come.

So dear Friends, unto the Lord I commit you, who knows how it is with all
his Babes and Children, and beholds all their Trials, Straits and Sufferings,
inward and outward, and his ear is open to the cry of the Poor, and groanings
of the Needy, who is God all-sufficient for all those that trust, hope, rely
and depend upon him, and able to keep them by his power through Faith in his
Name, unto his heavenly Kingdom: So the Lord be with you all, and the Almighty
protect and defend you, and keep you from Evil, unspotted from the World, and
preserve you in Love, Peace and Unity with himself, and one with another in his
innocent unfeigned Love, in his Light, Life, Power and Truth, and make and keep
you all of one Heart, and one Mind, and one Soul; that you all with one consent
may still worship and serve the Lord God in the one Spirit and the one Truth,
in which I dearly greet, salute and embrace you all, and remain your Friend and
Companion in the Patience and Tribulation of Jesus; Farewell, dear Friends.

William Bennit.

Dear Friends,
IN the Love which waxes not Old, neither is subject to Change, which God has
shed abroad in the hearts of those that believe in the Light, through the
operation of his Eternal Spirit; in this Love which opens our Hearts unto the
Lord, and one another, does the unfeigned Salutation of my Soul reach forth
unto you, as in which Love Iabide, I cannot forget the Family of Love, and
Household of Faith, neither can length of Time, nor distance of Place, ^onds nor
Tribulations extinguish the remembrance of you, whom the Lord ^ath chosen (out
of the Elect Seed) from out of the Fa^ilies of the Earth, to place his Name
among, and to mani^est his*Power and Glory in and through you his People, to
the praise of your God, in your Generation: dear Friends, who are called to be
made pertakers of the Blessed Everlasting Inheritance of the Saints in Light,
and through Faith in the Light of Life you are called and raised up, to bear
Testimony unto him whom the Nations Despise; but unto you that believe in him
he is Precious, and you that have seen his B^auty and beheld his Comeliness, and
have tasted of his Love, and have savoured the sweetness of his pre^ious
Ointment, which has healed your Wounds, and cured your Diseases, and with
which your Souls have been Bathed, Warmed and sweetly Refreshed; unto you that
have tasted of his Divine Virtues, who is the Light of ^he World, he is the
chiefest of ten Thousand; who has called and chosen you out of the World, to
follow him in the Regeneration, and to bear his Image before the World, and to
show forth his Testimony against the World, therefore do the World hate you,
and desire and seek your Destruction, and would tempt you, and by cruelty force
you from the beloved of you^ Souls; but dear Hearts, every one cleave in spirit
unto the Lord, and hold fast his blessed Truth, received into your Hearts, that
the Enemy within, nor his Instruments without by all their Tempta^^ons and
Cruelty, may never move you to decline, nor degenerate from that blessed
Testimony which God has given you to bear for him, in the midst of a Wicked
and U^godly Generation; who must fill up the measure of their Iniquity, that
Judgment may come upon them to the full, and the measure of your Sufferings
must also be fulfilled; therefore, dear Lambs, hold fast Faith and a good
Conscience, and p^t on Courage and Strength unto the end; and hold fast the
Word of Patience, that you may be kept in the hour of Temptation, and the
Preservation of your Souls you may come to witness by the Power of God, through
all Trials, Troubles, Losses, Straits, Afflictions and Tribulations, that the
Lord suffers to befall you, trust you in him, and depend upon his everlasting
Arm, which is your help, stay and strength, God will restrain the Wrath of our
Enemies, and dissipate the Purposes, and confound the Evil Devises of our
Adversaries, so far as it seems good unto him; the Lord God Everlasting who
keeps Covenant with his People, and whose tender Mercy, Compassion and
Fatherly Care fails not toward the House of Jacob; his blessed soul
refreshing strengthening Presence be with all his People, to Feed, Nourish and
Strengthen them, and Cherish them, Support and Uphold them, Comfort and
Consolate them in all their sufferings for his Names sake, and bear up all his
little Ones, for whom my Soul is in Travel, and the Lord keep all his in the
Covenant of his everlasting Love, that if our Earthen Vessels be Broken, and
turned to the Dust for the Testimony of Jesus, our Souls may rest with the
Lord; so whether we Live w^ may Live to God, or whether we Dye we may Dye unto
God, that whether we Live or Dye we may be the Lords, and he be glorified in us
either by Life or Death, which is the desire of your Friend and Brother in the
love of Truth. Dear Lambs, my love remains with you, though Bonds hold me
close, be you bundled up together in Love, Peace and Unity, that you may be a
help strength and comfort one to another in the Lord, and let none be careless,
but all watch and keep close to the Lord, and keep your meetings, and wait upon
God to be fitted for every Trial yet to come, neither let any be discouraged or
surprised with fear through the terror of your Enemies, you know that the Lord
has carried us through much already, his Arm is not shortened, our God is a God
of Wonders, let us stand still and see his Salvation, which he will manifest on
the behalf of the meek of the Earth, that are appointed as Sheep for the
Slaughter, and has no helper but the Lord; God Almighty hasten it for his own
Elects sake, which cries Day and Night unto him, Amen says my Soul, even come
Lord Jesus, come quickly, and take unto thee thy great power to Reign, for unto
thee belongs the Dominion, for thou art worthy, let all Nations come and
Worship before thee, and give Glory to thy Name, who art Just in all thy Ways,
and Righteous in all thy Judgments, thy Counsels of old are Faithfulness and
Truth.

Bury Goal this 18th of the 9th Month 1670. William Bennit.

A Loving Exhortation and Warning to SEAMEN, and all others whom it does
concern.
YOU that go down to the Sea in Ships, that do Business in great Waters, where
you see the Works of the Lord, and his Wonders in the deep; great Cause have
you to fear and love the great God of Heaven and Earth, who gives you Life and
Being, who is the God of all your Mercies, who in Mercy has oftentimes
preserved you in great Danger and Peril, and delivered you when you have been
ready to Perish: Oh, forget not his Mercy toward you; but Repent speedily, and
Fear and Dread his great Name, and stand in Awe, and Sin no more against him,
whose Power is over all, who commands the Winds and the Seas, and they obey
him: When sometimes you have been in Great Jeopardy of Your Lives, and the Lord
has in Mercy delivered you, how little have some of You Eyed the Mercy and
delivering Hand of the Lord therein; ^ut have been Ready to ascribe the Honor
of your Deliverance to the Anchor, Cable and Manhood, more then to the Lord;
and when you have been in Great Danger of your Lives, and saw no Way, but you
must Perish, have you not then cried to the Lord to deliver you? (and the Guilt
of your Iniquities being heavy upon your Consciences) have you not been ready
to make Promises to the Lord in your Distress, that if he spared your Lives, ye
would Repent, and turn unto him, and Fear, and Serve him, and forsake your Evil
Ways? And when the Lord has answered your Desires, and in Mercy has given you
your Lives for a Prey, when you came to Land, have you then performed your Vows
and Promises to the Lord? or have you not gone on in Sin and Evil still? let
God's Witness in every Conscience speak, for unto that I make my Appeal:
Consider how greatly it concerns you Seamen (and so it does all other
People) to mind their latter End, and to be ready for sudden Death; let every
particular One consider seriously how it stands between God and their own
Souls: Oh, it is a blessed Thing to be fit to Dye, and to feel Pe^ce with God;
it is their Sins and Iniquities that make People unfit for God's Kingdom; they
that dye in their Sins must perish, as Christ said unto some, Except you repent
you shall likewise perish; without Holiness and Purity none can see God: The
Soul of Man is Immortal, and can never Dye, but must (when it leaves the Body)
be in a feeling Sense of Joy and Peace, or Woe and Misery forever; The Wicked
and all that forget God must be turned into Hell: Oh that all People, Young and
Old, may repent and return to the Lord with their whole Hearts, and he will
show them Mercy! Prize your time, for it is precious, and you know not how
short it is: Oh fear and dread the Eternal God that gives you Life and Being,
and can take it away when he pleases; It is not a talking of being Saved and
Redeemed by Christ, and of his dying for you, will stand you in any stead, that
live in Sin and Vanity; Christ said, A Man must be born again, or else he
cannot see the Kingdom of God: So dear People, both Young and Old, mind the
Pure Divine Light of Christ Jesus in your own Consciences, that which Checketh
and Reproves you; when you speak or act that which is Evil, and come to Obey
it; for it is the Way of Life, and will Lead you, if you obey it, out of all
Sin, Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, into the Way of Life, and teach you to live
Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present Evil World; Then Peace with God
will be the Portion of your Souls.

The 15th of the 3d Month 1675 Written in Tender Bowels of Unfeigned Love to
your Souls, by a Friend to all People, William Bennit.

THE END.

