THE BELIEF OF PRAYING FOR THE DEAD.

(...) A holy and Godly Thought.

Maccab. l. 2. c. 12. Permissu Superiorum.



London Printed, and Sold by Matthew Turner at the Lamb in High-Holbourn. 1688.

THE Introduction.
I Lately met, in the Country, with a Discourse concerning Purgatory and Prayer
for the Dead; wherein the Author endeavors by many ways to wean me from my
Faith, in these Points: First, He begins to discountenance the Belief of the
Roman Catholic Church, which teaches me to Pray for the Deceased; by telling
me, She was beholden for This to Her Worthy Forerunners, the Poets and Heathen
Philosophers. Then he labors to entangle it with the ancient Custom of the
Primitive Church, Praying to GOD for all the Saints. After, he proceeds to
contradict it by the opposite Profession of the Greeks, who never received any
such Doctrine from their Ancestors. And he finally resolves to lose it, amidst
the diverse Opinions of the Fathers, concerning the State of Men after Death.
But all this in vain: For we know who is the Master of Confusion and
Contradiction. And the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against that Faith,
which is built on the Rock, CHRIST. It Is here Roman Catholics fix their
Article of Praying for Souls departed. Read without Prejudice; judge without
Partiality; confess your Conviction without Obstinacy.

THE BELIEF OF Praying for the Dead.
CHAP. I. Of Pagans Praying for the Dead.
THE Discourser troubled at the early Practice of Praying for the Dead in the
Church of GOD, allows this Custom, with a smile, Page 3.
to have been of very venerable Antiquity, and to have exceeded even
Christianity it self, for some Hundreds of Years. The Ghost of Elpenor in
Homer, Hom. Odyss. 12. Virg. Aeneid. 6.
and of Palinurus in Virgil, abundantly show this.

Jests are not seasonable in serious debates of Religion. Nor do Roman
Catholics believe Prayers to be profitable for the Dead, because the Poets
have described many Ceremonies used for their deliverance, which nearly
resemble the present Practice of the Roman Church. Which of our Authors have
given this loose Account? Where has our Church thus explicated the Reason of
Her Belief? When Pagans speak like Christians, we do not condemn them. And if
the Poets seem to hint in their Fancies at something of our Faith, we still
continue to profess it.

Praep. Evang. l. 11. c. 16.
Eusebius recounts of Plato, that he divided Mankind into three States. Some
who excelled in Holiness of Life, enjoy eternal Felicity, which it is neither
possible for any Words to express, nor Thoughts to conceive. Others, who
abandoned themselves to Vices and Wickedness, he supposed were at their deaths
conveyed to Hell, there to be tormented for ever. But now, besides these, he
speaks of a middle sort, who, though they had sinned, yet had repented of it;
and these he thought went down for some time into Hell, to be purged and
absolved by grievous Torments; but after this, they should be removed, and
share in Honors prepared for them. The Discourser catches hold of this third
State, and will have the Church of Rome beholden to Paganism for it, which
introduced it before Christianity was heard of, some Hundreds of Years.

This is very remarkable. But, Is not Hell and Heaven too, as Christians
believe them, described by this Pagan Philosopher? Will he call Hell a piece of
Paganism, and renounce Heaven upon the same score, as he does Purgatory, or a
middle State, where the Dead are relieved by the Prayers of the Faithful,
because these Doctrines are of very venerable Antiquity, and exceeded
Christianity for some Hundreds of Years?

I warrant ye, the Discourser will in his next Pamphlet condemn, for the same
reason, the Old Testament, which was writ long before Christianity; and call in
question the New Testament too, which exceeded even the Religion by Law
established, many Hundreds of Years.

CHAP. II. Of the Primitive Church Praying that GOD would be mindful of the
Saints.
IT IS one thing to Pray to God with reference to the Saints, and another to
Pray to God for Souls departed. The Primitive Church meant by praying to God
for all the Saints, to honor the Blessed Citizens of Heaven; and begged that
God, being mindful of them, would, at their intercession, grant the Faithful
upon earth their Petitions. These Prayers were Thanksgivings. She prayed to God
for Souls departed, that he would be pleased to remit to them those lesser
faults, which they had through humane frailty contracted, and for which they
suffered in a middle State. These Prayers were Expiations. The present Church
performs her Devotions after the same manner. Prayers for the Deceased, are
offered as an Expiation to God for their Sins; Con. Trid. Sess. 22. cap. 2.
Docet Sancta Synodus Sacrificium vere propitiatorium esse -- pro Defunctis in
Christo nondum ad plenum Purgatis.
The holy Sacrifice is an Expiation (says the Council of Trent) for the
Departed in Christ not yet thoroughly purged. Prayers for the Saints are
directed as a Thanksgiving to God, for their Happiness, whose Favor we covet;
Et. cap. 3. De Sanctorum victoriis gratias agens, eorum patrocinia implorat.
Giving Thanks to God, continues the same Ecumenical Synod, for their
Victories, whose protection we implore.

Had the Discourser taken this distinction, he would not have told us, that he
needed no other Evidence, than the Liturgies of the Primitive Church, in which
we find them to have prayed for the best of persons, Page 49.
for our B. Lady, for the holy Apostles, etc. to show that they did not pray
for the Dead, with any intent to relieve them from Purgatory, or place of
punishment, by their Suffrages. And, I answer, we need no other Evidence than
these public Records, and the very places of those Liturgies he cites, to
prove, that the Primitive Church meant, by praying that God would be mindful of
His Saints, to beg their Intercession; and by praying for Souls departed, to
relieve them.

Lit. Aegyp. ex Arab. Con. Ush.
In the Liturgy of the Church of Egypt, ascribed, says the Discourser to S.
Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzene, and S. Cyril of Alexandria, thus they pray; Be
mindful, O Lord, of thy servants, which have pleased thee from the beginning,
our holy Fathers the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, and all the
Souls of the Just, which have died in the Faith, especially the holy glorious,
and ever more Virgin Mary, Mother of God, S. John the Forerunner, the Baptist,
and Martyr, S. Stephen the first Deacon, and Martyr, S. Mark the Apostle,
Evangelist and Martyr.

See how fervent the Primitive Church was in this Devotion, which alleges the
Memories of Her Saints, thereby to move God's mercy toward Sinners. This is
confirmed in the Book of Exodus, Chap. 32.13.
where we read the like prescription of Prayer. Remember Abraham, Isaac, and
Israel, thy servants, to whom thou swarest, by thy own self, and said unto
them, I will multiply your Seed as the stars of Heaven -- and our Lord
repented (was pacified) of the evil which he thought to do unto his People.
Thus Moses prayed to God by the Mediation of the holy Patriarchs. A Form of
Prayer so pleasing to Heaven, that God having declared a little before how He
would consume the Israelites for their Sin of Idolatry, the Memories of His
holy Servants, though not yet in Heaven, being but laid before Him, He
presently pardoned them. And how much more easily will he yield himself to be
overcome by the Intercession of those, who sing His perpetual Praises in
eternal Felicity? This is just the Con. Trid. Sess. 22 Cap. 3.
Roman Catholics praying to Saints. How agreeable to the practice of the
Primitive Church! How conformable to Scripture!

In the Liturgy of Constantinople, S. Chrysostom. Lit. edit. Goar. in Euchol. p. 78.
Par. 1647.
continues the Discourser, said to be Saint Chrysostom's, we find the very
same. We offer unto Thee, this reasonable service, for those who are at Rest in
the Faith, our Forefathers, Fathers, Patriarks, Prophets and Apostles,
Preachers, Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors, Religious Persons, and for every
Spirit perfected in the Faith, especially, for our most Holy, Immaculate, and
most Blessed Lady, the Mother of God, the ever Virgin Mary.

Here the Discourser wisely ended the Prayer, before he came to Amen: Or
rather, found his Mistake, and so made a Pause. The Liturgy goes on, raising
the Praises of Our B. Lady beyond those of Seraphims. Then adds the Saint,
whose Memory we celebrate, and all the Saints, Ibidem. (...).
by whose Intercession we beseech Thee, O GOD to protect us. This is the
Reason, which the Liturgy gives of the Primitive Church praying GOD to be
mindful of his Saints.

If you now ask, but why did She pray for Souls departed; the following Words
of the same Liturgy will satisfy you. He (the Priest) says for the Dead. For
the Rest and Remission of the soul of thy servant [N] O GOD instate it in a
lightsome place, (...).
where there is no more any Grief, or Weeping; seat it, where it may see the
splendor of Thy Face. The Priest prays for Rest; the Departed therefore is in
Pain: the Priest prays for his Remission; which shows him to be in Sin.

This is so plain of its self, That Nicholaus Cabasila, admired, how any one of
ordinary Capacity, could so grossly mistake the sense of the Liturgy, as the
Discourser has done. Some here are deceived (says this Author) taking the
Commemoration of Saints, as a Prayer made to GOD for them, In Exposit. Liturg.
c. 33. (...).
and not as a Thanksgiving. What gave occasion to this Thought, I cannot
imagine: For neither the things themselves, nor the Words of the Sacrifice,
afford any the like Conception. But what do we pray for in reference to them,
who sleep? For Remission of their sins, for their Inheritance of the Kingdom
of GOD; for their Rest in the Bosom of Abraham, with the consummated Saints.
Thus, the Greek Church prayed.

S. Aug. Sermon. de Verb. Aplic. 1.

Ideoque habet Ecclesiastica disciplina, quod fideles noverunt, cum Martyrs eo
loco recitantur ad Altar Dei, ubi non pro ipsis oratur, pro caeteris autem
Defunctis oratur; injuria est enim pro Martyr orare, cujus nos debemus
orationibus commendare.


And, this is what St. Austin affirms of the Latin Church's pious Custom,
though not well understood by Strangers: The Faithful, says this Father, know
what means this Ecclesiastical Duty, when the Martyrs are repeated in their
place at the Altar of GOD, where Prayers are not offered for them, but for
other Commemorated Souls they are offered: For it is an Injury to pray for a
Martyr, to whose Intercession we ought to recommend our selves. And elsewhere
he tells us, how Prayers benefit other Commemorated Souls. Enchir. cap. 110 Pro
non valde bonis Propitiationes sunt.
They are Expiations, says He, for those who are not very bad.

CHAP. III. Of the Greek Church Praying for the Dead.
THE Discourser offers Three Reasons to prove, That the Greek Church never
prayed for the Dead, with intent to free them from Purgatory, or a Middle
State, where they suffer Pain and Anguish for the Remainder of their Offenses.

I. Discourse p. 7.
Their Apology penned by Marcus Eugenicus Archbishop of Ephesus, and presented
to Cardinal Cusan, declares as much.

II. The Deputies of the Council of Basil, the Year before, positively declare,
That they neither had received any such Doctrine from their Ancestors, and
therefore, they would never accept it.

III. The Proceedings of the same Marcus, and of the Greek Church after,
neither of which, would be drawn to consent to this Union.

If what is related by the Discourser, may be supposed to have been transacted
(which is much to be suspected) the Three Reasons alleged, must of necessity
be understood of some other Controversy, than what is under Debate: for this
was never contradicted by the Greek Church.

Indeed, some single Persons may unfortunately have fallen into Error, and so
share in the forgoing Reasons. And in this sense, the First Reason evidences of
what mind Marcus was, before the Council of Florence; but the Greek Church
always professed the contrary Doctrine. The Second Reason foretells, how
Marcus with his Deputy, would not own in the Council, to have received any such
Tradition from his Ancestors, and therefore would never accept it; but the
Subscription of the Greek Church is there extant, and Recorded against him. The
Last Reason concludes Marcus continued firm in his former erroneous Resolution;
but the Greek Church carried home what She had publicly consented to, and
signed in the Synod.

But Marcus never consented to the Council's Determination; nor did Arius to
the Nicean. And Macedonius was averse to that of Constantinople; and Nestorius
never approved of the Third ecumenical Council. O strange Proceeding! The
Discourser's Cause is so desperate, that he is forced to rely on an Apostate
from Faith, to support it.

The Greek Church before the Council of Florence, Against the First Reason.

Performed this Christian Duty to Souls departed in the sense already set down.
This is not an Opinion, picked out of some single Writer, or warranted without
any Tradition. It is the general Practice of their Church, Authorized in their
Liturgies, and acknowledged in their public Offices and Devotions.

The Liturgy, which is Ascribed to St. Chrysostom, prays, That the Souls
departed, may change their Sins, into Pardon; their Pain, into Rest; their
Griefs and Weepings, into Joys and Jubilees of never ending Satisfaction. The
Words are already mentioned in the foregoing Chapter.

S. Basil's Liturgy on Whit-sunday Feast, S. Bas. Precat. tertia in
Pentacosten. (...).
uses the same Language. O GOD, Who vouchsafest on this perfect, and all-saving
Feast, to receive the Suffrages and Supplications made for the Detained in Hell
(or place of Purgation,) We earnestly hope You will import to these Imprisoned,
Freedom from Griefs, which encompass them, and Consolation. Hear us abject and
miserable Creatures praying to Thee: Give Rest to the Souls of thy Servants,
before our days departed, in a bright place, a flourishing place, a place of
Cheerfulness; where there is no more any pain, sorrow and sighing; and seat
their Souls in the Tabernacles of the Just, and of Peace, and Forgiveness.

In the Paracletica, the Greek Church thus sings. In Paraclet. (...).
From Tears, and Bewailings, which are heard in Hell, deliver thy Servants O
SAVIOR. Hell is an usual Word, which signifies the Place of the Damned, and
expresses likewise the Middle State of Souls. Thus the Word Prison expresses
the Place, where Heinous Malefactors are detained; and signifies also the Goal,
into which, those, who commit only Petty Faults and Misdemeanors, are
conducted. We cannot here by the Word Hell, understand the everlasting
Confinement: The Greek Church holds the Wicked and Impious without Redemption.
Nor can the Damned be called the Servants of Christ, Deliver thy Servants, O
Savior. They are his greatest Enemies.

In Offic. Exeq. in Euchol. Goar. p. 526. (...).
In the Office, they pray; O let the Soul, Lord, of thy deceased Servant [N]
enjoy rest in a place of brightness, a place of pleasantness and delight,
whence all pain, grief, and anguish, are banished: Forgive, as a clement and
merciful God, whatever offense may be by him committed in word, deed, and
thought.

In Officio Fun. the Priest prays, that our B. Lady would intercede to God, In
Offic. Fun. ibidem, page 572. (...). page 577. (...).
to free the Deceased from bitter Torments. -- Afterward he says, With a
doleful Voice we beg the Creator of all things to release the Deceased, and
take pity on him.

Nich. Athenarum Metropolis, in Offic. Ol. S. in Orationibus. (...).
In Officio Olei Sancti, they pray, O God, Give rest to the soul of thy Deceased
Servant: Ease him of Evils; deliver him from darkness; take him out of Prison,
and lodge him where the Just inhabit: Loose his Chains; save him from stripes;
lead him out of Prison and Darkness, and associate him with your Elect.

Against the Second Reason.
The Greek Church in the Council of Florence,
Ratifies what we have delivered concerning Prayers for the Dead. The Council
called, and assembled; the Latins forthwith proposed the Question of
Purgatory, or place where the Dead are tormented, and helped by the Prayers of
the Faithful; The Greeks gave this Answer: The Greeks truly hold, Conc. Genesis
Labbei Paris. page 27. (...).
That in the World to come there is pain, sorrow, and a place of pain, but no
Fire. The Greeks then never disputed the being of Purgatory, where Souls
departed undergo pain, and sorrow. And the Latins believe no more. For,

In the Last Session, the Procession of the Holy Ghost agreed too, on both
sides, all embroils untangled, and disturbances quieted, the Debate of
Purgatory was moved again, and resolved by both Churches, the Latin and Greek
joining jointly together, that there were Three States of the Dead; of Saints
in Heaven; of the Wicked in Hell; and of a middle State of Souls in a place of
Torments, viz. of those Christians who had sinned, repented of it, and
confessed, yet had not performed Works of satisfaction; (...). and page 515. in
Def. Conc. (...).
for which Prayers and Alms are offered and given. In this Sense Joseph
Patriarch of Constantinople confessed a Purgatory of Souls. And all the Greeks,
except one or two, subscribed to the Definition of the Council, worded after
this manner. If truly penitent, they died in the Love of God, before they
satisfied by worthy fruits of repentance, for what they committed and omitted,
their souls, after death, are to be purged in Purgatory pains, and that they
may be relieved in these pains, the suffrages of the Faithful living, holy
Sacrifices, Alms-deeds, performed according to the Church's Institution, are
beneficial to them.

Against the Third Reason.
The Greek Church after the Council of Florence,
No doubt carried home, what She had always professed and subscribed to in the
Council. Paludanus asks, How does the Synod prove Souls to be purged after
Death? Palud in Discep. pro Conc. Fl. (...).
And Answers, first, From our own Practice; and after, From the Testimonies of
the Holy Fathers. And the very Liturgies that they formerly had in Esteem, the
Greeks now reverence. The public Prayers they Anciently offered, are the same
which they now-a-daies pour forth.

Missa S. P. Joan. Chrysostom. Page 28. (...).
The Priest prays thus in the Mass, which the present Greeks now say in Rome,
for the Dead; O GOD, that the soul of thy departed servant [N] may enjoy Rest,
and obtain Pardon; seat it in the place of Light, where no sorrow, nor
bemoanings are heard; place it where it may wait on the splendour of thy
Countenance.

Gabriel Severus assures us, that as the well-meaning Greeks always did, so do
they at present pray with intent to free the Detained in a middle State of pain
and sorrow. Gab. Sever. Philadelphien. de Purg. (...).
The Apostles, says this Greek, and who succeeded them, the Prelates, and
Priests, and the whole Order of Orthodox Persons, prayed like servants with
dejected minds; and now pray GOD for the faithful Orthodox deceased Christians,
that they may be freed from their Torments, and obtain Pardon of their Sins.

I end this Chapter with the misfortune of Marcus Eugenicus. For, what is
worse, Georg. Sch. ult. sess. conc. Florentini. (...).
said Georgius Scholarius in the Council of Florence, What is worse, than that
one man, of what Dignity soever he be, should oppose an Ecumenical Synod,
which represents the Universal Church of GOD.

The Greek Church then always held Prayers for the Dead, as part of a
Christians duty; and this too, with intent to free those Christians who had
sinned, but repented, yet had not performed Works of satisfaction, from a
Middle State of souls, a Prison of confinement, tears, sorrows, sighings,
pains, darkness, evils, stripes, chains, and bitter torments. If this be not to
pray with design to deliver souls departed out of Purgatory, I know not what it
means.

CHAP. IV. Of the diverse Opinions of the Fathers concerning the State of Men
after Death.
A Midst the Variety of Opinions, the Discourser singles out Three, which he
guessed to be most fit to his present purpose, and which seem to have been
among the ancient Fathers, concerning the State of Men after Death, more
generally received. Bellar. de SS. Beat. 1. c. 5.


I. That the Souls departed do not straightway go to Heaven, but remain in a
place of sequester, a pleasant State, free of trouble and pain, yet earnestly
expecting their final Consummation in Glory.

Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 39.
An other Opinion there was of the Millenary Kingdom, That those of the
Faithful, whose Piety had been most eminent, should reign a thousand years in
all delights with Christ upon earth.

A Third Opinion, and that too, not without Patrons, was, That all men being
raised up at the Last Day, should pass through a certain probatory Fire, in
which every man should be scorched and purified, some more, others less,
according as they had lived, better or worser Lives here upon earth.

Page 47.
The First, says the Discourser, Prayed that GOD would comfort them in the
bosom of Abraham, with the blessed Company of Holy Angels, and the Vision of
our Savior Christ, till the wished for day of Judgment should come. The Second
flattered themselves, That by their Prayers, they might hasten the Felicity of
their Friends; and accordingly prayed for their speedy rising in Christ's
Kingdom. The Third sort prayed that God would have Mercy on their Dead at the
last day, and not suffer them to be so much singed and burnt in the General
Conflagration, at the end of the World. How true these things are, I shall not
enquire. The Discourser advances them without proof, and holds them no more
than Opinions. This is sufficient for me at present.

Page 5.
But the Discourser avers, that it is from these Opinions, That those of the
Roman Communion impose upon the unwary, their pretense of Antiquity for this
Doctrine. Confidence will assert any thing. And I expected a great Warranty for
this bold Assertion. And may expect long enough, before I get one; for the
Discourser is so far from thinking of this, that he has not as yet made Choice
of which of these Opinions he shall pitch upon to do our business; and
therefore barely asserts, from these Opinions it is, but he knows not from
which of them it is; or rather he knows it is from none of them, nor upon any
other pretense whatsoever, do the Roman Catholics endeavor, to impose upon
the Unwary. This indeed he waranted sufficiently, wiping off in some manner,
the foregoing Aspersion, Disc. p. 10.
by taking care to tell the Reader, That he allowed of what Natalis Alexander
said, to be the Belief in this point of the Roman Church. Not. Alexand. Sec. 4.
par. 3. page 352. Id unum itaque Catholicos inter and Protestants in
Controversiam venit utrum Fides doceat aliquem esse defunctorum statum in quo
poenis temporaneis expientur, a quibus, Ecclesiae precibus liberari, vel in ijs
sublevari possint.
These are Natalis's Words; The only thing therefore, that is in Controversy
between Catholics and Protestants, is this, whether Faith teaches there is a
State of the Dead, in which they shall be expiated by temporary Punishments,
and from which they may be freed, or otherwise helped by the Prayers of the
Church.

How far distant this Belief and Sense of Roman Catholics is from the Three
mentioned Opinions, a short perusal, and slight comparison, will abundantly
evidence. For the First, that place of Sequester, was free, as the Discourser
will have it, of all pain and trouble: And the Second, that of the Millenary
Kingdom, overflowed with satisfactions; there is no Sin in either of them, to
be pardoned; no penalty to be endured, which are the Motives, Why Roman
Catholics pray, that God will be pleased to help the detained in a Middle
State, or Purgatory. Nor can the last State, viz. that of the general
Conflagration, enter into this present Controversy, because it has not as yet a
Being, it only will be, Disc. page 5.
says the Discourser in the end of the World. And what is convincing, the
Discourser acknowledges all this to be true, where he says, It is evident to
any one that shall please to compare these with the Account I shall hereafter
give of the present Roman Purgatory, how vastly different they were from what
is now proposed to us as an Article of Faith.

It Is very true, That Roman Catholics distinguish between Faith and Opinion,
what they now believe in this present Controversy, was always looked upon, as
part of a Christians duty. But I cannot see how Reformers can allow of any such
distinction. Opinion increased their pretended Reformation of Religion, into
Thirty Nine Articles. But Roman Catholics are the Old Church, with which
Christ has promised, and his Promises are certain, to be present, till the end
of the World. Nihil innovetur, nisi quod traditum est.
She daily repeats what blessed Pope Stephen said in the Third Age, in the
Voice of Her surviving and chief Pastors upon Earth; Let nothing of Novelty be
introduced, keep what you have from Tradition.

CHAP. V. What it is the Church of Rome means by Praying for the Dead.
I Have already given a short, and as I think, satisfactory Account of this,
Chap. 3.
in the Decree of the Council of Florence, where it is determined, That we pray
for the Faithful deceased, who have not sufficiently satisfied, here upon
earth, for their Offenses for which they now suffer, that God would be pleased
to free them from these Sufferings.

The Council of Trent teaches the very same, Council. Trid. Sess. 22. cap. 2.
Docet sancta synodus sacrificium istud vere propitiatorium esse -- quod non
solum pro fidelium vivorum peccatis, poenis, satisfactionibus, and alijs
necessitatibus, sed and pro defunctis in Christo nondum ad plenum purgatis,
rite juxta Apostolorum Traditionem, offertur.
That the Sacrifice is an Expiation offered, not only for the sins, pains,
satisfactions, and other necessities of the Living; but also for the deceased
in Christ, not yet fully purged, according to the Tradition of the Apostles.

In the Third Canon of the same Session, Sess. 22. Can. 3. Si quis dixerit
Missa Sacrificium non esse propitiatorium, neque pro Vivis and Defunctis, pro
peccatis, poenis, satisfactionibus, and alijs necessitatibus, offerri debere;
Anathema sit.
the same Council thus resolves; If any shall say, that the Mass is not a
propitiatory Sacrifice, nor ought to be offered for the Living and the Dead,
for their sins, pains, satisfactions, and other necessities, let him be
Anathema.

And in the Decree of Purgatory, we find these Words; Since the Catholic
Church, Sess. 25. Decretum de Pur. Cum Catholica Ecclesia, Spiritu sancto
educta, ex sacris Literis, and antiqua Patrum-Traditione, in sacris Conciliis,
and novissime in hac OEcumenica Synodo docuerit, Purgatorium esse, Animasque
ibi detentas, fidelium Suffragiis, potissimum vero acceptabili Altaris
Sacrificio juvari, praecipit sancta Synodus, etc.
inspired by the Holy Ghost, has from Holy Scriptures, and Ancient Tradition of
Fathers, taught in Holy Councils, and last of all, in this Ecumenical Synod,
that there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls there detained, are helped by the
Suffrages of the Faithful; especially, by the acceptable Sacrifice of the
Altar, the holy Synod commands, etc.

Our Article of Belief is thus worded in our profession of Faith, Apud Conc.
Trid. Sess. 25. in fine. Constanter teneo Purgatorium esse, Animasque ibi
detentas Fidelium Suffragijs juvari.
couched in the Bulla of Pius the Fourth; I firmly hold, that there is a
Purgatory, (or middle State) and that the Souls there retained, are helped by
the Suffrages of the Faithful.

In the Canon of the Mass, the Priest makes this Commemoration of the Dead; In
Can. Miss. Memento etiam famulorum, famularumque tuarum N. and N. qui nos
praecesserunt, cum signo Fidei, and dormiunt in somno Pacis.
Be mindful O Lord, of thy servants N. and N. who are gone before us, with the
sign of Faith, and rest in the sleep of Peace.

Here are mentioned such Dead as are prayed for in particular.

Ipsis Domine, and omnibus in Christo quiescentibus locum refrigerij, lucis,
and pacis, ut indulgeas deprecamur. Per eundem Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.
To whom O Lord, and to all that rest in Christ, grant we beseech Thee, a place
of refreshment, of light, and of peace: through the same Christ our Lord, Amen.

In Miss. Defunct. Fidelium Deus omnium Conditor and Redemptor, animabus
samulorum, famularumque tuarum remissionem cunctorum tribue peccatorum, ut
indulgentiam, quam semper optaverunt, Piis supplicationibus consequantur.
And in the Mass for the Dead, he prays thus; O God, the Creator and Redeemer
of the Faithful,; grant to the souls of thy servants, both men and women,
remission of all their sins, that by the pious supplications of the faithful
for them, they may obtain the Pardon, they have always wished for.

Though the Custom, Intention, and Belief of the Roman Catholic Church, be fully
laid down and manifested from these public Records, as to what She means by
praying for souls departed, yet perhaps, the repeating of them in some few
Reflections, may not be ungrateful to meaners Capacities.

I. Reflection.
WE pray for all Sinners, though never so great; of whose Salvation we have
some Signs and Hopes at their departing hour: For these may be called the
Faithful deceased. Conc. Flor. Sess. ult. in Definit. Fidei.
This is what the Council of Florence includes in these Words: If they dyed
truly penitent in the Love of God. They may be called the deceased in Christ,
as the Council of Trent expresses it; Con. Trid. Sess. 22. c. 2.
and the Souls of thy Servants, as the Priest prays for them in the Mass for
the Dead.

Nor ought we to be blamed, for complying with this pious Exercise; though some
of the deceased, for whom Prayers are offered, should be really in Heaven, or
in Hell; for in doubtful things, the securest is best to be chosen. And
Prayers, some ways or other, still prove beneficial. S. Austin illustrates
this, after his usual manner, with great sense and approbation: When Offerings,
either of the Altar, says this Father, or of Alms, are ordered for all the Dead
who were Baptized in Christ, S. Aug. Enchir. 110. Cum ergo Sacrifica, sive
Altaris, sive quarumcunque Eleemosynarum pro Baptizatis defunctis omnibus
offeruntur, pro valde bonis, gratiarum actiones sunt, pro non valde malis,
propitiationes sunt; pro valde malis, and si nulla sunt Adjumenta Mortuorum,
qualescunque Vivorum Consolationes sunt.
if they be made for the very Good; or Saints, they are thanksgivings; if for
them, who are not very Bad, or in a middle State, they are Expiations; if for
the very Wicked, or the Damned, although they prove not advantageous to these
unfortunate Deceased; yet they become Consolations to the Living. They are
Witnesses of the performance of their Christian Charity.

II. Reflection.
WE pray that God would be pleased to lessen the pain, which the Faithful
deceased endure in a middle State. Conc. Flor. in Decret.
The Council of Florence declares, we pray with intent to free them from their
Sufferings; that of Trent affirms, Con. Trid. Sess. 22. Can. 3.
The sacrifice is offered as an Expiation for their pains; the Priest at Mass
in the Memento, begs, That God would grant them a place of Refreshment.

What this Pain substantially consists in, the Church allowing of a Middle
State, concludes to be the suspension of seeing God; which musts needs be
grievous, in regard the Object expected, is so earnestly desired. For Hope
prolonged, Proverb. Spes quae differtur affligit Animam.
as the wise Man teaches, torments the Soul.

How far this suspension of seeing God is extended; whether accompanied with
grief, or darkness, or anguish, or real fire, etc; when these pains are to end;
where undergon, in the dusky air, where the Devils dwell, or under ground, or
elsewhere; are School-Questions, variously agitated by Divines, and appertain
not to Faith. But we are sure there is some pains to be endured, because there
is something of sins remain, to be purged and pardoned.

III. Reflection.
THe cause of Pain, is Sin: Sin consists of Two Parts: The Fault which stains
the Soul: and the Guilt, which Renders it Liable to punishment. If the Sin be
mortal, eternal; if venial, it must be temporal: For all Sin deserves some
punishment. Now besides eternal pain, which the Fault of all mortal Sin carries
along with it, there remains sometimes at least the Guilt of some temporal
penalty due to the Justice of God, to be paid in this world, or in the next.
The Church has pronounced this Truth, in these Words of the Council of Trent;
Conc. Trid. Can. 30. Sess. 6. Si quis post acceptam Justificationis gratiam,
cuilibet peccatori poenitenti ita Culpam remitti, and reatum aeternae poenae
deleri dixerit, ut nullus remaneat reatus poenae temporalis exsolvendae, vel in
hoc saeculo, vel in futuro, in Purgatorio, antequam ad regna Coelorum aditus
patere possit, Anathema sit.
If any one shall say, That the Fault after the Grace of Justification, is so
remitted to every penitent Sinner, and the Guilt of eternal Punishment is so
blotted out, that there remains no Guilt of temporal pain to be paid for, now,
or hereafter in Purgatory, before there be an Entrance granted into the Kingdom
of Heaven, let him be Anathema. And GOD has revealed the same in Holy
Scriptures. Is it not true, That the Fault, and Guilt of eternal Punishment of
the first Sin, which we call Original, are both expiated, and and quite washed
away in the waters of Baptism? And yet there remains a Guilt of temporal
Affliction to be undergone, that of Death. Romans 5.12.
We must all die. Again, the Israelites grievously offended God by murmuring.
Moses interceded for them. Numb. 14.
And our Lord said I have forgiven it. And yet God with the same breath
declares, That he has not remitted the temporal Punishment, which remains due
to His Divine Justice. This they are to pay. Their Fathers are excluded the
Land of Canaan, and die in the Wilderness. And their Children wander forty
Years in the Desert.

This Guilt of temporal Penalty, which is oftentimes the remainder of mortal
Sin remitted, retains the name of Sin. Thus the Evening, or Remainder of the
day, is not improperly still called day. And it is upon this Account, and for
lesser, or venial Sins; whose Fault, whilst the Sinner lived upon earth, is not
forgiven, or Guilt not pardoned; that we generally pray God to remit to Souls
departed, Con. Flor. in Decret.
their Sins; who have not sufficiently satisfied for their Offenses, says the
Council of Florence; for their Sins and Satisfactions, decrees the Council of
Trent; Conc. Trid. Can. 3. Sess. 22.
for the Remission of all their Sins, prays the Priest in the Mass for the Dead.

IV. Reflection.
I Close the Controversy between Catholics and Protestants in this narrow
Compass, whether, We ought to believe that the Dead in Purgatory are helped by
the Prayers of the Living, as our Article of Faith words it: or (which is the
same thing, and contains all) whether, It be part of a Christians Duty to pray,
(as the Priest does at Mass) that God will remit to Souls departed, their Sins.
The Discourser cannot blame me for omitting the word Pain, in my Proposition.
For if there be any detained in a middle State, whose Sins are not yet fully
purged, or if they be small ones, and entirely remain; there is without
dispute, some Penalty to be undergone for them. This is undeniably true,
because all Sin, as the Discourser acknowledges, infers an Obligation to
Punishment. Page 31.


CHAP. VI. Why Roman Catholics believe the Dead are helped by Prayers.
IF you ask me the Formal Reason, Why Roman Catholics believe it to be a part
of a Christians duty to pray for the Faithful deceased; I answer, Because God
has taught us so. Apostolical Tradition assures us of it; the Practice of the
Universal Church confirms it; Holy Scriptures authorize it.

We do not pretend that Sciptures have any where commanded this Doctrine.
Tertull. l. de Coron. Mil. c, 4. Si Legem expostules Scripturarum, nullam
invenies.
If you seek a Precept in the Scriptures, says Tertullian, you cannot find any.
Nor is this absolutely necessary, to make it a part of Christian duty. It is
abundantly sufficient for this Obligation; if first, it be recommended to us by
Revelation from Heaven; and secondly, proposed to the Faithful, or practiced by
the Universal Church of CHRIST. The Will of GOD, or Revelation, is recommended
to us in Holy Scriptures, or conveyed to us by the Apostles and their
Successors. The Universal Church is either taken diffusively, as it is spread
over the World; or collectively, as it is assembled in an Ecumenical Synod,
which represents the whole Church. All Four conspire together to confirm Roman
Catholics in their Belief of Praying for the Dead; and to confound their
Opposers. The Holy Scriptures recommend it in many places to the Faithful. The
Apostles taught it. The Universal Church practiced it. And General Councils
have defined it.

As for General Councils, I have alleged already, Two very plain Ones; that of
Florence, and that of Trent. The Council of Trent pretended no Command in
Scripture for this Doctrine. We read it decreed by the Tridentine Fathers,
because the Apostles taught it; according to the Tradition of the Apostles,
declares this Ecumenical Synod, in the 2d. Chap. and 22d. Session; and because
it is recommended in the Scriptures, the same Council, in the Decree of
Purgatory, determines Prayers for the Dead, from the Scriptures.

CHAP. VII. Of the Universal Church Praying for the Dead.
TO ackowledge Prayers offered by the Universal Church of CHRIST, with intent
to expiate the Sins of Souls departed, in a middle State, is to believe this
Pious Custom came from the Divine Apostles. S. Aug. Ep. 118. Quod universa
tenet Ecclesia, nec a Conciliis institutum, sed semper retentum est, nonnisi
authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur.
For, as S. Austin observes, What the whole Church holds, and was not
Instituted by Councils, but was always retained, is most truly believed to
come from Apostolical Tradition. In finding out then one of these, we learn
both of them. Our Masters shall be the holy Penmen of Primitive Times.

Petrus Venerabilis
Writing against the Petrobrusian Heretics; thus exhorts all Christians out of
the Book of Maccabees to pray for the Dead. The Faithful Jews prayed for the
heinous Offenses of their Dead; that, what they had Committed, Ep. 2. cont.
Petrob. Cap. 5. Rogant fideles Judaei pro delictis tam gravibus defunctorum, ut
quod fecerant, oblivioni traderetur, and non rogabunt fideles Christiani pro
defunctis in spe bona fidelibus eundem Deum, ut eis nondum plene laxata Peccata
remittantur? Rogaverunt hoc illi adhuc in tempore irae, and non rogabunt hoc
isti in tempore gratiae?
might totally he forgiven; and the faithful Christians will not pray for their
faithful piously departed, that their sins not fully remitted, may by the same
GOD be Pardoned? The Jews prayed in the time of Anger; and Christians are
negligent in the day of Grace? Is not this to pray with intent, as Roman
Catholics do, that God will remit to souls departed, their sins? And what
follows will not give you leave to doubt that this pious Devotion was believed
the duty of Christians in those days. Ibidem. Qui bona vivorum Mortuis, qui
digni sunt prodesse denegat, ad communis fidei laesionem pertinere cognoscat.
Let him, continues this Venerable Writer, that denies the good Works of the
Living to be advantageous to the Dead, who deserve them, know that he makes a
Breach in Faith.

S. Bernard
Calls them, who deny this pious Doctrine, Heretics, and Hypocrites. Is it
not, says this Saint, Super Cantica Ser. 66. page 762. Non sufficit haereticos
esse, nisi and hypocritae sint. Mortuos viventium fraudantes auxilijs, non
credunt ignem Purgatorium restare post mortem.
sufficient for them to be Heretics, unless they be Hypocrites too. They are
Heretics, because they Defraud the Dead of help from the Living, nor do they
believe that there remains after Death Purgatory Fire. As Hypocrites, they
make a fair show, and pretending to follow the pure Word of God.

S. Isidore of Spain
Says, Because sacrifice and prayers are offered through the whole world for the
rest of the Faithful Deceased, S. Isid. Hisp. l. 1. de Offic. Eccles. c. 18.
Sacrificium pro Defunctorum fidelium requie offerri, vel pro eis orari, quia
per totum hoc Orbem custoditur, credimus quod ab ipsis Apostolis traditum sit.
Hoc enim ubique Catholica tenet Ecclesia; quae nisi crederet fidelibus
defunctis dimitti peccata, non pro eorum spiritibus vel Eleemosynam faceret,
vel Deo sacrificium offerret.
we believe this Custom comes from the Apostles themselves. For the Catholic
Church every where observes this; Nor would She give Alms, or offer Sacrifice
for Souls Departed, unless she believed the Faithful Deceased, received pardon
of their Sins. Nothing can be more fully expressed for Roman Catholics. First,
Prayers are offered for the Faithful deceased. Secondly, For their Rest, and
Remission of their Sins. Thirdly, The Catholic Church through the whole world
practiced the same. Fourthly, 'Twas believed Apostolical Tradition. And shall a
pretended Reformer start up, without any warrant of a new Revelation from
Heaven, and banish this Pious Devotion, and contradict the whole Church of God,
and teach contrary to what the Blessed Apostles delivered.

S. Gregory the Great,
Eminent for Learning and Piety, and with whom the whole Church of Christ
communicated in Religion, page 6.
the Discourser of his own accord gives up as one of ours, so would he if he
were just, give us all the Fathers.

The Council of Calcedon,
Or the Fourth General, which the Religion by Law Established reverences,
approves of the same Doctrine, Recording to Posterity what was laid to
Dioscorus's Charge, who was condemned by the Synod. Amongst others of the
Accusations, which were brought against him, we find that he was impeached, and
said to have disposed of a great sum of Money, contrary to the Deceased's
desires, who gave it with intent to be prayed for. Conc. Calc. an. 451. Tom. 4.
Conc. Lab. Page 401. Act. 3. (...).
But no body, says the Acts of this Ecumenical Synod, is ignorant of the
business of the Renowned Peristeria of Happy Memory. For She Commanded in her
last Will and Testament, a considerable sum of Money to be given for her Soul
to Monasteries, Hospitals, Almshouses, and to the Poor of the Egyptian
Province. And yet by the disposal of Dioscorus, things were so Ordered, That as
much as lay in him, even Incense was not offered from the Sacrifice to GOD, in
Remembrance of the most Illustrious deceased Peristeria. The Acts take Notice,
First, That this Lady gave Money, with intent, that after her Death, the
Prayers of the Faithful should benefit her Soul. In Bulla pii Pont.
This is our Article of Faith, which obliges us firmly to hold, that the Dead
are helped by the Prayers of the Living. Secondly, This was the Practice of the
whole Church, because spoken of with approbation in an Ecumenical Council, and
no body, say the Acts, was ignorant of it. Thirdly, The hinderance of this
Devotion was looked upon as a great Crime. 'Twas laid to Dioscorus's Charge, In
as much as lay in him, Sacrifice was not offered for the Deceased.

Theodoretus,
Who lived at the same time that this general Council was assembled, gives us
another confirmation, not of a private Person, praying in his Oratory for the
Soul of his deceased Friend, but of the Emperor Theodosius, prostrating himself
before the Relics of St. John Chrysostom, Theod. l. 5. Histor. c. 36. (...).
and praying for the Souls of his deceased Parents, Arcadius and Eudoxia. His
looks, says this Historian, and eyes fixed on the Tomb of this Holy Man (St.
Chrysostom) he let tears fall for his Parents, and he begged that he (the Saint)
would obtain pardon for them, of their faults contracted through ignorance. For
long before this, his Parents were dead, and he was left very young, and an
Orphan.

St. Austin
Is so clear in this Controversy for Roman Catholics, that Calvin had not
confidence enough to deny it. These are the Saints words: St. Aug. Sermon. 34. de
verbis Apostoli. Orationibus St. Ecclesiae, and Sacrificio salutari, and
eleemosynis quae pro illorum spiritibus erogantur, non est dubitandum mortuos
adjuvari ut cum eis miseri cordius agatur a Domino, quam eorum peccata
meruerunt. Hoc enim a Patribus traditum universa observat Ecclesia; ut pro eis,
qui in corporis and sanguinis Christi communione defuncti sunt. cum ad ipsum
sacrificium loco suo commemorantur, Oretur.
Funeral Pomps, attendance of Obsequies, rich constructure of Monuments are
some Comfort to the Living, and no Relief to the Dead. But it is not at all to
be doubted, that the Prayers of the holy Church, the wholesome Sacrifice, and
Alms-deeds given for the deceased, are beneficial to the Dead, that God might
deal more mildly with them, than their sins have deserved. For this which was
delivered by our Forefathers, the Universal Church observes, to pray for those
who are departed in the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, when they
are commemorated in their place at the Sacrifice. Thus S. Austin. And thus
Roman Catholics. We pray for the Faithful deceased; S. Austin prays for the
same; for those who are departed in the Communion of the Body and Blood of
Christ: We pray with intent, that God may ease their Sufferings, so did S.
Austin, That God might deal more meekly with them than their Sins have
deserved. We look upon this as part of our Christian Duty; so did S. Austin;
For this which has been delivered by our Forefathers, the Universal Church
observes.

Nor is this Learned Father contented here. He reckons the opposite Error,
Heretical. The Aerian Heretics, De Haeres. number 53. de Aerio. Aeriani ab Aerio
quodam sunt nominati, qui cum esset Presbyter doluisse fertur quod Episcopus
non potuit ordinari, and in Arianorum haeresim lapsus, propria quoque dogmata
addidisse nonnulla, dicens, orare vel offerre pro Mortuis oblationem non
oportere -- contra ista sentit Ecclesia Catholica.
says he, take their Name from Aerius, who being a Priest, was grieved that he
could not get a Bishopric, and being fallen into the Arian Heresy; he added
some of his own peculiar Doctrines, saying, We ought not to pray, nor offer
sacrifice for the Dead. -- The Catholic Church teaches the contrary. This
Aerius is the first Man we read of, who denied Prayers for the Dead. In what
sense he denied them, S. Austin declares, viz. in the sense opposite, to what
the Universal Church observed. Now the Universal Church prayed, as this Holy
Father observes, with intent to ease the Deceased in their Sufferings, That GOD
might deal more meekly with them, than their Sins deserved.

S. Hierome
Vindicates himself from Origen's Error, in which some would involve him, In
Proverb. cap. 2. Mortuo homine iniquo nulla erit ultra Spes. Heu misere hanc
sententiam pertransijt Origenes qui post universale extremumque judicium vitam
credit omnibus impiis and peccatoribus dandum. Notandum autem, quod etsi impiis
post Mortem spes veniae non est sunt tamen qui de levioribus peccatis, cum
quibus obligati defuncti sunt, post Mortem absolvi possunt; vel poenis
videlicet castigati, vel suorum precibus, and eleemosynis, Missarumque
celebrationibus; sed haec quibuscunque fiunt, and ante judicium, and de
levioribus fiunt erratis.
writing thus upon this passage of the Proverbs; The Wicked Man dead, all Hope
is ended; ah Misery! Origin overlooked this sentence, who believed, that Life
would be given, after the last and universal Judgment, to all the Wicked and
Sinners. What follows is the Belief of the Church, which S. Hierome stamps with
a Notandum. But take Notice, says he, although there be no Hope of Pardon
after Death for the Wicked; yet there are some, who may be absolved after
Death, from lesser Faults, with which they dyed engaged, viz. expiated either
by Pains, or Prayers of their Friends, or Alms-deeds, or saying of Masses; but
these things, for whomsoever they are performed, are done before (the Last)
Judgment, and that too, for lesser Offenses.

If you ask what anciently were the Devotions for the Dead; you have here
Prayers, and Alms-deeds, and saying of Masses prescribed; a word, which is so
disagreeable to the fondlings of New Religions. If you would know why the Dead
are detained in a middle State, S. Jerome tells you, because, when they dyed,
they were involved in lesser Faults. If you urge on, and say, they do not
suffer there; this Father replies, their Faults are expiated by suffering Pains.

Had the Discourser seen this evident Testimony, sure he would not have
triumphed, that in S. Jerome there was no mention of those, Page 23. and 24.
who depart this Life in a state of Charity, to be punished in Purgatory, or a
middle state of Souls; sure he would not have vaunted, that if he did not with
Rufinus, accuse him of being involved in the Error of Origin; yet Bellarmin
himself cannot deny him to have been charged with an Opinion not very much
differing from it, viz. that All Catholic Christians, shall in the end be
saved, after they have been tried and purifyed in the Fire of the last
Judgment. Rather than he will have a Father without Error, he will be twice
injurious to him. When I find any passage of a Father dubious, or hard to be
understood, I straightway compare it with clearer and easier, about the same
matter, and so gather its meaning. Thus if I should read in S. Jerome, that all
Catholics shall in the end be saved after they are purifyed, or, that
Christians, if they be overtaken in their sins, shall be saved after
Punishment: I straightway suppose, if these sins be mortal, they have repented
of them; and that all Catholics, whom God has ordered to be tried and
purifyed, shall after be saved. Now, these cannot be all Catholic Christians,
generally speaking, but only those who depart this Life in Charity, which is
compatible with lesser, or venial Faults. And these are to be purged, not at
the day of Judgment, but before this dreadful day. This is not my Opinion, it is
S. Jerome's own interpretation; in the end of the foregoing Testimony; but, by
whomsoever Pains are undergone, or Prayers offered, they are done before
Judgment; and that too for lesser Offenses.

S. Epiphanius
Charges Aerius with the same Error, which we have read S. Austin imputed to
him; that he opposed, mentioning the Names of the Dead; asking to what purpose
they did it? He that is alive, prays, or offers the Sacrifice; What shall
this advantage the Dead? But if the Dead are indeed profited thereby, then let
no man from henceforth trouble himself to live well, only let him oblige his
Friends, or give Money to persons to pray for him, that none of the inexpiable
sins he has committed may be required of him. This is the Case of Aerius in the
Discourser. Disc. p. 53.
Can any Reformer Argue better against the Church of Rome, than this Heretic
does against S. Epiphanius. Aerius asks to what purpose they pray for the Dead,
S. Epiphanius answers to benefit them.

Aerius presses forwards, if Prayers profit the Dead, let no man endeavor to
live well, only let him give Money to be Prayed for, That none of those
inexpiable Sins he has Committed, may be required of him.

S. Epiphanius replies, that these Prayers do not extinguish all sort of
Faults. They only purify the stains of smaller Offenses; which this Father
calls Slips, of the Perfect. But for the most part, says he, they therefore
profit us, because when we enjoyed this World, we wilfully, S. Epiph. haec 75.
page 911. (...), etc.
yet with reluctance failed, an evident sign of a more perfect Condition. We do
therefore make Commemoration of the Just, and of sinners (of whose Salvation we
have some hope.) For sinners we implore Gods Mercy. For the Just, we honor our
Savior Christ. Here are Prayers manifestly offered for Expiation of Sin, not
for notorious Crimes; for these, no expiation can be made in the World to come.
They were offered for smaller Faults, with which the Sinner laden, departed,
and for which he suffers in a middle State, and therefore Gods Mercy was
implored for him.

Lastly, S. Epiphanius assures us, the Answer he gave, was that of the Church,
unalterable; and therefore not to be called in question by a private Reformer.
And I say, pursues this Father, Ibidem Number. ult. (...).
the Church necessarily performs this (Christian Duty) who received it,
delivered to Her from Her Ancestors. But can any one break the Order of his
Mother, or Law of his Father? In Solomon it is written, Hear O Son, the Words of
thy Father, and do not despise the Law of thy Mother; declaring, That the
Father, who is God, His only begotten Son, and the Holy Ghost, have taught us
by the written and unwritten Word; and that our Mother the Church, has some
Laws in her own Hand, which neither can be dissolved nor broken. From these
Laws established in the Church, which are laudable ones, and full of
administration, this Impostor is convinced. Language, which I heartily wish the
Pretended Reformers would learn to speak!

S. Chrysostom
Is very copious in his exhorting Christians to pray for the Dead. I'lle
content my self with one single passage, Hom. 3. in Ep. Phillip. Edit. Etonae
P. 20. (...).
but so plain a one, that none but a Roman Catholic could have spoken it. Not
in vain, says he, is it Enacted by the Apostles, that in the dreadful
Mysteries Commemoration be made of the Dead. They (the Apostles) knew very
well, how much profit, from hence, and benefit accrews to their Souls. For when
all people stand (at their Devotions before the Altar) with lifted up Hands,
and the Quire of Priests, and the dreadful Sacrifice, exciting Veneration, how
shall we fail to appease GOD, in praying for them? And this truly is to be
understood of those who departed in the Faith.

S. Chrysostom says the Dead are helped by the Prayers of the Living, much
profit from hence accrews to them: And the Reformers deny it. St. Chrysostom
says the Pain hereby, which the Dead suffer, is alleviated, how shall we fail
to appease God in praying for them? And is not his Anger attended with
Punishment? And the Reformers hold it a fond Invention. S. Chrysostom says,
this pious Custom received its authority from Apostolical Tradition, not in
vain Enacted by the Apostles: and the Reformers contradict it. S. Chrysostom
admonishes us, that these Prayers only belong to them who die with hopes of
Salvation, They are said for those who departed in the Faith: Disc. page 65.
And the Reformers explicate him corruptedly of the Damned. O wonderful Piety
of Reformers! Rather than they should not be cruel to their Dead, they labor
to pervert the Writings of the Fathers: Yet I cease to be surpised, why they
exclude the Dead from their Prayers, when I consider how they banish Christ
from their Altar, and abolish the dreadful Sacrifice.

Eusebius Caesariensis
Speaks of the earnest desire, which Constantine the Great had, to be prayed
for after Death, who took care, that his Corpse should be entombed near the
shrines of the Blessed Apostles, whether all pious People resorted to perform
the Devotions for the Dead, to GOD and his Saints. He chose, says Eusebius, Lib
4. de vita Constable. c. 60. (...). --
this place of Reposal with an incredible Cheerfulness of Faith, foreseeing
that he should share after Death in their Prayers, which were said in honor of
the Apostles, -- believing that their Remembrance would exceedingly profit his
Soul; nor was he frustrated of his expectation. An innumerable Multitude of
People with the Priests of God, Ibidem Cap. 71. (...).
not without Lamentation, and with many tears, offered Prayers to God for the
Soul of the Emperor. These Prayers were offered with intent to relieve the
Emperor's Soul; Constantine believed, that the Intercession of the Apostles to
God for him, would profit his departed Soul exceedingly. And this must be to
free him from the confinement of a middle state. It could not be that of the
Damned in Hell, Eusebius had never such an impious thought of Constantine. It
could not be that of Heaven; the blessed Apostles there, were to interceed for
him. It must then be that of Purgatory, wherein, if detained, the Emperor
believed that the prayers of the Faithful would relieve him.

There is no reason in the world to understand this Third State after death, of
the Discoursers place of Sequester which was filled with quietness, nor of the
Millenary Kingdom, which abounded with delights. Eusebius was never accused of
these errors, nor ought he to be taxed with these Opinions. And what removes
all doubt, is that he speaks of the Third State above mentioned, not as an
Opinion, but delivers it as the custom of the universal Church. This is
verified by the devotions of the people of the whole Empire, who prayed to God
for the Soul of the departed Emperor. Nor could it be less than the Sentiment
of the first Universal Council, because it was that of Constantine, and
Eusebius, who both sat in this Synod among the Nicean Fathers, of whom
Constantine received most of his instructions.

Arnobius
Tells us, how Christians laboring under Persecution, were not permitted the
reasonable Exercise of their Religion; which made them thus to complain; Why
should our Chapels be so outragiously thrown down, Lib. 4. Adu. Gent. Page
ult. Cur immaniter Conventicula dirui (meruerunt) in quibus summus oratur Deus,
pax cunctis and venia postulatur, Magistratibus, Exercitibus, Regibus,
Familiaribus, Inimicis, adhuc vitam degentibus, and resolutis Corporum
vinctione.
in which Prayers were offered to our sovereign God, peace and pardon was
implored for all, for Magistrates, Armies, Kings, Friends and Foes, whether
alive or dead? This is exactly what the Council of Trent has defined; Sess. 22.
Can. 3.
Prayers offered for the living and the dead, for their sins, pains and
satisfactions. Did not Christians anciently pray for one another, that they
might be absolved from their sins and satisfactions? And why must not the Dead
share in these Prayers? Arnobius affirms, they prayed for all, whether alive or
dead? Why do you divide them? And these dead were in pain or inquietude,
because they prayed for peace. They were in sin, because pardon was implored
for them. If this be not to pray for Souls in Purgatory, the Discourser has
forged a new one of his one.

Tertullian
Exhorts Widows to be mindful in their Devotions of the souls of their deceased
Husbands, after this manner, De Monogamia. Pro anima ejus oret, and refrigerium
interim adpostulet ei, and in prima Resurectione consortium, and offerat annuis
diebus dormitionis ejus.
Let her pray for his soul, and beg now for him, ease or refreshment, and his
company in the first Resurrection, and let her see sacrifice be offered yearly
for him, on the day of his departure.

Here are Prayers offered with intent to free the dead from pain and anguish.
We pray, for what is wanting. Now Tertullian exhorts Widows to pray for ease
for their Husbands; therefore they wanted ease, and so were in pain. He
exhorted them to pray for refreshment; they wanted then refreshment, and so
were in anguish.

This ease or refreshment was not begged for them in the Millenary Kingdom,
Disc. page 47. Tertull. Refrigerium interim adpostulet ei. Disc. page 4.
of which the Discourser would understand the first Resurrection. For
Tertullian exhorts them to beg this refreshment now for the Dead, before the
first Resurrection. Nor can this be expounded of the Discoursers place of
sequester. Here, neither Ease nor Refreshment was wanting: And of this,
Tertullian speaks no where.

And this Exhortation of praying for the Dead, was grounded on the then
Universal Practice of the Church. Had it been otherwise, the Writers of those
times, would have replied, 'twas a Novelty which Tertullian brought into the
Church, and so have silenced him. Thus they opposed with all their might, the
Error of Montanus, toward which, I know Tertullian was at this time much
inclined. But what has the rigid Error of the Montanists, which allowed of no
Repentance in this life for the relapsed into grievous and notorious sins, to
do with this pious custom which extends devotion even after death, to Souls
departed? And what is considerable, those Books which Tertullian wrote, when he
could not be censured of the suspicion of being a Montanist, deliver the same
doctrine. Thus he says, in his Book, Oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitijs
annua die fa-, cimus.
de Corona Militis, and third Chapter, that we offer sacrifices for the dead,
and keep the anniversary of their Birth. Oblations and Anniversaries ought not
to be confounded; Oblations are for the Faithful not yet fully purged,
Anniversaries in honor of the Saints. It Is S. Gregory Nazianzen's Explication:
Some, says he, we perform, S. Greg. Nazian. Orat. in laud. Caesarij. Alia
quidem persolvimus, alia vero dabimus, anniversarios Honores, and
Commemorationes offerentes.
and some we give. We perform Anniversary Honors, we give Commemorations, (or
Oblations, when Commemoration of the dead is made). With what intent these
Obblations were made, Tertullian teaches us elsewhere, for lesser Faults, for
which the dead are imprisoned, he (GOD) will cast thee into the infernal Goal,
Tertull. de Anima c. 35. Ille te in Carcerem mandet infernum, unde non
dimitteris, nisi modico quoque delicto, mora Resurrectionis, expenso.
whence thou shall not go forth, until the smallest Fault be expiated in the
delay of Resurrection. And finally, Tertullian affirms this middle state, or
prison, where smaller Faults are to be expiated, before the detained go to
Heaven, into the delay of Resurrection, to be part of what the Church believed,
in these Words, If you ask a Command for this in Scripture, there is none to be
found. Lib. de Coron. Mil. c. 4. Traditio tibi pretendetur auctrix, consuetudo
confirmatrix, fides observator.
Tradition (from the Apostles) has increased this into a Precept; Custom
confirms it, Faith observes it.

Dionysius Areopagita
Makes mention of Three States of Men after death.

De Hierar. Eccles. tom. 1. c. 7. Edit. Paris, 1644. Page 352. and 357. (...).
The First are the Wicked, who die miserably, and go straightway to Hell, and
for whom the Priest never prays at the Altar: For the Wicked deceased, he never
prays.

The Second State is of the Just, who go straightway to Heaven, and of these he
recounts two degrees. Some lived a divine Life upon earth, others not so
fervent in Charity, a holy Life: both after death enjoy the sight of God. The
Prelate prays for neither. They want not his Prayers. For both of them he gives
Thanks to God, Ib. page 352. (...). --
who leads here a divine, says S. Denis, and most holy Life, as much as it is
possible for man to imitate God, shall in the next World enjoy divine and happy
Rest. And whose Life is inferior to this divine one, yet likewise holy, he
will receive equal recompense for his Merits. The blessed Prelate giving Thanks
for this divine Justice, goes on with the holy Sacrifice. Thus the Roman
Catholic Church holds prayers offered with reference to the Saints, a
Thanksgiving to GOD.

Besides these Two States, we find mention of a Third. This cannot be Hell; the
place admits of Mercy. It cannot be Heaven, the detained are not yet fully
purged from sin, or lesser Faults. And it is for the remission of these, that
the Prelate prays. The Prayer of the Holy Prelate implores the Divine Goodness
to pardon the deceased of all his sins committed by humane frailty, Ib. Parag.
3. (...).
and to transfer him into the light and region of the Living; and to seat him
in the Bosom of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in a place, where there is no more
any pain, sorrow, or sighing.

S. Maximus in his exposition of this passage, S. Max. in Dionys. (...).
calls these Faults of human frailty, little Sins; and these are those venial
Offenses, which accompanied the dead to Purgatory, there to be expiated, before
the detained change sorrow, grief, or weeping, into joy, and eternal felicity;
and of which the Church of ROME begs pardon in her Prayers for Souls departed.

And lest succeeding Ages should be forgetful of the dead, or oppose this pious
Devotion of the Faithful for them, S. Denis guided with a Prophetic Spirit,
left in few words, Three strong Motives, which are of themselves proper to
remind the Forgetful of this duty, and able to convince any unbyas'd
Understanding of it.

First, he says, That this Doctrine is divinely revealed.

Secondly, That it is grateful to Heaven.

Thirdly, That these Prayers will prove effectual to relieve the Dead.

Ib. Page 357, (...).
The holy Bishop, concludes this ancient FATHER, asks, what is divinely
promised, what is acceptable to God, and what will certainly be granted? And
after this, can any one pretend to be exempted from praying with intent to help
Souls departed in a middle state of pain, sorrow, and sighing; or of Purgatory,
where lesser Faults are expiated.

This is the sense the Greeks gave of Dionysius Areopagite, and they understood
his Language. Mich. in Ep. ad Nilum Mona. (...).
You have, says Michael Glyca, chiefly Dionysius the Great, banishing the
Opinion (of no middle State); and openly teaching, what sins may, and what may
not be pardoned. For discoursing of those who died in Sin, he adds this, if
they be small, they receive help from Good Works, which are done for them, if
they be notorious Faults, GOD has concluded against them. And Gabriel Severus a
Greek Schismatic, writing against the Latins, about the being of real Fire in
Purgatory, which is no matter of Faith, declares the Greeks agree with the
Latins: In as much as we (the Greeks) likewise affirm, That the Souls of those
who piously departed, are helped in those places, in which they are kept, Gab.
Tract. de Purgat. adu. Lat. (...).
and set free by Alms-deeds, and Prayers, which are offered for them, as
Dionysius Areopagite says.

The Discourser apprehended very much the pressing of this ancient Father's
Authority, and therefore would have us doubt of his Works, and calls him, the
pretended Dionysius. But the two Greeks above-mentined call him the true
Areopagite; so does S. Gregory the Great; S. Greg. hom. 34. Evang. Conc. 6.
Genesis Act. 5. Relatio est aliud Testimonium e Codicillo S. Dionysij Episcopi,
Atheniensis and Martyris. Apud Niceph. l. 15. c, 14. S. Greg. Naz. orat. 42. in
Pascha.
so does the sixth Ecumenical Council. Juvenalis Bishop of Jerusalem, who
Lived at the Time of the fourth Ecumenical Synod, affirms the same. S. Gregory
Nazianzen makes use of this Authority. Dionysius Alexandrinus Commented upon
him in the Third Age, as S. Maximus assures us. And the Monotholite Heretics
citing his Authority, 'twas explicated by the Fathers of the Church, as that of
Dionysius. And I think these grave and weighty Authorities will easily sink
down the light Pretension of a Discourser.

CHAP. VIII. Of Scriptures recommending Prayers for the DEAD.
HOly Scriptures have in many places recommended this pious Office to the
Faithful. I Will content my self with three or four Instances. The First shall
be, what we read in the Second Book, and Twelth Chapter of

The Maccabees:
And the day following, Judas came with his Company, to take away the bodies of
them that were overthrown, and with their Kins-men to lay them in the
Sepulchers of their Fathers. And they found under the Coats of the slain, some
of the Donaries of the Idols that were in Jamnia, from which the Law forbideth
the Jews: therefore it was made plain to all, that for that cause they were
slain. All therefore Blessed the just Judgment of our Lord; who had made
manifest the hidden things. And turned to Prayers, they begged of him, that the
Sin committed, might be perfectly blotted out.

Then Judas exhorted the People to keep themselves from the like Sin, made a
Collection among them of a considerable sum of Money, and sent it to
Jerusalem, to offer Sacrifice for the Sin, well, and religiously thinking of
the Resurrection. Edit. Sixti. (...).
For unless he hoped that they, that were fallen, should rise again, it would
seem superfluous and vain to pray for the Dead. After considering, that there
is an excellent Reward laid up for those, that die piously, which was a Holy,
and Godly Thought; he therefore made an Expiation for the Dead, that they might
be Absolved from their Sin.

This is so plain and easy, that I cannot imagine, how any one, except he
wilfully will mistake, should understand it otherwise, than in the Roman
Catholic Affirmation.

The Sin, questionless, that they committed, (whom GOD permitted to be cut off
by the Enemy) was mortal. The Law forbad to covet, Deuteronomy. 7. Josh. 7.
or take any thing appertaining to Idols. They were commanded to destroy it;
and therefore because this People had taken the Donaries of Idols, they were
slain, says the Text.

Judas and his Company, hoped that their Fellow Soldiers repented, before they
died, of their grievous Sin. There was sufficient Ground for this: They fought
in defense of their Country, and their Religion: For these, they bravely
Ventured their Lives. As therefore the Justice of GOD punished their Crime, by
permitting them to be killed; might not their surviving Associates hope the
Divine Goodness would recompense the venturing of their Lives for GOD's Honor
and Glory, by Repentance, before Death surpised them? His Mercy exceeds all
other of the Divine Attributes. At least, this makes the case dubious: And in
ambiguous things, a favorable Interpretation is approved of: For who knows the
sense of the Lord, or who was His Counselor? If this be not satisfactory, what
follows will convince you; for it is certain, That Judas ordered Prayers to be
offered for the slain, because he hoped they repented of their Sin:
Considering, says the Text, That there is an excellent Reward, laid up for
those that die godlily, he therefore made an expiation for the Dead, Is not a
godly Death, a mark of Repentance?

These Prayers, ordered by Judas, were offered as an Atonement for the Sin of
the deceased: That this was his design, is apparent. No body can dispute the
being of a Sacrifice among the Jews, which was offered for Sin. The Law of
Moses in Numbers and Deuteronomy, frequently makes mention of such a one: And
all the Tribes forthwith after the Battle, agreeing in a general Collection of
a sum of Money, to be sent upon this Account to Jerusalem, demonstrate, that
this Sin-Offering was extended to, and allowed of for the Dead. Two Motives
excited Judas hereunto. First, the Resurrection to Life; For unless he hoped
that they that were fallen, should rise again, it would seem superfluous and
vain to pray for the Dead. And Secondly, the Pardon of Sin; after considering,
continues the Text, That there is an excellent Reward laid up for those that
die godlily; he therefore made an Expiation for the Dead, that they might be
absolved from their Sin.

By Sin, for which Prayers were offered, is meant the remainder of mortal Sin,
the Guilt which infers an Obligation to some temporal Penalty, this is evident:
Judas hoped that the Slain died godlily, or repented: but he could not be of
this persuasion, unless he likewise believed, that the Fault of their notorious
Crime, was pardoned; For Repentance, carries along with it Forgiveness.
Whenever you shall invoke my Name, says the LORD, I will hear you. Now
besides the Guilt of eternal Damnation which follows the Fault of grievous
Offenses, as the shadow does the body, both standing, or perishing together,
there can nothing remain, to which the Title of Sin may be given, but the Guilt
which infers an Obligation to temporal Punishment. It Is then this Guilt which
is here called Sin, for which Judas, (after the hope of Pardon and Repentance
of the Fault, as the Text affirms; Considering, That there is an excellent
Reward laid up for those that die godlily, who repent of their Sins, and are
pardoned) therefore made an Expiation for the Dead, that they might be absolved
from their Sin. This is further confirmed, in these other Words of the Text;
And turning to Prayers, they begged of God, That the Sin Committed, might be
perfectly blotted out: The Sin then, was before blotted out, the Fault
pardoned, but not perfectly blotted out; the Guilt, which deserved some
temporal Penalty, remained to be expiated: For had they deemed it had been
before perfectly blotted out, they would not have begged of God, a perfect
Forgiveness: This had been already Granted. There was then, some Penalty that
remained, of which they begged forgiveness. But the Pain of Sin, is, ordinarily
speaking, only completely satisfied with pain. Nor can any one hope to be
perfectly pardoned of Sin, according to the rate of God's ordinary Providence,
without entire satisfaction; which if not paid now, must hereafter be
compensated.

This is exactly what Mr. de Meaux Writes of the Roman Catholic Belief in this
point, in his excellent Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church, Exposit. page:
17. Sect. 8.
which all Christendom approves of: Those who depart this Life, says this
Venerable Prelate, in Grace and Charity, but nevertheless, indebted to the
Divine Justice some Pains which it reserved, are to suffer them in the other
Life. This is what Obliged all the Primitive Christians to offer up Prayers,
Alms-deeds, and Sacrifices, for the Faithful, who departed in Peace, and
Communion of the Church, with a certain Faith, that they might be assisted by
these means. This is what the Council of Trent proposes to us to believe,
touching Souls departed in Purgatory, Sess. 25. de Purg.
without determining in what their Pains consist, or many other such like
things, concerning which, this Holy Council demands great Moderation, blaming
those who divulge what is uncertain, or suspected.

And to finish; This passage of Holy Scripture, out of the Second Book of
Maccabees, is so strong and convictive in behalf of praying for the Dead, that
our Adversaries can have nothing at all to say for themselves, but with a
strange Boldness, to deny these Books to be part of the Bible: Yet the old
Editions of Scripture in English, which were printed near the Beginning of the
Pretended Reformation, give them, without distinction, their proper place in
the Bible. What private Revelation the Reformers have had since, to displace
them, and cast them out, they never told us. The Discourser indeed, gives us
this Reason for it, that they were never received by the Jews as Canonical,

That we may well understand the Meaning of this Objection, it will not be
amiss to speak here, of Two Canons of a Bible, which the Jews used. The First
Canon of the Bible was composed by Esdras: This is generally allowed of. The
Second Collection was more ample, and increased by the superaddition of many
Books to the former. This was more rarely spoken of in ancient Times, because
less common. 'Twas compiled sometime before our Saviors coming, with the
addition of those Books which were Written after the Collection of the First
Canon. Lib. 2. Cont. Appion.
Joseph the Jew, assures us of such an addition made, where he cites the Text
of Ecclesiastic, as part of their Scripture, which Book is not found in the
Collection of the First Canon of the Jews, and was written near Two Hundred
Years after it. This supposed, I am of the Discoursers mind, that the Books of
Maccabees, were not by the Jews acknowledged as part of the First Collection of
Canonical Scripture: they were written near Three Hundred Years after the First
Collection made by Esdras. But can the Discourser prove to me, that these Books
were not by the Jews received as part of the Second Collection of Canonical
Scripture?

If the Discourser (notwithstanding this reasonable Distinction) remains
unsatisfied, and still scruples their Authenticness, and continues to say, that
the Jews did not receive them as Canonical; I Will humor him in this, and grant
him what he asks. But are we Jews? If the Jews did not, the Church of Christ,
received them as Canonical Scripture.

S. Jerome it is true, says, In Praef. Salom.
that the Church did not look upon them, as part of that Canonical Scripture,
which was contained in the First Canon of the Jews, and which was universally
received from the beginning by all Christians: So did S. Gregory the Great.
Lib. Moral. 19. c. 13.
Neither of them deny the Maccabees to be part of that entire Canon of
Scripture, which the Church of Christ appprov'd of, and read in their days. In
this entire Canon of Scripture, Canon 47. Sunt autem Canonicae Scripturae
Maccabaeorum Libri duo.
the Third Council of Carthage, which all well-meaning Christians always
looked upon as Orthodox, numbered the Maccabees: So did Innocent the First,
Head of the Universal Church of Christ upon Earth, in his Letter to Exuperius,
Bishop of Toulouse. S. Austin in express Words says, That the Jews do not
receive the Books of Maccabees as Canonical, S. Aug. l. 18. de Civit. Dei. c.
37. Maccabaeorum Libros, non Judaei, sed Ecclesia pro Canonicis habet.
but the Church does. And in the Second Age, the Valentinian Heretics
asserted, That the Bible no where patronized it to be lawful to venture their
Lives for GOD ALMIGHTY's sake: And Origin instanced that Famous Example of the
Mother and seven Sons, who died upon this Account, out of the Second of
Maccabees, as part of Holy Scripture, and confuted them. Reasons, without
exception, that if the Jews did not, Christians numbered these Books with the
rest of Canonical Scripture.

In S. Matthew
We read an other Confirmation of this Truth, where Christ himself says, Chap.
12. v. 32.
That the Sin against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven, neither in this
World, nor in that to come. I cannot choose here but take Notice, how wittily
the Discourser Reasons upon the World to come. He will have the World to come,
to be in this present World, and not to be, till this World end. Thus he
delivers himself; They (Catholics) suppose, That the World to come, Page 19.
must signify the time between every man's Death, and the General Resurrection.
The World to come, cannot be, till this World end (i. e.) till the time be,
That Purgatory shall be no more, which now is in this Present World. I expected
the acuteness of so sharp a Wit, could have distinguished between Life, and
Death; this World, and the next; especially, when Scripture had done it before
him. We therefore, following the distinction which Scripture gives, understand
by this World, this present Life, which all Mankind, more or less enjoys; and
by that to come, the State of Man after Death, a middle State, where some Sin
is to be expiated.

It Is certain that by this passage, neither in this World, nor in that to come,
is meant, that the Sin against the Holy Ghost, in which Man dies, is never to
be forgiven: For if it were ever to be forgiven, certainly it would be pardoned
in this World or that to come; for no other place can be assigned, where Pardon
is to be expected: S. M. c. 3. v. 29.
And thus S. Mark interprets the Phrase, He has not Forgiveness for ever, and
shall be guilty of an eternal Sin.

From hence Roman Catholics infer, That there are some Sins not eternal, to be
pardoned in the next World; and if to be pardoned, without dispute in a middle
state of Souls, for whose delivery, Prayers are offered by the Faithful living.
Our Reason is, because Scripture assigns this World, and that to come, as the
only two places, where Sin may be pardoned, saying, That the Sin against the
Holy Ghost shall in neither of them, or never be pardoned. Let those, says S.
Bernard, who deny Purgatory, ask of him, S. Bern. super Cantica Sermon. 66.
Quaerant ergo ab eo, qui dixit quoddam peccatum esse, quod neque in hoc
saeculo, neque in futuro remitteretur; Cur hoc dixerit, si nulla manet in
futuro remissio purgatione peccatis?
who said there is some Sin, which shall neither be forgiven in this World, nor
in that to come; Why did he say this, if there remain in the World to come, no
forgiveness, or purgation of Sin?

S. Isidore of Spain is more express; Lib. 1. de off. Eccles. c. 18. Nam and
cum Dominus dicit, qui peccaverit in Spiritum sanctum non remitteretur ei,
neque in hoc saeculo, neque in futuro, demonstrat quibusdam illic dimittenda
peccata, and quodam purgatorio igne purganda.
For when our Lord says, whosoever shall sin against the Holy Ghost, it shall
not be forgiven him, neither in this World, nor in that to come; he
demonstrates, that Sin is forgiven to some there, and expiated in a certain
Purgatory Fire. And to the same Words of CHRIST, S. Austin gives the like
Interpretation; S. Aug. Civit. Dei, l. 2. c. 24. De Defunctis quibusdam vel
ipsius Ecclesiae, vel quorundam piorum exauditur Oration; -- neque enim de
quibusdam veraciter diceretur, quod non eis remittatur, neque in hoc saeculo,
neque in futuro, nisi essent, quibus, etsi non in isto, tamen remittetur in
futuro.
For some Souls departed, the Prayers of the Church, or pious Persons are
heard; -- for otherwise it would not be truly said of some, that it should not
be forgiven them, neither in this World, nor in that to come, unless there were
some, to whom, if not in this, it shall be forgiven in the World to come.

And I am of opinion, if the Discourser will but seriously consider our
Saviors own Words, that he will acknowledge some Sins to be pardoned, in this
Life, and some after Death. I shall instance only one Example, somewhat of the
like nature to convince him. If some of the Discoursers Companions should tell
him, that he had a Lawsuit in hand, and that he was certain never to win it,
neither at the King's Bench, nor Court of Chancery; I am persuaded the
Discourser, or any man of sense, would infer from this Person's talk, that
Lawsuits were pleaded both at the King's Bench, and in Chancery: And why will
he not infer from these Words of our Saviors, Some sins shall never be
pardoned, neither in this World, nor in that to come; that there are some sins,
both pardonable in this World, and in that to come? And if there be some sins
there to be forgiven, I suppose he will allow of some Pain there to be
suffered; for all sin deserves some Punishment: And it is upon this account the
Roman Church prays for the Dead, that their pain may be eased, and sins
forgiven.

S. Paul 1 Cor. c. 15. v. 29.

Makes use of two Arguments to verify the Resurrection of Man, Devotion
performed for the Dead, and the exposing of his own Life, which was in danger,
preaching this ineffable Mystery, which is the Foundation of Christian
Religion: Otherwise, says the Text, what shall they do that are baptized for
the Dead, if the Dead rise not at all? Why also are they baptized for them? Why
also are we in danger every hour? I expect here the Discourser will exclaim
against the hardness of this passage. I am somewhat of his opinion; it is so
difficult, that if I were a Reformer, I could make no sense of it.

Mark 10. Orat. in S. Lumina.
This Word Baptism, as hard as it is, S. Mark interprets to be pain or austerity:
And S. Gregory Nazianzen calls Purgatory Fire, the last Baptism: But let the
word Baptism signify whatever affliction the Discourser shall please to assign,
Penance, or Prayer, it will still Literally be true, that it is performed to
benefit the Dead: For if the Dead are not hereby helped, why does S. Paul urge
again so earnestly? Why also, to what end, are they baptized, or afflicted for
them? If this Devotion profit not the Dead, might not we answer the Apostle,
and say, to no end at all: And so void and silence his pressing Forwardness.
Far be it from me, Divine APOSTLE, to contend against thy Testimony!

S. John,
The beloved Disciple of Christ, speaks of Two states of Sinners after Death:
He speaks of those, who we know depart in mortal, or deadly sin: For these he
forbids us to pray. They are without Redemption, abandoned by God. S. John
speaks of an other sort of Sinners, whom we know by outward signs of
Repentance, die not in deadly sin: For these he does encourage us, if he do not
command us, with confidence to pray. And this is, says the Scripture, Ep.
Catho. 1. Chap. 5. v. 14.
the Confidence which we have toward him, that whatsoever we shall ask
according to His Will, He hears us. He that knows his Brother to sin, a Sin
not to Death; let him him ask, and Life shall be given him, sinning not to
Death. Here is Encouragement for us to pray for those, who die with Repentance:
And Two strong Motives excite us hereunto.

First, We are encouraged thus to pray; because we ask, What is according to
GOD's Will: And

Secondly, God will hear us, pardon the Delinquent, and give him Life
everlasting. The Text continues, There is a sin to Death, for that I say not,
that any man ask. Here is an Inhibition to pray for any, of whom we have no
signs, no Hopes of Repentance at their Death.

I do not expect here that the Discourser will deny S. John speaks of Praying
for the Dead. The Text is too plain against him. And what is convincing,
neither the Church, nor any Man is dissuaded here from praying for any Sinner
yet living, nor for the Remission of any Sin in this Life. I know the Montanist
Heretics held some sins not pardonable. But the Church of Christ before the
Death of any Sinner, prays, and is often heard, for the sins of Heretics,
Jews, Turks, Apostates, or what other Infidels, or ill-Livers soever in the
World: so long as Life is, all have hopes of Pardon. But S. John speaks here of
a Sinner, now placed in such a state, that Prayer for him will not be
available; therefore he speaks of praying for the sins of the Departed. Of
these, some die without repentance. These we are not to pray for: Others duly
repent; for these, we are encouraged to pray, and God will hear us, and give
them Life everlasting.

CHAP. IX. Of Purgatory.
IF the Word Purgatory be not found in Scripture, no pious Reader ought upon
this sole account to scruple at it: the sense of it is delivered in Holy Writ.
Do we read any where in the Bible of the Word Trinity? We all of us believe in
the blessed Trinity, one GOD, and three divine Persons, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. The Word, Catholic, is not written in Scriptures: We all of us profess
in the Creed, I believe one Catholic Church.

By the Word Purgatory, we not improperly signify a middle state after Death,
where Souls departed, endure some Pain for smaller Offenses, not forgiven in
this World. That there is such a state of Souls, I have already from Fathers,
and Scripture demonstrated; for if both these teach us to pray, as I have
shown, that God will be pleased to deal with some Souls departed more mildly
than their sins deserve, to forgive them, and to seat them in the Kingdom of
Heaven, who can justly refuse the being of Purgatory? This is all we mean by
it: This is our Belief; and of this I will add one more Proof, very plain and
easy.

There are two sorts of sin, Mortal, and Venial: I call a Mortal sin, that
Crime, which breaks Charity between God and the Delinquent, and for which he is
to suffer eternal pain. I mean by Venial sin, that Fault, which lessens
Friendship between God, and the Just; for which, he must undergo some Penalty,
because he has transgres'd, yet not that of eternal Damnation. I know that God
might have punished all sins, and this too with Justice, eternally. But the
Divine Goodness considering the weakness of human frailty, which fails almost
at every step it makes, willed all Offenses should not be Mortal, or liable to
everlasting Torments. This he has revealed to us in S. Matthew, where we read,
Math. 5.23.
Whosoever is angry with his Brother, shall be in danger of Judgment; whosoever
shall say to his Brother, Raca, shall be in danger of Council; whosoever shall
say to his Brother, thou Fool, shall be guilty of Hell Fire. Is not here an
uncontrolled difference of two sorts of sin? Some are guilty of Hell Fire;
these, I call Mortal; Others are not guilty of Hell Fire, but in danger of
Judgment; these, I name Venial faults. And they are these quotidian slips,
which the Prophet attributes to the Just, who fails seven times a day. If he be
just, he is GOD's Favorite, and not guilty of Hell Fire. If he fail, as all of
us do, witness this Sentence of S. James, We all offend in many things, S. Jam.
3.2.
before he may recover these Lapses, Death may surprise him, when he neither
thinks of them, nor of the World to come, where then must these smaller
Offenses be Expiated? Must the Delinquent go straight to Heaven? This is not a
place of Punishment. Must he be thrown headlong down into Hell? This is not a
state of expiation. The Justice of God will not punish this Delinquent
eternally with the Damned, because his divine Mercy has declared in this
passage of S. Matthew, that these lesser blemishes, with which he died engaged,
carry not along with them the Guilt of Hell Fire. The Mercy of God will not as
yet deck him with the beauties of Heaven, Apocalyp.
because His Justice has pronounced, That no unclean thing enters into Heaven;
and elsewhere he says, Psalm. 14. Ingreditur sine Macula.
Who enters, enters without stain. There is then some middle place of Souls,
assigned by the Divine Providence, to punish these lighter Offenses, that
Justice and Mercy may meet together. This, Roman Catholics believe and call
Purgatory.

Conclusion.
I Hope the Pretended Reformers will hereafter be so just, as to grant, That
the Holy Fathers anciently prayed with the same intent, which the Church of
Rome does at present, to free Souls departed, of their Lesser Offenses and
Pains, in a middle State or Purgatory. Petrus Venerabilis prays, That their
Sins not yet forgiven, may be pardoned: S. Bernard, That they may be Freed from
Purgatory; S. Isidore, That their remaining Sins may be expiated in a certain
Purgatory Fire; S. Austin, That GOD may deal more meekly with them, than their
sins deserved; S. Jerome, For lesser Faults; Theodoretus, For what thorough
Imprudence they had committed; S. Chrysostom, To profit the Deceased, and to
appease GOD; S. Epiphanius, To extinguish not inexpiable, but lesser sins;
Arnobius, For their sins and satisfactions; Tertullian, For their ease and
refreshment; and Dionysius Areopagite, For all their sins through human frailty
committed.

These Authorities are so plain and convictive, That to speak sincerely, I
cannot see how any Word of Reply may be given them. Had these Holy Writers
delivered their private Opinions, one might have given them a put-off, and
said, they were Men, and so might err. But what they speak of, either
intimates the Practice of the whole Church in their Times, or reckons it
APOSTOLICAL TRADITION, or hold it part of their Faith; in which they cannot be
said, without Injury to mistake. Would it not be injurious to say, That the
Learnedest Prelates of the Reformers, might now mistake all of them in their
Books, delivering to Posterity, that in England, Service according to the
Religion by Law Established, is generally said in the Language of the People?
The Peasant knows as much, and the very Idiot is not ignorant of it. Sure the
same may be granted to the FATHERS of the Church. Then they cannot all be said
with Injury to mistake in delivering what was the Belief of the Church in their
days. Petrus Venerabilis assures us, that the Denial of this pious Devotion
for the Dead, is a Breach of Faith; S. Bernard believes this Article delivered
in Scripture; S. Isidore, What is practiced through the whole World, and taught
by the Apostles; S. Austin, What the Universal Church observes; S. Chrysostom,
What is Instituted by the Apostles; S. Epiphanius, Which is ordained by the
Church; Eusebius, What Christians did in the flourishing Increase of the
Church; Arnobius, How they prayed for the Dead in time of Persecution;
Tertullian, What Faith observes; and Dionysius Disciple of S. Paul, alleging
the same Practice, who can deny it to be Apostolical Tradition?

Or if it were nothing, when the Pretended Reformers left the Roman Church, to
have utterly lost the whole Assembly of Fathers, and renounced Apostolical
Tradition; yet it is considerable to overlook, rather than believe, this pious
Devotion for the DEAD, Recommended to us in the Maccabees, in S. Matthew, in S.
Paul, and in S. John, the Beloved of CHRIST.

Good GOD! What a state is that Christian in, who rejects the Belief of the
Universal Church of Christ, contradicts Apostolical Order, and struggles with
Holy Scriptures. The Apostles instituted what was right; they were inspired by
the Holy Ghost. The whole Church erres not in her Belief; the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against Her. Holy Scriptures agree in the Recommendation of
the same Doctrine; they are the infallible Word of GOD. Here I leave the
Pretended Reformers to a serious Consideration of a speedy Conformity with the
Church of Rome in this pious Practice and Belief of Praying for the DEAD.

THE END.
Ecclesiae Judicio subjiciantur.


