PROLOGUE.
Wits, like Physicians never can agree,
When of a different Society.
And Rabels Drops were never more cried down
By all the Learned Doctors of the Town,
Than a New Play whose Author is unknown.
Nor can those Doctors with more Malice sue
(And powerful Purses) the discenting Few,
Than those with an Insulting Pride, do rail
At all who are not of their own Caball:
If a Young Poet hitt your Humor right,
You judge him then out of Revenge and Spite.
So amongst men there are Ridiculous Elves,
Who Monkeys hate for being too like themselves.
So that the reason of the grand debate,
Why Wit so often is damned, when good Plays take,
Is, that you Censure as you love, or hate.
Thus like a Learned Conclave Poets sit,
Catholic Judges both of Sense and Wit,
And Damn or Save, as they themselves think fit.
Yet those who to others faults are so severe,
Are not so perfect but themselves may Err.
Some write Coract indeed, but then the whole
(Bating their own Dull stuff in the Play) is stole:
As Bees do suck from Flowers their Honey dew,
So they rob others striving to please you.
Some write their Characters Gentile and fine,
But then they do so Toil for every line,
That what to you does Easy seem, and Plain,
Is the hard Issue of their laboring Brain.
And some the Effects of all their pains we see,
Is but to Mimick good Extemporie.
Others by long Converse about the Town,
Have Wit enough to write a Lewd Lampoon,
But their chief skill lies in a Bawdy Song.
In short, the only Wit that is now in Fashon,
Is but the gleenings of good Conversation.
As for the Author of this Coming Play,
I ask't him what he thought fit I should say
In thanks for your good Company to day:
He called me Fool, and said it was well known,
You came not here for our sakes, but your own.
New Plays are stuffed with Wits, and with Deboches,
That Crowd and sweat like Citts, in May Day Coaches.
Written by a Person of Quality.
Some Books printed this Year 1677. For John Amery, at the Peacock; against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street.
ADvice to Grand Jurors in cases of Blood, Asserting from Law and Reason, That
at the Kings Suit in all cases (where a Person by Law is to be indicted for
killing of another person) that the Indictment ought to be drawn for Murder,
and that the Grand Jury ought to find it Murder, where the Evidence is, that
the party intended to be indicted had his hands in Blood, and did kill the
other Person. By Zachary Babington Esquire 8o. price. 2 s. 6 d.

The Country Justice, Containing the practice of the Justices of the Peace, in
and out of their Sessions, with an Abridgment of all Statutes relating
thereunto to this present Year 1677. By Michael Dalton Esquire Fol. price bound 12
s.

A Treatise of Testaments and last Wills, fit to be understood by all Men, that
they may know, whether, whereof, and how, to make them. Compiled out of the
Laws Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Cannon, as also out of the Common Laws, Customs
and Statutes of this Realm. The fourth Edition, with very large Additions. By
Henry Swynburne, sometimes Judge of the Prerogative Court of York, in large 4o.
price bound 7 s.

The Debauchee, or the Credulous Cuckold, a Comedy, Acted at His Highness the
Duke's Theater, in 4o. price 1 s.

Man without Passion, or the Wise Stoic, according to the Sentiments of
Seneca, written Originally in French, by that great and Learned Philosopher
Anthony Le Grand. English't by G. R. printed 1675. 8o. price 2 s. 6 d.

An Introduction to the History of England, comprising the principal Affairs of
this Land, from its first planting, to the comeing of the English Saxons.
Together with a Catalogue of the 76 British and Pictish Kings, by D. D.
Langhorne. Printed 8o. price 2 s.

The Actors Names.
Mr. Ievorne, Don Antonio, The Viceroy's Son. Mr. Medburne, Don Pedro, A Noble
Spaniard, his Friend. Mr. Betterton, Belvile, An English Colonel in Love with
Florinda. Mr. Smith, Willmore, The ROVER. Mr. Crosbie, Frederick, An English
Gentleman, and Friend to Bell. and Fred. Mr. Underhill, Blunt, An English
Country Gentleman. Mr. Richards, Stephano, Servant to Don Pedro. Mr. Percivall,
Philippo, Lucetta's Gallant. Mr. John Lee, Sancho, Pimp to Lucetta. Biskey, and
Sebastian, Two Bravo's to Angellica. Officers and Soldiers. Page To Don
Antonio.
Women.
Mrs. Betterton, Florinda, Sister to Don Pedro. Mrs. Barrer, Hellena, A gay
Young Woman designed for a Nun, and Sister to Florinda. Mrs. Hughs, Valeria, A
Kinswoman to Florinda. Mrs. Gwin, Angellica Bianca, A Famous Courtizan. Mrs.
Leigh, Moretta, Her Woman. Mrs. Norris, Callis, Governess to Florinda and
Hellena. Mrs. Gillo, Lucetta, A Jilting Wench. Servants, Other Masqueraders Men
and Women.
The Scene NAPLES, in Carnival time.

THE ROVER: OR, The Banished Cavaliers.
ACT the First.
Scene the First. A Chamber.
Enter Florinda and Hellena. Flor. WHat an Impertinent thing is a Young Girl
bred in a Nunnery? How full of Questions? Prithee no more Hellena, I have told
thee more than thou understand'st already.


Hell. The more's my grief, I would fain know as much as you, which makes me so
Inquisitive; nor is it enough I know you are a Lover, unless you tell me too, who
it is you sigh for.


Flor. When you are a Lover, I Will think you fit for a Secret of that Nature.


Hell. It Is true, I never was a Lover yet -- but I begin to have a shrewd
guess, what it is to be so, and fancy it very pretty to sigh, and sing, and
blush, and wish, and dream and wish, and long and wish to see the Man; and when
I do look pale and tremble; just as you did when my Brother brought home the
fine English Colonel to see you -- what do you call him Don Belvill.


Flor. Fie Hellena.


Hell. That blush betrays you. -- I am sure it is so -- or is it Don Antonio the
Viceroy's Son? -- or perhaps the Rich Old Don Vincentio whom my Father designs
you for a Husband? why do you blush again?


Flor. With Indignation, and how near soever my Father thinks I am to Marrying
that hated Object, I shall let him see, I understand better, what is due to my
Beauty, Birth and Fortune, and more to my Soul, then to obey those unjust
Commands.


Hell. Now hang me, if I don't love thee for that dear disobedience. I love
mischief strangely, as most of our Sex do, who are come to Love nothing else --
but tell me dear Florinda, don't you love that fine Anglese? -- for I vow next
to loving him my self, 'twill please me most that you do so, for he is so gay
and so handsome.


Flor. Hellena, a Maid designed for a Nun, ought not to be so Curious in a
discourse of Love.


Hell. And do thou think that ever I Will be a Nun? or at least till I Am so
Old, I Am fit for nothing else -- Faith no Sister; and that which makes me long
to know whether you love Belvile, is because I hope he has some mad Companion
or other, that will spoil my devotion, nay I Am resolved to provide my self this
Carnival, if there be ere a handsome proper fellow of my humor above ground,
tho I ask first.


Flor. Prithee be not so wild.


Hell. Now you have provided your self of a Man, you take no care for poor me
-- prithee tell me, what do thou see about me that is unfit for Love -- have
I not a World of Youth? a humor gay? a Beauty passable? a Vigor desirable?
well Shaped? clean limbed? sweet breathed? and sense enough to know how all
these ought to be employed to the best advantage; yes I do and will, therefore
lay aside your hopes of my Fortune* by my being a Devote, and tell me how you
came acquainted with this Belvile? for I perceive you knew him before he came
to Naples.


Flor. Yes, I knew him at the Siege of Pampulona, he was then a Colonel of
French Horse, who when the Town was Ransack't, Nobly treated my Brother and my
self, preserving us from all Insolences; and I must own, (besides great
Obligations) I have I know not what, that pleads kindly for him about my Heart,
and will suffer no other to enter. -- But see my Brother.


Enter Don Pedro Stephano with a Masquing habit and Callis. Pedro. Good morrow
Sister. -- Pray when saw you your Lover Don Vincentio?


Flor. I know not Sir -- Callis when was he here? for I consider it so little,
I know not when it was.


Pedro. I have a Command from my Father here to tell you, you ought not to
despise him, a Man of so vast a Fortune, and such a Passion for you -- Stephano
my things.


[Puts on his Masquing habit. Flor. A Passion for me, it is more than e're I
saw, or he had a desire should be known -- I hate Vincentio, Sir, and I would
not have a Man so dear to me as my Brother, follow the ill Customs of our
Country, and make a slave of his Sister -- and Sir, my Fathers will, I Am sure
you may divert.


Pedro. I know not how dear I am to you, but I wish only to be ranckt in your
esteem, equal with the English Coll. Belvile -- why do you frown and blush? is
there any guilt belongs to the Name of that Cavalier.


Flor. I Will not deny I value Belvile, when I was exposed to such dangers as the
Licensed Lust of common Soldiers threatened, when Rage and Conquest flew
through the City -- then Belvile this Criminal for my sake, through himself
into all dangers to save my Honor and will you not allow him my esteem?


Pedro. Yes, pay him what you will in Honor -- but you must consider Don
Vincentio's Fortune, and the Jointure he will make you.


Flor. Let him consider my Youth, Beauty and Fortune; which ought not to be
thrown away on his Age and Jointure.


Pedro. It Is true, he is not so young and fine a Gentleman, as that Belvile, --
but what Jewels will that Cavalier present you with? those of his Eyes and
Heart?


Hell. And are not those better than any Don Vincentio has brought from the
Indies.


Pedro. Why how now! has your Nunnery breeding taught you to understand the
value of Hearts and Eyes?


Hell. Better than to believe Vincentio's deserve value from any Woman -- he
may perhaps increase her Baggs, but not her Family.


Pedro. This is fine -- go -- up to your Devotion, you are not designed for the
conversation of Lovers.


Hell. Nor Saints, yet a while I hope [Aside. Is It not enough you make a Nun of
me, but you must cast my Sister away too? exposing her to a worse confinement
than a Religious life.


Pedro. The Girl's mad -- it is a confinement to be carried into the Country,
to an Ancient Villa belonging to the Family of the Vincentio's these five
hundred Years, and have no other Prospect than that pleasing one of seeing all
her own that meets her Eyes -- a fine Air, large Fields and Gardens, where she
may walk and gather Flowers.


Hell. When by Moon Light? For I am sure she dares not encounter with the heat
of the Sun, that were a task only for Don Vincentio and his Indian breeding,
who loves it in the Dog days. -- and if these be her daily divertisements,
what are those of the Night, to lie in a wide Moth -- eaten Bed Chamber, with
furniture in Fashion in the Reign of King Sancho the First; The Bed, that which
his Fore -- fathers lived and died in.


Pedro. Very well.


Hell. This Appartment (new furbrusht and fitted out for the young Wife) he
(out of freedom) makes his dressing Room, and being a Frugal and a Jealus
Coxcomb, instead of a Valet to uncase his feeble Carcass, he desires you to do
that Office -- signs of favor I Will assure you, and such as you must not hope
for, unless your Woman be out of the way.


Pedro. Have you done yet?


Hell. That Honor being past, the Giant stretches it self; yawns and sighs a
Belch or two, loud as a Musket, throws himself into Bed, and expects you in his
foul sheets, and e're you can get your self undrest, call's you with a snore or
Two -- and are not these fine Blessings to a young Lady?


Pedro. Have you done yet?


Hell. And this Man you must kiss, nay you must kiss none but him too -- and
nuzel through his Beard to find his Lips. -- And this you must submit to for
Threescore years, and all for a Jointure.


Pedro. For all your Character of Don Vincentio, she is as like to Marry him,
as she was before.


Hell. Marry Don Vincentio! hang me such a Wedlock would be worse than Adultery
with another Man. I had rather see her in the Hostel de Dieu, to wast her Youth
there in Vows, and be a Handmaid to Lazers and Cripples, than to lose it in
such a Marriage.


Pedro. You have considered Sister, that Belvile has no Fortune to bring you
to, banished his Country, despised at home, and pitty'd abroad.


Hell. What then? the Viceroy's Son is better than that Old Sir Fisty. Don
Vincentio! Don Indian! he thinks he is trading to Gambo still, and would Barter
himself (that Bell and Bawble) for your Youth and Fortune.


Pedro. Callis take her hence, and lock her up all this Carnival, and at Lent
she shall begin her everlasting Penance in a Monastery.


Hell. I care not, I had rather be a Nun, than be obliged to Marry as you would
have me, if I were designed for it.


Pedro. Do not fear the blessing of that choice -- you shall be a Nun.


Hell. Shall I so? you may chance to be mistaken in my way of devotion: -- a
Nun! yes I am like to make a fine Nun! I have an excellent humor for a Grate:
no, I Will have a Saint of my own to pray to shortly, if I like any that dares
venture on me.

[Aside.
Pedro. Callis, make it your business to watch this Wild Cat. As for you
Florinda, I Have only tried you all this while and urged my Fathers will; but
mine is, that you would love Antonio, he is Brave and young, and all that can
complete the happiness of a Gallant Maid -- this absence of my Father will give
us opportunity, to free you from Vincentio, by Marrying here, which you must do
to Morrow.


Flor. To Morrow!


Pedro. To Morrow, or 'twill be too late -- it is not my Friendship to Antonio,
which makes me urge this, but Love to thee, and hatred to Vincentio --
therefore resolve upon to Morrow.


Flor. Sir, I shall strive to do, as shall become your Sister.


Pedro. I Will both believe and trust you -- Adieu


Ex. Ped. and Steph. Hell. As becomes his Sister! -- that is to be as resolved
your way, as he is his --

[ Hell. goes to Callis
Flor. I never till now perceived my Ruin near,
I Have no defense against Antonio's Love,
For he has all the Advantages of Nature,
The moving Arguments of Youth and Fortune.

Hell. But hark you Callis, you will not be so cruel to lock me up indeed,
will you.


Call. I must obey the Commands I have -- besides, do you consider what a life
you are going to lead?


Hell. Yes, Callis, that of a Nun: and till then I Will be indebted a world of
Prayers to you, if you will let me now see, what I never did, the Divertisements
of a Carnival.


Call. What, go in Masquerade? 'twill be a fine farewell to the World I take it
-- pray what would you do there?


Hell. That which all the World does, as I am told, be as mad as the rest, and
take all Innocent freedoms -- Sister you will go too, will you not? come prithee
be not sad. -- We'll out -- wit Twenty Brothers, if you will be ruled by me --
come put off this dull humor with your Cloths, and Assume one as gay, and as
fantastic, as the Dress my Cousen Valeria, and I have provided, and let us
Ramble.


Flor. Callis, will you give us leave to go?


Call. I have a Youthful itch of going my self. [Aside. -- Madam, if I thought
your Brother might not know it, and I might wait on you; for by my troth I Will
not trust Young Girls alone.


Flor. Thou see my Brother's gone already, and thou shall attend, and watch
us.


Enter Stephano. Steph. Mad? the Habits are come, and your Cousen Valeria is
dressed, and stays for you.


Flor. It Is well. -- I Will write a Note, and if I chance to see Belvile, and
want an opportunity to speak to him, that shall let him know, what I Have
resolved in favor of him.


Hell. Come, let us in and dress us.


[Exeunt. SCENE II. A Long Street.
Enter Belvile Melancholy, Blunt and Frederick. Fred. When what the Devil ails
the Coll. In a time when all the World is gay, to look like mere Lent thus?
Had thou been long enough in Naples to have been in Love, I should have
sworn some such Judgment had befallen thee.


Belv. No, I have made no new Amors since I came to Naples?


Fred. You have left none behind you in Paris?


Belv. Neither.


Fred. I cannot divine the Cause then, unless the Old Cause, the want of Money.


Blunt. And another Old Cause, the want of a Wench -- Would not that revive you?


Blev. You are mistaken, Ned.


Blunt. Nay, 'Sheartlikins, then you are past Cure.


Fred. I have found it out; thou have renewed thy acquaintance with the Lady
that cost thee so many sighs at the Siege of Pampulona -- Pox on it, what do you
you call her -- her Brother's a Noble Spaniard -- Nephew to the Dead General --
Florinda -- Ay Florinda -- and will nothing serve thy turn but that damned
virtuous Woman? whom on my Conscience thou love in spite too, because thou
see little or no possibility of gaining her.


Belv. Thou art mistaken, I have Interest enough in that lovely Virgins heart,
to make me proud and vain, were it not abated by the severity of a Brother, who
perceiving my happiness --


Fred. Has civily forbid thee the House?


Belv. It Is so, to make way for a Powerful Rival, the ViceRoy's Son, who has
the advantage of me, in being a Man of Fortune, a Spaniard, and her Brother's
Friend, which gives him Liberty to make his Court, whilst I have recourse only
to Letters, and distant looks from her Window, which are as soft and kind

As those which Heaven sends down on Penitents.


Blunt. Heyday! 'Sheartlikins, simile! by this Light the Man is quite spoild.
--


Fred. What the Devil are we made of, that we cannot be thus concerned for a
Wench -- 'Sheartlikins our Cupids are like the Cooks of the Camp, they can
Roast or Boil a Woman, but they have none of the fine tricks to set 'em off, no
Hogoes to make the Sauce pleasant and the Stomach sharp.


Fred. I dare swear I have had a hundred as young kind and handsome as this
Florinda; and Dogs eat me, if they were not as troublesome to me in the Morning,
as they were welcome over Night.


Blunt. And yet I warrant, he would not touch another Woman, if he might have
her for nothing.


Belv. That Is thy joy, a cheap Whore.


Blunt. When I 'Sheartlikins I love a Franck Soul -- when did you ever hear of
an honest Woman that took a Man's Money? I warrant 'em good ones -- but
Gentlemen, You may be free, you have been kept so poor with Parliaments and
Protectors, that the little Stock you have is not worth preserving -- but I
thank my Stars, I had more Grace than to forfeit my Estate by Cavaliering.


Belv. Methinks only following the Court, should be sufficient to entitle 'em
to that.


Blunt. 'Sheartlikins, they know I follow it to do it no good, unless they pick
a hole in my Coat for lending you Money now and then, which is a greater Crime
to my Conscience, Gentlemen, than to the Commonwealth.


Enter Willmore. Will. Ha! dear Belvile! noble Colonel!


Belv. Willmore! welcome ashore, my dear Rover! -- what happy wind blew us this
good Fortune?


Will. Let me salute my dear Fred. and then Command me. -- How is it honest Lad?


Fred. Faith, Sir, the Old Complement, infinitely the better to see my dear mad
Willmore again. -- Prithee why came thou ashore? and where is the Prince?


Will. He Is well, and Reigns still Lord of the watery Element. -- I must abord
again within a day or two, and my business ashore was only to enjoy my self a
little this Carnival.


Belv. Pray know our new Friend, Sir, he is but bashful, a raw Traveller, but
honest, stout, and one of us.

[ Embraces Blunt
Will. That you esteem him, gives him an Intr'est here.


Blunt. Your Servant, Sir.


Will. But well, -- Faith I Am glad to meet you again in a warm Climate, where
the kind Sun has its God-like Power still over the Wine and Women -- Love and
Mirth! are my business in Naples, and if I mistake not the place, here is an
Excellent Market for Chapmen of my humor.


Belv. See, here be those kind Merchants of Love you look for.


Enter several Men in Masquing Habits, some playing on Music, others dancing
after, Women dressed like Courtizans, with Papers pinned on their Breasts, and
Baskets of Flowers in their Hands. Blunt. 'Sheartlikins, what have we here?


Fred. Now the Game begins.


Will. Fine pretty Creatures! may a stranger have leave to look and love? --
What Is here -- Roses for every Month?


[Reads the Papers. Blunt. Roses for every Month? what means that?


Belv. They are, or would have you think they are Courtizans, who here in
Naples, are to be hired by the Month.


Will. Kind, and obliging to inform us -- Pray where do these Roses grow? I
would fain plant some of 'em in a Bed of mine.


Wom. Beware such Roses, Sir.


Will. A Pox of Fear: I Will be baked with thee between a pair of Sheets, and
that is thy proper Still; so I might but strew such Roses over me, and under me
-- Fair one, Would you would give me leave to gather at your Bush this idle
Month; I would go near to make some Body smell of it all the year after.


Belv. And thou have need of such a Remedy, for thou stink'st of Tar and Ropes
Ends, like a Dock or Pesthouse.


[The Woman puts herself into the Hands of a Man, and Ex. Will. Nay, nay, you
shall not leave me so.


Belv. By all means use no violence here.


Will. Death! Just as I was going to be damnably in Love, to have her led off!
I could pluck that Rose out of his Hand, and even kiss the Bed, the Bush grew
in.


Fred. No Friend to Love, like a long Voyage at Sea.


Blunt. Except a Nunnery, Fred.


Will. Death! But will they not be kind? quickly be kind? Thou know I Am no
tame sigher, but a Rampant Lion of the Forest.


Advances from the farther end of the Scenes, two Men dressed all over with Horns
of several sorts, making Grimasses at one another, with Papers pinned on their
Backs. Belv. Oh the fantastical Rogues, how they are dressed! It Is a Satyr against
the whole Sex.


Will. 'Is this a Fruit that grows in this warm Country?


Belv. Yes: It Is pretty to see these Italians start, swell and stab, at the
word Cuckold; and yet stumble at Horns on every Threshold.


Will. See what is on their Back -- Flowers of every Night. [Reads. -- Ah Rogue!
and more sweet than Roses of every Month! This is a Gardener of Adam's own
breeding.


[They dance. Belv. What think you of those Grave People?

-- is a Wake in Essex half so mad or Extravagant?


Will. I like their sober grave way, it is a kind of Legal Authorized
Fornication, where the Men are not chid for it, nor the Women despised, as
amongst our dull English, even the Monsieurs want that part of good Manners.


Belv. But here in Italy, a Monsieur is the humblest best bred Gentleman --
Duels are so bafled by Bravo's, that an Age shows not one but between a
Frenchman, and a hangman, who is as much too hard for him on the Piaza, as
they are for a Dutchman on the New Bridge -- but see another Crew.


Enter Florinda, Hellena and Valeria, dressed like Gypsies; Callis and Stephano,
Lucetta, Philipo and Sancho in Masquerade. Hell. Sister, there is your English
Man, and with him a handsome proper Fellow -- I Will to him, and instead of
telling him his Fortune, try my own.


Will. Gypsies on my life -- sure these will prattle if a Man cross their
hands. [ Goes to Hellena. -- dear, pretty, (and I hope) young Devil, will you
tell an Amorous stranger, what luck he is like to have?


Hell. Have a care how you venture with me Sir, least I pick your Pocket, which
will more vex your English humor, than an Italian Fortune will please you.


Will. How the Devil came thou to know my Country and Humor?


Hell. The First I guess by a certain forward Impudence, which does not
displease me at this time, and the loss of your Money will vex you, because I
hope you have but very little to lose.


Will. Egad Child you are in the right, it is so little, I dare not offer it thee
for a kindness -- but cannot you divine what other things of more value I have
about me, that I would more willingly part with.


Hell. Indeed no, that is the business of a Witch, and I am but a Gypsy yet. --
Yet without looking in your hand, I have a parlous guess, it is some Foolish
heart you mean, an Inconstant English heart, as little worth stealing as your
Purse.


Will. Nay, then thou do deal with the Devil, that is certain. -- thou have
guest as right, as if thou had been one of that number it has languisht for.
-- I find you will be better acquainted with it, nor can you take it in a better
time; for I am come from Sea, Child, and Venus not being propitious to me in
her own Element: I have a world of Love in store -- would you would be good
natured and take some on it off my hands.


Hell. When -- I could be inclined that way -- but for a Foolish Vow I am going
to make -- to dye a Maid.


Will. Then thou art damned without redemption, and as I am a good Christian, I
ought in Charity to divert so wicked a design -- therefore prithee dear
Creature let me know quickly when, and where I shall begin to set a helping
hand to so good a Work.


Hell. If you should prevail with my tender heart (as I begin to fear you will,
for you have horrible loving Eyes) there will be difficulty in it, that you will
hardly undergo for my sake.


Will. Faith Child I have been bred in dangers, and wear a Sword, that has been
employed in a worse Cause, than for a handsome kind Woman -- name the danger --
let it be any thing but a long Siege -- and I Will undertake it.


Hell. Can you storm?


Will. Oh most furiously.


Hell. What think you of a Nunnery Wall? for he that wins me, must gain that
first.


Will. A Nun! Oh how I love thee for it! there is no sinner like a young Saint --
nay now there is no denying me, the Old Law had no Curse (to a Woman) like dying
a Maid; witness Ieptha's Daughter.


Hell. A very good Text this, if well handled, and I perceive Father Captain,
you would impose no severe penance on her who were inclined to Console her
self, before she took Orders.


Will. If she be Young and Handsome.


Hell. Ay there is it -- but if she be not --


Will. By this hand, Child, I have an Implicit Faith, and dare venture on thee
with all Faults -- besides, it is more meritorious to leave the World, when thou
have tasted and proved the pleasure on it. Then 'twill be a virtue in thee,
which now will be pure Ignorance.


Hell. I perceive good Father Captain, you design only to make me fit for
Heaven -- but if on the contrary, you should quite divert me from it, and bring
me back to the World again, I should have a new Man to seek I find; and what a
grief that will be -- for when I begin, I fancy I shall love like any thing, I
never tried yet.


Will. Egad and that is kind -- prithee dear Creature, give me credit for a
Heart, for faith I Am a very honest Fellow -- Oh, I long to come first to the
Banquet of Love! and such a swinging Appetite I bring -- Oh I Am impatient. --
thy Lodging sweetheart, thy Lodging! or I Am a dead Man!


Hell. Why must we be either guilty of Fornication or Murder if we converse
with you Men -- and is there no difference between leave to love me, and leave
to lie with me?


Will. Faith Child they were made to go together.


Lucett. Are you sure this is the Man?


[ Pointing to Blunt. Sancho. When did I mistake your Game?


Lucett. This is a Stranger, I know by his gazing; if he be brisk, he will venture
to follow me; and then if I understand my Trade, he is mine, he is English too;
and they say that is a sort of good natured loving People, and have generally so
kind an opinion of themselves, that a Woman with any Wit may Flatter them into
any sort of Fool she pleases.


Blunt. It Is so -- she is taken -- I have Beauties which my false Glass at home
did not discover.


She often passes by Blunt, and gazes on him, he struts and Cocks, and walks
and gazes on her. Flor. This Woman watches me so, I shall get no opportunity to
discover my self to him, and so miss the intent of my coming -- but as I was
saying, Sir, -- by this Line you should be a Lover.


[Looking in his hand. Belv. I thought how right you guest, all Men are in
Love, or pretend to be so -- come let me go, I Am weary of this fooling.


[Walks away. Flor. I will not, till you have confessed whether the Passion that
you have vowed Florinda, be true or false?


She holds him, he strives to get from her. Belv. Florinda!


[Turns quick toward her. Flor. Softly.


Belv. Thou have named one will fix me here for ever.


Flor. She Will be disappointed then, who expects you this Night at the
Garden-gate, and if you fail not -- as let me see the other hand -- you will go
near to do -- she vows to dye or make you happy.


[Looks on Callis who observes 'em. Belv. What can thou mean?


Flor. That which I say -- Farewell.

[Offers to go.
Belv. Oh charming Sybil stay, complete that joy which as it is will turn into
destraction! -- where must I be? at the Garden-gate? I know it -- at Night you
say? -- I Will sooner forfeit Heaven than disobey.


Enter Don Pedro and other Masquers, and pass over the Stage. Call. Madam, your
Brother's here.


Flor. Take this to instruct you farther.


[Gives him a Letter, and goes off. Fred. Have a care, Sir, what you promise;
this may be a Trap laid by her Brother to ruin you.


Belv. Do not disturb my happiness with doubts.


[Opens the Letter. Will. My dear pretty Creature, a Thousand Blessings on
thee! still in this habit you say? -- and after Dinner at this place.


Hell. Yes, if you will swear to keep your heart, and not bestow it between
this and that.


Will. By all the little Gods of Love I swear, I Will leave it with you, and if
you run away with it, those Deities of Justice will revenge me.


[Ex. all the Women. Fred. Do you know the hand?


Belv. It Is Florinda's.
All Blessings fall upon the virtuous Maid.

Fred. Nay, no Idolatry, a sober Sacrifice I Will allow you.


Belv. Oh Friends, the welcom'st News! the softest Letter! -- nay -- you shall
all see it! and could you now be serious, I might be made the happiest Man the
Sun shines on!


Will. The reason of this mighty joy?


Belv. See how kindly she invites me to deliver her from the threatened violence
of her Brother -- will you not assist me?


Will. I know not what thou mean, but I Will make one at any mischief where a
Woman's concerned -- but she will be grateful to us for the favor, will she not?


Belv. How mean you?


Will. How should I mean? thou know there is but one way for a Woman to
oblige me.


Belv. Do not profane -- the Maid is nicely virtuous.


Will. Who Pox, then she is fit for nothing but a husband, let her e'n go,
Colonel.


Fred. Peace, she is the Colonel's Mistress, Sir.


Will. Let her be the Devil, if she be thy Mistress, I Will serve her -- name the
way.


Belv. Read here this Postscript.

[Gives him a Letter.
Will. [Reads.] -- Kind Heart, if we Three cannot weave a string to let her
down a Garden-Wall, 'twere pity but the Hangman wove one for us all.


At Ten at night -- at the Garden-Gate -- of which, if I cannot get the Key, I
will contrive a way over the Wall -- come attended with a Friend or Two. Fred.
Let her alone for that, your Woman's wit! your fair kind Woman! will out-trick a
Broker or a Jew: and contrive like a Jesuit in Chains -- but see, Ned Blunt is
stolen out after the Lure of a Damsel.


[ Ex. Blunt and Lucetta. Belv. So, he will scarce find his way home again,
unless we get him cried by the Bell-man in the Marketplace, and 'twou'd sound
prettily -- a lost English Boy of Thirty.


Fred. I hope it is some Common crafty Sinner, one that will fit him; it may be
she will fell him for Perue, the Rogue's sturdy, and would work well in a Mine;
at least I hope she will dress him for our Mirth, cheat him of all, then have him
well-favourd'ly banged, and turned out Naked at Midnight.


Will. Prithee what humor is he of, that you wish him so well?


Belv. Why of an English Elder Brother's humor, Educated in a Nursery, with a
Maid to tend him till Fifteen, and lies with his Grandmother till he is of Age:
one that knows no pleasure beyond riding to the next Fair, or going up to
London with his right Worshipful Father in Parliament-time; wearing gay Cloths,
or making honorable Love to his Lady Mothers Landry-Maid: gets drunk at a
Hunting-Match, and ten to one then gives some proofs of his Prowess. -- A Pox
upon him, he is our Banker, and has all our Cash about him, and if he fail, we
are all Broke.


Fred. Oh let him alone for that matter, he is of a damned stingey quality, that
will secure our stock; I know not in what danger it were indeed if the Jilt
should pretend she is in Love with him, for it is a kind believing Coxcomb;
otherwise if he part with more than a piece of Eight -- gueld him: for which
offer he may chance to be beaten, if she be a Whore of the First Rank.


Belv. Nay the Rogue will not be easily beaten, he is stout enough; perhaps if
they talk beyond his capacity, he may chance to exercise his Courage upon some
of them, else I Am sure they will find it as difficult to beat as to please him.


Will. It Is a luckey Devil to light upon so kind a Wench!


Fred. Thou had a great deal of talk with thy little Gypsy, coud'st thou do
no good upon her? for mine was hard-hearted:


Will. Hang her, she was some damned honest Person of Quality I Am sure, she was
so very free and witty. If her face be but answerable to her Wit, and humor,
I would be bound to Constancy this Month to gain her -- in the mean time, have
you made no kind acquaintance since you came to Town? -- you do not use to be
honest so long, Gentlemen.


Fred. Faith Love has kept us honest, we have been all fired with a Beauty
newly come to Town, the Famous Paduana Angellica Bianca.


Will. What the Mistress of the dead Spanish General?


Belv. Yes, she is now the only adored Beauty of all the Youth in Naples, who
put on all their Charms to appear lovely in her sight, their Coaches, Liveries,
and themselves, all gay, as on a Monarch's Birthday, to attract the Eyes of
this fair Charmer, while she has the pleasure to behold all languish for her
that see her.


Fred. It Is pretty to see with how much Love the Men regard her, and how much
Envy the Women.


Will. What Gallant has she?


Belv. None, she is exposed to Sail, and Four days in the Week she is yours --
for so much a Month.


Will. The very thought of it quenches all manner of Fire in me -- yet prithee
let us see her.


Belv. Let Us first to Dinner, and after that we will pass the day as you please
-- but at Night ye must all be at my Devotion.


Will. I will not fail you.


The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
Scene I. The Long Street.
Enter Belvile and Frederick in Masquing Habits, and Willmore in his own
Clothes, with a Vizard in his Hand. Will. BUt why thus disguised and muzzel'd?


Belv. Because whatever Extravagances we commit in these Faces, our own may not
be obliged to answer 'em.


Will. I should have changed my Eternal Buffe too; but no matter, my little
Gypsy would not have found me out then; for if she should change hers, it is
impossible I should know her, unless I should hear her prattle. -- A Pox on it,
I cannot get her out of my Head: Pray Heaven, if ever I do see her again, she
prove damnably ugly, that I may fortify my self against her Tongue.


Belv. Have a care of Love, for of my conscience she was not of a quality to
give thee any hopes.


Will. Pox on 'em, why do they draw a Man in then? She has played with my Heart
so, that 'twill never lie still, till I have met with some kind Wench, that
will play the Game out with me -- Oh for my Arms full of soft, white, kind --
Woman! such as I fancy Angelica.


Belv. This is her House, if you were but in stock to get admittance; they have
not dined yet; I perceive the Picture is not out.


Enter Blunt. Will. I long to see the Shadow of the fair Substance; a Man may
gaze on that for nothing.


Blunt. Coll. Thy Hand -- and thine


Fred. I have been an Ass, a deluded Fool, a very Coxcomb from my Birth till
this hour, and heartily repent my little Faith.


Belv. What the Devil's the matter with thee Ned?
-- Oh such a Mrs.

Fred. such a Girl!

Will. Ha! where.


Fred. Ay where!


So fond, so amorous, so toying and so fine! and all for sheer Love ye Rogue!
Oh how she looked and kissed! and soothed my Heart from my Bosom -- I cannot think
I was awake, and yet methinks I see and feel her charms still --

Fred. -- Try if she have not left the taste of her Balmey Kisses upon my Lips
--


[Kisses him. Belv Ha! Ha! Ha!


Will. Death Man where is she?

-- What a Dog was I to stay in dull England so long, -- How have I laughed at
the Coll. When he sighed for Love! but now the little Archer has revenged him!
and by this one Dart, I can guess at all his joys, which then I took for
Fancies, mere Dreams and Fables. -- Well, I Am resolved to sell all in Essex,
and plant here for ever.


Belv. What a Blessing it is, thou have a Mistress thou dare boast of; for I
know thy Humor is, rather to have a proclaimed Clap, than a secret Amor.


Will. Do know her Name?


Bluns. Her Name? No, 'sheartlikins what care I for Names. -- She Is fair!
young! brisk and kind! even to ravishment! and what a Pox care I for knowing
her by any other Title.


Will. Did give her any thing?


Blunt. Give her! -- Ha, ha, ha! when she is a Person of Quality; -- that is a
good one, give her! 'sheartlikins do think such Creatures are to be bought?
Or are we provided for such a Purchase? give her quoth ye? Why she presented me
with this Bracelet, for the Toy of a Diamond I used to wear: No, Gentlemen, Ned
Blunt is not every Body -- She expects me again to Night.


Will. Egad that is well; we'll all go.


Blunt. Not a Soul: No, Gentlemen, you are Wits; I am a dull Country Rogue, I.


Fred. Well, Sir, for all your Person of Quality, I shall be very glad to
understand your Purse be secure; it is our whole Estate at present, which we are
loath to hazard in one Bottom; come, Sir, unlade.


Blunt. Take the necessary Trifle useless now to me, that am beloved by such a
Gentlewoman -- 'sheartlikins Money! Here take mine too.


Fred. No, keep that to be cozened, that we may laugh.


Will. Cozened! -- Death! would I could meet with one, that would cousen me of
all the Love I could spare to Night.


Fred. Pox, it is some common Whore upon my life.


Blunt. A Whore! -- yes with such Cloths! such Jewels! such a House! such
Furniture, and so Attended! a Whore!


Belv. Why yes Sir, they are Whores, though they will neither entertain you with
Drinking, Swearing, or Bawdry; are Whores in all those gay Cloths, and right
Jewels, are Whores with those great Houses richly furnished with Velvet Beds,
Store of Plate, handsome Attendance, and fine Coaches, are Whores and Errant
ones.


Will. Pox on it, where do these fine Whores live?


Belv. Where no Rogues in Office Ecliped Constables, dare give 'em Laws, nor
the Wine Inspired Bullies of the Town, break their Windows; yet they are Whores
tho this Essex Calf believe 'em Persons of Quality.


Blunt. 'Sheartlikins, you are all Fools, there are things about this Essex Calf,
that shall take with the Ladies, beyond all your Wit and Parts -- this Shape
and Size Gentlemen are not to be despised -- my Waste too tolerably long, with
other inviting signs, that shall be nameless.


Will. Egad I believe he may have met with some Person of Quality that may be
kind to him.


Belv. Do thou perceive any such tempting things about him, that should make
a fine Woman, and of Quality, pick him out from all Mankind, to throw away her
Youth and Beauty upon, nay and her dear heart too! -- no, no, Angellica has
raised the Price too high.


Will. May she languish for Mankind till she dye, and be damned for that one
sin alone.


Enter Two Bravo's, and hang up a great Picture of Angellica's, against the
Balcone, and Two little ones at each side of the Door. Belv. See there the fair
Sign to the Inn where a Man may Lodge that is Fool enough to give her price.


[ Will. gazes on the Picture. Blunt. 'Sheartlikins, Gentlemen, what is this!


Belv. A Famous Courtizan, that is to be sold.


Blunt. How? to be sold! nay then I have nothing to say to her -- sold! what
Impudence is practiced in this Country? -- with what Order and decency
Whoring's Established here by Virtue of the Inquisition -- come let us begone,
I Am sure wee're no Chapmen for this Commodity.


Fred. Thou art none I Am sure, unless thou coud'st have her in thy Bed at a
price of a Coach in the Street.


Will. How wondrous fair she is -- a Thousand Crowns a Month -- by Heaven as
many Kingdoms were too little, a plague of this Poverty -- of which I never
complain, but when it hinders my approach to Beauty: which Virtue never could
purchase.


[Turns from the Picture. Blunt. What Is this? -- [Reads.] A Thousand Crowns a
Month!

-- 'Sheartlikins here is a Sum! sure it is a mistake.

-- Hark you Friend, does she take or give so much by the Month?


Fred. A Thousand Crowns! why it is a Portion for the Infanta.


Blunt. Hark ye Friends, will not she trust?


Brav. This is a Trade, Sir, that cannot live by Credit.


Enter Don Pedro in Masquerade, followed by Stephano. Belv. See, here is more
Company, let us walk off a while.


[ Ex. English. [Pedro Reads. Enter Angellica and Moretta in the Balcone, and
draw a Silk Curtain. Ped. Fetch me a thousand Crowns, I never wished to buy this
Beauty at an easier rate.


[passes off. Ang. Prithee what said those Fellows to thee?


Brav. Madam, the first were admirers of Beauty only, but no purchasers, they
were merry with your Price and Picture, laughed at the Sum, and so past off.


Ang. No Matter, I Am not displeased with their rallying; their wonder feeds my
vanity, and he that wishes but to buy, gives me more Pride, than he that gives
my Price, can make my pleasure.


Brav. Madam, the last I knew through all his disguises to be Don Pedro, Nephew
to the General, and who was with him in Pampalona.


Ang. Don Pedro! my old Gallant's Nephew, when his Uncle died he left him a
vast Sum of Money; it is he who was so in love with me at Padua, and who used
to make the General so Jealous.


Morett. Is this he that used to prance before our Window, and take such care
to show himself an Amorous Ass? If I am not mistaken he is the likeliest Man to
give your price.


Ang. The Man is brave and generous, but of an humor so uneasy and
inconstant, that the victory over his heart is as soon lost as won, a Slave
that can add little to the Triumph of the Conqueror, but Inconstancy's the sin
of all Mankind, therefore I Am resolved that nothing but Gold, shall charm my
heart.


Moret. I Am glad on it; it is only Interest that Women of our profession ought to
consider: though I wonder what has kept you from that general Disease of our Sex
so long, I mean that of being in Love.


Ang. A kind, but sullen Star under which I had the happiness to be born; yet I
have had no time for Love; the bravest and noblest of Mankind have purchased my
favors at so dear a rate, as if no Coin but Gold were current with our Trade
-- but here is Don Pedro again, fetch me my Lute -- for it is for him or Don
Antonio the Viceroys Son, that I have spread my Nets.


Enter at one Door Don Pedro, Stephano; Don Antonio and Diego at the other Door
with People following him in Masquerade, antickly attired, some with Music,
they both go up to the Picture. Ant. A Thousand Crowns! had not the Painter
flattered her, I should not think it dear.


Pedro. Flattered her! by Heaven he cannot, I have seen the Original, nor is
there one Charm here more than Adorns her Face and Eyes; all this soft and
sweet, with a certain languishing Air, that no Artist can represent.


Ant. What I heard of her Beauty before had fired my Soul, but this
confirmation of it has blown it to a flame.


Pedro. Ha!


Page. Sir, I have known you throw away a Thousand Crowns on a worse face, and
tho you are near your Marriage, you may venture a little Love here* Florinda will
not miss it.


Pedro. Ha! Florinda! -- sure it is Antonio.

[aside.
Ant. Florinda! name not those distant joys, there is not one thought of her
will check my Passion here.


Pedro. Florinda scorned! and all my [A noise of a Lute above. hopes defeated,
of the Possession of Angelica. [ Ant. gazes up. Her Injuries! by Heaven he
shall not boast of.


[Song to a Lute above. SONG.
WHen Damon first began to Love
He languisht in a soft desire,
And knew not how the Gods to move,
To lessen or increase his Fire.
For Caelia in her charming Eyes
Wore all Love's sweets, and all his cruelties.
II.
But as beneath a Shade he lay,
Weaving of Flowers for Caelia's hair,
She chanced to lead her Flock that way,
And saw the Amorous Shepherd there.
She gazed around upon the place,
And saw the Grove (resembling Night)
To all the joys of Love invite,
Whilst guilty smiles and blushes dressed her Face.
At this the bashful Youth all Transport grew,
And with kind force he taught the Virgin how
To yield what all his sighs could never do.
Ant. By Heaven she is charming fair!


Angellica throws open the Curtains, and bows to Antonio, who pulls off his
Vizard and bows and blows up kisses. Pedro unseen looks in's face. Pedro. It Is
he; the false Antonio!


Ant. Friend, where must I pay my Offering of Love?
[ To the Bravo. My Thousand Crowns I mean.

Pedro. That Offering I have designed to make.
And yours will come too late.

Ant. Prithee begone, I shall grow angry else.
And then thou art not safe.

Pedro. My Anger may be fatal, Sir, as yours;
And he that enters here may prove this truth.

Ant. I know not who thou art, but I am sure you are worth my killing, for
aiming at Angelica.


[They draw and fight. Enter Willmore and Blunt, who draw and part 'em. Blunt.
'Sheartlikins, here is fine doings.


Will. Tilting for the Wench I Am sure -- nay gad, if that would win her, I have
as good a Sword as the best of ye. -- Put up, -- put up, and take another time
and place, for this is designed for Lovers only.


[They all put up. Pedro. We are prevented; dare you meet me to Morrow on the
Molo?
For I Have a Title to a better quarrel,
That of Florinda in whose credulous heart
Thou'st, made an Interest, and destroyed my hopes.

Ant. Dare!
I Will meet thee there as early as the day.

Pedro. We will come thus disguised, that whosoever chance to get the better,
he may escape unkown.


Ant. It shall be so. [ Ex. Pedro and Stephano. Who should this Rival be?
unless the English Colonel, of whom I Have often heard Don Pedro speak; it must
be he, and time he were removed, who lays a claim to all my happiness.


Willmore having gazed all this while on the Picture, pulls down a little one.
Will. This Posture's loose and negligent,
The sight on it would beget a warm desire,
In Souls whom Impotence and Age had chilled.
-- This must along with me.

Brav. What means this rudeness, Sir? -- restore the Picture.


Ant. Ha! Rudeness committed to the fair Angellica!
-- Restore the Picture, Sir --

Will. Indeed I will not, Sir.


Ant. By Heaven but you shall.


Will. Nay, do not show your Sword, if you do, by this dear Beauty -- I will
show mine too.


Ant. What right can you pretend to it?


Will. That of Possession which I will maintain -- you perhaps have a 1000
Crowns to give for the Original.


Ant. No matter, Sir, you shall restore the Picture.


Ang. Oh Moretta! what is the matter?


[Ang. and Morett. above. Ant. Or leave your life behind,


Will. Death! you lie -- I will do neither.


Ang. Hold, I command you, if for me you Fight.


They Fight, the Spaniards join with Ant. Blunt laying on like mad. They leave
off and bow. Will. How Heavenly fair she is! -- ah Plague of her price.


Ang. You Sir in Buffe, you that appear a Soldier, that first began this
Insolence --


Will. It Is true, I did so, if you call it Insolence for a Man to preserve
himself; I saw your Charming Picture and was wounded; quite through my Soul
each pointed Beauty ran; and wanting a Thousand Crowns to procure my remedy --
I laid this little Picture to my Bosom -- which if you cannot allow me, I Will
resign.


Ang. No you may keep the Trifle.


Ant. You shall first ask me leave, and this.


[Fight again as before. Enter Belv. and Fred. who join with the English. Ang.
Hold! will you ruin me! -- Beskey -- Sebestian -- part'em. --


[The Spaniards are beaten off. Morett. Oh Madam, we are undone, a pox upon that
rude Fellow, low, he is set on to ruin us: we shall never see good days, till
all these fighting poor Rogues are sent to the Galleys.


Enter Belvile, Blunt Fred. and Wilmour with his shirt bloody. Blunt.
'Sheartlikins, beat me at this sport, and I Will never wear Sword more.


Belv. The Devil's in thee for a mad Fellow, thou art always one, at an
unluckey Adventure -- come let us begone whilst wee're safe, and remember these
are Spaniards, a sort of People that know how to revenge an Affront.


[To will. Fred. You bleed! I hope you are not wounded.


Will. Not much: -- a plague on your Dons, if they fight no better they will never
recover Flanders. -- what the Devil was it to them that I took down the Picture?


Blunt. Took it! 'Sheartlikins we'll have the great one too; it is ours by
Conquest. -- prithee help me up and I Will pull it down --


Ang. Stay Sir, and e're you Affront me farther, let me know how you durst
commit this outrage -- to you I speak Sir, for you appear a Gentleman.


Will. To me, Madam -- Gentlemen your Servant.


Belv. stays him. Belv. Is the Devil in thee? do know the danger of entering
the house of an incensed Courtizan?


Will. I thank you for your care -- but there are other matters in hand, there
are, tho we have no great Temptation -- Death! let me go.


Fred. Yes to your Lodging if you will, but not in here.

-- Damn these Gay Harlots -- by this hand I Will have as sound and handsome a
Whore, for a Patacoone, -- death Man, she will Murder thee.


Will. Oh! fear me not, shall I not venture where a Beauty calls? a lovely
Charming Beauty! for fear of danger! when by Heaven there is none so great, as
to long for her, whilst I want Moto purchase her.


Pedro. Therefore it is loss of time unless you had the Thousand Crowns to pay.


Will. It may be she may give a Favor, at least I shall have the pleasure of
Saluting her when I enter, and when I depart.


Belv. Pox, she will as soon lie with thee, as kiss thee, and sooner stab than do
either -- you shall not go.


Ang. Fear not Sir, all I have to wound with is my Eyes.


Blunt. Let him go, 'Sheartlikins, I believe the Gentlewoman means well.


Belv. Well take thy Fortune, we'll expect you in the next Street -- farewell
Fool -- Farewell --


Will. 'Buy Colonel --


[Goes in. Fred. The Rogue's stark mad for a Wench.


[Exeunt. SCENE. A fine Chamber.
Enter Willmore, Angelica and Moretta. Ang. Insolent Sir, how durst you pull
down my Picture?


Will. Rather, how durst you set it up, to tempt poor Amorous* Mortals with so
much excellence? which I find you have but too well consulted by the unmerciful
price you set upon it. -- Is all this Heaven of Beauty shown to move despair in
those that cannot buy? and can you think the effects of that despair, should be
less extravagant than I have shown?


Ang. I sent for you to ask my Pardon Sir, not to Aggravate your Crime -- I
thought I should have seen you at my Feet imploring it.


Will. You are deceived, I came to rail at you, and rail such truths too, as
shall let you see, the vanity of that Pride, which taught you how, to set such
Price on Sin. For such it is, whilst that which is Loves due. is meanly
bartered for.


Ang. Ha! ha! ha! alas good Captain, what pity it is your edifying Doctrine
will do no good upon me -- Moretta! fetch the Gentleman a Glass, and let him
surveigh himself. To see what Charms he has -- and guess my business.


[Aside, in a soft tone. Morett. He knows himself of Old, I believe those
Breeches and he have been acquainted ever since he was beaten at Worcester.


Ang. Nay do not abuse the poor Creature --


Morett. Good Weather beaten Corporal, will you march off? we have no need of
your Doctrine, though you have of our Charity, but at present we have no scraps,
we can afford no kindness for God's sake; in fine Sirrah, the price is too high
'ith Mouth for you, therefore Troop I say.


Will. Here good Fore-Woman of the Shop serve me, and I Will be gone.


Morett. Keep it to pay your Landress, your Linen stinks of the Gun Room; for
here is no selling by Retail.


Will. Thou have sold plenty of thy Stale. Ware at a Cheap rate.


Morett. Ay the more Silly kind Heart I, but this is an Age wherein Beauty is
at higher rates -- In fine you know the price of this.


Will. Igrant you it is here -- set down a Thousand Crowns a Month -- pray how
much may come to my Share for a Pistol. -- Bawd take your black Lead and Sum it
up, that I may have a Pistols worth of this vain gay things, and I Will trouble
you no more.


Morett. Pox on him he will fret me to death: -- abominable Fellow, I tell thee,
we only sell by the whole piece.


Will. It Is very hard, the whole Cargo or nothing -- Faith Madam, my Stock will
not reach it, I cannot be your Chapman -- Yet I have Country Men in Town,
Merchants of Love like me; I Will see if they will put in for a share, we cannot
lose much by it, and what we have no use for, we'll sell upon the Frydays Mart
at -- Who gives more? I am studying Madam how to purchase you, though at present
I am unprovided of Money.


Ang. Sure this from any other Man would anger me -- nor shall he know the
Conquest he has made -- poor angry Man, how I despise this railing.


Will. Yes, I am poor -- but I Am a Gentleman,
And one that Scorns this baseness which you practice;
Poor as I am, I would not sell my self,
No not to gain your Charming high prized Person.
Though I admire you strangely for your Beauty,
Yet I contemn your mind.
-- And yet I would at any rate enjoy you,
At your own rate -- but cannot -- see here
The only Sum I can command on Earth;
I know not where to eat when this is gone.
Yet such a Slave I am to Love and Beauty
This last reserve I Will sacrifice to enjoy you.
-- Nay do not frown, I know you're to be bought,
And would be bought by me, by me,
For a mean triffling sum if I could pay it down
Which happy knowledge I will still repeat,
And lay it to my Heart, it has a Virtue in it,
And soon will cure those Wounds your Eyes have made.
-- And yet -- there is something so Divinely powerful there --
Nay I will gaze -- to let you see my strength.
[Holds her, looks on her, and pawses and sighs. -- By Heaven bright Creature
-- I would not for the World
Thy Fame were half so fair, as is thy Face.

Turns her away from him. Ang. His words go through me to the very Soul.
[Aside. -- If you have nothing else to say to me --

Will. Yes, you shall hear how Infamous you are --
For which I do not hate thee --
But that secures my heart, and all the Flames it feels
Are but so many Lusts --
I know it by their sudden bold Intrusion.
The Fire's impatient and betrays, it is false --
For had it been the purer flame of Love,
I should have pined and languisht at your feet,
E're found the impudence to have discovered it.
I now dare stand your scorn, and your denial.

Monet. Sure she is bewitch, that she can stand thus tamely and hear his saucy
railing -- Sirrah, will you be gone?


Ang. How dare you take this Liberty? -- withdraw. [ To Mor. -- Pray tell me,
Sir, are not you guilty of the same Mercenary Crime,

When a Lady is proposed to you for a Wife, you never ask, how fair -- discreet
-- or virtuous she is; but what is her Fortune -- which if but small, you cry --
she will not do my business -- and basely leave her, thou she languish for you
-- say, is not this as poor?


Will. It is Barbarous Custom, which I will scorn to defend in our Sex, and do
despise in yours.


Ang. You Are a brave Fellow! put up thy Gold, and know,
That were thy Fortune large as is thy Soul,
Thou shoud'st not buy my Love,
Coudst thou forget those mean effects of vanity
Which set me out to sale, and, as a Lover, prize my yielding joys.
Can thou believe they will be entirely thine,
Without considering they were Mercenary?

Will. I cannot tell, I must bethink me first -- ha -- death I Am going to
believe her.

[Aside.
Ang. Prithee confirm that faith -- or if thou can not -- flatter me a
little, 'twill please me from thy mouth.


Will. Curse on thy charming Tongue! do thou return
My feigned contempt with so much subtilty?
[Aside. Thou'st found the easiest way into my heart,
Tho I yet know, that all thou say is false.

[Turning from her in Rage. Ang. By all that is good it is real,
I never loved before, tho often a Mistress.
-- Shall my first Vows be slighted?

Will. What can she mean?

[Aside.
Ang. I find you cannot credit me. --

[In an angry tone. Will. I know you take me for an errant Ass,
An Ass that may be soothed into belief,
And then be used at pleasure;
-- But, Madam, I have been so often cheated
By perjured soft deluding Hypocrites,
That I Have no faith left for the couzening Sex;
Especially for Women of your Trade.

Ang. The low esteem you have of me, perhaps
May bring my heart again:
For I have pride, that yet surmounts my Love.

[She turns: with pride he holds her. Will. Throw off this Pride, this Enemy to
Bliss,
And show the Power of Love: it is with those Arms
I can be only vanquished, made a Slave.

Ang. Is all my mighty expectation vanished?
-- No, I will not hear thee talk -- thou have a Charm
In every word that draws my heart away.
And all the Thousand Trophies I designed
Thou have undone -- Why art thou soft?
Thy looks are bravely rough, and meant for War.
Coud'st thou not storm on still?
I then perhaps had been as free as thou.

Will. Death, how she throws her Fire about my Soul!
[Aside. -- Take heed, fair Creature, how you raise my hopes,
Which once assumed pretends to all dominion.
There Is not a joy thou have in store,
I shall not then Command.
-- For which I Will pay thee back my Soul! my Life!
-- Come, let us begin the account this happy minute!

Ang. And will you pay me then the price I ask?

Will. Oh why do thou draw me from an awful Worship,
By showing thou art no Divinity.
Conceal the Fiend, and show me all the Angel!
Keep me but ignorant, and I Will be devout
And pay my Vows for ever at this shrine.

[Kneels and kisses her hand. Ang. The pay, I mean, is but thy Love for mine.
-- Can you give that?

Will. Entirely -- come, let us withdraw! where I Will renew my Vows -- and breath
'em with such Ardour thou shall not doubt my zeal.


Ang. Thou have a Power too strong to be resisted.


[ Ex. Will. and Angellica. Moret. Now my Curse go with you -- is all our
Project fallen to this? to love the only Enemy to our Trade? nay, to love such
a Shameroone, a very Beggar, nay a Pyrate Beggar, whose business is to rifle,
and be gone, a no Purchase, no Pay Taterdemalion, and English Piccaroon.

A Rogue that fights for daily drink, and takes a Pride in being Loyally Lousie
-- Oh I could curse now, if I durst. -- This is the Fate of most Whores.

Trophies, which from believing Fops we win,
Are Spoils to those who cousen us again.

The End of the Second ACT.
ACT III.
Scene I. A Street.
Enter Florinda, Valeria, Hellena, in Antic different Dresses, from what they
were in before. Callis attending. Flor. I Wonder what should make my Brother in
so ill a humor? I hope he has not found out our Ramble this Morning.


Hell. No, if he had, we should have heard on it at both Ears, and have been
Mewed up this Afternoon; which I would not for the World should have happened --
hey ho, I Am as sad as a Lover's Lute. --


Vall* Well, methinks we have learnt this Trade of Gypsies as readily, as if we
had been bred upon the Road to Loretta: and yet I did so fumble, when I told
the stranger his Fortune, that I was afraid I should have told my own and yours
by mistake -- but, methinks Hellena has been very serious ever since.


Flor. I would give my Garters she were in Love, to be revenged upon her, for
abusing me -- how is it, Hellena?


Hell. Ah -- would I had never seen my mad Monsieur -- and yet for all your
laughing, I am not in Love -- and yet this small acquaintance of my Conscience
will never out of my head.


Val. Ha, ha, ha -- I laugh to think how thou art fitted with a Lover, a fellow
that I warrant loves every new Face he sees.


Hell. Hum -- he has not kept his word with me here -- and may be taken up --
that thought is not very pleasant to me -- what the Deuce should this be now,
that I feel?


Val. What is it like?


Hell. Nay, the Lord knows -- but if I should be hanged, I cannot choose, but
be angry and afraid, when I think, that mad Fellow should be in Love with any
Body but me -- what to think of my self, I know not -- would I could meet with
some true damned Gypsy, that I might know my Fortune.


Val. Know it! why there is nothing so easy, thou will love this wandering
Inconstant, till thou findst thy self hanged about his Neck, and then be as mad
to get free again.


Flor. Yes, Valeria, we shall see her bestride his Baggage Horse, and follow
him to the Campaigne.


Hell. So, so, now you are provided for, there is no care taken of poor me --
but since you have set my heart a wishing -- I am resolved to know for what, I
will not dye of the Pip, so I will not.


Flor. Art thou mad to talk so? who will like thee well enough to have thee,
that, hears what a mad Wench thou art?


Hell. Like me! I don't intend every he that likes me shall have me, but he
that I like; I should have staid in the Nunnery still, if I had liked my Lady
Abbess as well as she liked me -- no, I came thence not (as my wise Brother
imagines) to take an Eternal Farewell of the World, but to Love, and to be
beloved, and I will be beloved, or I Will get one of your Men, so I will.


Val. Am I put into the number of Lovers?


Hell. You? why Couz, I know you are too good natured to leave us in any
design: thou wou't venture a Cast, tho thou come off a loser, especially with
such a Gamester. -- I observe your Man, and your willing Ear incline that way;
and if you are not a Lover, it is an Art soon learnt -- that I find.


[Sighs. Flor. I wonder how you learnt to Love so easily, I had a 1000 Charms
to meet my Eyes and Ears, e're I could yield, and 'twas the knowedge of
Belvile's merit, not the surprising Person took my Soul -- thou art too rash to
give a heart at first sight.


Hell. Hang your considering Lover; I never thought beyond the fancy that 'twas
a very pretty, idle, silly, kind of pleasure to pass ones time with, to write
little soft. Nonsensical Billiets, and with great difficulty and danger receive
Answers; in which I shall have my Beauty praised, my Wit admired, (tho little
or none) and have the vanity and power to know I am desirable; then I have the
more inclination that way, because I am to be a Nun, and so shall not be
suspected to have any such Earthly thoughts about me -- but when I walk thus --
and sigh thus -- they will think my mind's upon my Monastery, and cry how happy
it is she is so resolved.

-- But not word of Man.


Flor. What a mad Creature's this?


Hell. I Will warrant, if my Brother hears either of you sigh, he cries (gravely)
-- I fear you have the indiscretion to be in Love, but take heed of the Honor
of our House, and your own unspotted Fame, and so he Conjures on till he has
laid the soft winged God in your Hearts, or broke the Birds Nest -- but see
here comes your Lover, but where is my Inconstant? let us step aside, and we may
learn something.


[Go aside. Enter Belvile Fred. and Blunt. Belv. What means this! the Picture's
taken in.


Blunt. It may be the Wench is good Natured, and will be kind Gratis. Your
Friend's a proper handsome Fellow.


Belv. I rather think she has cut his Throat and is fled: I am mad he should
throw himself into dangers -- pox on it I shall want him too at Night -- let us
knock and ask for him.


Hell. My Heart goes a pit, a pat, for fear it is my Man they talk off.


[Knock, Moretta above. Morett. What would you have!


Bell. Tell the stranger that entered here about two hours ago, that his
Friends stay here for him.


Morett. A Curse upon him for Moretta, would he were at the Devil -- but he is
coming to you.


Hell. I, I, it is he! Oh how this vexes me.


Bell. And how and how dear Lad, has Fortune smiled! are we to break her
Windows! or raise up Alters to her. hah!


Will. Does not my Fortune sit Triumphant on my Brow! do not see the little
wanton God there all gay and smiling. Have I not an Air about my Face and Eyes,
that distinguish me from the Crow'd of common Lovers! By Heaven Cupids Quiver
has not half so many Darts as her Eyes! -- Oh such a Bona Roba! to sleep in her
Arms is lying in Fresco, all perfumed Air about me.


Hell. Here Is fine encouragement for me to fool on.

[Aside.
Will. Hark'ey where did thou purchase that rich Canary we drank to day! tell
me that I may Adore the Spigot, and Sacrifice to the Butt! the Juice was
Divine! into which I must dip my Rosary, and then bless all things that I would
have bold or Fortunate.


Belv. Well Sir, let us go take a Bottle, and hear the story of your Success.


Fred. Would not Frenoh Wine do better.


Will. Damn the hungry Balderdash, cheerful Sack has a generous Virtue in it
inspiring a successful confidence, gives Eloquence to the Tongne! and vigor to
the Soul! and has in a few hours completed all my hopes and wishes! There Is
nothing left to raise a new desire in me -- come let us be gay and wanton -- and
Gentlemen study, study what you want, for here are Friends, -- that will supply
Gentlemen, -- hark! what a Charming sound they make -- it is he and the Gold
whilst here, and shall beget new pleasures every Moment.


Blunt. But heark'ey Sir, you are not Married are you?


Will. All the honey of Matrimony, but none of the sting Friend.


Blunt. 'Sheartlikins you are a Fortunate Rogue!


Will. I am so Sir, let these -- inform you! -- ha how sweetly they Chime! --
pox of Poverty it makes a Man a slave, makes Wit and Honor sneak, my Soul grew
lean and rusty for want of credit.


Blunt. 'Sheartlikins this I like well, it looks like my lucky Bargain! Oh how
I long for the approach of my Squire, that is to conduct me to her House again
when -- here is two provided for.


Fred. By this light y' are happy Men.


Blunt. Fortune is pleased to smile on us Gentlemen -- to smile on us.


Enter Sancho and pulls down Blunt by the sleeve. Sancho. Sir my Lady expects
[They go aside. you -- she has removed all that might oppose your will and
pleasure -- and is impatient till you come.


Blunt. Sir I Will attend you -- oh the happiest Rogue! I Will take no leave, least
they either dog me, or stay me.


[Ex. with Sancho. Belv. But then the little Gypsy is forgot?


Will. A mischief on thee for putting her into my thoughts I had quite forgot
her else, and this Nights debauch had drunk her quite down.


Hell. Had it so good Captain!


[Claps him on the Back. Will. Hah! I hope she did not hear me.

[Aside.
Hell. What afraid of such a Champion?


Will. Oh! you're a fine Lady of your word, are you not? to make a Man languish
a whole day -- *


Hell. In tedious search of me.


Will. Egad Child you are in the right, had thou seen what a Melancholy Dog
I have been ever since I was a Lover, how I have walked the streets like a
Capuchin with my Hands in my Sleeves -- Faith sweet Heart thou would pity
me.


Hell. Now if I should be hanged I cannot be angry with him he dissembles so
Heartily -- alas good Captain what pains you have taken -- now were I
ungrateful not to reward so true a Servant.


Will. Poor Soul! that is kindly said, I see thou barest a Conscience -- come
then for a beginning show me thy dear Face.


Hell. I Am afraid, my small acquaintance, you have been staying that swinging
Stomach you boasted of this Morning; I then remember my little Collation would
have gone down with you, without the Sauce of a handsome Face -- is your
Stomach so queasiy now?


Will. Faith long fasting Child, spoils a Man's Appetite -- yet if you durst
treat, I could so lay about me still --


Hell. And would you fall to, before a Priest says Grace?


Will. Oh (...), what an Old out of fashioned thing have thou named? thou
cou'st not dash me more out of Countenance shoud'st thou show me an ugly Face.


[Whilst he is seemingly Courting Hellena. Enter Angellica Moretta Biskey and
Sebastian all in Masquerade, Ang. sees Will. and stares. Ang. Heavens 'ts he!
and passionately fond to see another Woman.


Morett. What could you less expect from such a swaggerer?


Ang. Expect! as much as I paid him, a Heart entire
Which I had Pride enough to think when 'ere I gave,
It would have raised the Man above the Vulgar
Made him all Soul! and that all soft and constant.

Hell. You see Captain, how willing I am to be Friends with you, till time and
ill luck make us Lovers, and ask you the Question first, rather then put your
Modesty to the blush, by asking me (for alas!) I know you Captains are such
strict Men and such severe observers of your Vows to Chastity, that 'twill be
hard to prevail with your tender Conscience to Marry a young willing Maid.


Will. Do not abuse me, for fear I should take thee at thy word, and Marry thee
indeed, which I Am sure will be revenge sufficient.


Hell. OF my Conscience, that will be our Destiny, because we are both of one
humor; I am as inconstant as you, for I have considered, Captain, that a
handsome Woman has a great deal to do whilst her Face is good, for then is our
Harvest-time to gather Friends; and should I in these days of my Youth, catch
a fit of foolish Constancy, I were undone; it is loitering by daylight in our
great Journey: therefore I declare, I Will allow but one year for Love, one year
for indifference, and one year for hate -- and then -- go hang your self -- for
I profess my self the gay, the kind, and the Inconstant -- the Devil's in it if
this will not please you.


Will. Oh most damnably -- I have a heart with a hole quite through it too, no
Prison mine to keep a Mistress in.


Ang. Perjured Man! how I believe thee now.

[aside.
Hell. Well, I see our business as well as humors are a like, yours to cousen
as many Maids as will trust you, and I as many Men as have Faith -- see if I
have not as desperate a lying look, as you can have for the heart of you.

[Pulls off her Vizard: he starts. -- How do you like it Captain?


Will. Like it! by Heaven, I never saw so much beauty! Oh the Charms of those
sprightly black Eyes! that strangely fair Face! full of smiles and dimples!
those soft round melting Cherry Lips! and small even white Teeth! not to be
expressed, but silently adored! -- oh one look more! and strike me dumb, or I
shall repeat nothing else till I Am mad.


[He seems to Court her to pull off her Vizar: she refuses. Ang. I can endure
no more -- nor is it fit to interrupt him, for if I do, my Jealousy has so
destroid my Reason, -- I shall undo him -- therefore I Will retire -- and you,
Sebastian, [To one of her Bravo's. follow that Woman, and learn who it is; while
you tell the Fugitive, I would speak to him instantly.


[To the other Bravo. [Exit. This while Flor. is talking to Belvile, who stands
sullenly. Fred. courting Valeria. Val. Prithee, dear stranger, be not so
sullen, for tho you have lost your Love, you see my Friend franckly offers you
hers to play with in the mean time.


Belv. Faith Madam, I am sorry I cannot play at her Game.


Fred. Pray leave your Intercession, and mind your own Affair, they will better
agree apart; he is a modest sigher in Company, but alone no Woman scapes him.


Flor. Sure he does but rally -- yet if it should be true -- I Will tempt him
farther -- believe me, Noble Stranger, I Am no common Mistress -- and for a
little proof on it -- wear this Jewel -- nay, take it, Sir, it is right, and
Bills of Exchange may sometimes miscarry.


Belv. Madam, why am I chose out of all Mankind to be the Object of your Bounty?


Val. There Is another civil Question asked.


Fr. Pox of's Modesty, it spoils his own Markets and hinders mine.


Flor. Sir, from my Window I have often seen you, and Women of my Quality have
so few opportunities for Love, that we ought to loose none.


Fred. Ay, this is something! here is a Woman! -- when shall I be blessed with so
much kindness from your fair Mouth? -- take the Jewel, Fool.


[aside to Belv. Belv. You tempt me strangely Madam every way --


Flor. So, if I find him false, my whole Repose is gone.

[Aside.
Belv. And but for a Vow I Have made to a very Lady, this goodness had subdued me.


Fred. Pox on it be kind, in pity to me be kind, for I am to thrive here but as
you treat her Friend.


Hell. Tell me what you did in yonder House, and I Will unmasque.


Will. Yonder House -- oh -- I went to -- a -- to -- why there is a Friend of
mine lives there.


Hell. What a She, or a He Friend?


Will. A Man upon Honor! a Man -- a She Friend -- no, no Madam you have done
my business I thank you.


Hell. And wast your Man Friend, that had more Darts in's Eyes, than Cupid
carries in's whole Budget of Arrows.


Will. So --


Hell. Ah such a Bona Roba! to be in her Arms is lying in Fresco, all perfumed
Air about me -- was this your Man Friend too?


Will. So --


Hell. That gave you the He, and the She Gold, that begets young pleasures?


Will. Well, well Madam, then you see there are Ladies in the World, that will
not be cruel -- there are Madam there are --


Hell. And there be Men too, as fine, wild Inconstant Fellows as your self,
there be Captain there be, if you go to that now -- therefore I Am resolved --


Will. Oh! --


Hell. To see your Face no more --


Will. Oh!


Hell. Till to morrow.


Will. Egad you frighted me.


Hell. Nor then neither, unless you will swear never to see that Lady more.


Will. See her! -- when never to think of Woman kind again.


Hell. Kneel, -- and swear --


[Kneels, she gives him her hand. Will. I do never to think -- to see -- to
Love -- nor Lie -- with any but thy self.


Hell. Kiss the Book.


Will. Oh most Religiously.


[Kisses her hand. Hell. Now what a wicked Creature am I, to damn a proper
Fellow.


Call. Madam, I Will stay no longer, it is e'ne dark.


[ To Flor. Flor. How ever Sir, I Will leave this with you -- that when I Am gone,
you may repent the opportunity you have lost, by your Modesty.


Gives him the Jewel which is her Picture, and Ex. he gazes after her. Will.
'Twill be an Age till to Morrow, -- and till then I will most impatiently
expect you -- Adieu my Dear pretty Angel.


[Ex. all the Women. Belv. Ha! Florinda's Picture -- 'twas she her self -- what
a dull Dog was I? I would have given the World for one minutes discourse with
her --


Fred. This comes of your modesty! -- ah pox of your vow, 'twas ten to one, but
we had lost the Jewel by it.


Belv. Willmore! the blessed'st opportunity lost! Florinda! Friends! Florinda!


Will. Ah Rogue! such black Eyes! such a Face! such a Mouth! such Teeth -- and
so much Wit! --


Belv. All, all, and a Thousand Charms besides.


Will. Why do thou know her?


Belv. Know her! Ay, Ay, and a pox take me with all my Heart for being Modest.


Will. But hearkey Friend of mine, are you my Rival? and have I been only
beating the Bush all this while?


Belv. I understand thee not -- I Am mad -- see here --


[Shews the Picture. Will. Ha! whose Picture's this! -- it is a fine Wench!


Fred. The Colonels Mrs. Sir.


Will. Oh oh here -- I thought 'thad been another prize -- come, come, a Bottle
will set thee right again.


[Gives the Picture back. Belv. I am content to try, and by that time 'twill be
late enough for our design.


Will. Agreed.

Love does all day the Souls great Empire keep,
But Wine at night Lulls the soft God asleep.

Exeunt. SCENE the II. Lucetta's House.
Enter Blunt and Lucetta with a Light. Luc. Now we are safe and free; no fears
of the coming home of my Old Jealous Husband, which made me a little thoughtful
when you came in first -- but now Love is all the business of my Soul.


Blunt. I am transported! -- pox on it, that I had but some fine things to say
to her, such as Lovers use, -- I was a Fool not to learn of Fred. a little by
heart before I came -- something I must say -- [Aside. 'Sheartlikins sweet
Soul! I am not used to Complement, but I Am an honest Gentleman, and thy humble
Servant.


Luc. I have nothing to pay for so great a Favor, but such a Love as cannot
but be great, since at first sight of that sweet Face and Shape, it made me
your absolute Captive.


Blunt. Kind heart! how prettily she talks! Egad I Will show her Husband a
Spanish trick; send him out of the World and Marry her: she is damnably in Love
with me, and will never mind Settlements, and so there is that saved.

[Aside.
Luc. Well Sir, I Will go and undress me, and be with you instantly.


Blunt. Make have then, for adshartilikins dear Soul thou can not guess at
the pain of a longing Lover; when his joys are drawn within the compass of a
few Minutes.


Luc. You speak my sense, and I Will make have to prove it.

[Ex.
Blunt. It Is a rare Girl! and this one Nights enjoyment with her, will be worth
all the days I ever past in Essex. -- would she would go with me into England;
though to say truth there is plenty of Whores already. -- But a Pox on 'em they
are such Mercenary -- Prodigal Whores, that they want such a one as this,
that is Free and Generous to give 'em good Examples -- When what a house she has,
how rich and fine!


Sancho. Sir, my Lady has sent me to conduct you to her Chamber.


[ Enter Sancho. Blunt. Sir, I shall be proud to follow -- here is one of her
Servants too! 'Sheartlikins by this garb and gravity, he might be a Justice of
Peace in Essex, and is but a Pimp here.


[Exeunt. The Scene Changes to a Chamber with an Alcove Bed in it, a Table, etc.
Lucetta in Bed. Enter Sancho and Blunt, who takes the Candle of Sancho at the
Door. Sancho. Sir, my Commission reaches no farther.


Blunt. Sir I Will excuse your Complement -- what in Bed my sweet Mistress.


Luc. You see, I still outdo you in kindness.


Blunt. And thou shall see what haste I Will make to quit scores -- oh the
luckiest Rogue!


[He undresses himself. Luc. Should you be false or cruel now! --


Blunt. False! 'Sheartlikins, what do thou take me for? A Jew? an insensible
heathen -- a Pox of thy Old Jealous Husband, an he were dead, Egad, sweet Soul,
it should be none of my fault, if I did not Marry thee.


Luc. It never should be mine.


Blunt. Good Soul! I Am the fortunatest Dog!


Luc. Are you not undest yet?


Blunt. As much as my impatience will permit.


[Goes toward the Bed in his shirt, Drawers. Luc. Hold, Sir, put out the
Light, it may betray us else.


Blunt. Any thing, I need no other Light, but that of thine Eyes! --
'Sheartlikins, there I think I had it. [Puts out the Candle, the Bed descends,
he groaps about to find it. -- When -- when -- where am I got? what not yet? --
where are you sweetest? -- ah, the Rogue's silent now -- a pretty Lovetrick
this -- how she will laugh at me anon! -- you need not, my dear Rogue! you need
not! -- I Am all on fire already -- come, come, now call me in pity. -- Sure I Am
Enchanted! I have been round the Chamber, and can find neither Woman, nor Bed
-- I locked the Door, I Am sure she cannot go that way -- or if she could, the
Bed could not -- Enough, enough, my pretty wanton, do not carry the jest too
far -- ha, Betrayed! Dogs! Rogues! Pimps! -- help! help!


[Lights on a Trap, and is let down. Enter Lucetta, Phillippo, and Sancho with
a Light. Phill. Ha, ha, ha, he is dispatch finely.


Luc. Now, Sir, had I been Coy, we had mist of this Booty.


Phill. Nay, when I saw 't was a substantial Fool, I was mollified; but when
you dote upon a Serenading Coxcomb, upon a Face, fine Clothes, and a Lute, it
makes me rage.


Luc. You know I was never guilty of that Folly, my dear Phillippo; but with
your self -- but come, let us see what we have got by this.


Phill. A rich Coat! -- Sword and Hat -- these Breeches too -- are well lined
-- see here, a Gold Watch! -- a Purse -- ha! -- Gold! -- at least Two Hundred
Pistols! -- a bunch of Diamond Rings! and one with the Family Arms! -- a Gold
Box! -- with a Medal of his King! and his Lady Mother's Picture! -- these were
Sacred Relics, believe me! -- see, the Wasteband of his Breeches have a Mine
of Gold! -- Old Queen Besse's, we have a quarrel to her ever since Eighty
Eight, and may therefore justify the Theft, the Inquisition might have
committed it.


Luc. -- See, a Bracelet of bowd Gold! these his Sisters tied about his Arm at
parting -- but well -- for all this, I fear his being a Stranger, may make a
noise and hinder our Trade with them hereafter.


Phill. That Is our security; he is not only a Stranger to us, but to the
Country too -- the Common Shore into which he is descended, thou know
conducts him into another Street, which this Light will hinder him from ever
finding again -- he knows neither your Name, nor that of the Street where you
House is, nay nor the way to his own Lodgings.


Luc. And art not thou an unmerciful Rogue! not to afford him one Night for all
this? -- I should not have been such a Jew.


Phill. Blame me not, Lucetta, to keep as much of thee as I can to my self --
come, that thought makes me wanton! -- let us to Bed! -- Sancho, lock up these.

This is the Fleece which Fools do bear,
Designed for witty Men to sheere.

[Exeunt. The Scene changes, and discovers Blunt, creeping out of a
Common-Shoar, his Face, etc. all dirty. Blunt. Oh Lord! [Climbing up. I am got
out at last, and (which is a Miracle) without a Clue -- and now to Damning and
Cursing! -- but if that would ease me, where shall I begin? with my Fortune, my
self, or the Queen that cozened me -- what a Dog was I to believe in Woman? oh
Coxcomb! -- Ignorant conceited Coxcomb! to fancy she could be enamored with my
Person! at first sight enamored! -- oh, I Am a cursed Puppy! it is plain, Fool
was writ upon my Forehead! she perceived it! -- saw the Essex-Calf there -- for
what Allurements could there be in this Countenance? which I can endure,
because I Am acquainted with it -- oh, dull silly Dog! to be thus soothed into a
Couzening! had I been drunk, I might fondly have credited the young Queen! --
but as I was in my right Wits, to be thus cheated, confirms it I am a dull
believing English Country Fop -- but my Camrades! death and the Devil! there is
the worst of all -- then a Ballad will be Sung to Morrow on the Prado, to a
Lousie Tune of the Enchanted 'Squire, and the Annihilated Damsel -- but Fred.
that Rogue! and the Colonel, will abuse me beyond all Christian patience -- had
she left me my Clothes, I have a Bill of Exchange at home, would have saved my
Credit -- but now all hope is taken from me -- well, I Will home (if I can find
the way) with this Consolation, that I am not the first kind believing Coxcomb;
but there are Gallants many such good Natures amongst ye.

And tho you have better Arts to hide your Follies,
Adsheartlikins y' are all as errant Cullies.

SCENE, the Garden in the Night.
Enter Florinda in an undress, with a Key and a little Box. Flor. Well, thus
far I Am in my way to happiness; I have got my self free from Callis; my Brother
too I find by yonder light is got into his Cabinet, and thinks not of me; I
have by good Fortune, got the Key of the Garden backdoor. -- I Will open it to
prevent Belvile's knocking -- a little noise will now Allarm my Brother. Now am
I as fearful as a young Thief. [Unlocks the door. -- hark -- what noise is
that -- oh, 'twas the Wind that played amongst the Boughs -- Belvile stays long,
methinks -- it is time -- stay -- for fear of a surprise -- I Will hide these
Jewels in yonder Jessamin.


[She goes to lay down the Box. Enter Willmore drunk. Will What the Devil is
become of these fellows, Belvile and Frederick, they promiss'd to stay at the
next Corner for me, but who the Devil knows the Corner of a Full Moon -- now --
where-abouts am I! -- hah -- what have we here a Garden! -- a very convenient
place to sleep in -- hah -- what has God sent us here! -- a Female! -- by this
Light a Woman! -- I Am a Dog if it be not a very Wench! --


Flor. He Is come! -- hah -- who is there?


Will. Sweet Soul! let me salute thy Shoe-string.


Flor. It Is not my Belvile. -- good Heavens! I know him not -- who are you, and
from whence come you?


Will. Prithee -- prithee Child -- not so many hard questions -- let it suffice
I am here Child -- come, come kiss me.


Flor. Good Gods! what luck is mine?


Will. Only good luck Child, parlous good luck -- come hither, -- it is a
delicate shining Wench -- by this hand she is perfumed, and smells like any
Nosegay -- prithee dear Soul, let us not play the Fool, and lose time --
precious time -- for as Gad shall save me I Am as honest a Fellow as breathes,
though I Am a little disguised at present -- come I say -- when thou may be free
with me, I Will be very secret. I Will not boast who 'twas obliged me, not I -- for
hang me if I know thy name.


Flor. Heavens! what a filthy Beast is this?


Will. I am so, and thou ought the sooner to lie with me for that reason --
for look you Child, there will be no sin in it, because 'twas neither designed
nor premeditated. It Is pure Accident on both sides -- that is a certain thing
now -- indeed should I make Love to you, and you vow fidelity -- and swear and
lie till you believed and yielded -- that were to make it wilful Fornication --
the crying Sin of the Nation -- thou art therefore (as thou art a good
Christian) obliged in Conscience to deny me nothing. Now -- come be kind
without any more idle prating.


Flor. Oh I am ruined -- Wicked Man unhand me.


Will. Wicked! -- Egad Child a Judge were he young and vigorous, and saw those
Eyes of thine, would know 'twas they gave the first blow -- the first
provocation -- come prithee let us lose no time, I say -- this is a fine
convenient place.


Flor. Sir, let me go, I conjure you, or I Will call out.


Will. Ay, Ay, you were best to call Witness to see how finely you treat me --
do --


Flor. I Will cry Murder! Rape! or any thing! if you do not instantly let me go.


Will. A Rape! Come, come, you lie you Baggage, you lie, what, I Will warrant you
would fain have the World believe now that you are not so forward as I. No, not
you -- why at this time of Night was your Cobweb Door set open dear Spider --
but to catch Flies? -- Hah -- come -- or I shall be damnably angry. -- When what
a Coyl is here --


Flor. Sir, can you think --


Will. That you would do it for nothing -- oh, oh I find what you would be at --
look here, here is a Pistol for you -- here is a work indeed -- here -- take it I
say --


Flor. For Heavens sake Sir, as you're a Gentleman --


Will. So -- now -- now -- she would be wheadling me for more -- what, you will
not take it then -- you are resolved you will not -- come -- come take it, or
I Will put if up again -- for look ye, I never give more -- when how now Mistress,
are you so high in the Mouth a Pistol will not down with you -- hah -- when what a
works' here -- in good time -- come, no struggling to be gone -- but an you are
good at a dumb Wrestle I Am for ye -- look ye -- I Am for ye --


[She struggles with him. Enter Belvile and Frederick. Belv. The Door is open,
a pox of this mad Fellow, I Am angry that wee've lost him, I durst have sworn he
had followed us.


Fred. But you were so hasty Colonel to be gone.


Flor. Help! help! -- Murder! -- help -- oh I am ruined.


Belv. Ha! sure that is Florindas voice.
[Comes up to them. -- A Man! Villain let go that Lady.

[A Noise. [ Will. turns and draws, Fred. interposes. Flor. Belvile! Heavens!
my Brother too is coming, and twill be impossible to escape -- Belvile I
conjure you to walk under my Chamber Window, from whence I Will give you some
Instructions what to do -- this rude Man has undone us.

[Exit.
Will. Belvile!


Enter Pedro, Stephano, and other Servants with Lights. Ped. I Am betrayed! run
Stephano and see if Florinda be safe? [ Ex. Steph. So, who e're they be, all is
not well, I Will to Florindas Chamber.


They Fight, and Ped. Party beats 'em out. Going out, meets Steph. Steph. You
need not Sir, the poor Lady's fast asleep and thinks no harm. I would not awake
her Sir, for fear of frighting her with your danger.


Red. I Am glad she is there -- Rascals how came the Garden Door open?


Steph. That Question comes too late Sir, some of my Fellow Servants
Masquerading I Will warrant.


Ped. Masquerading! a lewd Custom to debauch our youth, -- there is something
more in this then I imagine.


[Exeunt. Scene changes to the Street. Enter Belvile in Rage. Fred. holding
him, and Wilmore Melancholy. Will. When how the Devil should I know Florinda?


Belv. Ah plague of your Ignorance! if it had not been Florinda, must you be a
Beast? -- a Brute? a Senseless Swine.


Will. Well Sir, you see I am endu'd witn patience -- I can bear -- tho Egad
you are very free with me, methinks. -- I was in good hopes the Quarrel would
have been on my side, for so uncivilly interrupting me.


Belv. Peace Brute! whilst you are safe -- oh I Am distracted.


Will. Nay, nay, I Am an unlucky Dog, that is certain.


Belv. Ah Curse upon the Star that Ruled my Birth! or whatsoever other
Influence that makes me still so wretched.


Will. Thou break'st my Heart with these complaints; there is no Star in fault,
no Influence, but Sack, the cursed Sack I drunk.


Fred. When how the Devil came you so drunk?


Will. When how the Devil came you so sober?


Belv. A Curse upon his thin Skull, he was always before hand that way.


Fred. Prithee Dear Colonel forgive him, he is sorry for his Fault.


Belv. He Is always so after he has done a mischief -- a plague on all such
Brutes.


Will. By this Light I took her for an Errant Harlot.


Belv. Damn your debaucht opinion! tell me Sot had thou so much sense and
light about thee to distinguish her Woman, and coud st not see something about
her Face and Person, to strike an awful Reverence into thy Soul?


Will. Faith no, I considered her as mere a Woman as I could wish.


Belv. 'Sdeath, I have no patience -- draw, or I Will kill you.


Will. Let that alone till to Morrow, and if I set not all right again, use
your pleasure.


Belv. To Morrow! damn it
The Spightful Light will lead me to no happiness.
To Morrow is Antonio's, and perhaps
Guides him to my undoing; -- oh that I could meet
This Rival! this powerful Fortunate!

Will. What then?


Belv. Let thy own Reason, or my Rage instruct thee.


Will. I shall be finely informed then, no doubt, hear me Colonel -- hear me --
show me the Man and I Will do his Business.


Belv. I know him no more than thou, or if I did I should not need thy Aid.


Will. This you say is Angellicas House, I promised the kind Baggage to lie
with her to Night.


[Offers to go in. Enter Antonio and his Page. Ant* knock on the Hilt of's
Sword. Ant. You paid the Thousand Crowns I directed?


Page. To the Ladies Old Woman, Sir I did.


Will. Who the Devil have we here!


Belv. I Will now plant my self under Florinda's Window, and if I find no comfort
there, I Will dye.


[ Ex. Belv. and Fred. Enter Moretta. Moret. Page!


Page. Here Is my Lord.


Will. How is this! a Pickroone going to board my Fregate? here is one Chase Gun
for you.


Drawing his Sword, justles Ant. who turns and draws. They fight, Ant. falls.
Moret. Oh bless us! we are all undone!


[Runs in and shuts the Door. Page. Help! Murder!


[ Belvile returns at the noise of fighting. Belv. Ha! the mad Rogue's engaged
in some unlucky Adventure again.


Enter two or three Masqueraders. Masq. Ha! a Man killed!


Will. How! a Man killed! then I Will go home to sleep.


[Puts up and reels out* Ex. Masque another way. Belv. Who should it be! pray
Heaven the Rogue is safe for all my Quarrel to him.


[As Belvile is groping about, Enter an Officer and six Soldiers. Sold. Who Is
there?


Offic. So, here is one dispatched -- secure the Murderer.


Belv. Do not mistake my Charity for Murder! I came to his Assistance.


[Soldiers seize on Belvile. Offic. That shall be tried, Sir -- St. Iago,
Swords drawn in the Carnival time!


[Goes to Antonio. Ant. Thy hand prithee.


Offic. Ha! Don Antonio! look well to the Villain there. -- How is it, Sir?


Ant. I Am hurt.


Belv. Has my humanity made me a Criminal?


Offic. Away with him.


Belv. What a cursed chance is this?


[Ex. Soldiers with Belv. Ant. This is the Man, that has set upon me twice --
carry him to my Appartment, till you have farther Orders from me.


[To the Officer. Ex. Ant. led. The End of the Third ACT.
ACT IV.
Scene I. A fine Room.
Discovers Belvile as by dark alone. Belv. When shall I be weary of railing on
Fortune, who is resolved never to turn with smiles upon me -- Two suchd efeats
in one Night -- none but the Devil, and that mad Rogue could have contrived to
have plagued me with -- I am here a Prisoner -- but where -- Heaven knows --
and if there be Murder done, I can soon decide the Fate of a Stranger in a
Nation without mercy -- yet this is nothing to the Torture my Soul bows with,
when I think of losing my fair, my dear Florinda -- hark -- my door opens -- a
Light -- a Man -- and seems of Quality -- armed too! -- now shall I dye like a
Dog without defense.


Enter Antonio in a Nightgown, with a Light; his Arm in a Scarf, and a Sword
under his Arm: he sets the Candle on the Table. Ant. Sir, I come to know what
Injuries I have done you, that could provoke you to so mean an Action, as to
Attack me basely, without allowing time for my defense?


Belv. Sir, for a Man in my circumstances to plead Innocence, would look like
fear -- but view me well, and you will find no marks of Coward on me; nor any
thing that betrays that Brutality you accuse me with.


Ant. In vain, Sir, you impose upon my sense.
You are not only he who drew on me last Night,
But yesterday before the same house, that of Angellica.
Yet there is something in your Face and Meine
That makes me wish I were mistaken.

Belv. I own I fought to day in the defense of a Friend of mine, with whom you
(if you're the same) and your Party were first engaged.

Perhaps you think this Crime enough to kill me,
But if you do; I cannot fear you will do it basely.

Ant. No, Sir, I Will make you fit for a defense with this.


[Gives him the Sword. Belv. This Gallantry surprises me -- nor know I how to
use this Present, Sir, against a Man so brave.


Ant. You shall not need;
For know, I come to snatch you from a danger
That is decreed against you:
Perhaps your Life, or long Imprisonment;
And 'twas with so much Courage you offended,
I cannot see you punished.

Belv. How shall I pay this Generosity?

Ant. It had been safer to have killed another
Than have attempted me:
To show your danger, Sir, I Will let you know my Quality;
And it is the Viceroy's Son, whom you have wounded.

Bell. The Viceroy's Son!
Death and Confusion! was this Plague reserved
To complete all the rest -- obliged by him!
The Man of all the World I would destroy.
aside.
Ant. You seem disordered, Sir.

Belv. Yes, trust me, Sir, I am, and it is with pain
That Man receives such Bounties,
who wants the Power to pay 'em back again*

Ant. To gallant Spirits it is indeed uneasy;
-- But you may quickly over pay me, Sir.

Belv. Then I am well -- kind Heaven! but set us even,
That I may fight with him and keep my Honor safe.
[aside. -- Oh, I Am impatient, Sir, to be discounting
The mighty Debt I owe you, Command me quickly --

Ant. I have a Quarrel with a Rival, Sir,
About the Maid we love.

Belv. Death, it is Florinda he means --
That thought destroys my Reason,
And I shall kill him --
aside.
Ant. My Rival, Sir,
Is one has all the Virtues Man can boast of --

Belv. Death! who should this be?
[aside. He challenged me to meet him on the Molo,
As soon as day appeared, but last Nights quarrel,
Has made my Arm unfit to guide a Sword.

Belv. I apprehend you, Sir, you would have me kill the Man,
That lays a Claim to the Maid you speak of.
-- I Will do it -- I Will fly to do it!

Ant. Sir, do you know her?

Belv. -- No, Sir, but it is enough she is admired by you.

Ant. Sir, I shall rob you of the Glory on it,
For you must fight under my Name and Dress.

Belv. That Opinion must be strangely obliging that makes
You think I can personate the brave Antonio,
Whom I can but strive to imitate.

Ant. You say too much to my Advantage;
-- Come, Sir, the day appears that calls you forth.
-- Within, Sir, is the habit.
[ Exit Antonio.
Belv. Fantastic Fortune, thou deceitful Light,
That Cheats the wearied Traveller by Night,
Tho on a Precipice each step you tread,
I am resolved to follow where you lead.
[Exit.
SCENE, the Mole.
Enter Florinda and Callis in Masks with Stephano. Flor. I Am dying with my
fears, Belvile's not coming as I expected under my Window,

Makes me believe that all those fears are true.
aside. -- Can thou not tell with whom my Brother fights?

Steph. No, Madam, they were both in Masquerade, I was by when they challenged
one another, and they had decided the Quarrel then, but were prevented by some
Cavaliers; which made 'em put it off till now -- but I am sure it is about you
they fight.


Flor. Nay, then it is with Belvile, for what other Lover have I that dares
fight for me, except Antonio? and he is too much in favor with my Brother --
if it be he, for whom shall I direct my Prayers to Heaven?

aside.
Steph. Madam, I must leave you, for if my Master see me, I shall be hanged for
being your Conductor -- escapt narrowly for the excuse I made for you last
Night in the Garden.


Flor. And I Will reward thee for it -- prithee no more.


[ Ex. Steph. Enter Don Pedro in his Masquing Habit. Pedro. Antonio's late to
day, the place will fill, and we may be prevented.


[Walks about. Flor. Antonio sure I heard amiss.

[aside.
Pedro. But who will not excuse a happy Lover
When soft fair Arms confine the yielding Neck;
And the kind whisper languishingly breathes.
-- Must you begone so soon? --
Sure I had dwelt for ever on her Bosom.
-- But stay, he is here.

Enter Belvile dressed in Antonio's Clothes. Flor. It Is not Belvile, half my
fears are vanished.

Pedro. Antonio!

Belv. This must be he.
[aside. You're early, Sir, -- I do not use to be outdone this way.

Pedro. The wretched, Sir, are watchful, and it is enough
You Have the advantage of me in Angellica.

Belv. Angellica! or I Have mistook my Man! or else Antonio.
-- Can he forget his Intrest in Florinda,
And fight for common Prize?
aside.
Pedro. Come, Sir, you know our terms --

Belv. By Heaven not I.
[aside. -- No talking, I am ready, Sir.

[Offers to fight, Flor. runs in. Flor. Oh, hold! who e're you be, I do conjure
you hold!
If you strike here -- I dye --

[ To Belv. Pedro. Florinda!

Belv. Florinda imploring for my Rival!

Pedro. Away, this kindness is unseasonable.

[Puts her by, they fight; she runs in just as Belv. disarms Pedro. Flor. Who
are you, Sir, that dares deny my Prayers?

Belv. Thy Prayers destroy him, if thou would preserve him,
Do that you are unacquainted with and Curse him.

[She holds him. Flor. By all you hold most dear, by her you love,
I do conjure you, touch him not.

Belv. By her I love!
See -- I obey -- and at your feet resign
The useless Trophy of my Victory.

[Lays his Sword at her feet. Pedro. Antonio, you have done enough to prove you
love Florinda.


Belv. Love Florinda!

Does Heaven love Adoration! Prayer! or Penitence! Love her! here, Sir, -- your
Sword again. [Snatches up the Sword and gives it him. Upon this truth I Will fight
my life away.


Pedro. No, you have redeemed my Sister, and my Friendship!


Belv. Don Pedro!

He gives him Flor. and pulls off his Vizard to show his Face and puts it on
again. Pedro. Can you resign your Claims to other Women,
And give your heart entirely to Florinda?

Belv. Entire! as dying Saints Confessions are!
I can delay my happiness no longer.
This Minute! let me make Florinda mine.

Pedro. This Minute let it be -- no time so proper,
This Night my Father will arrive from Rome,
And possibly may hinder what we purpose!

Flor. Oh Heavens! this Minute!

Enter Masqueraders and pass over. Belv. Oh, do not ruin me!

Pedro. The place begins to fill, and that we may not be observed, do you walk
off to St. Peter's Church, where I will meet you, and conclude your happiness.


Belv. I Will meet you there. -- If there be no more Saints Churches in Naples.

[Aside.
Flor. Oh stay Sir, and recall your hasty doom!
alas I have not yet prepared my Heart
To entertain so strange a Guest.

Pedro. Away this silly modesty is Assumed too late.

Belv. Heaven Madam! what do you do?

Flor. Do! despise the Man that lays a Tyrant's Claim
To what he ought to Conquer by submission.

Belv. You do not know me -- move a little this way.

[Draws her aside. Flor. Yes, you may force me even to the Alter,
But not the holy Man that offers there
Shall force me to be thine.

[Pedro talks to Callis this while. Belv. Oh do not loose so blessed an
opportunity!
-- See -- it is your Belvile -- not Antonio,
Whom your mistaken Scorn and Anger ruins.

[Pulls off his Vizard. Flor. Belvile.
Where was my Soul it could not meet thy Voice!
And take this knowledge in.

As they are talking, Enter Wilmore finely dressed, and Frederick. Will. No
Intelligence! no News of Belvile yet -- well I am the most unlucky Rascal in
Nature -- ha -- am I deceived -- or is it he -- look Ferd. -- it is he -- my
dear Belvile.


Runs and Embraces him. Belv. Vizard falls out on's Hand. Belv. Hell and
confusion seize thee!

Pedro. Ha! Belvile! I beg your Pardon Sir.

[Takes Flor. from him. Belv. Nay touch her not, she is mine by Conquest Sir,
I won her by my Sword.

Will. Did thou so -- and Egad Child we will keep her by the Sword.


[Draws on Pedro. Belv. goes between. Belv. Stand off
You Are so profanely Lewd, so cursed by Heaven,
All quarrels thou espousest must be Fatal.

Will. Nay an you be so hot, my Valor's Coy, and shall be Courted when you
want it next.


[Puts up his Sword. Belv. You know I ought to Claim a Victors right.
[ To Pedro. But you're the Brother to Divine Florinda,
To whom I Am such a Slave -- to purchase her,
I durst not hurt the Man she holds so dear.

Pedro. 'Twas by Antonio's, not by Belvile's Sword
This question should have been decided Sir,
I must confess much to your Bravery's due,
Both now, and when I met you last in Arms.
But I am nicely punctual in my word,
As Men of Honor ought, and beg your Pardon.
-- For this mistake another time shall clear.
-- This was some Plot between you and Belvile.
But I Will prevent you.

Aside to Flor. as they are going out Belv. looks after her and begins to walk
up and down in Rage. Will. Do not be Modest now and loose the Woman, but if we
shall fetch her back so --


Belv. Do not speak to me --


Will. Not speak to you -- Egad I Will speak to you, and will be answered too.


Belv. Will you Sir --


Will. I know I Have done some mischief, but I Am so dull a Puppey, that I Am the
Son of a Whore, if I know how, or where -- prithee inform my understanding --


Belv. Leave me I say, and leave me instantly.


Will. I will not leave you in this humor, nor till I know my Crime.


Belv. Death I Will tell you Sir --


Draws and runs at Will. he runs out, Belv. after him, Fred. interposes. Enter
Angellica, Moretta and Sebastian. Ang. Ha -- Sebastian --
Is not that Willmore? -- have -- have and bring him back.

Fred' The Colonel's mad -- I never saw him thus before, I Will after 'em least he
do some mischief, for I am sure Wilmore will not draw on him.

[Exit.
Ang. I am all Rage! my first desires defeated!
For one for ought he knows that has no
Other Merit than her Quality.
-- Her being Don Pedro's Sister -- he loves her!
I know it is so -- dull, dull, Insensible --
He will not see me now tho often invited;
And broke his word last Night -- false perjured Man!
-- He that but Yesterday fought for my Favors,
And would have made his Life a Sacrifice
To Have gained one Night with me,
Must now be hired and Courted to my Arms.

Morett. I told you what would come ou't, but Moretta's an old doting Fool --
why did you give him five Hundred Crowns, but to set himself out for other
Lovers! you should have kept him Poor, if you had meant to have had any good
from him.


Ang. Oh, name not such mean trifles; -- had I given him all
My Youth has earned from Sin,
I had not lost a thought, nor sigh upon it.
But I have given him my Eternal rest,
My whole repose, my future joys, my Heart!
My Virgin heart Moretta! Oh it is gone!

Morett. Curse on him here he comes;
How fine she has made him too.

Enter Willmore and Sebast. Ang. turns and walks away. Will. How now turned
shadow!
Fly when I pursue! and follow when I fly!
[Sings.] Stay gentle shadow of my Dove
And tell me e're I go,
Whether the substance may not prove
A Fleeting thing like you.
There Is a soft kind look remaining yet.

As she turns she looks on him. Ang. Well Sir, you may be gay, all happiness,
all joys pursue you still, Fortune's your Slave, and gives you every hour
choice of new hearts and Beauties, till you are cloyed with the repeated Bliss,
which others vainly languish for. --

-- But know false Man that I shall be revenged.


[Turns away in Rage. Will. So gad there are of those faint hearted Lovers,
whom such a sharp Lesson next their hearts, would make as Impotent as Fourscore
-- pox of this whining. -- My business is to laugh and love -- a pox on it, I
hate your sullen Lover, a Man shall lose as much time to put you in humor now,
as would serve to gain a new Woman.


Ang. I scorn to cool that Fire I cannot raise,
Or do the Drudgery of your virtuous Mistress.

Will. A virtuous Mistress! death, what a thing thou have found out for me! why
what the Devil, should I do with a virtuous Woman? -- a sort of ill-natured
Creatures, that take a Pride to torment a Lover, Virtue is but an infirmity in
Woman; a Disease that renders even the handsome ungrateful; whilst the
ill-favored for want of Solicitations and Address, only fancy themselves so.
-- I have layn with a Woman of Quality, who has all the while been railing at
Whores.


Ang. I will not answer for your Mistres's Virtue,
Though she be Young enough to know no Guilt;
And I could wish you would persuade my heart
'Twas the Two hundred Thousand Crowns you Courted.

Will. Two Hundred Thousand Crowns! what Story's this? -- what Trick? -- what
Woman? -- ha!


Ang. How strange you make it, have you forgot the Creature you entertained on
the Prazo last Night?


Will. Ha! my Gypsy worth Two Hundred Thousand Crowns! -- oh how I long to be
with her -- pox, I knew she was of Quality.

[Aside.
Ang. False Man! I see my ruin in thy face.
How many Vows you breathed upon my Bosom,
Never to be unjust -- have you forgot so soon?

Will. Faith no, I was just coming to repeat 'em -- but here is a humor indeed
-- would make a Man a Saint -- would she would be angry enough to leave me, and
Command me not to wait on her.

[Aside.
Enter Hellena dressed in Man's Cloths. Hell. This must be Angellica! I know it
by her mumping Matron here -- Ay, ay, it is she! my Mad Captain's with her too,
for all his swearing -- how this unconstant humor makes me love him! -- Pray
good grave Gentle woman is not this Angellica?


Moret. My too young Sir, it is -- I hope it is one from Don Antonio.


[Goes to Angellica. Hell. Well, something I Will do to vex him for this.

[aside.
Ang. I will not speak with him; am I in humor to receive a Lover.


Will. Not speak with him! when I Will begone -- and wait your idler Minutes -- can
I show less obedience to the thing I love so fondly?


Offers to go. Ang. A fine excuse, this! -- stay --


Will. And hinder your advantage! should I repay your Bounties so ungratefully?


Ang. Come hither, Boy -- that I may let you see
How much adove the advanges you name
I prize one Minutes joy with you.

Will. Oh, you destroy me with this indearment. [Impatient to be gone. --
Death! how shall I get away -- Madam, 'twill not be fit I should be seen with
you -- besides, it will not be convenient -- and I Have a Friend -- that is
dangerously sick.


Ang. I see you're impatient -- yet you shall stay.


Will. And miss my Assignation with my Gypsy.


[Aside, and walks about impatiently. Hell. Madam,
Moretta brings Hellena, who addresses her self to Angellica. You Will hardly
pardon my Intrusion,
When you shall know my business!
And I Am too young to tell my Tale with Art:
But there must be a wondrous store of goodness,
Where so much Beauty dwells.

Ang. A pretty Advocate whoever sent thee.
-- Prithee proceed -- Nay, Sir, you shall not go.

[To Will. who is stealing off. Will. Then I shall lose my dear Gypsy for ever
-- Pox on it, she stays me out of spite.
aside.
Ang. I am related to a Lady, Madam,
Young, Rich, and nobly born, but has the Fate
To be in Love with a young English Gentleman.
Strangely she loves him, at first sight she loved him,
But did Adore him when she heard him speak;
For he, she said, had Charms in every word,
That faild not to surprise, to Wound and Conquer.

Will. Ha! Egad I hope this concerns me.
[aside.
Ang. It Is my false man, he means -- would he were gone.
This Praise will raise his Pride, and ruin me -- well
Since you are so impatient to be gone
I will release you, Sir.

[ To Will. Will. Nay, then I Am sure 'twas me he spoke off, this cannot be the
effects of kindness in her.

aside. -- No, Madam, I Have considered better on it,
And will not give you Cause of Jealousy.

Ang. But, Sir, I Have -- business, that --

Will. This shall not do, I know it is but to try me.

Ang. Well, to your story, Boy, -- tho 'twill undo me.
[aside.
Hell. With this addition to his other Beauties,
He won her unresisting tender heart,
He vowed, and sigh't, and swore he loved her dearly;
And she believed the cunning flatterer,
And thought her self the happiest Maid alive,
To day was the appointed time by both
To consummate their Bliss,
The Virgin, Altar, and the Priest were dressed,
And whilst she languisht for the expected Bridegroom,
She heard, he paid his broken Vows to you.

Will. So, this is some dear Rogue that is in Love with me,

And this way lets me know it; or if it be not me, she means some one whose
place I may supply.


Ang. Now I perceive
The cause of thy impatience to be gone,
And all the business of this Glorious Dress.

Will. Damn the young Prater, I know not what he means.

Hell. Madam,
In your fair Eyes I read too much concern,
To tell my farther business.

Ang. Prithee, sweet Youth, talk on, thou may perhaps
Raise here a storm that may undo my passion,
And then I Will grant thee any thing.

Hell. Madam, it is to entreat you, (oh unreasonable)
You would not see this stranger;
For if you do, she Vows you are undone,
Tho Nature never made a Man so Excellent,
And sure he'ad been a God, but for inconstancy.

Will. Ah, Rogue, how finely he is instructed!
[aside. -- It Is plain; some woman that has seen me e'n passant.

Ang. Oh, I shall burst with Jealousy! do you know the Man you speak off? --


Hell. Yes, Madam, he used to be in Buffand Scarlet.

Ang. Thou, false as Hell, what can thou say to this?

[ To Will. Will. By Heaven --

Ang. Hold, do not Damn thy self --

Hell. Nor hope to be believed. --

[He walks about, they follow. Ang. Oh perjured Man!
Is It thus you pay my generous Passion back?

Hell. Why would you, Sir, abuse my Lady's Faith? --

Ang. And use me so unhumanely.

Hell. A Maid so young, so innocent --

Will. Ah, young Devil.

Ang. Do thou not know thy life is my power?

Hell. Or think my Lady cannot be revenged.

Will. So, so, the storm comes finely on.
[aside.
Ang. Now thou art silent, guilt has struck thee dumb.
Oh, had thou still been so, I Would lived in safety.

[She turns away and weeps. Will. Sweet heart, the Lady's Name and House, --
quickly: I Am impatient to be with her. --


Aside to Hellena, looks toward Angel. to watch her turning, and as she comes
toward them he meets her. Hell. So, now is he for another Woman.
[aside.
Will. The impudents young thing in nature,
I cannot persuade him out of his Error, Madam.

Ang. I know he is in the right, -- yet thou'st a tongue
That would persuade him to deny his Faith.

[In rage walks away. Will. Her Name, her Name, dear Boy. --

[Said softly to Hell. Hell. Have you forgot it, Sir?

Will. Oh, I perceive he is not to know I am a stranger to his Lady.
[aside. -- Yes, yes I do know -- but -- I have forgot the --
[Angell. turns. -- By Heaven such early confidence I never saw.

Ang. Did I not charge you with this Mistress, Sir?
Which you denied, though I beheld your, Perjury.
This little generosity of thine, has rendered back my heart.

[Walks away. Will. So, you have made sweet work here, my little mischief;
Look your Lady be kind and good natured now, or
I shall have but a Cursed Bargain on it.
[ Ang. turns toward them. -- The Rogue's bred up to mischief,
Art thou so great a Fool to credit him?

Ang. Yes, I do, and you in vain impose upon me.
-- Come hither, Boy, -- is not this he you spoke of.

Hell. I think -- it is, I cannot swear, but I vow he has just such another
lying Lovers look.


[ Hell. looks in his face, he gazes on her. Will. Hah! do not I know that face
--
By Heaven my little Gypsy, what a dull Dog was I,
Had I but looked that way I Would known her.
Are all my hopes of a new Woman banished?
aside. -- Egad if I do not fit thee for this, hang me.
-- Madam, I have found out the Plot.

Hell. Oh Lord, what does he say? am I discovered now?

Will. Do you see this young Spark here? --

Hell. He Will tell her who I am.

Will. -- Who do you think this is?

Hell. Ay, ay, he does know me -- Nay, dear Captain! I am undone if you
discover me.


Will. Nay, nay, no eogging, she shall know what a precious Mistress I have.


Hell. Will you be such a Devil?


Will. Nay, nay, I Will teach you to spoil sport you will not make. -- this small
Ambassador comes not from a Person of Quality as you Imagine, and he says: but
from a very Errant Gypsy, the talking'st, prating'st, canting'st little Animal
thou ever saw.


Ang. What news you tell me, that is the thing I mean.


Hell. Would I were well off the place, if ever I go a Captain, Hunting again
-- Aside


Will. Mean that thing? that Gypsy thing, thou may as well be Jealous of
thy Monkey or Parrot, as of her, a German Motion were worth a duzen of her, and
a Dream were a better enjoyment, a Creature of a Constitution fitter for Heaven
then Man.


Hell. Tho I Am sure he lies, yet this vexes me. Aside.


Ang. You are mistaken, she is a Spanish Woman Made up of no such dull Materials.


Will. Materials, Egad an she be made of any that will either dispense or
admit of Love, I Will be bound to continence.


Hell. Unreasonable Man, do you think so? Aside to him. -- you may return my
little Brazen Head, and tell your Lady, that till she be handsome enough to be
beloved, or I dull enough to be Religious, there will be small hopes of me.


Ang. Did you not promise then to marry her?


Will. Not I by heaven.


Ang. You cannot undeceive my fears and torments, till you have vowed you will
not marry her.


Hell. If he Swears, that he will be revenged on me indeed for all my Rogueries.
Aside.


Ang. I know what Arguments you will bring against me, Fortune, and Honor. --


Will. Honor, I tell you, I hate it in your Sex, and those that fancy
themselves possessed of that Foppery, are the most impertinently troublesome of
all Woman kind, and will transgress Nine Commandments to keep one, and to
satisfy your Jealousy I swear.


Hell. Oh, no swearing dear Captain. Aside to him.


Will. If it were possible, I should ever be inclined to marry, it should be
some kind young Sinner, one that has generosity, enough to give a favor
hansomely to one that can ask it discreetly, one that has Wit enough to Manage
an intrigue of Love -- oh, how civil such a Wench is, to a Man that does her
the Honor to marry her.


Ang. By Heaven there is no Faith in any thing he says.


Enter Sebastian. Sebas. Madam, Don Antonio --


Ang. Come hither.


Hell. Ha! Antonio, he may be coming hither and he will certainly discover me,
I Will therefore retire without a Ceremony.

[ Exit Hellena.
Ang. I Will see him, get my Coach ready.


Seba. It waits you Madam,


Will. This is luckey: what Madam, now I may be gone and leave you to the
enjoyment of my Rival?


Ang. Dull man, that can not see how Ill, how poor,
That false dissimulation looks -- begone
And never let me see thy Couzening Face again,
Least I relaps and kill thee.

Will. Yes, you can spare me now, -- farewell, till you're in better Humor --
I Am glad of this release --

Now for my Gypsy:
For though to worse we change, yet still we find
New Joys, new Charms, in a New Miss that is kind.
[ Ex. Wilmore.
Ang. He Is gone, and in this Ague of my Soul
The Shivering fit returns;
Oh with what willing haste, he took his leave,
As if the longed-for Minute, were arrived
Of some blessed assignation.
In vain I have Consulted all my Charms,
In vain this Beauty prized, in vain believed,
My Eyes could kindle any lasting fires;
I had forgot my Name, my Infamy,
And the reproach that Honor lays on those
That dare pretend a sober passion here.
Nice reputation, though it leave behind
More Virtues than inhabit where that dwells;
Yet that once gone, those Virtues shine no more.
-- Then since I am not fit to be beloved,
I am resolved to think on a revenge
On him that soothed me thus to my undoing.

[Exeunt. SCENE the Third. A Street.
Enter Florinda and Valeria in Habits different from what they have been seen
in.

Flor. We Are happily Escaped, and yet I tremble still.


Val. A Lover and fear! when I am but half an one, and yet I have Courage for
any attempt, would Hellena were here, I would fain have had her as deep in this
Mischief as we, she will fare but in else I doubt.


Flor. She pretended a Visit to the Augustine Nuns, but I believe some other
design carried her out, pray Heaven we light on her. -- Prithee what did do
with Callis?


Val. When I saw no reason would do good on her, I followed her into the
Wardrobe, and as she was looking for something in a great Chest, I topled her
in by the heels, snatched the Key of the Appartment where you were confined,
locked her in, and left her bawling for help.


Flor. It Is well you resolve to follow my Fortunes, for thou dare never
appear at home again after such an action.


Val. That Is according as the young Stranger and I shall agree. -- but to our
business -- I delivered your Letter, your Note to Belvile, when I got out under
pretense of going to Mass, I found him at his Lodging, and believe me it came
seasonably; for never was Man in so desperate a Condition, I told him of your
resolution of making your Escape to day, if your Brother would be absent long
enough to permit you; if not, rather than be Antonio's.


Flor. Thou should have told him I was confined to my chamber upon my
Brothers suspicion, that the business on the Molo was a Plott laid between him
and I.


Val. I said all this, and told him your Brother was now gone to his Devotion,
and he resolves to visit every Church till he find him; and not only undeceive
him in that, but carress him so as shall delay his return home.


Flor. Oh Heavens! he is here, and Belvile with him too.

They put on their Vizards.
Enter Don Pedro, Belvile, Willmore. Bell. and Don Pedro seeming in serious
discourse. Val. Walk boldly by them, and I Will come at distance, least he
suspect us.

She walks by them, and looks back on them.
Will. Hah! a Woman, and of an Excellent Mien.


Ped. She throws a kind look back on you.


Will. Death, it is a likely Wench, and that kind look shall not be cast away --
I Will follow her.


Bell. Prithee do not.


Will. Do not, by Heavens to the Antipodies, with such an invitation.


[She goes out, and Will. follows her. Bell. It Is a mad Fellow for a Wench.


Enter Fred. Fred. Oh Col. such News!


Belv. Prithee what?


Fred. News that will make you laugh in spite of Fortune.


Bell. What, Blunt has had some Damned Trick put upon him, Cheated, Banged or
Clapped.


Fred. Cheated Sir, rarely Cheated of all but his Shirt andDrawers, the
unconscionable Whore too turned him out before Consummation, so that traversing
the Streets at Midnight, the Watch found him in this Fresco, and conducted him
home: By Heaven it is such a sight, and yet I durst as well been hanged as
laughed at him, or pity him; he beats all that do but ask him a question, and is
in such an Humor.


Ped. Who is it has met with this Ill usage, Sir?


Bell. A Friend of ours whom you must see for mirths sake* I Will employ him to
give Florinda time for an escape.

[Aside.
Ped. What is he?


Bell. A Young Countryman of ours, one that has been Educated at so plentiful a
rate, he yet never knew the want of Money, and 'twill be a great Jest to see
how simply he will look without it, for my part I Will lend him none, and the Rogue
know not how to put on a Borrowing face, and ask first, I Will let him see how
good it is to play our parts whilst I play his -- prithee Fred. do you go home
and keep him in that posture till we come.

[Exeunt.
Enter Florinda from the farther end of the Scene, looking behind ber. Flor. I
am followed still -- hah. -- my Brother too advancing; this way, good Heavens
defend me from being seen by him.


[She goes off. Enter Willmore, and after him Valeria, at a little distance.
Will. Ah! There she sails, she looks back as she were willing to be boarded,
I Will warrant her Prize.


[He goes out, Valeria following. Enter Hellena, just as he goes out, with a
Page: Hell. Hah, is not that my Captain that has a Woman in chase? -- it is not
Angellica; Boy, follow those people at a distance, and bring me an account
where they go in, -- I Will find his haunts, and plague him every where, -- ha --
my Brother --


[Ex. Page. [Bel. Will. Ped. cross the Stage: Hell. runs off. Scene changes to
another Street. Enter Florinda. Flor. What shall I do, my Brother now pursues
me,
Will no kind Power protect me from his tyranny? -- hah, here is a door open,
I Will venture in, since nothing can be worse then to fall into his hands, my
life and honor are at stake, and my Necessity has no choice.


[She goes in. Enter Valeria and Hellena's Page peeping after Florinda. Page.
Here she went in, I shall remember this house.


[Ex. Boy. Val. This is Belvil's Lodging; she is gone in as readily as if she
knew it, -- hah -- here is that Mad Fellow again, I dare not venture in, -- I Will
watch my opportunity.


[Goes aside. Enter Willmore, gazing about him. Will. I have lost her
hereabouts -- Pox on it, she must not escape me so.


[Goes out. Scene changes to Blunts Chamber, discovers him sitting on a Couch
in his Shirt and Drawers, reading. Blunt. So, now my mind's a little at peace,
since I have resolved revenge -- a Pox on this Tailor tho, for not bringing
home the Clothes I bespoke; and a Pox of all poor Cavaliers, a Man can never
keep a spare Suit for 'em; and I shall have these Rogues come in and find me
naked, and then I Am undone; but I Am resolved to arm my self -- the Rascals
shall not insult over me too much. [Puts on an old rusty Sword, and Buff Belt.
-- Now, how like a Morrice-Dancer I am Equipt -- a fine Lady like Whore to
Cheat me thus, without affording me a kindness for my Money, a Pox light on
her, I shall never be reconciled to the Sex more, she has made me as faithless
as a Physician, as uncharitable as a Churchman, and as ill natured as a Poet.
Oh how I Will use all womankind hereafter! what would I give to have one of 'em
within my reach now! any Mortal thing in Petticoats, kind Fortune, send me! and
I Will forgive thy last nights Malice -- here is a Cursed Book too, (a warning to
all young Travelers) that can instruct me how to prevent such Mischiefs now
it is too late, well it is a rare convenient thing to read a little now and then,
as well as Hawk and Hunt.


[Sits down again and Reads. Enter to him Florinda. Flor. This House is haunted
sure, it is well furnished and no living thing inhabits it -- hah -- a Man,
Heavens how he is attired! sure it is some Rope-dancer, or Fencing-master; I
tremble now for fear, and yet I must venture now to speak to him -- Sir, if I
may not interrupt your Meditations --


[She starts up and gazes. Blunt. Hah -- what is here! are my wishes granted?
and is not that a she Creature? ads heartlikins it is! what wretched thing art
thou -- hah!


Flor. Charitable Sir, you have told your self already what I am; a very wretched
Maid, forced by a strange unlucky accident, to seek a safety here,

And must be ruined, if you do not grant it.


Blunt. Ruined! is there any ruin so inevitable as that which now threatens
thee? do thou know, miserable Woman! into what Den of Mischiefs thou art
fallen? what abiss of Confusion -- hah! -- do not see something in my looks
that frights thy guilty Soul, and makes thee wish to change that shape of Woman
for any humble Animal, or Devil? for those were safer for thee, and less
mischievous.


Flor. Alas, what mean you, Sir? I must confess, your looks have something in
'em, makes me fear, but I beseech you, as you seem a Gentleman, pity a harmless
Virgin, that takes your house for Sanctuary.


Blunt. Talk on, talk on, and weep too, till my Faith-return Do, flatter me out
of my Senses again -- a harmless Virgin with a Pox, as much one as 'tother,
adsheartlikins. When what the Devil can I not be safe in my House for you, not
in my Chamber, nay, even being naked too cannot secure me: this is an Impudence
greater than has invaded me yet -- Come, no resistance.


[Pulls her rudely. Flor. Dare you be so cruel?


Blunt. Cruel, adsheartlikins as a Galley slave, or a Spanish* Whore: Cruel,
yes I will kiss and beat thee all over; kiss, and see thee all over; thou shall
lie with me too, not that I care for the enjoyment, but to let thee see I have
tain deliberated Malice to thee, and will be revenged on one Whore for the sins
of another; I will smile and deceive thee, flatter thee, and beat thee, kiss
and swear, and lie to thee, embrace thee and rob thee, as she did me, fawn on
thee, and strip thee stark naked; then hang thee out at my window by the heels,
with a Paper of scurvy Verses fastened to thy breast, in praise of damnable
women -- Come come along.


Flor. Alas, Sir, must I be sacrificed for the Crimes of the most infamous of
my Sex, I never understood the fins you name.


Blunt. Do, persuade the Fool you Love him, or that one of you can be just or
honest, tell me I was not an easy Coxcomb, or any strange impossible tale: it
will be believed sooner than thy false Showers or Protestations. A generation
of damned Hypocrites to flatter my very Clothes from my Back! dissembling
Witches! are these the returns you make an honest Gentleman, that trusts,
believes, and loves you -- but if I be not even with you -- Come along -- or I
shall --


[Pulls her again. Enter Fredrick. Fred. Hah! what is here to do?


Blunt. Adsheartlikins, Fred. I am glad thou art come, to be a witness of my
dire revenge.


Fred. What Is this, a Person of Quality too, who is upon the ramble to supply
the defects of some grave impotent Husband?


Blunt. No, this has another pretense, some very unfortunate accident, brought
her hither, to save a life pursued by I know not who, or why, and forced to
take sanctuary here at Fools Haven. Adsheartlikins to me of all Mankind for
protection? is the Ass to be Cajold again, think ye? No, young one, no Prayers
or Tears shall mitigate my rage; therefore prepare for both my pleasures of
enjoyment and revenge, for I am resolved to make up my loss here on thy body,
I Will take it out in kindness and in beating.


Fred. Now Mistress of mine, what do you think of this?


Flor. I think he will not -- dares not be so barbarous.


Fred. Have a care, Blunt, she fetched a deep sigh, she is enamored with thy
Shirt and Drawers, she will strip thee even of that, there are of her calling such
unconscionable Baggages, and such dexterous Thieves, they will flea a man and he
shall never miss his skin, till he feels the cold. There was a Countryman of
ours Robbed of a Row of Teeth whilst he was a sleeping, which the Jilt made him
buy again when he wak't -- you see Lady how little reason we have to trust you.


Blunt. 'Dsheartlikins, when this is most abominable.


Flor. Some such Devils there may be, but by all that is Holy, I am none such, I
entered here to save a Life in danger.


Blunt. For no goodness, I Will warrant her.


Fred. Faith, Damsel, you had even confessed the plain truth, for we are fellows
not to be caught twice in the same Trap: look on that Wreck, a tite Vessel when
he set out of Haven, well Trimmed and Laden, and see how a Female Piccaroon of
this Island of Rogues has shattered him, and can thou hope for any Mercy?


Blunt. No, no, Gentlewoman, come along, adsheartlikins we must be better
acquainted -- we will both lie with her, and then let me alone to bang her.


Fred. I Am ready to serve you in matters of Revenge that has a double pleasure
in it.


Blunt. Well said. You hear, little one, how you are condemned by public Vote
to the Bed within, there is no resisting your Destiny, sweet heart.


[Pulls her. Flor. Stay, Sir, I have seen you with Belvile, an English
Cavalier, for his sake use me kindly; you know him, Sir.


Blunt. Belvile, when yes, sweeting, we do know Belvile, and wish he were with
us now, he is a Cormorant at Whore and Bacon, he would have a Limb or two of thee my
Virgin Pullet, but it is no matter, we will leave him the bones to pick.


Flor. Sir, if you have any Esteem for that Belvile, I conjure you to treat me
with more gentleness; he will thank you for the justice.


Fred. Harkey, Blunt, I doubt we are mistaken in this Matter.


Flor. Sir, if you find me not worth Belvile's care, use me as you please, and
that you may think I merit better treatment than you threaten -- pray take this
present --


[Gives him a Ring: he loods on it. Blunt. Hum -- a Diamond! when it is a
wonderful Virtue now that lies in this Ring, a mollifying Virtue;
adsheartlikins there is more persuasive Rhetoric in it, than all her Sex can
utter.


Fred. I begin to suspect something; and 'twould anger us vilely to be trust up
for a rape upon a Maid of quality, when we only believe we ruffle a Harlot.


Blunt. Thou art a credulous Fellow, but adsheartlikins I have no Faith yet,
when my Saint prattled as parlously as this does, she gave me a Bracelet too, a
Devil on her, but I sent my Man to fell it to day for Necessaries, and it
proved as counterfeit as her Vows of Love.


Fred. However let it reprieve her till we see Belvile.


Blunt. That Is hard, yet I will grant it.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Oh, Sir, the Colonel is just come in with his new
Friend and a Spaniard of Quality, and talks of having you to Dinner with 'em.


Blunt. 'Dsheartlikins, I Am undone -- I would not see 'em for the World.
Harkey, Fred. lock up the Wench in your Chamber.


Fred. Fear nothing, Madam, what e're he threatens, you are safe whilst in my
hands.


[ Ex. Fred. and Flor. Blunt. And, Sirrah -- upon your life, say -- I am not at
home, -- or that I am asleep -- or -- or any thing -- away -- I Will prevent their
coming this way.


[Locks the Door, and Exeunt. The End of the Fourth ACT.
ACT V.
Scene I. Blunt's Chamber.
After a great knocking as at his Chamber Door, Enter Blunt softly crossing the
Stage, in his Shirt and Drawers as before. Ned, Ned Blunt, Ned Blunt.

[call within. Blunt. The Rogues are up in Arms, 'Sheartlikins this Villainous
Frederick has betrayed me, they have heard of my blessed Fortune,

Ned Blunt, Ned, Ned --


[and knocking within. Bell. When he is dead Sir, without dispute dead, he has
not been seen to day, let us break open the door -- here -- Boy --


Blunt. Ha, break open the door. d'sheartlikins that mad Fellow will be as good
as his word.


Bell. Boy bring something to force the door,


[a great noise within, at the door again. Blunt. So, now must I speak, in my
own defense, I Will try what Rhetoric will do -- hold -- hold what do you mean
Gentlemen, what do you mean?


Bell. Oh Rogue art a live, prithee open the door and convince us.


[within. Blunt. Yes, I am alive Gentlemen, -- but at present a little busy.


Bell. How, Blunt grown a Man of business, come, come, open and let us see this
Miracle.


[within. Blunt. No, no, no, no, Gentlemen it is no great business -- but -- I
am -- at -- my Devotion -- d'sheartlikins will you not allow a Man time to Pray.


Bell. Turned Religious! a greater wonder then the first, therefore open
quickly, or we shall unhinge, we shall.


[within. Blunt. This will not do -- when hearkey Col. to tell you the plain truth,
I am about a necessary affair of life -- I have a wench with me -- you
apprehend me? the Devils in it if they be so uncivil as to disturb me now,


Will. How a Wench! Nay then we must enter and partake no resistance -- unless
it be your Lady of Quality, and then we will keep our distance,


Blunt. So, the business is out.


Will. Come, come lends more hands to the Door -- now heave altogether -- so
well done my Boys --


[breaks open the Door. Enter Belvile, Willmore, Fred. and Pedro. Blunt looks
simply, they all laugh at him, he lays his hand on his Sword, and comes up to
Wilmore. Blunt. Hearkey Sir, laugh out your laugh quickly, de ye hear, and
begone. I shall spoil your sport else, 'adsheartlikins Sir, I shall the jest
has been carried on too long -- a plague upon my Tailor. --

[aside.
Will. 'Sdeath, how the Whore has dressed him, Faith Sir I Am sorry.


Blunt. Are you so Sir, keep't to your self then Sir, I advise you, de'ye hear,
for I can as little endure your pity as his Mirth.


[lays his hand on's Sword. Belv. Indeed Willmore, thou were a little too
rough with Ned Blunts Mistress, call a Person of Quality whore? and one so
young, so sandsome, and so Eloquent -- ha, ha, he. --


Blunt. Harkey Sir, you know me, and know I can be angry, have a care -- for
adsheartlikins I can fight too -- I can Sir, -- do you mark me -- no more --


Belv. Why so peevish good Ned, some disappointments I Will warrant -- what? did
the Jealous Count her Husband return just in the nick?


Blunt. Or the Devil Sir -- de'ye laugh -- [they laugh. Look ye settle me a
good sober countenance, and that quickly too, or you shall know Ned Blunt is
not --


Belv, Not every Body, we know that.


Blunt. Not an Ass to be laughed at Sir,


Will. Unconscionable sinner, to bring a Lover so near his happiness, a
vigorous passionate Lover, and then not only cheat him of his movables, but
his very desires to.


Belv. Ah! Sir a Mistress, is a trifle with Blunt. he will have a duzen the next
time he looks abroad, his Eyes have Charms, not to be resisted, there needs no
more then to expose that taking Person, to the view of the Fair, and he leads
'em all in Triumph.


Ped. Sir, tho 'I'me a stranger to you, I am ashamed at the rudeness of my
Nation; and could you learn who did it, would assist you to make an Example of
'em.


Blunt. When aye, there is one speaks Sense now, and han'somly; and let me tell
you Gentlemen, I should not have showed my self like a Jack Puding, thus to
have made you Mirth, but that I have revenge within my power, for know, I have
got into my possession a Femal, who had better have fallen under any Curse,
then the ruin I design her: 'adsheartlikins she assaulted me here in my own
Lodgings, and had doubtless committed a Rape upon me, had not this Sword
defended me.


Fred. I know not that, but O my conscience thou had Ravished her, had she not
redeemed her self with a Ring -- let us see it Blunt.


[ Blunt shows the Ring. Belv. Hah! -- the Ring I gave Florinda, when we
Exchange our Vows -- harkey Blunt, --


[Goes to whisper to him. Will. No whispering good Col. there is a Woman in the
case, no whispering.


Belv. Harkey Fool, be advised, and conceal both the Ring and the story for
your Reputations sake, do not let people know what despised Cullies we English
are, to be cheated and abused by one Whore, and another rather bribe thee than
be kind to thee is an Infamy to our Nation.


Will. Come, come where is the Wench, we will see her, let her be what she will,
we will see her.


Ped. Ay, ay, let us see her, I can soon discover whether she be of quality, or
for your diversion.


Blunt. She Is in Freds Custody.


Will. Come, come the Key,


[To Fred. who gives him the Key, they are going. Belv. Death, what shall I do
--

Stay Gentlemen -- yet if I hinder 'em I shall discover all, -- hold -- lets go
one at once -- give me the Key.


Will. Nay hold there Col. I Will go first.


Fred. Nay no dispute, Ned and I have the gropriety of her.


Will. Damn propriety -- then we will draw cuts, -- nay no corruption good Col.
come the longest Sword carries her --


Belv. goes to whisper Will. They all draw forgetting Don Pedro being as a
Spaniard had the longest. Blunt. I yield up my interest to you Gentlemen, and
that will be; revenge sufficient.


Will. The Wench is yours -- [ to Pedro.] Pox of his Tolledo, I had forgot that.


Fred. Come Sir, I Will Conduct you to the Lady


[ Ex. Fred. and Ped. Belv. To hinder him will certainly discover her --
[Aside. Do know Dull beast what mischief thou have done?

Will. walking up and down out of Humor. Will. Aye, Aye, to trust our Fortune
to Lotts, a Devil on it, 'twas madness that is the truth on it.


Belv. Oh intolerable Sott --


Enter Florinda running mask't, Pedro after her: Will. gazing round her. Flor.
Good Heaven defend me from discovery.

[aside.
Pedro. It Is but in vain to fly me, you're fallen to my Lot.


Belv. Sure she is undiscovered yet, but now I fear there is no way to bring her
off:


Will. When what a Pox is not this my woman, the same I followed but now?


[ Ped. talking to Florinda, who walks up and down. Ped. As if I did not know
ye, and your business here.


Flor. Good Heaven, I fear he does indeed --

[aside.
Ped. Come, pray be kind, I know you meant to be so when you entered here, for
these are proper Gentlemen.


Will. But Sir -- perhaps the Lady will not be imposed upon, She Will choose her
Man.


Ped. I am better bred, then not to leave her choice free.


Enter Valeria, and is surpised at sight of Don Pedro. Val. Don Pedro here!
there is no avoiding him.

[aside.
Flor. Valeria! then I Am undone, --

[aside,
Val. Oh! have I found you Sir -- [To Pedro running to him. -- the strangest
accident -- if I had breath -- to tell it.


Ped. Speak -- is Florinda safe? Hellena well?


Val. Ay, Ay Sir -- Florinda -- is safe -- from any fears of you.


Ped. Why where is Florinda? -- speak --


Val. Aye, where indeed Sir, I wish I could inform you, -- but to hold you no
longer in doubt --


Flor. Oh what will she say --

[Aside.
Val. -- She Is fled away in the habit -- of one of her Pages Sir -- but Callis
thinks you may retrieve her yet, if you make haste away, she will tell you, Sir,
the rest -- if you can find her out.

[Aside.
Ped. Dishonorable Girl, she has undone my Aim -- Sir -- you see my
necessity of leaving you, and hope you will Pardon it; my Sister I know will make
her flight to you; and if she do, I shall Expect she should be rendered back.


Belv. I shall consult my Love and Honor Sir.


[ Ex. Ped. Flor. My dear Preserver, let me embrace thee.


[ To Val. Will. What the Devil's all this?


Blunt. Mystery by this light.


Val. Come, come, make haste and get your selves married quickly, for your
Brother will return again.


Belv. I Am so surpised with fears and joys, so amazed to find you here in
safety, I can scarce persuade my heart into a faith of what I see --


Will. Harkey Colonel, is this that Mistress who has cost you so many sighs,
and me so many quarrels with you?


Bell. It is -- pray give him the honor of your hand.


[ To Flor. Will. Thus it must be received then [Kneels and kisses her hand.
And with it give your Pardon too.


Flor. The Friend to Belvile may command me any thing.


Will. Death, would I might, it is a surprising Beauty.

[Aside.
Bell. Boy run and fetch a Father instantly.


[Ex. Boy. Fred. So, now do I stand like a Dog, and have not a syllable to
plead my own Cause with: by this hand, Madam, I was never thoroughly confounded
before, nor shall I ever more dare look up with confidence, till you are
pleased to Pardon me.


Flor. Sir, I Will be reconciled to you on one condition, that you will follow the
Example of your Friend, in Marrying a Maid that does not hate you, and whose
fortune (I believe) will not be unwelcome to you.


Fred. Madam, had I no Inclinations that way, I should obey your kind Commands.


Bell. Who Fred. marry, he has so few inclinations for Woman kind, that had he
been possessed of Paradise, he might have continued there to this day, if no
Crime but Love could have dis-inherited him.


Fred. Oh I do not use to boast of my intregues.


Bell. Boast, when thou do nothing but boast; and I dare swear, were thou as
Innocent from the sin of the Grape, as thou art from the Apple, thou might
yet claim that right in Eden which our first Parents lost by too much Loving.


Fred. I wish this Lady would think me so modest a man.


Val. She would be sorry then, and not like you half so well, and I should be
loath to break my word with you, which was, That if your Friend and mine
agreed, it should be a Match between you and I.


[She gives him her hand. Bred. Bear witness, Colonel, it is a Bargain.


[Kisses her hand. Blunt. I have a Pardon to beg too, but adsheartlikins I am
so out of Countenance, that I Am a Dog if I can say any thing to Purpose.


[ To Florinda. Flor. Sir, I heartily forgive you all.


Blunt. That Is nobly said, sweet Lady, -- Belvile, prithee present her her Ring
again; for I find I have not Courage to approach her my self.


[Gives him the Ring he gives to Florinda. Enter Boy. Boy. Sir, I have brought
the Father that you sent for.


Bell. It Is well, and now my dear Florinda, let us fly to complete that mighty
joy we have so long wished and sigh't for: -- Come Fred. -- you will follow?


Fred. Your Example Sir, 'twas ever my ambition in War, and must be so in Love.


Will. And must not I see this juggling knot tied?


Belv. No, thou shall do us better service, and be our guard, least Don Pedro's
sudden return interrupt the Ceremony.


Will. Content -- I Will secure this pass.


[ Ex. Bell. Flor. Fred. and Vall. Enter Boy. Boy. Sir, there is a Lady without
would speak to you.


[ To Will. Will. Conduct her in, I dare not quit my Post.


Boy. And Sir, your Tailor waits you in your Chamber.


Blunt. Some comfort yet, I shall not dance naked at the Wedding.


[Ex. Blunt and Boy. Enter again the Boy, conducting in Angellica in a Masquing
Habit and a Vizard. Will. runs to her. Will. This can be none but my pretty
Gypsy -- Oh, I see you can follow as well as fly -- Come, confess thy self the
most malicious Devil in Nature, you think you have done my business with
Angellica. --


Ang. Stand off, base Villain --


[She draws a Pistol, and holds to his Breast. Will. Hah, it is not she, who art
thou? and what is thy business?


Ang. One thou have injured, and who comes to kill thee for it.


Will. What the Devil can thou mean?


Ang. By all my hopes to kill thee --


[Holds still the Pistol to his Breast, he going back, she following still.
Will. Prithee on, what acquaintance? for I know thee not.


Ang. Behold this face! -- so lost to thy remembrance,
And then call all thy sins about thy Soul,
[Pulls off her Vizard. And let 'em dye with thee.

Will. Angellica!


Ang. Yes, Tailor,
Does not thy guilty blood run shivering through thy Veins?
Have thou no horror at this sight, that tells thee,
Thou have not long to boast thy shameful Conquest?

Will. Faith, no Child, my blood keeps its old Ebbs and Flows still, and that
usual heat too, that could oblige thee with a kindness, had I but opportunity.


Ang. Devil! do wanton with my pain -- have at thy heart.


Will. Hold, dear Virago! hold thy hand a little,
I am not now at leisure to be killed -- hold and hear me --
-- Death, I think she is in earnest.
[aside.
Ang. Oh if I take not heed,
My coward heart will leave me to his mercy.
[Aside, turning from him. -- What have you, Sir, to say? -- but should I hear
thee,
Thoud'st talk away all that is brave about me:
[Follows him with the Pistol to his Breast. And I have vowed thy death, by all
that is Sacred.

Will. When then there is an end of a proper handsome Fellow,
That might a lived to have done good service yet;
-- That Is all I can say to it.

Ang. yet -- I would give thee -- time for -- penitence.

[Pausingly. Will. Faith Child, I thank God, I have ever took
Care to lead a good sober, hopeful Life, and am of a Religion
That teaches me to believe, I shall depart in peace.

Ang. So will the Devil! tell me,
How many poor believing Fools thou have undone?
How many hearts thou have betrayed to ruin?
-- Yet these are little mischiefs to the Ills
Thoust taught mine to commit* thoust taught it Love?

Will. Egad 'twas shrewdly hurt the while.

Ang. -- Love, that has robbed it of its unconcern
Of all that Pride that taught me how to value it.
And in its room
A mean submissive Passion was conveyed,
That made me humbly bow, which I nere did
To any thing but Heaven.
-- Thou, Perjured Man, did this, and with thy Oaths,
Which on thy Knees, thou did devoutly make,
Softened my yielding heart -- And then, I was a slave --
-- Yet still had been content to have worn my Chains:
Worn 'em with vanity and joy for ever,
Had thou not broke those Vows that put them on.
-- 'Twas then I was undone.

[All this while follows him with the Pistol to his Breast. Will. Broke my
Vows! when where have thou lived?
Amongst the Gods? for I never heard of mortal Man,
That has not broke a thousand Vows.

Ang. Oh Impudence!

Will. Angellica! that Beauty has been too long tempting,
Not to have made a thousand Lovers languish,
Who in the Amorous Favor, no doubt have sworn
Like me: did they all dye in that Faith? still Adoring?
I do not think they did.

Ang. No, faithless Man: had I repaid their Vows, as I did thine, I would have
killed the ungrateful that had abandoned me.


Will. This Old General has quite spoiled thee, nothing makes a Woman so vain,
as being flattered; your old Lover ever supplies the defects of Age, with
intolerable Dotage, vast Charge, and that which you call Constancy; and
attributingall this to your own Merits, you domineer, and throw your Favors
in's Teeth, upbraiding him still with the defects of Age, and Cuckold him as
often as he deceives your Expectations. But the Gay, Young, Brisk Lover, that
brings his equal Fires, and can give you dart for dart, you will will be as nice
as you sometimes.


Ang. All this thou'st made me know, for which I hate thee.
Had I remained in innocent security,
I should have thought all men were born my flaves,
And worn my power like lightening in my Eyes,
To have destroyed at pleasure when offended:
-- But when Love held the Mirror, the undeceiving Glass
Reflected all the weakness of my Soul, and made me know
My richest treasure being lost, my Honor,
All the remaining spoil could not be worth
The Conqueror's Care or Value.
-- Oh how I fell like a long worshiped Idol
Discovering all the Cheat.
Would not the Insence and rich Sacrifice,
Which blind Devotion offered at my Alters,
Have fallen to thee?
Why would thou then destroy my fancied power.

Will. By Heaven you are brave, and I admire thee strangely
I wish I were that dull, that constant thing
Which thou would have, and Nature never meant me:
I must, like cheerful Birds, sing in all Groves,
And perch on every Bough,
Billing the next kind she that flies to meet me;
Yet after all could build my Nest with thee,
Thither repairing when I Would loved my round,
And still reserve a tributary Flame.
-- To gain your credit, I Will pay you back your Charity,
And be obliged for nothing but for Love.

[Offers her a Purse of Gold. Ang. Oh that thou were in earnest!
So mean a thought of me,
Would turn my rage to scorn, and I should pity thee,
And give thee leave to live;
Which for the public safety of our Sex,
And my own private Injuries, I dare not do*
Prepare
[Follows still, as before. -- I will no more be tempted with replies.

Will. Sure --


Ang. Another word will damn thee! I Have heard thee talk too long.


Anto. Hah! Angellica!


[She follows hiu with the Pistol ready to shoot; he retires still amazed.
Enter Don Antonio, his Arm in a Scarf, and lays hold on the Pistol. Ang.
Antonio! what Devil brought thee hither?


Anto. Love and Curiosity, seeing your Coach at door.

Let me disarm you of this unbecoming instrument of death -- amongst the Number
of your slaves, was there not one, worthy the Honor to have fought your
quarrel?

Takes away the Pistol. -- Who are you Sir, that are so very wretched
To merit death from her?

Will. One Sir, that could have made a better End of an Amorous quarrel without
you, than with you.


Anto. Sure it is some Rival, -- hah -- the very Man took down her Picture
yesterday -- the very same that set on me last night -- blessed opportunity --


[Offers to shoot him. Ang. Hold, you're mistaken Sir.

Anto. By Heaven the very same!
-- Sir, what pretensions have you to this Lady?

Will. Sir, I do not use to be Examined, and am Ill at all disputes but this --


[Draws: Anton. offers to shoot. Ang. Oh hold! you see he is Armed with certain
death;
[ To Will. -- And you Antonio, I command you hold,
By all the Passion you have so lately vowed me.

Enter Don Pedro, sees Antonio, and stays. Ped. Hah, Antonio! and Angellica!
[Aside.
Anto. When I refuse obedience to your Will,
May you destroy me with your Mortal hate.
By all that is Holy I Adore you so,
That even my Rival, who has Charms enough
To make him fall a Victim to my jealousy
Shall live, nay and have leave to love on still.

Ped. What Is this I hear?
[aside.
Ang. Ah thus! it was thus! he talked, and I believed.
[Pointing to Will. -- ( Antonio,) yesterday,
I Would not have sold my Intrest in his heart,
For all the Sword has won and lost in Battle.
-- But now to show my utmost of contempt,
I give thee Life -- which if thou would preserve,
Live where my Eyes may never see thee more,
Live to undo some one, whose Soul may prove,
So bravely constant to revenge my Love.

[Goes out, Ant. follows, but Ped. pulls him back. Ped. Antonio -- stay.

Ant. Don Pedro --

Ped. What Coward fear was that prevented thee
From meeting me this morning on the Molo?

Anto. Meet thee?

Ped. Yes me; I was the Man that dared thee to it.

Anto. Have thou so often seen me fight in War,
To find no better Cause to excuse my absence?
-- I sent my Sword and ^^e to do thee right,
Finding my self incapable to use a Sword.

Ped. But 'twas Florinda's Quarrel that we fought,
And you to show how little you esteemed her,
Sent me your Rival, giving him your Intrest.
-- But I have found the cause of this affront,
And when I meet you fit for the dispute,
-- I Will tell you my resentment.

Ant. I shall be ready, Sir, e're long to do you reason.
[Ex. Anto.
Ped. If I could find Florinda, now whilst my angers high,
I think I should be kind, and give her to Belvile in revenge.

Will. Faith, Sir, I know not what you would do, but I believe the Priest
within has been so kind.


Ped. How! my Sister Married?

Will. I hope by this time he is, and bedded too, or he has not
My longings about him.

Ped. Dares he do this! does he not fear my Power?

Will. Faith not at all, if you will 'go in, and thank him for the favor he
has done your Sister, so, if not, Sir, my Powers greater in this house than
yours, I have a damned surly Crew here, that will keep you till the next Tide,
and then clap you on board for Prise; my Ship lies but a League off the Molo,
and we shall show your Donship a damned Tramontana Rovers Trick.


Enter Belvile. Belv. This Rogue's in some new Mischief -- had Pedro returned!

Ped. Colonel Belvile, I hear you have Married my Sister?

Bell. You have heard truth then, Sir.

Ped. Have I so; then, Sir, I wish you Joy.

Bell. How!

Ped. By this embrace I do, and I am glad on it.

Bell. Are you in earnest?

Ped. By our long Friendship and my obligations to thee, I am,
The sudain change, I Will give you reasons for anon,
Come lead me to my Sister,
That she may know, I now approve her choice.

[Ex. Bell. with Ped. Will. goes to follow them. Enter Hellena as before in Boys
Clothes, and pulls him back. Will. Ha! my Gypsy: -- now a thousand blessings
on thee for this kindness, Egad Child I was even in despair of ever seeing thee
again; my Friends are all provided for within, each Man his kind Woman.


Hell. Hah! I thought they had served me some such trick!


Will. And I was even resolved to go aboard, and condemn my self to my lone
Cabin, and the thoughts of thee.


Hell. And could you have left me behind, would you have been so ill natured?


Will. When it would have broke my Heart Child: -- but since we are met again, I
defy foul weather to part us.


Hell. And would you be a Faithful Friend, now if a Maid should trust you*


Will. For a Friend I cannot promise, thou art of a form so Excellent a Face
and Humor, too good for cold dull Friendship; I am parlously afraid of being
in Love Child, and you have not forgot how severely you have used me?


Hell. That Is all one, such usage you must still look for, to find out all your
Haunts, to rail at you to all that Love you, till I have made you love only me
in your own defense, because no body else will love.


Will. But have thou no better quality, to recommend thy self by.


Hell. Faith none Captain: -- when 'twill be the greater Charity to take me for
thy Mistress. I am alone Child, a kind of Orphan Lover, and why I should dye a
Maid, and in a Captains hands too, I do not understand,


Will. Egad, I was never clawed away with Broad-sides from any Female before,
thou have one Virtue I Adore, good Nature; I hate a Coy demure Mistress, she is
as troublesome as a Colt, I Will break none; no give me a mad Mistress when Mewed,
and in flying on I dare trust upon the wing, that whilst she is kind will come
to the Lure.


Hell. Nay as kind as you will good Capt. whilst it lasts, but let us lose no
time,


Will. My time's as precious to me, as thine can be, therefore dear creature,
since we are so well agreed, let us retire to my Chamber, and if ever thou were
treated with such Savory Love! -- come -- my beds prepared for such a guest all
clean and Sweet as thy fair self, I love to steal a Dish and a Bottle with a
Friend, and hate long Graces -- come let us retire and fall too.


Hell. It Is but getting my consent, and the business is soon done, let but old
Gaffer Himen and his Priest, say amen to it, and I dare lay my Mothers daughter
by as proper a Fellow as your Father's Son, without fear or blushing,


Will. Hold, hold, no Bugg words Child, Priest and Hymen, prithee add a
Hangman to 'em to make up the consort, -- no, no, we will have no Vows but Love,
Child, nor witness but the Lover, the kind Deity enjoin naught but Love! and
enjoy! Himen and Priest wait still upon Portion, and Jointure; Love and Beauty
have their own Ceremonies; Marriage is as certain a bane to Love, as lending
Money is to Friendship: I Will neither ask nor give a Vow, -- though I could be
content to turn Gypsy, and become a left handed bridegroom, to have the
pleasure of working that great Miracle of making a Maid a Mother, if you durst
venture; it is upse Gypsy that, and if I miss, I Will lose my Labor.


Hell. And if you do not lose, what shall I get? a cradle full of noise and
mischief, with a pack of repentance at my back? can you teach me to weave Incle
to pass my time with? it is upse Gypsy that too.


Will. I can teach thee to Weave a true loves knot better.


Hell. So can my dog.


Will. Well, I see we are both upon our Guards, and I see there is no way to
conquer good Nature, but by yielding, -- here -- give me thy hand -- one kiss
and I am thine --


Hell. One kiss! how like my Page he speaks; I am resolved you shall have none,
for asking such a sneaking sum, -- he that will be satisfied with one kiss,
will never dye of that longing; good Friend, single kiss, is all your talking
come to this? -- a kiss, a caudle! farewell Captain, single kiss.

[Going out he stays her.
Will. Nay if we part so, let me dye like a bird upon a bough, at the Sheriffs
charge, by Heaven both the Indies, shall not buy thee from me. I adore thy
Humor and will marry thee, and we are so of one Humor, it must be a bargain
-- give me thy hand. -- [Kisses her Hand. And now let the blind ones (Love and
Fortune) do their worst.


Hell. When God-a-mercy Captain!


Will. But harkey -- the bargain is now made; but is it not fit we should know
each others Names? that when we have reason to curse one another hereafter (and
People ask me who it is I give to the Devil) I may at least be able to tell,
what Family you came of.


Hell. Good reason, Captain; and where I have cause, (as I doubt not but I
shall have plentiful) that I may know at whom to throw my -- blessings -- I
beseech ye your Name.


Will. I am called Robert the Constant.


Hell. A very fine name; pray was it your Faulkner or Butler that Chisten'd
you? do they not use to Whistle when they call you?


Will. I hope you have a better, that a man may name without crossing himself,
you are so merry with mine.


Hell. I am called Hellena the Inconstant.


Enter Pedro, Belvile, Florinda, Fred. Valleria. Ped. Hah! Hellena!


Florin. Hellenah!


Hell. The very same -- hah my Brother! now Captain show your Love and Courage;
stand to your Arms, and defend me bravely, or I am lost for Ever.


Ped. What Is this I hear! false Girl, how came you hither, and what is your
business? Speak.

[Goes roughly to her.
Will. Hold off Sir, you have leave to parley only.

Puts himself between.
Hell. I had even as good tell it, as you guess it; Faith Brother my business,
is the same with all living Creatures of my Age, to love, and be beloved, and
here is the Man.


Ped. Perfidious Maid, have thou deceived me too, deceived thy self and Heaven;


Hell. It Is time enough to make my peace with that,
Be you but kind let me alone with Heaven,

Ped. Belvile, I did not expect this false play from you; was it not enough
you would gain Florinda (which I pardoned) but your lewd Friends too must be
inricht with the spoils of a Noble Family?


Bell. Faith Sir, I am as much surpised at this as you can be: Yet Sir, my
Friends are Gentlemen, and ought to be Esteemed for their Misfortunes, since
they have the Glory to suffer with the best of Men and Kings; it is true, he is a
Rover of Fortune, Yet a Prince, aboard his little wooden World.


Ped. What Is this to the maintenance of a Woman of her Birth and Quality.


Will. Faith Sir, I can boast of nothing but a Sword which does me right where
e're I come, and has defended a worse Cause then a Woman's; and since I loved
her before I either knew her Birth or Name, I must pursue my resolution, and
marry her.


Ped. And is all your holy intent of becoming a Nun, debauched into a desire of
Man?


Hell. When -- I have considered the matter Brother, and find, the Three hundred
thousand Crowns my Uncle left me (and you cannot keep from me) will be better
laid out in Love than in Religion, and turn to as good an account, -- let most
voices carry it, for Heaven or the Captain?

All cry, a Captain? a Captain?


Hell. Look ye Sir, it is a clear case.


Ped. Oh I am mad -- if I refuse, my life's in danger -- [aside. -- Come --
there is one motive induces me -- take her -- I shall now be free from fears of
her Honor, guard it you now, if you can, I have been a slave to it long enough,

[gives her to him.
Will. Faith Sir, I am of a Nation, that are of opinion a woman's Honor is not
worth guarding when she has a mind to part with it.


Hell. Well said Captain.


Ped. This was your Plot Mistress, but I hope you have married one that will
revenge my quarrel to you --


[ To Valleria. Val. There Is no altering Destiny, Sir.


Ped. Sooner than a Woman's Will, therefore I forgive you all -- and wish you
may get my Father's Pardon as Easily; which I fear.


Enter Blunt dressed in a Spanish Habit, looking very ridiculously; his Man a
justing his Band. Man. It Is very well Sir --


Blunt. Well Sir, 'dshearlikins I tell you it is damnable Ill Sir, -- a Spanish
habit good Lord! Could the Devil and my Tailor devise no other punishment for
me, but the Mode of a Nation I abominate?


Bell. What Is the matter Ned?


Blunt. Pray view me round, and judge, --


[Turns round. Bell. I must confess thou art a kind of an odd Figure.


Blunt. In a Spanish habit with a Vengeance! I had rather be in the Inquisition
for Judaisme, than in this Doublet and Breeches, a Pillory were an easy
Collar, to this three handfuls high; and these Shoes too, are worse, then the
stocks with the sole an Inch shorter than my Foot: In fine, Gentlemen, methinks
I look altogether like a Bag of Bays stufft full of Fools flesh.


Bell. Methinks it is well, and makes thee look e'n Cavalier: Come Sir, settle
your face, and salute our Friends, Lady --


Blunt. Hah! -- say thou so my Little Rover -- [To Hell. Lady -- (if you be
one) give me leave to kiss your hand, and tell you adshearlikins for all I look
so, I am your humble Servant, -- a Pox of my Spanish habit.


Will. Hark -- what is this?

[Musick is heard to play.
Enter Boy. Joy. Sir, as the Custom is, the gay people in Masquerade who male
every man's House their own, are coming up:


Enter several Men and Women in Masquing Habits with Music, they put
themselves in order and Dance. Blunt. Adsheartlikins, would twere lawful to
pull off their false faces, That I might see if my Doxie were not amongst them.


Bell. Ladies and Gentlemen, since you are come so ap ropo, you must take a
small Collation with us.

[To the Masquero's*
Will. Whilst we will to the Good Man within, who stays to give us a Cast of his
Office. [To Hell. -- Have you no trembling at the near approach?


Hell. No more than you have in an Engagement or a Tempest.


Will. Egad you are a brave Girl, and I admire thy Love and Courage.

Lead on, no other Dangers they can dread,
Who Venture in the Storms of the Marriage Bed.

[Exeunt. THE END.
EPILOGUE.
THe Banished Cavaliers! a Roving Blade!
A Popish Carnival! a Masquerade!
The Devel's in it if this will please the Nation,
In these our blessed times of Reformation,
When Conventickling is so much in fashon.
And yet --
That Mutinous Tribe less Factions do beget,
Than your continual differing in Wit;
Your Iudgment's (as your Passion's) a disease:
Nor Muse nor Miss your Appetite can please;
Your grown as Nice as queasie Consciences,
Who Is each Convulsion, when the Spirit moves,
Damns every thing, that Maggot disapproves.
With Canting Rule you would the Stage refine,
And to Dull Method all our Sense confine.
With the Insolence of Common Wealths you rule,
Where each gay Fop, and Politic grave Fool
On Monarch Wit impose, without control.
As for the last, who seldom sees a Play,
Unless it be the old Black Friars way,
Shaking his empty Noddle over Bamboo,
He Cries, -- Good Faith, these Plays will never do.
-- Ah, Sir, in my young days, what lofty Wit,
What high strained Scenes of Fighting there were Writ:
These are slight airy Toys. But tell me, pray,
What has the House of Commons done to day?
Then shows his Politics, to let you see,
Of State Affairs he will judge as notably,
As he can do of Wit and Poetry.
The younger Sparks, who hither do resort,
Cry, --
Pox of your gentile things, give us more Sport;
-- Damn me, I Am sure 'twill never please the Court.
Such Fops are never pleased unless the Play
Be stufft with Fools, as brisk and dull as they:
Such might the Half-Crown spare, and in a Glass
At home, behold a more Accomplished Ass,
Where they may set their Cravats, Wigs and Faces,
And Practice all their Buffonry Grimasses:
See how this -- Huff becomes, -- this Damny, -- stare, --
Which they at home may act, because they dare,
But -- must with prudent caution do elsewhere.
Oh that our Nokes, or Tony Lee could show
A Fop but half so much to the life as you.
Postscript.
This Play had been sooner in Print, but for a Report about the Town (made by
some either very Malicious or very Ignorant) that 'twas Thomaso altered; which
made the Booksellers fear some trouble from the Proprietor of that Admirable
Play, which indeed has Wit enough to stock a Poet, and is not to be peec't or
mended by any but the Excellent Author himself; That I have stolen some hints
from it, may be a proof, that I valued it more than to pretend to alter it* had
I had the Dexterity of some Poets, who are not more Expert in stealing than in
the Art of Concealing, and who even that way outdo the Spartan-Boyes. I might
have appropriated all to my self, but I, vainly proud of my Judgment, hang out
the Sign of Angellica, (the only stolen Object) to give Notice where a great
part of the Wit dwelt; tho if the Play of the Novella were as well worth
remembering as Thomaso, they might (bating the Name) have as well said, I took
it from thence: I will only say the Plot and Business (not to boast on it) is my
own: as for the Words and Characters, I leave the Reader to judge and compare
'em with Thomaso, to whom I recommend the great Entertainment of reading it,
tho had this succeeded ill, I should have had no need of imploring that Justice
from the Critics, who are naturally so kind to any that pretend to usurp their
Dominion, they would doubtless have given me the whole Honor on it. Therefore I
will only say in English what the famous Virgil does in Latin; I make Verses,
and others have the Fame.

FINIS.

