A Christian ADMONITION OR Friendly Exhortation, sent to WILLIAM LAWD, lace
Archbishop of Canterbury, now Prisoner in the Tower.

Dedicated to all those that seek for the peace of Sion, by the conversion of
her Enemies. By, T. B.

When thou thine Enemy do see,
In great distress and misery,
Pray for his State, and Counsel give,
That so his soul in peace may live.
13. Luke, 34. As fragrant sweet parfumes the heart rejoice,
So does good Counsel from a friendly voice.
27. Proverb. 9. READ AND CONSIDAR



Printed in the Year of Grace, M.DC.XLI.

A Christian Admonition, or friendly Exhortation to William Lawd, late
Archbishop of Canterbury.
My Lord:
MY Idle Muse that long has bin at ease,
Not daring to lanche forth into the seas
Of these distempered times, does now at last
Her former sluggishnesse quite from her cast,
And with earnest desiers which are not weak,
Wishes she might one word unto you speak:
But not to jeere your Lordship; No not I,
It is a thing I always did defy;
But in plain honest terms, let me begin,
A soule-convincing song to you to sing.
What was the cause! O thou that sat so high,
To steare the stern of our prosperity:
That thou so plainly to the world did show,
Thou sought'st to guide us to our overthrow?
What was the reason! may I be so bold
To ask the question, was it store of Gold
Thou did aim at, for to gratify,
Thy vast desiers, and to satisfy
Thy covetous and carnal appetite,
And by that means to raise thee up delight?
Then had thou thy desiers, gold good store
Came in unto thee, daily more and more;
Thousands, yea many thousands was the rate,
Which came in yearly thee to satiate;
Thy lands and livings which are large and great,
Thy Courts, wherein was thy judicall seat,
Thy fees, thy fines, thy Incomes every way,
Still brought thee store of gold both night and day,
Yet was all this too little, that thou must
Seek still for more, by ways which were unjust?
Must thou take bribes? Nay, which me thinks is more?
Sell justice to augment thy boundles store,
Yea sell judicial places too, which were
Misused by them, that bought them for to rear
Their sums of money up again and so,
Injustice from thy Courts did daily flo?
Or was it honor, that thou sought'st to gain?
Did that vain shadow flote upon thy brain?
Did thy desires strive to pluck that flower,
Which wither will, thou see in half an hour?
Why then thou had it in a large degree,
No man in all the land exceeded thee.
Thy place and person both adorned were:
With titles which did store of honors bear?
Thou was it Archbishop of old Canterbury;
Which title for to grace it, grace did carry;
Primate and Metropolitan of all
Those large Confines, which we do England call,
Oxfords chief Chancellor thou wast also,
And ruld'st that place, from whence great Arts do flo?
Yet all this was too little to content,
Thy large desiers, which were daily bent,
To be some body greater then all this,
Some say thou hop'st that men thy toe shall kiss:
For thus they say, but it is a lie I hope,
Thou look to be a Cardinal or Pope:
And yet it is evident thou feign would be
Something above the pitch of thy degree:
Or else thou would not have us guided all
By Laws which only did thee maker call.
Was it a small thing in thine eyes to be
Raised to a place of so much dignity:
From such a mean and low degree as thou,
Made Lord of them, and they to thee must bow,
Which did deserve the place better then thee,
Except that thou might use such tyranny
Over thy brethren, as to make them yield
To what thou pleasedst, or to fly the field:
Or else both souls and bodies bear the thrall,
Which from thy stern austeritie did fall?
What was the cause, J pray thee let us know,
(And now at last in plain terms to us show:)
Thou soughtest for to lead us in a way,
Which God has not commanded to obey?
What did thou make thy self? a God on Earth?
Have thou forgot the place of thy mean birth,
That thou so proudly should upon thee take,
New duties, and new Doctrines for to make:
And by thy strict command enforce us all,
Thy ways, the ways of God and truth to call?
And to that end did many men exalt,
Which 'twixt thy ways, and Gods did alwais halt,
And gav'st them store of worldly wealth and places,
Still favoring them in their base sinful cases:
That so they might preach thee not Christ to men,
Nay many thou exaltst, which with their pen;
And in their preaching too, did much disgrace
The name of Christ, and sought for to deface
That glorious name, by which we saved are;
And all to make thy ways and ends seem fair:
And if a zealous Pastor did desire,
To do that which his calling did require:
Which was to tell the people of their sin,
And show them the true way for to walk in
Then presently, he must suspended be,
And quite deposed of his Ministry;
Though never so ancient, learned, grave, and wise:
Yet all this seemed nothing in your eyes?
Though wife and children should a begging go,
You did not care, you did not feel their woe,
And some base Fellow then his place must take,
Which never any Conscience yet did make
Of what he taught, or how he lived, only
To please your grace, he always had an eye,
And would at your command, both cringe and bow
And sing a Mass, if you would it allow:
They were the men you did so much esteem;
And those that liked the^, you did Christians deem:
But could your Lordship any way believe
That Christians true could any credit give,
To such base, idle, superstitious sots,
That best could preach over their Tavern pots?
No! though your grace thought ignorance to be
The Mother of devotion, yet did we
Justly believe, that 'twas the only way,
Both souls and bodies utterly to slay,
But now me thinks, I hear your grace reply
(Willing to clear your self) and to deny
What here you are accused off, and say,
You did not seek to walk this crooked way,
But all you did, was for to please the King,
That you his profit and content might bring:
You sought the peace and welfare of the Land,
And sought to give content upon each hand?
But pray my Lord, do not your self deceive:
It Is now hye time this lying plea to leave.
What? would you make us still believe, that we
Cannot the truth from so much falsehood see?
What! did you rule the King, or he rule you?
Surely I think the former to be true;
For he good man put all his trust in you,
And what you did, he thought must needs be true:
Impossible it was, he thought, that he,
That raised was unto that high degree,
By his mere favor, should so basely deal
From him and his Gods truth for to conceal:
But yet suppose, the King command should give
To do that, which might his true subjects grieve;
Yet it had bin your duty to have shown
His Majesty the truth, and have made known
His duty to his God, and to his Land,
And so have caused him to understand
The inconveniences that would arise,
From such things, which Gods people did despise.
But now, J hope your wisdom will suppose,
Your vices only I seek to disclose;
And by that means, seek for to amplify,
And to increase your former misery;
But i will assure you, that was not the end;
For which this short epistle now was penned;
But my aim was, if possible I might,
Let in your Conscience so much godly light,
Which now at last, might cause you to begin
With true remorse to look upon your sin.
O! that I now such rhetoric could use:
Or that my lines such virtue could infuse
Into your heart, as now might cause you make
A narrow search, and a strickt notice take
Of that soul, black, mishappen ugly sin:
Which you these many years have lived in!
Alas! you know, that Jesus Christ came down,
To level Ceremonies with the ground:
They did him and his Office typisie,
And he once come, they all must straightway die;
And yet, you needs must set them up again,
And none must from their exercise refrain:
Christ did all Altars utterly deface,
That in his Church they never might have place:
He made their stone like chalk-stones of the field
Which* little profit do to any yield,
And yet you needs must them again erect,
And they forsooth must needs be trimly decked
With superstitious Romish relics base;
Which do all Christianity deface.
What did you think that Christ must come again,
And here submit himself for to be slain;
To clear the world of those enormities,
Which Antichrist does on the earth devise?
No certainly, he shorter work will make,
And ere long, to a strict ^ccount him take:
Therefore J would entreat you now at last,
All selfe-conceitednesse from you to cast;
And look upon your self, just as you are:
Let not your self, your self, in pity spare;
And see what folly, yea what madness made,
You in that black and muddie waters wade?
Yea now the days you have to live are few,
If Justice spare, yet Nature claims her due,
An will ere long in you be satisfied,
It is a debt which cannot be denied:
Therefore in time, while it is called to day,
The voice of Christian Counsel now obey,
And look for mercy; fos it may be found,
God still will hear your true repenting sound.
Look upon him, whom you have crucified,
Look upon him, whom you have so denied;
Look upon him, whose truth ye sought to hide,
He never mercy any man denied?
He died for them, which did his death conspire,
He died fer them, which did his death desire:
And therefore died for you, and I, and all,
That can for mercy from his sinnings call:
O! therefore let not grace resisted be
By black despair, that mortal enemy,
Of every sinner, whose chief strength does lie
In ignorance of Christ's sufficiency:
Whose precious blood does in it power bear
The greatest sinners soul from sin to clear.
Which that it may do yours, my prayer shall be
To God alone which does all secrets see:
That he would all your heinous sins pass over,
And with Christ's blood all your offenses cover;
That so your soul being free from Satan's bands,
He may receive it in his heavenly hands.
FINIS.

