John La Motte Esquire* Citizen of London: borne j. May 1577, and Deceased July
13, 1655.


Abraham's Interment: OR The good Old-mans Burial in a good Old Age.

Opened in a Sermon, At Bartholomews Exchange, July 24. 1655. at the Funeral
of the Worshipful John Lamotte Esquire Sometimes Alderman of the City of London.

By FULK BELLERS M.A. Preacher of the Gospel.

Unto which is added a short Narrative of his Life and Death.

2 KIN. 20.1. Set thy house in order, for thou shall dye and not live.

JOB 21.22. Acquaint thy self now with God, and be at peace, thereby good shall
come unto thee.

LONDON: Printed by R. I. for Tho. Newberry, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the sign of the three Golden Lions in Cornhill. 1656.

TO THE Right Worshipful, the truly Religious, THE Lady Hester Honywood. AND
To her most hopeful Nephew Mr. Maurice Abbot, of the Inner Temple.
Daughter, and Grandson, Co-heires of John Lamotte Esquire etc.
Much honored,
THe sweetness of Communion with God (whereby Saints taste and see how good
the Lord is) is more clearly discerned by their own personal experience, than
can be declared by any verbal expressions. This was the highest pitch of Adams
happiness, during his estate of concreated integrity, that he was admitted to
the enjoyment of this grand privilege; what is it then for any of his fallen
Offspring, to be restored to this great exaltation? And yet we know that
Believers, by faith in Christ, are reinstated in this advancement, and are many
times enabled to say, and that feelingly, (...). 1 John 1.3.
truly our fellowshp, (or our Communion) is with the Father, and with his Son
Jesus Christ. This is the Heaven of Heavens, to Saints Triumphant, and Heaven
here on this side Heaven, to Saints Militant, Expectants of Heaven hereafter.

Unutterable is the Contentment that man finds sometimes in his Cordial
acquaintance, with an Ancient, Fast and Religious Friend, to whom he may
freely, and fully unbosome himself, and from whom he may receive suitable, and
seasonable advice, with all candor and faithfulness, upon all occasions. Now
if words cannot to the life hold out that satisfaction that man finds in his
converse with man, like unto himself, is it any wonder, if I am not able fully
to display that heart-ravishing delight, which the renewed soul meets
withal, whilst it nourishes humble and holy Communion with God, the high and
lofty one that inhabiteth Eternity? It is agreed on by all, that holy
familiarity with him is full of spiritual solace; though all my language be
too short, completely to describe before you, how satisfactory and contentfull
it is. How sweet are those holy Parlies with God in prayer, and how pleasant
their returns? far pleasanter to a gracious, than the returns of ships (richly
laden with rarest Commodities) to a Carnal heart; how delightful are the
droppings of the Sanctuary, whereby the souls of Saints become as watered
Gardens, as so many Edens, and whereby they come to hear of joy and gladness,
so that the bones which God at any time has broken begin to rejoice?

How ensuring are the Incomes of the Spirit, in that sealing Ordinance of the
Lords Supper, wherein the truly penitent and believing Soul, looking up to
Christ, (by the Eye of Faith) whom he has peirced, and being in heaviness
for him, etc. receives the pledge of the Remission of his sins, and of all
other Covenant-Mercies, which more exhilerates him with heart reviving joy,
then the sight of a Pardon does, a condemned Malefactor?

It was upon this account that the heart of David was filled with such
Pantings, as the Heart after the waterbrooks, to come and appear before God in
soul-reviving Ordinances, and that Marquess of Vico Galeatius that eminent
Confessor, when offered Golden Mountains of Honors, and Riches, how resolutely
did he reply, their money perish with them that think all the honors of Italy,
etc. to be worth one hours Communion with God at Geneva, a place wherein
Religion flourished. Now how abundant that worthy and experimental Christian
was (to whom you owe your extraction, as branches to their root) in nourishing
communion with God, and how sweet he found it, both in his life, and at his
death, I need not relate to you in special, who were full well acquainted with
the manner of his holy Conversation in his Life, and of his comfortable
departure at his end. My suit to you is Honored Lady,
Who have made such Eminent progress in Grace, Labor yet more and more to
imitate your deceased Father, in walking in all the ways of holiest Communion
with God, treading daily in his steps of Soul resignation, Faith, Patience,
Charity, Zeal, and all other Christian graces, whereof he left an exemplary
Copy to you and your hopeful Issue to write after. I need not suggest that it
is constancy which is the Crowning grace.

Honored Sir,
Though you have attained as yet to a little more than a fourth of the days
that your Indulgent Grandfather arrived at, yet he has left you, as a Coheir
of his Estate, so I hope of his graces also; strive therefore that he may in
all his soul-adorning endowments, live in you, that as he (and many others)
looked upon you with a hopeful eye, whilst he lived, so the world may see
you more and more, to answer all those blooming hopes, now he is removed from
you.



To conclude, my humble address to you both is, that you would be mindful of
all the holy Counsels and savory advertisements wherein he abounded toward
you, and among others those that he communicated to you frequently by his
letters, and forget not that Letter (added unto his life) whereby being dead he
yet speaks to you, and then doubt not, but there will be a full return into
your bosoms, of all the prayers which he so fervently and frequently darted up
to Heaven in your behalfs, which is the persuasion

Of your Worships much Obliged in the Lord. FULK BELLERS.
December. 24. 1655.
ABRAHAM'S Interment: OR, The good Old man's Burial in a good old Age.
GEN, 15.15. And thou shall go unto thy Fathers in peace, and be buried in a
good old age.


SOlomon tells us, Eccles. 7.2.
It is better to go into the house of Mourning, than to go to the house of
Feasting, for that is the end of all men; and the living (the godly living)
will lay it to heart. The Lord has turned his own House into a House of
Mourning unto us, Ubi lugetur mortuus Mercer.
upon this sad account, viz. the interment of him, who as he was much esteemed
of by the Citizens of this Renowned City in general, so in special of this
place, whereof he has been an ancient and worthy Parishioner, and peculiarly
by that great Congregation; ^hereof he has been a vigilant Elder near thirty
years to^^ther, one aged in grace as well as years, unto whom ^his personal
Promise to the Father of the Faithful was made good; though not for the number
of years that Abraham lived up unto, yet for that time that Moses reckons up as
the ordinary term of the oldest age. Psalm. 90.
Promises passed of general Mercies to particular persons may be fulfilled
over and over again, Josh. 1.5. Heb. 13. Id quidem Joshuae dicitur, subesse
vero generalem consolationem piorum, Apostolus h^c allegatione docet. Paraeus.
as that, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, made first to Joshua,
extended by Paul to all Believers, and in them daily fulfilled. The like I may
say of this Promise here in some sense, there is somewhat that may be enlarged
to all in Christ, as to go to their Fathers in peace, though for the latter
branch of it, it be only made good to some, not to all, as to be buried in a
good old Age, since all attain not to that period in the letter of it; yet in
both the Branches of it, it may some way be accommodated to our deceased
Brother, as in the sequel of our Discourse will plainly (by Divine assistance)
be made out unto you. The words may be looked upon with a double aspect. 1.
Relative, 2. Absolute.

1 Relative, in reference to what goes before, and follows after; so they
contain a cordial given to Abraham, against a fainting fit that might surprise
him; God had passed many Promises to Abraham, in the former part of this
Chapter.

1 I am thy Shield, and thy exceeding great reward; I am so, and will continue
to be so; for the passage in the Hebrew is Elliptical, and the Supplement may
be made up by the future, (...)
as well as by the present time, or we may take in both, I am, and will be so
unto thee.

(...)
2 He will give him an Heir out of his own Bowels, whence should arise an
innumerable Issue, as the Stars in Heaven for number, Zehne^i. Simil. p. 18.
or multitude, verse. 4, 5.

3 He will bestow the Land of Canaan for their Revenue, and that by Covenant,
verse. 7.18. a large income for to support them*

Q.
Abraham seems astonished at the hearing of these things, and Questions,
Whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it verse. 8. a question that sprang
not out of diffidence, or a^^solute unbeleef, but out of an holy Admiration, as
one extasied with joy, and desiring more fully to be informed about it. Sol. To
this God gives a double answer. 1 Visional. 2. Verbal.

1 Visional, They should have it when they had been first grievously afflicted,
many of them slain, many chopped in pieces, which seems to be something of the
Mystical meaning of those Ceremonies in that Sacrifice, by which the Covenant
should be confirmed, verse. 10. viz. the dividing of the Sacrifice, Pezel. and
Pareus in loc.
and laying each pe^ce one against another; and when the Birds of Prey should
come down, i. e. Pharaoh and the Egyptians fall on to devour them, the Lord
would raise up one of Abraham's Seed, implicitly Moses, to fray them away, and
to deliver his Off spring, verse. 11. they should not want protection.

2 Verbal, verse. 13, 14. which make out the former Mystery. Know of a certainty
thy Seed shall be a stranger in a Land that is not theirs ( viz. Egypt) and
shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years, and also that
Nation whom they shall serve will I judge, and afterward shall they come out
with great substance.

Probably the Searcher of all hearts saw Abraham in some doubt, why livery and
seisin, or peaceable possession of that Land should be deferred so long? He
therefore assigns the cause in the Verse after the Text, for the iniquity of
the Amorites is not yet full. He was minded to root them up, and that none
might in after times censure his proceedings as injurious, he will suffer them
to fill up the measure of their iniquity, that they might be without excuse,
and the mouths of all stopped, at the beholding of their total extirpation.

Q. It may be yet some scruple might rest upon the spirit of Abraham, what
shall become of me when all these evils betide my posterity?

A. The Lord bids him rest satisfied, for before all these evils surprise thy
Seed, Leo Judae. Junius. Pareus.
thou shall go to thy Fathers in peace. And hence the best Expositors render
the Hebrew Particle (translated by ours as copulative) discretively, yet thou
shall go, or, but thou shall go to thy Fathers in peace.

This Relative consideration of the words may yield unto us this profitable
instruction. That Doct. The Lord in his abundant Mercy sometimes takes away his
by death, from the beholding of future evils.

This we see is promised here to Abraham. Lest his heart should rend in pieces
upon the sight of all the miseries that should befall his Offspring in future
times; he shall first go to his Fathers in peace. The like for substance was
promised to pious Josiah long after; 2 Chro. 34.28.
when evils were approaching apace, Caesus fuit Josias 31. anno Regni, aetatis
39. quoties ei moriendum fuisset si diutius vivendo vidisset veram religionem
everti, filios Captivos abduci, regnum exscendi. Lavat.
the apprehension whereof did much scare, and deject him, God cast in this
Promise for his support; Behold, I will gather thee to thy Fathers, and thou
shall be gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the
evil that I will bring upon this place, and the inhabitants of the same; the
bare sight of which (had he lived to have seen it) would probably have broken
his heart, viz. the sight of Religion ruined, his Sons captivated, his Kingdom
rooted up, etc. God therefore removes him by death, from the beholding of any
of these. Now that it savours of abundant mercy, to take away the righteous
from beholding evils to come, let us consider;

First, Is it not a great mercy, that a man shall be removed, before he come to
be a spectator of other men's sins? the seeing and hearing of all the unlawful
deeds of those wretched Sodomites, (...) 2 Pet. 2.8.
amongst whom Lot lived, was a trouble of heart unto him, and keeps him as it
were upon the rack. This drew not a few, but many brinish tears, yea rivers of
them, Psalm. 189.136.
from the eyes of holy David, professing that rivers of tears ran down his eyes,
because men kept not Gods Law. This filled the hearts of those Mourners in
Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 9.4
with heart-rending sighs, and their tongues with heaven-peircing cries, for
all the abominations that were done in the midst of Jerusalem; the more grace,
the more sighing and sobbing, weeping and wailing for other men's sins. God
snatches away a gracious Father, Master, Husband, or Prince from the beholding
of the graceless practices of his Issue, Servants, wife or subjects, that
would be a corrosive unto him.

Secondly, Does it not savor much of Mercy to be taken away from beholding of
other men's punishments? was it not upon this account that the long lived
Patriarchs were taken away by death, before the flood came? yea Methuselah the
year of the deluge (if that Chronologer be not out) lest his eyes should see
that dismal sight, ^ucholcer. Chronol.
the drowning of all flesh. I persuade my self, that when Abraham looked upon
the smoke of Sodom and the Country about it, Genesis 19.28.
ascending as the smoke of a furnace, it did occasion no little grief of heart
unto him; Septuagint. (...)
and what the beholding of the miseries of Jerusalem in the besieging, sacking,
and ruining of it, did create to Holy Jeremy, his book of the Lamentations,
penned upon that doleful occasion, may abundantly declare.

The death of Jacob and Joseph before the oppressions came on, and strange
cruelties of the Egyptians made seizure upon their offspring, Possidonius.
savoured of mercy; and it was a great blessing for Augustine to be taken away
by a natural death, when Genserik had besieged Hippo, that he might not see
the cruelties of the Vandalls, that were breaking in upon the Church of God; O
Heidelberga* Heidelberga. In vita Parei.
and for Pareus, that he should die at Heidelberg before the enemy was Master
of it, a place that he so entirely loved.

Thirdly, Is it not a great mercy to be taken away from the tasting of evils
in their own persons? that they may not feel the smart of grievous and direful
Judgments? he that is omniscient foresees calamities and judgments a coming
which we cannot see; He took notice of the deluge in his own decree, before the
Cataracts of Heaven were opened, he therefore snatches away those that he was
minded to secure, lest they should be in wrapped in the common calamity. Our God
(rich in mercy) deals as a prudent rich man, when he sees the fire come near
his own habitation, he removes his Jewels, or his treasures, into another
place, where they may be secured from danger, or as a careful Husbandman in
catching weather in Harvest; when he sees the Heavens be clouded, or a storm
up, he will do his utmost to get his Corn into his barn, if possible before it
be wet. We read of the Egyptians, when they heard that God would cause it to
rain a grievous hail, such as had not been in Egypt since the foundation of it
to that present, Ex. 9.20.
he that feared the word of the Lord amongst the Servants of Pharaoh, made his
Servants and his Cattle fly into their houses; so deals our God, when he
sees a storm a coming, he drives in his, that as they shared not with others
in their sins, so neither shall they partake with them in their sufferings; yea
even that Heathen observed, that when God brings on any remarkable destruction
or Alteration in a Nation, Plato.
he first takes away them that are good in it.

Use I shall dismiss this Relative observation with this word of improvement,
Lay to heart the Lords taking away of any godly professors at any time; for
albeit the dispensation savours of mercy to them, yet many times it proves
ominous to them that are left behind; when Swallows fly away, winter is then
approaching Their death indeed is a blessing unto themselves, for blessed are
they that dye in the Lord, Rev: 14.13.
and not only they that die for him; yet mostly it portends evil to survivers:
however it shall be well with themselves, as is here promised unto Abraham,
which leads me to the second. The Absolute consideration of the words, which
affords two soul cheering Cordialls.

1 Thou shall go to thy Fathers in Peace. 2 And be buried in a good old age.
A couple of Promises, or a couple of Branches of the same Promise, that would
require a couple of hours for the unfolding of them, to view them exactly. I
must deal as a Travailer that is on his way, who may glance his eye here, or
there, but makes no stay till he comes to his Journyes end, no more shall I,
till through help from my God I shall have spoken something of both these, as
they lie before you.

And for the opening of the first, we shall inquire.

Quest. 1 What is meant by his going to his Fathers? Was he to go back to
Haran, or Ur of the Chaldees, in his life, or be carried thither, to be
interred after death; or was he to go to that place whither their souls went
upon the dissolution of their bodies?

Sol. 1. Abraham was not to go to his Fathers, first, In Body; the place of his
local Interment, was to be Genesis 25.7*
Macpelah in Canaan, and not any other place; secondly, Nor in Soul, that
removed to the immediate fruition of God in glory; whereas many of his
Ancestors were Idolators, serving other Gods, Josh. 24.2.
and doubtless many of them died in their Paganish condition.

2 But the sense of this expression is, Abraham shall die, that is the meaning
of the Hebraism; thou shall go to thy Fathers, that is, corporal death shall
arrest thee as well as it did do them.

Now if you compare these words with verse the sixth, where we read that
Abraham believed in the Lord, and it was counted to him for Righteousness;
though he were a believer in Christ, yet he must go to his Fathers, that is,
he must die as well as they, this may inform us, Doct. That albeit faith in
Christ does exempt Believers from the second, yet it will not free any from the
strak of the first death.

Abraham though a Believer, yea the highest in the form of Believers, being
the Father of the faithful, yet he must die; Dan.
and it is no wonder, since the Decree is gone forth from God, which is far
more irrevocable than the laws of the Medes and Persians. It is appointed unto
all men (Believers as well as unbeleevers) once to die. When the Scripture
says all, Heb. 9.27.
none is exempted; some indeed have had a writ of Privilege from some kinds of
death, yet none from death in the main. Moses was freed from the bitings of
fiery Serpents, as Magistrates sometimes (through mercy) are privileged from
death in times of common mortality, Deuteronomy. 34.5.
yet death surprised them in the end; for Moses the servant of the Lord died in
the land of Moab. Daniel was secured from being devoured by those hungry Lions,
Joh. 8.52
yet his body became a prey to Death, as well as the bodies of other Prophets.
Elisha was spared from being torn in pieces by the Shee-bears out of the Wood,
2 King. 13.2
yet Death took him away in the end.

2 This Decree has made seizure in all Ages, even where faith has been in an
eminent way, as in Moses, witness his undertaking that difficult Embassage to
Pharaoh, to deliver Israel out of Egypt, Faith in the end did eat up all his
fears, and engaged him in that difficult work, yet Death at last did arrest
him, as was hinted before; so in Job, a great Practitioner in the life of
faith; that made him draw up this Resolution, Though he slay me, yet will I
trust in him.

David, a Believer, a man after Gods own heart, and yet Death overtook him; and
Paul, who professed, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life
that I now live, I live by the faith of the Son of God, etc. yet, did not death
surprise him?

I might be endless here, to show you how Death attached Believers, both
before, as well as under the Law, yea even in the time of the Gospel; had the
debt of Sin been taken off, and the Decree rescinded, that Pursevant of Death
would not go on daily to Arrest Beleevrrs at Gods Suit.

Thirdly, The holiest Believer has in his body the Principle of death, viz.
sin, and that entwisted even with his very Nature; Rom, 5.12.
As by one man sin entered into the World, and death by sin, and so death
passed upon all, etc. The holiest may cry out, as those Sons of the Prophets, O
thou man of God, death is in the pot, death is in the body.

Bodies of Sin will become bodies of Death, because sin is in the Soul as a
Canker at the root, that will kill the Tree, as the Worm that smote Jonahs
Gourd, that made it wither away; this drew out that Emphatical Quere, Psalm*
89*49
What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? Shall he deliver his soul
(himself) from the hand of the grave? A question that carries a Negative answer
in the bowels of it, q. d. no man, even the most eminent believing, or holiest
for living, can free himself from the tasting of death.

Use. Look not you now that are Believers to be freed from the common fare of
all real Christians, viz. Death; count upon this, Dye I must, I know not how
soon.

Q. But if my faith exempt me not from death, what avails me to be a Believer?

Sol. Much every way, chiefly because by Believing though thou be not freed
from the stroke, yet sure thou art to be protected from the sting of death, so
that even in the very jaws of death a Believer may 1. holily exult, O Death,
where is thy sting! O Grave, where is thy victory! 1 Cor. 15
the sting of death is sin, the strength of sin is the Law, but thanks be to
God that gives us victory through Christ Jesus our Lord; Rev. 20.6 Romans 8.2
2. yea sure thou art to be delivered from the Second Death, thy faith
interesting of thee in the first Resurrection, and implanting thee into Christ,
it frees thee from Condemnation. He that believes on the Son has everlasting
life, viz. even here someway in possession, Joh. 3.36
as well as hereafter fully in reversion. Besides, thou may be certain the
condition of death is altered to thee, it being not now formally the wages of
sin, but turned into a part of those advantageous chattles that do belong unto
thee, 1 Cor. 3.23. All is thine, even Death, as well as other things. Death to
thee is only the final period to all thy miseries, and the ready inlet to thy
full and eternal happiness.

Now God permits his Decree to take hold upon thee for diverse gracious ends and
purposes, viz.

1 To cast out perfectly the remainders of sin, that even after our Conversion
do still abide within us. When the Priest under the Law had been to view the
house infected with the Plague of the fretting Leprosy, Lev. 14.43, 44, 45
the house was to be broken down, stones, the timber, and all the mortar of it:
Jesus Christ sees the fretting Leprosy of Sin to be in thee, that will not be
outed of its Habitation, till that earthly Tabernacle of thine be pulled down.

2 To put an end to all the perplexing miseries that do befall thee here.
Whilst Israel was in the Wilderness they were infested with fiery Serpents,
never totally freed from them till they came to Canaan; so whilst thou art in
the wilderness of the World, thou art liable to the stingings of many fiery
Serpents, the fiery Serpents of Sin and Misery. Absolute immunity will be
obtained by Death from them, and not before.

3 To be a gate for thy Admission, or entrance into Heaven. Death indeed to on
unbeleever is the door of Hell, but to a Believer it is the entrance of Heaven;
this in eagered Paul with so much panting to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ; Genesis 28.17
what Jacob spoke in another case, is true here of the death of a Believer,
this is the gate of heaven.

Use 2. Yet know this for thy comfort, though death be unavoydable, dye thou
must, yet thou may assure thy self thou shall dye in peace; which leads me to
the manner how Abraham shall be gathered unto his Fathers, which is the Elixir
of the Promise; He shall go in peace; whence we may observe, Doct. That it is a
Believers transcendent Privilege to go unto his Fathers, (or to dye) in peace.

For the profitable handling of this truth; 1 I Will endeavor to show you what is
meant by going to his Fathers, or dying in peace. 2 I Will study clearly to make
it out: 1 That it is a privilege to dye in peace. 2 A transcendent privilege
belonging to Believers.
3 I Will cast in something by way of improvement.


Q. 1. What is meant by going to his Fathers, or dying in peace?

Sol. The Phrase is of different construction in different places of Scripture.

I find it sometimes opposed to a violent, immature, or forcible kind of end.
Thus to Zedekiah, as bad as he was, it was promised* Thou shall not dye by the
Sword, viz. a violent, but thou shall dye in peace, i. e. come unto a Natural
death, Jer. 34.4, 5. so David advising Solomon to cut off Joab by a forcible
death, he uses almost a parallel expression, not in a promissory, 1 King. 2*6
but minatory way; Let not his hoary head go down to the grave in peace, i. e.
let him dye a violent death, and be rolled to his grave in blood.

But sometimes I find it opposed to an uncomfortable end, and then to dye in
peace is to dye in the sense of inward peace, or in an estate of
reconciliation* and this I look upon as the common privilege of all believers.
Josiah had this in promise, 2 Chro. 84.28
though he dyed of his Wounds, yet he dyed in a reconciled condition with God;
and this is the main of the Promise to Abraham here, compared with verse. 6.

Abraham believed in the Lord, and he accounted it to him for righteousness,
Romans 5.1.
being now justified through faith he had peace with God, And when he comes to
dye he shall dye in peace, being sensible of his standing in the grace and
favor of God, Joh. 8. Genesis 25.8
and resting on the invaluable merits of Jesus Christ, whose day he saw, and
upon that account with a placid spirit he resigned up his Soul unto him.

Q. 2 How it may be made out, that to dye in peace is a privilege belonging to
believers?

1 We call that a Privilege which is an Immunity, Privilegium est privata lex.
Privarum seu singular jus contra jus commune indultum. Hostien. Reginald
praxis, ^ori praenit. vol. prioris, p. 547.
granted to some of favor, and denied to others of justice. We all deserve as
to dye, so to dye with fear, terror, and amazement; but our God in mercy
exempts Believers from the common Law of death, as it is the Job 18.14 Es.
57.20, 21
King of Terrors, and vouchsafes them this favor, to depart in peace, when
others depart with horror.

2 This we say is the Believers privilege; for, as for

1 Unbeleevers, and all wicked men whatsoever, there is no peace to the wicked
says my God, they are as the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest; whose waters
cast out in re^a^d dirt; an elegant Similitude, whereby the Prophet sets
forth to the life the restlesness of wicked men, though the Sea has no Winds,
nor Tempests from without to infest it, yet it is restless of its own nature
from within; so it is in wicked men; though they have no outward causes of
trouble, yet still they have causes of inward trouble upon point of Conscience,
than which what more exquisite torture or tormenter can there be? The Heathens
tell us of the Furies lashing wicked miscreants* and these were only the lashes
of an enraged Conscience, every man's own sin creating Soul-racking trouble to
each impenitent sinner. But

2 For Believers, it is unto them promised, they being the persons alone that
love the Law, Psalm. 119.165. Great peace have they that love thy Law, and
nothing shall offend them. The Law of God, it is the picture of the mind of
God, which a Believer loves no less than a loving loyal Wife the Letters of her
indeared Husband, yea, infinitely more, they being the persons that alone are
righteous, being justified by faith they have peace with God, and they alone
shall enter into peace; they had peace entering into them living, Es. 57.1, 2
and they enter into peace when dying; it is they, and they alone that are able
to say when Death approaches, Luke 2.
Lord now letest thou thy servant depart in peace, etc.

2 I will make out, that to dye in peace is a transcendent privilege:

Sol. 1. That Logicians call Transcendent, that exceeds in Nobility, Scheibler
Me^aph. lib. 2. c. 1 ^. 15. transendunt praedicamenta Communitate effendi.
(...) praesidio custodie^. Beza.
Eminency, Sublimity, all Aristotle's Categories; besides, to dye in peace, in
true Gospel peace was a thing he knew not of, and we shall not trouble our
selves to labor to reduce it to any of them; this peace is the peace of God
that passes all understanding, it is that peace of God whereof he is the
Author, and Conferror, that keeps our hearts staid in peace, as in an
impregnable Garrison; this peace is prayed for as a privilege of greatest
worth; Peter prays not only that Grace, but that Peace might be multiplied to
those to whom he wrote. Col. 3.18 (...)
And so Paul, Let the peace of God rule in your hearts, as a Judge deciding all
Controversies between them that are contending for Masteries; nay, this was
conferred by Christ as the greatest mercy that we might receive on this side
Heaven, witness that Golden bequest of his, Joh. 14.2^
My peace I give to you. Princes in power seldom promise toys or trifles, but
things of moment and greatest worth. It was a great favor of Jesus Christ to
his Disciples at sea, to allay the Winds, and the Storms that were up against
them, and what is it to allay the storms of Conscience that are upon them?
Christ among other titles is dignified with this, Es. 9.6*
that he is the Prince of peace, yea our peace, who has taken away the enmity
between us and our God, having purchased peace for us, by no meaner price than
the blood of his Cross; that privilege must needs be transcendent that was
purchased at such a transcendent rate.

2 Besides, if we do but look unto the nature of this peace, it is that peace
that does transcend all the Ken of Nature; Nature may take notice of peace with
man, but for that peace with God, and peace with Conscience, it is out of
Natures Horizon. Romans 5.^ Psalm. 85.9*
He that has peace with God, shall always have peace in God, he will speak
peace unto his people. Prove. 16.7*
If we have peace with him, he can make our enemies to be at peace with us. The
Prince that has peace with any State, has peace with all the Forces belonging
to it; we having peace with him, he can make all his Creatures to be at peace
with us, not only the Beasts, Job 5.23
but the very stones in the Field to be in an amicable League with us; and when
peace rules in Conscience, having tranquillity within, we need not care what
storms are without. When Christ speaks peace to Conscience, as once to the
raging Sea, peace and be still, who then can create trouble? 1 John 3
And if our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God, so that
triumphantly we may break out, The Lord is near that justifies me, who shall
contend with me? When a man has been arraigned for his life, and after is
acquitted, how is he inwardly comforted? it was this inward peace that enabled
the Martyrs with serenity of soul, and undauntedness of spirit to pass through
the fiery Trial; and for Confessors, though surrounded with many troubles, yet
hear their acknowledgements, the Father loves me, the Son has redeemed me,
Maul. 118.12^.
the Spirit comfort me; how then can I be sorrowful? in the most racking
pain of the Stone cries out another, one asking him what he felt, he answered, I
have peace within, though in my flesh I am sensible of most exquisite torments;
it is this peace that is Heaven upon earth while we live, and rendereth us
undaunted even in the jaws of death.

Use. Now for the improvement of this truth, be persuaded to get an interest in
this privilege, I mean to get well-grounded peace, that when Death comes you
may go to your Fathers in peace. It may be some may quere,

Q. Do all that dye peaceably, dye in peace?

R. Yes, all that dye in an estate of true real Gospel peace. I confess there
is as much difference between true and false Peace, as between true and
counterfeit Gold, Silver, or Jewels; yet this observe, that then peace is well
grounded according to the tenor of the Gospel, when

1 It flows in after the convincing sight of sin, Joh. 16.7, 8
when a man beholding his face in the glass of the Law, and the Curse of it,
Act. 16.30, 31
has been brought to cry out, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? False peace
springs out of a senseless, benumbed, sleepy, or seared Conscience, that never
met with any trouble at all, according to that of Christ, When the strong man (
armed with strong corruption) keeps (possession of) his palace, Luke 11.12
( i. e. his heart) his goods are in peace, all goes well, all is at peace; but
when the Spirit comes in, and convinces of sin, he ejecteth the strong man out
of his Dominion. Mar. 4.39
Christ spoke not peace, and be still, to the Sea, until the storms had been
upon it; So neither speaks he to Conscience.

2 It comes from heaven, even from the God of peace who is in heaven, Psalm. 85.9
and speaks peace (upon the sense of their Justification) unto his people,
who are a willing people, to serve him in all duties that he requires; yea, an
obedient, and holy people before him; false peace is altogether from Satan, who
promises peace, though men go on to add drunkenness to thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.19
and strikes a Covenant with the sinner, which makes him fondly conclude, Es.
28.15.18
that he has made a Covenant with Death, and with Hell he is at an agreement,
this sinful peace God sooner or later will dissolve, it shall not stand. But as
for that true peace begun here, when we are made sensible of the blood of
Sprinkling, Heb. 10.22
and have our Consciences purged from dead works, it will endure unto eternity.

3 It is attended with Sanctity, and that is the ground of Paul's conjunction of
them, Now the God of peace sanctify you throughout; 1 These 5.23
to whom God speaks peace, he is always a Sanctifier, a purifier of the heart
and life from sin.

Q. It may be some may say, how may we get into such an estate that we may be
sure to dye in peace?

S. If thy heart be touched with what thou say,

1 Presently fall upon the duty of repentance, bewailing sins of Nature, of
Practice, against the light of the Law and Gospel, crying mightily for pardon;
this ushered in true peace to David's Soul, and brought him in ease in the
setting of his bones, Psalm. 51
and making him to rejoice after their breaking. So that heart-smitten Publican
cries out, Lord be merciful to me a sinner, and then goes away in a justified
condition. Luke 18.13
Till Sin be removed by Repentance what peace can there be? What peace so long
as the Whoredoms of thy Mother Jezabel, and her Witchcrafts are so many? What
peace so long as iniquities remain unrepented of? So long as Wind remains shut
up in the bowels of the earth that can get no vent, an Earthquake daily is to
be feared; so here, an Heart quake is to be expected, until you have repented.

2 Labor by faith to take hold of Jesus Christ, whose Blood alone is able to
cleanse our Consciences from dead works, Heb. 9.14*
i. e. from sin; when we look up to him (with the eye of faith) whom we have
peirced, Zech. 1^
and be in heaviness for him, as a man is in heaviness for the death of his
first born, this brings peace. Faith devolves all our guilt upon our Suerty
Christ, and then takes hold of his Meritorious Righteousness, which becoming
ours by application, we are justified in Gods sight, Romans 5.1
and thereby acquitted from sin.

3 Walk up unto the Gospel; the promise of peace is made alone to them that
walk according to this rule, not according to the flesh, Gal. 6.16.
but according to the Spirit, this brings peace. Mark the perfect man, and
behold the upright (in heart and life) for the end of that man is peace. Psalm.
37:37


4 Keep a good Conscience; this is as a continual Feast, Prove: 15.15 Es. 38:1,
2, 3
not only in Life, but when Death stares thee in the face; as we see in
Hezekiah, Remember, O Lord, now I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee
in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy
sight. And upon this account Paul was so careful to exercise himself, Acts 24.16
in keeping a good Conscience, free from offense, both toward God, and man. A
polluted, corrupt Conscience, will sting a man in the end, as we see in Spyra,
and many Apostates; whereas an undefiled Conscience will cheer us in the worst
of times.

1 Cor. 15.31
5 Dye daily to sin; make it thy work every day to drag thy corruptions to the
Cross of Jesus Christ, never leaving till thou have fastened them there, and
gotten them Crucified, even thy beloved sins mortified within thee; and dye
daily unto the World; get into Christ, by whom the World may be crucified unto
thee, and thou unto the World, Gal. 6.14
and carry thy self as a Crucified man in respect of it, not heeding, minding,
or regarding of it, and if thou do thus, thou may expect an interest in
this common Mercy among all Saints, to dye in peace, whether ever thou share in
the later part of the Promise or no, to be buried in a good old age. Which
leads me now to the second Branch in this Promise, Thou shall be buried in a
good old age. Whence we may take notice of this last observation.

Doct. That burial in a good old age is afforded unto some Saints by Gods
special indulgence; For the prosecution of this truth I shall labor to show 1
What is meant by Burial. 2 What by a good old Age. 3 How it may be made out,
that for a Saint to be buried in a good old age is an evidence of Gods
indulgence


Q. 1. What is meant by Burial?

Sol. Burial speaks nothing, (...)
but the covering of the dead body of man with earth, or the interring of it.

Now touching Burial I have nothing to say, operuit, terra humavit
for any thing that savours of the least of Superstition in it, I neither look
upon it if denied by cruel men, as any badge of Gods Curse to Believers, though
sometimes he gives way to some such stupendous dispensations, which was the
ground of that sad complaint of old, The dead bodies of thy Servants have they
given to be meat unto the Fowls of the Heaven, and the flesh of thy Saints unto
the beasts of the earth, Psalm. 79.2
their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem, and there was
none to bury them.

Men indeed have discovered much inhumanity this way, especially Papists
against Protestants, by prohibiting their Burial, or digging up their bones
again, as they did of Bucer, Acts and Mon.
Fagius, etc. such acts savor of wrath in men, but none in God toward them
that were in Covenant with him.

So neither do I construe it if afforded, or permitted, as any help to heaven,
because upon the dissolution of the body, the Spirit returns to God that gave
it, the Soul is admitted immediately into the embraces of God, though the body
be kept above ground diverse days together; yet this I may say, upon a
Scripture account, concerning Burial, that the decent interment of the bodies
of Saints, when death has divorced those old companions, the Soul and Body,
speaks

1 Mercy in the Interrers, 2 Samuel 2.5, 6
which David acknowledged in burying the body (the trunck) of Saul; though we
know he was a bad man, yet he so far resented this act of the men of
Bethshemesh, that he sends unto them this Message, and with it this
benediction, Blessed are ye of the Lord, that have showed this kindness to
Saul, and have buried him; and he adds this prayer for them, The Lord show
kindness and truth to you, and passed this Promise unto them, I also will
requite this kindness, because ye have done this thing.

2 Justice, in them that discharge this office; when the Soul is returned to
God that gave it, Eccles. 12.9
it is a part of justice that the Body should return to the earth whence it was
taken, the Earth indeed is the common Mother of all, (...)
who receives all that came from her, as the Mother the Child into her lap.
God I know laid this in justice upon man for sin at the first, Genesis 3.19
Thou shall return to the earth, for dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall
return.

3 It speaks hope, that the interrers have of the happy Resurrection of those
bodies which now they commit to the ground, they having been Instruments of
Righteousness, Members of Christ, and being still united to him, shall
certainly be raised by him unto glory; and upon these accounts I deem the care
of Saints to have been to see their friends decently interred, as Genesis 25.9
Isaac, Abram, Genesis 50.
Joseph, his Father Jacob, and those devout men, Acts 8.2.
that stoned, Massacred, Martyrd Body of that Proto-martyr Stephen, as knowing
that the bodies of Saints sown in corruption, shall be raised in incorruption;
sown in dishonor, shall be raised in glory; sown in weakness, shall be raised
in power. And hence the Burial-place among the Greek Fathers is called the
sleeping place, (...)
or the Dormitory of Saints, they only sleep, and therefore they will awake
again, they still though in the dust are united unto Jesus Christ, and shall be
reunited with their Souls, 1 These. 4.
that ascending to Heaven, they may be ever with the Lord.

Q. 2. What is meant by a good old age?

S. 1. The Notion here rendered Old Age, properly imports gray hairs, and by a
Metonymy of the Adjunct, Old Age, gray hairs being the ordinary discoverers of
it, for that observation of that Rabbine, that gray hairs is more than old Age,
Bux^or^.
because as he says, a man at sixty is come to old Age, and one at seventy to
gray hairs, after which a man becomes decrepit. This is but his mere Fancy,
for how many even with us come to gray hairs before fifty years, some before
forty years of age? But to wave this, it is sufficient for us to know, that in
the Old Testament they are used as Synonimaes, i. e. words signifying the same
thing, and that by old age we understand, the winter of man's life, the evening,
or Sunset of his days, the utmost period of his time on earth. Other Ages have
still another Age to succeed them, as Child hood is succeeded by Youth, Youth
by Manhood, Manhood by Old Age, but old Age has no other Successor but Death,
it being the last declension, or degree of the longest life.

2 By a good Old Age we mean not barely a great age, though I confess old Age
is an Emblem some way of Gods Eternity, Dan. 7.9.
whence he is styled the Ancient of days, and therefore so described, his
raiment was as white as snow and the hair of his head as white as wool; a
Periphrasis of old age; and besides, old age has been honored by God, in
choosing men of age for weighty employments, as God chose Moses and Aaron when
they were stricken in years, to lead Israel out of Egypt, and when he would
establish a standing Judicatory in Israel, Numb. 11.1^
he would have seventy men of the Elders of Israel gathered unto him; Moreover,
their Judges were old men that sat in the Gate to hear, Deuteronomy. 22:15
and determine the Causes of the people that were brought before them; nay, I
acknowledge that old age is some way venerable in it self, which was the ground
of that Command, Levit. 19.22
Rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man; those of
Gadera built a Temple to old age, Aelian.
because of the reverence and respect they bore unto it.

2 Much less do we mean by a good old age, the turning over of many years in a
way of sin, old age cannot be good where old men are naught, Prove. 14.34
sin being a reproach to any people, or persons, whether they be old or young;
to see men stricken with age, and overrun with covetousness, when all the
Limbs of their bodies grow old, only covetousness grows young, which makes them
afraid sometimes to use what God has cast in upon them, and the less of the
way they have yet to travel, Quo minus resta^ viae eo plus quaerunt viatici.

Cicero de senectute.


the more they are a coveting provision for the way; or to see an old man
overrun with pettishness, frowardness, crosness, that no man can speak to him,
no more than to Nabal; or to see the fruits of the old man, old corruptions to
remain in strength, 1 Samuel 25.17
a man abiding in old age, an old Swearer, an old Drunkard, an old Cheater, an
old Athiest, contemning the Word, or Ministry, etc. In brief, when a man
remains an old weather-beaten sinner though his age be continued to a hundred
years, it can never be a good old age unto him; Es. 65.20
for a sinner of an hundred years old shall be accursed.

3 Nor yet do I mean that old age is therefore good, because only attended with
Corporal, or outward good things, such as are Health, and Strength, though I
deny not to be lively in old age, and to enjoy a good measure of them, to be a
great blessing; when a man is able to say with Caleb, Josh. 14.10, 11
who professed, I am this day fourscore and five years old, and yet I am as
strong this day as in the days that Moses sent me, as my strength was then,
even so is my strength now for war both to go out and to come in; it is a great
mercy but yet common with Christians and Pagans, as with Masinissa in Tully.
Lib. de Senect.
Neither do I look upon old age as only good when attended with Riches and
Honor, though these make old age sometimes the more pleasant, when Grace is
present for the managing of them; yea I acknowledge old age to be
uncomfortable, (...). Laert.
where a competency of Creature Comforts are wanting; however, if Grace be
absent, though Riches be present, old age cannot be good.

4 But old age is then good,

1 When men are good in old age. I do not look that any man is, Mat. 19.17
or can be good of himself, for there is none good but God; but men are then
good when they are made good by the sanctifying Spirit of God; or plainer thus,
Then old age is good when crowned with Grace, the best of good things; Prove.
16.31
hear Solomon's determination, A gray head is a crown of glory, if it be found
in a way of righteousness. When a man has put off the Old Man, and put on the
New, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, when he
has the Image of God repaired in him, Psalm. 103.5
which makes him renew his youth like the Eagle. I shall not dispute the manner
of it, how the Eagle does renew her youth, Zenor. adag.
whether it be by soaring aloft into the Element of Fire, and there leaving her
Feathers, and casting her self speedily into the Sea, whereby she grows young
again; yet there is this Morally in it, when the Soul soars aloft, to enjoy
communion with God, who is as a consuming Fire, out of Christ, the Soul casts
it self into the sea of Mercy, into that Fountain opened for Sin, and for
uncleanness, whereby it does renew its Spiritual youth; or whether it be by
knocking off her beak (the upper part of her bill) by beating it against the
Rock, which Morally we may thus apply, when the Soul finds corruption in it
self, it gets to the Rock Jesus Christ, and there repenting and believing, yea
by the highest actings of Faith endeavoring to knock off its beak, its
inordinate desires to the World, a Saint becomes clad with the Sun of
Righteousness, Rev. 12.1
and presently the Moon is under his feet, which makes him to use the world as
though he used it not; a renewed old man is as a renewed Eagle, enabled to
mount up in duties with wings as Eagles, to run in the ways of Gods
Commandments, and yet is not weary (of well-doing) to walk, Es. 40.31
and yet is not faint; in a word, when the Soul of man is once bathed in that
Fountain that is set open for the cure of Sin, 2 King, 5.14
he comes out as Naaman out of Jordan, when his flesh was restored as the flesh
of a little Child, and he became clean. Man washed in this Fountain becomes a
new Creature, 2 Pet. 1.4
having a new nature, i. e. a Divine Principle of good infused into him, and
this makes him good, good at all times, good in age especially.

2 When men do good in old age, Eccles. 6.3.6*
as the Lord has rejoiced over them to do them good, so they make it their
work, Psalm 91.
even with joy to do all the good they may, that makes them in age more holily
fruitful than ever in youth, I mean in all the fruits meet for repentance, in
all the fruits of the Spirit* as in love, joy, peace, long suffering,
gentleness, Gal. 5.22.
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, with all the expressions of them,
wherewith they abound in old age; in this, trees planted by Christ in his
Church, differ from trees planted by men in their Gardens, the former are
always most fruitful in age, as the Psalmist avers, such as are planted in the
House of the Lord, Psalm. 92.13, ^^ 15.
( i. e. such are implanted into Christ) they shall flourish in the Courts of
our God, they shall still bring forth fruit in old age, viz. The fruits of
Piety, Purity, Mercy, being desirous cordially to Consecrate, as their time and
strength, so their estates to God, saying as David, of thine own, Lord have I
given thee. 1 Chro. 29.14
A good old man looks upon himself only as a Steward of all outward enjoyments,
and as a Steward he will be careful to dispose of all according to his Masters
mind; he puts down his Imprimis for the maintenance of the Worship of God, and
his Items for the poor, the sick, the lame, the blind; and in a word, he does
endeavor to do good to all men, Gal. 6.10.
but especially to those that are of the household of faith, he does desire to
be rich in good works, ready he is to distribute, willing to communicate,
laying up in store for himself a good foundation against the time to come, that
he may lay hold upon eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.18. In a word, he makes it his end
to honor God with his substance, and with the first fruits of his increase,
Prove. 3.9
as knowing this to be the most thriving way.

3 When a man grows up to be an old Disciple, then old age is good, Prove. 3.5.
Acts 21.16.
when a man is grown old in the sincere profession of the Gospel, as we read of
Mnason dignified with this title, because he had been a Disciple of long
standing in the Church of God (whether he were of the Seventy two first sent
abroad by Christ, or one that came in to Christ long before others) an old
Disciple he was, and Spiritual seniority carries Spiritual dignity along with
it; and upon this account Paul gives pre-eminence to A^dronicus, and Junia,
Romans 16.7.
because they were in Christ before him; an old Disciple as an old friend
should be valued at a far higher rate than old gold

4 When a man is adorned with those Graces that are the ornaments of old age;
what though his face be withered, or furrowed with wrinckles without, yet the
hid man of his heart is decked with grace within, especially with those reckoned
up by Saint Paul, Tit. 2.^.
as sobriety (in Opinions, in conversation) in meat and drink (which sometimes
prove a snare to men in age, as they did to Noah and Lot.) 2 Gravity,
consisting in a seemly, modest, yea venerable deportment in Gesture, Speech,
Apparel, Countenance. 3 Temperance, which speaks the moderating of themselves
in respect of their desires, but above all with 4. Soundness in the 1. Faith,
not as Reeds blown up and down with every wind of Doctrine, but built upon the
Rock Jesus Christ, they remain unmovable; yea when moved to renounce Christ,
or his Truth, they reply with Policarpus, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 15.
This fourscore and six years have I served him and he never did me hurt, and
shall I now defy him? etc.

2 Soundness in Charity, in love to God, to Christ, to his Church, his
Ministers, his Members, where he sees any thing of Jesus Christ.

3. Soundnes in patience, willing to do, or suffer any thing for Christ,
counting all things but loss or dung that so he may win him, Phil. 3.

To conclude, when a man is gray in years, and gray in all sanctifying Graces
that beautify old age, old age is good then to him, and for him.

5 When a man is every day more and more built up in all the old experiences of
Gods Love and goodness toward him, Psalm. 35.25
as David, I have been young, and now am old, yet never saw I the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. What though others of his intellectuals
do decay with age? yet he is careful to keep his memory for to be a
Storehouse, a Treasury of all Gods Mercies, as we see in old Abraham, what a
Recognition do we read of Gods old loving kindnesses. Genesis 24.7. The Lord which
took me from my Fathers house, and from the land of my Kindred, and which
spoke unto me, and swear unto me saying, unto thy seed will I give this land.

So in old Jacob, what a mercy-admiring man was he? the God that fed me all
my life long to this day; Gen, 48.15, 16.
the Angel that redeemed me from all evil, etc. as the Remembrance of old
sins is loathsome to a gracious old man, so of old mercies exceeding grateful,
etc.

6 When a man in his old age makes it his business to finish that work that God
bath given him to do. A man came not into the World to eat, drink, sleep, take
his ease, or heap up Riches, but God sent every man into the World upon some
special account or other; whether as a Magistrate, a Minister, or a private
Christian? among other ends as private persons, Phil. 2.
God sent us into the World that we should work out our Salvation with fear
and trembling, to make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.
i. e. sure to our selves; when a man makes it his work, to work the works of
him that sent him, Joh. 9.4*
while it is called to day, because he knows the night comes in which no man
can work or walk; when a man can say with Christ, Joh. 17.
not long before his death, I have finished the works thou gave me to do; or
with aged Paul, 2 Timothy 4.
The time of my departure is at hand; I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course; I have kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me a
Crown of Righteousness; when a man with David has served God in his
Generation, then death becomes welcome.

Seventhly and lastly, Old age is then good when a man makes it in old age his
only work to make provision for death, his passage to happy eternity, 1 Pet.
1.14.
as knowing with Peter, shortly he must put off this Tabernacle of his, he
says as Isaac, behold I am old and know not the day of my death, Mat. 27.60.
2 Samuel 19.25.37. De morte magis quam de delitiis aulieis eogitat. Lavater.
only I desire to provide for it, and is always a pondering of it, it was upon
this account that Joseph of Arimathea built his own Monument, and Barzillai
when moved by David to turn Courtier, and to go with him to Jerusalem, he
humbly begs a dismission, that he may turn back to his own City, and die
there, and be buried by the grave of his father and of his mother, and that
because that day he was fourscore years old, he minded more to provide for
death, than to enjoy momentary Courtly delights; so old Simeon waited for
(Christ) the consolation of Israel, Luke 2.2^.37
and old Anna departed not from the Temple, but served God with fasting and
prayer day and night, and all to fit themselves the more for their dissolution.

3 Q. How it may be made out for a man to be buried in a good old age is a
special favor and mercy of God.

S. To be buried at any time savours of some mercy, as Jer. 22.19. it savours
of Judgment, to be buried with the burial of an Ass, or to lie uninterred
because of sin.

But to be buried in a good old age, we cannot but look upon it as a choice
mercy, because very few live to be old; look upon an Apple Tree in the Spring,
you may almost see it covered with Blossoms, yet how many fall before they come
to knit? and if knit, how many fall yet before they come to be ripe? Erasmus de
contemp. mundi.
many are worm-eaten, and they drop; many are beaten down by violent Tempests,
scarce one of ten, yea twenty, yea sometimes not one of forty comes to its full
maturity; so it is in regard of man, abundance of Children like blossoms seem
to cover the ground, but how few of them live to Youth, fewer to Manhood,
fewest of all to old age? but how infinitely far fewer do live to a good old
age? it must needs therefore be a chief Mercy. Is it not a Mercy when we have
done our work, then to be called home to receive our Wages? Then to be gathered
when here we are fully ripe? then to come to the Grave in a full age, like a
shock of Corn comes in his season? Job 5.26.
To conclude, is it not a mercy then to be called to make your account, when we
have been long a preparing, and making ready for it? the accounting day to a
just Steward is a glad day indeed, when he can do it with joy, and not with
grief; this fills the Soul with panting, Rev. 22.20.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; because he has now made his peace with God,
and he can now lift up his head, Luke 21.28
because his full redemption draws nigh, being insured that the day is now
drawing on apace, when he shall hear Christ thus speaking unto him, Come thou
blessed of my Father, inherit a Kingdom provided for thee from the beginning of
the world.

But for the improvement of all, take these three words.

Use 1. To you concerned in this great, this common loss, wherein the Daughter
has lost a tender Father, the Grandchildren an indulgent Grandfather, the
Servants a good Master, the Parish a worthy Parishioner, the Congregation to
which he belonged a vigilant Elder, yea the City a great Ornament; I know the
loss is great to all related to him, yet to alleviate your grief weigh with me
1 Gods great mercy to you in sparing him so long, a Father, a Friend, a Master,
a Parishioner, an Elder, that he might be eyes to the blind, strength to the
weak, a cloather of the naked, one that stood often in the gap to divert Wrath
from you. 2 Gods mercy to him in gathering him to his Fathers in peace,
admitting him to burial in a good old age. 3 Ponder, 1 These. 4.
though we may mourn, yet we must not murmr or mourn as them without hope for
him that sleeps in Christ, Lazarus our friend sleeps, our deceased friend is
only gone to sleep, he will awake again in the Resurrection; could he now speak
unto you he would doubtless say, Weep not for me, but weep for your selves.


2 To you not only that are concerned in this loss, but to all of you that knew
him, take notice of that light part of his Cloud which he held forth long
before you, there were many signal things in him worth your imitation.

1 His constant attendance upon the Word, which I observed to be in him these
ten last Winters, when so many went back in the late defection from Ordinances
among us, he spoke in effect as Peter when the Disciples were questioned, Will
ye also go away? Lord, to whom shall we go, Joh. 6.66.68.
thou have the words of eternal life? When others through sloathfulness would
not rise, how diligent was he in coming to the Morning Exercise, especially on
the Lords Day, even in the sharpest Winter season, when health would permit him?

2 His real friendliness to all the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, yea to all
where he saw any thing of Christ; he was both open handed, and open hearted to
all the needy Members of Christ, and would more gladly do good than receive
thanks for the good he had done.

3 His sympathising with the Church of God in all her sorrows, especially
heretofore in the Palatinate, and at present in Piedemont; as Lots Captivity
settled on the spirit of Abram, so did the miseries of the people of God on his
heart, Es. 22.4. Jer. 9.1.
he seemed to be of Esays and Jeremies temper. O the Rowlings, Yernings,
compassionate Meltings for them that were Massacred, and his bounty to them
that did survive, often saying of our Popish Adversaries in the Massacre of
Piedemont, we have only a pattern of that Stuff which our enemies would cut out
for us all.

4 His exemplary Piety, he taking up the resolution of old Joshua, Josh. 24.
I and my house will serve the Lord; his known Meekness and Humility, though
God had cast in a great Estate upon him, yet he was not lifted up; a meek and
quiet spirit in the sight of God is of great price. I omit his walking in a way
of private communion with God, which was best felt in himself, yet he gave many
discoveries of it to all that came near him that were acquainted with the
workings of the Spirit.

To all of you now that count upon, or desire to come to the Grave in a good
old age.

Q. It may be some of you may be inquiring, what must I do that I may share in
this branch of this Promise?

Sol. I shall only give a brief answer unto this, and so dismiss you.

1 If thou be young, lay the foundation of a good old age in Youth, Prove. 22.6.
Train up a Child in the way he should go, and he will not forget it when he
is old. A young Timothy will prove an old Mnason, a young Disciple will become
an old Disciple; but can any man look for good fruit from that tree in Autumn,
Eccles 12.
wherein he could not behold either Blossoms or Leaves in the Spring? Remember
therefore thy Creator in the days of thy youth; remember, to acquaint thy self
with him, and to make peace, that so good may come unto thee in time of age;
get grace in youth, and become obedient unto thy Parents, which probably may
prepare a way for thy Burial in a good old age. Exodus 20.12


2 If Youth be elapsed, or run out in vanity, yet

1 Now presently repent, repent of sins of Youth, and set upon the ways of
Holiness; Paul had been in his youth a Persecutor, 1 Timothy 1 15
injurious, a Blasphemer, yet after repentance what a foundation did he lay of
a good old age, 1 Cor. 5.10.
laboring more abundantly than others? he had been zealous to draw others to
Hell, so now he was as forward to win others to Heaven; for Augustine, how
vain, vilde, vicious, sinful was his youth, wallowing himself in all
Licentiousness, as his confessions speak? where how does he bewail himself, and
yet after repentance, what an useful Instrument was he in the Church of Christ?
many admire, and that deservedly, Chrysostoms golden Rollings, Cyprians
Martyr-like spirit; running through all his Works; but we may behold these, nay
more than these in Augustine after his repentance.

2 Rest not till thou be implanted into Jesus Christ; our ingrafting into him
intitles us to dye in peace, and to live not only long here, but even to
eternity hereafter, as freeing us from Condemnation, Romans 8.1
and ensuring us of admission into Heaven. The Science ingrafted into the tree
lives as long as the tree, and we ingrafted in Christ, as long as Christ, and
that will be to eternity; if our implantation qualify us for eternity, it
cannot but qualify us for the longest date of life here below.

3 Live piously being implanted. Piety not only has the promises of this life,
but of that that is to come; impiety cuts asunder the thread of our lives, but
Piety prolongs our days, Prove. 3.1.2
as Solomon witnesses, My Son, let thine heart keep my Commandments, for
length of days, and long life, and peace shall they add to thee.

4 Live temperately, lest thou diggest thy Grave with thine own teeth; sobriety
being the best natural means for the prolongation of life, as is obvious to
experience.

3 If thou art a verging, or inclining toward old age, and art implanted into
Christ.

1 Show thy self to be a tree of Gods planting in all those fruits of the
Spirit, Gal. 5.22
mentioned by the Apostle, as God has made thee good by Grace, so be thou
abundant in all gracious actings, in all Christian duties.

Fruit-bearing trees are seldom cut down till they become fruitless.

2 Let thy life be a life of Prayer, and wrestling with God, among other
things, that God would not cast thee off in the time of age, Psalm. 71.5, 6.17,
18
nor forsake thee when thy strength fails; yea let thy life be a perpetual
meditation of death, Job. 14.14
and all the days of thy appointed time do thou wait upon God until thy change
shall come.

3 Get old Simeons light, or his clear sight of Christ, by faith, when thou
have once obtained this thou will then be panting with him, Luke 2.26
and crying, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace; old Abraham was
then happy when he saw the future day of Christ by the Prospective-glass of
faith, Joh. ^.56.
through the interval of two thousand years distance, and no wonder that he
rejoiced; men go to Hell with their eyes shut, Acts 7.55.
but to Heaven with their eyes open.

4 Wait then for old Paul's Crown, 2 Timothy 4*8.9
if in sincerity thou art able to say, The time of my departure is at hand, I
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith;
thou may then conclude, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give unto me at that
day, and to all that love his appearing; if constantly thou perseverest, and
go on in the ways of faith, and love, and holiness, thou may expect the
accomplishment of this Promise unto thee, to go to thy Fathers in peace, and to
be buried in a good old age, if the Lord see it meet for thee.

A Short Narrative of the Life and Death OF JOHN LAMOTTE Esquire
JOhn Lamotte Esquire sometimes Alderman of the City of London, was born at
Colchester in Essex, May 1. 1577. his Father was Francis Lamotte (Son of
Baldwin Lamotte of Ypres in Flanders) who, in the time of the great Persecution
in the Low Countries, under Duke D' Alva, was driven out of his Native Country,
and came, together with his Wife Mary, to shelter themselves, and to enjoy the
free profession of the true Religion (for which they had abandoned all their
Temporal (very considerable) goods, and enjoyments) under the protection of
that famous Nursing-mother of Gods afflicted Children in those bloody times,
Queen Elizabeth* here in England, in the fourth year of her Reign; taking up
their residence at Colchester, where he lived many years in very good esteem,
and was very forward and industrious for the setting up, and promoting of the
great Manufacture there for the Public good, and God blessed him in the same,
and in a hopeful Issue, until he dyed in a good age at London. Now as both
these Parents had made Piety their greatest interest, and the Freedom of
Religion their best Purchase, so they were ever exceeding sollicitous, and
diligent to season their Children, and this their Son especially, from the very
Cradle with the fear and nurture of the Lord, and that with such blessed
success on him, that having Piety instilled into him by their means, and
public Ordinances, through Gods Grace, he never departed from it to his dying
day, but proved most exemplary therein, through all the course and relations of
his life; so that even in his younger years he never was given to, nor
delighted with those vain and sinful Sports and Pastimes, to which youth is
ordinarily so prone to, and so hard to be weaned from. His Recreation was
commonly to turn from one honest or pious employment unto another, as from that
of his Calling, (being brought up timely to Trade and Merchandise and in which
he was always very careful, and industrious) to the reading of the Bible, and
other good Books, Meditation, and learning of Languages, acquainting himself
with several of the best Histories, especially such as treated of the
Persecutions, and Deliverances of the Church of God, and the Propagation of the
Gospel, all which he made in a manner his own, such delight he took both in the
perusal, and rehearsal of the same on all occasions, and yet omitting no
public opportunities, whereby he might nourish communion with God at any time.

He would often bless God, that according to his earnest prayers (when he came
first up to London) he had kept him from bad company, and from all allurements
and engaging occasions of haunting Taverns, and the like places, whereby so
many hopeful young men come to be undone. Being grown up to some greater
maturity of years and Grace, and acquaintance with God, and beginning to Trade
for himself, his singular care and exactness, industry, and discretion, was
soon taken notice of, and he had more credit when he began, than diverse that
had lived in pretty good repute before him, every one was ready and even
desirous to trust him, and deal with him; which great advantage he nevertheless
used very soberly, undertaking no more than he was well able to manage, and
minding what once he had undertaken with all the vigilance and attendance such
employments, and the duty of his Calling did require; and the blessing of God
was evidently upon all his ways and affairs, yet so that as he was not hasty to
be rich, he would often say, he was not hastily rich.

By Gods good providence and direction, he was afterward guided to Marry a
party of like good and pious education, and disposition, and of a Stock
likewise tried, and grown up under Persecution, Mistress Anne Tivelin, whose
Parents had sheltered themselves at Canterbury: she was then the Widow of Mr.
David King Merchant, of whom she had Mr. Ezekias King, yet living, the pious
and learned Minister of Fulmore in Cambridgeshire; with this Consort Mr.
Lamotte lived well and comfortably many years, and they had together several
gracious Children, eight in all, whereof six, two Sons and four Daughters, dyed
in their younger years, and only two Daughters (most piously and virtuously
educated) lived to married estate; the elder Hester, being wedded first to John
Manning Esquire an eminent Merchant of this City, by whom she had three Children,
but none surviving him, and after his decease to Sir Thomas Honywood Knight, of
Markshall in Essex, both living yet happily together, beloved and honored of
all that know them far and near, together with their hopeful Issue, two Sons
and one Daughter, the remainder of seven Children they have had together; the
younger Daughter Elizabeth was married to that worthy Gentleman Master Maurice
Abbot, (Son to Sir Maurice Abbot, once an Honorable Alderman, and Lord Mayor
of this City, and Brother to those two famous Abbots, George, sometimes Arch
bishop of Canterbury, and learned Robert, Bishop of Salisbury) and by him she
had that hopeful Son and studious Gentleman Mr. Maurice Abbot, the present
Coheir with his Aunt, besides three others dying young, as she also her self
was not long enjoyed, and dyed exceedingly bewailed for her singular parts,
piety, and goodness: Thus, though Mr. Lamotte left but one only Daughter
surviving, and four Grandchildren, yet he saw 22 of his offspring.

His first wife deceasing about the year 1626. he married again the year after
M^is. Elizabeth Monk, the widow of Levinus Monk Esquire, one of the six
Clerks, a Gentleman of rare parts, trust and experience in stare-affaires in
King James his time; with her he lived eighteen years, but had no issue by her.

During all this time, as he advanced still in years, piety, experience and
estate, so he was (through the mercy of God) accordingly respected, passing
through, and bearing all the eminent offices in his Parish, Company, and
elsewhere in the City and Commonwealth, until he was chosen Alderman; besides
the Eldership of the Dutch Church here, wherein he served that Congregation,
near thirty years together, with that exemplarie integrity of zeal, as will not
easily be forgotten; as also in all the rest, he still demeaned himself
unblameably, equally desirous and zealous still to furher and advance
godliness and honesty, and to withstand and reform abuses and iniquity of all
kinds.

The Love unto, and constant attendance upon the Word of God in public and
private, for the upholding and cherishing communion with God, by hearing and
reading the Scriptures, and meditating therein, had so possessed and filled his
soul, that most of his discourses and Letters were most savourly seasoned with
it, and he would often express a great deal of heart-grief and astonishment,
at most men's heedlessenesse in duties so highly and nearly concerning their
everlasting Welfare. And how real his piety and acquaintance with God was,
appeared sufficiently, as by many other discoveries, so also by those streams
of true Christian charity, which uncessantly issued from him and which made him
not only willing and ready to impart and communicate liberally in that kind
himself, but also to solicit and stir up others perpetually, setting all (as
it were) on fire of compassion, that came near him, especially where and
whenever any public calamity befell the people and Church of God: No care,
(...) pains, no cost, charge, or trouble was too much then unto him to testify
his sympathizing bowels, in and for their sorrows and afflictions, whether at
home or abroad; whereof, especially, since the year 1620. the respective
Persecutions and Troubles in France, at Rochel, in the Valtelin, in Bohemia, in
Germany, and more particularly in the lower and upper Palatinate, and therein
above other places, the long continued distresses of the City of Frankendale,
besides many other cases nearer home, in England, Scotland, Ireland, all along,
even to the late cruel and barbarous massacre of the poor Waldenses in
Piedmont, could make up and show forth in this One Member, such a living
Character and pattern of real Charity, as alas, we see but few now a days,
to the no small discredit of our profession.

And God having given him such largeness of heart, and freeness of hand, he
gave also unto him understanding to manage all his affairs with order and
discretion, that he knew both where and when to spare and to spend, whereby he
was enabled still to do the more good, finding and acknowledging always both
the temporal and spiritual returns and comforts of doing the same; and that
made him always as God blessed him to lay aside a proportion for charitable
uses, which he as carefully distributed afterward.

But if God was pleased at any time to exercise him with losses or crosses of
any kind, whereof he had his share too (among other of Gods Children) as well
in his Trade and Estate now and then, by several casualties by Sea and Land,
at home and abroad, in his several functions and relations, and especially in
his body by diverse great infirmities and sicknesses, principally toward and in
the latter part of his life, yet he always showed abundance of patience and
quiet submission, to the ever-good hand and pleasure of his heavenly Father,
and faithful Redeemer, comforting himself very much with the examples of
Jacob, Joseph, Job, David, and others of Gods Saints and servants, in all ages,
with whose histories he was exactly acquainted; praising God still, that in
respect of his outward man, he so long vouchsafed him the benefit of his sight
and hearing in that comfortable measure, whereby he could partake still of his
holy Ordinances, both in public and private; and for his inner man, that in
all his troubles and afflictions, God never long withheld his gracious and
Fatherly countenance from him, in Jesus Christ, wherein he found comfort
sufficient to allay all his grief, and prevent all murmuring in his troubles;
he did not much vent himself by discourses, but retired himself* and unbosomed
his heart, and spread his condition before the Lord in prayer. When but three
weeks before his decease, he was sore afflicted with extremity of head-ake and
Colic, that he began to find some impatience to seize on him, he soon
recollected and chekt himself, saying, How often and fervently have I besought
the Lord, that he would be pleased to fit and prepare me for himself, and his
everlasting Kingdom, and why then should I find fault and repine, now when he
thus really and effectually does prepare me, making me by these very pains and
torments, loathe this wretched World so much the more, and long for my happy
change, and dissolution, and to be with my Redeemer; and thus he continued for
the most part, even to his last hour, which was July 13. 1655. in the seventy
ninth year of his age; looking death cheerfully in the face, as of whom he was
not afraid, being implanted into Christ, and thereby freed from the imbondaging
fear of death, always almost speaking of the same, and setting the remembrance
of our latter end, both before himself, and others, upon all occasions, knowing
there was no such effectual means to make us apply our hearts to wisdom, that
is to say, to the fear of God, the only Antidote against all other fear.

And as in Troubles and Affliction he showed a great deal of filial submission
and resignation to God, so it was a comfort to all that conversed with him to
see and observe his continual thankful remembrances of and cheerful
rejoicing in Gods mercies and goodness, both to the Church in general and
particular, and to the Land and Nation wherein he lived; as also to any of his
dear friends and relations; as well as to his own person, loving both to hear
and speak much of that Argument, and ever and anon most feelingly exclaiming, O
what cause have we to praise our good and merciful God, that yet preserves,
yet affects, yet delivers and favors us, and passes by, and forgiveth our
manifold infirmities, transgressions and provocations aggravated with so much
unthankfullness, if yet we would love him and believe in him, and yet walk in
his fear obediently before him, to our everlasting happiness. On Queen
Elizabeth's anniversarie Coronation day, he would usually bid some friends, and
put them in mind of the great Mercy of God showed to England on that day, by
quenching the fires in Smith field, and continuing the Gospel ever since, for
so many years among us, even beyond the number of years recorded in Scripture,
of an uninterrupted prosperous estate of the Church; and then, as also on his
Birthday, and other joyful occasions of friends, meeting at his house he
would often say* he had desired their company, to eat bread with him before the
Lord (as Jethro and Moses did) in remembrance of such and such signal Mercies
and Deliverances, whereof his memory was a living Chronicle, especially of
those grand Deliverances, both before and since the Reformation, from under the
great sufferings and bloody Persecutions in France, and the Low Countries,
whereof he would often discourse in so punctual and feeling a manner, as if he
had been an eyewitness, yea a sharer in them, taking many arguments thence of
encouraging both himself and others, to be still mindful of them in bonds and
miseries, as being themselves in the body; saying, why, their case might have
been ours, or may be yet, who knows?

And instancing often in this particular with holy admiration and
thankfulness, that when his own Father (for Religion sake being fain to flee
for his life) stood doubtful, whether, like as many others did, he should
repair for shelter to the Palatinate and Frankendale, or to England, that yet
God inclined his heart to choose England for his place of refuge, whereupon he
would frequently infer, he had great cause, especially since their late sad
condition in that place and Country (in acknowledgement of that preserving
mercy) to have a fellow feeling of their Miseries, wherein himself and his
might have been involved together with them, since God had not only kept and
safeguarded him and his from the same, but likewise abundantly blessed and
protected him and them hitherto. And therefore he was very mindful to send
relief to many of them from time to time.

Together with all these eminent graces, God had likewise endued him with a
large portion of Wisdom, Judgment, and Understanding, in many things of
moment and importance, grounded on much experience, observation and practice of
his own, for which he was deservedly much esteemed by men of no small place and
account. He brought still forth out of his Treasure old and new, and knew so
pertinently to produce, compare and apply the same, that it was great pleasure
and no less profit and instruction to hear him.

The pious and indefatigable care and pains he took in bringing up of his
Children, and governing his family, in the fear and admonition of the Lord, is
hinted partly already. His perpetual endeavor was to bring them into
acquaintance and communion with God, and to make them stand in filial awe and
fear of him, to read and meditate, and take delight in the Word of God, to be
well grounded and settled in Religion, and not shaken by every wind of Doctrine;
to avoid and flee all vain and idle courses, companies and dalliances; to be
painful, careful and diligent, every one in his peculiar calling and
employment, orderly and exact in all their affairs, sober and frugal in the
use of Gods good creatures, full of bowels of compassion to the afflicted and
distressed Members of Christ, and to all that were in need, and cheerfully
ready to communicate unto such; loving and helpful one to another, obedient to
all good orders, submissive to the Magistrate, respectfull to the Ministry,
Civil and upright toward all, and watchful at all times, to be in readiness
when the Lord should call them hence, to give an account of their Stewardship,
etc. in all which he would say and exhort them to no more than himself
continually endeavored to practice before their eyes; and that this his tender
care toward them might yet extend beyond his life, and he still speak to them,
and mind them of these sayings, he left for them in writing, by abundance of
Letters to his nearest and dearest Relations from time to time, especially in
one of his last Papers, written, as it seems, when he had set his House in
order, to be ready for the Lord (a Copy whereof follows after this Narrative)
such excellent instructions, and admonitions, as shows plainly, as he took
pains and care to leave them a comfortable Temporal estate, so their Spiritual
good estate was that he mainly wished their whole hearts possessed of, as his
was, for to enjoy communion with God, and the abiding comfort thereof both in
this life, and that to come together with him.

A Letter of John Lamotte Esquire to his Daughter and Grandchildren, written not
long before his death.
BEloved Daughter, Dame Hester Honywood, and beloved Grandchildren, Maurice
Abbot, and Elizabeth, Thomas, John Honywood, I do wish you all the blessing and
peace of God the Father, and of our Lord Jesus Christ his dear Son, our Savior
and Redeemer, and that his fear and love may be so rooted and grounded in you,
that it may knit and bind your hearts together in love and amity, as my heart
has been to every one of you, ever praying for you all, that God of his mercy
would bless you all, and plant his fear in your hearts, and unfeigned faith in
Christ Jesus in your souls. I desire that no strife, nor envy, nor grudging
arise about the dividing of the Estate which the Lord of his mercy has lent
me, for I settled the Land after Prayer by the best counsels and advice I could;
and my personal estate I have by Will (after Prayer) to the best of my skill in
all good Conscience, as equally drawn it as I could; so I would after I am dead
have you receive it from God with a thankful and contented mind, and pray to
the Lord to bless it to you, and every one of you to his own posterity. I
having been by Trade a Merchant, and what by Gods blessing I have advanced, I
have endeavored, and labored to gain it honestly, and to keep faith and a
good Conscience always, ever acknowledging that these following Parties had a
share in my estate, as in all other men's, The Commonwealth, the Service of
God, the Ministers, and the poor Members of Christ, of whom, as I have
endeavored to be careful; so would I have every one of you to be zealous for
the Service of God, heartily affectionate to the poor members of Christ, and to
give, with the releef, a comfortable word when occasion permits.

John Lamotte.

Errataes marring the sense.
PAge 3. l. 10 r. piece, p. 4. in the margin r. excindi. p. 7. l. last but one,
r. him, p. 10. l. 10 r. an, p. 11. l. 36. r. mire. p. 14. l. v 9, r. the heart,
p. 15. l. 30. r. thou, p. 25. l. 34. r. our, p. 19. l. 36. r. naught, p. 27. l.
1. r. through. Omissions p. 4. l. 1. r. or adversitively, but, etc. p. 25. l.
33. r. like as a shock.


