THE TOWN-FOPP: OR Sir Timothy Tawdrey. A COMEDY. As it is Acted at his Royal
Highness the DUKE's THEATER.

Written by Mrs. A. Behn.

Licensed September 20. 1676.

ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for James Magnes and Rich. Bentley in Russel Street
in Covent Garden near the Piazza's. M.DC.LXXVII.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Lord Plotwell Bellmour Nephew to the Lord Plotwell, Contracted to Celinda.
Charles Brother to Bellmour. Friendlove Brother to Celinda, in Love with Diana.
Sir Timothy Tawdrey A Fopp Knight, designed to Marry Celinda. Hangers on to Sir
Timothy.
Sham Sharp
Trusty An old Steward to Bellmour's Family. Page and Dancers, and Servants.
The Lady Diana Niece to the Lord Plotwell. Celinda Sister to Friendlove,
Contracted to Bellmour. Phillis Sister to Bellmour. Betty Flauntit kept by Sir
Timothy. Driver A Bawd. Two Whores.
Ienny Doll
Nurse.
SCENE Covent Garden. PROLOGUE.
AS Country Squire who yet had never known
The long expected joy of being in Town;
Whose careful Parents scarce permitted Heir
To Ride from Home unless to Neighboring Fair:
At last by happy Chance is hither led
To purchase Clap with loss of Maidenhead;
Turns wondrous Gay, bedizen'd to Excess,
Till he is all Burlesque in Mode and Dress:
Learns to talk loud in Pit, grows Wily too,
That is to say, makes mighty Noise, and Show.
So a young Poet who had never been
Dabling beyond the height of Ballading;
Who, in his brisk Essays, durst never excel
The lucky flight of Rhiming Dogerel,
Sets up with this sufficient Stock, on Stage,
And has, perchance, the luck to please the Age:
He draws you in, like cozening Citizen,
Cares not how bad the Ware, so Shop be fine.
As tawdry Gown and Petticoat gain more
(Though on a dull diseased ill-favor'd Whore)
Than prettier Frugal, though on Holy Day,
When every City Spark has leave to Play,
-- Damn Her she must be Sound She is so Gay.
So let the Scenes be fine, you will never inquire
For Sense, but lofty flights in nimble Wire.
-- What we Present to Day is none of these;
But we could wish it were, for we would please,
And that you will swear we hardly meant to do:
Yet here is no Sense; Pox on it, but here is no Show;
But a plain Story, that will give a taste
Of what your Grandsires loved in the Age that is past.
THE TOWN-FOPP: OR Sir TIMOTHY TAWDREY.
ACT. I.
Scene 1. The Street.
Enter Sir Timothy Tawdrey, Sham and Sharp. Sir Tim. HEreabouts is the House
wherein dwells, the Mistress of my heart; For she has money Boys, mind me,
money in abundance, or she were not for me -- the Wench her self is good
natured, and inclined to be civil, but a Pox on it -- She has a Brother a
conceited Fellow, whom the world mistakes for a fine Gentleman, for he has
Traveled, talks Languages, bows with a bone meine, and the rest, but by
fortune he shall entertain you with nothing but words --


Sham. Nothing else? --


Sir Tim. No -- He Is no Country Squire Gentlemen, will not Game, Whore, nay,
in my Conscience you will hardly get your selves Drunk in his Company -- He
Treats A-la-mode, half Wine, half Water, and the rest -- But to the business,
this Fellow loves his Sister dearly, and will not trust her in this lewd Town,
as he calls it, without him, and hither he has brought her to marry me.


Sham. A Pox upon him for his pains --


Sir Tim. So say I -- But my comfort is, I shall be as weary of her, as the
best Husband of 'em all -- But there is convenience in it; besides, the match
being as good as made up by the old Folks in the Country, I must submit -- The
Wench I never saw yet, but they say she is handsome -- But no matter for that,
there is Money, my Boys!


Sharp. Well Sir, we will follow you -- but as dolefully as people do their
Friends to the Grave, from whence they are never to return, at least not the
same substance, the thin aerie Vision of a brave Good Fellow, we may see thee
hereafter, but that is the most.


Sir Tim. Your pardon, sweet Sharp, my whole design in it is to be Master of my
self, and with part of her Portion to set up my Miss, Betty Flauntit, which, by
the way, is the main end of my ^arrying, the rest you will have your shares of --
Now I am forc^d to take you up Suits at treble Prizes, have damned Wine and
Meat put upon us, 'cause the Reckoning is to be Book'd: But ready Money ye
Rogues! What Charms it has! Makes the Waiters fly Boys, and the ^aster with
Cap in hand -- excuse what is amiss, Gentlemen -- Your Worship shall command the
best -- and the rest -- How briskly the Box and Dice dance, and the ready Money
submits to the lucky Gamester, and the gay Wench consults with every Beauty to
make her self agreeable to the Man with ready Money. In fine, dear Rogues! All
things are sacrificed to it is power; and no Mortal conceives the joy of, Argent
Content. It Is this powerful God that makes me submit to the Devil Matrimony;
and then thou art assured of me, my stout Lads of brisk Debauch.


Sham. And is it possible you can be tied up to a Wife? Whilst here in London,
and free, you have the whole World to range in, and like a wanton Heifer, eat
of every Pasture.


Sir Tim. Why do think I Will be confined to my own dull Enclosure? No, I had
rather feed coarsly upon the boundless Common, perhaps two or three days I may
be in Love, and remain constant, but that is the most.


Sharp. And in three Weeks, should you Wed a Cinthia, you would be a Monster.


Sir Tim. What, thou meanest a Cuckold, I warrant? God help thee* But a Monster
is only so from its Rarity, and a Cuckold is no such^strange thing in our Age.

Enter Bellmour and Friendlove. But who comes here?
Bellmour! Ah my little dear Rogue! How do thou!
-- Ned Friendlove too! Dear Lad, how do thou too?
Why welcome to Town in faith, and I Am glad to see you both.

Friend. Sir Tim. Tawdrey! --


Sir Tim. The same, by fortune, dear Ned; And how, and how Man, how go matters?


Friend. Between who Sir?


Sir Tim. Why any body Man: But, by fortune, I Am overjoyed to meet thee: But
where do think I was going?


Friend. Is It possible one should divine?


Sir Tim. Is It possible you should not, and meet me so near your Sisters
Lodgings? Faith I was coming to pay my Respects and Services, and the rest --
Thou know my meaning -- The old business of the Silver World Ned; by Fortune
it is a mad Age, we live in Ned, and here be so many -- wicked Rogues, about
this damned lewd Town, that 'Faith I am fain to speak, in the vulgar modish
style, in my own defense, and Rally Matrimony, and the rest.


Friend. Matrimony! -- I hope you are so exactly refined a Man of the Town,
that you will not offer once to think of so dull a thing, let that alone for
such cold complexions as Bellmour here, and I that have not attained to that
most excellent faculty of keeping yet, as you, Sir Timothy, have done, much to
your glory, I assure you.


Sir Tim. Who I Sir? You do me much Honor: I must confess I do not find the
softer Sex cruel; I am received as well as another Man of my Parts.


Friend. Of your Money, you mean Sir.


Sir Tim. Why Faith Ned, thou art in the right, I love to buy my pleasure, for,
by Fortune, there is as much pleasure in Vanity and Variety, as any Sins I know;
What think thou Ned?


Friend. I am not of your mind, I love to love upon the square; and that I may
be sure not to be cheated with false Ware, I present 'em nothing but my heart.


Sir Tim. Yes, and have the consolation, of seeing your frugal Huswifery Miss,
sit in the Pit, at a Play, in a long Scarf, and Nightgown, for want of Points,
and Garniture.


Friend. If she be clean, and pretty, and dressed in Love, I can excuse the rest,
and so will she.


Sir Tim. I vow to Fortune Ned, thou must come to London, and be a little
managed: 'Slife Man, should thou talk so aloud in good Company, thou
would be counted a strange Fellow, Pretty -- and dressed with Love -- a fine
Figure, by Fortune; No, Ned, the painted Chariot, gives a Luster, to every
ordinary Face, and makes a Woman, look like Quality; ay, so like, by Fortune,
that you shall not know one from the other, till some scandalous,
out-of-favor'd-laid-aside-Fellow of the Town, cry -- Damn her, for a Bitch --
how scornfully the Whore regards me -- She has forgot since Jack -- such a one,
and I, club'd for the keeping of her, when both our Stocks, well managed, would
not amount to above seve^ shillings six pence a week; besides now and then a
Treat of a Breasto^ Mutton* from the next Cooks -- Then the other laughs, and
cries -- I -- Rott her -- And tells his Story too, and concludes with who
ma^nages the Gilt now? Why Faith some dismal Coxcomb or other, yo^ may be sure,
replies the first: But Ned, these are R^gues, and Rascals, the value no Man's
Reputation, because they despise their own: But Faith (...) have laid aside all
these vanities, now I have thought of Matrimony; b^^ I desire my Reformation
may be a secret, because, as you know for (...) Man of my Address, and the rest
-- It Is not altogether so Jantee.


Friend. Sir, I assure you, it shall be so great a Secret for me, that I will
never ask you who the happy Woman is, that is chosen for this great work of your
Conversion.


Sir Tim. Ask me! -- No, you need not, because you know already.


Friend. Who I? I protest Sir Timothy --


Sir Tim. No Swearing, dear Ned, for it is not such a Secret, but I will trust
my Intimates; these are my Friends, Ned; pray know them -- This Mr Sham and
this -- by fortune, a very honest Fellow [Bows to 'em.] Mr Sharp, and may be
trusted with a business that concerns you as well as me.


Friend. Me? What do you mean Sir Timothy?


Sir Tim. Why Sir, you know what I mean.


Friend. Not I Sir.


Sir Tim. What, not that I am to marry your Sister Celinda?


Friend. Not at all.


Bell. O this unsufferable Sott!

[Aside.
Friend. My Sister, Sir, is very nice.


Sir Tim. That Is all one, Sir, the old People have adjusted the matter, and
they are the most proper (...) a Negotiation of that kind, which saves us the
trouble of a tedious Courtship.


Friend. That the old People have agreed the matter, is more than I know.


Sir Tim. Why Lord Sir, will you persuade me to that? don't you know that your
Father (according to the method in such cases, being certain of my Estate) came
to me thus -- Sir Timothy Tawdrey! -- You are a young Gentleman, and a Knight,
I knew your Father well, and my right worshipful Neighbor, our Estates lie
together, therefore Sir, I have a desire to have a near Relation with you -- At
which, I interrupted him, and cry^d -- Oh Lord Sir! I vow to Fortune, you do me
the greatest Honor Sir, and the rest --


Bell. I can endure no more, he marry fair Celinda?


Friend. Prithee let him alone.

[Aside.
Sir Tim. To which he answered -- I have a good Fortune -- Have but my Son Ned,
and this Girl, called Celinda, whom I will make a Fortune, suitable to yours*
your honored Mother, the Lady Tawdrey, and I, have as good as concluded the
match already. To which I (who, tho I say it, am well eno^gh bred for a Knight)
answered the Civility thus -- I vow to Fortune Sir -- I did not swear, but
cried -- I protest Sir, Celinda, deserves -- no, no, I lie again, 'twas merits
-- I, Celinda -- merits a much better Husband than I.


Friend. You speak more truth than you are aware of.

[Aside. Well, Sir, I Will bring you to my Sister, and if she likes you, as well
as my Father does, she is yours; otherwise, I have so much tenderness for her,
as to leave her choice free.


Sir Tim. Oh Sir you Compliment. Alons, Entrons.


[Exeunt. Scene 2. A Chamber.
Enter Celinda, and Nurse. Cel. I wonder my Brother stays so long; sure Mr
Bellmour is not yet arrived, yet he sent us word he would be here to day. Lord
how impatient I grow.


Nur. Ay, so methinks if I had the hopes of enjoying so sweet a Gentleman, as
Mr Bellmour, I should be so too -- But I am past it -- Well, I have had my
pantings, and heavings, my impatience, and qualms, my heats, and my colds, and
my I know not what is -- But I thank my stars, I have done with all those
Fooleries.


Cel. Fooleries! --
Is there any thing in life but Love?
Would thou prai^e Heaven for thy Being,
Without that grateful part of it?
For I confess I Love.

Nur. You need not, your sighs, and daily (nay, and nightly too) disorders,
plainly enough betray the truth.


Cel. Thou speak as if it were a Sin;
But if it be so, you your self helped to make me wicked.
For e're I saw Mr Bellmour, you spoke the kindest things of him,
As would have moved the dulle^t Maid to Love;
And e're I saw him, I was quite undone.

Nur. Quite undone! Now God forbid it: What, for Loving?
You said but now there was no life without it.

Cel. But since my Brother came from Italy,
And brought young Bellmour to our house,
How very little thou had said of him;
How much above thy praise, I found the Youth?

Nur. Very pretty! You are grown a notable Proficient in Love --
And you are resolved (if he please) to Marry him.

Cel. Or I must dye.


Nur. I, but you know the Lord Plotwell, has the possession of all his Estate,
and if he Marry without his liking, has power to take away all his Fortune, and
then I think it were not so good Marrying him.


Cel. Not Marrying him! Oh can thou think so poorly of me?
Yes, I would Marry him, though our scanty Fortune,
Could only purchase us
A loanly Cottage, in some silent place,
All covered o^re with Thatch,
Defended from the outrages of storms
By leafless Trees, in Winter, and from heat,
With shades, which their kind Boughs wou^d bear anew,
Under whose Covert, we would feed, our gentle Flock;
That should in gratitude repay us Food,
And mean and humble Clothing.

Nur. Very fine!

Cel. There we wou^d practice such degrees of Love,
Such lasting, innocent, unheard of joys,
As all the busy World should wonder at,
And ami^st all the^r Glories, find none such.

N^r. Good lack! how prettily Love teaches his Scholars to prattle? -- But hear
ye, fair Mrs Celinda, you have forgot to what end and purpose you came to Town,
not to Marry Mr Bellmour, as I take it -- but Sir Timothy Tawdrey, that Spark
of Men.


Cel. Oh name him not -- Let me not in one moment
Descend from Heaven to Hell --
How came that wretched thing into thy Noddle?

Nur. Faith Mistress I took pity of thee, I saw you so elevated with thoughts
of Mr Bellmour, I found it necessary to take you down a degree lower.


Cel. Why did not Heaven make all Men like to Bellmour?
So strangely sweet and charming.

Nur. Marry come up you speak well for your self;
Oh intolerable loving Creature!
But here comes the utmost of your wishes.

Cel. My Brother and Bellmour! with strange Men!

Enter Friendlove, Bellmour, Sir Timothy, Sham, and Sharp. Friend. Sister,
I Have brought you here a Lover, this is the worthy person you have heard of, Sir
Timothy Tawdrey.


Sir Tim. Yes, ^aith Madam, I am Sir Timothy Tawdrey, at your service -- Pray
are not you Mrs Celinda D^esswell?


Cel. The same, but cannot return your Compliment.


Sir Tim. Oh Lord, oh Lord, not return a Compliment, faith Ned thy Sister^s
quite spoiled, for want of Town Education; it is pity, for she^s Devilish pretty.


Friend. She^s modest. Sir, before Company; therefore these G^ntlemen and I
will withdraw into the next Room.


Cel Inhumane Brother, will you leave me alone with this Sott?


Friend. Yes, and i^ you would be rid of the trouble of him, be not coy, nor
witty; two things ^e hates.


Bell. 'Sdeath! Must she be blown upon by that Fool?


Friend. Patience dear Frank, a little while.


[ Exeunt Friendl. Bell. Sham and Sharp. [ Sir Timothy walks about the Room,
expecting when Celinda should speak. Cel. Oh dear Nurse, what shall I do?


Nur. I that ever help you at a dead Lift, will not fail you now.


Sir Tim. What a Pox not a word?


Cel. Sure this Fellow believes I^ll begin.


Sir Tim. Not yet -- sure she has spoke her last --


Nur. The Gentleman's good natured, and has took pity on you, and will not
trouble you, I think.


Sir Tim. -- Hey day, here^s Wooing indeed -- Will she never begin trow -- This
some would call an excellent quality in her Sex -- But a Pox on^t I do not like
it -- Well, I see I must break silence at last -- Madam -- not answer me --
shaw this is mere ill breeding -- by Fortune -- it can be nothing else -- Oh my
Conscience, if I should kiss her, she would not bid me stand off -- I Will try --


Nur. Hold, Sir, you mistake your Mark.


Sir Tim. So I should, if I were to look in thy moldy Chaps, good Matron --
Can your Lady speak?


Nur. Try Sir.


Sir Tim. Which way?


Nur. Why speak to her first.


Sir Tim. I never knew a Woman want a Cue, for that, but all that I have met
with, were still beforehand with me, in tittle tattle.


Nur. Likely those you have met with may, but this is no such Creature Sir.


Sir Tim. I must confess, I am unused to this kind of Dialogue,
And I am an Ass, if I know what to say to such a Creature,
-- But come, will you answer me to one Question?

Cel. If I can Sir.

Sir Tim. But first I should ask you if you can speak?
For that is a Question too.

Cel. And if I cannot, how will you be answered?


Sir Tim. Faith that is right; why then you must do it by signs.


Cel. But grant I can speak, what is it you will ask me?


Sir Tim. Can you Love?


Cel. Oh yes, Sir, many things; I love my Meat, I love abundance of Adorers, I
love choice of new Clothes, new Plays, and like a right Woman, I love to have
my Will.


Sir Tim. Spoke like a well-bred person, by Fortune; I see there is hopes of
thee Celinda; thou will in time learn to make a very fashionable Wife, having
so much Beauty too. I see Attracts, and Allurements, wanton Eyes, the
languishing turn of the Head, and all that invites to Temptation.


Cel. Would that please you in a Wife?


Sir Tim. Please me, why Madam, what do you take me to be? a Sott? -- a Fool?
-- or a dull Italian, of the humor of your Brother? -- No, no, I can assure
you, she that Marries me, shall have Franchise -- But my pretty Miss, you must
learn to talk a little more. --


Cel. I have not Wit, and Sense enough, for that.


Sir Tim. Wit! Oh la, O la, Wit! as if there were any Wit required in a Woman
when she talks; no, no matter for Wit, or Sense: talk but loud, and a great
deal, to show your white teeth, and smile, and be very confident, and it is
enough. -- Lord what a ^ight it is to see a pretty Woman stand right up an end
in the middle of a Room, playing with her Fan, for want of something to keep
her in countenance. No, s^e that is mine, I will teach to entertain at another
rate.


Nur. How Sir? Why what do you take my young Mistress to be?


Sir Tim. A Woman -- and a fine one, and so fine as she, ought to permit her
self to be seen, and be ador^d.


Nur. Out upon you, would you expose your Wife; by my troth and I were she, I
know what I would do. --


Sir Tim. Thou do -- what thou would have done sixty Years ago, thou meanest.


Nur. Marry come up, for a stinking Knight, worse than I have gone down with
you, e're now -- Sixty Years ago quoth ye -- As old as I am -- I live without
Surgeons, wear my own Hair, am not in Debt to my Tailor, as thou art, and art
fain to kiss his Wife, to persuade her Husband to be merciful to thee -- who
wakes thee every morning with his Clamor and long Bills, at thy Chamber door.


Sir Tim. Prithee good Matron peace, I Will Compound with thee.


Nur. It Is more than thou will do with thy Creditors, who, poor Souls, despair
of a Groat in the Pound for all thou ow^st them, for Points, Lace, and
Garniture -- for all in fine, that makes thee a complete Fopp.


Sir Tim. Hold, hold, thy eternal Clack.


Nur. And when none would trust thee farther, give Judgments for twice the
Money tho^ borrowest, and swear thy self at Age; and lastly, -- to patch up
your broken Fortune, you would fain Marry my swe^t Mistress Celinda here -- But
'faith Sir, you're mistaken, her For^une shall not go to the maintenance of
your Misses, which being once sure of, she, poor Soul, is sent down to the
Coun^rey house, to learn Housewifery, and live without M^nkind, unless she can
serve her self with the handsome Steward, or so -- whilst you tear it away in
Town, and live like Man and Wife with your Jilt, and are every day seen in the
Glass Coach, whilst your own natural Lady is hardly worth the hire of a Hack


Sir Tim. Why thou damnabie confounded torment, will thou never cease?


Nur. No, not till you raise your Siege, and be gone; go march to your Lady of
Love, and debauch -- go -- You get no C^linda here.


Sir Tim. The Devil's in her tongue.


Cel. Good gentle Nurse, have mercy upon the poor Knight.


Nur. No more Mistress, than he will have on you, if Heaven had so abandoned you,
to put you into his power: -- Mercy -- quoth ye -- no, no more than his
Mistress will have, when all his money's gone.


Sir Tim. Will she never end?


Cel. Prithee forbear.


Nur. No more, than the Usurer would, to whom he has mortgaged his best part of
his Estate, would forbear a day after the promised payment of the money.
Forbear --


Sir Tim. Not yet end: Can I Madam, give you a greater proof of my passion for
you, than to endure this for your sake?


Nur. This -- thou art so sorry a creature, thou will endure any thing, for the
lucre of her fortune; it is that thou have a passion for: not that thou carest
for money, but to sacrifice to thy lewdness, to purchase a Mistress, to
purchase the Reputation of as errant a Fool, as ever arrived at the honor of
keeping, to purchase a little Grandeur, as you call it; that is, to make every
one look at thee, and consider what a Fool thou art, who else might pass
unreguarded amongst the common crowd.


Sir Tim. The Devil's in her tongue, and so it is in most Women's of her Age; for
when 't has quitted the Tail, it repairs to her upper Tire.


Nur. Do not persuade me, Madam, I am resolved to make him weary of his Wooing.


Sir Tim. So God be praised, the storm is laid -- And now Mrs. Celinda* give me
leave to ask you, if it be with your leave, this affront is put (...) of my
Quality?


N^r. Thy Quality --


Sir Tim. Yes, I am a Gentleman, and a Knight.


Nur. Yes, Sir, Knight of the ill-favored Countenance is it?


Sir Tim. You are beholding to Don Quixot for that, and ^tis so many Ages,
since thou could see to read, I wonder thou have not forgot all that ever
belong^d to Books.


Nur. My eye-sight^s good enough to see thee in all thy colors, thou Knight of
the Burning Pestle thou.


Sir Tim. Again, that was out of a Play -- hark ye Witch of Endor, hold your
prating tongue, or I shall most well-^avourdly Cudgel ye.


Nur. As your Friend the Hostess has it in a Play too, I take it, Ends which
you pick up behind the Scenes, when you go to be laughed at even by the Player
Women.


Sir Tim. Will thou have done, by Fortune I Will endure no more.


Nur. Murder, Murder.


[A Letter. Cel. Hold, hold.


Enter Friendlove, Bellmour, Sham and Sharp. Friend. Read here, the worst of
News, that can arrive,
[Gives Bellm. a Letter. -- What Is the matter here? -- Why how now Sir Timothy,
What up in Arms with the Women?

Sir Tim. Oh Ned, i^ m glad thou^rt come -- never was Tom Dove baited as I have
been.


Friend. By whom? my Sister.


Sir Tim. No, no, that old Mastiff there; -- the young Whelp, came not on,
thanks be praised.


Bell. How, her Father here to morrow, and here he says, that shall be the
last moment, he will defer the Marriage of Celinda, to this Sott -- Oh God, I
shall grow mad, and so undo 'em all -- I Will kill the Villain at the Altar -- By
my lost hopes I will -- And yet there is some left -- Could I but -- speak to
her -- I must rely on Dresswells friendship -- Oh God to morrow -- Can I
endure that thought -- Can I endure to see the Traitor there, who must to
morrow rob me of my Heaven -- I Will own my flame -- and boldly tell this Fopp,
she must be mine --


Friend. I assure you, Sir Timothy, I am sorry, and will chastise her.


Sir Tim. Ay Sir, I that am a Knight -- a Man of Parts and Wit, and one that is
to be your Brother, and designed to be the glory of marrying Celinda.


Bell. I can endure no more -- How Sir -- You marry fair Celinda!


Sir Tim. Ay Frank, Ay -- Is she not a pretty little plump white Rogue, hah --


Bell. Yes.


Sir Tim. Oh I had forgot, thou art a modest Rogue, and to thy eternal shame,
had never the Reputation of a Mistri^s -- Lord, Lord, that I could see thee
address thy self to a Lady -- I fancy thee a very ridiculous Figure, in that
posture, by Fortune.


Bell. Why Sir -- I can Court a Lady --


Sir Tim. No, no, you are modest; that is to say, a Country Gentleman; that is
to say, Ill-bred; that is to say, a Fool by Fortune, as the World goes.


Bell. Neither Sir -- I can Love -- and tell it too -- and that you may believe
me -- look on this Lady Sir --


Sir Tim. Loo^ on this Lady Sir -- Ha, ha, ha, -- Well Sir -- Well Sir -- And
what then --


Bell. Nay view her well Sir --


Sir Tim. Pleasant this -- Well Frank I do -- And what then?


Bell. Is she not charming Fair -- Fair to a wonder!


Sir Tim. Well Sir, it is granted --


Bell. And can thou think this Beauty meant for thee, for thee dull common
Man?


Sir Tim. Very well, what will he say next?


Bell. I say, let me no more see thee approach this Lady.


Sir Tim. How Sir, how?


Bell. Not speak to her, not look on her -- by Heaven -- not think of her.


Sir Tim. How Frank, art in earnest?


Bell. Try, if thou dare?


Sir Tim. Not think of her --


Bell. No not so much as in a Dream, could I Divine it.


Sir Tim. Is he in earnest Mr Friendlove?


Friend. I doubt so Sir Timothy.


Sir Tim. What does he then pretend to your Sister?


Bell. Yes, and no Man else, shall dare do so.


Sir Tim. Take notice I am aff^onted in your Lodgings -- for you Bellmour --
You take me for an Ass -- therefore meet me to morrow morning about 5, with
your Sword in your hand, behind Southamp^on House.


Bell. It Is well -- there we'll dispute our Title to Celinda.
[Ex. Dull Animal! Ye Gods could never Decree
So bright a Maid should be possessed by thee.

The End of the First Act.
ACT. II.
Scene 1. A Palace.
Enter Nurse with a Light. Nur. WEll, it is an endless trouble, to have the
Tuition of a Maid in Love, here is such Wishing and Longing -- And yet one must
force them to what they most desire, before they will admit of it -- Here am I
sent out a Scout of the Forlorn Hope, to discover the approach of the Enemy --
Well -- Mr. Bellmour, you are not to know, it is with the consent of Celinda,
that you come -- I must bear all the blame, what mischief soever comes of these
Night-works.

Enter Bellmour. Oh are you come -- Your hour was Twelve, and ^ow it is almost
Two.


Bell. I could not get from Friendlove -- Thou have not told Celinda of my
coming.


Nur. No, no, even make peace for me, and your self too.


Bell. I warrant thee Nurse -- Oh how I hope and fear this nights success!


[Exeunt. Scene a Chamber, Celinda in her Night A^tire, leaning on a Table.
Enter to her Bellmour and Nurse. Cel. Oh Heavens! Mr. Bellmour at this late
hour in my Chamber!

Bell. Yes, Madam; but will approach no nearer till you permit me;
And sure you know my Soul too well to fear.

Cel. I do Sir, and you may approach yet nearer,
And let me know your business.

Bell. Love is my business, that of all the world
Only my flame as much surmounts the rest
As is the Objects beauty, I adore.

Cel. If this be all, to tell me of your Love,
To morrow might have done as well.

Bell. Oh no, to morrow would have been too late,
Too late to make returns to all my pain.
-- What disagreeing thing offends your Eyes?
I Have no deformity about my Person,
I Am Young, and have a Fortune great as any
That do pretend to serve you;
And yet I find my interest in your heart,
Below those happy ones that are my Rivals.
Nay, every Fool that can but plead his Title,
And the poor interest that a Parent gives him,
Can merit more than I.
-- What else my lovely Maid can give a freedom
To that same talking, idle Knighted Fopp.

Cel. Oh if I am so wretched to be his,
Surely I cannot live,
For, Sir, I must confess I cannot love him.

Bell. But thou may do as bad, and marry him,
And that is a sin, I cannot over live
-- No, hear my Vows --

Cel. But are you ^ir in earnest?

Bell. In earnest? Yes, by all that is good I am;
I Love you more than I do Life, or Heav'n^

Cel. Oh what a pleasure it is to hear him say so!
[Aside. -- But pray, how long Sir, have you Loved me so?

Bell. From the first moment that I saw your Eyes,
Your charming killing Eyes, I did adore 'em,
And ever since have languisht day and night.

Nur. Come, come, never stand asking of questions,
But follow your inclinations, and take him at his word.

Bell. Celinda, take her counsel,
Perhaps this is the last opportunity;
Nay, and by Heaven the last of all my Life,
If you refuse me now --
Say, will you never marry Man but me?

Cel. Pray give me till to morrow, Sir, to answer you;
For I have yet some fears about my Soul
That take away my rest.

Bell. To morrow! You must then marry -- oh fatal word!
Another! a Beast, a Fool, tha^ knows not how to value you.

Cel. Is It possible my Fate should be so near?

Nur. Nay then dispose of your self, I say, and leave dissembling, it is high
time.


Bell. This night the Letter came, the dreadful News
Of thy being married, and to morrow too.
Oh answer me, or I shall die with fear.

Cel. I must confess it, Sir, without a blush,
(For it is no sin to Love) that I could wish --
Heaven and my Father, were inclined my way.
But I am all obedience to their wills.

Bell. That Sigh was kind,
But ere to morrow this time,
You Will want this pitying sense, and fee^ no pantings,
But those which joys and pleasures do create.

Cel. Alas Sir! what is it you would have me do?

Bell. Why -- I would have you Love, and after that
You need not be instructed what to do.
Give me your Faith* give me your Solemn Vow
To be my Wife, and I shall be at peace.

Cel. Have you considered, Sir, your own condition,
It Is in your Uncles power to take your Fortune,
If in your choice you disobey his will.
-- And Sir, you know that mine is much below you.

Bell. Oh I shall calm his Rage,
By urging so much Reason as thy Beauty,
And my own flame, on which my Life depends.
-- He now has kindly sent for me to London,
I fear his business --
Yet if you will yield to marry me,
We'll keep it secret, till our kinder Stars
Have made provision for the blessed discovery*
Come give me your Vows, or we must part for ever.

Cel. Part! oh it is a fatal word!
I will do any thing to save that Life,
To which my own so nearly is allied.

Enter Friendllove. Fri^nd. So forward Sister!

Bell. Ha! Friendlove!

Friend. Was it so kindly done to gain my Sister
Without my knowledge?

Bell. Ah Friend! 'Twas from her self alone
That I would take the blessing which I ask.

Friend. And I^ll assist her, Sir, to give it you.
Here take him as an Honor, and be thankful.

Bell. I as a blessing sent from Heaven receive her,
And e're I sleep will justify my Claim,
And make her mine.

Friend* Be not so hasty Friend:
Endeavor first to reconcile your Uncle to it.

Bell. By such delays we are lost: Have thou forgot?
To morrow she is designed another Bride!

Friend. For that let me alone to evade.

Bell. If you must yet delay me,
Give me leave not to interest such wealth without security.
And I Celinda will instruct you how to satisfy my fears.
[Kneels, and takes her by the hand. Bears witness to my Vows --
May every Plague that Heaven inflicts on Sin,
Fall down in thunder on my head,
If e're I marry any but Celinda,
Or if I do not marry thee fair Maid.

Nur. Heartily sworn as I vow.

Cel. And here I wish as solemnly the same.
-- May all arrive to me,
If e're I marry any Man but Bellmour!

Nur. We are Witnesses as good as a thousand.

Friend. But now my Friend, I Would have you take your leave, the day comes on
apace, and you^ve not seen your Uncle, since your arrival.


Bell. It Is death to part with thee my fair Celinda,
But our hard Fates, imposes this separation;
-- Farewell -- Remember you are all mine.

Cel. What have I else of joy to think upon --
-- Go -- go -- depart.

Bell. I will -- but it is as Misers part with Gold,
Or people full of Health depart from Life.

Friend. Go, Sister, to your Bed, and dream of him.

[Ex. Cel. and Nurse. Bell. Whilst I prepare to meet this Fopp to fight him.

Friend. Hang him, he will never meet thee; to beat a Watch, or kick a Drawer, or
batter Windows, is the highest pitch of Valor he e're arrived to.


Bell. However I Will expect him, lest he be Foolhardy enough to keep his word.


Friend. Shall I wait on thee?

Bell. No, no, there^s no need of that -- Good morrow my best Friend.


Friend. But e're you go, my dearest Friend and Brother,
Now you are sure of all the joys you wish
From Heaven, do not forgetful grow, of that great trust
I gave you of all mine, but like a Friend
Assist me in my great concern of Love
With fair Diana, your lovely Cozen;
You know how long, I have adored that Maid,
But still her haughty Pride repelled my flame,
And all it^ fierce efforts

Bell. She has a spirit equal to her Beauty
As mighty and tyrannick, yet she has goodness,
And I believe enough inclined to Love,
When once her Pride's overcome; I have the honor
To be the Confident of all her thoughts:
And to ^ugment thy hopes, it is not long since,
She did with sighs confess to me, she Loved
A Man she said scarce equal to her Fortune;
But all my interest could not learn the Object:
But it must needs be you, by what she said
This I Will improve, and so to your advantage --

Friend. I neither doubt thy Industry, nor Love,
Go and be careful of my Interest there,
Whilst I preserve thine as entirely here.

[Ex. severally. Scene 2.
Enter Sir Timothy, Sham and Sharp. Sharp. Good morrow Sir Timothy, what not
yet ready, and to mee^ Mr. Bellmour at five, the time's past.


Sir Tim. -- Ay Pox on it -- I have not slep to night for thinking on it.


Sham* Well Sir Timothy, I have most excellent News for you, that will do as
well, I have found out --


Sir Tim. A new Wench, I warrant -- but prithee Sham, I have ^^ther matters in
hand; 'Sheart I am so mortified with this same though^ of Fighting, that I
shall hardly think of Woman kind again.


Sharp. You were so forward Sir Timothy --


Sir Tim. Ay Sharp, I am always so when I Am angry; had I been but a little
more provoked then, that we might have gone to it when the heat was brisk, I had
done well -- but a Pox on it this fighting in cool blood I hate.


Sham. 'Shaw, Sir, it is nothing, a Man would do it for Exercise in a morning.


Sir Tim. Ay, if there were no more in it than Exercise; if a Man co^'d take a
Breathing without breathing a Vein -- but Sham, this Wounds, and Blood, sounds
terribly in my ears; but since thou say it is nothing, prithee do thou meet
Bellmour in my stead; thou art a poor Dog, and it is no matter if the world were
well rid of thee.


Sham. I would do it with all my Soul -- but your Honor Sir --


Sir Tim. -- My Honor! it is but Custom that makes it Honorable to fight Duels
-- I warrant you the wise Italian, thinks himself a Man of Honor; and yet when
did you hear of an Italian, that ever fought a Duel? Is It not enough, I am
affronted, have my Mistress taken away before my face, hear my self called,
Dull, Common Man, Dull Animal, and the rest -- But I must after all give him
leave to kill me too, if he can -- And this is your damned Honorable English
way of showing a Man's Courage.


Sham. I must confess I am of your mind, and therefore have been studying a
Revenge, suitable to the Affront: and if I can judge any thing, I have hit it.


Sir Tim. Have thou? dear Sham, out with it.


Sham. Why Sir -- what think you of debauching his Sister?


Sir Tim Why is there such a thing in Nature?


Sham. You know he has a Sister, Sir.


Sir Tim. Yes, Rich, and Fair.


Sham. Both, or she were not worthy of your Revenge.


Sir Tim. Oh how I love Revenge, that has a double pleasure in it -- and where
-- and where -- is this fine piece of temptation?


Sham. In being Sir -- but Sharp here, and I, have been at some cost in finding
her out.


Sir Tim. Ye shall be overpaid -- there is Gold, my little Maquero but she is
very handsome?


Sharp. As a Goddess, Sir.


Sir Tim. And art thou sure she will be Lewd?


Sharp. Are we sure she is a Woman, Sir? -- Sure she is in her Teens? has Pride
and Vanity -- and two or three Sins more, that I could ^ame, all which never
fails to assist a Woman in Debauchery -- But Sir, there are certain people that
b^long to her, that must be considered too.


Sir Tim. Stay Sir, e're I part with more money, I Will be certain what returns
'twill make me -- that is -- I Will see the Wench, not to inform my self, how
well I like her, for that I shall do, because she is new, and Bellmours Sister
-- but to find what possibility there is in gaining her -- I am used to these
things, and can ^uess from a look, or a kiss, or a touch of the hand -- but
then I warrant, 'twill come to the knowledge of Betty Flau^tit.


Sham* What Sir -- then it seems you doubt us?


Sir Tim. How do you mean, your honesty or judgment?
I can assure you, I doubt both.

Sharp. How Sir? doubt our honesty?


Sir Tim. Yes -- why I hope neither of you pretend to either, do you?


Sham. Why, Sir, what do you take us for Cheats?


Sir Tim. As errant, as any's in Christendom.


Sharp. How Sir? --


Sir Tim. Why how now -- what fly in my face? are you^ stomachs so queasie,
that Cheat will not down with you?


Sham. Why Sir -- we are Gentlemen -- and though our ill Fortunes have thrown us
on your Bounty -- we are not to be termed --


Sir Tim. Why you pair of Hectors -- whence this impudence?
-- De'e you know me ye Raggamuffins?

Sham. Yes, but we knew not that you were a Coward before. You talked big, and
huft where e^re you came, like an errant Bully, and so long we Reverenced you
-- but now we find, you have need of our Courage -- we'll stand on our
Reputations.


Sir Tim. C^urage and Reputation! -- h^, ha, ha -- why ye lousy
Tatterdemallions -- dare ye talk of Courage and Reputation?


Sharp. Why, Sir, who dares question either?


Sir Tim. He that dares try it.


[Ki^ks 'em. Sharp. Hold, Sir, hold.


Sham. Enough, enough, we are satisfied.


Sir Tim. So am not I, ye mangy Mungrels, till I have kicked Courage and
Reputation out of ye.


Sham. Hold there Sir, ^tis enough we are satisfied, that you have Courage.


Sir Tim. Oh are you so? then it seems I was not to be believed -- I told you I
had Courage when I was angry.


Sham Ay Sir, we have proved it, and will now swear it.
-- But we had an inclination to try Sir.

Sir Tim. And all you did, was but to try my Courage -- hah!

Sharp. On our Honors nothing else Sir Timothy.

Sir Tim Tho^ I know ye to be cursed cowardly lying Rogues,
Yet because I have use of ye, I must forgive ye.
-- Here kiss my hand, and be forgiven.

Sham. It Is an Honor we are proud of Sir.


Sir Tim. Oh is it so Rascallians! then I hope I am to see the Lady without
I^dentures.


Sharp. Oh Lord Sir! any thing we can serve you in.


Sham. And I have bribed her Maid to bring her this morning into the M^ll.


Sir Tim. Well, let us about it then; for I am for no Fighting to day -- De'e
hear Boy -- Let the Coach be got ready, whilst I get my self dressed


Boy. The Coach Sir! Why you know Mr Shatter has pawned the Horses.


Sir Tim. I had forgot it -- A Pox on it, this it is to have a Partner in a
Coach; By Fortune I must Marry, and set up a whole one.

[Ex.
Scene 3.
Enter Charles Bellmour and Trusty. Trusty. Mr Charles, your Brother, my young
Master Bellmour is come.


Char. I^m glad on it; my Uncle, began to be impatient that he came not, you
saying you left him but a days journey behind you yesterday. My Uncle has
something of importance to say to him, I fancy it may be about a Marriage
between him and my Lady Diana -- such a whisper I heard --


Trusty. I Marry Sir, that were a Match indeed, she being your Unkles only
Heir.


Char. Ay but they are Sisters Children, and too near akin to be happy.


Trusty. 'Twere pity my young Master should be unhappy in a Wife; for he is the
sweetest natured Gentleman -- But one comfort is Mr Charles, you, and your
Sister Mrs ^hillis, will have your Portions assigned you ^f he Marry.


Char. Yes, that he cannot deny us the very day after his Marriage.


Trusty. I shall be glad to see you all disposed of well; but I was half
afraid, your Brother would have Married Mrs Celinda Friendlove, to whom he made
notable Love in Yorkshire, I thought; not but she is a fine Lady; but her
Fortune is below that of my young Master^, as much as my Lady Diana's is above
his -- But see, they come -- let us retire, to give 'em leave to talk alone.


[Exeunt. Enter Lord Plotwell and Bellmour. Lord. And well Frank, how do thou
find thy self inclined, tho^ ^^o^'dst begin to think of something more than
Books? Do thou not wish to know the joys that are to be found in a woman
Frank? I well remember at thy age I fancied a thousand fine things of that kind.


Bell. Ay my Lord, a thousand more perhaps than are to be found.


Lord. Not so; but I confess Frank unless the Lady be fair, and there be some
Love too, it is not altogether so well; therefore I, who am still busy for thy
good, have fixed upon a Lady --


Bell. Ha! --


Lord. What do start? Nay, I Will warrant thee she will please, A Lady rich, and
fair, and Nobly born, and thou shall Marry her Frank.


Bell. Marry her my Lord --


Lord. Why yes Marry her -- I hope you are none of the fashionable Fopps, that
are always in mutiny against Marriage, who never think themselves very witty,
but when they rail against Heaven and a Wife -- But Frank, I have found better
Principles in thee, and thou have the Reputation of a sober young Gentleman,
thou art besides a Man of great Fortune Frank.


Bell. And therefore Sir, ought the less to be a Slave.


Lord. But Frank, we are made for one another, and ought by the Laws of God, to
communicate our blessings*


Bell. Sir, there are Men enough, fitter much than I, to obey those Laws, nor
do I think them made for every one.


Lord. But Frank, you do not know what a Wife I have provided for you.


Bell. It Is enough I know she is a Woman, Sir.


Lord. A Woman, why what should she be else?


Bell. An Angel, Sir, e're she can be my Wife.


Lord. In good time, but this is a Mortal Sir -- and must serve your turn --
but Frank, she is the finest Mortal --


Bell. I humbly beg your pardon, if I tell you,
That had she Beauty such as Heaven never made,
Nor meant again to enrich a Woman with,
It could not take my heart.

Lord. But Sir, perhaps you do not guess the Lady.

Bell. Or could I Sir, it could not change my nature.

Lord. But Sir, suppose it be my Niece Diana.

Bell. How Sir? the fair Diana.

Lord. I thought thou would come about again;
What think you now of Womankind, and Wedlock?

Bell. As I did before, my Lord.

Lord. What, thou can not think I am in earnest, I confess Frank, she is
above thee in point of Fortune, she being my only Heir -- but suppose it is she.


Bell. Oh I Am undone -- Sir I dare not suppose so greatly in favor of my self.


Lord. But Frank, you must needs suppose --


Bell. Oh I am ruined, lost, for ever lost.


Lord. What do you mean Sir?


Bell. I mean I cannot Marry fair Diana.


Lord. Death how is this? --


Bell. She is a thing, above my humble wishes --


Lord. Is that all? take you no care for that, for she loves you already, and I
have resolved it which is better yet.


Bell. Love me Sir? I know she cannot,
And Heaven forbid that I should injure her.

Lord. Sir, this is a put-off: resolve quickly, or I Will compel you.

Bell. You wou^d not use extremity,
What is the forfeit of my disobedience?

Lord. The loss of all your Fortune,
If you refuse the Wife I have provided --
Especially a handsome Lady, ^s she is Frank.

Bell. Oh me unhappy!
What cursed Laws provided this severity?

Lord. Even those of your Fathers disposal, who seeing so many examples, in
this lewd Age, of the ruin of whole Families, by imprudent Marriages, provided
otherwise for you.


Bell. But Sir, admit Diana be inclined,
And I (by my unhappy Stars so cursed)
Should be unable to accept the Honor.

Lord. How Sir? admit? -- I can no more admit,
Than you can suppose -- therefore give me your final answer.

Bell. Sir, can you think a blessing e're can fall
Upon that Pair, whom Interest joins, not Love.

Lord. Why what is in Diana that you should not love her?

Bell. I must confess she has a thousand Virtues,
The least of which would bless another Man;
But Sir, I hope if I am so unhappy
As not to love that Lady, you will pardon me.

Lord. Indeed Sir but I will not, love me this Lady, and marry me this Lady, or
I will teach you what it is to refuse such a Lady.


Bell. Sir, it is not in my power to obey you.

Lord. How? not in your power?

Bell. No, Sir, I see my fatal r^ine in your eyes,
And know too well your force, and my own misery.
-- But Sir -- when I shall tell you who I Have married --

Lord. Who you have married! -- By all that is Sacred if that be true, thou art
undone for ever.


Bell. Oh hear me Sir!
I came with hopes to have found you merciful.

Lord. Expect none from me; no, thou shall not have so much of thy
Estate, as will afford thee Bread.
By Heaven thou shall not.

Bell. Oh pity me, my Lord, pity my Youth;
It is no Beggar, nor none basely born
That I have given my heart ^o, but a Maid,
Whose Birth, whose Beauty, and whose Education,
Merits the best of Men.

Lord. Very fine! where is the Priest that durst dispose of you, without my
order? Sirrah you are my slave -- at least your whole Estate is at my mercy --
and besides, I Will charge you with an Action of 5000 l. for your ten Years
maintenance: Do you know that this is in my power too?


Bell. Yes, Sir, and dread your Anger worse than death.

Lord. Oh Villain! thus to dash my expectation.

Bell. Sir, on my bended knees, thus low I fall
To beg your mercy.

Lord. Yes, Sir, I will have mercy,
I^ll give you Lodging -- but in a Dungeon Sir,
Where you shall ask your food of Passers by.

Bell. All this, I know you have the power to do,
But, Sir, were I thus cruel, this hard usage
Would give me cause to execute it.
I wear a Sword, and I dare right my self;
And Heaven would pardon it, if I should kill you:
But Heaven forbid, I should correct that Law,
Which gives you power, and orders me obedience.

Lord. Very well, Sir, I shall ^ame that Courage, and punish that Harlot, who
e're she be, that has seduced ye.


Bell. How Harlot, Sir! -- Death such another word,
And through all Laws and Reason I will rush,
And reach thy Soul, if mortal like thy Body.
-- No Sir, she is Chaste, as are the new-made Vows,
I breathed upon her Lips, when last we parted.

Lord. Who waits there?
Enter Trusty and Servants. -- Shall I be murdered in my own House?
It Is time you were removed --
Go get an Action of 5000 l. entered against him;
With Officers to Arrest him.

Trusty. My Lord, it is my young Master Bellmour.

Lord. Ye all dote upon him* but he is not the Man you take him for.

Trusty. How my Lord? not this Mr Bellmour?

Lord. Dogs obey me.

[Offers to go. Bell. Stay Sir -- oh stay -- what will become of me?
'Twere better that my Life were lost than Fortune --
For that being gone, Celinda must not love me.
-- But to die wretchedly --
-- Poorly in Prison -- whilst I can manage this --
-- Is below him, that does adore Celinda.
[Draws. -- I Will kill my self -- but then -- I kill Celinda.
-- Should I obey this Tyrant -- then too she dies.
-- Yes Sir -- You may be cruel -- take the Law,
-- And kill me quickly, 'twill become your justice.

[Weeps. Lord. Was I called back for this? Yes, I shall take it Sir, do not
fear.


[Offers to go. Bell. Yet, stay Sir -- Have you lost all Humanity?
Have you no Sense of Honor, nor of Horrors!

Lord. Away with him -- go, be gone.

Bell. Stay Sir! oh God! what is it you would have me do?
-- Here -- I resign my self unto your will --
But oh Celinda! -- what will become of thee!
[Weeps. -- Yes, I will Marry -- and Diana too.

Lord. It Is well you will, had I been good natured now,
You had been undone, and mist Diana too.

Bell. But must I Marry? -- Needs Marry Sir? --
Or lose my Fortune, and my Liberty,
Whilst all my Vows are given to another?

Lord. By all means, Sir --

Bel^. If I must Marry any but Celinda,
I shall not, Sir, enjoy one moments bliss!
I shall be quite unmanned, Cruel and Brutal!
A Beast, unsafe for Woman to converse with;
Besides, Sir, I have given my Heart and Faith,
And any second Marriage is Adultery.

Lord. Heart and Faith, I am glad it is no worse; if the Ceremony of the Church
has not past, it is well enough.


Bell. All Sir, that Heaven, and Love requires, is past.


Lord. Thou art a Fool Frank, come -- dry thy Eyes,
And receive Diana. -- Trusty -- Call in my Niece.

Bell. Yet Sir relent, be kind, and save my soul.

[Ex. Trusty. Lord. No more -- by Heaven, if you resist my Will, I Will make a
strange example of thee, and of that Woman, who e're she be, that drew thee to
this folly. Faith and Vows quoth ye.


Bell. Then I obey.

Enter Trusty and Diana. Lord. Look ye here Frank, is this a Lady to be
disliked? Come hither Frank -- Trusty -- Haste for Dr. Tickletext, my
Chaplain's not in Town; I Will have them instantly Married -- Come hither Diana
-- Diana, will you Marry your Cozen Frank Bellmour?


Dia. Yes, if it be your pleasure; Heaven could not let fall a greater blessing.

[Aside.
Lord. And you Frank, will you Marry my Niece Diana?


Bell. Since you will have it so.


Lord. Come follow me then, and you shall be both pleased.


Bell. Oh my Celinda --
To preserve thee, what is it I would not do,
Forfeit my Heaven, nay more I forfeit you.
[Ex.
Scene 4. The Street.
Enter Sir Timothy Tawdrey, S^am and Sharp. Sir Tim. Now Sham, art not thou a
damned lying Rogue, to make me ^aunter up and down the Mall all this morning,
after a Woman that thou know in thy Conscience was not likely to be there?


Sham. Why Sir -- if her Maid will be a jilting Whore, how can I help it --
Sharp -- Thou know we presented her handsomely, and she protested she would do it.


Sharp. Ay, Ay Sir [Aside] but the Devil a Maid we saw.


Sham. Sir, it may be Things have so fallen out, that she could not possibly
come.


Sir Tim. Things! a Pox of your Tricks -- Well, I see there is no trusting a
poor Devil -- Well, what device will your Rogueship find out to Cheat me next?


Sham. Prithee help me out at a dead Lift Sharp.

[Aside.
Sharp. Cheat you Sir! -- If I been't revenged on this She-Counsellor of the
Patching and Painting, this Letter-in of Midnight Lovers, this Receiver of
Bribes for stolen Pleasures; may I be condemned never to make Love to any thing
of higher quality.


Sir Tim. Nay, nay, no Threatening Sharp, it may be she is Innocent yet -- Give
her the other Bribe, and try what that will do.


[Gives him money* Sham. No, Sir, I Will have no more to do with frail Woman, in
this case, I have a surer way to do your business.


Enter Page with a Letter. Sir Tim. Is not that Bellmour's Page?


Sharp. It is Sir.


Sir Tim. By Fortune the Rogue's looking for me; he has a Challenge in his hand
too.


Sham. No matter, Sir, Huff it out.


Sir Tim Prithee do thee Huff him, thou know the way on it.


Sham. What Is your business with Sir Timothy Sir?


Page. Mine Sir, I don't know the Gentleman, pray which is he?


Sir Tim. I, I,'t is so -- Pox on him.


Sharp. Well, Boy, I am he -- what -- Your Master --


Page. My Master Sir --


Sharp. Are not you Bellmour's Page?


Page. Yes, Sir.


Sharp. Well, your News.


Page. News Sir? I know of none, but of my Masters being this morning --


Sir Tim. Ay, there it is -- behind Southampton House.


Page. Married* this morning


Sir Tim. How? Married! 'Slife, has he served me so?


Sham. The Boy is drunk -- Bellmour Married!


Page. Yes indeed, to the Lady Diana.


Sir Tim. Diana! Mad by Fortune; what Diana?


Page. Niece to the Lord Plotwell.


Sir Tim. Come hither Boy -- Art thou sure of this?


Page. Sir, I am sure of it; and I am going to bespeak Music for the Ball anon.


Sir Tim. What have thou there -- a Letter to the Divine Celinda; A dainty Boy
-- there is money for thee to buy Nickers.


Page. I humbly thank you.

[Exit.
Sh^rp. Well, Sir, if this be true, Celinda will be glad of you again.


Sir Tim. Ay, but I will have none of her -- For, look you Sham, there is but
two sorts of Love in this World -- Now I am sure the Rogue did love her; and
since it was not to Marry her, it was for the thing you wot on, as appears by
his writing to her now -- But yet I will not believe what this Boy said till I
see it,


Sham. Faith Sir, I have thought of a thing, that may both clear your doubt,
and give us a little mirth.


Sir Tim. I conceive thee.


Sham. I know you are quick of apprehension, Sir Timothy.


Sir Tim. O your servant dear Sham -- But to let thee see I am none of the
dullest, we are to Jigg it in Masquerade this evening, hah.


Sham. Faith, Sir, you have it, and there you may have an opportunity to Court
Bellmour's sister.


Sir Tim. It Is a good motion, and we will follow it; send to the Dukes House,
and borrow some Habits presently.


Sham. I Will about it, Sir.


Sir Tim. Make haste to my Lodging -- But hark ye -- not a word of this to
Betty ^launtit, ^he'll be up in Arms these two days, if she go not with us;
and tho^ I think the fond Devil is true to me, yet ^twere worse than Wedlock,
if I should be so to her to.

Though Whores in all things else the Mast'ry get,
In this alone, like Wives, they must submit.

The End of the^ Second Act.
ACT. III.
Scene 1. The Street.
Enter Lord Plotwell, Bellmour leading in Diana, followed by Charles Bellmour,
Phillis, and other Ladies and Gentlemen. [Musick play^s, till they are all
seated. Lord. HEre Nephew, I resign that Trust which was reposed in me by your
dead Father, which was that on your Wedding day, I should thus -- make you
Master of your whole Fortune, you being Married to my liking -- And now
Charles, and you my Niece Phillis, you may demand your Portions to morrow, if
you please, for he is obliged to pay you the day after that of his Marriage.


Phill. There Is time enough my Lord.


Lord. Come, come Ladies, in tro^h you must take but little rest to night, in
complasance to the Bride, and Bridegroom, who I believe, will take but little
-- Frank -- why Frank -- what have thou changed thy humor with thy condition?
thou were not wont to hear the Music play in vain.


Bell. My Lord, I cannot dance.

Dia. Indeed you're wondrous sad.
And I methinks too* bear thee company.
I know not why, and yet excess of joy,
Have had the same effects with equal grief.

Bell. It Is true, and I have now felt the extremes of both.


Lord. Why Nephew Charles -- has your breeding at the Academy instructed your
heels in no motion?


Char. My Lord, I Will make one.


Phill. And I another, for joy that my Brother's made happy in so fair a Bride.


Bell. Hell take your ignorance, for thinking I am happy,
-- Would Heav^n would strike me dead.
That by the loss of a poor wretched life,
I might preserve my soul -- but oh my erro!
That has already damned it self, when it consented
To break a Sacred Vow, and Marry here.

Lord. Come, come begin, begin, Music to your office.

[Soft Music* Bell. Why does not this hard heart, this stubborn Fugitive
Break with this Load of Griefs; but like ill Spirits
It promised fair, till it had drawn me in,
And then betrayed me to Damnation.

Dia. There Is something in disorder in his Soul,
Which I Am on fire, to know the meaning of.

Enter Sir Timothy, Sham and Sharp in Masquerade. Sir Tim. The Rogue is
Married, and I am so pleased, I can forgive him our last Nights quarrel;
prithee Sharp, if thou can learn that young things name, it is a pretty airy
Rogue, whil^st I go talk to her.


Sharp. I will, Sir, I will.

[One goes ^to take out a Lady. Char. Nay, Madam, you must dance.

[Dance. Bell. I hope you will not call it Rudeness, Madam, if I refuse you
here.
[The Lady that danced, goes to take out the Bridegroom. After the Dance* she
takes out Sir Timothy, they walk a C^rrant. Am I still tame and patient with my
ills?
Gods! What is Man? That he can live and bare
Yet know his power to rid himself of grief
I will not live, or if my destiny
Compel me to it, it shall be worse than dying.

Enter Page with a Table Book. Bell. What Is this?


Page. The answer of a Letter, Sir, you sent to the Divine Celinda; for so it
was directed.


Bell. -- Hah -- Celinda -- in my crowd of thoughts
I had forgot I sent -- come nearer Boy --
-- What did she say to thee? -- Did she not smile?
And use thee with contempt and scorn -- tell me.

Page. How scorn, Sir!

Bell. -- Or she was angry -- called me perjured Villain --
False, and forsworn -- nay, tell me truth.

Page. How, Sir?

Bell. Thou do delay me -- say she did, and please me.

Page. Sir!

Bell. Again -- tell me, what answer Rascal did she send me?

Page. You have it, Sir, there in the Table Book.

Bell. Oh I am mad, and know not what I do.
-- Prithee forgive me Boy -- take breath my Soul
Before thou do begin; for this -- perhaps may be
So cruel kind.
To leave thee none when thou have ended it.
[Ope^s it, and reads. LETTER.
I Have took in the Poison which you sent, in these few
Fatal words -- Forgive me my Celinda, I am Married --
'Twas thus you said -- And I have only Life left to return --
-- Forgive me my sweet Bellmour -- I am dead.
CELINDA.




-- Can I hear this, and live? -- I am a Villain!
In my Creation destined for all mischief.
-- To commit Rapes, and Murders, to break Vows,
As fast as Fools do Jests.
Come hither Boy --
And said the Lady nothing to thee?

Page. Yes -- e're she read the Letter, asked your health,
And joy dispersed it self, in blushes through her cheeks.

Bell. Her b^auty makes the very Boy adore it.

Page. And having read it,
She drew her Tablets from her Pocket,
And trembling -- writ what I have brought you Sir.

Bell. Though I before had loaded up my Soul
With sins, that would have weighed down any other,
Yet this one more it bears, this sin of Murder.
And holds out still -- What have I more to do,
But being plunged in, in blood, to wade it through.

Enter Friendlove in Masquerade. [A Iigg. Friend. There stands the Traitor with
a guilty look,
That Traitor, who the easier to deceive me,
Betrayed my Sister; yet till I came and saw
The Perjury, I could not give a Faith to it.
-- By Heaven, Diana, loves him, nay dotes on him,
I find it in her Eyes, all languishing
They feed the fire in his, armed with a double Rage,
I know I shall go through with my Revenge.

Sir Tim. Fair Maid --

Phill. How do you know that Sir?


Sir Tim. I see you are fair, and I guess you're a Maid.


Phill. Your guess, is better than your eyesight, Sir.


Sir Tim. What e're you are, by Fortune, I wish you would permit me to love you
with all faults.


Phill. You? Pray who are you?


Sir Tim. A Man, a Gentleman -- and more, a Knight too, by Fortune.


Phill. Then 'twas not by merit Sir -- But how shall I know you are either of
these?


Sir Tim. That I Am a Man, the effects of my vigorous^ f^ame shall prove -- a
Gentleman my Coat of Arms shall testify, and I have the Kings Patent for my
Title.


Phill. For the first you may thank your Youth, for the next your Father, and
the last your Money.


Sir Tim. By Fortune, I love thee for thy pertness.


Phill. Is it possible you can love at all?


Sir Tim. As much as I dare.


Phill. How de ye mean?


Sir Tim. Not to be laughed a^; it is not the Mode to love much: A Platonic
Fopp, I have heard of, but this is an Age of sheere enjoyment, and little Love
goes to that; we have found it incommode, and loss of time, to make long
Addresses.


Enter Celinda like a Boy. Phill. I find, Sir, you and I shall never agree upon
this matter.
But, see Sir, here^s more company.

Cel. Oh Heaven! it is true, these Eyes confirm my Fate.
Yonder he is -- and that fair splendid thing
That gazes on him with such kind desire,
Is my blessed Rival -- oh he is Married.
-- Gods! and yet you let him live!
Live too with all his Charms, as fine and gay,
As if you meant he should undo* all easy Maids.
And kill 'em for their sin of loving him.
Wretched Celinda!
But I must turn my Eyes from looking on;
The fatal triumphs of my death -- Which of all these
Is my Brother? Oh this is he; I know him
By the Habit he sent for to the Playhouse.
[ Points to Sir Tim. And hither he is come in Masquerade,
I know with some design against my Bellmour*
Whom though he kill me, I must still preserve.
Whilst I, lost in despair, thus as a Boy
Will seek a Death from any welcome hand,
Since I want Courage, to perform the Sacrifice.

Enter one and dances an Entry, and a Iigg, at the end on it* Lord. Enough,
enough at this time, let us see the Bride to Bed, the Bridegroom thinks it long.


Friend. Hell! Can I endure to hear all this with patience?
Shall he depart with Life to enjoy my Right,
And to deprive my Sister of her due?
-- Stay -- Stay -- and resign
That Virgin.

Bell. Who art thou, that dare lay a claim to ought that is here?

Friend. This Sword shall answer ye.

[Draws. Bell. Though I could spare my Life, I Will not be robbed on it.

[Draws. Dia. Oh my dear Bellmour!

All draw on Bellmour's side -- Diana holds Bellmour, Celinda runs between
their Swords, and defends Bellmour; Sir Tim. Sham and Sharp draw, and run into
several corners, with signs of fear. Friend. Who art thou that thus fondly
guard'st his heart?
[ To Celinda. -- Be gone -- and let me meet it.

Cel. That thou may do through mine, but no way else.

Friend. Here are too many to encounter, and I Will defer my vengeance.


Char. Stay Sir, we must not part so.
[Ex. Drawing at the ^ame door, that Sir^ Tim. is sneaking out at. Come back I
say.
[ Pulls in Sir Tim* Slave! do thou tremble?

Sir Tim. Sir, I Am not the Man you look for --
By Fortune, Sham, we are all undone!
He has mistook me for the fighting Fellow.

Char. Villain! defend thy Life!


Sir Tim. Who I Sir? I have no quarrel to you, nor no Man breathing, not I, by
Fortune.


Cel. This Coward cannot be my Brother!

[Aside.
Char. What made thee draw upon my Brother?


Sir Tim. Who? I Sir? by Fortune I love him -- I draw upon him!


Char. I do not wonder thou can lie, for thou'^^ a Coward!
Did^ not thou draw upon him? Is not thy Sword yet out?
Did I not see thee fierce, and active too, as if thou had dared?

Sir Tim. Why he is gone Sir; a Pox of all Mistakes, and Masqueradings I say --
this was your Plot Sham.


Char. Coward! show then thy face.


Sir Tim. I Will be hang^d first, by Fortune; for then 'twill be plain 'twas I,
because I challenged Bellmour last night, and broke my assignation this morning.

[Aside.
Char. Show thy face without delay, or --


Sir Tim. My face, Sir, I protest, by Fortune, it is not worth seeing.


Char. Then Sir, you are worth a kicking -- take that -- and that --


[Kicks him. Sir Tim. How Sir? how?


Char. So Sir, so.


[Kicks him again. Sir Tim. Have a care Sir -- by Fortune, I shall fight with a
little more.


Char. Take that to raise you.

[Strikes him. Sir Tim. Nay then I am angry, and I dare fight.

[They fight out. Lord. Go, Ladies, see the Bride to her Chamber.

[Ex. Women. Bell. The Knight, Sir Timothy Tawdrey,
-- The Rascal mist me at the appointed place,
And comes to attack me here. --
[Turns to Cel. -- Brave Youth! I know not how
I came to merit this Relief from thee.
Sure you are a stranger to me, you are so kind.

Cel. Sir, I believe those happy ones that know you
Had been far kinder, but I Am indeed a stranger.

Bell. May thou be ever so, to one so wretched;
I will not ask thy name, lest knowing it,
(I am such a Monster) I should ruin thee.

Cel* Oh how he melts my Soul! I cannot stay,
Lest Grief, my Sex, and Business should betray.
[Aside. -- Farewell Sir --
-- May you be happy in the Maid you love.
[ Ex. Cel.
Bell. Oh do thou mock my griefs -- by Heaven he did.
-- Stay Sir -- he is gone.

Enter Charles, Bellmour. Char. The Rogue took courage, when he saw there was
not remedy; but there is no hurt done on either side.


Lord. It Is fit such as he should be chastis'd, that do abuse Hospitality.
Come, come, to Bed, the Lady, Sir, expects you.


Bell. Gentlemen, good night.

[Ex.
Enter Diana, Scene a Bedchamber. Dia. I long to know the cause of Bellmour's
disorder to night,
And here he comes.

Enter Bellmour, Lord, Charles, and the rest. Char. Shall Not we see you laid
Brother?

Bell. Yes in my Grave, dear Charles,
But I Will excuse that Ceremony here.

Char. Good night, and no rest to you Brother.

[Ex. all but Bellmour and Diana. Dia. Till now my Bellmour, I wanted
opportunity
To ask the cause, why on a joyful day,
When Heaven has joined us, by a sacred tie,
Thou droopst like early Flowers, with Winter storms.

Bell. Thou art that Winter storm, that nips my Bud,
All my young springing hopes, my gay desires,
The prospect of approaching joys of Love,
Thou in a hapless minute have took from me,
And in its room,
Have given me an eternal desperation.

Dia. Have you then given me Vows ye can repent of?

Bell. I given ye Vows! be witness ye just Powers!
How far I was from giving any Vows:
No, no, Diana, I had none to give!

Dia. No Vows to give!
What were they which to the holy Man
Thou did repeat, when I was made all thine?

Bell. The effects of low submission! such as Slaves
Condemned to dye, yield to the angry Judge.

Dia. Do thou not love me then?

Bell. Love thee! no by Heaven! yet wish I were so happy.
For thou art wondrous fair, and wondrous good!

Dia. Oh what a defeat is here!
The only Man, who from all Natures store
I found most charming, fit for my desires,
And now after a thousand expectations,
Such as all Maids that Love like me do hope,
Just ready for the highest joys of Love!
Then to be met thus cold -- nay worse with scorn.
[Aside. -- Why since you could not love me, did you marry me?

Bell. Because I was a Beast! a very Villain*
That staked, a wretched Fortune, to all my joys of Life.
And like a prodigal Gamester lost that all.

Dia. How durst you, Sir, knowing my Quality,
Return me this false Pay, for Love so true?
-- Was this a Beauty, Sir, to be neglected?

Bell. Fair angry Maid, frown on, frown till you kill,
And I shall dying bless those Eyes that did so.
For should I live, I should deprive the happier World
Of treasures, I am too wretched to possess.
And were not pity that vast store of Beauty,
Should like rich Fruit, dye on the yielding Boughs.

Dia. And are you then resolved to be a stranger to me?

Bell. For ever! for a long Eternity.

Dia. Oh thou'st undone me then; have thou found out
A Maid more fair, more worthy of thy Love?
Look on me well.

Bell. I have considered thee,
And find no blemish in thy ^oul, or Form,
Thou art all over Divine, yet I must hate thee,
Since thou have drawn me to a mortal sin,
That cannot be forgiven, by Men, or Heaven:
-- Oh thou have made me break a Vow Diana,
A Sacred Solemn Vow,
And m^de me wrong the sweetest Innocence,
That ever blessed the Earth.

Dia. Instead of cooling, this augments my fire,
No pain is like defeated, new desire.
[Aside* It Is false, or but to try my Constancy.
Your Mistress is not so Divine as I,
And should I, against himself believe the Man
Who first inspired my heart with Loves soft flame!

Bell What bliss on me insensible you throw,
I Would rather hear thee swear, thou art my Foe,
And like some Noble and Romantic Maid
With Poniards, would my stubborn heart invade,
And whilst thou do the faithful Relic tear,
In every Vein thoud'st find Celinda there.

Dia. Come, Sir, you must forget Celinda's Charms,
And reap delights within my circling Arms,
Delights that may your Errors undeceive
When you find joys, as great as she can give.

Bell. What do I hear? -- Is this the kind relief
Thou do allow to my despair and grief?
Is this the comfort that thou do impart
To my all wounded, bleeding, dying heart?
Were I so Brutal -- could thy Love comply
To serve it self with base Adultery?
For could I love thee, could I love again,
Our Lives would be but one continued Sin;
A Sin of that black die* a Sin so foul,
'Twould leave no hopes of Heaven for eithers Soul.

Dia. Dull Man* Do think a feeble vain Excu^^
Shall satisfy me for this Nights abuse?
No, since my Passion, thou'st defeated thus,
And robbed me of my long wished happiness*
I Will make thee know what a wronged Maid can do,
Divided 'twixt her Love, and Injuries too.

Bell. I dare thy worst
Should Hell assist thy aims, thou could not find
New Plagues, unless thou should continue kind,
Hard Fate Diana, when thy Love must be
The greatest Curse that can arrive to me.
-- That friendship which our Infant years begun,
And till this day has still continued on,
I will preserve, and my Respects shall be
Profound, as what was ever paid by me.
But for my Love it is to Celinda due,
And I can pay you ^one that is just and true.

Dia. The rest, I^de have thee know I do despise,
I better understand my conquering Eyes:
Those Eyes that shall revenge my Love and Shame,
I Will kill thy Reputation, and thy Name.
[Ex.
Bell. My Honor! And my Reputation, now!
They both were forfeit, when I broke my Vow.
Nor could my Honor with thy Fame decline,
Whoever prophanes thee, injures naught of mine.
This night upon the Couch my self I Will lay,
And* like Franciscans, let the ensuing day
Take care for all the toils it brings with it,
Whatever Fate arrives, I can submit.
[Ex*
The Scene a Street.
Enter Celinda, dressed as before. Cel. Not one kind Wound to send me to my Grave,
And yet between their angry Swords I ^an,
Expecting it from Bellmour, or my Brothers.
Oh my hard Fate! that gave me so much Misery,
And dealt no Courage, to prevent the shock.
-- Why came ^ off alive, that fatal place
Where I beheld my Bellmour, in the embrace
Of my extremely fair, and lovely Rival;
-- With what kind care she did prevent my Arm
(Who greedy of the last sad pa^ting twine)
I would have thrown about him, as if she knew
To what intent I made the passionate offer.
-- What have I next to do, but seek a death
Where ever I can meet it -- Who comes here?

[Goes asid^. Enter Sir Timothy, Sham and Sharp, with Fiddlers and Boy. Sir Tim.
I believe this is the Bedchamber Window where the Bride and the Bridegroom
lies.


Sham. Well, and what do you intend to do, if it be Sir?


Sir Tim. Why first sing a Bawdy Song, and then break the Windows, in Revenge
for the Affront was put upon me to night.


Sharp. Faith, Sir, that is but a poor Revenge, and which every Footman may take
of his Lady, who has turned him away for filching -- You know, Sir, Windows are
frail, and will yield to the lusty Brick-bats; it is an Act below a Gentleman.


Sir Tim. That Is all one, it is my Recreation; I served a Woman so the other
night, to whom my Mistress had a Pique.


Sham. Ay, Sir, it is a Revenge fit only for a Whore to take --
And the Affront you received ^o night, was by mistake.

Sir Tim. Mistake! how can that be?


Sham. Why, Sir, did you not mind, that he that drew upon Bellmour, was in the
same dress with you?


Sir Tim. How should his be like mine?


Sham. Why by the same chance, that yours was like his -- I suppose sending to
the Playhouse for them, as we did, they happened to send him such another ^abit,
for they have many such for dancing Shepherds.


Sir Tim. Well I grant it a mistake, and that shall repri^ve the Windows.


Sharp. Then, Sir, you showed so much courage, that you may bless the minute
that forced you to fight.


Sir Tim. Ay, but between you and I, 'twas well he kicked me first, and made me
angry, or I had been ^ustily swing'd, by Fortune -- but thanks to my spleen
that saved my bones that ^bou^ -- but then I did well -- hah! came briskly off,
and the rest.


Sham. With honor* Sir, I protest.


Sir Tim Come then, we'll Serenade him. Come, Sir, ^une your Pipes, and sing.


Boy. What shall I sing, Sir?


Sir Tim. Any thing suitable to the time and place.


SONG.
1.
The happy Minute's come, the Nymph is laid,
Who means no more to rise a Maid
Blushing, and panting, she expects the approach
Of Joys that kill with every touch;
Nor can her Native modesty and shame
Conceal the Ardour of her Virgin flame.
2.
And now the Amorous Youth is all undrest,
Just ready for Loves mighty Feast,
With vigorous haste the Vail aside he throws,
That does all Heaven at once disclose;
Swift as desire, into her naked Arms
Himself he throws, and rifles all her Charms.

God morrow Mr. Bellmour, and to your lovely Bride, long may you live, and love.


Enter Bellmour above. Bell. Who is it, has sent that Curse?

Sir Tim. What a pox is that Bellmour? The Rogue's in choler, the Bride has not
pleased him.


Bell. Dogs! De you upbraid me? ^^ll be with you presently.

Sir Tim. Will you so -- but I Will not stay your coming.

Cel. But you shall, Sir.

Bell. Turn Villains!

[ Sir Tim. etc. offers to go off, Celinda steps forth, and draws, they draw,
and s^t upon her. Enter Bellmour behind them: They turn, and Celinda sides with
Bellmour, and fights. Enter Dia. Bellmour ^igh^^ 'em out, and leaves Celinda
breathless, lea^ing on her Sword. Dia. I Will never demand the cause of this
disorder,
But take this opportunity to fly
To the next hands will take me up -- who is here!

Cel. Not yet, my sullen heart!

Dia. Who Is here? one wounded -- alas --

Cel. It Is not so lucky -- but who art thou
That do with so much pity, ask?

Dia. He seems a Gentleman -- handsome, and young --
[Aside. Pray ask no questions, Sir, but if you're what you seem,
Give a Protection to an unhappy Maid.
-- Do not reply, but let us haste away.

Cel. Hah -- What do I hear! sure it is Diana.
-- Madam, with haste, and joy, I Will serve you.
-- I Will carry her to my own Lodgings.
Fortune, in this, (...) done my Sufferings right,
My Rival's in my Power, upon her Wedding night.

[Aside. [Exeunt. Enter Bellmour, Sir Tim. Sham and Sharp. Sir Tim. Lord, Lord,
that you should not know, your friend and humble servant, Tim. Tawdrey -- But
thou lookst as if thou had not been a Bed yet.


Bell. No more I have.


Sir Tim. Nay then thou losest precious time, I Will not detain thee.


[Offers to go. Bell. Tho^ art mistaken, I hate all Womankind --


Sir Tim. How, how!


Bell. Above an hour -- hark ye Knight -- I am as lewd, and as debaucht as
thou art.


Sir Tim. What do you mean Franck?


Bell. To tell a truth, which yet I never did.
-- I Whore, Drink, Game, Swear, Lie, Cheat, Rob, Pimp, Hector, All,
All I do that is vicious.

Sir Tim. Bless me!


Bell. From such a Villain, hah!


Sir Tim. No, but that thou should hide it all this while.


Bell. Till I was married only, and now I can dissemble it no longer -- come --
let us to a Bawdy House.


Sir Tim. A Bawdy House! What already!
This is the very qui^tessence of L^wdness.
-- Why I thought that I was wicked, but by Fortune,
This dashes mine quite out of countenance.

Bell. Oh you are a puny sinner! -- I Will teach thee Arts* (so rare) of sin, the
least of them shall damn thee.


Sir Tim. By Fortune, Franck, I do not like these Arts.


Bell. Then you are a Fool -- I Will teach thee to be rich too.


Sir Tim. Ay, that I like.


Bell. Look here my Boys!
[Holds up his Writings -- which he takes out of his Pockets. The Writings of
3000 l. a year.
-- All this I got by Perjury.

Sir Tim. By Fortune a thriving Sin.

Bell. And we will live in Sin while this holds out.
-- And then to my cold Home -- Come let us ^e gone.
-- O^ that I ^e'r might see the Rising Sun.
[Ex.
The End of the Third Act.
ACT. IV.
Scene 1.
Discovers Celinda as before sitting in a Chair, Diana by her in another, who
sings. SONG.
1.
Celinda, who did Love disdain,
For whom had languish'd many a Swain,
Leading her bleating Flocks to drink,
She spied upon the Rivers brink
A Youth, whose Eyes did well declare
How much he loved, but loved not her.
2.
At first she laughed, but gazed the while,
And soon it lessened to a smile;
Thence to surprise* and wonder came
Her Breast to heave, her Heart to flame;
Then cried she out, Ah now I prove
Thou art a God! Almighty Love.
3.
She would have spoke, but Shame denied,
And bad her first consult her Pride;
But soon she found that Aid was gone,
For Love, alas! had left her none.
Oh how she burns, but it is too late,
For in his Eyes, she reads her Fate.

Cel. Oh how numerous are her Charms --
-- How shall I pay this generous condescension,
F^ir lovely Maid --

Dia. Why do you flatter Sir?

Cel. To say you're lovely, by your self I do not,
I Am young, and have not much converst with Beauty,
Yet I Will esteem my judgment, since it knows,
Where my devotions, should be justly paid.
-- But Madam, may I^not yet expect
To hear the Story, you so lately promised me.

Dia. I owe much to your goodness, Sir -- but --

Cel. I am too young, you think, to hear a Secret;
Can I want Sense to pity your Misfortunes,
Or Passion to incite me to revenge 'em?

Dia. Oh would he were in earnest!

Cel. She Is fond of me, and I must blow that flame,
[Aside. Do any thing to make her hate my Bellmour.
-- But Madam, I Am impatient for your Story,
That after that, you may expect my service.

Dia. The Treatment you this Night have given a distressed Maid, enough obliges
me; nor need I tell you, I m Nobly born, something about my dress, my looks and
mien, will doubtless do me reason.


Cel. Sufficiently --

Dia. But in the Family where I was Educated, a Youth of my own Age, a Kinsman
too, I ch^nc'd to fall in Love with; but with a Passion my Pride still got the
better of, and he, I thought, repaid my young desires: but Bashfulness on his
part, did what Pride had done on mine, and kept his too concealed. -- At last
my Uncle, who had the absolute dominion of us both, thought good to Marry us
together.


Cel. Punish him Heaven, for a Sin so great.
-- And are you Married then?

Dia. Why is there Terror in that word?

Cel. By all that is Sacred, it is a word that kills me,
Oh say thou art not;
And I, thus low will fall, and pay thee Thanks.

[Kneels* Dia. You Will wish indeed I were not, when you know
How very, very wretched it has made me.

Cel. Should you be telling me a Tale all day,
Such as would melt a heart that never could love,
'Twould not increase my Reason for the wish
That I had died e're known you had been Married.

Dia. So many soft words from my Bellmour's mouth
Had made me mad with joy, and next to that,
I wish to hear 'em from this Youth;
If they be real, how I shall be revenged!
[Aside. -- But why at my being Married should you sigh?

Cel. Because I love, is that a Wonder, Madam?
Have you not Charms sufficient at first sight
To wound a heart tender and young as mine?
Are you not heavenly fair? -- oh there is my grief --
-- Since you must be another.

Dia. Pray hear me out, and if you love me after,
Perhaps you may not think your self unhappy.
When Night was come, she longed for Night, and all
Retired to give us silent room for joy. --

Cel. Oh I can hear no more! -- by Heaven I cannot.
-- Here -- stab me to the heart -- let out my life,
I cannot live, and hear what followed next.

Dia. Pray hear me Sir --

Cel. Oh you will tell me he was kind --
Yes, yes -- oh God -- were not his balmy Kisses,
Sweeter than Incence offered up to Heaven?
Did not his Arms softer and whiter far,
Than those of Jove's, transformed to Wings of Swans,
Greedily clasp thee round -- oh quickly speak,
Whilst thy fair rising Bosom met with his;
And then -- oh -- then --

Dia. Alas Sir! What Is the matter -- sit down awhile.

Cel. Now -- I am well -- pardon me lovely Creature,
If I betray a Passion, I Am too young
To Have learnt the Art of hiding:
-- I cannot hear you say that he was kind.

Dia. Kind, yes, as Blasts to Flowers, or early Fruit;
All gay I met him full of youthful heat,
But like a damp, he dashed my kindled flame,
And all his Reason was -- he loved another,
A Maid he called Celinda.

Cel. Oh blessed Man!

Dia. How Sir?

Cel. To leave thee free, to leave thee yet a Virgin.

Dia. Yes, I have vowed he never shall possess me.

Cel. Oh how you bless me -- but you still are Married,
And whilst you are so -- I must languish --
[Aside.
Dia. Oh how his softness moves me!
-- But can all this disorder spring from Love?

Cel. Or may I still prove wretched.

Dia. And can you think there are no ways
For me to gratify that Love?
What ways am I constrained to use to work out my Revenge.
[Aside.
Cel. How mean you Madam?

Dia. Without a Miracle, look on my Eyes --
-- And Beauty -- which you say can kindle Fires,
-- She that can give -- may too retain desires.

Cel. She Will Ravish me -- let me not understand you.

Dia. Look on my Wrongs --
Wrongs that would melt a frozen Chastity,
That a Religious Vow had made to Heaven.
-- And next survey thy own perfections.

Cel. Hah --

Dia. Art thou so young, thou can not apprehend me?
Fair bashful Boy, have thou the power to move,
And yet not know the business of thy Love?

Cel. How in an instant, thou have chill d my blood,
And made me know no Woman can be good?
It Is Sin enough to yield -- but thus to sue
Heaven -- it is my business -- and not meant for you.

Dia. How little Love is understood by thee,
It Is Custom, and not Passion, you pursue;
Because enjoyment first was named by me,
It does destroy, what should your flame renew;
My easy yielding does your fire abate,
And mine, as much your tedious Courtship hate.
Tell Heaven -- you will hereafter sacrifice,
-- And see how that will please the Deities:
The ready Victim, is the Noblest way,
Your Zeal and Obligations too, to pay.

Cel. I think the Gods would hardly be adored,
If they their blessings should unaskt afford,
And I that Beauty can no more admire
Who e're I sue, can yield to my desire.

Dia. Dull Youth farewell,
For since it is my Revenge that I pursue
Less Beauty, and more Man, as well may do.

[Offers to go. Enter Friendlove disguised, as one from a Camp. Cel. Madam you
must not go with this mistake.

[Holds her. Friend. Celinda, has informed me true -- it is she --
Good morrow Brother, what so early at your devotions?

Cel. O my Brother's come, and luckily relieves me.
[Aside.
Friend. Your Orizons are made to a fair Saint.
-- Pray Sir what Lady's that?
Or is it blasphemy to repeat her name?
-- By my bright Arms, she is fair -- With what a charming
Fierceness, she charges through my body to my heart.
-- Death how her glittering Eyes give fire, and wound!
And have already pierced my very Soul!
-- May I approach her Brother?

Cel. Yes, if you dare, there is danger in it though,
She has Charms that will bewitch you.
-- I dare not stand their mischief.
[Ex.
Friend. -- Lady -- I am a Soldier -- yet in my gentlest terms
I humbly beg to kiss your lovely hands --
-- Death! there is Magic in the touch.
By Heaven you carry an Artillery in every part.

Dia. This is a Man indeed fit for my purpose.
[Aside.
Friend. Nay do not view me, I am no lovely object.
I am a Man bred up to Noise and War,
And know not how to dress my looks in smiles;
Yet trust me, fair one, I can love and serve
As well as an Endymion, or Adonis.
Would you were willing to permit that service.

Dia. Why Sir? -- What could you do?

Friend. Why -- I could die for you.

Dia. I need the service of the living, Sir.
But do you love me, Sir?

Friend. Or let me perish, flying from a single Enemy.
I am a Gentleman, and may pretend to love you,
And what you can command, I can perform.

Dia. Take heed Sir, what you say, for I Am in earnest.

Friend. Command me any thing that is just and brave,
And by my Eyes it is done.

Dia. I know not what you call just, or brave,
But those whom I do the honor to command,
Must not capitulate.

Friend. Let him be blasted with the name of Coward,
That dares dispute your orders.

Dia. Dare you fight for me?

Friend. With a whole Army; it is my Trade to fight.

Dia. Nay, it is but a single Man.

Friend. Name him.

Dia. Bellmour.

Friend. Of Yorkshire? -- Companion to young Friendlove, that came lately from
Italy?

Dia. Yes, do you know him?

Friend. I do, who has often spoke of Bellmour;
We Traveled into Italy together -- But since, I hear,
He fell in Love with a fair cruel Maid,
For whom he languishes,

Dia. Heard you her name?

Friend. Diana, rich in Beauty, as in Fortune.
Would she had less of both, and more of pity.
And that I knew not how to wish, till now
That I became a Lover, perhaps as unsuccessful.

Dia. I knew my Beauty had a thousand Darts,
But knew not they could strike so quick and home.
[Aside. Let your good wishes for your Friend alone,
Lest he being happy, you should be undone,
For he and you, cannot be blessed at once.

Friend. How Madam?

Dia. I am that Maid he loves, and who hates him.

Friend. Hate him.

Dia. To death.

Friend. Oh me unhappy.
[Aside.
Dia. He sighs, and turns away -- am I again defeated?
Surely I am not fair, or Man's insensible.

Friend. She knows me not --
And 'twas discreetly done to change my shape;
For Woman, is a strange Fantastic Creature,
And where before, I could not gain a smile,
Thus I may win her heart.
[Aside* -- Say Madam, can you love a Man that dies for you?

Dia. The way to gain me, is to fight with Bellmour.
Tell him from me you come, the wronged Diana,
Tell him, you have an interest in my heart
Equal to that which I have made in yours.

Friend* I Will do it; I will not ask your Reason, but obey.
Swear e're I go, that when I have performed it,
You Will render me possession of your heart.

Dia. By all the Vows that Heaven ties hearts together with,
I Will be entirely yours.

Friend. And I Will not be that conscientious Fool
To stop at blessings 'cause they are not lawful,
But take 'em up, when Heaven has thrown 'em down,
Without the leave of a Religious Ceremony.
[Aside. Madam, this House, which I am Master of,
You shall command, whilst I go seek this Bellmour.

Dia. But e're you go, I must inform you why
I do pursue him with my just Revenge.

Friend. I will attend, and hear impatiently.
[Ex.
Scene a Bawdy House.
Enter Mrs. Driver, and Betty Flauntit. Flaunt. Driver, prithee call for a
Glass, that I may set my self in order, before I go up, for really my Knight
has not been at home all this night, and I am so confused --

Enter one with a Glass, and two Wenches. Lord Mrs. Driver, I wonder you should
send for me when other Women are in company; you know, of all things in the
World, I hate Whores, they are the pratingst lewdest poor Creatures in nature;
and I would not for any thing, Sir Timothy should know that I keep company,
'twere enough to lose him.


Mrs. Driv. Truly Mrs. Flauntit, this young Squire that you were sent to for,
has two or three persons more with him that must be accommodated too.


Flaunt. Driver, though I do recreate my self a little sometimes, yet you know I
value my Reputation and Honor.


Ienny. Mrs. Driver, why should you send for us where Flauntit is? stinking
proud Flirt, who, because she has a tawdrey Petticoat, I warrant you, will
think her self so much above us, when if she were set out in her own natural
colors, and her original garments, would be much below us in beauty.


Mrs. Driv. Look ye Mrs. Ienny, I know you, and I know Mrs. Flauntit, but it is
not Beauty or Wit that takes now adays; the Age is altered since I took upon
me this Gentile Occupation, but it is a fine Petticoat, right Points, and clean
Ga^nitures, that does me credit, and takes the Gallant, though on a stale Woman:
And again, Mrs. Ienney, she is kept, and Men love as much for Malice, as for
Lechery, as they call it. Oh it is a great mover to joy, as they say, to have a
Woman that is kept.


Ien. Well! be it so, we may arrive to that excellent degree of Cracking, to be
kept too one day.


Mrs. Driv. Well, well, get your selves in order to go up to the Gentlemen.


Flaunt. Driver, what art thou talking to those poor creatures, Lord how they
stink of Paint and Pox, faugh --


Mrs. Driv. They were only complaining that you that were kept, should intrude
upon the privileges of the Commoners.


Flaunt. Lord, they think there are such joys in keeping, when I vow Driver,
after awhile, a Miss has as painful a life, as a Wife, our Me^ ^rink, stay out
late, and Whore, like any Husbands.


Driv. But I hope in the Lord, Mrs. Flauntit, yours is no such Man, I never saw
him, but I have heard he is under decent correction.


Flaunt. Thou art mistaken Driver, I can keep him within no moderat^ bounds
without blows; but for his filthy custom of Wenching, I have almost broke him
of that -- but prithee Driver, who are these Gentlemen?


Driv. Truly, I know not, but they are young, and fine as Princes; two of 'em
were disguised in Masquing Habits last night, but they have sent 'em away this
morning, and they are free as Emperors -- one of 'em has lost a thousand pounds
at Play, and never repined at it: one's a Knight, and I believe his courage is
cooled, for he has ferretted my Maids over and over to night -- But it is the
fine, young handsome Squire that I design you for.


Flaunt. No matter for his handsomness, let me have him that has most money.

[Ex.
Scene a Chamber, a Tabl^ with Box and Dice.
Enter Bellmour, Sir Timothy, Sham and Sharp. Bell. Damn it, give us more Wine.
[Drinks. Where stands the Box and Dice? -- Why Sham.

Sham. Faith, Sir, your luck's so bad, I have not the conscience to play longer --
Sir Timothy and you play off a hundred Guinneys, and see if luck will turn.


Bell. Do you take me for a Country Squire, whose Reputation will be cracked at
the loss of a petty thousand? you have my Note for it to my Goldsmith.


Sham. It Is sufficient if it were for ten thousand*


Bell* Why Sir Timothy -- Pox on it you are dull, we are not half d^baucht and
lewd enough, give us more Wine.


Sir Tim. Faith Franck, I Am a little maukish with sitting up all night, and
want a small refreshment this morning -- Did we not send for Whores?


Bell. No, I am not in humor for a Wench --
By Heaven I hate the Sex.
All but divine Celinda*
Appear strange Monsters to my eyes and thoughts.

Sir Tim. What art Italianiz'd, and love thy own Sex?

Bell. I Am for any thing that is out of the common Road of Sin, I love a Man
that will be damned for something! To creep by slow degrees to Hell, as if he
were afraid the World should see which way he went, I scorn it, it is like a
Conventickler -- No, give me a Man, who, to be certain of's damnation, will
break a Solemn Vow to a Contracted Maid.


Sir Tim. Ha, ha, ha, I thought thou would have said at least -- had murdered
his Father, or ravish^d his Mother -- break a Vow quoth ye -- by Fortune I have
broke a thousand.


Bell. Well said my Boy! a Man of Honor! and will be ready when e're the Devil
calls for thee -- So -- ho -- more Wine, more Wine, and Dice.

Enter a Servant with Dice and Wine. Come, Sir, let me --

[Throws and loses. Sir Tim, What will you set me, Sir?

Bell. Cater Tray -- a hundred Guinneys -- oh damn the Dice -- it is mine --
come a full Glass -- Damnation to my Uncle.


Sir Tim. By Fortune, I Will do thee reason -- give me the Glass -- and Sham, to
thee -- Confusion to the musty Lord.


Bell. So -- now I Am like my self, profanely wicked.
A little room for life -- but such a life
As Hell it self shall wonder at -- I Will have a care
To do no one good deed in the whole course on it,
Lest that should save my Soul in spite of Vow-breach.
-- I will not dye -- that peace my sins deserve not.
I Will live, and let my Tyrant Uncle, see
The sad effects of Perjury, and forced Marriage.
-- Surely the Powers above envied my bliss,
Marrying Celinda, I had been an Angel!
So truly blessed, and good.

[Weeps. Sir Tsm. Why how now Franck -- by Fortune the Rogue is Maudlin -- So,
ho, ho, so-ho.


Bell. The matter?

Sir Tim. Oh art awake -- What a Devil ayl'st thou Franck?

Bell. A Wench, or any thing -- come, let^s drink a roun^,

Sham. They Are come as wished for.

Enter Flauntit, Driver, Doll and Jenny masked. Bell. Oh Damn 'em! What shall I
do?
Yet it would look like Virtue to avoid 'em.
No, I must venture on -- Ladies you are welcome.

Sir Tim. How the Women? -- Hold, hold, Bellmour, let me choose too -- Come,
come, unmask, and show your pretty Faces.


Flaunt. How? Sir Timothy! What Devil owed me a spite.
[Aside.
Sir Tim. Come, unmask, I say, a willing Wench would have showed all in half
this time.


Flaunt. Wou^d she so Imp^dence!

[Pulls off her Mask. Sir Tim. How! my Betty!

Flaunt. This is the Trade you drive, you eternal Fopp, when I sit at home
expecting you night after night.


Sir Tim. Nay dear Betty! --

Flaunt. It Is here you spend that which should buy me Points, and Petticoats,
whilst I go like no bodies Mistress, I Would as live be your Wife at this rate, so
I had; and I Am in no small danger of getting the Foul Disease by your Lewdness.


Sir Tim. Victorious Betty, be merciful, and do not ruin my Reputation amongst
my Friends.


Flaunt. Your Whores, you mean, you Sott you.

Sir Tim. Nay triumphant Betty, hear thy poor Timy.

Flaunt. My poor Ninny, I Am used barbarously, and will not endure it.

Sir Tim. I Have won Money to night, Betty, to buy thee Clothes -- hum -- hum --
Well said Franck, towse the little Jilts, they came for the purpose.


Flaunt. The Devil confound him, what a Prize have I lost by his being here --
my comfort is, he has not found me out though, but thinks I came to look for him,
and accordingly I must dissemble.


Bell. What Is here? a Lady all in tears!

Sir Tim. An old acquaintance of mine, that takes it unkindly that I am for
change -- Betty, say so too, you know I can settle nothing till I Am Married,
and he can do it swingingly, if we can but draw him in.


Flaunt. This mollifies something, do this, and you will make your peace; if not,
you Rascal your Ears shall pay for this nights transgression.


Sir Tim. Come hither Franck, is not this a fine Creature!

Bell. By Heaven a very Devil! --

Sir Tim. Come, come, approach her, for if you will have a Miss, this has all the
good qualities of one -- go, go -- Court her, thou art so bashful --


Bell. I cannot frame my tongue to so much blasphemy, as it is to say kind
things to her -- I Will try my heart though -- Fair Lady -- Damn her, she is not
fair -- nor sweet -- nor good -- nor -- something I must say for a beginning.
Come Lady -- dry your eyes.

This Man deserves not all the tears you shed.
-- So -- at last the Devil has got the better of me,
And I am entered.

Flaunt. You see, Sir, how miserable we Women are that love you
Men.

Bell. How did you love him! love him against his will.

Flaunt. So it seems, Sir --

Bell. Oh thou art wretched then indeed; no wonder if he hate thee --
Does he not Curse thee? Curse thee till you are damned, as I do lost Diana?
[Aside.
Flaunt. Curse me! he were not best in my hearing,
Let him do what he will behind my back.
What ails the Gentleman? --

Bell. Gods! What an odious thing mere Coupling is!
A thing which every sensual Animal
Can do as well as we -- but prithee tell me,
Is there naught else between the Nobler Creatures?

Flaunt. Not that I know of, Sir -- Lord he is very silly, or very innocent, I
hope he has his Maidenhead; if so, and rich too, oh what a booty were this for
me!

[Aside.
Bell. It Is wondrous strange,
Why was not I, created like the rest;
Wild, and insensible, to fancy all.

Flaunt. Come, Sir, you must learn to be gay, to sing, to dance, and talk of
any thing, and fancy any thing that is in your way too.


Bell. Oh I can towse, and ruffle, like any Leviathan when I begin --
Come prove my vigor.

[Towses her. Flaunt. Oh Lord Sir! you tumble all my garniture.

Bell. There Is Gold to buy thee more --

Flaunt. Oh sweet Sir -- would my Knight were hanged, so I were well rid of him
now -- Well Sir, I swear you are the most agreeable person --


Bell. Am I? -- let us be more familiar then -- I Will kiss thy hand; thy breast,
thy lips -- and --


Flaunt. All -- you please Sir --


Bell. A tractable Sinner!

[Offers to kiss her. Faugh -- how she smells -- had I approached so near
divine Celinda, what a natural Fragrancy had sent it self through all my
ravished senses!


Flaunt. The Man's extasi'd, sure I shall take him.
[Aside. Come, Sir, you'are sad.

Bell. As Angels fallen from the Divine abode,
And now am lighted on a very Hell!
-- But this is not the way to thrive in wickedness*
I must rush on to ruin -- Come fair Mistress,
Will you not show me some of your Arts of Love,
For I am very apt to learn of Beauty -- Gods --
What is it I negotiate for -- a Woman!
Making a bargain to possess a Woman!
Oh never, never!

Flaunt. The Man is in Love, that is certain -- as I was saying,
Sir --

Bell. Be gone Repentance! thou needless goodness,
Which if I follow, can lead me to no joys.
Come tell me the price of all your pleasures.

Sir Tim. Look you Mistress, I am but a Country Knight,
Yet I should be glad of your farther acquaintance.
-- Pray who may that Lady be --

Driv. Who Mrs. Flauntit Sir?

Sir Tim I she? she is tearing fine by Fortune.

Driv. I Will assure you, Sir, she is kept -- and is a great Rarity, but to a
Friend or so --


Sir Tim. Hum -- kept -- pray by whom?

Driv. Why a silly Knight Sir, that --

Sir Tim. I, I, silly indeed -- a Pox upon her -- a silly Knight you say --


Driv. Ay, Sir, one she makes a very Ass of.

Sir Tim* Ay so methinks -- but she is kind, and will do reason for all him.


Driv. To a Friend, a Man of Quality -- or so.

Sir Tim. Ay s^e blinds the Knight.

Driv. Alas, Sir, easily -- he, poor Cully, thinks her a very Saint -- but when
he is out of the way, she comes to me to pleasure a Friend.


Sir Tim. But what if the Fool miss her?

Driv. She cries Whore first, brings him upon his Knees for her fault, and a
piece of Plate, or a new Petticoat, makes his Peace again.


Sir Tim. Why -- look you Mistress, I am that Fopp, that very silly Knight, and
the rest that you speak of.


Driv. How Sir? then I m^undone, she is the upholder of my Calling, the very
grace of my Function.


S^r Tim. Is she so? even keep her to your self then, I^ll have no more of her,
by Fortune -- I humbly thank you for your intelligence, and the rest. Well -- I
see there is not one honest Whore in the Nation, by Fortune.

Enter Charles Bellmour and Trusty. Hark ye Mistress, what was your business
here?

Flaunt. To meet a R^gue! --

Sir Tim. And I to meet a Whore, and now wee're well met.

Flaunt. How Sir?

Sir Tim. Nay never be surpised, for your Intrigues are discovered, the good
Matron of the House (against her Will) has done me that kindness -- you know
how to live without your Keeper, and so I Will leave you.


Flaunt. You're too serviceable a Fool to be lost so.
[Aside.
Bell. Who knows this bold Intruder?

Char. How, Sir, am I a stranger to you! but I should not wonder at it, since
all your last Nights actions betrayed a strange depravity of Sense. -- Sir, I
have sought you long, and wish I had not found you yet, since both the place
and company declare, how grossly you have dissembled Virtue all this while.


Bell. Take hence that prating Boy.

Char. How Sir? -- You are my elder Brother, yet I may be allowed to do the
business that I came for, and from my Uncle to demand your Wife.


Bell. You may return, and tell him that she is dead.

Char. Dead! sure, Sir, you Rave.

[Turns him about. Bell. Indeed I do -- but yet she is dead they say.

Char. How came she dead?

Bell. I killed her -- ask no more but leave me.

[Turns him about again. Char. Sir, this is Madmans language, and not to be
believed.

Bell. Go to -- you are a saucy Boy.

Char. Sir, I Am an angry Boy --
But yet can bear much from a Brothers mouth,
You Have lost your sleep, pray Sir, go home and seek it.

Bell. Home! I have no home, unless thou meanst my Grave,
And thither I could wish, thou would conduct me.

[Weeps. Flaunt. Pray Heaven this young virtuous Fellow don't spoil all.
-- Sir, shall I send for a Scrivener to draw the Settlement you promised me.

Bell. Do so, and I Will order him to get it ready.

Char. A Settlement! on whom? this Woman Sir?

Bell. Yes, on this Woman Sir.

Char. Are you stark mad? -- Know you where you are?

Bell. Yes, in a Bawdy House.

Char. And this Woman, Sir --

Bell. A very Whore! -- a tawdrey mercenary Whore!
And what of this?

Char. And can you love her, Sir?

Bell. No, if I did, I would not gratify her.

Char. What -- is it in Charity to keep her honest?

Bell. Neither.

Char. Is your Lust grown so high --

Bell. Take that --
[Strikes him. For naming but so base a thing to me.

Char. I wear a Sword, but not to draw on mad Men.
But since you are so free Sir, I demand that Fortune, which by my Fathers Will,
you are bound to pay the day after your Wedding day; my Sister's too is due.


Bell. Ha, ha, ha -- Sir Timothy, come hither -- who do think this is?


Sir Tim. A Fiddler perhaps -- let him play in the next Room.


Bell. No, my Brother -- come to demand his Portion of me -- he says I am in
lewd company, and, like a Boy, he would correct me.


Sir Tim. Why this comes of idleness, thou should have bound him Prentice in
time, the Boy would have made a good saucy Tailor.


Char. Sir, you are a Rascal, whom I must thus chastise.


[Kicks him. [They all draw, and Bellmour stands foremost, and fights with
Charles, the Women run squeaking out, Sir Tim. Sham and Sharp sneak behind,
Trusty interposes. Trust. Hold, hold, I beseech you my dear Masters! oh what a
sight is this! two Brothers fighting with each other! oh, were my old Master
alive, this would break his heart: oh, Sir, you have killed your Brother.


Bell. Why then his Portion's paid.


[Charles is wounded. Sir Tim. How kill^d? nay it is time we departed then, and
shifted for our selves.


[Ex. Sir Tim. Sham and Sharp. Trust. Oh Sir, shall I send for a Chyrurgion.


Char. No for a Coach rather, I am not wounded much.


[Ex. Trusty. Bell. How dare thou trust thy self alone with me?


Char. Why should I fear thee?


Bell. Because I Am mad.
Mad as a Tygress robbed of her dear young.

Char. What is it that makes you so?

Bell. My Uncles Politics, Hell take him for it,
Has ruined me, thou and my sister too.
By Marrying me to a fair hated Maid,
When I had plighted all my Faith before.

Enter Trusty. Trust. Sir, here is a Coach.

Char. Come, Brother, will you go home with me?

Bell. Home! -- no, never to that place thou call'st so,
If when I Am dead, thou would behold thy Brother,
And take the last adieu from his cold lips:
(If those so Perjured can deserve that kindness;)
Inquire for lost Celinda, at who^e feet
Thou shall behold me fallen a Sacrifice.
Till then, I Will let mistaken Parents know
The mischiefs that ensue a broken Vow.

[Ex. severally. The End of the (...) Act.
ACT. V.
Scene Covent Garden.
Enter Betty Flauntit alone. SUre I rose the wrong way to day, I have had such
damned ill luck every way: First to be ^ent for to such a Man as this Bellmour,
and, as the Devil would have it, to find my Knight there: Then to be just upon
the point of making my Fortune, and to be interrupted by that virtuous Brother
of his: Then to have a quarrel happen, that (before I could whisper him in the
ear, to say so much as meet me here again -- anon) forced me to quit the house,
lest the Constable had done it for me: Then that that silly Bawd should
discover all to my Cully; if this be not ill luck, the Devil^s in it -- But
Driver must bring matters about, that I may see this liberal Squire again --
But here comes my Noddy, I must pretend to be angry.

Enter Sir Timothy. Sir Tim. Lord, Lord, how you look now, as if you had
committed no misdemeanor; alas, good Innocent, what can thou say for thy
self, thou Renegado thou, for being false to my bosom, say?


Flaunt. False to your bosom! You silly impudent Sott you -- who dares accuse
me?


Sir Tim. Even your trusty and well-beloved Friend Mrs. Driver the Bawd.


Flaunt. She! she is an impudent confounded Liar -- and because she would have
your Worshipful Custom -- scandalized me, to breed a difference between us.


Sir Tim. I, if you could make me believe that indeed, when she knew me not,
nor ever saw me all days of her life before.


Flaunt. I know that Simpleton, but when I went to inquire for you by your
name, and told her my business, our Amors are not kept so secret, nor was she
so dull, as not to understand how matters went between us.


Sir Tim. Now, tho^ I know this to be a damned Lie, yet the Devil has assisted
her to make it look so like Truth, that I cannot in Honor but forgive her.


Flaunt. Forgive me! -- Who shall forgive you your debauched Whoring and
Drinking -- marry you had need so you are such a Ruffler, at least if you are
everywhere as you are at home with me -- No, Sir, I Will never Bed with you
more; here I live sneaking without a Coach, or any thing to appear withal;
when even those that were scandalous two Ages ago, can be seen in Hide-Park in
their fine Chariots, as if they had purchased it with a Maidenhead; whilst I,
who k^^p my self entirely for you, can get nothing but the Fragments of your
Debauches -- I Will be damned before I Will endure it.


Sir Tim. Just as the Bawd said, yet I am mollifi'd -- nay, dear Betty forgive
me, and I Will be very good for the future.


Flaunt Will you swear to be so?


Sir Tim. I, by Fortune I will.


Flaunt Come, what will you give me then to be Friends? for you won Money last
Night.


Sir Tim. Ay, that^s it that appeases her highest storms -- here my Jewel,
here is a hundred Guineys to buy thee fine things.


Flaunt. Yes, great store of fine things, indeed, with this pitifu^ Sum, let me
feel in your Pockets, and see if you have no more.


[She feels in his Pockets. Sir Tim. So, 'twas well I laid by the rest, my
Peace had not been made under every Rag on it else; and what I was painfully
cheating for all this Night, would have been laid out at the Mercers and
Lacemans in half an hour -- Well, are you satisfied I have no more?


Flaunt. Have you sunk none indeed, and indeed, my Timmy?


Sir Tim. No, I need not, you sink mine fast enough, I thank ye.

[Aside.
Flaunt. Well, get your self ready to go abroad with me.

[Ex. Flaunt.
Sir Tim. I have other matters in hand -- now have I Four hundred Guineys in
Bank, which I won last Night of Bellmour, which I Will make use of to debauch his
sister, with whom I Am damnably in love, and long for the return of my two
Setting Dogs, to bring me News of the Game.


Enter Sham and Sharp. Oh are you come.

Sham. Ay, Sir, with News worth the hearing; I have been diligent, Sir, and got
my self acquainted with the old Steward of the Family, an avaricious Judas,
that will betray for Gold.


Sir Tim. And that we'll furnish him with -- his Masters Gold, like all other
mortal things, must return from whence it came.


Sharp. Not all, Sir, for Sham and I have disposed of part.


Sir Tim. Indeed you are a little shabby.


Sham. Ay, Sir, Fools were made to repair the breaches of us that have Wit
enough to manage 'em.


Sir Tim. What -- the Goldsmith paid the Money at sight, without demanding why?


Sharp. Readily Sir -- he is a brave Fellow, and must not be lost so.


Sham. By no means, we must make use of him whilst he is hot, for I doubt the
humor is not natural, and I fear he may cool.


Sir Tim. But to our business.


Sharp. Ay, Sir, this same Sister of his you must have.

If it be but to put that insolent Whore Flauntit out of favor, who manages
this Fopp too entirely.

[Aside.
Sir Tim. Ay, but art thou sure there is no danger in this Enterprise? shall I
not have my throat cut? and the rest.


Sham. We have none of that Italian humor now adays, I can assure ye; they
will sooner with a Brotherly kindness, assist the yielding Sister, to the
willing Gallant.


Sir Tim. A good thriving inclination, by Fortune.


Sham. And, Sir, you have all encouragement; her Brother, you heard, refused to
pay her Portion, and you know the Fate of a young handsome Wench in this Town,
that relies on weak Virtue -- then because she is in the house with her Uncle,
this same Steward has contrived matters so, to bring you in at the Backdoor,
her Lodgings being in the Garden.


Sir Tim. This is something -- oh I Am impatient to be with her -- Well, I must
in, and make some Lie to Betty for my absence, and be with you presently.

[Ex. Sir Tim.
Sharp. What design have thou in hand? for I suppose there is no such real
thing, as the debauching of this Lady.


Sham. Look ye Sharp, take to thee an implicit Faith, and believe
impossibilities; for thou and I must cozen this Knight.


Sharp. What our Patron?


Sham. I Sharp, we are bound to labor in our Callings, but mum -- here he
comes.


Enter Sir Timothy. Sir Tim. Come, let us away, my Lyoness begins to roar.

-- You Sharp go seek after Bellmour, watch his motions, and give us notice.

[Ex.
Flaunt. He is gone, and I believe [Betty Flauntit peeping out. For no
goodness; I Will after him, and watch him.


[Ex. cross the stage, Enter Lord Plotwell, Charles, Trusty, and two Servants.
Lord. In a Bawdy House, with Whores, Hectors, and Dice! oh that I should be so
deceived in Mankind, he whom I thought all Virtue and Sobriety! but go some of
you immediately, and take Officers along with you, and remove his Quarters,
from a Bawdy House to a Prison, charge him with the murder of his Wife.


Char. My Lord, when I demanded her, he said indeed that she was dead, and
killed by him; but this, I guess, was the effects of madness, which debauchery,
and want of sleep, has brought him to.


Lord. That shall be tried; go to the place where Charles has directed you, and
do as I command you.

[Ex. Servants. -- Oh sweet Diana. in whom I had placed my absolute delight,
And gave thee to this Villain, because I wished thee happy.
And are my expectations fallen to this?
Upon his Wedding Night to abandon thee!
And show his long dissembled Natural Lewdness.

Char. My Lord, I hope, it is not his Natural Temper,
For e're we parted, from a Brutal Rudness,
He grew to all the softness Grief could dictate.
He talked of breach of Vows, of Death, and Ruin,
And dying at the feet of a wronged Maid,
I know not what he meant.

Lord. Ay, there is his grief; there is some Jilting Hussy has drawn him in, but
I Will revenge my self on both.


Enter Page. Page. A Letter for your Lordship.


Lord Reads. MY LORD,
AS your goodness has been ever great toward me, so I humbly beseech ^ou to
continue it; and the greatest proofs you can give me of it, is to use all your
interest to undo that tie between Bellmour and my self, which with such joy you
knit. I will say no more, but as you love my Life, and my dearer Honor, get a
Divorce, or you will see both Ruined in

Your Diana.




[Gives Charles the Letter. A Divorce; yes, if all my Interest or Estate can
purchase it -- some joy yet that thou art well.


Char. Doubtless her Reasons must be great for this Request.


Lord. Yes, for she loved him passionately, when I first told her of my desi^ns
to Marry 'em together, she could not hide her joy; which was one Motive, I
urged it to him with such violence.


Char. Persons so near of Kin, do seldom prosper in the Marriage Bed.


Lord. However it is, I now think fit to unmarry 'em;
And as for him, I Will use him with what Rigor,
The utmost limits of the Law allows me.

Char. Sir, I beseech you.


Lord. You beseech me! you, the Brother of the Villain! That has abused the
best of all my hopes? -- no I think -- I shall grow (for his sake) to hate all
that belong to him.


Char. Sir, how have I offended?


Lord. Yes Sir, you have offended me, and Nature has offended me; you are his
Brother, and that is an offense to me.


Char. Is that a fault, my Lord?


Lord. Yes, Sir, a great one, and I Will have it so; and let me tell you, you nor
your Sister (for that Reason) must expect no more friendship at my hands, than
from those that are absolute strangers to you: your Brother has refused you
your Portions, and I Will have as little mercy as he, and so farewell to you --
But where is the Messenger that brought the Letter?


Page. Without my Lord.


[Ex. Lord and Page. Trust. Here Is like to be a hopeful end of a Noble Family.
My comfort is, I shall dye with grief, and not see the last of ye.


[Weeps. Char. No Trusty, I have not been so meanly educated, but I know how to
live, and like a Gentleman: all that afflicts me in this misfortune, is my dear
Sister Phillis; she is young, and to be left poor in this loose Town, will ruin
her for ever.


Trust. Sir I think we were best to Marry her out of the way.


Char. Marry her! to whom? who is it regards poor Virtue?


Trust. For that let me alone; and if you dare trust her to my management, I Will
undertake to Marry her to a Man of 2000 l. a year; and if I fail, I Will be sure
to keep her Honor safe.


Char. Prithee how will thou do this?


Trust. Sir, I have served your Family these thirty years, with faith and love,
and if I lose my credit now, I Will never pretend to it more.


Char. Do what thou will, for I am sure you are honest,
And I Will resign my Sister to thy conduct,
Whilst I endeavor the conversion of my Brother.
[Ex. Char.
Enter Phillis. Phill. No News yet of my Brother.


Trust. None: the next you will hear is, that he is undone, and that you must go
without your Portions; and worse than that, I can tell you your Uncle designs
to turn you out of doors.


Phill. Alas! what should I do, if he should be so cruel? Would I were in
Flanders at my Monastry again, if this be true.


Trust. I have better business for you, than telling of Beads -- No, Mrs.
Phillis you must be Married.


Phill. Alas! I am too young, and sad for Love.


Trust. The younger, and the less Love, the better.


Enter Page. Page. Mr. Trusty, here is a Gentleman would speak with you, he says
his name^s Mr. Sham.


Trust. Gud's me Mistress, put on all your Holyday looks, for this is the
little Merchant of Love by Retail, that brings you the Husband I promised you.


Enter Sham. Sham. Well Mr. Trusty, I have brought Sir Timothy, as I promised,
he is at the Garden door.


Trust. The best time in the World, my Lord's out of the way.


Sham. But you know our conditions.


Trust. Yes, that if he Marry her, you are to have all the Money that he offers
to debauch her.


Sham. Right.


Trust. Bring him in then, and I Will civilly withdraw.

[Ex. Trusty.
Enter Sham, bringing in Sir Timothy. Sir Tim. Well Sham, thou have prepared
all things, and there needs no Ceremony.


Sham. None, none Sir, you may fall downright to the business.


Enter Phillis. Sir Tim. Sing. Come, my Phillis, let us improve
Both our joys of equal Love,
Whilst we in yonder shady Grove,
Count Minutes by our Kisses.

Phill. What sort of Courtship's this? it is very odd!


Sir Tim. 'Pox on Formal Fopps, we have highborn and generous Souls, and scorn
the common Road -- Come, let us enjoy, whilst Youth and Beauty lasts.


Phill. What means this Rudeness? I Will tell my Brother.


Sir Tim. Your Brother, by Fortune he is so lewd, that should I be so
unconscionable to leave thee a Virgin but this Night, he would Ravish thee
himself, and that at cheaper Rates than I design to do it.


Phill. How dare you talk to me at this rate?


Sir Tim. Talk to thee -- by Fortune I Will play the Tarquin with thee, if thou
yieldst not quickly -- for thou have set me all on fire.


Phill. Defend me, Heaven from such a Man.


Sir Tim. Then it must defend you from all the Sex, for all Mankind are like
me, nay, and all Womankind are, or would be, what I must make thee


Phill. What Is that, a Wench?


Sir Tim. Fie, fie, that is a gross name, no, a Miss, that is the word -- a Lady
of delight, a Person of pleasure, and the rest; I Will keep thee, not a Woman of
Quality shall be half so fine -- Come, dear Phillis, yield* Oh I am mad for the
happy hour -- come, say the word, it is but incl^^ning thy head a little thus --
the pretty Eyes down, and thy Cheeks all blushes, and fetching a long sigh --
thus -- with -- do -- what you please -- at the end on it -- and I shall take it
for granted.


Phill. That, Sir, you will never hear me say to any thing but a Husband, if I
must say it then.


Sir Tim. A Husband! it is enough to spoil a Man's appetite, the very naming
on it -- By Fortune thou have been bred with thy great Grandmother, some old
Queen Elizabeth Lady, that used to preach warnings to young Maidens; but had
she lived in this Age, she would have repented her Error, especially had she
seen the Sum that I offer thee -- Come, let us in, by Fortune, I Am so vigorous,
I shall ravish else.


Phill. Unhand me, or I Will call out. I assure you this is not the way to gain
me.


Sir Tim. I know there is a way to gain all mortal Womankind, but how to hit
the Critical Minute of the Berjere --


Phill. Is past your Politics at this time Sir.


Sir Tim. I Will try all ways, and the Devil's in it if I don't hit upon the
right at last.

[Aside. All the soft things I Have said --


Phill. That a ^night of your Parts ought to say.


Sir Tim. Then I have kneeled -- and cry d -- and swore -- and --


Phill. And damned your self five hundred times --


Sir Tim. Yet still you are impregnable -- I^ll make another Proposition to you,
which is both reasonable and modish -- If it prove a Boy -- I Will Marry you --
the Devil's in it, if that be not fair.


Phill. You get no earnest of me, Sir, and so farewell to you.

[Ex. Phillis.
Enter Sham. Sir Tim. Oh Sham, I am all over fire, mad to enjoy! I have done
what Man can do (without doing what I would do) and still she is Flint; nothing
will down with her but Matrimony -- what shall I do? for thou know I cannot
Marry a Wife without a Fortune.


Sham. Sir, you know the old Cheat, hire a Lay Rascal in a Canonical Habit, and
put a false Marriage upon her.


Sir Tim. Lord, that this should not enter into my Coxcomb before? haste then
and get one -- I Will have it done immediately, whilst I go after her to keep up
my flame.

[Ex. Sir Tim.
Sham. And I Will fit you with a Parson presently.

[Ex.
The Scene a Street.
Enter Friendlove disguised as before. Friend. I find Diana knows me not, and
this years absence, since I fir^^ made my Addresses to her, has altered me
much, or she has lost the remembrance of a Man, whom she ever disesteem'd till
in this lucky dress, the price of her Favor is Bellmour's life; I need not
have been bribed for that, his breach of Faith both to my sister and my self,
enough incites me to Revenge -- He has not yet enjoyed her, that blessing is
reserved for me alone; and though the Priest have joined 'em, that Marriage may
be disannulled, and she has a Fortune sufficient to excuse her other faults.

Enter Bellmour sad. -- Hah! the Man I seek -- so near my Lodgings too -- Sir!

Bell. Sir!

Friend. Traitor! thou know me, and my business.
-- Look on this face, if thou dare look on him, whom thou have doubly
wronged -- and draw thy Sword.


Bell. Thou should be Friendlove, Brother to Celinda.

Friend. And Lover of Diana too -- oh quickly draw,
Or I shall leave thee like a Coward, dead.

Bell. No, rather like a Sacrifice,
[Offers to embrace him. And thou should be the Priest should offer it;
But that I have yet
For some few moments, business for my life.

Friend. I can allow no time for business now,
My injuries are in haste, and so am I.

Bell. Should thou stab here, a thousand gaping wounds,
Upon this false, this perjured heart of mine,
It would not part with life, unless 'twere laid
Near to the Sacred Altar of my Vows.
Lo at the feet of my fair injured Wife.

Friend. Ha! -- means ^e his Wife!
[Aside. Can thou repent thy injuries to her,
And leave the rest of all thy sins neglected?

Bell. Those I have done to thee, though soul and barbarous
May plead the excuse of force -- but those to her,
Not thou, nor I, nor she, or Heaven can pardon.

Friend. Heavens!
My sisters wrongs, and mine, may plead excuse,
But those to her alone can never be pardoned.
-- This place, Sir, is too open -- come with me,
For I Have desired, and now resolve to kill thee.

Bell. And so thou shall, defenseless, I will yield,
And leave my bosom, open to thy Sword.
-- But first conduct me to my Wife.
For I will see her -- nor can I dye unpardoned.

Friend. See his Wife! -- of whom do you demand her?

Bell. Of thee! -- dare thou detain me?

[Offers to go in. Friend. Death how should he know she is here!
[Aside. -- Stay, Sir, this way our business lies.

[Pulls him back. Bell. I ask not thine, but mine lies only this way.

[Offers to go in^ again. Friend. By Heaven you shall not enter here!

Bell. I know thou love her,
And it is with reason thou deny'st an entrance
To one so much unworthy to approach her.

Friend. Yes, I do love her, and dare own it too;
And will defend her from one so base and treacherous.

Bell. Who dares ^eny thy Reasons?

Friend. She Has made me take an Oath, to fight with thee.
And every wound, my lucky Sword should make,
She bad me say, was sent thee from her hate.

Bell. Oh I believe thee! prithee tell on, young man,
That I may dye without the aid of wounds.

Friend. To break thy heart, know then, she loves another.
And has took back the Vows she made to thee,
And given 'em to a Man more worthy of 'em.

Bell. Alas! I credit thee -- yet -- then by Heaven she is false!
And I will know, why it is she is thus perjured.
[Offers to go. -- Nay now -- nor Heaven, nor Hell, shall hinder me.
-- Stand off, or to the number I Will add one sin more,
And make my passage to her through thy heart.

Friend. And so you shall Sir.
[They fight, Bellmour disarms Friend. and runs in. -- Disarmed! by Heaven you
shall not so escape
A Rage that is too just here to give over.

The Scene changes to the inside of Friendloves Lodgings. Enter Celinda, as
before, met by Nurse. Nur. Oh Madam, here is Mr. Bellmour, he has wounded my
young Master, who denied him entrance, and is come into the house, and all in
Rage demands his Wife.


Cel. Oh Heaven! demands his Wife! is that sad Curse
Added to all the rest -- does he then love her?

Enter Bellmour with two Swords. Nur. Whether do you press Sir? And what is your
business?

Bell. To see my Wife, my Wife, impertinence.
And must I meet with naught but opposition?

[Pushes her roughly away. Cel. Let him come in.

Nur. Marry he lets himself in, I thank him.

Cel. What Man art thou thus covered over with horror!

Bell. One sent from Hell, to punish Perjury!
-- Where Is this perfidious Fair? this blushless Maid!
That has by my example broke her Vows!
A President that Fiends, would shame to follow.

Cel. Who is it you mean Sir?

Bell. A thing that has no name, she is so bad!
One who so lately gave her self to me,
And now is flown into another Arms.
One that attacks my life, for the same sins,
Which she her self commits -- and thinks to live too.
-- Yet still she is my Wife, whom I have injured:
Till when, she was a Saint -- come lead me to her.
Though she be false as I, yet I Will forgive it.

[Throws by the Swords. Cel. Heavens! he repents his Cruelty to her,
And never mentions me! Ah then it is time to die.
And that I may be sure of death --
[Aside. Well, Sir, I will conduct this happy Lady to you.

Bell. Gods! happy! -- whilst I am wretched.
[Ex. Cel. -- Oh what an Ague chills my shivering Limbs,
Turns my hot rage, to softest love, and shame,
Were I not here to dye -- here at her feet,
I would not stand the shock of her Reproaches.
-- But yet she need not speak, a look's sufficient
To call up all my sins to my undoing --
-- She comes -- Oh Heaven! she comes --
Enter Celinda and Diana. -- Like penitent Criminals thus -- with my Eyes
declined,
I bow my head down, for the last sad blow.

[Stands bowed. Cel. Sir, in obedience to your Commands,
I Have brought the Lady.

Dia. How! the perfidious Bellmour!
The only object of my hate and scorn.

Bell. Say on, my angry Deity --
[Kneels. Whilst I thus trembling hear my fatal doom
Like sinners conscious, never to be forgiven,
I dare not lift my guilty Eyes toward Heaven.

Cel. Can I hear this? and yet retain my life!

Dia. Had I but two days since beheld this Youth
Thus prostrate at my feet, I should have thought
My self more blessed,
Than to have been the Deity he calls me.

Enter Friendlove. Friend. Defend me! the Traitor here! and at Diana's feet,
The fittest Altar for my Sacrifice!
-- Turn, turn, from what thou love, and meet my justice!

Cel. Oh hold, my dearest Brother!

[Bellm. rises, and turns about* Bellm. Nay, now I Am ready for the welcome Sword,
Since my Celinda's false, and cannot pardon.

Cel. Oh do not dye with that profane opinion.
Celinda fal^e! or cannot pardon thee!

Dia. Stay, generous Sir, my pity has forgiven him.

Bell. Thou! why who art thou -- Diana!

Dia. Yes, that Diana
Whom maugre all the Penitence thou show,
Can scarce forgive the injuries thou'st done her.

Bell. I show a Penitence for injuring thee!
By Heaven I never could do one, or other,
All that I am is the divine Celinda's.

Friend. He Is stark mad I
[Aside.
Bell. But since she cannot pardon, I can dye.

[Offers to fall on his Sword. Cel. Can thou not credit me! she pardons thee.
Live -- and enjoy -- Diana.

[Turns her face from him. Bell. What art thou? who know her heart so well!
Art thou my Rival? the blessed Youth to whom
She has given her Vows? -- live -- and enjoy -- Diana!
-- Yes -- yes -- thou art my Rival, and I Will kill thee.

Cel. Do, whilst I meet thy Sword.

[Opens her Arms, Dia. stays him, he lets fall his Sword, and gazes. Bell. Dull
-- dull Adorer! not to know my Saint.
Oh how have I profaned? to what strange Idol
Was that I kneeled?
Mistaking it for a Divinity!

Cel. To your fair Wife Diana!

Bell. Oh cruel Maid!
Has Heaven designed me any but Celinda!

Dia. Maid! bless me! -- did I then love a Woman!
-- I am pleased thou should renounce me, make it good,
And set me free from Fetters which I hate.

Bell. If all our Laws can do it I will -- for here
Ends all my claim.

[To Cel. Friend. Was this the Wife you did demand of me?

Bell. Yes, I had no other.

Dia. Fair Maid! forgive me all my shameful Passion!
And charge my fault upon your Beauty only.

Cel. Excellent Creature! I should sue for that
Which my deceit will never make me hope.

Bell. And art thou true to Love, and all thy Vows?
Whilst I to save my Fortune,
(That only which could make me merit thee)
Gave my unwilling hand to this fair Noble Maid.
-- Ah Friendlove, when thou hearst my Story told,
Thou will forgive, and pity me.

Dia. What was it you said Sir? -- Friendlove.

Friend. Yes, Madam, I hope the name can make no difference:
Or hate that still, so you love the Man.

Dia. Though I Am again defeated, yet this last
Proves least offensive, nor shall an empty word,
Alter my fixed Resolves, to love you still.

Friend. Then I am blessed!

Bell. But yet the office of the Priest has past.
What remedy for that?

Dia. My Uncle's power; the nearness of our blood,
The contradiction of our circumstances.

Bell. And above all that, my Contract with Celinda.
-- Methinks I feel a joy spread over my heart,
The blessed omen of approaching happiness.

Cel. I do believe thee, for by sympathy,
Mine takes new fire and hope.

Dia. I have already writ to my Uncle, and the Messenger assured me,
he would gratify my desires; that done, I will be yours.

[To Friendlove. Bell. Bell. But why thus dressed? it might have led my Rage
Full of despair, and jealousy to have hurt thee,

Cel. Sir, when the Letter came of your being Married,
I will not tell you all the effects it had
Upon my desperate Soul;
But this I know, I had resolved to dye.
But first to see you, your Page informed the Nurse,
All that had past, and of the last Nights Ball;
And much concerned, she got this Habit for me,
And informed me how 'twas I was to Act.
And that my Brother (describing of his dress) was gone before;
This made me haste, lest e're I came,
His Rage had done the business which it went for.

Friend. And so it had, had thou not hindered me,
For I, Sir, was the Man, who drew on you.

Bell. And was it thou that did defend my heart,
That I might live to pay thy goodness back.

Cel. It was to save your life, and to expose my own.

Dia. Come, let us in, and consult what is best for us to do.

Bell. Come my Celinda,
Let us no longer doubt, the Powers above
Will be propitious to United Love.

[ Ex. Cel. Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, my Lord Plotwell is at the door in his
Coach.

Dia. My Uncle come! Sir, we will not doubt our Fortune.
But how came he to know of my being here?

Serve. Madam, I fear he followed me, after I had given him the Letter.
Enter Lord Plotwell, Charles, Trusty. Lord. Bellmour and Diana kneeling! [
Bellmour and Diana kneels. -- Rise, the joy I have to see you thus, makes me
Resolve to grant you any thing, and pardon all that is past.

Bell. Be not so hasty in your goodness, Sir,
Lest you repent as fast.

Dia. Sir, we have an humble Suit to you.

Lord. What is it ye can jointly ask, I will not grant?

Dia. By all that Love you ever had for me,
By all those Infant charms, which used to please you
When on your Lap, you taught my Tongue that Art
Which made those dear impress^ons on your Heart*
Which ever since to my advantage grew,
I do conjure you hear me now I sue,
And grant the mighty grace I beg of you.

Lord. What is it you would ask?

Bell. Oh dress your Face and Eyes in gentler Looks,
If you would have us hope for any mercy.

Lord. Rise, and whatever you ask, I Will freely grant.

Dia. That you will undo that knot, that ties us two.

Lord. How! this Request from thee! who loved him once,
And wished no good beyond possessing him.

Dia. Heaven has not, Sir, decreed us for each other,
Something of Fate or Chance
Has otherwise disposed those first Resolves.

Lord. Too virtuous Maid, I know thou do but feign,
His wickedness has forced thee to this change.

Dia. No, Sir, were he the only Man
Of kind and good, I never would be his.
-- And if you should compel me, I should live
The infamous Reproach of my whole Sex.

Lord. Well, and you Sir, that are the cause of this,
What can thou say to move me for thy Pardon?

Bell. I am so guilty in your opinion,
My Prayers would but make yours merciless;
I only say Celinda is my Wife,
And I should injure this too generous Maid,
Not to adore her equal to her merit.

Lord. I see, Sir, you have found your Wits again.
-- Well, I see there is no opposing Destiny,
And I have still such tenderness for thee,
[To Dia. That had thou pleaded his Cause to me before,
I should have been less cruel to him.
-- Where is that Lady which you so admire,
Whose beauty does eclipse that of Diana.

Bellmour goes out, and brings in Celinda. Dia. This, Sir, is she who merits
more than I.

Lord. She Is fair indeed; here Franck,
I give thee thy Celinda, whose beauty
Excuses all thy faults of disobedience.

Bell. Thus low, I thank you for this goodness Sir.

[Kneels. Lord. There only wants the ceremony of the Law to undo what is between
you and Diana, if she remain a Virgin.


Bell. For me by Heaven she is,
And for the rest I do not doubt her virtue.

Dia. You may believe him, Sir* and this alone's the Man (...) I will, or never
will be happy.


Lord. Mr. Friendlove, I give consent to it, he has a Noble Character, and what
he wants in Fortune, has in Virtue -- take her young Man.


Friend. It Is such an Honor, Sir, that (my Gratitude) without the mighty
Passion I have for her, would make me ever thankful.


Lord. This Term, we shall make the former Marriage void, till then love on,
and fear no frowns from Fortune -- but Nephew -- now I hope your Brother shall
have his Portion.


Bell. My dearest Charles, forgive me all that is past, And share the Fortune,
Heaven has given thy Brother.


Char. The joy I have, Sir, to be undeceived, is much the greatest blessing
Heaven can send me.


Enter Sir Timothy followed by Phillis, Sham, Sharp, and Betty Flauntit. Sir
Tim. I am pursued by two impertinent Women, prithee Friendlove, tell 'em I am
gone out at the Backdoor, and send 'em away.


Lord. What Is the News here?


Sir Tim. How Celinda here, and Bellmour too! nay, now would I compound for my
Life, at any rate, by Fortune.


Phill. Sir, this Villain here has abused me, and with a false Marriage has
robbed me of my Honor.


Bell. How!


Sir Tim. My Lord, I say this young Jilt would rob me of my self, and courting
her, and enjoying her only for a Miss, would persuade me I am Married to her.


Flaunt. Sir, I say, I am doubly wronged; first by this false Knight, who has
belonged to me these three years, which gives me a right to him, as good as if
I were Married to him; who has now unlawfully left my Bed, for that of this
Gillflurt, who on the other side takes away my Knight, and consequently eats
the bread out of my mouth.


Bell. What means all this?
Speak some of ye that know.

Flaunt. Oh Lord! who is here? the fine Squire.

[Aside.
Trust. Sir Timothy Tawdrey, Sir, is Married to Mrs. Phillis.


Sir Tim. How can that be a Marriage, when he who joined us, was but a hired
Fellow, dressed like a Parson?


Trust; Sir, 'twas Parson Tickle-text, that Married 'em.


Sir Tim. Oh what a damned lying Pimp is this! -- Sham did not thou hire a
Fellow, (because I was damnably in Love, and in haste) to Marry us, that was no
Parson?


Sham. Why truly Sir -- I did go to hire such an one --


Sir Tim. Look ye there now.


Sham. But could meet with none; and because you said you should dye if you
enjoyed her not presently, and that she would not yield on any other terms, but
those of Marriage, I e'ne brought the Parson that Trusty had provided for you.


Sir Tim. Oh Villain to betray me! and for no Reward!


Trust. Yes indeed, Sir, the 400 Guineys you left behind my young Mistresses
Looking-glass fell to his share.


Sir Tim. What Is my Money gone! and am I Married too! This it is not to use to
go to Church; for then I might have chanced to know the Parson.


Bell. Death you Dog! you deserve to dye, for your base designs upon a Maid of
her quality -- how durst you, Sister, without my leave, Marry that Rascal?


Phill. Sir, you denied me my Portion, and my Uncle designed to turn me out of
doors* and in my despairs, I accepted of him.


Flaunt. Married! and to a Wife of no Fortune! that is the worst part on it --
what shall I do?


Bell. Renounce this lewd Fool, and I Will make thee a Fortune suitable to thy
quality.


Sir Tim. Say you so? -- Renounce me Sir! I Would have you to know I merit her:
and as for Lewdness, I name no body Bellmour -- but only some have the Art of
hiding it better than I -- but for Whoring, Drinking, Dicing, and all the
deadly sins that thereupon depend, I thank my stars I come short of you: And
since you say, I shall not have your Sister, by Fortune, I will have your
Sister, and love your Sister, and lie with your Sister, in spite of you.


Lord. Well Sir Timothy, since my Niece has done amiss, it is too late to mend
it -- and that you may not repent, I Will take care her Fortune shall be suitable
to the Jointure you will make her.


Bell. With this Proviso that you make no Settlements to Misses, Sir Timothy --
I am not so unreasonable to tie you up from all of that Profession; that were
to spoil a fashionable Husband, and so put you quite out of Fopp Road.


Lord. This day we'll set apart for mirth,
And all must make my house their happy home.

Bell. To thee, Celinda, all my good I owe,
My Life, my Fortune, and my Honor too,
Since all had perished by a broken Vow.

Flaunt. What am I like to lose my Timy? Can thou have the heart to leave me
for ever? I who have been true and constrant to you.


Sir Tim. Alas! now do I melt again, by Fortune -- thou art a Fool, do think
I would have had her, but for her Fortune; which shall only serve to make thee
out-flaunt all the Cracks in Town -- go -- go home and expect me, thou wilt have
me all to thy self within this day or two.

Since Marriage but a larger License is
For every Fopp of Mode to keep a Miss.

Epilogue Spoken by SIR TIMOTHY TAWDREY.
SIR TIMOTHY, Gallants, at last is come
To know his Sentence, and receive his Doom.
But pray before you are resolved to be
Severe, look on your selves, and then on me;
Observe me well, I am a Man of Show,
Of Noise, and Nonsense, as are most of you,
Though all of you don't share with me in Title,
In Character you differ very little.
Tell me in what you find a difference?
It may be you will say, you're Men of Sense;
But Faith --
Were one of you of the Stage, and I in the Pit,
He might be thought the Fopp, and I the Wit.
On equal Grounds you will scarce know one from the other;
We are as like, as Brother is to Brother.
To judge against me then would be ill Nature,
For Men are kind to those they are like in Feature.
For Judges therefore I accept you all;
By you, SIR TIMOTHY will stand or fall.
He Is too faint-hearted that his Sentence fears,
Who has the Honor to be tried by's Peers.
Written by Mr. E. R.
FINIS.
Plays Printed for I. Magnes and R. Bentley.
FOrced Marriage: Or the Jealous Bridegroom. Tartuff: Or the French Puritan.
All Mistaken: Or the Mad Couple. English Monsieur. Andromach. Nero. Mistaken
Husband. Sophonisba. Calisto: Or the Masque at Court, Acted by the Lady Mary
and the Lady Anne, and other Persons of the highest quality. Court of Augustus
Caesar. Country Wit. Abdelazer. The Town-Fopp: Or Sir Timothy Tawdrey. Madam
Fickle: Or the Witty False One. The Plain-dealer. (Now in the Press)
FRENCH NOVELLS.
L' Heureux Esclave, First Part. L' Heureux Esclave, Second Part. Le Faux Comte
de Brion.

