THE Young KING: OR, THE MISTAKE. As it is acted at his Royal Highness The DUKES
THEATER. Written by A. Behn.

LONDON: Printed for D. Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple Bar.
T. Benskin in St. Brides Churchyard Fleet Street. And H. Rhodes, next door to
the Bear-tavern near Bride-lane in Fleet Street. 1683.

PROLOGUE.
BEauty, like Wit, can only charm when new;
Is there no merit then in being true?
Wit rather should an estimation hold
With Wine, which is still best for being old.
Judgment in both, with vast expense and thought,
You from their native soil, from Paris brought.
The drops that from that sacred Sodo^ fall,
You like industrious Spiders suck up all.
Well might the French a Conquest here design,
Were but their Swords as dangerous as their Wine.
Their Education yet is worse than both;
They make our Virgins Nuns, unman our Youth.
We that don't know 'em, think 'em Monsters too;
And will, because we judge of 'em by you.
You Will say, this once was so but now you're grown
So wise t'invent new Follies of your own:
Their slavish imitations you disdain;
A Pox of Fops that purchase fame with pain:
You're no such Fools as first to mount a Wall,
Or for your King and Country venture all.
With suchlike grinning honor 'twas, perchance,
Your dull Forefathers first did conquer France:
Whilst they have sent us in revenge for these,
Their Women, Wine, Religion, and Disease.
Yet for Religion, it is not much will down,
In this ungirt, unblest, and mutinous Town.
Nay, I dare swear, not one of you in Seven,
E're had the impudence to hope for Heaven.
In this you're modest --
But as to Wit, most aim before their time;
And he that cannot spell, sets up for Rhyme:
They Are Sparks who are of noise and nonsense full,
At Fifteen witty, and at Twenty dull;
That in the Pit can huff, and talk hard words,
And briskly draw Bamboo instead of Swords:
But never yet Bancounter could compare
To our late vigorous Tartarian War:
Cudgel the Weapon was, the Pit the Field;
Fieree was the Hero, and too brave to yield.
But stoutest hearts must bow; and being well can'd,
He cries, Hold, hold, you have the Victory gaiv'd.
All laughing call --
Turn out the Rascal, the eternal Blockhead.
-- Sounds, cry Tartarian, I am out of Pocket:
Half Crown my Play, Six pence my Orange cost,
Equip me that, do you the Conquest boast.
For which, to be at ease, a gathering's made,
And out they turn the Brother of the blade.
-- This is the fruits of idleness and ease.
ACTORS NAMES.
DACIANS.
Queenof Dacia OrsamesHer Son, kept from his Infancy in a Castle on a Lake,
ignorant of his quality and of all the World besides; never having seen any
Humane thing save only his old Tutor. CleomenaHis Sister, bred up in War, and
designed to reign instead of Orsames: the Oracle having foretold the bloody
Cruelties should be committed during his short Reign, if ever suffered to wear
the Crown. HonoriusGeneral of the Army, and Uncle to Orsames and Cleomena.
OlympiaHis Daughter, young and beautiful. Ismenis and ArtabazesTwo Rival
Princes in love with Cleomena. PimanteA Fop-Courtier. AratesA Courtier.
SemirisWoman to Cleomena. VallentioA Colonel of the Army. Pages and Attendants.
SCYTHIANS.
Kingof Scythia. ThersanderHis Son, under the name of Clemanthis, when on the
Dacian side. AmintasA young Nobleman, beloved by Thersander, and Lover of
Urania. LysanderPage to Thersander. UraniaIn love with Amyntas. LycesA
Shepherdess. Soldiers, Shepherds, Shepherdesses, and a Rabble of the Mobile.
SCENE, the Court of Dacia, between the two Armies just before the Town.

To Philaster.
It Is the glory of the Great and Good to be the Refuge of the Distressed; their
Virtues create 'em troubles; and he that has the Godlike Talent to oblige, is
never free from Impunity, you, Philaster, have a Thousand ways merited my
Esteem and Veneration; and I beg you would now permit the effects of it, which
could not forbear, though unpermitted, to dedicate this youthful sally of my
Pen, this first Essay of my Infant-Poetry to your excellent Self: It Is a
Virgin-Muse, harmless and unadorned, unpracticed in the Arts to please; and if
by chance you find any thing agreeable, it is natural and unskilled Innocence.
Three thousand Leagues of spacious Ocean she has measured, visited many and
distant Shores, and found a welcome every where; but in all that vast tract of
Sea and Land could never meet with one whose Person and Merits could oblige her
to yield her ungarded Self into his protection: A thousand Charms of Wit, good
Nature, and Beauty at first approach she found in Philaster; and since she knew
she could not appear upon the too-critical English Stage without making choice
of some Noble Patronage, she waited long, looked round the judging World, and
fixed on you. She feared the reproach of being an American, whose Country rarely
produces Beauties of this kind: The Muses seldom inhabit there; or if they do,
they visit and away; but for variety a Dowdy Lass may please: Her youth too
should atone for all her faults besides; and her being a Stranger will begit
civility, and you that are by nature kind and generous, tender and soft to all
that is new and gay, will not, I hope refuse her that Sanctuary I am too
sensible she will have need of in this loose Age of Censure. You have goodness
enough to excuse all her weaknesses, and Wit enough to defend 'em; and that is
sufficient to render her Estimable to all the world that knows the generous and
excellent Philaster; whilst this occasion to celebrate you under this Name, is
both a Pleasure and an Honor to

ASTREA.

THE Young KING: OR, The Mistake.
ACT the First.
SCENE the First. A Grove near the Camp.
Enter Pimante alone with Letters.
Pim. GOne! well, I have never the ill luck, I thank my Stars, to meet with any
of these mighty men of Valor. -- -- Vallentio, Noble Colonel!

Enter Vallentio.
Vall. Pimante! When, what the Devil brought thee to the Camp?


Pim. Affairs, affairs --


Vall. They must be wondrous pressing that made thee venture; but the
Fighting's past, and all the Noise over, every man of Fame gone to receive
what is due to his Merit; and the whole Camp looks now like a City in a great
Plague, no stirring -- But prithee what is thy business here?


Pim. Why, I brought Letters from the Queen to that same mighty man of Prowess
-- what do you call him?


Vall. The brave Clemanthis?


Pim. The same -- But Colonel, is he indeed so very terrible a thing as Fame
gives out? -- but she was ever a notable Wag at History.


Vall. How dare thy Coward-Thoughts venture upon any thing so terrible as the
remembrance of that Gallant man? Is not his Name like Thunder to thy Ears? Does
it not make thee shrink into thy self?


Pim. Lord, Colonel, why so hot? it is the cursedst thing in the world to be
thus continually used to fighting; why how uncivil it renders a man? I speak by
way of Question.


Vall. Oh! how soft and wanton I could grow in the Description I could make of
him. --
He merits all in Peace as well as War:
Composed of Charms would take all Womankind,
As th^se of's Valor overcome the Men.

Pim. Well said In Faith, Colonel; but if he be so fine a man* Why did you not
keep him here amongst you to do Execution on the Scythians? for I think e're
long you will give 'em Battle.


Vall. The General -- whose noble Life he saved,
Used all his interest with him, but in vain:
He neither could oblige his stay in the Camp,
Nor get him to the Court* oh! were his quality
But like his Actions great, he were a man
To merit Cleomena,
Whose Worth and Beauty, as a thing Divine,
I reverence:
But I abhor the feeble Reign of Women;
It foretells the downfall of the noblest Trade -- War:
Give me a man to lead me on to Dangers,
Such as Clemanthis is, or as Orsames might have been.

Pim. Colonel, it is Treason but to name Orsames, much more to wish he were us
King.


Vall. Not wish he were! by all those Gods I will,
Who did conspire against him in their Oracles.
Not wish him King! yes, and may live to see it.

Pim. What should we do with such a King? The Gods foretell he shall (...)
fierce and bloody, a Ravisher, a Tyrant over his People; his Reign but short,
and so unfit for Reign.


Vall. The Gods! I Will not trust them for a days Pay -- let them but give one a
taste of his Reign, though but for an hour, and I Will be converted to them.


Pim. Besides, he is very ill bred for a King; he knows nothing of a world,
cannot dress himself, not sing, nor dance, or plays on any Music; never saw a
Woman, nor knows how to make use of one if he had her. There Is an old fusty
Philosopher that instructs him; but it is in nothing that shall ever make a fine
Gentleman of him: He teaches him a deal of Awe and Reverence to the Gods; and
tells him that his natual Reason's sin -- But, Colonel, between you and I,
he will no more of that Philosophy, but grows as sullen as if you had the
breeding of him here in the Camp.


Vall. Thou tell me heavenly news; a King, a King again! oh for a mutinous
Rabble that would break the Prison-walls and set Orsames free, both from his
Fetters and his Ignorance.


Pim. There is a discourse at Court, that the Queen designs to bring him out,
and try how he would behave himself: but I Am none of that Council; she is like
to make a fine Court on it; we have enough in the Virago her Daughter, who, if
it were not for her Beauty, one would swear were no Woman, she is so given to
noise and fighting.


Vall. I never saw her since she was a Child, and then she naturally hated
Scythia.


Pim. Nay, she is in that mind still: and the superstitious Queen, who thinks
that Crown belongs to Cleomena --


Vall. Yes, that was the promise of the Oracle too.


Pim. Breeds her more like a General than a Woman: Ah how she loves fine Arms!
a Bow, a Quiver; and though she be no natural Amazon, she is capable of all
their Martial Fopperies.

-- But hark; what noise is that?

[Song within.
Vall. It Is what we do not use to hear. -- Stand by.

SONG.
1.
Damon, I cannot blame your will,
'Twas Chance and not Design did kill;
For whilst you did prepare your Arms
On purpose Celia to subdue,
I met the Arrows as they flew,
And saved her from their harms.
2.
Alas, she could not make returns,
Who for a Swain already burns:
A Shepherd who does her caress
With all the softest marks of Love,
And it is in vain thou seek'st to move
The cruel Shepherdess.
3.
Content thee with this Victory,
I Am young and beautiful as she;
I Will make thee Garlands all the day,
And in the shades we'll sit and sing.
I Will crown thee with the pride of the Spring
When thou art Lord of the May.
Enter Urania, dressed gay -- Lyces a Shepherdess.
Ly. Still as I sing you sigh.

Uran. I cannot hear thy Voice, and the returns
The Echoes of these shady Groves repeat,
But I must find some softness at my Heart:
-- Would I had never known another Dwelling,
But this too happy one where thou were born.
[Sigh's.
Ly. You sigh again: such things become none but unhappy Maids that are
forsaken; your beauty is too great to suffer that.


Ura. No Beauty's proof against false perjured man.

Ly. Is It possible you can have lost your Love?

Ura. Yes, pretty Maid, can tell me any tidings of him?

Ly. I cannot tell; by what marks do you know him?

Ura. Why by these: -- A tempting Face and shape:
A Tongue bewitching, soft, and Breath as sweet
As is the welcome Breeze that does restore
Life to man half killed with heat before:
But has a Heart as false as Seas in Calms,
Smiles first to tempt, then ruins with its Storms.

Ly. Oh fair Urania! there are many more
So like your Love, if such a one he be,
That you would take each Shepherd to be he:
It Is grown the fashion now to be forsworn;
Oaths are like Garlands made of finest Flowers,
Wither as soon as finished;
They change their Loves as often as their Scrips,
And lay their Mistresses aside like Ribbons
Which they themselves have sullied.

Pim. Gad I Will venture in --

Vall. Fair Women, and so near the Camp!
What are ye, and from whence?

Pim. Ha! it is no matter for that; ask no Questions, but fall to.
[Goes to Lyces.
Ura. I Am not ashamed to tell thee one or the other;
I am a Maid, and one of gentle birth,
A Scythian born, and Enemy to thee,
Not as thou art a Man, but Friend to Dacia.

Vall. What sin have I committed, that so fair a creature should become my
Enemy? but since you are so, you must be my Prisoner, unless your Eyes prevent
me, and make me yours.


Pim. How, take a woman Prisoner! I hope you're a finer Gentleman than so.

Vall. But, Madam, do not fear; for I will use you
As well as such a man as I can do.

Ura. Though thou best rough, thou have a Noble look,
And I believe my treatment will be gentle.

Vall. Fair Maid, this confidence is brave in thee;
And though I am not used to make returns
Unless in Thunder on my Enemies,
Yet name the way, and I will strive to serve you.

Ura. Then Sir, I beg not you would set me free,
Nor yet retain me here a Prisoner;
But as you are brave, conduct me to the Castle on the Lake,
Where young Amyntas lies, the spoil of War.

Vall. Amyntas, Madam is a gallant Youth,
And merits more from Fortune than his Chains;
But I could wish (since I have vowed to serve you.)
You would command me something
Worthy your Beauty and that Resolution.

Ura. There is no other way to do me service.

Vall. Then most willingly I will obey you.

Ura. But, Sir, I beg this Virgin may depart,
Being a Dacian, and a neighboring Villager.

Vall. All your Commands shall strictly be obeyed.

Pim. Pox on her, she is coy, and let her go: Well Colonel*
I doubt you will be for the Queen by and by.

Ura. Here -- take this Jewel as a part of payment
For all thy goodness to an unknown Maid.
[To Lyces. And if by chance I ever see thee more,
Believe me, Lyces, I will quit the score.
[Exit Lyces weeping. [Excunt.
SCENE the Second. A Grove of Trees.
Within the Scence lies Thersander sleeping, his Cap and Feather at a distance
from him. Enter Cleomena dressed like an Amazon with a Bow in her hand, and a
Quiver of Arrows at her back, with Semiris attired like her.
Cleo. I Am almost tired with holding out the chase.

Sem. That Is strange! methought your Highness followed not so fast to day as I
have seen you heretofore.


Cleo. I do not use to leave the Game unvanquish'd,
Yet now by what strange inclination led
I know not,
The sport growing dull, I wished to meet a place.
Far from the noise and business of the day:
Have thou ti'd fast my Horses?

Sem. Madam, I have.

Cleo. What place is this, Semiris?

Sem. I know not, Madam, but it is wondrous pleasant!

Cleo. How much more charming are the works of Nature.
Than the productions of laborious art!
Securely here the wearied Shepherd sleeps,
Guiltless of any fear, but the disdain
His cruel Fair procures him;
How many Tales the Echoes of these Woods
Could tell of Lovers if they would betray,
That steal delightful hours beneath their Shades!

Sem. You Would rather hear 'em echo back the sound
Of Horns and Dogs, or the ficrce noise of War.

Cleo. You charge me with the faults of Education,
That couzening form that vails the face of Nature,
But does not see what is hid within, Semiris:
I have an Heart all soft as thine, all woman,
Apt to melt down at every tender object:
-- Oh Semiris! there is a strange change within me.

Sem. How, Madam!

Cleo. I would thou knew'st it;
Till now I durst do any thing -- but fear,
Yet now I tremble with the thoughts of telling thee
What none but thou must know -- I am in love.

Sem. Why do you blush, my Princess, it is no sin;
But, Madam, who is the happy glorious object?

Cleo. Why? can thou not guess then?

Sem. How is it possible I should?

Cleo. Oh Gods! not guess the man,
Or, rather think some God! Dull stupid Maid,
Have thou not heard of something more than mortal?
'Twixt Humane and Divine! our Countries Genius,
Or a young God of War! not heard of him!

Sem. It Is not Prince Artabaces, or Ismenes?

Cleo. Away, thou angerst me.

Sem. Pardon me, Madam,
It can be none at Court, if none of these;
And all besides are much below that glory.

Cleo. What call'st thou much below? mistaken thing;
Can a gay name give Virtue, Wit, or Beauty?
Can it gain Conquest, or in Fields or Courts?
No nor defend its own fantastic owner.
-- Come, guess again.

Sem. I can guess no further than a mam, and that I Am sure he is.

Cleo. I know not --
For yet I never saw him, but in's Character,
Unless sometimes in Dreams.

Sem. Is It not enough he conquers where he comes,
But that his Fame prevents his Sword and Eyes?
Perhaps his person may not be agreeable;
The best in Camps are not the best in Courts.

Cleo. So brave a mind must have as brave an outside.
-- My Uncle's Lettets from the Camp contain
Nothing but wonders of his worth and valor,
And it is impossible but such a man
Must merit Love as well as admiration.

Sem. Does he not come to Court?

Cleo. The Queen has made him many invitations;
But he, for some unknown, and cruel cause,
Humbly implores her pardon for refufing,
Nor can the General learn his quality.
But like his deeds, believes it must be great.

Sem. It Is most likely; but I should never fall in love with Fame alone.

Cleo. I hope it is not Love -- but strange curiosity
To see this brave Unknown -- And yet I fear --
I Have hid this new impatience of my Soul,
Even from thee, till it grew too importunate;
And strove by all my loved divertisements
To chase it from my Bosom, but in vain!
It Is too great for little Sports to conquer,
The Music of the Dogs displeased to day,
And I was willing to retire with thee,
To let thee know my story:
And this lone Shade, as if designed for Love,
Is fittest to be conscious of my crime:
-- Therefore go seek a Bank where we may sit,
And I will sigh whilst thou shall pity me.
[ -- Stands with her Arms across.
Sem. See, Madam, what I Have found!
[Sem. looks about, finds the Cap and Feathers.
Cleo. It Is a fine Plume, and well adorned,
And must belong to no uncommon man:
-- And look, Semiris, where its Owner lies --
-- Ha! he sleeps, tread softly lest you wake him:
-- Oh Gods! who is this with so divine a Shape?

Sem. His Shape is very well.

Cleo. Gently remove the Hair from off his Face,
[Sem. puts back his bair. And see if that will answer to the rest:
-- All lovely! all surpizing! oh my Heart,
How thou betrayst the weakness of our Sex!
-- Look on that Face where Love and Beauty dwells --
And though his Eyes be shut, tell me, Semiris,
Has he not wondrous Charms?

Sem. Yes, Madam; and I would excuse you if you should now fall in love, here is
substance; but that same Passion for Fame alone, I do not like.


Cleo. Ah do not call my blushes to my Face,
But pardon all my weakness:
May not my Eyes have leave to gaze a while?
Since after this, there is not another object
Can merit their attention --
-- But I Will no longer view that pleasing form --
-- And yet I Have lost all power of removing --
[Turns from him. [Turns and gazes. Even now I was in love with mere Report,
With Words, with empty Noise;
And now that Flame, like to the breath that blew it,
Is vanished into Air, and in its room
An Object quite unknown, unfam'd, unheard of
Informs my Soul: how easily it is conquered!
How angry am I with my Destiny!
Till now, with much disdain I have beheld --
The rest of all his Sex, and shall I here
Resign a Heart to one I must not love?
Must this be he must kill the King of Scythia?
For I must lay no claim to any other:
Grant, oh ye Gods, who play with Mortals thus,
That him for whom you have designed your Slave
May look like this Unknown,
And I Will be ever grateful for the bounty;
-- But these are vain imaginary Joys.
[Thersander wakes, rises, and gazes.
There Is. -- Am I awake, or do my Dreams present me
Idea's much more bright and conquering
Than ever approached my waking sense by far?
-- Sure it is Diana, the Goddess of these Woods,
That beauty and that dress confirm me it is;
[Kneels. -- Great Goddess, pardon an unlucky Stranger,
The errors he commits against your Divinity,
Who, had he known this Grove had Sacred been,
He would not have profaned it by his presence.

Cleo. Rise, Sir, I am no Deity,
Or if I were, I could not be offended
[Rises. To meet so brave a man -- Gods, how he looks!

There Is. Can you be mortal!
What happy Land contains you? or what men
Are worthy to adore you?

Cleo. I find you are a stranger to this place,
You else had known me to be Cleomena.

There Is. The Princess Cleomena! my mortal Enemy!
[Aside.
Cleo. You seem displeased at the knowledge of my Name*
But, give me leave to tell you, yours on me
Would have a another sense.

There Is. The knowledge of your Name has not displeased me;
[Kneels. But, Madam, I had sooner took you for
The Sovereign of the world than that of Dacia;
Nor ought you to expect less Adoration
From all that world, than those who are born your Slaves;
-- And amongst those devout ones number him
Whose happy fate conducted to your Feet,
And who will esteem himself more fortunate,
If by that little service he had rendered you,
Clemanthis Name have ever reached your Ear.

Cleo. Clemanthis! what could the Gods do more,
[Aside. To make me ever blessed! -- Rise noble Youth --
[Raises him. Could thou salute me Mistress of the world,
Or bring me news of conquest over Scythia,
It would not reach so kindly to my Soul,
As that admired illustrious name of thine:
This Crown's in debt to your all-conquering Sword;
And I Am the most obliged to make Returns,
Which if you knew me, sure you would not doubt,
If to those Favors you have already done us,
You Will add one more, and go with me to Court.

There Is. To the Court! to the utmost bounds of all the Universe.
At your command, through dangers worse than Death,
I Would fly with hasty Joy --
Like Gods, do but decree, and be obeyed.

Sem. Madam, the Company we left are coming this way, and with them Prince
Honorius.


There Is. The General here so soon!
[Aside. Enter Honorius, Ismenes, Women and Huntsmen.
Cleo. Welcome, victorious Uncle.
[Hon. Kisses Cleo's hand.
Hon. Madam, I heard the noise of Horns and Dogs,
And thought your Highness was abroad to day;
Following the cry, it brought me to this Company
Who were in search of you, and 'twas my duty to attend them.
-- My gallant Friend Clemanthis here!
This was above my hopes: let me embrace thee, --
And tell thee with what joy I find thee in the presence
Of my fair Niece, who must prevail upon you
To wait on her to Court; what I could not entreat, let her command.

There Is. Where Duty and my Inclination leads me,
There needs no invitation.

Cleo. Already, Uncle, he has promised it.

Ism. Sir, is this the man to whom all Dacia is so much obliged?

Hon. This is that gallant man whose single valor
Has gained the Victory over the Nomades,
Who killed their King, and scattered all their Forces;
And when my feeble strength (which Age and Wars
Had made unfit for mighty Toyls) grew faint,
He, like Aeneas, bore my aged Limbs
Through all the fiery dangers of the Battle.

There Is. Too much you have said to my advantage, Sir,
Robbing the Gods and Fortune of their glory.

Ism. Rank me amongst your Captives; for I find
Whether you fight, or not, you must be Victor.
[Embraees There Is. Enter Vallentio, Urania, Pimante: Val. keels, and delivers
Urania to the Princess.
Cleo. What new encounter's this?

Vall. I need not ask where I should pay my duty;
My wonder will direct me to your feet.

Cleo. Who knows the man that makes me such a present?

Hon. Madam, he is an Officer of mine,
A worthy gallant fellow;
But one that hardly knows what Cities are,
But as h'as viewed 'em through their battered Walls,
And after joined 'em to your Territories.

Cleo. Rise, high in her esteem that loves a Soldier.
[Herises.
Vall. I need say nothing for my Prisoner, Madam,
Whose looks will recommend her: only this,
It was against my will I made her so,
Who never refused, till then, to take your Enemies.

There Is. It is Urania, she will know me, and betray me.
[Aside.
Cleo. Say, lovely Maid, whom, and from whence thou art?

Ura. A Scythian, Madam, and till now your Foe.

Pim. Aye, Madam, we took her, we took her.

Cleo. So fair an one must merit my esteem:
I hope there are not many such fine Creatures
Brought into th'Camp against us; if there be,
The Scythians cannot doubt of Victory.
-- Thy Name and business here?

Ura. Urania, Madam --
My story were too tedious for your Ear,
Nor were it fit I should relate it here.
-- But it is not as an Enemy I come,
It Is rather, Madam, to receive my doom;
Nor am I by the chance of War betrayed,
But it is a willing Captive I am made:
Your Pity, not your Anger I shall move,
When I confess my fault is only Love:
Love to a Youth who never knew till now
How to submit, nor could to ought but you:
-- His Liberty for Ransom you deny;
I dare not say that this is cruelty,
Since yet you may be pleased to give me leave
To die with him with whom I must not live.

There Is. Excellent Maid! what generosity her Love has taught her!
[Aside.
Cleo. That you esteem me, cruel is unkind,
But faults of Lovers must forgiveness find:
Amyntas Chains had far more easy been,
Had he been less a Favorite to his King;
-- But you, Urania, may perhaps redeem
That Captive which I would not render them.

Ura. Madam, this bounty would exceed belief,
But you too generous are to mock my grief:
And when you shall m'unhappy story learn,
'Twill justify my Tears, and your concern.

Cleo. I need no Arguments for what I do,
But that I will, and then it must be so.

Ura. The Prince of Scythia in the Camp of Dacia!
If I could be mistaken in that form,
I Would hate my Eyes for thus deluding me:
But Heaven made nothing but Amyntas like him.
[Aside.
Cleo. Come, let us to Court, by this the Queen expects us:
-- You my fair Prisoner must along with me:
[Takes her hand. -- Thy hand, Clemanthis, too -- Now tell me, Uncle,
[Takes him with the other hand. -- What Scythian that beholds me thus attended,
Would not repine at my felicity,
Having so brave a Friend, so fair an Enemy.
[Exeunt.
ACT the Second.
SCENE the First. A Castle or Prison on the Sea.
After a little playing on the Lute -- Enter Orsames with his Arms across
looking melancholy, followed by Geron with a Lute in his hand.
Ors. I Do not like this Music;
It pleases me at first,
But every touch thou giv'st that is soft and low
Makes such impressions here,
As puzzles me beyond Philosophy
To find the meaning of;
Begets strange notions of I know not what,
And leaves a new and unknown thought behind it,
That does disturb my quietness within.

Ger. You were not wont to think so.

Ors. It Is true --
But since with time grows ripe and vigorous,
And will be active, though but ill employed.
-- Geron, thou'st often told me,
That this same admirable frame of Nature,
This order and this harmony of things,
Was worthy admiration,
-- And yet thou say all men are like to us,
Poor, insignificant Philosophers.
I, to my self could an Idea frame,
Of man, in much more excellence.
Had I been Nature, I had varied still,
And made such different characters of men,
They should have bowed and made a God of me,
Adored, and thanked me for their great creation:
-- Now, tell me, who is indebted to her bounties?
Whose needless blessings we despise, not praise.

Ger. Why, what would you have done had you been Nature?

Ors. Some men I would have made with mighty Souls,
With thoughts unlimited by Heaven or Man;
I would have made 'em -- as -- thou paint'st the Gods,

Ger. What to have done?

Ors. To have had dominion over the lesser world,
A sort of men with low submissive Souls,
That barely should content themselves with life,
And should have had th'infirmities of men,
As fear, and awe, as thou have of the Gods;
And those I would have made as numberless
As Gurls upon the face of yonder Sea,
Of which each blast drives Millions to the Shore,
Which vanishing, make room for Millions more.

Ger. But what if these, so numerous, though so humble,
Refuse obedience to the mighty few?

Ors. I would destroy them, and create anew.
-- Have not observed the Sea?
Where every Wave that hastens to the Bank,
Though in its angry course it overtake a thousand petty ones,
How unconcerned 'twill triumph over their ruin,
And make an easy passage to the Shore, --

Ger. Which in its proud career 'twill roughly kiss,
And then 'twill break to nothing.

Ors. Why, thou and I, though tame and peaceable,
Are mortal, and must unregarded fall:
-- Oh that thought! that damned resistless thought!
Methinks it hastens fate before its time,
And makes me wish for what I fain would shun.

Ger. Appease your self with thoughts of future bliss.

Ors. Future bliss! the Dreams of lazy Fools;
Why did my Soul take habitation here,
Here in this dull unactive piece of Earth!
Why did it not take wing in its Creation,
And soar above the hated bounds of this?
What does it lingering here?

Ger. To make it self fit for that glorious end
'Twas first designed for, --
By patient suffering here.

Ors. But Geron, still to live! still thus to live
In expectation of that future bliss,
(Though I believed it) is a sort of virtue
I find the Gods have not inspired me with.

Ger. Philosophy will teach you, Sir --

Ors. Not to be wise, or happy --
I Will hear no more of your Philosophy.
-- Leave me -- For I, of late desire to be without thee.

Ger. This disobedience, Sir, offends the Gods --

Ors. Let 'em do their worst,
For I am weary of the life they gave.

Ger. He grows too wise to be imposed upon,
And I unable to withstand his reasons. --
[Ger. goes out. [Ors. lies down on the ground. Enter Urania, and Keeper.
Keeper. This Ring is sufficient warrant, and the Path on your right hand will
lead you to the Lord Amyntas -- but have a care you advance no further that
way. --

[Keeper exit.
Ura. What strange disorder does possess my Soul!
And how my blood runs shivering through my Veins,
As if alas 't had need of all its aid,
At this encounter with my dear Amyntas.

Ors. Ha! what noise is that?
[He rouzes.
Ura. I heard a voice that way -- or else it was the fear
This gloomy place possesses all that enter it:
-- Stay, I was forbad that walk --
-- Heavens! I have forgot which 'twas I should have taken,
I Will call my Love to guide me -- Amyntas, Amyntas --

Ors. What voice is that?
Methought it had more sweetness in it than Gerons --
[Rises, gazes, then runs fiercely to her. -- Ha -- what charming thing art
thou?

Ura. It Is not Amyntas -- yet I should not fear,
He looks above the common rate of men.
-- Sir, can you direct my way --
To find a Prisoner out they call Amyntas?

Ors. -- Oh Gods! it speaks, and smiles, and acts like me!
It is a man, a wondrous lovely man!
Whom Nature made to please me.
-- Fair thing, pray speak again:
Thy Voice has Music in it that does exceed
All Geron's Lutes, pray bless my Ears again,

Ura. Sir, as you're Noble, as you are a Gentleman,
Instruct me where to find my Lord Amyntas.

Ors. Bright Creature! sure thou were born in the upper world,
Thy Language is not what we practice here;
Speak on, thou harmony to every Sense,
Ravish my Ear as well as sight and touch.

Ura. Surely he is mad -- nay, Sir, you must not touch me.

Ors. Perhaps thou art some God descended hither,
[Retires and bows. And came to punish, not to bless thy Creatures;
Instruct me how to adore you so,
As to retain you here my houshold-God,
And I and Geron still will kneel and pray to you.

Ura. Alas, I am a woman.

Ors. A Woman! what is that?
Something more powerful than a Deity;
For sure that word awes me not less than the other.

Ura. What can he mean -- oh I shall die with fear --
[Aside. -- Sir, I must leave you.

Ors. Leave me! oh no, not for my future being!
You needs must live with me, and I will love you;
I Have many things that will invite you to it:
I have a Garden compassed round with Sea,
Which every day shall send fresh Beauties forth,
To make thee Wreaths to crown thy softer Temples.
Geron shall deck his Altars up no more;
The gaudy Flowers shall make a Bed for thee,
Where we will wanton out the heat of the day --
What things are these, that rise and fall so often?
[Touches her Breasts. Like Waves, blown gently up by swelling Winds;
Sure thou have other wonders yet unseen,
Which these gay things maliciously do hide.

Ura. Alas, I am undone, what shall I do? --
[Aside.
Ors. -- Nature, thy conduct's wise! nor could thy favors
Be given to one more apprehensive of 'em!
-- Say, lovely Woman! for I am all on fire,
Impatient of delay,
Can you instruct me what I am to do?
[Sighs. Undress, and let me lead thee to my Bed.

Ura. Alas, Sir, what to do? defend me Heaven!
[Aside.
Ors. Why, I will hold thee -- thus, between my Arms,
-- I Will see thee sleep, and wonder at thy form,
-- Then wake thee to be gazing on thy Eyes,
-- And something more -- but yet I know not what.

Ura. His whole discourse amazes me,
And has more ignorance than madness in it:
-- But how shall I get free?

Ors. Thou grow'st impatient too, come, let us in --
[Goes to take her in; she strives to get free; he struggles with her.
Ura. Hold off, you are too rude.

Ors. This is the prettiest play I ever was at,
But I shall gain the better. --
[Takes her in his arms to carry her off.
Ura. Help, help.
Enter Amyntas in Fetters.
Amin. A woman's voice! -- Villain, unhand the Lady.

Ors. Ha! what new thing art thou?

Amin. One sent from Heaven to punish Ravishers. --
[Snatches Ura. while Ors. is gazing on him.
Ors. Thou'st called up an unwonted passion in me,
And these be the effects on it --
[Ors. strikes him: they struggle and fall. Enter Geron.
Ger. Hah! what is the matter here? a woman too!
We are undone -- Madam, I pray retire --
[Ura. goes into Amin. Apartment. For here is no safety for your Sex.

Ura. I gladly take your Counsel.

Ors. What art thou?

Amin. That which I seem to be.

Ors. Then you are a God; for till I saw a woman,
I never saw a thing so fine as thou:
And it is but just thou should be more than mortal,
That durst command that Creature from my Arms.

Amin. It is the King -- I know it by his Innocence and Ignorance --
[Aside. -- Rise, I beseech you, Sir, and pardon me.

Ors. Sure I could live a year with looking on thee;
-- But where is the Creature called it self a Woman?

Ger. What woman, Sir?

Ors. Ha! Geron, where is the woman?

Ger. What do you mean, Sir?

Ors. The Heavenly woman! that was here but now.

Ger. I saw none such, nor know I what you mean.

Ors. Not what I mean? thou could not be so dull:
What is it that I have strove for all this while?

Amin. I Will leave him too, my presence may be hurtful,
And follow the Lady that is fled to my Apartment.
[Amin. Exit.
Ors. Go, fetch the woman, or by Heaven I Will fling thee into the Sea.

Ger. I must delude him.
[Aside.
Ors. Fly, why stayst thou dully here? and bring the woman.

Ger. Sure you are Frantic.

Ors. I am so, and thou shall feel the effects on it,
Unless thou render back that lovely Creature.

Ger. Oh! this is perfect madness, Sir, you are lost;
Call back your Noble Temper, and be calm.

Ors. No, there is a furious Tempest in my soul,
Which nothing can allay but that fine thing.

Ger. Hear reason yet -- no Humane being can get entrance here:
Look round this Castle, and no other Object
Will meet your Eyes, but a watery Wilderness,
And distant and unhabitable Lands:
-- What Airy Vision has possessed your fancy?
For such the Gods sometimes afflict men with.

Ors. Ha! an Airy Vision! -- oh but it cannot be;
By all that is good, 'twas real Flesh and Blood.

Ger. And are you sure you were awake?

Ors. As thou art now.

Ger. Then 'twas an Apparition.

Ors. Away, -- thou'st often told me of such fooleries,
And I as often did reprove thee for it.

Ger. From whence, or how should any living thing get hither?

Ors. It dropped, perhaps, from Heaven, or how I know not;
But here it was, a solid living thing:
You might have heard how long we talked together.

Ger. I heard you talk, which brought me to this place,
And found you struggling on the ground alone:
But what you meant I know not.

Ors. -- It Is so -- I grant you that it was a Vision --
-- How strong is Fancy! -- yet -- it is impossible --
Have I not yet the music of its words?
Like answering Echoes lessening by degrees,
Inviting all the yielding sense to follow;
Have not my Lips (that fatally took in --
Unrest from every touch of that fair Hand)
The sweet remains of warmth received from thence,
Besides the unerring witness of my eyes?
And can all these deceive me? tell me, can they?

Ger. Most certainly they have.

Ors. Then, let the Gods take back what they so vainly gave.

Ger. Cease to offend, and they will cease to punish.

Ors. But why a Woman? could they secure my Faith
By nothing more afflicting?

Ger. Shapes divine are most perplexing.
To Souls, like yours, whom terrors cannot fright,
It leaves desires of what it cannot gain,
And still to wish for that --
Is much the greatest torment of the mind.

Ors. Well said -- but Geron, thou'st undone thy aim,
And used the only argument could invite me
To Offend again, that thus I might be punished:
The Gods themselves invite me to the sin;
Not see'ng a Woman, I never had guilty bin.
[Exeunt.
SCENE the Second.
Enter Amyntas in Fetters with Urania.
Amin. My gallant Maid! this generosity,
Above thy Sex, and much above my merit,
I never can repay: my dear Urania,
Thou did outdo thy Sex before in beauty,
In all the Charms that makes 'em so adored:
But this last act, this noble mark of Love,
Begets a reverend wonder in my Soul,
And I beheld thee as some sacred thing,
That -- this way should be worshipped --
[Kneels and kisses her hand
Ura. I Am glad you have so kind a sense of that
Which every Maid that loved like me would do:
What could you less expect -- ah my Amyntas,
That fatal night before our Wedding Day,
Being alarmed by the Enemy,
And you were sent to try your force with theirs,
My Heart foretold your fate; and that same night
Whose darkness veiled my blushes all alone,
Dressed like a Youth I hasted from the Court,
And being well mounted, soon o'ertook the Army,
When all unknown, I got so near your person,
That in the fight I had the glory twice
To serve you, when your Horses being killed
I still presented you with fresh, whose Riders
Thy Valor had dismounted.

Amin. Oh Gods! were thou that boy,
Whom often I said, I thought was sent from Heaven,
And begged t'encounter when the Fight was ended?

Ura. The same, 'twas all you would time to say; for after that
Venturing too far, they took you Prisoner.

Amin. Oh with what shame I look upon your bounty,
Which all my Life's too little to acknowledge:
What followed then, my dear fair Urania?

Ura. I gladly would have been a Prisoner too,
But I appeared a poor dejected boy,
That was not worth their Fetters:
-- Then I resolved upon this last adventure,
To make my applications to the Princess,
Knowing her noble nature;
To try (since mighty Ransoms were refused)
What simple Love would do, and in my way
I lighted on a Druid, who in's youth
Had lived in Courts, but now retired to Shades,
And is a little Monarch over his Flocks,
To him I told my story, who encouraged me in my resolved design,
And I so luckily have made an interest
In Cleomena's Heart,
These Chains she'as given me freedom to dismiss,
And you must only wear Loves Fetters now:
[She takes off his Chains. -- Come, haste, Amyntas, from this horrid place,
And be thy self again, appear in Arms.
The Scythians are encampt within thy view,
And ere three births of Day the Armies meet;
The Event of which, I at the Druids Cell
Will wait; sending continual Vows to Heaven
For thy dear safety: there when the Fight is done
I wish to meet thee:
-- But now your Country and your King expect you,
And I love glory equal to Amyntas.

Amin. But yet the generous bounty of the Princess
Obliges here, no less than duty there;
I know not how the Gods of War to move
To grant me Victor, or the Vanquished prove;
My Heart to either is not well inclined,
Since -- vanquished I am lost, conquering unkind.
[Exeunt.
SCENE the Third. A Grove.
Enter Thersander, Lysander.
There Is. Urge it no more, Lysander, it is in vain,
My Liberty past all retrieve is lost,
But they are such glorious Fetters that confine me,
I would not quit them to preserve that life
Thou justly say I hazard by my Love.

Ly. The Scythian Gods defend it!

There Is. The Gods inspire it, it is their work alone:
-- I know she is my Enemy, hates Thersander,
Has sent for all the neighboring Kings for aid,
That hither Artabases and Ismenes
Have brought their powers t'assist her against my Crown:
But what of this? she loves me as Clemanthis,
Which will surmount her hatred to the Scythians:
Oh, my Lysander! did thou know her Charms,
Thou Would also know it is not a mortal force
That can secure the Heart: She Is all Divine!
All Beauty, Wit, and Softness! and she loves!
Already I have found the grateful secret:
She scorns the little Customs of her Sex,
And her belief of being so much above me,
Permits her to encourage my design;
She gives a boldness to my bashful flame,
And entertains me with much liberty.

Ly. Were all this true, you're equally unhappy;
She must be only his that conquers you,
That wins your Crown and lays it at her feet.

There Is. -- Love never considers the event of things,
The Path before me's fair, and I Will pursue it;
Fearing no other forces than her Eyes,
Bright as the Planets under which they are born.

Ly. -- And will you let her know you are in love?

There Is. -- If all my sighs, if eyes still fixed on hers
With languishment and passion will inform her,
I Will let her know my flame, or perish in the attempt.

Ly. -- Dare you declare it as you now appear?
And can you hope, that under the degree
Of what indeed you are, she will permit it?
And your discovery is your certain ruin.

There Is. Thy counsel, dear Lysander, comes too late,
She Is in the Grove, where now I must attend her,
And see where she approaches. --
Enter Cleomena, Semiris.
Cleo. The Stranger, say you, grown of late so pensive!
-- I must enquire the cause -- what if it should be Love?
And that too not for me! hah my Semiris!
That thought has given me pains I never felt:
-- Gods! why comes he not? I grow impatient now:
-- Say, did thou bid him wait me in the Grove?

Sem. Madam, I spoke to him my self. --

Cleo. And told him I would speak with him!

Sem. As you commanded me, I said.

Cleo. It seems he values my commands but little,
Who is so slow in his obedience:
-- Where found you him?

Sem. In The Antic Gallery, Madam.

Cleo. Gallery! what did he there? tell me exactly,
-- I have no Picture there.

Sem. Madam, he was viewing that of Olympia your fair Cousin,
But for the excellency of the Work, not Beauty.

Cleo. Thou art deceived; viewing her Picture, say you?
-- Oh thou have touched a tender part, Semiris;
-- But yonder is he that can allay my rage,
[Sees Thersander. And calm me into love by every look.
-- Clemanthis, you absent your self too much,
From those to whom your presence is agreeable;
I hear that you are grown retired of late,
And visit shady Groves, walk thus -- and sigh
Like melancholy Lovers; -- has the Court,
(Who for your entertainment has put on
More gayity than in an Age before)
Nothing that can divert you? -- Cease your Ceremony;
[Bows low. I am your Friend, and if ought harbor there,
Within that sullen Breast, impart it here --
And I Will contribute any thing to ease you.
-- Come -- boldly tell thy griefs;
I have an interest in thy noble life:
-- Perhaps, since you are arrived at Court, you have seen
Some Beauty that has made a conquest over your Heart;
-- Who ever she be, you cannot fear success.

There Is. The honors you have heaped upon your Slave,
Have been sufficient:
To have encouraged any bold attempt;
And here are Beauties would transform a God,
Much more a Soldier, into an amorous shape;
-- But I confess, with shame, I brought no Heart
Along with me to Court, and after that
What acceptable Sacrifice can I offer?
This makes me shun the pleasures of your Court;
And seek retirements silent as my griefs.

Cleo. It seems you were a Lover ever I saw you,
And absence from your Mistress makes you languish.

There Is. Ah, Madam, do not ask me many questions,
Lest I offend where I should merit pity.
The boldness may arrive unto her knowledge,
And then you will lose the humblest of your Creatures,
Whilst, as I am, I may among the crowd
Of daily Worshippers, pay my Devotions.

Cleo. Give me your hand, we'll walk a little:
[They go and sit down on a Bank -- How do you like this Grove?

There Is. As I do every place you're pleased to bless.
Heaven were not Heaven were Gods not present there;
And where you are, it is Heaven every where.

Cleo. Look Clemanthis -- on yonder tuft of Trees,
Near which there is a little murmuring Spring,
From whence a Rivolet does take its rise,
And branches forth in Channels through the Garden;
-- 'Twas near a place like that -- where first I saw Clemanthis.
[Sigbing.
There Is. Madam, be pleased to add, 'twas also there
Clemanthis left his Liberty at the feet
Of Divine Cleomena!
And charged himself wi^^ those too glorious Chains
Never to be dismissed but with his Life.
[She rises in anger, he kneels.
Cleo. How, Clemanthis?

There Is. Ah! Madam, if I too presumptuous grow,
From your Commands, and all your bounties to me,
You should forgive the pride you do create,
And all its strange effects:
Which if I have mistaken, let me die.
Only this mercy grant me, to believe,
That if our Adorations please the Gods,
Mine cannot be offensive to my Princes,
Since they are equally Religious.

Cleo. Stranger -- before I punish thy presumption,
Inform me who it is that has offended:
Who giving me no other knowledge of him,
Than what his Sword has done -- dares raise his eyes to me?

There Is. Madam, what you demand is just,
And I had rather die than disobey you;
But I am constrained by a necessity
(Which when you know, you certainly will pardon,)
For some time to conceal my birth and name.

Cleo. Till then, you should have kept your flame concealed,
'T had been less disobliging from a criminal one
Whose quality had justified his boldness.

There Is. Ah! Madam, would Heaven and you would find no other difficulty,
Than want of quality to merit you.

Cleo. I must confess; Clemanthis, with a blush,
That nothing of the rest displeases me.

There Is. Ah, Madam, how you bless me!
And now with confidence I dare assure you,
That which should render me more worthy of you,
Shall be in me found more to your advantage,
Than in those Princes who have taken on 'em
The glory of your Service.

Cleo. As I am very reasonable, and do act
With more Sincerity than Artifice,
I Will now desire no more,
But have a care you use my bounty well;
For I am now grown kind enough to think
That all you say is true.

There Is. Madam, banish me your presence, as the man
Of all the world unworthy to adore you,
If I present not to you in Clemanthis
A man enough considerable to hope.

Cleo. But oh! Clemanthis, I forget my fate,
My Destiny depends upon my people:
Urged by the Queen, they have made a resolution
To give me to that Prince who does most powerfully
Advance the ruin of the King of Scythia.

There Is. Madam, I am not ignorant of the Conditions
That are imposed on those pretend to you;
I will not only serve you in this War,
With more success than any,
But set the Crown of Scythia on your head.

Cleo. That Is bravely said.

There Is. Perhaps, it seems extravagantly spoken,
In the condition you behold me now;
But here I vow -- I never will demand
[Kneels. The Divine Cleomena till I have crowned her --
Yes, Madam, till I have crowned her Queen of Scythia,
-- Till then -- give me but hope -- enough to live --
[Rises.
Cleo. That Is to your Passion due; and when I know
Who it is I favor, -- I will more allow.

Sem. Madam -- the Queen is here --
Enter Queen, Honorius, Artabases, Ismenis, Guards, Attendance, etc.
Queen. I Am glad to see ye all in readiness;
To morrow I intend to be in the Camp,
-- And Cleomena is your General,
Since it is her Cause we fight, it is but just
She share the danger of it with the glory.

Arta. We all approve it, Madam, and are proud
Fair Cleomena shall a witness be
Of what we do to serve her,
And see the easy Conquest we shall make
Upon the persons of her Enemies.

Hon. I know not, Sir, what you may do,
But we have found it not so easy.

Arta. Oh there is no doubt but we'll depopulate Scythia,
And lead its King, with the vain Prince his Son,
Laden with Irons to adorn your Triumphs.

There Is. Madam, I must confess your force is great,
And the assistance of these men, considerable;
Yet I advise your Majesty to prepare
For the defeat of the great King of Scythia,
As to a business much more difficult
Than they present it to you; for I know
The Forces of that Nation are not less.
[Looks with scorn on them. -- Consider too, that King was never conquered,
Though these believe to do it with so much ease.
I often have seen Thersander, that young Prince,
Upon whose Sword Fortune her self depends,
-- And I can tell -- he is not easily chained,
As, Artabazes, you imagine him.

Arta. What, do you think to fright us with the praises
You give our Enemies?
-- I have heard of that King, and of Thersander too;
But never heard of so much Terror in 'em,
Should make us apprehend an ill success:
-- And you, Clemanthis, do not know us well,
To think we'll tremble for the Prince of Scythia,
Though many such as you should take his part.

There Is. How! many such as I!
[Comes up to his Breast. Gods! wish your selves no other Enemies
To join with that young Prince;
To conquer him and many such as I,
Requires a number of such Kings as You.

Ism. It is too much, Clemanthis: were you well
Affected to the Service of the Queen,
You would not thus commend her Enemies.

There Is. Madam, I humbly beg your pardon,
If I have failed in the respect I owe you,
By what I Have said in savor of your Enemies,
Whom, whilst you think so easily overcome,
You will neglect that power should make you Victor.

Queen. It Is virtue, Sir, that makes you give what is due,
Though to the advantage of those men you hate --
-- I must not have you take ought ill from him --
[To the King. But as you have all unanimously joined
To assist us in this War, so all embrace,
[Thers. salutes 'em coldly. Be one, and ever Friends.
Brother, I leave the Conduct of this hopeful Army
[To Hon. To your unquestioned care; and if you can,
Oblige this noble Stranger for ever to our service.

Cleo. Uncle, I Will to the Camp with you;
And you, Clemanthis, must be near me still.
[Thers. bows. All go out but There. Hon. Manent There Is. Hon. Lysander.
Hon. Clemanthis, you are troubled.

There Is. I was a little ruffled, but it is gone.

Hon. You should not blame them, Sir, for enjoying you,
A man so young, and such a name in War!

There Is. That, Sir, is only your esteem of it.

Hon. No, dear Clemanthis, that I may declare
To all the world and thee, how much I prize it
Without consulting of your Quality,
I Will make you absolute Master of my Fortune.

There Is. Heavens! whence this generosity!
[Aside.
Hon. I have a Daughter, Sir, an only Child,
Whom all the world esteems a virtuous one,
And for whose love Princes have su'd in vain,
I now with joy wll render you in marriage.

There Is. I am undone --
It is a Princess, Sir, I much admire,
But never durst behold with eyes of love,
A Maid so much above me.

Hon. I am a man, whose martial disposition
Renders unartful in my Language,
I cannot study fineness in my words,
But with sincerity declare my heart,
And do propose this Marriage with Olympia
For your advantage and the public interest,
Besides my own content.

There Is. Have you considered, Sir, I am below her?

Hon. No more of that, go visit my Olympia.
She is prepared to give you entertainment.
[Hon. Exit.
There Is. Marry Olympia!
-- No -- could he with Olympia give the world,
I could not love, nor marry her.
-- Oh my Lysander! what evasion now?
-- Did hear the noble offer of the General?

Ly. I did, great Sir; and what will you return?

There Is. If I refuse, I must offend the man
To whom of all the world I Am most obliged,
And one who knowing me but by my Services,
Offers me what Thersander might accept.

Ly. It Is fit you should consult the Princess, Sir,
What it is you ought to do.

There Is. I Will take thy counsel -- and wait upon Olympia:
-- Yes, I will go visit her, though but to prove
No torment can be like dissembled Love.
[Exeunt.
SCENE the Fourth. A Chamber.
Enter Queen, Cleomena, Honorius.
Queen. Is It possible, my Brother, you can have
So great a passion for the public good?
As willing to sacrifice your Child to its repose,
And make her Arms the soft and easy Chains
To link this gallant stranger to our interest?

Hon. His virtue I prefer above a Crown.

Cleo. You should love Virtue as you ought to love it;
Not give it over-measure, -- But are you sure he will accept it?

Hon. I am not certain, being not come so far;
But I proposed it, and no doubt he liked it.

Cleo. This cannot be his malice; for he was ever noble,
[Hon. talks to the Queen. But false or feigned, I can endure no more on it;
-- By Heaven this Stranger's false! false as his name!
-- Semiris found him gazing on her Picture:
-- It Is so -- he loves Olympia!
And when I asked the Name of her he loved,
I urged it with such softness in my eyes,
That he in pity of me swore 'twas I:
-- Now can I find how much my Soul's possessed
With love, since it is with jealousy oppressed.
[Goes out.
Queen. How do you like the Trial of Orsames
Which I intend to make?

Hon. You Will both oblige your people, and do a Mothers duty.

Queen. You know 'twas not the Tyrant in my nature
That from his infancy has kept him ignorant
Of what he was -- but the Decrees of Heaven.

Hon. Madam, it is true; and if the Gods be just,
He must be King too, though his Reign be short:
You cannot alter those Decrees of Heaven.

Queen. The Gods are witness how these eighteen years
I have with much regret concealed his birth.

Hon. You know the last defeat the Scythians gave us,
The impatient people broke the Castle-gates,
And against all your powers were ready to have crowned him;
And should we now be conquered, nothing less
Will still the mutinous Army: try him, Madam,
He may be fit for great Impressions,
Had he but good examples to dispose him.

Queen. I Will have it done to night:
Heaven, if it be thy will, inspire my son
With Virtue fit to wear his Fathers Crown.
[Exeunt. Scene draws off, discovers Thersander seemingly courting Olympia.
Enter Cleomena; sees them, starts, gazes on them, then goes out unseen; and the
Scene closes, and changes to her Apartment: -- She enters in a rage --
Cleo. Perfidious man! am I abandoned then?
[Rage. Abandoned for Olympia! my Slave --
-- And yet I loved him more than I did Heaven --
[Soft. And shall he quit me thus?
Without being punished for this Infidelity?
-- No, let me be a shame to all my Sex then --
-- Oh, Clemanthis! to whom I fondly gave my liberty
When first I saw thee sleeping in the Wood:
-- But I grow soft, a passion too unfit
For so much anger as my Soul's possessed with:
-- 'Twas but even now, he loved me with such Ardor;
And he, who promised me the Crown of Scythia,
Dare thou become unjust, ungrateful Stranger!
Who having raised thy Eyes to Cleomena,
Would sacrifice her to another Mistress:
-- This Heart which ought not to have been given away
But by the Services and Blood of Kings,
How have thou lost it on a false Unknown,
Without being paid for it one single sigh --
Enter Thersander: She draws a Dagger: offers to kill him; but cannot. Traitor
-- have thou the impudence to appear before me?
Or, do thou come to meet thy just reward?
[Offers to stab him. -- There Is something in his looks that does preserve him,
Or, I Am not truly brave, and dare not kill him:
-- Go treacherous Unknown, whom I Have preferred
Before so many Princes, who in vain.
Sue for this credulous Heart which thou'st betrayed.

There Is. Ah! Madam, can you be thus cruel to me,
And not inform me how I have offended?

Cleo. Be gone, I say, if thou would save a life
Which those that dare do evil fear to lose.

There Is. Those Eyes thus ordered are far worse than death:
End what you have so well begun,
And Kill me:
Yet from another hand
The blow would be less cruel.

Cleo. Oh Impudence!
Still he would cheat my Rage, as he has abused my Love,
But, Monster, though thou art below my hand,
I Am yet a Princess, and I can command:
By Heaven I Will try how much rage can invent.
Semiris, call Olympia to me straight;
She shall in triumph with me stand and smile,
To see thee by some common Vassal bleed.

There Is. There needs no other witness of my death,
But her I have offended:
To you alone I offer up my life: for dying,
I Have something to relate may justify your rage,
Though not deserve your pity.

Cleo. Hell!
Now I Am confirmed, he fears that she should see
Him die, lest it should cost her but a Tear:
-- Why should I want the strength! --
[Offers to present the Dagger, -- But oh, I cannot:
But can thou live, false man, and see me frown?

There Is. No, Madam, I can die -- thus --
[Offers to fall on his Sword.
Cleo. Stay --
Thou shall not so much glory gain:
No, live, and prove wretched enough to know
[Exit raving. How very poorly thou have lost my Heart.
[Thers. gazes after her.
There Is. Must I then live? -- I will obey -- Farewell
The fairest and unkindest of thy Sex;
If e're it be thy chance to meet with one
That loves more than Thersander, if thou can
Treat him worse than thou have done me --
For oh! how miserable is the wretch, (whose prayer
Repulsed) like me, lives only to despair.
[Exit.
ACT the Third.
SCENE the First.
The Curtain is let down -- being drawn up, discovers Orsames seated on a
Throne asleep, dressed in Royal Robes, the Crown and Scepter lying by on a Table.
On either side of the Stage Courtiers richly dressed, and multitude of Lights.
Above is discovered the Queen, Olympia, and Women, Pimante, Artabazes, Ismenes:
Soft Music plays, whilst he wakes by degrees, and gazes round about him, and
on himself with wonder.
Orsa. -- Gods! what am I?
-- Or, is there any other Gods but I?

Ger. Yes, my great Lord --
But you're a King, a mighty Monarch, Sir.

Osa. I understand thee, it is some God thou mean.

Ger. On Earth it is; your Power too is as great:
Your Frowns destroy, and when you smile you bless;
At every nood, the whole Creation bows,
And lay their grateful Tributes at your feet;
Their Lives are yours, and when you daign to take 'em,
There Is not a mortal dares defend himself:
But that you may the more resemble Heaven,
You should be merciful and bountiful.

Orsa. I do believe I am this King thou speak of.

Ger. Behold this Crown -- this sacred thing is yours.
[Kneels and gives him the Crown and Scepter; he puts it on, and walks about.
Orsa. It is a glorious Object --
And fit for none but me --

Olim. Madam, methinks the King is the finest man
That ever I saw-shall he not still be King?

Queen. I hope he will deserve it.

Ors. So, now methinks I move like Heaven it self,
All circled round with Stars.
-- Hah! -- what is this that kneels?
[The Queen kneels, he snatches her up.
Ger. The Queen your Mother, Sir. --

Ors. By my great self it is another woman,
Which I have burnt with a desire of seeing:
-- Begone, and leave us here alone together;
I Have something to impart to this fair thing,
Must not be understood by you.

Queen. Why, Sir, what is it you can impart to me,
Which those about you must not understand?

Ors. A new Philosophy inspired by Nature,
And much above whatever Geron taught,
-- Come and augment my knowledge.

Queen. Why me, Sir, more than any one about you?

Ors. Thou art all soft and sweet like springing Flowers,
And gentle as the undisturbed Air.

Queen. But I am your Mother.

Ors. No matter* you are a woman, art thou not?
And being so, the Mother cannot awe me.

Ger. Sir, it is the person gave you life and being.

Ors. That gave me life! oh how I love thee for it!
Come -- and I Will pay thee back such kind returns -- --

Ger. Most Royal Sir, this Woman was
Not made by Heaven -- for you.

Ors. Away with your Philosophy; but now you said --
I was a King, a mighty God on Earth,
And by that Power I may do any thing.

Ger. But Kings are just as well as powerful, Sir.

Ors. I am so to my self, do not oppose me.

Ger. Sir, this is one not meant, not formed for you.

Ors. Am I a God, and can be disobeyed?
Remove that Contradictor from my sight,
And let him live no longer: ha, more Women!
Enter Olympia, and other Women. Oh Nature, how thou'st furnished me with store!
And finer far than this --
[Gazes on Olympia. -- But what is that whose Eyes give Laws to all,
And like the Sun, eclipses the lesser Lights?

Queen. Speak to him, Olympia.

Ors. Who tells me what she is?

Olym. Oh how I tremble! -- Sir, I am a Maid.

Ors. A Maid! and may you be approacht with Knees and Prayers?
[Kneels.
Olym. I am your Slave, you must not kneel to me --
[Takes him up.
Ors. How soon my Glories vanished!
Till now I did believe I was some God,
And had my Power and my Divinity
Within my will, but by this awful fear
I find that thou art the greater Deity:
-- Pray tell me fairest, are you not a Woman?

Olym. I am a Woman, and a Virgin, Sir.

Ors. I did believe that thou were something more.
For I have seen a woman, and never knew
So much disorder in my Soul before:
-- For every look of thine gives me a pain,
And draws my Heart out of its wonted seat.

Olym. Alas, Sir, have I hurt you?

Ors. Extremely hurt me, thou have a secret power,
And can at distance wound,
Which none but Heaven and you could ever do:
-- But 'twas my fault, had I not gazed on thee,
I had been still a King, and full of health.
-- Here -- receive this Crown, it is now unfit for me,
Since thou have greater power -- whilst it sits here --
[He takes off his Crown, and puts it on her. It looks like Stars fallen from
their proper Sphere;
-- So, now they are fixed again.

Queen. Pimante, speak to him to take it back.

Pim. He kills me with his looks.
-- Sir, when you part with this, you will be despised;
Your Glory, and your Thunder, all will vanish.

Ors. I yet have something that shall make thee fear,
I am still a King, though I must bow to her;
Take him away to death immediately --

Pim. Any where to be out of your sight --
A King, quotha!
[Exit.
Ors. Come, my fair Virgin, this shall be my Altar,
And I will place thee here my Deity.

Queen. Great Sir, that Throne is only fit for you.

Ors. I say again, I Will have it fit for two:
Thou art a Woman, thank the Gods for that:
-- Ascend, my lovely Virgin, and adorn it:
Ascend, and be immortal as my self.

Art. That Throne she was not born to.

Ger. Into the Sea with that bold Councellor,
And let him there dispute with Winds and Waves.
[Art. Exit. Being seated on the Throne, Enter several in Masquerade and dance.
-- Could I be sensible of any pleasure
But what I take in thee, this had surpised me.

Olym. A Banquet, Sir, attends you.

Ors. Dispose me as you please, my lovely Virgin,
For I Have resigned my being to your will,
And have no more of what I call my own,
Than sense of Joys and Pains, which you create.
[They rise, and sit down at a Banquet. He gazes on her.
Olym. Will you not please to eat?

Ors. It is too gross a pleasure for a King:
Sure, if they eat, it is some Celestial Food,
As I do by gazing on thy Eyes --
Ah lovely Maid! --

Olym. Why do you sigh, Sir?

Ors. For something which I want; yet having thee,
What more can Heaven bestow to gratify
My Soul and Sense withal?

Olym. Sir, taste this Wine;
Perhaps 'twill alter that deceived opinion,
And let you know the error of your Passion;
'Twill cause, at least, some alteration in you.

Ors. Why should thou ask so poor a proof of me?
But yet, I will obey; -- give me the Wine.
[They put something into the Bowl.
Olym. How do you like it, Sir?

Ors. Why -- well; but I am still the same.
Come, give it me again -- it is very pleasant --
Will you not taste it too? --
Methinks my Soul is grown more gay and vigorous;
What I Have drank, has deifi'd thee more,
Heightens the pleasures which I take to gaze on thee,
And sends a thousand strange uneasy Joys,
That play about my Heart, and more transport me:
Drink, my fair Virgin, and perhaps thy eyes
May find some Charms in me to make thee thus.

Olym. Alas they have found already but too many.
[Aside.
Ors. I thought I must have gazed on thee for ever;
-- But oh! my Eyes grow heavy in the play,
As if some strange Divinity above me
Told me my safety lay in their declension:
-- Is it not Sleep? -- Sure Kings do never sleep;
That were a low submission to a power
A Monarch should despise -- but yet it is so:
Ye Gods, am I but mortal then?
Or do you ever sleep? I find ye do;
But I must -- and lose this lovely object:
Grant, oh ye Gods, that I may find it in a Dream,
Let her Idea hover about my Soul,
And keep it still in this harmonious Order --
-- And gently blow the flame 't has kindled there.
[Falls asleep. Enter Geron, Pimante, and Arates.
Pim. Are ye sure he is asleep?

Ger. How do you like him, Madam?

Queen. I fear he is a Tyrant in his nature.

Ger. But, since he can be tamed by Love and Beauty,
You should not doubt but he will be fit to reign.

Queen. Remove him now into his own Apartment,
And still continue to impose upon him,
Till you receive new Orders.
[Exeunt.
SCENE the Second.
Enter Cleomena, with a Truncheon in her hand, a Sword and Quiver of Arrows by
her side, with Semiris.
Sem. Madam, you are sad,
As if you doubted your success to day.

Cleo. There are some moments wherein I do repent me
The too rash Banishment of poor Clemanthis.
How did he take the Letter which I sent?

Sem. As persons innocent and full of health
Receive unlookt-for Sentences of Death;
He sighed, and said he would obey your will;
And, Madam, had you seen his silent grief,
You would have thought him innocent.

Cleo. Innocent! banish that foolish pity from your heart
That would persuade thee he is innocent:
Did not I see him courting of Olympia?
And can my Eyes deceive me?

Sem. Olympia, Madam! Gods, what do I hear!
Till now I did not know his fault of banishment.

Cleo. And was it not cause enough?

Sem. Ah, Madam, what injustice have you done?
Before Clemanthis came into your Cabinet
He entertained me for a pretty while
With the intentions of your generous Uncle,
He told me how he offered him Olympia,
And that he durst not seem to disesteem it,
Being your Uncle, and a man to whom
He owed so much: but most to hide his passion;
And then was coming to consult with you
How he should manage this affair with him.

Cleo. And is this truth thou tell me, dear Semiris?

Sem. Madam, I do not use to abuse your credit.

Cleo. Fly then, Semiris, and reverse his doom.

Sem. Would I knew whither, Madam.

Cleo. Why, is he then no longer in the Camp?

Sem. Ah, Madam, is he longer in the world?
For it is impossible to be imagined
He parted hence with any thought of life.

Cleo. Send every way to find him -- hark, I Am called --
[Trumpets sound. And he that finds him first, is made for ever.
Oh Jealousy, thou passion most ingrate!
Thy ills procure more mischiefs than thy hate.
It Is thou art Tyrant, when Love bears the blame,
It Is pity you are consistent with Loves flame:
I Will not my weakness nor resentment show;
A Heart like mine, should sooner break than bow.
-- Come my Semiris, we too long have stayed;
That call, till now, was never disobeyed.
[Trumpets sound. Exeunt.
SCENE the Third. Scythian Tents.
Enter Amyntas, dressed fine, with Urania.
Ura. Within this Shade till the black day be past,
I will attend thy Fortune, or thy Fate.

Amin. The King has taken horse, the Fight's begun,
And I must leave thee to the Gods and Prayer.

Ura. Why was I made a Woman? or being so,
Why had I not a Masculine courage given me?
That side by side I might have shared thy glory,
Or have expired together.

Amin. Thou will undo me with this tenderness;
Come, send me kindly from thee,
With joys about my Heart that may preserve it;
Here rest till my return; farewell, my fair.

Ura. And if I never see thee more, farewell --
[Amin. Exit. Here I will lay me down, and never rise
Till thou return'st with Laurel or with Cypress.
[Sits down. Now I could curse the Fortune of my Prince,
Who quits a Father for an Enemy,
To satisfy a flame will ruin him.
[A noise of fighting. -- The Fight increases: oh ye Gods of battle,
In midst of all your rage preserve my Love.
Enter Artabazes over the Stage, and goes out.
Arta. My Nephew killed! and I dismounted too! oh cursed Fate!

Ura. This noise has comfort in it, it sounds like Victory.
[A hollowing within amongst the noise of fighting. Enter Amyntas. -- Oh Gods!
Amyntas! what has Fortune done?

Amin. Th'undaunted Scythians never lost the field,
Yet now at first 'twas doubtful
To which side Fortune would incline her self.
Ismenis killed where ever he turned his Sword,
And quite defeated our Agripian Forces;
Yet was not satisfied, knowing the King
To be the price of Cleomena's Heart,
But sought him out on all sides,
Whom 'twas not hard to find;
For he was hurrying now from Rank to Rank,
Distributing a death to all opposers.
But young Ismenis having pierced the Squadrons,
And knowing our great King by several Marks,
Boldly cried out, -- Defend the life I claim.
The King made no reply, but at that word
Prepared himself to fight.

Ura. Thou kill'st me, till thou bring'st him off again.

Amin. Disordered thus -- the Dacians took advantage,
And charged with so much vigor -- we gave ground,
When on that side the single Combat was,
There appeared a body of two thousand Horse,
Led by a man whose looks brought Victory,
And made the conquering Foe retire again:
But when he did perceive the King engaged,
With unresisted fury he made up,
And rushing in between them,
Gave the young Prince a blow upon his Head,
That struck him from his Horse.
After this Victory Thersander's Name
Did fly from mouth to mouth,
Inspiring every Scythian with new valor:
He killed Philemon, and forced Artabazes
To seek his safety by his Horses flight:
-- But here is the King, -- retire into this Wood.
[Ura. exit. Enter King, Thersander, Officers and Soldiers.
King. Let me once more embrace my dear Thersander.

Amin. The Prince is wounded, Sir.

King. He is, -- but they look lovely on him.

There Is. They Are too slight marks to give you of my duty;
Your Majesty has greater need of care.

King. Thou art my best Physician, and thy sight
Heals all the wounds I have: come in with me,
And let me lay thee to my panting Bosom,
Thou great preserver of my Crown and Life.

There Is. I Will wait upon you, Sir.
[Exeunt all but There Is. and Amin. Now let me take thee to my Arms, my Friend;
For thou art half my self, my dear Amyntas;
I have strange news to tell thee since we parted,
And need thy counsel in an affair of love: --
-- Thou know my business to the Dacian Court,
Was to have set thee free; but oh my Friend!
In lieu of that, I Have made my self a Captive.

Amin. Your story, Sir, I know, but heard withal,
The Princess did repay your grateful flame.

There Is. I thought she did: for so a while she seemed,
And when I thought my self the most secure,
Being fortified with all her new-made promises,
My blooming hopes were blasted ever full blown,
And I received her Orders for my banishment,
Which I as soon obeyed: but by the way
I did conceive a thousand revolutions,
Sometimes to serve my Princess, -- then my Father;
Sometimes 'twas Nature got the upper hand,
And then again 'twas Love: in this dispute
I met the Levies of the Isadons,
Who were the last of all our Cavalry,
To whom I made me known, and came so luckily,
As gained the yet-disputing Victory.

Amin. 'Twas in an happy moment.

There Is. Thus I compli'd with what I owed my duty,
But these of Love are still unsatisfi'd;
Dare I, who could offend to that degree
As to deserve a banishment from her,
Approach her uninvited?

Amin. 'Twere dangerous, Sir.

There Is. Then 'twere the fitter for my enterprise:
-- But her displeasure, -- oh my Cleomena!
If, for the punishment of my disobedience,
You Would only take away that Life you threaten,
How willingly I would resign it up,
Rather than undergo this separation!

Amin. You Will certainly expose your Life by going:
What other reason could she have to banish you,
But from her knowledge that you were Thersander?
And, Sir, you see her passion for Clemanthis
Could not overcome her hatred for her Enemy.

There Is. No, when I call to mind her cruel words;
If choosing me before so many Kings,
I find 'twas to the Stranger, not the Scythian,
She killingly addressed 'em; therefore I Will venture on in my design;
-- Give order that our Horses be made ready,
Whilst I excuse our absence to the King: our stay will not be long,
Mean time it may be thought
We Are gone to view the Camp:
Interest and Love but rarely do agree,
Yet I must reconcile 'em both in me.

SCENE the Fourth. The Dacian Tents.
Enter Queen, Cleo. Hon. Arta. Ism. Women, Attendants.
Cleo. 'Twas strangely lost, and yet I dare affirm
The Victory had been ours but for Thersander,
Who like the impetuous Sea opposed by Land,
Made breaches and o'reflow'd all that lay near it.

Ism. I had revenged you on the King of Scythia,
Had his arrival not prevented me.

Cleo. He is brave, without dispute.

Ism. And it is as certain that he did surprise me,
Without permitting time for my defense,
He had not else so soon dismounted me;
But, Madam, I design (if you approve it)
To fight Thersander in a single Combat.

Arta. That Justice I may hope as well as you;
He killed my Nephew, young Philemon,
For which I Will be revenged.

Queen. I cannot but commend that noble ardor
That carries you to these designs of glory;
What thinks my Brother of it?

Hon. I like it, if the Victor will accept it.

Cleo. And so do I;
And that we may do equal justice to you all,
We'll write Thersander's name,
And he who draws that name shall fight the Combat.

Hon. But are you sure he will accept the offer?

Ism. I dare engage he will.

Cleo. I am of your opinion;
The truly Brave are never proud of Conquest.
I Will write his name my self.
Enter Page.
Hon. What Shouts are these?
[A shout without.
Page. Madam, Clemanthis is arrived.

Queen. The news is welcome.
Enter There Is. kneels, kisses the Queens hand; the same to Cleomena. -- salutes
all.
There Is. Madam, the great necessity which made me leave you --
When I believed my self unprofitable,
Could not detain me, when I was assured
My Sword could do you service.

Queen. This visit recompenses all our loss,
You Have made it in a time you may redeem
The opinion your absence almost forfeited.

Hon. Sir, I could chide you too, but that your sight
Changes my Anger into kinder Welcomes.

There Is. I ought to suffer, Sir, in your opinion,
Till my excuses may redeem my credit.

Cleo. How great at once, and innocent he seems,
And how his Eyes his past offense redeems!
Whilst all my cruelties they seem-t' upbraid,
They pardon too the faults themselves have made.

Queen. I Am satisfied, and you are fitly come
To share a danger we are now disputing.

There Is. It Is not the danger, Madam, can divert me
From enterprizing ought that is to serve you.

Arta. Madam, consider who we are,
And ought not to be ranked with one below us.

There Is. Your honor, Artabazes, is too nice;
Would we could find in this dispute, whatever it be,
That were the greatest difficulty:
-- Madam, name your Commands.

Queen. We are drawing of a Lot
To fight Thersander in a single Combat.

There Is. Hah -- Thersander, Madam, is a Conqueror.

Ism. Since you're so nice, we will excuse you, Sir.

There Is. What an unlucky accident was this!
One moments longer stay had made me happy,
[Aside. And rendered up these Rivals to my power.

Hon. Come, Sir, the Lots are ready.
[They draw Lots. It falls to There Is.
There Is. My fears are all completed, --
[Aside. The Lot is mine.

Cleo. Clemanthis, I Am so sensible of the danger
[Aside to him. Whereto you must expose your self for me,
I cannot think with pleasure on the Victory
You possibly may gain.

There Is. Encouraged thus, I cannot fail of Conquest:
[Bows to her, and speaks low. But, Madam, if Thersander be as nice
[Turns to the Queen. As these two Princes are, it will be hard
To get him to accept a Challenge from me.

Cleo. Clemanthis deeds has raised his fame too high
To be esteemed unworthy of that Justice;
Nor can we find the Scythian Prince a Foe
More equal to his youth and valor too.

There Is. If Fortune bless me with success to day,
I Will owe it to your Cause, and not my Sword.

Queen. May thou be ever Victor.
[They lead him out. Manent Arta. Ism.
Arta. My Art shall fail me then.

Ism. You are displeased, Sir.

Arta. Is that a wonder?
Who can be tame and see an unknown Youth,
Who brings no forces but his single Arm,
Ravish the hope and spoil of Victory from us,
And rival us in Love as well as Glory,
Whilst all our Claims to Cleomena's heart,
Must be neglected since we want success?

Ism. We could pretend to her no other way.

Arta. Have you, or I, less virtue than Clemanthis?

Ism. Yes, if we envy at his merits.

Arta. Pursue your virtuous Road, and in the end
See whether you or I reaches first the Goal.
I Will take revenge.
[Arta. exit.
Ism. I honor will pursue,
A Path which never led me to Repentance:
-- Clemanthis, if thy life I basely sought,
Like him, I Would save the hazard of my own;
But as thou't brave, so thou shall bravely fall
Before Thersander rob me of thy life,
Or thou the fortune have to vanquish him --
-- And if in this encounter I expire,
I do but fall a Victime to an hopeless Fire.
[Exit. Scene changes to the Wood, discovers There Is. and Amin. among the Trees,
changing Clothes; after which they come forth.
There Is. So, now thou do appear so like Clemanthis,
That not a Dacian but will be mistaken in thee.

Amin. My Lord, I know not how I may appear,
But I am ignorant how I am to act.

There Is. Remain within the Covert of this Wood,
Until the sign be given for the Combat,
And then appear upon the place appointed,
Where I will meet and fight with thee;
But so I Will order all the blows I give,
They shall not wound nor hurt thee,
For still remember I must be the Victor.

Amin. I will endeavor to perform it so,
[Noise. That none shall know the fallacy.

There Is. Be gone, I hear a noise; farewell, dear Amyntas,
Remember that you act Clemanthis well.
[Exit There Is. Enter some Fellows in Cloaks.
1 Fell. That Is he that goes into the Wood, I know him by his Plume; are ye all
ready?


2 Fell. Yes, for a greater Murder than the killing of a single man; and here is
a place as fit as we could wish: shall we set upon him all together?


1 Fell. Ay, ay, neatness in this affair is not required; kill him, and
Artabazes desires no more.

The Fellows go behind the Trees, they fight, Amyntas falls: Enter Ismenis.
Ism. Into this Wood he went, as if he knew my business;
Here we unseen may end the difference --
[Noise within. -- Hark -- What noise of fighting's that?
Perhaps my aid's required.
Ism. goes in, Scene draws open, discovers Amyntas lying as dead all bloody,
Pimante peeping, Ismenes reenters.
Ism. It is Clemanthis, and this barbarous deed
Is done by Artabazes.
Enter Pimante.
Pim. Had ever Cavalier such damned luck? I have heard it disputed, that this
same danger was to be courted by the Brave and Bold; but I, who took the best
care I could whilst the fight lasted to secure my self by this retreat, find my
self even here surrounded with it; and poor Clemanthis, who, I Will warrant, came
too with my design, has met here what he endeavored to shun: yonder is Ismenis
toowell, we are all but men.


Ism. Here Is yet some breath remaining, oh Pimante lend thy assistance.
-- Clemanthis, if thou yet have so much sense,
Inform us how thou came thus wounded?

Amin. Know Sir, Thersander -- Prince of Scythia --
-- Thersander -- Prince of -- Scythia --
[Faints.
Pim. Alas he is dead, Sir, trouble him no further.

Ism. The Prince of Scythia do this!

Pim. Ay, ay, this mighty Prince, fearing to encounter a single man, has set a
dozen to kill him; mercy upon us, 'twas a bloody fight: but, Sir, what shall we
do with the Body?


Ism. If I could command thee any thing, it should be Silence,
Till I have met Thersander in his room.
[Ism. exit.
Pim. You shall command me, though I was never good at secrets.
Enter Cleomena, Semiris.
Cleo. Let the Coach wait at the entrance of the Wood:
I find I am a perfect Woman now,
And have my fears, and fits of Cowardice.

Sem. Madam, will you not see the Combat then?

Cleo. I dare not, something here assures me
Clemanthis will be conquered.

Pim. Ha! the Princess here? on my Conscience there was never mischief but a
Woman was at one hand on it.


Sem. How now, Pimante, why do you look so scurvily?

Pim. Ah, Madam, such a sight so dismal and bloody!

Cleo. What says he?

Pim. Clemanthis, Madam --

Cleo. Clemanthis! oh what of him?
Why my prophetic heart do thou betray me?

Sem. For Heavens sake, Madam, reassume your courage.

Cleo. Yes -- I will hear -- the fatal story -- out.

Pim. Truth is, Madam, to retire from the fury and noise of the Battle, I came
into this Wood and when I thought all danger past, I heard even here the noise
of Swords and fighting; which endeavoring to avoid, I fell almost into the
danger of them.


Sem. Leave out the History of your own Fears, and come to the business.


Pim. But ah, Madam, unseen I saw: who did I see --
Ah, who should I see but Clemanthis, Madam;
Fixed with his back against you Cypress-tree,
Defending of himself against a dozen Murderers.
I was, alas, too weak to take the weaker side,
And therefore came not forth to his assistance.
Prince Ismenis would have taken his part, but came too late too;
But ever he died we begged to know his Murderers,
And he could answer nothing but -- Thersander.

Cleo. Remove me to the Body of my Love --
[They lead her to Amin. wholies wounded: she gazes on him a while, his Face
being all bloody. -- I will not now deplore as Women use,
But call up all my Vengeance to my aid,
Expect not so much imbecility --
From her whose Love nor Courage was made known
Sufficiently to thee, oh my Clemanthis!
I would not now survive thee,
Were it not weak and cowardly to die,
And leave thee unrevenged:
-- Be calm, my Eyes, and let my Soul supply ye;
A silent broken Heart must be his Sacrifice:
Every indifferent sorrow claims our Tears,
Mine do require Blood, and it is with that
These must be washed away --
[Rises, wipes her Eyes. Whatever I design to execute,
Pimante, and Semiris, I conjure ye,
Go not about to hinder, but be silent,
Or I will send this Dagger to my Heart,
Remove the Body further into the Wood,
And strip it of these glittering Ornaments;
And let me personate this dear dead Prince:
Obey, and dress me straight, without reply.
There is not far from hence a Druids Cell,
A man for Piety and knowledge famous,
Thither convey the breathless Sacred Corpse,
Laid gently in my Chariot,
There to be kept concealed till further Orders.

Sem. Ah, Madam, what is it you intend to do?

Cleo. What should I do but die -- ah do not weep,
But haste to do as I commanded ye:
Haste, haste, the time and my revenge requires it.

Sem. For Heavens sake, Madam, for your Royal self,
Do not pursue this cruel fatal Enterprise;
Pity the Queen, your Servants, and all Mankind.

Cleo. Away thou feeble thing that never knewst the real joys of Love,
Or ever heard of any grief like mine;
If thou would give me proofs of thy esteem,
Forget all Words, all Language, but Revenge!
Let me not see so much of Woman in thee
To shed one Tear, but dress thy Eyes with fierceness,
And send me forth to meet my Love, as gay,
As if intended for my nuptial day.
That Soul that sighs in pity of my Fate,
Shall meet returns of my extremest hate:
Pity with my Revenge must find no room;
I Will bury all but Rage within thy Toomb.
[Exeunt.
ACT the Fourth.
SCENE the First. A Flat Wood.
Enter Cleomena dreft in Clemanthis's Clothes, Semiris bearing the Cap and
Feather, Pimante the Sword.
Cleo. COme, my Semiris, you must assist a little,
-- And you Pimante, buckle on my Sword.

Pim. I never parted with a Sword so unwillingly in my life.

Cleo. So -- How do thou like me now?
Might I not pass, thus habited, for Clemanthis?

Pim. Yes, Madam, till you come to the fighting-part.

Cleo. Now go, and do as I have ordered you.

Sem. Ah, Madam, though I must not wait on you to fight,
I will in death, it is my first act, and last of disobedience.
[Weeps.
Cleo. Do not disturb me with thy grief, Semiris:
Go, leave me to my self, and thoughts of vengeance;
And thou, base Traitor-Prince, shall buy thy Life
At such a rate shall ruin thee for ever;
And if I fall -- as I believe I shall --
The very shame to know I am a Woman,
Shall make thee curse thy Fortune and thy Arms,
If thou have any sense of manhood left,
After the barbarous murder thou have done:
But if my better Fortune guide my Arm,
This Arm (whom Love direct) to meet thy Heart,
Then I shall die with real satisfaction:
The time draws on when I should try my Fate;
Assist me mighty Love in my design,
That I may prove no passion equals mine.

Sem. Madam, consider whom you must encounter.

Cleo. Consider thou who is dead, the brave Clemanthis!
[Weeps. Oh it is a shame to weep being thus attired,
Let me once more survey my self --
And yet I need not borrow resolution:
Clemanthis, thou art murdered, that is the word,
It Is that creates me man, and valiant too,
And all incensed Love can prompt me to:
Hark -- hark -- the joyful Summons to my death.
[Trumpets sound. Go, leave me to approach it solemnly --
Come, my dear Sword, from thee I must expect
That service which my Arm may fail to effect;
And if thou ever did thy Master love,
Be sure each stroke thou make may mortal prove.
[Exeunt severally.
SCENE the Second.
After a noise of Trumpets at some distance and fighting -- the Scene draws,
and discovers Cleomena and Thersander fighting. Lysander. On one side stands
the King of Scythia with his party: On the other, the Queen of Dacia, Hon.
Artabazes, and her party; Vallentio.
There Is. What mean thou to fight as if indeed thou were Clemanthis?
But since thou art not him thou represent'st,
Who ever thou be'st 'twas indiscreetly done,
To draw me from an order might have saved thee:
-- Who is it that dares assume Clemanthis shape?
[They fight:
Cleo. Unworthy Scythian, whose reported Valor
Cleo. falls: he stoops to look on her. Unjustly was admired, could thou
believe the covert of the Wood
Could hide thy Treason -- Treason which thou durst own too?
[A cry of joy on the Scythians side.
There Is. Ah! Cleomena, is it you?
What have I done that could so far transport you?
Clemanthis boldness has incurred your hate,
But he has been severely punished for it;
And here in lieu of that unhappy Stranger,
Receive Thersander with his equal Passions;
But not his equal Crimes.

Cleo. Oh Villain, since thou have punished Clemanthis,
Punish the unhappy Cleomena too,
And take her life who came to have taken thine.

Queen. It Is not Clemanthis, but my Cleomena --
With whom Thersander fights -- ah cruel Child!
[They carry her off.
There Is. Oh whither, whither do you bear my Goddess?
Return, and here resign your sacred load.
That whilst 't has life it may behold the Sacrifice
That I will make of this wild wretched man
That has so much offended -- disobeyed.
-- My Arms, my Arms, Lysander, mount me straight,
And let me force the disobedient Troops;
Those Coward Slaves that could behold her bleed,
And not revenge her on the Murderer:
Quickly my Arms, kill, burn, and scatter all;
Whilst 'midst the ruins of the world I fall.
[The Scythian Guards carry him off by force. Enter Ismenes with his Sword.
They all desoend.
Ism. Still thus defeated, and outstript by Fate,
Resolved betimes, but salli'd out too late;
Fortune and Love are equally unkind:
-- Who can resist those mighty Powers combined?
[Exeunt.
SCENE the Third. A Prison.
Enter Orsames, Geron.
Ger. May I not know what it is afflicts you so?
You were not wont to hide your Soul from me.

Ors. Nor would I now, knew I but how to tell thee;
Oh Geron, thou have hitherto so frighted me
With thoughts of Death, by stories which thou tell
Of future punishments in the other world,
That now I find thou'st brought me to endure
Th^s^ ills from Heaven thou say our sins procure:
There Is not a little God of all the number
That does not exercise his arts on me,
And practice power, which by my suffering
He grows more mighty in -- I Will not endure it.

Ger. Why not, as well as I?

Ors. Thou may do what thou will; but there is a difference
(As vast as 'twixt the Sun and lesser lights)
Between thy Soul and mine:
Thou can contented sit whole days together,
And entertain thy Lute, that dull Companion,
Till duller sleep does silence it and thee;
But I, whose active Soul despise that drouzy God,
Can even dare him in his height of power,
Then, when he ties thee to thy lazy Couch,
Where you are so far from sense, thou'st lost thy Soul;
Even then, my Geron, my divertive Fancy
Possesses me, beyond thy waking Thought --
But, Geron, all was but an airy Dream;
I waked, and found my self a thing like thee.

Ger. What was your Dream?

Ors. Why, I will try to tell it thee --
-- Methought I saw the Firmament divide,
And all the Clouds, like Curtains, drawn aside:
The Sun in all his glory, never put on
So bright a Ray, nor with more luster shon;
The Face of Heaven, too bright for mortal Eye
Appeared, and none durst gaze upon it but I:
In Jove's illustrious Throne I only sat,
Whilst all the lesser Gods did round me wait:
My Habit, such as cannot be expressed;
Iris in all her various Colors dressed,
The Morning-sun, nor Sun-declining Sky,
Was half so beautiful, so gay, as I.
The brightest Stars in all Heavens Canopie
Were chosen out to make a Crown for me;
With which, methought, they glorified my brow,
And in my hand they placed the Thunder too:
The World was mine, and thousands such as thou
Still as I moved low to the Earth did bow;
Like thronging Curls upon the wanton Sea,
They strove, and were as numerous as they:
Thither I soon descended in a Cloud,
But in the midst of the adoring Crowd,
Almighty Woman at my feet did bow,
Adorned with beauties more than Heaven can show.
But one among the rest (for there were store)
Whilst all did me, I did that one adore;
She did unking me, and her wondrous Eyes,
Did all my Power and Thunder too despise:
Her Smiles could calm me, and her Looks were Law;
And when she frowned, she kept my Soul in awe.
Oh, Geron, while I strive to tell the rest,
I feel so strange a passion in my breast,
That though I only do relate a Dream,
My torments here would make it real seem.

Ger. It Is lucky that he takes it for a Dream.
-- Pray do not form Idea's in your fancy,
And suffer them to discompose your thoughts.

Ors. In spite of your Philosophy, they make
A strange impression on me.

Ger. That Is perfect madness, Sir.

Ors. Geron, I will no longer be imposed upon,
But follow all the Dictates of my Reason.
-- Come, tell me, for thou have not done so yet,
How Nature made us? by what strange devices:
Tell me, where 'twas you lighted on me first?
And how I came into thy dull possession?
Thou say we are not born immortal,
And I remember thou were still as now,
When I could hardly call upon thy name,
But as thou would instruct my lisping Tongue;
And when I asked thee who instructed thee,
Thou'st sigh, and say a man, out-worn by Age,
And now laid low in earth -- But tell me, Geron,
When time has wasted thee, for thou art decaying,
Where shall I find some new-made work of Nature,
To teach those Precepts to, I Have learnt of thee?
-- Why art thou silent now?

Ger. You ought not, Sir, to pry into the hidden secrets of the Gods.

Ors. Come, tell not me of Secrets, nor of Gods --
What is it thou studiest for, more new devices?
Out with 'em -- this sullenness betrays thee;
And I have been too long imposed upon.
I find my self enlightened on the sudden,
And every thing I see instructs my Reason;
'T has been enslaved by thee -- come, out with it.

Ger. I dare not, Sir.

Ors. Who is it thou fear?

Ger. The anger of the Gods,
Who will not have their high Decrees revealed,
'Till they themselves unfold 'em in their Oracles.

Ors. What are those Oracles?

Ger. Heavenly Voices, Sir, that expound what is writ
In the eternal Book of Destiny.

Ors. I Will know what is writ in that eternal Book,
Or let thee know what it contains of thee.

Ger. What will you do?

Ors. Throw thee into the Sea; by Jupiter, I will.
[Offers to take him up.
Ger. Stay, Orsames --
-- It Is true, I have Commands from Cleomena,
But yet the time is hardly ripe for the design.

Ors. Begin your story -- or by Heaven --

Ger. I shall -- When you consider who I am,
With how much care and toil I Have brought you up:
How I have made my aged Arms your Cradle,
And in my bosom lulled you to your Rest:
How when you wept, my tears kept time with yours,
And how your smiles would dry again those showers;
You will believe it is my concern for you,
And not your threats, makes me declare a truth.

Ors. Forward, my dearest Geron,
Whilst I as silent as a healthy sleep,
As growth of Flowers, or motion of the Air,
Attend each longed-for Syllable thou breathest.

Ger. Be pleased to walk into the Garden, Sir,
And there I Will tell you wonders to ensue;
But first great Sir, your Pardon for the past.
[Kneels.
Ors. I give it thee -- Gods, this is fine indeed!
Thy Language and thy Mien are altered;
Oh how my Soul's enlarged already -- go, lead the way.
[Exeunt.
SCENE the Fourth. Scythian Tents.
Enter Thersander, Lysander.
There Is. Leave me, I will be calm,
For this same change of Cleomena's habit,
Has but increased my love -- and all my softness --
'Twas in that habit that I left Amyntas;
Gods! has he betrayed me then?
No, I must not have so mean a thought of him;
It Is certain that she knows I am Thersander --
But if the bold Clemanthis be Thersander,
Son to the Enemy of Cleomena;
Yet still it is that Clemanthis that adored her,
And whom she once made happy with her love.
But I have wounded her, and here remains
The marks of my dishonor in her blood.
Oh cruel instrument of my shameful Crime!
Must the first service thou have rendered me
Prove to my Soul so fatal; that Sword I left Amyntas?
Would have denied obedience to this hand,
This sacrilegious hand drew it against her.
[Draws his Sword^. Enter King, Lysander solus.
King. How now Thersander, what still melancholy?
Upon the first appearance of your sadness,
I thought 't had been for fighting with a Woman;
But now I fear that could not be the cause,
Unless 'twere fortified by stronger passions;
-- It Is not impossible, but when you saw
The Eyes of Cleomena in the Combat,
They might disarm your rage, and teach you love.
If this be all, I Will offer Peace in such a time
As they are not able to make War against us,
And with it Propositions of a Marriage.

There Is. Happy mistake! great Sir;
I Will not deny the Eyes of Cleomena
Have given me Wounds which nothing else can cure;
And in that moment when I would have killed her,
They stayed my guilty hand, and overcame
The shameful Conqueror --
I Will say no more, nor give Laws to your bounty;
But if your Majesty approve my flame,
I shall receive her as the greatest blessing
Heaven can bestow upon me.

King. I Am glad to find my son of my opinion;
For I already have proposed it to 'em,
Which I believe they will with joy embrace.

There Is. All but the lovely Princess, whose aversion
Is still so great against our Family,
That I despair she ever will be drawn to it.

King. They Will hardly rally up their routed Forces
To make fresh War upon us; they are at our mercy now,
And as an honor will embrace the Alliance.

There Is. Pray Heaven they may.

King. If they refuse, I will recall my mercy,
And make them dearly buy their scorn:
Come, we expect our Herald from their Tents.
[Exeunt.
SCENE the Fifth.
Enter Queen, Cleomena in a Nightgown, Semiris. A Table with Pen and Ink.
Cleo. Madam, I confess my self unworthy of your tenderness.

Queen. Ah, Cleomena! you value my repose at too cheap a rate,
When you expose a life so dear to me
To so much danger as to fight Thersander.

Cleo. I am not the first person of my Sex
Has drawn a Sword upon an Enemy:
Do you not say he is my Father's Murderer?
And does he not deprive me of that Crown
You say the Gods have destined me to wear?

Queen. It Is true, he is son to him that killed thy Father;
But bating that, he has committed nothing
But what would rather cause esteem than hate.

Cleo. Pardon me, Madam, if I am forced to say
My Sentiments cannot correspond with yours.

Queen. What think you of a Husband in this Prince?

Cleo. How, Madam, marry Thersander!

Queen. The King has generously offered it;
My Council do approve it, and the Army
Cannot contain their Joy for the blessed news.

Cleo. Gods! let the Council, and the Army perish,
E're I lose one single moment of my satisfaction:
Is this the hate which with my Milk you made me suck
For all that Race? is this the effects of my fierce Education?

Queen. All things must be preferred to the Public good,
When joined with my Commands.

Cleo. What you command, I dare not disobey;
But, Madam, I beseech you, do not claim
That cruel duty here.

Queen. You Will find it fit to change that peevish humor,
And I will leave you to consider of it.
[Queen exit.
Cleo. Gods! marry me, marry me to Thersander!
No, not whilst this -- remains in my possession:
[Pulls out a Dagger. -- I must confess it is a generous offer,
How came it in their Souls?

Sem. Madam, perhaps Love has inspired it.

Cleo. Hah, Love -- that miracle may be:
When I reflect upon the Prince his words,
When he had vanquished me -- I do not doubt it:
Then he confessed he had a passion for me;
I wonder at the sudden birth of it.

Sem. Madam, your Eyes make Captives at first sight.

Cleo. Oh my dear eyes, how shall I love ye now,
For wounding more than my dull Sword could do?
'Twas Anger and Revenge that gave ye charms,
Only to help the weakness of my Arms;
And when my Woman's courage feeble grew,
My Heart did kindly send its aids to you.
And thou, Thersander, surely can not blame
My cruelty, who do allow thy Flame;
Love on, love on; and if thou do despise
All other ways, I Will kill thee with my Eyes.
She sits down and writes. Enter a Page.
Page. Madam, there is without an Officer
Who bad me tell your Highness that he waits.

Cleo. Admit him -- and Page, give you this Letter to the Queen.

Sem. Madam, it is Vallentio whom you sent for.
Enter Vallentio.
Cleo. Vallentio, I believe thee brave and honest.

Vall. Madam, the last I dare affirm.

Cleo. Tell me, Vallentio, did st thou ever love?

Vall. Madam, your Interest, my Arms, and a brave Enemy.

Cleo. But did thou never feel a softer passion?

Vall. Madam, I own, though with a blush I do so,
I Have felt the power of two fair Eyes,
And I have wounds that yet would bleed afresh,
Should but the cruel Murtheress appear.

Cleo. Then thou art fit to hear a secret from me;
-- But first, Vallentio, tell me whom I am?

Vall. My Princess, Madam, and my General,
And one, who from your power of Beauty holds
No less Dominion over the adoring world,
Than from the greatness you were born to.

Cleo. And you're contented I should be your Queen?

Vall. Madam, I am -- Pimante has been prating.
[Aside.
Cleo. The Army too are of your mind?

Vall. I cannot answer for the Army, Madam.

Cleo. But -- what think you of Orsames?

Vall. Madam, I think he merits to be King
In any other world but where you reign.

Cleo. And what if I would have him King of this?

Vall. Why then he shall be King, if you would have it so.

Cleo. Yes, I would have it, by my self I would;
This is the time to let the Monarch know
The glories he was born to;
Nor can I die in peace till he be crowned.
[Aside. I Will have this Nation happy in a Prince;
A Prince they long in silence have bemoaned,
Which every slight occasion breaks out loud,
And soon will raise them up to a Rebellion;
The common peoples God on Holy Days:
-- And this, Vallentio, I have often observed;
And it is an act too humble for my Soul,
To court my self into security.

Sem. Madam, the Gods do disapprove his Reign,
Which they not only say shall be but short,
But bloody and Tyrannick.

Cleo. I will expound that Oracle
Which Priests unridling make more intricate:
They said that he should reign, and so he did,
Which lasted not above a pair of hours;
But I my self will be his Oracle now,
And speak his kinder fate,
And I will have no other Priest but thee,
[To Vallentio. Who shall unfold the mystery in plain terms.

Vall. Madam, the City and the Army are by this defeat
Enough inclined to hear that reason.

Cleo. Geron already has instructions what to do,
And you need none, wanting no resolution.

Vall. If I miscarry, Madam, I Will be condemned
Never to look a Foe in the face again.

Cleo. Haste, and be prosperous --
[Vall. exit. Semiris, are those Garments ready I spoke for?

Sem. Madam, they are here -- but now what will you do?

Cleo. Now, I will die -- and now thou know my will.

Sem. Ah Madam, it is too much you let me know,
Denying me to attend you where you go;
[Weeps. With such a Guide I know I cannot err.

Cleo. Alone I Will go, the Journey is not far
In passing; though I miss the aids of Day,
Yet my Clemanthis lights me on my way:
Why do thou weep? indeed thou art unkind.

Sem. I weep because you would leave me here behind,
Doubting my love. I beg you would permit
That I might give you the last proof of it.
I in your last adventure was too flow,
And will not be denied my duty now.

Cleo. Thou show'st a Soul so generous and free,
That I Am contented thou should follow me:
Come, dry thy Eyes, such helps we do not need:
To ease our griefs, we must not weep but bleed.
[Exeunt. Enter Vallentio passing over the Stage, is met by a Rabble of
Citizens.
I Cit. Well Colonel, have you delivered our grievances to the Queen?

Vall. Yes, I have.

I Cit. Well, and what success? shall we have a King?

Vall. And why a King? why should you be thus earnest for a King? what good
will a King do you? he is but a single man, cannot redeem the lost Victory,
cannot raise up your dead members, no, nor levy new ones.


I Cit. That Is all one Colonel, we will have a King: for look ye, Colonel, we
have thought of a King, and therefore we will have one: hah Neighbors! a
substantial Reason.


All. Ay, ay, a King, a King.

Vall. I like your Resolution, but not your Reason; and must have a better than
that.


I Cit. Sha, Sir, we can give you many, though that is sufficient; as look you
Sir, it is first a new thing to have a King, -- a thing -- a thing -- we have
not been acquainted, with in our Age; besides, we have lost the Victory, and we
are very angry with some body, and must vent it somewhere; you know, Colonel,
we have busy Heads, working Brains, which must be executed; therefore what say
you, are we to have leave to shut up shop, and to go to work with long Staff
and Bilboe, or are we to be very mutinous, and do it in spite of you?


Vall. You shall not need; go, shut up your Shops, gather your Fellow-mutineers
together, and meet me at the Citadel; but be sure ye are well armed, lest the
Queens Guards prevent you.


Cit. I warrant you for honest true hearts enough at any mischief, though not
to go against the Scythians; for, Colonel, we love Civil Wars, Colonel, Civil
Wars.


Vall. Make haste, and then I Will show you my Orders for the Kings Deliverance.


Cit. Oh incomparable Colonel! we will raise thy Statue in Brass in the
Marketplace, and worship it when we have done -- but harkey, Colonel, are we
to give no Quarter?


Vall. None, to those that oppose you.

All. No, no, none, none.

Cit. O how this will please ye all, my Mates --
[Cit. go out. Enter Pimante.
Pim. Oh Colonel, the Princess, Colonel.

Vall. Well, Sir.

Pim. She Is fled away, and none knows whither.

Vall. I left her in her Tent just now.

Pim. Ay, ay, Colonel, that is all one, she is gone just as she should have been
married too -- there is the Devil on it; oh the days we should have seen! the
dancing, loving days!


Vall. Gone alone?

Pim. No, no, that dissembling thing Semiris is with her; she only left a
Letter for the Queen, which she has sent to the Prince of Scythia. Oh, adieu,
adieu, to Love and Music. --

[Goes out crying.
Vall. This is strange -- if she be gone, it is time the King were free -- I Will
haste to meet the Rabble that it may not look like an act of my own.

[Exit. Scene Thersander's Tent: He enters with a Letter in his hand open --
with Attendants.
There Is. Be gone, I Will read the Letter over again,
And here impress thy cruelty, and see what that will do
To set me free.

There Is. reads the Letter -- Finding it impossible to obey your unkind Commands,
I am fled, and do resolve never to marry that Barbarian, whose Crimes are only
known to me; no, nor any other that cannot bring me his head; whereto I
solicit Artabazes, and Ismenis if they will obey, --

Cleomena.

If I consult my Reason and my Courage,
They say I should not love this cruel Maid;
But oh my Reason, you're too weak to counsel;
I Will think of nothing then but dying for her,
Since it is my Life she asks, and here demands it;
But it is in vain to arm my happy Rivals,
For I my self can more devoutly serve you.
It Is I will pierce this unaccepted Heart,
Whose flames are found so criminal --
Enter Lysander.
Ly. Sir, there is without a Youth desires admittance.

There Is. From whom comes he?

Ly. He would not tell me that, but has a Letter,
Which he will deliver only to your Highness.

There Is. Bring him in, it may be from Amyntas.
Enter Cleomena dressed like a Country-Shepherd, comes bowing to him, gives him a
Note.
There Is. reads to himself -- Guard thee well, Thersander; for thou shall die by
the hand that brings thee this.
[She stabs him; he falls into Lysander's Arms.
Cleo. Here Is to thee, dear Clemanthis --

Ly. Help, Treason, help --

There Is. Ah lovely Youth, who taught thee so much cruelty?
And why that Language with that angry blow?

Cleo. Behold this face, and then inform thy self.
[Discovers her self.
There Is. It Is Cleomena! oh ye Gods, I thank ye!
It is her hand that wounds me;
And I Will receive my death with perfect joy,
If I may be permitted but to kiss
That blessed hand that sent it.
Enter King, Guard.
King. Thersander murdered! oh inhumane deed!
Drag the Traitor to a Dungeon, till we have
Invented unheard of Tortures to destroy him by --
[The Guards seize Cleo. and Sem. who was just entering. My Wounds are deep as
thine, my dear Theasander;
Oh fatal day, wherein one fatal stroke
Has laid the hopes of Scythia in his Tomb!
[The Guards go to carry Cleo. and Sem. There Is. calls 'em back.
There Is. Oh stay, and do not bear so rudely off.
Treasures you cannot value.
-- Sir, -- do not treat her as my Murderer,
But as my Sovereign Deity --
Instead of Fetters, give her Crowns and Scepters;
And let her be conducted into Dacia,
With all the Triumphs of a Conqueror.
For me, no other glory I desire,
Than at her feet thus willingly to expire.
[Goes to throw himself at her feet, they prevent it, and go off.
ACT the Fifth.
SCENE the First.
A Council Table: the King of Scythia seated on a Throne, Officers Attendands,
and Guards.
King. BRing the fair Prisoner forth, and let us examine
What Reasons could inspite her with this cruelty?
-- How beautiful she is!
[Gazes on her. Enter Cleomena, in Fetters, Lysander with the Guard.
Cleo. Thy silence seems to license me to speak,
And tell thee King that now our faults are equal;
My Father thou have killed, and I thy Son;
This will suffice to tell thee who I am:
-- Now take my Life since I have taken his,
And thou shall see I neither will implore
Thy needless Clemency by word or sign:
But if my Birth or Sex can merit ought,
Suffer me not to languish any longer
Under these shameful Irons.
[With scorn.
King. Cruel as fair, it is with too much Injustice
Thou say our Crimes are equal;
For thou have killed a Prince that did adore thee;
And I deprived thy Father of his life
When he assaulted mine in open field,
And so, as cannot leave a stain on thee,
Or give the Cause to say I Have done thee wrong.
But if I had, wherefore (oh cruel Maid)
Did thou not spare that Heart that di'd for thee,
And bend thy Rage against thy Father's Foe?
But thou well knew'st in killing of Thersander,
The Fathers life would quickly follow after.

Cleo. I will not seek excuses for my actions,
But I protest to thee before the Gods,
It was not to revenge my self on thee
I killed thy Son;
But what he suffered was for his own sin,
For he has banished from me all on earth
That could complete my happiness --
[Weeps. And now dispose my destiny as you please,
Only remember that I am a Woman.

King. What thou have said will find but little credit:
But yet- Thersander lives;
And if it please the Gods to spare that life,
I shall have generosity enough
To set thee free in favor of thy Sex
And my Thersanders love.

Cleo. Not dead! why should the Gods protect him?

King. Her Soul is sure possessed with some despair:
Madam, I doubt you need not fear his life,
He will obey and die as you desire --
[Weeps. But not with satisfaction till he see you
Conducted into Dacia.
I should not of my self have been so generous
TO have given you freedom with the life of him
Who did deserve a kinder destiny;
But it is his will, -- and possibly his last,
Therefore you're free, and may depart this Camp
Whenever you please; only this favor grant,
(If an unhappy King may hope for any)
You Will suffer him to take his last farewell.
[Weeps.
Cleo. Immortal Gods! how can it be? a man
Whose wickedness armed me against his life,
Should show such virtue in the rest of 's Actions!
-- Sir, I will see the Prince,
Not as the price of what you offered me,
But that he may confess he did deserve
A death less glorious than I have given him:
And I shall take it well if he will own
That which may justify my offense to you.

King. Madam, I thank you --
-- Dismiss her Fetters, and if she please
Let her have Garments suitable to her Sex,
Only the Guards attend her at a distance.
[Go out severally.
SCENE the Second. The Grove.
Enter Amyntas dressed like a Shepherd, Urania like a Shepherdess, the Druid,
Lyces, and other dancing Swains, etc.
Druid. Sir, I Am afraid you made too bold a venture;
And though your wounds were more numerous than dangerous,
I am not willing you should trust 'em to the Air.

Amin. Father, your skiil has wrought a perfect Cure,
For which, the life you saved you shall command.

Ura. Me too h' has cured of all my jealous fears,
By this eternal Knot 'twixt thee and me
Which he has has tied, and Fate can never undo:
-- Farther -- to you I owe Amyntas liberty;
To you his Life: and now for all my joys,
Which if my future service can repay,
Command with freedom her you have preserved.

Amin. Come, dear Urania, let us hasten to the Camp;
For I impatient grow to see my Prince:
Heaven knows what my mishap may have procured him.

Ura. How loath I am to leave these pretty Shades,
The Gods and Nature have designed for love:
Oh, my Amyntas, would I were what I seem,
And thou some humble Villager hard by,
That knew no other pleasure than to love,
To feed thy little Herd, to tune a Pipe,
To which the Nymphs should listen all the day;
We'd taste the waters of these Crystal Springs,
Which more delight than all delicious Wines;
And being weary, on a bed of Moss,
Having no other Canopie but Trees,
We'd lay us down and tell a thousand stories.

Amin. For ever so I Would be content to dwell;
I would put off all frightful marks' of War,
And would appear as soft and calm to thee,
As are thy Eyes when silently they wound.
An Army I would quit to lead thy Flock,
And more esteem a Chaplet wreathed by thee,
Than the victorious Laurel:
-- But come, Love makes us idle.

Druid. My Prayers ever go along with you;
And your fair Bride, Urania, I could wish
My youth and vigor were as heretofore:
When only Courts and Camps could make me happy,
And then I would not bid farewell so soon --
To so much virtue as I Have found in you.

Amin. I humbly thank you Father, for a goodness
That shames my poor returns.
Come pretty Lyces, and thou honest Damon,
With all the rest of our kind train;
Let Us hasten to the Camp, during this Truce
Your little Rustic sports will find a welcome.

Ura. There are no Women in the Camp, my Lord.

Amin. No matter, thou can not hate a Soldier,
Since I am one: and you must be obedient,
And learn to bear my Bow and Arrows now.
It is the duty of a Scythians Wife.

Ura. She that can claim Amyntas by such ties,
May find a safety wheresoe'er she flies.
[Exeunt.
SCENE the Third. A Prison.
Enter Orsames joyful, and Geron.
Ors. Am I indeed a King?
And is there such a thing as fair Olympia?
Had thou not been the first had told me this,
By Heaven thou would di'd for thus concealing it;
Not all the obligations of my Youth
Should have preserved thee.

Ger. Till now I wanted opportunity;
For had you known your quality before,
You would have grown impatient of the Crown,
And by that haste have overthrown your Interest.

Ors. And can thou now provide against my ignorance!

Ger. Sir, we have gained the Army on our side.

Ors. What Is that?

Ger. Those numbers that I told you should adore you.

Ors. When shall I see them, Geron?

Ger. E'relong, Sir: should your deliverance
Be wrought by any other means than theirs,
It were to snatch a glory from their hands
Which they design their only recompense.

Ors. Oh how I am transported with the Joy!
But Geron, art thou sure we do not dream?

Ger. Then life it self's a Dream --.
-- Hark, I here a noise --
[Noise,
Within. Kill the Dog -- down with him.

Ors. Oh how I Am ravished with this unknown noise!

Within. Break down the Prison-walls and Gates, and force your passage --
Enter Vallentio followed by a Rabble of Citizens and Officers, tearing in the
Keeper all bloody.
Vall. No killing to day, my Fellow Soldiers, if you can help it; we will not
stain our Tryumphs in blood --
[They all stand and gaze. Ors. gazes on them. Ye Gods instruct me where to bow
my Knee --.
But this alone must be the Deity --.
[Kneels. Ors. lets him kneel, and gazes on him.
1 Cit. Is that the King, Neighbor, in such mean Clothes?

Gorel. Yes, goodman Fool, why should the Colonel kneel else?

3 Cit. Oh pray Neighbor let me see a little, I never saw a King all days of
my life -- Lord, Lord! is that he the Colonel kneels to?


Gorel. What questions this ignorant fellow asks!

3 Cit. Good lack a day, it is as a man may say -- it is just such another body
as one of us, only he looks a little more terrably.


Ger. Sir, why do you let him kneel?

Ors. Rise, and let me look upon thee.

Vall. Great Sir, we come to offer you a Crown,
That long has waited for this great support:
It ought to have been presented
In a more glorious order,
But time and your affairs permit not that.
A thousand dangers wait upon delay;
But though the World be yours, it is not safe
Depending on a fickle multitude
Whom Interest and not Reason renders just.

Ors. Thou art a wondrous man!

1 Cit. Good Gorel, stand back, and let me see a little: my Wife loves
newalties abominationly, and I must tell her something about the King.


Gorel. What a pox have we to do with your Wife? stand back.

Vall. Now daign, great Sir, to arm your hand with this --
[Gives Ors. a Sword, he gazes on it. Nay, view it well, for though it be but
homely,
It carries that about it can make the wearer proud;
-- an edge -- pray feel it, Sir, -- 't has dealt
Many a mortal wound --
See how it dares the Sun for brightness, Sir;
Or if there be a stain, it is an ornament
Died in the blood of those that were your Enemies:
It never made a blow or thrust in vain.
-- How do you like it, Sir?

Ors. So well, I know not whether this or thee
Be most agreeable to me:
You need not teach me how I am to use it,
That I will leave for those that dare offend me.
Look Geron, is it not a glorious object?
There Is nothing but my bright Olympia's eyes
That can out-glitter this.

1 Cit. Hah Simon, did he not talk bravely?

Vall. Come, Sir, it is time you left this Dungeon for a Throne;
For now is the time to make the world your own.
All shouting -- Vive le Roy, Vive le Roy. [Exeunt.
SCENE the Fourth. A Tent.
Enter Cleo. and Semiris dressed as women again.
Sem. Dear Madam, I could wish you would sleep a while.

Cleo. That peace I have not been acquainted with
Since my Clemanthis death;
Yet now methinks my Heart's more calm and still,
And I perhaps may thus expire in silence --
-- Prithee, Semiris, take thy Lute and sing to it,
Whilst I will try to sleep --
[Lies down on a Couch, Sem. plays and sings. SONG
made by J. Wright Esquire
1.
Fair Nymph, remember all your scorn,
Will be by time repaid;
Those Glories which that Face adorn,
And flourish as the rising Morn,
Must one day set and fade.
Then all your cold disdain for me,
Will but increase Deformity,
When still the kind will lovely be.
Compassion is of lasting praise;
For that is the beauty never decays.
2.
Fair Nymph, avoid those storms of Fate
Are to the cruel due,
The powers above, though never so late,
Can be, when they revenge your hate,
As pitiless as you.
Know, charming Maid, the powers Divine
Did never such soft Eyes design
To wound a heart so true as mine:
That God who my dear flame infused,
Will never see it thus abused.
Return, my dear Clemanthis, oh return,
[Cleo. rises as in a Dream. And see it is not into thy loved bosom
That I have sent my vengeance.

Sem. What mean you, Madam?

Cleo. But thou, poor Ghost --
Instead of hasting me to my revenge,
Endeavour'st to touch me with Compassion.

Sem. Madam, who is it you follow thus and speak to?

Cleo. Thersander, why do rob me of that face?
Is It to disarm me of my indignation?

Sem. Oh, Madam, what do you do?

Cleo. Ha! do thou see nothing?

Sem. Not any thing.

Cleo. Yonder Is the Scythian with Clemanthis Face,
Or else Clemanthis with Thersander's Wound.

Sem. Compose your thoughts, dear Madam, 'twas a dream,
An idle dream, born from a troubled fancy:
-- How was it, Madam?

Cleo. Methought I saw Clemanthis,
As when he was most charming to my Soul,
But pale and languishing, having a Wound.
Like that I gave his Murderer:
To which with one of his hands he seemed to point;
The other stretching out with passionate actions,
And gazing on me, -- thus methought he spoke:
-- See how you recompense my faithful sufferings,
-- See the performance of your promises;
Look on this Wound which you have given my Heart,
That Heart that still adored you --
And yet you're not content with all these cruelties,
Though even in your anger and my death,
I still continue faithful and submissive.
-- Thus spoke the lovely Phantome.
Enter Pimante.
Pim. Madam, there waits without a Servant to the Prince.

Cleo. He may come in --
Enter Lysander.
Lys. Madam, my dying Prince begs you may know
How willingly he does obey your will,
And dying still implores you would believe
He Is guilty of no fault but having loved you,
For which presumption he deserves to die;
-- But it is not by your Dagger, but your Eyes:
That was too weak to exercise your will,
Your cruelty had power alone to kill;
And now one visit from you he implores,
And after that he will trouble you no more.
[Weeps.
Cleo. That I will grant to satisfy the King.

Lys. When he is dead --
He Will send the Spirit of Clemanthis to you,
Who shall upbraid you with your cruelty,
And let you see, in wounding of Thersander,
You found the readiest way to kill Clemanthis.

Cleo. What means he by these words?

Lys. He humbly begs you will pardon the rough treatment
You Have had among the Scythians,
Whose Crown, he says, Clemanthis promised you,
And he entreats you would accept from him.

Cleo. To send the Spirit of Clemanthis to me --
How this agrees with my sad dream!
How did thy Master know --
Clemanthis promised me the Crown of Scythia --
[Advances toward Lysander, and she starts. -- Sure I have seen that Face
before --
-- Art not Lysander, Page to Clemanthis?

Lys. Madam, I am, and ever served that Master.

Cleo. How could thou then come near his Enemy?

Lys. Madam, it was by his command I came.

Cleo. How! could Clemanthis love his Murderer?
It is no wonder then that generous Spirit
Came while I slept and pleaded for the Prince.

Lys. What means the Princess?
Enter Pimante.
Pim. Oh Madam, I have news to tell you that will
Make you forswear ever fighting again.

Cleo. What mean you?

Pim. As I was passing through a street of Tents,
I saw a wounded man stretched on the ground;
And going, as others did, to learn his Fate,
I heard him say to those that strove to help him,
Alas, my Friends, your succors are in vain;
For now I see the Gods will be revenged
For brave Clemanthis murder.
How! cried I out, Are you then one of those
Thersander sent to kill that Cavalier?
Thersander, cried he, had no hand in it;
But Artabazes set us on to kill him.
Here he began to faulter in his speech:
And sure he spoke the truth; for 'twas his last.

Cleo. This looks like truth: Thersander's every action
Declared too much of virtue and of honor,
To be the Author of so black a deed.
-- Tell him, I Will visit him, and beg his pardon.
[To Lysander, who bows and goes out. -- Generous Thersander, if this news be
true,
My Eyes shall spare some drops for injuring you.
[Exeunt. Scene changes to Thersander's Tent, he in a Nightgown sitting on a
Couch; by him the King, Officers, Attendants to them. Enter Cleomena, Semiris,
Pimante, Lysander. The King rises to meet Cleo. and seats her in a Chair by
him.
Cleo. Thersander, I am come to beg thy pardon,
If thou art innocent, as I must believe thee,
And here before the King to make confession
Of what I did refuse the Queen my Mother.
-- Know then, I loved! and with a perfect passion,
The most unfortunate of men, Clemanthis.
His Birth I never knew, but do believe
It was Illustrious, as were his Actions;
But I have lost him by a fatal accident,
That very day he should have fought with you.
[Weeps.
There Is. Gods! where will this end?
[Aside.
Cleo. But e're the fatal moment of his death,
Ismenis begged to know who did the Murder,
But he could answer nothing but Thersander,
And we believed it you:
Then Love and my Revenge made me a Soldier;
-- You know the rest --
And doubtless you have accused me with Ingratitude.

There Is. No, I shall never complain of Cleomena,
[He kneels before her. If she still loves Clemanthis.

Cleo. There needs no more to make me know that Voice:
Oh stay, this joy too suddenly surprises --
[Ready to swound. -- Gently distill the bliss into my Soul,
Lest this excess have the effects of grief:
-- Oh, my Clemanthis! do I hold thee fast?
And do I find thee in the Prince of Scythia?

King. I lose my Reason by this strange encounter!

There Is. Was It then a secret to my Cleomena,
That her Clemanthis was the Prince of Scythia?
I still believed that was his only crime.

Cleo. By all my joys I knew it not -- but sure
This is enchantment; for it is as certain
These Eyes beheld thee dead.

Pim. Av, and so did I, I Will be sworn.

There Is. That must be poor Amyntas in my dress,
Whose story when you know, you will bemoan.

Cleo. But oh my life! the cruel wound I gave thee
Let me be well-assur'd it is not mortal,
Or I am lost again.

King. The Surgeon gives me hopes; and 'twere convenient
You should forbid him not to speak too much --
Enter a Soldier.
Sold. Arm, arm, great Sir, I think the Enemy
Is rallying afresh, for the Plain is covered with numerous Troops,
Which swiftly make this way.

King. They dare not break the Truce.

Sold. I know not, Sir, but something of a King I heard 'em talk of --

Cleo. It is Vallentio that has kept his word --
Receive 'em, Sir, as Friends, not Enemies;
It is my Brother, who never knew till now.
Ought of a peopled World.

King. I long to see that Monarch, whose friendship I must
Court for you, fair Princess:
If you will accept Thersander whom I offered,
I do not doubt an happy peace on both sides.

Cleo. Sir, it is an honor which we ought to sue for.

There Is. And it is to me a blessing --
I wanted confidence to ask of Heaven.
Enter Orsames, Vallentio, Honorius, Artabazes, Ismenis, Soldiers, etc.
Orsames dressed gay with a Truncheon in his hand, advances first, is met by the
King; who gaze on each other.
Ors. If thou be'st he that art Orsames Enemy,
I do demand a Sister at thy hands.

King. Art thou Orsames?

Ors. So I am called by all that yet have viewed me:
-- Look on me well --
Do see no marks of grandeur in my face?
Nothing that speaks me King?

King. I do believe thou art that King, and here
[Gives him Cleomena. I do resign that Sister thou demandest.

Ors. It is a Woman too! another Woman!
I would embrace thee, if I durst approach thee.

Cleo. You need not fear, you may embrace your Sister --
[Cleo. embraces him.
Ors. This is the kindest woman I e're saw.

Cleo. Brother, behold this King no more your enemy,
Since I must pay him duty as a Father.
Enter Queen, Olympia, Women.
Ors. Hah, Olympia! sure it is an airy vision --

Ger. Approach her, Sir, and try.

Queen. Permit a wretched Mother here to kneel.

King. Rise, Madam, and receive me as your friend;
This pair of Lovers has united all our Interests.
[Points to Cleo. and There Is.
Queen. Heavens! what is this I see, Clemanthis
And the Prince of Scythia?

There Is. Yes, Madam, and a man that humbly begs
The happy Title of your Son -- Honorius,
Of you I ask the greatest pardon --
[Talks to Olympia.
Ors. I am a King, and do adore thee too,
And thou shall rule a World with me, my fair;
A Sword I Will give thee, with a painted Bow,
Whence thou shall shoot a thousand gilded Arrows.

Olym. What to do, Sir?

Ors. To save the expense of Cruelty;
For they will kill as sure, but rightly aimed:
This noble Fellow told me so.
[To Va^
Olym. Sir, I Will do any thing that you will have me:
But now the Queen your Mother, Sir, expects you.

Ors. Instruct my Eyes, Olympia; for it is lately
I Have learnt of some such thing.

Olym. This, Sir, -- you ought to kneel to her.

Ors. Must I then kneel to ought but heaven and thee?

Queen. My dear Orsames, let my Tears make way,
[Kneels. Before I can assure thee of my joy.

Ors. Gods! how obliging is this kind concern!
Nor all my passion for my fair Olympia
Could ever yet betray me to a Tear.
[Weeps.
Queen. Thou'st greater need of Anger than of Tears,
Having before thy Eyes thy worst of Enemies,
One that has long deprived thee of a Crown,
Through what she thought her duty to the Gods;
But now repents her superstitious error,
And humbly begs thy pardon.

Ors. I will, if you will implore Olympia but to love me.

Queen. I will, my Orsames; and it is the only present
I can make to expiate my fault.

Ors. And I Will receive her as the only thing
Can make me both a Subject and a King.
Oh Geron, still if this should prove a Dream!

Ger. Sir, Dreams of Kings are much less pleasant.
Enter Lysander.
Lys. Sir, there are without some Shepherdesses
Who say they would present you
Something that will not be unwelcome to your Highness.
[To There Is.
There Is. Let them come in --
They seat themselves. Enter Amyntas, Urania maskt, Shepherds, Shepherdesses,
followed with Pipes or Wind-Musick. They dance; after which Amin. kneels to the
Prince, Ura. to the Princess. -- My dear Amyntas, do I find thee live!
Fortune requites my sufferings
With too large a share of happiness.

Amin. Sir, I do live to die again for you.

There Is. This my Divine, was he who had
[To Cleo. The glory to be bewailed by you; for him you wept,
For him had almost died.

Amin. That Balm it was, that like the Weapon-salve
Heals at a distance --

Cleo. But why, Amyntas, did you name Thersander
When you were asked who wounded you?

Amin. Madam, if loss of blood had given me leave,
I would have told him how I came so habited,
And who I was, though not how I was wounded.

King. Still I am in a mist, and cannot see the happy path I tread.

There Is. Anon we will explain the mystery, Sir.

Hon. Now great Orsames, it is but just and fit
That you receive the Rites of Coronation,
Which is not to be paid you in a Camp;
The Court will add more to that joyful day.

King. And there we'll join our Souls as well as Swords,
Our Interests as our Familes.

Ors. I am content that thou should give me Laws:
Come, my Vallentio, it shall never be said
I recompensed thy services
With any thing less grateful than a Woman:
-- Here, I will choose for thee --
And when I know what it is I more can do,
If there be ought beyond this gift, it is thine.
[Gives him Sem.
There Is. Scythia and Dacia now united are:
The God of Love o'recomes the God of War.
After a Dance of Shepherds and Shepherdesses, the Epilogue is spoken by Mrs.
Bary, as a Nymph; at his R. H. second exile into Flanders.
EPILOGUE.
AFter our showing Play of mighty Pains,
We here present you humble Nymphs and Swains.
Our Rustic Sports sometimes may Princes please;
And Courts do often divert in Cottages,
And prize the Joys with some young Rural Maid,
On Beds of Grass, beneath a lovely Shade,
'Bove all the Pride of City-Jilts, whose Arts
Are more to gain your Purses than your Hearts:
Whose chiefest Beauty lies in being fine*
And Coyness is not Virtue, but Designs
We use no colors to adorn the Face,
No artful Looks, nor no affected Grace.
The neighboring Stream serves for a Looking-glass.
Ambition is not known within our Groves;
Here Is no disputes for Empire, but for Loves:
The humble Swain his Birthright here enjoys,
And fears no danger from the public Voice.
No wrong nor insolence from busy Powers:
No Rivals here for Crowns, but those of Flowers:
His Country and his Flocks enjoys with ease,
Ranges his native Fields and Groves in peace:
Not forced by Arbitrary Votes to fly
To foreign Shores for his security.
Our humble Tributes uncompell'd we pay,
And cheerful homage to the Lord of May:
No emulation breaks his soft repose;
Nor do his Wreaths or Virtues gain him Foes:
No politic mischiefs can disturb his Reign,
And malice would be busy here in vain.
Fathers and Sons just Love and Duty pay;
This knows to be indulgent, that to obey.
Here Is no sedition batcht, no other Plots,
But to entrap the Wolf that steals our Flocks.
Who then would be a King, gay Crowns to wear,
Restless his nights, thoughtful his days with care;
Whose greatness, nor whose goodness can secure
From outrages which Knaves and Fools procure?
Greatness, be gone, we banish you from hence,
The ^a^ie^^ state is lowly Innocence.
Here honest Wit and Mirth in triumph reigns,
Music and Love shall ever bless our Swains,
And keep the Golden Age within our Woods and Plains.
FINIS.

