THE Widow Ranter OR, The HISTORY of Bacon in Virginia. A TRAGI-COMEDY, Acted
by their Majesty's Servants.

Written by Mrs. A. Behn.

LONDON, Printed for James Knapton at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1690.

To the much Honored Madam Welldon.
Madam,
KNowing Mrs. Behn in her Lifetime designed to Dedicate some of of her Works
to you, you have a Natural Title, and claim to this and I could not without
being unjust to her Memory, but fix your name to it, who have not only a Wit
above that, of most of your Sex; but a goodness and Affability Extremely
Charming, and Engaging beyond Measure, and perhaps there are few to be found
like you, that are so Eminent for Hospitallity, and a Ready and Generous
Assistance to the distressed and Indigent, which are Quallities that carry much
more of Divinity with them, then a Puritanicall outward Zeal for Virtue and
Religion.

Our Author, Madam, who was so true a Judge of Wit, was (no doubt of it)
satisfied in the Patroness she had pitched upon: If ever she had occasion for a
Wit and Sense like yours it is now, to Defend this (one of the last of her
Works) from the Malice of her Enemies, and the ill Nature of the Critticks, who
have had Ingratitude enough not to Consider the Obligations they had to her
when Living; but to do those Gentlemen Justice, it is not (altogether) to be
Imputed to their Critticism, that the Play had not that Success which it
deserved, and was expected by her Friends; The main fault ought to lie on those
who had the management of it. Had our Author been alive she would have
Committed it to the Flames rather than have suffered it to have been Acted with
such Omissions as was made, and on which the Foundation of the Play Depended:
For Example, they thought fit to leave out a Whole Scene of the Virginian Court
of Judicature, which was a lively resemblance of that Country-Justice; and on
which depended a great part of the Plot, and wherein were many unusual and
very Natural J^sts which would at least have made some sort of People laugh:
In another Part of the Play is Omitted the appearance of the Ghost of the
Indian King, Killed by Bacon, and though the like may have been Represented in
other Plays, yet I never heard or found but that the sight was very agreeable
to an Audience, and very Awful: besi des the Apparition of the Ghost was
necessary, for it was that which struck a Terror in the Queen, and fright'ned
her from heark'ning to the Love of Bacon, believing it a horrid thing to
receive the Caresses and Embraces of her Husbands Murderer: And Lastly, many of
the Parts being false Cast, and given to those whose Tallants and Genius's
suited not our Authors Intention: These, Madam, are some of the Reasons that
this Play was unsuccessfull, and the best Play that ever was writ must prove
so: if it have the Fate to be Murdered like this.

However, Madam, I cannot but believe you will find an hours diversion in the
reading, and will meet with not only Wit, but true Comedy, (though low,) by
reason many of the Characters are such only as our Newgate afforded, being
Criminals Transported.

This Play, Madam, being left in my hands by the Author to Introduce to the
Public, I thought my self obliged to say thus much in its defense, and that it
was also a Duty upon me to choose (...) Patroness proper for it, and the Author
having pitched upon your name to do Honor to some of her Works, I thought your
Protection, could be so useful to none, as to this, whose owning it may
Silence the Malice of its Enemies; Your Wit and Judgment being to be Submitted
to in all Cases; Besides your Natural Tenderness and Compassion for the
Unfortunate, gives you in a manner another Title to it: The preference which is
due to you upon so many Accounts is therefore the Reason of this present
Address, for at the worst, if this Play should be so Unfortunate as not to be
thought worthy of your Acceptance; Yet it is certain, that its worth any Man's
while to have the Honor of subscribing himself,

Madam, Your Most Obedient Humble Servant, G. J.

Dramatis Personae
Mr. Bowman. Indian King called Cavarnio. Mr. Williams. Bacon -- General of
the English. Mr. Freeman Colonel Wellman deputy Governor Mr. Harris. Colonel
Downright a Loyal Honest Coun. Mr. Alexander. Hazard. Mr. Powell. Friendly.
Two Friends known to one another many years in England. Mr. Sandford. Dareing
Mr. Cudworth. Fearless.
Lieutenant Generals to Bacon Mr. Bright. Dullman. A Captain. Mr. Underhill.
Timorous Cornet. Mr. Trefuse Whimsey Mr. Bowen. Whiff. Mr. Barns. Boozer.
Justices of the Peace, and very great Cowards. Brag. A Captain. Grubb. One
Complained on by Capt. Whiff for calling his Wife Whore. Mr. Blunt. A
Petitioner against Brag. Mr. Baker. Parson Dunce, formerly a Farrier ^led from
England, And Chaplain to the Governor. Clerk. Boy. Mrs. Bra^girdle,Indian
Queen, called Semernia, beloved by Bacon. Mrs. Knight. Madam Surelove: beloved
by Hazard. Mrs. Jordon. Mrs. Crisante. Daughter to Col. Down. Mrs. Currer.Wid.
Ranter in Love with Dareing. Mrs. Cory. Mrs. Flirt.


Mrs. Whimsey. Mrs. Whiff. 2. Maids. Priests, Indians, Coachman, Soldiers, with
other Attendants.

SCENE Virginia in Bacons Camp.

Books Newly Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's-Church-Yard.
A Congratulatory Poem on his Highness the Prince of Orange's coming into
England. By Tho. Shadwell.

A Congratulatory Poem to the Most Illustrious Queen Mary, upon Her Arrival
into England. By Tho. Shadwell.

The Squire of Alsatia. A Comedy Acted by their Majesty's Servants. Written by
^ho Shadwell.

Bury Fair. A Comedy, Acted by Their Majesty's Servants. Written by Tho.
Shadwell.

A True Widow. A Comedy, Acted by their Majesty's Servants. Written by Tho.
Shadwell.

The Fortune-Hunters, O^, Two Fools well-met. A Comedy, as it is Acted by their
Majesty's Servants. Written by James Carlisle,

The Forced Marriage, Or, the Jealous Bridegroom: As it is Acted by their
Majesty's Servants. Written by A. Behn.

The Female Prelate: Being a History of the Life and Death of Pope Joan: A
Tragedy, As it is Acted at the Theatre-Royall.

Mr. Anthony. A Comedy. Acted by their Majesty's Servants. Written by the Right
Honorable the Earl of Orrery.

The Governor of Cyprus, or, the Lovers of Virotto, and Dorothea. A Novel in
Twelves.

The Wanton Friar, or, the Irish Amor, First and Second Part. A Novel in
Twelves.

The History of the Inquisition, as it is Exercised at Goa; Written in French
by the Ingenious Monsieur De^on, who labored five years under those
Severities, With an Account of his Deliverance; translated into English.
Quarto. Price 1 (...).

Some Observations concerning Regulating of Elections for Parliament, found
among the Earl of Shaftsbury's Papers after his Death, and now recommended to
the Consideration of the present Parliament. In Quarto. price 3 d.

Quadriennium Jacobi, or, the History of the Reign of King James II. from his
first coming to the Crown to his Desertion.

PROLOGUE,
By Mr. DRYDEN.
Heaven save ye Gallants: and this hopeful Age,
Y' are welcome to the downfall of the Stage:
The Fools have labored long in their Vocation;
And Vice, (the Manufacture of the Nation)
O're-stocks the Town so much, and thrives so well,
That Fopps and Knaves grow Druggs and will not sell*
In vain our Wares on Theaters are shown,
When each has a Plantation of his own.
His Cause never fails; for whatsoever he spends,
There Is still Gods plenty for himself and Friends.
Should Men be rated by Poetic Rules,
Lord what a Pole would there be raised from Fools!
Mean time poor Wit prohibited must lie,
As if'twere made some French Commodity.
Fools you will have, and raised at vast expense,
And yet as soon as seen, they give offense.
Time was, when none would cry that Oaf was m^,
But now you strive about your Pedigree:
Bawble and Cap no sooner are thrown down,
But there is a Muss of more then half the Town.
Each one will challenge a Child's part at least,
A sign ^e Family is well increased
Of Foreign Cattle! there is no longer need,
When we are supplied so fast with English Breed.
W^ll! Flourish, Countrymen: drink swear and roar,
Let every freeborn Subject keep his Whore;
And wandering in the Wilderness about,
At end of 40 years not wear her out.
But when you see these Pictures let none dare
To own beyond a Limb or single share:
F^ ^here the Punk is common! he is a Sot,
(...) needs will Father what the Parish go^.
EPILOGUE.
GAllants you have so long been absent hence,
That you have almost cooled your diligence,
For while we study or revive a Play,
You like good Husbands in the Country stay,
There frugally wear out your Summer Suite,
And in Frize Jerkin after Beagles Toot,
Or in Mon^tero Caps at field-fares shoot,
Nay some are so obdurate in their Sin,
That they swear never to come up again.
But all their charge of Clothes and treat Retrench,
To Gloves and Stockings for some Country Wench.
Even they who in the Summer had mishaps,
Send up to Town for Physic for their Claps.
The Ladies too are as resolved as they,
And having debts unknown to them, they stay,
And with the gain of Cheese and Poultry pay.
Even in their Visits, they from Banquets fall,
To entertain with Nuts and bottle Ale.
And in discourse with secresy report
Stale-News that past a Twelvemonth since at Court.
Those of them who are most refined, and gay,
Now learn the Songs of the last Summers Pl^y:
While the young Daughter does in private Mour^,
Her Loves in Town, and hopes not to return.
These Country grievances too great appear;
But cruel Ladies, we have greater here;
You come not sharp as you were wont to Plays;
But only on the first and second Days:
This made our Poet, in his visits look
What new strange courses, for your time you took.
And to his great regret he found too soon,
Basset and Umbre, spent the afternoon:
So that we cannot hope to see you here
Before the little Net work Purse be clear.
Suppose you should have luck; --
Yet sitting up so late as I am told,
You Will loose in Beauty, what you win in Gold:
And what each Lady of another says,
Will make you new Lampoons, and us new Plays.
ACT. I.
SCENE I. A Room with several Tables.
Enter Hazard in a Traveling Habit, and a Sea-Boy Carrying his Port-mantle.
Haz. WHat Town's this Boy?


Boy. James-Town, Master,


Haz. Take care my Trunk be brought ashore to Night, and there is for your Pains.


Boy. God bless you Master.


Haz. What do you call this House?


Boy. Mrs Flirts, Master, the best House for Commendation in all Virginia.


Haz. That Is well, has she any handsome Lady's Sirrah?


Boy. Oh! She Is woundly handsome her self Master, and the Kindest Gentlewoman
-- look here she comes Master -- God bless you Mistress, I have brought you a
young Gentleman here.


Flirt. That Is well, honest Jack -- Sir, you are most heartily Welcome.


Haz. Madam, your Servant;

[Salutes her.
Flirt. Please you to walk into a Chamber Sir.


Haz. By and by, Madam, but I Will repose here a while for the coolness of the
Air.


Flirt. This is a Public Room, Sir, but it is at your Service.


Haz. Madam, you oblige me.


Flirt. A Fine-spoken Person -- A Gentleman I Will warrant him, come Jack, I Will
give thee a Cogue of Brandy for old acquaintance.

[Exeunt Landlady and Boy. Hazard Pulls out Pen, Ink and Paper, and goes to
Write.
Enter Friendly. Friend. Here Nell, a Tankard of Cool drink quickly.


Nell. You shall have it, Sr.


Friend. Hah! who is that Stranger? he seems to be a Gentleman.


Haz. If I should give Credit to mine Eyes, that should be Friendly.


Friend. Sr, you seem a stranger, may I take the Liberty to present my Service
to you?


Haz. If I am not mistaken Sr, you are the only Man in the world whom I would
soonest Pledge, you will Credit me if three years Absence has not made you forget
Hazard.


Friend. Hazard, my Friend! come to my Arms and Heart.


Haz. This Unexpected Happiness O're-Joys me. Who could have Imagined to have
found thee in Virginia? I thought thou had been in Spain with thy Brother.


Friend. I was so till Ten Months since, when my Uncle Colonel Friendly dying
here, left me a Considerable Plantation; And faith I find Diversions not
altogether to be despised; the God of Love Reigns here, with as much Power, as
in Courts or Popular Cities: but prithee what Chance, (Fortunate for me) drove
thee to this part of the New World?


Haz. Why (faith) Ill Company, and that Common Vice of the Town, Gaming, soon
run out my Younger Brothers Fortune, for Imagining like some of the Luckier
Gamesters to Improve my Stock at the Groom-Porters; Ventured on and lost all --
My Elder Brother an Errant Jew, had neither Friendship, nor Honor enough to
Support me, but at last was mollified by persuasions and the hopes of being for
ever rid of me, sent me hither with a small Cargo to seek my fortune, --


Friend. And begin the world withal.


Haz. I thought this a better Venture then to turn Sharping Bully, Cully in
Prentices and Country Squires, with my Pocket full of false dice, your high and
low Flats and Bars, or turn broker to young Heirs; take up goods, to pay ten
fold at the Death of their Fathers, and take Fees on both sides; or set up all
night at the Groom Porters begging his Honor to go a Guinney the better of the
lay. No. Friendly, I had rather starve abroad then live Pitty'd and despised at
home.


Friend. Thou art in the Right, and art come just in the Nick of time to make
thy Fortune -- Will thou follow my advice?


Haz. Thou art too honest to Command any thing any thing that I shall Refuse.


Friend. You must know then, there is about a Mil^ from James Town a Young
Gentlewoman -- No matter for her Birth, her Breeding's the best this world
affords, she is Married to one of the Richest Merchants here, he is Old and
Sick, and now gone into England for the Recovery of his Health, where he will e'e^
give up the Ghost, he has writ her word he finds no Amendment, and Resolves to
stay another Year, the Letter I accidently took up and have about me; it is
easily Counterfeited and will be of great use to us.


Haz. Now do I fancy I conceive thee.


Friend. Well, hear me first, you shall get another Letter writ like this
Character, which shall say, you are his Kinsman, that is come to Trafick in
this Country, and it is his will you should be received into his House as such.


Haz. Well, and what will come of this?


Friend. Why thou ar^ Young and Handsome; She Young and De^ring; (...) were
easy to make her Love thee, and if the Old Gentleman chance to dye, you Guess
the rest, you are no Fool.


Haz. Ay, but if he should return --


Friend. If -- Why if she Love you, that Other will be but a slender Bar to thy
happiness; For if thou can not Marry her, thou may lie with her, (and Gad)
a Younger Brother may pick out a Pretty Livelihood here that way, as well as in
England -- Or if this ^ail, there thou will find a perpetual Visiter the Widow
Ranter, a Woman bought from the Ship by Old Coll. Ranter; she served him half a
year, and then he Married her, and dying in a year more, left her worth Fifty
thousand Pounds Sterling, besides Plate and Jewels: She Is a great Gallant, But
assuming the Humor of the Country Gentry, her Extravagancy is very Pleasant,
she retains something of her Primitive Quallity still, but is good natured and
Generous.


Haz. I like all this well.


Friend. But I have a further End in this matter, you must know there is in the
same House a Young Heiress, one Coll. Downrights Daughter, whom I Love, I think
not in Vain, her Father indeed has an Implacable hatred to me, for which Reason
I can but seldom Visit her, and in this Affair I have need of a Friend in that
House.


Haz. Me you're sure of.


Friend. And thus you will have an Opportunity to Manage both our Amors: here
you will find Occasion to show your Courage as well as Express your Love; For
at this time the Indians by our ill Management of Trade, whom we have Armed
against Our selves, Very frequently make War upon us with our own Weapons, Though
often coming by the Worst are forced to make Peace with us again, but so, as
upon every turn they fall to Massacring us wherever we ly exposed to them.


Haz. I heard the news of this in England, which hastens the new Governors
arrival here, who brings you fresh Supplys.


Friend. Would he were landed, we hear he is a Noble Gentleman.


Haz. He has all the Qualities of a Gallant Man, besides he is Nobly Born.


Friend. This Country wants nothing but to be People'd with a wellborn Race to
make it one of the best Collonies in the World, but for want of a Governor we
are Ruled by a Council, some of which have been perhaps transported Criminals,
who having Acquired great Estates are now become your Honor, and Right
Worshipful, and Possess all Places of Authority; there are amongst 'em some
honest Gentlemen who now begin to take upon 'em, and Manage Affairs as they
ought to be.


Haz. Bacon I think was one of the Council.


Friend. Now you have named a Man indeed above the Common Rank, by Nature
Generous; Brave Resolved, and Daring; who studying the Lives of the Romans and
great Men, that have raised themselves to the most Elevated fortunes, fancies
it easy for Ambitious men, to aim at any Pitch of Glory, I Have heard him often
say, Why cannot I Conquer the Universe as well as Alexander? or like another
Romulus form a new Rome, and make my self Adored?


Haz. Why might he not? great Souls are born in common men, sometimes as well
as Princes.


Friend. This Thirst of Glory cherisht by Sullen Melancholy, I believe was the
first Motive that made him in Love with the young Indian-Queen, fancying no
Hero ought to be without his Princess. And this was the Reason why he so
earnestly pressed for a Commission, to be made General against the Indians, which
long was promised him, but they fearing his Ambition, still put him off, till
the Grievances grew so high, that the whole Country flockt to him, and begged he
would redress them, -- he took the opportunity, and Led them forth to fight,
and vanquishing brought the Enemy to fair terms, but now instead of receiving
him as a Conqueror, we treat him as a Traitor.


Haz. Then it seems all the Crime this brave Fellow has committed, is serving
his Country without Authority.


Friend. It Is so, and however I admire the Man, I am resolved to be of the
Contrary Party, that I may make an Interest in our new Governor; Thus
stands-affairs, so that after you have seen Madam Sure-Love, I Will present you
to the Council for a Commission.


Haz. But my Kinsmans Character --


Friend. He was a Lester-shire younger Brother, came over hither with a small
fortune, which his Industry has increased to a thousand pound a year, and he is
now Coll. John Sure-love, and one of the Council.


Haz. Enough.


Friend. About it then, Madam Flirt to direct you.


Haz. You are full of your Madams here.


Friend. Oh! it is the greatest affront imaginable, to all a woman Mistress, though
but a retale Brandy-munger. -- Adieu^ -- one thing more, tomorrow is our
Country-Court, pray do not fa^l to be there, for the rarity of the
Entertainment: but I shall see you anon at Sure-lo^ where I Will Salute thee as
my first meeting, and as an old acquaintance in England -- here is company,
farewell.

[Ex^t Friend.]
Enter Dullman, Timorous, and Boozer. Hazard sits at a Table and writes. Dull.
Here Nell -- Well Lieutenant Boozer, what are you for?

[Enter Nell.
Booz. I am for Cooling Nants, Major:


Dull. Here Nell, a quart of Nants, and some Pipes and smoke.


Tim. And do ye hear Nell, bid your Mistress come in to Joke a little with
(...), for adzoors I was damnable drunk last night, and am better at the
petticoat than the bottle to day.


Dull. Drunk last night, and sick to day, how comes that about Mr. Justice? you
use to bear your Brandy well enough.


Tim. Ay your shier-Brandy I Will grant you, but I was Drunk at Coll. Downrights
with your high Burgundy Claret.


Dull. A Pox of that Paulter Liquor, your English French wine, I wonder how the
Gentlemen do to drink it.


Tim. Ay so do I, it is for want of a little Virginia Breeding: how much more
like a Gentleman it is, to drink as we do, brave Edifying Punch and Brandy, --
but they say the young Noblemen now and Sparks in England begin to reform, and
take it for their mornings Draught, get Drunk by noon, and despise the Lowsey
Juce of the Grape.

Enter Mrs. Flirt.
Dull. Come Landlady, come, you are so taken up with Parson Dunce, that your
old friends cannot Drink a Dram with you, -- what no smutty Catch now, no Gibe
or Joke to make the Punch go down Merrily, and advance Trading? Nay, they say,
Gad forgive ye, you never miss going to Church when Mr. Dunce Preaches -- but
here is to you*

[drinks.
Flir^* Lords, your Honors are pleased to be merry -- but my service to your
Honor.

[drinks.
Haz. Honors, who the Devil have we here? some of the wise Council at least,
I Would sooner took 'em for Hoggerds.

[aside.
Flirt. Say what you please of the Doctor, but I Will swear he is a fine
Gentleman, he makes the Prettiest Sounets, nay, and Sings 'em himself to the
rarest Tunes.


Tim. Nay the man will serve for both Soul and Body, for they say he was a
Farrier in England, but breaking turned Lifeguard man, and his Horse dying --
he Counterfeited a Deputation from the Bishop, and came over here a
Substantial Orthodox: but come, where stands the Cup? -- here, my Service to
you Major.


Flirt. Your Honors are pleased -- but methinks Doctor Dunce is a very
Edifying Person, and a Gentleman, and I pretend to know a Gentleman, -- For I
my self am a Gentlewoman; my Father was a Barronet, but undone in the late
Rebellion -- and I am fain to keep on Ordinary now, Heaven help me.


Tim. Good lack, why see how Virtue may be belied -- we heard your Father was a
Tailor, but trusting for old Olivers Funeral, Broke, and so came hither to
hide his head, -- but my Service to you; what, you are never the worse?


Flirt. Your Honors knows this is a Scandalous place, for they say your Honor
was but a broken Excise-ma^, who spent the Kings money to buy your Wife ^ne
Petticoats, and at last ^ot worth a Groat, you came over a poor Servant, though
now a Justice of Peace, and of the Honorable Council.


Tim. Adz zoors if I knew who 'twas said so, I Would sue him for Scandalum Magnatum.


Dull. Hang 'em Scoundrells, hang 'em, they live upon Scandal, and we are
Scandall-Proof, -- They say too, that I was a Tinker and running the Country,
robbed a Gentleman's House there, was put into Newgate, got a reprieve after
Condemnation, and was Transported hither -- And that you Boozer was a Common
Pick-pocket, and being often flogg'd at the Carts-tale, afterward turned
Evidence, and when the times grew Honest was fain to fly.


Booz. Ay, Ay, Major, if Scandal would have broke our hearts, we had not
arrived to the Honor of being Pri^y-Councellors -- but come Mrs. Flirt, what
never a Song to Entertain us?


Flirt. Yes, and a Singer too newly come ashore:


Tim. Adz zoors, let us have it then:

[Enter Girl, who sings, they bear the (...)*
Haz. Here Maid, a Tankard of your Drink;


Flirt. Quickly Nell, wait upon the Gentleman;


Dull. Please you Sir to taste of our Liquor -- My service to you (...) see you
are a Stranger and alone, please you to come to our Table?

[He rises and comes*
Flirt. Come Sir, pray sit down here, these are very Honorable Persons I
assure you, -- This is Major Dullman, Major of his Excellencies own Regiment,
when he Arrives, this Mr. Timorous, Justice a Peace in (...) T^s Capt. (...),
all of the Honorable Council.


Haz. With your leave, Gentlemen;

[(...)*
Tim. My service to you Sir;
[drink^ What have you brought over any Cargo Sir, I Will be your Customer.

Booz. Ay, and cheat him too, I Will warrant him.

[aside
Haz. I was not bred to Merchandising Sir, nor do intend to follow the Drudgery
of Trading.


Dull. Men of Fortune seldom travel hither Sir to see fashions.


Tim. Why Brother, it may be the Gentleman has a mind to be a Planter, will you
hire your self to make a Crop of Tobacco this year?


Haz. I was not born to work Sir.


Tim. Not work Sir, zoors your betters have workt Sir, I have work^ my self
Sir* both set and stripped Tobacco, for all I am of the Honorable Council not
work quoth a -- I suppose Sir you wear your fortune upon your Pack Sir?


Haz Is ityour Custom here Sir to affront Strangers? I shall expect
satisfaction.

[Rises*
Tim. Why does any body here owe you any thing?


Dull. No, unless he means to be paid for drinking with us -- ha, ha, ha.


Haz. No Sir, I have money to pay for what I drink: here is my Club -- my Guinia,

[flings down a Guinia. I scorn to be obliged to such Scoundrells;


Booz. Hum -- Call Men of Honor Scoundrells;

[rise in huff
Tim. Let him alone, let him alone Brother, how should he learn manners, he
never was in Virginia before.


Dull. He Is some Covent Garden Bully;


Tim. Or some broken Citizen turned Factor,


Haz. Sir you lie, and you're a Rascal,

[flings the Brandyin's face.
Tim. Adz zoors he has spilled all the Brandy.

Tim. runs behind the door, Dull. and Booz. strike Hazard.
Haz. I understand no Cudgel Play, but wear a sword to right my self.

[draws, they run off
Flirt. Good heavens, what quarelling in my House?


Haz. Do the Persons of Quallity in this Country treat strangers thus?


Flirt. Alas Sir, it is a familiar way they have, Sir.


Haz. I Am glad I known it, -- Pray Madam can you inform one how I may be
furnished with a Horse and a guide to Madam Sure Loves?


Flirt. A most Accomplished Lady, and my very good friend you shall be
Immediately --

[Exeunt
SCENE, II.
Enter Wellman, Downright, Dunte, Whimsey, Whiff, and others. Well. Come Mr.
Dunce, though you are no Counselor, yet your Council may be good in time of
necessity, as now.


Dun. If I may be worthy advice, I do not look upon our danger to be so great
from the Indians, as from young Bacon, whom the People have nick named
Fright-all.


Whim. Ay, Ay that same Bacon, I would he were well hanged, I am afraid that
under pretense of killing all the Indians he means to Murder us, Ly with our
Wives, and hang up our little Children, and make himself Lord and King.


Whiff. Brother Whimsey, not so hot, with leave of the Honorable Board, My
Wife is of Opinion, that Bacon came seasonably to our Aid, and what he has done
was for our defense, the Indians came down upon us, and Ravished us all, Men,
Women, and Children.


Well. If these Grievances were not redres^ we had our reasons for it, it was
not that we were insensible Capt. Whiff of what we suffered from the Insolence
of the Indians: But all knew what we must expect from Bacon if that by Lawful
Authority he had Arrived to so great a Command as General, nor would we be
huft out of our Commissions.


Down. It Is most certain that Bacon did not demand a Commission out of a design
of serving us, but to satisfy his Ambition and his Love, it being no secret
that he passionately Admires the Indian Queen, and under the pretext of a War,
intends to kill the King her Husband, Establish himself in her heart, and on
all occasions have himself a more formidable Enemy, than the Indians are.


Whim. Nay, nay, I ever foresaw he would prove a Villain.


Whiff. Nay, and he be thereabout, my Nancy shall have no more to do with him.


Well. But Gentlemen the People daily flock to him, so that his Army is too
Considerable for us to oppose by any thing but Policy.


Down. We are sensible Gentlemen that our Fortunes, our Honors, and our Lives
are at Stake, and therefore you are called together to consult what is to be
done in this Grand Affair, till our Governout and Forces arrive from England;
The Truce he made with the Indians will be out to Morrow.


Whiff. Ay, and then he intends to have another bout with the Indians. Let Us
have Patience I say till he has thrum'd their Jackets, and then to work with
your Politics as soon as you please.


Down. Colonel Wellman has answered that point good Captain Whiff, it is the
Event of this Battle we ought to dread, and if won or lost will be equally
fatal for us, either from the Indians or from Bacon.


Dunce. With the Permission of the Honorable Board I think I have hit upon an
Expedient that may prevent this Battle, your Honors shall write a Letter to
Bacon, where you shall acknowledge his Services, invite him kindly home, and
offer him a Commission for General --


Whiff. Just my Nancys Counsel -- Doctor Dunce has spoken like a Cherubin, he
shall have my voice for General, what say you Brother Whimsey?


Dunce. I say, he is a Noble fellow, and fit for a General.


Dun. But conceive me right Gentlemen, as soon as he shall have rendered
himself, seize him and strike off his Head at the Fort.


Whiff. Hum! his head -- Brother


Whim. Ay, ay, Doctor Dunce speaks like a Cherubin:


Well. Mr Dunce, your Counsel in extremity I confess is not amiss, but I
should be loath to deal dishonourably with any man.


Down. His Crimes deserve death, his life is forfeited by Law, but shall never
be taken by my consent by Treachery: If by any Stratagem we could take him
a-live, and either send him for England to receive there his Punishment, or
keep him Prisoner here till the Governor arrive, I should agree to it, but I
question his coming in upon our Invitation.


Dun. Leave that to me*


Whim. Come, I Will warrant him, the Rogue's as stont as Hector, he fears neither
Heaven nor Hell.


Down. He Is too Brave and Bold to refuse our summons, and I am for sending him
for England and leaving him to the Kings Mercy.


Dun. In that you will find more difficulty Sir, to take him off here will be more
quick and sudden: for the people worship him.


Well. I Will never yield to so ungenerous an expedient. The seizing him I am
content in the Extremity wherein we are, to follow. What say you Collonell
Downright? shall we send him a Letter now while this two days truce lasts,
between him and the Indians?


Down. I approve i^.


All. And I, and I, and I.


Dun. If your Honors please to make me the Messenger, I Will use some arguments
of my own to prevail with him.


Well. You say well Mr. Dunce, and we will dispatch you presently.


Whiff. Ah Doctor, if you could but have persuaded Collonell Wellman and
Colonel Downright to have hanged him --

Ex. Wellm. Dow. and all but Whim. Whiff. and Dunce.
Whiff. Why Brother Whiff you were for making him a General but now.


Whiff. The Councills of wise Statesmen Brother Whimsey must change as causes
do, do you see.


Dun. Your Honors are in the right, and whatever those two leading Counselors
say, they would be glad if Bacon were dispatched, but the punctillio of Honor
is such a thing.


Whim. Honor, a Pox on it, what is that Honor that keeps such a Bustle in the
world, yet never did good as I heard of.


Dun. Why it is a Foolish word only, taken up by great men, but rarely
practiced, -- but if you would be great men indeed --


Whiff. If we would Doctor, name, name the way.


Dun. Why, you command each of you a company -- when Bacon comes from the Camp,
as I am sure he will, (and full of this silly thing called Honor will come
unguarded too,) lay some of your men in Ambush along those Ditches by the
Sevana about a Mile from the Town, and as he comes by, seize him, and hang him
upon the next Tree.


Whiff. Hum -- hang him! a rare Plot.


Whim. Hang him -- we will do it, we will do it Sir, and I doubt not but to be made
General for the Action -- I Will take it all upon my self.

[aside.
Dun. If you resolve upon this, you must about it instantly -- Thus I shall at
once serve my Country, and revenge my self on the Rascal for affronting my
Dignity once at the Councell-Table, by calling me Farrier

[Ex. Doctor
Whiff. Do you know Brother what we are to do?


Whim. To do, yes, to hang a General, Brother, that is all.


Whiff. All, but is it Lawful to hang any General?


Whim. Lawful, yes, that ^is Lawful to hang any G^nerall that sights against
Law.


Whiff. But in what he has done, he has sorv'd the King and our Country, and
preserved all our Lives and Fortunes.


Whim. That Is all one, Brother, if there be but a Quirk in the Law offended in
this Case, though he fought like Alexander, and preserved the whole world from
perdition, yet if he did it against Law, it is Lawful to hang him; why what
Brother, is it fit that every impudent fellow that pretends to a little Honor,
Loyalty and Courage, should serve his King and Country against the Law? no, no,
Brother, these things are not to b^ suffered in a Civil Government by Law
Established, -- wherefore let us about it --

[Exeunt
SCENE III. Sureloves House.
Enter Ranter and her Coachman. Ran. Here Jesiry, ye D^unken Dog, set your
Coach and Horses up, 'le not go till the Cool of the Evening, I love to ride in
Fresco

[En. a Boy.
Coach. Yes after hard drinking -- (aside) it shall be done, Madam.


Ran. how now Boy, is Madam Surelove at home?


Boy. Yes Madam.


Ran. Go tell her I am here, Sirrah.


Boy. Who are you pray, forsooth?


Ran. Why you Son of Baboone don't you know me?


Boy. No Madam, I came over but in the last Ship.


Ran. What from Newgate or Bridewell? from shovi^g the Fu^ler, Sirrah, Lifting
or ^ing the Cly?


Boy. I don't understand this Country-Language for sooth, yet.


Ran. You Rogue, it is what we transport from England ^ost -- go ye D^g, go tell
your Lady, the Widow Ranter is come to dine with her -- I hope I shall not find
that Rogue Dareing here. S^ling after [Ex. Boy. Mrs. Chrisame: if I (...), by
the Lord, 'e Lay him thick, Pox on him why should I love the Dog, unless it be
a Judgment upon me.

Enter Sure-love and Chrisante. -- My dear I w^ll how do do? -- as for you
Gentlewoman you are my Rival, and I am in rancouragai^st you till you have
renounced my Dareing.


Chris. All the Interest I have in him Madam, I resign to you.


Ran. Ay -- ^ut your house lying so near the Camp, gives me Mortal sears -- but
^thee how thrives thy Amor with honest Friendly?


Chris. As well as a^ Amor can, that is absolutely forbid by a Father on one
side, and pursued by a good resolution on the other.


Ran. Hay Gad, I Will warrant for Friendlys resolution, what, though his Fortune be
not answerable to yours, we are bound to help one another* -- here Boy -- some
Pipes and a Bowl of Punch, you know my humor Madam, I must Smoke and Drink in
a Morning, or I am Mauki^h all day.


Sure. But will you drink Punch in a Morning*


Ran. Punch, it is my Mornings draught, my Table-drink, my Treat, my Regalio, my
every thing, ah my dear Surelove, if thou would but refresh and Cheer thy
heart with Punch in a morning, thou would not look thus Clowdy all the Day.

Enter Pipes and a Great Bowl, she falls to smoking
Sur. I have reason Madam to be Melancholy, I have received a Letter from my
Husband, who gives the an account that he is worse in England than when he was
here, so that I fear I shall see him no more, the Doctors can do no good on him.


Ran. A yery good hearing. I wonder what the Devil thou have done with him so
long? an old fusty weather-beaten Skelleton, as dried as Stock Fish, and much
of the Hue. -- come, come, here is to the next, may he be young, Heaven, I
beseech thee.

[drinks.
Sure. You have reason to praise an old man, who died and left you worth fifty
thousand Pound.


Rant. Ay Gad -- and what is better Sweetheart, died in good time too, and left
me young enough to spend this fifty thousand pound in better Company -- rest
his Soul for that too.


Chris. I doubt 'twill be all laid out in Bacons Mad Lieutenant General
Darling.


Ran. Faith I think I could lend it the Rogue on good Security.


Chris. What Is that, to be bound Body for Body?


Ran. Rather that he should love no bodies Body besides my own, but my Fortune
is too good to trust the Rogue, my money makes me an Infidel.


Chris. You think they all love you for that:


Ran. For that, Ay what else? if it were not for that, I might sit still and
sigh, and cry out, a Miracle! a Miracle! at sight of a Man within my doors:

[Enters Maid
Maid. Madam here is a young Gentleman without would speak with you.


Sure. With me, sure you are mistaken, is it not Friendly?


Maid. No Madam it is a Stranger;


Rant. It Is not Dareing that Rogue, is it?


Maid. No Madam.


Rant. Is he handsome? does he look like a Gentleman?


Maid, He Is handsome and seems a Gentleman.


Rant. Bring him in then, I hate a conversation without a Fellow, -- hah -- a
good handsome Lad indeed:

[Enter Hazard with a Letter.
Sure. With me Sir would you speak?


Haz If you are Madam Surelove:


Sure. So I am called;


Haz. Madam I am newly arrived from England, and from your Husband my kinsman
bring you this --

[gives a Letter
Rant. Please you to sit Sir;


Haz. She Is extremely handsome --

[aside -- sits down
Rant. Come Sir will you Smoke a Pipe?


Haz. I never do Madam --


Rant. Oh fie upon it you must learn then, we all smoke here, it is a part of good
breeding, -- well, well, what Cargo, what goods have ye? any Points, Lace, rich
Stuffs, Jewels; if you have I Will be your Chafferer, I live hard by, any body
will direct you to the widow Ranters.


Haz. I have already heard of you, Madam.


Rant. What you are like all the young Fellows, the first thing they do when
they come to a strange place, is to enquire what Fortunes there are.


Haz. Madam I had no such Ambition:


Rant. Gad, then you're a fool, Sir, but come, my service to you; we rich
Widows are the best Commodity this Country affords, I Will tell you that.

[this while she reads the Letter.
Sure. Sir, my Husband has recommended you here in a most particular manner, by
which I do not only find the esteem he has for you, but the desire he has of
gaining you mine, which on a double score I render you, first for his sake,
next for those Merits that appear in your self.


Haz. Madam, the endeavors of my life shall be to express my Gratitude for
this great Bounty;

[Enter Maid.
Maid. Madam Mr. Friendly's here:


Sure. Bring him in;


Haz. Friendly, -- I had a dear Friend of that name, who I hear is in these
Parts -- Pray Heaven it may be he.


Rant. How now Charles.

[Enter Friendly.
Friend. Madam your Servant -- Hah! should not I know you for my dear friend
Hazard.

['Embracing him.
Haz. Or you'rs too blame my Friendly:


Friend. Prithee what calm brought thee ashore?


Haz. Fortune de la gar^, but prithee ask me no questions in so good Company;
where a minute lost from this Conversation is a misfortune not to be retrieved:


Friend. Do like her Rogue --

[(...) aside.
Haz. Like her! have I sight, or sense -- Why I adore her.


Friend. My Chrisante, I heard your Father would not be here to day, which made
me snatch this opportunity of seeing you.


Rant. Come, Come, a Pox of this whining Love. It spoils good company:


Friend, You know my dear friend, these opportunities comes but serd^m, and
therefore I must make (...) of '^m*


Rant. Come, come, I Will give you a better opportunity at my House to morrow, we
are to eat a Buffilo there, and I Will secure the old Gentleman from coming.


Friend. Then I shall see Chrisanto once more before I go:


Chris. Go -- Heavens -- whether my Friendly?


Friend. I have received a Commission to go against the Indians, Bacon being
sent for home.


Rant. But will he come when sent for?


Friend. If he refuse we are to Endeavor to force him.


Chris. I do not think he will be sorc'd, not even by Friendly.


Friend. And faith it goes against my Conscience to lift my Sword against him,
for he is truly brave, and what he has done, a Service to the Country, had it
but been by Authority.


Chris. What pity it is there should be such false Maxims in the World, that
Noble Actions how ever great, must be Criminal for want of a Law to Authorize
'em.


Friend. Indeed it is pity that when Laws are faulty they should not be mended
or abolish^.


Rant. Hark'ye Charles, by Heaven if you kill my Dareing I Will Pistol you


Fri. No, widow I Will spare him for your sake,

[They join with Surelove
Haz. Oh she is all Divine, and all the Breath she utters serves but to blow my
Flame,

[Enter Maid
Maid. Madam dinner's on the Table -- --


Sure. Please you Sir, to walk in -- come Mr. Friendly.

[she takes Hazard
Rant. Prithee good wench bring in the Punch-Bowle:

[Exeunt.
ACT II.
SCENE I. A Pavillion.
Discovers the Indian King and Queen sitting in State, with Guards of Indians,
Men and Women attending: to them Bacon richly dressed, attended by Daring,
Fearless, and other Officers, he bows to the King and Queen, who rise to
receive him. King. I Am sorry Sir, we meet upon these terms, we who so often
have embraced as friends.


Bac. How charming is the Queen? [aside.] War, Sir, is not my business, nor my
pleasure: Nor was I bred in Arms; My Country's good has forced me to assume a
Soldiers life: And it is with much regret that I Employ the sirst effects of it
against my Friends; Yet whilst I may -- Whilst this Cessation lasts, I beg we
may exchange those Friendships, Sir, we have so often paid in happier Peace.


King. For your part, Sir, you have been so Noble, that I repent the fatal
difference that makes us meet in Arms. Yet though I Am young I Am sensible of
Injuries; And often have heard my Grandsire say -- That we were Monarchs once of
all this spacious World; Till you an unknown People landing here, Distressed
and ruined by destructive storms, Abusing all our Charitable Hospitality,
Usurped our Right, and made your friends your slaves.


Bac. I will not justify the Ingratitude of my forefathers, but finding here
my Inheritance, I am resolved still to maintain it so, And by my sword which
first cut out my Portion, Defend each inch of Land with my last drop of Blood.


Queen. Even his threats have charms that please the heart:

[aside
King. Come Sir, let this ungrateful Theme alone, which is better disputed in
the Field.


Queen. Is it impossible there might be wrought an understanding betwixt my
Lord and you? 'Twas to that end I first desired this truce, My self proposing
to be Mediator, To which my Lord Cavarnio shall agree, Could you but Condescend
-- -I know you're Noble: And I have heard you say our tender Sex could never
plead in vain.


Bac. Alas! I dare not trust your pleading Madam? A few soft words from such a
Charming mouth would make me lay the Conqueror at your feet as a Sacrifice for
all the ills he has done you.


Queen. How strangely am I pleased to hear him talk

[aside
King. Se^ernia see -- the Dancers do appear;

Sir will you take your seat?

[to Bacon: [He leads the Queen to a seat, they sit and talk.]
Bac. Curse on his sports that interrupted me, My very soul was hovering at my
Lip, ready to have discovered all its secrets. But oh! I dread to tell her of
my pain, And when I would, an Awful trembling seizes me, And she can only
(...) my dying eyes, read all the Sentiments of my Captive heart.

[sits down, the rest wait.
Enter Indians that dance Anticks; After the Dance the King seems in discourse
with Bacon, the Queen (...) and comes forth. Qu. The more I gaze upon this
English Stranger, the more Confusion struggles in my Soul, Often I have heard of
Love, and often this Gallant Man (When Peace had made him pay his idle Visits)
(...) told a thousand tales of dying Maids. And ever when he spoke, my panting
heart, with a Prophetic fear in sighs replied, I shall fall such a Victim to
his Eyes.

[Enter an Indian.
Indian. Sir here is a Messenger from the English Council

[to the King Desires admittance to the General.


Bac. With your Permission Sir, he may advance.

[to the King
Re-enter Indian with Dance. A Letter. Dun. All health and Happyness attend
your honor, This from the Honorable Council:

[gives him a Letter
King. I Will leave you till you have dispatched the M^ger, and then expect your
precense in the Royal Tent.

Exeunt King, Queen, and Indians.
Bac. (...), read the Letter

[to Daring. [reads
Daring. SIR, the necessity of what you (...) (...) makes it pardona^, and we
could wish we had done the Country, and our selves so much Justice (...) to
have given you that Commission you desired -- We now find it reason^ble (...)
raise (...) forces, to appose these Insolences, which possible yours may be
(...) weak to accomplish, to which end the Council is ordered to meet this
Evening, and destring you will come and take your place there, and be pleased
to accept from us a Commission to Command in Chief in this War -- Therefore
send those Soldiers under your Command to their respective houses, and have,
Sir, to your affectionate Friends --


Fear. Sir, I fear the hearts and Pen did not agree when this was writ


Dar. A plague upon their shallow Politics! Do they think to play the old game
twice with us?


Bac. Away, you wrong the Council, who of themselves are Honorable Gentlemen,
but the base Coward fear of some of them, puts the rest on tricks that suit not
with their nature.


Dunce. Sir, it is For noble ends you're sent for, and for your safety I Will
engage my life.


Dar. By Heaven and so you shall -- and pay it too with all the rest of your
wise-headed Council.


Bac. Your zeal is too Officious now: I see no Treachery, and can fear no
danger.


Dun. Treachery! now Heavens forbid, are we not Christians Sir, All Friends and
Countrymen! believe me Sir, it is Honor calls you to increase your fame, and he
who would dissuade you is your Enemy.


Dar. Go Cant, Sir to the Rabble -- for us -- we know you.


Bac. You wrong me when you but suspect for me, let him that acts dishonourably
fear. My Innocence, and my good sword's my guard.


Dar. If you resolve to go, we will attend you.


Bac. What go like an Invader? No Daring, the Invitation's friendly, and as a
friend, attended only by my menial Servants, I Will wait upon the Council, that
they may see that when I could Command it I came an humble Suppliant for their
favor -- You may return, and tell 'em I Will attend.


Dunce. I kiss your Honor's hand* --

[goes out.
Dar. 'Sdeath will you trust the saithless Council Sir, who have so long h^ld
you in hand with promises, That curse of Statesmen, that unlucky vice that
renders even Nobility despised.


Bac. Perhaps the Council thought me too aspiring, and would not add Wings to
my Ambitious flight.


Dar. A pox of their considering caps, and now they find that you can ^ar
alone, they send for you to knip your spreading wings.

Now by my soul you shall not go alone.


Bac. Forbear, lest I suspect you for a mutineer; I am resolved to go.


Fear. What, and send your Army home? a pretty fetch:


Dar. By Heaven we will not disband -- not till we see how fairly you are dealt
with: if you have a Commission to be General, here we are ready to receive new
orders: If no -- We Will ring 'em such a Thundering Peal shall beat the Town about
their Treacherous Ears.


Bac. I do Command you not to stir a man, Till you're informed how I am treated
by 'em: -- leave me all --

[Exeunt Officers. While Bacon reads the Letter again, To him the Indian Queen,
with Women waiting.
Queen. Now while my Lord's asleep in his Pavi^ion I Will try my power with the
General, for an Accommodation of a Peace: the very dreams of war fright my soft
slumbers that used to be employed in kinder Business.


Bac. Ha! -- The Queen -- What happyness is this presents it self which all my
Industry could never gain?


Queen. Sir --

[approaching him
Bacon. Pressed with the great Extremes of Joy and Fear I trembling stand, unable
to approach her:


Queen. I hope you will not think it fear in me, though timorous as a Dove, by
nature framed: Nor that my Lord, whose youth's unskilled in War can either
doubt his Courage, or his forces, t^ makes me seek a Reconcilation on any
honorable terms of Peace.


Bac. Ah Madam! if you knew how absolutely you command my Fate I fear but
little honor wonld be left me, since what so e're you ask me I should grant.


Queen. Indeed I would not ask your Honor, Sir, That renders you too Brave in
my esteem. Nor can I think that you would part with that. No not to save your
Life.


Bac. I would do more to serve your least Commands than part with trivial Life.


Queen. Bless me! Sir, how came I by such a Power?


Bac. The Gods, and Nature gave it you in your Creation, formed with all the
Charms that ever graced your Sex.


Queen. Is It possible? am I so Beautiful?


Bac. As Heaven, or Angels there:


Queen. Supposing this, how can my Beauty make you so obliging?


Bac. Beauty has still a power over great Souls, And from the moment I beheld
your eyes, my stubborn heart melted to compliance, and from a nature rough and
turbulent, grew Soft and Gentle as the God of Love.


Queen. The God of Love! what is the God of Love?


Bac. It Is a resistless Fire, that is kinddl'd thus -- takes her by the hand and
gazes on her. at every gaze we take from fine Eyes, from such Bashful Looks,
and such soft touches -- it makes us sigh -- and pant as I do now, and stops
the Breath when e're we speak of Pain.


Queen. Alas, for me if this should be Love!

[aside.
Bac. It makes us tremble, when we touch the fair one, And all the blood runs
shivering through the veins, The heart's surrounded with a feeble Languishment,
The eyes are dying, and the Cheeks are pale, The tongue is faltring, and the
body sainting.


Queen. Then I Am undone, and all I feel is Love,

[aside. If Love be Catching Sir, by looks and touches, Let us at distance
parley -- or rather let me fly, For within veiw, is too near --

[aside
Bac. Ah! she retires -- displeased I fear with my presumptious Love, -- Oh
pardon, fairest creature:

[kneels
Queen. I Will talk no more, our words exchange our Souls, and every look ^ades
all my blooming honor, like Sun beams, on unguarded Roses -- take all our
Kingdoms -- make our People Slaves, and let me fall beneath your Conquering
Sword. But never let me hear you talk again or gaze upon your Eyes --

[goes out
Bac. She Loves! by Heaven she Loves! And has not art enough to hide her Flame.
though she have Cruel honor to suppress it. However I Will pursue her to the
Banquet.

[Exit
SCENE II. The Widow Ranters- Hall.
Enter Sure-Love fan'd by two Negro's, followed by Hazard. Sure. This Madam
Ranter is so prodigious a Treater -- oh! I hate a room that smells of a great
Dinner, and what is worse a desert of Punch and Tobacco -- what! are you taking
leave so soon Cousin?


Haz. Yes Madam, but it is not fit I should let you know with what regret I go,
-- but business will be obeyed.


Sure. Some Letters to dispatch to English Ladies you have left behind -- come
Cousin Confess:


Haz. I own I much admire the English Beauties, but never yet have put their
Fetters on --


Sure. Never in Love -- oh then you have pleasure to Come.


Haz. Rather a Pain when there is no hope atrends it,


Sure. Oh such diseases quickly cure themselves,


Haz. I do not wish to find it so; For even in Pain I find a pleasure too.


Sure. You are infected then, and came abroad for cure.


Haz. Rather to receive my wounds Madam;


Sure. Already Sir. -- who e're sne be, she made good have to Conquer, we have
few here, boast that Dexterity.


Haz. What think you of Chrisante, Madam?


Sure. I must confess your Love and your Despair are there plac^d right, of
which I am not fond of being made a Consident, since I Am assured she can Love
none but Friendly.

[coldly
Haz. Let her Love on, as long as life shall last, let Friendly take her, and
the Universe, so I had my next wish, --

[sighs Madam it is your self that I adore, -- I should not be so vain to tell
you this, bu^ that I know you have found the secret out already from my sighs.


Sure. Forbear Sir, and know me for your kinsmans wife, and no more:


Haz. Be Scornful as you please, rail at my passion, and refuse to hear it;
yet I Will Love on, and hope in spite of you, my Flame shall be so constant and
Submissive, it shall compel your heart to some return.


Sure. You're very Confident of your power I perceive, but if you chance to
find your self mistaken, say your opinion and your affectation were
misapplied, and not that I was Cruel,

[Ex Surelove
Haz. Whatever denyalls dwell upon your Tongue, your eyes assure me that your
heart is tender,

[goes out
Enter the Bag-Piper, Playing before a great Boule of Punch, carried between
two Negro's, a Highlandler Dancing after it, the Widow Ranter led by Timorous,
Chrisante by Dullman; Mrs. Flirt and Friendly all dancing after it; they place
it on the Table. Dull. This is like the Noble Widow all over In Faith,


Tim. Ay, Ay, the widows Health in a full Ladle, Major, -- but a Pox on it what
made that young Fellow here, that affronted us yesterday Major?

[drinks [while they drink about
Dull. Some damned Sharper that would lay his Knife aboard your Widow Cornet.


Tim. Zoors if I thought so, I Would Arrest him for Salt and Battery, Lay him in
Prison for a Swinging fine and take no Bail.


Dull. Nay, had it not been before my Mrs here, Mrs Chrisante, I had swing'd
him for his yesterdays affront, -- ah my sweet Mistress Chrisante -- if you did
but know what a power you have over me --


Chris. Oh you're a great Courtier Major:


Dull. Would I were any thing for your sake Madam.


Ran. Thou art any thing, but what thou should be, prithee Major leave off
being an old Buffoon, that is a Lover turned to ridicule by Age, consider thy
self a Mere rouling Tun of Nants, -- a walking Chimney, ever Smoking with
Nasty Mundungus, -- and then thou have a Countenance like an old worm-eaten
Cheese,


Dull. Well widow, you will Joake, ha, ha, ha --


Tim. Gad', Zoors She Is pure Company, ha, ha --


Duoe. No matter for my Countenance -- Coll. Downright likes my Estate and is
resolved to have it a Match.


Friend. Dear Widow, take off your Damned Major, for if he speak another word
to Chrisante, I shall be put past all my patience, and fall foul upon him.


Ran. S'life not for the world -- Major I bar Love-making within my
Territories, it is inconsistent with the Punch-Bowle, if you will drink, do, if not
be gone:


Tim. Nay Gad's Zooks if you enter me at the Punch-Boule, you enter me in
Politics -- well it is the best Drink in Christendom for a Statesman,

[they drink about, the Bag-Pipe playing
Ran. Come, now you shall see what my high Land-Vallet can do --

[a Scots Dance
Dull. So -- I see let the world go which way it will, widow, you are resolved
for Mirth, -- but come -- to the conversation of the times.


Rant. The times, why what a Devil ailes the times, I see nothing in the times
but a company of Coxcombs that fear without a Cause.


Tim. But if these fears were laid and Bacon were hanged, I look upon Virginia
to be the happiest part of the world, gads Zoors, -- why there is England --
it is nothing to it -- I was in England about 6. years ago, and was showed the
Court of Aldermen, some were nodding, some saying nothing, and others very
little to purpose, but how could it be otherwise, for they had neither Bowl of
Punch, Bottles of wine or Tobacco before 'em to put Life and Soul into 'em as
we have here: then for the young Gentlemen -- Their farthest Travels is to
France or Italy, they never come hither.


Dull. The more's the Pity by my troth,

[drinks.
Tim. Where they learn to Swear Mor-blew, Mor-Dee:


Friend. And tell you how much bigger the Louvre is then White Hall; buy a suit
A-la-mode, get a swinging Cap of some French Marquis, spend all their money and
return just as they went.


Dull. For the old fellows, their business is Usury, Extortion, and undermining
young Heirs.


Tim. Then for young Merchants, their Exchange the is Tavern, their Warehouse
the Playhouse, and their Bills of Exchange Billet-Deaxs, where to sup with
their wenches at the other end of the Town, -- now Judge you what a Condition
poor England is in: for my part I look upon it as a lost Nation gads zoors.


Dull. I have considered it, and have found a way to save all yet:


Tim. As how I pray,


Dull. As thus, we have men here of great Experience and Ability -- now I would
have as many sent into England as would supply all places, and Offices, both
Civil and Military, de see, their young Gentry should all Travel hither for
breeding, and to learn the mysteries of State.


Frien. As for the old Covetous Fellows, I would have the Tradesmen get in
their debts, break and turn Troupers.


Tim. And they would be soon weary of Extortion gadz zoors;


Dull. Then for the young Merchants, there should be a Law made, none should go
beyond Ludgate;


Fry. You have sound out the only way to preserve that great Kingdom,

[drinking all this while sometimes
Tim. Well, Gad zoors it is a fine thing to be a good Statesman,


Fri. Ay Cornet, which you had never been had you staid in old England.


Dull. Why Sir we were somebody in England,


Fry. So I heard Major,


Dull. You heard Sir, what have you heard, he is a kid-Naper that says he heard
any thing of me -- and so my service to you -- I Will sue you Sir for spoiling my
Marriage here, by your Scandalls with Mrs. Chrisante, but that shall not do Sir,
I Will marry her for all that, and he is a Rascal that denies it.


Fry. God's Death you Lie Sir -- I do.


Tim. Gad zoors Sir Lie to a Privy-Councellour, a Major of Horse, Brother, this
is an affront to our Dignities, draw and I Will side with you.

[they both draw on Friendly, the Ladies run off.
Fri. If I disdain to draw, it is not that I fear your base and Cowardly force,
but for the respect I bear you as Magistrates, and so I leave you --


Tim An Arrant Coward Gad zoors.

[goes out
Dull. A mere paultroon, and I scorn to drink in's Company.

[Exeunt, putting up their Swords.
SCENE III. A Sevana, or large Heath.
Enter Whimsey, Whiff, and Boozer, with some Soldiers, Armed. Whim. Stand --
stand -- and hear the word of Command -- do ye see you Cops, and that Ditch
that runs along Major Dullmans Plantation.


Booz. We do.


Whim. Place your Men there, and lie Flat on your Bellies, and when Bacon comes
(if alone) seize him dy' see:


Whiff. Observe the Command now, (if alone) for we are not for bloud-^ned.


Booz. I Will warrant you for our Parts.

[Exeunt all but Whim and Whiff
Whim. Now we have Ambusht our men, let us light our Pipes and sit down and take
an Encouraging dram of the Bottle.

[pulls out a bottle of brandy out of his Pocket -- they sit.
Whiff. Thou art a Knave and have Emptyed half the Bottle in thy Leathern
Pockets, but come here is young Fright-all's health.


Whim. What, wilt drink a man's health you are going to hang?


Whiff. It Is all one for that, we will drink his health first, and hang him
afterward, and thou shall pledge me de see, and though 'twere under the Gallows.


Whim. You Are a Traitor for saying so, and I defy thee.


Whiff. Nay, since we are come out like Loving Brothers to hang the General,
let us not fall out among our selves, and so here is to you [drinks though I have
no great Maw to this business:


Whim. Prithee Brother Whiff, do not be so Villainous a Coward, for I hate a
Coward.


Whiff. Nay it is not that -- But my Whiff, my Nancy dreamt to night she saw me
hanged.


Whim. 'Twas a Cowardly Dream, think no more on it, but as dreams are Expounded
by Contraries, thou shall hang the General.


Whiff. Ay -- but he was my friend, and I owe him at this time a hundred Pounds
of Tobacco.


Whim. Nay, then I m sure thoud'st hang him if he were thy brother.


Whiff. But hark -- I think I hear the Neighing of horses, where shall we hide
our selves, for if we stay here, we shall be Mawl'd damnably.

[Exeunt both behind a Bush, peeping.
[Enter Bacon, Fearless and 3 or 4 Footmen.] Bac. Let the Groom lead the Horses
over the Sevana we will walk it on Foot, it is not a quarter of a Mile to the
Town; and here the Air is cool.


Fear. The Breazes about this time of the day begin to take Wing and fan
refreshment to the Trees and Flowers.


Bac. And at these hours how fragrant are the Groves:


Fear. The Country's well, were but the People so,


Bac. But come let us on --

[they pass to the Entrance.
Whi^. There Boys --

[The Soldiers come forth and fall on Bacon.
Bac. Hah! Ambush --

Draws, Fearless and Foot^n draw, the Soldiers after a while fighting take Bac.
and Fear. they having laid 3 or 4 Dead.
Whiff. So, so, he is taken

Now we may venture out.


Whi^. But are you sure he is taken?


Whiff. Sure cannot you believe your Eyes, come forth, I hate a Coward -- Oh
Sir, have we caught your Mightiness?


Bac. Are you the Authors of this Valliant Act? None but such Villainous
Cowards dare have attempted it*


Whim. Stop his railing tongue.


Whiff. No, no, let him rail, let him rail now his hands are tied, ha, ha, Why
good General Fright-all, what was no body able do you think to tame the Roaring
Lion?


Bac. You Will be hanged for this?


Whim. Come, come, away with him to the next Tree.


Bac. What mean you Villains?


Whiff. Only to hang your Honor a little, that is all. We Will teach you Sir, to
serve your Country against Law.

[As they go off, Enter Daring with Soldiers.]
Dar. Hah -- My General betrayed -- this I suspected.

His Men come in, they fall on, Release Bacon and Fearless and his Man, who get
Swords. Whim's Party put Whim and Whiff before 'em striking 'em as they
Endeavor to run on this side or that, and forcing 'em to bear-up, they are
taken after some Fighting.
Fear. Did not the General tell you Rogues, you would be all hanged?


Whiff. Oh Nancy, Nancy, how Prophetic are thy Dreams?


Bac. Come let us on --


Dar. God's Death what mean you Sir?


Bac. As I designed -- to present my self to the Council:


Dar. By Heavens we will follow then to save you from their Treachery 'twas this
that has befallen you that I feared, which made me at a distance follow you.


Bac. Follow me still, but still at such a distance as your Aids may be
assisting on all occasion -- Fearless go back and bring your Regiment down, and
Daring let your Sergeant with his Party Guard these Villains to the Council.

[Ex. Bac. Dar. and Fearless.
Whiff. A Pox on your Worships Plot;


Whim. A Pox on your forwardness to come out of the hedge.

[Ex. Officers with Whim and Whiff.
SCENE IV. The Council Table.
Enter Coll. Wellman, Coll. Downright, Dullman, Timerouse, and about 7 or 8
more Seat themselves. Well. You heard Mr. Dunce's opinion Gentlemen, concerning
Bacon's coming upon our Invitation. He believes he will come, but I rather
think, though he be himself undaunted, yet the persuasions of his two
Lieutenant-Generalls, Daring and Fearless may prevent him, -- Colonel, have you
ordered our Men to be in Arms?

[Enter a Soldier.
Down. I have, and they will attend further order on the Sevana:


Sol. May it please your Honors, Bacon is on his way, he comes unattended by
any but his Footmen, and Coll. Fearless.


Down. Who is this Fellow?


Well. A spy I sent to watch Bacon's Motions.


Sol. But there is a Company of Soldiers in Ambush on this side of the Sevana
to seize him as he passes by.


Well. That Is by no order of the Council.


Omnes. No, no, no order;


Well. Nay, 'twere a good design if true,


Tim. Gad zoors would I had thought on it for my Troup,


Down. I am for no unfair dealing in any Extremity.

Enter a Messenger in have.
Mes. An't please your Honors, the saddest news -- An Ambush being laid for
Bacon, they rusht out upon him, on the Sevana, and after some fighting took him
and Fearless --


Tim. Is this your sad News -- zoors would I had had a hand in it.


Brag. When on a sudden, Daring and his Party fell in upon us, turned the tide
-- killed our men and took Capt. Whimsey, and Capt. Whiff Prisoners, the rest
run away, but Bacon fought like a fury.


Tim. A bloody Fellow;


Down. Whim. and Whiff? they deserve death for Acting without order


Tim. I Am of the Colonels opinion, they deserve to hang for it.


Dull. Why Brother, I thought you had wished the Plot had been yours but now?


Tim. Ay, but the Case is altered since that, good Brother,


Well. Now he is Exasperared past all hopes of a Reconciliation.


Dull. You must make use of the Statesman's refuge, wise dissimulation.


Brag. For all this Sir, he will not believe but that you mean Honorably, and
no persuasions could hinder him from Coming, so he has dismissed all his
Soldiers, and is Entering the Town on foot,


Well. What pity it is a brave Man should be Guilty of an ill Action.


Brag. But the noise of his danger has so won the hearts of the Mobile, that
they increase his Train as he goes, and follow him in the Town like a Victor.


Well Go wait his coming [Ex. Brag. he grows too popular, and must be humbled,


Tim. I was ever of your mind Colonel.


Well. Ay right or Wrong -- but what is your Counsel now?


Tim. Even as it used to be, I leave it to wiser heads.

[Enter Brag.
Brag. Bacon Sir is Entering.


Tim. Gad zoors would I were safe in Bed,


Dull. Colonel keep in your heat and treat Calmly with him,


Well. I rather wish you would all follow me, I Would meet him at the head of all
his noisy Rabble, and seize him from the rout.


Down. What Men of Authority dispute with Rake-Hells? it is below us Sir.


Tim. To Stake our Lives and Fortunes against their nothing.

Enter Bacon, after him the Rabble with Staves and Clubs bringing in Whim. and
Whiff. bound.
Well. What means this Insolence -- What Mr. Bacon do you come in Arms?


Bac. I Would need Sir come in Arms, when men that should be Honorable can have
so poor designs to take my life.


Well, Thrust out his following Rabble.


First Rab. We Will not Stir till we have the General safe back again.


Bac. Let not your Loves be too Officious -- but retire --


1st. Rab. At your Command we vanish --

[the Rabble retire.
Bac. I hope you will pardon me, if in my own defense I seized on these two
Murderers.


Down. You did well Sir, 'twas by no Order they Acted, -- stand forth and here
your Sentence -- in time of war we need no Formal Trials to hang Knaves that
Act without order.


Whiff. Oh Mercy Mercy Collonell -- 'twas Parson Dunce's Plot.


Down. Issue out a warrant to Seize Dunce Immediately -- you shall he carried
-- to the Fort to Pray --


Whim. Oh Good your Honor I never Prayed in all my Life,


Down. From thence Drawn upon a Sledg to the Place of ^xecution, -- where you
shall hang till you are dead -- and then be ^ut down and --


Whim. Oh hold -- hold -- we shall never be able to endure ^lf this:

[kneeling
Well. I think the offense needs not so great Punishment, their Crime Sir is but
equal to your own, acting without Commission.


Bac. It Is very well Explained Sir, -- had I been Murdered by Commission then,
the Deed had been approved, and now perhaps, I am beholding to the Rabble for my
Life: --


Well. A fine pretense to hide a Popular fault, but for this once we Pardon
them and you,


Bac. Pardon, for what? by Heaven I Scorn your Pardon, I Have not offended Honor
nor Religion:


Well. You have offended both in taking Arms,


Bac. Should I stand by and see my Country ruined, my King dishonored, and his
Subjects Murdered hear the sad Cries of widows and of Orphans, You heard it
Loud, but gave no pitying care to it* And till the war and Massacre was brought
to my own door, my Flocks, and Herds surpised, I bore it all with Patience,
Is it unlawful to defend my self against a Thief that breaks into my doors?


Well. And call you this defending of your self?


Bac. I call it doing of my self that right, which upon Just demand the
Council did refuse me, If my Ambition as you're pleased to call it, made me
demand too Much, I left my self to you:


Well. Perhaps we thought it did,


Bac. Sir you affront my Birth, -- I am a Gentleman, And yet my thoughts were
humble -- I would have fought under the meanest of your Parasites --


Tim. There Is a Bob for us Brother;

[to Dull
Bac But still you put me off with promises -- And when compelled to stir in my
defense I called none to my aid, and those that came, 'twas their own wrongs
that urged 'em:


Down. It Is feared Sir, under this pretense you aim at Government:


Bac. I scorn to answer to so base an accusation, the height of my Ambition is,
to be an honest Subject.


Well. An honest Rebel, Sir --


Bac. You know you wrong me, and it is basely urged -- but this is trifling --
here are my Commissions.

[Throws down Papers. Down. reads.
Down. -- To be General of the Forces against the Indians, and Blank
Commissions for his Friends.


Well. Tear them in pieces -- are we to be imposed upon? De ye come in Hostile
manner to compel us?


Down. Be not to rough Sir, let us argue with him --


Well. I am resolved I will not.


Tim. Then we are all Dead Men, Gudzoors! he will not give us time to say our
Prayers.


Well. We every day expect fresh Force from England, till then, we of our
selves shall be sufficient to make Defense, against a sturdy Traitor.


Bac. Traitor, 'Sdeath Traitor -- I defy ye, but that my Honor's yet above my
Anger; I Would make you answer me that Traitor dearly.

[Rises.
Well. Hah -- am I threatened -- Guards secure the Rebel.

[Guards seize him.
Bac. Is this your Honorable Invitation? Go -- Triumph in your short Lived
Victory, the next turn shall be mine.

[Exeunt Guards with Bac. A noise of Fighting -- Enter Bacon, Wellman, his
Guards Beat back by the Rabble, Bacon snatches a Sword from one, and keeps back
the Rabble, Tim. gets under the Table.
Down. What means this Insolence!


Rab. We Will have our General, and knock that fellows brains out, and hang up
Colonel Wellman.


All. Ay ay, Hang up Wlelman.

The Rabble seize Wellman, and Dullman, and the rest.
Dull. Hold, hold Gentleman, I was always for the General.


Rab. Let Us Barbicu this Fat Rogue.


Bac. Begone, and know your distance to theCouncel.

[The Rabble let 'em go.
Well. I Would rather perish by the meanest hand, than owe my safety poorly thus to
Bacon

[In Rage.
Bac. If you persist still in that mind I Will leave you, and Conquering, make
you happy against your will.

[Ex. Bacon and Rabble, Hollowing a Pacon, a Bacon.
Well. Oh Villainous Cowards, who will trust his Honor with Sycophants so base?
Let us to Arms -- by Heaven I will not give my Body rest, till I Have Chastised
the boldness of this Rebel.

[Exeunt Well. Down. and the rest all but Dullman, Tim. Peeps from underthe
Table.
Tim. What is the Roystering Hector gone Brother?


Dull. Ay, ay, and the Devil go with him.

[Looking sadly, Tim. comes out.
Tim. Was there ever such a Bull of Bash^n? Why what if he should come down
upon us and kill us all for Traitors?


Dull. I rather think the Council will Hang us all for Cowards -- ah -- oh -- a
Drum -- a Drum -- oh --

[He goes out.
Tim. This is the misery of being Great,

We Are Sacrificed to every turn of State.


ACT III.
SCENE I.
The Country Court, a great Table, with Papers, a Clerk writing. Enter a great
many people of all sorts, then Friendly, after him Dullman. Friend. HOw now
Major; what, they say Bacon scared you all out of the Council yesterday: What
say the People?


Dull. Say? they Curse us all, and Drink young Frightall's Health, and swear
they will fight through Fire and Brimstone for him.


Friend. And to morrow will hallow him to the Gallows, if it were his chance to
come there.


Dull. It Is very likely: Why I am forced to be guarded to the Court now, the
Rabble swore they would De Wit me, but I shall hamper some of 'em. Would the
Governor were here to bear the brunt on it, for they call us the Evil
Counselors.

Enter Hazard, goes to Friendly. Here Is the young Rogue that drew upon us too,
we have Rods in piss for him in faith.

'Enter Timorous with Bailiffs, whispers to Dullman, after which to the
Bailiffs.
Tim. Gadzoors that is he, do your Office.


Bayl. We arrest you Sir, in the Kings name, at the suit of the Honorable
Justice Timorous.


Haz. Justice Timorous, who the Devil's he?


Tim. I am the man Sir, de see, for want of a better; you shall repent Gud^
zoors your putting of tricks upon persons of my Rank and Quality.

After he has spoke he runs back as afraid of him.
Haz. Your Rank and Quality!


Tim. Ay Sir, my Rank and Quality; first I am one of the Honorable Council,
next a Justice of Peace in Quorum, Cornet of a Troop of Horse de see, and
Churchwarden.


Fry. From whence proceeds this Mr. Justice, you said nothing of this at Madam
Ranters Yesterday; you saw him there, then you were good Friends?


Tim. Ay, however I have carried my Body swimmingly before my Mistress, de see,
I had rancour in my Heart, Gads zoors.


Friend. Why, this Gentleman's a stranger, and but lately come a shore.


Haz. At my first Landing I was in company with this Fellow and two or three of
his cruel Brethren, where I was affronted by them, some words past and I drew
--


Tim. Ay ay Sir, you shall pay for it, -- why -- what Sir, cannot a Civil
Magistrate affront a Man, but he must be drawn upon presently?


Friend. Well Sir, the Gentleman shall answer your Suit, and I hope you will take
my Bail for him.


Tim. It Is enough -- I know you to be a Civil Person.

Timorous and Dullman take their Places, on a long Bench placed behind the
Table, to them Whimsey an Whiff, they seat themselves, then Boozer and two or
three more; who seat themselves: Then enter two bearing a Bowl of Punch, and a
great Ladle or two in it; the rest of the Stage being filled with People.
Whiff. Brothers it has been often moved at the Bench, that a new Punch Bowl
should be provided, and one of a larger Circumference, when the Bench sits late
about weighty affairs, oftentimes the Bowl is emptyed before we end.


Whim. A good Motion, Clark set it down.


Clark. Mr. Justice Boozer the Council has ordered you a writ of Ease, and
dismiss your Worship from the Bench.


Boo. Me from the Bench, for what?


Whim* The Complaint is Brother Boozer, for Drinking too much Punch in the time
of hearing Trials.


Whiff. And that you can neither write nor read, nor say the Lords Prayer.


Tim. That your Warrants are like a Brewers Tally a Notch on a Stick; if a
special Warrant, then a Couple. Gods Zoors, when his Excellency comes he will
have no such Justices.


Booz. Why Brother, tho I cannot read my self; I have had Dol^ns Country-Justice
read over to me two or three times, and understand the Law; this is your Malice
Brother Whiff, because my Wife does not come to your Warehouse to buy her
Commodities, -- but no matter, to show I have no Malice in my heart, I drink
your Health -- I care not this, I can turn Lawyer and plead at the Board.

[Drinks, all Pledge ^m and hum.
Dull. Mr. Clark, come, to the Trials on the Docket.

[Clark reads.
Clar. The first is between his Worship Justice Whiff, and one Grubb.


Dull. Ay, that Grubb's a Common Disturber, Brother your Cause, is a good Cause
if well managed, here is to it.

[Drinks.
Whiff. I thank you Brother Dullman, -- read my Petition.

[Drinks*
Clar. The Petition of Captain Thomas Whiff Shows, whereas Gilbert. Grubb,
calls his Worships Wife Ann Grabb Whore, and said he would prove it; your
Petitioner desires the Worshipful Bench to take it into Consideration, and your
Petitioner shall pray, etc. -- Here Is two witnesses have made Affidavit Vive
voce, an't like your Worships.


Dull. Call Grubb.


Clar. Gilbert Grubb, come into the Court.


Grub. Here.


Whim. Well, what can you say for your self Mr. Grub.


Grub. Why an't like your Worship, my wife invited some Neighbors wives to
drink a Cagg of Syder, now your worships wife Madam Whiff being there fuddl'd,
would have thrust me out of doors, and bid me go to my old Whore Madam Whimscy,
meaning your Worships wife.

[To Whimsey.
Whim. Hah! My wife called Whore, she is a Jude, and I Will arrest her Husband
here -- in an Action of debts.


Tim. Gads zoures she is no better than she should be I Will warrant her,


Whiff. Look ye Brother Whimsey, be patient, you know the Humor of my Nancy
when she is drunk, but when she is sober, she is a civil Person, and shall ask
your pardon.


Whim. Let this be done and I am satisfied. And so here is to you

[drinks.
Dull: Go on to the Trial.


Grub. I being very angry said indeed, I would prove her a greater Whore than
Madam Whimsey.


Clar. An't like your Whrships, he confesses the words in open Court.


Grub. Why, an't like your Worships, she has had two Bastards I Will prove it.


Whiff. Sirrah, Sirrah, that was when she was a Maid, not since I married her,
my marrying her made her Honest.


Dull. Let there be an order of Court to Sue him, for Scandalum Magnatum.


Tim. Mr. Clark, let my Cause come next.


Clark. The Defendant's ready Sir.

[Hazard comes to the Board.
Tim. Brothers of the Bench take notice, that this Hector here coming into Mrs.
Flirts Ordinary where I was, with my Brother Dullman and Lieutenant Boozer; we
gave him good Council to fall to Work, now my Gentleman here was affronted at
this Forsooth, and makes no more to do but calls us Scoundrels, and drew his
Sword on us, and had not I defended my self by running away, he had Murdered
me, and Assassinated my two Brothers.


Whiff. What witness have you Brother?


Tim. Here Is Mrs. Flirt and her Maid Nell, -- besides we may be witness for one
another I hope; our words may taken.


Clark. Mrs. Flirt and Nell are Sworn.

[They stand forth.
Whim. By the Oaths that you have taken, speak nothing but the Truth.


Flirt. An't please your Worships, your Honors came to my House, where you
found this Young Gentleman; and your Honors invited him to Drink with your
Honors: Where after some opprobrious words given him, Justice Dullman, and
Justice Boozer struck him over the head; and after that indeed the Gentleman
drew.


Tim. Mark that Brother he drew.


Haz. If I did, it was se defendendo.


Tim. Do you hear that Brothers, he did in defiance.


Haz. Sir, you ought not to sit Judge and Accuser too.


Whiff. The Gentleman's in the right Brother, you cannot do it according to Law.


Tim. Gads Zoors, what new tricks, new querks?


Haz. Gentlemen take notice, he swears in Court.


Tim. Gads Zoors what is that to you Sir.


Haz. This is the second time of his swearing.


Whim. What do you think we are Deaf Sir? Come, come proceed.


Tim. I desire he may be bound to his Good behavior, Fined and deliver up his
Sword, what say you Brot her?

[Jogs Dull. wko nods.
Whim. He Is asleep, drink to him and waken him, -- you have have mist the Cause
by sleeping Brother.

[Drinks.
Dull. Justice may nod, but never sleeps Brother -- you were at -- Deliver his
Sword -- a good Motion, let it be done.

[Drinks.
Haz. No Gentlemen, I wear a Sword to right my self.


Tim. That Is fine in faith, Gads Zoors, I have worn a Sword this Duzen year and
never could right my self.


Whiff. Ay, 'twou'd be a fine World if Men should wear Swords to right
themselves, he that is bound to the Peace shall wear no Sword.


Whim. I say he that is bound to the Peace ought to wear no Peruke, they may
change 'em for black or white, and then who can know them.


Haz. I hope Gentlemen I may be allowed to speak for my self.


Whiff. Ay, what can you say for your self, did you not draw your Sword Sirrah?


Haz. I did.


Tim. It Is sufficient he confesses the Fact, and we will hear no more.


Haz. You will not hear the Provocation given.


Dull. It Is enough Sir, you drew --


Whim. Ay, Ay, it is enough he drew -- let him be Fined.


Friend. The Gentleman should be heard, he is a Kinsman too, to Colonel John
Surelove.


Tim. Hum -- Colonel Sureloves Kinsman.


Whiff. Is he so, nay, then all the reason in the World he should be heard,
Brothers.


Whim. Come, come Cornet, you shall be Friends with the Gentleman, this was
some Drunken bout I Will warrant you.


Tim. Ha, ha, ha -- so it was Gads Zoors.


Whiff. Come drink to the Gentleman, and put it up.


Tim. Sir, my Service to you, I am heartily sorry for what is past, but it was
in my Drink.

[Drinks.
Whim. You hear his acknowledgements Sir, and when he is sober he never
quarrels, come Sir sit down, my Service to you.


Haz. I beg your Excuse Gentlemen -- I have earnest business.


Dull. Let us adjourn the Court, and prepare to meet the Regiments on the
Sevana.

[All go but Friend. and Hazard.
Haz. Is this the best Court of Judicature your Country affords?


Friend. To give it its due it is not. But how does thy Armor thrive?


Haz. As well as I can wish, in so short a time.


Friend. I see she regards thee with kind Eyes, Sighs and Blushes.


Haz. Yes, and tells me I am so like a Brother she had -- to Excuse her kind
concern, -- then blush so prettily, that Gad I could not forbear making a
discovery of my Heart.


Friend. Have a care of that, come upon her by slow degrees, for I know she is
Virtuous; -- but come let us to the Sevana, where I Will present you to the two
Colonels, Wellman and Downright, the Men that manage all till the Carrival of
the Governor.


SCENE II. The Sevana or Heath: Enter Wellman, Downright, Boozer, and Officers.
Well. Have you dispatched the Scouts, to watch the Motions of the Enemies? I
know that Bacon's Violent and Haughty, and will resent our vain attempts upon
him; therefore we must be speedy in prevention.


Dow. What forces have you raised since our last order.


Booz. Here Is a list of em, they came but slowly in, till we promised every one
a Bottle of Brandy.

[Enter Officer and Dunce.
Offi. We have brought Mr. Dunce here, as your Honor commanded us after strict
search we found him this morning in Bed with Madam Flirt.


Dow. No matter he will exclaim no less against the vices of the Flesh, the next
Sunday.


Dunc. I hope Sir, you will not credit the Malice of my Enemies.


Well. No more, you are free, and what you counseled about the Ambush was both
prudent and seasonable, and perhaps I now wish it had taken effect.

Enter Friend. and Haz.
Friend. I have brought an English Gentleman to kiss your hands, Sir, and offer
you his service, he is young and brave, and Kinsman to Col. Surelove.


Well. Sir, you are welcome and to let you see you are so, we will give you your
Kinsmans command, Captain of a Troop of Horse-Guards, and which I am sure will
be continued to you when the Governor arrives.


Haz. I shall endeavor to deserve the Honor, Sir.

Enter Dull. Tim. Whim. and Whiff, all in Buff, Scarf and Feather^
Down. So Gentlemen, I see you're in a readiness.


Tim. Readiness! What means he, I hope we are not to be drawn out to go against
the Enemy, Major?


Dull. If we are, they shall look a new Major for me.


Well. We were debating, Gentlemen, what course were best to pursue against
this Powerful Rebel.


Frion. Why, Sir, we have Forces enough, let us charge him instantly, delays are
dangerous.


Tim. Why, what a damned fiery Fellow's this?


Down. But if we drive him to Extremities, we fear his siding with the Indians.


Dull. Colonel Downright has hit it; why should we endanger our Men against a
desperate Termagant? If he love Wounds and Scars so well, let him exercise on
our Enemies -- -- but if he will needs fall upon us, it is then time for us
enough to venture our lives and fortunes.


Tim. How, we go to Bacon, under favor I think it is his Duty to come to us, an
you go to that Gads Zoores.


Fry. If he do, 'twill cost you dear, I doubt Cornet. -- I find by our List,
Sir, we are four thousand men.


Tim. Gads Zoores, not enough for a Breakfast for that insatiate Bacon, and his
two Lientenant Generals Fearless and Daring.

[Whiff sits on the ground with a Bottle of Brandy.
Whim. A Morsel, a Morsel.


Well. I am for an attack, what say you Gentlemen to an attack? -- What, silent
all? -- What say you Major?


Dull. I say, Sir, I hope my courage was never in dispute. But, Sir, I am going
to Marry Colonel Downright's Daughter here -- and should I be slain in this
Battle 'twou'd break her heart; -- -- besides, Sir, I should lose her Fortune.

[Speaks big.
Well. I Am sure here is a Captain will never Flinch.

[To Whim.
Whim. Who I, an't like your Honor?


Well. Ay, you.


Whim. Who I? ha, ha, ha,: Why did your Honor think that I would fight?


Well. Fight, yes? Why else do you take Commissions?


Whim. Commissions! O Lord, O Lord, take Commissions to fight? ha ha ha; that is
a jest, if all that take Commissions should fight --


Well. Why do you bear Arms then?


Whim. Why sor the Pay; to be called Captain, noble Captain, to show, to cock
and look big and bluff as I do; to be bowed to thus as we pass, to domineer,
and beat our Soldiers: Fight quoth a, ha ha ha.


Friend. But what makes you look so simply Cornet?


Tim. Why a thing that I have quite forgot, all my accounts for England are to
be made up, and I Am undone if they be neglected -- else I would not flinch for
the stoutest he that wears a Sword --

[Look big.
Dow'n. What say you Captain Whiff?

[VVhiff almost drunk.
Whiff. I am trying Colonel what Mettle I Am made on; I think I am Valiant, I
suppose I have Courage, but I confess it is a little of the D -- breed, but a
little inspiration from the bottle, and the leave of my Nancy, may do wonders.

Enter Seaman in have.
Seam. An't please your Honors, Frightall's Officers have seized all the Ships
in the River, and rid now round the Shore, and had by this time secured the
Sandy Beach, and Landed men to Fire the Town, but that they are high in Drink
aboard the Ship called the Good Subject; the Master of her sent me to let your
Honors know, that a few men sent to his assistance will surprise them, and
retake the Ships.


Well. Now, Gentlemen, here is a brave occasion for Emulation -- why writ not
the Master?


Dull. Ay, had he writ, I had soon been amongst them in faith; but this is some
Plot to betray us.


Sea. Keep me here, and kill me if it be not true.


Down. He says well -- there is a Brigan^ine and a Shallop ready, I Will Embark
immediately.


Friend. No Sir, your presence is here more necessary, let me have the Honor
of this Expedition.


Haz. I Will go your Volentier Charles.


Well. Who else offers to go.


Whim. A mere trick to Kidnap us, by Bacon, -- if the Captain had writ --


Tim. Av, ay, if he had writ --


Well. I see you're all base Cowards, and here Cashier ye from all Commands and
Offices.


Whim. Look ye Colonel, you may do what you please, but you lose one of the
best dressed Officers in your whole Camp, Sir --


Tim. and in me, such a Head Piece.


Whiff. I Will say nothing, but let the State want me.


Dull. For my part I am weary of weighty Affairs.

[In this while VVellman, Down. Friend. and Haz. talk.
Well. Command what Men you please, but Expedition makes you half a Conqueror.

[Exit Friend. and Haz. Enter another Seaman with a Letter, gives it to
Downright, he and Wellman Read it.
Down. Look ye now Gentlemen the Master has writ.


Dull. Has he -- he might have writ sooner, while I was in Command, -- if he
had --


Whim. Ay Major -- if he had -- but let them miss us --


Well. Colonel have with your Men and Reinforce the Beach, while I follow with
the Horse; -- Mr. Dunce pray let that Proclamation be Read concerning Bacon, to
the Soldiers.


Dun. It shall be done Sir,

[Exit Down: and Well. The Scene opens and discovers a Body of Soldiers.
Gentlemen how simply you look now.


Tim. -- Why Mr. Parson I have a scruple of Conscience upon me* I am
considering whether it be Lawful to Kill, tho it be in War; I have a great
aversion to it, and hope it proceeds from Religion.


Whiff. I remember the Fit took you just so, when the Dutch Besieged us, for
you could not then be persuaded to strike a stroke.


Tim. Ay, that was because they were Protestants as we are, but Gads Zoors had
they been Dutch Papists I had mauled them? but Conscience --


Whim. I have been a Justice of Peace this six years and never had a conscience
in my Life.


Tim. Nor I neither, but in this damned thing of Fighting.


Dun. Gentlemen I am Commanded to read the Declaration of the Honorable
Council to you.

[To the Soldiers.
All. Hum hum hum --


Booz. Silence -- silence --

[Dunce reads.
Dun. By an order of Council Dated May the 10 th 1670: To all Gentlemen
Soldiers, Merchants, Planters, and whom else it may concern. Whereas Bacon,
contrary to Law and Equity, has to satisfy his own Ambition taken up Arms,
with a pretense to fight the Indians, but indeed to molest and enslave the
whole Colony, and to take away their Liberties and Properties; this is to
declare, that whoever shall bring this Traitor Dead or alive to the Council
shall have three hundred Pounds reward. And so God save the King.


All. A Council, a Council! Hah --

[Hollow. Enter a Soldier hastily.
Sold. Stand to your Arms Gentlemen, stand to your Arms, Bacon is Marching
this way.


Dun. Hah -- what numbers has he?


Soul. About a hundred Horse, in his March he has surpised Colonel Downright,
and taken him Prisoner.


All. Let Us fall on Bacon -- let us fall on Bacon hay --

[Hollow.
Booz. We Will hear him speak first -- and see what he can say for himself.


All. Ay, ay, we will hear Bacon speak --

[Dunce pleads with them.
Tim. Well Major I have found a Stratagem shall make us four the Greatest Men
in the Colony, we'll surrender our selves to Bacon, and say we Disbanded on
purpose.


Dull. Good --


Whiff. Why, I had no other design in the World in refusing to ^ight.


Whim. Nor I, do you think I would have excused it with the fear of disordering my
Cravat String else --


Dun. Why Gentlemen, he designs to Fire James Town; Murder you all, and then
lie with your Wives, and will you slip this opportunity of seizing him?


Boo. Here Is a Tarmagant Rogue Neighbors -- we'll Hang the Dog. All, Ay, Ay,
hang Bacon, hang Bacon.

Enter Bacon, and Fearless, some Soldiers leading in Downright bound; Bacon
stands and stares a while on the Regiments, who are silent all.
Bac. Well Gentlemen -- in order to your fine Declaration you see I come to
render my self --


Dun. How came he to know of our Declaration?


Whim. Rogues, Rogues among our selves -- that inform.


Bac. What are ye silent all, -- not a Man lift his Hand in Obedience to the
Council to Murder this Traitor, that has exposed his Life so often for vou? Hah
what not for three hundred Pound, -- you see I Have left my Troops behind, and
come all wearied with the Toils of War, worn out by Summers heats and
VVinters colds, Marched tedious Days and Nights through ^ogs and Fens as dangerous
as your Clamors, and as Faithless, -- what tho 'twas to preserve you all in
safety, no matter, you should obey the Grateful Council, and Kill this honest
Man that has defended you?


All. Hum, hum hum.


Whiff. The General speaks like a Gorgon.


Tim. Like a Cherubin, Man.


Bac. All silent yet -- where is that mighty Courage that cried so loud but now?
A Council a Council, where is your Resolution, cannot three hundred Pound
Excite your Valor, to seize that Traitor Bacon who has bled for you? --


All. A Bacon, a Bacon, a Bacon. --

[Hollow.
Dow. Oh Villainous Cowards -- Oh the Faithless Multitude!


Bac. What say you Parson -- you have a forward Zeal?


Dun. I wish my Coat Sir did not hinder me, from acting as becomes my Zeal and
Duty.


Whim. A Plaguey Rugid Dog -- that Parson --


Bac. Fearless seize me that canting Knave from out the Herd, and next those
Honorable Officers.

[Points to Dull. VVhim. VVhiff. and Tim. Fearless seizes them, and gives them
to the Soldiers, and takes the Proclamation from Dunce and shows Bacon, they
read it.
Dull. Seize us, Sir, you shall not need, we laid down our Commissions on
purpose to come over to your Honor.


Whiff. We ever loved and honored your Honor.


Tim. So entirely, Sir -- that I wish I were safe in James Town for your sake,
and your Honor were hanged.

[Aside.
Bac. This fine Piece is of your Penning Parson -- though it be countenanced by
the Councils Names -- Oh in gratitude -- Burn -- Burn the Treacherous Town --
Fire it immediately --


Whim. We'll obey you, Sir --


Whiff. Ay, ay, we'll make a Bonfire on it, and Drink your Honors Health round
about it.

[They offer to go.
Bac. Yet hold, my Revenge shall be more Merciful, I ordered that all the Women
of Rank shall be seized and brought to my Camp. I Will make their Husbands pay
their Ransoms dearly; they would rather have their Hearts bleed than their Purses.


Fear. Dear General, let me have the seizing of Colonel Downright's Daughter;
I would fain be Plundering for a Trifle called a Maidenhead.


Bac. On pain of Death treat them with all respect; assure them of the safety
of their Honor. Now, all that will follow me, shall find a welcome, and those
that will not may depart in Peace.


All. Hay, a General, a General, a General.

[Some Soldiers go off, some go to the side of Bacon. Enter Dareing and
Soldiers with Chrisante, Surelove, Mrs. Wnim. and Mrs. Whiff, and several
other Women.
Bac. Successful Dareing welcome, what Prizes have ye?


Dare. The Fairest in the World Sir, I Am not for common Plunder.


Down. Hah, my Daughter and my Kinswoman! --


Bacon. It Is not with Women Sir, nor honest Men like you that I intend to
Combat; not their own Parents shall not be more indulgent, nor better safeguard
to their Honors Sir: But it is to save the Expense of Blood, I seize on their
most valued Prizes


Down. But Sir, I know your wild Lieutenant General has long loved my
Chrisante, and perhaps, will take this time to force her to consent.


Dare. I own I have a Passion for Chrisante, yet by my Generals Life -- or her
fair self -- what now I Act is on the score of War, I scorn to force the Maid I
do adore.


Bac. Believe me Ladies, you shall have Hon ourable Treatment here.


Chris. We do not doubt it Sir, either from you or Dareing, If he Love me -- --
that will secure my Honor, or if he do not, he is to brave to injure me.


Dare. I thank you for your just opinion of me, Madam.


Chris. But Sir, it is for my Father I must plead; to see his Reverend Hands in
Serval Chains -- and then perhaps if stubborn to your will, his Head must fall
a Victim to your Anger.


Down. No my good Pious Girl, I cannot fear Ignoble usage from the General --
And if thy Beauty can preserve thy Fam^, I shall not mourn in my Captivity.


Bac. I Will never deceive your kind opinion of me -- Ladies I hope you're all of
that opinion to.


-- Surel: If seizing us Sir can advance your Honor, or be of any use
considerable to you, I shall be proud of such a slavery.


Mrs. Whim. I hope Sir we shall not be Ravished in your Camp.


Dare. Fie Mrs. Whimsey, do Soldiers use to Ravish?


Mrs. Whiff. Ravish -- marry I fear 'em not, I Would have em know I scorn to be
Ravished by any Man!


Fear. Ay a my Conscience Mrs Whiff, you are too good natured


Dare. Madam, I hope: you will give me leave to name Love to you, and try by all
sub misive ways to win your heart?


Chris. Do your worst Sir, I give you leave, if you assail me only with your
Tongue.


Dare. That Is generous and brave, and Ple requite it.

Enter Soldier in haste.
Soul. The Truce being ended, Sir, the Indians grow so insolent as to attack us
even in our Camp, and have killed several of our Men.


Bac. It Is time to check their boldness, Dareing haste draw up our Men in
order, to give 'em Battle, I rather had expected their submission.

The Country now may see what they are to fear,

Since we that are in Arms are not secure.

[Exeunt leading the Ladies.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. A Temple, with an Indian God placed upon it, Priests and Priestesses
attending; Enter Indian King on one side attended by Indian Men, the Queen
Enters on the other side with Women, all bow to the Idol, and divide on each
side of the Stage, then the Music Playing louder, the Priest and Priestesses
Dance about the Idol, with ridiculous Postures and crying (as for
Incantations.) Thrice repeated, Agah Yerkin, Agah Boah, Sulen Tawarapah, Sulen
Tawarapah.
After this soft Music plays again, then they Sing something fine, after which
the Priests lead the King to the Altar, and the Priestessess, the Queen, they
take off little Crowns from their Heads, and offer them at the Alter. King.
Invoke the God, of our Quiocto to declare, what the Event shall be of this our
last War against the English General.

[Soft Music ceases. The Music changes to confused Tunes, to which the Priest
and Priestess Dance Antickly Singing between; the same Incantation as before,
and then Dance again, and so invoke again alternately: Which Dance ended a
Voice behind the Alter cries, while soft Music Play -- The English General
shall be,
A Captive to his Enemy;
And you from all your Toyls be freed,
When by your hand the Foe shall bleed
And ere the Sun's swift course be run,
This mighty Conquest, shall be won.

King. I thank the Gods for taking care of us, prepare new Sacrifice against
the Evening, when I return a Conqueror, I will my self perform the Office of a
Priest.


Queen. Oh Sir, I fear you will fall a Victim first.


King. What means Semernia, why are thy looks so Pale?


Queen. Alas the Oracles have double meanings, their sense is doubtful, and
their words Inigma's, I fear Sir I could make a truer interpritation --


King. How Semernia! by all thy Love I charge thee as you respect my Life, to
let me know your thoughts.


Queen. Last Night I Dreamed a Lion fell with Hunger, spite of your Guards
slew you, and bore you hence.


King. This is thy Sexes fear, and no interpretation of the Oracle.


Queen. I could convince you farther.


King. Have thou a secret thou can keep from me? Thy Soul a thought that I
must be stranger too? This is not like the Justice of Semernia, come unriddle
me the Oracle.


Queen. The English General shall be, a captive to his Enemy; he is so Sir
already to my Beauty, he says he languishes for Love of me.


King. Hah -- the General my Rival -- but go on --


Queen. And you from all your War be freed: Oh let me not explain that fatal
line, for fear it mean, you shall be freed by Death.


King. What, when by my hand the Foe shall bleed? -- away -- -- it cannot be --


Queen. No doubt my Lord, you will bravely sell your Life, and deal some wounds
where you will receive so many.


King. It Is Love Semernia makes thee Dream, while waking I Will trust the Gods,
and am resolved for Battle.

Enter an Indian.
Ind. Have, Have Great Sir to Arms, Bacon with all his Forces is prepared, and
both the Armies ready to engage.


King. Have to my General bid him charge em instantly, I Will bring up the
supplys of stout Teroomians, those so well skilled in the Envenomed Arrow,
[Exit Indian] -- Semernia -- words but poorly do express the griefs of parting
Lovers -- it is with dying Eyes, and a Heart trembling -- -- thus -- [Puts her
Hand on his Heart] They take a heavy leave, -- one parting Kiss, and one Love
pressing sigh, and then farewell -- but not a long farewell; I shall return
Victorious to thy Arms, -- commend me to the Gods and still remember me.

[Ex. King.
Queen. Alas! What pity it is I saw the General, before my Fate had given me to
the King -- but now -- like those that change their Gods, my faithless mind
'twixt two opinions wavers; while to the Gods my Monarch I commend; my wandering
thoughts in pity of the General makes that zeal cold, declined -- ineffectual;
-- If for the General I, implore the Deieties, methinks my Prayers should not
ascend the Skies since Honor tells me it is an impious zeal.

Which way so ever my Devotions move,

I am too wretched to be heard above.

[Goes in, all Exeunt.
SCENE II. Shows a Field of Tents, seen at some distance through the Trees of a
Wood, Drums, Trumpets and the noise of Battle with hollowing. The Indians are
seen with Battle-Axis to Retreat Fighting from the English and all go off, when
they Re-enter immediately beating back the English, the Indian King at the head
of his Men, with Bows and Arrows; Dareing being at the head of the English:
They Fight off; the noise continues less loud as more at distance.
Enter Bacon with his Sword drawn, meets Fearless with his Sword drawn. Fear.
Have, have Sir to the Entrance of the Wood, Dareings Engaged past hope of a
retreat, ventring too far, persuing of the Foe; the King in Ambush with his
Poisoned Archers, fell on and now we are dangerously distressed.


Bac. Dareing is Brave, but, he is withal, too rash, come on and sollow me to
his Assistance --

[Go out. A hollowing within, the Fight renews, Enter the Indians Beaten back
by Bacon, Dareing and Fearless, they Fight off, the noise of Fighting continues
a while, this still behind the Wood. Enter Indians Fying over the Stage,
pursued by the King.
King. Turn, turn ye fugitive Slaves, and face the Enemy; Oh Villains, Cowards,
Deaf to all Command, by Heaven I had my Rival my in view and Aimed at nothing
but my Conquering him -- now like a Coward I must fly with Cowards, or like a
desperate Madman fall, thus singly midst the numbers.

[Follow the Indians. Enter Bacon enraged with his Sword drawn, Fearless, and
Dareing following him.
Bac. -- Where is the King, Oh ye perfidious Slaves, how have you hid from my
just Revenge -- search all the Brakes, the Fuzes and the Trees; and let him not
escape on Pain of Death.


Dare. We cannot do wonders Sir.


Bac. But you can run away --


Dare. Yes, when we see occasion -- yet -- should any but my General tell me so
-- -- by Heaven he should find I were no starter.


Bac. Forgive me, I Am Mad -- the Kings escaped, hid like a trembling slave in
some close Ditch, where he will sooner starve than Fight it out.

Re-enter Indians running over the Stage, pursued by the King who shoots them
as they Fly, some few follow him.
King. All Is lost -- the day is lost -- and I Am betrayed -- Oh Slaves, that
even Wounds cannot Animate.

[In Rage.
Bac. The King!


King. The General here, by all the Powers betrayed by my own Men.


Bac. Abandoned as thou art I scorn to take thee basely, you shall have
Soldiers chance Sir for your Life, since chance so luckily has brought us
hither; without more aids we will dispute the day: this spot of Earth bears
both our Armies Fates, I Will give you back the Victory I have won, and thus
begin a new, on equal terms.


King. That Is Nobly said -- the Powers have heard my wish! You Sir first taught
me how to use a Sword, which heretofore has served me with success, but now --
it is for Semernia that it draws, a prize more valued than my Kingdom, Sir --


Bac. Hah Semernia!


King. Your Blushes do betray your Passion for her.


Dar. 'Sdeath have we Fought for this, to expose the Victor to the Conquered
Foe?


Fea. What Fight a single Man -- our Prize already.


King. Not so young Man while I command a Dart.


Bac. Fight him, by Heaven no reason shall dissuade me, and he that interrupts
me is a Coward, whatever be my Fate, I do command ye to let the King pass
freely to his Tents.


Dar. The Devils in the General.


Fea. 'Sdeath his Romantic humor will undo us.

[They Fight and pause.
King. You Fight as if you meant to outdo me this way, as you have done in
Generosity.


Bac. You're not behind hand with me Sir in courtesy, come here is to set us
even --

[Fight again.
King. You bleed apace.


Bac. You Have only Breathed a Vein, and given me new Health and Vigor by it.

[They Fight again, Wounds on both sides, the King staggers, Bacon takes him in
his Arms, the King drops his Sword: How do you Sir?


King. Like one -- that is hovering between Heaven and Earth, I Am -- mounting --
somewhere -- upwards -- but giddy with my flight, -- I know not where.


Bac. Command my Surgions, -- instantly -- make haste Honor returns and Love
all Bleeding's fled.

[Ex. Fearless.
King. Oh Semernia, how much more truth had thy Divinity than the Predictions
of the flattering Oracles. Commend me to her -- I know you will -- visit -- your
Fair Captive Sir, and tell her -- oh -- but Death prevents the rest.

[Dies. Enter Fearless.
Bac. He Is gone -- and now like Caesar I could weep over the Hero I my self
destroyed.


Fea. I Am glad for your repose I see him there -- 'twas a Mad hot Brained Youth
and so he died.


Bac. Come bear him on your Shoulders to my Tent, from whence with all the
solemn state we can, we will convey him to his own Pavillion.

Enter a Soldier.
Sold. Some of our Troops pursuing of the Enemy even to their Temples, which
they made their Sanctuary, finding the Queen at her Devotion there with all her
Indian Ladies, I Would much ado to stop their violent rage from setting fire to the
Holy Pile.


Bac. Hang em immediately that durst attempt it, while I my self will fly to
rescue her.

[Goes out, they bear off the Kings Body, Ex. all. Enter Whimsey pulling in
Whiff, with a Halter about his Neck.
Whim. Nay I Am resolved to keep thee here till his Honor the General comes, --
what to call him Traitor, and run away after he had so generously given us our
freedom, and Listed us Cadees for the next command that fell in his Army; --
I Am resolved to Hang thee --


Whiff. Will thou betray and Peach thy Friend: Thy Friend that kept thee
Company all the while thou were a Prisoner -- Drinking at my own charge. --


Whim. No matter for that, I scorn Ingratitude and therefore will Hang thee --
but as for thy drinking with me -- I scorn to be hehind hand with thee in
Civility and therefore here is to thee.

[Takes a Bottle of Brandy out of his Pocket, Drinks.
Whiff. I cannot drink.


Whim. A certain sign thou wo't be Hanged.


Whiff. You used to be a my side when a Justice, set the cause be how it would.

[Weeps.
Whim. Ay -- when I was a Justice I never minded Honesty, but now I Will be true
to my General, and Hang thee to be a great man. --


Whiff. If I might but have a fair Trial for my Life --


Whim. A fair Trial -- come I Will be thy Judge -- and if thou can clear thy
self by Law I Will acquit thee, Sirrah, Sirrah, what can thou say for thy self
for calling his Honor Rebel?

[Sits on a DrumHead.
Whiff. 'Twas when I was Drunk an't like yourHonour.


Whim. That Is no Plea, for if you kill a Man when you are Sober you must be
Hanged when you are Drunk, have thou any thing else to say for thy self, why
Sentence may not pass upon thee?


Whiff. I desire the Benefit of the Clergy.


Whim. The Clergy, I never knew any body that ever did benefit by em, why thou
can not read a word?


Whiff. Transportation then --


Whim. It shall be to England then -- but hold -- who is this?

[Dullman creeping from a Bush.
Dull. So the dangers over, I may venture out, -- Pox on it I would not be in
this fear again, to be Lord Chief Justice of our Court. Why how now Cornet --
what in dreadful Enter Timorous with Battle Ax, Bow and Arrows, and Feathers on
his Head. Equipage? Your Battle Ax Bloody, with Bow and Arrows?


Tim. I Am in the posture of the times Major -- I could not be Idle where so
much Action was, I Am going to present my self to the General with these
Trophies of my Victory here --


Dull. Victory -- what Victory -- did not see thee creeping out of yonder Bush,
where thou weret hid all the Fight -- stumble on a Dead Indian, and take away
his Arms?


Tim. Why, did thou see me?


Dull. See thee Ay -- and what a fright thou were in, till thou were sure he
was Dead.


Tim. Well, well, that is all one -- Gads zoors if every Man that pass for
Valiant in a Battle, were to give an account how he gained his Reputation, the
World would be but thinly stocked with Heroes, I Will say he was a great War
Captain, and that I killed him hand to hand, and who can disprove me?


Dull. Disprove thee -- why that Pale face of thine, that has so much of the
Coward in it.


Tim. Shaw that is with loss of Blood -- Hah I am overheard I doubt -- who is
yonder -- [Sees Whim. and Whiff.] how Brother Whiff in a Hempen Cravat-String?


Whim. He called the General Traitor and was running away, and-I'm resolved to
Peach.


Dull. Hum -- and one witness will stand good in Law, in case of Treason --


Tim. Gads zoors in case of Treason he will beHang'd if it be proved against him,
were there never a witness at all, but he must tried by a Council of War Man --
come, come let us disarm him --

[They take away his Arms, and pull a Bottle of Brandy out of his Pocket.
Whiff. What, I hope you will not take away my Brandy Gentlemen, my last
comfort.


Tim. Gads zoors it is come in good time -- we will Drink it off, here Major --

[Drinks, Whiff takes him aside.
Whiff. Hark ye Cornet -- you are my good Friend, get this matter made up
before it come to the General.


Tim. But this is Treason Neighbor.


Whiff. If I Hang -- I Will declare upon the Ladder, how you killed your War
Captain


Tim. Come Brother Whimsey -- we have been all Friends and loving Magistrates
together, let us Drink about, and think no more of this business.


Dull. Ay, ay, if every sober man in the Nation, should be called to account of
the Treason he speaks in's Drink the Lord have mercy upon us all -- put it up
-- and let us like loving Brothers take an honest resolution to run away
together; for this same Frightal minds nothing but Fighting.


Whim. I Am content, provided we go all to the Council and tell them (to make
our Peace) we went in obedience to the Proclamation to kill Bacon, but the
Traitor was so strongly guarded we could not effect it, but Mum -- who is here
--

[To them, Enter Ranter and Jenny, as Man and Footman.
-Rant. Hah, our four Reverend Justices -- I hope the Blockheads will not know
me -- Gentlemen, can you direct me to Lieutenant General Dareings Tents.


Whiff. Hum, who the Devil's this -- that is he that you see coming this way,
'Sdeath yonder is Dareing -- Let Us slip away before he advances.

[Exeunt all but Ranter and Jenny.
Jen. I am scared with those dead Bodies we have past over, for God's sake
Madam, let me know your design in coming.


Rant. Why? now I Will tell thee -- my damned mad Fellow Dareing who has my heart
and soul -- Loves Chrisante, has stolen her, and carried her away to his Tents,
she hates him, while I am dying for him.


Jen. Dying Madam! I never saw you melancholy.


Rant. Pox on it no, why should I sigh and whine, and make my self an Ass. and
him conceited, no, instead of snevelling I Am resolved --


Jen. What Madam?


Rant. Gad to beat the Rascal, and bring of Crisante.


Jen. Beat him Madam? What a woman beat a Lieutenant General.


Rant. Hang 'em, they get a name in War, from command, not courage; how know I
but I may fight, Gad I have known a Fellow kicked from one end of the Town to
the other, believing himself a Coward, at last forced to fight, found he could,
got a Reputation and bullyed all he met with, and got a name, and a great
Commission.


Jen. But if he should kill you Madam?


Rant. I Will take care to make it as Comical a Duel as the best of 'em, as much
in Love as I am, I do not intend to die it is Martyr.

Enter Dareing and Fearless.
Fear. Have you seen Crysante since the fight?


Dar. Yes, but she is still the same, as nice and coy as Fortune, when she is
courted by the wretched, yet she denis me, so obligingly she keeps my Love
still in its humble Calm.


Rant. Can you direct me Sir, to one Dareings Tent:

[Sullenly.
Dar. One Dareing -- he has another Epithet to his name?


Ran. What Is that, Rascal, or Coward?


Dar. Hah, which of thy Stars young man has sent thee hither, to find that
certain Fate they have decreed.


Ran. I know not what my Stars have decreed, but I shall be glad if they have
ordained me to Fight with Dareing, -- by thy concern thou should be he?


Dar. I am, prithee who art thou?


Ran. Thy Rival, tho newly arrived from England, and came to Marry fair
Chrisante, whom thou have Ravished, for whom I hear another Lady Dies.


Dar. Dies for me?


Ran. Therefore resign her fairly -- or fight me fairly --


Dar. Come on Sir -- but hold -- before I kill thee, prithee inform me who this
Dying Lady is?


Ran. Sir I owe ye no Courtesy, and therefore will do you none by telling you
-- come Sir for Chrisante -- draws.

[They offer to Fight Fearless steps in.
Fea. Hold -- what mad Frolicks this? -- Sir you Fight for one you never saw
[to Ranter] and you for one that Loves you not. [To Dare.


Dar. Perhaps she will Love him as little.


Ran. Gad put it to the Trial, if you dare -- if thou be'st Generous bring me
to her, and whom she does neglect shall give the other Place.


Dar. That Is fair put up thy Sword -- I Will bring thee to her Instantly.

[Exeunt.
SCENE a Tent;
Enter Chrisante and Surelove. Chri. I Am not so much afflicted for my
confinement as I am, that I cannot hear of Friendly.


Sure. Art not persecuted with Dareing?


Cri. Not at all, tho he tells me daily of his Passion I rally him, and give
him neither hope nor despair, -- he is here.

Enter Dareing Fear. Rant. and Jenny.
Dare. Madam, the Complaisance I show in bringing you my Rival, will let you
see how glad I am to oblige you every way.


Ran. I hope the danger I have exposed my self too for the Honor of kissing
your hand Madam, will render me something acceptable -- here are my Credentials
--

[Gives her a Letter.
Cri. (Reads) Dear Creature, I have taken this habit to free you from an
impertinent Lover, and to secure the Damned Rogue Dareing to my self, receive
me as sent by Colonel Surelove from England to Marry you -- favor me -- no
more -- your Ranter -- Hah Ranter? [Aside] -- Sir you have too good a Character
from my Cousin Colonel Surelove, not to receive my welcome.

[Gives Surelove the Letter.
Ran. Stand by General --

[Pushes away Dareling and looks big, and takes Chrisante by the hand and
kisses it.
Dare. 'Sdeath Sir there is room -- enough -- at first sight so kind? Oh Youth
-- Youth and Impudence, what Temptations are you -- to Villainous Woman.


Chri. I confess Sir we Women do not Love these rough Fighting Fellows, they are
always scaring us with one Broil or other.


Dar. Much good may do you with your tame Coxcomb.


Ran. Well Sir, then you yield the Prize?


Dar. Ay Gad, were she an Angel, that can prefer such a callow Fop as thou
before a man -- take her and domineer.

[They all laugh. -- 'Sdeath am I grown Ridiculous.


Fear. Why have thou not found the Jest? by Heaven it is Ranter, it is she that
loves you, carry on the humor. (aside.) Faith Sir, if I were you, I would
devote my self to Madam Ranter.


Chri. Ay, she is the fittest Wife for you, she will fit your Humor.


Dar. and Ranter -- Gad I Would sooner marry a She Bear, unless for a Penance for
some horrid Sin, we should be eternally challenging one another to the Field,
and ten to one she beats me there; or if I should escape there, she would kill
me with Drinking.


Ran. Here Is a Rogue -- does your Country abound with such Ladies?


Dar. The Lord forbid, half a dozen would ruin the Land, debauch all the men,
and scandalize all the women.


Fear. No matter, she is rich.


Dar. Ay that will make her Insolent.


Fea. Nay she is generous too.


Dar. Yes when she is Drunk, and then she will lavish all.


Ran. A Pox on him -- how he vexes me.


Dar. Then such a Tongue -- she will rail and smoke till she choke again then six
Gallons of Punch hardly recovers her, and never but then is she' good Natured.


Ran. I must lay him on --


Dar. There Is not a Blockhead in the Country that has not --


Ran. -- What --


Dar. -- Been Drunk with her.


Ran. I thought you had meant something else Sir.

[In huff.
Dar. Nay -- as for that -- I suppose there is no great difficulty.


Ran. 'Sdeath Sir you lie -- and you're a Son of a Whore.

[Draws and Fences with him, and he runs back round the Stage.
Dar. Hold -- hold Virago -- dear Widow hold, and give me thy hand.


Ran. Widow!


Dar. 'Sdeath I knew thee by instinct Widow tho I seemed not to do so, in
revenge for the trick you put on me in telling me a Lady died for me.


Ran. Why, such an one there is, perhaps she may dwindle forty or fifty years
-- or so -- but will never be her own Woman again that is certain.


Sure. This we are all ready to testify, we know her.


Chri. Upon my Life it is true.


Dar. Widow I have a shrewd suspicion, that you your self may be this dying
Lady.


Ran. Why so Coxcomb?


Dar. Because you took such pains to put your self into my hands.


Ran. Gad if your heart were but half so true as your guess, we should conclude
a Peace before Bacon and the Council will -- besides this thing whines for
Friendly and there is no hopes.

[To Crisante.
Dar. Give me thy hand Widow, I am thine -- and so entirely, I will never -- be
drunk out of thy Company -- Dunce is in my Tent -- prithee let us in and bind
the bargain.


Ran. Nay, faith, let us see the Wars at an end first.


Dar. Nay, prithee, take me in the humor, while thy Breeches are on -- for I
never liked thee half so well in Petticoats.


Ran. Lead on General, you give me good encouragement to wear them.

[Exeunt.
ACT V.
SCENE I. The Sevana in sight of the Camp; the Moon rises. Enter Friendly,
Hazard and Boozer, and a Party of Men.
Fr. WE we are now in the sight of the Tents.


Booz. Is not this a rash attempt, Gentlemen, with so small Force to set upon
Bacons whole Army?


Haz. Oh, they are drunk with Victory and Wine; there will be naught but
Revelling to Night.


Fr. Would we could learn in wha Quarter the Ladies are lodged, for we have no
other business but to release them -- but hark -- who comes here?


Booz. Some Scouts, I fear, from the Enemy.

Enter Dullman, Tim. Whim. and Whiff, creeping as in the dark.
Fr. Let Us shelter our selves behind yonder Trees -- lest we be surpised.


Tim. Would I were well at home -- Gad Zoors -- if e're you catch me a Cadeeing
again, I Will be content to be set in the fore front of the Battle for Hawks Meat.


Whim. You Are afraid of every Bush.


Tim. Ay, and good Reason too: Gad Zoors, there may be Rogues hid -- prithee
Major, do thou advance.


Dull. No, no, go on -- no matter of ceremony in these cases of running away.

[They advance.
Fr. They approach directly to us, we cannot escape them -- their numbers are
not great -- let us advance.

[They come up to them.
Tim. Oh, I am annihilated.


Whiff. Some of Frightall's Scouts; we are lost men.

[They push each other foremost.
Fr. Who goes there?


Whim. Oh, they will give us no Quarter; 'twas long of you Cornet, that we ran
away from our Colors.


Tim. Me -- 'twas the Majors Ambition here -- to make himself a great Man with
the Council again.


Dull. Poxo' this Ambition, it has been the ruin of many a Gallant Fellow.


Whiff. If I get home again, the height of mine shall be to top Tobacco; would
l'd some Brandy.


Tim. Gads Zoors, would we had, it is the best Armor against fear -- hum -- I
hear no body now -- prithee advance a little.


Whim. What, before a Horse Officer?


Fr. Stand on your Lives --


Tim. Oh, it is impossible -- I am dead already.


Fr. What are ve -- speak -- or I Will shoot?


Whim. Friends to thee -- who the Devil are we friends too?


Tim. E'ne who you please, Gad Zoors.


Fr. Hah -- Gad Zoors -- who is there, Timorous?


Tim. Hum -- I know no such Scoundrel --

[Gets behind.
Dull. Hah -- that is Friendly's Voice.


Fr. Right -- thine's that of Dullman -- who is with you?


Dull. Only Timorous, Whimsey and Whiff, all Valiantly running away from the
Arch Rebel that took us Prisoners.


Haz. Can you inform us where the Ladies are lodged?


Dull. In the hither Quarter in Dareings Tents; you will know them by Lanthorns
on every corner -- there was never better time to surprise them -- for this day
Dareing's Married, and there is nothing but Dancing and Drinking.


Haz. Married! To whom?


Dull. That I never inquired.


Fr. It Is to Crisante, Friend -- and the reward of my attempt is lost. Oh, I am
mad, I Will fight away my life, and my despair shall yet do greater wonders, than
even my Love could animate me too. Let Us part our Men, and beset his Tents on
both sides.

[Friendly goes out with a Party.
Haz. Come, Gentlemen, let us on --


Whiff. On Sir -- we on Sir? --


Haz. Ay, you on, Sir -- to redeem the Ladies


Whiff. Oh, Sir, I am going home for money to redeem my Nancy.


Whim. So am I, Sir.


Tim. I thank my Stars I am a Batchellor -- Why, what a plague is a Wife?


Haz. Will you March forward?


Dull. We have achieved Honor enough already, in having made our
Campaign-here --

[Looking big.
Haz. 'Sdeath, but you shall go -- put them in the front, and prick them on --
if they offer to turn back run them through.


Tim. Oh, horrid --

[The Soldiers prick them on with their Swords.
Whiff. Oh, Nancy, thy Dream will yet come to pass.


Haz. Will you advance, Sir?

[Pricks Whiff.
Whiff. Why, so we do, Sir; the Devil's in these fighting Fellows.

[Ex. [An Alarm at a distance.
Within. To Arms, to Arms, the Enemy's upon us.

A noise of fighting, after which enters Friendly with his Party, retreating
and fighting, from Dareing and some Soldiers, Ranter fighting like a Fury by
his side, he putting her back in vain; they fight out. Re-enter Daring with
Friendly all bloody. Several Soldiers enter with Flambeaux.
Dar. Now, Sir -- what injury have I ever done you, that you should use this
Treachery against me?


Fr. To take advantage any way in War, was never counted Treachery -- and had I
Murdered thee, I had not paid thee half the Debt I owe thee.


Dar. You bleed too much to hold too long a Parley -- come to my Tent, I Will
take a charitable care of thee.


Fr. I scorn thy Courtesy, who against all the Laws of Honor and of Justice,
have ravished innocent Ladies.


Dar. Sir, your upbraiding of my Honor shall never make me forfeit it, or
esteem you less -- Is there a Lady here you have a Passion for?


Fr. Yes, on a Nobler score than thou dare own.


Dar. To let you see how you're mistaken, Sir, who e're that Lady be whom you
affect, I will resign, and give you both your Freedoms.


Fr. Why, for this Courtesy, which shows thee brave, in the next Fight I Will
save thy Life, to quit the obligation.


Dar. I thank you, Sir -- come to my Tent -- and when we have dressed your Wounds,
and yielded up the Ladies, I Will give you my Passport for your safe conduct
back, and tell your Friends in the Town we'll Visit them in the Morning.


Fr. They Will meet you on your way, Sir --


Dar. Come, my young Soldier, now thou'st won my Soul.

An Alarm beats: Enter at another passage Boozer with all the Ladies; they pass
over the Stage, while Hazard, Downright, beating back a Party of Soldiers.
Dull. Tim. Whim and Whiff, pricked on by their Party to fight, so that they lay
about them like Madmen. Bacon, Fearless and Dareing come in, rescue their men,
and fight out the other Party, some falling dead. Bacon, Fearless and Dareing
return tired, with their Swords drawn. Ent^ Soldier running.
Sold. Return, Sir, where your Sword will be more useful -- a Party of
Indians, taking advantage of the Night, have set Fire on your Tents, and born
away the Queen.


Bac. Hah, the Queen! By Heaven this Victory shall cost them dear; come, let us
fly to rescue her.

[Goes out. [Scene changes to Wellman's Tent. Enter Wellman, Brag, Grub and
Officers.
Well. I cannot sleep my Impatience is so great, to engage this haughty Enemy,
before they have reposed their weary Limbs -- Is not you Ruddy Light the
Mornings Dawn.


Bragg. It Is, and please your Honor.


Well. Is there no News of Friendly yet, and Hazard?


Bragg. Not yet -- it is thought they left the Camp to Night, with some design
against the Enemy.


Well. What Men have they?


Bragg. Only Boozers Party, Sir.


Well. I know they are brave, and mean to surprise me with some handsome Action.

Enter Friendly.
Fr. I ask a thousand Pardons, Sir, for quitting the Camp without your leave.


Well. Your Conduct and your Courage cannot Err; I see thou'st been in action
by thy Blood.


Fri. Sir I Am ashamed to own these slender wounds, since without more my luck
was to be taken, while Hazard did alone effect the business; the rescuing of
the Ladies.


Well. How got ye Liberty?


Fri. By Dareings generosity, who sends you word he will visit you this Morning.


Well. We are prepared to meet him.

Enter Downright, Hazard, Ladies, Whim. Whiff, Dullman, Tim. looking big; Well.
Embraces Down. --
Well. My worthy Friend how am I joyed to see you?


Dow. We owe our Liberties to these brave Youths, who can do wonders when they
Fight for Ladies.


Tim. With our assistance Ladies.


Whim. For my part I Will not take it as I have done, Gad I find when I am
Damnable Angry I can beat both Friend and Foe.


Whiff. When I fight for my Nancy here -- adsfish I Am a Dragon.


Mrs. Whiff. Lord you need not have been so hasty:


Frien. Do not upbraid me with your Eyes Chrisante, but let these wounds assure
you I endeavored to serve you, tho Hazard had the Honor on it.


Well. But Ladies we will not expose you in the Camp, -- a Party of our Men shall
see you safely conducted to Madam Sureloves; it is but a little Mile from our
Camp.


Fri. Let me have that Honor Sir.


Chri. No, I conjure you let your wounds be dressed, obey me if you Love me, and
Hazard shall conduct us home.


Well. He had the Toil, it is fit he have the recompense.


Whiff. He the Toil Sir, what did we stand for Ciphers?


Whim. The very appearance I made in the front of the Battle, awed the Enemy.


Tim. Ay, Ay, Let the Enemy say how I mauled 'em -- but Gads zoors I scorn to
brag.


Well. Since you have regained your Honor so Gloriously -- I restore you to your
Commands, you lost by your seeming Cowardice.


Dull. Valor is not always in Humor Sir.


Well. Come Gentlemen since they are resolved to engage us, let us set our Men in
order to receive 'em.

[Exit all but the four Justices.
Tim. Our Commissions again -- you must be bragging, and see what comes on it; I
was modest ye see and said nothing of my Prowess.


Whiff. What a Devil, does the Colonel think we are made of Iron, continually
to be beat on the Anvil?


Whim. Look Gentlemen here is two Evils -- if we go we are dead Men if we stay
we are hanged -- and that will disorder my Cravat-string -- therefore the least
Evil is to go -- and set a good Face on the matter as I do --

[Goes out singing. SCENE a thick Wood, Enter Queen dressed like an Indian Man,
with a Bow in her hand and Quiver at her Back, Anaria her Confident disguised
so too, and about a Duzen Indians led by Cavaro.
Quee. I tremble yet, do think we are safe Cavaro.


Cav. Madam these Woods are intricate and vast; and 'twill be difficult to find
us out -- or if they do, this habit will secure you from the fear of being
taken.


Quee. Do think if Bacon find us he will not know me? Alas my fears and
blushes will betray me.


Ana. It Is certain Madam if we stay we Perish; for all the Wood's surrounded by
the Conqueror.


Quee. Alas it is better we should Perish here, than stay to expect the violence
of his Passion; Towhich my heart's too sensibly inclined.


Ana. Why do you not obey it is dictates then, why do you fly the Conqueror?


Quee. Not fly -- not fly the Murderer of my Lord?


Ana. What world, what resolution can preserve you, and what he cannot gain by
soft submission, force will at last overcome.


Quee. I wish there were in Nature one excuse either by force or Reason to
compel me: -- For oh Anaria -- I adore this General, -- take from my Soul a
Truth -- till now concealed -- at twelve years Old -- at the Pauwmungian Court
I saw this Conqueror. I saw him young and Gay as new born Spring, Glorious and
Charming as the Mid-days Sun, I watch't his looks, and listened when he spoke,
and thought him more than Mortal.


Ana. He has a graceful Form.


Quee. At last a Fatal Match concluded was, between my Lord and me I gave my
Hand, but oh how far my heart was from consenting, the angry Gods are witness.


Ana. 'Twas pity.


Quee. Twelve teadious Moons I past in silent languishment; Honor endeavoring
to destroy my Love, but all in vain, for still my pain returned when ever I
beheld my Conqueror, but now when I consider him as Murderer of my Lord --
[Feircely] I sigh and wish -- some other fatal hand had given him his Death --
but now there is a necessity I must be brave and overcome my Heart: What if I
do? ah whether shall I fly, I have no Amazonian fire about me, all my Artillery
is sighs and Tears, the Earth my Bed, and Heaven my Canopy.

[Weeps: [After a noise of Fighting. Hah, we are surprised, oh whether shall I
fly? And yet methinks a certain trembling joy, spite of my Soul, spite of my
boasted Honor, runs shivering round my heart..

[Enter an Indian.
Ind. Madam your out guards are surpised by Bacon, who hews down all before
him, and demands the Queen with such a voice and Eyes so Feirce and Angry, he
kills us with his looks.


Cav. Draw up your Poisoned Arrows to the head, and aim them at his Heart, sure
some will hit.


Quee. Cruel Cavaro, -- would 'twere fit for me to contradict thy Justice.

[Aside.
Bac. within. The Queen ye slaves, give me the Queen and live!

He Enters furiously beating back some Indians, Cavaro's Party going to shoot,
the Queen runs in.
Quee. Hold, hold, I do Command ye [Bac. Flys on em as they shoot and miss him,
and fights like a fury, and wounds the Queen in the disorder; beats them all
out. -- hold thy commanding Hand, and do not kill me, who would not hurt thee
to regain my Kingdom --

[He snatches her in his Arms she reels.
Bac. Hah -- a Woman's Voice, -- what art thou? Oh my fears!


Quee. Thy hand has been too cruel to a Heart -- whose Crime was only tender
thoughts for thee.


Bac. The Queen! What is it my Sacreligious hand has done?


Quee. The noblest office of a Gallant Friend, thou'st saved my Honor and have
given me Death.


Bac. Is It possible! ye unregarding Gods is it possible?


Quee. Now I may Love you without Infamy, and please my Dying Heart by gazing
on you.


Bac. Oh I am lost -- for ever lost -- I find my Brain turn with the wild
confusion.


Quee. I faint -- oh lay me gently on the Earth.

[Lays her down.
Bac. Who waits -- [Turns in rage to his Men.] make of the Trophies of the War
a Pile, and set it all on Fire, that I may leap into consuming. Flames -- while
all my Tents are burning round about me. [VVildly Oh thou dear Prize for which
alone I Toiled.

[Weeps and lies down by her. Enter Fearless with his Sword drawn.
Fea. Hah on the Earth -- how do you Sir?


Bac. What would thou?


Fea. Wellman with all the Forces he can gather attacks us even in our very
Camp, assist us Sir or all is lost.


Bac. Why prithee let him make the World his Prize, I have no business with the
Trifle now; it now contains nothing that is worth my case, since my fair Queen
-- is Dead, -- and by my Hand.


Quee. So charming and obliging is thy moan, that I could wish for Life to
recompense it; but oh, Death falls -- all cold -- upon my Heart like Mildews on
the Blossoms.


Fea. By Heaven Sir, this Love will ruin all -- rise, rise and save us yet.


Bac. Leave me, what e're becomes of me -- loose not thy share of Glory --
prithee leave me.


Qu. Alas, I fear, thy Fate is drawing on, and I shall shortly meet thee in the
Clouds; till then -- farewell -- even Death is pleasing to me, while thus -- I
find it in thy Arms --

[Dies.
Bac. There ends my Race of Glory and of Life:

[An Alarm at distance -- continues a while.
Bac. Hah -- Why should I idly whine away my life, since there are Nobler ways
to meet with Death? -- Up, up, and face him then -- Hark -- there is the
Soldiers knell -- and all the Joys of Life -- with thee I bid farewell --

[Goes out. The Indians bear off the Body of the Queen. The Alarm continues:
Enter Downright, Wellman, and others, Swords drawn.
Well. They fight like men possessed -- I did not think to have found them so
prepared.


Down. They'ye good intelligence -- but where is the Rebel?


Well. Sure he is not in the fight, oh that it were my happy chance to meet him,
that while our men look on, we might dispatch the business of the War. -- Come,
let us fall in again now we have taken breath.

They go out: Enter Dareing and Fearless hastily, with their Swords drawn, meet
Whim, Whiff, with their Swords drawn, running away.
Dar. How now, whether away?

[In anger.
Whim. Hah, Dareing here -- we are pursuing of the Enemy, Sir, stop us not in
the pursuit of Glory.

[Offer to go.
Dar. Stay -- I have not seen you in my ranks to day.


Whiff. Lord, does your Honor take us for Starters?


Fear. Yes, Sirrah, and believe you are now rubbing off -- confess, or I Will run
you through.


Whiff. Oh Mercy, Sir, Mercy, we'll confese.


Whim. What will you confess -- we were only going behind you Hedge to untruss
a point; that is all.


Whiff. Ay, your Honors will smell out the truth if you keep us here long.


Dar. Here, carry themPrisoners to my Tent, [Ex Sold with Wh. and Whiff.

Enter Ranter without a Hat; and Sword drawn. [Daring (...) goes the other way.
(...). A Pox of all ill luck, how came ^to ^ese Dareing in the fight? Ha --
who is here? -- Dullman and Timorous Dead -- the Rogues are Counterfeits -- I Will
see what Movables they have about them, all is Lawful Prize in War.

[Takes their Money, Watches and Rings: goes out.
Tim. What, Rob the Dead? -- Why, what will this Villainous World come to.

[Clashing of Swords just as they were going to rise. Enter Hazard bringing in
Ranter.
Haz. Thou could expect no other Fate Young man, thy hands are yet too tender
for a Sword.


Ran. Thou look like a good natured Fellow, use me civilly, and Dareing
shall Ransom me.


Haz. Doubt not a Generous Treatment.

[Goes out.
Dull. So, the Coast is clear, I desire to remove my Quarters to some place of
more safety -- --

[They rise and go off.
Well. 'Twas this way Bacon fled. [Enter Wellman and Soldiers hastily. five
hundred pound for him who finds the Rebel.

[Go out. Scene changes to a Wood: Enter Bacon and Fearless, with their Swords
drawn, all bloody.
Bac. It Is Just, ye Gods! That when you took the Prize for which I fought,
Fortune and you should all abandon me.


Fear. Oh fly Sir to some place of safe retreat, for there is no mercy to be
hoped if taken. What will you do, I know we are pursued, by Heaven I will not
dye a shameful Death.


Bac. Oh they will have pity on thy Youth and Bravery, but I Am above their
Pardon.

A noise is heard. Within. This way -- this way -- hay -- hallow.


Fear. Alas Sir we are undone -- I Will see which way they they take.

Exit:
Bac. So near! Nay then to my last shift. Undoes the Pomel of his Sword. Come
my good Poison, like that of Hannibal, long I have born a noble Remedy for all
the ills of Life. Takes Poison. I have too long survived my Queen and Glory,
those two bright Stars that influenced my Life are set to all Eternity.

Lies down. Enter Fearless, runs to Bacon and looks on his Sword.
Fea. -- Hah -- what have ye done?


Bac. Secured my self from being a public Spectacle upon the common Theater of
Death.

Enter Dareing and Soldiers.
Dar. Victory, victory, they fly, they fly, where is the Victorious General?


Fea. Here -- taking his last Adieu.


Dare. Dying? Then wither all the Laurels on my Brows, for I shall never
Triumph more in War, where is the wounds?


Fea. From his own hand by what he carried here, believing we had lost the
Victory.


Bac. And is the Enemy put to flight my Hero?

[Grasps his Neck.
Dar. All routed Horse and Foot, I placed an Ambush, and while they were
pursuing you, my Men fell on behind and won the day.


Bac. Thou almost makes me wish to Live again, If I could live now Fair
Semernia's Dead, -- But oh -- the baneful Drug is just and kind and hastens me
away -- now while you are Victors make a Peace -- with the English Council --
and never let Ambition -- Love -- or Interest make you forget as I have done --
your Duty -- and Allegiance -- farewell -- a long farewell --

[Dies Embracing their Necks.
Dar. So fell the Roman Cassius -- by mistake --

Enter Soldiers with Dunce, Tim. and Dullman.
Sold. An't please your Honor we took these Men running away.


Dar. Let 'em loose -- the Wars are at an end, see where the General lies --
that great Soul'd Man, no private Body e're contained a Nobler, and he that
could have conquered all America, finds only here his scanty length of Earth,
-- go bear the Body to his own Pavillion -- [Souldiers goes out with the Body]
Tho we are Conquerers we submit to treat, and yield upon conditions, you Mr.
Dunce shall bear our Articles to the Council --


Dun. With joy I will obey you.


Tim. Good General let us be put in the agreement.


Dar. You shall be obliged --

[Ex. Dar. Dunc. Dull. and Tim. as Fear. goes out, a Soldier meets him
Sold. What does your Honor intend to do with Whim and Whiff, who are
Condemned by a Council of War.

Enter Dareing, Dullman Tim. Fearless and Officers.
Dare. You come too late Gentlemen to be put into the Articles, nor am I
satisfied you're worthy of it.


Dull. Why did not you Sir see us ly Dead in the Field.


Dar. Yes, but I see no wound about you.


Tim. We were stunned with being knocked down, Gads zoors a Man may be killed
with the But end of a Musket, as soon as with the point of a Sword.

[Enter Dunce.
Dun. The Council Sir wishes you Health and Happiness, and ^sends you these
Signed by their Hands --

[Gives Papers.
Dar. Reads. That you shall have a general Pardon for your self and Friends,
that you shall have all new Commissions, and Dareing to Command as General;
that you shall have free leave to Inter^ your Dead General, in James Town, and
to ratify this -- we will meet you at Madam Sureloves House which stands
between the Armies, attended by only by our Officers. The Councels noble and
I Will wait upon them.

Exit Dunce. SCENE a Grove near Madam Sureloves, Enter Surelove weeping, Well.
Crisante, Mrs. Flirt, Ranter as before, Down. Haz. Frien. Booz. Brag.
Well. How long Madam have you heard the news of Colonel Su^ve's Death?


Sure. By a Vessel last Night arrived.


Well. You should not grieve when men so old pay their debt to Nature, you are
too Fair not to have been reserved for some young Loves Arms.


Haz. I dare not speak -- but give me leave to hope.


Sure. The way to oblige me to it, is never more to speak to me of Love till I
shall think it fit --

[VVellman speaks to Downright.
Well. Come you shall not grant it -- it is a hopeful Youth.


Dow. You are too much my Friend to be denied -- Crisante do you Love Friendly?
nay do not blush -- till you have done a fault, your Loving him is none -- here
take her young Man and with her all my Fortune -- when I am Dead Sirrah -- not
a Groat before -- unless to buy ye Baby Clouts.


Fri. He merits not this Treasure Sir, can wish for more.

Enter Dareing, Fearless, Dunce and Officers, they meet Well: and Down. who
Embrace em. Dull. and Tim. stand.
Dar. Can you forgive us Sir our disobedience.


Well. Your offering peace while yet you might command it, has made such kind
impressions on us, that now you may command your Propositions; your Pardons are
all Sealed and new Commissions.


Dar. I Am not Ambitious of that Honor Sir, but in obedience will accept your
goodness, but Sir I hear I have a young Friend taken Prisoner by Captain Hazard
whom I entreat you will render me,


Haz. Sir -- here I resign him to you.

[Gives him Ranter.
Ran. Faith General you left me but scurvily in Battle.


Dar. That was to see how well you could shift for your self, now I find you
can bear the brunt of a Campaign you are a fit Wife for a Soldier.


All. A Woman -- Ranter --


Haz. Faith Madam I should have given you kinder. Quarter if I had known my
Happiness.


Flirt. I have an humble Petition to you Sir.


Sure. In which we all join.


Flir. An't please you Sir, Mr. Dunce has long made Love to me and on promise
of Marriage has --

[Simpers.
Dow. What has he Mrs. Flirt.


Flir. Only been a little familiar with my Person Sir --


Well. Do you hear Parson -- you must Marry Mrs. Flirt.


Dun. How Sir, a Man of my Coat Sir, Marry a Brandy-munger.


Well. Of your calling you mean a Farrier and no Parson -- [Aside to him] she will
leave her Trade -- and spark it above all the Ladies at Church, no more -- take
her and make her honest.

Enter Whim and Whiff stripped.
Cries. Bless me, what have we here?


Whim. Why, an't like your Honors, we were taken by the Enemy. -- hah Dareing
here and Fearless?


Fea. How now -- Gentlemen were not you two Condemned to be Shot for running
from your Colors.


Dow. From your Colors.


Fea. Yes Sir, they were both listed in my Regiment.


Dow. Then we must hang them for deserting us.


VVhim. So out of the Frying Pan -- you know where Brother --


Whiff. Ay -- he that is Born to be Hanged -- you know the rest, a Pox of these
Proverbs.


Well. I know ye well -- you're all rank Cowards, but once more we forgive ye,
your Places in the Council shall be supplied by these Gentlemen of Sense and
Honor. The Governor when he comes shall find the Country in better hands than
he expects to find it.


VVhim. A very fair discharge,


VVhiff. I Am glad it is no worse, I Will home to my Nancy.


Dull. Have we exposed our Lives and Fortunes for this?


Tim. Gads zoors I never thrived since I was a Statesman, left Planting, and
fell to promising and Lying, I Will to my old Trade again, bask under the shade
of my own Tobacco, and Drink my Punch in Peace.


Well. Come my brave Youths let all our Forces meet,
To make this Country Happy, Rich, and great;
Let scanted Europe see that we enjoy
Safer Repose, and larger Worlds than they.

FINIS.

