

THEOPHILA; OR LOVES SACRIFICE. A Divine Poem.

WRITTEN BY E. B. Esquire Several Parts thereof set to fit Aires by Mr I. IENKINS.

Longum Iter per Praecepta, breve and efficax per Exempla. Si Praeceptis non
accendimur, saltem Exemplis incitemur, atque in Appetitu Rectitudinis nil sibi
Men's nostra difficile aestimet, quod perfect peragi ab Aliis videt. Greg. Mag.
l. 9. c. 43.

Id peragas Vita, quod velles Morte peractum.

LONDON, Printed by R. N. Sold by Henry Seile in Fleetstreet, and Humphrey
Moseley at the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

Men's Authoris.
TE, mi CHRIST, Tuaeque canam Suspiria SPONSAE;
ARDORESque pios, and GAUDIA coelica, Mundo
Abdita; divinae pandam MYSTERIA Mentis,
Accensasque Faces COELO! Fuge, caeca Libido,
Et Fastus populator Opum, Livorque secundis
Pallidus, and rabidis violenta Calumnia Dictis,
Diraque pacatas lacerans Discordia Mentes,
Et Scelerum male-suada Cohors. TE, mitis IESV,
Da mihi velle sequi! Gressus alato sequentis!
DIVINAE sum testa ROTAE; Vas obline fido
Rimosum Gypso, sic Vas ego reddar Honoris:
Sum tenebrosa Tui radiantis LUMINIS umbra,
Quod, veniente Die, quod, decedente, viderem!
Cujus nec VISUS Spatium, nec GLORIA Laudem,
Nec Vox ulla capit MERITUM, nec TERMINUS Aevum!
Unius est in Verba satis jurasse MAGISTRI,
Et TE praesentem Causae petiise PATRONUM!
Thema sit Aethereo sacranda THEOPHILA TEMPLO,
Pura repurgato solvens LIBAMINA Cord.
The Authors Design.
OF CHRIST, and of the SPOUSES Sighs, I sing,
And of the Joys that from Those Ardors spring,
The World never knew; Of her Souls mystic Sense,
And of her Heavenly Zeal. Blind Lust, pack hence,
Hence Pride, exhausting Wealth; Hence, Envy, fly,
Pal'd at Success; hence foul-mouthed Calumny,
And savage Discord, striving to divide
United Minds; with all Sins Troop beside.
JESUS! grant I may follow THEE, my Feet
Wing THOU, and make them in pursuance fleet!
Close up my Cracks by Faith, so shall I be
A Vessel made of HONOR unto THEE.
I Am but a faint Resultance from thy LIGHT,
Which, at Sols Rise and Set, enchears my Sight.
No Space thy VIEW, no Glory bounds thy PRAISE,
No Terms do reach thy WORTH, no Age thy DAYS!
May I but swear Obedience to thy LAWS,
And crave THEE PATRON to my present Cause!
My Subject's THEOPHIL, for HEAVEN designed,
Offering pure SACRIFICE with sacred MIND.

LADIES,
WE jangle not in Shools, but strain to set
Church-Musick, at which SAINTS being met,
May warble forth HEAVENS Praise, and thence HEAVENS Blessing get.
CHurch-Anthems irksome to the Factious grow;
In what a sad Case were They, trow,
Should They be penned in HEAVEN, where Hymns for ever flow^
As, fired Affections to your Beauties move:
So, Stillatories be of Love;
That, what was Vapor, may, by VIRTUE, Essence prove.
SUrvey THEOPHILA; her Rules apply,
That You may live, as You would die:
VIRTUE enamels Life; It Is GRACE does glorify.
OF may those fragrant Flowers that in HER grew,
Blown by such Breath, drench't by such Dew,
Spring, and display their Buds, LADIES ELECT, in You!
TO this Spring-Garden, VIRGINS, chaste and fair,
Coacht in pure Thoughts, make your Repair,
To recreate your Minds, and take fresh Heavenly Air.
YE snowy FIRES, observe her in each GRACE;
So, may You, bright in Soul as Face,
Have in The Gall'ery of Heroic Women Place.
NAy, when your Days and Piety shall sum
Up their Compleatness, may Ye come
To endless GLORIES Court, and with blessed SOULS have Room!
THE PREFACE.
SAd Experience confirms, what THE ANCIENT OF DAYS foretold; That the last
Times shall be worst: For, in this Dotage of the World (where Atheism stands at
the right hand of Profaneness, and Superstition on the blind Side of
Ignorance; where there is unmercifull Oppression, and overmerciful Connivence)
her beloved Favorites, (who are of past things mindeless, of future regardless,
having different Opinions, yet but one RELIGION, Money, one GOD, Mammon) do
laugh at OTHERS, who fall not down, and worship the Golden Image that secular
Nabuchodonisors have set up; But, let them, who think themselves safe in the
Herd, being night-wildred in their Intellects, prosecute their Sensuality,
which will soon, like Dalila, put out their Eyes; For, earthly Complacencies,
and exterior Gaities are not only Chaff in the hand, VANITY, but also Chaff
in the Eye, VEXATION OF SPIRIT. How art thou, foolish World, laden with Sin,
fond of Trifles, neglecting Objects fit for CHRISTIANS, fit for Men! Could thy
Minions consider, that thou can give but what thou have, a smoke of Honor, a
shadow of Riches, a sound of Pleasure, a blast of Fame, which can neither add
to Length nor Happiness of Life; That thy whole Self art an overdeer Bargain,
if bought of the Devil, at the expense of a deadly Sin, when as sudden Chance
or Sickness may snatch and rend them hence in a Moment, they would not then so
madly rant it as they do, but court Sobreity, being aware of the Dangers that
proceed from, and wait upon the abused Opulency of an indulgent Fortune, whose
Caresses are apt to swell into Exorbitances of Spirit, and run wildly into
Dissoluteness of Manners. But, for want of Circumspection, Men grow covetous as
Jewish Merchants, ambitious as Eastern Potentates, factious as the giddy
Multitude, revengefull as Jealousy, and proud as Usurpers; though soon such
swallowed Baits dissolve into a gally Bitterness; Wherefore, it were highly to
be wished, that in the midest of their Extravagancies they would ponder, that
nothing is more unhappy then the Felicity of Sinners, who prosper as if they
were the Beloved of GOD, when, indeed, by His Patience they are only (probably)
hardened to their more dreadful Destruction! How, how will eternal Anguish be
aggravated by temporary past Happiness! If we contemplate what unspeakable
Torments are for ever there, we should have no cause to envy Worldlings
Prosperity, but rather wonder that their Portion on Earth is not greater, and
that ever they should be sensible of Sickness, Affront or Trouble; since, if
their Fortunatenesse should far exceed their Ambition, it could not any way
recompense that Torture for an Hour, which yet shall hold to the Duration of an
infinite Eternity! when as all the Play and Pageantry of Earth is ever
changing* and nothing abides but the Stage of the World, and the Spectator GOD.
That Bliss is not true of whose Eternity we may doubt* View then, Christian
Reader, the Folly of ^ll Counsel unmaskt, and demonstrated that all Policy is
wretched without Piety, without Scriptural Wisdom, without CHRIST the Essential
Wisdom; And that all Iniquity has so much of Justice in it, that it usually
condemns, yea leads it self to Execution; witness Absolons Head, Achitophels
Hands, and the Surrender of Caesar's Cittadell, (summoned by Judgments Herald,
and all his Glories Cobweb-guard yielded to the Storm) just before the Statue
of Pompey, whose Ruin he had so ambitiously pursued. Would then any Wise man
choose to be Caesar for his Glory, Absolon for his Beauty, Achitophel for his
Policy, Dives for his Wealth, or Judas for his Office? Seeing then that
Happiness consists not in the Affluence of Exorbitant Possessions, nor in the
Humors of fickle Honor, all external Splendors being unsatisfactory, let
Christians neglect terrestrial Vanities, and retire into the Recesses of
Religion, nothing being so great in humane Actions as a pious knowing Mind,
which disposes great Things, and may yield such permanent Monuments, as bring
Felicity to Mankind above the Founders of Empires; being an Antepast to the
overflowing FEASTS of ETERNITY. Man endued with Altitude of Wisdom, in the
sweetness of Conscience and Height of Virtue, is of all Creatures
sub-Angelical the ALMIGHTIES Masterpiece, the Image of his MAKER, a Candidate
of DIVINITY, and Model of the Universe; who, in holy Colloquies, Whisprings,
and secret Conferences with GOD, finds HIM a Torrent of Pleasure, a Fountain
of Honor, and an inexhaustible Treasure; whose divine Life is a Character of
the DIVINE NATURE, by taking GOD for the Text, Truth for the Doctrine, and
Holiness for the Use; without which the highest Endowments of the most refined
Wit are but the quaint Magic of a learned Lunacie. Most wretched therefore are
they, beyond all Synonima's of Misery, whose undisciplined Education leaves
them unfurnisht of Skill to spend their Time in any Thing, but what in the
prosecution of Sin tends to Death; Wealth and Greatness rendering them past
Reproof, even ready to tempt their very Tempter; whereby they are wholly
inclined to Sensualities, being in their Entertainments commonly intemperate in
their Drink humerous, their Humors quarrelous, their Duels damnable,
concluding a voluptuous and brutish Life in a bloody and desperate Death,
preferring the Body before the Soul, Sense before the Spirit, Appetite before
Reason, temporary Fooleries, fantastic Visits, idle Courtships, gay Trifles,
fascinating Vanities (as if the Pleasure of Life were but the smothering of
precious Time in those things, which are mere Puffs in Expectation, Vanity in
Enjoyment, and Vexation of Spirit in Departure) before solid Goodness, and
eternal Exultations. To divert thee therefore from such Shelves of indiscreet
Vice, and to direct thee to the safe and noble Channel of Virtue, even to Faith
with good Works, to Piety with Compassion, to Zeal with Charity, and to know the
End which distinguishes thee from a Beast, and to choose a good End, which
differenceth thee from an evil Man; be so much thine own Friend, as to peruse
seriously this spiritual Poem, which treats on Sub-coelestials, Coelestials;
and Super-coelestials, whereby a delightful Curiousness may steal thee into the
Pleasure of Goodness. Know then that Sub-coelestials, or Sublunaries have
their Assignment in the lowest Portion of the Universe, and being wholly of a
corporeal Nature, do enjoy Spiritual Gifts, the Chief of which is Life, by Loan
only; where there is no Generation without Corruption, no Birth without Death.
From the Surface of the Earth to the Center is 3436 Miles, the whole Thickness
6872 Miles, the whole Compsse 21600 Miles; from its Center to the Moon is
3924912 Miles. Now Coelestials, or ethereal Bodies are seated in the middle,
which, participating of a greater Portion of Perfection, impart innumerable
rare Virtues, and influential Efficacies to Things below, not enduring a
Corruption, only subject, having obtained their Period, to change. The glorious
Projection and Transfusion of aetheral Light, both of the Sun and of the Stars
of the six Magnitudes constitute, by astronomicall Computation, more than 300
Suns upward to the EMPYRAEAN HEAVEN. A Star in the Equator makes 12598666
Miles in an Hour, which is 209994 Miles in a Minute, a Motion quicker than
Thought. Super-coelestials are Intelligencies, altogether Spiritual and
Immortal, excellent in their Beings, intuitive in their Conceptions; such as
are the glorious Quire of the Apostles, the exulting Number of the Prophets,
the innumerable Army of crowned Martyrs, triumphing Virgins, charitable
Confessors, etc. or the blessed Hierarchy of Angels, participating somewhat of
GOD and Man; having had a Beginning as Man, and now being immortal with GOD,
having their Immortality for his Sempiternity; void of all Mixture, as is GOD,
and yet consisting of Matter and Form as does Man; Subsisting in some Subject
and Substance as does Man, yet being incorporeal, as is GOD; They having
Clarity, Impassibility, Subtility, and Agility, having Understanding without
Error, Light without Darkness, Joy without Sorrow, Will without Perturbation,
Impassibility without Corruption; pure as the Light, ordained to serve the LORD
of Light; They are local and circumscribed by Place, as is Man; yet are they in
a place not properly by way of Circumscription, but by way of Definition;
though they cannot be in several Places at once, yet are they able in a Moment
to be any where, as GOD always is every where; of admirable Capacity and
Knowledge, resembling GOD; yet ignorant of the ESSENCE of GOD, much less see
they all Things in IT, in that like Man. Even these Incorporeal Substances
would pine and starve, if an All-filling, and infinitely All-sufficient and
Superabundant GOD were not the Object of their high Contemplation, whose Bliss
of theirs is the nearest Approach to that Divine MAJESTY, WHO is a true, real,
substantial, and essential NATURE, subsisting of HIMSELF, an eternal BEING, an
infinite ONENESS, the radical PRINCIPLE of all Things; whose ESSENCE is an
incomprehensible Light, His POWER is Omnipotency, and his BECK an absolute
Act; WHO, before the Creation, was a BOOK rolled up in HIMSELF, having Light
only in HIMSELF; WHO is a SPIRIT existent from everlasting to everlasting; One
ESSENCE* Three SUBSISTENCIES; whose DIVINE NATURE is an essential and infinite
UNDERSTANDING, which knows all Things actually always; which cannot possibly
be comprehended by any finite Creature, much less by Man, grovelling on Earth
in the Mud of Error and gross Ignorance, who are unable by any Art or
Industry to find out the true Nature, Form and Virtue of the least fly or
gnat. The whole Universe is the Looking-glass of GODS Power, Wisdom, and
Bounty; HE loves as Charity, knows as Truth, judges as Equity, rules as
Majesty, defends as Safety, works as Virtue, reveals as Light, etc. HE is a
never deficient Brightness, a never weary Life, a Spring ever-flowing, the
Principle of Beginning, etc. If any Creature knew what GOD is, he should be
GOD; for none knows HIM but HIMSELF, who is Good without Quality, great
without Quantity, present without Place, everlasting without Time; WHO by a
Body is no where* by Energie every where, Above all by Power, beneath all by
sustaining all, without all by compassing all, within all by penetrating all,
being absent seen, being present invisible; of WHOM to speak, is to be silent,
WHOM to value is to exceed all Rate, WHOM to define, is still to increase in
Definition; INFINITENESS being the right Philosophers Stone, which turns all
Metals into Gold, and one Dram of IT being put, not only to a Seraphin, or to a
whole Element, but even to the least gnat in the World, or the least mo^e in
the Sun, is of Force to make it true and very GOD: For, first It makes it to
be the first ESSENCE, derived from none other. 2. It makes it to be but One,
because there cannot be two INFINITES; where there are two, there is Division;
where Division, there is end of one, and beginning of another, and so no
INFINITE. 3. It makes the Subject to be immaterial, for no Matter can be
INFINITE; for, a Body is contained, and, if contained, not infinite; being
without Matter, it is also without Passion; for, sola materia patitur; and so
becomes also immutable, for there can be no Change without Passion. 4. It
makes a thing to be immovable, for whatsoever moves has Bounds, but in
INFINITE there is no Bounds. 5. The INFINITE THING is simple, for in
Composition there is Division and Quality, and so by consequent Limits. Thus,
INFINITENESS distinguishes from all Creatures, and is first primary without
Cause, but existing absolutely in HIMSELF, and of HIMSELF, and is to all other
Things the Cause and Beginning, yet not diminishing HIM, having all their
Essence, but no part of his ESSENCE from Him. But, o, here the most superlative
Expressions of Eloquence are no other than mere Extenuations. I tread a Maze,
and thread a Labyrinth on Hills of Ice, where, if I slip* I tumble into
Heresy; I am with S. Peter in the Deep, where, without the Hand of POWER, I
should sink eternally, and be swallowed up by the bottomless Gulf. The
Prosecution of this Argument were fitter for the Pens of ANGELS, than for the
Sons of Corruption; whereof we may say, that if all should be written of
INFINITENESS, not only the whole World, but even Heaven It Self would not
suffice to hold the Books which should be written. I satisfy my Incapacitie
with rejoicing in GODS Incomprehensibility. And now, descending from these
amazing Heights, know, Reader, that Divine Poesy is the internal Triumph of
the Mind, rapt with S. Paul into the third Heaven, where She contemplates
Ineffables: it is the sacred Oracles of Faith put into melodious Anthems that
make Music ravishing, no earthly Jubilation being comparable to It; It
discovers the Causes, Beginnings, Progress, and End of Things, It instructs
Youth, comfort Age, graceth Prosperity, solaceth Adversity, pleases at
Home, delights abroad, shortneth the Night, and refreshes the Day; No Star
in the Sphere of Wisdom outshines It: Natural Philosophy has not any thing in
it which may satisfy the Soul, because that is created to something more
excellent then all Nature; but this Divine Rapture chains the Mind with
harmonious Precepts from a divine Influence, whose Operations are as subtle and
resistlesse as the Influence of Planets; teaching Mortals to live as in the
Sight of GOD, by whom the Coverts of the thickest Hypocrisy (that white Devil)
are most clearly seen thorough. Now it is Judgment begets the Strength,
Invention the Ornaments of a Poem; both These joined form Wit, which is the
Agility of Spirits: Vivacity of Fancy in a florid Style disposes Light and
Life to a Poem, wherein the Masculine and refined Pleasures of the
Understanding transcend the feminine and sensual of the Eye: From the
Excellency of Fancy proceed grateful Similies, apt Metaphors, etc. Sublime
Poets are by Nature strengthened, by the Power of the Mind inflamed, and by
divine Rapture inspired; They should have a plentiful stock to set up, and
manage it artfully, their Conceptions should be choice, brief, perspicuous,
well-habited. In Scripture Moses, Job, David, Solomon, and others, are famous
for employing their Talents in this kind. S. Paul likewise cited three of the
Heathen Poets (whom he calls Prophets) as evident Convictions of Vice, and
Demonstrations of Divinity. viz. Epimenides to the Cretians. Tit. 1. 12. (...).
Menander to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15. 33. (...). And Aratus to the Athenians.
Acts 17. 28. (...) From these Results I fell in love with our more divine and
Christian Poesy, observing that in the Sayings and Writings of our Blessed
SAVIOR and his Disciples, there are no less than sixty Authorities produced
from above forty of David's Psalms. Hence from that high Love, which has no
Weapons but fiery Rays, my Spirit is struck into a Flame to enter into the
secret and sacred Rooms of Theology, and, Reader, if thou will not prejudice
thine own Charity by miscrediting me, I dare profess, thou will neither repent
of thy Cost or Time in reviewing these Intervall Issues of spiritual
Recreation, which may thus, happily, prove a pleasant Lure to thy pious
Devotion: May likewise thy Charity suggest to thy Belief, that I have done my
best to that End, and if thou think that I have wanted Salt to preserve them
to Posterity, know that the very Subject It self is Balsam enough to make them
perpetual. Delightest thou in a Heroic Poem? If Actions of Magnanimity and
Fidelity advancing moral Virtue merit the Title of Heroic, much more may
THEOPHILA, a Combatant with the World, Hell, and her own Corruptions, gain an
eternal LAUREL; Whose Example and Precepts, well followed, will without Doubt
bring Honor, Joy, Peace, Serenity, and Hopes full of Confidence. The Composer
has extracted out of the even Mixture of Theorie and Action this cordial Water
of saving Wisdom, by distilling Them through the Limbeck of PIETY, whereof they
drink to their Souls Health, who not only take it in, as parched Earth does
Rain, but turn it into nourishment by a spiritual Digestion, being made like It
Divine. This metrical Discourse of his serious Day, to which he was led by
Instigation of Conscience, not Titillation of Fame, inoculates Grafts of Reason
on the Stock of Religion, and would^ have all put upon this important
Consideration, that the Life of Nature is given to seek the Life of GRACE,
which brings us to the Life of GLORY; the obtainment of which is his only
Aim, being fully persuaded, that as every new Star gilds the Firmament, and
increases its first Glory: So those, who are Instruments of the Conversion of
Others, shall not only introduce new Beauties, but, when Themselves shine like
other Stars in GLORY, they shall have some Reflections from the Light of Others,
to whose fixing in the Orb of HEAVEN they Themselves have been Isntrumental.
He would not run thee out of Breath by longwinded Strains; for in a Poem, as in
a Prayer it is Vigor not Length that crowns it; (...).

Taedia ut Ambages pariant, nervosa Favorem
Sic Brevitas; Labor est non brevis esse brevem.
He wishes it might be his Happiness to meet with such Readers, as discern
the Analogy of Grounds, as well as the Knowledge of the Letter, and have as
well a Systeme of Reason, as the Understanding of Words: yea, such as have
Judgment and Affections refined, and with THEOPHILA be Lovesick too, which
Love is never more eloquent, than when ventilated in Sighs and Groans, HEAVENS
delighted Music being in the broken Consort of Hearts and Spirits, the Will
there accepted for the Work, and the Desire for Desert. Behold here in an
Original is presented an Example of Life, with Force of Precepts, happy who
copy them out in their Actions! Indeed Examples and Precepts are as Poems and
Pictures; for, as Poems are speaking Pictures, and Pictures are silent Poems:
so Example is a silent Precept, and Precept a speaking Example: And as Music
is an audible Beauty, and Beauty a visible Music: So Precepts are audible
Sweets to the Wise, and Examples silent Harmony to the illiterate, who may
unclasp and glance on these Poems, as on Pictures with Inadvertency; yet He who
shall contribute to the Improvement of the Author, either by a prudent
Detection of an Error, or a sober Communication of an irrefragable Truth,
deserves the venerable Esteem and Welcome of a good ANGEL; And He who by a
candid Adherence unto, and a fruitful Participation of what is good and pious
confirms Him therein, merits the honorable Entertainment of a faithful Friend:
But he who shall ^^^duce him in Absence, for what in Presence he would seem to
applaud, incurres the double Guilt of Flattery and Slander; and he who wounds
Him with ill Reading and Misprision, does Execution on Him before Judgment.

Now He who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, bring those to everlasting
Life, who love the Way, and Truth in Sincerity!

The several Cantos.
The Humiliation. Restoration. Inamoration. Representation. Association.
Contemplation Admiration.
The Recapitulation. Praelibation. Translations. Abnegation. Disincantation.
Segregation. Reinvitation. Termination.

Be pleased, Reader, first to correct these Typographical Errors.

Acres circumfert centum licet Argus Ocellos,
Non tamen errantes cernat ubique Typos.
AT the bottom B4. Line 20. Read Ecstasies, Page 1. Stanza 1. Strains. p. 54.
St. 23. Condescent, p. 76. St. 71. Unbounded. p. 84. St. 25. Thee. p. 106. St.
86. does most. 132. 31. non. p. 144. rectify the Figures. p. 169. St. 60.
repurgat. 173. 90, eversis 203. 82. For. 214. l. 12. exanimes. 217. l. 7.
splendet. 239. 29. did. 268. l. 25. Nectare, etc.

PNEVMATO-SARCO-MACHIA: OR THEOPHILA'S Spiritual Warfare.
THE Life of a true CHRISTIAN is a continual Conflict; Each Act of the good
Fight has a Military Scene; and our Blessed SAVIOR coming like a Man of War
commands in Chief, under the FATHER, who has laid Help upon One that is
Mighty, by anointing him with the Holy GHOST and with Power. This World is his
pitched Field; his Standard the Cross; his Colors Blood; his Armor Patience;
his Battle Persecution; his Victory Death; And in mystical DIVINITY his
two-handed Sword is the Word and Spirit, which wounds and heals; and what is
shed in this holy War is not Blood but Love; his Trumpeters are Prophets and
Preachers; his Menacies Mercies; and his Arrows Benefits: When he offers
HIMSELF to us, He then invades us; His great and small Shot are Volies of Sighs
and Groans; when we are converted we are conquered; He binds when He embraces
us; In the Cords of Love He leads us Captives; and kills us into Life, when He
crucifies the Old, and quickens in us the New Man. So then here is no Death,
but of inbred Corruptions: No Slaughter, but of carnal Affections, which being
Mortified the Soul becomes a living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto GOD.

WHEN that great Gen'ralissimo of all
Infernal Ianizaries shall
His Legions of Temptations raise, enroul,
And muster Them against Thee, my Soul:
And Ranks of Pleasures, Profits, Honors bring,
To give a Charge on the right Wing:
And place his dreadful Troops of deadly Sins
Upon the Left, with murdering Gins:
And draw to his main Body thousand Lusts,
And for Reserve, wherein he trusts,
Shall specious Sanctities Brigade provide,
Whose Leader is spiritual Pride:
And having treacherously laid his Trains
In Ambush, under Hope of Gains
By sinning, as so many Scouts, to find
Each March and Posture of thy Mind:
Then, Soul, sound an Alarm to FAITH, and press
Thy ZEAL to be in Readiness;
And leavie all thy Faculties to serve
Thy CHIEF. Take PRAYER for thy Reserve
Under the Conduct of his SPIRIT; See
Under the Banner that they be
Of thy SALVATIONS CAPTAIN: Then be sure
That all thy Outworks stand secure.
Yet narrower look into the indenting Line
Of thy ambiguous Thoughts: Design
With constant Care a Watch over every Part;
Even at thy Cinque Ports, and thy Heart
Set Sentinels: Let FAITH be Captain over
The Lifeguard, standing at the Door
Of thy well-warded Breast: Disloyal Fear
That corresponds with Guilt, cashear.
Nor let Hypocrisy sneak in and out
Thy Garrison, with that Spy, Doubt.
The Watchword be IMMANUEL: Then set
Strong Parties of thy Tears; and let
Them still to salie forth prepared stand,
And but expect the Souls Command;
Waiting until a blessed Recruit from HIGH
Be sent, with GRACES free Supply.
Thus where the LORD of Hosts the Van leads, there Triumphant Palms bring up
the Rere.

TO MY FANCY UPON THEOPHILA.
FLy, FANCY, Beauties arched Brow,
Darts, winged with Fire, thence sparkling flow.
From Flash of Lightning Eye Balls turn;
Contracted Beams of Crystal burn.
Wave Curls, which Wit Gold-tresses calls,
That golden Fleece to Tinsel falls.
EVade Thou peach-bloom Cheek-Decoies,
Where both the Roses blend false Joys.
Press not the two-leav'd Rubie Gates,
Which fence their Pearl-Portcullis Grates.
Suck not the Breath, though it return
Fragrant, as Phoenix spicie Urn.
LOck up thine Ears, and so disarm
The Magic of inamoring Charm.
The lily'd Breasts with Violets vein'd
Are Flowers, as soon deflowered as gained.
Love-lo^ks, Perfume, Paint, Spots dispraise;
These by the Black-Art Spirits raise.
GArnish no Bristows with rich Mine,
Glowworms are Vermin, though they shine.
Should one Love-knot All Lovelies tie,
This One, These All, soon cloy and die.
Cupid, as lame as blind, being gone,
Live One with HIM, WHO made Thee One.
AVoid exotic Pangs of the Brain,
Nor let thy Margent blush a Stain.
With artful Method Misc'line sow:
May Judgment with Invention grow.
Profit with Pleasure bring to the Test,
Be Oar refined, before impressed.
Pass Forge and File, be Point and Edge
Against what severest Brows allege.
Mix Balm with Ink; Let thy Salt heal:
TO each Palate various Manna deal.
Have for the Wise strong Sense, deep Truth:
Grand-Sallet of choice Wit for Youth.
CUll Metaphors well-weigh'd and clear,
Enucle'ate Mysteries to the Ear.
Be Wit Stenography'd, yet free;
It Is largest in Epitome.
Fly through Arts Heptarchie, be clad
With Wings to soar, but not to gad.
THy Pineons raise with mystic Fire,
Sometimes 'bove high-roof't Sense aspire.
So draw THEOPH'LA, that each Line,
Centring in HEAVEN, may seem Divine.
Her Voice soon fits Thee for that Quire;
W' are cindred by intrinsic Fire.
Magnetic VIRTUE'S in her Breast
Impregn'd with GRACE, the noblest GUEST.
Who in LOVES Albo are enrol'd,
Unutterable Joys behold.
Geographers Earths Globe survey,
Fancy, HEAVEN'S Astrolabe display.
SIx have thou viewed of Europs Courts,
Soon, as Idaeas, passed their Sports.
Sense, can thou perse and construe Bliss?
Only SOULS sanctified know This.
Then hackney not to Toys, Life's Span.
The SAINTS Rere tops the Courtiers Van.
IN Hopes Cell holy Hermit be:
Let Ecstacies transfigure Thee.
There, as Truths Champion, strive all Ways,
To storm LOVES Tower with Hosts of Praise.
Keep strong Faiths Court of Guard. The Stars
March in Batalia to these Wars.
ZEalous in Prayer besiege the Sky,
Conquests are Crowned by Constancy:
Stand Cen'tnell at the BRIDEGROOMS Gates;
Who serve there, reign over earthly States,
Raised on Devotions flaming Wings
Disdain the crakling Blaze of Things.
NO Music courts Spiritual Ears
Like high-tun'd Anthems; This uprears
Thee, FANCY, rapt through Mists of Fears,
And Clouds of Penitential Tears;
Eagling 'bove transitory Spears,
Till even the INVISIBLE appears.
Divorced from past and present Toys,
'Spouse New Ierus'lems future Joys;
Be Re-baptiz'd in Eye-dew-Fall,
Of All forgot, forget Thou All.
These Acts well kept, Commence, and prove
Professor in Seraphick LOVE.
A Friends ECHO to his FANCY upon SACRATA.
I.
WHen Fancy bright SACRATA courts,
It is not with accustomed Sports;
^Tis not in prizing of her Eyes,
To the Disvalue of the Skies;
Nor robbing Gardens of their Hue,
To give her ^lowrie Cheeks their Due.
II.
^Tis not in stripping of the Sea
For Coral, to resign that Plea
It has to the Vermilion Die,
If that her r^ddy Lips be nigh,
Or that I long to see them open,
As if I thence for Pearl did hope.
III.
Nor is it in promising my ^ars
Rather to her than to the Spears;
Or that a Smile of hers displayes
As much Content as Phoebus Rays,
Or that her Hand for Whiteness shames
The Down of Swans on Silver Thames.
IV.
Let such on these Romances dwell,
Who do admire Loves Husk and Shell.
Hark, wanton Fair-ones, all your Fawns
Are Happinesses hapless Pawns:
With these alone the Mind does Flag;
Beauty is often the Souls Black Bag.
V.
Pure Flames that ravish with their F^re,
Ascend unmeasurably Higher;
Which after Search we find to be
In Virtue linkt with Piety,
The Radiations of the Soul
All Splendors of the Flesh control.
VI.
Fond Sense, cry up a rosy Skin,
SACRATA rosy'd is within:
But brighter THEOPHIL behold,
Who^e Vest is wrought with ^urfled Gold.
LOVES self in her his Flame embeams,
LOVES Sacrifice ZEALS Rapture seems.
VII.
Of Paradise before the Fall
This Saint is Emblematical.
Then, Fancy, give Her due Renown,
She Is Queen of Arts; This Book, her Crown.
SACRATA turns CASTARA unto us,
And BENLOVVES (Anagramm'd) BENEVOLUS.
JER. COLLIER, M. A. and Fell. of S. John's Coll. Camb.

Non me Palma negata Macrum, data reddet Opimum.
A Smooth clear Vein should have it Sourse
From Nature, and have Art but Nurse:
Which, though it Men at Athens feasts,
May fight at Ephesus with Beasts.
WIts, rudely haled to Momus Bar,
By braying Beasts condemned are.
Reason! How many Brutes there be
Among Men, 'cause not informed by Thee?
VAtes Poet-Prophet is; If good,
Alike both scorned, and understood.
Though Readers Censure's Writers Fate,
Spleen shall not contract, nor Praise dilate.
OR clap, or hiss. The Moon sails round,
Though barked at by each yelping Hound.
The brighter She, the more they bark;
But slumbring quetch not in the dark.
DEign Him, bright (...), your piercing Glance,
(Arts Foes are Sons of Ignorance)
So, freed from Nights rude Overseers,
The POET may be tried by his PEERS.
A VERDICT FOR THE Pious SACRIFICER.
TO shine, and light, not scorch, thy MUSE did aim;
And so has raised this Quintessential Flame.
By the Salt, and Whiteness of her Lines, We think
With holy Water (Tears) She mixed her Ink;
And both the Fire and Food of this chaste MUSE
Is more what Altars, than what Tables use.
Who does not pray with Zeal thy FAITH may move,
Rightly concentrick with thy HOPE and LOVE.
So, in the TEMPLE these Religious Hosts
From Hecatombs may rise to HOLOCAUSTS.
WALTER MONTAGVE, Com. Manch. Filius.

FOR THE AUTHOR, Truly Heroic, By BLOOD, VIRTVE, LEARNING.
SCholar, Commander, Traveller commixt;
Schools, Camps, and Courts raise FAME, and make it fixed.
Your Fame and Feet have Alps and Oceans past:
Famed Feet! which Art cannot raise, nor Envy blast.
Beaumont and Fletcher coined a golden Way,
TO express, suspend, and passionate a Play.
Nimble and pleasant are all Motions there,
For two Intelligences ruled the Sphere.
Both Sock and Buskin sunk with Them, and then
Davenant and Denham buoyed them up again.
Beyond these Pillars Some think nothing is:
Great BRITAINS Wit stands in a Precipice.
But, Sir, as though HEAVENS Streits discovered were,
By Science of your Card, UNKNOVVNS appear:
Sail then with Prince of Wits, illustrious Dunne,
Who rapt Earth round with Love, and was its Sun.
But your first Love was pure: Whose every Dress
Is inter-tissu'd Wit and Holiness;
And mends upon It self; whose Streams (that meet
With Sands and Herberts) grow more deep, more sweet.
I, winged with Joy, to the PRAELIBATION fly;
Thence view I Errors Trage-comedie:
With THEOPHIL from Fear to Faith I rise,
The mystic Bridge, twixt Hell and Paradise.
Hell escaped seems double Heaven: RENEVV'D, with Bands
Of Prayers, Vows, Tears, with Eyes, and Knees, and Hands,
I see her cope with HEAVEN, and HEAVEN does thence,
As in the Baptists Days, feel Violence.
But her ecstatick SONGS OF LOVE, declare
To Iedidiah, She 's apparent Heir.
Be those then next, The SONG OF SONGS. Love styles
Her Fourth, The Second Book of CANTICLES.
But with what dreadful yet delightful Tones
She sings when GLORIFIED? Then, stinglesse Drones
Are Death and Hell: Joys Crescent then is encreast,
To fullest Luster, at her BRIDAL FEAST.
Sixth, Sev'nth, and Eighth such Banquets frame would make
WISDOM turn Cormorant; my Spirits shake
In The Reading. Soul of Joy! thy ravishing Sp'rite
Draws bedrid Minds to longing Appetite.
FAME, write with Gold on Diamond Pages; treat
Upon the GLORIES of a Work so great.
Be It then Enacted, that all Graces dwell
In Thee, THEOPH'LA, Virtues Chronicle:
Who jemm'st it in JERUSALEM Above,
Where all is GRACE and GLORY, LIGHT and LOVE.
To That, UNPARALLEL, This comes so near,
That, 't is a Glimpse of HEAVEN to read Thee here.
O, blessed Ambition! Speculations high
Enchariot Thee, Elijah-like, to the SKY!
What State worth Envy, like Thy sweet Abode,
That overtops the World, and mounts to GOD?
Walked through your Eden Stanza's, you invite
Our ravished Souls to recre'ate with Delight,
In Bower of count Discourse: Great Verse, but Prose
Such, None but our Great MASTER could compose.
For Bulk, an easy Folio is this All;
Yet we a Volume may each Canto call,
For Solid Matter: where we should consult
On Paragraphs, mark what does thence result:
For, every Period's of DEVOTION Proof,
And each Resolve is of concerned Behoof.
Peruse, Examine, Censure; o, how bright
Does shine RELIGION, checkered with Delight!
Diffusive Soul! your Spirit was soaring, when
This Manna dew'd from your inspired Pen.
Such melting Passions of a Soul divine,
Could They be cast in any Mould but Thine?
Wonder arrests our Thought; That you alone
In such Combustions, wherein Thousands groan,
(And when some Sparkles of the public Flame
Seized on your private 'State, and scorcht the same)
Could warble Thus. Steer Ships each Pilot may
In Calms; but Who so can in Stormy Day
May justly domineer. But what may daunt
Him, who, like Mermaids, thus in Storms can chaunt?
Grace crowns the Suffering, Glory the Triumphing SAINT.
TH. PESTILL, Regi quondam a Sacris.

THose LADIES, Sir, we VIRTUOSA'S call,
But Copies are to this ORIGINAL;
Whose charming Empire of her GRACE does Sense
Astonish by a SUPER-EXCELLENCE.
And, like as Midas Touch made Gold: So, thus
THEOPHILA'S Touch may make THEOPHILUS.
Zeuxes culled out Perfections of each sort
For his Pandora; yet did All come short
As far of This Embellishment as She
Had been limn'd out in Paintings Infancy.
For, Magisterial VIRTUE draws no Grace
From Corp'ral Limbs, or Features of the Face.
Here Heaven-born SUADAS, Star-like, gild each Dress
Of the BRIDE SOUL espoused to HAPPINESS.
Here PIETY informs Poetic Art;
As All in All, and all in every Part.
For All These died not with famed Cartwright, though
A Score of Poets joined to have it so.
T. BENLOWES. A. M.

A GLANCE AT THEOPHILA.
WHo sacrificed last? The hallowed Air
Seems all ensould with sweet Perfume,
Which pleased Heaven deigns to assume,
The smiling Sky appears brightly fair;
Was It not THEOPHILA'S famed Sire,
Say, sacred Priest, obtained the holy Fire
To bless, and burn his Victime of sublime Desire?
Know, curious Mortal, this rare Sacrifice,
Scarce known to our now-bedrid Age,
Was got by Zeal, and holy Rage,
And offered by Benevolus the Wise:
For, speckled Craft, and a loose Fit
Of aguish Knowledge, glim'ring Acts beget;
Chaste Piety bears Fruit to Wisdom, not to Wit.
No Tigers Whelp with Blood-besmeared Jaws,
No Cub of Bears, lick't into Shape,
No lustful Offspring of the Ape,
No muskie Panther with close guileful Claws,
No durtie gruntling of the Swine,
No Lions Whelp of ere so high Design,
Is offered here: Keep off Unclean! Here Is all divine.
The chosen Wood (as Harbinger to all
Those future then, now passed Rites)
Was Laurel, that Guards Lightning Frights,
The weeping Fur, sad Yewe for Funeral,
The lasting Oak, and joyful Vine,
The fruitful Fig Tree Billets did consigne;
The peaceful Olive with cleft Juniper did join.
On Knees in Tears think Altar'd THEOPHIL,
Incenst with sweet Obedience,
Who makes LOVES Life in Death commence,
Scaling with Heart, Hands, Eyes, HEAVENS lofty Hill:
Her circled Head you might behold
Was glorified with burnisht Crown of Gold,
Embost with Gems; embraced by ANGELS manifold.
Thus in a fiery Chariot up SHE flies,
Perfuming the forsaken Earth,
(The Widwife Orbs do help her Birth)
Into the Glory of the HIERARCHIES.
Where Ecstasies of Joys do grow,
Which they Themselves eternally do sow,
But it is too high for Me to think, or Thee to know.
Priests thus by Hiroglyphick Keys
Unlock their hidden Mysteries.
W. Dennie Baronet.

TO THE AUTHOR Upon His Divine Poem.
TIll now I gues'd but blindly to what Height
The Muses Eagles could maintain their flight!
Though Poets are, like Eaglets, bred to soar,
Gazing on Stars at Heavens mysterious Power,
Yet I observe they quickly stoop to ease
Their Wings, and perch on Palace-Pinacles:
From thence more usefully they Courts discern;
The Schools where Greatness does Disguises learn;
The Stages where She acts to vulgar sight
Those Parts which Statesmen as her Poets write;
Where none but those wise Poets may survay
The private practice of her public Play;
Where Kings, GODS Counterfeits, reach but the Skill
In studied Sceans to act the Godhead ill:
Where Cowards, smiling in their Closets, breed
Those Wars which make the vain and furious bleed:
Where Beauty plays not merely Natures part,
But is, like Power, a Creature formed by Art;
And, as at first, Power by Consent was made,
And those who formed it did themselves invade:
So harmless Beauty (which has now far more
Injurious Force than States or Monarchs Power)
Was by consent of Courts allowed Arts Aid;
By which themselves they to her Sway betrayed.
It Was Art, not Nature, taught excessive Power;
Which whom it lists does favor or devour:
It Was Art taught Beauty the imperial Skill
Of ruling, not by Justice, but by Will.
And, as successive Kings scarce seem to reign,
Whilst lazily they Empires Weight sustain;
Thinking because their Power they Native call
Therefore our Duty too is Natural;
And by presuming that we ought obey,
They lose the craft and exercise of Sway:
So, when at Court a native Beauty reigns
Over Love's wild Subjects, and Arts help disdains;
When her presumptuous Sloth finds not why Art
In Powers grave Play does act the longest part;
When, like proud Gentry, she does level all
Industrious Arts with Arts mechanical;
And vaunts of small inheritance no less
Than new States boast of purchased Provinces;
Whilst she does every other Homage scorn,
But that to which by Nature she was born:
Thus when so heedlesly She Lovers swayes,
As scarce she finds her Power ere it decays;
Which is her Beauty, and which unsupply'd
By what wise Art would carefully provide,
Is but Loves Lightning, and does hardly last
Till we can say it was ere it be past;
Soon then when Beautie's gone she turns her face,
Ashamed of that which was erewhile her Grace;
So, when a Monarch's gone, the Chair of State
Is backward turned where He in Glory sat.
The secret Arts of Love and Power; how these
Rule Courts, and how those Courts rule Provinces,
Have been the task of every noble Muse;
Whose Aid of old nor Power nor Love did use
Merely to make their lucky Conquests known
(Though to the Muse they owe their first Renown;
For She taught Time to speak, and even to Fame,
Who gives the Great their Names, She gave a Name)
But they by studying Numbers rather knew
To make those happy whom they did subdue.
Here let me shift my Sails! and higher bear
My Course than that which moral Poets steer!
For now (best Poet!) I Divine would be;
And only can be so by studying Thee.
Those whom thy Flights do lead shall pass no more
Through darkning Clouds when they to Heaven would sore;
Nor in Ascent fear such excess of Light
As rather frustrates than maintains the Sight;
For thou do clear Heavens darkened Mysteries,
And make the Luster safe to weakest Eyes.
Noiselesse, as Planets move, thy Numbers flow,
And soft as Lovers Whispers when they woo!
Thy labourd Thoughts with Ease thou do dispense,
Clothing in Maiden Dress a Manly Sense.
And as in narrow Room Elixir lies;
So in a little thou do much comprise.
Here fix thy Pillars! which as Marks shall be
How far the Soul in Heavens discovery
Can possibly advance; yet, whilst they are
Thy Trophies, they but warrant our Despair:
For, humane Excellence has this ill Fate
That where it Virtue most does elevate
It bears the blot of being singular;
And Envy blasts that Fame it cannot share:
Even good Examples may so Great be made
As to discourage whom they should persuade.
WILL. D'AVENANT.
TOWER, May 13th 1652.
For the much Honored AVTHOR.
THe winged Intellect once taught to fly
By Art and Reason, may be bold to pry
Into the Secrets of a wandering Star,
Although its Motions be irregular:
And from the Smiles and Glances that those bright
Corrivals cast, that do embellish Night,
Guess darkly at, though not directly know,
The various Changes that fall here below.
And perching on the highest Perimeter,
May find the Distances of every Sphere,
Which in full Orbs do move, tunicled so
That the less Spheres within the greater go,
As Cell in Cell, spun by the dying Fly;
Or Ball in Ball, turned in smooth Ivorie.
Each has a Prince circled upon a Throne,
In a refulgent Habitation.
Only the Constellations seem to be
Like Nobles, in an Aristocrasie.
Their milkie Way like Innocence, and thus
Should all great Actions be Diaphanous.
But the great Monarch, Light, disposes All:
His Stores are Magazine, and Festival:
And by his Power Earths Epicycle may
Move in a silver Sphere, as well as They.
Else, her poor little Orb appears to be
A very Point to their Immensitie.
Thus strung, like Beads, They on their Centers move;
But the great Center of this All, is LOVE.
Though the brute Creatures by the height of Sense
Foretell their calm and boystrous Influence,
Yet to find out their Motions is Man's part,
Not by the help of Nature, but of Art,
Which rarifies the Soul, and makes it rise,
And sees no farther than that gives it Eyes.
And by that Prospect will directly tell
What Regions stoop to every Parallel.
Which Cities furred are with Snow, which lie
Naked, and scorcht under Heavens Canopie.
How Men, like Cloves stuck in an Orange, stand
Still upright, with their Feet upon the Land.
And where the Seas opposed to us do flow,
Yet quench they not that Heat where Spices grow.
It sees fair Mornings rising Neck beset
With orient Jems, like a rich Carcanet.
Who every Night does send her Beams to spy
In what dark Caves her golden Treasures lie:
And there they brood and hatch the callow Race,
Till they take wing, and fly in every place.
It sees the frozen Fur shrouding its Arms,
While Cocus Trees are courted with blessed Charms,
That swell their pregnant Womb: whose Issue may
Sweeten our World, but that they die by the Way.
It sees the Seasons lying at the Door,
Some warm and wanton, and some cold and poor;
And knows from whence they come, both foul and fair,
And from their Presence gilds, or soils the Air.
It sees plain Natures Face, how rude it looks
Till it be polished by Men and Books;
And most of her dark Secrets can discover
To open View of an industrious Lover.
What ever under Heavens great Throne we prize
Or value, in Arts Chamber-practise lies.
But when before the ALMIGHTY JUDGE he come
To speak of HIM, my Orator is dumb.
Go then, thou silent Soul, present thy Plea
By the fair Hand of sweet THEOPHILA.
Hap'ly thy harsh and broken Strains may rise
In the Perfume of her sweet Sacrifice:
And if by this Access thou find'st a Way
To the highest THRONE, alas! what can thou say?
What can the Bubble (though its Breath it bring
Upon the gliding Stream) say of the Spring?
Can the proud painted Flower boast that it knows
The Root that bears it, and whereon it grows?
Or can the crawling Worm, though never so stout,
With its Meandrings find the Center out?
Can INFINITE be measured by a Span?
And what art thou, less than all these, o Man?
Man is a thing of naught! yet from ABOVE
There beams upon his Soul such Rays of LOVE,
As may discover by Faiths Optic, where
The burning Bush is, though not see HIM there.
The meekest Man on Earth did only see
His Shadow shining there, it was not HE.
And if that great Soul, who with holy Flame,
And ravished Spirit to the Third Heaven came,
Saw Things unutterable, What can We
Express of those Things that we never did see?
The Senses strongest Pillars cannot bear
The Weight of the least grain of GLORY there.
No more then where to bound, or comprehend
INFINITY, they can Begin, or End.
Since then the Soul is circumscribed within
The narrow Limits of a tender Skin;
Let us be Babes in Innocence, and grow
Strong upwards, and more weak to things below.
By sacred Chymistrie, the Spirit must
Ascend and leave the Sediment to Dust.
This Cordial is distilled from the Eyes,
And we must sprinkle it on the Sacrifice:
Offered in the Virtue of THEOPH'LAS Name,
Which must be to it Holocaust and Flame.
Then, winged with Zeal, we may aspire to see
The hallowed Oracles expressed by THEE,
Who art LOVES Flamen, and with Holy Fire
Refin'st thy Muse, to make her mount the Higher.
ARTH. WILSON.

For the Renowned COMPOSER.
APOETS Ashes need nor Brass, nor Stone
To be their Wardrobe; Since his Name alone
Shall stand both Brass and Marble to the Tomb.
Nor does he want the Cere-cloths balmy Womb
TO enwrap his Dust, until his drowzie Clay
Again enliv'ned by an active Ray,
Shot from the last Day's Fire, shall wake, and rise,
Attired with Light. No; When a POET dies,
His Sheets alone wind up his Earth, They Will be
Instead of Mourner, Tomb, and Obsequie;
And to embalm It, his own Ink he takes:
Gum Arabic the richest Mummy makes.
Then, Sir, You need no Obelisk, that may
Seclude your Ashes from Plebeian Clay.
For, from your Mine of Fancy, now we see
Y' have dug so many Iems of Poesy,
That out of them you raise a glorious Shrine,
In which your ever-blooming Name will shine;
Free from the Eclipse of Age, and Clouds of Rust,
Which are the Moths to other common Dust.
Then, could we now collect the all worshipped Oar,
With which kind Nature paves the Indian Shore;
And gather to one mass that Stock of Spice,
Which copies out afresh old Paradise,
And in the Phoenix odorous Nest is pent,
All would fall short of This rich Monument.
About the Surface of whose Verge, You stick
So many fragrant Flowers of Rhetoric,
That Lovers shall approach in Throngs, and seek
With their rich Leaves to adorn each Beauties Cheek;
So that, these sacred Trophies will become
In Aftertimes your Altar, not your Tomb.
To which the Poets shall in well-drest Lays,
Offer their Victimes, with a Grove of Bays.
For here among these Leaves, no speckled Snake,
Or Viper does his Bed of Venom make:
No Lust-burnt Goat, nor looser Satyr weaves
His Cabin out, among these spotless Leaves.
A Virgin here may safely dart her Eye,
And yet not blush for Fear, lest any by
Should see Her read. These Pages do dispense
A Julep, which so charms the Itch of Sense,
That we are forced to think your guiltless Quill
Did, with its Ink, the Turtles Blood distill.
T. Philipot.

Pietatis, Poeticesque Cultori.
IGne cales tali, quali cum Nuncius Ora
Seraphicus sacro tetigit Carbone Prophetae.
Macte DEI plenum Pectus; Te his dedito Flammis,
Sancte Poetarum Phoenix! Reparabilis Ignis
Te voret hic Totum; Quo plus consumeris Illo,
Hoc magis Aeterno Tu consummaberis Aevo.
INCIPE Censura major, qui Font Camaenas
Idalias tingis casto; Tua Metra Sionem
Parnasso jungunt celebri; tam digna Lituris
Nulla canis, quam sunt omni dignissima Laud.
THEIOPHILAM resonare docens Modulamine diam,
Impia priscorum lustrasti Carmina Vatum.
PERGE; beatifico correptus NVMINE, PERGE,
Vivida felici fundendo Poemata Flatu,
Pectore digna tuo, COELI penetrare Recessus:
Et quae densa tegit Nubes Mysteria claro
Lumine perlustra, solito non concite Plectro,
Quaelibet altisono prosterne Piacula Versu.
PERFICE, terrenum transcende, POETA, Cacumen:
Conversus converte Vagos; Quos decipit Error
Incautos, Meliora doce; Britonesque bilingues
Lingua fac erudiat Britonum, sit quanta superbi
Pectoris Ambitio and Very Caligo; Camaenis
Subdola vesani depinge Sophismata Secli.
IO. GAVDENTIVS. S. T. D.

In Sanctos THEOPHILAE Amores.
VIx mihi Te vidisse semel concessit Apollo,
Inque tuo pictam Carmine THEIOPHILAM:
Quum gemino Ipse miser, sed fortunatus AMORE
Deperii; dubious sic Ego factus Amans.
Cur Dubious? Fallor. Nam, quamvis partibus aequis,
Igne simul duplici me novus urat Amor,
Afficitur tamen Objecto, atque unitur in uno,
Totaque divisis una Favilla manet.
Ne, Lector, mirere; Novum est. Sed protinus Ignes,
Si sine fell legas, experiere meos.
THEIOPHILA! In cunctis Praecellentissima Nymphis;
Nominis ad Famam quot Tibi Corda cadent!
Corporis, Ingeniique Bonis dotata triumphas,
Binaque cum summa Laud, Trophaea geris.
DOCTE, Tibi aeternae quales Spectacula Chartae,
Quotque Illi efficient Pagina docta Procos!
Sexus uterque pari, visa HAC, ardebit Amore;
HACque frui ex aequo Sexus uterque volet.
Ne vercare tamen, Cuncti licet Oscula figant
THEIOPHILAE, ne sit casta, vel una TIBI.
Famae Ejus nil detrahitur si publica fiat;
Hanc ut ament Omnes, Nil Tibi, AMICE, perit.
Tu solus DOMINA dignus censeberis Illa,
ILLAM qui solus pingere dignus eras.
P. de CARDONEL.

In celeberrimam THEOPHILAM, feliciter elucubratam.
A Nne novi, veterisve prius Monumenta revolvam
Ingenii? and Tragicos superantia Scripta Cothurnos,
Atque Sophoclaeis numerari digna Triumphis?
Quam been vivificis depingitur Artibus ECHO?
Quam been monstriferas Vitiorum discutis Hydras?
Carminibusque doces quantum peccaverit Aevum?
Quanta Polucephalis repserunt Agmina Sectis?
SPHINGE THEOLOGICA quae dia Poemata pangis?
Mira and Vera canens, nodosa Aenigmata solvis.
Nec vitae pars ulla perit, nec transigis unam
Ingratam sine Luce Diem; dum pervigil Arts
Exantlas, avidisque bibis Permessida Labris.
Iam, velut primo Phoenix revocatus Eoo,
Apparet nostris nova Sponsa THEOPHILA Terris.
Illius e roseis flammatur Purpura malis;
Et Gemmis Lux major adest, and blandius Aurum
A Calamo, BENLOSE, tuo; dum Dotibus amplis
Excolis, Ingeniique Opibus melioribus ornas.
Lactea Ripheas praecellunt Colla Pruinas;
Front Decor radiat, sanctoque Modestia Vultu;
Suada verecundis and Gratia plena Labellis
Assidet, and casti Mores imitata Poetae,
Te Moderatorem fusis amplectitur Vlnis.
Hi^ce Triumphatrix decorata THEOPHILA Gemmis,
Celsior assurgit, Mundumque nitentior intrat
Virgineis comitata Choris; QUAM Tramite longo
Agmina Cecropiis stipant Heliconia Turmis.
Non aliter quoties adremigat Aequoris Vndas
Fraenatis Neptunus Equis, fluit ocyus Antris
Nereidum Gens tota suis, Dominumque salutant,
Blandula caeruleo figentes Oscula Collo.
P. F.

Qui Virtutes THEOHILAE praedicat, Religioni non Gloriae studeat. Noverim Te,
DOMINE, noverim me!
LAudis in Oceano me submersistis, Amici;
Maxima pars Decoris me, nihil esse, patet.
Laus, famulare DEO, submissi Victima Cordis
Est Hecatombaeis anteferenda Sacris.
CHRIST, meae da par ut sit mea Vita Camaenae;
Sim neque Laus Aliis prodiga, parca TIBI.
Ore-come me not with your Perfumes, o Friends!
My greatest Worth, to show I Am nothing, tends.
Praise, wait on HEAVEN. The Host of an humble Heart
Excells the sacred Hecatombs of Art.
Grant, LORD, my Life may parallel my Lays!
They me too much, I THEE too little, praise.
IN DIVINOS POETAS.
SAncto SANCTA COLUMBA Musa Vati.
Parnassus superae CACUMEN AETHRAE.
CHRISTI GRATIA Pegasus supremus.
Vati Castalis Vnda DIUS IMBER.
Pennam dat SERAPHIN suis ab Alis.
AGNI scribitur Optimi CRUORE.
Vati Bibliotheca SPHAERA COELI.
VITAE e CODICE faenerans Medullam,
Internos penetrat POLI RECESSUS.
O, CONAMINA fructuo^iora!
O, SOLAMINA delicatiora!
Per Quae creditur ANGELUS Poeta,
PATRONUSque pio DEVS Poetae!
ON DIVINE POETS.
A Hallowed Poets Muse is The Holy DOVE.
Parnassus the EMPYRAEAN HEIGHT Above.
His lofty-soaring Pegasus CHRIST'S LOVE.
HEAVENS Shoure of GRAOE is his Castalian Spring.
A SERAPHIN lends Pen from his own Wing.
His Ink is o^ the best LAMBS purple Die.
To Him HEAVENS SPHERE is a vast Library.
Raised by the Advantage of the ETERNAL BOOK,
His piercing Eye even into HEAVEN does look.
O, what ENDEAVORS can more fruitful be!
What COMFORTS can we more delightful see!
By which the Poet we an ANGEL deem;
Yea, GOD to's sacred Muse does PATRON seem.
Ergo brevi stringam COELESTIA Cantu.
AIming to profit as to please, We bring
No usual Hawk to try her Wing.
Come, come THEOPH'LA, fresh as May:
Hark how the Falkner lures! This is Loves Holy Day.
Her stretch is for Devotions Quarrie, which
Mounts up her Zeal to Eagle-pitch:
Cheer Thou her present timorous Flight,
Whilst She thus cuts with Wing the driving Rack of Height.
From thence, 'bove sparkling Stars, She Will spritely move,
Her Plumes of Faith being pruned by Love.
AS GRACE shall ymp her Pineon, more,
Or less, she will, or flag, or 'bove what is mortal, soar.
The Author musing here survay,
How He may THEOPHI^ portray:
Where Others Art ^urpast you ^ind,
They draw the Body, HE the Mind.
The World's benea^h his Foot; while SHE
HEAVEN, by the Heavenly Sphere, does see.
A CROWN is r^acht HER from the SKIES,
Up with his BOOK an Eagle flies.

THE PRELIBATION To the SACRIFICE.
CANTO I.
ARGUMENT.
Spes alit occiduas qui Sublunaribus haeret;
Rivales JESUS non in Amore sinit.
Quid mihi non sapiat Terra, mihi dum sapit ETHER?
Sed sapiet, sapias ni mihi, CHRIST, nihil.
Awake, Arise, LOVES Steersman, and first taste
Delight; Sound That; ere Anchor's cast
On JOY; stere hence a pray'rful Course to HEAVEN at last.
STANZA I.
MIght Souls converse with Souls, by AN^EL-way,
Enfranchised from their pris'ning Clay,
What STRIANS by INTUITION, would They then convay!
II.
But, Spirits, sublimed too fast, evap'rate may,
Without some interposed Allay;
And Notions, subtiliz'd too thin, exhale away.
III.
The Gold (Sols Child) when in Earths Womb it lay
As precious was, though not so gay,
As, when refined, it does It self abroad display.
IV.
Mount, Fancy, then through Orbs to GLORIES Sphere;
(Wild is the Course that ends not there:)
You, who are VIRTUES Friends, lend to her Tongue an Ear.
V.
Let not the wanton Love-fights, which may rise
From vocal Fifes, Flame-darting Eyes,
(Beauties Munition) Hearts with Wounds unseen surprise:
VI.
Whose Basilisk-like Glances taint the Air
Of VIRGIN pureness, and ensnare
Entangled Thoughts in the Trammels of their Ambush-hair.
VII.
Loves Captive view, who is Days in warm Frosts spends;
On's Idol dotes, to Wit pretends;
Writes, blots, and rends; nor heeds where he begins or ends.
VIII.
His Stock of Verse in Comic Fragments lies:
Higher than Ten'riffs Pique He flies:
Sols but a spark; Thou outray'st all Diamonds of the Skies.
IX.
Victorious Flames glow from thy brighter EYE;
Cloud those twin-lightning ORBS (They Will ^rie
Anice-vein'd Monk) cloud Them, or, PLANET-struck, I die.
X.
Indians, pierce Rocks for Gems; Negro's, the Brine
For Pearls; Tartars, tohunt combine
For Sables; Consecrate all Offerings at HER SHRINE.
XI.
Crouch low.-O, Vermeil-tinctur'd CHEEK! for, thence
The Organs to my Optic Sense
Aredazled at the Blaze of so bright ANGELENCE.
XII.
Does Troy-bane Hellen (Friend) with ANGELS share?
All Lawless Passions Idols are:
Frequent are fuco'd Cheeks; The Virtuosa's rare:
XIII.
A Truth authentic. Let not skin-deep white
And red, perplex the nobler Light
Of The Intellect; nor mask the SOULS clear piercing Sight.
XIV.
Burn Odes, Lusts Paperplots; Fly Plays, its Flame;
Shun guileful Courtisms; Forge for Shame
No Chains; Lip-traffick, and Eye-dialogues disclaim.
XV.
Hark how the frothy, empty Heads within
Roar and carouse in the jovial Sin,
Amidst the wild Levalto's on their merry Pin!
XVI.
Drain dry the ransackt Cellars, and resign
Your Reason up to Riot, join
Your Fleet, and sail by Sugar-rocks through Floods of Wine:
XVII.
Send Care to dead Sea of Phlegmattick Age;
Ride without Bit your restive Rage;
And act your Revel-rout Thus on the tippling Stage.
XVIII.
Swell us a lusty BRIMMER,-more,-till most;
So Vast, that none may spy the Coast:
We Will down with ALL, though therein sailed LEPANTO'S Host:
XIX.
Top and Top-gallant hoise; We will out-rore
The bellowing Storms, though shipwrackt more
Healths are, than tempting'st Sirens did inchant of yore
XX.
Each Gallon breeds a Ruby;- Drawer, score'um;
Cheeks died in Claret seem of the Quorum,
When our Nose-carbuncles, like Link-boyes, blaze before'um.
XXI.
Such are their Ranting Catches to unsoul,
And outlaw Man; They stagger, roll,
Their ^eet indent, their Sense being drunk with Circes Bowl.
XXII.
Intombed Souls! Why rot ye thus alive,
Melting your Salt to Lees? and strive
To strangle Nature, and hatch Death? Healths, Health deprive.
XXIII.
The sinlesse Herd loathes your Sense-stifling Streams,
When long Spits point your Tale: Ye Breams
In Wine and Sleep, your PRINCES are but Fumes, and Drea^s.
XXIV.
I Would rather be preserved in Brine, than rot
In Nectar. Now to Dice they are got:
Their Tables snare in both; Then what can be their Shot?
XXV.
Yet Blades will throw at A^l, sans Fear, or Wit;
Oa^h^ black the Night when ^ice do'nt hit;
When Winners lose at Play, can Losers win by it?
XXVI.
Egypts Spermatick Nurse, when her spread Floor
Is flowed 'bove sev'nteen Cubits ore,
Breeds Dearth: And Spend-thri^ts waste, when they inflame the Score.
XXVII.
Tell me, ye pybald Butterflies, who poise
Extrinsick with intrinsic Joys;
What gain ye from such short-lived, fruitless, empty Toys?
XXVIII.
Ye Fools, who barter Gold for Trash, report,
Can Fire in Pictures warm? Can Sport
That stings, the mock-sense fill? How low's your HEAVEN! how short!
XXIX.
Go, chaffer BLISS for Pleasure* which is had
More by the Beast, than Man; the Bad
Swim in their Mirth: (CHRIST wept, nere laughed) The Best are sad.
XXX.
Brutes covet naught but what is terrene; HEAVENS Quire
Do in eternal Joys conspire;
Man 'twixt them Both does intermediate Things desire.
XXXI.
Had we no Bodies, we were ANGELS; and
Had we no Souls, we were unmann'd
To Beasts: Brutes are all Flesh, all Spirit the Heavenly BAND.
XXXII.
At first GOD made them One thus, by subjecting
The Sense to Reason; and directing
The Appetite by the Spirit: But Sin by infecting
XXXIII.
Man's freeborn Will, so shatters Them; that They
At present nor cohabite may
Without ^Regret, nor without Grief depart away.
XXXIV.
Go, cheating World, that dancest ore thy Thorns;
Love what undoes; hat'st what adorns:
Go, idolize thy Vice, and VIRTUE load with Scorns.
XXXV.
Thy luscious Cup, more deadly then Asps Gall,
Empoys'neth Souls for Hell: Thou all
Times Mortals do enchant with thy delusive Call.
XXXVI.
Who steals from Time, Time steals from him the Prey:
Pastimes pass Time, pass HEAVEN away:
Few like the blessed Thief do steal SALVATIONS Day.
XXXVII.
Fools rifle Times rich Lott'rie: Who mispend
Life's peerlesse Gemme, alive descend;
And Antidate with Stings their never-ending End.
XXXVIII.
Whose vast Desires engrosse the boundless Land
By Fraud, or Force; Like Spiders stand,
Squeezing small Flies; Such are their Nets, and such their Hand.
XXXIX.
When Nimrods Vulture-Talons pared shall be,
Their Houses Name soon changed you will see;
For their Bethesda shall be turned to Bethanie.
XL.
Better destroyed by Law, than ruled by Will;
What Salves can cure, if Balsams kill?
That Good is worst that does degenerate to Ill.
XLI.
Had not GOD left the BEST within the Power
Of Persecutors, who devour;
We had nor MARTYRS had, nor yet a SAVIOR.
XLII.
SAINTS melt as Wax, Fools-clay grows hard at Cries
Of that scarce-breathing Corse, who lies
With dry Teeth, meager Cheeks, thin Maw, and hollow Eyes.
XLIII.
GOD made Life; Give't to Man; By opening Veins,
Death's sluc'd out, and Pleuretick Pains:
Make GOD thy Pattern, Cure thy self, Alms are best gains.
XLIV.
HEAVENS GLORY to atchieve, what scantling Span
Has the frail Pilgrimage of Man!
Which sets, when risen; ends, when it but now began.
XLV.
Who fight with outward Lusts, win inward Peace;
Judgments against Self-Iudges cease:
Who face their Cloaks with Zeal do but their Woes increase.
XLVI.
The Mighty, mighty Torments shall endure,
If impious: Hell admits to Cure.
The best Security is never to be secure.
XLVII.
Oaks, that dare grapple with HEAVENS Thunder sink
All shivered; Coals that scorch do shrink
To Ashes; Vap'ring Snuffs expire in noysom Stink.
XLVIII.
Time, strip the writhel'd Witch; Pluck the black Bags
From off Sins grizly Scalp; the Hags
Plague-sores show then more loathsome than her leprous Rags.
XLIX.
'Twas She slew guiltless Naboth; 'twas she curled
The painted Iezabel; she hurled
Realms from their Center; She unhinged the new-fram'd World.
L.
Blessed then who shall her dash against Rocks; (her Groans,
Our Mirth) and wash the bloody Stones
With her own cursed Gore; repave them with her Bones.
LI.
By Salique Law She should not reign: Storms swell
By her, which Halcyon Days dispell:
Nought's left that is good where she in Souls possessed does dwell.
LII.
'Twas her Excess bred Plagues! Infecting Stars,
Infesting Dearth, Intestine Wars
Surfeit with Graves the Earth, amongst Living making Jars.
LIII.
My Soul, enlabyrinth'd in Grief, spend Years
In Sackcloth, chamleted with Tears,
Retired to Rocks dark entrals, court unwitnest Fears.
LIVE.
There pass with Heraclite a gentler Age,
Free from the sad ACCOUNT of Rage,
That acts the toilsome World on its tumultuous Stage.
LV.
There sweet RELIGION strings, and tunes, and skrues
The Souls Theorb', and does infuse
Grave Dorick Epods in the Enthusiastic MUSE.
LVI.
There LOVE turns trumpets into Harps, which call
Off Sieges from the gunshot Wall;
Alluring them to HEAVEN, her Seat Imperial.
LVII.
Thence came our Joy, and Thence HYMNS eased our Grief;
Of which the ANGELICAL was chief;
Glory to GOD; Earth Peace; Good Will for Man's Relief.
LVIII.
Quills, plucked from Venus Doves, impresse but shame:
Then, give your Rimes to Vulcans Flame;
He Will elevate your badger Feet: He Is free, though lame.
LIX.
Things fall, and Nothings rise! Old VIRTUE framed
Honor for WISDOM: WISDOM famed
Old VIRTUE: Such Times were! Wealth then Arts Page was named
LX.
Lambeth was Oxfords Whetstone: Yet above
Preferments Pinnacle they mov^,
Who string the Universe, and bracelet It for LOVE.
LXI.
Virtues magnifick Orb inflames their Zeal;
By high-rais'd ANTHEMS Plagu^s they heal;
And threefork'd Thunders in HEAVENS outstretcht Arm repeal.
LXII.
Shall Larks with shrill-chirpt Mattens rouse from Bed
Of curtain'd Night Sols orient Head?
And shall quick SOULS lie numbed, as wrapped in Sheets of Lead?
LXIII.
Awake from slumbring Lethargy; The gay
And circling Charioter of Day,
In's Progress through the azure Fields sees, checks our Stay.
LXIV.
Arise; and rising, emulate the rare
Industrious Spinsters, who with fair
Embroid'ries checker-work the Chambers of the Air.
LXV.
Ascend; Sol does on Hills his Gold display,
And, scattering Sweets, does spice the Day,
And shoots delight through Nature with each arrow'd Ray.
LXVI.
The Opal-colour'd Dawns raise Fancy high;
Hymns ravish those who Pulpets fly;
Convert dull Lead to active Gold by LOVE-CHYMIE.
LXVII.
As Natures prime Confectioner, the Be,
By her Flow'r-nibling Chymistrie,
Turns Vert to Or: So, VERSE gross Prose does rarifie.
LXVIII
Powers cannot Poets, as They Powers up-buoy;
Whose Soul-enliv'ning Charms Decoy
Each wrinkled Care to the Pacifick Sea of Joy.
LXIX.
As, where from Jewels sparkling Luster darts,
Those Rays enstarre the duskie Parts:
So, Beams of Poesy give Light, Life, Soul to Arts.
LXX.
Rich POESY! Thy more irradiant Gems
Give Splendour unto DIADEMS,
And with coruscant Rays emblazest HONORS Stems.
LXXI.
Thee MUSE (Arts ambient Air, Inventions Door,
The Stage of Wits) both Rich and Poor
Do court.^A PRINCE may glory to become thy WOOER.
LXXII.
POETS ly'entomb'd by KINGS. Arts Gums dispense;
By Rumination bruised, are thence
By VERSE so fired, that their Perfume ENHEAV'NS the Sense.
LXXIII.
Its The'ory makes All wiser, yet Few better;
Practice is Spirit, Art the Letter;
Use artlesse does enlarge, Art useless does but fetter.
LXXIV.
Sharp Sentences are Goads to make Deeds go;
Good Works are Males, Words Females show:
Whose Lives act Presidents, prevent the Laws, and Do.
LXXV.
So far We know, as we obey GOD; and
HE counts We leave not his Command,
When as our Interludes but 'twixt our Acts do stand.
LXXVI.
Honors brave SOUL is in that Body shrin'd,
Which floats not with each giddy Wind,
(Fickle as Courtly Dress) but WISDOMS Sea does find:
LXXVII.
Steering by GRACES Pole Star, which is fast
In the APOSTOLLICK Zodiac placed,
Whose Course at first four EVANGELICK Pilots trac't:
LXXVIII.
The THEANTHROPICK WORD; That mystic Glass
Of Revelations; That mass
Of Oracles; That Fu'el of Prayer; That Wall of Brass;
LXXIX.
That Print of HEAVEN on Earth; That Mercies Treasure,
And Key; That Evidence, and Seizure;
Faiths Card, Hopes Anchor; Loves full Sail; Abyss of Pleasure.
LXXX.
Such SAINTS high Tides n'ere ebb so low, to shelf
Them on the Quicksand of their self*
Swallowing Corruption: Sin's the Wrack, They fly that (Elf.
LXXXI.
Gloomier than West of Death; than North of Night;
Than Nest of Triduan Blacks, with Fright
Which Egypt scared, when HE brought Darkness, WHO made Light.
LXXXII.
Compared to whose Storm, thundering Peals are calm:
Compared to whose Sting, Asps yield Balm:
Compared to whose loathed Charm, Death is a Mercy-Psalm.
LXXXIII.
Her Snares escaped, soar, Muse, to HIM, whose bright
Spirit-illuminating Sight
Turns Damps to glorious Days; turns Fogs to radiant Light.
LXXXIV.
RELIGION's Wisdoms Study; That display,
LORD, countermand what goes astray;
And smite the Ass (rude Flesh) when it does start or bray.
LXXXV.
Soul, thou art less than MERCIES least; Three never
Depart from Sin; Shame, Guilt, and Fear:
Fear, Shame, Guilt, Sin, are Four; Yet All in One appear.
LXXXVI.
Crest-faln by Sin, how wretchedly I stray!
Me thinks it is Pride in me to pray:
HEAVEN aid me struggling under this sad Load of Clay.
LXXXVII.
No Man may merit, yet did ONE, we hold;
Who most do vant their Zeal, are cold:
Thus Tin for Silver goes with these, and Brass for Gold.
LXXXVIII.
Renew my Heart, direct my Tongue; unseal
My Hand, inspire my Faith, reveal
My Hope, increase my Love, and my Backslidings heal!
LXXXIX.
Let Language (Man's choice Glory) serve the Mind:
Thy SPIRIT on Bezaliel shined:
Help, BLOOD, by Faith applied! Thy Spittle cured the Blind.
XC.
Turn Sense to Spirit; Nature's changed alone
By GRACE; THAT is the Chymick-stone:
And thy all-pow'rful WORD is pure Projection;
XCI.
TRUTHS Touchstone, surest Rule that ere was fra'md,
(Tradition, Man's dark Map, 's disclaimed)
The Paper burns me not, yet I am all inflamed:
XCII.
For, as I read, such inward Splendour glowes;
Such Life-renewing Vigor flows,
That All, what is known of thy most righteous WILL, It shows:
XCIII.
Whose Spells make Enochs walk with THEE; withhold
Corruption, and translate e're old:
All Vaticans are dross; THIS, Magisterial Gold.
XCIV.
Thus, poor numm'd Tartars, when the are brought into
Warm Persias Gem-pav'd Court, are so
Revived, that then They live; till then half dead with Snow.
XCV.
Good Thoughts from THEE infused I do derive;
Good Words effus'd THOU do me give;
Good Works diffused by THEE, in THEE do live, and thrive.
XCVI.
Nerve-stretching Muse, thy Bow's new strung; shoot then
Hymns to the BEST, from worst of Men;
Make Arts thy Tributaries, twist Heart, Tongue, and Pen.
XCVII.
But how can Eves degenerate Issue, bent
To Sin, in its weak Measures vent
Thy PRAISE? Unmeasurable! and Omnipotent!
XCVIII.
Shrubs cannot Cedars, nor Wrens Eagles praise;
Nor purblinde Owls on Sols Orb gaze:
What is a drop to Seas, a Beam to boundless Rays?
XCIX.
Yet Hope, and Love may raise my drooping Flight;
And Faith in THEE embeam my Night:
Great LOVE, supply Faiths Nerves, with winged Hope -- I WRITE.
C.
My Spirit, LORD, my Soul, my Body, all
My Thoughts, Words, Works hereafter shall
Praise THEE, and Sin bemone.
JESU, how lov'dst THOU me!
Me blessed, thy LOVE make!
Me raised, Thy LOVE take!
JESU, my precious ONE!
May This, LOVES OFFERING be.
My Heart, Tongue, Eye, Hand, bowe^ Knee,
As All came from, let All return to THEE!
NVnc sacra primus habet Finem, mea Cura, Libellus;
Iam precor impellat sanctior Aura ratem!
I felix, rapidas diffindas Caerula Syrtes;
Te Divina regit DEXTERA; Sospes abi.
NON NOBIS DOMINE. THEOPHILAS LOVE-SACRIFICE.
The Summary of the Poem.
THEOPHILA, or Divine Love, ascends to her BELOVED by three Degrees. By
Humility, by Zeal, by Contemplation. In the First She is Sincere, In the
Second Fervent, In the Third Extatical. In her Humiliation She sadly condoles
her Sin, in her Devotion She improves her Grace, In her Meditation She
antidates her Glory, and triumphantly congratulates the Fruition of her SPOUSE.
And by three Ways, which Divines call the Purgative, Illuminative, and
Vnitive; She is happily led into the Disquisition of Sin by Man; of Suffering
by CRIST as SPONSOR; of Salvation, by HIM as REDEEMER. In the Purgative Way she
falls upon Repentance, Mortification, Self-denial; helped in part by the
Knowledge of herself, which breeds Contrition, Renuntiation, and Purpose of
Amendment: In the Illuminative she pursues Moral Virtues, Theological Graces,
and Gospel-promises, revealed by CHRIST, as the Great APOSTLE, which begets in
her Gratitude, Imitation and, Appropriation. In the Vnitive she is wholly taken
up with Intuition of supercoelestial Excellencies, with beatifical
Apprehensions, and Adherencies, as to CHRIST in Body, to the Holy GHOST in
Spirit, to GOD the FATHER in a bright Resemblance of the Divine NATURE. All
which are felt by the Knowledge of CHRIST as MEDIATOR; whence flow Admiration,
Elevation, consummated in GLORIFICATION. And were Mysteriously intimated in the
Symbolical Oblations of the Star-led Sophies, Who, by their Myrrh, signified
Faith, Chastity, Mortification, the Purgative Actions; by their Incense implied
Hope, Prayer, Obedience, the Illuminative Devotions; by their Gold importing
Charity, Satiety, Radiancie, the Vnitive Eminencies: And it is the only
Ambition of THEOPHILA to offer these presents to her BELOVED; by whom her Sin
is purged, her Understanding enlightened, her Will and Affections enflamed to
the Communion of all his GLORIES. Thus, She by recollecting past Creation,
present Corruption, and future BEATIFICAL VISION, endeavors to rowze us up from
Hellish Security, Worldly Solicitude, and Carnal Concupiscence, that being
raised, we may conform to the will, submit to the Power, and sympathize with
the SPIRIT of CHRIST, by a total Resignation of Self-comforts, Abilities, Ends;
and by the internal Acts of Love, Devotion, Contemplation, She makes Sense
subservient to Reason, Reason to Faith, and Faith to the written Word. By Faith
she believes what he has revealed, and yields him up all her Understanding: By
Hope She waits for his Promises, and refers to Him all her Will. By Charity she
Loves his Excellencies, and resignes to him all her Affections. And by all
these She triumphs over Sin, Death, Hell, in the sensual World, and by his
Virtue, Grace, Favor, enjoyes an eminent Degree of PERFECTION in the
Intellectual.

THE AVTHORS PRAYER.
O THOU most High, distinct in PERSONS, undivided in ESSENCE! Eternal PRINCIPLE
of all Substances, essential BEING of all Subsistencies, CAUSE of all
Causalities, LIFE of our Souls, and SOUL of our Lives! Whose DEITY is as far
beyond the Comprehension of our Reason, as thy OMNIPOTENCY transcends our
Impotencie: We, wretched Dust, acknowledge, that Adams Fall, as it deprived us
of all Good, so has it depraved us with all Evil; for, from our production, to
our Dissolution, our Life, if strictly discussed, will be found wholly tainted,
always tempted with Sin. We discover our Condition to be more corrupt than we
can fully discover: The Sense of our Sin stupifies us, the Sight of it reveals
our Blindness, and the Remembrance thereof does put us in Mind of our
forgetfulness of THEE. The Number of our Transgressions surpasses our Skill
in Arithmetic; their Weight is insupportable, depressing us even to the
Abyss; their Guilt more extense than any thing but thy MERCY. O LORD, we have
loved Darkness more than Light, because our Deeds were evil! therefore THOU
have showed us terrible Things; We have sucked out the Dregs of deadly Wine:
Our National Crimes have extorted from thy JUSTICE National Judgments: Our
hellish Sins inflame thy WRATH; and thy WRATH enflames Hellfire against us! We
want so much of Happiness, as of Obedience (our Beatitude consisting in a
thorough Submission of our Determinations unto thy Disposings, and our Practice
to thy Providence) which causes us, with humbly-pressing Importunity, to
implore thy GOODNESS (for HIS SAKE, who of mere Love took upon Him a Nature of
Infirmities to cure the Infirmities of our Nature) that THOU would give us a
Sense of our Senselesness, and a fervent Desire of more Fervency; and true
Remorse and Sorrow for want of Remorse and Sorrow for these our Sins. O, Steer
the mystical Ship of thy CHURCH safe amidst the Rocks and Quicksands of Schism
and Heresy, Superstition and Sacrilege into the fair Havens of PEACE and
TRUTH! Give to thy disconsolate Spouse, melting in Tears of Blood, the Spirit
of Sanctity and Prudence! May the Light which conducts her to thy Celestial
CANAAN be never mocked by new false Lights of apostatizing Hypocrisy, nor
extinguished by Barbarism! Thou, our FATHER, art the GOD of Peace; thy SON, our
SAVIOR, the Prince of Peace, Thy SPIRIT, the Spirit of Peace, thy Servants the
Children of Peace, whose Duty is the Study of Peace, and the End of their
Faith the Peace of GOD which passes all Understanding! Let All submit to thy
SCEPTER, adore thy JUDGMENTS, revere thy LAWS, and love THEE above All, for
thine OWN SAKE, and others (even their Enemies) for THY SAKE, having THEE for
our Pattern, thy PRECEPTS for our Rule, and thy SPIRIT for our Guide.

And now, in particular, I throw my self (who have unmeasurably swarved from
thy Statutes) upon thy Mercies; beseeching THEE to give me a deep Sense of my
own Unworthiness, and yet withal sincere Thankfulness for thy Assistancies:
Grant that my Sorrow for Sin may be unfeigned, my Desires of Forgiveness
fervent, my purpose of Amendment steadfast; that so my Hopes of HEAVEN may be
advanced, and, what THOU have sown in thy MERCY, THOU may reap from my
Duty! Let Religion and right Reason rule as Sovereign in me, and let the
irascible and concupiscible Faculties be their Subjects! Give me an Estate
balanced between Want and Waste, Pity and Envy; Give me Grace to spend my
Wealth and Strength in thy Service; Let all my Melancholy be Repentance, my
Joys spiritual Exultations, my Rest Hope, my Peace a good Conscience, and my
Acquiescence in THEE! In THEE, as the Principle of Truth, in thy Word as the
Measure of Knowledge, in thy Law as the Rule of Life, in thy Promise as the
Satisfaction of Hope, and in thy Union as the highest Fruition of Glory! O,
Thou Spring of Bounty, who have given thy SON to Redeem me, Thy Holy SPIRIT to
sanctify me, and Thy SELF to satisfy me; give me a generous Contempt of
sensual Delusions, that I may see the Vanity of the World, the Deceitfulness
of Riches, the Shame of Pleasures, the folly of Sports, the Inconstancy of
Honors, the Danger of Greatness, and the strict Account to be given for All!
O, then give me an undaunted Fortitude, an elevated Course of Contemplation, a
Resignation of Spirit, and a sincere Desire of thy Glory! Add, O LORD, to the
Cheerfulness of my Obedience, the Assurance of Faith, and to the Confidence of
my Hope, the Joys of Love! O, THOU who art the Fountain of my Faith, the
Object of my Joy, and the Rock of my Confidence, guide my Passion by Reason, my
Reason by Religion, my Religion by Faith, my Faith by thy Word; be pleased to
improve thy Word by thy SPIRIT; that so, being established by Faith, confirmed
in Hope, and rooted in Charity, I may be only ambitious of THEE, prizing THEE
above the Delights of Men, Love of Women, and Treasures of the World! Nothing
being so precious, as thy Favor, so dreadful as thy Displeasure, so hateful
as Sin, so desirable as thy Grace! Let my Heart be always fixed upon Thee,
possessed by Thee, established in Thee, true unto Thee, upright toward Thee,
and entire for Thee! that being thus inebriated with the sweet and pure streams
of thy Sanctuary, I may serve Thee to the utmost of each Faculty, with all the
Extension of my Will, and Intension of my Affections, till my Love shall ascend
from Earth to HEAVEN, from small Beginnings to the Consummati^n of a
well-regulated and never ceasing Charity! O GOD, who art no less infinite in
Wisdom than in Goodness, let me where I cannot rightly know Thee, there
reverently admire Thee, that in Transcendencies my very Ignorance may honor
Thee. Let thy Holy SPIRIT inflame my Zeal, inform my Judgment, conform my
Will, reform my Affections, and transform me wholly into the Image and
Imitation of Thy Only SON! Grant that I may improve my Talent to thy Glory,
who art the Imparter of the Gift, the Blesser of the Action, and the Assister
of the Design! So that having sown to the Spirit, I may by thy Mercies, and
Thy SONS Merits (who is the SON of thy Love, the Anchor of my Hope, and the
Finisher of my Faith) reap Life everlasting! And now, in his only Name
vouchsafe to accept from dust and ashes the Oblation of this weak, yet willing
Service; and secure the Possession to THY SELF, that Sin may neither pollute
the Sacrifice, divide the Gift, nor question the Title. Fill my Mouth with
Praises for these happy Opportunities of Contemplation, the managing of public
Actions less agreeing with my Disposition; and though my Body be retired, yet
let my Soul be enlarged (like an uncaptiv'd Bird) to soar in the Speculation of
Divine Mysteries! O, be praised, for that, in this general Combustion of
Christendom, THOU have vouchsafed me a little Zoar, as Refuge, in which my Soul
does yet live to magnify Thee; But above All for my Redemption from the
Execution of thy Wrath by the Execration of the SON of thy Love, having made
Innocence to become guilty, to make the guilty innocent, and the Sun of
Righteousness to suffer a total Eclipse to expiate the Deeds of Darkness: Be
THOU exalted for the Myriads of thy Mercies in my Travells through Europ, as
far transcending my Computation as Compensation; But chiefly for the Hope Thou
have given me, that when I have served Thee inhumbly-strict Obedience to the
Glory of thy Name, THOU art pleased that I shall enter into the GLORY of my
LORD to all Eternity; where I shall behold THEE in thy Majesty, CHRIST thy SON
in his Glory, the SPIRIT in his Sanctity, the Hierarchy of Heaven in their
Excellency, and the Saints in their Rest; in which Rest there is perfect
Tranquillity, and in this Tranquillity Joy, and in this Joy Variety, and in
this Variety Security, and in this Security Immortality, with Thee, Who
reignest in the Excellencies of Transcendencie, and in the infinite Durations
of a blessed Eternity. To WHOM with the IMAGE of thy GOODNESS, and the BREATH
of thy LOVE, o most glorious TRINITY, and ineffable UNITY be all Sanctity and
Adoration sacrificed now, and for evermore. Amen, Amen.

INto the most Holy TREASVRIE
Of the ever-glorious PRAISES
Of the MEDIATOR between
GOD and Man, CHRIST JESUS;
The Empyraean Flame of the DIVINITY,
Indefinible, Interminable, Ineffable;
The Immaculate Earth of the HUMANITY,
Inseparable, Inconfusible, Inconvertible;
Mysterious in an Hypostaticall UNION,
WHO is,
The true LIGHT enlightening the World,
The ETERNAL WORD,
By ENERGIE Incarnated,
Embrightning our knowledge,
Enlivening our FAITH,
Quickening our HOPE,
Enflaming our LOVE:
Prostrated dust and ashes,
With an adoring Awfulness, and trembling Veneration,
To his INFINITE MAJESTY
Does humbly cast this Mite;
(Acknowledging from GOD all Opportunities of Good)
to be improved by His GRACE, to His GLORY.
THEOPHILAS LOVE-SACRIFICE. CANTO II.The Humiliation.
ARGUMENT.
Vnde superbit Homo? cujus Conceptio, Culpa;
Nasci, Poena; Labor, Vita; necesse more.
Totus homo pravus; Caro, Men's, Natura, Voluntas;
Coelicus act Hominis Crimina tollit AMOR.
The Deiform'd Soul deformed by Sin, repents;
In Prayers and Tears, her Grief She vents,
And, till Faith cheer her by CHISTS Love, Life, Death, laments.
STANZA I.
ALMIGHTY POWER, Who did All Souls Create;
Who did Redeem their fallen Estate;
Who still do Sanctify, and them Redintegrate.
II.
Sourse, River, Ocean of all Bliss, instill
Spring-tides into my low-ebb'd Quill:
Each graceful Work flows from (what works all Grace) Thy Will.
III.
LORD! Thou, before Time, Matter, Form, or Place,
Wast All; E're Natures mortal Race:
Thy SELF, Host, Guest, and Palace, Natures total Space.
IV.
When yet (though not discerned) in that Abyss
CREATOR, WORD, and SPIRIT of Bliss,
In UNITY the TRINE, one GOD, adored is.
V.
E're THOU the Chrystal-mantled HEAVEN did rear,
Or did the Earth, Sols Bride, appear,
First Race of Intellectuals made, THEE to revere.
VI.
Praise best does Inexpressibles express:
Soul, The ARCHITECT of Wonders bless;
Whose All-creating WORD embirth'd a Nothingnesse.
VII.
Who brooding on the Deep, Production
Disposed, then called out Light, which on
The formless Worlds rude Face was all dispers'dly thrown.
VIII.
When callow Nature, plucked from out her Nest
Of Causes, was awaked from Rest,
Her shapeless Lump with fledged effects He trimly dressed.
IX.
Then newborn Day HE gilt with glittering Sun
(Contracted Light); with changing Moon
He Night adorned, and hung up Lamps, like spangled Bullion.
X.
The Earth, with Water mixed, HE separates:
Earth Plants brought forth, and Beasts All Mates;
The Waters Fowl, and Fish to yield Man delicates.
XI.
Then did of the El'ements Dust Man's Body frame
A perfect Microcosm, the Same
He quickened with a sparkle of Pneumatick Flame.


XII.
More Heavenly specified by Life from the WORD;
That, Nature does, This, Grace afford;
And Glory from the SPIRIT designed, as threefold Cord.
XIII.
Man, ere a Child; by' Infusion wise; though He
Was of, yet not for Earth, though free
Chanc'lour installed of Edens Universitie.
XIV.
His Virgin-Sister-Wife in the Grove He wooed,
(Heavens Nursery); new Fruit his Food,
Skin was his Robe: Clouds washed, Winds swept his Floor. All good.
XV.
Envy, that GOD should so love Man, first moved
Satan, to ruin HEAVENS Beloved:
The Serpent Devil'd Eve, She Is Dam to Adam proved.
XVI.
Both taste, by tasting, tastlesse Both became;
Who All would know, knew naught but Shame:
They blush for That which They, when righteous, could not name.
XVII.
Still in our Maw that Apples Core does stick,
Which they did swallow, and the thick
Rind of forbidden Fruit has left our Nature sick.
XVIII.
Now serves our Guiltiness, as winding Sheet,
To wrap up Lepers; Cover meet;
While thus stern Vengeance does our Wormships sadly greet.
XIX.
Disloyal Slaves, look out, see, Mischief revels;
Look in, see your own Den of Evils;
Look up, see Heavens dread JUDGE; Look down, see Hells fierce Devils.
XX.
Created in GODS Image to look high;
Corrupted, like to Brutes, you lie:
Perdition's from your selves: No Cure for those will die.
XXI.
Your Beauty, Rottenness skinned over, does show
Like to a Dunghill, blancht with Snow,
Your glorious Nature's by embasing Sin brought low.
XXII.
Hence you the heavy Doom of Death do gain,
Enforced unto laborious Pain;
And the ANGELS flaming Sword does you, expuls'd, restrain.
XXIII.
Thus She reproacht; Yet more (alas) remained;
Man's Issue in his Loins is staind:
Sin set his Throne in Him, and since over all has reigned.
XXIV.
Black Sin! more hideous then green Dragons Claws,
Dun Gryphons Talons, swart Bears Paws,
Then checkered Panthers Teeth, or tawnie Lions Jaws.
XXV.
Forfeit to the CREATOR'S thus Man's Race,
And by the WORD withdrawn is Grace,
From him the SPIRIT of GLORY turned his pleasing Face.
XXVI.
Yet that this Second Race, in fallen Plight,
Might not with the First be ruined quite,
The WORD does interpose to stop the incensed MIGHT.
XXVII.
Then undertakes for Man to satisfy,
And the sad loss of GRACE supply,
That us He might advance to GLORIES Hierarchy.
XXVIII.
Then Peace is preached in the Woman's SEED; but then
As Men increase; So, Sins of Men,
And Actual on Original heapt, GOD's vexed again.
XXIX.
Till drencht they were in Deluge, had no Shore;
And burnt in Sodom-Flames, of yore;
Plagued in Egypt, plunged into the Gulf of Core.
XXX.
And gnawn by Worms in Herod: Sin's Asps Womb,
Plotter, Theif, Plaintiff, Witness, Doom,
Sledge, Executioner, Hells Inmate, Horrors Tomb.
XXXI.
Misgotten Brat! thy Trains are infinite
To ruin each entangled Wight:
Mischiefs nere rest in Men, the have everlasting Spite.
XXXII.
Spite wageth War, then War turns Law to Lust;
Lust crumbles Faith into Distrust;
Distrust by causeless Jealousy betrays the Just;
XXXIII.
The Just are plundered by thy Rage; thy Rage
Bubbleth from Envy; Envie's Page
To thy Misdeeds; Misdeeds their own Misfate engage.
XXXIV.
Thus linkt to Hell's thy Chain! Cursed be that Need
Makes Sinners in their Sins proceed:
Shame, to Guilts forlorn Hope, leads left hand Files. Take heed.
XXXV.
GODS Fort (the Conscience) in the worst does stand;
Though Sin the Town keeps by strong Hand,
Yet lies it open to the Check at HEAVENS Command.
XXXVI.
Hence Hell surrounds them: In their Dreams to fall
Headlong they seem, then start, groan, crawl
From Furies, with excessive Frights which them appal.
XXXVII.
Never was more Mischief, never was less Remorse;
Never Revenge on his black Horse
Did swifter ride; Never to GOD so slow Recourse!
XXXVIII.
The Age-bow'd Earth groans under Sinners Weight;
While guiltless Blood cries to HEAVENS Height,
JUSTICE soon takes the Alarm, whose steeled Arm will Smite.
XXXIX.
Inevitable Woes a while may stay,
Vengeance is GODS, Who will repay
The desperately Wilful, nor will long delay.
XL.
It Is darkest near Daybreak. HE will o'return
The Implacable, who Mercy spurn;
Superlative Abuses in the Abyss shall burn.
XLI.
Deaths Hell Deaths Self out-deaths! Vindictive Place!
Deep under Depths! Excentrick Space!
Horror It self, than Thee, wears a less horrid Face!
XLII.
Where Pride, Lust, Rage, (Sin treble-pointed) dwell;
Shackled in red-hot Chains they yell
In bottomless Extremes of never-slaking Hell!
XLIII.
Riddle! Compelled, at once, to live and die!
Frying they freez, and freezing fry!
On helpless, hopeless, easelesse, endless Racks they lie!
XLIV.
And rave for what they hate! Cursing in vain,
Yet each Curse is a Prayer for Pain,
For, cursing still their Woe, they woo GODS Curse again!
XLV.
Devils and Shreeks their Ears, their Eyes affright!
There Is blazing Fire, yet darkest Night!
Still paying, never discharged. Sins Debt is Infinite!
XLVI.
Angels by one Sin fell; So, Man: How then
May Sinners stand! Let Us quit Sins Den:
This Moment's Ours; Life hasts away; Delays gangrene.
XLVII.
Conviction ushers Grace; Fall to prevent
Thy Fall, Times Fore-lock take; Relent.
Shall is to come; and Was is past; then, Now repent.
XLVIII.
Before the Suns long Shadows span up Night;
E're on thy shaking Head Snowes light;
E're round thy palsy'd Heart Ice be congealed quite;
XLIX.
E're in thy Pocket thou thine Eyes do wear;
E're thy Bones serve for Calender;
E're in thy Hand's thy Leg, or Silver in thy Hair;
L.
Preventing Physic use. Think, now ye hear
The Dead-awakening Trump; Lo, there
The queazie-stomackt Graves disgorge Worms fatning Cheer.
LI.
Sins Sergeants wait to attach you; Then, make haste,
Lest you into Despair be cast:
The JUDGE unsway'd: Take Days at best, count each your Last.
LII.
Time posts on loose-rein'd Steeds. The Sun ere't face
To West, may see Thee end thy Race:
Death is a Noun, yet not declined in any Case.
LIII.
The Cradle's nigh the Tomb. That Soul has Woe,
Whose drowzie March to HEAVEN is slow,
As drawling Snails, whose slime glues them to Things below.
LIVE.
Anathema to lukewarm Souls. -Lo, here
THEOPHILA'S unhinged with Fear,
Clamm'd with chill sweat, when as her ranckling Sins appear.
LV.
Perplexed in Crimes meandring Maze, GODS Law,
And Guilt, that does strict Judgment draw,
And her too carnal, yet too stony Heart She saw.
LVI.
Yet Rocks may cleave (she cries.) Then, weeps for Tears,
And grieves for Grief; fears want of Fears;
She Hell, HEAVENS Prison, views; Distress, for Robe, She wears.
LVII.
Depraved by Vice, deprived of GRACE; with Prayer,
She runs Faiths Course; breaks through Despair,
O'retakes Hope. Broken Legs by setting stronger are.
LVIII.
Shame, native Conscience, views That HOLY ONE,
Who came from GOD to Man undone,
Whose Birth produced a Star, Whose Death eclips't the Sun.
LIX.
She sees Earth-Heav'n, Flesh-Spirit, Man-GOD in Stamp
Of Him, who shakes, but does not cramp
The bruised Reed; Snuffs puts not out the sputtring Lamp.
LX.
She sees for Creatures the CREATOR came
To die; The SHEPHERD proved the Lamb
For Sacrifice, when Jews released a spotted Ram.
LXI.
She sees defamed Glory, wronged Right,
Debased Majesty, crushed Might,
Virtue condemned, Peace robbed, Love slain! And All by Spite.
LXII.
She, streaming, sees, like Spouts, each broached Vein
With Gore, not to be matched again!
Her Grief thence draws up Mysts to fall in weeping Rain.
LXIII.
Vast Cares, long dumb, thus vent. Flow Tears, Souls Wine,
Juice of an Heart oppressed; Incline,
LORD, to this heart-broke Altar cemented with Brine!
LXIV.
Romorsefull Clouds, dissolve in Showr's; It Is Blood
Turns rocky Hearts into a Flood:
Eyes, keep your Sluices open; HEAVEN best by Tears is wooed.
LXV.
THOU, Who one Shoarless Sea of All did make,
Except one floating Isle, to take
Vengeance on Guilt; My Salt Flood raised, drown Sin in the Lake.
LXVI.
O, how these Words, Arise to Judgment quell!
On Wheels in Torments broke I Would dwell,
So as by Grace I might be saved from endless Hell.
LXVII.
To Angel-Intercessor, I Am forbid
To pray; Yet pray to ONE that did
Pray to ANOTHER for HIMSELF when is Blood-drops slid.
LXVIII
FATHER! Perfections Self in CHRIST does shine;
Thy Justice then in HIM confine;
Through's Merits, make thy Mercies, both are endless, mine!
LXIX.
See not, but through's abstersive Blood, my Sin;
By which I being cleans'd within,
Add Perseverance. It Is as hard to hold, as win.
LXX.
Her Eyes are Sentinels to Prayer, to Moans
Her Ears, her Nose courts Charnel-bones;
Her Hands Breast-hammers are, her constant Food is Groans.
LXXI.
Her Heart is hung with Blacks, with Dust she cloyes
Her golden Tresses; Weds Annoyes,
Breeds Sighs, bears Grief, which, Ibis-like, Sin-snakes destroys.
LXXII.
Thus mounts she drizling Olivet; the Plains
Of Jericho she leaves. (While Rains
The Farmer wet, they fully swell his earing Grains.)
LXXIII.
She, her own Farmer, stockt from HEAVEN, is bent
To thrive; Care 'bout the Pay-day's spent.
Stange! She alone is Farmer, Farm, and Stock, and Rent.
LXXIV.
The Porcupine so's Quiver, Bow, and Darts
To' her self alon^e; has all Wars Arts;
Her own Artillery needs no Aid from foreign Parts.
LXXV.
Sad Votaresse! thy Earth, of late oregrown
With Weeds, is plough'd, tilled harrow'd, sown.
The Seed of Grace sprouts up when Nature is kept down.
LXXVI.
Thy Glebe is melow'd with Faith-quickning Juice;
The Furrows thence Hope-blades produce;
Thy Valley clothed with LOVE will Harvest Joys diffuse.
LXXVII.
Live, Phoenix, from Self-death. In The Morn who dies
To Sin, does but immortalize:
Who study Death, ere dead, ere the Resurrection rise.
LXXVIII.
Rachel! thy Children Goal and Crown have won,
Ere they had Skill or Will to run.
Blessed, who their whole Days Work in their Life's Morn have done.
LXXIX.
Like misty Morn, She rose in Dew; so found
She never was, till this Sickness, sound;
Till Sin, in Sorrows flowing Issue (Tears) lay drowned.
LXXX.
Souls Lifeblood Tears, prevailing Pleaders, tame
Such Rebels, as by Eve did shame
Man's Glory; only These the old fallen World new frame.
LXXXI.
Lust causes Sin, Sin Shame, Shame bids repent,
Repentance weeps, Tears Sorrow vent,
Sorrow shows Faith, Faith Hope, Hope Love, Love Souls Content.
LXXXII.
Thus, from bruised Spiceries of her Breast, does rise
Incense, sweet smelling Sacrifice:
Whilst she lifts up to HEAVEN, her Heart, her Hand, her Eyes.
LXXXIII.
I Am sick with trembling, sunk with mourning, blasted
With sinning, and with sighing wasted;
New Life begins to breath; O, Joy, too long untasted!
LXXXIV.
Twice did new Life (by Breath, by Death) bestow
On Man prevaricating, Who,
By yielding to a Woman, made Man yield to Woe.
LXXXV.
Then did his Soul restore (as first inspire)
With second Grace, renewing Fire;
Whence He has part again in thy Celestial Quire.
LXXXVI.
Once more for this Heav'n-Denison did get
A never-fading Coronet,
Which was with two bright Jewels, Grace and Glory, set.
LXXXVII.
'Twas at my bloud-stain'd Birth Thy Love said, Live:
Links of Thy praevious Chain revive
Even crumbled Dust: So, Thou my Soul from Death reprive!
LXXXVIII.
CHRIST, The Unction art, Salvation JESUS; in
Thy Death Redemption, Blood for Sin
Gives Satisfaction, Thy Ascension Hope does win;
LXXXIX.
Thy Session Comfort. Though I did offend,
LORD, Fears disband, give Grace to amend,
That, Hope, which reaps not shame, may rise, and Peace descend.
XC.
My Pardon sign. The Spear pierct THEE's the Pen,
Thy Blood the Ink, Thy Gospel then
The Standish is, O, let my Soul be Paper clean!
XCI.
Kind, angry LORD, since Thou do wound, yet cure;
I Will bear the Yoke, the Cross endure;
Lament, and Love; and, when set free, keep Conscience pure.
XCII.
Thus mourns she, and, in mourning thus, she joys;
Even that adds Comfort, which annoyes;
Sighs turn to Songs and Tears to Wine, Fear Fear destroies.
XCIII.
As holy Flame did from her Heart arise,
Dropped holy Water from her Eyes,
While Prayer her Incense was, and LOVE her SACRIFICE.
XCIV.
Arm! Arm! She breaks in with strong ZEAL; The Place.
Sin quitts, now garrisoned by GRACE;
Illustrious Triumphs do the Steps of Victors trace.
XCV.
When the loud Volleyes of her Prayers begin
To make a Breach, they soon take in
The Parapets, Redouts, and Counterscarps of Sin.
XCVI.
At once she works and fights: With Lamp she waits,
Midst Virgins, at the BRIDEGROOMS Gates,
With HIM to feast* Her with his BRIDAL DELICATES.
XCVII.
To HEAVEN now goes she on her Knees; which cry
Loud, as her Tongue; much speaks her Eye:
HEAVEN, stormed by Violence, yields. Eyes, Tongue, and Knees scale high.
XCVIII.
My Last crave Pardon for my First Extremes;
Be praised, who crown'st my Morn with Beams;
Converted Age sees Visions, erring Youth dreamt Dreams.
XCIX.
RELIGION's its own Luster; Who This shun,
Night-founder'd grope at midday Sun.
Rebellion is its own self-tort'ring Dungeon.
C.
Man's restless Mind, GODS Image, cannot be blessed
Till of this ONE, This ALL, possessed.
THOU our Souls Center art, our everlasting REST!
Pars superata Freti, Lucem praebentibus Astris;
Longior at nostrae Pars superanda Viae.
Da, DEUS, ut Cursus suscepti nostra propinquet
Meta, laboranti grata futura Rati.
Magnificat Anima mea DOMINUM. THEOPHILA'S LOVE-SACRIFICE. CANTO III. The
Restoration.
ARGUMENT.
Laetior una Dies, IESV, tua SACRA Canenti;
Quam sine TE, melicis Secula mill Lyris.
Vt paveam Scelus omne, petam super Omnia COELUM;
Da mihi Fraena TIMOR, Da mihi Calcar AMOR!
The Authors Rapture; GRACE is praised; a Flood
Of Tears is poured for Albions Blood,
Shed in a Mist; for smot Micaiahs PEACE is wooed.
STANZA I.
MUSE, twang the powerful Harp, and brush each String
Of The warbling Lute, and Canzons sing
May ravish Earth, and thence to HEAVEN in Triumph spring.
II.
Noble Du-bartas, in a high-flown Trance,
Observed to start from's Bed, and dance;
Said: Thus by me shall caper all the Realm of France.
III.
As viscous Meteors, framed of earthy Slime,
By Motion fired, like Stars, do clime
The woolly-curdled Clouds, and there blaze out their Time.
IV.
Streaming with burnisht Flames; yet Those but ray
To spend Themselves, and light our Way;
And panting Winds, to cool ours, not their own Lungs, play.
V.
So, my enliv'ned Spirits ascend the Skies,
Wasting to make the Simple wise.
Who bears the Torch, himself shades, lightens others Eyes.
VI.
As Lust for Hell, ZEAL sweats to build for HEAVEN,
When fervent Aspirations, driven
By all the Souls quick Powers, to that high Search are given.
VII.
High is the Sphere on which FAITHS Poles are hing'd:
Pure Knowledge, Thou art not restring'd,
Thy Flames enfire the bushie Heart, yet leave't unsing'd.
VIII.
Suburbs of PARADISE! Thou, Saintly Land
Of Visions, Wooed by WISDOMS Band;
By dull Mules in gold-trappings how do slighted stand!
IX.
Whose World's a frantic Sea; more cross Winds fly
Than Sailers Compass knows; SAINTS ply
Their Sails through airy Waves, and anchor still on HIGH.
X.
It Is HOLINESS lands there; where None (distasted)
Rave with Guilts Dread, nor with Rage wasted;
Nor Beauty-dazled Eyes with Femal Wantons blasted.
XI.
No childish Toys; no boiling Youths wild Thirst;
No ripe Ambition; no accursed
Old griping Avarice; no doting Sloth there is nursed:
XII.
No Glutt'nies Maw-worm; nor the Itch of Lust;
No Tympanie of Pride; nor Rust
Of Envy; no Wraths Spleen; nor Obdurations Crust:
XIII.
No Canker of Self-Love; nor Cramp of Cares;
No Schism-Vertigo; nor night-Mares
Of inward Stings affright; here lurk no penal Snares.
XIV.
Hence Earth a dim Spot shows; where Mortals toil
For shot-bruis'd Mud-walls (childish broil;)
For pot-gun-cracks against Ant-hill-works; o, what a Coil!
XV.
Where Glutt'ny is full gorged; where Lust still spawns;
Where Wrath takes Blood, and Avarice pawns;
Where Envy frets, Pride struts, and dull Remisness yawns.
XVI.
Where Mars the Ascendant's: How Realms shattered lie,
With scattered Courts, beneath mine Eye;
Which show like atoms chased by Winds Inconstancy.
XVII.
Here, the Universe in NATURES Frame does stand,
Upheld by TRUTH, and WISDOMS Hand:
Zanzu^mims show from hence as Dwarfs on Pigmy land.
XVIII.
How vile's the World! Fancy, keep up thy Wings,
(Ruffled in Bussle of low Things,
Tossed in the common Throng) then acquiesce 'bove Kings.
XIX.
Thus, Thou being rapt, and struck with Enthean Fire,
In SKIES Star Chamber strike thy Lyre:
Proud Rome, not all thy Caesar's could thus high aspire.
XX.
Man's spirit'ual State, enlarged, still widening flows,
As the Helix does: A Circle shows
Man's natural Life, which Death soon from its Zenith throws.
XXI.
HEAVENS Perspective is over-reas'ning FAITH,
Which Soul-entrancing VISIONS has;
Truths Beacon, fired by Love, Joys Empire open lay'th.
XXII.
This All-enforming LIGHT in the pregnant Mind,
The Babe THEOPHILA enshrined:
GRACE dawns when Nature sets: Dawn for fair Day designed.
XXIII.
Breathe in thy dainty Bud, sweet Rose; It Is Time
Makes Thee to ripened VIRTUES clime,
When as the SUN of GRACE shall spread Thee to thy Prime.
XXIV.
When her Lifes-Clock struck twelve (Hopes Noon) so bright
She beamed, that Queen admired her Sight,
Viewing, through Beauties Lantern, her intrinsic Light.
XXV.
As, when fair Tapers burn in Crystal Frame,
The Case seems fairer by the Flame:
So, does HEAVENS brighter LOVE brighten this lovely Dame,
XXVI.
Her Soul the Pearl, her Shell out-whites the Snow,
Or Streams that from stretched Udders flow;
Her Lips Rock-rubies, and her Veins wrought Saphyrs show.
XXVII.
Attractive Graces dance about her Lips;
Spice from those scarlet Portals skips;
Thence Gileads mystic Balm (Griefs sov^ragin Balsam) slips.
XXVIII.
Such precious Fume the incensed ALTAR vents:
So, Gums in Air breath Compliments:
So, Roses damaskt Robe, prankt with green Ribbons, sents.
XXIX.
Her Eyes amaze the Viewers, and inspire
To Hearts a warm, yet chaste Desire,
(As Sol heats all) yet feel they in Themselves no Fire.
XXX.
Those Lights, the radiant Windows of her Mind,
Who would pourtray, as soon may find
A way to paint the viewless, poise the weightless Wind.
XXXI.
But, might we her sweet Breast, LOVES Eden, see;
On those Snow- mountlets Apples be,
May cure those Mischiefs wrought by the forbidden Tree.
XXXII.
Her Hands are soft, as swannie Down, and much
More white; whose temperate Warmth is such,
As when ripe Gold and quickening Sunbeams inly touch.
XXXIII.
Ye Sirens of the Groves, who, pearcht on high,
Tune gutt'ral Sweets, Air-Minstrels, why
From your Bough-Cradles, rockt with Winds, to HER do you fly?
XXXIV.
See, Lilies, gown'd in Tissue, simper by Her;
With Marigolds in flaming Tire;
Green sattin'd Bays, with Primrose fringed, seem all on Fire.
XXXV.
The art silver-voic'd, Teeth- pearl'd, thy Head's gold-thatcht,
Natures Reviver, Flora's patcht,
Though trickt in Mayes new Raiment, when with Thee She Is matched.
XXXVI.
THOU, chaste as fair, Eve ere she blushed: From Thee
The Libe'ral Arts in Capite,
The Virtues by Knight Service, Graces hold in Fee.
XXXVII.
A gracious Soul, figured in Beauty, is
Best Pourtrayture of Heavenly Bliss,
Drawn to the Life: Wit-feign'd Pandora vails to This.
XXXVIII.
So, Cynthia seems Star-chambers President,
With crescent Splendour from Sol lent,
Rallying her starrie Troop to guard her glittering Tent.
XXXIX.
(Pearl'd Dews add Stars) yet Earths Shade shuts up soon.
Her Shop of Beams; Whose Cone does run
'Bove the horned Moon, beneath the golden-tressed Sun.
XL.
Wh' on Sky, Clouds, Seas, Earth, Rocks does Rays disperse,
Stars, Rainbows, Pearls, Fruits, Diamonds pierce;
The Worlds Eye, Sourse of Light, Soul of the Universe.
XLI.
Who glowes like Carbuncles, when winged Hours
Dandle the Infant-Morn, which scours
Dame Luna, with her twinkling Spies, from azure Towers.
XLII.
Thee, THEOPHIL, Days sparkling Eye we call;
Thy Faith's the Lid, thy Love the Ball,
Beautying thy graceful Mein with Form ANGELICAL.
XLIII.
That Lady-Prioress of the cloistered Sky,
Coacht with her spangled Vestalls nigh,
Vails to this Constellation from DIVINITY.
XLIV.
Vertue' s her Spring of Honor, her Allies*
Are Saints, Guard Angels, HEAVEN her Prize;
Whose Modesty looks down, while thus her Graces rise.
XLV.
Eugenia Wit, Paidia Art affords,
Eusebia Truth for Her uphords.
(Poets have Legislative Power of making Words.)
XLVI.
Her Heart's a Court, her richly-temper'd Breast
A Chapel for Loves regent GUEST:
Here feasts She sacred Poets, SHE Herself a Feast.
XLVII.
Ye Bay-crown'd Lords, Who dig from Wisdoms Pits
The Oar of Arts, and with your Wits
Refine't, who prop the doa^^ng World in stagg'ring Fits*
XLVIII.
And in Fames Court raise Obelisks divine;
Such Symphonies do ye combine,
As may inspirit Flesh with your Soul-ravishing Wine.
XLIX.
While Winter Autumn, Summer clasps the Spring;
While tenter'd Time shall Paeans sing,
Your Eagle-plumes (that others waste) shall ymp Fames Wing.
L.
The rampant Juice of Teneriffe recruits
Wildely the routed Spirits: So, Lutes,
Harps, Viols, Organs; ah! and Trumpets, Drums and Flutes!
LI.
Though Art should humor grumbling Bases still,
Tortring the deep-mouthed Catlins, till
Hoarse-thundring Diapasons should the whole Room fill;
LII.
Yet those -- But string this LADIES Harp; She Will try
Each Chords tuned Pulse, till She descry
Where mosts harmonious Musicks mystic Soul does lie.
LIII.
Now Grace with Language chimes; Thrice blessed, who taste.
Their HEAVEN on Earth, in Life's Book graced;
Who leaving Sense with Sense, their Spirit with SPIRITS have placed.
LIVE.
With those divine Patritians, who being not
Eclips't with Sense, or Bodies Spot,
Are in the Spring of living FLAME Seraphick hot.
LV.
One TASTE gives Joys! Joys, at which, Words but rove;
Schools, purblinde, grope at Things Above,
Cymmerian-like, on whose Suns brow Clouds darkly move.
LVI.
HEAVENS Paths are traceless; by Excess of Light;
O're-fulgent Beams daz'd Fyes benight.
Say Ephata, and Clay' s Collyrium for my Sight!
LVII.
Transported in this Ecstasy, befriend
Me, like the Stagirite, to end
My Thoughts in That Euripus, None can comprehend!
LVIII.
This mystic Chain, o, lengthen't still! imparts
Links, fett'ring 'bove all Time-born Arts;
Such sweet Divisions from tuned Strings may ravish Hearts.
LIX.
Best Tenure holds by the Ear: In Saul, disguised,
When Satan often Tarantuliz'd,
The Psalming Harp was 'bove they swaying Scepter prized.
LX.
This Hymn, ZEALS burning Fever, does refine*
My gross hydropick Soul; Divine
Anthems unbowel BLISS, and ANGELS down incline.
LXI.
ANGELS shot forth the happiest CHRISTMAS News;
Even CHRIST to warble Hymns did use;
When Heavens highest DOVE does soar, He Wings of Verse does choose.
LXII.
No Verse, no Text. Since Verse charms All, Sing on;
Let Sermons wait till PSALMS be done;
Soul-raisers, ye prevent the RESURRECTION.
LXIII.
But, ah! in War (Wraths Midwife) which does tire,
Yet never fills the Jaws of Ire,
(Keen as the Evening Wolf) can She yet use her (...).
LXIV.
Yes. She Is unmoved in Earthquakes, tuned in Iars;
(Fear argues Guilt) She stands in Wars,
And Storms of thundering Brass, bright as corus^ant Stars*
LXV.
Vertue' s a Balsam to It self. Invoke
She MERCY did to oil steels Yoke:
Thus, in an iron Age, This golden VIRGIN spoke.
LXVI.
Dread GOD! Black Clouds surcharged with Storms,
When P^ple Robes hide Scarlet Sin,
Ingrain'd from that Lifeblood, which mo^ted their Souls (...) begin,
LXVII.
Our Sea-girt World ( once Fort'nate Isle, O, Change
Deplorable!) to It self seems strange;
Unthrifty Death has spread where thriving Peace did range.
LXVIII.
War has our lukewarm Claret broacht with Spears:
LORD, save thy Ark from Floods of Fears,
Or thy sad Spouse may sink as deep in Blood, as Tears!
LXIX.
She chaws Bread tleept in Woes, gulpt down with Cries;
She drinks the Rivers of her Eyes;
Plunged in Distress for Sin, to THEE She fainting flies.
LXX.
Tune the Irish Harp from Sharps to Flats! Compose
Whatever vicious Harshnesse grows
Upon the Scottish Thistle, or the English Rose!
LXXI.
No ramping Lion its own Kind does fear,
No tusked Bore, no rav'ning Bear:
Man, Man's Apollyon, does CHRIST'S mystic Body tear.
LXXII.
Ye Sons of Thunder, if You Will needs fight on,
Lead your fierce Troops against Turkish Moon,
Out of the Line of FAITHS Communication.
LXXIII.
The large-commanding Thracian Force defy:
Like Gun-stocks, though your Corpse may fly
To Earth, Your Souls, like Bullets, will ascend on HIGH.
LXXIV.
If GOD be then in the Camp, much more will HE
In's Militant Church (His Temple) be,
To chasten Schism, and pervicacious Heresy.
LXXV.
LORD* rent's thy Coat, Loves Type! This, sads the Good!
Though Presters, rudely fierce, fain would
Be heard; THOU hat'st uncivil Prayer, and civil Blood.
LXXVI.
Ah, could dissembling Pulpeteers cry't Good
To wade through Seas of native Blood,
Break greatest Ties, play fast and loose, beneath Smects Hood!
LXXVII.
By Such were Catechisms, Communions, Creeds
Disused! As March spawns Frogs; so, Weeds
Sprung hence. Worst Atheist from corrupted Churchman breeds.
LXXVIII.
Use the LORDS Prayer, be the Publican; recant
The Pharisee; Or else, avaunt
With your six-hundred-sixtie-six-word- Covenant.
LXXIX.
LORD, they, through faithless Dreams, the Feast disown
Of thy SONS INCARNATION!
(Then whether will such Proteus-tants at last be blown?)
LXXX.
That FEAST of Feasts, Archangels Joy, Heaven here
Espoused to Earth, Saints Bliss, most dear
Prerogative of the Church, The Grand Day of the Year.
LXXXI.
Man, first made Good, Himself unmade, and then*
The WORD, made Flesh, must dwell with Men,
That, Man, thus worse then naught, may bettered be again.
LXXXII.
Dare to own Truth. Drones seized the Bees full Bower;
All Is paint that Butterflies deflowr;
As Ants improve; so, Grasshoppers impair their Hour.
LXXXIII.
When Pirat-wasps sail to the hony'd Grot,
They Will find a Trap-glasse, Death in the Pot:
Levites, slight not your Breast-work for vain Outworks got.
LXXXIV.
We ken Kirk-Interest; Draco's Laws recall;
Repair the old Church; Saints the Wall,
True Pastors Conduits, Grace the Font, Love cements All.
LXXXV.
Pass freely would we of Oblivion
An Act, and pardon all bygone,
Would you smite Hand on Thigh, and say, What have we done!
LXXXVI.
Truths Pensioners! your Flocks bleat; Food they need;
CHRIST'S Flesh, their Meat; Blood, Drink indeed:
View GLORIES Crown; In Season, out of Season, feed.
LXXXVII.
Ye Friends to the BRIDEGROOM, Stewards to the Bride,
With Oracles of Truth us guide;
Truth blesses Church and State; Faithful, till crowned, abide.
LXXXVIII.
So, when the JUDGE with his Reward appears,
You Will reap in Joy what is sown in Tears:
Moist Seed-times crown the Fields with golden-bearded Ears.
LXXXIX.
JUDGE-ADVOCATE to the wronged; sure, THOU to Guilt,
Which would unmake thy Creatures, wilt
Be just, when Inquisition's made for Blood that is spilt.
XC.
At our Ears Port land Peace and Truth! O, then,
Welcome, as Sol to the Russ in's Den!
As Shore to shipwrackt, as to Towns dismantled, Men!
XCI.
O, might a second ANGEL-QUIRE nere cease
To Worms, worn out with Wars Distress,
To sing, in all Men's hearing, their blessed Song of PEACE!
XCII.
Peace! Home of Pilgrims, first Song at CHRIST'S Birth;
Peace, His last Legacy on Earth;
Peace, general Preface to all Good; Peace, SAINTS true Mirth.
XCIII.
Love, Thou, Support to Martyrs! as Iet Straw,
So Us to our BELOVED do draw;
Thou art Golds true Elixir, Thou summ'st up the Law.
XCIV.
Who can Divine Love speak in words of Sense?
Since, Man, as ransomed, Angels thence
Transcends! Such is CHRIST'S Passions high Pre-eminence!
XCV.
Here did She seal her Lips, unsluce her Eyes
To flowing Rhet'rick, and descries
The World's a Cask, its Wine false Mirth, its Lees Fools Prize.
XCVI.
And now, by lympid Spring of Life-joy, where
Crystal is lymbect all the Year
To GOD She would her Heav'n-ascending Raptures rear.
XCVII.
Taught hence, misguided Zeal, whom Heats dispose
To Animosities, may close;
And bloody Furies CONVERTS be, by pond'ring Those.
XCVIII.
Harmonious Beauty, feast our Ear! They Are Kings
At least, who hear, when LOVE thus sings:
LOVE, to high Graces Key skrues up low Natures Strings.
XCIX.
Love, Thou can Ocean-flowing Storms appease;
And such oregrown Behemoths please,
As tax the scaly Nation, and excise the Seas.
C.
If, THEOPHIL, thy LOVE-SONG cannot assuage
The Fate incumbent on this Age,
No Time to write, but weep; For we are ripe for Rage!
Ite sacrosanctae Tabulata per Alta Carinae;
Non opus est Fluviis, Lintea pando Mari.
Ite Rates Ventis, quo vos rapit Aura, secundis:
Brittica Cymba pias findat AMORIS Aquas.
-- Animarum Sponsus JESUS. The Soul against Complations fights,
Whom Death and Hell present with ^ights:
The World with (...)calt and honor cou^ts;
The Fleshes Glass invites to Spouts:
But THEOPHIL by Faith her Shield,
And Hopes firm ^ncho^ stands the Field;
Accompany^d with GRACE and LOVE,
By ANGELS SHE does upward move.

THEOPHILA'S LOVE-SACRIFICE. CANTO IV. The Inammoration.
ARGUMENT.
O, DEVS, aut nullo caleat mihi Pectus ab Igne!
Aut solo caleat Pectus ab Igne Tui!
Languet ut Illa DEO, mihi Men's simul aemula languet!
Coelitus ut rapitur, me Violenta rapit!
She Onset makes, first with Love-darts aloof;
Then, with ZEALS Fireworks, storms HEAVENS Roof;
Whose FAITHS Shield, and SALVATIONS Helmet are Hellproof.
THEOPHILA'S Soliloquie.
STANZA 1.
WHen Heavens LOVE! Paramount, HIMSELF reveals,
And to the suppliant Soul, her Pardon seals,
At feard-Hopes doubtful Gate, with trembling fell,
2.
(Who Heav'n-ward sails, coasts by the Cape of Hell)
That Her HE deigns to take, She joys in Woes,
To have in Labor passed the Parturition Throes.
3.
All Travell-pangs, all New Birth Heart-deep Groans,
All After-births of Penitential Mones,
Are swallowed up in living Streams of Bliss;
4.
When as the Heaven-born Heir, the New-man is,
By the quickening SPIRIT of the HIGHEST reborn:
Time past has pas'd her Night, present presents her Morn.
5.
See Joy in Light, See Light in Joy; O, see,
Poor worthless Maid, Fruit brought thee from Lifes-Tree,
By the SPOUSE and SPIRIT, Saints sole Supporters! Rise
6.
Then, Hells Apostate, and be Heavenly wise:
THOU art (Lets interpledge our Soul my ONE,
My ALL, though not by UNITY, by Union!
7.
Ineffably mysterious Knot begun;
Saints mount, as Dew allured by beckning Sun:
Loves faithful Friends, what parallels your Guard,
8.
Where Truth is Sentinel, and Grace the Ward?
The Way is Flow'r-strown, where the Guide is Love:
His SPIRIT with you below, your Spirit with HIM Above.
9.
Reciprocal Excess of Joy! Then, soar
My Soul to HIM, Who Man became; Nay more,
Took Sin it self, to cleanse thy fully'd Clay,
10.
But took it, only to take it away.
O, SELF DONATION! peerlesse GIFT, unknown!
Now since that HE is Thine, be never Thou thine own*
11.
O, Prodigy of Great and Good! Faith, sound
This LOVES Abyss, that does so strangly bound
ALMIGHTINES IT SELF! From Whose Veins, see,
12.
Unsluc't, LOVES purple Ocean, when His Free
Red-streaming Life did vanquish Death and Hell!
That thou might live, HE died! That thou might rise, HE fell!
13.
GOD so loved Man, that Naturalists may deem
GOD to set Man before HIMSELF did seem!
When Man, with seeing blind, against GOD arose,
14.
And slew his only FRIEND, GOD saved his Foes!
Sol mour'nd in blacks! Heavens Viceroy, Nature, swounded!
Excess Loves Reason was, Immensitie Love bounded!
15.
Ye Twins of Light, as Sun-flow'rs be inclined
To the SUN of RIGHTEOUSNESS; Let Taste, refined,
Like nothing as LOVES Heavenly Manna; and
16.
Let all but CHRIST feel rough, as Esaus Hand;
Let naught like's Garment smell; Let Ears rejoice,
But in expresles Dictates of LOVES whispering Voice!
17.
HE IS thy bright Sun; 'twixt WHOM, and thy Souls Bliss,
Thy earthie Body interposed is;
Whereby such dread Eclipses caused are,
18.
As famed Ast^^^omers can never declare:
Yet often HE shines; Then, vanish servile Fears;
Then, Heav'n-ward filial Hopes dry up thy trickling Tears.
19
Spiritual Light Spirituals clears: In HEAVEN
Thou Wilt view that full what now by Glimps, like Steph'n
Thou can^st but spy; There, shall thou Face to Face,
20.
His Light, His Joy, His Love, His Power, His Grace,
And His ALL-FILLING GLORY clearly see*
In optic Emanations from ETERNITY!
21
In The RING of boundless LUSTER, from whose Ray
This petty World gleaneth its peep of Day:
Thou shall be Crowned with Wreaths of endless Light:
22.
Here, oft's an Enterview in Heat, and Might,
By Inter-lucidations from ABOVE,
Twining Embraces with his ensphearing ARM of LOVE!
23
Most blessed Souls, to whom He does appear,
Folded within your Arms chaste Hemisphear!
O, Condescend! How Is LIPS shed Love! Life, Merit!
24.
He makes his Angels Court of Guard! By's SPIRIT
HE crowns you with his Grace! So, with his BLOOD,
When HE Redeemed you, and consigned His FLESH for Food!
25
Meat came from the Eater, from the Strong did Dew
Sweetness; when as, incomparably true,
OMNIPOTENCIES SELF did largely shed
26.
His mystic Oil of Joy upon thy^ Head:
Then, trample Sin in Babylons golden Cup;
Treasures away She trifles, Trifles treasures up.
27
Oil of this Lamp, obsequious Soul, lights Thee
To thine approaching HEAVEN* In Sancti^ie
Be actuated then; Being up assum^d
28.
By this bright Sun, with this rich Oil perfumed,
The art prepossest with Heavenly Comforts, which,
With their Soul-chearing Sweets, both ravish and enrich.
29
Poor, panting Heart, Loves Seat, yearn for Ioys Pith!
To have (thy highest Bliss!) Communion with
The FATHER and the SON, one SPIRIT with CHRIST!
30.
And One in THEM, as THEY are One! Thou fly'st
Through Grace to GLORY! VISION shall sublime
Thy Faith, FRUITION Hope, ETERNIT^ thy Time!
THEOPHILA'S LOVE-SONG.
STANZA. 31.
SELF! o, how mean an Harmony it breeds!
JESUS! All Names this NAME of Names exceeds!
This Name's GODS Mercy at full Sea, it is LOVES
32.
High Tower, Joys Loadstone; This, my Spirit moves.
Hark: Rise my Love, my Fair One, Come away;
Lingering breeds Loss; I am thy Leader, Light, and Way.
33.
What Speed Speeds self can make, Soul, fly withal;
GREATNESS and GOODNESS most Magnetical!
Shoot, like a Flashof Fire, to the ruby Wine,
34.
His precious BLOOD, transcendently Divine!
(How poor those costly pearls were, drunk by Some)
My LORD, drink Blood to me! Let It to the Worlds Health come!
35
All Hope's unanchor'd but in THAT. THOU art,
'Bove Indies Womb, rich to my Lovesick Heart!
Flesh-fair Endowments are but Skin-deep Brags,
36.
Varnisht Corruption; Wealth is but Cares Bags;
The Bag impostom'd choaks. Gold, Beauty, Fame
Are sublunary Mysts to SAINTS Seraphick Flame.
37
JESUS! THIS fans my Fire, which has at best
But Grains of Incense, Pounds of Interest.
Go, Interest; Take the Principal, Thine own:
38.
Divine LOVE loves thy LOVELINES alone!
What Flames to THINE proportionable be!
LORD, had not first loved Man, Man could not have loved THEE!
39
Why love us, but because THOU would? O, why
For Lepers would the UNDEFILED die?
That Pen was dipped in the Standish of thy Blood,
40.
Which wrote the Indenture of our termless Good!
O, LOVE, 'bove Wish! Never such LOVE enrolled!
Who think their utmost Flames enough for THEE, are cold.
41.
Whose HIGHNESS did not to be low disdain,
Yet, when at Lowest, Highest did remain!
Who bow'dst HEAVENS Altitude, refresh with Flowrs,
42.
With JESSES Sovereign Flower, my fainting Powers,
Which sink (as shaft-struck Heart embost) twixt Grief,
And Joy: Grief for my Sin, Joy for thy free Relief^
43.
Wrackt is with bitter-sweet Extremes my Mind,
Shell'd, sheathed, cag'd, coffined in her treacherous friend;
Her always tempting mass of Flesh She bears,
44.
Her Hopes, did they not sprout from Thee, were fears:
HOPE, Thou Perfume of LOVERS, for thy Sake
LOVE'S generous, throws at All: Life's but a petty Stake;
45
Scarce worth the Prize. LOVE makes two Spirits but one;
Me, Counterpart to thy Indenture, own;
I, active then as Light, tread Air and Flame,
46.
Without or Wing, or Chariot; and disclaim
All the faint Sweets of Earth. Thy SPIRIT views
How in Loves torrid Zone thy sweltring Martyr stews.
47
Row me, ye Dove-wingd Oars, whom Hope does buoy,
To wisht-for Hav'n, flowing with Tides of Joy!
Yet wish I not, my Joy, thy Joys Above,
48.
Merely for Joy; nor Pleasures of thy LOVE,
Only for Love of Pleasure; No, let free
Spiritual Languors teem! Fruitful, yet Virgins be!
49
Give, give me Children, or I die! LOVE, rest
Thy Head upon the Pillows of my Breast!
When me THOU shall impregn'd with Virtues make
50.
A fruitful Eden, All the Frutage take!
Thy Passion, Jonathan, below did move;
Rapt SPIRITS, in high Excess flame with intensest Love!
51
My Life is hid with THEE in GOD! Descry
THY SELF, o, THOU, my plighted SPOUSE, that I
May ever glorious be! That my joy'd Soul
52.
With THEE may make up Marriage! and my whole
Self THEE for Bridegroom have! My Hope still sends
Up Come, that I may enter with thy feasted Friends!
53.
O, That long-long'd for COME! o, COME! mine Eyes,
LOVES Sentinels, watch, like officious Spies!
Strike Sparks of JOY t'enflame LOVES Tinder! make
54.
The Exile view her Home, the Dreamer wake!
Tears raise the Fire of LOVE! Ease Sighs of Air,
Fires Passion, watery Tears, and earthy self Despair!
55.
My Sighs, condensed to Drops, compute Hours spent!
Cancel the Lease of my Clay-Tenement,
Which pays deer Rent of Groans! o, grant a Writ
56.
Of Ease! I languish out, not live! Permit
A Pass to SIONS MOUNT! But, I resign
My green-sick Will, though sick of LOVE, to that of Thine!
57.
Waitings, which ripen Hopes, are not Delays;
Presence how great, how true's LOVE, Absence says:
While Lungs my Breath shall organ, I Will press still
58.
The Exinanition of my o'regrown Will.
Behold, I quickly come. O're-joyd I Am here!
O Come! Till then, each Day's an Age, each Hour a Year.
59.
JESU! (That NAME'S Joys Essence!) hasten on!
Throng amorous Sighs for Dissolution!
Fastidious Earth, avaunt; With Love-plumes soar,
60.
My Soul, to meet thy SPOUSE, Can wish for more?
Only Come! give a RING! Re-eccho then,
O, Come. Even so, LORD IESV, Come! Amen. Amen.
LXI.
Who Is this Inamor'd VOT'RESSE? Like the Morn
From Mountain unto Mountain born?
Who first, with Night-drops dew'd, seemed Turtle Dove forlorn?
LXII.
But now, e're warped Body, near Decay,
Stands, Bow-like, bent, to shoot away
Her Soul, Ere prone Looks kiss her Grave, e're her last Day,
LXIII.
She (LOVE-fill'd) wants no Mate, has rather one
Body too much. In The SPIRITS Throne
CHRIST'S Peace is fullest Quire! Such Loneness, least alone!
LXIV.
When soft-flying Sleep, Deaths Sister, Wings does spread
Over that curtain'd Grave, her Bed,
Then, with prophetic Dreams the HIGHEST crowns her Head.
LXV.
Behold, a comely PERSON, clad in white,
The all-inlightning Sun, less bright
Than that illustrious FACE of HIS, which blessed her Sight.
LXVI.
To Her, in MAJESTY, His Way HE broke,
And, softly thus to Her HE spoke.
Come, Come away. My JESUS? says She. So, She woke.
LXVII.
Her Prayers, more passionate, than witty, rise,
As Sols Postilion, bright; her Eyes,
Wrestling with GOD for GRACE, bedew Loves Paradise.
LXVIII
Betimes, when keen breathed Winds, with frosty Cream,
Peri'wig bald Trees, glaze tatling Stream:
(For May-games past, white-sheet- peccavi is Winters Theme.
LXIX.
Those Day-breaks give good Morrows, which she takes
With Thanks, so, doubly Good them makes.
Who in GODS Promise rests, in GODS Remembrance wakes.
LXX.
SAINTS nothing more, SAINTS nothing less regard,
Than LOVES SELF, than self-Love; unscar'd,
Though rackt into an Anagram, their Souls being spared.
LXXI.
Through Virtuous Self-mistrust They acted move
Like Needle, touched by the Stone of Love.
Blessed Magnet, which attracts, and Souls directs ABOVE!
LXXII.
Were She but mortal, She were satisfied,
So GOD lived in Her, till She died;
His WORD, her Deed, his WILL, her Warrant; BOTH, her (Guide.
LXXIII.
Thus, this DEVOTA breaths out yerning Cries.
Let not Dust blind my sensual Eyes,
When as my Spirits Energie transcends the Skies!
LXXIV.
VIRTUES raise Souls. All Is FILIAL to ABOVE;
Low'st Step is Mercenary Love;
Fraternal are the Sides that SAINTS Ascent improve.
LXXV.
Manna to my enamored Soul, art THOU!
The SPIRIT of Heaven, distilled, does flow
From thy ASPECT; By That, from Brutes, we ANGELS grow.
LXXVI.
Had I, o, had I many Lives, as Years;
As many Loves, as Love has Fears;
All, All were THINE, had I as many Hearts, as Hairs!
LXXVII.
From THEE my JOY-EXTENSIONS spreading flow;
Dilating, as Leaf-gold! be n't slow,
O, THOU, my All, and more! Love-lorn, THEE still I woo!
LXXVIII.
The Widow pressed, till THEE to grant She bound;
The VIRGIN sought THEE, till she found;
The Publican did knock, till opening, knocking crowned.
LXXIX.
Though naught but dross I in my self can spy,
Yet melted with THY beaming EYE,
My Refuse turns to Gold, by mystic Alchymie;
LXXX.
Then, whet thy blunt Sithe, Time, and wing thy Feet:
Life, not in Length, but Use, is sweet:
Come, Death, (the Body brought a bed of the SOUL) Come, fleet!
LXXXI.
Be Pulse, my Passing Bell; be Skin, my Hearse:
Nights sable Curtains that disperse
The Rays of Day, be Shroud: Dews, weep my funeral Verse!
LXXXII.
Pity me, Lovesick Virgins! Then, She swound;
Overcome with Zeal, She sunk to the Ground:
Darts of intolerable Sweets her Soul did wound.
LXXXIII.
She lay with flaming LOVE empierc't to the Heart:
Wak't, As She bled, She kissed the Dart;
Then sighed. Take all I am, or have! All, All THOU art!
LXXXIV.
Then, sunk again. Revived, LOVES BOW She bent
And married String to Shaft, and sent
Ejaculations, which the Skies, like Lightning, rent.
LXXXV.
Piercing Them through (feathered with Sighs) to show
She little paid, yet much did owe:
The Feathers sung, and fired, as they did upward go.
LXXXVI.
No ice-fring'd Cloud may quench LOVES soaring Flame:
LOVE is more strong then Death, or Shame.
Grown up all Soul, the Flesh sinks in a triple Qualm.
LXXXVII.
I charge ye, SION VIRGINS, let Her still
Enjoy her disencloystred Fill
In These high Ecstasies of UNION and WILL.
LXXXVIII.
Do not with Claps of Hands, or noise of Feet,
Awake Her from what is more sweet,
Till the bright rising Day Star light Her to HEAVENS Street.
LXXXIX.
Yield Her, what her unfettered Rapture gives,
Since She Is more where She loves, than lives:
Transanimations, scaling HEAVEN, break carnal Gyves.
XC.
In LOVES triumphant Chariot placed She is;
Concentrick are her JOYS with HIS
Encharioted in Fire, her Spirit HEAV'N-ripe for Bliss.
XCI.
They Are only sound, who Thus are lost in Trance;
Transported to the Highest Advance,
With Him, who was in Spirit rapt to' expreffeles Glance.
XCII.
Returned; She cried. O, slay me thus again!
Never lives she who thus never is slain!
How sweet the Wounds of LOVE! No Pleasure to LOVES pain!
XCIII.
In furnac't Heat, Pyrausta-like, I fry!
To live is Faith! it is Gain to die!
One Life's enough for Two! THOU liv'st in me, not I!
XCIV.
How, midst Regalios of LOVES Banquet, I
Dissolve in Sweets Extremity!
O, Languors! Thus to live is in pure Flames to die!
XCV.
Three Kings three Gifts to the KING of Kings did bring;
Myrrh, Incense, Gold, to Man, GOD, King:
For Myrrh, Tears; Incense Prayers; Gold, take Loves Offering!
XCVI.
O, take Loves Hecatomb! Then, through her Eyes
Did LOVE inamoring Passions rise:
HIGHEST GLORY crowns THEOPHILA's Love-Sacrifice.
XCVII.
Not She, Mortality alone did die;
Death's but Translation to the Sky:
All Virtues fired in her pure BREAST their Spicerie.
XCVIII.
As, when Arabias Wonder Spices brings,
Which fanned to Flames by her own Wings,
She, from the glowing Holocaust in Triumph springs:
XCIX.
So, VIRTUES Pattern, (Priestesse, Altar, Fire,
Incense, and Victime) up did spire;
VICTORIA, VICTORIA, sung All HEAVENS QUIRE.
C.
She Ecchoing (Echo, which does all surpass!
GODS Sight is GLORIES Looking-glass!)
MAGNIFICATS, HOSANNAS, HALLELUIAHS!
Pars Cursus emensa mei, Pars restat aranda:
Ex aequo Metam Vesper and Ortus habent.
Ergo per immensos properent cava Lintea Fluctus:
Iactatam capiant Littora sancta Ratem!
-- Amans Anima satiatur Amantis. View See the Authors ^ig^ Design^,
His Book displaid, ^is ^apers shine,
Is A^honian Bird, (...)Dog, and Cat,
(...) intimate.
TIEOPHLA. does before Him stand
Amused wit^ erected Hand^;
And, like an Eagle, upward flies,
(...)by (...)ANGELS to the SKIES.

THEOPHILA'S LOVE-SACRIFICE. CANTO V. The Representation.
ARGUMENT.
Mundus Opes, Animam COELUM, Terramque resumpsit
Terra: DEVS, Vitam cum tulit, IPSE dedit.
Solus AMOR facit esse DEVM; QUEM, Mente capaci,
Si Quis conciperet, posset and esse DEVS.
The Authors Vision, Her Ascent, HEAVENS Place
Descried, where reigns all glorious GRACE,
Where Is all-sufficient GOOD, the Sum of BLISS She has.
STANZA I.
I AM vile, a thing impure, Corruptions Son,
Earth-crawling Worm, by Sin undone,
Whose suppliant Dust does own its Shame, and to HEAVEN does run.
II.
GRACE, intervene 'twixt Sin and Shame, and tie
A hopeful BLISS to Misery!
LORD, pardon dust and ashes: both, yea worse, am I!
III.
Though dust, thy Work: though Clay, Thy HAND did turn
This Vessel; and, though ashes, the URN
THOU art, them to restore when Sky and Earth shall burn.
IV.
Whilst that my Heav'n-allyed-Soul does stay
Wholly on THEE, not Europs Sway
Can elevate my Wish, like one Grace-darted Ray.
V.
Meet, meet my imprisoned Souls Address! oh, might
She view, through mouldring Earth, thy SIGHT!
GRACE perfects Natures want: Say here, Let there be Light!
VI.
Then, though in Flesh my Spirit pris'ned be,
She may by FAITH ascend to THEE,
And up be raised, till she shall mount to Liberty.
VII.
Clear-sighted FAITH, point out the Way; I will
Neglect curled Phrases frizled Skill:
Humble DEVOTION, lift Thou up my flagging Quill;
VIII.
Which faints at first Approach; my Faith's too light
To move This MOUNTAIN, reach This HEIGHT:
Can squeaking Reeds sound forth the Organs full delight?
IX.
I Am mute, for only Light can Light declare;
A Diamond must a Diamond square;
Yet, where I dare not speak, there yet adore I dare.
X.
Ear has not heard, nor Eye has seen, nor can
Man's Heart conceive (vast Heart of Man)
The Riches treasured up in GLORIES Ocean!
XI.
Tomes full of mystic Characters enfense
Those Seas of BLISS! To write to Sense
HEAVENS Chronicle, would ask a HEAV'ND- Intelligence.
XII.
How then, from Flood of Tears may an Arkt Dove try
Its ventrous Pineons, to descry
That Land, unknown to Nature? Vast ETERNITY!
XIII.
Fear Gulfs unfathomable; nor desire,
Ere of GODS Court thou art, to aspire
To be of's Counsel; Pry not, but with Awe admire.
XIV.
Dwarf-words do limp, do derogate, do scan
Nor Height, nor Depth. Since Time began,
What constitutes a Gnat was never found out by Man.
XV.
Dares mortal Slime, with ruder tongue, express
What even CELESTIALS do confess
Is inexpressible? Thou Clod of Earth, first guess
XVI.
In like Degrees from Aequinoctial Track,
Why Men are tawny, white, and black?
Why Bactrias Camel two? Arabs, one Bunch on's Back?
XVII.
Can lead Leviathan with a silken String?
Can cover with a Hornets Wing
Behemoth? Can thou Seas into a Nutshell bring?
XVIII.
Can Motion fix? count Sands? recall past Day?
Show Height, Breadth, Length of the spreading Ray?
Discardinate the Spears? and rapid Whirlwindes stay?
XIX.
Tell, tell how ponderous Earths huge proplesse Ball
Hangs poised in the fluent Hall
Of fleeting Air? how Clouds sustained are from Fall?
XX.
How burnt the Bush, when Verdure clothed its Fire?
How from the Rock, Rod-struck in Ire,
Did Cataracts gush out? How did the Sea retire?
XXI.
Can thou take Post-Horse with the coursing Sun,
And with Him through the Zodiac run?
How many Stages be there ere the Race be done?
XXII.
Then, tell how once He shot his Beams downright
From the same Zenith, while for Night,
Mortals stood gazing at a doubled Noon-dayes-Light?
XXIII.
Tell, how that Planet did in after-dayes
Turn Cancer, shooting Parthian Rays,
Ten whole Degrees reverst, which did the World amaze.
XXIV.
Poor thingling Man! Propitious HEAVEN, assign
Some ANGEL for this high DESIGN!
HEAVENS HISTORY requires at least a SERAPHIN.
XXV.
O, might some glorious SPIRIT then retire,
And warble to a sacred Lyre
The Song of Moses and the LAMB in HEAVENS full Quire!
XXVI.
'Twas at Nights Noon, when Sleep the Oppressed had drowned;
But sleepless were Oppressors found;
'Twas, when Skies spangled Head in sable Veil was bound:
XXVII.
For, theevish Night had stole, and closed up quite,
In her dark Lantern, starrie Light:
No Planet seen to sail in that dead Ebb of Night:
XXVIII.
When, lo, all-spreading RAYS the Room surround!
Like such Reflections, as rebound,
Shooting their Beams to the Sun, from Rocks of Diamond.
XXIX.
This, to a Wonder, summoned my Sight,
Which dazzled was at so pure Light!
A FORM ANGELLICK there appeared divinely bright!
XXX.
I wished my Self more Eyes to view this Gleam;
I was awake, I did not dream;
Too exquisite Delight makes true Things feigned seem.
XXXI.
Model of HEAVEN it was; I floated long
Twixt Joy and Wonder; Passion strong,
Wanting due Vent, made Sight my Speech, and Eyes my Tongue!
XXXII.
Often, my rapt Soul, ascending to the Eye,
Peept through upon ANGELITIE,
Whose Blaze did burnisht Plate of sparkling Sol outvie!
XXXIII.
If gracious Silence shined forth any where
With sweet Aspect, 'twas in this Sphere;
The Soul of Sweetness, and the SPIRIT of Joys mixed here.
XXXIV.
From out LOVES Wing He must a Pensil frame,
Who, on Times cloth, would paint this Flame:
None can pourt^ay this glorious Draft but who is the same.
XXXV.
Vail then, Ti^antes-like, this guessed at FACE,
(The Curtain of That inward GRACE)
Whose Forehead with Diaphanous Gold impaled was.
XXXVI.
For, starrie Knobs, like Diamonds, did attire
That Front with GLORY, and conspire
To lavish out their Beams, to radiate that Fire.
XXXVII.
Whose Amber-curling Tresses were unbound,
And, like a glittering Veil, spread round,
And so about the snowy Shoulders sweetly wound.
XXXVIII.
Whose Robe shot forth a Tissue-waving Shine,
Which seemed loose-flowing, far more fine
Than any interwoven Silk with silver-Twine.
XXXIX.
With gracious Smile, approaching nearer, sat
This glorious THING: o, humble State!
Yet, on the VISION inexpressive RAYS did wait.
XL.
'Twas glorified THEOPHILA sat there.
I, mute, as if I tongueless were,
Till Her Voice-Musick drew my Soul into mine Ear:
XLI.
'Twas 'bove Lutes sweetest Touch, or richest Air!
I bring Thee Things (says She) are rare:
All subcoelestial Streams Drops to this OCEAN are.
XLII.
Hear, first, my Progress. Loosed from Natures Chain,
And quit from Clay, I did attain,
Swift as a glancing Meteor to the Aerial Plain:
XLIII.
Where, passing through, I did perfume the Air
With sacred Spice, and incenst Prayer;
While grateful Clouds their liquid Pearl, as Gift, prepare.
XLIV.
I spare t^unlock those Treasuries of Snow;
Or tell what paints the rainy Bow;
Or what cause Thunders, Lightnings, Rains; or whence Winds flow.
XLV.
Those Regions passed, where bearded Comets light
The World to fatal Woes; a bright
Large Orb of harmless Fire enflamed my Heav'n-ward Flight.
XLVI.
To azure-arched Sky ascends my Soul,
(Thence view I North and Southern Pole)
Where Globes in Serpentine, yet ordered Motions roll.
XLVII.
Thence by the changing Moons alternate Face,
Up, through unweari'd Phosphors Place,
I mount to Sols Diurnal and his Annual Race:
XLVIII.
By whose propitious Influence Things are
Quickened below, this Monarch Star,
Making his Progress through the Signs, unclouds the Air;
XLIX.
And, eight-score Times out-bulks the Earth; whose Race
In four and twenty Hours space
'Bove fifty Milions of Germanick Leagues does pace.
L.
This Giant with as many Tongues as Rays,
Speaks out, so often as He displayes
His Beams, which gild the World; that Man his LORD should praise.
LI.
Through Spears I passed to Stars, that nail HEAVENS Court,
(My Stay was with Skie-wonders short,)
Which, by first Movers Force, are whirled about their Fort.
LII.
Through the blew-spangled Frame, my psalming Tongue
Made the Orbs suspend their usual Song,
To hear Celestial Hymns the glist'ring Quires did throng.
LIII.
Chime out, ye Crystal Spears, and tune your Poles;
Skies, sound your Base, ere ye to Coals
Dissolve, and tumble on the Bonfire World in Shoals.
LIVE.
The Primum Mobile does seem immense,
And does transfused Influence
Through all inferior Orbs, as swift as Thought, dispense.
LV.
Suppose, a Millstone should from thence be hurled
Unto the Center of this World,
'Twould make up sixscore Years, ere it could down be whirld.
LVI.
Now, entered I HEAVENS Suburbs, (...);
No orient Jewels cast such (...)
(O, might this Verse be wreathed but with (...)Diadems!)
LVII.
Sols radiant Fulgence in meridian Skies
Seemed Shade unto those CLARITIES;
Where Beauties Self might beautify her fair^st Eyes.
LVIII.
It Is 'bove highest Verge, where Reason dares be bold;
That HEAVEN of GOD is of such Mold,
That Eyes, till glorified, cannot the same behold.
LIX.
It Is purely Spirit'al, and so must be,
Above compare in all Degree,
With Ought that draws its Line from the six Days Pedigree.
LX.
It Is immaterial, 'bove the highest Sphere,
Does brighter then the rest appear;
Than Orbs of Fire, Moon, Sun, or Crystaline more clear.
LXI.
It Is Space immense, from whence Apostates driven,
Their Rooms might so to Men be given
With Those confirmed SONS, the Indigenae of HEAVEN.
LXII.
Absurdly some Philosophers did dream,
That Heaven's an uncreated Beam
Which forth eternally from GOD HIMSELF did stream.
LXIII.
It Is but a Creature, though its Essence be
To change unsubject, standing free
On never shaken Pillars of INFINITY.
LXIV.
Ocean of JOYS! Who can THEE fully state?
For clearer knowledge Man must wait;
First shoot Deaths Gulf, thy Soul may then arrive thereat:
LXV.
For no One enters There, till He has trod
Deaths Path, then, from that Period
Elected Souls ascend to Heaven, to BLISS, to GOD!
LXVI.
(Zeal through me fir's its way to speak, that I
Would thither; like winged Lightning, fly,
Were my Flesh-curtain drawn that clouds my Spirits Eye!
LXVII.
What Heights would Souls affect, could they undress
Themselves of Rags, that them depress!
How beautiful' s the Form of naked HOLINESS!
LXVIII
New Light, Life, Love, Joy, Bliss there boundless flow!
There shall my Soul thy GLORY know,
When She her Robe of Clay shall to Earths wardrobe throw!
LXIX.
Fond that I am to speak. Pass on to BLISS,
That with an individual Kiss.
Greets Thee for ever! Pardon this Parenthesis.)
LXX.
Faith's the Souls Eye; As nothing were between,
They that believe, see Things unseen:
Close then thy carnal, thy spiritual Eyes unscreen.
LXXI.
For, my transplanted Spirit shall emblaze
Words, may make Wonder stand at Gaze:
Vnboundless Bliss does even the sep'rat Spirit amaze!
LXXII.
O, Fleet of Intellectuals, Glory-fraught,
(Inestimable Arras, wrought
With Heart-orecoming Colors) how ye pass all Thought!
LXXIII.
THOU All-comprizing, uncompriz'd! WHO art
Ever, yet never made, impart
THOU (Loves Abyss, without or Ebb, or Shore) an Heart
LXXIV.
Of WISDOM to attempt, proceed, and end
what never Was, Is, Can be penned!
(May Spots in Maps (dumb Teacher) Empires comprehend?
LXXV.
The Skie-enchased Diamonds lesser show
Than Julie's hairy Worms that glow,
Sampled with those Rebounds unbounded GLORIES throw.
LXXV.
That Vessel of Election, rapt to the Soil
Of highest BLISS, did here recoyl:
In The same Attempt it is Honor to confess a Foyl.
LXXVII.
Sense knows not 'bove Court-Triumphs, Thrones, or Kings,
Gems, Music, Beauties, Banquetings,
Without such Tropes it cannot unfold Spiritual Things.
LXXVIII.
O, how That most unutterable BLAZE
Of HEAVENS all-luminating RAYS
Does Souls (disrobed of Flesh) both brighten, and amaze!
LXXIX.
That boundless Solstice, with transparent Beams,
Through HEAVENS triumphant ARCHES streams,
And, gliding through each Spirit with intrinsic Gleams
LXXX.
Pierces to the little World, and does dispell
The gloomy Clouds of Sin, that swell
The Soul, decoying it to ever-burning Hell!
LXXXI.
By GLORY, how are SPIRITS made divine!
How super-radiantly They shine
From the ever-flowing SPRING of the refulgent TRINE!
LXXXII.
Beyond Report of highest Discourse They dart
Their Radiations, 'bove all Art!
This cath'like BLISS ore-flowes the most capacious Heart!
LXXXIII.
Conceive a Court, where all Joys domineer,
Where Seas of Sweets oreflow, and where
GLORIES exhaustless Mines, Sports endless Springs, appear:
LXXXIV.
Where infinite Excess of Sweets never cloyes!
Where, still Fruitions Feast employes
Desire! where Who enjoy the least cannot count their Joys!
LXXXV.
One may to a Glimps, None to a Half can rise,
Had He more Tongues, than HEAVEN has Eyes!
Such, nothing see, as would in Words this SIGHT comprize!
LXXXVI.
Can Measures such UNMEASURABLES hold?
Can Time INFINITY unfold?
Superlative DELIGHTS may be admired, not told.
LXXXVII.
When GLORIES Heaven is all one Sunny Blaze,
That flowing RADIANCE does amaze,
While on That inconceivable RESULT we gaze!
LXXXVIII.
What King would not court Martyrdom, to ^old
In Capite a Citie' of Gold,
Where, look how many Gates, so many Pearls are told!
LXXXIX.
The Structure's Square; A firm Foundation,
Twelve-fold, for Each a precious Stone,
The LAMBS APOSTLES Names engraven thereupon.
XC.
There sparkles forth the verdant Emerald,
The blew-ey'd Saphyr therein walled,
The Topaz too, with that Stone which from Gold is called:
XCI.
There, Jasper, Chaloedon, Chrysoprase shine,
There Sardonix, and Sardius join,
There Beryl, Hyacinth, and Amethyst combine.
XCII.
No, sympathizing Turkise there, to tell
By Palenesse the Owner is not well,
For, Grief's exild to Earth, and Anguish groans in Hell!
XCIII.
The Streets with Gold perspicuous are arrai'd,
With blazing Carbuncles inlaid;
Yet, All seem Night, to GLORIES from the LAMB desplay'd:
XCIV.
For, thousand Suns make an Eclipse to THOSE!
The Diamond there for Pavement grows,
As, on its glittering Stock, and all its Sparkles throws.
XCV.
And there, on every Angel-trodden Way
Loose Pearls, instead of Pebbles, play,
Like duskie atoms in the Suns embrightning Ray.
XCVI.
Had I a Quill sent from a SERAPHS Wing,
And Skill to tune't! I could not sing
The Moity of that Wealth, which That All-glorious KING
XCVII.
Of HEAVEN enstates Those in, who follow Good,
And prize^t above their vital Blood!
HEAVEN my be gained on Earth, but never understood!
XCVIII.
As, when the Sun shakes off the Vail of Night,
And scatters on the Dawn his Light,
He soon takes Prisoner to Himself the engaged Sight:
XCIX.
So, when I view those indeficient BEAMS,
O, They in overfulgent GLEAMS,
Like Diamonds, thawed to Air, embubble forth in Streams!
C.
Even SPIRITS, who have disrobed their Rags of Clay,
Laid up in Wardrobe till that Day,
Overcome, They dazzled are by each IMPERIOUS RAY!
Sexta repercussi, Pars antepenultima, Ponti,
Imparibus restat perficienda Modis;
Quam (si praestiterit Mentem DEUS OPTIMUS) addam
Flammiferos Phoebus cum jug at ortus Equos.
Ex obscuro spectabile COELUM. THEOPHILA'S LOVE-SACRIFICE. CANTO VI. The
Association.
ARGUMENT.
Panduntur COELI, juvat hinc invisere Divum
Atria, mortali non adeunda Pede:
Hic, Animae pennis advecta THEOPHILA, cernit
Agmina COELICOLUM ducere fancta Choros.
HEAVENS Order, Beauty, Glory is descried;
Here, read the State of the GLORIFIED,
Which THEOPHIL in the Heraldry of HEAVEN had eyed.
STANZA I.
THose happy Mansions, glorious SAINT, discover,
Where the bright Host of Spirits hover!
Bring down all HEAVEN before the Eyes of the HEAVENLY LOVER.
II.
Frail Man, with Zeal, and Wonder here behold
Clay cast into a Heavenly Mold:
Faith did, now VISION does BEATITUDE unfold.
III.
The Tenants in This splendid FRAME are They
Whose grosser and unpolish Clay,
Calcined in Graves, now Robes of GLORY do array.
IV.
Here MARTYRS sit enthroned, who late did bleed
Sap from their fertile Wounds, to feed
With Oil the Churches Lamps, and with red Dew her Seed.
V.
These ovant Souls, KNIGHTS of Saint VINCENT are,
For high Achievements gained; each Scar,
To make a golden Constellation, seems a Star.
VI.
Not by inflicting, but receiving Blows,
By suffering, They ore-came their Foes:
How long, LORD, ere THOU do avenge their Blood on Those?
VII.
These own their Bliss, sprung from the Word and Will
Of The LAMB, by Whom They conquered still
Themselves, and that revolted Band that Hell does fill.
VIII.
Therefore, Each prostrate Casts, with the Elders, down
At the LAMBS Feet their Palm and Crown,
Beholding round all Eminencies, but their own.
IX.
The APOSTLES here, with Him, in whose sweet Tongue
The Lute of high-tun'd LOVE was strung,
When through so many Regions He the GOSPEL sung.
X.
The loving, loved EVANGELIST here lives
On LOVES pure Influence, and gives
No Bounds to's flaming Love, but how to heighten't strives.
XI.
LOVE was his only Theme. SHE, here is crowned,
Who, near Deaths Tomb, Life risen found;
Whose Eye-bowl was Tear-brimm'd, whose Towel Hair unbound.
XII.
Parcht Africks GLORY, born in's Mothers Eyes,
(An happier Offspring of her Cries,
Than of her Womb) here to ecstatick LOVE does rise.
XIII.
The Bounds are boundless of divine AMOR;
Love hopes, and yet has all Things, for,
In HEAVENS eternal Heraldry, true LOVE is Or.
XIV.
Fruition LOVE enfires, thence Zeal's renu'd;
LOVE has the SPIRITS Plenitude,
Burning with Flames in SPLENDOUR of BEATITUDE!
XV.
LOVE caused the SON of GOD from's Throne dismount,
And make HIMSELF of no Account,
Become a Man of Sorrows, Who of Ioy's the Fount!
XVI.
This LOVE, by Quire of HEAVEN scarce understood!
Could so much Ill cause so much Good,
For Man's Redemption that GODS SON should shed His Blood?
XVII.
THOU, LOVE, when as my guilty Soul did dwell
In Nest of Ruin, did unshell
My Spirit (fledged with GRACE) from that disord'red Cell,
XVIII.
And, having crushed the outward Film of Earth,
Gav'st Her, new formed with GLORY, Birth
That She might stye to the SEAT of Beatifick Mirth!
XIX.
And praise THEE, with those VIRGIN-SOULS, who in
The Cloisters of their Flesh have bin
Washed in their SAVIORS Bath of Blood from Spots of Sin.
XX.
Flowers on our Heads, as on their Stems, do grow,
Which into fadeless Colors flow,
Nor Cold to blast, nor Heat to scorch, nor Age they know.
XXI.
Scenting 'bove thousand precious Ointments, shed
On consecrated AARONS Head;
Above pearl'd Dew on Hermons ever-fragrant Bed.
XXII.
How far, immaculate FLAMES, do You excel
All that in Thoughts high Turret dwell!
What then can Optics see? What then can Volumes tell?
XXIII.
If Beauties Self we could incarnate see,
Teeming with Youth and Joy, yet She
Would not so beauteous as the VIRGIN MOTHER be.
XXIV.
Who, like a full-orb'd Moon, our Stars out-shin'd
In glorious Fulgurance of Mind!
For whose surpassing Splendor I this Ode desig'nd.
XXV.
Hail, blessed VIRGIN-SPOUSE, who did bequeath
Breath unto HIM, Who made Thee breathe!
And gav'st a Life to HIM, Who gave the Life from Death!
XXVI.
Who bor'st HIM in thy Womb, Whose Hands did stack
The studded Orbs with Stars, and tack
The glowing Constellations to the Zodiac!
XXVII.
And, what improves the Mystery begun,
New Mysteries from Thee were spun,
HE did, at once, become thy Father, Spouse, and Son!
XXVIII.
Conceiving HIM, as by the Womb, so the Ear!
By the ANGELS Tongue HEAVEN cast Seed there!
Thou heard'st, believ'dst, and thence did breed, and thence did bear!
XXIX.
Thou only may (so it be humbly) boast
To have brought forth the ETERNAL HOST
By mystic OBUMBRATION of the HOLY GHOST!
XXX.
By Thee did GOD and Man embrace Each other!
Thus, HEAVEN to Earth became a Brother!
Thus, Thou, a VIRGIN, to thy MAKER wast a MOTHER!
XXXI.
Thy Fleece was wet, when all the Ground lay dry!
Dry, when all moist about did lie!
As AARONS rootless Rod, so did Thou fructify!
XXXII.
Thou art, from whence FAITHS Burgeon sprang, the Ground!
Before, in, after Birth was found
Pureness untoucht, with VIRGIN-MOTHERS Honor crowned!
XXXIII.
Thou, Shrine of GLORY, Ark of BLISS, Thou, high
Fair Temple of DIVINITY,
In Thee, the Masterpiece of Nature I descry!
XXXIV.
My ravished Soul (said She) extols His NAME,
Who rules the HEAVENS expansed Frame,
Whose MERCY raised me up to magnify the SAME.
XXXV.
Who can anatomize the glorious List
Of Heirs to GOD, Coheirs with CHRIST,
Who Royalize it There by GRACES high Acquist?
XXXVI.
Whose several GLORIES admirable are!
And yet as INFINITE, as Fair!
Where Alls's enjoyed at Full; where every Thing is rare!
XXXVII.
The Joy of EACH ONE is the Joy of ALL!
BEATITUDE'S reciprocal!
They drink CHRIST'S Cup of flowing Wine, who pled'gd his Gall!
XXXVIII.
Silence most Rhet'rick has, and GLORIES best
Do pourtray forth that Royal FEAST,
At which each blessed SAINT is an Eternal GUEST!
XXXIX.
Nor can a Thought of earthly Friends Annoyes
Extenuate one Grain of JOYS,
While MERCY saves the Wise, while JUSTICE Fools destroys!
XL.
Strangely their Intellects enlightened be!
Natures Compendium did not see
One half; yea, ere He tasted the forbidden Tree!
XLI.
If, that Sea-parting PRINCE, from cleft Rocks Space
Viewing GODS Back-parts, thought it Grace,
What Honor is it then to see HIM FACE to FACE!
XLII.
WHO does inspirit the indeficient Ray,
Not dimmed with a minute Allay;
Where, though no Sun ere rose, yet it is ETERNAL DAY!
XLIII.
Where, ALL are filled, yet ALL from Food abstain!
Where ALL are Subjects, yet ALL reign!
ALL rich, yet have no Bags that stifled Wealth contain!
XLIV.
Where each SAINT does a glorious Kingdom own;
Where each KING has a starry Crown;
Each CROWN a Kingdom, free from the rude Peoples Frown.
XLV.
Where Each has All, yet, more than All, They owe;
All Subjects, yet no KINGS They know,
Save KING of Kings, and LORD of Lords, who quel'd their Foe.
XLVI.
Where highest JOY is their perpetual Fare;
Their Exercise HOSANNAS are;
SPIRITS the Choristers, the Subject PRAISE and PRAYER.
XLVII.
The Laureate KING his Psalming Voice does raise,
And sings to's solemn Harp high Lays,
Being HIMSELF the Organ to His MAKERS Praise.
XLVIII.
Enflamed with holy Zeal, and high Desire,
Encircled with the Enthean QUIRE,
Warbles This Epinician Canzon to his Lyre.
XLIX.
Thou, CROWN of BLISS, whose Footstool's Earth, whose Throne
Outshines ten thousand Suns in One,
Who art the Radi'cal LIFE of all true JOY alone!
L.
Royal PROTECTOR! when in THEE, Lights Sun,
Mortals would deem the last Hour run,
We find no Wane of Day, but a SOLSTITIAL Noon!
LI.
When, We Times Volumes of past Thousands scan,
Thy ORIGIN with Time to span,
We find no Track in Infant Age when It began!
LII.
ANCIENT of DAYS! to WHOM all Times are Now;
Before Whom, SERAPHIMS do bow,
Though highest CREATURES, yet to their CREATOR, low!
LIII.
Who art by Light-surrounded POWERS obeyed,
(HEAVENS Host Thy ministering SPIRITS made)
Clothed with UBIQUITY, to WHOM all Light is Shade!
LIVE.
Whose Thunder-clasping HAND does grasp the Shole
Of total Nature, and unroul
The spangled Canopy of HEAVEN from Pole to Pole!
LV.
Who, on the Clouds and Winds, thy Chariot, rid'st;
And, brideling wildest Storms, them guid'st;
Who, moveless, All do move; Who, changing All, abid'st!
LVI.
The Ocean Thou begirt'st with misty Shrouds;
That Monster wrapt'st in swathing Clouds,
And, with thy mighty WORD controul'st tempestuous Floods!
LVII.
Earth-circling Oceans Thy DISPLEASURE flee;
Mountains dismounted are by THEE;
Those airy Giants smoke if THOU incensed be!
LVIII.
Innumerable Troops of Joys do stand
Before Thy boundless PRESENCE, and
Incessantly attend Thy ever-blissefull HAND!
LIX.
Thou, LORD; Good, without Quality, do send
Bliss to All Thine; Great, without End;
Whose Magnitude no Quantity can comprehend!
LX.
What Is worthless Man? what his earth-crawling Race?
That THOU should such a shadow grace,
And in unspeakable triumphant GLORY place!
LXI.
Who may thy MERCIES Height, Depth, Breadth extend?
In Height It does to HEAVEN ascend,
Confirms the ANGELS, and in Depth does low descend,
LXII.
Lessening the Pains of the damned even in HELL;
In Breadth, from East to West does swell,
And over all the World, and all thy WORKS excel!
LXIII.
Immense EXISTENCE! HEAVEN'S amazed at thy
INCOMPREHENSIBILITIE!
INTELLIGENCIES dread Thine All-commanding-EYE!
LXIV.
Ye winged HERO'S, whom all BLISS embow'rs,
To HIM in Anthems strain your powers,
Whose Sea of Goodness has no Shore, whose Age, no How'rs!
LXV.
Then, ore the trembling Cords his swift Hand strayes,
And closed All with full Diapaze;
As, in a sounding Quire the well-strook Consort plays.
LXVI.
Victorious Iubilies, when Echoed clear
From the Church-Militant, are dear
To HEAVENS triumphing QUIRE; Such no gross Ear can hear.
LXVII.
Musicks first Martyr, Stradas Nightingale,
Might ever wish (poor Bird)) to fall
On that excelling HARP, and joy in the Funeral!
LXVIII.
Had it but heard Those AYRS, where Music meets
With Raptures of Voice-warbled Sweets,
Flowing with ravishing EXCES in SIONS STREETS.
LXIX.
All, what Symphonious Breaths inspire, All, what
Quick Fingers touch, compared, sound flat:
Could I but coin a Word beyond all Sweets! 'Twere THAT
LXX.
What Orders in NEW-SALEMS HIERARCHY,
In what Degrees They' enstated be,
Are Wings that mount my Thoughts to high Discovery.
LXXI.
Blessed Sight, to see HEAVENS ordered HOST to move
In Legions glist'ring ALL Above,
Whose Armor is true ZEAL, whose Banner is pure LOVE!
LXXII.
Bright-harnessed INTELLIGENCIES! Who
Enucleate can your ESSENCE so,
As Men may both your mighty Power, and Nature know!
LXXIII.
Invisible, impassive, happy, fair,
High, incorporeal, active, rare,
Pure, scientifick and illustrious SPIRITS You'are.
LXXIV.
Guess at their Strength, by ONE; Was not almost
Two hundred thousand of an Host
By' an ANGEL slain, when Assurs Chief against HEAVEN (did boast?
LXXV.
In Brightness They the Morning Star outvie;
In Nimbleness the Winds out-flie;
And far surpass the Sunbeams in Subtilitie.
LXXVI.
ARCHANGELS, Those superior SPIRITS, are
GODS LEGATES, when he will declare
His Mind to's Chosen; GABRIEL did thus prepare
LXXVII.
GODS Embassy, when his BELOVED did tie
Our Flesh to his DIVINITY;
GRACE was the Kiss, the UNION was the Ring from High;
LXXVIII.
ANGELS the Posie sung: This, made our Clay
Over Empyraean Courtiers sway,
When as the SPOUSE his mystic NUPTIALS did display.
LXXIX.
No sooner shall That great ARCHANGEL sound
His wakefull Trump of Doom to the Ground,
And Echo shall, as banded Ball, make quick Rebound;
LXXX.
But, pampered Graves, with all their Jaws, shall yawn;
And Seas, Floods Nurse, strange Shoals shall spawn
Of Men, to wait of the dreadful JUDGE at's Judgments Dawn.
LXXXI.
To Incorruption then Corruptions Night
Shall turned be; for That strange Sight
Inebriates Souls with deepest Woes, or highest DELIGHT!
LXXXII.
Then shall my Ear, my Nose, my Hand, Tongue, Eye,
Always hear, smell, feel, taste, espy,
Hosanna's, Incense, Offerings, Feasts, Felicity!
LXXXIII.
To act GODS WILL, ore sublunary Things,
The DOMINATIONS sway, as Kings;
He curbs Aerian Potentates, by the POWERS HE wings;
LXXXIV.
The PRINCIPATES, of Princes take the Care,
TO enlarge their Realms, or to empair;
VIRTUES in acting of his WILL have their full Share;
LXXXV.
THRONES HIM contemplate, nor from's Presence move;
To CHERUBS HE reveals Above
Hid Things; He SERAPHINS enflames with ardent Love.
LXXXVI.
Praecelling SERAPHS show GODS ARDOR still;
Wise CHERUBS his ABYSS of SKILL
In Governing of ALL; beatious THRONES instill
LXXXVII.
To us his STEDDINES in's blessed THRONE,
Ever unalterably ONE;
Powr's, Virtues, Principates to his Commands are prone;
LXXXVIII.
Dominions own his REGAL SWAY; and so
ARCHANGELS, ANGELS swiftly show
Agilitie that from the DEITY does flow.
LXXXIX.
Their Number's numberless, not half so few
As orient Pearls of early Dew;
Like Aromatic Lamps THEY in HEAVENS TEMPLE show:
XC.
And yet of THEM though vast the Number be,
The Thing that most does glorify
Their MAKER's This, THEY differ specifically.
XCI.
Of the first Machine THEY the Parcels are;
Yet, if we Them with GOD compare,
Then with, their Wings they skreen Themselves, though else most fair.
XCII.
Lawless Desire does never pierce their Breast;
The ALMIGHTIES FACE is still their FEAST;
Their BLISS in Service lies, in Messages their REST:
XCIII.
They speak with Thought, atchieve without a Fee;
Silence They hear, Idaeas see;
Still magnifying HIM, who cannot GREATER be!
XCIV.
Thus, THEY, with one fleet Glance intuitive,
Into Each others Knowledge dive;
And, by Consent, Thoughts, else inscrutable, unrive.
XCV.
Each ONE in Psalms ETERNITY employes;
Where Use nor tires, nor Fullness cloyes;
Enjoying GOD, their END, without an end of JOYS!
XCVI.
Each ravishing Voice, each Instrument, each Face
Composed such MUSIC, that I was
In Doubt, Each so in Tune, which did precede in GRACE:
XCVII.
The spritely Instruments did sweetly smile;
The Faces played their Parts; mean while
The Voices, with both Graces, did them Both beguile.
XCVIII.
The Nine-fold QUIRE such Heavenly Accents there
In Sweets EXTENSION still do rear,
As over-pow'r the Windings of a mortal Ear.
XCIX.
Who MUSIC hate, in barbarous Discord roll;
In HEAVEN there is not such a Soul;
For, there is All-Harmony. SAINTS sing, the damned howl.
C.
Celestial Sweets did this Discourse excite;
Firm Joy, fast Love, fixed Life, fair Sight!
But may a Creature, its CREATORS GLORY write?
Nunc alti Plumbum scrutatur Viscera Ponti,
Viscera Navarchae non repetenda Manu!
Hinc, procul optatam divino LUMINE Terram
Cernimus, optatum perficiamus Iter!
Te DEUM Laudamus. THEOPHILA'S LOVE-SACRIFICE. CANTO VII. The Contemplation.
ARGUMENT.
Pango nec humanis Opus enarrabile Verbis,
Quae melius possem Mira silendo loqui!
Da, DEVS, Illa canam, quae Vox non personet ulla,
Metiar ut minimis MAXIMA MIRA modis!
She launcheth into shoarlesse SEAS of LIGHT,
Inexplicable, Infinite!
Whose BEAMS both strike her blind, and renovate her (Sight!
STANZA I.
WEre all Men Maro's, were those Maro's all
EVANGELISTS, met in Earths Hall
For Grand-Inquest of That which we ETERNAL call:
II.
Draw Time from's Cradle (Innocence) could They,
And piled Heaps of Ages lay
Amassed in one Scale; Those would they find to weigh,
III.
Ballanc't with THEE, no more (when All is done)
Than, if They vainly had begun
To poize minutest atome with the MIGHTY SUN.
IV.
Could They Earths Ball, with Numbers quilted see;
Yet, those thronged Figures sum not THEE,
They were but Ciphers to immense ETERNITY!
V.
Should every Sand for thousand Ages run,
When emptyed Shoars of Sands were done,
That Glass no more THEE measures, then if now begun!
VI.
Had Tongues HEAVENS Mint, to coin each ANGEL-GRACE
In Dialect; They Would fail of the Space,
Where All to come is One with All that ever was!
VII.
FAITH, stretch thy Line, yet That Is too short, to ^ound
SEA without BOTTOM, without BOUND;
As Circular, as Infinite, o Shoarlesse Round!
VIII.
Immense ETERNITY! What mystic Art
Of THEE may copy any Part,
Since THOU an indeterminable CIRCLE art!
IX.
Whose very CENTER so diffused is found,
That not HEAVENS Circuit can It bound,
Then what, what may the whole CIRCUMFERENCE surround?
X.
HEAVENS HERO'S, can ye find for the ENDLESS End?
Can POWERS IMMENSITY extend?
UBIQUITIE enclose? The BOUNDLES comprehend?
XI.
JEHOVAH's Zone to this uncentred BALL,
Ecliptic, and Meridionall,
Who WAS before, Is with, and SHALL be after All!
XII.
But now behold Its Height, Above all Height!
Placed beyond Place! Above Lights Light!
Rapt were the three APOSTLES by a Glimps of the Sight!
XIII.
O, Thou all-splendent, all transcending Throne!
Compact of Highest Dominion!
That 'bove the Super-Eminence of LUSTER shone!
XIV.
From Each of Thine ineffably bright Sides
Diffusion of such Splendour glides,
As rowls 'bove thousand Seas of JOYS in flaming Tides
XV.
With such Refulgence, that, if CHERUBS might,
With Face unvailed, gaze on That Sight,
Strait their Spiritual Natures would be nothing'd quite.
XVI.
Nature, put on thy most coruscant Vest;
Thy Gayeties show, brought to this Test,
As a crude Ielley dropped from duskie Clouds at best.
XVII.
Could Thou impov'rish every Indian Mine,
And, from each golden Cell, unshrine
Those Beams, that with their Blaze outface Days em'lous Shine:
XVIII.
Could find out secret Engines to unlock
The treasu'ring Casket of each Rock,
And reap the glowing Harvest of that sparkling Shock:
XIX.
Could thread the Stars (fixed and erratick) here,
That stud the luminated Sphere,
That all those Orbs of Light one Constellation were:
XX.
Could join Mines, Gems, Skie-Tapers, All in one;
Whose neer-Immense Reflection
Might both outrival, and outvie the glorious Sun:
XXI.
Could all thy Stones be Gems, Seas liquid Gold,
Air Crystal, Dust to Pearl enrold,
Each Star a Sun, that Sun more bright a thousand fold:
XXII.
Yet would those Gems seem Flints, those Seas a Plash,
Those Stars a Spark, That Sun a Flash;
Pearl'd Islands, Diamond Rocks, Gold Mines, All ^ully'd trash:
XXIII.
Yea, were all Eyes of Earth, Sky, HEAVEN combined,
And to one Optic point confined,
This super-radiant OBJECT would even strike That blind^
XXIV.
Blind, as the sable Veil of gloomy Night;
(The GOSPELS SEL^ but hints This SIGHT)
All seem obscurer Shades to THIS non-parel LIGHT*
XXV.
Amazing! Most Inexplicably RARE!
O, if, but Those Who Worthy are,
None may This LIGHT declare; None may This LIGHT declare!
XXVI.
Best Eloquence is languid, highest Thoughts vail,
To think, to speak, Wit, Language fail;
It Is an ABYSS, through which no SPIRITS Eye can sail!
XXVII.
Here GLORY dwells, with Lustres so surrounded,
That brightest RAYS are quite confounded,
When they approach this radiant Eminence unbounded!
XXVIII.
Forth from This FULGURANCE such Splendors fly,
As shall draw up frail Dust on HIGH;
Which, else, would in its lumpish Vrn still bedrid lie.
XXIX.
Before the ALMIGHTIES Throne my Soul I throw,
WHENCE All, that is Good and Great, does flow.
LORD, I that GRACE implore, which may this GLORY show!
XXX.
GREAT GOD! THOU All-beginning, Unbegun!
Whose Hand the Web of Nature spun!
At once the Plenitude of All, and yet but ONE!
XXXI.
PARENT of Beings, Entities sole Stud!
Spirits eternal SPRING and FLOOD!
Sprung of THY SELF, or rather no way sprung! CHIEF GOOD!
XXXII.
Abstract of Joys, whose WISDOM an ABYSS!
Whose POWER OMNIPOTENCY is!
Whose Soul-enlivening SIGHT'S the Universal BLISS!
XXXIII.
THOU do descend on Wings of Air displaid,
'Bove Majesty It self arraid,
Curtain'd with Clouds, the HOST of HEAVEN Attendants made!
XXXIV.
ESSENCE of Glory, SUMMITY of Praise!
Abasht at thy All-piercing RAYS,
Heavens QUIRE does chaunt uncessant ALLELUIAHS!
XXXV.
Diamonds than Glass, than Diamonds Stars more bright;
Than Stars the Sun, than Sun Heavens Light;
But infinitely purer than Heavens Self' s THY SIGHT!
XXXVI.
Great is the Earth, more large the Airs Extent:
Planets exceed; The Firmament
Of Stars outvies; Vnlimited's the HEAVENLY TENT:
XXXVII.
But, as my tenter'd Mind its Spirits still
Strains forth, from less to more (LORD, fill
My out-spent Raptures by thy All-repairing SKILL!)
XXXVIII.
When I above Air, Stars, HEAVEN, on would press
Rackt Thoughts to SPEARS beyond EXCES;
Myriads of Spears seem Motes to thy Immense ONENESS!
XXXIX.
ETERNITY is but THINE Howerglasse!
IMMENSITY but fills THY Space!
Whole Natures six Days Work took up but six Word^ place!
XL.
One Word did the All-surrounding Skie-roof frame,
With all its Starrie sparkling Flame!
Not all created Wisdom can spell out THY NAME!
XLI.
Supreme COMMANDER of the rolling Stars!
Thy LAW sets to their Progress Bars,
Does Epicycle their obliquely gliding Cars!
XLII.
No Lines, Poles, Tropicks, Zones can THEE enthrall,
First MOVER of the Sphearick Ball,
Above, Beneath, Without, Within, Beyond them All!
XLIII.
What could, but thy All-potent HAND, sustain
Those Magazines of Hail, Snow, Rain,
Lest They should fall at once, and deluge All again?
XLIV.
By Them THOU Plenty do to Earth distill;
And Man's dependent Heart do fill:
Winds are Van-Curriers, and Postilions to THY WILL!
XLV.
It Is That the ominous Cause of Earthquakes binds
In Subterranean Grotts; That finds
Strange Ruptures to enfranchise the ever-strugling Winds!
XLVI.
Thy Sandy Cord does proudest Surges bound;
And Seas unfathomed Bottoms sound;
Thy semi-circling Bow in the Clouds thy Covenant crowned!
XLVII.
Earths Hinges hang upon thy Fiat; set
Midst Air-surrounding Waters, yet
Stand fixed on That, like Which, what is so Firm, so Great!
XLVIII.
Yet Earths fast Columns at thy Frown do quake;
And Oceans dreadful Horrors make;
Flints melt, the Rocks do roll, the airie Mountains shake!
XLIX.
Yea, HEAVENS SELF trembled, and the Center shook,
With thy amazing PRESENCE struck,
When POWER of Powers on Sina's Mount His Station took!
L.
Each Ens (as linkt to PROVIDENCE, thy Chain)
Is governed by thy FINGERS Rein!
THOU, seeing us, we GRACE; we, THEE, do GLORY gain!
LI.
WHO have no Eyes to see, nor Ears to hear;
Yet ^eest, and hear'st, All-EYE, All-EAR!
WHO, no where art contained, yet art THOU every where!
LII.
The optic Glass we of thy PRAESCIENCE may
Call the Ark, where all Idaeas lay,
By which each Entitie THOU do at first pourtray!
LIII.
Future Events are praeexistent here,
As if they lately acted were;
Then any new dissect Anatomy more clear!
LIVE.
Each where, at once, THOU totally art still
The same unchanged; yet, at thy Will,
THOU changest All; Who, though THOU art unmoved, do fill
LV.
Things that are most remote; In whose Forecast
Contingencies do crowd so fast,
As if, past Things were now, and Things to come were past!
LVI.
Though Acts on Earth cross to thy WILL are done,
Besides thy WILL yet acts None;
Preceding and succeeding Will, in THEE are One!
LVII.
Of whose vast MANOR all the Earth's Demains!
Though Earth, nor Air, nor HEAVEN contains,
Yet each obscurer Grott thy OMNIPRESENCE gains!
LVIII.
Though naught accrues to Thy unbounded STATE
From Spirits, which THOU did create,
Yet They thy GOODNESS and thy LOVE shall still dilate!
LIX.
THOU, who made All, made neither Sin, nor Death;
Man's Folly first gave them their Breath;
That did ^base whole Nature with it self beneath.
LX.
But Sin to cure, THOU in a Crib gav'st Man
EMANUEL! DIVINE- humane!
WHO diff^ring Natures joined; Whose REIGN no Ages scan!
LXI.
And THOU, O MEDIATOR! THOU, whose PRAISE,
Like Morning Dewes, to first of Days
Was sung by Heavenly CHORISTERS in SERAPH LAYS!
LXII.
GOD, by the HOLY ^HOST, begat THEE, LORD!
Flesh took by the ETERNAL WORD!
Whose Self-Eternal EMANATION None record!
LXIII.
As thy Eternal EMANATION's past;
So to ETERNITY shal't last!
In the beginning was the WORD, shows still THOU wast!
LXIV.
There GOD in ESSENCE, One in PERSONS Three!
Here NATURES two in One agree!
THOU, sitting in the Midst of TRINAL-UNITY
LXV.
At Heavens High Councel-Table, dart'st such Rays,
As strike even CHERUBS with amaze!
Of which the School, disputing All, it nothing says.
LXVI.
Search we the Ages past so long ago,
None, None this MYSTERY could show,
Till in that Maiden-Birth, it was acted here below!
LXVII.
A Dove hatched in that Nest THY SELF did build!
A LAMB that Thine own Flock does shield!
A Wintersp FLOWER that framed, from whence it sprung, the Field^
LXVIII
The Jewish Shepherds all affrighted are,
When HERALDS THEE proclaimed in the Air!
Yea, Magi came to adore, led by a newborn Star!
LXIX.
Yet, though thus wond'rously begot, thus born,
SPONSOR for us, fallen Race, forlorn,
T'ingratiate us with GOD, becam'st to Man a Scorn!
LXX.
The GRACE SELF wast, the Honor to Evangelize!
The sacred FUNCTION, as a Prize,
Thou took'st, yet That not on, till called in Aarons Guize!
LXXI.
Which GOD to Apostolize did bring to pass,
By the HOLY GHOSTS Descent, at Face
Of Jordans then blessed Streams, of Which John Witness was!
LXXII.
Thence, led by the HOLY GHOST to the Wilderness,
There tempted by the Fiends address,
Him overcam'st by Scriptum est; Hence our Release!
Then forth thou wentst. --
LXXIII.
Thy SERMONS, Oracles; ACTS, Wonders were!
THOSE Faith begot, THESE OTHERS Fear!
By BOTH, thus wrought in us, to THEE our selves we rear!
LXXIV.
THOU gav'st the Lame swift Legs, the Blind clear Eyes!
THOU heal'dst all humane Maladies!
THOU made the Dumb to speak! THOU made the Dead to rise!
LXXV.
And art to Dead Men LIFE, to sick men HEALTH!
SIGHT to the Blind, to the Needy WEALTH!
A PLEASURE without Pain! a TREASURE without Stealth!
LXXVI.
LORD, in, not of this World, Thy KINGDOM is;
Thy chos'n Apostles preached thy Bliss,
That none of all thy Creatures might SALVATION miss.
LXXVII.
Abra'ham, long dead before, yet saw THY DAY,
In Isaac born, and Vows did pay!
Type first, then Antitype, and quicknest every way!
LXXVIII.
Thy Gospel WISDOMS Academie showed;
Thy Mercy, JUSTICE calmed; Life, viewed
Is TEMPERANCE; Thy Death the Flag of FORTITUDE!
LXXIX.
Thou, Altar, Sanctuary, Sacrifice,
Priest, Bread of Life do All suffice!
N'ere cloying Feast, where Appetite by Food does rise!
LXXX.
And, SON of MAN, do Sin of Man forgive!
To be THY Victimes Hearts do strive,
Who liv'dst that Life might die, and di'dst that Death might live!
LXXXI.
Yet dy'dst THOU not, but that (Spirit quickened) free
THOU might Saints Paradised see,
Rejoiced Assurance give to Them rejoiced in THEE!
LXXXII.
And that, from thence, to Satan's gloomy Shades,
Made Prison for the damned Hades,
Thou mi^ht'st Thy CONQU^ST show, Thy GLORY that never fades!
LXXXIII.
Thence loosed Deaths Chains from BODY, up to rear IT,
That, when RAISED STATE THOU do inherit,
THOU might become to us an ever-quickning SPIRIT!
LXXXIV.
The FATHER to reveal gives to his SON
THEE, HOLY GHOST (thus THREE in ONE)
Of All peculiar SANCTIFYER, yet not Alone!
LXXXV.
The FATHERS Love, and SONS; Adoptions Seal,
The SPRING of Sanctity, The WEAL
Of The Church: THY SELF in Light of fiery Tongues reveal!
LXXXVI.
O LIGHT unscann'd! Of Wisdom every Glance
Beams only from Thy COUNTENANCE;
Whose STORE, when emptied most It self most does advance!
LXXXVII.
Whose Fruits are Gentleness, Peace, Love, and Joy,
All crowned with Bliss* freed from Annoy;
Which neither Time, World, Death, Hell, Devil can destroy!
L^XXVIII.
THOU art a Feast, framed of that fruitful Fare,
Which Hungers wast not, but repair!
A rich Perfume, no Winds can winnow into Air!
LXXXIX.
A Light unseen, yet in each Place do shine!
A Sound no Art can e're define!
A pure Embrace, that Times Assault can n'ere untwine!
XC.
Floods of unebbing Joys from THEE do roll!
Which, to each Sin-disdaining Soul
THOU do exhibit in an unexhausted Bowl!
XCI.
This Wine of ECSTASY, by the SPIRIT given,
Does raise the ravished Souls to HEAVEN!
Affording them those COMFORTS are of Earths bereav'n!
XCII.
Thy UNION is as strict, as large thy MERIT!
No HEAVEN but THEE, which SAINTS inherit
Through Grace, divinest Sap, deriv^d by the HOLY SPIRIT!
XCIII.
When Souls enflamed by that highest LIGHT,
Fix on Thy glorifying SIGHT,
All Glories else, compared to THAT, are duskie Night!
XCIV.
When highest INFUSIONS pass our highest Sense,
Amazement is high Eloquence,
Bove all Hyperboles which fall to Exigence.
XCV.
Blessed TRINITY, THE art ALL; Above All, GOOD!
Beatitudes BEATITUDE!
Which swallows us, yet swim we in this LIVING FLOOD!
XCVI.
THE art KING of Kings, of Lords LORD! None like THEE!
Who, for thy Style have MAJESTY!
And for thy Royal Robes have IMMORTALITY.
XCVII.
MERCY for Throne! for Scepter JUSTICE have!
IMMENSITIE' s for Kingdom placed!
And for thy Crown such GLORY as does ever last!
XCVIII.
For Peace, what passes Understandings Eye!
Power, IRRESISTABILITIE!
For HOLINESS, All what is most sacred, pure, and high!
XCIX.
For Truth, thy WORD! WISDOM for Counselor!
OMNIPOTENCE does Guard Thy TOWER!
Thou ministering Angels have to act thy Sovereign POWER!
C.
OMNISCIENCE Thine Intelligencer is!
For Treasure Thou have Endless BLISS!
For Date ETERNITY! O, swallow me ABYSS*
Ite, pii Cantus, Cantus quibus arduus Ether
Est Portus; Portum, quem videt alma Fides.
Visuram Littus Navem, sacra Serta coronent,
Serta per innumeros non per^tura Dies!
Gloria in excelsis DEO. THEOPHILA'S LOVE-SACRIFICE. CANTO VIII. The Admiration.
ARGUMENT.
COELI trina MONAS, TRIAS una, faveto precanti!
PERSONAS una Tres DEITATE colo!
Sunt tria, sunt and idem, Fons, Flumen, Gurges aquartum:
Sic tria sunt unum, Sol, Jubar, at* Calor.
The Elixir centuplies It self. But, o
Myriads of Myriads must She so,
T'express GODS ESSENCE which no Intellect can show!
STANZA I.
PRojection to my Soul! Thy SIGHT's a Wreath
Of GLORY; Thou do VIRTUE breath;
Thy Words, like sacred Incense, Fuel, and Flame bequeath.
II.
THOU MAID of Honor in HEAVENS Court! to break
Thy Gold-twist LINES shows Judgment Weak;
Yet deign to hear my Suit; Of GODS hid NATURE speak!
III.
Can Counters sum up INFINITE* Fond Man,
Could grasp whole Oceans in thy Span,
And Phoebus could outface in his Meridian;
IV.
Tear Rocks of Adamant, and scale the Wall
Of The glorious Empyraean HALL;
And Worms to Super-Eminence of SERAPHS call!
V.
Yet THIS, even then, thou could nor learn, nor teach:
The World, unravelled, cannot stretch
To sound the ABYSS. IT SELF alone It SELF can reach.
VI.
Of all Intelligencies not all Light
Mustred into one Optic Sight,
Can speak what each where is, yet no where seen to the He ight!
VII.
WHO out of Nothing all Things did compact;
Whose Will's His Work, whose Word his Act:
Of WHOM, who says the most, must from His WORTH detract?
VIII.
How from the ESSENCE the CREATOR flows!
Or how the WORD, what Creature knows!
How the SPIRIT, All in it, All from't, does Heavens Assembly pose!
IX.
Here they, who leave the Churches Ship, are tossed
Till irrecoverably lost!
Whose Rudder is GODS Word, Steersman, the HOLY GHOST.
X.
ARCHESSENCE! THOU, Self-full! Self-Infinite!
Residing in approachlesse LIGHT!
In the INCOMPREHENSIBILITIES of HEIGHT!
XI.
Thy peerlesse uncreated NATURE is
The SUPER-EXCELLENCE of BLISS!
Where Holiness and Power; where Truth and Goodness kiss!
XII.
WHO only in THY SELF subsists, without
Or Form, or Matter! yet, no doubt,
Inform'st the Matter of the Universe throughout!
XIII.
No Need compels THEE, no Disasters sad
Disturb thy STATE, no Mirth makes glad;
Oblivion takes not from THEE, nor can Memory add!
XIV.
With prudent Reverence, Thus. What ere's in GOD,
His ESSENCE is; There Is His ABode;
Whose Will his Rule, whose Heaven his Court, whose Hell his Rod.
XV.
He' exists an active ENS, uphoulding both
IT SELF, and every Thing that does
Exit; without distinction or of Parts, or Growth!
XVI.
Not made by Nothing, Nothing Nothing makes;
Nor Birth from any Thing HE takes;
For, what gives Birth, precedes: Springs usher in their Lakes.
XVII.
Were HE Material, then HE local were;
All Matter be'ing in Place; So, there
The INCIRCUMSCRIPTIBLE would circumscribed appear.
XVIII.
HE IS so diffusive, that HE IS All in All!
All in the Universal Ball!
All out of It! The only WAS, the IS, the SHALL.
XIX.
To help thy Reason, think of Air; there see
Vbiquitie^ unseen, and free
From Touch; Inviolable, though it pierced be.
XX.
Mere Air corrupts not, though conveyed unto
All Lungs; for, thither It does go
To cool them; Quickneth All, as the Worlds Soul does show:
XXI.
Moisture and Heat, its Qualities, are Cause
Of all Production: yet, because
This Element's a Creature, GOD CREATOR pause.
XXII.
SELF-LIFE the Attribute of's BEING is!
His WILL, of Governing! and His
COMMAND of Execution! and his LOVE of Bliss!
XXIII.
All Is tied in this Love-knot: JEHOVAH's LOVE.
Times Birth the TRINITY does prove:
CREATOR made, WORD spoke, and SPIRIT of GOD did move:
XXIV.
Let us in our own Image Man create.
Which, Solomon does explicate;
Remember the CREATORS in thy youthful State.
XXV.
The FATHER spoke, the SON in the Stream did move
At his Baptizing; from Above
The HOLY GHOST descended in the Form of the DOVE.
XXVI.
Of HIM, to HIM, and through HIM all Things be:
Of, through, and to declare the THREE;
And in the HIM, the UNITY of GOD we see.
XXVII.
Thus HOLY, HOLY, HOLY'S named, to show
A TERNION we in UNION know:
The Notions issuing from the TRINE, int' ONE do flow.
XXVIII.
Whilst that I think on THREE, I am confined
To ONE! while I have ONE in Mind,
I am let forth to THREE! Yet THREE in ONE combined!
XXIX.
O, Inconceivable INDENTITIE!
In ONE how may a PLURAL be!
COAEQUAL both in ATTRIBUTES, and MAJESTY!
XXX.
The FATHER is true GOD in the TERNION:
The WORD unborn, yet after SON:
The SPIRIT GOD Coessential; THREE, cause THREE from ONE!
XXXI.
The FATHER and WORD are ONE! ONE, shows their Power:
Are, distinct PERSONS. ONE does shour
On Tritheits Vengeance: Are, does Arrians devour.
XXXII.
ONE, yet not One! The FATHER and the SON
In PERSONS two, from FATHER one
By the SPIRIT; SON is one by Resignation!
XXXIII.
The WORD is what HE was; yet, once was not
What now HE is! for, HE has got
A NATURE more then once HE had, to cleanse our Spot!
XXXIV.
For, never had Man from Earth to Heaven attained,
Had GOD from Heaven to Earth not deigned
His SON! now unto GOD Man's way by MAN is gained!
XXXV.
EQUAL, and SON, the form of Servant takes!
The World, unmade by Sin, new makes!
EQUAL, SON, Servant! All are Mysteries, not Mistakes!
XXXVI.
Thus, by free GRACE is Man's Defection healed:
Behold the Mystery reveald.
WORD, Aequal; shado'wing, SON; Unction is Servant sealed!
XXXVII.
Because GODS AEQUAL, Serpents Tempts are quelled:
Yet HE, as SON, to Death must yield
For us; by Resurrection to regain the Field.
XXXVI^I.
The SPIRIT is true GOD; from Ever HE
Did reign with BOTH! The TRINITY
COEQUAL, COETERNAL, COESSENTIAL be!
XXXIX.
The FATHER's full, though the SON has All engrost!
Nor yet is ought of this All lost,
Though the FATHER give HIM SELF to the SON by th'H^LY GHOST!
XL.
For, though HE freely thus give All his STORE;
Yet has He INF'INITE, as before!
Conceive for Glimps ^some endless Spring, or Mine of Ore!
XLI.
What Soul will have this TRIAD for his Book,
With Faith must on the Back-parts look,
For, with HIS glorious FACE, blind are even SERAPHS struck!
XLII.
By Speculation from Sols Substance^ we
The FATHER; from its Splendour see
The SON; from's Heat the HOLY GHOST. Here, One is Three.
XLIII.
The Intellect, the Memory, the Will
Resemblance make of the TRINE; These fill
One Soul, yet are distinct in outward Workings still!
XLIV.
Thus, to restore from Fall, we may descrie
THE TRINITY in UNITY!
Inscrutable ABYSS rebates our weaker Eye!
XLV.
Be Ever-Ever-Ever blessed, o, TRINE!
Ever UNITEDNESSE divine!
WHO do as well in Ants, as in ARCHANGELS shine!
XLVI.
The Principats, Thrones, Dominations, all
Archangels, Powers Celestial
Are Ministers attending on thy SOVEREIGN CALL!
XLVII.
The Government 'bove Star-embroidred Hall,
Thus truly is Monarchical,
Where All are Kings, and yet one KING does rule Them All!
XLVIII.
Less then the thousand Part I have expressed;
Man's Weakness cannot bear the Rest.
For thy Expresselesse NATURE, LORD, be ever blessed!
XLIX.
SOUL of all Sweets! my Love, Life, Joy and Bliss!
To' enjoy THEE'S Heaven! Hell THEE to miss!
What Is Earths! Even Heaven has its Beatitude from THIS!
L.
Remove the Needle from the Pole Star, and
It Is still with trembling mot^on fanned,
Till it returns. No Fixure but in GOD does stand.
LI.
To Saints all other Objects prizelesse be;
In GOD, the ALL of All, we see:
Feast to the Taste, all Beauty to the Sight is HE!
LII.
Music to the Ear; and Those whom HE unites,
Partake with HIM in highest DELIGHTS!
Spring-tides of Pleasures over-whelm their ravished Sprites!
LIII.
But, Contraries, when opposite, best show,
(As Foils set Diamonds off, we know)
See Hell, where Caitives pine, yet still their Tortures grow!
L^V.
As Metals fiery Waves in Furnace swell,
That Founders run, to cast each Bell;
This, not endured; more Rage ten thousand Times is Hell!
LV.
Where Souls still rave, adust with horrid Pain!
They tug, they tear, but all in vain,
For, them from raging Smart, HOPE never shall unchain!
LVI.
O, that for trash these Esaus sold their BLISS!
For Sin, that worse than Nothing is!
This desperates their Rage! How they blaspheme at This
LVII.
This Viper clings, corrodes, against which no Ward!
GODS BEATIFICK SIGHT debarred,
Renders their Case, 'bove all the Pains of Sense more hard!
LVIII.
O, never-sated Worm! unpitied Woes!
Unintermitted! what Sin owes,
Hell pays! The Damned are Anvils to relentless Blows!
LIX.
Fiends forfeit not their Energie. There Cain
Fries, but for one Lamb by him slain!
O, what Flames then shall Butchers of CHRIST'S Flock sustain?
LX.
Earths fatal Mischief, prosperous Thief, that Thunder
Which tore the Nations all asunder,
Whom Just Fate flew, in the Worlds Revenge, that conquering Wonder,
LXI.
That Ghost of Philips hot-brained Son may tell
Heartbreaking Stories of his Hell!
Too late He finds one Soul did his whole World excel!
LXII.
There, cursed Oppressors dreadful Rackings feel!
Whose Hearts were Rocks, and Bowels Steel!
O, scorching Fire! (cries Dives) for one Drop I kneel!
LXIII.
Obliged is Man, GODS Steward, to supply
Brethren, in CHRIST Coheirs, who lie
Gasping in stiff'ning Frosts, no Covering but the Sky:
LXIV.
Whose withered Skins, fear as the saplesse Wood,
Cleave to their Bones, for want of food,
Seem Natures Monsters thrown a Shore by Mis'ries Flood.
LXV.
Though all their Physick's but a Diet spare;
Have no more Earth, than what they are,
Nor more of the World, than Graves, yet in Heavens Love they share.
LXVI.
Inestimable LOVE, from None bereav'n!
HEAVEN sunk to Earth, Earth mounts to HEAVEN!
Just JUDGE! to Dives Hell, to Laz'rus Heaven is given!
LXVII.
LOVE, Disengage us of our selves! LOVE has
Nor Bi^, nor Reins! Rich, 'bove Earths Mass!
Fixed in Idaeas of LOVES Soul-inliv'ning GRACE!
LXVIII
O, LOVE! o HEIGHT, above all Height, to THINE!
Thy FAVOR did to Foes incline!
Unmeasurable MEASURE! endless END of Line!
LXIX.
LOVE darts all Thoughts to its BELOVED; does place
All BLISS in waiting on His GRACE;
It languisheth with Hope to view HIM Face to Face!
LXX.
And ushers in that BEATIFICK LOVE,
Which so divinely flames Above,
And does to VISION, UNION, and FRUITION move!
LXXI.
Ice is a thing distinct from the Ocean wide;
But, melted by the Sun, does glide
Into It, becomes one with it, and so shall e're abide.
LXXII.
Desire's a Tree, whose Fruit is Love, the Showers
That ripen it are Tears, the Flowers
Are Languors, Leaves Afflictions, Blossoms Pray'r-spent How'rs.
LXXIII.
O, Mental PRAYER, thy Joys are high! Resort
By Thee's to GOD! Thou art the Port
Of inward Peace from Storms! The Path to SIONS Court!
LXXIV.
By Prayer GOD's served betimes; Remember Who
The Blessing got by Wrestling so;
Who early pray, they healthy, holy, happy grow.
LXXV.
Then pray, before Lights rosy Blush displayes
In The Orient Sols enchearing Rays,
When He from's Opall East to West oblikely strayes:
LXXVI.
Before the Cock, Lights Herald, Daybreak sings
To's Feathr'ie Dames; ere roost- Lark springs,
Morns Usher; when the Dawn its mungrell hour forth brings^
LXXVII.
PRAYER, Thou art Life's best Act, Souls silent Speech,
The Gate of GRACE; Saints GOD beseech
By Prayer, but joined with Alms and Fasts they HIM besiege!
LXXVIII.
Fasting, the Souls delicious Banquet, can
Add Strength to PRAYER, feast the inner Man,
And throw up to ETERNITY the Bodies Span!
LXXIX.
Fasts, sackcloth, ashes, grovelling on the ground
SAINTS studied have with Pain, and found
With Joy, that what degrades the Sense, in HEAVEN is crow'nd!
LXXX.
Prize FAITH, the Shield of Martyrs, Joys Confection,
Souls Light, the PROPHETS sure Direction,
Hopes Guide, Salvations Path, the Pledge of all Perfection!
LXXXI.
In Faiths mysterious EDEN make abode;
With Jacobs Staff, and Aarons Rod
Frequents its Grove, where none are but the LOVED of GOD!
LXXXII.
The Radiations of FAITHS Lamp excite
Such a Colosse of sparkling Light,
That Saints, through worldly Waves may steer Life's Course aright.
LXXXIII.
Being in, not of this World, They Comforts rear
Above the Pitch of servile Fear:
Terrestrial Blossoms first must die, ere Fruit They bear^
LXXXIV.
No clogging Fetters of impris'ning Clay,
No wry-mouth squint-eyed Scoff can stay
Their swift Progression, soaring in their HEAVENLY Way!
LXXXV.
Thoughts on the endless Weight of GLORY shall
Render even Crowns, as Dung, and all
Afflictions light, as Chafe chased on Earths empty Ball.
LXXXVI.
The Torch that shines in Night, as Eye of Noon,
Is but as Darkness to the Sun:
Run after Shades, they fly; fly after Shades, they run.
LXXXVII.
All worldly Gayes are Reeds, without Support,
Fitly with Rainbow gleames they sort,
Want Solidnesse; when gained, they are as false, as short.
LXXXVIII.
While Fools, like silly Larkes, with Feathers play,
And stoop to the Glass, are twitcht away,
Amidst their pleasing Madness, to Hels dismal Bay!
LXXXIX.
O, could embodied Souls Sins Bane view well,
Rather in Flames they would choose to dwell!
Not so much Ill, as Sin, have all the Pains of Hell!
XC.
A smiling Conscience (wronged) does sweetly rest,
Though starved abroad, within does feast;
Has HEAVEN It self for Cates, has GOD HIM SELF for Guest!
XCI.
May call HIM FATHER; ^His Vicegerent be!
An Atome of DIVINITY!
Redeemed by's SON, by the SPIRIT inspired, blessed by ALL THREE!
XCII.
His JUDGE becomes his ADVOCATE! has Care
To plead for Him! The ANGELS are
His Guardians! from his GOD Him Heights, nor Depths may scare.
XCIII.
O, Blessed, who in His COURTS their Days do spend!
And on that SOVEREIGN GOOD depend!
His WORD, their Rule; his SPIRIT, their Light; HIM SELF their End!
XCIV.
While Pride of Life, and Lust of the Eye do quite
Dazzle the World, SAINTS out of Sight
Retire, to view their BLISS: On which some Canto's write:
XCV.
For, Souls, sincerely good, in humble Cell
Encloystred, near Devotions Bell,
By Contemplations Groves and Springs near HEAVEN do dwell.
XCVI.
Bright-gifted soaring MINDS (though Fortune trod)
Are careless of dull Earths dark Clod;
Enricht with higher Donatives; their PRIZE is GOD!
XCVII.
Farewell. As vanished Lightning then She flies.
O, how in Me did Burnings rise!
The only Discord was Farewell. Hearts out-reach Eyes.
XCVIII.
The Air respires those quintessential Sweets
From whence She breathed, and who so meets
With Such, the tuneful Orbs He in that Zenith greets.
XCIX.
Dwell on This Joy, my Thoughts, re-act her Part;
Such Raptures on thy shuddering Heart
Make Thee all- Ecstasie^ by Spirit-seizing Art!
C.
Chewing upon those HEAV'N-enchanting Strains,
My Soul Earths giddy Mirth disdains;
Fleet Joy runs Races in my Blood through thousand Veins!
Contingit gratam victrix Industria Metam;
Et mea nunc Portu fessa potire Ratis.
Est Opus exactum, Cujus non poenitet Acti:
Me juvat at Caepti Summa videre mei.
-- OMNIA in UNO, and in OMNIBUS UNUS. MIra mih^ inter Authorem and Opus
occurrit Symphonia: Ille Caelebs, Hoc Virgineum; ^lle Philomusicus; Hoc, ipsum
Melos; Ille Dilectus, Hoc (...)Dilect^o: Quis en^m ad ^im Amoris explicandum,
vel copiosius dixit, vel impensius Opere perfecit, quam Author hic in sua
THEOPHILA? quae tanta Florum ^^rietate con^^ersa est, ut quid prius legam, aut
laudem, vix mihi post (...) Lectionem constare possit. Quid etiam Jucundius
Animi Oculis, quam siti^ntem tam coelesti Nect are Animam adimplere? Sine me
Deliciis igitur istis inebriari: and me Epulis his^e, Mel and Amorem
spirantibus, jugiter accumbere. Mo^us amandi DEUM non habet modum; nullus plane
in hoc Genere Excessus datur^ Scripserunt De Art Amandi Varii, sed imperfecte
admodum, and impure^ac si, non tam Amandi quam Peccandi Artem edocere profes^
essent: Quia hujusmodi illecebrae, dum sensim sine sensu Venenum hauriunt,
Morbo sine Medela afficiunt. Hic autem sunt Dictu honesta, Lectu jucunda, Scitu
utilia, Observatu digna, and Factu praestantissima. Eximium ergo hoc felicis
Ingenii Specimen, propter Multiplices Aculeos in Legentium Animos suaviter
penetrantes, and penitiorem ae^ternae Veritatis Cognitionem instillatam,
Auresque harmonice demulcentem, in Lucem emitti, non possum non laetari.

M. G. S. T. D.

I am satis expertus Briticum Mare, contraho Vela;
Naviget Ausonio Musa Latina Salo.
Fallo^, an externo venit Aura secundior Orb?
Portus in Latios versa Triremis eat.


Ad piae Poesios Cultum Invitatio.
VOS, Eruditionis Candidati, quibus Crux DOMINI Gloriae, Religio Cordi,
Integritas Honori, Doctrina Ornamento, Poesis sacra Oblectamento, qui
Cupiditates Rationi, Rationem Religioni, ut Christiani, subjugastis, cum Musis
convivamini devotioribus, ut perpetua Posterorum vigeatis Memori^. Non ad Mundi
deliria, VOS, Animae pie anhelantes sed, fulguris more, ad Sublimia nascimini.
Credit Vosmetipsos DE^I Filios, respondete Generi, vivite Coelo, PATREM
Similitudine re^erte; Quid enim evidentius coelestis Originis Indicium, quam
humano Corpore Mentem Angelicam circumferre, Vosmetipsos ergo erigite,
Dictatores, Magna loquimini, Magna viuite; Caeteros, ad inferiora depressos,
Quadrupedes non esse natos, paeni^^eat. O, quam divina Res est Men's variis
ornata Disciplinis! Acquisitio Sapientiae Carbunculos, and pretiosissimas
Orientis Gazas antecellit: Nihil, Vobis, ^ Animae, DEI insignitae Imagine,
desponsatae Fide, dota^ae Spir^^u, redemptae Sanguine, deputatae cum Angelis,
capaces Beatitudinis, aeque sit Curae, quam ut omnes altiores Animi vestri
Vires in summum Illius Honorem, qui primum Illum Vobis inspiravit Aestum,
ex^ratis, Tanti enim est Quisque quanti Men's, quae, praeter DEUM, nihil
excelsius in Terris Seips^ complecti potest. Ad Se igitur revocetur, Secum
versetur, in Se abeat, Sibi tota intendat, deque sua Sublimitate, and Autore
semper adorando, cogitet. Hoc autem praestare non possit, nisi Vitia Corporis
ableget, nisi Avaritiae and Ambitioni renuntiet, nisi sui Juris sit, nisi Se
denique a Sensibus separata, penitius perfruatur; tunc enim ad DEUM, Objectum
suum, libera assurgat; Haec autem ipsius in Seipsam Conversio a^ Defixio,
^antae est Voluptatis, ut excogitari nulla in hac Vita possit, quae vel ad
aliquam ejus particulam accedat. Ut igitur ad summum hoc Bonum, summis Ingeniis
Propositum, perveniatis, Votis and Vocibus cohortamur: Imo DEUS in Vobis and
velle, and persicere operetur; Ipse Author, Ipse Remunerator, Ipse Cansa
effectiva and finalis; Cui soli, Nobilissimi, incumbite, and Vnum Hoc agite^ ut
vos, DEO and Davidicae Pietati consecratos, Seeds in GLORIae Templ^ aeternae
excipiant. Sed, quia^ Heroes alloquimur, heroico nostram han^ Paraenesin
Carni^e substringemus.

THEOPHILAE AMORIS HOSTIA. HECATOMBE IX. RECAPITVLATIO. Animae pie anhelantis
Descriptio.
Beato THEOPHILAE Virginis Incendio
Quisquis flagrare gestis,
In quo felicior Salamandra triumphs,
Et instar Pyraustae nascaris, instar Phoenicis moriaris;
Vt AEVITERNITATI resurgas,
Non tam vitam deserens, quam conserens:
Sanctioris Ovidii Carmina
Cordis Oculis, and Oculorum Cord perlustres:
Debuissent Incendia dia Adamantino Stylo
In Tabula IMMORTALITATIS incidi;
Sed, quoniam pennae ductibus scribenda fuere,
Pennas porrigat Scribenti Pietas pennatior Ave,
Et centum Oculos Legenti oculatior Argo.
PORTICUS.
Amor erga Magistrum, and Sodalem
Languidius se movet, and quodamodo vegetat;
Erga Parentem and Conjugem
Expansius se exerit, and quasi sentit;
Erga Patriam, and Patriae Patrem
Elatius se erigit, and Rationem induit:
At erga DEVM
Totus Ecstasin patitur, Sese transcendit,
Nec Modi, nec Limitis capax;
Sed, separatarum instar Animarum,
Cupit, aestuat, ebullit, anhelat!
Finitus INFINITATEM ambit, ac suspirat!
ARGUMENTUM.
Musa sacrata struens Aras, ut NUMEN honoret,
Calcat, and odit haras, Musa peligna, tuas:
Est Haec, ut Clytie, studiosa Pedissequa SOLIS;
Sol DEUS est, SOLIS Lumen AMANTIS amat.
Distichon 1.
MUsa, silere potes, vaga dum Citharistria Sylvae
Crispillat tremulo gutture mill Sonos?
2.
Ars acuit Concepta, Poesis accuminat Artem;
Spicula jactet Epos; jacta coronet Eros:
3.
Spes Arcus, sit Amor tibi Dextra, Fidesque Sagitta;
A Spe missa Fides, NUMEN Amore petit.
4.
Est sacrum quod conor Opus: DEUS, annue Coeptis!
Seminat Ista Fides, Spes alit, auget Amor.
5.
Mundus Ager, Semen VERBUM, DEUS Ipse Colonus,
Latro Satan, Lolium Gens mala; Sancta, Seges.
6.
Da mihi Coelipetae Fastigia, NUMEN, Alaudae;
Men's, ut Avis, penna remige sulcet Iter^
7.
Nosse DEUM, been posse BONUM, sunt Vota Piorum:
Da mihi nosse Bonum, da mihi posse, DEUS!
8.
Notio non COELI, sed habet Dilectio Palmam:
Tu mihi nosse dabas COELICA, velle dabis.
9.
Quod volo, quod possum, quod sum, Tibi debeo, CHRIST:
Quod sum, quod possum, quod volo, CHRIST, cape.
10.
Nil video sine TE, sapio nil, nil queo; Solus
SOL meus es, meus es SAL, mea sola SALUS.
11.
Lux, Via, Vita pio, DEUS; hac Face, Tramite, Cord,
Qui videt, it, vivit, non cadit, errat, obit.
12.
Da cumulem tua centenis ALTARIA Donis!
Victima sint Versus, Ara Cor, Ignis Amor.
13.
Thura Preces, Lachrymae Myrrhae, Pietasque sit Aurum:
Mentis Opus, Clysmus Cordis, Amoris Opes.
14.
Hoc Hecatombaei TIBI Carminis offero Libum:
Vt Tu millenos, Nate Davide, Boves.
15.
Vult pia Musa DEUM! Quoties volat altius, Alas
Flagitat assidue, SANCTA COLUMBA, Tuas!
16.
Far per Aethereas volitante Vigore PHALANGES,
Fulgida Chrysolithum Lux ubi stellat Iter.
17.
Carmine ducat Amor, quos terret Concio; Mentes
Elevet in COELUM, quo nequit ire Fides!
18.
Grata repercussi referant Modulamina Nervi;
Unica nec nostrae sit Synalaepha Lyrae.
19.
Vmbra mihi DEUS. -- i, patulae, Maro, tegmine fagi;
Tu, Siloame, veni; Castalis Vnda, vale.
20.
Vana profanorum calcando crepundia Vatum,
Spirituale pius parturit Author Opus.
21.
Vita quid est? Fumus. Quid Forma? Favilla. Quid Aurum?
Idolum. Quid Honos? Bulla. Quid Orbis? Onus:
22.
Vita repent fugit, cito Forma polita recedit,
Aurum fallit, Honor deficit, Orbis hebet.
23.
Vita Voluptatis brevis est, Vitaeque Voluptas;
Non capit illa DEO quid sit AMANTE capi.
24.
Illa maritali quae Taeda parata Leandro,
Illa Sepulturae Taeda parata fuit.
25.
Mill Viae Morti, proh, mill! sed unica Vitae:
Crimina qui non hic eluet, ille luet.
26.
Bellica faedifragos pessundabit Ira Tyrannos:
Non Vobis, Sceleri vincitis; Vltor adest.
27.
Peccantum Limen, Peccati linquite Semen;
Contagem ducit Proximitate Pecus.
28.
Hinc, Josephe, fugis, fugis hinc sine Vest, Johannes;
Proh Dolor! Ipse manes, Petre, manendo negas!
29.
Conscia Men's Noctesque, Diesque, Domique, Forisque
Pungitur: In Sese Verbera Tortor agit!
30.
Jussa december, bis sex Credenda, Sacratio Caenae,
Heu, nimis in Templis, LEGE loquente, silent!
31.
Grex perit hinc! Veniet, qua nou speratur in hora,
JUDEX: Terribilis Sontibus ULTOR adest!
32.
Nec Prece, nec Pretio, nec Fraud, nec Art, nec Ira
Vincitur! In Paenas Flamma perennis erit!
33.
Imbre rigante Genas, quoties Tibi CHRIST, querebar,
Nocte vigil, nullo Test, MEDELA, veni!
34.
Aspicis, and Pateris? Scelus omne repelle, Colonus
Nec great Arma sua qua serit Arva Manu!
35.
Vis, Amor, est exorsa DEO; data GRATIA gratis;
Hanc Vim THEIOPHILAE Nomine Musa vocat.
36.
Vreris ignifluis confossa THEOPHILA Telis!
Sacra beatificans si cremet Ossa Calor,
37.
Quo magis ardescis, magis, hoc, sis Follis ad Ignes;
Omnibus exundet, qui calet intus, AMOR.
38.
Ure Tepescentes, Viresque, Calentibus add;
Igne crema, recrea Lumine, Mente bea.
39.
Et Mare tentanti Pharos^ esta, BENIGNA, Poetae,
Dum pandit Vento Lintea plena sacro!
40.
Vela pius Genius, Tu Sidus, Acumina Remi,
Vates Nauta, Salum Vena, Poema Ratis.
41.
Confecro Fraena tuae moderanda Poetica Dextrae;
Sunt Donantis Honor, sed CAPIENTIS Amor.
42.
Stringe soluta, recude proterva, revelle prophana,
Supple manca, poli scabra, superba preme.
43.
Irrita sulphurei rides Crepitacula Mundi;
Regnaque pro Nidis, quae fabricantur, habes.
44.
Despicis Orbis Opes, opulentior Orb, minorque
Orbis, majori pulchrior Orb, micas.
45.
Congestas effundis Opes, releventur ut Aegri:
Sic ab Amante tuo semper amere DEO.
46.
Scisque DEUM, notumque doces, doctumque vereris;
Praxis habet Cultum; Quae canis, illa facis.
47.
Osa Malis, pretiosa Piis, Lyra viva Poetis,
Casta Fide, Genio candida, chara DEO.
48.
Sylva Smaragdicomas quae ventilat, invidet Auro
Crinis, and ad Cirros GRATIA trina rubet.
49.
Gaudia tot spargunt splendentia Sidera Vultus,
Quot fovet Attis, Apes, quot gerit Aethra Faces.
50.
Invidet igniparis Adamantinus Ardor Ocellis,
Vibrat abinde sacras Pupula casta Faces.
51.
Emula puniceis Tinctura Corallina Labris;
Livet ad Ambrosias pensilis Vva Genas.
52.
Mirarer Labrique Rosas, and Lilia Malae,
Mala sed exuperat Lilia, Labra Rosas.
53.
Suavia mellifluo dimanant Verba Palato,
Verbula Nectareis limpidiora Cadis.
54.
Quas non Delicias, radiantibus ebria Guttis,
Psaltria dia, creas! Ore Mel, Aure Melos.
55.
Spiras Tota Crocos, Violas, Opobalsama, Myrrhas,
Bdellia, Thura, Cedros, Cinnama Narda, Rosas.
56.
Ruris Aroma Rosas. Quot Cantica sacra profundis,
Tot paris Ore Favos, tot jacis Ore Faces.
57.
Dum jaciuntur ab Ore Favi, superaeque Favillae,
Pascor, ut incendar; Flamma dat ipsa Dapes!
58.
Languet Olor dum spectat Ebur Cervicis: Ad AGNUM
Haec Via susceptum Lactea monstrat Iter.
59.
Ningit in Alpinis mansura Pruina Papillis;
Anser es His Cornix, Nix nigra, sordet Olor.
60.
Vellera cana Nivis, Manibus collata, lutescunt;
Figis ubi Gressum pressa resultat Humus.
61.
Lilia Lacte lavet, Violas depurpuret Vva,
Aere Crocos tingat, Murice, Flora, Rosas;
62.
Nec potis est meritam Tibi texere Flora Corollam;
Te, nec hyperbolicus, dum cano, Cantor ero.
63.
Floribus omnigenis, Gemmisque nitentibus ardens,
Tu Paradisiaci PRAEDA videris Agri.
64.
Quaelibet in Vita VIRTUS sic aequa relucet;
Vt dubitetur an haec, illa, vel ista praeit.
65.
Desuper extat Amor; Tibi Men's contermina Coelo,
Regnat Honor, radiat Forma, triumphat Amor.
66.
Illud es Elixir, Chymica quod protinus Art,
Mutet in auratas me, rude Pondus, Opes.
67.
Igne Cinis fit agente Vitrum; micat Igne Metallum;
Corpus and hoc fieri SPIRITUS Igne potest.
68.
Magneti salit e Ferro celer Ignis Amoris;
Imo Silex faculas, quis putet? intus alit.
69
Durius at Saxo nil est, nil mollius Igne:
Dura sed ignitus Saxa resolvit AMOR.
70.
Haec meditans, quis non Facibus soluatur Amoris?
Tu Charis es, Studiis Tu Cynosura meis.
71.
Gemmula Mentis, Ocella Sinus, pia Flammula Cordis:
Incepi Duce Te, Te Duce caepta sequar.
72.
Sponsa creata DEO, Virtutum fulgida Caetu,
Jus colis, Affectus supprimis, Acta regis.
73.
Est Tibi Vita DEUS, Pietas Lex, Gloria CHRISTUS,
Expetis HUNC, Tibi Qui semper AMORE praeit.
74.
Quid Te, CHRIST, Crucem perferre coegit? Amoris
Ardor! Amaroris Pignus Amoris erat!
75.
Factus Amans, fit and Esca DEUS! Te nutrit JESUS:
O BONITAS! Quales Hoc in AMANTE Dapes!
76.
Est mihi CHRISTUS (ais) Laus, Splendour, Aroma, Triumphus,
Musica, Vina, Dapes, Fama, Corona, DEUS.
77.
Omnia Tu JESUS! prae TE, nihil Omnia! COELUM
Exploraturae, quam mihi sordet Humus!
78.
Orbis es Exilium, Mors Ianua, Patria COELUM;
Dux sit Amor, Baculus Spes, Comes alma Fides.
79.
Diffluat in Gemmas Oriens, in Carmina COELUM;
Nec Meritis Oriens, nec POLUS aequa ferat.
80.
Fac timeam, fac amem; Quae Te timet, acrius ardet;
Nempe tui Cultus Fons Timor, Amnis Amor.
81.
Vox tua Norma mihi; Tibi Palms adhaereo VITI;
Totus es IPSE mihi, sim tua tota DEUS!
82.
Comprecor exaudi, patior succurre, molestor
Auxiliare, premor protege, flagro fave!
83.
TE voco, laudo, rogo, colo, diligo, quaero, REDEMPTOR,
Affectu, Prece, Re, Spe, Pietate, Fide!
84.
Si TE contueor, liquefio, perusta Favillis;
Ni TE contueor, sum glaciata Gelu!
85.
O, Facibus superadde Faces, ut Tota liquescam!
Sim vel Mortis Odor, sim vel Amantis Amor.
86.
Grata Procella, jugum mihi gratum, gratus and Ignis,
Me quibus immergit, deprimit, urit AMOR!
87.
Non mea sum, sed Amore DEI languesco! Sorores,
Me stipate Rosis, languet Amore Sinus!
88.
Nil Animantis habet, quae Pectore vivit Amantis:
Hoc in Amore mihi sit mora nulla mori!
79.
Unio sit Nobis, Animamque liquamur in unam!
Vnaque Vita Duos stringat, Amorque Duos!
80.
Tu super Omne places! Tua sum, Tu noster, and Ambos
Mutuus Ardor agit, possidet unus Amor.
81.
Uror ^o; Redamatur Amor! Votoque; fruiscor!
Dum quod Amans redamor, dum quod Amante fruor.
82.
O, quid Amare! Quid est Redamari! GAUDIA nacta
Tanta, stupendo tacet! Tanta, tacendo stupet!
83.
Vivo DEO, morior Mundo, moriendo resurgo;
Inde, catenato Dite, triumphat AMOR.
84.
Sic amet omnis Amans, sic immoriatur Amanti:
Vt Lyra, Lusciniae Vitaque Morsque; fuit.
85.
Si mea Lumen habent, si Nomen Carmina; Lumen
Ex Oculo SPONSI, Nomen ab Ore venit.
86.
Argus eat, qui Talpa venit, radiatus Amore;
Vates Sperati fidus Amoris ero.
87.
Cingant THEIOPHILAE potius mea Tempora Lauri,
Quam gemmans Capiti sit Diadema meo.
88.
Nam, quid erunt, Animae Damno, Diademata Mundi?
Celsa ruunt, fugiunt Blandula, prava necant.
99.
Vt praesens novit, sic postera noverit Aetas,
Sivc premamus Humum, Sive premamur Humo.
100.
Finis Fine caret, nec Terminus ullus Amantem
Terminat; Hic Modus est non habuisse Modum.
Imus in Albionis, Freta per Latialia, Littus;
Siste Britannales, Hac Vice, Musa, Pedes.
Anglica number praestent Latiis, Briticisve Latina
Scire velim: Placeant quae magis, Illa dabo.
THEOPHILAS LOVE-SACRIFICE. CANTO IX. The RECAPITVLATION. And Pourtrait of a
Heavenly breathing Soul.
Whosoever delights to burn in holy Fire
Of VIRGIN fair THEOPHILA,
Joy, Salamander, in that Flame;
Thou so, Pirausta born, may like the Phoenix burn,
That to ETERNITY thou rise,
Not losing Life, but sowing well the same:
A holier Ovids smoothed Verse
With Eyes of Heart, with Heart-all-Eyes, behold:
Such sacred Flames by Adamantine Hand
Ought to be placed in lasting Vrns;
But, 'cause these Writings needed Aid of Pens,
Virtue, than Birds more swift, unto the Scribe lend Wing,
And let the Readers Care more Eyes than Argus bring.
The PORTICO.
Love to the Master, and the Mate
Stirs it self feebly in Life's lowest Sphere;
That to our Parent, and the Bed
More large extends, and breathes a Life of Sense;
That to our Country, and its Sire
Self raises loftier in Reasons Air:
But, That to GOD,
Ravished with Ecstasie, It self transcends,
Nor Bounds, nor Limits would It own;
But, narrow'd That (like Lovers, kept apart)
Warms, heats, yea boyls, boyls up and over!
Longs for the Eternal, sighs for HIM, beyond that Lover!
THE ARGUMENT.
Blessed Muse the Altar builds, where LOVE'S adored;
And throws down, loose Wit, thy Nest abhorred:
She, Clytie-like, to the Sun of Glory turns;
GOD is her Sun, with Light of ZEAL She burns.
Distick 1.
MUSE, can be silent, when each charmed Grove
Harbors a thousand warbling Notes of Love?
2
Art whets the Mind, and Hymns set Edge on Art:
Dart up an Epod; ZEAL, crown thou the Dart.
3.
Hope be thy Bow, thy Hand Love, Faith the Shaft;
Let Hope shoot Faith to GOD with Loves strong Draft.
4.
Sacred's my Theme; may my first Fruits HIM please!
Faith plants, Hope nourishes, Love ripens These.
5.
This World's the Field, GOD sows, his WORD the Seed,
Satan the Thief, the Good, Corn, the Ill the Weed.
6.
LORD, mount me to the Pitch of Larks on High;
That I, as Birds winged Oars, may cut the Sky!
7.
SAINTS would know GOD, so, as they Good may do:
Let me both know this Good, and act It too!
8.
HEAVENS Love, not knowledge does the Palm acquire:
Who Heavenly Knowledge gave, will give Desire,
9.
That Ought I will, can, am, is, CHRIST, from Thee:
CHRIST, what I am, can, will, accept from me!
10.
No Light, Taste, Strength without THEE; Thou alone
Art Health unto my Soul, my Salt, my Sun.
11.
Thou, Light, Way, Life; who sees, walks, lives by
That Flame, Path, Strength, does not fall, fail* nor die.
12.
Upon thy Altars let my Verses prove
The Victime, Heart the Altar, the Fire Love!
13.
Prayer Frankincense, Tears Myrrh, be Gold, Souls Health:
The Minds best Work, Hearts Laver, and Loves Wealth.
14.
I This Verse- Hecatomb to THEE do bring;
As Solomon his numerous Offering.
15.
The pious Muse courts HEAVEN; when highest Things
She soars for, still She craves, BLESSED DOVE, thy Wings!
16.
With active Plumes fly up to the ANGEL-QUIRE,
Where Chrysolites to gild thy Way conspire.
17.
Love may Them lead by Verse, whom Sermons fright;
Bring Them, where Faith comes not, into Heavens Light.
18.
O may our Numbers in sweet Music flow;
Nor the least Harshnesse of Elisions know!
19.
Shade me, o LORD! I seek not Virgils Tree;
Hence Springs profane; Glide, Siloam, by me!
20.
Trampling vain Labors* with loose Wits defiled,
The Hallowed BRAIN brings forth a Spritely Child.
21.
What Is Life? a Vapor; Beauty? Ashes; Gain?
An Idol; Honor? Bubble; the World? vain:
22.
Life flits away, and Beauty wanes at full,
Gold cheats, and Honor fades, the World is dull.
23.
Life Pleasure's short, and Pleasures Life is vain;
It knows not highest Bliss, GODS LOVE, to gain.
24.
That Torch which flamed so bright in Hero's Room*
Did light her loved Leander to his Tomb.
25.
To Death a thousand Ways, to Life but one:
For Sin who groans not, he for Sin shall groan.
26.
Armed Wrath perfidious Tyrants throws from high;
They conquer Right, Sin Them; The AVENGER'S nigh.
27.
Sinners first Steps, Sins Seed, and Fruit avoid;
Many by near Infection are destroyed.
28.
Kill Vice in the Egg: John, Joseph, Robelesse fly;
Peter, Thou stay'st, and stay'st but to deny!
29
By Night and Day, at Home, and when Abroad,
Guilt stings the Soul, and thereon lays its Load!
30.
Of Decalogue, Creed, Supper of the LORD,
Though Laws speak loud, our Church has scarce a Word!
31.
Hence Flocks are pined. The JUDGE in Time will come
Unthought of: Near to Guilt's the AVENGERS Doom!
32.
Nor Prayer, nor Price, nor Fraud, nor Rage, nor Art
Can help; Ah, fear then Flames eternal Smart!
33.
Wet-cheekt, how often I Have moan'd to THEE my DEAR,
All Night awake, alone, o Cure, appear!
34.
See THOU, and suff'rest? Stop Sins Course, and Birth;
Let not that Hand bear Arms, that sowes the Earth.
35.
LOVES Pow'r's infused from GOD, a free-giv'n Grace;
THEOPHILA from Love takes Name and Race.
36.
Thou burn'st, pierced THEOPHIL, with fiery Dart;
If blessed Heat enflames thy vigorous Heart,
37.
The more Thou burn'st, the more be Bellows still;
As thy Flames grow, Let those Flames Others fill!
38.
Heat the Lukewarm, to Those, more hot, give Fire;
Bless GOD; Refresh with GRACE, inflame Desire.
39.
The Poets Pharos be that sets forth sail,
While he steers sheet-fill'd with a holy Gale.
40.
Pure Wit's the Sails, quick Judgment Oars, Thou the Star;
Pilot the Scribe, Sea Vein, the Ship Hymns are.
41.
I give Wits Tackling to thy guiding Hands:
Honor in giving, Love in taking stands.
42.
Bind up what is loose, what is rash new-mold, refell
What Is ill, lame help, smooth rough, depress what swell.
43.
Thou slight'st Earths rattling Squibs, with Sulphur filled:
Kingdoms such Nests are as the Birds do build.
44.
Above all Worldly Wealth thy Riches rise;
Thy Microcosm the Macrocosm out-vies.
45.
Thou lay'st out hoarded Gold the Poor to aid;
So, with GODS Love, thy Love to GOD's repaid.
46.
Thy sacred Skill imparted Reverence breeds;
Thy Worship's Practice, and thy Words are Deeds.
47.
Fiends Hate, Saints Prize, whence Lyrick Strings sound clear,
Of spotless Faith, pure Mind, to the HIGHEST dear.
48.
The Emerald-Grove envies thy golden Hair,
Whose Curls make GRACES blush Themselves more fair.
49.
As many Joys thy starry Beauties shed,
As Bees in Attis, Gems in Skies are spread.
50.
The Diamond sparkleth Rage at thine Eye-Beams,
Whose chaste Orbs brandish thence their sacred Gleams.
51.
The Coral Die is blankt at Lips so red,
And livid Grapes at rosy Cheeks hang head:
52.
I Would gaze of the Lili'd Cheek, and the Lips Rose,
But o, thy Cheek, thy Lip surpasses those!
53.
Grace pours sweet-flowing Words from charming Lips,
Sparkling 'bove Nectar which in the Crystal skips.
54.
Rare PSALTRESSE, with Heav'n-drops inebriate,
What Sweets to Mouth, and Ear do Thou create?
55.
Sweet Violets, Saffron, Balm, Myrrh from Thee flows,
Bdell, Incense, Cedar, Cinn'amon, Nard, the Rose.
56.
The Rose, Swains Spice: Such Heav'n-dew'd Verse do frame,
As sweet as Honeycomb, as bright as Flame.
57.
While Combs, and Flames divine from THEE are cast,
I Am fed, as fired; Even Flames do nurse my Taste!
58.
The Swan pines at thy Neck; This Milkie Way
Does Steps, begun to the Holy LAMB, display.
59.
There falls on thine Alp-Breasts a lasting Snow,
To which Snow's black, Swans foul, the Goose a Crow.
60.
The hoary Frost turns Dirt, vi'd with thy Hand,
And, where thy Fooot does tread, it prides the Land.
61.
On Lilies Milk, on Violets Purple throw,
On Saffron Gold, Scarlet of the Rose bestow;
62.
Wreaths, worthy Thee, fair Flora never can weave;
Nor can our highest Strains THEE higher heave.
63.
With all-bred Flowr's, and glittering Buds THOU beam'st;
As if to have cropped all Paradise THOU seem.
64.
Each Virtue's in thy Life, so poised, so fine;
What Is first? This? That? or The Other? since All shine.
65.
Love to thy Soul derived is from Above,
Where Honor reigns, sparks Beauty, triumphs Love.
66.
In Chymick Art Thou my Elixir be;
Convert to Gold the worthless Dross in me.
67.
Fire makes of Ashes Glass, makes Metals shine;
This Fire my Body may to Spirit calcine.
68.
Enamored Ir'on does to the Magnet fly;
Yea Sparks in hardest Flints concealed lie.
69.
Nothing more hard than Stone, more soft than Fire;
Yet Stones are melted by inflamed Desire.
70.
Is It so? Who'd not dissolve in Flames of Love?
Be THOU the Grace, Thou my Thoughts Loadstar prove.
71.
Minds Gemme, Eyes Apple, Hearts intenser Flame;
THOU shew'dst the Way, I Will prosecute the Same.
72.
For GOD created, bright in VIRTUES Train,
Weigh'st Right, quell'st Passions, and over Deeds do reign.
73.
GOD is thy Life, Law Virtue, Glory CHRIST;
HIM, who leads Thee by Love, Thou love HIM highest.
74.
CHRIST, to endure the Cross, what did THEE move?
The Pledge of Bitterness was Pledge of LOVE!
75.
IS GOD both Meat, and Lover? CHRIST thy Food?
What Banquet is This LOVER! As Sweet, as Good!
76.
CHRIST's Spice (Thou say) Light, Triumph, Praise to me;
Music, Wine, Feast, Fame, Crown, GOD; All to Thee.
77.
LORD, Thou art All in All! Thou lost, All Is naught;
How base seems muddy Earth, where HEAVEN is sought!
78.
Earth's Exile, Death the Gate, my Home's Above;
My Staff's Hope, Faith Companion, Leader Love.
79.
Turn Indie into Jewels, HEAVEN to Verse,
Nor Indie can thy Worth, nor HEAVEN rehearse.
80.
Let me Thee fear, and love; Fear Loves Heat blows;
Fear is DEVOTIONS Fount, whence LOVE o'reflowes.
81.
Thy Word's my Rule, I cleave to THEE, my Vine;
LORD, Thou art All to me, I Am wholly Thine.
82.
O, hear my Prayer, my Sufferings bear, my Task
Take off, redress my Wrongs, grant what I ask!
83.
With Prayer, Desire, Faith, Zeal, Hope, Deed I call,
Laud, seek, love, pray, worship THEE All in All.
84.
If I behold THEE, I Am all flaming Spice;
If not behold THEE, I Am congealed to Ice!
85.
Add Flames to Flames, that I may melt away!
Be I beloved of THEE, or else Deaths Prey!
86.
Sweet Seas, light Yoke, a friendly Flame I find,
Which me with Love does drown, and burn, and bind.
87.
I Am not mine own, but faint for GOD above!
Rose-deck me VIRGINS, for I Am sick of LOVE!
88.
Naught of a Liver, has a Lovers Heart;
Or, live beloved, or Life-bereft, depart!
89.
Let us be One! In One, Two melted flow!
Let one Life, as one Love, inform us Two!
90.
My only Joy, I Am Thine; THOU mine; and Both
The like Flame burns; The One loves, as to Other does.
91.
Fire! Fire! Love is Beloved! My MAKER'S mine!
Loving, I Am loved! while with my SPOUSE I twine!
92.
O Love beloved! Her, who such Joys partakes*
Silence makes Wonder, Wonder Silence makes!
93.
To HEAVEN I live, to Earth I die; dying rise!
So, Hell being chained, LOVE takes the Victors Prize.
94.
Lovers so love, as for the Loved to die!
As Stradas Lute was Life and Destiny.
95.
If these my Lays have either Light, or Name,
Name from thy Word, Light from thy Grace does flame.
96.
Who came a Mole, goes Argus hence by LOVE;
I shall Faiths Priest to hopeful Charis prove.
97.
THEOPHILAS Bays to Me more Honor brings,
Than Gems that blaze on the proud Heads of Kings.
98.
For what boot worldly Crowns with SOULS loss bought,
Heights fall, spruce Courtship fades, Vice brings to naught.
99.
We may hereafter, as we now have found
The Voice of Fame above, so, under Ground.
100.
The Last shall last; Term cannot Vacation lend
To the LOVER; Here it is End to have no END.
To see, not know, is not to see:
Then, let our English Reader be
Warned, not on Latian Alps to roam;
The next Vales path will lead Him home.
PRAELIBATIO AD THEOPHILAE AMORIS HOSTIAM: Quae unica Cantio a Domino ALEX.
ROSSAEO in Carmen Latinum conversa est. CANTIO I.
ARGUMENTUM.
Evigiles, surgas, divini Rector Amoris;
Delicium prius explores, quam Gaudia tents:
Ad Coelos Cursum tandem pia Vota gubernent.
Tristichon I.
MUtua si Mentes agerent Commercia Secum,
Angelicum in Morem, terrena Mole solutae,
Intuitu quales possent effundere Cantus!
II.
Spiritus ut subito si sublimetur, abibit
In Fumum, nimium chymicus nisi temperet Aestum;
Haud aliter perit omne nimis subtle Noema.
III.
Aurum, Sole satum, Terrae inter Viscera clausum,
Non pretio cessit, quamvis non splenduit aeque,
Qualiter excoctum flagranti fulgurat Igne.
IV.
Men's age, nunc Famae Sphaeram conscende per Orbs*
Errat enim quisquis non Cursum dirigit illuc:
Virtutis Comites, Aures adhibete Docenti.
V.
Ergo, ne Veneris lascivae Praelia, Cornu
Vocali accensa, aut Oculis flammantibus Igne,
(Formae Armis) cedant inopinis Pectora Plagis.
VI.
Quarum pestiferis Oculis, jaculantibus Ignem,
Virginitatis Honos purus maculatur, and ipsa
Men's capitur Laqueis fictarum incauta Comarum.
VII.
Aspice Captivum Veneris, qui transigit Aevum
In fervente gelu, colit Umbram; atque Ingeniosum
Se credens, scribit, delet, laceratque, furitque.
VIII.
Ejus Opes Fragmenta quidem sunt Comica, quorum
Praesidio superat Tenariffae Verticis auram.
Sol Tibi scintilla est, Tu Lumine Sidera vincis.
IX.
Victrix Flamma tuis Oculis micat acribus, Orbs
Obnubas geminos lucentes, n^mque rigentem
Accendent Monachum, vel fiam Morte Bidental.
X.
Ob Gemmas Indi penetrant Saxa, Aethiopesque
Oceanum ob Conchas, pretiosis Pellibus instat
Tartara Gens; Omnes ejus dant munera Templo.
XI.
Flagrantes dimitte Genas, quae fulgure nostras
Perstringis Oculorum Acies, non far valentes
Tales Angelico radiantes Lumine Vultus.
XII.
Estne Helene, Trojana Lues, atque Angelus idem?
Passio non domita est insanae Mentis Idolum:
Multae se fucant, Paucae Virtutibus ornant.
XIII.
Verius hoc nihil est; Cutis alba, rubore Rosarum
Permista, eximium Lumen ne Mentis obumbret,
Neve Animae Visum penetrantem obnubulet unquam.
XIV.
Ure Odas, Veneris Stratagemata chartea; Ludos
Effuge, sunt Flammae; fabrices ne Vinc'la, Dolosque
Neve loquare Oculis; Oris Commercia vita.
XV.
Spumea nonne audis Cerebella, and inania, ut intus
Et rugeant, nec non Joviali in Crimine Potu
Luxurient, saltentque furentes, atque cachinnent?
XVI.
Praedatas Cellas siccate, and mox Rationem
Luxuriae Vinclis submittite; per Freta Vini, and
Mellis arundinei Scopulos date vela furentes.
XVII.
Ad Senii Mare mortiferum transmittite Curas:
Quadrupedem effraenem defessi agitate Furoris
Bacchantes, Rabiem in Vini monstrate Theatro.
XVIII.
Turgescant Vino Carchesia, donec in altum
Provehimur Bacchi, Terraeque Vrbesque recedant:
Omnia sorbemus, sit ibi Naupactia Classis.
XIX.
Aplustrum simul and Carchesia pandite, Fluctus
Horrisonos Fremitus superemus; Plura Salutis
Naufragia hic, quam cum cecinerunt Monstra marina.
XX.
Amphora quaeque parit (signato, Prome,) Pyropum;
Et tinctae Baccho Buccae, mihi saepe videntur
Tediferae, quoties Gemmis micat undique Nasus.
XXI.
Cantibus alternis Homines sese esse negantes,
Exleges fiunt. Titubant, seseque volutant,
Atque Pedes sinuant, potant Circaea Venena.
XXII.
O, tumulatae Animae, vivae putrescitis! usque
Ad Faeces Vester liquefit Sal: Quisque coercet
Naturam, and Mortem accelerat, Spernitque Salutem.
XXIII.
Insontes Pecudes vestros odere Liquores
Cum Nugas Vomitu and Punctis distinguitis: Aci,
In Vino and Somno; Proceres nisi Fumus and Umbra.
XXIV.
Mallem condiri Muria, quam Nectare dulci
Putrere. Invitat miseros nunc Alea, Mensae
Illaqueant, nunquam felix datur Exitus illis.
XXV.
Sed sine Mente uno jactu Patrimonia perdunt:
Obscurant Noctem cum decipit Alea Diris.
Vincitur en Victor; number Victus vincere posset?
XXVI.
Denis and septem Cubitis si Nilus inundat
Fertilis Egypti Campos, miseranda sequetur
Esuries, Tabes sequitur sic saeva Nepotes.
XXVII.
Dicite vos pictae, vos, dicite, Papiliones,
Gaudia quae Veris pensatis falsa, quid estis
Lucratae, ex infrugiferis Nugisque caducis?
XXVIII.
Stulti qui propter Nugas divenditis Aurum,
Dicite, number caleat quae Flamma est picta? Voluptas
Number stimulans juvat? o, angustum Coelum, inferiusque!
XXIX.
Ite, and Deliciis (fruitur queis Bestia sola)
Gaudia mutetis vera; at Gens impia turget
Deliciis; CHRISTUS flevit; Gens optima luget.
XXX.
Nil nisi terrenum cupiunt Animalia Bruta;
Coelestes Animae coelestia Gaudia quaerunt;
Ast Homines mediae Naturae Dona requirunt.
XXXI.
Gens humana foret si moles Corporis expers,
Angelicae Naturae esset; si Mente careret,
Brutiginae: Caro Brutorum est, Men's Angelicorum.
XXXII.
Principio Deus Hos univit, subjiciendo
Sensum Judicio Rationis, tum moderando
Affectum Arbitrio Mentis, verum inficiendo
XXXIII.
Libertatem Animae, Crimen concussit, ut Ip^ae
Jam nequeunt habitare simul, nisi Lucta sequatur;
Nec sine Tristitia divelli posse videmus.
XXXIV.
Jam valeat Mundus fallax, spinosa Voluptas
Cui Cordi est, quod perdit amat, quod Nobile spernit.
I, Cole nunc Vitium, ride Virtutis Amantes.
XXXV.
Mellito Cyatho, at Fell Aspidis haud meliore,
Inficis incautas Animas ad Tartara, semper
Mortales Magico and fallaci decipis Ore.
XXXVI.
Dum Tempus fallis, Tempus te fallit, and aufert
Praedam, dum Tempus perdis, Coelestia perdis,
Sed, cum Fure bono, pauci furantur Olympum.
XXXVII.
Projiciunt Stulti pretiosum Temporis Aurum:
Qui Vitae Gemmam generosam prodigit, ille
Ad Barathrum graditur, Stimulisque agitatur Averni.
XXXVIII.
Cui Terram amplecti vastam furiosa Cupido est,
Vique Doloque simul; Muscis hic Retia tendit,
Ut foribus laxos suspendit Aranea Casses.
XXXIX.
Cum Mors praescindet Nimrodi Vulturis ungues,
Nomina cernemus subito mutata Domorum:
Bethesda his fiet tandem Bethania tristis.
XL.
Arbitrio subdi pejus, quam Lege perire;
Pharmaca quae curare valent, si Balsama perdunt?
Namque Bono quod degenerat, nil pejus habetur.
XLI.
Sique Tyrannorum arbitrio non traderet ullos
OMNIPOTENS Sanctos, crudeli Morte premendos,
Nullum Martyrium foret, aut Salvator Jesus.
XLII.
Stulti durescunt, sed Sancti, ut Cera, liquescunt:
Corporis ad gemitum morientis, jamque jacentis
Nudo Dente, Genis macris, Oculisque cavatis.
XLIII.
Vitae Author Vitam praebet, largire Misellis;
Dissectis Venis praeclusa est Janua Lethi:
Sit Deus Exemplar; te cura; pasce Famentes.
XLIV.
Ut Coelum obtineas, heu, quantula Portio Vitae
Hic peregrinantis superest! namque excipit Ortum
Occasus subito, Finisque ab Origin pendet.
XLV.
Cum Vitiis cui Bella foris, Pax permanet intus:
Cessat Judicium. quum sese judicat ullus:
Extra vestiri Zelo est augere Dolores.
XLVI.
Magnates, Vos magna manent Tormenta, Tyranni
Si sitis. Infernus Medicinam haud exhibet ullam:
Securus ne sis, securus si cupis esse.
XLVII.
Robora franguntur quae Coeli Murmura temnunt;
Ardentem in Cineres Prunam considere cernes;
Nec non in fumos clarum vanescere Lychnum.
XLVIII.
Exue rugosam Sagam, jam Tempus, and aufer
Peccati Achanis velamina nigra, Magarum
Leprosis pannis superabunt Ulcera foeda.
XLIX.
Insontem hoc Naboth Ferro superavit, idemque
Jezabelis pinxit Faciem, Centroque removit
Tot Regna, atque novum dimovit Cardine Mundum.
L.
Felices hujus qui spargent Saxa Cerebro,
Quique ea loturi maledicto Sanguine, sternetque
Osse Vias: Cujus Gemitus sunt Gaudia nostra.
LI.
Non debet Salica regnare Haec Lege, Procellas
Excitat, Halcyonumque Dies dispellit, in Aula
Mentis nil habitat Bonitatis, si regit Illa.
LII.
Luxuries ejus quot Morbos edidit? Astra
Inficit, Esuriemque auget, Vivisque molesta est
Dum crapulantur humum Tumulis civilia Bella.
LIII.
Men's mea, Maestitiae Labyrinthis septa, quot Annis
In sacco, Lachrymis baccato, transige Vitam!
Clam nigris in Speluncis ambito Timores!
LIVE.
Cumque Heraclito pacatum transige Tempus,
A Turbis procul, and procul a Discordibus Armis,
Quae Mundum insanum turbato in Pegmate versant.
LV.
Illic Relligio dulcis vel Pectine pulsat,
Vel Digitis Cytharam, vel Cantu personat Antra,
Divinae inspirat vel Dorica Carmina Musae.
LVI.
Proque Tubis resonabit Amor Testudine, solvens
Obsidione Urbes, quassatas Mart, vocansque
In Coelum, Imperii Sedem, mortalia Corda.
LVII.
Nostra hinc Laetitia, hinc Hymni Solatia nostra,
Praecipue Angelici. Summo sit Gloria PATRI,
Pax Terris, Hominum succedat prompta Voluntas!
LVIII.
Pennae quas Veneris Volucres dant, Dedecus addunt;
Ergo, Vulcano Versus committite; tollet
Ille pedes Melis; liber, sed claudicat Ille.
LIX.
Tollitur en Nihil, ast Aliquid cadit! o, ubi Merces
Antiquae Virtutis Honos! Sapientia quondam
Virtutem evexit; coluisti, Plute, Minervam.
LX.
Cos fuit Oxonii Lambeth! tamen Ille Volatu
Exuperat long Pinnacula Divitiarum,
Qui Virtutem ambit, puro Virtutis Amore.
LXI.
Virtutis Radiis accenditur Illius Ardor,
Et Pestes omnes Modulis fugat ille canoris,
Fulminaque extinguit per Coeli Expansa trisulca.
LXII.
An matutinae Volucres cantando citabunt
Solemn ex nocturnis Tenebris, tectoque Cubili?
Atque Animae vivae in Tenebris and Morte jacebunt?
LXIII.
Evigilate ergo de Somno, and Nocte sopora;
Increpat ecce Moras nostras Auriga Diei,
Sol dum caeruleos moderatur in Aethere Currus.
LXIV.
Jamque experrecti, Textrices mill Laborum
Conspicite aerias, quae fingunt Art stupenda
Maeandros, texuntque suis per inania Telis.
LXV.
Surgite, Sol Aurum per summa Cacumina spargit,
Condit Aromatibus Lucem, dum spargit Odores,
Cuncta sagittiferis Radiis Dulcedine replet.
LXVI.
Erigit in Coelum Mentes Lux aurea Phoebi:
Pulpita qui fugiunt, Hymnis capiuntur. In Aurum
Vertit Amor Plumbum, Chymico praestiantior omni.
LXVII.
Utque Opifex Naturae Apis est, Tragemata fingens
Mellea, dum sugens chymice transformat in Aurum
Flores; ditatur sic plumbea Carmine Prosa.
LXVIII.
Hicque THEANTHROPOS Sermo, tum mystica Vitra
Oris fatidici, nec non Oracula tanta,
Fomentumque Precum, tum Murus Aheneus hic est;
LXIX.
Coeli Sculptura hic, Pietatis Clavis, and ipsa
Gaza, Instrumentum, Spesque Anchora, Charta fidelis,
Atque Voluptatis Gurges, sic Navis Amoris.
LXVIII. Prima 68. and 69. post 77. relegantur.

Nullus REX VATEM, sed Regem Carmine VATES
Evehit, Ille Animas languentes excitat, Ille
Ad Mare Pacificum Curas transmittit edaces.
LXIX.
Ut Gemmae radiant, atque aemula Lumina Stellis,
Per Loca transmittunt tenebrosa: ita docta Poesis
Et Lucem, ac Animam, Vitamque dat Artibus ipsam.
LXX.
O dives, ridens, radiansque Poetica Gemmis,
Nobilitas Splendore tuo Diademata Regum!
Tu Gentilitium Clypeum depingis Honoris.
LXXI.
Te, (quae circundas Arts velut Aere) Teque
Rerum inventarum Portam, Scenam Ingeniorum,
Tam dives, quam pauper amat, Regesque procando.
LXXII.
VATES and REGES Tumulo conduntur eodem;
Ruminat Ars quodcunque accenditur Igne Poetae,
Sensibus ut nostris divinum exhalet Odorem.
LXXIII.
Prudentes reddit Speculatio, non meliores:
Littera solum Ars est, sed Praxis Spiritus; Usus
Art valet, sic Ars usu; qui seperat, aufert.
LXXIV.
Languida Facta quidem Dictis stimulantur acutis,
Verba ut Femellis, Maribus sic Facta probantur*
Sit Vita Exemplar, fac, Leges praeveniantur.
LXXV.
Maxima Cognitio nostra est servire TONANTI,
Tunc nos morigeros Mandatis aestimat, Actus
Excipiunt quando quaedam Interludia nostros.
LXXVI.
Illorum Mentes sola ad Sublimia tendunt,
Quorum non quovis agitantur Pectora Vento,
Utque Aula instabiles, sed in Aequore nant Sapientis.
LXXVII.
Non alia his Cynosura nitet quam Gratia, quamque
Portat Apostolicus collustrans Signifer Orbem:
Hac Evangelici Cursum rexere Magistri.
LXXX. Hic lege prima 68. and 69.

Nunquam sic refluit Sanctorum Fluctus, ut ipsos
Urgeat in Syrtes Errorum cuncta vorantes,
Peccati Clades fugiunt, ut naufraga saxa.
LXXXI.
Ut Casus Mortis, Noctis Septentrio, Non tam
Obscuri, aut Tenebrae triduanae, quas super omnem
Egyptum induxit, qui Lucem and Sydera fecit.
LXXXII.
Tempestati hujus collata Tonitrua languent;
Si Stimulos spectes Aspis fert Balsama, Mors est
Vel Pietas, hujus cum Carmina faeda videbis.
LXXXIII.
Hujus cum laqueos mea Musa evaseris, illuc
Tend Alis, ubi Lux Mentes quae luminat, ardet;
Et Nebulas abigit, tenebrasque Nitore resolvit.
LXXXIV.
Sit tibi Relligio curae, quam discute, meque
Errantem cohibe, DEUS alme, and percute Carnis
Ignavae (si quando salit vel rudet) asellum.
LXXXV.
Men's minor es minimo COELI indulgentis Amore:
Peccatum haud linquunt Terror, Pudor, atque Reatus;
Quatuor hi Comites Coetum glomerantur in unum.
LXXXVI.
Peccato defectus ego, nunc perditus erro;
Namque orare mihi vesana Superbia visa est.
Luctantem, DEUS alme, leva sub Pondere Terrae.
LXXXVII.
Nemo merere potest, meruit tamen UNUS, and horum
Qui jactant Sese, Zelum frigescere cernis,
His stannum, Argentum est, aes Aurum saepe videtur.
LXXXVIII.
Cor renova, Linguam mihi dirige, porrige Dextram,
Inspiresque Fidem, Spem velo detege tectam:
Erige collapsum, crescat Vis semper Amoris.
LXXXIX.
Lingua, Decus nostrum, Menti servire memento.
SPIRITUS ille tuus Bezaliel illustravit.
Mors Fide me salvat, Caecis das Lumina sputo.
XC.
Spiritus ex sensu fiat, nam Gratia sola
Naturam vertit, chymichus Lapis ecce repertus,
Et Verbum omnipotens sola est Projectio pura.
XCI.
VERBUM, Cos very, nec Regula certior ulla:
Rejicimus Mappam tenebrosam Traditionum.
Non urit me Charta, tamen Men's ignibus ardet.
XCII.
Dum lego, Men's intus magno Splendore coruscat,
Et novus ecce Vigor penetrat Praecordia, namque
Omnia describit Placitorum Arcana tuorum.
XCIII.
Hujus Carminibus tecum versantur Enochi;
Avertit Mortem, transfert nos ante Senectam:
Dat Vaticanus Scoriam, purum hic nitet Aurum.
XCIV.
Sic cum pigra gelu Gens Tartara, splendida Gemmis
Tecta subit Sophiae, subito Fervore refecta,
Quae nive semianimis fuerat, se vivere sentit.
XCV.
Infundis mihi Tu Meditamina sancta, meoque
Effundis pia Verba Ore, and laudando per Orbem
Diffundis mea Facta, tuo quae Munere vivunt.
XCVI.
Musa, mihi Chordas tendens, cane Facta Bonorum
Hymnis, sed pravos taceas; Artesque Tributum
Dent tibi, tu Cordi Linguam, Pennamque ligabis.
XCVII.
Degener at Soboles Evae, pollutaque Culpis,
An TE Mensura tenui comprendere posset,
Omnipotens quum sis, nec mensur abilis unquam?
XCVIII.
Arbustum Cedros, Aquilam non regulus effert
Laudibus, aut cernit Phoebeas noctua Flammas,
Gutta quid Oceano? Radiis Jubar infinitis?
XCIX.
Languentem sed Spes and Amor per inane volatum
Far valent, in TE noctem Fiducia lustrat;
Grandis AMOR, suppleto Fidem, Spei scribimus Alis!
C.
Spiritus, alme Deus, Men's, Corpus, and omnia Facta,
Et Verba, and Mentis Meditamina, po^^ea descent
Et Lauds celebrare tuas, and Crimina fle^e.
O, quantum JESU me diligis! Ergo Beatum
Me tua jam reddat Dilectio, suscipiatque
Erectum rursus Dilectio MAXIM JESU!
Haec ara est, atque haec mea victima dulcis amoris.
Cor, Oculus, Lingua, atque Manus, Poplesque reflexus
A te sunt Cuncta haec, ad te sint Cuncta vicissim
Post Homerum Iliada, post Vossaeum Grammaticen, post Rossaeum, celeberrimum
illum Virgilii Evangeliz antis Autorem, Carmen Heroicum conscribere audax plane
videatur Facinus. Tenuitatis quippe meae, and imparis long in Poesi venae
conscius, cum non possum quod vellem, volo tamen quod possum effundere.

Est aliquid prodire tenus si non datur ultra. THEOPHILAE AMORIS HOSTIA: CANTIO
III. Latino Carmine donata. Restauratio.
ARGUMENTUM.
Authoris Raptus, laudatur Gratia; fusae
Sunt Lachrymae charo Britonum pro Sanguine fuso
Obscure, petitur Pax ictis prisca Michaiis.
Tristichon I.
SOllicites mea Musa Lyram, digitoque pererra
Argutae Chelyos Chordas, and Cantica psallas
Quae rapiant Terras, and scandant Astra Triumphis.
II.
Ecstatico raptus Motu Bartaeius Heroes,
Lecto subsiliens, alacres ducensque Choraeas,
Dixit; In hunc Morem saltabunt Gallica Regna.
III.
Seu Meteora Soli viscoso Semine facta,
Quae, motu succensa suo, super ardua tendunt
Nubila, Stellarum nec non de More coruscis
IV.
Effulgent Flammis; Duntaxat at illa relucent
Vt Sese absumant, and nos per Compita ducant;
Nec pro se Venti, sed Nobis, Flamina spirant:
V.
Enthea sic superas mea Men's ascendit ad Arces,
Sese dispendens, Stolidos ut reddat Acutos:
Qui Taedam praefert Aliis, Se Lumine private.
VI.
Qualiter Inferno sudat vesana Libido:
Sic Coelo aspirat divini Zelus Amoris;
Scrutari Hoc Mentis contendit tota Facultas.
VII.
Cardinibus subnixa Fides convertitur altis;
Purior haud ullis praeclusa Scientia Metis;
Flamma, Cor accendens, non Ignis Signa relinquit.
VIII.
Horti florentis blandum Poimaeria, sancta
Visorum Tellus, Sapientum grata Cohorti,
Auratis Asini Phaleris Ludibria prostas.
IX.
Hui^ Mare fit rabidum Mundus, Discordia major
Est ubi Ventorum, quam Pyxis nautica norit:
Incumbit Sanctus Velis, tenet, Anchora Coelum.
X.
Appulit hic Pietas, ubi non confracta Dolor
Conscia Men's fremitat, Rabie aut consumpta maligna;
Lumina lascivae Veneris nec Fulgure tacta.
XI.
Non Nugae hic Pueri; Juvenis non fervidus Aestus;
Ambitus Aetatis maturae nullus; Avari
Grandaevi haud Vitium; non Otia pigra coluntur.
XII.
Non Gula, lascivi aut Pruritus turpis Amoris,
Turgidus haud Fastus, non invidiosa Rubigo,
Ira nec ardescens, aut Obduratio Cordis.
XIII.
Non Amor invadit proprius, vel Pectora Curae
Scindentes, Schisma aut Doctrinae mobile flatu,
Non caeci pungunt Stimuli, nec Poena Latebris.
XIV.
Hinc macula apparet Tellus obscura ubi; certant
Pro vanis Homines, puerilis more tumultus;
Formicae, veluti peterent, munimina, scloppis.
XV.
Est ubi Luxuries satiata, Libidoque spumat,
Sanguis ubi Irato, petiturque ubi Pignus Avaro,
Turget ubi Ambitio, Livor fremit, Otia torpent.
XVI.
Imperio Martis remanent quam Regna revulsa,
Dispersis Aulis! sub nostro Lumine quae sunt
Pulvis ut exiguus Ventorum Flatibus actus.
XVII.
Hic stat formosi polydaedala Machina Mundi,
Sustentata Manu Very, summique JEHOVAE.
Apparent instar Nanorum exinde Gigantes.
XVIII.
Quam vilis Mundus! pia Musa, innitere Pennis
Firmis, (terreno fueras detenta Tumultu,
Iactata and Turba) demum transcende Monarchas.
XIX.
Raptus in hunc morem divino concitus Igne,
Aetheris in Camera stellata percute Chordas:
Aspirate tui nequeunt huc, Roma, Regentes.
XX.
Sese dilatans Animus fit latior usque
Sicut Helix; Hominis status at Nativus, ut Orbis,
Quem subito a Zenith deturbant Fata superno.
XXI.
Perspiciens Ratione Fides oculatior Aulam
Sideream, Mentes rapiunt sua Visa serenas;
Very accensa Pharos per Amorem Gaudia pandit.
XXII.
Haec Lux quae Radiis conuestit singula claris,
THEIOPHILAM, inclusit Praegnanti Mente decoram;
Excipit occiduum Naturae, Gratia, Solemn.
XXIII.
Fundat Aroma Calyx, ^osa quam dulcissima, Virtus
Illustris matura siet tua Tempore justo,
Explicet ac Radius divinus Floris Honorem.
XXIV.
Anni Procursu duodeni sic sua Forma
Enituit, Formam Dominae stupuire potentes;
Spectantes Animae Lucem per Corporis Vmbram.
XXV.
Ardet Crystallo veluti Lucerna polito,
Cujus transparens decoratur Fabrica Flammis;
Haec ita divino splendescit VIRGO Nitore.
XXVI.
Men's Gemmam superat, superat s^a Concha pruinam,
Flumina vel Lactis manantia ab Vbere pleno:
Venae Saphiros praecellunt, Labra Rubinos.
XXVII.
Circum Labra volant Charites sua^nille venustae,
Suavia Puniceis labuntur Aromata Portis,
Inde fluunt cunctos medicantia Balsoma Morbas.
XXVIII.
Emittunt tales Altaria Sancta Vapores;
Tales Blanditias halant Fragrantia Gummi;
Sic Rosa coccinea spirat praesslorida Vest.
XXIX.
Attonitos reddunt Spectantum Lumina Vultus,
Afficiunt quampi^ Pracordia fervida castis,
Attamen Ardoris sunt ipsa immunia, Flammis.
XXX.
Lampadas hasce volet quisquis depingere, quisquis
Exprimeret clara radiantes Luce Fenestras,
Pingeret Aspectum fugientem, ponderet Austrum.
XXXI.
Suave videremus Pectus, micat Eden Amoris,
Illis Monticulis nascuntur Mala decoris,
Quae Mala de vetita sanarent Arbore nata.
XXXII.
Mollities, Candorque Manus transcendit Oloris
Plumas; est talis cujus moderatior Ardor,
Qualis cum coeunt Radius Phoebeus and Aurum.
XXXIII.
Iucundae Nemoris Syrenes, Musica turba,
Gutturibus quarum dimanat dulcior Aer,
Illam quid petitis cunabula vestra perosae?
XXXIV.
Ecce Latus ^laudunt Argentea Lilia castum,
Calthae fulgentes Auri flammantis amictu,
Ignes evibrat cum Lauro Primula Veris.
XXXV.
Margaron excellunt Dentes; Tegmen, Caput, Auri,
Vox praeit Argento, de TE Natura Vigorem
Sumit, Panniculis est prae TE squallida Flora.
XXXVI.
O, Formosa, Pudica tamen, seu Chava, priusquam
Candida purpureo suffuderat Ora Rubore
A TE Virtutes, Arts, Charitesque profectae.
XXXVII.
Ad vivum depicta manet non Pulchrior Icon
Quam pia Men's pulchro quae splendet Corpore clausa:
Hujus Coelesti cedit Pandora Decori.
XXXVI^I.
Aulae Sideribus pictae sic Cynthia Praeses
Apparet, Phoebi Splendoribus aucta refractis,
Fulgida Stellarum dum stipant cas^ra Phalanges.
XXXIX.
(Astra Pruma refert) subito Telluris at Umbra
Objecta Lucem retrahit, cui Conus opacus
Falcatam supra Lunam, sub Lumine Solis.
XL.
Qui Coelum, Nubes, Terras, Mare, Saxaque lustrat,
Qui penetrat Gemmas, Fructus, Stellas, Adamantas;
Mundi Oculus, clarae Promus, Condusque Die^.
XLI.
Cujus gliscentes imitatur Flamma Pyropos,
Purpureas Aurora Fores dum pandit Eoo,
Noctis lucentem Dominam, Famulasque repellens.
XLII.
THEIOPHILAM radians Lumen Te appello Diei,
Palp^bra quippe Fides tua fit, seu Pupula Fervor,
Vultus Angelico speciosos More venustans.
XLIII.
Aetheris illa potens, casta and Regina, reclusi,
Plurima vestalis quam cingit Virgo propinqua,
Disparet, dia haec si CONSTELLATIO splendet.
XLIV.
Nobilitas vera est Virtus, Cognatio Sancti,
Tutela Angelicus Chorus est, COELUMque Brabium;
Cujus demissus, dum surgit Gratia, Vultus.
XLV.
Eugenia Ingenium, Paidia ministrat Acumen;
Thesauros Very charos Eusebia praebet.
(Cudendi Voces Vati concessa Potestas.)
XLVI.
Aula Cor est formosa sibi, divinius Ejus
Pectus, Sacrati Penetralia candida AMORIS;
Hic Sibi Delicio est, Sanctos reficit^q Poetas.
XLVII.
Illustres Domini, quos Laurea Serta coronant,
Arts qui eruitis, qui cultas redditis Arts,
Estis and infirmi qui Sustentacula Mundi;
XLVIII.
Qui struitis Famae Monumenta perinclyta Templo,
Mellea de Vobis Modulamina talia manent,
Qualia divino mulcerent Pectora Succo.
XLIX.
Dum succedit Hyems Autumno, Ver premit Aestas,
Dum recitat Modulis Tempus Poeana vetustis,
Vestris Vos Famae Plumis reparabitis Alas.
L
Illud quod praebent sublimia Taenera Vinum,
Insane Vires poterit reparare fugatas;
Sic Citharae, atque Tubae, sic Organa, Tympana, Sistra.
LI.
Conciliat quamvis reboantia Murmura Basso
Ars, torquens Nervos graviores usque, sonoro
Fulmine dum complent Aulam Diapasona totam;
LII.
Ista parum valiant; DOMINAE Testudine tensa
Hujus, Chordarum Pulsum tentaverit Omnem,
Dum Men's Harmoniae pertracta est Pollice docto.
LIII.
Gratia inest Verbis; O, terque quaterque beati,
Queis Coelum Terris, aeterno CODICE scripti!
Qui, Sensu amoti, cupiunt Commercia Mentis!
LIVE.
Inter Eos qui divino de Semine creti,
Non obscurati Sensu nec Corporis Umbra,
Seraphice exardent vivacis ORIGIN Flammae.
LV.
Gaudia dat Gustus, non exequanda Loquelis!
Ritu Cimmerioque Scholis palpanda superna,
In quorum Solis Frontem sunt Nubila densa.
LVI.
Callis inaccessus nimio fit Lumine CoeLI;
Splendidior Radius teneros perstringit Ocellos:
Ephata fare, Lutum Visu me reddet acuto.
LVII.
Hoc Raptu emotus divino, fac mihi talis
Contingat Finis, Stagaritae qualis, in illo
Euripo, quem non ullus comprendere posset!
LVIII.
Mystica praebe at haec (o sit protensa!) Catena
Nexus, qui string at vel quavis fortius Art!
Talia lenitos rapiant Modulamina Sensus.
LIX.
Musica pervadit Mentes, cum percitus Oestro
Insano Saulus, Genio fremuitque maligno,
Gemmea prae Plectris sordebant Sceptra Tyranni.
LX.
Hujus inardescens HYMNI me Flamma repugnat
Foecibus a Terrae: Cantus Penetralia Coeli
Divini reserant, deducunt Agmina pura:
LXI.
Agmina pura DEI celebrant NATALIA laeta;
Hymnos vel CHRISTUS modulatur; SANCTA COLUMBA
COELI, summa petens, Numerorum deligit Alas.
LXII.
Ni Versus, non sit Textus, quia quaelibet HYMNI
Incantant; actis famuletur Concio PSALMIS,
Ante Diem summum, per Vos demortua surgunt!
LXIII.
Ast ubi grassatur Furiis Bellona tremendis,
Stragibus, heu, lassata, sed haud satiata recedens,
Praedatrice Lupa truculentior, Organa pulset?
LXIV.
Est equidem non Mota Solo, pacata Tumultu:
Degeneres trepidant; manet illa invicta Catervis,
Displosi metuit nec rauca Tonitrua Scl^ppi.
LXV.
Insunt Virtuti sua Bal^ama; (...)
Intense NUMEN Gladii mollire (...):
Aetatis Ferro sic AUREA (...)profatur.
LXVI.
Ingruit, O, NUMEN V^^^RANDUM! dira Procella,
Coccina purpureae cum velant Crimina Vestes,
Effuso tinctae pretioso Sanguine Vitae!
LXVII.
Orbis Aquis cinctus, fortunatissimus olim,
O, deplorandum! quantum mutatus ab illo!
Pax ubi floruerat pia, Mors ibi prodiga regnat!
LXVIII.
Rubrum deprompsit Vinum Mavortius Ardor!
Conserves Arcam, DEUS, in Torrente Timorum,
Aut tua subsidat Lachrymis, tum Sanguine, SPONSA!
LXIX.
Est Panem Lachrymata suum, Gemitusque resorbet:
Lumina pro Potu sua sunt in Flumina versa!
Ipsa, immersa Malis, ad TE Se languida confert.
LXX.
Ad Modulos Compone graves, PATER Orbis, acutos
Hybernae Chelios! quaevis Discordia Concors
Esto, Scoti fuerit super, aut Insignibus Angli!
LXXI.
Non inter Socios saevo Formido Leoni;
Vel praedabundis inter se convenit Vrsis;
Mutua Pernicies, lacerat, Vir, CORPUS JESUS!
LXXII.
Si modo fert Animus, pugnetis Fulmina Martis,
Turcico and invisam Labaro deducite Lunam,
Sacra relinquentes Fidei Confinia rectae.
LXXIII.
Agminibus Thracum densis contendite; quamvis
Sclopporum seu Truncus iners, Caro vestra deorsum
Tendat, summa petent Animae de more Globorum.
LXXIV.
NUMINIS in mediis si sit Praesentia Castris,
In TEMPLO residet multo magis ILLE sacrato,
Haeresin ut pellat, perversaque Schismata purget.
LXXV.
Haec Tunicam rupere Tuam, Dolor unde Bonorum!
Zelotae quamvis rauca TE Voce fatigant,
Voto indignaris civili Sanguine mixto.
LXXVI.
Fallaces potuere Bonum suadere fuisse
Praecones, per Diluvium vadare Cruoris?
Praestigiis uti, Summosque resolvere Nexus?
LXXVII.
Inde Catechismi neglecti, and sacra Synaxis!
Herbae hinc syl^estres, seu Ranae Vere Palustres!
Athea Schismatici Corruption pessima Cleri.
LXXVIII.
Praetextus fugiant speciosos, sunto fideles;
Cultu divino repetantque PRECAMEN JESUS;
Foederis aut valiant Mysteria dira trisexti.
LXXIX.
Sic seduxerunt illos Insomnia vana,
Vilescant illis ade^ut NATALIA CHRISTI!
(Nemo tenet Nodis mutantem Protea Vultum.)
LXXX.
FESTUM Festorum, supremae dulce COHORTI;
Inclinat COELUM hic Terris, hinc Gaudia SANCTIS;
Judice Relligione Dies primarius Anni.
LXXXI.
Factus Homo bonus est primum, tum degener; IPSE
SERMO Caro Factus, nostra haud Commercia vitans,
Pejor ut is nihilo, meliori Sort fruatur.
LXXXII.
Audetis Verum profiteri? Pabula pascunt
Fuci aliena; merum Pigmentum Papiliones;
Tettix deperdit, redemit sibi Tempora Myrmex.
LXXXIII.
Mellea dum repetunt Vespae Spelaea rapaces,
Illis Insidiis structis merguntur in Olla,
Corporis haud tanti sint ac Munimina Mentis.
LXXXIV.
Kirk-Int'rest kenimus; Leges revocate Draconis,
Instaurate vetus Templum; Sunt Moenia Sancti,
Seu Tubus est Pastor, Fons Gratia, Gluten Amorque.
LXXXV.
Vobis praeteritos ignoscat Musa Furores,
Singula propitio condant Oblivia Velo,
De Rebus moveat si Vos Metanoea peractis.
LXXXVI.
Very Cultores, balantes pascite CHRISTI
Agnos; quippe Merum SANGUIS, CARO dapsilis Esca:
Illos pascentes semper, spectate CORONAM.
LXXXVII.
Dispensatores SPONSO, Sponsaeque fideles,
Nos sacra diuini ducant ORACULA Very,
Relligione Status floret, data GLORIA Fidis.
LXXXVIII.
Cum JUDEX veniet, Merces erit ampla Labori,
Pro Lachrymis Vobis manabunt Gaudia Rivis,
Auratae surgunt Spicae sementibus udis.
LXXXIX.
Laesis, Omnipotens VINDEX! certo aequa rependes
Illis, qui sese foedo maculare Reatu,
Sanguinis innocui cum sit Detectio fusi!
XC.
Aurea Pax aures, Verunque appellat amicum!
Lumina non Phoebi latebris tam grata Borusso,
Urbibus exersis Homines, vel Littora Fractis.
XCI.
O, si coelestis vel tandem TURMA secunda,
Nobis, Bellorum diris Cruciatibus haustis,
Grata salutiferae resonaret Cantica PACIS!
XCII.
PAX Domus est fessis, PAX ad NATALIA CHRISTI
Cantio prima fuit, Terris suprema VOLUNTAS,
PAX Bonitatis amans, PAX Sanctis vera Voluptas.
XCIII.
Martyribus fulcimen AMOR, ceu stramen Achates
Attrahit; ad nostrum sic nos perducis AMANTEM,
Elixir Auri verum, Compendia Legis!
XCIV.
Ullane Divinum narret Facundia Amorem?
Quippe redemptus Homo Naturas nobiliores
Angelicas superat; Tanti sit Passio CHRISTI!
XCV.
Hic demum tacuit, Lachrimarum Flumina manant
Ex oculis, illi Mundus Cadus esse videtur,
Gaudia falsa Merum, Stultorum portio Faeces.
XCVI.
Et nunc Laetitiae vivae de Font micanti,
Pura vbi perpetuo Chrystalla fluentia Cursu,
Men's erit aethereas conscendere Raptibus Oras.
XCVII.
Hinc Documenta sibi Zelus malesanus habebit,
Ardores Cujus tradunt in Praelia saevi,
(...)fera depositis mitescant Secula Bellis.
XCVIII.
Aur^bus exhibeas Epulum, selecta VENUSTAS!
Dum si^ cantat AMOR, Reges dulced^^e capti:
GRATIA Naturae Nervos intendit AMORE.
XCIX.
Horrisonas Amor ipse potes sedare Procellas,
Cantibus and placare tuis immania Cete,
Quae Dominatrici diverrunt Marmora Cauda.
C.
Si tua, VIRGO, nequit compescere Erotica Musa
Incumbens Aevo Fatum miserabile nostro,
Pro Scriptis Lachrymae; Nam Gens^est danda FURORI^
Provecti, tandem Latiales linquimus Oras,
Te petimus Patrium, Terra Britanna, Solum.
Hic ubi Nemo citis designet Littus Ocellis:
Egressae faveant Fluctus, and Aura Rati.
Upon the Vanity of the World.
LOng have I sought the Wish of All
To find; And what it is Men call
True Happiness; But cannot see
The World has It, which It can be,
Or with It hold a Sympathy.
He that enjoyes what here below
Frail Elements have to bestow,
Shall find most sweet bare Hopes at first;
Fruition by Fruition's burst,
Seawater so allayes the Thirst.
Who ever would be happy then,
Must be so to Himself; for, when
Judges are taken from without,
To Judge what we are, fenced about,
They do not judge, but guess, and doubt.
His Soul must hug no private Sin;
For, that is a thorn conceal d in the Skin;
But Innocence, where She is nursed
Plants valiant Peace; So, Cato durst
Ev^n then be best, when Rome was worst.
GOD-built He must be in his Mind;
That is, Divine; whose Faith no Wind
Can shake; when firmly ^e relies
Upon the ALMIGHTY, He outflies
Low Chance, and Fate of Destinies.
As Fountains rest not till they lead,
Meandring high, as their first Head:
S^, Man rests not till He has trod
Deaths Height: then, by that Period,
He rests too, raised in Soul to GOD.
Owen Feltham.
POtestas Culminis est Tempestas Mentis, Splendorem habet Titulo, cruciatum
Animo; desuntque Inopiae multa, Avaritiae omnia. Ne petas igitur, devota Anima,
esse qualis in Anglia DUX Buckingamiae, and in Aula Caesaria Princeps ab
Eggenberg, and in Hispania Comes D' Olivares, and in Imperio Ottomanico
Mustapha Bassa fuere; nec tibi magis arrideant cerussatae Lauds, and
calamistrata Encomia, quam sincerae and sacrosanctae Amoris Anhelationes.
Seculi delectatiunculas devita, and Coelorum Jubilo recreaberis: delicatula
nimis es, si velis gaudere cum Mundo, and postea regnare cum CHRISTO: Amarescat
Mundus, ut dulcescat DEUS. Quamdiu est in te Aegypti Farina, Manna coeleste non
gustabis; Gustat DEUM cui Libido Seculi Nauseam parit: Exinanitio nostra
plenitudinis Coeli capaces reddit. Si vis frui Sole, verte dorsum Umbrae: nec
amaris a Mundo, nisi a CHRISTO repulsa, nec a CHRISTO, nisi a Mundo spreta.
Dejicit se de Culmine Majestatis qui a DEO ad Consolatiunculas Creaturulae
confugit. O qu^am contempta recula est homo nisi supra humana se erexerit!
Beatum nil facit Hominem, nisi qui fecit Hominem; minimum enim Dei omnis Orbis
Magnitudine est magnificentius. Paucis, nec tibi ignominiosum sit pati quod
passus est CHRISTUS, nec gloriosum facere quod fecit Judas. Morere Mundo, ut
vivas DEO. Quicunque cum DEO habet Amicitiam, Felicitatis tenet Fastigium. Haec
unica Laus, hic Apex Sapientiae est, ea viventem appetere, quae morienti forent
appetenda: Mortis ergo Meditationi, and Aeternitatis Contemplationi Lucernulae
tuae Oleum impendas. Vale.

STorms on the Mind from Honors Hill descend;
Titles external Beams add not to Bliss:
The Poor wants much, the Covetous All. My Soul,
No painted Praise, nor flowr'd Encomiums prize
Equal to pious Breathings of pure Love:
Eschew the petty Pleasures of the Time,
And Heavens Refreshments make thy Jubilie:
Imagine not to swim in worldly Pomp,
And afterward to reign with CHRIST in Bliss;
Earth must be Gall, that GOD may Honey prove:
He the best Relish has of Heaven, who most
Disdains the base Licentiousness of the Age;
We must be emptied of our Selves, before
We can have Entrance into the Heavenly Court:
If we desire Fruition of the Sun,
Then must our Backs upon the Shade be turned;
Disclaimed by CHRIST are those the World does love,
And those whom CHRIST does love, the World contemns:
He of his Greatness does Himself divest,
Who goes from GOD, and Creature Comforts seeks.
O, what a mean despised thing is Man,
Unless he raise Himself above the Earth,
Since naught but his CREATOR makes him high!
Let Us think it no Shame to endure what CHRIST endured,
Nor glory to do that which Judas did;
Dead to the World, let us be alive to GOD,
Who gain his Favor are supremely blessed:
This is the Height of Wisdom, to desire
Those things in Life, which Thou would dying crave:
Then on the Thoughts of Death thy Lamps Oil spend,
And muse upon that State which nere shall end.
Mundo immundo.
NOn possum, non Art loqui; Furor addit Acumen:
Crimina taxantur, Nomina salva latent.
Munde, quid hoc sibi vult? tanto longinquius erras,
Quanto plus graderis; Te Cacoethes habet.
In quos Schismaticas torsisti saevius Hastas,
Quam quos Virtutis coelitus Vmbo tegit.
Protege me, Coelum! Quis adest? Oppressor avarus,
Cui prior est NUMMUS Numine, LIBRA Libro.
Numme, potens Deus es! Sic undique supplicat AURO,
Omnipotens veluti Numen inesset Ei;
Aurum Nequitiae Pater est, and Filius Orci;
Os promit Nectar; Men's Aconita vomit.
Hic vorat, utque rapax ruit in nova frusta Molossus;
Vasta Sitim pariunt Aequora, Terra Famem;
Tota nec explerent Pellaeas Aequora Fauces,
Terraque sat tantae non erit una Fami.
Perfida quisquis amat, se perdit, and odit amando:
Plus habet Ille DEI, qui minus Orbis habet.
Dum captat, capitur; Demon licet Omnia spondet,
Dat Mundus, magnum praeter inane, nihil.
Plena Fames, mellita Lues, Persuasio fallax,
Gloria Flos, Pulvis Gaza, Tiara cinis.
Tendiculas, Pigmenta, Dolos, Crepitacula, Fumos;
Has rauco Merces Gutture laudet Anus.
Insatiata Fames rapto superincubet Auro,
Porcus and aggestas grunniat inter Opes.
Littera R hebraea, pelasga, latina notabunt
Quod, malus, eR-RO-RESh, nil nisi, Mundus habet.
THE VANITY OF THE WORLD. CANTO X. The Abnegation.
ARGUMENT.
What Is potent Opulencie? What Is remiss
Voluptuousness? World, what is All This,
To That the SOUL'S created for, ETERNAL BLISS?
STANZA I.
VArious are Poets Flames; Some, Eclogues write,
Others describe a horrid Fight,
Some Lyrick Strains, and some the Epick do delight:
II.
But, here my sharpened Muse shall entertain
The Scourges of Satyrick Vein,
To lash the World, in which such Store of Vices reign.
III.
No Grandee Patron court I, nor entice
Love-glances from enchanting Eyes,
Nor Blandishments from lisping Wantons vocal Spice.
IV.
No such trite Theams our fired Genius fit,
Of which so many Pens have writ:
Prudential Souls affect sound Reason, not slight Wit.
V.
Blessed Talents which the GOSPELS PEARL do buy:
Frail Hopes that on the World rely,
Where None are saved by Faith, but by' Infidelity.
VI.
The way to gain more Ground, is to retreat;
Our Flight will be our Foes Defeat;
Minds conquering great Delights, triumph in JOYS more great:
VII.
Pull me not, World; nor can, nor will I stay;
Iugler, I know what thou can say:
Thy magic Spells charm easy Sense but to betray.
VIII.
Wits toil to please Thee, Sables yield their Skins;
The Silkworm to thy Wardrobe spins;
Rocks send their Gems, Seas Pearls, to purvey for thy Sins.
IX.
Thou brightnest Cupboards with thronged massy Plate;
Heap'st Ermin'd Mantles of Estate;
Show rich caparison'd champing Coursers at thy Gate.
X.
Thou cull'st of Natures Spoil from Air, Earth, Seas,
The winged, hoof'd, finnie Droves, to please
Gluttons, who make themselves Spittles of each Disease.
XI.
And shall, like Dives, a sad Reckning pay;
Feasts hastened on his Funeral Day;
Death brought the Voider, and the Devil took away.
XII.
Tell me no more, The art sweet, as spicie Air;
Or, as the blooming Virgin, fair;
And can with jovial Mirth resuscitate from Care.
XIII.
Boast not of Rubie-Lips, and Diamond-Eyes,
Rose-Cheeks, and Lilie-Fronts, made Prize,
With dimpled Chins, the Trap-pits where a Fondling lies.
XIV.
Deaths Sergeant soon thy courted Helens must
Attach, whose Eyes, now Orbs of Lust,
The Worms shall feed on, till they crumble into Dust.
XV.
Boast, World, who unto Revels do decoy
Thy Favorites, that they are bathed in Joy;
Disdaining Saints, who precious Time in PRAYER employ:
XVI.
Who, where they come, with purer Rays of Light,
Dazzle thy bat-ey'd Legions quite,
Rage, Impudence, and Ignorance, the Imps of Night.
XVII.
Fool, thy Attractives, in no Limits pent,
Indulge to Surfets, not Content,
And, but illude the Mind, not give It Ornament.
XVIII.
Gild over thy bitter Pills with guilefull Arts;
Sweet Potions brew for frolic Hearts:
When most thou smil'st, thou actest most perfidious Parts.
XIX.
With Thee dwells fawning Craft, and glozing Hate,
The Allurements of Imperious State,
Which, Barks, like Calms, invite unto a Shipwrackt Fate.
XX.
Guile, rule the World, that does in Madness roll:
Great Things the Better often control,
Where Pride is coacht, Fraud shopt, and Taverns drown the Soul.
XXI.
Folly in ruffling Storms with Frenzy meets,
Ebbing, and flowing ore the Streets
Of The care-fill'd pompous City, which exiles true Sweets.
XXII.
O fretting Broyls in populous Bussle pent,
Where still more Noise than Sense they vent,
And, now as much to Gold, as, late to Battles bent!
XXIII.
World, reason if thou can. Thy Sports leave Stings;
Thy Scenes, like Thee, prove empty Things;
Thou glorious seem in Paint, from whence all Falsehood Springs.
XXIV.
So, Rainbow Colors on Doves Necks have shone
In Hiew so diverse, yet so one,
That Fools have thought them all, the Wiser knew them none.
XXV.
I Will countercharm thy Spells, that SOULS, e're thee,
May trust wild Irish Seas; Who flee
Distressed to thy Relief, Thou say; What Is that to me?
XXVI.
Fawn, and betray, and Treasons self outdare,
TO overthrow by raising is thy Care,
But I Will ungull thy Minions, undisguize thy Ware.
XXVII.
Thy Gold's Dross, glittering Troubles are thy Bliss,
By Pomp thou cheat'st, thy All Is amiss:
Thou art Sins Stage, the Devil prompts, Flesh Actor is.
XXVIII.
Spectator- Sense applauds each witching Gin,
But, unto Reasons Eye within,
Thou seem Hells Broker, and the servile Pimp of Sin.
XXIX.
Thus Peaches do rough Stones in Velvet tire;
Thus rotten Sticks mock Starrie Fire;
Thus Quagmires with green Emeralds crown their cheating Mire.
XXX.
So, Mermaids lovely seem in Beauties Guize,
With Voice, and Smiles, draw Ears, and Eyes,
But whom they win, they sink; those never more shall rise.
XXXI.
Thy Shop's but an Exchange of apish Fashion,
Thy Wealth, Sports, Honors are Vexation,
Thy Favors glistring Cares, sweet Surfets, wooed Damnation.
XXXII.
Base Proverbs are thy Counsels to enthrall.
Each for himself, and God for All:
Young SAINTS (I dread to speak it) to old Devils fall.
XXXIII.
Rain on thy Darlings Head a Danaen Shour,
Let him be drencht in Wealth, and Pour;
What then? The have Stormed, and seized on All in one short hour.
XXXIV.
O, thou Prides restless Sea! swollen Fancies blow
Thee up, do blew with Envy grow,
Brinish with Blood, like the Red Sea, with Lust do flow.
XXXV.
Remorceless Rage! thou in thy fifth Acts Breath,
When Blood does freeze to Ice of Death,
And Life's jail'd up for Natures Debt, where art? Beneath.
XXXVI.
World, even Thy Name a whirling Storm implies,
Where Men, in Generations rise,
Like Bubbles, dropsy'd Bladders of the rainie Skies.
XXXVII.
Some strait sink down, whom Waters Sheet does hide;
Some, floating up and down, abide;
The longest are so circumvolv'd, as Rest's denied.
XXXVIII.
So, have we rid out Storms, when Eol's Rave
Plough'd up the Ocean, whose each Wave
Might waken Death with Noise, and make its Paunch a Grave.
XXXIX.
The sick Ship groaned, fierce Winds her Tacklings rent;
The proud Sea scorned to be Shoar-pent;
We seemed to knock at Hell, and bounce the Firmament.
XL.
Clouds then ungilt the Skies, when Lightnings Light
Flasht thousand glimmering Days to our sight,
But Thunders Canons soon turned those flasht Days to Night.
XLI.
Thus art thou, World, Life's Storm, at Death Distress;
Starving's the Bottom of Excess:
Thy Self a piteous Creature, how can me redress?
XLII.
No: had less cruel been, the had been less kind;
Oyl's in thy Gall to heal my Mind:
Thus Hell may help to HEAVEN, Satan a Soul befriend:
XLIII.
A good Cause with good Means some use, yet fare
But ill, when Others, of thy Care,
Whose Cause is bad, and Means ill used, successful are.
XLIV.
No Wonder Sins Career, uncheckt, runs on,
Since here Life's Joy it has alone,
Which, though thou bragg'st is given, no sooner's given, than gone.
XLV.
Pomp, Pleasure, Pelf, idolatriz'd by Fools,
Dispute we now in WISDOMS Schools:
Ambitions quenchless Fire in the Spring of Judgment cools.
XLVI.
Pride bladders tymp'nous Hearts, till pricked by Fear,
Soon they subside by venting there:
Unsafe Ascents to Power do watching Dangers rear.
XLVII.
Fearful, and feared is Pomp; Ambition steep
Does Envy get, and Hatred keep;
High State wants Station; Honour-thirsting Minds cannot sleep.
XLVIII.
Summon ASPIRO, with his Looms of State
To weave Prides Web, in spite of Fate;
Who, once got up, throws down the Steps did elevate.
XLIX.
He hates Superiors, 'cause Superiors, and
Inferiors, lest they's Equals stand;
And on his Fellows squints, that are in joint Command.
L.
The Ambitious treacherous are, and hoodwinkt quite;
Their giddy Heads have dazzled Sight,
For, Jealousy clothes Truth in double Mists of Spite.
LI.
His Eye must see, and wink; his Tongue must brave,
And flatter too; his Ear must have
Audience, yet careless be: Thus acts he KING and Slave.
LII.
So, brightest Angel blackest Devil hides;
Highest Rise to lowest Downfall slides;
A Mathematick point thus East and West divides.
LIII.
Bright Wisdom sends dark Policy to School,
Proves the Contriver but a Fool,
Who builds his Maxims on a Precipice, or Pool.
LIVE.
Great Ones, keep Realms from Want; They Will you from Hate:
Life's not so dear as Wealth; For, That
Holds single Bodies, This the Body of the State.
LV.
Who bad Desires conceive, they soon wax Great
With Mischief, then bring forth Deceit,
So, brood They Desolation, till it grows complete.
LVI.
Let such as sail against VIRTUES Wind, use Skill
To tack about; for, what is first Ill,
Grows worse by Use, and worst by Prosecution still.
LVII.
Even That to which Prides touring Project flies,
When graspt, soon by Fruition dies:
Great Fears, great Hopes, great Plots, great Men make Tragedies!
LVIII.
Achitophel and Absalon proved This,
Whose Brains of their Designs did miss;
Teaching deep Machavels; Fraud worst to the Plotter is.
LIX.
Fallacious They, and fallible have been,
Who made RELIGION cloak their Sin:
Man's greatest Good, or greatest Ill is from Within.
LX.
Those Policies that hunt for Shadows so,
As let at last the Substance go,
Which ever lasts, make wretched End in endless Woe.
LXI.
Had for thy Householdstuff the Spoil of Realms,
Could thou engross Cathaiahs Gems,
And more then triplicate Romes triple Diadems;
LXII.
Could with thy Feet toss Empires into Air,
And sit in the Universal Chair
Of State; were Pageants made for Thee the whole Worlds Mayor;
LXIII.
Yet those but Pageants were; Thou, Slave to Sense;
To him, not's own, all Things dispense
But Storms; Thou happier wast in the Preterperfect Tense.
LXIV.
Steward, give up the Account, the Audit's near
To reckon how, and when, and where;
Where much is lent, there is much required: Dooms Day's severe.
LXV.
Thus, proud Ambition is by Conscience peal'd;
Vapors sent up, a while concealed,
In thundering Storms pour down at length, when All Is reveald.
LXVI.
Though Prides high Head does brush the Stars, yet shall
Its Carcass like a Sulphur Ball,
Plunge into Flames Abyss. Pride concav'd Satan's Hall.
LXVII.
The Mighti'st are but Worms; pale Cowards they
Abasht shall stand at that GREAT DAY,
When Conscience, King of Terrors, shall their Crimes display.
LXVIII.
Giants of Earth, Aviso's may you tell,
That though with envied State you swell,
Yet, soon within Corruptions Charnel-house you will dwell.
LXIX.
Scepters are frail, as Reeds: who had no Bound,
Are claspt within six foot of Ground;
Whose Epitaphs next Age will be Oblivion found.
LXX.
Such Yesterday, as would have been their Slave,
To day may tread upon their Grave,
That flats the Nose: Best Lectures dust-seel'd Pulpets
LXXI.
Who tossed the Ball of Earth, in dark Vaults rest:
All what that General once possessed
Was but a Shirt in's Tomb, who vanquished all the East.
LXXII.
Invading Cyrus in a Tub of Gore,
Might quaff his Fill, who evermore
Had thirsted Blood: Him timeless Fate midst Triumphs tore.
LXXIII.
Weigh Things; Life's frail, Pomp vain; remember Paul,
(The way to rise will be to fall)
In's high Commission low, in's low, Conversion, tall.
LXXIV.
Soul, w'udst aspire to the Highest? clip Tumors Wing;
To the Test of HEAVEN thy Axioms bring:
Best Polit'ick David was. Who conquers Sin's the King.
LXXV.
Let raised Thoughts, Elijah-like, aspire
To be encharioted in Fire:
Faith, Love, Joy, Peace, the Wheels to Saints sublime Desire.
LXXVI.
Avaro cite, as void of Grace, as stored
With Gold, the GOD his Soul adored;
Wealth twins with Fear: Why start'st? Unlock thy unsunn'd Hord:
LXXVII.
I Will treble't by the Philosophic Stone;
This makes thee stare. Why, thus it is done,
To Passives Actives join in due Proportion.
LXXVIII.
Behold vast Sums unown'd! Thou hutch-cram'd Chink,
Art made as Nothing with a Wink,
Thou, bred from Hell, with Hell-deeds Souls to Hell do sink.
LXXIX.
Gold is the Fautress of all civil Jarres,
Treasons Reward, the Nerve of Wars,
Nurse of Profaneness, suckling Rage that Kingdoms marres.
LXXX.
Thou potent Devil, how do thou bewitch
The dreggy Soul, spott'st it with Itch!
This Slave to thee, his slave, was never poor, till rich.
LXXXI.
Now chest the all worshipped Ore with reverend Awe;
Sols Gold, and Luna's Silver draw
(Should Hell have these, 'twould plundered be) to sat thy Maw.
LXXXII.
While Gripes of Famine mutiny within,
And tan, like Hides, the shrivel'd Skin
Of The Poor, whose pining Want can not thy Pity win:
LXXXIII.
Having their Gravestones underneath their Feet,
Breath out their Woes to All they meet,
While thou to them are flintier than their Bed, the Street.
LXXXIV.
Blinded with Tears, with crying hoarse, forlorn
They seem to be of All, but Scorn:
Death than Delay (Wants bloudless Wound) is easier born.
LXXXV.
Thy Dropsy breeds Consumption in thine Heir;
Who thus to himself; -- I Will ease your Care,
Measure not Grounds, but your own Earth: Die now to spare.
LXXXVI.
What Is raked by Wrong, and kept by Fear, when mine,
Shall spread, as I Am -- Then brood the Shine,
Penurious Wretch, till thou by empty Fullness pine.
LXXXVII.
Thy Care's to lessen Cost; how slow thy Pays!
How quick Receipts! Love Fasting-Dayes,
But it is to save; thus starv'st in Store, thee Plenty slayes.
LXXXVIII.
When shall I rifle every Trunk and Shelf
Of this old muckie wretched Elf,
Who turns, as Chemists do, all that he scrapes, to Pelf?
LXXXIX.
O, sordid Phrenzie! Anxious Maze of Care!
O, gripple Covetize to spare,
And dream of Gold! The Misers Heaven, the Indians Snare.
XC.
Oppression is the Bloud-shot in their Eyes;
Bribes blanch Gehesa till he dies:
Fool, read, this Night Death may thy dunghill Soul surprise.
XCI.
Think not for whom thou do thy Soul deceive,
And injured Nature so bereave;
But still thy knotty Brain with wedg-like Anguish cleave.
XCII.
Sruck blind with Gold, brood on thy Rapines, till
Thou hatch up stinging Cares to the fill:
The heaviest Curse on this side Hell's to thrive in Ill.
XCIII.
Go, venture for it with Sharks; haste, Miser old
To the Hook, because the Bait is Gold:
Pawn thy Soul for it, as Judas did, when is LORD he sold.
XCIV.
Possessors are as Saul possessed, who cross
HEAVENS Law; Gain, got by Guile, proves Loss;
Getting begits more Itch; Lusts specious Ore is dross.
XCV.
Who sow to Sin shall reap to Judgment; Train
To Hell is Idolized Gain.
Can Death, or Vengeance bribe? If not, dread ceaseless Pain.
XCVI.
Why so fast poasted by thy struggling Cares,
And Self-slaying Fraud, with all their Snares?
Stay, view thy self; Destruction her cracked Glass prepares.
XCVII.
His pursie Conscience opens now. I Have run
On Rocks (he houls) too late to shun,
Lost Use, and Principle! Gold, I Am by Thee undone!
XCVIII.
If, to exhort be not too late, attend
The wholesome Counsel of a Friend,
Renounce thy Idol, and prevent thy wretched End.
XCIX.
Sound for Faiths Bottom with Hopes anch'ring Cord;
Repent, Restore, large Alms afford,
The dismal Fraught of sinking Sins cast overboard.
C.
He who returns to 's Avarice left, his Sore
Grows desperate, Deadlier than before,
His Hopes of HEAVEN much less, his Fears of Hell much more.
Oceani Monstrum natat infraenabile, Lingua;
Naves saepe pias haec Echeneis habet;
Cui paro Naumachiam, Freta conturbata pererrans,
Sit Remoque meo, Lis, Remoraeque tuae.
-- Spes rebus affixa fugacibus, uno
Frangitur Afflatu --
THE VANITY OF THE WORLD.CANTO XI. The Disincantation.
ARGUMENT.
Crispulus hic, nulli Nugarum Laud secundus,
Cui Men's Lucisinops, Stulta Ruina Domus;
Qui Cereri, Bromioque litat, Luxuque liquescit;
Huic ne putrescat, pro Sale Vita datur.
Volupto, crowned with Bliss of Fools, is bent
To Wine, Feasts, Gauds, loose Merriment;
Runs on in Lusts Career, till Grace stops-with Repent.
STANZA I.
O Headless, heady Age! O giddy Toys!
As humble Cots yield quiet Joys;
So prouder Palaces are Drums of restless Noise.
II.
'Twas in the blooming Verdure of the Year,
When through the Twins Sol's Course did steer,
That a spruce Gallant did, on Summons, strait appear.
III.
Glittering in Brav'ry, like the Knight of the Sun;
Whose Nags in Hide-park Races run
This Even. It Is sure Volupto, old Avaros Son.
IV.
Hot shows the Day, by the Dust upon his Head,
And all his Clothes so loosely spread,
He Is so untrust, as if it were not long to Bed:
V.
His Hands keep Time to the Tune of's Feet, his Pace
Is danced Measures, and it is Grace
Enough, ore's Shoulder to afford a quarter-face.
VI.
Act, 'bove French Monkies, Antimasks he might
Before the Apes (Spectators right)
Such Dops, Shrugs, Puppet-playes show best by Candlelight.
VII.
How mimick hum'rous Garbs in various kind
Do checquer Whimsies in the Mind!
As differing Flowers on Peru's Wonder Gardners find.
VIII.
Have thou black Patches too? for Shame, forbear;
Smooth Chins should not have Spots, but Hair:
But thou art modish, and can vapor, drink, and swear.
IX.
How blazing Tapers waste Life's blink away
In Socket of their mouldring Clay!
How powdered Curls do sin-polluted Dust bewray!
X.
As Prudence framed Art to be Natures Ape;
So Pride forms Nature to Arts Shape:
Corrupted Wine is worst that is pressed from richest Grape.
XI.
Wilt Reasons Sense dissolve in senseless Wine?
And sing, while Youths frail Gem does shine,
Come, Laughter, stretch our Spleen; Come Sack in Crystal Shrine!
XII.
First, Wine shall set, next shall a wanton Dame
Our Blood on Fire, then quench our Flame.
But, Brute, Repentance shall, or Hell thy wildfire tame.
XIII.
Now, with the Gallon ere thou try'st a Fall,
Think of the Handwriting on the Wall:
If Bacchus the Inturn gets, down Conscience goes and All.
XIV.
Should thou but once the swinish Drunkard view,
Presented in a Myrrour true,
Quite souc'd in Tavern Juice; in him, thy self thou would rue.
XV.
A nobler Birth, with an ignoble Breast,
Rich Corpse without a Minde's a Beast:
He Is razed from Honors Stem, who, Riot, is thy Guest;
XVI.
Thy Guests swollen Dropsies, and dull Surfets are:
The Gluttons Teeth their Graves prepare;
They Are sick in Health, and living dead, whose Maw's their Care.
XVII.
Go, Corm'rants, go, with your luxurious Flock,
Raped from three Elements; we mock
Your muskie Jellie, Pheasant, candid Apricock.
XVIII.
To Arabs, that they send their Phoenix write;
In's spice Nest be cookt it might:
Far fetched, dear bought, best suits the Apician Appetite.
XIX.
Go, with thy Stags embalmed, entombd in Paste;
On Tenants Sweat feeds rampant Waste:
We prize 'bove wild Intemp'rance, a Carthusian Fast.
XX.
Excess enhanceth Rates: Thou, on this Score,
Grind'st 'twixt thy Teeth the starving Poor,
Who beg dry Crumbs, which they with Tears would moysten ore.
XXI.
Laz'rus, thy Skin's Deaths Sheet, 'twixt that and Bone
There Is no Parenthesis! bemone,
Dives, CHRIST'S Members now, or thou shall ever groan.
XXII.
Prance, pampered Stallions, to the Grave you are driven:
Naught satisfies the Soul but HEAVEN,
Thou Art empty, World, from Morn, through Noon to doting Even.
XXIII.
In twice-dy'd Tyrian Purple thou do nest,
Restless, with heaving Fumes oppressed,
Which cause tumultuous Dreams, Foes to indulgent Rest.
XXIV.
From hence the Spark, (what pity it is!) is Ill
Grown cropsick. Post for Physics Skill;
Phlebotomize he must, and take the Vomit Pill.
XXV.
Doctor, the Cause of this Distemper state us.
His Cachexie results from Flatus
Hypocondrunkicus ex Crapula creatus.
XXVI.
School him, whose HEAVEN is Sense, whose Reason dim;
Who wastes his Time, as Time wastes him:
Give ore his Soul, Divine; Tailor make's Body trim.
XXVII.
Now, sheathed in rusling Silks, new Suits display;
Thy Clothes outworth Thee: Wisemen say,
Hedg-creeping Glowworms never mount to starrie Ray.
XXVIII.
Yet, who is born under Jupiter shall move
In The Sphere of Honor, Riches, Love;
Say Wizards. Under Jove w' are all born, none above.
XXIX.
Still to be pounct, perfumed, still queintly dressed,
Still to be guarded to a Feast
By fawning Looks, and squinting hearts -- like an Arrest.
XXX.
Still to have toting Waits un^eel thine Eyes,
In Bed, at Board, when sit, when rise:
Such, Card'nal-like, their Paris prize 'bove Paradise.
XXXI.
Know, Worldlings, that Prosperitie's a Gin,
If wantoniz'd, breeds Storms within:
To Torture turns the Metamorphosis of Sin.
XXXII.
Pomp its own Burden is, Whose slippery State
Often headlong, by too rash Debate,
Tumbles for value of a Straw, pulls on its Fate.
XXXIII.
His Heart-blood seeths; that Blood sends up in Heat
Fierce Spirits; those, in the Eye, their Seat,
Fires kindle; fiery Eyes, like Comets, Ruin threat.
XXXIV.
Fierce Balaam, hold thy Hand, and smite no Ass
But him in the Saddle; he alas
Wounds through her Sides himself: Wrath through the Soul does pass.
XXXV.
Duels for Blood, like Molocks Idol, gape.
Thou, turned a Swine out of an Ape,
First put'st on Peacocks Pride, at last the Tigers Shape.
XXXVI.
They Are gross, not Great, who serve wild Laws of Blood;
Such, only Great, who dare be Good:
GRACE buoies up Honor, which, without It, sticks in mud.
XXXVII.
Make thorough Search: As hard to find thy Cure,
As Circles puzling Quadrature,
Or, next Way by North-Sea to sail to China sure.
XXXVIII.
Lo, idle Sloth in Lap of Sodom placed.
Here lies He -- did Occasions wast,
Invaluable now, irreparable past.
XXXIX.
Go, wanton with the Wind: misused Hours have
A Life, no other then the Grave:
Most, for Life's circumstance, the Cause of living wave.
XL.
The privy Council of the glorious TRINE
Did in creating Man combine;
Angels looked on, and wondered at the Soul divine!
XLI.
Which, Storehouse of three living Natures is,
Does the vast World epitomize,
Of whom, even All we see's but a Periphrasis!
XLII.
Now, to what End can we conceive Man's Frame,
Save to the Glory of GODS Name,
And his eternal Bliss, included in the Same.
XLIII.
Fools, living die; SAINTS, dying live: Seeds thrive
When earth't: Who dye to Sin survive;
So, to come richer up, Pearl-fishers deeper dive.
XLIV.
Now Is Courtesan appears, who blows Loves Fire,
Her prattling Eyes speak vain Desire;
To catch this art-fair fly the following Trouts aspire.
XLV.
The gamesome Fly that round the Candle plays,
Is scorcht to Death in the courted Blaze:
Thus is the Amourist destroyed by lustful Gaze.
XLVI.
This Dame of Pleasure, does, to seem more bright,
Lattice her Day with bars of Night;
Spots this fair Sorceress Cloud, more to enforce Delight.
XLVII.
This Helen, who does Beauty counterfeit,
And on her Face black Patches set
(Like Tickets on the Door) shows that She may be Let.
XLVIII.
She Would Coach Affection on her Cheek: But why
W'ud Cupids Horses climb so high
Over her alpine Nose, t'orethrow it in her Eye?
XLIX.
Truths Apes, beware; such Wheels your Earth do wear;
Horses with rugged Hoof will tear;
Who living's coacht with Pride, shall dying fall with Fear.
L.
(But, noble LADIES, VIRGINS chaste, as fair;
Sweet modest Sex, that Virtuous are,
Ye First, my Honor; my Respect, ye Second, share.
LI.
ANGELICK FORMS, far be it to perplex,
Or cast Aspersion on your Sex:
Loose Art in Those, your native beaming Luster decks.
LII.
So, have I seen the Limners Hand design
A ruder Piece, near one Divine,
With this course face, to make That other Beauty shine.)
LIII.
Her Eyes spread Nets, her Lips Baits, and her Arms
Enthralling Chains: Sense hugs the Charms
Of Idleness and Pride, while Reason's free from Harms.
LIVE.
Tempestuous Whirlwindes revell in the Air
Of her feig'nd Sighs; her Smile's a Snare,
Which she as slighly sets, as subtly does prepare.
LV.
Scarce is the Toy at Noon to the Girdle dressed;
Nine Pedlars need each Morn be pressed
To lanch her forth: A ship as soon is rigged to the West.
LVI.
At length She Is built up with accoutred Grace;
The Spark's enflamed with her set Face,
Her glancing Eye, her lisping Lip, her mincing Pace.
LVII.
On those, his optic Faculties do play,
Like frisking Motes in sunny Day,
Like gaudy nothings in the Trigon Glass that ray.
LVIII.
On her, profusely now he spends his Ore;
Scarce the Triumvir lavisht more
When he did costly treat his stately Memphian Whore.
LIX.
Thou, inconsid'rate Flash, spend'st precious Days
In Dances, Banquets, Courtisms, Plays,
To gain the Shade of Joy, which, soon as gaind, decays.
LX.
Which, barely tasted makes thee long the more;
Enjoyed, it is loathed, was loved before:
Thus, nor Mirths Flood, nor ebb can please, nor Sea, nor Shore.
LXI.
His Pulse beats Cupids March, and's itching Vein
Must vent loose Lines, whence Souls are slain;
Which, by augmenting Lust, will but augment his Pain.
LXII.
Ah, might too forward Sin be checked by Fear!
But, what may cure that Eye, that Ear,
Which, being blind and deaf, brags best to see and hear!
LXIII.
Thy Juno's but a Cloud: She is not She
Thy fond Esteem makes Her to be;
Her Basilisks double Eyesight kills with viewing Thee.
LXIV.
She murders Poisons, thence Complexion's found
To murder Hearts. O, Joys unsound
From light-bred Daughters, though they weigh ten thousand pound!
LXV.
Tell me not, simpring Lais, that thy Ray
Can Blood, turned Ice, unfreeze, like May;
Whose spotted Face to Virtue does Soul spots betray.
LXVI.
Cerusse, not Lilies there; thy blushing Rose
Its Tincture to Vermilion owes:
Cursed be those civil Wars LOVES ROYALTY oppose.
LXVII.
Say not, a noble Love to thee he bears;
While's Hand writes Odes, his Eye drops Tears;
That tim'rously he is bold, burns, freezes, dares, and fears.
LXVIII.
Nor tell me, Nymphadoro, that Loves Throes
For her, rob thy Repast, Repose:
Thou peul'st not to repent, but to bebrine thy Woes:
LXIX.
Woes, worse then Waitings at the five Men's trade;
Worse than, when sick, through Sloughs to wade
In Stormy Night, hard jolted on a dull tired Jade.
LXX.
Shake off these Remoras would thee undo:
The VIRTUOUS loveli'est are. GRACE woo;
What Jeweller for Glass will orient Pearl forgo?
LXXI.
The Soul, that Beauteousnesse of GRACE exquires,
And to decline Bypath Desires,
Must inward bend the Rays of his selected Fires.
LXXII.
Unmuffle, ye dim Clouds, and disinherit
From black usurping Mysts his Spirit;
From Rocks, that split vain Hopes, to Heavenly Comforts rear it.
LXXIII.
B'entrencht ere midnight Larums; undergo
The Penance of repentant Snow,
Which, melting down, will quench, and cleanse, as it does flow.
LXXIV.
Repentance Health is, given in bitter Pill;
Best Rectifier of the Will;
The Joy of Angels, Love of GOD, the Hate of Ill.
LXXV.
Action's the Life of Counsel; Bathe thy Soul,
In The LAMBS red Laver; in Dust roll,
Before Despair; Hells Sergeant comes, drink Sorrows Boul.
LXXVI.
Ere the icie Mantle of a wrinkled Skin
Candies the Bristles of thy Chin,
Repent; ere chap-faln Door shall let Deaths Terrors in.
LXXVII.
Never too late does true Repentance sue;
Yet, late Repentance seldom's true:
Who would not, when they might, may, when they would, It rue.
LXXVIII.
For Minutes of impertinent Delight,
Loose not, o, loose not INFINITE!
Scorn to be Vassal to base Sin, and hellish Spite.
LXXIX.
Why do out-sin the Devil? He never soiled
With Lust, or Glutt'ny was; never foiled
With Drink, nere in the Net of Slothfulness entoyl'd.
LXXX.
I may persuade, yet not prevail! Sin-charms
Bewitch him, till Wrath cries to Arms:
Sins first Face smiles, her second frowns, her third alarms.
LXXXI.
Sinners are fondly blind when they transgress;
All Woes are, than such Blindness, less:
That Wretch most wretched is, who sleights his Wretchedness.
LXXXII.
Presumption slayes her thousands! too late then
Foe to advise of Danger, when
Vengeance, that dogs their Steps, shall worry them in's Den.
LXXXIII.
Gallants, Should Trophies Caesarize your Power,
Should Beauty Helenize your Flower,
Should Mammon Danaize ye with his golden Shower;
LXXXIV.
Yet, when REVENGE shall inward Thunders send,
And Sodom-Storms on Souls descend,
Salvation scorned, what rests but every torturing Fiend!
LXXXV.
That GOD refused, who you from Depth of naught
To Being, nay Well-being brought!
Ingrate, for Talents lent, return your selves Sin-fraught.
LXXXVI.
Bad Great Ones are Great Bad Ones: Foul Defect
It is, when Power does Shame protect;
Such, will do what they will, but, what they ought, neglect.
LXXXVII.
Virtue by Practice to her Pitch does soar;
But they, who such a Course give ore,
Shall sadly wish for Time, when Time shall be no more.
LXXXVIII.
Ye, brittle Sheds of Clay, resolve ye must
Into Originary Dust,
When swift-heeld Death oretakes you. Where Is then all your Trust?
LXXXIX.
Men in their Generations live by turns;
Their Light soon to its Socket burns;
Then to converse with Spirits they go, and None returns.
XC.
Tomb-pendant Scutcheons, pompous Rags of State,
Those gorgeous Bubbles but relate
The thing that was, nere lived: It Is Goodness gildeth Fate.
XCI.
Grace outlasts marble Vaults; That crowns Expense;
Brass is shortliv'd to Innocence:
Times greedy Self shall one Day find its Praeter-tense.
XCII.
When Heavens that had their Deluge-dropsie, shall
Their burning Fever have; When All
Is one Combustion; when Sol seems a black burnt Ball:
XCIII.
When Nature's laid asleep in her own Urn;
When, what was drowned at first, shall burn;
Then, Sinners into quenchless Flames, Sins Mulct, shall turn!
XCIV.
Nere shall a cooling Julep Such appease,
Whom Brimstone Torrents without Ease
Enrage, in the dungeon of dark flames, and burning Seas!
XCV.
In Center of the terrible Abyss,
Remotest from supernall Bliss,
That horrid, hideous, gloomy, endless Dungeon is!
XCVI.
Fools, who has charmed you? Sue betimes Divorse
From your vain World, where power did force
A Rape, there let not Choice make Marriage, which is worse.
XCVII.
Man is a World, and more; For this huge Mass
Shrunk, as a Scroul, away shall pass;
Whilst His pure Substance is as everlasting Glass.
XCVIII.
The World is like the Basilisks fell eyes;
Whose first sight kills; first seen, it dies:
Man, by a brave Disdain, its poys'ning Venom flies.
XCIX.
Gay World, who Thee adores, thou great wilt make;
Pearl may he quaff, and Pleasures take
Of Sense, but must descend into the Sulph'ry Lake!
C.
Is Hell the Upshot thou to thine can lend?
Crawl, grovelling Trifles, to your End;
Vanish beneath my Scorn. Go, World, recant, amend.
Provehimur Portu, Terramque relinquimus illam
Quae natum Gremio prima rigente tulit.
O felix Oculus Portum visurus Amantis,
Sit licet in Lacrymas naufragus ipse suas!
Dedignor Indigna.

In lenocitantes hujus Tempestatis Venerillas, Juvenum Scrobes, Animarum
Voragines.
IN nova fert Animus mutatas dicere Formas
Spectra, salax quarum Mente Libido furit.
Ludicra depicti jam prodit Imago Theatri,
En hic Scena vafris insidiosa Dolis.
Ergo mihi nunquam nisi Personata videnda es?
Si vis Personam sumere, sum tuam.
Cui loquor? Ipse tua deludor Imagine; Vera
Quid facies, cum vel fallere picta potes?
Picta Genas, discincta Sinus, nudata Papillas;
Albor Cerufsa, fit, Minioque Rubor.
Vendere si non vis Carnem, conclude Macellum;
Nec Lupa mentita decipe Carne Procos.
Nunc emere haud fas est, quia Quadragesima, Carnes;
Venales Mammas ergo Lanissa, tege.
Affigis Maculas dum Signa loquacia Malis,
Mercandum Pretio Corpus adesse notas.
Quae primam extenuat Culpam, rea saepe secundae est;
Saepius e prima Labe secunda venit.
Plurima compositos conservat capsa Colores;
Sic Faciem tibi, cum caetera vendis, emis.
Suavia viscosis renuo libare Labellis,
Ne teneat Fucus fixa Labella tuus.
Quam levis Incessus! quam Lumina paeta vagantur!
Verbula quam molli Gutture fracta fluunt!
Quid me blanda tuis fallacibus obruis Hirquis?
Serpentem Gremio, Virus in Ore geris.
Non amat, hamat Amor tuus, o Trivenefica, nostro
Non opus est Cultu, Te nimis ipsa colas.
Sidera contendas Oculi sint, Purpura Malae,
Electrum Crines, Dens Ebur, Ora Favi.
Consulto Speculo geris Omnia; fallet Imago:
Versus cancrinus quo^d Literas.
Te nam (an jurares) sera Ruina manet.
Sed quorsum in miseras labuntur Carmina Nugas?
Praesens, est absens, pars minor illa sui.
Quid velit haec Pictura loquens? quem postulat Usum?
Ut suspendatur nonne Tabella nitet?
Quid tunc e tanto restabit Amantibus Igne?
Fumus iners, tristis Faex, inamoenus Odor.
Ne jactes igitur Formam, fucata; Megaeram
Formosam fieri sic quoque posse reor.
Dicite, Doctores, huic quae Complexio? Quinta.
Quis placet huic Sensus, dicite? Sextus erit.
Sub quo signo orta? Opposito sub Virginis Astro
Edita sub cauda, credo, Draconis erat.
Quaenam illi fuerit Men's? Subdola. Lingua? dolosa.
Quae Metamorphosis? Prodigiosa sibi.
Naso, suam Metamorphosin qui scribere possit,
Quotidie Formas cum novet ista Venus?


In sceleratissimam Seculi Licentiam, cujus in melius commutandi exilis admodum
supersit Spes.
TOtus adeo in Maligno (mali ligno) positus est Mundus, ut vehementer hujusmodi
Satyris egeat. Vbique nunc locorum damnosa Malorum Vitia, noxiarum instar
herbarum, citissime pullulescunt. Perjuria, Superbia, Temulentia, etc. Terram
sub Mole Peccatorum non ruere admirabile, cum Coeli, qui ingentia illa Corpora
Solis, Lunae, Stellarum, praeter suam Vastitatem non solum ferunt, sed
circumferunt, absque Ruinae Periculo; unicum tamen Peccatum far nequiverunt,
sed statim per solidas illas Machinas, peccatum, cum suo Authore Lucifero,
delapsum, etiam Terram penetrans, ad Fundum Abyssi infernalis descendit.

ACtor Homo, Coelum Spectator, grande Theatrum Mundus, Vita frequens Fabula,
Scena Dies.

Unde ego, sublimi positus, Deliria Mundi
Defleo, dum Vitij Pondere triste gemit.
Esse quid hoc dicam, perversa quod Omnia cerno!
Denis quam Tenebris mergitur Orbis iners!
Talia tartareo crevere Piacula Seclo,
Vix Terris Scelerum mox Modus ullus erit.
Luxus ovans, impurus Amor, maculosa Libido,
Persica Mollicies, Spes levis, Ira gravis.
Carnificina Boni, sed Iniqui sedula Nutrix,
Orbis es, Illecebras nil nisi turpis habes.
Fraus juvat, hinc justa est, fallique and fallere gaudes;
Mors Jocus, Infernus Fabula, S^anna Polus.
Heu, Pietas ubi prisca! Profana o Tempora! Mundi
Faex, Vesper, prope Nox; o mora! CHRIST, Veni^

TE rapit aerio ventosa Superbia Curru;
Siste rotas, Currus ferventes siste; Loquamur.
Nunc opus est leviore Lyra. Tu, Cyprie Bubo,
Ore procax, Novitatis amans, Venerisque Satelles,
Callidus incautas Philtris mollire Puellas,
Splendida rimaris petulanti Lumine Spectra,
Et Mala quaeque Bonis praefers, Deliria Veris,
Frivola vaniloquo Mendacia gutture jactas,
Mentis inops, Ratione carens, Virtutis inanis,
Volveris effuso suadente Libidine Luxu,
Lauta coronatis ambis Convivia Mensis,
Sunt tibi Deliciae, Risus, Jocularia Cordi,
Futilibus fatuus Garritibus Era pulsas,
Quique ciet Nugas, Donaria summa reportat,
Illicitumque putas nihil; Omne, quod officit, optas;
Expetis ut fulvum Mundus vertatur in Aurum;
Aurita de Gente Midae reor esse Nepotem:
Stulte, tuas Vestes, Avis ut Junonia plumas,
Aspicis; in Cute curanda male conteris Aevum.
O, Genus insipidum! sani tibi mica Cerebri?
Auscultet tumido Gens implacabilis Ore.
Luxuries praedulce Malum, blanditur, and angit:
Innumeras parit ipsa Cruces, nutritque, Voluptas:
Vita vices morientis habet, morerisque superstes.
Sed, quid ago? Surdis cantatur Fabula* Fati
Vespera mox veniet! quid inexorabilis haeres?
Cuncta tenere putes; tu percipis omnia; Solum
Hoc nescis, Pant^n quod es insanissimus Andr^n.

In strenuos hujus Seculi Compotores, and Gulones Perditissimos.
QValis hic Boatus? quae Vociferatio? Auscultemus. Aut bibite, aut hunc
Cantharum, quantus quantus est, in Capita impingam vestra. Sic enim assuefacti
(a sue facti) sunt; Qui tamen Ipsi nondum hesternam edormiverunt Crapulam. Heu,
quam petitis perituri peritura! Labantes ad Praecipitium impellitis, and ad
Infernum proruentibus, calcar subditis! Interim tamen vos accusat Conscientia,
Testis est Memoria, Ratio Iudex, Voluptas Carcer, Timor Tortor, Oblectamentum
Tormentum! Vnde, hi vorando, bibendo, ludendo, dormiendo, moriendo, just
obliviscantur sui, qui vivendo (nisi jurando) semper obliti sunt Dei.

TUrgidus iste quis est? ambas perpotus ad Aures,
Qui tradit rabidae Fraena soluta Gulae;
Qui plures avido Calices ingurgitat haustu;
Cui Venus in Vinis, Ignis in Igne furit;
Cui Venture Deus est, and lauta Culina Sacellum;
Orgia cui madidi grata profana Dei;
Cui sunt Liba Dapes, and Compotatio Festum;
Et Pietas plena Lance litare Gulae;
Plurima qui spondet, perfusus Tempora Baccho;
Omnia quae Socijs, cras, sine front negat;
Cujus Lingua vomit spumantia Vota Salutis,
Obrutus est nimio dum sine Mente Mero.
Vivamus liquidi, potemus, edamus, ovemus;
Nulla Sepultorum nascitur Vva Cavis:
Mordaces Curas solvamus Vociferando,
Sic permittamus laetius ire Dies:
Fall Diem, strue Serta, Scyphum rape, tingere Nardo;
Si tibi Cura mei, sit tibi Cura Meri:
Prome Falerna, remitte Pavenda, propellito Nubes:
Leviathae Os utinam nunc mihi grande foret!
Gemmatis si Musta bibam flammantia Poclis,
Inde frequens Naso Gemma repent micet^
Plurima sic olidis epotat Vina Tabernis,
Vt referat brutas sordida Vita Sues:
Immersus Vitij Barathro, Scelerisque Profundo,
Ebrius Errorum Nectare, Porcus ovat.
Immemor ipse sui, nimium memor ipse Suorum,
Carneus iste Cadus, Viva Culina cluat.
Nocturno reboat dum caeca Plataea Tumultu,
Quodvis ex animo suave peregit Opus.
Una Salus tibi sit nullam potare Salutem:
Te Puer in triviis erudijsse potest.
Qui mihi Discipulus, Bibo sis, cupis atque doceri;
Huc ades, Abdomen spernere disce tuum.
Pondus iners, Carnis Cumulus, Vinique Culullus,
Progenies Grylli, Dux Epicurus harae;
Coenum, non Coelum sapis, Ingluviemque saginas,
Non Mentem; solum pro sale Vita datur.
Ditia sorbebit subit^ Patrimonia Guttur;
Quod tua peccarunt Guttura, Vitra luunt.
Quae Mare, Terra, Polus, Pisce, Alite, Vite ministrant,
Desidis alta Gulae Cuncta Barathra vorant.
Effera Tempestas Cellae, Barathrumque Macelli!
Examines tumulet mortua Turba tuos!
Hoc verbo concludo, nec os tibi sublino: Nequam es:
Exitio, nisi te corrigis, Ipse tibi.
EHeu, quam Magnificus iste jam aegrotat misere! ecce, Linteola Manu contrahit,
distorto Ore and distento Labia dispandit, anhelis Pulmonibus difficile spirat,
longum Vale Mundo dicit, tenebrescentes Oculos circumvolvit, and suburbia
Mortis intrat. Lectores, clarum hic Speculum Fragilitatis cernite. Gregor.
Magnus Lib. 4. Cap. 38. Dialogorum, de Chrysorio Romano tradit Historiam, de
quo, an Divitijs, seu Vitijs magis abundaverit, incertum fuit. Cum, quasi
expirans, anxiaretur, apparuere illi teterrimi, Daemones, ipsum certatim
prensantes, trahereque ad Inferna annixi; Ille, Horrore tremuit, seque super
Lectum huc atque illuc vertere miseris coepit Modis. Nec dubitaret Quisquam
Spiritus sibi apparuisse, qui probe illius Gestus; and Lamenta consideraret.
Postremo, ipse, cum jam Amicorum Auxilio desperasset, ad Hosts conversus,
Inducias, oro, Inducias, inquit, Inducias, vel tantum usque ad mane! cui,
Daemones; Stulte, hac nocte eripietur tibi Anima. Dum hoc poscendo ingeminat,
Animam exhalavit! Vae vobis miseris, qui in ipsis Voluptatum Blandimentis,
saevis Pa^perum Oppressionibus, and iniquis Praeliandi Ardoribus subito
auferimini!

INstare, heu, summum, Men's, tibi creed Diem,
Actus Fabellae jam tibi quintus adest,
Namque stat ad Mortis Limina Vita tremens;
Quid modo, dum Muris imminet Hostis, agas?
Te rapiet subito Mors inopina Gradu!
An non supremi Iudicis Ora times?
Mente soporata Cuncta quieta fluunt,
Exagitat saevis evigilante Minis!
Stat vinctum rigido sons Adamante jecur,
Undique constrictum Crimine, Lege, Nece!
Stare tamen nullo men's queat aegra Loco!
Afflictum Pectus quis tolerate potest!
Me Tremor, Impietas, Flagra, Gehenna rotant!
Totus in Aspectu sum rea Massa Dei!
Heu, quam terribilis Sontibus Vltor adest!
Qui Flagellorum millia mill parat!
Quis dabit hisce Modum, queis Modus omnis abest!
Supplicium Aeternum! Dirus ut ille Sonus!
Nullis Inferni Flamma domatur aquis!
Aestus at infusae Gurgite crescit Aquae!
Nunc, Mundi quid Honos, Gaza, Jocusque, valent!
Vos, speciem fumi, quicquid habetis, habet;
Perfidiosa sequi Ludicra Mundus amat;
Tristia sub placido melle Venena latent;
Quo magis arrident, sunt metuenda magis;
Turgida ventoso Pectora Folle replent.
Inter Acidalias, ceu Sybarita, Rosas
Crevi, Praeda feris discrutianda Rogis!
Praedonum Paphia mitior Ira face;
Cultorem perdis; qui tibi vivit, obit;
Arbore seu Chavae, prima Venena necis,
Arbore sic CHRISTI Vita secunda fluit.
Hac, hac sit nostra Meta terenda rota!
Jam nunc Justorum Fata lubire velim!
Pro Te, CHRIST, pati, est vincere, Vita mori:
Te peto dum superest Halitus; Oro, fave.
Hanc, DEUS, ex magno mittis Amore Crucem:
Sum miser, ah, misero fer miseratus Opem!
Nunc opus est Precibus, nunc Open, CHRIST, tua!
Unus Opem, Vulnus qui dedit, Ille ferat!
Poenitet admissi Criminis; oro DEUS,
Sanguinis inspergat, Gutta vel una tui!
^perem, vix ullam Spes ubi cernat Opem!
Singula baptizem Corporis Acta mei!
Sint Lachrymae Mentis Gaudia sola meae!
Quae suaves aliquid, Nectaris instar, habent;
Tristia qui spargit, Gaudia abinde metet;
Laetitiae Segetem flebilis Unda parit:
Langueo, sola sons Lachryma! Lingua sile.
Haec, Lector, siccis qui tueare Genis! Mundi Contemptus.
DEliciae, Luxus, laqueata Palatia, Gemmae,
Incautos, veluti blanda Venena, ^ecant;
In Trabea Livor, Gemma Timor, Ira sub Auro;
Bullatum his Pectus plurima Pestis agit.
Est Honor umbra Rei. Quid Honoris Spes? minus umbra;
Umbram finge umbrae, spes id Honoris erit;
Dum placet, illudit; dum splendit, fallit; amoenam
Sic referens bullam, frangitur illa micans:
Aurea pacatam turbant Laquearia Mentem,
Et Vigiles Noctes Purpura saepe trahit;
Oblongas videt ire vigil sua Taedia Noctes,
Praeque ipsis longas Noctibus ire Dies:
Saepe Equitem excussit, fracta Cervice Sedentis,
Ad Titulos properans Ambitionis Equus:
Illis, sceptrigeri quos lactat Gloria Mundi
Auratis Tectis, fit peregrina Salus.
Divitias Avidus per aperta Pericula Ponti,
Retia quae Mentis, concumulare studet.
Haec, mihi ne noceant cauto, cretata facessat
Ambitio, and fulvi sordida Cura Luti.
Felix qui streperi Ludibria rideat Orbis,
Aspernans Aevi luxuriantis Opes.
THE SWEETNESS OF RETIREMENT, OR The Happiness of a Private Life. CANTO XII.
The Segregation.
ARGUMENT.
TV, mihi Thema, Quies Animae, sanctusque Recessus;
Rores dum saturant me, Deus alme, tui.
Vera Quies, Paucos nosti, notissima Paucis;
Dum fugio Plures, te peto, vera Quies.
Carmina Secessum? Potius Devotio quaerit:
Sic quadrant Modulis Pectora sancta suis.
Turbat Apollineas clamosa Molestia Musas;
Christicolae Modulos sed magis illa gravat.
Sit procul Vrbs, prope Vota mihi; mihi reddar, and intus
Plena Fide perstet Men's mea, plena Deo!
Hoc Nemus est Templum, patuli Laquearia Rami;
Fit sacrae Truncus quisque Columna Domus:
Pervia Sylva patens est Porta, Cacumina Pinnae;
Baptismi Pignus Rivulus omnis habet:
Dat Mensam Collis sacram mihi Cespite tectus;
Pectoris Ara Fides, Zelus Amorque focus.
Si quis Baptistes in Eremo praedicet, Ecce
Pulpita, in arborea Sede locata, patent.
Hic licet elata dare Verba precantia Voce;
Et si^e Test, Deo nec nisi Test, loqui.
Ipsa monent tremulas quatientia Flamina frondes,
Per nos fundendas Cord tremente Preces.
Antevolansque cavo Suspiria nostra Susurro,
Dum gemit Aura levis, Tugeme, Cultor, ait.
Voce Deum celebro; Concordes sponte Choristae,
Sunt Praecentores, dum modulantur, Aves.
Amen subijcio; dat Amen, quasi Clericus, Echo.
Sylva placet, Luxus Desidiose, Vale.
THE ARGUMENT.
True Bliss! Thou know but Few, to Few art known;
While we shun Many, Thee alone
We court, and All enjoy in Thee, when All are gone.
STANZA I.
WAste not an other Word on Fools; Forsake
What grates the Ear, pure Notions take;
Know, that the smoothest Hones, the sharpest Razors make.
II.
Ill suits it with a Russet Life, to write
Court- Tissue: Swayns, by thresholds Sight,
Observe, as well, as Lords by Clocks of Gold, Times flight.
III.
Whose Crystal Shrines, like Oysters, gape each hour,
Discov'ring Time by Figures Power:
That is the nobler Watch, foreshowes the threatening Shour.
IV.
While comb'rous Gain does various Cares obtrude,
The richer Mind courts Solitude,
And does Guile (subtle to beguile it self) exclude.
V.
More than high Greatness humble Goodness draws;
Elm Rafters, mantled 'Ore with straws,
Out-blesse Escuriall Tour's that seem Heavens Cupulas.
VI.
Each City-Shop's a Trap; each Toy, a Yoke;
What Wiseman willingly would choke
Himself in thicker Clouds of griping Care, than Smoke?
VII.
Who would not fly that Broil, whence Bliss is flown;
Where, in Times dregs, Religion's grown
From Best, to All (flow Tears of Blood!) from All, to none.
VIII.
LORD, guide thy Church, which Interests empair;
Who, without Knowledge, factious are,
They little mind the Flock, so they the Fleece may share.
IX.
Why climbed they else the Pulpit, as Lots Brother,
With Fire in one Hand, Knife in the other?
'Twas vip'rous Nero slew his own indulgent Mother.
X.
As Peace Heavens Blessing; so is War His Rod,
Man-hunting Beast, a Scourge from GOD,
Which does unhinge the World; fierce Grapes in Wraths Press trod.
XI.
Let me, in Griefs Prerogative, be bold
To question Such, as dare to hold
That they the SHEPHERD loved, when they forsook the Fold.
XII.
Such Scramblers at the Shearing Feasts, I shun;
Forgetting, and forgotten, run
To fraudlesse Swains. I have a FRIEND compliant won;
XIII.
By his Example may my Life be penned,
May He read, like Himself, his Friend:
Souls in Conjunction should, like Stars, kind Influence send.
XIV.
Us Sympathy, the Minds true Priest, does join;
It Is Grace makes Sociall Love, divine;
Tuned Octaves Uni'sons are, Duos in One combine.
XV.
When two enweav'd are in one high Desire,
They feel like ANGELS, mutual Fire;
Flames Intellectiue live, material Flames expire.
XVI.
Vain World, thy Friends are Thieves of Time; Twice they
Are robbed; for, Times Self steals away,
Leaving a dull December for a sportive May.
XVII.
Fools Chat is built on Sand; But blessed who hives
Discourse, that on Heavens Sweetness lives,
Such, as to raise the Fire to highborn Virtue strives.
XVIII.
For Birds of Paradise the proper Fare
Is purest Vapor of the Air;
Souls nourisht from the Influ'nce of GODS SPIRIT are.
XIX.
Dew fattens Earth, the Earth yields Plants, and then
The Plants feed Beasts, the Beasts feed Men;
Man on His WORD should feed, who gave him Origin.
XX.
From Public Roads, to private Ioy's our Flight;
To view GODS Love, we leave Man's sight;
Rich in the Purchase of a Friend, who gilds Delight.
XXI.
Thus go we, like the Heroes of old Greece,
In Quest of more than Golden Fleece,
Retreating to sweet Shades, our shattered Thoughts we piece.
XXII.
So, when the Sun, Commander of the Day,
Muffles with Clouds his glorious Ray,
He clearer afterward does his bright Face display.
XXIII.
Kings, too much seen, grow mean. Renown does dawn
From Cotts, unsightly hanged, and drawn
With Spider-woven Arras, and their Cobweb-Lawn.
XXIV.
Victorious Charles the fifth, who had acquired
Fame, Wealth, and what could be desired
By greatest Emperors, left All, to live retired.
XXV.
That Sea-dividing PRINCE, whose Sceptered Rod
Wrought Freedom to the Church of GOD,
Made in the Mount of Horeb forty Days Abode.
XXVI.
In Wilderness the BAPTIST shined more clear,
In Life's Night Starrie Souls appear:
They who Themselves eclips, are to Heavens Court more dear.
XXVII.
But, now what need we cite Examples more,
This by our SAVIOR heretofore
Was practiced, Who, whole Nights retired, did GOD implore.
XXVIII.
Examples are best Precepts. Sweet Secesse,
The Nurse to inbred Happiness,
How do Thou Intellects with fuller Knowledge bless!
XXIX.
Waft us, All-guiding POVV'R, from wild Resort,
By Cape of Hope, to Virtues Port,
Where Conscience, that strong Champion, safely guards the Fort.
XXX.
Here, Liberty, even from Suspicion free,
Does terminate our Fears; by Thee
We conquer Lusts: Each Sense wears Reasons Livery.
XXXI.
With Thee, like cloistered Snails, is better State,
Than to be Lions in a Grate:
The World hers, coopt like Bajazet, does captivate.
XXXII.
But, here (the Type of ever-smiling Joys,
Without disturbing Fears, or Noise)
We bright-ey'd Faith, with quick-ey'd Art, in Truths Scale poize.
XXXIII.
Religious Mary's Leisure we above
Encombred Marthas Cares approve;
Uncloystred, we this Course beyond Courts Splendour love.
XXXIV.
Seated in safe Repose (when circling Earth
Suffers by Rage of War, and Dearth)
Secure from Plagues and angry Seas, we manage Mirth.
XXXV.
The low-built Fortune harbors Peace, when as
Ambitious high-rooft Babels pass
Through Storms; Content with Thankfulness each Blessing has.
XXXVI.
So fragrant Vilets, blushing Strawberies
Close shrouded lurk from lofty Eyes,
The Emblem of sweet Bliss, which low and hidden lies.
XXXVII.
No masked Fraud, no Tempest of black Woes,
No flaunting Pride, no Rage of Foes,
Bends hitherward, but soon is laid, or over-blows.
XXXVIII.
We rule our conquered Selves; what need we more?
To gadding Sense we shut the Door;
Rich in our Mind alone. Who wants himself, is Poor.
XXXIX.
Slander is stingless, Envy toothless here;
The Russet is well lined we wear;
Let Citts make Chains the Ensigns of their Pomp appear.
XL.
Faith linkt with Truth, and Love with Quiet too,
Ore pleasant Lawns securely go;
The golden Age, like Jordans Stream, does here reflow.
XLI.
For Fields of Combat, Fields of Corn are here,
For Trooping- Ranks, Tree-ranks appear;
War steels the heart, but here we melt Heart, Eye, and Ear.
XLII.
O, might a sacred Muse Earths Frenzy calm!
On That we'd pour such suppling Balm,
As might vain Trophies turn to an unfading Palm.
XLIII.
Then should each He, who wears the Face of Man,
Discern their Emptiness, and span
The Vulgars trivial Idols, and their Follies scan.
XLIV.
Though in rough shells our Bodies kerneld are,
Our Roof is neat, and sweet our Fare,
Banished are noysom Vapors to the pent-up Air.
XLV.
No subtle Poison in our Cup we fear,
Goblets of Gold such Horrors bear;
No Palace Furies haunt, o rich CONTENT! thy Cheer.
XLVI.
How Great are Those who use, like Gold, their Clay;
And who like Clay, Gold, Great are they;
To Grandeur, slighted Titles are the ready Way.
XLVII.
Courts amplest Shine nor adds, nor takes from MINDS
That pierce the World, true MERIT binds
Bright Souls unto It, whilst Fog the ignoble blindes.
XLVIII.
Humble, not slav'd; without Discomfort sad;
Timorous, without despair; and glad,
Without wild Freaks we are. The World's or Fool, or Mad.
XLIX.
From Taurus when Sols Influence descends,
And Earth with verdant Robe befriends,
And richer Showers, then fell on Danaes Lap, dispends;
L.
When early Phosphor lights from Eastern Bed
The gray-ey'd Morn, with Blushes red;
When Opal-Colours prank the Orient Tulips Head:
LI.
Then walk we forth, where twinkling Spangles show,
Entinseling like Stars the Dew,
Where Buds, like Pearls, and where we Leaves, like Em'ralds, view:
LII.
Birds by Grovets in feathered Garments sing
New Ditties to the non-ag'd Spring;
O, how those tracelesse Minstrels cheer up every Thing!
LIII.
To hear quaint Nightingales, the Lutes of the Wood,
And Turtle-Doves, by their Mates wooed,
And smelling Vio'let sweets, how do These cheer the Blood!
LIVE.
While teeming Earth flow'rd Satin wears, embost
With Trees, with Bushes shagg'd, with most
Clear Riv'lets edged, by rocking Winds each gently tossed;
LV.
The branching Standarts of the chirping Grove,
With rustling Boughs, and Streams that move
In murmuring Rage, seem Natures Consort, tuned by Love.
LVI.
We to their hoarse Laments lend listening Ears;
And sympathize with them in Tears,
Sadly remembering British Sions acted Fears!
LVII.
Then, our sad Hearts are pricked, whence spring forth Cries;
From those, drained through the bruised Soul, rise
Faith-fumes, by Heavens Fire drawn, which drop through melting Eyes!
LVIII.
Cause hungry Swords devoured Man's Flesh, like Food,
And thirsty Spears were drunk with Blood:
LORD, how thy Spouse turns mummy'd Earth! her Gore a Flood!
LIX.
Edgehill with Bones looked white, with Blood looked red,
Mazed at the Number of the Dead:
A Theme for Tears in unborn Eyes to be still shed!
LX.
How many bound with Iron, who did escape
The Steel! and Death commits a Rape
On them in Jayls, who Her defied in warlike Shape!
LXI.
Cross-biasnesse to Grace our Ruin spinn'd!
Harrow'd with Woes, be HEAVEN our Friend!
Sodom against Nature, We against Light of TRUTH have sinned!
LXII.
This draws Eye-tribute from Compunctions Den;
GRACE, guard thy prostrate Suppliant then,
Who am the Chief of Sinners, and the Worst of Men!
LXIII.
My Guilt before thy MERCY-SEAT I lay,
For HIS sake save me, who gave way
To dye for Sinners! Ah, Sin kills HIM every Day!
LXIV.
Sin n'ere departs, till humbled in deep Fears,
Embalmed in Prayers, and drowned in Tears,
The fragrant Araby breathes no Perfume like Theirs.
LXV.
More fruitful Those, unwitnessed, appear;
Gems are too cheap for every Tear:
Deep Sorrow from Itself does its high Comfort rear.
LXVI.
Salt Tears, the pious Converts sweetest Sport,
To hopeful Joys the entering Port,
Ye waft blessed Mariners to Sions glorious Court.
LXVII.
But whether stray'st thou, Grief? Pearld Dew arraies
As yet the Virgin-Meads, whose Gaies
Unbarb'd, perk up to prank the curled Stream that plays.
LXVIII.
By rushy-fringed Banks with purling Rill,
Meandring underneath the Hill:
Thus, Stream-like, glides our Life to Deaths broad Ocean still.
LXIX.
The pleasant Grove triumphs with blooming May,
While Melancholy scuds away;
The painted Quire on motly Banks sweet Notes display.
LXX.
Earths flow'r-wov'n Damask does us gently woo,
On her embroidered Mantle to
Repose, where various Gems, like Constellations, show.
LXXI.
Our selves here steal we from our selves, by Qualms
Of Pleasure, raised from new-coyn'd Psalms,
When Skies are blew, Earth green, and Meadows flow with Balms.
LXXII.
We there, on grassie tufted Tapistries,
In guiltless Shades, by full-hair'd Trees,
Leaning unpillow'd Heads, view Natures Ants, and Bees.
LXXIII.
Justly admiring more those agile Ants,
Than Castle-bearing Elephants;
Where Industry, epitomized, no Vigor wants.
LXXIV.
More than at Tusks of Bores we wonder at
This Moths strange Teeth! Legs of this Gnat
Pass large-limm'd Gryphons; Then on Bees we musing sat;
LXXV.
How Colonies, Realms Hope, they breed; Proclaim
Their King; how Nectar-Courts they frame;
How they in waxen Cells record their Princes Fame:
LXXVI.
How Kings amidst their Bands in Armor shine;
And great Souls in small Breasts confine;
How under strictest Laws they keep up Discipline;
LXXVII.
How All agree, while their King lives, in one;
But dead, the public Faith's overthrown,
Their State becomes a Spoil, which was so plenteous grown.
LXXVIII.
Abstruser Depths! here Aristotle's Eye
(That Ipse of Philosophy,
Natures Professor) purblinde was, to search so high.
LXXIX.
Thinking, which Some deem Idleness, to me
It seems Life's Heaven on Earth to be;
By Observation GOD is seen in all we see.
LXXX.
Our Books are HEAVEN above us, Air and Sea
Around, Earth under; Faith's our Stay,
And Grace our Guide, the Word our Light, and CHRIST our Way.
LXXXI.
Friend, view that Rock, and think from Rocks green Wound
How thirst-expelling Streams did bound:
View Streams, and think how Jordan did become dry Ground.
LXXXII.
View Seas, and think how Waves, like Walls of Glass,
Stood fixed, while Hebrew Troops did pass;
But closed the Pharian Host in one confused Mass.
LXXXIII.
These Flowers, we see to Day, like Beauty, brave,
At Even will be shut up, and have
Next Week their Death, then buried soon in Stalks, their Grave.
LXXXIV.
Beautie's a Flower, Fame Puff, high State a Gaze,
Pleasure a Dance, and Gold a Blaze,
Greatness a Load: These soon are lost in Times short Maze!
LXXXV.
As solemn Statesmen slight mere childish toil,
Framing Card-structures: ANGELS smile,
And pity so, when Life strait flits, Man's tearing Broyl.
LXXXVI.
Search Empires Dawn, unwinde Times Ball again,
Unreel through Ages its snarl'd Skain;
Run back, like Sol on Ahaz Dial; See- All Is vain.
LXXXVII.
This did I from THEOPHILA descry,
(Not her fair-feather'd Speech could fly
To Ground, but my Ears Pitfall caught it instantly;
LXXXVIII.
Though her informing Voice be parted hence,
Tides of impressive Notions thence
Flow, soft as Shours on Balm, and sweet as Frankincense.)
LXXXIX.
The Conqueror who wades in Blood for Power,
Cannot ensure the ensuing Hour;
Death soon may his Ovations sweetest Nectar sour.
XC.
All Is vain. The Assyrian Lion, Persian Bear,
Greek Leopard, Roman Eagle-where?
Where is famed Troy, that did so proudly domineer?
XCI.
Troy's gone, yet Simois stays. O, Fortunes Play!
That which was fixed is fled away,
And only what was ever-flitting still does stay!
XCII.
Vast Pyramids uprear'd t'interre the Dead,
Themselves, like Men, are sepulchred;
Ambitious Obelisks, Ostents of Pride, Dust wed.
XCIII.
HEAVEN sees the crumbling Fabric of Earths Ball,
That Dust is Man's Original;
To HIM All Nature is as withered Leaves that fall:
XCIV.
Terrestrials transient are. Kings fight for Clods;
HEAVENS HEIR is mightier PRINCE by odds,
Even All is His, and He is CHRIST'S, and CHRIST is GODS.
XCV.
Thoughts, dwell on This. Let Us be our own Deaths-Head.
The glorious Martyr lives, though dead,
Sweet Rose, in his own fadelesse Leaves enveloped:
XCVI.
HEAVEN was his Watch, whose starrie Circles wind
All Ages up; the Hand that signed
Those Figures, guides them; World, thy Clocks are false and blind.
XCVII.
Time in ETERNITIES immense Book is
But as a short Parenthesis;
Man's Life, a point; GODS Day is never-setting Bliss.
XCVIII.
Could Man sum up all Times, so, as if there
A Moment not remaning were;
Yet all those close-throng'd Figures seem but Ciphers here.
XCIX.
Could Calculators multiply times Glass
To Myriads more of Years; alas,
Those Sands, to This DURATION, as a Minute pass.
C.
Such mental Buds we from each Object take,
And, for CHRIST'S Spouse, of Them we make
Spiritual Wreaths, nor do we Her own Words forsake.
CI.
Arise, o, North, and thou, o, South-winde, blow;
Let Scent of Flowers, and Spices flow,
That the BELOVED may into his Garden go.
CII.
Whose Beauty Flowers, whose Height made lofty Trees,
Whose Permanence made Time, and These
Pay Tribute by Returns to HIM, as Springs to Seas.
CIII.
This steals our Soul from her thick Loom, to aspire
To Canzons, tin'd with Enthean Fire;
Taking high Wing to soar up to the Angel-Quire.
CIV.
By such like Speculations would we stie
To the SUN of Righteousness! though I
A Star am less than least of all the Galaxie.
CV.
The Burden to each Hymn is This. Thy Ways,
LORD, are inscrutable! All Days,
All Tongues, are few, are weak, to sound thy endless Praise*
CVI.
O, that a VOICE more audible, and high'r
Than that shrill Trump, when All Is on Fire,
Might all Men's Hearts and Tongues with thy Renown inspire!
CVII.
Nature, bless GOD, His Benefits be sung,
While that an Ear can hear a Tongue;
Commerce with HIM is the only Trade, All else but Dung.
CVIII.
But Dung -- the wild Inhabitant repeats
From her inhospitable Seats:
But, now it is Noon; prepare we for our costless Meats.
CIX.
LORD of all grassie and all glassie Plains!
Whose mighty Hand does wield Fates Reins,
Who do embase the Hills, emboss the woody Veins.
CX.
By THEE, the Pyrate, who by Nile being bred
Has Land for Table, Pool for Bed,
Camels, Arabias wandering Ships, by THEE are ^ed;
CXI.
THOU with thy inexpressibly immense
Finger of active Providence,
The Worlds great HARBINGER, do All to Each dispense.
CXII.
Strickt Temperance so cooks our Mess, that we
With no Brain-clouds eclipsed be:
The driest Cleernesse makes the brightest Ingenie.
CXIII.
The Mount's our Table, Grass our Carpet, Well
Our Cellar, Trees our Banquet, Cell
Our Palace, Birds our Music, and our Plate a Shell.
CXIV.
Nature, pays all the Score. Next Fountain has
Bath, Drink, and Glass; but our Souls Glass
Presents Religions Face. Our Meal's as short as Grace.
CXV.
See, where the udderd Cattle find us Food;
As, those Sheep Cloth; these Hedg-rowes Wood.
See, now a Present brought us from the Neighborhood:
CXVI.
Even the Herb that Cramp and Toothach drives away*
And bribes Ear-Minstrels not to play;
And from archt Roofs to spungie Bellows Dews dos stay;
CXVII.
That makes quick Spirits and agile Fancy rove,
And genuine Warmth in the Brain does move,
'Bove Furs or Fires; Whose Pipe's both Ventiduct, and Stove;
CXVIII.
That mounts Invention with its active Smoke;
Draught of Promethean fir'd-Air took,
Renerves slack Joints, and ransacks each Phlegmattick Nook.
CXIX.
That Lust cloyes which Expectance swells; but, here
Are DAINTIES, that whet Taste and Ear;
Where all are cheered with Joy, and overjoyed with Cheer.
CXX.
But, having traverst more of Ground to Day,
Let us, for our Refreshment, stay,
And with next rising Sun, complete next closing Lay.
Irati saevas Maris evitare Procellas
Quae potuit, felix est nimis illa Ratis;
Littoris optati Prospectu Navita gaudet;
Gratulor emensam nec minus ipse Viam.
Animi Pabulum Contemplatio. Tam formosa nitet, tam suaue THEOPHI^A. spira^,
^umin^ collustrat, perfundit Odoribus Auram:
Est Opus exactum, quavisque ex Part politum,
^orpore, nonse^us ac, effulget, Mente Venustas:
Ingenium, Dulcedo, Decus, Symmetria grata,
Absque Pari certant Vnitis Viribus Illa.
(THEOPHI^A's filled with Sweetness, and so (...)
(...) her Breath perfumes (...)
(...)-composed (...)
Complete in Mind, and as exact in Feature^:
(...) and proportioned well,
(...) mee^ without a Parallel.
(...)

THE PLEASVRE OF RETIREMENT CANTO XIII. The Reinvitation.
ARGUMENT.
FElix qui Suus est, Animi propriique Monarcha;
Laus est Imperii ponere Iura Sibi.
Felices Animae, pulso Plutone Tyranno,
Queis datur Elysiis imperitare Plagis!
Maximus internum quisquis superaverit Hostem,
Major Alexandro, Caesare major erit.
Fabritium Aeacidae, Senecam praepono Neroni,
Hic hiat Immenso, postulat Ille parum.
Ecquid habent Reges, nisi Membris Tegmen and Escam?
Quae vel Nob^^cum vile Mapale tenet.
Ipse mihi Regnum, summa dominabor in Aula
Mentis, and hoc quod sum vel minor esse velim.
Rex est quem R^tio regit, and quem ducit Honestum;
De Regno videas regia Sceptra queri.
Aspice quid Cinere^ sit Caesaris inter, and Iri,
Est unus Color his omnibus, unus Odor.
Ergo.
Affectus superans, and qui superatur ab illis,
Non nisi Victor ovat, non nisi Victus obit.
THE ARGUMENT.
Who Chance, Change, Hopes, and Fears can underbring;
Who can obey, yet rule each Thing,
And slight Misfortune with a brave Disdain, He Is King.
STANZA I.
WHen lavish Phoebus pours out melted Gold;
And Zephyrs breath does Spice unfold;
And we the blew-ey'd Sky in Tissue-Vest behold.
II.
Then, view the Mower, who with big-swoln Veins,
Wieldeth the crooked Sithe, and strains
To barb the flowrie Tresses of the verdant Plains.
III.
Then view we Valleys, by whose fringed Seams
A Brook of liquid Silver streams,
Whose Water Crystal seems, Sand Gold, and Pebbles Gems;
IV.
Where bright-scal'd gliding Fish on trembling Line
We strike, when they our Hook entwine:
Thence do we make a Visit to a Grave Divine.
V.
With harmless Shepherds we sometimes do stay,
Whose Plainness does outvie the Gay,
While nibling Ewes do bleat, and frisking Lambs do stray.
VI.
With Them, we strive to recollect, and find
Dispersed Flocks of our rambling Mind;
Internal Vigils are to that due Work designed.
VII.
No puffing Hopes, no shrinking Fears Them fright;
No begging Wants on Them do light;
They wed Content, while Sloth feels Want, and Brav'ry Spite.
VIII.
While Swains the burth'ning Fleeces shear away,
Oat-pipes to past'ral Sonnets Play,
And all the merry Hamlet Bells chime Holy Day.
IX.
In neighbring Meads, with Ermin Mantles proud,
Our Eyes and Ears discern a Crowd
Of wide-horn'd Oxen, trampling Grass with Lowings loud.
X.
Next Close feeds many a strutting udder'd Cow;
Hard by, tired Cattle draw the Plough,
Whose galled Necks with Toil and Languishment do bow.
XI.
Near which, in restless Stalks, waved Grain promotes
The skipping Grasshoppers hoarse Notes;
While round the aerie Choristers distend their Throats.
XII.
Dry Seas, with golden Surges, ebb and flow;
The ripening Ears smile as we go,
With Boasts to crack the Barn, so numberless they show.
XIII.
When Sol to Virgo Progress takes, and Fields
With his prolonged Luster gilds;
When Sirius chinks the Ground, the Swain his Hope then builds.
XIV.
Soon as the Sultrie Month has mellow'd Corn,
Gnats shake their Spears, and wind their Horn;
The Hindes do sweat through both their Skins, and Shopsters scorn.
XV.
Their Orchards with ripe Fruit impregned be,
Fruit that from Taste of Death is free,
And such as gives Delight with choice Variety.
XVI.
Yet who in's thriving Mind improves his State,
And Virtue Steward Makes, his Fate
Transcends; He Is rich at an inestimable Rate.
XVII.
He shuns Prolixer Lawsuits; nor does wait
At Thoughtful Grandies prouder Gate;
Nor ^larming Trumpets him, nor drowning Storms amate.
XVIII.
From costly Bills of greedy Emp'ricks free,
From Plea of Ambo-dexters Fee,
From Vicar Any Thing, the worst of all the Three.
XIX.
He in Himself, Himself to rule, retires;
And can, or blow, or quench his Fires:
All Blessings up are bound in bounding up Desires.
XX.
His little World commands the Great: He there
Rich Memory has for Treasurer;
The Tongue is Secretary to his Heart, and Ear.
XXI.
While May-Dayes London Gallants take a Pride,
Coacht through Hide Park, to eye, be eyed,
Which Days vain Cost might for the Poor a Year provide;
XXII.
He may to Groves of Myrrh in Triumph pace,
Where Roots of Nature, Flowers of Grace,
And Fruits of Glory bud. A Glimps of HEAVEN the Place.
XXIII.
This the Spring-Garden to spiritual Eyes,
Which fragrant Scent of Gums out-vies;
Three Kings had thence their triple mystic Sacrifice.
XXIV.
O, happi^^ Walks, where CHRIST, and none beside
Is Journeies End, and Way, and Guide!
Where from the humble Plains are greatest Heights descried.
XXV.
Heav'nward his Gaze. Here does a Bower display
His Bride-room, and SCRIPTURIA
Her self is Bride; Each Morn presents his Marriage-Day.
XXVI.
What Ecstasie's in this delicious Grove!
The unwitnest Witness of his Love!
What Power so strongly can as flamed Affections move!
XXVII.
The Larks, winged Travelers, that trail the Sky,
Unsoyl'd with Lusts, aloft do fly,
Warbling SCRIPTURIA, SCRIPTURIA on high.
XXVIII.
(TO have been affected by a Virgin Heir,
Rich, young, and chaste, wise, good, and fair,
Was once his first Delight, but HEAVEN restrained that Care!
XXIX.
Thou, Providence, did both their Wills restrain;
Thou made their Losses turn to Gain;
For Thou gav'st Heaven to her, on him do Blessings rain!)
XXX.
But stop, pleased Thoughts; A high'r Love's here designed;
Fit in each Breast to be enshrined;
Bright Angels do admit no Sex, nor does the Mind.
XXXI.
To all her Lovers thousand Joys accrue;
And Comforts, thicker than Mayes Dew,
Shour down on their rapt Souls, as Infinite as new!
XXXII.
Her Oracles directing Rules declare,
Unerring Oracles, Truths Square;
Her Soul-informing Light does Earth for HEAVEN prepare.
XXXIII.
All beatizing Sweets, as in their Hive,
At her fair Presence do arrive,
Which are to drooping Spirits best Restorative.
XXXIV.
To whose Sight Eagles, paralelled, are blind;
Had Argus thousand Eyes, he would find
Darkness, compared with her illuminating Mind.
XXXV.
The Sun does glean his Splendour from her Eyes;
Thence burn we' in Sweets, as Phoenix lies
Glowing on Sols Ray-darted Pile of Spiceries.
XXXVI.
From precious Limbeck sacred Loves distill
Such Sublimations, as do fill
Minds with amazed Raptures of their Chimick Skill.
XXXVII.
That such Soul-Elevations still might stay,
We'd bear and do, both vow and pay,
And serve the LORD of Lords by her directive Way!
XXXVIII.
Soon as our Ear drinks in His Command,
Be It acted by our Heart, and Hand;
Under his Banner we shall Satan's Darts withstand.
XXXIX.
May He accept the Music of our Voice,
While on his Goodness we rejoice,
And while each melting Psalm makes on His GRACE its Choice.
XL.
On Feast-Dayes from that Bour to Church we haste,
Where HEAVEN dissolves into Repast,
When we Regalios of the mystic BANQUET taste.
XLI.
O, Deliccaies, infinitely pure!
To Souls best Nutriment and Cure!
Where Knowledge, Faith, and Love Beatitude ensure.
XLII.
Poor Solomon's Provision, poor to This,
Manna, Heav'n-dewing Banquet, is:
Who reigns in Heaven becomes on Earth our Food and Bliss.
XLIII.
O, Sacramental Cates, divinely dressed!
GOD the Feast-maker, CHRIST the Feast,
The HOLY GHOST Inviter, and the Soul the Guest!
XLIV.
All Joys await the blessed Convives, knit
All Excellencies are in It,
This overcomes our Spirits, overpowr's our Wit!
XLV.
For us, poor Worms, that ^lories SOVEREIGN died!
O, let our fleshly Barks still ride
At Anchor in calm Streams of His empierced SIDE!
XLVI.
This is Heavens Antepast! By Union
He Is One to ^ll, and All to One
In Loves intrinsic Mystery to Souls alone!
XLVII.
Ecstatick Raptures loose our Hearts on high
With Joys Ineffabilitie!
Exub'rant Sweets orewhelm, as Torrents, Tongue and Eye.
XLVIII.
Such Life-infusing Comforts, from Above,
Our Souls with inward Motions move,
That totally for GOD we quit all Creature Love!
XLIX.
Should HE condemn us, yet would Love compel
Him down with us, and we would dwell
Rather than without HIM in Heaven, with HIM in Hell.
L.
Soul of my Soul! when I a Joy receive
Disjoined from THEE, let my Tongue cleave
To's Palate! Me of All, not of this Feast bereave!
LI.
Not in the winter Solstice of my Years,
When shivering Snow surrounds deaf Ears,
And dreary Languishment Deaths gashly Vizard wears;
LII.
When they shall tremble that the House defend;
The Columns which support it bend;
The Grinders fail, the Watch through Casements Objects blend;
LIII.
Then shine, dear LORD! when quivering Winter Dress
Is icicled with hoary Tresse;
When all Streams frozen are, but Tears, through Loves Excess;
LIVE.
When periwig'd with Snow's each bald-pate VVood,
Bound in Ice-Chains each struggling blood;
When North-Seas bridled are, pris'ning their scaly Brood.
LV.
Then let those freezing How're be thawed by Prayer!
As Wells in VVinter warmer are
By Circumsession of refrigerating Air.
LVI.
That, nipt with Cold, or parcht with Heat, resign
We may our Will in each to THINE,
Be It less or more, be it low or high, be it Storm or Shine.
LVII.
After Nights Soot smears Heaven, Day gilds its Face;
Wet April past, sweet May takes place;
And Calm Air smiles, when rufling Winds have run their Race.
LVIII.
Who hope for Mines, scorn Dross; Such only get
Who lose a Game to win the Set:
Wordlings, He Is rich who is ^ood; Above's his Cabinet.
LIX.
To well-tuned Tempers Things that disagree
Have often some Likeness; thus, we see
Wind kindles Fire; Discord makes Concord Harmony.
LX.
Affliction tunes the Breast to rise, or fall,
Making the whole Man Musical;
We may Affliction Christians second Baptism call.
LXI.
Who CHRIST for Spouse, his Cross for Jointure has;
His Hand supports, where is Rod does pass:
The LORD of Angels, He the KING of Sufferings was.
LXII.
Loves Life took Death, that Death Loves Life might gain!
The Sovereign died that Slaves might reign!
The World cannot Books that should be writ of HIM contain.
LXIII.
Those have the greatest Cross, who Cross nere bore;
They Are rich in Want, who GOD adore;
Who does supply all Emptiness with His full Store.
LXIV.
Saint Paul, the Gentiles Doctor, rich 'bove Kings,
And high 'bove Oratories Wings,
Rapt up to HEAVEN, had Nothing, yet possessed all Things.
LXV.
The Rav'n of Birds proves Caterer, and feasts
Elijah; so the Lion of Beasts
Was Samsons Purveyor; Quails to murmuring Jews were Guests.
LXVI.
Midst Thorns environed, Love sweet Roses finds;
Steep ways lie plain t^inamor'd Minds;
Love gilds all Chains (surpised not thrall'd) with Comfort binds.
LXVII.
Then, threaten, World, a Goal shall bolt me in;
He Is free, as Air, who serves not Sin;
Who's gathered in Himself, His self is his own Inn.
LXVI^I.
Then let fierce Goths their strongest Chains prepare;
Grim Scythians me their Slave declare;
My Soul being free, those Tyrants in the Face I Will stare.
LXIX.
Man may confine the Body, but the Mind
(Like Natures Miracles, the VVinde
And Dreams) does, though secured, a free enjoyment find.
LXX.
Rays drawn in to'a point more vigorous beam;
Joys more to Saints, engoal'd, did stream;
Linnets their Cage to be a Grove, Bars Boughs esteem.
LXXI.
Burnisht to Glory from Afflictions Flame,
From Prison to a Scepter^came
The loved and feared ELIZA-Titles vail t'Her Name.
HAving reformed Religion: established Peace: reduced Coin to the just value:
delivered Scotland from the French: revenged domestical Rebellion* saved France
from headlong Ruin by Civil War: supported Belg^a: overthrown the Spanish
invincible Navy: expelled the Spaniards out of Ireland: received the Irish
into Mercy: enriched England by her most prudent Government 45 Years:
Elizabeth a virtuous and triumphant Queen: in the 70th year of her Age, in most
happy and peaceable manner departed this Life: leaving here her mortal parts
until by the last Trump she shall rise immortal.



LXXII.
She past the Furnace to be more refined;
From Flames drew Purity of Mind,
Not heat of Passion; hence, being tried, She brighter shined.
LXXIII.
Here wound, here lance me, LORD, thy Austin cries,
Dissect me here for Paradise!
The Cross the Altar be, so Love be Sacrifice!
LXXIV.
Imprint thy LOVE so deep into my Heart,
That neither Hunger, Thirst, nor Smart,
Gain, Loss, nor Thraldom, Life nor Death Us ever part!
LXXV.
Should Foes rip up my Breast with piercing Blade,
My Soul would but have Passage made,
Through which to HEAVEN she might in Purple Riv'lets wade.
LXXVI.
Forbid the Banes 'twixt Soul and Body joined,
The Corpse but falls to be refined,
And re-espous'd unto the Glorified high Mind.
LXXVII.
Who makes the ALMIGHTY his Delight, He goes
To Martyrdom, as to Repose;
The Red Sea leads to PALESTINE, where all Joy flows.
LXXVIII.
Steeled against Afflictions Anvel, let us become
Proud of the Worlds severest Doom;
No Majesty on Earth is like to Martyrdom.
LXXIX.
Enter into thy Masters Ioy' s so great,
This Thought is with such Flames repleat,
That from the High Court of Mercy Souls all Deaths defeat.
LXXX.
Who says, Fear not, HIM must we fear alone;
Blessed, whom no Fear makes Faith be gone;
How many must they fear, who fear not only ONE!
LXXXI.
We are but once to our Graves Port brought in,
To which from Birth w' have sailing bin,
It matters not what Way, so we escape Rocks of Sin.
LXXXII.
But, hark, it is late; the Whislers knock from Plough;
The droyling Swineheards Drum beats now;
Maids have their Cursies made to the spungy-teated Cow.
LXXXIII.
Larks roosted are, the folded Flocks are pent
In hu^dled Grates, the tired Ox sent
In loose Trace home, now Hesper lights his Torch (...)Tent.
LXXXIV.
See glimmering Light, the Pharos of our Cot;
By Innocence protected, not
By Guards, we thither tend, where Ev'n-song's not forgot
LXXXV.
O, Prayer! Thou Anchor through the Worldly Sea!
Thou sovereign Rhet'rick, 'bove the Plea
Of Flesh! that feed'st the fainting Soul, thou art (...)Key.
LXXXVI.
Blessed Season, when Days Eye is closed, to win
Our Heart to clear the Account, when Sin
Has past the Audit, Ravishments of Soul begin.
LXXXVII.
Who never wake to meditate, or weep,
Shall ^ure be sentenced for their Sleep;
Night to forepassed Day should still strict Centrie keep.
LXXXVIII.
O let them perish midst their flaring Clay,
Who value Treasures with a Day
Devoutly spent! FAITH'S the true Gem, the World a Gay.
LXXXIX.
So wastful, Vs^rer, as thy self, there is None,
Who (...)three true Gems for one
(...); Thy Rest, Fam^, Soul for ever gone!
XC.
When (...)Mists our Hemisphear invade,
Of all the Air when one Blot's made,
(...)
XCI.
Then for an Hour, (Elixir of Delight!)
We, Heaven beleag'ring, pray and write,
When every Eye is locked, but those that watch the Night.
XCII.
Saints fight on bended Knees; their Weapons are
Defensive Patience, Tears, and Prayer;
Their Valor most, when without Witness, Hell does scare.
XCIII.
May whiter Wishes, winged with Zeal, appear
Lovely unto Thy purest Ear,
Where nothing is accepted but what is chaste, and clear!
XCIV.
Life's hectic Fits find Cordials in Prayers Hive,
Transcendently Restorative,
Which might our Iron Age to its first Gold retrive.
XCV.
See, listening Time runs back to fetch the Age
Of Gold, when Prayer does Heaven engage;
Devotion is Religions Lifeblood; it is Gods Page,
XCVI.
Who brings rich Bliss by Bills of sure Exchange;
The Blessings that the Poor arrange
For Alms received that Day, beatifies our Grange.
XCVII.
Dance, Nabals, with large Sails on smiling Tides,
Till the black Storm against you rides,
Whose pitchie Rains interminable Vengeance guides!
XCVIII.
But, LORD, let Charity our Table spread;
Let Unity adorn our Bed;
And may soft Love be Pillow underneath our Head!
XCIX.
Enricht, lets darn up Want; what Fortune can
Or give, or take away from Man,
We prize not much: HEAVEN pays the good Samaritan.
C.
Thus, Life, still blessing, and still blessed, we spend;
Thus entertain we Death, as Friend,
To disapparel us for GLORIES endless End.
CI.
Who, thus forgot, in Graces grows, as Years,
Loves cherisht Prayer, unwitnest Tears,
Rescued from monstrous Men, no other Monster fears.
CII.
They who their dwelling in Abdera had,
Did think Democritus was mad;
He knew it was so of them. The Application's sad.
CIII.
Knew but the World what COMFORTS, tiding on,
Flow to such Recollection,
It would run mad with Envy, be with Rage undone.
CIV.
O, Sequestration! Rich, to Worldlings Shame;
A Life's our Object, not a Name:
Herostratus did sail, like Witch, in the Air of Fame.
CV.
Get long-breathed Chronicles, ye need such Alms,
Sue from Diurnal Breefs for Palms,
Injurious Grandeur for its frantic Pride wants Balms.
CVI.
In Aerie Flatt'ries Rumor, not Fame lies;
Inconstancy, Times Mistress, cries
It up, which soon by arguing Time, Truths Parent, dies.
CVII.
Fames Plant takes Root from Virtue, grows thereby;
Pure Souls, though Fortune-trod, stand high,
When mundane shallow-searching Breath It self shall die.
CVIII.
O, frail Applause of Flesh! swollen Bubbles pass.
Turf-fire more Smoke than Splendour has;
What Bulwark firm on Sand? What shell for Pearl may pass?
CIX.
But Saints with an attentive Hope from High,
On HEAVENS Paroll do live and die;
Passing from Life's short Night to Days ETERNITY.
CX.
Wh^ blessedly so breathe, and leave their Breath,
Of dying Life make living Death;
Each Day, spent like the last, does act a HEAVEN beneath.
CX^.
Death's one long Sleep, and humane Life no more
Than one short Watch an Hour before:
World! after thy mad Tempest it is the landing Shore.
CXII.
Mid point betwixt the Lives of Loss, and Gain;
The Path to boundless Joy, or Pain;
Saints Birthday, Natures Dread: GRACE does this Bandog chain.
CXIII.
When Moses from high Pisgahs Top descried
Fair Canaan, Type of the HEAVENLY B^IDE,
He breathed out his Joy-ravisht Soul, so sweetly died.
CXIV.
To IMMORTALITY the Grave's a Womb;
We pass into a Glorious Room
Thorough the gloomie Entry of a narrow Tomb.
CXV.
LORD, as THOU made (most powerful ONE in THREE)
The World of nothing; so, let me
Make nothing of the World, but make my All in THEE!
CXVI.
Pardon the By-steps that my Soul has trod,
Most Great, Good, Glorious, Gracious GOD!
Seal THOU the Bill of my Divorse to Earths dull clod!
CXVII.
Thy boundless Sourse of GRACE the scarlet Spot
Scoured white as Wool, that first did blot
The Original in Man, that was so fairly wrote.
CXVIII.
Check not my Hope, but spur my Fear to THEE,
Virtue to court, and Vice to flee!
Love, lend thou me thy Spur; Fear, thou my Bridle be.
CXIX.
From hence, to run in Heavenly Paths, I Will strive;
My slender Pen to the World I give;
My only^ study shall be how to live, to live.
CXX.
None Blessed, but Those, who, when last Trump shall send
It Summons, find the JUDGE their Friend.
The End does crown the Work; great GOD crown thou my END.
O, ter felicent, fortunatumque quieto
Cui natat in Portu nescia Cymba Metus!
ODEVS! optato sistant mea Carbasa Coelo!
Omnis ab aethereis Spes sit habenda Plagis.
-- Est summus, JESU, tua Gratia Quaestus. VIvitur exiguo-Facile assentior
sapientissimo Aguri, DEUM obsecranti ut nec Divitias sibi, nec Egestatem, sed
tantum ad degendam Vitam donaret Necessaria. Vita privata, quam delectas!
Corporis spectem Valetudinem? Nusquam salubrior Aer. Frugalitatem? Nusquam
minoris vivitur. Quaestum? Nusquam Lucrum innocentius. Vitae Integritatem?
Nusquam alibi minus Corruptelae.

Navis es in Portu, tumidae secura Procellae;
Men's Desideriis hic vacat alta suis.
Liberiore POLUM contemplor Cord, quiescit
Hic Men's tuta, sibi libera, plena DEO.
Quae, sibi multa petit, petit anxia multa, Voluntas;
Et cui plura dedit Sors, Mala plura dedit.
Alta cadunt, inflata crepant, cumulata fatiscunt;
Crimine vixque suo plena Crumena caret.
Celsior immundi Men's despicit Orgia Mundi,
Indignabundo proterit illa Pede.
Munde, vale; quid me fallacibus allicis Hamis?
Sophrosynen sacra Sobrietate colo:
Regia sit ramosa Domus, Rivusque Falernum;
Arcta, sed ampla, DEUM si capit, illa Domus.
Florea gemmata subrident Pascua Vest,
Faetaque nativas explicat Arbor Opes.
Caltha, Rosae, Tulipae, Violae, Thyma, Lilia florent,
Dum gravido Zephyrus rore maritat Humum.
Frugibus exultant Valles, Grege Pascua, Rupes
Fontibus, intonso Crine triumphat Ager;
Terra Famem, levat Vnda Sitim, fugat Vmbra Calorem;
Dat Togam Ovis, Lignum Sylva, Focumque Silex.
Quod satis est Vitae, satis est; Praestetur Egenis
Quod reliquum: Vitae sat Toga, Panis, Aqua.
Non Mensis quaecunque Dapes celebrantur in istis
Praegustantis egent; Vite Venena latent.
Hic Parasitus abest, fugit hinc Gnathonica Pestis;
Cura nec hic Animos irrequieta coquit.
Cholica, Spasmus, Hydrops, Vertigo, Podagra recedunt;
Grata Sapore beat Mensa, Sopore Thorus.
Pange DEO Lauds, positis Men's libera Curis;
Caetera si desint, NUMINE dives eris.
Sis modico contenta, gravis Nulli; Ipsa Misellis
Quas impendis Opes, has an habebis? habes.
Quod CHRISTUM decuit, deceat Te. Noverit uti
Quisquis praesenti Sort beatus erit.
Sic Abrahae gaudebo Sinu; dum, Dives, in Orco
Aeternum diro deliciose peris.
Vita beata, tuas qui possim pangere lauds?
Mill cui Vitas, si mihi mill, darem!
Da, velut spero, been, CHRIST, spirem!
Da, velut credo, been, CHRIST, vivam!
Vnus hac qui Spe fruitur, fruetur
Mortuus ASTRIS.
Amico
Si lenis tremula Quies in Vmbra
Sit Cordi, huc propera, ferasque Tecum
Totum quicquid habes Libentiarum.
THEOPHILAE AMORIS HOSTIA. CANTIO VII. A Domino Jeremia Colliero in Versus
latiales traducta. Contemplatio.
ARGUMENTUM.
Proripit in vastum Lucis se VIRGO Profundum,
Quam nullae exequent Voces, nec Limite claudant;
Obtundunt Radii Visum, renovantque Vigorem.
Tristicon 1.
SI Maro Quisque foret, fierent si quique Marones
Praecones sacri, Conventus and Orbis apertus,
Quo scrutarentur Virtus AETERNA quid esset.
2.
Si vel ab innocuis possent deducere Cunis
Primaevum Tempus, congestaque Secula mill
Inferrent Trutinae; tamen haec sub Pondere justo
3.
Ponentes, norint tandem non mominis esse
Majoris, frustra quam si cum Sole potenti
Exiles tentent atomos librare Bilance.
4.
Si Terrae Molem numeris spectare refertam
Possent, non istis tua constet Summa Figuris,
AETERNO cyphrae comparent qualiter AEVO!
5
Si Sabulum flueret, per Saecula mill marinum,
Quando deficeret vacuatis Littus Arenis,
Aeque TE primo mensum est Clepsammion illud.
6.
Coelitus impertita foret Facundia, Linguis
Aligeros referens, Spatium tamen haud aequarent,
Est ubi prorsus idem cum fluxis OMNE futurum.
7.
Tend FIDES bolidem, brevis at nimis illa nequibit
Expertis Fundi Maris explorare PROFUNDUM,
Limite constricti nullo, nec Littore cincti.
8.
AETERNA haud unquam commensurabilis Aetas,
Nulla TUI partem poterit describere Penna;
CIRCULUS es siquidem cui non est Terminus ullus.
9
Vel cujus Centrum tam se diffuderit, ipsum
Ambitus ingentis nequeat circundare COELI,
Exterius poterit quid circumcingere Corpus?
10.
Vos, quibus Aethereus Vigor est, number Fine carentem
Finem exquiratis? number IMMENSUM extendere fasest?
Claudere UBIQUE manens? comprendere and INFINITUM?
11.
Hujus Zona DEUS sine puncto, maximus, Orbis
Ante Mare, et Terras, et quod tegit omnia CO^LUM,
Qui fuit, est, and erit cum cuncta creata peribunt.
12.
Quin contemplemur supra Sublimia quaeque,
Vltra quemque Locum, super omnes Luminis Orbs!
Pectus Apostolicum rapuit Radiatio trinum.
13.
Circumquaque micans. SOLIUM Praesigne! supremo
Imperio constans, and Majestate verenda!
Caetera transcendens, quem nullus Fulgor adaequet!
14.
Cingit utrumque LATUS vel inenarrabile LUMEN!
Quod circumfusum tanto SPLENDORE coruscat,
Aequora Laetitiae superet flammantia mill.
15.
Quod sic EFFULGENS si conspectare liceret,
Detecta FACIE Cherubinis, Lumine tanto
Perculsi, in Nihilum remearent illico primum.
16.
Indue Te Tunica, dives Natura, corusca,
Ornamenta tamen, tanto collata decori,
Sunt tua, concretus seu lapsus Nubibus Humor.
17.
Indorum posses Opibus spoliare Fodinas,
Illos, auratis, Radiosque recludere, Cellis,
Qui collucentes cum Phoebi Lampade certant:
18.
Arcana posses reserare peritius Art
Intima cujusvis ditis penetralia Rupis,
Illinc Thesauros nec non auferre nitentes:
19.
Errantes, fixasque simul connectere Stellas
Posses, quae rutilis exornant Aethera Bullis,
Luminis ut coeant cuncti Orbs Sydus in unum:
20.
Iungere si posses Gemmas, Aurique Fodinas,
Aethereasque Faces, radiata Reflectio quarum
Fulgida rivalis superaret Lumina Solis:
21.
Si Lapides Gemmae, riguum Mare funderet Aurum,
Margara si Pulvis fieret, Chrystallus and Aer,
Sol quodvis Sydus, plures Sibi mill Nitores;
22.
Gemmae illae Silices essent, Mare parva lacuna,
Stellae istae Scintilla forent, Flagratio Phoebus:
Aurum, Gemma micans, Adamantes, sordida Scruta:
23.
Si Terrae, complexa forent, and Lumina COELI,
Optica and unius peterent Confinia Centri,
Hoc prius Objectum vel caecum redderet illud.
24.
Caecum, seu piceae Velamen Noctis opacum,
(Innuitur Sacro duntaxat Visio Textu)
Hujus respectu LUCIS sunt quaelibet Vmbrae.
25.
O, plane infandam, summoque Stupore refertam!
Si Nemo nisi qui dignus describere possit,
Hanc sane LUCEM possit describere Nemo.
26.
Selecti Eloquii cujusvis languet Acumen,
Defecit Ingenium, Verborum hic curta supellex;
Hanc Lumen Mentis nullius tranet ABYSSUM.
27.
Hic residet tantis circundata GLORIA Flammis,
Quales confundant Aciem vel maxim acutam,
Huc tendat propiore nimis quae improvida Gressu.
28.
SPLENDOUR dimanat talis Fulgoribus istis,
Qualis pulveream sublimet in ardua Molem,
Vrna quae composta secus remaneret inerti.
29.
NUMINIS ante Thronum Summi provolvo meipsum,
Profluit unde Bonum quodvis ut ab ubere Font:
Hoc Decus ut pandam faveat tua GRATIA Coeptis.
30.
Magne DEUS, sine Principio, tamen omnis Origo,
Cujus Naturae telam Manus inclyta nevit;
Vna qui Virtute tua Loca singula comples.
31.
Alme PARENS rerum; qui fulcis quodque creatum,
Vitam Spiritibus qui praebes, continuasque,
Ortus es ipse Tibi, Bonitatis Origo supremae.
32.
Laetitiae SUMMA es, cujus Sapientia Abyssus,
Ad quodvis sese tendit tua vasta Potestas,
Ac cunctos Facies reddet jucunda beatos.
33.
Aeris expansis puncto dilaberis Alis,
Induis Augustae Te Majestatis amictu,
TE Nubes velant, TE stipant Agmina Coeli.
34.
Omnis Honoris Apex, Summae es Fastigia Laudis,
Ad Radios late sparsos suffusa Pudore
Hymnos decantat, coelestis Turma, perennes.
35.
Gemmae quam superant vitrum! quam Sidera Gemmas!
Sidera quam Phoebus! quam Phoebum Gloria Coeli!
Pur^o^ ast ipsis long est tua VISIO COELIS.
36.
Magna quidem Tellus, se profert latius Aer,
Planetae excedunt, Stellarum Regia major,
Supremi fines nec habent Tentoria Coeli.
37.
Men's mea dum Zelo conatur plura refer
Fervida protenso, Pectus, DEUS alme, repleto
Igne novo, nullum languorem Carmina noscant.
38.
Cum super Aerios tractus, and Sidera Musae
Vrgeo Progressus, uni TIBI mill videntur
Sphaerae, non secus ac atomi sub Sole minuti
39.
Est Aetas aeterna tibi seu clepsydra tantum,
Immensum nisi sit Spatium complere valet nil*
Cujus sex Verbis rerum Natura creata est.
40.
Omnia complectens totius Fabrica Coeli,
Cum Stellis rutilis, Verbo surgebat ab uno,
Quomodo mortalis narret Sapientia NOMEN?
41.
Aetheris, Arbitrio, Crystalla micantia volvis,
Illis consignat Virtus tua coelica Metas,
Obliquos horum moderatur Dextera Currus.
42.
Nullae Te Zonae, Tropic^ve, Pol^ve retardent,
Cum sis Sphaeralis Motor `Primarius Orbis,
Intra, extra, supra, quin ultra singula perstans.
43.
Ingentes Pluviae atque Nivis sustentat acervos
Omnipotens tua sola Manus, qua nempe remota
Diluvium humanum perdat genus omne secundum.
44.
Hisce ministratur stillatis Copia Terris,
Et confisa ^IBI mortalia Corda replentur,
Flamina Ventorum peragunt tua Jussa per Orbem;
45.
Haec Tu, quando voles, caecis inclusa cavernis
Constringis, vilidoque sinis prorumpere motu,
Vnde Tremore gravi Tellus concussa dehiscit.
46.
Vndarum furias Vinclis compescis Arenae,
Oceani arcanum vasti scrutare Profundum,
Te memorem pacti monstrat Thaumantias Iris.
47.
Cardinibus Verbi Tellus innixa potentis,
Aer quam cingit, nec non circumfluus Humor,
Ponderibus librata suis immobilis astat.
48.
Ejus sed Frontem Te corrugante Columnae
Firmatae trepidant, Fremitu Mare Littora plangit,
Solvuntur Silicum Rupes, Montesque vacillant.
49.
Insuper intremuere Poli, Centrumque recussum
Terrae, quae Vultus perculsa Stupore verendi,
Accedit Montem Sina dum summa POTESTAS.
50.
Imbutum Vita quodvis tua Cura focillat,
Divinis Cursum cujusvis flectis Habenis,
Gratia de Vultu, de Vultu Gloria manat.
51.
Non Tibi sunt Aures, non sunt Tibi Lumina, verum
Percipis Auditu quodvis, and cernis acute;
Te Locus haud capiat, tamen Ipse per Omnia praesens.
52.
Optica coelestis dicamus Specla Pronoias,
Arcam, qua positas Idaeas videris omnes,
Ad quas conceptas formaveris Icona quamvis.
53.
Quippe praeexistunt sic hic Eventa futura,
Sicut abhinc multo non tempore gesta fuissent;
Cernimus haud dissecta recens tam Corpora clare.
54.
Totus ubique s^mel remanes, Tu semper es idem,
Attamen Arbitrio commutas omnia solo,
Tu complere remota soles Immobilis Ipse.
55.
Sic interponunt se contingentia Turmis
Sollerti Curae, quae mire cuncta gubernat,
Ac modo praeteritum, sit praeteritumque futurum.
56.
Arbitrio quamvis male fint conformia quaedam,
Nil tamen omnino citra hoc procedat in Actum;
Praevia, successura simul manet una Voluntas.
57.
Te penes ingentis sunt Climata dissita Mundi,
Quamvis nec Tellus, nec Temet continet Ether,
Obscurum lustrat Praesentia quodlibet-antrum.
58.
Quamvis ab istis quas tu formaveris olim
Mentibus, accedat nil ad Praeconia clara,
Attamen aeternum celebrabunt munera Amoris.
59.
Praeter Peccatum and Mortem tu cuncta creasti,
Haec sua Stultitiae humanae primordia debent,
Illud Naturam conspersit Sordibus omnem.
60.
Sed quo curares Peccati Vulnera, Nobis
Donas IMMANUEL, sibi qui non sumere nostram
Naturam renuit, qui non Praesepe recusat.
61.
O, dulcis noster Mediator! Munera cujus
Laudis seu rores, AETERNO, matutini
Sunt celebrata Choro caelesti Cantibus altis.
62.
Concurrrente, Deus, genuit Te Flamine Sancto,
Tu Verbo aeterno contentus sumere Carnem;
Qualiter emanas homini fas dicere non est.
63.
Sicut ab Aeterno fuit Emanatio mira;
Haec sic aeternum mir^e durabit in aevum:
Principio Verbum, monstrat Te cuncta praeisse.
64.
Vnum est esse Tibi, pariter Tutrinus and unus;
Et duplex Natura Tibi conspirat in una,
Ipse trin-unius resides Deitatis Honor;
65.
Deque tuo Radii Solio tot mill refulgent,
Quales Aligerum non possint Lumina far;
De quibus evolvunt Nil docta Noemata Cleri.
66.
Aetatum, pateat, Monumenta legendo priorum,
Haec sacra quod nullus potuit Mysteria nobis
Pandere, Virgineo prius ac sunt edita Partu:
67.
Nido a Se structo fuit hic exclusa Columba,
Ille Gregem partus fuit hic qui protegat Agnus,
Se producentem, Flos, qui formaverat Agrum:
68.
Agmine Coelicolum Te Concelebrante corusco;
Pectora Pastorum subito trepidare pavore;
Te, monstrante Magi venerantur Sydere Cursum.
69.
Cum sis divina mirandus Origin tali,
Vilia mortalis pateris Convitia Gentis,
Iratout possis nos conciliare PARENTI.
70.
Laetus Honoris erat proprii tua Gratia Praeco,
Es tu dignatus sacratum Munus obire,
Ast Aaronis eras solito de more vocatus.
71.
Ac ut divino constarent singula Verbo,
In te de superis descendit Spiritus auris,
Lenes propter aquas Iordanes, test Johanne.
72.
Hinc in Desertum perductus Flamine sacro,
Daemonis appulsu tentatus, Codice verum
Hunc superas Scripto, fluit unde Redemptio nostra.
Protinus egressus --.
73.
Actus Sermones, Oracula mira fuerunt,
Haec genuere Fidem, nec non genuere Timorem,
Erectas Animas ad Te tollamus utrisque.
74.
Firmatum claudis gressum tribuisti, Lumina Caecis,
Morbo languentes diro quocunque levabas,
Defunctis Vitam, Mutis dederasque Loquelam.
75.
Defunctis T^ Vita, Salus mortalibus aegris,
Tu caecis Lumen, Tu rerum copia egenis,
Thesaurus furtum spernens, sincera Voluptas.
76.
Non ex hoc Mundo Regnum Tibi, RECTOR OLYMPI,
Nuncia Apostolico procedunt Pectore laeta,
Vttua sit totum Miseratio nota per Orbem.
77.
Mortuus ante Diem conspexit fidus Abraham,
Vota Tibi pariter nato solvebat Isaco,
Antitypum atque Typus, versare per omnia vivus.
78.
Est Evangelicus, Sapiens Academia, Codex,
Justitiam vicit Clementia blanda severam,
Sobrius ut Vitam ducebas, Fortis obibas.
79.
Es Tu, sacra Domus, Tu purum Altar, Sacerdos,
Tu Vitae Panis, citra fastidia Festum,
Ex Escis ubi acuta novis exurgit Orexis.
80.
Mortali natus mortalia Crimina deles,
Victima grata foret Tibi quodvis Pectus honestum,
Ob Genus humanum qui velles fundere Vitam.
81.
Non dedignatus, Crucis es tolerare probrosae
Tormina, quo nobis concessus sit Paradisus;
Quo pia Sanctorum Solentur Gaudia Mentes.
82.
Ferrea Tartarei diffringens Claustra Tyranni,
Dira tenebrosi Phlegetontis Monstra coerces:
Sic tua cuncta Tibi subigebat Dextera victrix.
83.
Tu Virtute tua solvebas Vincula Mortis,
Atque reviviscens superam contendis in Arcem,
Inspirat Vitam Laethatis Spiritus Oris.
84.
Te, Pater, electis ut signet Dona Salutis
SHIRITUS ALME, dedit NATO (sic Trinus in Vno)
Sanctificas Omnes proprie, non solus at Omnes.
85.
PATRIS Amor, nec non NATI, coeleste Sigillum,
Praesidium Sanctis, felix Pietatis Origo,
Alta salutiferae pandas Mysteria Linguae.
86.
O Iubar immensum Radiis insigne coruscis,
Omnis ab aspectu Sophiae Radiatio clara,
Non collata potest minui tua Copia cunctis.
87.
Gaudia sunt Comites, Clementia, Pacis Amorque;
Quorum pacatum perturbant nulla Tenorem
Tristia; Quem Mundus, nec Mors, nec destruat Orcus.
88.
Festum ex selectis quod constet talibus Escis,
Qualiter haud acris possit consumere Orexis,
Dives Odor quem non dispergat Ventus in Auram:
89.
LUX Oculos fugiens, tamen Ipse per Omnia splendes,
Tu Sonus es qualem non Musicus explicet ullus,
Arctus es Amplexus, quem Tempora nulla resolvant.
90.
Exinde irrefluo volvuntur Gaudia Cursu,
Qualia inexhaustis soleas praebere Culullis,
Cordibus, a foeda Peccati Labe remotis.
81.
Ecstaticum hoc Vinum quod tradit SPIRITUS ALMUS,
Sidereum motas extollit ad Aethera Mentes;
Terrenis orbas Coeli Solatia mulcent.
82.
O quam sacrati connectit Gluten Amoris!
Ros fluit Ambrosiae divino qualis ab Ore!
Sunt tua quae solum faciunt Commercia Caelum.
93.
Illustres Animae, succensae hoc Lumine summo,
Quando tuos Vultus radiantes Luce tuentur,
Quodque Decus reputant obscurae Noctis adinstar.
94.
Sublimis nostros superans Infusio S^nsus,
Tu stupor Eloquii Nomen mereare profundi,
Aequet hyperbolicus quem nullus Sermo superbus.
95.
Sacrosancta TRIAS, complecteris Omnia solum,
Exuperans quodcunque Bonum, super Omnia Felix,
Nos haustura, tamen vivo hoc in Font natamus:
96.
Imperio REX magne tuo par nulla Potestas,
Augusto cujus Majestas provenit Ore,
Pulchraes perpetui praecinctus Vest Decoris.
97.
Iustitia est Sceptrum, Solium miseratio Mitis,
Regna perimmensos extendunt coelica Tractus,
Gloria permansura, Tibi, per Secla Corona.
98.
Pax Intellectus tua quodvis praestat Acumen,
Obsisti poterit tua vasta Potentia frustra,
NUMEN es Ipse sacrum, Sacro purgatius omni.
99.
Ore fluit Verum, Sapientia Pectore manat,
Ante tuam excubias agit Omnipotentia Turrim,
Aligeri peragunt tua Iussa verenda Ministri.
100.
Perspicit Obtutu vel cuncta Scientia primo,
Thesauro frueris per Te sine Fine beato,
Tempus es Aeternum; Quae me demergat ABYSSUS!
Peroratio Eucharistica.
SUmmas TIBI agit Grates, maxim Coelorum PRAESES, aeternumque adorandum NUMEN,
Servus tuus humillimus, quem post tot varias mundanarum Sollicitudinum
Procellas, vastosque Curarum Fluctus, cum olim Hollandiam, Brabantiam,
Artesiam, Germaniam, Austriam, Hungariam, Styriam, Carinthiam, partem Italiae,
nec non Galliae incolumem in Patriam reduxisti. Quam gratum enim mihi placidum,
post tot periculosas inter peregrinandum Agitationes, Quietis Pacisque
Intervallum, ut devotae LEGUM tuarum Observationi totus exinde vacem! Tu,
benign DEUS, dulcissimum hoc mihi Otium concedis, quo TIBI Soli prompto
libentique Animo inservire statui: sicut per TE vivo, sic TIBI viverem, and
quicquid a Gratia acceperim, in Honorem refunderem! Haec ergo Laudi and Gloriae
solius sapientis and immortalis DEI submisse consecrentur.

CONDITOR Omnipotens Coelique Solique! supremum
Cujus ad Arbitrium cuncta creata fluunt;
Clementer Finem lassis imponito Rebus,
Nec plus terrenis Men's operosa vacet:
Omnia solerter sub utroque jacent^ia Phoebo
Perpendens, tandem non nisi vana scio.
Qua sese bifido Scaldis discriminat Alveo
Vidi, Teque tua, Rhene palustris, Aqua:
Non iter excelsae remoratae Nubibus Alps,
Quae nec in aeriis Nix sedet alta Jugis;
Vidimus oppositos vario sub Climate Mores;
Vidimus innnmeras quas vehit Ister Aquas:
Diverso didici diversa Idiomata Tractu,
Quaeque Observatu sunt been digna, scio:
Gallica Mobilitas, Fraus Itala, Fastus Iberi,
Teutonica Ebrietas nota fuere nimis.
Quamlibet in Partem Regina Pecunia Mundum
Flectit, acerba Meum Bella Tuumque gerunt.
Me conservanti per mill Pericula, Grates
Qui possim meritas solvere, CHRIST, Tibi!
Cerno, detestans Vitium, lassusque Tumultu,
Quod, non Vita* prior Vita, sed Error erat.
Velle Meum, sit velle Tuum, REGNATOR Olympi!
CUI soli Grates Men's agit, egit, aget.
Si plures mihi Vita futura superstet in Annos,
Huic sit juncta pia Sedulitate Fides!
Nam nil contulerim been docto sanus Amico,
Spiritus ut sano Corpore sanus agat.
Nosse, and amare DEUM; Promissis credere CHRISTI,
Consulere Afflictis edocuisse Rudes,
Accumulare Bonis Inopes, succurrere Lapsis,
Obnixe Votis Ista petenda meis.
Vertam Bodleias, congesta Volumina, Gazas,
Quae Vaticano proxima, Roma, tuo:
Nocturna versanda tamen, versanda diurna,
Prae cunctis aliis BIBLIA SACRA Manu:
Unde, ut Apis sese sustentat Mectare Cellae;
Sic vivam lectis Floribus hisce piis.
Talia fac, vives, Lector; Quicunque beatus
Esse cupis, tali Vita sit acta modo.
Me Vitam, atque Necem tibi proposuisse memento:
Elige ^ive velis vivere, ^ive mori.
FINIS.
MORTE DEDIT MORTI MORTEM, MORS MORTIS, JESUS



In glorioss: passione^. and Resurrectione^ (...) Christj. G. G.
Aslesuia aima dies (...) Read decus maesto, red De letio redijt soet ExaniMEM
TENuit. que Occisum, and TOrtum mil At nunc full Mineo ca^^ Mortis inex^^ Etae,
reseran Obvia s Idereo vi Ru^^atur Chaos horr Exi^t e t Umulo claus Te Christ
i Minerito te Udumoculis Udis coelu Induitur VEstem av Marmora fi Nduntur, re
Uit^ def, Ectos, rursu Nuta^te int Remuit^uatefa Delu bro In sancto s In^reuere
Suis ^ach Singusta^tque t Ibj torvu Ast Vbj Nunc gremio Laetius os o Rbj^red
Uictor hab Es merito s^ Aaetheria reGione co^ior Terra re Nascent^ r Ocea^us
^la Uait cla Rugitu inge Mnat, ferit a I ^^^ego (...)Te (...)t Exe^uias h
Umiles quale Su^^liciter Undo: Te (...)Mih^ dulc (...)sacra (...)M DE aurea
saecula mund o US quem ignobilis arbor M illus IT TU (...)s Es Mo^ESque
^remebant Vtatrum ^er (...) u Sque se^ulc Hra subact (...) Detaurea side Ravult
u Endum (...)Ite ^ro^han l Us, victu Sque trium^^^ t Stratum mor Te malign a
Mius ons ^ Uget, and a tra m Erso sol S^ualidus ore Vomunt reclu Sa se^ulchra
Schaos horr Et, and orb e Cta and ter Rita tellu s. (...)a Usaea fatis^^t;
Rijmis turb Ata ^luenta Mque ferun Tur (...)aequor E^^urgis t Elluris, and
illud Dis rediu Ivus ouante Eci^s a tro P^aea trium^ho Scoelesti S and a^ma
Editu^ gratat^ Ur ovantem Ru^que celeus Ma canoro Vrea, sid Era^^lamor Ibj
deilinc Tissimus i^se Smihj carmi Na ^raetant Tedulcj ins ono cantu ^ssime Chri
Ste canent^

