THE Younger Brother: OR, THE Amorous Jilt.

A COMEDY, ACTED at the Theater Royal, By His MAJESTY, Servants.

Written by the late Ingenious Mrs. A. BEHN. With some Account of her Life.

LONDON. Printed for J. Harris, at the Harrow in Little-Brittain, and Sold by
R. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1696.

THE Mock Marriage: Or, the Woman wears the Breeches. A Comedy, Acted at the
Theater Royal, by His Majesty's Servants. Written by Mr. Scott of Cambridg.

Printed for J. Harris at the Harrow in Little-Brittain.

THE Epistle Dedicatory. TO Colonel Codrington.
THE unjust Sentence this Play met with before very partial Judges in the
Acting, will, I Am pretty sure, he rev^^^^^ by the more unprejudiced Readers and
it is evident, M^^^ will exert it self so far, as to justify my Presumption in
i^dicating it, notwithstanding its smell success, to you. Sir (...) whom I must
always profess the highest Esteem and Value, sp^^^^ from that Nobleness of your
Nature that takes a God-like Delight in redressing the Misfortunes of ^^em more
than fly to You for their unhappiness; a generous Soul indeed, never gives a
greater Proof of her Excellence, than in her Protection of the ^^so^^^^^^ for
tho suffering Merit challenges a Regard from all, yet it (...) with it from
none but such as you, Sir, who are so Emi^^^^ for tha^ Virtue, which more than
all the rest, commands the Esteem and Veneration of the Thinking World, your
Generosity I m^^n, (...) which gives the most perfect Touches of that likeness,
man can have to his Almighty Original; for those are but ^^^rv^^ awkard Copies
of him that want it. It Is, I may say, the very Essence of God, who with our
Beings, dispenses the grateful Knowledge of himself in the Benefits he bestows.

The narrow Virtues of the Old Philosophers, were rather Vices, if winnow'd
well, formed to gratify their Proud, Lazy, Superiority, at the Expense of all
the Public Duties incumbent on mankind, whom they pretend to Purge from his
Passions, to make him happy, by that means to amuse our Curiosity with
Chymera's, whilst we lost our real Good, will still naturally flow from those
Springs of Pleasure, Honor, Glory, and Noble Actions, the Passions given us by
Heaven for our common Good. But their own Practice generally showed the Vanity
of their Emperic Boasts, when they Buried all the Nobler Pleasures of the Mind
in Avarice, and Pedantick Pride, as Lucian has pleasantly made out in
Hermotimus.

Those Notional Excellencies that divert us from, or weaken a Public Spirit,
are always False and Hypocritical, that under a gaudy outside, conceals a
rotten Carcass, full of Infectious Distempers that destroy the noblest end of
our Being, The doing good to one another. Vanity has always been the Refuge of
little Souls, that place their Value in a false Greatness, Hyppocrisie and
great Titles What a seeming Holiness does for the Avaritious, Designing Saint;
Titles do for the proud Avarice of the mere Man of Quality, cheaply Purchasing
a Respect from the many; but it is the Generous man only that sixes himself in
the Hearts of the most valuable part of mankind, where proper Merit only is
esteemed, and the Man, not his Equipage, and Accidental Appurtenances respected.

The Application of this, I shall leave to all that know you, Sir, who are all
sensible what Virtues you make your Darlings, and choice of Virtue shows the
Nobleness of our Temper, as much as Choice of Friends, the degrees of our
Understandings; and if that be true that most men choose those Virtues which
are nearest akin to their Darling Vices, I Am sure 'twill be a strong proof,
that even your Failings (for every Man has his share of them too) are more
Beneficial to the world, than the Virtues of a numerous part of Mankind. In
Colonel Codringto^ indeed, we find the true Spirit and Bravery of Old Rome,
that d^ pises all dangers, that in the Race of Glory thou art the Noble Chase.
Nor can the manly Roughness of your Martial Temper (Fierce to none but your
Countries Foes) destroy that engaging sweetness your agreeable Conversation
abounds with, which heightened with so large a share of Wit, Learning, and
Judgment, improves as well as delights; so that to have known you any way, must
give us some advantage or other. This it was that encouraged me to dedicate
this Play, Sir, to you, of which I may venture to say more, and with more
assurance, than if it had been my own.

Mrs. BEHN was a Woman so Accomplished, and of so Established a Fame among the
Men of Sense, that I could not suppose a very severe treatment from the Town,
which has been very indulgent to the Performances of others, especially when,
besides the Reputation of the Author, the Play it self had an Intrinsic Merit;
for we find it full of Humor, Wit, and Variety; the Conversation Gay and
Genteel, the Love, Soft and Pathetic, the incidents Natural, and Easy, and the
Conduct of the Plot very Justifiable. So that I may reasonably impute its
miscarriage to some Faction that was made against it, which indeed was very
Evident on the First day, and more on the endeavors employed, to render the
Profits of the Third, as small as could be.

It suffered not, I Am sure, in the Action, nor in Mr. Verbruggen's reading of
some of his ^art, since he lost nothing of the Force of Elocution, nor
Gracefulness of Action; nor indeed can I, with Justice to my self, impute it to
any part that I ventured to add to the Original; for all the Alterations which
I made were in the first Act, in removing that old bu^^le ab^^^ Whigg and Tory,
(which was the Subject of most of the Second Scene) and placing the Character
of a Rake-bell in its room, which was so little, that it could not Influence a
more Capricious Audience, to the Damning of the whole. There might indeed be
some objections about the Plot, but not very Rational, I think; I Am sure, at
least, it is the first Play, for some Years, could be quarreled at for having
too much Plot. In the Edition however, I have put in a great deal, which the
length of the Play obliged me to cut out for the Action.

Here, Sir, if the Play had been my own, I should have complained that the Town
had its favorite Fools, as well as favorite Wits, and that Comedy or Farce
from any other hand, would no more go down with them, than their favorites
will with true Judges that read, not see'em. I should have had indignation
enough, perhaps, to have railed at the Critics of all Degrees, and Denominations
of Box and Pit, nay, Galleries too, and told 'em that they were so conceited of
their own Wit, that they could take no pleasure in hearing that of another, or
that Wit in a Play seeming to affront the Parts of the Audience, they suffered
their Resentment to destroy their Satisfaction. This, and a great many other
Satirical Reflections, which are Natural for a Disappointed Poet to make, I
should then have vented; but being satisfied, that the Reputation of Mrs. BEHN
is not affected by the malicious Endeavors of some of my Enemies, I now
present it under your Patronage, Sir, to the more competent Judges; Proud of
the Opportunity of Offering you an occasion of so agreeable a Province, as the
Protection of the unfortunate, and letting the World know how much I am, Sir,

Your Humble Servant Chapter Gildon.

An ACCOUNT of the Life of the Incomparable Mrs. BEHN.
MRS. Behn, was a woman of so Celebrated a fame while she lived, and so
esteemed by all that have read any thing of her writing since her Death, that I
suppose a short Account of her Life will be a very grateful present to the
Ingenious. To give a perfect draught of her is a task of more weight than my
present Time, and Affairs will allow, or indeed my Abilities, for to draw her
to the Life, one must write like her, that is with all the softness of her Sex,
and all the fire of ours. But an indifferent sketch of so Admirable a Woman,
will be welcome where no better is to be had, and that value which the Artist
cannot give, it will gain from the Original.

Her Maiden Name was Johnson, her father was a Gentleman of a good Family in
Canterbury in Kent. Her Childhood she passed in that City, but not without the
promises of the extraordinary Excellencies of her Riper years, both in Wit and
Beauty; she had always agreat Inclination for Poetry, and was truly born a
Poet, not made nor formed by Industry. I must not be particular in all the
little Accidents of her Childhood, for that would be more than my Reader would
Pardon, tho most Writers of Lives take care to omit not the least trivial
Actions of the very infancy of the Persons they would Celebrate, and indeed
make them often more considerable, than any of their Life. But one motive to
that Impertinence I want, Prolixity; for I aim at as short a Relation as
possible. She was very Young when she went with her Father, Mother, Brother and
Sisters to Suri^^m, which Voyage was in nothing so considerable as the
Admirable History of Or^onoko, which it produced, and which has given the
occasion of so Celebrated a Tragedy. The disappointmens of fortune in the loss
of her Relations and Friends there, obliged her to return for England, where
she Married Mr. Behn, an Eminent Merchant; and in the time of the Watch War,
grew to such an esteem for Wit, nay and Judgment too; and which is more
uncommon in the Fair Sex, Secresy, and Management of Public Affairs; that she
was employed by K. Charles the Second, in several Negotiations in Flauders,
which required Industry and Caution, and which she quitted with all the
Applause Success could gain a Beautiful Woman in the heart of a King, that had
always a peculiar value for that Sex. How grateful he was, or whether her
service made his satisfaction extend to a reward, I have forgot. But to that
soft Court we owe her exerting her Poetical Genius, which for many years gave
the sensible part of the Town so many agreeable Diversions. She was of a
generous, and open temper, an easy and free Conversation, with abundance of Wit
and nice Reasoning above most, if not all that I have ever observed in that
Sex, which tho often happy in a brisk Wit, and pleasant Repartee, yet are, for
want of Education, Study and Application of Mind, generally to seek in the
nicer Observations, and Reflections of Judgment. The finer sort of Reasoning is
most commonly out of their way, and indeed not so agreeable as a genteel
railery, and at most a superficial Argumentation, built on the first
Appearances of things, which are too often a very false and unfaithful
Foundation. But Mrs. Behn, in the nicest Metaphysical points, would Argue with
judgment, and extremely happy distinctions; she would, with an engaging Air,
enforce her Notions, with all the Justness of the most able Philosopher, tho
not with his Majestical Roughness; which made all she said more prevalent with
her Hearers. But this is not half her true Praise, for her Conversation was
general, and never impertinent; her Vanity gave no Alloy to her Wit, and was no
more than might justly Spring from Conscious Virtue; she never insinuated her
Merit by any other means, than the Fine Things she spoke, which obliged others
to praise her so much, that she could not put her Friends to the Blush to
praise her self, tho that is a Vanity much more agreeable in a Lady, than in a
Man; in the first, it saves a Man the Expense of Flatter, whilst he may cheaply
do it by saying, Amen, to what the Lady advances of her own; but in the latter
it is intolerable, and without excuse of either Pleasure or Profit.

To give the Reader a view of Her, or her Works, as they both require, would
swell into a Volume, and provoke too much the Envy of the rest of her Sex, who,
whilst the First Place every thing is not given to her may lose their Malice
and Envy in a generous Emulation of out-doing her in some excellence or other.

After what I have said of Mrs. Behn, 'twill be concluded, that she was too
great a favorite of Nature, to have many obligations to fortune; at least the
latter part of her Life found her Circumstances much below her Desert; and
after a tedious Sickness, and several years foregoing Indisposition, she died
soon after the Revolution, and lies now Buried in the Cloisters of
Westminster-Abby, under a plain Marble Stone, with two Wretched Verses for her
Epitaph, who had her self Wrote so many good.

Her Muse was never subject to the Curse of bringing forth with Pain; for she
always Writ with the greatest case in the world, and that in the midst of
Company, and Discourse of other matters. I saw her my self write Oroonoko, and
keep her turn in Discoursing with several then present in the Room. Among
several Pieces that I saw of hers, in her own handwriting, this following Play
was one; which, spite of the malice of some, and folly of others, who are
dully vain of being hard to please, as my Lord Rochester says, has intrinsic
value enough to recommend it self to the World, and condemn the Brutal
Treatment it met with the first day.

PROLOGUE, by an unknown hand,
Spoke by Mr. Powel.
AS Rivals of each other jealous prove,
And both strive which shall gain the Lady's Love,
So we for your Affections daily Use,
Not the intrigues in the Galery;
(Who squeezes hand of Phillis masked, that stood
O^ling for sale in V^lvet Scarf, and Hood)
Can with more passion his dear Nymph pursue,
Than we to make Diversion s^t for you.
Grant we may please, and we have our outmost Aim,
It Is to your favor only we lay Claim,
In what can we oblige? Could we present you
With Mistress Young, and safe, it would content you;
Then husbands wearied out with Spouse alone,
And hen-peck'd Keepers that drudge on with one,
I fancy hither would in crewds resort,
As thick as Men for Offices to Court:
Who'd s^ay behind, the Beau above three score,
Would hobble on and gape for one bit more;
Men of all Stations, from the Nobles down,
To grave Sir Roger in his Cap and Gown,
Would hither come; but we some time must take,
E're we a project of such moment make;
Since that is laid by, for your diversion then,
We do invite the Brothers of the pen,
The Courtier, Lawyer, Soldier, Player too,
Wit never had more Encouragement than now,
Tho free, or Aliens to our stage we take 'em,
Not kick 'em out, but native subjects make 'em:
The Ladys too are always welcome here,
Let 'em in writing or in Box appear.
To that fair Sex we are obliged to day,
Oh! then be kind to a poor Orphan play,
Whose Parent while she lived obliged you all,
You praised her living, and you mourned her fall.
Who could like her, our softer Passions ^^ve,
The Life of humor, and the Soul of Lo^^,
Wits Eldest Sister, throughout every line,
You might perceive some Female Graces shine;
For poor Astrea's infant we implore,
Let it then live, tho she is now no more.
(...)
Spoken by Mr. Horden.
We Are grown Impatient to be out of pain,
And fain would know our fortune, loss, or gain:
The Merchants phrase may not be Improper now,
If ye our City Character allow.
But some Spruse Critics. I hear, swears it is strange,
To take a powdered Beau off from the Exchange;
A place more famed for Band, and dress precise,
For greasy Cuckholds, Stockjobbers, and lies,
Than for a Spark o'th town, but now a days
The Cit sets up in bo^, puffs, perfumes, plays,
And tho he passes for a Man of Trade,
Is the chief squeaker at the Masquerade,
Let him his Sister, or his wife beware,
It Is not for nothing Courtiers go so far;
Thus for a while he holds, till Cash is found
To be a Dr. many a woeful Pound,
Then off he moves, and in another year
Turns true Alsatian, or Solicitor.
For we (except o'th stage) shall seldom find
To a poor broken Beau, a Lady kind,
Whilst powerful Guinea last, he is wondrous pretty,
And much the finest Gentleman o'th City,
But when fob's empty, he is an odious Creature,
Fough he how he stinks? h'as not one taking feature,
Then such an Awkard mein, and vulgar sense,
I vow I wonder at his Impudence,
It Is well Lejere appeared, George ows the prize
To the Gay Monsieur, Footmen, and Disguise,
Charms which few English Women can withstand,
What cannot a Man of Quality command?
As to the faults, or Merits of the Play
We leave ye to bejudges of, yet say,
Ye ought in justice to be kind to day.
For to our Cost (alas we soon shall find,
Perhaps not half the money ye designed,
Consider, Sirs, it goes to be refined.
And since in all Exchanges it is a notion,
For what ye take to be in due proportion,
So may we justly hope no wrong is done ye,
If ye have par of Wit, for par of Money
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Prince Frederick Sir Rowland Marteen. George Marteen Mr. Welborn Sir Merlin
Marteen Sir Morgan Blunder Mr. Twang Brittone Mr. Verbrugen Mr. Johnson Mr.
Powel Mr. Horden Mr. Pinkerman Mr. Bullock Mr. Smeaton Mr. Kent Constable and
Watch.
WOMEN.
Mirtilla Olivia Teresia Lady Blunder Mrs. Menage Lady Youthly Mrs. Knight Mrs.
Verbrugen Mrs. Temple Mrs. Powel Mrs. Willis Mrs. Harris
THE Younger Brother: OR, THE Amorous Jilt.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
SCENE A Chamber. Enter George Marteen, in a Rich Riding Habit, with his Valet
Britton. Geo. WEre you with Mrs. Manage, Britton?


Britt. Yes Sir; And she cries as much for her wanting Room for you in her
House, as she would have done some Forty Years ago for a Disapointment of her
Lover. But she assures me, the Lodging she has taken for you, is the best in
all Lincolns-Inn-Fields.


Geo. And did you charge her to send Mirtilla's Page to me?


Britt. I did Sir; and he will be with you instantly.


Geo. It Is well -- Then shall I hear some News of my Mirtilla. aside. Britton,
have thee, and get my Equipage in order; a handsome Coach, rich Liveries, and
more Footmen; for it is Appearance only passes in the World. -- And de you hear,
take care none know me by any other Name than that of Lejere.


Britt. I shall Sir. (Exit.)


Geo. I came not from Paris into England, as my Old Father thinks to reform
into a Dull wretched Life in Wales. No, I Will rather trust my kind Mistress
Fortune, that has still kept me like her Darling, than purchase a Younger
Brother's narrow Stipend, at the Expense of my Pleasure and Happiness.


Enter Olivia in a Pages Habit. She runs and Embraces George. Oliv. My ever
charming Brother!


Geo. My best, my dear Olivia!


Oliv. The same lovely man still!

Thy Gallantry and Beauty's are all thy own, Paris could add no Graces to thy
Air; nor yet pervert it into Affectation.


Geo. Spare me, and tell me how Mirtilla fares.


Oliv. I think, Brother, I writ you word to Paris, of a Marriage ^^ncluded
betwixt me, and VVelborn?


Geo. That Letter I received, but from the Dear Mirtilla, not one soft word;
not one tender Line has blessed my Eyes, has Eased my panting Heart this tedious
three Months space; and thou with whom I left the weighty Charge of her dear
Heart, to watch her lovely Eyes, to give me notice when my Rivals pressed, and
when she waver'd in her Faith to me, even thou were silent to me, cruel Sister.


Oliv. Thou will be like a Lover presently, and tire the Hearer with a Book of
words, of heavy Sighs, Dying Languishments, and all that huddie of Nonsense;
and not tell me how you like my Marriage.


Geo. Welborn's my Friend, and worthy of thy Heart.


Oliv. I never saw him yet, and to be sold unseen, and unsigh'd for in the
Flower of my Youth and Beauty, gives me a strange aversion to the Match.


Geo. Oh! you will like him when you see him -- But my Mirtilla.


Oliv. Like him -- no, no, I never shall -- what, come a stranger to my
Hu^bands Bed? It Is Prostitution in the lewdest manner, without the ^^^^ction;
the Pleasure of Variety, and the Bait of Profit, may make ^ame E^^^sse for
Whores, who change their Cullies, and quit their Nau^^^ ^oo^^ -- No, no, my
Brother, when Parents grow Arbitrary, it is ^^ne we lo^^ into our Rights and
Privileges; therefore, my dear George, (...) thou hope for Happiness in Love,
Assist my Disobedience.


^e^. In any worthy Choi^e be sure of me, but can thou wish happiness (...)
Lov^ and not inform me something of Mirtilla.


Oliv. I Will tell you better ^ews -- Our hopeful Elder Brother, Sir Mer^^ (...)
to be disinherited, for he is, Heaven bethanked --


Geo. M^^^^d to some Town Jilt, the common fate of Coxcombs.


O^^^. N^, so, my dear George, but sets up for a Celebrated Rake-hell, (...)
we^l as G^me^^er; ^e could not have found out a more dextrous way to ^^ve made
thee H^^^ to four Thousand Pounds a Year.


Ge^. What Is th^^ without Martilla?


Oliv. Prithee no more of her -- Love spoils a fine Gentleman: Gaming, Whoring
and Fighting, may qualify a man for Conversation; but Love perverts all ones
thoughts, and makes us fit Company for none but ones self, for even a Mistress
can scarce dispense with a sighing, whining Lovers Company long, though all he
says flatters her Pride.


Geo. Why do thou trifle with me, when thou know the Violence of my Love?


Oliv. I wish I could any way divert your Thoughts from her I would not have
your Joy depend on such a fickle Creature.


Geo. Mirtilla False? What my Mirtilla False?


Oliv. Even your Mirtilla's False, and Married to another.


Geo. Married! Mirtilla Married? It Is impossible.


Oliv. Nay Married to that Bawling, Drinking Fool, Sir Morgan Blunde^.


Geo. Married, and Married to Sir Morgan Blunder, a sot, an ill-bred senceless
Fool; almost too great a Fool to make a Country Justice?


Oliv. No doubt, she had her Aims in it, he is a very Convenient Husband I Will
assure you, and that suits her Temper: he has Estate and Folly enough, and she
has Youth, and wantonness enough to match 'em.


Geo. Her choice gives me some Comfort and some Hopes; for I Will pursue her, but
for Revenge, not Love.


Oliv. Forget her rather, for she is not worth Revenge, and that way 'twill be
none; Prostitute in Soul as Body, she doats even on me in Breeches.


Geo. On thee, her Page; dote on thee, a Youth; she knew thee not as Woman.


Oliv. No that Secret I have kept to do you Service. -- At first she said she
loved me for your sake, because you recommended me, and when I Sung, or played
upon my Flute, would kiss my Cheek, and Sigh, and often, (when alone) would
send for me, and Smile, and Talk, and set my Hair in Curles, to make me Sa^^y
and Familiar with her. On^ Day she said, Endimi^n, thy Namesake, was t^^s
C^ressd by Cynthia. A Goddess did not scorn the humble Sw^in whom by her Love
she equaled to her Deity; she found that I had Sense to understand her, and
paid her Advances back with equal Ardour.


Geo. Oh! Curse, where learnt she all this wickedness? Aside.


Oliv. But she being obliged to go for Ilande^s, to see her Sister ^ak^ the
Holy Habit, I feigned a Sickness to be l^^^ behind, hoping that Absence might
abate her Flame; yet she returned more Amorous, and fearing the Thefts of Love
might wound her Honor, she thought (...) Husband would secure that shame; and
luckily my Aunt arrived s^om W^^^^, and brought Sir Morgan with her, who
Lodging where w^ did at Mr^. Manages; My Aunt (that doats on Quality in either
S^^ made up this hasty Match, unknown to me, though for my sake.


Geo. What will not Faithless Woman do when she is raging.


Oliv. And now having so well prepared the way, she grows impatient for an
Opportunity, and thou art Arrived most happily to succor me.


Geo. No, for some Days keep this Habit on, it may be useful to us, but I must
see this Faithless Perjured Woman, which I must contrive with Mrs. Manage.


Oliv. Yet pray resolve to see my Father first; for now is the Critical Time to
make thy Fortune; he came to Town last Night, and lodges here at Mrs. Manages,
with my Aunt Blunder.


Geo. What in the House with thee, and not know thee?


Oliv. No more than a Priest Compassion; he thinks me at Hackney, making wax
Babies, where he intends to visit me within these three days. -- But I forgot
to tell you, our Brother, Sir Merlin Lodges in this House with you, and should
he know you --


Geo. It Is impossible -- I Have not seen him, or my Father, these five Years.
Absence, my Growth, and this unexpected Equipage, will not be penetrated by his
Capacity.


Oliv. True, he will never look for his Brother George, in the Galantry and
Person of Monsieur Lejere -- My good Father Expects you Home, like the Prodigal
Son, all Torn and Tattered, and as Penitent too,


Geo. To Plod on here in a Laborious Cheating all my Youth and Vigor, in hopes
of drunken Pleasures when I Am old: Or else go with him into Wales, and there
lead a thoughtless Life, Hunt, and Drink, and make Love to none but
Chambermaids. No, my Olivia, I Will Use the Sprightly Runnings of my Life, and
not hope distant Pleasures from its dregs.


Oliv. For that, use your Discretion; now Equip your self to your present
business, the more simply you are clad and look, the better. I Will home, and
Expect you. Exit.


Geo. Do so, my good Sister, a little formal Hipocrisy may do, 'twill relish
after Liberty; for a Pleasure is never so well Tasted, as when it is seasoned
with some opposition.


Enter Britton. Britt. Sir, I Have News to tell you, will surprise you, Prince
^redrick is Arrived.


Geo. Is It Possible? I left him going for Flanders.


Britt. Passing by our Door, and seeing your Livery, inquired for you, and
finding you here, alighted just now. But see, Sir, he is here.


Enter Prince Fredrick; they meet and Embrace. Geo. My Life's preserver,
welcome to my Arms, as health to sick men.


Fred. And thou to mine, as the kind Mistress to the longing Lover; My Soul's
Delight, and Darling of the Fair.


Geo. Ah! Prince, you touch my bleeding Wound.


Fred. Ha! Lejere, leave to unhappy Lovers, those sighs, those folded Arms, and
down cast Eyes.


Geo. Then they are fit for me: my Mistress, Sir, that Treasure of my Life, for
whom you have heard me sigh, is perjured, false, and married to an other. Yet
what is worse, I find my Prince, my Friend, here in my Native Country, and am
not able to pay him what his Greatness merits.


Fred. You pain me when you compliment my Friendship. (Embracing.)


Geo. Perhaps you will not think me worth this Honor when you shall hear my
Story.


Prince. Thou can say nothing I can value less.


Geo. Perhaps too my way of Living has deceived you, being still received by
Princes, as Companions in all their Riots, Loves, and Divertisements, where
even you, did me the Honor to Esteem, and call me Friend.


Prince. What e're thou art, I Am sure thy Mind's illustrious.


Geo. My Family, I must confess, is Honorable; but, Sir, my Father was the
Younger House, of which my unhappy self was destined to be last: I Am a Cadet,
that outcast of my Family, and born to that Curse of our Old English Custom:
Whereas in other Countries, Younger Brothers are trained up to the Exercise of
Arms, where Honor and Renown attend the Brave: we basely bind our Youngest out
to Slavery, to Lazy Trades, idly confined to Shops or Merchants Books, debasing
of the Spirit to the mean Cunning, how to Cheat and Chasser.


Prince. A Custom insupportable. --


Geo. To this, to this low wretchedness of Life, your Servant Sir -- was
destined by his Parents, and am yet this Bound Indentur'd Slave.


Prince. Thou have no cause to quarrel with thy Stars, since Virtue is most
Vallu'd when Oppressed -- Are all your Merchants Apprentices, thus Gay.


Geo. Not all -- But, Sir, I could not bow my mind to this so necessary
Drudgery, and yet however, I assumed my Native Temper, when out of the Trading
City; in it, I forced my Nature to a dull s^o^enly Gravity, which well enough
deceived the busy Block-heads; my Clothes and Equipage I ledg'd at this End of
the Town, where I still pa^^'d for something better than I was, when e're I
Pleased to change the Trader for the Gentleman.


Prince. And lived thus undiscovered --


Geo. With Ease, still Loved and Courted by the Great, ever Played high with
those durst venture most; and durst make Love where're my fancy liked, but
sometimes running out my Masters Cash, (which was supplied still by my Father)
they sent me, to Reform my Expensive Life, a Factor, into ^rance -- still I
Essayed to be a Plodding Thriver, but found my Parts not formed for Dirty
business.


Prince. There Is not a Thought, an Action of thy Soul, that does not tend to
something far more Glorious.


Geo. If yet you think me worthy of your Favor, command that Life, you have so
often preserved.


Prince. No more; -- Thou have encreast my Value for thee. -- Oh! take my
Heart, and see how't has been used by a Fair Charmer, since I saw thee last --
that sullen day we Parted, you for England, you may remember, I designed for
Flanders.


Geo. I do with Malancholly, Sir, remember it,


Prince. Arrived at Ghent, I went to see an English Nun Initiated, where I
beheld the pretty Innocent, delivered up a Victim to Foolish Chastity; but
among the Relation; then attending the Sacrifice, was a Fair Sister of the
Young Votress, but so surpassing all I Would seen before, that I neglecting the
Dull Holy Business, Paid my Devotion to that Kneeling Saint.


Geo. That was the nearest way to Heaven, my Lord.


Prince. Her Face, that had a thousand Charms of Youth, was height'n'd with an
Air of Languishment; a lovely Sorrow, dwelt upon her Eyes, that Taught my New
born-Passion Awe and Reverence.


Geo. This Description of her, Fires me. -- (aside)


Prince. Her Dimpl'd Mouth, her Neck, her Hand, her Hair, a Majesty, and Grace
in every Motion, completed my Undoing; I raved, I burnt, I languish'd with
desire, the Holy Place could scarce contain my madness, with Pain, with
Torture, I restrained my Passion when she retired, ^ed sadly from the Alter; I,
mixing with the Crowd, inquired her Name, and Count^y; her Servant told me,
that she was of Quality, and lived in England, nay, in this very Town, this
gave me Anguish not to be con^^^d, till I resolved to follow her, which is the
cause you find me here so soon^ thy Aid, thy Aid, Lejere, or I am lost.


Geo. I wish to live no longer, then to serve your Highness, if she be Sir
(...) Maid of Quality, I shall soon find her out, and then you will easily Conquer.

You Have all the Youth, and Beauty, that can Charm, and what gains most upon a
woman's heart, you have powerful Title Sir, a sort of Philter, that ^r sails to
win. But you have not told me yet the Ladies name.


Prince. I had forgot that; -- It Is in these Tablets write: I Am now in have,
going to receive same Bills: I Gives him the Tablets. ^odg at Wilborns, who
came over with me, being sent for to be Married.


Geo. I know the House, it is in Southampton-S^^tare. I Will wait upon your ^^^^se
-- ( Exit Prince.)


Geo Let me see -- Daughter to a Dece^^'d Lord, a Maid, Opening the tablets,
reads. and no Dowry, but Beauty, Living in L^^^lns-Inn-Fields, -- Ha^ -- her
Name Mirtilla! Mirtilla. (Pauses)


Prince, thou have paid thy self, for all the Favors done me. Mirtilla! --
(Pauses.)

Why yes, Mirtilla! He takes but what she has given away already. --

Oh! Damn her, she has broke her Faith, her Vows, and is no longer mine -- And
you are my Friend. (Pauses again.)

Mirtilla's but my Mistress, and has taken all the Repose of my poor Life away
-- Yes, let him take her, I Will reisign her to him; and therefore shut my Eyes
against her Charms; Fix her inconstancy about my Heart, and scorn whatever she
can give me. (Exit.)


SCENE II. A Chamber.
Enter Sir Morgan Blunder in a Nightgown and Cap; to him Manage with a Candle.
Man. Your Lady mother has sent you a Candle, Sir.


Sir Morg. Good Mrs. Manage, remember my kind Love to my Lady mother, and tell
her, I thank her for her Posset, but never eat in a morning after hard drinking
over night.


Man. Ah, Sir, but now you're married to a fine Lady, you ought to make much of
your self.


Sir Mor. Good Madam, as little of your Matrimony as of your Candle, my stomach
is plaguey squemish, and a hair of the Old Dog's worth both of 'em. Oh! sick!
sick!


Enter Sir Merlin, singing a Song in braise of a Rake hell's Life. A Song. The
Town-Rake.
Written by Mr. Motteux.
I.
WHat Life can compare with the Jolly Town-Rake's,
When in Youth his full Swing of all pleasure he takes!
At Noon be get up, for a Whet, and to dine,
And wings the d^ll hours with Mirth, Music and Wine,
Then Jogs to the Playhouse, and chats with the Masks,
And thence to The Rose, where he takes his Three Flasks
There, great as a Caesar, he revels, when drunk,
And scours all he meets, as he reels to his Punk;
Then finds the dear Girl in his Arms when he wakes.
What Life can compare with tue folly Town-Rake's!
II.
He, like the Great Turk, has his Favorite She;
But the Town's his Seraglio, and still he lives free.
Sometimes she is a Lady; but as he must range,
Black Betty, or Oyster-Doll, serves for a Change.
As he varies his Sports, his whole Life is a Feast;
He thinks him that is soberest the most like a Beast.
At Houses of Pleasure breaks Windows and Doors;
Kicks Bullies and Cullies, then lies with their Whores.
Rare work for the Surgeon, and Midwife he makes.
What Life can compare with the Jolly Town-Rake's!
III.
Thus in Covent Garden he makes his Campaign,
And no Coffee-house haunts, but to settle his Brain.
He laughs at dry Morals, and never does think,
Unless it is to get the best Wenches and Drink.
He dwells in a Tavern, and lies every where,
And improving his hours, lives an Age in a Year:
For as Life is uncertain, he loves to make haste;
And thus he lives longest, because he lives fast.
Then a Leap in the Dark to the Devil he takes.
What Death can compare with the Jolly Town-Rake's!
Sir Mer. Why, how now, Sir Morgan, I see you will make a Husband of the Right
Town Mode: What, married but four days, and at your separate Appartment already?


Sir Morg. A Plague of your what de call ums.


Sir Merl. Rakhells you would say, Cousin, an honorable Appellation for men of
Bravery.


Sir Morg. Ay, ay, your Rakehells -- I was never so mudl'd with Treason. Tierce
Claret, Oaths and Dice all the Days of my Life -- Was I in case to do Family
duty; S'life you drank down all my Love, all my Prudence too; Gad forgive me
for it.


Sir Merl. Why, how the Devil came thou to bear thy Liquor so ill? Ods my
Life, you Drunk like a French man new come to the University;


Sir Morg. Pox, I can bear their Drinking as well as any Man, but your London
way of Boming and Politics does not agree with my Constitution; look ye,
Cosen, set quietly to it, and I Will stand my Ground, but to have Screaming
Whores, Noisy Bullies, Rattling Dice, Swearing and Cursing Gamsters, Cous.
turns the Head of a Country Drinker, more than the Wine.


Sir Merl. Oh! Use Cosen, will make an able Man.


Sir Morg. Use, Cosen, Use me no Uses, for if ever you catch me at your Damned
Clubs again, I Will give you my Mother for a Maid; why you talk down right
Treason.


Sir Merl. Treason, ay --


Sir Morg. Ah Cosen, why we talked enough to --, Hang us all.


Sir Merl. My Honest Country Couz. when will thou understand the Cuelphs, and
the Gibelins; and learn to talk Treason of this side the Law? Bilk a Whore,
without Remorse, break Windows, and not pay for 'em; Drink your Bottle without
asking Questions; Kill your Man without letting him Draw; Play away your Money,
without fear of your Spouse, and stop her Mouth by Undermining her Nose?


Sir Mor. Come, come, look you Cousin, one word of Advice now I Am sober; what
the Devil should provoke thee and me to put our selves, on our Twelve
Godfathers for a Frolic? We who have Estates, I should be loath to leave the
World with a scurvy Song, composed by the Poet Sternold.

Enter at the Door Sir Rowland, harkening. Or why, de see, should I expose my
Noddle to the Billmen in Flannel, and lie in the Roundhouse, when I may go to
bed in a whole skin with my Lady Wife.


Sir Merl. Gad, Sir Morgan, thou have sometimes pretty smart Satirical Touches
with thee; Use but Will's Coffee a little, and with thy Estate, and that
Talent, thou may set up for a Wit.


Sir Morg. Mercy upon me, Sir Merlin, thou art stark mad: What, I a Wit! I had
rather be one of your Rakehells; for, look ye a man may sweat and stare, or so,
break Windows, and Drawers Heads, or so; un^^g a Needy Whore, and yet keep ones
Estate; but should I turn Wit, 'twere impossible; for a Wit with an Estate, is
like a Prisoner among the Canibal^.


Sir Merl. How so, good Sir Morgan?


Sir Morg. Why, the Needy Rogues only feed him with praise, to fatten him for
their Palates, and then devour him.


Sir Merl. I applaud your Choice, Cousin; for what man of (...) would not
prefer a Rake to a Wit? The one enioys the pleasures, the other can only Rail
at; and that not out of Conscience, but Impotence; for alas! a Wit has no
quarrel to Vice in perfection, but what the Fox had to the Grapes; He cannot
play away his Hundred Pound at sight; his Third Day will not afford it; and
therefore he Rails at Ca^^e^^e^s, Whores si^^^ him, as much as Noblemen, and
for the same cause, money; These care not to sell their Carcasses for a Sonnet,
nor these to scatter their (...) be told an Old Tale of a Tub, they were so
well acquainted with before.


Sir Morg. What Is that, Sir Merlin?


Sir Merl. Why, their Praise; -- For the Poets Flattery seldom reaches the
Patron's Vanity; And what is too strong seasoned for the rest of the World, is
too weak for their Palates


Sir Morg. Why, look ye, Cousin, you're a shrewd (...) Whence learned you this
Satyr; for I Am sure it is none of thy own; (...) should as soon suspect thee
guilty of Good Nature, as Wit.


Sir Merl. I scorn it; and therefore I confess I stole the Observation from a
Poet; but the Devil pick his Bones for diverting me from the Noble Theme of
Rakehells.


Sir Morg. Noble Theme, Sir Merlin! look ye, de see: Don't mistake me; I think
it is a very scurvy one; and I would not have your Father know that you set up
for such a Reprobate; for Sir Rowland would certainly disinherit thee.


Sir Merl. O keep your musty morals to your self, good Country Couz; They Will do
you service to your Welsh Criminals, for stealing an Hen, or breaking up a
Wenches enclosure, or so, Sir Morgan; but for me, I despise 'em: I have not
been admitted into the Family of the Rakehellorums for this, Sir: Let my Father
drink Old Adam, read the Pilgrim's Progress, The Country Justices Calling, or
for a Regale, drink the dull manufacture or Malt and Water; I des^e him; he
cannot cut off the Entail, of what is settled on me; and for the rest, I Will trust
Dame ^ortune; and pray to the Three Fatal Sisters to cut his Rotten Th^^d in
Two, before he thinks of any such Wickedness.


Enter Sir Rowland in a great Rage. Sir Roll. Will you so, Sir? Why how now
Sirrah! get you out of my House, Rogue; get out of my Doors, Rascal. (beats
him.)


Enter Lady Blunder. Lady Blund. Upon my Honor now, Brother, what is the
matter? Whence this Ungenerous Disturbance?


Sir Roll. What Is the matter? the Disturbance! Why, sister, this Rogue here --
this unintelligible graceless Rascal, here, will needs (...) up for a Rakehell,
when there is scarce such a thing in the Nation, above an Ale-draper's Son, and
chooses to be awkerdly out of Fashion, merely for the sake of Tricking and
Poverty; and keeps company with the senseless, profane, lazy, idle, Noisie,
Grovelling Rascals, purely for the sake of spending his Estate like a Notorious
Blockhead: But I Will take care he shall not have what I can dispose of: You Will be
a Rake-hell, will you?


Lady Blun. How Cousin! Sure you will not be such a filthy beastly thing, will you?


Sir Me^l. Lord, Aunt, I only go to the Club sometimes, to improve my ^^lf in
the Art of Living, and the Accomplishments of a five Gentleman.


Sir ^ow. A fine Gentleman, Sot, a fine Coxcomb. (beats him.)


Sir M^rg. Hold, hold, good Uncle, my Cousin has been only drawn in, a ^^^ie,
or s^, do see, be^^, Heir to a good Estate; and that is what his Club (...) to
(...) off Old Tavern Scores, and buy Utensils for Whores in Fa^^^^.


Sir R^^ My Estate sold to pay Tavern Scores, and keep Nasty Whores?


(...) ^^^n. Whores ^ay filthy creatures; do they deal in Whores? Pray (...)
what is a R^^e-hell?


Sir I^^^. A Rake-hell is a man that de^ies Law and good manners, nay and good
^e^^e too; ha^^ both Morality and Religion, and that not for any Reason (for he
never thinks), but merely because he don't understand 'em, ^^^'s the Whore's
pro^e^tion and punishment, the Bawds Tool, the Sharpers Bubble, the Vi^^^r^
Property, the Drawers Terror, the Glasiers Bene^^tor: in short, a ^ea^ing
thoughtless, heedless, ridiculous, universal Cox^^o.


Sir Merl. O Lord, Aunt, no more like him than an Attorney's like an honest
man. Why a Rake-hell is --


Sir Row. What siraah! what you rebel? (strikes him.)


La. Blun. Nay, Good Brother, permit my Nephew to tell us his Notion.


Sir Merl. Why, Aunt, I say a Rake-hell is your only Man of Beavery; he slights
all the Force of Fortune, and sticks at no Hazard -- Plays away his hundred
pounds at sight, pays a Ladies Bill at sight, drinks his Bottle without
Equivocation, and sights his Man without any provocation.


Sir Row. Nay then Mr. Rogue, I Will be sworn thou art none: Come, Sir, will you
fight, Sir? will you fight, Sir? Ha! (Draws his Sword.)


Sir Merl. Fight, Sir! fight Sir?


Sir Row. Yes, fight, Sir: Come, spare your Prayers to the Three Fata! sisters,
and cut my Thread thy self, thou Graceless, Reprobate Rascal -- Come, come on,
you Man of Bravery. ( Runs at Sir Merlin, (...) retires before him. Sir Morgan
holds Sir Rowland.)


Sir Merl. Oh, good Sir, hold; I recant, Sir, I recant.


Sir Roll. (putting up) Well, I Am satisfied thou' It make no good ^^^e hell, in
this Point, whatever you will in the others; And since N^t^^e ha^ made thee a
Coward, Inclination a Coxcomb, I Will take care to make thee a Beggar; and so
thou shall be a Rake-hell but in Will. I Will disinherit thee, I will, Villain.


La. Blun. What, disinherit your Eldest Son, Brother?


Sir Merl. Ay, Aunt, his very Heir Apparent? Aunt to show you h^^ the Old
Gentleman has misrepresented us. Give me leave to present y^^ a Dance. -- I
provided to Entertain your Son with, in which is represent^^ all the Beauties
of our Lives.


D. Blun. Oh! by all means, Cosen, by all means.


Sir Mark. What hoa? Roger bring in the Dancers.


Here the Dance, representing Rake-hells Constable watch, etc. Enter Phillip
Phil. Sir, who does your Worship think is a^ri^'d.


Sir Row. My Son George, I hope, come in the Nick.


Phil. Even so, Sir, from Paris -- Exit.


Sir Roll. The Prodigal Returned, then Kill the ^^tt^d Calf?

Enter George Dressed like a Prentice. -- My own dear Boy, thou art welcome to my
(Kneels) Arms, as e^^e thy Mother was; for whose dear sake I pardon all thy
Follies.


Sir Merl. (aside) Ay, Sir, I had a Mother too, or I Am belied -- (weeping) Pox
take him that he should come just in the Nick, as the Old Fellow says --
(aside.)


Sir Row. Yes, you had a Mother.

Whom in my Youth I was compelled to Marry; and Gad, I think, I got thee with as
ill a will, but George and my Olivia? In heart of Love, when my desire was Now.
But hark ye Boy George, you have cost me a damned deal of Money, Surrah; but you
shall Marry, and Redeem all George.


Geo. What you please, Sir, to study Virtue, Duty, and Allegience, shall be my
future business.


^^r ^^w. Well said George! Here Is a Boy now.


Sir Merl. Virtue and Allegiance, Lord, Lord, how came so sneaking I follow to
spend Five Thousand Pounds of his Masters Cash?


Sir Row. She Is Rich, George, but something homely.


Geo. She Will not be Proud then, Sir.


Sir Row. Not much of her Beauty -- she is of a good staid Age too, about same
fourscore.


Geo. Better still, Sir, I shall not fear Cuckoldom.


Sir ^ow. For that I cannot Answer; but she has two Thousand a year. (...) to
settle my Family, and then -- Marry my self George.


(...). Blun. What to this old Ladies Granddaughter? Methinks she is (...) ^it
for your Son, Sir Merlin, and the Old Lady for you.


Sir Row. No, no, the Young Rogues can help themselves with Mistresses; but
it is well if an old man can keep his Wife to himself -- I Have invited 'em to
Dinner to day, and see, they are come.


Enter Lady Youthly, led by her Chaplin, and leaning on a Staff, and Terelia.
La. Youth. Where Is Sir Rowland Marteen? Oh, your Servant, Sir, I am come. Runs
against George.


Ch^p. Your Ladyship is mistaken, this is not Sir Rowland, but a Handsome
proper Young Man.


La. Youth. A young man! I cry you mercy heartily -- young man, I a lighted in
the Sun, and am almost Blind.


Geo. With wondrous Old Age. (a side.)


La. You. Good lack, Sir Rowland, that I should mistaken young man so!


Sir Row. Ay, Madam, and such a young man too.


La. ^^uth. Ay, ay, I see him now. (Puts on her Specticles.)


Geo. S^d^^th, what a Sepulcher is here, to bury a Husband in? How came she to
escape the Hood? for sure she was not born since. (aside.)


Sir Row. This is the lusty lad, my Son George, I told your Ladyship of.


La. Youth. Got so, cot so, is it so Sir, I ask your Pardon, Sir. Mr. Twang,
take a survey of him, and give me your Opinion of his Person, and his Parts.


Twang. Truly Madam, the young Man is of a comely Personage and Lineaments.


La. Youth. Of what Sir -- Lord, I have such a Cold. ( Cough's)


Geo. Which she got when the ^ick^s went Naked.


L. Blun. Madam, you have a Power over Sir Rowland; Pray entreat him ^o take
his Son, Sir Merlin, into Grace again. ( To Teresia.)


Tere. That, Sir, you must grant me, pray let me know the Quarrel.


( Sir Rowland seems to tell.) Geo. By Heaven she is Fair as the first Ruddy
Streakes of Opening Day. ( Looking on Teresia.) Young as the Budding Rose, soft
as a Cupid, but never felt his Dart, she is so full of Life and Gayity. Pray,
Madam, who is that Lady. ( To La. Blun.)


La. Blun. The Grand Child of your Mistress, and your Mother that must be.


Geo. Then I shall Cuckhold my Father, that is certain. (aside.)


Sir Roll. For your sake, Madam, once again I re-establish him in my Family,
but the first fault Cashier's him -- Come let us in -- here my Lady Youthly,
take George by the Hand, but have a care of the young Rogue, if he comes once
to touch so Brisk a Widow, he sets her Heart on Fire.


Geo. Which will burn like a snuff of a Candle. No Body will be able to endure
it. (aside.)

-- So Fortune, I see, provides for me.

On this Hand Wealth, on that young Pleasures Lie.
He never wants these, who has that Kind Supply.

The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Sir Rowland, Teresia, and Lady Youthly, etc. L. Yo^t^ W^ll, Sir Rowland,
if I should be inclined to cast away my self on your Son George, what would you
settle --


Sir Row. Settle, not a souse Madam, he carries the best Younger Brothers
Fortune in Christendom about him.


L. Youth. Why, the Young Man's deserving, I confess. But he is your Sun, Sir
Rowland, and something ought to be settled upon the Heirs of our Bodies,
Lawfully begotten.


Sir Row. (aside.) All Hercules his Labors, were a Jigg to his that shall
beget 'em.


Sir. Rowland, If you like him upon these terms, to make him Master of your
Fortune --


L. Youth. For that, let him trust to me, and his own deservings.


Sir Row. No trusting in these Fickle Times, Madam -- Why, I Will let the young
sturdy Rogue out to Hire; he will make a pretty Livelihood at Journey work; and
shall a Master-Workman, a Husband deserve nothing?


L. Youth. Ay, these Husbands that know their own Strength, as they say, set so
high a Value on their Conjugal Virtues -- And if he be Disloyal again a the other
side he gives a Wife so ill an Example -- for we are all Liable to Temptations.


Sir R^^l Well said, if thou be so, it must be the Old Tempter himself.
(aside.)

(Alone.) Look ye, Madam, I Will propose a f^^r Swap, if you will consent that I
shall marry Teresia, I Will consent that you shall Marry George.


L. Youth. How, my Granddaughter? Why, I designed her for your Eldest Son, Sir
Merlin; and she has a good a fortune of Five Hundred a year that I cannot
hinder her of; and is too young for you.


Sir Roll. So is George for your Ladyship; and as for his Fortune, it is more
than likely, I shall make him my Eldest Son.


L. Youth. Say you so, Sir; well, I Will ^^^^der, and take Advice of my Friends.


Sir Row. Consider, alas, Madam, my House will be Besieged by all the Widows in
Town; I shall get more by showing him, than the Rhinoceros. Ga^ I Will sell the
young Rogue by Inch of Candle, before he is Debauched and Spoiled in this lewd
Town.


La. Yorth. Well, suppose --


Sir Roll. Nothing under Teresia -- Gad, I think some old Dog Star Reigns to
Day, that so many old Heats are burning in their Sockets -- I Am in Love with
this young Tittymouse here, most damnably -- Well what say you Widow? Speak
now, or you know the Proverb.


L. Youth. Well, Sir Rowland you are too hard for me.


Excunt all but Teresia. Enter Olivia, Runs to her and Embraces her. Tere. It Is
as you said, Olivia, I am destined to your Father.


Oliv. What, the Sentence is past then?


Tere. Ay, but the Devil is in us, if we stay till Execution Day. Why this is
worse than being mewed up at Hackney-School -- My Fortune's my own, without my
Grandmother, and with that Stock, I Will set up for my self, and see what
Traffic this wide World affords a young beginner.


Oliv. That Is well resolved; I am of the same mind, rather than Marry Mr.
Wellb^^n, whom I never saw. -- But prithee let us see what we have in Stock,
besides Ready Money -- What Toys and Knick-nacks to invite.


Tere. Faith my Inventory is but small -- Let me see -- First, one Pre^^y well
made Machin, called a Body, of a very good Motion, fit for several uses -- one
Pretty Conceited Head-Peice, that will fit any bodies Coxcomb, -- when it is
Grave and Dull, will sit an Alderman, when Politic and busy, a Statesman;
turn it to intreigne, will fit a City Wife, and to Invention, it will set up an
Evidence.


Oliv. Very well!


Tere. Item, one Tongue that will prattle Love, if you put the Heart in time
(for they are Commodities I resolve shall go together) I have Youth enough to
Please a Lover, and Wit enough to please my self.


Oliv. Most Excellent Trifles all! As for my outside, I leave to the
Discretion of the Chasserer; but I have a rare Devise, called an Invention,
that can do many Feats; a Courage that would stock a Coward; and a pretty
Impl^ment, called a Heart, that will strike Fire with any convenient force; I
have ^^^ght thousand Pounds to let out on any able Security, but not a Gr^^^
(...) I like the Man.


Tere. Thus (...) shall rui^ all the l^ws, and ^^do the Indian Houses -- but
where (...) we show! W^^^ meet with the Love Merchants?


Oliv. What things you of the Gallery at (...) Esaias in Masks?


Tere. S^^, a state (...) taken up b^ women of Quality, and now run into
Ridicule, by all (...) Devils of the Town, and is only a Trap for a Te^^^, a
small new (...) ^^sider, or a City Cul^^ where they Baul out their Eighteen
Pence in B^^dy, and Filthy Nonsense, to the Disturbance of the whole House,
and the King's Peace, the Man of Quality have forsaken.


Oliv. What think you of the Mall


Tere. As too Public to end an Intreague; our Affairs require a Conquest as
sudden as that of Caesar, who came, saw and overcame.


Oliv. It Is true, besides there is so many Cruisers, we shall never Board a
Prize. What think you of the Church?


Tere. An Hippocritical shift, of all masks I hate that of Religion; and it
should be the last place I Would wish to meet a Lover in, unless to Marry him.


Oliv. And Faith that is the last thing a Lover should do, but we are compelled
to have, it is our last Refuge if we could but see; and like our men, the
business were soon dispatched. -- Let me see -- Faith e'n put on Breeches too,
and thus disguised, seek our Fortune -- I am within these three days to be
fetched from Hackney School, where my Father believes me still to be, and thou
in that time to be Married to the old Gentleman; Faith resolve -- and let us in
and Dress thee -- away, here is my Lady -- (they run out)


SCENE II.
Enter Mirtilla and Mrs. Manage. Mi^t. Ah, let me have that Song again.


Song.
By Mr. Gildon.
I.
NO, Delia, no! What man can range
From such Seraphic Pleasure
It Is want of Charms that make us change,
To grasp the Fury Treasure.
What man of sense would quit a certain Bliss,
For hopes and empty Possibilities!
II.
Vain Fools their sure Possessions spend,
In hopes of Chymic Treasure,
But for their fancied Riches find
Both want of Gold and Pleasure.
Rich in my Delia, I can wish no more;
The Wanderer, like the Chemist, must be poor.
Man. Not see him, Madam -- I protest he is Handsomer, and Handsomer, Paris has
given him such an Air: -- Lord, he is all over Monsieur -- Not see him, Madam,
-- Why? I hope you do not, like the Foolish sort of Wives, design a strict
Obedience to your Husband.


Mir. Away, a Husband! -- when absence, that sure Remedy of Love, had healed
the Bleeding Wound Lejere had made, by Heaven I thought I never should Love
again -- but since -- Endimion has Inspired my Soul, and for that Youth I burn,
I pine, I languish.


Enter George richly dressed, stands at a distance gazing on Mirtilla. Man. See,
Madam -- there is an Object may put out that Flame, and may revive the Old one
--


Mir. Shame, and confusion, -- L^jere. turns and walks away.


Geo. Yonder she is, That Mien and Shape I know, the the False Face be turned
with shame away. (Offers to Advance, and Stops.

-- God's Death, -- I tremble!

Yet came well fortified with Pride and Anger! I see thou'st in thy Eyes a
little Modesty. (goes to her nearer.)

That would conceal the Treasons of thy Heart.


Mir. Perhaps it is their scorn that you mistake.


Geo. It may be so, she that sets up for Jilting, should go on, 'Twere mean to
find remorse, so young, and soon; Oh, this gay Town has Gloriously improved you
amongst the rest; that taught you Perjury.


Mir. Alas! When was it Sworn? --


Geo. In the Blessed Age of Love.

When every Power looked down, and heard thy Vows.


Mir. I was a Lover then, should Heaven concern its self with Lover's
Perjuries, 'twou'd find no leisure to preserve the Universe.


Geo. And was the Woman so strong in thee, thou could not wait a little?
Were you so raving mad for Fool and Husband, you must take up with the next
ready Coxcomb? Death, and the Devil, a dull Clumsey Boar! -- What was it
charmed you? The Beastly Quantity of Man about him.


Mir. Faith a much better thing, five thousand Pounds a Year, his Coach and
Six, it shows well in the Park.


Geo. Did I want Coach, or Equipage, and show?


Mir. But still there wanted Fool, and Fortune to it; He does not Play at the
Groom Porters for it; Nor do the Drudgery of some worn out Lady.


Geo. If I did this, thou had the spoils of all my Nation's Conquests, while
all the whole World was wondering whence it came, for Heaven had left thee
Nothing but thy Beauty, that dear Reward of my Indust'rious Love.


Mir. I do confess --


Geor. Till time had made me Certain of a Fortune, which now was hasting on. --

And is that store of Love and wondrous Joys I had been hoarding up so many
tender Hours, all lavish't on a Brute, who never Lusted 'bove my Lady's Woman;
for Love he understands no more than sense.


Mir. Prithee Reproach me on -- (sighs.)


Geo. 'S Death, I con'd rave! Is this soft tender Bosom to be pressed by such a
Load of Fool? Damnation on thee -- Where got'st thou this Course Appetite? Take
back the Powers, those Charms she is sworn Adorned me, since a dull, Fat-Fac'd,
noisy, Taudry Block-head, can serve her turn as well. (Offers to go.)


Mir. You shall not go away with that Opinion of me. --


Geo. Oh, that false Tongue can now no more deceive -- Art thou not Married?
Tell me that false Charmer.


Mir. Yes. -- (holding him.)


Geo. Curse on that word; would thou had never learnt it -- it gave thy
Heart, and my Repose away.


Mir. Do think I Married with that dull design? Can thou believe I gave my
Heart away, because I gave my Hand? -- Fond Ceremony that -- A necessary trick,
devised by wary Age, to Traffic 'twixt a Portion, and a Jointure; him whom I
Loved is Married to my Soul.


Geo. Art thou then mine? And will thou make Atonement, by such a Charming
way? -- Come to my Clasping Arms.


Enter Lady Blunder at the Door. Sees 'em, and offers to go out again. L. Blun.
Oh, Heavens! How rude am I? -- Cry Mercy, Madam, I protest I thought you would been
alone.


Geo. 'S Death! my Aunt Blunder! (aside.)


Mir. Only this Gentleman, Madam. --


L. Blun. Sir, I beg your Pardon -- and am really sorry --


Geo. That you find me with your Daughter, Madam.


L. Blun. I hope you take me to be better Breed, Sir: Nor had I interrupted
you, but for an Accident that has happened to Sir Morgan, coming out of the
City in a Beastly Hackney, he was turned over in Cheap Side, and Striking the
filthy Coachman, the nasty Mobb came out, and had almost Killed him, but for a
young Gentleman, a stranger, that came to his Rescue, and whom he has Brought
to Kiss your Ladyship's Hands -- But I Will Instruct him in his Duty, he shall
wait till your Ladyship is more at Leisure -- alas! He Is already on the Stairs.
(Exit.)


Mir. Let him wait there -- Lejere, It Is necessary you dapart, sure of my
Heart, you cannot fear the rest; the Night is hast'ing on; Trust me but some
few Hours, and then Lejere I Will pay you back with interest.


Geo. All blessings light on thee.

But will your Lady Mother make no Discovery of my being here.


Mir. She Would sooner Pump for me, and believe it a part of good Breeding (...)
away, I hear 'em coming.


(She puts him out at a backdoor.) Enter Lady Blunder Peeping. L. Blun. He Is
gone -- Sir Morgan, you may approach.


Enter Sir Morgan, Pulling in the Prince, Sir Merlin, and a Page to the Prince.
Sir Morg. Nay, as Gat shall save me, Sir, you shall see my Lady, or so, do you
see, and receive the Thanks of the House.


Prince. As Gat shall save me, Sir, I am sorry for it -- another time, Sir, I
have earnest business. Now, I am sure nothing worth seeing can belong to this
litter of Fools.


L. Blun. My Daughter is a Person of Quality, I assure you, Sir.


Prince. I doubt it not Madam -- if she be of the same piece -- Send me a fair
deliverance.

(Sir Morgan leads him to Mirtilla he starts.) -- Ha! What bright Vision's that?


Mir. Heaven! It Is the lovely Prince I saw in ^landers. (aside.)


Sir Merl. Look how he stares -- why, what the Devil ails he?


Sir Morg. To her, Sir, or so d' ye see, what a Pox are you afraid of her?


L. Blun. He Is in Admiration of her Beauty, Child.


Prince. By Heaven the very Woman I Adore! (aside.)


Sir Morg. How d' ye, see Sir, how de ye, ha, ha, ha?


Prince. I cannot be mistaken; For Heaven made nothing but Young Angels like
her!


Sir Morg. Lookee Page, is your Master in his right Wits.


Sir Merl. Sure he is in Love, and Lov's a devilish thing.


Sir Morg. Sa, ho, ho, ho, where are you Sir, where are you?


Prince. In Heaven! (Puts him away.)

Oh! do not rouse me from this Charming Slumber, lest I should wake, and find
it but a Dream.


Sir Morl. A plaguey dull follow this, that can sleep in so good Company as we
are.


Sir Morg. Dream -- A Fiddle-stick; to her, man, to her, and Kiss her soundly,
or so, d' ye see.


Sir Merl. I, I, Kiss her, Sir, Kis^ her -- i^, (...), i^, he is very simple.


Prince. Kiss her, -- there is universal R^in in her Lips.


Mir. I never knew 'em guilty of such mischiefs.


Sir Morg. No, I Will be sworn, I have Kis^ 'em twenty times, and never did me
harm.


Prince. Thou Kiss those lips? impossible, and they false; they never were
pressed but by soft Southern Winds.


Sir Morg. Southern Winds -- ha, ha, lookee d' ye see boy thy Master's mad, on
so, d' ye see -- why, what a Pox, d' ye think I never Kiss my Wife, or so d'
see.


Prince. Thy Wife! --


Mir. He will betray his Passion to these fools: Alas, he is mad -- and will
undo my Hopes. (aside.)


Prince. Thou may as well claim Kindred to the Gods; she is mine, a Kingdom
shall not buy her from me.


Sir Morg. Hay day, my Wife yours! lookee, as do you see, what is it
Midsammer-moon with you, Sir, or so, do you see?


Mir. In pity give him way, he is madder than a Storm.


Prin. Thou know thou art, and thy dear Eyes confess it -- a numerous Train
attended our Nuptials, Witness the Priest, witness the Sacred Altar where we
kneeled -- when the blessed silent Ceremony was performed


Mir. Alas! he is mad, past all recovery mad.


Sir Merl. Mad, say, poor Soul -- Friend, how long has your Master been thus
Intoxicated?


Page. He Is mad indeed to make this Discovery. (aside) Alas, Sir, he is thus as
often as he sees a Beautiful Lady, since he lost a Mistress, who Died in
Handers to whom he was Contracted.


Sir Merl. Good lack -- ay, ay, he is distracted, it seems.


Page. See how he Kneels to her, stand off, and do but mind him.


Mir. Rise, Sir, -- you will ruin me -- dissemble if you Love -- or you can never
be happy. (in a low Voice, and Raising him.)


Prin. My Transport is too high for a disguise -- give me some hope, promise me
some Relief, or at your Feet I Will pierce a Wounded Heart.


Mir. Rise, and hope for all you wish: Alas, he Faints --


(She takes him up, he falls upon her Bosom.) Page. Hold him fast, Madam,
between your Arms, and he will recover presently. Stand all away. --


Prince. Oh! tell me, will thou bless my Youth and Love? Oh! Swear, (...) thou
should break -- for Women would be Gods, but for inconstancy.


Page. See, he begins to come to himself again -- keep off --


Mir. You have a thousand Charms that may secure you -- The Ceremony of my
Nuptials is every evening Celebrated, the noise of which, draws all the Town
together, be here in Masquerade, and I Will tontrive it so, that you shall speak
with me this Night alone.


Prince. So, now let my Soul take Air --


L. Blun. What pity it is so fine a Gentleman should be thus.


Mir. You must be bringing home your Fops to me, and see what comes of it. (As
she passes out.)


Sir Morg. Fops, I thought him no more a Fop, than I do my own Natural Cosen
here ( Exit Mir. in scorn.)


Prin. Where am I? (The Page has Whispered him.


Sir Mer. Why, here, Sir, here, at Sir M. Blun. Lodging in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields.


Prince. That Is well, he has told me -- Where have I been this long half hour,
and more?


Sir Mer. Nay, the Lord Knows?


Prin. I fancied I saw a lovely Woman.


Sir Merl. Fancied -- why so you did man, my Lady Mirti^a Blunder.


Prince. methought, I slept upon her snowy Bosom, and dreamed I was in Heaven,
where I claimed her.


Sir Merl. Good lack aday -- why, so you did, Sir, ha, ha, ha.


Prince. And raved on Love; and talked abundance of Nonsense.


Sir Morg. Ha, ha, ha, by my Troth, and so you did, Sir.


Prince. I ask your Pardon, Sir, it is an infirmity I have that ever takes me at
the Approach of a Fine Woman, which made me so unwilling to see your Lady.


Sir Morg. Lookee, I ask your Pardon heartily, or so, d' ye see -- and am sorry
you are not in a Condition to Visit her often.


Prince. I shall be better when-I'm used to her; it is the first time only
affects me.


Sir Morg. Pray, Sir, be Pleased to use your self to her, or so, d' ye see --
she is a civil person, and a Person of Quality before I married her, d' ye see.


L. Blun. My Son tells you Truth, Sir.


Prince. Madam, I doubt it not, pray beg her Pardon, and do you give me yours.
(Bows and Kisses her hand, and goes out.


L. Blun. A most Accomplished Person -- (Exeunt.)


SCENE. III.
Enter Olivia and Teresia, in Men's Clothes. Oliv. WEll, the Ball does not
begin these three Hours, and we'll divert our selves at my Aunt's
Bassett-Table, which you see is Preparing, her Natural Propensity to oblige
both Sexes makes her keep a Bank on purpose to bring 'em together. There we
shall see the Old and the Young, the Ugly, and the Handsome, Fools that have
Money, and Wits that have none; and if the Table afford us nothing to please the
Appetite, we'll abroad for Forage.


Enter Sir Merlin pulling in George, followed by Sir Morgan, Page and ^ootmen
to George. Sir Merl. Nay, Sir, I am resolved you shall Honor my Aunt's
Basset-Table --


Geo. My Aunt's Basset-Table; There may be money Stirring among these Fools, and
Fortune may befriend me. (aside.)


Sir Merl. Sir Morgan, Pray know this worthy Gentleman, I have the Honor to
lodge in the House with him. They salute one another, Sir Mer. together.

Sir, This is Sir Morgan Blunder, a Person of Quality in Wales, I assure you.


Geo. I question it not, Sir, and am proud of the Honor of Kissing your Hands.


Tere. Yonder Is a handsome Gentleman.


Oliv. My Brother George, as I live, it is as I could wish. (aside.)


Enter Welborn. Welb. Lejere.


Geo. Welborn! Welcome from Paris, I heard of your Arrival from Prince Fredrick.


Welb. Yes, I am come to my Destruction, Friend.


Geo. Ay, thour't to be Married, I hear to a Welsh Fortune.


Welb. Tho Matrimony be a sufficient Curse, yet that is not the worst -- I am
fallen most damnably in Love, since I arrived, with a young Creature I saw in
the Mall the other Night, of Quality she was, I dare swear, by all that was about
her, but such a Shape! a Face! a Wit! a Mind, as in a moment quite subdued my
Heart; she had another Lady with her, whom (dogging her Coach) I found to be a
Neighbor of mine, and Granddaughter to the Lady Youthly, but who my Conqueror
was I never since could learn.


Oliv. 'Slife, Teresia, yonder is the Handsome Fellow that entertained us with
so much Wit, on Thursday last in the Mall.


Tere. What, when you Changed your Breeches for Petticoats at my Lodgings.


Oliv. That Night, and ever since, I have felt a sort of a Tender for him.


Tere. As I do for his Friend -- Pray Heaven he be not Married! I fear he has
laid an Imbargo on my Heart, before it puts out of the Port.


Geo. Are you not for the Basset?


Welb. No, I Have business at the Ball to Night, besides my Lady Blunder has a
Quarrel to me for last Night's Debauch; I Will wait on you in the Morning. Exit.
Welborn.


Geo. Well, you to your Business, and I to mine. --

(Speaks as the rest go out.) Let the Dull Trading Fool by Business Live,
Statesmen by Plots, the Courtier cringe to thrive;
The Fop of Noise and Wealth be Cullied on,
And purchase no one Joy by being undone,
Whilst I by Nobler careless ways advance,
Since Love and Fortune are acquired by Chance.

Exeunt Omnes. The End of the Second Act.
A SONG Sung by Sir Rowland in the Second Act. To TERESIA.
THO the young prize Cupid's Fire
It Is more val'd by the Old;
The Sun's warmth we now admire,
More than when the Season's cold.
Dialogue in the Masque, at the beginning of the third Act.
He TIme and Place you see conspire,
With tender Wishes fierce desire:
See the willing Victim stands
To be offered by your hands:
Ah! Let me on Lov's Altars lying,
Clasp my Goddess whilst I Am dying.

She. Oh Lord! what hard words, and strange things do you say;
Your Eyes to seem closing, and just dying away:
Ah! Pray what do you want? Explain but your mind,
Which did I but know, perhaps I Would be kind.

He. My pretty soft maid, full of innocent Charms,
I languish to sigh out my Soul in thy Arms;
Oh! then, if I Am loved, deny not the Bliss,
But tell me I Am happy, with a ravishing Kiss.

She. Oh! Fie, Sir, I vow I cannot endure you,
Be civil, or else I Will cry out I assure you;
I will not be Kissed so, nor tumbled, not I,
I Will tell all your tricks, that I will, if I dye.

He. Nay, never dissemble, nor smother that Fire;
Your Blushes, and Eyes betray your desire.
The pratic'd not Innocent, dally with bliss,
Then prithee be kind, and taste what it is.

She. Let me dye now, you are grown a strange sort of a man
To force a young Maid, let her do what she can;
I fear now I blush to think what we are doing.
And is this the End of all you Men's wooing?

He. At this pleasure all Aim, both Godly and Sinners,
And none of 'em blush for it but poor young beginners.
In pleasure both Sexes, all Ages agree,
And those that take most, most happy will be.

Chorus. In pleasure both Sexes, etc.

ACT III.
SCENE the First.
Enter Olivia as a Man, Teresia in Masquerade; the Scene opens, and discovers
Lady Youthly, Lady Blunder, Mirtilla, Manage, Prince Frederick in a Rich Habit,
Welborn in one like his, with a Cloak over him, stands aside, and several
others of both Sexes. Oliv. OH, my dear Teresia, I Am lost in Love! I Have seen a
Man, -- or rather it is Angel! so gay, so soft, so charming, and so witty; so
dressed! so shaped! and Danced with such an Air!


Tere. Hey day! Prithee where is this Wonder to be seen?


Oliv. Why do thou ask? Have thou not seen a man of Dress, and Movement of
uncommon Fashion?


Tere. A great many, very odd, and Fantastic, I Am sure my dear Man is none of
'em. [Sighs.


Oliv. Thy Heart when fired burns easily, and soft, but I am all impatient,
darts, and flames, all the effects of Love are panting in my Heart, yet never
saw his Face; but see, he comes, and I must find a way to let him know the
mischiefs he has done.


Mir. Endimion, where is Sir Morgan?


Oliv. At his usual Diversion, Madam, Drinking.


Mir. Do you wait near me to Night, I may perhaps have kinder business for you
ever the morning.


Oliv. You heap too many Blessings on me, Madam.


Prince. Oh, turn thy lovely Eyes upon thy Slave, that waits and watches for a
tender look.


Mir. Oh, Sir, why do you press a yielding heart too much, undone by what
you have said already.


Oliv. Those soft Addresses must be those of Love. [Aside.


Mir. My Honor was in danger when I promised -- and yet I blush to tell you I
was pleased, and blessed the dear necessity that forced me.


Oliv. Ha! it is the man I love -- and Courts Mirtilla, and she receives him
with inviting looks. 'Sdeath, she is a common Lover! already I Am arrived to
Jealousy!


Enter George in Masquerade, with a Paper on his Back and Breast, goes to
Mirtilla, sees one Courting her. Geo. What gilded thing is that? -- I must
disturb 'em --

It Is I, Mirtilla, languishing for the appointed Happiness, while you, perhaps,
are taken up with different thoughts --


Mir. aside. Lejere! How very feeble do Old Lovers Charm! Only the New and gay
have power to warm -- How shall I put him off? For now my Ambitious Love
declares for Frederick; it is great to enslave a Prince.

-- Lejere -- wait till I give the word -- perhaps it may be late -- go mix
your self in the Crowd, you may be else suspected -- [Goes from him.


Tere. I have a shrewd guess that this should be my man by his shape, and mein.
( Looking round about George.) Let me see -- What Is this written on his back?
-- To be Let Ready Furnished -- (Reading it.) A very good hearing, So ho, ho,
ho, who is within here? [Claps him on the back.


Geo. Who Is there? Exit Olivia.


Tere. Love and Fortune.


Geo. Two very good Friends of mine, prithee who art thou that bring'st 'em?


Tere. A wandering Nymph, that has had a swinging Character of your Person and
Parts -- if thou be'st the man, prithee dear Stranger, let me see thy Face, and
if I Am not mistaken, it is ten to one, but we may go near to strike up some odd
Bargain or other.


Geo. And I am as likely a Fellow, for some odd Bargain or other, as ever you
met with -- Look ye, am I the man?


Tere. Let me see -- A very handsome Face, inclining to round, fine wanton
Eyes, with a Plaguey Roguish Lear, plump, round, red Lips, not tall, nor low,
and extremely well fashioned. (Reads all this in her Tablets.) -- Ay, ay, you
are the man --


Geo. I am glad on it, and prithee dear Creature, let me see if thou art not the
Woman --


Tere. Heaven! what Woman, Sir?


Geo. Why, any Woman that is Pretty, Witty, Young, and Good-natured.


Tere. I had rather show any thing almost than my Face.


Geo. Faith, and that is kind; but every thing in its due time: I love to arrive
at Happiness by degrees, there is as much Pleasure in the Journey of Love, as in
the Arrival to it, and the first Stage is a handsome Face.


Tere. Where you Bait a while, take a short Survey, and away.


Geo. To wit, and good Humor; where a man finds Pleasure enough to engage him
a long while.


Tere. Then to all the small Villages, called little Freedoms, Kissing,
Playing, Fooling, Sighing, Dying -- and so on to the last Stage, where Whip and
Spur laid by, all tired and dull, you lazily lie down and sleep.


Geo. No, I Am a more vigorous Lover: And since in the Country of True Love,
there remains a Terra Inc^gnita, I shall always be making new Discoveries.


Tere. True Love! Is there such a thing in the whole Map of Nature?


Geo. Yes, I once discovered it in my Voyage round the World.


Tere. Sure it is some Enchanted place, and vanishes as soon as it is approached.


Enter Sir Rowland. Geo. Faith, let us set out for it, and try; if we lose our
Labor, we shall, like Searchers for the Philosophers Stone, find something
that will recompense our pains. --

Lady Youthly sees her, and sends her Woman to take her from him. Ha, gone -- I
must not part so with you -- I Will have you in my Eye.


The Spanish Dance: Whilst they Dance, the Prince talks to Mirtilla. Mir. This
Night gives you an Assignation -- I tremble at the thought -- Ah, why will you
pursue me thus to Ruin? Why with resistless Charms invade my Heart, that
cannot stand their Force -- alone -- without my Woman -- the Enterprise with
you would be too dangerous.


Prince. Dangerous to be adored! and at your Feet behold your Slave making
Eternal Vows?


Mir. If I were sure that you would pass no further. --


Prince. Let the fond God of Love be my Security -- will you not trust a Deity?


Mir. Whom should she trust, that dares not trust her self?


Geo. That is some Lover, whom I must observe. [Aside.


Mir. Alas, the Foe's within that will betray me, Ambition, and our Sexes
Vanity -- Sir, you must prevail --


Prince. And in return, for ever take my Soul.


Mir. Anon I Will feign an illness, and retire to my Apartment, whither this
Faithful Friend shall bring you, Sir. Pointing to Manage.


Geo. Hum! -- that looks like some Love Bargain, and Manage called to Witness.
By Heaven, gay Sir, I Will watch you.


Tere. But hark ye, my Fellow-Adventurer, are you not married?


Geo. Married -- that is a Bug word -- prithee if thou have any such Design,
keep on thy Mask, lest I be tempted to Wickedness.


Tere. Nay, truth is, it is a thousand pity's to spoil a handsome man, to make a
dull Husband of: I have known an Old Battered Bully of Seventy, unmarry'd, more
agreeable for a Gallant, than any scurvy, out-of-Humour'd Husband at Eight and
Twenty.


Geo. Gad, a thousand times.


Tere. Know. I have Five Hundred Pounds a Year.


Geo. Good.


Tere. And the Devil and all of Expectations from an Old Woman.


Geo. Very good.


Tere. And this Youth, and little Beauty to lay out in love. Pulls off her Mask.


Geo. Teresia! the lovely Maid designed for my Mother, now, what a Dog am I?
that gives me the greater Gust to her, and would fain Cuckold my Father. [Talks
to her aside.


[Mirtilla seems to faint.] Man. My Lady faints -- help, help.


Mir. Only the beat Oppresses me -- but let it not disturb the Company. I Will
take the Air a little, and return Goes cut with Manage.


Geo. Is this designed, or real -- perhaps she is retired for me -- M^s. Manage
--


Manage Reenters, he pulls her by the sleeve. Man. Ha! Monsieur Lejere! what
shall I feign to put him off withal. Aside.


Geo. Why do thou start? How does my dear Mirtilla?


Man. Reposing, Sir, a while, but anon I Will wait on her for your admittance.


Prince Frederick puts on Welborn 's Cloak, goes out, and Welborn enters into
the Company dressed like the Prince. Geo. Ha, she spoke in passing by that gay
thing -- What means it, but I Will trace the Mystery.


Sir Row. The young People are Lazy, and here is nothing but gaping and peeping
in one another Vizards; come, Madam, let you and I shame 'em into Action. (
Sir Rowland, and Lady Youthly, Dance.)


After the Dance, enter Olivia with a Letter. Olivia gives Welborn the Letter.
Well. Ha! what is this, Sir, a Challenge?


Oliv. A Soft One, Sir.


Well. A Billet -- whoever the Lady be. (Reads.) She merits something for but
believing I am worth her Mirth.


Oliv. I know not, Sir, how great a Jest you may make of it; but I assure you
the Lady is in earnest, and if you be at leisure to hear Reason from her. --


Well. Fair and softly, my Dear Love Messenger, I am for no hasty Bargains; not
but I should be glad to hear Reason from any of the Sex -- But I have been so
damnably Jilted -- Is she of Quality?


Oliv. Yes.


Well. Then I Will not hear any thing from her; they are troublesome, and
insolent; and if she have a Husband, to hide her Intriegues she has recourse to
all the little Arts and Cunnings of her Sex; and she that jilts her Husband,
will her Lover.


Oliv. She is not troubled with a Husband, Sir.


Well. What, she is parted from the Fool; then she is Expensive, and for want of
Alimony, jilts all the believing Block-heads that she meets with.


Oliv. But this is a Maid, Sir.


Well. Worse still! At every turn she is raving on her Honor; then if she have
a Kinsman, or a Brother, I must be Challenged.


Oliv. Sir, you mistake, my Lady is for Matrimony.


Well. How!


Oliv. You have not forsworn it, I hope.


Well. Not so -- but --


Oliv. If a Lady, Young and Handsome, and Ten Thousand Pounds --


Well. Nay, I am not positive --


Enter Sir Morgan, and Sir Merlin, Drunk, Singing. Sir Morg. and Sir Merl.
Singing. Wise Coxcombs be damned, here is a Health to the Man,
That since Life is but short, lives as long as he can.
Sir Morg. Where is my Lady Mirtilla, Rogues?


Sir Merl. And my Mistress, Rascals? For we are resolved to show our selves in
Triumph to our Wives and Mistresses.


L. You. Your Mistress, Sir Merlin? mistake not your Mark,


Sir Merl. Ha! Art thou there, old Cathedral? Why thou look as magnificently
as Old Queen Bess in the Westminster-Cupboard.


Sir M^rg. Lookee as de see, when Adam wore a Beard, she was in her Prime, or
so, de see. (Sings.)


L. You. Sir, you are a saucy Jack, and your Father shall correct you.


Sir Merl. My Father! my Father's an old Tossed, de see; and I hope to see him
hanged.


Sir Row. Here Is a Heathen-Christian! see his Father hanged!


Sir Merl. Ay hanged, and all the old Fathers in Christendom. Why, what-a-Pox
should Fathers trouble the World for? When I come to Reign in Parliament, I
will enact it Felony, for any Father to have so little Grace to live, that has
a Son at Years of Discretion.


Sir Row. A damned Rogue, I Will disinherit him immediately.


L. Blun. Is it so great a Crime, Brother, for a Gentleman to be Drunk?


Sir Merl. You Lie like a Son of a Whore -- I have been drinking Confusion to
all the Fathers and Husbands in England.


Sir Morg. How, Sir, Confusion to Husbands! Lookee de see, Sir, swallow me that
Word, or I Will make you deposite all the conjugal Wine you have drunk.


Sir Merl. I deposite all your Wine! Sirrah, you're a Blunderbuss.


Sir Morg. Sirrah! you are a diminitive Bully.


Sir Merl. Sirrah! you're the Whore of Babylon, and I defy you.


Sir Morg. Lookee de see, I scorn to draw upon a drunken Man, or so, I being
sober; but I boldly challenge you into the Cellar, where thou shall drink till
thou renounce thy Character, or talk Treason enough to hang thee, and that is
fair and civil.


Sir Merl. Agreed; and when I Am drunk enough to ravish, I Will Cuckold my old
Dad, and fight him for his Mistress.


Sir Row. I have no Patience; I Will kill the Dog, because I Will have the Law on
my side -- Come on, Sir. (Draws, the Ladies run out.)


(Sir Merlin draws) George runs in and parts 'em. Geo. Villain! Rascal! What,
draw upon thy Father!


Sir Row. Pray, Sir, who are you? that I may thank you for my Life.


Geo. One, Sir, whose Duty 'twas. (Pulls off his Visard.)


Sir Row. What, my dear George! -- I Will go and cut off the Inta^ of my Estate
presently, and thou shall have it all, Boy, thou shall --


Exeunt all but George. Geo. Fortune is still my Friend! Had but Mirtilla been
so! I wonder that she sends not to me! My Love's impatient, and I cannot wait
-- while the dull Sot is boozing with his Brother-Fools in the Cellar. I Will
softly to the Chamber of my Love -- Perhaps she waits me there -- Exit.


SCENE the Second.
A Chamber, and Alcove, discovers Mirtilla, and Prince Frederick. Prince. Oh! I
am ravished with excess of Joy.


Mir. Enough, my charming Prince! Oh, you have said enough!


Prince. Never, my Mirtilla!

The Sun that views the World, nor the bright Moon, that favors Lover^
Stealths, shall ever see that Hour. Vast, as thy Beauties, are my young
Desires; and every new Possession kindles new Flames, soft as thy Eyes, soft as
thy render Touches, and, ever the Pantings of my Heart are laid, new
Transports, from new Wishes, dance about it, and still remains in Love's
Harmonious Order. (Kisses and Embraces her.)


Enter George, softly. Geo. This House I know, and this should be her
Bedchamber, because the Best; and yet methought I heard another Voice -- but I
may be mistaken.


Prince. I faint with Pleasure of each tender Clasp: I sigh, and languish,
gazing on thy Lies; and dye upon thy Lips, with every Kiss!


Geo. Surely I know that Voice! Torments, and Hell! -- but it is impossible?
(Aside.)


Prince. Oh! satisfy my Doubt, my trembling Doubt! Am I beloved? Have I about
me ought engaging to Thee, Charmer of my Soul?


Geo. It is the Prince. (Aside)


Mir. Ah, Prince! Can you such needless Questions ask, after the Sacrifice
which I have made.


Geo. Hell take thee for that Falsehood. (Draws.)


Mir. Think not the mighty Present of your Jewels, enough to purchase
Provinces, has bought one single Sigh, or Wish: No, my dear Prince, you owe 'em
all to Love, and your own Charms.


Geo. Oh damned, dissembling Jilt! (Aside)


Prince. No more, no more, my Soul's oppressed with Joy: let me unload it in thy
tender Arms, and sigh it out into thy ravishing Bosom.


Geo. Death, and Damnation! --

I shall forget his Quality, and Virtue, forget he was my Friend or saved this
Life; and like a River, swelled with angry Tides, overflow those Banks that
made the Stre^m so gay.


Mir. Who Is there? -- I heard a Voice -- Manage?


Geo. Yes. (Softly.)


Prince. Approach thou Confident of all my Joys; approach, and be Rewarded --
(Prince takes his J^wel from his Hat.)


Geo. Yes, for my excellent Bawding -- By Heaven I dar not touch his Princely
Person.


Prince. Where art thou? take this Jewel, and retire. (Gropes for his Hand,
gives it him.)


Geo. Even my Misfortunes have a sort of Luck; but I Will withdraw, for fear this
Devil about me, should raise my too rash Hand against his Life.


Exit. Prince. Come, my eternal Pleasure -- each Moment of the happy Lover's
Hour, is worth an Age of dull, and common Life Exeunt into the Alcove, the
Scene shuts.


SCENE the Third. A Garden, by Night Still.
Enter George with his Sword in his Hand, as before. Geo. Why do I vainly call
for Vengeance down, and have it in my Hand? -- By ^eav'n, I Will back -- Whether?
To kill a Woman, a young perjured Woman! -- Oh, ye false Fair Ones! should we
do you Justice, A universal Ruin would ensue; Not One would live to stock the
World anew. Who is it among ye All, ye Fair Deceivers, ye Charming Mischiefs to
the Noble Race, can swear she is Innocent, without Damnation? No, no, go on --
be false -- be fickle still: You act but Nature -- but my faithless Friend --
where I repose the Secrets of my Soul -- except this one -- Alas! he knew not
this: -- Why do I blame him then?


Enter Olivia, dressed as before. Oliv. Fire! Fire! Fire!


Geo. Olivia's Voice! -- Ha! what art thou? Thy Voice should be Olivia's, but
thy Shape -- And yet a Woman is all over Disguise.


Enter Lady Blunder in her Nightgown. L. Blun. Fire! Fire! Fire! My Son, my
dear Sir Morgan.


Enter Sir Rowland, and Servants. Sir Row. A Pox on your Son, and mine to boot;
they have set all the Sack-Butts a Flaming in the Cellar, thence the Mischief
began. Timothy, Roger, Jeffrey, my Money-Trunks, ye Rogues! my Money-Trunks!


L. Blun. My Son, good Roger! my own Sir Moggy!


Sir Row. The Ten thousand Pounds, ye Rascal, in the Iron Trunk, that was to be
paid Mr. Welborn for Olivia's Portion. Exit.


L. Blun. Oh my Son! my Son! -- Run to the Parson, Sam, and let him send the
Church-Buckets. Oh, some help! some help!


Enter Manage. Man. Oh, Heavens! my Lady Mirtilla's Chamber's all on Flame.


Enter Britton. Geo. Ha, -- the Prince! I had forgot his Danger.


Man. Ah! look up, and see how it burns!


Geo. Britton, a Million for a Ladder!


Man. Blessing on you, Sir, if you dare venture through the House, there lies
one in the Fore Garden.


Brit. The Passage is on fire, Sir, you cannot go.


Geo. Revenge is vanished, and Love takes its place: Soft Love, and mightier
Friendship seizes all. I Will save him, though I perish in the Attempt. Runs out,
Britton after him.


Enter, at another Door, Sir Rowland. L. Blun. A Thousand Pound for him that
saves Sir Morgan.


Sir Row. And, de ye hear, let my Rogue lie; I Would rather he should be burnt,
than hanged on Tyburn Road, for murdering his Father. -- But where is Boy
George?


Enter Men with Trunks. Rog. Safe, Sir, I hope; he was not in the House.


Sir Row. So, so, away with these Trunks to my Lady Youthly's in
Southampton-Square, and tell her we must trouble her to Night. Come, Sister,
let us away. Exeunt Lady Blunder, and Sir Rowland,


Prince Frederick, and Mirtilla, appear at the Window, the Flame behind 'em.


Prince. Help, help, and save Mirtilla! Ask any Price, my Life, my Fortune! All!


Mir. Oh, Heavens! the Flame pursues us as we fly.


Prince. No help! Oh Gods, I shall prevent the Flame, and perish by my Fears to
see you dye!


Mir. Alas! Sir, you with ease may save your Life! This Window you may leap,
but I want Courage.


Prince. No, my Mirtilla, if it be thy Fate, I Will grasp thee, even in Flames,
and dye with thee.


Mir. We dye! we dye! the Flame takes hold of us!


Enter George with a Ladder, and puts it to the Window. Prince. Ha! some
pitying God takes Care of us. Have, have, my Charmer; Heaven has sent us Aid.
Puts her on the Ladder, she descends into George 's Arms; after her, the
Prince. George puts her into Manage 's Arms, she faints; he runs up to receive
the Prince.


Prince. Lejere! dear Man of Luck -- Some happy Star reigned at thy glorious
Birth; every thing is prosperous thou espousest. -- How fares my Love, the
Treasure of my Soul?


Man. Only fainting with the Fright, but she recovers.


Prince. My Chair there, quickly, that waits for me. -- (Enter Chair; he puts
her, and Manage into it.)

Enter Olivia. Carry 'em to Mr. Welborn's, to my Lodgings there, and then
return to me; for I am wondrous faint, and cannot walk.


Oliv. Ha! by my Life, my Man!


Prince. But if I might impose so much Lejere upon thy Friendship, I beg thou
would see her safely carried to my Lodgings at Welborn's.


Geo. You shall Command me, Sir. Exeunt Chair, George, and Britton.


Oliv. You seem not well, Sir; pray repose upon my Arm a while.


Prince. I thank you, Sir, indeed I am not well.


Oliv. Methinks I find a Pleasure but in touching him -- Would I ^ou'd see his
Face by all this fatal Light.


Enter Constable and Watch. Constable. So, so, the Fire abates, the Engines played
rarely; and we have Ten Guinea's here, Neighbors, to watch about the House;
for where there is Fire, there is Rogues -- Hum, who have we here? -- How now,
Mr. -- Hum, what have you got under your Arm there, ha? Take away this Box of
Jewels.

( Sir Morgan, and Sir Merlin, creeping out of the Cellar Window.) Ha, who have
we here creeping out of the Cellar-Window? more Rogues!


Sir Mer. Sirrah! you're a Bawd, Sirrah! and for a Tester will wink at the
Vices of the Nation, Sirrah! Call Men of the best Quality, Rogues! that have
stood for Knights of the Shire, and made the Mobile drunk Sirrah!


Constable. We cry you Mercy, Sir, we did not know your Worships.


Sir Morg. Lookee de see, here is a Crown for you; carry us to the next Tavern,
and we'll make thee, and all thy Mirmidons, as drunk as a Boat in a Storm.


Oliv. Sir, I find you have Interest with these Arbitrary Tyrants of the
Parish; Pray will you bail me, and this Gentleman?


Sir Merl. What, Endimion! my Lady Mirtilla's Page? He lent me Money to Night
at the Basset-Table; I Will be bound Hand and Foot for him, Mr. Constable, and
gad we'll all to the Tavern, and drink up the Sun, Boys.


Oliv. Yonder Gentleman too has received some Hurt by the Fire, and must go
Home, Sir; but you must restore him the Box, Mr. Constable.


Sir Morg. Ay, ay, lookee de see, return the Gentleman all; they are Gentlemen,
and our intimate Friends, de see. Exeunt Prince, and Olivia.


Enter a Servant. Constable. Stand: Who goes there?


Sir Morg. Philip -- Lookee de see, he shall along with us to the Tavern.


Serve. Sir Morgan, I came to seek you: Your Lady Mother sent me back on
purpose; she has spoiled her Beauty with crying for you.


Sir Morg. And washed off all her Paint? -- Or so de see! Gad sa' me, Philip,
this is ill Luck. Come let us go drink down Sorrow.


Serve. Being sent of such an Errand, as your Safety, Sir, I dare not stay and
drink now, before I Have satisfied your Mother.


Sir Mer. Not drink! I charge you, in the King's Name, Mr. Constable, bring him
along. (The Constable and Watch seize him.)

(Sings.) Wise Coxcombs be damned, here is a Health to the Man,
That since Life is but short, lives as long as he can.

ACT IV.
SCENE the First. The Prince's Lodgings.
Enter Page with Lights. Sets 'em on the Table, Exit. Enter Mirtilla led by
Mrs. Manage. Mir. HA! where am I, Manage?


Man. Heaven be thanked, Madam, at the Prince's Lodgings.


Mir. What happy Star conducted us, and saved us from the Fury of the Flames?


Man. Those whose Influence are always Gracious to your Ladyship.


Mir. But where is the Prince? Where Is my Illustrious Lover?


Man. Waiting the Return of the Chair, Madam.


Mir. But my Endimion! -- Is Endimion safe?


Man. Madam, he is: I saw him in the Garden.


Mir. Then perish all the rest -- Go send to search him out, and let him
instantly be brought to me. -- Ha -- Lejere!


Enter George. Geo. Bawd stand aside -- and do your Office yonder -- [ Puts
away Manage. Why are you frighted, Madam, because I Am not the Lover you
expected?


Mir. What Lover! be witness Heaven --


Geo. That thou art false, false as the insatiate Seas, that smiling tempt the
vain Adventurer, whom flattering, far from any saving there, swell their false
Waves to a destructive Storm.


Mir: Why all this mighty Rage? -- Because I disappointed you to Night?


Geo. No, by Heaven, I dully could have waited for the Hour; have hoped, and
wished, and languish'd out an Age. But, oh Mirtilla! Oh thou perjured Fair! --
But vanish all the softness of my Soul, I will be satyrial.

A Plague, a Torment, to your fickle Sex,
Those smiling, sighing, weeping Hypocrites.

Mir. And can you think my Flight is Criminal? because I saved this worthless
Life -- for you --


Geo. What Innocence adorns her Tongue, and Eyes! While Hell and Furies gives
her Heart its motion, you know not where you are?


Mir. Perhaps I do not.


Geo. Swear, for you are damned already, and by what black Degrees I will
unsold: When first I saw this gay, this glorious Mischief, tho Nobly born,
'twas hid in mean Obscurity; the shining Viper lay half dead with Poverty, I
took it up, and laid it next my Heart, fed it, and called its faded Beauties
back.


Mir. Confessed: And what of this?


Geo. Confirmed you mine, by all the Obligations Profuseness could invent, or
Love inspire.


Mir. And yet at your Return you found me married to another.


Geo. Death and Hell! that was not yet the worst: You flattered me with some
Pretense of Penitence; but on the Night, the dear destructive Night, you raised
my Hopes to all distracting Love could wish -- that very Night -- Oh let me
rave and dye, and never think that Disappointment over!


Mir. What, you saw me Courted at the Ball, perhaps?


Geo. Perhaps I saw it in your Chamber too. Breathless, and panting with
new-acted Joy, the happy Lover lay -- Oh Mirtilla!


Mir. Nay, if he knows it, I Will deny't no more. Aside.


Geo. There is no Honesty in all thy kind.


Mir. Or if there be, those that deal in it are weary of their Trade. But
where is the mighty Crime?


Geo. No, I expect thou should outface my Eyes, out-swear my H^aring, and
out-lye my Senses -- The Prince! the Prince! thou faithless dear Destruction.


Mir. The Prince! good Heaven! Is all this Heat for him?


Geo. Thou own'st the Conquest then?


Mir. With as much Vanity as thou would do, if thou had won his Sword: Have
thou took care wisely to teach me all the Arts of Life, and do thou now
upbraid my Industry? Look round the World, and thou shall see, Lejere, Ambition
still supplies the Place of Love The wornout Lady, that can serve your
Interest, you swear has Beauties that out-charms Fifteen; and for the Vanity of
Quality, you feign and languish, lie, protest, and flatter -- All Things in
Nature Cheat, or else are Cheated.


Geo. Well said; take off thy Veil, and show the Jilt.


Mir. You never knew a Woman thrive so well by real Love, as by Dissimulation:
This has a Thousand Arts and Tricks to conquer; appears in any Shape, in any
Humor; can laugh or weep, be coy or play, by turns, as suits the Lover best,
while simple Love has only one Road of Sighs and Softness; these to Lejere are
due: But all my Charms, and Arts of gay Dissembling, are for the credulous
Prince. -- Ha -- he is here! -- and with him the dear Youth that has enslaved
me, who triumph's over the rest. Aside.


Enter Prince Frederick, Olivia following, ^^s Mirtilla, and withdraws. Oliv.
Ha! Mirtilla, and my Brother here! Oh how I long to see that Stranger's Face.
Aside.


Prince. Mirtilla, thou Charmer of Life's dull and redious Hours, how fares thy
Heart? Dwells any Pantings there, but those that Love, and his dear Joys create.


Mir. Or if there do, you should excuse it now.


Geo. How many Devils reign in beauteous Woman*


Prince. My dear Lejere congratulate my Joys; take all my Friendship thou --
but thou my Soul. Come, come, my Friend, (...) retire together; I Will give thee
leave to gaze upon my Heaven, and feed on all the Sweets that Friendship may:
But all the rest of the v^s^ ^^o^e is ^rine.


Man. Madam Endimion is already here. (...) to her.


Mir. Thou have revived me -- Let him w^it my (...).


Exit Prince, and Mirtilla; Geo^^e (...) at the Door Olivia comes forward.
Oliv. Spite! Spite, and dire Revenge, seize my fo^^l ^oul! -- Oh that I were
a Man, a loose lewd Man, how easily wou^d I rob him of her Heart, and leave him
but the shadow of Enjoyment.


Re-enter George. Geo. Now, my dear Sister, if thou ever lovedst me, revenge
thy Brother on this perjured Woman, and snatch her from this gallant Rival's
Arms. She loves thee -- Dissemble thou to love again; meet her Advances with an
equal Ardour, and when thou have wound her up to dalliance, I Will bring the
Prince a witness of her Shame.


Oliv. But what if he should kill me --


Geo. I Will take care of that.


Oliv. Then ever the morning dawns, you shall behold it: She languishes to see
me, and I wait on purpose for her Commands.


Geo. As I could wish: Be sure to Act the Lover well. Exit George.


Oliv. As well as I can Act it.

Enter Welborn, habited as last. That all Mankind are Damned, I Am positive; at
least all Lovers are.


Well. What have we here? the Spark that rallied me about a Woman at the Ball to
Night? Who is it, Sir, you Curse so heartily?


Oliv. Ha, how Beautiful he is -- how many Charms dwell in that lovely Face --
(Aside.) It Is you I curse.


Well. Gad, I thank you for that, you were kinder to Night, when you told me of
a fine Woman that was in Love with me.


Oliv. Why, what have you to do with Womankind?


Well. A pretty civil Question; has the Lady that sent you, a mind to be
informed?


Oliv. Or if she had, you're not at leisure now you are taken up, Sir, with
another Beauty. Did not you swear, never to speak to Womankind, till I had
brought her, I told you, sighed for you?


Well. Right, and I have kept my word Religiously.


Oliv. The Devil you have, witness the Joy Mirtilla gave your Soul: Eve^ now
you were all Transport, all Ecstasy of Love; by Heaven you had forgot you
brought me in, and past Triumphant in Mirtilla's Arms, Love in your Heart, and
Pleasure in your Eyes.


Well. Ay, sure he mistakes me for the Amorous Prince, and thus, perhaps, has
mistook me all the Night: I must not undeceive him. Aside.

What e're you saw, I have a heart unwounded, a heart that never sound^^ loved,
a little scratch it got the other day by a Young Beauty in the Ma^^, (...) Name
I know not, but I wished to know it, and dogged her Coach, (...) ^^gh'd a
little after her but since never saw the lovely Vision.


Oliv. Sure this was I. (Aside.) What Livery had she, Sir?


Well. That I took notice of, 'twas Green and Gold -- Since that, I tri^^ now
and then with Love to chase away this Image, and that is all.


Oliv. Ha, now I view him well, it is the same handsome Fellow that Entertained
us in the Mall last Thursday.


Well. C^^e, Sir, it is late, please you to take a Bed with me to Night, where
we'll beget a better Understanding.


Oliv. A better than you imagine -- 'Sdeath, to Bed with him, I tremble at the
thought -- Sir, I do not love a Bedfellow.


Well. Sir, I have lent my Lodgings to a Stranger of Quality. (...) I would
offer you a single Bed -- but for once you may dispense with a Bedfellow.


Oliv. I will not put you to that trouble, Sir.


Well. Do you design to make me your Friend, and use me with Ceremony? Who waits
there? Enter Footman.


Oliv. 'Slife, what shall I do? I could even consent, to prevent his going to
Mirtilla -- besides, I have no home to go to --


Well. Come, no more Scruples -- here -- a Nightgown and a Cap for the
Gentleman.


Oliv. What shall I do -- I have a little urgent Business, Sir.


Well. If there be absolute necessity, I Will see you to your Lodgings.


Oliv. Oh, by no means, Sir. 'Sdeath, whither can I go?


Well. Why do you pause? Deal freely with me, Sir, I hope you do not take me for
a Lover of my own Sex -- Come, come, to Bed.


Oliv. Go you, Sir, I Will sit and Read by you till Day.


Well. 'Sdeath, Sir, de think my Bed's Infectious?


Oliv. I shall betray my Sex in my denial, and that at last I can but do if
Necessity compel me to it. Aside.

Go on, Sir, you have shamed me. Exit both.


Enter Prince and George. Prince. And thus thou have my whole Adventure out,
short was the Conquest, but the Joys are lasting.


Geo. I am glad on it, Sir.


Prince. Why do wear a Cloud upon thy brows, when Love's gay Sunshine dances
in my Eyes? If you are her Lover too, I pity thee; her Solemn Vows breathed in
the height of love, disarm me thy hopes, if Friendship would permit thee.


Geo. I do not think it, Sir --


Prince. Not think it, not think that she has sworn!


Geo. Yes, doubtless, Sir -- she is Prodigal of Vows, and I dare swear, by all
she is sworn by, she will break 'em all: She has less Faith than all the fickle
Sex, uncertain and more wanton than the Winds, that spares no Births of Nature
in their wild course, from the tall Cedar, to the flowers beneath, but Ruffles,
Ravishes, and Ruins all.


Prince. I speak of my Mirtilla.


G^^. Why, so do I -- of yours, of mine, or any man's Mirtilla.


Prince. Away, she that with force of Love can sigh and weep --


Geo. This very she, has all the while dissembled: Such Love she deals to every
gaudy Coxcomb, how will she practice then upon a Hero?


Prince. Away, it cannot be.


Geo. By all your Friendship to me, Sir, it is truth.


Prince. Wrecks and Torture, -- let her have made of me a meet Example, by whom
the cozened World might have grown wise: No matter, then I had been pleased,
though Cullyed -- Why have thou ruined my Repose with Truths that carry more
Damnation than a Lie? But Oh -- thou at my Friend, and I forgive thee.


Geo. Sir, I have done, and humbly ask your Pardon. Offers to go


Prince. Stay, stay, Lejere, -- if she be false, you are all the World has left
me; and I believe -- but can thou prove this to me?


Geo. Perhaps I may before the Morning's dawn.


Prince. Ha, prove it here -- here, in this very House!


Geo. Ay, here, Sir


Prince. What, in my Lodgings will she receive her Spark -- by Heaven, were he
the Darling Son of a Monarch, an Empire's Hope, and Joy of all the Fair, he
should not live to rifle me of Peace, -- Come, show me this destined Victim to
my Rage.


Geo. No, my Revenge is only Comical -- If you would see how Woman can
dissemble, come on, and follow me.


Prince. What, disturb her Rest! Did thou not see her fainting with the
Fatigues this Night had given her, and begged me I would leave her to Repose?


Geo. Yes, and wondered at her Art; and when you begged to watch by her
Bedside, with what dear Promises she put you off; while every word fell feebly
from her Tongue, as if 't had been her last, so very sick she was -- till you
were gone -- hark -- a Door opens -- I will obscure the Lights.


Puts away the Lights. Enter Olivia. They retire a little. Oliv. Was ever Maid
so near to being undone? Oh, Heavens! in Bed with the dear Man I love, ready to
be betrayed by every sigh. George peeps.


Geo. It Is Olivia. Pater Manage groping.


Man. I left him here -- what, by dark? Endimion, young, ha^dsom Sir, where are
you? Calls Olivia.


Geo. Do you hear that, Sir?


Man. Oh, are you here? -- Runs against Olivia.


Oliv. Slife, it is Manage -- how shall I escape -- Aside.


Man. Come, Sir, my Lady Mirtilla has dismissed her troublesome Lovers, for your
more agreeable Company.


Geo. Do hear that, Sir?


Man. Come softly on, Sir, and follow me.


Oliv. I Am all Obedience --

She cannot Ravish me, and that is a Comfort. Aside, going out.


Prince. Oh, Lejere -- can this be possible? Can there be such a Woman?


Geo. Follow him, Sir, and see --


Prince. See what! -- Be witness of her Infamy! Hell! Hell, and all the Fires
of Lust possess her, when she is so old and lewd, all Mankind shun her, -- I ll
be a Coward in my own di^e Revenge, and use no manly Mercy. -- But oh, I faint,
I faint with Rage and Love, which like two meeting Tides, swell into Storms. --
Bear me a minute to my Couch within.


Geo. What have I done, now I repent my Rashness.


Scene draws off, discovers Mirtilla at her Toylet, dressed. Enter Manage,
leading Olivia in as Endymion, who falls at Mirtilla 's feet, whilst she is
there, sings a Song; she takes him up. Mir. Rise, -- When Lovers are alone they
pardon Ceremony -- I sent for you to end the Night with me; say -- how shall we
employ it?


Oliv. I Will sigh, and gaze upon your lovely Face.


Mir. Nothing but sigh, and gaze; we shall grow dull.


Oliv. I Will tell you Tales of Love, and sing you Songs


Mir. Thy Voice, it is true, can charm a thousand ways; but Lovers time their
Joys, these for the Day, those for the lovely Night And when they would be
silently in love, have Music of soft Sighs and gentler Whispers.


Oliv. Oh, Love inspires all this -- What shall I do? Aside.


Mir. Nay, think not because I sent for you alone, while Night and Silence
favor Lovers Stealths, to take advantage of my yielding Heart.


Oliv. I would to Heaven she were in earnest now.


A Noise. Enter Manage. Man. Oh, hide your Favorite, Madam -- do you hear.


Mir. A jealous Lover only, comes in such a Storm -- Dear, to my Heart, whose
safety is my Life. Submit to be concealed -- but where -- Oh heavens, he comes
-- It Is for you I fear -- They search for a place.


Man. He comes --


Mir. Here, let my Train secure you -- Till now I never found the right Use of
long Trains and Farthingals.


She kneels, Man. puts her Train over Olivia. Enter Prince, and George, at the
Door. Geo. 'Sdeath, you have made these Pauses and Alarms to give her time to
Jilt you.


Prince. Pray heaven she do -- I Would not be undeceived for all the Sun surveys.
Enter^.


Mir. My Lord the Prince! now you are kind indeed. Go^s and embrace, him. --
hah! what means this Unc^^cern?


Prince. I thoug^t (...) left you sick, extremely sick.


Mir. And are young loved to find my Health return?


Prince. No, wondrous glad of it. You're mighty Gay, Mirtilla, much in Glory.


Mir. Can he who lays his Fortune at my Feet, think me too glorious for his
Arms and Eyes?


Geo. Fifty to one, the Gyps^ ji^s him yet. Aside,


Prince. Pray heaven she lies but handsomely -- Aside.

-- for mine Mirtilla. Ha -- ha --


Mir. Am I not yours? You cannot doubt my Vows.


Geo. She Will do it, and make me love her anew for her rare dexterity at
dissembling.


Prince. I left you wearied, going to your Bed, but find you at your Toylet
gayly drest^ is if some Conquest you designed ever morning.


Mir. Ma^^^^, Sir, from the Fire, secured these Trifles: and I was trying
several Dresse^on; that this slight Beauty that you say has charmed you, might,
when yo^ s^^ it next, complete the Conquest.


Geo. And that thou will, if Flattery can do it.


Prince. Now, were she guilty, as I am sure she is not, this softness would
undo me, and appease me.


Mir. You seem as if you doubted what I say. This while, Oliv. gets off uns^en.
By all the Powers --


Prince. H^^d, I scorn to need an Oath to six my Faith: Oh! thou art all Divine
and can not err Embraces her.

Cursed be the Tongue that da^es profane thy Virtue, and cursed the listening
Fool that dares believe it.


Geo. What a poor, wretched, baflled thing is Man, by feebler Woman awed and
made a Coxcomb!


Mir. Durst any one traduce my Virtue, Sir? and is it possible that you could
hear it -- Then perish all the Beauties you have flattered.


Tears her Head-things. Prince. Come to my Arms, thou Charmer of my Soul! and
if one spark of Jealousy remain, one of those precious Tears shall quench the
C^ime -- Oh, come and let me lead thee to thy Bed, and breathe new Vows into
thy panting Bosom. Leads her off, she looks back on Geo and smiles.


Geo. Now all the Plagues of injured Lovers wreck thee; 'Sdeath, where has she
hid Olivia? or how am I deceived? -- It Is Day, and with it new Invention rise
to damn this Woman to the sin of Shame: Break all the Chains that hold the
Princely Youth, and sink her with her fancied Power and Vanity. Exit.


Scene changes to Lady Youthly 's. Enter Sir Rowland half dressed, Lady Blunder
in an Undress, Lady Youthly in her morning-dress, Teresia and Mr. Twang. Sir
Row. Morrow my Lady Youthly, and thank you for my Nights Lodging -- You are as
early up as if it had been your Wedding Day.


L. You. Truly, Sir Rowland, that I intend.


Sir Row. But where is the Bridegroom, Madam?

Enter Roger. how now, Roger, what, no news yet of George?


R^g. Alas! none Sir, none, till the Rubbish be removed.


Sir Row. Rubbish -- What -- what is George become the Rubbish of the World
then? Weeps.


Twang. Why, Man is but dust, as a man may say, Sir.


L. Blun. But are you sure, Roger, my Jewel, my Sir Moggy escaped.


Rog. The Watch drew him out of the Cellar-window, Madam.


L. You. How Mr. Twang, the Young Gentleman burnt -- Oh --


falls in a Chair. Tire. Alas! my Grandmother faints with your ill News -- Good
Sir Rowland comfort her, and dry your Eyes.


Sir Row. Burnt, Madam! No, no, only the House fell on him, or so --


Feigns Cheerfulness, and speaks to Lady Youthly. La. You. How! the House fell
on him -- Oh!


Sir Row. Ah, Madam, that is all; why, the young Rogue has a Back like an
Elephant -- 'twill bear a Castle, Madam.


La. You. Alas, good Man: What a Mercy it is, Mr. Twang, to have a Back like an
Elephant!


La. Blun. Of what wonderful Use it is upon Occasion --


Sir Row. Ay -- but -- but I shall never see him more, Back nor Breast. Weeps.


Twang. Good Sir, discomfort not my Lady -- Consider man's a flower --


Sir Row. Ay, but George was such a Flower! He was, Mr. Twang, he was the very
Pink of Prentices. Ah! what a rare Rampant Lord Mayor he would have made? And
what a Swinging Sheriff -- Cries.


Tere. What, cry, so near your Wedding Day, Sir Rowland?


Sir Row. Well, if he be gone -- Peace be with him; and 'Ifaks, Sweetheart,
we'll Marry, and beget new Sons and Daughters -- but -- but -- I shall never
beget another George. Cries.


Tere. This is but a scurvy Tune for your Hymenical Song, Sir.


Sir Row. Alas! Mrs. Teresia, my Instrument is untuned, and good for nothing
now but to be hung upon the Willows.

Cry within. Murder, Murder, Murder. Enter Footman.


Sir Merlin his Sword drawn, and Sir Morgan. Sir Row. What Is here, my Rogue?


Twang. What Is the matter, Gentlemen, that ye enter the House in this Hostile
manner?


Sir Morg. What, Mr. Twang, de see!


Sir Mer. Ay, ay -- stand by Divinity -- and know, that we, the Pillars of the
Nation, are come, de see -- to Ravish.


La. Blun. Oh, my dear Sir Morgan. Embraces him.


Sir Merg. I do not intend to Ravish, like a Jew, in my own Tribe --


La. You. What say they, Mr. Twang, Ravish? Oh, save my Honor -- lead me to my
Bedchamber, where if they dare venture to come, they come upon their Peril.
Twang leads her out. Sir Morgan goes to Teresia.


Sir Mer. Old Fellow, do hear? Sir Pandarus of Troy, deliver me my Cresida,
de see, peaceably, or I am resolved to be^r her off Vi and Armis.


La Blun. Sweet Nephew, retire, we are just upon making your Peace.


Sir Mer. Ha -- Old Queen Gwiniver, without her Ruff on? --


Sir Merlin takes hold of her to bear her off; she cries out: Sir Rowland draws
upon him. As they are going to Fight, Enter George. Geo. Is there a man in
Nature's Race so vile, dares lift a guilty Hand against his Father?


Sir Mer. Father me no Fathers; I fight for Teresia, my Lawfully begotten
Spouse.


Geo. That I once called you Brother, saves your Life; therefore resign your
Sword here at his Reverend Feet.


Sir Mer. Sirrah; you lie, Sirrah --


Geo. There, drag away this Brute. Disarms him. To the Footman.


Sir Mer. Rogues, Dogs, bring Mrs. Teresia along with you.


Tere. Sure this is my fine Fellow -- and yet the very same that is to be
married to my Grandmother; nor can that City Habit hide the Gentleman,


George speaks this while with his Father, who embraces him. Sir Morg. Burnt,
say you, Mrs. Teresia de see -- my Lady Mirtilla burnt! Nay then, it is time to
go sleep, get sober, and Marry again. Goes out.


Sir Row. Enough, my Boy, enough; thou deserve my whole Estate, and thou
shall have it, Boy -- This day thou shall Marry the Widow, and I her
Grandchild. I Will to my Lawyers, and settle all upon thee instantly --


Goes out. Geo. How! Marry to day -- Old Gentleman, you must be cozened, and
Faith, that goes against my Conscience -- Ha, the Fair, the Young Teresia there
-- When a man's bent upon Wickedness, the Devil never wants an Opportunity to
present him with, that she should be in my way now -- Fair Creature, are you
resolved to be my Mother-in-law?


Tere. As sure as you to be my Grandfather, Sir -- And see -- the News of your
being come, has raised my Grandmother.


Enter Lettice and Lady Youthly. Geo. A Pox upon her, her Ghost had been less
frightful.


Tere. I could have spared her now too; but see she advances as swift as Time.


Geo. And as old: What shall I do? I dye to speak with you --


La. You. Where -- where is this Young Welcome Gentleman -- Oh, are you here,
Sir -- She sees him not, but runs upon him.

Lettice, take Teresia, and get you to your Chamber, she has her Trinkets to
get ready against the Wedding anon, for we'll make but one work of both.


Tere. Ay, 'twill save Charges, Madam --


La. You. Ay, ay, get you gone, Lovers sometimes would be private.


Geo. Hark ye -- leave me not to her mercy, by Love, if you do, I Will follow
you to your Chamber.


Tere. Leave you! no, hang me if I'do, till I have told you a piece of my mind,
for I find there is no dallying.


La. You. Well, Sir, I have finished the Great Work.


Geo. I wish you had -- Teresia, once you made me hope you did not hate me.


La. You. What says he, Teresia?


Tere. He says, he hopes you do not hate him, Madam.


La. You. No, by my Troth, Sir; I feel something for you, I have not felt
before.


Geo. Not these Threescore Years, I dare swear -- You have too much Wit,
Teresia, to have been only pleased with the Embroidered Coat, and Gaudy Plume,
where still the man's the same.


La. You. What says he, Embroidered Coat and Plume?


Tere. He hopes your Ladyship likes him never the worse, for being without
those Fopperies.


La. You. Marry do I not, I love not this over-finery in a Husband; those
Fellows that Dress, think so well of themselves, they never mind their Wives.


Geo. Are you so dull, Teresia, not to see, this Habit was put on, only to get
an Opportunity to tell you my Passion?


La. You. Tell me of his Passion! was it so, alas, good Young Man -- Well,
well, I Will defer your Joys no longer, this Night shall make you happy. Mr.
Twang shall join us, Sir.


Geo. A blessed hearing -- You see, Charming Maid, how very shore a space there
is between this and the hastening hour; stand not on Virgin Niceties, but
answer me, our time admits of no Consideration.


Tere. I have not been this Four and Twenty hours a Lover, to need Considering;
as soon as you had my Heart, you had my Consent, and that was the first moment
I saw you at the Basset-Table.


Geo. Ha! at the Basset-Table?


Tere. Yes, I was the frank Youth that lent you Money -- but no more -- your
Time and Place.


La. You. What are you prating to him there?


Tere. He doubts your Love, Madam, and I Am confirming it.


La. You. Alas, good Gentleman! -- anon I Will convince him -- for in the
Evening, Sir, the Priest shall make us one.


Geo. Ah, Madam, I could wish 'twere not so long deferred, for sure I love you
like a sighing Swain, and as a Proof of it, I have here prepared an Emblem of
my Love in a Dance of Country Lovers, where Passion is sincere.


La. You. Good-lack-a-day, indeed you're so obliging: But pray let us have the
Dance. Dance.


La. You. Very pretty indeed. Come, good Gentleman, don't droop, don't droop;
come, hold up your Head -- you may be allowed one Kiss beforehand.


Geo. (Kisses her.) Oh, what a Pestilential Blast was there? Aside.


La. You. Come, come, Teresia, come with me.


Geo. to Teresia. I Will send a Chair to your Back-Gate anon, that shall wait you
on the Field-side, and bring you whither I shall appoint. Get Ready instantly.


Tere. And if I fail, may I be eternally damned to the Embraces of Old Age.
Exeunt all but George.


Geo. Mirtilla, thus thy Scorn I will out-brave,
And let my Father the kind Cheat forgive,
If I with dexterous Charitable care
Ease him of Burdens he wants strength to bear. Ex^^.

ACT V.
SCENE the First.
Enter Welborn dressing himself; to him, a Footman with a Letter. Well. Prithee
what became of the Spark that lay with me last night?


Foot. I know not, Sir, he 'rose before day -- What Letter's this, Sir? It lay
upon your Toylet. Gives Welborn a Letter.


Well. To the dear Man whose Name I would be glad to Reads. know -- Hum' -- a
Woman's Hand -- Opens it.

The Lady you saw last Thursday in the Mall, you had in Bed with you last
Night. Adieu.

Oh! dull Divinity of Love! that by no Instinct, no sympathizing Pains or
Pleasure, could instruct my Sense, how near I was to Happiness!

Enter George, fine. -- Lejere, behold me here the most unlucky Fellow
breathing. Thou know I told thee how I was in love with a young Woman in the
Mall: And this very Night, I had this very Woman in my Arms.


Geo. Is this your ill Luck, Sir?


Well. 'Sdeath, all the while I took her for a Man: But, finding me asleep, she
softly 'rose; and, by a Light yet burning in my Chamber, she writ this Billet,
and left it on my Table. Gives it George, he reads it.


Geo. By all that Good, Olivia! -- And were you very Honest, Sir?


Well. To my eternal Shame, as chaste as Ice.


Geo. What will you say now, Charles, if I bring this Woman to you again?


Well. Can thou? Oh, let me kiss thy Lips away.


Geo. For all her Frollick, Charles, she is very honest, a Fortune, and of
Quality -- and were it not for Olivia, thou should marry her.


Well. Olivia I never saw, and now 'twill be too late.


Geo. Nay then, Sir, I must fight in her Defense.


Well. You fight in her defense! Why, do thou love her? -- By all that is Good,
I will resign her to thee.


Geo. You shall not, Sir; and know she is my Sister.


Well. Olivia thy Sister! --


Geo. Ask no more Questions, but defend your self, if you refuse to marry her;
for her Honor's mine.


Well. Were she an Angel, I must love this Woman.


Geo. Then thou shall have her -- Have, and get a License -- no more -- trust
my Friendship -- Go. Exit Welborn.

Enter Olivia. Olivia, where did you lie last Night? -- Nay do not blush, for
you may yet be Virtuous.


Oliv. Virtuous! Not the young Roses in the bud secured, nor breaking Morn,
ungaz'd at by the Sun; nor falling Snow, has more of Purity.


Geo. I do believe you; but your dangerous Frolicks will make the World talk
shamefully.


Oliv. Let him talk on, I will not humor Fools.


Geo. No more -- here is Manage -- Contrive an Assignation with Mirtilla; but do
not hide again where none may find you. This done, I Will tell you more, and make
you happy. How now, Manage, is the Prince stirring?


Man. He Is in his dressing Room, Sir, -- This from my Lady, Sir.


Slides the Letter into Olivia 's hand as she passes out. Geo. What have you
there, Olivia? Takes the Billet.


Oliv. An Assignation from your perjured Mistress, Sir.


Geo. It Is well -- You must obey the Summons. And wind her up to all the height
of Love; then let her loose to Shame. I Will bring her Lover in the height of
Dalliance, who, when he sees her Persidy, will hate her.


Oliv. And then the lovely Man stands fair for me. Aside.


Geo. Go write an Answer back -- and wait her hour. Exeunt severally.


SCENE, the Second. The Dressing Room. Discovers the Prince at his Toylet,
dressing. Music and a Song. Enter Lejere; waits till the Song is ended. The
Prince sees him, comes to him with Joy, and falls about his Neck. SONG,
by Mr. Gildon.
AH, Charmion! shroud those killing Eyes,
That dart the Extremes of Pleasure,
Else Celadon, though favored, dies
As well as him that you despise,
Though with this different measure:
While lingering Pains drag on his Fate,
Dispatch is all the Advantage of my State;
For, ah! you kill with Love, as well as Hate.
2.
Abate thy Luxury of Charms,
And only Part discover;
Your Tongue, as well as Eyes, had Arms
To give a Thousand fatal Harms
To the poor listening Lover:
Thy Beams, Glory's Veiled should be,
And like the Front of Heaven, unseen, pass by;
For to behold 'em, in full force, we dye.
Prince. Lydia, Oh! I faint, I dye with thy Beauty's Luxury! By heaven, I Am all
Rapture, Love, and Joy: Such a dear Night, Lejere! -- Poets may fancy pressing
Goddesses, on downy Beds of Clouds -- But oh, Lejere! -- Those Gods were never
half so blessed as I!


Geo. What pity 'twere to wake you from this Dream.


Prince. It is not in the Power of Time nor Age: For even then Mirtilla will
have Charms! Oh, how she speaks! how well she will grace a Story


Geo. How gay her Wit! how movingly she writes!


Prince. I do believe she does. A little seriously.


Geo. Would it displease you, should you see a Billet from her?


Prince. That Is as it were directed. Gravely.


Geo. You would not credit what you saw last night.


Prince. Nor would have lost that Night for all the Treasure the vast Ocean
hid^^.


Geo. I would not have a Man so good, and great, be made a Woman's P^operty --
There, Sir. Gives him the Billet.


Prince. I Will not believe it here is; there are a thousand ways to ruin
Innocence; if she be false -- she is damned. Confirm me, and of course I shall
despise her. You cure me, when you show her worth my Scorn.


Geo. Will you be ruled then, and believe it Friendship in me?


Prince. I will.


Geo. Give her, by Absence, but an Opportunity; feign some Excuse to leave the
Town to day.


Prince. See where she comes -- Enter Mirtilla.

Adorned with all the beauteous Wonders of her Sex. The Gods of Love are
playing in her Eyes, and give us Wounds from every graceful Motion? Ah, my
Mirtilla! how shall I support the Absence of a many coming Hours, that
languish, being from thee but a moment?


Mir. I hope, my Lord, Fate is not so unkind, to let me live without you many
Hours.


Prince. Can all this be dissembled? Aside to George.


Geo. How much more have I heard? yet all was false.


Prince. I must this Day -- this tedious live-long Day, be absent from thy
sight -- but shall be back i'th'Evening: I Will leave Lejere to wait on your
Commands.


Mir. Lejere shall ever, Sir, be dear to me --

But I Will retire, and sigh till your Return -- That World affords no Pleasure
where you are not.


Prince. Do you hear that, Sir? Aside to George.

Till Night, thou dearest Blessing of my Life -- Adieu.


Mirtilla going out, pulls Lejere by the Sleeve. Mir. Thou little, mischievous,
informing Thing, how vainly have thou lavished out Invention! Smiling. Exit.


Prince. By Heaven, methinks 'twere Sin but to suspect her.


Geo. Think so; I Will trouble your Repose no more: I Have done my Duty, and I
would not see you made a --


Prince. Property -- Ha -- A loathed convenient Tool -- A Woman's Implement --
God's Death! she that off -- Loose to the nasty Love of every Tool, that will be
Flattered, Cozened, Jilted, Cuckolded -- No more -- I will, unseen, convey my
self into the Closet in my Dressing Room; it is near her Bed -- And if I find
her Wanton.


Geo. If you find her -- The Youth is waiting now that shall convince you.


Prince. Where? -- Oh set the happy Slave but in my View, and --


Geo. No faith, Sir, be convinced before you strike, for fear she jilt you out
of Sense and Reason --


Prince. Come to my Closet, from thence we may observe all that passes in her
Chamber; from whence I Will break upon the perjured Fair, like Thunder from a
Cloud, and more destructive. Exeunt.


Seen discovers Mirtilla and Manage. Mir. Is the Prince gone?


Man. Yes, Madam.


Mir. Then bring Endimion to me.


Man. Madam, I wish you would think no more of him; for I foresee, that this Amor
must Ruin you. Remember you have left a Husband for the Prince.


Mir. A Husband, my Drudge, to toil for me, and save me the Expense of careful
Thoughts: My Cloak, my Led-Horse, for Necessity to fill my Train -- no more --
but Endimion waits. Exit Manage.

-- There is a native Generosity in me, that checks my Inconstancy to this
great Man; yet I have so much Woman in my Soul, cannot pain my self to do him
Justice -- A new desire of humouring my Wish, sways all my Interest, and
controuls all my Honor. Why should I lose a Pleasure for a Promise, since
Time, that gives our Youth so short a Date, may well excuse our needful
Perjury. Enter Manage, and Olivia, she runs and Embraces him. -- Let the young
bashful Maid, unskilled in Love, deny the pressing Swain.

Let withered Age who fondly dreams of Virtue, lose the dear Opportunities of
Life.

The coming Hours present themselves to us; and are too nice, not to be
snatched when offered.


Oliv. So hasty this disarms me of Excuse. Aside.


Mir. Why are thy Eyes bent down? Why do thou pause?


Oliv. So hot! -- I must prepare to show my Sex's Evidence, if nothing else
will do. Unbuttons her Coat.


Mir. What not a Word!

Advance thou bashful Youth -- Love in thy Eyes, and Coward in thy Heart! The
one all Fire, the other too much Ice.


Prince, and George, looking out. Prince. Yet stay me, my Lejere, from my hasty
Vengeance.


Oliv. Ah, Madam, how are you mistaken! It Is not Coldness in me -- but --


Mir. What? Bashfulness!

Oh Love will lend thee Courage.

This Trembling is the soft Effects of it.


Oliv. Oh how vilely she is mistaken!


Mir. Come to my Bed, and press the Roses down; and lend more sweetness to 'em
than they bring.


She leading him to her Bed. The Prince enters, with Lejere, holding his Sword
in hand, he takes hold of Olivia. Prince. Love -- thus I fling thy gaudy
Fetters off, and am no more a Slave to faithless Beauty.


The Prince helding Olivia by the Bosom of her Coat, her Breast appears to
Mirtilla. Mir. Ha! what do I see? -- Two Female rising Breasts. By Heaven a
Woman. -- Oh fortunate Mischance.


This while George is arguing with the Prince, not to hurt Olivia. Prince. No I
will not hurt thee, cease thy trembling.


Mir. Oh, Sir, 'twere Sin to hurt the lovely Youth.


Prince. No, Madam, since I have taken back my Heart, I can present you with
another Lover. Gives Olivia to her


Mir. Ha! another Lover! -- What means my Prince?


Prince. Eternally to leave you to your Frailty.


Mir. Can you so easily cancel all your Vows?

Then kill me at your Feet I do implore it. Kneels and Weeps.


Prince. Away, I do forgive Thee, wretched Woman -- But yet be gone -- least
Love and Rage return, and I should kill you yet with your young Darling.


Mir. Whom mean you, Sir, this lovely Maid?


Oliv. Maid! -- What means she? Sure she cannot know me.


Prince. Talk on, false Woman! till thou have persuaded my Eyes and Ears out of
their native Faculties, I scorn to credit other Evidences.


Mir. Try 'em once more, and then repent, and dye.


Opens Olivia's Bosom, shows her Breasts. Prince. Ha -- by Heaven a Woman!


Mir. You that would smile at my supposed undoing, present your self no more
before my Eyes 'Twas to perplex you that I feigned this Passion.

I saw you had your Spies to watch for Mischief, To George.

And poison all my Happiness with the Prince. --

And since I Am thought so Criminal, I Will take an everlasting Leave of you To
the Prince. When I am dead, may she you honor next repay your Tenderness as I
have done -- But may she never meet my wretched Fate. She snatches Olivia 's
Sword out.


Prince. Hold, thou most valued Treasure of the World, or turn the pointed
Weapon to my heart.


Mir. No, I Am false; unworthy of your Love.


Geo. Yes, by Heaven. But thou have Jilted him so handsomely, thou'st vanquished
all my Rage.


Mir. Yes. I am false; false to this Gallant Man. To George.

False to my Husband, to my Sexes Fame; for you more Charming, I alas, am
perjured.


Prince. Lejere! have I then injured thee?


Geo. This is the Fatal Beauty, Sir, for whom so often you have seen me
languish.


Prince. Ah! would thou see me on a Precipice, and not prevent my Danger?


Geo. To mightier Friendship I could all surrender, and silently have born her
Perjuries; but those to you, awakened all my Rage; but she has out-trick'd me,
and I beg her Pardon -- And to secure her yours, have loved anew, and beg
Protection in your Lodgings, Sir, for a young Maid whom I design to marry.


Prince. Command my Life, my Fortune, and my Sword, for the unwilling Injury I
have done thee -- And is this the charming perjured Fair, Mirtilla?


Geo. It is, Sir.


Prince. Since it is possible that you could cease to love this Gallant Man,
whom I have heard with so much tender Passion tell your Loves, what sacred Vows
had past, and what Endearments, how can I hope from thee a lasting Faith? --
Yet on the Oaths that thou have sworn to me -- by all thy Hopes of Pardon for
thy Perjuries, to ease my panting Heart -- once speak the Truth -- Did thou
not take this Woman for a Man?


Mir. I did -- and were she so, I would with Pride own all the Vows I Have broke.


Prince. Why this is fair -- and though I buy this Knowledge at the vast Price of
all my Repose; yet I must own, it is a better Bargain then chaff'ring of a Heart
for feigned Embraces -- Thou have undone me -- yet must have my Friendship; and
'twill be still some Ease in this Extreme, to see thee yet repent, and love
Lejere.


Mir. No, Sir, this Beauty must be first declining, to make me take up with a
former Lover.


Geo. No, Sir, I have disposed my Heart another way; and the first knowledge of
her Falsehood cured me: Her Marriage I forgave -- that thing of form -- But
never could her Fondness to this Youth.


Prince. Who Is this Lady, Sir, whose Pardon I must beg?


Geo. My Sister, Sir, who I disguised on purpose to be a Guard to this
suspected Fair One.


Enter Welborn. Well. Ha! she is there!

Now every Feature points me out my Conqueress. -- Nay start not -- I have
found Thee, thou malicious Charmer, to bring me so near to Bliss, and not
afford me one kind hint.


Oliv. And are not you a very dull Fellow, that loved and longed, and had the
Maid so near you, and yet needed a Hint.


Well. Nay, if you concealed your precious Talent, how should it profit any Body?


Oliv. Concealed it? -- No, Faith, I made a very fair Tender; but you refused
it, as not being Current Coin.


Well. But if you most feloniously, and unlawfully deface our Sovereign's Image,
so as it may be as soon taken for the Grand Signior's, I may suspect the Metal
too.


Oliv. What say you if I tender it before these lawful Witnesses?


Well. I Will take it for good Payment -- I Charles Wellborn --


Oliv. Ha, Welborn! Aside.


Well. Take thee -- whom? -- Gad if the Parson of the Parish knew your Name no
better than I -- 'twill be but a blind Bargain.


Geo. Olivia, Marteen --


Well. My destined Wife?


Geo. The very same: Have you the Parson ready?


Well. He waits in my Chamber.


Oliv. Madam, I beg you will lend me something more becoming my Sex.


Mir. Manage will furnish you from my Wardrobe. Exit Olivia.


Enter Teresia. Geo And see my good Genius appears too.


Tere. See, Sir, I am resolved to be welcome to your Arms; look here are the
Writings of the Estate my Grandfather left me, and here is Three thousand Pound
my Grandmother has settled on me, upon her Marriage with you.


Gives him the Writings. Geo. And here is my Father's Estate settled on me --
Come let us put them together -- and go in, and let the Parson do as much for us.


Puts 'em in her Case. Tere. But have you very well considered this Matter?


Geo. Teresia, we'll do like most Couples, marry first, and consider afterward
-- Leads her in


Enter a Footman. Footm. Sir, Here Is Sir Merlin, with a Lady masked, would
speak with you.


Well. Carry 'em into the Dining Room, I Will wait on 'em anon.


Exeunt Omnes. SCENE, my Lady Youthly's. Discovers Her, and Lettice dressing
her. L. You. Hold the Glass higher, Lettice; Is not this Tour too brown? --
Methinks it does not give a youthful Air to my Face.


Let. That Is not in Nature.


L. You. Like Nature! Ay, but Nature's self wants Art, nor does this Fontange
suit with my Complexion -- Put on a little more Red, Lettice, on my Cheeks, and
Lips. She does so.


Let. Ay, for they are but a little too much upon the Coventry Blue -- This
Tour must come more forward, Madam, to hide the Wrinkles at the corners of your
Eyes -- Pulls it.


L. You. Ay, Lettice, but there are others, that neither Tours, nor Paint, nor
Patches will hide, I fe^r -- Yet altogether, Lettice --


Puts on her Spectacles, and looks in the Glass. Enter Sir Rowland. Sir Row.
What, no Bride yet, nor Bridegroom!


L. You. Ay, what can be the Meaning of this?


Sir Row. But Teresia, Madam, where can she be gadding?


L. You. Why Lettice tells me, She went to buy some Trifles to adorn her this.
Night -- Her Governante is with her, and my Steward.

Enter Mr. Twang. Twang, Alas, what pity it is; the Supper is quite spoiled, and
no Bridegroom come!


(A Noise of Hallowing without, and Music.) Enter Lady Blunder. L. Blun. Bless
us! Here Is a whole Regiment of Liveries, Coaches, and Flambeau's, at the Door!
The Fops of the Town have heard of a Wedding, and are come in Masquerade.


Enter Music playing; after them, Prince Frederick leading Mirtilla, George
leading Teresia; Sir Merlin, Diana, Mrs. Manage, Brittoon, Pages, and Footmen,
all in Masquerade. Sir Morgan comes in, all in Mourning; Welborn, and Olivia.
Sir Mer. Hearing of a high Wedding, Sir, we made bold (as the Saying is) to
give you Joy. Sir, Are not you the Bridegroom?


Tere. Where Is your Bride, Sir? Ha! ha! ha!


Sir Mer. Ay, ay, where is your Bride?


Sir Row. What Is that to you, Sir, Coxcomb?


Sir Mir. Hum -- How the Devil came he to know me now? -- Is this Reverend
Gentlewoman your Lady, Sir?


Sir Row. Ounds, they come to mock us! -- Hark ye, hark ye Tawdrums, if you are
Men, show your Faces; if Apes, play over your Monkey-Tricks, and be gone, do you
hear? -- We are not at leisure for Fooling.


Geo. Be but at leisure, Sir, to pardon (George kneels) this one Disobedience
of my Life, and all the rest I Will dedicate to please and humor you. Sir, I am
married. Pulls off his Mask.


Sir Row. What the Devil's that to me, Sir.


Geo. Do not you know me, Sir?


Sir Row. No, Sir, nor don't care to know any such slaunting Coxcombs.


Geo. Look on me, Sir. Looks on him, knows him, goes away, and returns.


Sir Row. Hum, hum, hum! --


Tere. It is your Son, Sir, your darling Son, who has saved your Life from
Insolence?


Sir Row. Hum -- Teresia!


L. You. How, Teresia! what robbed me of my intended Husband? Oh undone!
undone! Falls into a Chair.


Sir Row. And have thou after all, served me such a Rogne's Trick, thou
ungracious Varlet? What Cuckold thine own Father!


Geo. Oh do not frown, I cannon bear your Anger! Here will I hang for ever till
you Pardon me. Clasps his Knees.


Sir Row. Look -- look -- now cannot I be angry with the good-natured young
Rogue Weeps.

Well George -- But hark ye, Sirrah, this is a damned Trick of yours.


Geo. Sir, I found my Youth was fitter for her than your Age, and you will be as
fond of a Grandchild of my begetting, as you would of a Son of another Man's,
perhaps.


Sir Row. Thour't in the Right on it.


Sir Mer. Ha! Is Monsieur Lejere then my Brother George?


Geo. Sir, Here Is another Couple wants your Pardon; my Brother Merlin, and my
Lady Diana.


La. Blun. Diana! what Sir Harry Modish's Mistress?


Dia. Yes, he pawned me at the Basset-Table; and, in Revenge, I resolved to
marry the next Man of Fortune I met with.


Sir Row. The Fool had more Wit then I thought he had; for which I Will give him
a Thousand Pound a Year.


Geo. I humbly thank you, Sir.


Mirt. Pray, Melancholy Sir, who are you in Mourning for?


Sir Morg. Alas! Madam, for a Person of Quality that was my Wife; but rest her
Soul, she is burnt Weeps.

And I shall never see any thing again like her.


Mirt. No! What think you of this Face, Sir.


Sir Morg. As Gad shall sa' me, as like as if the same.


La. Blun. In troth, and so she is.


Prince. It Is true, she was once your Wife; but I have preserved her from the
Flames, and I have most Right to her.


Sir Morg. That Is a hard Case, Sir, that a Man must lose his Wife, because
another has more Right to her than himself; Is that Law, Sir?


Prince. Lover's Law, Sir.


La. Blun. Ay, ay, Son, it is the Fashion to marry one Week, and separate the
next: I Will set you a President for it my self.


In this time Welborn kneels with Olivia; Sir Rowland takes 'em up, and kisses
'em. Sir Morg. Nay, if it be the Fashion, I Will even into the Country, and be
merry with my Tenants, and Hawk, and Hunt, and Horse-match.


Prince. But now, Sir, I Will resign my Right to you, and content my self with
the Honor to have preserved her from the Fire.


Prince delivers Mirtilla to Sir Morgan, who receives her. Sir Morg. As gad
shall sa'me, Sir, you're a civil Person; and now I find you can endure a Woman,
Sir, I Will give you leave to visit her.


Sir Row. Well, since we are all agreed, and that the Fiddles are here, adsnigs
we'll have a Dance, Sweetheart, though thou have outwitted me.


Takes Teresia, George takes Lady Youthly, etc. After the Dance, Lady Youthly
weeps. Geo. What, weeping yet? Here, Mr. Twang, take the Lady to your Care; in
these Cases, there is nothing like the Consolation of your young Chaplain.

The Widow, with young Jointure, and old Face,
Affected Mien, and Amorous Grimace,
Uses to fall to the younger Brother's share;
But I by Fortune, and Industrious Care,
Have get one that is Rich, Witty, Young, and Fair.

FINIS.

