PROPOSALS FOR RAISING A College of Industry OF ALL USEFUL TRADES and
Husbandry, WITH Profit for the RICH. A Plentiful Living for the POOR, AND A
Good Education for YOUTH. Which will be Advantage to the Government, by the
Increase of the People, and their Riches.

MOTTO, Industry brings Plenty.

The Sluggard shall be clothed with Rags.

He that will not Work, shall not Eat.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street.
1695.

The Contents.
1. AN Epistle to the Children of Light. 2. The Introduction, with Reasons for
providing for the Poor. 3. A Specimen showing the Way of doing it in a
Colledge-Fellowship. 4. Proposals to the Colledge-Founders. 5. Some of the
Advantages to the Founders and Rich by it. 6. Some of the Advantages to the
Poor Collegians. 7. Some Rules about Governing the Colledge-Workmen. 8. Of the
Education of Children. 9. An Answer to several Objections. 10. A Postscript.
To the Children of Light, In Scorn called QUAKERS.
It Is the Glorious Title the Great Founder of Christianity has given You that
walk therein, when he said, Whilst ye have the Light, walk in the Light, that
ye may become the Children of the Light.

The Consideration of Your great Industry and Diligence in all Affairs of this
Life, Your great Charity in Relieving Your own Poor, and Others also, as
Occasions offer, Your great Morality acknowledged by All, and Your Religious
Sincerity, known to the L'ord; Has induced me to Dedicate these following
Proposals to Your serious Consideration, whilst I think You a very regular
Body, willing and capable of such an Undertaking; Your Poor being less Vicious
than other Poor are, (Debauchery being the Bane of Industry) it will be the
easier to put them into a good Method, as a Pattern and Example to the rest of
the Nation, by which you may show forth the more the Christianity of your
Faith, by the Virtuous Works that come from it, of which Love and Charity is
the Chief. In which You have been very Exemplary in the Worst of Times, and of
greatest Sufferings: How have You Relieved and Succored the Afflicted, not
suffering a Beggar among You! By which Love one to another, Your Master and
Great Doctor of the Christian Religion, said, All Men should know such were his
Disciples.

Now a Day of Rest, in a good measure, is upon You, and You more at Liberty to
provide for Your Families, than in some of the former Days, in which You could
not so well provide for Your Poor, the following Method, I think, will open You
a Way of a plentiful Provision for them; and not only them, but for many
others; for which may hope You will find Encouragement from the Government, if
desire it, to set forward so good and profitable a Work for the Public, as
well as to them as shall be immediately concerned.

As a Husbandman has several sorts of Works, according to the time of the Year
and Season; and as you have Variety of Seasons, you have Variety of Works: A
Father expects from a Son or Servant, as they grow in strength, they should
increase in service; so does Your God and Father expect from You an Improvement
to his Honor, upon every Talent He has given You, whether visible or
invisible; and that You use it to his Honor, according to its kind.

I often having thought of the Misery of the Poor of this Nation, and at the
same time have reckoned them the Treasure of it, the Labor of the Poor being
the Mines of the Rich, and beyond all that Spain is Master of; and many
Thoughts have run through me how then it comes that the Poor should be such a
Burden, and so miserable, and how it might be prevented; whilst I think it as
much more Charity to put the Poor in a way to live by honest Labor, than to
maintain them Idle, as it would be to set a Man's broken Leg, that he might go
himself, rather than always to carry him.

John Bellers.

THE Introduction.
It Is the Interest of the Rich to take Care of the Poor, and their Education,
by which they will take Care of their own Heirs: For as Kingdoms and Nations
are subject to Revolutions and Changes, much more (and nothing commoner) than
for private Families to do so; and who knows how soon it may be his own Lot, or
his Posterities, to fall poor? Is there any poor now, that some of their
Ancestors have not been rich? Or any rich now, that some of their Ancestors
have not been poor?

View the Cities, Towns, and Counties in this Nation, and see what alterations
come in two or three Generations in most Families. Were above one in ten of the
Men now Housekeepers in London, born there? And but few (in comparison of the
Multitude) that have gone out with Estates: And what better is it with
Gentlemen's younger Children, and the Eldest also, many times.

There is Three Things I am at: First, Profit for the Rich, (which will be Life
to the rest.) Secondly, A plentiful Living for the Poor, without difficulty.
Thirdly, A good Education for Youth, that may tend to prepare their Souls into
the Nature of the good Ground.

However prevalent Arguments of Charity may be to some, when Profit is joined
with it, it will raise most Money, provide for most People, hold longest, and
do most good: For what Sap is to a Tree, that Profit is to all Business, by
increasing and keeping it alive; so employing the Poor, excells the barren
keeping them; in the first, the increase of the Poor is no Burden, (but
Advantage) because their Conveniences increase with them; but in the latter,
there is no strength or relief but what they have from others, who possibly may
sometimes think they have little enough for themselves.

As a good and plentiful Living, must be the Poor's Encouragement; so their
Increase, the Advantage of the Rich: Without them, they cannot be Rich; for if
one had a hundred thousand Acres of Land, and as many Pounds in Money, and as
many Cattle, without a Labourer, what would the Rich-Man be, but a Labourer?
And as the Laborers make Men rich, so the more Laborers, there will be the
more rich Men, (where there is Land to employ and provide for them.) Therefore
I think it the Interest of the Rich to encourage the honest Laborers Marrying
at full Age; but by the want of it, it seems to me the World is out of Frame,
and not understanding its own Interest.

For is it not strange to consider how industrious the World is, to raise Corn
and Cattle, which only serves Men, and how negligent of (or rather careful to
hinder) the increase of Men, who are a thousand times better (than Beasts)
being to serve God? Do not Men greatly reproach their Maker, as if he had
chosen the uselessest part of the Creation to serve him, whilst Men think them
the least worth their while to raise?

But they that provide Food for the Poor, lend to the Lord, who is the best
Play Master; and if an industrious raising of Corn and Cattle (mean things) is
commendable in a Husbandman, how much more is the putting Mankind into a
comfortable way of living, which will be instrumental in Gods hand in finishing
his Creation (Man being the Head of it) by providing for the increase of their
Posterity, which joined with a good Education, they may prove in the Ages to
come, both Good and Great in this World, and as Angels in the Next: For as
Ground that brings forth the grossest Weeds, may by good Culture and Seed,
bring forth excellent Corn, so we may hope as great a Change may be made by
good Instruction and Example among the worst of Men, at least of their Stock.

Therefore how prudent is it to provide a good Education and Employ for the
Poor, considering how many, for want of it, comes to be Miserable and
Vagabonds, and continue so for many Generations, from Father to Son?

This Colledge-Fellowship will make Labor, and not Money, the Standard to
value all Necessaries by; and though Money has its Conveniences, in the common
way of living, it being a Pledge among Men for want of Credit; yet not without
its Mischiefs; and called by our Savior The Mammon of Unrighteousness; most
Cheats and Robberies would go but slowly on, if it were not for Money: And when
People have their whole Dependence of Trading by Money, if that fails, or is
corrupted, they are next door to ruin; and the Poor stand still, because the
Rich have no Money to employ them, though they have the same Land and Hands to
provide Victuals and Clothes, as ever they had; which is the true Riches of a
Nation, and not the Money in it; except we may reckon Beads and Pin-dust so,
because we may have Gold at Guiney for them.

Money in the Body Politic, is what a Crutch is to the Natural Body, cripled;
but when the Body is sound, the Crutch is but troublesome: So when the
particular Interest s made a public Interest, in such a College Money will be
of little Use there.

Though it is not so Natural for the Old and Rich to live with a Common Stock, yet
more Natural with the Young and Poor, witness the several Hospitals of England
and Holland: Old People are like Earthen Vessels, not so easily to be new
molded; yet Children are more like Clay out of the Pit, and easy to take any
Form they are put into.

The variety of Tempers, and the idle Expectations of some of the first
Workmen, may make the Undertaking difficult; and therefore the more Excellent
will be the Accomplishment: And if the Poor at first prove brittle, let the
Rich keep Patience; seven or fourteen years may bring up Young Ones that Life
will be more Natural to: And if the attaining such a Method, would be a
Blessing to the People, certainly it is worth more than a little Labor to
Accomplish it. When by the good Rules thereof may be removed, in great measure,
the Profaneness of Swearing, Drunkenness, etc. with the Idleness and Penury of
many in the Nation; Which evil Qualities of the Poor, are an Objection with
some against this Undertaking, though with others a great Reason for it: For the
worse they are, the more need of endeavoring to mend them; and why not by this
Method* till a better is offered.

A Specimen showing how the Rich may gain, the Poor maintain themselves, and
Children Educated, by being Incorporated as a College of all Sorts of Useful
Trades, that shall work one for another, without other Relief: Suppose Three
Hundred in a College, to work the Usual Time or Task as Abroad, and what any
does more, to be paid for it, to encourage Industry.
TWo hundred of all Trades I suppose sufficient to find Necessaries for Three
hundred, and therefore what Manufacture, the other hundred make, will be Profit
for the Founders.

2 A Governor and Deputy 2 Shoo-makers 3 Tailors 1 Baker 1 Brewer 1 Butcher 1
Upholster 1 Barber 1 Physician 2 Linen Weavers 2 Woollen Weavers 4 Cooks 4
Gardiners 1 Tanner 1 Felmonger 2 Flax-Dressor and ThredMaker 1 Tallow-Chandler
1 Soap-Maker 1 Hatter 1 Capper 2 Carpenter and Joyner 2 Bricklayer and Labourer
1 Cooper 2 Smiths 1 Pin-Maker 1 Needle-Maker 2 Butler and Store-keeper 44
Women and Girls.
2 Governess and Deputy 6 Bed-Makers 6 Nurses 6 Washers 4 House-Cleaners 6
Sempsters to make and mend Clothes 5 Knitters or Weavers of Stockins 2 Spinners
and Carders for Stockins 20 Linen Spinners and Carders 20 Woollen Spinners and
Carders 5 Dairy-Maids 82
A Farm of 500 l. per an.
2 A Steward and his Wife 3 Plowmen 3 Plowboys 4 Taskers 3 Shepherds 3 Hinds
for Cattle 6 Hedgers and Laborers 24
44 Tradesmen, etc. 82 Women and Girls. 24 Men and Boys upon the Farm. 10 Men's
work at 15 l. each, is 150 l. a year, for Fuel, Iron, etc. 5 Men's Work at 15
l. each, is 75 l. a year for HouseRent. 35 Men's Work at 15 l. each, is 525 l. a
year, for Rent of a Farm for Meat, Drink, etc. 200 100 Peoples Labor, if but
10 l. each, is 1000 l. per annum Profit, but if we value them at 15 l. each, is
1500 l. Profit. 300
I do not suppose the Computation is exact to a Man, for as some Trades Useful
are not set down, so there is some of them set down, who are able to provide
for two or three times that Number: But if it should require 220 People to
provide Necessaries for 300, it will pay the Undertakers well enough.

And that this Computation is not much out of the way, for 200 providing all
Necessaries for 300, may appear

First, From a View of the Nation, where I suppose not above Two Thirds, if One
half of the Nation, are Useful Workers; and yet all have a Living.

Secondly, From the many Advantages the College will have over others, for
there will be saved, 1. Shopkeepers And all their Servants and Dependents. 2.
All Useless Trades And all their Servants and Dependents. 3. Lawyers And all
their Servants and Dependents. 4. Bad Debts 5. Dear Bargains 6. Loss of Time
for want of Work. 7. Many Women and Childrens work. 8. Beggars. 9. Much
House-room. 10. Firing 11. Cooking, Brewing, and Baking. 12. Fetching and
Carrying of Work and Provision. 13. Clothing hurt in the Making, not so fit for
Sale, may wear never the worse; and the College will find Customers to wear
it, that a Tradesman must lose by.


Thirdly, There will be several Advantages to the Land: 1. There will be all
the Soil of the Tradesmen, besides the Husbandmans, for improving it. 2. As
there will be more Cattle kept, and occasion for more Pasture, than in most
Corn-Countries, so the Plowed Ground may be the better kept in heart, by the
great quantity of Dung made, and it will be less worn out of heart, by often
laying that down and breaking up fresh. 3. Now much Land is Unimproved, to what
it might be, because the Landlord or Tenant are not able, or not willing to do
it for the other: The College, I conceive, will have neither of them
Difficulties. 4. All the Mechanics will be ready at Harvest, to help in with
it, in a quarter of the time others do it, which when wet, may be of great
Advantage: which change of work, as it will be acceptable to many, so for the
health of such as are used to sitting much.


Proposals to the College Founders.
FIrst, Though the Example be put of Renting Land and House at 600 l. per annum,
the better to show how the Profit will arise by such an Undertaking, all
Charges deducted; yet I propose the raising

10000 l. To buy an Estate in Land of 500 l. per an. 2000 l. To Stock the Land,
and 3000 l. To Prepare Necessaries to Set the Several Trades to Work. In all
15000 pound.


By which means the trouble of raising Money to pay Rent, will be saved, and
the Founders may have the more Goods from the College, if desired, and the
Undertaking will not be so apt to miscarry in its infancy.

Secondly, The Stock to be valued every year, and the Profit to be divided;
that such as desire to draw their Profit out, may have it yearly; but such as
desire to continue it in the College, may have it added as Principal, and that
Stockjobbing (which will ruin any good thing) may be prevented. If any have a
mind to sell their Interest, the rest of the Proprietors shall have the Liberty
to bring in a Purchaser by Majority of Votes, at the Value as last cast up.

Thirdly, The first Founders the more the better; and if some of every Useful
Trade, the better; and then every Trade will be the better managed, and every
Man's Days Work better understood.

Fourthly, None to Subscribe less then 25l.

Fifthly, Every 50l. to have a Vote in making Bylaws and choosing Officers,
but no one to have above Five Votes.

Sixthly, Once a Year, Twelve or more of the Proprietors to be chosen a
Committee, as Visitors to Inspect, and Counselors for Advice for the
Governors and Workmen to apply to, as there may be occasion.

Seventhly, The Governors nor under Officers not to have any Sallary, but only
all the Reasonable Conveniences the College can afford them.

Eighthly, Because the whole Success (under the Providence of God) will lie in
a Right Beginning (for though an Acorn does Naturally produce an Oak, yet how
many little Accidents may prevents its ever being one? So any Great
Undertaking, however Rational and Natural in its beginning, may easily be
spoiled) therefore let the Nation be looked through for the First Workmen, if
can find but Three or Four in a County (the rest may be Prentices) of good
Lives and Tempers, it will be a leven to Influence their Successors, and it
will be such a Pattern of Plentiful Living, that many of the Poor will readily
submit to the Rules to partake of it; and to the Children bred Prentices in the
College, it will be their Element.

Some Advantages to the Founders, and Rich, by such a College.
FIrst, If the Living in this Affair, will make their own Eyes and Hands their
Executors and Overseers, and deposit that now they are Alive, which they intend
to give when Dead, it may be that and much more Money saved to themselves and
their Heirs.

Secondly, The Founders of the College from thence may have for themselves and
Families, (in part of their first Cost) Yearly a certain quantity of Woolen and
Linen Cloth, Shoes, Stockings, etc.

Thirdly, Though the Computation be but 300 in a College; there may be 3000,
or more, and such a one may be at

Colchester, where are made Bays and Perpetuanoes.

Taunton, for Serges, Stroud for Cloth, Devonshire for Kersies, and other
places for other Goods.

Fourthly, which Manufacture having One Third more than will be used by the
College, it may be Employed,

1. In being Divided among the Founders. 2. In Providing for more People in the
College, which is best Profit. 3. In Buying and Improving of Land. 4. In
Building. 5. In fetching Foreign Commodities. 6. In Selling for Money, which
will be of least use in the College.
Fifthly, Any that have Estates in Land or Money, doing the College Business,
and Living under the College Rules; may have the Colledge-Allowance, and lay
up the Profit of their own Estates.

Sixthly, Any giving 15l. a Year Land, or 300l. in Money, to the College, or
what other sum may be thought reasonable according to the County its in; may
have the right of keeping one Person in the College (without Work) with
College Allowance, and under College Rules, or but half the Money, and do
half the Work, or any other proportion; which is a good Expedient for an
Indigent Child, for the Father to buy it a College Commons; Reserving liberty
to the College, in case of Exorbitancy, to Expel him the house, Returning his
Money, or handing him Colledge-Allowance abroad.

Seventhly, An Estate Settled thus in a College, is not so liable to be Lost or
Spent, as most other Estates; for if the Heir be simple there is enough of the
rest to look after it, and being joined with good Company, he will not be so
liable to be a Spend-Thrift; and if he should, the College for his Labor will
Entertain him and his Posterity; so that he and his, may reap Benefit from his
Fathers Estate, after he has Spent it; and here a Parent may Entail it upon
the College, and then the Heir cannot well Sell it.

Eighthly, Here Peoples Children of Estates may be Boarded and Educated in all
Useful Learning, who seeing others Work, at spare times, instead of Playing,
would be Learning some Trade, Work not being more Labor than Play; and seeing
others Work, to imitate them, would be as much Diversion to the Children as
Play, which would the more Inure them to Business when grown up, the want of
which has Ruined many a hopeful Plant, who will be doing, if not of Good, of
Evil; an Idle Learning being little better then the Learning of Idleness.

Ninthly, A Hundred Pound a Year in such a College, I suppose will maintain
Ten times as many People as a 100 l. a Year in Almshouses, because the
Provision and Manufacture raised from a 100 l. a Year Land, is worth Ten times
the Rent, as the Farmer raises yearly Three times his Rent, and the Mechanics
makes their Work worth Three or Four times what it was in the Farmers Hands.

Some of the Advantages the Poor Collegians will have.
1. FRom being Poor they will be made Rich, by enjoying all things needful in
Health or Sickness, Single or Married, Wife and Children; and if Parents die,
their Children well Educated, and preserved from Misery, and their Marrying
encouraged, which is now generally discouraged.

2. As the World now lives, every Man is under a double Care, besides his
Bodily Labor, First, To provide for himself and Family. Secondly, To guard
against the Intrigues of his Neighbors overreaching him, both in Buying of,
and Selling to him; which in such a College will be reduced to this single
Point, of doing only an easy Days Work, and then instead of every bodies
endeavoring to get from him, every body is working for him, and they will have
more Conveniences in the College than out.

3. In the common way of Living and Trade, Men, their Wives or Children often
lose half what they get, either by Dear Bargains, Bad Debts, or Lawsuits, of
which there will be neither in the College; and if the Earth gives but forth
its Fruit, and the Workmen do but their parts, they will have plenty; whereas
often now the Husbandman and Mechanics both are ruined, though the first have a
great Crop, and the second industriously makes much Manufacture; Money, and
not Labor, being made the Standard, the Husbandman paying the same Rent and
Wages, as when his Crop yielded double the Price; it being no better with the
Mechanics, where it is not who wants his Commodity, but who can give him Money
for it, (will keep him) and so often he must take half the Value in Money
another could give him in Labor, that has no Money.

4. That as they grow in Years in the College, they shall abate an Hour in a
Day of their Work, and when come to Sixty Years old (if Merit prefer them not
sooner) they shall be made Overseers, which for ease and pleasant Life, will
equal what the Hoards of a private Purse can give; and excel, in so much as it
has less care and danger of Losing.

5. And if we may compute by the Parable of the Sower, that one third of the
People lose Heaven by the Cares of this Life, may not a Collegiate way of
Living be the occasion of saving Many by preventing them Cares; and for Bodily
Labor, it is a Primitive Constitution of God, it should Earn its Bread in the
sweat of its Brows, Labor being as proper for the Bodies Health, as eating is
for its living; for what pains a Man saves by Ease, he will find in Disease;
and less Labor will provide for a Man in the College than out.

6. The Regular Life in the College, with abatement of Worldly Cares, with an
easy honest Labor, and Religious Instructions, may make it a Nursery, and
School of Virtue.

7. The Poor thus in a College will be a Community something like the Example
of Primitive Christianity, that lived in common, and the Power that did attend
it, bespeaks its excellency; but considering the Constitution of Mankind that
have Estates (but it is not so with the Poor) it was none of the least Miracles
of that Age, and so abated as other Miracles did.

8. A College thus Constituted cannot so easily be undone whatever Changes
comes (except the People are destroyed) for if plundered, Twelve Months time
will recruit again; like the Grass new Mowed, the next Year supplies again;
Labor bringing a supply as the Ground does, and when together they assist one
another, but when scattered are useless, if not preying upon one another.

A few Rules for Governing the College Workmen.
1. ALL the Colleges and Hospitals of England and Holland should be visited to
see what Rules and Orders they have for Governing their Societies, that may be
useful in this College.

2. It should be called a College rather than a Workhouse, because a Name more
grateful; and besides all sorts of useful Learning may be taught there.

3. The Members of the College may be distinguished in Caps and Clothes, as
the Master-workmen from the Prentices, and Women from Girls.

4. A certain number of the Boys and Girls should be appointed weekly to wait
at Table upon the Men and Women at Meals, that as much as may be, the Men and
Women may live better in the College than any where else.

5. There should be several Wards.

1. For Young Men and Boys. 2. For Young Women and Girls. 3. For Married
Persons. 4. For Sick and Lame.
6. As the Men and Women have distinct Lodging, so they should have distinct
Work-rooms; and as much as the Imploys would admit of it, the Men should be in
one Room, and the Women in another, that their Governors may the better look
over them.

7. The Men shall be Prentices till Twenty Four Years old, and Women till
Twenty One Years, or Marry, (as the Law allows) and then shall have liberty to
go out of the College or stay in, and Marry if they will.

Of the Education of Children, and Teaching them Languages.
1. Though Rules, as well as Words, must be understood to make a complete
Scholar, yet considering Words lies in the Memory, and Rules in the
Understanding, and that Children have first Memory before Understanding; by
that Nature shows Memory is to be first used, and that in the Learning of
Language, Words should be first Learned, and afterward Rules to put them
together; Children learning the Words of their Mother Tongue, and then
Sentences; but to understand what Rules their Language has, requires a
ripeness of Judgment; and the putting of Rules upon Children before, cripples
their Understandings; when Boys of Twelve Years old are as long again at School
learning a Language by Rules, as a Child of Three Years old without Rules.

And therefore I think Vocabulary and Dictionary is to be learnt before
Accidence and Grammar; and Childrens reading and discoursing one to another,
gives a deeper Impression than reading to themselves, we remembering a Man's
Voice longer than his Face; a sound upon the Ear penetrating the Spirits, more
than a silent Seeing, where the Spirits are not affected with the Subject, as
few Children are with their Books.

2. Four Hours in a Morning, and Four in an Afternoon, is too long to tie a
Child to his Book; it is hard for a Man to be tied upon one Subject so long,
much more is it toilsome to Children, whose Natures are weak, and love change;
it hurts their Spirits, makes them out of love with their Books, and loses
much time; the Children might be employed to more profit; a Labouring-man will
hold longer at Work, than a Thinking-man in his Study: Men will grow strong
with working, but not with thinking; who have stronger Bodies than Laborers,
and weaker Bodies than great Students? Labor adds Oil to the Lamp of Life,
when Thinking Inflames it.

3. Where People of Estates are willing to qualify their Children, with what
Learning they will take; or where others appear of ready and pregnant
Understandings, it may be worth encouraging to the furthest degree; yet beyond
Reading and Writing, further Learning will not be so useful to most among us as
among other People, whilst many of them expect to get their Living by it, as
Priests, Lawyers, etc.

4. Though Learning may be useful, yet a Virtuous Education tends more to
Happiness here and hereafter; and what is a great Impediment in the common
Education, is the letting Children employ themselves without Directions, which
is a loss several ways, First, To their Bodies and present Condition. Secondly,
To their Spirits and future Being; for at Four or Five Years old, besides
Reading, Boys and Girls might be taught to Knit and Spin, and bigger Boys
Turning, etc. and beginning Young they would make the best Artists; and being
upon Business, though slight, it improves their Reasons by sensible
Demonstration, (which is sooner learned than any Rational Demonstration without
it; as a Child at three years old by Feeling knows Fire will burn, much better
than one of Thirteen from the most Rational Discourse without Feeling) whereas
a childish silly Employ, leaves their Minds silly. And the Will being the
greatest Enemy a Man has, when it is not subject to the Will of God; How
valuable is it then, for a Child's Will to be kept under another Direction
than its own? It will be the less difficult to submit it to the Will of God,
when grown a Man, especially if seasoned with Religious Lessons of Scriptures,
etc.

Thus the hand employed brings Profit, the Reason used in it makes wise, and
the Will subdued makes them good.

For though Men should be guided more by Reason than Sense, yet Children are
guided more by Sense than Reason; and therefore must be hedged from Evil more
by wise Management than Discourse; as we see Colts are tamed more by it than
words.

All which considered, there is less wonder any prove Ill; but that any prove
good, from such an Idle Education as the common Breeding of Children, where the
Mind is at leisure to receive all the evil Impressions their several Ages are
capable of.

A good Education, though with but a little Estate, makes a happier Man, than a
great Estate without it; for the first not only supports the Name of his
Family, but raises a Name and Family to himself; whereas the latter, many
times the more Rich, the more Wicked; and only pleased when at once he is
making an End of Body, Estate, and Name together.

Such Parents as have also a sense of a Future State, and the Happiness or
Unhappiness their Children are capable of, will think there is no comparison
between a Good and an Evil Education.

And I think such a Colledge-Education, under good Rules, beyond any Private
one, having several Advantages the Private will want.

1. There will be all sorts of Employs and Tools for every Age and Capacity to
be employed with.

2. All Languages and Learning may be learned there, by having some of all
Nations (Tradesmen) who may teach their Mother Tongue to the Youth, as they
teach it their own Children.

3. Men and Children submit easier to Rules and Laws they see others submit to
as well as themselves, than if they were alone; as Children in a School, and
Soldiers in an Army, are more regular, and in subjection, than when scattered
asunder.

4. They will be more under the Eyesight of one Master or another, than in a
private Family; and consequently prevented of more Folly.

5. Company being the delight of all Creatures, whether Men or Beast, and the
World being so corrupted, makes its Company a great Snare to Youth; but the
College having company sufficient, will prevent the Temptation of going
abroad; and being well governed, will much prevent the Evils that are learned
abroad.

6. There may be a Library of Books, a Physick-Garden for understanding of
Herbs, and a Laboratory for preparing of Medicines.

And though Ships and Boats cannot swim in the College, the Men that manage them
may be of the Colledge-Fellowship, and have their Conveniences thence, as well
as return their Profit or Cargoes thither.

In short, As it may be an Epitomy of the World, by a Collection of all the
useful Trades in it; so it may afford all the Conveniences and Comforts a Man
can want, and a Christian use.

Answers to several Objections.
Object. 1. Though the Work be very Good and Excellent, if it could be
Accomplished, yet there will be so much Difficulty, Laebour and Care, in the
doing it, there will not be found Men that will undertake the Toil of it.

Answ. 1. This Objection would have prevented any good Work, if Difficulty
would have prevented the doing it.

2. If the Act be but good, we may hope God will raise Instruments; for though
some Men have taken up a Rest in their Estates, and seek only a Provision and
Diversions in it for their own Families, yet there is many have a touch of a
more Universal Love.

3. Though it would be Toilsome for any one Man, or a few, yet it is easily done
by a greater Number; as one Man cannot, and ten Men must strain, to lift a Tun
weight, yet one hundred Men can do it only by the strength of a Finger of each
of them.

4. As this will be a greater Charity than most Gifts, by the great good it
will do to the Poor, so it will be as certain Profit to the Founders as most
Trades, and consequently worth some of their time, as well as any other Trade.

5. If evil men corrupt and debauch their fellow Creatures by the Influence and
Opportunities their Estates give them; Is there not the greatest Reason and
Prudence for good Men to place their Estates, at least some of it, so as it may
influence many to Virtue, especially when it will bring Profit with it.

And whether some may not be raised to an Estate, (as Queen Hester was to a
Crown) for to be Instruments in such a work; and then will it not add to the
difficulty of making up their account at the last day, if they neglect so great
an Opportunity of doing Good, when it was in their hands?

Object. 2. The Times being troublesome, and Trade dull, it is not seasonable to
set such a thing a foot; and if we should have the Calamity of War, (or any
other) among us, the Undertaking would be Ruined.

Answ.

1. It is the chiefest time when Trading's dull, because now the Poor cannot so
easily get work, they will the readier accept of new Masters and Terms; whereas
when Trade comes quick, the best Workmen will be fixed under rheir Old
Masters, and only the worser sort want work.

2. If Calamities should come of any sort, the Poor in a Body would subsist
better than if single; because when together, their Labor would provide
Conveniences one for another, which single Persons could do little at.

3. Whatever Calamities would ruin a College, will much easier ruin single
Persons; and therefore if danger of losing all, its best for the Rich to do
some good whilst they have it; for if they should lose their Estates, it would
be out of their power to do it. And besides if the Poor be put in a good
Method, they may be able to help their old Benefactors, when the Rich may have
nothing to help themselves, nor cannot work for want of use.

Object. 3. But if there should happen a Scarcity or Famine in the Land, how
will the People be provided for then?

Answ. 1. If more virtuous than the rest of the Nation, they may hope to escape
better, but not else.

2. But as there is hopes, by good Orders, of a more Virtuous way of living in
the College than elsewhere, so by more Wisdom, of better Provision in a
Scarcity, by Stores laid up. For the Nation is commonly sick of a great Plenty,
that if Corn is cheap, care not where they send it away for Money, tho they may
want it next year.

3. But the College, not wanting Money, will not be under the Temptation of
Selling it, nor extravagantly wasting it, but will keep it till they may want
it at home. And there has seldom been any years of Scarcity, but years of
Plenty have been first.

Object. 4. Why propose to get by the Poor's Labor, and not let them have all
the Profit, and then will need raise less Money, as 1500 l. instead of 15000 l.?

Answ. 1. Because the Rich have no otherway of living, but by the Labor of
others; as the Landlord by the Labor of his Tenants, and the Merchants and
Tradesmen by the Labor of the Mechanics.

2. A thousand pound is easier raised where there is Profit, than one hundred
pound only upon Charity; People readily employing all their Estates where there
is Profit, when they will not give a Tenth of it to the Poor.

3. The more valuable the Fund, and the more Men is concerned in it, the better
will it be looked after, and the more People will be provided for.

4. It Is not proposed only for Relieving the Poor, but also how the Rich may
employ their Estates with Profit to themselves, and prevent any from being
poor; a comfortable living in the College to the Industrious Labourer, being
the Rich Man's Debt, and not their Charity to them; Labor giving the Labourer
as good a Right to a living there, as the Rich Men's Estates do them.

5. This Method is a greater Security to the Poor (than the common way of
living) who here must be provided for, according to the constitution of the
Colledge-Laws, before the Rich can have any thing; the Rich being only to have
what the College don't spend. Whereas the Poor now are at great uncertainty,
(at least difficulty) of getting a living, because the Tradesmen are
endeavoring to get one from another what they can; so they are all straining
the Necessity of the Mechanic, not regarding how little he gets, but to get as
much as they can for themselves.

6. Considering it is either by Losses, or being outwitted and cheated, or the
Idleness and Extravagancy of the Poor, that makes most want Charity from
others: If by the Colledge-Rules may be removed these four Evils, few will then
want the Gift of Charity?

Object. 5. If take not in Aged and Decriped People into this College; what
Charity, to take in People that can live out of it?

Answ. All Living Growing Bodies, whether Natural or Politic, must be Suckled
and Nursed before come to their Strength; for how Helpless or Useless is the
Body of Man new Born, and how much Tendence do they want, that with good
looking after grow in time to be Strong Men, and not only able to serve
themselves, but their Parents that Bred them?

So this Body Politic of the College, by the many Difficulties at first it
will meet with, must only take in Useful hands to Strengthen and Support it,
that in time may grow to be able to bear all the Poor could reasonably be put
upon it.

Object. 6. May it be supposed, That any that can get more than will keep them,
will come work in the College only for Victuals and Clothes?

Answ. 1. Suppose not; but besides their own keeping, there is laid up in the
College Stores, sufficient for their Young Children, as born.

2. For themselves when Sick or Aged, and better Provided for than most
Mechanics.

3. If they Dye, and leave Wife and Young Children, they will be kept from
Misery, added to the Uncertainty of a Man's Life, whether he may Live to make so
good a Provision for his Wife and Children as the College.

4. But where good Workmen at first are not to be had otherwise, they may be
allowed some Wages to Instruct the Youth.

5. What they get more than their Task, will be their own, and if can get
enough, may put it into the Foundation if they will.

6. The Advantage from the Prentices will be Sufficient to the Founders, if no
more.

7. Though some young men may be in hopes of better preferment, yet not all;
and also many that have tried the world, and find the difficulty of living in
it, would be glad of so certain a Provision as the College. The vanity of the
Spanish Beggar does not attend all Poor, who when an English Merchant would
have taken her Son and provided for him, refused his offer, saying, Her Son
might come to be King of Spain for ought she knew, and therefore should not be
his Servant: For though some Poor get Estates, how many more become miserable?

Object. 7. The People will not bear the Confinement of the College.

Answ. 1. Neither would the Poor work, if there were not greater
Inconveniences; that is, Starving, or Robbing, and that is hanging.

2. The Confinement will not be more, if so much, as the best governed
Prentices are under in London, and many other places.

3. It Is not intended the Confinement should be more than's absolutely needful
for the good Government of the College.

4. I suppose the Plenty and Conveniences in the College, will sufficiently
allay the hardness of the ColledgeRules.

Object* 8. Why the Name College, and not a Community, or Workhouse?

Answ. A Workhouse bespeaks too much of Servitude, for People of Estates to
send their Children for Education; and too much of Bridewel, for honest
Tradesmen to like it; and the Name Community implies a greater Unity in Spirit,
than College does; and therefore not so proper to be used to such a mixed
multitude of Men and Boys; the word College more relates to an outward
Fellowship than an inward Communion, and therefore better suits the Subject.

Object. 9. What Reason is there for a Difference in Apparel?

Answ. The Apparel mentioned in the Proposals, is not meant any Religious or
Scholastic Habit, but only such as may keep the Men and Boys from a Level, and
to distinguish their different Qualities; as well as good Husbandry: For what
Master will cloth his Servant as himself?

Object. 10. There have been several Manufactures set a Foot at several times,
and many of them have not turned to Profit.

Ans 1. If a man have never so much Clothing and no Food, he may dye with
hunger, which is the Case of several Manufactures. The Raisers of Food are so
far scattered asunder from the Manufactures, that it is endless to seek their
Custom.

2. To sell it to Shop keepers it must be cheap, because they must be kept out
of it, if not raise Estates; which will leave little Profit to the Undertakers,
if not starve the Workmen.

3. Stock jobbing has helped to ruin some of them; for however well laid the
first Undertaking might be, and understood by the first Undertakers, yet being
bid beyond the real worth, by cunning Brokers for foolish Buyers, the first
Beginners s^ll themselves out, and leave it to the Buyers; and then between the
Carelessness of one, and Ignorance of the other, it must fall; which would spoil
the best Undertaking in the World, if it had no other Disadvantage.

J. B.

POSTSCRIPT.
1. TO Answer all Objections would be to empty the Sea, whilst Mistake or
Prejudice may object against any thing that is offered, the greatest Truth
having met with Objections; but if I can be but understood by the
Well-inclined, or stir up the Wise to propound a better Method than this, it is
sufficient; whilst I bad rather put my Money into a good Undertaking of
another, than a bad one of my own.

2* To reconcile different Interests, and to answer Objections that are
Contradictions will be difficult; as for the Rich Man to say, it will yield no
Benefit to the Undertakers, and at the same time for the Poor to object, The
Proposals give too much to the Rich, and too little to them: For Answer, I say,
As the Proposition seems to have all the Profit the Earth and Mechanics can
raise any where, so it cuts off all Superfluity and Extravagancies used among
others, and consequently raise the greatest Stock^ both for Founders and
Workmen, which is the Point I aim at: Whilst I am not willing to admit of the
Supposition, That though such Advantages is offered to the Rich and Poor, they
will lose it, for want of agreeing how to divide it, hoping there is but few
would make out the Truth of the Story of Covetousness and Envy, who when they
were offered, whatever the first asked, only the second should have double to
what the first asked, they could not agree which should ask first.

However I have this satisfaction, I intend the advantage of both, whilst I
think the Method will afford both Profit to the Rich, as well as Plenty to the
Poor. I will not pretend to seek any Method of Living in this World, that has
no inconveniency in it, but only what has fewest. But till the Rich be
satisfied to put it a-foot, the Poor cannot, if they would, for want of
Materials.

FINIS.

