April. 11. 1681.
Imprimatur

TIMO. HALTON Vice-Cancel. OXON.

Moses's Charge to Israel's Judges, Opened in an Assise SERMON Preached at
Salisbury, Feb. 27. 1680.

Before the Right Honorable Sr THOMAS JONES Judge of Assise.

By JOHN BENNION M. A.

Vicar of Malmesbury in Wiltshire.

Published by Command of Mr. High Sherif.

(...). Arist. Eth. l. 5. cap. 3. Printed at Oxford, and are to be sold by
FRANCIS DOLLIF, Bookseller near the Mare-Maid Tavern. Anno Dom. 1681.

TO THE Right Worshipful. THOMAS GORE of ALDRINGTON Esquire, HIGH SHERIF OF
THE COUNTY of WILTS.
HAD this Epistolar Address, and the Publishing of this Sermon it Prefaceth,
been Matter of mine own free Choice; I might justly have fallen under the Censure
of Libelling so great a Judgment as yours. But when You were pleased first to
summon so young and weak a Minister, as my self, on so solemn an Occasion to
the Pulpit; and then to command so poor a Performance, as this of mine, to the
Press; I am no farther concerned, than in two such high Proofs of my Obedience.

But you, Sir, who have so determined this Dedication upon your Self, are
thereby as well obliged to the Defense of your own Reputation, how well soever
otherwise established; as to the Patronage of this Sermon, now made Public,
against such Variety of Censure as it is like enough to meet withal, in this our
Censorious Age. As either

First for the Plainness of the Style; tho a plain Dress best become the
Natural Beauty of all Truth in general; and more especially such Practical
Truth, as is the Subject Matter of this Discourse. Or

Secondly the Shortness of the Sermon: Not considering, it was a Word to the
Wise; and that a short word to such is sufficient; especially in such Matters,
whereabout their Wisdom is not only most principally, but most familiarly also
conversant: Otherwise there is scarcely any one Branch of my Text, that would
not have supplied a no very fruitful Invention, with abundant Matter, for a
more Copious Discourse than this of mine, upon the whole of it. These two
Objections, together with a third, answered in the Close of my Sermon, might be
made by no ill meaning Friends:

There Is yet a fourth to be expected from our worst meaning Enemies; or some
Advocates for them, whose Eyes directed to, speak their Hearts also set toward
their Tents, as ready to run over to them: Namely, that I am too severe against
Papists, and Popish Priests.

Now to this Objection, which has least of Reason, and most of Danger in it, I
shall not (for that Cause) go about to make any Defense of mine own; but here
more especially pray in your Patronage and Protection, according to your
Office; his whom you represent, the King's Majesty's, according to his Laws;
and above all, the highest Defense of all, even that of God himself, according
to his all wise and Powerful Providence, against both the Makers of the
Objection, and those in whose behalf it is made: and this last Preservation,
not for my self alone, but also, and much more, for our King against their
various ways of Assassinations; for our Church against their manifold
Idolatries, and Superstitions; and for our State against all their Hellish
Plots, and Machinations.

And, as for means conducing to these Ends, I yet farther pray, that the King
may want no such Subjects, the Church no such sons, this Country no such
Friends, and the whole Kingdom no such Magistrates, as your Learned and Worthy
Self: the King no Subjects so truly Loyal, the Church no Sons so truly
Obedient; this Country no Friends so every way faithful, and the whole Kingdom
no Magistrates so altogether unbiased and incapable of Corruption. Men of the
right old English make, and Protestant spirit, Courageous, Undaunted, bravely
bearing up against and stemming the tide of all opposition from Rome and
France. This is and shall be the Constant tenor in the fervent Prayers of

RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, Your most Humble Servant and Dutiful Chaplain JOHN BENNION.

Deuteronomy. 1. 16. and part of the 17. verse. 16. And I charged your Judges at that
time, saying; Hear the Causes between your Brethren, and judge righteously
between every man and his brother, and the stranger that is with him. 17. Ye
shall not respect Persons in Judgment, but you shall hear the small as well as
the great; you shall not be afraid of the face of man, for the Judgment is
Gods.
WHEN Moses (the sole Judge of Israel) found the Suits and Controversies of
the People to grow up and multiply, as their numbers did; he soon felt the
weight of his Office a burden too heavy for the shoulders of a single person
to bear, verse 10. 12. The Lord your God has multiplied you; and behold, you
are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude. How can I my self alone bear
your cumbrance and your burden and your strife? He therefore counsels them to
make choice of other subordinate Rulers and Judges; that might be as helpful
to him, so useful to them; and withal advises what manner of persons to
choose; men that were Wise, and Understanding, and Known among their Tribes, v.
13. The Israelites approved the motion, and said; the thing, which thou have
said, is good for us to do. v. 14. And they followd his advice; chooseing
Persons of that Character he had recommended to them; and when they had so
done, they brought them to Moses, who did two things:

First he installed them in their Office, v. 15. So I took the Chief of your
Tribes, Wise men, and Known, and made them Heads over you.

Secondly he gave them their Charge in the words of my Text. I charged your
Judges at that time, saying; Hear the Causes between your Brethren, and judge
righteously between every Man and his Brother, and the Stranger that is with
him.

Ye shall not Respect Persons in judgment, but you shall hear the small as well
as the great; you shall not be afraid of the face of Man, for the judgment is
God's. In which words and in the Context before, You are to take notice of

1. The Person Charging, and that was Moses, who at that time was the only
Ruler and Judge of the Israelites.

2. The Persons Charged, and they are described First by their Office, Judges.
Secondly by their Relation, Your Judges. Thirdly by their Qualities Wise Men.
Understanding Known



3. The Matter of the Charge, set down both 1. Affirmatively. 2. Negatively.

1. Affirmatively 1. Hear; Objectum Quod, the Cause. Cui, your Brother's cause.
2. Judge;

And this judgment must be

First for the Quality, Righteous.

Secondly for the Quantity or Extent of it, between every man and his Brother,
and the stranger that is with him.

2. Negatively 1. Not respect Persons. 2. Not be afraid of the face of man.

And the Reason both of the one, and the other, follows in the next words: For
the Judgment is God's.

1. In the Affirmative part of the Charge the first duty enjoined the Judges is
to hear the Cause. And by hearing is to be understood a diligent and
circumspect attention to the business in hand, to all Persons and Things; all
Circumstances and Evidences, that may make the state of the Cause to appear;
which is farther explained Deuteronomy. 19. 18. The Judges shall make diligent
inquisition etc. like some skillful and wise Physician, who first of all feels
the Pulse of his Patient; then considers his Age, and the Constitution of his
Body; is inquisitive after the time when, and the manner how, the Disease first
begun; what alterations it has since made; what Paroxysms, or Fits, it now
has; when they come, and how long they hold him: with these, and such like
Queries he endeavors every way to be fully informed of the true state of his
Patients Body, before he will (or indeed can) prescribe a Remedy. So the just
Magistrate, in matters Criminal does not pronounce Sentence; nor in matters
Civil, give his Determination; till he has first duly considered of the Action
and the Circumstances it is clothed with, thoroughly examined Witnesses, scanned
and compared Evidences, and used all other expediencies to come to the clear
knowledge of the truth; which he can never do, till he has first with equal
patience heard both Parties speak. For he that is first in his own cause,
seems just, but his neighbor comes and searches him, Pro. 18. 17. A
diligent Disquisition of the Cause, and a mature Deliberation thereupon, is
therefore necessary in matters of Judicature Lib. 2. Cap. 23.
Cunctari judicantem decet, imo oportet, said Seneca the Philosopher: and Sen.
(...) Act. 2. (...)
Seneca the Tragedian lays down the like Position, Qui statuit aliquid part
inaudita altera, aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus fuit. He that Determines a
Case at-all-adventures, tho perhaps he should stumble upon Justice, yet he is
himself unjust; and that because he should hear both sides speak before he
determines. Even the poor and illiterate Man's Tale is to be heard in his own
Dialect, as well as his who can set it off in a better Dress: And there be two
expressions in the Text, that afford us a double Medium or Argument to press
this duty.

The one lies in this Your Judges. The other lies in this The Cause of your
Brethren.
To begin with the first of these, I charged your Judges to hear, from whence
it will naturally follow that Judges and Magistrates were Non sed Popul
Adrianus (...). Ari^^ Epist. ad (...)
not so much ordained for their Own sakes, as for the Peoples; not so much to
Domineer and Lord it over them, as to Succor and Defend them.

Senec^ Medea (...) Scen. prae^^
Hoc Reges habent magnificum and ingens etc.

Prodesse miseris, Supplices fido Lare Protegere. The Grandeur of Kings and
Magistrates consists in this, that they have power to help those who are not
able to help themselves. Nay, it is for this very reason, that they are styled
Gods; and that by God himself, who gave them this power; and has imprinted in
the very natural Conscience of every man Notions of Fear and Honor, Subjection
and Contribution to be given to Kings and other Magistrates and Superiors; and
that not only for wrath, but for conscience sake. Yet (as the Learned e Bishop
Sanderson well observes) the same Sermon. ad ^tratum.
Conscience which binds us who are under Authority to the performance;
binds you who are in Authority to the requital of these duties, I say the
same conscience; tho not the same wrath: For here is the difference. Both
wrath, and Conscience bind us to our duties; so that if we withdraw our
subjection, we wound our own Consciences, and incur your just wrath: But only
Conscience binds you to yours, and not wrath; so that if ye withdraw your
help we may not use wrath, but must suffer it with patience, and permit all to
the judgment, of your own Consciences, and of God the Judge of all men's
Consciences; but yet still in Conscience the obligation lies equally upon you,
and Us: As we are bound to give you Honor, so are you to give us Safety; as we
to fear you, so you to help us; as we to fight for you, so you to care for us;
as we to pay you Tribute, so you to do us Right. For for this cause pay we
tribute and other duties to you, who are Gods Ministers; even because you ought
to be attending continually upon this very thing; to approve your selves the
Ministers of God to us for good. So far that Godly Learned Bishop Sanderson:
which perhaps had been too much to quote from another, but not from that every
way Reverend Author.

Well then (My Brethren) if Magistrates were Ordained more for Your sakes, than
for their Own; it will follow; that the Judge is the People's; and therefore
his Eyes are their's to see and observe for them; his Ears their's to hear for
them; he is chosen and sworn for them; he Rides their Circuit, Sits on their
Bench, is Guarded and attended by them: All his Authority, Wisdom, Learning
and Experience in Law-Cases is for them; tho the Judge be indeed the King's as
to his Delegation to, yet is he the People's as to the Execution of his Office;
deriveth his Authority from the King; is to manage it for the King's Liege
People. And therefore wonder not that We so closely urge this labor and
diligence in Hearing; I charged your Judges to hear.

But Secondly, Another Argument, yet farther to enforce this duty, is taken
from the Relation of the People to the Judges; they are Your Brethren: your
Brethren by Nature, as Men; your Brethren in a Political Notion, as Members of
the same Body Politic; and your Brethren also by Grace, as of the same
Mystical Body; and therefore upon all these Considerations you are obliged to
hear them. Thus your Brother's Liberty restrained by unjust Imprisonment, his
Name wounded by Reproaches, his House broken up, his Sheep or his Oxen driven
away, his Life endangered etc. do every of them call for that Brotherly Love
and Affection from you, which should move you diligently to Hear his Cause, and
so to hear it, as to do him Justice; which is the second duty in the Charge
given to the Judges.

2ly They must judge righteously between every Man and his Brother, and the
Stranger that is with him. And this Righteous Judgment consists in the
pronouncing of a Sentence conformable to Justice, after the Cause is fully
understood: I say in pronouncing of a Sentence conformable to Justice; for in
every Cause there is it is Justice either on this side, or that; and when the
Judicial Sentence answers the Justice of the Cause, then it is Righteous.

But as this Judgment for the Quality must be Righteous, so for the Quantity or
Extent, it must be between every Man and his Brother, and the Stranger that is
with him. As therefore the Apostle Paul said in another case, 1 Cor. ^
does God take care for Oxen? so may we say in this, does God take Care for
Strangers? Yes he does; For he preserves both Man and Beast; but first Man, and
amongst Men first his own People, then generally all, even Strangers too; for
though Strangers to you, they are not so to him, and his Providence: And as
they are a part of his Care, so has he made them a part of yours also; and
that the rather, because Strangers are more liable to Affronts and Abuses in
their Persons, to Injuries and Rapines in their Estates, than other Men. These
are therefore to be defended, and sheltered by you; your Authority and Power is
to be exercised for, and in the behalf of these, so long as they behave
themselves justly and peaceably in the Land.

As our Love, and Pity must not move in too narrow a Sphere; so neither must
your Justice, and Equity: As to that former the Apostle 2 Pet. ^
Peter says, we must add to our brotherly kindness Charity; Brotherly kindness
peculiarly respecting the Brotherhood of Christians; but Charity so
comprehensive, as to regard Man as Man, and therefore every Man: upon which
account Aristotle when reproved for bestowing a Charity upon a bad Man,
replied; that he did not therein respect (...), not the manners, but the Man.
And as to this latter Moses here in effect says, you must to Justice to your
Brethren add that to Strangers: nay Justice it self, in it is proper formal Act,
says so too; that you who have the Administration of it, must suum cuique
tribuere, distribute to every man his due Right, not only to your Brethren,
Neighbors, and Countrymen, but even to the poorest honest Strangers, if the
other would injuriously withhold it from them.

But there are a sort of Strangers amongst us, that your Justice and Judgment
are to be executed against, and upon; and that in the utmost Rigor and
Severity, without any Constructio favorabilis of the Letter of our Law, which
(as it is said of that of God's) kills; who ought to have Judgment without
Mercy, because they would have showed no Mercy. And these are the Birds of St.
OMERS, and such like * Cages of unclean Birds; unclean Birds I say, who ^ev.
18. 2.
have Defiled, and Birds of Prey too, who would have Destroyed their own Nest,
wherein they were hatched, and for some time bred; who, tho Native English Men,
yet have made themselves first Strangers, and then Enemies both to the Church
and State of England; Contrived their Subversion, the Murder of their gracious
King, and the Ruin of a flourishing Church, and Kingdom: Of such
stranger-Emissaries I shall say no more, but as once the Jews did to Pilate in
another Case, John 1
If You let these Men go, You are not Caesar's friend.

There are two Reasons in the Text to be given for this Righteousness in
Judgment:

The First is drawn from the Solemn Charge given to the Judges, when they are
first Invested in their Office; I took the Chief of your Tribes, Wise men and
Known, and made them Heads over you; and I charged your Judges at that time to
Judge righteously: answerable to which is that Charge of Jehosaphat to his
Judges, 2 Chronicles. 19. 5, 6, 7. where it is said that he set Judges in the Land
throughout all the senced Cities of Judah, City by City; and said to the
Judges, take heed what ye do: (and there is the same reason for Circuiting
Judges in Diverse Counties with Us, as there was for Settled Judges in
Particular Cities with Them) for (says he) Ye judge not for man, but for the
Lord, who is with you in the judgment; wherefore now let the fear of the Lord
be upon you, take heed and do it: for there is no iniquity with the Lord our
God, nor Respect of Persons, nor taking of Gifts. Nay it is well known that
every Judge, upon his first Installment into that Office, is Charged by the
Magistrate that is above him, and that with an Oath, (another, and yet farther
Bond upon his Conscience) to do Righteously between the King and his People:
And therefore says the Righteous and Impartial Judge, Justice Condemns this
man to die, and if I Absolve him, I Condemn my self, I lose the favor of my
God, and the peace of my own Conscience: Some would Complement, others would
Bribe, and a third sort would by their Threats affright me into Perjury; but I
must not, I will not do it; For the Vows of my God, and the Trust of my King
are upon me: The Consideration of which makes him Charge through all
difficulties, all Temptations, how great, how sweet soever, to the Discharge of
his Duty; As the Soldiers of Saul did, who had sworn they would not Eat, till
their Master was avenged of his Enemies; and tho they saw honey upon the
Ground, (could have had it for stooping) yet they would not so much as taste,
because they feared their Oath, 1 Samuel 14. 24, 25, 26.

The Second reason is drawn from the Order of the Charge; you shall first Hear,
and then Judge. i. e. All your Diligence and Exactness in inquiring into the
matter before you, in putting Questions, Scanning and comparing Evidences, is
in order only unto this very thing, that you may thereupon proceed unto a
Righteous Judgment. For by the Ear the Understanding of the Judge is informed
where the Justice of the cause lies; and the Understanding directs the Mouth to
give a right Sentence; otherwise the Jury is impannel'd in vain, the Witnesses
give in their Evidence, and you hear but in vain: Nay a Magistrate, who is
inquisitive where the Equity lies, but corrupt in passing sentence, acts like
Herod, who Ma^^
diligently enquired, where Jesus the King of the Jews was, that he might come
and worship him; when indeed his intent was only to destroy him. And so much
for the affirmative part of the Charge.

2ly. In the Negative part of it there are two things forbidden:

1. You shall not respect Persons. (...) translated by the Septuagint (...),
and in Latin may be rendered Non agnoscetis faciem, you shall not judge
according to the outward quality, state and condition of men; whether they be
rich or poor, your friends or your enemies, you shall not at all respect the
qualities of the persons, but only the merits of the Cause. As for Example;
There are, suppose, two Prisoners at the Bar indicted for Treason, Murder, or
the like; they both upon good evidence appear guilty; one man has no Persons,
no Faces to appear for him, and so Judgment passes, that he shall die: The
other appears under many Faces, the face of a Kinsman, of an Honorable,
Learned, or Rich man, or great Friend; and the Consideration of this prompts
the Magistrate to Spare, when he should Smite; this is to acknowledge Faces, or
Respect persons in Judgment; quite contrary to that of Levit. 19. 15. (which is
a full explication of this part of my Text) Thou shall not respect the person
of the Poor, nor honor the person of the Mighty. And this is to become like
the Great Judge of all, who thus expresses himself, Rev. 22. 12. My reward is
with me (...), to give every man according as his work shall be. The Balance
weighes the Gold, Silver, or Iron all alike; Nor should Justice (who is
therefore painted blind) know any difference between the Noble and the Base,
but (as it is in my Text) should hear the small as well as the great.

2. You shall not be afraid of the face of man; which is the last duty of the
good Magistrate in my Text. And certainly Courage in a Judge is sometimes as
requisite as any other Qualification we have spoken of: For to what purpose
does he Hear and Understand, if he dare not determine aright? to what purpose
is the sword of Justice put into his hand, if he dare not turn the edge of it
against Offenders? and why was every step to Solomon's Throne supported with
Lions, but to teach Kings and Magistrates, that they should be men of Courage
and Resolution?

As the Law is Mutus Magistratus, the dumb Magistrate, i. e. cannot speak, but
by the Magistrates mouth; so the Magistrate must be Lex Loquens, the speaking
law, i. e. ought to speak the very mind of the Law in every Case that comes
before him, how severe soever it way be against any (even the greatest) Persons
concerned: which he that dares not do, looks like a painted Jupiter with a
Thunderbolt in his hand; his Arm ever up, but never strikes. Law altogether
unexecuted, is like a sword by the side of the Magistrate, that dares not so
much as peep out of the scabbard; partially executed, like a sword but half or
three quarters drawn; at best but like striking with the scabbard, when it
should have been with the sword. This (which is bad) is to bear the sword in
vain, and to no purpose, or (which is worse) mischievously and to ill purpose;
such foolish pity has not only (as it is in our proverb) spoiled a City, but
endangered King and Kingdom; nay many Kingdoms together; whereof I wish we had
not too much Experience, in the so much suffered (and thereby even encouraged)
insolence of Popish Recusants; who as they lately were, so we may well presume
they still are, designing and practiceing (for while their * principles are
unchanged, their practices will (...) Plut. ^mo ^o.
be the same) against the Life of that sacred Person, by whose unparalleld
clemency, many of them hold their own; and had effectually once taken it away,
had not divine providence, still watching over it, substituted a Ram instead of
that great sacrifice to the Triple-Mitred Idol: A Generation they are, on whom
Favor and Indulgence is as ill placed as complement on a Woolf, or courtship
on a Tygre.

Now this fear of the face of man, is a piece of pusillanimity or cowardice in
the heart of the Judge, arising from the Consideration of some Evils that are
threatened or may befall him, in the due Execution of his Office. As thus; if I
pass a righteous sentence in such, or such a Case, I may soon judge my self out
of my Place and Honor, out of all my Great Friends, my Liberty, my Estate,
and perhaps endanger my Life it self. And where Magistrates are so far biased
as to pervert Judgment, I am apt to think, it is usually either the Respect, or
the Fear of Men that overrules them. But when we consider it is but Man, that
will be displeased, methinks there should be no force in the Argument. It is
but man that threatens, but you have to do with the great God; and Is. 51. 12
who art thou, that art afraid of a man that shall die, and of the son of man,
that shall be made as grass; and forgettest the Lord thy maker? For tho man may
threaten, yet without God he cannot execute; Dan. 3^
Nebuchadnezar's Furnace cannot burn, nor Dan. 6^
Darius his Lions devour without Divine permission; and 1 King ^
Jeroboam's hand shrivels up, when he would offer violence to the man of God.

Now the Reason both of the Affirmative and Negative Duties follows in the last
words; For the judgment is God's: The consideration of which will give edge to
the courage of the Righteous Judge, and make him as bold as a Lion. I am (says
he) God's Vicegerent, his mouth to pass that Sentence which he himself would
have passed; and to what purpose has he styled me a God after his own name, but
because as such I should do justice? And shall I be a Judas in the place, or a
Pilate on the Bench of God? The Judgment is God's, and shall I for Fear or
Respect of men bow it according to their corrupt Will and Pleasure? shall I (as
much as in me lies) make the God of Truth a Liar, an Accepter of Persons, an
Oppressor, a Condemner of the Just, and an Absolver of the wicked, represent
the Judge of all the earth as any way not doing Right? No, God forbid; I must
not, I dare not but give Righteous sentence, for the judgment is God's: it is
his, and he will defend me in every Righteous Judgment; and therefore I neither
value the Envy or Reproaches of those that are below, nor the Frowns and
Menaces of those that are above me. The judgment is God's i. e. He notes and
observes all that is done, and will call over the judgment again if it be not
Righteous. Such a time Barabbas, a Rogue, a murderer was absolved, and Christ
crucified by Pilate; Such a time Jezabel took away Naboth's life, that she
might have his Vineyard; So many Traitors acquitted at another time, so many
strangers and widows oppressed in their cause, and (with Reverence be it
spoken) God in his own seat baffled to his face, and sometimes Friends, nay
sometimes Enemies preferred before him. But however remember this, the Case
will one day come to another hearing; For the judgment is God's.

And now, my Lord, what has been spoken upon this subject, having had no less
of practice, then Doctrine in it; I shall not expose my self to your judicial
censure for an Action of Trespass upon your time (if not your patience also) in
any farther distinct and particular application. Nor yet was, what in that more
general way, has been already said, intended to instruct you in, but only mind
you of, and move you to your before well known Duty; which if it may not be
done, I am yet to learn the use of an Assise Sermon. In that sense therefore
your Lordship's Candor has I doubt not all along understood me.

But I hope I as little need, as love Apology. For though some may perhaps
think I have used more liberty than becomes so young a man, with your so great
Dignity of Office, and no less Gravity of Wisdom, for an agreeable mannagement,
and discharge of it; yet would they withal consider me as a minister of Jesus
Christ, and one who desires to be found faithful to him, they might in my
Text, and those other Scriptures on this solemn occasion made use of, find
Gravity enough unlessen'd by any Levity of mine, to excuse my Boldness, were it
needful.

It Is true, my Lord, you are upon the Bench, in the stead of God to Us; and it
is no less true, we are in the Pulpit, in the stead of Christ to you: And
therefore as being a minister of Christ, I beseech you in his stead, that you
would take this Charge of Moses home to your Soul; that you would with
Diligence and Patience hear the Causes between your Brethren; and when upon
hearing and due Examination, you come rightly to understand them, that you
would judge righteously between every man and his Brother, and the stranger
that is with him; not respecting Persons in judgment, not fearing the face of
man how great soever, as considering there is a greater above him, who is with
you in the judgment, and to whom you must one day be accountable; For the
judgment is God's.

FINIS.

