Bellum Belgicum Secundum, OR, A POEM Attempting something on his MAJESTY'S
Proceedings against the DUTCH.

O nimium dilecte Deo! cui militat aequor,
Et conjurati veniunt ad Classica venti.
Claud. CAMBRIDGE, Printed by J. Field, and are to be sold by Robert Nicholson,
Bookseller in Cambridge. 1665.

Bellum Belgicum Secundum, OR, A POEM, Attempting something on his Majesty's
Proceedings against the DUTCH.
I Sing (assist me Bordeaux wine) the feud
Which Britains glory, Hollands shame renewed.
Ambitious thoughts the Dutchmen still possess,
They will contest although without success.
So mutinous Carthage oftentimes rebelled,
So Rome her insolence as often quelled.
Englands long bloody flux at last was cured,
The yoke removed which she so long endured;
Lucky Rebellion had its pardon sealed,
Our King a worser Evil never healed,
The Churches cause he pleaded too, and won,
Proving himself hers, and his fathers son,
To Crown and Mitre were all duties paid,
And the Phanatick spirit now was laid.
When Injuries come Ecchoing to our shores,
The troubled Ocean rages, foams and roars,
Some cries the wind does drown, and some the flood,
None is distinctly heard but that of blood.
The guilty Dutch distracted with just fears,
Cannot stop others mouths, nor their own ears,
Therefore prepare a war, however withstood;
And since the cause was not, they will make it good,
See what injustice they to England show,
To make her Plaintiff and Defendant too.
And shall these Corm'rants live upon our Seas?
Shall our Fish multiply to their increase?
Shall we by them in the same nets be caught,
And feed their barren Country thus for naught?
Or shall our Merchants labor still in vain,
When Dutchmens fraud dare intercept their gain?
What Pirates spare, shall they rob in the strand?
And must we suffer shipwreck thus by land?
Ah! shall our friends, our Countreymens dear Ghosts,
Lie unrevenged upon Amboyna's coasts?
From punishment to execution led,
Traitors in this because so tortured.
Are these returns of succor? did we thus
Set them upon their legs to spurn at us?
Or did our love deserve such thanks as these,
To strike us in the strength of courtesies?
We might survive although our trade were dead,
But shall we let our selves be murdered?
Must we our fortunes and our lives surrender?
And is our King only our Faiths Defender?
Vain Passion! thus to moan the public weal
That art as blind as common peoples zeal,
And can it be you are deaf too? not once hear
Of our great Fleet and greater Overseer
Our Sovereigns gracious self? whose princely sense
Of honor's tender as his conscience.
Go view his Arsenall, where thou may see
All the effects of Royal Industry;
What work and what dispatch, whilst some at prow,
Some at the Stern, some at the Hatches blow.
Look how the Cyclops in their Aetna move,
When they are forging thunderbolts for Jove,
Some blow the bellows, some the iron heat,
And others Metals on the anvill beat:
Just so I Would said, yet they are here outdone,
And Jove to Charles is no comparison.
All Nations now stand and spectators are,
Admire our Fleet, much more our Princes care;
A Prince, whose ease consists in action, one
Who makes all business recreation;
Whose speed prevents our hope, removes our fear,
And is at sea before we know him there.
The Heavens here with a new Beacon blaze,
Which Holland with fresh terrors does amaze;
England rejoices for to see the Star,
Since Heaven in this seems to proclaim the war.
The Channel's destined for this scene of blood,
On which spread out like to some mighty wood,
The strong though wooden walls of England stand,
Trusting next to Gods arm, the Admirals hand.
Illustrious James, well known to foreign Lands,
Famous on Spanish Seas, and Dunkirk Sands.
Such a man Nations bear not till they groan,
Whose worth till he be lost is seldom known.
On shipboard like an Angel in his sphere,
His Judgment as those Orbs solid and clear.
Whose greater soul was well designed by fates,
As fit to pull down high and mighty States;
And what his excellence does most enlarge
The prudent management of his vast charge;
His discipline so strict and so severe,
That Venus though Sea-born cannot live there,
No rudeness seen, nothing which goodness loathes,
No storms provoked are by louder oaths.
So virtuous be all actions and intents,
Each Ship a Church more then in make presents.
The soldiers might have manned the Argo, all
Are so composed like to their Admiral;
In this they do exceed the Youths of Greece,
That they are fetching home a richer fleece;
Which if they do bravely bring off again,
Heaven had Their Ship, but it shall have Our men.
Thy help Calliope I must implore,
To say what Holland does so long ashore;
I nothing hear but what the News-book tells,
That is, where famous Rowland Pepin dwells.
But thou know all the doings of that Nation,
Then deign to furnish me with a Relation.
The English Fleet had Holland so affrighted,
That the Dutch Provinces were scarce united;
The people cry, they are landed; Seamen see,
That harbor can no longer safety be.
Their crusing Capers think it a good bout,
If they bring in all that they carry out.
In vain the Fleet for hight De Ruyter waits,
Who like themselves, they hear, is in the Straits.
Opdam is either sick or so would seem,
Therefore our Duke is forced to visit him;
Yet the uncivil Dutch will not look out,
As if they were all troubled with the gout;
Let Physic this disease no longer curse,
Since it has now disgraced Holland far worse.
Their Orators come back as they were sent,
Scarce entertained with a complement,
The King who did before use to pretend
Himself their servant, is not now their friend;
Poor Holland! it is a sign thou art undone,
No Nation will adore a setting Sun.
How their lost Brandy troubles them we guess,
Their source of valor flows from drunkenness;
Others may trust in Oak, they in the Vine,
Their spirits are nothing without those of wine;
No wonder then if Eastward they bare sway,
Bacchus we know first conquered India.
Yet let them not think to escape their doom,
Caesar went sober when he conquered Rome.
Whilst then we for them at the Texel stay,
Let us their Country and their men survey.
Since the great Deluge did the Earth deface,
The water kindly hid this naked place;
For here Deucalion might have lived alone,
The Country had not helped him to a stone.
No tree to make a Gibbet here does grow,
Though the inhabitants deserve it so.
The Government is like the people rude,
Confusion is its best similitude.
Hither all factions crowd, and yet are free,
The largest conscience here has liberty.
One prays by's beads, another (which alas
Is but the same) prays by the hourglass,
A third is sainted from his gashly face,
Yet Brimstone hels known fuel gives that grace,
Dippers in every corner do appear,
'Tmay be because there is most water here.
The land with spiders and with sects does swarm,
Only those poisonous creatures do less harm;
Nor is it to schismatics unfitly given,
It being the farthest in the world from heaven.
The day is come, and red out of the flood,
Rises the Sun as if he would set in blood.
Our Fleet into a fair half moon is spread,
But such as no Eclipse e're suffered;
The Moon her self does not such light dispense,
And on the sea has lesser influence.
The Dutch advance in the same form made out,
The English entertain them with a shout,
Which makes the Welkin tremble, Enemy start,
And through the ear does thunderclap the heart:
Strange power of tongue! and mighty strength of breath!
Such, could he speak, would be, the voice of death.
Here hope and fear do vary, never did we
Our selves so strong, our foe so potent see.
Both terrible and numberless appear,
Like to the rugged waves which do them bear.
Blind fortune had she eyes might justly pause,
There seems to be no odds, but in the Cause.
The Battle is strait joined, the Cannons roar,
The Ships receive some blows, the Seamen more,
Who from their desperate wounds new courage take,
As if the loss of blood did spirits make.
The gazing heavens stand aloof and wonder,
Learning from them to lighten and to thunder.
The frightened sea under the noise does quake.
The neighboring Islands round about do shake.
Huge clouds of smoke do interrupt the light,
Equally scattering round horror and night.
Here water does the leaking ship invade,
What was before support is ruin made;
There flames the vessel, and the men surround,
And it is a happiness for to be drowned;
Some therefore leap into a hollow wave,
Closed, like the Ant, in a Pellucid grave;
Some in the Funeral Bonefires stoutly burn,
While the ship does supply Faggot and Urn.
Me thinks I see how the flames upward roll,
Making the body mount after the soul;
And lest the Conqueror should Trophies forbid,
The fire it self does raise a Pyramid.
The English had fainted, but a nobler flame
Inspired their souls at thought of Charles his Name,
Who absent does not let the Victory pause,
Acting it like some Universal cause;
For a firm constancy we hope in vain,
Unless the cause which first made, do sustain.
Here brave Prince Rupert so well known to fame,
Does prove himself for to be still the same,
Their idle shot he gallantly defies
Till he come fully up, and then replies,
Ruin attends each bullet, and not one
But carries with it sure destruction;
Not long ere Opdams head does upward fly,
His dull Dutch fancy never soared so high;
Yet his trunk keeps the chair, so kind is fate,
To let him die as well as live in State;
Then down he plunges with Ship, men and all,
And visits Pluto like a General.
Our Duke had hitherto but little gained,
The dubious Victory being yet maintained
By his sole conduct; to which gentle source
He is resolved to join his valors force,
When the united torrent stronger flows,
And by an interruption fiercer grows:
For on both sides Lords dead and wounded lie,
Whose noble purple does his garments die,
Therefore he will no longer represent
But be an army. Thousands here are sent
Into the deep to show his pious rage,
Death does not kill so many in an age;
Where e're he moves, destruction makes his way,
And turns the Channel into a Red Sea,
His acts would be thought miracles to the Dutch,
Did they not exercise the sense so much.
The Hollanders grow weary of the Fight,
Their Wings can serve them now only for Flight;
Thus both Fleets represent two Moons again,
The English Crescent, and the Dutch in the Wain.
Whilst others gather spoils, Great Sir, return,
Let not your conquest without triumph mourn;
The Vermin so dissected cannot meet,
Nor have they wood to make another Fleet;
Their Lion will never ramp it as before,
In vain without a Forest must he roar.
The Tempest now is over, the Sea is clear,
And the Kings-fisher begins to appear,
Our Merchants may with profit plow the main,
And know with certainty for whom they gain.
Charles next to God does bear the greatest sway,
For he makes both the Winds and Seas obey.
Let then each Church give thanks, and every Bell,
Ring out both Englands joy, and Hollands knell.
FINIS.

