A PINDARICK POEM ON THE HAPPY CORONATION Of His most Sacred MAJESTY JAMES II.
AND His Illustrious Consort QUEEN MARY.

By Mrs. BEHN.

LONDON, Printed by I. Playford for Henry Playford, near the Temple-Church:
1685.

A Pindarick Poem ON THE CORONATION.
I.
ARise my Muse! Advance the Mourning Head!
And cease lamenting for the Mighty Dead!
Quench all the Funeral Tapers in your Tears,
And as the fainting flames expire,
Let your soft falling Tides retire;
While you behold the Prospect that appears
In the vast Glories of succeeding years!
Advance! and throw thy sable weeds away!
And string thy Lyre for some Harmonious Lay,
Worthy the Celebration of this Mighty Day!
Come ye soft Angels, all, and lend your aid,
Ye little Gods that tuned the Spheres,
That wantoned, sung, and smiled and played,
When the first World was by your Numbers made;
And Danced to order by your Sacred Ayrs!
Such Heavenly Notes as Souls Divine can warm,
Such wondrous touches as would move
And teach the Blessed to Sing and Love!
And even the Anger of a GOD would Charm!
O Tune it high, and strike with bold success,
But sweet and gentle, every strain,
As that which once taught by the Charming Swain,
By its soft force the Spirit disposest
From the great King and Prophers raging Breast.
II.
Yet when thou would the Royal HERO sing,
Thy Godlike PATRON, and they Godlike KING!
Rough as a useful storm make him appear!
Or as that welcome Eastern Wind,
By which the Almighty Power designed
The Egyptian Locust from the Land to bear.
Resolved as the first Messenger of Heaven,
To whom the great Command was given
The first Born Rebels to chastise;
Who, while the flaming Sword he bore,
'Twas only to declare his Power,
And unusurpt maintain his Paradise.
Paint him like Mars when Battails were in view,
And no soft Venus could his Soul subdue;
All bent for nobler spoil than Beauties Charms,
And loosed a while from Sacred LAURA's Arms.
LAURA! the Chaste! the Pious! and the Fair!
Glorious, and kind as Guardian-Angels are,
Earths darling Goddess! and Heavens tenderest care!
III.
But oh my Muse, when e're thou do presume
To touch on so Divine a Theme,
Let it be Nature all, thou do indite,
That those who read in Ages distant hence
May feel the very Zeal with which I write;
And by the unlabored Verse be warmed to tender sense:
That future Lovers when they hear,
Your all-ador'd and wondrous character;
(For sure the mighty LAURA's Name will Live
As long as Time its self survive)
May find the Holy Passions you inspire,
Such awful flame, such hopeless pain,
Wander and trill through every trembling Vein;
And Bless the Charmer that Creates the Fire!
Bless the soft Muse that could express
Beauty and Majesty in such a dress,
As all the World Adoring shall confess!
Oh fond seducer of my Nobler part,
Thou soft insinuating Muse,
If ever inspiration did impart
The Soul of Music or Poetic Art;
Teach me, oh teach me how to choose
Fancy for so Divine a Theme, O thou enchanting Muse!
IV.
The Glorious Ides of April now were come,
And Heaven all opened to survey
The Mighty Triumphs of the Blessed Day:
And Earth had dressed her self in all her Bloom,
And sent abroad a universal joy!
Ten Thousand Angels filled the glittering Air;
And all was Harmony above,
Over all the Azure plains the Golden Cherubs move;
And Seraphins were chanting every where,
Gay Robes of Light the young Divinities put on,
And spread their shining Locks to outvie the Sun.
On Pillows formed of yielding Air they lie,
Placed in the midway Regions of the Sky;
On Jury Lutes and Silver Harps they played,
And gave the Sacred PAIR a Heavenly Serenade:
Called forth the wondering Crowd, the Beaut'ous throng,
While all the Host of Heaven attended on the Song.
V.
Awake, Oh Royal Sir! Oh Queen, adored, awake!
For whom our Triumphs and our Songs we make;
The Sleepless Crowds their early duties show,
The attending Hierarchies of Angles bow;
All Heaven and Earth with one united joy
Expect the mighty business of this coming Day:
All Languish for its blessed approach -- but You,
You to whom Glory's can no Luster give,
Whose Beams, like the expanded Sun,
Adorn what e're they deign to Shine upon;
But no exalt addition can receive.
Thou HERO of the expecting world arise!
Shake off the downy pleasures from thy eyes;
And from the softest Charms of LOVE, Arise!
From joys too fierce for any sense but Thine,
Whose Soul, whose Faculty's are all Divine;
So Bodies when refined, all Heaven survey,
While feebler Mortals faint with every ray:
O rise from the enchanting Ravisher,
Nor listen to the Music of Her Tongue;
Her Angel Eyes, and Voice, so conquering are,
Love will make humbler Glory wait too long.
VI.
And Thou bright Goddess of the Day!
For Whom all longing Eyes and Hearts prepare;
These tender panting, those soft Tears of Joy,
And with impatient Murm'rings fill the Air;
O Charming Goddess of the Day appear!
Full of Thy Blessed Idea, they disdain
A vulgar thought to entertain;
Big with Prophetic Joy, they laboring wait
To utter Blessings wonderful and great;
This day no rough Fatigues of Life shall vex,
No more Domestic Cares the mind perplex;
All common thoughts are lost in the vast crowd of Joy.
This Iubilee! this Sacred Holy Day!
The Soul resolves for Mirth and Play.
She leaves all Worldly thoughts behind,
And in Her have out-strips the wanton Wind;
Would even her early vows neglect to pay,
But that to Heaven you guide the way;
When for Your safety all agree to Pray.
The Poor Man now forgets his pressing needs,
No Penury his exalted looks confess,
Neglects the Body, while the Soul he feeds
On fancied pleasures scarce arrived in guess.
No sad Complaints ascend the Sky's,
No Nymphs reproached in Lovers sighs,
Or Maid forsaken, bends her lovely eyes.
All with erected Looks salute the World!
None bow beneath the Pressure of a thought,
Unless where Envy has her Vipers hurled,
And raging Malice even to Madness wrought,
They hate the Light that guides the work Divine;
And how'l and gnash their Teeth, and suffer Hell before their time.
The Brave are glad, and gay, the young rejoice,
The old in Prayers and Blessings lift the Voice;
Virgins the wealth of Flowery April bring,
And all the Muses, and the Angels sing!
VII.
Behold the HERO the blessed Voice obeys,
And like the God of Luster gilds
With early Beams the Eastern Hills,
And by degrees the adoring World surveys:
So the bright Harness he puts on,
And in his hand Divine he takes the Reins,
And with life-giving Rule the God maintains
The Glorious Empire of the Sun.
With ease he guides the fiery Coursers round,
And heat, and life, and light, do still abound;
And all things smile and thrive that are in Nature found.
Now fiercer Rays of Brightness he assumes,
And every Minute does enlarge his Beams;
Till to the farthest Poles their Influence spread,
And scatter Plenty where his Glory's shed.
While all the guilty fantoms of the Night
Shrink from the Piercing terror of his Light!
Each coming vulgar-day, the MONARCH showed,
But this more Sacred, views Him all a GOD!
New youth and vigor fill His Royal Veins,
His Glorious Eyes young flames adorn;
A new Divinity in His looks, Proclames
That for Eternal Empire He was Born!
'Twas so He looked in Dunkirks bloody field,
When the dull faithless Belgians He compelled;
But when he saw the ungrateful British Foe advance,
For whom even yet He had a tender sense,
Thus spoke! (When, mounted like a Conquering God,
From Rank to Rank the wondrous Hero Rod!)
Before (said be) mixed Nations We withstood
Conquest, scarce worthy our expense of Blood;
Like Gallick onsets, brisk at first they'ppear,
But dare not trust the event of fiercer War:
'Twas play before, a game We smiling won,
Now'twill be Toil, and work, not easily done;
My dear loved Soldiers these are English Men!
Who though they are forced to fly will turn again;
Stanch to the Scent of War, inured to Blood!
Oh happy, if the expensive flood
Had been defus'd for wretched Englands good!
New Courage to the fainting Troops He gave,
And by His great Example taught 'em to be Brave:
Wonders the Promised Monarch did perform,
And dealt Destruction round like a resistless storm!
VIII.
Nor did His forward Gallantry in War
Surmount his Clemency in Peace,
His Captives proudly their soft Fetters bear,
And charmed to an excess,
Adore the wonders they beheld,
And kissed the Sacred Hand that chast'em ore the field.
His early Courage did His Foes convince,
Who now their scorned Commissions tear,
No longer will the Tyrants Ensigns bear;
But Vow Allegiance to their Native Prince.
They saw the God of War in every Grace,
While soft Adonis revell'd in His face;
The Goddess here, might all her wish enjoy,
The rough stern HERO, in the Charming Boy!
Such Looks as after Victory He put on,
With such to day the Glittering MONARCH shone;
Such Grace in Smiles, such sweetness in address,
Awful as Heaven, as easy of Access;
And Merciful as that, when e're he can redress!
True Representer of the Powers Divine!
Such was the first Born-Man,
Heaven did for an immortal Race design,
E're the first bright deluded Maid
To sense of Fear, the Lord of All betrayed;
So looked the new-form'd wonder, so His Reign began!
So the gay Beauties of His World surveyed,
While Heaven looked down and smiled, well-pleased with what 'thad made.
IX.
See the bright QUEEN forsakes her softer ioys,
And now prepares for Pomp and Noise;
That necessary Toil of the Illustrious Great!
Who rarely taste the Bliss of sweet Retreat,
Like Heaven who neither sleep nor slumber knows,
Short Dreams of Glory make their whole repose:
Whatever rest soft Nature does design,
The Sun, and They, must still appear and shine!
And now, the more surprising Light
Breaks from the silent Empire of the Night;
So Venus looked when from the Seas
The rising Beauty viewed the world,
When amorous Waves around the Virgin curled;
And all the wondering Gods with awful pleasure gazed:
All sigh with Love! all languish in their flame,
Yet none his pain presumes to name;
For oh! the God-born Maid from mighty Neptune came.
X.
And now the Nymphs ply all their Female arts
To dress Her for Her victory of hearts;
A Thousand little LOVES descend!
Young waiting Cupids with officious care
In smiling order all attend:
This, decks Her Snowy Neck, and that Her Ebon Hair.
The Trophies which the Conqueress must adorn,
Are by the busy wantons born;
Who at Her Feet the shining burdens lay,
The GODDESS pleased to see their Toyls,
Scatters Ten Thousand Graces from Her Smiles;
While the winged Boys catch every flying Ray.
This bears the valued Treasure of the East,
And lugs the Golden casket on His Breast;
Another little hand sustains
The weight of Oriental Chains;
And in the flowing jetty curles
They weave and braid the luced Pearls;
Round Her bright Face their nimble fingers play,
And every touch gives the young Gods a joy!
They gaze and hov'r round Her wondrous Eyes;
Where a vast Heaven of Wit and Beauty lies;
They point their Darts, and make their Arrows fine,
From the eternal Rays with which they shine;
From her fair rising Breasts soft sighs they take,
To keep young tortured Lovers still awake.
From every Charm and Grace they bear,
Uneasy wishes, and despair;
From Her alone the Bankrupt LOVES supply,
Their rifl'd Quivers with Artillery.
Fatal to All but Her Loved- Monarchs heart,
Who of the same Divine Materials wrought;
Could equally exchange the dart,
Receive the wound with Life, with Life the wound impart;
And mixed the Soul as gently as the thought:
So the Great THUND'RER Semele d'stroy'd,!
Whilst only JUNO could embrace the God!
XI.
Behold Her now by Loves and Graces dressed!
Like the Great Wife of Jove in Venus Cest;
Now She may ask whatever the God can grant,
If ought of Power, or Glory, She can want;
But Heaven has superseded all Her care,
And given till it has left no use for Prayer.
No wish for Times swift Coursers to run back,
To catch one flying minute past;
The coming hours, new pleasures have;
Fortune and Nature still agree to make
Each present minute gayer than the last:
This gives you Empire! while Three Nations pay
Their willing homage to your Scepters sway.
That gives you Beauty! which without the aid
Of feebler power, Commands and is obeyed!
Bewitching youth does over all appear,
So Flowers just blown, their noblest Luster show,
When shining in their Morning dew;
All their fresh Fragrancies they wear.
Almighty Wit and Virtue! Crowns the whole,
In every look and Feature of your Face,
We may the well-known Excellencies Trace
Of your Diviner Soul!
Though the soft Music of your Words should cease,
Your Charming Eyes would Your great Thoughts confess!
Oh Blessed are they that may at distance gaze,
And Inspirations from Your looks may take,
But how much more their happier Stars they Praise,
Who wait, and listen when you speak!
Mine for no scanted bliss so much I blame,
(Though they the humblest Portion destined me)
As when they stint my noblest Aim,
And by a silent dull obscurity
Set me at distance, much too far
The Deity to view, or Divine Oracle to hear!
So when the Israelites all wondering stood,
With awful Reverence in the vale beneath,
They saw from far the Glory's of the GOD;
But to approach the Sacred Mount was Death!
His Dictates by the Holy Prophet came,
'Twas He alone that did the power receive,
To hear the ALMIGHTY'S voice and live;
It was enough for them below to view the Heavenly flame.
XII.
Not the gay feathered Chanters of the Air
With earlier Songs salute the breaking Day,
Than crowding Here Is, who to Court repair,
Do hail, and bless the Kingdoms Hope and Joy!
And now the gilded Barges wait
The coming of the Illustrious Freight;
So Rich a Prize no Vessel blessed before,
But that which the Almighty SAVIOR bore!
Their Golden Streamers glitter in the Air,
And rufl'd by the softer Wind,
(That plays and wantons unconfined)
They gently waft the Worlds Peculiar Care.
The sullen Sea-Gods wondering rise,
Roused by the joyful shouts and cry's;
Which from the crowded shores ascend the Sky's.
They shake Their Tridents and the Waves obey,
Dress their Blew Locks and flounce along the Sea,
To pay their Tributes to the Greater DEITY.
Him, whom so often with wonder they beheld,
With slaughter dye the verdant watery field;
When over the wild insatiate flood,
He darted Thunder like an Angry God!
While round Him Death in horrid Triumph lay,
Where storms of winged ruin forced their way.
Yet still the saving Angel guarded Him;
The Bloody Signets which He wore
Made the Avenger pass the sacred Door,
And still Preserved the faithful guest within.
Oh had that Senate, whose Ingratitude
The ROYAL HEIR endeavored to Exclude;
Behel'd His single wonders of that Day,
When over the liquid Plain He cut His way;
Through showers of Death and Clouds of dark'ning smoke,
Like fatal Lightning the fierce Victor broke,
And killed, where e're He dashed the unerring stroke;
Instead of Votes against His Right and Fame,
They Would raised Eternal Altars to His Name!
Adored Him as a thing Divine,
And made a God of Him before His time!
But they Heavens mightiest Blessing did disown,
And strove (oh base reward!) in vain to blast His NAVAL CROWN.
XIII.
The Tritans from the Marvels which they saw,
Did Omens of their Future homage draw;
They in the HERO viewed their coming KING,
And from Their wonder fell to Worshipping.
And what before was to the victor due,
They to the Monarch doubly here renew.
The River Nymphs forsake their native streams,
And make their Court to happier Thames;
Their Pipes of Reeds and shelly Music bring,
The Tritons play, while the young Naieds sing;
And all the listening shore along,
Of Jove! and Juno! was their Song.
Which oftentimes they did rehearse,
And Io peans Crowned the Verse!
XIV.
Jove for whom our Alters smoke,
Jove, whom Gods and Men invoke;
By whose sole power the laughing year
Rouls round the gilded Hemisphere;
Who do its easy paces move,
By the soft rule of Peace and Love:
Accept what we thy watery Subjects bring,
Oaken Garlands for our King,
Ever Green and flourishing!
Which Thy Empire shall Proclaim
Over the Tributary Main;
See the Triumphant wreath's are dressed
With all the shining Trophies of the East;
Such as remotest shores afford,
With which they own and greet their Lord;
By this gay tenure it is they hold
Their Rocks of Diamonds, and their Hills of Gold:
And thus acknowledge thus we pay
Great Jove! on this Thy solemn Holy Day.
XV.
But what at Sacred Juno's feet
Shall the Adoring Nymphs present?
Juno charming, chaste and sweet,
The refuge of the Innocent:
The business of our pious Theames,
Our waking Bliss, our joy in Dreams;
The President of Virtuous Wives,
The bright example of the fair,
Whence Virgins learn their modest lives,
And Saints their pure Devotion there:
And all the Goddesses of less degree
Take a peculiar Majesty.
The humble softness of a mortal mind,
(Where all the Graces are confined)
With every Grandeur of a Deity!
The noblest Songs from You their Beauties take,
Divinely you restore our fainting skill,
Inspire the chaste and flowing quill,
Teach Poets how to sing! and Angels how to speak!
Oh what to Juno shall we pay
On this Her solemn Holy day!
XVI.
Ten Thousand Garlands from the stores
Of flowery Aromatic shores;
With shining Colors newly born,
All blooming Beauties of the Morn!
Gathered before the Delphick God,
Or the soft Wind that gently breaths,
Had kissed the tender Virgin Bud,
Had robbed the sweetness from their leaves;
In mystic order these shall spread
The hollowed ground, where Thou shall tread,
And shed their Infant Odours round Thy Sacred head:
Ten Thousand Hearts all with soft wishes filled,
Chaste as Thy Bosom, pure as is Thy Fame,
Ten Thousand Vows from Souls that yield
Eternal Adorations to Thy Name!
Let the coutending Merchant strive
For Indian Pearls and Western Ore,
Those raffl'd Toys by which They thrive,
And sell their safties on the shore;
Unvalu'd trifles to a Power Divine,
To whom a wounded Heart is more
Than all the Ransackt World has laid before
Upon the Worshipped shrine!
These are the Tributes we devoutly pay
Great Juno on Her solemn Holy Day.
XVII.
While thus the Ravished Nerieds Sung
The Echoes from the crowded shore,
Repeated the glad Music over;
And all the Banks with Acclamations rung,
Like well-tuned Vollies with united Peals:
Which after rattle in the distant Sky,
Long live our Sacred King and Queen! they cry,
And all the vacant round with joyful murmer fills,
Repeating still the greateful noise
As fast as e're they could recharge the Voice;
The different shoutings of the Throng,
The Female Treble, and the Manly Base,
The dead flat Notes of the declining race,
Tuned to the sharp ones of the young,
Compleats the noblest Music of the Day:
And though each bore a different part,
'Twas all one Voice, and one united Heart,
Rejoiced, and blessed the Monarch all the way.
XVIII.
Here let the Royal Pair a while repose
Oh thou impatient Muse!
Though loath as are my Eyes the bliss to lose;
Who never yet could satisfy their sight,
Which does new life infuse,
When ever they repeat the true delight.
How often, how silently, alas!
I glide, and hover round the awful place,
Like Fantoms, where their hidden Treasure lies;
Or hoping Lovers who at distance gaze,
And watch the tender Moments of their Mistress Eyes.
How e're I toil for Life all day,
With what e're cares my Soul's oppressed,
It Is in that Sunshine still I play,
It Is there my wearied Mind's at rest;
But oh Vicisitudes of Night must come
Between the rising Glories of the Sun!
XIX.
And now the Royal Robes are on,
But oh! what numbers can express
The Glory of the Sacred Dress!
Not the gay Planet, when he is hasting down,
Flowing and ruddy to his Thetis Bed,
And guilds the Sky with dazzling Red:
Nor the soft Rays of newborn Light,
Or Heaven in fancy e're was formed so bright.
And now a vast Illustrious Train of Stars
Declares, great CYNTHIA first appears;
Those Stars who rule the Fortune, and the Fate,
Of all the Amorous, Brave, and Great:
For what e're Merit Nature gives,
It Is by their influence alone it thrives;
So sparkling and so fair a Train,
Did never attend the Goddess over the Aerial Plain;
The Conquering Nymphs and Hero's there,
The Graces and the Worthy's mingled were;
Each would a noble Song require,
But I have Tuned my joyful Lyre
Only for Royal Theams;
And the kind Flatterer sooths my heart,
And will no trembling Note impart
To any Music, but the Charming Names
Of Sacred LAURA! Sacred JAMES.
XX.
She Comes --
Behold the Badge of Peace and Innocence!
The Ivory Scepter is in Triumph born,
So does the Milky way advance
Before the Rising Morn;
A Hero more than half a God,
Whom all the Graces and the Charms Adorn;
Whom every Muse, and Virtue does inspire,
Whom all the Witty, Great, and Good, admire,
Supports the awful Mystic Rod:
DORSET, whose Eyes with all the Beauties shone,
Which he in Love, and in Success puts on.
A carless Grandeur, and a Generous Air,
Did over all the Lord of Hearts appear,
Eternal softness, and Eternal Wit:
His looks made good to day, all he e're spoke or Write.
XXI.
The Golden Scepter noble RUTLAND bore,
In whose rich Veins the Royal Purple Springs
From mighty YORK! whose conquering Arms of yore
Could sway the Fortunes, and the Fates of Kings:
Still to the juster side they brought their Swords,
And many a Glorious field the wondrous Name Records.
Next view a Hero in His propher Sphere,
While BEAUFORD does the Sacred Circle beat,
A Prince! whom Heaven and Nature formed to move
The ill-maner'd World to Reverence, and to Love.
A Prince! so truly brave, so greatly good,
That when in after Ages Men would Fame,
Some future Hero with the Noblest Name,
Whose constant Loyalty undaunted stood,
Preserved it self in its divinest forms
Amidst a Thousand meeting Storms;
A second BEAUFORD's Name the youth shall Crown,
And over pay His Glory and Renown.
XXII.
And now loud Admirations fill the space,
And Hearts with nimbler Motions beat,
Behold the QUEEN the Raptured Crowds repeat!
She comes! She comes with a Triumphant Grace,
And all Heaven opens in her Angel Face;
Bright were Her Beams, and all around they Shone,
And darted awful Fire to all the lookers on;
So heedless Lovers do with CUPIDS play
'Till the Boys shoot and spoil their fancied Joy:
Thus all adorned with Sacred Beauty's Charms
Through the vast Christian Camp the fair INCHANTRESS Rode,
And where the noblest Warriers wondering stood,
Her killing eyes dealt their resistless harms;
Through the rough Male the subtle Lightning played,
And the stern Heart to tenderness betrayed:
Her Love-drawn Chariot moved with solemn State,
While round it the adoring Princes wait,
With Sigh and Vows Petitioning their Fate;
But with this difference, while that Charmer strove
To take Revenge! in the soft snares of Love,
Ours, all Divine! by chance her Beauty's hurled,
And has without design subdued the World;
But oh! in vain is any likeness made,
It Is Coppying of the Day! by Gloom and Shade.
The wonder that the PROPHET did unfold,
When Heaven in Revelation he surveyed,
And the Bright WOMAN did behold
In wondrous Garments of the SUN Aray'd,
And underneath her feet the Moon subdued,
At this Divine Appearance seemed renewed.
XXIII.
A NYMPH the fairest ever shined in Courts,
NORFOLK the Generous, Gay, and Great,
To whom each Muse officiously resorts,
And with their Songs their Patron Mistress Greet,
To make the Illustrious Train complete;
The Sacred ROBE supports.
Aided by young DIANA'S all as fair
As the coy Maid the amorous GOD pursued,
As Chaste as she, as unsubdu'd;
Unsoyl'd even by the wanton wisp'ring Air,
No guilty though had ever spread
Their lovely Virgin Cheeks with Red,
No Lovers Sighs had blown the blushes there,
For all their Roses in the Bud appear.
XXIV.
And now the ravished People shout a new!
Their KING! their dear-lov'd MONARCH is in view;
The constant AYLESBURY, and the Loyal GRAY,
Prepare the mighty Way.
This bears the Marshal Staff, and that the Spur,
Of blessed Saint EDWARD, KING and CONFESSOR.
To whom Heaven first the Mystery did unfold,
By Sacred Touches, and by Hollowed Gold,
To heal that else uncurable Disease
that poses Art, and baffles all the Wise.
The faithful PETERBOROW, whose unmatched zeal,
Pursued his Suffering Princes adverse Fate,
When Factious Malice that out-acted Hell,
Drove the submitting Exile to a Foreign State;
Deserved the Glory which that day he wore,
And dares defend the Treasure that he bore. [ Scepter.]
PEMBROOK! the thoughful PEMBROOK next surveys,
All formed for Victory and Love,
In whose fine Eyes a Thousand Graces move,
And little sighing Gods around him play,
Who watch each melancholy look, and bear
The pointed Ruin to some gazing fair.
His hand the SWORD adorned with equal Grace,
As Wit his softer Tongue, or Love his conquering Face.
Great DARBY, and the long-fam'd SHREWSBURY,
Whose happless Sires in bright Allegiance shone,
With Toil, and Wounds, and many a Victory,
Such Trophies for their Heirs have wone,
As this days Triumphs do their Fames reward,
The Pointed and more Honored Broken SWORD.
OXFORD the Brave, whose unexampl'd Name,
Was never tainted with Rebellious Crimes,
But amongst the vast Records of deeds and times,
Remains unblemisht in the Book of Fame:
Justly that Sword of State in Peace he ought to bear,
Who knows so Nobly how to manage it in War.
XXV.
Upon the Royal Charge two Princes wait,
Youg GRAFTON, the Illustrious and the Great,
England's High Constable, for this blessed Day,
Too large a Power to bear a longer Sway.
Beneath this Change, ah! sigh not Royal Youth,
Thy blooming Virtues still will rise and Live;
As Flowers transplanted better thrive,
And mend their Luster, and their growth;
Securely thou may shine beneath this Sun,
And in the Path of Honor thou'st begun,
May a long Race, of lasting Glories run:
Remaining as thou art, brave, Loyal, true,
Thou, in thy KING, will find the FATHER too.
NORFOLK! the greatest Subject, and the best,
Whose Loyalty endured the utmost test;
A PRINCE! whose Glorious Name has stood,
Beloved at home, adored abroad:
Steadfast in all the Virtues of the Brave,
And to no Vices of the Great a slave;
True to his KING, his Honor, and his Word,
MAECENA of my Muse, my Patron Lord.
XXVI.
Great ORMOND! whom no time or Age can bow;
But on his awful Reverend brow,
Serenely as the Summer of his years,
Before the Autumn blasts bereaves
The goodly Ceder of his youthful Leaves,
Full blown, not fading, still appears.
Who to Command, and to obey,
For a long Race of years has showed the noblest way;
Brave in the Field, in Council Wise,
Steadfast in Loyalty, in Honor nice;
Gracious in Power, unruffl'd in a Storm,
Humble in Court, and Glorious in a Calm:
This Day, the Sacred Diadem he bore,
Whose dear defense so long had been his care,
That Diadem that Graced his hand before,
Whose Right, so often he did assert in War.
Great SOMERSET, that Name of high Renown,
Allied to Kings, though not of Kingly Race.
Guarded the Worlds great Treasure, England Crown,
While the Worlds Emblim did the Hero Grace;
His Youth and Beauty did Adorn his State,
And the young Atlas smiled beneath his Glorious weight.
The n're to be forgotten ALBEMARLE,
Whose Name shall last when Nature is no more,
That Name, that did lost Britain's Joy restore;
Its Worshipped Champion and its General.
The second Guardian of the CROWN was made,
And in his hand to day the Peaceful SCEPTER swayed;
The true-born English Bravery of whose mind,
His Native Loyalty, and intrinsic worth,
Shows him of that Diviner kind,
When Demigods with Mortals joined,
And brought the firstborn Race of Hero's forth.
XXVII.
And now, the Earthly GOD appears in view,
While the glad Crowd their louder shouts renew,
Wild with their joy, even rudly they express
Its vast concern, its vast excess!
All stretch themselves beyond their native height,
At more advantage to behold the Sight;
That Sacred sight! which though each day we view,
It Is every day all Charming, Dear, and New!
So on Olympus top the GOD appears,
When of his Thunder he disarms,
And all his atributes of mercy wears
The sweetness of Divine forgiving Charms.
With Smiles he casts his Gracious Eyes around,
Inspiring FAITH from every look and Grace,
No Soul so dull to humane sense was found
As not to read its safety in His Face.
Where Fortitude and Brabery sat
In solemn Triumph over Fate,
Where Truth in all her honest Glory shined,
That darling virtue of His Godlike mind;
So well His looks, and Soul accord,
The kind Confirmers do confess
How like a King! he does profess,
How like a GOD! maintain His Word.
O ye fond hapless unbelieving few,
Ye Obstinate, ye Stubborn, stiff-neck'd crew;
Who love your fears of insecurity;
And have like Witches, your infection hurled,
To torture and disease the World;
Come and be cured of your blind Sorcery,
That Hell-born Malice, that your have expressed,
And Damned your selves merely to Damn the rest;
You, whom no word of King, or GOD! can calm,
But wrest'em both to your convenient sense,
Who like Land Pirates bless the Storm,
When the rich Shipwreck proves your recompense.
By different Kings your Virtues have been tried,
The Pious, Peaceful, and the Brave were given,
But still that Hypocrite (self-interest) swayed,
And you disliked because the choice of Heaven!
So the fond Jews their Faithless murmerings showed,
Rebelled for change, though Governed by their GOD.
As a bright Evening Crowns a Glorious Day,
NORTHUMBERLAND brought up the Rear,
NORTHUMBERLAND the Lovely, Young, and Gay,
Blessed by the Crowds, and to the Soldiers dear;
A charming Youth of Royal Race,
His God-like Father pictured in his face,
With a soft mixture of his Beauteous Mothers Grace.
XXVIII.
Thus the great charge they to the Temple bring
There, not to make, but to confirm the King!
So the Triumphant Ark with Songs was born,
And sanctified the place it did Adorn!
And Lo --
The opening Scene of the third Heaven appears,
Where Glory sits Enthroned above the Stars;
Where no faint Mortal object meets the Eye,
But every where it is all Divine,
All Raptured Joy! all perfect Ecstasy;
Where Angels and Dominions join,
Where Principalities and Powers combine,
And round the Sacred Throne in wondrous order shine.
Where every sense receives the full delight;
Seraphic Music Charms the Ear:
The Eyes are Ravished with incessant Light,
And Hallowed Incese fills the perfumed Air.
The Soul with Noblest touches blessed,
Disdains the scanty confines of the breast,
And flatterers where emencer Glories play,
And greedily it seeds on Heavenly joy!
XXIX.
Mistaken Schoolmen, you who vainly strive
Just Notions of Eternal Bliss to give,
By dull comparison with thing's below,
Saphers, and Diamonds, Crystal Gold, and Light;
By lessening Objects, time, and pains bestow
To Paint, what cannot be conceived by sight.
Henceforth the Sacred Mansion to display,
(And tell us what you mean, by what ye say)
Describe Great JAMES, and LAURIA's Coronation Day!
Tell, how they sat Enthroned with Rays of light,
What Hosts of Angels did Adore the sight.
Describe the Hallelujah's of the Crowd,
When thrice with joyful cries they gave Assent aloud:
Tell, how the awful MONARCH Mounted stood,
And by the best of Mortals make us guess the GOD.
Tell us, that so Mount SINAI's top He blessed,
When to his People he dispensed the Law,
When shining Glories all the Godhead dressed,
And all below adored the wonder that they Saw!
And when the Ministering Powers yea would express,
Describe the Reverend Clergy in Pontifick dress.
And who would tell us how the Almighty speaks,
When Angels bow with awful listening down!
From Ely's Sermon, the best Rhetoric takes;
Elly, that Ornament of the still Loyal Gown:
And when Heavens brightness ye would make appear,
Behold the QUEEN, and copy it all from Her.
XXX.
All Hail! thou born of more than Kingly Race,
Monarchs and Poets did thy Lineage Grace!
At once the Crown and Laurel dressed,
The Royal Family of ESST.
Great ARIOSTO from Thy Race did Spring,
That taught his Hero's how to Love and Sing!
May all the Ioys Triumphant Beauties Bless,
And all Chaste Lovers fancy in Success:
May all the Glory that on Empires wait,
With every quiet of retreat,
Crown your soft hours, and be in Heaven confirmed,
While to secure you Blessed, the adoring Worlds concerned.
Great Prince of wonders, and welcome to that Throne,
Both to Your Virtues, and Your Sufferings due,
By Heaven and Birthright all Your own,
You shared the Danger, share the Glory too;
Whom Providence, (by Numerous Miracles wrought)
Through all the mazes of Misfortunes brought!
You mount the unruly World with easy force,
Reward with joy, but Punish with remorse;
The wanton Beast Restive with ease has lain,
And against the Rider lifts the saucy heel;
But now a skillful hand assumes the Rein,
He does the experienced Conqueror feel,
And finds his headstrong Disobedience vain,
Proud of his Glorious load, he leaps, and bounds
Becomes the Beauty of the neighboring Plains,
New Life and new Activity he gains,
And through the Groves his cheerful Neigh resounds;
Lives Glad and Gay, beneath that Generous Rule
That never will let his useful Mettle cool.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Pindarick on the Death of our late Sovereign, with an Ancient Prophecy on
His Present Majesty. Written by Mrs. Behn.

A Poem Humbly Dedicated to Her Sacred Majesty Catherine Queen Dowager, on the
Death of her dear Lord and Husband King CHARLES the Second, by Mrs. Behn.

A Pindarick Ode on the Sacred Memory of our Late Gracious Sovereign King
CHARLES the Second: To which is added another Essay on the same occasion, by
Sir F. F. Knight of the Bath.

THE Vision: A Pindarick Ode: Occasioned by the Death of our Late Sovereign
King CHARLES the Second, by Edm. Arwaker, M. A. The second Part of the Vision,
a Pindarick Poem on the Coronation, by Edm. Arw.

A Poem on the Sacred Memory of our late Sovereign: with a Congratulation to
his Present Majesty. Written by Mr. Tate.

The Elegies are sold single or in one Volume by Henry Playford near the
Temple-Church.


