THE Luckey Chance, OR AN ALDERMAN'S Bargain.

A COMEDY.

As it is Acted by their MAJESTY'S Servants.

Written by Mrs. A. BEHN.

This may be Printed, April 23. 1686. R. P.

LONDON, Printed by R. H. for W. Canning, at his Shop in Vine-Court,
Middle Temple. 1687.

To the Right Honorable Laurence, Lord Hyde, Earl of Rochester, one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, Lord High Treasurer of England, and
Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter.
My Lord,
WHen I consider how Ancient and Honorable a Date Plays have born, how they
have been the peculiar Care of the most Illustrious Persons of Greece and Rome,
who strove as much to out do each other in Magnificence, (when by Turns they
managed the great Business, of the Stage, as if they had contended for the
Victory of the Universe:) I say, my Lord, when I consider this, I with the
greater Assurance most humbly address this Comedy to your Lordship, since by
Right of Ancient Custom, the Patronage of Plays belonged only to the great Men,
and chie^est Magistrates. Cardinal Richelie^, that great and wise Statesman,
said, That there was no surer Testimony to be given of the flourishing
Greatness of a Stars, than public Pleasures and Divertisements -- for they are
says ^e -- the Schools of Virtue, where Vice is al^ays either (...) or
disdained. They are seoret Instruitions to the People, in things that it is
impossible to insinuate into them any other Way. It Is Example that prevails
above Reason or Divine P^cepts (Philosophy not understood by the (...)) it is
Example alone that inspires Morality, and best establishes Verine. I have my
self known a Man, whom neither Conscience nor Religion c^'d persuade to
Loyalty, who with beholding in our Theater a Modern Politician set forth in all
his Colors, was converted, renounced his Opinion, and quitted the Party.

The Abbot of Aubignac, to show that Plays have been ever held most important
to the very Political Part of Government, says, The Philosophy of Greece, and
the Majesty and Wisdom of the Romans, did equally concern their Great Men in
making them Venerable, Noble and Magnificent: Venerable, by their Consecration
to their Gods: Noble, by being governed by their chiefest Men; and their
Magnificency was from the public Treasury, and the liberal Contributions of
their Noble Men.

It being undeniable then, that Plays and public Diversions were thought by
the Greatest and Wisest of States, one of the most essential Parts of good
Government, and in which so many great Persons were interested; suffer me to
beg your Lordships Patronage for this little Endeavor, and believe it not
below the Grandeur of your Birth and State, the Illustrious Places you so
justly hold in the Kingdom, nor your Illustrious Relation to the greatest
Monarch of the World, to afford it the Glory of your Protection; since it is
the Product of a Heart and Pen, that always faithfully served that Royal Cause,
to which your Lordship is by many Ties so firmly fixed. It approaches you with
that absolute Veneration, that all the World is obliged to pay you; and has no
other Design than to express my sense of those excellent Virtues, that make
your Lordship so truly admired and loved. Amongst which we find those two so
rare in a Great Man and a Statesman, those of Gracious Speech and easy Access,
and I believe none were ever sent from your Presence dissatisfied. You have an
Art to please even when you deny; and something in your Look and Voice has an
Air so greatly good, it recompenses even for Disappointment, and we never leave
your Lordship but with Blessings. It is no less our Admiration, to behold with
what Serenity and perfect Conduct, that great Part of the Nations Business is
carried on, by one single Person; who having to do with so vast Numbers of Men
of all Qualitys, Interests and Humors, nevertheless all are well satisfied,
and none complain of Oppression, but all is done with Gentleness and Silence,
as if (like the first Creator) you could finish all by a Word. You have, my
Lord, a Judgment so pier^g and solid, a Wisdom so quick and clear, and a
Fortitude so truly Noble, that those Fatigues of State, that would even sink a
Spirit of less Magnitude, is by yours accomplished without Toil, or any
Appearance of that harsh and crabbed Austerity, that is usually put on by the
b^isy Great. You, my Lord, support the Globe, as if you did not feel its
Weight; nor so much as seem to bend beneath it: Your Zeal for the Glorious
Monarch you love and serve, makes all things a Pleasure that advance his
Interest, which is so absolutely your Care. You are, my Lord, by your generous
Candor, your unbyast Justice, your Sweetness, Affability and Condescending
Goodness (those never-failing Marks of Greatness) above that Envy which reigns
in Courts, and is aimed at the most elevated Fortunes and Noblest Favorites of
Princes: And when they consider your Lordship, with all the Abilitys and Wisdom
of a great Counselor, your unblemisht Virtue, your unshaken Loyalty, your
constant Industry for the Public Good, how all things under your Part of Sway
have been refined and purged from those Grossnesses, Frauds, Briberys, and
Grievances, beneath which so many of his Majestys Subjects groaned, when we see
Merit established and preferred, and Vice discouraged; it imposes Silence on
Malice it self, and compells em to bless his Majesty's Choice of such a Pillar
of the State, such a Patron of Virtue.

Long may your Lordship live to remain in this most Honorable Station, that
his Majesty may be served with an entire Fidelity, and the Nation be rendered
perfectly Happy. Since from such Heads and Hearts, the Monarch reaps his Glory,
and the Kingdom receives its Safety and Tranquillity. This is the unfeigned
Prayer of

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble, And most Obedient Servant. A. Behn.

PREFACE.
THe little Obligation I have to some of the witty Sparks and Poets of the
Town, has put me on a Vindication of this Comedy from those Censures that
Malice, and ill Nature have thrown upon it, tho in vain: The Poets I heartily
excuse, since there is a sort of Self-Interest in their Malice, which I should
rather call a witty Way they have in this Age, of Railing at every thing they
find with pain successful, and never to show good Nature and speak well of any
thing; but when they are sure it is damned, then they afford it that worse
Scandal, their Pity. And nothing makes them so through-stitcht an Enemy as a
full Third Day, that is Crime enough to load it with all manner of Infamy; and
when they can no other way prevail with the Town, they charge it with the old
never failing Scandal -- That it is not fit for the Ladys: As if (if it were as
they falsely give it out) the Ladys were obliged to hear Indecencys only from
their Pens and Plays and some of them have ventured to treat 'em as Coursely as
'twas possible, without the least Reproach from them; and in some of their most
Celebrated Plays have entertained 'em with things, that if I should here strip
from their Wit and Occasion that conducts 'em in and makes them proper, their
fair Cheeks would perhaps wear a natural Color at the reading them: yet are
never taken Notice of, because a Man writ them, and they may hear that from
them they blush at from a Woman -- But I make a Challenge to any Person of
common Sense and Reason -- that is not wilfully bent on ill Nature, and will in
spite of Sense wrest a double Entendre from every thing, lying upon the Catch
for a Jest or a Quibble, like a Rook for a Cully; but any unprejudiced Person
that knows not the Author, to read any of my Comedys and compare 'em with
others of this Age, and if they find one Word that can offend the chastest Ear,
I will submit to all their peevish Cavills; but Right or Wrong they must be
Criminal because a Woman's; condemning them without having the Christian
Charity, to examine whether it be guilty or not, with reading, comparing, or
thinking; the Ladies taking up any Scandal on Trust from some conceited Sparks,
who will in spite of Nature be Wits and Beaus; then scatter it for Authentic
all over the Town and Court, poisoning of others Judgment with their false
Notions, condemning it to ^orso the Death, Loss of Fame. And to fortis^ their
Detraction, charge me with all the Plays that have ever been o^sive; though I
wish with all their Faults I had been the Author of some of those they have
honored me with.

For the farther Justification of this Play; it being a Co^edy of I^trigne, Dr.
Daven^ out of Respect to the Commands he had from Court, to take great Care
that no Indecency should be in Plays, sent for it and nicely looked it over,
putting out any thing he but imagined the Critics would play with. After that,
Sir Rog^ L'Estrange read it and licensed it, and found no such Faults as it is
charged with: Then Mr. Killigrew, who more severe than any, from the strict
Order he had, perused it with great Circumspection; and lastly the Master
Players, who you will I hope in some Measure esteem Judges of Decency and their
own interest, having been so many Years Prentice to the Trade of Judging.

I say, after all these Supervisors the Ladys may be convinced, they left
nothing that could offend, and the Men of their unjust Reflections on so many
Judges of Wit and Decencys. When it happens that I challenge any one, to point
me out the least Expression of what some have made their Discourse, they cry,
That Mr. Leigh opens his Night Gown, when he comes into the Bride-chamber; if
he do, which is a Jest of his own making, and which I never saw, I hope he has
his Clothes on ^nderneath? And if so, where is the Indecency? I have seen in
that admirable Play of Ocdipus, the Gown opened wide, and the Man shown in his
Drawers and Wastecoat, and never thought it an Offense before. Another orys,
Why me know not what they mean, when the Man takes a Woman off the Stage, and
another is thereby cuckolded; is that any more than you see in the most
Celebrated of your Plays? as the City Politics, the Lady Mayoress, and the Old
Lawyers Wife, who goes with a Man she never saw before, and comes out again the
joyfull'st Woman alive, for having made her Husband a Cuckold with such
Dexterity, and yet I see nothing ^nnatural nor obscene: it is proper for the
Characters. So in that lucky Play of the London Cuckolds, not to recite
Particulars. And in that good Comedy of Sir Cour^y Nice, the Tailor to the
young Lady -- in the famed Sir Fopling Dor^ont and Relli^, see the very Words
-- In Valentinian, see the Scene between the Court Ba^ds. And Valentinian all
loose and rusl'd a Moment after the Rape, and all this you see without scandal,
and a thousand others The Moor of Venice in many places. The Maids Tragedy --
see the Scene of undressing the Bride, and between the King and A^intor, and
after between the King and (...) -- All these I Name as some of the best Plays
I know; If I should repeat the Words expressed in these ^cenes I mention, I might
justly be charged with course ill Manners, and very little Modesty, and yet
they so naturally fall into the places they are designed for, and so are proper
for the Business, that there is not the least Fault to be found with them;
though I say those things in any of mine would damn the whole Piece, and alarm
the Town. Had I a Day or two's time, as I have scarce so many Hours to write
this in (the Play, being all printed off and the Press waiting,) I would sum up
all your Beloved Plays, and all the things in them that are past with such
Silence by; because written by Men: such Masculine Strokes in me, must not be
allowed. I must conclude those Women (if there be any such) greater Critics in
that sort of Conversation than my self, who find any of that sort in mine, or
any thing that can justly be reproach't. But it is in vain by dint of Reason or
Comparison to convince the obstinate Critics, whose Business is to find Fault,
if not by a loose and gross Imagination to create them, for they must either
find the Jest, or make it; and those of this sort fall to my share, they find
Faults of another kind for the Men Writers. And this one thing I will venture
to say, though against my Nature, because it has a Vanity in it: That had the
Plays I have writ come forth under any Man's Name, and never known to have been
mine; I appeal to all unbyast Judges of Sense, if they had not said that Person
had made as many good Comedies, as any one Man that has writ in our Age; but a
Devil on it the Woman damns the Poet.

Ladies, for its further Justification to you, be pleased to know, that the
first Copy of this Play was read by several Ladys of very great Quality, and
unquestioned Fame, and received their most favorable Opinion, not one charging
it with the Crime, that some have been pleased to find in the Acting. Other
Ladys who saw it more than once, whose Quality and Virtue can sufficiently
justify any thing they design to favor, were pleased to say, they found an
Entertainment in it very far from scandalous; and for the Generality of the
Town, I found by my Receipts it was not thought so Criminal. However, that
shall not be an Encouragement to me to trouble the Critics with new Occasion
of affronting (...) for endeavoring at least to divert; and at this rate, both
the few ^oets that are left, and the Players who toil in vain, will be weary of
their Trade.

I cannot omit to tell you, that a Wit of the Town, a Friend of mine at Wills
Coffee House, the first Night of the Play, cried it down as much as in him lay,
who before had read it and assured me he never saw a prettier Comedy. So
complaisant one pestilent Wit will be to another, and in the full Cry make his
Noise too; but since it is to the witty Few I speak, I hope the better Judges
will take no Offense, to whom I am obliged for better Judgments; and those I
hope will be so kind to me, knowing my Conversation not at all addicted to the
Indecencys alleged, that I would much less practice it in a Play, that must
stand the Test of the censuring World. And I must want common Sense, and all
the Degrees of good Manners, renouncing my Fame, all Modesty and Interest for a
silly Saucy (...) to make Fools laugh, and Women blush, and wise Men ashamed;
My self all the while, if I had been g^ilty of this Crime charged to me,
remaining the only stupid, inse^lible. Is this likely, is this reasonable to be
believed by any body, but the wilfully blind? All I ask, is the Privilege for
my Masculine Part the Poet in me, (if any such you will allow me) to tread in
those successful Paths my Predecessors have so long thrived in, to take those
Measures that both the Ancient and Modern Writers have set me, and by which
they have pleased the World so well. If I must not, because of my Sex, have
this Freedom, but that-you will usurp all to your selves I lay down my Quill,
and you shall hear no more of me, no not so much as to make Comparisons,
because I will be kinder to my brothers of the Pen, than they have been to a
desenceless Woman; for I am no^ content to write for a Third day only. I value
Fame as much as if I had been born a Hero; and if you rob me of that, I can
retire from the ungrateful World, and scorn its sickle Favors.

PROLOGUE
Spoken by Mr. Jevon. SInce with Old Plays you have so long been cloyed,
As with a Mistress many Years enjoyed:
How briskly dear Variety you pursue;
Nay though for worse ye change, ye will have New.
Widows take heed, some of you in fresh Youth
Have been the unpitied Martyrs of this Truth.
When for a drunken Sot, that had kind hours,
And taking their own Freedoms, left you yours;
'Twas your delib'rate Choice your Days to pass
With a damned, sober self-admiring Ass;
Who thinks good usage for the Sex unfit,
And slights ye out of Sparkishness and Wit.
But you can fit him -- Let a worse Fool come,
If he neglect, to o^siciate in his room.
Vain Amorous Coxcombs every where are found,
Fops for all uses, but the Stage abound.
Tho you should change them oftener than your Fashions,
There still would be enough for your Occasions:
But ours are not so easily supplied,
All that could ever quit cost, we have already tried.
Nay, dear some times have bought the Frippery Stuff.
This, Widows, you -- I mean the old and tough --
Will never think, be they but Fool enough.
Such will with any kind of Puppies play;
But we must better know for what we pay:
We must not purchase such dull Fools as they.
Should we show each her own partic'lar Dear,
What they admire at home, they would loath here.
Thus, tho the Mall, the Ring, the Pit is full,
And every Coffee-House still swarms with Fool:
Tho still by Fools all other Callings live,
Nay our own Women by fresh Cullys thrive.
Tho your Intrigues which no Lampoon can cure,
Promise a long Succession to ensure,
And all your Matches Plenty do presage:
Dire is the Dearth and Famine on the Stage.
Our Store's quite wasted, and our Credit's small,
Not a Fool left to bless our selves withal.
We Are forced at last to rob, (which is great pity,
Though it is a never-foiling Bank) the City.
We show you one to day entirely new,
And of all Jests, none relish like the true.
Let that the value of our Play inhance,
Then itmay prove indeed the Luckey Chance.
Actor's Names.
Mr. Leigh. Sir Feeble Fainwou'd An old Alderman to be married to Leticia. Mr.
Nokes. Sir Cautious Fulbank An old Banker married to Julia. Mr. Batterton. Mr.
Gayman A Spark of the Town, Lover of Julia. Mr. Kenestone. Mr. Belmour
Contracted to Leticia disguised, and presses for Sir Feeble's Nephew. Mr.
Jevon. Mr. Bearjest Nephew to Sir Cautious, a Fop. Mr. Harris. Capt. Noysey His
Companion. Mr Bowman. Mr. Bredwel Prentice to Sir Cautious, and Brother to
Leticia, in love with Diana. Rag Footman to Gayman. Ralph Footman to Sir
Feeble. Dick Footman to Sir Cautious. WOMEN.
Mrs. Barry. Lady Fulbank In love with Gayman, honest and generous. Mrs. Cook.
Leticia Contracted to Belmour, married to Sir Feeble, young and virtuous. Mrs.
Montford. Diana Daughter to Sir Feeble, in love with Bredwel virtuous. Pert
Lady Fulbank's Woman. Mrs. Powel. Gammer Grime Landlady to Gayman, a Smith's
Wife in Alsaria. A Parson, Fiddlers, Dancers and Singers. The Scene London.

THE LUCKY CHANCE; OR AN Alderman's Bargain. A COMEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE I. The Street at Break of Day.
Enter Belmour disguised in a traveling Habit. Bell. SURE it is the Day that
gleams in yonder E^st,
The Day that all but Lovers blessed by Shade
Pay cheerful Homage to:
Lovers! and those pursued like guilty me
By rigid Laws, which put no Difference
'Twixt fairly killing in my own Defense,
And Murders bred by drunken Arguments,
Whores, or the mean Revenges of a Coward.
-- This is Letic^a's Fathers House --
[Looking about. And that the dear Balcony
That has so often been conscious of our Loves;
From whence she'as sent me down a thousand Sighs,
A thousand Looks of Love, a thousand Vows!
O thou dear Witness of those Charming Hours,
How do I bless thee, how am I pleased to view thee
After a tedious Age of six Months Banishment.

Enter several with Music. Fid. But hark ye Mr. Gingle, is it proper to play
before the Wedding.


Gin. Ever while you live, for many a time in playing after the first Night,
the Bride's sleepy, the Bridegroom tired, and both so out of Humor, that
perhaps they hate any thing that puts 'em in mind they are married.


[They play and sing. [Enter Phillis in the Balcony, throws 'em Money. RISE
Cloris, charming Maid arise!
And baffle breaking Day,
Show the adoring World thy Eyes
Are more surprising Gay;
The Gods of Love are smiling round,
And lead the Bridegroom on,
And Hymen has the Altar crowned,
While all thy sighing Lovers are undone.
To see thee pass they throng the Plain;
The Groves with Flowers are strown,
And every young and envying Swain
Wishes the Hour his own.
Rise then, and let the God of Days,
When thou do to the Lover yield,
Behold more Treasure given away
Then he in his vast Circle e're beheld.
Bell. Hah, Phillis Leticia's Woman!

Ging. Fie Mrs. Phillis, do ye take us for Fiddlers that play for Hire? I came
to compliment Mrs. Leticia on her Wedding Morning because she is my Scholar.


Phill. She sends it only to drink her Health.

Ging. Come Lads let us to the Tavern then --

[Exit Music. Bell. Hah! said he Leticia?
-- Sure I shall turn to Marble at this News
I harden -- and cold Damps pass through my senseless Pores. --
-- Hah -- who is here --

Enter Gayman wrapped in his Cloak. Gay. It Is yet too early, but my Soul's
impatient
And I must see, Leticia --

[goes to the Door. Bell. Death and the Devil -- the Bridegroom --
Stay Sir, by Heaven you
pass not this way --

goes to the Door as he is knocking, pushes him away, and draws. Gay. Hah! what
art thou that durst forbid me Entrance?
-- Stand off.

[They fight a little, and closing view each other. Bell. Gayman!

Gay. My dearest, Belmour.

Bell. Oh thou false Friend, thou treacherous base Deceiver!

Gay. Hah, this to me dear Marry?

Bell. Whether is Honor, Truth and Friendship fled?

Gay. Why there never was such a Virtue.
It Is all a Poets Dream.

Bell. I thank you Sir.

Gay. I am sorry for it, or that ever I did any thing that could deserve it: put
up your Sword -- an honest man would say how he is offended, before he rashly
draws.


Bell. Are not you going to be married Sir?

Gay. No Sir, as long as any man in London is so, that has but a handsome Wife
Sir.


Bell. Are not you in Love Sir?

Gay. Most damnably, -- and would fain lie with the dear jilting Gypsy.


Bell. Hah -- who would you lie with Sir?

Gay. You catechize me roundly -- it is not fair to name, but I am no Starter,
Harry; just as you left me you find me, I am for the faithless Julia still, the
Old Alderman's Wife. -- 'Twas high time the City should lose their Charter,
when their Wives turn honest: but pray Sir answer me a Question or two?


Bell. Answer me first -- what make you here this Morning?

Gay. Faith to do you Service. Your Damned little Jade of a Mistress has
learned of her Neighbors the Art of Swearing and Lying in abundance, and is --


Bell. To be married!

[Sighing. Gay. Even so, God save the Mark; and she will be a fair one for many an
Arrow besides her Husbands, tho he an old Finsbury Hero this threescore Years.


Bell. Who mean you?

Gay. Why thy Cuckcold that shall be, if thou be'st wise.

Bell. Away --
Who is this Man? -- thou dally'st with me.

Gay. Why an old Knight, and Alderman, here of the City, Sir Feeble Fain-wou'd,
a jolly old Fellow, whose Activity is all got into his Tongue, a very excellent
Teazer; but neither Youth nor Beauty can grind his Dugion to an Edge.


Bell. Fie what Stuff's here.

Gay. Very excellent Stuff, if you have but the Grace to improve it.

Bell. You banter me -- but in plain English tell me
What made you here thus early,
Entering yon House with such Authority?

Gay. Why your Mistress Leticia -- your contracted Wife, is this Morning to be
married to old Sir Feeble Fainwou'd, induced to it I suppose by the great
Jointure he makes her, and the Improbability of your ever gaining your Pardon
for your high Duel -- Do I speak English now Sir?


Bell. Too well, would I had never heard thee.

Gay. Now I being the Consident in your Amors, the Jack-go-between -- the
civil Pimp, or so -- you left her in charge with me at your Departure --


Bell. I did so.

Gay. I saw her every day -- and every day she paid the Tribute of a Shower of
Tears, to the dear Lord of all her Vows,

Young Belmour;
Till Faith at last, for Reasons manifold,
I slackt my daily Visits.

Bell. And left her to Temptation -- was that well done?

Gay. Now must I afflict you and my self with a long Tale of Causes why;

Or be charged with want of Friendship.

Bell. You will do well to clear that Point to me.

Gay. I see you are peevish, and you shall be humor'd.
-- You know my Julia --
Played me even such another Prank as your salse one is going to play you, and
married old Sir Cautious Fulbank here in the City; at which you know I stormed,
and raved, and swore, as thou wo't now, and to as little purpose. There was but
one Way loft, and that was Cuckolding him.


Bell. Well that Design I left thee hot upon.

Gay. And hotly have pursued it. Swore -- Wept -- Vowed -- Wrote, upbraided,
prayed and railed; then treated lavishly -- and presented high -- till between
you and I Harry, I have presented the best part of Eight hundred a year into
her Husbands hands, in Mortgage.


Bell. This is the Course you would have me steer, I thank you.

Gay. No no, Pox on it, all Women are not ^ilts. Some are honest, and will give
as well as take; or else there would not be so many broke in the City. -- In
fine Sir, I have been in Tribulation, that is to say, Money-less, for six
tedious Weeks, without either Clothes -- or Equipage to appear withal; and so
not only my own Love affair lay neglected -- but thine too -- and I am forced
to pretend to my Lady, that I am in the Country with a Dying Uncle -- from whom
if he were indeed dead, I expect Two thousand a year.


Bell. But what is all this to being here this Morning?

Gay. Thus have I lain concealed like a winter Fly, hoping for some blessed
Sunshine to warm me into Life again, and make me hover my flagging Wings; till
the News of this Marriage (which fills the Town) made me crawl out this silent
Hour -- to upbraid the fickle Maid.


Bell. Did thou? -- pursue thy kind Design. Get me to see her, and sure no
Woman even possessed with a new Passion,

Grown confident even to Prostitution;
But when she sees the Man to whom she'as sworn so very -- very much, will find
Remorse and Shame.


Gay. For your sake though the Day be broke upon us,
And I Am undone if seen -- I Will venture in --
[Throws his Cloak over. Enter Sir Feeble Fainwou'd -- Sir Cautious Fulbank --
Bearjest and Noysey. [pass over the Stage and go in. -- Hah -- see -- the
Bridegroom!
And with him my destined Cuckold, old Sir Cautious Fulbank.
-- Hah -- what ail'st thou Man?

Bell. The Bridegroom!
Like Gorgons Head he'as turned me into Stone --

Gay. Gorgon's Head -- a Cuckolds Head -- 'twas made to graft upon --


Bell. By Heaven I Will seize her even at the Altar!
And bear her thence in Trinmph.

Gay. Ay, and be born to Newgate in Triumph, and be hanged in Triumph -- 'twill
be cold Comfort celebrating your Nuptials in the Press Yard, and be waked next
Morning like Mr. Barnardine in the Play -- Will you please to Rise and be
hanged a little Sir?


Bell. What would thou have me do?

Gay. As many an Honest Man has done before thee --
Cuckold him -- Cuckold him.

Bell. What -- and let him marry her! She that is mine by Sacred
Vow already? By Heaven it would b^ Flat Adultery in her!

Gay. -- She Will learn the Trick, and practice it the better with thee.


Bell. Oh Heavens! Leticia marry him! and lie with him! --
-- Here will I stand and see this shameful Woman,
See if she dares pass by me to this Wickedness.

Gay. Hark ye Harry -- in earnest have a care of betraying your self -- and do
not venture sweet Life for a fickle Woman, who perhaps hates you.


Bell. You counsel well -- but yet to see her married! --
How every thought of that shocks all my Resolution --
But hang it I Will be Resolute and Saucy,
Despise a Woman who can use me ill,
And think my self above her.

Gay. Why now thou art thy self -- a Man again.
But see they are coming forth, now stand your ground.

Enter Sir Feeble, Sir Cautious, Bearjest, Noysey, Leticia sad, Diana, Phillis.
[Pass over the Stage. Bell. It Is she, support me Charles, or I shall sink to
Earth,
-- Methought in passing by she cast a scornful Glance at n^e
Such charming Pride I Have seen upon her Eyes,
When our Love-Quarrels armed 'em with Disdain --
-- I Will after 'em, if I live she shall not escape me.

Offers to go. Gay holds him. Gay. Hold, remember you are proscribed,
And dye if you are taken --.

Bell. I Have done and I will live, but he shall never enjoy her.
-- Who Is yonder, Ralph, my trusty Confident?
Enter Ralph. Now though I perish I must speak to him.
-- Friend, what Wedding's this?

Ral. One that was never made in Heaven Sir,
It Is Alderman Fainwou'd, and Mrs. Leticia Bredwell

Bell. Bredwell -- I Have heard of her -- she was Mistress --

Ral. To fine Mr Belmour Sir, -- ay there was a Gentleman
But rest his Soul -- he is hanged Sir.

[Weeps. Bell. How! hanged?

Ral. Hanged Sir, hanged -- at the Hague in Holland.

Gay. I heard some such News, but did not credit it.

Bell. For what said they was he hanged?

Ral. Why even for High Treason Sir, he killed one of their Kings.


Gay. Holland's a Commonwealth, and is not ruled by Kings.

Ral. Not by one Sir, but by a great many; this was a Cheesmonger -- they fell
out over a Bottle of Brandy, went to Snicker Snee, -- Mr. Belmour cut his
Throat, and was hanged for it, that is all Sir. --


Bell. And did the young Lady believe this?

Ral. Yes, -- and took on most heavily, -- the Doctors gave her over -- and
there was the Devil to do to get her to consent to this Marriage -- but her
Fortune was small, and the Hope of a Ladyship, and a Gold Chain at the Spittle
Sermon did the Business, -- and so your Servant Sir. --


[Ex. Ralph. Bell. So -- here is a hopeful Account of my sweet self now

Enter Post-man with Letters. Post. Pray Sir which is Sir Feeble Fainwoud's?

Bell. What would you with him, Friend?

Post. I have a Letter here from the Hague for him.

Bell. From the Hague! Now have I a Curiosity to see it --
I am his Servant -- give it me --
[Gives it him and Exit. -- Perhaps here may be the second part of my Tragedy.
I Am full of Mischief, Charles -- and have a mind to see this Fellows
Secrets. For from this hour I Will be his evil Genius, haunt him at
Bed and Board, he shall not sleep nor eat -- disturb him at his
Prayers, in his Embraces; and teaz him into Madness.
Help me Invention, Malice, Love, and Wit.
[Opening the Letter. Ye Gods, and little Fiends instruct my Mischief.
[Reads. Dear Brother, according to your Desire I have sent for my Son from St.
Omers, whom I have sent to wait on you in England, he is a very good Accountant
and fit for Business, and much pleased he shall see that Uncle to whom he is so
obliged, and which is so gratefully acknowledged by --

Dear Brother, your affectionat Brother

Francis Fainwoud.

-- Hum -- harkye Charles, do you know who I am now?

Gay. Why I hope a very honest Friend of mine, Harry Belmour.

Bell. No Sir, you are mistaken in your Man.

Gay. It may be so.

Bell. I am do you see Charles, this very individual, numerical young Mr. -- what
ye call um Fainwoud, just come from Saint Omers into England -- to my Uncle the
Alderman.

I am, Charles, this very Man.

Gay. I know you are, and will swear't upon occasion.

Bell. This lucky Thought has almost calmed my mind.
And if I don't fit you my dear Uncle --
May I never lie with my Aunt.

Gay. Ah Rogue -- but prithee what care have you taken about your Pardon?
^'twere good you should seeure that.


Bell. There Is the Devil Charles, -- had I but that -- but I have had a very
good Friend at work, a thousand Guyneys, that seldom fails; but yet in Vain, I
being the first Transgressor since the Act against Duelling.

But I impatient to see this dear Delight of my Soul,
And hearing from none of you this six Weeks, came from
Bruxels in this Disguise -- for the Hague I have not
Seen, though hanged there -- but come -- lets away
And complete me a right Saint Omers Spark, that I
May present my self as soon as they come from Church.

[Exeunt SCENE II. Sir Cautious Fulbank's House.
Enter Lady Fulbank, Pert, and Bredwell. Bredwel gives her a Letter. [Lady
Fulbank reads Did my Julia know how I Languish in this cruel Separation, she
would afford me her Pity, and write oftener. If only the Expectation of two
thousand a Year kept me from you, ah! Julia how easily would I abandon that
Trifle for your more valued Sight, but that I know a Fortune will render me
more agreeable to the charming Julia, I should quit all my Interest here, to
throw my self at her Feet, to make her sensible how am I entirely her Adorer,

Charles Gayman.

-- Faith Charles you lie. -- you are as welcome to me now,
Now when I doubt thy Fortune is declining,
As if the Universe were thine.

Pert. That Madam is a Noble Gratitude. For if his Fortune be declining, it is
sacrificed to his Passion for your Ladyship.

-- It Is all laid out on Love.

L. Full. I prize my Honor more than Life,
Yet I had rather have given him all he wished of me,
Than be guilty of his Undoing.

Pert. And I think the Sin were less.

L. Full. I must confess, such Jewels, Rings, and Presents as he made me must
needs decay his Fortune.


Bred. Ay Madam, his very Coach at last was turned into a Jewel for your
Ladyship.

Then Madam what Expenses his Despairs have run him on --
As Drinking and Gaming to divert the Thought of your marrying my old Master.


L. Full. And put in Wenching too. --

Bred. No assure your self Madam --

L. Full. Of that I would be better satisfied -- and you too must assist me as
e're you hope I should be kind to you in gaining you Diana


[ To Bredwel. Bred. Madam, I Will dye to serve you.

Pert. Nor will I be behind in my Duty.

L. Full. Oh how fatal are forced Marriages!
How many Ruins one such Match pulls on --
Had I but kept my sacred Vows to Gayman
How happy had I been -- how prosperous he!
Whilst now I languish in a loathed Embrace,
Pine out my Life with Age -- Consumptious Coughs,
-- But do thou fear that Gayman is declining?

Bred. You are my Lady, and the best of Mistresses --
Therefore I would not grieve you, for I know
You love this best -- but most unhappy Man.

L. Fulb. You shall not grieve me -- prithee on --

Bred. My Master sent me yesterday to Mr. Crap his Scrivener, to send to one
Mr. Wastall, to tell him his first Mortgage was out, which is two hundred
pounds a Year -- and who has since engaged five or six hundred more to my
Master; but if this first be not redeemed he will take the Forfeit on it, as he
says a Wise Man ought.


L Fulb. That is to say, a Knave according to his Notion of a Wise Man.


Bred. Mr Crap being busy with a Borrowing Lord, sent me to Mr. Wastall; whose
Lodging is in a nasty Place, called Alsatia, at a Black-Smiths.


L. Fulb. But what is all this to Gayman?

Bred. Madam, this Wastall was Mr. Gayman.

L. Fulb. Gayman? Saw thou Gayman?

Bred. Madam, Mr. Gayman, yesterday.

L. Fulb. When came he to Town?

Bred. Madam, he has not been out of it.

L. Fulb. Not at his Uncles in Northamptonshire?

Bred. Your Ladyship was wont to credit me.

L. Fulb. Forgive me -- you went to a Black-Smiths --

Bred. Yes Madam; and at the Door encountered the beastly thing he calls a
Landlady; who looked as if she'ad been of her own Husband's making, composed of
molded Smith's Dust. I asked for Mr. Wastall, and she began to open -- and did
so rail at him, that what with her Billingsgate, and her Husband's Hammers, I
was both Deaf and Dumb -- at last the Hammers ceased, and she grew weary, and
called down Mr. Wastall; but he not answering -- I was sent up a Ladder rather
than a pair of Stairs; at last I scaled the top, and entered the incharted
Castle; there did I find him, spite of the Noise below, drowning his Cares in
Sleep.


L. Fulb. Whom foundst thou Gayman --?

Bred. He Madam, whom I waked -- and seeing me.
Heavens what Confusion seized him! which nothing but my own
Surprise could equal. Ashamed -- he would have turned away,
But when he saw by my dejected Eyes, I knew him,
He sight, and blushed, and heard me tell my Business.
Then begged I would be secr^t: for he vowed, his whole Repose and Life,
depended on my Silence. Nor had I told it now,

But that your Ladyship, may find some speedy means to draw him from this
desperate Condition.


L. Fulb. Heavens is it possible!

Bred. He Is driven to the last degree of Poverty --
Had you but seen his Lodgings, Madam!

L. Fulb. What were they?

Bred. It Is a pretty convenient Tub Madam. He may lie along in it, there is just
room for an old Joined Stool besides the Bed, which one cannot call a Cabin,
about the largeness of a Pantry Bin, or a Usurer's Trunk, there had been Dor^ex
Curtains to it in the Days of Yore; but they were now annihilated, and nothing
left to save his Eyes from the Light, but my Land-ladies Blew Apron, tied by
the strings before the Window, in which stood a broken sixpenny Looking-Glass,
that showed as many Faces, as the Scene in Henry the Eighth, which could but
just stand upright, and then the Comb-Case filled it.


L. Fulb. What a lewd Description have thou made of his Chamber!


Bred. Then for his Equipage, it is banished to one small Monsieur, who (saucy
with his Master's Poverty) is rather a Companion than a Footman.


L. Fulb. But what said he to the Forfeiture of his Land?

Bred He sigh't, and cried, Why farewell dirty Acres.
It shall not trouble me, since 'twas all but for Love!

L. Fulb. How much redeems it?

Bred. Madam, five hundred pounds.

L. Fulb. Enough -- you shall, in some Disguise convey this Money to him, as
from an unknown hand: I would not have him think it comes from me, for all the
World;

That Nicety and Virtue I Have professed, I am resolved to keep.

Per. If I were your Ladyship, I would make use of Sir Cautious his Cash: Pay
him in his own Coin.


Bred. Your Ladyship would make no Scruple of it, if you knew how this poor
Gentleman has been used by my unmerciful Master.


L. Fulb. I have a Key already to his Counting House; it being lost, he had
another made, and this I found and kept.


Bred. Madam, this is an excellent time for it, my Master being gone to give my
Sister Leticia at Church.


L. Fulb. It Is so, I Will go and commit the Theft, whilst you prepare to carry
it, and then we'll to Dinner with your Sister the Bride.


[Exeunt. SCENE III. The House of Sir Feeble.
Enter Sir Feeble, Leticia, Sir Cautious, Bearjest, Diana, Noysey. Sir Feeble
sings and salutes 'em. Sir Feeb. VVElcome Joan Sanderson, welcome, welcome,
[Kiss the Bride. Ods bobs, and so thou art Sweetheart.

[So to the rest. Bear. Methinks my Lady Bride is very Melancholy.

Sir Cau. Ay, Ay, Women that are discreet, are always thus upon their
Wedding Day.


Sir Feeb. Always by Daylight, Sir Cautious.

But when Bright Phoebus does retire
To Thetis Bed to quench his fire,
And do the thing we need not name,
We Mortals by his influence do the same.
Then thou the Blushing Maid lays by
Her simpering, and her Modesty;
And round the Lover clasps and twines
Like Ivy, or the cirkling Vines.
Sir Feeb. Here Ralph, the Bottle Rogue, of Sack ye Rascal, had thou been a
Butler worth hanging, thou would have met us at the door with it -- Ods bobs
Sweetheart thy Health.


Bear. Away with it, to the Brides Haunce in ^elder.

Sir Feeb. Gots so, go to Rogue, go to, that shall be, Knave, that shall be, by
the Morrow Morning; he -- ods bobs, we'll do it Sweetheart; here is to it --


[Drinks again. Let. I dye but to Imagine it, would I were dead indeed.

Sir Feeb. Hah -- hum -- how is this? Tears upon your Wedding Day? Why -- why --
you Baggage you, ye little Ting, Fools-face -- away you Rogue, you are naughty,
you are naughty,

[Patting, and playing, and following her. Look -- look -- look now, -- buss it
-- buss it -- and Friends, did'ums, did'ums, beat its none silly Baby -- away
you little Hussy, away, and pledge me --


[She drinks a little. Sir Cau. A wise discreet Lady, I Will warrant her, my Lady
would prodigally have took it off all --


Sir Feeb. Dear's its nown dear Fubs; buss again, buss again, away, away -- ods
bobs, I long for Night -- look -- look Sir Cautious; what an Eye's there --


Sir Cautious. Ay, so there is Brother, and a Modest Eye too.

Sir Feeb. Adad, I love her more and more, Ralph -- call old Susan hither --
Come Mr. Bearjest, put the Glass about. Ods bobs, when I was a young Fellow, I
would not let the young Wenches look pale and wan -- but would rouse 'em, and
touse 'em, and blowze 'em, 'till I put a Color in their Cheeks, like an Apple
John affacks -- Nay, I can make a shift still, and Pupsey shall not be Jealous
--


Enter Susan, Sir Feeble whispers her, she goes out. Let. Indeed not I Sir. I
shall be all Obedience

Sir Cau. A most Judicious Lady; would my Julia had a little of her Modesty;
but my Lady's a Wit.


[Enter Susan with a Box. Sir Feeb. Look here my little Puskin, here is fine
Play-things for its n'own little Coxcomb -- go -- get ye gone -- get ye gone
and off with this Saint Martins Trumpery, these Playhouse Glass Baubles, this
Necklace, and these Pendants, and all this false Ware; ods bobs I Will have no
counterfeit Geer about thee, not I. See -- these are right as the Blushes on
thy Cheeks and these -- as true as my Heart my Girl. Go -- put 'em on and be
fine --


[gives 'em her Let. Believe me Sir I shall not merit this Kindness.

Sir Feeb. Go to -- More of your Love, and less of your Ceremony -- give the
old Fool a hearty Buss and pay him that Way -- he ye little wanton Tit, I Will
steal up -- and catch ye and love ye -- adod I will -- get ye gone -- get ye
gone --


Let. Heavens what a nautious thing is an old Man turned Lover.

[Exit Leticia and Diana. Sir Cau. How steal up Sir Feeble -- I hope not so; I
hold it most indecent before the lawful Hour.


Sir Feeb. Lawful Hour! Why I hope all Hours are Lawful with a Man's own Wife.


Sir Cau. But wise Men have Respect to Times and Seasons.

Sir Feeb. Wise young Men Sir Cautious, but wise old Men must nick their
Inclinations, for it is not as 'twas wont to be, for it is not as 'twas wont to
be --


[Singing and dancing. Enter Ralph. Ralph. Sir here is a young Gentleman without
would speak with you.


Sir Feeb. Hum -- I hope it is not that same Belmour come to forbid the Banes
-- if it be, he comes too late -- therefore bring me first my long Sword, and
then the Gentleman.


[Exit Ralph. Bea. Pray Sir use mine it is a traveled Blade I can assure you
Sir.


Sir Feeb. I thank you Sir --
Enter Ralph and Belmour disguised, gives him a Letter; he reads. -- How -- my
Nephew --
Francis Fainwood?

[Embraces him Bell. I am glad he has told me my Christian Name.

Sir Feeb. Sir Cautious know my Nephew -- it is a young Saint Omers Scholar --
but none of the Witnesses.


Sir Cau. Marry Sir, the wiser he -- for they got nothing by it.

Bell. Sir I love and honor you because you are a Traveller.

Sir Feeb. A very proper young Fellow, and as like old Frank Fainwood as the
Devil to the Collier; but Francis you are come into a very lewd Town Francis
for whoring and plotting and roaring and drinking, but you must go to Church
Francis, and avoid ill Company, or you may make damnable Havoc in my Cash
Francis -- what you can keep Merchants Books?


Bell. 'T has been my Study Sir.

Sir Feeb. And you will not be proud but will be commanded by me Francis?


Bell. I desire not to be favored as a Kinsman Sir, but as your humblest
Servant.


Sir Feeb. Why thou't an honest Fellow Francis -- and you are heartily welcome
-- and I Will make thee Fortunate! But come Sir Cautious let you and I take a
Turn i'th'Garden, and beget a right Understanding between your Nephew Mr.
Bearjest and my Daughter Dye.


Sir Cau. Prudently thought on Sir, I ll wait on you --

[Exit Sir Feeble and Sir Cautious. Bea. You are a Traveller Sir, I understand
--

Bell. I have seen a little part of the World Sir.

Bea. So have I Sir I thank my Stars, and have performed most of my Travels on
Foot Sir.


Bell. You did not travel far then I presume Sir.

Bea. No Sir, it was for my Diversion indeed; but I assure you I traveled into
Ireland a-foot Sir.


Bell. Sure Sir, you go by Shipping into Ireland?

Bea. That Is all one Sir, I was still a-foot -- ever walking on the Deck --


Bell. Was that your farthest Travels Sir?

Bea. Farthest -- why that is the End of the World -- and sure a Man can go no
further.


Bell. Sure there can be nothing worth a Man's Curiosity?

Bea. No Sir? I Will assure you there are the Wonders of the World
Sir; I Will hint you this one. There is a Harbor which since the
Creation was never capable of receiving a Lighter, yet by another
Miracle the King of France was to ride there with a vast Fleet of
Ships, and to land a hundred thousand Men.

Bell. This is a swinging Wonder -- but are there Store of Mad Men there Sir --?


Bea. That Is another Rarity to see a Man run out of his Wits.

Noy. Marry Sir, the wiser they I say.

Bea. Pray Sir what Store of Miracles have you at St. Omers?

Bell. None Sir since that of the Wonderful Salamanca Doctor, who was both here
and there, at the same Instant of time.


Bea. How Sir! Why that is impossible.

Bell. That was the Wonder Sir, because 'twas impossible.

Noy. But 'twas a greater Sir that 'twas believed.

Enter L. Fulb. and Pert. Sir Cau. and Sir Feeb. Sir Feeb. Enough, enough, Sir
Cautious we apprehend one another, Mr. Bearjest, your Uncle here and I have
struck the Bargain, the Wench is yours with three thousand Pound present, and
something more after Death: Which your Uncle likes well.


Bea. Does he so Sir, I Am beholding to him, then it is not a Pin matter whether
I like or not, Sir.


Sir Fee. How Sir not like my Daughter Dye?

Bea. Oh Lord Sir -- dye or live it is all one for that Sir -- I Will stand to the
Bargain my Uncle makes.


Pert. Will you so Sir, you will have very good Luck if you do --

[aside. Bea. Prithee hold thy Peace, my Lady's Woman.

L. Fulb. Sir I beg your Pardon for not waiting on you to Church --
I knew you would be private --

Enter Let. fine in Jewels. Sir Feeb., You honor us too highly now Madam --

[presents his Wife, who salutes her. L. Fulb. Give you Joy my dear Leticia! I
find Sir you were resolved for Youth Wit and Beauty.


Sir Feeb. Ay Madam to the Comfort of many a hoping Coxcomb but Let -- Rogue
Let -- thou wo't not make me free o'th'City a second time, wo't thou entice
the Rogues with the Twire and wanton Leere -- the Amorous Simper that cries come
kiss me -- then the pretty round Lips are pouted out -- he Rogue how I long to
be at'em! -- well she shall never go to Church more -- that she shall not.


L. Fulb. How Sir, not to Church, the chiefest Recreation of a City Lady?


Sir Feeb. That Is all one Madam, that tricking and dressing and prinking and
patching, is not your Devotion to Heaven, but to the young Knaves that are
lick't and combed -- and are minding you more than the Parson -- ods bobs there
are more Guckolds destined at Church than are made out of it.


Sir Cau. ha, ha, ha, he! tickles ye e-Faith Ladys.

[to his Lady. Bell. Not one chance look this Way -- and yet
I can forgive her lovely Eyes --
Because they look not pleased with all this Ceremony;
And yet methinks some Sympathy in Love
Might this Way glance their Beams -- I cannot hold --
-- Sir, is this fair Lady my Aunt?

Sir Feeb. Oh Francis! Come hither Francis.
Let, here is a young Rogue has a Mind to kiss thee.
[Puts them together, she starts back. -- Nay start not, he is my own Flesh and
Blood
My Nephew -- Baby -- look -- look how the young
Rogues stare at one another, like will to like, I see that.

Let. There Is something in his Face, so like my Belmour it calls my Blushes up,
and leaves my Heart defenseless --


Enter Ralph. Ralph. Sir, Dinner's on the Table.

Sir Feeb. Come, come -- let us in then -- Gentlemen and Ladys --
And share to day my Pleasures and Delight
But --
Adds bobs they must be all mine own at Night.

The End of the first Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I. Gayman's Lodging.
Enter Gayman in a Nightcap, and an old CampaignCoat tied about him. Very
melancholy. Gay. CUrse on my Birth! Curse on my faithless fortune!
Curse on my Stars, and cursed be all -- but Love!
That dear, that charming Sin, tho to have pulled
Innumerable Mischiefs on my Head,
I have not, nor I cannot find Repentance for.
No let me dye despised, upbraided, poor:
Let Fortune, Friends and all abandon me --
But let me hold thee thou soft smiling God
Close to my Heart while Life continues there.
Till the last Pantings of my vital Blood
May the last spark of Life and Fire be Love's!
Enter Rag. -- How now Rag, what is a Clock?

Rag. My Belly can inform you better than my Tongue.

Gay. Why you gormandizing Vermin you, what have you done with the Threepence
I gave you a Fortnight ago.


Rag. Alas Sir that is all gone; long since.

Gay. You gutling Rascal, you are enough to breed a Famine in a Land. I have
known some industrious Footmen, that have not only gotten their own Livings,
but a pretty Livelihood for their Masters too.


Rag. Ay, till they came to the Gallows Sir.

Gay. Very well Sirrah, t^se'y died in an honorable Calling -- but hark'y' Rag
-- I have Business -- very earnest Business abroad this Evening, now were you a
Rascal of Docity, you would invent a way -- to get home my last Suit that was
laid in Lavender -- with the Appurtenances thereunto belonging, as Perriwig,
Cravat -- and -- so forth --


Rag, Faith Master I must deal in the black Art then, for no Humane Means will
do it -- and now I talk of the black Art Master, try your Power once more with
my Land-lady --


Gay. Oh! Name her not, the thought on it turns my Stomach -- a Sight of her is
a Vomit, but he is a bold Hero that dares venture on her for a Kiss, and all
beyond that sure is Hell it self -- yet there is my last, last Refuge -- and I
must to this Wedding -- I know not what -- but something whispers me -- this
Night I shall be happy -- and without Julia it is impossible! --


Rag. Julia; whose that my Lady Fulbank Sir?

Gay. Peace Sirrah -- and call -- a -- no -- Pox on it come back -- and yet --
yes -- call my fullsome Landlady.

[ Exit Rag. -- Sir Cautious knows me not, by Name or Person.
And I will to this Wedding, I Am sure of seeing Julia there.
And what may come of that -- but here is old Nasty coming.
I smell her up -- hah my dear Landlady --
[ Enter Rag and Land. Quite out of Breath -- a Chair there for my Landlady --

Rag. Here Is never a one Sir.

Land. More of your Money and less of your Civility good Mr. Wastall.


Gay. Dear Land-Lady --

Land. Dear me no Dears Sir, but let me have my Money -- Eight Weeks Rent last
Friday. Besides Taverns, Alehouses, Chandlers, Landeresses, Scores, and ready
Money out of my Purse; you know it Sir.


Gay. Ay but your Husband does not; speak softly.

Land. My Husband! What do you think to fright me with my Husband -- I Would have
you to know I am an honest Woman and care not this -- for my Husband. Is this
all the thanks I have for my Kindness, for patching, borrowing, and shifting
for you; 'twas but last Week I pawned my best Petticoat, as I hope to wear it
again it cost me six and twenty Shillings besides Making; then this Morning my
new Norwich Mantue followed, and two postle Spoons, I had the whole Dozen when
you came first; but they dropped, and dropped, till I had only Judas left for my
Husband.


Gay. Hear me good Landlady --

Land. Then ^'ve past my Word at the George-Tavern for forty Shillings for you,
ten Shillings at my Neighbor Squabs for Ale; besides seven Shillings to Mother
Suds for washing, and do you fob me off with my Husband? --


Gay. Here Rag -- run and fetch her a Pint of Sack -- there is no other way of
quenching the Fire in her flaber Chops; -- but my dear Landlady have a little
Patience.


[ Exit Rag. Land. Patience? I scorn your Words Sir -- is this a place to trust
in, tell me of Patience that used to have my Money before Hand; come, come pay
me quickly -- or old Gregory Grimes House shall be too hot to hold you.


Gay. Is It come to this, can I not be heard!

Land. No Sir, you had good Clothes when you came first, but they dwind'ld
daily, till they dwindl'd to this old Campaign -- with tan'd-colour'd Lining --
once red -- but now all Colors of the Rainbow, a Cloak to sculk in a-Nights,
and a pair of Piss-burn'd shammy Breeches. Nay your very Badg of Manhood's gone
too


Gay. How Landlady, nay then i-Faith no Wonder if you rail so.


Land. Your Silver Sword I mean -- transmogrified to this twohanded Basket Hilt
-- this old Sir Guy of Warwick -- which will sell for nothing but old Iron. In
fine I Will have my Money Sir, or in faith Alsatia shall not shelter you.


[ Enter Rag. Gay. Well Landlady -- if we must part -- let us drink at parting,
here Landlady, here is to the Fool -- that shall love you better then I have
done.


[Sighing drinks. Land. Rot your Wine -- do you think to pacify me with Wine Sir.

[She refusing to drink he holds open her Jaws; Rag throws a Glass of Wine into
her Mouth. -- What will you force me -- no -- give me another Glass, I scorn to
be so uncivil to be forced, my Service to you Sir -- but this shall not do Sir --


[She drinks, he embracing her sings. Ah Cloris it is in vain you scold,
Whilst your Eyes kindle such a Fire.
Your railing cannot make me cold,
So fast as they a Warmth inspire.
Land. Well Sir you have no Reason to complain of my Eyes nor my Tongue
neither, if rightly understood.


[weeps. Gay. I know you are the best of Landladys,
As such I drink your Health --
[drinks. -- But to upbraid a Man in Tribulation -- fie -- it is not done like a
Woman of Honor, a Man that loves you too.


[She drinks. Land. I am a little hasty sometimes, but you know my good Nature


Gay. I do and therefore trust my little Wants with you.
I shall be rich again -- and then my dearest Landlady --

Land. Would this Wine might never go through me, if I would not go as they say
through Fire and Water -- by Night or by Day for you.


[She drinks. Gay. And as this is Wine -- I do believe thee --

[he drinks. Land. Well -- you have no Money in your Pocket now I Will warrant
you -- here -- here is ten Shillings for you old Greg'ry knows not of.


[Opens a great greasy Purse. Gay. I cannot in Conscience take it, good Faith
I cannot -- besides the next Quarrel you will hit me in the Teeth with it.


Land. Nay pray no more of that, forget it, forget it. I own I was to blame --
here -- Sir you shall take it.


Gay. Ay -- but what should I do with Money in -- these -- damned Breeches? --
No put it up -- I cannot appear abroad thus -- no I Will stay at home and loose my
business.


Land. Why, is there no Way to redeem one of your Suits?

Gay. None -- none -- I Will even lay me down and dye --

Land. Dye -- marry Heavens forbid -- I would not for the World -- let me see
-- hum -- what does it lie for?


Gay. Alas! dear Landlady a Sum -- a Sum.

Land. Well, say no more, I Will lay about me --

Gay. By this Kiss but you shall not -- Assafe^ida by this Light.

Land. Shall not? that is a good one i-Faith: shall you rule -- or I?

Gay. But should your Husband know it.

Land. Husband -- marry come up, Husbands know Wives Secrets? No sure the
Worlds not so bad yet -- where do your things lie? and sor what?


Gay. Five pound equips me -- Rag can conduct you -- but I say you shall not go
-- I Have sworn --


Land. Meddle with your Matters -- let me see, the Caudle Cup that Molly's
Grandmother left her will pawn for about that Sum -- I Will sneak it out -- well
Sir you shall have your things presently -- trouble not your Head, but expect
me.


[ Exit Landlady and Rag. Gay. Was ever Man put to such beastly Shifts?
'Sdeath, how she stunk -- my Senses are most luxuriously regall'd -- there is my
perpetual Music too --

[Knocking of Hammers on an Anvil. The ringing of Bells is an Ass to it.

Enter Rag. Rag. Sir there is one in a Coach below would speak to you.

Gay. With me -- and in a Coach, who can it be?

Rag. The Devil I think, for he has a strange Countenance.

Gay. The Devil, show your self a Rascal of Parts, Sirrah, and wait on him up
with Ceremony.


Rag. Who the Devil, Sir?

Gay. Ay the Devil Sir, if you mean to thrive.
[ Exit. Rag. -- Who can this be -- but see he comes to inform me
-- withdraw --

[Enter Bredwell dressed like a Devil. Bred. I come to bring you this --
[gives him a Letter, he reads. Gayman reads. Receive what Love and Fortune
present you with, be grateful and be silent, or twill vanish like a Dream, and
leave you more wretched than it found you [adieu. -- hah --

[gives him a Bag of Money. Bred. Nay view it Sir, it is all substantial Gold.

Gay. Now dare not I ask one civil Question for fear it vanish all --

[aside But I may ask how it is I ought to pay for this great Bounty.

Bred. Sir all the Pay is Secrecy --

Gay. And is this all that is required Sir?

Bred. No you're invited to the Shades below.

Gay. Hum, Shades below? -- I am not prepared for such a Journey Sir.


Bred. If you have Courage, Youth, or Love, you will follow me,
When Nights black Curtains drawn around the World,
And mortal Eyes are safely locked in Sleep,
[In feigned Heroic Tone. And no bold Spy dares view when Gods caress:
Then I Will conduct thee to the Banks of Bliss.
-- Durst thou not trust me?

Gay. Yes sure on such substantial Security.

[hugs the Bag. Bred. Just when the Day is vanished into Night,
And only twinkling Stars inform the World,
Near to the Corner of the silent Wall
In Fields of Lincoln's Inn thy Spirit shall meet thee.
-- Farewell --

[goes out. Gay. Hum -- I am awake sure, and this is Gold I grasp.
I could not see this Devil's cloven Foot,
Nor am I such a Coxcomb to believe,
But he was as substantial as his Gold.
Spirits, Ghost, Hobgoblings, Furys, Fiends, and Devils
I Have often heard old Wives fright Fools and Children with,
Which once arrived to common Sense they laugh at.
-- No, I am for things possible and Natural,
-- Some Female Devil old, and damned to Ugliness,
And past all Hopes of Courtship and Address,
Full of another Devil called Desire,
Has seen this Face -- this -- Shape -- this Youth
And thinks it worth her Hire. It must be so.
I must moyl on in the damned dirty Road,
And sure such Pay will make the Journey easy;
And for the Price of the dull drudging Night,
All Day I Will purchase new and fresh Delight.

[Exit. SCENE II. Sir Feeble's House.
Enter Leticia pursued by Phillis. Phil. Why Madam do you leave the Garden,
For this Retreat to Melancholy?

Let. Because it suits my Fortune and my Humor.
And even thy Presence would afflict me now.

Phil. Madam, I was sent after you, my Lady Fulbank has challenged
Sir Feeble at Bowls, and stakes a Ring of fifty Pound against his new Chariot.


Let. Tell him I wish him Luck in every thing
But in his Love to me --
Go tell him I am viewing of the Garden.
[ Exit Phillis. -- Blessed be this kind Retreat, this 'lone Occasion
That lends a short Cessation to my Torments.
Enter Belmour at a distance behind her. And gives me leave to vent my Sighs
and Tears!

Bell. And doubly blessed be all the Powers of Love,
[Weeps. That gives me this dear Opportunity.

Let. Where were you all ye pitying Gods of Love.
That once seemed pleased at Belmours Flame and mine,
And' smiling joined our Hearts, our sacred Vows
And spread your Wings, and held your Torches high.

Bell. Oh --

[She starts, pauses. Let. Where were you now! When this unequal Marriage,
Gave me from all my Joys, gave me from Relmour:
Your Wings were flag'd, your Torches bent to Earth;
And all your little Bonets veiled your Eyes.
You saw not, or were deaf and pityless.

Bell. Oh my Leticia!

Let. Hah, it is there again that; very Voice was Belmours:
Where art thou, oh thou lovely charming Shade?
For sure thou can not take a Shape to fright me.
-- What art thou -- speak!

[Not looking behind her yet for Fear: Bell. Thy constant true Adorer.
Who all this fatal Day has haunted thee
To ease his tortured Soul.

[Approaching nearer. Let. My Heart is well acquainted with that Voice,
speaking with Signs of Fear. But oh my Eyes dare not encounter thee.

Bell. Is it because thou'st broken all thy Vows?
-- Take to thee Courage and behold thy Slaughters.

Let. Yes, though the Sight would blast me I would view it.
[Turns. -- it is he -- it is very Belmour? or so like --
I cannot doubt but thou deserve this Welcome.

[Embraces him. Bell. Oh my Leticia!

Let. I Am sure I grasp not Air; thou art no Fantom.
My Arms return not empty to my Bosom,
But meet a solid Treasure.

Bell. A Treasure thou so easily threw'st away?
A Riddle simple Love never understood.

Let. Alas I heard, my Belmour, thou we^ dead.

Bell. And was it thus you mourned my F^neral?

Let. I will not justify my hated Crime.
But Oh remember I was poor and helpless.
And much reduced, and much imposed upon.

[Belmour ^eeps. Bell. And Want compelled thee to this wretched Marriage -- did
it?


Lit. It Is not a Marriage, since my Belmour lives:
The Consummation were Adultery.
I was thy Wife before, wo't thou deny me?

Bell. No by those Powers that heard our mutual Vows,
Those Vows that tie us faster than dull Priests.

Let. But oh my Belmour, thy sad Circumstances
Permit thee not to make a public Claim.
Thou art proscribed, and dy'st if thou art seen.

Bell. Alas!

Let. Yet I would wander with thee over the World,
And share thy humblest Fortune with thy Love.

Bell. Is It possible Leticia thou would fly
To foreign Shores with me?

Let. Can Belmour doubt the Soul he knows so well?

Bell. Perhaps in time the King may find my Innocence, and may extend his Mercy:

Mean time I Will make Provision for our Flight.

Let. But how 'twixt this and that can I defend my self from the loathed Arms
of an impatient Dotard, that I may come a spotless Maid to thee?


Bell. Thy native Modesty and my Industry
Shall well enough secure us.
Feign you nice Virgin-Cautions all the Day:
Then trust at Night to my Conduct to preserve thee.
-- And will thou yet be mine! Oh swear anew,
Give me again thy Faith, thy Vows, thy Soul:
For mine is so sick with this Days fatal Business,
It needs a Cordial of that mighty strength;
Swear, -- Swear, so as if thou break'st --
Thou may be -- any thing -- but Damned Leticia.

Let. Thus then, and hear me Heaven

[Kneels. Bell. And thus -- I Will listen to thee.

[Kneels. Enter Sir Feeble, L. Fulbank, Sir Cautious. Sir Fee. Let, Let,
Let, where are you little Rogne Let.
-- Ha^ -- hum -- what is here --

Bell. snatches her to his Bosom as if she fainted. Bell. Oh Heavens, she is gone,
she is gone!

Sir Fee. Gone -- whither is she gone? -- it seems she had the Wit to take good
Company with her --


The Women go to her, take her up. Bell. She Is gone to Heaven Sir, for ought I
know.

Sir Cau. She was resolved to go in a young Fellows Arms I see.

Sir Fee. Go to, Francis -- go to.

L. Full. Stand back Sir, she recovers.

Bell. Alas, I found her dead upon the Floor,
-- Should I have left her so -- if I had known your Mind --.

Sir Fee. Was it so -- was it so -- got-so, by no means Francis. --

Let. Pardon him Sir; For surely I had died,
But for his timely coming.

Sir Fee. Alas poor Pupsey -- was it sick -- look here -- here is a fine thing
to make it well again. Come buss, and it shall have it -- oh how I long for
Night.

Ralph, are the Fiddlers ready?

Ral They are tuning in the Hall Sir.

Sir Fee. That Is well, they know my mind. I hate than same twang, twang, twang,
fum, fum, fum, tweedle, tweedle, tweedle, then serve go the Pins, till a man's
Teeth are on Edge; then snap says a small Gut, and there we are at a loss
again. I long to be in Bed -- with a hey tredodle, tredodle, tredodle -- with a
hay tredool, tredodle, tredo --


Dancing and playing on his Stick, like a Flute. Sir Cau. A prudent Man would
reserve himself -- Goodfacks I danced so on my Wedding Day, that when I came to
Bed, to my Shame be it spoken, I fell fast asleep, and slept till morning.


L. Full. Where was your Wisdom then, Sir Cautious?
But I know what a wise Woman ought to have dove.

Sir Fee. Odshobs, that is Wormwood, that is Wormwood -- I shall have my young
Hussy set a-gog too; she will hear there are better things in the World than she
has at home, and then odsbobs, and then they will have it, adod they will, Sir
Cautious. Ever while you live, keep a Wife ignorant, unless a Man be as brisk
as his Neighbors.


Sir Cau. A wise Man will keep 'em from bawdy Christnings then, and Gossipings.


Sir Fee. Christnings, and Gossipings; why they are the very Schools that
debauch our Wives, as Dancing-Schools do our Daughters.


Sir Cau. Ay, when the overjoyed good Man invites 'em all against that time
twelve Month: Oh he is a dear Man, cry's one -- I marry cry's another, here is a
Man indeed -- my Husband -- God help him --


Sir Fee. Then she falls to telling of her Grievance till (half maudlin) she
weeps again: Just my Condition cry's a third, so the Frolic goes round, and we
poor Cuckolds are anatomized, and turned the right sides outward; adsbobs we
are Sir Cautious.


Sir Cau. Ay, ay, this Grievance ought to be redrest Sir Feeble, the grave and
sober Part o the Nation are hereby ridiculed, -- Ay, and cuckol'd too, for
ought I know.


L. Full. Wise men, knowing this, should not expose their Infirmities, by
marrying us young Wenches; who, without Instruction, find how we are imposed
upon.


Enter Fidles playing, Mr. Bearjest and Diana dancing; Bredwel, Noysey. etc. L.
Full. So Cousin, I see you have found the way to Mrs. Dy's
Heart.

Bea. Who I, my dear Lady Aunt, I never knew but one Way to a Woman's Heart, and
that Road I have not yet traveled; For my Uncle, who is a wise Man, says
Matrimony is a sort of a -- kind of a -- as it were do you see of a Voyage, which
every Man of Fortune is bound to make one time or other -- and Madam -- I am as
it were -- a bold Adventurer.


Die. And are you sure, Sir, you will venture on me?

Bear. Sure? -- I thank you for that -- as if I could not believe my Uncle: For
in this Case a young Heir has no more to do, but to come and see, settle,
marry, and use you scurvily.


Die. How Sir, scurvily?

Bear. Very scurvily, that is to say, be always fashionably drunk, despise the
Tyranny of your Bed, and reign absolutely -- keep a Serag^ (...) Women, and let
my bastard Issue inherit: Be seen once a Quarter, or so, with you in the Park
for Countenance, where we loll two several Ways in the gilt Coach like Janus,
or a Spread-Eagle.


Die. And do you expect I should be honest the while?

Bear. Heaven forbid, not I, I have not met with that Wonder in all my Travels.


L. Full. How Sir, not an honest Woman?

Bear. Except my Lady Aunt -- Nay as I am a Gentleman and the first of my
Family -- you shall pardon me, here -- Cuff me, Cuff me soundly.


[Kneels to her. Enter Gayman richly dressed. Gay. This Love's a damned
bewitching thing -- now tho I should lose my Assignation with my Devil, I
cannot hold from seeing ^uia to Night: hah -- there, and with a Fop at her Feet
-- Oh Vanity of Woman!


[Softly pulls her. L. Fulb. Oh Sir, you are welcome from Northamptonshire.

Gay. Hum -- surely she knows the Cheat.

[Aside. L. Fulb. You are so Gay, you save me Sir the Labor
Of asking if your Uncle be alive.

Gay. 'Pray Heaven she have not found my Circumstances!
[Aside. But if she have, Confidence must assist me --
-- And Madam you are too Gay, for me to enquire
Whether you are that Julia, which I left you?

L. Fulb. Oh, doubtless Sir --

Gay. But why the Devil do I ask -- Yes, you are still the same; one of those
hoiting Ladies, that love nothing like Fool and Fiddle; Crowds of Fops; had
rather be publicly, tho dully, flattered, than privately adored; you love to
pass for the Wit of the Company, by talking all and loud.


L. Fulb. Rail on! 'till you have made me think my Virtue at so low Ebb, it
should submit to you.


Gay. What -- I Am not discreet enough,
I Will babble all in my next high Debauch,
Boast of your Favors, and describe your Charms
To every wishing Fool?

L. Fulb. Or make most filthy Verses of me --
Under the name of Cloris -- you Philander,
Who in lewd Rhimes confess the dear Appointment;
What Hour, and where, how silent was the Night,
How full of Love your Eyes, and Wishing, mine.
Faith no; if you can afford me a Lease of your Love,
'Till the Old Gentleman my Husband depart this wicked World,
I Am for the Bargain.

Sir Cau. Hum -- what is here, a young Spark at my Wife?

[Goes about 'em. Gay. Unreasonable Julia, is that all,
My Love, my Sufferings, and my Vows must hope?
Set me an Age -- say when you will be kind,
And I will languish out in starving Wish.
But thus to gape for Legacies of Love,
'Till Youth be past Enjoyment,
The Devil I will as soon -- sarewel --

[Offers to go. L. Fulb. Stay, I conjure you stay --

Gay. And loose my Assignation with my Devil.

[Aside. Sir Cau. It Is so, Ay, Ay, it is so -- and Wise men will perceive it;
it is here -- here in my Forehead, it more than Buds; it sprouts, it flourishes.


Sir Feeb. So, that young Gentleman has nettl'd him, stung him toth' quick: I
hope he will chain her up -- the Gad Bee's in his Qunnundrum -- in Charity I Will
relieve him -- come my Lady Fulbank, the Night grows old upon our hands, to
dancing, to jiggeting -- Come shall I lead your Ladyship?


L. Fulb. No Sir, you see I am better provided --

[Takes Gayman's hand. Sir Cau. Ay, no doubt on it, a Pox on him for a young
handsome
Dog.

[They dance all. Sir Feeb. Very well, very well, now the Posset, and then --
ods bobs, and then --


Dia. And then we'll have the other Dance.

Sir Feeb. Away, Girls, away, and steal the Bride to Bed; they have a deal to
do upon their Wedding-nights; and what with the todious Ceremonies of dressing
and undressing, the smutty Lectures of the Women, by way of Instruction, and
the little Stratagems of the young Wenches -- ods bobs, a man's cozened of
half his Night: Come Gentlemen, one Bottle, and then -- we'll toss the Stocken.


[Exeunt all but L. Fulb Bred. who are talking, and Gayman. L. Fulb. But do
thou think he will come?

Bred. I do believe so Madam --

L. Fulb. Be sure you contrive it so, he may not know whither, or to whom he
comes.


Bred. I warrant you Madam for our Parts.

[Exit Bredwel stealing out Gayman. L. Fulb. How now, what departing?

Gay. You are going to the Bride-chamber.

L. Fulb. No matter, you shall stay --

Gay. I hate to have you in a Crowd.

L. Fulb. Can you deny me -- will you not give me one
Lone hour in the Garden?

Gay. Where we shall only tantalize each other with dull Kissing, and part with
the same Appetite we met -- no Madam, besides I have Business --


L. Fulb. Some Assignation -- is it so indeed?

Gay. Away; you cannot think me such a Traitor; it is most important Business.


L. Fulb. Oh it is too late for Business -- let to Morrow serve.

Gay. By no means -- the Gentleman is to go out of Town.

L. Fulb. Rise the earlier then --

Gay. -- But Madam, the Gentleman lies dangerously -- sick -- and should he die
--


L. Fulb. It Is not a dying Uncle, I hope Sir?

Gay. Hum --

L. Fulb. The Gentleman a dying, and to go out of Town to
Morrow!

Gay. Ay -- a -- he goes -- in a Litter -- it is his Fancy Madam -- Change of
Air may recover him.


L. Fulb. So may your change of Mistress do me Sir -- farewell.


[Goes out. Gay. Stay Julia -- Devll be damned -- for you shall tempt no more,
I Will love and be undone -- but she is gone --

And if I stay the most that I shall gain
Is but a reconciling Look, or Kiss.
No my kind Goblin --

I ll keep my Word with thee, as the least Evil,
A tantalizing Woman's worse than Devil.
The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I. Sir Feeble's House.
The Second Song before the Entry. A SONG made by Mr. Cheek.
NO more Lucinda, ah! expose no more
To the admiring World those conquering Charms:
In vain all day unhappy men adore,
What the kind Night gives to my longing Arms.
Their vain Attempts can never successful prove,
Whilst I so well maintain the Fort of Love.
Yet to the World with so bewitching Arts,
Your dazzling Beauty you around display,
And triumph in the Spoils of broken hearts,
That sink beneath your feet, and crowd your way:
Ah! suffer now your Cruelty to cease,
And to a fruitless War prefers a Peace.
Enter Ralph with Light, Sir Feeble, and Belmour sad. Sir Fee. SO, so; the'r
gone -- Cme Francis, you shall have the Honor of Undressing me for the
Encounter, but 'twill be a Sweet one, Francis.


Bell. Hell take him, how he tezes me?

[Vndressing all the while. Sir Feeb. But is the young Rogue laid Francis -- is
she stolen to Bed? What Tricks the young Baggages have to whet a man's Appetite?


Bell. Ay Sir -- Pox on him -- he will raise my Anger up to Madness, and I shall
kill him, to prevent his going to Bed to her.


Sir Feeb. A pise of those Bandstrings -- the more Have the less Speed.


Bell. Be it so in all things, I beseech thee Venus?

Sir Feeb. Thy Aid a little Francis -- oh -- oh -- thou choakst me. 'Sbobs,
what do mean --


[Pinches him by the Throat. Bell You had so hampered 'em Sir -- the Devil's
very mischievous in me.


[Aside. Sir Feeb. Come, come quick, good Francis, adod I Am as yare as a Hawk
at the young Wanton -- nimbly good Francis, untruss, untruss --


Bell. Cramps seize ye -- what shall I do -- the near Approach distracts me!


Sir Feeb. So, so, my Breeches, good Francis. But well Francis, how do think
I got the young Jade my Wife?


Bell. With five hundred pounds a year Jointure Sir.

Sir Feeb. No, that would not do, the Baggage was damnably in love with a young
Fellow, they call Belmour, a handsome young Rascal he was they say, that is truth
on it, and a pretty Estate, but happening to kill a Man, he was forced to fly.


Bell. That was great pity Sir.

Sir Feeb. Pity, hang him Rogue, 'sbobs, and all the young Fellows in the Town
deserve it; we can never keep our Wives and Daughters honest for rampant young
Dogs; and an old Fellow cannot put in amongst 'em, under being undone, with
Presenting, and the Devil and all. But what do think I did, being damnably in
Love -- I feigned a Letter as from the Hague, wherein was a Relation of this
same Belmour's being hanged.


Bell. Is It possible Sir, could you devise such News?

Sir Feeb. Possible man? I did it, I did it; she swoonded at the News, shut her
self up a whole Month in her Chamber; but I presented high; she sight and wept,
and swore she would never marry. Still I presented, she hated, loathed, spit upon
me, still adod I presented! till I presented my self effectually in Church to
her; for she at last wisely considered her Vows were cancelled since Belmour
was hanged.


Bell. Faith Sir, this was very cruel to take away his Fame, and then his
Mistress.


Sir Feeb. Cruel, you are an Ass, we are but even with the brisk Rogues, for
they take away our Fame, Cuckold us, and take away our Wives. -- So, so, my Cap
Francis.


Bell. And do you think this Marriage lawful Sir?

Sir Feeb. Lawful; it shall be when I Have had Livery and Seisin of her Body --
and that shall be presently Rogue -- quick -- besides this, Belmour dares as
well be hanged as come into England.


Bell. If he gets his Pardon Sir --

Sir Feeb. Pardon, no, no, I have took care for that, for I have you must know
got his Pardon already.


Bell. How Sir, got his Pardon, that is some amends for robbing him of his Wife.


Sir Feeb. Hold honest Francis; what do think 'twas in Kindness to him? no
you Fool, I got his Pardon my self, that no body else should have it, so that
if he gets any Body to speak to his Majesty for it, his Majesty cries he has
granted it; but for want of my Appearance, he is defunct, trust up, hanged
Francis.


Bell. This is the most excellent Revenge I ever heard of.

Sir Feeb. Ay, I learnt it of a great Politician of our Times.

Bell. But have you got his Pardon? --

Sir Feeb. I Have don't, I Have don't; Pox on him, it cost me five hundred pounds
tho! here it is, my Solicitor brought it me this Evening.


[Gives it him. Bell. This was a lucky Hit -- and if it escape me, let me be
hanged by a Trick indeed.


Sir Feeb. So, put it into my Cabinet -- safe Francis, safe.

Bell. Safe I Will warrant you Sir.

Sir Feeb. My Gown, quick, quick -- the other Sleeve, man -- so now my Nightcap;
well I Will in, throw open my Gown to fright away the Women; and jump into her
Arms.


[Exit Sir Feeble. Bell. He Is gone, quickly Oh Love inspire me!

Enter a Footman. Foot. Sir, my Master Sir Cautious Fulbank left his Watch on
the little Parlor-Table to Night, and bid me call for it.


Bell. Hah -- the Bridegroom has it Sir, who is just gone to Bed, it shall be
sent him in the Morning.


Foo^. It Is ^ery well Sir -- your Servant --

[ Exit Footman. Bell. Let me see -- here is the Watch, I took it up to keep for
him -- but his sending has inspired me with a slidden Stratagem, that will do
better than Force, to secure the poor trembling Leticia -- who I am sure is
dying with her Fears.


[ Exit Bell. SCENE changes, to the Bedchamber; Leticia in an Undressing, by the
Women at the Table. Enter to them Sir Feeble Fainwou'd. Sir Fe^. What Is here?
what is here? the prating Women still. Ods bobs, what not in Bed yet? for shame
of Love Leticia.


Let. For shame of Modesty Sir; you would not have me go to Bed before all this
Company.


Sir Feeb. What the Women; why they must see you laid, it is the Fashion.


Let. What with a Man? I would not for the World.
Oh Belmou^, where art thou, with all thy promised Aid?

Die. Nay Madam, we should see you laid indeed.

Let. First in my Grave Diana.

Sir Feeb. Ods bobs, here is a Compact amongst the Women -- High Treason against
the Bridegroom -- therefore Ladies withdraw or adod Ill lock you all in.

[Throws open his Gown, they run all away, he locks the Door. So, so, now we are
alone Letioia -- off with this foolish Modesty, and Nightgown, and slide into
my Arms,

[She runs from him. H'e' my little Puskin -- what fly me my Coy Daphne,
[He pursues her. [Knocking. Hah -- who is that knocks -- who is there? --

Bell. It Is I Sir, it is I, open the Door presently.

Sir Feeb. Why, what is the matter, is the House o-fire?

Bell. Worse Sir, worse --

[He opens the Door, Belmour enters with the Watch in his hand. Let. It Is
Belmour's Voice!

Bell. Oh Sir, do you know this Watch?

Sir F^b. This Watch.

Bell. Ay^ Sir, this Watch

Sir Feeb. This Watch -- why prithee, why do tell me of a Watch, (...) Sir
Cautio^ Fulbank's Watch, what then, what a Pox do trouble me with Watches.

Offers to put him out, he returns.
Bell. It Is indeed his Watch She, and by this Token he has sent for you, to come
immediately to his House Sir.


Sir Feeb. What a Devil art Mad Francis, or is his Worship Mad, or does he
think me Mad -- go prithee tell him I Will come to him to Morrow.


[Goes to put him out. Bell. To Morrow Sir, why all our Throats may be cut
before to Morrow.


Sir Feeb. What say thou, Throats cut?

Bell. Why, the City's up in Arms Sir, and all the Aldermen are met at
Guild Hall; some damnable Plot Sir.


Sir Feeb. Hah -- Plot -- the Aldermen met at Guild Hall? -- hum -- why let 'em
meet, Vll not lose this Night to save the Nation.


Let. Would you to bed Sir, when the weighty Affairs of State require your
Presence.


Sir Feeb. -- Hum -- met at Guild hall? -- my Clothes, my Gown again Francis,
I Will out -- out, what upon my Wedding night? no -- I Will in.


[Putting on his Gown pausing, pulls it off again. Let. For shame Sir, shall
the Reverend Council of the City debate without you?


Sir Feeb. Ay, that is true, that is true, come truss again Francis, truss again
-- yet now I think on it Francis, prithee run thee to the Hall, and tell 'em
it is my Wedding-Night, do you see Francis; and let foam body give my Voice for --


Bell. What Sir?

Sir Feeb. Adod I cannot tell; up in Arms say you, why, let 'em sight Dog,
fight Bean; mun, I Will to Bed -- go --


Let. And shall his Majesty's Service and his Safety lie unregarded for a
slight Woman Sir?


Sir Feeb. Hum, his Majesty! -- come, have Francis, I Will away, and call Ralph,
and the Footmen, and bid 'em Arm; each man shoulder his Musket; and advance his
Pike -- and bring my Artillery Implements quick -- and let us away: Pupsey --
b^u'y Pupsey, I Will bring it a fine thing yet before Morning, it may be -- let us
away; I shall grow fond, and forget the Business of the Nation -- come follow
me Francis --


[Exit Sir Feeble; Belmour runs to Leticia. Bell. Now my Leticia, if thou^e'r
did love!
If ever thou design'st to make me blessed --
Without delay sly this Adulterous Bed!

Sir Feeb. Why Francis -- where are you ^nave?

[Sir Feeb. within. Bell. I must be gone, lest he suspect us -- I Will loose him,
and return to thee immediately -- get thy self ready --


Let. I will not fail my Love.

[Exit Belmour. -- Old man forgive me -- thou the Agressor art,
Who rudely forced the Hand without the Heart.
She cannot from the Paths of Honor rave,
Whose Guide's Religion, and whose End is Love.
[Exit. Scene changes to a wash-House, or out-House. Enter with Dark-lanthorn
Bredwel disguised like a Devil, leading Gayman. Bred. Stay here, till I give
notice of your coming.

[Exit Bredwel, leaves his Dark-lanthorn. Gay. Kind Light, a little of your Aid
-- now must I be peeping tho my Curiosity should lose me all -- hah -- Zouns,
what is here -- a Hovel or a Hog-sty? hum, see the Wickedness of Man, that I
should find no time to Swear in, but just when I Am in the Devils Clutches.


Enter Pert, as an old Woman with a Staff. Old Woman. Good Even to you, fair
Sir.

Gay. Ha -- desend me! if this be she, I must rival the Devil, that is certain.


Old W. Come young Gentleman, dare not you venture?

Gay. He must be as hot as Vesuvius, that does -- I shall never earn my
Morning's Present.


Old W. What do you fear, a longing Woman Sir?

Gay. The Devil I do -- this is a damned Preparation to Love.


Old W. Why stand you gazing Sir, a Woman's Passion is like the Tide, it stays
for no man when the Hour is come --


Gay. I Am sorry I have took it at the Turning.
I Am sure mine is ebbing out as fast.

Old W. Will you not speak Sir -- will you not on?

Gay. I would fain ask -- a civil Question or two first.

Old W. You know, too much Curiosity lost Paradise.

Gay. Why there is it now.

Old W. Fortune and Love invite you if you dare follow me.

Gay. This is the first thing in Peticoats that ever dared me in vain. Were I
but sure she were but Humane now -- for sundry Considerations she might down --
but I will on --


[She goes, he follows; both go out. SCENE. A Chamber in the Apartment of L.
Fulbank. Enter Old Women followed by Gayman in the dark. [Soft Music plays,
she leaves him. -- Hah, Music -- and Excellent!
SONG.
OH! Love, that stronger art than Wine,
Pleasing Delusion, Witchery divine,
Want to be prized above all Wealth,
Disease that has more Joys than Health.
Tho we blaspheme thee in our Pain,
And of thy Tyranny complain,
We all are bettered by thy Reign.
What Reason never can bestow
We to this useful Passion owe.
Love wakes the Dull from slugesh Ease,
And learns a Clown the Art to please.
Humbles the Vain, kindles the Cold,
Makes Misers free, and Cowards bold.
It Is he reforms the Sot from Drink,
And teaches airy Fops to think
When full brute Appetite is fed,
And choked the Glutton lies, and dead:
Thou new Spirits does dispense,
And fines the gross Delights of Sense.
Virtues unconquerable Aid,
That against Nature can persuade:
And makes a roveing Mind retire
Within the Bounds of just Desire.
Chearer of Age, Youths kind unrest,
And half the Heaven of the Blessed.
Ah Julia, Julia! if this soft Preparation
Were but to bring me to thy dear Embraces;
What different Motions would surround my Soul,
From what perplex it now.
Enter Nymphs and Shepherds, and dance. [Then two dance alone. All go out but
Pert and a Shepherd. -- If these be Devils, they are obliging ones.
I did not care if I ventured on that last Female Fiend.

Man sings. Cease your Wonder, cease your Guess,
Whence arrives your Happiness.
Cease your Wonder, cease your Pain.
Humane Fancy is in vain.

Chorns. It Is enough you once shall find,
Fortune may to Worth be kind;
[gives him Gold. And Love can leave off being blind.

Pert sings. You, before you enter here --
On this sacred Ring must swear.
Puts it on his Finger, holds his Hand. By the Figure which is round,
Your Passion constant and profound.
By the Adamantine Stone,
To be fixed to one alone.
By the Luster which is true,
Never to break your sa^red Vow.
Lastly by the Gold that is t^y'd
For Love all Dangers to abide.

They all dance about him, while those same two sing. Man. Once about him let
us move,
To confirm him true to Love.

[bis. Pert. Twice with mystic turning Feet,
Make him silent and discreet.

[bis Man. Thrice about him let us tread,
To keep him ever young in Red.

[bis. Gives him another part. Man. Forget Aminta's proud Disdain.
Taste here, and sigh no more in vain.
The Joy of Love without the Pain.

(...). That God vepenes his former Slights,
And For^ thus your Faith requir^s.

Both. Forget ^;
Then taste, and sigh no more in vain,
The Joy of Love without the Pain.
The Joy of Love without the Pain.

[ Exeunt all Dancers. Looks on himself and feels about him. Gay. What the
Devil can all this mean? If there be a Woman in the Case -- Sure I have not
lived so bad a Life, to gain the dull Reputation of so modest a Coxcomb, but
that a Female might down with me, without all this Ceremony. Is it care of her
Honor? -- that cannot be -- this Age afford none so nice: nor Fiend, nor
Goddess can she be, for these I saw were mortal! No -- it is a Woman -- I am
positive. Not young nor handsome, for then Vanity had made her Glory to 'ave
been seen. No -- sinee it is resolved a Woman -- she must be old and ugly, and
will not bauk my Fancy with her Sight. But baits me more with this essential
Beauty.


Well -- be she young or old, Woman or Devil.
She pays, and I Will endeavor to be civil.
SCENE in the same House. The flat Scene of the Hall. After a knocking, Enter
Bredwel in his masking Habit, with his Vizard in one Hand and a Light in
the other in haste. Bred. HAh, knocking so late at at our Gate --

(Opens the Door. Enter Sir Feeble dressed and armed Cap-a-pee with a broad wast
Belt stuck round with Pistols, a Helmet, Scarf, Buffcoat and half Pike. Sir
Feeb. How now, how now, what is the matter here?

Bred: Matter, what is my Lady's innocent Intrigue found out? -- Heaven's Sir
what makes you here in this warlike Equipage?


Sir Feeb. What makes you in this showing Equipage Sir?

Bred. I have been dancing among some of my Friends.

Sir Feeb. And I thought to have been fighting with some of my Friends. Where Is
Sir Cautious? where is Sir Cautious?


Bred. Sir Cautious -- Sir, in Bed.

Sir Feeb. Call him, call him -- quickly good Edward.

Bred. Sure my Lady's Frollick is betrayed and he comes to make
Mischief. However I Will go and secure Mr. Gayman.
[Exit Bredwel. Enter Sir Cautious and Boy with Light. Dick, Pray Sir go to
Bed, here is no Thieves; all is still and well.

Sir Cau. This last Nights Misfortune of mine Dick, has kept me waking and
methought all Night I heard a kind of a silent Noise. I am still afraid of
Thieves, mercy upon me to loose five hundred Ginneys at one clap Dick. -- Hah
-- bless me! What Is yonder! Blow the great Horn Dick -- Thieves -- Murder,
Murder.


Sir Feeb. Why what a Pox are you mad? It Is I, it is I Man.

Sir Cau. I, who am I? Speak -- declare -- pronounce.

Sir Feeb. Your Friend old Feeble Fainwood.

Sir Cau. How, Sir Feeble! At this late Hour, and on his Wedding Night -- why
what is the matter Sir -- is it Peace or War with you?


Sir Feeb. A Mistake -- a Mistake -- proceed to the Business good Brother, for
time you know is precious.


Sir Cau. Some strange Catastrophe has happened between him and his Wife to
Night, that makes him disturb me thus -- come sit good Brother, and to the
Business as you say --

[Aside
They sit one at one end of the Table, the other at the other, Dick sets down
the Light and goes out -- both sit gaping and staring and expecting when either
should speak. Sir Feeb. As soon as you please Sir. Lord how wildly he stares!
He Is much disturbed in's Mind -- well Sir let us be brief --

Sir Cau. As brief as you please Sir, -- well Brother --

[^pawsing still. Sir Feeb. So Sir.

Sir Cau. How strangely he stares and gapes -- some deep Concern!


Sir Feeb. Hum -- hum --

Sir Cau. I listen to you, advance --

Sir Feeb. Sir?

Sir Cau. A very distracted Countenance -- pray Heaven he be ^ot mad, and a
young Wife is able to make any old Fellow mad, that is the Truth on it.


[Aside. Sir Feeb. Sure it is something of his Lady -- he is so loath to bring it
out -- I am sorry you are thus disturbed Sir.


Sir Cau. No disturbance to serve a Friend --

Sir Feeb. I think I am your Friend indeed Sir Cautious, or I would not have
been here upon my Wedding Night.


Sir Cau. His Wedding Night -- there lies his Grief poor Heart!
Perhaps she has cuckolded him already --
[Aside. -- Well come Brother -- many such things are done --

Sir Feeb. Done -- hum -- come out with it Brother -- what troubles you to
Night.


Sir Cau. Troubles me -- why, knows he I am robbed?

[Aside. Sir Feeb. I may perhaps restore you to the Rest you have lost.

Sir Cau. The Rest, why have I lost more since? Why know you then who did it?
Oh how I Will be revenged upon the Rascal?


Sir Feeb. It Is -- Jealousy, the old Worm that bites --
[Aside Who is it you suspect?

Sir Cau. Alas I know not whom to suspect, I would I did; but if you could
discover him -- I would so swinge him. --


Sir Feeb. I know him -- what do you take me for a Pinip Sir? I know him --
there is your Watch again Sir, I Am your Friend, but no Pimp Sir --


[Rises in Rage. Sir Cau. My Watch, I thank you Sir -- but why Pimp Sir?

Sir Feeb. Oh a very thriving Calling Sir -- and I have a young Wife to
practice with. I know your Rogues?


Sir Cau. A young Wife -- it is so, his Gentlewoman has been at Hot-Cockles
without her Husband, and he is Horn mad upon it. I suspected her being so close
in with his Nephew -- in a Fit with a Pox --

[Aside. Come come Sir Feeble it is many an honest Man's Fortune.

Sir Feeb. I grant it Sir -- but to the Business Sir I came for.

Sir Cau. With all my Soul --

[They sit gaping and expecting when either should speak. Enter Bredwel and
Gayman at the Door. Bredwel sees them and put Gayman back again. Bred. Hah --
Sir Feeble -- and Sir Cautious there -- what shall I do? For this Way we must
pass, and to carry him back would discover my Lady to him, betray all and spoil
the Jest -- retire Sir, your Life depends upon your being unseen.


[go out. Sir Feeb. Well Sir, -- do you not know that I am married Sir?
And this my Wedding Night?

Sir Cau. Very good Sir.

Sir Feeb. And that I long to be in Bed?

Sir Cau. Very well Sir --

Sir Feeb. Very good Sir, and very well Sir -- why then what the Devil do I
make here Sir!


[Rises in a Rage. Sir Cau. Patienco Brother -- and forward --

Sir Feeb. Forward -- lend me your Hand good Brother -- lets feel your Pulse --
how has this Night gone with you?


Sir Cau. Ha, ha, ha -- this is the oddest Quonundrum -- sure he is mad -- and
yet now I think on it, I have not slept to Night, nor shall I ever sleep again
till I have found the Villain that robbed me.


[weeps. Sir Feeb. So -- now he weeps -- far gone -- this laughing and weeping
is a very bad Sign! Come let me lead you to your Bed.


[Aside Sir Cau. Mad -- stark Mad -- no -- now I Am up it is no Matter -- pray
ease your troubled Mind -- I am your Friend -- out with it -- wllat was it
acted? O^ but designed?


Sir Feeb. How Sir?

Sir. Cau. Be not ashamed -- I Am under the same Prema^ire I doubt, little
better than a -- but let that pass --


Sir Feeb. Have you any Proof?

Sir Cau. Proof of what, good Sir?

Sir Feeb. Of what, why that you are a Cuckold -- Sir a Cuckold if you will have it.


Sir Cau. Cuckold Sir -- do ye know what ye say?

Sir Feeb. What I say?

Sir Cau. I what you say, can you make this out?

Sir Feeb. I make it out --

Sir Cau. Ay Sir -- if you say it and cannot make it out -- you're a --


Sir Feeb. What am I Sir? What am I?

Sir Cau. A Cuckold as well as my self She, and I Will sue you for Scandalum
Magnatum, I shall recover swinging Damages with a City Jury.


Sir Feeb. I know of no such thing Sir.

Sir Cau. No Sir?

Sir Feeb. No Sir.

Sir Cau. Then what would you be at Sir?

Sir Feeb. I be at Sir -- what would you be at Sir?

Sir Cau. Ha, ha, ha -- why this is the strangest thing -- to see an old
Fellow, a Magistrate of the City, the first Night he is married forsake his
Bride and Bed, and come armed Cap-a-pee, like Garga^ta, to disturb another old
Fellow and banter him with a Tale of a Tub; and all to be-cuckold him here --
in plain English what is your Business?


Sir Feeb. Why what the Devils your Businessa and you go to that?

Sir Cau. My Business with whom?

Sir Feeb. With me Sir, with me, what a Pox de ye think I do here.


Sir Cau. It Is that I would be glad to know Sir.

Enter Dick. Sir Feeb. Here Dick, remember I Have brought back your Masters
Watch, next time he sends for me over Night I Will come to him in the Morning.


Sir Cau. Ha, ha, ha -- I send for you? Go home and sleep Sir -- ad and yo^
keep your Wife wijubg ti si Alittle purpose you would go near to be (...) with
(...) of Horns


Sir Feeb. Roguery -- ^ --
Look ye this was the Message I received --

Tells him fee^ringly. En^ Bredwell to the Door -- in a white Sheet like a
Ghost ^ Bred. Now Sir we are two ^o two, for this Way you must pass or be taken
in the Ladys Lodgings -- I'll-first adventure out to make you pass the fafer.
And that he may not, if possible, fee Sir Cautious, whom I shall fright into a
Trance I am sure.

[Aside. And Sir Feeble the Devil's in t if he know him.

Gay. A brave kind Fellow this --

Enter Bred well stalking on as a Ghost by them. Sir Gay. Oh -- andone --
andone -- help help --
I Am dead, I Am dead -- I

[Aside -- and stands still. Bred. As I could wish --
[Aside -- turns. -- Come on thou ghastly thing and follow me --

Enter Gayman like a Ghost with a Torch -- Sir Cau. Oh Lord, oh Lord --

Gay. Hah -- old Sir Feeble Fain^ood -- why where the Devil am I? -- It Is he --
and be it where it will I Will fright the old Dotard for couzening my Friend of
his Mistress --


[stalks on -- Sir Feeb. Oh guard me -- guard me -- all ye Poe'rs?

[Tr^blign. Gay. Thou call'st in vain fond W^otch -- for I am Be^,

Whom first thor^ robst of Fame and Life.
And then what dearer was -- his Wife --
[Goes out shaking his Torch at him. Sir Cau. Oh Lord -- oh Lord!

Enter Lady Fulbank in an (...) and Pert undrest. L. Fulb. Heavens what Noise
is this? -- So he is got safe out I see -- hah what thing art thou --


[Sees Sir Feeble an^'d. Sir Feeb. Stay Madam stay -- (...) I, it is ^a poor
trembling Mortal --

L. Fulb. Sir Feeble Fa^ood -- rise -- are you both mad? --


Sir Cau. No no -- Madam we have seen the Devil.

Sir Feeb. Ay and he was as tall as the Mohnment.

Sir Cau. With Eyes like a Beacon -- and a Mouth -- Heaven bless us like London
Bridge at a full Tide.


Sir Feeb. Ay, and reared as loud --

L. Fulb. Idle Fancys, what makes you from your Bed? And you
Sir from your Bride?

[Enter Dick with Sack. Sir Feeb. Oh! that is the Business of another Day, a
Mistake only Madam.


L. Fulb. Away, I Am ashamed to see wise Men so weak, the Fantoms of the Night,
or your own Shadows, the Whimseys of the Brain for want of Rest, or perhaps
Bredwell your Man -- who being wiser than his Master played you this Trick to
fright you both to Bed.


Sir Feeb. Hum -- adod and that may be, for the young Knave when he let me in
to Night, was dressed up for some Waggery --


Sir Cau. Ha, ha, ha, 'twas even so sure enough Brother --

Sir Feeb. Ads bobs but they frighted me at first basely -- but I Will home to
Pupsey, there may be Roguery, as well as here -- Madam I ask your Pardon, I see
we are all mistaken.


L. Fulb. Ay, Sir Feeble; go home to your Wife.

[Exit severally. SCENE the Street. Enter Belmour at the Door, knocks, and
enter to him from the House Phillis. Phil. OH are you come Sir, I Will call my
Lady down.

Bell. Oh haste, the Minutes fly -- leave all behind. And bring Leticia only to
my Arms.

[A Noise of People. -- Hah -- what Noise is that? It Is coming this Way -- I
tremble with my Fears -- hah -- Death and the Devil -- It Is he --

Enter Sir Feeble and his Men armed, goes to the Door, knocks. Ay it is he --
and I Am undone -- what shall I do to kill him now? besides the Sin would put me
past all Hopes of pardoning.


Sir Feeb. A damned Rogue to deceive me thus --

Bell. Hah -- see by Heaven Leticia! Oh we are ruined!

Sir Feeb. Hum -- what is here two Women? --

[stands a little off. Enter Leticia and Phillis softly undre st with a Box.
Let. Where are you my best Wishes? Lord of my Vows -- and Charmer of my Soul?
Where are you?


B^ll. Oh Heavens! --

[Draws his Sword half Way. Sir Feeb. Hum, who is here? My Gentlewoman -- she is
monstrous kind of the sudden. But whom is it meant to?


[Aside. Le^ Give me your Hand my Love, my Life, my all --
-- Alas! where are you?

Sir Feeb. Hum -- no, no, this is not to me -- I am jilted, cozened, Cuckol'd,
and so forth --


[Groping she takes hold of Sir Feeb. Let. Oh are you here, indeed you frighted
me with your Silence -- here take these Jewels and let us have away.


Sir Feeb. Hum -- are you thereabouts Mistress, was I sent away with a
Sharn-Plot for this! -- She can not mean it to me.


Let. Will you not speak -- will you not answer me? -- do you repent already?
-- before Enjoyment are you cold and false?


Sir Feeb. Hum -- before Enjoyment -- that must be me? Before Enjoyment -- Ay
ay it is I -- I see a little

[merrily. Prolonging a Woman's Joy, sets an Edge upon her Appetite.

Let. What means my Dear? Shall we not haste away?

Sir Feeb. Have away? there it is again -- no -- it is not me she means what at
your Tricks and Intrigues already -- yes yes I am destined a Cuckold --


Let. Say, am I not your Wife; can you deny me?

Sir Fee. Wife! adod it is I she means -- it is I she means --

[Merrily. Let. Oh, Belmour, Belmour!

[Sir Fee. starts back from her Hands. Sir Fee. Hum -- what is that -- Belmour?

Let. Hah! Sir Feeble! -- he would not, Sir, have used me thus unkindly.


Sir Fee. Oh -- I Am glad it is no worse -- Belmour quoth a; I thought the Ghost
was come again.


Phill. Why did you not speak, Sir, all this while -- my Lady weeps with your
Unkindness.


Sir Fee. I did but hold my peace to hear how prettily she prattled Love: But
fags you are naught to think of a young Fellow -- adsbobs you are now.


Let. I only said -- he would not have been so unkind to me.

Sir Fee. But what makes ye out at this Hour, and with these Jewels?


Phill. Alas Sir, we thought the City was in Arms, and pack't up our things to
secure 'em, if there had been a Necessity for Flight. For had they come to
Plundring once, they would have begun with the rich Aldermen's Wives, you know
Sir.


Sir Fee. Adsbobs and so they would -- but there was no
Arms -- nor Mutiny -- where is Francis?

Bell. Here Sir.

Sir Fee. Here Sir -- why what a Story you made of a Meeting in the Hall and --
Arms and -- a -- the Devil of any thing was stirring, but a couple of old
Fools, that sat gaping and waiting for one another Business --


Bell. Such a Message was brought me Sir.

Sir Fee. Brought, you are an Ass Francis -- but no more -- come, come, lets to
Bed. --


Let. To Bed Sir? what by Daylight -- fot that is hasting on -- I would not for
the World -- the Night would hide my Blushes -- but the Day -- would let me see
my self in your Embraces.


Sir Fee. Embraces, in a Fidlestick, why are we not married?

Let. It Is true Sir, and Time will make me more familiar with you, but yet my
virgin Modesty forbids it. I Will to Diana's Chamber, the Night will come again.


Sir Fee For once you shall prevail; and this Damned Jant has pretty well
mortified me: -- a Pox of your Mutiny Francis -- Come I Will conduct thee to
Diana, and lock thee in, that I may have thee safe Rogue. --


We Will give young Wenches leave to whine and blush,
And fly those Blessings which -- ^ads bobs they wish.
The End of the third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. Sir Feeble's House.
Enter Lady Fulbank, Gayman fine, gently pulling her back by the Hand; and
Ralph meets 'em. L. Fulb. HOw now Ralph -- Let your Lady know I am come to wait
on her.


[ Exit Ralph. Gay. Oh why this needless Visit --
Your Husbands safe, at least till Evening safe,
Why will you not go back?
And give me one soft Hour, though to torment me.

L. Fulb. You are at Leisure now I thank you Sir,
Last Night when I with all Loves Rhetoric pleaded,
And Heaven knows what last Night might have produced,
You were ingage'd! False Man, I do believe it,
And I am satisfied you love me not.

[Walks away in scorn. Gay. Not love you!
Why do I waste my Youth in vain Pursuit,
Neglecting Interest, and despisng Power!
Unheeding, and despising other Beauties.
Why at your Feet is all my Fortune laid,
And why does all my Fate depend on you?

L. Fulb. I Will not consider why you play the Fool,
Present me Rings and Bracelets; Why pursue me;
Why watch whole Nights before my senceless Door,
And take such Pains to show your self a Coxcomb --

Gay. Oh! why all this?
By all the Powers above! by this dear Hand,
And by this Ring, which on this Hand I place,
On which I Have sworn Fidelity to Love;
I never had a Wish or soft Desire
To any other Woman,
Since Julia swayed the Empire of my Soul!

L. Fulb. Hah, my own Ring I gave him last Night.
[Aside. -- Your Jewel Sir, is rich,
Why do you part with things of so much value
So easily, and so frequently?

Gay. To strengthen the weak Arguments of Love.

L. Fulb. And leave your self undone?

Gay. Impossible, if I am blessed with Julia.

L. Fulb. Love's a thin Diet, nor will keep out Cold,
You cannot satisfy your Dunning Tailor,
To cry -- I am in love!
Tho possible you may your Seamstress.

Gay. Does ought about me speak such Poverty?

L. Fulb. I am sorry that it does not, since to maintain this Gallantry, it is
said you use base means, below a Gentleman.


Gay. Who dares but to imagine it is a Rascal, a Slave, below a Beating -- what
means my Julia?


L. Fulb. No more dissembling, I know your Land is gone -- I know each
Circumstance of all your wants, therefore -- as ever you hope that I should
love you ever, tell me -- where 'twas you got this Jewel Sir.


Gay. Hah -- I hope it is no stolen Goods;
[Aside. Why on the sudden all this nice Examining?

L. Fulb. You trifle with me, and I Will plead no more.

Gay. Stay -- why -- I bought it Madam --

L. Fulb. Where had you Money Sir? you see I am no Stranger to your Poverty.


Gay. This is strange -- perhaps it is a Secret.

L. Fulb. So is my love, which shall be kept from you.

[Offers to go. Gay. Stay Julia -- your Will shall be obeyed! --
[S ighing. Though I had rather die, than be obedient,
Because I know you will hate me, when it is told.

L. Fulb. By all my Vows, let it be what it will,
It never shall alter me from loving you.

Gay. I have -- of late -- been tempted --
With Presents, Jewels, and large Sums of Gold.

L. Fulb. Tempted! by whom?

Gay. The Devil, for ought I know.

L. Fulb. Defend me Heaven! the Devil?
I hope you have not made a Contract with him?

Gay. No, tho in the shape of Woman it appeared.

L. Fulb. Where met you with it?

Gay. By Magic Art I was conducted -- I know not how,
To an enchanted Palace in the Clouds,
Where I was so attended --
Young Dancing -- singing Fiends innumerable!

L. Fulb. Imagination all.

Gay. But for the Amorous Devil, the old Proserpine.

L. Fulb. Ay she -- what said she? --

Gay. Not a Word! Heaven be praised, she was a silent Devil -- but she was laid
in a Pavillion, all formed of gilded Clouds, which hung by Geometry, whither I
was conveyed, after much Ceremony, and laid in Bed with her; where much ado,
and trembling with my Fears -- I forced my Arms about her.


L. Fulb. And sure that undeceived him --

[Aside. Gay. But such a Carcass 'twas -- deliver me -- so rivell'd, lean, and
rough -- a Canvass Bag of wooden Ladles were a better Bed fellow.


L. Fulb. Now tho I know that nothing is more distant than I from such a
Monster -- yet this angers me.

Death could you love me and submit to this?

Gay. 'Twas that first drew me in --
The tempting Hope of means to conquer you,
Would put me upon any dangerous Enterprizer
Were I the Lord of all the Universe,
I am so lost in Love,
For one dear Night to clasp you in my Arms,
I Would lavish all that World -- then die with Joy.

L. Fulb. 'S'life after all to seem deformed, old, ugly --

[Walking in a sret. Gay. I knew you would be angry when you heard it.

[He pursues her in a submissive posture. Enter Sir Cautious, Bearjest, Noysey
and Bredwel. Sir Cau. -- How, what is here -- my Lady with the Spark that
courted her last Night -- hum -- with her again so soon -- well this Impudence
and Importunity undoes more City Wives than all their unmerciful Finery.


Gay. But Madam --

L. Fulb. Oh here is my Husband -- you would best tell him your Story -- what makes
him here so soon --


[Angry. Sir Cau. Me his Story -- I hope he will not tell me he is a mind to
Cuckold me!


Gay. A Devil on him, what shall I say to him?

L. Fulb. What -- so Excellent at Intrigues, and so Dull at an Excuse?


[Aside. Gay. Yes Madam, I shall tell him --

Enter Belmour. L. Fulb. -- Is my Lady at leisure for a Visit Sir?

Bell. Always to receive your Ladyship.

[She goes out. Sir Cau. With me Sir, would you speak?

Gay. With you Sir, if your Name be Fulbank?

Sir Cau. Plain Fulbank, me thinks you might have had a Sirreverence under your
Girdle Sir, I am Honored with another Title Sir --


[Goes talking to the rest. Gay. With many Sir, that very well become you --
[Pulls him a little aside. I Have something to deliver to your Ear.

Sir Cau. So, I Will be hanged if he do not tell me, I Am a Cuckold now. I see it
in his Eyes; my Ear Sir, I Would have you to know I scorn any man's Secrets Sir --
for ought I know you may whisper Treason to me Sir. Pox on him, how handsome he
is, I hate the sight of the young Stallion.


[Aside. Gay. I would not be uncivil Sir, before all this Company.

Sir Cau. Uncivil -- Ay, Ay, it is so, he cannot be content to Cuckold me, but
he must tell me so too.


Gay. But since you will have it Sir -- you are -- a Rascal -- a most notorious
Villain Sir, do you hear --


Sir Cau. Yes, yes, I do -- hear -- and am glad it is no worse.


[Laughing. Gay. Griping as Hell -- and as insatiable -- worse than a Brokering
Jew, not all the twelve Tribes harbors such a damned Extortioner.


Sir Cau. Pray under favor Sir -- who are you?

[Pulling off his Hat. Gay. One whom thou have undone --

Sir Cau. Hum -- I Am glad of that however.

[Aside smiling. Gay. Racking me up to starving Want and Misery,
Then took Advantages to ruin me.

Sir Cau. So, and he would revenge it on my Wife --

[Aside smiling. Gay. Do you not know one Wastall Sir?

Enter Ralph with Wine, sets it on a Table. Sir Cau. Wastall -- ha, ha, ha --
if you are any Friend to that poor Fellow -- you may return and tell him Sir --
do you hear -- that the Mortgage of two hundred pound a Year is this Day out, and
I Will not bate him an Hour Sir -- ha, ha, ha -- what do you think to hector
civil Magistrates?


Gay. Very well Sir, and is this your Consoience?

Sir Cau. Conscience -- what do you tell me of Conscience? Why what a Noise's
here -- as if the undoing a young Heir were such a Wonder; ods so l've undone a
hundred without half this ado.


Gay. I do believe thee -- and am come to tell you -- I Will be none of that
Number -- for this Minute I Will go and redeem it -- and free my Self from the
Hell of your Indentures.


Sir Cau. How redeem it, sure the Devil must help him then! -- Stay Sir -- stay
-- Lord Sir what need you put your self to that trouble, your Land is in safe
Hands Sir, come come sit down -- and let us take a Glass of Wine together Sir
--


Bell. Sir my Service to you.

[Drinks to him. Gay. Your Servant Sir. Would I could come to speak to Belmour
which I dare not do in Public, least I betray him. I long to be resolved where
'twas Sir Feeble was last Night -- if it were he -- by which I might find out
my invisible Mistress.


Noy. Noble Mr. Wastall --

[Salutes him; so does Bearjest. Bell. Will you please to sit Sir?

Gay. I have a little Business Sir -- but anon I Will wait on you -- your Servant
Gentlemen -- I Will to Crap the Scriveners.


[Goes ont. Sir Cau. Do you know this Wasball Sir! --

[To Noysie. Noy. Know him Sir, Ay too well --

Bea. The Worlds well amended with him Captain, since I lost my Money to him
and you at the George in White Friars.


Noy Ay poor Fellow -- he is sometimes up and sometimes down, as the Dice favor
him --


Bea. Faith and that is pity; but how came he so fine o'th'sudden:
'twas but last Week he borrowed eighteen pence of me on his
Wast Belt to pay his Dinner in an Ordinary.

Bell. Were you so cruel Sir to take it?

Noy. We are not all one Man^ Children; faith Sir, we are here to Day and gone
to Morrow --


Sir Cau. I say 'twas done like a wise Man Sir -- but under
Favor Gentlemen this Wastall is a Rascal --

Noy. A very Rascal Sir, and a most dangerous Fellow -- he cullye in your
Prent^ and Cashiers to play -- which ruins so many o'th'young Fry i'th'City --


Sir Cau. Hum -- does he so -- do hear that Edward?

Noy. Then he keeps a private Press and prints your Amsterdam and Leyden Libels.


Sir Cau. Ay and makes em too I Will warrant him; a dangerous Fellow --


Noy. Sometimes he begs for a lam^ Soldier with a wooden Leg.

Bea. Sometimes as a blind Man sells Switches in New Market Road.

Noy. At other times he runs the Country like, a Gipsey -- tells
Fortunes and robs Hedges, when he is out of Linen.

Sir Cau. Tells Fortunes too -- nay I thought he dealt with the Devil -- well
Gentlemen you are all wide of this Matter -- for to tell you the Truth -- he
deals with the Devil Gentlemen -- otherwise he could never have redeemed his
Land.


[Aside. Bell. How Sir, the Devil?

Sir Cau. I say the Devil. Heaven bless every wise Man from the Devil.


Bea. The Devil, sha! there is no such Animal in Nature. I rather think he pads.


Noy. Oh Sir he has not Courage for that -- but he is an admirable Fellow at
your Lock.


Sir Cau. Lock! My Study Look was picked -- I begin to suspect him --

Bea. I saw him once open a Lock with the Bone of a Breast of Mutton, and break
an Iron ^ar asunder with the Eye of a needle.


Sir Cau. Prodigious -- well I say the Devil still.
Enter Sir Feeble. Who Is this talks of the Devil -- a Pox of the Devil I say,
this last Nights Devil has so haunted me --


Sir Cau. Why have you seen it since Brother?

Sir Feeb. In Imagination Sir.

Bell. How Sir a Devil?

Sir Feeb. Ay, or a Ghost.

Bell. Where good Sir?

Bea. Ay where? I Would travel a hundred Milo to see a Ghost --

Bell. Sure Sir 'twas Fancy?

Sir Feeb. If 'twere a Fancy, 'twas a strong one, and Ghosts and Fancys are all
one, if they can deceive. I tell you -- if ever I thought in my Life -- I
thought I saw a Ghost -- Ay and a damnable impudent Ghost too; he said he was a
-- a Fellow here -- they call Belmour.


Bell. How Sir!

Bear. Well I would give the World to see the Devil, provided he were a civil
affable Devil, such an one as Wastalls Acquaintance is --


Sir Cau. He can show him too soon, it may be. I Am sure as civil as he is, he
helps him to steal my Gold I doubt -- and to be sure -- Gentlemen you say he is
a Gamester -- I desire when he comes anon, that you would propose to sport a
Dye or so -- and we'll sall to play for a Teaster, or the like -- and if he
sets any Money -- I shall go near to know my own Gold, by some remarkable
Pieces amongst it; and if he have it, I Will hang him, and then all his six
hundred a Year will be my own which I have in Mortgage.


Bea. Let the Captain and I alone to top upon him -- mean time Sir I have
brought my Music -- to entertain my Mistress with a Song.


Sir Feeb. Take your own Methods Sir -- they are at Leisure -- while we go
drink their Healths within. Adod I long for Night, we are not half in kelter,
this damned Ghost will not out of my Head yet.


[Exeunt all but Belmour. Bell. Hah -- a Ghost! What can he mean? A Ghost, and
Belmour's.
-- Sure my good Angel, or my Genius,
In pity of my Love, and of Leticia --
But see Leticia comes, but still attended --
Enter Leticia, Lady Fulbank, Diana. -- Remember -- oh remember to be true!

[Aside to her passing by, goes out. L. Fulb. I was sick to know with what
Christian Patience you bore the Martyrdom of this Night.


Let. As those condemned bear the last Hour of Life.
A short Reprieve I had -- and by a kind Mistake.
Diana only was my Bedfellow --

[weeps. Dia. I wish for your Repose you never had seen my Father.

[weeps. Let. And so do I, I fear he has undone me --

Dia. And me, in breaking of his Word with Bredwell --

L. Fulb. -- So -- as Trincolo says would you were both hanged for me, for
putting me in mind of my Husband. For I have ^'en no better Luck than either of
you --

-- Let our two Faces wath your approaching one:
I love young Bredwell and must pl^ad for him.

Dia. I know his Virtue ^.
But Pride and Modesty, for ^.

Let. Wrong not my Brother so who dies for you --

Dia. Could he so easily see me given away
Without a Sigh at parting?
For all the Day a Calm was in his Eyes,
And unconcerned he looked and talked to me.
In dancing never pressed my willing Hand,
Nor with a scornful Glance reproacht my Falmood.

Let. Believe me that Dissembling was his Masterpiece.

Dia. Why should he fear, did not my Father promise him?

Let. Ay that was in his wooing time to me.
But now it is all forgotten --

[Musick at the Door. After which enter Bearjest and Bredwell. L. Fulk. How now
Cousin! Is this high piece of Gallantry from you?


Bea. Ay Madam, I have not traveled for nothing --

L. Fulb. I find my Cos^en is resolved to conquer, he affails with all his
Artillery of Charms; we'll leave him to his Success Madam --


[Exit Leticia and Lady Fulbank. Bea. Oh Lord Madam you oblige me -- look Ned
you had a mind to have a full View of my Mistress, Sir, and -- here she is

[He stands gazing. Go -- salute her -- look how he stands now, what a sneaking
thing is a Fellow who has never traveled and seen the World! -- Madam -- this
is a very honest Friend of mine, for all he looks so simply.


Dia. Come he speaks for you, Sir.

Bea. He Madam, tho he be but a Bankers Prentice Madam; he is as pretty a Fellow
of his Inches as any in the City -- he has made Love in Dancing Schools, and to
Ladys of Quality in the middle Gallery, and shall joke ye -- and repartee with
any Foreman within the Walls -- prithee to her -- and commend me, I Will give
thee a new Point Cravat.


Dia. He looks as if he could not speak to me.

Bea. Not speak to you? -- yes Gad Madam and do any thing to you too.


Dia. Are you his Advocate Sir?

[In Scorn. Bea. For Want of a better --

[Stands behind him pushing him on. Bred. An Advocate for Love I am;
And bring you such a Message from a Heart --

Bea. Meaning mine dear Madam^

Bred. That when you hear it, you will pity it.

Bea. Or the Devils in her --

Dia. Sir I have many Reasons to believe
It is my Fortune you pursue, not Person?

Bea. There Is something in that I must confess.
[Behind him. But say what you will Ned --

Bred. May all the Mischiefs of despairing Love
Fall on me if it be.

Bea. That Is well enough --

Bred. No were you born an humble Village Maid,
That fed a Flock, upon the neighboring Plain;
With all that shining Virtue in your Soul,
By Heaven I would adore you -- love you -- wed you.
Tho'the gay World were lost by such a Nuptial.
[ Bea. looks on him. -- this -- I would do were I my Friend the Squire.

[Recollecting. Bea. Ay if you were me -- you might do what you pleased; but
I Am of another Mind.


Dia. Should I consent, my Father is a Man whom Interest sways not Honor, and
whatsoever Promises he'as made you, he means to break 'em all, and I am
destined to another.


Bea. How another -- his Name, his Name Madam -- here is Ned and I fear never a
single Man i'th'Nation. What is he? -- what is he? --


Dia. A Fop, a Fool, a beaten Ass -- a Blockhead.

Bea. What a damned Shame's this, that Women should be sacrificed to Fools, and
Fops must run away with Heiresses -- whilst we Men of Wit and Parts -- dress
and dance, and cock, and travel, for nothing but to be ta me Keepers.


Dia. But I by Heaven will never be that Victim.
But where my Soul is vowed it is fixed for ever.

Bred. Are you resolved, are you confirmed in this?
Oh my Dima speak it over again.
[Runs to her and embraces her. Bless me and make me happier than a Monarch

Bea. Hold, hold dear Ned -- that is my part I take it.

Bred. Your Pardon Sir, I had forgot my self.
-- But time is short -- what is to be done in this?

Bea. Done, I Will enter the House with Fire and Sword do you see, not that I care
this -- but I Will not be fob'd off -- what do they take me for a Fool -- an Ass?


Bred. Madam, dare you run the Risk of your Father's Displeasure, and run away
with the Man you love?


Dia. With all my Soul --

Bea. That Is hearty -- and we'll do it -- Ned and I here -- and I love an Amor
with an Adventure in it like Amadis de Gaul -- harky Ned -- get a Coach and six
ready to Night when it is dark at the back Gate --


Bred. And I Will get a Parson ready in my Lodging, to which I have a Key through
the Garden by which we may pass unseen.


Bea. Good -- Mun here is Company --

Enter Gayman with his Hat with Money in it, Sir Cautious in a Rage -- Sir
Feeble, Lady Fulbank, Leticia, Captain Noysey, Belmour. Sir Cau. A hundred
Pound lost already! Oh Coxcomb, old Coxcomb, and a wise Coxcomb -- to turn
Prodigal at my Years, whe' I was bewitched!


Sir Feeb. Sho, 'twas a Frolic Sir, I have lost a hundred pound as well as
you. My Lady has lost, and your Lady has lost, and the rest -- what old Cows
will kick sometimes, what is a hundred Pound?


Sir Cau. A hundred Pound, why it is a Sum Sir -- a Sum -- why what the Devil
did I do with a Box and Dice? --


L. Fulb. Why you made a shift to loose Sir? And where is the harm of that? We
have lost, and he has won, anon it may be your Fortune.


Sir Cau. Ay, but he could never do it fairly, that is certain. Three hundred
Pound! why how came you to win so ummercifully Sir?


Gay. Oh the Devil will not loose a Gamester of me -- you see Sir.


Sir Cau. The Devil! -- mark that Gentlemen --

Bea. The Rogue has damned Luck sure, he has got a Fly --

Sir Cau. And can you have the Conscience to carry away all our Money Sir?


Gay. Most assuredly, unless you have the Courage to retrieve it.
I Will set it at a Throw, or any Way, what say you Gentlemen?

Sir Feeb. Ods bobs you young Fellows are too hard for us every Way, and I am
engaged at an old Game with a new Gamester here -- who will require all an old
Man's Stock.


L. Fulb. Come Cousin will you venture a Guinny -- Come Mr. Bredwel --


Gay. Well if no Body dare venture on me I Will send away my Cash --


[They all go to play at the Table but Sir Cau. Sir Feeb. and Gay. Sir Cau. Hum
-- must it all go? -- a rare Sum, if a Man were but sure the Devil would but
stand Neuter now --

[Aside. -- Sir I wish I had any thing but ready Money to stake -- three
hundred Pound -- a fine Sum!


Gay. You have Movables Sir, Goods -- Commodities --

Sir Cau. That Is all one Sir; that is Moneys worth Sir; but if I had any thing
that were worth nothing --


Gay You would venture it, -- I thank Iyou Sir, -- I would your Lady were worth
nothing --


Sir Cau. Why so Sir?

Gay. Then I would set all this against that Nothing.

Sir Cau. What set it against my Wife?

Gay. Wife Sir, Ay your Wife --

Sir Cau. Hum, my Wife against three hundred pounds? --
What All my Wife Sir?

Gay. All your Wife. Why Sir, some part of her would serve my turn.


Sir Cau. Hum -- my Wife -- why, if I should loose, he could not have the
Impudence to take her --


[Aside. Gay. Well, I find you are not for the Bargain, and so I put up --


Sir Cau. Hold Sir -- why so hasty -- my Wife? no -- put up your Money Sir --
what loose my Wife, for three hundred pounds! --


Gay. Loose her Sir -- why she shall be never the worse for my wearing Sir --
the old covetous Rogue is considering on it I think -- what say you to a Night?
I Will set it to a Night -- there is none need know it Sir.


Sir Cau. Hum -- a Night! -- three hundred pounds for a Night! why what a
lavish Whore-master's this: we take Money to marry our Wives, but very seldom
part with 'em, and by the Bargain get Money -- for a Night say you? -- gad if I
should take the Rogue at his word, 'twou'd be a pure Jest.


[Aside. Sir Feeb. You are not Mad Brother.

Sir Cau. No, but I Am wise -- and that is as good; let me consider --


Sir Feeb. What whether you shall be a Cuckold or not?

Sir Cau. Or loose three hundred pounds -- consider that; a Cuckold -- why,
it is a Word -- an empty Sound -- it is Breath -- it is Air -- it is nothing -- but
three hundred pounds -- Lord, what will not three hundred pounds do! You may
chance to be a Cuckold for nothing, Sir --


Sir Feeb. It may be so -- but she shall do it discreetly then.


Sir Cau. Under favor, you are an Ass Brother, this is the discreetest way of
doing it, I take it.


Sir Feeb. But would a wise man expose his Wife?

Sir Cau. Why, Cato was a wiser man than I, and he lent his Wife to a young
Fellow they called Hontens^, as S^ory says; and can a wise man have a better
President than C^o


Sir Feeb. I say Cato was an Asa Sir, for obliging any young Rogue of 'em all.


Sir Cau. But I am of Cato's Mi^l; well, a sugle Night you say.


Gay. A (...) Night -- to have -- to hold -- pos^ -- and so forth at discretion.


Sir Cau. A Night -- I man have her ran and (...)
Morning.

Sir Feeb. Safe no doubt in it -- but how sound I --

Gay. And for Nonperformance, you mast pay me Three hundred puunds, I Will
forseit as much it I tell --


Sir Cau. Tell? -- why make your Three hundred pounds six hundred, and let it
be put into the Gazet, if you will man -- but is it a Bargain? --


Gay. Done -- Sir Feeble shall be witness -- and there stands my Hat.


[Puts down his Hat of Money, and each of 'em take a Box and Dice, and kneet on
the Stage, the rest come about 'em. Sir Cau. -- He that comes first to One and
thirty wins --

[They thron and count. L. Fulb. What are you playing for?

Sir Feeb. Nothing, nothing -- but a Trial of Skill between on Old man and a
Young -- and your Lady sli^p is to be Judge.


L. Fulb. I mall be partial Sir.

Sir Cau. Six and five's eleven --

[Throws -- and pulls the Hat toward him. Gay. Cater Tray -- Pox of the Dice
--

Sir Cau. Two fives -- one and twenty --

[S^ up, pulls the ^at nearer. Gay. Now Luck -- Dubles of slxes -- nineteen.

Sir Cau. Five and four -- ^itty --

[Dra^s the Hat to him. Sir Feeb. Now if he wins it, I Will ^wear he has a Fly
indeed -- it is impossible without Doubles of sixes --


Gay. Now Fortune shine -- and for the future frown.

[Throws. Sir Cau. -- Hum -- two sixes --

[Rifes and looks dolefully round. L. Fulb. How now? what is the Matter you look
so like an Ass, what have you lost?


Sir Cau. A Bauble -- a Bauble -- it is not for what I Have lost -- but because I
have not won --


Sir Feeb. You look very (...) Sir -- what think you of Cato now?


Sir Cau. A wise man may have his Failings --

L. Fulb. What has my Husband lost? --

Sir Cau. Only a small parcel of Ware that lay dead upon my hands, Sweetheart.


Gay. But I shall improve 'em, Madam, I Will warrant you.

L. Fulb. Well, since it is no worse, bring in your fine Dancer
Cousin, you say you brought to entertain your Mistress with

[ Bearjest goes (...). Gay. Sir, You Will take care to see me paid to Night?

Sir Cau. Well Sir -- but my Lady you must know Sir, has the common Frailties
of her Sex, and will refuse what she even longs for, if persuaded to it by me.


Gay. I'is not in my Bargain to folicit her Sir, you are to procure her -- or
three hundred pounds Sir; choose you whether.


Sir Cau. Procure her? with all my Soul Sir; alas, you mistake my honest
Meaning, I scorn to be so unjust as not to see you a-bed together; and then
agree as well as you can, I have done my part -- in order to this Sir -- get
you but your self conveyed in a Chest to my House, with a Direction upon it for
me, and for the rest --


Gay. I understand you --

Enter Bea. with Dancers. All go out but Sir Cautious. Sir Feeb. Ralph get
Supper ready.

Sir Cau. Well, I must break my Mind, if possible, to my Lady -- but if she
should be refractory now -- and make me pay Three hundred pounds -- why sure
she will not have so little Grace -- Three hundred pounds saved, is Three hundred
pounds got -- by our account -- Could All --


Who of this City Privilege are free,
Hope to be paid for Cuckoldom like me;
The unthriving Merchant, whom gray Hair adorns,
Before all Ventures would ensure his Horns;
For thus, while He bus lets spare Rooms to hire,
His Wife rackd Credit keeps his own entire.
The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE I. Sir Cautious his House.
Enter Belmour alone sad. Bell. THe Night is come, Oh my Leticia!
The longing Bridegroom hastens to his Bed;
Whilst she with all the Languishment of Love,
And lad Despa^, casts her fair Eyes on me,
Which silently implore, I would deliver her.
But how! Ay, there is the Question -- hah --
[Paus^g. I Will get my self hid in her Bedchamber --
And something I will do -- may save us yet --
If all my Arts should fail -- I Will have recourse
[Draws a Dagger. To this -- and bear Leticia off by Force.
-- But see she comes --

Enter Lady Fulbank, Sir Cautious, Sir Feeble, Leticia, Bearjest, Noysey,
Gayman. Exit Belmour. Sir Feeb. Lights there Ralph,
And my Lady's Coach there --

[Bearjest goes to Gayman. Bear. Well Sir, remember you have promised to grant
me my diabolical Request, in showing me the Devil --


Gay. I will not fail you Sir.

L. Fulb. Madam, your Servant; I hope you will see no more Ghosts, Sir Feeble.


Sir Feeb. No more of that, I beseech you Madam: Prithee Sir Cautious take away
your Wife -- Madam your Servant --

[All go out after the Light. -- Come Let, Let; hasten Rogue, hasten to thy
Chamber, away, here be the young Wenches coming --


[Puts her out, he goes out. Enter Diana, puts on her Hood and Scarce. Dia. So
-- they are gone to Bed; and now for Bredwel -- the
Coach waits, and I Will take this opportunity.
Father farewell -- if you dislike my courst,
Blame the old rigid Customs of your Force.

[Goes out. SCENE A Bed Chamber. Enter Sir Feeble, Leticia and Phillis. Let. AH
Phillis! I am fainting with my Fears,
Have thou no comfort for me?

[He undresses to his Gown. Sir Feeb. Why what art doing there -- fidle fadling
-- adod you young Wenches are so loath to come to -- but when your hands in,
you have no ^.


(...). Why do you talk so Sir?

Sir Feeb. Was it an angered, at the (...) tum-a-me, I Will undress it, ^


Let. You are so wanton Sir, you make me blush --
I will not go to Bed, unless you to Promise me --

Sir Feeb. No bargaining my little Hussy -- what you will tie my hands behind
me, will you?


[She goes to the Table. Let. -- What shall I do? -- assist me gentle Maid,
Thy Eyes methinks puts on a little hope!

Phil. Take Courage Madam -- you guess right -- be consident.

Sir Feeb. No whispering Gentle woman -- and putting Tricks into her Head, that
shall not cheat me of another Night -- Look on that silly little round
Chity-face -- look on those smiling roguish^ loving Eyes there -- look -- look
how they laugh, ^wire and tempt -- he rogue -- I Will buss 'em there, and here
and every where -- Ods bobs -- away, this is fooling and spoiling of a man
Stomach, with a Bi^here, and a Bit there -- to Bed -- to Bed --


As she is at the Toilet he looks over her shoulder, and sees her Face in the
Glass. Let. Go you first Sir, I will but stay to say my Prayers, which are that
Heaven would deliver me.


[Aside. Sir Feeb. Say thy Prayers? -- what art thou mad, Prayers upon thy
Wedding-night? a short Thanksgiving or so -- but Prayers quoth a -- 'Sbobs
you will have time enough for that -- I doubt --


Let. I am ashamed to undress before you Sir, go to Bed --

Sir Feeb. What was it ashamed to show its little white Foots, and its little
round Bubbys -- well I Will go, I Will go -- I cannot think on it, no, I cannot --


[Going toward the Bed, Belmour comes forth from betme^n the Gurtains his Coat
off, his Shirt bloody, a Dagger in his hand, and his Disguise off. Bell. Stand
--

Sir Feeb. Hah --

Let. and Phil. squeak -- Oh Heavons -- why is it Belmour?


[Aside to Phil. Bell. Go not, to Bed, I guard this Sacred Place,
And the Adulterer dies that enters here.

Sir Feeb. Oh -- why do I shake -- sure I Am a Man? what art thou?


Bell. I am the wronged, the lost, and murdered Belmour.

Sir Feeb. O Lord! it is the same, I saw last Night -- oh! -- hold thy dread
Vengeance -- pity me; and hear me -- oh! a Parson -- a Parson -- what shall I
do -- oh! where shall I hide my self.


Bell. In The utmost Borders of the Earth I Will find thee --
Seas shall not hide thee, nor vast Mountains guard thee.
Even in the depth of Hell, I Will find thee out,
And lash thy filthy and Adulterous Soul --

Sir Feeb. Oh! I am dead, I Am dead, will no Repentance save me -- 'twas that
young Eye that tempted me to sin; oh! --


Bell. See fair Seducer, what thou'st made me do,
Look on this bleeding Wound, it reached my Heart,
To pluck my dear tormenting Image thence,
When News arrived that thou had broke thy Vow.

Sir Feeb. Oh Lord! oh! -- I Am glad he is dead tho.

Let. Oh hide that fatal Wound, my tender Heart faints with a Sight so horrid!


[seems to weep. Sir Feeb. So she will clear her self and leave me in the Devil's
Clutches.


Bell. You Have both offended Heaven, and must repent or dye.

Sir Feb. Ah -- I do confess I was an old Fool -- bewitched with Beauty,
besotted with Love, and do repent most heartily.


Bell. No, you had rather yet go on in Sin:
Thou would live on, and be a baffled Cuckold.

Sir Feeb. Oh, not for the World Sir: I am convinced and mortified.


Bell. Maintain her fine, undo thy Peace to please her, and still be Cuckol'd on
-- believe her -- trust her, and be Cuckold still.


Sir Feeb. I see my Folly -- and my Ages Dotage -- and find the Devil was in me
-- yet spare my Age -- ah! spare me to repent.


Bell. If thou repent'st, renounce her, fly her sight; --
Shun her bewitching Charms, as thou would Hell;
Those dark eternal Mansions of the dead --
Whither I must descend.

Sir Feeb. Oh -- would he were gone! --

Bell. Fly -- be gone -- depart, vanish for ever from her to some more safe and
innocent Apartment.


Sir Feeb. Oh that is very hard! --

[He goes back trembling, Belmour follows in with his Dagger up; both go out.
Let. Blessed be this kind Release, and yet methinks it grieves me to consider
how the poor Old man is frighted.


[ Belmour reenters, puts on his Coat. Bell. -- He Is gone, and locked himself
into his Chamber --
And now my dear Leticia let us fly --

Despair till now, did my wild Heart invade,
But pitying Love has the rough Storm allayd.
[Exeunt. SCENE II. Sir Cautious his Garden.
Enter two Porters and Rag bearing Gayman in a Chest. Set it down; he comes
forth with a dark Lanthorn. Gay. SEt down the Chest behind yon' Hedge of Roses
-- and then put on those Shapes I have appointed you -- and be sure you
well-favourd'ly bang both Bearjest and Noysey; since they have a Mind to see
the Devil.


Rag. Oh Sir leave 'em to us for that, and if we do not play the Devil with
'em, we deserve they should beat us. But Sir we are in Sir Cautious his Garden,
will not he sue us for a Trespass?


Gay. I Will bear you out; be ready at my Call.
[Exeunt. -- Let me see -- I have got no ready Stuff to banter with -- but no
Matter any Giberish will ferve the Fools -- it is now about the Hour of ten --
but Twelve is my appointed lucky Minute, when all the Blessings that my Soul
could wish Shall be resigned to me.

Enter Bredwel. -- Hah who is there, Bredwel?

Bred. Oh are you come Sir -- and can you be so kind to a poor
Youth, to favor his Designs and bless his Days?

Gay. Yes, I am ready here with all my Devils, both to secure you your
Mistress, and to cudgel your Captain and Squire, for abusing me behind my Back
so basely.


Bred. 'Twas most unmanly Sir, and they deserve it -- I wonder that they come
not?


Gay. How durst you trust her with him?

Bred. Because it is dangerous to steal a City Heiress, and let the
Thest be his -- so the dear Maid be mine --
Hark -- sure they come --
Enter Bearjest; runs against Bredwell. -- Who Is there, Mr. Bearjest?

Bear. Whose that, Ned? -- Well I have brought my Mistress -- have thou got a
Parson ready -- and a License?


Bred. Ay, ay -- but where is the Lady?

Bea. In the Coach, with the Captain at the Gate. I came before to see if the
Coast be clear.


Bred. Ay Sir -- but what shall we do -- here is Mr. Gayman come on purpose to
show you the Devil, as you desired.


Bea. Shoh! a Pox of the Devil Man -- I cannot intend to speak with him now.


Gay. How Sir? do you think my Devil of so little Quality to suffer an Affront
unrevenged?


Bear. Sir I cry his Devilships Pardon: I did not know his Quality -- I protest
Sir I love and honor him, but I am now just going to be married Sir, and when
that Ceremony's past, I Am ready to go to the Devil as soon as you please.


Gay. I have told him your Desire of seeing him, and should you baffle him?


Bea. Who I Sir? Pray let his Worship know, I shall be proud of the Honor of
his Acquaintance; but Sir my Mistress and the Parson waits in Neds Chamber.


Gay. If all the World wait Sir, the Prince of Hell will stay for no Man.


Bred. Oh Sir rather then the Prince of the Infernals shall be affronted, I Will
conduct the Lady up, and entertain her till you come Sir.


Bea. Nay I have a great Mind to kiss his -- Paw Sir, but I could wish you would
show him me by Daylight Sir.


Gay. The Prince of Darkness does abhor the Light. But Sir I will for once
allow your Friend the Captain to keep you Company.


Enter Noysey and Diana. Bea. I Am much obliged to you Sir, oh Captain --

[Talks to him. Bred. -- Haste Dear; the Parson waits,
To finish what the Powers designed above.

Dia. Sure nothing is so bold as Maids in Love!

(They go out. Noy. Pshoh! he conjure -- he can fly as soon.

Gay. Gentlemen you must be sure to confine your selves to this
Circle, and have a Care you neither swear, nor pray.

Bea. Pray, Sir? I dare say neither of us were ever that Way gifted.


A horrid Noise. Gay. Cease your Horror, cease your Have.
And calmly as I saw you last,
Appear! Appear!
By thy Pearls and Diamond Rocks,
By thy heavy Money Box.
By thy shining Petticoat,
That hid thy cloven Feet from Note.
By the Veil that hid thy Face,
Which else had frightened humane Race.
Appear, that I thy Love may see,
[Soft Music ceases. Appear kind Fiends, appear to me!

[A Pox of these Rascals why come they not. Four enter from the four Corners of
the Stage to Music that plays, they dance, and in the Dance, dance round 'em,
and kick, pinch, and beat 'om. Bear. Oh enough, enough! Good Sir lay 'em and
I Will pay the Music --


Gay. I wonder at it -- these Spirits are in their Nature kind, and peaceable
-- and you have basely injured some body -- and then they will be satisfied --


Bear. Oh good Sir take your Cerberuses off -- I do confess the Captain here
and I have violated your Fame.


Noy. Abused you -- and traduced you, -- and thus we beg your Pardon --


Gay. Abused me? It Is more than I know Gentlemen.

Bea. But it seems your Friend the Devil does.

Gay. By this time Bredwel's married.
-- Great Pantamogan hold for I am satisfied
[Exit Devils. And thus undo my Charm --
[Takes away the Circle, they run out. -- so -- the Fools are gone, and now to
Julia's Arms

[going. SCENE Lady Fulbank's Antichamber. She discovered undrest at her
Glass. Sir Cautious undrest. L. Fulb. BUt why to Night? indeed you're wondrous
kind methinks.

Sir Cau. Why I don't know -- a Wedding is a sort of an Alarm to Love; it calls
up every Man's Courage.


L. Fulb. Ay but will it come when it is called?

Sir Cau. I doubt you will find it to my Grief --

[Aside. -- But I think it is all one to thee, thou car'st not for my
Complement; no, thou would rather have a young Fellow.

L. Fulb. I am not used to flatter much; if forty Years were taken from your
Age, 'twou'd render you something more agreeable to my Bed, I must confess.


Sir Cau. Ay, ay, no doubt on it.

L. Fulb. Yet you may take my Word without an Oath, were you as old as Time,
and I were young and gay as April Flowers,

Which all are fond to gather;
My Beautys all should wither in the Shade,
Ever I Would be worn in a dishonest Bosom.

Sir Cau. Ay but you're wondrous free methinks -- sometimes, which gives shrewd
Suspicions.


L. Fulb. What, because I can not simper -- look demure, and justifiy my Honor
when none questions it.

-- Cry sie, and out upon the naughty Women,
Because they please themselves -- and so would I.

Sir Cau. How, would, what cuckold me?

L. Fulb. Yes, if it pleased me better than Virtue Sir.
But I Will not change my Freedom and my Humor,
To purchase the dull Fame of being Honest.

Sir Cau. Ay but the World, the World --

L. Fulb. I value not the Censures of the Crowd.

Sir Cau. But I am old.

L. Fulb. That Is your Fault Sir, not mine.

Sir Cau. But being so, if I should be good-natured and give thee leave to love
discreetly? --


L. Fulb. I Would do it without your leave Sir.

Sir Cau. Do It -- what -- cuckold me?

L. Fulb. No, love discreetly Sir, love as I ought, love Honestly.

Sir Cau. What in Love with any Body, but your own Husband?

L. Fulb. Yes.

Sir Cau. Yes quoth a -- is that your loving as you ought? --

L. Fulb. We can not help our Inclinations Sir,
No more than Time, or Light from coming on --
But I can keep my Virtue Sir entire.

Sir Cau. What I Will warrant this is your first Love Gayman?

L. Fulb. I Will not deny that Truth, tho even to you.

Sir Cau Why in Consideration of my Age and your Youth, I Would bear a Conscience
-- provided you do things wisely.


L. Fulb. Do what thing Sir?

Sir Cau. You know what I mean --

L. Fulb. Hah -- I hope you would not be a Cuckold Sir?

Sir Cau. Why -- truly in a civil Way -- or so. --

L. Fulb. There is but one Way Sir to make me hate you;
And that would be tame Suffering.

Sir Cau. Nay and she be thereabouts, there is no discovering --

L. Fulb. But leave this fond Discourse -- and if you must --
Let us to Bed --

Sir Cau. Ay, ay -- I did but try your Virtue, mun -- do think I was in
earnest?


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir here is a Chest directed to your Worship.

Sir Cau. Hum -- it is Wastall -- now does my Heart sail me -- a Chest say you?
-- to me? -- so late -- I Will warrant it comes from Sir Nicholas Smuggle -- some
prohibited Goods that he has stolen the Custom of, and cheated his Majesty --
well he is an honest Man, bring it in --


[Exit Servant. L. Fulb. What into my Apartment Sir, a nasty Chest!

Sir Cau. By all Means -- for if the Searchers come -- they will never be so
uncivil to ransack thy Lodgings -- and we are bound in Christian Charity to do
for one another -- Some rich Commodities I am sure -- and some fine Knick-knack
will fall to thy share I Will warrant thee -- Pox on him for a young Rogue, how
punctual he is! --

[Aside. [Enter with the Chest. -- Go my Dear, go to Bed -- I Will send Sir
Nicholas a Receipt for the Chest, and be with thee presently --


[Exit severally. Gayman peeps out of the Chest, and looks round him wondering
-- Gay. Hah, where am I? By Heaven my last Nights Vision -- It Is that enchanted
Room and yonder the Alcove! Sure 'twas indeed some Witch, who knowing of my
Infidelity -- has by Enchantment brought me ^her -- it is so -- I am betrayed --

[Pauses. Hah! or was it Julia! That last Night gave me that lone Opporunity --
but hark I hear some coming --


[Shuts himself in. Enter Sir Cautious. Sir Cau. Lifting up the Chest Lid. So
you are come I see --

[Goes and locks the Door. Gay. Hah -- he here, nay then I was deceived, and it
was Julia that last Night gave me the dear Assignation.


[Aside. Sir Cautious peeps into the Bedchamber. L. Fulb. Within. Come Sir
Cautious -- I shall fall asleep and then you will waken me --


Sir Cau. Ay my Dear I Am coming -- she is in Bed -- I Will go put out the Candle,
and then --


Gay. Ay I Will warrant you for my Part --

Sir Cau. Ay -- but you may over-act your Part and spoil all -- but Sir I hope
you will use a Christian Conscience in this Business.


Gay. Oh doubt not Sir, but I shall do you Reason.

Sir Cau. Ay Sir, but --

Gay. Good Sir no more Cautions, you unlike a fair Gamester will ^ook me out of
half my Night -- I am impatient --


Sir Cau. Good Lord are you so hasty; if I please you shan't'go at all.


Gay. With all my Soul Sir, pay me three hundred Pound Sir --

[Aside. Sir Cau. Lord Sir you mistake my candid Meaning still. I am content to
be a Cuckold Sir -- but I would have things done decently, do you mind me?


Gay. As decently as a Cuckold can be made Sir.
-- But no more Disputes I pray Sir.

Sir Cau. I Am gone -- I Am gone -- but harky Sir -- you will rise before Day?


[Going out, returns. Gay. Yet again --

Sir Cau. I vanish Sir -- but harky -- you will not speak a Word? But let her
think it is I?


Gay. Be gone I say Sir --
[beruns out. I am convinced last Night I was with Julia.
Oh Sot -- insensible and dull --

Enter softly Sir Cautious. Sir Cau. So -- the Gandle's out -- give me your
Hand.

[Leads him softly in. SCENE Changes to a Bedchamber. Lady Fulbank supposed in
Bed. Enter Sir Cautious and Gayman by Dark. Sir Cau. Where are you my Dear?

[Leads him to the Bed. L. Fulb. Where should I be -- in Bed, what are you by
Dark?


Sir Cau. Ay the Candle went out by Chance.

[ Gayman signs to him to he gone, he makes grimaces as loath to go, and Exit.
SCENE dr^ws over and represents another Room in the same House. Enter Parson,
Diana, and Pert dressed in Diana's Clothes. Dia. I Will swear Mrs. Pert you look
very prettily in my Clothes; and since you Sir have convinced me that this
innocent Deceit is not unlawful, I am glad to be the Instrument of advancing
Mrs. Pert to a Husband, she already has so just a Claim to.


Par. Since she has so firm a Contract, I pronounce it a lawful
Marriage -- but hark they are coming sure --

Dia. Pull your Hoods down -- and keep your Face from the Light.


[ Diana runs out. Enter Bearjest, and Noysie disordered. Bea. Madam I beg your
Pardon -- I met with a most divellish Adventure, -- your Pardon too Mr. Doctor,
for making you wait -- but the Business is this Sir, -- I have a great Mind to
lie with this young Gentlewoman to Night, but she swears if I do, the Parson of
the Parish shall know it --


Pars. If I do Sir, I shall keep Counsel.

Bea. And that is civil Sir, -- come lead the Way,
With such a Guide, the Devil's in it, if we can go astray.

SCENE changes to the Antichamber. Enter Sir Cautious. Sir Cau. NOw cannot I
sleep! But am as restless as a Merchant in stormy Weather, that has ventured
all his Wealth in one Bottom. -- Woman is a leakey Vessel -- if she should like
the Young Rogue now, and they should come to a right Understanding -- why then
am I a -- Wital -- that is all, and shall be put in Print at Snow-hill with my
Effigies o'th'top like the Sign of Cuckolds Haven -- hum -- they are damnable
silent -- pray Heaven he have not murdered her, and robbed her -- hum -- hark,
what s that? -- a Noise -- he has broke his Covenant with me, and shall forfeit
the Money -- how loud they are? Ay, ay, the Plots discovered, what shall I do
-- Whythe Devil is not in her sure to be refractory now and peevish, if she be
I must pay my Money yet -- and that wou d be a damned thing -- sure they are
coming out -- I Will retire and harken how it is with them.


[Retires. Enter Lady Fulbank undrest -- Gayman half undrest upon his Knees,
following her, holding her Gown L. Fulb. Oh! You unkind -- what have you made
me do?
Unband me false Deceiver -- let me loose --

Sir Cau. Made her do? -- so, so -- it is done -- I Am glad of that --


[Aside, peeping. Gay. Can you be angry Julia!
Because I only seized my Right of Love.

L. Fulb. And must my Honor be the Price of it?
Could nothing but my Fame reward your Passion?
-- What make me a base Prostitute, a foul Adulteress,
Oh -- be gone, be gone -- dear Robber of my Quiet.

[Weeping. Sir Cau. Oh fearful! --

Gay. Oh! Calm your Rage and hear me; if you are so,
You are an innocent Adulteress.
It was the feeble Husband you enjoyed
In cold Imagination, and no more,
Shyly yon turned away -- faintly resigned.

Sir Cau. Hum -- did she so --

Gay. Till my Excess of Love -- betrayed the Cheat.

Sir Cau. Ay, ay that was my Fear --

L. Fulb. Away -- be gone -- I Will never see you more --

Gay. You may as well forbid the Sun to shine.
Not see you more! -- Heavens! I before adored you
But now I rave! And with my impatient Love,
A thousand mad, and wild Desires are Burning!
I have discovered now new Worlds of Charms.
And can no longer tamely love and suffer.

Sir Cau. So -- I have brought an old House upon my Head.
Entailed Cuckoldom upon my self.

L. Fulb. I Will hear no more -- Sir Cautious -- where is my Husband?
Why have you left my Honor thus unguarded?

Sir Cau. Ay, ay, she is well enough pleased I fear for all that.

Gay. Base as he is, 'twas he exposed this Treasure.
Like silly Indians bartered thee for Trisles.

Sir Cau. Oh treacherous Villain! --

L. Fulb. Hah -- my Husband do this?

Gay. He by Love, he was the kind Procurer,
Contri^'d the Means, and brought me to thy Bed.

L. Fulb. My Husband? My wise Husband!
What Fondness in my Conduct had he seen,
To take so shameful and so base Revenge.

Gay. None -- 'twas filthy Avarice seduced him to it.

L. Fulb. If he could be so barbarous to expose me,
Could you who loved me -- be so cruel too!

Gay. What -- to possess thee when the Bliss was offered,
Possess thee too without a Crime to thee:
Charge not my Soul with so remiss a Flame,
So dull a Sense of Virtue to refuse it.

L. Fulb. I am convinced the Fault was all my Husbands --
And here I vow -- by all things Just and sacred,
To separate for ever from his Bed.

[Kneels. Sir Cau. Oh I am not able, to endure it --
Hold -- oh hold my dear --

[He kneels as she rises. L. Fulb. Stand off -- I do abhor thee --

Sir Cau. With all my Soul -- but do not make rash Vows.
They break my very Heart -- regard my Reputation!

L. Fulb. Which you have had such Care of Sir already --
Rise, it is in vain you kneel.

Sir Cau No -- I Will never rise again -- Alas! Madam I was merely drawn in, I
only thought to sport a Dye or so -- I had only an innocent Design to have
discovered whether this Gentleman had stolen my Gold -- that so I might have
hanged him --


Gay. A very Innocent Design indeed.

Sir Cau. Ay Sir, that is all, as I Am an honest, man --

L. Fulb. I Have sworn, nor are the Stars more fixed than I

Enter Servant. Serve. How! my Lady and his Worship up?
-- Madam, a Gentleman, and a Lady below in a Coach knock^ me up, and say they
must speak with your Ladyship.


L. Fulb. This is strange! -- bring 'em up --
[ Exit Servant. Who can it be at this odd time of neither Night nor Day?

Enter Leticia -- Belmour and Phillis. Let. Madam, your Virtue, Charity and
Friendship to me, has made me trespass on you for my Lives Security, and beg
you will protect me -- and my Husband --


[Points at Belmour^ Sir Cau. So -- here is another sad Catastrophe!

L. Fulb. Hah -- does Belmou live, is it possible
Believe me Sir, you ever had my Wishes:
And shall not fail of my Protection now.

Bell. I humbly thank your Lady ship.

Gay. I Am glad thou have her Harry -- but doubt thou durst not own her; nay,
dare not own thy self.


Bell. Yes Friend, I have my Pardon --
But hark, I think we are pursued already --
But now, I fear no force.

[A noise of some body coming in. L. Fulb. However step into my Bedchamber.

[ Exeunt Leticia, Gayman and Phillis. Enter Sir Feeble in an Antic manner.
Sir Feeb. Hell shall not hold thee -- nor vast Mountains cover thee, but I will
find thee out -- and lash thy silthy and Adulterous Carcass.


[Coming up in a menacing manner to Sir Cau. Sir Cau. How -- lash my silthy
Carcass? -- I desie^ thee Satan --


Sir Feeb. 'Twas thus he said.

Sir Cau. Let who is will say it, he lies in's Throat.

Sir Feeb. -- How! the Ghostly -- hush -- have a care -- for 'twas the Ghost of
Belmour -- oh! hide that bleeding Wound, it chills my Soul! --


[Runs to the Lady Fulbank. L. Fulb. What bleeding Wound? -- Heavens are you
frantic Sir?


Sir Feeb. No -- but for want of rest -- I shall ever Morning.
[Weeps. -- She Is gone -- she is gone -- she is gone --

[He weeps. Sir Cau. Ay, Ay, she is gone, she is gone indeed.

[Sir Cau. weeps. Sir Feeb. -- But let her go -- so I may never see that
dreadful Vision -- harky Sir -- a Word in your Ear -- have a care of marrying a
young Wife.


Sir Gau. Ay, but I have married one already.

[Weeping. Sir Feeb. Have thou? Divorce her -- fly her, quick -- depart -- be
gone, she will Cuckold thee -- and still she will Cuckold thee --


Sir Cau. Ay Brother, but whose fault was that? --
Why, are not you married?

Sir Feeb. Mum -- no Words on it, unless you will have the Ghost about your Ears;
Part with your Wife I say, or else the Devil will part ye.


L. Fulb. Pray go to Bed Sir?

Sir Feeb. Yes, for I shall sleep now, I shall ly alone; [ Weeps. Ah Fool, old
dull besotted Fool -- to think she would love me -- 'twas by base means I gained
her -- couzened an honest Gentleman -- of Fame and Life --


L. Fulb. You did so Sir, but it is not past Redress -- you may make that honest
Gentleman amends.


Sir Feeb. Oh would I could, so I gave half my Estate --

L. Fulb. -- That Penitence attones with him and Heaven.
-- Come forth Leticia, and your injured Ghost.

Sir Feeb. -- HahGhost -- another Sight would make me mad indeed.

Bell. Behold me Sir, I have no Terror now.

Sir Feeb. Hah -- who is that Francis? -- my Nephew Francis?

Bell. Belmour -- or Francis -- choose you which you like, and I am either.


Sir Feeb. Hah, Belmour! and no Ghost?

Bell. Belmour -- and not your Nephew Sir.

Sir Feeb. But art alive? Ods bobs I Am glad on it Sirrah,
-- But are you real Belmour?

Bell. As sure as I Am no Ghost.

Gay. We all can Witness for him Sir.

Sir Feeb. Where be the Minstrels, we'll have a Dance -- adod we will -- ah --
art thou there thou couzening little C^itsface? -- a Vengeance on thee -- thou
made me an old Doting loving Coxcomb -- but I forgive thee -- and give thee
all thy Jewels, and you your Pardon Sir, so you will give me mine; for I find you
young Knaves will be too hard for us.


Bell. You are so generous Sir, that it is almost with grief I receive the
Blessing of Leticia.


Sir Feeb. No, no, thou deserve her, she would have made an old fond
Blockhead of me -- and one way or other you would have had her -- ods bobs you
would --


Enter Bearjest, Diana, Pert, Bredwel and Noysey. Bear. Justice Sir, Justice --
I have been cheated -- abused --
Ass assinated and Ravished!

Sir Cau. How my Nephew ravished! --

Pert. No Sir, I am his Wife.

Sir Cau. Hum -- my Heir marry a Chambermaid!

Bear. Sir, you must know I stole away Mrs. Die, and brought her to Nea's
Chamber here -- to marry her.


Sir Feeb. My Daughter Die stolen --

Bear. But I being to go to the Devil a little Sir; whip -- what does he, but
marrys her himself Sir; and fob'd me off here with my Ladys cast Petticoat --


Noy. Sir, she is a Gentlewoman, and my Sister Sir.

Pert. Madam, 'twas a pious Fraud, if it were one, for I was contracted to him
before -- see here it is --


[Gives it 'em. All. A plain Case, a plain Case.

Sir Feeb. Hark'y' Sir, have you had the Impudence to marry my Daughter Sir?


[To Bredwel, who with Diana kneels. Bred. Yes Sir, and humbly ask your Pardon,
and your Blessing --

Sir Feeb. You will have it, whether I will or not -- rise -- you are still too
hard for us, Come Sir forgive your Nephew --


Sir Cau. Well Sir, I will -- but all this while you little think the
Tribulation I am in, my Lady has forsworn my Bed.


Sir Feeb. Indeed Sir, the wiser she.

Sir Cau. For only performing my Promise to this Gentleman.

Sir Feeb. Ay, you showed her the Difference Sir, you are a wise man. Come dry
your Eyes -- and rest your self contented, we are a couple of old Coxcombs: do you
hear Sir Coxcombs.


Sir Cau. I grant it Sir, and if I dye Sir -- I bequeath my Lady to you -- with
my whole Estate -- my Nephew has too much already for a Fool.


[To Gayman. Gay. I thank you Sir -- do you consent my Julia?

L. Fulb. No Sir -- you do not like me -- a canvass Bag of wooden Ladies were a
better Bedfellow.


Gay. Cruel Tormentor! oh I could kill my self with Shame and Anger!


L. Fulb. Come hither Bredwel -- witness for my Honor -- that I had no Design
upon his Person, but that of trying of his Constancy.


Bred. Believe me Sir, it is true -- I feigned a danger near -- just as you got
to Bed -- and I was the kind Devil Sir, that brought the Gold to you.


Bear. And you were one of the Devils that beat me, and the Captain here Sir?


Gay. No truly Sir, those were some I hired -- to beat you for abusing me to
day --


Noy. To make you 'mends Sir, I bring you the certain News of the Death of Sir
Thomas Gayman your Uncle, who has left you Two thousand pounds a year. --


Gay. I thank you Sir -- I heard the news before.

Sir Cau. How Is this; Mr Gayman, my Lady's first Lover? I find Sir Feeble we
were a Couple of old Fools indeed, to think at our Age to cousen two lusty
young Fellows of their Mistresses; it is no wonder that both the Men and the
Women have been too hard for us, we are not fit Matches for either, that is the
truth on it.


That Warrior needs must to his Rival yield,
Who comes with blunted Weapons to the Field.
EPILOGUE
Written by a Person of Quality, spoken by Mr. Betterton. LOng have we turned
the Point of our just Rage I
On the half Wits, and Critics of the Age.
Often has the soft, Insipid Sonneteer
In Nice and Flutter, seen his Fop-face here.
Well was the Ignorant Lampooning P^ck
Of shatter head Rhi^ ^hipt on Cressey's lack;
But such a trouble Weed is Poetaster,
The lower it is cut down, it grows the faster.
Tho Satyr then had such a plenteous Crop,
An After Match of Coxcombs is come up.
Who not content false Po'try to renew,
By sottish Censures would condemn the true
Let writing like a Gentleman -- fine appear,
But must you needs judge too en Cavalier?
These whiffling Critticks, it is our Authress fears,
And humbly begs a Trial by her Peers:
Or let a Pole of Fools her Fate pronounce,
There Is no great harm in a good quiet Dunce.
But shield her, Heaven! from the left handed Blow
Of Airy Blockheads, who pretend to know.
On (...) Dullness let her rather split,
Than be Fop-mangl'd under color of Wit.
Hear me ye Scribbling Beaus, --
Why will you in shier Rhyme, without one stroke
Of Poetry, Lady's just Disdain provoke,
And address Songs, to whom you never spoke.
In doleful Hymns for dying Fellons fit,
Why do you tax their Eyes, and blame their Wit?
Unjustly of the Inn'cent you complain,
It Is Bulkers give, and Tubs must cure your Pain.
Why in Lampoons will you your selves revile?
It Is true, none else will think it worth their wh i will:
But thus you're hid! oh, it is a Politic Fetch:
So some have hanged themselves, to ease Jack Ketch.
Justly your Friends and Mistresses you blame,
For being so they well deserve the Shame,
It Is the worst Scandal to have born that Nam
At Poetry of late, and such whose Skill See the late Satyr on Poetry.

Excels your own, you dart a feeble Quill;
Well may you rail at what you Ape so ill.
With virtuous Women, and all Men of Worth,
You're in a state of Mortal War by Birth.
Nature in all her Atome Fights never knew
Two things so opposite as Them and You.
On such your Muse her utmost Fury spends,
They Are slandered worse than any but your Friends.
More Years may teach you better, the mean while,
If you cannot mend your Morals, mend your Style.
ADVERTISEMENT.
LA Montre; or the Lover's Watch: By Mrs. A. Behn, is sold by W. Canning, at
his Shop in Vine-Court, Middle Temple.

FINIS.

