Sir Patient Fancy: A COMEDY As it is Acted at the Duke's Theater.

Written by Mrs. A. BEHN, the Author of the ROVER.

Licensed Ian. 28. 1678. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher for Richard Tonson, within Grays-Inn-gate in
Grays-Inn-lane, and Jacob Tonson, at the Iudge's Head in Chancery Lane. 1678.

TO THE READER.
I Printed this Play with all the impatient haste one ought to do, who would be
vindicated from the most unjust and silly aspersion, Woman could invent to cast
on Woman; and which only my being a Woman has procured me; That it was Baudy,
the least and most Excusable fault in the Men writers, to whose Plays they all
crowd, as if they came to no other end then to hear what they condemn in this:
but from a Woman it was unnatural: but how so Cruel an unkindness came into
their imaginations I can by no means guess; unless by those whose Lovers by
long absence, or those whom Age or Ugliness have rendered a little distant from
those things they would fain imagine here -- But if such as these durst profane
their Chaste ears with hearing it over again, or taking it into their serious
Consideration in their Cabinets; they would find nothing that the most innocent
Virgins can have cause to blush at: but confess with me that no Play either
Ancient or Modern has less of that Bugbear Bawdry in it. Others to show their
breeding (as Bays says,) cried it was made out of at least four French Plays,
when I had but a very bare hint from one, the Malad Imagenere, which was given
me translated by a Gentleman infinitely to advantage: but how much of the
French is in this, I leave to those who do indeed understand it and have seen
it at the Court. The Play had no other Misfortune but that of coming out for a
Woman's: had it been owned by a Man, though the most Dull Unthinking Rascally
Scribler in Town, it had been a most admirable Play. Nor does it is loss of Fame
with the Ladies do it much hurt, though they ought to have had good Nature and
justice enough to have attributed all its faults to the Authors unhappiness,
who is forced to write for Bread and not ashamed to own it, and consequently
ought to write to please (if she can) an Age which has given several proofs it
was by this way of writing to be obliged, though it is a way too cheap for men
of wit to pursue, who write for Glory, and a way which even I despise as much
below me.

PROLOGUE, Spoken by Mr. BETTERTON.
WE write not Now as the Ancient Poets writ*
For your Applause of Nature, Sense and Wit;
But, like good Tradesmen, what is in fashion vent,
And Cozen you, to give ye all Content.
True Comedy, writ even in Dryden's style,
Will hardly raise your Humors to a smile:
Long did his Sovereign Muse the Scepter sway,
And long with joy you did true Homage pay;
But now, like happy States luxurious grown,
The Monarch Wit unjustly you dethrone,
And a Tyrannick Commonwealth prefer,
Where each small Wit starts up and claims his share;
And all those Laurels are in pieces torn,
Which did ere while one sacred Head adorn*
Nay, even the Women, now, pretend to reign,
Defend us from a Poet Joan again:
That Congregation's in a hopeful way
To Heaven, where the Lay-sisters Preach and Pray*
Oh the great blessing of a little wit,
I Have seen an elevated Poet sit
And hear the Audience laugh and clap, yet say,
Gad after all it is a damned silly Play:
He unconcerned, cries only -- is it so?
No matter these unwitty things will do,
When your fine fustian useless Eloquence
Serves but to chime a sleep a drowsy Audience.
Who at the vast Expense of wit would treat,
That might so cheaply please the Appetite?
Such homely fare you're like to find to night,
Our Author
Knows better how to juggle then to write:
Alas! a Poet's good for nothing now,
Unless he have the knack of conjuring too;
For it is beyond all natural sense to guess
How their strange Miracles are brought to pass.
Your Presto Jack be gone, and come again,
With all the Pocus Art of Legerdemain,
Your dancing Tester, Nut-meg and your Cups,
Out-does your Heroes and your Amorous fops*
And if (...) chance to please you, by that rule,
He that writes Wit is much the greater Fool.
The Actors Names.
Mr. Anthony Leigh, Sir Patient Fancy, An old Rich Alderman, and one that
fancies himself always Sick. Mr. Crosby, Leander Fancy His Nephew, in Love with
Lucretia. Mr. Betterton, Wittmore, Gallant to the Lady Fancy, a wild young
Fellow of a small Fortune. Mr. Smith, Lodwick Knowell, Son to the Lady Knowell,
in Love with Isabella. Mr. Nokes, Sir Credulous Easy, A Foolish Devon-shire
Knight, designed to Marry Lucretia. Mr. Richards, Curry, His Groom. Roger,
Footman to the Lady Fancy. Five Doctors. Six Servants to Sir Patient. Ballad
Singers and Serenaders. Page to the Lady Knowell.

Women.
Mrs. Corrar, The Lady Fancy, Young Wife to Sir Patient. Mrs. Gwin, The L.
Knowell, An Affected Learned Woman, Mother to Lodw. and Isabella. Mrs. Price,
Lucretia, Daughter to the Lady Knowell. Mrs. Betterton, Isabella, Daughter to
Sir Patient Fancy. Fanny, A Child of 7. years old, Daughter to Sir Patient
Fancy. Mrs. Gibbs, Maundy. The Lady Fancy's Woman. Betty Waiting Woman to
Isabella.

SCENE, LONDON, in two Houses.

Sir Patient Fancy: A COMEDY.
ACT the First.
Scene the First. A Room.
Enter Lucretia with Isabella. Isab. IT IS much I owe to fortune, my dear
Lucretia, for being so kind to make us Neighbors, where with ease we may
continually exchange our Souls and thoughts without the attendance of a Coach,
and those other little Formalities that make a business of a visit, it looks so
like a Journey I hate it.


Lucr. Attendance is that Curse to Greatness that confines the Soul, and spoils
good Humor; we are free whilst thus alone, and can laugh at the abominable
Fopperies of this Town.


Isab. And lament the numberless impertinences wherewith they continually
plague all young Women of Quality.


Lucr. Yet these are the precious things our grave Parents still choose out to
make us happy with, and all for a filthy Jointure, the undeniable argument for
our slavery to Fools.


Isab. Custom is unkind to our Sex, not to allow us free choice, but we above
all Creatures must be forced to endure the formal recommendations of a Parent;
and the more insupportable Addresses of an Odious Foppe, whilst the Obedient
Daughter stands -- thus -- with her Hands pinned before her, a set look, few
words, and a meine that cries -- come marry me; out upon it.


Lucr. I perceive then whatever your Father designs, you are resolved to love
your own way.


Isab. Thou may lay thy Maidenhead upon it, and be sure of the misfortune to
win.


Lucr. My Brother Lodwick's like to be a happy man then.


Isab. Faith my dear Lodwick or no body in my heart, and I hope thou art as
well resolved for my Cozen Leander.


Lucr. Here Is my hand upon it I am, yet there is something sticks upon my
Stomach, which you must know.


Isab. Spare the Relation, for I have observed of late your Mother to have
ordered her Eyes with some softness, her mouth endeavoring to sweeten it self
into smiles and dimples, as if she meant to recall Fifteen again and give it
all to Leander, for at him she throws her Darts.


Lucr. Is It possible thou should have perceived it already?


Isab. Long since.


Lucr. And, now I begin to love him, 'twou'd vex me to see my Mother Marry him,
-- well I shall never call him Father.


Isab. He Will take care to give himself a better title.


Lucr. This Devonshire Knight too who is recommended to my Mother as a fit
Husband for me, I shall be so tormented with -- My Brother swears he is the
pertest unsufferable Fool he ever saw, when he was at my Uncles last Summer he
made all his Diversion.


Isab. Prithee let him make ours now, for of all Fops your Country Fop is the
most tolerable Animal; those of the Town are the most unmanagable Beasts in
Nature.


Lucr. And are the most noysie, keeping Fops?


Isab. Keeping begins to be as ridiculous as Matrimony, and is a greater
imposition upon the liberty of man, the Insolence and Expense of their
Mistresses has almost tired out all but the Old and Doting part of mankind;
The rest begin to know their value, and set a Price upon a good shape, a
tolerable Face and Mein, -- and some there are who have made excellent Bargains
for themselves that way, and will flatter ye and gilt ye an Antiquated Lady as
artfully as the most experienced Miss of 'em all.


Lucr. Lord, Lord! what will this World come to, -- but this Mother of mine, --
Isabella. Sighs,


Isab. Is discreet and virtuous enough, a little too affected, as being the
most learned of her Sex.


Lucr. Methinks to be read in the Arts as they call 'em, is the peculiar
Province of the other Sex.


Isab. Indeed the men would have us think so, and boast their Learning, and
Languages, but if they can find any of our Sex fuller of words, and to so
little purpose as some of their Gownmen, I Will be content to change my
Petticoats for Pantiloons and go to a Grammar School.


Lucr. Oh they are the greatest Babelards in Nature.


Isab. They call us Easy, and Fond, and charge us with all weakness, but look
into their Actions of Love, State, or War, their roughest business, and you
shall find 'em swayed by some who have the luck to find their feables; witness
my Father, a man reasonable enough, till drawn away by doting Love and
Religion: what a Monster my young Mother makes of him, Flattered him first into
Matrimony, and now into what sort of Fool or Beast she pleases to make him.


Lucr. I wonder she does not turn him to Christianity, methinks a Conventicle
should ill agree with her humor.


Isab. Oh she finds it the only way to secure her from his suspicion, which if
she do not e're long give him cause for, I am mistaken in her Humor, -- but
see your Enter L. Knowel and Leander. Mother and my Cozen Leander, who seems,
poor man, under some great Consternation, for he looks as gravely as a
Lay-elder conducting his Spouse from a Sermon.


La. Kno. Oh fie upon it. See Mr. Fancy where your Cozen and my Lucretia are
idling, dii boni, what an insupportable loss of time's this?


Lean. Which might be better employed if I might instruct 'em Madam.


La. Kno. Aye Mr. Fancy, in Consultation with the Ancients, -- Oh the delight
of Books! when I was of their age, I always employed my looser hours in
reading, -- if serious, 'twas Tacitus, Seneca, Plutarch's Morals, or some such
useful Author; if in an Humor gay, I was for Poetry, Virgil, Homer, or Tasso,
Oh that Love between Renaldo and Armida Mr. Fancy! Ah the Caresses that fair
Corcereis gave, and received from the young Warrier, ah how soft, Delicate and
tender! upon my Honor I cannot read them in the Excellence of their Original
Language, without I know not what Emotions.


Lean. Methinks it is very well in our Mother tongue Madam.


La. K. O Faugh Mr. Fancy what have you said, Mother tongue! Can any thing
that is great or moving be expressed in filthy English, -- I Will give you an
Energetical proof Mr. Fancy, observe but Divine Homer in the Grecian Language
-- Ton d'apamibominus, Prosiphe, Podis Ochus Achilleus! ah how it sounds! which
English't dwindles into the most grating stuff: -- then the swift Foot Achilles
made reply, -- oh faugh.


Lucr. So now my Mother's in her right Sphere.


La. Kn. Come Mr. Fancy we will pursue our first design of retiring into my
Cabinet and reading a leaf or two in Martial, I am a little dull and would
fain laugh.


Lean. Methinks Madam discourse were much better with these young Ladies. Dear
Lucretia find some way to release me. Aside.


La. Kn. Oh how I hate the impertinance of women, who for the generality have
no other knowledge then that of dressing, I am uneasy with the unthinking
Creatures.


Lucr. Indeed it is much better to be Entertaining a young Lover alone, but I Will
prevent her if possible. Aside.


La. Kn. No, I am for the substantial pleasure of an Author. Philosophemur! is
my Motto, -- I Am strangely fond of you Mr. Fancy, for being a Scholar.


Lean. Who Madam I a scholar? the greatest Dunce in Nature, -- Malicious
Creatures will you leave me to her mercy?


To them aside. Lucr. Prithee assist him in his misery, for I am Mudd, and can
do nothing toward it. Aside.


Isab. Who my Cozen Leander a Scholar Madam?


Lucr. Sure He Is too much a Gentleman to be a Scholar.


Isab. I Vow Madam he spells worse then a Country Farryer when he Prescribes a
Drench.


Lean. Then Madam I write the lewdest hand!


Isab. Worse then a Politician or a Statesman.


Lucr. He cannot read it himself when he has done.


Lean. Not a word on it Madam.


La. Kn. This agreement to abuse him, I understand -- Aside. -- Well then Mr.
Fancy, let us to my Cabinet -- your hand.


Lean. Now shall I be teas'd unmercifully, -- I Will wait on you Madam. Exit
Lady. -- Find some means to redeem me or I shall be Mad.


Exit. Lean. Enter Lodwick. Lod. Hah my dear Isabella here, and without a spy?
what a blessed opportunity must I be forced to lose, for there is just now
arrived My Sisters Lover, whom I am obliged to receive, but if you have a mind
to laugh a little --


Isab. Laugh! why are you turned Buffoon, Tumbler or Presbyterian Preacher.


Lod. No, but* there is a Creature below more ridiculous then either of these.


Lucr. For loves sake what sort of Beast is that?


Lod. Sir Credulous Easy your new Lover just come to Town Bag and Baggage, and
I was going to acquaint my Mother with it.


Isab. You Will find her well employed with my Cozen Leander.


Lucr. A happy opportunity to Free him, but what shall I do now Brother!


Lod. Oh let me alone to ruin him with my Mother, get you gone, I think I hear
him coming, and this apartment is appointed for him.


Lucr. Prithee haste then and free Leander, we will into the Garden. Exeunt Lucr.
and Isab.


A Chair and a Table. Enter Sir Credulous in a riding habit, Curry his Groom
carrying a Portmantle. Lod. Yes -- it is the Right Worshipful, I Will to my Mother
with the news. Exit Lod.


Sir Cred. Come undo my Portmantue and Equip me that I may look like somebody
before I see the Ladies. -- Curry, Thou shall e'ne remove now Curry from Groom
to Footman, for I Will never keep Horse more, no, nor Mare neither since my Poor
Gillian's departed this life.


Cur. 'Ds diggers, Sir, you have grieved enough for your Mare in all
conscience, think of your Mistress now Sir, and think of her no more.


Sir Cred. Not think of her? I shall think of her whilst I live, poor Fool,
that I shall, though I had forty Mistresses!


Curr. Nay to say truth Sir, 'twas a good natured Civil beast, and so she
remained to her last gasp, for she could never have left this world in a better
time, as the saying is, so near her journeys End.


Sir Cred. A Civil Beast? Why was it Civilly done of her think thou to dye
at Branford, when had she lived till tomorrow, she had been converted into Money
and have been in my Pocket? for now I am to Marry and live in town, I Will sell
off all my Pads; poor Fool, I think she e'ne died for grief I would have sold
her.


Curr. 'Twas unlucky to refuse Parson Cuffets wifes money for her Sir.


Sir Cred. Aye, and to refuse her another kindness too that shall be nameless
which She offered me, and which would have given me good luck in horseflesh
too, Zoz I was a modest fool that is truth on it.


Curr. Well well Sir, her time was come you must think, and we are all Mortal
as the saying is.


Sir Cred. Well 'twas the lovingst titt, -- but grass and hay she is gone --
where be her shoes Curry?


Curr. Here Sir, her Skin went for good Ale at Branford.


gives him the shoes. Sir Cred. Ah! how often has she carried me upon these
shoes to Mother Iumbles, thou remember'st her handsome Daughter and what pure
Ale she brewed, between one and the other my Rent came short home there, but let
that pass too, and hang sorrow as thou say, I have something else to think
on. Takes his things out, lays them upon the Table. And Curry, as soon as I am
dressed, go you away to St. Clements Churchyard, to Iackson the Cobbler there!


Curr. What your Dog-tutor Sir?


Sir Cred. Yes, and see how my whelp proves I put to him last Parliament.


Curr. Yes Sir.


Enter Leander and starts back seeing Sir Cred. Sir Cred. And ask him what
Gamesters come to the Ponds now adays, and what good Dogs.


Curr. Yes Sir.


Lean. This is the Beast Lodwick spoke of; how could I laugh were he designed
for any but Lucretia! Aside.


Sir Cred. And do hear, ask him if he have not sold his own Dog Diver with
the white Ear, if I can purchase him, and my own Dog prove right, I Will be Duke
of Ducking Pond ads zoz. Sir Cred. dresses himself. Well, I think I shall be
fine anon, he.


Curr. But zo zo Sir, as the saying is, this Suit's a little out of fashion,
'twas made that very year I came to your Worship, which is five Winters and as
many Summers.


Sir Cred. What then Mun, I never wear it but when I go to be drunk and give my
Voice for a Knight of the shire, and here at London in Term time, and that but
Eight times in Eight Visits to Eight several Ladies to whom I was recommended.


Curr. I wonder that amongst Eight you got not one Sir.


Sir Cred. Eight! Zoz I have had Eight score Mun, but the Devil was in 'em,
they were all so Forward, that before I could seal and deliver, whip quoth
Iethro, they were either all Married to some body else, or run quite away; so
that I am resolved if this same Lucretia prove not right, I Will e'ne forswear
this Town and all their false Wares, amongst which Zoz I believe they vent as
many false Wives as any Metropolitan in Christendom, I Will say that for it and a
Fiddle for it in faith, -- come give me my Watch out, -- so, My Diamond Rings
too, so, I think I shall appear pretty well all together Curry, hah?


Lean. Like something Monstrously Ridiculous, I Will be sworn.


Aside. Curr. Here Is your Purse of broad Gold Sir, that your Grandmother gave
you to go a wooing withal, I mean to show Sir.


Sir Cred. Aye, for she charged me never to part with it, -- so, now for the
Ladies. Shakes his Ribbons.


Lod. Leander, what make thou here, like Holy Day Fool gazing at a Mother?
Enter Lodwick.


Lean. Yes, and one I hope I have no great reason to fear.


Lod. I am of thy opinion, away, my mother's coming, take this opportunity with
my Sister, she is i*th' Garden, and let me alone with this Fool, for an
Entertainment that shall show him all at once, away -- Exit Lean.


Lod. goes in to Sir Cred. Sir Cred. Lodwick, My dear Friend! and little spark
of ingenuity! -- Zoz mam I Am but just come to Town. Embrace.


Lod. It Is a joyful hearing Sir.


Sir Cre. Not so joyful neither Sir, when you shall know Poor Gillian's dead,
My little gray Mare, thou knew'st her mun, Zoz 'thas made me as Melancholy as
the Drone of a Lancashire Bagpipe, but let that pass, and now we talk of my
Mare, Zoz I long to see this Sister of thine.


Lod. She Will be with you presently Sir Credulous.


Sir Cre. But hark ye, Zoz I have been so often fob'd off in these matters,
that between you and I Lodwick if I thought I should not have her, Zoz I Would
never lose precious time about her.


Lod. Right Sir, and to say truth, these Women have so much Contradiction in
'em, that it is ten to one but a man fails in the Art of pleasing.


Sir Cre. Why there is it, -- therefore prithee dear Lodwick tell me a few of
thy Sisters Humors, and if I fail, -- then Hang me Ladies at your door, as the
Song says.


Lod. Why faith she has many odd Humors hard enough to hit.


Sir Cre. Zoz let them be as hard as Hercules his Labors in the Vale of Basse,
I Will not be frighted from attempting her.


Lod. Why, She Is one of those fantastic Creatures that must be courted her own
way.


Sir Cre. Why let us hear her way.


Lod. She must be surprised with strange Extravagancies wholly out of the Road
and Method of common Court-ship.


Sir Cre. Shaw, is that all, Zoz I Am the best in Christendom at You're out of
the way bus'nesses, -- Now do I find the reason of all my ill success, for I
used one and the same method to all I Courted, whatever their Humors were;
Hark ye, prithee give me a hint or two, and let me alone to manage matters.


Lod. I have just now thought of a way that cannot but take --


Sir Cre. Zoz out with it man.


Lod. Why, what if you should represent a Dumb Ambassador from the Blind God of
Love.


Sir Cre. How, a Dumb Ambassador? Zoz man how shall I deliver my Embassy then,
and tell her how much I love her, -- besides I had a pure speech or two ready
by heart, and that will be quite lost. Aside.


Lod. Phy, phy! how dull you are! why; you shall do it by Signs, and I Will be
your Interpreter.


Sir Cre. Why faith this will be pure, I understand you now, Zoz I am old
Excellent at Signs, -- I vow this will be rare.


Lod. It will not fail to do your business if well managed, -- but stay, here is
my Sister, on your life not a syllable.


Enter Lean. Lucr. and Isab. Sir Cre. I Will be rackt first, Mum budget, He falls
back making Faces and Grimaces. -- prithee present me, I long to be at it, sure.


Lod. Sister, I here present you with a worthy Knight, struck dumb with
Admiration of your Beauty, but that is all one, he is employed Envoy
extraordinary from the blind God of Love, and since like his young Master he
must be defective in one of his Senses, he chose rather to be Dumb then Blind.


Lucr. I hope the small Deity is in good health Sir?


Isab. And his Mistress Psyche Sir? He smiles and bows and makes Signs.


Lod. He says that Psyche has been sick of late, but somewhat recovered, and
has sent you for a Looking every word upon Sir Credulous as he makes signs.
token a pair of Jet Bracelets, and a Cambrick Handkerchief of her own spinning,
with a Sentence wrought in it; Heart in hand, at thy Command.


Sir Cred. Zoz, Lodwick what do you mean? I Am the Son of an Egyptian if I
understand thee. Pulls him, he signs to him to hold his peace.


Lod. Come Sir, the Tokens, produce, produce, -- How! Faith I am sorry for that
with all my heart, He falls back, making damnable Signs. -- he says -- being
somewhat put to it on his journey, he was forced to Pawn the Bracelets for half
a Crown, and the handkerchief he gave his Landlady on the Road for a kindness
received, -- this it is when people will be fooling. --


Sir Cred. Why, the Devil's in this Lodwick, for mistaking my Signs thus, hang
me if ever I thought of Bracelets or a Handkerchief, or ever received a
civility from any Woman breathing, -- is he bewitch't trow? Aside.


Lean. Lodwick, you are mistaken in the Knight's meaning all this while. Look
on him Sir, -- do not you guess from that look and wrying of his mouth, that
you mistook the Bracelets for Diamond Rings, which he humbly begs, Madam, you
would grace with your fair hand.


Lod. Ah, now I perceive it plain.


Sir Cred. A Pox of his Complement. Why this is worse than the other, -- What
shall I do in this case? -- should I speak and undeceive them, they would swear
'twere to save my Gems: and to part with 'em -- Zoz, how simply should I look?
-- but hanged, when I have married her they are my own again.


Gives the Rings and falls back into Grimaces Leander whispers to Lodwick. Lod.
Enough, -- Then Sister she has sent you a Purse of her own knitting, full of
broad Gold, --


Sir Cre. Broad Gold! why, what a pox does the Man Conjure?


Lod. Which Sister faith you must accept of, you see by that Grimace how much
'twill grieve him else.


Sir Cre. A pretty civil way this to Rob a man, -- Why Lodwick -- why what a
Pox will they have no mercy, -- Zoz I Will see how far they will drive the jest.


Gives the Gold, and bows and scrapes and screws. Lod. Say you so Sir? Well
I Will see what may be done, -- Sister, behold him, and take pity on him, he has
but one more humble request to make you, it is to receive a Gold Watch which he
designs you from himself.


Sir Cre. Why, how long has this fellow been a Conjurer? for he does deal with
the Devil, that is certain, -- Lodwick, --


Pulls him. Lod. Aye do, speak and spoil all, do.


Sir Cred. Speak and spoil all quoth he! and the Deuce take me if I am not
provoked to it; why, how the Devil should he light slap dash, as they say, upon
every thing thus? Well, Zoz, I am resolved to give it her, and shame her if she
have any conscience in her. Gives his Watch with pitiful Grimaces.


Lod. Now Sister you must know there is a mystery in this Watch, it is a kind of
Hieroglyphick that will instruct you how a Married Woman of your Quality ought
to live.


Sir Cred. How, my Watch Mysteries and Hieroglyphics! the Devil take me if I
knew any such virtues it had.


They are all looking on the Watch. Lod. Beginning at Eight, from which down to
Twelve you ought to employ in dressing, till Two at Dinner, till Five in
Visits, till Seven at the Play, till Nine in the Park, at Ten at Supper with
your Lover, if your Husband be at home, or keep his distance, which he is too
well bred not to do, then from Ten to Twelve are the happy hours of the
Bergere, those of entire enjoyment. --


Sir Cred. Say you so? hang me if I shall not go near to think I may chance to
be a Cuckold by the shift.


Isab. Well Sir, what must she do from Twelve till Eight again?


Lod. Oh those are the dull Conjugal hours for sleeping with her own Husband,
and dreaming of Joys her absent Lover alone can give her.


Sir Cred. Nay an she be for sleeping, Zoz, I am as good at that as she can be
for her heart, or snoring either.


Lod. But I have done; Sir Credulous has a dumb Oration to make you by way of
farther Explanation.


Sir Cred. A dumb Oration! Now do I know no more how to speak a dumb Speech
than the Dog.


Lucr. Oh I love that sort of Eloquence extremely.


Lod. I told you this would take her.


Sir Cred. Nay, I know your silent Speeches are incomparable, and I have such a
Speech in my head. --


Lod. Your Postures, your Postures, begin Sir.


He puts himself into a ready Posture as if he would speak, but only makes
faces. Enter Page. Page Sir, My Lady desires to speak with you. To Lean.


Lean. I Will wait on her, -- a Devil on it. --


Page I have command to bring you Sir, instantly.


Lean. This is ill luck Madam, I cannot see the Farce out, I Will wait on you as
soon as my good fortune will permit me.


Goes out. Lucr. He Is going to my Mother, dear Isabella let us go and hinder
their discourse: Farewell Sir Ambassador, pray remember us to Psyche, not
forgetting the little Blind Archer, ha ha ha, --


Ex. laughing. Sir Cred. So, I have undone all, they are both gone, slown I
protest; Why what a Devil ail'd'em? now have I been dumb all this while to no
purpose, you too never told her my meaning right; as I hope to breath, had any
but your self done this, I should have sworn by Helicon and all the rest of the
Devils, you had had a design to have abused me, and cheated me of all my
Movables too.


Lod. What a hopeful project was here defeated by my mistake! but Courage Sir
Credulous, I Will put you in a way shall fetch all about again.


Sir Cred. Say you so? ah dear Lodwick let me hear it.


Lod. Why, you shall this night give your Mistress a Serenade.


Sir Cred. How! a Serenade!


Lod. Yes, but it must be performed after an Extravagant manner, none of your
dull Amorous night-walking noises so familiar in this Town, Lucretia loves
nothing but what is great and Extravagant, and passes the reach of Vulgar
practice.


Sir Cred. What think you then of a silent Serenade? Zoz say but the word and
it shall be done man, let me alone for Frolicks in faith.


Lod. A silent one? no that is to wear a good Humor to the stumps; I would have
this want for no noise, the Extremes of these two addresses will set off one
another.


Sir Cred. Say you so? what think you then of the Bagpipe, Tongs and Gridiron,
Cat-calls and loud sounding Cymballs?


Lod. Naught, naught, and of known use, you might as well treat her with Viols
and Flute-doux, which were enough to disoblige her for ever.


Sir Cred. Why, what think you then of the King of Bantam's own Music?


Lod. How! the King of Bantam's Music!


Sir Cred. Aye Sir, the King of Bantam's: a Friend of mine had a Present sent
him from thence, a most unheard of curiosity I Will assure you.


Lod. That, that by all means Sir.


Sir Cred. Well, I Will go borrow 'em presently.


Lod. You must provide your self of a Song.


Sir Cred. A Song! hanged it is but rummaging the Play-Books, stealing thence is
Lawful Prize -- Well Sir Cred. your servant.


Exit. Enter Leander. Lod. I hope 'twill be ridiculous enough, and then the
Devil's in it if it do not do his Business with my Mother, for she hates all
impertinent Noises but what she makes her self. She Is now going to make a Visit
to your Uncle, purposely to give me an opportunity to Isabella.


Lean. And I Am engaged to wait on her thither, she design to carry the
Fiddles too, he is Mad enough already, but such a Visit will fit him for Bedlam.


Lod. No matter, for you have all a lewd hand with him; between his continual
imaginary sickness, and perpetual Physic, a man might take more Pleasure in an
Hospital. What the Devil did he marry a young Wife for? and they say a handsome
creature too.


Lean. To keep up his Title of Cuckold I think, for she has beauty enough for
temptation, and no doubt makes the right use on it: would I could know it, that
I might prevent her cheating my Uncle longer to my undoing.


Lod. She Will be cunning enough for that, if she have wit: but now thou talk
of intrigues, when did see Wittmore? that Rogue has some lucky Haunt which we
must find out. -- But my Mother expects your attendance, I Will go seek my
Sister, and make all the Interest there I can for you, whilst you pay me in the
same Coin to Isabella. Adieu.


Lean. Trust my Friendship -- Exeunt severally.


The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I. A Garden.
Enter Lady Fancy, Wittmore and Maundy. Wit. ENough my Charming Mistress,
you have set my Soul at Peace, and chased away those Fears and Doubts my Jealousy
created there.


Maun. Mr. Wittmore's satisfied of your constancy Madam, though had I been your
Ladyship, I should have given him a more substantial Proof, which you might
yet do, if you would make handsome use of your time.


Wit. Maundy advises well my Dearest, let us withdraw to yonder Covert Arbor,
whose kind shades will secure us a happiness that Gods might envy. Offers to
lead her out.


La. Fan. I dare not for the world, Sir Patient is now asleep, and it is to
those few Minutes we are obliged for this enjoyment, which should Love make us
transgress, and he should wake and surprise us, we were undone for ever; no let
us employ this little time we have in consulting how we may be often happy, and
securely so: oh how I languish for the dear opportunity!


Wit. And could you guess what torments I have suffered in these few Fatal
Months that have divided us, thou would pity me.


La. Fan. -- but to our business; for though I am yet unsuspected by my
Husband, I am eternally plagued with his company, he is so fond of me, he scarce
gives me time to write to thee, he waits on me from room to room, hands me in
the Garden, shoulders me in the Belcony, nay does the office of my women,
dresses and undresses me, and does so smirk at his handiwork! in fine, dear
Wittmore, I am impatient till I can have less of his company, and more of thine.


Wit. Does he never go out of Town?


La. Fan. Never without me.


Wit. Nor to Church?


La. Fan. To a meeting house you mean, and then too carries me, and is as
vainly proud of me as of his Rebellious opinion, for his Religion means nothing
but that, and Contradiction; which I seem to like too, since it is the best
cloak I can put on to cheat him with.


Wit. Right my fair Hypocrite.


La. Fan. But dear Wittmore, there is nothing so Comicall as to hear me Cant,
and even cheat those knaves the Preachers themselves that delude the Ignorant
Rabble.


Wit. What Miracles cannot your Eyes and Tongue perform!


La. Fan. Judge what a fine life I lead the while, to be set up with an old
Formal Doting sick Husband, and a Herd of snivelling grinning Hypocrites that
call themselves the teaching Saints, who under pretense of securing me to the
number of their Flock, do so sneer upon me, pat my Breasts and cry, fie, fie upon
this fashion of tempting Nakedness.


through the nose. Wit. Dear Creature, how could we laugh at thy new way of
living, had we but some minutes allowed us to enjoy that pleasure alone.


La. Fan. Think, dear Wittmore think, Maundy and I have thought over all our
devices to no purpose.


Wit. Pox on it I Am the dullest Dog at Plotting, Thinking, in the world, I
should have made a damnable Ill Town Poet; has he quite left off going to the
Change?


La. Fan. Oh, he is grown Cautiously rich, and will venture none of his
substantial stock in transitory Traffic.


Wit. Has he no Mutinous Caball, nor Coffee-houses, where he goes religiously
to consult the welfare of the Nation?


La. Fan. His imagined sickness has made this their Rendesvouz.


Wit. When he goes to his blind Devotion, cannot you pretend to be sick? that
may give us at least two or three opportunities to begin with.


La. Fan. Oh! then I should be plagued with continual Physic and Extempore
Prayer till I were sick indeed.


Wit. Damn the Humorous Coxcombe and all his Family, what shall we do?


La. Fa. Not all, for he has a Daughter that has good Humor, Wit, and Beauty
enough to save her, -- stay -- that has jogged a thought as the learned say,
which must jogg on, till the motion have produced something worth my thinking.
--


Enter Roger running. Maun. Ad's me here is danger near, our Scout comes in such
have.


La. Fa. Roger, what is the matter?


Rog. My Master, Madam, is risen from sleep, and is come into the Garden, --
See Madam he is here.


La. Fa. What an unlucky accident was this?


Wit. What shall I do? it is too late to obscure my self.


La. Fa. He see's you already through the Trees, -- here -- keep your distance,
your Hat under your Arm, so, be very Ceremonious whilst I settle a demure
Countenance. --


Maun. Well, there never came good of Lovers that were given to too much
talking; had you been silently kind all this while, you had been willing to
have parted by this time.


Enter Sir Patient in a Nightgown, reading a Bill. Sir Pat. Hum, -- Twelve
Purges for this present January, -- as I take it, good Mr. Doctor, I took but
Ten in all December, -- by this Rule I am sicker this Month than I was the
last, -- and good Master Apothecary methinks your Prizes are somewhat to high,
at this rate no body would be sick. -- Here Roger, see it paid however, -- Ha,
hum. Sees 'em and starts back. What Is here, my Lady Wife entertaining a lewd
fellow of the Town? a flaunting Cap and Feather Blade?


La. Fa. Sir Patient cannot now be spoken with. But Sir, that which I was going
just now to say to you, was, that it would be very convenient in my opinion to
make your addresses to Isabella, -- 'twill give us opportunities. Aside We
Ladies love no imposition, this is Counsel my Husband perhaps will not like,
but I would have all Women choose their Man, as I have done, -- my dear
Wittmore. Aside.


Sir Pat. I profess ingenuously an excellent good Lady this of mine, though I do
not like her Counsel to the young man, whom I perceive would be a suitor to my
Daughter Isabella.


Wit. Madam, should I follow my inclinations, I should pay my vows no where but
there, -- but I am informed Sir Patient is a man so positively resolved. --


La. Fa. That you should love his Wife. Aside.


Wit. And I Will comply with that resolve of his, and neither Love nor Marry
Isabella, without his Permission, and I doubt not but I shall by my respects to
him gain his consent, -- to Cuckold him. Aside.


Sir Pat. I profess ingenuously a very discreet young man.


Wit. But Madam, when may I promise my self the satisfaction of coming again?
For I Am impatient for the sight and enjoyment of the fair person I love.


La. Fa. Sir, You may come at night, and something I will do by that time
shall certainly give you that access you wish for.


Wit. May I depend upon that happiness?


La. Fa. Oh, doubt not my power over Sir Patient.


Sir Pat. My Lady Fancy, you promise largely.


La. Fa. Sir Patient here?


Wit. A Devil on him, would I were well off, now must I dissemble, profess, and
lie most confoundedly.


Sir Pat. Your Servant Sir, your Servant, -- My Lady Fancy, your Ladyship is
well entertained I see, have a care you make me not Jealous, my Lady Fancy.


La. Fa. Indeed I have given you cause Sir Patient, for I have been
entertaining a Lover, and one you must admit of too.


Sir Pat. Say you so, my Lady Fancy? -- Well Sir, I am a man of Reason, and if
you show me good causes why, can bid you welcome, for I do nothing without
Reason and Precaution.


Wit. Sir I have. --


Sir Pat. I know what you would say Sir, few words denotes a wise head, -- you
would say that you have an ambition to be my Son in Law.


Wit. You guess most right Sir.


Sir Pat. Nay Sir, I Will warrant I Will read a man as well as the best, I have
studied it.


Wit. Now Invention help me or never.


Sir Pat. Your Name I pray? Putting off his Hat gravely at every word.


Wit. Fain-Love, Sir.


Sir Pat. Good Mr. Fain-Love, your Country?


Wit. Yorkshire, Sir.


Sir Pat. What, not Mr. Fain-Love's Son of Yorkshire, who was Knighted in the
good days of the late Lord Protector?


Off his Hat. Wit. The same Sir, -- I am in, but how to come off again the
Devil take me if I know.


Sir Pat. He was a man of admirable Parts, believe me, a notable headpiece, a
Publick-spirited Person, and a good Commonwealths man, that he was, on my word,
-- Your Estate Sir, I pray? Hat off.


Wit. I have not impaired it Sir, and I presume you know its value? For I Am a
Dog if I do. --


Sir Pat. OF my word it is then considerable Sir, for he left but one Son, and
Fourteen hundred Pounds per annum, as I take it, which Son I hear is lately
come from Geneva, whither he was sent for virtuous Education. I am glad of your
Arrival Sir, -- Your Religion I pray?


Wit. You cannot doubt my Principles, Sir, since educated at Geneva.


Sir Pat. Your Father was a discreet Man, ah Mr. Fain-love, he and I have seen
better days, and wish we could have foreseen these that are arrived.


Wit. That he might have turned honest in time, he means, before he had
purchased Bishops Lands.


Sir Pat. Sir, You have no Place, Office, Dependence or Attendance at Court I
hope?


Wit. None Sir. -- Would I had, -- so you were hanged.


La. Fa. Nay Sir, you may believe, I knew his Capacities and Abilities before I
would encourage his Addresses.


Sir Pat. My Lady Fancy, you are a discreet Lady; -- Well I Will marry her out of
hand to prevent Mr. Lodwick's hopes, for though the young man may deserve well,
that mother of his I Will have nothing to do with, since she refused to marry my
Nephew. Aside.


Enter Fany. Fan. Sir Father, here is my Lady Knowell and her Family come to see
you.


Sir Pat. How! her whole Family! I am come to keep open House; very fine, her
whole Family! she is Plague enough to mortify any good Christian, -- tell her,
my Lady and I am gone forth; tell her any thing to keep her away.


Fan. Should I tell a lie Sir Father, and to a Lady of her Quality?


Sir Pat. Her Quality and she are a Couple of impertinent things, which are
very troublesome, and not to be endured I take it.


Fan. Sir, we should bear with things we do not love sometimes, it is a sort of
trial Sir, a kind of mortification fit for a good Christian.


Sir Pat. Why, what a notable talking Baggage is this! How came you by this
Doctrine?


Fan. I remember, Sir, you Preached it once to my Sister, when the old Alderman
was the Text, whom you exhorted her to marry, but the wicked Creature made ill
use on it.


Sir Pat. Go your way for a Prating Huswife, go, and call your Sister hither. [
Exit Fanny.] -- Well I Am resolved to leave this Town, nay, and the World too,
rather than be tormented thus.


La. Fa. What Is the matter Dear, thou do so fret thy self?


Sir Pat. The matter! my house, my house is besieged with impertinence, the
intolerable Lady, Madam Romance, that walking Library of Profane Books is come
to visit me.


La. Fa. My Lady Knowell?


Sir Pat. Yes, that Lady of eternal noise and hard words.


La. Fa. Indeed it is with pain I am obliged to be civil to her, but I consider
her Quality, her Husband was too an Alderman your friend, and a great Ay and no
Man in the City, and a painful promoter of the good Cause.


Sir Pat. But she is a Fop, my Lady Fancy, and ever was so; an idle conceited
she Fop, and has vanity and tongue enough to debauch any Nation under Civil
Government: but, Patience, thou art a virtue, and Affliction will come, -- Ah
I Am very sick, alas I have not long to dwell amongst the Wicked, Oh, oh. --
Roger, is the Doctor come?


Enter Roger. Rog. No Sir, but he has sent you a small draught of a Pint, which
you are to take and move upon it.


Sir Pat. Ah, -- Well I Will in and take it; -- Ah -- Sir, I crave your Patience
for a moment, for I design you shall see my Daughter, I Will not make long work
on it Sir, alas I would dispose of her before I die, Ah, -- I Will bring her to
you Sir, Ah, Ah. --


Goes out with Roger. La. Fa. He Is always thus when visited, to save charges,
-- But how dear Wittmore came thou to think of a Name and Country so readily?


Wit. Egad I was at the height of my invention, and the Alderman civilly and
kindly assisted me with the rest; but how to undeceive him, --


La. Fa. Take no care for that, in the mean time you will be shrewdly hurt to have
the way laid open to our enjoyment, and that by my Husbands procurement too:
but take heed dear Wittmore, whilst you only design to feign a Courtship, you
do it not in good earnest.


Wit. Unkind Creature!


La. Fa. I would not have you endanger her heart neither: for thou have Charms
will do it. -- Prithee do not put on thy best looks, nor speak thy softest
language; for if thou do, thou can not fail to undo her.


Wit. Well my pretty Flatterer, to free her heart and thy suspicions, I Will
make such awkward Love as shall persuade her, however she chance to like my
Person, to think most lewdly of my parts, -- But it is fit I take my leave, for
if Lodwick or Leander see me here, all will be ruined, death I had forgot that.


La. Fa. Leander's seldom at home, and you must time your Visits: but see Sir
Patient's returned, and with him your new Mistress.


Enter Sir Patient and Isabella. Sir Pat. Here Is my Daughter Isabella, Mr.
Fain-love: she will serve for a Wife, Sir, as times go; but I hope you are none
of those, -- Sweetheart -- this Gentleman I have designed you, he is rich and
young, and I am old and sickly, and just going out of the world, and would
gladly see thee in safe hands.


Maun. He has been just going this twenty Years. Aside.


Sir Pat. Therefore I command you to receive the tenders of his Affection.


Enter Fany. Fan. Sir Father, my Lady Knowell's in the Garden.


La. Fa. My Dear, we must go meet her in decency.


Sir Pat. A hard case a man cannot be sick in quiet. --


Goes out. Isab. A Husband, and that not Lodwick! Heaven forbid.


Aside. Wit. Now Foppery assist to make me very ridiculous. -- Death she is
very pretty and inviting, what an insensible Dog shall I be counted to refuse
the enjoyment of so fair, so new a Creature, and who is like to be thrown into
my Arms too whether I will or not? -- but Conscience and my vows to the fair
Mother: No I will be honest, -- Madam, -- as Gad shall save me, I Am the Son of
a Whore, if you are not the most Bell Person I ever saw, and if I be not
damnably in love with you, but a pox take all tedious Courtship, I have a
freeborn and generous Spirit, and as I hate being confined to dull cringing,
whining, flattering, and the Devil and all of Foppery, so when I give an heart
I Am an Infidel, Madam, if I do not love to do it frankly and quickly, that
thereby I may oblige the Beautiful receiver of my Vows, Protestations,
Passions, and Inclination.


Isab. You're wonderful engaging Sir, and I were an Ingrate not to facilitate
a return for the Honor you are pleased to do me.


Wit. Upon my Reputation, Madam, you're a civil well-bred Person, you have all
the Agreemony of your Sex, La Bell Talie, la Boon Mien, and reparteet bien, and
are tout one toore, as I Am a Gentleman, fort agreeable. -- If this do not
please your Lady, and Nauseate her, the Devil's in 'em both for unreasonable
Women. -- To Maund.


Fan. Gemini Sister, does the Gentleman Conjure?


Isab. I know not, but I Am sure I never saw a more affected Fop.


Maun. Oh a damnable impertinent Fop, it is pity, for he is a proper Gentleman.


Wit. Well if I do hold out, Egad I shall be the bravest young fellow in
Christendom: but Madam, I must kiss your hand at present, I have some Visits
to make, Devoirs to pay, necessities of Gallantry only, no Love engagement by
Jove Madam, it is sufficient I have given my Parole to your Father to do him
the honor of my Alliance; and an unnecessary Jealousy will but disoblige
Madam your slave -- Death these Rogues will see me and I Am undone. -- Exit.


Enter Lady Fancy, Lady Knowell, Sir Credulous and Lucr. with other women and
men. La. Kno. Isabella, your servant, Madam, being sensible of the insociable
and solitary life you lead, I have brought my whole Family to wait on your
Ladyship, and this my Son in Futuro, to kiss your hands, I beseech your
Ladyship to know him for your humble servant: my Son and your Nephew Madam are
coming, with the Music too, we mean to pass the whole day with your Ladyship:
-- and see they are here.


Enter Lodwick pulling in Wittmore, Leander with them, Lod. Nay since we have
met thee so luckily, you must back with us.


Wit. You must excuse me Gentlemen.


Lod. We Will show ye two or three fine women.


Wit. Death these Rogues will ruin me -- but I have business Gentlemen that
--


Lean. That must not hinder you from doing deeds of Charity, we are all come to
teaze my Uncle, and you must assist at so good a work -- come gad thou shall
make love to my Aunt, -- I would he would effectually. Aside.


Lod. Now I think on it, what the Devil do thou make here?


Wit. Here? -- oh Sir -- a -- I have a design upon the Alderman.


Lod. Upon his handsome Wife thou meanest? ah Rogue!


Wit. Faith no, -- a -- it is to -- borrow Money of him, and as I take it
Gentlemen you are not fit persons for a man of Credit to be seen with, I pass
for a graver man.


Lod. Well Sir, take your Course -- but egad he will sooner lend thee his wife
than his Money. Ex. Wit. they come in.


Lean. Aunt I have taken the boldness to bring a Gentleman of my aquaintance to
kiss your Ladyships hands.


Lod. Thy Aunt! -- death she is very handsome, -- Madam your most humble servant.
Kisses the La. Fan.


Lean. Prithee employ this Fool that I may have an opportunity to entertain thy
Sister.


Lod. Sir Credulous, what not a word? not a Complement? hah -- be brisk man, be
gay and witty, talk to the Ladies.


Sir Cred. Talk to 'em? why what shall I say to 'em?


Lod. Any thing so it be to little purpose.


Sir Cred. Nay Sir, let me alone for that matter -- but who are they prithee?


Lod. Why that is my Lady Fancy, and that is her Daughter in Law, salute 'em Man.
--


Sir Cred. Fair Lady, -- I do protest and vow, you are the most beautiful of
all Mothers in Law, and the World cannot produce your equal.


Lod. The Rogue has but one method for all Addresses.


They laugh. La. Kn. Oh absurd! this Sir is the beautiful Mother in Law.


To La. Fancy. Sir Cred. Most Noble Lady, I cry you mercy, Enter Sir Pat. Then
Madam as the Sun amongst the Stars, or rather as the Moon not in conjunction
with the Sun but in her opposition, when one rises the other sets, or as the
Vulgar call it Full moon -- I say as the Moon is the most beautiful of all the
sparkling lights, even so are you the most accomplished Lady under the Moon --
and Madam, I am extremely sensible of your Charms and Celestial Graces. To
Isabella.


Sir. Pat. Why this is abominable and insupportable.


Lucr. I find Sir, you can talk to purpose when you begin once.


Sir Cred. You are pleased to say so, Noble Lady; but I must needs say, I am
not the worst bred Gentleman for a Country Gentleman that ever you saw, for you
must know incomparable Lady that I was at the University three years, and there
I learnt my Logic and Rhethorick, whereby I became excellent at Repartee,
sweet Lady. As for my Estate, my Father died since I came of Age, and left me a
small younger Brothers Portion, dear Lady.


Lucr. A younger Brothers Sir?


Sir Cred. Ha ha, I know what you would infer from that now; but you must know
delicious Lady, that I am all the Children my Father had.


Lucr. Witty I protest.


Sir Cred. Nay Madam when I set on it I can be witty.


Lean. Cruel Lucretia leave 'em, and let us snatch this opportunity to talk of
our own affairs.


Sir Cred. For you must know bright Lady, though I was pleased to rally my
self, I have a pretty competent Estate of about 3000 l. a year, and am to marry
Madam Lucretia.


La. Fan. You're a happy man Sir.


Sir Cred. Not so happy neither, inestimable Lady, for I lost the finest Mare
yesterday -- but let that pass, were you never in Devonshire Madam?


La. Fan. Never Sir.


Sir Cred. In Troth and that is pity sweet Lady, for if you loved Hawking,
Drinking, and Whoring, -- oh Lord, I mean Hunting, in faith there be good
fellows would keep you company Madam.


Sir Pat. This is a Plot upon me, a mere Plot. -- My Lady Fancy, be tender of
my reputation, Foppery's catching, and I had as lieve be a Cuckold as Husband
to a vain Woman.


Sir Cred. Zoz, and that may be as you say Noble Sir. Lady pray what
Gentleman's this -- Noble Sir, I am your most humble servant.


Sir Pat. Oh cry you mercy Sir. walks away.


Sir Cred. No offense dear Sir I protest, 'slife I believe it is the Master of
the house, he looked with such authority -- why who cares, let him look as big
as the four Winds, East, West, North, and South, I care not this, -- therefore,
I Beg your Pardon Noble Sir.


Sir Pat. Pray spare your Hat and Legs Sir, till you come to Court, they are
thrown away in the City.


Sir Cred. O Lord dear Sir, it is all one for that, I value not a Leg nor an Arm
amongst Friends, I am a Devonshire Knight Sir all the world knows, a kind of
Country Gentleman, as they say, and am come to Town to Marry my Lady Knowells
Daughter.


Sir Pat. I Am glad on it Sir. walks away, he follows.


Sir Cred. She Is a deserving Lady Sir, if I have any Judgment, and I think I
understand a Lady Sir in the right Honorable way of Matrimony.


Sir Pat. Well Sir, that is to say you have been married before Sir, and what is
all this to me good Sir?


Sir Cred. Married before incomparable Sir! not so neither, for there is
difference in men Sir.


Sir Pat. Right, Sir, for some are Wits, and some are Fools!


Sir Cred. As I hope to breath 'twas a saying of my Grandmothers, who used to
tell me Sir, that bought Wit was best. I have brought money to Town for a small
purchase of that kind, for Sir, I would fain set up for a Country Wit -- Pray
Sir where live the Poets? for I would fain be acquainted with some of them.


Sir Pat. Sir I do not know, nor do I care for Wits and Poets. Oh this will
kill me quite, I Will out of Town immediately.


Sir Cred. But Sir, I mean your Fine railing Bully Wits, that have Vinegar,
Gall and Arsenick in 'em as well as Salt and Flame and Fire and the Devil and
all.


Sir Pat. Oh defend me! and what is all this to me Sir?


Sir Cred. Oh Sir, they are the very Soul of Entertainment, and Sir, it is the
prettiest sport to hear 'em rail and baule at one another -- Zoz would I were a
Poet.


Sir Pat. I wish you were, since you are so fond of being railed at -- if I
were able to beat him I would be much angry -- but Patience is a Virtue, and I
will into the Country. --


Aside. Sir Cred. It Is all one case to me dear Sir, -- but I should have the
pleasure of railing again, cum privilegio, I love sighting with those pointless
Weapons -- Zoz Sir, you know if we men of quality fall out -- (for you are a
Knight I take it) why there comes a Challenge upon it, and ten to one some body
or other is run through the Gills, why a pox on it I say this is very damnable,
give me Poets License. --


La. Fa. Take him off in pity. To Leander.


Lod. Indeed Railing is a Coin only current among the Poets -- Sir Credulous.
--


Sir Pat. Oh blessed deliverance -- what a profane wretch is here, and what a
lewd world we live in -- oh London, London, how thou aboundest in Iniquity, thy
Young men are debaucht, thy Virgins defloured, and thy Matrons all turned
Bawds! my Lady Fancy, this is not company for you I take it, let us fly from
this vexation of spirit on the never-failing wings of discretion. --


Going to lead Lady Fancy off -- the Lady Knowell speaking to Isabella all this
while. La. Kn. How! marry thee to such a Fop say thou? oh egregious! -- as
thou love Lodwick let him not know his name, it will be dangerous, let me
alone to evade it.


Isab. I know his fiery temper too well to trust him with the secret.


La. Kn. Hark ye Sir, and do you intend to do this horrible thing? --


Sir Pat. What thing, my Lady Knowell?


La. Kn. Why to marry your Daughter Sir.


Sir. Pat. Yes Madam.


La. Kn. To a beastly town Fool? Monstrum horrendum!


Sir Pat. To any Fool, except a Fool of your Race, of your Generation. --


L.K. How! a Fool of my Race, my Generation! I know thou meanest my son, thou
contumelious Knight, who let me tell thee, shall marry thy Daughter invito te,
that is, (to inform thy obtuse understanding) in spite of thee, yes shall
marry her, though she inherits nothing but thy dull Enthusiasmes, which had she
been legitimate she had been possessed with.


Sir Pat. Oh abominable! you had best say, she is none of my Daughter, and that
I was a Cuckold. --


La. Kn. If I should Sir, it would not amount to Scandalum Magnatum, I Will tell
thee more; thy whole Pedigree, -- And yet for all this Lodwick shall marry your
Daughter, and yet I Will have none of your Nephew. --


Sir Pat. Shall he so, my Lady Knowell? I shall go near to outtrick your
Ladyship for all your Politic Learning. It Is past the Canonical hour as they
call it, or I would marry my Daughter instantly, I profess we never had good
days since these Canonical Fopperies came up again, mere Popish tricks to
give our Children time for disobedience, -- the next Justice would have served
turn, and have done the business at any hour, but Patience is a Virtue --
Roger, go after Mr. Fain-love, and tell him I would speak with him instantly.


La. Kn. Come come Ladies, we lose fleeting time, upon my Honor we do, for
Madam as I said I have brought the Fiddles, and design to Sacrifice the entire
Evening to your Ladyships Diversion.


Sir Cred. Incomparable Lady, that was well thought on, Zoz, I long to be
jigging.


Sir Pat. Fiddles, Good Lord! why what am I come to! -- Madam I take it, Sir
Patient Fancies Lady is not a proper Person to make one at immodest Revellings,
and Profane Masqueradings.


La. Fa. Why? ah it is very true Sir, but we ought not to offend a Brother that
is weak, and consequently a Sister.


Sir Pat. An Excellent Lady this, but she may be corrupted, Ah she may fall, I
will therefore without delay carry her from this wicked Town.


La. Kn. Come come Gentlemen, let us in, Mr Fancy you must be my man -- Sir
Credulous come, and you sweet Sir, come Ladies, -- Nunc est saltandum, etc.
Exeunt.


Scene changes to a Chamber. Enter Sir Patient as before, Lady, Fancy,
Wittmore, Maundy, and Roger with things. Sir Pat. Maundy fetch my Clothes, I Will
dress me and out of Town instantly -- persuade me not. [ To Wit.] Roger, is
the Coach ready Roger?


Rog. Yes Sir, with four horses.


La. Fa. Out of Town! oh I Am undone then, there will be no hopes of ever seeing
Wittmore. [Aside.] -- Maundy oh help me to contrive my stay, or I Am a dead
Woman. -- Sir, sure you cannot go and leave your affairs in Town.


Sir Pat. Affairs! what Affairs?


La. Fa. Why your Daughter's Marriage Sir, -- and -- Sir, -- not Sir but that I
desire of all things in the World the blessing of being alone with you, far
from the noise and lewd disorders of this filthy Town.


Sir Pat. Most excellent Woman! ah thou art too good for sinful Man, and I
will therefore remove thee from the temptations of it -- Maundy, my Clothes --
Mr. Fain-love, I will leave Isabella with my Lady Fidget my Sister, who shall
to morrow see you married to prevent farther inconveniences.


La. Fa. What shall I do?


Maun. Madam, I have a design, which considering his Spleen, must this time do
our business -- it is -- [Whispers.]


La. Fa. I like it well, about it instantly, hah -- Ex. Maundy. alas Sir, --
what ails your Face? good Heaven -- look Roger.


Sir Pat. My Face! why what ails my Face! hah! --


La. Fa. See Mr. Fain-love, oh look on my dear, is he not strangely altered?


Wit. Most wonderfully.


Sir Pat. Altered, hah -- why where, why how altered? -- hah, Altered say you?
--


Wit. Lord how wildly he stares!


Sir. Pa. Hah, stare, -- wildly? --


Rog. Are you not very sick Sir?


La. Fa. Sick! oh heavens forbid -- how does my dearest Love?


Sir Pat. Me thinks I feel my self not well of the sudden -- ah -- a kind of
shivering seizes all my Limbs, -- and am I so much changed.


Wit. All over Sir, as big again as you were, --


La. Fa. Your Face is Frightfully blown up, and your dear Eyes just starting
from your head, oh I shall sound with the apprehension on it. falls into
Wittmore 's Arms.


Sir Pat. My head and Eyes so big say you, -- oh I am wondrous sick of the
sudden, -- all over say you -- oh oh -- Ay I perceive it now, my Senses fail
me too.


La. Fa. How Sir, your Senses fail you?


Wit. That Is a very bad sign, believe me.


Sir Pat. Oh Ay, for I can neither feel, nor see this mighty growth you speak
off. falls into a Chair with great signs of disorder.


Wit. Alas I Am sorry for that Sir.


Rog. Sure it is impossible, I Will run and fetch a Glass Sir. Offers to go.


La. Fa. Oh stay, I would not for the world he should see what a Monster he is,
-- and is like to be before to Morrow. Aside.


Rog. I Will sit him with a Glass -- I Will warrant ye it shall advance our design.


Enter Maundy with the Clothes, she starts. Maun. Good Heaven what ailes you
Sir?


Sir Pat. Oh -- oh -- it is so.


Maun. Lord how he is swollen? see how his Stomach struts?


Sir Pat. Ah it is true, though I perceive it not.


Maun. Not perceive it Sir! put on your Clothes and be convinced -- try 'em
Sir. She pulls off his Gown and puts on his Doublet and Coat, which come not
near by a handful or more.


Sir Pat. Ah it needs not, -- mercy upon me -- falls back. I Am lost, I Am gone,
Oh man what art thou, but a Flower? I am Poisoned, this talking Ladies breath's
infectious; methought I felt the contagion steal into my heart; send for my
Physicians and if I die, I Will swear She Is my Murderer, oh see see, how my
trembling increases, oh hold my Limbs, I die. --


Enter Roger with a Magnifying Glass, shows him the Glass; he looks in it. Rog.
I Will warant I Will show his Face as big as a Bushel. Aside.


Sir Pat. Oh, oh, -- I Am a dead man, have me to bed, I die away, undress me
instantly, send for my Physicians, I Am Poisoned, my Bowels burn, I have within
an Aetna, They carry him out in a Chair. My Brains run round, Nature within me
reels.


Wit. And all the drunken Universe does run on wheels. ha ha ha.

Ah my dear Creature, how finely thou have brought him to his journies end!


La. Fa. There was no other way but this to have secured my happiness with
thee, there needs no more then that you come anon to the Garden back-gate,
where you shall find admittance, -- Sir Patient is like to lie alone to night.


Wit. Till then 'twill be a Thousand Ages.


La Fa. At Games of Love Husbands to cheat is fair, It Is the Gallant we play
with on the square. Exeunt severally.


The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Scene draws off and discovers Lady Knowell, Isabella, Lucretia, Lodwick,
Leander, Wittmore, Sir Credulous, Other Men and Women, as going to Dance. La.
Kno. COme one Dance more, and then I think we shall have sufficiently teased
the Alderman, and 'twill be time to part. -- Sir Credulous, where is your
Mistress?


Sir Cred. Within a mile of an Oak, dear Madam, I Will warrant you, -- well, I
protest and vow, sweet Lady, you dance most Nobly, -- Why, you Dance -- like --
like a -- like a Hasty Pudding before Jove. They Dance some Antic, or
Rustick-Antick. Lodwick speaking to Isabella.


SONG Made by a Gent.
SItting by yonder River Side
Parthenia thus to Cloe cried,
Whilst from the fair Nymphs Eyes apace
Another Stream o'reflow'd her Beauteous Face.
Ah happy Nymph, said she, that can
So little value that false Creature man.
Often the persidious things will cry,
Alas they burn, they bleed, they dye;
But if they are absent half a day,
Nay, let 'em be but one poor hour away,
No more they dye, no more complain,
But like unconstant wretches live again.
Lod. Well, have you considered of that business yet Isabella?


Isab. What business?


Lod. Of giving me admittance to night.


Isab. And may I trust your honesty?


Lod. Oh doubt me not, my Mother's resolved it shall be a match between you and
I, and that very consideration will secure thee, besides who would first sully
the Linen they mean to put on?


Isab. Away here is my Mother.


Enter Lady Fancy. La. Fa. Madam I beg your pardon for my absence, the effects
of my Obedience, not Will; but Sir Patient is taken very Ill of the sudden, and
I must humbly entreat your Ladyship to retire, for rest is only essential to
his recovery.


La. Kno. Congruously spoken upon my Honor. Oh the impudence of this Fellow
your Ladyships Husband, to espouse so fair a person only to make a Nurse of!


La. Fa. Alas Madam! --


La. Kno. A slave, a very household Drudg, -- Oh faugh, come, never grieve, --
for Madam, his Disease is nothing but imagination, a Melancholy which arises
from the Liver, Spleen, and Membrane called Mesenterium, the Arabians name the
distemper Myrathial, and we here in England Hypochondriacal Melancholy; I could
prescribe a most potent Remedy, but that I am loath to stir the envy of the
College.


La. Fa. Really Madam I believe, --


La. Kn. But as you say Madam, we will leave him to his repose, pray do not grieve
too much.


Lod. Death, would I had the consoleing her, it is a charming Woman!


La. Kno. Mr. Fancy your hand; Madam your most faithful Servant, -- Lucretia,
come Lucretia -- your Servant Ladies and Gentlemen. --


La. Fa. A Devil on her, would the nimbleness of her Ladyships Tongue were in
her Heels, she would make more have away* oh I long for the blessed minute. --


Lod. Isabella, shall I find admittance anon?


Isab. On fair conditions.


Lod. Trust my Generosity, -- Madam your Slave. -- Exit.


To La. Fa. gazing on her, goes out. Sir Cred. Madam, I would say something of
your Charms and Celestial Graces, but that all praises are as far below you, as
the Moon in her Opposition is below the Sun, -- and so Luscious Lady, I am
yours, -- now for my Serenade, -- Exeunt all but La. Fa. and Maundy.


La. Fa. Maundy, have you commanded all the Servants to Bed?


Maun. Yes Madam, not a Mouse shall stir, and I have made ready the Chamber
next the Garden for your Ladyship.


La. Fa. Then there needs no more but that you wait for Wittmore's coming to
the Garden Gate, and take care no lights be in the House for fear of Eyes.


Maun. Madam I understand Lovers are best by dark, and shall be diligent, the
Doctor has secured Sir Patient by a sleeping Pill, and you are only to expect
your approaching happiness.


Exeunt. SCENE II. Lady Knowell's Chamber.
Enter Lady Knowell and Leander. La. Kn. Leander raise your Soul above that
little trifle Lucretia, -- cannot you guess what better Fate attends you? --
fie, -- how dull you are! -- must I instruct you in plain rightdown terms? --
and tell you -- that I propose you Master of my fortune? -- now possibly you
understand me.


Enter Lucretia, and peeps. Lean. I wish I did not Madam,
Unless I Would virtue to deserve the Bounty;
I have a Thousand faults Dissimulation hides,
Inconstant, wild, debauched as youth can make me.

Lucr. All that will not do your business. -- Aside.

La. Kn. Yet you would have my Daughter take you with all these faults, they are
virtues there, but to the name of Mother, they all turn retrograde, I can
endure a man
As wild and as inconstant as she can,
I have a Fortune too that can support that Humor,
That of Lucretia does depend on me,
And when I please is nothing;
I Am far from Age or Wrinkles, can be Courted
By Men as gay and youthful as a new Summer's morn,
Beauteous as the first Blossoms of the Spring
Before the common Sun has kissed their sweets away,
If with salacious appetites I loved,

Lean. Faith Madam I could wish, --

La. Kn. That I were but Fifteen? but --
If there be inequality in years,
There is so too in Fortunes, that might add
A Luster to my Eyes, Charms to my Person,
And make me fair as Venus, young as Hebe.

Lean. Madam you have enough to engage any unconquered heart, but 'twas, I
thought, with your allowance I disposed of mine, and it is a heart that knows
not how to change.


La. Kn. Then it is a foolish unambitious heart, unworthy of the Elevation it
has not Glorious Pride enough to aim at: -- Farewell Sir, -- when you are
wiser, you may find admittance. Goes out.


Lean. Stay Madam. --


Enter Lucretia. Lucr. For what? to hear your Penitence? Forgive me Madam*
I will be a Villain, forget my vows of Love, made to Lucretia,
And Sacrifice both her, and those to interest.
Oh how I hate this whining and dissembling!

Lean. Do, Triumph over a wretched man, Lucretia.


Lucr. How! Wretched in loving me so entirely, or that you cannot marry my
Mother, and be master of her mighty Fortune? It Is a temptation indeed, so
between Love and Interest, hang me if ever I saw so simple a look as you put on
when my Mother made Love to you.


Lean. You may easily guess the confusion of a man in my circumstances, to be
languishing for the loved Daughter, and pursued by the hated Mother, whom if I
refuse will ruin all my hopes of thee.


Lucr. Refuse her! I hope you have more wit?


Leand. Lucretia, could she make a Monarch of me, I could not marry her.


Lucr. And you would be so wise to tell her so?


Lean. I would no more abuse her, than I could love her.


Lucr. Yet that last must be done.


Lean. How!


Lucr. Do believe me so wicked to think I mean in earnest? No, tell her me a
fine story of Love, and liking, gaze on her, kiss her hands, and sigh, commend
her face and shape, swear she is the miracle of the Age for wit, cry up her
Learning, vow you were an Ass, not to be sensible of her perfections all this
while, what a Coxcombe, to dote upon the Daughter when such charms were so
visible in the Mother? Faith she will believe all this.


Lean. It may be so, but what will all this serve for?


Lucr. To give us time and opportunity to deceive her, or I Am mistaken.


Lean. I cannot teach my Tongue so much deceit.


Lucr. You may be a fool and cry, Indeed forsooth I cannot love, for alas I
have lost my heart, and am unworthy of your proffered blessings, -- do, and
see her marry me in spite to this Fop Easy, this Knight of Nonsense; no, no,
dissemble me handsomely and like a Gentleman, and then expect your good fortune.


Enter Antic. Ant. Madam, your Mother's coming.


Lucr. Away then, she must not see us together, she thinks you gone.


Lean. But must I carry off no comfort with me?


Lucr. Will you expose me to the incensed jealousy of a Parent? go or I shall
hate ye, -- Thrusts him out.


SCENE A Garden.
Enter Maundy by dark: opens the Garden door. Maun. Now am I returned to my old
trade again, fetch and carry my Ladies Lovers, I was afraid when she had been
married these night-works would have ended, but to say truth, there is a
Conscience to be used in all things, and there is no reason she should languish
with an old man when a young man may be had. -- The door opens, he is come, --
Enter Lodwick. I see you're a punctual Lover Sir, Pray follow me as softly as
you can.


Lod. This is some one whom I perceive Isabella has made the Confident to our
Amors. -- Exeunt.


Scene draws off, and discovers La. Fancy in her Nightgown, in a Chamber as by
the dark. La. Fa. Oh the agreeable confusion of a Lover high with expectation
of the approaching bliss! What tremblings between joy and fear possess me? All
my whole Soul is taken up with Wittmore, I Have no Idea's, no thoughts but of
Wittmore, and sure my tongue can speak no other language, but his name. --
Who Is there?


Enter Maundy leading Lodwick. Maun. Madam, it is I, and your expected Lover
here -- I put him into your hands, and will wait your commands in the next
Chamber. Ex. Maund.


Lod. Where are you my dearest Creature?


La. Fa. Here, -- give me your hand, I Will lead you to those joys we both so
long have sight for.


Lod. Hah! to joys? sure she does but dally with me, -- Aside.


La. Fa. Why come you not on my Dear?


Lod. And yet, why this admission? and in the dark too, if she designed me none
but virtuous Favors? -- What damned temptation's this?


La. Fa. Are you bewitched, what is it that frights you?


Lod. I me fixed, Death, was ever such a Lover?
Just ready for the highest joys of Love,
And like a bashful Girl restrained by fear
Of an ensuing Infamy, -- I hate to Cuckold my own Expectations.

La. Fa. Heavens! what can you mean?


Lod. Death, what is this, -- sure it is not Virtue in me, -- Pray Heaven it be
not impotence! -- Where got I this damned honesty which I never found my self
master of till now? -- why should it seize me when I had least need on it?


La. Fa. What ails you? are you mad? -- we are safe, and free as Winds let
loose to ruffle all the Groves, what is it delays you then? Soft.


Lod. Pox of this thought of Wife, the very name destroys my appetite,
Oh with what vigor I could deal my Love
To some fair lewd, unknown,
To whom I Would never made a serious vow?

La. Fa. Tell me the Mystery of this sudden coldness? have I kept my Husband in
Town for this? Nay, persuaded him to be very sick to serve our purpose, and am
I thus rewarded! -- ungrateful man!


Lod. Hah, -- it is not Isabella's voice, -- your Husband say you? -- Takes hold
greedily of her hand.


La. Fa. Is safe, from any fear of interrupting us.
Come -- these delays do ill consist with Love
And our desires; at least if they are equal.

Lod. Death it is the charming Mother!
What lucky Star directed me to night!
O my fair dear dissembler, let us haste
To pay the mighty Tribute due to Love.

La. Fa. Follow me then with careful silence, -- for Isabella's Chamber joins
to this, and she may hear us.

Lod. Not Flowers grow, nor smooth streams glide away,
Not absent Lovers sigh, nor breaks the day
More silently than I Will those joys receive,
Which Love and Darkness do conspire to give. Exeunt.

Scene changes again to a Garden. Enter Isabella and Fanny in their
Night-gowns. Isab. Well I have no mind to let this dear mad Devil Lodwick in to
night.


Fan. Why Sister, this is not the first venture you have made of this kind, at
this hour, and in this place, these Arbours were they tell-tales, could
discover many pretty stories of your loves, and do you think they will be less
faithful now? Pray trust 'em once again. Oh I do so love to hear Mr. Lodwick
protest, and vow, and swear, and dissemble, and when you don't believe him,
rail at you, -- a vads it is the prettiest man --


Isab. I have a strange apprehension of being surprised to night.


Fan. I Will warant you, I Will sit on yon Bank of Pinks, and when I hear a noise
I Will come and tell you, so Lodwick may slip out at the back gate, and we may be
walking up and down as if we meant no harm.


Isab. You Will grow very expert in the arts of Love Fanny?


Fan. When I am big enough I shall do my endeavor, for I have heard you say,
Women were born to no other end than to love: And it is fit I should learn to
live and die in my calling, -- Come open the Gate or you will repent it, we shall
have my Father marry you within a day or two to that ugly man that speaks hard
words. -- a yads I cannot abide him.


Isab. What noise is that?


Fan. Why it is Mr. Lodwick at the Garden door, -- let him in whilst I Will to my
Flowery Bank and stand Sentinel. --


Runs off. Isabella opens the Gate. Enter Wittmore. Wit. Who Is there?

Isab. Speak low, who should it be but the kind fool her self who can deny you
nothing, but what you dare not take?

Wit. Not take! what is that? have thou reserves in store?
-- Oh come and let me lead thee to thy Bed,
Or seat thee on some Bank of softer Flowers,
Where I may rifle all thy unknown store.

Isab. How! surely you're not in earnest? -- Do you love me?

Wit. Love thee! by thy dear self all that my Soul adores,
I Am all impatient Flame! all over Love!
-- You do not use to doubt, but since you do,
Come, and I Will satisfy thy obliging fears,
And give thee proofs how much my Soul is thine,
I Will breath it all anew into thy bosom, --
Oh thou art fit for the transporting Play,
All loose and wanton, like the Queen of Love
When she descends to meet the Youth in shades.

Isab. And are you Sir in earnest? can it be?

Wit. That question was severe, what means my Love!
What pretty art is this to blow my flame,
Are you not mine? did we not meet t'injoy?
I came not with more vigorous eager have,
When our first Sacrifice to Love we paid,
Than to perform that Ceremony now.
Come do not let the Sacred Fire burn out
Which only was prepared for Love's rich Altar,
And this is the Divine, dark, silent Minute. -- Goes to lead her off.

Isab. Hold Ravisher, and know this saucy Passion
Has rendered back your interest. Now I hate ye,
And my Obedience to my Father's will
Shall marry me to Fain-love, and I Will despise ye. Flings from him.

Wit. Hah! Isabella! Death I have made sweet work, -- stay gentle maid, --
she will ruin all if she go -- stay -- she knew me, and cunningly drew me to this
discovery; I Will after her and undeceive her. Runs after her.


A confused Noise of the Serenade, the Scene draws off to La. Fancy's
Antichamber. Enter Isabella groping as in the dark. Isab. Pray Heaven I get
undiscovered to my Chamber, where I Will make Vows against this perjured Man;
hah, sure he follows still; no Wood Nymph ever fled before a Satyr, with half
that trembling haste I flew from Lodwick, -- oh he has lost his Virtue and
undone me. Goes out groping, and the noise of Serenade again.


Scene changes to Lady Fancy 's Bedchamber, discovers her as before; Lodwick
as just risen in disorder from the Bed: buttoning himself and setting himself
in order; and noise at the door of unlatching it. Enter Isabella groping, Sir
Patient without. La. Fa. It is this Door that opened, and which I thought I had
secured.


Sir Pat. Oh insupportable, abominable, and not to be endured!


Isab. Hah my Father! I Am discovered and pursued, -- grant me to find the Bed.


La. Fa. Heavens 'twas my Husbands Voice, sure we are betrayed. It must be so,
for what Devil but that of Jealousy, could raise him at this late hour?


Isab. Hah, where am I, and who is it that speaks. --


To her self. Lod. So, he must know that I have made a Cuckold of him.


Aside. S. P. Within, call up my men, the Coachman, Groom, and Butler; the
Footmen, Cook and Gardener, bid 'em all rise and Arm, with long Staff, Spade
and Pitchfork, and sally out upon the wicked.


Lod. Short! what a death shall I dye, -- is there no place of safety
hereabouts -- for there is no resisting these unmercifull Weapons.


Isab. A man's Voice!


La. Fa. I know of none, nor how to prevent your discovery.


Enter Sir Patient. Sir Pat. Oh oh lead me forward, I Will lie here on the Garden
side, out of the hearing of this Hellish Noise.


La. Fa. Hah Noise -- what means he?


Lod. Nay I know not, is there no escaping? --


Isab. Who can they be that talk thus? sure I have mistook my chamber.


La. Fa. Oh he is coming in -- I Am ruined, what shall we do? here -- get into
the Bed -- and cover your self with the clothes -- quickly -- oh my Confusion
will betray me.


Lodwick gets into the Bed, Isabella hides behind the Curtain very near to him.
Enter Sir Patient led by Nurse and Maundy with Lights. Maun. Pray go back Sir,
my poor Lady will be frighted out of her wits at this danger you put your self
into, the noise shall be stilled.


La. Fa. Oh what is the matter with my Love, what, do you mean to murder him? oh
lead him instantly back to his Bed.


Sir Pat. Oh oh, no, I Will lie here -- put me to Bed, oh I faint, -- my
Chamber's possessed with twenty thousand evil Spirits.


La. Fa. Possessed! what sickly Fancy's this?


Sir Pat. Ah the house is beset, surrounded and confounded with profane
tinkling, with Popish Horn-Pipes and Jesuitical Cymballs, more Antichristian
and Abominable then Organs, or Anthems.


Nurs. Yea verily, and surely it is the spawn of Cathedral Instruments played
on by Babylonish Minstrells, only to disturb the Brethren.


Sir Pat. Aye it is so, call up my Servants, and let them be first chastis'd and
then hanged, accuse 'em for French Papishes, that had a design to fire the
City, or any thing -- oh I shall dye -- lead me gently to this Bed.


La. Fa. To hinder him will discover all -- stay Sir. --


Sir Pat. Hah my Lady turned rebellious! Throws himself forward to the Bed. --
put me to Bed I say, hah -- what is here -- what art thou -- a Man -- hah, a
Man, Treason! betrayed! my Bed's defiled, my Lady Polluted, and I am Cornuted,
oh thou Vile Serpent of my Bosom! She stands with her Face toward the Stage
in signs of fear.


Isab. A Man, and in my Virtuous Lady Mothers Chamber! how fortunate was I to
light on this discovery!


La. Fa. Well, Sir, -- since you have seen him, I beseech you for my sake,
Dear, Pardon him this one time. Cokesing him.


Sir Pat. Thou beg his Pardon? oh was ever heard such Impudence!


La. Fa. Indeed my Love, he is to blame, but we that are judicious should bear
with the frailties of Youth.


Sir Pat. Oh insupportable Audacity! -- what can thou say false Woman?


La. Fa. Truly not much in his defense my dear.


Isab. Oh cunning Devil. --


La. Fa. But Sir, to hide the weakness of your Daughter, I have a little
strained my Modesty. --


Isab. Heavens! what says she? --


La. Fa. It Is Isabella's Lover Sir, whom I Have concealed.


Lod. A good hint to save both our Credits.


Sir Pat. How Mr. Fain-love mean you?


Lodwick rises and comes a little more forward, Isabella does the like till
both meet at the feet of the Bed and start, Lodwick looking simply. La. Fa. Aye
my dear, Mr. Fain-love.


Lod. Isabella here! must she know too what a fine inconstant Dog I am? --


Isab. Lodwick! and in my Mothers Chamber! may I believe my Eyes?


Sir Pat. But how got he hither -- tell me that! oh Youth, Youth, to what
degree of wickedness art thou arrived?


La. Fa. She appointed him to come this night Sir, and he going to her Chamber,
by mistake came into mine, it being the next to here is.


Maun. But Lord Sir, had you heard how my Lady schooled him, whilst I ran down
to fetch a light!


Lod. Now does my Conscience tell me, I am a damned Villain. -- Aside, looking
pitifully on Isabella.


La. Fa. But the poor Man presently perceived his mistake, and begged my Pardon
in such feeling terms -- that I vow I had not the heart to deny it him.


Isab. Oh Traitor! would thou had been that Ravisher I took thee for, rather
then such a Villain -- false! and with my Mother too!


La. Fa. And just then Sir you came to the door, and lest you should see him,
entreated me to hide him from your Anger, -- the offense is not so heinous Sir,
considering he is so soon to marry her.


Sir Pat. -- Well Sir, and what have you to say in your defense? -- hah -- how
Mr. Knowell! -- worse and worse -- why how came you hither Sir? hah, --


La. Fa. Not Wittmore! oh I am ruined and betrayed.


falls almost in a sound. Sir Pat. Hah, Isabella here too! --


Isab. Yes Sir, to justify her Innocence. --


Sir Pat. Hah! Innocence! and justify! take her away, go out of my sight thou
limb of Satan, -- take her away I say, I Will talk with you to morrow, Lady fine
tricks -- I will. --


Isab. -- And I Will know before I sleep the mystery of all this, and who 'twas
this faithless Man sent in his room to deceive me in the Garden. -- Goes out.


Lod. A plague of all ill-luck -- how the Devil came she hither? I must follow
and reconcile her. -- Going out, Sir Patient stays him.


Sir Pat. Nay Sir, we must not part so till I have known the truth of this
business I take it.


Lod. Truth Sir, oh all that your fair Lady has said, Sir, I must confess, her
Eyes have wounded me enough with Anger, you need not add more to my shame. --


La. Fa. Some little comfort yet that he proved indeed to be Isabella's Lover:
oh that I should mistake so unluckily! Aside.


Sir Pat. Why, I thought it had been Mr. Fain-love.


La. Fa. By all that is good, and so did I.


Lod. I know you did Madam or you had not been so kind to me: your servant dear
Madam, -- Going, Sir Patient stays him.


La. Fa. Pray Sir let him go, oh how I abominate the sight of a man that could
be so wicked as he has been!


Sir Pat. Ha, -- good Lady, excellent woman, well Sir for my Ladies sake I Will
let you pass with this, but if I catch you here again, I shall spoil your
intrigues, Sir, marry shall I, and so rest ye satisfied Sir. --


Lod. At this time, I am Sir -- Madam a thousand blessings on you for this
goodness. --


La. Fa. Ten thousand Curses upon thee, -- go boast the ruin you have made.
Aside to Lod.


Sir Pat. Come, no more anger now my Lady; the Gentleman's sorry you see, I Will
marry my pert Huswife to morrow for this, -- Maundy see the Gentleman safe out,
-- ah -- put me to Bed, ah -- this nights work will kill me, ah, ah --


Ex. Lodwick and Maundy. The Scene draws over Sir Patient and Lady: draws again
and discovers the Garden, Wittmore, Fanny and Isabella. Isab. How, Mr.
Fain-love? it cannot be. --


Fan. Indeed Sister it is the same for all he talks so, and he told me his
coming was but to try your virtue only.


Enter Lodwick and Maundy as passing over, but stand. Isab. That Fain-love whom
I am so soon to marry! and but this day courted me in another Dialect!


Wit. That was my Policy Madam, to pass upon your Father with. But I Am a Man
that knows the value of the Fair, and saw charms of Beauty and of wit in you,
that taught me to know the way to your heart was to appear my self, which now I
do. Why did you leave me so unkindly but now?


Lod. Hah, what is this? whilst I was grafting horns on another's head, some
kind friend was doing that good office for me.


Maun. Sure it is Wittmore! -- oh that dissembler -- this was his Plot upon my
Lady, to gain time with Isabella. Aside.


Wit. And being so near my happiness, can you blame me, if I made a trial
whether your Virtue were agreeable to your Beauty, great, and to be equally
adored?


Lod. Death, I Have heard enough to forfeit all my patience -- Draw Sir and make
a trial of your Courage too. --


Wit. Hah! what desperate fool art thou? draws.


Lod. One that will see thee fairly damned e're yield his Interest up in
Isabella -- oh thou false Woman!


They fight out, Isabella and Maundy run off. Scene changes to the long Street,
a Pageant of an Elephant coming from the farther end with Sir Credulous on it,
and several others playing on strange confused Instruments. Sir Cred. This sure
is extraordinary, or the Devil's in it, and I Will never trust Serenade more. Come
forward and all play again. -- hold, hold, now for the Song, which because I
would have most Deliciously and Melodiously sung, I Will sing my self: look ye,
-- hum -- hum. -- Sir Credulous should have Sung.
THou grief of my heart, and thou Pearl of my Eyes,
D'on on Flannel Peticoat quickly, and rise:
And from thy resplendent window discover
A face that would mortify any young Lover:
For I like great Jove Transformed do woo,
And am Amorous Owl, To wit to woo, to wit to woo.
A Lover Ads Zoz is a sort of a tool
That of all things you best may compare to an Owl:
For in some dark shades he delights still to sit,
And all the night long he cries Woe to wit.
Then rise my bright Cloris and d'on on ship-shoe:
And hear thy Amorous Owl chant, Wit to woo, wit to woo.
-- Well, this will not do, for I perceive no Window open, nor Lady-bright appear,
to talk obligingly, -- perhaps the Song does not please her, you
Ballad-singers, have you no good Songs of another fashion?


1. Man. Yes Sir, several, Robin, -- Hark how the Waters fall, fall, fall, --


Sir Cred. How Man! Zoz, remove us farther off, sor fear of wetting.


1. Man. No no, Sir, I only gave my fellow a hint of an excellent Ballad that
begins -- Ill wodded joys how quickly do you fade. Sings.


Sir Cred. Aye, aye that, we will have that, -- Ill wodded joys how quickly do you
fade, -- [Sings] That Is excellent! Oh now the Windows open, now, now show your
capering tricks. Valting.


They all play again. Enter a company of fellows as out of Sir Patient' s
House, led on by a precise Clerk, all armed with odd weapons. Abel. Verily,
verily, here be these Babes of Perdition, these Children of Iniquity.


Rog. A pox of your Babes and Children, they are men and Sons of Whores whom we
must bang confoundedly, for not letting honest godly People rest quietly in
their Beds at Midnight.


Sir Cred. Who Is there?


Rog. There with a Pox to you, cannot a Right-worshipful Knight that has been
sick these Twenty Years with taking Physic, sleep quietly in his own House for
you, and must we be raised out of our Beds to quiet your Hell-pipes in the
Devil's name?


Abel. Down with Gog and Magog, there, there is the rotten Bell-wether that
leads the rest astray, and defiles the whole flock.


Rog. Hang your Preaching and let us come to him, we will maule him. Beat Sir Cred.


Sir Cred. Oh Quarter Quarter, Murder, help, Murder, Murder.


Enter Lodwick. Lod. Damn these Rascals who e're they were, that so unluckily
redeemed a Rival from my fury, -- Hah, they are here, -- Egad I Will have one
touch more with 'em, -- the dogs are spoiling my designed Serenade too -- have
amongst ye, -- Sir Credulous how is it? Fights and beats 'em off.


Sir Cred. Who Is there, Lodwick! Oh dear Lad, is it thou that have redeemed me
from the enchanted Cudgels that demolished my triumphant Pageant, and
confounded my Serenade? Zoz, I Am half killed man, -- I have never a whole Bone
about me sure.


Lod. Come in with me -- a plague upon the Rascal that. escaped me. Exeunt.


The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV
SCENE I. Lady Knowel's House.
Enter Lucretia followed by Sir Credulous. Lucr. Married to morrow! and leave
my Mother the possession of Leander? I Will die a thousand Deaths first, -- How
the Fool haunts me! Aside.


Sir Cred. Nay delicious Lady, you may say your Pleasure, but I will justify
the Serenade to be as high a piece of Gallantry as was ever practiced in our
Age, though not comparable to your Charms and Celestial Graces, which should I
praise as I ought, 'twou'd require more time than the Sun employs in his
Natural motion between the Tropicks; that is to say a whole Year, (for by the
way, I am no Copernican) for, Dear Madam, you must know my Rhetoric Master, --
I say my Rhetoric Master who was --


Lucr. As great a Coxcombe as your self, -- pray leave me I am serious, -- I
must go seek out Lodwick.


Sir Cred. Leave ye! I thank you for that In Faith, before I have spoke out my
speech, therefore I say Divine Lady -- because my Rhetoric Master commanded
the frequent use of Hypallages, Allegories, and the richest Figures of that
beauteous Art, -- because my Rhetoric, --


Lucr. I must leave the Fool, follow if you dare, for I have no leisure to
attend your nonsense. Goes out.


Enter Lady Knowell. La. Kno. What, alone Sir Credulous? I left you with
Lucretia.


Sir Cred. Lucretia! I Am sure she makes a very Tarquinius Sextus of me, and
all about this Serenade, -- I protest and vow, incomparable Lady, I had begun
the sweetest Speech to her -- though I say it, such Flowers of Rhetoric --
'twou'd have been the very Nosegay of Eloquence, so it would; and like an
ungrateful illiterate Woman as she is, she left me in the very middle on it, so
snuffy I Will warrant.


La. Kn. Be not discouraged Sir, I Will adapt her to a reconciliation, Lovers
must sometimes expect these little Belli-fugaces, the Grecians therefore truly
named Love Glucupicros Eros.


Sir Cred. Nay bright Lady, I am as little discouraged as another, but I Am
sorry I gave so extraordinary a Serenade to so little purpose.


La. Kn. Name it no more, 'twas only a Gallantry mistaken, but I Will accelerate
your felicity, and to morrow shall conclude the great dispute, since there is
such Volubility and Vicissitude in Mundan affairs. -- Goes out.


Enter Lodwick, stays Sir Credulous as he is going out the other way. Lod. Sir
Credulous, whither away so fast?


Sir Cred. Zoz, what a Question's there, do not know I am to untie the Virgin
Zone to morrow, that is, barter Maiden-heads with thy Sister, that is, to be
Married to her man, and I must to Lincolns-Inne to my Counsel about it.


Lod. My Sister just now told me of it, but Sir, you must not stir.


Sir Cred. Why what is the matter?


Lod. Have you made your Will?


Sir Cred. My Will! no, why my Will man?


Lod. Then for the good of your Friends and Posterity stir not from this place.


Sir Cred. Good Lord, Lodwick, thou art the strangest Man, -- what do ye mean
to fright a body thus?


Lod. You remember the Serenade last night?


Sir Cred. Remember it! Zoz I think I do, here be the marks on it sure. -- Pulls
off his Peruke and shows his head broke.


Lod. Ads me, your head's broke.


Sir Cred. My head broke! why 'twas a hundred to one but my neck had been broke.


Lod. Faith not unlikely, -- you know the next House is Sir Patient Fancy's;
Isabella too you know is his Daughter.


Sir Cred. Yes, yes she was by, when I made my dumb Oration.


Lod. The same, -- this Lady has a Lover, a mad, furious, sighting killing
Hector, (as you know there are enough about this Town) this Monsieur supposing
you to be a Rival, and that your Serenade was addressed to her --


Sir Cred. Enough, I understand you, set those Rogues on to murder me.


Lod. Would 'twere no worse.


Sir Cred. Worse! Zoz man, what the Devil can be worse?


Lod. Why he has vowed to kill you himself wherever he meets you, and now
waits below to that purpose.


Sir Cred. Sha, sha, if that be all I Will to him immediately, and make Affidavit
I never had any such design. Madam Isabella? ha, ha, alas poor man, I have some
body else to think on.


Lod. Affidavit! why he will not believe you, should you sweat your heart out,
some body has possessed him that you are a damned Fool, and a most egregious
Coward, a fellow that to save your life, will swear any thing.


Sir Cred. What cursed luck's this! -- why how came he to know I lived here?


Lod. I believe he might have it from Leander who is his friend.


Sir Cred. Leander, I must confess I never liked that Leander, since yesterday.


Lod. He has deceived us all that is the truth on it, for I have lately found out
too, that he is your Rival, and has a kind of a --


Sir Cred. Smattering to my Mistress, hah, and therefore would not be wanting
to give me a lift out of this world, but I shall give him such a go-by -- my
Lady Knowell understands the difference between Three thousand a year and --
prithee what is his Estate?


Lod. Shaw -- not sufficient to pay Surgeons Bills.


Sir Cred. Alas poor Ratt, how does he live then?


Lod. Hang him, the Ladies keep him, it is a good handsome fellow and has a
pretty Town Wit.


Sir Cred. He a Wit! what, I Will warrant he writes Lampoons, rails at Plays,
curses all Poetry but his own, and mimicks the Players -- ha,


Lod. Some such common Notions he has that deceive the Ignorant Rabble, amongst
whom he passes for a very smart Fellow, -- 's life he is here.


Enter Leander. Sir Cred. Why -- what shall I do, he will not affront me
before company? hah!


Lod. Not in our house Sir, -- bear up and take no notice on it.


Lod. whispers Lean. Sir Cred. No notice, quoth he? why my very fears will
betray me.


Lean. Let me alone, -- Lodwick, I met just now with an Italian Merchant, who
has made me such a Present!


Lod. What is it prithee?


Lean. A sort of specific Poison for all the Senses, especially for that of
smelling, so that had I a Rival, and I should see him at any reasonable
distance, I could direct a little of this Scent up to his Brain so subtlely,
that it shall not fail of Execution in a day or two.


Sir Cred. How -- Poison! Showing great signs of fear, and holding his Nose.


Lean. Nay should I see him in the midst of a thousand People, I can so direct
it that it shall assault my Enemies Nostrils only, without any effects on the
rest of the Company.


Sir Cred. Oh -- I Am a dead man!


Lod. Is It possible?


Lean. Perhaps some little sneezing or so, no harm; but my Enemy's a dead man
Sir, killed.


Sir Cred. Why, this is the most damnable Italian trick I ever heard of; why
this outdoes the famous Poysoner Madam Brenvilliers, well, here is no jesting I
perceive that, Lodwick.


Lod. Fear nothing, I Will secure you. Aside to him. Enter Wittmore. -- Wittmore!
how is it friend! thou look cloudy.


Wit. You Will hardly blame me Gentlemen, when you shall know what a Damned
unfortunate Rascal I am.


Lod. Prithee what is the matter?


Wit. -- Why I am to be Married Gentlemen, Married to Day.


Lod. How, Married! nay Gad then thou'st reason, -- but to whom prithee?


Wit. There Is the Devil on it again, to a fine young, fair, brisk Woman that
has all the temptations Heaven can give her.


Lod. What pity it is they should be bestowed to so wicked an end! Is this your
intrigue that has been so long concealed from your Friends?


Leand. We thought 't had been some kind Amor, something of Love and Honor.


Lod. Is she Rich? if she be wondrous Rich, we will excuse thee.


Wit. Her Fortune will be suitable to the Jointure I shall make her.


Lod. Nay then it is like to prove a hopeful Match, -- what a Pox can provoke
thee to this, do love her?


Wit. No there is another Plague, I am cursedly in love elsewhere, and this was
but a false address to hide that real one.


Lod. How, love another? in what quality, and manner?


Wit. As a man ought to Love, with a good substantial Passion, without any
design but that of right-down honest Enjoyment.


Lod. Aye, now we understand thee, this is something! ah friend! I had such an
adventure last night! -- you may talk of you intrigues and substantial
Pleasures, but if any of you can match mine, -- Egad I Will forswear womankind.


Lean. An adventure! prithee where?


Sir Cred. What, last night, when you rescued me from the Billbo-blades? indeed
ye looked a little furiously.


Lod. I had reason, I was just then come out of a Garden from fighting with a
man whom I found with my Mistress, and I had at least known who't had been but
for the coming of those Rascals that set on you, who parted us, whilst he made
his escape in the crowd.


Wit. Death! that was I, who for fear of being known got away, was it he then
that I fought with, and whom I learnt loved Isabella! Aside.


Lod. You must know Gentlemen, I have a sort of a Matrimonial kindness for a
very pretty woman, she whom I tell you I disturbed in the Garden, and last
night she made me an assignation in her Chamber: when I came to the garden Door
by which I was to have admittance, I found a kind of Necessary called a Bawdy
waiting woman, whom I followed, and thought she would have conducted me to the
right woman; but I was luckily and in the dark led into a Ladies Chamber, who
took me for a Lover she expected, -- I found my happy mistake, and would not
undeceive her.


Wit. This could be none but Lucia. Aside. -- Well Sir, and what did you do
there?


Lod. Do? why what do think? all that a man inspired by Love could do, I
followed all the Dictates of Nature, Youth and Vigor!


Wit. Oh hold my heart -- or I shall kill the Traitor. Aside.


Sir Cred. Followed all the Dictates of Nature, Youth, and Vigor? prithee
what is that?


Lod. I kissed a thousand times her balmy Lips, and greedily took in the nimble
Sighs she breathed into my Soul!


Wit. Oh I can scarce contain my self. Aside.


Sir Cred. Pshaw, is that all man?


Lod. I claspt her lovely Body in my Arms, and laid my Bosom to her panting
Breast.
Trembling she seemed all love and soft desire,
And I all burning in a youthful fire.

Sir Cred. Bless us, the Man's in a Rapture.


Wit. Damnation on them both.


Sir Cred. Well to the point man, what did do all this while*


Lean. Faith I fancy he did not sleep, Sir Credulous.


Lod. No friend, she had too many Charms to keep me waking.


Sir Cred. Had she so? I should have begged her Charms pardon, I tell her that
though.


Wit. Curse on my sloth, oh how shall I dissemble? Aside.


Lean. Thy adventure was pretty lucky -- but Wittmore thou lost not relish it.


Wit. My Mind's upon my Marriage Sir, -- if I thought he loved Isabella I
would marry her to be revenged on him, at least I Will vex his Soul as he has
tortured mine, -- well Gentlemen, you will dine with me, -- and give me your
opinion of my Wife.


Lod. Where do thou keep the Ceremony?


Wit. At Sir Patient Fancyes, my Father in Law.


Lod. How! Sir Patient Fancy to be your Father in Law?


Lean. My Uncle!


Wit. He Is fired -- it is his Daughter Sir I am to Marry. --


Lod. Isabella! Leander, can it be? -- can she consent to this? and can she
love you?


Wit. Why Sir, what do you see in me, should render me unfit to be beloved?
angry.


Lod. Married to day! by Heaven it must not be, Sir.


draws him aside. Wit. Why Sir, I hope this is not the kind Lady who was so
soft, so sweet, and charming last night.


Lod. Hold Sir -- we yet are friends. --


Wit. And might have still been so, had thou not basely robbed me of my
Interest.


Lod. Death! do you speak my Language? Ready to draw.


Wit. No, take a secret from my angry heart, which all its friendship to thee
could not make me utter, -- it was my Mistress you surprised last night.


Lod. Hah, my Lady Fancy his Mistress? Curse on my prating Tongue. -- Aside.


Sir Cred. What a Devil's all this, hard words, heart-burnings, resentments and
all that?


Lean. You are not quarrelling I hope, my friends?


Lod. All this Sir we suspected, and smok't your borrowing Money last night, and
what I said was to gain the mighty secret that had been so long kept from your
friends -- but thou have done a baseness. -- lays his hand on his Sword.


Lean. Hold, what is the matter?


Wit. Did you not rob me of the Victory then I Have been so long a toyling for?


Lod. If I had 'twou'd not have made her guilty, nor me a Criminal, she taking
me for one she loved, and I her for one that had no interest in my friend, and
who the Devil would have refused so fine a woman? nor had I, but that I was
prevented by her Husband, -- but Isabella Sir you must resign.


Wit. I will, provided that our friendship's safe; I am this day to marry her,
and if you can find a means to do it in my room, I shall resign my interest to
my friend, for it is the lovely Mother I adore!


Lod. And was it you I fought with in the Garden?


Wit. Yes, and thereby hangs a tale of a mistake almost equal to thine, which
I Will at leisure tell you. Talks to Lod. and Lean.


Sir Cred. I Am glad they are friends, Zoz here was like to have been a pretty
business, what Damnable work this same womankind makes in a Nation of Fools
that are Lovers!


Wit. Look ye, I Am a Damned dull fellow at invention, I Will therefore leave
you to contrive matters by your selves, whilst I Will go try how kind fortune
will be to me this Morning, and see in what readiness my Bride is; what you do
must be thought on suddenly, I Will wait on you anon, and let you know how
matters go, -- I Am as impatient to know the truth of this, as for an
opportunity to enjoy Lucia. goes out.


Lod. Leander what shall I do?


Lean. You were best -- consult your Mother and Sister, women are best at
intrigues of this kind: but what becomes of me?


Lod. Let me alone to dispatch this fool, I long to have him out of the way, he
begins to grow troublesome -- but now my Mother expects you. --


Lean. Prithee be careful of me. -- Ex. Leander.


Sir Cred. What was this long whisper, something about me?


Lod. Why yes faith I was persuading him to speak to his friend about this
business, but he swears there is no hopes of a reconciliation, you are a dead
man unless some cleanly conveyance of you be soon thought on.


Sir Cred. Why, I Will keep within doors and defy malice and foul weather.


Lod. O he means to get a warrant and search for stolen goods, prohibited
Commodities or Conventicles, there is a thousand civil pretenses in this Town
to commit outrages -- let me see. --


They both pawse awhile. Sir Cred. Well I have thought, -- and of such a
business, that the Devil's in it if you don't say I am a man of intrigue.


Lod. What is it?


Sir Cred. Ha ha ha, I must have leave to laugh to think how neatly I shall
defeat this son of a whore of a thunder thumping Hector.


Lod. Be serious Sir, this is no laughing matter, if I might advise, you should
steal into the Country, for two or three days till the business be blown over.


Sir Cred. Lord, thou art so hasty and conceited of thy own invention, thou will not give a man leave to think in thy company, why these were my very
thoughts, nay more, I have found a way to get off clever, though he watch me as
narrowly as an enraged Sergeant upon an escape.


Lod. That indeed would be a Masterpiece.


Sir Cred. Why, look ye, do ye see that great Basket there?


Lod. I do, -- this you mean. -- pulls in a Basket.


Sir Cred. Very well, put me into this Basket, and cord me down, send for a
couple of Porters, hoist me away with a Direction, to an old Uncle of mine, one
Sir Anthony Bubleton at Bubleton-Hall in Essex, and then Whip slap dash, as
Nokes says in the Play, I Am gone and who is the wiser.


Lod. I like it well.


Sir Cred. Nay lose no time in applauding, I Will in, the Carrier goes this
morning, farewell Lodwick. -- Goes into the Basket. I Will be here again on
Thursday. Lod. writes a direction.


Enter Boy. Lod. By all means Sir, -- Who Is there, -- call a couple of Porters.
Ex. Boy.


Sir Cred. One word more, the Carrier lies at the Bell in Friday-street, pray
take care they set me not on my head. --


Pops in again. Enter Boy and two Porters. Lod. Come hither, cord up this
Basket, and carry it where he shall direct -- Leander will never think he is
free from a Rival till he have him in his possession, -- To Mr. Leander Fancy's
at the next door; say it is things for him out of the Country. -- Write a
direction to him on the Basket lid. Aside to the Boy.


Porters going to carry off the Basket on a long Pole between 'em. Enter Lady
Knowel. La. Kn. What Is this? whither goes this Basket?


Sir Cred. Ah Lord! they are come with the Warrant.


Peeps out of the Basket. Lod. Only Books Madam offered me to buy, but they do
not please me.


La. Kn. Books? nay then set down the Basket Fellows, and let me peruse 'em,
who were the Authors, and what their Language?


Sir Cred. A Pox of all Learning I say, -- it is my Mother-in-Law. Porters going
to set down the Basket.


Lod. Hold, hold Madam, they are only English, and some Law- French.


La. Kn. Oh faugh, how I hate that vile sort of reading! up with 'em again
fellows, and away. The Porters take up and go out.


Lod. God-a-mercy Law- French. Aside.


La. Kn. Law- French! out upon it, I could find in my heart to have the Porters
bring it back, and have it burnt for a Heresy to Learning.


Lod. Or thrown into the Thames, that it may float back to Normandy to have the
Language new modeled.


La. Kn. You say well, but what is all this ad Iphicli bonis, where is Sir
Credulous all this while? his affairs expect him.


Lod. So does Leander your Ladyship within.


La. Kn. Leander! Hymen, Hymenaee, I Will wait on him, Lodwick I am resolved you
shall marry Isabella too, I have a design in my head that cannot fail to give
you the possession of her within this two or three hours.


Lod. Such an Indulgence will make me the happiest of men, and I have something
to say to your Ladyship that will oblige you to hasten the design. --


La. Kn. Come in and let me know it. Exeunt.


SCENE II. A Table and Chairs.
Enter Lady Fancy in a Morning dress, Maundy with Pen, Ink, and Paper. La. Fa.
Wittmore in the Garden say thou with Isabella! Oh Perjured man! it was by his
contrivance then I was betrayed last night.


Maun. I thought so too at first Madam, till going to conduct Mr. Knowel
through the Garden, he finding Mr. Wittmore there with Isabella, drew on him,
and they both fought out of the Garden, what mischief's done* I know not, --
but Madam, I hope Mr. Knowel was not uncivil to your Ladyship: I had no time to
ask what past between you.


La. Fa. Oh name it not! I gave him all I had reserved for Wittmore! I was so
possessed with the thoughts of that dear false one, I had no sense free to
perceive the cheat, -- but I will be revenged, -- come let me end my Letter, we
are safe from interruption.


Maun. Yes Madam, Sir Patient is not yet up, the Doctors have been with him,
and tell him he is not so bad as we persuaded him.


La. Fa. -- And was he soft and kind? -- By all that is good she loves him, and
they contrived this meeting, -- my Pen and Ink -- I am impatient to unload my
Soul of this great weight of jealousy. -- Sits down and writes.


Enter Sir Patient looking over her Shoulder a tip-toe. Maun. Heaven! here is
Sir Patient Madam.


La. Fa. Hah, -- and *it is too late to hide the Paper, -- I was just going to
subscribe my name.


Sir. Pat. Good morrow, my Lady Fancy, your Ladyship is well employed I see.


La. Fa. Indeed I was, and pleasantly too, I am writing a Love-letter Sir, --
but my Dear, what makes you so soon up?


Sir Pat. A Love-letter! -- let me see it. Goes to take it.


La. Fa. I Will read it to you Sir.


Maun. What mean you Madam? Aside.


Lady Fancy Reads. It was but yesterday you swore you loved me, and I poor easy
fool believed, but your last nights Infidelity has undeceived my heart, and
rendered you the falsest Man that ever Woman sight for. Tell me, how durst you,
when I had prepared all things for our enjoyment, be so great a Devil to
deceive my languishing expectations? And in your room send one that has undone
--

Your --





Maun. Sure she is mad to read this to him.


Sir Pat. Hum, -- I profess ingenuously -- I think it is indeed a Love-letter,
-- my Lady Fancy what means all this? as I take it here are Riddles and
Mysteries in this business.


La. Fa. Which thus Sir I Will unfold. -- Takes this Pen and writes Isabella.


Sir Pat. How! undone -- your -- Isabella, meaning my Daughter?


La. Fa. Yes my Dear, going this morning into her Chamber, she not being there,
I took up a Letter that lay open on her Table, and out of curiosity read it, as
near as I can remember 'twas to this purpose, I writ it out now because I had a
mind thou shou'd'st see it; for I can hide nothing from thee.


Sir Pat. A very good Lady I profess, to whom is it directed?


La. Fa. Why, -- Sir, -- What shall I say, I cannot lay it now on Lodwick. --
Aside. I believe she meant it to Mr. Fain-love, for whom else could it be
designd? she being so soon to marry him.


Sir Pat. Hah, -- Mr. Fain-love! so soon so fond and amorous!


La. Fa. Alas, it is the excusable fault of all young Women, thou know I was
just such another fool to thee, so fond -- and so in love. --


Sir Pat. Ha, -- thou were indeed my Lady Fancy, indeed thou were, -- but I
will keep the Letter however, that this idle Baggage may know I understand her
tricks and intrigues. --


Puts up the Letter. La. Fa. Nay then 'twill out: no I beseech you Sir give me
the Letter, I would not for the World Isabella should know of my theft, 'twou'd
appear malicious in me, -- besides Sir, it does not befit your Gravity to be
concerned in the little quarrels of Lovers.


Sir Pat. Lovers! Tell me not of Lovers, my Lady Fancy; with Reverence to your
good Ladyship, I value not whether there be love between 'em or not, Pious
Wedlock is my business, -- nay, I will let him know his own too, that I will,
with your Ladiship's permission.


La. Fa. How unlucky I am! -- Sir, as to his Chastisement, use your own
discretion, in which you do abound most plentifully, -- but pray let not
Isabella hear of it, for as I would preserve my duty to thee, by communicating
all things to thee, so I would conserve my good opinion with her.


Sir Pat. Ah, what a blessing I possess in so excellent a Wife! and in regard I
am every day descending to my Grave, -- ah -- I will no longer hide from thee
the provision I have made for thee, in case I die. --


La. Fa. This is the Music that I longed to hear. -- Die! -- Oh that fatal
word will kill me -- [Weeps.] Name it no more if you would preserve my life. --


Sir Pat. Hah, -- now cannot I refrain joining with her in affectionate tears
-- no but do not weep for me my excellent Lady -- for I have made a pretty
competent Estate for thee, Eight thousand Pounds, which I have concealed in my
Study behind the Wainscot on the left hand as you come in.


La. Fa. Oh tell not me of transitory wealth, for I Am resolved not to survive
thee, Eight thousand Pounds say you? -- Oh I cannot endure the thoughts on it.
Weeps.


Sir Pat. Eight thousand Pounds just, my dearest Lady.


La. Fa. Oh you will make me desperate in naming it, -- is it in Gold or Silver?


Sir Pat. In Gold my Dearest the most-part, the rest in Silver.


La. Fa. Good Heavens! why should you take such pleasure in afflicting me.
[Weeps.] -- Behind the Wainscot say you?


Sir Pat. Behind the Wainscot, prithee be pacified, -- thou make me lose my
greatest virtue, Moderation, to see thee thus, alas we are all born to die. --


La. Fa. Again of dying! uncharitable man, why do you delight in tormenting me?
-- on the left hand say you as you go in?


Sir Pat. On the left hand my Love, had ever Man such a Wife?


La. Fa. Oh my Spirits fail me, -- lead me, or I shall faint, -- lead me to the
Study and show me where it is, -- for I am able to hear no more of it.


Sir Pat. I will, if you will promise indeed and indeed, not to grieve too
much. Going to lead her out.


Enter Wittmore. Wit. Heaven grant me some kind opportunity to speak with
Lucia! hah, she is here, -- and with her the fond Cuckold her Husband, -- Death,
he has spied me, there is no avoiding him. --


Sir Pat. Oh, are you there Sir? -- Maundy look to my Lady, -- I take it Sir,
you have not dealt well with a person of my Authority and Gravity. Gropes for
the Letter in his pocket.


Wit. So, this can be nothing less than my being found out to be no Yorkshire
Esquire: a Pox of my Geneva breeding, it must be so, what the Devil shall I say now?


Sir Pat. And this disingenuous dealing does ill become the person you have
represented, I take it.


Wit. Represented! Aye there it is, would I were handsomely off of this
business; neither Lucia nor Maundy have any intelligence in their demure looks
that can instruct a man, -- why faith Sir, -- I must confess, -- I am to blame
-- and that I have -- a --


La. Fa. Oh Maundy! he will discover all, what shall we do?


Sir Pat. Have what Sir?


Wit. From my violent passion for your Daughter. --


La. Fa. Oh I Am all confusion. --


Wit. Egad I am in the wrong, I see by Lucia's looks.


Sir Pat. That you have Sir, you would say, made a sport and May Game of the
engagement of your word; I take it Mr. Fain-love, it is not like the stock you
came from.


Wit. Yes, I was like to have spoiled all, 'sheart what fine work I had made
-- but most certainly he has discovered my passion for his Wife, -- well,
Impudence assist me -- I made Sir a trifle of my word Sir, from whom have you
this intelligence?


Sir Pat. From whom should I Sir, but from my Daughter Isabella?


Wit. Isabella! The malicious Baggage understood to whom my first Courtship
was addressed last night, and has betrayed me.


Sir Pat. And Sir to let you see I utter nothing without precaution, pray read
that Letter.


Wit. Hah -- a Letter! what can this mean, -- it is Lucia's hand, with
Isabella's name to it, -- Oh the dear cunning Creature to make her Husband the
messenger too. [He Reads] -- How, I send one in my room?


La. Fa. Yes Sir, you think we do not know of the appointment you made last
night, but having other affairs in hand than to keep your promise, you sent Mr.
Knowel in your room, -- false man.


Wit. I send him Madam! I would have sooner died.


Sir Pat. Sir as I take it he could not have known of your designs and
Rendezvous without your information, -- were not you to have met my Daughter
here to night Sir?


Wit. Yes Sir, and I hope it is no such great crime, to desire a little
conversation with the fair person one loves, and is so soon to marry, which I
was hindered from doing by the greatest and most unlucky misfortune that ever
arrived: but for my sending him, Madam, credit me, there is nothing so much
amazes me and afflicts me, as to know he was here.


Sir Pat. He speaks well, ingenuously he does. -- well Sir for your Father's
sake, whose memory I reverence, I will for once forgive you, but let us have no
more night-works, no more Gamballs I beseech you good Mr. Fain-love.


Wit. I humbly thank ye Sir, and do beseech you to tell the dear Creature
that writ this, that I love her more than life or fortune, and that I would
sooner have killed the man that usurped my place last night than have assisted
him.


La. Fa. Were you not false then? -- Now hang me if I do not credit him. Aside.


Sir Pat. Alas good Lady! how she is concerned for my Interest, she is even
jealous for my Daughter. Aside.


Wit. False! charge me not with unprofitable sins; would I refuse a Blessing,
or blaspheme a Power that might undo me? would I die in my full vigorous
health, or live in constant pain? All this I could, sooner than be untrue.


Sir Pat. Ingenuously, my Lady Fancy, he speaks discreetly, and to purpose.


La. Fa. Indeed my Dear he does, and like an honest Gentleman, and I should
think my self very unreasonable not to believe him, -- and Sir I Will undertake
your peace shall be made with your Mistress.


Sir Pat. Well, I am the most fortunate man in a Wife that ever had the
blessing of a good one.


Wit. Madam, let me fall at your feet, and thank you for this Bounty.
[Kneels.] -- Make it your own case, and then consider what returns ought to be
made to the most passionate and faithful of Lovers.


Sir Pat. I profess, a wonderful good natured youth this, rise Sir, my Lady
Fancy shall do you all the kind Offices she can, of my word she shall.


La. Fa. I Am all obedience Sir, and doubtless shall obey you.


Sir Pat. You must, indeed you must, and Sir I Will defer your Happiness no
longer, this day you shall be married.


Wit. This day Sir! -- why, the Writings are not made.


Sir Pat. No matter Mr. Fainlove, her Portion shall be equivalent to the
Jointure you shall make her, I take it, that is sufficient.


Wit. A Jointure quoth he! it must be in New Eutopian Land then, -- and must I
depart thus, without a kind word, a look, or a billiet, to signify what I am to
expect? Looking on her slils.


Sir Pat. Come, my Lady Fancy, shall I wait on you down to Prayer? Sir you will
go get your self in order for your Marriage, the great affair of human life, I
must to my mornings Devotion: come Madam. She endeavors to make signs to
Wittmore.


La. Fa. Alas Sir, the sad discourse you lately made me, has so disordered me,
and given me such a pain in my head, I am not able to endure the Psalm singing.


Sir Pat. This comes of your weeping, -- but we will omit that part of
th'exercise, and have no Psalm sung.


La. Fa. Oh by no means Sir, 'twill scandalize the Brethren, for you know a
Psalm is not sung so much out of devotion as it is to give notice of our Zeal
and Pious intentions, it is a kind of Proclamation to the Neighborhood, and
cannot be omitted, -- Oh how my head aches!


Wit. He were a damned dull Lover that could not guess what she meant by this.
Aside.


Sir Pat. Well, my Lady Fancy, your Ladyship shall be obeyed, -- come Sir, we will
leave her to her Women. Ex. Sir Pat.


As Wittmore goes out, he bows and looks on her, she gives him a sign. Wit.
That kind look is a sufficient invitation. --


La. Fa. Maundy follow 'em down, and bring VVittmore back again, -- [ Exit
Maund.] There Is now a necessity of our contriving to avoid this marriage
handsomely, -- and we shall at least make two hours our own, I never wished
well to long Prayers till this minute.


Enter Wittmore. Wit. Oh my dear Lucia!


La. Fa. Oh VVittmore! I long to tell thee what a fatal mistake had like to
have happened last night.


Wit. My friend has told me all, and how he was prevented by the coming of
your Husband from robbing me of those sacred delights I languish for, oh let us
not lose inestimable time in dull talking, but haste to give each other the
only confirmation we can give, how little we are our own.


La. Fa. I see Lodwick's a Man of Honor, and deserves a heart if I had one to
give him. Exeunt.


SCENE III. A Hall.
Enter Sir Patient and Roger. Sir Pat. Roger, is Prayer ready, Roger?


Rog. Truly nay Sir, for Mr. Gogle has taken too much of the Creature this
Morning, and is not in case, Sir.


Sir Pat. How mean you Sirrah, that Mr. Gogle is overtaken with Drink?


Rog. Nay Sir, he has over-eaten himself at Breakfast only.


Sir Pat. Alas and that is soon done, for he has a sickly Stomach as well as I,
poor man -- where is Bartholomew, the Clerk, he must hold forth then to day.


Rog. Verily he is also disabled, for going forth last night by your
commandment to smite the wicked, he received a blow over the Pericranium. --


Sir Pat. Why how now Sirrah, Latin! the Language of the Beast! hah -- and what
then Sir?


Rog. Which blow I doubt Sir, has spoiled both his Praying and his Eating.


Sir Pat. Hah! what a Family's here? no prayer to day!


Enter Nurse and Fanny. Nurs. Nay verily it shall all out, I will be no more
the dark lanthorn to the deeds of darkness.


Sir Pat. What Is the matter here?


Nurs. Sir, this young Sinner has long been privy to all the daily and nightly
meetings between Mr. Lodwick and Isabella, and just now I took her tying a
letter to a string in the Garden which he drew up to his Window, and I have
born it till my Conscience will bear it no longer.


Sir Pat. Hah, so young a Bawd! -- tell me Minion, -- private meeting! tell me
truth I charge ye, when? where? how? and how often? oh she is debauched! -- her
reputation's ruined, and she will need a double Portion. Come tell me truth, for
this little Finger here has told me all.


Fan. Oh Geminy Sir, then that little Finger's the hougesest great Liar as ever
was.


Sir Pat. Huzy huzy -- I will have thee whipped most unmercifully: Nurse fetch me
the Rod.


Fan. Oh pardon me Sir this one time and I Will tell all. Kneels. -- Sir -- I
have seen him in the Garden, but not very often.


Sir Pat. Often! oh, my Family's dishonored, tell me truly what he used to do
there -- or I will have thee whipped without cessation, oh I Am in a cold Sweat,
there is my fine Maid, was he with her long?


Fan. Long enough.


Sir Pat. Long enough! -- oh it is so, long enough -- for what, hah? my dainty
Miss, tell me, and did thou leave 'em?


Fan. They used to send me to gather flowers to make Nosegays Sir.


Sir Pat. Ah, demonstration, it is evident if they were left alone that they
were naught, I know it, -- and where were they the while? in the close Arbor?
-- Aye Aye -- I will have it cut down, it is the Pent-house of Iniquity, the
very Coverlid of Sin.


Fan. No Sir, they sat on the Primrose Bank.


Sir Pat. What, did they sit all the while, or stand -- or -- lie -- or -- oh
how was it?


Fan. They only sat indeed Sir Father.


Sir Pat. And thou did not hear a word they said all the while?


Fan. Yes I did Sir, and the man talked a great deal of this, and of that, and
of the other, and all the while threw Jesimine in her bosom.


Sir Pat. Well said, and did he nothing else?


Fan. No indeed, Sir Father, nothing.


Sir Pat. But what did she say to the man again?


Fan. She said, let me see, -- Aye she said, Lord you will forget your self, and
stay till somebody catch us.


Sir Pat. Ah, very fine, -- then what said he?


Fan. Then he said, Well if I must be gone, let me leave thee with this hearty
curse, A Pox take thee all over for making me love thee so confoundedly.


Sir Pat. Oh horrible!


Fan. -- Oh I could live here for ever, -- that was when he kissed her -- her
hand only, are you not a Damned woman for making so fond a Puppy of me?


Sir Pat. Oh unheard of wickedness!


Fan. Would the Devil had thee and all thy family, e're I had seen thy Cursed
face.


Sir Pat. Oh I Will hear no more, -- I Will hear no more -- why what a Blasphemous
wretch is this!


Fan. Pray Sir Father, do not tell my Sister of this, she will be horribly angry
with me.


Sir Pat. No no, get you gone, -- oh I am heart-sick -- I Will up and consult with
my Lady what is fit to be done in this affair, oh never was the like heard of.
-- Goes out, Fanny goes the other way.


Scene, the Lady Fancies Bedchamber, she is discovered with Wittmore in
disorder. A Table, Sword, and Hatt. Maun. O Madam, Sir Patient's coming up.


La. Fan. Coming up say you!


Maun. He Is almost on the top of the Stairs, Madam.


Wit. What shall I do?


La. Fa. Oh Damn him, I know not, if he see thee here after my pretended
Illness, he must needs discover why I feigned, -- I have no Excuse ready, --
this Chamber's unlucky, there is no avoiding him, here -- step behind the Bed,
perhaps he has only forgot his Psalm Book and will not stay long. Wittmore runs
behind the Bed.


Enter Sir Patient. Sir Pat. Oh, oh, pardon this interruption my Lady Fancy --
oh I am half killed, my Daughter, my Honor -- my Daughter, my Reputation.


La. Fa. Good Heavens Sir, is she dead?


Sir Pat. I would she were, her Portion and her Honor would then be saved, but
oh I Am sick at heart, Maundy, fetch me the Bottle of Mirabilis in the Closet,
-- she is wanton -- unchaste, Enter Maundy with the Bottle. oh I cannot speak it,
oh the Bottle -- [Drinks] she has lost her Fame, -- her Shame -- her Name -- oh
[Drinks] this is not the right Bottle -- that with the red Cork [Drinks] Ex.
Maundy. -- and is grown a very the other end of the town Creature, a very Apple
of Sodom, fair without and filthy within, what shall we Enter Maundy. do with
her? she is lost, undone; [Drinks] hah -- let me see, [Drinks] this is --
[Drinks] not as I take it -- [Drinks] -- no -- it is not the right -- she is
naught, -- she is lewd, -- [Drinks] -- oh how you Vex me -- [Drinks] this is not
the right Bottle, yet -- [Drinks] no no -- here. Gives her the Bottle.


Maun. You said, that with the Red Cork Sir. Goes out.


Sir Pat. I meant the Blew, -- I know not what I say, -- in fine, my Lady let
us marry her out of hand, for she is fallen, fallen to Perdition; she
understands more wickedness then had she been bred in a profane Nunnery -- a
Court, or a Playhouse, Enter Maundy. [Drinks] -- therefore let us Marry her
instantly -- out of hand, [Drinks] Misfortune on Misfortune, [Drinks] -- but
Patience is a wonderful Virtue, [Drinks] -- ha -- this is very Comfortable, --
very Consoling, -- I profess if it were not for these Creature ravishing
Comforts, sometimes, a Man were a very odd sort of an Animal [Drinks] but ah --
see how all things were ordained for the use and comfort of man [Drinks.]


La. Fa. I like this well; Ah Sir it is very true, therefore receive it
plentifully and thankfully.


Sir Pat. Drinks Ingeniously -- it has made me mavelous lightsome, -- I
profess it has a very notable Faculty, -- very knavish -- and as -- it were --
waggish, -- but -- hah -- what have we there on the Table? a Sword and Hat?
Sees Wittmore' s Sword and Hat on the Table which he had forgot.


La. Fa. Curse on my Dullness, -- oh -- these Sir, they are Mr. Fainloves -- he
being so soon to be Married, and being straightened for time, sent these to Maundy
to be new trimmed with Ribbon Sir -- that is all, -- take 'em away you naughty
Baggage, must I have men's things seen in my Chamber?


Sir Pat. Nay nay, be not angry my little Rogue, I like the young man's
frugality well, -- go go your ways, -- get you gone -- and finefy your knacks,
and tranghams, and do your business -- go. -- Smiling on Maundy, gently
beating her with his hand: she goes out, he bolts the door after her, and sits
down on the Beds feet.


La. Fa. Heavens, what means he!


Sir Pat. Come hither to me my little Apes face, -- come -- come I say -- what
must I come fetch you? -- Catch her, catch her, catch her -- catch her, catch
her, catch her. Running after her.


La. Fa. Oh Sir I am so ill I can hardly stir.


Sir Pat. I Will make ye well, come hither ye Monky face, did it, did it, did it?
alas for it, a poor silly fools face, dive it a blow and I Will beat it.


La. Fa. You neglect your Devotion Sir.


Sir Pat. No no, no Prayer to day my little Rascal, -- no Prayer to day --
poor Gogle's sick -- come hither -- why you Refractory Baggage you, come or I
shall touze you, ingenuously I shall, tom tom or I Will whip it.


La. Fa. Have you forgot your Daughter Sir? and your disgrace?


Sir Pat. A fiddle on my Daughter, she is a Chick of the old Cock I profess, I
was just such another wag when young, -- but she shall be married to morrow, a
good Cloak for her knavery; therefore come your ways, ye wag, we will take a nap
together, good faith my little Harlot I mean thee no harm.


La. Fa. No of my Conscience. --


Sir Pat. Why then, why then you little Mungrel?


La. Fa. His precise worship is as it were disguised, the outward man is
overtaken -- pray Sir lie down, and I Will come to you presently.


Sir Pat. Away you wag, will you? will you -- catch her there, catch her.


La. Fa. I will indeed -- death there is no getting from him, -- pray lie down
-- and I Will cover thee close enough I Will warrant thee. -- Aside. He lies down,
she covers him. Had ever Lovers such spightfull Luck? hah -- surely he sleeps,
bless the mistaken Bottle -- Aye, he sleeps, -- whist, Wittmore. --


He coming out falls: pulls the Chair down, Sir Patient flings open the
Curtain. Wit. Plague of my over Care, what shall I do?


Sir Pat. What Is that, what noise is that? let me see, we are not safe, lock up
the doors, what is the matter, what Thunder Clap was that? Wittmore runs under
the Bed: she runs to Sir Patient and holds him in his Bed.


La. Fa. Pray Sir lie still, 'twas I was only going to sit down, and a sudden
giddiness took me in my head which made me fall and with me the Chair, there is
no danger near ye Sir -- I was just coming to sleep by you.


Sir Pat. Go you 're a flattering Huswife, go, Catch her, catch her -- catch
her. -- Lies down, she covers him.


La. Fa. Oh how I tremble at the dismal apprehension of being discovered, had I
secured my self of the Eight thousand Pound, I would not value Wittmores being
seen, but now to be found out would call my Wit in question, for it is the
fortunate alone are wise. -- Wittmore peeps from under the Bed: she goes softly
to the door to open it.


Wit. Was ever man so Plagued? -- hah -- what is this? -- confound my tell-tale
Watch, the Larum goes, and there* no getting to it to silence it; -- Damned
Misfortune!


Sir Patient rises and flings open the Curtains. Sir Pat. Hah, what is that!


La. Fa. Heavens! what is the matter? we are destined to discovery. She runs to
Sir Patient, and leaves the door still fast.


Sir Pat. What Is that I say, what is that? let me see, let me see, what
ringing's that, oh let me see what it is.


Strives to get up, she holds him down. La. Fa. Oh now I see my fate's
inevitable, alas that ever I was born to see it. Weeps.


Wit. Death she will tell him I am here! nay he must know it, a Pox of all
invention and Mechanics, and he were damned that first contrived a Watch.


Sir Pat. Hah, do weep, -- why do weep? I say what noise is that? what
ringing? hah* --


La. Fa. It Is that, it is that my dear that makes me weep, alas I never hear
this fatal Noise but some dear friend dies.


Sir Pat. Hah, dies! oh that must be I, Aye Aye, oh.


La. Fa. I Have heard it Sir this two days, but would not tell you of it.


Sir Pat. Hah! heard it these two days? oh, what is it, a death-watch? -- hah.
--


La. Fa. Aye Sir, a death-watch, a certain Larum death-watch, a thing that has
warned our Family this hundred years, oh -- I Am the most undone Woman.


Wit. A blessing on her for a dear dissembling Gilt -- death and the Devil,
will it never cease?


Sir Pat. A death-watch? ah, it is so, I Have often heard of these things --
methinks it sounds as if 'twere under the Bed. --


Offers to look, she holds him. La. Fa. You think so Sir, but that it is about
the Bed is my grief, it therefore threatens you: oh wretched Woman!


Sir Pat. Aye, aye, I Am too happy in a wife to live long: well, I will settle
my House at Hogsdowne with the Land about it, which is 500 l. a year upon thee,
live or dye, -- do not grieve. --


Lays himself down. La. Fa. Oh I never had more cause, come try to sleep; your
fate may be diverted -- whilst I Will to prayers for your dear health, -- I have
almost run Covers him, draws the Curtains. out all my stock of Hypocrisy, and
that hated Art now fails me, -- no all ye Powers that favor distressed Lovers,
assist us now, and I Will provide against your future Malice. She makes signs to
Wittmore, he peeps.


Wit. I Am impatient of Freedom, yet so much happiness as I but now enjoyed
without this part of Suffering had made me too blessed, -- Death and Damnation!
what cursed luck have I?


Makes signs to her to open the Door: whilst he creeps softly from under the
Bed to the Table, by which going to raise himself he pulls down all the
Dressing things: at the same instant Sir Patient leaps from the Bed, and she
returns from the door and sits on Wittmores back as he lies on his hands and
knees, and makes as if she swounded. Sir Pat. What Is the matter! what is the
matter! has Satan broke his everlasting Chain and got loose abroad to Plague
poor Mortals? hah -- what is the matter? Runs to his Lady.


La. Fa. Oh help, I dye, -- I faint -- run down and call for help.


Sir Pat. My Lady dying? oh she is gone, she faints, -- what ho, who waits? Cries
and baules.


La. Fa. Oh, go down and bring me help, the door is locked, -- they cannot hear
ye -- oh -- I go -- I dye. --


He opens the door and calls help, help. Wit. Damn him! there is no escaping
without I kill the Dog.


from under her, peeping. La. Fa. Lie still or we are undone. --


Sir Patient returns with Maundy. Maun. Hah, discovered!


Sir Pat. Help, help my Lady dies. --


Maun. Oh I perceive how it is -- Alas she is dead, quite gone, oh rub her
temples Sir.


Sir Pat. Oh I Am undone then, -- [Weeps] oh my dear, my Virtuous Lady? --


La. Fa. Oh where is my Husband, my dearest Husband -- oh bring him near me.


Sir Pat. I Am here my Excellent Lady. --


She takes him about the neck and raises her self up, gives Wittmore a little
kick behind. Wit. Oh the dear Lovely Hypocrite, was ever Man so near
discovery? -- Goes out.


Sir Pat. Oh how hard she presses my head to her Bosom!


Maun. Ah, that grasping hard Sir, is a very bad sign.


Sir Pat. How does my good, my dearest Lady Fancy?


La. Fa. Something better now, give me more Air, -- that dismal Larum
Death-watch had almost killed me.


Sir Pat. Ah Precious Creature, how she afflicts her self for me, -- come let us
walk into the Dining room, it is more Airie, from thence into my Study, and make
thy self Mistress of that Fortune I have designed thee, thou best of Women.
Exeunt, Leading her.


The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE I. A Table, and Six Chairs.
Enter Isabella Reading a Letter, Betty tricking her. Isab. HHow came you by
this Letter?


Bet. Miss Fanny received it by a string from his Window, by which he took up
that you writ to him this morning.


Isab. What means this nicety? forbear I say. --


puts Betty from her. Bet. You cannot be too fine upon your Wedding day.


Isab. Thou art mistaken, leave me, -- whatever he says here to satisfy my
jealousy, I am confirmed that he was false, yet this assurance to free me from
this intended marriage, makes me resolve to pardon him however guilty. -- Enter
Wittmore. How now! what means this insolence? How dare you having so lately
made your guilty approaches, venture again into my presence?


Wit. Why? Is there any danger, but what is so visible, in those fair eyes?


Isab. And there may lie enough Sir, when they are angry. By what Authority do
you make this saucy visit?


Wit. That of a Husband Madam, I came to congratulate the mighty joy this day
will bring you.


Isab. Thou dare not marry me, there will be danger in it.


Wit. Why sure you do not carry Death in your embraces, I find no Terror in
that lovely shape, no Daggers in that pretty scornful look; that breath that
utters so much Anger now, last night was sweet as new-blown Roses are, -- and
spoke such words, so tender and so kind.


Isab. And can thou think they were addressed to thee?


Wit. No, nor could the shade of Night hide the confusion which disordered
you, at the discovery that I was not he, the blessed he you looked for.


Isab. Leave me, thou hated object of my Soul.


Wit. This will not serve your turn, for I must marry you.


Isab. Then thou art a fool, and drawest thy ruin on; why I will hate thee, --
hate thee most extremely.


Wit. That will not anger me.


Isab. Why, I will never let thee touch me, not kiss my hand, not come into my
sight.


Wit. Are there no other women, kind, fair, and to be purchased? he cannot
starve for Beauty in this age, that has a stock to buy.


Isab. Why, I will Cuckold thee, look to it; I will most damnably.


Wit. So would you, had you loved me, in a year or two; therefore like a kind
civil Husband I Have made provision for you, a friend, and one I dare trust my
Honor with, -- it is Mr. Knowel, Madam.


Isab. Lodwick! What Devil brought that name to his knowledge? -- can thou
know him, and yet dare hope to marry me?


Wit. We have agreed it, and on these conditions.


Isab. Thou basely injurest him, he cannot do a deed he ought to blush for:
Lodwick do this! Oh do not credit it, -- prithee be just and kind for thy own
Honors sake, be quickly so, the hasty minutes fly, and will anon make up the
fatal hour that will undo me.


Wit. It Is true, within an hour you must submit to Hymen, there is no avoiding
it.


Isab. Nay then be gone my poor submissive Prayers, and all that dull Obedience
custom had made us slaves to, -- do, Sacrifice me, lead me to the Altar, and
see if all the holy mystic words can Conjure from me the consenting syllable:
No, I will not add one word to make the charm complete, but stand as silent in
th'inchantiug Circle, as if the Priests were raising Devils there.


Enter Lodwick. Lod. Enough, enough, my charming Isabella, I am confirmed.


Isab. Lodwick! what good Angel conducted thee hither?


Lod. Even honest Charles VVittmore here, thy friend and mine, no Bugbear
Lover he!


Isab. VVittmore! that friend I Have often heard thee name? now some kind
mischief on him, he has so frighted me, I scarce can bring my sense to so much
order, to thank him that he loves me not.


Lod. Thou shall defer that payment to more leisure, we are men of business now.
My Mother knowing of a Consultation of Physicians which your Father has this
day appointed to meet at his house, has bribed Monsieur Turboone his French
Doctor in Pension, to admit of a Doctor or two of her recommending, who shall
amuse him with discourse till we get our selves married; and to make it the
more ridiculous, I will release Sir Credulous from the Basket, I saw it in the
Hall as I came through, we shall have need of the fool. Ex. Wit.


Enter Wittmore pulling in the Basket. Wit. 'Twill do well.


Lod. Sir Credulous how is it man? Opens the Basket.


Sir Cred. What am not I at the Carriers yet? -- Oh Lodwick thy hand, I Am
almost poisoned -- this Basket wants airing extremely, it smells like an old
Ladies Wedding-Gown of my acquaintance, -- but what is the danger past, man?


Lod. No, but there is a necessity of your being for some time disguised to act
a Physician.


Sir Cred. How! a Physician! that I can easily do, for I understand Simples.


Lod. That Is not material, so you can but Banter well, be very Grave, and put
on a starched countenance.


Sir Cred. Banter? what is that, man?


Lod. Why Sir, talking very much, and meaning just nothing; be full of words
without any connection, sense, or conclusion: come in with me, and I Will instruct
you farther.


Sir Cred. Pshaw, is that all, say no more ont, I Will do it, let me alone for
Bantering, -- but this same damned Rival? --


Lod. He Is now watching for you without, and means to souce upon you, but trust
to me for your security, come away, I have your habit ready. [Goes out.] --
This day shall make thee mine, Dear Isabella. -- Ex. Lod. and Wit.


Enter Sir Patient, and Leander, and Roger. Sir Pat. Marry Lucretia! is there
no Woman in the City fit for you but the Daughter of the most notorious
fantastical Lady within the Walls?


Lean. Yet that fantastical Lady you thought fit for a Wife for me Sir.


Sir Pat. Yes Sir, Foppery with Money had been something, but a poor Fop,
hanged it is abominable.


Lean. Pray hear me Sir.


Sir Pat. Sirrah, Sirrah, you're a Jackanapes, ingenuously you are Sir, Marry
Lucretia quoth he!


Lean. If it were so Sir, where is her fault?


Sir Pat. Why Mr. Coxcombe, all over. Did I with so much care endeavor to
marry thee to the Mother, only to give thee opportunity with Lucretia?


Enter Lady Knowel. Lean. This Anger shows your great concern for me.


Sir Pat. For my name I am, but 'twere no matter if thou were hanged, and thou
deservest it for thy lewd Cavaliering Opinion, -- they say thou art a Papist
too, or at least a Church of England Man, and I profess there is not a pin to
choose, -- Marry Lucretia!


La. Kn. Were I querimonious, I should resent the affront this Balatroon has
offered me.


Isab. Dear Madam, for my sake do not anger him now.


Aside to her. La. Kn. Upon my Honor you are very free with my Daughter Sir.


Sir Pat. How! she here! now for a Peal from her eternal Clapper, I had rather
be confined to an Iron-mill.


La. Kn. Sure Lucretia merits a Husband of as much worth as your Nephew Sir.


Sir Pat. A better, Madam, for he is the lewdest Hector in the Town, he has all
the Vices of youth, Whoring, Swearing, Drinking, Damning, Fighting, -- and a
Thousand more, numberless and nameless.


La. Kn. Time Sir may make him more abstemious.


Sir Pat. Oh never Madam! it is in's Nature, he was born with it, he is given
over to Reprobation, it is bred in the bone, -- he is lost.


Lean. This is the first good Office that ever he did me.


La. Kn. What think you Sir, if in defiance of your Inurbanity, I take him with
all these faults my self?


Sir Pat. How Madam!


La. Kn. Without more Ambages Sir, I have considered your former desires, and
have consented to marry him, notwithstanding your exprobrations.


Sir. Pat. May I believe this Madam, and has your Ladyship that goodness! --
and have thou my Boy so much Wit? why this is something now, -- well he was
ever the best and sweetest natured youth, -- why what a notable wag's this? and
is it true my Boy, hah?


Lean. Yes Sir, I had told you so before had you permitted me to speak.


Sir Pat. Well Madam, he is only sit for your excellent Ladyship, he is the
prettiest civillest Lad! -- well go thy ways; I shall never see the like of
thee, no -- Ingeniously the Boy's made for ever, Two thousand Pounds a year
besides Money, Plate, and Jewels, made for ever. -- Well Madam, the
satisfaction I take in this Alliance, has made me resolve to give him
immediately my Writings of all my Land in Berkshire, Five hundred Pounds a year
Madam, and I would have you Married this morning with my Daughter, so one
Dinner and one Rejoicing will serve both.


La. Kn. That Sir, we have already agreed upon.


Sir Pat. Well I Will fetch the Writings. Come Isabella, I Will not trust you out
of my sight to day. Ex. Sir Pat. and Isab.


Lean. Well then Madam, you are resolved upon this business of Matrimony.


La. Kn. Was it not concluded between us Sir this morning? and at the near
approach do you begin to fear?


Lean. Nothing Madam, since I Am convinced of your goodness.


La. Kn. You flatter Sir, this is mere Adulation.


Lean. No, I am that wild Extravagant my Uncle rendered me, and cannot live
confined.


La. Kn. To one Woman you mean? I shall not stand with you for a Mistress or
two, I hate a dull morose unfashionable Blockhead to my Husband, nor shall I be
the first example of a suffering Wise Sir; Women were created poor obedient
things.


Lean. And can you be content to spare me five or six nights in a week?


La. Kn. Oh you're too reasonable.


Lean. And for the rest, if I get drunk, perhaps I Will give to you: yet in my
Drink I Am damned ill natured too, and may neglect my duty, perhaps shall be so
wicked to call you cunning, deceitful, gilting, base, and swear you have undone
me, swear you have ravished from my faithful heart, all that could make it
blessed or happy.


Enter Lucretia weeping. La. Fa. How now* Lucretia?


Lucr. Oh Madam, give me leave to kneel before, and tell you if you pursue the
Cruelty I hear you're going to commit, I am the most lost, most wretched Maid
that breaths; We two have plighted faiths, and should you marry him, 'twere so
to sin as Heaven would never pardon.


La. Kn. Rise fool.


Lucr. Never, till you have given me back Leander, or leave to live no more, --
pray kill me Madam; and the same
Flowers that deck your Nuptial-bed,
Shall serve to strew my Hearse, when I shall lie
A dead cold witness of your Tyranny.

La. Kn. Rise, I still designed him yours. -- I saw with pleasure Sir, your
reclination from my addresses, -- I have proved both your Passions, and 'twere
unkind not to Crown 'em with the due praemium of each others merits. Gives her
to Lean.


Lean. Can Heaven and you agree to be so bountiful?


La. Kn. Be not amazed at this turn, Rotat omne fatum, -- but no more, -- keep
still that mask of Love we first put on, till you have gained the Writings, for
I have no joy beyond cheating that filthy Uncle of thine, -- Lucretia wipe your
eyes, and prepare for Hymen, the hour draws near. Thalessio, Thalessio! as the
Romans cried.


Lucr. May you be still admired as you deserve!


Enter Sir Patient with Writings, and Isabella. Sir Pat. How Madam Lucretia,
and in tears!


La. Kn. A little disgusted Sir, with her Father-in-law, Sir.


Sir Pat. Oh is that all, hold up thy head Sweetheart, thy turn's next, --
here Madam, I surrender my Title, with these Writings, and with 'em my Joy, my
Life, my Darling, my Leander, -- now let us away, where is Mr. Fain-love?


Isab. He Is but stepped into Cheapside to fit the Ring Sir, and will be here
immediately.


Sir Pat. I have business anon about Eleven of the Clock, a Consultation of
Physicians to confer about this Carkase of mine.


Lean. Physicians Sir, what to do?


Sir Pat. To do! why to take their advice Sir, and to follow it.


Lean. For what I beseech you Sir?


Sir Pat. Why Sir for my health.


Lean. I believe you are not sick Sir, -- unless they make you so.


Sir Pat. They make me so! -- do you hear him Madam, -- am not I sick Sir? not
I, Sir Patient Fancy sick?


La. Kn. He Will destroy my design, -- how Mr. Fancy, not Sir Patient sick? or
must he be incinerated before you will credit it?


Sir Pat. Aye Madam, I want but dying to undeceive him, and yet I am not sick!


Lean. Sir I love your life, and would not have you die with Fancy and Conceit.
--


Sir Pat. Fancy and Conceit! do but observe him Madam, -- what do ye mean Sir,
by Fancy and Conceit?


La. Kn. He Will ruin all, -- why Sir, -- he means --


Sir Pat. Nay let him alone, let him alone, (with your Ladyships pardon) --
come Sir, -- Fancy and Conceit, I take it, was the Question in debate, --


Lean. I cannot prove this to you Sir, by force of Argument, but by
demonstration I will, if you will banish all your couzening Quacks, and take my
wholesome advice.


Sir Pat. Do but hear him Madam, not prove it.


La. Kn. Sir he means nothing, -- not sick! alas Sir you're very sick.


Sir Pat. Aye, Aye, your Ladyship is a Lady of profound knowledge -- why have I
not had the advice of all the Doctors in England, and have I not been in
continual Physic this Twenty years, -- and yet I am not sick! ask my dear Lady
Sir, how sick I am, she can inform you. La. Kno. goes and talks to Isab.


Lean. She does her endeavor Sir, to keep up the humor.


Sir Pat. How Sir!


Lean. She wishes you dead Sir.


Sir Pat. What said the Rascal? wishes me dead!


Lean. Sir she hates you.


Sir Pat. How! hate me! what my Lady hate me?


Lean. She abuses your Love, plays tricks with ye, and cheats ye Sir.


Sir Pat. Was ever so profane a wretch! what, you will not prove this neither?


Lean. Yes, by demonstration too.


Sir Pat. Why thou saucy Varlet, Sirrah, Sirrah thank my Lady here I do not
cudgel thee, -- well I will settle the rest of my Estate upon her to morrow, I
will Sir, -- and thank God you have what you have Sir, make much on it.


Lean. Pardon me Sir, it is not my single opinion, but the whole City takes
notice on it, that I tell it you Sir is the effects of my Duty not Interest,
pray give me leave to prove this to you Sir.


Sir Pat. What you are at your Demonstration again? -- come -- let us hear.


Lean. Why Sir, -- give her frequent opportunities, -- and then surprise her,
-- or, -- by pretending to settle all upon her, -- give her your Power, and see
if she do not turn you out of doors, -- or -- by feigning you are sick to death
-- or indeed by dying.


Sir Pat. I thank you Sir, -- this indeed is Demonstration, I take it. -- Pulls
off his Hat.


Lean. I mean but feigning Sir, and be a witness your self of her sorrow, or
contempt.


Sir Pat. Pauses -- Hah -- hum, -- why ingeniously this may be a very pretty
Project, -- well Sir, suppose I follow your advice? -- nay I profess I will do
so, not to try her Faith, but to have the pleasure to hear her Conjugal
Lamentations, feel her Tears bedew my Face, and her sweet Mouth kissing my
Cheeks a thousand times, verily a wonderful comfort, -- and then Sir, what
becomes of your Demonstration. -- Enter Wittmore with the Ring. Oh, -- Mr.
Fain-love, come come you're tardy, let us away to Church.


Enter Roger. Rog. Sir here is Doctor Turboone, and those other Doctors your
Worship expected.


Enter Lady Fancy. Sir Pat. The Doctors already! -- well bring 'em up, come
Madam, we have waited for your Ladyship, -- bring up the Doctors Roger.


La. Fa. Wittmore, I have now brought that design to a happy conclusion for
which I married this formal Ass, I Will tell thee more anon, -- we are observed.


La. Kn. Oh Lodwick's come.


Enter Lodwick, Monsieur Turboon, Fat Doctor, Amsterdam, Leyden, Sir Credulous.
Sir Pat. Doctor Turboon your Servant, I expected you not this two hours.


Turb. Nor had ee com Sir, bot for dese wordy Gentelmen, whose affairs wode not
permit them to com at your hour.


Sir Pat. Are they English pray?


Turb. Dis is Sir, -- [ pointing to Lod.] an admirable Physician, and a rare
Astrologer. -- Dis speaks good English, bot a Collender born. points to Sir
Cred.


Sir Cred. What a pox does the Fellow call me a Cullender?


Lod. He means a High Dutch man of the Town of Collen, Sir.


Sir Pat. Sir I have heard of your Fame, -- Doctor pray entertain these
Gentlemen till my return, I Will be with you presently.


Lod. Sir I hope you go not forth to day? Gazing on his Face.


Sir Pat. Not far, Sir.


Lod. There is a certain Star has ruled this two days Sir, of a very malignant
Influence to persons of your Complexion and constitution, -- let me see --
within this two hours and six Minutes, its Malice will be spent, till then it
will be fatal.


Sir Pat. Hum, reigned this two days? -- I profess and things have gone very
cross with me this two days, -- a notable man this.


La. Kn. Oh a very Profound Astrologer Sir, upon my Honor I know him.


Sir Pat. But this is an affair of that importance Sir --


Lod. If it be more than health or Life, I beg your Pardon Sir.


Sir Pat. Nay no offense Sir I beseech you, I Will stay Sir.


La. Kn. How! Sir Patient not see us Married?


Sir Pat. You shall excuse me Madam.


La. Fa. This was lucky, oh Madam would you have my Dear venture out, when a
malignant Star reigns! not for the world.


Sir Pat. No I Will not stir, had it been any Star but a malignant Star, I had
waited on your Ladyship. But these malignant Stars are very Pernicious stars.
Nephew, take my Lady Knowell; Mr. Fain-love my Daughter, and Bartholomew do you
conduct my Lady, the Parson stays for you, and the Coaches are at the door.
Exeunt Lady Knowell, Leander, Wittmore and Isab. Lady Fancy and Bartholomew.


Enter Boy. Boy. Sir, my Lady has sent for you.


Lod. Sir I Will be with you presently, Sir Credulous be sure you lug him by the
Ears, with any sort of stuff, till my return, I Will send you a friend to keep
you in Countenance.


Sir Pat. Please you to sit Gentlemen?


Amst. Please you Sir. To Sir Cred. who bows and runs back.


Sir Cred. Oh Lord sweet Sir, I hope you do not take me -- Nay I beseech you
Noble Sir -- Reverend Sir.


Turning from one to the other. Leyd. By no means Sir, a stranger.


Sir Cred. I beseech you -- Scavantissimi Doctores, -- incomparable Sir, -- and
you -- or you.


Fat D. In Troth Sir, these Complements are needless, I am something corpulent
and love my ease. Sits.


Sir Cred. Generous Sir, you say well, therefore Conlicentia, as the Grecians
have it. Sits.


Amst. -- Brother. --


Leyd. Nay good Brother, -- Sir Patient. --


Sir Pat. Ingeniously, not before you, Mr. Doctor.


Leyd. Excuse me Sir, an Alderman, and a Knight. --


Sir Pat. Both below the least of the Learned Society.


Leyd. Since you will have it so. All sit and cry hum, -- and look gravely.


Sir Cred. Hum -- hum, most Worthy, and most Renouned -- Medicinae Professores,
qui hic assemblati estis; and vos altra Mesioris, I am now going to make a
Motion for the Public good of us all, but will do nothing without your
Doctorships Approbation.


Sir Pat. Judiciously concluded.


Sir Cred. The question then is, Reverentissimi Doctores, whether -- for mark
me, I come to the matter in hand, hating long Circumstances of words; there
being no necessity as our Learned Brother Rabalis observes in that most
notorious Treatise of his called Garagantua, there is says he, no necessity of
going over the Hedge when the Path lies fair before ye; therefore as I said
before, I now say again coming to my Question, for as that admirable Welsh
Divine says in that so famous Sermon of his, upon her Creat Cranfather Hadam
and her Creat Cranmother Heeve concerning the Happell, -- and her will warrant
her, her will keep to her Text still, -- so I stick close to my question, which
is Illustrissimi Doctores, whether it be not necessary to the Affair in hand --
to take -- a Bottle, and if your Doctorships are of my opinion -- hold up your
Thumbs. All hold up their Thumbs. -- Look Sir, you observe the Votes of the
Learned Cabalists.


Sir Pat. Which shall be put in Act forthwith -- I like this man well, he does
nothing without mature deliberation. Goes ont.


Enter Brunswick. Brun. By your leaves Gentlemen, -- Sir Crodulous -- Whispers.


Sir Cred. Oh -- it is Lodwicks Friend, the Rascall's dressed like Vanderbergen in
the Strand: -- Sir Patient -- pray know this glorious Doctor Sir.


Sir Pat. A Doctor Sir?


Sir Cred. A Doctor Sir, yes, and as Eloquent a Doctor, Sir, as ever set Bill
to Post, why it is -- the incomparable -- Brunswick, high Dutch Doctor.


Sir Pat. You're welcome Sir, -- Pray sit; ah -- well Sir you are come to visit
a very Crazy sickly Person Sir.


Brun. Pray let me feel your Pulse Sir, -- what think you Gentlemen, is he not
very far gone? -- Feels his pulse, they all feel.


Sir Cred. Ah far, far, -- Pray Sir, have you not a certain wambling Pain in
your Stomach Sir, as it were Sir a -- a Pain Sir.


Sir Pat. Oh very great Sir, especially in a Morning Fasting.


Sir Cred. I knew it by your stinking breath Sir, -- and are you not troubled
with a pain in your Head Sir?


Sir Pat. In my Head Sir?


Sir Cred. I mean a -- kind of a -- Pain, -- a kind of a -- Vertigo as the
Latins call it, and a Whirligigoustiphon as the Greeks have it, which signifies
in English Sir, a Dizzie-swimming kind -- of a de ye see -- a thing -- that --
a -- you understand me.


Sir Pat. Oh intolerable, intolerable, -- why this is a rare man.


Fat D. Your reason Sir for that? To Sir Cred.


Sir Cred. My reason Sir? why my reason Sir is this, Haly the Moore, and Rabbie
Isack and some thousands more of learned Dutchmen observe your dull wall Eye
and your Whir -- Whirligigoustiphon, to be inseparable.


Brun. A most Learned reason.


Fat D. Oh Sir inseparable.


Sir Cred. And have you not a kind of a -- something -- de ye mark me, when you
make water, a kind of a stopping -- and -- a -- de ye conceive me, I have
forgot the English term Sir, but in Latin it is a Stronggullionibus.


Sir Pat. Oh Sir most extremely, it is that which makes me desperate Sir.


Sir Cred. Your ugly Face is an infallible sign, your Dysurie as the Arabicks
call it, and your Ill-favor'd Countenance, are constant Relatives.


All. Constant, constant.


Sir Cred. Pray how do you eat, Sir?


Sir Pat. Ah Sir, there is my distraction. Alas Sir, I have the weakest stomach
-- I do not make above four Meals a day, and then indeed I eat heartily -- but
alas what is that to eating to live, -- nothing Sir nothing. --


Sir Cred. Poor heart I pity him.


Sir Pat. And between meals, good Wine, Sweetmeats, Candles, -- Cordialls and
Mirabilises, to keep up my fainting Spirits.


Sir Cred. A Pox of his Aldermanship: an the whole Bench were such notable
swingers, it would Famish the City sooner than a Siege.


Amst. Brothers what do you think of this man?


Leyd. Think Sir? I think his Case is desperate.


Sir Cred. Shaw Sir, we shall soon rectify the quiblets and quillities of his
blood if he observes our directions and diet, which is to eat but once in four
or five days.


Sir Pat. How Sir, eat but once in four or five days! such a diet Sir would
kill me, alas Sir kill me.


Sir Cred. Oh no Sir, no, for look ye Sir the Case is thus, do ye mind me -- so
that the business lying so obvious de ye see, there is a certain method do ye
mark me -- in a -- Now Sir when a man goes about to alter the course of Nature,
-- the case is very plain, you may as well arrest the Chariot of the Sun, or
alter the Eclipses of the Moon, for Sir this being of another Nature, the
Nature of it is to be unnatural, you conceive me Sir? -- therefore we must
crave your absence Sir for a few Minutes, till we have debated this great
Affair.


Sir Pat. With all my heart Sir, since my case is so desperate, a few hours
were not too much. Ex. Sir Patient.


Sir Cred. Now Sir, my Service to you. Drinks.


Enter Fanny. Fan. Oh living heart! what do all these men do in our house? sure
they are a sort of New-fashon'd Conventiclers: -- I Will hear 'em preach. They
drink round the while.


Amst. Sir my service to you, and to your good Lady, Sir.


Ley. Again to you Sir, not forgetting your Daughters: they are fine Women Sir,
let Scandal do its worst. Drinks.


Turb. To our better trading Sir.


Brun. Faith it goes but badly on, I had the weekly Bill and 'twas a very thin
Mortality, some of the better sort dye indeed that have good round Fees to give.


Turb. Verily I have not killed above my five or six this week.


Brun. How Sir killed?


Turb. Killed Sir! ever whilst you live, especially those who have the grand
Verole, for it is not for a man's Credit to let the Patient want an Eye or a
Nose, or some other ting, I have killed ye my five or six dozen a week -- but
times are hard.


Brun. I grant ye Sir, your Poor for Experiment, and improvement of Knowledge,
and to say truth there ought to be such Scavengers as we to sweep away the
Rubbish of the Nation.


Sir Cred. and Fat seeming in discourse. Sir Cred. Nay an you talk of a beast;
My service to you Sir -- [Drinks] Aye, I lost the finest beast of a Mare in all
Devonshire.


Fat D. And I the finest Spaniel Sir.


Here they all talk together till you come to -- purpose Sir. Turb. Pray what
news is there stirring?


Brun. Faith Sir, I am one of those fools that never regard whether Jews or
Philip have the better or the worst.


Turb. Peace is a great blessing Sir, a very great blessing.


Brun. You are in the right Sir, and so my service to you Sir.


Ley. Well, Sir, Stetin held out Nobly, though the Gazetts are various.


Amst. There Is a world of men killed they say, why what a shame it is so many
thousand should dye without the help of a Physician.


Ley. Hang 'em they were poor Rogues and not worth our killing, my service to
you Sir, they will serve to fill up Trenches.


Sir Cred. Spaniell Sir! no man breathing understands Dogs and Horses better
then my self.


Fat D. Your Pardon for that Sir.


Sir Cred. For look ye Sir, I Will tell you the Nature of Dogs and Horses.


Fat D. So can my Groom and Dog-keeper, but what is this t'th' purpose Sir? Here
they leave off.


Sir Cred. To the purpose Sir, good Mr. Hedleburgh do you understand what is to
the purpose? you're a Dutch Butter-ferkin, a Kilderkin, a Double Jugg.


Fat D. You're an ignorant Blockhead Sir.


Sir Cred. You lie Sir, and there I was with you again.


Amst. What, quarrelling, men of your gravity and Profession!


Sir Cred. That is to say Fools and Knaves, pray how long is it since you left
Toping and Naping, for Quacking, good Brother Cater-tray, -- but let that pass,
for I Will have my Humor, and therefore will quarrel with no man, and so I
drink. --


Goes to fill again. Brun. -- But what is all this to the Patient, Gentlemen?


Sir Cred. Aye -- the Wine's all out, -- and quarrels apart Gentlemen as you
say, what do ye think of our Patient, for something I conceive necessary to be
said for our Fees.


Fat D. I think that unless he follows our Prescriptions he is a dead man.


Sir Cred. Aye Sir a dead man.


Fat D. Please you to write Sir, you seem the youngest Doctor. To Amst.


Amst. Your Pardon Sir, I conceive there may be younger Doctors then I at the
board.


Sir Cred. A fine Punctilio this, when a man lies a dying -- Sir Aside. you
shall excuse me, I have been a Doctor this 7 years.


They shove the pen and paper from one to the other. Amst. I Commenc't at Paris
twenty years ago.


Ley. And I at Leyden, almost as long since.


Fat D. And I at Bercelona thirty.


Sir Cred. And I at Padua, Sir.


Fat D. You at Padua?


Sir Cred. Yes Sir I at Padua, why what a Pox do ye think I never was
beyond sea?


Brun. However Sir you are the youngest Doctor and must write.


Sir Cred. I will not lose an Inch of my Dignity.


Fat D. Nor I.


Amst. Nor I.


Ley. Nor I. Put the paper from each other


Brun. Death what Rascals are these?


Sir Cred. Give me the pen -- here is ado about your Paduas and Punctilioes.
Sets himself to write.


Amst. Every Morning a Dose of my Pills Merda quecrusticon, or the Amicable
Pill.


Sir Cred. Fasting?


Ley. Every hour Sixscore drops of Adminicula Vitae.


Sir Cred. -- Fasting too? Sir Credulous writes still.


Fat D. At Night twelve Cordial Pills, Gallimofriticus.


Turb. Let blood once a week, a Glister once a day.


Brun. Cry Mercy Sir, you're a French man -- After his first sleep, threescore
restorative Pills called Cheatus Redivivus.


Sir Cred. -- And lastly, fifteen spoonfulls of my Aqua Tetrachymagogon, as
often as it is necessary, little or no Breakfast, less Dinner, and go supperless
to bed.


Fat D. Hum, your Aqua Tetrachymagogon?


Sir Cred. Yes Sir, my Tetrachymagogon, for look ye do ye see Sir, I cured the
Archduke of Strumbulo, of a Gondileero, of which he died, with this very Aqua
Tetrachymagogon.


Enter Sir Patient. Sir Pat. Well Gentlemen am I not an intruder?


Fat. Sir we have duly considered the state of your Body: and are now about the
order and method you are to observe.


Brun. Aye this distemper will be the occasion of his death.


Sir Cred. Hold Brothers, I do not say the occasion of his death: But the
occasional cause of his death. Sir Pat. reads the Bill.


Sir Pat. Why here is no time allowed for eating Gentlemen.


Amst. Sir we will justify this Prescription to the whole College.


Ley. If he will not follow it, let him dye.


All. Aye let him dye.


Enter Lodwick and Leander. Lod. What have you consulted without me Gentlemen?


Lod. reads the Bill. Sir Pat. Yes Sir, and find it absolutely necessary for my
health Sir, I should be starved: and yet you say I am not sick Sir.


To Leand. Lod. Very well, very well.


Sir Pat. No Breakfast, no Dinner, no Supper?


Sir Cred. Little or none, but none's best.


Sir Pat. But Gentlemen consider, no small thing?


All. Nothing, nothing.


Sir Cred. Sir, you must write for your Fee. To Lod.


Lod. Now I think on it Sir you may eat, [writes] a Rosted-Pippin cold upon a
Vine leaf, at night.


Lean. Do you see Sir, what damned canting Rascals these Doctors are?


Sir Pat. Aye, aye, if all Doctors were such, ingeniously I should soon be
weary of Physic.


Lean. Give 'em their Fees Sir, and send 'em to the Devil for a company of
Cheats.


Sir Pat. Truth is, there is no faith in 'em, -- well I thank you for your care
and pains. gives 'em Fees.


Sir Cred. Sir if you have any occasion for me, I live at the Red colored
Lanthorn, with Eleven Candles in it, in the Strand; where you may come in
privately, and need not be ashamed, I having no Creature in my House but my
self, and my whole Family. --

Exeunt. Ick quam Van Neder Landt te spreken
End helpen Van Pocken end ander gebreken.
That Is a top of my Bill sweet Sir.


Fan. Lord, Sir Father, why did you give 'em money?


Lean. For talking nonsense this hour or two upon his distemper.


Fan. Oh lemini Sir, they did not talk one word of you, but of Dogs, and
Horses, and of killing folks, and of their Wives and Daughters; and when the
Wine was all out, they said they would say something for their Fees.


Sir Pat. Say you so? -- Knaves, Rogues, Cheats, Murderers! I Will be revenged on
'em all, -- I Will never be sick again, -- or if I be I Will die honestly of my
self without the assistance of such Rascals, -- go, get you gone, -- To Fan.
who goes out.


Lean. A happy resolution, would you would be so kind to your self as to make a
trial of your Lady too, and if she prove true, 'twill make some kind of amends
for your so long being cozened this way.


Sir Pat. I Will about it, this very minute about it, -- give me a Chair. -- He
sits.


Lean. So, settle your self well, disorder your Hair, -- throw away your Cane,
Hat, and Gloves, -- stare and roll your eyes, squeez your Face into
Convulsions, -- clutch your hands, -- make your Stomach heave, -- so, very
well, -- now let me alone for the rest, -- Oh, help, help my Lady, my Aunt, for
Heavens sake help, -- come all and see him die. Weeps.


Enter Wittmore, Lady Fancy, Isabella, Lucretia, Lady Knowell, and Roger. Wit.
Leander, what is the matter?


Lean. See Madam, see my Uncle in the Agonies of Death.


La. Fa. My dearest Husband dying, Oh! Weeps.


Lean. How hard he struggles with departing life!


Isab. Father, dear Father, must I in one day receive a blessing with so great
a curse? Oh, -- he is just going Madam. -- Weeps.


La. Fa. Let me overtake him in the shades below, why do you hold me, can I
live without him? -- do I dissemble well? --


Aside to Wit. Sir Pat. Not live without me! -- do you hear that sirrah?


Aside to Lean. Lean. Pray Mark the end on it Sir, -- feign, -- feign, --


La. Kn. We left him well, how came he thus of the sudden?


Lean. I fear it is an Apoplexy Madam.


La. Fa. Run, run for his Physician! but do not stir a foot. Aside to Roger.
Look up and speak but one kind word to me.


Sir Pat. What cries are these that stop me on my way?


La. Fa. They Are mine, -- your Ladies, -- oh surely he will recover, [Aside] your
most obedient Wife's.


Sir Pat. My Wife's my Heir, my sole Executrix.


La. Fa. Hah, is he in's senses? [ Aside to Wit.] Oh my dear Love, my Life, my
Joy, my all, [Cryes] oh let me go; I will not live without him. Seems to faint
in Wittmore 's Arms. All run about her.


Sir Pat. Do ye hear that sirrah?


Lean. Have yet a little patience, die away, -- very well -- Oh he is gone, --
quite gone. La. Fa. swounds.


La. Kn. Look to my Lady there, [swounds again] -- sure she can but
counterfeit. [Aside.] They all go about her.


Sir Pat. Hah, my Lady dying!


Lean. Sir I beseech you wait the event; Death! the cunning Devil will
dissemble too long and spoil all, -- here -- carry the dead Corpse of my dearest
Uncle to his Chamber. Nurse to your care I commit him now. Exeunt with Sir Pat.
in a Chair.


All follow but Wittmore; who going the other way meets Sir Credulous and
Lodwick, as before. Wit. Lodwick! the strangest unexpected News, Sir Patient's
Dead!


Sir Cred. How, dead! we have played the Physicians to good purpose in faith,
and killed the man before we administered our Physic.


Wit. Egad I fear so indeed.


Lod. Dead!


Wit. As a Herring, and 'twill be dangerous to keep these habits longer.


Sir Cred. Dangerous! Zoz man we shall all be hanged, why our very Bill
dispatched him, and our Hands are to it, -- oh, I Will confess all. -- Offers to
go.


Lod. Death Sir, I Will cut your Throat if you stir.


Sir Cred. Would you have me hanged for company Gentlemen? Oh where shall I
hide my self, or how come at my clothes?


Lod. We have no time for that, go get you into your Basket again, and lie
snug, till I have conveyed you safe away, -- or I Will abandon you. -- [Aside to
him.] It Is not necessary he should be seen yet, he may spoil Leander's Plot.
Aside.


Sir Cred. Oh thank ye dear Lodwick, -- let me escape this bout, and if ever
the Fool turn Physician again, may he be choked with his own Tetrachymagogon.


Wit. Go have and undress you, whilst I Will to Lucia. Ex. Lod.


As Wittmore is going out at one Door, Enter Sir Patient and Leander at the
other. Lean. Hah, Wittmore there! he must not see my Uncle yet.


Puts Sir Pat. back. Ex. Wit. Sir Pat. Nay Sir, never detain me, I Will to my
Lady, is this your Demonstration? -- was ever so virtuous a Lady? -- Well I Will
to her, and console her poor heart, ah the joy 'twill bring her to see my
Resurrection! -- I long to surprise her.


Going off cross the Stage. Lean. Hold Sir, I think she is coming, -- blessed
sight, and with her Wittmore! Puts Sir Pat. back to the door.


Enter Lady Fancy and Wittmore. Sir Pat. Hah, what is this?


La. Fa. Now my dear VVitmore, claim thy Rites of Love without control,
without the contradiction of wretched Poverty or Jealousy: Now, undisguis'd
thou may approach my Bed, and reign over all my Pleasures and my Fortunes, of
which this minute I create thee Lord.

And thus begin my Homage. -- Kisses him.


Sir Pat. Sure it is some Fiend! This cannot be my Lady!


Lean. It Is something uncivil before your face Sir, to do this.


Wit. Thou wondrous kind, and wondrous Beautiful, that Power that made thee
with so many Charms, gave me a Soul sit only to adore 'em; nor were thou
destined to another's Arms, but to be rendered still more fit for mine.


Sir Pat. Hah, is not that Fain-love? Isabella's Husband? Oh Villain! Villain!
I will renounce my Sense and my Religion.


Aside. La. Fa. Another Arms! Oh call not those hated thoughts to my
remembrance,
Lest it destroy that kindly heat within me,
Which thou can only raise, and still maintain.

Sir Pat. Oh Woman! Woman! damned dissembling Woman!

Aside. La. Fa. Come let me lead thee to that Mass of Gold he gave me to be
despised:

And which I render thee, my lovely Conqueror,

As the first Tribute of my Glorious Servitude, -- Draw in the Basket which I
told you of, and is amongst the Rubbish in the Hall, [ Ex. Wittmore.] That
which the Slave so many years was toiling for, I in one moment barter for a
Kiss, as Earnest of our future Joys.


Sir Pat. Was ever so prodigal a Harlot? was this the Saint? was this the most
tender Consort that ever man had?


Lean. No in good faith Sir.


Enter Wittmore pulling in the Basket. La. Fa. This is it with a direction on it
to thee, whither I designed to send it.


Wit. Good morrow to the day, and next the Gold, open the Shrine, that I may
see my Saint -- hail the Worlds Soul --


Opens the Basket, Sir Cred. starts up. La. Fan. O Heavens! what thing art thou?


Sir. Cred. O Pardon, Pardon sweet Lady, I confess I had a hand in it.


La. Fa. In what, thou slave? --


Sir Cred. Killing the good believing Alderman, -- but 'twas against my will.


La. Fa. Then I Am not so much obliged to thee, -- but where is the money, the
8000 l. the Plate and Jewels, sirrah?


Wit. Death the Dog has eat it.


Sir Cred. Eat it! oh Lord, eat 8000 l. would I might never come out of this
Basket alive, if ever I made such a meal in my life.


Wit. Ye Dog you have eat it, and I Will make ye swallow all the Doses you writ
in your Bill, but I Will have it upward or downward. Aside.


Sir Pat. Hah, one of the Rogues my Doctors.


Sir Cred. Oh dear Sir, hang me out of the way rather.


Enter Maundy. Mau. Madam, I have sent away the Basket to Mr. VVittmores
Lodgings.


La. Fa. You might have saved your self that labor, I now having no more to
do, but to bury the stinking Corpse of my quondam Cuckold, dismiss his
Daughters, and give thee quiet possession of all. To Wit.


Sir Pat. Fair Lady, you will take me along with you? Snaps.


Pulls off his Hat and comes up to her. La. Fa. My Husband! -- I Am betrayed --


Sir. Pat. Husband! I do defy thee Satan, thou greater Whore than she of
Babylon: thou shame, thou abomination to thy Sex.


La. Fa. Rail on, whilst I dispose my self to laugh at thee.


Sir Pat. Leander, call all the House in, to be a witness of our Divorce. Ex.
Leander.


La. Fa. Do, and all the World, and let 'em know the Reason.


Sir Pat. Methinks I find an inclination to swear, -- to curse my self and
thee, that I could no better discern thee; nay, I Am so changed from what I
was, that I think I could even approve of Monarchy and Church Discipline, I Am
so truly convinced I have been a beast and an ass all my life.


Enter La. Know. Isabella, Lucre. Lean. Lodwick, Fan. etc. La. Kn. Hah, Sir
Patient not dead?


Sir Pat. Ladies and Gentlemen, take notice that I am a Cuckold, a Crop-ear'd
snivelling Cuckold.


Sir Cred. A Cuckold! sweet Sir, shaw that is a small matter in a man of your
Quality.


Sir Pat. And I beg your pardon Madam, for being angry that you called me so. [
To La. Know.] And yours, Dear Isabella, for desiring you to marry my good
Friend there [points to Wit.] whose Name I perceive I was mistaken in: -- And
yours Leander, that I would not take your Advice long since: And yours fair
Lady, for believing you honest, -- it was done like a credulous Coxcomb: -- And
yours Sir, for taking any of your Tribe for Wise, Learned, or Honest. To Sir
Credulous.


Wit. Faith Sir, I deceived ye only to serve my Friend, and Sir, your
Daughter is married to Mr. Knowell; your Wife had all my stock of Love before,
Sir. Lod. and Isab. kneel.


Sir Pat. Why God-a-mercy -- some comfort that, -- God bless ye -- I shall love
disobedience while I live for it.


Lod. I Am glad on it Sir, for then I hope you will forgive Leander, who has
married my Sister and not my Mother.


Sir Pat. How! has he served me so, -- I Will make him my Heir for it; thou have
made a Man of me my Boy, and faith we will be merry, -- fair Lady, you may
depart in peace fair Lady, restoring my Money, my Plate, my Jewels and my
Writings, fair Lady --.


La. Fa. You gave me no Money Sir, prove it if you can, and for your Land,
'twas not settled with this Proviso, If she be Honest?


Sir Pat. It Is well thou do confess I am a Cuckold, for I would have it
known, fair Lady.


La. Fa. 'Twas to that End I married you, good Alderman.


Sir Pat. In Faith I think thou did sweetheart, In Faith I think thou did.


Wit. Right Sir, for we have long been Lovers, but want of Fortune made us
contrive how to marry her to your good Worship. Many a wealthy Citizen Sir, has
contributed to the maintenance of a younger Brother's Mistress, and you are not
the first Man in Office that has been a Cuckold, Sir.


Sir Pat. Some comfort that too, the Brethren of the Chain cannot laugh at me.


Sir Cred. A very pleasant old Fellow this faith, I could be very merry with
him now but that I am damnable sad, -- Madam, I shall desire to lay the Saddle
on the right Horse. To La. Know.


La. Kn. What mean you Sir?


Sir Cred. Only Madam, if I were as some men are, I should not be as I am.


La. Kn. It may be so Sir.


Sir Cred. I say no more, but matters are not carried so swimmingly, but I can
dive into the meaning on it.


Sir Patient talks this while to Lodw. La. Kn. I hate this Hypothetical way of
arguing, answer me Categorically.


Sir Cred. Hypothetical and Categorical! what does she mean now? [Aside.] --
Madam, in plain English I am made a John A-Nokes of, Iack-hold-my-staff, a
Merry Andrew Doctor to give Leander time to marry your Daughter, and 'twas
therefore I was hoisted up in the Basket, -- but as the Play says, it is well
it is no worse: I Would rather lose my Mistress then my life.


Sir Pat. But how came this Rascal Turboon to admit you?


Lod. For the lucre of our fees Sir, which was his recompense.


Sir Pat. I forgive it you, and will turn Spark, they live the merriest lives
-- keep some City Mistress, go to Court, and hate all Conventicles.

You see what a fine City Wife can do
Of the true breed: Instruct her Husband too:
I wish all civil Cuckolds in the Nation,
Would take Example by my Reformation.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for R. Tonson, at Grays-Inn-gate in Grays-Inn-lane.
THE Portugal History, or a Relation of the Troubles that happened in that
Court, in the Year 1667. and 1668. Price bound, 3 s. The Art of making Love, or
Rules for the Conduct of Ladies and Gallants in their Amors. Price bound 1 s.
The Courtiers Calling, showing the ways of making a Fortune, and the Art of
Living at Court. Price 1 s. 6 d. The Life of the Valiant and Learned Sir Walter
Raleigh, Knight, with his Trial at Westminster. Price 2 s. The Tragedy of the
last Age Considered and Examined, in a Letter to Fleetwood Shepherd, Esquire By
Tho. Rymer. Pr. 1 s. 6 d.
Published this Term.
Pleas of the Crown, or a brief, but full account of whatsoever can be found
relating to that Subject. Price 2 s. 6 d. Heroin Musqueteer, or the Female
Warrior, a Novel. Pr. 1 s. Don Carlos Prince of Spain: A Tragedy. Titus and
Berenice with the Cheats of Scapene, both by Thomas Olway. Anthony and
Cleopatra: A Tragedy, written by Sir Charles Sidley, Baronet. Circe, a Tragedy:
Written by Charles D' Avenant, L. L. D. The Siege of Babylon: A Tragedy, by S.
Pordage, Esquire. Edgar, or the English Monarch, a Tragedy, by Tho. Rymer, of
Gray's Inn, Esquire.
EPILOGUE, spoken by Mrs. Gwin.
I Here, and there, o'reheard a Coxcomb Cry Looking about.
Ah, Rott it -- it is a Woman's Comedy,
One, who because she lately chanced to please us,
With her Damned stuff will never cease to teaze us.
What has poor Woman done that she must be,
Debarred from Sense and Sacred Poetry?
Why in this Age has Heaven allowed you more,
And Women less of Wit then heretofore?
We once were famed in Story, and could write
Equal to men; could Govern, nay could Fight.
We still have passive Valor, and can show
Would Custom give us leave the Active too,
Since we no provocations want from you.
For who but we, could your Dull Fopperies bear,
Your Saucy Love, and your brisk Nonsense hear;
Endure your worse then womanish affectation,
Which renders you the Nuisance of the Nation;
Scorned even by all the Misses of the Town,
A sest to Vizard Mask, the Pitt-Buffoone;
A Glass by which the admiring Country Fool
May learn to dress himself en Ridicule:
Both striving who shall most Ingenious grow
In Lewdness, Foppery, Nonsense, Noise and Show.
And yet to these fine things we must submit
Our Reason, Arms, our Lawrells, and our Wit.
Because we do not Laugh at you when Lewd,
And scorn and cudgel ye when you are Rude;
That we have Nobler Souls then you, we prove,
By how much more we are sensible of Love;
Quickest in finding all the subtlest ways
To make your Ioys: why not to make you Plays?
We best can find your Feables, know our own,
And Gilts and Cuckolds now best please the Town;
Your way of writing's out of Fashion grown.
Method, and Rule -- you only understand,
Pursue that way of Fooling, and be Damned.
Your Learned Cant of Action, Time, and Place,
Must all give way to the unlabored farce.
To all the Men of Wit we will subscribe:
But for you half Wits, you unthinking Tribe,
We'll let you see, what e're besides we do,
How Artfully we Copy some of you:
And if you're drawn to the life, pray tell me then
Why Women should not write as well as Men.

