A PROLOGUE By Mrs. Behn to her New PLAY, CALLED Like Father, like Son, OR THE
Mistaken Brothers, Spoken by Mrs. Butler.
LOrd what a House is here, how Thin it is grown!
As Church 'ere Conventicling was put down:
Since all the Brave are to Newmarket gone!
Declining Statesmen are abandoned too,
Who scarce a Heartless Whigg will Visit now:
Who once had Crowds of Mutineers in Fashion,
Fine drawn in Cullys of the Association:
Sparks, Justices and Jurymen by Dozens,
Whom his perverted, late betrays and Cozens.
But change of Scene, having unvailed their Cheats,
Pensive State Puss alone, Majestic Sits;
Purr's on his pointless Mischiefs, though in vain;
Verses are all the Darlings of his Brain.
So we who having Plotted long to please,
With new Parts, new Clothes, new Face, new-Dress;
To draw in all the yielding Hearts of the Town,
His Highness comes and all our Hopes are gone.
Ah Fickle Youth, what lasting Joys have we,
When Beauty thus is left for Loyalty;
I would to Heaven ye had been all Whiggs for me:
Whilst Honest Tory Fools abroad do Roame,
Whigg Lovers Slay and Plot, and Love at Home.
Nay one Advantage greater far than this,
The Party helps to keep their Mistresses.
The Devils it't if I Am not Fine and Vain,
Whom public Bank Contribute to Maintain.

Epilogue spoken by Mr. Gevan.
ANd now Messiers, what do you say,
Unto our Modern Conscientious Play?
Nor Whigg, nor Tory here can take Offense,
It Libels neither Patriot, Peer nor Prince.
Nor Sheriff, nor Burgess, nor the Reverend Gown;
Faith Here Is no Scandal worth Eight Hundred Pound,
Our Damage is at most but Half a Crown.
Only this Difference you must allow,
That you receive the Affront and pay us too;
Would some Body had managed matters so.
Here Is no Reflection on Damned Witnesses,
We Scorn such out of Fashion things as these,
They fail to be Beloved, and fail to Please.
No Salamanchian Doctorship's Abused,
Nor a Malicious State'man here Accused.
Though here are Fools of every Fashion,
Except State Fools, the Fools of Reformation.
And these Originals decline so fast,
We shall have none to Copy by at last.
There Is Ioe and Jack a pair of Whining Fools
Pointing at Mr. Williams, Mr. Wiltshire. And Leigh, and I, Dull, Lavish,
Creeping Tools.
Bowman's for Mischief all, and carry's on
With Faun and Sneer as Gilting Whigg has done,
But like theirs too, his Projects are o'r thrown.
Sweet Mistress Coral here has lost her Lover,
Pshaw English or Irish ground shall find another.
Poor Madam Butler too, are you defeated,
To Mrs. Butler. You never were before so basely Cheated.
Here Mistress, Betty, Hah! she is grown a very Woman,
Thou'st got me Child, better me than no man.
Here Is Blundering Richards is my Huffing Esquire,
Damn me, the best in England's for it, do you hear.
Is that your Cue come nearer, Faith they Face
Has Features not unlike Ioe Hains's Grace.
Impudence assist thee, and boldly try
To speak for us, and for the Comedy.

Mr. Richards Speaks.
I Will do it Gallants, I Will Justify this Play;
'Od Zoons it is Good, and if you liked you may.

LONDON, Printed for I. V. 1682.


