THE COUNTREY-MANS RUDIMENTS: OR, An ADVICE To the FARMERS in EAST-LOTHIAN how
to Labor and Improve their Ground.



Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty; And are to be Sold at their Shop, 1699.

DEDICATION. To the Young Nobility and Gentry of Scotland.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THere needs no Rhetoric to illustrat the many and great Advantages, that
accresces to a Nation by the diligent Practice and due Encouragement of
Husbandry. The thing speaks for it self: Neither need I tell you, how Worthy,
Noble and Excellent an Employment it is, for those whom GOD has blessed with
large and opulent Heretable Possessions. It is indeed an Employ below no man,
no not of Kings and Princes; The Holy Writ records the same of Uzziah, as one
of his best Characters. Cicero in his Cato major, treats very largely of it,
and in his most excellent Book of Offices, penned for his Son Marcus to direct
him in his Youth, Life and Conversation: He says, that of all Beneficial
Industry, certainly there is not any thing more agreeable or more worthy of a
man of Honor and Reason, than the Culture and Improvement of the Earth.

Of the Excercises of Husbandry, Hiero, Philometer Attalus and Archelaus, all
Kings, have writ most fully; Zenephon and Mago have done the like and besides
them Cato, Varro, Pliny, Collumella, Virgil, Cressentius, Palladius, and many
others of later times, not a few of the Ancients have placed the summum bonum
in them, and have deified these men, who were most famous in that Profession,
as Appollo, who red the Herds of Admetus King of Thessaly, Mercury and his Son
Daphnis, Pan and Protheus.

Virgil calls Husbandmen fortunate, and Horace Blessed; to fortify this, the
Oracle of Delphus pronounced Aglaus the most happy man (when the Potent and
Rich Croesus did expect the Honor,) and that because he had a little Farm in
Arcadia, and never stirred from it; it is therefore no dishonor, for your
Honors to apply your selves this way, which was so highly Honored among the
Ancients, which was no ways shameful, for many Roman Emperors, and most Potent
Kings, not only to direct (which is all I require of you) but also to Till,
Sow, Graft and Plant their own Lands; This did Dioclesian, and Attalus, having
voluntarly quited their Empires to follow this Course of Life. Cyrus also, that
great Monarch, when his Friends came to see him, was wont to Glory in nothing
more than in a Garden of his own Planting. Seneca Planted Plain Trees (a Tree
indeed which I recommend to be Planted near Gentlemen's Houses, and on their
Avenues) and dug Fish Ponds with his own hands, he delighted to be no where
more willingly then in the Fields, where he is said to have studied that most
excellent Book of Morals; In a Word, it was thought so truly Honorable, that
the most Noble and Ancient Families had their Rise and Surname from some
particular Country Employments, as the Fabii-Lentulii, the Ciciroes, Pisos,
from these Grains, the Bubulci, Statilii, Tauri, Pomponii, Vituli, Vitelli,
Porcii, Catoes, Aunii, Caprii, and many others, from their different Herdings;
and though Cornelius Agrippa in his Vanity of Sciences, does abundantly Satyrise
all other Employments, yet he has nothing to say against this, but that it is
the effect of Sin, that makes us be at all this pains, which we must all
acknowledge.

I must confess, that I am very well satisfied to see so much Industry of late,
about the Dwelling-Houses of the most of the Nobility, and Gentry within this
Kingdom; As also, so great Proneness and Inclination for Trade, and shall be
very sorry, if they meet not with due Encouragement from the Government.

I am glad also, to hear, that His Majesty is not very well pleased with our
vaging Abroad, nor with our Unnecessar and Expensive Court Attendancies.

All these things makes me to hope, that your Honors will set up, for what is
the real and true Interest of your Country, and for that which in time, will
tend to your own particular Profit, and the Aggrandizing of your Families.

And really, when I now consider the great Scarcity that has happened for
several years bygone, next unto the just Judgment from GOD upon us for our
Sins, I must impute it in part, to our great neglect of Husbandry, and
therefore, as the sensible effects of the sad Calamity, ought to be a Spur to
all sincere Christians to humble themselves for their Sins, which bring on such
Judgments, so it ought to be an Incitement to all those, whom God has blessed
with Estates to Double their Diligence in the Improvement of their Grounds, and
that not only by precept but example, that the Land be not reduced to utter
Misery.

I shall not multiply words upon this matter, though the Theme be very large and
capacious, the Subject matter being so obvious to every man: But shall only say
a few things.

Husbandry inlarges a Country, and makes it as if ye had conquered another
Country adjacent thereto; And I am sure, a Conquest by the Spade and the
Plough, is both more just, and of longer continuance, then what is got by Sword
and Bow.

Husbandry gives lmployment to many poor people, and sure they are much better
employed so, then under the masquerade name of a Soldier in time of peace

Husbandry breeds up and accustoms men to Labor, which as it keeps a Nation
from many Vices, which are the ordinar Concomitants of Idleness; So when
necessity requires, it fits and enables them for warlike Performances, much
better then by any formal, idle, lazy way of Driviling; and this Cato and
Vegetius affirms.

The Romans thought it no Disparagement to take their Generals from the Plough,
and they thought it no dishonor to return to the same again; they thought toil
and labor to be the best way of excercising their Soldiers, and this their
Camps, Ways, Theaters, Baiths, Aqueducts, and Form of Military Discipline,
which consistted of long Marches, speedily performed, under the load of Weighty
Armor, both Offensive and Defensive, as also Provision; does abundantly
testify.

In fine, Husbandry is the Stock, and Trade the Improvement of that.

Husbandry is the Foundation, and Trade the Superstructure.

Husbandry furnishes Materials for Trade, and makes Barter go for Money, so
that we Trade with our Goods, and bestows our Money at Home, amongst our own
People, which still tends for the further Improvement of our Lands.

Up then brave Youths, leave off Courts and Politics, especially when at so
great distance from you, and in another Kingdom* Follow Husbandry and Trade,
two necessary Twins, who like Man and Wife, ought not to be separated.

To what a prodigious greatness do ye see other Nations have come to, who,
before the Union of the two Crowns, were not to be accounted much above us, and
this all by Husbandry and Trade, which we have hitherto neglected, whether by
a plain and singular stupidity, or by some other ill made Bargains, I shall not
venture to determine.

If you fall to this then in good earnest, laying aside the general advantage
to the whole Nation, I am persuaded you shall find more pleasure and profit this
way, then in the old trodden Path to London, and in time this old Distict
verified.

Non minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri
Casus in est illic, hic erit artis opus.
Which strained to our purpose, may run thus.

Its no less virtue to improve our Lands,
Then to gain more from other Bankrupt-hands.
The first's true management, the others lot,
Be not then wise behind hand, as the Scot.
Go on then Noble young Men, and by your Example, let the People under you see
how to do; For I must say again, we are all more taken by Example, then by
Precept: I have indeed good hopes of this rising Generation, and I hope they
shall both see their Predecessors Errors, and fall upon good Mediums to redeem
their evil spent time, and thereby shall evite the Consequences of many poor
unfortunate Courtiers; as the Poet expresses it, Vitam animas, opera and
sumptus, impendimus aulae.
Proemia pro meritis quae retributa putas?
Aula dedit nobis rescripta votata papiro,
Et sine mente son^s and sine cord manus
Paucos beavit aula, plares perdidit
Sed and hos quoque ipsa quos heavit perdidit.


I shall trouble your Honors no further, now that I think I have used Reason
enough to persuade you to so good and necessar a Work; But in case of
obstinacy, that I may leave you without excuse, and that I may have this to say
for my self, that neither Rhyme nor Reason could convince you, of what is
infallibly both your Duty and Interest: I shall conclude with, and set before
you, the Opinions of two very famous Courtiers, Horace and Buchannan, the one a
favorite of the favorite Maecenas, and the other of the Earl of Murray,
commonly called the good Regent.

Horace Epod. 2.
Beatus ille, qui procul negotiis
Ut prisca Gens mortalium,
Paterna rura bobus exercet suis,
Solutus omni foenere.
Before Ambition, Malice, Envy, Strife,
Had found the way to shorten humane life:
Before the use of Gold came in Request,
Solid Contentment was man's only Guest;
Before vain Titles, and a Court were Known,
Man lived Tranquilly on what was his own,
He owed no Debt, neither had ought to crave,
Save what from his own Lands he hoped to have.
His Fathers Lands therefore with care he plowes.
With lowing Bullocks, them in time he sowes
With hopeful Grain, which quickly does afford,
A just requital to its frugal Lord.
So all his Val's with Fruitful Corn abound,
His Pastors green with Flocks are chequered round.
Non excitatur cassico miles truci:
Nec Horret iratum mare:
Forumque vitat, and superba Civium
Potentiorum limina.
Nor is he raised by Mars his hot allarm,
Neither from angry Neptun fears he harm,
He shuns Law Suits, and so needs not attend
In Anti-Chambers of big looking Men,
Ergo aut adulta vitium propagine
Altas maritat populus:
Inutilesque falce ramos amputans.
Feliciores inlerit.
But as his Vines grow up he does apply
Both Art and pains them carefully to ty
To some straight Pole he pruins the fruitful (Vine,
The Barren he roots out, and plants again.
Aut in reducta valle mugientium
Prospectat errantes greges:
Aut pressae puris mella condit amphoris;
Aut tondit infirmas oves;
Sometimes in bending val's, he is pleased to see
The bellowing wandering Herds feed quietly,
At other times the woolly Flocks he shears,
And the sweet honey from its Comb he clears,
And stores it up for the enshewing years.
Vel cum decorum mitibus pomis caput:
Autumnus arvis extulit;
Ut gaudet, insitiva decerpens pyra,
Certantem and uvam purpurae;
But when long looked for Harvest shows his head
Adorned with Fruits of which we stand in need
How does he joy to pull the grafted Pear,
And clustred grapes, which smallest twigs do bear
Whose purple color does by far excel
The purpled robes of Kings on earth who dwell.
Qua muneretur te, priape, and te, pater.
Sylvane tutor finium.
Therefore to the Preipus praise redounds;
And to Sylvanus the Guardian of our bounds.
Libet jacere modo sub antiqua ilice;
Modo in tenaci gramine.
Labuntur altis interim ripis aquae
Queruntur in Sylvis aves.
Fontesque lymphis obstrepunt manantibus:
Somnos quod invitet leves.
For by your care we free from anxious thoughts
Safely rest under the Oaks Shaddie Boughs;
Anon in some green Meadow down we ly,
While from high Banks the pearled Streams gly'd by.
As careful Nurse, when Babes go to their rest,
Chant forth some Sonnet such as please them best.
So do the Birds their Tenor, Trible, sing
Amidst the Groves, while Fountains murmuring,
Does beat a Counter Bass, and does entrap
The painful Plowman in a quiet nap.
At cum tenantis annus hibernus jovis,
Imbres, Nivesque comparat,
Aut trudit aecreis hinc and hinc multa cane.
Apros in obstantes plagas.
Aut ameti levi rara tendit retia,
Turdis edacibus dolos;
Pavidumque leporem, and advenam laqueo gruem
Jucunda captat praemia.
But when cold Winter comes with Rains and Snows,
His hoarie Head with purled locks he shows
By Jov's command, then does the painful Swain,
Order his subtle toils, and then does train
By force of cures the wildest Boars therein,
Or else by slighter Nets, whole Nights does watch,
The hungry Blackbird in his Snares does catch
By Gins the fearful Hare and Stranger Swan
Falls as a victim to she Husbandman.
Quis non malarum quas amor curas habet,
Haec inter obliviscitur?
Amidst these pleasures innocent and just
Who will not soon forget the ills of Lust.
Quod si pudica mulier in partem juvet,
Domum atque dulces liberos:
Sabina qualis, aut perusta solibus,
Permicis uxor appuli:
Sacrum and vetustis extruat lignis focum
Lassi sub adventum viri:
Claudensaue textis cratibus laetum pecu^
Distenta siccet ubera:
Et horna dulce vina promens dolio
Dapes inemptas apparet:
But if you have a Chaste and Virtuous Wife,
The true support and comfort of man's life,
Who bears her part in your Domestic cares,
And manages your Childrens small Affairs,
Like to Sabina, or brave Appules Dame,
Who by Sols Rays lovely, but black became,
Her Household fire with seasoned wood does burn
As she attends her wearied Lords return.
She also does the skipping Ewes restrain
Within their twisted Folds, that she may drain
Their well stored Duggs of all their Milkie gain.
So from sweet Hog-sheads cleaned she draws her Wine,
Both fresh and brisk, that he and she may dine.
On unbought Danties neatly cookt in time.
Non me lucrina juverint conchylia,
Magisve rhombus, aut scari,
Si quos Eois intonata fluctibus
Hiems ad hoc vertat mare;
Non afra avis descendat in ventrem meum,
Non attagen jonicus
Jucundior; quam lecta de pinguissimis
Oliva Ramis arborum
Aut herba lappathi prata amantis, and gravi
Malvae salubres corpori
Vel agna festis caesa terminalibus,
Vel haedus ereptus lupo.
Lucrinas Oysters, nor the Turbot Square,
Neither the Scarian Fish, the gild-head rare
May with these Dainties any ways compare,
The Scarian Fish is said to chaw the Cood,
And may be found after an Eastern Flood,
And is accounted most delicious Food,
I have no Gust for Affricks choicest Fowl,
The Asian Black-Cock I love with my Soul,
And yet in pleasant taste it cannot compare
With a green joicie O ive pulled with care,
Nor with a Lamb killed at abounding Feast,
Nor with a Kid caught from a Ravenous Beast.
When dressed and disht by fair Sabinas Laws,
With wholesome mallos Meadows Sorrel sauce,
Has inter epulas, ut juvat pastas oves
Videre properantes domum*
Videre fesses vomerem inver^um boves
Collo trabentes languido:
^^^tosque vernas, dius examen Domus
^ir cum reuidentes lares.
Amidst your Banquets when with ease you see,
Your fathed flocks come home, most joyfully:
Also your Oxen when their labors done,
With wearied necks chaff'd by the Showers, and Sun,
Their reversed Plows lay down at their return.
The numerous Offspring of your homely Cell
Thus by your care in Riches does excel
All others wants by change you can supply,
Thus happily you live, and thus you die.
Haec ubi locutus: faeneratur Alphius,
Jam jam futurus rusticus,
Omnem religit Idibus pecuniam:
Quaerit Calendus ponere.
By this Discourse Alpheus highly charmed,
And for a Country life is bravely armed,
Recals his Money, and resolves no more
To be a scourge and Tyrrant to the poor.
But in a Four-nights time his mind does change
And in its wonted Usuries does Range
To take from Flesh what is bred in the bone,
All men may see how hardly it is done.
G. Buchannani Baptistes, Chorus 1.
Ficta crudelis pietas tyrranos,
Impios mores stola simbritatae
Celati in pano tenui recondit
Nuda se virtus tuguri sub umbra
Rustici, nec se titulis superbis
Vendit: insanosque fori tumultus
Ridet, and plausus popularis aurae
Nec iliens magni foribus pritoni
Assidet vitae tacitos beatae
Rure secreto sibi no a tantum
-- Exigit annos.
To the Reader.
CUstom has decreed, that any Treatise, how small and trivial so ever, is not
worth a Farthing, if it want a Preface and Dedication, though the Author should
know nothing to say for himself, save to Deprecat the Readers Wrath, and beg
his Mercy.

I fear this will not serve my turn, for these brave and gallant Sparks, to
whom I have Dedicated this Shedule, will stop their Ears and Cry: They are the
melancholy Fancies of some old Casheired Courtier: The present Court-Favorits
will laugh at me, and think they know better things: The Soldier will cartill
me, and plunder me too, if he can: The Husband man will Curse me for doubling
their Labors: The Landlords will malign me for favoring, the Yeomanrie so
much: The Lawyers will revile me as an ignorant enemy to their Employment: The
Grammerians will rail at me for breaking Prissians head so often: The
Rhetoricians will redicule my homely Style; And above all, the Poets will
insult over me, for invading their Province with my barbarous paltry
inconsistant Rhyme.

In short, there are many more whom I will not name, who will give me no thanks
for my pains, and no doubt Phisiologists, Logicians and Sophisters will consult
how to destroy all my arguing by their Sylogistical Sophismes.

But for the veracitie of the thing it self, and my integrity in the design, I
give them all a fair Defiance* for the seat of Truth is in the Heart* not in
the Tongue-neither imports it how we tell Truth, since falsehood only wants
Eloquence.

Euripides calls Truth plain and simple, and Theophrastus says* the most
ignorant are very well able to speak before the most learned, when they say
nothing but what is true and reasonable; Therefore to speak Jntelligibly not
Rhetorically, to intend the truth of the Matter not the Ornament of the
Language, is the duty of every plain, honest ingenuous man.

I know the Style and Rhyme, is indeed as rude and unpolite. as the most
censuring can call it; but the subject Matteris Excellent, Profitable, and
National.

A pretty man is nothing the worse of being clothed in a homely Dress, and I
think the Plowman has as good a Privilege to coin words as the most learned
Philosophers. and the one is as good and significant as the other.

To conclude Tho. the Poesy take not with the more delicate and refined Spirits
yet it will go very well down with the Shearers in a Harvest day, or with the
whistling Plowman at his Plow, and I think it may answer well enough to the
tune of Down the Burn Davie, with small reduplication. To the carping and
Satirical Critic, I only say, Carpere vel noli mea vel ede tua.
Qui Moevium non odit amet tua carmina Loeli.


Your humble Servitor, A, B, C,

Advice to the Farmers of East-Lothian.
THere are many large and learned Treattises of Husbandry, which indeed contain
all that is necessary for the Management and Improvement of Grounds to the best
Advantage; But these Books are either so dear and ill to be had, that they
cannot be easily got by ordinar Farmers; or else they are so general and
intricat, and the Mannurs or Goodings proposed so difficult to be purchased,
that they lose themselves in a Labyrinth, not knowing well what Method to
follow, amongst so many proposed, and thereby are wholly discouraged.

Such Treatises also propose different ways of ordering Grounds according to
the different nature of Soils, and that most prudently: but yet it leaves the
honest Husbandman who is generally Illiterat, to guess what will prove best for
his Grounds, which readily does occasion Mistakes in the Application.

This cannot well be prevented, but by a particular Treatise for a particular
Shire or Bounds of Land, whereof the person who gives his Advice has
particular Knowledge, and has made it his Business to understand the
Husbandmens way of Laboring, and the Faults and Defects thereof.

This small Treatise is therefore principally designed for East-Lothian: but
there is no Bar nor Let why other places may not follow the same method, if
their Ground and Soil will allow.

Although I am not to say any thing altogether new, or unheard of before: nor
are you to expect extraordinary Inventions from me; yet I dare be bold to say
there was never such a good, easy Method of Husbandry as this, so succinctly
extensive and methodical in all its parts published before. Neither shall I
affright you with Hedging, Ditching, Marling, Chalking, Pairing and Burning,
Draining, Watering, and such like, which are all very good Improvements indeed,
and very agreeable with the Soil and Situation of East-Lothian: but I know ye
cannot bear as yet, such a crowd of Improvements, this being only intended to
initiat you in the true Method and principles of Husbandry. I shall begin with
the easiest first, and as I find you t^ke and practice it, you shall hear more
and ^^^e ^ooner from me. I shall then as briefly and plainly as possible, and
in your own Terms and manner of speaking give my Opinion (with all submission
to better Judgments) how to order your Grounds for the best Advantage, that so
you may work more by the Head, and less by the Hands.

The Soil of East-Lothian generally taken, is accounted the best of any County
or Shire in Scotland; and although it pays too dear a Rent, yet it is as
capable to be Improven beyond what it is at present as any in Scotland.

The poor Farmers that they may pay their dear Rent who are ordinarily
industrious enough, work hard, but without any Method or Project, whereby both
they and their Grounds suffer, and so consequently the Landlord.

In East-Lothian the Farm-Rooms as they are commonly called, are divided or
distinguished in Infield and Outfield Land: that is to say, in these Lands
where they lay their Dung yearly, and these upon which they never lay any Dung.

The Infield Land (where Wheat is sown) is generally divided by the Tennent
into four Divisions, or Breaks as they call them, viz. One of Wheat, one of
Barley, one of Pease, and one of Oats; so that the Wheat is sown after the
Pease, the Barley after the Wheat, and the Oats after the Barley.

The Outfieid-Land is ordinarily made use ^^promiscously, for feeding of their
Cows, Horse, Sheep and Oxen, Its also dunged by their Sheep who ly in Earthen
Folds; and sometimes when they have much of it, they Fauch or Fallow a part of
it yearly.

As to the Method for Laboring the Ground where Wheat is sown, it is
absolutely impossible that any Soil how good soever, can hold out with profit to
the Farmer, by this rude way of ordering it; unless it be some parcel of Ground
adjacent to some Burgh or Villadge, where they can have plenty of Dung, or to
the Sea, where they can have plenty of Sea Ware.

The English who indeed excel in the Knowledge of Husbandry, do not handle
their Grounds (though very good) so rudely; the Ground must rest, as well as the
Husbandman, if you expect favor from it.

Therefore I have known and seen, that in the best and fertilest Soils in
England for Corn, the fourth or third part of their Infield-Land rest yearly;
but most ordinarily a third. Yea I have seeen in several good and fertile
Grounds, as in Leicester, Northhamptoun and 'Vorcester Shires, the whole third
of their Infield-Land ly Fauch, by which Method, they did sow both their Wheat
and Barley after Fauch; then their Oats after their Barley and Pease after the
Wheat. And indeed I observed their Corns extraordinary good; for such gentile
Treatment of the Ground, did not only cause a great Birth of Stalks upon the
Ground, but made the Stalks and consequently the Head so strong that it did not
fall down and grow sloumy as some would fancy it would do. And the Husbandmen
told me, that they had tried several ways, but by this Method they found most
Profit, although they were not able to dung the third part of their Land that
lay Fauch.

But I will not urge new Beginners too far at first, left they scare and prove
skittish, and so throw off my Advice altogether, as unbroken Colts do their
Riders.

In the first place, therefore I shall advise such as sow Wheat and whose
Ground is of the best and in the best Condition; to divide or cast their
Infield Land into five equal Breaks; whereof two Breaks of Pease, one of Wheat
one of Barley, and another of Oats. By this Method you shall sow both your
Wheat and Barley after Pease, which without all question is the far better
Method than that which is at present more generally used. This although it be
the better way than the former, in four Breaks, yet it is no ways sufficient to
bring your Ground into any tolerable state and condition, unless you Fauch also.

Therefore, I advise you in the next place, to Fauch or Fallow some part of
these two Breaks designed for Pease.

I will not positively determine how much you shall leave resting of these two
Breaks, lest I discourage you too much; but I dare affirm, the more you leave,
the greater Advantage; yet much of that must depend upon the prudence of the
Farmer. If his Ground be in any tolerable condition, he may Fauch the less; I
say tolerable: For I do assure you, there are none, or at least, very little,
in so good a condition as the goodness of the Soil is capable of: So that I
think of the best Grounds, a third at least of each of these two Breaks
designed for Pease, may ly Fauch; and the half where the Grounds are not so
good: which may be thus ordered. The third part of that Break of Pease, fauched
and designed to be sown with Wheat the ensuing year, must be plowed about the
Martinmas. That is to say, after your Wheat is sown for that year, fallow down
that third part of the pease-break designed for Wheat the next year; so that
the first thing you are to do after Harvest, is to Till and Sow your Wheat for
the year to come: and the next to that, is to Till and Fallow for the Wheat to
be sown the year thereafter.

The reason why I would have you fallow it so early is, that it may get all the
Winter Frost, but be sure to plow it with also shallow or thin a Furrow as ye
can, that it may only rot the Stubble, and render the ground below mellow and
soft for the next plowing

The first plowing, must be, that they call gathering of the Rigs to an hight,
that where the Ground is moist, it may ly dry all the Winter time, and
consequently be sitter for the next plowing, which is called Cleaving.

Your second Plowing must be about the end of June, or beginning of July
between and which time you must have soyled your Ground with all the Dung,
Lime* or any other Mannure during the whole Winter and Spring by past; For I do
not look upon it as good Husbandry to lead out your Dung in the Winter time
for your Wheat-fauch, because much of its Stength is taken away by the Winter
Rains, neither in the Summer time, till immediately before the second plowing,
because much of it is Spirit and Goodness is exhailed by the Summar-Sun and
withering Wind.

This second plowing must be, by cleaving the Rigs, a Term so well known that
it needs no Explanation; but be sure to plow it as deep as ye can, that the new
Earth may be brought up most against the ensuing Seed time: And after it is so
plowed, you must harrow it well by Thortering, that is to harrow cross the
Rigs, as also the ordinar way; by which Method you shall bring the Crowns and
Furrows of the Rigs to an equal thickness of Earth, and recover all the
Couch-grass and other Weeds, ordinarily called Wrack from amongst it, and thus
it may ly till Michaelmass, or the time your Corns are got in.

Then let it be the first Land you plow after your ordinar way for Seed, having
first led out any other Goodings ye have purchased since your last plowing;
Plow it with a tolerable deep Furrow, that it may cover the Seed well, and
endure the Winter washing Rains the better.

Nota, I have observed, that abroad, where their Grounds are very light and
Stenory, they have sown Wheat and Barley upon the Surface of the Earth after
the second Plowing, then tilled it over with a thin Furrow, and sometimes
harrowed it over thereafter, and sometimes not; which no doubt is a very good
Method of Husbandry, and may be practiced with advantage where the Grounds
will allow: This in their terms is called under-fur sowing.

By thus ordering your Fauch, with plow when the two parts of the same Break
upon which Pease grew that year, and likewise designed, for wheat will not, by
reason of the dry Season which ordinarily attends that time of the year, and so
it will prove your earlyest Wheat, will soon take Root, the Body of the Pickle
will be turned to a Root, like that of Grass or other Herbs before the Winter
Frosts and cold Rains, and consequently be free from being slain, blecked, and
many other Inconveniences; the being free of which, beside many other
Advantages, is more than sufficient to recompense you for all your pains.

As for the third part of your Break of Pease, fauched and designed for Barley,
I think ye need not plow it till about Lambmass, by which ye will gain the
whole Winter and Summars-Grass.

Nota, though you have a Cropped both of your fauched Wheat and Barley both in
one and the same year, yet the Ground rests two Winters and one Summer for
Barley, whereas it rests only one Winter and one Summer for Wheat: This being
considered, as also that the Barley is not so impoverishing a Grain as the
Wheat, you may expect as good a Cropped of the Barley as of the Wheat though you
should lay less Dung and Gooding upon it.

It cannot therefore be expected, that ye can lay any Summer-dung upon your
Barley Fauch, unless it be Sea-ware to these Lands that ly contiguous to the
Shore, or Burgh Dung to these who are adjacent to a Town, because the Wheat
being to be first sown, will require all you can make, but after your Wheat is
sown, let all you can purchase be laid on your Barley-fauch betwixt and the
next plowing.

The next plowing, or Steering as they call it, must be at or about Candlemas
(the ground being alwise dry,) both Plowing and Harrowing being after the same
manner you did with your Wheat-Fauch.

The Reason why I advise you to lay on your Dung at this time, is, because
Winter dung not having time to come to a perfect Corruption and Consistence,
when laid on at Seed time, if the Season prove dry by its internal Heat, does
much more Prejudice than good to the Barley, whereas being laid on at this
early stirring time, it not only impregnats the Earth with it is Heat, but is
also fully incorporat with the Earth against the next plowing.

Though the Wheat be quite otherwise ordered, as I have showen already, yet the
full Corruption of the Dung at that time of the year, and the succeeding
Winter-Season, prevents these last named Inconveniences, and tends rather for
it is advantage.

You may possibly ask me, why I advise you to stir your Barley so soon.

It Is because of the early Fallowing of it, for if it should ly untouched till
March or April, the ordinar time of Stirring the Bear-land with you, the Grass
would begin to take root and Spring, and it would be grown too much to it self,
(as they call it) and so the design of Fauching Fail in part.

Next, I advise thee of Stirring it so soon that in case ye find it not in so
good a condition as you desire, as sometimes it falls out, when the Winters
prove Rainy, without Frosts, especially in Clay-grounds, that then you may give
it another Furrow before you sow it, and this you may do in March or April,
according to your accustomed manner; But then you must remark, that if ye give
it but three Furrows, as generally will hold, you must sow it with the first of
your Barley, but if you be necessitat to give it four Furrows, it must be sown
amongst the last, for there must be a competent time betwixt the two last
plowings, that in light and Couch-grass grounds, the Weeds and Grass may breard
and spring up, and in Clay grounds that the Earth may come again to some
closness and consistency, and resume its natural Moisture before the Barley be
sower stir always deep, that new Earth may be brought up, as I said of the
Wheat. For the last plowing called Seed furrowing, let your Furrows be as thin
and narrow a^ can be, and as small harrowed as possible, for it has no Winter
Colds nor Frosts to bide, however let it be duly Water-furrowed, if the Ground
require it; for oft-times a sudden Spait of Rain scalds the tender Grain, and
thereby the superface of the Ground becomes more hardened when dry Weather comes
thereafter.

In these Grounds where no Wheat is sown, where the Ground is good, the
Infield-Land is ordinarily divided in three Divisions or Breaks, Pease, Barley
and Oats; so that the Barley is sown after the Pease, and the Oats after the
Barley. All that I shall say upon this, is only to remark, That where the
Tennent pays his Rent much in Barley, he is oft-times necessitat to sow Barley
after the Oats, as well as after the Pease, which I look upon to be none of the
best ways of Husbandry. Where the Tennent pays therefore much Barley, I do
advise him to cast his Ground in four equal Breaks, viz. Pease Barley, Oats,
and one in Fauch, which must ly after the Crop of Oats.

Labor and Manure the fourth Break of Fauch as I have ordered before; and thus
ye will not only be able to sow a double quantity of Barley, without sowing any
after Oats, but also ye will find your Ground fall into a good Condition.

But if that Method, which indeed is the very best, be too harsh a Pill to
swallow at first; then I shall propose, that according to your own Prudence, ye
may make what quantity ye please; Fauch either of your Pease or Oat breaks,
such as are in worst condition, but rather of your Oat-Break; then Labor and
Manure it as is above-prescribed, and ye shall find great benefit by the same.
Thus much of the Infield-Land; but still the more Ground ye Labor as is before
advised, the more profit.

Before I proceed to speak of the ordering of the Outfield-Land, I must remove
an ordinary Objection against what I have said of Fauching of the Infield-Land.

The Farmers with whom I speak, tells me we have a dear Rent to pay, and all
our Ground is little enough to pay the same, we may not spare so much yearly
unsowen.

But their Advantage is the very thing I design; and there cannot be a good
Master, nor a good Countreyman, who looks not upon the Tennents profit as his
own. I do therefore entreat you seriously to consider this which follows, and
your Objection evanisheth.

Suppose you leave as much Fauch as would have sown you three Bolls of Barley,
and that reasonably you might expect the third Increase, by which you would
have gained six Bolls beside your Seed, three threes being nine, three your
Seed, six is the product. Now this I confess you lose for one year only; now
see how you are repayed with more than triple Interest.

You fallow three Bolls of Barley sowing, and having ordered it as is before
said, you may reasonably expect the sixth Increase. For this I do assert and
maintain, and Experience shall make every man know it, that what ever Ground
will yield the third, fourth or fifth, by the ordinar Custom will double it by
this Method for three years to come: and at the end of these years, leave it in
a better condition than it found it; for a good Cropped of Corns makes a good
Stubble, and a good Stubble is the equalest Mucking that is. And I must say
this by the by, that if in East-Lothian they did not leave an higher Stubble
than in other places of the Kingdom, their Grounds would be in a much worse
condition than at present they are, though bad enough.

Now three times six being eighteen, your Seed being three, the Product is
fifteen; of which allowing six for the year it lay Fauch, and six that it would
have produced the second year if it had not been fauched, which makes twelve;
yet all is repayed you by the very first Crop after Fauch, and three Bolls
more; for twelve and three make fifteen, which was the Product.

Then for the other two succeding years, according to the above named
Calculation, ye have thirty Bolls increase besides your Seed, and three of Gain
for the first Crop, in all thirty three; from which you must defalct twelve of
Increase for two years more, that the same Ground would have produced, though
it had not been fauched; so twelve from thirty three, there remains twenty one;
by this it is evident, that the Farmer gains twenty one Bolls in three Crops.
By this new Method of three Bolls sowing, more than he would have done by four
Crops of the like quantity of Seed the ordinary way; and leaves his Land to the
Boot, in a much better Condition than what it was formerly. But suppose you
shall continue for ten or twelve years this way, still increasing the quantity
of your Fauch, as ye see cause, what a vast Difference will arise, such a
prodigious Increase as shall leave no room for Comparisons. I shall not therefore
trouble you with any further calcul I am afraid some of you will be puzelled
enough to understand what I have said already; but I hope in time, Experience
will make you find it: and then a full Purse, and full Belly, warm Clothes, and
a good Stock, will persuade more then all my Rhetoric or Arithmetic can do.

And to encourage you to this Method, I think your Masters should forbear for
two or three years, the Rent of any such Land as you lay Fauch proportionally;
by which to your own Conviction, I am sure the strength of your Objection is
taken off, and in that time you will have enough to repay the same.

As for the Outfield Land, which is ordinarily the highest, lying dryest, and
worst Grounds.

In East-Lothian the ordinar way of Laboring these Lands is by Folding,
Fauching and Lyming.

As for the making of Sheep-folds of the Surfice of the Earth, dug up with
many little Divisions, that the Sheep and other Bestial may Dung them the more
equally. Though it be no where so much practiced as in the Lothians, and in the
Merse, where indeed they not only use it, but abuse it, by taking more Crops
after their Foldings, than their Ground is able to bear; by which they reduce
it to such a condition, as it is neither profitable for Corn nor Grass for
many years to come; Yet if rightly used, I account it a most excellent and
profitable part of Husbandry, especially for these Grounds that ly betwixt
Moor and Dale as they call it, which are ordinarlie the most improvable Grounds
in the Country.

I do therefore advise the Tennent to Dung his Folds well and thoroughly, and
yet never to take any more Crops than three, or in extraordinary good Grounds
and well Dunged, four at the most; by this Method the Ground will soon come to
a Sward again, and be fit for the same use, the strength of the Ground being
that way preserved.

But if any think fit to Lime these Foldings, let them lay on their Lime with
the very first Cropped: And as they Dung their Folds in the Summertime, with
the same breath, let them spread on the Lime; I know they use to do it the
second Cropped, but I assure you the first is best, because no part of the
strength of the Ground is exhausted, and consequently it will endure the
longer. Next, the Lime so mixed with Dung, will imprignat, and so have effect
upon the Ground the very first Cropped, more than it will do otherwise for two
Cropts to come, for this is a true maxim, never lime Ground when it is weak,
for then the lime wants Matter to work upon, and generalie does more hurt then
good; but when ye have brought your Ground to the greatest Strength it is
capable of, then lime and you shall find profit.

As for these Grounds which you intend to lime that has not been Folded, I
approve of laying on the Lime on the Lee Ground, that is to say before it be
plowed, rather than after Fauching, and more especially if the Ground be light,
because Lyme being of a subtle spirituous piercing Nature, tends alwise
downward, and being laid upon Fauch-land, it falls into the Furrows, and having
no Crust to support it, consequently stays not above so long, as when it is
laid upon the grassie superface, where fixing by the Summer showers into the
Roots of the Grass, it incorporats with the Superface of the Earth, which is
ordinarlie the best and fertilest part of the Ground, and thereby renders it
Mellow and fit for receiving the Seed.

I confess indeed in strong Clay Grounds, if ye fallow before and after a
frostie winter, harrow well in the Summer time by thortering and other wise
before you lay on your Lime, it is very good husbandry; Therefore I do advise
you to lay on your Lime alwise (if by any means you can) in the Summer time,
for by winter liming ye lose a great deal of it both by Snows, Rains and
Frosts, which chills too soon such a delicat hot manure as lime is, and carries
it to the Ground before it be incorporate therewith; Lyme therefore your
Clay-land in the Sumner, Fallow it at Lambas, Harrow it well after the first
Frost, Seed fur and Sow it some time in February, and through GOD'S Blessing,
you may expect a good Cropped of Oats that same year.

Or which is much better, if ye fallow upon Clay-Ground in the winter time,
plow and harrow it over again betwixt and Lambas, sow it at the time appointed,
which will do very well: But for the Reasons above-specified I think it will
not last so long as when it is laid on upon Lee.

I advise you to take no more Crops of your lymed Ground without resting, than
seven or eight in the best Grounds, five or six in Grounds which are not so
good, three or four in your worst, and generally according to the strength of
your Ground, ye may take more or fewer as ye see Cause.

But if ye intend to reduce it into a part of your Infield-Ground, and give it
the ordinary Goodings in its Towers, then ye may continue it as long as ye
think fit, but by no means let it bear above three or four years before
dunging, by this gentle Treatment of your Lands, you may safely plow your lymed
Lands after three or four years resting, for two or three years together and
find good increase. By which you will get als many Crops after your lime, as
now you use to do and much better, though at a greater distance, and still your
ground in good Condition, no ways run out, as experience teaches us, but als
capable to be improven as formerly.

Cold Clay requires a greater quantity of lime then light dry Ground, and moist
Clay more then dry Clay, because it requires the more heat to overcome and
qualify its moisture.

But I am of opinion that take your moister Clay Grounds, and these who ly upon
a Lavel, so that the moisture has no descent from off them, and plow it twice
or thrice, I mean gather the Rigs up to as great a hight as you can before
limeing, then lime according as has been before directed, and I doubt not but
ye shall find als great an increase as upon any other Ground whatsomever.

This also I must say for all hanging Grounds in general whither Infield or
outfield, that they lose a great deal of their strength and Goodings by their
winter Rains; And therefore I prefer the lavel Grounds as best, not only for
Grass but Corn, providing alwise they have no Springs nor unnatural Summer
Moisture within them, those who are such, must be ditched and drained and kept
from Pasturage; But all the prejudice the Husbandman sustains by the other,
which is only by the Supervenient Rains, and runnings from of other Grounds in
time of Winter may be easily remeided by a little patience in waiting until
such time as they are dryest, and this both for Plowing and Sowing, and so this
will rather tend for their benefit than prejudice, for I can assure you there
is scarce any better point of Husbandry, then to contrive some lavel piece of
Ground, so as it may receive or gain what the higher lying Lands lose.

In all moist clay Ground you should make your Ridges Narrow, Straight and
high, gathered without turnings and windings, as ordinarlie they are, that so
the Rain and Moisture may have free passage to the Furrows.

Every distinct break of Land should have Head-rigs and Foot-rigs well and
exactlie gathered up, and alwise kept in good order, by this you preserve not
only your Ground from the impetuous fall of Rains that come from the hills
above, but you do also preserve the goodings from running off the said Lands
by the use of the Foot-rig, and thereby does observe the Act of Parliament made
for preserving of highways. Thus much of liming only, I do not advise the
limeing of the Infield-Land, rather let it rest. And for these who have much
Outfield Land in their Rooms, to endeavor by limeing to bring in als much
Ground as will answer for a fifth Division or Break; And this by ordering it as
I have already advised, will become as good Infield Land as any they have,
and continue as long.

As for the Fauching of Out-field Land without any design of Liming it, I
cannot much advise you to it, unless you have great quantities of it,
especially of Moorish-Ground, upon which ye design to bring a stool of Grass,
and this also is most effectually done by Liming, but where that cannot well be
had, you must follow the next best.

But if ye will fauch, Winter-fauching is certainly the best for such an
Improvement, and two Crops in bad Ground, and three in the best, is sufficient
for a time.

But in regard the Roots of the heath and heather are not so easily got out,
and destroyed after two years rest, you may plow it again for one year, and so
forth, till it take the desired effect.

For Grass, I know it is a very great rarity in East-Lothian amongst the
Husbandmen, neither can they well have it (as at present their Farms are
ordered) unless they turn some part of there infield Land to Grass, and lime as
much of their out-field Land as corresponds thereto, and reallie I know not
whether that Method might not prove in time the best Husbandry for all the
infield Land, notwithstanding the Charges and Expenses thereof, it could not be
done indeed suddenly, and quickly, but the way is easy and obvious enough,
and would quickly defray its own Expenses; For ye may remember I said before,
that the outfield Lands are the lightest and highest Grounds, and being
generally of a very good Soil here in East-Lothian, which is evident by their
bearing very good Wheat and Pease after limeing, and yet bearing no
considerable Quantity of Grass, 'as by sad experience is found, and the infield
on the other side being capable to prove very good Pasturage, and generally
able to produce very good Hay when right ordered, as some Gentlemen who has
done so has found by Experience; For these Reasons, I say there might be such
a change, and that with very great profit both to Landlord and Tennent.

But this being designed only as an A, B, C. or Introduction to (I hope) better
things, I shall not insist upon it, least it choke you too much.

Therefore I do only advise you, that ye may have at least some Grass to keep
your beasts in good Condition, who must assist you to improve your grounds, to
endeavor to choose out some of the most convenient and moist places you can,
wherever it is to be found in your Ground: and set it apart for horse grass,
the Horses must work all your Work, lead all the Materials for Improvement,
which is indeed the greatest Charge they deserve, therefore to be well seen
too, their work being rather more in Summer than in winter.

Having found out such a piece of Ground as is above described, I must in treat
you (for now single advice I fear will not do) to get it enclosed.

I have observed so many usless Stones lying upon most of the labored Grounds
in East-Lothian, that as it would be a good piece of Husbandry to free the
Land of them, and thereby save both Oak and Iron, and ease Smith, Plowman and
beasts to the boot, so it would be no difficult task to rickle up a dry Stone
dike round any piece of Ground so designed.

If you have not the Convenience of Stone near you, a good strong earth Dyke
and Ditch will do very well, both which your Servants at their spare hours may
very well do without any Charge to their Master, and I am very confident your
Masters will furnish you with Trees and hedge Timber to plant round the same.

This will prove great advantage to you, more than if it were bearing you red
Wheat, as they say:

For first, it will save you the Expense of a horse hire, sometimes two; for if
all your horse be not at the work, two or three must have a herd to keep them.

Secondly, you will get your horses kept out all night, which indeed is very
refreshing to a hard wrought beast to eat and rest himself at pleasure during a
sweet pleasant Summers night, and more especially for mares who have their
Foals sucking upon them.

Thirdly, Thereby you will gain much more labor from your Servants* a great
part of whose time was taken up in gathering Thistles and other Garbadge for
their horses to feed upon in their Stables, and thereby the great trampling and
pulling up and other destruction of the Corns while they are yet tender will be
prevented. And this I must say is a greater prejudice than most of the Farmers
have been aware of.

Fourthlie, The Planting grown up will render it both more fertile and warm,
and prove beneficial for upholding the Farmers houses, and Neat Graith, which I
am of the opinion they should have for their encouragement, providing they so
hain the Timber, that it may grow again.

And lastly, where six or eight horses feed, the same Ground will maintain two
good Cows for the House-wise, without doing prejudice to the horse-grass, for
they will Feed most upon the Grass that arise from the horse dung, which is
called Tath, as the horses will also do upon that of the Cows; and so the
Ground will be kept very clean, but by all means keep it free from Sheep,
Summer and Winter.

For the remainder part of your Out-field Ground, I appropriat it all entirely
for Sheep, for all the Out-field Lands being generally high as said is, are
fittest for them, and they are really most profitable when rightly ordered,
both for your Family by their Milk and Wool, or by furnishing you either with a
fat Sheep or Lamb, either for your Family, or the Butcher.

Besides their Pasture being kept clean from all other Beasts, they will
prosper exceedingly, and be kept free from the Rot, which oftimes is occasioned
by the Dung of other Beasts, which many poor Farmers in East-Lothian finds by
woeful Experience, and then you will make the more Foldings, the more ye have of
them, which is very profitable, as is above said: The old Proverb says, a
Summer fed Ox, and a Winter fed Cow.

As for your Laboring Oxen, and other yield Beasts, they require indeed to be
well fed in some moist Pasture, though the Grass be course it matters not much,
providing it be long, and enough of it, to fill their Bellies, which will
alwise make them strong and fleshy, though not Fat, which is unnecessar, but
for the Shambles.

Now since these dry Out-field Grounds cannot be a fit Pasture for your Oxen,
neither will ye be willing to spare any more of your Infield Ground, as you do
for your Horses, nor will I advise you: Therefore I think some place in the
Muires should be provided for them.

If the Commons of Innerweek and Dumbar were divided according to each Paroch
proportion, who have Right and Interest therein, it would very well serve that
turn, and might, by a Diligent and exact Care, keep some yield Sheep upon the
dryest parts thereof, but in this I am not resolved. But since it is not so, I
could wish, that these who have Interest therein might meet together, and fall
upon some ways, how to feed Oxen and yield Beasts thereupon, rather than Sheep,
for the Ground is generally so moist, that a man loses his Stock of Sheep
oftener by Rot, than get any good by feeding thereupon.

It should also be Stinted and Proportioned, that in be not over burdened, and
I am confident, by this way of ordering, it might not only feed and maintain
all the laboring Oxen, of those who have Right of Pasturage on the same, but
also of these who have no Right to it, who might be taken in for payment, as
these who have the Property. Farmers in Lamermuir do the same to us now.

But till that be adjusted, the next best is for three or four Farthers in the
low Country of Lothian to take a Farm in common amongst them in their Mure
Grounds, where they may order things as their necessities require; and I am
confident that this method, if rightly gone about, would be found most
profitable, and that several ways, with which I shall not trouble you at
present.

Nota, It is most profitable for Gentlemen who have enclosed, or are incolsing
large Parks about their dwelling houses.

Thus having gone through briefly and according to my design, the particular
ways of ordering your Ground, I shall subjoyn thereto some some few generals,
which if rightly gone about, and prudently applied, will tend certainly for
your Advantage.

Endeavor to plow all your Grounds as dry as you can. And all your Clay Ground
as early as you can.

Sow all sorts of Grain as dry as you can, I mean the Ground being dry
according to the old maxim, set wet and sow dry; yet if the Land be hard,
being wet plowed, and having gotten no Frost to sofen it, in that case you must
either wait upon a shower, or sow it in the sounding, as they call it, that is
to say, before it be fully dry, and then be sure to harrow it well,
intermitting a day, two or three betwixt the several harrowings; And by this
Method ye may bring it to a tolerable good condition.

As to that common Country Ryme, sow Wheat Sinking, Pease Winking, Oats
Clinking, and Bear Drinking; I make no such difference, only I doubt not but
that all the honest Labouring-men will be content to sow all their Grains
Drinking, as their hard labor, does but equitablie require.

Wheat and Pease require to be Thicker sown than Barleie and Oats, and Wheat
thicker then Pease, because it has the Winter storms to endure.

I approve the Method of stipeing and moistning the Wheat in Bryme or
Salt Water, and drying it with Lime before it be sown; It both makes it sow
thick, warmeth the Pickle, and preserves it from Fowls and Vermin: but
whether it preserves it against being blacked, I have not yet found out,
neither I fear shall, till it be certainly known, whether that misfortune fall
upon the Root or the Ear.

I think it also a very good thing to moisten your Barley before it be sown,
especially in dry Seasons, but not with Salt Water, Bryme or Lime, for that
the Season of the Year will not admit, yet I do advise it where they sow Winter
Barley.

Change your Seed often of all Grains, but especially of Oats; but remark,
that it does best from a worse Ground to a better, and from a Colder to a
Hotter.

Let your Seed Corn be likewise well dight, and the weakest of the Pickles
taken from it, for the foulness and dirtiness of Grounds proceeds from the one,
and the soon degenerating of the Seed from the other.

As for your houses, such as have them already built, must keep them as they
are; but for building of new ones, let all sit-houses as they call them, stand
East and West, their Doors and Windows to the South, because they are warmest.

Their Barns must stand North and South from the West end of their Sit-house,
their Doors East and West, because the Wind blow most that way, and they are
best for winnowing of Corns. If your Farm be large, I advise three Barns, one
for Wheat and Barley, one for Oats, and the third for Pease, thereby you will be
able to feed your Beasts equally with any sort of Straw that is most proper for
them in its Season.

Their Barn-Yard to the West of their Barns, the best place for drying and
winning of Corns in Stacks, and if it be a Colline rising Ground, so much the
better.

Their Stable and Byres from the South-end of their Barns, East and West, their
Doors to the North opposite to their sit-house, for the Convenience both of
Hearing and attending their Beasts, and furnishing them with Straw from their
Barns.

Their Entry from the East, because that seldom or never there blows a high
Wind from that Airth; And therefore your dunghill is least prejudged, but be
sure to have no Entry, but one to your Closs, for two Entries blows away all
your Straw, and the other manure and dryes the Dunghill too much: if you build
a house for Chaff, Strae, nait graith and such like things: build it on the
East Side of your Closs North and South, so your Closs will be the warmer, and
your entry to your sit-house being betwixt the North Gavil of your Chaff-house
and the East Gavil of your sit-house, may be cleansed and kept clean, which the
rest of the Closs ought not to be.

Build all the Walls of your houses with stone and lyme, for Stone and Clay is
the Destruction of all, the Rain moistens the Clay, the Stone and Timber
slydes, the Wall falls, the Roof, Timber and all breaks, and so both men and
beasts are in danger of their lives.

Cover your houses with a few Divots and plenty of Straw, which they call
Thatch and Divot, take notice and mind them yearly by stinging them with Straw
alwise where they begin to fail, but never add any more Divots, and you shall
find great profit thereby, for the frequent falling of Houses consumes much
time to the Tennent, besides the Charge and loss of it; Therefore I advise you
never to put cover upon cover, otherwise ye may be certain with the first great
Rain and Frost in the Winter Season, you will bring down the whole house about
your Ears, although it be new and reasonably strong built.

Plant round all your yards with Ash and Elm trees, with which your Masters
will furnish you, and in time they will serve to keep up the whole in-stead of
Houses; and I am of opinion the Tennent should have the cutting of them, as I
have said before in the like case, providing that he hain and preserve the old
Stocks, that they may grow again.

For your Yard, I do not mean your Barnyards, but a piece of Ground set apart
for Cabbage, and other Roots, let it alwise be at the North-side of your
Sit-house, where you may have a little door to go in at, by which it will be
preserved from the Summer scorching Sun, and Southern Wind, the two greatest
enemies to Kitching Grounds, designed only for ordinar things. I think half an
Aiker of Land is sufficient for the Quantity, unless where the Farm is little,
the Yard may be the less, a good large Grass Yard is also very useful upon
many occasions.

For the ordering of your Yard, I shall propose nothing but what is both
profitable and easy; In the first place, then plant Cabbage and Summer Kaill,
which is all that is necessar for Herbage, Leeks, Sybous and other curious
Herbs not being for your handling.

For Roots, I advise you only to sow Potatoes and Turnips, a larger or less
quantity as you affect most, but rather Potatusses, because being once
planted, they will never fail, they require little more labor than to keep the
Ground where they grow free from Grass; The Flandrian Bowers make so much of
this Root, and had such pletnie thereof, that both the Confederate and French
Army found great support thereby, by feeding the common Soldiers most
plentiously, it is both delicious and wholesome.

For Turnipes, you must sow them about the middle of June, and by Hallowmass,
you will find them excellent Provision for your Family, take them up before the
Frost come on, and hang them up on the Roof of your Victual house, and they
will keep well the Winter, your Potatis succeed when the Turnips are ending,
and your Cabbage may be preserved in the same manner, till your spring Kail
come in.

The advantage of the Potatis is so excellent and useful, that in England and
several other places Abroad, the poor People boil them, dry them, mix them
with a little Meal, kned them, and make them up in Bread, which is a most
useful and wholesome Food, especially in times of Scarcity; Of the Joice of
them also stilled, they make most excellent Aquavitae; This is all that is
necessar for you to have in your Yards, except it be some Turkey Beans, and for
want of these, some good ordinar Beans and Pease, which will not only tend for
the gooding and improvement of your Yard, but are very good also to boil with
your Pork, and keep your Servans also from treading down your Fields of Pease,
they are also very useful for your Bees.

Each Farmer may therefore have one Hive or two of Bees, the ordering of them
is so well known, that I shall not say any thing, but that they will be found
very profitable, and no charge.

Be careful to gather as much Summer Dung as possible, Dung being the Mother of
Corn, for that end buy Straw wherever you can get it, for bedding your Closses,
Byres and Stables in the Summer time, it is ordinarily cheap then, and ye cannot
bestow half a Merk better, than upon a Threave of good Wheat or Bear Straw,
which being rightly used, will make more Dung then ten Threaves eaten by Beasts
in the Winter time; but be sure not to neglect the shoveling and cleansing of
your Close after every shower of Rain, then carry all to your Dunghils, which
you must carry up equal and tight, all which are necessar for the equal way of
Roting, and though they seem trival in themselves, yet they ought not be
neglected.

Green Fairn or Brachens, if they be within a mile of you, are well worth your
pains of bringing home; bed your Close with them, in the same manner as with
Straw, it makes a most excellent Mannure, far above that of Rushes.

The Turse of Mossie, or any four, moist, Rusbie Earth, may be well brought
home a mile off, and may be either thrown into your Close, to be trod to Dung
with your Beasts, or laid by Lares, as they call it, upon your Dunghill, which
being covered afterward with Dung, then with the Turfe, and so forth, which
makes a most excellent compost, and it is alwise good to lay the Foundation of
your Dunghill this manner of way.

Lyme and Earth mixed and made up in Heaps in the Fields, after a years
standing, proves a very good Manure for the In-field Land, especially for
these who are thin of Earth, as the preceding compost is also.

Sea-Sand is good for Clay Grounds, for besides the Saltness by its Sharpness,
it cuts the Clay, and saves much Labor; there is no loss to lead it a Mile.

In short, there is not an easier and more profitable way, then to mix Metal
with Metal, that is to say, dig Pits in the Ground, and cover over your Lands
two or three Inches thick, the light Sandy Ground with clay Grounds, and the
Clay-Grounds with Sand grounds, try this but once, and ye will be persuaded of
the truth of it.

Nota, It holds also upon Grass the same way used, only it must be harrowed
very small.

If your Grounds ly within three Miles of a Burgh or Village, it is worth your
pains to lead Dung all the Summer time, and lay it upon your Wheat Fauch,
especially having a Cart way thereto. Sea Ware may be led two Miles with
profit, and is most excellent for your Bear Fauch.

If a Tennent have a large Farm, he ought to abstain from all manner of Work
himself, except in cases of necessity; It is an ordinary saying, a good Grieve
is worth* two Workers, he needs not be idle though he work not with his hands,
let him work with his Noddle, Project and Contrive, Grieve and Oversee the
Execution of his Project; let him sow his own Corns, much depends upon a good
and equal Sower: look to his Shearers that they shear clean, and reap that
which GOD has given them, the contrary of which I have observed, to be among
the greatest faults of many in East-Lothian, where generally speaking, I am
sure they leave more behind them, than grows upon several Out-field Grounds in
many places of Scotland, and at least the Seed of what they sow themselves.

This bad custom has not only its rise but is supported by a certain Lasie
Idle Employment, called gathering, which a Greedy sort of people have perverted
from its proper usefulness, for whereas none should have the Liberty of
gathering, save the Poor and Indigent People, who are not able to do any manner
of Work, or the Children of those poor People, when they cannot come abroad
themselves, and their Children fit for no Labor, or Service; Now it is become
a Trade, and a very cheating one too, for strong healthie people, and many of
them no ways Indigent, hire Shearers in their place, that they may follow that
unlawful Employment, and so eat the Bread out of the Poors Mouth: It is
observable also, that they go alwise, where they have most Friends amongst the
Shearers, and as amongst Soldiers every one follows his Leader, and then they
are sure not to want; And now since the Farmers think it not worth their while
to take notice of it, (though I think their bad Crops by gone should teach them
some Wisdom) I think the Justice of Peace should nottice it.

The Farmer himself should also cast all his Stacks to the proof and see it
well dighted; and for that end he should learn to Write, and know the common
Rules of Arithmetic, that he may keep an exact Book of all his Sowings and
Increase, he should also be every Night at the Redding of his Barns, and Lock
in the Doors thereof himself.

In fine, he should frequent Mercats and Fairs, and know how all things are
Sold and Bought; that so he may put off his old Oxen, and Horses, and other
things: As also to Buy such things as are nceessary for him, at the best
Advantage: By this Method, I am sure he shall never be idle.

I am against great Farms, it is almost impossible to improve a great Room to
that advantage as a lesser; I think two Plows sufficient for the greatest, the
Rent being about six Chalders of Victual, when the Ground is very good, and
four in that which is not so good, but I am most fully convinced, they should
take long Leases or Tacks, that they may not be straightened with time, in the
Improvement of their Rooms, and this is profitable both for Master and Tennent.

Now having given you my Opinion in as few words as is possible, how to order
all things to the best Advantage, I think it very necessary before I
conclude, to teach you how to take Land, that is to say, how to make a good
bargain with your Landlord, for the Lands you are to pay Rent for, and if ye
succeed in this, it will prove a great Encouragement for you to bestow all the
Pains and Charges I have required of you.

The Lands of East-Lothian, generally speaking, pay all their Rent in Victual,
which at the first view appears to be a very easy way for the Tennents, he
threshes out so much of the Product of his Ground, and delivers it to his
Master for his Rent, gets his discharge* and is neither troubled with Mercats
nor ill Debitors, it does also resemble also the Primitive simplicity, when
the use of Money was not so much as known, and things went by Excambion, or
changing things of which we had more than sufficient, for those things we
wanted, and stood in need of, as Corn for Cattle, Milk for Oil, Wool for Flax,
etc. But since the state of things are very much altered now, from what they
were of Old, I have observed this Victual-Duty to prove oft-times very
prejudicial to the honest Farmer.

Therefore I do advise all Tennents to endeavor to take their Farms so, as
they may have half Victual and half Money for their Rent, and that for these
Reasons.

First I have observed ordinarlie, the thing that breaks the Tennent is bad
years, that is to say, bad Crops, when the Ground brings not forth according to
its usual Fertility.

When the Crop proves bad the price of Victual arises often to the Double, and
Pease to the triple of what they are sold at in the years of Plenty.

In these Years, the poor Tennent not having wherewith to pay his whole Rent,
whatever he falls short in a Year of Scarcity, he is not able to make it up in
two or three Years of Plenty, because then the Corns sell at a very low rate,
and so being once entangled with Debt, he is discouraged to prosecute his
Labor with Diligence, Expense and Heartiness, and so dwingels away to nothing.

Now suppose a Tennent, who pays six Chalders of Victual of Yearlie Rent,
should in place thereof, pay only three Chalders, and 300 Pounds Scots in
Money, which is the ordinar Account made of Victual in East-Loathian, for the
Lands sell generally at 2500 Merks the Chalders, the interest of which is 100
pound Scots Yearlie, and thus the Chalder of Victual is worth a hundred pounds
Scots commuuibus Annis.

Suppose then he pays 300 pounds, and three Chalders of Victual, and a Dear
Year comes in the worst of Years; generally Tennents are able to pay four
Chalders for six, at least the half; So that by this Method, in a bad Cropped, he
is alwise able to pay his Victual Rent, and if a good Cropped or two follow, he
will be alwise able one way or other by sale of Beasts or otherwise, to recover
his Money Rent.

But suppose he has one Chalder to sell, that Chalder in a dear year will
render him double Money, and sometimes more; So that he will be but 100 pound
in his Masters Debt by this Method, which a plentiful Year will easily
discharge; Whereas by the other Method he would have been in about four.

As to an Objection that may be made, that in cheap years, it will be difficult
for the Tennent to raise 300. lib. out of his three Chalders of Victual,
considering the low prices Market Charges, breaking of Merchants and such like,
considering all things, I think there is no great weight in it.

For first, It is to be considered, that the Years of plenty may well bow a
Tennent, but can never break him,

Secondly, Your Land is either very ill taken, or else in plentiful Years ye
will have a greater Quantity of Corns to spare then the exact three Chalders
for which ye pay the Money.

And thirdly, The difference consists mainlie in the price of Oats, and Pease,
for Wheat and Barley are seldom or never at less value then 100 lib. the
Chalder, and Oats (for few Tennents pay any quantity of Pease) made in Meal,
will in the cheapest Years arise to near 80 lib. the Chalder; So that there
will be but twenty pound of loss upon the Chalder in the very cheapest Years,
which is no great thing, considering that experience teaches us, that the
ruin of Tennents proceeds mostlie from bad Crops, which by the Method proposed
might be prevented.

And by the by, I must add this, that in plentiful Years, the making the Oats
in Meal, is a very good part of Husbandry, for there is evident advantage by
the selling of it out in the beginning of Harvest, when all the unprovident and
unfrugal must buy; As also for two years provision for your Family, that in
case of a succeeding bad Crop, you may sell and spare your Corns with
advantage. For your Pease keep them by you in a cheap Year, for once in three
Years ordinarily they will double the Stock.

And lastly, the provident Husband man wlll endeavor to reir up a Cow or Colt,
and many otherways he may imploie his Corn when it is cheap, as by feeding of
Swine, Poultry etc. All which will soon make up that small difference I have
brought it too, and much more. There may some object, that the Master will not
consent to make such an alteration, because he finds the value of Money is
continually arising and it is but just and reasonable, that the price of Corns
and Cartel should rise proportionallie, for if the Government should make the
40 shil. pieces to pass for three pound Scots, which is a third more value then
what it is. Is it not als reasonable, that I should raise the price of the
Victual a third also, since the Money is no better and the Victual no worse
then formerly, what ever value be put upon it. They say also that the
Conversion of the ipsa corpora to Money, is a kind of Dilapidation; And the
uncertain value of our Corn, is evident by the Conversion of Bolls of Victual
payable to Aba^cies or the like unto half a Merk for each Boll, which is paid
this day according to the value of the present case, whereas those who are in
the same Circumstance with them, and who had not made the Conversion pay the
full Boll this very day, It is also evident by the half-crown piece coined in
Regent Mortons time, which now passes for a Crown.

In answer thereto, first, There is no good Master who will scruple such a
thing, which evidently tends so much to the advantage of his Tennent and
nothing of loss to himself, for when he gets 100 lib. for the Chalder of his
Victual, he gets as much as the Interests of his money comes to, and his Money
well secured besides, which is enough in all conscience, if he be not an Usurer.

Secondly, it tends to the general advantage of the Nation, for in a good
Yeamandrie, both the Riches and Strength of a Nation consists, as Witness our
Neighbors in England.

3 As to the objection about the Coin, the altering and overvaluing of the Coin
of a Nation, is certainly noways advantageous, but prejudicial to a National
Interest, and ought not to be done, this is so evidently demonstrated by
several hands already that I shall say nothing of it: Only if the Lands were set
for Money, as is proposed, I hope these who are in the Government, who are
generally all Landlords would see that they and the Nation receive no
prejudice that way.

Fourthly, Though this should happen, ye need not doubt, as all other things
rises in price, the Rents of Lands wlll rise also.

And Lastly besides all, it will in time give Encouragement for fewing, both
to Master and Tennent, of which I shall speak next.

I observe the ordinary Methods with the Tennents in East-Lothian, is, when it
pleases GOD to bless their Labors, so that their Stocks increase, then they
take another Room, and after that a third, and so forth, and after all, comes a
bad Year, and Dishes up all.

I would therefore advise a Tennent, when GOD blesses his endeavors, and he
finds that he has some foregear, as they call it, that he would go to his
Master, and tell him, he is content to give him some Money, providing he will
give him some ease of his Yearlie Rent. The Method I propose, is this.

If a Tennent pay six Chalders of Victual, or three Chalders of Victual, and
300 lib. Scots Yearlie, which I think the best way, or the half, third, fourth
or fifth part of such a Rent; for as I said before, the six Chalers of Victual
is the greatest Rent that ought to be in any one Farm. This Tennent comes to
his Master, and says, I will give you 2500 Merks, if ye will give me down a
Chalder of Victual, or 100 pound Scots of my Yearlie Rent, and give me an
Heretable Right to it, for my self, Heirs and Successors, for the remander part
of the Rent, this can be made applicable for any Room of whatsoever Rent, or
any Sum whatsoever offered proportionally.

This I do advise the Master to accept because if he be a frugal man, he knows
how to make als good use of his Money, and it evidently insures the rest of his
Rent; and if he be a Spendthrift, it is als good to take of his own as to
borrow from his Neighbors, and possibly turn Bankrupt altogether.

If the same Tennent purchase more, I do advise both Master and Tennent to do
the same till the half Rent, or at most two parts of the Rent be thereby
exhausted, and thereafter the Tennent and his Successors are to pay the
Superplus to the Master for ever, and are to be oblidged to keep good Horse and
Arms to attend him, and maintain their Houses in good and sufficient condition,
and this I call feuing of Land.

I know this is not the ordinar and strickest way of Feuing, according to the
Feudal Law, or conform to the practice in some places, especially in the West
of Scotland, where, upon the death of the Master or Tennent the Feu-duty is
doubled, and for that of a singular Successor, the whole intrinsic value of
the Lands so holden for a year, is payable to the Landlord, where also several
Clauses anent Alienations without consent of Superiors, and other unreasonable
irritant Clauses place against the poor Vassals, whereby when an unjust and
hard Master succeeds, or very frequently a Lawyer, there are many evident
Advantages to be taken by reason of the Ignorance of the poor Vassals.

But as I dislike such Courses, so what is said is all which I understand and
mean by Feuing: And it seems most reasonable, that as I will not advise Masters
to diminish their Rents above the one half, by this new way of Feuing, So that
I should not subject the poor laborious Husbandman to any irritant Clauses,
neither to vast Entries, which in time probably may destroy both him and his
Succession.

Thus in as few and plain words as I could, I have finished my Advice, that
what is said may be easily understood by the meanest Capacity. I have used your
own dialect and form of speaking, I wish from my heart you would follow and
practice what is folly Writ and intended for your Instruction, which will
encourage me to a second Treatise, for Husbandry is an inexhaustable Treasure;
there are many Excellent things to be said upon it, both new and old, but Paul
may Plant and Apollos water, yet it is GOD who gives the increase, which that
he may do, be diligent in prayer for the blessing of the everliving GOD upon
your endeavors, that you may be blessed in your Basket, blessed in your store,
blessed in your Herds, that your Pastures may abound with Flocks, and your
Valleys with Corns and that he may set a Hedge about you and all that you have,
and may be your God and the God of your Seed, and to let you see by this
excellent Mixture of Spiritual with Bodily Exercises, that you are as happy as
a World can make you, and thereby preserved from Envy, and consequently render
you absolutely contented with your own manner of Life. I shall conclude with a
Poem, in commendation of a Country Life, and the Pleasures attending the same,
as follows.

A POEM in Praise of a Country Life, and the Pleasures thereof, in Imitation
of Virgil in the Epilogue of his second Book of Georgicks.
AGricula in curvo terram dimovit aratro.
Quos ramifructus quos ipsa volentia, rura
Sponse tulere sua carpsit.

I Sing the Pleasures of a rural Life,
Void of all carping care, and wrangling strife,
Blessed with bright Phoebus Beams, Birds bear their part.
With charming Notes, without acquired Airt
They warble forth their Makers Praise so High
As frightens Night and rouseth slumbering Day.
None beats their Time, and yet they all agree
Without a Book in perfect Harmony.
Bass, Counter, Tenor, Trible there you will hear,
There Is no discord to choack a tender Ear.
All play their parts with a melodious Sound,
From topping Rocks while Echoes answer round
The drousie Trees awakened with their call
Burst forth in leaves where instantly they fall
With all the cunning that can be expressed.
In various forms to build their circ'led Nest,
Where they may Nestle and bring forth a quire
Of well set voices for the coming Year.
The cheerful Lambs attending on their Dames,
In sprightful skips perform their harmless games
Whiles in a crowd they run and one does gain
Who Is straight applauded by 'his following train
Another runs alone while all look on,
And chears his Metal with a pleasant Tone.
Yet all obey when called and each does know,
By his Dames voice to which place he should go,
They running call and calling run with have
To quench their drought by sucking of the breast
The other Beasts in herds both wild and tame
With gentile pace feed through the flourie plain
Forget their Winters toil and stormy Showers
And seem delighted with the vernant Flowers
Under the shades of Arched Groves they rest.
Then up again and feed where they think best
Not dyeted by Plowmans straightened hand,
Both ease and Food they have at their command
So free from care they drink the pearled streams
Breath a pure Air and shuns Appollos Beams.
Mountains they mount and vernant meads with haist
Are all cut down to please their wanton taste.
Ceres makes haste to hoord up plenteous Store
For man and beast when Spring can do no more,
Fish, Fowl and Beasts brings forth all what they can,
And mother Earth produces all for man.
The tender Grain by hopeful Peasants Sown,
No sooner Roots then up again its Grown.
The Blade the Stalk, and then the tender Ear,
In its green Cover softly does appear.
Fearing the blustering wind it pipes about,
Finding all fair it Gently ventures out.
Then frankly nourished by Earths fatning Clot,
It forms its Kirnal in its chaffie Coat.
Which warmed by Appolo's warming Rays,
Blade, Stalk and Husk apparently decays.
The Ear does bow his head, the Stalk does bend,
And does the Sickle with consent attend.
Thus Flowers do blow, and fruit Trees throu the Field.
As Bees their Honey, Cows their Milk do yield.
The painful Swain collects what Nature gives,
Clothed with content, most happily he lives.
Can Court or Camp, can Bench or Bar afford,
Such innate pleasures to its fretful Lord.
Galen may kill, not cure, and Merchants cheat,
Seamen may drink and swear, and rivals hate,
Strumpets may pox the Sparks, and they in pain
Prompt with revenge, may pay them back again
The Priest may baul at all, yet long to try
These amorous moods, themselves to mortify.
But happy he who Aglaus like does dwell,
Within the confines of his Country Cell.
And whose content does free him of the sense,
Of deadly vice and its Experience.
FINIS.

