THE ROUNDHEADS OR, The Good Old Cause, A COMEDY As it is Acted at His Royal
Highness the DUKES Theater. By Mrs. A. Behn.

LONDON, Printed for D. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple bar*
and Benskin in St. Brides Church Yard, and H. Rhodes next door to the Bear
Tavern near Bride Lane in Fleetstreet. MDCLXXXII.

To the Right Noble Henry Fitz-Roy, Duke of Grafton, Earl of Sutton, Viscount
of Ipswich, Baron of Sudbury, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and
Colonel of his Majesty's Regiment of Foot Guards, etc.
May it please Your Grace.
DEdications which were Originally designed, as a Tribute to that Reverence and
just esteem we ought to pay the Great and Good; are now so corrupted with
Flattery, that they rarely either find a Reception in the World, or merit that
Patronage they would implore. But I without fear Aproch the great Object being
above that mean and mercenary Art; nor can I draw the Lovely Picture half so
charming and so manly as it is; and that Author may more properly boast of a
Lucky Hi^t, whose choice and fortune is so good, then if he had pleased all the
different ill Judging world besides in the business of the Play: for none that
way, can ever hope to please all; in an Age when Faction rages, and differing
Parties disagree in all things -- But coming the first day to a new Play with a
Loyal Title, and then even the sober and tender conscienc'd, throng as to a
forbidden Conventicle: fearing the Cub of their old Bear of Reformation should
be exposed, to the scorn of the wicked, and dreading (tho but the faint shadow
of their own deformity) their Rebellion, Murders, Massacres and Villainies, from
40 upwards, should be Represented for the better undeceiving and informing of
the World, flock in a full Assembly with a pious design to Hiss and Rail it as
much out of countenance as they would Monarchy, Religion, Laws, and Honesty;
throwing the Act of Oblivion in our Teeths, as if that (whose mercy can not
make them forget their Old Rebellion) could hinder honest truths from breaking
out upon 'em in Edifying Plays, where the Loyal hands ever outdo their venomed
Hiss; a good and happy omen, if Poets maybe allowd for Prophets as of old they
were: and it is as easily seen at a new Play how the Royal Interest thrives, as
at a City Election, how the good Old Cause is carried on; as a Noble Peer
lately said, Though the Tories have got the better of us at the Play, we carried
it in the City by many Voices, God be praised!

This Play, called, The Roundheads, which I humbly lay at your Graces feet,
Pardon the Title, and Heaven defend you from the bloody Race, was carried in
the House nemine contra dicente, by the Royal Party, and under your Graces
Ilustrious Patronage is safe from any new Seditious affronts abroad; Your Grace
alone whom Heaven and Nature has formed the most adorable Person in the whole
Creation, with all the advantages of a Glorious birth, has a double right and
power to defend all that aproch you for sanctuary; your very Beauty is a guard
to all you daigne to make safe: for You were born for Conquest every way? even
what Phanatick, what peevish Politition, testy with Age, Diseases, miscarried
Plots, disappointed Revolutions, envious of Power, of Princes, and of Monarchy,
and mad with Zeal for Change and Reformation, could yet be so far lost to sense
of Pleasure, as not to turn a Rebel to Revenge, the Good old Cause, and the
patronage to Plebean sedition with only looking on you, 'twoud force his meger
face to blushing smiles, and make him swear he had mistook the side, curse his
own Party, and if possible, be reconcild to Honesty again: such power have
charms like Yours to calm the soul, and will in spite of You plead for me to
the disaffected, even when they are at Wars with Your Birth and power. But this
Play for which I humbly beg Your Graces Protection, needs it in a more peculiar
manner, it having drawn down Legions upon its head, for its Loyalty -- what, to
Name us cries one, it is most abominable, unheard of daring cries another -- she
deserves to be swing'd cries a third; as if twere all a Libel, a scandal
impossible to be proud, or that their Rogueries were of so old a Date their
Reign were past remembrance or History; when they take such zealous care to
renew it daily to our memories: And I am satisfied, that they that will
justify the best of these Traitors, deserves the fate of the worst, and most
manifestly declare to the World by it, they would be at the Old Game their
Forefathers played with so good success, yet if there be any honest loyal man
alied to any here named, I heartily beg his Pardon for any offensive Truth I
have spoken, and it is a wonderful thing that amongst so Numerous a Flock they
will not allow of one mangy Sheep; not one Rogue in the whole Generation of the
Association. Ignoramus the 1st and the 2d.

But as they are, I leave them to your Grace to Judge of them; to whom I humbly
present this small Mirror, of the late wretched Times: wherein your Grace may
see something of the Miseries three the Most Glorious Kingdoms of the Universe
were reduced to; where your Royal Ancestors victoriously Reigned for so many
hundred years: How they were Governed, Parcell'd out, and deplorable enslaved,
and to what Low, Prostituted Lewdness they fell at last: where the Nobility and
Gentry were the most contemned and despised part of them, and such Mean, (and
till then obscure) Villains Ruled, and Tyraniz'd, that no Age, nor Time, or
scarce a Parish Book makes mention or could show there was any such Name or
Family. Yet these were those that impudently Tug'd for Empire, and Profaned
that Illustrious Throne and Court, so due then, and possessed now (through the
infinite Mercies of God to this bleeding Nation) by the best of Monarchs; a
Monarch, who had yet the divine goodness to Pardon even his worst of Enemies
what was past; Nay, out of his Vast and God-like Clemency, did more than Heaven
it self can do, put it out of his Power by an Act of Oblivion, to punish the
unparalleled Injuries done His Sacred Person, and the rest of the Royal Family:
How great his Patience has been since, I leave to all the World to judge: but
Heaven be praised, he has not yet forgot the Sufferings and Murders of the
Glorious Martyr of ever blessed memory, Your Graces Sacred Grandfather, and by
what Arts and Ways that Devilish Plot was laid! and will like a skilful
Pilate, by the wreck of one Rich Vessel, learn how to shun the danger of this
present. Threatening and saved the rest from sinking; The Clouds already begin
to disappear, and the face of things to change, thanks to Heaven His Majesty's
infinite Wisdom, and the Over-Zeal of the (falsely called) True Protestant
Party: Now we may pray for the King and his Royal Brother, defend his Cause,
and assert his Right, without the fear of a taste of the Old Sequestration
called a Fine; Guard the Illustrious Pair, good Heaven, from H^ll^sh Plots,
and all the Devilish matchinations of Factious Cruelties: and you, great Sir,
(whose Merits have so justly deserved that glorious Command so lately trusted
to your Care, which Heaven increase, and make your glad Regiment Armies for our
safety. May you become the great Example of Loyalty and Obedience, and stand a
firm and unmovable Pillar to Monarchy, a Noble Bull-work to Majesty; defend
the Sacred Cause, employ all that Youth, Courage, and Noble Conduct which God
and Nature purposely has endued you with, to serve the Royal Intrest: You, Sir,
who are obliged by a double Duty to Love, Honor, and Obey his Majesty, both as
a Father and a King! O undissolvable Knot! O Sacred Union! what Duty, what
Love, what Adoration can express or repay the Debt we owe the first, or the
Alegiance due to the last, but where both meet in one, to make the Tie Eternal;
Oh what Counsel, what Love of Power, what fancied Dreams of Empire, what
fickle Popularity can inspire the heart of man, or any Noble mind, with
Sacreligious thoughts against it, can harbor or conceive a stubborn
disobedience: Oh what Son can desert the Cause of an Indulgent Parents, what
Subject, of such a Prince, without renouncing the Glory of his Birth, his
Loyalty, and good Nature.

Ah Royal lovely Youth! bevvare of false Ambition; wisely believe your Elevated
Glory, (at least) more happy then a Kings, you share their Ioys, their
pleasures and magnificence, without the toiles and business of a Monarch, their
careful days and restless thoughtful nights; know, you are blessed with all
that Heaven can give, or you can wish; your Mind and Person such, so excellent,
that Love knows no fault it would wish to mend, nor Envy to increase! blessed
with a Princess of such undisputable charming Beauty, as if Heaven designing to
take a peculiar care in all that concerns your happiness, had formed her on
purpose, to complete it.

Hail happy glorious Pair! the perfect joy and pleasure of all that look on
ye, for whom all Tongues and Hearts have Prayers and Blessings; May you
outlive Sedition, and see your Princely Race as Numerous as Beautiful, and
those all great and Loyal Supporters of a long Race of Monarchs of this Sacred
Line. This shall be the perpetual wish, this the Eternal Prayer of

SIR, Your Graces most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, A. Behn.

PROLOGUE, Spoken by the Ghost of Huson ascending from Hell dressed as a Cobbler.
I Am the Ghost of him who was a true Son
Of the late GOOD OLD CAUSE, Ecliped, Huson,
Roused by strange scandal, from the eternal flame
With noise of Plotts, of wondrous birth and name
Whilst the sly Jesuit robs us of our fame.
Can all their Conclave, though with Hell the agree
Act mischief equal to Presbittery?
Look back on our success in Forty One,
Was ever braver Villainies carried on
Or new ones now more hopefully begun.
And shall our unsuccess our merit lose
And make us quit the Glory of our Cause!
No, Hire new Villains, Rogues without remorse
And let no Law nor Conscience stop your course.
Let Polititions order the Confusion
And let the Saints pay Pious Contribution.
Pay those that Rail, and those that can delude
With scribbling Nonsense the Loose Multitude.
Pay well your Witnesses, they may not run
To the right side and tell who set 'em on
Pay 'em so well, that they may never Recant
And so turn Honest merely out of want.
Pay Juries that no formal Laws may harm us
Let Treason be secured by Ignoramus.
Pay Bully Whig, who Loyal writers bang
And honest Tories in Effigy hang:
Pay those that burn the Pope to please the fools
And daily pay Right Honorable Tools
Pay all the Pulpit knaves that Treason brew
And let the zealous Sisters pay 'em too;
Justices, bound by Oath, and obligation
Pay them the utmost price of their Damnation
Not to disturb our useful Congregation.
Nor let the Learned Rabble be forgot
Those Pious hands that crown our hopeful Plott.
No, Modern Statesmen cry it is Lunacy
To barter Treason with such Rogues as we.
But subtiller Oliver did not disdain
His Mightier Politiques with ours to join.
I, for all uses in a State was able
Could Mutiny, could fight, hold forth, and Cobble.
Your lazy State man, may sometimes direct
But your small busy knaves the Treason Act.
The Actors Names.
1. Lord Fleetwood. 2. Lord Lambert. Competitors for the Crown, but Lambert is
General of the Army. Lord Wariston Chairman of the Committee of Safety. Hewson.
Desbro, Duckingfield Corbet. Commanders, and Committee men. 3. Lord Witlock.
Ananias Gogle Lay Elder of Clements Parish. A Rabble Of the sanctified Mobily.
Corporal Right An Oliverian Commander, but honest, and a Cavelier in his heart.
Loveless A Royalist, a man of Honor, loves Lady Lambert. Freeman His friend of
the same Character in love with Lady Desbro. Lady Lambert In love with
Loveless. Lady Desbro In love with Freeman. Lady Fletwood. Lady Cromwell.
Gilliflower Lady Lamberts Old Woman. Several Ladies For Redress of Grievances.
Two Pages To Lady Lambert. Page To Lady Desbro. Footmen Fiddlers, and a B^nd of
Loyal City Apprentices*
THE ROVND-HEADS, OR THE Good Old Cause.
ACT. I.
Scene I. The Street.
Enter three Soldiers, and Corporal Right. Cor. AH Rogues, the World runs
finely round, the business is done.


1 Sold. Done, the Town's our own, my fine Rascal.


2 Sold. We'll have Harlots by the Belly, Sirrah.


1 Sold. Those are Commodities I confess I would fain be truck^ing for, -- but
no words of that Boy.


Cor. Stand, who go's there? To them a Ioyner and Felt-maker.


1 Sold. Who are you for, -- hah?


Ioyn. Are for Friend; we are for Gad and the Lord Fleetwood.


1 Sold. Fleetwood, knock 'em down, Fleetwood that snivelling Thief?


Felt. Why Friends, who are ye for?


Cor. For? who should we be for, but Lambert, Noble Lambert? Is this a time
of the day to declare for Fleetwood, with a Pox? indeed. in the morning 'twas a
Question had like to have been decided with push a Pike.


2 Sold. Dry blows would never a don't, some must have sweat blood for it, but
-- it is now decided.


Ioyn. Decided!


2 Sold. Yes, decided Sir, without your Rule for it.


Ioyn. Decided? by whom Sir? by us the Freeborn Subjects of England, by the
Honorable Committee of Safety, or the Right Reverend City? without which Sir,
I humbly conceive, your Declaration for Lambert is illegal, and against the
Property of the People.


2 Sold. Plain Lambert; here is a saucy Dog of a Joyner; Sirrah, get ye home,
and mind your Trade, and save the Hangman a labor.


Ioyn. Look ye, Friend, I fear no Hangman in Christendom; for Conscience and
Public good, for Liberty and Property, I dare as far as any man.


2 Sold. Liberty and Property, with a pox, in the mouth of a Joyner; you are a
pretty Fellow to settle the Nation, -- what says my Neighbor Feltmaker?


Felt. Why verily, I have a high respect for my honorable Lord Fleetwood, he
is my intimate Friend, and till I find his Party the weaker, I hope my Zeal
will be strengthened for him.


2 Sold. Zeal for Fleetwood, Zeal for a Halter, and that is your due: Why, what
has he ever done for you? Can he lead you out to Battle? Can he silence the
very Cannon with his Eloquence alone? -- Can he talk -- or fight -- or --


Felt. But verily he can pay those that can, and that is as good -- and he can
pray --


2 Sold. Let him pray, and we'll fight, and see whose business is done first;
We are for the General, who carries charms in every syllable; can act both the
Soldier and the Courtier, at once expose his Breast to dangers for our sakes
-- and tell the rest of the pretending Slaves a fair Tale, but hang 'em sooner
than trust 'em.


1 Soul. Ay, ay, a Lambert, a Lambert, he has courage, Fleetwood's an Ass to
him.


Felt. Hum -- here is Reason Neighbor. to the Ioyner.


Ioyn. That Is all one, we do not act by reason.


Corp. Fleetwood's a Coward.


2 Sold. A Blockhead.


1 Sold. A snivelling Fool; a General in the Hangings, no better.


Ioyn. What think ye then of Vane?


2 Sold. As of a Fool, that has dreamt of a new Religion, and only fit to
reign in that Fifth Monarchy he preaches so much up; but no King in this Age.


Felt. What of Haslerig?


2 Sold. A Hangman for Haslerig, I cry, No, no, One and all, a Lambert, a
Lambert; he is our General, our Protector, our King* our Keiser, our -- even
what he pleases himself.


1 Sold. Well, if he pleases himself he pleases me.


2 Sold. He Is our Rising Sun, and we'll adore him, for the Speaker's Glory's
set,


Cor. At naught, Boys; how the Rogue looked when his Coach was stopped?


Ioyn. Under favor, what said the Speaker?


2 Sold. What said he? prithee what could he say that we would admit for
Reason? Reason and our business are two things: Our Will was Reason and Law
too, and the Word of Command lodged in our Hilts: Cobbet and Duckenfield showed
'em Cockpit Law.


Cor. He understood not Soldiers Dialect; the Language of the Sword puzzled his
Understanding; the Keeneness of which, was too sharp for his Wit, and
overruled his Roles -- therefore he very mannerly kissed his hand, and wheeled
about, --


2 Sold. To the place from whence he came,


Cor. And e're long, to the Place of Execution.


1. Sold. No, damn him, he will have his Clergy.


Joy. Why is he such an Infidel to love the Clergy?


Cor. For his Ends: But come, lets go drink the General's Health; Lambert! not
Fleetwood, that Son of a Custard, always quaking.


2 Sold. Ay, Ay, Lambert I say, -- besides, he is a Gentleman.


Felt. Come, Come, Brother Soldier, let me tell you, I fear you have a Stewart
in your Belly.


Cor. I am sure you have a Rogue in your Heart, Sirrah, which a Man may
perceive through that sanctified Dogs Face of yours; and so get ye gone ye
Rascals, and delude the Rabble with your canting Politics. Everyone beats 'em.


Felt. Nay, and you be in Wrath, I Will leave you.


Joy. No matter Sir, I Will make you know I Am a Freeborn Subject, there is Law
for the Righteous Sir, there is Law. Go out.


Cor. There Is Halters ye Rogues? --


2 Sold. Come Lads, let us to the Tavern, and drink Success to change; I doubt
not but to see 'em chop about, till it come to our great Hero again. -- Come,
to the Tavern.


Going out, are met by Loveless and Freeman who enter, and stay the Corporal.
Cor. I Will follow ye Comrade presently. Ex. the rest of the Soldiers, -- Save
ye noble Colonel.


Free. How is it Corporal?


Cor. A brave World Sir, full of Religion, Knavery, and Change; we shall
shortly see better days.


Free. I doubt it Corporal;


Cor. I Will warrant you Sir, -- but have you had never a Billet, no Present, nor
Love-remembrance to day, from my good Lady Desbro?


Free. None, and wonder at it: Have thou not seen her Page to day?


Cor. Faith Sir I was employed in Affairs of State, by our Protector that shall
be, and could not call.


Free. Protector that shall be? who is that, Lambert or Fleetwood, or both?


Cor. I care not which, so it be a Change; but I mean the General? -- but Sir,
my Lady Desbro is now at Morning Lecture here hard by, with the Lady Lambert.


Lov. Seeking the Lord for some great Mischief or other.


Free. We have been there, but could get no Opportunity of speaking to her, --
Loveless, know this Fellow, -- he is honest and true to the Hero, though a
Red-Coat? I trust him with my Love, and have done with my Life.


Lov. Love! Thou can never make me believe thou art earnestly in Love with
any one of that damned Reformation.


Free. Thou art a Fool; where I find Youth and Beauty, I adore, let the Saint
be true or false.


Lov. It Is a Scandal to one of us to converse with 'em; they are all sanctified
Iilts; and there can be neither Credit nor Pleasure in keeping 'em Company; and
'twere enough to get the Scandal of an Adherer to their devilish Politics to
be seen with 'em.


Free. What, their Wives?


Lov. Yes, their Wives. What see thou in 'em but Hypocrisy? Make Love to
'em, they answer you in Scripture.


Free. Ay, and lie with you in Scripture too. Of all Whores, give me your
z^alous Whore; I never heard a Woman talk much of Heaven, but she was much for
the Creature too. What do think I had thee to the Meeting for?


Lov. To hear a Rascal hold forth for Bodkins and Thimbles, Contribution my
beloved! to carry on the Good Cause, that is, Roguery, Rebellion, and Treason,
profaning the sacred Majesty of Heaven, and our glorious Sovereign.


Free. But -- were there not pretty Women there?


Lov. Damn 'em for sighing, groaning Hypocrites.


Free. But there was one, whom, that handsome Face and Shape of yours, gave more
occasion for sighing, than any Mortification caused by the Cant of the
Lay-Elder in the half Hogs Head; Did thou not mind her?


Lov. Not I, damn it I was all Rage, and had not thou restrained me, I had
certainly pulled that Rogue of a Holder-forth by the Ears from his sanctified
Tub. 'Sdeath he hum'd and haw'd all my Patience away, nose'd and snivel'd me to
Madness. Heaven! That thou should suffer such Vermin to infect the Earth,
such Wolves amongst thy Flocks, such Thieves and Robbers of all Laws of God and
Man, in thy holy Temples. I rave to think to what you are fallen, poor England!


Free. But the she Saint --


Lov. No more, were she as fair as Fancy could imagine, to see her there, --
would make me loath the Form; she that can listen to the dull Nonsense, the
bantering of such a Rogue, such an illiterate Rascal, must be a Fool, past
sense of loving, Freeman.


Free. Thou art mistaken. -- But, did thou mind her next the Pulpit?


Lov. A Plague upon the whole Congregation: I minded nothing but how to fight
the Lord's Battle with that damned sham Parson; whom I had a mind to beat.


Free. My Lady Desbro is not of that Persuasion, but an errant Heroic in her
Heart, and feigns it only to have the better occasion to serve the Royal Party.
I knew her, and loved her before she married.


Lov. She may chance then to be saved.


Free. Come, I Will have thee bear up briskly to some one of 'em, it may redeem
thy Sequestration; which, now thou see no hopes of compounding, puts thee
out of Patience.


Lov. Let 'em take it, and the Devil do 'em Good with it: I scorn it should be
said I have a Foot of Land in this ungrateful and accursed Island; I Would rather
beg where Laws are obeyed and Justice performed, than be powerful where Rogues
and base born Rascals rule the Roast.


Free. But suppose now, dear Loveless, that one of the Wives of these Pageant
Lords should fall in love with thee, and get thy Estate again, or pay thee
double for it?


Lov. I would refuse it.


Free. And this for a little dissembled Love, a little Drudgery --


Lov. Not a night by Heaven -- not an hour -- no not a single kiss, I Would rather
make love to an Incubus.


Free. But suppose 'twere the new Protectoress her self, the fine Lady Lambert?


Lov. The greatest Devil of all; Damn her, do think I Will Cuckold the Ghost of
old Oliver?


Free. The better; there is some Revenge in it; do know her?


Lov. Never saw her, nor care to do.


Cor. Colonel, Do you command me any thing?


Free. Yes, I Will send thee with a Note -- Let Us step into a Shop and write it;
Loveless stay a moment, and I Will be with thee. Ex. Free and Corporal.


Enter L. Lambert, L. Desbro, Gilliflowr, Pages with great Bibles, and Footmen:
Love. walks sullenly, not seeing 'em. L. Lamb. Train carried. La. Lam. O, I Am
impatient to know his Name; ah, Desbro, he betrayed all my Devotion; and when I
would have prayed, Heaven knows, it was to him, and for him only.


L. Des. What manner of man was it?


L. Lam. I want words to describe him; not tall, nor short; well made, and such
a face -- Love, Wit, and Beauty revel'd in his Eyes:
From whence he shot a thousand winged Darts
That pierced quite through my Soul.

L. Des. Seemed he a Gentleman?

L. Lam. A God! Although his outside were but mean; but he shone th'ro like
Lightning from a Cloud, and shot more piercing Rays.


L. Des. Stayed he long?


L. Lam. No; methought he grew displeased with our Devotion
And seemed to contradict the Parson with his Angry Eyes.
A Friend he had too with him, young and handsome,
Who seeing some disorder in his Actions, got him away.
-- I had almost forgot all Decency,
And started up to call him, but my Quality
And wanting something to excuse that Fondness,
Made me decline with very much ado.

Gill. Heavens, Madam, I Will warrant they were Heroicks.

La. Lam. Heroicks!

Gill. Cavaliers, Madam, of the Royal Party.

L. D. They were so, I knew one of 'em.

La. Lam. Ah Desbro, do thou?
Ah Heavens, that they should prove Heroicks!

L. D. You might have known that by the Conquest; I never heard, e're one o'th
the other Party ever gained a Heart: and indeed, Madam, it is a just Revenge, our
Husbands make Slaves of them, and they kill all their Wives. Love. sees 'em,
and starts.


Lov. Hah, what have we here? -- Women -- faith, and handsome too -- I never saw
a Form more Excellent! whoever they are, they seem of Quality, -- by Heaven, I
cannot take my Eyes from her. pointing to La. Lam.


La. Lam. Hah, he is yonder, my Heart begins to fail,
My trembling Limbs refusing to support me --
His Eyes seem fixed on mine too; ah, I faint -- leans on Desbro.

Gill. My Ladies Coach, William -- quickly, she faints.

Lov. Madam, can an unfortunate Stranger's aid add any thing to the recovery of
so much Beauty? bowing, and holding her.

La. Lam. Ah, Would he knew how much! aside.

Gill. Support her, Sir, till her Ladyships Coach comes -- I beseech ye.

Lov. Not Atlas bore up Heaven with greater Pride.

La. Lam. -- I beg your Pardon, Sir, for this Disorder
That has occasioned you so great a Trouble --
You seem a Gentleman -- and consequently
May need some Service done you; name the way,
I shall be glad to let you see my Gratitude.

Lov. If there be ought in me, that merits this amazing Favor from you, I owe
my thanks to Nature that endowed me with something in my Face that spoke my
Heart.


La. Lam* Heaven! how he looks and speaks -- to Desbro, aside.


L. Des. Oh, these Heroicks, Madam, have the most charming Tongues.


La. Lam. Pray come to me -- and ask for any of my Officers, and you shall have
admittance --


Lov. Who shall I ask for Madam? for I Am yet ignorant to whom I owe for this
great Bounty.


La. Lam. Not know me! Thou art indeed a Stranger. I thought I Would been so
Elevated above the common Crowd, it had been visible to all Eyes who I was.


Lov. Pardon my Ignorance;
My Soul conceives ye all that Heaven can make ye,
Of Great, of Fair and Excellent;
But cannot guess a Name to call you by
But such as would displease ye --
-- My heart begins to fail, and by her Vanity
I fear she is one of the new Race of Quality: aside.
-- But be she Devil, I must love that Form.

La. Lam. Hard Fate of Greatness, We so highly Elevated
Are more exposed to Censure than the little ones,
By being forced to speak our Passions first.
-- Is my Coach ready?

Page It waits your Honor.

La. Lam. I give you leave to visit me -- ask for the General's Lady, if my
Title be not by that Time altered.

Lov. Pistols and Daggers to my Heart -- it is so.

La. Lam. Adieu Sir. Ex. all but Lov. who stands musing.

Enter Freeman. Free. How now, what is the matter with thee?


Lov. Prithee wake me Freeman.


Free. Wake thee!


Lov. I dream! by Heaven I dream!
Nay yet the lovely Phantam's in my View,
Oh! wake me, or I sleep to perfect Madness.

Free. What ayl'st thou, what did dream of?

Lov. A strange fantastic Charmer,
A thing just like a Woman friend,
It walked and looked with wondrous Majesty,
Had Eyes that killed, and Graces decked her Face;
But when she talked, mad as the Winds she grew.
Chimera in the form of Angel, Woman!

Free. Who the Devil meanest thou?

Lov. By Heaven I know not; but, as she vanished hence, she bad me come to the
General's!

Free. Why this is she I told thee eyed thee so at the Conventicle; it is
Lambert, the renowned, the famous Lady Lambert -- Mad call'st thou her? it is
her ill acted Greatness, thou mistak'st; thou art not used to the Pageantry of
these Women yet; they all run thus mad: it is greatness in 'em, Loveless.


Lov. And is thine thus, thy Lady Desbro?


Free. She Is of another Cut, she married as most do, for Interest, -- but what
-- thou't to her?


Lov. If Lightening stop my way,
Perhaps a sober view may make me hate her. Exit. both.

Enter Lambert and Whitlock. Scen. A Chamber. Whit. My Lord, now is your time,
you may be King; Fortune is yours, you have time it self by the fore-lock.


Lam. If I thought so, I Would hold him fast by Heaven.


Whit. If you let slip this Opportunity, my Lord, you are undone -- Aunt
Caesar, aut Nullus.


Lam. But Fleetwood --


Whit. Hang him soft head.


Lam. True, he is of an easy Nature, yet if thou did but know how little Wit
governs this mighty Universe, thou would not wonder men should set up him.


Whit. That will not recommend him at this Iuncto, though he is an excellent
Tool for your Lordship to make use of; and therefore, use him Sir as Cataline
did Lentulus; drill the dull Fool with hopes of Empire, on, and that all tends
to his Advancement only: The Block-head will believe the Crown his own: what
other Hopes could make him ruin Richard, a Gentleman of Qualities a thousand
times beyond him?


Lam. They were both too soft; an ill Commendation for a General, who should be
rough as storms of War it self.


Whit. His Time was short, and yours is coming on; Old Oliver had his.


Lam. I hate the Memory of that Tyrant Oliver.


Whit. So do I, now he is dead, and serves my Ends no more. I loved the Father
of the Great Heroic, whilst he had Power to do me good: he failing, Reason
directed me to the Party then prevailing, the Fag End of the Parliament: it is
true, I took the Oath of Allegiance, as Oliver, your Lordship, Tony, and the
rest did, without which, we could not have sat in that Parliament; but that
Oath was not for our Advantage, and so better broke than kept.


Lam. I am of your Opinion my Lord.


Whit. Let Honesty and Religion preach against it; but how could I have served
the Commons by deserting the King? how have showed my self loyal to your
Interest, by fooling Fleetwood, in the deserting of Dick; by dissolving the
honest Parliament, and bringing in the odious Rump? how could I have flattered
Ireton, by telling him, Providence brought things about, when 'twas mere
knavery all, and that the hand of the Lord was in it, when I knew the Devil was
in it? or indeed, how could I now advise you to be King, if I had started of
Oaths, or preferred Honesty or Divinity before Interest and the Good Old Cause.


Lam. Nay, it is most certain, he that will live in this World, must be indu'd
with the three rare Qualities of Dissimulation, Equivocation, and mental
Reservation.


Whit. In which Excellency, Heaven be praised, we outdo the Jesuits.


Enter La. Lam. L. Lamb. I Am glad to see you so well employed my Lord, as in
Discourse with my Lord Whitlock he is of our party, and has Wit.


Whit. Your Honor graces me too much.


Lam. My Lord, my Lady is an absolute States-Woman.


La. Lam. Yes, I think things had not arrived to this exalted height, nor had
you been in Prospect of a Crown, had not my Politics exceeded your meaner
Ambition.


Lam. I confess, I owe all my good fortune to thee.


Enter Page. Page My Lord, my Lord Wariston, Lord Hewson, Colonel Cobbet, and
Colonel Duckenfield desire the Honor of waiting on you.


La. Lam. This has a ^ace of Greatness -- let 'em wait a while in the
Antichamber.


Lam. My Love, I would have 'em come in.


La. Lam. You would have 'em, you would have a Fools Head of your own; pray let
me be Judge of what their Duty is, and what your Glory; I say I Will have 'em
wait.


Page. My Lord Fleetwood too is just alighted, shall he wait too Madam?


La. Lam. He may approach; and d' ye hear -- put on your fawning looks, flatter
him, and profess much Friendship to him, you may betray him with the more
facility.


Whit. Madam, you counsel well, Ex. Page, re-enter with L. Fleetwood.


Enter Lord Fleetwood. Lamb. My good Lord, your most submissive Servant.


Whit. My Gracious Lord, I am your Creature -- your Slave --


Fleet. I profess ingeniously, I am much engaged to you, my good Lords; I hope
things are now in the Lard's handling, and will go on well for his Glory and my
Interest, and that all my good People of England will do things that become
good Christians.


Whit. Doubt us not, my good Lord; the Government cannot be put into abler
hands, than those of your Lordship; it has hitherto been in the hard clutches
of Jews, Infidels, and Pagans.


Fleet. Yea verily, Abomination has been in the hands of Iniquity.


Lam. But, my Lord, those hands, by my good Conduct, are now cut off, and our
Ambition is, your Lordship would take the Government upon you.


Fleet. I profess, my Lord, by ye and nay, I am ashamed of this Goodness, in
making me the Instrument of saving Grace to this Nation; it is the great Work of
the Lard.


La. Lam. The Lard, Sir, I Will assure you the Lard has the least hand in your
good fortune; I think you ought to ascribe it to the Cunning and Conduct of my
Lord here, who so timely abandoned the Interest of Richard.


Fleet. Ingeniously, I must own, your good Lord can do much, and has done much;
but it is our Method to ascribe all to the Powers above.


La. Lam. Then I must tell you, your Method's an ungrateful Method.


Lam. Peace, my Love.


Whit. Madam, This is the Cant we must delude the Rabble with.


La. Lam. Then let him use it there, my Lord, not amongst us, who so well
understand one another.


Lam. Good Dear, be pacified -- and tell me, shall the Gentlemen without have
admittance?


La. Lam. They may. Page goes out.


Enter Hewson, Desbro, Duckenfield, Wariston, and Cobbet. War. Guds Benizon
light on you, my gued Loords, for this days work; Madam, I kiss your white Honds.


Duc. My Lord, I have not been behind hand in this days turn of State.


Lam. It Is confessed, Sir; What would you infer from that?


Duc. Why, I would know how things go; who shall be General, who Protector, or
who King next.


Hews. My Friend has well translated his meaning.


La. Lam. Fie, how that filthy Cobbler Lord betrays his Function.


Duc. We Are in a Chaos, a Confusion, as we are.


Hews. Indeed the Commonwealth at present is out at heels, and wants
underlaying.


Cob. And the People expect something suddenly from us.


Whit. My Lords and Gentlemen, we must consider a while.


War. Bread a gued there is mickle Wisdom i that Sirs.


Duc. It ought to be consulted betimes, my Lord, it is a matter of moment, and
ought to be consulted by the whole Committee.


Lam. We design no other, my Lord, for which reason, at three a clock we'll
meet at Wallingford House.


Duc. Nay, my Lord, do but settle the Affair, let us but know who is our Head,
and it is no matter.


Hew. Ay, my Lord, no matter who; I hope 'twill be Fleetwood, for I have the
length of his Foot already.


Whit. You are the leading men, Gentlemen, your Voices will soon settle the
Nation.


Duc. Well, my Lord, we'll not fail at three a clock.


Des. This falls out well for me; for I have Business in Smithfield, where my
Horses stand; and verily, now I think on it, the Rogue the Ostler has not given
'em Oats to day: Well, my Lords, farewell; if I come not time enough to
Wallingford House, keep me a place in the Committee, and let my Voice stand for
one, no matter who.


War. A gued Mon I's warrant, and takes muckle Pains for the Gued of the Nation,
and the Liberty of the Mobily: -- The Diel confound 'em and.


Lam. Come, my Lord Wariston, you are a wise man, What Government are you for?


War. Ene tol what ya please my gued Loord. takes him aside.


Lam. What think you of a single Person here in my Lord Fleetwood?


War. Mary Sir, and he is a brave Mon, but gen I may cooncel, take it for yar sell
my gued Loord, ant be gued for him, it is ene gued for ya te.


Lam. But above half the Nation are for him.


War. Bread a gued, and I's for him than.


Fleet. The Will of the Lard be done; and since it is his Will, I cannot
withstand my Fate -- ingeniously.


Whit. My Lord Wariston, a Word -- what if Lambert were the Man? takes him
aside.


War. Right Sir, Wons and ya have spoken and; He Is a brave Mon, a Mon indeed
gen I's 'ave any Judgment.


Whit. So I find this Property's for any use. aside.


Lam. My Lord, I perceive Heaven and Earth conspire to make you our Prince.


Fleet. Ingeniously, my Lords, the weight of three Kingdoms is a heavy Burden
for so weak Parts as mine; therefore, I will, before I appear at Council, go
seek the Lard in this great Affair; and, if I receive a Revelation for it, I
shall with all Humility espouse the Yoke, for the Good of his People and mine:
and so Gad with us, the Commonwealth of England.


Ex. Fleet. Desbro, Wariston, Duc. Cob. Hus. and Whit. La. Lam. Poor deluded
Wretch, it is not yet come to that.


Lam. No my Dear, the Voice will go clearly for me; what with Bribes to some,
Hypocrisy and Pretense of Religion to others, and promised Preferments to the
rest, I have engaged 'em all.


La. Lam. And will you be a King?


Lam. You think that is so fine a thing -- but let me tell you, my Love, a
King's a Slave to a Protector, a King's tied up to a thousand Rules of musty
Law, which we can break at Pleasure; we can rule without Parliaments, at least,
choose whom we please, make 'em agree to our Proposals, or set a Guard upon 'em,
and starve 'em till they do.


La. Lam. But their Votes are the strangest things, -- that they must pass for
Laws; you were never voted King.


Lam. No, nor care to be: the sharpest Sword's my Vote, My Law, my Title. They
voted Dick should reign, where is he now? They voted the great Heroicks from
the Succession; but had they Arms or Men, as I have, you should soon see what
would become of their Votes -- No my Love! It Is this -- must make me King. His
Sword.

Let Fleetwood and the Rump go seek the Lard,
My Empire and my Trust is in my Sword.

ACT II.
Scene I. A Chamber of State.
Enter La. Lambert, Gilliflower, and Women-servants. La. Lam. GIlliflower, Has
none been here to ask for any of my People, in order to his approach to me?


Gill. None, Madam.


La. Lam. Madam! how dull thou art! wou't never learn to give me a better
Title, than such an one as foolish Custom bestows on every common Wench?


Gill. Pardon my Ignorance, Madam.


La. Lam. Again Madam!


Gill. Really, Madam, I should be glad to know by what other Title you would be
distinguished?


La. Lam. Abominable dull! Do thou not know on what score my Dear is gone to
Wallingford House?


Gill. I cannot divine, Madam.


La. Lam. Heaven help thy Ignorance! he is gone to be made Protector, fool, or
at least, a King, thou Creature; And from this day I date my self her Highness.


Gill. That will be very fine indeed, an't please your Highness.


La Lam. I think 'twill suit better with my Person and Beauty than with that
other Woman -- what d' ye call her? Mrs. Cromwell -- my shape -- and Gat^ -- my
Humor, and my Youth, have something more of Grandeur -- have they not?


Gill. Infinitely, an't please you Highness.


Enter Page. Page Madam, a Man without has the boldness to ask for your Honor.


La. Lam. Honor, fool!


Gill. Her Highness, Blockhead.


Page Sawcily pressed in, and struck the Porter for denying him entrance to your
-- Highness.


La. Lam. What kind of Fellow was it?


Page A rude, rough, Hectoring Swash, an't please your Highness; nay, and two
or three times, Gad forgive me, he swore too.


La. Lam. It must be he. aside.


Page His Habit was something bad and Cavalierish -- I believe it is some poor
petitioning, begging Tory, who having been sequestered, would press your
Highness for some Favor.


La. Lam. Yes, it must be he -- ah foolish Creature! and can he hope Relief,
and a villainous Cavalier? out upon 'em, poor Wretches -- you may admit him
though, I long to hear how one of those things talk.


Gill. Oh most strangely, Madam, -- an't please your Highness, I should say.


Enter Loveless. La. Lam. It Is he, I Will swear, Gillifl^wer, these Heroicks are
punctual men, -- how now, your Business with us, Fellow?


Lov. My business, Madam? --


La. Lam. Have thou ever a Petition to us?


Lov. A Petition, Madam? -- Sure this put on Greatness is to amuse her
Servants, or has she forgot that she invited me; or indeed forgot me? -- aside.


La. Lam. What art thou?


Page Shall we search his Breeches, an't please your Highness, for Pistol, or
other Instruments?


La. Lam. No Boy, we fear him not, they say the Powers above protect the
Persons of Princes. walks away.


Lov. Sure she is mad, yet she walks loose about,
And she has Charms even in her Raving Fit.

La. Lam. Answer me. What art thou? How shall I get my Servants hence with
honor? aside.

Lov. A Gentleman --
That could have boasted Birth and Fortune too
Till these accursed Times, which Heaven confound,
Racing out all Nobility, all Virtue,
Has rendered me the rubbish of the World;
Whilst new raised Rascals, Canters, Robbers, Rebels
Do Lord it over the Freeborn, Brave and Noble.

La. La. You're very confident, know you to whom you speak? but I suppose you
have lost your Estate, or some such trivial thing, which makes you angry.


Lov. Yes, a trivial Estate of some five and twenty hundred pound a year, but I
hope to see that Rogue of a Lord reduced to his Cobler's Stall again, or, more
deserv'dly hanged, that has it.


La. Lam. I thought 'twas some such Grievance -- but you must keep a good
Tongue in your head, lest you be hanged for Scandalum Magnatum -- there is Law
for ye, Sir.


Lov. No matter; then I shall be free from a damned Commonwealth, as you are
pleased to call it, when indeed it is but a mungrel, mangy, Mock-Monarchy.


La. Lam. Is it your business Sir to rail?


Lov. You raised the Devil, Madam.


Page Madam, shall I call your Highness Guards, and secure the Traitor?


La. La. No; that you may see how little I regard or fear him; leave us all --
Ex. all but Gill.
We'll trust our Person in his hands alone --
-- Now Sir -- your Business? smilingly approaches him.

Lov. Madam, I waited here by your Commands.


La. Lam. How shall I tell him that I love him, Gilliflower?


Gill. Easily, Madam, tell him so in plain English. Madam, it is great; Women of
your exalted height ever speak first; you have no Equals dare pretend to speak
of love to you.


La. Lam. Thou art in the right -- Do know my Quality, and thy own Poverty?
And have thou nothing to ask that I may grant?


Lov. Sure she loves me! and I, frail flesh and blood,
Cannot resist her Charms; but she is of the damned Party. aside.

La. Lam. Are all your Party, Sir, so proud?


Lov. But what have I to do with Religion? Is Beauty the worse, or a kind Wench
to be refused for Conventickling? She lives high on the Spoils of a glorious
Kingdom, and why may not I live upon the Sins of the Spoiler? aside.


La. Lam. Sir -- you are poor!


Lov. So is my Prince; a Plague on the occasion.


La. Lam. I think you are -- no Fool too?


Lov. I would I were, then I had been a Knave, had thrived, and possibly by
this time had been tugging for rifled Crowns and Kingdoms.


La. Lam. This Satyr ill befits my present Business with you, -- you -- want
some Necessaries -- as Clothes, and Linen too; and it is great pity so proper
a man should want Necessaries. Gilliflower -- take my Cabinet Key, and fetch
the Purse of Broad-pieces that lies in the lower Drawer; it is a small Present,
Sir, but it is an Earnest of my farther Service, Gill. goes out, and returns
with a Purse.


Lov. I Am angry, that I find one Grain of Generosity in this whole Race of
Hypocrites. aside.


La. Lam. Here Sir, it is only for your present use; for Clothes -- three
hundred Pieces; let me see you sweet --


Lov. Stark mad, by this good day.


La. Lam. Ah Gilliflower! How prettily those Cavalier things charm; I wonder
how the Powers above came to give them all the Wit, Softness, and Gallantry, --
whilst all the great ones of our Age have the most slovenly, ungrateful, dull
Behavior; no Air, no Wit, no Love, or any thing to please a Lady with.


Gill. Truly Madam, there is a great Difference in the Men; yet Heaven at first
did it is part, but the Devil has since so over-done his, that what with the
Vizor of Sanctity, which is the gadly Sneere, the drawing of the Face to a
prodigious length, the formal language, with a certain Twang through the Nose,
and the pious Gogle, they are fitter to scare Children than beget love in
Ladies.


Lov. You hit the Character of your new Saint.


La. Lam. And then their Dress, Gilliflower.


Gill. Oh! It Is an Abomination to look like a Gentleman; long Hair is wicked
and Cavalierish, a Periwig is flat Popery, the Disguise of the Whore of
Babylon; handsome Clothes, or laced Linen, the very Tempter himself, that
debauches all their Wives and Daughters: therefore, the diminutive Band, with
the Hair of the Reformation Cut, beneath which, a Pair of large sanctified
Souses appear, to declare to the World, they had hitherto escaped the Pillory,
though deserved it as well as Pryn.


La. Lam. Have a Care what you say, Gilliflower.


Gill. Why Madam, we have no Informers here.


Enter Page. Page. Madam, here is Old Noll's Wife desires Admittance to your Hon
-- your Highness.


La. Lam. Bid the poor Creature wait without, I Will do her what good I can for
her Husbands sake, who first infused Politiques into me, by which I may boast I
have clim'd to Empire.


Lov. So, her Madness runs in that Vein I see. Aside.


Gill. Alack Madam, I think she is coming.


Crom. without. Does she keep state in the Divel's Name, and must I wait!


La. Lam. Heavens! I shall be scandalized by the godly, Dear Gilliflower,
conceal my Cavalier; I would not have a Cavalier seen with me for all the
World. -- Step into my Cabinet -- Ex. Gill. and Lov.


Enter La. Cromwell, held back by a Man. -- to them Gilliflower. Crom. Unhand me
Villain -- 'twas not long since a Rudeness Sir like this had forfeited thy Head.


La. Lam. What would the Woman?


Crom. The Knave, the perjured Villain thy Husband, byth' Throat, thou proud,
imperious Baggage; to make me wait? who is Train thou have been proud to bear --
how durst thou, after an Affront like this, trust thy false Face within my
Fingers reach? that Face, that first bewitch't the best of Husbands from me,
and tempted him to sin.


Gill. I beseech your Highness retire, the Woman's mad.


Cro. Highness, in the Devil's name, sure it is not come to that; no, I may live
to see thy Cuckold hanged first, his Politics are yet too shallow, Mistress.
Heavens! Did my Husband make him Lord for this? raise him to Honor,
Trusts, Commands, and Councels,
To ruin all our Royal Family,
Betrayed young Richard, who had reigned in Peace
But for his Perjuries and Knaveries;
And now he sooths my Son in Law, soft Fleetwood,
With empty hopes of Power, and all the while
To make himself a King:
No, Minion, no; I yet may live to see
Thy Husband's Head o'th top of Westminster
Before I see it circled in a Crown.

La. Lam. I pity the poor Creature.

Crom. Ungrateful Traitor as he is,
Not to look back upon his Benefactors;
But he, in lieu of making just Returns,
Reviles our Family, prophanes our Name,
And will in time render it far more odious
Than ever Needham made the great Heroicks.

La. Lam. Alas, it weeps, poor Woman!

Cro. Thou lie, false Strumpet, I scorn to shed a Tear
For ought that thou can do or say to me;
I Have too much of my Husband's Spirit in me.
Oh, my dear Richard, had thou had a grain on it,
Thou and thy Mother never had fallen to this.

Gill. His Father sure was seeking of the Lard when he was got.

Enter La. Fleetwood, her Train borne. Crom. Where is this perjured Slave, thy
Wittal Lord?
Dares he not show his Face, his guilty Face,
Before the Person he has thus betrayed?

L. Fleet. Madam, I hope you mistake my honored Lord Lambert, I believe he
designs the Throne for my dear Lord.

Crom. Fond Girl, because he has the Art of fawning,
Dissembling to the height, can sooth and smile,
Profess, and sometimes weep: --
No, he will betray him, as he did thy Brother;
Richard the Fourth was thus deluded by him.
No, let him swear and promise what he will,
They are but Steps to his own ambitious End;
And only makes the Fool, thy credulous Husband
A silly deluded Property.

Enter Fleetwood. Fleet. My honored Mother, I am glad to find you here, I hope
we shall reconcile things between ye. Verily, we should live in brotherly Love
together; come, ingeniously, you shall be Friends, my Lady Mother.


Cro. Curse on the occasion of thy being a Kin to me.


Flee. Why, an please ye forsooth Madam?


Cro. My Daughter had a Husband,
Worthy the Title of my Son in Law:
Ireton! my best of Sons: he would Wit and Courage,
And with his Councels, raised our House to Honors,
Which thy impolitick Easiness pulls down:
And whilst you should be gaining Crowns and Kingdoms
Art poorly couzening of the World with fruitless Prayers.

Fleet. Nay, I Will warrant you Madam, when there is any gadly mischief to be
done, I am as forward as the best, but it is good to take the Lard along with us
in every thing. I profess ingeniously, as I am an honest man, verily -- never
stir -- I shall act as becomes a good Christian.


Cro. A Good Coxcombe.
Do thou not see her reverend Highness there,
That Minion now assumes that glorious Title
I once, and my Son Richard's Wife enjoyed,
Whilst I am called the Night Mare of the Commonwealth?
But would I were, I Would so hag-ride the perjured Slaves
Who took so many Oaths of true Allegiance
To my great Husband first, and then to Richard --
Who, whilst they reigned, were most illustrious,
Most high and mighty Princes; whilst fawning Poets
Write Panegyricks on 'em: And yet no sooner was
The wondrous Hero dead, but all his glorious
Titles fell to Monster of Mankind, Murderer
Of Piety, Traitor to Heaven and Goodness.

Flee. Who calls him so? Pray take their Names down: I profess ingeniously,
forsooth Madam, verily I Will order 'em, as I am here I will.

Cro. Thou, alas they scorn so poor a thing as thou.

Fleet. Do they ingeniously? I Will be even with 'em, forsooth Mother, as I am
here I will, and there is an end on it.

Cro. I would there were an end of our disgrace and shame, which is but just
begun, I fear. --
What will become of that fair Monument
Thy careful Father did erect for thee, to La. Fleetw.
Yet whilst he lived, next to thy Husband Ireton?
Lest none should do it for thee after he were dead?
The Malice of proud Lambert will destroy all.

Fleet. I profess, Madam, you mistake my good Lord Lambert, he is an honest man,
and fears the Lard; he tells me I am to be the man; verily he does, after all is
done.


Cro. Yes, after all is done, thou art the man to be pointed at.


Fleet. Nay, ingeniously, I scorn the words, so I do: I know the great Work of
Salvation to the Nation is to be wrought by me, verily.


Cro. Do, Cant on, till Heaven drop Kingdoms in thy mouth: dull, silly Sot,
thou ruin of our Interest: thou fond, inccorrigible, easy Fool.


Enter Page. Page My Lord, the Committee of Safety waits your coming.


Fleet. Why, law you now, forsooth, -- I profess verily, you are ingeniously
the hardest of belief -- tell the honorable Lords I Am coming: Go, Lady mother,
go home with my Wife; and verily you will see things go to your wish. -- I must
to Coach. --


L. Fleet. Madam your humble Servant. to La. Lam.


Fleet. Honored Lady I kiss your hands. Ex. Crom. Fleet. and La. Fleet.


Enter Loveless. Lov. Was this the thing that is to be Protector?
This little snivelling Fellow rule three Kingdoms?
But leave we Politics, and fall to Love,
Who deals more Joys in one kind, happy moment
Than Ages of Dull Empire can produce.

La. Lam. Oh Gods! Shall I who never yielded yet,
But to him to whom three Kingdoms fell a Sacrifice,
Surrender at first Parley?

Lov. Perhaps that Lover made ye gayer Presents,
But could not render you a Heart all love,
Or mind embyass'd in Affairs of Blood.
-- I bring no Guilt to fright ye from my Embraces,
But all our hours shall be serene and soft.

La. Lam. Ah, Gilliflower, thy Aid, or I Am lost;
Shall it be said of me in after Ages
When my great Fame amongst Queens shall be recorded,
That I, ah Heavens! regardless of my Countries Cause,
Espoused the wicked Party of its Enemies,
The Heathenish Heroicks! ah, defend me!

Lov. Nay -- by all that is --

La. Lam. Ah hold! Do not profane my Ears with Oaths or Execrations, I cannot
bear the sound.

Lov. Nay, nay, -- by Heaven I Will not depart your lodgings, till that soft
Love that plays so in your Eyes give me a better proof -- by --

La. Lam. Oh hold, I dye, if you proceed in this Abomination!

Lov. Why do you force me to it? do you think to put me off with such a Face --
such lips, -- such smiles -- such Eyes -- and every Charm -- You Have made me
mad, and I shall swear my Soul away, if disappointed now.


Gill. Ah, save the Gentleman's Soul, I beseech ye, Madam.


La. Lam. I Am much inclined to Acts of Piety -- leaning on him, smiling. He
goes to lead her out, Enter La. Desbro.
And you have such a Power, that however I incommode my Honor --
-- Desbro here! how unseasonably she comes?

La. Des. Cry mercy, Madam, I Will withdraw a while.

La. Lam. Ah Desbro! thou art come -- in the most lucky minute -- I was just on
the point of falling -- As thou say, these Heroicks have the strangest Power
--


La. Des. I never knew a Woman could resist 'em.


La. Lam. No marvel then, our Husbands use 'em so, betray 'em, banish 'em,
sequester, murder 'em, and every way disarm 'em. --


La. Des. But their Eyes Madam.


La. Lam. Ay, their Eyes Desbro; I wonder our Lords should take away their
Swords, and let 'em wear their Eyes.


La. Desbro. I Will move it to the Committee of Safety, Madam, those Weapons
should be taken from 'em too.


La. Lam. Still they will have some to be revenged on us.


La. Des. Ay, so they will; My Lord says, a Cavalier is a kind of Hidra, knock
him of the Head as often as you will, he has still one to peep up withal.


Enter Page. Page. Madam, here is Mr. Freeman to speak with your Honor.


Lov. That Is a Friend of mine Madam, and 'twou'd be unnecessary he saw your
Highness and I together: let us withdraw --


La. Lam. Withdraw, why, What will Desbro say?


Des. O Madam, I know your Virtue and your Piety too well to suspect your
Honor wrongfully? it is impossible a Lady that goes to a Conventicle twice a
day, besides long Prayers and loud Psalm-singing, should do any thing with an
Heroic against her Honor. Your known Sanctity preserves you from Scandal. --
But here is Freeman -- Puts 'em in.


Enter Freeman. Free. So Madam -- you are very kind --


La. Des. My charming Freeman, this tedious day of Absence has been an
Age in love! How have thou lived without me?

Free. Like one condemned, sad and disconsolate,
And all the while you made your Husband happy.

La. Des. Name not the beastly Hypocrite, thou know
I make no other use of him,
But a dull Property to advance our Love.

Free. And it is but Justice, Maria, he sequestered me of my whole Estate,
because, he said, I took up Arms in Ireland, on Noble Ormond's Side; nay, hired
Rogues, perjured Villains -- Witnesses with a Pox, to swear it too; when at
that Time, I was but eight years old: But I 'scapt as well as all the Gentry
and Nobility of England. To add to this, he takes my Mistress too.


La. Des. You mistake, my lovely Freeman; I married only thy Estate, the best
Composition I could make for thee, and I will pay it back with Interest too.


Free. You would suspect my love then, and swear that all the Adoration I pay
you, were, as we do to Heaven, for Interest only.


La. Des. How you mistake my love, but do so still, so you will let me give
these -- Proofs of it. Gives him Gold.


Free. Thus like Atlante, you drop Gold in my Pursuit
To love, I may not over-take you:
What Is this, to giving me one happy minute?
Take back your Gold, and give me current love,
The Treasure of your Heart, not of your Purse, --
When shall we meet Maria?

La. Des. You know my leisure Hours are when my honorable Lord is busied in
Affairs of State, or at his Prayers; from which long-winded Exercise I have of
late withdrawn my self: three Hours by the Clock he prays extempory, which is,
for National and Household Blessings: for the first -- it is to confound the
Interest of the King, that the Lard would deliver him, his Friends, Adherers
and Allies, wheresoever scattered about the Face of the whole Earth, into the
Clutches of the righteous: Press 'em good Lard, even as the Vintager does the
Grape in the Wine Press, till the Waters, and gliding Channels are made red with
the Blood of the wicked. In a Tone.


Free. And grant the faithful to be mighty, and to be strong in Persecution;
and more especially, Ah! I beseech thee confound that malignant Tory Freeman --
that he may never rise up in Judgment against thy Servant, who has taken from
him his Estate, his Sustinance, and Bread; give him Grace of thy infinite
Mercy, to hang himself, if thy People can find no zealous Witnesses to swear
him to the Gallows legally. Ah, we have done very much for thee Lard, thou
shoud'st consider us thy Flock, and we should be as good to thee in another
thing. In a Tone.


La. Des. Thou hit'st the zealous Twang right; sure thou have been acquainted
with some of them.


Free. Damn 'em, no; what honest Man would keep 'em Company, where harmless Wit
and Mirth's a Sin, laughing scandalous, and a merry Glav, Abomination.


La. Des. Yes, if you drink Healths my wicked Brother; otherwise, to be
silently drunk, to be as abusive and satirical as you please, upon the
Heroicks, is allowable -- for laughing, indeed it is not so well; but the
precise Sneere and Grin is lawful; no swearing indeed, but lying and
dissimulation in abundance -- I Will assure you, they drink as deep, and
entertain themselves as well with this silent way of lewd Debauchery, as you
with all your Wit and Mirth, your Healths to the Royal Family.


Free. Nay, I confess, it is a great Pleasure to cheat the World.


La. Des. It Is Power, as divine Hobs calls it.


Free. But what is all this to Love? Where shall we meet anon?


La. Des. I Will tell you, that will please you as well. -- Your Friend is
within, with her Highness that shall be, if the Devil and her Husband's
Politics agree about the matter.


Free. Ha, has my cautious Railer managed matters so sleyly?


La. Des. No, No, the Matter was managed to his Hand: You see how Heaven brings
things about, for the Good of your Party; this Business will be worth him, at
least a thousand pound a Year, or two, well managed. -- But see, my Ladies
Woman.


Gill. Oh Madam, my Lord! Running cross the Stage into her Ladies Chamber.


Free. Death, how shall I bring my Friend off? He Will certainly be ruined.


Enter Gill. Lov. and La. Lam. Gill. Madam, he is coming up.


Lov. Madam, for my self I care not, but much concerned for you.


La. Lam. takes two Papers out of her Pock. and gives 'em to Lov. and Free. La.
Lam. Here, take these two Petitions, each of you one, -- Poor Fellows -- you
may be gone, your Petitions will not be granted.


Enter Lambert. Lam. How now, my Dear, what Petitions? -- Friends, what is your
Business?


La. Lam. It Is enough we know their Business Love, we are sufficient to
dispatch such Suitors, I hope.


Lam. Pardon me, my Dear, I thought no harm; but I saw you frown, and that made
me concerned.


La. Lam. Frown! 'Twou'd make any Body frown, to hear the Impudence of
Gentlemen, these Cavaliers; -- would you think it my Dear, if this Fellow has
not the Impudence to petition for the Thirds of his Estate again, so justly
taken from him for bearing Arms for the Man? --


La. Des. Nay, I 'am informed, that they, but two Nights ago, in a Tavern,
Drunk a Health to the Man too.


Lam. How durst you, Sirrah, approach my Lady with any such saucy Address, you
have received our Answer.


Lov. Death, I Have scarce Patience. Aside.


Free. We knew, my Lord, the Influence your Ladies have over you, and Women are
more tender and compassionate naturally, than Men; and Sir, it is hard for
Gentlemen to starve.


La. Lam. Have you not able Limbs, can ye not work --


Lov. Persons of our Education work!


Lam. Starve or beg then.


La. Lam. Education, why, I Will warrant there was that young Creature they call
the Duke of Gloucester, was as well educated as any Lad in the Parish, and yet
you see he should have been bound Prentice to a handy Crafts Trade, but that
our Lords could not spare Money to bind him out, and so they sent him to beg
beyond Sea.


Lov. Death, I shall do Mischief: not all the Joy she gave me but now, can
atone for this Blasphemy against the Royal Youth.


Free. Patience -- Well my Lord, we find you are obdurate, and we'll withdraw.


Lam. Do so: And if you dare presume to trouble us any more, I Will have you
whipped, do you hear.


La. Des. Madam, I Will take my leave of your Ladyship. Ex. Lov. Free. and L. Des.


La. Lam. My Lord, 'twas I that ought to threaten 'em -- but you are so forward
still -- what makes you from the Committee?


Lam. I left some Papers behind.


La. Lam. And they will make use of your Absence to set up Fleetwood King.


Lam. I Will warrant ye my Dear.


La. Lam. You Will warrant? you're a Fool and a Coxcomb; I see I must go my self,
there will be no business done 'till I thunder 'em together: They want Old
Oliver amongst 'em, his arbitrary Nod could make ye all tremble; when he wanted
Power or Money, he need but Cock in Parliament, and lay his hand upon his
Sword, and cry, I must have Money, and had it, or kicked ye all out a doors:
And you are so mealy mouthed, you cannot Cock for a Kingdom.


Lam. I Will warrant you Dear, I can do as good a thing for a Kingdom.


La. Lam. You can do nothing as you should do it: You want Old Oliver's Brains,
Old Oliver's Courage, and Old Oliver's Counsel: Ah, what a politic Fellow was
little Sir Anthony! What a Head-peice was there! What a plaguey Fellow Old
Thurlo, and the rest: But get ye back, and return me Protector at least, or
never hope for Peace again.


Lam. My Soul trouble not thy self, go in --
With mine, no Power can equal be,
And I will be a King to humor thee. Exeunt.

ACT III.
Scene I. A Council Chamber, great Table, Chairs, and Papers.
Enter two Clarks, who lay Papers in Order, and Doorkeeper. Door. COme, Haste,
Haste, the Lords are coming; -- keep back there, room for the Lords, room for
the honorable Lords: Heaven bless your Worships Honors.


Enter Lambert, Fleetwood, Whitlock, Wariston, discoursing earnestly; to them
Duckenfield, Cobbet, Hewson, Desbro, and others; Duck takes Wariston by the
Hand, and talks to him. War. Bread a gued Gentlemen, I's served the
Commonwealth long and faithfully; I's turned and turned to and Interest and and
Religions that turned up Trump, and wons a me, but I's get naught but Bagery by
my Sol; I's no put in for a Pansion as well as rest o ya Loones.


Cob. What we can serve you in my Lord, you may command.


Duc. And I too my Lord, when the Government is new molded.


War. Wons Sirs, and I's sa moold it; 'twas never sa moolded sin the Dam boond
the Head on it.


Duc. I know there are some ambitious Spirits that are for a single Person; but
we'll have hot work e're yield to that.


War. The faud Diel take 'em then for Archibald; it is warse than Monarchy.


Duc. A thousand Times: Have we with such Industry, been pulling down Kings of
the Royal Family, to set up Tyrants of our own, of mean and obscure Birth? No,
if we are for a single Person, I Am for a lawful one.


War. Wons and ya have spoken and my Lord, so am I.


Duc. But Lambert has a busy, haughty Spirit, and thinks to carry it; but
we'll have no single Person.


War. Nor I, ods Bread; the faud Diel breast the Wem of Lambert, or any single
Person in England. I's for yare Interest my gued Lords. Bowing.


Lam. My Lord Wariston, will you please to assume the Chair.


Enter Loveless, Freeman, and others with Petitions. War. Ah, my gued Loord,
I's yare most obedient humble Servant.


Bowing to Lam. all set. All. Hum, Hum.


Fleet. My Lords and Gentlemen, we are here met together in the Name of the
Lard --


Duc. Yea, and I hope we shall hang together as one man. -- A Pox upon your
preaching. Aside.


Fleet. -- And hope this days great work will be for his Praise and Glory.


Duc. 'Bating long Graces my Lord, we are met together for the Business of the
Nation, to settle it, and to establish a Government.


Fleet. Yea, verily: And I hope you will all unanimously agree, it shall be
your unworthy Servant.


Lam. What else my Lord?


Flee. And as thou Lard has put the Sword into my hand --


Duc. So put it into your Heart -- My Lord, to do Justice.


Fleet. Amen.


Duc. I Would rather see it there than in your Hand. Aside.


Fleet. For, we are, as it were, a Body without a Head; or, to speak more
learnedly, an Animal, unanimate.


Hus. My Lord, let us use, as little as we can, the language of the Beast; hard
Words, none of your Eloquence, it savoureth of Monarchy.


Lam. My Lord, you must give men of Quality leave to speak in a Language more
Gentile and Courtly than the ordinary sort of mankind.


Hew. My Lord, I am sorry to hear there are any of Quality amongst this
Honorable Dissembly. stands up.


Cob. Assembly, my Lord --


Hews. Well, you know my meaning; or if there be any such, I Am sorry they
should own themselves of Quality.


Duc. How, own themselves Gentlemen? Death Sir, d' ye think we were all born
Cobblers?


Hews. Or if you were not, the more the pity, for little England, I say. in
heat.


Fleet. Verily, my Lords, Brethren should not fall out, it is a scandal to the
Good Cause, and makes the Wicked rejoice.


War. Wons and theys garr the Loosey Proverb on it te, When Loons gang together
by the Luggs, gued men get their ene.


All. He, he, he.


Duc. He calls you Knaves by craft, my Lords.


War. Bread a gued, take it among ye Gentlemen, I's meant we will.


Fleet. I profess, my Lord Wariston, you make my hair stand an end to hear how
you swear.


War. Wons, my Loord, I's swear as little as your Lordship, only I's swear out,
and ya swallow and.


Duc. There Is a Bone for you to pick, my Lord.


All. He, he, he.


Lam. We give my Lord Wariston leave to jest.


Des. But what is this to the Government all this while? a dad I shall sit so
late, I shall have no time to visit my Horses, therefore proceed to the Point.


Hews. Ay, to the Point, my Lords; the Gentleman that spoke last spoke wll.


Cob. Well sed Brother, I see you will in time speak properly.


Duc. But to the Government, my Lords? beats the Table.


Lam. Put 'em off of this Discourse, my Lord. aside to War.


Des. My Lord Wariston, move it, you are Speaker.


War. The Diel a me, Sirs, and no ya talk of a Speaker, I's tell ye a blithe
Tale.


Fleet. Ingeniously my Lord, you are to blame to swear so.


Lam. Your Story, my Lord.


War. By my Solmon, and there was a poor Woman the other day begged ot'h' Carle
the Speaker, but he would give her naught unlas she would lat a feart; wons at last a
feart she lat, Ay marry, quoth the woman, no my Rump has a Speaker te.


All. He, he, he.


Duc. But to our Business --


Des. Business; ay, there is the thing, I Have a world on it. I should go and
bespeak a pair of Mittens and Shears for my Hedger and Shearer, a pair of Cards
for my Thrasher, a Sithe for my Mower, and a Skreen-fan for my Lady Wife, and
many other things; my Head's full of business -- I cannot stay. --


Whit. Fie my Lord, will you neglect the business of the day? we meet to oblige
the Nation, and gratify our Friends.


Des. Nay, I Will do any thing, so I may rise time enough to see my Horses at
night.


Lov. Damn 'em, what stuff's here for a Council Table?


Free. Where are our English Spirits, that can be governed by such Dogs as
these? --


Lam. Clark, Read the Heads of what past at our last sitting.


War. In the first place, I must mind your Lordships tol consider those that
have been gued Members in the Commonwelth.


Fleet. We shall not be backward to gratify any that have served the
Commonwealth.


Whit. There Is Money enough; we have taxt the Nation high.


Duc. Yes, if we knew where to find it: however read.


Clark reads. To Walter Walton Draper, six thousand nine hundred twenty nine
pounds six shillings and five pence, for Blacks for his Highness Funeral.


Lam. For the Devil's, put it down for Oliver Cromwell's Funeral: We'll have no
Records rise up in Judgment for such a Villain.


Lov. How the live Asses kick the dead Lion? aside.


Duc. Hark ye, my Lords, We sit here to reward Services done to the
Commonwealth; let us consider whether this be a Service to the Commonwealth or
not?


Lam. However, we'll give him Paper for it.


Hews. Ay, let him get his money when he can.


Lam. Paper's not so dear, and the Clerk's pains will be rewarded.


War. Right, my gued Loord, 'sbred, that Cromwell was the faudest limmer Loon
that ever came intol our Country, the faud Diel has taken him by the luggs for
robbing our Houses and Land.


Fleet. No swearing, my Lord.


War. Weel, weel, my Loord, I's larne to profess and lee as weel as best on ya.


Hews. That may bring you profit, my Lord -- but Clerk proceed.


Clerk reads. To Walter Frost, Treasurer of the Contingencies, twenty thousand
pounds: to Thurloe, Secretary to his Highness --


Duc. To old Nol. --


Clerk reads Old Nol, ten thousand pound, for unknown Service done the
Commonwealth -- to Mr. Hutchinson Treasurer of the Navy, two hundred thousand
pounds --


War. Two hundred thousand pound; Owns what a Sum's there? -- Marry it came
from the Mouth of a Cannon sure.


Clerk reads. A Present to the Right Honorable and truly Virtuous Lady, the
Lady Lambert, for Service done the late Protector.


Hews. Again -- say Cromwell.


Cler. -- Cromwell -- six thousand pound in Iacobus's.


War. 'Sbread, sike a Sum would make me honor the face of and Iemmy.


Clerk. To Mr. Ice six thousand pound; to Mr. Loether late Secretary to his
High --


Whit. To Oliver Cromwell say, can you not obey Orders?


Cler. -- Secretary to Oliver Cromwell -- two thousand nine hundred ninety nine
pounds, for Intelligence and Information, and piously betraying the King's
Liege People.


War. Haud, haud Sirs, Mary en ya gift se fast ya'll gif and away fro poor
Archibauld Johnson.


Whit. Speak for your self, my Lord; or rather my Lord, do you speak for him.
to Lam


Lam. Do you move it for him, and I Will do as much for you anon. aside to Whit.


Whit. My Lord, since we are upon Gratifications, -- let us consider the known
Merits of the Lord Wareston, a Person of industrious mischiefs to the Malignant
Party, and great Integrity to us, and the Commonwealth.


War. Gued faith an I's ha been a trusty Trojon Sirs, what say you my very gued
and gracious Loords? --


Duc. I scorn to let a Dog go unrewarded; and you, Sir, fawn so prettily, it is
pity you should miss Preferment.


Hews. And so it is; come, come, my Lords, consider he was ever our Friend, and
it is but reasonable we should stich up one another's broken Fortunes.


Duc. Nay Sir, I Am not against it.


All. It Is reason, it is reason.


Free. Damn 'em, how they lavish out the Nation?


War. Scribe, pretha read my Paper --


Hews. Have you a pertition there!


Cob. A Pitition, my Lord.


Hews. Pshaw, You Scholards are so troublesome.


Lam. Read the Substance of it. to the Clerk.


Cler. That your Honors would be pleased, in consideration of his Services, to
grant to your Petitioner a considerable Sum of Money for his present supply.


Fleet. Verily, order him two thousand pound --


War. Two thousand poond? Bread a gued, and I's gif my Voice for Fleetwood.
aside.


Lam. Two thousand; nay, my Lords, let it be three.


War. Wons, I lee'd, I leed; I's keep my Voice for Lambert. -- gueds Benizon
light on yar Sol, my gued Lord Lambert.


Hews. Three thousand pound, why such a Sum would buy half Scotland.


War. Wons, my Lord, ya look but blindly on it then: time was, a mite on it had
bought and shoos in yar Stall, Brother, though no ya so abound in Irish and
Bishops Lands.


Duc. You have nicked him there, my Lord.


All. He, he, he.


War. Scribe -- gang a tiny bit farther.


Clerk. -- And that your Honors would be pleased to confer an Annual Pension
on him. --


Lam. Reason, I think; What say you my Lords of five hundred pound a year?


All. Agreed, agreed.


War. The Diel swallow me, my Lord, ya won my heart.


Duc. It Is very well -- but out of what shall this be raised?


Lam. We'll look what Malignants Estates are forfeit, undispos'd of -- let me
see -- who has young Freeman's Estate?


Des. My Lord, that fell to me.


Lam. What all the fifteen hundred pound a year?


Des. A dad, and all little enough.


Free. The Devil do him good with it.


Des. Had not the Lard put it into your hearts to have given me two thousand
par an um out of Bishops Lands, and three thousand par an um out of the
Marquess's Estate; how should I have lived and served the Commonwealth as I
have done?


Free. A plague confound his Honor, he makes a hard shift to live on Eight
thousand pound a year, who was born and bred a Hedger.


Lov. Patience, Friend.


Lam. I have been thinking -- but I Will find out a way.


Lov. Or betray some honest Gentleman, on purpose to gratify the Loone.


Lam. And Gentlemen, I am bound in Honor and Conscience to speak in behalf of
my Lord Whitlock; I think fit, if you agree with me, he should be made
Constable of Windsor Castle, Warden of the Forest, with the Rents,
Perquisites, and Profits thereto belonging, nor can your Lordships confer a
Place of greater Truth and Honor in more safe hands.


Duc. I find he would oblige all to his side. aside. Has he not part of the
Duke of Buckingham's Estate already, with Chelsey House, and several other
Gifts?


Lam. He has dearly deserved 'em, he has served our Interest well and
faithfully.


Duc. And he has been well paid sor't.


Whit. And so were you, Sir, with several Lordships, and Bishops Lands, you
were not born to, I conceive.


Duc. I have not got it, Sir, by Knavish Querks in Law, a Sword that deals out
Kingdoms to the brave, has cut out some small parcels of Earth for me, And what
of this? stands up in a heat.


Whit I think, Sir, he that talks well, and to the purpose, may be as useful to
the Commonwealth as he that fights well; Why do we keep so many else in Pension
that never drew Sword, but to talk, and rail at the Malignant Party; to libel
and defame 'em handsomely, with pious, useful Lies:

Which pass for Gospel with the common Rabble,
And Edify more than Hugh Peters's Sermons?
And make Fools bring more Grist to the public Mill:
Then Sir -- to wrest the Law to our convenience
Is no small, inconsiderate Work?

Free. And which you may be hanged for very shortly -- aside.

Lam. It Is granted, my Lord, your Merit's infinite, --
We made him Keeper of the Great Seal, it is true, it is Honor, but no Salary.

Duc. Ten thousand pound a year in Bribes will do as well.


Lam. Bribes are not so frequent now as in Old Noll's days.


Hews. Well, my Lord, let us be brief and tedious, as the saying as, and humor
one another; I Am for Whitlock's advance.


Lam. I move for a Salary, Gentlemen, Scobel and other petty Clerks have had a
thousand a year, my Lord sure merits more.


Hews. Why, -- let him have two thousand then.


Flee. I profess ingeniously, with all my heart.


Whit. I humbly thank your Lordships -- but, if I may be so bold to ask, from
whence shall I receive it?


Lam. Out of the Customs.


Cob. Brotherly love ought to go along with us -- but, under favor, when this
is gone, where shall we raise new supplies?


Lam. We'll tax the Nation high, the City higher;
They are our Friends, our most obsequious Slaves,
Our Dogs, to fetch and carry, our very Asses --

Lov. And our Oxes, with the help of their Wives. aside.


Lam. Besides, the City's rich, and near her time, I hope, of being delivered.


War. Wons a gued, wad I Would the laying o her, she should be sweetly brought to
Bed, by my Sol.


Des. The City cares for no Scotch Pipers, my Lord.


War. By my Sol, but she has danced after the gued Pipe of Reformation, when
the Covenant Jigg gang'd maryly round Sirs.


Cla. My Lords, here are some poor malignant Petitioners.


Lam. Oh, turn 'em out, here is nothing for 'em; these Fellows were petitioning
my Lady to day -- I thought she had given you a satisfactory Answer?


Lov. She did indeed, my Lord; but, it is a hard Case, to take away a
Gentleman's Estate, without convicting him of any Crime.


Lam. Oh Sir! we shall prove that hereafter.


Lov. But to make sure Work, you will hang a man first, and examine his Offense
afterward; a Plague upon your Consciences: my Friend here had a little fairer
Play, your Villains, your Witnesses in Pension swore him a Colonel for our
Glorious Master, of ever blessed Memory, at eight years old; a Plague upon
their miracles.


Fleet. Ingeniously, Sirrah, you shall be pillory'd for defaming our reverend
Witnesses: Guards take 'em to your Custody both.


Free. Damn it, I shall miss my Assignation with Lady Desbro; a Pox of your
unncessary Prating, what shall I do? Guards take 'em away.


Lam. And now, my Lords, we have finished the business of the Day. My good Lord
Fleetwood, I am entirely yours, and at our next sitting shall approve my self
your Creature. --


Whit. My good Lord, I am your submissive Vassal.


Wariston. Wons my Lord, I scorn any man should be mere yare Vassal than
Archibald Johnson. To Fleetwood.


Ex. All. SCENE. A Chamber. Enter La. Desbro. and Corporal in haste. La. Des.
Seized on, secured, was there no time but this? What made him at the Committee,
or when there, why spoke he honest Truth? What shall I do, good Corporal
Advise: take Gold, and see if you can corrupt his Guards, but they are better
paid for doing mischief; yet try, their Consciences are large. Gives him Gold.


Cor. I Will venture my Life in so good a Cause, Madam. Ex.


Enter Page. Page Madam here is Mr. Ananias Gogle, the Lay Elder of Clements
Parish.


La. Des. Dam the sham Saint; am I now in Condition to be plagued with his
impertinent Nonsense?


Page Oh! Pray Madam hear him preach a little; it is the purest sport. --


Enter Ananias. Ana. Peace be in this Place.


La. Des. A blessed Hearing; he preaches nothing in his Conventicles, but Blood
and Slaughter. Aside. What would you Sir, I Am something busy now.


Ana. Ah, the Children of the Elect have no Business, but the great work of
Reformation? Yea verily, I say, all other Business is profane, and diabolical,
and divelish; Yea, I say, these Dressings, Curles, and shining Habilliments, --
which take so up your time, your precious time; I say, they are an Abomination,
yea, an Abomination in the sight of the Righteous, and serve but as an Ignis
fatuus, to lead vain man astray. -- I say again -- Looking now and then behind
on the Page.


La. Des. -- You are a very Coxcomb.


Ana. I say again, that even I, upright I, one of the new Saints, find a sort
of a -- a -- a -- I know not what, -- a kind of a -- Motion as it were -- a
stirring up -- as a man may say, to Wickedness; -- Yea, verily it corrupts
the outward man within me.


La. Des. Is this your Business Sir, to rail against my Clothes, as if you
intended to preach me into my Primitive Nakedness again?


Ana. Ah, the Naked Truth is best; but, Madam, I have a little work of Grace to
communicate unto you, please you to send your Page away --


La. Des. Withdraw -- sure I can make my Party good with one wicked Elder: Now
Sir -- your Business. Ex. Page. -- Be brief.


Ana. As brief as you please -- but -- who in the sight of so much Beau -- ty
-- can think of any Business but the Business! -- Ah! hide those tempting
Breasts, -- Alack, how smoth and warm they are -- Feeling 'em, and sneering.


La. Des. How now, Have you forgot your Function?


Ana. Nay, but I am mortal man also, and may fall seven times a day; -- Yea
verily, I may fall seven times a day: -- Your Ladyships Husband is old, -- and
where there is a good Excuse for falling, -- Ah, there the fall-ing -- is
excusable. -- And might I but fall with your Ladyship, -- might I, I say. --


La. Des. How, this from you, the Head of the Church militant; the very Pope of
Presbytery?


Ana. Verily, the Sin lies in the Scandal; therefore, most of the discreet
pious Ladies of the Age, choose us, upright men, who make a Conscien^e of a
secret, the Laiety being more regardless of their Fame. -- In sober sadness,
the Place -- inviteth, the Creature tempting, and the Spirit very violent
within me. Takes and ruffles her.


L. Des. Who waits there? -- I Am glad you have proved your self what I ever
thought of all your pack of Knaves.


An, Ah, Madam! Do not ruin my Reputation; there are Ladies of high Degree in
the Commonwealth, to whom we find our selves most comforting; why might not you
be one? -- for, alas, we are accounted as able men in Ladies Chambers, as in
our Pulpits; we serve both Functions -- Enter Servants. Hah! her Servants --
stands at a distance.


La. Des. Should I tell this, I should not find belief. aside.


Anan. Madam, I have another Errand to your Ladyship. -- It is the Duty of my
Occupation to catechize the Heads of every Family within my Diocese; and you
must answer some sew Questions I shall ask -- In the first place, Madam -- Who
made ye?


La. Des. So, from whoring to a zealous Catechism -- who made me? what
Insolence is this, to ask me Questions which every Child that lisps out words
can answer.


An. It Is our Method, Madam.


La. Des. Your Impudence Sirrah -- let me examine your Faith, who are so saucy
to take an account of mine -- Who made you? But lest you should not know, I
will inform you: First, Heaven made you a deformed, ill favored Creature, then
the Rascal your Father made you a Tailor, next, your Wife made you a Cuckold,
and lastly, the Devil has made you a Doctor: and so get you gone for a Fool and
a Knave all over.


Ana. A man of my Coat affronted thus!


La. Des. It shall be worse, Sirrah, my Husband shall know how kind you would
have been to him, because your Disciple and Benefactor, to have begot him a
Babe of Grace for a Son and Heir.


Ana. Mistake not my pious meaning, most Gracious Lady.


La. Des. I Will set you out in your Colors: your impudent and Bloody
Principles, your cheats, your Rogueries on honest men, through their kind,
deluded Wives, whom you cant and goggle into a Belief, it is a great work of
Grace to steal, and beggar their whole Families, to contribute to your
Gormandizing, Lust, and Laziness; Ye Locusts of the Land, preach Nonsense,
Blasphemy, and Treason, till you sweat again, that the Sanctified Sisters my
rub you down, to comfort and console the Creature.


Ana. Ah! Am --


La. Des. Sirrah, be gone, and trouble me no more -- be gone -- yet stay -- the
Rogue may be of Use to me -- amongst the heap of Vice, Hypocrisy, and Devils
that possess all your Party, you may have some necessary sin; I Have known some
honest, useful Villains amongst you, that will swear, profess, and lie devoutly
for the Good Old Cause.


Ana. Yea verily, I hope there are many such, and I should rejoice, yea,
exceedingly rejoice, in any Gadly Performance to your Ladyship.


La. Des. This is a pious Work: You are a Knave of Credit, a very Saint with
the rascally Rabble, with whom your Seditious Cant more prevails, your precious
hum and ha, and gifted Nonsense, than all the Rhetoric of the learned or
honest.


Ana. Hah ^


La. Des. -- In fine, I have use of your Talent at present, there is one now in
Confinement of the Royal Party -- his name's Freeman.


Ana. And your Ladyship would have him dispatched; I conceive ye -- but would
you have him dispatched privately, or by Form of Law? we have Tools for all uses,
and it is a pious Work and meritorious.


La. Des. Right: I would indeed have him dispatched, and privately; but it is
hither privately, hither, to my Chamber, privately, for I have private Business
with him: D' ye start? -- this must be done -- for you can pimp I Am sure upon
occasion, you have Tools for all uses; come, resolve, or I Will discover your
bloody offer; Is your Stomach so queasie it cannot digest Pimping, that can
swallow Whoring, false Oaths, Sequestration, Robbery, Rapes, and Murders daily?


Ana. Verily, you mistake my pious meaning; it is the Malignant I stick at; the
Person, not the Office: and in sadness, Madam, it goes against my tender
Conscience to do any good to one of the Wicked.


La. Des. It must stretch at this time; go haste to the Guard, and demand him
in my Husband's Name; here is something worth your Pains -- having released him,
bring him to me, you understand me -- go bid him be diligent, and as you behave
your self, find my Favor; for know, Sir, I am as great an Hypocrite as you,
and know the Cheats of your Religion too; and since we know one another, it is
like we shall be true.


Ana. But should the man be missing, and I called to an account? --


La. Des. He shall be returned in an hour; go, get you gone, and bring him, or
-- no more -- Ex. Ana.

For all degrees of Vices, you must grant
There is no Rogue like your Geneva Saint.

ACT IV.
Scene I. Chamber, Candles and Lights.
Enter La. Desbro, and Freeman. La. Des. BY what strange Miracle, my dearest
Freeman, were thou set at Liberty?


Free. On the zealous Parole of Rabbie Ananias; that Rhetoric that can convert
whole Congregations of well-meaning Block-heads, to errant Knaves, has now
mollify'd my Keeper; I Am to be rendered back within this Hour: let us not, my
dear Maria, lose the precious minutes this Reverend Hypocrite has given us.


La. Des. Oh! You are very gay, have you forgot whose Prisoner you are, and
that perhaps, e're many days are ended, they may hang you for High Treason
against the Commonwealth? they never want good throw-stitch'd Witness, to do a
Murder lawfully.


Free. No matter; then I shall dye with Joy, Maria, when I consider, that you
loved so well to give me the last Proof on it.


La. Des. Are you in Earnest, Freeman, and would you take what Honor will not
suffer me to grant?


Free. With all my Heart, Honor's a poor Excuse: Your Heart and Vows (your
better part) are mine; you have only lent your Body out to one whom you call
Husband, and whom Heaven has marked for Cuckoldom. Nay, it is an Act of honest
Loyalty, so to revenge our Cause; whilst you were only mine, my honest Love
thought it a Sin to press these Favors from you; 'twas injuring my self as
well as thee; But now we only give and take our Right.


La. Des. No more, my Husband's old. --


Free. Right my Dear Maria; -- and therefore, --


La. Des. -- May possibly dye. --


Free. He will be hanged first.


La. Des. -- I hope so -- either of which, will do our Business: --
Unreasonable Freeman, not to have Patience till my Husband be hanged a little.


Free. But what if Destiny put the Change upon us, and I be hanged instead of
Desbro?


La. Des. Why then thou art not the first Gallant Fellow that has died in the
Good and Royal Cause; and a small Taste of Happiness will but turn thee off the
Ladder with the sadder Heart.


Free. Have thou the Conscience, lovely as thou art,
To deal out all thy Beauty to a Traitor?
Is not this Treason of the highest Nature,
To rob the Royal Party of such Treasure
And give it to our mortal Enemies:
For Shame, be wise and just,
And do not live a Rebel to our Cause;
It Is Sin enough, to have Society with such a wicked Race.

La. Des. But I am married to him.


Free. So much the worse, to make a League and Covenant with such Villains, and
keep the sinful Contract; a little harmless Lying and Dissimulation I Will allow
thee, but to be right down honest, it is the Devil.


L. Des. This will not do; it never shall be said I Have been so much debauched
by Conventickling to turn a Sainted Sinner: No, I Am true to my Allegiance
still, true to my King and Honor. Suspect my Loyalty when I lose my Virtue; a
little Time, I Am sure, will give me honestly into thy Arms, if thou have
Bravery show it in thy Love.


Free. You will overcome, and shame me every way; -- but when will this Change
come? And till it do, what Pawn will you give me? I shall be happy then.


La. Des. My Honor, and that Happiness you long for; and take but two Months
Time for their Redemption.


Free. How greedily I Will seize the Forfeiture!


La. Des. But what am I like to get if this Change do come?


Free. A Slave, and whatever you please to make of him.


La. Des. Who knows, in such a universal Change, how you may alter too?


Free. I Will give ye Bond and Vows, unkind Maria; -- Here, take my hand -- Be it
known unto all Men, by these Presents, that I John Freeman of London, Gent.
acknowledge my self in debt to Maria Desbro, the Sum of one Heart, with an
incurable Wound; one Soul, destined hers from it is first Being; and one Body,
whole, sound, and in perfect Health; which I here promise to pay to the said
Maria, upon Demand, if the aforesaid John Freeman be not hanged before such
Demand made. Whereto, I set my Hand, -- and seal it with my Lips.


La. Des. And I, in Consideration of such Debt, do freely give unto the
abovesaid John Freeman the Heart and Body of the abovesaid Maria Desbro, with
all Appurtenances thereto belonging, whenever it shall please Heaven to bring
my Husband fairly to the Gallows. in a tone.


Free. Amen. -- kiss the Book -- Kisses her.


Ana. hums without. La. Des. Hah! that is Ananias sure; some Danger's near, the
necessary Rascal gives us Notice of.


Free. it is so, what would thou have me do?


La. Des. thou art undone if seen. -- Here, step within this Curtain. He goes.


Enter Ananias, humming, and spreading his Cloak wide; Desbro behind him,
puffing in a Chafe. Des. Ads nigs, what a Change is here like to be, -- puff
puff -- we have managed matters sweetly -- to let the Scotch General undermine
us; puff, puff.


La. Des. What Is the matter?


Des. Nothing Cockey, nothing, but that we are like to return to our first
nothing.


Ana. Yea verily, when our times come; but ah, the great work of Reformation is
not yet fully accomplished, which must be wrought by the Saints, and we cannot
spare one of them until the Work be finished.


Des. Yea, yea, it is finished I doubt, puff, puff; fie, fie, what a Change is
here!


Ana. Patience, ah, it is a precious Virtue! --


Des. Patience Sir! what, when I shall lose so many fine Estates which did
appertain to the Wicked; and which, I trusted, had been established ours; and
tell thou me of Patience! puff, puff. walking fast.


Ana. How lose 'em Sir? Handle the matter with Patience; I hope the Committee
of Safety, or the Rump, will not do an illegal thing to one of the Brethren.


Des. No, No, I have been a trusty Knave to them, and so I have found them all
to me: but Monk! Monk! O that ever we should be such blind Fools to trust an
honest General!


Ana. Patience Sir, What of him!


Des. I just now received private Intelligence, he is coming out of Scotland.
with his Forces. -- puff, puff.


Ana. Why, let him come a Gads Name, we have those will give him a civil
Salute, if he mean not honorably to the Commonwealth. Patience Sir.


Des. But if he prove the stronger, and should chance to be so great a Traitor
to us to bring in the Man -- the King?


La. Des. How, the King Husband; the great Heroic?


Free. Death, this Woman is a Sybill? Ah, Noble Monk!


Ana. Hum -- the King! --


Des. Ah, and with the King, the Bishops; and then, where is all our Church and
Bishops Lands! Oh! undone. -- puff puff.


Ana. How, bring in the King and Bishops! my righteous Spirit is raised too: --
I say, I will excommunicate him for one of the Wicked; yea, for a profane
Heroic, a Malignant, a Tory, -- a -- I say, we will surround him, and confound
him with a mighty Host; yea, and fight the Lards Battle with him; yea, we will.
--


Des. Truckle to his Power. -- puff, puff.


Ana. Nay, I say verily, nay; for, in Sadness, I will dye in my Calling.


Des. So I doubt shall I -- which is Plowing, Hedging, and Ditching.


Ana. Yea, we have the Sword of the Righteous in our hand, and we will defend
the mighty Revenues of the Church, which the Lard has given unto his People,
and chosen ones -- I say, we will defend --


Des. Ah, Patience, Sir, ah, it is a pious Virtue --


Ana. Ah, it is Zeal in one of us, the outgoings of the Spirit.


Enter Page. Tom. Sir, Will you go down to Prayers? the Chaplain waits.


Des. No, no, Boy, I am too serious for that Exercise,
I cannot now dissemble, Heaven forgive me.

Ana. How, Sir, not dissemble -- ah, then you have lost a great Virtue indeed,
a very great Virtue; ah, let us not give away the Good Old Cause -- but, as we
have hitherto maintained it by Gadly cozenage, and pious frauds, let us
persevere -- ah, let us persevere to the end; let us not lose our Heritage for
a Mess of Pottage, that is, let us not lose the Cause for Dissimulation and
Hypocrisy, those two main Engines that have carried on the great Work.


Des. Verily, you have prevailed, and I will go take counsel of my pillow: Boy
-- call my man to undress me -- I Will to bed, for I am sick at heart. Ex. Tom.
Page.


Free. Death, what shall I do now? Des. walks, she whispers Ana.


La. Des. You must get my man off, or we are undone.


Ana. Madam, be comforted, Heaven will bring all things about for our
advantage. -- as Des. turns.


La. Des. But he is behind the Curtains man -- Des. turns from 'em.


Ana. Ah, let Providence alone -- s^reads his cloak wide and goes by degrees
toward the Bed. -- Your pious Lady, Sir, is doubtful, but I will give her
ample satisfaction.


Des. Ah do, Mr. Ananias, do, for she is a good and a virtuous Lady, certo she
is. goes close to the Bed-post, and speaks over his shoulder.


Ana. Get ye behind my cloak --


La. Des. Indeed Sir, your Counsel and Assistance is very comfortable,


Ana. We should be helps meet to one another, Madam.


Des. Alack, good man ^ La. Des. goes to cokes her Husb.


La. Des. Ay, my Dear, I am so much obliged to him, that I know not without thy
thy aid, how to make him amends.


Free. So this is the first Cloak of Zeal I ever made use of. An. going,
spreading his cloak to the door, Freeman behind goes out.


Des. Good Lady give him this twenty pieces, a dad he worthily deserves 'em.
gives her Gold.


La. Des. Indeed, and so he does, Dear, if thou knew'st all.

-- What say you now, do I not improve in Hypocrisy? and shall I not in time
make a precious member of your Church? to Ana.


Ana. Verily, your Ladyship is most ingenious and expert,
-- Sir, I most humbly take my leave. Ex. Ananias.

Enter Tom Page. Page. My Lord, my Lord Lambert has sent in all haste for you,
you must attend at his house immediately.


Des. So, he has heard the News -- I must away -- let my Coach be ready -- Ex.
Des.


La. Des. How unlucky was this that Freeman should be gone -- Sirrah, run, and
see to overtake him, and bring him back. Ex. all.


SCENE 2. A fine Chamber.
Enter Gilliflower and Loveless, by dark, richly dressed. Lov. Where am I,
Gilliflower?


Gill. In my Ladies Apartment, Sir, she will be with you presently; you need not
fear betraying, Sir, for I Will assure you I Am an Heroic in my heart: my Husband
was a Captain for his Majesty of ever blessed memory, and killed at Naseby, God
be thanked, Sir.


Lov. What pity it is that thou should serve this Party?


Gill. 'Bating her Principles, my Lady has good Nature enough to oblige a
Servant; and truly Sir, my Vails were good in old Oliver's days; I got well by
that Amor, between him and my Lady; the man was lavish enough.


Lov. Yes, of the Nations Treasure -- but, prithee tell me, Is not thy Lady
mad, raving on Crowns and Kingdoms?


Gill. It appears so to you, who are not used to the Vanity of the Party, but
they are all so mad in their degree, and in the Fit they talk of nothing else
Sir; we have to morrow a hearing, as they call it.


Lov. What Is that, a Conventicle?


Gill. No, no, Sir, Ladies of the last Edition, that present their Grievances
to the Council of Ladies, of which my Lady's Chief, which Grievances are laid
open to the Committee of Safety, and so redressed, or slighted, as they are.


Lov. That must be worth one's Curiosity, could one but see it.


Gill. We admit no man, Sir.


Lov. 'Sdeath, for so good a sight I will turn Woman.
I Will Act it to a hair.

Gill. That would be excellent.


Lov. Nay, I must do it: the Novelty is rare -- but I Am impatient -- prithee let
thy Lady know I wait.


Gill. She Is in Affairs of State, but will be here immediately; mean time,
retire into her Cabinet, I Will send the Page with Lights, there you may repose,
till my Lady comes, on the Pallat. she leads him out.


SCENE. A great Chamber of State, -- and Canopy.
And at a Table, seated Lambert, Fleetwood, Desbro, Hewson, Duckingfield,
Wariston, Cobbet; all half drunk, with Bottles and Glasses on the Table; La.
Lam. and La. Fleet. Lam. My Lord Wariston, you are not merry to night.


War. Wons Mon, this Monk sticks in my Gullet, the muckle Diel pull him out by
the Lugs; the faud Loone will en spoil ad our sport mon.


Lam. I thought I had enough satisfied all your Fears; the Army's mine, that is
-- it is yours, my Lords, and I Will employ it too so well for the Good of the
Commonwealth, you shall have cause to commend both my Courage and Conduct: my
Lord Wariston, will you accompany me?


War. Ah, my gued Lord, the Honor is too great! It Is not but I's dare fight my
Lord, but I love not the limmer Loone, he has a villainous honest Face an's
ene; I's kend him ence, and liked him not; but I's drink tol yar gued Fortune;
let it gang aboote, ene and ad Sirs. all drink.


Lam. We'll leave all discourse of business, and give our selves to Mirth; I
fancy good Success from this days Omen.


Enter Gill. whispers La. Lam. she rises. La. Lam. Waited so long!


Gill. And grew inpatient, and please your Highness; must I go tell him you
cannot see him to Night.


La. Lam. Not for the World; my silly Politician will be
Busying himself in dull Affairs of State;
-- Dull in Comparison of Love, I mean;
I never loved before; Old Oliver I suffered for my Interest,
And it is some Greatness, to be Mistress to the best;
But this mighty Pleasure comes A propo
To sweeten all the heavy Toyls of Empire.

Gill. So it does, an't please your Highness.

La. Lam. Go, let him know I Am coming -- Madam, I must beg your Pardon, you
hear, my Lord to morrow goes on this great Expedition; and, for any thing we
know, may fall a glorious Sacrifice to the Commonwealth; therefore, it is meet I
offer up some Prayers for his Safety, and all my Leisure Hours 'twixt this and
that, will be too few. -- Your humble Servant Madam. -- Ex. La. Lam.


La. Fleet. My Dear, I Will leave you too, my Time of Devotion is come, and
heaven will stay for no Body; where are my People, is my Coach ready, or may
Chair.


Fleet. Go in your Chair my Love, lest you catch cold.


La. Fleet. And light your Flambeaus, -- I love to have my Chair surrounded
with Flambeaus.


Enter Page. Page Your Chair is ready, Madam. She goes out, led by Fleet.


Hews. What think ye now my Lords of settling the Nation a little; I find my
Head swim with Politics, and what ye call ums.


War. Wons, and wad ya settle the Nation when we real our selves?


Hews. Who, pox shall we stand making Childrens Shoes all the year? No, No,
let us begin to settle the Nation, I say, and go throw stich with our Work.


Duc. Right, we have no Head to obey; so that if this Scotch General do come,
whilst we Dogs fight for the Bone, he runs away with it.


Hews. Shaw, we shall patch up matters with the Scotch General, I Will warrant
you: However, here is to our next Head. -- One and All. -- all drink.


Flee. Verily Sirs, this Health drinking savoureth of Monarchy, and is a Type
of Malignancy.


War. Bread, my Lord, no preaching over yar Liquer, wee's now for a Cup of the
Creature.


Cob. In a gadly way you may, it is lawful.


Lam. Come, Come, we are dull, give us some Music -- Come my Lord, I Will give
you a Song, I love Music as I do a Drum, there is Life and Soul in it, call my
Music.


Fleet. Yea, I am for any Music, except an Organ.


War. 'SBread Sirs, and I's for a Horn-pipe; I Have a faud Thief here shall
dance ye dance tol a Horn-pipe, with any States man a ya'ad.


All. He, He, He.


Duc. I know not what your faud Thief can do; but, I Will hold you a Wager,
Colonel Hewson, and Colonel Desbro, shall dance ye the Saints Jigg with any
Sinner of your Kirk, or Field Conventickler.


War. Wons, and I's catch 'em at that sport, I's danc^ tol 'em for a Scotch
Poond but farst yar Song, my Lord, I hope it is body, or it is not w^rth a Feart.


All. He, He, He.


Song sung by Lord Lambert.
A Pox of the Statesman that is witty
That watches and Plots all the sleepless Night,
For Seditious Harangues to the Whigs of the City,
And piously turns a Traitor in spite.
Let him wrack and torment his lean Carrion,
To bring his Sham-Plots about,
Till Religion, King, Bishop, and Baron,
For the Public Good, be quite rooted out.
Whilst we that are no Politicians,
But Rogues that are Resolute, barefaced and Great,
Boldly head the rude Rabble in open Sedition,
Bearing all down before us in Church and in State.
Your Impudence is the best State trick,
And he that by Law means to rule,
Let his History with ours be related,
Though we prove the Knaves, it is he is the Fool.
War. The Diel a me, well sung my Lord, and gen and Trads fail, yas make a
quaint Minstrel.


All. He, He, He.


War. No Sirs, yar Dance? They fling Cushions at one another, and grin. Music
plays. -- Mary Sirs, an this be yar dancing, tol dance and never stir Stap, the
Diel lead the Donce for Archibald. When they have flung Cushions thus a while
to the Music Time, they beat each other from the Table, one by one, and fall
into a godly Dance; after a while, Wariston rises, and dances ridiculously a
while amongst them, then to the Time of the Tune, they take out the rest, as at
the Cushion Dance, or in that Nature. Wariston being the last taken in, leads
the rest. -- Haud Minstrels hade; Bread a gued, I's fatch ad Ladies in -- lead
away Minstrels tol my Ladies Apartment. Music playing before all.


Ex. Dancing. SCENE. Flat.
Enter Page. Page Cock. Here must I wait, to give my Lady Notice when my Lord
approaches; -- The fine Gentleman that is alone with her, gave me these two
fine pieces of Gold, and bad me buy a Sword to fight for the King with-all; and
I Am resolved to lay it all out in Sword, not a penny in Nickers, and fight for
the Heroicks as long as I have a Limb, if they be all such fine Men as this
within. But hark, sure I hear some coming. -- Ex.


Flat Scene draws off, discovers La. Lam. on a Couch, with Loveless, tying a
rich Diamond Bracelet about his Arm; a Table behind with Lights, on which, a
Velvet Cushion, with a Crown and Scepter covered. Lov. This Present's too
magnificent: Such Bracelets young Monarchs should put on.


La. Lam. Persons like me, when they make Presents, Sir, must do it for their
Glory, not considering the merit of the Wearer; yet this, my charming Loveless,
comes short of what I ought to pay thy worth; comes short too of my Love.


Lov. You bless me, Madam --


La. Lam. This the great Monarch of the World once tied about my Arm, and bade
me wear it, till some greater man should chance to win my Heart:
Thou art that man whom Love has raised above him;
Whom every Grace and every Charm thou have
Conspire to make thee mightier to my Soul;
And Oliver, Illustrious Oliver!
Was yet far short of thee.

Lov. He was the Monarch then whose Spoils I triumph in.

La. Lam. They were designed for Trophies to the young and Gay.
Ah, Loveless! that I could reward thy Youth
With something that might make thee more than man,
As well as give the best of Women to thee -- rises, takes him by the hand,
leads him to the Table. He starts.
-- Behold this Gay, this wondrous Glorious thing.

Lov. Hah -- a Crown -- and Scepter!
Have I been all this while
So near the Sacred Relics of my King!
And found no Awful motion in my blood,
Nothing that moved Sacred Devotion in me? kneels.
-- Hail Sacred Emblem of Great Majesty,
Thou that have circled more Divinity
Than the great Zodiac that surrounds the World.
I never was blessed with sight of thee till now,
But in much reverenced Pictures -- rises and bows.

La. Lam. Is It not a lovely thing?

Lov. There Is such Divinity in the very Form on it,
Had I been conscious I Would been near the Temple
Where this bright Relic of the Glorious Martyr
Had been inshrin'd, 'thad spoiled my soft Devotion!
-- it is Sacrilege to dally where it is;
A rude, a Saucy Treason to approach it
With an unbended knee; for Heav's sake, Madam,
Let us not be profane in our Delights,
Either withdraw, or hide that Glorious Object.

La. Lam. Thou art a Fool, the very sight of this --
Raises my Pleasure higher,
Methinks I give a Queen into thy Arms:
And where I love I cannot give enough; softly.
-- Would I could set it on thy Head for ever,
'Twou'd not become my simple Lord
The thousandth part so well. goes to put it on his Head, he puts it back

Lov. Forbear, and do not play with holy things,
Let us retire, and love as Mortals should,
Not imitate the Gods, and spoil our Joys.

La. Lam. Lovely, and unambitious!
What hopes have I of all your promised Constancy,
Whilst this, which possibly 'ere long may adorn my Brow,
And ought to raise me higher in your Love,
Ought to transform you even to Adoration,
Shall poorly make you vanish from it is Luster;
Methinks the very Fancy of a Queen
Is worth a thousand Mistress's of less Illustrious Rank.

Lov. What every Pageant Queen? You might from thence infer
I Would fall in Love with every little Actress, because
She acts the Queen for half an hour,
But then the gaudy Robe is laid aside.

La. Lam. I Will pardon the Comparison in you.

Lov. I do not doubt your Power of being a Queen,
But trust, it will not last.
How truly brave would your great Husband be,
If whilst he may, he paid this mighty Debt
To the Right Owner!
If whilst he has the Army in his Power
He made a true and lawful use of it,
To settle our great Master in his Throne;
And by an act so glorious raise his Name
Even above the Title of a King.

La. Lam. You love me not, that would persuade me from my Glory.

Enter Gilliflower. Gill. Oh, Madam, the Lords are all got merry, as they call
it, and are all dancing hither.


La. Lam. What at their Oliverian Frolicks? -- dear Loveless, withdraw, I would
not give the fond believing Fool a Jealousy of me.


Gill. Withdraw, Madam, it is impossible, he must run just into their mouths.


La. Lam. Im' ill at these Intrigues, being used to Lovers that still came with
such Authority, that modestly my Husband would withdraw -- but Loveless is in
danger, therefore take care he be not seen.


Gill. Heavens! they are coming, there is no retreat --


La. Lam. Lie down on the Couch -- and cover him you with the Foot-Carpet, --
so, give me my Prayer Book. He lies down along on the Couch -- they cover him
with the Carpet: La. Lam. takes her Book, sits down on his Feet, and leans on
the back of the Couch reading; Gill. stands at the other end; they enter dancing
-- as before. -- What Insolence is this? do you not hear me, you -- Sots --
whom Gayety and Dancing do so ill become.


War. singing. Welcome, Ione Sanderson, welcome, welcome. goes to take her out,
she strikes him. Wons, Madam, that is no part of the dance.


La. Lam. No, but it is part of a reward for your Insolence, which possibly your
Head shall answer for. --


Lam. Pardon him, my dear, he meant no disrespect to thee.


La. Lam. How dare you interrupt my Devotion, Sirrah?
Begone with all your filthy ill-bred Crew. Lam. sits down on Loveless.

Lam. My only dear, be patient; hah!
Something moves under me! Treason, Treason. He rises.

Lov. rouls off, and turns Lam. over, the rest of the men run out crying
Treason, Treason, overthrowing the Lights, putting 'em out. La. Lam. Treason,
Treason! my Lord, my Lord!

Lam. Lights there, a Plot, a Popish Plot, lights. She groping about finds Lov.
by his clothes knows him.

La. Lam. The Crown, the Crown, guard the Crown!
-- Here, take this Key, the next room is my Bedchamber,
Secure your self a moment. -- Ex. Loveless.
Lights there, the Crown -- who art thou? takes hold of Lamb.

Lam. It Is I.

La. Lam. Ah, my Lord, what is the matter? --

Lam. Nay, my Lady, I ask you what is the matter, Enter Page with lights. By
Heaven, all is not well: Hark ye, my fine she Politician, who was it you had
hid beneath this Carpet?


La. Lam. Heavens! Do hear him, Gilliflower? Sure the Fellow's mad.


Gill. Alack, my Lord, Are you out of your Honorable Wits?
Heaven knows, my Lady was at her Devotion.

Lam. Bawd, come, confess thy self to be one; at her Devotion, yes, with a He
Saint.


Gill. Ah! Gad forbid the Saints should be so wicked.


La. Lam. Hark ye, thou little snivelling Hypocrite, who have no Virtue but a
little Conduct in Martial Discipline; who have by Perjuries, Cheats, and Pious
Villainies, wound thy self up into the Rabbles Favor, where thou may stand,
till some more great in Roguery remove thee from that height, or to the
Gallows, if the King return. Have thou the impudence to charge my Virtue?


Lam. I know not, Madam, whether that Virtue you boast were lost, or only
stak't, and ready for the Gamester; but I am sure a Man was hid under this
Carpet.


La. Lam. Oh Heavens, a Man!


Gill. A Lord, a Man? Are you sure 'twas a man, my Lord?
-- Some Villainous Malignant, I Will warrant.

Lam. It may be so.

Gill. Alack, the Wickedness of these Heroicks, to hide under Carpets; why
they will have the Impudence to hide under our Petticoats shortly, if your
Highness take 'em not down. To La. Lam.


Lam. I do believe so; Death -- a Cuckold; shall that black Cloud shade all my
rising Fame?


La. Lam. Cuckold? Why is that Name so great a Stranger to ye,
Or has your rising Fame made ye forget
How long -- that Cloud has hung upon your Brow?
-- 'Twas once the height of your Ambition Sir,
When you -- were a poor -- sneeking Slave to Cromwell:
Then you could cringe and sneere -- and hold the Door;
And give him every Opportunity
Had not my Piety defeated your Endeavors.

Lam. That was for Glory,
Who would not be a Cuckold to be great?
-- If Cromwell leaped into my Saddle once,
I Will step into his Throne for it: but, to be pointed at
By Rascals that I -- rule, -- it is insupportable.

La. Lam. How got this Fellow drunk; call up my Officers:
Who dur'st deliver him this Quantity of Wine?
Send straight in my Name, to summon all the
Drunken Committee of Safety to my Presence.
By Heaven I Will show you Sir -- yes they shall
See what a fine King they are like to have
In Honest, Gadly, Sober, Wise Jack Lambert.
-- Nay, I Will do it; do you think to take away my Honor thus?
I, who by my sole Politics and Management,
Have set you up Villain of Villains, Sirrah.
-- Away -- summon 'em all. to Gilliflower.

Lam. Stay -- be not so rash; who was beneath the Carpet?


La. Lam. I will not answer thee.


Lam. Nor any living thing?


La. Lam. No Creature in the Room, thou silly Idiot, but Gilliflower and I, --
at our Devotion, praying to Heaven for your Success to morrow; -- and am I thus
rewarded! Weeps, Gill. weeps too.


Lam. My Soul, I cannot bear the sight of Tears
From these dear charming Eyes.

La. Lam. No matter Sir, the Committee shall right me.


Lam. Upon my Knees I ask thy Pardon Dear; by all that is good, I would have
sworn I Would felt something stir beneath me, as I sat, which threw me over.


La. Lam. Only your Brains turned round with too much drinking and dancing,
Exercises you are not used to: -- Go sleep, and settle 'em; for I Will not daign
to Bed with you to Night; -- retire, as 'ere you hope to have my Aid in your
Advancement to the Crown.


Lam. I Am gone, -- and once more, pardon my Mistake. bows, and goes out.


Ex. Gill. La. Lam. -- So, this fighting Fool, so worshipped by the Rabble, how
meanly can a Woman make him sneeke; to Loveless. -- the happy Night's our own.
--


Enter Gill. Loveless. Lov. Excellent Creature, how I do adore thee!


La. Lam. But you, perhaps, are satisfied already. --


Lov. Never! should thou be kind to all Eternity. Thou have one Virtue more,
I pay thee Homage for; I heard from the Alcove how great a Mistress thou art in
the dear Mystery of Jilting.


La. Lam. That Is the first Lesson Women learn in Conventicles; Religion teaches
those Maxims to our Sex, by this!

Kings are deposed, and Commonwealths are ruled;
By Jilting all the Universe is fooled.

ACT V.
Scene I. Street.
Enter Corporal, half dressed; with Soldiers, Ioyner and Felt-maker. Cor. HA
Rogues, the City-Boys are up in Arms; brave Boys, all for the King now!


Felt. Have a Care what you say Sir; but as to the City's being in Mutiny, that
makes well for us: we shall fall to our old Trade of plundering, something will
fall to the Righteous, and there is Plunder enough.


Corp. You plunder Sirrah, knock him down, and carry him into the Guardroom,
and secure him. Two Soldiers seize him.


1 Sold. They say, the Committee of Safety sat all Night at General Lambert's,
about some great Affair -- some rare Change Rogues!


2 Sold. Yes, and to put off Sorrow, they say, were all right reverendly drunk
too.


Cor. I suppose so, there is some heavenly matter in hand; there was Treason
cried out at the General's last Night, and the Committee of no Safety all ran
away.


1 Sold. Or rather reeled away.


Cor. -- The Ladies squeek'd, the Lords fled, and all the House was up in Arms.


Felt. Yea, and with Reason they say; for, the Pope in diguise was found under
the Ladies Bed, and two huge Jesuits as big as the Tall Irishman, with
Blunderbusses; having, as it is said, a design to steal the Crown now in Custody
of the General. --


2 Sold. Good lack, is it possible?


Ioyn. Nay Sir, it is true, and is it not time we looked about us?


Cor. A Pox upon ye all, for lying Knaves: -- secure 'em both on the Guard,
till farther Order, -- and let us in to the City-boys: hay for Lumbard-street.


2 Sold. Ay hay for Lumbard-street; there is a Shop I have marked out for my
own already.


1 Sold. There Is a handsome Citizens Wife, that I have an Eye upon, her
Husband's a rich Banker, I Will take the one with the other.


Joy. You are mistaken Sir, that plunder is reserved for us, if they begin to
mutiny; That wicked City that is so weary of a Commonwealth.


2 Sold. Yes, they are afraid of the Monster they themselves have made.


Enter Lov. and Free. in disguise. Cor. Hah, my Noble Colonel; what, in
Disguise!


Free. We have made our Escapes, -- and hope to see better times shortly; the
Noble Scotch General is come Boys.


Enter Captain of the Prentices, and a great Gang with him, armed with Staffs,
Swords, etc. Cap. Come my Lads, since you have made me Captain, I Will lead you
bravely on! I Will dye in the Cause, or bring you off with Victory.


1 Pren. Here Is a Club shall do some Execution; I Will beat out Hewson's the other
Eye; I scorn to take him on the blind Side.


Capt. In the first Place, we must all sign a Petition to my Lord Mayor. --


2 Pren. Petitions, we'll have no Petitions Captain; we are for Club Law,
Captain.


Cap. Obey, or I leave you.


All. Obey, Obey.


Capt. Look ye, we'll petition for an honest Free Parliament I say.


1 Pren. No Parliament, no Parliament, we have had too much of that Mischief
already Captain.


All. No Parliament, no Parliament.


Capt. Farewell Gentlemen, I thought I might have been heard.


Free. Death Sirs, you shall hear the Captain out.


All. We obey, we obey.


Capt. I say, an honest Free Parliament, not one picked and chosen by Faction;
but such an one shall do our Business Lads, and bring in the Great Heroic.


All. Ay, Ay, the Great Heroic, the Great Heroic!


Lov. A fine Youth, and should be encouraged.


Capt. Good -- in the next place, the noble Scotch General is come, and we'll
side with him.


Free. Ay, Ay, all side with him.


1 Pren. Your Reason, Captain, for we have acted too much without Reason
already.


2 Pren. Are we sure of him, Captain?


Capt. Oh, he will doubtless declare for the King, Boys.


All. Hay, Via la Roy, via la Monk.


Capt. Next, I hear there is a Proclamation coming out to dissolve the Committee
of no Safety.


All. Good, good.


Capt. And I hope you are all brave enough to stand to your Loyal Principles
with your Lives and Fortunes.


All. We'll dye for the Royal Interest.


Capt. In the next place, there is another Proclamation come out.


2 Pr. This Captain is a man of rare Intelligence; but for what Captain?


Capt. Why -- to -- hang us all, if we do not immediately depart to our
respective Vocations, how like you that, my Lads?


2 Pr. Hum -- hanged! I Will e'n home again.


1 Pr. And I too, I do not like this hanging.


3. Pr. A man looks but scurvily with his Neck awry.


4 Pr. Ay, ay, We'll home.


Capt. Why now you show what precious men you are -- the King would be finely
hope up with such Rascals, that for fear of a little hanging would desert his
Cause; a Pox upon ye all, I here discharge ye --

-- take back your Coward Hands, and give me Hearts, flings 'em a Scroll.
I scorn to fight with such mean-spirited Rogues.
I did but try your boasted Courages.

Lov. A brave Boy.


Lov. and Free. We'll dye with thee, Captain --


All. Oh, noble Captain, we recant --


1 Pr. We recant, dear Captain, we will die, one and all.


All. One and all, one and all.


Capt. Why so, there is some trusting to you now.


3 Pr. But is there such a Proclamation, Captain?


Capt. There is; but anon, when the Crop-ear'd Sheriff begins to read it, let
every man enlarge his Voice, and cry, No Proclamation, no Proclamation.


All. Agreed, agreed.


Lov. Brave noble Lads, hold still your Resolution,
And when your leisure hours will give ye leave,
Drink the King's Health, here is Gold for you to do so.

Free. Take my Mite too, brave Lads. gives 'em Gold.


All. Hay! Viva the brave Heroicks.


Enter Ananias Gogle. Ana. Hum, What have we here, a Street-Conventicle! -- or
a Mutiny? Yea verily, it is a Mutiny, -- What means this appearance in
Hostile manner, in open Street, by Daylight?


Capt. Hah! one of the sanctified Lay Elders, one of the Fiends of the Nation,
that go about like roaring Lions, seeking whom they may devour?


Lov. Who, Mr. Ananias the Padder.


Ana. Bear Witness Gentlemen all, he calls me an Highway Man; thou shall be
hanged for Scandal on the Brethren.


Lov. I Will prove what I say, Sirrah; do not you rob on the Highway in the
Pulpit? Rob the Sisters, and preach it lawful for them to rob their Husbands;
rob men even of their Consciences and Honesty; nay, rather than stand out, rob
poor Wenches of Bodkins and Thimbles.


Ana. I commit ye; here Soldiers, I charge ye in the Name of -- of -- marry I
know not who, in my Name, and the good People of England, take 'em to safe
Custody.


Capt. How, lay hold of honest Gentlemen! Noble Cavaliers, knock him down.


All. Knock him down, knock him down.


Free. Hold worthy Youths; the Rascal has done me Service.


Ana. pulling off his Hat to 'em all. Ye look like Citizens, what evil Spirit
is entered in unto you, oh men of London! that ye have changed your Note, like
Birds of evil Omen; that you go astray after new Lights, or rather, no Lights,
and commit Whoredom with your Fathers Idols, even in the midst of the Holy
City, which the Saints have prepared for the Elect, the Chosen ones.


Capt. Hark ye, Sirrah, leave preaching, and fall to declaring for us, or thou
art mortal.


Ana. Nay, I say nay, I will dye in my Calling -- yea I will fall a Sacrifice
to the Good Old Cause; abomination ye with a mighty hand, and will destroy,
demolish, and confound your Idols, those heathenish Malignants whom you follow,
even with Thunder and Lightening, even as a Field of Corn blasted by a strong
Blast.


Lov. Knock him down.


All. Down with Dagon, down with him.


Enter Hewson with Guards. Hews. Ah Rogues, have I caught ye napping? They all
surround him and his Red-Coats.


All. Whoop Cobbler, Whoop Cobbler.


The Boys, Lov. and Free. Corp. and Sold. beat off Hewson and his Party. An.
gets a Sword, and fights too. SCENE changes to a Chamber.
Enter La. Lam. and Gill. Gill. I Have had no time to ask your Highness how you
slept to night; but that is a needless Question.


La. Lam. How mean you? do you suspect my Virtue? do you believe Loveless dares
attempt any thing against my Honor? No Gilliflower, he acted all things so
like a Gentleman, that every Moment takes my Heart more absolutely.


Gill. My Lord departed highly satisfied.


La. Lam. She is not worthy of Intrigues of Love, that cannot manage a silly
Husband as she pleases -- but Gilliflower, you forget that this is Council day.


Gill. No but I do not, Madam, some important Suitors wait already.


Enter La. Des. and La. Fleetwood. La. Lam. Your Servant, Madam, Desbro,
thour't welcome --
Gilliflower, are all things ready in the Council Chamber?
We that are Great must sometimes stoop to Acts,
That have at least some show of Charity;
We must redress the Grievance of our People.

La. Fleet. She speaks as she were Queen, but I shall put a Spoke in her rising
Wheel of Fortune, or my Lords Politics fail him Scen. draws off, Table with
Papers: Chairs round it.


La. Lam. Where are the Ladies of the Council? -- how remiss they are in their
Attendance on us?


La. Fleet. Us! Heavens, I can scarce endure this Insolence!
-- We will take care to mind 'em of their Duty --

La. Lam. We, poor Creature! how simply Majesty becomes her? They all sitting
down, Enter La. Cromwell angrily, and takes her Place; Lamb. uppermost. --
Madam, as I take it, at our last sitting, our pleasure was that you should sit
no more.


Crom. Your pleasure! Is that the General Voice? This is my Place in spite of
thee, and all thy fawning Faction, and I shall keep it, when thou, perhaps,
shall be an humble Suppliant here at my Footstool.


La. Lam. I smile at thee.


Crom. Do, and cringe; it is thy bu'sness to make thee Popular --
But it is not that,
Nor thy false Beauty that will serve thy Ends.

La. Lam. Rail on; declining Majesty may be excused,
Call in the Women that attend for redress of Grievances. Ex. Page
Enter Page with Women, and Loveless dressed as a Woman. Gentlewomen, what is
your Business with us?

Lov. Gentlewomen? some of us are Ladies.


La. Lam. Ladies, in good time; by what Authority, and from whom do you derive
your Title of Ladies?


La. Feet. Have a care how you usurp what is not you own?


Lov. How the Devil rebukes Sin? aside.


La. Des. From whom had you your Honors, Women?


Lov. From our Husbands.


Gill. Husbands; who are they, and of what standing?


2 Lad. Of no long standing, I confess.


Gill. That Is a common Grievance indeed.


La. Des. And ought to be redressed.


La. Lam. And that shall be taken into consideration; write it down,
Gilliflower, Who made your Husband a Knight, Woman?


Lov. Oliver the first, an't please ye.


La. Lam. Of horrid Memory; write that down -- who yours?


2 La. Richard the Fourth, an't like your Honor.


Gill. Of sottish Memory; Shall I write that down too?


La. Des. Most remarkably.


Cro. Heavens! Can I hear this Profanation of our Royal Family? aside.


La. Lam. I wonder with what impudence Noll and Dick could Knightifie your
Husbands? for it is a Rule in Heraldry, that none can make a Knight but him that
is one; It Is Sancha Pancha's Case in Don Quixot.


Crom. How dare you question my Husband's Authority? rises in Anger.
Who nobly won his Honor in the Field,
Not like thy sneaking Lord, who gained his Title
From his Wife's gay Love-tricks,
Bartering her Honor for his Coronet.

La. Lam. Thou lie, my Husband earned it with his Sword, braver and juster
than thy bold Usurper, who waded to his Glory, through a Sea of Royal Blood. --


La. Des. Sure Loveless has done good on her, and converted her.


La. Fleet. Madam, I humbly beg you will be patient, You Will ruin all my Lord's
Designs else. -- Women, proceed to your Grievances, both public and private.


Lov. I petition for a Pension, my Husband, deceased, was a constant active
man, in all the late Rebellion, against the Man; he plundered my Lord Capel, he
betrayed his dearest Friend Brown Bushel, who trusted his Life in his hands,
and several others; plundering their Wives and Children even to their Smocks.


La. Lam. Most considerable Service, and ought to be considered.


2 La. And most remarkably, at the Trial of the late Man, I spit in's Face, and
betrayed the Earl of Holland to the Parliament.


Crom. In the King's Face, you mean -- it showed your zeal for the Good Cause.


2 La. And 'twas my Husband that headed the Rabble, to pull down Gog and Magog,
the Bishops, broke the Idols in the Windows, and turned the Churches into
Stables and dens of Thieves; robbed the Altar of the Cathedral of the twelve
pieces of Plate called the twelve Apostles, turned eleven of 'em into Money,
and kept Judas for his own use at home.


La. Fleet. On my word, most wisely performed, note it down --


3 La. And my Husband made Libels on the Man, from the first Troubles to this
day, defamed and profaned the Woman and her Children, printed all the man's
Letters to the Woman with Burlesque Marginal Notes, pulled down the sumptuous
Shrines in Churches, and with the golden and Popish Spoils adorned his own
Houses and Chimney Pieces.


La. Lam. We shall consider these great Services.


Lov. To what a height is Impudence arrived? aside.


La. Lam. Proceed to private Grievances.


Lov. An't please your Honors, my Husband prays too much; which both hinders
his private Business at home, and his Public Services to the Commonwealth --


La. Lam. A double Grievance -- set it down, Gilliflower.


Lov. And then he rails against the Whore of Babylon, and all my Neighbors
think he call me Whore.


Crom. A most unpardonable fault.


La. Lam. We'll have that rectified, it will concern us.


Lov. Then he never kisses me, but he says a long Grace, which is more
mortifying than inviting.


La. Des. That is the fault of all the new Saints, which is the reason their
Wives take a pious care, as much as in them lies, to send 'em to Heaven, by
making 'em Cuckolds.


La. Fleet. A very charitable work, and ought to be encouraged.


Loveless gives in a Petition to Gilliflower. Gill. The humble Petition of the
Lady Make-shift, reads, -- Heavens! Madam, here is many thousand hands to it of
the distressed Sex.


All. Read it.


Gill. reads. Whereas there passed an Act June 24th against Fornication and
Adultery, to the great detriment of most of the young Ladies, Gentlewomen, and
Commonalty of England, and to the utter decay of many whole Families,
especially when married to old men; your Petitioners most humbly beg your
Honors will take this great Grievance into Mature Consideration and that the
said Act may be repealed.

-- a blessing on 'em, they shall have my hand too.


La. Lam. We acknowledge, there are many Grievances in that Act: but there are
many Conveniences too, for it ties up the Villainous Tongues of men from
boasting our Favors.


Crom. But as it lays a Scandal on Society -- it is troublesome, Society being
the very Life of a Republic -- Peter's the first, and Martin the Second.


Lov. But in a Free State, why should not we be free?


La. Des. Why not? we stand for the Liberty and Property of our Sex, and will
present it to the Committee of Safety.


Lov. Secondly, we desire the Heroicks, vulgarly called the Malignants, may not
be looked on as Monsters, for assuredly they are Men; and that it may not be
charged to us as a Crime to keep 'em company, for they are honest men.


2 L. And some of 'em men that will stand to their Principles.


La. Lam. Is there no other honest men that will do as well?


3 La. Good men are scarce.


La. Lam. They Are all for Heroicks, sure it is the mode to love 'em -- I cannot
blame 'em. aside.


Lov. And that when we go to Mornings and Evenings Lectures, to Tantlings or
elsewhere, and either before or after visit a private Friend, it may be
actionable for the Wicked to scandalize us, by terming of it, ^busing the
Creature, when it is harmless recreating the Creature.


All. Reason, Reason.


Lov. Nor that any Husband should interupt his Wife, when at her private
Devotion.


Enter Page. La. Lam. I have been too late sensible of that Grievance.


Gill. And Madam, I would humbly pray a Patent for Scolding, to ease my Spleen.


Page An please Your Highness, here is a Messenger arrived Post, with Letters
from my Lord, the General. Ex. Page


La. Lam. Greater Affairs -- oblige us to break up the Council. Rises, the
Women retire. Enter Page with Messenger, or Letters. -- What means this Haste?
Opens, and reads 'em.


Crom. Hah, bless my Eyesight, she looks pale, -- now red again, some Turn to
his Confusion, Heaven, I beseech thee.


La. Lam. My Lord's undone! His Army has deserted him;
Left him denfenceless to the Enemies Power.
Ah Coward Traitors! Where Is that brutal Courage
That made ye so successful in your Villainies?
Has Hell that taught ye Valor, now abandoned ye?
-- How in an Instant are my Glories fallen!

Crom. Ha, ha, ha, -- What, has your Highness any cause of Grief?


Gill. Call up your Courage Madam, do not let these things scoff you, -- you
may be yet a Queen: Remember what Lilly told you Madam.


La. Lam. Damn Lilly, who with lying Prophesies, has raised me to the hopes of
Majesty: a Legend of his Devils take him for it.


Crom. Oh, have a Care of Cursing, Madam!


La. Lam. Screech-Owl, away, thy Voice is ominous.
Oh I could rave! but that it is not great;
-- And silent Sorrow -- has most Majesty.

Enter Wariston, huffing. War. Wons Madam, undone, undone; our honorable
Committee is gone to the Diel, and the damned loosey Rump is and in and; the
muckle Diel set it i'solt, and his Dam drink most fort.


Crom. The Committee dissolved, whose wise Work was that? it looks like
Fleetwood's silly Politics.


War. Mary, and yar Ladiship's in the Right, 'twas en the Work of the faud Loone,
the Diel breast his Wem for it.


Enter Hewson, Desbro, Whitlock, Duc. and Cob. Hews. So Brethren in Iniquity,
we have spun a fine Thread, the Rump's all in all now; rules the Roast, and has
sent for the General with Sissers and Rasor.


Whit. With a Sisserara, you mean.


Hews. None of your Terms in Law, good Brother.


War. Right, but gen ya have any Querks in Law, Mr. Liar, that will save our
Crags, 'twill be warth a Fee.


Duck. We have played our Cards fair.


War. Is deny that; Wans Sirs ya played 'em faul; a Fule had the shooftling of
'em, and the Muckle Diel himself turned up Trump.


Whit. We are lost Gentlemen, utterly lost; who the Devil would have thought of
a Desolution?


Hews. Is there no Remedy?


Duc. Death, I Will to the Scotch General; turn but in time as many greater
Rogues than I have done, and 'twill save my Stake yet. -- Farewell Gentlemen.


Des. No Remedy?


War. Nene Sirs again the Kings Evel; Bread Sirs, ya's ene gang tol yat Stall
again: Is en follow Duckingfield -- Farewell Mr. Leyer.


La. Lam. See the Vicissitudes of Humane Glory.
These Rascals, that but Yesterday petitioned me
With humble Adoration, now scarce pay
Common Civilities due to my Sex alone.

Enter Fleetwood. Cro. How now Fool, what is it that makes ye look so pertly?
Some mighty Business you have done, I Will warrant.


Fleet. Verily Lady Mother, you are the strangest Body; a Man cannot please
you. -- Have I not finely circumvented Lambert? Made the Rump Head, who have
committed him to the Tower; never stir now that I have, and I Am the greatest
Man in England, as I live I am, as a Man may say.


Crom. Yes, till a greater come. Ah Fool of Fools, not to foresee the Danger
of that nasty Rump.


La. Fleet. Good Madam, treat my Lord with more Respect.


Crom. Away fond Fool, born with so little Sense,
To dote on such a wretched Idiot;
It was thy Fate in Ireton's days, to love him,
Or you were foully scandall'd

Fleet. You are not so well spoken of neither, never stir now, and you go to
that. I can be King to morrow if I will.


Crom. Thou lie, thou wo't be hanged first; mark that I tell thee so. I Will
prove Cassandra to thee, and prophecy thy Doom; Heaven pays the Traitor back
with equal measure. Remember how you served my poor Son Richard. Ex. Crom. and
Page


Flee. She Is mad -- Come, my Dear, let us leave the House of this Villain that
meant to have cozened me illegally of three Kingdoms, -- but that I outwitted
him at last. Ex. Fleet. La. Fleet. and Page


Enter Page. La. Lam. Imprisoned too, in the Tower! What Fate is mine? leans on
Des.


Page Madam, the fine Heroick's come to wait on you.


La. Lam. Hah, Loveless! let him not see the Ruins of my Greatness, which he
foretold, and kindly begged I would usurp no more. weep.


Enter Loveless. Lov. This News has brought me back, I love this Woman! Vain as
she is, in spite of all her Fopperies of State -- bows to her, and looks sad.


La. Lam. Alas, I do not merit thy Respect,
I Am fallen to Scorn, to Pity and Contempt. weeping.
Ah Loveless, fly the Wretched --
Thy Virtue is too noble to be shined on
By any thing but rising Suns alone:
I Am a declining shade. --

Lov. By Heaven, you were never great till now!
I never thought thee so much worth my Love,
My Knee, and Adoration, till this Minute. kneels.
-- I come to offer you my Life, and all,
The little Fortune the rude Heard has left me.

La. Lam. Is there such god-like Virtue in your Sex?
Or rather, in your Party.
Curse on the Lies and Cheats of Conventicles,
That taught me first to think Heroicks Devils,
Blood-thirsty, lewd, tyrannick Salvage Monsters.
-- But I believe 'em Angels all, if all like Loveless.
What heavenly thing then must the Master be,
Whose Servants are Divine?

Enter Page running. Page Oh Madam! all the Heroick-Boys are up in Arms, and
swear they will have your Highness, dead or alive, -- they have besieged the
House.


La. Lam. Heavens, the Rabble! -- those faithless things that used to crowd my
Coaches Wheels, and stop my Passage, with their officious Noise and Adoration.


Enter Freeman. Free. Loveless, Thy Aid; the City-Sparks are up;
Their zealous Loyalty admits no Bounds.
A glorious Change is coming, and I Will appear now bare faced.

Lov. Madam, fear not the Rabble; retire, Freeman and I can still 'em.

leads her in, and bows low. Free. My dear Maria, I shall claim ye shortly --

L. D. Do your worst, I Am ready for the Challenge go in.

Ex. Lov. and Free. another way. SCENE. The Street.
Enter Captain and the rest. Capt. I say we'll have the She-Polititian out, she
did more mischief than her Husband, pitiful, dittiful Lambert; who is, thanks
be praised, in the Tower, to which place, Lord of his mercy bring all the Kings
Enemies.


All. Amen, Amen.


Enter Lov. and Freeman. Lov. Why how now Captain, what besiege the Women? No,
let us lead our Force to Nobler Enemies.


Cap. Nay, noble Chief, your word's our Law.


Lov. No, I resign that Title to the brave Scotch General, who has just now
entered the City.


Cap. We know it, Sir; Do you not observe how the Crop-ear'd Phanaticks trot
out of Town? -- The Rogues began their old beloved Mutiny, but 'twou'd not do.


Lov. A Pox upon 'em, they went out like the Snuff of a Candle, stinkingly and
blinkingly.


1 Pr. Ay, ay, let 'em hang themselves, and then they are cold meat for the
Devil.


Cap. But noble Champion, I hope we may have leave to roast the Rump to Night?


Lov. With all our hearts; here is Money to make Fires --


Free. And here is for drink to it, Boys.


All. Hey -- Via le Roy, via les Heroicks! go out hollowing.


Enter Ananias peeping, Felt. and Ioyner. Ana. So, the Rabble's gone: ah,
Brethren! what will this wicked World come too?


Felt. Alack, alack, to no goodness, you may be sure; pray what is the News?
Fleet peeping out of a Garret Window.


Fleet. Anania, Anania.


Ana. Who calls Ananias? lo, here am I.


Fleet. Behold, it is I, look up. How goes tidings?


Ana. Full ill, I fear, it is a bad Omen to see your Lordship so nigh Heaven;
when the Saints are Garettifi'd.


Fleet. I am fortifying my self against the Evil day.


Ana. Which is come upon us like a Thief in the Night; like a Torrent from the
Mountain of Waters; or a Whirlwind from the Wilderness.


Flee. Why, what has the Scotch General done?


Ana. Ah! He plays the Devil with the Saints in the City, because they put
the Covenant Oath unto him, he pulls up their Gates, their Posts and Chains,
and enters.


Felt. And would the wicked City let him have his beastly will of her?


Ana. Nay, but she was ravished -- deflow'red.


Ioyn. How, ravished! oh, monstrous! was ever such a Rape committed upon an
innocent City? lay her Legs open to the wide World, for every Knave to view her
Nakedness?


Felt. Ah, ah! what Days, what Times, and what Seasons are here?


Enter Capt. Corporal, and Prentices, with faggots, hollowing. Corp. What say
you now, Lads, is not my Prophecy truer than Lillie's? I told you the Rump
would fall to our handling, and drinking for: the Kingss proclaimed, Rogues.


Cap. Ay, ay, Lilly, a Plague on him, he prophesied Lambert should be uppermost.


Cor. Yes, he meant perhaps on Westminster Pinnacle; where is Lilly now, with all
his Prophecies against the Royal Family?


Capt. In one of his Twelve Houses.


1 Pr. We'll fire him out to night, Boy; come, all hands to work for the Fire.
Exeunt all, hollowing.


Fleet. Ah, dismal, heavy day, a day of Grief and Woe,
Which have bereft me of my hopes for ay, ah Lard, what shall I do? Exit.

SCENE. A Chamber.
Enter Lov. leading La. Lam. in disguise, Page and Gilliflower disguised, Lov.
dressing her. Lov. My Charmer, why these Tears?
If for the fall of all thy painted Glories,
Thou art, in the esteem of all good men,
Above what thou were then:
The glorious Sun is rising in our Hemisphere,
And I, amongst the crowd of Loyal Sufferers,
Shall share in its kindly Rays.

La. Lam. Best of thy Sex --
What have I left to gratify thy goodness?

Lov. You have already by your noble Bounty
Made me a Fortune, had I nothing else;
All which I render back, with all that Wealth
Heaven and my Parents left me:
Which, though unjustly now detained from me,
Will once again be mine, and then be yours.

Enter Free. Free. Come, haste, the Rabble gather round the House,
And swear they will have this Sorceress.

Lov. Let me loose among 'em, their rude officious honesty must be punished.

La. Lam. Oh, let me out, do not expose thy Person to their mad rage, rather
resign the Victim. holds him.

Lov. Resign thee! By Heaven, I think I should turn Rebel first.

Enter La. Des. disguised, and Page, with Jewels in a Box. La. Des. With much
ado, according to thy direction, dear Freeman, I have passed the Pikes, my
House being surrounded, and my Husband demanded, fell down dead with fear.


Free. How, thy Husband dead!


La. Des. Dead as old Oliver! and much ado I got off with these Jewels, the
Rabble swore I was one of the Party, and had not the honest Corporal convinced
'em, I had been pulled to pieces: -- Come, haste away, Madam, we shall be
roasted with the Rump else.


La. Lam. Adieu, dear Mansion! whose rich gilded Roofs so often put me in mind of
Majesty -- And thou my Bed of State, where my soft Slumbers have presented me
with Diadems and Scepters, -- when waking I have stretched my greedy Arms to
grasp the vanished Phantom! ah, adieu! And all my hopes of Royalty adieu. --


Free. And dare you put your self into my Protection? Well, if you do, I doubt
you will never be your own Woman again.


La. Des. No matter, I Am better lost than found on such occasions. Exeunt.


SCENE, a Street; a great Bonfire, with Spits, and Rump rosting, and the Mobile
about the Fire, with Pots, Bottles, and Fiddles.
1 Pren. Here, Jack, a Health to the King.


2 Pren. Let it pass, Lad, and next to the Noble General.


1 Pren. Ralph, baste the Rump well, or never hope to see a King again.


3 Pr. The Rump will baste it self, it has been well crammed.


Enter Freeman, La. Des. Loveless, and La. Lam. Gill. Pages, etc. Capt. Hah,
Noble Champion, Faith Sir, you must honor us so far as to drink the King's
Health, and the Noble General's before you go.


Enter Wareston, dressed like a Pedlar, with a Box about his Neck full of Ballads
and things. War. Will ya buy a Guedly Ballat or a Scotch Spur Sirs? a guedly
Ballat or a Scotch Spur. -- S'bread, Is escaped hither te we will enough, Is saved
my Crag fro stretching two Inches longer than 'twas borne: will ya buy a Jack
line to roast the Rump, a new Jack Lambert line, -- or a blithe Ditty, of the
Noble Scotch General -- come buy my Ditties.


Capt. How a Ditty of the General? let us see it, Sirrah.


War. S'bread, Sirs, and here is the guedly Ballad of the General's coming out
of Scotland.


Capt. Here, who sings it? we'll all bear the bob.


Wariston sings the Ballad, all bearing the Bob. Enter Ananias, crying
Almanacks. Ana. New Almanacks, new Almanacks.


Cap. Hah, who have we here? Ananias Holder-forth of Clements Parish?


All. Ha, a Traitor, a Traitor.


Lov. If I be not mistaken, this blithe Ballad-singer too was Chairman to the
Committee of Safety.


Capt. Is your Lordship turned Pedlar at last?


War. What mon I do no? Lerd, ne mere Lerd than yar sell Sir; wons Is show 'em
a fair pair a heels. goes to run away, they get him on a Colt-staff, with
Ananias on another, Fiddlers playing Fortune my Foe round the Fire.


Capt. Play Fortune my Foe, Sirrah.


Enter Hewson, dressed like a Country-Fellow. Cor. Who are you, Sir? you have
the mark of the Beast.


Hews. Who, aye, Sir? aye am a Doncer, that come a merry making among ya --


Cap. Come, Sirrah, your Feats of Activity quickly then.


He dances, which ended, they get him on a colt-staff, and cry a Cobbler, a
Cobbler. All. A Cobbler, a Cobbler.


Capt. To Prison with the Traitors, and then we have made a good Nights work
on it.

Then let us all home, and to the Powers Divine,
Pray for the King, and all the Sacred Line.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE spoken by Lady DESBRO.
THe Vizors off, and now I dare appear
High for the Royal Cause in Cavelier;
Though once as true a Whig as most of you,
Could Cant, and Lie, Preach and dissemble too;
So far you drew me in, but faith I Will be
Revenged on you for thus debauching me,
Some of your pious Cheats I Will open lay,
That lead your Ignoramus Flock astray:
For since I cannot fight, I will not fail
To exercise my Tallent; that is to rail:
Ye Race of Hypocrites, whose Cloak of Zeal
Covers the Knave that cants for Common Weal,
All Laws the Church and State to ruin brings,
And impudently set a Rule on Kings
Ruin, destroy, all is good that you decree
By your Infallible Presbitery.
Prosperous at first, in ills you grow so vain,
You thought to Play the Old Game ore again,
And thus the cheat was put upon the Nation,
First with long Parliaments, next Reformation:
And now you hoped to make a new invasion,
And when you cannot prevail by open force,
To cunning tickling tricks you have recourse,
And raise Sedition forth without remorse.
Confound these cursed Tories then they cry In a Preaching Tone.
Those Fools, those Pimps to Monarchy;
Those that Exclude the Saints; yet open the Door
To introduce the Babylonian Whore:
By Sacred Oliver the Nations mad;
Beloved, 'twas not so when he was Head!
But then, as I have said it often before ye,
A Cavelier was but a Type of Tory.
The Currs durst then not bark but all the Breed
Is much increased since that good Man was dead,
Yet then they railed against the Good Old Cause,
Railed foolishly for Loyalty and Laws;
But when the Saints had put them to a stand,
We left them Loyalty and took their Land:
Yea, and the Pious work of Reformation
Rewarded was with Plunder, Sequestration;
Thus cannot the faithful, nay, they are so uncivil
To pray us harmless Players to the Devil,
When this is all the Exception they can make,
They damn us for our glorious Masters sake.
But why against us do you unjustly erm
Our small Religion sure can do no harm,
Or if it do, since that's the only thing
We will reform, when you are true to the King.

