A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF M. ANTHONY HINTON: Late Treasurer of St.
Bartholomews Hospital.

On the 15th. of November, 1678. At St. Sepulchers Church.

BY WILLIAM BELL, D.D. and Vicar of the said Church.

London, Printed by M. Clark, and to be sold by Benj. Took at the Ship in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1679.

To my ever honored Friend, Mrs. MARY HINTON.
YOU have herein what you earnestly desired, and have truly deserved of me, the
Sermon preached at the Funeral of your deceased, and justly beloved Husband;
and now at the instance of his near Friends, made more public: and their
desires had been sooner complied with, but that it pleased God by a fit of
sickness to hinder me, and thereby it, from coming sooner abroad. His life was
a better Comment on the Text, than any I could make. He was such an Original,
as did (as Originals usually do) exceed the Copy; so that I lay claim herein
not to your thanks, but to your pardon: And for that too I have no other plea,
but that you commanded me to show my weakness. But though I fell short in the
Application, I may fear I have exceeded in the Discourse it self, having added
much that was prepared, but could not be then delivered, by reason of the
straitness of time allowed to such occasions. That you may receive spiritual
advantage, and comfort by all, you have, together with the Sermon, the hearty
constant Prayer of,

St. Sepulchers, Jan. 28. 1678/9. Madam, Your faithful Servant in our common
Master, Christ Jesus, William Bell.

A Funeral Sermon, ON
ACTS xxiv. 16. Herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience void
of offense toward God, and toward Men.


THis Chapter of the Text is the Account of a Trial, Ver. 1.
wherein the Judge is Felix; the Plaintiffs are the Jews, and their High
Priests; and Tertullus, of Council for them; the Defendant is St. Paul; the
Crimes laid to his charge are Sedition, Schism, and Heresy, which, if true,
rendered him undeserving of life, and liberty, who yet by his very enemies was
judged to have done nothing worthy of Death, or of Bonds. Acts xxiii. 29.
He easily wipes off these aspersions by the evidence of his peaceable
behavior in the Synagogue, and in the City; All his guilt was honoring the
Father in honoring the Son, which was the old Religion of the Patriarchs, and
Prophets, though by the modern Jews condemned of Novelty, Ver. 14. context.
and Heresy: And asserting the Resurrection, which was an Article of the
Jewish as well as Christian Creed; which Resurrection because it was to be both
of the Just and the Unjust, Ver. 15. to 21.
all his design and endeavor was to make that safe, which was already sure;
that if by any means he might attain the resurrection to everlasting life, Dan.
xii. 2.
and not to shame and everlasting contempt; and in pursuance of that end, he
did exercise himself to have a Conscience void of offense toward God and toward
Men.

I shall not suspect your knowledge of the History of this our Apostles life,
so as to undertake the proof of the truth of the Assertion in his person, Phil.
iii. 17.
but rather urge you to walk as you have him for an example, and that in the
sincerity, universality, constancy, and industry of an inoffensive obedience.

First, The sincerity of that obedience consists in having a Conscience void of
offense, which Conscience is the knowledge we have of our selves, common with
others, God, and his holy Angels: Or a concluding Science in a practical
Syllogism, whereof Scripture makes the Major Proposition: Whosoever obeys, or
obeys not, shall be accordingly saved or damned. To which Conscience assumes,
by excusing, or accusing, that I so do, or do not obey; and having thus
witnessed at the Bar, it takes the Tribunal, and (suitably to its own Verdict)
acquits or condemns, I, and executes too, as being in its own Court, Informer,
Judge, and Executioner. And Conscience, as it is well instructed, concludes
rightly; or as misinstructed, concludes falsely; or as doubtful, concludes not
at all; or if probable, concludes on probable reasons. Now the good, and
erroneous Conscience both bind; that simply, and this suppositively, till
better informed. The robbing of Baal Berith was Sacrilege with them who were
persuaded he was a God. Judge. ix. 4.
But the Conscience here in the Text is a true counterpart of the Divine Law
which is its rule, a Zeal according to knowledge, and so to know the will of
God, as to do it.

A Conscience void of offense, or scandal, that loves not to give, or take it.
As when we neither lay Galtraps in the way of others, to obstruct them in their
Christian fight, or race; nor stumble at those that are laid in our way by
others. When evil example or instruction is followed, that is a true scandal
effectually given. When what is good, or indifferent, is misinterpreted, or
avoided, when by just Authority commanded, that is a false offense effectually
taken. Offenses may be sometimes given where they are not taken, Mat. iv.
as in Satan's several temptings of our Savior; and they may be taken where
they are not given: Thus Christ was a stone of offense, set for the falling of
many in Israel.

Now to have a Conscience void of offense, is to have a right knowledge of our
rule of duty, and of our suitable compliance with it. And that,

Secondly, In the universality of our obedience, as first it respects God, who
cannot properly be said to be offended by us, since grief is no more in him,
Isa. xxvii. 4.
than fury is; but only by way of Analogy, or resemblance, when we do what in
us lies to provoke him, by breach of the Letter, and contempt of the penalty of
his Laws, affronting his Omniscience, his Holiness, and his Justice, by saying
the God of Jacob sees not, or sees not to regard: And offense toward him is
avoided, by firm belief of his Attributes, and a proportionable standing in aw
of them, so as not to sin against them. Considering, 1 John iii. 20.
that if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knows all
things. Heb. iv. 13.
All things are naked and open before him, as the Sacrifice was, when flayed,
and chin'd down, and all its inwards exposed to view. If Conscience is a
Thousand Witnesses, God is more than a Thousand Consciences, whom we must ever
set before us, which was the mean he prescribed Abraham to express sincerity,
Genesis xvii. 1.
and to attain perfection. Not that our eye-service brings God before us, but
finds and owns him there, because every where; and every where such a searcher
of the heart, and a discerner and Judge of its thoughts, and intents, that with
him a lustful look is Adultery, a malicious will is Murder, and a covetous
desire Theft. He judges not as man judges. With us the mind makes not guilty,
without the Act, nor the Act without the mind: But with him the conceptions of
Lust are sin, as well as the productions, as the Child is the same in the Womb
and at the Breast. It is then no advantage to us to have none conscious of our
Evil Acts without us, while we have a Conscience within us; or to have no
Conscience within us, while we have a God above us. We may dig deep to hide our
Counsel from him, but he will bring forth the thing that is hid to light. So
that when we are sat from the Justice of men, we are not secure from the
Justice of God. He that made the eye shall not he see? He that teaches man
knowledge, shall not he punish? We may escape the Sea and the Viper, yet we
have a Nemesis, an avenger within and without us; if not, we have one above us;
He that is higher than the highest regards, even the most high, from whom there
lies no appeal. 1 Samuel ii. 23.
If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him, but if a man sin
against the Lord, who shall plead for him? Trespasses may be compromised, but
not Transgressions, Job ix. 33.
for there is no man to lay his hand upon the Offender and the Offended, unless
he who is God-man, the only Mediator, undertake it; who yet will be no Umpire
in our obstinate and wilful quarrels, but for those alone who endeavor to keep
Consciences void of offense toward him, by serving him as without hypocrisy,
so secondly without partiality too, respecting all his Precepts, not thinking
our selves sound, if we are so in any part, where the Leprosy brake out in the
forehead, it rendered the whole man unclean. No duty is little where an Infinite
God commands; nor any sin small for which an Immortal Christ did die, and
Eternal flames are kindled. Though no one good Act can save us, yet any one
evil Act may damn us. We may die of one wound as well as of Caesar's two and
thirty. Nor will our good works compound for our bad, our Zeal for our
Rebellion, or our Loyalty for our Drunkenness. There is such a firm League
between all the Precepts, that the enemies to the one are enemies to the other.
The whole Ten words being but one Law. He has other Gods besides the Lord, who
makes his belly his God, by Gluttony, or by Concupiscence which is Idolatry; he
has not kept a day to the Lord, but to his Lust, who by long Prayers and a
Fast has killed and taken possession; has first made the Widow, and then
undone her, by devouring her House or her Vineyard. And he has taken the name
of God in vain, who has born false witness against his Neighbor. A good
Conscience desires in all things to live honestly. And our duty is then
current, when neither allayed, nor clipped. Its intrinsic value consists in a
sincere, the extrinsick in a uniform obedience. And this is a Conscience void
of offense toward God. And it must be so in the demonstration of it.

Secondly, Toward men, toward every man: Toward (1.) Superiors; and they are
first in the Second Table, and God himself has said they are Gods, whether the
Gods of our Houses, Parents; or of our Country, the Magistrate. And he commands
us to do them homage by honor and Tribute; and he forbids us to plead
Conscience for disobedience, when commanded to obey for Conscience sake. Which
Conscience, if truly tender, will be so to every appearance of evil, to
Sedition, Schism, and Sacrilege, as well as to Blasphemy, an Oath, or an Idol.
Now Rebellion is commonly an Inceptor in the Family; where we are ill taught to
bear the yoke in our youth, our elder years are empty of respect to the
Doctrine of the Pulpit, and the Laws of the Throne; and then with the Fathers
of our flesh we are gradually taught to despise those of our Faith, and of our
Country too. But while we wound the honor of all, like Swords, we are
insensible of the mischiefs we do. Exodus iv. 16.
In Primitive Judaism Moses was a God to Aaron, and Aaron was a mouth to Moses,
to plead for him who protected him: In Primitive Christianity, when the
Emperors were Heathens, the Christian Legions would not be worse, by becoming
Rebels; but with their Swords by their sides, received those of their
Executioners into their bowels, as an effect not of their Cowardice, but of
their Valor; he dares do any thing, but sin, for his Religion, who dares die
for it. Luke xxii. 38.
In Christ's Retinue two Swords, when sheathed, were enough, and one, when
drawn in his defense, was too much. His Gospel must not, like the Alchoran,
Mat. xxvi. 52.
be propagated by Armies: Nor his Kingdom, like that of Romulus, be founded in
the blood of any but our elder Brother, that is, his own. He asserted the right
of Caesar by Precept, and Practice, employs his Divinity to attest his Loyalty,
Mat. xvii. 37.
and out of the mouth of a Fish sends the Tribute silver to him to whom it was
superscribed, and that for himself and Peter, who did not angle for his own
profit, laid no claim to the Roman-penny: We ill requite the goodness of God in
giving us Kings as Nursing Fathers, when we undermine the Thrones we are by
many obligations bound to support. Nor matters it much whether we do it by
Achitophels head, or Absaloms hand, by Shimei's tongue, or Sheba's trumpet. If
the Jew was enjoined to pray for that Land where he was Captive, Jer. xxix. 7.
since in the peace thereof he was to have peace: How much more are we bound to
seek the peace of the Land of our Nativity, since they only can prosper that
love it? We should not then be like foolish Passengers in a Ship, who rip up
the Planks of the Vessel, wherein they are embarked, to build their own Cabins.
Sure I am, Christ never furnished us with the Doctrine of speaking evil of
Dignities, nor true Christianity with the use. St. Paul retracts the rash
expression of Whited Wall, Acts xxiii. 3, etc.
used to a Judge, though an unjust one, and that with remorse, and calls it his
sin, though his sin of Ignorance: While our hearts never smite us for the
wounds we give the Royal Robe, by the ill language we speak, or hear, when the
reputations of our Superiors are evaporarated in the smoke of a Coffee-house,
and all our Allegiance lies drowned, and forgotten in Rheum, and Lethe; we must
have a toleration for ill opinions, and ill manners too: And our Laws, like
those of Moses to the Jews, and Solon to the Athenians, must be adapted to the
hardness of our hearts; Mat. xix. 8.
while a War, a Plague, and a Fire have ruined many, but reformed none: Nay,
Isa. 1.5.
our revoltings have increased with God's smitings; like the high attainers of
our Age, we are above all Ordinances only by being against them: Of which
Ordinances the powers that be are one. Our Remedy lies in the strengthening the
hands of our Superiors, by subjection to them, and love to one another, that
since God has given us Judges, as at the first, 26.
and Counselors as at the beginning, it may appear that with our Government
we have a restoration of our Loyalty too. And this we shall do, if we keep our
Consciences and our Conversations void of offense toward our Superiors. And

Secondly, Toward our Equals, and that in things Civil and Religious; in their
concerns as Men, and as Christians. Not invading their property by fraud or
violence. The truly Conscientious person shuns every dishonest Act, not so much
for the sake of his Reputation, as his Peace; Every black mote is to him, as to
a tender eye, his grief, as well as his blemish. He dares not wound his Soul to
save his Estate, or his Life; as knowing that God hates the profitable, as well
as the pious fraud, and that light gains ill got make the Conscience more heavy
than the Purse. When good plain Jacob saw the Money returned with the Corn in
his Son's Sacks, Genesis xlii. 25, etc.
he orders them to take double money with them in their second Journey, for
peradventure, says he, it was an oversight: He would not purchase his food too
cheap, lest he should buy repentance too dear, and by such an act of Injustice
turn his bread into gravel: Prove. xx. 17.
And he is an Israelite indeed who is thus without guile, John i, 47.
such a Nathanael who is come home to Christ, one of whose Laws it is, that
whatsoever we would that men should do unto us, Mat. vii. 12.
we should do so unto them. I know a Christian must do more than this, but he
is no Christian who does less. Our Righteousness must exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. v. 20.
it must flow from a better Principle and spring of Grace; have a larger
current in our Conversation with all men, not those of our own Sect only; and
empty it self into a deeper Sea, God's Glory, not our own. Let us walk
according to this rule in all simplicity and sincerity, and then let others
call it Morality, and think they can be Saints without it; whilst Christ
commands it, and Christians practice it, we will call it Christianity, a
Conscience avoiding offense toward men in their Civil concerns. And let be so
in (2.) their Sacred concerns too. Let us not misguide the ignorant and ductile
by false fires, as Thieves draw Travelers into dark Woods with a design to rob
them. Let us not suffer Sin to rest upon them, but rebuke them with a spirit of
meekness, and instruct them with a spirit of wisdom, as men of feeding lips and
healing tongues. Ephesians. iv. 29.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of our mouths, which is as offensive
to chaste ears, as a stinking breath from rotten Lungs is to the Nostrils. Let
us not judge the strong, nor despise the weak, but think heartily of all, and
act charitably toward all, and where we lawfully may, Phil. iv. 5.
let our moderation be known unto all men: As tender and teeming Mothers
forbear what their stomachs would bear for their burdens sake. Temperance is
not the want, but the restraint of Appetite, the restraint of a lawful Lust:
But Brotherly-kindness considers not only what is lawful, Gal. v. 6.
but what is expedient also. St. Acts xvi. 3.
Paul, who very well knew that neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, circumcised Timothy to comply with the Jews, but would not
circumcise Titus, Gal. ii. 3.
that he might gratify the Gentiles. It is an unchristian use of our Christian
liberty to offend the Magistrate in forbearing what we may do, or our Brother,
in doing what we may forbear. This, if ingenuously observed, would keep the
peace in the great world without us, and in the little world within us too: For
this is the justice of a good Conscience that gives to every one his due, and
to every one in his order: First, Glory to God on high, and then on earth peace
and good will toward men: For as we are not to displease God to please our
Prince, nor to displease our Prince to please our Fellow Subjects; so neither
are we to displease our fellow subjects to please our selves. Where the way is
one, we can follow both, Fear God, and the King: But where they part, we show
by our attendance, to which we retain. We cannot serve two Masters, Dan. iii.
his Servants we are whom we obey. This caused the three Children to choose
affliction rather than sin, and to deem a Furnace seven times heated cooler
than Hell. But (God be thanked) this is not our case, and I hope will never be.
We have no Statutes of Omri, Micah vi. 16.
no manners of the house of Ahab to obey, but such a Government as, be the
times never so bad, we may be as good as we will in them; and that safely too,
we are not called to praise God in the fire, Romans xii. 1.
or to offer up our bodies as any other than a living sacrifice to him: And are
so far from suffering for righteousness sake, that we are not so much as
buffeted for our faults: But can break the Laws pretendedly with as good a
Conscience as others can really keep them. But God, who prescribes the Order,
prescribes the Union too; we must provide things honest in the sight of both
God, and man. 2 Cor. viii. 21.
For though Loyalty is no more founded in Grace than Dominion is, a Nero must
be obeyed as well as a Constantine; Romans xiii. 1, etc.
and there may be as good Subjects in Turkey, as in England, if not better; and
an Aristides may be as just as St. Paul, yet he is no good Christian who is a
Rebel, or a Cheat: Christ will not be righteousness to them who will have none
of their own. His Kingdom consists not in Carnal Wisdom, or weapons, but in
Love, Joy, and Peace; that peace which is both our duty, and our reward, and
both in the Text. To have a Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward
men.

Thirdly, That which speaks the constancy of duty, is that it must be always
the same in all conditions, places, and times. We are to be chaste with Joseph,
in the Palace, as well as the Prison; within the Curtains of our bed, as those
of the Tabernacle. To be sober among the Vines, and temperate at a loaded
Table; to pray for the King as heartily in our Closets, as in his Chapel; and
no more to curse him in our Bedchamber, than we would in his own. To be true
to every trust of the dead, as of the living; and not, as too many among us,
who are so unlike to God, and so like the Devil, that they are most certainly
false to all that put confidence in them: Whereas an inoffensive Conscience
sets God and man before its eyes, and is the same to those that may be absent,
as toward him that cannot; and that in all Conditions, when he hides his face
as when he shines on our Tabernacle. Its Piety is not strong only when we are
weak, and then languishing when we recover: Is not puffed up by prosperity, nor
cast down by adversity, as Boats that rise with the Flood, and sink with the
Ebb. Its mouth is not full of murmuring when uempty of bread, Phil. iv. 11.
but in all estates has learned to be content. Can tend on the Ark when its
Manna is gone, and nothing left but the Rod, and the Law, when banished, as
well as when it gratifies the flesh-hook: Can be devout at Mesech and Kedar, as
in the goings, and solemn Procession of the Sanctuary. Good Barzillai was as
faithful a Subject to David, when hunted on the Mountains, as when he went to
be Crowned at Hebron. A good Conscience neither flatters the rich, nor
oppresses the poor; takes not the opportunity of a Friend's distress to
insult, or to betray; to stand aloof from the sore, or only to pour Vinegar
into it by sharp upbraidings, or uncharitable conclusions; but where it cannot
be a Shield to prevent a wound, is ever ready with Balm to heal it; not
trampling on a Prostrate, whether Friend, or Enemy, but is equally prompt to do
good, and to forgive evil. James i. 27.
Pure and undefiled Religion, (the Religion of a Conscience so qualified too)
visits the Fatherless and the Widow, with a visit like that of Christ, Luke i.
68.
visits to redeem, and as the same Christ too, keeps it self unspotted of the
world. It throws no dirt, (and it is hard to do it with clean hands) nor does
any thrown at it stick on it, but is soon wiped off by undisturbed Innocence.
And this, all this is,

Fourthly, and lastly, The whole employ of a good Conscience, as wherein it
does exercise it self, (as the word signifies) prepares for the Combat, bends
all its wit and force to it; is

First, Diligent to the utmost of its power, striving to excel others, and our
selves. That those things be in us and abound. If it be possible, and as much
as in us lies to have peace with God and man, with all men. And this is more
than a mere bending our tongues and wits to holiness, and righteousness; not a
speaking great things, but living them.. And though God sometimes takes the
will for the deed, it is there only where there is no ability to perform: 2
Cor. viii. 12.
Thus Love may fulfill the whole Law in a hearty disposition to all obedience
where the Act is not feazible. David's desire to keep Gods Commandments, Psalm.
cxix. 4, 5.
goes for the deed; 'twas exercise when he did but strive in Prayer after that
perfection, which is not here attainable: Yet a mere present wishing we might
do God's will can no more secure us from Hell, than a future wishing we had
done it can deliver us out of it. It is not a setting our faces toward Zion
that will bring us thither, when like Weathercocks, the next wind of a
Temptation, alters our aspect, and we are still where we were. Mat. xxv. 15,
etc.
Two Talents improved to four have in Heaven a proportionable reward, with the
five that were made ten: But the lazy Well-willers Talent that rusted in the
Napkin had that rust as a swift witness against him, before that God who
expects his own with usury. We have the knowledge of his Commandments, and they
are not grievous. The Dictates of his Spirit, the Assistances of our own
Consciences, the Examples of his Son and Servants, the Encouragement of all his
Promises, which makes our service as profitable as it is reasonable: And if
herewith we faithfully do what we can, he will mercifully accept of what we do.
And herein we must be, as diligent, so,

Secondly, Prudent too, to strive lawfully, as well as earnestly; to have light
with our heat; and that light is, in the essentials of Religion, the Word of
God, and we are not to vary from the Pattern in the Mount. To the Law and to
the Testimony, Isa. viii. 20.
if they speak not according to this, it is because there is no truth in them.
They oblige our Faith in all the Articles of our several Creeds, 2 Timothy i. 13.
those forms of sound words founded in Scripture. Our obedience in worshipping
God by Prayer, and Praise, by hearing, and receiving his Sacraments, revering
his Name, avoiding Polytheism, Atheism, Idolatry, Blasphemy, honoring our
Superiors, not invading the Life, Chastity, Estate, or Reputation of our
Neighbor: Which Laws are a Moral and perpetual rule to all our Intentions,
Expressions, and Actions, and with these neither men nor our own Consciences
can dispense: And our trial at the last day will be not merely by our
Consciences, but as they have been guided by that Word. Since Conscience, like
Fame, may be as tenacious of a lie as of a truth, may condemn where God
acquits, or acquit where God condemns. He must touch the Needle to make it
point right, which else will vary (as we know Conscience has done) to all the
Points in the Compass. We rightly set our Watches by the Dial, when we are
assured the Dial is well set by the Sun.

In things Civil, the rule is right Reason; we expect not a Law out of
Scripture for every minute action of Life. We try a Circle not by a Square, but
by a Compass. The Law of the Land, where it speaks, is the common Conscience
which ought to guide us in all things that are not apparently opposite to the
Divine Law. The Church is a Vineyard, and is in the State, as in it is Fence,
without which it would not be long a Vineyard. Hos. i. 9.
Israel was Loammi, that is, not a People, when without the true God, a
teaching Priest, and Law, when the Pillars are dissolved the People melt. 2 Chronicles. xv. 3.
By undermining our Superiors we Sap our own foundations; and while we pluck
flowers from the Crown to weave Garlands for our selves, the success is to see
both droop, and wither together. Did we rightly understand things, we should
acknowledge it our liberty to be subject, the very worst of Governments being
better than none. Law is the Mound of Property, and without that enclosure,
every man would turn all his Lusts, like Beasts without stint, into the Common.
Now the Law is but a dead letter, it is life is it is execution, and it is best
execution is in our active obedience. It is not indifferent to the Law, or the
Lawgiver, whether we do or suffer; as it is in Bylaws of Corporations whether
we fine or serve. Justice would be all Sword, if it did not only consist in the
mulcting or punishing our Persons, or our Purses. It is from our corruptions
that Penal Statutes are inflicted as well as enacted. Would we be a Law to our
selves, we should not need so many from our Superiors. It is then as imprudent
as it is ungrateful, like Sons of Belial, to shake off that easy yoke, that
protects where it restrains, and by keeping us in order, keeps us in safety
too. Let the Law of the Land subdue that of our Lusts; Let us study to be
quiet, and to do our own business. And leaving the Steerage of the Vessel to
those that sit at the Helm, let us keep our own Cabins, and there strengthen,
and encourage our Pilots by our Devotion, and by our Subjection.

In things indifferent let us walk by the rule of Charity, but of Charity first
to the Church our Mother, and as we owe to her our better birth, so let us pay
her our better Honor. Her love first descended on us, before ours could ascend
to her, and now we are able, let ours ascend to her, before it spread to the
Brethren; it is the Method and order of Grace as well as of Nature. In pursuance
of which, let us not dispute her Wisdom, or her Authority in confining our
practice in what makes for Decency, or Order, whereof she is certainly a more
competent Judge than her Children: In God's name, let us search the Scriptures
for every circumstance of Worship, but then let us not conclude, we find not
this thing commanded there, therefore we dare not do it; but rather, we find
not this thing there forbid, therefore we may do it; Romans iv. 15.
for where there is no Law there is no transgression: If we doubt, the Command
of Authority supersedes the doubt. But while we peremptorily avoid what is
indifferent, we meet that Judaism we pretend to run from; and are too
superstitious whilst we would not be at all so. Nay, we lose that liberty
whereof we are so tender, as biased to one side, and that against the Powers
that are set over us, we are easily drawn away by those who have no right to
guide us, but are restiff and headstrong to those that have a right to our
obedience; like debauched Gallants, who value their Curtizan above their
Surgeon, and will give more to get a Disease than to have it cured. Where
the Word is silent, we have our Liberty, but let us not use it for any occasion
of the slesh. 1 Pet. ii. 16.


The Primitive Christians when confined to a few things made necessary by the
Precept, and not so in themselves, such as abstinence from things strangled,
Acts xv. 31.
and from blood, are said to rejoice for the Consolation. And so did our
Ancestors when reformed from that Worship which was become all husk, and shell,
and rind; yet thought not themselves obliged to strip off all the Leaves from
Christ's Vine, as if they injured those Grapes which they overshadowed; whose
moderation let us imitate, following after the things which make for peace. And
nothing makes more for it than our hearing the Instructions of our Civil
Father, Prove. i. 8.
and not forsaking the Law of the Church our Mother.

And here, were the Orator as good as the Cause, I should hope, with as much
success as willingness, to plead for the Church of England, whose Doctrine and
Discipline are a perfect Comment on this Text, a giving to God and Caesar their
due; receiving as a rule of faith all the Articles of the Three Creeds,
preserving to God his Worship entire, without the rivallings of Saints, or
Angels, or the likeness of any thing above or below. Not invading or depressing
the Offices of Christ by Lording it over his Heritage, or derogating from his
Satisfaction, or Intercession, by owning any other Purgatory but that of his
sufferings in this world, to secure us from those of the world to come. And
therefore teaching us that no man can by Masses, Oblations, Pilgrimages, or
works of Supererogation redeem his Brother, or pay to God a ransom for him.
Psalm. xlix. 7.
And that the all-sufficient merits of Christ need not be Imp'd by ours, or
those of men subject to like passions with our selves. And therefore we look on
Heaven not as wages, but as gift, yet are careful to maintain good works, Romans
vi. 23.
as necessary to salvation, which is that Penny that is paid to none but those
that labor: But when we have sowed in righteousness, Hos. x. 12.
we hope to reap in mercy. We own but one Mediator between God and us; Nor can
we think our better Moses needs any Aaron or Hur to support his hands, in that
Mount above, whilst he intercedes for his Church that is militant here below.
And therefore as we adore not what is left of the Saints here, so we sue not to
what is ascended of them on high. Nor dare we give that worship to a dead
Barnabas and Paul, Acts xiv. 11.
which they refused when living. How can we call on them in whom we have not
believed? We dare not vacate the Prophetical Office of Christ, by teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of men. We own such Traditions, as can prove their
Pedigree to be truly ancient, not repugnant to Scripture, and to consist with
Decency and Order. And that every National Church has power to determine
practice in things indifferent, and to bind to obedience for Conscience sake,
Conscience of that duty that is owing to the fifth Commandment; But we follow
not cunningly devised fables, while we have a more sure word of Prophecy. We
receive the Sacraments in their due number, and order, and by the Font we pass
to the Altar, for so we can call it, as its shewbread is a Commemorative
Sacrifice, tendered not to God for us, but by him to us; and as at it we offer
up our selves to him once offered up for us in the Christian Sacrifices of a
broken heart, a thankful tongue, a charitable hand, and an holy life.

We have a Liturgy in a known tongue, that so we may pray with the
understanding, and know to what we say Amen. And if we pray not with the spirit
too (I mean not that of the gift of Tongues, but) of prayer and supplication,
both Gods, and our own, it is our own fault that most excellent expressions are
not attended with suitable affections. If our Common Prayer be a dead Letter,
our hearts make it so; for no Clothes will warm the dead: And without the
pouring out of the heart, the pouring out of words, extempore, or premeditated,
is but the sacrifice of fools, and that whether a Pharisee lengthen, or Beads
number it. And as we have the same appetite for our daily bread, we can in the
same words beg it of him, who gives it, and has given us a form wherein to ask
it.

And as our Church is conscienciously careful to avoid all offense toward God,
so is she no less toward men. And although ground between the two Milstones of
the Papist, censuring her as Schismatical, and the Schismatic condemning her
as Papistical, yet disclaims the disloyal principles, and practices of both the
Conclave and the Classes. Not affecting the title of cursed Cham, as he who
will be called a servant of servants, Genesis ix. 29.
yet like servants on horseback bring Princes to his foot, and exalts himself
above all that are called Gods. Eccl x. 7.
And if any pretending Protestants among us have done otherwise, they went out
from us because they were not of us. We are taught not to hew out Reformation
by the Sword, whose mouth is an ill Advocate for the truth. It is usually drawn
in the quarrel of a Curtizan, but not of a chaste Wife. If any thing be amiss,
we expect the amendment from those Powers that did at first orderly and
authoritatively reform us, whose Supremacy in all Causes Civil and
Ecclesiastical we humbly recognize, as exclusive of all Foreign Jurisdiction,
without giving them what they claim not, the Administration of Gods Word and
Sacraments. And as our Church as a tender Mother denies not pardon to her
Children even for wilful sins, committed after Baptism; so like a prudent
Mother, she heals not their hurts slightly, by the palliate cures of easy
Confession, and hasty Absolutions, on mere Attrition, or pecuniary
Commutations, or slight corporal Penances. She approves of no sorrow but that
godly one that works repentance never to be repented of: 2 Cor. vii. 10.
Such tears as quench the fire of Lust, and such a Reformation as withdraws the
fuel. We are so taught by her the tremendous mysteries of Predestination, and
Election, as to steer evenly between the two equally dangerous rocks of
Presumption and Despair. She imposes not on her Ministers, or others, the hard
yoke of Celibacy or single life, but teaches them, and by them, Heb. xiii. 4.
that Marriage is honorable among all, and the bed undefiled is true Chastity.
That Continency is not, as Faith, Hope, Charity, Repentance, and Fear, common
to all Christians, but peculiar to some, and is a gift that may be denied to
them that ask it in Prayer, since where it is not, God has by Matrimony
provided a remedy. Nor does she bind any to Poverty, and a Mendicant state,
Prove. xxx. 8.
which wise Agur did deprecate; as if that could be a blessing under the
Gospel, which was a curse under the Law, to serve in the want of all things.
Deu. xxviii. 48.
She obliges not by any Vows, Number. xxx. 7.
but what are free, deliberate in things possible, and lawful, and with consent
of Superiors. She deprives us not of half our Legacy in the New Testament of
our dying Savior, by entertaining us at a dry Communion, and denying us the
Cup of blessing. Nor does she rob us of all our reason, and the better half of
our senses by the incredible Doctrine of Transubstantiation, that pregnant
Mother of Errors, that would persuade us that is flesh, which we see, taste,
and feel is a Wafer. That there are but the accidents of Bread, shape, and
color, and accidents without a subject; 1 Cor. xi. 26.
whereas it is truly called bread as before, so after the Consecration. That
with the same mouth we can make, and eat our God. First, change his glorious
body into the likeness of our sinful ones, and then cast him out into the viler
draught. That every loaf and bit shall be the whole man, and at the same time
in so many several places: But it is not flesh and blood, Mat. v. 6.
but righteousness that we hunger and thirst after, and have the blessing of
satisfaction in. Yet we receive that Sacrament, not as a mere badge of our
Profession but as a sign and seal of God's mercy to us, and of his grace
thereby working in us, which grace depends not upon the worthy or unworthy
qualifications of him that administers, but of them who receive that Sacrament.
Which while we celebrate in remembrance of an absent Christ, we yet own a real
presence of him who is every where: While we pray that we may so eat and drink,
that our bodies may be cleansed by his body, and our souls washed by his most
precious blood. And the whole office performed with as much respect as is
required, or was practiced by the Primitive Church, though we proceed not to a
preserving, enshrining, procession with, and adoration of the Host, or any
other elevation, but that of the lifting up of our hearts.

And so let us ever lift them up in thankfulness to that God, who has called
us out of darkness into his marvelous light, in a Church and under a Government
old as Christianity it self, whose gray hairs are its Crown, Prove. xvi. 31.
as found in a way of righteousness. It is called Heresy and Novelty, yet it
is the good old way, wherein we worship the God of our Fathers; a righteous,
though a dolorous way, as by which the King of Kings, and one of the best of
Kings walked to their Cross: In this Profession died the true Defender of the
Church in its ancient Faith, and fruitions; equally abhorring Sacrilege and
Apostasy: Who by no Arts or force could be brought to subject her to parity or
poverty, to gratify those who would have her go as naked out of the world, as
she came into it. He took care not to have his nest fired by a coal snatched
from God's Altar, earnestly praying that neither he, nor his might ever be
accessory to it. And (God be thanked) he has been hitherto heard in what he
desired. Thus he was the most Christian King, by a better title than that to
France, as purchased, not by his Subjects blood, but by his own: He was content
to exchange a Crown of Gold for a Crown of Thorns, and for which he now wears a
Crown of Glory. And may that Religion which such a Savior founded in, and such
a Sovereign sealed with his blood, be our Religion for ever.

Amen and Amen.
Application to the Occasion.
AND now it is time to give you an instance of a fit Servant and Subject to
such a Christ, and such a King: And you have one before you, that of our
deceased Friend. He kept a Conscience void of offense toward God and toward
man. To trace him as high as we can, he was of a generous Family, and therein
the obedient Son of an obliging Father, and from thence he was the honest
Servant of a good Master, and afterward the kind Master of many Servants. But
what is here most proper to consider him in, is his better Profession, that of
a Christian, that of a Protestant: And herein he was a steady Professor, too
well ballasted to be carried about by every (by any) wind of Doctrine, whether
it blew from Rome, or Geneva. He lived to see Religion in its splendor, and
its eclipse, and he equally loved it in both conditions, or if there was any
difference, he exceeded in the latter.

When those Vipers, who sucked the breasts of the Church, were ready to tear
out her bowels, she took sanctuary in his house, and there frequently dealt out
her bread of life in the Word and Sacrament, by many of her Fathers to many of
her Children. There afflicted Loyalty had wherewithal to content it, for it had
food, and raiment from thence. How many of the Lords Prophet did this good
Obadiah refresh with something better than bread and water? 1 Kings xviii. 3.


He was for many years very useful to this Parish, wherein there was nothing
that he did disrelish more than dishonesty: He had a clear head to discern it,
and a clean heart to abhor it. When his example could not allure men to a
sincere, his strict justice would aw them into an outward honesty. Among those
losses we sustained by the late dreadful sire, it was none of the least that it
parted him and us; yet when he went from us he seemed still to be of us. We had
(as of a setting Sun) somewhat of his head to enlighten us, and of his heart to
warm us. And how open was his hand to repair this Church, when no longer his
Church? So that should I be silent, Hab. ii. 11.
the stone in the wall, and the beam out of the timber would charge me with
ingratitude: These speak his Epitaph, while the whole Fabric is his Monument.
There are other Charities too, wherein I could be loud with a zeal for him
according to knowledge, my own knowledge; but that he, who in all his good
deeds sought God's glory, and not his own, has thereby enjoined me silence. It
was enough for him to do them, and then to leave it to God to reward them; and
he did them with that humility, that he deemed he did not deserve the praise of
men, much less that of God.

His behavior in the Royal Society of Apothecaries (for King James who made
them a Company used to call them his Society) was such as gained him the
applause and affections of all. They found enough, if not too much to imitate,
nothing to condemn. It is not unknown to many of you that those public
buildings too owe much to his Care, and Charity. He was very Instrumental to
rear them, out of their ashes, who is now dropped into his own, only with this
difference, that he expects what they enjoy, to have his later state made
better than his former.

His last Scene of life was suitable to all the rest, a work of Charity; when
hastening to God he took the Hospital of St. Bartholomew in his way. Hither the
unanimous votes of the Governors, the panting desires of the Sick and Lame,
with the importunate Letters of the ever Venerable Mr. Mills his Predecessor
invited him. This good old man could not die, till satisfied he should survive
himself in such a Successor; and then he sung his Nune Dimittis.

And here our Friend enjoyed, if not the most honorable, yet the most
advantageous employment, that is, advantageous to others, not to himself. For
he did not sell, but give himself to good works. And here they had a Treasure
in a Treasurer, a Treasure that is indeed in heaven The Motto of his Mourning
Ring.
, no sooner showed to them than snatched from them. The Treasure is gone, and
nothing but the earthen vessel remains, to show how poor we are; The Wife, in
the loss of a most affectionate Husband; the Sick, of a Compassionate Father;
the Company, of a loving Brother, and my self of a kind and constant Friend.
For, give me leave to tell you, that had it not been for his and some others
endeavors sixteen years ago in my behalf, I had not been now here, to give him
this just testimony of my gratitude to his memory.

And now farewell Pious Christian, Loyal Subject, Faithful Friend, Just Steward,
and Good Samarican: yet we take no entire leave of thee, we take no leave of
thy memory, that of the Just is ever blessed. The names of Mills, and Hinton
can never die. We take no leave of thy life, we will endeavor to live like
thee, that we may live with thee. We take but a short leave of thy body, Thou
art going to the bottom of the Grave, and we are at the brink of it. We are all
but awake for a while, and then we shall not sleep for ever. Christ shall
change our vile bodies together, with thine, and make them like to his own most
glorious body, according to that mighty working whereby he is able to subdue
all things to himself. When we shall hear what we hope, and believe thou have
already heard, even that comfortable invitation, and Commendation: Come ye
blessed Children of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world. You have been faithful in a few things, I will make you
Rulers over many things, enter into the Joy of your Lord, for which he fit us,
and to which he bring us through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of
the truth.

Amen and Amen.
FINIS.

