Imprimatur. Io. Battely Rmo Dno Dno Wilhelmo Archiep. Cantuar. a Sacris
Domesticis.

Ex Aedib. Lambeth. Sept. 8. 1686.
A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES HELD AT LEICESTER, JULY xxii. MDCLXXXVI.
Before the Right Honorable Sir EDWARD ATKINS Lord Chief Baron, and Sir
CHRISTOPHER MILTON Baron of the Exchequer.

By the Honorable GEORGE BERKELEY, A.M.

Published at the Request of Thomas Wilson, Esquire High Sheriff of the County of
Leicester.

LONDON, Printed by I. Macock, for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred
Majesty, 1686.

A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES Held at LEICESTER, July xxii. 1686.
MATTHEW. vii. 12. Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so
to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets.


OUR Savior, upon the close of his Sermon upon the Mount, does in this Chapter
forbid an affectation of Censure and Forwardness in Judging our Neighbor,
cautions us against the Profanation and Prostitution of Holy things; exhorts
us unto Prayer, with that persuasive inducement of God's Benignity and
Goodness, compared with the tenderness of an earthly Parent, showing us the
disproportion of created and uncreated Goodness, to strengthen the Argument a
fortiori.

After which, he descends to this Principle of Common Equity, Therefore all
things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, etc.

In which Words we may consider these following Propositions, as directly
contained or implied therein.

I. That all men by a natural Principle, which flows immediately from the very
frame of their Natures, are inclined to wish well to themselves. II. That every
particular man's happiness does so much depend upon the general and common good
of Society, that it cannot be separate therefrom. III. A General Rule of
Natural Justice and Common Equity to be observed by all men in Society and
Converse with one another, viz. That whatsoever we would that men should do
unto us, we should do even so unto them. IV. Lastly, The Divine Authority and
Sanction of this Precept, For this is the Law and the Prophets.
I. I begin with the first of these, viz. That all men by a natural Principle,
which flows immediately from the very frame of their Natures, are inclined to
wish well to themselves. That every man hunts after his own felicity, and is at
all times a Well-wisher to his own good (however he mistaketh the thing, or the
way to that good) is a Maxim so evident and clear, that no man in his sound
wits can call it into question; it is derived from the very necessity of our
Natures, men cannot do otherwise if they would. It is the very fundamental Law
of our Being, and the very first Principle that God has put into us: In other
Creatures it is called Instinct, which God has implanted in their Natures, as
a power necessary for their support and preservation. We can as soon stifle, or
annihilate our very Beings, as deprive our selves of this motion and desire
after happiness; which if we could take away, would destroy our Constitution as
men, and quite unhinge the frame of our Natures. As we cannot but directly feel
our own passions by a quick and immediate perception; so we applaud or else
condole our selves, as the motions of Pleasure or Pain do affect us, according
unto that Scheme of Good and Evil which we have framed in our minds. For unless
the mind be alienated through Phrenzy or other distemper of Body, it is not to
be conceived, that we should not seek and pursue after as good a condition as
we can possibly be in, in our desires and wishes at least, if not in our
practice and endeavor.

But this is a Point so very plain, that I shall no longer insist thereon; but
proceed to the next Particular, viz.

II. That every particular man's happiness does so much depend upon the general
and common Good of Society, that it cannot be separate therefrom. As God, has
given us no desire or natural inclination without sufficient power also of
putting the same in execution; so in nothing more has he put us into a
capacity of pursuing our truest interest in this World, than by the constant
exercise of Sociable Duties, and the good Offices of common Life and
Conversation. This is apparent in the general Order of Providence: The lowest
Creatures that partake of life, are sorted and combined together for their
Common Good. In Bees we have a resemblance of Rule and Polity; Birds and Beasts
accompany each other, and join in the respective Offices of their kind, and
contribute their mutual Aid, unless of the most savage and wild Natures. And
though we excel other Animals in a reasonable Soul, to study Nature and the
Author of it, and to pursue the ways of Happiness; yet this is so far from
promoting solitude and a life unsociable, that it rather excites our
inclinations and desires to a combination with one another under good and
profitable Laws of Community. For no man has that sufficiency in himself, as
not to want the assistance of others; no Creatures, not the Angels themselves,
are absolutely perfect and completely independent, much less can any Mortal be
sufficient of himself, without external Aid and foreign Supplies. Therefore
since God has appointed a Communion and Fellowship in other Creatures inferior
to Man, how much more in us, who are Members of his Church Militant on Earth,
that we may be the same in his Church Triumphant in Heaven? Now as our
happiness under God is fundamentally seated in Society, to which many Virtues
have an immediate respect and relative application; so he that will be happy in
a well-disciplin'd and civilized Community, must observe the Laws of it, which
are modeled for the benefit of each particular Member, with a due regard unto
the public; without which Proviso, in tract of time, the Establishment would
fall, and the Community be dissolved.

And thus I have briefly shown the necessity of Society in general, as we are
rational and discoursive Creatures. I come now in the next place to consider,

III. The General Rule of Natural Justice and Common Equity to be observed by
all men in Society and Converse with one another, expressed in my Text, That
whatsoever we would that men should do unto us, we should do even so unto them.
As we are pushed on to the love of our selves by a forcible and controuling
Instinct of Nature; so God has made this the Foundation of Justice and
Charity, the Rule and Measure of Domestic and Political Duties. He that
watches and observes the motion of his own mind, the inward frame of his own
heart, can tell his behavior to himself, and the various tendency of his
passions toward whatever does really, or is but supposed to concern him. As
every man is tender of himself, so he also desires and expects that other
people should have regard unto him; should beware of incroaching upon his
Person, or invading his Interest. Now if a man find these inclinations and
propensions in himself, he should consider the same likewise in others, who are
men of the same original Mould as he is, endued with like affections, and
correspondent Principles of inclination and desire; that so by containing his
Passions within the Bounds of Reason and Religion, he may teach others to
moderate the excesses of them, to prevent those violent effects that issue from
so predominant and boisterous Principles. So that, the love of our selves is
understood by all men, it needs no Paraphrase or Explanation: Nature and Reason
prompt us to it, and Religion recommends it so far as to make it the Model of
our proceedings with one another. Now he that truly loves himself is a Friend
of Humanity, and loves his common Nature in another man: for we are not only
taught of God to love our Brethren in Christ, I These. 4.9.
but may be our own Instructors, only by observing the Rule of my Text, which
is fitted and squared to all conditions of Life. For it preserves and
maintains all establishments of men; it justles out no Duty or distinction of
Order amongst us; it does not confound the different respects due to men, as
Morality enjoins, and Prudence points out and directs; it does not overturn
Communities by loosening the Bands of Authority and Subjection, or confounding
the degrees and stations, which are necessary, whether in Oeconomical or Civil
Societies.

To love our Neighbor as our selves is by Reduction and Inference, the love of
Piety and God himself, according to the Dialect of Scripture Phrase in Holy
Writ. Saint John expressly joineth them together, He who loves God, 1 John
4.20, 21.
loves his Brother also; and if a man say, I love God, and hates his Brother,
he is a Liar: for he that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can be
love God whom be has not seen? Should I speak of this Rule as it deserves, in
what a plentiful Field of Arguments might I expatiate, what a multitude of
Motives and forcible Perswasives might I produce, to oblige men to the practice
of this so excellent a Duty? Do we not prize and value our selves amidst
disgraces and misfortunes? and our frailties and weaknesses, do they not but
very little depress us in our own opinion; nor, do we desire to be lessened in
the esteem of others? Why then should we audaciously revile, inwardly despise,
or scossingly reproach our Neighbor? As we heartily covet our own welfare and
profit, rejoice in the success of our own actions, and are hugely pleased when
others bear a part in our Joy; so should we congratulate our Neighbor on the
like occasion. As we are not Stoically affected in the case of our Safety, our
Fortune, our Honor and Repute, nay our very Pastimes and Diversions, but
require the assistance of others, and expect it from them; in the like manner
let us be helpful to our Neighbor, and Promoters of his good. As we would not
be shot with Envy in the prosperous circumstances of our lives; so neither
ought we to repine at another man's increase of Fortune, growth in Reputation,
or Advancement in Power. If we find Delight and Complacency resulting to us
from a flourishing condition in Wealth or Repute, or any additional Ornament to
our state, are we not apt to communicate this satisfaction to others, that we
may augment our Joy by an accession of theirs? Why then should we be close and
reserved to our Neighbor in like Cases? Why should we not extremely rejoice at
the Temporal or Spiritual good of our Neighbor, especially the latter, which
does so infinitely outweigh and vastly transcend all other concerns? Alas! Do
not our disgraces and misfortunes strike and pierce our very hearts? Does not
pain and sickness in us importune our Neighbors compassion, and entreat the
relief and succor of our Christian Brethren? Does not this then prompt us also
to a fellow-feeling with, and commiseration of our Neighbor in his distress?
There is none of us all that will not stickle earnestly for our selves; we
manage our own concerns with vigorous and faithful industry, and we do all we
can to prevent want and a destitute condition, the fears whereof do so disquiet
and molest us; we are not satisfied with an empty wish, but put our invention
on the Rack, in projecting our designs, and bringing to pass our desires; and
if we are considerate and wife, with as much solicitude and carefulness we
propagate the Honor of God in our lives, we impress an awe of Religion in our
hearts, we supplant ignorance and hurtful error in our minds, and do
exterminate sin and a bad conscience in our selves: this inculcates to us how
ready and disposed, how officious we should be in furthering our Neighbors
good, in advancing and procuring his Benefit, in ministering to the wants and
necessities both of his Body and his Soul. And as we do not usually thwart and
oppose our own eager propensions, nor desire that others should contradict our
fancy and humor; so we may learn hence what Equity and Moderation we should
exercise toward them, what a complaisant and civil demeanor we should bear
toward all men, endeavoring to please them in all things for their
edification. Romans 15.2.
Is any man easily incensed against himself? or does he desire to see others
boil with indignation against him, or betray a spightful and haughty Spirit
toward him? Then, let him also show a frank and condescending meekness of
Temper, such as will soften the harshness of bad Tempers; rather than insult
upon the frowardness of another, or exasperate him with unseemly reproaches, or
libel him with harsh and bitter Invectives. As we have a natural fondness for
our selves, and every man wishes himself an increase of content and happiness;
so this propension inclines us naturally unto a Sociable Life, that we may in
common partake of those Benefits which cannot be had in solitude. Now the Laws
of Society require a mutual regard unto the Members thereof; for they are not
calculated for the profit of one, but of many; and therefore he that wilfully
oppresses another is a Transgressor against the grand Law of our Nature, and
by his practice would discard all humanity, and overthrow all helpful Society.
Alexander Severus the Emperor had always this Saying in his mouth, Lamprid. in
Vit. Alex. Sev. c. 51. p. 577. Hist. August. L. Bat. 1661.
Quod tibi non vis fieri, alteri ne feceris, Do not that to another, which in
thy conscience thou desire should not be done unto thee. This comprehends our
deportment in all our words and actions, so as to carry our selves harmless and
inoffensive to others, as we desire they would do to us. Now it is certain that
no man is willing that his Neighbor should be rude in his address, of a
churlish temper, of an untractable and refractory humor, of a crabbed and
disingenuous behavior; of a Cynical disposition on the one side, or of a
glosing dissimulation on the other; that he should be either a Blab, or a
Sycophant. No man cares that his Neighbor should be singular, wilful and
testy, humoursome and capricious; but rather gentle and conversable, frank and
easy, complaisant and obliging, in whatsoever things are honest and of good
report. No man is willing to have an unjust Tyranny obtruded upon him in words
and actions, by a troublesome Lawgiver and Dictator in Discourse, or a greedy
Extortioner in Business and Dealing. No man is willing that his Neighbor
should treacherously collude with him in Promises and Covenants, or wickedly
and deceitfully trepan him. We would all be gently accosted, and favorably
handled in word and deed. No Body is fond of ill-natured censure, of unworthy
and base detraction. Who is there ambitious of being exposed and Bussoon'd, to
have hisfaults unravelled with envy and spite, his imperfections publicly
canvass'd as a common Theme of Discourse, an entertainment of laughter and
malice? No Body cares to be wrongfully upbraided, unseasonably charged and
rebuked; nor are we fond of being proudly overawed, insolently brow-beaten, or
imperiously controuled. No man cares to be sawcily bearded, to be stubbornly
withstood in a reasonable matter by a wilful and cross-grained opposition. Is
there any man who is willing to have his words wrested, his sense misconstrued,
or his actions misreported and traduced? Is there any one who is willing that
his person should be vilified with open slander, nay with malicious truth?
stabbed in effigy by cowardly whispering, or grieved with unmanly scoffs, with
insupportable insulting Taunts? If it be true, that we are apt to wink at our
own faults and conceal them, to color our own failings, nay to make an Apology
for our very Crimes, and grow angry that others will not bestow the Curse which
Isaiah mentions, upon themselves, Isai. 5.20.
of calling evil good, and bitter sweet: is it commendable or honest then to
disclose another's nakedness, to aggravate all the miscarriages of our
Neighbor, and magnify them beyond all modesty and measure? It Is certain we
would not be hurt or prejudiced in Body, damnified in Estate, or deflowred in
Reputation; we have so delicate and nice a feeling in our own concerns, that we
cannot bear a moderate reflection, but it shocks us immediately; we cannot
endure the Brunt of a false Story of our selves; how does it stagger and
unsettle us, amuse and affright us? How eager are we to stop the mouths and
ears of others against our selves, and stifle, as soon as possibly we can, the
infection, and hinder it from spreading? And this may be a Rule to square our
Deportment, and fashion our Behavior in whatsoever relates to Ingenuity and
Candor, to honest and plausible Dealing, to the sweet and comfortable
enjoyment of reasonable Society.

For this is a Rule of unsailing Equity, of impartial Truth, and Godly
Simplicity, to do to others, as we would have them do to us, if we could
exchange our persons with them: which in a Negative sense implies the for
beating what we dislike, and the declining such Proceedings with our Neighbor,
as are hateful to our selves. And this removes an Objection which might perhaps
be started, viz. That it seems an infringement of Order, and a relaxing of
Society, for men of very different and unequal capacities, so far above or
below one another, by natural or acquired Rights, to follow the strictness of
this Rule; That it tends to the confusion and levelling of Persons, and
therefore is impracticable. No certainly, this holy and wise Law has a respect
unto the Common Good of Mankind, and cannot overthrow that peace and
settlement, which God, by writing it in the hearts of men, intended it should
uphold and establish, although it had never been enforced by positive
Institution and Command: no more being meant thereby than a commodious Rule
ever at hand to adjust and temper all the Duties of Sociable Life; that every
man would do by his Neighbor that which his Reason and Conscience tells him he
should expect from him in like circumstances; to fulfill the Laws of universal
Justice, and to establish an equal and uniform Charity, which is the Bond of
Perfection, and the Top of all humane Virtue.

I come now to consider the last Proposition in my Text, viz.

IV. The Divine Authority and Sanction of the Precept, For this is the Law and
the Prophets. This is not only a Dictate of the Law of Nature, a Precept every
way agreeable to our rational Faculties; but it is the very Basis and
Groundwork of Legal and Prophetical Dispensations throughout the Book of God.
What is the Second Table of the Decalogue? in what does it consist, but in
standing Rules of Direction concerning our Duty unto our Neighbor, in strict
Injunctions of due Honor and Obedience to our Superiors, and of Justice to
all men; in severe Prohibitions to be injurious to any in their Persons, their
Property and Good Name, or any thing belonging to them? What are the Prophets,
but inspired Commentators upon the whole Law of God, with extraordinary
Commission to enforce Righteousness and Morality, nay and often to prefer it
before Devotion it self, as more pleasing to God, Hos. 6.6. Matt. 9.13.
for he loves mercy better than Sacrifice, and the good we do our
Fellow Creatures that need it, better than his own Worship and Service; who
though he infinitely deserves it, yet needs it not.

Now, as this Body of Institutes was given to Moses by the Ministry of Angels,
and delivered to the People of Israel, the Seed of Jacob, God's peculiar
Inheritance; so the Gospel of our Lord, the Covenant of Grace, has exceedingly
confirmed and strengthened this Second Table of the Commandments, by
superadding eternal Rewards and Punishments unto all those who willingly
observe, or wilfully transgress them. Does not our Savior assure us, That with
what measure we mete unto others, it shall be measured to us again in our
Accounts with God in the Journal of our Lives? when He that sets Judgment to
the Line, Isai. 28.17.
and Righteousness to the Plummet, will pronounce us everlastingly condemned or
acquitted by the Rule of Charity. And therefore St. Paul exhorts us (for a Test
of our Holiness, Col. 3.12.
and Mark of our Election) to put on Bowels of mercy, humbleness of mind, to be
clothed with meekness and long-suffering; Gal. 6.2.
to bear one another Burdens, Romans 12.3.
and think soberly of our selves. In reference also to public Establishments,
how firmly does the Apostle bind us to Obedience? Romans 13.
Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers: Render to all men their Dues,
Tribute to whom Tribute, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to
whom Honor. 1 Pet. 2.13.
So also S. Peter, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's
sake. And that we may not be blown and puffed up with vanity (which renders us
overweening and conceited, imperious and haughty) we are forbid to do any
thing, Philip. 2.3.
through strife or vainglory; but in lowliness of mind to give pre-eminence to
others, and esteem them better than our selves. In another Text we are bid to
honor all men, 1 Pet. 2.17.
and love the Brotherhood that is, the entire Fellowship and Fraternity of
Christians. Nor has the Scripture only secured Reverence to Authority in a
Public Station, and regulated our general converse; but it has likewise
stated the welfare of private Societies, by teaching the reciprocal Duties of
each Member thereof, and their respective Obligations: Husbands, love your
Wives, and be Col. 3.19.
not bitter against them. Wives, submit your selves unto your own Husbands, as
unto the Lord; for the Husband is the Head of the Wife, Ephesians. 5.2.
as Christ is Head of the Church. And for Oeconomical Provision and Care, I
Tim. 5.8.
Whosoever does not provide for his own, especially for them of his own
household, is in the Apostle's judgment, worse than an Infidel. Lastly, we have
the mutual Offices of Children and Parents, Masters and Servants, specified and
determined in the New Testament, as well as in the Old: Ephesians. 6.4.
That Fathers should not provoke their Children, but bring them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord: Ephesians. 6.1.
That Children should obey their Parents in all things, as well-pleasing unto
God. As also, That themselves should not be provoked to anger, left they be
discouraged and out of heart, and rendered thereby apt to go astray from their
Duty. So in like manner, Servants are enjoined to obey in all things their
Masters according to the flesh; not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but in
singleness of heart, Ephesians. 6.5, 6.
fearing God; to be subject with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but
the froward: and Masters are commanded to give their Servants what is just and
equal, as knowing they have also a Master in heaven, Ephesians. 6.9.
who is no Accepter of persons.

Here we see a Summary and compendious deduction of the several Branches of
Duty, arising from this just and holy Precept.

It remains therefore that we apply it to our selves, that we should ponder it
in our minds, and examine and sift our consciences, how far we have swerved
from the Rule, how far we have crookedly and perversely carried our selves
toward our Neighbor in every respect and circumstance; how indirectly and
obliquely we have dealt with other men: yet on the contrary, with great
fondness and doting partiality to our selves. For if all Commandments
referring to Intercourse, and our Dealings with one another (as, Thou shall not
steal, Thou shall not commit Adultery, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not bear
false witness, Thou shall not covet) be contained in this one Article of loving
our Neighbor as our selves, as our Blessed Savior tells us, Romans 13.9.
and S. Paul Also affirms and makes a particular recital thereof; if those
Commandments are virtually comprised and summed up in this Precept of our
Savior, That we should do unto others, as we would have them do unto us (which
is indeed undefiled and unspotted Religion, as including all the Duties of
Society, without reserve, or distinction of partiality and prejudice) then let
us bethink our selves and consider how faulty and unequal we have been in the
Weights and Measures of our Justice and Charity to our selves and others. Do we
not for the most part use a double Balance, weighing our own Interests and
Concernments in the one, and those of our Neighbor in another; standing
strictly upon the Equity of this Rule to our selves, but having little or no
regard to it when others challenge the like from us? This is certainly very
great partiality and injustice. Since then we have so clear and certain a Rule,
which is always ready at hand (because every man carries it in his own breast)
it is a matter certainly of wonder and astonishment, that any one who calls
himself a Christian, should not be extremely ashamed, not only to break and
daily transgress this righteous rule of Justice and Equity, but even to fly out
into those enormous Crimes of Murder and Oppression, of Subornation and
Perjury, which an honest and sober Heathen would be ashamed and blush at.

We have therefore great and mighty reason to magnify and extol the Providence
of God, who has ordained and constituted Magistrates as his and the King's
Ministers of Justice, to execute wrath upon all those who do evil; Romans 13.4.
without which, the World would soon become a Wilderness, or a mere Shambles of
Cruelty and Oppression, and Mankind only a barbarous Herd of Prey, the greater
and mightier still devouring the lesser and weaker, and every one inhumanely
striving to crush his Neighbor. I beseech therefore Almighty God to prosper
your undertakings, that Justice in an even Balance may be equally administered;
that the innocent may be protected and relieved, whilst the wicked man is
caught in the Snare which he laid for the intrapping of others. And I pray God
we may all remember the great Account we must one day make at the one great
general Assize, when an Archangel shall found a Trumpet before the Judge of
the whole Earth, Eccles. 12.14.
and every man shall be recompensed according to his deeds, whether they be
good, or whether they be evil. For which Great Day, God of his Infinite Mercy
grant we may all prepare our selves, for the sake of his only beloved Son our
Savior Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit be given all
Honor, Praise and Dominion, now and for. evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.
The WORKS of the Reverend and Learned 'Doctor Hammond in Four Volumes, viz.
Vol. I. A Collection of Discourses chiefly Practical. Vol. II. A Collection of
Discourses in Defense of the Church of England. 1. Against the Romanists. 2.
Against other Adversaries. Vol. III. A Paraphrase and Annotations upon the New
Testament. Vol. IV. A Paraphrase and Annotations upon the Books of Psalms. A
Paraphrase and Annotations upon [the ten first Chapters of the] Proverbs. MS.
XXXI. Sermons Preached upon several Occasions. With an Appendix to Vol. II.

