(...): OR, A DESCRIPTION OF THE Body of Man: BEING A Practical Anatomy,
SHEVVING The Manner of Anatomizing from Part to Part; The like has not been
set forth in the English Tongue.

^dorned with many demonstrative Figures ^ong since Composed in Latin, by that
Famous J. Berengarius of Carpus, Dr. of A. and P. Reader of Surgery in the
University of BONONIA.

Done into English by H. Jackson Surgeon ^y whom is also added a fit Etymon
to the Names of the Parts, in their proper place.

^ondon, Printed for Livewell Chapman, at his shop in Exchange-Alley in
Co^n-hill. 1664.

TO The Worshipful Society of the Mystery and Commonalty of
Barber-Chirurgeons of London, together with all Students and Practitioners in
Anatomy, Henry Jackson a Member of the aforesaid Society commends these his
Labors.
(Most renowned Brethren, and Friends:)
I Am provoked in my mind, after long deliberation, to publish this Work, being
commanded in my first undertaking thereunto, by my aged Father, an ancient
member of this Society, who having met with this Author in his Travels in
Italy, esteemed it as a great Treasure, and too good indeed to be concealed;
which being in old and curt Latin, cost me not a little pains to put it into
smooth English; and yet I never overread the Work but I had comfort in it, and
thought it worth all my pains. I have also been much encouraged by the
commendations I have heard of the Book, by the learned Dr. Guinn, and Dr.
Andrews, in their public Anatomy Lectures at our Hall, as also by that exact
Anatomist Doctor Wharton, who has had the perusing of it, and is pleased to
prefix his Epistle to it. And now considering the great want there is of such a
Work, that may be as a Directory to young Practizers in Anatomy, how to dissect
from part to part, and how studious most ingenuous men are of this Art; as also
how mysteriously those that have it do conceal it, I am, I say, provoked to
thrust forth this Work into the world; by the help of which for the three
Venters and general parts, and Muscles of the Body of Man and Woman; as also by
a little Treatise of Master William Molins, of the Anatomical Administration of
Muscles, which he calls (...), (which I also commend to the industrious
Practitioner in Anatomy) I am not ignorant what a great light of experience may
be gained to the diligent hand of such who do industriously labor in this
Science. I have also added a fit Etymon to the names of the parts in their
place, from diverse Authors, besides those inserted by this Author, because it
is both pleasant and profitable, and ^^stomably observed in Anatomy Lectures.
By the help of which Book, I am of opinion, that the ingenuous Surgeon may
be enabled, not only to Dissect from part to part, but also (where more
excellent Physicians are not to be had) to explain and read upon the parts, to
the satisfaction of a Country Auditory; which effects hoping the Lord will
crown this work withal. I take leave humbly to subscribe my self,

From my house in Southwark, Febru. 25. 1659/60. A Lover of this Art, and of
you all, Henry Jackson.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Am desired by my learned Friend and Tutor, M. Mark Franck, sometimes Fellow
of Pembrook Hall, Cambridge, to read this Translation of his old acquaintance
Master Jackson, Surgeon, and to write my thoughts, as an Epistle before it;
in obedience whereof I shall briefly address my self. I understand the Author
to be Jacobus Carpus Bononiensis (because of his Figures, as also his
mentioning his Commentaries upon Mundinus) printed in Latin in the year one
thousand five hundred and thirty, about one hundred and thirty years ago. He
was in his time much esteemed for a most industrious, judicious, and expert
Anatomist, and has in this Book given good testimony thereof, for he has in
this Isagoge exceedingly much improved the administration of Anatomy, in many
difficult parts of it, which is one of the principal qualifications of an
Anatomist; therefore its hoped this Book will be as well worth the reading as
any in that particular, by whosoever that will favor that ever Noble
employment and exercise. Moreover, this good old Author is concise and short,
without any tedious repetitions, and also writ in an excellent good order and
method, and will neither spend time in reading, nor charge considerable. Its
hoped the Reader will easily be persuaded to indulge this Writer with the
common abatement necessarily granted to all our ancient Authors.

First, for that he writ so long before our for ever renowned Doctor Harvey,
and therefore was not acquainted with those curious truths of the circuit of
the blood, which evidently demonstrates that the Veins reduce that blood which
was sent by the Arteries from the Heart abroad into the parts of the Body, and
that the Heart with the Blood and Spirits, is the chief Organ of vitality, the
habitacle of the spirit of Life, common to us with Brutes: but the Brain, the
Primum sensorium, the seat of the Intellect, the complement of man, and the
palace of the immortal soul.

The other excuse to be entreated for the Author of this Work, is also for his
age; for he lived before our incomparable Doctor Glisson, had demonstrated the
true uses of the Liver; the exact way of Natures making Blood; the nature and
course of the Lympha, and the motion of the Chyle; and that the Spleen poures
no juice, either sour or sweet into the Stomach: which being supplied, our
Author may happily pass completely current.

Formerly Italy bred many such learned Physicians and Philosophers as this
Author, and then it was worth the while to journey to Padua to hear them, as
other Nations anciently went into Egypt: But now England by the industry of
Harvey and Glisson, is the only Scene for both; so that the politic Italian,
if he will attempt the attaining to the knowledge of any thing considerable in
either, must visit England, and ours stay to better purpose at home, unless the
careful Father shall judge it necessary for the manning (...) Son, to hazard
him such a P^lgrimage as to survey the ruins of old Rome, and Campus Martius
the stately place of the new. Lectures upon barbarous Avicen will never advance
the true worth (...) knowledge of Physic, nor his Auditors ever admit the
truth of the Circulation of the Blood, whilst they dote upon his third or
middle Sinus in the Septum of the Heart, which this good Author did then deny.

This Anatomist has pursued the various ducts of the Vessels, to wit,
Arteries, Veins, and Nerves, and also the Muscles, with a notable design,
which has given our later Authors occasion frequently to mention his Labors
with honor. This Book, as it is ancient and learned, so it has been rare to
be found with us; therefore we owe much to this Translators indus, who has
rendered it answerable to the Original, and made it both easy for any to be
had, and by the vulg^^ to be understood. I crave your excuse for this freedom,
both in commending the Author, and informing the Reader, that he be not
mislead; as also to add, that I suppose the word Colligancy may in some places
be read continuation, or connection, or communion, without wrong to the Authors
sense, but in all shall willingly submit, and so conclude

Feb. ^4. 1659/60. Tho. Wharton.

De Libello Jacobi Berengarii (...)
Anagr. Jacobus Berengarius. Vis Cibare? Bonus ager.

^ne cibare v^^is? (loquitur Jacobus) adesto,
Est bonus (inquit) ager, qui been pascit oves:
(...) Barengarius duro percussit aratro,
Fructus distribuit, pauperis auxilio.
Henricus Jackson.
(...).
Errata.
FOl. 77. for quantiby, read quanti^^, f. 80. for different Vessels, r.
deferent Vessels, f. 108. for cancrenated r. caneerated, f. 114. for on the
upper part it contains the Natural members, and on the lower the Vital, etc.
r. for on the upper part it contains the Vital members, and on the lower the
Natural, f. 223. for of Mundinus is called in^^sivi, r. are called incisivi. f.
24^. for endimious r. endemious, f. 249. for and first it is to be noted, r.
and first is to be noted, f. 263. for from which the voice and conservat^^^ of
life reboundeth, r. from which the voice reboundeth, and it is a conservation
of life, f. 309. for concur, r. occur, f. 313. for safety and such like, r.
^^f^^ti and such like.

A Brief and Practical ANATOMY.
THis Work has two Parts, the first handles things Universal, the second
things Particular; the first ^oth (according to the opinions of ^ome) denote
Anatomia to be de^ived of (...) a Greek word, which ^n Latin signifies per,
and sur^um, through, upward, a thing ^ruly equal and right, and (...), which is
divisio or sectio, a division ^r section, as it were a right divi^ion (...)
Declarat etiam aequalem quandam distributionem. Vi. Scap.
through or about the parts.

But by a truer interpretation (...), in composition (amongst the ^est)
signifies a certain enquiry ^ade through all the parts, whereupon in
composition of this word (...), which is incido, to incise, it signifies in
singulas parts seco, that is, to make incision into every part, to the end
that we may know what and how many they be: and although it may seem reason
that every thing should be spoken of what parts it has, yet use has obtained
this, that it be spoken of Animals, and especially of men.

Therefore Anatomia, or Anatome, Anatomy, is a division of all the parts of a
living Creature, that we may know their Substance, Quantity, Number, Figure,
the Situation, and Colligancy of them, and Colligantia from Colligo, as, is
such an affinity of the parts, as is by being tied or fastened to one another.
all these are in dead bodies; and therefore Galen said in his Book of the
Constitution of the Art of healing, I think it were necessary for ^^ when we
intend this Art, not only to know the parts and their composition, but their
operations also; and in this Physicians do differ from Builders, for they do
only know the parts and compositions of Houses, whereof none has operation,
because it is not a living Creature; but by Physicians, of the members of man,
insomuch as he is a living Creature, operations are to be sought; and because
that in a living man, and not in a dead, there are Operations, Complexions, and
Passions, so that these three being added to the other six, there are in a real
Anatomy those aforesaid nine things to be considered.

But because we must begin from the whole as being best known; First, some dead
body being laid with his face upward, in a place fit for dissection and
demonstration, being before washed, the hairs shaved, and very well cleansed
from filth, even from the head to the feet; we must know, that the body is
divided into four parts, that is, into three notable Bellies, and the extremes,
to wit, the hands and the feet, with some others.

The first part being the Head is Testa, an earthen pot, called in Latin
Caput, quia ibi s^nsus initium capiunt, because the Senses take their beginning
there; in which the Animal members are contained; and this is called the
highest Belly.

The second part is a Cavity between the ribs and the bones annexed to them, in
which there are principally the Spiritual or Vital members, and some others;
and this is called Pectus, and Cassus, the breast, and the middle belly.

The third part is the hollowness which is within the Abdomen, and part of the
Back underneath the Septum transversum, otherwise Diafragma, and goes down
before unto the Pecten, and behind unto the Anus; in which the Nutritive
members, and also the Generative are partly contained; and this is called the
lower belly.

The fourth part is the whole residue of the body, as the neck, the hands, and
the feet, and parts that belong unto them.

Of the Anatomy of the lower Belly.
THe universal part being seen, I come to the particular, in which the Workman
must begin his incision from the lower belly, wherein there are many members
first to be Anatomised and cast away, lest if they be left behind, they should
hinder the rest of the body by their putrefaction and evil savor.

Therefore let this Belly be considered according to the nine aforesaid
conditions: and first for the Substance which is diverse, as well according to
the parts Containing, as the parts Contained; the Substance of the parts
Contained will appear in its place, but the Substance of the parts Containing
in the former and lateral part is Pannicular and Musculous, that it may be fit
for Constriction and Dilatation, because of impregnation, and food, and the
like. There is also notable fatness in these parts in a fat Body, but in a lean
body little, and sometimes none at all; and fatness is not properly a member,
but increasing and diminishing as a superfluity, nevertheless profitable.

But the hinder substance of this belly is fleshy, musculous, bony, and also
somewhat membranous.

Its Quantity and Figure are apparent, its Situation and place is under the
belly of the Vital members, the Septum transversum being between; and it
begins from the lower furcula of the Breast, and from the bounds of the five
lower Ribs on both sides, and goes unto that part in which the body is divided
into two parts by the great Feet to which it is fastened; The great foo^ is the
whole thigh, leg, and foot, from the groyn downward.
it has Colligancy with the Brain by means of the Nerves, and with the Heart
by means of the Arteries, and with the middle Belly by some Muscles; the
Colligancy that it has with the Liver, and with the members of Generation is
sufficiently known,

It is in Number one Belly, yet the number of the parts of it is diverse,
because some are Contained, and some Containing; the parts contained are the
Liver, with its little Gystern containing Choler* and the Spleen, and the
Ventriculus called of many Stomachus, although not well, also the six
Intestines with the Veins dispersed through them, and the Reins with their
Emulgents, and the Bladder with the Uritidian pores, which are called the
Emunctories of the Reins, and the Mesentereon with his glandules, and the Vena
Porta, and Vena Chyli^ descending with the Arteria Aorta; and also the
Umbelical veins and Arteries, and the Seminary vessels, with the Didimies, and
Testicles, and the Matrix in a Woman; and although the Didimies and Testicles,
with their Scrotum or Oscheon may be exterior parts, yet they are reckoned
within that Belly, because they are immediately fastened unto it.

But of the parts Containing, some are Common, some Proper, and some more
proper; the Common are all those parts which compass about that Belly, to wit
the Anteriour, the Lateral, and the Posteriour parts; the Anteriour or Lateral
parts are called in Latin Sumen, but by antiquity Abdomen, in Greek (...), and
of Epigastrion.
some (...), and in Arabic Mirach; Etron.
the Posteriour are called Imum dorsi, the bottom or lowest part of the back.

But the parts Proper, some are also before, some on the sides, and some
behind; those which are before, of the latter Physicians are commonly appointed
five; the first which is the highest is in the middle of the Body, about the
lower furcula of the Breast, and is called Gladialis, and scutalis cartilago,
and also Pomum granatum; but this part is common both to the middle, and to the
lower belly, taking up but little room.

The second immediately under that is called Pars stomachalis, the region of
the Stomach, because the stomach, that is the Ventricle, has its former part
in that region, and this part reaches unto the Navel.

The third part is called Umbilicalis, and it is that part in which the Navel
is enclosed in the middle of the Abdomen, which is now frustrate from his
principal function in a child.

The fourth part is called of Mundinus, Sumen, because it is the most eminent
part of the very Sumen, Synecdoche partis.
and there the part is taken for the whole; this region is from the Navel unto
the Pecten.

The fifth part is called Pecten, within which is the Os pubis, or Pectinis, in
that region there begins the neck of the Bladder in both Sexes, and of the
Matrix in a woman.

The Lateral parts, as they are equally divided on both sides, are of
Physicians commonly said to be two, to wit, the Superior, and the Inferior;
the superior is called Hypochondrium, the Inferior is called Ilium, or
Flancus; the Ilia are also called Lagones, and Ceneones; (...) Laxa significat.
(...) vacua significat.
in the right Hypochondrium is the Liver, but in the left the Spleen; the upper
part of the Ilia begins from the top of the Os ancharum, and ends about
the bottom, in the extreme part of this Belly; their lowest part is called
Inguen and bubo, but the Hypochondria do begin from the lowest of the false
ribs, and are terminated below at the Ilia; between the Ilia and Hypochondria
there appears a certain cavity when a man bends himself forward, which of
some is called Colago, and of some Intrum.

The parts properly called the Posteriour, some are in the middle, and some on
the sides; those which are in the middle are Spina inferior, and filum inferius
dorsi, the lower spine, and line of the Black.

Of the Lateral parts some are Superior, and some Inferior; the Superior are
called, Regiones Lumbares, or Renales, the regions of the Loins or Reins; the
Inferior are called Parts supra clunos, the parts above the Buttocks

But the parts called more Proper, some are also Anteriour, some Lateral, and
some Posteriour; the Anteriour and Lateral parts happen together, and they are
that skin which you first meet withal, under which there is Fatness, and eight
Muscles; of which four are oblique, two long, and two broad; all which are
dilated, and united to the likeness of a Pannicle, which may be called, and
indeed is called of Avicen, Panniculus Carnosus, the fleshy pannicle; neither
is there any other fleshy pannicle there, as late Physicians do suppose.

Under the Muscles there is a membrane subtle and hard, called in Greek (...)
or (...), Periton^i^^
and in Arabic Sifac; and all these do make the Abdomen or Mirach.

But the Posteriour parts called also more Proper, are the Skin, sometimes some
Fatness, and a musculous flesh on both sides of the Spondiles, to wit, before
and behind, called of some Lumbaris, and a simple flesh not musculous, filling
the empty places of this part; and the spondiles of the Reins or Alkatim, and
three bones of the Os sacrum, or the three Spondiles, called in Arabic
Alhovius, and the three Spondiles called Alhosos, or Caudae; also their
Cartilages, with their Pannicles, and Nerves, Veins, and Arteries, with the
pannicle Peritonion; the Anatomy of those parts shall be spoken of in their
place; but now I return to the Anatomy of the Abdomen.

Of the skin of the lower Belly, and of Umbilicus quasi umboiliacus quod ibi
fit iliorum umbo. Grae. (...).
Umbilicus the Navel.
YOu shall first consider the situation of the Navil, which is termed the root
of man; which has two veins without the body toward the Matrix, and very often
one; and two Arteries covered with the superfluous skin; which in Children new
born is tied up, and cut near unto the Abdomen, and is consolidated and shut up
again it self; the middle part of it thus consolidated is called Acromphalum,
and because it is wrinkled it is called Vetula, and in Greek (...); Graica.
these things being noted, cut the skin in the manner of a cross in length and
breadth through the whole Abdomen, and excoriate it, reserving the Navel
unhurt, which you shall very often perceive entering into the belly with one
notable Vein and two Arteries, which are frustrated from their proper work in
Children; the Vein is ascending, penetrating into the concave of the Liver in
the Vena porta.

The Arteries descend by the inward part of the Abdomen, almost unto the
Pecten, and they pass unto the back from the sides of the Bladder, and are
implanted, one on the right side, the other on the left into the Arteria aorta,
which is two-forked about the Os facrum near the Reins.

From those Vessels the blood and spirit does pass to the Liver, and Heart of
an infant in the Mothers womb; but you shall see the Navel better after the
Anatomy of the Abdomen, which you shall carefully reserve, observing the skin
which is twofold; the first is the Exterior, which is a gross superfluity of
members, and therefore it grows again; the second is the Interior, which is
nervous, not growing again, under which or within which, about the sides, there
are in both Sexes two Veins, one on the right side, another on the left, hardly
to be seen in one that is born, but in a faetus of three months they do very
well appear, which do ascend unto the Mamillae or Teats, which observe and
keep for the Anatomy of the Mamillae or Teats, especially in a Woman.

But in the whole skin of the body there are very small veins dispersed into
fibraes, and they are so small and narrow that the blood cannot pierce through
them, not any thing else but a banished humor which is called Sweat, and the
Wheyishnesse.
Serosity of the blood.

Of fatness, called pinguedo. Pinguis dicitur quasi (...) ^ (...) poto and
(...) terrerus.

AFter the Skin there is always some fatness, especially in a body not
brought down by sickness, more in one than in another, which remove, that the
members contained under it may the better be seen.

Of the Muscles of the lower Musculus a ^uri^^ similitudi^e.
Belly.
AFter the Fatness are to be seen eight Muscles of the Abdomen, of which first
of all four named obliques do occur; two of them are placed on the right side,
and two on the left, which do cover all that belly before with their Chords,
from the top to the bottom; and do ride over all the other; for in each side
of the belly, and before in the middle of the abdomen, one of them is
descending, and one ascending; the descendent are above the ascendent, which
you may see being guided by a learned hand.

First, you shall warily separate the descendent from the ascendent* and you
shall find them in each side of the belly to be crossed of one another, one
cross is on the right side, another on the left; their fleshy part does
mutually cross it self, even as the sinewy or Chordy part also does cross it
self; their fibers do always reach obliquely from the sides toward the middle
of the Belly, therefore the Chords of those muscles of the right side, do
reach unto the left part of the same right side; and the chords of the muscles
of the left side, do reach after a contrary manner: for their own proper chords
do in each side cross one another.

And the Oblique muscles begin to make their chord when they meet with the Long
muscles; and the chords of the Muscles of the right side, and also of the left
are terminated when the long muscles are contiguous, which place is in the
middle of the belly, by the Linea recta, from the Pomum granatum unto the
Pecten.

The Descendent take their beginning from the breast, the Ascendent from the
upper and anteriour region of the Ossium ancharum; their Chords are double
coated, and very broad, hardly to be separated, having their beginning from the
pannicles covering them, and from the nervous vills through them dispersed.

The First Figure of Museles
^^^ce these Six Figures between the: 16 and 25. pages

engraving of man with musculature exposed

The II Figure of Museles
engraving of man with musculature exposed

The III Figure of Museles
engraving of man with musculature exposed

The IIII Figure of Museles
engraving of man with musculature exposed

The V Figure of Museles
engraving of man with musculature exposed

The VI Figure of Museles
engraving of man with musculature exposed



Two coats of the Chords of the descendent Muscles on both sides, and one coat
of the Chords of the Muscles ascendent does cover over the long muscle of his
side from the top to the bottom; also one coat of the Oblique muscles does
cover or involve the long muscle of his side toward the bottom, that is toward
the Chord of the Broad muscle; because the long muscles, have not a proper
pannicle covering them, as the sense shows; and you may very well see the
aforesaid oblique muscles in the three figures immediately following; but
observe all their ligaments diligently in your incision, which you may not take
quite away (unless those which are over the long Muscles) but those which are
under the Long muscles are to be kept until you have anatomized them.

The first Figure of Muscles.
In this Figure you have two Ob^ique Muscles descending, one on ^he right side,
another on the left, which are above all the Muscles; the fleshy part of them
appears on the sides, and in the middle of the belly, their Chords are above
the long Muscles, to wit, one on the right side, another on the left, which are
pellicular and broad, which are terminated in the Linea, which is in the middle
of the belly, as you see, and those ligaments are of the two Pellicles, to wit,
below and above.

The second Figure of Muscles.
In this Figure you have two Oblique Muscles ascending, which do cross
themselves with the two descending placed in the other Figure, which descendent
are indeed above those ascendent; and one whole Muscle of the aforesaid
descendent (placed above in the other Figure) does with his Chord obliquely
ride over one of those oblique ascendent Muscles, and they together make the
shape of X the Greek letter; and the fleshy part of those Muscles is also on
the sides, but their Chords are in the middle of the belly, which are also of
the two Pellicles, and they have one Pellicle only over-riding the long
Muscles, but the other Pellicle is below the long Muscles, which cleaves to
the Chords of the latitudinal Muscles; and those Chords are also terminated in
the Linea, which as you see is in the middle of the belly.

The third Figure of Muscles.
In this Figure you see how the Long Muscles being taken away, under them there
is one Pellicle which is of the Chord of the Oblique Muscles, which has
Oblique Vills, and there is one under each Long Muscle, as you see in this
Figure, and the Long Muscles are those which hang between the thighs, that
they may appear taken from their Natural place, that the Chords of the
aforesaid Oblique ascending Muscles might be seen.

Of the Long Muscles.
THe Long or right Muscles are two, placed in the middle of the Abdomen, below
and above the Chords spoken of before, reaching with their Vills from the lower
furcula of the Breast through the length of the belly unto the Os Pectinis, and
they are therefore called Long; they touch one another, taking up the anteriour
part of the belly in breadth, being in the quantity of their breadth in all
eight fingers or thereabout; those Muscles have not a proper pannicle as
others, yet they have short Chords terminated in the Pecten, and they have not
any other Chords; their substance is fleshy, and divided through the breadth by
two sinowy or ligamental intermedians, whereof one is above the Umbelical
region, the other below, so that every Muscle seems divided into three fleshy
parts notably distinct; as you may see in the Figure following.

The fourth Figure of Muscles.
In this Figure you see two Long Muscles stripped from the Chords of the
Oblique muscles, which Long muscles are above the l^gaments of the Latitudinal
muscles, and every Muscle has two sinowy or ligamental divisions in it,
reaching through the breadth; to wit, one above the Navil, and another below,
as you see; and so every Long muscle seems divided into three Parts, or into
three Muscles; and Nature has done thi^, because by how much the threeds of
the Muscles are shorter, by so much they are the better, and more easily
contracted.

Of the Broad Muscles.
THe aforesaid things being seen, you may cast away as well the Oblique as the
Right Muscles, that you may the better see the Broad, which with their Chords
are under the Long muscles (one of the coats of the Chords of the Oblique
ascending muscles coming between them:) which observe with diligence after the
Long muscles are removed, which tunicle is very subtle, notably fastened to the
Chords of the Latitudinal muscles the Broad muscles have their fleshy part
under the fleshy part of the Obliques, and they are called broad, because the
position of their Vills is through the breadth of the belly, and they are more
above the Umbelical region than below, because their principal operation is
from the upper parts to the lower, which is to help the expulsive virtue of the
Intestines; the fleshy part of them is toward the back, they are terminated
into Chords in that region, where the situation is of the Longitudinal muscles,
and the Right meets with the Left his Chord being between; their fleshy part
is under the flesh of the Obliques, and their Chords are immediately under the
Chord of the aforesaid Oblique ascending muscles; those Chords also are very
broad, and also double coated and hard, compact together, fastened to the
pannicle Peritonion or Sifac, and their Chords do cross themselves with the
Long muscles unto right Angles.

The situation of the Muscles of the lower Belly appears by that which has
been said; their substance, their quantity, and their shape is to be seen; in
number they are Eight, four Oblique, two Long, two Broad: their Colligancy is
shown, for they are very firmly chained together, and they are so united that
they are judged one pannicle, which is called Carnosus, the Fleshy Pannicle;
their complexion in a live man appears by their substance.

The helps of them are to keep the Intestines warm, and to hold in all the
united members of nutrition, and to help the retentive virtue, but chiefly the
expulsive, and sometimes they help the members of breathing, especially in See
Galen in 4o interior c. 15. where he makes mention of five operations of
breathing, whereof this is one.
Flamine cum ictu, in a Blast with a stroke or noise, and in a violent
expiration: they may suffer passions of all sorts.

You shall see the aforesaid Muscles in the first Figure following, and in the
second Figure you shall see the situation, place, and also the shape of the
eight Muscles of the Abdomen, or Epigastrion, otherwise Mirach; but he which
intends better to search into these Muscles, and many other things, let him
have recourse unto our Commentaries upon Mund. the envy of whose labor shall
affect me after death.

The fifth Figure of Muscles.
In this Figure you have two Broad muscles, above which were the Long and
Oblique muscles, which are now taken away from them, as you see, and the fleshy
part of those Latitudinal muscles is on the sides, but the Nervous part of them
(to wit, their Chords) is in the middle of the Belly, and they are compounded
of the two Pellicles, that is of that below and above, and they are fastened
with the pannicle Siphac, and those Muscles are more in the upper part of this
belly than in the lower, as you see, that they might the better expel
downwards, that which is in the Intestines.

The sixth Figure of Muscles.
In this Figure are three kinds of Muscles, to wit, Oblique, Long, and Broad,
and you have in the right part two Muscles, which are not covering the whole
right part, as they do naturally, and as it is shown in the first and second
Figures, and they are so made in this place, that the crossing of them may the
better be seen; but in the left part you have one Long muscle, and one Broad of
which Broad the fleshy part does only appear, but the Chord of that Broad
muscle is under the Long muscle before spoken of.

Of the Peritonion or Siphac.
THe aforesaid things being seen, remove carefully the Chords of the Broad
muscles from a membrane annexed to them toward the Intestines, which is
subtle (...), Circumtendo, quia circum intestina circumtenditur.
and hard, named Peritonion and Siphac, this compasses all the vacuity of the
lower Belly round about; it is round, but not perfectly, its substance is
Nervous, and hard, its shape is spoken of.

From that Pannicle do arise two Purses or Baggs, in which the two Testicles
are placed within the Scrotum, which are parts of the same Scrotum; its
quantity is so much as is the vacuity of the lower belly, its situation
appears; in number it is one pannicle only; its Colligancy is with the Broad
muscles, and with all the members contained in that Belly; and all the members
of this Belly, have a proper Pannicle involving them, arising from this
Peritonion.

It has Colligancy, (according to Avicen) with the Pleura, it has also
Colligancy with the Septum transversum, and with the Testicles, its complexion
is the same which is of other Pannicles.

Its Helps are to fasten the members of Nutrition, and Generation, to the Back,
and to warm the Intestines, and to keep them from Rupture, and it is to hold
them from going out of the belly; it helps also (together with the Septum
transversum) the expulsion of that which is contained in the Ventricle, and in
the Intestines, and in the Matrix.

It suffers Passions of all sorts; its proper Passion is Rupture and
Mollification; look for the cure of them all somewhere else, because in the
demonstration of Anatomy, it is not convenient to put the cure of Ascites,
neither the cure of wounds of the Abdomen, nor of the Intestines, nor the
manner of gelding, nor drawing out of the stone (as Mundinus has done) neither
also of any other disease: yet we will say somewhat of the Flebotomy of the
Veins of Guidez, and perhaps some other special things.

Of the Omentum or Zirbus.
THe members spoken of are to Omentum di^. quasi opimentum, ex opimus, vel ab
omen, quod ex omenti inspectione ominarentur.
be cast away, that the rest of the members may the better be seen; and first
comes the Zirbus or Omentum, called of the vulgar sort Rete, a Net, or Caul,
which is a member compounded of two very thin sinewy Pellicles, with much
fatness annexed to it.

This member has many pulsant and quiet Veins, but more manifest in a lean
body, than in a fat; its Pannicles are discontinued throughout, unless about
the circumference of it; it bears the form of a Pouch or Bag, for between
those Pellicles there is a very great hollowness.

Its substance has been spoken of, it Colligance is with Siphac, with Colon,
and with the Spleen; its situation is toward the forepart, reaching over the
Intestines from the Ventricle unto the Inguina; the quantity of it may be
seen; it is in number only one member; its shape is handled, its complexion is
the complexion of the parts of which it is compounded: its helps are to help
digestion, and to mollify the dregs: it may suffer passions of all sorts; it
causes the Ramex in the Scrotum, in the Navel, in the Inguina, and in other
places of the Sumen, if the Peritonion be broke or mollified.

Of the Intestines.
REmove the Zirbus, and you Intestinum quod intus in ventre continetur.
shall see the Intestines, which are continual from the Ventricle unto the
Anus, they are revolved to and again, that they might retain the meat a long
time for a good end, and they are six in number.

The first beginning with the lowest is Rectum, of the length of a Palm, or
thereabouts.

The second is Colon, which ascends by the left side, unto the Region of the
Kidney, and Spleen, and from thence it passes from the left side unto the
right, riding over the Stomach, and in the right side it is united to the
intestine Saccus situated about the highest part of the Os Anchae.

This Intestine called Saccus or Cecus is to be reckoned the third in order,
and these three are said to be of a gross substance, for they are fleshy, and
they may be consolidated if they receive solution.

The fourth is the long Intestine called Ileon, and Revolutum, or Involutum,
because it is on both sides revolved throughout the Belly.

In the fifth place is Jejunum.

In the sixth, Duodenum, and these three are subtle, called of some Lactes;
the solution of which, if it be notable, is not consolidated: The uppermost
are subtle by their Colligancy, and the lower gross; all of them have two
Tunicles, and a common Pannicle coming from the Peritonion covering them over,
and fastening them to the Back.

In the inside of them there sticks Pituity or Phlegm to resist corrosion, and
to make slippery the dregs; in them there are fibers of all sorts, but most
broad; their complexion is cold and dry and the small are colder than the
gross, because their substance is Nervous: and in the gross there is some
flesh; their shape is apparent; their particular situation has been, and shall
be laid open by that which follows; their Helps are known; they suffer
passions of all sorts.

For the seeing of the particular Anatomy of the Intestines, first observe with
diligence the situation of them, and before you separate them from the
Mesentereon, consider their Veins, which are called of some Lactes, which do
transport the Chilus to the Vena Portae, in the very small branches of which
begins sanguification, by the help of the Liver; note also the situation of
the Vena Portae which is without the concave of the Liver, reaching with eight
branches toward the Intestines, and toward the Stomach, the Omentum, and the
Spleen, all which observe with diligence, if you can, before the Intestines be
cast away.

Of the Intestine Rectum.
THese things being dispatched, Rectum quia ascendit recte.
first we must see the Rectum, or Longaon, which is to be cleansed from the
filth, driving it with your hand into the Colon: and its extreme part toward
the Colon is to be tied in two places, and to be cut between the Ligatutes;
for its situation is from the Anus ascending to the upper parts through the
belly, about the length of a Palm, having few Miseraick veins, because that
which it contains nourishes but a little; it is terminated about the left
Ilium, where the Colon begins, the Rectum being united thereunto.

Of the Intestine Colon. (...) dictum quasi (...) Cavum.

YOu shall observe the Colon to be placed in the left side, and it ascends
about the left Rein, and there it is strict, that it might give place to the
Spleen, which it covers, and to which it is fastened: it reaches from hence
to the right side, and does ride over the Ventricle, and is fastened unto it:
hence is caused the departing for a time in a Syncopis; hence does its pain
increase after meat is eaten; but the grief of the Reins grows in the second
digestion; it is fastened to the Omentum, of which, and also of the Ventricle it
is moistened; it is covered with that Penula of the Liver, in which is the
Cistis Bilis, the Gall, and therefore it is very black and bitter: it is vauted
or celled, and Pituity abounds there.

In it are engendered Cucurbitines, and also other Worms: in it also the Ordure
does obtain an unequal shape: there is in it a rumbling a little before the
time of feeding,

It is thus situated that the weight might the better descend from the ^pper to
the lower part: and by its situation to have the keeping of Clisters, and the
places of applying Medicines in the Colic; its quantity is to be seen; its
substance is a little fleshy; and it is sinowy and fat, and solid, that it may
resist hard and sharp matters; it has also notable miseraick veins through
which the Chilus and blood does pass.

Its proper passion is a windy pain; in it there are bred stones, and skins by
adust phlegm*

These things being seen, you may separate the Colon from the Mesentereon, to
which it is fastened, and let alone the Rectum in its place, until the Anatomy
of the Anus, which cannot be perfectly seen, but when you make Anatomy of the
Virga and Vesica.

Of the Intestine Saccus. Ex sacci similitudine It is called Cecus blind, and
Monoculus, one eyed, because it has but one orifice.

TO this Intestine about the O^ Anchae beneath the Kidney in the right side is
placed an intestine called Cecus, Saccus, and Monoculus, because it hangs
like a sack, and it has but one Orifice, by which it draws and expels the
excrements, but in certain hours it draws from the Ileon, and drives it into
the Colon; in this there is a greater digestion than in any other Intestine,
for it is a second Ventricle, first it draws, next it digesteth, and
afterward expels unto the Colon.

Its quantity is about a palm in length, but it is as broad as Colon, and also
more, it is not fastened to the Mesentereon, but hangs in the belly; in it are
bred worms called Serpents.

But this Intestine is often found frustrate in nature, because it does none of
the aforesaid things, and then it is also found fastened to the Intestine Colon
and Ileon, and it is as it were a certain additament, and its shape appears
strictly compacted, but within it is empty, and is less in breadth than the
least finger of the hand, and it is of the length of three inches or
thereabouts.

Of the Intestine Ileon.
TO this Intestine Saccus going (...) in arctum cogo.
upward is immediately fastened the first of the slender Intestines called
Ileon, and Longum, and Revolutum, or Involutum, whose substance is slender; its
shape is very long and round; its quantity is longer than all the other
Intestines together; there are more Miseraicks in that Intestine than in any
other, because of his length; its situation is more about the Ilia, yet it is
in other places through the belly; it is fastened to the Mesentereon, from which
it must be separated that you may Hic morbus dic (...) ab (...) misericordia
quia miserandus dolor.
well observe the other upper Intestines. Its proper passion * is dispositio
Iliaca, and the passion called Miserere mei, in which the ordure passes to the
mouth.

Of the Intestine Jejunum.
TO this Ileon is continued the J^junum signifies hungry, empty, or barten,
because this gut is always found empty.
second small Gut, called Jejunum, Hira, Hilla, and Sterilae, or Vacuum, and it
is empty, because it is near unto the Liver by whom it is emptied, by drawing
Chilus from it, and by expelling that which is contained in it, by means of
Choler from the Cistis, entering into it about the Duodenum: it has more
Miseraicks, than any other Intestine like unto it in length, that they might
quickly succor the Liver, yet it is emp^iest in the upper part about the
Duodenum, and it is not altogether straight, but begins to be revolved
where it is fastened to the Ileon, and therefore it is partly straight, and
partly involved; it is of a Citron color, because it is ^e^r the Liver;
insubstance and shape it is like to Ileon; its quantity may be seen, but it is
not much, and its situation is about the region of the Liver, and somewhat
below, but in the middle of the belly.

These things being seen you may also excarn this Intestine from the
Mesentereon that you may the better see the Duodenum, which you shall know in
his longitude from the stomach below, to be in quantity as much as are 'twelve
fingers in breadth from the stomach downward.

Of the Intestine Duodenum.
IN the last place is to be seen the highest of the small Guts, called (...) a
duodecem digitorum longitudine
Duodenum and Dodecadactylon, whose quantity in length appears above, and in
breadth is less than every other Intestine, and is as much as the lower gate of
the Ventricle, called in Greek (...), and in Latin Janitor.

The substance of it is slender, it is not revolved, but straight, fastened to
the Ventricle toward its upper part, and it is fastened to the Mesentereon,
also about the Jejunum, it is fastened to the Cistis bilis, by the Chanel which
conveyeth choler for the cleansing of the Intestines from phlegm principally,
and from excrements.

That Chanel enters Diagonallically in that Intestine between Or between the
two Tunicles.
a Tunicle, and a Tunicle, lest the Choler, and perhaps Chilus might again
ascend unto the Cistis.

Consider that Chanel warily, and keep it for the Anatomy of the aforesaid
Cistis; the helps of this Intestine are to take from the Ventricle things
digested, and to send them to the other Intestines; it suffers every kind of
disease.

Of the Mesentereon.
THese things being seen, divide the Duodenum below the (...), quia medium
inter intestina fitum obtinet.
pore coming to it from the Cistis bilis, binding it first, lest that which is
contained in the Ventricle go forth; and you may put away the other Intestines
when you have first warily excarned them (as it is said before) from the
Mesentereon or Eucarus, which of some is also called Lactes; this member is
placed among the very Intestines, fastening them in their Center to the back;
and it is compounded of doubled Pellicles of fat, and of Glandules, in the
which there are many veins proceeding from the Liver, which are commonly called
Miseraicks, and of Galen are called the hands of the Liver, because they snatch
from the Intestines the matter of blood, and give it to the Liver; those veins
are of the branches of Vena portae; in this member there are also some Arteries.

This member is divided into two parts; the first is fastened in the upper part
to the Jejunum and Duodenum, which is very glandulous, and its Pellicles are
single; the Venaeportae do pass through that part to the Ventricle, to the
Spleen, and to the Omentum this part in a Hog is of a savoury taste, and is
commonly called the Sweet-bit, and also Brisaro, and Bocea saporita: In those
great Glandules is sometimes contained a matter causing a sickness, which is
called Melancholia Mirachia.

Another part of this member is fastened to the other Intestines, whose
Pellicles are doubled, because they fasten great members to the back; and this
second part is esteemed of all men for the true Mesentereon; those two members
are nourished from the veins of the Porta.

Their quantity and shape appear, the first is lesser than the second, their
complexion is cold, they have colligancy with the back by means of Siphac;
their helps are to fasten the Intestines to the back, and to sustain the
Miscraick veins, and other veins of the Porta, and to moisten the dregs of the
Intestines.

In number they are two members, even among the vulgar; they may suffer
diseases of every sort; this member or members is to be let alone in its
place, until the Anatomy of the veins of Porta be seen.

Of the Ventricle, which is commonly called the Stomach.
THe Mesentereon being dispatched, Ventriculus vertus dic. (...) enim idem est
quod Gula.
blow up the Ventricle through the Duodenum left before, as much as you can,
that the chiefest greatness of it may be seen, then you may reduce it to a
mean inflation, that other things requisite in it may the better be seen.

And first you shall observe its place which is in the middle of the whole
body, the extreme parts excepted, and it is immediately under the Septum
transversum; on the right side it has the Liver, and on the left the Spleen,
under it the Intestine Colon, and other Intestines, before the Omentum, and
Abdomen, behindethe back, and the parts contained therein; its situation is
oblique, fastened to the back under the Diafragma; its upper part is in the left
side, that it might give way to the Liver, which is in the right, and placed on
high: and that melancholy might the more easily go from the Spleen to the mouth
of it: the lower part of it is in the right side, that it may give way to the
Colon which is in the left taking up a great room; but its lower part in the
right side toward the Portanarium or gate, is less than in the left side
toward the Colon, because in the right side the Liver takes up a greater room
than the Colon placed in the left; also its lower part is in the right side,
lest otherwise the Orifices should be direct, both that the meat might be the
better retained, and that the Choler from the gall might the more easily enter
into the Duodenum continued to the lower part of it.

Its substance is nervous, by predomination, its color appears, its shape is
round, arched after the manner of a Or Morescan.
Mores Goard; its quantity is apparent.

It has Colligancy with the heart by Arteries, with the Liver and Spleen by
veins, with the Brain by the descendent nerves; it is fastened to the Anus by
the Intestines, and to the mouth by means of the Gula; it is fastened to the
Zirbus toward the former part; it has two Tunicles, the innermost is more
sinowy by reason of the appetite, and more gross rugged and hard, because it
meets with hard meats; it is harder in the upper part, and also more
sensible; it has an outward Tunicle more subtle enclining a little to the
nature of flesh; the innermost is some way nourished by the Chilus; the
outermost is nourished by Venaportae; the innermost has toward its inside
long fibers serving for attraction, and toward its outside it has oblique
fibers for retention, the outermost has broad fibers for expulsion.

The bottom of it serves for the digestive faculty by means of the outermost
Pannicle, and by means of the heat of those parts which are about it, yet it
has a proper hidden virtue of digestion, as the Matrix of generating, and the
Liver of making blood, the upper part of it serves for the appetite by the
help of melancholy, milking it self into its mouth from the Spleen, and for
this cause it is often found black.

The Ventricle has also a common Tunicle involving it, and fastening it to the
Back arising from the Peritoneon, which is grosser than any other member
contained in the lower belly, except the Mesentereon in that part wherein it is
doubled, and it is so in the Ventricle because of the extension that it has in
victuals.

The body of it is fastened with its upper Orifice to the back, to wit, between
the twelve and thirteenth of the Spondiles of the back, which Orifice is
properly called the Stomach, and there are applied Medicines for the comforting
of the appetite, and this Orifice is in the very lower part of the Gula, or
Meri, which by penetrating the Diafragma is continued upwards to the extreme
part of the mouth (especially with its innermost pannicle) and this Orifice is
shu^ up by the Diafragma, lest in the inclination of the body the meat might
easily return back; it is also fastened to the back by its lower part, that is
by the Pyluron, or otherwise Pyloron, or Portanarium in that place where the
Duodenum is fastened to the back by the Mesenterion, but the rest of it is
loose, and is easily moved any way; this Portanarium is higher than the bottom
that contains the food, lest the meat might too easily fall downward.

In number it is one member; its complexion by the parts compounding it is cold
and dry.

Its helps are to cause appetite, to retain, and to concoct the food, and to
give the gross part to the intestines, but the good and digested to other
members by means of the Liver.

It suffers passions of all sorts, and through the great sense of it the
heart and brain do suffer with it.

Of the Spleen. Splen a suppleo dic. quia vacuum locum ex contraria part
Jecoris supplet.

HAving left the Ventricle in its place for the seeing of the Venae portae, we
must mind the anatomy of the Spleen or Milt, and first you shall see it placed
in the left Hypochondrion, cleaving to the Ventricle with its little concave
part, and with its Gibbous part touching the ribs, toward the back and sides;
it is covered with the Peritoneon.

But you may lift up the Corpse as if it sat, that you may the better see the
situation of it, which is under the Diafragma, immediately in the
Hypochondrion, especially in a living body; but in a dead body, lying along, it
seems to be under the ribs, because its heaviness does easily drive the
Diafragma to the upper parts, for the Lungs are empty, and loose, easily
yielding; you may also break up some of the false ribs that you may the better
see the situation of the Spleen; you may likewise do so in the Anatomy of the
Liver for the aforesaid cause; this manner likewise would be somewhat
convenient in showing the situation of the Stomach, which also in a dead body
lying along seems (through the emptiness of the Lungs) to be under the
bones of the breast with some of its upper part, more than it is naturally in a
living body.

Its shape is square, somewhat like a half Moon, of a loose substance; it has
colligancy with the Heart by great arteries (which you must mark) making thin
the gross blood, which being made thin nourishes the Spleen; it is fastened to
the Liver by a branch of the Porta, to the brain by nerves, to the Mesentereon
and Omentum by veins, and to Siphac by the pannicle covering it, to the stomach
by many veins, some whereof do nourish the left part of the Ventricle, and one
does milk out melancholy unto the mouth thereof; its quantity is known; its
complexion is ordained hot and moist, and is appointed opposite for that which
is contained in it; in number it is one member; it is helpful to the whole body
by purging the mass of blood from the dreggs, and for that cause it provokes
laughter; sometimes it makes blood, it stirs up appetite, it helps the
digestion of the Stomach; it suffers every kind of Disease, and there is
sometimes in it a special impediment of its course and strong motion; and it is
held that that part being taken away by a wound Creatures do sometimes live,
and there are some that think, that through the greatness of it laughter has
been quite hindered, and that it has sometimes changed place with the Liver
(but very strangely.)

Of the Liver.
HAving seen the aforesaid (...) ab (...) id est operari sanguinem.
parts, you must raise up the Corpse, as it is before made plain, that the Liver
may show its situation, which is immediately under the Diafragma in the right
Hypochondrion; it is great in a man, because he is a hot and moist Creature;
it is of a Moon-like shape; its concave part is toward the Ventricle, but its
gibbous part is touching the ribs about the Diafragma, but higher, and toward
the sides, and the back. Its substance is the flesh of it, and the net woven of
the Veins dispersed in it, and its flesh is coagulated blood; it has five
Loabes, sometimes four, and three, and sometime two.

In the hollow part of it is one Vein called Porta, which enters into it with
five branches, which toward its gibbous part are dispersed throughout the whole
body even to the least members; that the Chylus divided in them to the least
members might the better be transformed into blood.

Also in the hollow part is a little Cistis or bladder cleansing the blood from
Choler, before it pass unto the gibbous part; also in the hollow part the Vena
Umbelicalis enters into the Vena Portae to nourish the young one in the
Mothers womb.

In the gibbous part is one Vein called Chilis, dispersed also with five
branches through the whole body of it unto the least members; the least
branches of this Chilis are joined or united with the branches of Porta, and
they suck from them blood purified from Choler and Melancholy, but mixed with
wateriness, which requires a farther decoction in the gibbous part.

The Liver has vent in its gibbous part of the Septum transversum, and of the
Vena Chilis ascending by it to the heart, by which it is fastened unto it; it
has also small Arteries in the hollow part of it by which it is vented. These
Arteries come from Aorta which is near there, and are difficult to be seen; it
is fastened to the Metaphraenum by its pannicle suspending, and to the Abdomen
by the Vena Vmbelicalis; to the brain by a Nerve; but by the means of a
pannicle risen from the Peritoneon of which it is circumvolved; it has also
colligancy with every member that has a vein; its complexion is hot and moist;
in number it is one; its parts are proper flesh, the Vena Porta, Vena Chilis,
and Arteries, a Nerve with a pannicle, and the Cistis of choler; its operation
is the making of Blood; its proper passion is the Dropsy; yet it suffers
every kind of disease.

Of the Vena Portae.
WIthout the substance of the Porta quia per totum corpus portat sanguinem.
Liver is Vena Portae, so called of a witty man according to its nature (Galen
being witness,) and from him has the name remained until now; which
Hippocrates, and all the company of Asclepias have commended, because its
branches do carry the food before labored in the belly unto that place of the
digestion for the whole Creature, which we call the Liver.

This vein without the Liver has eight parts, two are small, six greater; one
of the lesser has two branches, one nourishes the Duodenum, and the other the
Mesenterion, close to the Duodenum.

The other lesser vein nourishes the Ventricle about the Portanarium.

The first of the six greater nourishes the outermost broad part of the
Ventricle.

The second with some branches goes toward the Spleen, from which first
branch goes to nourish the Mesenterion; forthwith one other great branch goes
to the Spleen, which in the way is divided into more branches, of which one
great one does nourish the left lower part of the Ventricle.

This same branch goes on entering into the Spleen, and ^t sends from ^t two
branches, one of which ascends, the other descends; of the ascending there
are three parts, one part nourishes the Spl^e^, another nouri heth the upper
part of the Ventricle, the other part passes to the mouth of the Ventricle,
milking into it Melancholy for the stirring up of the appetite, which for the
most part goes forth with the excrements thorough the ^ntestines.

The aforesaid descending Vein is divided into two parts, one branch nourishes
the Spleen, the other goes to the Omentum in the left side, and nourishes
that.

The third branch of the six aforesaid, goes on the left side for the
succouring of the Intestine Rectum.

Also the fourth branch of the six greater is spread into capillary branches,
whereof some go to nourish the right side of the Ventricle, and some to nourish
the right side of the Omentum.

The fifth goes to the Mesenterion in that place where it is fastened to the
Colon.

But the sixth goes to the Mesenterion in that part where it is fastened with
its branches to the Jejunum and Ileon, which are called the Meseraick veins,
and this is very large.

The substance of these veins is such as of others; their quantity, and their
principal number and situation, and shape and Colligancy are manifest; their
complexion is cold and dry, but by reason of that which is contained, it is hot
and moist; their help is to bring the afore-laboured meat to the Liver; it also
with its branches begins the second digestion, it also carries nutriment to
the Ventricle, to the Spleen, and Omentum, and it nourishes the Intestines; it
suffers passions of all sorts, and especially opilations, and also the
opening of his Meseraicks, and sometime scissures, and it suffers with the
Liver in all the diseases of it.

Of the Cistis containing Choler, which is called Fell the Gall.
THe Cistis of Choler called the Fell quod folliculu^ gestans bilem.
Gall, is a purse or sack in the hollow part of the Liver, cleaving to a loab
in the middle; it is compounded of a pannicular substance which is thin, solid,
and without blood; having only one Tunicle covered with the Pannicle which
covers the Liver; in it there are fibers of all sorts; in the inside it has
long and oblique fibers, on the outside broad.

Its substance is thin, because it digesteth not any thing, and it is hard,
that it may resist the sharpness of the Choler; it has one Pore entering
immediately into its purse (which is called communis) being greater than others
which (according to the opinions of some) is divided into three parts:

One goes to the Liver, continued with the Vena Portae, from which it draws
Choler by narrow passages, in that Pore there are only long fibers.

One other Pore goes toward the Intestines, which is double at a certain
distance, whereof one part goes to the Duodenum toward the Jejunum, that it
may cleanse the Intestines from phlegm and excrements by the sharpness of the
Choler sent through it; and that Pore enters in the Duodenum A Diagone is a
line in Geometry drawn from one corner to another.
Diagonally between two Tunicles of it, lest that Choler, and those things
which are contained in the Intestine should go back, and stop it.

Another (according to some) goes to the Pyloron of the Ventricle to comfort
the digestion with its Choler; which if it be much, makes a man miserable by
the continual vomiting of Choler (but some do deny this Pore;) by the common
neck is caused its attraction and expulsion.

Its quantity and shape appear; in number, it is one member; and it is fastened
to the heart by a small Artery which it has, and to the Brain by a small
nerve; its native complexion is cold and dry.

Its helps are to purge the blood from Choler, and to make hot the digestion of
the Liver, and to keep it from putrefaction; it does also comfort the
Ventricle, and cleanses it from phlegm, and helps the expulsive virtue of the
Intestines; sometimes a man is without a gall, but this man is of a feeble
health, and of a shorter life.

It suffers passions of all sorts; its proper passion is opilation, by which
is caused Morbus regius, or Yellow Jaundice.
Icteritiae, and if there is opilation in the common Pore, and the body be not
purged of Choler, then are caused cholerical diseases of diverse sorts, yet the
excrements may be colored.

But if there be an opilation in the neck, reaching to the Intestines, and
unto the Portanarium, then the excrements are discolored; and also the Choler
is not purged from the Cistis, but does flow back to the Liver, and does cause
many cholerical diseases.

And if there be opilation in the neck toward the Liver, the excrements may
be colored for some time; and it will also cause cholerical diseases of
diverse sorts; but the opilation continuing, the excrements will be
discolored. We have spoke of other things in the Comments upon Mundinus.

Of the great Vein Chilis, and Aorta, descending, and emulgent.
THe aforesaid parts being seen, you may put away the Mesenterion, the Spleen,
and the Liver, (...) a (...), pasco, quia parts sanguine ut matter venarum
pascit. (...) quod vas signific. ab (...), tollo, qu^a ut vas sanguinem vitalem
per totum tollit.
of whose gibbous part, reserve that, from which the great chanel of Vena
Chilis does immediately go forth, that you may see the beginning of it; but
leaving the Ventricle in its place unpuffed up that some other parts of it may
also be seen.

In the first place you shall see a great vein go forth of the gibbous part of
the Liver, which is called Parigiba, and Chilis, and Concava, and Matter
venarum; from which the blood is dispensed to all the parts of a living
creature, by means of its branches, which are the receptacles of it; this vein
is subtle, full of pores, and gentle, not double-coated, as the Arteria Aorta,
lest it should too long time contain the blood which is gross, but that it
should quickly nourish the members; it is also such, because it is without
motion; but an Artery carries subtle blood, which of some is called the vital
spirit; this does continually systolize and diastolize: therefore it is hard,
gross, and compact, lest it should be broken, and it is such, that it may a
long time contain the subtle blood contained in it, which by reason of its
motion is disposed to solution. The upper part of this Vein ascends to the
heart and further, perforating the Diafragma, which is called Chilis ascendens;
of which it shall be spoken in its place.

This same Vein directly descends, cleaving to the back, and is called Chilis
descendens, which the great Artery descending, does accompany, called Aorta,
which observe with diligence, together with the Vein, but the Vein is above the
Artery, and they are both envolved in the Peritoneon.

In the descent of both of them, their branches are first divided, which go to
the swadling-bands or pannicles of the Kidneis; but when they are in the direct
of the Reins, the Vein, and likewise the Artery, send from them one notable
branch on the right side, another on the left, which are continued in the
Reins. These branches are called Emulgents; for the most part, the right branch
is higher than the left, because it must be near to the Liver, that it may
quickly cleanse it from the Wateriness contained in the Chilis; And the left is
lower, that its Kidney might give place to the Spleen, which is lower than the
Liver. Those Orifices are not direct, that by the first might be drawn from
members at hand, by the second from members afa^ off, and lest their attraction
should be hindering to one another.

In like manner, from that Vein, and from the great Artery under the Kidneis,
are many other Veins and Arteries separated, which nourish the Rectum, the
Bladder, the Matrix, and the parts near unto them. In like manner, in the
direct of every Spondile, one branch from each of them enter into it, and is
dispersed in the muscles near unto them; also of the aforesaid branches,
between every Spondile do enter very small branches, which do feed the Nuca,
and the Pannicles, Ligaments, and Spondiles, which envolve and fasten the same
Nuca, as you shall see in the dissection of them; of the aforesaid branches,
some also go to the muscles, and to the membrane of the Abdomen.

This Vein, and likewise the Artery about Os sacrum, beneath the Spondiles of
the Reins, is forked into two equal parts to the form of a greek letter, which
is called Lambda l Some call those two-forked Arteries Sempiternal, in which do
enter two Umbelical Arteries, one whereof is on the right side, the other on
the left, which descend in them to the sides of the Bladder.

Those two-forked Veins and Arteries, one on the right side, the other on the
left, descending toward the Hippes, (according to some) are in each side
divided into ten parts, whereof one nourishes the lower part of the Back,
being dispersed through the Loins toward the Kidneis within, and without.

And one other part being divided into capillary branches, nourishes the
Peritoneon.

And one nourishes the profound muscles of the Hippe.

And one nourishes the musdes of the Anus, and from it spring the Hoemoroidal
Veins.

And one nourishes the neck and mouth of the Matrix, from which also two
branches go to the Bladder, one to the bottom, the other to the neck of it; and
that which goes to the neck in women, is small, but in men great, because of
the yard.

And one other of the ten goes to the parts of the Pecten.

And one other extends to the long muscles of the Abdomen; whose branches
ascending, are continued with the veins of the Breast, which descend toward them;
and they united together, extend to the Mamillas, and from that branch in a
woman, there do likewise go notable parts to the Matrix, from whence two Veins,
not accompanied with Arteries, ascend by the Abdomen unto the Mamillas, by
which they are fastened to the Matrix; and therefore in women with child, and
in the time of praeternatural retention of the Menstrues, for the most part the
Mamillas swell. or Tea^s.


And one other of the ten does also go to the Matrix in a woman, but in a man
it goes to the yard, and to the cod.

But another goes to the Universal muscles of the Hipp.

And another part, which is the tenth, does also extend to the Hipp, and that
is notable, and descends by the inside of the Hipp; and when it is near to
the Knee under the Ham, it is divided into three branches, whereof one is made
oblique toward the outside of the Shank, and reaches unto the Little foot; and
this branch is called Sciatica, because being incised, it helps in the pains
of it; and the beginning of that branch Mundinus knew not. One other of the
three aforesaid descends unto the Foot by the inside, and this is called
Saphena; but the third branch holds the middle between the aforesaid
branches; all which do nourish the Shank, and the Foot; but of them, speech
shall be made in the Anatomy of the Great foot.

But observe, that there are more Veins than Arteries; Witness Galen in his
sixteenth Book of the Utility of the parts, in the thireenth and fourteenth
Chapters; and witness the sense; and it is reason, because there are many cold
members naturally, not wanting eventation, for which also a little spirit does
suffice; therefore they have not many Arteries; and in the hands, and in the
feet, and in the brain, and in the superficial part of the neck, and in the
Cutis of the whole body there are some Veins without Arteries; but there is no
Artery without a Vein joined to it, some whereof that are chiefly notable, are
fastened together by a Pannicle risen from the Artery; and they are united
together, that the Veins might be made firm, and fortified by the aforesaid
Pannicle, and that the Artery might give life to the Vein, and that the Vein
might give blood to the Artery in necessities, whereof is made vital spirit,
and the Artery it self is nourished: but the small Arteries are not fastened
with the Veins by the aforesaid Pannicle, although they are companions to one
another, but they are companions that they may give life to, and nourish the
members; witness Galen, where it is quoted above.

And the Veins and Arteries do go from the nearer places for the nourishing
of their members, except the Veins and Artries of the Testicles, and Mamillaes,
which go unto them from afar off, that the blood might make long delay in
them, by which it is the better digested, and is more easily turned into good
Sperm, and into Milk; and there are many Arteries and Veins not perceiveable by
the sense, as those which go to the bones and to the skin, and those which
extend unto the extreme parts of the members.

The situation of these Veins and Arteries, and also the substance and the
quantity, and the shape do appear; the number of the branches of them is
unperceiveable; their colligancy appears by that which has been and is to
be said; their helps are to nourish and give life to the whole body; they
endure passions of all sorts.

But to them do happen Diseases compounded of the chief of Opilations, which
are worser than the opilations of the nostrils, and Intestines, and like
places; both because their opilation forbids the members to be nourished,
not suffering the blood to flow unto them; as also because they cause the blood
to flow back again unto the Liver, which causes in it opilation, or
putrifieth, or induces some other ill Diseases; also their oppilation is ill,
because it is often unknown, and because Medicines cannot be well applied unto
them, as well within the body as without: their solutions may be of an inward
cause, and of an outward, of which there are three kinds, one is commonly
called Diabrosis, which is a corrosion of the vein, of Dia, which is de, of, or
composition, and Brosis, or Rosis, which is Comestio, an eating; another kind
is called Rexis, which is interpreted incisio, incision; the third is called
Anastomosis, which is the same that the opening and dilatation of the Veins is
every where; Diabrosis corrodeth the veins, (...).
Rexis cutteth them, Anastomosis causes them to open.

But to the Emulgent Veins (among other Diseases) may happen a weakness of the
attraction of the wonted watery blood, as also in the Reins, whereupon they do
either not attract, or else weakly; and thereby happens either a difficulty,
or a total ablation of the Urine; yea there being in the Bladder no Urine; in
which case rude Physicians do err, attempting to draw Urine from the Bladder,
with a Siringe or other handy operation, and that is a singular hazard, for the
most part bringing death, which I have often seen, and amongst the rest, I was
with many honored Physicians, in the cure of the magnificent and illustrious
Lord, Lord Galataeus, of the noble Family of the Palavicinians, which was
suflocated by the waterinesse of Urine gathered together in the Veins
throughout, and this waterinesse induced to him a Squinancy, for which we
applied Ventoses without scarification for diversion sake, and the Ventoses
were filled with pure water through the pores of the skin; but these things by
chance I have written for the profit and honor of young men.

Of the Reins.
WIth the aforesaid Emulgent Renes (...) a fluendo: qnod per eos Sperma and
urina fluunt.
branches are continued two fleshy bodies solid, covered with the Peritoneon,
called Renes, or Renones; they are two and not one, as the Cistis of Choler,
and the Spleen, because the waterinesse is more than the dregs and scum of the
blood, for which is required one great place of purging, or two small ones; and
it was not one great Ridney, lest it should crush together and press the
Intestines, and lest they should make the Back unequal; and they were two, that
if the operation of one should be hurt, that of the other might remain firm;
and they were solid, that they might help much in a little room; and lest the
Blood should go forth with the Urine by some of its Pores; and that they might
not draw any thing by sucking it, but that which is thin; and that they might
resist the sharpness of the Urine; they were also solid, because a thick body
is stronger for attraction.

Their quantity appears; their Phaeseolus, Plin l. 18. ca. 12.
shape may be seen, which is like the grain of the Kidney bean; they have
colligancy with the Brain by Nerves, by means of the Pannicles involving them;
with the Liver by the aforesaid Veins; with the Heart by great Arteries. Galen
has noted, that the great Arteries in the Kidneys, are not only for the cause
of nutrition, and giving life, seeing the Kidneys are little members, for which
a little Artery did suffice, but in them there are great Arteries, because they
do also cleanse the Heart from waterinesse and Choler; and he says moreover,
many times Aorta draws from the Stomach, and from the Intestines blood not
pure, yea Chylus which the Emulgent arteries do purge out to the Kidneys.

I my self also in the year 1521. in our exercise at Bononia, saw in one
publicly Anatomised, one of the Emulgent arteries that made one Pore in the
right side without the Kidney, which in a notable distance beneath the Kidney
did enter into the Uritidia^ pore risen from the aforesaid Kidney, and both of
them by one chanel did reach unto the Bladder; nevertheless this Emulgent
artery did also enter into the Kidney in his wonted place; and in that
individual the Kidneys were continued, as if it were one Kidney; and it had two
Veins, and two Emulgent arteries, and two Uritidian pores with one only
Pannicle involving, which did take up the wonted places of the Kidneys, and
also the middle part of the Back, which is in the place between the Spleen and
the Liver, a little below them.

Therefore let alone the left Kidney in its place, for the seeing of the
Spermatical vessels, and divide the right in its concave part through the
middle, according to the length of it, unto its center, considering the place
of its Vein and great Artery, which do enter into the substance of the Kidney
in the hollow part of it, from which the Kidney does draw spirit and nutriment,
and the watery super fluities of the whole body mixed with Choler; all these
mixed matters pass through the whole substance of the Kidney although it be
solid, because they are subtle; for blood could not pass alone to the least
parts of the Kidneys, because they are solid, except it were mixed with water
and Choler; all which mixed are resembled to the washing of flesh, being drawn
by the Kidneys through the Emulgents, from the Liver, and from the Heart, by
means of the vein Chilis, and the artery Aorta.

This blood mingled with much wateriness is alone retained of the Kidneys for
their nutriment; and the water together with the choler separated from the
blood passes to a certain notable hollowness, being in the center of the
Kidney, as it were into a ditch; the which the river or chanel called the
Uritidian pore brings to the Bladder; this Pore called of the Greeks *
Uretra, is a very long, pannicular, solid, (...).
hollow body, having its beginning from the body of the Bladder (because as it
is said it resembles it) and ending at the Kidney, which consider with
wariness, and keep together with the Kidney for the anatomy of the Bladder.

And in the Kidney there is not a net, neither any other pannicular strainer,
as some suppose, but the Kidneys are made hollow Organes, attracting by some
Orifices, but sending forth by others a thin waterish superfluity.

Therefore Galen said in hls fourth Book, De Utilit. cap. 12. Finally, many
Drunkards drinking whole Amphoras, and pissing the proportion of the multitude
of drink, are not troubled about the separation, but the blood which comes to
the Vena cava, is readily and by stealth all purged forth by the Reins not
touching the Vein; the aforementioned Ditch has about it a solid Pannicle,
perforated with more than ten great holes, through which Nature milketh forth
the Urine into the aforesaid hollownesse, by means of a certain small substance
of the Kidney, like to the Nipples of the Teates of women.

The Colligancy of the Reins appears by that which has been said; they are
also fastened to the Brain by a little Nerve, by means of a pannicle covering
them.

Their helps are to purge the whole body from superfluous Water and Choler, but
especially the Liver and the Heart, nevertheless in the rest of the Veins there
also remains much Waterinesse mixed with the Blood, which is called Vehiculum
nutrimenti, the Wagon of the nutriment, which appears in Blood flebotomised,
or otherways drawn from the body.

They suffer every kind of Disease, all which almost are of a hard curation, as
is the Diabetes, or as it were the continual dropping down of the Urine; they
also suffer a weakness of the attractive quality, by means of which the Urine
goes not to the Bladder, and by that means a living Creature is sometimes
choked, or dies some other way; also of such a weakness is caused the
Ascitis: they also suffer Stones, Gravel, and Hairs, but the hairs are bred or
condensed in the uritidian pores; the stones of it are red, small, oftentimes
long, being bred in the aforesaid trench; when the Kidneys are weakened, not
able to retain the blood, the Urine goes forth bloody; it also goes forth so
when the Liver is weak, not separating the Waterinesse from the Blood, by that
separation and quantit which it ought.

Of the Seminary Vessels called Spermatica.
THose things being dispatched (...) idem est quod semen a (...), semine.
in both Sexes, first you shall note in the great Vein Chilis, and the Artery
Aorta, sometimes above the Kidneys, sometimes below, one little Vein, and one
Artery, both which are united at some distance touching one another, descending
to the Testicles of the right side.

You shall also note two like Vessels in the like manner descending, and united
in the left side, one from the Emulgent vein of the left Kidney, and another
from the Artery Aorta; all those little Veins and Arteries so descending are
called Vasa Spermatica praeparantia, that is, the Seminary preparing vessels;
these vessels are covered about with a Pannicle risen from the Peritoneon,
called of Celsus Aegitroides; the Vein lies above, but the Artery lies
beneath.

Those vessels are broader and harder in a Man than in a Woman, excepting the
time of impregnation and menstrues, as it appears to the sense, by the much
blood then retained in them; but at other times they are harder and broader in
a man, and also they are always longer, because they are to carry their matter
contained to a longer distance; and they are such, because the Masculine Seed
is more, and is grosser than the Feminine; by which length also of the vessels
of a man his Seed is the more digested; and the Seed of the right side
engenders Boys, because its matter is more digested, and cleansed from
waterinesse, but of the left side Girls, because it is cold and watery, coming
from the aforesaid Emulgents filled with watery blood.

These vessels in both Sexes agree in the place from whence, but disagree to
whence; their termination in a woman is within the body, as it shall be said in
the Anatomy of the Matrix, which is placed after the Anatomy of the Yard, and
of the Anus, for better orders sake.

But these vessels in a man descend on both sides unto the Os Pectinis, in the
end of the Ilia, above the Loins, and therefore they are also called Lumbaria,
which vessels in their descent above the Os Pectinis do enter on both sides
into one pannicular covering, risen partly from the extreme parts of the Sifac,
which is commonly called Didymus, and Cremasteres, and they pass in the Cod
near unto the Testicles, as it may be seen in one only side, leaving the other
side untouched, for the seeing of the Anatomy of the Didymus; but take heed
lest you spoil the Scrotum in any part, but draw that vessel only which you
intend to see together with his Didymus, and Testicle, to the upper parts
toward the Pecten.

These vessels descending near unto the Testicls are very hard, and are
revolved like to Varices, A Disease in certain Veins swelled with wind and
melancholy blood like Worms.
whereupon they are called Variciformia, which are made soft when they meet
with the Testicles (about which they are revolved) lest they might hurt them
with their hardness, and there these vessels are called Epididymi, and
Anendor, and Andros.

From those vessels the matter of the Sperm does immediately pass to the
Testicles, in whose substance it procures whiteness, and the generative
virtue; and from the Testicles it is again cast out to the aforesaid soft
vessels named Epididymi, from which it passes to other inferior vessels
continued with them, which are called Deferentia, whose substance is white, and
harder than the rest; these different vessels in a man ascend from the
Testicles unto the Pecten, being contiguous with the aforesaid preparing
vessels descending; which Deferents so ascended in the upper part of the Os
Pectimis, are turned back again within the belly on both sides; which keep
warily together with the Testicles, until you have seen the Anatomy of the
Didymies, and also of the Testicles.

These vessels reflected within the body descend between Rectum and the
Bladder, and there they dilate themselves into more caves ful^ of Sperm,
therefore there these Vessels are called Conservantia and Deferentia, keeping
together, and carrying the Sperm; and of Galen guided by Eracleus, they are
called Parastrata, Adeniformia, because Kernelly flesh does compass them.

On the right side, and on the left, these Vessels do pierce through the neck
of the Bladder, and within the Yard about the Anus, they cast forth the Sperm,
which afterward is driven forth through the Chanel of the Yard. (...) sig:
geminus quia gemini su^t


Of the Didymies.
THese Vessels together with the Testicles, are involved in each ^ide with one
Pannicle, from the bottom of the Cod unto the lowest part of the Ilia; the
greater part whereof has its beginning from the Peritoneon, descending into
the Scrotum, in the end of the Abdomen, which is commonly called Didymus, and
suspenforium Tisticuli. Of the Greeks they are called Cremasteres; the
substance of which consider, which are of three, (and perhaps according to
some) of four revolutions of Pannicles.

The first is outmost, risen from the Pannicles of the Spondiles; another is
risen from Sifac, or Peritoneon, contained within the Abdomen, near unto the
Thigh, which of Celsus is called Darion.

Of these two, by reason of their strong Colligancy, is made as it were one
only Pellicle.

Another is of the Pannicle, immediately involving the aforesaid vessels, risen
from the Peritoneon, about the back; which is called Aegitroides.

Another is of the Chords of the muscles of the Testicles, which is small;
consider also their quantity and Colligancy, their complexion and number; they
have the Shape of a Cistis, in the top narrow, in the bottom broad, as much as
is the thickness of the Testicles.

Its uses are to hang up the Testicles, and to keep fast the aforesaid Vessels.

Of the Scrotum, or Cod. Scrotum seu Scortum ex (...) pellis, (...) Galeno
(...), quod Testiculos tegat veletque

Of those Pannicles, and of the skin, is compounded Oscheon, or Scrotum, that
is, the purse of the Testicles, in which there are some Nerves giving sense
unto it, and some Arteries and Veins nourishing it; and the Scrotum is one
member common to the two Didymies, and it is a Sinus or vault, to the Didymies,
Testicles, and to the Seminary Vessels.

This member is divided by the middle of a light Membrane, which of some is
called Sutura, and Taurum, and Chorda; which also does somewhat appear in the
outmost skin in the middle of the Scrotum, according to the length of the Body;
the Quantity, Shape, Situation, Number, and Colligancy of this Member, are
apparent; its complexion is cold and dry; its helps appear.

This member with the Didymies, endures every kind of disease; their proper
passion is a dilatation of them, by which means are caused many Burstnesses,
called Herniae, to wit, one of the Zirbus, called Omentalis; another
Intestinalis. In the Scrotum also is caused the Hernie, or Hymea, waterish,
windy, humeral, and fleshy; and also the Varicous; which is made by a repletion
of the Seminary Vessels, caused of gross blood, or of much and watery.

Of the Testicles. Testiculi dicti quod testes sunt V^rilitatis.

Within the aforesaid suspensories on both sides are two glandulous white
members, like to the flesh of the Teats, which are called Testiculi, whose
Shape is like an Egg, and therefore they are also called Ova; their substance
is without blood and all sense, yet it feels by its Pannicles; each of them
has two muscles cleaving to its Pannicles, that they might preserve them, and
lift them up, lest they should be relaxed.

Their Qu^antity, their Number, and Situation, are apparent: their Native
complexion is temperate in things active, moist in passive, but in fluent it is
hot, by which means (Witness Aristotle) they draw to themselves from the whole
body matter of the Sperm, as it were Ventoses; and they are placed of
Physicians among the principal Members; they have Colligancy with the other
principal Members, by Veins, by Arteries, and by Pannicles; their helps are to
preserve the Species: they endure passions of all sorts.

Of the Vesica, or Bladder. Vesica quasi vas aquae

THese things being dispatched, take away the Kidneys with the Uritidian pores,
risen from the Bladder, entering Diagonally within its Tunicle, nearer to the
neck than to the bottom, lest the Urine might flow back unto them; through
those Pores does sometimes pass a Little stone to the Bladder bred in the
Kidneys, causing in them an extension, with a vehement pain, because they are
Sinewy as the Bladder.

First, cut the body of the Bladder about the bottom of it, which is
compounded of one only Tunicle, in the outward part of which do go two Nerves
for its sense; first noting its Situation, which is in the Lower part of the
Belly, in the hollowness of the Little trough, in which is also the Intestine
Rectum, toward the Back, and the Matrix in a woman in the middle of them.

You shall also note its Colligancy, and Quantity, and Shape, and Number, whose
substance is Sinewy of the Nerves of the Ligament, not to be consolidated, if
it receive solution, in the Neck it is fleshy, and therefore there is
consolidated; its Neck is united to the Yard throughout, even unto the extreme
part of the Glans, from whence goes forth the Urine.

Its complexion is cold and dry, and it is circumvolved with one Pannicle risen
from the Peritoneon; its uses are to retain the Urine a long time, lest a man
should continually rise to send it forth: But it does as it were, continually
flow from the Kidneys to it. Certain glandules of flesh do help its retention,
envolving and compressing the beginning of its Neck, on the outside; causing in
the Neck some turnings, by reason of which the Bladder is not wholly cleansed
from the water, and one only muscle of the Bladder, envolving the mouth of it,
does help its Voluntary retention, and likewise Expulsion.

The Bladder may endure passions of all sorts, which are sometimes incureable,
as is a very great stone; and Excoriation in a Choleric body, and in an old
man.

Of Virga, or the Yard. Virga quasi Vim gerens.

AFter the aforesaid Members, comes the Yard, which is of a Ligamental
substance, it is also Sinewy and hollow like a Sponge, yet with some muscles;
the Yard, and likewise the Tongue, has more and greater Veins and Arteries
than any other Member like to it in bigness; through the aforesaid Porosities
the Yard above being guided by the imaginative virtue, is oftentimes magnified
and erected of the Spirit, for in it is a natural virtue, by which when a
living creature is moved to Copulation, it is puffed up, and enlarged; and
there is caused naturally a motion in the Heart and in Arteries, but in these
it is caused always for necessity; but in this sometimes when it is necessary.
Its beginning and Situation is of a part of the Pecten, in the middle, known to
all.

Its Shape is very long and round, having in it a Chanel, by which the Urine
and Sperm go forth. The upper part of it is called Glans, and the head of the
Yard, and there it is compact, hard, and of a dull sense, lest it should be
hurt in copulations; a certain soft Skin does compass about that Glans, which
is called Preputium, being obedient to turning Praeputium a praeputando eo quod
a Judais praeputaretur.
back in every Friction.

This Praeputium in the lower part, in the middle only, according to the
length, is fastened to the greater part of the Glans, by a certain Pellicular
member, called of the Vulgar, El filello.

Its Number, and also Quantity, are apparent; its Native complexion through
influence is hot and moist; it has Colligancy with the Os pect^nis, with the
Kernelly Parastata, with the Bladder, by means of the Chanel without, by which
the Urine flows forth; with the Brain, by means of the Nerves, coming to the
muscles and skin of it; with the Heart and Liver, by means of the aforesaid
Arteries and Veins descending.

The Yard has in it three Orifices, one wide, the which is common both to the
Sperm and Urine; and two small, by which the Sperm coming from the aforesaid
Seminary vessels, do enter into that common Orifice. Those two Orifices or
Vessels, do enter into this Chanel, in the place called Perineon, which is a
place between the Yard and the Anus. That Chanel from those Orifices to the
Bladder, is according to the truth called the Neck of the Bladder; from hence
unto the extreme part of the Glans, it is called the common Hole and Chanel of
the Yard, and of some it is called ^retra.

The Yard also has four Muscles, two toward its lower part, on both sides
one, near unto the chanel of the Urine; which are long-ways extended, and do
dilate the Yard, and elevate it; that the Sperm may with easiness pierce through
it.

There are of it two other Muscles beginning from the root of it toward Os
Pectini^, coming transverse about the Glans in its upper part; which when they
are extended the Yard is lifted up, and when they cease from extension it is
kept down; that if the extension happen to one, and not to the other, the Yard
will decline to the part of the extended muscle.

The profit of the Yard is made principally for conservation of the Species;
for by its means the Sperm is sent into the field of Nature, that is into the
Matrix; which if it be of a moderate quantity (as likewise the Tongue) it is
praised, and is profitable; for the shortness of it does not bring the Sperm to
the due place; and its too much length is the cause of the resolving of the
spirits in the Sperm.

The Yard also by its Colligancy does empty the Bladder from Urine, whereof it
is a sign, because Lice applied to its extreme Orifice provoke it by biting.

The helps of the Praeputium, and the aforesaid Pellicle fastening it to the
Glans, are to yield some delight in Copulation, and to defend the Glans from
outward hurts.

That Praeputium the Jews take away in Circumcisions, working contrary to the
intent of Nature; the Yard suffers passions of all sorts, its proper passion
is a Priapism.

For the well seeing of this Anatomy, the things spoken of being first
observed, and the situation of the Intestine Rectum being noted, separate with
a Scalprum, Falx, or Saw, or other Engine, the Os Pectinis from its lateral
part, and together with the Bone separate a notable part of the Buttocks, to
wit, that in which are the muscles of the Anus, and take away the Rectum, the
Bladder, and the Yard, with the Seminary Vessels, and the aforesaid Uritidian
Pores, and put the aforesaid members (being first washed, and clean from the
dung and bloudiness contained in them) upon some table, that you may the better
see the aforesaid members, putting away with diligence the Os Pectinis only
from the aforesaid members.

And first, you shall note the place of the aforementioned Uritidian Pores entering
into the Bladder, by putting into them a Probe, or Radius, or some such thing,
and you shall perceive it pierce Diagonally through the substance of the body
of the Bladder, into the hollowness of it, as has been said before.

These things being seen, you shall also see the aforesaid Seminary vessels to
enter between the Rectum and the Bladder, and with some instrument of Incision
separate warily the Rectum from the Bladder, because in that place these
members are very firmly fastened, and you shall see the Parastata aforementioned
full of caves, and large, and incising them you shall find the Sperm there
contained for two or more Copulations, and these Vessels are terminated in the
chanel of the Yard.

And about that place you shall see notable glandulous flesh on the sides of
the neck of the Bladder, which does somewhat digest and whiten the Sperm there
contained, or at least keeps it that it be not dried up, conserving also in
it the genitive spirit.

Those fleshes do also keep the neck of the Bladder lest it should be dried,
and also the Yard, which by reason of its length hanging without is apt to be
dried, and shut up; and for this cause Women have not that flesh; also those
fleshes with their somewhat fatness resist the sharpness of the Urine.

These things being noted, you may slit the Yard long-ways, and you shall see
the aforesaid chanel with the Orifices, through which the Sperm enters, which
are two, one on the right side, another on the left, not much distant from the
hollowness of the Bladder; you shall also see the body of the Yard hollow, or
pory, to the likeness of a Sponge, not very hollow, but somewhat compact.

Of the Rectum.
THe aforesaid things being noted, you must be mindful of the place of the
Intestine Rectum left before, for the Anatomy of the Anus, which you shall
observe to be in the hollowness of the little Trough, and is terminated within
the Buttocks, in the place called Anus, from whence by the order of Nature
those excrements of the first digestion go forth; the higher part of it
reaches to the left side where it is fastened to the Intestine Colon.

You shall also consider its quantity, which is apparent; and it^ Shape,
situation, and number you have seen before; it has Colligancy with the Heart,
with the Liver, and the Brain, with the Bladder in a man, and with the Matrix
in a woman.

Consider also its Complexion, which is cold, therefore it is between the
Buttocks, lest it should be offended by cold.

After this divide it according to the length, and having very well washed it,
you shall observe its inversion, which is ascendi^^ from the outermost part to
the i^side, the space of four fingers or thereabouts; for oftentimes you shall
see the end of its inversion, and sometimes you may not see it; this inversion
cleanses it from the Excrements, because in the avoiding the excrements the
Rectum does somewhat descend; and this is best seen in Horses avoiding their
excrements. (...), stringo, est musculus.


The lower extremity of it is called Anus, and Podex, and Sphincter; and it
has many other names recited by me in my Commentaries upon the Anatomy of
Mundinus.

Its substance is fleshy and Pannicular, which is made more fleshy with its
Muscles, there is in it some fatness toward the outside, in it there are many
broad and long Fibers, few Oblique, the long are without, and within, helping
the expulsion by drawing downward.

In it there are Four Muscles, one is in its extreme Orifice, being mixed with
the Cutis, and dispersed throughout with it; which constringeth the Anus on
every side, by which means it comes to pass that the dung may be wholly
cleansed from it, there is another Muscle more within, being raised toward a
man's head, which Muscle has two heads, and is here continued with the root of
the Yard; the benefit of it is strictly to bind the extreme part of the Anus:
after them there is one pair of Muscles reaching over-thwart above the others,
whose help is to raise the Rectum upward, which being mollified, there is
caused the falling down of the Rectum without, between the Buttocks, for a
certain distance.

In the extremity of this Inrestine there appear many Veins, in some notable,
in some hidden which are called Hemorroidales, flowing by fits, which consider.

Those Veins have their beginnings from the branches of the Vein Chilis
descending, nourishing the muscles of the Anus; many do use the Flux of them
instead of Purgation, neither are they made very weak by it.

The helps of the Anus are to bring forth the Dung in due time, its muscles
help the Parastata in the sending forth of Sperm in Copulation, whereof it is a
sign, because some are at once copulating and avoiding excrements. They also
help the Bladder in the sending forth the Urine.

The Anus suffers passions of all sorts; all which are hard to be cured; and
amongst the rest the extremity of the Rectum falls down; and in like manner
the Matrix, which we bring back by Stiptick means; there are also bred
coudylomata or certain little swellings; The ficus, and also fungi, likewise
Marisca, and Ragadas or Ragadiae, which are wont to proceed of Inflammation;
yet sometimes a lascivious wantonness of Luxury and Burning Lust does cause
these Diseases, in both Sexes; seeking by-ways, nature being neglected, not
without the injury of it, and the Divine Majesty.

Of the Matrix, not praegnant. Matrix a matre quae a materia dic* quod ibi
materia speciem conservans inseritur.

THe Members contained in the Lower belly of a man, being seen, I pass unto the
Anatomising of a woman, in which the Anatomy of the Matrix is to be seen, and
of their Testicles, with the Seminary vessels, and their Bladder.

The Matrix which is also called Vulva, has two parts, to wit, a Receptacle,
or Sinus, or hollowness, and Cervix, or Collum, a Neck, and it is a Member
created of Nature for increase; the substance of its Receptacle is Sinnowy,
mixed of the Chords of a Ligament and confused flesh, therefore it is a little
sensible, and it is compounded of one only Tunicle, circumvolved with the
Peritoneon, and it is Sinnowy, that it might be extended in Copulations, and
that it might be gathered together to a little quantity in the Birth; also all
its hollowness is moved to the Center in the receiving of the Sperm, and
embraces and touches it with its sides.

But the substance of its Neck is of Lacertous flesh, as it were,
Cartilagineous, having wr^^ckle upon wrinckle, which do give delight by
Friction in Copulations; this part is sensible enough.

Its hollowness is called Uterus, and Venture, and Receptaculum faetus.

Its fastening which is the Orifice of the Neck, is called, Pudendum Muliebre,
and Vulva, and Natura, and Os Genitale.

In this N^ck is the Yard placed in Copulations.

Between the Neck and the Receptacle within, is a certain pellicular substance,
fleshy, sensible enough, perforated in the middle, that may be dilated and
constringed, called Os Matricis, the Mouth of the Matrix, having the form of a
Mullets head, otherwise of Cephalus, or of the Tench fish, or of a new bred
Puppy; which in Copulations, and Births, and Menstrues, is opened by the order
of nature, but at other times, especially when it is pregnant, it is so shut,
that a small needle cannot enter into it, unless with violence.

The Shape of its Neck is very long, round, hollow, it is as much unviolated as
is the Yard of him that does copulate therewith, but in a Virgin it is less.

This has about the middle of it, the Virginal pannicle, like a Net woven
together of small Ligaments, and very many Veins, which one violated, is
without, because it is broke in the first copulation with a man; this Pannicle
is called Eugion, and Cento, and Imen.

To the extreme part of the Neck, on the sides are added Skins, which are
called Praeputia.

Within the Neck, a little toward Os Pectinis, does enter a short Neck of the
Bladder, whose Orifice is shut up of certain small, fleshy, and pannicular
Additaments, of which, and of the aforesaid Praeputia, by reason of the Air,
there is caused some noise in making water.

The Shape of the Receptacle is Quadrangular, with some roundness, hollow below
as the Bladder.

In the Receptacle toward the Neck, there is on both sides one Ligamental
additament fastened to the Back toward the Anchae, having the Shape of a Snails
horn, therefore these are called, the Horns of the Matrix.

About these Horns on both sides, is one Testicle, harder, and less than in a
man, not perfectly round, but pressed together like an Almond; in them are
engendered Sperm, not gross, as in a man, nor hot, but watery, thin, and cold.

Those Testicles have not one Pannicle, in which they may be both contained, as
is the Scrotum in a man, but each has a proper Pannicle, risen from the
Peritoneon, fastening them about the Horns; and each of them has one small
muscle, of which it is moved.

In those Testicles are implanted the aforesaid Seminary vessels, which being
called Praeparantia, descend from the Chilis, and from Aorta, and from the
Emulgents; from thence do reach other Vessels, named Deportantia, continually
spreading themselves unto the Receptacle, and they bring Sperm within the
hollowness of the Matrix.

The Orifices of these Vessels are called Fossulae, and Cotilidones; through
them flow the Menstrues, from them does the young one draw Nutriment by the
Umbelical Veins and Arteries fastened to the aforesaid Fossulae.

In a woman there are not the Vessels Parastata, nor the Vessel Epididymum,
because in a woman the soft Vessels are not offensive to the Testicles, as they
are in a man through their hardness.

The whole Matrix with its Testicles and Seminary vessels, is like to the
Members of Generation in men: but the Members of men are complete, expelled
forth by reason of their heat; but of women they are diminished, retained
within for their want of heat.

And the Matrix is as it were the converted Instrument, for the Neck of the
Matrix is as the Yard, and its Receptacle with the Testicles and Vessels is
even as the Cod.

For in the Cod being turned in, there is a hollowness within it; and without
it, being likewise turned in, there do lie the Testicles and Seminary vessels,
as in the Receptacle of the Matrix, but the Testicles and Vessels of men are
greater.

The Situation of the Fissure of the Matrix is between the Anus and Os
Pectinis, and the place which is between both Orifices, is called Perinion.

The Neck ascends above from the Fissure through the Belly, unto the
Receptacle, whose place is between the Rectum and the Bladder; all these are
placed long-waies in the hollowness of the Little trough.

The Quantity of the Receptacle in Damsels, is small, and less than their
Bladder; neither is its hollowness filled, unless with the filling of the
increase of the body, whereof it is: but in full grown (unless it be great with
young) it is not much greater than may be comprehended in a hand; but it
increases by reason of the Menstrues, having walls, as it were, fleshy, thick,
and gross, but in one pregnant, it is very much stretched, and thin, appearing
more Sinnowy, and then it ascends toward the Navil, more and less, according
to the quantity of the young one.

It has only one concavity or Cell, which nevertheless somewhat toward the
bottom of it, is divided into two parts, as if they were two Matrixes, both
ending at one Neck.

In the right side of it, for the most part are fastened the Male, in the left
the Female.

It has Colligancy with the Brain by Nerves, with the Heart by Arteries, with
the Liver and Teats by Veins, with the Intestine Rectum by Pannicles, with the
Bladder by the Neck of it, which is short, not penetrating without, as in a
man; with the Anchae by the horns (but of the horns above) The Receptacle is
every way loose, and therefore falls to the sides, and sometimes its
Receptacle goes altogether forth out of the body, through the Neck of it.

The Number of it is apparent, and perhaps he does not err that says there
are two Matrixes, because there are two Concavities as two hollow hands,
touching one another, covered with the selfsame Pannicle terminated at one
Chanel,

And that you may somewhat satisfy your self, of its Figure, Place, and
Situation, you may see the underwritten Figures immediately following; to the
seeing of which let not him come which is not ingenuous and expert in Lines,
and Shadow, or in Picture, which does much help Physicians, and many other
Artificers; the Native complexion of the Matrix actuated by the Influence, is
hot and moist; its helps are to purge the body of its natural bloody
Superfluity; but principally to conserve the Species.

It may suffer every kind of disease; it often falls down, and it may all
be drawn forth out of the body, the health remaining. One Matrix being
corrupted, I saw drawn wholly forth by my Father in the Land of Carpus, which
was cured, and lived long.

I also at Bononia, drew forth one other wholly, which was cancrenated in the
year one thousand five hundred and seven, in the Month of May, which lived in
health.

One other being corrupted, my Kins-man (by my brother) Danianius, drew wholly
forth in my presence, in the Assembly of many Docters and Scholars, anno Domini
one thousand five hundred and twenty, the fifth of October, that last by name.
Gentilis was the Wife of Christopher Briantus of Mediolanum, inhabitant at
Bononia, Millane.
in a Country called Lo Inferno, which at that hour one thousand five hundred
twenty two, the tenth of November, was sound, and exercising household affairs.

If you seek greater things, look in my Commentaries upon the Anatomy of
Mundinus, and there you shall have of the pregnant Matrix, and many other
things. And these things are sufficient for the Anatomy of the Lower Belly.

The first Figure of the Matrix.
YOu have in this Figure the Matrix with its Horns at the sides, under which in
their natural place are the Testicles fastened to the Seminary vessels, which
vessels, as you see, are terminated at the body of the Matrix: and they have
their Original above, about the Region of the Reins, from the Emulgent, and
from the Vein Chilis, as it is said above; and this Matrix is figured great, as
if it were pregnant. In the former part of which is the Bladder, with its
Uritidian pores, and the Neck of the Bladder is terminated in the Neck of the
Matrix, fastened a little above, which is called Vulva; and the Testicles in
this Figure are in their due place; but these things are better seen in the
Anatomising of one woman great with Child, and also one not with Child.

The second Figure of the Matrix.
YOu have in this Figure the whole Matrix with the Horns, and the Testicles
above the Horns, and you see how the Seminary vessels go to the Testicles, and
from the Testicles to the Matrix, but the Testicles are not in their natural
place, because their natural place is below the Horns, but they are set above
the Horns in this Figure, that the Seminary vessels may the better be seen to
enter into them, and you shall see in this Figure, how the Mouth of the Matrix
is above the Neck, which Mouth is that Hole which you see above the Neck of the
Matrix.

The third Figure of the Matrix.
YOu have in the Belly of this Figure the Matrix opened, in which you see some
black pricks, showing the Heads of the Veins, which are called Cotilidones. You
have besides the Matrix turned in without the Belly, and it is that Figure over
which you see the Finger, a token of the present Figure, and in the bottom of
the Matrix is a certain depression, as you see, which is that that
distinguishes the right side from the left; neither may there another division
be found in the Matrix; and them black pricks are the Cotilidones; and you see
how the Neck of the Matrix is without Cotilidones; and you see how the Neck is
like to a man's Yard.

The fourth Figure of the Matrix.
BEcause things ten times repeated, are wont to please, you have here two other
figures of the Matrix, whereof one is turned in, in which you see how in the
Receptacle throughout are many black prints, betokening so many Cotilidones,
which nevertheless are, not in the Neck; in the other you see the natural
Matrix with the Testicles and Spermatical vessels, and the horny Ligaments,
with which it is fastened to the Anchae; you see also the Neck and Mouth,
through which the Menstrues and the young one go forth, and the seed of man
enters in.

Of the Anatomy of the Middle Belly.
THe aforesaid things being seen, dissect the Middle belly, in which are the
Vital members, with which also for the better orders sake, you shall see some
members of the former part of the Neck, and some parts of the Face within and
without, before the upper Belly be Anatomized.

The Parts first to be seen, are the Members of the Breast; which is called,
Cassus, Clibanum, and of some Thorax; for in that are parts containing, and
contained.

And of the parts containing (as in the Lower belly) some are common, some
proper, and some more proper.

The parts common, are all the parts compassing the emptiness of the Breast;
whereof some are bcfore, some on the sides, and some behind.

But in that Belly (neither is it so in the Belly of the Natural members) are
placed the upper parts, neither are the lower determined by them, as in the
Upper belly: because the parts before, on the sides, and behind, in the Belly
of the Natural members are united, and do make the lower part of that, and in
like manner make the upper part of this Belly; for this is terminated in its
upper part; but that in its lower part, as in a point, and this is compassed
about of the aforesaid parts above, and that below. But the Septum transversum
or Diafragma does mediate between them, and makes the uppermost part of the
lower Belly, and the lowermost of the upper; but because the Septum transversum
is common to both Bellies, therefore it is not properly and determinately put
for any containing part of the aforesaid Bellies; but Authors do place it
among the parts contained; nevertheless it is a part contained and containing;
and it is called contained, in as much as it is within the hollowness of the
body, and it is containing, because on the upper part it contains the Natural
members, and on the lower the Vital.

I say therefore, that the common part of the Middle belly before, and on the
sides, is cal^^d Pectus, but the hinder part is called Summum dorsi, the top of
the Back; and they that place the Neck with the Back, do name this middle part
of the Belly, the middle of the Back.

But the parts proper, some also are before, some on the sides, and some
behind; those which are before, are commonly appointed three, to wit, an
upper, a lower, and a middle.

The upper is a place, where immediately under the Neck are joined together two
Bones, both of them reaching side-waies toward the Shoulders, called the two
Lateral Furculaes; and this part is named the upper Furcula, taking its name
from its figure and place, taking up a little room, especially in the length of
the Breast; and this place of some is called Jugulum, and Clavis.

Immediately under that is the middle Isido: vi. Rider: de pectore.
part, properly called Pectus, so called, Quia pexa est inter Eminentes
Mamillarum parts, because it is hairy between the Eminent parts of the Teats;
and this part is downward from the first aforesaid part, almost as far as the
Septum transversum in length, but in breadth as much as is the breadth of the
bones of the Breast, the Ribs excepted.

But the lower part is the place where the aforesaid bones of the Breast are
terminated about the Region of the Septum transversum: and because those bones
reach on the Sides, making likewise a Fork, therefore this place is called the
lower Furcula, in the middle of which is Cartilago scutalis, called Pomum
granatum, because it is like to a part of the Balaustium, that is, of the
flower of the Pomgranate.

But the lateral parts are termed the Ribs, and the Sides, and the Region of
the Teats.

But the posteriour parts, some are in the middle, and some on the Sides; those
in the middle are called Interscapilium, and Metaphrenon, and Noton; those on
the sides are called Scapulae, Spatulae, and Scapilium; but some do call the
lateral parts with those in the middle, Metaphrenon, and Noton.

But the parts more proper, some are also before, some on the sides, and some
behind.

Those which are before, are first the Skin, the Fat, some muscles, the bones
and Cartilages, and the Pannicle Pleura.

But the lateral parts are the Skin, the Fat, the substance of the Teats, many
Muscles, Ribs, and also the Pannicle Pleura.

Last of all are the parts behind, to wit, the Skin; some fat; flesh
musculous, and some simple, not musculous, filling up certain Vacuities of the
bones, twelve Spondiles of the Ribs, or of the Breast, and the Pannicle Pleura.

The parts contained, are the muscle Diafragma, called Septum transversum:
which according to some is to be numbered among the parts contained of the
Breast, in as much as its principal operation is to serve the Heart by reason
of its motion, by which it moves the Lungs: there is after that the Pannicle
Mediastinus, Capsula Cordis, the Heart, with his Artery Aorta, and the Lungs
with their Vessels, the Vena Chilis ascending, the Nerves descendent, and the
ascendent which are called Reversivi, the Glandule called Timum, and Morum, the
Gula, that is the passage for the meat from the mouth to the Ventricle, with
the Pannicles covering the aforesaid Members.

The substance of this Belly is pellicular, fat, bony, cartilagineous,
musculous, and pannicular.

The Bones of it are not united, as in the Head, but divided, that the Breast
might be obedient to the motion of breathing; and therefore for its motion
there are muscles in it; Galen said 7 de Utilit: If the Breast were made of
muscles only, they would fall upon the Heart and Lungs; that therefore there
might be some space between, and that in like manner the whole Organ might be
moved, the muscles are placed to the Bones by course.

This Belly called Pectus is great in quantity, because it serves many and
great members, yet it has a greater hollowness behind than before; the
beginning whereof toward the hinder part is from the first Spondiles under the
Neck unto the Septum transversum, as much as twelve Ribs contain: but before,
it takes up only the part contained between the upper Furcula, and the lower
inclusively.

In a man the Breast is broad, not carinated, as in the greater part of Beasts,
yet it is broader in a man than in a woman; but for the bearing of the young,
the lower Belly is greater in a woman than in a man; and for this reason the
Region of the Reins, of the bone Sacrum, and the Ancharum in a woman is very
large.

The Shape, and Number, and Situation of the Breast appears, but the inward
concavity of it is like to the hollowness of half an Egg, cut obliquely
through the breadth, the part whereof is sharper toward the Neck; it is also
like to the nail of an Oxes hoof (as is the figure of the Lungs.)

It has Colligancy with the whole body; its complexion is according to its
parts; its native complexion actuated through influence is hot; the helps of it
are principally to keep the Heart, and the Lungs: it suffers passions of all
sorts. Mamilla diminut. ^x Mamma quae ex vo^e infant um dicitur, ut etiam
Papilla ex vo^e Pappas.


Of Mamillae, or the Teats.
IN the former part of the Breast toward the sides are two round Members,
taking their name Mamilla from their The Author takes Mamilla from Mamillana,
a kind of Figs like Dugs.
Figure, called of the Ancients, Rumae. In the middle of each of them there is
one little Knob, which is called Papilla, through which the Infant feeds, about
which there is a Circle, which is red or roset, and sometimes black, called in
Greek, Fos. The substance of these is of Veins, Arteries, and Nerves, between
which there is a hollowness, which glandulous flesh does fill up, being white,
without sense, and by reason of its whiteness, when blood staieth in them, it
is made white, and is turned into Milk; and the Teats turn blood to whiteness,
and make Milk, as the Liver turns Chilus into redness, and makes it blood;
for every one of them turns the humor in them contained to its own likeness
in nature and color: of this blood, being made white, the one part nourishes
the Teats, and the other is Milk, and this is a profitable superfluity.

Unto the Teats do come their Veins and Arteries, descending from the Region of
the Armpits about the Ribs; and also from the Region of the Pecten do come
Veins through the Abdomen, which you have kept above, those Veins and Arteries
do best appear in a body very lean, but in a fat they are hidden; but they are
very well seen in a Faetus of three or four months.

The number of the Teats, and the quantity appear, yet they are greater in a
woman than in a man for the ingendring of Milk; their Situation is in the
Breast, because it is broad, not carinated, in which they may fitly be placed;
and also because the superfluity of the Members above passes not into Hairs,
neither into the Teeth, nor into the Horns, as in brute Beasts.

They have Colligancy with the Brain by Nerves, with the Heart by Arteries,
with the Liver and Matrix by Veins; but they receive the greatest part of the
blood from the Matrix, of which the Milk is made, therefore those that give
suck, have not their Menstrues, unless seldom, and few; and in those that have
not their Menstrues in due time, their Teats swell; also the Teats do swell,
and are pained a little before the time of the Menstrues, because the Matrix,
and the Veins therewith united, are full.

The helps of them in a man are for comeliness, and for the defense of the
Members of the Breast; and they reverberate heat to the Heart, and sometime
there is Milk made in a man by reason of the abundance of Nutriment, especially
in one that has great and strong Teats; in a woman they have also the
aforesaid helps, but they are principally for the ingendring of Milk, that the
newborn Child might be nourished therewith, until it can swallow solid
meat; and Milk is a proportioned nutriment for the newborn Child, because it
is made of blood, by which it was first nourished in the womb; they suffer
diseases of all sorts.

Of the Muscles of the Pectus quasi pactus quod ex costis quae veluti
firmamentum pectoris sunt, compactum aut pactinatum fit. Gasp. Baubinus.
Breast.
THe aforesaid things being seen and noted, you may excoriate the Skin of the
whole Breast, leaving the muscles in their place, and incise the Teats, that
you may see their substance, especially their flesh, in which are Veins and
Arteries dispersed throughout, and ye shall observe the Papilla.
nipples to have very many small holes, from which the Milk goes out; at which
holes (according to some) the extremities of the aforesaid Veins are
terminated, through which the Milk goes forth; and according to others the
Milk goes forth from the Spongiosities of the flesh of the Teat terminated at
the holes of the Nipple, and not immediately from the Veins; both of them are
probable.

These being seen, you shall note in the Breast many muscles, which move the
Breast voluntarily; although the Breast may also be moved naturally, to wit,
according to the motion of the Heart and Lungs, as we have said in our
Commentaries; whereof some are without, some between the Ribs, and some within
the Breast.

Of those without, there are two under the upper Furculaes, continual with the
first Rib, which do reach to the head of the Spatula, and with them are united
one other pair, whereof every odd is doubling the first pair, and making it
into two parts, the upper part whereof is continued to the Neck, and moves
that, but the lower moves the Breast, and this pair is continued with one pair
which is continual with the fifth and sixth Rib.

After that is another pair in the hollowness of the Spatula, continued with
one pair coming from the Spondiles, even unto the Spatula, and all they are, as
it were, one pair, which are continued with the hinder Ribs.

After that is another pair, risen from the sixth Spondile of the Neck, and
from the first and second upper Spondile of the Breast, continued with the same
Ribs; and all those muscles do di^^te the Breast.

After that there is one other pair extended under the roots of the upper Ribs,
which descending, is united with its extremities to one pair, which is about
the lower Furcula, continued with the long muscles of the Abdomen; above which
pair are two pair which cover it, and all they bind the Breast.

But the muscles within the Ribs are dilating and constringing, differing among
themselves in their work; and those which are between the Ribs, between Rib and
Rib, are four, to wit, two muscles toward the outside; and two toward the
inside, which ye shall know, separating them lightly, by the going of their
Fibers; the two first uppermost have their Fibers transverse, and do dilate the
Breast; but the second, which are below, have their Fibers broad, and are
constringing.

But the muscles within the Breast is only one, to wit, the Diafragma, or
Septum transversum, which when it rests, draws the Breast together, (but by
accident) and when it is moved, it does dilate it, yet the motion of the
Diafragma is compounded of voluntary and natural.

The number of which in all is one hundred and five muscles, the aforesaid
muscles of the Back and Neck excepted, to wit, the two first under the upper
Furculaes, and two other continued with the fifth and sixth Rib; after that two
muscles coming from the holl^^ness of the Spatula, continued with the hinder
Ribs; after that two from the sixth Spondile of the Neck, and from the first,
and from the second of the Breast continued with the same Ribs; and those are
eight in all, all dilating; there are also so many constreining (the Diafragma
excepted) which also dilateth.

And of them which constrein, first, there are two under the upper Ribs, and
two about the lower ^^rcula, above which are four o there is covering them, all
which together with the Diafragma, are 17, afterward there are between the
twenty four Ribs twenty two spaces, and for every space are four muscles, which
are in all between the Ribs eighty eight, and together with the aforesaid
seventeen, they make the number one hundred and five muscles.

But that all they may well be seen, the Spatulaes must be also excoriated,
and the Back; and first you shall see the outward muscles, secondly the muscles
between the Ribs; the Diafragma shall be seen below in its place; but these
things are spoken more largely of me in my Commentaries upon Mundinus.

Mark, O Reader, that the motions of the Breast are four, to wit, violent
expiration, and unviolent, and inspiration unviolent, and also violent, to
which the aforesaid muscles are obedient.

In the unviolent motion of inspiration, do serve the muscles between the Ribs,
dilating the Breast; also the motion of the Heart and Lungs do serve it, for
whilst the Diafragma is moved, it draws the Lungs, which is filled with Air
like a Breast plate, and dilateth the Breast, the dilative motion of the heart
helping it; also the two first muscles which are about the upper Furculaes, do
help that motion, and that motion is mixed of voluntary and natural, the
natural excelling.

But to the violent inspiration, do concur with these aforesaid, all the other
muscles dilating the Breast, together with the Diafragma; and that motion is
also compounded of natural and voluntary, the voluntary abounding whilst the
Heart remains in strength.

But to the unviolent motion of expiration, do concur (though easily) the
inward muscles of the Ribs, and all the other constringent muscles; but this
motion is chiefly natural, because it is caused of the Heart, and of the Lungs.
But to the violent motion of expiration, the Heart and the Lungs do help, but
all the constringent muscles do principally help, and likewise the muscles of
the Abdomen.

By that which has been said, does appear the affinity of the muscles of the
Breast, and their figure, place, quantity, and substance; their number is
spoken of; their complexion is hot and moist; their helps are spoken of; they
suffer passions of all sorts.

Of the Bones of the Breast.
THe bones of the Breast are not one continued, as in the Head, but they are
many, touching one another, that they might be dilated; those which are before,
and on the sides, are properly the bones of the Breast; but those which are
behind, are more appropriated to the Back; the lateral bones of the Breast are
called of the Latins,* Costae, they are called in Greek, Pleura, or Pleuron,
and Costa ut Custos quia ab ipsis Viscera Custodiantur, vel a Coasso.
Chondron; in number they are twenty four, in each side twelve, of which the
ten lowermost (five on each side, in Greek called Roas) are shorter than the
rest, and not much bony, but cartilagineous, which of the Latins are called
Mendosae, and Incomplete, the false Ribs; but the uppermost are complete and
whole, and are called Costae verae, or the true Ribs, which in each side are
seven, with which on both sides is continued the aforesaid bone of the Breast;
which bone in the middle is hard, and toward the Ribs cartilagineous, because
between the bone of the Breast and the Ribs, there is a Cartilage.

This bone is (according to some) compounded of seven bones, to which on both
sides are united the seven true Ribs; and according to some others, it is of
fifteen, that is seven on each side, and one in the middle; and according to
others, it is of twenty one, to wit, of seven in the middle, and of seven
Cartilages on both sides, to which the true Ribs are united.

Their figure is crooked, like an Half Moon; their substance, and quantity, and
place appear; the Ribs have Colligancy with the first twelve Spondiles below
the Neck, and with the aforesaid bones of the Breast, and with the Pannicles
covering them; their complexion is cold and dry; their helps appear; they may
suffer passions of all sorts.

You should see the Anatomy of them best, if in one undivided, you would attend
them only, not having respect to the Spiritual members.

Of the Pannicle Pleura. Pleura nomen tenet de costis ita dictae, sub quibus
locum habet.

BEtween the Members containing, is placed a Pannicle immediately cleaving to
the Ribs, and the bones of the Breast, which is called Pleura, whose substance
is Sinnowy, hard, and subtle, from which do arise the Pannicles, immediately
covering the Members in that Belly; its figure is plain, extended throughout in
the circumference of the Breast, and it is also extended about the Diafragma
throughout, toward the upper part of it, firmly cleaving to it; its quantity
appears from that which has been said; it takes up the whole concavity of the
Breast, excepting a certain part of it before, which is taken up of the
Mediastinus.

Its number, and situation, Colligancy, and complexion, are apparent; its helps
are to cloathe and defend the Members of the Breast, and to fasten its bones
together; and to mediate between the bones and the Members contained in the
Breast, lest that which is soft, should be hurt of that which is very hard; it
endures passions of all sorts; you shall not see that Pannicle (...)
intersepire itaque latin dicitur Septum transver sum inter spiritualia and
naturalia dividens.
perfectly, unless inc^sing the Ribs, you open the Breast, in that manner which
shall be spoken of below.

Of the Septum transversum, or Diafragma, the Midriff.
THe parts containing being seen, the contained do follow; and first, is to be
seen a Pannicular muscle, called Diafragma, Secondly, the Pannicle Mediastinus,
Thirdly, the Pannicle called Capsula, and Receptaculum Cordis, the Receptacle
of the Heart; after those Members shall be seen the Heart, and the residue of
the parts contained in the Breast.

I say, that within the body between the upper and the middle belly is a
certain substance pannicular and fleshy, fastened to the Back about the twelfth
Spondile; which is fastened to the Back toward the forepart, always by the
extremities of the false Ribs, until it is terminated and bound to the end of
the lower Furcula of the Breast; and so it divides the natural members from
the vital; and this member is called Septum transversum, and Paries, and
Phrenes, and Diafragma; and Galen in his Book de Voce and Anhclitu, calls it
Percordium, which is a Muscle, and not a Pannicle, yet it executes the office
of a Pannicle in defending the Heart and the upper members from the stinking
vapors fuming up from the members of nutrition; its fleshy part is at the
extreme parts of it; and its Chord is in the center of it, united to the Lungs,
because by that Situation it serves to move it.

To this is the Pannicle Pleura fastened throughout toward the upper part; and
in the same manner the Sifac is fastened to it below; it is perforated toward
the Back by the Vein Chilis ascending, from which there do remain in it two
Veins nourishing it, one on the right, the other on the left; the Artery Aorta
descending, does also perforate it toward the Back; and the Gula or Merum,
which is immediately fastened to the Ventricle toward the Lower Belly.

Its shape and quantity appear; its Substance, Colligancy, and Situation are
spoken of; yet it is fastened to the Heart by small Arteries, and to the Brain
by three pair of Nerves, whereof two come from the Nuca, and one from the
Brain, and those appear sometimes notable.

Its complexion is hot and moist, its helps are in part spoken of; yet Galen
said, that in it is the beginning of respiration, and of all the strength of
the body; and these helps he first found out; it helps also in expelling
from the Stomach, and from the Intestines, and from the Matrix some matters
contained in them; it also provokes laughter (according to some) by moving the
mind in ticklings beside the will. It suffers passions of all sorts; its
solution is deadly.

Of the Mediastinus. Mediastinus eo quod hunc ventrem medi^ dividit.

AFter the Anatomy of the Diafragma, comes the Pannicle Mediastinus, so
called, because it divides the void places of the Breast in the middle,
according to the length; it has also other names; for the seeing of which,
first, separate the bones of the Breast from the Ribs, on the right side, and
on the left; in like manner (lest you should hurt the parts contained in the
Breast) separate also the Diafragma before, from the bones of the Breast; and
you shall observe that Pannicle to divide the Breast from the bottom to the
top, and from before backward: its substance is pannicular, its figure and
quantity appear, its Situation is spoken of; in number they are two Pannicles,
notably distant toward the forepart, having in them a notable hollowness; but
toward the Back it appears one only; it has Colligancy with the Pleura,
from which (according to some) it has its Original; it has also Colligancy
with the Diafragma, and with the Back, and with the Lungs, by means of a
Pannicle risen from the Pleura; it has also Colligancy with the Meri, witness
Avicen, and also with the bones of the Breast; it has Colligancy also with the
Brain by Nerves, with the Heart by Arteries, with the Liver by Veins; its
complexion is cold and dry; its helps are to divide the Breast and the Lungs
through the middle, that if hurt should happen to one part, it might not happen
to the other; it also defends the upper Furculaes: from it there is also a
conservation of the heat of the Heart; it endures passions of all sorts.

Of the Capsula Cordis. In qua ut in capsula Cor includitur.

THe aforesaid things being seen, you must put away the foremost bones of the
Breast, separating them from the former part of the Pannicle Mediastinus, which
leave in its place, until you have seen the Anatomy of the Lungs; take away
also the tops of the Ribs on both sides, that ye may have large room for the
seeing of the other parts, and in that Section you shall well consider the
bones of the Breast, and also the Pleura; but leave the Diafragma whole, where
you can, fastened in its place, especially to the Back, that the Nerves coming
to it from above, may be seen, and that the Colligancy of the Gula or Meri
with it might be seen.

Those things being taken away, you shall see the Lungs, in the middle whereof
is one Pannicle, fastened to the Mediastinus, which is hard and gross, that it
might the better defend the Heart from outward things; the shape whereof is
even as the Bowel contained of it, called, the Heart, which is hollow, and like
a Pouch, and therefore it is called Capsula, a little Coffer, in which there is
the Heart it self, and water in a notable quantity bedewing it, and hindering,
lest it should be dried up by its strong heat; which if it be exhaust, there
is caused Morbus Cardiacus, or the passion of the Heart; whereby a living
creature is brought to a consumption, as it happened to Galens Ape; this Capsula
is very sensible; and perhaps was perfectly bred at the first with the Heart.
Its substance, situation, shape, and helps have been spoken of; in number it is
one, its quantity appears, it is fastened to the pannicular roots of the
Heart, and to the Pleurs, and Mediastinus, and Diafragma, by their Pellicles,
to the Liver by Veins, to the Heart by Arteries, to the Brain by Nerves; its
native complexion is cold and dry, but influent, hot, because it is next the
Heart; it suffers pa^sions of all sorts.

Leave in their place the aforesaid Capsula, and Mediastinus, and Diafragma,
until you have seen the Anatomy of the descending Nerves, which as they
descend to the lower belly, do send branches to the aforesaid Members, as it
shall be spoken hereafter.

Of the Heart. Cor a Cura quia in eo omnis solicitude and scienti^^ausa manet.

AFter the Capsula, the Heart does occur; in the Anatomy of which, and also of
the Lungs, and of some parts of the Head and Neck, I will proceed more largely,
by reason of their artificial composition and operation.

For the dignity of the Heart is of more value than other parts, for of all the
members it is the most principal, and is called, Sol Microcosmi, the Sun of the
little world, for it illuminateth the other members by its Spirit, for this
has a special heat; it does certainly pant, and has motion as a living
creature; therefore it is reported to be the first thing formed in young ones
in the womb, after that the Brain and Liver, the eyes (as it pleases some) but
very slowly; but that these do dye first, but the Heart last; this member only
is not putrified by hurts; neither is it free from the punishments of life, but
being notably hurt, it presently brings death, and the life remains in
that, though the other parts be corrupt; and for this cause that creature
lives not, in whose Heart there may be found a hurt, as it is in other parts.

And creatures which have a little Heart, are bold; but they are fearful which
have a great one; as by the proportion to Mice, to the Hare, to the Ass, to
the Stagg, and to all fearful creatures, or through fear hurtful; but a great
Heart endued with much Spirit, does make them more bold than others.

It is reported, that some men have been born with a hairy Heart, and these are
more bold and stronger than others; as for Example, Aristomenes Messanius,
which slew three hundred Lacedaemonians, and he, when he was wounded and taken,
at length escaped, getting away through a Cave of Foxes; being taken the second
time, he being adventurous, escaped; the third time being ensnared, the
Lacedaemonians cut open his Breast for the cause of seeing his manhood, and his
Heart was found hairy. All creatures also have a Heart that have a Midriff and
blood; Witness Aristotle 2 de Histor. cap. 15. but in some it cannot be
discerned by reason of its smalness.

The Situation of the Heart is in the middle of the Breast within the Lungs; in
man only it declineth to the left Papp, with its lower part; lest it should
meet with the bones of the Breast, which are not carinated, as in Beasts, but
compressed into breadth.

It has the shape of a Pyramidis, but the gibbous part is not chiefly such,
because it is hot, following the form of fire; but because it is a perfect mixed
body, having life, it possesses a shape competent to its work.

Its upper part wherewith it reaches to the upper members, and is fastened to
the Back, is broad; and this part is the more noble of the parts of the Heart,
because the life of a living creature is conserved by the means of two Orifices
of Arteries of the left side, coming from that part; but the bottom does gather
it self into a sharp figure, and goes out almost into a swords point; and in
the former part it is eminent.

Also its gibbous part is toward the upper parts of the Breast; and it is of
such a shape, that its upper and lower building might be good; and that there
might not be a superfluity in it, apt to hinder its continual motion, and that
in the end of it, it might be gathered into one point, that that which is hurt
with the touching of the bones, might be the least of the parts of it, that it
might take the less hurt.

Its substance is of simple flesh, every where solid, but it has part of its
point, and the left side of it of grosser flesh, that it might conserve the
Spirit placed there, and that it might equal the weightiness of the blood
contained in the right Ventricle with its weight, whose walls are lighter than
of the left Ventricle*

In its hollow places are very many white Ligaments, (there being many
Caruncles and Pellicles, or doors of the Vein Chilis) and they are fastened to
the Vena Arteriosa.

Also the Heart is involved in a subtle and firm membrane, with some fatness,
which do keep and strengthen the substance and heat of it, and being dried,
they hinder it.

In the top of it, where it cleaves to the Back, are two tugged and hollow
Pellicles, called Auriculares, which are united to the houses or Ventricles of
it, to wit, to the right and left, taking and keeping the superfluent Spirit,
and blood, (like a good S^eward) and restoring it in necessities.

Nature has ordained those Auriculae, that they filling up places of the
Hearts greatness, might receive the Blood and Spirit sometimes overflowing in
the Heart, by which it might have had filled up the places of other members
near unto it.

Also by its greatness it had been heavy, unfit for motion; and likewise if it
should be very great, it would often be empty, by reason of the want of Spirit
and Blood, and consequently weak, as ^ fearful creatures, having a great Heart,
to wit, wanting Blood and Spirit in the proportion.

Its roots are fastened to the top of it, which are solid, and hard; and as it
were, cartilagincous, that its continual motion upon these might be nimble.

In the Heart also are Fibers of many shapes, and placed after a diverse
manner, that it might sustain continual and strong motions, which are natural,
and not voluntary; and therefore there is not any lacert in it.

In the upper part of it about the outside, is one Vein, proceeding from Chilis
obliquely, branching it self to the least parts toward the Mucro, which
nourishes it.

There also are two pulsant Veins, proceeding from Aort^* spreading abroad
toward the outside; one is in the same place wherein is the aforesaid Vein not
pulsant, which gives life to i^; another is spread in the right Ventricle, and
brings the vital virtue to it; it also concocteth and gives life to the
blood continually, entting in there, and by means of that the Liver is vented
by the Chilis in its gibbous part, and conserveth its own vitality.

It has a threefold Sinus or hollow place, or little house, or V^^tricle; the
right is bigger than (...) left, and the left comes unto the extremity of its
point; but the right is ended a little below that place.

Between them is a wall, gross and thick, called of Galen, Diafragma, in which
are many small holes, going from the right Sinus into the left, being broader
from the right than to the left; those holes are dilated, whilst that the
Heart is abbreviated and opened, and they are shut up whilst it is lengthened
and shut, by this means the blood being rarefied and prepared, goes from the
right unto the left, where it is completely turned into the vital Spirit.

These Orifices are counted of Physicians for the middle Sinus. Galen, witness
Avicen, calls that Sinus, a ditch, and passage, and not a Ventricle, that it
might be the Receptacle of the nutriment wherewith the Heart is nourished;
which nutriment is thick and strong, like to the substance of it, ^^d it is the
mine of the Spirit, begotten in it of subtle blood; and it prevails, that
the more temperate blood is in the middle Ventricle.

But the right Sinus has two Veins, one whereof whose Tunicle is simple, is
bigger than the other Veins, coming from the Liver; it is called, Chilis, and
Concava, and Audax ascendens, and this is very great, because it gives blood
to all the other Veins within and without the Heart, taking nothing from them,
and therefore it brings more blood into the Heart than it can carry back; it
is also very great, that it may contain much blood, oftentimes flowing and
flowing back; and th^^ it may bring it to the Heart in a short space, that it
may the more commodiously be con^^cted by it.

Thls blood so concocted, is divided into three parts, one part of the subtle
choleric, beingless than the rest, goes to the nourishing of the Lungs.

The other more and subtiler than the aforesaid, reaches through the
perforations of the Diafragma unto the left Sinus, where it is made Spirit.

But the rest of it not so subtle, and which is also far more than the rest,
passes through the same Chilis to all the parts of a living creature, and
nourishes them, oftentimes going in and out in the right Sinus, that it might
be perfectly concocted, and might receive life.

Nevertheless Avicen places a fourth part in the middle Ventricle, which he
says is temperate, but this is unknown to my eyes; perhaps because in the
middle wall of the Heart there pierces blood, nourishing it; but it turns
into the substance of the thing nourished, because there (in my judgment)
there is not blood without the ^^ins, unless in the right and left Ventricle.

The upper Orifice of this Vein is terminated at the Heart; whilst the Heart is
dilated, and draws the blood, it is opened, and whilst it is restrained, it
is shut, expelling the blood; but it is not shut whol^y, because in part it
remains open* therefore nature always reteineth in it (as a treasure and
mine of heat) some portion of servent blood* which at length changes the Blood
that comes in into its own nature, by uniting it self with it.

And this Orifice is opened and shut of three Sinnowy or Ligamental Pellicles,
whose color is white, being fastened with their upper extremities to the walls
of the aforesaid Sinus, by white and solid Ligaments.

Those Pellicles named Ostiola, are wholly opened at the inside of the Sinus,
giving way to the blood, entering in, and are shut at the outside, but not
wholly, and those Pellicles are solid and hard (and in like manner are the
Pellicles of the arterious Vein) left in the great and continual motions of the
Heart, there might happen to them disruption, because they are fastened in the
top of them to Ligaments, continually extending them.

But the Pellicles of the Artery Aorta, and of the Arterial vein, are less hard
than they; because they are not any thing extended by Ligaments, and therefore
they are without fear of breaking.

Another Vein goes to the Lungs; the name of this is Vena non pulsans, or
quieta, it is also called Vena Arterialis; and it is called a Vein, because it
carries blood for the nourishing of the Lungs; and it is called Arterialis,
because it has two Coats, that it might be strong and compact, because of the
Choleric and subtle blood flowing in it, and lest it should be broke by
reason of its continual motion; in whose Orif^ce are three Pellicles or doors,
shutting themselves wholly within the Sinus, and opening themselves without,
giving way to the blood going out. In the Dilatation of the Heart they are
altogether shut, lest the blood should flow back unto the Lungs; but in the
constriction they are opened, and the Veins cleave to the walls, neither are
they any where else united by Ligaments, as the most are.

The substance of these is pannicular; their shape is like to the vacuity which
is within the letter C They are therefore called Ostifola C formia; they have
also that Circular form which a man's nail has; which Pellicles are with their
Circular part fastened to the body of the Vein.

But the left Sinus more noble than the rest (because the middle and the right
do service first to it; it also excels the rest by reason of the Spirit
contained in it) has in the top or it two Veins: one not much less than the
aforesaid great Chilis, which is as the stock of a Tree, distributed through
the whole body; and this is pulsant and double-coated, whose thickness (witness
Erosilus) is six-fold to a Vein; and this is called Arteria Aorta, and the
great Artery; whose inner Coat is harder than the outer* because it meets
with percussion, and the substance of the Spirit, for the keeping of which it
is intended.

That same carries the Vital spirit to the whole body of a living creature,
and keeps it in life

For by that Artery (said Galen) all the members except the Lungs, do inspire
and expire, lest their liveliness should be suffocated; but the Veins are as
the storehouses of meat, needing neither to diastolize nor systolize; and
therefore the body of them is subtle, porous, and soft; but the Lungs do
inspire and expire by reason of the motion of the Heart and Breast.

This Artery or its branches, are seldom without the Chilis accompanying them,
and Aorta ascending a little above the Heart, is divided into two parts; one
part is made oblique below, and descends, which in the Breast, and in the
lowest Belly, sends forth many Fibraes from it, even unto the feet, and
gives life unto the members of them; under that branch being made oblique
below, they do ascend by the left Nerves of the voice, which are called
Reversini; and this place is called, Flexor, and Girgilius, of which it shall
be spoken in another place.

Another part ascending about a part of the Lungs, and the glandule Timum,
gives life unto, and fills with Spitit the upper part of the Breast, the
Arms, the Neck, and Head, and the parts of them,

And always those Arteries which are fastened to the Veins, by many pores or
little Fibraes, are united or joined together, and the Vein receives into it
the Artery, and on the contrary, the Artery the Vein; and from the Vein does
pass blood into the Artery, which is likewise made spiritual in necessity, and
from the Artery into the Vein does pass the Vital spirit, concocting the blood
thereof, and conserving it in its virtue; also the Tunicles are nourished, and
receive life from that which is contained in them; and this Artery is less
above the Heart than below; Witness Galen 16 de Utili: Cap. 11. and it is made
so because there are more parts from the Heart of a living creature below, than
are above it; and this Artery is so much greater descending, than that which
ascends by the Back, by how much the multitude of the lower parts exceeds
the upper; and in this is known not a little justice of nature: the Vein Chilis
descending must also be bigger than the ascending for the same cause.

In the Orifice of this pulsant Vein, which is called Auritium, are also the
three gates C formia, opening and shutting themselves at the same time, and in
the same manner, in which the Arterial vein is opened and shut.

There is in that Ventricle another Vein, not pulsant, but quiet, called
Arteria Venalis; and it is called an Artery, because it carries and recarrieth
the Spirit or Air to the Heart, and from the Heart to the Lungs; from whence it
is sent without the Breast; and it is called a Vein, because it has a single
Coat.

In the Orifice of this are only two Pellicles or doors, fastened after the
same manner, and incomplete; and they are opening and shutting themselves in
the dilatation and constriction of the Heart, with which they make the doors,
being in the Orifice of the Vein Chilis; also this Arterial vein carries more
Air to the Heart than it can bring out; because by the blood and Air brought in
by it, is the vital spirit engendered, which by the Artery Aorta, passes to all
the parts of a living creature.

By the aforesaid things the Colligancy of the Heart, and the complexion and
helps of it appear; its quantity may be seen; in number it is one, although it
is reported, that the Heart of an Ape had two heads, but prodigiously; it is
also reported, that the Partridges in Paphlagonia have two Hearts. Every kind
of disease may happen to it, but it endures them not if they continue long.

Of the Lungs.
THe Heart being seen, comes the Lungs, called in Latin Flabellum dicitur a
flando. Sic Ventilabrum a ventilando.
Flabellum, and Ventilabrum, and in Greek Greece etiam (...) a (...) suffior,
sufflatur enim ut follis spiritum trahens and emittens.
Pneumon, for this is the Artificer of breathing, and the work-shop of Air;
this is nourished by Air, as the body is with Meat; this fills the hollowness
of the Breast, round about the Heart with its five Coats or Lobes, whereof two
are on the left side, and three more on the right; of them three one is less
than the rest, cleaving to the Back, as it were, in the middle; which has
little pipes, but almost no motion; and this is the Mat or Pallet to the Chilis
ascending; and about that Lobe toward the top of it, there is also certain
glandulous flesh, which also with the aforesaid Lobe, is a Pallet or Coverlet
of the aforesaid Vein, and this flesh is of a notable bigness, and is called of
Authors, Morum, and Timum; and of the Vulgar it is called, Animella, and
Laticinium, and it is in usual meats of a rank taste, especially that which is
found in Claves, and in milk Kids.

The substance of the Lungs is mixed of thin, light, soft, and red flesh,
inclining to whiteness, like to the coagulated froth of blood, and it consists
of three vessels or pipes, entangled as in a net, through all the parts
thereof, in the same manner, that the branches of the Vein Chilis are in the
Liver; and this composition may be like to a honey comb, and also to a Sponge;
therefore it is capable of blood and Air, for the Lungs is as it were a certain
sto^e-house of Air to the Heart, fit to serve to both motions, to wit,
dilatation and constriction.

Certainly its flesh is rare, that there might be much blood, and Air
continually in it. Two vessels in it, which contain it, do show the multitude
of the blood, which are bigger in the Lungs than in any other member like unto
it, the Heart and Liver excepted, in which the vessels containing blood are
greater, surely not for themselves, but because they give Spirit and blood to
all the members.

This blood in the Lungs is much, because the abounding plenty of it is
dissolved by reason of the continual motion, which a great quantity does
continually oppose; and it is subtle, that it might pass suddenly to all the
parts of the Lungs to nourish it* and it is also subtle, that it might be
light, lest by its heaviness it should hinder the motion of the Lungs.

Also the long submersion of a living creature in the water without choking,
shows that there is always a great quantity of Air in it, and the sending
forth of a long and continual voice and blast, hindering from the receiving of
new Air, or when one abhors it by reason of stink, or other causes, yet this
Air in the aforesaid drownings and stinks, is kept in the mouth, and in the
jaws, the Tonsils helping with their Pellicles.

The help of this Air continually drawn, is, that by that being first altered,
the Heart might be cooled and contemperated in necessities; and also that the
Heart might have vent, left it should be choked.

The utility of it also is, that not out of a little part thereof might be
engendered Spirits necessary for the being and wel-being; and it is a help of
the expulsion of the abounding hot and smoaky matter which is drawn; it is for
the entering in of the Air that is less hot* ^eing altered first in the Lungs,
and then in the members through which it passes.

This smoal^y air, as it were an adusted superfluity of spirit, is driven by
the pulsant Vein into the branches of the Trachea, in the constriction of the
He^^^; and afterward goes forth ^^nce from aliving Creature by the Trachea,
and by the nostrils and mouth, the systolative motion of the Lungs helping it.

But the air going into the Heart has the beginning of alteration in the
Nostrils, in the mouth, in the jaws, in the Trachea, and in the branches of it
dispersed in the Lungs; in like order which one feeding on meat and drink has
in the mouth, in the Gula, and in the Ventricle and Liver.

For the alteration of the Lungs in the air is compared to the alteration of
the Liver in Chi^us, for by the Liver is the Blood made of Chilus, which
receives a perfect concoction in the Heart, but the spirit is prepared by the
Lungs, of air which is made truly vital in the Heart, this going to the upper
parts in the Rete mirabili, or in the least branches of Arteries about the
Brain, is again altered; from whence entering the Ventricles of the Brain, the
Animal spirit is ma^^ perfectly true, which is a brig^^, light, and pure spirit.

Also the flesh of the Lungs is light, lest it should hinder the motion of it;
it is also soft, that it might defend the vessels thereof from breaking; and it
is reddish clear, declining to whiteness, because of the dominion of the Air
over it, with which it is nourished, and also because of the coldness thereof.

A thin Pannicle does cover this substance of the Lungs, being bred of many
Membranes proceeding from the Pipes thereof, and from the Pannicles of the
Breast; by means whereof it is sensible.

The Pipes of the Lungs are three, one whereof (as also the rest) growing
always less, descends to all the parts of it, even unto the Pannicle
inclusively envolving it, from the Faringa, or Epiglottis, through the foremost
part of the Neck united to the Gula; this is hard and always open, and also
bigger than the rest, and it is compounded of very many Cartilagea, each
whereof is united one near to the other by pannicular ligaments, and this is
called Trachea, and Aspera arteria, and Laringa, and Bronchium: its Cartilages
in the Lungs are entire, and also annilar, but in the Neck they are incomplete,
and in the manner of a C. From their Magnitude and Figure it is judged in the
Hawkings of them, whether there be Ulcers in the extreme parts of the Lungs,
or in the middle, or in the neck.

Between these Cartilages, and in all the Trachea within and without* there is
a Pannicle of a mean substance, perfectly circular, fastened to the jaws and
mouth, in which are Vills lengthning and ^^ortning the Trachea in the motions
of the Lungs.

The helps of this Pannicle is also to defend those Cartilages from the going
in of extraneal things; it is also a pacifier of the voice in the going out.

This Pipe does not carry blood as others, but only Air; also by this alone the
unnatural things contained in the breast are purged out, having entered into it
in the time of the dilatation of the Lungs by the thin Pannicle involving it,
therefore is there caused an expulsion of Sanies, and other unnatural things to
the mouth, and without; the Heart not being troubled.

This Pipe also possesses a middle situation among the rest; on the right side
of it is the quiet Vein, but on the left side the Pulsant Vein, but the Pulsant
Vein toward the former parts, without the Heart, does immediately enter into
the substance of the Lungs, lest by reason of the motion of it, because it is
subtle, it should receive solution; but the Vein not pulsant, because it is
doublecoated, and strong, does not immediately enter the Lungs, but first
compassing about the Trachea, it also enters the Lungs, reaching toward the
hinder parts.

In this Bowel, only the pulsant Vein has not without cause changed substance
with the not pulsant; for the Vein not pulsant, called Arterial, in other
members is single, in the Lungs double-coated; first, lest it should be broken
by the continual motion thereof; secon^ly, that it might also contain subtle
blood, nourishing the flesh of the Lungs, and also the Trachea.

But the pulsant Vein, called the venal Artery, is of a single coat, nimble in
motion, that it might obey dilatation and constriction in a short space; this
brings Air to the Heart, and carries it out; in it also there is spiritual
blood, nourishing the Lungs, (as some would have it) but it is rather giving it
life; its branches are united or joined together with the branches of the
Trachea, through which the Lungs gives Air to the Heart; but the Heart not
being unthankful, gives life and nutrition unto that.

The branches of this Vein are so narrow, that the blood cannot pierce through
them to the Trachea, and therefore they are passable to the Air, but impassable
to the blood; but if they be notably opened, the blood flows from them to the
Trachea; and perhaps (as some would have it) from the branche ^f the Vein not
pulsant, blood also flows into the Trachea, whereby is caused spitting of
blood, without the solution of the Veins of the Breast; nevertheless the
pulsant Vein is more apt to this.

Every one of the aforesaid vessels in their first entrance of the Lungs, is
divided into five branches, always growing less throughout all the parts
thereof, and multiplying their branches; two are in the left side, and three on
the right, whereof one less than the rest goes to the little Lobe on the right
side, cleaving more to the Back; which (as we said before) is a Coverlet to
the Chilis ascending.

The shape of the Lungs is like unto an Oxes hoof; in number some think that
they are two members united into one, in such wise, that it appears one Lung,
with five Lobes, divided into two like parts, that one being hurt, the other
might remain firm; in the hinder part it is longer than before, following the
situation of the Midriff; in number it is one; the quantity of it, the
situation, and colligancy appear; its complexion is hot from the part of its
contents and place; but by accident, because of the Flegms remaining i^ it, it
is cold; its helps are to serve the Heart by preparation and carrying; it
serves also to the breathing, and to the voice, and in like manner to speech,
and its little Lobe serves to the Chilis ascending; it suffers passions of
all sorts.

Of the Anatomy of some parts of Collum ex (...) membrum ^ secundum* eminentiam
quia capitis basis aut fulcrum, alii a colle quia ascendit ab humeris collis
more.
the Neck, and of the pulsant and quiet Veins, inclusively ascending from the
Liver and the Heart, even unto the Head and Hands.
THe aforesaid things being seen in the Section of parts, the Trachea should
first occur, and the Epiglottis, and also the Gula; nevertheless these for
the present cannot well be seen, unless the Anatomy of the Neck, and some parts
of the Face be set before; which being seen, we will speak of the parts
aforesaid: the Lungs therefore being dispatched, reserve some of the upper
fleshy part of it, for the seeing of the Trunck of the Trachea Arteria (laying
aside the rest) except the fifth Lobe of it, which cleaves to the Back; keep
also a certain glandule near unto it, which is called morum and timum, that the
situation of the Chilis, and the ascendent Artery upon these may be seen, to
which these two members are a coverlet; you shall also keep the Heart and its
Capsula, and the Pannicle Mediastinus, and the Stomach, and also the Midriff,
for the enquiring of other things of them.

Those things being kept, for better orders sake, I come first unto the speech
of the Neck, and I term the Neck to be an Organical member, noble, and very
necessary to a man for the members contained in it, which witness Aristotle, 3
de partibus, Cap. 3. is made for the Trachea, serving to the Lungs, and for the
Gula.

But Galen in his eighth book de juvamentis, Cap. 1. says, that it is
principally for the Lungs, because creatures wanting a Neck, want Lungs, as
Fishes: but he adds, that the Neck is the way of those members which descend
from above downward and of them which ascend from below upward; those which
descend, are the Nerves, the Gula, some muscles, and the Nuca; but the
ascending, are the pulsant Veins, and the quiet: and the Nuca is contained of
the Spondiles, that it may be safe from outward hurts; and that hollowness
which is between the parts of the Veins and Arteries, is filled by glandules
remaining there; and all those are kept of their Coverings and Ligaments, after
that they are all covered with the Skin; and that which is compounded of all
those, is the Neck, which is placed for the Cane of the Lungs, by which is made
the voice and breathing; also the Neck in some creatures is instead of a Hand,
because they take their meat from the earth by the help of the Neck, by reason
of the length of their feet. But of this sort the Neck serves for the Cane of
the Lungs, and by means of it the Nerves do reach to the Arms, and to the
Hands, and to the Diafragma, and to other members, the Nuca being their guide;
and therefore for the Original of the Nerves were the Spondiles placed between
the Breast and the Head, of which the Neck is compounded. These things Galen
speaks, which nevertheless says not whether the Trachea ascend or descend;
and although he may say, that the Gula does descend, yet perhaps it does
ascend, neither can its descent be proved more than its ascent; neither of the
Trachea; because they have not a manifest beginning, as Veins and Arteries, and
as Nerves.

We may therefore say for the present, that the Neck is taken for that part
upon which the Head is sustained and turned, which serves to the upper Belly,
to the middle, and also to the lower, by means of Nerves descending from the
Brain, and from the Nuca; the situation of which is before from the upper
Furculaes of the Breast, and behind from the upper Spondile of the Ribs, and
on the sides from above the Shoulders, unto the bone of the Head called
Basillare; and commonly the hinder part of it is called, Cervix, of which shall
be spoken somewhere else; but the former part is called Collum, and because
this member is principally for the Trachea, it shall be the nobler o^ these
parts, for the nobility o^ which the Anatomy of the Neck is to be placed with
it; and because the Trachea is a part of the Lungs, which is of the more
principal parts of the middle Belly, spoken of before; therefore the Anatomy of
the Neck for the present, comes with the Anatomy of the middle Belly.

This part named Trachea, is called of many, Guttur, and Faringa; although
Faringae (according to some) are the Veins which do swell in great voices, and
those Veins are called of Celsus, Granges, and Fragitides, and of some,
Sfragitides; and those Veins with the Arabians are called, Guidez, and
Apopleticae, and Somni, and of some Pensiles, and Spermatici, and Juveniles,
and Jugulares, and ^anicae; and of Galen in libro de ^. part. they are called
Fagoti^ because they are near unto ^ passage^ of the meat, and of ^e Carotides,
or Somni; but Cel^ calls the Arteries only that ^ain there, Carotidas,
called so of (...), which is Somnus, sleep; because according to some, for ^he
most part, there is an opilation made in the branches of those Arteries,
causing sleep, and also the Apoplexy.

And of those Veins there is on both sides one immediately under the Skin,
which is commonly called, Guidez manifesta; also on both sides under some
notable muscles of the Neck, is one Vein, which is called Guidez occulta, and
Profunda, the hidden and deep Guidez, which is fellow to the Artery Carotida.

With those profound Veins and Arteries, there is on both sides assotiated one
Nerve of a notable greatness, which is called, Descendens, from which do arise
on both sides the Reversives; of all which speech shall be made ^ ^tle below.

Also the former part of ^ Neck, is called of some Jug^ and of some Gula;
althoug^ ^ well; because Gula is the p^ of meats and drinks; and ^gulum is that
part which is im^^diately above the upper Fur^^laes of the Breast; neverthele^
some call the aforesaid Furcula^^ Jugulum, and Clavis, and Clid^^ and Clidia;
the extremity o^ these Furculaes toward the Spatulaes, is called Epomis; but
the other part toward the middle of the Breast, is called, Paras^^gis.

The aforesaid things being noted, the Anatomy of the muscles, moving the Neck
and Head, should occur after the Skin: but we cannot have the perfect
demonstration of them, unless the Anatomy of those Nerves, Veins, and aforesaid
Arteries should be destroyed; therefore we will be silent of these,
referring the Readers to Galen, and to Avicen, and ^er Authors; for these mus^
^e many in number, and di^ (...) placed, and therefore they (...) be seen with
diligence, (...) finding out of which, you (...) attend to them only, be^
(...) ^hey are Anatomized with ^culty; and for this Galen, 12 ^^l. part. Cap.
8. where he ^eth of these muscles, said, ^oncerneth him to be diligently
^re-exercised, who studies cer^inly to follow these things here ^oken of; he
says also in the same ^lace, that speech only is not suffi^nt in Anatomy, but
there is re^red touching and seeing, and ^refore let there be refuge to the
^foresaid Authors, because we should attend to the Neck and Head only, in
which are many muscles, as well about the Spondiles as elsewhere, which in a
common Anatomy cannot be seen.

For the Head, by means of the Neck with its bones and mus^les, has many
motions, where^^ some, witness Avicen, prima partitione primi libri, are prop^
to the Head, and some comm^ to it, and to the five Spondiles ^ the Neck; by
which there i^ compound motion of the decli^tion of the Head and Neck to^ther;
and those motions do ^ther bow forward or backwa^ or on the right, or on the
^^ and between them is a motion ^ conversion or turning about; a^^ those
muscles are many and great, because the Position of them is of many shapes; and
also, because they have great, and almost continual motions; therefore Gal^^
(in the place before,) said, (...) they compass about the Head ^ every side,
which they move un^ any part that you would decli^ it; concerning the number ^
them, there is discord betwe^ Avicen and some of his Compan^ons contrarying him.

Therefore the enquiry of them being partly left alone, incise the skin from
the sides of the neck, laying bare the lateral and anteriour muscles, above
which i^mediately under the skin you shall note the Vein Guidez manifesta,
which you reserved unhurt; after that incise those great Muscles, descending
obliquely from the ea^s even unto the upper Furculaes, toward the middle of
the Breast; under which on both sides is one Glandule, to the form as it were
of an Almond; which is filling the empty places there remaining between the
Veins and Arteries, about the lower part of the Epiglottis; and therefore it is
called Aequatrix partium colli, the equal divider of the parts of the Neck;
which also it moystneth in necessities; you shall also observe under those
glandules on both sides one notable Vein Gui^ez; and in like manner one Artery
fellow to it, which are called Occultae, and Apopleticae, many names of which
are spoken of above.

Near unto the aforesaid Arteries and Veins you shall also note one Nerve, on
both sides, compounded of many Fibers; these Nerves are called descending, and
the reversive Nerves do spring from these, of which a fair enquiry shall be
made below.

Keep those Nerves, and (...) branches of the aforesaid Ar^^^^ and either Vein,
to wit, the ^^den, and the manifest, until th^^ you have seen the Veins and
A^teries ascending from the Heart, and from the Liver, even unto that place,
for the seeing of which the Workman may return back again about the region of
the gibbous part of the Liver, and there he will note a great trunk of the
Vein Chilis ascending; which in its ascension first perforateth the Midriff,
and there sends for^^ many little Veins on both sid^^ whereof two do feed
the Mid^^ but the rest do nourish the lower ribs, and the members near unto
them. But a very great branch of it ascending reaches even unto the Heart,
being every way loose, without an Artery fellow to it, and by that branch the
gibbous part of the Liver is vented, and perhaps vivified.

This branch is divided into three parts, one whereof much less than the rest
enters about the roots of the Heart, and is dispersed through the substance
thereof, and nourishes it.

Another bigger than the rest is united to the right mansion of the Heart, and
brings blood very plentifully to it.

From that branch (according to some) that Vein called Arterialis, which
nourishes the Lungs, takes its original: but of these Veins we have spoken
somewhat in the Section of the Heart.

The third Branch of the aforesaid, which is also notable, ascends also above
from the region of the Heart, under which is a certain glandulous flesh called
Morum, and Timum, and this, together with the fifth lobe of the Lungs which
cleaves to the back, is (as we have said before) a Mattresse, or Bed to the
aforesaid Branch, ascending even unto the highest Furcula of the Breast; where
this Vein is parted into two branches, reaching transverse toward the
Spatulaes on the right side, and on the left; in that same manner also does the
great Artery, called Aorta Ascendens reach transversly toward the S^^tulaes;
and that you may the better see those Veins and Arteries, lay aside the upper
Furcula, yet warily, lest you loosen the members near unto them.

Those things being dispatched, you must see the aforesaid Veins and Arteries,
noting first that every one of them is divided into two Branches, one whereof
as well of the Vein as Artery ascends by the Neck on both sides toward the
Head, from which do arise all the Veins of the Neck called Guidez, which you
shall keep to be better seen afterward.

Another Branch also on both sides is divided into five parts, one of them
nourishes the upper Ribs, and one the place of the Spatulaes, and one the deep
muscles of the Neck, and one penetrateth in the upper Spondiles of the Neck,
and from thence passes to the Head, and the branches of the pulsant Vein do
associate them.

Another branch greater than all the aforesaid five, reaches to the Axilla, or
Armpit, and this is divided into four parts, one of them is spread in the
muscles placed above the Breast, which move the Spatulaes, and one entteth in
the loose flesh, and in certain Pannicles of the Axillaes, and one goes from
the upper part of the Breast about the Teats, descending toward the Abdomen;
and this (according to some) nourishes them, and in part carries the matter
of milk to them; and this (as we have said elsewhere) is coupled in the
Abdomen, with a Vein ascending from the Inguina, and from the Matrix to the
Teats; and of that branch Galen speaks, in 14 de utilit. part. cap. 8.
saying, That from the Thorax do reach Veins to the Hypocondria, and to the
whole Epigastrion, and are coupled with Veins which are carried from the lower
parts to the Matrix, having Colligancy, that when the living creature is
increased in the Matrix, they might bring in the nourishment for it; which
being born, the^ puff up the Teats again; wherefore it happens, that the
Menstrues, and to give suck, cannot well be together.

But another branch greater than the aforesaid, is divided on both sides into
three branches; one reaches to the muscles which are in the Spatulaes, and one
to the muscles of the Axillaes, but another bigger than the aforesaid, reaches
by a near part toward the Adjutorium, and this goes unto the little hand; this
branch is called Asellaris, and Basillica, which being flebotomized, helps in
diseases of the Breast, by reason of its near Colligancy unto the true Ribs,
and to the whole Breast; this Vein is also called of the Vulgar, the Liver
vein, because it is nearer to it than the Cephalica.

But of the first branches (which I spoke that you should keep) from which are
made the Guidez, there ascends on both sides one, and before they do much
ascend, ^hey are divided into two parts on both sides; one of them is called,
Guidez manifesta, the manifest Guidez, because it is near unto the Skin, easily
apt to be seen, which in one living swells in a strong voice; but the other,
because it is below some muscles, is called, Guidez profunda and submersa, the
deep and overwhelmed Guidez.

And indeed the manifest Guidez, presently when it ascends above the Furcula,
is divided into two parts on both sides, whereof one ascends, but the other
is involved about the Furcula, from which do arise many branches, nourishing
the parts near unto them, and some of those branches do again ascend, and are
united again with the aforesaid first branch of the manifest Guidez; but before
they are united, one notable branch reaches to the Spatula; and by the
outside, under the Skin of the Adjutory, is terminated even unto the little
hand; and this is called, Spatularis, Humeralis, and Cephalica, because it
helps the Head, by reason of the near Colligancy that it has with its
Guidez, that nourishes the Head; but of that Vein, Cephalica, and also of
Basilica and of the Artery fellow to it, it shall be spoken more amply in the
particular Anatomy of the great and little Hand.

And the aforesaid manifest Guidez on both sides notable, is immediately under
the Skin above the muscles of the Neck, which with its branches does nourish
the upper and lower Mandible, and the Tongue, and the Head, ascending on the
outside, about the Ears.

And some would have that those branches of the manifest Guidez, which are
about the Ears, should be called, Venae Spermaticae, because they say, that the
Sperm comes by them from the Brain; and they are moved from the sayings of
Hippocrates, in his Book de aere and aqua, which says, that whosoever have the
Veins behind the Ears cut, they are altogether deprived of all Generation;
nevertheless there are some that think, that such Veins are from the branches
of the profound Guidez, which nourish the muscles remaining between the first
and second Spondile of the Neck; and some which say, that Hippocrates did
understand by the Veins the very Arteries, because they are more fit for good
Sperm than the Veins; nevertheless Hippocrates says in the same place, that
Sperm also comes from the whole and Avicen, 20 tertii cap. 3. says, that
Galen knew not whether the incision of these Veins may cause barrenness to
incur or no: nevertheless he said, but it seems to me that it does not
matter that the Sperm should be of the Brain only, although the nourishing of
it be of the Brain; nevertheless it is gathered by the good Anatomy of the
Spermatick vessels, that the incision of these Veins behind the Ears makes
not barren, by reason of the Sperm descending by them; nevertheless those Veins
being cut, may weaken the Brain so, that it may not duly send the Animal spirit
for conception; and this the profound Guidez may rather do than the manifest,
and the Arteries may rather do this than the Veins, because they are the
carriers of the Spirit; but either is possible.

But the profound Guidez, on both sides near to the Meri or Gula, ascends
below the aforesaid muscles which you cut, and in its ascent sends forth
branches, nourishing the Gula, and the muscles of the Faringa; they also
nourish the muscles remaining between the first and second Spondile of the
Neck, from which (according to some) the Spermatick Veins recited of
Hippocrates, do arise, which are behind the Ears, of which there is yet a
controversy.

They also nourish the Pericranium, ascending by it from the bottom, even unto
the top of the Head; and there by perforating the Cranium, they descend to the
Dura, and Pia Matter, carrying nourishment to them.

Also from the aforesaid profound Vein, does arise one branch on both sides,
piercing the bone Basilare, in the direct of the commissure Lambda; and being
born up of the Dura Matter, it ascends even unto the top of the Head; and from
that in the same place do go forth many branches through the pores of the
Skull, which also do nourish the Pericranium; nevertheless the greater part of
the aforesaid branches ascending within the Skull with the Dura Matter, do pass
into the Pia Matter, with which also do pass some branches of the aforesaid
manifest Guidez, piercing the Skull on the top of the Head from the outward to
the inward part, and from hence they pass to the substance of the Brain, and
nourish that.

Also some of the aforesaid Branches in the direct of the Commissure
Sagittalis, and Lambda, do enter into the Dura matter, being doubled in that
place; and this place is as it were a press of which the blood is pressed out
from the aforesaid Veins, into a certain large place being near there, toward
the outside, which is called Platea Fovea, Palmentum, and Lacuna; about which
Platea are certain Veins sucking the blood pressed out into it, which out of
the same do nourish the center of the Brain; and all those Veins within the
skull, together with the Arteries, are those of which it is rightly called
Secundina; and otherwise it is called Pia Matter. But the aforesaid Arteries
called Carotides, being in the Neck, near to the Veins Guidez, and the
descendent Nerves, ascending on the sides of the Neck on both sides, do reach
with some Branches dispersing here and there before, and also behind, and to
the Tongue, and to the upper Mandibles, and the lower; and in the whole face,
and in the hinder part of the Head, and some notable ones about the Ears, in
the Temples, do reach with their Branches to the top of the Head; and some
also reaching to the muscles about the common juncture, are spread abroad to
the Neck, and to the Head, where there is a great hole, from which the spinal
Marrow goes forth; it may be from those branches Hippocrates said, that Sperm
descends from the Brain, because the Ancients did call the Arteries also
Veins; and therefore Avicen said, twenty tertii, that these Veins were
continued to the Nuke, that they might not be far off from the Brain, in
which there is light milkey blood, which goes first to the Reins, forthwith
after that to the Veins reaching to the Testicles; and one notable Branch of
these Arteries on both sides pierces the bone, Bafilare toward the former
part, and is united to the Pia Matter, giving life to the Brain, and carrying
spirit to the Ventricles thereof.

From that Branch ascended on both sides immediately above this bone Basilare
(according to the Hinges of Physic) is made the Retentirabile; which is
(according to them) of a notable magnitude, which is before, behind, and on the
sides.

And the aforesaid Veins nourishing the Brain in their ascent must be
sustained of some solid body, as is the Pericranium, and Dura Matter, because
they cannot ascend by themselves for their single and soft coat, and the blood
in them is more apt to descend than to ascend, because it is heavy.

But the Arteries are not joined to any solid body, but standing by themselves
do ascend too within the Skull, because they are double coated and hard.

And it was not necessary that they should ascend, and afterward turn their
heads downward as the Veins, because their blood is light, and more apt for
ascending than descending.

Yet you shall better see the branches of those Veins, and also of some
Arteries in the Anatomy of the Members following.

The substance of Veins and Arteries has been spoken of in another place;
their complexion is judged from the composition of them; their shape is known,
they have Colligancy with the whole body; their bigness is also known; they are
bigger in one body than in another; But the situation of many of them is often
varied; in number they are unperceiveable, because many of them are hidden;
their helps are to feed all the members; they also suffer passions of all
sorts, but there often happens to them a straightened opilation, caused from the
fullness of blood, which if it be made in the branches of the Veins Guidez,
there always follows profundity of sleep, the Apoplexy, and extreme
suffocation.

That Vein Guidez is sometimes flebotomized, yet seldom in our Region and Age;
its incision helps the Leprosy not confirmed, and in a strong squinancy, in
a sharp Astma, in straightness of breathing, in hoarsness of voice caused by
super-abounding of blood in an Apostume of the Lungs, for evacuation and
diversion sake, for the antecedent cause, in the beginning and augmentation;
nevertheless this incision of the Veins Guidez is to be made by a learned
hand, with a Flebm or Lancet, having some Obstacle near the point, lest all the
sides of the Vein be opened, for these Veins are slippery in the touching of
them, because they are not annexed to the flesh, as many others, as well also
because of the soft and slippery glandules being under them; as also, lest the
Flebm should prick a Nerve or other members placed there.

But the manner of flebotomizing these Veins, is thus; first, let the lower
Belly of the Patient be bound, between the Ilia and Hypochondria, with a girdle
decently binding; let him also hold his mouth shut in expelling the air from
the Breast; then let the Patient decline his head to the contrary side that is
to be let blood; because by doing so the Vein swells as a Chord extended,
and with a fit instrument holding the Vein firm with the hand, or other device,
the Vein must be peirced in the more eminent place.

Authors commend such a Section to be made according to the breadth,
nevertheless I would do it obliquely, and let not the quantity of blood be
superfluous, neither let it be done the second time; and let the Workman have
with him powders constringent for stopping of Blood, as Bole-Armonick, Sanguis
Draconis, the hairs of a Hare, Mummy, the barks of Frankincense, Aloes, and the
like, and among all let him have Vitriol, or Colcotar, also Soot is praised,
and burnt Beans, and Paper burnt, Skins, and the likc to these, the white of an
Egg well beaten being always laid over, and with decent Ligature, and the
Patient lying with his head lifted up for eight days, with light sleep, and
decent diet; as far as it shall seem good to the lawful Physician.

Of the Anatomy of the descending and the Reversive Nerves.
THe Anatomy of the Veins ascending Nervus ex (...) quod ex (...) nuto, and
flecto: quia Nervi instrumenta voluntarii motus. Gal*
from the Liver upward being dispatched, in which also many things have been
spoken of the Arteries ascending, I return to the descendent Nerves, from which
the Reversives do arise; and I say, that in the lateral parts of the Neck, a
little under the Ears, between or under some Muscles, are notable Veins, and
Arteries (as it was manifested before) to which on both sides there does adhere
one notable Nerve called Descendent; these Nerves the Ancients did call
Apoplecticos: and not well, because they did not know the operations of them,
witness Galen in his Book De Voce and anhelitu: And these Nerves do arise
principally from the sixth pair of the Nerves of the Brain, and they rise also
from the third, and descend perpendicularly, because in such sort they must
move the members.

These Nerves are compounded of many branches, whereof some by descending
(witness Galen) are spread abroad to the Heart, and to its Capsula, to the
Mediastinus, and likewise to the Breast in the roots of the Ribs, and some
notable enough to the mouth of the Stomach, and to the Diafragma, and some
lesser to the Liver, to the Spleen, to the Kidneys, and to other sensible
members of the lower Bellies, to which also do go certain Nerves obliquely
descending from the Nuke, and from those Nerves descending some notable
branches are again turned back upward, which are called Reversivi, and Retro
Redeuntes, which are commonly called the Nerves of the Voice, and they reach
toward the Epiglottis, binding themselves with certain of its muscles, whose
heads are placed at the lower parts of its body.

Some branches also of the aforesaid descendent Nerves (besides those
Reversives) do go likewise by descending to some of the Muscles of the
Epiglottis, the heads whereof are turned upward, and they are Reversives (as it
pleases some) with their muscles they shut the cartilage Cymbalaris, and
Glotida, but the muscles of the descending Nerves do move other Cartilages,
and also they open the Cymbalaris.

From the seventh pair also, and from the Nuca, do come Nerves to the muscles
of the Epiglottis, which do move it obliquely, (witness Galen.)

Those Nerves are two; one right, the other left, nevertheless they are divided
into very many Fibers, or branches, as it appears, because of the many members
to which they go.

Their quantity and color is apparent; their complexion and substance is such
as of other Nerves, yet the Reversives are drier and harder, because they are
to bear notable, and as it were continual motions, especially when they shut
the Epiglottis, to which shutting there is required a stronger motion than to
the opening of it, because there are more muscles opening than shutting it;
also the motion of the Heart, of the Lungs, and of the Breast does open it; and
therefore that such Nerves should be strong, Nature has set them afar off
from the moist Brain, from which by how much the more they are distant, by so
much the more drier are they; and they pass near unto the Heart about the
Artery, where perhaps by reason of its heat they do obtain dryness and
hardness, and they are turned back upward, that by drawing downward they might
shut the Epiglottis, which when they are relaxed, many other muscles helping,
the Epiglottis is opened.

Their situation is on the sides of the Neck descending to the aforesaid
members, but the Nerves which are called Reversivi, in the left side begin to
be turned back to the upper parts, when they meet with the great Artery Aorta
in the place a little above the Heart, where that Artery is first forked, and
begins to be turned back through the Breast to the lower members, about
which great branch descending is made the motion of the attraction, and
relaxation of those Nerves, and that bifurcation of the Artery is to those
Nerves as a wheel upon which water is drawn from a Well with a cord; and this
place as well on the left as on the right, about which these reversive Nerves
are moved, or to which they are joined in their motion, is called of Galen,
Diablum, and Flexor; it is also called of some Girgilus, and Bachan, and Galen
in his eighth Book, De juvamentis, cap. 2. does resemble that reversion of the
Nerves, to those that with Horses in a Camp are turned back to the way from
which they first came, and says, that it is as it were a turning back of a
thing upon a small wheel; and in the seventh, De Utilitate, cap. 14. he says,
that he first of all found out those Nerves placed in that manner, and their
Muscles, having the heads of them downward.

He says also, that that reversion of those Nerves shows, that the Nerves
have their original from the Brain, and not from the Heart, as Aristotle did
think, for if the Nerves should have their beginning from the Heart, those
Reversives should come from it, and not from the Brain, as it appears to
sense.

And to those Reversive Nerves of the right side Nature has also made the
Girgilus (or that wheel which she made in the left side) of one sufficiently
noted branch of the Artery ascending, being obliqued toward the right Armpit,
about the upper Furcula of the Breast of the right side, which Artery goes to
the right Arm, to which branch it has joined other Pellicles remaining there,
that it might be strong, because this branch is not so great as is that about
which the reversive Nerves of the aforesaid left side are turned back.

And under that branch of the right side, fortified of the aforesaid Pellicles,
do the right reversive Nerves ascend by the Neck; and as well those of the
right as of the left are by ascending, implanted to the muscles of the
Epiglottis with many branches, as it appears to sense, by means of which they
move the Epiglottis, or Laringa voluntarily, as a Rider, by means of his Bridle
and Reigns, moves the Horse when he list.

The helps of the aforesaid descending Nerves are to give sense, and some
motion (according to some) to the members to which they go in their descent,
concerning which it was spoken before; and the helps of the Reversives are for
the giving of the Voice; and therefore they are called Nervivocis, the Nerves
of the Voice, as well the descending as the Reversives do suffer passions of
all sorts; and if their complexion be notably changed, as sometimes it happens
in the uncovering of them by reason of an Ulcer, especially of the descending,
and happily of the Reversives, the Voice is lost, and their other operations,
if they be not taken away, they are at least diminished; and if the Reversives
only should be wholly cut on both sides, the Voice and the Speech is lost; but
if in one side only, the half of the operations is hurt; but if the descending
be cut, of which the Reversives be parts (according to some) those Five
Operations will be hurt, of which Galen makes mention, 4 Interiorum, cap. 15.
to wit, Exitus aeris a pectore cum anhelitu, a going forth of air from the
Breast with painful breathing; and Flamen sine ictu seu strepitu, a blast
without stroke or noise; and flamen^^um strepitu, a blast with noise; and Vox,
the voice; and Loquela, the speech; yet some will have it, that by the incision
of the descending Nerves, the voice alone, and that blast with the stroke is
lost; but concerning those Nerves look upon our Commentaries.

These things being seen, leave the reversive Nerves in their place in the
Neck, that by them you may the better see the muscles of the Epiglottis, to
which they are fastened; leave also the upper part of the Ventricle, and all the
Gula or Meri, and that upper part of the Lungs, which you kept for the seeing
of the Trachea; leave also such a part of the Veins and Arteries, reaching to
the Arms and to the Head, that you may see the Anatomy of them in their place;
but you may cast away the Heart and the other members of the lower and middle
Belly, which have first been seen, and kept for the seeing of the Veins,
Arteries, and Nerves spoken of before; and before we do further proceed in the
present order of Anatomy, some things are to be spoken of the Face, and of some
parts of it; afterward we shall come to the Epiglottis, and Gula,

Of the Face. (...) quasi (...) hoc est quod antrorsus videat. Gas. Bauhi.

THe Face, called Facies of the Romans, and of the Greeks * (...), which is
only to man, is the former part of the Head known to all: this part should
rather come to be Anatomized with the upper Belly than with the middle, but
for the present we speak of it by the way, because in a common Anatomy the
Gula or Meri cannot be shown, unless there be first mention made of some parts
of the Face, and Facies is said, quasi faciens hominem, making the man; for by
it is the knowledge and distinction of every person.

This part called Facies, is also called Vultus a Volvendo, of rolling, and so
called a Volendo, of Willing, because by it the affections of the mind are
known, in which the color of it is changed, either for bashfulness, or for
some fault committed, or for fear, or sickness; nevertheless there are some
whose countenance is seldom changed, and those are called Vultuosi, brazen
faced.

Also the countenance is changed from age to age, and the Face differs from the
countenance in that, because the Face is always the same, and the countenance
is changed; albeit the Face may change its color and quantity by age; and the
knowledge of the Face is much considered of the Physiognomist; it is also
considered of the Physician; as in the first Prognostic you shall first
consider the Face of the sick man, for it helps in the knowing of many
diseases, as the Leprosy, the Periplemonia, the yellow Jaundice, cachexia, and
the time of Menstrues in a woman; in that they are also known that counterfeit
sickness, but not always.

Its situation is under the former hairy part of the Head; its substance is of
more rare and soft Skin, than any other Skin of the body, of the vapors
ascending to it from the whole; and for comeliness sake, under that Skin are
many Muscles and Veins, pulsant and quiet, Nerves, Pannicles, Ligaments,
Cartilages, and Bones; in number it is one Organical member.

The number of the parts of it, is the Forehead, the Temples, the Ears, the
Eyebrows, the Nose, the Eyes, the Eyelids, the Cilia, or hair of the Brows, the
Cheeks, Maxillae, or Mandibulae, the Jaws, which are here Synonymaes, the
Mouth, and the ball of the Cheeks, the Lips, Gelasini, the foreteeth, Mystax,
the Mustache, the trench or hollow place under the Nose, and the Chin, with its
trench; its quantity, its figure, and Colligancy are apparent; its complexion
is such as is the complexion of the parts of it; its helps are also to be
gathered from its parts; it suffers passions of all sorts.

Of the Forehead, and the other parts Frons a ferendo quod animi indicia prae
se ferat Ca. Bauhi.
of the Face, the Nose, the Eyes, the Eyelids, the Cilia, and the Mouth, with
the parts thereof excepted.
FRons the Forehead, is all that middle upper part of the Face without hairs,
which is above the Eyes; nevertheless it is said of some, that the Eyes are in
the Forehead; and therefore witness Varro, it is called, Frons a foratu
Oculorum, from the boaring of the Eyes.

Under the Skin of the Forehead, is dilated one muscle, having its Fibers
according to the length of the body, by which it moves the Eyebrows; in the
Forehead are also wrinckles, reaching according to the breadth of it, according
to the situation of which, Empericks do cut their Abscessions, (but ill)
because then the Eyebrows do fall; therefore the incisions in the Forehead
ought to be made according to the length of the body.

In the Forehead are some Veins which are cut in diverse diseases, and
Hors-leeches also are applied to them; under the aforesaid muscle is the Os
Frontis, called Coronale.

Of the Temples. Tempora dicuntur quasi aetatis tempus and annos sua canitie
and macilentia prodant.

ON the sides of the Forehead, are the Temples, called in Latin * Tempora,
which is times, because in them are known the years of many living creatures;
for they first wax gray in man, but not always; they are also made hollow in
the long continuance of time; in the Temples are little bones, somewhat long,
reaching overthwart the Head, which do keep the Temporal muscles within them,
and the Skull; these bones are called of Avicen, Ossa paris; and beyond the
aforesaid muscles in the Temples, there are also some Arteries, and notable
Veins, which in some diseases are incised.

Of the Eyebrows. Supercilium qui supra cilium nascuntur crines; cilium vocatur
vel a cilleo quod sepiusmovetur vel a celo quod celet oculum.

SUpercilia the Eyebrows, are known to all, whose situation is in the ending of
the Forehead; they are bred together with a man for ornament sake, intended of
nature, that they might defend the Eyes from dust falling, and from rain, and
the like; its hairs do not increase as those of the Head, for a good ends sake.

Of Intercilium, or the space between the Brows.
IN the bounds of the Forehead is a certain space between, dividing the
Eyebrows in the middle of them, it also divides the Forehead from the Nose;
and to this part as to a center, are bounded the Nose, and the lower and middle
part of the Forehead; this part is called Glabella, or Glabra; for Glaber is
interpreted, Sine pilis, without Hair; this place is also called, Lepor nasi,
the comeliness of the Nose: in that place do often begin Erisipilas, called by
another name, Gutta Rosea.

Of Malis, the Cheeks. Mala contract. ex maxilla Cicerone, vel ex mali
similitudine.

MAlae are those round parts in the Face, which are also called Poma, and they
are below the Eyes on the sides of the Nose, and they are only to mankind; and
they are properly called Genae, although the greater part of the Face may be
called Gena. The Skin of this part is thinner than any other part of the Face,
which is easily made red, and changes its color in the affections of the
mind, which commonly in well complexioned people is of a Roset color; those
Malae do adorn the Face, and they are a defense to the Eyes, and to the Nose;
and each of them has one broad muscle, firmly united to its Skin, which are
serviceable to them and to the Lips; as shall be said hereafter in the Section
of the Lips.

Of Barba, called Gena, the Beard. Gena Latin: a genero ibi capilli generantur.

IN the Face also is a barbarous part, which has a proper name, and is called,
Gena, a (...), genero, to beget, because the Hairs are created there; this part
also of some is called Mystax, or From whence may come our English word
Mustachio.
Mustax.

Of Mentuma memini Ci ceroni quod quibusdam ejus inter recordandum aliquis usus
esse videatur.
Mentum, the Chin.
IN the lower part of the Face is Mentum the Chin, so called ab Eminendo, from
appearing above the rest; for it is eminent above the Gula; (it is also called,
(...) Polluci and Ruffo (...), quod pili ibidem floreant.
(...)) from Mentum its discase is called Mentagra; its upper part begins
from the root of the upper Lip, and has an end in the lowest part of the Face;
and in respect of its place it may be called Mentum, because they that are
Mentum vult quasi a miti diduci.
lowest ought in all things (if they are not) to be mild.

In the middle of the Chin is a certain hollowness, called of some B^ccula, and
Buccella, a little Cheek, it is also called Typos.

Of Gelasinis.
ON the sides of the mouth, on Martiali Gelasinus ^ (...) rideo maxim onim
apparent risu.
both sides in the skin (in some persons, and especially in Boys, and in
Women) is a certain little pit, which appears in ^aughter, which shows
grace and ^omliness, and therefore those pits ^re called Umbelicus Veneris, and
^elasinus, these are also called, ^mbelicus Veneris, Venus Navel, because they
are like to the hol^owness found in the leaves of the ^erb called Venus Navel,
and ^ayledon.

Of the hollow pit under the Nose.
UNder the Nose, in the middle of the upper Lip is a certain little valley,
which Lactantius Firmianus for the similitude of its hollowness, calls
Lacuna, a (...) Polluci and Ruffo quasi amatorium sive amabile dixeris vel
amoris illecebra velut esset quoddam in amore illectame^tum.
Ditch, it is called of some Philtr^^, and Sperion, and Hyspia; concerning the
Nose, the Eyes, the Eyebrows, the Eyelids, the Mouth, and its parts; it shall
be spoken in their place, beginning with the Anatomy of the mouth.

Of the Anatomy of the Mouth, an^ the parts thereof.
THat therefore the Trachea Epiglottis, and Gula may be^ fitly Os Scalig. ex
(...) vox.
showed, as we have promised I come to the Section of the Mouth, and the parts
of it; and ^ say, that the Mouth is that hollow part in the face, being
immediately within the Lips, by which the meat and drink, and in part ai^ do
first enter within the body, and by which Spittles and Voices go forth, and in
which the Speech is formed, and it is called Os, as it were Ostium, the door to
the aforesaid things, letting them in and out.

But the Cheek or Cheeks Bucce, are those parts in the face or mouth which may
naturally be puffed up of the breath, that is, that hollowness of the mouth
which is puffed up of the breath, being brought back from the Lungs, and
retained in the mouth the lips being shut.

The parts of the Mouth are the Lips, the Teeth, the Gums, the Jaw-bones, the
Palate, the Uvea, the Tongue, the Tonsils, and the Fauces.

From the aforesaid things does appear the substance, situation, and figure of
the Mouth; its quantity is known to all; in number it is one member; the number
of the parts of it is spoken of; its Colligancy is taken from its parts, and
also its helps; its complexion is such as are its parts; it suffers passions
of all sorts.

Of the Lips.
LAbia, which are also called Labrum a lavando, quidam, eo quod in eo
lavationem infantium solitum est fi^r^: haud improprie labium a labor dici puto
quod ex iis verba elabuntur.
Labra; the Lips in some are gross, in some thin; gross do commonly argue
rudeness of wit; the more prominent part of the Lip is named Prochilum; the
continual joining of them is called Prostomion, or Prostomia, and those which
have their Lips hanging over, and likewise their Teeth, are called Brochi; in
the middle of the Lips is a clift which is properly called Os, the mouth.

The substance of the Lips is compounded of Musculous flesh, skin, and a
Pannicle continued to the Gula; the union of these parts is so compacted, that
one can very hardly be separated from the other, and it is such, lest through
the grosness of it, its nimble motion should be hindered, which serves for
every difference of placing, and therefore in them there are four proper
Muscles, and two common to them, and to the balls of the face. And the proper
are little, according to the bigness of the Lips, which before they are united
to the skin are chained together one to another, so that their parts are
unseparable without the ^ending of them, one pair whereof hangs obliquely
under the apples of the face toward the Lips; also the other two hang obliquely
from the lower Mandible toward the Lips.

And although there are only four muscles in the Lips, nevertheless there are
eight motions, witness Galen, 11 De Utili. cap. 16. to wit, four Strait, and
four Oblique, for every one of them while it is moved moves Obliquely, because
the situation of every one of them is oblique, but when two of them are equally
moved, they move rightly, as it is in the opening of them, in which there is
one right motion; but the other right motion in the Lips, is when they are
shut, or pressed together to one another.

There are also two other right motions in the Lips, one is, when they are
turned outward, and the other when they are folded inward; and those motions
are made of strait Fibers, some whereof innermost are within those muscles of
the Lips, and some are outward; and when the outermost are extended, then the
Lips are turned outward, and when the innermost, then they are folded under or
inward; and how the Oblique motions are made of one Muscle only, and the right
of more, it is easy to judge, if you look into the shuttings of a Purse, which
when they are drawn together rightly, and uniformly, they open the mouth of the
Purse, and when only one of them is drawn, the mouth of the Purse is moved
over-thwart.

Nevertheless Avicen, although he speaks of the aforesaid situation of the
Muscles, sets down but four Motions, as there are four Muscles; and says,
that four Motions is sufficient for them; he says, that every part of them
when it is moved, moves to its own part, and when two, they are moved to two
parts, and are dilated to two; they have therefore a perfection of their motion
to four parts, neither have they any other motion besides them.

And as well Galen as Avicen do speak of the proper motion, because the motion
common to the Cheeks, and Lips, is made of two broad Muscles, which are in
either Mandible; and the broad ones are bigger than the aforesaid, and those,
witness Galen, are outward from the Cheeks unto the spine of the Neck, unto
which do pass Nerves from the Breast, and from the Clavicles, that is, from
the upper Furcu^aes of the Breast, which are implanted into the Cheeks, and
into the lower Lip by right Fibers, and some other Fibers, reaching also from
the Clavicies obliquely, and some other more oblique than the aforesaid,
ascending from the Scapulaes to the sides of the Lips are implanted in the
Cheeks; and moreover, some other do reach from the place behind the ears (which
sometimes they move) unto those Muscles; nevertheless those muscles are not
manifestly known, although they have a multitude of Nerves almost from all the
parts of the Neck; yet they are known if the Lips and the balls of the face be
moved, when the Mandibles are shut to their uttermost power; not because the
bony parts of the Cheeks may be moved, but their aforesaid fleshy musculous
part is moved with the skin, which is properly for the only motion of the Lips;
to which part, and also to the very Lips the aforesaid Broad Muscles do go,
which move the Lips, and the Cheek-balls, and this is called the common motion
that is of the Lips, and of the Cheek-balls.

Some also would have that the Cheek-balls in their upper part be somewhat
moved of the Broad Muscle moving the forehead, and some say, that those Broad
Muscles moving the Cheeks and the Lips, do also help the chawing.

And the motion of those muscles are best seen in those which are living,
especially in them that are lean, and therefore I make mention of them,
omitting the Anatomy of many muscles, because they may not be seen in those
that are living, neither be shown in a common Anatomy; I will also declare the
Anatomy of the Tongue, and Mandibles for the same cause.

These Lips within themselves, and also the whole mouth are covered with a
Pannicle, covering the Gula, or Meri, and the Stomach, and for this the lower
Lip does tremble when one is ready to Vomit: but this Pannicle is harder and
thicker in the mouth than any where else, and grosser in the Meri than in the
Ventricle, and always as it descends it is made more soft and subtle, because
in the mouth it first meets with meats somewhat hard, which as they descend
are always made softer, witness Galen 4. De utilit, and according to that of
Avicen, that one feeding, receives some digestion by chawing.

The Figure, situation, quantity, and number of the Lips do appear; their
complexion is set down hot; they have Colligancy with the Brain by Nerves, with
the Liver by Veins, with the Heart by Arteries, and therefore sometimes in the
compression of them the effects of the mind are known; the Lips also are
stretched out, and restrained voluntarily; they have also Colligancy with the
Ventricle, and Meri, and with the whole body by means of the Skin; their helps
are many, they are first for the defense of the Teeth, and for the good form of
the Face, for the expressing of the Speech, for the taking of meat and drink,
and they are to the mouth as a door to a house, necessarily opening and
shutting themselves; they also hinder the Air from entering cold to the Heart by
it self, and by accident; they also retain the Air brought back from the Lungs
in necessities.

They endure passions of all sorts, and among others they suffer Ragadias,
Chaps, and oftentimes Cancers and trembling in Crisises, and in Fevers by
participation from the Brain, and from the Ventricle.

Of the Teeth.
THe aforesaid things being seen, you may first open the Dens quast edens, ab
^dendo.
mouth as much as you can, by cutting the Cheeks on each of the sides, that you
may the better see the Teeth and the Gums; first noting the substance of the
Teeth which is bony, and is harder than a bone (witness Celsus) nevertheless
some say, that they are of the nature of flesh and bone, both because they
feel, and because they are renewed again; they also do increase all the time
of their endurance for their ends sake, because if they should not increase
they would not last, and the chawing would be naught, from whence the life
would be short.

In number they are thirty two, to wit, in one rank, near unto either Cheek
there are placed sixteen, they are also oftentimes twenty eight only, because
then the four hinder teeth are wanting, which of Avicen are called Negnegid.
and these are two in either side, and sometimes they want six in all, and the
Negnegids are the last in coming, which are called also the Teeth of
understanding, of sense, and of wisdom, because in some they are bred in
Manhood, or in Old age; and witness Aristotle 2. De Natura seu de Historiis
animalium; the Male have more Teeth than the Female, as it appears in the Sex
of Women, of Sheep, of Sows, and of she Goats.

The names of them are other of Celsus, other of Galen, other of Aristotle,
other of Avicen, other of Mundinus; and first these are the names of Avicen,
for in every part, whether in the upper, or in the lower, or in the middle of
the mouth toward the forepart, beginning in the middle, there are first two
equals somewhat broad, called Duales; at the sides of which on both sides is
one, which of Mundinus is called Incisivi, and of Avicen are called Quadrupli,
yet Galen called the Duales Incisivos, which two Duales, and two Incisivi,
Celsus calls Quaternos, and Aristotle called all these Acutos, that they may
cut, and it agrees with Galen; on the sides of them, on both sides is one,
which are commonly called Cynodentes, or Canini, Dog-teeth; and of some they
have been called Gelasini, because they appear in laughter more than the rest,

Then all the rest (according to Avicen) are Molares, Grinders, called a
Molendo, from grinding; which in some (according to him) are on both sides
four, on the sides of the Dog-teeth, and in some they are five, and in tha
manner they are thirty two, or twenty eight, numbering them thus; two Duales,
and two Quadruples, or Incisives, and two Dog-teeth, all which are six, and the
Grinders (according to Avicen) are ten, or eight; if ten in either part, to
wit, in the upper or in the lower, they are in all sixteen, and as so, they are
thirty two, but if they be eight, they are in either part fourteen, and so they
are twenty eight.

Nevertheless Mundinus in the number thirty two, places two Duales above, and
so many below, and two Incisives, and two Dog-teeth, and four Molares, and six
Maxillaries, yet neither Galen, nor Aristotle do appoint particular names of
all the Teeth, but Celsus appoints four Dog-teeth, on either side two, next
to the Quaterni above, and as many below; Celsus also appoints eight
Maxillaries above, and eight below, to wit, four on both sides next to the
Dog-teeth.

Their shape is diverse, for some have only one sharp head, and one root, as
all the Duales, and the Quadruples, or Incisives, and the Dog-teeth.

But the lower Molares have at the least two heads, and two roots, and
sometimes three, and as many heads, and especially the farthest; but the
uppermost have at the least three heads, and as many roots, and sometimes four,
and especially the farthest, which are as it were a wall holding the others
firm; and the roots of the upper Teeth are crooked, that they may be the
stronger, lest they should fall by their own weightiness; and the holes in
which they are fastened are wondrously fitted to them.

And from the Jaw Bone does arise for every Tooth one round additament,
fastening the Tooth by means of the strong Ligaments; and those additaments
Galen called Praesepia, which are not only in the place of the Gums, but in the
extreme of their roots.

And the Molares have more roots than the rest, because their operation is more
continual than the rest, and because in chawing they are not moved upward and
downward only, but they are moved laterally, or circularly.

All the Teeth have some sense, (witness Galen and Avicon) their quantity and
situation are apparent; they have Colligancy with the Mandibles and Gums, and
with the Brain by the Nerve; their complexion is known, their helps are to
prepare the meat for the Stomach; they also accent the Speech; they are also
the weapons of Nature.

They suffer every kind of Disease which other Bones do suffer, in them there
is pain, commotion, corrosion, putrefaction, congeling, alteration of color,
and elongation from their Natural place.

Of Gingivis, the Gums.
AFter the Teeth are to be seen the Gums, Gingivae, so called, a Gignendis
dentibus, from the begetting of Teeth; and they are simple flesh, hard, in
which the Teeth are infixed; in them there are so many holes as there are Teeth.

In number they are two the one above, the other below; their shape appears,
which follows the shape of their Jaw Bone; their situation also appears,
and their quantity, and their Colligancy; their helps are to make f^^m the
Teeth, and to cloth the Bones of the Mandible about them, and with their heat
to comfort them, and to them that want Teeth they do afford the help of
chawing; they have also a notable sense by their Colligancy with the Brain, by
means of the Nerves dispersed through them; they endure passions of all sorts.

Of Palatum, the Palate.
AFter the Gums, according to Palatum quod labiis dentibusque quasi palis
munitum sit.
the true method of universal Anatomy, does occur the Palate; which is a part
of the mouth, witness Aristotle, primo de Historiis, cap. 11. and is that part
of the mouth either open or shut which is above the tongue.

This part is bony, ordained of the bones of the upper Mandibles, nevertheless
it is covered with some flesh, with its pannicle covering it, in which there
are some Nervs giving the sense of Tasting and this part in the mouth is
resembled to the hollowness of the roof of a Vault, or to the covering of a
Furnace, and therefore it it is called Caelum, and Altum oris, the highest part
of the mouth; and it is called Palatum, quia in apertione oris palam
ostenditur, because in the opening of the mouth it is showed openly to us; or,
quia manifest latum videtur, because it seems manifestly broad; and the
Palate, witness Galen, is as it were a bell lying before the Laringa, or
Epiglottis, in which is made the founding of the Voice, in which by the means
of the Nerves is the notable Sense of Tasting.

Its situation, its figure, its quantity, and number, and Colligancy appear;
its complexion is cold, because it is bony by predomination; in that member
there is not any hole serving the Collatory, as some do think, by which the
superfluities of the Brain should be purged out, but such a hole or holes are
in the bone Basilare, above the Nostrils, as shall be spoken in another place.

The helps of it are, that the mouth being shut, and also open, the Air might
be retained there to this purpose, that it might warm it if it be cold, lest
being so it might hurt the Heart in its entrance; it also retains Air, by
which the Heart is refreshed in necessities; it also helps in the retaining
the Vocal air, and therefore the Palate is rugged for this, that the air may
go forth full o^ surges; the Palate also by its hollowness helps the
revolution of meat in the mouth in the time of chawing; by means of its
hollownesse also the Tongue is moved more nimbly for its operations; it also
helps digestion with its pellicle, the pellicle of the whole mouth helping
it, and i^ may be the Spitle mixed with meats in chawing.

It suffers Passions of all sorts, and among other Diseases it suffers in
Fevers the Colam, or Alcolam.

Of the Vvnla, or Uvea.
IN the ending of the Palate about the Fauces, toward the Ex Uvae similitudine.
head, right against the root of the Tongue is one member, fleshy, of a rare
substance, covered with the membrane, whose quantity and shape is equalled to
the grane of a Grape, and therefore it is called Vva, Uvigena, and Uvigera; it
is also called Columella, and also ^^^^mna, and of some Gargare^^, Gargar, and
Gurgulio, it is also called Fundibulum; nevertheless this member increases
more than naturally in length and breadth, by humidity filling it, and
sometimes it is like unto a Mouse tail, as I have often seen; and sometimes it
is indurated, and sometimes stranguleth, witness Aristotle.

Man only has this member; its substance is spoken of, in which there are some
Veins, and Arteries, and therefore if it receive solution it notably induces
blood; its complexion is warm and moist; its number, situation, and Colligancy
appear; this member gives way to things that are swallowed; neither has it
voluntary motion, therefore it is without muscles; it helps in the breaking
and altering the air, and according to some in the tuning the Voice; it also
hinders thirstinesse, by hindering air from entering the Fances violently.

It suffers Passions of all sorts, and especially corrosion, and
mo^lification, in which there is often required Cautery.

Of the Tongue.
THe Tongue is sometimes taken Lingua ex lingo, qua part lingimus.
for the variety of Languages, as the Greeks, the Arabians, the Latins, and of
that kind; it also signifies many other things, but for the present it is
taken for a member contained in the mouth, and it is called Lingua a ligando,
of binding, because it is bound from one end to another within the lower
Mandibles.

The substance of this member is naturally rare, fungous, and soft; it is also
soft by accident, because of the Humidities descending from the Head, and from
the Stomach to it; also the glandulous flesh in the root of it (in which there
are fountains of Spitle) does moysten it, by means of the Spitle; it has also
a multitude of Nerves, as well for the Sense of touching and taste, as for the
motion; those that give the ^aste come from the third pair of the Nerves of the
Brain, but those that give the motion come from the seventh, and these Nerves
are notable, because the Tongue has need of an excellent sense, and also
motion; it also needs very much heat and nourishment, therefore it (and in
like manner the Yard) has more and greater pulsant and quiet Veins than any
other member like to it in bigness; and the Nerves that give it motion are
distinct from them that give it sense, but those which give the sense of
Feeling, do also give Tasting, and the tasting is more easily corrupted than
the feeling, because the tasting is a more subtle virtue than the feeling; and
the situation of the Nerves of sense is superficial, but the situation of the
Nerves of motion is nearer the Center more or less, according to the place of
the muscles, which are commonly appointed nine, to wit, four pair and one
single, with which it is moved to every difference of position; and the Tongue
in its roo^ is large, gross, and strong, but in the former part it is subtle
and sharp, that it might be more fit for motion.

Of the aforesaid muscles two are on the sides of the Tongue, of both sides
one, which are called Latitudinal, proceeding from the sharp bones of the Head,
placed behind the Ears, from which place also in part do come the Fibers of
one muscle, which is common for the motion of the Lips, and for the motions of
the Apples of the Face, and these bones are called Sagittalia, and Acularia;
there are also two called Longitudinals, beginning from the upper part of the
bone Lambda; which are continued with the middle of the Tongue; and there are
two other muscles which move the Tongue overthwart, proceeding from that side
which is the lower of the two sides of the bone Lambda, and those do penetrate
between the aforesaid Longitudinals, and Latitudinals.

There are also two others converting it, and turning it upward, and the Fibers
of them are spread abroad in breadth under the aforesaid, and these are
continued with the ^one of the lower Mandible; nevertheless Avicen 12.
animalium says, that those last are above the others; after that there is one
muscle called single, which continues the Tongue to the bone Lambda, and
draws the one to the other, and this muscle drives the Tongue to the outward
parts, by lengthening it, it also draws back, and shortneth i^.

Yet there are many that say, that the Tongue is not moved to the outward parts
voluntarily, but merely naturally from the imagination, as the Yard; and some
say that it, and also the Yard are moved of muscles, and of the imagination
together, and some of the imagination only, which by means of the spirit
causes a windiness, dilating, and erecting the Yard, and in like manner the
Tongue, with bringing it o^^ of the mouth; but these things are handled of
Galen, Pr^^ de motibus liquidis, and of ^^vicen, Prima primi, in the Chapter of
the muscles of the Tongue, and there the Expositors do resolve the doubts,
which see.

Of the Bone of the Tongue.
THe Tongue in the root of it has a bone to which it is knit and fastened, and
stands firm, as upon his Basis in his many motions; and this bone is
quadrilateral, or four-sided, not very hard, but it is as it were
Cartilagineous, and it is called Os Hyoides Latini cum Graecis appellant, idque
voce contractiore, siquidem (...) dicendum esset, quod (...) literae formam ex
primat, vocatur (...) sed quia ubi confunctum est and sinum facit, non i^a
acuto angulo terminatur, rectius illud n figurae quam l simile dicemus.
Columbus De ossib. 1. 1.
Hyoideum, and Lambda, or Lamb, because it is like to that Greek letter; two
of the sides of it are toward the Tongue, which are in the form of the
aforesaid Letter two forked, and two also so formed bigger than the first, are
toward the Cartilage Deltalis, or Target Cartilage of the Epiglottis; which
they embrace, and are fastened to it, lest it slide here and there, that this
bone might the better make firm the other members fastened to it; and it is not
only fastened to the Epiglottis, but also to the Meri by some Ligaments.

And this bone was not of a very long, or of a straight Figure, because the
weightiness of the Tongue had drawn it to one side only, and then there had not
been good speech, nor good chawing; and this bone is called Hyoideum of Galen,
and Os Lambdae, and of Avicen Alfahic.

The helps of this bone are of Galen set down many, although it be a little
bone; first, many muscles do come from it to the Tongue, and some muscles also
of the Epiglottis, and some do go from it to the Spatula, and some to the
Breast, and some to the Mandibles; from that also, or from its Ligaments do
arise the Chords of the muscles near unto it, and it is also a defense of the
Target Cartilage of the Laringa, and this bone is the principal foundation upon
which the Tongue is turned in its motions.

This Bone has three conjugations of muscles proper unto it, to wit, one pair
proceeding from the extremities of the lower Mandible, toward that part with
which it is continued to the root of the Tongue, whereof the one is on the
right, the other on the left, and that pair whilst it is contracted draws it
toward the Mandible.

The second pair arises under the Chin, and passes to that bone under the
Tongue, and is fastened to it toward the upper part, to wit, toward the
Epiglottis, and that bone, this draws to part of the Mandible.

The third pair arises from the Needle-like additaments of the bone of the
Head, to wit, from the two sharp bony extremities, which are behind the Ears,
and those muscles are continued with the end of that bone, which is toward the
Tongue, and they draw it to the upward parts backward.

All the other muscles continued to this bone are common to it, and to the
members to which they go.

Under the Tongue it self are two notable Veins, on either side one, which in
many dispositions are let blood (especially in the Synanche or Squincy) which
are red, sometimes black, and sometimes green, and they are called of some
Raninae.

Under the Tongue also where it is fastened to the mouth, are certain notable
Caves divided into two parts, which are called the Orifices, or Mouths, or
fountains of Spitle, which of Avicen are called Generativa salivae, the
engenderers of Spitle, in which a style or pin of a Table Book does easily
enter; these Orifices are opened and shut like a Purse, as the Spitle
increases and diminishes; these fountains are terminated to the aforesaid
kernelly flesh placed in the root of the Tongue, from which a spitly moisture
does continually sweat out into the aforesaid fountains.

Under the Tongue also is a certain pellicle, in the middle of it reaching
long-wayes, which is called of our Vulgars Il filello, which in some is great,
and the Widwives or Chirurgions do cut that in the age of infancy, which if it
be not cut makes them hard of speech.

The complexion of the Tongue is hot and moist; its shape, and situation, and
Colligancy does appear from what has been said; its quantity is conspicuous,
for witness Aristotle, one is broad, another narrow, another mean, but that is
laudible which is measured in its Longitude and Latitude, according to the
ability of speaking.

In number, although it may seem one member, yet there are two members,
nevertheless they appear one compounded of two likes; for commonly Nature has
created the Senses double, that if hurt should happen to one part, the other
part might remain unhurt; and it was not divided sensibly into two parts
distant from one another for the chawing and speech, but it is united by means
of one Pannicle covering it, nevertheless this Pannicle is divided in length
into two sides, below and above, yet united and very firmly fastened to the
Tongue, and this Pannicle is continual with the pannicle covering the Stomach,
and Meri, and the whole mouth within side.

The helps of the Tongue are principally for the distinction of Voice, and for
the joining of Letters, and therefore Galen in his Book, De voce and anhelitu
said, there are three members appointed for the Voice and Speech, to wit, the
Trachea, the Epiglottis, and the Tongue, and every one has glandules tempering
it with ^oysture.

And the glandules of the Tra^hoa are in the Neck moystning it, and making the
parts of the Neck even.

And the glandules of the Epiglottis are those which are called Arcae aeris,
chests of air.

There is also a certain far kernelly flesh about that, covering of the
Epiglottis, which is called Glotida, which is a principal organ of the Voice;
but the Tongue has glandules to which Veins do pass, carrying Spitle to
them, but the rest are without a Vein but are filled of their own accord with
moisture flowing to and again unto them, and in the Epiglottis is engendered
moisture, with which it is moystued: some moisture also flows unto it from
the Head.

The Tongue also helps for the discerning of taste, it also helps for the
turning of meat in the mouth, so that every part of it may be bruised; it also
helps swallowing; it suffers passion^ of all sorts.

Of the Amigdals, or Almonds.
IN the upper part of the Tongue on the sides about the root of it, Ex
Amygdalorum similitudino
are certain kernally or glandulous fleshes, on either side one, called of many
Amigdalae, Almonds, which together with the aforesaid Uvea, and Galsamach, and
also Aifahic, are placed of Avicen (9. tertii) among the parts added to the
throat, and by the throat, the interpreter of Avicen, understands the space
in which are the passages of the meat, and of breathing (but not well) because
Gut^^r, the Throat, is taken of the Latins for the Trachea arteria, it is also
taken for the former part of the Neck, which is from the Jaws to the Jugulum,
and therefore Celsus said that the Veins Granges, that is, Guidez, are in the
right and left side about the Guttur, or Throat, and Pliny being witness, the
throat is so much in a man, as oftentimes swells up in a Disease, and this
tumor is called Botium, and also Struma, although Struma may also manifest
Scrophul^^^, and some other tumors.

Therefore that space which is behind the Uvea, and the aforesaid Almonds, and
Galsamach, and Alfahic, is called Faux; and Faux, or Guttur in the rule of
Avicen, 9 Tertii, is not any member, but is that vacuity to which the top of
the Gula or Meri is terminated, in the termination of which toward the
forepart is the Uvea, and the Almonds, and Alfahic, and Galsamach; but in its
upper termination is that hollowness which is terminated by above the Palate,
to the Nose, and to the bone Basilare, toward the Anfractus, or turnings,
being under the Colatory, of which, speech shall be made hereafter.

And the aforesaid Glandules, of which we intend for the present, are commonly
called Tonsiles, and Celsus calls those Glandulaes, and Mundinus Fauces
(although not well) and the Greeks call them Antiadas, and Parhitmia.

The substance of these Almonds is fleshy and sinowy, to wit, with Pellicles,
with which it is fastened on the sides coming from the root of the Tongue toward
the Palate, and by means of them the aforesaid Amigdales are united to the
Palate, and those Nervous pellicles, together with the Glandules, are as it
were little hollow ears, and therefore they are called Arca a Chest, or the
Storehouse of Air, for those Chests are notable in the Beasts Cynocephalis,
within which they keep not only air, but sometimes (as I have seen) meat, as
are Chestnuts, Chiches, Filberds, Beans, or the like, yet those Amigdales with
their pellicles may be seen better in one than in another, but better in a
living Creature, because in a dead Creature they are drawn back and those
Chests keep the air more in the going out than in the coming in, that all might
not go forth from the passage of the Heart, and the Creature perish, and that
in drownings in waters, and in stinkes it might be refreshed by the air
retained.

And those Pellicles only (according to some) are those which Avicen calls
Galsamac, or G^lzama, but in my judgment they are not but the aforenamed
Chests* because Avicen says, that above the Galsamac is the Alfahic, to wit
the bone Lambda; and this bone is annexed to the Tongue and to the Epiglottis
before, under those Pellicles, and if those Pellicles are Golmaza, or Galsamac,
the writing of Avicen is corrupted, to wit, that which says, And the Alfahic
is above the Galsamac neither is there any other member there toward the Palate
unless the Uvea, and the pellicles of the Glandules (of which speech has past)
which make an arch for the retaining of air, and therefore Galsamac is not
there, (but in my judgment) Galsamac is the Epiglottida, to wit, that
pellicular covering which shuts the Epiglottis, lest meats and other
extraneal matters might enter into it, as we shall speak anon.

From that which has been said, the helps of the Amigdales do lie open; their
Colligancy, also shape, quantity, and number do appear; their situation is
best seen when the tongue is deprest, and the mouth opened in the furthest part
of it; their complexion is hot and moist.

They suffer passions of all sorts, and now adays they are Apostumated,
indurated, and ulcerated in a certain Endimious disease, which of the Vulgar is
called Mor^u^ Gallicus; and they do easily receive Rhumes from the Head, and
in them is caused the false Squinantia, or Synanche, which is called
Branconcellus, and therefore it is said,

Ad fauces Branchus, ad nares Coriza catarrus:
If the Catarre does come unto the Jaws,
It Is Branchus called; Coriza to the Nose.
It is also called Dragonzellus, and perhaps corruptly, and at Bononia
Strangog^oni, because they are apt to strangle, they are also called Gaioni.

You shall see those Amigdales, and also the Tongue better, the Mandibles being
excoriated in that manner, as shall be spoken hereafter, because I will place
the Anatomy of their Muscles, and of the members of the whole Face, and also of
the whole cane of the Lungs, that they may be seen as the Workman list,
because they are seldom shown in a common dissection.

Of the lower Mandibles, or Jaws.
THe Amigdales being seen, it seems good to me to determine Mandibulae ex
mandendo, virt. officii.
of the two lower Mandibles, that the rest of the Neck may be more fitly and
diligently Anatomized; of the upper it shall be spoken in their place, and the
Mandibles are taken of me for the present for those bones of the Head in which
the Teeth are infixed.

And first it is to be noted, the skin covering their Muscles, which in men is
commonly full of hairs; after which are their proper muscles, serving to three
motions, to wit, to the motion of opening the mouth, and to the motion of
shutting it, and to the motion of chawing and grinding; the motion opening
makes the lower Mandibles to descend, and shutting elevateth them; and the
grinding motion makes them turn about, and decline to two parts; it is
therefore necessary that the motion of shutting should be by muscles which
descend from above, and draw to the upper parts; and the motion of opening is
made on the contrary manner, and that of grinding with transversion.

The Muscles shutting are two, great ones, and having great Chords, which are
called the muscles of the Temples, because they are fastened to the Temples
between the Craneum, and the Ossa Paris, and in a man they are smalllest they
should burden the Head, and also because a man chaweth things not very hard,
and those muscles have great Chords, terminated to the lower extremity of the
Mandibles, and they are very soft because they are near the Brain, from which
they have three Nerves, two from the third pair, and one from the fourth, and
by consequence the solution of them is very bad* and therefore Galen, 11 De
Utili, cap. 3. says, If therefore as Hippocrates said, those parts which are
near, and common, and prime, are most of all maligned, but there is not any
nearer than the Temporal muscles, neither does any other muscle communicate
more with the Brain by more Nerves; it is good reason to hearken out the
beginning of their passions; and for their nobility, Nature has placed them in
the hollowness of the Temples between the bones, keeping them on every side;
the muscles of the Eyes are also very noble, because they are near to the
Brain, but they have not so many Nerves as the other, and those two Temporal
muscles are helped of two other muscles, which do go unto the aforesaid
Mandibles, by the inner part of the Cheek, and the Chords of those Temporal
muscles do not arise from the end of the muscle, but from the middle of it,
that they may be stronger.

But the muscles opening do arise from a place called in Arabic Alhiliricti,
which are two bones called Acuta, Acularia, and Sagittantia, added to the
hinder part of the Head, and those bones are behind the Ears, and these two
muscles descending are united, and are made one muscle, afterward they are
separated, and of them is made a Chord that they may be strong; after that
they are again branched, and are filled with flesh, and the muscle is made;
after that it meets with the reflection of the Mandibles, and when it is
contracted it draws the Mandible backward; and because the Mandibles are
heavy, descending of themselves, two muscles only do suffice them.

But the chawing muscles are two, on either side one, which are triangular, and
very sinowy under the balls, and they are such that in the contracting they
might have diverse motions, so that by them the grinding and chawing might be
complete, and those muscles with one of their Basis are about the Ossa Paris,
and with one other toward the balls of the Face, and with another toward the
Mandibles; yet every angle of the aforesaid muscles is most firmly mixed with a
part of the Face in the direct of them, that they might move the Mandibles
diversely, and some would have it (witness Gal^n) that every one of those
muscles should be three muscles, and that gibbosity which is in the balls of
the Face, is of those muscles in part.

The Tongue also, besides those muscles helps the chawing by turning about
the meat.

And the muscles lifting up the Mandibles are great, because they have a great
motion, and they are soft, because they are next to the Brain.

And the muscles depressing are small, because it is more easy to depress the
Mandible than to elevate it, and to hold it being elevated.

But the chawing muscles are mean, because the circumduction or turning about
of the Mandibles is more easy than the elevation, and more hard than the
depression.

Some will wonder that Nature made the Teeth of chawing greater, and more than
they of incising; it is to be said, that Nature has prepared not only teeth to
out the meat, but she has ordained Reason and Art, which she uses for the
cutting of meats; She has also made the chawers greater, and more, because
the chawing action is stronger, and more permanent; which chawing Art does not
for the most part (unless by accident in sick people) as she does the cutting
of meats.

The muscles being seen, that you may the better see the Os Lambdae, and the
head of the Meri, and the Epiglottis, you shall cut the skin transversly from
either corner of that Fissure which is called the Mouth, and the aforesaid
muscles toward the Ears, in which Section consider (if you can) the aforesaid
muscles, and also the other parts of the Face, excepting the Nose, the
Eyelids, the Eyes, and the Ears, fleaing the skin with diligence from them,
which being seen you shall lay bare the bones of the lower Mandibles from their
upper junctures unto the middle of the chin, in which they are firmly united by
one juncture; the aforesaid bones are also united on both sides to the Head, by
one loose juncture about the ears; you shall also note their Situation, Number,
Figure, Colligancy, and quantity; their substance, complexion, and helps lie
open, they endure passions of all sorts.

Of the Anatomy of the Throat, and of the Gula.
THe Mandibles being seen, remove Guttur a gutta, quia voces sunt quasi gutta
fluentes sermonis.
them with diligence with a crooked Knife, Saw, or other Instrument, wholly
from their place, that you may the bett^^ see the Throat, and the Gula, yet
keep the Tongue unhurt, and the bone Lambda, that you may see the Colligancy of
these members; the Mandibles being removed, observe the situation of the
Throat, and of the Gula, and of the bone Lambda, which is placed near unto the
root of the tongue, and the top of the throat; howbei^ ^^u may not stir these
memb^^^, unless you shall first see the muscles of them; but before you may see
them you must give way, to the Anatomy of the Throat, and of the Gula, for
those members are so fastened to one another by Pannicles, and Ligaments, that
one cannot be showed without the other.

The Throat depending under the Jaws even unto the Lungs, possesses the
foremost situation; first, that by its hardness it might be a defense to the
Gula; Secondly, because by that situation it is more direct to the Lungs, and
so does serve it better, and more easily; Thirdly, it is foremost, because the
Gula is longer than it, which if it should be before the throat, it should
either be obliqued from the end of the Throat unto the Stomach, and the
swallowing had been ill; or because there should also have been some
inconvenient hollowness from the end of the Throat unto the Stomach, toward the
back.

And the Throat is a body very long, round, hollow as a Cane, whose substance
is compounded of many annular Cartilages, yet they are imperfect circles, like
those Bracelets called Armilla, and they are like the letter C. and therefore
they are called Cartilagines C forms, C like Cartilages, and Semicirculares,
but they are bigger than a half circle, and in the part not Circular they do
meet with the Gula, by means of a soft pannicle and somewhat hard, being
perfectly Sphaerical, covering and fastening them within and without, and beyond
the pannicle, on the inside covering the throat from the top to the bottom;
there are (...) Ligaments filling the throat toward the Gula, where the
Cartilages are uncompleat, nevertheless those Cartilages without the ^^^nicle
are properly the instrument of voice.

The upper part of the throat is commonly called Epiglottis, Laringa, and Nodus
Gutturis, and sometimes Gurgulio, and it is called (...) Bronchii and Gutturis,
but the ^est of it is often called an Arte^^ and a Spiritual Organ, or Pipe,
and the Vocal Artery, and the sharp Artery, and the cane of the Lungs, and it
is called Faringa a findendis vocihus, of cleaving of Voices, or of Fando, of
speaking, and Gargar, and Gargarean but Laring a for the most part b^ the
interpreter of the Books of Galen, De utilitate parti^m, in the Latin tongue;
Laringa is taken for the upper part of it, but the lower part is commonly
called Trachea, and Guttur, called so, Garriendo of chattering, because that
chattering comes from thence; and Avicen, Prima pri^^ capitis, de musculis
gutturis, ^^derstandeth by Guttur this member, but Nona tertii, by Guttur he
understands that space which is behind the Palate, in which the passage of
meat, and of breat which of the Latins is called Fa^^ or Fauces.

This member is also called Bronchium, or Bronchum, for the likeness of a
certain Fish, and also of an Earth-worm called Bronch^^^ whose body is long,
Cartila^^^^ous, or scaly and annular, as is Viper.

The lowermost part of this member is divided into two parts, one on the right,
another on the left, which enters into the upper part of the Lungs, and from
hence it is divided into infinite Fi^ers unto it all, growing always less
through the whole substance of the Lungs, through the center of it to the
extremes, carrying and re-carrying spirit to the Heart, in that manner which it
appeared in the demonstration of the Lungs.

This member is not of one Carriage only, but of many, unequal without, and
hollow within, united one near another, at a certain ^^nce by Ligaments, and
Pan^^^^s; that by means of the Fi^^rs of the Pannicles which are longitudinal,
and the Nerves of their Muscles, it might be extended and drawn back in its
motions; and it is moderately hard and light, that it might be shrill; and in
the deprived of sense, that it ^ight resist outward things hurting it; and it
is round, because it is less apt to be hurt; and their Cartilages toward the
Gula are incomplete, that by their hardne^^ they might resist things swallowed,
therefore the chanel of the Trachea is filled behind of the aforesaid Pannicles
and Ligament, which by their softness do give way to things swallowed, and
(...) this cause the hollownesse of (...) throat within it (its panni^^^ giving
way) serves the Gula ^^ necessities, when great morsels are swallowed, and the
pannicles ^^ the throat do easily obey in s^^^lowings, because the time of
breathing and of swallowing is diverse, and not only the thr^^^ in this serves
the Gula, but (...) the Gula the throat in breathing because in the time of
breathing the Gula is empty, as the throat is empty of breath in the time of
swallowing, because the Epiglottis is always shut in swallowings*

Also the hinder part of the throat was not Cartilagineous, but pannicular,
that it might be the more easily moystned by drinking, or by licking with the
tongue some moist thing, as it often happens in great heats and in Fevers, and
that also matters ^ontained in (...) Breast might be more easily brought out
by hawk^^gs, as it is in the Plurisie.

And this member was wisely (...) Cartilagineous, and Pellicu^^ for two
reasons, to wit, for (...) sound or voice, and for breathing, and it does
therefore serve ^^ and the Voice, and it is not still toward the Gula, because
(...) it is soft, and as it were fleshy, (...) therefore if the Trachea and
^^iglottis be not decently dry, (...) moist, there is hoarsnesse, ^^^ess
Galen, in his Book De vo^^ anhelitu, as it is before drink and liquid meat,
that the Voice ^^ clear and shrill, but drink being taken by the Gula moystning
the Tra^hea next, and united to it, a clear voice is not uttered, and if i^ be
superfluously moystned with drink or rheum there is caused ^^arsness, and
therefore old men reason of the moisture of these ^^ts are hoarse, and dry
bodies have a more clear and shrill voice than moist; and if the instruments of
the passages of the Voice be opened, then s^ddenly mu^^ air goes out, and that
is Anbel^tus, the breathing; and if they (...) constrained, with the breathing
there is somewhat to be (...) differing, by the difference of (...) instrument
constrained; and if (...) Epiglottis be constrained a (...) is made; but if
the cane only there is made a certain so^^^ which is between breathing, and
voice, and this is Roucedo hoarsness, of these things speaks Galen.

From that which has been (...) the substance of the throat does appear, whose
lower pannicle i^ solid and hard enough, that it might resist Catharres, and
evil Hawkings, and the smoakie vapor breathed from the Hearr, and that it may
withstand the motions of the throat in the voice; the situation, figure, and
Colligancy, and number, and helps of the throat, and its quantity are to be
seen; its complexion is cold and dry; it suffers passions of all sorts.

Of the top of the Throat which is called Epiglottis.
He aforesaid things being (...) quod lingulae superemineat quae (...) dicitur
Columb.
^^ seen, I come to the top of the ^^^oat, the principal substance of (...)
member is of many Cartilages joined together artificially, and with great
diligence, from which the Voice, and conservation of life reboundeth; the
Muscles, Ligaments, and Pannicles covering the whole Trachea, do bind to^^^^er
these Cartilages within and without.

This member (witness Galen) is not of one only Cartilage, but of many, unlike
in shape and quantity, that by the benefit of the (...) it might be dilated
and con^^^^ned for the breathing and voice; and its Cartilages are at least
four, whereof one is not a pure Cartilage, therefore Authors the commonly
appoint three Cartilages in the Epiglottis, which are pure; the first pure
Cartilage is called Peltalis, or Scutalis, or Scutiformis, because it bears
the form of a Buckler, the unequal part of it is forward, but the concave is
turned to the center of the Epiglottis, that is, to the passage of air, and
this is bigger than the rest, which of us seems notably eminent in the former
part of the Neck under the skin.

After the Scutalis, toward the Gula, or Meri, is the second pure Cartilage,
which wants a name, neither has it a name of the Greeks, nor of the Latins,
and therefore it is called Cartilage ^^nominata, or the Chartilage without
name; this second has its lower part of a perfect circle, with which it is
united with the upper circle of the Trachea Arteria, behind, before, and on the
sides, and toward the forepart it is firmly united with its circular part
under the Scutalis, and the Scutalis has two notable additions, with which it
does embrace the second, and those two united together do compound the whole
circular pore of air before, behind, and on the sides, being altogether
cartilagineous and hard.

The third Cartilage being also pure, is commonly called Cymbalaris, and of
Galen is called Autyoi^de^, because it is fastened within the second Cartilage
in the top of it, toward the pore of air, right against the bone Hyoidea; this
third is so much less than the second, as the first is greater than the second,
and this Cartilage (in my judgment) is not one only, but two, united so that
they seem one on^^, and this in its opening takes the course of the two
shuttings of a little Book, one whereof is shut against the other, and they
work in a contrary manner in the opening of them, and this Cartilage when it is
shut in its upper part, and also in its lower, makes the hole wider than in
the middle of it, and then it has such a hole, or holes, as the trumpet has
in its ends, but greater above than below; therefore Galen said in his eighth
Book, De juvamentis, that for the voice it behoved the Epiglottis to be first
broad, afterward narrow, and after that again to be made broad; and when this
is shut it meets with the Scuta^^^, and when the parts of it, or the side^
are opened, they go toward the Cartilage that has not a name.

Above these three Cartilage^ is a fourth, which is a body membranous,
cartilagineous, and fat, being like to the tongues of Pipes, and therefore
Galen calls it Glotida, it is also called Sublinguium, and this is the most
principal Organ of Voice; and the Glotida is not a member of pure Cartilage,
because a hard thing is hardly doubled, neither of pure Membrane, because in
shutting it would be doubled, but it is compounded of Membrane and Cartilage
for its decent shutting; and in it there is also fat, lest it should be dried
as well by the almost continual motion, as also by the breathing and
respiration of the air ^^^ing it; this member has the Epiglottis to shut in
time of swal^^^ing; and the Cymbalaris also shuts it; this on the hinder
(...), but the Glotida before, so (...) ordinarily neither in Vomit^^^^, nor in
swallowings, any thing (...) ^^^^er into the cane of the (...).

And the Epiglottis is not of one (...) Cartilage, but of many, ^^at it might
be dilated and con^^^ained in the diversities of for^ings of the Voices, and
therefore Nature gave to those Cartilages, and also to the Throat muscles
serving them, four where^^ do unite the first Cartilage to the second, and two
of them are within, shutting the Epiglottis, and two without.

There are other four which join the second with the third, to wit, with the
Cymbalaris, two whereof are behind, and those open, drawing the Cymbalaris to
the hinder parts, and two on the sides, drawing that also to the sides.

There are two other muscles about the Cartilage Scutalis, within the
Epiglottis, which (...) the Cymba^aris.

There are also two other Muscles within the Epiglottis; (...) the root of the
Cymbalaris, also shutting the Epiglottis; and the^^ twelve are proper to the
Cartilages of the Epiglottis; joined ^^ none of the adjacent parts, wit^^^^
Galen, 7. Deutilitate.

The Glotida also has one pair of Muscles, by means of which it shuts the
top of the Epiglottis, and those are stronger than the rest, witness Galen, 8.
De juvamentis, and those resist the muscles of the Breast, and other muscles
opening the Epiglottis, and perhaps (according to some) that those are the two
last immediately described.

Beyond the aforesaid are also eight other Muscles, whereof two are proper to
the cane of the Lungs, witness Galen in his Book De voce and anhelitu, and
those are in the channel of the throat, (...) A^^cen says those are at the
(...).

There is another pair of Muscles serving the Throat, yet not ^^incipally, but
serving also to the ^^^bers by, and this pair conti^^^^h the third Gartilage
with (...) Gula.

And there are two other, serving the Throat, at the ruin of ^^ch there is
caused hoarsness, and in that manner there will be twenty muscles serving to
the Epiglottis and the Throat.

And from hence is comprehended the error of some Moderns, which do believe
that in the Fau^^ there are two proper muscles serving to them, thinking that
Avicen, in Primo primi de musculis gutturis, should by Guttur understand the
Fauces, as he did in Nona tertii, but we deny this; because that Faux is not
any determinate member, as we have spoke more largely in our Commentaries upon
Mundinus, and therefore those that intend to judge rightly, do not trust in
names, because the Interpreters of the Greek, and of the Arabic into Latin
(being often ignorant) do take one thing for another* and by that means almost
all Sciences are spurious by the variety of Interpreters.

Of the Gula.
AFter the Throat is to ^^ Gula ex (...) Gusto.
showed the Gula, which holds the hinder part to the Throat before the Spine;
this descends unto the Stomach from the Fances by the Neck and Breast, being
contiguous to the Artery Aorta, and to the Spina, perforating t^^ Midriff; this
some Latins do call Gula, the Servant or Steward of Meats; the Arabians Meri,
the Greeks call it (...), as it were Ferens comesta, carrying things ab (...)
fero; and (...) Edo.
that are eaten.

This member being included descends directly unto the fourth Spondile of the
Breast, afterward it is a little obliqued to the right side, giving place to
the Aorta descending, lest the motions of the Aorta should hinder things
swallowed, and when it is not much distant from the Midrist it is a little
lifted up, lest it should compress the Vein Chilis, and that it might be the
better fastened for the sustaining of the aforesaid descending Nerves, after
that about the tenth Spondile it does a^^^n begin to be obliqued to the le^t
side, and so descends obliqued to the Ventricle.

The substance of this member is fleshy and pellicular, having in the inner
Pannicle long Fibers serving for attraction, terminated at the ^^in of the
mouth, and of the lips, and broad ones in the outer part serving for expulsion,
helping the expulsion to the lower, and also to the upper part, by contracting
themselves, and by that means the Long and the Broad Fibers do help the
swallowing, they also help Vomiting, and two Nerves do cleave to the Gula,
descending from the Brain, on either side one, from which the Reversives do
arise.

And the inner Pannicle o^ the Gula is thicker in the top of it than in the
bottom, and thicke^ there than in the Stomach, an^ thicker in the Stomach than
in the first Intestine, because there is no^ required a resistance equally
strong in touching of the matter digested, as of the undigested; and this
inward Pannicle is continued to the mouth, that the attraction ^^ meats might
be continual, by which means the Epiglottis ascends naturally in
swallowings* being drawn of the Fibers of the Meri, o^ Gula, by reason of the
strong Colligancy of them together; and from hence it is comprehende^ that the
Meri is a part of the Stomach continued to it with gradation.

The Epiglottis also ascends, witness Galen in his Book, De Voce and
A^helitu, because in all the inward part of the throat is tha^ Pannicle
involving, being fastn^^^ even unto the extremity of (...) mouth* and lips, in
which also there are long Fibers, drawing the Epiglottis to the upper parts.

And there are some which say, t^^t the Epiglottis does also as^^nd
voluntarily, because it ascends when we will, and by that means it will have
its motion compounded of a voluntary motion, and a natural; but Galen thinks
otherwise in his Book D^motibus liquidis, holding that (...) Epiglottis does
only ascend naturally, in whose ascension the muscles of the Glotida do
necessari^^ draw it to the lower parts; and it may be those Muscles are not
moved voluntarily, because the Epiglottis in his ascent being d^^wn by the
aforesaid Fibers, ^oth draw the Glotida with it as other Cartilages; in whose
ascent the Glotida is necessarily deprest, because it is fastened to its proper
Muscles, which are united with their lower part toward the Tra^^^a, and with
their upper to the (...) it self, which do not (...) with the Glotida, and
therefore do draw it downward, and by that means also (not always voluntarily
is the Glotida shut in swallowing, by the ascension of the Epiglottis in the
aforesaid manner, whereby it comes to pass, that things drank and swallowed
pass not to the Guttur, unless in a time in which the swallowing does hasten
before the ascension of the Epiglottis be perfected, and then Nature expels
the things entered into the Cane with a Cough if it can; for it is reported in
the History, that there happened choking Plin. lib. 7. c. 7
to Fabius the Praetor, and, to Anacreon the Poet; to this, with the stone of a
Raison, to the other with a Hair swallowed in Milk; yet the Glotida is shut
voluntarily by its Muscles, when we will retain inspiration and respiration;
and in that manner the aforesaid Muscles of the Glotida do shut it, sometimes
by themselves, and sometimes by accident.

The shape of the Gula is ve^^ long, dilated in the upper (...) the Fances like
a trumpet; (...) is not like a Cane, for it is like a Gut, whose lower Orifice
is continual to the Stomach, where has notable sense by reason of notable
branches of Nerves ^^om the Brain terminated at it; its ^uantity appears; in
number it is ^^e member; it is fastened to the ^outh, and to the Epiglottis most
^irmly, so that one is hardly se^arated from the other, it is also ^astned to
the Throat through^^^, to the Heart by Arteries, to ^he Liver by Veins, and to
the ^rain by the aforesaid Nerves; ^^ complexion tends to hot, but ^ot
excelling, because it is very ^^nnicular; its helps are to carry ^^ings
swallowed to the Stomach, ^^d to bring back many super^^ous things from it, to
without ^e mouth; it suffers passions fall sorts.

He that desires with diligence ^o have the demonstration of the ^hroat, and
Gula, first let him see ^e ^^tuation of them, beginning (...) lowest part,
noting the ^ula, and as he goes upward let ^im ^ore the Colligancy of it ^ith
the Throat, separating them with a Falx, or other device, ne^^ unto the
Epiglottis, nothing the a foresaid Muscles, to some of which he shall see the
Reversire Nerves to be fastened.

The Muscles being seen, ^^ him separate the Gula in the ^^ of it from the
Epiglottis, and ^^ him note its Cartilages, notin^ also the situation of the
bo^^ Lambda, which with its two greatter additaments embraces the Cartilage
Scutalis, and with i^ lesser sustaineth the Tongue; aft^^ that the three
aforesaid Cartilag^ of the Epiglottis may be seen, a^^ the fourth Cartilage
united wi^^ fatness, and pellicle, called Gloti^^ by means of which is made t^^
shutting of the Epiglottis; afterward let the Tongue be cut noting its
aforesaid parts; and the^ things suffice for the Anatomy ^^ the middle Belly,
in which I have been prolixe, and not absurd^^ because these things are deli^^^
to learners.

Of the Anatomy of the upper Belly.
THe upper Belly is named Ca^ut the Head, Quia ibi sensus (...) Grecis dict:
(...) cavitate, Bauhin.
^^tium capiunt, because the Senses ^^e their beginning there, which ^^ Greeks
call (...), and the ^^ad for the present is taken for a^ that which is
sustained by the Neck, in which the Animal members are contained, that is, the
^^ain; of the former part of which ^ere is demonstration made of ^ome parts,
for the better orders ^^ke.

This Belly in a man is notable ^^ its contents, and it has parts ^^mmon and
proper; of the com^o^ some is before, some behind, ^l some on the sides; some
above, some beneath; the former ^^ is called Sinciput, the hinder ^^ Occiput,
the lateral Tempora, ^^ Temples, and the place of the Ears; and the upper part
is called Interciput, Vertex, and Cacumen, ^^ the lower is called Basis
capitis, the Basis of the Head, and of its members, whether the Head b^e for
the Brain, or for the Eyes, we have spoken in another place.

The parts proper, some are c^^taining, and some contained; the containing are
all the outwa^d parts, to wit, first the Hairs, which nevertheless are not to
be numbered in the parts of the Hea^ (unless unproperly) because they are not
members, but they are reckoned as a superfluity, sometimes profitable.

Secondly, is the Skin, which is gross, somewhat fleshy, th^^ the Hairs might
be well fastened i^ it, and that it might be a defense to the parts below it.

Under the skin is a little fles^ or none, except in the Fore-hea^^, and in the
Temples.

After the Skin and Flesh is ^ Pannicle compassing the whol^ bone of the Head,
called in Greek (...), and in Arabic ^^mocatim, and of some Zinzi^ matter.

After the Pericraneum follows the bone of the Head, called of the Latins
Calva, and Testa, and in Greek Craneum, or (...), (...) corneum Licophroni
autem (...) ab imperando.
because it is hard.

The things contained are the hard Pannicle, and the soft Pannicle; this is
called Pia matter, and ^^cundina, but that is called Dura ^ater; and above the
mouth, in the bottom of the Head, below the hard Pannicle, manifold use does
place the Rete mirabile.

Within the aforesaid Pannicles is the medullous substance of the ^^ain, with
its Ventricles, Glan^^les, Worms, and Nerves risen from the Brain, yet the Pia
Ma^^r, and the Dura, are of some pla^ed among the parts containing, ^ut the
Nose, and the Miringa of the Ears in like manner, and the Eyes also are placed
among the ^^rts of the Head contained, but not in the upper Belly, never^^eless
they are contained in the ^ead, and so the whole Face is contained in it also,

Therefore the Hairs are first to ^^ examined, which are engendered by reason of
the vaporo^^ matter raised up from the whole to the Head, as it were
overflowing by reason of the heat ^^ the whole body, and from hence are made
the hairs of the He^d called Capilli, made for their end because they are for
comeliness, as it pleases some, and that it might defend the Head from many
outward things.

The Skin of the Head appears of it self, this wants motion unless in the
Forehead, and the Temples, and it is therefore deprived of Muscles; it has
also little sense.

You shall (by excoriating the whole skin from the Head) see the Pannicle
called Pericraneum, every way made involving the Head, that the Dura Matter
mi^h^ be hung up in the Craneum by commissures, and by many other pores of the
Craneum; this Pannicle is also there, lest the Skull should meet with the Skin,
an^ the flesh of the Head without a medium, and that the Craneum by means of it
might be sensible, and that there might inhere to this Pannicle Veins and
Arteries, feeding the Head on the outside, and those which enter in by the
Commissures and other Pores, and those which go out.

After that Pannicle is the Bone called Craneum, which lay bare throughout,
considering the form of it, which ought to be round, that it might be of the
greater capacity, and less apt to be hurt, and it is lightly compressed on the
sides, making the Prow of a ship before, and the Poope behind, that its
Ventricles might be long, serving the better to the operations of the
understanding, and every form erring from that is evil, and by how much the
more it is differ^^g from that, it is the worse; this bone is not one
continual, nor hard and thick as are many other, but thin and spongious, not
very gross, and compounded with some Commissures or Junctures.

Nevertheless the joints of it are not knobby, but with teeth like Sawes, and
rough, because they are not moved, and the Skull is so that its junctures might
be stronger, and that if hurt should happen to one part, the other might
remain unhurt, and also that the virtue of a Medicine to be applied to the
Head, for an offense of the Brain, might the better work its effect; and that
the vapors raised up from the whole, and from the Brain, might the more easily
go forth and be resolved; and therefore the upper part of it is thinner than
any other part, neither is it very hard there, because hurt does not happen to
the top, as to other parts (yet fiery Mars hurts every place) and it is such
lest it should burden the body, but it is thicken in the forehead, because it
is soft there; nevertheless it has two tables, within which there is a notable
hollowness, lest it should burden the body, and that between them there might
be air implanted receiving the favors; and this part is softer than the rest,
because that which it contains is softer.

But the Bone behind is harder, because that which is contained behind is
harder also the Bone behind is harder, because the eyes cannot defend it with
their sight, yet it is thicker and harder in the sides, that it might be
shrill, because there within the substance of it the Organ of Hearing ought to
be placed.

Also part of this bone in the hinder part toward the Neck is thick, gross,
compact, and hard, and also on the sides behind the Ears, because there are
fastened strong Chords of the Neck, which have great and almost continual
motions; and behind the Ear are certain shar^ eminences called Clavales, and
Aculares, being very hard, to which many Muscles are fastened, moving the
members of the mouth, and of the face, and of the neck, which if they had been
soft should not resist the aforesaid motions.

And this Bone is also hard about the Temples, because there are great Muscles
moving the Mandibles, and therefore all those bones on the sides toward the
hinder part are hard as a rock, and are called Petrosa.

Also the lower part of this Craneum called Os Basilare is hard, chiefly in the
direct of the Palate, where the Optic Nerves are situated in the form of a
Cross, through which (perforated in that place like a Sieve) the moist watery
superfluity of the Brain descends, and this place is commonly called
Collatorium.

This Bone Basilare in the top of it is not smooth but unequal, which may best
be seen in Churchyard, as also other parts of the Head, and likewise all the
bones of the Body, to the seeing of which let not him have recourse, which is
not a lawful Physician.

The number of the Bones of the whole Head, and the names of their Commissures
I have very well spoken of in my Commentaries upon Mundinus, therefore I let
pass the declaring of many things for brevities sake, especially because the
Writers of them do not agree.

Part of this Bone happening first, is that in which are the places of the Eyes
called Frons the Forehead, which is terminated in the first Saw-like juncture
meeting it, which is called Coronalis, because (as it pleases some) Kings are
crowned in that place, or perhaps because this Commissure bears as it were a
Bow-like, or Circular and Coronal form, descending from the top of the Head, of
both sides, unto the corners of the places of the eyes, which are toward the
ears.

Right against this Bone is one other Bone terminated in the Sawlike juncture,
placed in the hinder part of the Head, which is called Commissura Lambdae,
because it is like to that Greek Letter which is called Lambda; this Commissure
has also the form of a Bow.

Between these Junctures is another Commissure also like a Saw, placed in the
top of the Head reaching from before backward, and this is called Sagittalis,
because it goes strait from every of the aforesaid Bow-like junctures to the
other, as an Arrow stands to a Bow.

At the sides of this Bone above the two Ossa paris in the walls of the
Temples, are two rough Junctures, on either side one, the lower bones of which
do ride over the upper bones.

The first three Junctures are called true penetrating within by a direct line,
and those last penetrating obliquely are called false.

Between those lateral Commissures ascending toward the Sagittalis, there is
also on both sides, one other rough Juncture which is seldom seen, unless in
heads macerated a good while, or boiled to the uttermost, between which and the
Sagittalis are two bones, on either side one, thinner than the other bones of
the Head, which Galen calls Ossa Bregmatis, and Avicen Prima primi calls it
Craneum, that place where the Coronal juncture is joined with the Sagittalis,
is called of some Bregma, and Zuendech, and Fontanella capitis, in which the
bone grows together in Children at the last; and there are applied Cauteries,
and Cerates, and other local Medicines for Catarrs, and many other Diseases; in
other parts of the Head also are many other Junctures, of which speech is not
made, because Physicians have not so much regard of them as of the aforesaid.

From that which has been said has appeared the situation, substance, and
shape of the Head; its quantity lies open, its helps and Colligancy are in
part, and shall be spoken of; in number it is one; the number of the parts is
spoken of, and also of the Commissures of the Craneum, whereof three are like
Saws, penetrating directly inward, the rest are like Scales, pe^etrating
obliquely.

Its complexion is the complexion of the parts compounding it; it suffers
passions of all sorts, which if they be in the coverings, and in the Brain it
self are judged ill, more or less, according to the place and quality of the
Disease.

Of the Dura Matter.
THe aforesaid parts being seen, Meniux dicta, ex rotunditate, a (...) luna.
(that the parts contained within the Skull may be more fitly seen) divide the
Head from the Neck about the third Spondile; after that cut the Skull a little
above the Ears (unto the inward circumference of it round about, so that you
may not hurt the Dura Matter) keeping always the aforesaid situation.

This being done, lift up the whole upper bone cut from its lower part with
some Elevatory fit and strong, because it is most firmly fastened to the Dura
Matter on every side, as well in the Commissures as in many other pores of it.

The Skull being lifted up, you shall see the Dura Matter, called also Miringa,
which is a pannicle somewhat thick, sinowy, and strong, yet it is porous, that
the vapors may go forth from the Brain; its figure is plain, extended into a
circular form, comprehending within it the whole medullous substance of the
Brain, with the Pia Matter.

The Dura Matter is doubled from the Prow to the Poop according to the length,
and in the direct of the Commissure Sagittalis, within the substance of the
Brain, for the quantity of two inches, dividing the right part from the left;
it is also doubled behind according to the breadth, dividing the hinder part of
the Brain from the former; this second Duplication is n^^ fastened together as
the other (...), because the first is joined together by some Ligaments, and by
(...) Veins, so that in it there is a hollowness apt to hold any thing within
it self, and within that hollowness from before to behind, are many Veins
ascended from the aforesaid Guidez, which are there compressed of the aforesaid
Duplication, and being compressed they do press out blood unto many little
Branches of them, which are continual with the branches of the Pia Matter
nourishing the Brain.

Toward the hinder part, in that doubling is a certain hollowness called
Lacuna, and Platea, and Fovea, and Palmentum, into which part of this blood is
pressed, and there is almost always some blood there; for which Erophilus
called that trench the third Vein, because this hollowness is very long as a
Vein; and elsewhere Chords, as in Veins and Arteries; and in that trench there
is not found blood under the form of blood; and Avicen calls that doubling
Torc^lar. Its quantity, situation, Colligancy, and complexion do appear; in
number it is one ^annicle; it helps besides the aforesaid, are to cloth the
Brain with the Pia Matter, according to its length, breadth, and depth, only by
compassing, and by peircing into it, as it appears before; it also helps by
mediating between the hard Bone, and the Pia Matter which is very soft.

It also helps in supporting the Veins which nourish the Brain, and the
members near unto it; it suffers passions of all sorts, its notable solution
is evil.

Of the Pia Matter.
UNder that is another thin Membrane woven throughout Pia vel lenis matter quae
media est inter duram matrem and cerebrum, ut dura inter eam and craneum.
with very subtle Arteries and Veins, being immediately fastened ^o the Brain,
called Pia Matter, and Secundina, because it nourishes the Brain, as the
Secundina does the young one; and in my opinion in those little Branches of
Arteries every where dispersed in ^he Pia Matter, the blood or vital spirit is
made subtle and prepared, that in the substance of the Brain, and in the
Ventricles it may be made animal, as we have said in our Commentaries upon
Mundinus.

This Membrane is sinowy and thin, and is fastened to the Dura Matter in the top
of it, from the Prow to the Poop by many little Veins, and with some Veins
about the sides of the Head, and it is fastened through the whole substance of
the Brain which it nourishes; and according to the truth, the two Worms placed
within the Ventricles of the Brain, do draw their beginning from those Veins
and Arteries, of which the spirit is carried to within the Ventricles, and also
blood nourishing the inward parts of the Brain; in the walls also of the
Ventricles is some portion of the Pia Matter carrying blood and spirit, blood
for the nourishing of the parts near unto it, but spirit for the operations of
the Soul, as the aforesaid Worms do.

From that which has been said, do appear its substance, shape, number,
Colligancy, and situation, and its quantity appears, which enters notably,
not only into the Brain without, but also within the Ventricles, and in many
foldings or turnings, although some may say that the Pia Matter is not in the
hinder Ventricle, by reason of the hardness of its substance, nevertheless this
part is nourished, and therefore it has Veins although but little ones; its
native complexion is cold and dry; its helps appear; it suffers passions of
all sorts, which are worse than in the Dura Matter.

^f the Marrow of the Brain.
AFter the Pia Matter does occur the substance of the Brain, ^^lled unproperly
Medulla, or Medulla quia in medio ossis vel quod madefaciat ossa.
Marrow, because it does not nourish or moysten the bones near unto it, as the
Marrow of other ^ones, but the bones of the Head are nourished that they may
conserve that.

Its substance is to be seen, softer before, and above, than behind and below;
in quantity it exceeds the quantity of the Brain of other living Creatures,
as well by reason of the multitude of the animal spirits, as also that by its
cold and moist complexion it might contemperate them, which come very hot from
the Heart.

Its situation appears, and also its shape, which is such above, and
throughout, as is the form of the Skull, nevertheless it has many manifest
foldings at the first sight, and also many hidden which are seen in the
dissection of it, within which the Pia Matter annexed to it does enter the (...)
out; its Colligancy appears, and will appear by the knowledge of its Nerves.

In number it is one member yet it has two parts which are not altogether
separated from one another, but notably united.

One part notably exceeding the other in greatness, is from before unto behind,
filling the whole hollowness of the Skull before, and in the middle from the
top to the bottom, and behind it fills only the highest part of the Skull,
being also in the direct of the greatest part of the Bone Lambda, and this part
is called the former Brain.

The other part far less than the first, called of Aristotle Cerebellum, and
more solid than the first, fills up the hinder and lower part of the Head,
and this has its place in the hinder part of the Head, under the first part
aforesaid; but in this hinder part of the Brain called Cerebellum, there is not
any concavity, or ven^^^^e (as many note) It is well ^^^^red every where of the
Dura and Pia Marer, and the sense shows all these things; the first part
aforesaid is notably divided of the Dura and Pia Matter into two parts,
according to the length of the Head, that is, into the right and left part,
that its substance and its Ventricles might be distinct and doubled.

First therefore, remove diligently with a Razor in the other of the sides of
that Duplication, side-ways according to the top and bottom) the Pia Matter,
together with a notable quantity of the Brain, going down for the space of
three fingers more or less, according as you shall find the Ventricles of it.

For in every side of that doubling you shall find one notable hollowness
called a Ventricle, which is extended long-ways, somewhat obliqued, descending
toward the hinder part of the sides.

One side being seen, see likewise the other, in which you shall see the very
same as in the former; and these Ventricles are divided from the substance of
the Brain, that if hurt should happen to one part, it might not happen to the
other; and the operations of the one part of those Ventricles are like unto the
other fellow to it.

In that Ventricle on both sides is one pellicular red substance called Vermis
the Worm, compounded of Veins and Arteries, which reaches from one end to the
other of each Ventricle, which has motion (according to some) voluntarily
opening and shutting the Ventricles.

Beneath those Worms at the sides of them is a certain eminent part of the
Brain, which many do liken to men's Buttocks in shape, which in the lengthning,
and in like manner in the shutting of the Ventricles do touch one another, but
in the shortning and opening of them they are separated one from another.

In those aforesaid Ventricles, in the former part of them there is commonly
placed Fantasy, Common Sense, and the Imagination.

The aforesaid things being seen, remove a notable part of the Marrow of the
Brain, that the other hollownesses of the Brain may be more diligently seen,
noting in the foremost Basis of the two aforesaid hollownesses one hole, which
is common to the aforesaid cavities, by which the spirit, and also some
Humidities contained in them, do by descending go forth to a certain
hollowness reaching toward the Bone Basilare, about that place where there is a
certain glandulous flesh under the crossing of the Optic Nerves.

This hollowness is called of Mundinus, Lacuna; of Avicen, Cap^t Rosae, and of
others Embotum, because it is broad above, narrow below, every where compassed
of a thin pannicle unto the Bone Basilare, and by that Embotum to the aforesaid
bone (pierced there with very small pores as a Sieve) are the superfluous
moystures of the Brain for the most part emptied, which afterward in many
turnings of the Bone Basilare placed above the bone of the Palate, are thickened
of the air drawn by the Nostrils, and of the natural heat, and at length are
sent forth by the Nostrils and Mouth, by means of the Jaws, in that form which
is known to all, having by reason of diverse causes a diverse substance, color,
quantity, and figure; from that which has been said, does appear the helps of
the Brain, which nevertheless are of one sort from Aristotle, and of another
from Galen and his followers, which see; it suffers passions of all sorts;
its solution is deadly, not always but for the most part.

About that Embotum toward the hinder part, also under the aforesaid Ventricle,
or Ventricles, there is a certain hollowness somewhat long, whose walls are
like unto the aforesaid Buttocks, which shut and open that hollowness when
there is need, either from the motion of the aforesaid worms which are
immediately above them, or from another motion caused of the spirits.

And that hollowness Authors do commonly put for the middle Ventricle, in
which they say that the Cogitative virtue is. In the hinder part of this middle
Ventricle is a little hole which reaches to one other hollowness, which is
descending toward the place where the beginning of the Nuca is; and this
hollowness is not in the aforesaid Cerebellum, as many think, neither is it
compassed every where of the medullous substance of the Brain, but it is placed
between the hinder and former Brain, compassed notably toward the Cerebellum of
the Pia Ma^^r covering it.

And between that last hollowness; and the aforesaid middle Ventricle, is a
certain glandulous flesh, called Conarium, because it is in the form of a Cone,
or Pine apple; this glandule there does sustain many Veins of the Pia Matter,
ascending toward the Center of the Brain, that they may nourish it; and this
Glandule does strain the superfluous Humidities to the aforesaid middle
Ventricle, from which they are purged, forth to the aforesaid Embotum; and from
thence as it appears above.

In that hollowness spoken of in the last place, which is behind the middle
Ventricle, being called the hinder Ventricle, Authors do commonly place the
Memorative Virtue, but I think otherwise.

And I say first, that the Apprehensive, Cogitative, and Memorative Virtue are
in the first of those Cavities placed for the former Ventricle, as well in the
right as in the left, and the Apprehensive or Common Sense is in the former
part of it, and the Cogitative in the middle, but in the hinder part of it is
the Memorative.

And I say, that the aforesaid Ventricle, which Authors put for the middle
Ventricle, is not for the Cogitative Virtue, but is a way for the purging out
of many superfluities of the Brain, and for the carrying of spirits to the
aforesaid third Ventricle, which spirits serve not to the Memorative Virtue,
but to the Motive and Sensitive Virtue, which come from the aforesaid first
Ventricle and are serving to the Common Sense, and from hence it is
comprehended that the Nuca has vertually its beginning from the former part of
the Brain, and also that the Nuca does substantially arise from the former part
of the Brain, as well from the color of it, as also from the continuation;
(which is nevertheles continued also with the Cerebellum placed behind) yet it
has greater direction, and also Colligancy with the Brain, than with the
aforesaid Cerebellum.

But we have spoken these things better, and more fully, in our Commentaries
upon Mundinus.

Of the Nerves proceeding from the Brain.
AFter the aforesaid things are to be seen the Nerves proceeding from the
Brain, which are (...) ex (...), Nuto, and flectomotus est flexionis
instrumentum.
commonly seven pair, of every pair there is on either side one like to its
fellow; and a Nerve called in Greek (...), or (...), i^ consimular member,
white, viscous in substance, long and round in shape, fast and hard to
separate, the Organ of Sense and motion, and the pure sensitive^ ^^e softer,
and colder than the motives.

Therefore take away the Brain lightly, beginning from the former part, and you
shall find in the direct of the upper part of the Nose two white long
substances, on either side one, cleaving to the Pia Matter, the heads of which
are somewhat gross, wherefore they are called of many Carunculae Ma^^llares, or
fleshy Teats, and they are the instruments of the Sense of Smelling, which
Galen calls not Nerves, because they are soft; in the direct of them the
pannicles of the Brain, and the Os frontis are perforated as a Sieve, as well
for the smells as for the purging out superfluities of the Brain in
necessities, because for the most part they are purged forth by the Colatory,
which is in the direct of the ^^oresaid Embotum; and there be^^re in the Skull
is a certain notable hollowness filled for the most part with air, in which air
the ^^^se of Smelling is first received of those Caruncles.

After the aforesaid Caruncles you shall see two great Nerves, which serve the
eyes for the sight, and these seem to be crossed, but there is yet contention
about this under a Judge.

After those is one pair of Nerves, which is placed for the second pair, and
these give motion to the Eyes.

After those is a third pair, which is a little while united to the fourth,
from which it is afterward separated, and descending it is spread by the Face;
and within and below the Bone Basilare it is united with the sixth pair to be
spoken of now; and together they make the aforesaid Nerves, descending to the
members of the middle and lower Belly, and from them do arise the Reversives.

Afterward are the Nerves of the fourth pair, descending to the Palate for the
sense of Tasting, and these are subtle; yet some take the third pair for the
fourth; and contrariwise, as we have said in our Commentaries, and there we
have declared the cause of that error.

After that there is the fifth pair, which is spread abroad on both sides,
within the bone Basilare, in the direct of the Ears, and serves to the sense
of Hearing.

After that is the sixth pair, which is mingled with the third, as it is said
before; after that is the seventh pair, which because it is Oblique, gives
motion to the Tongue, and also to some Muscles serving the Epiglottis, it also
gives the sense of Tasting to the Tongue it self.

The substance of these Nerves is known to all, yet the hinder are harder than
the former for the senses within; its figure, quantity, situation, number, and
Colligancy appear; in complexion they are not very dry, and therefore they have
not strong motions; and they ar^ cold by nature; their helps also appear; they
suffer passions of all sorts, all which are evil, because of their colligancy
and operations.

Of the Rete Mirabile, according to the common opinion, and somewhat of the
Nuca.
THe aforesaid things being seen, lay aside the whole Brain, Rete mirabile ex
textura mirabili.
with that portion of the Nuca which is between the Spondiles, which you cut,
and kept with the Head; first noting its situation, substance, number, and
figure; its Colligancy with the Brain is spoken of above; its quantity and
other things requisite unto it, shall be better observed from that which is to
be said; in the beginning whereof near to the Brain is a certain hollowness,
continued to the hollowness commonly placed for the Ventricle of the Memorative
Virtue, by which the spirits sent from the Brain, for sense and motion, do
pass to its Nerves; and the Nuca (as also the Brain) is covered of the Dura and
Pia Matter, as the sense does demonstrate.

Those things being noted, above there is only the Dura Ma^er, because by
removing the Brain the Pia Matter is also removed, by reason of the firm and
continual Colligancy of them together.

Between the Dura Matter, and the bone Basilare, in the region of the crossing
of the Optic Nerves, where the aforesaid Colatory is, there do ascend by the
Bone Basilare two notable Arteries, one on the right, the other on the left, as
it appeared above in the Chapter of the Aorta ascending; from which (as Authors
do commonly say) above the Bone immediately under the Dura Matter, are made
many very subtle branches wonderfully united together, one above another, to
the likeness of a Net, taking up a great place before, behind, and on the
sides; after this, of those many branches are again bred two arteries like to
the first, from which the aforesaid little branches are ^^de; and these two
Vessels perfect and great do afterward ascend again above the Skull, to branch
out even unto the Ventricles of the Brain, carrying spiri^^ to them made
subtle in the Rete mirabile.

And about that Net, some say, that there are two Glandules supporting it, and
they say, that the helps of that Net are, that a subtilization of the vital
spirit might be caused there, that being divided unto less branches it might
be the better altered, and the Animal spirit might be made; and perhaps that
its little branches might be more easily stopped, and might cause sleep, by the
vapors raised up from the meat, and made thick by the Brain, falling down.

Nevertheless that Net I never saw, and I think Nature does not work that by
many things which it can do by few; but Nature can make subtle these spirits
in the least branches of the Arteries, descending above the Dura Matter cleaving
to the bone Basilare, and ascending by the Pia Matter even unto the center of
the Brain; therefore this Net is not given here between the Dura Matter, and the
bone Basilare; many other reasons have I spoken upon this in my Commentaries
upon Mundinus, to which for brevities ^ake I referte the Readers, and Nasus a
(...) fluor: propter mucci fluorem; ut (...) a (...) fluo grae: sic Latin:
nasus a no, per quem excrement a flnunt and quasi emanant, quod etiam spiritus
innatet and enatet.
among other reasons, sensible experience is to me a guide.

Of the Nose.
THe aforesaid things being seen, the speech of the bone Basilare should
concur; but because the Anatomy of it, especially of the number of its parts is
placed diverse among Authors; and also because this Bone is better seen in
Churchyards, than in a Common dissection, therefore I shorten my speech
concerning them, and refer the desirers of this Art to our Commentaries, and
to Churchyards.

Let us therefore speak somewhat of the Nose, which for the present is taken
for that principal eminent part, which being set with an equal ridge on the
center of the Eyebrows, does distinguish and fence either sight of the Eye;
the lower lateral parts of this member Galen calls Alaria, they are otherwise
called Alula; its upper part is called Lepor, and Summum Nafi, the lower part
Inaum Nasi* the middle exterior part is called Columna, and the inner part of
it dividing the right side from the left, is called Septum porrectum, and
Interfinium Nasi, and some do call the lower holes of the Nose N^res, but for
the present the hollownesses placed above the Palate in the bone Basilare, are
of us called Nares, in which the moist superfluity of the Brain being strained
through, is made thick; of which we have spoken somewhat above.

The substance of the Nose is of Skin, Muscles, Cartilages, and Bones, and of
the Pannicle covering its bones; its skin is so united to its muscles that it
cannot (but with difficulty) be separated; its former and lower part is
Cartilagineous, but its upper part bony; its muscles are two small ones, but
hard, one on the right hand, the other on the left, more toward the lower part,
because both do arise from the balls of the Mandibles, and they move the wings
of the Nose to what part a man will.

After the Muscles are three Cartilages, one in the middle, and two on the
sides, which are softer than the middlemost, which is hard enough, that it
might keep the Nose (which it divides within by the middle) straight and
strong.

The Bones of the Nose are two, triangular, touching the Forehead, perforated
with small holes toward the corners of Tears, by which the Humidities in the
Eyes may penetrate, and from the Eyes into the Nose, and from the Nose into the
Month, and by reason of this the savor of Medicines put into the Eyes is
tasted of the Tongue.

And the Os front is in the direct of the Nose is perforated as a Sieve, that
it might serve for smelling, and that by them holes the superfluous moystures
might go forth from the Brain, passing first by the holes which are in their
Pannicles, about the places of the Mamillary Caruncles.

From that which has been said, is seen the substance of the Nose; in number
it is one member, but divided into two parts at the inside, that if one part
should but hurt, the other might be firm; its figure, quantity, situation, and
colligancy appear; its complexion is appointed cold and dry; its helps are for
comeliness, and for carrying and re-carrying air to the Lungs; they also carry
the matter forth from themselves, sent through the Colatory to the aforesaid
Caves, which Caves are for the present called Nares.

They suffer passions of all sorts, and their solution is easily consolidated;
in the lower end of it are sometimes applied Horseleaches for safety, and such
like; its proper passion is the annoyance of the Olfactive Virtue, which may
happen to it principally by reason of opilation caused in the holes that are in
the Bone ^^silare, in the direct of the aforesaid mamillary Caruncles. Palpebr^
a palpacid^ id est praetentando objecta, (...) grac: quasi (...) hoe est visus
tunicae.


Of the Eyelids.
PAlpebrae of Palpitando, of stirring, called also Genae a (...) genero ibidem
pili generantur.
Genae, are the pellicles covering the Eyes, known ^n all; their substance is
of Cartilage and Membrane, with a very little (and it may be as it pleases
some) with no fleshy part, the Muscles excepted, and it is Cartilagineous, that
the Hairs may be fastened in it, which stand strait, and hard, that they may the
better defend the Eyes; these are called Cilia, a Celandis Oculis, of covering
the Eyes; it is also Cartilagineous, because it better ^esisteth outward
things, and that it might stand upright when it is opened, because if it should
be pellicular it should easily be deprest, and it is covered with skin for
defense and comeliness.

In the upper Eyelids under their skin is a Pannicle proceeding from the
Pericraneum, which is turned inward, involving their Cartilage without and
within, even unto the tunicle Cornea, the conjunctiva being between covering
the muscles of the Eye, and in the lower in like manner there reaches a
Pannicle, risen from the Pannicle covering the balls of the Face, and by that
means it seems that the tunicle Conjunctiva should arise also from the
Pannicle covering the lower bones of the Face.

About that Cartilage which Galen calls Tarsum, there is some fat moystning
them for necessities sake, lest they should be dried up by reason of their
almost continual motion; the upper alone are moved, but not the lower.

And on either side their motion is of three Muscles, witness Avicen, whereof
one opens, which is in the middle, but the two others are in the corners,
which shut, yet Galen 10. De Vtilitate, cap. 8. seems to place but two
Muscles, whereof one is said to be in the corner toward the Ear, which he says
does open if it be moved alone, and the other in the corner of the Nose, which
he says does shut if it be also moved alone; and if both be equally moved
the eyelid is not more shut than it is opened, and this half shutting is
called of Hippocrates, Curva Palpebra, a crooked eyelid, which in Sicknesses
does infer an ill sign; and also Galen says in the same place, Cap. 10. that
he never knew the aforesaid muscle placed at the corner of the Nose, because
he saw great Cauteries to be applied there for Fistulaes, and nevertheless the
motion has yet remained in the Eyelids, which had not remained if the muscle
had been there.

And he does affirm, 11 De Utilitate, cap. 14. That the musculous skin of the
Forehead, and of the balls of the Face, by their motion is sufficient for the
shutting and opening of the Eyelids, and some do add with the help of the
muscles; but Aristotle, 2 De partibus Animalium, cap. 13. says, that the
eyelids move not voluntatily, but by instinct of nature; nevertheless it
seems to me, that they have a proper motion, and a common, the common is of
the Forehead, and of the balls of the Face; but the proper is of their proper
muscles, which have their Nerves annexed to the Eyelids, and to the muscle
moving the Forehead, and to the Temporal muscles, and to those of the balls of
the Face, but whether those Nerves should proceed from the Nuca, or from the
Brain, it is not perceived by sense; yet Avicen says, that in the upper
eyelid only there are Muscles, because they are nearer to their beginning,
that is to the Brain; which are small, and some say that they are without
Chords, about the situation of which some are disagreeing among themselves.

And the lower Eyelids are not moved (witness Avicen) because the motion of
the upper suffices for the perfect shutting and opening to one another; and
the lower are less than the upper, and more joined to the eyes, lest by reason
of their greatness, and the separation of them from the eyes, they should
gather in themselves bloud-shot, and tears, and other outward things, witness
Galen 10. De Utilitate.

In the substance of the Eyelids, in either angle or Canthus, toward the Nose,
are two small holes manifest to the sense, one in the upper eyelid, another in
the lower, by which the Tears go forth, and in that Angle are spongeous
fleshes which contain within them that humidity of Tears, that they might
moysten the members near unto them, lest they should be dried; and those
humidities do come sometimes from the Nose, and also from the Brain, by the
Veins of their pannicles.

The situation of the Eyelids, the number, quantity, shape, and Colligancy
appear; their substance is handled; their complexion is appointed cold and dry;
their helps are to defend the Eyes from small and soft things, but the bones
adjacent do defend them from great and hard things; and they help in the
causing of sleep; their Hairs also do help the Eyes, lest when the eyelids
be open, dust or other small things might hurt them, and by their blackness
they do strengthen the sight; and they are not very thick, lest they should
shadow the sight; nor too thin, that they might hinder small things to enter
into the eyes.

They suffer passions of all sorts; and among others they suffer the turning in
of their Hairs, which is cured by Cauterizing every Hair turned in, in its
root, with a golden Needle, afterward they are cured, as other places
cauterized.

Of the Anatomy of the Eyes.
THe Eyelids being seen, the Eyes do occur, called Ocnli Oculi ab occulendo
Varroni, quod ciliorum teguminibus, sen palpebris (ut Lactantius de opificio)
occulantur.
ab occultando of hiding, for they are hid between the Eyelids; for the seeing
of which, first cut the Os front is in the direct of them, so that at length
you may see the other of them, in the manner hereafter to be spoken, noting
first its Nerve, which is called Opticus, which by perforating the tunicles of
it reaches toward its center; and between the Conjunctiva, and Cornea, there
is a notable fatness and glandulous flesh taking up the humidities, as the
glandulous flesh of the root of the Tongue does, which it streameth out
sometimes by the Nose, and by the holes which are in the eyelids spoken of
before, by means of which, as well by the fatness as by the humidities the Eyes
are kept from drying up.

There are also its proper Muscles which are seven, whereof one moves upward,
another downward, and one other toward the right hand, another toward the left,
and two reaching overthwart do move circularly, but the seventh is near the
Optic Nerve, which it does sustain and elevate, and defends it from
relaxing, whilst the eyes are fixed in a continual beholding, and therefore
this alone fastneth the Eye; some do say, that that muscle is doubled, and
some that it is trebled, and all these muscles have their Nerves from the
second pair of the Nerves of the Brain.

The aforesaid things being seen, separate the muscles, the aforesaid fat, and
likewise the glandulous flesh from its pellicles, which are really four, yet
they are commonly appointed seven, which do differ somewhat in substance,
situation, color, shape, and quantity, and in complexion, but in Colligancy
they do not differ; they do also differ somewhat in their helps.

In those Pellicles which are called the Membranes, and Tunicles of the Eyes,
there are three Humors, yet some do add a fourth which they call Aethercus,
or the Airy Humor.

Therefore of those Tunicles beginning before, the Conjunctiva does first
occur; so called, because it joyneth the Eye to the Head; and this proceeds
from the Pericraneum, and from the Pannicle of the Bones covering the lower
bones of the Face about; but it proceeds immediately from the innermost
pellicle of the Eyelids, risen from the aforesaid Pannicles; it does also
somewhat proceed from the Pericraneum covering the orbs of the Eyes, and this
alone is truly one Tunicle.

Nevertheless the Conjunctiva does not cover the whole Eye before; but in the
place where that fails, before the Eye in the middle is the second Tunicle,
which because it is clear as a horn, is named Cornea, this (according to some)
has four slender Tunicles, as it is found in its Ulcers.

To this Cornea toward the hinder part is one Pannicle not bright, but obscure
and hard, therefore it is called Sclirotica, which covers the whole Eye
behind, yet this is bigger than the Cornea, and those two are of some placed
for one only for their Colligancy, because they both arise from, or are fastened
to the Dura Matter.

After them beginning likewise before there is one Tunicle called Uvea, and
Coronoydea, and Foraminalis, because it is perforated as a Crown, and as the
grane of a Grape when it is removed from that it hangs by, or the Cluster,
and its hole is called Pupilla; its color is various but often black, and
party-colored like the Rainbow, or of an Azure color.

To this toward the hinder part is fastened one Tunicle, which is almost of like
greatness as is the Uvea, and also of the same color, and this is called
Secundina; because that, and also the Uvea do proceed from the Pia Matter,
called Secundina; or as it pleases some, because this Secundina nourishes the
Eye, as the Secundina the young one.

Between the Secundina and the Uvea is the Humor called Albugi^e^^, which in the
direct of the Pupilla, comes even unto the Cornea, and there this Humor is
bright, more clear than in another place, and therefore some say that this
Hu^our is called Aethereus, or the ^irie Humor, and so do appoint Four
Humors; and because those two aforesaid Tunicles do arise from the Pia Matter,
some do say that those two are one only.

After those Tunicles are two others, one before, another behind, which is
bigger than that before; the former is called Aranea, the hinder Retina; Aranea
is subtle, but compact, more bright than an Adamant Jewel; Retina also is
subtle, but not bright as Aranea.

Between these are two Humors; toward the hinder part, and on the sides is the
Vitreal Humor, which is like unto liquefied glass, yet it is somewhat thick
and viscous, in the former part of which is placed the Christalline Humor, as
a Gem is placed in a Ring; the Vitreal Humor is far greater than the
Christalline, but the Christalline is harder than the Vitreal, and it is bright
as a Gemme; also those aforesaid two Tunicles do arise from the Optic Nerve
(according to Authors) and therefore they are placed for one, which
nevertheless, whether they be one or two, as likewise the rest, does little
concern the Physician; and the Optic Nerves are (according to some) notably
perforated, nevertheless the sense denies this in a dead Creature; we have
spoken of other things concerning the Eyes in our Commentaries.

From that which has been said, is seen the substance of the Eyes; they are
situated in their Orbs, that is in two great holes placed in the Forehead, and
they are not very eminent without, lest they should be hurt of outward things;
and for this cause they have the Eyebrows eminent without, and below the bones
of the balls of the Face; their number, Colligancy, shape, and quantity appear.

Their complexion by reason of the Humors is set down cold, and moist; and by
reason of the Pansides is set down cold, and dry; and by reason of the
multitude of the spirits is set down warm; their helps are known to all; they
suffer Passions of all sorts: their proper Passion is the taking away,
diminishing, and corruption of the sight.

If you cannot see all these things in one Eye, see them in both, at least see
in one the muscles, and the glandulous flesh, with its fatness, and also the
Conjunctiva; but in the other see the Tunicles, and Humors; yet a learned hand
does seek after harder things.

Of the Ears.
AFter the Eyes do occur the Ears, called Aures ad hauriendis vocibus, from
drawing Voices, Aures ab hauriendis vocibus Lactantio and Virgilio; alii ab
aura, quod sonus per auram defertur; aliia Grae. (...) vox.
or because they are Audit vocum, hearers of the Voice; and as well the
Cartilage of them as the holes are called Aures; their upper part is called
Pina, or Pirula, and Lobus, but their lower Fimbra, and Lobus, where there are
certain Veins flowing notably; if they receive solution, their inward part is
called Scaphus.

Their substance is Cartilagineous, that it might be safe from outward things,
and shrill; they are without motion for the most part; some do think that the
Memorative Virtue is in the lower part of them, therefore those that would
remember do rub those parts; the truth is, that that last concavity of the
first Ventricle of the Brain being doubled (in which I do place the Memorative
Virtue) does reach obliquely toward the Ears, and perhaps that by reason of
this the rubbing of those parts does help the memory.

These members are covered with Skin, yet they have some flesh very firmly
united to their skin; there is not sense in them, unless a little; their shape
is known to all; they are winding as Periwincles, that the air making the sound
might the better flow into them without violence.

Their perforation is in a bone more thick than any other part of the Skull,
within which is a certain hollowness, which a certain thin and solid Pannicle
does cover, risen (according to some) from the Auditive Nerve, which is of the
fifth pair of the Nerves of the Brain.

In the aforesaid hollowness, which the aforesaid Pannicle does cover before,
is implanted air, which receives the forms of hearing, which it gives to the
Auditive Nerve, dilated into the Pannicle, which is called Miringa Auris, and
then the sense of hearing comprehends the Vocal wave, and every other sound
coming to it.

And to this Pannicle within the aforesaid hollowness, are added two little
bones apt to be moved of the air there in the next motion, which in their
motion do strike one another, of which according to some, are caused all the
forms of sound more and less, according to the air moved without.

There are some which would have the aforesaid Pannicle to rise from the Pia
Matter, which passes with the Auditive Nerve to the aforesaid hollowness; but
concerning its beginning see our Commentaries.

For the well seeing of these things, there is required a learned hand, with
Tenacles, a crooked Knife, a Saw, and a fit Mallet, because the aforesaid
things, as well the Nerve which comes from within, as the Miringa, which is
toward the Orifice of the Ear, with the little bones, are seen with difficulty.

From the aforesaid things is seen the inward, and outward substance of the
Ear; its situation, quantity, shape, number, and Colligancy appear; their
complexion is cold and dry; their helps are known to all; they suffer passions
of all sorts; their proper passion is the hurt of the Auditive Virtue.

Of the upper Mandibles.
THe Ears being seen, lest any part of the Head should remain untouched, I come
to the Mandibulae a mandendo, cujus in action non parum adjuvant.
upper Mandibles, which are placed after the aforesaid members, for better
orders sake; those Mandibles have only two proper bones under the Nose, and are
divided by one only commissure by the length of the Palate; in which are the
Teeth, which are in shape, name, and number like to those which are in the
lower Mandibles.

These upper Mandibles are (according to some) compounded of twelve and more
bones, but improperly, because they do add them of the eyes, and Ossa Paris,
and those of the balls of the Face, and other bones, to the two aforesaid bones.

The substance, number, quantity, situation, shape, Colligancy, and complexion
of these Mandibles appear; their helps are those which are of the lower, and
which are of the Palate; they suffer passions of all sorts.

Of the Involutions above the Palate.
FRom the Fauces above the Palate, Palatum quod labiis dentibusque quasi palis
munitum sit, vel Palatum quasi palam latum.
to the holes of the Nose, is an ample way, by which a man continually breathes
to and fro; to this about the top are certain little Vaults, windings, or
caves, placed under the Colatory below the Embotum of the Brain; the bony walls
of which are subtle and pelliculiar: hence by the holes of the Nose, and by
the Fauces, the gross excrements of the Brain are streamed forth to the mouth.

For the well seeing of those, the great hole of the bone Basilare, by which
the Nuca descends, being first seen, and those Spondiles of the Neck being
well shown, which you took away with the head, divide the Bone Basilare with a
Saw, or Falx, through the middle, even unto the Palate inclusively, and you
shall see all the aforesaid things very well.

Of the Anatomy of the Extremes.
THe Head being dispatched, in a common dissection, the hinder part of the Neck
does first occur, called Ruffo (...) a (...) Tendo, sic etiam Lat. Tendo quiaix
capitis motu tenditur.
Tenon, and Cervix quasi Cerebri via.
Cervix, whose situation is from the Bone Basilare of the Head, even unto the
seventh Spondile inclusively, descending from the head downwards.

This part has parts contained, and containing; the Containing are the Skin,
the Muscles, the Pannicles, and the Spondiles.

The Contained are the Membranes covering the Nuke, the Nuca it self, with its
Nerves, Veins, and Arteries.

Of the Containing, some are without, some within; those which are without,
some are above, some below, and some in the middle.

The upper outward parts are called of some Fontanella Colli, and it is the
place where the first, and also the second Spondile are joined to the Head;
this place is called of Avicen, 4 Primi, Alchadam, in which are applied many
Cauteries for diverse dispositions of the Head, and there also are Setons placed.

Its lowest part is called of Avicen, Alchael, or Alchel, and the middle part
between these is called Nocra.

From Alchael, even unto the Alkadam inclusively, there are between every
Spondile actual Cauteries applied to Children, in preservation from the
Epilepsie, and it is a singular remedy.

Among the outward parts containing is also placed the Skin first occurring,
which is to be excoriated, that the other outward parts containing may be
seen, to wit, the Muscles, which in this Section are placed after, for the
reason spoken of in the Anatomy of the former parts of the Neck, which
nevertheless by the excoriating may be shown after a certain confused manner,
and casting them away, first noting the quantity, substance, situation,
complexion, and shape of them; the number, Colligancy, and helps of them being
omitted, which cannot be wholly comprehended, by reason of the diflection of
the head placed before, and of the former parts of the neck; which things being
seen, the bones of the Neck do occur, placed among the former parts containing.

These Bones are called Spondyli, and they are seven, which are more subtle
than the rest, because they must be light, lest they should burden the body,
and they are such because Nothos, called corruptly Nuca, is grosser there,
which by descending is always made more subtle, because it sends part of
its substance for every Spondile; yet the first Spondile united to the Head, is
grosser in the hinder part than the other six, yet it has a broader
perforation, and the greatest part of the Spondiles unto the Os Sacrum, have
wings and eminences, which this first is without, that the head might the
better be bended to the hinder part, and lest it should tear the Nerves going
forth from the Nuca near unto them; in that Spondile also toward the upper part
are two pits, in which do enter two pieces of the Bone Bafilare, near unto
that great perforation by which the Nuca goes forth; it has also two other
pits almost alike toward the lower part, in which do enter two pieces of the
second Spondile, although there be some that say, that those pieces are in the
first Spondile, and do enter into the second; the first Spondile is united to
the Head by strong ligaments, upon which it is bended side-waies.

After the first Spondile follows the second, which differs from all the
rest in shape, for this Spondile has in its top a certain additament, which
Hippocrates calls a Tooth, but of Galen it is called Pyroydea, because of its
sharp form, and this additament enters into a certain pit which is in the
first Spondile, distinct from the perforation by which the Nuca goes forth;
and by reason of this the Head is safely moved forward and backward, and round
about, or Obliquely, without the dislocation of the aforesaid Spondiles, which
would be easy, if the aforesaid additament should not resist it; because the
juncture of the second Spondile with the first, is looser than any other found
in the whole Spine; also the other junctures of the Spine of the Neck are
looser than those that are below them, and they have their bones Simenia,
forked and small, lest they should burden the body.

After the Spondiles of the Neck do follow twelve Spondiles, to which are
united on both sides twelve Ribs, and those are called the Spondiles of the
Back.

After those do follow five Spondiles called Lumbares, and Renales, that is,
belonging to the Loins and Reins, and there are the Kidneys, and two Muscles
called Lumbi; Avicen calls that Region Alchatim; and these are bigger than
the rest, and the place which is between the uppermost of them, and the
lowermost Spondile of the Ribs, is called of Galen Glutum, and of Homer
Acrusta, in that region is fastened the Diafragma.

After those Spondiles do follow three others, which are not Spondiles unless
unproperly, and these are called of Avicen, Spondili Alhavins, and of Averroes
they are called Ossa Agit, and of Galen Os sacrum, and Amplum; but this sacrum,
according to Galen, consists of four bones, with which the Ossa Ancharum are
continued, which are very firmly united with that bone on both sides, and by
the command of Nature they are opened, or separated from one another in the
birth; also those Ossa Ancharum are in such a time opened in the Pecten,
wherein other times they are also naturally very firmly united.

After those bones first appointed, three by Avicen, are also three others,
called Ossa Alhosos, and Caudae, and so in all the true and false Spondiles are
commonly in number thirty, of all which the substance is bony, with some
cartilage placed between their junctures, and they are all firmly conjoined by
Ligaments, left they should be easily dislocared by their motion. Their
quantity, shape, situition, and Colligancy is to be seen; their complexion
appear^th; their helps are to defend the Nuca, and its Nerves placed with^n
them.

They are also a foundation of the whole body; but the Spondiles of the Reins,
and Alhovius do principally this; they suffer passions of all sorts.

For the well showing of these Spondiles Churchyards are requisite, our
Commentaries upon Mundinus being somewhat helping; and that their inner
substance may be well seen, and in like manner their Marrow, commonly called
Nuca, divide the Spondiles through the middle from the head to the tail with a
great Falx, preserving as well as you can the Nuca, and its Nerves unhurt; this
dissection being made, you shall consider their Bones and Cartilage, and the
Pannicle covering the inward part of them, and also the Ligaments with which
these Vertebraes or Spondiles are united together; these being seen return to
the Nuca.

Of the Nuca.
THe Spondiles being showed, the parts contained within them, as well in the
Neck as elsewhere, Nuca vox Africa forte a nuce dici possit Nuca enim spondilis
includitur ut nuce nucleus.
are to be seen; the chief of whom is the Nuca, with its Nerves; the other
parts are two hard Pannicles, and one soft, that which is harder than the rest
cleaves to the bones, the other is instead of the Dura Matter, being also hard;
the other is soft, instead of the Secundina, or Pia Matter, all compassing about
the Nuca it self, and the Nerves.

The substance of the Nuca is viscous, moist, with some solidity, and it is
like to the substance of the Brain, but somewhat harder, and by how much the
more it descends it waxes the more hard; neither is it Marrow (as neither
the Brain) as some do think; its shape appears to all.

Its situation and place is from the lowest part of the Head* descending unto
the second uppermost Spondile of the Reins inclusively, and it does not pass
that place; but from that place downwards. The whole substance of the Nuca is
divided into many Nervs, which by descending even unto the last Spondile of the
Cauda are divided through them; the number and quantity appear; it has
Colligancy with all members unto which its Nerves do pass; it is also fastened
to the Liver, and to the Heart by means of the Acrta and Chilis, by certain
very little Veins and Arteries, reaching to it through the holes of the
Spondiles; these Veins and Arteries do perforate the aforesaid hard Pannicles
compassing it about, and do enter into the soft Pannicle risen from the Pia
Matter, by means of which cleaving unto it, that they may be supported, they do
nourish and give life to the Nuca.

Its complexion is commonly appointed cold and dry, but some think otherwise.

Its helps are that Nerves might pass from it to the members, not in so great a
distance as if they should come from the Brain, and that the Nerves might be
more distinct, not hindering one another, and that they might be drier, and
lest from their hurt the Brain should immediately be hurt; and also if there
should not be a Nuca, the Brain should be bigger, and should too much burden
the lower members; it suffers passions of all sorts.

Of the Nerves risen from the Nuca.
WHat a Nerve is, we have spoken somewhere else; Nervus Grae: (...) quod per
totum corpus diffunduntur.
not only the substance of them, but their shape and complexion; from the head
therefore descending to the end of the Spine of the back are Nerves risen from
the Nuca, and these are thirty one pair, and one Nerve without a fellow,
numbering them thus; the first pair of Nerves goes forth from the first
Spondile, one Nerve on the right, another on the left, as they are also always
in all the other Spondiles; and the second pair goes forth from the middle
between the first and second Spondile; and in like manner is the third pair
between the second and third Spondile of the Neck, and every Spondile
descending has one pair of Nerves correspondent unto it, either in the Orifice
of its fellow, or in the Orifice proper to its self; and the last Spondile
Alhovius, which is contiguous to the first of the three Bones, Alhosos, or
Candae, has its pair of Nerves, as likewise the Spondiles above it; but
between that and the first of the Spondiles Alhosos, is another pair of Nerves,
and by reason of that doubled pair there are thirty one pair, and one Nerve
unfellowed; because by descending between the first Spondile and the second
there is one pair, and between the second and the third there is also one other
pair, but from the last Bone which is properly called Canda, goes forth one
Nerve only; and as so there are thirty Spondiles true and not true, and one
Nerve without a fellow.

Their Colligancy is better known from whom than to whom, and they have
Colligancy with the greatest part of members having motion; their situation and
quantity appears, as also their number; the helps of those Nerves are to give
motion and sense; they suffer passions of all sorts.

From the aforesaid things does appear, that in a man's body there are thirty
eight pair of Nerves, and one Nerve, which in all are seventy sev^n, those two
excepted which go to the Nose for the Olfactive Virtue, which are not commonly
termed Nerves, because they are too soft; yet I call them Nerves, in as much as
they are the Organs of the sense of Smelling, and as so there are seventy nine,
whereof sixty three come from the Nuca, and fourteen from the Brain, or
sixteen, the Mamillary caruncles being reckoned with them; of which it has
been spoken above in the Anatomy of the Nerves of the Brain, which afterward
are terminated to infinite Branches, and Fibers, which sense does not
comprehend, and these are thus,

The Nerves coming from the Brain are seven pair, or eight.

The Nerves of the Nuca of the Neck are eight pair.

The Nerves of the Nuca of the Back, and of the Ribs are twelve pair.

The Nerves of the Nuca of the Reins, or Alkatim are five pair.

The Nerves of the Nuca of Alhovius are three pair.

The Nerves of the Nuca of Alhosos, with the two Nerves, between the Spondiles
Alhosos, and Alhovius, are three pair, and one odd Nerve going forth from the
Cauda.

The Figure of the Spondiles and Nerves.
IN this Figure you may easily see the number of the Spondiles, and you see how
from the substance of the first Spondile do go forth two Nerves, from either
side one, and you may note the number of the Nerves in the extremity of the
lines placed in that Figure.

Yet note (Reader) that the Figure has not a true similitude with the
Spondiles, except in number, but their true Figure is seen in the true
Spondiles dried in Churchyards.

Of the Anatomy of the Hands. Manus a manando quod ex Brachiis m^net, vel quod
boc instrumento potissimum actiones e nobis emanent.

THe aforesaid things being seen, I do first come to the Veins of the Hands
used to be Flebotomised; with which also we shall see the Cartilages, the
Marrow, the Bones, and the Nayls, the Muscles of such members being let alone,
which in a common dissection are not shown; yet the knowledge of Muscles is a
very great help in Surgery, witness Aver. primo colliget, and therefore
because for the present they cannot be shown, we will place in the end of the
Book certain Figures showing some Muscles, especially the outmost; we will also
place Figures showing the principal bones.

First therefore do occur two members placed on the sides, which from the
shoulders even unto the extremity of the Fingers are of Galen called the great
hands; these members (for the present) have three parts.

The first part beginning from the top is commonly called Adjutorium, above
which is the Spatula, which also of some is placed in the great hand.

Under the first part called Adjutorium, is the second called Brachium, and
between these is the juncture called Cubitus, but commonly Brachium is taken of
many for that first and second part aforesaid.

Under the second is the third part called the little hand, and it is properly
called Manus ab emanando, quia ab is it a part fere omnia artificia emanant;
because almost all Handy-crafts do flow from that part.

Between that and the second is one juncture compounded of very many Bones,
called in Arabic Raseta, and Ascam, and in Greek (...).

Those things being noted, you shall excoriate the whole skin of the great hand
with diligence from the Neck even unto the ends of the Fingers; and you shall
see, first the Vein Basilica, that is Regia, or Kingly; the Ancients before
Aristotle did call that Vein Jecoraria, and it keeps that name yet, because
it is commonly called Vena Hepatis, the Liver Vein; it is also called
Ascellaris, or Axillaris, because as it appears above in the Anatomy of the
Veins, this Vein passes by the Ascella, for Ascella is that hollow place on
both sides, which is under the shoulders in the lateral part, between the upper
part of the Breast, and the top of the Adjutory, which because it has no vent
in many does savor ill; for it is not vented, witness Aristotle in his
P^oblems; in these places is a notable part of glandulous flesh, which
receives some excrements of the Heart, as likewise the kernels which are about
the Inguina, and in the Neck about the Guidez, not much distant from the Ears,
which receive the superfluities of the Liver and Brain, and those places are
called the Emulctories of the Heart, of the Liver, and of the Brain; and those
fleshes are as it were a mattress to the great Veins placed about them.

This Vein called Ascellaris, and Basilica, descends by the inside and lowest
part of the Arm, with the Artery fellow to it for a certain distance; after
that the Vein is notably manifested alone about the juncture of the Cubite in
the inward part; and there is flebotomised, and helps principally for the
Diseases of the Breast, because it is immediately united to the Veins nourishing
its parts.

But from the Neck, by the outside, there does pass from the shoulders to that
Juncture, by the Adjutory, one Vein called Spatularis, Humeralis, and
Cephalica, which also about the Juncture of the Cubite is flebotomised, which
principally helps for Discases of the Head and Neck, because it is
immediately united to the Veins Guidez.

Between them is one Vein reaching over-thwart from the one to the other, from
which it receives blood indifferently; this is called Nigra, Communis, and
Media, because it emptieth from the members of the Head and Breast, and
consequently from the whole upper part, by which means it does also empty from
the lower parts.

And the Cephalica descends alone for the most part, directly even unto the
little hand, between the forefinger and the thumb, and is called of Albucasis,
and of Rasis, and also of me, the true Funis Brachii, and of Cauliacus, and of
Canamusalus it is called Cephalica ocularis.

This being cut helps in Diseases of the Head, by reason of its Colligancy
with the aforesaid Cephalica, and also by reason of its directness.

But the Basilica descending also alone almost unto the hand, by the inside,
and lower, is obliqued toward the outside about the little hand, which sends
forth branches from it between the little and the Ring-finger, and this being
incised emptieth from the Breast by means of the aforesaid Basilica.

Between those two Veins of the little hand, there are (for the most part) some
Branches between the forefinger and the middle, and between the middle and the
Ringfinger, which incised stand instead of the common Vein; but the branch
which is between the forefinger and the middle, does more participate with the
Cephalica, and that which is between the middle and the Ring-finger does more
participate with the Bafilica; and from the Cephalica above the Cubite by the
outside of the arm, does descend one Vein named also of many Funis Brachii,
which for the most part is terminated in the aforesaid Veins being on the sides
of the middle finger; and this Funis Brachii is not in use for flebotomy, yet
it may be incised in case of necessity, and it would carry from the Head,
because it is continued with the Cephalica.

There does also often arise from the common Vein, which is in, the bending of
the Cubite, one branch which does descend alone on the outside of the branch of
the aforesaid Cephalica, between the thumb and the forefinger, and therefore
some have affirmed, that that branch incised does help in the Diseases, in
which the aforesaid common Vein does help.

Many times also there does not any Vein descend from that common Vein between
the Forefinger and the Thumb, and this I have often noted, not only in that,
but in many other Veins I have seen them, and also Arteries, to differ their
situation, and in some individual theit branches are deficient, and in some
superfluous.

Many times also there is a branch between the Forefinger and the Thumb,
compounded of a branch of the Cephalica, and a branch of the Common Vein, and
then it emptieth from the Common Vein, and from the Cephalica, and more from
the Cephalica than from the Common, by reason of its greater directness; for
the directness of the Veins to the Members do make much for evacuations,
witness Galen in his Book De Phlebotomia.

And these things for the present do suffice for the Veins of the Hands, for
the well seeing of which the Figures placed below Place this figure between
352. and: 353: pages

engraving labeling the veins of the arm are to be considered, in which are
seen the situations, and some names of the principal Veins; the Figures follow.

The first Figures of Veins.
HEre you see in one Figure the Vena a veniendo, quod per eam sanguis veniat,
vel a via, and no, quod via sint natantis san guinis.
true Funis Brachii, reaching directly from the Shoulder even unto the
Forefinger, and the Thumb; which in the little hand is called Salvatella of
Mundinus; and of Dinus, and of Ugo, and of their followers Sceilen, which is
counted of Avicen for one branch of the Common Veins; and you see in both the
Figures how the Basilica is in the nearest part of the arm, and nourishes it,
and how from that, one branch goes oblique toward the left part of the hand
near the Juncture, and goes between the little Finger and the Ring-finger, and
is called Ascellaris, of Galen, and of his followers, because it is a branch of
the Ascellaris, or Basilica; and that branch between the little and the
Ring-finger, you shall see in the following Figure; you see also in those two
Figures, the common Vein, which is a branch between the Cephalica and the
Basilica, or Ascellaris; and you see how from the Common Vein one branch
enters into that branch of the Vein Cephalica descending, which is terminated
between the Forefinger and the Thumb, which of Albucasis is called Funis
Brachii, and also of others, as it appears above.

The second Figures of Veins.
IN these Figures is seen the place of the Salvatella of Mundinus, and the
place of the Salvatella of Rasis, and the place of the Sceilen of Avicen, and
the place of the Salubris of Haly, and the place of that branch of the Basilica
which is terminated between the little and the Ring-finger, which Vein Rasis
called Salvatella, and it is seen how that Vein which is called Funis Place
this figure between 354. and 355 pages

engraving labeling the veins of the arm Brachii, of Avicen, is terminated
about the middle Finger, in a branch of the Vein which is called Sceilen of
Avicen, and Salubris of Haly; in this Figure also is seen how the true Funis
Brachii is a branch of the Cephalica, which is terminated between the
Forefinger and the Thumb; and in these Figures, and also in the other Figure,
are drawn certain small branches which are dispersed through the muscles of the
Arms and Hands, and every Vein of our body has them, which at length are
terminated to Capillary Veins, and although every Vein drawn in those Figures
has them not, yet it makes no matter.

The Veins being seen at least in one hand, because that is enough, all its
Bones are to be laid bare, with which also the Spatula is to be seen, made,
that the hand might be sustained of it, and lest otherwise the Adjutory should
be continued with the Breast, because then the facility of the operation of the
hands one to another should be destroyed, and there should be caused a
straightning; and it was separated from the Ribs, for its strong motion; and
because being so placed, it might the better defend the members of the Breast
toward the hinder part; and it was on the sides, lest in its motion it should
meet with the Spondiles, toward which it is thin, and broad as a Splatter, and
therefore it is called Spatula; its part toward the Adjutory is gross, in the
hcad of whieh is a certain hollowness termed Pixis, in which is revolved the
upper round extremity of the Adjutory called Vertebrum.

The Os Spatulae there has two additaments, one is at the top and behind,
which is fastened with the upper Furcula of the Breast, and is called Rostrum
corvi, the Crows bill; whose help is to hinder, lest the Adjutory should be
moved from its place to the upper parts; the other of the said additaments is
within and below, which also does hinder the dislocation of the Adjutory.

This Bone upon the back of it has a triangular substance, whose Basis is
toward the hinder part, and its eminence is toward the inside, lest the
superficious part of the Back should be raised into a sharp point, and should
easily be hurt, in the extremity of which there is a Cartilage.

Mark, that a Cartilage is twofold; one which is altogether softer than the
Bone in any other part of a living Creature, and this is in the broader extreme
of the Bone Spatula, and in the Breast, and in the Epiglottis, and also
elsewhere in many places; there is also another Cartilage harder than that,
which nevertheless is softer than a Bone, and this is in the extremities of the
Bones of the great Junctures, which of Avicen is called Alaguahic; this
cleaves immediately to the substance of the bones; but the other Cartilage in
the aforesaid Junctures cleaves to that Alaguahic; and to the aforesaid softer
Cartilage, the Ligaments in the Junctures do afterward immediately cleave,
fastening the bones together; and these things are best seen in bones boiled to
the uttermost.

The Spatula being seen, see the Os Adjutorii, which is the greatest of the
Bones of the Hand, whose shape is known to all, somewhat crooked, in whose
hollowness, as in many other bones, there is Marrow, called Medulla, quia est
in medio ossium; because it is in the middle of the bones.

For Marrow (witness Aristotle, secundo de partibus animalium) is a nourishment
of Blood, and it is a concocted and contained excrement; and (Avicen prima
primi says,) that the bones are nourished of it; and hence is Nature known
artificial, which since She has not always Veins fit for the Bones, puts
their nourishment in their Pores and Concavities; and also if it be a
superfluity, She likewise puts the excrement in them, since She has not
another place fit for the aforesaid things.

The lower extremity of the Adjutory Bone has two eminences, with which it is
joined with the two Fociles of the Arm, making with strong Ligaments the
juncture of the Cubite; and in the hollowness which is between the aforesaid
eminences, does enter the extremity of the lower Focile, which is greater than
the upper, which is crooked, that the Juncture might be the more firm for the
continual (as it were) and strong motions of this Juncture, which for this
cause also is seldom dislocated; and if it be dislocated, it is with
difficulty reduced into its former degree; the Fociles of the Arm are also
hollow, because all Bones are either hollow within, or porous, that they might
be light, lest they should burden the body.

And the extremities of those Fociles, and of all Bones, and of the Junctures
of the Hand and Foot, are grosser than in the middle, because in the
extremities there must be great Ligaments for the strength of the junctures,
and in the middle they are small, that they might give place to the Bodies of
the Muscles, which must necessarily be many and great, for their many shaped
motion.

After the Bones of the Arm are the Bones Rasettae, or Carpi, which are eight,
for the multitude of motions* and also for other cause.

Afterward is the little Hand, whose inner part without the Fingers is called
Vota, and Palma, but its outward part is without a name (witness Aristotle
primo de Histor.) Its Bones are four correspondent to the other Fingers, (the
Thumb excepted) from which is compounded the Pecten of the hand, and the
Procarpum, or Procarpium, and Antecarpum, and Metacarpum, yet there are some
that would that the first Bone of the Thumb should be in the Raseta, and as
so, the Thumb has not but two bones; some say, that the first Bone of the
Thumb is in the Pecten of the hand.

After the Pecten are the Fingers; First is Pollex the Thumb, which has two
bones out of the Vola; after that is Index, or the pointing Finger next unto
it; next to which is Medius the middle Finger, longer than the rest; afterward
is the Finger called Medicus, and Anularis, the Physicians, and Ringfinger;
after that is the least, named Auricularis; these four have three junctures,
and three Bones; and also the Thumb in my opinion has three junctures, and
three bones, because I do not place the first bone serving it, neither in the
Raseta, nor in the Pecten.

In the inner part of the Fingers there is notable flesh, which is a coverlet
to the Bones, lest they should be hurt in their continual meetings of hard
things, which they necessarily touch in the operations of the hands; but in the
sides of them is less flesh, and less in the outward part, because in those
parts they do not meet with things hurting them in their operations, as within
the hand.

The Chords of those Fingers, especially the outermost, do enter into their
juncture above; and every Finger has a Chord, of which speech is not made for
the present, because their Muscles cannot be seen, whereof some are deep
placed in the arm, and some Chords come to the Fingers from the Neck, as we
have more largely spoke of the Ringfinger in our Commentaries upon Mundinus.

Therefore in the great Hand there are thirty one Bones (the Bones Sisamiis
excepted) which fill up some junctures; and first is the Bone Spatula,
afterward the Bone Adjutorium, after the two fociles of the arm, and eight of
the Raseta, and four of the Pecten, and fifteen of the Fingers.

In the end of the bones of the Fingers are the Nayls, whose helps are for the
comeliness of the hand, and for the defense of the end of the fingers, and to
take up small things; and the Nayls are engendered of superfluities, as also the
Hairs, therefore they do continually increase, yea in a dead man. From the
aforesaid things ^^th appear the substance of the ^^^ds; their situation,
number, ^^^pe, and Colligancy, and their quantity lie open; their complexion is
such as are their parts; their helps cannot be described, for they are the
Organes of Organes; they suffer passions of all sorts.

Of the Anatomy of the Feet.
THe Hands being seen, see Pes Lati. a Grae. (...). Quasi in ipso a toto
corpore cessatum fit Aristotele.
likewise the Feet, at least one, which is enough in that diffection, as also
one hand; the Foot therefore is divided into great and small, as also the Hand,
witness Haly and Galen; and the Foot, witness Haly, has four parts, the first
part is called Ancha, the Hip; the second Coxa, the Thigh; the third Crus, the
Shank; the fourth Pes parvus, the little Foot.

And first, the skin of it is to be excoriated every where from the top to the
bottom; in the inward part of which under the skin, is one notable branch of
the Vein Chilis, descending from the Inguen by the Thigh, which (...) it is
under the Hamme (as (...) have said above) is divided in^^ three parts; one
does descend directly by the inside unto the innermost hollowness of the Foot,
and this is called Saphena, which is cut in diverse diseases.

One other is obliquated toward the outside by the calf of the Leg, and
descends to the foreign or outermost hollowness, and this is called Sciatica,
or Scia, which being cut avails for the pain of the Hip; and the bifurcation
of this Mundinus knew not, neither his followers; and it may be that this
branch does avail for the pain of the Sciatica, because some of its branches
are united with the branches of the Veins nourishing the Muscles, and the
outward part of the Hip toward the juncture of the Sci^.

Between those branches in the Raseta of the Foot, are Veins common to both the
aforesaid branches; which sometimes are Place this Figure between 304 and 305
pages

engraving labeling the veins of the feet and legs cut, especially if the other
of those two aforesaid may not be found; which happens often, because as it
appeared above, the Veins do not keep the same situation, nor number, nor also
quantity.

Between the aforesaid Saphena, and also the Sciatica, under the Hamme, even
unto the little Foot, there does descend one notable branch, which keeps the
middle between these, which may be cut in place of the deficiency of the other
aforesaid; in the Figures under written, you shall see the aforesaid Veins, at
least the Saphena, and the Sciatica.

Here follows the Figures of the Veins of the Feet.
IN these three Figures you have all the Veins used to be flebotomised in the
Feet, and in that Figure which is in the middle you see how one Vein big
enough coming from the inner part of the Hippe goes overthwart, descending,
and under the Hamme is divided into two Forks, one branch of which goes by the
inner part of the Foot, or Shank, even unto the little Foot, which is called
Saphena.

But another Branch goes by the outer part of the Foot, which is called Scia,
and those branches as well inward as outward, are seen in the Figures on the
sides, which are flebotomised about the anckles, or about the toes of the Feet.

The Veins of the Foot being seen, the Muscles are to be removed wholly from
the bones; as also it is done in the Section of the Hand, for the same cause,
noting that glandulous flesh about the Inguen, which is the emunctory of the
Liver, about which does pass one aforesaid branch of the Vein Chilis
descending, from which the Saphena, and the Sciatica Vein are made; and in that
flesh the matters overflowing to the Liver are drunk in, as we have said in
another place.

The Muscles being removed, the Bones of the Foot do remain, of which that
which does first occur, from the upper parts, is called Os Anchae, which Bone
is on either side one; these two Bones are in the hinder part most firmly
united to the Os Sacrum, or to the bones Alhovius; but in the Pecten they join
themselves togeter, and these two Bones as well before as behind, are (by Gods
appointment) opened in Births; and these Bones are more crooked and large in a
Woman than in a Man, for the Birth; and these Bones have four names, before
they are called Ossa Pectinis, Penis, Pubis, and Femoris; and on the hinder
part they are called Ossa Anchae, and on the top and before they are called
Ossa Ilii, and Alharthapha, and below in the place in which there is a
hollowness, it is called Pixis, into which does enter the head of the Os Coxae,
which is round on the top, called Vertebrum; they are called Ossa Sciae, and
Acceptabulum.

To those two Bones Ancharum in the hinder part do adhere the Buttocks called
Nates a nitendo, of being neat and comely, and Sessus a sedendo, of sitting; in
those parts the flesh is thicker than in other members, lest pressing upon it,
the soft of the body should be pressed with Bones; and those parts (according
to some) have Colligancy with the whole, therefore they say, that Ventoses and
Horse-leeches applied there are instead of flebotomy; and they are dull of
sense, because they are little Nervous; and among other helps they do perform
rest to the body by sitting; they do also defend the Anus from cold; and they
are for comeliness, by hiding the place of excrements.

After that Bone or Bones of Ancha, does follow the Os Coxae, being a long
concave within, and unequal without, and more gross than any other Bone of the
body; hollow, that it might be light, in which there is marrow, as also in
other great Bones; and the juncture between that Bone and the Os Ancha is
called Scia; that Bone has two Additaments above, and two below, but those
above are greater, one whereof does enter into the aforesaid Pixis of the Os
Anchae, in the center of which, besides other Ligaments, it is most firmly
united with one ligament, Chordy, round, and hard, lest it should be easily
dislocated.

And their lower additaments are joined with the two Pociles of the Shank, in
the former part of which there is a smooth round bone called Rotula, and all
these bones are fastened together very firmly by Ligaments, and this Juncture is
called Genu the Knee, whose hinder part is called Poples the Ham.

From the Knce to the little Foot is the Leg, whose former part is called
Crea, and the hinder part Sura, in that part are the two aforesaid Bones which
are called Focilia, Arundines, Colla, Tibiae, and Cannae; those two Fociles do
differ in quantity, for the bone placed in the inner part, is longer, and more
gross than that which is placed in the further; and the lesser is not joined
with the bone of the Hip, but cleaves to the great Focile below the Knee, that
it might strengthen it, and that it might keep it straight.

Those two Focil^s toward the bottom, are terminated to one Bone of the little
Foot, which is gross enough, named of Avicen Os Cahab, at the sides whereof the
two aforesaid Fociles do make that eminence on either side which are called
Cavillae the Ankles; and of all these is ordained the greater of the junctures
of the little Foot.

The Foot also has a concavity below, and a unequal part above, which is called
Mons, and Altum pedis; and the whole Foot is compounded of many bones, whereof
that which first occurreth is the aforesaid Os Cahab, under which is Os
Calcanei the Heel-bone, which as one stands is declining toward the bottom;
before the Os Cahab is one Bone called Naviculare, after that four Bones of the
Raseta, to which toward the outside is united one Bone of the Sisaminum, after
that five Bones of the Pecten of the Foot; then are fourteen bones of the Toes;
in the middle juncture of the great Toe are seen also two Bones, Sisamia, or
Sisamina, so called because they are like to the grains of Sisamum.

And the Chords extending the Toes begin in the Shin, and those contracting
them are in the sole of the Foot, which Chords with their Muscles cannot well
be seen but in bodies consumed in the water, or dried in the Sun.

In the extremity of the bones of the Toes are also the Nayls, the helps of
whom are those which are in the Hands, this excepted, that they are not for the
taking up of small matters.

From the things done before is to be seen the substance of the Feet, in which
also are Cartilages, Albaguahic, and Arteries, as in the hands; their
situation, shape, quantity, Colligancy, and number appear; their complexion is
such as is the complexion of Organical members; their helps are to change the
place, and to carry the upper parts to the will of the Soul as far as they can:
they suffer passions of all sorts; the Figures of the Muscles and of the Bones
do follow.

The first Figure of Muscles.
THis is a Figure which resembles a Man flead from the skin, in which are seen
the shapes of the outward Muscles of the former part of a man, by which
Physicians are helped in knowing the Heads, and also the middle parts of the
Muscles, that thereby they might the better know to Prognosticate of Wounds,
Ulcers, and Apostumes, and that also they might know to make the incision of
Ulcers, and of Wounds, and other Chiturgical operations, without the hurt of
the Chords, which are the heads of the aforesaid Muscles.

place these.4. figures between. 372. and.373. pages

engraving set of images depicting muscles and skeleton 1
2
3
4


The second Figure of Muscles.
IN this Figu^^ are seen the outward Muscles on the sides of a man's body, from
which Physicians are made cautious in Prognosticating Aposturnes, Ulcers, and
Wounds, and in Incision, and in other Chirurgical operations.

The third Figure of Muscles.
THis is a Figure in which are seen all the Muscles behind, placed immediately
under the skin, which does perform the aforesaid helps to Physicians, and those
Figures do also help Painters in the drawing of members.

The first Figure of Bones.
IN this Figure are seen the forms, and situations, and also the true number of
all the Bones of a man's body, except the bones of the head, and also the bones
of the back; all the junctures of which cannot be seen, unless in bodies
boiled, or dried in Churchyards.

The second Figure of Bones.
IN this Figure are seen the bones of the hinder part of a man; there are also
seen two Skuls, in the right of which is seen the Coronal Commissure which is
in the upper part, and the Sagittalis is seen which is in the middle, the
Commissure of Lauda is also seen, which is in the lower part on the sides;
there are also seen the two Commissures named of me above in the Anatomy of the
Craneum, which are above the Commissures Squamosas being near the Ears, but
they are almost not to be perceived; on the left side is another Skull, in
which are seen the Mandibles, and part of the Coronal Commissure, and two
Commissures below, the Sagittalis being on one side, and there is seen one bone
of the two Ossa Paris which is from the region of the Eye, or from the Bone
called Domum Faciei, reach^ng ^^ace these 2. figures between pages.374.
and.375.

engraving set of two images depicting the human skeleton through the breadth
of the ^ead toward the Ear.

The third Figure of Bones.
YOu have in this Figure the number, shape, and situation of the Bones of the
Hand and ^oot; in the Hand are the extre^ities of the two Fociles of the Arm,
and eight Bones of the Ra^etta, and four of the Pecten, and fifteen of the
Fingers.

In the Foot you have the Os ^alcanei, and the Os Cahab, and ^s Naviculare, and
four bones ^f the Rasetta, and five Bones of ^he Pecten, and fourteen Bones of
^he Toes.

These are those things which ^or the present we have given to ^ur Scholars
for common Ana^omy, for the end whereof let ^im be praised which is three and
^ne, whom I most humbly en^reat that he may direct me to ^reater matters.
Amen.

And he which is not content ^ith these, let him have recourse to our most
wholesome Comme^taries upon Mundinus. Fare y^ well in the Lord, ye which g^ther
the Flowers of our Art aft^ the manner of Bees; for we d^ reject the
outrageous Reader, t^ rest we entreat and reverence once more farewell.

FINIS.

