HISTORICAL Applications AND OCCASIONAL Meditations UPON Several Subjects.

Written by A Person of Honor.

LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher, for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred
MAJESTY. 1667.

BOld is the man that dares engage
For Piety in such an Age.
Who can presume to find a Guard
From Scorn, when Heaven's so little spared?
Divines are pardoned, they defend
Altars, on which their Lives depend:
But the Profane impatient are
When Nobler Pens make this their care.
For why should these let in a Beam
Of Divine Light to trouble them;
And call in doubt their pleasing Thought,
That none believes what we are taught?
High Birth and Fortune warrant give,
That such men write what they believe:
And feeling first what they indite,
New credit give to Ancient Light.
Amongst these few, our Author brings
His well-known pedigree from Kings.
This Book, the Image of his Mind,
Will make his Name not hard to find.
I wish the Throng of Great and Good
Made it less easily understood.
WALLER.

To the Lady HARMONIA.
MADAM,
YOur Ladyship was pleased to encourage me to write Religious Meditations, and
therefore to you I dedicate the First Fruits of my obedience to your Commands
in this particular. Your Ladyship can experimentally say what high advantages
pious Contemplations afford: Some of which are a just Divertisement from both
worldly and sinful Employments, a great Complacency and Delight in the present
Composure, besides the satisfaction to our Consciences, the Improvement of the
Divine Graces in us, and a rendering our Souls always in an Harmonious sweet
temper, (in which your Ladyship does so eminently excel) being always in a
praying capacity, having a willingness to resign our Wills to God's in all
things, whether in Life or Death. If this way of applying all our Discourses
and Conceptions to a Religious sense were made more generally practical, the
Power of Godliness, as well as the Form, would so govern us in all our actions,
that in this present Age neither the Speculative nor the Practical Atheists
would dare with so much impudence to show their faces, nor maintain their
detestable Principles so horridly and dis-ingenuously as now they do; the Age
would then be reformed, and we should be good Company to our selves; for when
we converse with God, we are never less alone then when alone. Next to pious
Meditations, Godly Friends are to be made choice of for our Conversation, such
as is your Ladyship, who (without the least suspicion of Flattery, I dare
affirm it) may justly be styled the Beauty of Society, and Harmony of
Friendship; your Civility being so great, and Carriage so gaining, that you are
able to convert a Barbarian into good manners, and make a man of a reprobate
nature become a good Christian. Your Example I confess is easier to be admired
then imitated; Your Precepts adequate and proportionable to so great a Pattern,
and those delivered to your Friends and Servants with such winning mildness and
Concern, as if it were your duty to be more engaged for the welfare of our
Souls and good Names then we ought to be our selves. Madam, I need say no more,
but pray for you, that God would multiply upon you (who are both Good and
Great) and upon yours all Temporal and Eternal Blessings, and increase the
number of such Excellent Saints as is your Ladyship: Then we should enjoy a
part of Heaven out of Heaven, while we had our beings upon the Earth. I had
taken the freedom to have named you by a Title, you are more known by, but
that I feared your so nice and scrupulous Modesty would have reprehended me,
disowning my celebration of this just Character: And should I have given an
account of my own Name, it would not be difficult for very many to conjecture
to whom I presumed to make this Address. I am,

Madam, Your greatest Honourer and most obedient Servant, who, as an admirer of
your Virtues, am ambitious to deserve of your Ladyship the Appellation of
CONSTANS.

A Prayer.
O Lord God, I confess mine iniquities, and my sins are ever before thee,
secret as well as known sins. Create in me a new heart, and renew a right
spirit within me. Cleanse the wicked and damnable thoughts of my heart by the
inspiration of thy Holy Spirit; forgive my wicked thoughts as well as my evil
vile words and actions. Give me thy Grace, that I may not only leave sin for a
time, but that I may loath sin; that I may look upon Jesus Christ not only as
a Savior, which the very worst of men would be glad to do at their Deaths, but
as a Sovereign to rule and reign in my heart. It may be in vain for me with
wicked Balaam to desire to die the death of the righteous, if I do not live the
life of the righteous. While I live in the World let me not be of the World;
but be pleased to indue me with so great a measure of thy Spirit, that I may
make it the great pleasure of my life to do thee service, whose service is
perfect freedom. Make me humble, charitable and obedient, willing to do good,
not only to my friends, but to my very enemies, heartily forgiving them as I
desire to be forgiven, and returning to them good for evil: But, Lord, to my
Relations and Friends, return their kindness double into their own bosoms.
Take from me, good Lord, both in my health and sickness, all that sinful,
misbecoming Impatience which so much prevails over me. Let not the fear of
Death so much terrify and discompose my spirits; but so moderate my
Affections, that I may willingly and entirely submit to thy Divine will and
pleasure, whether in Life or Death, natural or violent: But I most humbly
beseech thee, Heavenly Father, to prepare me for a better World before thou
take me out of this: So prepare me, O Lord, by sealing to me a Pardon for all
my sins past, and giving me such an assured well-grounded Faith in Christ
Jesus, and such an application of his imputative Righteousness; that when I
come to die, I may have nothing else to do but to die, and to surrender,
though a sinful, yet a penitent Soul into the hands of a gracious Redeemer.
While I live here, give me Grace that I may have dying thoughts, that when I
come to die I may have living hopes. Grant I may live here in thy fear, die in
thy favor, and at the end of my days attain the end of my hopes, even the
Salvation of my Soul in and through Christ Jesus my blessed Savior and
Redeemer.

Amen. Amen.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

Our Father, etc.

Historical Applications, AND Occasional Meditations.
I.
THE Society of Gresham College is composed of very The most ingenious and
Religious Mr Boil, worthy Sr Robert Murray, the famous and eminently learned
Dean Wilkins, cum multis aliis.
ingenious and eminent Persons, whose Conversation is desirable in many
respects; their endeavors to improve Arts and Sciences Mechanical and Liberal,
their inquisition into the works of Nature, may be both delightful and
profitable to themselves and others. If this be granted, let us raise our
Meditations higher, and consider how advantageous it will be for us to meditate
of the God of Nature, to advance his Glory, expressing our Love to him by
singing his praises while we have a being here, which is the delight and
employment of Beatified Souls to all Eternity.

II.
LEt us consider why so many of us so often miscarry in the Designs and actions
of this Life, even when we have most confidence and assurance. The Reason is
very obvious: We place too much trust in secondarie Causes, and in the son of
man, whose breath is in his nostrils; but in the beginning of every enterprise
neglect to implore the Divine assistance, and wholly to rely upon his Wisdom,
with an humble and dutiful acquiescence in his will, whether he shall please
to blast our purposes, or to prosper the action, God knowing what is better for
us then we do for our selves: If so, we are sure our Designs and endeavors
will be successful, or we shall have as much reason to be satisfied as if they
were, being free from all repining, murmuring thoughts, because we submit to
his Providence who is the sole disposer of all persons, actions and times,
which is the happy privilege as well as duty of a Christian.

III.
O Lord, I confess, because I slept unquietly the last night, (being troubled
with melancholic Dreams) and found my body indisposed this morning, I was more
discomposed in my mind, then when I have wilfully offended thy Divine Majesty
by sinning against thee; thus sinfully preferring the health of my Body before
the quiet and tranquillity of my Soul, perishing things before eternal. I
beseech God to forgive me this and all other my offenses; and, for the time to
come, give me grace that I may be but little concerned for my Body, making it
my great interest (as it ought to be) to take care for the eternal welfare of
my Soul; which is best secured by a good employment of my Time and Talent,
looking upon it not only as the Design and business of my life, but to be my
greatest pleasure and delight, to do thee service, in whose service is perfect
freedom.

Amen.
IV.
O Lord, how short and momentany is this Life in respect of Eternity! and yet
what great care do we take to provide for the things of this Life, as if all
our Eternity were here, and not hereafter! However, we must look upon Death,
which is natural, and must come, it may be to morrow, as the greatest Good to
us which is to be desired, or as the greatest Evil to be feared. Fear it we
may, but we cannot avoid it; and therefore it is in vain to be transported with
a foolish fear, which disquieteth our thoughts, but no way secures us from what
we fear, but by arming against it, which thus a good Christian ought to do: To
arm himself by putting on the Breast Plate of Righteousness, and flying for
Sanctuary to him who has had victory over death, by a lively Faith in his
Merits: Then the King of Terrors cannot be able to hurt us; but will do us
great service, in giving us a passage to the enjoyment of a blessed
Immortality, where we shall enjoy rest and ease and happiness unspeakable,
such as Ear has not heard, nor Eye has seen, neither has it entered into the
Heart of man to conceive. To which place God of his mercy bring us, for his
sake who has so dearly bought us, our blessed Savior Christ Jesus.

Amen.
V.
MY Soul and Body are two great Friends, having been Companions many years, and
therefore are unwilling to part: But let us consider, Friends are most sad, who
fear, when they are parting, they shall never meet more. But, O my Soul, it is
certain at the last day there must be a conjunction between thee and my Body;
though you part for a season, yet when you meet again after this life, you
shall never part more. Therefore be not dejected to separate when the Body
dies, which must of necessity be, according to the inevitable decree of Nature,
nay of the God of Nature: but be careful so to demean your selves while you
both live together here, that you may both part willingly, and meet joyfully,
hoping for a blessed Immortality; which God of his infinite mercy grant, for
Christ Jesus his sake.

Amen.
VI.
IT is said of Plutarch, that he should say of himself, It were better there
had never been such a man as Plutarch, then that they should justly report him
unmercifull and unjust. It was a worthy saying of an heathen, and might well
become the meditation of a Christian. There are many who go under the notion
and profession of Christians; few are really such comparatively: but better
were it we never were born, then that we should be Christians only in
profession, not in practice, having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power
of it in our lives and conversations: For then we have cause to fear the
pronouncing of the sad Sentence, Go ye cursed, etc. for we have but little
hopes of finding Christ our Savior at our Deaths, if we do not own him for a
Sovereign while we live.

VII.
IT is reported in story of a great Politician at Rome, That he made it his
whole Design for many years to secure the election of his intimate Friend to
the Popedom after the death of the present Pope, who was very aged; and having
for some considerable time impatiently expected an happy issue to his so much
desired hopes, the Pope dies, his Friend succeeds: Now he accounts himself a
happy man; It is but ask and have, of what is within the Pope's power; and this
is confirmed to him by a solemn promise from the mouth of his Holiness. But
mark the unhappy issue: Whilst our Politician is considering what places of
Honor or Profit will be most grateful to his Ambitious mind, his Friend the
Pope dies too, and he finds all his endeavors are rendered fruitless. Upon the
news of his death he vainly laments his loss, and says it was not in his power
to secure himself against such a misfortune. Thus it fares very often with the
men of the World, who put their trust and confidence in Princes, and in the Son
of man whose breath is in his nostrils. If we wholly rely upon our earthly
Friends, when they die, we lose our expectation of what advantage their
friendship and kindness can afford us: But if we rely upon God, and secure him
to be our Friend, he will comfort us when our Friends fail, when they die he
can raise us new ones; he will be our Friend when we have most need of him, not
only in our lives, but at our Deaths, and continue so to all eternity. O what
an unspeakable honor and happiness is it to gain God to be our Friend! even
the highest frail man is capable of. It is our greatest Concern to make
Friendship with the Almighty. Was it not a great honor for Abraham, the Father
of the Faithful, to have God to be his Friend, and to be called the Friend of
God? I pray God we may have the like felicity, that, following Abraham's
example, we may rest in his bosom: which God of his infinite mercy grant, for
Christ Jesus his sake.

Amen.
VIII.
THere was a great contest between Apelles a famous Painter and another, which
should appear the better Artist; and as a trial of skill, Apelles drew Grapes,
which were so naturally done, that the Birds pecked at them, supposing them to
be real Grapes: The other drew only the lively picture of a Curtain, and
bringing it to Apelles for his approbation, he was desired to draw away the
Curtain, that his Picture might be judged of. He then concluded himself the
better-Artist; For, says he, Apelles deceived the Birds, but I deceived
Apelles. Thus with Art and cunning we may deceive birds, beasts, and men, nay
our selves; but we cannot deceive God. Let us therefore so behave our selves in
our words, gestures; thoughts, actions, as considering we are always in God's
presence, to whom we must be accountable at our Death and at the day of
Judgment; and therefore let us not dare to commit sin, unless we can conceal
our actions from his all-seeing Eye.

IX.
I Have heard of a Jury of twelve men, who being asked by the Judge whether the
Prisoner at the Bar were Guilty or Not guilty, before the Foreman could
conveniently make answer, another person who stood by said, Not guilty; to whom
the Foreman looking with indignation repeated his words, Not guilty? adding, I
say, my Lord, he is Guilty: but before he expressed the latter, his two first
words were recorded according to Law, and by this mistake the Offender escaped.
But at the day of Judgment the Guilty have no advantage by any possibility of a
mistake or accident; for the Judge is infallible and righteous, and the
Conscience, which is both Jury and Witness, (Conscientia mill Testes) will
certainly deliver true evidence, not being deceived in the least tittle. At
this Bar voluble Oratorie prevails not, neither can subtle Law-distinctions
any ways avail; but Judgment shall be given to every one in Righteousness and
in Truth, by him who is Truth it self, and cannot lie; whose mercy we had need
implore in our lives and at our Deaths, that he may not be severe to mark what
is done amiss, but forgive and pardon us for Christ his sake.

X.
THe Dog (in the Fable) having meat in his mouth by the water side, and
perceiving the shadow of it reflect (which he erroneously mistook for real
flesh) opened his mouth greedily in hopes to get it, and by this means lost the
true substance. Thus it fares with many worldly men, to whom God has given
meat in their Mouths, his blessings in a liberal proportion, Eccles. 6. 2.
(Riches, wealth and honor, so that he wants nothing for his soul of all that
he desires; yet God gives him not power to eat thereof) but they, not
satisfied therewith, seek to increase their wealth per fas and nefas,
ravenously coveting the shadow which is vexation and vanity, and neglecting to
improve their Talents to God's glory and their own good, and by this means lose
the true substance, their hopes of eternal welfare.

XI.
A Scholar of Socrates observing that many of his fellow-Pupills had presented
their Master with great and rich presents, which he was incapable of doing by
reason of his poverty, came to Socrates, and told him, he freely gave him what
was in his power, Himself, devoted to his service. The most acceptable Gift to
the God of Heaven is our selves, our hearts and affections: My son, give me thy
heart, says Solomon. Without this Present all others are vain Oblations,
Sacrifices which are an abomination to the Lord: He will despise us and our
Offerings, if they are not tendered with an entire, humble, dutiful and obedient
heart; which I beseech God to give us, that we may retribute the same to him
again.

Amen.
XII.
A Story is told of the same Socrates, that one day being in his School, a
Physiognomist came to visit him, and taking great remark of his face, plainly
averred, that Socrates was guilty of such and such notorious Vices; which
Accusation his Disciples heard with much impatience, and could hardly forbear
striking him, declaring that he was a silly fellow, and that he had done their
Master injury, for what he had said was very false upon their knowledge.
Socrates interposes, and assures them that what this Artist had delivered
concerning him was well grounded, and therefore they had no such reason to
blame him; for (says he) I have a great natural propensity and inclination to
those Crimes, which certainly would have had a great predominancy over me, had
not my Reason and my Philosophy prevailed over them, which was no small
difficulty. Thanks be given to Almighty God for his restraining Grace, that we
have not been actually guilty of those sins to which our particular natures do
so much incline us; that every single offense has not been the unhappy parent
of many more: and this is wholly to be imputed to God's goodness to us; for
our resolutions may fail us of doing good and avoiding evil, our Reason may be
blinded and deceived, Philosophy, both as to the Theorie and as to the
Practick part, may be vain and unprofitable: but if we are endued with God's
Grace, this cannot fail us. He gives us to will and to do of his good
pleasure; but the more we rely upon him, and pray for his blessed assistance,
the surer we are to find the happy influence and benefit of his good Spirit,
which will teach us to walk holily, penitently, soberly, not as fools, but as
wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil.

XIII.
IT was said of a good man, that he should confess he had been undone unless
he had been undone; meaning, that if God had not awakened his Conscience with
temporal losses and afflictions, and caused him to look into himself,
Prosperity and inconsideration had swallowed him up. God many times grants our
requests in denying of them, when to his Majesty these appear inconsistent
with his Glory and our Good; for he only knows what is best for us. In a
prosperous condition we seldom take up the complaint of that good Heathen, who
sadly said, O Amici, diem perdidi! O my friends, I have lost a day! because he
could not call to mind any good he had done that day; but lose day after day
for many years together, until at last we have not a day left to repent in,
though many a misspent day to repent of; and then we must know, though true
Repentance is never too late, yet late Repentance is seldom true.

XIV.
ALL Societies and Compaines of men, as well Merchants as others, who are
sober, industirous, wise and well-governed, conduce much to the advantage and
benefit of that Kingdom or Commonwealth in which they live; Rich Merchants
make a Rich Kingdom: But let the great Traders have a care, lest, while they
enrich themselves with worldly Treasure, they neglect to labor after the
gaining eternal Riches. If so, at the last they will be accounted unwise
Merchants, who have been guilty of a foolish Exchange, losing their own Souls
for dross and perishing dung. For what shall a man give in exchange of his
Soul? Lose that, and lose all. It was the saying of a pious Minister (Mr Dod)
that no man was undone until he was damned. Loss of temporal Goods, Liberty,
nay Life it self, may be gain to us, if we suffer for Conscience sake, taking
up Christ's cross: But he is lost without Redemption who loses his Soul.

XV.
IT is a constant custom among Merchants at Sea, that when they apprehend
their Ship much endangered by a violent Storm, for fear their Ship should be
overladen, and that the Goods in her should occasion the sinking, they fling
them overboard, hoping by this means to preserve their Ship, and, what is more
precious, the Lives of the Mariners and Passengers. I wish we were as
spiritually wise, that we had a discerning spirit when our Souls are in danger
of being overset by the wealth and cares and pleasures of this World; that we
may be more willing then the Merchant at sea to part with these earthly Goods,
lest they should endanger the sinking our Souls in the bottomless pit of
perdition. I pray God we may make a just distinction between Earthly and
Heavenly Riches, momentany and eternal; that we may esteem Godliness the
greatest gain, and not make gain of the pretension of Godliness.

Amen.
XVI.
IT is reported of the Primitive Christians, that when by a strict Edict of an
Emperor they were prohibited to meet and assemble together in their public
Worship and Devotions, they obeyed the Command: Though they were troubled at
the Imposition, yet they esteemed it their Duty to obey the Authority God had
set over them in all things wherein they did no violence to their Consciences;
which in this they were free from, for they were still allowed to serve God in
their private houses and retirements. This Liberty ought to satisfy the
Dissenters from the Church of England, in case no other shall be permitted them
by the Supreme Authority: for though I have been and shall always be willing
to promote, so far as lawfully I may, Indulgence to all honest peaceable men of
what Persuasion so ever, so far as is consistent with public safety; yet
until the King shall be pleased to give liberty for several distinct
meetings, it is the Duty, in my opinion, of all His Majesty's Subjects, to
obey His Proclamations prohibiting their Meetings, and most agreeable to
Christian Principles.

XVII.
IT is a Poetical fiction of Erasmus, that he hung, when dead, between Heaven
and Hell. There are many men, when alive, appear to hang between Heaven and
Hell: Some faint desires they have tending toward Heaven; at the same time
their evil inclinations and actions carry them into the paths that lead to Hell
and destruction: They are long in suspense which way to take, the narrow or the
broad path; but by not choosing the first, they must necessarily fall into the
last. In the ways of Goodness, whose paths are pleasantness, non progredi
est regredi, they that proceed not forward must go backward. Many who have had
good resolutions may be now in Hell. He that resolves to go a journey, is
never the nearer performing it by intending it, if he does not go the journey.
I pray God give us to will and to do of his good pleasure.

XVIII.
A Good man should have no other exception against the Shortness of our lives
but this, that there is so little time for us to enumerate God's Blessings and
Providence, and to return him thanks for all his Mercies and Benefits which he
from time to time so largely and liberally has bestowed upon us, who deserve
not the least of them. It ought not to afflict us that our time is so short to
recreate our senses and delight our selves in sensual enjoyments; for this is a
cause of joy: While we live here, either through wilfulness or humane frailty,
we shall offend God who has been so gracious to us; but the time is at hand,
when at the period of our days there will be a period set to our sinning; all
Tears shall be wiped from our Eyes, and we shall sin and sorrow no more.

XIX.
IT is said of a wicked man who dies full of years, Diu fuit, non vixit, He
has been a great while upon the face of the Earth, but he has not lived at
all: for we should only account that living which is to Godward; the other
being but a dead life, he is dead while he is yet alive. Happy are we, if we
die to sin, and live to righteousness; if we so live in this World, that we may
not die eternally, walking with God, truly fearing him, and obediently loving
him; not with a servile love, but with a filial; not worshipping him as the
Parthians do the Devil, that he should do them no hurt, but because the love
of Christ constrains us, 2 Cor. 5. 14. for a true Christian loves Christ more
then he fears Hell.

XX.
IT is reported of a Florentine, that upon his Deathbed he sent for his
Children, and told them, It comforted him very much in his dying condition,
that he should leave them rich. He had indeed reason to thank God that he was
enabled to leave to them good fortunes, which they might by God's grace employ
to his Glory and their good: but he had much greater cause of rejoicing, if he
could truly have said, As for me and my family, we have constantly served the
Lord our God: And therefore, my dear Children, I hope both my self when my life
is ended, and you all in good time after me, shall be partakers of those joys
which God has out of his abundant mercy prepared for them that love him.

XXI.
IT was the constant This was always the constant worthy Principle of those
Ministers of the Profession of our Church of England.
Principle and Practice of the Primitive Christians, to resist their
Tyrant-Governors, as well as others, with no other weapons but preces and
lacrymae, Prayers and Tears. I wish no other Arms of late years, or at any
time, had been made use of against our lawful Kings: Charles the First of
blessed memory had not then been murdered before his own Doors, dying the
Martyr of his People, and made the more glorious by the infamy of so many
unparalled Villainies. All Principles contrary to this of Obedience to
Magistrates may be condemned as inconsistent with Piety and Policy. With Piety;
for the Precepts and Example of our Blessed Savior and his Apostles teach us
other Doctrines: with Policy; for if we allow that a Prince is to be resisted
in any case, every Factious party who can get arms into their hands will
pretend that to be the cafe, whenever they have a mind to incite the People to
rebel; though as contrary as Light is to Darkness: for it is too easy (as late
experience has demonstrated) to delude the people under specious pretenses,
and upon this Maxim no Kingdom or Commonwealth is safe.

XXII.
A Painter, who was esteemed a good Artist, being asked why he painted so
slowly; he answered, Pingo aeternitati, I paint for eternity. If we did
consider, our Eternity of happiness or misery depends upon the well or ill
spending our time here, we should then take greater care of our actions, and
not hastily do amiss.

XXIII.
WE are not naturally apt to content our selves here in this World with any one
constant place, or the same company: We find no perfect contentment in any of
our settled affairs, and therefore we endeavor to find it in variety; but all
in vain: Only this use we may make of it; Let us consider with our selves, the
things of this World may satiate us, cannot satisfy; what appertains to a
better life may satisfy us, and not satiate: Therefore being our Souls are of
such immortal capacities, as not to be contented with nor confined to
terrestrial things, let us make it our great design to provide for the eternal
Felicity of our Souls.

XXIV.
EDe, bibe, lude; post mortem nulla voluptas, inquit Epicurus. This is the
vulgar Tradition concerning Epicurus; and yet it cannot be proved that he ever
said or writ any such thing totidem verbis, only in effect he said it, for he
denied the Immortality of the Soul, and consequently every one is by that
Position left at liberty to do as he pleases, si post mortem nulla voluptas.
Thus if many of us were to be judged of by our practices, many abominable
Principles would be laid to our charge, which in words and outward profession
we wholly disown and detest. But what a deplorable thing is it, that there
should be such contrariety between our Opinions and our Actions, that the
latter should give the first the lie, which we account a word of greatest
disgrace and reproach to us if given by another, and yet contentedly and
frequently we give it our selves?

XXV.
PRaedicat viva voce, qui praedicat vita and voce, He preaches with a loud
voice, who preaches with his Life and Voice. That Minister whose Life is in
good measure proportionable to his Doctrine prevails much with his Auditory,
and converts many Souls; otherwise the people are apt to say, It Is true, he
preaches well; but why should I believe him who does not appear to credit
himself, for he says one thing and practices another? And if we condemn this in
a Preacher, we must not approve it in our selves. The moral Heathens will rise
up in judgment against us at the great Day, if we shall rely upon a bare Form
and outward profession of Godliness, but deny the Power of it in our lives and
conversations: for to whom much is given, of them much is required. It was a
wise saying of a natural Fool when he lay upon his Deathbed, Lord, require no
more of me then thou have given me. Let this be remembered to humble the wise
men: Many have been the wise sayings of Fools, but not so many as the foolish
actions of Wise men.

XXVI.
IT is reported in story of a great Emperor, who had made large promises, that
when his faith was suspected because his Predecessors had broke theirs so
frequently, he replied, That if faith and truth were nowhere else to be found
but in his breast, there they should remain. This I am well assured may without
flattery be justly applied to our gracious Sovereign CHARLES the Second, whom I
beseech God to bless with a long and happy Reign: His sweet, obliging, mild
disposition is more agreeable to the English temper then to any Nation
whatsoever, our Climate being so justly famed for producing in all Ages so many
good-natured people. What the Emperor said of himself, every one in particular
ought to make applicable, and not to follow the Generality, who constantly do
amiss; and thus argue, Tell not me what vain fashions or customs others
follow, how perfidious they are in their promises; I will keep my word and do
my duty, leaving the success to the wise Disposer of all things, endeavoring
to walk unblameably both in the sight of God and men.

XXVII.
IT is reported of the Lacedaemonians, that they had this fond Ceremony at the
Death of their Kings, That all, both men and women, mangled their Foreheads,
and in their Lamentations cried out, that their deceased King (how wicked
soever he were) was the best Prince they ever had. In all times there want not
some or other who will praise those that are great and in power, giving them
high applauses for their Virtues and deserts, though they be never so deformed
with the Leprosy of Vicious enormities: but such servile spirits will be
despised by good men; nay, at last, abominated even by those they so unworthily
flatter; and shall receive one of the Punishments of Liars, which is, Not to be
believed when they speak truth.

XXVIII.
HOnesty is the best Policy: it is simple and innocent, like a true Story or
Narrative; natural and easy, that needs no defense: and a good Conscience is a
continual Feast. He that in all his actions deals plainly and honestly, gains
such a reputation, that all persons both believe him, and believe well of him;
and therefore in all the affairs of the World he meets with many friends and
cheerful assistances; whereas those that have used great artifices to deceive
and undermine are soon found out, seldom trusted. We have an English Proverb
to this purpose, Once a Knave, and always suspected. If any of the most
virtuous, gentlest, mildest and fairest The Female.
Sex shall by any act of great Immodesty and Indiscretion expose themselves to
the just censure of the World, it will be difficult to recover their fame lost,
by after-acts of Sobriety and Modesty; but this should not discourage any to
attempt it: but the best way is to preserve a good Conscience, which is a Feast
prepared for us by the God of Heaven, to be fed on at all times and in all
conditions: it is introductive of the Peace of God, which is an happiness so
great that it passes humane under standing, and is a blessing of a vast
magnitude, such as the World can neither give to us, nor take from us when God
in mercy has afforded it to us. When a man's ways please God, he makes his very
enemies to be at peace with him, so that many times their hearts being turned,
they perform offices of friendship and great kindness to us.

XXIX.
OUr Christian Charity, which consists partly in forgiving our Enemies,
returning good for evil, and partly in giving to all who are the objects of
Charity, more especially to those of the household of Faith, is not only a
Charity to them, but our selves too. The first part, being divested from any
vindicative spirit, is the most lawful and most politic way of Revenge, the
Holy Writ says, it is an heaping Coals of Fire upon their heads; so justly
upbraiding them for the injuries they have done us, that we may have cause to
believe (probably speaking) they will become our Friends: but if not, let us
not be discouraged from forgiving them as often as they offend, as we hope God
will forgive us far greater offenses; let us in all things endeavor to do
our Duties, and leave the success to God. As for the second part of our
Charity, Commiserating and relieving our brethren in distress, God will reward
it plentifully in this World, and in the world to come infinitely, with a Go ye
blessed, etc. (as we find in Scripture:) besides the great satisfaction which
must necessarily arise to any good-natured man, to be the occasion of doing
good, with small Gifts so much to revive and rejoice the disconsolate spirits
of suffering persons. The Italian poor man says, Sir, do good to your self,
and bestow something on me: and certainly, if truly considered, we do
ourselves more good then those we relieve.

XXX.
IT has pleased God heavily to afflict my extraordinary Friends, in depriving
them of their only Son. Leves loquuntur, Ingentes stupent. God intends this as
a great trial of the Patience and Piety of the Parents: now God calls upon them
to rein their Wills to his readily and contentedly, without excessive sinful
Lamentation, not to grieve as without hope; they may go to him, he cannot come
to them. Let them consider, Heaven is the best Inheritance. God has given them
his Son, to redeem them from their sins and the just punishment of them;
therefore certainly it is their Duty, and I hope and believe it is their
Inclinations, not to repine that God has taken away their Son from the Evil to
come. Let them be comforted, that he died of a natural Disease, not occasioned
by vicious Disorder, but departed penitently, willingly submitting to the Will
of God; as I pray we may all do at all times, both living and dying. All
things work for good to those that love God, together, if not singly, every
individual thing; yet jointly, if we love God. And because it was the will of
the good God, it was better so then if it had been otherwise. All good
Christians wisely acquiesce in God's Providence; he knows what is best for us.
I hope God may restore to them his Blessings, as he did to his Servant Job,
with a great increase: if not, let them remember, the blessed Angels have no
Offspring.

XXXI.
WE can never be enough thankful to God for his Mercies to us, especially for
that Great transcendent one, the Mercy of all Mercies, in sending his Son to
die for us, to redeem us from the Slavery of Sin, that we may live and not die
eternally, that we may live happily here and hereafter. In the Obedience of his
Commands is great delight: They that are of a contrary opinion, it is because
they are unexperienced in his service, in whose Service is perfect Freedom.
For to obey Sin and the Lusts of the Flesh, is the greatest Vassalage in the
world; and he is a greater man who subdues his vile Affections, then if he were
a victorious Conqueror over all the World. For God does not account of us by
our outward Greatness, but by our inward Goodness: All humane Greatness
(however idolized by worldly men) is a Pageantry and a mere Representation
acted upon the Theater of the World, which quickly disappears, and the Scene si
changed and withdrawn when the Play is done. Farther to advance the Mercies of
God to us, Let us consider, God might have commanded us to have sacrificed an
Isaac, to have lived all the time of our lives in painful and vexatious
Trouble, exercising our selves in Acts contrary to our natural and reasonable
appetites; and yet after an Obedience to such seeming severe commands for an
hundred years or more, if he should give us Heaven at last, we had great reason
to be thankful: But now, on the contrary, he only commands us to live chastely
and temperately; not to deceive our Neighbors, but to love them as our selves;
to keep up a good report; to endeavor to do all the good we can, and to
refrain from evil; to forgive our Enemies, and not to be of contentious
natures, but, as much as lies in us, to live peaceably with all men: which
Commands if we endeavor to conform to, it will conduce to a temporal as well
as an eternal Felicity. When we digress from such Rules given us by our great
Lawgiver, we find sad effects, as consequential Punishments of our
Disobedience; as, Loss of Reputation, many ill Casualties and Diseases, many
times hastening our end by vicious Excesses. These Inconveniences to a rational
and considering person were sufficient (if there were no higher) to deter him
from evil practices.

XXXII.
I Being sick, and under some dejection of spirit, opening my Bible to see what
place I could first light upon which might administer Comfort to me, casually I
fixed upon the Sixth of Hosea; the first three verses are these.

1. Come, let us return unto the Lord; for he has torn, and he will heal us;
he has smitten, and he will bind us up.

2. After two days he will revive us, the third day he will raise us up, and we
shall live in his sight.

3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord: his going forth is
prepared in the morning, and he shall come unto us as the Rain, as the latter
and former Rain unto the Earth.

I am willing to decline Superstition upon all occasions, yet think my self
obliged to make this use of such a providentiall place of Scripture; First, by
hearty repenting me of my sins past; Secondly, by sincere reformation for the
time to come, desiring to turn from the evil of my ways, to serve the living
God, that so long as he spares me life, I may live as in his sight and presence.

XXXIII.
Upon the 29th day of May.
THis day is an Holiday, a day of Congratulation upon a double account; First,
of the King's Birth, Secondly, of his Restoration. The first was great cause
of rejoicing, That so Brave a Prince was born the Heir apparent to three great
Kingdoms, and an universal Joy to all good Subjects: He was an high Blessing
to the Excellent Monarch his Father, and to his sweet and Pious Consort,
Daughter of the Great Henry the IVth of France. The second was the greatest,
That his Majesty, after so much unjust Suffering and Banishment by his Father's
Murderers and his Rebellious Subjects, should by the miraculous Providence of
God Almighty be restored to his own Dominions by the unanimous Consent of all
his Subjects, nemine contradicente, without the effusion of one drop of blood.
These so transcendent Mercies to so distressed a Nation ought to be had in
continual remembrance: Our thankfulness to God Almighty and our Serving him
ought to be in some measure proportionable to our Mercies; nor ought we to
provoke him to wrath by our Sins as we have done, which God grant we may repent
of from the highest to the lowest, that so God may repent him of the evil of
Punishments which our sins have deserved.

Amen.
XXXIV.
If God be for us, who shall be against us?
WHo? Hence learn, If a Question be asked in Scripture, and let fall without an
Answer, it amounts to a Negative. First, let us engage in God's Cause, then
having the lawful Authority of his Vicegerent, who shall be against us? no
man can: It is not in the power of humane policy to oppose or countermine
Divine Determinations. They who trust in the arm of Flesh, and in the son of
Man whose breath is in his nostrils, are sure to be deceived; they trust to a
broken Reed, to a Bul-rush: We ought to look upon men but as God's instruments;
if we do otherwise, we may justly be made the objects of God's wrath and
severer punishments. So long as we do lawful things, we may hope God is on
our side, and expect his protection: out of our Calling, we are out of God's
keeping. Qu. But how shall we know God is on our side? Ans. By examining our
selves whether we look upon God as our ultimate End in all our actions and
designs; if we make all things subordinate to his Glory; if we look upon him as
the Wellspring and Fountain of Life, Health and Salvation, with a cheerful
Christian indifference submitting to his Will, whether he please to blast our
actions, or bless and prosper our purposes; if we have no sinful impatient
desire after temporal blessings, but upon all occasions endeavor to do our
Duties, and leave the success to God; if we shall choose to die rather then
deliberately to offend God: These, I say, are signs we are the true Servants of
God; and if we be so, then God will be on our side, and then we need not fear
what men or Devils can do against us; we are well guarded, no Bullet in Wars
by Sea or Land can hurt us without God's commission. There is an overruling
Providence governs all Sublunary things.

XXXV.
IT is a most deplorable thing to consider, that there should be such great
Dissensions and Animosities amongst Christians, who profess to believe in the
same Savior, and many times about Circumstantials, not Essentials or
Fundamentals, in Religion, even to a Scandal. There are many pious, learned,
well-disposed persons, who express great zeal and fervency of spirit to
reconcile the Differences in Christian Religion, but commonly meet with a
severe fate, (in stead of their deserved Reward) to be abominated, or at least
disliked, by all Parties. But we must remember, good men are but men, and
transported many times with ungovernable passions and humors. Naturally men
have a great affection to those of their own Interest and Party, sometimes
either not discerning, or conniving at their faults; and too much prejudice to
those who differ from them in opinion: though, if we consider calmly and
rationally, no man differs more in opinion from me then I do from him, and if I
desire he should think charitably of me, I am obliged in conscience to do so
of him; unless I know by his actions, he pretends Piety to cloak his
Rebellious and Factious spirit, with a design to disturb the Kingdom's peace,
and by violence or Arms to resist the Civil Magistrate, God's Vicegerent, or
is guilty of some notorious Crime: such a man I am bound to detect, and no
ways to countenance or protect. It were an happiness much to be prayed for,
that men of several Judgments, whether Episcopal, Presbyterians, Roman
Catholics, Independents, (and under that notion may be comprehended
Anabaptists, Quakers, and many other new fanatic and infatuated Sects) would
more put in practice those Principles of Piety, Charity and Morality, wherein
all or most of them agree: this would conduce much to Union; for then they
would think better one of another, and bear with the frailties of their
brethren, (being there is no Perfection in this life) and by a gentle, mild and
unpassionate way of arguing would sooner convince one another of their Errors.
Some can suffer better then dispute, who by calm disputation might soon be
convinced and reduced to sobriety of judgment. This would, I believe, prevail
more then Punishments and Persecutions, which so often beget Proselytes, and
create in others tender Commiserations of such men's sufferings, especially if
they be of honest deportment and dealing, and of good lives, as many of them
are, though such Sufferers may be faulty in neglecting those Condescensions and
just Compliances which (if they rightly consider) they may with a good
Conscience express toward both Civil and Ecclesiastical Governors. But
these Dissenters are ready to plead for themselves, What I suffer, it is for my
Conscience, it is not out of Faction or a spirit of Contradiction; and
therefore in these cases I must obey God, and not Man, (which is highly true,
when that is the case:) and farther say they, It appears to us an hard case,
that we must be under a temptation either to go against our Consciences, or
suffer for them: But God's will be done; if we suffer for his sake, we are
contented.

XXXVI.
MEn of several Opinions in the World fondly believe that only those of their
Judgments shall be saved, excluding others out of Heaven, who happily may be
admitted, when their Censurers may be refused for their Uncharitableness. The
way to Heaven certainly is not so straight in matters of Opinion as Practice;
for what will it advantage to be orthodox in Opinion, and dissolute in Life?
God will pardon many Errors, where the persons who maintain them intend well
and live well, if they do not obstinately and pertinaciously persist in them,
but are both willing to retract them, and heartily pray to God to convert them
from all their Errors and Failings, and to teach and confirm them in all saving
Truths. We must all ingenuously confess, that in our tenderest years those
Principles we first receive in our Education take a great impression in us, and
are not easily removed; we have an affection for them, study Arguments in their
defense, and have many times too great an aversion to the very Persons who
differ from us, as well as to their Opinions: yet certainly, difference in
Judgment ought not to cause strangeness and difference in Affection. Possibly
God may accept of this Plea from many particular persons hereafter; I have
endeavored to serve thee, O Lord, sincerely in the way I was brought up in,
which appears to me to be true, otherwise I should with as much zeal have
embraced any other Opinion, which I should have been convinced was the truest.
We have no warrant in the Word of God to condemn so much as the very Heathens,
who were men of good Lives, and many of them of pious, devout Conversations,
who never heard of Christ, no more then we have to condemn little infant
Children, who are not capable of committing actual sin.

XXXVII.
IT appears strange to me that wicked worldly men should be accounted wise,
whenas in the matters of greatest importance they are so careless and remiss,
even in the Salvation of their Souls. For all wise men in difficult cases will
do that which is safest: Now to live as believing there is a God, and truly to
fear and serve him, is certainly most secure: for though there be many
Arguments, besides the conviction of every man's Conscience, to prove there is a
God; yet no man can demonstrate the contrary, that is impossible; and if there
were none, no person would repent after death that he in his lifetime believed
there was one: but disbelieving the Deity in his life, he may by that God,
whose Essence he durst so impudently deny, be punished in Hell eternally.

XXXVIII.
IT is safest and best for us to believe as God in his Word has revealed to us,
and not to be guilty of carnal arguings: as, not to think it reasonable that
Man should be punished infinitely for finite sinning; or to seem to incline to
Origen's Opinion, (which most would be willing to embrace, if there were any
Religious ground for it) That all men at the last day shall be saved, even the
very Devils themselves. But thus consider, In this World the wisest men know
but in part, and see but in part; in the next World the mist will be taken from
our eyes, and we shall see clearly; the most ignorant persons here, shall know
more in the other world then the greatest Clerk upon Earth: But here it is our
duty to acquiesce in what we suppose is God's will we should believe or
practice; his Will is the highest Reason, and ought to be esteemed so by us.

XXXIX.
WE account an ungrateful man the worst of men, Ingratum si dixeris, omnia
dixeris; and yet we little consider how ungrateful we have been to the God of
Heaven, who has given us our Being and Well-being, who has done such great
things for us, by whom we live, and move, and have our being. What great
Dangers do we daily es^ape by his mercy? A Preserving Providence is no less
then a Creating one. What cause have we to be ashamed and repent of our
Ingratitude and perfidious Promises? If we once break a solemn promise and
engagement to men, we cannot expect to be trusted any more; and yet how many
Promises of more strict and circumspect walking have we broke with the great
God of Heaven and earth, either upon our Sickbeds, or upon our receiving the
blessed Sacrament, and many such like serious occasions? How many times have we
said, O Lord, spare me yet but this once, and I will live and amend? and when
we have recovered, our Vows have fallen off like cords of vanity. How dangerous
is such breach of Vows? and how justly may we upbraid ourselves for it,
abhorring our selves by reason of our Iniquities, and repenting in dust and
ashes, as holy Job did?

XL.
SUnday is the Lord's day, which ought more particularly to be devoted to God's
Service. For though it is our duty in our several Callings every day to serve
God, and endeavor to advance his Glory; yet on that day, the Weekly Holyday,
we should not think our own Thoughts, nor do our own Actions, (but what
necessity requires:) and therefore it is most fit then to refrain from playing
at Cards, or such Recreations which may administer Scandal to many good people.
If it be a measuring cast, whether any particular thing be lawful or unlawful,
it is safest and best to resolve on the Negative: for this is an infallible
Maxim, They that in all things will do the utmost that is lawful, will be
tempted in many cases to do that which is unlawful.

XLI.
When we are tempted to any sin, let us say, with Joseph, Shall I do this
wickedness, and sin against God? God forbid. Shall we sin that Grace may
abound? God forbid.

XLII.
IN this world as good Christians we are engaged in a Spiritual Warfare, the
Flesh warring against the Spirit; sometimes one prevails, sometimes the other.
But let us comfort our selves; We fight under Christ's Banner, he is the
Captain of our Salvation: and therefore in such a War we may joyfully hope to
obtain Victory over the Lusts of the Flesh, by the assistance of God's gracious
Spirit, if we valiantly contend to the end of our lives, being not weary of
well doing; for which we shall reap, if we faint not, the Crown of life. Let us
consider, then, how blameworthy those are, who are so far from contending,
that they willingly yield; and are so far from Fighting in a good Cause, that
they basely deliver themselves up Prisoners without striking one stroke; so far
from Resisting, that they tempt Temptations to tempt them; in this supplying
the place of the Great Tempter, the Devil, until they are justly given over to
a reprobate sense, sinning with delight and greediness, drinking Iniquity like
water, and living and dying with obdurate Hearts, and seared Consciences: From
which sad Judgment Good Lord deliver us.

Amen.
XLIII.
FRiendship is a noble thing. Worthy Doctor Hammond used to say, he pitied him
that was destitute of a Friend, as a very unhappy person. By conversing with a
Friend, and communicating our secret affairs to him, our Joys are by Sympathy
increased, and our Griefs lessened. Two dear Friends seem to have one Soul in
two Bodies; (they are like Twins, when one dies, the other pines away:) there
is but one Propriety between them both, all their Goods are in common.

Friends are to Friends like little Gods, whilst they
Honor and Friendship to each other pay.
Mr Herbert worthily says in his Poems,

All worldly Ioys go less,
To that of doing kindnesses.
This being so, Good God, let Hatred cease,
And Friends and Neighbors love, and live in peace.
Some very curious scrupulous persons have made Inquiries whether Friendship
between those of different Sexes may be innocent. To this I answer
affirmatively, without the least scruple or dispute: but he that truly values
the honor and reputation of his Female Friend will be very cautious, lest by
any act of his indiscreet affection he should lessen her good opinion in the
world; and, as that Learned and Pious Doctor Tailor says in his Tract of
Friendship, which is worthy the perusing, A man ought to lose much of his
Satisfaction, rather then she any thing of her Honor.

XLIV.
NEither the Ambitious nor Covetous man can ever be satisfied; for their
thirsty desires after Honor and Wealth increase by their obtaining what at
present they so greedily covet; like one in a Burning Fever, the giving him
Drink does but increase in him a desire still to have more, and his Thirst is
but little quenched. He that will not religiously frame his mind to content
himself in whatever station God has placed him, will scarcely be satisfied and
easy in any Condition: for if we cannot proportion our Fortunes to our Minds,
we should our Minds to our Fortunes; rendering thanks to God Almighty, who has
done such great things for us: and then we are happy as to this World. To make
our Felicity here the more conspicuous, we ought to compare our temporal state
to those beneath us, our Inferiors, and not to our Superiors.

If goods increase, they are increased that eat them, etc. Eccl. 5. 11.
If Riches increase, set not your heart upon them; but look upwards, and say,
Vanity of vanities, all is vanity and vexation of spirit. There is no end of
writing many Books; and much study is a weariness to the flesh. But observe
Solomon's conclusion, who was best experienced in the Trial of humane Delights
and affairs: After he had said, There is a season for all things, and that Time
and Chance happens alike to all, to the wise as well as foolish; and advised
all persons to make use of God's Blessings with a contented thankful mind, for
we know not who shall be after us; then he adds, Fear God, and obey his
Commands; for this is the whole Duty of Man.

A Prayer for the KING, and the Royal Family.
O Lord our God, let the choicest of thy Blessings fall down upon thy
Vicegerent, our Sovereign Lord, the KING, on the QUEEN, Queen Mother, the
Illustrious Duke of YORK, and all the Royal Family. O Thou who art the King of
Kings, who have in thine hands the Hearts of Kings, and can turn them as
Rivers of water, be pleased to send down the Light of thy Countenance so to
shine upon His MAJESTY, that He may be as holy, valiant and prosperous as King
David, wise and rich like Solomon, zealous in thy service as Josiah; that He
may always govern the People committed to his charge in thy fear. And as thou
have endued Him with a mild, gracious, and merciful disposition; suffer not, O
Lord, any of his Subjects to abuse his Clemency, and deprive themselves of the
continuance of it by a necessary Severity upon them: but be pleased so to
dispose the hearts of Prince and People, that in their several Stations and
Callings they may esteem it their greatest honor and satisfaction to do thee
Service. And after a long and happy Reign, let Him attain the end of his hopes
at the period of his days, even the Salvation of his Soul, for Christ his sake.

Amen.
The END.

