Mr. Royston,
THIS enclosed Speech coming by accident to my hands, I take the Innocent
freedom of presenting you with it, in order to its Publication; that I may upon
this occasion, at once express my forwardness to serve you, and my just
Respects unto that very Honorable Peer the Author of it, and those Worthy
Merchants to whom it was spoken.

SIR, I am Yours B. C.
March 5. 1680.
A SPEECH Made by the Right Honorable GEORGE EARL of BERKELEY, TO THE LEVANT
COMPANY AT THEIR ANNUAL ELECTION, February ix. MDCLXXX. His Lordship being
Governor of that most Loyal Society.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the Kings most Sacred Majesty,
MDCLXXXI.

A SPEECH Made by the RIGHT HONORABLE GEORGE EARL of BERKELEY, TO THE LEVANT
Company at their Annual Election, February ix. 1680.
GENTLEMEN,
THis being the day of your Annual Election, I am come to wait on you to resign
up my place of Governor into your hands: I am very sensible of your great
Kindness to me, and good opinion of me, in choosing me your Governor for Eight
Years past, for which I return you my hearty thanks, and should be glad in
return of all your favors, it were in my power to do good to every individual
person of this Worthy Society.

I have served you with all Faithfulness and Integrity, and shall never be
wearied nor discouraged from serving you so long as I live, whilst I believe my
self capable, and you are pleased to think me so.

I very much rejoice my interposition with his Gracious Majesty, has been so
prevalent and successful in your Concerns, that you have been left freer in the
choice of your Ambassador, than, I believe, you ever were before.

By this means you have proceeded to the Election of a The Right Honorable
James Lord Chandois.
Person of Honor and Integrity, a Nobleman, so well qualified in all respects
to serve you, that we have reason to hope we shall be safe under his Lordships
wise Conduct of our Affairs, and that by Gods blessing he will be Instrumental
to deliver us from our just fears, and from the unjust pretensions and demands
of so Insolent and Oppressive a Vizier.

Gentlemen, I pray God to bless you in all your concerns at home and abroad, by
Sea and by Land, and so unite our hearts in these too much divided times
amongst Christians, that there may be no contest between us but this, How we
should best express our selves good Protestant Subjects, good Englishmen,
Honorable and fair dealing Traders, delighting to do our Duties in our
Generation, by serving God, our King, (whom God in Mercy long, long preserve to
Reign over us) and our Country. I have no more to say, but leave you to your
free choice.

His Lordship, my Lord of Berkeley, was the same day, being the 9th of
February, again chosen Governor of the Turkey Company for the Year ensuing.

His Excellency the Lord Chandois, His Majesty's Extraordinary Ambassador for
Constantinople, departed from London, Monday, February xxi. 1680. in order to
his Voyage.

THE END.

