THE EARL OF BERKELEY'S SPEECH TO THE CORPORATION OF TRINITY-HOUSE AT DEPTFORD,
UPON Trinity-Munday, 1680.

When His Lordship was Elected MASTER BY A General and Unanimous Vote, Nemine
Contradicente.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the Kings most Sacred Majesty,
MDCLXXXI.

The EARL OF BERKELEY'S SPEECH TO THE CORPORATION OF TRINITY-HOUSE AT DEPTFORD,
UPON Trinity-Munday, 1680.
GENTLEMEN,
I Return you my hearty Thanks for this Extraordinary Testimony of your Respect
and Kindness, in Electing me your Master for the year ensuing; and that which
adds to the favor is, that I was so lately chosen first a Younger, and then an
Elder Brother of this most Worthy Society.

I must profess to You, I have for many years had a great value for those who
have relation to Sea affairs; and esteem it much my happiness, that for so long
a time I have had Relation to, and Conversation with Deserving Seamen and
Traders.

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit Utile Dulci. I am sure I shall serve you in
this Employment with all Faithfulness and Integrity, to the best of my Power,
and shall endeavor to improve the utmost Interest I can ever pretend to in the
Favor of his Gracious Majesty, our Great and most excellent good Master, and
in his Ministers, and other his good Loyal Subjects, as may best conduce to
your Advantage and Service; and although I cannot pretend to much Skill and
Knowledge in Maritine Affairs; yet I shall make it my business to increase my
Knowledge in such a degree, as may render me most capable of Serving You: And
so I do again return you Thanks for this Great Respect You have now showed Me.

When his Lordship resigned up his Place of Master, on Trinity-Munday this
present Year 1681. his Lordship delivered, himself to the Effect following.

GENTLEMEN,
I Return You many Thanks for your Extraordinary Kindness to me, in Choosing me
your Master for the Year past.

I now Recommend my worthy Deputy, Captain Nichols, to succeed me. I have
Served you with all Faithfulness; and if my Knowledge in your Concerns had been
as Great as my Affection for you, I might justly have said, without bragging,
that no Master has ever Served you better, because I am sure no Master ever
loved you better.

I am very glad it was my Honor and Happiness to attend you in presenting the
late Address to his Majesty, The KING'S Character.
He loves his People, and their Faith Defends;
The best of Masters, and the best of Friends.
Patient though wronged, never to Passion driven;
Just as His Laws, and merciful as Heaven.

who is not only the Sovereign of the Seas, but the Great Master in the Art of
Navigation, and a most Bountiful Rewarder of all our Services. That Loyal
Address being so well Accepted, I hope you will Receive the Fruits and Benefits
of it.

Worthy Gentlemen, I have had the Title of your Master for a Year, but I shall
continue an Elder Brother, and your true Friend and Servant all my whole Life.
I pray God to Bless and Prosper you in all your affairs both by Sea and by Land.

THE END.
The Names of those Elder Brethren of Trinity-House that Signed the Address
they made to His Majesty the 15th of May, 1681.
The Earl of Berkeley Master.

Captain Simon Nichols D. Master.

The Earl of Craven. Sir Richard Haddock. Sir Joseph Jordan. Sir John
Narbrough. Sir Rich. Brown. Sir Thomas Allin. Sir Matthew Andrews. Sir John
Berry. Samuel Pepys Esquire Capt. Hen. Tiddeman. Capt. Henry Low. Capt. John
Nichols. Capt. Anth. Tuchen. Capt. Simon Baylv. Capt. Henry Mudd. Capt. Isaac
Woodgreen. Capt. Hugh Till. Capt. John Hill. Capt. Francis Wilshaw. Capt. John
Proud. Capt. Henry Sheere. Capt. Tho. Collier. Capt. Robert Fisher. Capt. Tho.
Brown. Capt. James Bonnell. Capt. Anth. Young Capt. Arnold Brown.

There were only the two following Gentlemen who were then at Sea that did not
Sign, viz.

Capt. Samuel Chamblet.

Capt. Chr. Gunman.

The Humble ADDRESS OF THE CORPORATION OF TRINITY-HOUSE.
Windsor, May 15. 1681.
This day the Right Honorable George Earl of Berkeley, Master of the
Corporation of the Trinity-House of Deptford-Strond; in company with the
Wardens, Assistants, and Elder-Brethren of the said Corporation, attended His
MAJESTY here, with an ADDRESS, Introduced by his Lordship, with a Speech to the
Effect following.

May it please Your Majesty,
WE your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, do in all Humility
acknowledge, that your Majesty has been most Gracious to all your Subjects;
very particularly to Traders, and to those who have had the Honor to be
employed in your Maritine affairs. None of your Predecessors (SIR,) have ever
been pleased to give us so much Countenance and Encouragement as your Majesty
has done; and therefore we hope, you will please to pardon us, if we put some
value upon our selves for having received such Signal marks of your Grace and
Favor to us.

SIR,
Your great Goodness gives us the presumption of making this Humble Address to
your Majesty; which we beg may be now Read.

The Address was by His Majesty's Command accordingly Read, in the Terms
following, viz.

To the King's most Excellent MAJESTY THE HUMBLE ADDRESS OF THE Master,
Wardens, Assistants and Elder-Brethren of the Corporation of the Trinity-House
of Deptford-Strond,
SHOWS,
THat we your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Body Corporate of
the Seamen and Mariners of this your Kingdom of England, having taken into
serious consideration your Majesty's most Gracious Declaration, wherein you
have been lately pleased to give to all your good Subjects an assurance of your
Royal Purposes of calling frequent Parliaments, and employing your utmost
Endeavors (both in and out of Parliament) toward the Extirpation of Popery,
Redressing and Prevention of Grievances, and Governing in all things according
to the Laws of this your Kingdom; Do with all Humility return Our most humble
Thanks to your most Sacred Majesty, for this your so Gracious Condescension to
the just and ample satisfaction of all your Loyal Subjects; acknowledging it
likewise the especial Duty of this Corporation, to declare to the World your
Majesty's Royal and unwearied Care, both in the general promotion of all
Matters conducing to the Prosperity and Improvement of the Navigation and Trade
of this your Kingdom; and in the particular instance lately given thereof by
your Majesty, in your Royal Endeavors for the preservation of your City and
Port of Tangier, in the midst of so many Difficulties, and at so great Expense.

And we do most Humbly beseech your Majesty to accept of the Assurances which
we here in all Duty tender you, of the utmost Effects of Our constant and
sincere Allegiance to your Majesty, under your most Gracious Government, both
in Church and State, as it is now by Law Established: Adding in all Humility,
That as it has already been the Honor of very many your Faithful Subjects,
Members of this Corporation, to have hazarded their Lives in your Majesty's
Service on the Seas, so do we (according to our Oaths) unanimously Tender to
your most Excellent Majesty (as to the best of PRINCES) the future Command of
our Lives and Fortunes, in the defense of your most Sacred Majesty, your Heirs
and Successors; Zealously praying to Almighty God, to grant your Majesty a Long
and Prosperous Reign over Us, with a Lasting, Peaceable and Right Succession to
your Royal Throne, according to Law.

His Majesty was pleased to express His Gracious acceptance thereof to this
Effect.

My LORD,
I Thank you kindly and heartily for This Address, and shall not be wanting to
perform My part. And as I have always been a Friend to the Navigation and
Seamen of England, you may assure your selves I shall ever be so.

THE END.

