ESOPTPON THS ANTIMAXIAS, OR A Looking-glass for Rebellion; BEING A SERMON
PREACHED upon Sunday the 16. of June 1644.

In Saint Mary's OXFORD, BEFORE The Members of the two Houses of PARLIAMENT.

By NATH. BERNARD.

Published by the allowance of Authority.

Proverb. 24. 15, 16. Lay not wait, O wicked man, against the dwelling of the
Righteous* spoil not his resting place.

For a Just man falls seven times, and rises up again; but the wicked
falls into mischief.

Galat. 4. 16. Am I therefore become your Enemy, because I tell you the truth?

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1644.

To all my friends in the East parts of this Kingdom: especially to them, that
are of mine acquaintance, in ESSEX, and LONDON: Preachers and People.
Greeting.
THe time is onward to two years, since I have been, by several Committees at
Westminster, sequestered from my calling, and charge in Essex, banished from my
dwelling, and the society of my dear Wife, and Children: they turned out of
those doors, which no body else has, that I can hear, employed since. My
self by barbarous Rebels, threatened to be cut into a thousand pieces,
Pistolls discharged at me upon the high way: with several other abuses, which
to recount would savor of malice, to which Christianity commands me to be a
stranger. Some, I confess, showed me some favors; which I shall never be so
ungrateful, as to forget. Among others, some enquiring of those that were; or
would seem to be, my most intelligent Witnesses: (which was the title, the
Committee Chaireman was pleased to bestow on my informers,) what course they
thought, I should take to live? were answered: that I was an able bodied man,
and might go work. I understood their preferment, they intended me: (and they
were such as pretended my advancement) and I resolved, to follow their advice.
But being never bred to, nor practiced in Manual arts: I think they would
allow me time to choose, and to fit my self, to a calling. And now you have, my
first handy-worke, A Looking-glass of Rebellion: which I dedicate to your
uses. And when you shall therein, thoroughly, and truly, see your selves, either
innocent, or penitent, I shall look for thanks, at least, from you. For those
that like decayed Gentlewomen, perceive, or but conceit, their faces by no art
to be repaired: I believe, they will not stick to break, and mar my glass:
not because it is, but because themselves are too faulty. Men are usually not
apt to believe their own faces foul, without a reflection. Neither can they
see, to conviction, or Reformation without this kind of help: because the
faces as their own, are not within their own view, directly. 2. Sam. 12. initio.
The reason why Nathan came to David, with a Glass or Parable was no other, but
the same with mine. I conceive Men that way interested are now blind, to the
evil of Rebellion: because it is their own iniquity. I hope they will perceive
better, how the case stand; with Witches, in point of Religion, and
reformation, and apply it. My glass cannot deceive them: it is (I dare say)
clear and true. And the Cover is a little (I confess) too costly for them; But
too mean, for the place, where it was first opened, from whence, I was enjoined
by authority, to convey it abroad, by the Press, to public view. My
engagements to turn my face and Glass Eastward, are great, and many: and yet
truly, my brethren, I do it without any Idolatry.

But where is he, that will confess himself a Rebel? And where are they,
that will confess themselves witches? The Sermon, though it pretend not to it,
will yet with a little help of your consciences: show you not only what you are
like; but what you are.

I have had the happiness, while I lived amongst you, to be an instrument of
conveing good to some, as I am able to prove by evidence, by some of your own
acknowledgements. It is my desire to be blessed that way still: for this end, I
send this unto you, which, if it thrive not, retract your sentences; and
confess you did ill, to turn me to work for my living. Though indeed, that
is not my aim in this work, but to procure a blessed change in them that are
guilty; and a turning from such a sin, as will poison all their graces, were
they ten thousand times more then they are: disgrace all their Religion, were
it really answerable to the noise, the empty sound, makes in their dwellings:
and like the colloquintida, bring 2, King. 4. 40.
death into the pot, although the broth therein, were in a wholesome bargain,
worth a birthright. And a confirmation in those blessed Martyrs of allegiance,
and constancy, whose sufferings, quiet, and Lamb. like though they are, yet cry
loud in the ears of God Almighty: who will, ere long, crown their
afflictions, with victory: and grant them to see, Psalm. 112. 3.
their desire upon their enemies. Which is (I dare say for them) that they may
repent, and live. Romans 10. 1.
And this is the hearts desire and Prayer, of

Your yet, unfeigned lover, and friend in Christ Jesus NATH. BERNARD.
OXFORD, June 24. 1644.
1. SAM. 15. 23. For Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft.


WHen the Moon is Eclipsed, SenecaLib. 7. c. 1. Iuven. Satyr 6. Ovid. Met.
lib. 7. Statius in Theb. Live. lib. 26. Tacit. Annal. 1. Plin. lib. 2. c. 11.
Ovid. 4. Met.
and the Poets, call her, laborantem Lunam; the Sick Moon. Livie, and the
Philosophers say, she does deficere, fail; and Tacitus that she does
Languescere, faint, languish, or swoone away. All which phrases are borrowed,
from that general belief which the Heathens had of the Moons being at such
times bewitched. Crediderunt (says Pliny) Lunam excantationibus pati
defectum; nec nisi dissono aeris strepitu, ad pristinum, posse revocari
splendorem. That is, They believed that the Moon, through enchantments,
suffered defect: and that she should not be restored to her former
brightness, but by a confused noise of sounding brass.

Tum frustra resonant era auxiliaria Lunae. Which opinion, how ridiculously
sottish, and absurd soever, it appeared to the wiser Philosophers, and after
times: yet since it took, and had credit with very many Learned Men: Plurimi
praestantes doctrina viri etc. says Pliny, since it was as Plini. ubi supra^
ancient, as Pindarus and Stesichorus: since it grew so Catholic and
universal, that almost all Nations, the Greeks, and Romans (to be sure)
believed it. Lastly, since Plut. in Aemilio.
it was so durable, and lasting, that notwithstanding the Gospel had been
spread through all the world: yet, and among Christians, was this received: in
the times of S. Ambrose and S. August: as appears by the first his 82. Ambros.
Ser. de defect Lunae.
Ser: the other, tract at: derectitudine conversationis Cathol: I begin to
think; that as one way there is much error in it: so another way, there is
nothing more then truth therein, that is, if we withdraw it from the natural,
and apply it to the mystical Moon, the Church.

For as in Scripture, the Church is often compared to the Moon, Cant. 6. 10.
Math. 24. 29. Luke 21, 25. etc. So are the Churches persecutions, troubles, and
oppressions (upon the matter) made eclipses too. Is. 24. 11. Now to secure us
against the error, S. Paul assures us: that even Churches may be bewitched; in
his Epistle to the Galatians, whose (...), and Inscription being, to the
Churches of Galatia: the third Chapter begins, with O foolish Galatians, who
has bewitched you: where you shall find: 1. the effect of that witchcraft,
which was privatio lucis* they had forgone the light of truth. 2. the Medium or
Charm, which was non obediendo by not obeying, that you should not obey the
truth: (that is) they were as it is in Job, Rebels Lumini, Rebels against the
Light. Job. 24. 13.
And, Rebellion (says my Text) is, as the sin of Witchcraft.

The case is so plainly ours, that every body may perceive, this story a
parable, and our age, our Church, the present state of things: the
interpretation of it. For in our age, we have lived to see; our Church, this
Church of England fair as the Moon, so fairly shining, that her late
splendor, had strong influence upon the foreign parts This I heard from a
Minister of the Dutch Church in London* his name is M. Calendrine.
of Christendom: insomuch, that an Italian Protestant, for Religions sake
flying his Native habitation, and enquiring where he might best settle
himself, and Family, was, by agrave and learned Divine in Germany, advised
hither, with this recommendation, That if God had on earth, e're a Church
Triumphant, it was the Church of England. An expression so high, that very
modesty bids me say, that even then, it had it is spots like Moon too: and so
We should have been all Papists by this time was a frequent word in Essex and
London, when I was there. 1. King. 18. 44. which was pretended for the
necessity, of putting the Kingdom into a posture of War, and defense. Annal.
1* c. 7.
had the primitive, and Apostolical Church: Iud. 12. This our Moon, so fair,
and but few years since, almost at full, nothing near a change, Though
malicious slanderers gave, her out so, in a clear heaven, for no cloud; no not
so much as Eliahs cloud of a hands breadth, was perceived to arise, from any
parts beyond the Sea, though traitorous jealousies pretended so, was suddenly
surprised, by an Eclips, now grown so total, that she is not discernable, but
by her own bloody color. For which she is stared and wondered at, as a
dismal prodigy by all the world; and by some few pitied as bewitched.
Tacitus's description of an Eclipse in Tiberius's time, sums our misery, Luna
claro repent Coelo, visa est languescere. But with different success, for
that Eclipse caused the laying down of a Rebellion ( viz.) that of Percennius
and Vitubenus in Pannon^ia. This is the effect, and product of a Rebellion. For
as the Astrologers observe; that dark shadow which always follows the opacous
body of the earth, falls not upon the Moon, except at full she enter upon the
Constellation, called the Dragon. So the Globe of sins, which follows all
Nations; and we are not so impudent, nor impenitent, as not to confess in our
Kingdom of so great a demerit. That by it, and for it, we may justly, with the
Devils, be shut up under everlasting chains of Darkness, reserved unto the
Judgment of the last day. Rev. 11. 3. (...) Pagnine.
Yet had not fallen upon the Church, without a Dragon: not the red Dragon of
Tyrants persecution: but the Dragon Nahash which in the Hebrew, signifies a
Serpent, and witchcraft both. And so the time's iniquity gives just occasion to
me, of handling these words, For Rebellion is, as the sin of Witchcraft.

The nature of which words enforce me to the use of two arts: (for I must like
Nehemia build up the walls of my following discourse, with a sword in one hand,
and a trewell in the other,) 1. Logic 2. Physickes or Natural Philosophy.

The Logic of my Text, stands in the word [For:] which being a causall
particle, shows that my Text is, in the nature of an argument. And as an
introduction to it; give me leave to reveiw the precedent story, and the
Context.

Saul, Isreal's King, and Gods Vicegerent, being yet scarce warm in his
Throne, had twice greivously transgressed the Law of his God. 1. By
profanation of the holy orders of Preist-hood, and thrusting himself into
that sacred Office, so far, as to sacrifice unto God, and Offer a burnt
Offering. 1. Sam. 13. 12. which, though as himself pleades, was performed with
reluctance, yet introduced a mortality to his Crown: whereby, he together with
Vzzah, stands as examples, (especially to the comfort of us in this Age:) that
their power, nor life, ( let them look to it as well as they can,) is not
immortal, who thrust themselves unsent, unwelcome, ( i.) unordained into holy
Orders. 2. By neglect of his Regal Office, and bearing that Sword in vain:
which God had put into his hand, for the punishment of evil doers. Romans 1^. ^.
And particularly at this time, by sparing the Amalekites: whose destruction
was his express commission in this Chapter; And the failer of it, the matter
of which he stands here indicted: unto which indictment, he pleades not guilty,
in point of Fact: verse, 13. Blessed be thou of the Lord: I have performed the
Commandment of the Lord. But as evidence against him, sufficient to carry a
verdict, comes in; The Bleating of the Sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen, into
Samuels ears. verse, 14. Being therefore cast, in matter of Fact, and convict
that way: he traverses the Enditement, in point of Law, in the 15, 20, and 21.
verses. The sum of his plea is: that although literally, he had not performed
the words: yet, vertually he had done the matter, and gone the way of Gods
commandment: for all the reserve, was for Religion, and Religious purposes: to
sacrifice unto God. (for as for his pretense, that it was the sense of the
Kingdom: and as it were the Petitions of the People, of the several Counties,
or Tribes in Israel, it was but a mere pretense, and not worth the taking
notice of by Samuel, or by me at present.) Unto this the prophet (who in the
Cause was as Gods Attorney General) replies in two convincing arguments. The
one Ostensivum. verse, 22. Has the Lord as great delight in burnt-offerings,
and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold to obey, is better
then sacrifice: and to hearken, then the fat of Rams.

The other, Ducens ad impossible, in the words of my Text, whose
Syllogisticall sense runs thus, Impossible it is, that Religious intentions, or
Sacrifice should please God, coming by that, which is as the sin of
Witchcraft. But Rebellion is, as the sin of Witchcraft. Therefore no
sacrificing, nor intentions of Religion, can excuse Rebellion or make it
pleasing to God. Thus pleads Samuel: And thus stands my Text, in the order of
the context. For Rebellion, etc.

The Argument being thus made evident, by the coherence and scope of the place,
I must crave further leave, to consider Logically. First, what this Argument
concludes: and secondly, how it concludes.

For the first, it concludes two things; one by way of definition. Namely, that
Disobedience, when it is countenanced by Religion, amounts to Rebellion. For to
say, that all disobedience, even to God, is Rebellion against God, is neither
universally true, nor Logically inferred from this Text. Not every way true,
for David, then whom no man is more free, in confession of his sin: yet denies,
that at any time, he was a Rebel. Psalm. 18. 21. And the Schoolmen tell us out
of S. Aug. and Boethius, that, Tho: Aq. sec. se^undae. q. 162. art. 6. in concl.
Bernard.
Caetera peccata fugiunt a Deo: sola superbia Deo resistit. All other sins fly
from God: only Pride makes head against, and resists God. S. Bernard makes
Rebellion, decimum superbiae gradum, the tenth degree of Pride. Indeed I
confess, that every sin, is a Rebel in habitu: but not in h^mine. In the
habit, Romans 7. 23. not in the man, ibid: v. 17. If he be, but humble. Nor
Logically deduced from this Text: for Saul, till he come to defend his omission
by Religion, is not called a Rebel. His omission was a defection from God, but
his defense of it by sacrifice, made it galeatum peccatum, a sin in Arms, and
a Rebellion. And so the word [ Patzar] following, Englished Pagninus. (...)
stubbornness, makes manifest. For it signifies, to constrain, offer violence
to, and is the same in sense, with S. Peter's (...): to wrest Gods word, 2. Pet.
3. 16.

Secondly, it inferres and concludes, by way of an Elenchus, That no pretenses
of Sacrifices, or Religion, can reconcile God to Rebellion. Which is
simpliciter malum: being, as the sin of witchcraft. For as it is most absurd,
for a man to say, or think, I will turn witch, or consult witches, that I may
serve God better, and advance the purity of his worship: so is it equally
sottish, I will Rebel ( i.) rise up in Arms against my Ruler: that I may
serve God the more freely, or the better. For Rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft. And thus, have I shown the first general propounded, in this
argument, namely, what it concludes: I proceed to the second: to wit how it
concludes in this FOR. For Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft.

The manner, how this argument concludes, is considerable two ways; Ad Rem,
and Ad Hominem. First to the matter in hand, and secondly to the Man.

For the matter, it concludes necessarily: and therefore the affirmative
premises must be universal: for as Necessarium is, at least, or in the lowest
degree, De omni, so no necessary conclusion, can be inferred out of particular
premises, for

Syllogizari non est ex particulari. Hence I infer, against all the Rebels
in the world, that this word, Rebellion, is Terminus communis, a common name:
And intends not any particular, or proper thing. It is not this particular
business, only of Saul, who was a King to Israel, but a Subject in relation
to God; nor sins as they are immediately, only against God himself. But all
Rebellion whatsoever, whether immediately against God, or mediately, the
Rebellion also of a Subject or Subjects against the King, Children against
their Parents, Servants against their Masters, etc. Of all which this
predication is true. That Rebellion is, as the sin of witchcraft.

If any object, that this proposition is not formally universal: nor so
proposed, I answer.

Vid. Cracanthorp. Log.
That it is an easy rule, and obvious to every Puiny in Sophistry: That an
indefinite Proposition in a necessary matter, or truth, is equivalent to an
universal: and such is this. And therefore, according to S. Paul, written
(...), for our learning; whatsoever they think of it, who at this time (I may
say,) are Isa. 1. 2.
better fed then taught.

For the man: which is Saul, it is observable, out of 1. Sam. 28. 3. that Saul
had showed himself a very severe man, against wizards, and witchcrafts: and
that, long before Samuels death; And therefore probably before this time. Now
the Prophet argues against him (after Saint Paul's manner, Romans 2. 21, 22. Thou
that abhorrest Idols, committest thou Sacrilege?) from a thing which himself
abominates. In this manner. O Saul what have thou enterprized? is all thy
zeal, against witchcraft, come to this? have thou thought them intolerable,
fit to be taken away, root and branch; to be extirpated out of the land? Mal.
4. 1.
and do thou, now do that, which is as bad? do thou commit Rebellion:
which is as the sin of witchcraft? The time will come: that thou will go after
witches too* namely when I am dead. 1. Sam. 28. 14.
Thus stands the argument against the man. Let my Text be supplied, but with
the following words: and the argument will hold, against the Rebels, of this
generation, [ and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry] in the same manner.
O all you that are so zealous against Popery and Idolatry; that you are for
head and tail, branch and rush in one day, Isa, 9. 14.
whether are you going ^ what do you undertake? is this your way, to suppress
Idolatry, and Popery? namely to do that, which is as both: The time will come,
when you will run, to that which you now most abhor: nay, you are gone in
the way already, by your Rebellion. But I am to represent it to you, in the
Glass of witchcraft, and not of Idolatry, at this time. Which brings me from
the Log. to the Philosophy: leaving out the word, FOR,

Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft. Which absolute proposition, I intend
not to handle materialiter: That is, not the Subject, nor praedicate
distinctly, I will not read a State-Lecture of Rebellion, in the Politickes;
nor a daemonologicall-Lecture, concerning witchcraft. But the formale that
couples both these together; I mean to make the subject, of the remainder of
this discourse; And that is, the sicut of my Text. Rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft.

Corn. a Lap. in locum.
Which sicut, Cornelius a Lapide will have, to be a sicut similitudinis, non
paritatis; qualitatis, non quantitatis, aut aequalitatis: Of likeness, not
parity; of quality not of quantity, or equality. But he is a Jesuit, and I
dare not trust his judgment, in a case of Rebellion.

P. M. in locum.
Peter Martyr, therefore interprets this sicut: out of two of the Rabbines:
Rabbi Shelomo, and Rabbi David Kimchi: The one says, it is a sicut culpae of
sin: the other a sicut poenae of punishment. They both together, speak a full
truth: though each of them apart, but the one half of it. And so as the one
helps us with the same quality: which the Jesuit grants; so the other
furnishes us, with the quantity or parity, which he was pleased to deny. I
shall illustrate both of them, in the order, they are proposed in: and then
add, two other sicut's of mine own: a sicut Medicinae, of Remedy and Cure:
and a sicut of Application wherewith I would conclude.

For the sicut Culpae, I find in general. First of all, that Rebellion is a
sin, for the quality, much as, or like to witchcraft. For the Schoolmen,
concerning witchcraft say: Estius in Sent. lib 4 did. 34. Sect. 6.
Maleficium due in se continet peccata; societatem daemonis, and nocumentum
hominis. That it contains two sins: first, Society with the Devil, and
second, Mischieving of men. And in both these, Rebellions sicut holds to it.
For first, even that has society with the Devil, Ioh: 8. 44. And the first
Practitioners of Rebellion, our first Parents; did it not, nay I dare say, had
not done it without his society, Genesis 3. And so, as witchcraft, so Rebellion
has societatem daemonis.

Secondly the sicut holds between them, in the mischieving of men. For as
Estius learnedly, and judiciously proves; There can be no beneficium in
witchcraft, to any: Estius ubi supra.
but it always hurts men, either outwardly in their temporalls, or inwardly in
their souls: so Rebellion is ever hurtful, and mischievous (to the souls of
Rebels how, we shall see anon) to the outward estate, and visible prosperity
of all men, is so evident, that I submit it to your judgments, that hear me
this day: and to the experience of the Kingdom: except to such as are like
Marius, that did frui diis irat is: Iuren. Sat. 1.
thrive best, when God is most angry: those I would not have of the Jury.

Isai 1. 1^.
But because these sins are of a Scarlet and crimson tincture: Rebellion. For
it is compared with Witchcraft: Witchcraft. for it is made the rule of the
comparison, and Nemo repent fit turpissimus. I will more particularly examine
their Principia, Media, Effectus, Exitus, and Signa. And shall find a Sicut in
both: through all these.

Sicut Principiorum Pli. lib. 30. in princ.
First, there is in both, a Sicut principiorum, or beginnings. And these are,
either of the sin, or of the sinner. Of the sin, Pliny in the beginning of
his 30th book, observes: that of so gross, and base an art as Witchcraft is:
It is a wonderful thing to see, that it has prevailed in all ages, and all
Nations: to have some to be in love with it. And endeavoring a reason for it:
says, Tret imperi^sissima^ humani sensut arts ad se redigit. ibid.
it is Ars omnium fraudulentissima, the cheatingst Art, in the World. And it
does pretend, to three the most commanding arts of humane sense: for first,
Natam e medicina, specie salutari irrepsisse, quis non videt? It seems the
daughter of Physic, and pretends to do cures. Secondly, Addidisse vires
religionis; it borrows strength from Religion; and exacts faith, from all
that come near it. Thirdly, Miscuisse arts Mathematicas; it mingles the
Mathematics: by casting of figures, and drawing of Schemes.

Just so; A man would wonder, how so declamed a sin, as Rebellion is, could
have so many engaged in it? especially with us, who have not so learned Christ.
Ephesians. 4. 20. 2. Sam. 15. 1. etc.
And the reason is, as in Absolom's, so in our time, has it been brought in, by
a cheat. For first, As Witchcraft: so Rebellion has pretended to Physic: and
to work wonderful State-cures: and Salus populi, has been mightily cried up.
Virgil.
Whereas, God knows, nullam sperare salutem, had been far more wholesome for
the Commonwealth: for it could not then have fared so ill.

Secondly: Even Rebellion too, addidit vires Religionis, pretends a Religion,
for although Ajoynt Declaration of both Houses of Feb. 22. 1642. tell all the
World: that The defense of the Kingdom, from foreign invasion, The protection
of the present Parliament, from violence, and the bringing of Delinquents to
Justice, are the ONLY causes for which their present forces were raised: yet
within half a year after: they set forth a Sacred Vow and Covenant, wherein
they enjoyne every man to swear, that he does believe, the same forces, were
also raised for the just defense of the true Protestant Religion: Not only but
also. Fides Publica. Parkers or Sombodys. A new Broad-Scale. A State-Committee,
etc.


Thirdly; they mingle the Mathematiques: not only of Observations: but uncouth
figures, cast for the conjuring of all authority into their own hands: And all
men's states into their disposing. And thus holds the Sicut in the Beginning of
both sins. Now to the sinners, or men.

Part. 2. q. 1. ^. 2.
Iacobus Sprengerus in his Malle: Mallef. or hammer of Witches: says, they are
Miserae personae, quas tenet impatientia: miserable persons, possessed by
impatience. quibus taedio damni tristibus, vel odio ex injuria illata accensis,
and modum vindicandi quarentibus; vel paupertate nimia laborantibus, etc. se
demon insinuas; To whom when they are sad for losses: mad for received
injuries, and desirous of revenge: or sick of their poverty, and beggarly
conditions: the Devil in pleasing shape insinuates himself, aggravates the
causes of their sufferings, increases their passion, and hatred, promises them
help; neither discovering himself, nor doing any thing for them; but soothing
them, until he have brought them within the compass of his Covenant.

But here the Sicut is so evident in our Rebellion that I will not light the
Sun, with a rush candle: but surely Sprengerus was a malignant, and ill
affected: though the word of God, stand by him, and say, Rebellion is as the
sin of Witchcraft.

Sicut Mediorum. Malleus Malef. Formicar.
I have done with the Principia; I come to the Media: and we shall find a sicut
of instruments, likewise, which in Witchrafts, according to Sprengerus and Ioh.
Niderus, are 1. Profanations of the Lords days; of the day of Christ's Passion,
or Good Friday. 2. Of Churches and Consecrated places. 3. Shooting of Guns or
Arrows, at the Image of Christ. 4. Abusing and distorting of mangled parcells
of holy writ. 5. An unbaptized Child; And these, among others, are main
instruments, used by Witches, to do mischief with. For of these, the third
says Sprengerus, has this efficacy: That, as often as a Witch by any Weapon,
does pierce or violate the Image of our Savior; so many men, has she power to
bewitch to death. And now, if we consider how the Rebels have made profane
advantages of Gods own day, what Sacrilege upon Churches and consecrated
places, how often wrested Gods word, The instances to these would fill a volume.
how made much of Anabaptists; lastly, how violated the Images of Christ, which
though I abhor, the thought of worshipping them, yet I doubt not, have by
their impious hands, been so violenced: that the effects of the shedding of so
much blood, show, that the sicut holds true, in the Media also. Rebellion is as
the sin of Witchcraft.

Sicut Effectus.
The third sicut in the sins, is that of Effects: for as in Witchcraft, they
that suffer by it, First, suffer not according to the ordinary course of
nature, but are strangely taken: so that Physicians can give no regular account
of the Causes, Symptoms, and Prognostics, of their griefs: So in Rebellion,
they that rue it: are not dealt with, according to any regular, legal, and
judiciary process: but the Lawyers and Judges, (who are Political Physicians)
know no reasons why, nor how, men are punished; nor are able to say, what
issue, these things will come to.

Secondly, they that suffer by Witches: have commonly, first losses without
doors: they loose a Cow, or a Horse, or a Hog: and of these, first one, then
more, till they loose all: like Job. Cap. 1. then their Houses and Lands.
Lastly, their Bodies, and if God restrain not: their Lives, and Souls also.
Thus they dwindle and pine away. So where Rebellion prevails, are men: honest
men by these degrees ruined. First, their Horses seized on, their cattle
distrained, their goods plundered, or Excised, their Houses and Lands
sequestered, their bodies for security sake (forsooth) Imprisoned, their Lives
Murdered, and their precious souls and Consciences made either a Prey or a
Snare. Is. 59. 15. Prove. 20. 25.
Thus the Kingdom, where both these are, is by a pining way, ruined, and as it
is in the Prophet Nahum, Nations and Nahum, 3. 4.
Families are sold by the Witch craft of Rebellion: and thus also Rebellion is
as the sin of Witchcraft.

Sicut. Exitus.
The fourth Sicut, in the sins, is of Event: for as in Witchcraft, so in
Rebellion: both have their time, wherein they do many seeming wonders: from
which they receive, seeming benefits, especially in the way of Revenge, and
Plaguing of such, as (perhaps causelessely) they hate: having great power both
by Sea, and Land. Yet at last, the Devil will leave acting, the servants part
any longer: and that when once, they are brought under the power of justice.
Unto which, I wish the Rebels all may be brought as Iacobus Sprengerus says,
M^^^. M^lef. ^. 3. q. 15. Psalm. 21. 12.
Witches ought to be with their backs toward the Judge: God cause them to turn
their backs in the day of battle. For Rebellion is as the sin of
Witchcraft.

Sicut. Signorum.
The fifth and last of Sicut's, in the way of Sin, is that of Signs: which
according to my forementioned Authors are three. First, obdurateness, for
Witches never shed tears, in the midst of their own, or others torments. So
are the Rebels of our time hard hearted for who but Witches or Tigers could
see their dear native Country, I. Christ Luke ^3. ^4.
fainting like the Savior of it; under such a bloody sweat as now it lies in:
Find the stock decaying, of the grounds of all the Counties of the Kingdom:
almost all kind of beasts like Baalams Ass reprooving the madness 2. Pet.
2. 10.
of the English: bleating, and lowing, and groaning, while they are harrassed
too and fro, by the rugged Soldiers: as if they cried to God for better
Masters, then the English or Scots; when we like Egypt, have throughout the
Land, lost the Firstborn of every House Exodus 12. 29.
almost, and are now in expectation of the Red Sea of blood, to ore'whelme all:
Exodus 14. 23*
and yet abominate all thoughts of Peace: will not endure to hear of it.

Secondly, it is a sign of Witches, when if any matters be handled by a
Iusticiary, in a distant room from them and against them: yet they come to
know it, and to be acquainted with it. Which must (says Tholosanus) be
Daemonis open. Greg. Thol de Repub. 2. King. 6. 8.
So the Rebels of our Land, (having no Elisha I am sure among them,) come yet
to know what is here done, Here in the Kings Counsels. I am unwilling to
suspect that any, It was said concerning Judas the Traitor, that he was a
Devil, John 6, 70.
whose face and profession shows he came hither to serve the King, would
betray him: yet so it is, there is some Devil in it; they know all, and we are
bewitched.

The third sign, appeared even to me, sufficiently ridiculous and untrue: yet
my Author is very confident, having it from Judges that certainly affirm, they
had seen it tried, namely, That take a witch, and tie her hands and legs
together, and cast her into the water, yet will she never be drowned. And for
our Rebels, if the Laws of our land were but suffered to speak, they would
assure us, that they were never borne to such a fortune -- which brings me from
the Sicut culpae: of sin; to the Sicut poenae, of punishment. And therein
also we shall see, that Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft.

Culpae* Poenae.
The punishment of Witchcraft is apparent in Laws, or in Examples: and the
sicut holds good in each. For first, the Law of God, the Law of Nations, and
the Law of the Land make both, capital crimes. Thou shall not suffer a Witch
to live, Exodus 22. 18. is paralled, with an Whosoever he be that does Rebel
against thy Commandment -- shall be put to death, Josh. 1. 18. thus the secular
Law, which I call, that which reaches the life of the offenders.

The Civil Law punishes all those that entertain Witches into their Houses,
to make use of them in any sort: so does our law any that comply with Rebels,
with extreme punishment; which are the words of Leo's 65. Novell. Constitution.
in the end of it.

The Canons of the Counsels, censures a Witch, that has taken away the life
of any, with the greatest sentence of Excomunication; ( sc.) to death; those
that make use of Witches, with five years excomunication. The first of these
you have in the sixth Canon, of the Elibertine Council, Anno. 305. The other in
the Twenty third Canon, of the Ancyrane Council, held Anno 314. And how just
these were for Rebels no man but sees. In short. By the Canon Law, all Witches
are Infamous, and their testimony invalid against any; but such as are of their
own sin. The equity whereof is grounded upon the malice, which occasioned
the sin. And for my part, I believe this law to be, (in equity) in force
against our Rebels: for their malice will heap up whole Centuries of
accusations against such, as are not of their way. But with all wisemen they
should be infamous, and their Testimonies, not trusted: Marry if they accuse
one another, I shall be apt to believe them. And thus much for the Laws
concerning both.

For examples, instead of many that might be produc'de I will only instance in
two; Ahaziah, consulting with Baalzebub the God of Eckron, concerning his
sickness, had this punishment: never to rise off his bed, but to dye of that,
disease, that year, and he did so, 2. King. 1. 16, 17. Read but Ier. 28. 16.
and you shall find the like punishment betide Hananiah for Rebellion: the text
says to him, Thus says the Lord; Behold I will cast thee from off the face of
the Earth: this year thou shall dye, because thou have taught Rebellion,
against the Lord. And of him in the next verse. So Hananiah the Prophet died
the same year, in the seventh Month. Which parallel, I cannot choose but close
with the words of 2. Sam. 18. 32.
Cushi, The Enemies of my Lord the King, and all that rise up against him, to
do him hurt, be as these men were; that another year may never see them: if
it must see them, Rebels. The other Parallel, is in Saul: that consulted the
Witch of Endor; and Shemaiah the Nehelamite, that taught the People to Rebel.
Both unprosperous men; both punished by God alike, both they and their
posterity; the one for meddling with Witchcraft, the other with Rebellion: as
you may see if you consult and compare at your leisure the 1. Chron. 10.
verses, 13, 14. with Ier. 29. 32.

Nay Rebels own experience, will make them easily confess, that Witches do
not in the end, enjoy good success: although they promise it to themselves.
But a Witch will cry quittance with them: and say, Had Zimri 2. King. 9. 22.
and 31.
peace that slew his Master? i'ts the speech of Iezabel* and so there is a
Sicut in experiences.

Thus far have I illustrated the Rabbines Comment: showing how both for the
Quality of the sin, and the Quantity of the Punishment, Rebellion is as the
sin of Witchcraft.

Sicut. Medicinae.
I now add, in the third place; a SICVT Medicinae, of Remedy and cure. Wherein
to let pass a thousand charms against Witchcraft, rekon'd up by Gregory
Tholosanus, in his Syntagma. I shall mention only those, which himself
approves of, and will stand with Religion; and they are these.

The first is, Fidem integram servare, and according to the External, and
Internal acts of it: verbo and mente Christi passionem ruminare. That is to
preserve our faith entire and to ruminate both by confession, and meditation,
on the passion of Christ: which faith as it must be Sovereign against
Witchcraft; (for neither could Iannes and 1. Tim. 3. 8, 9.
Iambres the Magicians, resist or stand against Moses, nor Simon Magus against
S. Peter, nor Elymas the Sorcerer, Acts 8. 13.
against S. Paul:) So must it be good against Rebellion Acts. 13. 8, 9.
likewise: for Faith is a grace, that will Conquer the World, says S. John;
Subdue Kingdoms, says S. Paul, and 1. John. 5. 4. Heb. 11. 33. 2. Cor. 10. 5.
Bring into subjection, every thing that exalts it self: which is the true
and unseparable property of Rebellion. So that to the cure of Rebellion, I may
say, as our Savior says, in the case of other diseases. If we believe it is
very possible: for the nature of the sin lies in the breach of faith, Mark. 9.
23.
and the repair, in the redintegration of it. To which the thought and
confession of Christ, is most necessary.

The second is; Nos orationibus munire: for as the simple Heathen, thought the
Physic that would ease the enchanted Moon, was hideous noyses, and strong
shouts. And at this day, in some parts of Italy and Dalmatia the People ring
all their Bells: shoot off all their Guns: and lift up all their voices: when
but a black Thunder storm, or Cloud comes over their heads, to break it. So,
to remove from us, the enchantments of this Rebellion: we must lift up our
voices, or as Lam. 3. 41.
Jeremiah, Our heart with our hands unto God in the Heavens. For as in Jobs
case, who suffered so much, by the Devils power: Eliphaz says, sure thou
restrainest Prayer before God. Job. 15. 4.
So more truly in ours, lies the charge heavy: sure we restrain Prayer from
before God, else these men could not so long subsist.

The third is, Servare mandata dei, seu puras, and pias, and castas vitas
agere. To keep Gods Commandments; or to lead holy, godly, and chaste lives; the
want whereof, as it exposes men, to the power of the Devil; Ephesians. 4. 27.
and consequently of his Instruments, Witches, and the like: so does this want
in us foment and protract the Rebellion, now on foot. Whereas, if we were, in
the rest of our conversation, as we are in our Loyalty; the Rebels would be
ashamed, to speak evil of us: much more ashamed, and afraid, 1. Pet. 3. 16.
they would be, to do us hurt: and to think they did Ioh. 16. 2.
God service, when they kill us. The Poets tell us what strange virtue, there
is in verses, to subdue the force of Witchcraft.

Virgil. Carminibus, coelo possis deducere Lunam:
Carminibus, Circes socios mutavit Vlyssis.
Frigidus in pratis, cantando, rumpitur anguis.
Verses can do miracles: And particularly, kill Serpents, and Vipers, if they
stop not their ears. To which alludes that place of David. Where the Scripture
speaks of the Psalm. 58. 5.
deaf Adder: and the Charmer. Now for the Vipers of our Kingdom: we may have
charms against them: Even the Poem of an holy life. S. Paul calls true, godly
Christians: by the very word, (...), for we are his Poem, created in Christ
Jesus, to good works. For Ephesians. 2. 10.
as in a Poem, or an Epigram: So in a good man's life there Pulcherrimus Dei
hymnus, est homoqui in justitia aedificatur. Clem. Alex.
is an exact (...) measure of feet, and syllables, for quantity, quality, and
harmony: Together with an high, and ravishing sense: wherewith God, and man are
delighted. And thus, if we would (as it were) with Poetical exactness, and
care: compose our lives, as men do Verses, we should, quickly charm our
Enemies, or God would soon subdue them: according to his Promise, Psalm. 81. 13.

The fourth Remedy against Witchcraft, is Ritus and caeremonias Ecclesiae
colere. That is to esteem and observe the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church.
For as it is observed by Tholosanus out of Irenaeus, and Epiphanius: That
Tholos. Syntag. l. 34. c. 21. n. 8. Iren. l. 4. c. 8. and 9. Epipha: Haeres.
27. and 38.
most of your primitive Schismatiques, and Heresiarchs, were malefici Wizards,
or Witches. So must I observe: That this Rebellion, how often soever, attempted
heretofore by Papists; how long soever, plotted by the present Agents: could
never thrive; did never break forth: while the Church stood. But the Sinews,
and the Pillars, of the Government thereof, being cut, and turned out of
doors. Then Rebellion extended it self, like the Devil with a woe to the
Inhabitants of the Earth and of the Sea. To confirm Rev. 12, 12.
us, in that maxim, Imperare nescit qui parere non Livi.
didicit.

The fifth is, Publicam justitiam been exsequi, a faithful execution, of
public Justice. Not only that, which is to be between man and man. Wherein
S. Augustine has Lib. 2. de doct. Christ.
handsomely, packed up our duty, in four words. Fac quod vis pati: do, what
thou wilt be willing to suffer. But putting the Laws of the Land in execution;
which seizing upon any Witches once, is a sole sufficient charm, to conjure
away the Devil from them. So, I cannot but wonder, since a legal proceeding,
against Rebellion, has in one County of this Kingdom, laid the Witchcraft of
it, there Cornewall's order of Sessions, 1642. Isa. 59. 14.
ever since; we in other parts, and places, having as much need as they: do
yet see Justice if not fallen in the streets? yet walking therein, like a
Dutchman with its hands in it is pockets. Resigning that, to be done by the
sword of War: which should belong to the halter. Which brings me to the
sixth, and last Remedy, of both.

And that is. Verberentur trunco vitis, vel fune palmitum colloinjecto. That
is. Beat them with a cudgel of a Vinestock, or strangle them with a Witth of
Vine-branches. For (says my Author) Witches can have charms, against the
strokes of a Sword or Halberd, or the shots of Muskets, or Bows. But there is
no charm, against weapons made of Vines. So Rebels, there is no subduing, by
humane forces: but the Vine Christ Jesus. Him and his ways, must we observe,
and then, we shall prosper against them, which bids you, but reflect to the
forenamed five Remedies, and so we shall cure, Rebellion -- as the sin of
Witchcraft.

Which brings me, to my last sicut of Application: wherewith I will conclude.

The first is of Reprehension. For as, although the Law of God prescribe
against Witches: The sacred Story makes faith concerning them: Though the Laws
of the Land, provide against Witches, and our frequent experiences of several
hurts done by them assure us of them. Notwithstanding there are some, who stick
not, to maintain; That, there are no Witches in the World. So, are there such
monsters in opinion: that although Gods word tell us: we must submit to the
King, as to 1. Per. 2.
the Supreme: and not resist the higher Power; and though it Romans 13 verse. 3.
threaten damnation to Rebels; Though the Law of the Land, tell us; and the
oath by Statute, confirm us: That the King is Supreme; that it is Treason to
rise up in Arms against Him; yet will hold, the King may be resisted; though
to the danger of His Life; His Lands; Crown Lands seized on, to maintain a
War against Him, etc. And yet, after all this, they that do such things, to
be no Rebels: nor the Acts, Acts of Rebellion. Let these men know, that even
the Rebels, would have these very things, themselves go on with, to be
Treasons and Rebellion, with the highest aggravations, should they have been
done by a Parliament of Papists. And although, it were malignancy in us, to
consider of the Causes; and not of the Persons. Yet let 'em be assured, these
things, will one day be Judged, by One, that is no (...), no accepter of
Persons that Act. 10.
will Judge them by their works; not their works by them: and where then will
be their Privilege of Parliament? or Brotherly Assistance of the Scots?

Secondly, of Exhortation, wherein I would be earnest: for whereas the
Scripture, all Laws, Divine, Secular, and Canon forbid us, for any cause, or
pretense whatsoever, to have to do with witchcraft: not for the saving of a
Kingdom: which was Readiness case; nor for the saving of ones life: which is
Ahaziah's (...)n. 28. 15. (...)ag. 1. 4.
case, much less for ones health's recovery: much less for our liberty; (
which Witches at Sea somewhere seem to be Masters (...)n Nor(...)hey sell
(...)es. (...). Ovid. (...). 19.
of) much less yet for our lands or goods: least of all for our Religion must
we go for the living, to the dead. So say I, let us take heed of Rebellion,
which is, as the sin of witchcraft, and so conjoined, Gal. 5. 20. and settle
our selves never to yield to, nor comply with Rebels in their Rebellion. For
it is unlawful notabile (...)um will (...)e dam(...) of (...). 8. or (...)oize
it.
to do it, though to save our lives, or our health, or our liberty, or our
goods and fortune, most of all unlawful to do it for our Religion. For (what
Religion the Rebels are of, I think themselves know not, nor are yet agreed:
but) we by our Religion are taught to show all meeknes to all men, to hurt no
man but (...)2. Apolog.
to do as we would be done by. And to resist no higher power, but to suffer
patiently though we be beaten for well doing. Neither (...)7. 12. (...)3. 1, 2.
(...)2. 20.
has our Religion any quirk to alter the case: no equivocation to vary the
sense, no exception, of advantages to it self, for it is own defense. Banish
for this purpose, all cowardly thoughts of complying and yiedling against so
many laws, so great reason, and thine own conscience: and know that as
witches have least power upon them, that first fear them not* 2ly. nor give
them, nor lend them any thing. So Rebels have no power against the strong and
resolute to hurt them. And possunt (...) non (...). A(...). (...). 5.
therefore God where he doomes a Rebel to death, bids us, be strong and of a
good courage, Josh. 1. 18. and the Prophet Isaiah after he had girded the
Associators with an assurance they should be broken in pieces, Isa. 8. 9. in
11, and 12. verses instructs us, not to walk in the way of the Association:
nor, to say, a confederacy to whom they say a confederaey; neither to fear
their fear, nor to be afraid etc. and he tells us the end of the Associators,
v. 21. they shall be hardly bestead, and hungry; and it shall come to pass,
that they shall fret themselves, and curse their King and their God, and look
upwards; and their end shall be, to be driven into darkness. Let not our
fears, upon any Isai. 8, 22.
evil tidings, contribute to their strength. For they like Witches do agere ex
concessis. And had not men, by their diffidence of the Kings success; the King
by being good himself and well-meaning, too much contributed, by way of trust,
and almost all others through fear, they never had risen to these advantages,
of hurting the Kingdom, the King, and his loyal Subjects; their own fame, to
foreign Nations, and Posterity: and most of all, God's, and Religion's
honor, and their own souls, against the day of Christ Jesus.

The third, is of Information, to show us. That as it was a manifest sign,
That God was departed from Saul when he made use of, and fled to the
Witchcraft, of the witch of Endor, 1. Sam. 28. 15. so is it an assurance to
me, and to all the world: what ever familiarity they pretend to God's spirit
and acquaintance with Christ Jesus, yet as sure as by Sampsons short hair
Judge. 16. 19, 20.
we may conclude God is departed from them: by their betaking themselves to
this base shift, for Religion, unworthy to be named the same day, with it --
Rebellion. It may be were I amongst them, some Zedekiah would whirrit me on the
ear with a Which way went the spirit of the Lord from us? But I 2. Chron. 18.
23. 2. King. 1. 3. 16.
answer as Elijah to the Messengers of Ahaziah, Is it not because there is not
a God in England, that you betake your selves to these Murders, these Thefts,
these Sacriledges? etc. Sure you believe your selves like Saul, God is gone
from you: or at least that he will not be with you, to punish these things: for
I do not believe you, so blasphemous, as to impute these sins to God also.
And so Leo in his 65. Constable. Nov. Censures them that make use of witchcraft as
Apostataes. Apostataes from God are they, that are Rebels against his
anointed: and therefore 'Adrian his counsel, will be seasonable. In ruentem
parietem ne inclina, do not lean to a falling wall: Come out Rev. 18. 4.
of them my people that ye be not pertakers etc. For they are falling, God is
departed from them. And woe unto them when I depart from them, Hos. 9. 12.
says God. I seek not the fall of any man, his person or State, no not among
them that have ruined mine, but their sin he that endeavors to under prop, I
can wish no worse to; then the fruit of his, and their doings.

The last is of direction; That as for the Removal of Witchcraft, no indirect
course may be taken. For Estius tells us, it is unlawful to break a Magic
Spell, with intention, by breaking it, to disenchant what is bewitched thereby;
because even therein, we have society with the Devil: who is Excommunicated to
all mankind, says Gerson: Gods Enemy, says Estius. And therefore no way to be
dealt with, but by resisting till we conquer him. As S. Hieron: It Is a Story,
and it is this. The Devil declared to Hillar. (who was praying for one
bewitched) that he was charmed and necessitated to do what was done, but if he
pleased to send to such a place, and remove such Spells, all then would succeed
without force. Hillarion would not cast out the Devil by Beelzebub, but prayed
on till he obtained it that way. And so should we.
in the life of Hillarion. So we must use no indirect mean, to stave off this
Rebellion, as it were by charms, (other then such as I before mentioned) but
go on to resist it; till we conquer it: As the Sin, and the Devil, that now
bewitches, and torments, the whole Land. To the subduing whereof, as Gods help
must be implored, and Gods word must be followed. So to the use of all good
means, (without complying with the sin) will I conclude, as the Bible does:
with, Even so, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.

FINIS.

