THE SPEECH of the Honorable SR. WILLIAM BERKELEY Governor and Capt:
General of Virginea, to the Burgesses in the Grand Assembly at James Town on
the 17. of March 1650/1.

TOGETHER WITH A DECLARATION Of the whole Country, occasioned upon the sight of
a printed paper from England, Entitled An Act. etc.

HAGH, Printed By Samuel Broun English Bookeseller. 1651.

The speech of the Honorable SR. WILLIAM BERKELEY Gouvernour and Capt:
General of Virginea, to the Burgesses in the Grand Assembly at James Town on
the 17. of March 1650/1.
Together with a Declaration of the whole Country, occasioned upon the sight of
a printed paper from England, Entitled An Act. etc.
GEntlemen you perceave by the DECLARATION that the men of Westminster have set
out, which I believe you have all seen, how they mean to deal with you
hereafter, who in the ^^me of their wooing and courting you propound such hard
Conditions to be performed on your parts, and on their own nothing but a
benign acceptance of your duties to them. ^ndeed me thinks they might have
proposed something to ^s which might have strengthened us to bear those heavy
^haines they are making ready for us, though it were but an assurance that we
shall eat the bread for which our own Oxen plow, and with our own sweat we
reap; but this assurance (it seems) were a franchise beyond the Condition
they have resolved on the Question we ought to be in: For the reason why they
talk so Magisterially to us is this, we are forsooth their worships slaves,
bought with their money and by consequence ought not to buy, or sell but with
those they shall Authorize with a few trifles to Coszen us of all for which we
toil and labor. If the whole Current of their reasoning were not as
ridiculous, as their actions have been Tyrannical and bloody; we might wonder
with what brows they could sustain such impertinent assertions: For if you
look into it, the strength of their argument runs only thus: we have laid
violent hands on your Landlord, possessed his Manner house where you used to
pay your rents, therefore now tender your respects to the same house you once
reverenced: I call my Conscience to witness, I lie not, I cannot in all their
Declaration perceave a stronger argument for what they would impose on us,
then this which I have now told you: They talk indeed of money laid out on
this Country in its infancy: I will not say how little, nor how Centuply
repaid, but will only ask, was it theirs? They who in the beginning of this
war were so poor, and indigent, that the wealth and rapines of three
Kingdoms and their Churches too, cannot yet make rich, but are feign to seek
out new Territories and impositions to sustain their Luxury amongst
themselves. Surely Gentlemen we are more slaves by nature, then their power can
make us if we suffer our selves to be shaken with these paper bulletts, and
those on my life are the heaviest they either can or will send us. It Is true
with us they have long threatened the Barbados, yet not a ship goes thither but
to beg trade, nor will they do to us, if we dare Honorably resist their
Imperious Ordinance. Assuredly Gentlemen you have heard under what heavy
burdens, the afflicted English Nation now groans, and calls to heaven for
releife: how new and formerly unheard of impositions make the wifes pray for
barrennes and their husbands deafnes to exclude the cries of their succourles,
staruing children: And I am confident you do believe, none would long endure
this slavery, if the sword at their throats Did not Compel them to Languish
under the misery they howrely suffer. Look on their sufferings with the Eyes
of understanding, and that will prevent all your tears but those of
Compassion. Consider with what prisons and Axes they have paid those that have
served them to the hazard of their souls: Consider your selves how happy your
are and have been, how the Gates of wealth and Honor are shut on no man, and
that there is not here an Arbitrary hand that dares to touch the substance of
either poor or rich: But that which I would have you chiefly to consider with
thankfullnes is: That God has separated you from the guilt of the crying blood
of our Pious Souveraigne of ever blessed memory: But mistake not Gentlemen part
of it will yet stain your garments if you willingly submit to those murderers
hands that shed it: I tremble to think how the oaths they will impose will
make those guilty of ^t, that have long abhorred the traiterousnesse of the act:
But I confess having had so frequent testimonies of your truths and courages,
I cannot have a reasonable suspicion of any cowardly falling of from the former
resolutions, and have only mentioned this last, as a part of my duty and care
of you, not of my real doubts and fears: or if with untryed men we were to
argue on this subject, what is it can be hoped for in a change, which we have
not already? Is it liberty? The sun looks not on a people more free then we
are from all oppression. Is it wealth? Hundreds of examples show us that
Industry and Thrift in a short time may bring us to as high a degree of it, as
the Country and out Conditions are yet capable of: Is it securety to enjoy this
wealth when gotten? With out blushing I will speak it, I am confident theare
lives not that person can accuse me of attempting the least act against any
man's property? Is it peace? The Indians God be blessed round about us are
subdued; we can only fear the Londoners, who would feign bring us to the same
poverty, wherein the Dutch found and releived us; would take away the liberty
of our consciences, and tongues, and our right of giving and selling our goods
to whom we please. But Gentlemen by the Grace of God we will not so tamely
part with our KING, and all these blessings we enjoy under him; and if they
oppose us, do but follow me, I will either lead you to victory, or loose a life
which I cannot more gloriously sacrifice they for my loyalty, and your security.

Vera Copia John Corker
Cler: Dom: Commons.
This speech being ended the pretended Act of Parliament was publicly read in
the Assembly where upon (at the motion of the House of Commons to the Governor
and Council) this following vindication was unanimously agreed on.

WE The Governor Council and Burgesses of Virginea, have seen a printed
paper bearing date at London the 3. of October. 1651. wherein (with other
Plantations of America) we are prohibited trade and Commerce with all but such
as the present power shall allow of: We likewise see our selves branded in it
with the ignominious names of Rebels and Traitors, which we so much abhor,
that we would detest our selves if we thought they were deservedly imposed on
us: And shall take leave to think we are unworthily slandered, till stronger
proofs then we yet find, are brought against us to convince our judgments and
Consciences that we are guilty of those Horrid Crimes. Therefore though we
profess that our judgments and industry, have been long solely and necessarily
employed in providing against the necessities of our poor families, and by
Consequence should not presume that any Act or Transaction of ^ours could be
worthy the public view: Yet since the plainest vindication of innocence is
accepted, we shall intimate the reasons of ours, imploring charitable and abler
^udgments to perfect what we shall hint to them in our answeares, to the
Aspersions we find Authorized against us.

And First whereas they say, That the Plantations in America were seated at the
Cost and established by the Authority of some in England, and therefore ought to
be governed by the Laws of England. We conceave we may safely confess all
this, and yet not run the Hazard of any misprision of guilt, nay we think,
this only testimony of theirs were sufficient to clear us from the Aspersions
of Rebels, and Traitors, if we had no other marks of innocence left us: For
we say, we were some of us sent, others permitted to come hither by the
gracious favor of our Pious KINGS, sworn to govern, and be governed (as far
as possible the place was Capable of) by the laws of England; which laws we
have inviolably and sacredly kept as far as our abilityes to execute and our
Capacityes to judge would permit us, and with reason; for these laws only in
such times of tumults storms, and tempests, can humanely prevent our ruins:
These laws often enjoined us the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and they
tell us, that no power on earth can absolve or manumit us from our obedience to
ou^ PRINCE, and his lawful Successors: These laws tell us that when we have
don all we can to avoid it, we may resist violence with force, and in a
lawful defense of ourselves, destroy any that shall endeavor to take away our
lives or substance: These laws we profess are our guides and do believe we
deserve punishment and infamy if we willingly, or vvillfully deviate from them.

Secondly suppose we were such slaves by nature as to be awed with the iron
rods held over us, in what hand soever found; would not then themselves think
we deserved the worst usage could be inflicted on us. For what assurance could
we give of our new Loyalty, after having so childishly, and impiously,
relinquisht our old Allegiance? Could we reasonably repine to pay with our
own swea^ and blood, those Garrisons which must be kept among as, to fix such
volatile obedience as ours would appear to be? For as the Question is stated
to us, we ought to yield to whosoever possess themselves of Westminste^ Hall:
Where we experimentally have found, the heads of diverse factions and
pretensions, have presided and excluded one the other; and we have no Oraculous
assurance, but it may be so again; therefore in a Condition so dubious and
uncertain, as ours would be (wherein no less then our souls are concerned)
we desire them to permit us simple men to take leave to follow the perspicuous
and plain paths of God and our laws, and that they would be pleased to
remember that good charitable Axiom in them, That none should be condemned
till they here first Heard.

Thirdly we are told of Great sums of money laid out ^n this Country: For all
we have received we are most thankful: But surelyit will be no evidence of
ingratitude ^o say to whom we owe most, and this must needs be acknowledged
to our KINGS, who gave liberally themselves and permitted Lotteries to be
erected for us: We confess private adventurers added much, and might have
enjoyed the fruit of it, In the Year 1622 when there were but 300 persons lest
alive by that Massacre.
If the first blow to the Colony, had not taken from them all hopes or desires
of prosecuting that, which they so earnestly begun; But certainly what ever
their liberallity was, we should have avoided it more then our Rattle snakes,
of it had inevitably made slaves, our selves, our wives, children, and
Posterity. Since the Massacre only private Merchants have adventured hither
for private gains, and we confess have supplied us with that, which we could
not well have wanted, but this we suppose would be no convincing argument to
France, Spain, or the Low Countries, for their subjection to England because
these several places have been thus furnished by her. If then we owe any thing
it is to our KINGS liberallity, care, and protection, and w^ beseech you give
us leave to pay our acknowledgment t^ them.

Fourthly we are told of usurping a Government to our selve^ We wish we could
transmit our records to the view of ou^ accusers; By them it would appear how
little we deserv^ this imputation. For since the beginning of the Colony w^
have never innovated nor altered any thing in the maine ^^ the Government: But
in case we had done it, what more likely Patrons could we choose, to protect us
then those who accuse us? Grant we had banished, confined, imprisoned
condemned, and excecuted those that refuse to obey the laws confirmed by many
consummated free Parliaments would not those pardon and absolve us who have
done the same to others that have refused to obey their edicts, when they in
their consciences believe they ought not to acknowledge to be a Parliament? Yet
the truth is, we have done none of these things, no man here ever suffered in
his person or estate: Concerning the differences in England, our lavve^ keep
them in better awe then to dare to speak against the Protector of them: It Is
true indeed, Factious Clergy men.
Two, chose rather to leave the Country then to take the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, and we acknowledge that we gladly parted with them.

Having ansvveared these accusations, we appeal even to their own judgments
that produced them whether we deserve those hateful names of Rebels and
Traitors: Bu^ we believe they will still use them to us and others because
those Lucky Bugbeares of Rebels, and Malignants, have frighted diverse to the
desertion of honest causes: Yet being ^as we suppose in their own
consciences) free from these ^nputed crimes, (though very short sighted in such
subtle matters) we think we can easily find out the cause of this ^^cluding
us the society of Nations, which bring us necessa^^es for what our Country
produces: And that is the Ava^^ce of a fevv interrested persons, who endeavor
to rob us ^f all we sweat and labor for: Therefore on the whole ^atter we
Conclude: We are resolved to Continue our ^^legeance to our most Gracious KING,
yet as long as his ^^atious favor permits us, we will peaceably (as
for^erly) trade with the Londoners, and all other Nations in ^nity with our
Sovereign: Protect all foreign Mer^^ants with our utmost force from injury
in the rivers: ^^ve Letters of Reprisall to any injured with in our Capes:
^lvvaies pray for the happy restoration of our KING, and pentance in them,
who to the hazard of their souls have ^^osed him.

This is unammously consented to by the Governor, Council and Burgesses Test
To: Huberd
Cl: Cons: Johan Corker
Cl: Dom: Com:

