THE STJLL-BORNE NATIVITIE, OR A Copy of an Incarnation Sermon, that should
have been delivered at St. Margarets-Westminster, on Saturday December the five
and twenty, 1647. in the afternoon, by N. B BUT Prevented by the Committee for
Plundered Ministers who sent and seized the Preacher, carried him from the
Vestry of the said Church, and Committed him to the Fleet, for his undertaking
to Preach without the License of Parliament.

NOW Published by the Authority of that Scripture which says, Preach the
Word, be instant, in season, out of season. 2. Tim. 4. 2.

Isaiah 37. 3. This is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of Blasphemy: for
the Children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.

LONDON Printed for their sakes who love our Lord Jesus and his Birth day: Anno
Dom. 1648.

To the whole Congregation of Believers assembled at St. Margerets Church in
Westminster, on Saturday December the 25. 1647 in the afternoon, Grace, Mercy,
and Peace, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Worthy Christians,
I Had at the appointed time of preaching, the same judgment befell me which
befell to Zacharias the Father of John Baptist Luke 1, 20. When I thought to
have spoken unto the people that waited for me, and marvelled that I tarried
so long, I was struck dumb and not able to speak. And could I conceive it had
been done by an Angel I should (as a cause of it) suspect in my self the sin
of unbeleife. But, as it is, I am constrained to use Zacharias his way of
expressing my meaning. On the day of your meeting in the Temple I could only
becken but remained speechles, whence you all perceived I had seen a Vision in
the Vestry: and were not long in suspense what kind of one it was. But
whatsoever it was I was transported or carried away with it, and am yet dumb by
it.

But as the Angel, though he struck Zacharias speechless, yet took not away
his writing tables, v. 63. So I conceive by the tenor of that order which
commands a constraint both of my Tongu and Heels: I am not interdicted the
liberty of Pen and Paper, but I may lawfully use both without contempt.

And so by this means I shall (saving my regard to authority) now acquaint you
with that message of God, I should then [ viva voce] have delivered in your
hearing.

It is true* I in this Sermon represent as in a Sciagraph all the Joints of the
History of Christ: but insist only on the blessed mystery of the Union of the
two natures (God and Man) in one person without reaching unto his birth; or so
far as his conecption by the wholly Ghost. Nor indeed as it falls out is
there any need I should put forward to speak of his Nativity though that were
properly opus diei the work of the day, For all the circumstances do
sufficiently proclaim the Nativity and are now newly revived. Was all tho World
taxed, Lukt 2. 1. when the Messiah was borne? Alas for the day of the Lord! It
is so now. Was their no room for Christ in the Inn, Luke 27? There is none
for him now in the Churches* Were there Wisemen that sought to worship him, and
a Herod that under pretense of worship sought to destroy him Mat. 2. 1? It was
so now: there were that came to Church to worship Christ, and there were that
came to apprehend his Ministers. Was there a voice heard in Ramah, lamentation
and weeping, and great mourning, Mat: 2 18. There is another Rachel whose child
is not, if the news of Cornehill be true, Do these things cause a necessity
of Christ his going into Aegipt the sons of Israel's quondam bondage Mat: 2
18. There will I fear (but O the good God prevent that necessity) be such
another violence, to drive us to such another flight, Lastly was that Herod not
longliv'd: Mat. 2 19? I prophecy no eternity to the men of his carriage:
Psalm 55 23.

But beloved, I must once more crave your patience, for I must leave you and
wait upon the Committee. Whom as Gentlemen I respect as in Authority I
Honor: as my Enemies I love, bless, and pray for: Mat. 5, 44: and (that I may
perform all the duties I owe upon that score) I shall labor to do good to: I
must tell them that I have read a story of Tiberious the Emperor. That he (upon
the relation which Pilate made unto him of our Savior) had an intention and to
that purpose signified his meaning to have Jesus of Nazarath reputed and
received among the Roman Gods. But the Senate of Rome withstood it, because
that Honor had been given him by such as never asked their consents. But after
this I provoke any Historian to show me where that great Council did ever any
act either Honestly, Wisely, or like true Romans: but were made the properties
and instruments either of the Caesar's lusts, or Soldiers villainies. And now I
wish these men seriously to advise how much short this insolence is of the
former? When men may not Honor, Ministers may not preach Christ without their
License under pain of imprisonment without Bail or maine prise. I speak not
this out of Stomach for what I suffer, but as heartily as I would beg pardon for
my sins do I wish them a better exit, hoping yet they may acquire a better
and more glorious conclusion then these distempers can promise or the Roman
Council had.

And now I return to give you an account of that which otherwise migh seem
strange. Which is that way of application you shall meet with all, reversed upon
my self. I confess it is not usual; nor indeed proper for one that speaks
to others. But first, as it is the Minister of Christ's part to appear in
innocence a Dove, Math: 10 16: So as the Doves feed their young ones with that
which themselves have taken down: ought Preachers to digest in their own
breasts, and be fore-tasters of that spiritual food they divide to others* and
this I had labored to do. Secondly these meditations being now to be read, not
heard: I thought good so to dispose them, that each Reader might as I have done
suc^ in the juice and influence of them: and by reading as it were engage
himself upon the practical part of them. Unto both which no way so Organicall
as prayer. And I do humbly pray that every Reader may be also a Believer, and
have a heart open as well as an eye. For I conceive (with humble reverence)
that the Gospel if it go no further then the eye or ear is mortiferous and
deadly, a killing letter. But if it be transmitted to the more noble and vital
parts it is Sovereign, Food and Physic, Meat and Medicine. Christ in the
Flesh, may vouchsafe to accept the Stable and the Manger but coming in the
Spirit he must have a Temple to entertain him. And by so providing, we shall
supply what was wanting not at Bethlem only, but at Westminster also. If any
of you should be so ignorant as not to understand what I would be at in all
this. I must tell you that though I cannot assent to the mind of them that would
have the observation of this feast superstition; yet you that give place to the
Devil Ephesians: 4. 27. are more injurious to Christ then any, Sin, sin, that is
it must be taken down, it was sin and the Devil that snatched this bread of
life out of your mouths that sent me to Prison Revel. 2. 10. Can you (knowing
what Christ is) think to honor Christ in commemoration of the Nativity and at
that season so shufle the cards that sin shall be Trump in every dealing.
Remember John Baptist must be born before Christ You must Repent if the
Kingdom of God be at hand It is certain that that Spirit which confesses
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God, 1. John. 4. 2. and so on the
contrary the Non confessor thereof is the (...) That Spirit of Antichrist, verse.
3. I remember St. Augustine, with a great deal of pains proves every Heretic
to be a denyer of the coming of Jesus Christ in the flesh whatsoever his
Heresy be. But me thinks Origin with much more ease and plainness shows that
the best way to confess Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh, is by not
committing of sin; unto which purpose he lays that text, 1. John 3. 8. and
9. to the forementioned 4. c. 2. v. where in 4, Chapter to Be of God is the
Predicate to this Confession as the Subject. And in the 3. Chapter to be borne
of God is the Subject and not committing sin is the Praedicate. So that not
to commit sin is the remote (and but once remoov'd] definition of the
confession of Christ's Nativiny, or coming in the flesh. So that the
commemoration or confession by way of Observation of the Day to the end is not
Antichristian (they were mistaken that advised the Parliament so) But the
Drunkenesse and Gluttony the Luxury and Riot etc, These are Antichristian, and
so far Antichristian that where these are! Men (even when they would confess)
do deny Christ Jesus to be come in the Flesh. And of these since the secular
magistrate distinguishes not it behooves us Ministers to be careful. For
though I know not what State arguments there may be to prove the Holly and Ivy
superstitions: yet when these things shall be set up, sooted and smoked with
the sins of Intemperance and Excess, I shall think them fitter Trophies of a
Chimney-sweepers Birth day, then a Saviors, When we shall eat and drink and
rise up to play, I must think these are Ceremonies fitter for the Golden-calfe
which Aaron made in Horeb: then the lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the world. And verily (let me be angry in it) I judge it a cause of greater
fear and danger then a Prison or a Goal, lined with a good conscience, This
therefore was my first intention to persuade you all by renouncing sin to
celebrate the feast of Christ's Nativity for then we best testify the belief of
his coming when we most fear to offend him or his father. And in this way I
would be glad to keep Christmas with any one Being very desirous that all you
which would have heard me that Day had been both almost, and altogether such as
I am, Except the Fleet.

Which I must confess I take very pati^ntly; blessing God that it overtook me
not in any evil deed, but in well-doing or at least the intention of it.
Neither shall the error of the Committee in sending me to it, (And O that it
were the greatest they are guilty of) make me forget the Joy of Christ's
Incarnation, or the Good will toward men the Angels sung. They are Men so was
my Redeemer, for whose sake, and through whose Grace I can suffer greater
wrongs then these and yet never hate the Men. Indeed there is somewhat in it
that is not Man but Devil To make men Dumb as to matters of Duty and Faith:
that is the Act of the Unclean Spirit Math. 12 22: It is that has [in a
sence] made me lame so that I cannot walk. But if it has made me Dumb and
Lame. it has made them Deaf* and Blind. And truly Without a Miracle I fear
neither of us are like to recover. And because my infirmity is but an appendant
to theirs, I shall heartily pray for them, that they may receive their sight
even in this their day that they might see the things that belong to their, the
Churches, and the Kingdoms Peace: That Christ would say Epphata: Be opened.
That they that have ears to hear may hear What Christ himself has said
himself to them, to me, to the Parliament and all: Mat: 22, 21. Give unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are Gods. And
then I doubt not (for I suffer but by simpathie) but I shall be able (with him
Acts 38:) to walk and to praise God. Unto which time whether it be the
pleasure of God, to prolong my days I know not (for it has some analogy to
that time whereof our Savior speaks, when he says many Kings and Righteous
men have desired to see and have not yet seen.] but this I resolve on: While I
live not to cease day and night, praying for the hastening of it. For the time
we live in now (I am confident) is part of that mentioned Mat. 24: 21: Except
these days should be shortened no flesh can be saved: and the Promise which
closes the same verse: it revives me doubly in relation to the general with
hope: to my own particular with care: to give all diligence to make my caling
and Election sure. 2 Pet: 1* 10. The Elect (that is they that add to their
Faith; Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge, and to Knowledge Temperance, and to
Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godliness, and to Godliness brotherly
Kindness, and to brotherly Kindness Charity) have an interest in better
times. For their sakes these days shall be shortened. Wherefore God stir up
your hearts to endeavor be of that Number and to increase it. Neither is this
spoken by way of Pharisaicall imposition to ease my self but what ever others
intend, it is my resolution (and the good Lord Keep it for ever in the purpose
of my heart) to begin this only saving health in stead of all others, Psalm
116 18. For believe it I am very sensible we live in the worst of times, and
that I am one Christ Jesus came into the World to save that is to say the
Chief of Sinners.

And From the Fleet, January 8. 1647. Your Debtor in this service N. BERNARD.

THE STILL* BORNE NATJVJTY OR A Sermon of the glorious Mystery of the
Incarnation of our Lord and blessed Savior Jesus Christ Both God and Man; To
have been delivered at St. Margaret's Church in Westminster on Saturday
December the five and twenty 1647: Being Christmas day.
Text. John 1. 14. And the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt amongst us.
THe Prophet Ezechiell before Christ, and St. John the Divine after Christ: had
both one, and the same Vision ( Ezech 1. 10. Rev. 4. 8.] of four beasts or
living Creatures. That had the faces of a man, of a Lion, of an Ox: and of an
Eagle. Which faces Saint Gregory the great, applies to Christ, As that of a
man: for his Birth and Bowels of Compassion. That of an Ox: for the Sacrifice
of his Death, and Plough of Doctrine. That of a Lion: for his open eyed sleep,
(that is) his life in death, and strength in Resurrection: Rouzing himself
from the grave as a Lion from his den. Lastly that of an Eagle for his
ascension into Heaven, leading Captivity captive. Others apply this vision to
the four Evangelists, affixing: first the Face of a Man to St. Matthew: because
he begins his Gospel with the Generation and Nativity of Christ. Secondly the
Face of a Lion to St. Mark: for he begins his Gospel with that prophecy of
John Baptist: The voice of one crying or roaring in the Wilderness. Thirdly
the face of an Ox to Saint Luke, Because he begins his Gospel with Zacharias
Preisthood and Sacrifice. Lastly the face (to our present Evangelist Saint
John) of an Eagle: For he in the beginning of his Gospel acts perfectly both
the parts of an Eagle which we read of, Job 39 27: and 30. First like an Eagle
mounting up on high to speak of the Divinity of Christ to such an hight, that
the sublimest of the Heathen Philosephers stand at a Gaze admiring the mounty.
And this he does from the first to the sixth verse. Secondly like an Eagle
immediately stooping to the Carcass, Mat. 24 28: ( For where the body is thither
will the Eagles be gathered together: Luke 17 37.) And this is done in the
words of this verse: And the word was made flesh etc. Which words taken
altogether, most excellently in a very few syllables, expresses all the
notable, and most worthy-to-be-considered parts of Christ's whole History: So
that we want understanding, the text wants nothing to be accounted a complete
Gospel.

Aquinas distinguishes Christ's life on earth into these four divisions: first
his ingresse or coming into the World. And this we have in the former part of
my text and the word was made flesh. Secondly into his progress or going on in
the World. Thirdly into his congresse or dealing with the World. Fourthly into
his Egresse or going out of the World. And these three last parts, may be
understood in the latter part of my text [and dwelt amongst us] if the
original word (which is no more) but (he Tented or Tabernacled among us be
duly known.

But to go on: His Ingresse or coming into the world is by some record to be
threefold. First in Carne in the Flesh. Secondly in Spirity in the Spirit.
Thirdly in judicio in the last judgment. The first is a coming Ad homines: John
1, 11. Unto men. The Second is a coming In homines Rev. 3: 20 Into men. The
Third is a coming Contrae-homines Jude 14 against men.

His Progress in the World likewise appears to be threefold. First Locomotive
in respect of place of abode. And then the Gest's of his Progress are 1
Bethlem, 2 Egypt, 3 Nazereth, 4 Jerusalem. Secondly Natural by way of
augmentation growing 1 For mind in wisdom. 2 For body in Statute. 3 For
success, in favor both with God and man. Luke 2: 52. Thirdly official by way
of undertaking: 1 In circumcicion the fullfilling of the Law. 2 In Baptism the
Preaching of the Gospel.

His congresse or dealing with the World is fourefould. First with Men, in his
Conversation. Secondly with Satan in his Temptation. Thirdly with men's Sins,
in his Preaching. Fourthly with men's Sicknesses and Infitmities, in his
miracles.

His Egresse ongoing out of the World contains (besides those memorable
passages about his Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension) al those Testamentary
provisions by him made against his departure for succeeding generations*
Whether Commissions for his Ministers, Legacies for his friends, or Seals
(which we call Sacraments) for Prooving and confirming of his will. These are
the heads, of the History of the Gospel.

And now, Beloved (were it suitable to the consideration of the season or of my
stay here) I could without any great Travel fixing one foot of the Compass in
the center of this text: with the other fetch in all these points (though never
so vast a latitude) within a just circumference of without any excentricity.
But I had rather make another and more profitable use of them, whereunto the
review and consideration does directly lead me.

And That is: to admire the Infinite goodness of God in all this, to wretched
mankind: Who being in this Earth a stranger, and a stragler, without either
friend, or acquaintance, in the midst of enemies, dangers, and mischeifes, many
snares, no sure footing.

Sic erat instabilis tellus, innabilis unda. Sin procuring, Satan bringing
great woe and wrath to the inhabitants of earth and of the Sea. Such is the
mercy of God, toward so great his blessing upon Man (at whose hands yet mankind
had merited no such kindness, but rather curses.) that whether, he be to be
borne, or to grow, or to go in, or to deal, or to encounter with, or to dye
out of the world: He has given his own son to be, Duxque comesque viae et
vitae a guide and companion to him of life and way. And (what ever other men do
think of it) when I consider. That to be Borne to Grow, to Live, and to Dye,
be things common to me and my redeemer, I cannot choose but cry out.

O Lord my God since in these states thou have (so far as only nature goes)
fashioned us alike* let these lineaments and parts in me which sin has
drawn, and overcast with the black coal of guilt be filled up with the colors
of my Savior. That through the beauties of his holiness (as he glorified thee
on earth, so) in my life and death I may show forth his praises, and virtues
who has called me out of darkness into his marvelous light.

And so without hopes of further commerce with them (as to discourse) in this
place, I dismiss the latter part of my text and with it the 3. last general
branches of the Gospel History of the life of Christ, betaking my self to the
former part both of the Division, and of the text which speaks of Christ's
Ingresse into the World, And the word was made Flesh. And therein of his
coming in the Flesh only.

How Christ is called the word? If we should show, it would engage us upon a
discourse of that other Mystery of the Trinity unto a length prejudicial to
our present business: or if we should show how Flesh is put for our whole
nature, and why? It would run us, at this time, out of breath. I proceed
therefore to the substance of the words, The Incarnation of Christ Jesus. And
therein consider.

First the Union of the two Natures God and Man in this mystery.

Secondly the Conception of Jesus Christ by the Holy Ghost.

The Nativity or Birth of Christ of the most blessed Virgin Mary.

In speaking to the Union I have four things to go through withal: first to
show the several unions in Christ. Secondly, the signification of this word
person, Thirdlly the manner of the Union, and Lastly, the Reasons of the Union:
And of the first thus much.

There are in the person of Christ three unions and ale-immediate, first the
union of the Deity to the soul: Secondly the union of the Deity to the body;
And Thirdly the Union of body and soul together: the two first werenot of
nature, nor of merit, but wholly supernatural: And so not subject to
separation by force of any nature, al action or passion But the third being
natural, did leave a place for suffering and separation: So that when Christ
suffered death, the Deity forsook neither soul nor body, only the body was
forsaken by the soul.

The plurality of which substances and Unions notwithstanding, Christ must be
considered but as one, that is in person* Which word that you may understand
aright: know that it is derived a personando which is distinct sounding: And is
nothing else in Logic but what a Noune Substantive proper of the singular
Number is in Grammar (that is) one particular complete subsistence, which
Logicians call an Individuum, but with this differenc. That Person is a
particular reasonable creature; whereas a particular thing if it be
unreasonable, as a tree, or horse, etc, is not called a person: but by the
Schools a Suppositum, And in this sense Christ is said to be one: Not in
nature (for so is no man in a strict sense: for the soul and the body of men,
are of two different natures, as well as fountains or beginnings) But in
person: wherein though there may be aliud et aliud, one and another thing, yet
there cannot be alius and alius, one and another person: And so much for the
meaning of the word person.

Now for the manner of this union, we must know that things are united or made
on many ways: As 1 Faedere by a covenant, as Christ and the faithful: And
this may make one body but not one person. 2. By transmutation as Snow and
Water, but this makes one substance as well as suppositum, but so is not
Christ. 3. By aggregation as many materials united make an house, but this is
violent, and not voluntary: as was Christ. 4. By composition as body and soul,
make one man being united; but this is natural, and so is not the union of the
Deity to the Humanity in Christ. Lastly therefore by Assumption and this is
singular; proper to Christ alone. For the clear avoiding of old and dangerous
heresies, and errors which have risen about this Article of our Faith, we
conceive it not unnecessary to deal warily with those terms and words which we
borrow from the Latins in expressing our mind in this matter, such as are
Union Assumption, etc. As in this nice and narrow sense. To Assume and to Unite
do equally belong to the same Agents: But to be United and to be Assumed cannot
be praedicated equally by the same Subjects: Concerning the former, it will
appear plainly by and by. For the latter, the difference is thus, To be
united may not unproperly be attributed to God and Man in thus speaking: God
was united to Man, and man was united to God, and with this not a Caviller will
find fault: But to say (as on the one side truly Man was assumed to, and by
God: so on the other) God was assumed to or by Man were erroneous in it self
and dangerous in the consequents. For Relation we must allow to be in God, if
we acknowledge a Trinity of persons, but suffering, we dare not impute, least
with it we make him also changeable: Now to be United here, is only a term of
Relation, but to be Assumed is always a term of Passion.

To assume and to be assumed are words expressing, doing, and suffering and in
the present matter divide unto us God and man; God the Agent, whose part
therefore is to Assume. Man the Patient or sufferer, whose it is therefore to
be Assumed. To Assume as it is a compounded word, so it does signify a double
action, the first is taking: the second is application, taking to, The first is
caled principium: the second is called terminus assumptionis. The first
belongs to all the three persons in the Trinity. As the father did take and
give the humane nature to his Son as he says, Lo a body have thou given me. So
the Son did take [ not the nature of Angels (says the same Apostle) but the
seed of Abraham, so likewise the Holy Ghost did (whose it was, to sanctify the
nature assumed and by whom also we believe it was conceived) take our nature in
the first act. It was taken not to the father: nor to the Holy Ghost: but to
the second person which is Jesus Christ.

In the thing assumed it is worth our consideration: 1. Negatively to observe
that when God took our nature he separated it from sin and personality; he
took not our sin for that was contrary to his nature: He took not any person of
man at all, for that was contrary to his Unity, for so there should have been
Two Persons in the second person of the Trinity. As therefore our nature that
was assumed received fullness of grace from that most holy nature which assumed
it; So it owes its personal existence to the second person in the Trinity,
(having none of its own) to which it was united. 2. Positively learn what we
mean by our nature, for Nature in Scripture is sometimes put for the
corruption of our nature as Ephesians. 2. 3. but so Christ took not our nature
unless it were by way of imputation: For this is the Nature which by the
Schools is always opposed to Grace. Sometime in Scripture it is taken for
some part of nature, as for Reason only Rom: 2: 14: Or for sense only. 2. Pet:
2: 12: Jude. 10. but so Christ took not our nature, that is some part of our
nature. For that were to fall into the error of the Appollinarians and
Monothelites.

By Nature therefore we understand (not one or some) but all the partt of
nature (whether essential as soul and body: or integrall as the souls
faculties and the bodies Members) united; as also whatever flows from the
Principles of nature, as Growth from Vegetation, Eatting, Drinking, etc from
Sense, Discourse, and speech from reason, not refusing the very infirmities of
nature, as in the Soul Sorrow, Grief, Anger, Pity Vexation: in the will the
contradiction of the natural and Physical part (though with subjection too)
to the moral and deliberative in the understanding Negative Ignorance. And in
the Body Hunger and Thirst, Wearines and Weeping, Sense of Pain and mortality.
Ine brief by nature we mean whatsoever is general to and in all men, so that
it be not Grace or sin. For nature is that which grace nor Sin nor gives
nor takes away, but is only perfited and Sanctified not added by Grace;
corrupted and vitiated by sin, not extinguished. Again that is natural in a
man which may be well or il used. Grace only cannot be abused, Sin only cannot
be well employed: Nature only may be the weapon of unrighteousness to sin, Or
the instrument of righteousness to obedience: By which descriptions of nature,
it will be no hard matter for an ordinary understanding to find out what in man
was united and assumed to the Deity of Christ, in the work and mystery of the
Incarnation.

And now when a man considers the several immediate unions in Christ: and
finds the supernatural Unions of the Deity inseparable, even where soul and
body parts. He begins to be sensible of a natural combat between Flesh and
Spirit (I mean) soul and body: Yet ending in an acknowledgement of the
faithfullnes of God in Christ transcending all other freindship. For look we
after Damon and Pythias, Nisus and Eurialus, Theseus and Perithous, Scipio and
Laelius, Jonathan and David, Ruth and Naomi, (the only pair of Woman-freinds I
never read or heard of) And we shall find these come short of the love between
every man's soul and body! and yet these two are (in men) ready to fall out
one with another to see their own falsenesse, discovered by the apposed
faithfulness of God. So that the Soul, charge faithles dealing to the body,
first recounting it is care, study, pains, grief, joy, suffering, for the body;
all which were the body away the soul might be freed from, as having no back
to be clothed, no belly to be filled, no posterity to be provided for, no
cheeks to blush, no nor any subjection to corporal strokes, nor temptation to
sin, and yet how does this accursed earth forsake me, ( says the soul) then,
when if I am evil (and evil I am by conjunction with that too,) I must
anticipate those woeful torments due for sin, while that lies steeping in the
grave. Or if good (which I am by conjunction with Christ) then, when I have
most use, and should have most joy of the body that unnaturaly sinkes from me,
Leaving me (indeed) to enjoy (but alone) the glorified Mansion of the Saints:
wherein is the glorious body of my Lord, and my God, a most blessed and
beatificall object. But wanting a bodily eye to apprehend that fullnes which
dwells in him bodily. I suffer a comparative imperfection which makes me cry
out! How long Lord just and true? Where I ow; and without al wearines would and
could tender all worship etc. But all bodily service I come short of, having
(as before) no eye bodily to see, so [here] no knee to bend, no hand to lift
up, no tongue to speak To the honor of him that sits upon the throne and the
Lamb for ever.

On the other side the body though slower, yet falls in heavier in the charg,
and [like the Moon in the Hebrew Apologue against the Sun that would be
divorc'd] recriminates thus. The Soul is false to me and unkind! For its care,
study, pains, etc. are for its own Pride, and arrogance. For when the soul
is taken away a winding sheet, is as good to me, as Salomans Wardrobe: a grave
as palace, yea an Vrne, as the Universe! were it not for the souls Vanity,
nothing more thrifty then the belly, nor more hardy then back, the posterity
nothing, glory or sham too late, stroks unfelt, temptations unaccepted, sin
unperfited. I have been a true drudge to the soul an ungrudging slave, and [I
see now an il rewarded servant. My two feet have been teady to run, my two
hands to work, My 2 eyes to spy; My two ears to hearken; and my tongue [though
but one, yet as busy as any two twoes beside] to speak: yea al my senses, and
organical members, have been but the Pedees and Posts, to bring home, the far
fecht, and dear bought Dainties of experience, and knowledge, to the Lady (...)
this soul. And yet see her faithfulness! If I have done evil it was caeca
obedientia [and were she a Papist she by her own doctrine ought to suffer alone]
she goes but before for a few more stripes which her knowledge demerits: I my
ignorance notwithstanding shall be forced after to the increase of her torment
as well as mine? if I have done well she anticipates my reward and Crown and
glory, leaving me [unwilling to part with her] a loathing to my friends, a
companion to the Worms: and brother to corruption; not affording nec
beneficium salis so much kindness as salt, or a searecloth will do me: to keep
me from stinking and putrefaction, And here is the regreet of the two dearest
friends nature ever knew Now observe how much kinder and constanter Christ is
to both, then either to other: For beside that he is and does what ever each of
these is or does to one another, and that not only per modum efficientiae, as
an Efficient working that good that is in them, but also per modnm eminentiae,
by way of Excellency doing greater things for them both, then they are able to
apprehend at present. Like a soul caring, studying, laboring, greiving,
joying suffering for both: Like the Body going, working, seeing, hearing*
speaking for both: Like a soul, to the Body informing and conserning both:
Like a body to the Soul serving both And all this in an ineffable and glorious
way for the advancing of both: He does further, when the soul is taken out of
the body (as it were out of a sheath) take it into his hands does of the rust,
forbisheth it, and brightning it with his own glory, Clothes it with Majesty
Nay more, But I had need learue St. Paul's (...) unut terable words to express
the happiness of it there. For the things which eye has not seen to supply the
want of sight, nor ears heard to make up the loss of bodily tears etc. are
there ready to entertain it:

On the other side the Body, whose estate seems to be most deplored when friends
avoid the sight of it, the soul in whose service it is either worn out or
wounded to death forsaking it, has notwithstanding the everlasting arms
underneath it: treasuring it up for one of his jewels in whose sight the death
of the Saints is precious: For no doubt God who tells the wanderings, bottle
up the tears, numbreth the hairs, and writes in a book all the part of his
servants living: Can, and does (though the grave cause all the joints to drop
asunder, the bowels to engender worms, and a stinch; turns the pleasant eye
balls, the sometime seat of delight, into a rotten Gelly, dry the brain,
consume the mucles, rack the whole to pieces, and then grind it again to dust)
preserve each atom, and by a most inscrutable providence, keep every more of
that dust, to the glorious resurrection. And this although not comparable in it
self to the glory of the soul, yet has in it an unspeakeable weight of
comfort.

And therefore O My soul though I desire thee not to be so unnatural to cast of
the body! Yet learn to know a truer friend, then my flesh, Let thy care be to
gain and keep Christ, thy study to please him, thy labor to serve him, thy joy
to know him, thy grief to offend him, thy suffering for him, rather, yea more
then ever it has been for this body of mine, who will stay longer by thee,
prove kinder to thee then e're that has been or is like to be! And O My flesh!
though I would not have thee unreasonable, yet begin to be sensible of a truer
Guide, a constanter keeper, and a blesseder governor then ever my own soul
has or will be to thee: Let thy feet stand in the Gates of Sion, or be running
toward the house of God: Let thy hands be working the thing that is good, Let
thine eyes be lifted up to the place where Christ's honor dwells! And let this
be thy Covenant with them! and make thy tongue to tell of his praise and speak
good of his name that will restore all these (left to corruption by the soul)
to become vessels of glory in the resurection of the just, And in the mean
time keeps them that that not a hair of thy head shall be lost, And O thou
very God of peace who when thou beginnest to take into favor love with an
everlasting love (for such is thy Covenant) into protection never leavest nor
forsakest (such is thy unchangeable nature) so take my soul into favor, my
flesh into tuition, that both being sanctified throughout. My soul may long
for thee, my flesh may cry out for the living God! My Soul love thee as it is
beloved of thee and my body serve thee as it is, and shall be preserved by
thee; for ever.

Secondly when I contemplate the unity of Christ's person and therein consider,
how near Man is brought to God, I am enforced to acknowledge all promised
Unions of God to man possible; all commanded Unions of man again to God
reasonable. The promised Unions of God to Man are. 1. Pastoral, He our
shepherd we his Flock. 2. Oeconomicall, he our Master, we his servants. 3.
Consanguineal, He our Father we his Sons and Daughters. 4. Conjugall he our
Husband we his Spouse here, his hride in the resurrection, his Wife for ever:
and the like.

In the first: his call, and our following, declares us one way. In the second:
his command, and our obedience one Work, In the third: his tender care, our
dutiful honor, one Generation or Kindred. In the Last: his holy desire, and
our chaste submission, one love.

And all these unions made easy even to faith by the Unity of Christ's person.
He that gave us his son, how shall he not with him freely give us all things.
The commanded Unions, of man to God are, 1. Of Judgment that we, [as he doth]
approve the things that are more excellent. 2 Of Will for election that we (as
he does) desire truth in the inward parts, and this is to choose the better
part. 3. Of Affection, that we (as he doth] hate the evil and love the good:
being merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful. 4. Of Conversation that we
be holy as he is holy, perfect, as our Father which is in Heaven is perfect,
that we purify our selves as he is pure.

And all this is but to be one spirit as the Apostle says He that is joined to
the Eord is one Spirit. And good reason! For God requires no more of us then St
Paul did of the Galatians, and upon the same ground. Be ye as I am, for I am as
ye are. O ye Sons of Men be ye as Gods! And the Children of the most high,
for the son God is God, yet for your sakes, became the son of Man. And O my
Soul, since thou have no reason to doubt have faith to pray! Philosophy ^ath
taught thee, That every Essence is an Unity: not only in number, as opposed to
multitude, but even in nature, as an undivided being* the desire of which last
Unity is the cause of sorrow in the sense of division. Thy sinful (and
therefore woeful) experience has taught thee to feel thy self involved in
the curse of Simeon and Levi, to be divided and scattered: But this Mystery is
that which teaches thee by the Gospel to expect Unity as a gift, to desire it
as a benefit, On therefore my soul, take with thee, words, and say!

O Lord: I am by sin either a solitary wild Wolf, or at best a strayed sheep
from the sold of peace: but by this I know thou can, I hope thou will make
the Wolf lie down with the Lamb, or cause thine own immaculate Lamb the Lamb
of God to take away that sin which makes me a Wolf in thy sight. Or if a
strayed sheep, seek. O seek ( according to thy promise) that which was lost,
and bring again that which was driven away, bind up that which was broken,
strengthen that which was sick, feed me upon a good Pasture, and on the high
Mountains of Israel fold me.

O my God, I am by nature a fugitive, or a Captive: a Rogue, or a slave,
without Master, or under a cruel Master, where my work is sin, my wages death,
I sow the wind, and reap the Whirlewind, but O thou great Commander of all
hearts who rulest by love, and so make thy service to be perfect freedom, I
want a service, do thou entertain me, I am weary of my Old Master do thou
redeem me, I yield to thy Yoke, accept thy condition, embrace thy Covenant;
and for reward build upon thy courtesy. Thy Gospel shall be my Indenture, thy
Sacraments the Seals, thy son the Undertaker of my truth; thy Holy Spirit
and my own Conscience the Inward, thy holy Angels and the World the
Eyewitnesses of my fidelity. Thy secrets I will keep, Thy commands I will
religiously obey. Thy talents improve, Thy goods not wast, No contract will I
make prejudicial to thy service, For this purpose I yield my Ear to the awle
and door of thy house, bore it, for I will not go from thee for ever.

O Lord my God my poor soul is by sin become either an Orphant to my sorrow;
or a Bastard to my shame; either fatherless without God, or of a faulty
Father, John 8. 48. The first is the object of pity, but the last of reproach.
Thou have promised to succor the first, but have commanded thy doors to be
shut against the last. Thou will be a Father to the Fatherless, but a Bastard
shall not enter into thy Congregation to the tenth Generation, O my God, my
souls substance is true borne, as in thy Creation: only, since sin an Orphan
of grace, the Child of wrath, by nature! And so O Lord thy charge: Be a father
to it! And like Jacob cause't to return to its Fathers House in peace: Indeed
in quality it is base, of the lineage of the man of sin, and here the Crown is
fallen from our heads, Woe unto us, that we have sinned. The disherited may be
restored, the fatherless adopted, the Stranger naturalized: but the bastard
has his BEND SINISTER or BORDER GOBANY an Indeleble character or brand of
Infamy, which though amongst men it be an evil that knows no remedy, yet with
thee ( O Lord with whom all things are possible) easy to be cured. Thou have a
fountain of blood to regenerate to a new man the infamous soul of siufull
mankind. Do thou therefore who once tookest away the reproach of Pharez ( the
base Son of Judah) by making him a Lineall Progenitour to thine anointed: By
waking thy son to be progenitor genitrixq* to my soul in the womb of
Baptism to repentance, take away the sin of my birth and conception, that
the Spirit of adoption may enable me with confidence to say Abba Father.

And yet O my God if in all these relations (pardon me my Father, if in these
too far allusions my pen may seem irreverent, my heart desires to honor thee)
I measure thee by the line of a man. I may suspect the Unity and fear a
division. For if I am a sheep smite but the Shepherd, and the Sheep will be
scattered, For this is the prophecy. If I be a servant, the year of Iubile
may grant me an injurious liberty. For this is the Law of servants. If a Son on
my marriage day, I may forsake thee. For that is the rule of Espousals. O then
so it must be! thou must betroth me to thy self in faithfulness: for so shall
I in the day enjoy thee, in the night embrace thee, thy left hand shall be
under me, and thy right arm shall encompasse me. The year of Iubile for joy,
shall never go out, for liberty, never come in. How then O Lord shall I allure
thee, how shall I woo thee, for my sinful soul is like Thamar either a sad
neglected Widow, or which is worse a prostituted Strumpet, Once this is
certain: the Maiden innocence thereof is lost by the first transgression: which
to restore, is in the World of Women, the mock of Art: Yet in thy Church the
miracle of Grace, for it is as easy with thee to purify a spiritual Harlot
to virginity as to preserve a fleshly mother in virginity.

Thus having breifely described and largly applied the Nature of this Union and
the Natures united. I pass to speak of the Reason of the Incarnation with the
bare mention whereof I shall conclude.

The Reasons of the Incarnation may be reduced to these heads, such as concern
God. Others that concern us. Lastly some that concern the enemies of God, and
Man, Sin and Satan. Of the reasons that concern God, these two are anciently
given by the Fathers.

First, That God [whose counsel and purpose has ever been the illustration and
manifestation of his own glory] might more eminently, evidently, and
transcendently set forth before Men and Angels; The super-excellency of his
Goodness, Wisdom, Justice, and Power: Which no where so clearly shine as in
the great work of the incarnation. As may appear by a Particular
consideration of the even now named artributes.

As first his goodness is no where so manifest, as in him, in whom dwells the
fullnes of the godhead Bodily. The Best of Creatures before, had but the
footesteps: And at the best but an image of God in them. But here God himself:
not appears, but dwells: not his back parts only, but his fullnes in man. Nor
is that goodness here locked, but treasured: that of his fullnes we might all
receive, and grace for grace, etc. Or if we take it not only for holiness, but
for lovingkindnesse also! Where can we find a parallel to the goodness of the
Incarnation. Wherein that God who even humbles himself when he daines to
behold things done, not in Earth only, but in Heaven also, is pleased to
communicate himself, his love, yea and his very nature too: not to a creature
only, but an earthly creature: nor so only, but to a sinful nature, to an
enemy; the Son of his love, to the Children of wrath: so that as the Angel
speaking of Christ his goodness in the first sense calls him, (...). That Holy,
so may we in the latter call him (...), That Kind, That loving, That merciful
thing, who has so highly honored, and not despised the weakness of his own
workmanship.

Secondly his Wisdom is no where more apparent then in Him, in whom are hid
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. And indeed the very Incarnation it
self did reveal the wisdom of God in the contrivance of man's salvation so
gloriously, that if not only confounded the Devils, and befooled the subtle
Serpent, (as we shall see anon) but even posed the good Angels themselves. Of
whom, St. Peter testifies, that they did? (...) stoop to peer into the
mystery. For as the learned give the reason, They could not conceive how man
could ever be redeemed; For the laws rigor was so inexorable that Man could
not be quit but by sufferings of infinite value and worth: Now they knew that
indeed Man could suffer: But the sufferings of men and Angels, could not
merit, or countervaile the Laws rigor, within any limits of time. Again they
knew that if God interposed he could add value; But he could not (his very
essence forbidding it) suffer. So that here God charged his Angels with folly,
who knowing Gods promise of redemption to Israel, in the old Testament; yet
were nonplus't, and to seek in the means. Till God in the fulness of time
made known the mystery by the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, uniting God and Man
together in one person, for the accomplishing of his promise and covenant.

Thirdly, his Justice, and that both in respect of the Law whose every iota and
title stood firmer then Heaven; (for the Heavens gave way to the descending of
Christ:) or earth (which yielded and trembled at his resurrection) But the Law
stood strong, not suffering him to pass till all the percepts were obeyed, the
prophesies fullfilled, and trespasses satisfied for; Not condoning, much less
conniving at sin, though but imputed (and that) to the Son of God; And then
wherein (I pray) does the senerity of Gods Justice appear more or equally?
Zaleucus his one eye: And that Heathens self destroying, besides their cruelty
come infinitely short, of this most strict, yet aequable Justice: And secondly
in respect of the Subject, yiedling and exacting satisfaction in the same
nature that had sinned; and then rendering the purchased inheritance to the
nature that had merited by obeying. And lastly in respect of Death it self who
reigning over all by sin, lost not its dominion till Christ spoiled him of
it. And that most justly for Death entering upon Christ (to whom he had no title
by reason of the righteousness that was in Christ) considering he was flesh, not
knowing that he was also the Lord of life made a breach upon the flesh of
Christ, and at last death dyed (as all things do in their contraries) in the
life of Christ. Having first, forfeited his own tenement by a forcible entry
upon another man's possession, which gives a good title among Kings and
Soldiers to all things gotten by conquest.

Lastly his power which is briefly; more manifest in uniting the divine nature
to the humane; then it is in creating. Because there is a more real and
infinite distance between God and Man then between Man and Nothing, between
Heaven and Hell, then betwixt Heaven and the first Chaos, between sin and
Grace then Emptines and Grace: As also more difficulties in redemption, then in
creation, more corruptions to hinder, more Enemies to oppose the very work and
office of a Redeemer, and this is the first reason given by Damascene, lib. 3.
cap. 1. de orthodoxa fide.

Secondly, That there (in some manner) might be a proportionablnesse and
analogy in the Mediator to the Trinity, which (if I forget not) is by St.
Austin called a responsary Trinity for as in the Trinity there are three
persons in one essence. So in Christ there are three essences in one person: In
the first the persons of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost are but
one essence, ( i) God, So in the latter three essences, the word, the Soul,
and flesh, are but one person Christ and this is Saint Augustines, lib. 13. de
crtniate, cap. 1.

The reasons of the Incarnation that concern as are two. First the removing of
Evil from us. Secondly* the promoting of our good. To the effecting of both
these it was necessary that the word should be made Flesh and the Son of God
should become the Son of Man. For (although I confess with Saint Austin that
God in his absolute power could have framed another possible mean for the
salvation of mankind; yet) by that power which is ordinate to and equal with
his will there could be No other name given under Heaven whereby we should be
saved, but only this.

For if we consider Satan's power (who now Lords it over seduced and enthralled
mankind: And by a woeful CATACHRESIS is become the God of this World) his power
and strength ( I say) not to be overcome no not by the contention of an Arch
angel without a Mittimus to God [ The Lord rebuke thee.]

Or secondly sins most intimate adhearence to the sons of Adam; whose
vicious habits in us that they might appear (as it were more then accidental
to us, have (by the best speaker Gods word) the denomination of our very parts
and substance given to them. Being called the body of Sins, and of death: our
Members, yea and our very Flesh too: whose crucifying vicinity and tormenting
closeness, made a miserable Apostle make a more miserable 'EPIPHONEMA crying
out [(...)] who shall deliver me,

Or thirdly the more then necessary Flux of sinful acts and transgressions
from those vicious habits and corruptions, whose violent torrent like a breach
of the Sea or the Cataracts of Nilus (though caused by nature cannot by the
Laws of nature, or rules of Physic, though with the poor Woman in the Gospel
we spend our whole time and substance upon the Physicians) be stopped, no nor
(with reverence be it spoken) by Christ himself, without the Fountain be
dried up by a virtue proceeding from him.

Or lastly the strong Sequence of Gods law following sin inevitably with
Death, malediction and curse* Charging upon transgressors invincibly. That
vengeance and those intolerable plagues, which Gods word can be understood to
denounce, or Gods wrath to inflict. So: that to the removing of these
malignities there is required the interposition of a God.

It must be more then an Angel that must disenthrone the Devil He must be God
that must tread Satan under our feet.

Secondly it must be some thing more subtle and spiritual then any creature
whatsoever, that must get between us and our lust even the God in whom we live
and move and have our being that must separate our sins from us.

Thirdly it must be somewhat above nature that must hinder sins actions, and
cause the natural and most fruitful womb of concupiscence to miscary. It
must be the God of nature, that can make the fire not burn, the Sea not drown,
the Lions not devour, the Sun to go backward. He alone it is; that can give
sin a miscarying womb and dry breasts.

Lastly, it must be the Lawgiver himself: that must make the Fire no burn,
the Sea not drown, and lions of his law not devour guilty mankind.

And all this: yet not to be done in a direct judiciary way without an union,
for although Christ as God be stronger then the strong man Satan: Yet the
stronger dispossesses not the less strong, but by an entry into his house:
Christ must be incarnate;, that man may not be a Devil incarnate, Christ's
incarnation was an Ejectione firm against Satan.

Again this only way was it, whereby Christ had fairer evidence for his title
to man, then Satan had: for the Devil got in Man from Gods Regiment,
(notwithstanding the right of Creation) by getting Man to be of one way, and
one work with him (man having as little communion in essence and substance with
God, as with the Serpent) but now Christ comes with this plea, and defeats him;
For though Man and Satan are of one work, yet are they not of one nature,
though they be one way, yet they are not one flesh: though in this they be one:
both liars, both deceitful, both sinful: Yet in this Christ and Man agree
better, that they be bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh: And as the
Serpent (for this very reason) when he separated God and Man in the first fall,
yet could not nullify the Marriage of, or divorce Adam and Eve. Nor Sin nor
Satan could separate them whom God has put together: So Christ and his Church
standing upon the same terms, are so united, that: I am persuaded that neither
life nor death, (life will not, death cannot) nor Angels nor principalities,
etc. shall be able to separate from the love of God in Christ Jesus. Romans 8.
38. 39.

And so what has bin said of Satan, is likewise to be said of the goods which
he is possessed of, (I mean sins and plagues though I confess in some sense,
even Man may be accounted part of his chatrel goods.)

For sin like the Darkness of night is chased about the earth by the Sun
of Righteousness still and only giving place to Christ whose advancing into our
Horizon is the bringing in of the day of Salvation, and the driving away of the
Darkness of transgression: For all other means, whether the Light of
Conscience, Law of Nature, Counsels of Men, Rules of Philosophy, Ingenuity
of Education, yea and the very Law of God it self [that is it is Letter] are
nothing else but Stars and Candlelight; not to drive away the night. But as it
were so many arguments to prove that there is a night. Things that serve rather
to show that there is a Heaven and an Earth, then to enable us to enjoy either.
And therefore they that do charitably, acknowledge a possibility of salvation
to the Heathen; which never heard of the Gospel, say that this salvation does
accrue unto them from God for Christ sake. Man could let in sin, but it is
Christ that must expel it, Man could embrace wickedness, but God must send his
Son to bless us by turning us away from our iniquities. Israel could
destroy himself. But it is God must help. David needed no guide to go astray
like a lost sheep. But it is David's Lord must seek and save him.

And lastly concerning the Laws rigor, it fully appears by that which has
been spoken already, that it must be an Immanuell, that must exonerate the
burden satisfy the court of justice, arrest judgment, and take of the
seargeant: with a supersedeas. for an Execution taken out, and not served. And
all this is don by Christ as our Praes and Sponsor Surety, and Advocate, for
the removing of evil from us. And this is the first reason.

The: other reason concerning man is the promoting of his good which is done so
many ways so plentifully, that St. Bernard after his manner* calls Christ
incarnate Manna from Heaven, the joy of the hungry. A cluster of grapes, sweet
grapes from Gods vineyard the refreshment of the thirsty soul, O isle of
gladness. The health of the sickly, and a stone cut out of the mountain
without hands that the negligent may fear. In a word: For the general let that
go for all which Fulgentius with fifteen other Bishops more have subscribed
concerning this parti^ar except the Word which is God by uniting in a singular
way man's nature unto himself, had been borne of a virgin a true and perfect
man, there should never have been bestowed upon us (that are borne fleshly) an
Arise of a spiritual birth etc. But now what sweet enterchanges do there pass
between the Lords Anointed and mankind: He borrowes our Flesh, and gives us
his Spirit, takes Earth returns Heaven: Exchanges his Peace for our
chastisement, his sonship, for our servitude, his grace for our sin, his
crown for our curse, his life for our death, his joys for our sorrows. In sum
of God he became Man; That we by communion with him, of men might be made
partakers of the divine nature.

And because man's felicity stands in enjoying God: Thus familiarly, has the
Son of God bartered Natures states, and goods with man. His first nativity
from God, the Second from Man, making him whose* First Birth is from Man, to
have a Second from God.

And secondly in seeing God whose brightness, dazzling al sinful sight, with
the beauty of holiness: Therefore has the Lord Jesus Christ like unto another
meek Moses put on the veil of the flesh, that by it boldly we might enter and
have access to the Holy of Holies, to see as we are seen.

And thirdly if there be any inhaerent happiness [I understand the cause of
it] in man as well as sorrow, it is [but like the axe among the Prophets [a tool
not fit for their coat] borrowed, and that from Christ.

For there are three several Gifts which are all of them comprehended in or
subordinate to the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, concurring to the happiness of
man, in the Scripture called by the name of Grace: And distinguished by the
immediate extrinsecal Giver.

As first the grace of God which is the Father, by which grace, I conceive,
Christ himself is specified. To which sense I am enduced, by comparing that of
Saint Paul, Tit. 2. 11. to that of St. John c. 3. v. 16.

Secondly the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. Which grace must needs be the
Spirit, if we consider the promise John 15. 26. Which is somewhere also called
the Grace of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Lastly the Grace of the Spirit which is well known to be that frame of
holiness in the Saints, which being diversified is called the fruit of the
Spirit Gal. 5, 22 To the introducing of which last it was necessary that the
two former should precede. The Spirit as the proper fountain of holiness and
comfort: The incarnation as the Mediam and Motive of the Spirits mission to,
and acceptance with man: But of this parhaps fully and more clearly hereafter,
when (if ever) we come to write of Christ's Egresse from the world.

Lastly if in Man's felicity we may any way attend to man's actions: Or if there
be any such thing beside the name of it as moral felicity. Christ as incarnate
must be the procurer of it, which is done by him: As an Object of our Faith: A
Ground of Hope: A cause of Love: and a Rule of Operation.

Two things are required in the object of faith without either of which Faith
fails: Affability. the Party we believe must be apt to be spoken with Romans 10.
15. And Veracitie. The first is denied, to God though with imputation of fault
herein to Man's sin only: according to that Let not God speak least we die.
The other to man, God is not a Man that he should lie Let God be true and every
man a Liar. God cannot be believed though true because man cannot abide before
his voice. Man cannot be trusted when he speaks for untruths. Now in Christ
these two are united: The affability of Man Here is our access: The truth of
God Here the object of our faith.

Secondly the ground of hope as the most plentiful expression of Gods love, [
^t quid non speremus amati] being so loved what may we not hope for. He that
gave us his Son how shall he not with him freely give us all things.

The cause of love, thirdly he is in God to each of us personaly in us to God
dutifully. We love him because he loved us first.

Lastly the rule of Operation* In a Rule that men work by Two things are
necessary: Rectitude and Visibilicie. The first is in God without the second.
The second in man without the first, That Christ therefore might be a most
perfect rule for man to work by, To the righteousness of God, he assumed the
visibilitie of Man etc.

Thirdly the reasons of the Incarnation that respect sin is (without the
limitation of the power of God) that it might be a remedy to sin. Toll
morbos, toll vulnera, et nulla est medicinae causa. If there had been no sin
there had been no need of a Savior, and therefore the gloss upon (1. Tim. 1.
Christ came into the World to save sinners) is not amiss Nulla causa veniendi
fuit Christo Domino nisi peceatores salvos facere, and is answerable to that
Luke 19. The Son of man came not, but to seek and to save that which was
lost. Man by sin became like the Ax flowne of from the Helve and sunk in the
water, that this Ax may be restored, it must be made emergent, for this the
Prophet cast a bough into the water, Christ is that Bough which by the
Incarnation is cast into the water, and by it man, that before sank now swimms.
Sin in man was like death in the pot, that the pottage might be healed meal
was cast in, Christ is that Meal 2. Kings 4. 39. wherefore St. Augustine upon
my text Caro ^e obcaecaverat, caro te sanat; quoniam sic venit Christus ut de
carne, carnis vitia extingueret Flesh blinded thee (O Man) Flesh heals thee
For therefore Christ came that by his Flesh he might extinguish the sin of
the flesh. Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World,
Which sin of the World reading it in the singular number: Bid interprets
original sin. Because that alone of all other, is the sin of the whole
world, And indeed taken extensively is without comparison the greatest sin
that ever was: no one actual beside being to be charged upon all men: But in
respect of their intension of sin, it is the least (becauss least voluntary
now it is a rule quodcuuque malum est maxim voluntarium est maxim peccatum)
But I conceive the word sin is rather Genericall then Specificall containing
as well actual as original, For proof where of I oppose St. Peter's Comment.
Act. 3. 26, to that of Bid. which may serve as a final confirmation of this
reason. Unles I may take leave to them the necessity of Christ's incarnation to
the removing of sin, to bring in the expression of a Learned divine affirming
that If the whole Heaven were turned into one Sun: And the whole World into
Paradise: I add. If all the righteous men that ever were beside, were composed
into one Abel: And all the Angels of Heaven into one Seraphin: To make an
universal holocaust they would be insufficient to expiate any one of these many
sins whereof we stand guilty before God) Christ alone is an al suffieient
sacrifice for the sins of the whole world. Ioh. 2. 2. But of this sufficient
has been spoken in the fore going reasons which concern us.

Fourthly the reasons that concern Satan are his utter confusion and
overthrow: And that by man whose nature was by him first infected, and for ever
infested: As It was the pride of Satan's malignity against God that for his
sin had cast him out of Heaven to wound Gods Honor in the fall of the best
of his earthly creatures mankind, whom he therefore assaulted and overthrew So
it is the praise of Gods infinite justice, that although he might have
immediately vindicated his own honor, and avenged Adams fall, as well of
himself upon Satan, in cursing him as he did the poor Snake his instrument.
Yet he would not daigne to cope with him but in Man and therefore he sent his
Son in the form not of man only, but an enthralled man, A servant to destroy
him that had the power of death that is the devil.

Secondly that as Satan by working upon the frailty of humane flesh deceived
the first Adam so the Hook of the deity (it is St. Hieromes phrase) being
Baited with the Human Nature: The Flesh of the second Adam invited the Great
Devourer to bite: And so the great taker was taken: The great Devourer, was
deceived as we shall see more in the treatise of Christ's temptations.

Thirdly (and wherewith I will conclude the argument concerning the Devil)
this may ( a posteriore and by the effect) be added as a reason of the
Incarnation, that Satan in his promises, (though most false and lying) might
not out bid the goodness of, God in his most true and real performances. The
greatest Promise that even the Tempter promised to mankind, (though that in his
temptation of Christ to worship him was a very large lying one) was that to
Eve, Genesis 3. 5. Ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil: Now he was so far
from performing it, that he effected the contrary ( like a liar as he was, from
the beginning) which Almighty Gods Irony, verse 25, will prove (though at first
sight it seem to make good the Serpents words) This I say was the ^argest
promise that ever the Devil made with intention (as he ^doth a^ the rest) to
deceive.

This yet was somewhat less then the Incarnation did perform. For if we take
mankind as comprehended in the Humanity of Jesus Christ, it was more then (as
God) for it was true to say, Hic homo Deus est, this man is God! Knowing good
in himself as God; evil in his burden as Man: The evil of sin by
imputation, The evil of punishment, by a most bitter passion, Or otherside if
we consider mankind as it is in (...) The Company of true Believers, they are
at least sicut Dij, As Gods, And if I over value not St. Peter's words, 2 Pet.
I. v. 3* somewhat more: As being partakers of the divine nature. And for their
knowledge it is by the Incarnation improved to the highest pitch of the Devils
promise; knowing more communicated goodness (the only object in its kind of
created knowledge then ever before Heaven or Earth could represent to Men or
Ang^ells in the glory of the only begotten of the Father full of grace and
truth. John 1. 12

And evil was never so objected to view of Men or Angels as it was by the
exinanition of a Deity: The humbling of the supreme Majesty of Heaven to become
a man to suffer the confluence of Gods judgments, and curses for the expiation
of Man's sins.

And this use I must for ever make of it, when I am tempted to sin by
enticing promises: I will persuade my self to hope, far more performed for
me by Christ, then is now For ever was or will be promised by the grand work
master to sinners the Prince of darkness.

And now when I seriously weigh these reasons, and think to apply them, I can
nor hear nor see other object but (me thinks within me) an Heavenly host a
multitude of Angels singing that excellent Anthem, Glory; Never such glory! to
God on high! Glory to his goodness and mercy! Glory to his Wisdom and
Contrivance! Glory to his Justice and Severity! Glory to his Greatness and
Power. And if two infinites may bear a comparison I know whether be more (...)
in the highest? (...) or (...) Glory or God? For here is glory in highest, to
God: As Well as glory to God in the highest. This for the first sort of reasons
which concern God.

But when I consider the other also: I am again Nonplus't and know not which
will be the greater (...) or (...)? The Glory or the Goodwill. That which God
has reserved to himself? or that which he has imparted to man for if in this
(...) we shall consider Whose, to Whom, What, and in what Manner this
Goodness is expressed: We must confess it a (...) Such a commendation of Gods
Love, Romans 5. 8. As no Words can set forth but Christ's own (...)! The Father
had such goodwill Mat. 11 26 God so loved Ioh. 3 16. And though they raise in
my weakeheart such ravishing joys, and light: That I like Peter in mount Tabor
MATTHEW, 17. 4. must needs say. (...) It is good for us to be here. Yet when I
go about to pitch my Tabernacle. Like a Pilot without the Straits or Channel.
I sail on the Maine On an abyss where no bottom is. Under A height without a
Culmen. Nothing can describe it. But St Paul's (...) Romans 11, 33. It is so far
above a Poor Sinners Ela! so far below A mortal's Gamut, That it is a Song
indeed, only for Angels to set a tune to.

And yet me thinks hitherto there wants something to make it full Harmony
Music, must have three parts to make a Consort Glory to God in the highest,
There Is the ALTVS. Good will toward men, There Is the BASSVS. Yet we want a
TENOR. That is, On earth Peace. This we want indeed! every where. In the
Church. In the State, In the Field, In our Houses. In the City, In the
Country, In all places, and all businesses. Over our heads may for
inscription be written; at all our Towns ends may be hanged out for a sign
those words of St. Paul Without are fightings: Within are Fears. Nay I had
almost forgot to tell you that this is wanting among the reasons I have brought
for the incarnation though this were a maine end thereof. Wherefore in the
breife adddition of it I will conclude.

Christ came in a time when God had made wars to cease in all Lands, and
indeed he chose a time fit for his business, which was to reconcile things in
Heaven, and things on Earth: Col. 1 20. Which reconciliation though it was
perfected on the Cross, yet was it articled for, and treated in the
Incarnation: v. 22. And (Ephesians. 2. 14. 15.) Saint Paul says, He is our peace
who has made both one, Having abolished in the flesh the enmity- In which
words J humbly conceive the Apostle ties not his discourse to the abolition of
that legal Sanctification of the Jewish Nation-where by they were separated
from al other people to be a peculiar people to God only, but intends the Main
business Christ came into the world for: which is that mentioned in the
forenamed Colos. 1. 20. To reconcile or make peace (It is true prophetically
and de facto himself somewhere says he came not to send peace, but a sword
(that is) men by occasion of him, and his Doctrine would together by the ears.
But if he had made this his business de jure to sow contention, he might have
been still called the Son of man, But hardly the Son of God, if that text
Math 5. 9. be true) No No, we have experience enough that it was a Prophecy to
show what would be, but commands enough to the contrary to make it apparently
no Rule to tell us what should or ought to be.

Well then let us see How the Incarnation is the ground of that dearly wanted
blessing On Earth; Peace God when he framed the earth hung the happy affairs
thereof on two hooks. The upper and more golden was The Love of God, The Lower
and like it was The Love of our Neighbor. On these two (...) hang (not only
the Earth, but that Word by which that was made) The Law, and Prophets Math:
22. 40. Sin comes and unhinges the world: so that instead of Loves
Conjunction, All things fall in pieces by Hate Convulsions. All men being
naturaly thenceforth (...) or (...) Hateful or Hating Tit 3. 3. Hateful to God,
He repents that he has made man Genesis 6. 6, (...) Haters of God. Rom 1, 30,
They cannot endure him, either his presence, or voice Genesis 3. 8. Nay either of
these is death to them. Judge: 13. 22 etc. Hateful to one another: witness
Genesis 3. 12. Where Adam little less then grinds his teeth at his Wife, and Genesis
4. 8. where Kain kills Abel. Nay witness our sad times wherein we are fallen
into manifest Gentilisme, or at least so much of it as that forementioned
Character speaks. Tit 3. 3. To rectify all this disorder, it is contrived
that our Redeemer may be God and Man. Had he been Man only, and not God, as the
Arrians, and Socinians say, we might have reason to have been (...) Lovers of
Mankind, to love our Neighbor etc. but I doubt we should have been (...)
Haters of God nevertheless. Or at least have been reconciled upon other
grounds then through Christ.

Had he been God, and not man: we might have thought our selves bound the more
to love God with all our heart etc, but I fear we should naturally have hated
one another, As we now do Serpents or [ I shame to speak it] as we in England
have done these late years.

But what ever other men take for their course, this must be my rule to love
all the Lines that concen^er in my Savior. And that with a Love not only
Quoniam Psalm 116. 1. But also Amore tametsi; not because only with David they
are beneficial, But with Job (whose eyes opened to his Redeemer) though they
[wrong me, sequester me, imprison yea) kill me. Math 5, 44. Indeed Sin I may
not endure Heb. 12. 4. The Devil I must resist. 1. Pet, 5. 9. My Savior took
the nature of neither. And intended as really to put enmity betwixt me and
these, as God did put betwixt us and the Serpent. But for God and Man I shall
offer violence to my Lord Jesus if they be not united qua tales in my
affections, I must not hate or forsake God though he kill me: I must not hate
man neither though he kill me. For how shall I look upon the Lord Jesus Christ
who being both made peace for both. Of whose fulness I beseech the God of Heaven
I may receive and Grace for grace even (...) an unhypocritical Love Rom 12 9.
And let as many as be Christians be thus minded. Phi: 3* 15 And for them that
are otherwise minded, God in his due time reveal it to them, And let all
England say Amen.

FINIS.

