A Letter sent from Dr. Barnard, a Reverend Divine, and Parson of TREDAGH

To Sr. Simon Harcourts Lady in Westminster, LONDON March 18. 1641.

And Printed by the appointment of the Right Worshipful Sr. Francis Knowles
Knight a Member of the Honorable House of COMMONS.

Wherein more particularly is contained diverse very memorable passages twixt
the Kings Armies, and the Rebels in the Town of Tredagh and the Country round
about.

Which may give comfort and satisfaction to all his Majesty's good Subjects
here in England to see the powerful finger of the Almighty in preserving and
giving Victory to, as it were, a handful of men, against a multitude of
bloodthirsty Rebels.

London, Printed for Nathanael Butter, 1641.

AN ABSTRACT OF News since our releife, January 11. to the 20. of February,
Drogedagh Feb. 23. 1641.
AFter much misery we were releived by the Pinnace with some bisquet and
ammunition, extremity of want drawing on of both, that it was not, vnobserved
that it came just as we returned from Church, where we had been solemnly
praying for it. The Rebels h^d sunk a barque in the Channel, but two or three
days before the wind and tide had driven her out to sea, they had hoysted an
iron chain but that hindered not their passage over it neither; 1000. of shot
were sent from either side the river, and had double returns from ours, yet
not one man of ours lost, with what joyful acclamations, the Pinnace and her
shallop were received within the bay, what mutual salutations of shot were
given, and answered, how the streets rang again with thanks and prayers to
God, from all sorts, those who were eye and ear witnesses can never forget. At
this releife the countenances of the townsmen apparently fell, till upon
^econd thoughts* toward night they seemed to be very glad, and for an
expression were very kind to the soldiers, offering them drink upon every
guard upon free cost, which the poor men (not used to receive so liberally,
and without their officers knowledge) tw^^ parts of the watch were drunk about
midnight* (...) sleep* a breach was made in the wall in an (...) orchard
between St. James gate and the water, in which as was confessed, (by one
hanged the next day) an officer had a chief hand in, about three of the clock
500. entered, and continued an hour or two vndiscovered, till being marched
upon the key they shouted; which was either in assurance of victory, or to
invite the Town to their promised assistance, some of them had adventured up
to the Mill mount, and killed the first Sentinel, others had entered upon the
bridge; This shout being our first Alarm, the Governor run out unarmed, and
was the first that caused a drum to beat, and in that haste was compelled to
take the Main guard, who were his own Company, and commanded men from by
guards, these were his present strength, first posted down some pikes commanded
by the Ensign to make good the bridge until the Musketeers could make
ready, we met the enemy upon their first entry, and finding them resisted by
a guard of ours, charged home and soon compelled them to retreat. The
Governor immediately releeved his ensign with Musketeers, who met not
far from the bridge an other company of the Rebels, but being in the dark
took them by their answer to be friends, until he found the contrary by a
shot made at him, which went through the brimmes of another hat next him,
as soon as we gave fire it proved so effectual, that they instantly scattered
rnd were chased through the streets, leaving their dead bodies, as stumbling
blocks in our way; And now my Lord Moore with what horse he could make ready
came to the assistance, who chased the residue of them up the hill where they
dropped apace, but where the breach was could not yet be found till they
directed us by their flight, through which 100. escaped and now each Captain
had got together force, and environed them in each quarters, and with ease laid
them on heaps in every corner, so that the slain within the walls and
prisoners taken without were 200. This deliverance the worst of men
acknowledged to be the hand of God, for had they marched to the next port, and
cut the guard off there, who were most sleeping; A thousand of their own men
were there ready to enter and we had been lost. 'Twas Gods hand that their
shouts gave us the first Alarm to our safety and their destruction.

In this hot skirmish we lost few, the most being but cheqed them at their
first entrance unarmed, to prevent their giving notice, only three were lost
in fight. This was the only night (of any neglected) which the joy of the
present releife occasioned, but for the future, doubled our watches, forty
horse in several divisions still riding the round, and by their often visits,
a sentinel had scarce time to wink. My Lord Moore one night, and the
Governor another, (as supervisours of the whole) have not failed constantly
since to watch in their own persons. The Enemy without on the South side of
the Town, seemed to be about 3000. who in several bodies stayed an hour or
a after day, believing the Town to be taken, expecting the opening of a port,
which we perceiving, and having taken a Piper of theirs, caused him to play
very merrily upon one of the plat forms, and to call out in Irish that the
Town was theirs; It was good sport to see them shorten the way by leaping
ditches, and running themselves out of breath, who should be first taken, and
so were brought in by tennes.

This extraordinary blessing deserved a special solemn thanksgiving, which
we performed two days after. A fair wind inviting the Pinnace next day to
return, past with as many Prayers for safety, by the Soldiers on the walls,
as she had been received with praises; But a small fisher boat, as a Just
Judgment of God for the former nights work, by unskilfulnesse of the Pilat
ran a ground, and that night, was taken by the Enemy with 14. prisoners.

Also about 3. Miles of at Mormame Town the Pinnasse fell into the like hazard
being most falsely left by the shallops to the mercy of the Enemy, who played
upon her on both sides, 100. of the Rebels under the shelter of Cart loads of
furse, desperately approached so near that they got under the stern, and with
crows and pick-axes began to bulge her, where neither pike nor musket could
offend them. In this straight Captain Studvild, (who has much deserverved) in
the adventure of releiving us twice threw some grenades amongst them, they
endured the breaking of six, but when the seventh was cast, they run away,
and never attempted their design after, the number of the slain is
uncertain, but by the mighty stream of blood, it is conjectured to be about
60. Whilst we saw this danger we ceased not in public to pray for her
safety, whose loss was likely to be our ruin; This night, she was freed
into the Poole, and on the Monday morning, with a fair wind, bad us farewell.

We had an other Friggat, which assisting the Pinnasse in the burning of some
barques, ran the same casualtie, and lay under the same advantage to the
Enemy, who having made (...) brest-worke played upon her all night, but
returned without any harm, save the loss of one man; Many drums were sent
by the Rebels for exchange of Prisoners, till theirs here being spent, they
were forced to send for more to Aragh, and yet we have more still, who have
been cherished by the Towns men as if they were Martyrs, they giving them good
victuals caddoes and caps, so that they make no suite to be released* In 14.
days, our former supplies were wasted, and a gre^^ scarcity began to grow
upon us; The whole design of the Rebels we saw, was to starve us, by burning
all the corn and hay within two miles of us; they drew often nigh us in the
dark nights, and in mockery asked our Sentinels, if we had yet eaten up our
Cabbadge stalks and Horse hides: and indeed, famine was such at length with
the Common Soldiers, that Horses, Dogs, and Cats, were good meat; some
provisions (by searching) were found hid in Cellers; This sufficed not* but we
were forced to sally out, which was always blessed with some releife, and without
the loss of any Soldier. February the 7. we sallied out 40. musketeers and
25. horse to secure others appointed to bring in, who were unexpectedly set
upon by 400. newly come out of the North, we instantly charged them, killed
80. took two of their Colors, killed a Lieutenant and an Ensign, and took
an other, and 9. prisoners, one died as so one as he came to Town, and being
unbuttoned, he was begert with a Saint Francis Girdle next his skin, not one
of our men being hurt: An other time we marched out 100. foot, and a troop of
horse, we were set upon by 500. but we having notice by some of their own
party of their intention, we made a fair retreat through them and killed many
of them, of ours not one hurt, one was shot through the dubblet and shirt, and
had only his skin rased.

At length, our sto^e failed, so that from the hartiest, nothing could be
heard, but intentions of desperate (...)* our friggats and our agents had been
long in (...) b^^ heard nothing of their return, and by the continuance of
contrary winds, our hopes we saw, were dashed from thence.

Also in this extremity (besides our ordinary meetings on Wednesday) we
appointed the next Friday as a day extraordinary, only to beg our bread of
God; For my Subject, I took the fourth Petition of the Lords prayer, that day
we continued in the Church from morning to evening, which was blessed with much
affection and tears, wherein some confident passages fell, in assuring some
present extraordinary answer, might have seemed to have been without warrant.

But see the event, that very night the wind in^^ned, and the next morning
suddenly changed to as fair a wind and weather, as we could wish, and so
continued. That evening we receiving notice, that our supply approached, on
Sunday morning we met at Church earlier then we used in the continuance of
the same subject and petition, and at the conclusion of the Sermon, a Messinger
came into the Church with the glad tidings of our releife within the Bar, it
being so received in Gods House, we took it as from God himself, and so with
thanks giving to him, from whom every good gift descends, we went and saw
the salvation of God.

I must not forget an other deliverance, the same Sunday morning, the Enemy
about 4. a clock with their whole strength, made a bold attempt with scaling
ladders to the walls; 2. or 3. were fixed in one place, and some were gotten
up, the Sentinel missing fire at one, knocked him down with the butt end of
his musket, and crying out to the guard, who was nigh my chamber window: I was
the first that heard him, and the clattering of the Ladders, we instantly gave
them their fill of shot, and they left their Ladders with some of their blood,
the number of the slain is uncertain, they having drawn them away, but an
English boy taking his opportunity escaped from them, said, he saw three lying
dead in one ditch, by which may be conjectured what were slain of them; on
our part not one hurt, so that in the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 136. 24.
verse. We may praise God for that one day, who gives food to all flesh, and
who delivers us from our Enemies for his mercy endures for ever.

And yet a further deliverance, we are now quitting the Town of the Papists,
who have been the cause of all this evil; some of the Aldermen are parting,
some have offered to go (...) to Church, but it is thought with the same
affection as the C^pernaites for the loaves. An Inventory of all their goods
(...) taken, and such of men and women, as have been suspected to side with
the Rebels, have their daily passes to them, save sober souls, and of good
fashion have desired to be informed i^ which work I shall be glad to be
employed all day and every day. A prize was also taken by the Pinnasse, laden
with herring, bisquet, and other provision, which has added somewhat to our
score, we have 4. Companies more, so that we are in all 2000. foot and near
200. horse, more I could have writ, but the unexpected haste of the Pinnasses
return, who is now ready to weigh anchre causes me to break of and pleads my
excuse, for what is here confusedly written.

FINIS.

