THE ANATOMY OF THE SERVICE BOOK, DEDICATED TO THE HIGH Court of PARLIAMENT.

Wherein is Remonstrated the unlawfulness of it, And that by five several
Arguments;

Namely, From the Name of it. The Rise, The Matter, The Manner, and, The Evil
Effects of it.


Whereunto are added some Motives; by all which we clearly Evince the
Necessity of the Removeall of it.

Lastly, We have answered such Objections as are commonly made in the behalf
of it.

John 9. 31. Now we know that God hears not sinn^s: but if any man be a
Worshipper of God, and does his Will, him he hears. (...).

A pure Prayer is Gods Temple.

By DWALPHINTRAMIS.

Printed in the year, etc.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS, AND The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses,
of the Honorable House, of COMMONS.
GReat Senators though in those stormy times and Illiads of great affairs, we
present to your Honors, as one did to Antipater a Treatise, the subject
whereof is Happiness; (...) yet we are Confident we shall have a better
Answerthen I am not at leisure. Our humble suit is, for the Pure Worship of the
true God, and the quite abolishing of the Service Book, with the Hierarchicall
Maintainers of it, both Enmity to Christ, Kingdom; this (as we conceive) is
the prime Work of the day, saving health is the greatest good, Salus sum mum
b^num.
and Purity in Worship is the only means to attain the End, and you are the
Instruments of Instruments to advance this (...) (...)
Work. We desire no more of your Honors, but that the Reasons of our requests
may be weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and ut res cum re, Hicrom
and ratio cum ratione comparetur, that Matter with Matter, and Reason with
Reason (as a Father says) may be compared, and that which is found light may
be cast out of the Sanctuary. It suits neither with the Honor of your Place,
nor greatness of the work: that you should either see with Dr. Halls eyes, or
with ours; but that Eye-clearing word, should be the light of your Eyes, as we
hope it is: the Doctor his Charging upon Gods people with Passionate
reproaches, recoyles enough upon himself; though Tully tells us, that bad
Orators, instead of Reasons, Use, Declamations, we could not have expected it
from so great an Orator as the Doctor; we seek not Corban nor Mammon, as our
adversaries do, but the Kingdom of Christ in the Purity of his Worship, which
is first of all to be sought; for Reformations begins at the Sanctuary. You are
those Eliakims that must set the Lord upon his glorious Throne, and he will
make you as Nails in a sure place: to whose Honors we shall ever he devoted,

In all humble Service.

To the well-affected READER.
THE Waters of Affliction, not long ago had so overflowed the Banks of Zion,
Non de te^minis, se^ de toto posessione contentio. A^cdemic. quast.
that we might truly say with the Orator, that our Contention with our
Adversaries was not for Mounds and Marches only, but even for the whole
Possessions of our heavenly Inheritance: but blessed be our High and Mighty
God, who has not only limited those proud waves, but beaten the Authors
back with shame and confusion; so that we may now with boldness challenge
and maintain the Mounds and bounders of our heavenly Rights, and that before
such a lust and Supreme Judicature, as cannot deny Christ of any part of his
Right: before them we have our suit against the Service-Booke, which we have
clearly evinced by the Anatomizing of it, to be a rank Impostor in Gods
Worship; and notwithstanding of its long possession, to be a violent Intruder
in the House of God, upon which grounds, we desire and hope to have an
Injunction for Casting of it out. Then a word to you Readers, which are of
three sorts, either doubtful in suspense, who by this Treatise may be fully
resolved; or such as use it, who by strength of Reason may be brought off: and
lastly, such as cannot brook it, who by this ^reatise may be strengthened and
encouraged, not only ( as a learned Author observes) because many of Gods
people are of the same mind; but chiefly because God is of the same mind; Let
us then with sound minds and solid love, quit our selves like Men ( as the
Scripture phraseth) in Contending for the Truth, and the Truth shall overcome
and make us free; or as Job, Behold my sign, that the Almighty will witness
with me, although mine adversaries write a Book against me, Cap. 31. 35.

AN ANATOMY OF THE SERVICE BOOK.
CHAP.1.
The Preface.
ASloyaltie to King and Country, is the very fortress and wall of Polity,
being commanded and commended, both by the Laws of God and nature; so pure and
(...) fil^d Religion, Jam. 1. 27.
is the Fountain and Rock of approved loyalty; yea, equity, charity,
sobriety and loya tie; are the vi^gin daughters of unspotted piety, as the
foresaid place witnesses; we could be large in this Theme, but we hasten to
the particular; the Subject whereof is one of the weightiest pieces that yet
has been presented, Namely The Service-Booke, which notwithstanding the
present surfeit of books, yet we hope it shall find a place in the most
serious and judicious thoughts; we may well call it with the Comic, Fundi
nostri, calamitas* The (...) helming storm of the purity of worship, for as it
is true, No Ceremony, No Bishop, because the Ceremonies are the pitchie wings
whereon they fly, so it is as true, that no Service-booke, no Ceremony, for
that is the M^gazine of nimble Ceremonies; Doctor Boys in his epistle
Dedicatory to Richard Canturburie upon his Exposition of the Liturgy
complains heavilie, yet causelessly, that the Liturgy is crucified between
two Malefactors; on the left hand Papists, on the right hand Shismatiques,
meaning Puritanes, both of those he calls Foxes; but by a just retortion, we
shall set the saddle on the right horse, and shall make it appear, that the
purity of Christ his worship in this land, has long been crucified between
two thieves, namely, that superstitious and Popish Liturgy, and rank
Atheism, varnished with superstition, to whom we may well apply that saying of
Luther, They are tied together by their tails to do mischief; ^aesat. in Com.
in Gal.
though by their heads they seem to be contrary; and though we have no time to
tun over the common places of Ath^isme and superstition, and to show how like
Pilate and the superstitious jews, they concur to the crucifying of Christ
in his worship, yet thus much the Scripture witnes^eth, and experience proves,
and we humbly desire your honors to mind it, that all superstition, and the
purity of Gods worship, ever have been, and shall be at continual wars, and
can no more dwell under one roof, than a cha^te Spouse, and a proud inveigling
Strumpet, Sen^^a.
or no more in one Temple, than Dagon and the Arc. Superstitioest res insana,
Superstition (says one) is a mad thing, and so indeed it is; for it is
contrary to the wisdom of the Word, and of the Spirit, which are the ground,
and life of the worship of God. Superstitio est vitium contrariu religioni,
Sec. S^cu^d. 4. 92. Art. 10.
Superstition is a sin opposite to Religion (says Aquinas) which is very clear
from the nature and rise of it; for as Religion is a worshipping of God
according to his will, Quisquts praeceptis C^^lestibus obtemperaverit, is culior
est, Whosoever follows the divine Precepts, that is, a worshipper of God says
Lactant. but superstition carrying the very nature in the name of it tells us,
Lib. 6. 1. 2.
that (...) Supra statutum, over and above the Statutes of God. (...) Word in
the Greek is, (...). as if it should signify the fear of the Devil, and the
signification suits very well with the nature of the thing; for when a man
coyneth a worship to himself, he recedeth so far from the fear of God, and
whereas the Devil is the Author of all superstitious worship, whether it be of
another God, or of the true God after a way of selfe-device, or will worship,
then it may be truly called, the fear o^ the Devil, as the true worship of
the true God is notioned under the name of his fear: this superstition
shuts up the way to the Jews conversion, and opens the mouths of
Atheistical Gentiles against the profession of all religion, in derision
whereof Auerroes speaks tantingly thus: In Metaph^s 12.
Sit antma mea cum Philosophis, quia Christiani aa^ rant quod edunt, Let my
soul be with the Philosophers, because the Christians adore that which they
eat: So may the Jews take occasion to say; Let our souls be with the old
Ceremonies, since the Christians new Ceremonies are so foppish and ridiculous,
having no footing from the Word of God. But to bring the charge to the
particular in hand, if our Lyturgie be not a Mess of superstition and
superstitions Ceremonies, we profess we know not what superstition is: to
instance it in one particular, namely, in the grand Ceremony of adoration or
kneeling at the Sacrament; has it not been the staff and strength of that
abominable I doll, the breaden God? and if the Masters of the Ceremonies
disavow that opinion, yet the Sermoks and Writings of diverse of them do
testi^ie to their face, how they go as far, yea, and farther than many Papists
in that particular: as it is true that the current of Popish Champions do
maintain the bodily presence, Lib. 3. c. 12. De missa li. 2. c. 23. 48. p 242.
as Innocentius the father of that Monster, Bellarmir, and Heiga the Expositor
of the English Mass, by changing and chopping that fi^^t corpus; so diverse of
the Canturbur an faction, as himself, Mountagu, Packlington, Lawrence, agree
with the Papists and Lutherans in this point, namely, concerning the Matter,
leaving the Manner as a Caba^isticall Mystery: A^^id p. 10
de vocibus aixi, ne de in^ssa quidem, imo nec transubstantiationis certamen
moveremus, for word: (says Mountague) as the Moss, yea, or transubstantiation
it self, we will not contend. Se. m p (...). 18.
I like not those (siath Doctor Lawrence) that say his body is not there: and
to explain himself he adds Substantially, Essentially, not by way of
Commemoration or Representation: but should not this be their opinion, since
they act what they hold, by a material Altar, Priest, and Sacrifice, had not
that Hydra of the Scottish Lyturgie made a greater Monster, by the addition of
some more heads, and that very cunningly, by the English Authors, and sent out
to take in the Church of Scotland (had not that we say, lost all the heads, and
had the brains dashed against the stones) the aforesaid Authors made no
question, but that all the power of both Head and Tatle should have had room
enough to dominere here in England, the Pope having such a large army both of
Legionarie and Auxiliarie forces to maintain it. But blessed be God, who brake
the head of that young Dragon in our neighbor Nation, and we hope will by you
crush out all the blood of the old one here, who was the mother of that, and
the Masse-booke the mother of both: there is a Proverb amongst the
Naturalists, (...), Except a serpent eat a serpent, it cannot become a Dragon:
so except our Liturgy had been full of serpents, it could not have hatched
the Dragon that was sent unto Scotland. The superstitions of this bulk are
such, and so many, Act. 17. 22.
that if Paul were here and saw them, as he saw that of Athens, he would
undoubtedly cry out, Men and brethren, I see that in all things you are too
superstitious; we may better apply that speech of Tacitus; Annal.
concerning superstition, not exittalis, lib. 14.
hurtful or dangerous, but execrabilis, cursed and execrable, and so it is
indeed, both to whole Churches and other people, whose eyes God has opened to
see the evil of it, which we are confident you do; and I say as Paul said to
King Agrippa: Act. 26. 27.
We know you believe it: but as it seemed unreasonable to Festus to send Paul a
prisoner without the charge laid against him; Act. 25. 27.
so we neither will, nor dare charge any thing upon this Litu^gie, which we
shall not prove; nor desire the outing of it without good and sound reasons for
our desire; and therefore we humbly and heartily desire your Honors to take
into your consideration these five Reasons following:

The first is from the Name, wherein the Champions of the Service-Booke agree
with the Papists, calling at the Mass.

The second is from the Ground of it.

The third is from the Matter of it.

The fourth is from the Manner of it.

The fifth is from the Effects of it, to which we will add some Motives.

CHAP. II.
Of the Name.
FOr the First, the Service-Booke-men and the Papists do mutually interchange
the Name of Liturgy and Mass: the latter call their Mass by the name of
Lyturgie: the Jesuit Sanctes professes, Liturg. p. ^.
that the most convenient Name that can be given to the Mass, is that of
Lyturgie or Service, not but that the word Lyturgie is of good use, for (...)
signifies to officiate in sacred Worship, witness Acts 13. 1. (...), as they
were ministering unto the Lord. Where the Rhemists vaunt of a coined liberty, to
translate the word, saying Mass. Which were to cross the truth, and all the
learned upon the place, Romans 15. 16.
as O cumenius, Theophylact, and Chrysostom; yea, and their own Expositors,
as Cajetan and others: the Apostle rendereth it by another word of the same
value, (...): but howsoever they scrape kindness to a word of use, till they
abused it; yet who knows not, that knows any thing, that their Lyturgie is
the very Lethargy of Worship; and what difference between our Liturgy and
theirs? truly nothing but a pair of sheeres, and putting ours in a Coat of
another tongue, as shall afterward abundantly appear, only ours has not all
that theirs has; but ours has nothing to a word, but out of theirs; and
thence it is, that our Lyturgian Patrons do meet the Jesuit midway, by
owning the name of Mass to our Service-Booke, witness Pocklington, Sunday no
Sabbath.
who calls the second service, just the same with the Mass; so Cozens,
witness Master Smarts Sermon: and not only so, in relation to the second
service, but even in regard of the whole bulk, Antid. p. 10.
as Pocklington in the end of his Altar, etc. and Mountague. In name you see
then, there is an unanimous agreement, and (...), names are the very Images of
things: And for their agreement in Matter and Manner, in all things of
importance, we shall make it as evident as the former; in the mean time, what
reason is there, that we should groan still under the burden of a Lyturgie
borne in upon us, under the Name and Nature of the Mass, which is nothing but
a Mass of Idolatry, and an Idol of Abominations? the name is a name of
blasphemy out of the Devils Cabala, as we take it; for what language it is, or
what it signifies, for any thing we know, was never yet known; the Hebrews
call their Tribute by the name of Missa, witness that place in Exodus, laying
out the oppression of the Israelites, Exodus 1. 11.
by Pharaoh and his Princes, or Officers, who are called Officers of the
tribute set over Gods people: the word tribute in the first language is, Missa
of the word Messas, as the Learned observe, which signifies to melt: both the
name, and Etymol^gie, suit very well with the Popish Mass for it has melted
away true Religion and spiritual devotion. and as it inslaveth the souls of
people, by leaving them naked (as Solamon says) of the preaching of the Word,
Prove. 29. 18.
for so the word signifies, so it is made an engine to screw out the bowels of
their estates, wasting and melting men's substance, as the snow against the
Sun, besides the universal experience of the extortion of the Mass, where
ever it bears sway; we may instance it too fully in this Island, where
infinite masses of money have been melted away within these few years,
without any profit to the King or Subject, but to the great prejudice of both,
for the exhausting of the Subject is the emptiness of the King. Tiberius could
say, Adulterinum est eurum quod cum subditorum lachrymis exprimitur, it is a
base kind of gold that is squeezed out with the tears of the subject; but who
has cast the State in this consumption of money? Who has made the hearts to
ache, and the souls to groan of honest householders, when they have been
forced it may be, to part with more then they had? Who in time of peace, and
under good Laws, have caused men's houses and fields forcibly to be entered,
their goods to be carried away? Who have caused the Kings Liege people, and
that for obeying the laws of God and man to be carried to stifling prisons,
contrary to the laws of the Land, and privilege of the Subject? Who have
caused some to be tormented and tortured with unparalled cruelty, both for
kind and continuance? Lastly, who have been the Incendiaries or firebrands to
melt away (if they could) the Kings love to his Subjects, and the Subjects true
loyalty to the King! who (we say) but these Lyturgian Lords, and their Iesuited
confederates, together with their Popish and hellishly profane Priests,
Officers, and Appe^dice^; to prove these or any of them, were to show a man the
Sun: and many sheets could not hold the particulars. But to the purpose in
hand, the Service or Masse-Booke (as they call it) is the maine engine, it is
the Saddle, and we (to speak a homely truth) are the Asses (for Englishmen
are called by the Jesuits, the Popes Asses.) the Hierarchy and their
adherents are our riders; the saddle has so pinched and galled our backs,
that we know not how to take on the burden of the Lord Jesus, though it be
very light; our riders have with spur and rod of their Radamanthean Courts
and temporal usurpations so jaded us, (with leave be it spoken) that they have
almost rid the spirit of zeal and courage out of us; and had they but got the
saddle with some more new girts and trappings upon the Scots, as they intended,
they had gone near to have rid Religion and Polity to death: Genesis 49. 17 Genesis
4.
but as the Scots have proved like Dan, Lions for prowess, and S^rpents for
providence, in overturning both the saddle and rider; up in the name of the
Lord, and do the like: Deuteronomy. 33. 22.
what should we do with the Mass, some of whose friends not so well
acquainted with the nature of it, would storm, if we should call a spade a
spade, but they must believe their Booke-mens testimonies, published under the
favor of their little great landlord of the soil, (who knows best how it
should be called) one of whose Bandiliers tells us in great heat, Pocklington.
none but Schismatiques will deny the harmony of missification, Sunday no
Sabbath.
away with it then: to finish this point, I will enforce the conclusion with
this argument, We are not to name an Idol but with detestation; much less are
we to offer it as a worship of God.

But the Service or Masse-booke is an Idol, Ergo, we are not to mention it but
with detestation, much less to offer it to God as a worship.

The Spirit is abundant, in the proof of the former proposition, Exodus 23. 13.
Hos. 13.2 and 2. 17. Psalm. 16. 4. all remarkable places, teaching us to be wary
with what worship we join with; but in the first of these places there is a
triplication of the charge in diverse terms, yet all beating upon the same
thing, to make us to look to it: In the later proposition there are two
things, one employed, namely, that the Service-booke is the Masse-booke: for
proof whereof, Habemus confitentes, we have their own avouchment; and if they
should deny it, we shall in the point following prove it, whereunto now we come.

CHAP. III.
Of the Original.
THe second thing considerable for the matter in hand, is, whence the Liturgy
has his rise or Original, namely, from the Masse-booke, that whose original
and rise is naught, must be naught in it self: Can there come clean water out
of a corrupt Fountain? note that the Liturgy is wholly from the Masse-booke,
and other Popish pieces, as it shall be fully cleared: First, by comparing of
the Books: Secondly, for that mutual liking that our Liturgie-masters, and
the Masse-booke men, have one of another peace. And thirdly, from the evidence
given from the King and Council of England.

Sect. Now, to the first, every piece and parcel of the Liturgy, word for
word, is out of these pieces, namely, the Breviary, out of which the
Common Prayers are taken; the kituall or book of Rites, out of which the
Administration of the Sacraments, B^riall, Matrimony, Visitation of the sick
are taken; the Mass book, out of which the Consecration of the Lords Supper,
Collects, Epistles and Gospels are taken: as for the Book of Ordination of
Archbishops, Bishops, and Ministers, that is out of the Roman Pontificiall; we
might further prosecute the proof hereof, from the division of the Mass into
parts, essential and entegrall, with the enumeration of the said parts, as the
ten or eleven parts of the preparation to the Intro^, Lib. 2. de Messa, c.16.
as Pater noster, the first Collect, which Bellarmine calls the Mass, because
they are the best part of the Mass; the Introit, for which see Doctor Lauds p.
44.
pleading in his Starchamber Speech, the Kyrie Eleyso^, or, Lord have mercy
upon us, etc. the Gloria Patri, the Misereatur, the Confession, the Absolution,
the Angelick Hymn, Gloria in Excelsi^, word for word in the Scottish Liturgy,
the Salutation, the Lord be with you: Lastly, the posterior Collects, all
patches of Popes devisings, which the brevity which we study, will not suffer
us to instance. Cap. 3. page 107.
Be pleased to see Morney de Missa. If any object that in our Introit, the Ave
Maria is wanting; we answer, (as has been said) that though every thing in
the Massebooke be not in our Liturgy, yet all that is in our Liturgy is word
for word in the Mass book.

Again, though Ave Mtria be not actually in it, yet if purpose had holden, it
was in more then a fair possibility, to have been the head Cornerstone of the
Liturgy, witness Staffords invective defense thereof, printed at London, not
disallowed nor retracted in any pomt, by Heylin or Dow Canterburies j^rveyors,
of the piece: further, that which has been said of the pieces of the Introit,
may also be said of our Creeds, Epistles and Gospels Offertorie, and other
things, whether more or less principal, in regard of our calling them from
the Masse-booke. Secondly, Sect.
the second ground or reason is from that love and liking that the lovers of
the Liturgy bear to the Mass, as also from that mutual contentment, or
complacencie that the Masse-mongers take in the Service-booke, we have showed
already, how they agree in Name, and now we are to give evidence of their
mutual liking of the Matter; P. ult.
there be abundance of instances for the Papists approving of our Liturgy,
Explicat. Illust. quaes^. 4.p.112. p.46.
witness Mortons A^peale, Pope Piw the fourth, and Gregory the thirteenth,
offered to Queen Elizabeth to confirm the English Liturgy; witnesses Doctor
Abbot. then Prelat of Canterbury, and Master Cambden in the life of Queen
Elizabeth: to these I adjoyne Doctor Boys, who was a bitter Expositor of the
English Liturgy, as Heiga by the Doctors of Dowayes appointment was of the
Mass, Cap. 22.
after he had whetted his teeth upon the Schismatiques, in his Epistle to Ba
croft he produces the letter of P^us, for the approbation of the
Service-booke; and notes also, the testimony of approbation from Bristow in his
motives. Motive 34.
Queen Elizabeth being interdicted by the Popes Bull; Secretary Walsingham
wrought so, that he procured two Intelligencers to be sent from the Pope, as it
were, in secret into England, to whom the Secretary appointed a state
Intelligencer to be their guide, who showed them London and Canterbury service
in all the pomp of it; which the popish Intelligencers viewing and considering
well, with much admiration they wondered, that their Lord the Pope was so ill
advised, or at least ill informed, as to interdict a Prince, whose service and
ceremontes, so symbolized with his own; and therefore returning to Rome, they
possessed the Pope that they saw no service, ceremonies or orders in England, but
they might very well serve in Rome, whereupon the Bull was recalled; to this
also Doctor Carriar a dangerous seducing Jesuit, Consid. p. 45 Sect. 8.9.
gives ample evidence; the Common Prayer Book (says he) and the Catechism
contained in it, hold no point of Doctrine expressly contrary to antiquity, that
is, as he explaineth himself, the Romish service, etc. and thereupon he
comfort himself with hope of prevailing, and of the like mind were Harding
and Bristow (as has been said;) one more, and we have done: not long ago a
Jesuit meeting a woman in Paul's, in whose house he had lodged, she not
knovving then that he was a Jesuit, the vvork-men of Paul's being hot at
service, he asked her, how she liked that work; she retorting the question,
asked him how he liked it, he replied, exceeding well, neither had he any
exception to it; but that it was done by their Priests. We have insisted the
longer in this point; first, that men may see, that this plain and evident
approvement of our Liturgy by Papists, is not from one singular or more
indifferent Papist, but from an unanimous consent of the greatest, zealousest
and learned among them. Further, this symbolization of Papists and
Prelate-men in the name and nature of Mass and Liturgy, discovers how they
conspire against the Truth, and those who desire to worship God in Spirit and
Truth: it is a true maxim, Quae convenient in aliquoterito, convenient inter
se, and disse^tunt a contrario, They who agree in a third, agree between
themselves, and dissent from the contrary; If the Papists then sort with the
Service-bookmen, in the liking of the Liturgy, and the Service-book-men with
the Papists in the liking of the Mass, and so agree betwixt themselves, they
must both by consequent dissent from the true worship of God, which is
contrary to it. Lastly, the Papists liking of the Service Book, makes it
plainly appear, how little God likes it; for if it were pleasing to God, it
would never please the Papists: as the Israelites true and sincere
worshipping of God was an abomination, Exodus 8.26.
to the Egypetans, shall we sacrifice (says Moses) the abominations of the
Egyptians before their eyes, and will they not stone us? Even so, if this were
the true worship of God, the Papists and the Prelaticall crew, would never
endure it, but would stone, tear in pieces, imprison, burn, banish, and kill
with all manner of cruelty as they do, and have done, those that love and
worship God according to his Will: and as every shepherd was an abomination
to the Egyptians, so there was no being for such shepherds, as would not lead
out, and lay down their sheep by that muddie Nilus, or, Egyptian waters, yea,
and not only so, but they must bear false witness in proclaiming it under
their hand by subscription, that this stinking puddle is the River of God;
when indeed it is the Euphrates of Babylon by which the soul of many grieved
Ministers has sit down with tears, being forced to hang his harp upon the
Babyloxish willowes, but if his soul loathed the practice, much more the
approbation, then all the souls of the Masse-book-men would loath such an
one, and with open mouth, would dart out against him the poison of Aspes, all
manner of rotten calumnies, of sedition, tumult, schism, faction, and the
like, not vouchsasing him and his, native air to breath in, much less a
calling to maintain him and his: neither is this all, but when these Ministers
and others to fly the hatted of Esau and his brood, had cast themselves upon
the ends of the earth, to enjoy with much affliction the purity of the
ordinances; yet Esau his hatred slaked not, like a a boiling furnace, Rev. 12.
15
till he cast the scum of his cruelty after them, doing them all the mischief
he could in word and deed: the serpent cast not only the flood of waters out
of his mouth, that way after the woman; but also pursued others in other parts,
who endeavored to sacrifice that which God called for; for proof whereof take
Doctor Laud his own words, This hand (says he) shall reach them; and
threatening a Scottish-man for refusing to take the oath against his Country,
he laid his hand on his breast, and vowed and protested, as he lived, he would
make the hearts of all the Scots to ache; and what had the Scots done to him?
nothing, but maintained that worship, that was an abomination to him and his.
One instance more, very pat to the purpose, God having appeared to Abraham (as
often he did) Abraham in thankfulness builded an Altar, but immediately after
he is said to remove to a Mountai ne, Genesis 12. 8.
Eastward of Bethel; but what was the cause he staid not by it? the learned
tell us, that it was dangerous so to do; for the erecting of the Altar of God,
was so offensive to the Idolatrous Inhabitants, Calvin.
that it was a wonder, he was not stoned of them: where observe now by the way,
that if the Altars now erected, were of God, they would be an abomination to
the Prelates and their faction; and dangerous for God his people to stay by
them: but as they are Altars of Baal, erected and maintained by Baalites and
Bala^mites, so they and all their ceremonial accoutrements, and the
Service-booke it self, are an abomination, witness that place of Exodus
already quoted, Exodus 8. 26.
The abominations of the Egyptians shall we sacrifice to Jehovah our God, says
Moses to Pharaoh, it is not meet so to do.

The last ground or evidence of this particular, Sect.
is from the undeniable testimony of King and State, namely, King Edward the
sixth, and the Councels letter, to the Papists of Cornwall and Devonshire,
making of Commotions and Insurrections against the King and State, amongst many
they give this satisfaction for the Service-booke, that it was the very same,
word for word with the Masse-book; the difference only was, that it was in the
English tongue, the extract of the letter recorded in the Acts and Monuments,
are these; as for the Service in the English tongue, Vol. 2. p. 667.
it perchance seems to you a new Service, and yet indeed it is no other but
the old, the self same Words in English that were in Latin, a few things
taken out. If the Service of the Church, was good in Latin, it remains good
in English; for nothing is altered: but to speak with knowledge, that which
was spoken with ignorance, we have the whole letter in print at large for your
Service, we thought fit for brevity, only to transcribe so much as made for
the clearing of the point; the sum of that which has been said by way of
open discourse, we draw up in this Argument.

That which is word for word out of the Popis^ Massebook, is not to be offered
to God, as worship, but to be abolished as an abomination to him.

But the Liturgy in controversy, is word for word out of the Masse-book, as
has been proved abundantly.

Therefore it is not to be offered, as a worship to God, but to be abolished as
an abomination to him. Cap. 8. ^6.
As the later proposition of the Argument is proved to the full, so the former
is as clearly by the parallelling place of Exodus twice quoted, to which we
will add for abundance, these places following, Deuteronomy. 7. 25. and 12. 31. 2
Kings 23. 13. Ezra 9. 1. Esa. 44. 19. in all which places, the Lord commands
all Idols and Idolatrous Service, to be utterly det^sted and abandoned, and
still the ground and reason is given, that they are abominations to the Lord,
for so the word is in the number of multitudes; to speak impartially, we see
no color of way to evade this proposition, but by undertaking the defense of
the Masle-booke; for as Mountague and others produced that their Service is the
same in most things with the Church of Rome, Re^usan^^^, p. 1.
the differences are not great; nor should they make any separation, then a
necessity is laid upon the Prelates and the rest, either to defend the Mass,
so far to be the true worship of God, against the truth, and all Orthodox
Writers, or else, to give up the Service-booke to fall with the Original; and
though the Treatise will not give us leave, to limne out the Mass in every
piece, patched up by diverse Popes, having given a specification of some parts
of it, most concerning our Liturgy, yet will it not be amiss to lay down from
the learned, the first entrance of it into England, and then to take off
briefly, the silly defense that the Papists seem to make for it. To the
former, Augnstine the Monk sent from Gregori^, called the great, for what we
know not, except for his grand devices of wil-^orship, his man Austin finding
not all things for his tooth in France, put over into England, and there
finding an ignorant King, and a superstitious Queen, there like the envious
man, he sowes his corrupt feed of all Popish trumpery, as Masses, Letanies,
Processions, Copes, Vestments, Altars, Candlesticks, Holy waters,
Consecrations, etc. having like a serpent deceived the people (and as the
Apostle faith) corrupted their minds, from that simplicity that was in Christ,
2 Cor. 11. 3.
sore against the minds of the godly, and learned Preachers of the times; yet,
to make them (as Beda witnesses) add this condition, Lib. 1.
which he never meant to keep, that no man should be forc^d, or constrained
thereunto, but having played the wyly Fox in his entry, to finish the work he
had begun, he took on the Lions skin, and being opposed by one Dinoth a great
Divine, who withstood him to his face in a public Synod, avouching, that he
ought not to change the ancient form of Religion, neither would he
acknovvledge him for Archb. but the bloody Prelat, to be revenged on him,
incensed Etheldred King of North^mber land against him, who murdered the
servant and Minister of God, and twelve hundred of Monks with him: afterward
about the year 637. Pope John the fourth, sends over Malitus, Honorius, Iustus
his Bandogs one after another to hold out and confirm the continuance of this
dismal alteration, as they might easily do once having got footing, for
Pompous superstition suits too well with corrupt nature: then came in keeping
of Easter after the Romish manner, Ministers called Priests, chanting and
playing upon Organs; with all which, Lib. 18. c^p. 14. degest. Ang.
godly Beda his soul was grieved, who vented his grief in this sad complaint;
heretofore, instead of these things the principal service of God consisted in
preaching and hearing of God his word.

Here we may observe for matter of humiliation, Morney of the Mass. Lib. 1. c.
8.
how easily superstition finds entrance into England, and how hardly it is
rooted out; that former Maledict, Monk Benedict (as they call him) found so
little entertainment in France, that he made little stay there, only
stomacking that the Worship was not after the Romish Order, he certified his
Master by a grievous complaint, who being more moderate than the Monk, bid him
take that which was good in every Church; but England found that that would not
serve him, of whose Mass and mischief it could never yet be rid. It is also
worthy your observing, how he laid the foundation of the Mass, and
established it in blood; yea, that See of Canterbury, in him and his
successors, has been a See of blood; yea, it is too well known, that that
cursed Mass, whether Latin or English, has lived in blood, and bathed in the
blood of bodies, souls, and states, as shall be more particularly manifested
hereafter.

Now for any thing that can be said in defense of this Idol, Sect.
the Moss book, it is not worth the citing, and has been more than
abundantly refuted; yet one touch for a taste, and that upon Pray^rs, because
it is the subject of our discourse, we will show you one place out of the Old
Testament, and another out of the New; such as they make choice of to defend
their Mass or Liturgy (as they call it:) the place of the Old Testament is in
Genes. cap. 4. verse. 26. the words are these, Then men began to call upon the
name of the Lord: as there be diversity of thoughts upon the meaning of the
words, so Perierius a Popish Friar, will have this the meaning; that then they
found out some set form or order of Prayer, to gain footing forsooth to the
Popish Liturgy; but say it were so, what would it make for them? The Doctors of
Doway are of the same opinion, and fuller also in their words, it is meant (say
they) of public Prayer, with observing some Rites, and set form in a
particular place, dedicated to divine service. Grant that that were the
meaning, as indeed it is not, yet what would this make for them? Would the
faithful Prayers of the godly Patrtarchs confirm, or would they not rather
confute the abominable prayers of the Popish Mass? the word Invocat in the
first language, signifies also to profane, though not so in this place; for
it suteth not with the sense, but if this were the sense, then the Papists
might well take a hint to parallel their unhallowed Mass, which is nothing but
an high profanation of the Name of God.

The other place which I touch upon, and which they do egregiously abuse (as
they do many more) is from the New Testament, 1 Timothy 2. verse 1. I exhort
therefore, that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and
thanks-givings, be made for all men: out of which words of the Apostle, the
Rhemists make this deduction, that the prayers and petitions of the Mass are
deduced out of the Apostle his words, producing, or rather traducing; the
Fathers making them speak that for the Mass which they never meant: the
transcription of all the passages would be too tedious, but let Master
Cartwrights answer suffice. First, by way of Concession, grant the Masse-booke
to have the same prayers in it that the Apostle commands, will it therefore
follow (says he) that their prayers is the true service of God, no more than
the using, or rather abusing of the words of Justification, This is my body,
makes for the justifying of Transubstantiation. Inchanters and Charmers use
many holy words in their charms, as they do with a piece of the first Chapter
of Saint John's Gospel, but it aggravateth their sin. This plea from good
words, is, or has been too frequent in the mouths of some professors, whom
we desire to satisfy with this answer. Again, if their whole Liturgy or
Service be here as they say, where are their Mattens, Even-song, Complin,
Procession, Dirgie, etc. As for the name Mass used by the Fathers, we are to
understand, as Morney and others well observe; that as the Church finding
ease, and growing in wealth, under and after Constantines time, fell to grow
a little gawdie to please the Gentiles, and also to allure both the Jews and
Gentiles; the Christians were content to hear and speak antiquated names,
First Book of the Mass c. 4.
as Altars, Sacrifices, Priests, and so fell in the word Missa; but it is as
clear on the other side, that never one of the Fathers alleged, nor Orthodox
Counsels did use any of these words in their sense; and this may suffice for
the Popish Mass: They also abuse that place of the Acts 13. 2. translating it
as they were saying Mass; but the foolery of it, as has been said,
answers it self. The Mass then being such a piece, as it was Englands
great unhappiness to lie so many years under the burden of such an
abomination: so when the light of the Gospel sprung up, to fetch us out of
darkness, and from the shadovv of death, it was great incogitancy (to speak
the least) in our Reformers, in King Edwards days, to take a Monk from among
the Canaanites, Josh. 7.
and putting a coat of English cloth upon it, to represent it, being an
unclean beast, as a service to the Lord: it is no better truly than the
excommunicate thing. What had we to do with the river of Nilus? how could
we look to pick gold out of the Popes dunghill, where there is nothing but
mire and dirt? It is true, Valor. max. lib. 1. tit. de R^lig.
that Heathenish Rome sent the sons of their Senators to the Etrurians, to
have their instructions for ordering of their Religion; but why should we,
when God had brought us out of Babel, or Antichristian Rome, turn immediately
in again to take a pattern out of it, for the service of our God; this is an
express thvvarting of the Book of God, whose Omniscience should only
appoint in his own worship, witness that order and appointment given from him
by M^ses to the Israelites: first, he lays it down affirmatively, Deuteronomy. 12.
28.
Observe and hear all these words that I command thee; and he inforceth it
with a strong reason, it shall go well wuh thee and thine, when thou do
what is good and right in the eyes of Jehovah thy God: but now, least they
should patch up his service with some Heathenish tricks, he strictly inhibites
them, so much as to enquire after their Gods, Verse 30. 31.
saying thus; How did these Nations serve their Gods, even so will I do
likewise; where the Hebrews observe, two things are observable: First, I
dolatrous service is not to be enquired after, because that occasioneth a
turning in to it; and secondly, all imitation of such service is forbidden.
Crprtans complaint cited by the answers to the Humble Remonstrance, suits well
to this purpose, Ad hoc malorum d^voluta est Ecclesia Dei and sponsa Christi,
etc. The Church of God, and Spouse of Christ, falls unhappily into this evil
exigent, Ut lux de tenebris mutuetur, and id faciant Christiant quod
Antichristi faciunt: Ep. 74.
That light should borrow from darkness, and Christian should do that in Gods
service, especially, which the vassals of Antichrist do. From this discovery
also the Service-booke is unbottomed, of that maine plea from antiq^^ty, p. 13.
which Doctor Hall in his humble Remonstrance makes his sheet Anchor; but
Smectymnuus in his answer puts him to it, that for want of ground it is come
home: but to follow this a little further, and to wave the antiquity of a set
Liturgy, an instance whereof, for diverse hundred years, the Doctor, nor any
of their Bookmen cannot produce; we desire to know what antiquity they or any
other can allege for this Liturgy, surely he can go no higher than the
Masse-Book; and when it has gone as high, or higher than it can, sometime
abusing Scripture, and sometime butting upon the coined and counterfeit
Liturgies, fathered falsely upon the Apostles and Disciples of Christ; yea, and
also upon the Fathers, as Peter, James, Matthew, Andrew, Dents, Clement, Basil,
Chrysostom, and others; the falsehood whereof Morney discovers at large: First
Book of the Mass ^. 4. and 3.
yet for all this, says the same noble defender of the truth, the Popish Mass
is no part, nor ever was of the divine Service of God, and therefore the
English Liturgy out of it, and not able to ascend higher than it, can be no
divine Service, as they call it, (and that inclusively, by Catexochen, or
excellency) it can be no divine Service, but is indeed a devised service; but
suppose it, or the unbloody Sacrifice of the Mass, should look as high as
Cains unbloody sacrifice; yet if there want truth, they would prove no better
then ancient errors.

Last of all, Sect.
to shut up the point, the discovery whereof casts the Doctor upon a very foul
shift, namely, the denying of the Liturgy to have its rise, or to be selected
out of the Roman models; wherein we beseech your Honors, to cause him to
deal, Obsignat^s tabulis, by comparing the books together; and besides all
the evidences alleged, if it appear not, and that to the eye, to be what we
have said to be the truth; we will de-relinquish our suit; but if it be so as
we aver, we desire no more of the Doctor, and all the admirers of the
Liturgy, that they would deal heartily with the truth, with your Honors, and
with us, a whole Body of Petitioners; who in conscience do profess we desire
to do nothing against the truth, but for the truth; and as it becomes not
those that defend the truth, fictis contendere verbis, to skirmish with
devised, or velitory palliations, as the Poet has it, even so, (...), there is
nothing becomes candid ingenuity better than truth. To defend evil cunningly
is no good commendation; it was no grace to the Orator, of whom it was said,
Candida de nigris, and de candentibus atra, That he could with ill abused
eloquence, make black white, and white black; and yet, when such men have done
all what they can, they find that true of the Civilian; Mala causa pluribus
get mediis, The malady of an evil cause stands ever in need of more medicines
than he that undertakes the cure can afford. For a closure of the point, in
love to the truth, we desire all men that have any wit, to take notice of these
two things: the former, a man had better be tongue-tyed than appear in an ill
cause; the latter, when they have done all they can, it will fall out with them
as it did with the Scribes and Pharisees, envying that the people should follow
Christ, Joh. 12. 19.
Perceive you not (say they) one to another, how ye prevail nothing; the
world is gone after him. Just so in this case of the worship of Christ, as it
is partly begun, and shall be more fully accomplished, when they have done all
that they can, all is but lost labor, they shall not prevail, the world shall
go after Christ.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Matter.
NOW we come to the third particular, namely, the Subject matter of the
Liturgy, the grain is like the ground it grows upon, the fruit must be like
the tree; it is not possible that any wholesome sap of life should come out of a
noisome and poisonous root. To give a delineation of the matter in general, we
can use no better expression than that of Calvin, Troubles of Fian^eford. p. 36.
in his pithy letter to the Church of Frankeford, much troubled with this
Service-booke, where he calls it the Keliques or leavings of the Popish dregs;
this may be made to appear without contradiction, by scanning some
particulars; for to go through them all would fill up a great volume: then to
give a touch as briefly as we can, the Matter is partly false, partly
^ridiculously frivolous; yea, and some part of it is not without a tincture of
blasphemy. To this effect, a worthy and zealous Pastor to that people of
Frankeford, regrating fore the troubles brought upon them by that
Service-booke; after that he had told them that nothing must be thrust upon any
Congregation, without the warrant of the Word: and forasmuch as that in the
English Book there were things both superstitious, impure, and unperfect,
which he offered to prove before all men; p. 38. ib.
he would not consent that of that Church it should be received.

To come then to the first particular of the charge; Sect.
concerning the salshood of the Matter, which we will first discover in the
generals, and then come to some particulars: For the generals we lay down
these three instances, in false or corrupt translations of the Word; additions
to the word; and substractions; all which the Service Book not only allows,
but injoynes subscription to them, being so rendered in the old Latin Bible,
which translation the Service-booke injoynes to be used, and no other; yea, to
which the Ministers were to subscribe, it being the most corrupt piece of all
the Latin translation, none of them being sound; witness the current of the
learned Fathers and others; yea, the very pleaders for the Book and that
Bible: Ad Damasin prefat. ad 4. Evang.
Si in Latinis exemplaribus fides est adhibenda, responderit quibus, etc. If we
must believe Latin translations, you must first tell us which of them, says
Jerome? Which argues the Latin one, fathered upon him, not to be his; but of
all other Latin translations he damneth this most, which we are forced to
follow, as Erasmus testifies of him; 'Damnat superiorem translationem qua nos
tamen maxim utimur, he condemns (says he) that translation, meaning the
vulgar translation, condemned also by the grand pillars of Popery, Burgensis,
Lyra, Iansenius, and others; yea, and by two Popes, Sixtus the fifth, and
Clement the eighth. Lastly, we have the dict of the defendants themselves;
Doctor Spark, drebus illis, complaining of the corruptions of the
Service Book, instanced in these two particulars: First, for omitting much
Canonical Scripture, and putting Apocrypha in the place of it: Secondly, for
appointing a corrupt translation to be read: to some particular instances we
come, and amongst many places we must give but a touch: we will begin with
that palpable falsehood, Psalm. 105. 28. which the Book has thus, They were not
obedient to his Word; but the Scripture says, They were not disobedient to his
Word: what directer contradiction can there be than this? the Scripture given
by inspiration of the Spirit, admits no contradiction. Doctor Spark told the
Archbishop of Canterbury, that it was apparent by the History of their dealing
in Egypt; that to read, They were not obedient to his Word, were to charge
Moses and Aaron with falsehood.

Another place abused, Sect.
Luke 10. 1. being their Gospel for that Evangelists day; After these things
the Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them, two and two before them;
but the common Book read seventy two: which, though it be not in matters of
faith, as the defendants answer, yet it is a corrupting of the Scripture. May
we tear a man's skin from his flesh, because we cut not the sinews, nor break
not the bones? In a word, this is the answer of the Papists upon the place,
which our Writers take off.

But now we will evidence in a place as matter of faith as we take it, Sect.
Epistle the Sunday after the Nativity.
Gal. 4. 5. the Service-booke reads, that ^e through election might receive
the adoption that belongs to natural sons; where the Church Bible,
according to the original, has it thus: Ephesians. ^. 3.
that we might receive the adoption of the sons. For, natural sons of God
we cannot be said to be, Nam non nascimur, sed renascimur Christiani, for we
are not borne Christians, but borne again; yea, by nature we are the children
of wrath: is there not matter here of flat contradiction, and that in a high
point of faith?

We will trouble you but with one other place, Sect.
and that upon matter of faith too; namely, Luke 1. 28. and 48. the Text has
it, Hayle freely beloved, or having found favor; but the Service-booke will
none of that: but read it, Hayle full of grace, just with the Rhemists; and
the defenders of it go upon the same grounds that they do, crossing the true
signification of the words; all sound and learned Expositors, ancient and
modern, as Pagnious, Vatabalius, Chrysostom, Beza, Doctor Fulke, Doctor
Whitakers, and others, sorting full with Gregory, Martin, Reynolds, and the
rest; and gives encouragement to Stafford in his Female Glory, to tell the
Puritanes railingly, that till they be good Marians, (in his sense) they shall
never be good Christians. There are fifteen places more in the Service-booke
of this cut, but these are enough, and too many to be so abused.

Now we come to a touch of Additions, Sect.
as the Book adds three whole verses to the 14. Psalm, where a great
difference is to be thought on, between a Paraphrafter and a Translator. The
former may amplify, but yet in different letter from the Text; but the
Translator may not add, no not from other Texts of Scripture. The grand
Papists, the justifiers of this, and other such stuff, dare not avouch these
verses to be in the Hebrew or Greek copies, no not in the Greek Bible, set
forth at the command of Sextus Quintus, 1587. for the justifying of the vulgar
Latin, as appears by his own copy, written by Cardinal Carraffe, and
another Cardinal, p. 154.
namely, Cajetan avoucheth, that Paul in the third to the Romans, had taken
them from diverse places of Scripture; Sed ignor^ns nescio quis adjunxit has
Psalmo 14. But some ignorant party, I know not who, has added them to the 14.
Psalms: so there is a whole verse added to the 13. Psalm, and an addition
added to the 24. Psalm, corrupting the Text, and applying that to Jacob, which
is spoken of God; and diverse additions more, which we will not reckon.

Now a taste of omissions or leaving out, Sect.
as all the titles of the Psalms, being as other holy Scripture, given by holy
inspiration, and very useful; In his Preface to the Psalm.
yea, and Master B^cer learnedly and divinely affirms, are as so many keys
to unlock and open the door, that lets in to the understanding of the
Psalms; Hallelujah is left out of the 72. Psalm, the Book omitteth Praise
ye the Lord, seventeene times, and puts in Gl^ria Patri. Lastly, amongst
diverse other omissions, on which we cannot insist; the comfortable conclusion
of the Lords Prayer is left out. They have drowned in this Book 160. Chapters,
according to their own account, of Canonical Scripture; amongst which are
whole books, as the Cbronicles, Cantcles, and the most part of Apocalypse left
out, in place whereof the Apocrypha is placed, and that (as they say) tending
more to edifying, yea; and some Chapters also, wherein are palbable untruths,
as Ecclesiasticus 49. Iuduh 9. Tobit. 5. the last two of these Books, being
fabulous; a president of these foul abuses of Scripture, are found no where in
the world, but in the Popish Masse-booke. To this we may subjoyne that
profaning gross abuse of Epistles and Gospels, in which there are three
strange and remarkable occurrences, for which there is no ground or reason; but
from the Masse-booke, and Masse-mongers.

First, what reason is there, that in the Masse-booke, and in our Liturgy, the
Acts of the Apostles and Prophets, yea, any book of the old Testament, the
books of Genesis, excepted by them, should be called Epistl^s, as Acts 7. on
Stephens day, Rev. 14. on Innocents day, Joel 1. Esaias 50.

Secondly, Sect.
there is never a full passage or whole place, but scraps and shreads, as the
beginning of one Chapter, and ending of another; and in this they deal with
the Word, as Mezentius deal with his beds, he cut them, and lengthened them to
serve his own cruel humors, and not for the good of his guests. If Kings
will not have their Writs by confusion of names ^ronged, much less the King of
kings, who is the God of order.

Thirdly and lastly, at the Epistles there is silence, sitting, and what every
one will; Sect.
but at the Gospels there is standing, scraping, bowing, and a response before
and after; as every one of these were to serve some piece of superstition or
other: Rupert. 1. 4. sol. 49.
so thereasons given by Papists, are as ridiculous as the things are
superstitious: it is enough to name them in general, that the maintainers of
the Liturgy may be ashamed to allege them, and better of their own they have
not. We therefore desire your Honors, to cast a regardfull eye upon the
wronged and much abused Word, and not as paessers by (as Ieremis speaks) in a
case much like, but as supreme Judges here on earth, Ier. 1. 12.
to vindicate Gods dishonor done to him in his Ordinances. Obrysost. a These 2.
Gods Word, as the Fathers speak, is his Epistle, not in that sense they call
Prophesies Epistles, wherein he commends many lovely favors to us; yea, his
Testament wherein he leaves and bequeaths many rich legacies to us; If Kings
and Monarchs should deal so with us, would we suffer them to be abused,
corrupted, altered, cut in pieces? No, we would count them our deadly enemies
that should do so, and also traitors to the King. What an eye of indignation
then should your Honors cast upon such gross abusing of the Word, of the
Epistle and Will of the Omnisciont, and O^nipotent God; If clipping,
corrupting, or counterfeit coining be treason by the law, how much more, and in
a higher degree is it to deal thus with the Word? Yea, and more then that, to
maintain this, and cause Ministers to subscribe to it, being no less then
treason against the high and mighty God. Culpam deprehensam pertinacuer tueri,
culpa altera est, Pertinaciously to maintain a fault openly discovered, is a
greater fault then the former, on whom, whether nation or person, will the Lord
rest upon (says the Lord by the Prophet Esaias) but upon him that trembles at
my Word, that is, a humble soul, Esaias 66. 2.
not only moved to obedience to it in it self, but further, out of that
reverence that it bears to the Word, it will not as much as in it lies,
suffer the word to be abused by others, as one speaks of the Papis^s, that
corrupting the Fathers, they rather make them their so^^es, to speak what they
will have them, then Fathers indeed: Just so does that book, and the Champious
for it, make the Word thus dealt with none of Gods, Discoveric of corrupt
translations.
but their own; if a Minister add or take away from the Service-booke, it is
made, matter of indictment, but they, it seems, may add, take away, alter,
and corrupt what they will without controulement: this course gives a shrewd
randcounter to our learned and Orthodox Writers against the Papists, Prefac. p.
9.
witness Doctor Fulke his Answer to Campian, discovering the evils of the
Apocrypha. Gregory Martin recoils thus upon that learned Worthy, that by those
words he condemned their own Service Book, which appointed those Books to be
read.

Having thus proceeded against the Service-booke, Sect.
for its false translations, additions, omissions, misnominations, we come now
to some more particular untruths in the book, and that partly by false or
misapplication of Scripture, partly by coining things that have no show or
ground for them, partly by establishing some Popis^ expositions. Lastly, by
confirming and pressing upon Ministers and people, a heap of Popish and
Idolatrous Ceremonies; a touch of every one will suffice.

For the first, Sect.
be pleased to look upon that egregiously abused place, or Christ abused and
dishonored by their dealings with the place, namely, Rev. 12. 7. Michaeland
his Angels fought against the Dragon, etc. which words the Book appoints for
the Collect for Michaels day; where they make Christ by misapplying the place,
a created Angel; for the place is meant of Christ; neither can it agree to any
other; for which we have a cloud of witnesses, not only from the universal
concourse of the learned and Orthodox Writers, as Fathers and modern Authors,
as Austin, Ambrose, Musculus, Calvin, Beza, Doctor Fulke, Doctor Willet, and
many others, but also from the very name Michael, proper only to Christ, who,
verse 10. is called Christ: and further, from the scope of the place, to set
out Christ and his Angels, encountering countering Satan and his Angels: and
lastly, other places of Scripture parallelling the truth of this sense, Dan.
10. 13. and 12. 1. These. 4. 16. lude 9. Angels here under their General
Christ, are said to be on earth in the Church Milstant, for that is meant by
Heaven, and here they are said to die, which suiteth not with heavenly spirits:
the Rhemists indeed hold close to the sense of the Service Book, because it is
from their own Masse-book, and gives this as a reason, why Michael is painted
fighting with a Dragon, both opinion and reason are of the like weight: now for
things without color of ground, what color or ground is there for that speech
in the end of the Magnificat: O Ananias, Azarias and Misael, praise the Lord;
If this was the prayer of these men when they were alive, what sense or reason
that we should speak to them being dead, more then to others?

For Popish tenants, Sect.
look that prayer at the burial of the dead, That we with this our brother,
and all other our brethren departed in the true faith of thy holy Name, may
have our perfect consummation and bliss, both in body and soul: first, here
every one buried is a faithful brother, which cannot be said of every one, no,
not in the judgment of charity: it is true indeed, that the Priest of Newgate
bid the poor condemned thieves, provide money for their burial, and they
needed not doubt of their salvation; again, the words are an express Prayer,
and tied to be said by the Minister. Now, for the Ceremonies having place in
Gods worship, and being man's device, must needs be Idols, or Idolatrous
actions, Quicquid praeter mandatum, est Idolum; Whatsoever is placed in Gods
worship, without the commandment of God, is an Idol; for none has power to
ordain or place a Ceremony in Christ his Church, but himself, who is King of
it. For instance whereof, there is a remarkable place amongst many, Numb. 15.
39. And it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and
remember all the Commandments of the Lord, and do them, and that ye seek not
after your own heart, and your own eyes, after which you use to go a whoring;
where observe both the Ceremony and signification to be from Gods own
appointment; and further, every device of man in Gods worship, is to be
avoided, but against those there are diverse Treatises never answered, nor like
to be, yet it shall not be amiss by one indissoluble argument to put all the
defenders of the ceremonies to it, which is this:

That which is man's device, and has been an Idol in Gods worship, must of
necessity be an Idol still in the worship of God. But the Ceremonies mentioned
in the Service book, have been Idols in Gods worship; as Cross, Surplice,
etc. Erg^, they must be Idols still in the worship of God.

The proof of the former proposition, is from instance of Abraham's grove. Genesis
21. 33. but being abused to Idolatry, as 2 King. 17 10. Ierem. 51. 2. Esaias 57.
5. then God forbids his people the usage of it, because it was an Idol; yea,
commanded to destroy it, Deuteronomy. 12. 13. The latter proposition none can deny.
Here we might add the foul abuses of the Sacraments, as Baptism, and the
Lords Supper, and that Jewish or Popish institution of Churching of women,
called Purisication; and that bastardly piece of Confirmation, the particular
eno^mities whereof we need not stand upon, they are so well known, especially
to your Honors, which is a part of our happiness: again the Treatise would
be too large; yet we would not have the Lent fast forgotten, which the Patr^^s
of our Liturgy make a religious fast, abusing places of Scriptures by
misapplication of Scriptures, as Joel 2. 2. Part of Homil. of fast.
12. Matthew. 6. 16. 2 Cor. 6. 2. Matthew 4. 10. clear contrary to the divine law,
and indisputable prerogative of God; the Homilies appointed by the Law of the
land, the most and best reformed Churches, Anno quinto Eliza. C. quint. Sect.
and the harmony of Confessions, none siding with them in it, but Papists and
popishly affected.

Now we come to touch, and but to touch upon the foppish and foolish things in
the Book, besides the foolish and senseless iranslations of some Psalms,
pressed by the Service-booke, as Psalm. 58. 9. Psalm 68. 30. which would be too
large to set down and canvasse. What can be said for those Tautologies and
Battologies, used in the Service-booke, as, Lord have mercy upon us, Christ
have mercy upon us, the very Popish Kyrieleison, Christeleison condemned,
Matthew. 6. 7. the word Battologie here condemned, comes, as the learned
observe, from one Battus a ridiculous Poet, repeating the same words or verses
often, and so Christ forbids a vain repetition of words or phrases; and the
better the words are, the more grievous is the sin, so the vain repetition in
Prayer is most odious of all, both the heathenish and Popish Battologies are
struck dead at one blow (says Master Cartwright) for mumbling up the same
prayers again and again, and can these repetitions of ours, being the very
same in English go Scot-free? one foppery more, for we cannot name them all,
namely, that mutual salutation between Priest and people; in these words, The
Lord be with you, and with thy spirit. which Doctor Boyce girding at the
Novellists, takes upon him to defend from Ruth. 24. with many invective
strains, with other matter to little purpose: is it a good argument from
salutation in civil conversment, to fall a saluting one another in the worship
of God? if our Lord and Savior forbad his Disciples to salute any in the way,
Luke 10.4. 2 Kings 4. 29.
so far as it might be any impediment to his service, like unto that of
Elisha the Prophet; how much less will Christ admit salutations in the midst
of his Service; It seems their devotion is very hot, that falls to toss a
salutation whilst they are upon Gods worship. Hence is that apish trick in
the Northern parts, that all the women, especially in coming into the Church,
make a c^rtesie to the Priest. Doctor Boyce, for further confirmation, cites
the Lyturgie of James, Chrysostom, and Basil, but all know (as has been said)
that they who are acquainted with this subject, know these Lyturgies to be as
Apocryphal, Lib. 2. de Missac. 16. Lib. de Scri. Ecclesiast. sol. 51.
as the subject; the Doctor confesses upon the report of Bellarmine, that
Tritenhemius writ a whole book upon Dominus Vobiscum, in which are many
fruitless questions, and so we are sure the thing it self is fruitless.

CHAP. V.
Of the Letany.
WE come now to the last piece of the matter of the Lyturgie, but not the least
sinful, but rather the most offensive: Namely, the Letany, not a stump or a
limb of Dagon, but the head of the Mass book, appointed to be said on
Sundays Wednesdayes and Fridayes, yea, and at other times, if the Ordinary
appoint it: of this it may truly be said, as one said of the Pharisees sin,
Tossan. in Matthew. 12.
that it was either the sin of the holy Ghost, or a sin very nigh it; so
the Letany is either blasphemy, or very nigh blasphemy: upon these days one
of every house must be present; Canon. 15.
setting a note of some preheminency, both upon these week days and the
Service, yea, from the Etymology of the word (...) or Letany, the defenders of
it will have it to be a more serious and cordial prayer than others: it is
observed by the learned, that the Ancients had the order and manner of the
Letany from the Heathens, Serarius in Litan. Cassan. in Liturg. p. 242.
Excreit. p. 237.
as Dtonysius Halicarnassius witnesses, and Causabon observes in these words:
(...), the Letanies or Supplications about the altars of their gods. Polybius
renders the words very handsomely and significantly by the word, (...), which
signifies to entice the gods by blandishing allurements; these words and
others used by humane Writers to the same purpose, as by Homer and others,
falls in with the same fault, that our Savior accuses the Pharisees of,
namely, vain repetition and multitude of words, Matthew. 6. 7.
for which, says Christ, they think to be heard. Now this Letany is a very
fascinating fardel of tautologies and Battologies, besides its other faults; in
this Letany there is, Lord deliver us, eight times, Hea eus we beseech thee
twenty times: to omit many desires to be delivered from things from which there
is not the least appearance, no more than of the french pox, the danger of
being drunk at a Whitson ale, or a purse cut at a stage play, and not so much.
In that prayer to be delivered from fornication, what means that addition,
and from all other deadly sin, as though some sin were not deadly. Again,
after a tautological, summing up, and repetition of the titles and Elogies of
the Trinity tossed with responses, they fall on in a heathenish way to act the
word Letany or Maggany, as it is well rendered, namely, as it were to conjure;
and as if the devil were now to be dispossessed (which no Priest must dare to
do by the Canon without license from the Ordinary) they would use the very
same pieces, namely, By the mystery of thy holy incarnation, by thy holy
nativity and circumeision, by thy baptism, fasting and temptation; by thine
agony and bloody sweat; by thy cross and passion; by thy precious death and
burial, and by the coming of the holy Ghost, Good Lord deliver us. This piece
of the popish Masse-booke, whence we have it, is no better than that conjuring
or juggling of the Magitians, whereby they seemed to imitate Moses his working
of miracles, Porph. in his doubts.
which they did not, as the learned in that art testify without Magic spells;
they use ridiculous invocations says the same Author, and so be the
invocations in the Letany; and the better the words are, as we have said, the
more grievous the abuse: and that we may not come short of the Papists
Idolizing of this Letany, we have not only our ordinary and weekly Letanies,
but also our annual or yearly Letanies acted in procession. It is true we
have left out the Saints in our Lyturgie, that was too gross; but had the
Laudenses got their colors fixed ere this, the Letany had been flancked with
this stuff. But why did they expunge that suffrage in King Edward his Book
against the Pope, From the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, good Lord deliver
us? To shut up this cursory trial of the matter (for it is no more) how can
the Service-book-men justify these words of the Collect on the twelfth Sunday
after Trinity; giving unto us that which our prayer dare not presume to ask?
It is true, we obtain more than we pray for; but what we dare not pray for,
either in act or desire, we shall never obtain.

The sum of that which has been said we bring up into this Argument.

That service, the matter or bulk whereof is partly false, partly foolish and
frivolous, should not be presented unto God.

But the parts of the Service Book, whether essential or integrall, are such,
as has been fully proved.

Therefore they should not be presented to God.

We humbly entreat your Honors to lay this argument in the balance of truth,
and if it weigh down the Service-booke, let the said Book, we pray you, be
cast out of the Sanctuary as light.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Manner.
Now we come to the fourth particular, namely, the form or manner, which is
large, as exorbitant and offensive as the matter, the sorme is the essence of a
thing; say the matter were good, 2 Samuel 6.
and the manner naught, god would never like it: for the old Proverb is true,
God loves Adverbs better then Adjectives: Been better than Bonum. It was a
good work in David. to bring up the Arc from the house of Aminadab; but one
Philistine Ceremony spoiled the whole work. David therefore acknowledged the
b^each to be made, 1 Chronicles. 15. 13.
because they sought him not in order; when our Savior taught his followers to
pray in that plat form of prayer, which a Father calls the foun^ation of all
our prayers; he lays not down only the matter, Cyprian.
but also the form; when ye pray, 2 Timothy 1. 13.
pray (...), after this manner; hold fast (says the Apostle) the form of
sound words, which thou have heard of me, etc. where he lays down, not
only the matter of Preaching, but also the form; even so should prayer have a
form of sound words. Conformers to the Service-booke make Jonas his Gourd, 1
Co^. 14 40
of one place of Scripture: Let all things be done according to order and
decency. But as the place is no shelter for them, so we wonder that they
cannot see the gross disorder of the Service-booke and Ceremonies, and still
call for order. The Apostle rejoiced to see the order of the Colossians, 2
Colos. 5.
but it would have grieved him exceedingly to have seen the disorder of the
service: as he grieved at the superstition of the Athenians: for it is
Will Worship which the Apostle condemns in the same place of the Colossi^ns;
Verse 23.
but to some particulars, and first to the Minister, whose change of voice,
posture, and place, is strange and ridiculous: for the first, he must say some
prayers with a loud voice, not all: what can be the reason of this? but that of
the Mass Priests, that there are some mysteries: Tanquam sacra Cereris, that
the profane Laics should not hear. Secondly, for his posture; besides the
windings, turnings, and cringes, his face must be sometimes toward the people,
and sometimes his back. Thirdly, the Priest says somewhat in the Church,
somewhat in the Chancell, getting himself from the people as far as he can,
as if there were some outfall between him and the people; or, as if he were
the High Priest, gone into the Holy of Holi^s. In the second place comes the
unmannerly handling of the matter: First, they have many short Collects, but a
long and tedious Service; the persecuted Christians indeed, made short prayers
upon the fear of the enemies approaches, when they were forced to fly. A good
foundation we acknowledge; but to turn this into a general and continued
rule, will make but a scurvie building. Now, to the rest of the short cuts and
shreds, rather wishes than prayers, Lib. 1. p. 38.
(as Master Cartwright truly calls them) for which Doctor Boyce falls foul
upon him with an invective declaration, Lib. 3. p. 210.
not with refutation; which course suits not with learning, In his Comment on
Dominus Vobiscum.
much less with a Minister, calling it a rude speech savouring more of the
shop, than of the School: but the abilities of the man is far above his
calumny; and why does he not fall a railing at him for answering the Rhemists,
in charging the Masse-booke with the selfsame fault, where he calls them
short shreds, Matthew* 67.
patched up together, to make a wearisome service upon the long last; what
patched petitions? how scatteringly and disorderly divided, to the number of
thirty or forty? what interrupting pauses, and posting on again, with, Let us
pray? In this they are like unto little Girls, who setting themselves as
though they would sew, they cut abundance of cloth into useless shreds, doing
no good, but hurt; and yet for further discovery of this unmethodicall and
unmannerly dealing, let us put this quere to the maintainers of this patched
Service; that Master Cartwright puts to the Papists for the mammocks of their
Masse-booke. If such a suit (says he) were offered to a mortal man, Ibid.
would he not rather think himself mocked by the suppliant, than honored?
After the same manner speaks God to the Jews: Offer the now to thy Governor,
Malac. 1. 8.
will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord of Host^?
and if any object, that God speaks there of the Blind and the Lame, the
answer is easily made; whatsoever is not of God, in his service, for matter or
manner, it is blind and lame: for the closure of this dismembring of Gods
service, we annexe the tossing or driving the Service between the Priest and
the People; for either the People pray with the Priest, or they repeat his
prayer, or they add some responses or answers, all unsuitable to Gods service.
Sir Thomas Mo^e was so zealous in this way, that he did officiate at the Mass
in his Surplice. If the Minister be Gods mouth and the peoples, and stand
between them in things pertaining unto God, Heb. 2. 17.
is it not a gross absurdity? That when an Ambassador of State is delivering
an Embassage to the King, that the standers by or attendance, though much
concerned in the business, should set in with the Ambassadors speech, or
repeat what he says, or interrupt his speech, with a pause of a response. This
interrupting course in Gods worship is every way more gross, as much as the
high and dreadful God is greater than the greatest King; Gal. 6. 7.
and we are to take notice that God will not be mo^ked. To shut up the point,
one thing we cannot but wonder at, why the Popish Prelaticall Priests do admit
the common people a share in saying of Service, who will not have the people in
any case to try, Act. 17. 1. 3.
much less to judge of the doctrines of their Teachers, abusing the very
Scripture that makes against them; for they call themselves the Clergy,
alluding to the name (...), 1 Pet. 5.
which signifies the lot or portion, arrogating to themselves the Lord to be
their portion, and they to be the Lords. But by way of opposition they account
the people no better than unhallowed or carnal people, Psalm. 16. 5.
calling themselves abusively by the name of spiritual, which with the former
name portion, 2 Cor. 2. 15.
agrees to all Gods people; but we conceive the reason to be this, Gal. 6. 1.
that by filling their brains with the froth of that stuff, and their mouths
with that confused noise of words, (which the most of them regard no more than
the fool of Winasor, that could sing all the Service) and how should God
regard it: this they do (we say) to shut them out from the soule-saving Word,
and the Word from them, and then the Priests bear rule, or tyrannize over them
at their pleasure. Now we have done with the Arguments arising from the
Essential Bulk, or Integrall parts of the Book: whence we desire your
Honors to consider, how from four impregnable arguments, namely, from the
name, the rise, the matter and form, or manner, we have necessarily evinced
the ejection of the Service-booke, all which we briefly sum up thus: That
worship of God which for Name, Original, Matter and Manner, is naught all
over, is not to be suffered, head nor tail, but wholly to be cast out of Gods
House.

But the Liturgy or Service-Booke is such a worship, etc. Therefore it is to be
cast out.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Effects.
FRom Arguments taken from the Nature of the thing, we come to some Arguments
Collateral, yet forcible enough to evince both the Equity and the Necessity of
our desire: and first from the ill Effects of the Book, and that not
accident^l^y, which might happily excuse the Cause, but properly and originally,
holding always, in tali vel in tanto, an evil effect argues always an evil
cause; an evil Bird comes always of an evil egg, as bad fruit of a bad
tree: yea, the evil cause is always worse than the effect. Nam propter qu^d
aliquid tale est, illud ipsum est magis tale, That which makes a thing evil is
worse it self: For methods sake we will reduce the evils of the Service-booke
into four heads, distinguished from their several objects: as, first, it
shows its evil effects upon the Ministers: secondly, upon the Ordinances:
thirdly, upon the People: fourthly, against God most of all.

Sect. First, upon the Ministers, 2 Timothy 3. 3.
it works pernitiously, Mat. 13. 52.
whether they be good or bad worke-men, or no workmen; to instance in the
later, 1 Samuel 9* 9.
where Ministers should be apt to teach, furnished with old and new Seers,
Watchmen, Esaias 56, 10*
Begetters of sons unto God, 1 Cor. 4. 15* Ephesians. 4. 11.
and builders up of the body of Christ: but this Book settles such blind
fellows over people, who can neither ^eed nor lead; what we pray you, is the
procreant and conservant cause of dumb dogs that cannot bark; idle
shepherds, saying Sir John's; mere Surplice and Service-book-men, such as
cannot do so much as a Porter in his frock; for he does service, and the
Priest only says Service: is it not the Service-booke? A Priest in London,
when he heard the Service-booke should down, made this his maine argument,
or rather idlement; why, it should not: If they remove the Service-booke
(says he) What shall all the reading Ministers do? they must go beg, 2
Theff. 3. 10.
starve, or steal, for work they cannot: (the words were to this effect) not
remembering the Apostles principle, He that will not labor shall not ea^e.
Some years ago, a very godly man being convented before that High Commission,
was asked by some of them what he thought of the Service Book? the man being
afraid to deliver his opinion of such a piece of ordnance mounted, fully
charged upon him, the great Canoniers sitting by, ready to give fire; yet with
much ado, plucking up his spirits, he told them freely, that it was a halter
to lead a blind horse to the water: such dumb Diegoes, or devouring
Caterpillars, may rightly be called, Zach. 11. 15*
as the Prophet speaks, Foolish shepherds; and so the Service-booke the
Instrument of a foolish shepherd, they truck away their souls, and the souls
of others for a crust; are they not then errant fools? And this foolish
instrument the Service-booke is the Broker in this unhappy bargain.

Sect. Phil. 3. 2.
There are another sort of bad Ministers, who will not be idle, Verse 18.
(as they say) but they are very ill exercised; such the Apostle calls evil
workers, dogs, enemies to the Cross of Christ. The Apostle bids us beware of
such; but indeed ours are worse than those false Apostles: Phil. 1. 15*
for they preached Christ, though of envy, but ours preach error, heresies,
blasphemies, and calumnies out of envy, and not Christ. Were there ever the
like accusations heard of for number and nature, as has been laid against
those unparalled Ministers, for vileness, both in living and preaching? The
Goliath his staff, wherewith they maintain all this, and all their brags
against the Ho^st of Israel, is the Service-booke which is the Helena of the
Hierarchy, the strict and total observation whereof, Lincoln* Articles do
punctually appoint. To those we might adjoyne Non-residents and Pluralists,
who knowing that Service will serve the turn, can have choice of Readers to
serve their Cures at a cheap rate. In Kent a common F^dler read* Service for
twelve pence week: In another place, a Blacksmith did the like; yea, the
Prelates themselves trade in this commodity, when they have an old off^cast
servant, the ruins of a profane wretch, good for nothing, then make a Priest
on him. Witness a Prela^es Porter, made Priest of Paddington. One that we all
know, diebus illis, Chaplain to a great Officer of State, but now a proud
Prelate, in the time of his Chaplainry, possessed three Benefices, to the value
of seven hundred pounds a year, or thereabout, allowing nothing out of all
this for the feeding of so many s^ockes, save^ten pounds a piece, or
thereabouts, to three poor Curates, with a number of cast Service-bookes,
which are no good meat, neither cold nor hot; yea, had not this Service-booke
been, this man and others could never have been so unconscionable.

Yet further, Sect.
the Service Book has been the bane of many good Ministers, and that of two
sorts, Conformers, and Non conformers; the later of whom were deprived of their
Ministry, dearer to them than their lives; cast out of their Free-holds,
against the Law of the Land, Excommunicated, Imprisoned, their Families
dissolved, cashiered from all Calling^; yea, their very being through calumnies
and injuries thrust at; so that with Fimbria* against Scaevola, they quarrelled
with them, Tul.
Quod totum ferrum in se non receperant, that they received not the whole
deadly weapon into their body; and what the quarrel, but the Service-booke? To
which the Ministers must not only conform, but also subscribe; as to four
books more, some of which (it may be) they had never seen: that, nothing in
them was contrary to the Word of God, Monstrum horrendum, O fearful sin to
father falsehood and lies upon God, for which the Lord may justly quarrel with
this Nation!

Now for the godly and painful Ministers, yet conforming and subscribing; the
Service-booke was a heavy burden to them, and they groaned under the rigor
of the Service: It may be said of the Service-booke, as it was said of Gath in
another kind, namely, it was Metheg Amath, the bridle of the hilly tract, or
strength of the Philistines: so the Book was the strength of the Philisti^^
Prelacie, and a bridle with a Curbing bit, to stop, to wind and turn them at
their pleasure; yea, sometimes to cut them in the mouth, if they delivered any
such part of Gods Counsel, as touched their copyhold; besides the scoffing
calumnies that the Prelates and their Janissaries would put upon them; how did
they grieve the souls of diverse worthy men, that diverse of them were forced to
break through that Egyptian bondage, with danger of their liberties and lives,
if they had been reached by the Prelates ill Angels, but flying with the Woman
into the Wilderness, the flood of the Service-booke out of the mouth of the
Serpent, was sent after them, but both fire and water conspired to the
devouring of it; witness its arrival at New England, two fellows being
drunk, addressed themselves by water to disperse some bundles of them; one of
them swearing that he would have a pipe of Tobacco in despite of the Devil,
striking fire, the sparks fell into a barrel of Gunpowder, which blew both
men and books all into the air; the men were saved by swimming in the water,
and the Liturgy sunck when it could not swim, and so we hope it shall. Some
of us heard a painful Minister complain, with abundance of tears, a little
before his death, That so long as he, and such as he carried the Prelates
fardell after them, they would never down. We will shut up this point with a
very remarkable observation; though God made conforming Ministers* being the
Dispensers of his Word the means, Jerem. 23. 23.
to turn many, from their evil ways, yet this proved for the most part, but
in the point of life and conversation, and not in point of parity of worship,
according to our Lord and Masters practice upon his patient, John. 4* 23, 24.
that Samaritan woman, whom he reclaimeth not only from uncleanness of life,
but also from a polluted worship; the Woman here is not only touched in
conscience for her evil life, but also desires to be rectified in the case of
Religion. Cyril.
Christ heals her of both those diseases, and having given check (as a Father
observed) both to the arrogancy of the Samaritans, and of the Jews; for the
latter was faulty as well as the former, though not in the like degree, he
lays down an undeceivable rule for both, that they, and all who will worship
God acceptably, must worship him in spirit and in truth; in spirit, that is
opposed to bodily service, as washings, annointings, garments, etc. In truth,
that is opposed to shadows and figures, whereof Christ is the substance and
the body; such converts then as will reap comfort out of respect had unto all
Gods Commandments, Tract. 15. in Io^.
they must come down from the mountains of impure worship. Austin has a
pretty saying upon this, that he that will draw near to God, must come down
from his own mountain, or from the mountain of his own device in Gods
worship; it is a duty laid on Christ's Messengers, in preparing of his way, to
lay those mountains level as well as others; but the good men durst not
meddle with the Gerezim of the Service-booke, because they were captives to it,
and partly because the Philistims that kept it would fall upon them.

We come in the second place to the Ordinances, Sect.
blocked up by the book, as close as the Ministers; we must give but a touch:
as our Liturgian Masse-mongers, esteem more of the Service than Preaching, so
they justle out, and keep out Preaching with it. Sermon. on Psalm. 118. p. 78.
For the former, let Howson speak, not being ashamed to assert, that Preaching
is no part of divine worship, agreeable to that Canon of the constitution, Anno
1603. Canon 19.
making a clear and positive distinction between Preaching and Worship, in
these words, in time of divine Worship, or Preaching. And for the later, we
will cite but one testimony for brevities sake, namely, from the same Canons;
If any Minister having subscribed to the Articles, and to the Liturgy, and to
the Rites and Ceremonies therein contained, do afterward omit any thing, he is
liable to the penalty of suspension for one month; and after that, if he amend
not, to excommunication: and lastly, if he continue so the third month, to
total deprivation; they have their pattern from Pope Pius the fifth, who made
the same impious sanction, for the Breviary, that at no time, nor in any case,
any thing thereof should be omitted: yea, the Congregations of London have had
too much experience of Service for Sermons, which exchange is very robbery,
contrary to the Proverb; for it is ordinary with the Iourney-men Levites and
Letanie-priests to spin out all the time, in making up that course thread, of
the Service, that is allotted for Sermon; and this they do of malice, like the
dog in the manger; but were it good, they would never be so eager upon it; for
the Country Priests will cast it through a riddle, and curtall it to the waste,
to gain a long afternoon for profane sports; but judge ye Honorable
Senators* if this be not a miserable case, that Hagar should not only insult
over Sarah, but also thrust her out of her own house. How unreasonable, yea,
how dangerous a thing is it, that the wholesome and soule-saving Word of the
Lord Jesus, should give place to a fardell of men's devices in the worship of
God?

We come now in the third place, Sect.
to the People: there are three things of note in every commonwealth, (...),
the People, Religion, and Law, the Service-booke intrencheth upon all these: as
first upon the Law, in so many particulars, though we cannot name them all,
that it justly may be called Nomomastix, a scourge to the Law, we will instance
in one or two particulars: first by the Law of England, no Clergie-man to the
very Pope himself, shall bear any Rule, or Exercise any Jurisdiction, Nisi in
rebus spiritualibus, Except in spiritual things: witness the second Lawyer
that ever wrote of our Laws, namely, Lib. 1. fol. 5 (...).
Bracton, who lived in the time of King Henry the third, when Popery was in the
^uffe; for a little before, in King John his time, the Crown of England was at
the Popes disposing, which I allege the rather, to show the Insolency and
Impudency of our Prelates managing of the Service-booke against the Law, to
which book if Ministers will not conform and subscribe, they out them of their
free-holds, contrary to right and law; the iniquity of which course, has been
clearly manifested in Caudryes Case. Another witness yet more ancient appears
in this particular, namely, Lib. 4. ^ol. 32. c. 6.
Glanvill, the first that ever writ of our Laws, in the time of King Henry the
second, under whom the said Author was Lord Chief Justice; and speaking of
the Case of the trial of advowsons belonging (as he alleges) Ad Coronam and
dignitatem Regiam, To the pleas of the Crown; he produces a prohibition to
the spiritual Court, which he calls Curiam Christianitatis, that they meddle
not with the matter, though it might seem collaterally to belong to belong
unto their Courts; and if they should persist after the prohibition, then they
are commanded by appearance to answer it in the Kings Bench. But how many of the
Kings Prohibitions have been slighted by the High Commission, threatening those
that have brought them, the Case then depending, having its rise from that
Service-booke.

Another Instance we will cite of their incountering of the Laws, Sect.
it is decreed, that Ecclesiastical power shall neither Imprison nor fine,
except in case of mutation of Penance: but how many good Christians, both
ministers, and others, have been not only Fined more then they were worth, but
also closly Imprisoned in the nastiest dogholes they could devise, Stat. Artic.
cleri cap. 1. Fitzher. de nature. brev. sol. 51.
never parting with them till their breath departed from them; Edw. 3. c. 6.
and what was the ground of all these Illegal and cruel courses contrary to
the Common and Statute Laws? but Nonconformity to that Service-booke and
Ceremonies. We might be large in this point, but the Treatise will not bear^t,
only we pray your Honors, who are Iudices and Vindices Leg^s, the Judges and
revengers of the Laws and breaches thereof, to look upon this
Law-destroying-piece, and to manifest that the Law of God is in your hearts,
with which it cannot consist; cast it out of Gods house, that he may delight to
dwell amongst us.

In the second place, Sect.
for the Service Books affronting of Religion, somewhat has been said, and
more we have to say in the Fourth Evil Effect, namely against God: but now a
little more of its malignity against the people wherein we will be brief. People
are of two sorts, Good and Bad: how the better sort have suffered from this
Iron Furnace, it is more then manifest, in spoiling of their Goods, loss of
Liberty, desolating of their Families, being forced to wander from place to
place, their nigh friends and acquaintance, not daring through fear to lodge
them; at last forced either to forsake their native soil, and dearest friends,
with no small grief, gento patriae plangente, the genius of their Country, to
speak with Lypsius, amenting after them; or if they staid by it, and were
catched in the Prelates clutches, they told them when they petitioned, they
should lie till their bones rott^d, as Doctor Abbot then Prelate of Ca^turbury,
said of Master Bai^s, whom they stifled in the Gate House, and all this,
because they could not eat and swallow down, Deuteronomy. 4. 20.
to the choking of their conscience the Arsnical gobble^s of that poysonable
Book, which is worse than the Iron furnace, (for so the spirit terms it.)
Gods people came out of that, but the furnace heated for the not adoring by
their Service-booke, as Nebuchadnezzers for not adoring of his Idol, did
ordinarily consume such as were cast into it; so that it became like the Lions
Den, whereof the Poet speaks: Omnia te advorsum spectantia, nulla
re^rorsum. Many impressions of ingresse, but none of regresse; but is this all?
no, though it be too much, if any out of their zeal to Gods worship, stand up
in opposition against that Geliah, vvilling to redeem and buy the truth at
whatsoever rate they shall buy it. Indeed, if the adversaries may have their
will, not only with hands spoiling of their houses* exposing of their
families to all manner of miseries, but also with blows, and that not of an
ordinary size, but with torments and tortures unparalleld, as cutting,
branding, slitting, whipping, besides shameful pilloring, with censures of
fines upon one, more than they were all vvorth; after all this, they cannot
satisfy their rage in devising Go^gotha's bad enough, wherein to draine out
their hearts bloods, being deprived of the company of their wives, families
and friends, and used worse than dogs. Of such heavy inflictions upon
Ministers and Gods people, we profess we never read nor heard, neither under
the Heathen Rome, nor Antichristian Romes persecution; for though they tortured
the Martyrs of Christ, yet they rid them out of their miseries with their
lives, yea, the cruellest kind of American Savages, called the Mohaukes, though
they fattened their captive Christians to the slaughter, yet they eat them up
at once; but the Service-booke Savages eat the servants of God by piecemeal,
keeping them alive (if it may be called a life) Vt sentiant se mors, Cal^gula.
that they may be the more sensible of their dying. One instance, and but one
occurs to our reading, that has some resemblance of this dealing. Catulus, to
revenge his brothers death, desired Sylla to let him have Marius his brother to
revenge himself upon, who is said thus to torment him:

Cum laceros artus aequataque Lucan. l* 2. p. 33.
vulnera membris
Vidimus, and toto quamvis in corpore caeso;
Nil anime letale datum, etc.
Which a Poet Englisheth thus:

His mangled joints, May.
as many wounds as limbs
We see, yet no wound deadly given to him,
Through his spoiled body an example rare
Of cruelty, a dying life to spare.
Yet this Catulus did so but with one, but our Catuli, Si^ canibus similes --

Like old dogs, have filled their shambles with many: the aforesaid Poet gives
a good reason for it in these words: Lucan. l. 1. p. 14.
Nullus semel ore receptus, pollutus patitur sanguis mansu^scere fauces,
Englished thus: Never again grow those jaws pure that blood did once
distaine: May.
And why are these harmless men made worse then sheep to the slaughter; but
that they meddle with Diana, the Service Book, and the Master and Wardens of
that Company, who may truly say with Demetrius, (...), By this craft we get our
goods; so we have better grounds than Zipporah had, Act. 19. 25.
calling Moses a bloody husband, to say and maintain it, that the Service-booke
is a bloody book. Another sort of Gods people there were, who were so
terrified with the cruel usage of their brethren, that either they durst not
search into the rottenness of this Piece, and so like blind men that
swallowed many flies; and some, it may be, that did see the evil of it, durst
not avoid it, for fear of a worse turn from the Scribes and Pharisees, Joh.
12. 42.
then casting out of the Synagogue.

Lastly, some people professing the Lord Jesus, Sect.
and having been very useful in Gods House, by the necessary avoiding of this
quick-sand, have for want of good take heed, been cast upon the rocks of
Separation, Anabaptisme, and other unsound Tenants, which has made a very
great breach in profession. For which see more in Zyons plea: and though the
rise of Separatisme and other Sects, P. 34, 35, ^6*
be there justly charged upon the Hierarchy* yet by shunning of this sour
pasture, they fall unadvisedly foul, on breaking of the hedge.

Now we come to the worser sort of people, Sect.
of whom we may truly say, that which the Pharisees said falsely of Christ. A
cursed people, not knowing the Law, all the provocations in the Land, have not
made havoc of so many souls, especially under color of good, as this has
done; if Ignorance be the mother of destruction, then much guilt lies upon the
Service-booke. Where there is no vision, Pro. 29. 18.
the people must perish, or in the first language, are left naked. So how many
Congregations are stripped stark naked of the Word in this Land, in some of which
it is well known, there has scarce been a Sermon in an age; and in most
places where they have preaching, it is neither Seed to beget, nor Bread to
feed upon. And what makes this nakedness but the Lyturgie? which is enmity,
both to good Ministers and Ministry: For as the Ivy which winding it self
about the Vine, draws the sap and spirit out of it, so the advancement of this
Lyturgie, leaves neither life nor spirit in the Ordinance of the Word; and
being like priest like people, love to have it so: for the Lyturgie will never
bring them out of the deadly Lethargy of sin; it will never awake the soul,
nor pierce the conscience, and therefore they love it, as Micah did his Idol.
Judge 1^
But let a man of God, by the light of the Word, discover their wretched
condition, he had as good stir in a Hornets nest, they will quickly hunt him
and pursue him to the Lions Den, if they can; but (God be blessed for it) the
Beasts are in chase themselves. The love and liking of evil men unto this
Book, is an evidence of the badnesse of it, for if it were Gods Ordinance they
would hate it, as they do the Ordinances of God; as Isaac took Abimelech his
sending of him away for a token of his hatred: Genesis 26. 27*
so when a soule-hating people set away the Word, Genesis 26. 27.
and cleave to the Service, or the Service joined, it may be, with some dead
Ministry, then it is a token they hate the former, and love the later. A
worthy Minister went to visit one of his flock upon his deathbed, a man of
quality, for the world, but an enemy to goodness; the Minister groping the
pulse of his estate, he asked the Minister what he thought of the Bishop of
Canturbury, which the Minister waving (it being dangerous then to call a spade
a spade) he asked the party if he would pray with him, he replied yea, if he
would do it on the Book of Common prayer. To shut up this point, we will make
but general mention of the troubles which this Book did bring upon the
English exiles in foreign Nations in the time of the Marian persecution, for
the information in the particulars whereof, we refer you to a Book called
The troubles of Franckford, where from their first erecting of a Church in
Franckford, Anno 1554. this Book and the Patrons thereof, never left
persecuting of those that could not brook it, till after the death of Queen
Mary they returned home: in these troubles we commend three things to
consideration: First, in all these broils and unchristian vexations, the
maintainers of the Book dealt both maliciously and fraudulently with the other
party. The second thing, the Patrons of the Book, could not allege any thing
for it, and for others that they held, but such Popish stuff as they did foot
upon.

Lastly, some of those Patrons upon their return, became persecutours of such
as stood for the whole truth.

The last Evil effect, but not the least, Sect.
is, against God, we mean directly, or more ommediatly, for indirectly all the
other Effects were against God; but as all sin provokes God, so corrupt worship
is that sin against which the jealousy of God is inflamed, and he becomes a
consuming fire; Exodus 20. 5
yea, Deuteronomy. 4. 24.
the Lord calls such worship by way of transcendencie abomination. De^t. 12.
3^. 31.
If Moses would not sacrifice in Egypt, 2 Kings 23. 15.
because it was an abomination to the Lord, Exodus 8. 27
(as has been said) why should we provoke the Lord by abominable service? All
systems of Theology are full of this in the Thesi, therefore we will not
insist upon it, ^ut come as briefly as we can, to add something, to that which
has been spoken of the Hypothesis or Service Book, which M. Calvin calls (as
has been said in his letter to Franckford, P. 89.
the leaving of the popish dregs: so the papisticall Ceremonies therein
contained, are truly called by that Franckford Book burthem, yokes and clogs,
to Gods People and his service; besides those which have been names, we will
speak but a word or two more, namely, of Festival days, to Saints, at least
transitive, though not determinative, as the Papist* excuse their Idolatry. The
other is kneeling at the Communion; the former is an intrenching upon Gods
pr^rogative: For ^o^e can appoint an holy day, but he who ha^^ ma^e the days,
and has all power in his own hand, which is clear; first, from the
denomination of them in both Testaments; in the old they are called the solemn
feasts of Jehovah, Lev. 21. 1.
not only because they were to be kept to Jehovah, Exodus 3^. 5.
but also because they were of his appointing, and so in the new Testament,
Rev. 1. 10.
as we read but of one for the selfsame reasons, it is called The Lords day:
another instance of clearing is from that brand of rebuke, that is put by God
upon that Jeroboam that made Israel to sin: he, and he only that the Book
of God speaks of, took upon him, besides all his Idols and Idolatrous tricks
not to appoint another Numericall day, but the same day of another Month,
namely the eighth Month, where God has appointed the seventh Month, and that
out of respects speciously politic, because in the eighth Month all the
harvest would be in: and they might feast more freely. Secondly, that the Lords
feast being finished in Jerusalem, they might come to Ieroboams feast; but
these fig leaves could not cover his scarres: 2 Kings 6. 12. 32* 33.
but the spirit charge directly upon him, that that was the Month that he
had lied or coined to himself. Gretzer the Jesuit commends the English,
(though it be nothing to our commendation) Quod Calvino* papistae Anglice,
(...) cap. 2.
etc. That as the Popish-English-Calvinists, are freer in other Rites and
Ceremonies, than the Puritanes in France and Germany, and other where, so they
are in holy days. And to say the truth, we are too free indeed; for as a
learned man observes, Cartw^^g repl. 21.
we have more holy days than ever God gave to the Jews; we will not insist on
this subject, they who will know more of it, P. 6. 4^, etc*
let them read Altar Dam^scenum, only we will point at these two places, which
may fully show the unlawfulness of them: Gal. 4. 10, 11.
Ye observe years and days, I am afraid of you; Let no man judge you in meat
or in drink, Col. 2. 16.
or any part of a holy day. Yet those holy days, though then out of date, were
better than ours; for they were of Gods appointment, and so are not ours.

Follows in the next place Kneeling at the Sacrament, Sect.
the last particular that we are like to touch upon; for if we should reckon up
all, a great volume would not hold them. This P^pish modern posture, Colum.
Sect. 21.
of not above 400. years standing, which (as has been said) and Peter Martyr
witnesses, Propter transubstantiationem and realem praesentiam invecta est in
Ecclesiam, etc. That to maintain transubstantiation or real presence, it was
brought into the Church, and therefore to be abandoned with it. Though Innocent
the third, 1215. inacted for transubstantiation, and Honorius his successor
decreed for a reverent inclination of the body, to the Sacrament changed into a
breaden God, yet was it not used until the succeeding Popes, thinking this
reverence not enough for the countenance and maintenance of their upstart
Dei^^e allotted thereto, the highest point of adoration, for which there is
neither Scripture nor Antiquity; neither Precept nor President, but from the
Man of sin; neither do any Churches use it, save the Synagogue of Rome, some
Lutheran Churches and eurs; and howsoever this misplaced worship has been
cruelly man^ed out by the Prelacie, and fomented by that mis-begotten conceit
of humility in Gods worship, because they knew no better, yet the truth is, it
is mere will worship, and has been a sharp rod to Gods people; yea, and
proved a Scorpion to ^omes consciences, witness the former, the violent deaths
of diverse for refusing this gesture, us that worthy Gentleman, Master Dyton,
stifled by his imprisonment in the Gate House; Master Porter of Ware in the New
prison, and others: but because many learned and unanswerable Treatises are out
against this disapproved gesture, it shall be needless, actum agere, to do a
work so often done. It is true, some have attempted to say something for it;
but in the balance of truth, hoc aliquid nihil est, that something is just
nothing. For brevities sake we will only shut up the piece with one binding
Argument. To adore in, by, or before a Creature respectively, or with a
relation to the Creature, is Idolatry.

But to kneel at the Sacrament, is to adore, in, by, or before a Creature,
respectively, with relation to the Creature. Therefore it is Idolatry.

The explanation of the terms, will make the argument the better understood:
as, first, adoration is the highest point of external worship, which God will
not admit with an intervenient or relative respect to any Creature; for that
makes the Creature Objectum significative a quo, that is, the motive of the
worship; the terms thus explained: this is the very same argument that our
learned Divines stop the Papists mouths with, in the point of adoring God
mediatly by the Creature; and as the Papists cannot deny the Major; so sense
and reason, yea, the injunction of the commanders all verify the truth of the
Minor in kneelers; for they cannot deny the Elements to be the motive of their
kneeling, the conclusion then must needs hold; that it is Idolatry dis-junct or
improper at least, as we argue against the Papists: but if the minds of
thousands of ignorant receivers in the Country were known, it is to be feared,
they fall foul on conjunct or proper Idolatry, making the Bread objectum
determinativum: in plane, the Bread the object of their worship: with which sin
the Papists charge all the Protestant-kneelers; for, if Christ were not there
bodily (say the Jesuits) we would rather be racked with horses than kneel. ^o
said Spalato after his revolt to Rome, and we confess ingenuously, if the
Papists should re^ort this argument upon us, it would put the learned
Conformers to a nonplus to evade it. Here were place to have a sling at the
Cross, but we refer the desirous reader to Zyons plea, P. 95. to p. 106.
wherein there is a succinct and learned Treatise against the Cross, proving
it by many strong arguments, to be the mark of the Beast. All these, and much
more are the household stuff of the Service-booke, against which we will
produce one argument more in the closure of this point, namely, God will not
hear the prayers of the Service-booke* Ergo, they are not to be offered.

The Antecedent shall be proved from that place of Saint John's Gospel: John 9.
31.
God hears not sinners, if any man be a worshipper of him, and d^er of his
will, him be hears: out of the latter part, we reason thus negatively, a
Contrario: those prayers which are not a doing of the will of God, God hears
not.

This proposition is confirmed from other places, Romans 8* 27.
the Intercessions of the Saints (says the Apostle) must be according to the
will of God; Esaias 1. 12.
and if they be not, the Lord will say, who requires them?

Now to the latter Proposition:

But the Prayers of the Service Book are not the doing of the will, nor
according to the will of God; witness all the former Reasons given against it;
therefore God will not hear them.

CHAP. VIII.
Three Motives.
HAving thus clearly evinced by so many Reasons as a cloud of witnesses, the
unlawfulness of the Liturgy; for the expunging whereof we shall add some more
Motives in the closure: Let us now humbly crave your Honors favor, that
according to the justness of our desires, and the truth of the reasons
alleged; you would be pleased for the love that you bear and owe to the Lord
Jesus, to the purity of his worship, to the thriving of our bodies, souls,
and estates, to the turning away of Gods judgments, mediate and immediate, to
your gaining of honor above all your predecessors, to the chearing of the
hearts of Gods people, the daunting of the enemies, and the making our
Jerusalem the praise of the world; by all these, and many more, we again and
again entreat you, to pluck up that Plant of the Service-booke, which God
never set. Man. 15.13.
Oh, how the Prelaticall Priests grumble, when they hear of this place, and as
the wicked Man^chees abuse this place, in applying it against the Law of God;
so we have had woeful experience, how the Hierachicall crew, endeavor with
tooth and nail; and therein worse then the Manichees, to supplant Gods Law, of
whom we might justly say with the Prophet, They have almost undone thy Law; the
worship of God is a prime and precious piece, the ultimate end, as a Divine
says, Al^^^*
of all sacred performances, though the di^^cation of man be the end
subordinate: pure it is, and should be like God himself; Psalm. 1^. 10.
yea, it is called the fear of God, in regard of that reverend awe that should
be upon men, Esaias* 29* 1^*
when they are in divine duties; when Jacob awaked from the Vision, it is said
he was afraid; and said, How dreadful is this place, this is none other but
the House of God, and the gate of Heaven; by which is meant, the House of God
where his Saints are assembled, whose fear should be as Jacobs, not a slavish
fear, nor an Idolatrous fear, Genesis 28. ^7.
but a filial ^eare, not daring to present to their Father in worship what he
has not planted and commanded. Bernard descants very sweetly upon this;
terribilis plane locus, 6 Sam. Psalm. ^7.
dignus omni reverentia, etc. a terrible place indeed, (says the Father) not
meaning the stol^ walls, but the presence of God in the assembly, where the
faithful inhabit, the Angels frequent, and God himself dwells. How curious
was Moses, the man of God, in the matter and manner of Gods worship, that he
would neither have horn or hoof over or under the Commandment, that was the
ground of his punctuality, Exodus 1^. 26.
from which he would not go one hairs breadth; and wherein we entreat your
Honors to follow him to the full? Caleb is said to follow God; we will go
and sacrifice unto the Lord our God, as he shall say unto us, Can it be so
said of the Service-booke; no, sure it is no sacrifice of a sweet smell. Let
any man that fears God, tell us ingenuously, if he believes that Christ, the
golden C^nser standing at the golden Altar, Rev* 8 3* 4.
will receive the Lytur^ge^prayers and perfume them with the odours of his
merits, present them to the father: surely we have no ground for it, because
(as has been said) they are not according to the will of his Father. (...)
Yea, Christ seems to threaten out of his own mouth the contrary, in the 16
Psalm, which is mea^^ of Christ, he speaking of, and threatening their Idolatr^
(...) (...), he tells them plainly, he will not power out their oblations,
that is, he will not be a Mediator to their services: and surely this is no
acceptable service; it is no beaten oil for the Lamp (though Master Wommocke
pleased to style it so) it is not sure that pure oil, out of the two Olives,
Zach. 4. 3. 4*
into the golden Lamp, that lightens the Sanctuary; but it is rather
Traine-oyle, and scarce so good, that fowls the house, and darkneth the light;
and for its messages to heaven, which he mentions in his Epistle, we have
made a good plea, (as we conceive) for the contrary, let him disprove it if he
can; for the whole book, though it concern them with whom he deals in it;
yet because it glisters as if there were metal in it, we may lay it a little
to the test. The Epistle has two heads; in the former he maintains set
prayer in general; in the latter he endeavors to justify the set prayers
of the Lyturgie in particular; in both these the expressions be smooth, and the
palliations stretched to the furthest, but it may be said without offense of
both, (...) too neat, but nothing useful. The head of set prayer we have not
touched yet, till we come to answer some objections; Epist. p. 7.
but we cannot but wonder at Master Wommockes incogitancie, to father a set
form of prayer upon Timothy, terming it, the first furniture that he provided
for the house of God: a strange position, and as unsoundly grounded from Saint
Paul's direction. (Surely the Jesuits would blush at it) or at least it might
be one of John of Crage his observations: from these words, I exhort not that
you pray, as he glosseth, but that Prayers be made for all men. Made (says he)
i. e. set-prayers. 1 Timothy 2. 1.
This is like John of Garlando's tricks, that did what he could to spoil the
Text with the Gloss: It is like a Sorbonists mis-exposition of that place,
Exodus 29. 39. Thou shall present one Lamb; the word Ghasah signifies to make,
which he and the Romanists apply to the words of Institution, Hoc facite, Make
this a sacrifice; which as Galasius observes, is a very ridiculous piece. Does
any man think, that this was either Paul his intention or Timothy his
practice? no, Pas^r.
sure it is a gross mistake of the word (...), which does not signify a set
form of Prayer exhibited, but as the learned in the tongue observe, it
signifies preces fundere, to power out prayers by the help and guidance of
the spirit, proved by the comparing of other places where the same word is
used: again, the Spirit is said to make request for us, Luke 5. Phil. 1. 4.
Romans 8. 46.
dare any man gloss it by making a set form of prayer for us? no sure, but
the meaning is, he causes us to make request. To be brief, let us see how to
untie this knot; if Paul in these words prescribed a set form, and Timothy
made it the furniture of Gods house, then such a form should be found; and all
the Prayers enjoined by Paul should be set forms, because he injoynes no other
prayer here, than he does other where in other words, signifying to pray, as
(...), both signifying to pray. Luke 22. 33 1 Cor. 14. 15. and many other
places: but to assume, first, no pattern is to be found: secondly, to affirm
that all Paul's prescriptions of prayer were for set forms, were a very gross
and absurd falsehood.

Ergo, so is the ground whence it arises.

He might as well have said; when Christ promised to pray for Peter, that he
promised to make a set form of prayer for him: Luke 22 33.
for the words in both places are synonyma: but enough of this, which is
besides our purpose.

Now, Epist. p. 25.
let us view as briefly as we can, what he says for the Lyturgy in particular:
he confesses it to be the daughter of a Roman Catholic, Gospel first Sunday
in Lent. p. 12.
that is well, and so does D. Boyce: the Novellists say (says he) that our
Communion Book is nothing else but the Roman Missall and Portuis thrust out of
Latin into English, which the Doctor contradicts not, for he could not. Why,
says Doctor Hall, out of ancient models, not Roman: yea, why should the child
be beaten for the Parent, says M. Wommoc^?) For answer, if the child be as
like the parent in nature and properties, as has been proved, as an Egg is
like to an Egg: then there is room for neither in Gods worship; but both
mother and child, like Hagar and Ismael, must out of doors: for the parallels
of Saboth, Sun, and other things, wherewith he would palliate, they are not
Homogeneall, or of like nature; for nothing can make the^ clean in Gods
worship, being man's device and worship still.

Again, p. 28, 29.
the maintenance of these shreadie and scrappie Prayers, from gadding of the
soul, is but a gadding argument. We have spoken of the ground of short and
sappy ejaculations, Epist. 121.
upon other ground, and nothing like the foolish patches of the Masse-book.
Austin tells us of the many prayers that the Israelites made in the Egyptian
furnace, and that they were short ejaculations, but they would have continued
them, but for their burdens; but men are forced to break off here, where
there is no burden, but the Service-booke it self.

Again, p. 33.
he has a plea from the Lepro^-house, wherein we are very willing to join
issues with him; he confesses that the old Roman Liturgy was like a Leprous
house, the plague was spread in it; but now it is picked, scraped, plaistered
with well-tempered. (or rather untempered mortar) he should have said, that
upon the deepest search no corruption can appear, and therefore to be judged
clean by the Law; but there he goes too far, and farther (we conceive) then
most of the Prelates would do in a cold mood; yea, herein he is contradictory
to himself, p. 34.
for he acknowledges scars and defects in it; p. 33.
and in his last page of the Survey of the Parallels, he joins in evidence
with the Author, in the discovery of errors, and sueth for justice; but if the
Leprosy break out again, Levit. 14. 43, 44, 45.
then no affection of our Communion may lodge it. Now to apply, as the house
infected, was utterly to be demolished, and the rubbish and ruins thereof to
be carried forth into an unclean place: The Leprosy of the Mass he grants to
be this fretting Leprosy, the pieces we have (though we have them not all)
are the very same in another tongue. The Leprosy, of whose matter, manner, and
contagious effects, we have fully proved; and the burden of Ceremonies
therein contained and pressed upon men's consciences, to have been, and to be
still abominable Idols. Then it will follow, that all the water and industry of
the world cannot cleanse it, no more than the skin of a Black-amoore, or the
spots of a Leopard, which God can only change, but will not do with matters or
means of strange worship; then, as rubbish they are to be cast out into an
unclean place: mark, an unclean place, not the meanest clean place allowed
it, much less the Sanctuary of God. Upon this place, ^ynsworth.
a learned Author observes, that we are taught by this severe Judgment, to
abandon all sin, but more particularly, to abolish all Idolatry and
Instruments, and Implements of Idolatry. Citing that place which might serve to
clear this point, Esaias 30. 32
if there were no more: Ye shall also defile the covering of the graven
Images, and the ornaments of thy molten Images, etc. Thou shall cast them away
as a menstruous cloth; thou shall say unto it, get thee hence. Upon the
passages of the Appendix we shall touch when we answer the Objections; as for
the parallel which he vieweth, the Author will make it good.

We proceed then, Sect.
under your Honors favor, to our suit against the Liturgy, without
controversy, it is the garment spotted with the flesh, Veise 23. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
22.
condemned by the Apostle Jude, which some expound by that of the Apostle, to
be an abstaining from an appearance of evil; and so indeed, this were enough
to abolish the book. The best Expositors apply the place against the Carnal
Rites and Id^latrous Ceremonies, devised by men in Gods worship; which, if the
Papists were cleared, (says one) from the grossest of their Idolatry and
Paganism, would condemn them, and will not the retainment and maintenance
exceedingly condemn us, that profess we are come out of Babel? To these Rites
and Ceremonies, says the same Author, as to that spotted profession of Popery,
Doctor Willet.
we should not conform our selves, neither in use nor opinion, but decline in
all things, the very shadow and show of them. What can be said more
emphatically to the purpose? as God is to be admired in the least of his
creatures, as well as in the greatest, (says a Father; H^ero. Ep Nepotian.
) ^ta mente Christo dedita etc. So a mind devoted to Christ, does as well take
heed of small faults as of great, especially in Gods worship. The Hypocritical
and Idolatrous Jews are not only rebuked and threatened for eating of Swines
flesh, Esaias 65. 4.
contrary to the Law; but also, that the broth was found in their vessels.
Austin comparing the ten plagues of Egypt, with the ten Commandments, tells
us, Quaest, 4. 5
that the turning of the water into blood, does signify the corrupting of
divine worship by humane and carnal inventions of flesh and blood. The
Service-booke and Ceremonies being such, we have grounds to desire, and your
Honors to grant (as we conceive) ^j^ctionem firmam, against them both. Sarah
by Gods appointment, wills Abraham to cast out Hagar and Ismael, Genesis 21. 10
the Bond woman and her son: and why the Mother with the Son; for it seems
she offended not? yes, it seems (as the learned do observe) she was an
Abbetter of her Sons evil; so the Service-booke and the Prelates, the Cup and
the Cover, the Mother and the Son, should be cast out together: that riddle of
the Snow and the Water may well be applied to them, Matter me genuit, matter
quoque gignitur exme.

My mother brought forth me, and is brought forth by me; that proud
Hierarchicall humor in Austin the first, brought in the Liturgy, and that
Liturgy has brought out, and has kept up to this day the Hierarchy; if
Christ be King of, and in his Church, in a more glorious and eminentiall way
(as who dare deny it?) in word, though too many do deny it in deed, then
consequently, without all controversy, he must appoint his own officers,
government, and service. Now, there is nothing more inculcated, and laid home
in the Book of God, than Christ's Kingly office, to which all are subject, and
it is subject to none; we will but cite some few places of many: Psalm. 2. 6.
I have set, or anointed (says God) my King upon Zion, the mountain of my
Holiness, by which he means his Church. Whence a learned godly Minister
delivered within these few days; that as Christ set up his Church, so it is
his to provide for it. To appoint and no others, offices and officers, and all
religious service or worship, to which we were only to submit, and to none
other; another testimony from the Prophet Esaias shall suffice: Esaias 9. 6.
Unto us a child is borne, and a son is given, and the government shall be
upon his shoulders, and his name shall be called wonderful, etc. Now, if God
never took off this government from Christ his shoulders, nor Christ never
gave it up, nor all the powers of heaven, earth, and hell, be able to shake it;
then first it must follow, (as the Spirit speaks) Verse 7.
that of the increase of his government there must be no end. Secondly, it is
every way as good by consequence, that he will have no service or worship, but
of his own appointment. Porphyrius, who was a great Necromancer, (as Eusebius
witnesses) does tell us amongst other things, Lib. 5. deprep. Evang c. 6.
that the Devils themselves (whom he calls Gods) signify unto their especial
servants, the Magitians, Quibus rebus etc. with what things they are made to
appear, what is to be offered unto them, what days they should choose, and
what signs and Images they should make: which assertion Austin confirms,
Lib. 1. (...) Civil. (...)
Non potuit nisi ipsis primis doccentibus disc^ quid quisque illorum appetat,
vel quid exhorreat; it could never be learned but by their teaching (meaning
the Devils) what every one of them desires, and what they abhor: since the
Devil then loves to be Gods Ape in every thing, and his highest Meniall
servants account it nothing but reason, that he should prescribe orders in his
own House, and appoint what Service and Ceremonies therein as he pleases;
shall not the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and only he, appoint how, and
by what means he will be served in his own House; this is the reason why the
Service of God is called (...), 1 Epist. c. 2. 2.
reasonable service, for so we translate it, which might be more emphatically
rendered, sincere service, unmixed service, according to the Word; for so the
original word signifies, as the Apostle Peter calls the word, (...), the
sincere milk of the Word. Now, to draw to an end, for we are forced in the
bulk to exceed our intention; we crave leave further of your Honors to bind
our desires with three strong motives for effecting of the work, namely, from
Example or Pattern for doing of it, from danger if it be not done, and from
the universal Covenant binding every one in his place to the doing of it.

CHAP. IX.
I. Of the Pattern.
FOr the first, Tit. 2. 7.
as the Apostle wills, to show our selves to others, Patterns of all good
works and words; we should make others good Examples, matter of our Imitation:
Brevius iter per exampla quam per praecepta, Pattern is a more compendious way
then Precept: good Examples from Gods people have the force of a General rule
to apply: all the Reformed Churches, when God turned them from darkness to
light; they expelled the Prelates, as the Officers of the Kingdom of
darkness: and the Popish Liturgy, as a false worship, and work of darkness.
To pass France, the Low Countries, Geneva, the Palatinate, and others, be
pleased to cast your eye upon our Neighbor Nation of Scotland, who have
neither left root nor branch of Prelate or Popish Liturgy; and have not we
the same reasons to reject both? It is an infallible rule, both in Divinity
and Polity, both in Church and Commonwealth, P^reus in cap. 11. ad Romans p.
1114.
Vbi ^unt similes causae and circumstantiae, ibi locum habet exemplum; where
there are the like causes and circumstances, there example takes place: the
causes why they cast both out, were their offensivenesse to Christ, his Church,
King, and State; and has ever Nation been so prejudiced, in all these
particulars, as we have been? and have we not been, and are, partly yet
environed with a mantle wall of evil circumstances: as the Prelates
aggravation of their cruelty in pressing of that Book, and other like stuff,
their insolent domineering over Nobility, and others; yea, their daring
attempts, to set a-foot their interdicted power, and their supercilious
insultations, their proud words, and affronting attempts, vented by themselves
and their Priests, even now, when the hand of the Lord is lift up against them,
which they will not see; but they shall see it: in this they are worse than the
Egyptians or Philistims, who were content (the Lord his hand being upon them)
not only to let the Ark of the Lord go, 1 Samuel 6 6.
but also sent it up in the handsomest way that they could, taking Egypt for an
example, in this their insolent striving against God and his Truth: they may be
compared to the Peasants of Lycia, Metamor. Ovid. lib 6. ^io. 1. de falsa Ke^^g.
whom the Poet fayneth to be transformed into Frogs, for their cruel and
barbarous usage of Latona, of whom Lactantius also makes mention; but the Poet
tells us, that for all the Metamorphosis, they left not their old manner:

Litibus exercent linguas --
Et quanquam sub aqua, sub aquis maledicere tentant,
Englished thus:

Their brawling tongues, but setting shame aside,
Though hid in water, under water chide.
Or, with Du Bartas, in this posture, they may be compared to Lyzards or
Snakes, cut in pieces.

Threat with more malice, though with lesser might,
And even in dying, show their living spite.
Or, as God said to Moses of Pharaoh, that he would not let his people go, no,
not with a strong hand, that is, he will stand out with God; so do they, they
will not let the Ordinances go, Exodus 3. 19.
the Liberty of the Ministry go, they will not let the Kingdom of Christ
go, though Gods strong hand be out against them; but as he fell at last, so
shall they, and all their houshould-stuffe, and never rise again: the Scots
have put them in the Pond; let the love of the truth lead you, and their
practice be to you as a speaking Emblem in the words of Gedeon, Judge. 7. 17.
Look on me, and do likewise. We will shut up the point with a parallel of
loyal entertainment of Kings, in their inthronization: the men of Judah, and
the men of Israel contended zealously, who should be most officious in crowning
King David, 2 Samuel 24. 5
though he was crowned before: Judah anointed him King over them, and Israel
did the like over them; and to bring the parallel nearer home, what pious
emulation was between us and out brethren, the Scots; to set King James of
blessed memory upon the Throne of England? they might both deservedly say, (for
they showed it in effect) that they were his flesh and bone, 2 Samuel 5. 1. Deuteronomy
17. 25
as Israel said to David, he was no stranger, as the Scripture has it, but a
King from among his brethren; never King was received with greater concourse,
higher magnificence, and more applause; this made the Kingdoms, Psalm. 122. 2.
as Jerusalem as a City compacted in it self, which the Septuagint
translateth, (...), a participation, or communication together, often indeed
attempted, but never effected till then; but now (blessed be the name of God)
in a more loving league, and stricter bond than ever; contending who shall do
God and his Majesty that now is, most service: shall we not then join with
them heart and hand, in bringing the Lord Jesus, the King of glory into his
Kingdom? he has showed himself no Stranger amongst us, but done great
things for us; but to the woe of our hearts, we have used him too long like a
Stranger, in keeping him at doors, and the door upon the hinges. Now, let us
set open the gates, Rev. 3. 20.
and bring him in with triumph; which will never be done, so long as the
Prelacie and the Liturgy, or either of them keep the house; Non patitur regni
socios, Christ will have no consort in his Kingdom, much less an Antichrist;
Christ bare many casumnies and injuries from the Jews at his arraignment under
Pilat, and past by many things, not answering again; but when Pilat came to
meddle with his Kingdom, he would not let that pass, but freely avouched it;
Art thou a King (says Pilat?) thou say I am, answered Christ, and to this
and was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, ^oh. 18. 37.
that I should bear withessse unto the truth: of which words Paul gives this
testimony, that Christ, 1 Timothy 6. 13
before Pontius Pilate, witnessed a good confession: which words of the Apostle
have two remarkable things in them: First, that Christ has a Kingdom, which
he will vindicate, in despite of all opposing power, wherein he will have his
own Officers, Government, and Service, to take place. Secondly, that this
course must continue till the coming of the Lord Jesus, and every one that is
of the truth, especially Ministers and Magistrates must maintain it, as they
will answer it at that day; for this work, God has brought you together; and
if you should divert this work, so exemplnied, and pressed by command, 2 Samuel
19. 18.
(which God forbid) then might Christ say unto you, as David to his kindred,
ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh; wherefore are ye the last
to bring back the King? Wherein, if you will not be faulty, but intend (as we
verily hope you do) to bring back the King; then let it be your special
honor, to make the paths of the Lord straight, by removing of that rubbish,
that the King of glory may enter in.

The second Motive is from the Danger of not removing of the Service-booke.
Sect.
Danger, as all know, is the strongest motive to cause a people or nation to
take heed: Craesi fi^ius.
Histories report, that danger has made a dumb man speak. The danger from this
Service Book may be looked upon in a twofold respect, namely, a priori, from
that which is past, and a posteriori, from that which is like to ensue; the
former may also be looked upon in a way of prophecy, or in a way of
performance, the men and servants of God, to whom he: was pleased to reveal
himself in more then an ordinary way, especially in time of persecution or
some pressure lying upon them, have foretold, how the house of David should wax
weak, and the house of Saul should wax strong, that is, Popery should make
head, and the truth of Christ should suffer much, and many in trial should
forsake it; according to that of Simeon, a sword shall pierce through thine own
soul also, that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed, Luke 2. 35. where
by the swords piercing of the soul, according to all the ancient, is meant the
wounding sorrows of the mother of Christ at his sufferings, and by the
revealing of the thoughts, is meant the discovery of some stumbling or taking
scandal at his death. Chrysostom, Austin, Origer, Ambrose, Theophylact: and
what is the ground of all this but these dregs of Popery now in controversy,
and the hurtful Hierarchy, one of these upholding another; a godly and famous
Minister preaching to the banished beyond Seas in Queen Martes time, that Gods
anger was much provoked against England, for slacknesse to reform, when they
had time, place and power; and so it was indeed: for he cast back that partial
reformation into the flames of Antichristian tyrann^^, and gave many up unto
fearful Apostasy; Further the good man said, it stood them upon it, to look
to it, and to be circumspect for fear of after-claps, meaning, that a partial
reformation would not serve. God will never endure (as has been said) the
posts and threshold of Baal, and his to stand together; the like more fully was
delivered by Master R^gers, that honorable Proto-martyr, in his days, when
the Gospel should be established in England, if the Kingdom of Antichrist
were not utterly cashiered, and total reformation made in Gods worship, that
our persecution should be greater, and our trial hotter, then in the days
when he and other suffered; if we will not remove that which is an abomination
to God, as this Book is proved to be, it is just with God to cast us away. One
more of this kind from a Peer of this land, who on his death bed cried, Woe to
England, because they turned all their religion into polity: dangerous
experience has taught us the truth of these predictions: for from that halting
reformation after Queen Maryes death, wherein we pleased our selves with
Agrippa his almost, in the original (...), but a little, Act. 26. 28.
the Babylonians and Edomites, Prelates and Jesuits, under the favor of their
Canons, got at length, such footing, and made such head for Popery,
Arminianisme, and that especially, by causing the Nilus of that Service-booke
to swell, and heating the furnace of persecution, that Religion and Polity,
the two twins of Gods favor, were ground like to Archimedes his tomb, Tullie.
so overgrown with thorns, Cap. 12. 14.
that it could not be found; yea the woman in the Revelation was brought again
unto that strait, as to think on nothing but of flight to the wilderness: And
further, how nigh were our neighbors and brethren the Scots, to the pits
brinke of ruin, both of Religion and State, and that by readmitting of these
synonicall Prelates, and the Trojan horse, the Service book to enter, out of
which, if God had not beaten the brains, 1 Samuel 20. 3
we were like to have had a new Babylonish captivity; yea, we may both truly
say with David, There was but a step between us and death; had not God set in,
as a present help in our distress, and raised you and others, the men of his
right hand, in the very nicke of need, our enemies (as the Psalmist has it)
had swallowed us up alive.

As we are gone thus far with the danger past, Psa. 124. 3. Sect.
and partly present; so we desire your Honors leave, to present the appearance
(as we conceive) of future danger, and that partly to the Church, and State in
general, and partly more particular, to your selves, if this Service Book be
not removed: to make both these dangers more visible, let us compare our
presentment with the ninth Position of Zions plea, in these words, If the
Hierarchy be not removed, and the Scepter of Christ's Government (namely
Discipline) advanced to its place, there can be no healing of our s^are, no
taking up of our Controversy, with God, yea our desolations, by his rarest
Judgments, are like to be the astonishment of all Nations.

As the parts of the Position are soundly proved, so the same may be said of
the Service-booke, and the very same Arguments concerning our danger will serve
the one, as well as the other; wherefore we entreat your Honors to review the
Position, and its proofs, the Hierarchy and the Service-Booke are resembled
already, to Mother and Child, so may they be to two twins, begotten and born of
Pride and Superstition, nursed and brought up in the lap of Covetousness;
these twins are born together, live together, and must dye together: a great
Judge returning from the Circuit of the Emperors service, and hearing his Wife
to be alive, replied, si vivat illa, morior ego, if she live, I am dead: so if
they live (we mean their Callings, then our life may prove worse then death.
God will bear with many sins, in a People professing Christ, but with keeping
Christ out of his Throne, by intruding Officers and a Superstitious worship, he
will not bear, especially of a long continuance; but will be avenged of such a
People, if they be as the Apple of his eye, witness Samuels speech to the
Israelites, who besides their desiring a King before the Lords time, were
faulty in many other things, as appears verse the 20. yet he tells them, If
they, and their King, will follow the Lord, they should both continue (for that
is the best reading) where by following the Lord, is meant, especially the
serving of him according to his will: 1 Samuel 12, 14, 15, 20, 25.
but if they should turn aside from following the Lord in a corrupt way of his
worship, then the hand of the Lord should be against them, as it had been
against their Fathers, yea they should be consumed, Verse 17.
both they and their King; and as Samuel to terrify them called for thunder
and rain; so we have felt, both thunder and rain, Judgment yet mixed with
mercy, both from the mediate, and immediate hand of God, and do feel it at
this present, and to the end we should clear his House of corrupt worship. The
yoke of the Philistims was never removed from the neck of the Israelites,
till they put away their strange Gods, and Ashtaroth their special Idol: But
when their humiliation was joined with Reformation, then the Lord gave, not
only deliverance, but also Victory over, and freedom from their Enemies. 1 Samuel ^* 3, 4* etc.


II. From the Danger of not doing.
A word now of the particular Danger, Sect.
whereof we make bold to give you notice; as God has honored you, in calling
you, to be the Reformers of Church and State, so the work is great, Cap. 4 19.
as Nehemiah said, and the danger proportionable, if it be neglected. When God
puts his select Servants upon high Employments, whether they be Magistrates,
or Ministers, knowing best their weakness, and the many Impediments; he puts
them on ever and anon, to be courageous, not to fear or be afraid, and the
ground of all is, Joshua. 1 9. ^erem. 1. 17
have not I commanded you? So the Lord gives the Prophet Jeremy a charge to
speak all that the Lord should command, and backeth it, with a threatening, be
not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee, both the Hebrew and the
Septuagint has it, lest I make thee afraid. Saul his disobedience in sparing
Agag and the fat of the cattle (notwithstanding all his fair pretexts) with
the fearful punishment inflicted by God upon him, may be a terror to all men
in place, that they do not the work of the Lord by halves, and quarters, Number.
14. 24.
but that with Caleb they follow the Lord to the full. The Lord has laid his
Command upon you to put away the Excommunicate thing, and to cleanse his house
of Idols and Idolothites, and blessed be that God whom you serve; ye have
begun, by your Edicts, though men of disobedience hinder the work: but follow
home the work, we entreat you, and remember those Achans, but above all put
away that Ashtaroth, the Service Book, for that we may well call, Fundi nostri
calamitas, the very Caterpiller of Gods Husbandry. To shut up this Motive, from
the point of danger, be pleased to take notice, how God bears in upon Moses,
that great Commission to Pharaoh to let his people go, Exodus 4.
and that both by words and signs, namely, by turning his rod into a serpent,
his hand made leprous, and the waters turned into blood; which were not only
to confirm him, in his message, against the fear of his adversaries, but more
particularly to teach him, that if he withdrew himself, in part, or in whole,
from the work, the Plague of Leprosy, of Blood, and Biting with Serpents,
should be upon him; yea, God put Moses upon a present trial of Obedience and
Faith, by causing him to take the Serpent by the tail, notwithstanding of the
danger to be bitten by it: we speak to the wise, who can apply it better then
we.

CHAP. X.
Of the Covenant.
THe third Motive for removal of this Book, may be taken from the
Protestation dated May 5. 1641. Confirmed, sent abroad, and solemnly sworn
unto; yea, and bound up with a public Covenant, on the public day of
Thanksgiving, by Ministers and People, so that it is an inviolable Covenant
stricken between God* and us, like unto that in Nehemiah, Nehe. 9. 38
which is there called a sure Covenant, a written Covenant, to which our
Princes, Ministers and People seal unto, from which we cannot depart, except
we will incur that fearful Judgment threatened against Covenant-breakers,
Psalm. 15. 4.
Emblemed out unto us in Scripture, by dividing of the Sacrifices, Genesis 15. 17
and causing the parties to go betwixt them, admonishing, that God will so
divide them in his wrath, if they forsake the Covenant: The subject of the
Covenant consists of three parts: Jer. 34. 18.
In the first we are sworn and tied to maintain all the Rights of Religion,
King, and State: In the second, to oppose all Persons and Things, that do
oppose the three former mentioned, and more specifically, to oppose with all
our life and power, all Popery and Popish Innovations, which Expressions are
thrice mentioned; once in the Protestation, or oath, and twice in the
Explanation: the third and last piece of the subject, is the Peace of the three
Kingdoms, England, Scotland, and Ireland, which we by Oath are also bound to
maintain: Hence two Arguments will offer themselves; one more directly, and
the other by way of consequence.

For the former, Sect.
if all Popery and Popish Innovations are to be opposed, then it will follow,
that the Service book and Ceremonies should be opposed, and by consequence, by
your Authority abolished, Verba Statuti sunt amplianda, non restringenda, the
words of Acts and Statutes for good, and against evil, are to be taken in the
largest extent: but the words themselves, are universal enough. Now that the
Service Book and Ceremonies therein contained, and pressed upon men's
Consciences, are Popery, We, and many others have cleared; yea they are Popish
Innovations, Nam omnia quae a Christo non sunt, nova sunt, all things that are
not from our King Christ in his worship, are mere Innovations, as Tertullian
was wont to call Praxeas, Cont. Prax.
hesternum Praxeam, a yesterdayes upstart: so one, and all of them, are Exotic
and upstart things; It is true indeed by the Malignity of the Masters of those
Ceremonies, the bulk was increased, and would have been like the Crocodiles,
who grow so long as they have a being; if you had not come in place of the
Tutyrites, a creature terrible to the Crocodiles, which leapeth upon their
backs and brings them to the shore; but otherwise for the kind, Plin. lib. 8.
cap. 25.
they are all non ejusdem farinae, sed furfuris, the same kind of Bran; and as
the Woman said of the Foxes, If one be good; all are good. For the further
confirmation, that they are Popish, we have proof, from that Treatise of
Ceremonies annexed to the Service-Booke; Bible in the Dutch letter, An. 1561.
in some ancient Copies we have read, that they thought good to retain some
Popish Ceremonies: but in another Copy they call them the old Ceremonies
retained still, all one in effect.

The latter argument, from the Protestantion, Sect.
by way of sequel, is from out mutual Covenant, and Oath, jointly, and
severally to maintain the Peace of the three Kingdoms, which is impossible to
be done, in the Opinion of our Brethren the Scots, without Identity of
Discipline and Worship; witness the very words of the Arguments, by the
Scottish Commissioners, given to the Lords of the Treaty, persuading Conformity
in these, to be the chief means of Peace.

We will transcribe some passages, for all we cannot, leaving the thing it
self to your honors revievv. It is (say they) to be wished, that there were
one Confession of Faith; one form of Catechism, one directory for all the
parts of Gods public Worship: as Prayer, Preaching, administration of
Sacraments, Page 2.
etc.

The Arguments that they use, are first, from the Conjunction of spirit and
presence, both of great and small; of Assemblies in the Court and other where;
where there is Oneness of worship: but by the contrary, there is division,
where the worship is diverse.

Secondly, Unity of worship will extinguish those Nicknames; as Puritanes and
Shismaticks, put upon professors.

Thirdly, This will make the Ministers of both Nations, with face of face,
labor strenuously, and cheerfully to build up the Body of Christ.

Fourthly, and lastly, Page 3, 4.
This will break the back of the Recusants hope of bringing Rome into England,
all which works strongly for peace, the sense whereof we cite, though not the
very words: But if this unity of Worship be not (say the Commissioners) there
is no unity in Polity or Church to be looked for: for as all the former
combustions, and stormy tempests, formerly arose from that Popish
Service-booke, borne in upon them, whereby all the three States were much
endangered: so they profess in plain terms, that their Reformation so dearly
bought, shall again be spoiled and defaced from England; and whatsoever peace
shall be agreed upon, they do not conceive, Page 8.
how without Reformation it shall ever be firm and durable. for that Service
Government, and Officers, being none of Christ's; but the maine Evil, and the
cause of all Evil in the three Nations: that Maxim observed by the
Commissioners, we may fear will prove too true, the same causes will not fail
to produce the same Effects: witness Symeon and Levyes digging through the
wall, that is, the present conspired Plots of Treason, like to blow up all, if
they be not hindered, even when you and your Brethren are making up the breach:
Now as we are tied by Oath to the preservation of this Peace, according to our
Power; We can look for no Peace with God, nor blessing from God; if we give way
to that, or suffer that, according to our power, that breaks this peace. They
say in the Preface of the Ceremonies, that without Ceremontes it is impossible
to keep Order, or quiet Discipline in the Church. So we reply, that Man's
Ceremonies in Gods Worship, will spoil the peace and quietness, both of
Discipline and Worship, witness the putting of the Arc upon the Philistimes
Cart, though it was a new one. Erasmus tells us, Apoph, 66.
quod mala non sunt tantum abolenda, sed etiam quae speciem mali in se habent,
things evil of themselves, are not only to be abolished, but those that have
in them Appearance of Evil. In all this, Noble Senators, We take not upon us
to put uncouth glosses upon your Edicts, but under favor, we use the words
without forcing, to overturne that which crosses the Truth and Peace of
Religion and State: as Means conduce to the End, so impediments frustrate the
end, if they be not removed. And now since (under favor) We have presumed to
enlarge our selves in this point of Peace, We beg leave of your Honors to
speak a word, or two of the Improbabilities of Peace here among our selves,
without removal of that stumbling block, the Service-Booke. People can worse
be without the Ordinance, then without Liberties, Lives and Being. When Pompey
the Great, was about to supply Rome with food, in a great ^amine, the Master of
the Ship told him, when he went aboard (a great Storm appearing) that he could
not sail and live. Pompey replied, (...). There is necessity of Sailing, but
not of Living: and in this case what shall they do? for with this
Mock-ordinance, or Will Worship, of the Service-booke, they dare not join:
There are such multitudes of people (says Smectymnu^^) that distaste this
Book, that unless it be taken a course withal, there is no hope of any
mutual agreement, between Gods Ministers and their people. We will say no more
of this: but let the sudden tumult raised by that makebate Service Book in
Scotland, be a seasonable Caveat to us and all other Nations, to strike with
Authority, lest that which should be done with the Right hand, be done
unhappily with the Left hand.

Here might be place for another Motive, namely, from the reward, sed recte
fecisse praemium, to do nobly is reward enough, God imployeth not man, propter
indigentiam, sed propter munificentiam, so much for any need of him, as for
honoring of him, by that employment: up then, as the Lord bids you, your
Honor shall be blazoned through the world, you shall be called the Saviors
upon Mount Zion in setting Christ on his Throne, and the Kingdom shall be the
Lords.

Answer of the Surplice.
We had almost forgotten to say somewhat of one ragge of the Ceremonies,
namely, the Surplice, of all the Idolatrous Rites not the least, yea, worse (we
dare aver) than that Plague sore Clout which was sent, as should appear, to
infect Master Pym, and the rest of the House; for this ragge is so infectious
in Gods worship, that many thousands of Gods people dare not join with it, and
that upon good grounds, as shall appear: for as it has been argued against
all the rabble of the Ceremonies, it is man's device, and has been an Idol in
Gods worship.

Therefore in the worship of God, it must be an Idol still. The Antecedent no
man will deny, for it has been the Master Idol in worship amongst the
Papists, sanctifying all other Idols, and without which, it is unlawful to
officiate.

The Consequent is as clear from induction of particulars as has been
instanced from groves and things of that nature, yea, from the Brazen Serpent,
though of God his Institution: now according to the rule of Art, either let the
Defendant give an instance extra propositum, besides the thing in question; or
acknowledge the truth of the Consequent without contradiction.

This has been a grand Instrument of much mischief against the Ministers and
People of God, as we can show at large, depriving the people of their faithful
Ministers, and the Minister and theirs of all means of livelihood. The
unlawfulness of this Babylonish Garment will further appear, if we look to
the original whence we have it.

We must either have it from heathen Rome, which in her Idolatrous service did
Apishly imitate Aaron his garments, Gallesius.
as it is instanced in the reign of Numa, 800 years after the Law; or we must
have it from the Druides* the mad Heathen Priests amongst the Gauls and
Britains, or from the Antichristian Rome; as we have indeed, it being one of
the Popish Ceremonies retained: or, lastly, from the Priestly attire of Aaron
which Heathen and Popish Rome has impiously followed, denying thereby the Lord
Jesus to be come in the flesh, who with his graces was typi^^ed out by those
godly and beautiful garments, which being shadows, are done away, and Christ
the Body is come; for us then to imitate them in this foolish Relic, Col. 2.
17.
or to devise a Priestly garment of our own head in Gods worship, is to rob
Christ of his honor exceedingly, and to make our selves deeply guilty of
will worship: Had not God himself clothed those garments in the Law, with a
particular and punctual command for matter and monner, they had been foolish
and ridiculous things: they made the holy garments (says Moses) as the Lord
commanded: Exodus 39, 1 Sim^er.
which later words, as the Lord commanded, are repeated, as the learned observe
nine several times in this Chapter, intimating that they did not swarve one
jot from Gods direction, Pelarg.
teaching all Gods servants thereby, as the learned apply it ( ut se contineant
intra limits verbi Dei) that they contain themselves within the limits of
Godsword, Simler.
and bring nothing into the service of God of their own invention: for the
Apostle calls that (...), will worship: this being so, it appears what evil
workers those Ministers are who with an high hand do display this Banner of
the Man of sin against Gods own face in the time of his worship, interposing
betwixt Gods presence, and the worship, Exodus 39. 43.
and diverting of the blessing upon the worship, for Moses is said to bless
the work of the worship, upon on this ground, because he saw it done, as
^ehovah had commanded. The Hebrews add, and that truly, that because of this
the presence of God was in it.

Wherefore we humbly entreat your Honors, Esaias 20. 22
as ye would have God to be in his worship, and his blessing upon it, and upon
you and us in a perfect hatred of that menstruous Cloth and garment spotted
with the flesh, to cast it out, and all the rest, as Carcasses of abominable
things: but withal, we entreat you, to set the Masters of the Wardrobe on
packing with them.

It is observed as a custom among the Papists, that they bury their Prelates
in all their Pontifical robes, of which a learned Divine tells us, he could
give no reason, except they meant they should do service when they were dead,
that had never done any being alive. If your Honors will lap up the Prelates
in the Sear cloth of their own Surplices, and intombe them them in the
Tabernacle of the Service-Booke, imbalmed with the strange ointment of their
own Ceremonies, Genes. 35. 2 Verse. 5. Jos. 2. 9.
and bury them under the Oak that is in oblivion, as Jacob did the Idols of
his family, and as our neighbors and brethren have done with the like stuff,
then the fear of you shall be upon all your enemies, and the child that is to
come shall bless God for you.

CHAP. XI.
The Objections. Object.

NOw, we come in the last place, to remove some Objections, which we shall show
to be of no great weight, 1. Object. Sect.
and therefore we use the fewer words:

The first is from the Antiquity of the Service-Booke, to which Doctor Hal^ and
others have received an answer by Smectymnuus; but say it had Antiquity without
truth, it were no better than a custom of error, 2 Object. Sect.
Et nullum tempus occurrit Deo, there is no prescription to the King of Kings.

The second Objection: Many good men have used it, and liked it well; for
answer, Testimonia humana non faciunt fidem, Man's approbation is not current of
it self, but as it buts upon the faithful witness, otherwise it is an
inartificiall argument, as Logicians call it; the Patriarchs used, and did many
things that were not approveable; some good Kings of Judah, 1 King. 14. 4 1.
22. 43. 2 King. 18. 4 to 9.
as Amaziah and Iehosaphat, took not away the High places, were they any whit
the better for that? yea, the suffering of them is set up as the Kings fault;
it were better to follow Hezekiah that took them away. Master Womm^cke
alleges for the Service-booke, that Rome is not demolished in the first day,
and so we allege against it, that good men in mending times, did either see
as far as their Horizon, or at least as they durst: So we have more light,
and are set upon their shoulders, therefore it is both sin and shame for us
not to see more, and do more than they did: Hezekiah did more than Iosaphat,
and Josiah more than they both.

Thirdly, 3. Object. Sect.
it is objected, that it has many good things in it; that is answered already,
the Alcoran and Talmud have many good things in them: yea, the Apocrypha Books
have many excellent truths in them, are they therefore to be presented in Gods
worship.

The fourth objection is from a more convenient course of correcting of it, 4.
Object. Sect.
than of cashiering of it. For answer, what King or State did ever yet thrive
in moyling and toyling themselves, to make clean the Popes leprous stuff, to
bring it into the worship of God; but all that ever prospered in that work,
made utter extirpation. Popes will be content to hear of reformation, and give
order for it to their Cardinals, but they are joined to their Idols, as God
speaks of Ephraim, Elos. 4. 17.
Let them alone.

Secondly, this is not Gods course in reforming of his house: as the rubbish of
the Leprous house was to be cast out into an unclean place, as has been
said; so polluted pieces of Idolatrous service, Lev. 14. 43.
are not to be brought by any cleansing, into the House of God; God commands
his people to throw down the Altars of the Canaanite: where under Altars are
comprehended all other abominations; they were not to set a new trim upon any
of them, but because they obeyed not the Lord, they smarted for it. Blessed be
God, Judge. 2. 2.
who has put it into your hearts, to strike at Altars, (...), Pictures,
Crosses, and all the Popish Idols; we are in good hope you will not leave a
Popish Relic in the Land, neither in Church or Street, and then we may be
sure there shall no Canaanite dwell in our Land: this scraping and picking that
Master Wommock speaks of, will be no better then paring of the nails, and
shaving of the hair, which as the Great Turk said of his Army, will quickly
grow again; yea, and grow again the faster too: good medicines in natural
things may be extracted out of rank poisons, but so cannot pure worship out of
things polluted, being man's inventions; therefore the Prophet Esaias tells us,
Esa. 30. 22.
that nothing will serve, but the casting away of the polluted thing, not
cleansing of it.

The fifth and last objection, 5. Object. Sect.
is from Acts of Parliament, which the Service-book-men make the staff of
their confidence; and yet in truth, being well tried, it shall be found, that
they abuse the state and consciences of men most grossly. Doctor Hall and
others, strike much on that string, as Parliamentary Acts peremptorily
establishment; yet they make but very harsh Music. A man would think that
Doctor Hall, being a learned Divine, would first have laid this worship of
Liturgy in the balance of the Sanctuary, and tried the weight of it there, and
if it had proved too light, (as surely it would) then to have counted it a
piacle against God and man; to offer to make up the weight with humane Laws.
It is not unworthy your remembrance, how one of the later brood of the Scotrish
Prelates, alleging, or rather mis-alleading before our late Sovereign King
James, some Act of Parliament, for the establishing and maintenance of the
Prelacy; the King asked a Nobleman being by, being a great Legist and Officer
of State, what he thought of those Acts? the Nobleman replied, That it went
never well with them, since their Church men labored more to be versed in the
Acts of Parliament, than in the Acts of the Apostles. But to the matter for all
this cry, we are more than half confident, they shall have but little wool
for the Service-booke from the Acts of State, when they are well looked into.
We know not any color of confirmation for this Service-booke, except that
Statute prefixed to it, 1 Eliz. 6. 2.
which how little it makes for it, let the words of the Statute testify, of
which we shall set down those that are most pertinent; for it is needless to
write them all. In the fifth and sixth year of King Edward the sixth, an Act
was made for the establishing of a Book, called The Book of Common Prayer,
the which was repealed in the first year of Queen Mary, which Statute of
repeal was made void by this same Act the first year of Queen Elizabeth;
and that the aforesaid Book, with the alterations and additions therein added,
shall stand and be; and all Ministers shall use the said Book, authorized by
Act of Parliament in the said fifth and sixth year of King Edward the sixth,
and no other. This is the sum of the Statute, in relation to the Subject,
namely, What Service-booke it is that the Statute establishes; and for any
thing we can see, there is not one passage or title for confirmation, or
establishing any other Service-booke, but that of King Edward the sixth; diverse
Ministers in King James his time urged with subscription, answered the
Prelates, True it was, that if they refused, they and theirs were like to be
desolated; but if they yielded, they should make themselves transgressors of
the Laws of the Kingdom, in subscribing to another Book than that,
established by Law: the Prelates in pressing this subscription, forced two
Statutes, namely, the Statute alleged by the change of the Book; 13. Eliz.
cap. 12.
and also another Statute requiring no subscription, but barely to the Articles
of Religion, which only concern the Confession of true Christian faith, and
the Doctrine of the Sacraments.

Now, Sect.
to come to further answer; let us grant by way of Confession that there were
an Act, or Acts for ratifying of the Book, which in terminis we cannot see,
(as Statutes use to be expressed) yet by the Law of charity and duty, we hold
our selves bound to believe, that a State professing the truth of Religion,
would never inact so, for a Service-booke of man's device, as that it might be a
snare to the people of God, having other ends; as a kind of uniformity, supply
for want of Ministry, and bringing Papists to the Church, but not to press it
in the bulk beyond the sphere of any man's Conscience, witness a Rubricke in
King Edward the sixth his Book; but give it to speak as punctually for the
Book as they would have it, shall it be simply good? for that, it is only in
the power of a divine Statute simply to make a thing good, all Divines,
Humanists, and Lawyers, that have written on the Laws, August. de Civil. Dei
lib. 9.
concur in this Maxim, Omnium legum inanis censura, nisidivinae legis
imaginem gerant, the power of all Laws is void, except they bear the
impression of the Law of God: the Orator gives a reason for it, ^ex divina
omnium legum censura, Cic. lib. 3. de Repub.
the divine Law is the standard of all laws, yea, a thing evil in it self
established by a Law, becomes worse, as the learned tell us, it becomes
armata injust^tia an armed injustice, Lib. 4. last. Lucan. li. 1. May.
or with Laciantius to the same purpose, legitime injurias infer, to do
injury in form of Law, just with the Poet, jusque da^um sceleri -- well
Englished and licenced.

Which truth also is cleared from divine Authority: the Psalmist complains of
the injurious evil done upon Gods Church and People, Psalm. 94. 20.
aggravating it from this, (that is) it was framed by a decree; which place,
the Author of Zyons Plea, applies very pertinently to the Hierarchy, proving
it to be the Master-sin, wherewith the Church and State are pestered, and for
which especially, God has a controversy with us, because it is decreed by a
Law; and as a Law for the Hierarchy proved of no force to keep it up, no more
then the late Laws of Scotland could uphold their Prelates: so grant that
there were a Law for the Service Book, the thing being naught, what could it
help it? Within these hundred years there was a Law in England, for the Popes
supremacy, say that were not repealed, stood it either with Reason, Religion
or Loyalty to submit unto it? Yea, some fragments of Laws are yet unrepealed
in this land, that no judicious man will obey: neither have we alleged those
evidences upon this suspicion, to encounter with any Statutes; but to stop the
mouths of those men, who would make the Statute Law a blind guide, under
which their unlawful callings, and superstitious service, might march
furiously against the word of truth.

Now, Sect.
to come to an end, (for we are sorry we could be no briefer) we will only
answer this Quaere, consisting of these two heads: First, whether we do approve
of any set-prayer in a more private way: And secondly, whether we do approve of
any set-liturgie in public; to both these we answer ingenuously as we think;
and for the former, we do think that parties in their infancy or ignorance,
may use forms of prayer, well and wholsomely set, for helps and props of their
imbecility, yea, riper Christians may do well to read such profitable forms,
the matter whereof may by setting of their affections on edge, prepare and fit
them as matter of Meditation, the better for Prayer; but for those parties so
to continue without progress to conceived prayer; were as if children should
still be poring upon spelling, and never learn to read; or, as if children or
weak should still go by hold, or upon crutches, and never go right out. We may
say of set-prayer used for infirmity, as Divines say of the legal ceremonies,
in the interim, that they were tolerable, not necessary; and so whatsoever is,
or may be said in the behalf of it, is not so much (as we conceive) for the
commendation of it, as for the toleration of it for a time; and for giving
satisfaction to scrupulous consciences, for the vvarrantable use of it in case
of necessity.

To the second head; Sect.
for a set form of Liturgia in public we answer, that with all the
Reformed Churches we do allow a sound form of set-liturgie, as an exampler,
or president of our performance of holy ordinance, but so, that none should tie
himself, or be tied to those Prayers, Exhortations, and other things, in the
Liturgy, much less should it be violently thrust upon any Minister or people;
which proves in very deed a limiting of the spirit, especially, in a Minister
able to pray in and by the holy Ghost, yea, it is a very transplantation of the
Essence or Nature of Prayer, wherein the words are to follovv the affections,
and not the affections the words, as it does in the best set forms, but for
our Liturgy, what can be said for forms, or has been said, that cannot be
said for the Popish Liturgy; but the clothing it in another tongue; yet this
is pressed under great penalty, upon all the Ministers; Canon 38.
who, if they had the tongues of Angels, they should not pray, till every rag
and remnant of that be said. To shut up the business, if this Liturgy, idque
caput mali, being the head piece of our evil were put away, we should have
no more ado about such a Liturgy; then the Masters of the Synagogue had, when
after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, Acts 13. 15
they desired Paul to preach, where without question, as the learned observe,
Calvin.
Prayer was not vvanting.

FINIS.

