A POEM UPON HIS SACRED MAJESTY'S DISTRESSES, AND LATE HAPPY RESTAVRATION.



LONDON, Printed for R. Marriot, and are to be sold at his shop in St. Dunstans
Churchyard Fleetstreet 1660

UPON HIS SACRED MAJESTY'S DISTRESSES, AND LATE Happy Restoration.
CEase, Phancie, cease, thus to disturb my Muse
With strange Chymera's, not for any use
But barren subjects, or some aerie theme,
The issue of A Nonens, or a Dream,
Which scrued up to the most tow ring strain.
Its former nothing strait resumes again:
My Muse denies to bate one scruples right,
Back forty foot, for thou 'rt a grain too light.
Arms, and the Prince, I sing, whose generous vain,
Pregnant with sacred purple, knows no stain
But that he is Albions Prince, which may put on
A title more significant, Rubicon.
Nor can the factious Rhetoric of the Times
Nose forth a Canting gloss, to excuse the Crimes,
The horrid treason of a vip'rous Brood
That slew their Countries Father, who then stood
The Pilot of their Faith; but since he fell
Their Faith was shipwreckt, and they sunk to Hell.
Just so a sturdie Oak, which climbed so high,
Its vertex seemed to gore the azure sky,
Through the complaint of an ambitious Brier,
Humbl'd upon the Earth, does there expire:
But blustering Boreas through distended Cheeks
Empties his Belching lungs, the bramble seeks
For shelter, as before, but cannot find
Its spacious Friend to fan away the wind.
What Phlegra's this, whose Typhon scales the skies?
Will not such crimes awake heaven's Deities
Has Ganimedes (Nectar not profuse)
Sophisticated Jove with Lethe's juice?
Sure jealous Vulcan, searching for his Dame,
Does difappoint the Gods, and lets his flame
Faint for a new supply.
But, hark what sound!
What horrid object's this! see how the Ground
Blusheth with scarlet, whilst the thundering Gun
Disputes the Business, and the affrighted Sun
Sweats to drive up his steeds: But, Muse, declare
What high-sould Prince is that, who, thus, does dare
Do wonders at each motion: have ye heard
Niles Deep-base Cataracts? or the crackling beard
Of domineering flames? heard ye the winds
Break from Eolian Caves, whilst Boreas finds
Resistance from the foaming brine? his steel
So storms at every pass, till his foes reel:
Since wonders are so cheap, that every blow
Must be so prodigal, Let Heaven bestow
One on my trembling Muse, that she may see
Her Prince's miracles in a simile.
-- Have ye 'ere seen
A roaring Lion, big with rage, whose spleen
Durst venture on the Gods, when his proud foe
On solitary Cliffs, presumes his Bow
With his dividing steel, sufficient force
To beard his highness with, whose voice is hoarce
Already with his boiling rage, whose eyes
Shootforth contracted flame, his shag does rise,
His tallons all unsheath, whilst a deep groan
(Like Gorgons head,) would fright hisfoe to stone;
But yet the generous Archer speeds amain
His well-taught shasts, though still they light in vain
Upon his Royal fur: The Rampant King
Unites his fury 'cause he faild a spring,
With open mouth receives the bolder Dart,
First spits it forth, and then his generous heart
Kindles a double flame; his spirits rise,
Dart naught but vengeance from his blazing eyes,
Seizes his foe, and then his rending paw
Tears up his bosom, for his grinding jaw
To craunch his vanquished heart: So, just so
Our Royal Lion does entreat his foe,
With equal courage and with equal flame,
But with unequal stars, which seems to shame
And make Olympus blush: But Atlas frownd,
Swore Heaven should sink for him to the Stygian sound,
If its more favoring aspect did not look
Upon the just designs; then Phoebus took
The deep-divining rowles of Fate, and read
As great deliverance on my Sovereign's head,
As ever cop'd with danger: thus appeased,
Thick-shouldred Atlas was again well pleased:
Had you been there you might have heard a shout,
A sudden tempest, loud enough to rout
Joves thunder to a whisper; The army flies,
And Save-the-King runs Clambering up the skies:
But he, brave soul, rather then think of save,
Incircled by the dead, does court his grave;
Yet is preserved, and gone, Jove best knows how,
But, by Joves favor, I Will go beat the bough.
A stately Palace it is, it is large and tall,
My Leidge has turned his White to a Green hall!
His father purpl'd it! the Phancie's rare,
Since Purple, White and Green his Colors are.
But lo the Crescent-crowned Queen of Night
Spangles the double Poles with borrowed light,
And decks with wanton rays her gamesome hair,
Whilst shooting stars run trick about the Air;
And wonder much to see the sisters loome
Spin a long thread within the structing womb
Of a comsumptive Oak, which had not teemed
An hundred years before: but yet it seemed
Latona must be fetched, though it be in vain,
For now my King's secured by a Lane:
A raritie indeed, since when, I Am sure
The via Regia nere was thought secure.
-- But hark, the Capering brine
Does call my Muse, to frisk a nimble twine
With it, for joy my Sovereign does daine
TO accept the service of the prouder maine,
Whilst Zephir' whispers-forth a softer gail,
Whose wanton sporting swells the pregnant sail;
The furrow break in silver foam all over,
And straight, the stout Keel plows the Norman shore;
Which Ecchoeth welcome, and, repleat with joy,
Does storm Olympus with a viv' le Roy:
But fortune still, as various as before,
ventures to dally with his stars once more;
And, as an Ignis Fatuus does climb
Sometimes aloft, then courts its mother-slime:
So she unconstant paces foots amain,
First wantons with her flattery, then disdain;
And 'cause the French, of all men, sympathize
Her most transcendent rare varieties,
She makes them be the racket that must toss
My Sovereign (like a ball,) into a loss,
Or band' him to an hazard, whilst his foes
Are courted for a league, A rebel nose
Makes them forget their honor, and their blood,
For fear it should take snuff; thus, in the bud
My Princes hopes are nipt, whilst Fiends, not men;
First entertain, then turn him out again.
So have I often seen a greedy Cur
To cramb his spacious gut make a great stir,
With eager haste swallow the pleasing bit,
And then at length his paunch disgorged it.
But now the storm is past, the Day is fair,
French complements evaporate to air,
While the Austrian Prince exceeds France as far
As substance does a shadow, Sol a star,
Yet still there does some checkered clouds appear,
Like beautie-spots, within his hemisphear;
But are dispersed; and a Monck, whose hood
Vaild his defigne, prevents a purple stood;
And by a Labyrinth of windings, brings
Phanatick Custos up to relish Kings:
But now the stars with better aspects crowned
Distill rich influence, and forget they fround,
The whilst our Prince does gradually scale
Up Fortunes wheel by steps, that do not fail.
So have I seen Apollo's radient eye,
Peeping through sable Curtains of the sky;
First powder it with Argent, Or it next,
And after comment largely on the text.
But then arose a grand dispute, what Fee
The Senate held by; some would have it be
Fee-simple, but the greater vogue prevail,
And all conclude at last it was Fee-tail.
At whose decease no issue did succeed,
So the Reversion, as is due, must need
Fall to my Sovereign.
But, methinks, I hear
That Charlemaine moves in his proper sphere;
Whose harmony exceeds Apollo's lire,
Or Orpheus crystal spears, though all conspire
To ravish with these sceents. Plato's true,
The old Realm of England is become a new;
It Is its Platonic year, then let my soul
Extract the spirits of joy, and crown my bowl
Brimfull with wishes, whilst the Sun keeps time,
And ecchoing shouts do foot the measured time.
Melpomene no more, come, come, and twine
About our, Olive merriest of the nine,
And, when thy jolly store is emptied, then
Its quintescence extract, and that again.
Europa's Bull went wading by degrees,
First dipped his golden hoofes, anon his knees;
So has our Sovereign done, yet still we see
He is to us, as Jove to Semele.
Thus have we seen a swelling Cloud arise,
Whose spacious bulk did Lord it over the skies,
And golden Phoebus did a Prisoner doom
To the black conclave of it is sooty womb,
But thanks to Heaven, a more refulgent beam
Turned the Usurper to it is former steam.
And since our glittering Sun; with rays full grown,
On high Olympus top has fixed his Throne,
If any ambitious meteors shall appear,
Let them prove falling-stars in's hemisphear.
By James Bernard.

