ADVERTISEMENT. blazon or coat of arms
FOR the better finding out what Drugs are Prohibited, they are marked thus *,
being not brought directly from the Place of growth in English built Shipping,
as in the New Book of Rates, p. 112 in the Act for Encouraging and Increasing
of Shipping and Navigation, is more largely expressed. You will find those that
are Prohibited with this mark *, both in the Book and Catalogue.

THE TREASURY OF DRVGS UNLOCKED.

OR A Full and True Description of all sorts of Drugs, and Chemical
Preparations, sold by Drugists, Whereby you may know the place of their growth,
and from whence they come, and how to distinguish the Good from the Bad.

Very USEFUL for All Gentlemen, Merchants, Druggists, Doctors, Apothecaries,
Surgeons, and their Apprentices. As also for all Travelers, Seamen,
Customhouse Officers, and all others that either Traffic in them, or make any
use of them, or those that Import or deliver any of 'em at the Waterside.
Giving a true Accou^^ of all those that are Prohibited, and those tha^ (...),
whereby many needless Disputes and (...) Suits may be prevented. The whole Work
Alphabetically digested, with a complete Catalogue of all Drugs, etc.

By Jo. Jacob Berl^ of London, Merchant in Drugs.

London, Printed for John Harris at the Harrow against the Church in the
Poultrey, and Tho* Howkins in George-Yard, in Lombard-stret, 16^^

Price Bound One Shilling.

Courteous and Benevolent READER.
CErtainly nothing can promote Trade more than for Men to learn and understand
those Commodities and Merchandises; they do intend to Trade in; which gives me
hopes that this Treatise will be kindly accepted of, and that those of the
Trade of Druggist will be more Ingenuous than to hold that Popish Tenet, to
keep the People in Ignorance. The Price Current which is weekly published of
Drugs, may prejudice, this cannot: For the more Men understand the goodness of
a Commodity, the more value they will set upon it.

To avoid also those dangers (of prohibited Goods) by which I have been (as it
were) shipwracked, you will easily discern the places of growth, being
mentioned almost to every Commodity, and thereby avoid those Rocks and Perils
by which I have fore-gone a good estate. Vale.

THE TREASURY OF DRVGS UNLOCKED.
A.
Adianthum Album, Adianthum Nigrum, Maidenhair.
THe black grows here in England, France, Germany, and Norway, and most parts
of Europe. It is to be chosen, the Leaves very green, the stalks of a lively
reddish, black and dry withal. There has of late been a very good sort brought
from Bergen in Norway; that which comes from Bristol, and other parts in Wales,
is generally very good also.

The white Maiden Hair is not so plentiful here, neither so much in use. It is
brought from Italy, New England, France, and other places; the Stalk of it is
more of yellowish green, and the Leaves larger and thinner than the black.

Adeps Castoris.
THe Fat of Castor is taken from above the Cods of Castor, of which the
Dantzick and Poland sort generally have, as it were, two Cods above the Castor
Cods, which are full of Fat.

Adeps Hominis.
THE Fat of Man is gathered from those parts of Men, as Suet is made of other
Creatures, and Hogs Lard from Hogs, of which the sweetest and cleanest is to be
preferred.

Adeps Ursi.
THE Fat of a Bear is of a very stinking strong smell, very greasy; it is for
the most part brought from Greenland and other parts out of the North Countries.

Alumen Commune.
COmmon Alum is made here in England, and a great many other parts of Europe,
it is in large great Lumps of a sowrish astringent taste, white, and clear.

Alumen Plumosum.
IS in long shivers and long flakes, covered over with a small white fine Dust,
not unlike to Feathers; it comes from Chio in the Straits, and likewise out of
some parts of Germany: the best is in long flakes above an inch in length.

Alumen Roch.
IS an Alum which is roched, looks reddish and very clear as a Crystal, if
broken, and transparent; it comes from Smyrna in Turkey, and some places in
Italy. It is also called Roman Alum.

Agaricus.
IT IS an Excrescence of a fungous Matter of a Tree, very white, and light, and
cuts easily and short: the best comes from Barbary; there is another sort which
comes from Helvetia, and other parts of Germany, viz. Norimberg; which is finer
than that which comes from Russia, being in small pieces, but very fine, white,
and light: the Russia sort is the coursest of all, being sometimes very crusty,
and interwoven with red Veins, as also flinty and sandy, which is reckoned the
worst.

* Alce Succotrina.
IS the finest of Aloes, therefore by some called Aloe Lucida; it is made in an
Island called Succatora near Moco in the East Indies; the finest is most
transparent, if broken, it turns to a fine yellowish Powder: it is brought to us
from the East Indies: the smallest, thinnest, and lightest Bladders are to be
preferred.

* Aloe Hepatica.
THE right Aloe Hepatica ought to be of a fine light Liver color, fine and
clear, not very foetid in smell; that which is called so he^e in England is
nothing else but Aloe Caballina, of a strong foetid smell, and very course,
fitter to be given to Horses than Men: it comes from Surrat in the East Indies.

* Aloe Barbados.
IS the same as the former, but rather finer, yet of a foetid smell; it comes
in gourds, which is generally the best: some in pots is pretty good; that which
comes in Casks is moist, and inferior to the former.

* Ambra Grisea.
AMbergreese, the best is of an Ash color, something speckled, with little
small black and white specks; it is of a most fragrant, pleasant smell, clear
from any dross, and not crusty without, running a hot Needle slightly into it,
there will issue out a Fatness of a fragrant scent; it is brought from the East
and West Indies (viz. Bermoodos, etc.) and sometimes it is found in near parts
adjacent: There was lately a piece discovered in a Sperma Ceti Whale in
Ireland, somewhat like Ambergreese it is never the worse if it does incline to a
yellowish color; sometimes you will discover the beaks of Birds in it, which
is a symptom of its trueness: it has been observed that Birds will generally
strike at it, and several pieces floating at Sea have by that means been taken
up.

Ambra Nigra.
BLack Ambergreese, the best comes from the East Indies, being of a black
color, sometimes speckled with a few gray Specks: We have had in former times
an Irish black Ambergreese, which was more foetid than fragrant, breaking
softish and very shining, but of late (though much enquired for) scarce to be had
for Money.

* Amber Liquid.
IS a very fine and fragrant Liquor of the same Condensity, as a Strasbourg
Turpentine, of a pale reddish color; it comes from Egypt, Chio, and the
Straits.

Amygdala Amara.
BItter Almonds are to be chosen fresh, large, breaking white within, of a
bright color without, they come most generally from Barbary, some few from
Province, and other parts of France.

Amygdala Dulcis.
SWeet Almonds are to be chosen as aforesaid, but of a sweet taste, without
rancor, the best are the Jordan, after them Province and Barbary Almonds.

Anacardia
IS the Fruit of an Indian Tree, like a Birds Heart, with Juice like Blood; it
is by some called the Elephants Lowse; it is brought from Bantam in the East
Indies.

Antimonium Crudum.
CRude Antimony is a Mineral Body, in which the Metalline nature is finished,
consisting of Sulphur Mineral, of Metallic Mercury indigested, and of an
earthly Substance intermixed with Salt: That which is brought to us comes from
Dantzick and Poland, which is in Loaves of a pretty length being larger
streaked, and less foot in it than that which comes from France, which is in
large, round, thick Loaves, full of foot, and nothing nigh so good as the
former.

Antimonium Hungar.
OF all Antimonies, the Hungarian and Transylvanian Antimony is to be
preferred, because that it is of a purer Sulphur, and inbibeth a Golden
Mineral; therefore are its streaks more splendid and longer, of an obscure
reddishness, which shows its goodness; it is cast in a Pyramid fashioned Loaf,
and this Antimony is in all Medicines to be preferred before any other.

Antimonium Diaph.
DIaphoretick Antimony is a Chemical Preparation, with Nitre and Antimony, and
Washing, that it comes very white and light.

Antimonii Vitrum.
OR Stibium, is a Glass of Antimony, looks a transparent deep red, Chymically
so prepared, and that most in Amsterdam.

Antimonii Cerussa
IS Chymically prepared from Antimony, etc. made here in Town, being very white.

Aqua Fortis.
OF Aqua Fortis there is in Druggists Shops sold, viz. double and single. It is
a Chemical Preparation, drawn from Salt petre and Copperas, to several degrees;
the strength of it is known by pouring it upon the blade of a Knife, by its
strong scent, fum^^g and eating in presently in the blade of a Knife, or any
thing of Brass or Co^^er, as also by the quickly rotting a Pack-thred.

Aqua flor. Aurant.
ORange Flower Water is brought to us from Province and Nizza, in France, as
also from Genoua and other parts of Italy. Its Goodness is only known by the
rare odoriferous and fragrant Smell by dipping your Handkerchief, etc. in it.

Argentum Vivum.
QUick Silver is a Mineral Liquor, or a Metallic Volatile; the best is Virgin
Quick Silver, or that which is sometimes naturally found in the Earth, though
most of it is made of a Mineral which is called Cinnaber, by the force of Fire,
as also drawn out of other Metals; it is found in quantities in Hungaria,
Transylvania, Tyrol, and other parts of Germany, and some parts of Spain.

Aroma Equinum.
HOrse Spice is a thing made here in England of several Ingredients, as
Foenugrick, Turmerick, Long Pepper, etc. All ground together in Powder.

Auriculae Judae.
JEws Ears is a spungy Excrescency out of Elder Trees, they are found here in
England and most parts of Europe.

* Auripigmentum.
ORpment is a secundary Sulphureou Mineral, but inflammable: the finest comes
from Surrat in the East Indies, breaking of a shining Gold color, there is a
great deal in Saxony in Germany, but courser and lighter yellow, inclining to a
green, more hard and rocky than the former.

Aerugo Aeris.
VErdigrease is a thing made out of Copper, which by the Evaporating of new
Wine turns to a green Powder, and so gathered in Leather Bags, and brought to
us from Marseilles in France; that which is of a dry and lively color,
breaking easily into Powder, is to be preferred.

Aes Ustum.
IS nothing else but the Scales of Copper Calcined in a Reverberatory Fire;
which are easily reduced into a Calx by beating them in a Mortar.

Arsenicum Album.
White Rats-bane, the best of it breaks clear and transparent like Crystal,
and comes out of Saxony, by way of Hamborough; it is nothing else but a fusion
of Orpment and Salt, and therefore not a natural but an artificial thing.

Arsenicum Citrinum.
YEllow Arsenick comes likewise out of Saxony; It is to be chosen of a pure
yellow color, breaking clear within.

Arsenicum Rubrum.
BY some called Rose Alger, alias Arsenic Sandarac, is of an Orange color, if
beaten to Powder, the most pernicious of Poisons; even outwardly applied, it
produces horrible Effects, this comes from the places aforesaid.

B
Baccae Alkekengi, Winter Cherries.
THey grow here against a Wall in England, and in a great many other parts wild
amongst the Vineyards. The Berries are in a husk resembling red Cherries, but a
little more of an Orange color, being well dried, they will continue of a
lively red color, a little enclining to yellow.

* Baccae Coffee.
COho Seeds, or Coffee, is a Berry which grows upon a Shrub in the Deserts of
Arabia Foelix, from whence it is carried through all the Grand Siegnior's
Dominions even to the East Indies; the best comes now from the East Indies,
being large, bright, a full ^erry, and clean. Formerly that which came from
Turkey; (which generally looks a little greenish) was best esteemed; great
quantities are yearly imported from both parts.

Baccae Hederae.
IVY Berries grow in England and all parts of Europe, they are to be chosen of
a good full growth and well dried, and gathered in the right season.

Baccae Juniperi.
JUniper Berries grow here and in all parts of Europe: the largest and freshest
of a good pleasant Smell, black without, and very green within, are to be
preferred.

Baccae Lauri.
LAurberries, Bay Berries is a large Berry brought to us from Port a Port, of a
very hot oleaginous taste, a little inclining to black, brown Kernels within,
they come from several parts of the Straits.

Baccae Myrti.
MYrtilberries grow in Italy, France, and other hot Countries near the Rocks
and Cliffs of the Sea, brought to us from Marseilles.

Baccae Kermes.
ALkermes Berries is of a lively red color, very light, and soon broken,
something like a Fly within. They come from Italy, Venice, France, and
Marseilles.

Balsamum Capivi.
IS a Natural Balsam flowing from a Balsam Tree in Surinam in the West Indies,
of an Aromatic Smell, hot and bitter taste, of a body clear, transparent, like
Venice Turpentine, but exceeding all Turpentine for Goodness and Virtue.

* Balsamum Judaicum.
BAlm of Gilead, by some called of Meccha, by other Balsamum Syriacum, is a
Balsam much resembling the former, but of a more condensed Body; if some drops
are poured into Water, it will spread upon the surface of the Water, and uphold
a little piece of Tobacco Pipe; it is very fragrant, of Smell somewhat like
Rosemary and Sage Flowers: it is brought to us from Turkey, and is said to grow
out of a thorny Tree in Arabia, Media and India.

* Balsamum Peruanum.
NAtural Balsam, Indian Balsam is of a a very fragrant sweet Smell, a reddish
black color, sinking under Water; it is brought to us from Peru, and New Spain,
in earthen Jars covered over with Leather.

Balsamum Sulphuris,
IS nothing else but a Chemical Preparation made out of Flower of Brimstone,
and Oil of Turpentine, till it comes to a most curious Balsamic condensity, red
like a Ruby, sometimes it is made with Oil of sweet Fennel, or Annis-seed.

* Balsamum Tolutanum.
BAlsam Tolu, is a Balsamous Liquor, of a red, inclining to a Gold color,
consisting between a liquid and a thick Body, very glutinous, where ever it
fastneth it sticks close to it, and pleasant in Smell (and not nauseous like
other Balsams) like the best of Lemons, and Jasmin Flowers; it is brought from
Carthagena, by the Natives called Tolu, out of the Spanish West Indies, in
large and small Callabastes.

Bolus Armenus.
FIne Bole or Bolus verus, it takes its name from Armenia, a Country beyond
Greece, and is often brought from Turkey and the Straits; it is also dug in
Germany, nea^ Wirtemberg, and great store, its said, may be had in St. Helena;
the finest is of a fattish red color, being put to the tongue will easily
stick fast to it, being put in the water will as easily dissolve, as Butter in
melting.

Bolus Communis.
Common Bole is a thing made here in England of Red-oaker and Whiteing, etc.
the nearer it comes to the fine, the better esteemed.

* Borax.
IS a thing made out of natural Borax or Tincal, being in a manner refined from
its Dross, etc. is in pretty large Lumps, bigger than a Walnut, white, almost
transparent, of taste not acid, but as it were urinous. It is refined here, and
in Holland, and other parts of Europe.

Butyrum Jessamin.
JEssamin Butter is made out of the Jessamin Flowers and Lard, finely beaten in
a Marble Mortar.

* Bang.
IS an Herb which comes from Bantam in the East Indies, of an Infatuating
quality and pernicious use.

C.
* Camphora.
CAmphora or Camphor is a Gum of a Tree, of which there is great plenty in
Japan, in Burneo and China, and other parts of the East Indies, from whence it
is brought to us in Duppers and Casks unrefined, being refined in large round
Casks, is of a clear and almost trasparent body, of a white Crystalline color,
and Odoriferous strong smell, like the best Oil of Spike, of a Volatile
quality, easily dissolving, being set on fire almost inextinguible, burning in
Water and Air; and therefore of great use in Bombs, Carcasses, and other
Fireworks.

Cantharides.
CAntharides, or Spanish Flies, is an Insect which grows out of
Ash-Tree-leaves; they are found in Meadows and Cornfieldsd; they are to be
chosen of a very lively green Color, fresh, whole and large, without Dust, of
a longish body. They come from France, Spain, Italy and Germany.

Cap. Papaver. Albi.
WHite Poppy head grows here in most parts of England, Germany, France, etc.
being of very large Heads; a white Poppy seed within: Sometimes the Seeds are
brought out of France, being very white and of a sweet taste, causing
sleepiness.

Carabe.
AMber, or Succinum, is a bituminous Substance; or as some say, a Resin of the
Earth, and out of old Trees thoroughly digested; and from thence traduced into
the Seas. The best is reckoned the White, which is said to be the fattest; the
yellow or clear Amber color the next to it; some of three or four pounds a
piece in weight. They make several Toys of it, as Necklaces, Knife hafts,
Cabinets, etc. and a great deal is carried to the East Indies; the brown and
black is the worst, only fit to draw Oil and Salt; it is found near the
Sea-shores of Prussia, and brought to Sale at Coningsberg.

* Cariophylli.
CLoves, or little Cloves, so called, because it is said they are beaten down
before their full growth; those are to be chosen which are black, oily, very
hot in the taste, of a strong odoriferous smell. There is another sort which is
called Antophylli, or Mother Cloves, which are large, full grown, but not so
good as the former.

* Carpobalsamum.
SHould be the Berry that comes from the same Tree, out of which Balm of Gilead
is made, of a longish shape; somewhat like to Cubebs in the taste; growing
formerly in Palestina, then in Syria, but now transplanted into Egypt: but here
in England we use the Jamaica Pepper, or Pimento, of which the smallest,
roundest, and of a fragrant smell, (like Cloves) is to be preferred.

* Cassia Fistularis.
IS the fruit of a Tree growing in long Canes, or Pipes, hanging very full and
thick on the Branches: The best of all comes from the East Indies, and great
quantities used to be brought from Bantam; it is of a thin rind, full of Pulp,
and free from rattling: There are also quantities brought from the West Indies,
as St. Martenico, Gardelup, Brassil, etc. of which sort the Pipes are generally
large and thick rinded, and not so pulpy within, and therefore worth a great
deal less than the East India sort.

* Castoreum Angl. Nov.
New England Castor is the worst of all Castors, being in longish, hard, and
thin Cods, the substance within more like Resin than Castor; they are the Cods
from a Beaver: There is a sort which has been lately brought from Hudson's Bay,
which is in shape of the Cods something like New England, but in Quality and
goodness far exceeding it, being moister in the Cods, and the inner substance
of a very strong smell and taste, little inferior to the Poland sort.

Castoreum Russiae.
IS the Cods or Stones of a Beaver; The best of all Russia, or other Castor, is
that of Siberia, of a strong and grave smell, of good large round Cods well
fed, neither too dry nor too moist, if cut of a red liver color. There is
another sort which is brought from Poland and Dantzick, which is generally fat
and moist, and nothing near so good as the former.

Cera Alba.
WHite Wax is made out of yellow Wax, the same being by a certain Engine turned
into small Flakes and Shivers, and bleached in the Sun, will turn white as
Snow; which afterward is cast into round Cakes, some thicker, others thinner,
that is to be chosen, which smells well and chaws hard, not being mixed with
Sheeps or Lambs Suet, and and that which looks very white without the least
cast of any yellowness.

Cera Flava.
YEllow wax is made here in England from the Bee-hives, of a firm body, and
pleasant smell, it is of a good lively Color, and made up in round Cakes of
several bigness: That which comes from Dantzick and other parts of the East
Country, is likewise very good, and free from Adulteration. That which comes
from Guinea and African parts, is nothing near so good, being cast in Sand and
adulterated, and of no good Color.

Ceterach.
CEterach is an Herb which comes out of Germany; it is of a very ^ender
substance, of a light brownish Color, easily running to dust.

Chamaepitys.
GRound Pine, alias, Iva arthetica, is a Herb which is in sandy ground here in
England, and other parts of Europe, having a bluish Flower.

Chalybs Crud.
STeel is nothing else but Iron in the best way purged; that which comes from
Styria and Venice, is generally reputed the best: Other sorts come from Cologne
and Bergsland; but inferior to the former.

Chalybs Preparat.
IS Steel Chymically prepared by a strong Acid, etc.

Cerussa Veneta.
CErussa, or fine white Lead of Venice, is in little fine Loaves, wrapped up in
blew Papers, brought over to us being very heavy; formerly it used to be
brought from Venice, now great store is imported from Holland; but that which
is made here in England, is better esteemed.

Cinnabaris Factitia.
VErmilion, or made Cinnaber, is of a very fine lively red color, made out of
Quicksilver and Brimstone by the Chemical Art. First, it was made only in
Italy; afterward great quantities were imported from Holland; and now it is
likewise made in England: The goodness is known by its pure fine red color.

Cinnabaris Nativa.
NAtural Cinnaber is a Mineral consisting of Sulphur and live Mercury; some
does resemble a red Stone; the finest is a very smooth drop of a pure red,
glistering and shining like the best of Vermilion; it is said to be found in
Lybia; but of late, the Dutch have brought the finest yet seen from Japan, out
of the East Indies: That which is found in Germany, is rocky and stony, and far
inferior to the former.

* Cochinille.
IS a fine little Berry, breaking in a very dark red Powder, grayish colored
without; in shape like that Insect, called Lady-bird, but something less, and
therefore by many believed to be a Fly, (or an Insect) which cannot be, that
any such rich color can be in any such Creature: The truest account I ever
could learn, is, that some Flies and Insects fastening upon the leaves (which
are sharp as Needles) of a certain Shrub, on which your West India Shoak-bears
do grow, causes a kind of a blister, turning very red at first, and grayish the
outside. After the Indians do rub all the other part of the leaf when dry, and
thus the Cochinille is produced: Others think it only the blossom of a tender
Herb, taken off before it flowers; it is of an excellent color, of which all
the finest Scarlet and Purple are dyed. Brought from New Spain and Mexico.

Corallina.
IS nothing else but a Sea-moss, (Muscus Marinus) growing in little white
threads, as small Vipers to the Rock, like the Moss to a Tree, being good, is
very white in longish Strings, like the unrifling of a course white Linen;
some of an inch long, some shorter, it is of a saltish taste, the smell
resembling to Oisters.

Corallium Album.
WHite Coral is said to be a stony Juice growing under water in the Sea; some
like the small branches of a Tree, others of several forms and shapes, (I have
seen pieces of half a hundred Weight, covering pieces of the Wrack where the
Silver was fetched out) the best of it is that which is pure, white and clear,
almost transparent; free from Dross, resembling almost the white Wax: It comes
generally from the West Indies, and other parts near Spain and France; there is
a course sort like to pieces of Tobacco-Pipes, some small like Sugar-Confects,
is better; but the best, is of good handsome clear Branches, and very clear and
white.

Corallium Rubrum.
REd Coral, of a most pure red color, like Vermillion when pollished, and in
large Branches, such as used to be transported to the East Indies, is best. But
for Physical uses, a small little Sprig sort is used likewise; that of a pure
red is to be preferred; the pale scruffy sort is nothing near so good: It is
brought from the Tyrrhene and Sioilian Seas, as likewise, some parts of Italy,
and is polished at Naples.

Cornu Alcis.
THe Horn of an Elck is of several shapes, but that which is best for use, is a
broad, slat, thick, heavy Horn, a little hollowish at one side; if white
within, fit for rasping; is in some cases to be preferred before Hartshorn.

Cornu Cervi.
Hartshorn, or Stags horn, of which the best come out of Germany; the large
with white and clear tips, of a good fresh color without, and very white
within, are best; those which come from the East-Countreys, Scotland and
Norway, are not so good.

Cornu Rhinocerotis.
THe Rhinoceros horn is of a dark brownish color, with a sharp point, mostly
bends Half Moon fashion, but the Root very broad and heavy: I have seen some
of three foot in length; they are brought over from the East Indies.

Cornu Unicornu.
THe Unicorns horn is sometimes eight foot and more in length, others of a
smaller size; they are very sharp pointed, running taper all along, and twisted
of the color of Ivory, and a finer grain than any Ivory, and very white
within, they are not of a four legged Creature, like to a Horse, but come from a
Fish, and therefore a Sea-Unicorn; they are brought from the Straits David's,
near the North-Passage.

Cortex Cappari Rad.
CAper-bark is of the Roots of a Caper Tree, or rather a Shrub, whereupon the
Capers grow; the Bark is best which is bright, a fair Paisnip color, and
somewhat large, and not Worm eaten.

* Cortex Cassiae Ligneae.
CAssia-Lignea is of several sorts, the most and best for Physical
Prescription, is the quill sort, (being made up in small bundles) the thickness
of a Goose Quill, generally sixteen Inches, or thereabouts, long, of a bright
light Cinnamen color, of a sweet, but not sharp biting, etc. of a glutenous
taste when chawed. There is another sort, which is called the Tramboon sort, of
which there is one kind in bundles like Clove-Park, of a very hot biting taste,
breaking gummy as it were, and blackish within like Clove-Bark, which is very
good also; then likewise another sort much like this last, in large thick
rowles as big as a Thigh, which proves pretty good and strong, but is of a very
dark color. Others of the Tramboon sort, is like the small Cinnamon, something
of the same taste, but not so strong, but more woody, and of a worse color; all
come from the East Indies.

Cortex Cinnamomi.
CInnamon is a Bark of the Cinnamon Tree, which grows upon the Island Zeylon,
of a light bright Cinnamon color, of a very hot, but very pleasant odoriferovs
taste, of a fragrant scent in the very handling of it, in Pipes about a yard in
length; the smallest and thinnest Bark is generally best.

Cortex Citri.
CItron Peels come from Spain and Portugal; those which look of a lively yellow
color and fragrant smell, are best.

* Cortex Elatherii.
IS a Bark so called from the name of an Island which is in the West Indies;
it is a round curled Bark, (something like Jesuits Bark) of a very hot taste, and
fragrant smell when burned, therefore it is often used to sweet-scent Tobacco.

Cortex Esulae Rad.
IS a small bright Bark, growing in England, Germany, etc.

Cortex Granatorum.
ARe the Peels of Pomegranate-Apples, of which, greatest part are brought to us
from Portugal; the largest, reddish without, and a bright yellow within, are to
be preferred. They grow also abundantly in Turkey, Italy, Egypt, France and
Spain, and other parts of the World.

Cowitch.
IS the down of a large Cod, like a Pease-cod, of a brown color, like dark
Cinnamon, the said Cowitch being nothing else but a down covering the said
Cods, called Cowitch, because of its provoking itching and scratching, is of no
other use, but to play Tricks and Waggery with: It comes from Jamaica.

* Cortex Guajaci.
THe Bark of Lignum Vitae, or Lignum Guajacum, that which is fresh and new, and
taken from the Tree, when it is alive and green, is to be preferred, though a
great many use also the dry Bark; the Lignum Vitae grows abundantly in
Jamaica, and in most of the American Islands.

Cortex Limonum.
LEmon Peels are gathered here from the Lemmons, those in Holland and other
parts, they import great quantities from Portugal; those which are of a good
color and scent, are best.

* Cortex Peruanus.
Jesuits Bark, China chinna, quin quina, Cascarello, Cortex Patrum, is the
Bark of a Tree which grows in Peru, the Bark being not too large, but from
the smaller Twigs curled, a lively color, a little more dark yellowish than
Cinnamon, of a bitter taste, breaking shiningly, sometimes very rough, and a
whitish outward Bark are to be chosen: That which is very thick, dark colored
and flat, is nothing near so good.

* Cortex Sassafrae Lign.
THe Bark of Sassafras is of a reddish bright color, and strong taste: It is
brought from New England.

Cortex Tamarisci.
IS the Bark of a Tree which grows in Germany, along the Rhine and Danube, in
gravelly places; it comes in large bundles, the Bark looking an Iron gray
without, and light brown within.

* Cortex Winteranus.
WInter Bark is a whitish Bark brought to us from the West Indies, of a very
hot biting taste, pretty large and thick of Substance.

Cranium Humanum.
THe Scull of a Man ought to be of such an one which dies a violent Death, (as
War, or Criminal Execution) and never buried: Therefore those of Ireland are
here best esteemed, being very clean and white, and often covered over with
Moss.

Cremor Tartari.
IS a refining, and boiling, and shooting of French Argol, which is brought to
us in quantities from France, that which is best, looks very white and clear,
not yellowish, and the nearer it resembles Crystal Tartari, (which is made of
Rhenish Argol) the better it is to be esteemed.

Crocus Anglicus.
ENglish Saffron is mostly brought out of Cambridgeshire, and gathered near
Saffron*Walden, made up in Cakes; that which is of very fiery red, and blood
red color, of a very strong smell, of a hottish taste, striking a very good
Tincture, of a large Leaf, tough and firm in the tearing, is to be preferred:
That which is of a pale yellowish color, old and decayed, is by nothing near
so good, therefore the newest is to be chosen before any, unless the year
before brought forth that which was larger, richer, and of a better color.

Crocus Hispanicus.
SPanish Saffron comes in loose Leaves, and is generally oyled over; that which
is of a large Leaf, good lively color, and well scented, as abovesaid, is to
be chosen.

Crocus Martis.
IS a Chemical Preparation; being made of Iron by a Calcination in a
Reverberatory Fire, till it comes off in a fine pure red Crocus.

Crocus Metallorum.
THe Saffron of Metalls is made of Antimony, Salnitre, (and sometimes fine
Tartar) put to a Fusion and Detonation, the Faeces being separated, produces a
fine Liver-coloured Crocus.

* Cubebae.
CUbebs is an Aromatic Fruit, somewhat like to Pepper, being a little less, of
a hot Aromatic taste: They grow in the Isle of Java, and are generally brought
from Bantam.

Cuscuta.
DOdder is an Herb which is inclining to a red color, and very stalky; it
grows in most parts of Europe.

Crystallus.
CRystal is a stone much like to frozen Ice; that which is used in Physic
ought to be pure, clear and whitish, transparent like Water; it is abundantly
found in Germany, Bohemia, Hungaria, Cypres, France, etc.

Chelae Cancrorum.
CRabs-Claws are the tips of the larger Sea-Crabs gathered here in England, and
near adjacent places, the largest being most desired, being black on the tips,
and red underneath.

Cicerum Rub.
REd Cicer is a kind of a Pea of a bright fresh red color, a little sharp
point at one end of it, full and large, and not black or dark; they come from
Italy.

Cicer Album.
IS the same as aforesaid, being only of a white color instead of red; they
come from Italy, as the former.

* Colocynthis.
COloquintida, Coloquints is a wild Fruit, not unlike to Oranges, which being
pared, is very white and light, full of Seeds, coming from Egypt, the taste so
bitter, even exceeding Gall.

Coculus Indus.
IS a Berry which is brought from the East Indies, a little more round and
larger than Bay-berry, hollow within, and of a brownish color: They bring them
likewise from Turkey.

Colophonia.
IS nothing but a transparent, clear, and yellowish Resin, which will easily be
beaten into a (whitish) Powder: It Is brought to us from France.

D.
Dactylus.
DAtes is a Fruit coming from Barbary, some from Asia: The best are large, long
in shape, yellow color, inclining a little to red; (some a little darker) if
the stone within is very white, and a little Cap upon their tops, shows that
they are fresh, their taste is sweet, somewhat like to Malago-Wine.

Dens Apri.
THe Tush of a wild Boar is crookedly bent, something like to a Seahorse
Tooth, but a great deal less; not above two or three Inches long, as white as
Ivory, sharp at one end, and hollow at the other: They come from Germany.

Dens Equi Marini.
THe Seahorse Tooth is of a large bigness, some of four, five, or six pound
weight, crookedly bent like a Half Moon, white like Ivory: They are found in
the West Indies, Hudsons Bay, Greenland, and many other parts.

Diapente.
DIapente, is a Composition made by every Druggist, for the use and cure of
Horses.

E.
Ebor. Rasurae.
THe shavings of Ivory, being made by the Ivory Comb-makers and Turners; the
largest, whitest, and cleanest, are best.

^lixir Proprietatis.
IS a Chemical Preparation made of the best of Saffron, Myrrh and Aloes, etc.
which is known by the taste, as likewise by the good tincture from the Saffron.

Epithymum.
EPithymum, is a kind of a Dodder which grows over Time, like a Silk, or a
Cob-web, of a brown reddish color, that which has a good fragrant smell, and
fewest stalks, is to be preferred. It comes from Turkey, Italy, and other parts
of the Straits.

Ens Veneris.
IS a Chemical Preparation made of Copper, Sal Armoniack, etc. That which is
good, is very light; of a yellowish Orange color, is made here in Town.

F.
Flores Balaust.
ARe the blossoms of the Pomegranate Tree, of a very lively Scarlet red color,
(though they are dried) pretty large, they come in great quantities from Turkey,
sometimes also from Portugal, Italy and Spain,: They grow here in England, and
many other parts.

Flores Chamaemeli.
CAmomil Flowers, of which the double is called Roman Camomil-Flowers, being
most fragrant, and whiter than the single, the same being yellow within, and
white at the edge: They grow here in England, Germany, and most parts of Europe.

Flores Meliloti.
MElilot Flower is of a yellow color, growing here in England, in stony places
best: It is in its Flowers the whole Summer, the smell resembling somewhat near
to Honey.

Flores Origani.
ORiganum, the best which is liked of here in England, resembles the sweet
Marjarom, it is nothing else but a wild Marjarom, growing in Spain, Portugal,
Italy, and other hot Countries, of a fragrant smell, betwixt Marjarom and Time,
being in knotty Flowers, and free from Stalks, and of a light brownish color.
It is generally brought from Ve^ice and Cadiz.

Flores Staechados.
SAechas is a Flower pretty large, (much of the shape of large Hops) of a
fragrant smell when growing, the Flowers are yellow and bluish, but when dried
up, of a Beer color, or light brown in knobs: the largest not broken, well
scented, are best, which come from the Straits, Italy and Spain: There is a
bluish sort which comes from Marseilles, but is not so well liked of.

Flores Sulphuris
IS nothing else but rough Brimstone sublimed by a Chemical way; it is to be
chosen, that which is fine, light and soft, not harsh, of a fine lively yellow
color, almost insipid in taste, dissolving in the Mouth.

Folia Betonicae.
BEtony Leaves are gathered here in England, and most parts of Europe, their
Flowers being of a Purple color; the best are those which are gathered in May.

Folia Dictamni Cret.
DIttany Leaves grow in Candia* Dalmatia, Morea, etc. the bes^ are in large
Leaves, well covered with Willow-green, rough Cotton as it were upon them;
sometimes with Purple Flowers: Those Leaves which are thi^ and bald, are to be
rejected, they come from Italy.

* Folia Malabathri.
FOlium Indiae, Folium Cassiae, is brought to us from the East Indies, grows
plentifully in Cambaja near the Water^^de; the Leaf is large and broad, longer
than a Laurel leaf, not quite so broad; that is to be chosen which is green, of
a strong smell, Cinnamon like, and that which is fresh, not black or decayed.

Folia Rosarum Rubrar.
REd-Rose-Leaves come out of France, sometimes great sto^e are gathered in
England, of a sweet smell, lively, dark red color, choice ought to be made.

Folia Scordii.
SCordium, or wild Germander, grows in and near waterish places here in
England, and many places of Europe.

* Folia Sennae Aleppo.
ALeppo Senna, is the coursest of all Senna, (except the East India) being
generally full of Stalks, etc. of a shorter Leaf, it is to be chosen of a good
strong smell, not musty, green, of a pal^ color, and well cleansed.

* Folia Sennae Alexand.
ALexandria Senna, is the best of al^ Senna, of a large and long leaf, ^ fresh
smell, free from Stalks, and small* of a lively color, and a very goo^ scent.

Folia Soldonellae.
SEA-Colwort, or Bindweed, is an Her^ of a green leaf, growing near Maritim
places in Italy, France and Zealand* from thence it is brought to us.

Folia Tussilaginis.
THe leaves of Coltsfoot grow her^ in England, and most part of Europe.

G.
* Gallae.
GAuls, is a thing which grows upon Oaks (of a certain kind) in Turkey, more
in use by Dyers and Salters, than Druggists; the best sort are the Aleppo
Gauls, and the best of them, those which are blew and heavy, those which are
yellowish, inclining to red, (as most of the Smyrna sort) are not so much
esteemed: They are brought from Turkey.

* Grana Paradisi.
MAllagetta, is of a dark reddish color, hot taste like Pepper: They are
brought from Guinea.

* Gutta Gamba.
CAmbogium, Gutta-Gum, is an inspissated Juice of a Plant, but not well known
of what Herb: The same is brought from China, the color is not unlike to the
finest Curcuma; a fine yellow, pure, inclining to an Orange color* without
Dross, pure and clean, in round Rowles and Cakes, easily dissolving, when
touched with wet, or the Tongue, will turn whitish, or of a milky Substance.

* Gum Ammoniacum.
Gum-Ammoniack is in fine little drops, the best is loose, somewhat like fine
Olibanum, but in less drops, white within, and yellow without, smelling like to
Castoreum, of a bitter taste, it will easily stick to the Fingers, and so it
often comes all in one Mass or Lump; it is brought from Turkey and East Indies,
growing near the place where the Oracle of Hammon was, from whence it is thought
to take its name.

* Gum Animi.
HEre that which is called Gum Animi, is called beyond the Seas Copal, and so
Vice versa; the Gum here meant, is hard, transparent, rough without, like Gum
Senica; it is brought from Guinea.

* Gum Arabicum.
GUm Arabic, Gummi Thebaicum, Gum Babylon comes from a small Tree growing
near the Water, of a white, clear, and transparent color: It Is brought to us
from Turkey, and other parts of the Straits.

* Gum Asa faetida.
STinking Asa (by some called Devilsdirt) are the Tears (or Lachryma) of a Tree
called Laseris, growing in Syria, Lybia, and Media, the finest is in pure fine,
white and clean drops, free from Stalks and other mixture, of a very strong
foetid or stinking smell, even exceeding Garlike; it is adulterated with flower
Sagapenum, etc. It is brought from the East Indies and the Straits.

Gum Cerasorum.
GUM. from a Cherry-Tree is of a brown red color, softish and clammy; it is
found issuing out of Cherry-trees here in England, and all parts of Europe.

* Gum Carannae.
GVm Caragna is a softish resinous Gum, being very tough, of a darkish Olive
color (inclining to a Musk color) being soft, condenseth; being brought from
the Spanish West Indies, from a place called Cartagena, being of an odoriferous
smell.

* Gum Copal.
IS a whitish softish Gum (as it is here in England esteemed) of an indifferent
good smell, inclining to a yellowish white color, much like to the ordinary
Frankincense, but of a better smell; It comes from the Spanish West Indies.

Gum Bdellium.
It Is the Tear (or Lachryma) of a thorny Tree growing in Arabia, India and
Media, it is of a bitter taste, fat in feeling, of a fragrant smell, somewhat
softish, not easily to be beaten in a Mortar, of a light brownish color, (like
bright and fresh Prunelloes) and some of it black.

There is another sort which here is most desired, which comes amongst Gum
Senica, and a little resembling it, or like large pieces of Olibanum, which is
easily beaten into Powder, but by the Learned, not looked upon so true as the
former.

* Gum Benzoin.
IS very well scented, odoriferous and fragrant, the best is as if it were
marbled, or intermixed with white and light brown, or dark yellowish specks,
breaking very easily, being rubbed betwixt the Hands, of a most pleasant
fragrancy; it may also be distinguished by throwing some small Powder upon
Coal: It is said to be found in Samaria and Sidon, but that which is brought to
us, comes from the East Indies. There are several sorts, and of several
qualities, some gray and white, which is pretty good, and another sort all
grayish, little white, but inclining to a dark brown, full of Dross, which is
the worst.

Gum Elemi.
IS a Gum brought to us from the Spanish West Indies, (some say also from
Aethiopia) it is a very soft, bright, almost transparent Gum, white, inclining
to yellow and green color, so it seemed because of its moisture and softness,
it comes in longish Cakes, rouled up in flags, if lighted on a Candle, or
Fire, there will exhale a sweet Fragrancy.

* Gum Guajaci.
IS a Gum issuing out of a Lignum-vitae Tree, the best is in great pieces,
clear like Rosin, and breaks as easily, but of a green color, that which is
very clear and clean, breaking green, not filled up with Dross, (as some is)
ought to be chosen: It comes from Jamaica, and other parts of the West Indies.

* Gum Galbanum.
IS a fattish and glutinous Gum, generally v^^y moist, and of a strong flavor
and smell, but ^ragrant and pleasant withal, of a white, inclining to yellowish
color, sometimes full of little light Stalks and dusty; the clearest and
purest is to be preferred, which comes from Turkey. Some has lately been
brought from the East Indies, which has been much adulterated, and nothing
near so good as the former.

* Gum Euphorbium.
IS the Gum of a thorny Tree growing in Barbary, from thence it is imported to
us. The best is (...) like a middling sort of Manna in small Flakes, a little
smell, but very pernicious if taken, and hot in the Nose, will set it (speaking
comparatively) all on a Fire.

Gum Hederae.
GUM of Ivy is found in most part of Europe, as also here in England.

Gum Juniperi,
OR Gum Sandaraca, comes from Barbary, being in little longish tears or drops
of a yellowish color, almost transparent, very hard, and if beaten, it will
run in a very fine Powder, (which is called Pounce) it is abundantly used in
Varnish, gilding of Leather, etc.

* Gum Lacca.
IS said to be the Juice of a Tree, which is said to be gathered by flying or
winged Ants, (like as Bees do honey out of Flowers) which they induce about the
Twigs and Branches of Trees. And thus we see stick I (...) to us: It Is of a
redd^^^ ^^^ght color, not unlike to small ^ed Myrrh; that which is called Seed
Lack, is in small, bright reddish grains; the best is most brightest, inclining
to a yellowish color, it smells sweetish when burnt, (though unwholesome) Shell
Lack is made out of Seed Lack, being melted down of the finest Lack, and if
fine, is of a reddish color, and almost transparent. It comes from Martaba,
Malavar, and Sumatra in the East Indies.

* Gum Labdanum.
IS said to be a liquor (or rather a Juice) out of a Tree called Ledon, of a
blackish color, comes from Cypres in lumps, (which is generally the best) or
in Pigs-tails, rolled up in round tursted Cakes (which are generally of a
fragrant smell; but full of Sands) especially when burnt, that which is fat,
gummy, easily mollified, is best.

* Gum Myrrha.
MYrrh is a resinous gummy Juice which grows out of a Tree, of which they
open the Bark, from thence it flows in little and bigger drops, of a bright,
fattish, and yellowish color, of a fragrant smell and bitter taste, smooth and
bright, not too heavy, the black and crusty is not so good; it is said to come
from Arabia, but we have it brought from the East Indies.

* Gum Olibanum.
It Is the true and right, the best are in little round white-yellowish drops,
inclining a little to red, being in loose drops, and not run together; the best
comes from the Straits, very good comes likewise from the East Indies, but
some of it being run together in lumps and turned black, being nothing near so
much esteemed.

* Gum Opopanax.
OPopanax is a fine reddish fragrant Gum, it is gathered from a Root, being the
Juice of it, which thickened in the product; the best is in round loose drops,
but being very glutinous, it will stick together in lumps; the best comes from
the Straits and Turkey, and very good has been brought from the East Indies,
though of late they have very much adulterated the same in those parts, viz.
with Sagap^num, and Gum Ammoniacum.

* Gum Sagapenum.
SAgapenum, the Juice of Serapin, is a drop, or a Gum out of a Tree, growing in
the Regions of Media, and some from Alexandria, being sincere, very clear, the
outward color yellowish and reddish, inwardly white, of a sharp taste, grave
smell, a little resembling Garlic.

* Gum Sarcocolla.
IS a very small Lachryma in little grains ^ot much bigger than Gravel, of a
yellow, reddish color, of a bitterish and sweetish taste, (like Liquorish) it
runs out of a thorny Tree, being excorticated; it is brought to us from the
East Indies.

* Gum Styrax Call.
STorax Calamita, (a cannarum Calamis sic dicta) is the Gum of a T^ee, being a
resinous Juice, fat, soft in handling, of a most sweet fragrant smell, of a
reddish color, being mixed with Bran is the worse for it; some with Saw dust,
which is the worst of all. This is generally brought from Turkey and Alexandria.

* Gum Senica.
GUM Senica, is a Gum which comes from Guinea, growing near a River called
Senica, coming in large round Knobs, some reddish, some whitish, breaking very
clear with^n and rough without: It Is brought to us from Holland and France,
because our African Company have no admittance in those parts from whence they
bring it.

* Gum Tacamahaca.
OF which there is two sorts, one is brought over in shells, which is soft and
whitish, of a most pleasant and fragrant smell; the other in lumps, comes in
Chests, which is nothing near so good, being generally drossie; both come from
New Spain.

* Gum Tragacanthum.
GUM Traganth, is a Gum which is brought from Turkey; the best is very white, in
little small and curled Sprigs, that which is thick, brown and yellowish, is of
little value; it will easily dissolve and turn into a Mucilage, etc.

Gluten Oris.
MOuth Glue is made of Icing Glass, Gum Senica and Traganth, in little long
pieces, above an Inch and a half in length.

Granadillas Peru.
THe Granadilla is a black Berry (a sort of Cataputia) of a longish shape, a
little bigger than a Pine Kernel, of a black grayish Husk, a white Kernel
within, (like the Barbados Nuts) not speckled, but more a black color, one
half kernel being able to purge any body both upward and downward; they are
light, and not heavy, and come from Peru in America.

H.
Hordeum Gallicum.
FRench Barley, so called, because it used to be brought out of France; it is
nothing else but a Barley excorticated, or the upper Husk taken off by a
certain Mill, which is made for that purpose; that which is round, white and
clear, is the best: The same is now made here, and in Holland and Germany, etc.

Hordeum Perlatum.
PEarl Barley, so called, because it does very much resemble the larger sort of
Seed-Pearl, being very round and small, white, well-flowred over, fresh, and
not musty, the smaller the better, it is likewise done as aforesaid, but twice
or thrice over to make it the finer, the best comes from Germany, and in all,
used to be preferred before the French Barley.

I.
Ichthyocolla.
Icing-Glass (in High Dutch, Hauson blass, Low Dutch, Huysen blassen) is the
product of a great Fish in the Danube, called in Latin Huso, of a glewy
substance, without Bones, or grissel Bones, (except in the Head) sometimes four
and twenty foot in length, and without Scales, he being desirous of
fresh water, comes out of the Euxine Sea into the Danube, most Icing Glass is
made in Muscovy; the best is the Patriarch sort, four square, very thin and
white, almost transparent, the large Horse-shooe sort in thin Rings, and clear,
called the Czars sort, is the next; that which is yellow and brown within, a
thick sort, is inferior; that in square Books or Cakes, the worst of all.

Jujubae.
JUjubes is the fruit of a Tree called Ziziphus, of the bigness of a large Luke
Olive, of a red color like a Cherry, of taste of Raisins of the Sun, having a
Stone within like Prunes; the best are plum full of Pulp, and come from Italy;
there is another sort comes from France, which are lean and hungry, a lighter
red color, but nothing near so good.

* Juncus Odoratus.
SQuinanth, alias Camelshay, is brought from Turkey, and said to grow in Arabia;
that which is good, is of a strong Aromatic smell, is well colored, bright,
of a good length, being often times made up in small bundles, of a Pyramid
fashion; the short, grayish, and knotty sort, is nothing near so much to be
esteemed.

L.
Lac Sulphuris.
IS made of Flower of Brimstone, and Salt of Tartar, by a Chemical Preparation,
etc.

Lapis Amethystus.
THE Amethyst Stone, is of a dark Peach, or a live and light Purple, but a
great deal paler; the best is of the East Indies, or Oriental sort, which is
fit to be set in Rings, the other, and that which we use in Physic, is
courser, and not so well colored, which is brought to us out of Germany.

Lapis Amianthus.
IS a reddish Stone, the best coming from the East Indies, those which come
from Bohemia, and other parts of Germany, are not so good: This Stone is of
very little use, and very little sold amongst Druggists.

Lapis Armenus.
THE Armenian Stone is of several spots, green, bluish, gold-colour'd, and a
little inclining to black; this Stone is so called, because it is brought from
Armenia.

* Lapis Bezoar Occidentalis.
THE West India Bezoar, comes mostly from the Spanish West Indies, of several
sizes and bigness, some bigger than a Turky-Hens-Egg, others no bigger than a
Hasel-Nut, etc. The right is of an Ash-gray color, some inclining to black; it
shivers pieces from pieces, as well as the Oriental Bezoar, though in virtue by
fair inferior.

* Lapis Bezoar Orientalis.
ORiental Bezoar is found in the inner parts of a Beast, of several Forms and
Shapes, some round, Oval, longish and square, and sometimes in it a straw, a
bean, a stalk, a myrobalan Kernel, a Hair and pibble Stone; They are of several
bigness, those in sort not exceeding a dram; others of half, or one Ounce, but
those of two and three Ounces, are Rarities: They are of a dark green Olive
color, smooth and glissening.

Lapis Calaminaris.
IS a grayish Stone, inclining to yellow and red; it is very heavy, and used in
the making Brass out of Copper; and this Stone it comes from Germany, and
several other parts, as also from Bristol and others parts of England.

* Lapis Contrayerva.
IS a made Stone of Contrayerva-Roots, Pearls, Coral, Amber, Crab's-eyes, and
several other Ingredients, which after is gilded over, smells strong of the
Root.

Lapis Dentalis.
ARE littte bones out of a Haddock, or large Whiting, having two in every Head,
they have as it were little Teeth at one side of them, from which, I suppose
the name is derived.

Lapis Gagates.
JEtt, or Get, is a bituminous Stone, very shining and hard; it is so called
from Gaga, a River in Sicily: It comes likewise from Asia and Turkey.

* Lapis de Goa.
GOA Stones, (by some not rightly called Lapis Jaspar Antonicus) is a made
Stone, (by the Portugees of Goa, being the chief place the Portugoise have near
China in the East Indies) some say of Seed-pearl, Bezoar, Gold, and other
Ingredients; they are of a dark green color, mixed with Gold Streaks, in shape
almost of a large Olive, cutting very fine within, of a gray color.

Lapis Granatas.
GRanat is a dark reddish Stone, some as large as a small Pistol-shot, others
are small like Guinea Grains: There is a great many found in Bohemia, and other
parts of Germany, the clearest, and redest like Rubies, are the best.

Lapis Haematites.
SOme call it Boodstone, being of a blood red color; the best are long, and
do shiver sharp at one end, like a Needle: They are found in Bohemia and
Silesia, near Breslaw.

Lapis Hyacinthus.
HYacinth Stones are of a light brown, or Beer color, the best are small,
flat, and a rough outside: There is a large sort, which looks as if they were
cut or pollished, of a red color: The Oriental and best, are finer than both,
of the color of red fiery Flames. The former are found near a River in
Silesia, the other come from France, and the best from East India.

Lapis Jaspis.
Jasper Stone, is of a reddish color, (and not as some say, of a green
interwoven with red spots) it comes from the East Indies.

Lapis Judaicus.
IS a longish Stone of the bigness of a Finger; some shorter, it is of a gray
color; those which come from Syria are best esteemed.

Lapis Lazuli.
IS a bluish Stone, of a most excellent color if fine, (of which Ultramarine
is made) some are with Golden (or rather Brass) Veins interwoven; the courser
is mixed with white, like rough Alabaister; the best is that which holds its
color in Fire, and comes from the East Indies and Turkey; That which is found
in Germany, is nothing near so good.

Lapis Lyncis.
IS a Stone of various color, but most betwixt a gray and brown, sharp at one
end like an Arrow, and Pyramid fashion, the bigness of a little Finger: They
are found in Candia, Pomerania, Helvetia, and other parts of Germany.

Lapis Magnes.
Lodestone is of an Iron color, and looks sometimes rusty; if good, it will
draw Iron strongly to it, by virtue of which, Sailers and Mariners find out all
parts of the World: It Is found near Iron Mines, in Norway, Germany, Italy,
Sweedland, and Cornwall here in England.

* Lapis Manateae.
LApis Manateae, is a whitish bone of a Fish called Manatea, which is plentiful
in America and the West Indies, viz. St. Christopher's, Mevis, Jamaica, etc. It
is very white and hard, like a Stone, somewhat resembling white Ivory.

Lapis Nephriticus.
IS a grayish Stone, inclining to a pale green; it comes out of New and Old
Spain, likewise from some parts of Germany, of which one has been seen weighing
fifty Pound and more at Francf^rt.

Lapis Ostiocolla
IS of a whitish color, very rough, in shape like the Pipe of a man's Bone;
it is found in the Palatinate, Darmstad, and in Saxony.

Lapis Sapphirus
IS of a Steel color, in very small pieces, that sort comes from Germany, and
is used in Physic; but the Oriental Sapphire is of a most curious blew color,
which is set in Rings, and is brought from the East Indies.

Lapis Rubinus
IS of a pure, fine, red, fiery color; that which is Physically used, is very
small, like Gravel, but of blood red color; the harder they are, the better
they are reckoned: The small ones which are used, come out of Germany, Bohemia
and Italy; the large Oriental Rubies, being Jewels of great worth, come from
Zeylon, and other parts of the East Indies.

Lapis Sardus.
IS of a fleshy color, therefore sometimes (though corruptly) Carneol; they
are found in Egypt, Arabia, and likewise very good ones in Bohemia and Silesia.

* Lapis Smaragdus.
EMerauld Stone, are (if good) of a very fine green and lively color,
especially those which are the Oriental; the other which come out of Egypt, and
Germany, are far inferior, being sometimes mixed with white and purple
Amethysts.

Lapis Topasius.
TOpas Stones, some are very hard, and if fine and a good luster, they resemble
a Diamond, the nearest of any others; more soft, resemble Crystals, and so are
those which are found in Bohemia; They are likewise called Chrysolithus.

* Lapis Tutia
IS a dark grayish Stone, very rough on the one side, and hollow and smooth on
the other; it is said to be the Exfulmination of Brass Metal, but I rather
believe it Natural: They are brought from the East Indies.

Lapis ex fell Bovis.
IS a little Stone found in the gall of an Ox.

Lapis Spongiae.
ARe little white Stones which are found amongst the Sponges, being supposed to
be that which fastneth the Sponges to the Rocks: They come from the Gulf
L^panto.

Lapis Aetites.
THe Eagle Stone is of two sorts; the Oriental is of the bigness of a Prune, or
a Plumb, of a yellowish gray color, the other of diverse shapes and bigness,
are found near Sweinford in Germany. They have another Stone within (as it were
pregnant) which rattles, those are of an Iron color, rough without, some of
them are polished; they are found in the Nest of an Eagle. Women with Child
carry them under the left Arm, about them, to hinder Miscarriage and Abortion.

Lapis Hibernus.
IRish slate, is a softish Stone which is easily scraped to a Powder; it is of
an Ash-blew color, inclining to black.

Lignum Aloes.
IS brought from Bantam, in the East Indies, and is by them called Colum-back;
it is of a most fragrant smell, and of a darkish color; the knotty, resinous,
and blackest sort, which is sometimes full of black resin, like Aloes, is to be
chosen.

* Lignum Aspalathum
COmes likewise from the East Indies in great pieces, much resembling Lignum
Aloes, but somewhat of a lighter color, but nothing near so fragrant nor good.

* Lignum Guajacum.
LIgnum Vitae, looks greenish and bluish within, and white without; it is very
heavy, and comes from Jamaica, and other parts of the West Indies.

Lignum Juniperi.
JUniper Wood grows here in England, and most parts of Europe, it is very well
scented, like the Berries, if cut in March.

* Lignum Lentiscinum.
IS the Wood of a Mastich Tree, which comes from Marseilles in the shapes of
Faggot-sticks, when rasp'd, it will smell a little like Mastic: The smallest
sprigs of all are best esteemed. It grows likewise in Italy, and great
quantities in Chio.

Lignum Nephriticum.
IS a Wood which is blew within, and white without; to know whether it be
right, is to scrape some of the inner Wood, and let it stand for four or five
hours in Water, it will turn the said Water into a bluish Tincture, which will
appear above; it is brought from Mexico, the Spanish West Indies.

Lignum Rhodium.
It Is by some called Rosen Wood, not that any Roses do grow upon it, but that
the Wood has much the same fragrancy; the best is very fat, of a deep yellowish
color, inclining to red, is of a very strong smell, and if broken, of an oily
substance; it is brought from the Canaries.

Lignum Santalum Album.
White Sanders Wood is brought from the East Indies, is of a very little
smell, in long sticks as big as a Leg.

Lignum Santalum Citrium.
YEllow Sanders comes likewise from the East Indies, being very fragrant, and
of a sweet smell.

Lignum Santalum Rubrum.
REd Sanders, is a red and heavy Wood (called in Holland, Caliatours Wood) it
is brought from the East Indies, and if ground, is a very fine red Powder.

Lignum Sassafras.
SAssafras Wood, is rather a Root than Wood, of a pleasant smell; the best is
in long Sticks, straight, and not jumpy; the Bark without is very red, and cuts
of a Flesh color within.

Lithargyrus Argenti.
LItharge of Silver is whitish, and in lumps, very heavy, shining and
glistering, easily broken in shivers if good, if otherwise, it is hard and
rocky; it is a made thing out of Lead: The best of it is made in Poland; that
which is made in Germany is nothing near so good.

Lithargyrus Auri.
LItharge of Gold is made like the former of Lead, being smaller than that of
Silver, of a redder color, more resembling to Gold; it is not improperly called
the foam of Lead; there is no other difference betwixt both sorts, than that
the Litharge of Gold is more boiled: The best comes from Dantzick, and is of a
fine reddish color.

M.
Magisterium Corallior.
MAgistery of Coral, is a Chemical Preparation made of red Coral and distilled
Vinegar, etc. whereby the Coral is reduced into a fine Powder, almost
inpalpable. Some make it in little Casks, but it is nothing the better for it.

Magisterium Perlarum.
MAgistery of Pearls is likewise prepared of Pearls, as aforesaid.

* Margaritae Occitendal.
OCcidental Pearls, so called, because they are not of that Oriental Luster,
brightness, nor smoothness, as the Oriental Pearls; They come from Surrat and
the coast of the East Indies, being a Seed Pearl which is more obscure or muddy
than the Oriental; the best are round, even, of a shining Luster: There is a
large scrubbed, and rough sort, which are the least esteemed.

Margaritae Orientales.
ORiental Pearls, the best are of a fine lustrous oriental Water, of an even
size, round and smooth, something harder than the Occidental sort; They come
from the East Indies, as aforesaid, the best from Persia. There is another sort
called the South Sea Pearls, they are very smooth, of a more whiter and paler
color.

Margaritae Scotiae.
SCotch Pearls are pretty good, ^ound, smooth and even, but very hard, not
easily beaten into a Powder, not so lustrous, but more of a Copper and Leadish
dull color, than any of the aforesaid: They come from Scotland, Chester and
Wales.

Manna.
IS a Dew falling out of the Air, upon the Branches and Twigs of Trees, upon
Herbs and Stones, and there it hardneth; the large, bright, and flaky sort, dry
and whitish, very little inclining to a yellow, is best esteemed.: This is
found and gathered in Syria, Persia, Calabria; and though some have esteemed
that of Syria best, yet the Calabrian is with us most preferred.

Matter Perlarum.
MOther of Pearls; the best comes from the East Indies in large shells, the
nearer it resembles Pearls, and being in large smooth shells, the better:
There is some found in Jarsey and Guernsey, full of Holes, scruffy without, but
they are of little value.

Mandibula Lucii.
THe Jaw-bones of a Pike, are long and white, the Teeth as sharp as Needles,
are found here in England, and all parts of Europe.

Mastich.
IS a small Gum which comes from the same Tree, out of which we have the Chio
Turpentine, and therefore by many called Oil of Mastich, growing in Egypt,
Syria, and other parts of Turkey, as also the Isle of Chio: The best Mastich is
of a light color, almost transparent, free from Dross: It is brought to us
from Smyrna and Aleppo.

Mel Anglicanum.
ENglish Honey is the product of Bees, of a pale yellow color, of a lively
smell and taste, of a good body, not greasy, the (white) Virgins Honey is
accounted the best; the yellow is inferior to the white Honey, is gathered in
all parts of Europe, Asia and Africa.

Mercurius Dulcis.
IS a Chemical Preparation by way of Sublimation of Quicksilver and Mercury
corrosive, etc. If duly sublimed it will be very white and clear, the inside
sharp, and longish like Needles, and of a sweet taste.

Mercurius Sublimatus.
SUblimate is also a Chemical Preparation, the best, very white and shining,
etc. and comes from Venice in large Cakes, which are better than any made
elsewhere.

Mercurius Praecipitatus.
MErcury Praecipitate is likewise Chymically prepared of Quicksilver, etc. The
best is heavy, of a very lively fine, red and glistering, even beyond
Vermilion: The best comes from Venice, that which is made here and in Holland,
is not so good.

Mercurius Vitae.
IS a Chemical Preparation, made out of Quick Silver, Antimony, etc.

* Myrobalani Bellerici.
IS a round Mirabolane: They are much like some Gauls, of a yellowish color.

* Myrobalani Chebuli.
MYrobalani Chebuli, are the largest of Myrabolanes, of a yellowish color, and
a long size, well filled and large.

* Myrobalani Citrinae.
ARE much like the aforesaid Chebuli, but a great deal less and smaller,
longish, and of a yellowish color. All Myrobalanes come from Surrat in the
East Indies.

* Mirabolanes Emblici.
THese Myrobalanes are of a blackish color, growing naturally in several
pieces, as if they were sliced or cut so.

* Myrobalani Indae.
THough all Myrobalanes come from the East Indies, yet there is one sort which
is called by the name Indian Myrobalan, being very small, and almost eight
cornered, of a black color.

* Moschus.
MUsk is an Excremental Excrescence, or a swelling of corrupted blood, about
the Navle of a Musk Goat or Buck, (and not a Cat) which after Putrefaction and
Ripening, turns to Musk in a perfect Cod, which is said falls off of the
Creature: The best is the Tonquin or China Musk, in thin Cods, well filled,
round, and with little short Hairs, the Musk within of a good lively Musk
color, very strong, sweet smell, something moist, of a strong taste, a little
bitterish. The Agria and Bengale Musk, is in thick Cods, long hair'd, a great
deal of skin, and not half so full of Musk as the former; the Musk neither so
good nor fragrant. The Russia Musk is worse than any, being course, of a dark
color, great Tare and little Musk: Those Musk Cods which have been opened and
sowed again, are very suspicious of adulteration; for there is often found
Lead, Stones, Leather, etc. stuffed in the Cods, amongst the Musk, and that so
cunningly, that it can hardly be perceived.

Mumia.
THe Arabian Mumia, is a Liquor sweating out of dead Bodies, being Imbalmed
with Aloes, Myrrh and Balsom, etc. wrapped up in Cere-cloths: Sometimes whole
Bodies may be seen, with Hands, Legs and Toes, perfectly entire, being of a
black color: And that Mumia which is most gummy or bituminous, is best
esteemed. It Is brought from Chio and Egypt.

N.
Nuces e Barbados.
Barbados Nuts, is nothing else but a large Cartaputia, which provokes Vomit
vehemently, and sometimes works by Stool; some are of a blackish Husk, some
speckled, they are larger than a French Bean, and have a very white Kernel
within.

Nuces de Ben.
BEN Nuts, is of the bigness of a round large Hasel Nut, of a grayish Husk, a
white Oleaginous Kernel within, out of which Oil is drawn, like as out of
Almonds They are brought from Turkey, viz. Smyrna and Aleppo.

* Nuces Cuprussi.
CYpress Nuts are of a longish shape, something resembling those of a Firtree,
being more close and not so open. They are gathered here in England and other
parts of Europe, etc.

* Nuces Pistaechiae.
PIstachies is a little small longish Nut, the Kernel within, if fresh, is very
Red, and the outside and the inside very Green, of a most pleasant taste; the
hard Shell is very White and Greenish, inclining to a Red, with a Husk over it.
They grow in Persia, Arabia, Syria, and are brought from Aleppo and Smyrna in
Turkey.

* Nuces Vomicae.
IT IS a flat round Nut, almost as big as a Leaden Halfpenny, a little hollow in
the middle, which is brought from the East Indies. It will infatuate any flying
Foul or Bird, as likewise some other Creatures, etc.

* Nuces Indicae.
THIS Nut is in shape like a Nutmeg, in chawing turns Red; it is said they will
make one Drunk in taking them inwardly, but I could never find it. The People
in the East Indies chawing them for Refreshment or Recreation, as we do Tobacco.

Nuclei Pinei.
PINE Kernel, is a black and longish Kernel, something less than a Bayberry,
and a very white Kernel, Oily like an Almond within. They come from France by
the way of Marseilles.

* Nuces Moschatae.
THE Nutmeg is a Fruit of two kinds, the Masculine (a long and large Nut seldom
used) the Foeminine a round and lesser Nut, which are laid in quick Lime, that
the Worms should not take them. The best are new of a fatish substance, of a
full roundness and heavyness, not lean nor scraggy, of a grateful taste, and
not hollow within; they are carried from an Island called Band^ to Batava, and
from thence, as well as all other Spices, brought to Holland, and from thence
they are imported by the King's License: And so is Mace, Cloves, and Cinnamon,
etc.

O.
Oculi Cancrorum.
CRabs Eyes, (improperly so called, for they have none) but cray Fish Eyes (in
the German Crebtz) of which there is some of a large bigness, as big as the
Chester Lobsters, which have every one two Stones, or Crabs Eyes in the fore
part of the Head, even beyond their Eyes. In Silesia they have vast quantities,
insomuch, that the Servants do condition but to eat so many times in a Week:
There are store of Cray Fish likewise in Poland. They are brought from
Dantzick, Hamburgh, and other Sea Ports of Germany.

Oleum Absinthii.
OIL of Wormword is a Chemical Distillation, per Alembicum, of the same Herb;
the Oil of it is of a very dark color, smelling strong of Wormwood; very hot,
and pretty heavy, sinking under Water half way.

Oleum Anisi.
IS drawn from Anniseed in Germany. The best is very white, congealed like a
hard Snow, smelling strong of the Anniseed.

Oleum Amygdalarum Amar.
OIL of bitter Almonds, is drawn by a strong Screw-Press from bitter Almonds.
The Oil is nevertheless sweet; the best is when new and clear.

Oleum Amygdalarum Dulc.
IS drawn from sweet Almonds, as the Oil aforesaid.

Oleum Asparis.
IS an Oil drawn from a Bird, called Asper, whose scent is said to be so
strong, that Fishes are drawn by the scent as he is flying over the River, and
so taken up by him, having one leg like a Hawk, the other like a Duck.

Oleum Auranti^rum.
OIL of Oranges, is drawn from the upper rind, or Peel of Sevil Oranges, by a
Chemical way, per Alembicum. The best is of a most pure, fragrant smell, like
the best Sevil Oranges.

Oleum de Ben.
OIL of Ben is made by Expression, out of the inner Kernel of a Ben Nut. The
Oil is more of condensed Body, and will keep longer than any Oil of Almonds.

Oleum Carvi.
IS an Oil of Carvi Seeds, drawn from those Seeds by Distillation. It Is very
hot in taste, smells strong of the Seeds.

Oleum Cymini.
OIL of Cumin Seeds, is drawn as aforesaid, smelling and tasting of the said
Seeds.

(...) ^^^^amomi.
OIL of (...), is the most curious and be (...) ^ll Oils, Chymically drawn. The
(...) is made in the East Indies, of a mo^^ fragrant smell, yellowish color,
hot and biting, like Fire in the taste; very heavy and ponderous, sinking under
Water to the very bottom.

Oleum Caryophyllorum.
OIL of Cloves is likewise a very odoriferous heavy Oil, prepared as abovesaid,
of a fragrant smell, like Cloves, of a pale reddish color, and so heavy, that
it runs under Water.

Oleum e Cortice Caryophyllorum.
IS drawn from Clove Bark, as the Oil aforesaid; but nothing near so good, nor
odoriferous, nor heavy, as that of Cloves, and of the same color, but a little
darker.

Oleum Cerae.
IS an Oil Chymically extracted, by Retort. etc.

Oleum Faeniculi Dulcis.
OIL of sweet Fennel-seeds, is Chymically drawn from sweet Fennel-seeds; of a
strong smell like it; and in Winter and cold Weather, it will condense like the
Oil of Anniseeds.

Oleum Guajaci.
IS an Oil Chymically drawn from Lignum Vitae Chips, by Retort; of a strong
foetid smell, of a thick and black Body.

Oleum Jassemini.
IS drawn by Gentlewomen from Jassemin Flowers, b^ (...) ^^ve^^eration of the
Sun; it is of a mos^ fragrant smell. The best comes from Italy, and some from
France.

Oleum Junip^^^
IS drawn from new Junip^^ ^erries, by Alembick: The Oil (...) clear, of a
sweet smell, resembling the Berries.

Oleum Latericium.
OR Oleum Philosophorum, is drawn from Brick-batts, Chymically by Retort.

Oleum Laurinum Com.
IS made of Bay Leaves, and Sallad-oyl, etc.

Oleum Laurinum Fland.
IS a green Oil, very thick and green; made of green Bay Berries, and
Bayleaves. It Is brought from Italy.

Oleum Macis per express.
OIL of Mace, by expression, so called here in England; is nothing else but Oil
of Nutmegs by expression; the best comes from the East Indies: In China jarrs;
of a thick Body, a pale Orange color. There is another sort brought from
Holland in four square Cakes, but nothing near so good as the former.

The true Oil of Mace, by expression, is made in the East Indies, out of fresh
Mace, and comes over in Glasses and Bottles, being a liquid reddish Oil,
smelling very strong of the Mace; (and a little sowrish) at the bottom a little
thicker than above.

Oleum Macis Com.
IS a made stuff of Sheeps tallow. Palm Oil, and such like stuff colored, and
a little greased over with Oil of Nutmegs, etc. is of little value, and less
virtue than the aforesaid.

Oleum Majorani.
OIL of sweet Marjoram, is of a very clear color, a very little inclining to a
red cast, fragrant smell, drawn by Alembick, the Herb being dried first.

Oleum Menthae.
OIL of Mint, is drawn as the former, of a fragrant smell, resembling the Herb.

Oleum Nervinum.
NErve Oil, is a made thing here by some particular People, etc.

Oleum Nucis Moschatae
OIL of Nutmegs, is drawn by Alembick, from Nutmegs; is of a clear Oil, like
Water, of a fragrant smell, and hot, grave taste like Nutmegs.

Oleum Origani.
IS drawn from Origanum, by Distillation, and sometimes off wild Time; of a
dark red Color, of a strong scent, a very sharp and hot-biting taste, etc.

Oleum Palmae.
IS the product of the Palm Tree in Guinny, from whence it is brought, of a
red, or rather a deep Orange Color, of a sweet smell; that which is turned
White, and Pale Yellowish, is decayed.

Oleum Petroleum.
IS a fat Liquor, flowing from Rocks, and other Stones in Italy and Sicily:
There are two sorts, the white comes from Parma, the red from Sicily and Italy,
etc.

Oleum Rorismarini.
IS an Oil drawn from Rosemary, by Alembick, is very clear like Water, and of a
sweet smell like Rosemary.

Oleum Scorpionum.
IS made with Oil of Almonds, and live Scorpions put into it.

Oleum Spicae.
IS an Oil drawn from Lavender, Rosemary, and other Herbs in France, as they
grow together in the Fields, of a strong Smell and clear Color; it comes from
Marseilles in France.

Oleum Sabinae.
OIL of Savine is a Oil Chymically drawn from the Herb (or rather Shrub) of
Sabina, by Distilling in it in Water by Alembick, the Oil being very clear,
smelling very strong of the said Herb; the Oil being often imported from
Franconia in Germany, wh^re quantities of the said Savine does grow.

Oleum Succini
OIL of Amber is Chymically prepared, by retort out of course Amber, being
rectified it is of a light Amber Color, of a strong smell; the first drawing,
is a foetid thick Oil, of a dark Color.

Ol^um Sulphuris Com.
OIL of Sulphur is Chymically drawn from Brimstone, of a clear Color, a clear
and acid taste, and in effect, Spirit of Vitriol is every whit as good.

Oleum Sulphuris per Campan.
IS Chymically drawn from Brimstone, the same being set on fire under a great
Glass Bell, and gathered in a large Bladder; it is of a clear Color, something
inclining to a yellowish Color, of a very acid taste, and pretty heavy, almost
without smell.

Oleum Sassafrae.
IS drawn from Sassafrass-wood, per Alembicum; it is of a reddish Color, very
hot and heavy, and will sink under water.

Oleum Tart^ri Com:
IS a mixed Oil of Ol. Tartari, per deliquium and Water.

Oleum Tartari.
IS an Oil made of calcined Tartar, hung in an Hipocratical Sleeve, in a Celler
which runs out per deliquium, in a heavy but clear Liquor, somewhat sharp and
hot in taste.

Oleum Thymi.
OIL of Time is drawn from that Herb per Alembicum; of a yellowish clear
Color, fragrant smell and hot tast^

ebinthinae.
OIL of Turpentine is drawn out of common Turpentine, which comes out of
France; it is of a clear Body, very hot, penetrating, and of a strong smell.

Oleum Vitrioli.
IS an Oil drawn from calcined Copperas, by a strong Reverberatory Fire, when
it is rectified it is very clear, of a very heavy Oleaginous Body, very hot,
burning a Pack-Thread to pieces in an instant.

Oleum Myrrhae.
IS Chymically drawn out of Myrrhae per Retort; it is very thick, and of a
strong smell.

Opium.
IS made out of Poppies, being a J^ice boiled up to a Condensity, sme^^^ng very
strong, of a good lively Color, cutting easily, not hard, being wrapped up in
Leaves; the best comes from Aleppo, and Smyrna in Turkey; it is brought from
Surrat and Persia, in the East-Indi^s; but is far inferior in quality, being
nothing near so clean, nor of so strong a smell, as the Turkey sort.

Opobalsamum.
SEE Balsam Judaicum, Balsam Gilead, etc. being nothing else.

Os Sepiae.
CUttle-bones, is called by the Germans, the Scum of the Seas, being in effect,
nothing else but a White Scummy Substance, and these are found here in England
in Sussex, and near the Isle of Wight, and other parts on the Sea*shoar, those
which are large, long, broad, and well dried, are best, they are much sold by
these Ironmongers, which sell Tools to Silver-Smiths and Goldsmiths.

Os de Cord Cervi.
THE Bone out of the Heart of a Stag, is a Bone found in the Hearts of Stags,
almost resembling a Cross, but some more than others, being a little flat bone,
and to be had in any part of Europe, especially, if they use those of an Ox
instead of it.

P.
Piper Album.
WHite Pepper, is made from the largest black Pepper, by art; being very full,
round, large and white. Some has been made here in England, but not so good.

Piper Guineae.
GUinea Pepper, is improperly so called, not any coming from thence, but from
Marseilles: That which is in lively red Cods, not broken, and fresh, is to be
preferred.

Piper longum.
LOng Pepper, comes to us from the East Indies: The larger, and white within,
bright without, is the best.

Piper Nigrum.
BLack Pepper, is more of use to Grocers and Druggists. The best and largest,
is your Malabar Pepper, being heavy, and of a good substance.

Pix Burgundica.
BUrgundy Pitch, comes from a certain kind of Firr-tree, near Strasbourgh: That
which is soft, and of a bright color, is best.

Pix Liquida.
SOft Pitch, is a made thing by the Shoomakers, and of little use amongst the
Druggists.

Pix Navalis.
IS a softish Pitch, which comes from Godenburgh, and other places of Sweeden;
having its name (Ship-Pitch) because great quantities are used in building of
Ships.

Pix Sicca.
IS the very same as Ship Pitch, as aforesaid, being only boiled to a dryness
or hardness; and therefore called dry Pitch, because the other is liquid and
running.

Plumbum Album.
SEE Cerussa, both being one and the same; except some that are papered over,
others are not; which go by the Name of white Lead.

Plumbum Nigrum.
THE best black Lead is found here in England, in black Lead Mines; soft, and
of a firm body, not rocky, smooth, in pieces of several bigness. There comes a
sort from Spain, and although it be soft, yet it is subject to be brittle, and
break in small pieces, and Powder, that nothing can be made out of it. Another
sort coming from the West-Ind^es, is courser and rocky, of little use and value.

Plumbum Rubrum.
RED Lead is made here in England, in Darbyshire, in great quantities; and from
thence Transported to most parts of Europe; being of a red color, the next to
Vermilion, of a heavy body.

Plumbum Ustum.
IS a Chemical Preparation (which is called Caementatoria) of Lead, which is
made with Powder of Brimstone, and the Scales of Lead, which being thus burned,
is often washed; and thus becomes the Plumbum Ustum, which is used.

Polium Montanum.
IS an Herb which grows in Sicily, Italy, and Spain, being covered over with
a down of a lively fresh smell, and greenish Color.

Pompholyx,
OR Nihil Album, having its name from its fine and pure white Color; it is said
to be gathered of a Fume which rises from Metal (in the fusion of it) being
white and fine, but nothing near so heavyas white Lead. It is brought out of
Germany.

Priapus Cervi.
IS the Pisle of a Heart or Stag dry'dup, of a reddish brown Color.

Priapus Equi Marini.
A Seahorse Pisle is of a bony substance like Ivory, some above half a yard in
length, thick at the fore part (or Glans) and running smaller at the hind part.
They are brought from Greenland, and other parts of the West Indies.

Priapus Tauri.
IT IS the Pisle of a Bull, almost a yard long, dried up in the Sun.

Priapus Turturis Marini.
IT IS the Pisle of a Sea Turtel, dried up, is a quarter of a yard long.

Pulmo Vulpis.
IT IS the Lungs of a Fox dried, of a strong smell; the newest, freshest and
soundest are to be preferred.

Pulvis Curcumae.
POwder of Turmerick is ground in a Mill, of a fine lively reddish Orange
Color; being free from all other mixtures, smelling strong of Cucurma.

Pulvis Enulae Campan.
ELecampane Powder, is ground as aforesaid, the Roots being well dried first;
of a good smell, resembling Elecampane.

Pulvis Glycyrrhizae.
LIquorish Powder, is grounded out of Spanish Liquorish, of a pale yellowish
Color, and a strong taste of the Liquorish, it is adulterated with Flower,
whichmay be distinguished in the taste, etc.

Pulvis Santali Rubri.
POwder of red Sanders, is ground by a Mill, of a fine lively red color. It Is
used therefore, more in Dying than Physical Uses.

R.
Radix Acori.
OF which the truest is reckoned to be the Calamus Aromaticus; but amongst us
here in England it is a Root which comes from the East Indies, much resembling
Galanga major, being larger, more dark of color without, and whiter within;
not so Aromatic, or fragrant in taste, as Galanga minor.

Radix Alcannae.
ALkanet Root, is of a dark red color, and white within; that which is so the
most part red, very thin, and not woody, is best esteemed. They are brought out
of France, Italy, and some out of Holland.

Radix Angelicae.
ANgelica Root, is a longish Root, a large thick Head; a great many small Roots
(or large and long Vipers) of above half a foot in length, of a good
odoriferous smell, a hot Aromatic taste; the Root is flexible (if new) breaks
white within. They are sometimes mixed with Meum Roots, which break of a brown
yellowish within. They come from Germany.

Radix Aristolochiae Long.
LOng Aristolochia Roots come to us out of France by the way of Marscilles;
being a long thickish Root, cuts white, a little inclining to a yellowish
color within. Those which are fresh, are to be preferred.

Radix Aristolochiae Rotundae.
ROund Aristolochia Roots, are of a round shape, much like the foresaid Roots;
coming likewise the same way, etc.

Radix Asari.
ASarum Root, is a small (Ash-colored) Root, long fibers; of a pretty smell,
and aromatic and hot taste. They are likewise brought from Germany.

Radix Behen Albi.
IS a longish whitish Root, not unlike to wild Parsnips, but thinner. It
grows in Italy, Germany, and France, etc.

Radix Behen Rubri.
IS a dark reddish, brown colored Root; in round rowles or slices, like
Jallop: It grows as above.

Radix Bistortae.
SO called from its crooked bending together; it is likewise called the larger
Snake Weed, of a whitish color when scraped: It grows here in England and
Germany, etc.

Radix Calami Aromatici.
It Is a sweet scented Root, fragrant, hot, and somewhat bitterish in taste; it
breaks white, and is a little knotty as it were. It is brought in Quantities
from Germany.

* Radix Chinae Optimae.
CHina Roots, the best being large, well fed, and firm; cut white and bright
within, and light brown without; free from Worms. They come from Rantam and
China, in the East Indies.

* Radix Chinae Nodosae.
FLinty China Roots are heavy, and not easily to be broken or cut, because of a
resiny flinty Substance, which is black, like that of resiny Jallop.

* Radix Contrayervae.
COntrayerva Roots are of a lively yellowish color, inclining to red; of an
inch long, or more, full of little small Vipers round about them; of a good
pleasant smell, and white within. They come from the Spanish West Indies.

* Radix Costi Amari.
IN the Apothecaries Shops, there is sweet and bitter Costus, being both of one
Species; the newest being sweet, and with Age grow bitter. That which is to be
chosen, ought to be of an Ash color without, and white within, being fresh, of
a firm body and well scented.

* Radix Costi Dulcis.
AS what we have said to Costus Amarus, it is the newest and freshest of
Costus, etc.

* Radix Curcumae.
TUrmerick, Terra merita, is a Root which is brought from the East Indies.
There are two sorts; one long, which is pure and fine, called the Persian sort;
breaks not only of a fine yellow, but gives also a Tincture like Saffron: The
other sort is shorter and rounder, of a yellow green without* That which is
firm, of a lively color in breaking, and looks not black, is the best.

* Radix Cyperi Longi.
IS a long, dark, reddish Root, full of little knots or specks; breaking white
within, of a pleasant ^^ell; it is used in Perfumes, sweet Powder, etc. It
grows here in England.

Radix Cyperi Rotund.
IS a round reddish Root, coming from Turkey, out of Syria, Italy, and
Alexandria; it is esteemed better for virtue than the long Cypress Roots. That
which is well fed, firm, and hard to be broken, of a pleasant acriminous smell,
is to be preferred.

Radix Dictamni Alb.
IS a thin whitish Root, of a bitterish and glutenous taste. The best is
gathered in Winter, and comes to us from Germany.

Radix Doronici Romans
DOronicum, is (a kind of a Wolf-Bane) a little small knobby Root, firm, light,
brown without, and white within. It Is brought from Germany; it grows in
Austria, Styria and Helvetia.

Radix Ellebori Alb.
WHite Hellebore (or Sneese Root) is a round, short, knobby Root. It comes from
Germany; a little of it being scraped in Powder, will cause a violent sneesing.

Radix Ellebori Nigri.
BLack Hellebore, is a small, black, viperous Root; breaks (if good) white
within. It Is brought in bundles from Germany.

Radix Enulae Campanae.
ELecampane Roots, grow here in England, Germany, and other parts in Europe; of
a bitterish taste, and a pale yellowish color, inclining to white.

Radix Eryngii.
ERingo Roots, Sea-holm, or Sea-holly* Roots, a great deal of them are brought
from France. It grows likewise in Germany, England, and other places in
Europe; it is preserved in Confects, which are very white and delicious.

Radix Galangae.
GAlanga Minor, comes from the East Indies. It Is cut in little pieces, a
brownish red Coat, and pale red within, of a hot aromatic taste and smell.

Radix Gentianae.
GEntian Roots, is of a bitter taste, a dark yellow color within; of a large
bigness, (not slit, which is looked upon the worst) well fed, firm, breaking
clear and bright within. It comes out of Germany in great Quantities.

Radix Glycyrrhizae Angl.
ENglish Liquorish, grows here about this City, and in Yorkshire plentifully;
being good, it is large, thick, well fed, cuts bright within, and is of a good
length. It grows in most parts of Europe.

Radix Glycyrrhizae Hispan.
SPanish Liquorish, is brought over to us; being dry, of a bright color
within, and not blackish.

Radix Hermodactyli.
It Is a Root of the bigness of a Chestnut, white without, and within: They are
chosen large, heavy, firm, not Worm eaten; being beaten, will reduce into a
Powder, like Flower, of a sweet taste. They come from Syria, and some parts of
Italy.

* Radix Jalappae.
JAllop, is a Root which comes from the Spanish West Indies, being cut in
slices, and dried; of which are two sorts, white and black; of which, the black
being resinous, is to be preferred: The larger and the heavier, the better; the
white is not so good, especially Wormeaten.

Radix Iridis Florent.
FLorentine Orris, comes from Italy; the best being very white, full, round,
of a strong fragrant smell, like Violets.

Radix Mechoacannae.
MEcoacan Roots, is a Root which comes from the Spanish West Indies; being
very white, shrinking a little. It Is in pieces a great deal larger than Jallop.

Radix Mei Athamant.
MEum Roots; the best grows in Germany; is a single Root, bearded at the
Head, of a fragrant smell: Those which are gathered here in England, are full
bearded, and the Root not so large.

Radix Peoniae Maris.
THE greater Piony, or the Male Piony, is a reddish Root, round and ^hick, of
no great Consumption to the Druggist, being a thing very seldom used. They grow
in England, and most parts.

Radix Phu Majoris.
PHU the great, comes from Germany; it is by some called Garden Valerian: It
grows likewise in England.

Radix Polypodii Querc.
POlypody, is called by some, many Feet, or Fern; that of the Oak (being an
Excrescence) is the best. It Is found in England, Germany, etc. That which
breaks green within, and dark colored without, is best.

Radix Pyrethri.
PEllitory of Spain, is a very hot Root, breaks whitish within: That which
comes from Italy and the Straits, is thicker and shorter than that which comes
out of Germany, where it is called Tooth-Root.

* Radix Rhabarbari.
THE best of all Rubarbs is brought to us from Turkey; ('it is said to grow in
Tartary) of fine midling pieces, smooth, and not crusty, fresh colored, a
lively strong smell, cutting firm; (in chawing somewhat bitterish, and
astringent in taste) of a fresh yellowish color, a fragrant Flavor; not too
heavy, nor crusty, nor hollow, or rotten within. The Russia Rubarb is the next
to it, which is generally large and heavy, and more crusty; though sometimes
very fresh, and well scented, but nothing near so fine as there came lately
from the East Indies: And though it be never so good in the Country, yet in the
bringing over, it loses its smell and goodness, by the extreme Heat of the
Sun, turning black and hard within, which is of little value.

* Radix Rapontici.
RAponticum comes from Russia, as also from the Straits; that which is of a
fresh color, inclining to yellow and red, is the best, and the nearer it
comes to Rubarb.

Radix Rubiae Tinctorum.
MAdder Roots are made here in England, at Wisbitch, in the Isle of Ely, and a
great deal in Zealand. The largest and biggest, are preferred, being of a good
reddish color.

* Radix Sarsaparillae.
SArsaparilla, is brought to us from the the Spanish West Indies, is more like
long Weed than a Root; if good, very round, well fed, full, mealy, and white
within, (if cut) the hungry, and lean, is nothing near so good. There is a wild
Sarsaparilla which comes from Jam^^c^, which is large, but not mealy, rather
woody and stalky; it is worth little to the former. They come in round Collars
and long Bundles, and are (I mean the best in Collars) brought to us from Spain.

Radix Serpentariae Virg.
VIrginy Snack Root, is a small viperous Root, of a strong, hot, aromatical
taste, of a Parsnip color: It Is brought from Virginia; the goodness is known by
the smell and cleanness, being free from Sand or Dust.

Radix Sciilae.
SQuills, are a sort of Sea Onions, of a large and great bigness: There are two
sorts, viz. red and white: Those which are dry and sound are to be preferred.
They grow in Apulia, Portugal, ^i^ily, and other places; from whence ^^ey are
brought to us.

Radix Scorzonerae.
SCorcionera Roots, are brought to us from Germany: Those which are large,
fresh colored, a yellowish red without, and white within, are best.

Radix Thapsiae.
THapsie Turpith, is much like unto white Dictamus Roots, etc. like the
smallest Winter Bark, whitish; it is of ^ittle use, and is brought from the
East Indies and the Straits.

Radix Tormentillae.
TOrmentill Roots grow here in England, Germany, France, and most parts of
Europe.

Radix Turpethi.
OF Turpith there are two sorts; the best is that which is brought from Turkey,
called Turpethum Alexandrinum and Arabum, those being places of its growth, it
is large and gummy: That which comes from the East Indies, is nothing near so
good.

Radix Zedoariae.
TWO sorts are likewise of Zedoaria, the long and the round, both being of a
white color, strong smell and taste, somewhat near resembling Ginger. It is
brought from Turkey, and like to grow in Synnea, and the further parts of the
East Indies.

Radix Zinziberis.
GInger, of this the white and black; the white is generally the best esteemed;
great Quantities come from Barbados and other parts of the West Indies; and
there is likewise a great deal in the East Indies, but most which is brought
from thence, is confited or green Ginger.

Resina Pinca.
THe Rosin of a Pine Tree, is like common Rosin, of very little use.

Resina Jalapii.
ROsin of Jallop is of a Chemical Preparation, the same being drawn from a good
black rosiny Jallop; its goodness is known by being clear, transparent in a
manner.

Resina Scammonii.
ROsin of Scamony is likewise drawn from Scamony, in a Chemical way, as the
Rosin of Jallop, aforesaid.

S.
Sal Absinthii.
SALT of Wormwood is Chimically made of Wormwood, being calcined very dry and
white is the best.

Sal Artemisiae.
IS a Chimical Salt made of Mug^vort, by calcining, filtring, etc.

Sal Ammoniacum.
OF which there is two sorts, the Potlid sort, and the Sugar Loaf sort; the
best is clear and white; the former, which comes from Turkey, and the latter
which comes from the East Indies, is the worst sort.

Sal Chalybis.
OR Salt of Steel, is a Chimical Preparation made here in England, etc.

Sal Cardui.
IS likewise Chimically made of the blessed Thistle, by burning it to Ashes,
calcining and filtring, and rendering it to a Salt, which has very little of the
taste of Carduus.

Sal Cochleariae.
SAlt of Scurvey grass is Chimically made, as that of Wormwood, and therefore
much like it.

Sal Eupatorij.
IS likewise Chymically made, from the said Herb, as the other Salt aforesaid.

Sal Gemmae.
ALias Sal Fossile, is a Salt which is in stony pieces, like pieces of Crystal,
almost transparent, breaking in four square pieces; that which is clear and
clean is the best. It comes from Dantzick, Italy and France.

Sal Genistae.
IS Chymically made from Broom, as Salt of Wormwood, etc. aforesaid.

Sal Nitrum.
SAlt Petre, is a sulphurous Salt drawn out of the Earth; the best is that
which will easily be set on Fire, and which is well refined, clear and
transparant, in lumps and roches: The greatest part comes from the
East-India's; some little may be drawn out of Stables, Cellars, and other
places.

Sal Prunellae, or Lapis Prunellae
IS nothing else but a refined Salt Peter, melted down and cast in Cakes, etc.
in a Chemical way with Flos Sulphur.

Sal Succini.
SAlt of Amber; is a volatile Salt which comes over in the drawing of the Oil
of Amber; the said Salt playing up, and sticking fast to the Neck of the
Retort, from whence it is taken and prepared it is of an Acid Taste, and if well
refined will be whitish.

Sal Tartari.
SAlt of Tartar, is Chymically made of Argol, etc.

Sael Vitrioli.
SAlt of Vitriol is Chymically drawn from White Copperas, off the Caput Mortum
of Vitriol.

Saccharum Saturni.
SUgar of Lead is made by a Chemical way from white Lead and Distilled Vinegar:
The best is light whitish, in long Flakes:

Saccharum Cand Alb.
WHite Sugar Candy is made by the Sugar Bakers here in England, and most parts
of Europe; the cleanest and whitist is to be prefered.

Sanguis Draconis.
DRagons Blood is brought from Bantam in the East-India's: It Is the Juice of a
Tree, whose Fruit is red like a Cherry; some of it is extraordinary fine, which
comes in Drops wrapped up in Flags; others in round large Rowls, covered over
with Flags; the courser is in Lumps: the goodness is known by its fine red
Color, when struck upon white Paper.

Sanguis Hirci.
IS the Blood of a Young Goat, dried up, etc.

Scinci Marini.
ARe Creatures with four Legs, a Head and a Tail, like an Eft; they swim in
Ponds, and feed upon odoriferous Herbs. They are sent over dried up and salted;
those which are large, not broken, dry and fresh Colored are the best. They
come from Venice.

Scorpiones Terrestres.
SCorpions are a kind of a Venomous Worm or Insect, much resembling a
Cray-Fish, with his Tail having a sharp Sting bended like a Claw. They are
sometimes brought over alive from Germany, otherwise they are dried. The
largest are best, but the live ones are reckoned far better.

Serieum Crudum.
IS the Bag, or the silken Pouches of the Silkworm, which the Silkworm spins
the Silk upon. They are to be had in all places from whence Silk uses to come;
being about the bigness of a Birds Egg, and some bigger.

Sevum Cervinum.
STags, or Deers Tallow, is made in Enggland, and all parts of Europe; being
very hard and white, of a sweet smell if fresh.

Courteous Reader.
THE Intent of this Book was chiefly to know the place of Growth of most Drugs,
being thereto desired by an entire Friend of mine. The Description, and of the
quality of every Drug is difficult enough, but would be more in the Seeds;
which cannot well be shown but by Eyesight: Therefore I have only to all those
several Seeds, which come from beyond the Sea, set the places from whence they
are brought.

SEmen Acetosae. Semen Agni Casti. Semen Althea. Semen Ammeos. Semen Amomi,
Streights and Jamaica. Semen Anethi. Semen Angelicae. Semen Anisi. Semen Apij.
Semen Asparagi. Semen Bardanae. Semen Basilici. Semen Bombacis. Barbados. Semen
Cardamomi, major. East-India's. Semen Cardamomi, minor. Ditto. Semen Cardui.
Semen Carthami. Germany. Semen Carui. Norway. Semen Cataputiae. VVest-India's.
Semen Cichorii. Semen Citrij, France. Semen Citrulli. Ditto. Semen Cochleariae.
Semen Colocynthidos, Streights. Semen Coriandri. Semen Cucumeris, France. Semen
Cucurbitae, Ditto. Semen Cydoniorum. Semen Cymini. France. Semen Dauci com.
Semen Dauci cretici Candia. Semen Dutroa. East-India's. Semen Ebuli. Semen
Endiviae Semen Erucae Semen Foeniculi com. Semen Foenugreci. Germany. Semen
Fraxini. Semen Genistae. Semen Hyoscyami. Semen Lactucae. Semen Levistici.
Semen Limonum. France. Semen Lini. Semen Lupini. Portugal. Semen Malvae. Semen
Melonum. Semen Milij Solis. Semen Napi Dulcis. Semen Nasturtij. Semen Nigellae
Romanae. Germany. Semen Oculi Christi. Semen Papaveris alb. Semen Papaveris
nig. France. Semen Petroselini. com. Semen Petroselini Macedon. Venice. Semen
Plantaginis. Semen Poeoniae. France. Semen Peponum. Semen Portulacae. Semen
Psillij. France. Semen Rutae. Semen Santonicum. Semen Saxifragiae. Semen
Seseleos. France. Semen Sinapios. Semen Staphydis Agriae. Straits. Semen
Sumach. Semen Thlaspios. Semen Urticae.
* Scammonium.
IS the Juice of the Roots of Scamony, which is full of a Milky Juice, which is
thickened and made up in old Boots. The best of it comes from Aleppo, being
clean, free from Sand and Dross, shining like Rosin, breaking easily, and if
touched with the Tongue, turning white like Milk.

The Scamony which comes from Smyrna, is generally not so fine as the Aleppo,
being heavy, more drossie, and sometimes full of Dust and Sand.

Sperma Coeti.
IS said to be the Seed of a Whale: There has been Sperma Coeti Whales caught
upon the Coast of Ireland, but more commonly it is found in a dead Whales Head
near Bermoodos. The Sperma Coeti, is to be chosen very white, as Snow, in large
and great Flakes, not oily, or discolored, nor of a strong smell.

Spiritus Salis Ammon.
SPirit Sal-Ammoniack, is Chymically drawn from the Sal Ammoniack, etc. which
being very clear, like Rock Water; but of a most strong volatile Spirit, enough
to strike any Man's breath in smelling to a Quantity.

Spiritus salis Com.
SPirit of Salt is likewise Chymically drawn from Bay Salt, of an Acid taste:
The best is heavy, and of an Amber color.

Spiritus Mellis.
THE Spirit of Honey is Chymically drawn from Honey, by Retort.

Spiritus Vitrioli.
IS likewise Chymically drawn from Copperas, etc.

Spiritus Cornu Cervi.
IS drawn from Hartshorn: The Oil being separated, and the spirit rectified,
is as clear as Crystal.

Spiritus Cochleariae.
IS also Chymically drawn from Scurvy Grass, and Spirit of Wine; tasting very
strong of the Scrvy-Grass; and as clear as Water.

Spiritus Absinthii.
IS drawn Chymically from Wormwood, etc.

Spiritus Sulphuris.
IS likewise drawn from Brimstone, by Retort.

Spica Nardi Indicae.
IS a kind of a Root which comes from the East Indies; of a fragrant, strong
smell, and as it were hairy: That which is light, long, and short haired, is to
be chosen; of a yellow color, inclining to a red, of a bitter taste, sticking
to the Tongue.

* Spica Nardi Celticae.
CEltick Spicknard, is a kind of Flowers made up in bundles; the leaves of a
bright yellow, somewhat resembling Marigold-flowers, of a strong fragrant
smell, being free from Sand and Dust, and full of small Roots.

Spongia.
SPunges grow under Water, at the side of Rocks; The greatest part are brought
to us from Smyrna and Aleppo, and other plaees in Turkey. Those which are fine
feel smooth and close, not too full of large Holes: They are said to grow most
in the Archipelago. Those which are large, fine, close and lively colored,
either white or yellow, are to be preferred.

Sebesten.
IS a Fruit of a Tree much like unto a small Prune, the stone within almost
apiece, of a black color; they are to be chosen: Those which are fresh,
plump, full of Meat, and moist; they are imported from Italy. They grow
likewise in Syria and Egypt.

Styrax Liquida.
LIquid Styrax, is a fat liquor, as thick as many Balsam; of a strong and
fragrant smell, if clear and good, of a whitish color: It Is kept in Water
because of its clamminess. The same comes from the Straits.

Succus Acacia.
IS the Juice of a Thorny Fruit called Acacia, growing in Egypt; out of its
Seeds the true Acacia is made by Expression; the color not so black, but more
inclining to a red, which above all other, is to be preferred in making of
Venice Treacle. The Acacia now in use, is made of Sloes in Germany, and brought
over in round Balls, wrapped up in Bladders. The goodness is known by its sharp
Restringency.

Succus Liquiritiae Angl.
ENglish Juice of Liquorish, is made in round Balls and sealed; it is generally
made up with old Prunes, Liquorish, and such other Trumperies, and therefore
far inferior to the Spanish Juice.

Succus Glycyrrhizae Hisp.
SPanish Juice of Liquorish, is made by boiling the Juice to a Condensity, to
make it up in Rolls and Cakes, wrapped up in Bay Leaves: The best breaks freely
and clear, shining like Jet, free from being burnt to. It Is brought out of
Italy.

Succus Hypocistis.
IS the Juice of a Plant, being pressed out when in its Flowers, and dried up
in the Sun, and not unlike to Juice of Liquorish; being brought from Italy and
Germany.

Succus Kermes.
JUice of Alkermes, is made of Alkermes Berries, etc. and brought over from
Marseilles, being of a bright Scarlet color, well relished and tasted, of an
acid taste, and a good Body.

Sulphur Vivum.
OR live Brimstone, is nothing else but Brimstone, before Fusion, of a grayish
color, and acid taste; and not so easy to take fire, as other Brimstone, It is
brought to us from Italy.

T.
Talcum Com.
COmmon Tale looks red without, and white within: There is a great deal to be
had in Germany, and in Yorkshire, here in England.

Talcum Venetum.
VEnetian Talk, is a Stone which shines, of several colors, as it were of
Gold, Silver and green; and therefore by some called the Star of the Earth; yet
it will come off in Shivers: It Is brought to us from Italy.

* Tamarindi.
IS the Fruit of a small Shrub in the East Indies, growing like Ash-keys. The
best is reckoned to be the red, of a lively, sharp, accid taste; others like the
black sort better; those which are least stony and stringy, are to be
preferred: They come from the East Indies.

Tartarum Album.
WHite Argol, or Rhenish Argol, the best is that which comes from Heylbron and
Strasbourg breaking clear, and free, without Dross: It is brought out of
Germany.

Tartarum Rubruns.
REd Argol is very course: It Is brought to us from Genoua, Florence, and some
parts of France.

Tartarum Vitriclatum.
IS a Chemical Preparation made out of Oil of Tartar, per Deliquium, and Oil of
Vitriol.

* Tea.
IS a small Herb of a Shrub which grows in China; the same is used in most
Coffee-Houses: The goodness consists of a fine green Tenderness, excellent
fragrant smell, like Violet, and to keep a good, clear, and green color in the
Water; being chewed, streaks very green like Grass; of it are several sorts
which must be distinguished by the Eye, taste and smell, above all the leaves,
fine, crisp'd, green, inclining to Razor-blew-colour.

Terra Sigillata Alb.
IS a thing made out of fine Earth, and sealed here in England.

Terra Sigi^^^^a Rubr.
IS likewise made here, ^^d s^^led; their goodness are according to what Earth
is used in the making up of them.

Terra Lemnia.
IS a fattish red Earth, coming from Turkey, by some called Axungia Solis, this
is a fatter Earth, and darker red, than the fine Bole; the goodness of it
consists, if thrown into Water, to rise up in Bubbles, if touched by the
Tongue, to adhere to it.

Terra Sigillata V^ra.
USED to be brought out of Turkey, sealed with Turkish Characters; but of late
several Fallacies being discovered, there is a Sealed Earth made out of Terra
Lemnia; and some sealed Earths are brought from Germany, growing near
Strigonia, which is by modern Physicians best esteemed.

* Terra Japonica, alias Catechu.
IS a dark colored Earth, like to course Aloes Socatrina; if chewed, it
dissolves, tastes adstringent in the Mouth, and sweet in the Throat: It Is
brought from the East Indies.

Terra Samia.
IS an Earth which comes from Armenia, growing near a City called Samos: It Is
adstringent, and of a yellowish color.

Terebinthina Com.
IS brought to us in great Abundance from France, from whence the Oil of
Turpentine is drawn in Quantities, and little Barrels of several Weights, are
made up for the Druggists use: It Is of a thick Body, strong smell, and whitish
color.

Terebenthina Veneta.
VEnetian Turpentine, is of a thin, clear, transparent Body, and indifferently
well scented: It Is brought from thence, and some parts of Germany, as Brechmen,
being brought down from Salzburgh and N^rimburgh, etc.

Terebenthina Strasb.
IS of a green, and inclining to an Amber color; very clear, well scented, and
brought from Strasbourgh.

* Terebinthina Cypria.
IS brought to us in Gourds; something resembling Chio Turpentine, but that it
is generally foul, and full of Dross, and a thicker body than any other.

* Terebinthina e Chio.
CHio Turpentine, comes over from Turkey in earthen Pots, is very clear and
thick, of a yellowish color.

Tincal.
IS nothing else but an unrefined Borax, brought over to us in Tuppers, from
the East Indies: The best, is that which is in large greenish pieces, free from
Mud, (which it is generally pestered with) as also, small Pibble stones) and
greased over with stinking Oil, which is said to be Neats-foot Oil. The driest,
cleanest, and largest is therefore to be preferred.

Trochisci de Viperis,
It Is a little round Cake, made and sealed, with the Mucilage of the Powder of
Vipers, and beaten Biskets, and dried in the Sun. The best come from Venice.

Turnesole.
ARE nothing but old Rags, and Linnon dipped in the red juice of Grapes,
(others say in Mulberry juice) and dried up in the Sun: They strike a red
color in White Wind, or other Water, like Claret. They come to us out of
France.

THUS.
FRankincense, is brought to us from France, in large pieces; that which is
best, is in large, dry and white pieces.

V.
Viscus Quercinus.
THE best of Misseltoes; are found upon large Oaks, almost the color of the
same; other Missels are found upon Apple Trees, and others; but not so good.

Viscus Aucupum.
OR Bird-Lime, is a thing made here in England, with which Nut-Oyl being struck
over little Rods, is so clammy, that it fasteneth the small Birds to it.

Vitriolum Album.
White Cop^eras comes to us from Hamborow; that in large and great Pigs,
white, and not yellow nor dusty, is looked upon the best.

Vi^riolum Viride.
GReen Copperas is made in great quantities here in England, from a round Stone
which is found in the Isle of Wight, and old-rusty Iron.

Vitriolum Dantz.
IS made in Prussia; the same running more upon Copper: This is looked upon
better than English.

Vitriolum Hungariae.
THE Hungarian Vitriol, is of a bluish green color: It Is said to grow near
Silver, Gold and Copper: Several Counterfeits are sold for it.

Vitriolum Roman.
ROman Vitriol, is vulgarly so called, it is nothing else but Cypress Vitrio,
in cut Stones, very blew like a Sapphire. There is another sort which comes in
Duppers from the East Indies, not inferior to the former, but that it
generally runs together in lumps, and not loose, nor in cut Stones.

Ungula Alcis.
ELks claws, come to us from Dantzick. The best are those which are large, full
Legs to the upper Knuckle, full Hooff'd, and well Haired.

Unguent Flor. Aurant.
ORange Flower Butter is made from the Orange Flower, and if right, with
Pomatum. The best comes from Bermoodos; some good comes from France and Genoua.

Usnea Cranii Humani.
THE Moss of a Scull of any dead ^ody dying violently, and left unburied in the
Field, we have seen it in some Sculls brought from Ireland.

Z.
Zibethum, or Civet.
THE best of it is reckoned to be made in England, though a great deal more is
made in Holland, and with Certificates Transported into most parts of Europe.
That which is clear, of a fine, lively, whitish color, not mixed with Butter,
etc. is to be preferred. The African, Barbados, and other Civets coming from
the West Indies, are next to it: But that blackish sort which comes from the
East Indies, is by none which understands any, looked upon as any thing.

Zinziber Condit.
GReen Ginger is brought from several parts into England, as from the
East Indies, West Indies, and of late, a great deal from Barbados. That which
is clear, large, not stringy, is the best.

Zylobalsamum.
SEE Lignum Lentiscinum, being the same.

FINIS.
CATALOGUS Pharmacorum omnium quae apud PHARMACOPOLAS LONDINENSES Venalia
Prostant.
A
ADianthum Album. Adianthum Nigrum. Adeps Castoris Adeps Hominis Adeps Ursi
Alumen Commune Alumen Plumosum. Alumen Roch Agaricus Aloe Succotrina Aloe
Hepatica Aloe Barbados Ambra Grisea. Ambra Nigra Amber Liquid Amygdala Amara
Amygdala Dulcis Anacardia Antimonium Crudum Antimonium Hungarum Antimonium
Diaph. Antimonii Vitrum Antimonii Cerussa Aqua Fortis Aqua flor Aurant.
Argentum Vivum Aroma Equinum Auriculae Judae * Auripigmentum Aerugo Aeris Aes
Ustum Arsenicum Album Arsenicum Citrinum Arsenicum Rubrum.
B
BAccae Alkakengi * Baccae Coffee Baccae Hederae Baccae Juniperi Baccae Lauri
Baccae Myrti Baccae Kermes Balsamum Capivi * Balsamum Judaicum * Balsamum
Peruanum * Balsamum Sulphuris Balsamum Tolutanum Bezoarticum Minerale * Bitumen
Judaicum * Bolus Armenus Bolus Communis * Borax Butyrum Jessamin * Bang
C
* CAmphora Cantharides Cap. Papaver Albi Carabe * Caryophylli * Carpobalsamum
* Cassia Fistularis * Castoreum Angl. Nov. * Castoreum Russiae Cera Alba Cera
Flava Ceterach Chamaepitys Chalybs Crud. Chalybs Praeparat. Cerussa Veneta
Cinnabaris Factitia Cinnabaris Nativa * Cochinilla Corallina Corrallium Album
Corallium Rubrum Cornu Alcis Cornu Cervi Cornu Rhinocerotis Cornu Unicornu
Cortex Cappari Rad. * Cortex C^ssiae-Ligneae Cortex Cinnamomi Cortex Citri *
Cortex Elaterii Cortex Esulae Rad. Cortex Granatorum Cowitch * Cortex Guajaci
Cortex Limonum * Cortex Peruanus * Cortex Sassafrae Lign. Cortex Tamarisci *
Cortex Winteranus Cranium Humanum Cremor Tartari Crocus Anglicus Crocus
Hispanicus Crocus Martis Crocus Metallorum * Cubebae Cuscuta Crystallus Chelae
Cancrorum Cicer. Rub. * Cicer Alb Colocynthis * Coculus Indus Colophonia.
D
DActylus Dens Apri Dens Equi Marini Diapente
E
EBor Ra^ura Elixir Proprietatis Epithymum Ens Veneris
F
FLores Baulaust. Flores Chamaemeli Flores Meliloti Flores Origani Flores
Stoechadis Flores Sulphuris Folia Betonicae * Folia Dictamni Cret. Folia
Malahathri Folia Rosarum Rubrar. Folia Scordii * Folia Scnnae Aleppo * Folia
Sennae Allexand. Folia Soldanellae Folia Tussilaginis
G
* GAllae * Grana Parad. * Gutta Gamba * Gum Ammoniacum * Gum Animi * Gum
Arabicum * Gum Asa-faetida Gum Cerasorum * Gum Caranna * Gum Copal * Gum
Bdellium Gum Benzoin * Gum Elemi * Gum Guajaci * Gum Galbanum * Gum Euphorbium
Gum Hederae * Gum Juniperi Gum Lacca * Gum Labdanum * Gum Mastiche * Gum Myrrha
* Gum Olibanum * Gum Opopanax * Gum Sagapenum * Gum Sarcocolla * Gum Styrax
Call. * Gum Senica * Gum Tacamahaca Gum Tragacanthum Gluten Oris * Granadillas
Peru.
H.
HOrdeum Gallicum Herdeum Perlatum
I.
IChthoycolla Jujube * Juncus Odoratus.
L.
LAc Sulphur Lapis Amethystus Lapis Amianthus Lapis Armenus Lapis Bezoar
Occidentalis * Lapis Bezoar Orientalis Lapis Calaminaris Lapis Contrayerva
Lapis Dentalis Lapis Gagatis * Lapis de Goa Lapis Granatus Lapis Haematites
Lapis Hyacinthus Lapis Hybernicus Lapis Jaspis Lapis Judaicus Lapis Lazuli
Lapis Lyncis Lapis Magnetis Lapis Manateae Lapis Nephriticus Lapis Osteocolla
Lapis Sapphirus Lapis Rubinus Lapis Sardus Lapis Smaragdus Lapis Topasius *
Lapis Tutia Lapis e fell Bovis Lapis Spongiae Lapis Aetites Lignum Aloes *
Lignum Aspalthum * Lignum Guajacum Lignum Juniperinum Lignum Lentiscinum Lignum
Nephriticum Lignum Rhodium Lignum Santalum Alb. Lignum Santalum Citr. Lignum
Santalum Rubr. Lignum Sassafras. Lithargyrus Argenti Lithargyrus Auri
M.
MAgisterium Corallior Magisterium Perlar. * Margaritae Occidentales *
Margaritae Orientales Margaritae Scotiae Manna Matter Parlarum Mandibula Lucii
Mel Anglicanum Mereurius Dulcis Mercurius Sublimatus Mercurius Praecipitatus
Mercurius Vitae * Myrobalani Bellericae * Myrobalani Chebulae * Myrobalani
Citrinae * Myrobalani Emblicae * Myrobalani Indae * Moschus Mumia.
N.
NUcese Barbados * Nuces de Ben. * Nuces Cupressi * Nuces Pistachiae * Nuces
Vomicae * Nuces Indicae Nuclei Pinei Nuces Moschatae.
O.
OCuli Cancrorum Oleum Absinthii Oleum Anisi Oleum Amygdal^rum Amar. Oleum
Amygdalarum Dulc. Oleum Asparis Oleum Aurantiarum Oleum de Ben Oleum Carvi
Oleuus Cymini Oleum Cinnamomi Oleum Caryophyllorum Oleum e Cort. Caryophyllor
Oleum Cerae Ol^um Faeniculi Dulc. Oleum Guajaci Oleum Jessamin Oleum Juniperi
Oleum Latericium Oleum laurinum com. Oleum Laurin. Flan. Oleum Macis per
express Oleum Macis Com. Oleum Majoranae Oleum Menthae. Ol^um Nervinum Oleum
Nucis Moschatae Ol^um Origani Oleum Palmae Oleum Petrolei Oleum Ror^smarin
Oleum S^^rpionum Oleum Spicae Oleum Sabinae Oleum Succini Oleum Sulphuris com.
Oleum Sulphur per Camp Oleum Sassafrae Oleum Tartari Com. Oleum Tartari per
deliq. Oleum Thymi Oleum Terebinthinae Oleum Vitrioli Oleum Myrrhae * Op^um *
Opobalsamum Os Sepiae Os de Cord Cerv.
P.
PIper Album Piper Guineae Piper Longum Piper Nigrum Pix Burgundica Pix Liquida
Pix Navalis Pix Sicca. Plumbum Album Plumbum Nigrum Plumbum Rubrum Polium
Montanum Pompholyx Priapus Cervi Priapus Equi Marini Priapus Tauri Priapus
Turturis marin Pulmo Vulpis * Pulvis Curcumae Pulvis Enulae Campanae Pulvis
Glycyrrhizae Pulv. Santal. Rubr.
RAdix Acori Radix Alcannae Radix Angelicae Radix Aristolochiae Long. Radix
Aristolochiae Rotundae. Radix Asari Radix Behen Alb. Radix Behen Rubr. Radix
Bistortae Radix Calami Aromat. * Radix Chinae optimae * Radix Chinae Nodosae *
Radix Contrayervae * Radix Costi Amari * Radix Costi Dulcis * Radix Curcumae *
Radix Cyperi Long. Radix Cyperi Rotund Radix Dictamni Al. Radix Doronici Romans
Radix Ellebori Alb. Radix Ellebori Nigr. Radix Enulae Campanae Radix Eryngii *
Radix Gallangae Radix Gentianae Radix Glycyrrhizae Angl. Radix Glycyrrhizae
Hisp. Radix Hermodactyli * Radix Jalapae Radix Iridis Florent. Radix
Mechoacannae Radix Mei Athaman Radix Poeoniae Maris Radix Phy Majoris Radix
Polypodii querc Radix Pyrethri * Radix Rhabarbari * Radix Rhapontici Radix
Rubiae Tinct. * Radix Sarsaparille Radix Serpentariae Virg. Radix Scillae Radix
Scorzonerae Radix Tormentillae Radix Turpethi Radix Zedoariae Radix Zinziberis
Resma Pinea Resina Jalapii Resina Scammonii
S
SAL Absinthii Sal Arthemisiae Sal Armoniacum Sal Chalybis Sal Cardui B. Sal
Cochleariae Sal Eupatorii Sal Fraxini Sal Gemmae Sal Genistae Sal Nitrum Sal
Prunellae Sal Succini Sal Tartari Sal Vitrioli Saccharum Saturni Saccarum Cand.
Alb. Sanguis Draconis Sanguis Hirci Scinci Marini Scorpiones Terrestres Sericum
Crudum Semen Cervinum Semen Acetosae Semen Agni Casti Semen Althaeae Semen
Ammeos Semen Amemi Semen Anethi Semen Angelicae Semen Anisi Semen A^ii Semen
Asparagi Semen Bardanae Semen Basilici Semen Bombacis. * Semen Cardamomi major.
* Semen Cardamomi minor. Semen Cardui Semen Carthami Semen Carui Semen
Cataputiae Semen Cichorii Semen Citrii Semen Citrulli Semen Cochleariae * Semen
Colocynthidos. Semen Coriandri Semen Cucumeris Semen Cucurbitae Semen
Cydoniorum Semen Cymini Semen Dauci com. * Semen Dauci Cretici * Semen Dutroa
Semen Ebuli Semen Endiviae Semen Erucae Semen Faenicul com. Semen Faenicul.
dulc. Semen Fraxini Semen Fenugraeci Semen Genistae Semen Hyoscyami Semen
Lactucae Semen Levistici Semen Limonum Semen Lini Semen Lupini Semen Malvae
Semen Melonum Semen Milij Solis Semen Napi Dulcis Semen Nasturtii Semen
Nigellae Com. * Semen Oculi Christi Semen Papaveris Nigr. * Semen Petroselini
Com. Semen Petroselini Maeed. Semen Plantaginis Semen Poeoniae Semen Peponum
Semen Portulacae Semen Psyllii Semen Rutae Semen Santonicum Semen Saxifragiae
Semen Seseleos Semen Sinapios Semen Staphydis Agriae Semen Sumach Semen
Thlaspios * Semen Urticae Scammonium Sperma Coeti Spiritus Sa^^^ Ammon.
Spiritus Salis Commun. Spiritus Mellis Spiritus Vitrioli Spiritus Cornu Cervi
Spiritus Cochleariae Spiritus Absinthij Spiritus Sulphuris Spica Nardi Celticae
* Spica Nardi Indicae Spongiae Sebesten Styrax Liquida Succus Acaciae Succus
Glycyrrhizae Ang. Succus Glycyrrhizae Hisp. Succus Hypocst. Succus Kermes
Sulphur Vivum
T
TAleum Com. Talchum Venetiae * Tamarindi Tartarum Album Tartarum Rubrum * Tea
Terra Sigillata Alb. Terra Sigillata Rubr. Terra Lemnia Terra Sigillata Vera *
Terra Japonica. Terra Samia Terebinthina Com. Terebinthina Veneta Terebinthina
Strasb. * Terebinthina Cypria * Terebinthina e Chio * Tincal Trischisci de
Vipera Turnsole Thus.
V
VIscus Quercinus Viscus Aucupum Vitriolum Album Vitriolum Viride Vitriolum
Dantz. Vitriolum Hungariae Vitriolum Roman. Ungula Alcis Unguentum Flor.
Aurant. Usnea Cranij Humani
Z
ZIbethum Zinziber Condit Zylobalsamum
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by John Harris, at the Harrow against the Church
in the Poultrry: And Tho. Howkins, in George-Yard, in Lombard Street.
THere is now in the Press, and will speedily be Published, a very Excellent
and Useful Book; being curious Receipts in Physic and Chyrurgery: By Van
Helmon^ and Paracelsus, that famous Physician and Philosopher: Wherein is
contained, the proper Medecines for all Distempers incident to Men, Women and
Children; with Chemical Tinctures, Chymic^l Magisteries, and Phylosophical
Secrets, of excellent Use and Concerncernment. Never before Printed.

A Pleasant and Compendious History of the first Inventers and Instituters of
the most Famous Arts, Mysteries, Laws, Customs and Manners in the whole World.
Together with many other Rarities and Remarkable things, Rarely known, and
never before made public. To which is added, Several Curious Inventions,
peculiarly Attributed to England and Englishmen. The whole Work Alphabetically
Digested, and very helpful to the Readers of History. Price B^und One Shilling.

GLOR^^ BRITANNIC

Or, The Boast of the British S^^ Containing a True and full Account ^ the
Royal Navy of England, showing when each Ship was Built, by whom, and when its
Length, Breadth, Depth, Draught of Water, Tuns, the number of Men and Guns,
both in Peace and War, at Home and Abroad. Together with every Man's Pay, from
a Captain to a Cabin-Boy; truly Calculated and Ca^^ up, for a Day, a Week, a
Month, and a Calendar Year, or 13 Months and a Day. Carefully Collected and
Digested by a True Lover of the Seam^n, and of long Experience in the Practices
of the N^^y and Admiralty. Price One Shilling.


