The Lord ANDEVERS TWO SPEECHES.

THE ONE CONCERNING the Pacification the 6th. of MARCH.

The other the Star Chamber.



Printed, Anno Dom. 1641.

THE LORD ANDEVERS SPEECH the 6. of March. 1641.
MY LORDS,
I Did lately move your Lordships that the breach of the pacification might be
speedily reviewed as the unum necessarium; and truly my opinion at that time is
yet nothing altered, although upon better thoughts (me thinks) it would first
be known who did actually engage us in these fruitless dissensions, and so
derive the mischief from some original. For my Lords, the Kingdom cannot now
long stand at gaze or undergo new burdens.

Wherefore what is to be done (if you intend it should prosper) must presently
receive life from the whole people, otherwise we shall expire in a dream; and
when the success differs from expectation, it is not enough to cry, quod non
putaram. My Lords, the wiseman says, there is a proper season for all things
under the Sun, and we often find the experiment in natural bodies, which are
voluntarily weakened, to recover strength, yet with a restriction to such
bounds, and limits, as the Physician prescribes himself, and truly, I think
it is your Lordships case at this point, either to consider what should further
be done then is already, or else how to get out of those labyrinths we now are
in, lest the words of the Psalmist come home to our selves Vendidisti populum
sine pretio.

My Lords, I am confident the house of Commons does thoroughly see* both into
the prejudice, and vast expense that these 2. Armies lay upon the land, and
undoubtedly so many. Gentlemen of worth, as sit there, will have tender eyes
upon the Commonweal. It will therefore become your Lordships to second them in
your way, and whilst they apply to public wounds; the care of this house may
search the intestines, for if they be not cleansed, it will be but a
superficial Cure, and break out again.

My Lords, it seems the Earl of Strafford, and the Archbishop of Cant. have
gone the high ways of iniquity, and every one knows how to trace them, but
Mines under ground are most considerable, which (unless they be likewise found
out) may at any time spring and supprant the whole fabric of all our labors.
Let us then examine this fantastic war ab initio; lest, as the Duke of
Burgundy made a few Sheepskins ye cause of his quarrel, so we shall find those
few sheets of paper, sent under the name of a Liturgy, and book of Canons,
were but the Mopsas of the story to divert our eyes from the maine design.

Therefore my humble motion shall be for a selected Committee of no great
number, who may have power from the House to begin ab origin mali, revise
every man's negotiations, who was either an Actor or Counselor since the first
appearance of those troubles in Scotland, and that they may examine the
Scottish Counsel upon such Articles, as the heavy pressure of this Kingdom
shall upon common fame administer unto them.

FINIS.
THE LORD ANDEVERS SPEECH concerning the Star Chamber.
My Lords,
SInce your Lordships have already looked so far into the Privileges of
Peers, as to make a strict inquisition upon foreign Honors, let us not
destroy that amongst our selves, which we desire to preserve from strangers.

And if this grievance I shall move again have slept till now, it is very
considerable, lest custom make it every day more apparent then other. Your
Lordships very well know there was a Statute framed the 30. H. 7. authorizing
the Chancellor, Treasurer, Privy Seal, and the 2. chief Justices, calling to
them one Bishop, and a Temporal Lord of the Kings Counsel to receive
complaints upon Bill or information, and cite such parties to appear as stand
accused of any misdemeanors, and this was the infancy of the Starchamber. But
afterward Cardinal Wolsey. 8. Hen. 8. raised it to man's estate, from whence
(being now altogether unlimited) it is grown a Monster, and will hourly
produce worse effects, unless it be reduced by that hand which laid the
foundation, for the Statures that are ratified by Parliament admit of no other
remedy then an appeal.

Therefore I humbly offer unto your Lordships these ensning seasons why it
should be repealed, First that the very words of the. Stature clearly show it
was a needless in^^itution, for it says, they who are to judge can proceed
with no delinquent, otherwise the if he were convict of the same crime by due
process of Law, and do your Lordships hold this a rational Court that sends
us to the Law and calls us back from it again? Secondly, diverse judicatories
confound one another, and in pessima Republica plurimae leges, this 2. reason
is from Circumstance, or rather a consuitudine, and of this there are many
examples, both domestike and Foreign, but more particularly by the
Parliaments of France abbreviated into a standing Committee by Philip the Long,
and continued according to his intention until Lewis the 11. came unto the
Crownewho being a subtle Prince burned the volume in, the Epitome, for to this
day when ever the 3. estates are called, either at the death of the old King,
or to Crown the new, it is a Common Proverb, allons voire gen des estates. My
Lords, Arbitrary judgments destroy the Common Laws, and in the 2. great
Charters of the Kingdom, which being once lost, we have nothing else left but
the name of liberty. The last reason is (though it was the first cause of my
standing up) the great Eclipse that it has ever been to the whole Nobility,
for who are so frequently vexed there as Peers and Noblemen, and
notwithstanding their appeal to this assembly is ever good, whilst the famous
Law of 4. Ed. 3. remains in force for the holding of a Parliament once a
year, or more often, if occasion require, yet who durst a year ago mention
such a Statute without incurring the danger of Mr. Kilverts prosecution?

Therefore shall humbly move your Lordships, that a select Committes of a few
may be named to consider of the Act of Parliament it self, and if they shall
think it of as great prejudice as do, that then the House of Commons in the
usual manner may be made acquainted with it either by Bill or conference, who
may happily also think it a burden to the subject, and so when the whole body
of Parliament shall join in one supplication, I am confident his Majesty
will desire that nothing should remain in force which his people do not
willingly obey.

FJNIS.

