THE Cry of the Oppressed From under their OPPRESSIONS Ascending up to Him, Who
will Rebuke the Oppressor and Devourer, and deliver the Innocent.

Some of the Sufferings of the People of God, called QUAKERS, Concerning TITHES
and OATHS, etc.

By the Branches which are a new springing forth of the remainder of the bitter
Root of Episcopacy, which yet remains unplucked up in the rigid Presbytery.

Presented to Public view.

Eccles. 4. 1. So I returned, and considered all the Oppressions that are done
under the Sun, and behold the tears of such as were Oppressed, and they had no
Comforter* and on the side of their Oppressors there was power, but they had no
Comforter. Eccles. 5. 7. If thou see the Oppression of the Poor, and violent
perverting of judgment and justice in a Province, marvel not at the matter,
for he that is higher than the highest, regards; and there be higher than
they. London, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-Spread-Eagle at the
West End of Paul's, 1656.

TO THE READER.
READER,
CHrist Jesus the true Prophet says, Beware of false Prophets which come to
you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves: Ye shall know
them by their fruits, Matthew. 7. 15. And was ever such fruit brought fo^th in
any age? And in the 23 of Matthew. he cries Woe to the Hypocrites; and they were
such as devour Widows houses, and for a pretense make long Prayer: And was ever
such devouring of the houses of Widows? therefore shall they receive greater
damnation. And Peter in his 2 Epistle, chap. 2. he discribes false teachers to
be such as through covetousness, and with feigned words make Merchandise of the
People; and was ever such Merchandise made of the People? Now these and such
like be the fruits of the corrupt tree, and of the false Prophets, Hypocrites,
and false Teachers: But the man of God does flee such things, and does follow
after Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness, I Tim. 6. 11.
And they who were Ministers of Christ, though they had power to eat and drink,
I Cor. 9. 4. the Labourer being worthy of his meat: yet says the Apostle we
have not used this power; but suffer all things lest we should hinder the
Gospel of Christ: for better (says he) were it for me to die, than that any
man should make my rejoicing vain: what then is my reward? Verily, that when I
Preach the Gospel I may make the Gospel of Christ without Charge, that I abuse
not my power in the Gospel, verse. 18. Now these be the fruits of the good tree,
and of the true Ministers of Christ, who says by their fruits ye shall know
them. Now Reader, with a single eye read the late practices, and some of the
fruits of several of the most godly Ministers (as they are called) in the
Northren parts of this Nation: And let that of God in thee, which calls upon
thee to do to all men as thou would be done unto, judge of them by their
fruits, whose Ministers they are: By their fruits (says Christ) ye shall know
them: The true Minister of Christ he used not his power, to take what the power
did allow him; but thou shall find that many of these men who are called godly
Ministers, have not only used their power (as they call it) the Law of the
Nation) but abused their power, and in many particulars exceeded the Law: the
Statute which speaks of treble damages, which is their power, which gives three
pence for a penny, which is much, which were they but men, they would not exact,
or take more than they call theirs: And were they Christians, or Ministers of
Christ, they would not seek their own, but every man another wealth, 1 Cor.
10. 24 For the Ministers of Christ did not seek theirs, but them, 2 Cor. 12.
14. For the Children ought not to lay up for the Parents, but the Parents for
the Children: But these have made themselves manifest by their actions that
they are no Fathers, they are so unnatural; but cursed Children as Peter speaks
of, 2 Pet. 2. 14. And now see the Scriptures fulfilled and witnessed, which
says, Call to remembrance the days that are passed, how that after ye
received the light ye endured a great fight in afflictions, partly while ye
were made a gazing stock, both by reproaches and afflictions, and partly white
ye became companions of them which were so tossed to and fro, and such took
joyfully the sooyling of their Goods, knowing in themselves, that in heaven a
better and more enduring substance was laid up for them: Therefore ye despised
ones, in whom, and upon whom the Scriptures are fulfilled and fulfilling; who
have received the light wherewith Christ Jesus, the Covenant of light and life,
has you enlightened, and in it believed; cast not away your confidence, which
has great recompense of reward, for ye have nced of patience, that after ye
have done the will of God, ye may receive the promise, I or yet a little while,
and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry: Now the just lives by
Faith, but if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, says
the Lord, but ye are not of them who draw back unto perdition, but of them that
believe to the saving of the soul; in your unity is your strength, and in your
faithfulness does he rejoice, who is one with you in his measure.

G. B.
The Grounds why Tyths once commanded, are now denied; as also, why Oaths once
used, are now laid aside.
TYths were a Command and Ordinance of God, and the first Priesthood had a
command to take Tyths of the People according to the Law, Heb. 7. 5. But the
first Priesthood being changed, and the second Priesthood witnessed, there is
made of necessity a change also of the Law, verse. 12. And the Law being
changed, and the Commandment disa^nulled which the first Priesthood had to take
Tyths, verse. 18. Tyths of necessity must also be taken away. But it is said,
That Tyths now are not required as of Divine right, but upon a civil account.
To which it is answered, There is no Law in this Nation public that does give
Tyths, or require the payment of them to any Parson, Vicar, or Minister, as
they are called, upon such an account as Civil. The law saying, Tyths are due
to God and holy Church, 27 Hen. 8. Cap. 20. And where no law is, there is no
transgression; and are not they unreasonable men, that require that which the
law (which is reasonable) does not allow? And if there were such a law, how
could that law be wholesome, which should set up that which Christ Jesus the King
of righteousness has disannulled, or write again, the handwriting of
Ordinances which he has blotted out, and to his Cross nailed? And yet the
Servant in his place, and who in the house was faithful was worthy of his wage,
which was according to the law, and till the time of Resormation. But the Son
is freeborn who the Heir is, and abides in the house for ever, whose the
inheritance is; and his gift is free, and all who of his gift are made
partakers, who is the Son of righteousness, they are free indeed; for freely
they have received, and freely they give (who so reads let him understand)
yet subjection to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake I have learned. For
the earth is the Lords, and the fullness of it; and therefore if any in
Authority do take the earth, or any part of it from me, and give it to another,
I resist him not, nor any other whom he shall appoint, for ye must needs be
subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake, for so have I
learned Christ, to submit my self to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake
whose the earth is; But to put forth my hand to give that which is the Lords
(over which he has made me a Steward, and me commanded with my substance to
honor him) I dare not for conscience sake, give that which is the Lords to
uphold that which he has abolished and disannulled, for that were to his
dishonor: And yet by reason of oppressions the multitude of them, the
oppressed cry, and the Lord will hear the cry of the oppressed. For because of
swearing the land mourns, Jer. 23. 10. yet the servant of the Lord swore in
truth, in righteousness, and in judgment; but in the house for ever the
servant abides not, but the Son abides for ever; who says, Swear not at all,
but let your yea be yea, and your nay nay in all your communications, for
whatsoever is more than these comes of evil: These things spoke Jesus to his
friends to whom all things that he had heard of his Father he made known: but
the servant knows not what his Lord does: The servant swore who abode not in
the house for ever; but the Son who abides for ever, who does the Will of God,
he testifies what he has seen and heard, and no man receives his Testimony,
who says, Swear not at all, but he that is of God, Joh. 3. 32. And says the
beloved Disciple, We have seen, and do testify that the Father sent the Son to
be the Savior of the World, but the World him hates because he testifies of
it; that the works thereof are evil, Joh. 7. 7. he that receives the
Sonstestimony is come out of all oaths and strife the occasion of them, to the
yea and nay in all his communications, and has set to his seal that God is
true, and every man alyar that denies the testimony which God has given of
his Son, as all do who are out of his Doctrine; but who abide in the Doctrine
of Christ, their yea is yea, and nay nay in all their communications, and they
do the Will of God, who his Commandments keep, and such shall never be ashamed,
but freely they testify to all of what they have seen and heard: And blessed
are they that receive his testimony, in whose mouth there is no guile. And as
to witness bearing to the truth, and of it before men, it is according to the
Doctrine of Christ, Matthew. 18. 16. That in the mouth of two or three Witnesses
every word may be established; And this was practiced amongst the holy men of
God, and amongst the Saints as the Scriputures of truth do declare, which were
written for our learning. And of these things they are Witnesses who have
believed in him who is the Light of the World, the true Light which lights
every man that comes into the World: Of which Light he bears Witness, who is
called

Ger. Benson.
A brief Declaration of some of the Oppressions and Sufferings of those people
the World in scorn calls QUAKERS, in the Nothern parts, who daily suffer the
spoiling of their Goods, and imprisonment of their Persons, by reason they
cannot for conscience sake pay Tithes, and other customary dues (as they are
called) Oblations, Obversions, Easter-reckonings, Mortuaries, and such like
Popish Inventions; so that they are daily drawn before the Judgment Seats, and
required to answer the unjust demands of their Accusers, upon their oaths,
thereby endeavoring to ensnare them, who for conscience sake cannot swear at
all, their souls being made subject to the Commands of Christ Jesus, who says,
Swear not at all, but in all your communication let your yea be yea, and your
nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than these, comes of evil.
As likewise the names of several others, in other parts of the Nation, who are
sued for Tithes.
In the County of Cumberland.
Graystock Parish.
RIchard Peacock, for Tyth of the value of 8 s. 4 d. had taken from him for
Richard Gilpin Priest of Graystock, one Mare apprized by those that took her
away at 2 l. 6 s. 8 d.

John Slay, for Tithes of the value of 6 s. had taken from him for the said
Gilpin, one brass Pot woth 16 s.

The same, for Tyth of the value of 14 s. had taken from him for the said
Gilpin, five Sheep worth I l. 2 s. 6 d. one of them being another man's.

Margaret Slay Widow, and Richard Slay her son, for Tyth of the value of 8 s.
had taken from them for the said Priest Gilpin, four Sheep worth 18 s.

Agnes Buckbarrow, Tho Buckharrow, and Rich. Buckbarrow, for Tyth of the value
of 16 s. had taken from them for the said priest Gilpin, one Steare worth I l.
16 s.

John Mark, for Tyth of the value of 6 s. had taken from him for the said
Gilpin, seven pewter Platters worth a 11 s.

The same, for Tyth of the value of I l. 3 s. had taken from him for the said
Gilpin, one milch Cow, worth I l. IOS.

John Todhunter, for Tyth of the value of 1 s 10 d. had taken from him for the
said Gilpin, one brass Potworth 10 s.

The same, for Tyth of the value of 4 s. had taken from him for the said
Gilpin, another Pot, and two pewter Platters, worth 18 s.

Tho. Slay, for Tyth of the value of 8 s. had taken from him for the said
Gilpin, two stone of Wool worth 14 s.

These were taken away by Warrant from the Justices, upon the oath of a man
that lived five miles from some of them, and that knew not their Goods, but
swore what he heard reported.

Jo. Bewley, for Tyth of the value of 19 s. had taken from him for the said
Gilpin, three brass Pots, and five pewter Platters worth 4 l. 10 s.

John Sowerby, for Tyth of the value of 6 B. had taken from him for the said
Gilpin, one Pot worth 12 s.

Io: Udall, for Tyth of the value of 4 s. had taken from him for the said
Gilpin, one brass Pot, and one Pan woth 13 s. 8 d.

Richard Peacock, for Tyth of the value of 1 l. 4 d. had taken from him for the
said Priest, one Horse worth 2 l.

Tho. Barker, for Tyth of the value of 14 s. 2 d. had taken from him for the
said Priest, one Horse worth 2 l.

John Goodhouse, for Tyth of the value of 9 s. had taken from him for the said
Priest, one Mare worth 2 l.

All these suffered by the said Gilpin, who is a chief Priest in Cumberland,
and a Tryar of others.

Caldb^ck Parish, Richard Hutton Priest.
William Stalker, for Tyth of the value of 9 s. had taken from him by Justices
Writ, for the use of the said Hutton, two Cows and two Oxen worth 8 l. 10 s.

Richard Williamsox, for Tyth of the value of 5 s. 9 d. was imprisoned several
months, and had taken from him, for the use of the said Hutton, one Heifer
worth 35 s.

Richard Nicholson, for Tyth of the value of 10 s. which they say was due, had
taken from him for the said Priest, one Cow worth 50 s.

John Nicholson, for Tyth of the value of 9 s: had taken from him for the use
of the said Priest, one Ox worth. 33 s. 4 d.

Tho. Bewley, for Tyth of the value of 14 s: had taken from him for the use of
the said Priest, a Cow worth 40 s.

John Stricket, for Tyth of the value of 10 s. had taken from him for the said
Priest, one Cow worth 30 s.

Mungo Ancock, for Tyth of the value of 10 s: had taken from him for the use of
the said Priest, one Heiser worth 26 s: 8 d.

John Pattinson, for Tyth of the value of 8 s: 4 d. had taken from him for the
use of the said Priest, one Cow worth 30 s.

John Askne, for Tyth of the value of 3 s. 10 d. had taken from him for the use
of the said Priest, one Cow worth 30 s.

John Bewley, For Tithes of the value of 19 s. had goods taken from him for the
use of the said Priest worth 50 s.

Richard Banks, For Tithes of the value of 10 s: and 5 s. of it in another
Priests time, had taken from him for the use of the said Priest, Pans, Pots,
and pewter Platters worth 21 s.

Thomas Mark, For Tyth of the value of 13 s: had taken from him by a Justices
Writ from London, for the said Hutton, three Cows and two Oxen, worth near 10 l.

George Rothery, For Tithes claimed by the said Priest, was cast into prison at
Carlisle, and there lay for many months.

And from several others was Brass, Pewter, and other Goods taken at under
worth, and carried away at their own rating: These Goods and Chattle were taken
and carried away by Warrant from two Justices, by which the Priests Servants
entered into men's houses and fields, and took Goods according to their own
pleasure and carried them away, and the said Priest caused some to be killed
for his own use, and others to be sold, and the rest he kept.

All these suffered by one Priest.

Bolton Parish, John Forward Priest.
Tho: Porter, For Tyth of the value of 6 s: 8 d: had taken from him for the
said Priest, or his Farmers, one Mare worth 2 l: 13 s: 4 d.

John Wilkinson, For Tyth of the value of 4 s: had taken from him for the same,
one Cow worth 50 s.

John Pattinson, For Tyth of the value of 6 s: had taken from him for the same,
one Cow worth 38 ^: or above.

John Wilkinson, For Tithes prized to a 11 s. by the Priests Tyth gatherers,
who prized the like quantity in another man's hand but to 6 s: had taken from
him by them 18 l. weight of Brass, and some Pewter, and 100 sheaves of Big
Barley, a great part of that he had: with which Injustice some of the Justices
were acquainted, but no relief could be had.

Uldale Parish, Henry Fallowfield Priest.
William Caipe. For Tyth of the value of 25 s: 10 d: which the Priest demanded,
had taken from him by the Constable and the Priest servants, by a Warrant from
the Justices, one Mare worth more than 3 l.

Tho: Fell, For 10 s: 4 d: demanded by the Priest, had taken from him by the
said Constable, and Priests servants, one Mare worth 45 s.

John Caipe, For 5 s: demanded by the Priest, had taken from him by the said
Constable and Priests servants, four Sheep worth 13 s.

Matthew Caipe, For 17 s: demanded by the Priest, had taken from him by the same
Constable and Priests servants, one Mare worth 3 l.

Tho: Fell, For 16 s: which the Priest swore his Tithes worth, had taken from
him for the said Priest, one Cow worth more than 30 s.

John Caipe, For Tithes had taken from him Brass at the will of the said
Priest upon his own oath; and the said Priest had sued many more at the Law,
and here is the fruit of his Ministry.

John Fell elder, For Tithes of the value of 23 s: had taken from him for the
said Priest, 176 pounds of Wool.

Tho: Fell, For Tyth of the value of 10 s: had taken from him for the said
Priest, 27 l: of Pewter.

John Caipe, For Tyth of the value of 12 s: 8 d: had taken from him for the
said Priest Corn and Sacks worth 24 s.

George Scot, For Tyth of the value of 9 s: had taken from him three Sheep.

Tho: Harrison, For Tyth of the value of 9 s: 1 d: had taken from him for the
use of George Tyball Priest of Skeleton, one pair of Cart Wheels worth 21 s: 6 d.

John Bank, For Tyth of the value of 18 s: had taken from him for the said
Priest, one Pot, one Pan, five Pewter dishes worth 26 s: 8 d.

Richard Ireland of Tho: Close, For Tyth of the value of 8 s: had taken from
him for the use of John Jackson, Priest of Hutton in the Forest, one Caldron,
one Pot, one Beetle, one Pan, two pewter Dishes, a pewter Sawcer, and one
Saltseller, worth 59 s: or more.

Mungo Bewley, For Tyth of the value of 14 s: had taken from him for the use of
Lady Fletcher (so called) one Mare worth 3l.

Henry Loathaise, was sued at the County Court, by James Steward Priest of
Westward for a Tyth Pigg, he having a Sow which had six Piggs, and recovered 10
s: for it, and a and a Baliff came into the Market and took a Sack and one
bushel of Oats Cumberland measure, worth 4 s.

James Barn, For Tithes of the value of 12 s: had taken from him for the use
of Rowland Nichols, Priest of Aiceton, Corn and Sacks to the value of 25 s. and
upwards.

Matthew Kirkbride, For Tyth of the value of 12 d. being a very poor man, had
Goods taken out of his house worth 12 s. for the use of John Pattison Priest of
Kirkbride.

Peter Head of Pardsey, For the value of 12 s. had a Horse worth 3 l. taken
from him.

Widow Head of Pardsey, For Tyth of the value of 22 s. had two Mares worth 6
l. 10 s. taken from her by a Justices Writ, for the use of John Wind.

Mungo Wilson of Bugham, For Tithes of the value of 7 S. according to the rate
of the Town, had taken from him by Warrant from two Justices, one Cow worth 40
s. for the use of George Fletcher called Baronet, or his Farmers.

Rich. Whiney, For Tithes of the value of 7 s. as aforesaid, had taken from him
by the said Warrant, one Cow worth 37 s. for the use of the said Fletcher or
his Farmers.

Will. Allisin, For Tithes of the value of 7 s. as aforesaid, had taken from
him for the use of the said persons, one Cow worth 36 s.

Anthony Scrugham, For Tithes of the value of 3 s. 4 d. as aforesaid, had taken
from him, for the use of the said persons, one young Colt worth 24 s.

James Wilson, For Tithes of the value of 22 s. as aforesaid, had taken from
him for the use of the said persons two Oxen and one Steare, worth 6 l. 10 s.
or more.

Ellin Emmerson, upon having but three Geese, had one of them taken from her,
for the use of George Fletcher, called Baronet.

Alexander Stamper, For Tyth under the value of 40 s. had taken from him for
the use of John Salkeld of Threapland, two Oxen worth 5 l.

Tho. Walker, Because he did not set out his Tyth, had his whole Crop of Corn
entered upon, and detained by the said Salkeld, to the great disabling of him.

Leo Fisher, For want of seven Stouks of Tyth Bigg, had Brass and Pewter taken
from him, for the use of Henry Pearson, worth 20 s. though the said Pearsons
servants, took nine Stouks of Oats more than their due.

John Fell, For want of one Stouk of Bigg, had Brass taken from him worth 5 s.
when the Stouk of their own account, was but worth 7 d.

George Rothery, After he had suffered near twelve months imprisonment, because
he could not pay Tithes, valued at but 1 s. 9 d. had Goods taken from him
afterward for the said Tithes, worth 6 s

John Iredell, For want of nine Stouks of Corn, had Oats and Sacks taken away,
for the use of Gawen Egglesfield Priest of Plimland worth 20 s.

Lamphigh Parish, Comfort Star Priest.
Will. Bowman, For Tyth of the value of 16 s. had taken from him for the said
Priest, one Cow worth 2 l. 6 s. 8 d. and two Pewter Dishes more, worth 8 s. 8 d.

Lorton.
Tho. Head, For Tyth of the value of 24 s. had taken from him by Bailiffs by a
Justices Writ, for the use of one John Winder a Tyth-monger; two Horses worth 7
l. or 8 l. which they keep, though they had taken the fourth part of the Tyth
before, and since he has had taken from him for the said Tyth, one Cow worth
40 s.

Wigton.
Will. Pearson, For Tyth of the value of 2 s. 8 d. had taken from him for the
use of one called Lady Fletcher, one Horse worth 3 l. and for 3 s. had a Ketle
taken away worth 22 s.

John Richardson, For 12 s, demanded for her for Tyth, had taken away, one Cow
worth 40 s. and some Pewter Dishes and Yarne.

Graystock Parish.
John Slay, For Tyth of the value of eighteen shillings, had taken away one Cow
prised at forty shillings.

The same, For twelve pence, had taken from him 3 pans, 3 pewter dishes, a
small piece of pewter, and some Woollen yarn, worth ten shillings.

John Mark the elder, For Tyth of the value of seventeen shillings, had two
Cowes taken from him, prised at four pounds.

John Mark younger, For Tyth of the value of twenty one shillings four pence,
had taken from him one Cow, one brass Kettle, one pan, one plate, a Cann, a
pewter dish, and an Ax, prised at fifty eight shill. four pence.

John Soverly, For Tyth of the value of four shillings, had one Table, and
Frame, and a Chair taken from him worth ten shill. six pence.

John Todhunter, For Tyth of the value of nine shillings eleven pence, had a
load of Oats and Sack taken away, worth twenty shillings.

Widow Buckbarrow and her two Sons, For Tyth of the value of eighteen shillings
nine pence half penny, had taken away one Cow, one brass pot, and a pan prised
at two pound five shillings.

John Bewley, For Tyth of the value of nineteen shillings six pence, had taken
from him one Horse worth two pound five shillings.

Widow Slay and Richard Slay, For Tyth of the value of eleven shillings two
pence, had taken away two Chaldrons, four pewter dishes, two pans, and a sack
worth twenty eight shillings.

Thomas Slay, For Tyth of the value of seven shillings, had taken from him six
pewter dishes, eight fleeces of wool, and a Bed coverled worth twenty shill.

Cuthbert Hodgson, For Tyth of the value of fourteen shillings, had taken from
him one Cow worth thirty five shill.

John Sowerby, For Tyth of the value of fourteen shillings, had taken from him
a Mare well worth four pounds.

Caldbeck Parish.
John Stricket, For Tyth of the value of sixteen shillings, had taken from him
one Cow, worth fifty shillings.

Richard Wilson, For a rate Tyth of the value of one shilling farthing, had
goods taken from him worth seven shillings.

Thomas Hasken, For Tyth of the valve of two shillings four pence, had Goods
taken from him worth six shillings eight pence.

John Hasken, For Tyth of the value of twelve shillings seven pence, had Goods
taken from him worth forty shillings.

John Peacock, For Tyth of the value of twenty two shillings two pence, had
Goods taken away worth thirty seven shill.

George Scott, For Tyth of the value of fifteen shillings, had Goods taken away
worth eighteen shillings eight pence.

John Relfe, For Tyth of the value of five shillings three pence, had taken
from him as many Sheep as were worth thirty shill.

William Slalker, For Tyth of the value of eight shillings three pence, had
Goods taken from him worth twenty shillings.

Thomas Mark, For Tyth of the value of twenty two shillings four pence, had
Goods taken from him worth fifty four shill.

John Nicholson, For Tyth of the value of twelve shillings eight pence, had
Goods taken from him worth forty shillings.

Richard Scott, For Tyth of the value of four shillings ten pence, had Goods
taken from him worth seven shillings.

Widow Preslman, For Tyth of the value of eight shillings three pence, had
Goods taken away worth twenty shill. three pence.

Thomas Bewley, For Tyth of the value of twenty eight shill. six pence, had
Goods strained worth three pounds six shill.

Thomas Rickerby, For five pence half penny demanded for smoke passing up his
Chimny, had Goods taken away worth two shill. six pence.

Other Goods were taken from John Pattison, Richard Williamson, and others, but
the particulars we know not yet.

Brigham Parish.
William Richardson, For Tyth of the value of thirty shill. four pence, had one
Horse taken from him worth three pounds ten shill.

Henry Johnson, For Tyth of the value of thirteen shillings nine pence, had one
Horse taken from him worth two pound thirteen shill. four pence.

John Gill, For Tyth of the value of thirteen shill. four pence, had one Horse
taken from him worth two pounds ten shill.

Cockermouth Parish.
Richard Nuckham, For Tyth of the value of three shill. six pence, had a Horse
taken from him worth two pound thirteen shill. four pence.

And also he had taken from him, two brass pots worth fourteen shill. six
pence, because he could not for Conscience sake contribute to repair the
steeple house.

Deane Parish.
Isabel Head Widow, For Tyth of the value of twelve shill. had taken from her
one Cow, one Heifer, and one Stear worth at least five pounds, and for the like
Tyth this year, she had taken from her two Mares worth six poundand above,
these were taken by force of Justices Writs, though upon them no appearance was
made, or Judgment given.

Peter Head, For Tyth of the value of twelve shill. had a Cow taken from him,
and also a Horse by color of a Justices Writ, though no appearance or judgment
was upon it; for these and many other great and cruel oppressions, Wilfrid
Lawson Sheriff of Cumberland ought to be called to account.

Christopher Mauser, For Tyth of the value of twenty four shill. ten pence, had
taken from him for the use of Patriciu^ Curwen, worth five pounds.

Caldbeck parish for Richard Hutton priest.
Thomas Mark, For Tyth Wool of the value of sevente^n shillings, had a Horse
taken from him worth fifty four shillings.

The same also for other Tyth of small value, had two Ox^n and three Kine taken
away by color of a Justices Writ, without appearance or judgment.

John Pattison, For Tyth of the value of sixteen shillings eleven pence, had
taken from him Corn worth twenty five shill. six pence.

Richard Scott, For Tyth of the value of Four shill. Four pence, had two pair
of Shoes taken from him worth seven shill. Four pence.

John Stricket, For Tyth of the value of sixteen shill. Four pence, had one Cow
taken from him worth three pound six shill. eight pence.

Thomas Haskey, For Tyth of the value of three shill, five pence, had a pair of
Cart-wheels taken from him worth seven shill.

John Haskey elder, For Tyth of the value of fifteen shill. two pence, had Corn
and Sacks taken from him to Forty Four shill. ten pence.

William Stalker elder, For the Tyth of the value of fifteen shill. two pence,
had Corn and Sacks taken from him worth twenty four shill.

Richard Wilson, For Tyth of the value of thirteen shillings, had a brass Pot
taken from him worth seven shillings.

John Nicholson, For Tyth of the value of thirteen shill. Four pence, had a Cow
taken from him worth Forty shillings.

John Peacock, For Tyth of the value of twenty shill, or thereabouts, had Corn
and Sacks taken from him worth thirty shill. six pence.

All these Goods in Caldbeck Parish, were taken by Warrant from Justice Barwis
and Justice Fletcher, for the use of Priest Hutton.

Boulton Parish.
John Pattison, For Tyth of the value of twenty two shill. had one Cow taken
from him for the use of Priest Forward, worth fifty sh ll.

John Wilkinson, for Tyth of the value of Four shill. eight pence, had one Cow
taken from him for the use of the said Priest, worth fifty five shill.

Penreth Parish.
Taken from
Thomas Midleton, one pewter dish worth three shill. six pence.

Robert Dawson, three pewter dishes worth eight shill.

Peter Tailor, two pewter dishes worth Four shill.


These were taken by an old Priest, who was formerly ejected on pretense of
Easter Reckonings.

From Robert Dawson the Clerk also took one pewter dish worth sixteen pence.

Threapland.
Thomas Walker, For Tyth of the value of twenty three shillings, had his Barn
locked up, and all his whole years Corn seized upon, except nine Bushels of
Oats which he had got out. and also a Mare taken away under color of a
Justices Writ, though neither appearance nor judgment.

Richard Robinson, For Tyth of the value of thirty shillings or thereabouts,
had Goods and Cattle taken from him worth twenty Four pounds or thereabouts, by
color of a Justices Writ, without any due and legal proceeding thereupon.

Yorkshire.
JAmes Gurnel, For the value of five shillings tan pence pretended to be due to
John Wargent a Priest* and Christopher Wakefield an Impropriator for Tyths, had
Goods taken to the value of Forty shillings, of which they returned back only
two shillings six pence.

Robert Everat, For the value of thirty one shillings, pretended to be due for
Tyths to Robert Brown and Israel Townend, and Robert Otter, had his Horse taken
away which was worth three pounds, which they got valued to fifty shillings and
returned nothing again.

John Jayher, For the value of six shillings six pence pretended to be due unto
Thomas Healey Priest of Haxey for Tyths, had taken from him sixteen shillings
Four pence.

Alexander Harland, For the value of three shillings pretended to be due to
Stother a Priest for Tyths, by order of two men in Commission to do Justice,
was to have ten shillings, who granted their Warrant to distrain for the same,
and for that ten shillings they took away five Sheep, and rendered nothing again.

William Sharp, For the value of sixteen shillings pretended to be due for
Tyths, and Easter Reckonings, as they called them, unto William Cooper a
Minister so called, had a Mare worth three pound six shillings eight pence
taken away and prised to two pound thirteen shillings Four pence, which being
done, the said William Sharp said he wanted sixteen shillings of his due,
although the said Cooper never answered him in the Law.

Matthewr Maire, For the value of Fourteen shillings pretended to be due for
Tyths unto Samuel Pibard Priest of Owthorn, had Goods taken away to the value
of five pounds which they rated ^o fifty shillings, of which sum the Bailiff
said fifteen shillings remained, but was not received by the said Matthew. w.

Thomas Agar, For the value of one shilling, one penny, pretended to be due for
Tyths unto William Catlin Priest of Crambe and Bart^n, had a Mare taken worth
Four pound which they prised to three pound ten shillings, and took seventeen
shillings for the said one shilling one penny.

William Thorpe, For the value of one shilling one penny pretended to be due for
Tyths unto the above said William Catlin, had two Cows taken which they prised
to two pound out of which they took fifteen shall. six pence.

Robert Bell, For the value of seven pence half penny, pretended to be due for
Tyths to the said Catlin, had one Cow taken, which they prised to twenty
shillings, out of which they took sixteen shill.

George Matthew, For the value of two shillings, pretended to be due for Tyths
to the said Catlin, had a Horse taken which they prised to forty shillings, out
of which they took nineteen shill. which was done by warrant from two men in
Commission to do justice.

Edward Guy, For the value of two shillings nine pence, pretended to be due for
Tyths, and Easter Reckonings, as they are called, unto Robert Lowther Priest of
Bentham, formerly called a Malignant, had his Goods taken to the value of
thirteen shillings eight pence, and they said they must have more.

Richard Guy, For the value of five shillings Four pence, pretended to be due
to Alexander Fetherston a Priest, and for eight pence pretended to be due to
William Bells, Clerk to the abovesaid Robert Lowther, he had a Cow taken worth
twenty seven shillings, and had nothing returned back.

George Bland, For the value of two pence claimed for Tyths by the abovesaid
Robert Lowther, had his Goods taken to the value of sixteen shillings, and
nothing was returned back: And for eight pence claimed by the foresaid William
Bells, he had also Goods taken valued to fifteen shill. and nothing returned
back.

Richard Wickington, For the value of thirty Four shillings eight pence,
pretended to be due unto John Norton a Priest for Tyths, had one Horse, one
Mare, and two Oxen worth eleven pounds taken and by them prised to six pound.

John Wilson, For the value of three pound ten shillings, pretended to be due
for Tyths to John Silburn an Impropriator, who valued the same by his Son to
Four pounds Four shillings, procured a VVarrant from two men in Commission to
do justice, for five pound six shillings, for which they took Goods worth eight
pounds fifteen shillings, which they valued to five pound ten shillings, and
sold them for seven pound seventeen shillings eight pence, and returned nothing
again.

Walter Hall, For the value of thirty three shillings, pretended to be due to
the said John Silburn for Tyths, which his Son valued to be worth two pound
thirteen shillings Four pence, procured a VVarrant from two men in Commission
to do justice, for the sum of two pounds nineteen shillings Four pence, for
which they took Goods valued by two indifferent men to seven pounds, and
nothing returned.

Alexander Harland, For the value of three pounds ten shillings, pretended to
be due to John Beamond Priest for Tyths, with two men more, was worth five
pounds, whereupon two men in Commission to do justice, gave order to pay six
pound sixteen shillings, for which they di^trained two Oxen, and one Horse
worth eight pound ten shillings, which they valued to six pounds.

Mich. Simpson, a Farmer of forty two pound in the year, was sued by Charles
Kaine a Priest, for Tithes which happened of the said Farm, which by his
witnesses he proved to mount to the value of eighteen pound for one year,
before Judge Parker at the Assizes at York, which said Judge gave Judgment for
trible damages against him, which comes to fifty four pound.

William Pearson, was sued by Alexander Metcalf, called Parson of
Setterrington, for Tyth which was worth about ten pounds, for which Judge
Nudigate gave Judgment for thirty three pound six shillings eight pence, of
which nothing was abated.

Christopher Hutton, For the value of four pound twelve shillings six pence,
pretended to be due for Tithes and charges to John Pennil, Priest of
Overhemsley, had two Oxen distrained by Warrant from two men in Commission to
do Justice, which were worth seven pound, but by them valued at five pounds, of
which they returned nothing back.

Jeff, Nicholson, For the value of thirty four shillings pretended to be due
for Tithes unto Lancelot Hasel, titled Minister of Bulmer, had three fat Kine
driven away by color of a Warrant from two men in commission to do justice,
worth eight pounds, which they valued to five pound ten shillings, and so sold
them and never returned one penny.

Richard Simpson, For one penny which William Catline Priest of Crambe, proved
due to him for Tyth, distrained one Cow worth forty shillings, which they
valued to twenty shillings out of which they took fifteen shillings.

John Gothericke, for two pence which the said William Catline, proved due to
him for Tyth, distrained one Cow, worth thirty shillings, which they valued at
twenty shillings, out of which they took fifteen shillings.

John Pickering, having four Calven for which he offered the said Will. Catline
what had been usually paid for such a number, which the said Catline refused to
take, demanding of him a Tyth Calfat four, which the said John Pickering
refusing to give him, the said Catline summoned him before two men in
commission to do justice, who notwithstanding ordered the said Pickering to pay
one shilling eleven pence which he proved due to him, and three shillings for
charges.

James Cookson, For the value of seven shillings nine pence, which James
Williamson Minister of Crake proved before two men in Commission to do justice,
due to him for Tithes, had a Cow taken away worth two pound, which they prised
to twenty six shillings eight pence, and restored nothing again.

Will. Peart, For the value of twenty six shillings eight pence, which the
said Williamson proved before two men in Commission to do justice to be due to
him for Tyth, had two Heifers worth three pound taken from him, and nothing
restored to him again.

Volentine Johnson, For the value of five shillings eight pence, which the said
Williamson proved before two men in Commission to do justice to be due to him
for Tyth, had a Cow driven away worth two pound, which they prised to thirty
shillings, and nothing did they render to the owner.

Josias Cookson, For the value of twelve shillings nine pence, which the above
named James Williamson proved before two men in Commission to do justice; to
be due to him for Tyth, he had one Heifer taken away worth forty shillings, and
nothing rendered again.

Tho. Scot. For the value of eleven shillings six pence pretended to be due
unto Leonard Esh, an Impropriator called, had Goods taken from him worth six
pounds, which they (...) to five pound, and restored nothing to the owner again.

Thomas Johnson, For the value of thirty Four shillings pretended to be due
unto James (...) aforesaid, called Minister of (...) for Tyth had a Horse taken
from him, for which he paid fifty two shillings before his (...) was (...)

John Walker, For the value of eighteen shillings Four pence pretended to be
due unto the above named Williamson, for Tyths, by order of two men in
Commission to do justice was ordered to pay twenty five shillings, which
accordingly was paid to the said James Williamson.

Thomas Thurham, For the value of sixteen shillings pretended to be due unto
the above named Williamson, was ordered by two men in place to do justice, to
pay unto the said Williamson the sum of twenty three shillings, which was paid
for him.

Thomas Aldam, By the means of Thomas Rooksby Priest of Warmsworth, and Thomas
Vincent of the same, was cast into prison at York the 15 day of the 3d Month
called May, 1652, and there kept for about two years, and six months, in which
time both the said parties sued him at the Law, for not setting forth his
Tyths, he then being in prison. And at the Assizes at York, the said Thomas
Rooksby procured a judgment from Richard Nudigate (called a Judge) against him
for sixteen pounds ten shillings for the Tyth of eleven Acres of Wheat, Rye,
and Barley; ten Acres of Pease and Oats, and twelve Acres of Meadow in one
year, the ground being worth but about five shillings the Acre Rent in one
year, and the said Thomas Vincent likewise procured another Judgment from the
said Richard Nudigate (called a Judge) against the said Thomas Aldam at the
same Assizes for the Tyth of Fourteen Acrees of Wheat, Rye, and Barley, and
twelve Acres of Pease and Oats for one year, the sum of eighteen pounds six
shillings, the Land being but worth five shillings an Acre yearly Rent; and the
Bailiff (called Henry Worrel) levied the same upon the Goods of the said Thomas
Aldam, and took Four Oxen, seven Kine, one Stear, and one Heifer, which they
prised and valued to thirty pounds ten shillings, and sold by the Bailiff that
distrained them, which Goods were since valued by Neighbors to be worth thirty
six pounds, and the said Bailiff after distrained one Mare, and one Horse of
the said Thomas Aldams, which were prised to five pounds ten shillings, and for
that sum sold to Thomas Broughton one of the Apprisers, who made Merchandise
with the spoyler for gain, and so the spoil of Thomas Aldams Goods is about
his house; the Mare and Horse cost Thomas Aldam about eleven pounds, which they
valued and sold for five pounds ten pence.

Richard Tomliason, For the value of eighteen pence or thereabouts for Tyth
Hay, had one Mare taken from him worth five pounds.

Sedbergh, and thereabouts.
Thomas Blaikling, For Tithes of the value of twenty shillings three pence, had
a Horse taken from him worth three pound ten shill.

Edward Atkinson, For Tithes of the value of nine shilling three pence, had a
Mare taken from him worth about four pound.

Richard Speight, For Tithes of the value of five shillings eleven pence, had a
Cow taken from him worth three pound.

Anthony VVillan, For Tithes of the value of fifteen shillings, had a Horse
taken away worth above three pound.

Thomas VVillan, For Tithes of the value of ten shillings three pence, had a
Mare taken from him worth four pound.

George Mason, For Tithes of the value of five shillings, had a Horse taken
from him worth four mark.

Thomas Banks, for Tithes of the value of nineteen shill. six pence, had a
Horse taken from him worth above four pound.

All the obove named parriculars, were taken for the use of Richard Atkinson,
James Burton, and James Tompson, within the called Parish of Sedbergh.

Craike Parish,
Josias Cookson, For Tithes of the value of seven pence half penny, had judgment
given against him by two Justices to pay ten shillings Costs, and the value of
the said Tithes.

James Cookson, For Tithes of the value of ten pence, had judgment given
against him by two Justices to pay ten shill. Costs, and the value of the
Tithes.

John Walker, For Tithes of the value of twelve pence, had the like judgment
given against him to pay ten shillings Costs, beside the value of the Tithes.

Thomas Johnson, For Tithes of the value of four shillings eight pence haf
penny, had the like judgment given against him to pay ten shillings Costs,
besides the value of the Tithes.

These were decreed to be paid to James Williams^n, Priest of Craike; but what
Goods he has distrained for the same, was not known when this was given in.

Westmerland.
Edmond W^i^wel, For the value of six pence claimed by Priest Greenwood of
Hutton Chapel, to be due to him for one year and a half, had a Horse taken
from him, worth two pound eighteen shillings four pence.

John Sutton, For Tyth of the value of twenty one shill* claimed by John Winter
Priest of Clifton, so valued by the Priests Servant, was ordered by two
Justices, to have three pound seven shill. 6d. levied of his goods by Distress,
and six shill. eight pence for Costs, and had two Mares taken away worth six
pound thirteen shill four pence.

John Wilkinson, For Tyth of the value of thirty shillings, given in by oath of
one witness; and John Wilkinson his son, For Tyth of the value of thirty shill.
without other oath than the Priests owa, had Kine taken away from John the son
worth twenty pound, for the use of John Vaux, Priest of Great Musgrave.

John Wilkinson, For Tyth of the value of thirty shillings, so est^mated by the
Justices without other proof, was ordered to have two pound fire shill. eight
pence levied of his Goods, for the use of the foresaid Priest Vaux, and a Cow
was taken away for it worth five pound, though a son of the said John's tendered
the money.

John Fallowfield, For Tyth of the value of fifteen shillings, as the Priests
own witnesses estimated, had taken from him, for the use of Pierce Burton,
Priest of Morland, by Warrant from the Justices, one of them the Priests
brother, one Mare and a Foal worth five pound, and the priest sent one to offer
back eleven shill. eight pence, as the fellow that came said.

Henry Lycock, For Tyth of the value of two shillings, as was claimed, had
taken away for the use of the said Priest Burton, one Caldron worth eighteen
shill.

John Tompson, For Tyth of the value of sixteen shillings, so estimated by the
servants of him that demanded it, had taken from him a Horse worth fifty
shillings, for the use of Christopher Lister, and the man that took the Horse,
sent word to John Tompson, if he would not come and lose the Horse, he might
come and fetch more.

William Hebson, For Tyth to the value of three pound nine shillings four
pence, had taken Goods to the value of seven pound, for the use of Nicholas
Mawson.

More taken from him for repairing the Steeple-house, two shillings, his rate
by sesse being six pence.

William Halme, For Tyth to the value of twenty three shil. had Goods taken to
the value of forty four shill.

More taken for six pence sesse, for repair of the Steeple-house, to the value
of two shillings four pence.

Thomas Alexander, For Tyth to the value of twenty pence, had Goods taken to
the value of five shillings.

More, for three pence Seffe for repair of the Steeple-house, to the value of
two shillings six pence.

John Smith, For Tyth to the value of four shill. six pence, had Goods taken to
the value of eight shill.

Tho. Wharton, For six pence Sesse for repair of the Steeple-house, had taken
to the value of two shill.

Henry Lycock, For Tyth to the value of twenty six shill. had Goods taken to
the value of three pound.

More, for Tyth to the value of two shillings, had a Kettle taken to the value
of twenty shill.

Richard Smith, For Tyth to the value of five shillings six pence, had Goods
taken to the value of seventeen shill.

John Wilkinson, For nine shillings three pence, had Goods taken to the value
of twenty two shill.

Alice Wilson, For eight shillings, had Goods taken to the value of sixteen
shill.

Edmond VVhitewel, For four shill. six pence, had Goods taken to the value of
nine shill.

Annas Tarne, For ten shillings, had Goods taken to the value of twenty four
shill.

Musgrave Parish.
John Williamson, For Tyth estimated at thirteen shillings, had one Cow taken
away worth five pound, for the use of the Priests farmer.

John VVilliamsons son, For Tyth of the value of thirty shill. proved by one
witness to be due from his Father, and other thirty shillings by the Paiests
own oath, had four Cows taken away worth twenty pound, and nothing offered to
be returned, and the Cows driven away where the owner could never see them
again. These were taken for the use of the said Priest Musgrave.

Laneasbire.
Robert VVidder, Tho. Leaper, Robert Stons; These three being Inhabitauts of
the County of Lancaster, were sued and run to an Outlary in Westmerland,
having no knowledge of it till upon the Outlary they were apprehended, and
carried to Lancaster Goal, where they have remained above sixteen months; The
Suit was brought in the name of Ralph Ashton styled Baronet, and Thomas
VVitherington styled Knight, for refusing to pay Tithes to James Schoolcrof
Priest of Caton.

Richard Mires, Because for conscience sake he could not pay Tithes to Tho.
Shaw Priest of Aldingham, was imprisoned in the Goal of Lancaster, and there
remained many months.

Richard Ashburner, For Tithes of the value of twenty three shillings four
pence, as the Priest pretended, had a Horse taken away worth four pound; and
for Tithes of the value of twenty shillings, as he pretended, had taken away a
Cow worth fifty eight shillings four pence, for the use of Tho. Shaw Priest of
Aldingham: And ten days afterward, the said Priest brought a Writ against the
said Ashburner, and laid him in the Goal at Lancaster, where he has remained
many months.

John Lawson, and several others, were sued by the Priest of Lancaster, and had
their Goods taken away and trible damages given to the Priest.

William Greenbanck, For Tyth to the value of six pound, or thereabouts, which
by one James Baleman and James Whitehead, was sworn to above eleven pound, had
Goods taken from him for the use of Thomas Whitehead, called Minister or Parson
of Halton in Lancashire, to the value of twenty two pound and upward.

Janet Dickenson, a poor woman who has nothing to live upon but her hand
labor, who have farmed about one Rood of ground, the Tyth whereof was valued
to eight pence, for which the said Tho. Whitehead sued her in the Exchequer at
Westminster, to answer which Suit she traveled near two hundred miles; in
which Court he declared against her for Tyth of twenty seven Acres of Corn and
meadow.

Alice Weodhead of Clown in Darby shire, for Tyth to the value of twenty one
shillings, had Goods taken to the value of five pound.

Durham.
John Richmond, had Cattle worth forty pound or thereabouts, taken from him by
color of a Warrant from Commissioners sitting at Newcastle, as was pretended
but never showed to him, for the use of one VVildbore, who was long since cast
out of the Vicarage at Heighington for scandal and insufficiency, by
Commissioners sitting at Newcastle, which Cattle were driven to Durham, and
there sold for twenty pound, and not one penny offered back, when the sum they
demanded was but a small part of it; and though the said John Richmond (knowing
the said Commissioners had no power to give any judgment for Tithes to the
said priest) went to the Sheriff George Lilburn for a replevit, the said
Lilburn refused to grant it; and thus they join hand in hand to make their
oppressions remediless, yea even for those themselves call scandalous.

William Richmond, and Thomas Richmond, by the same illegal Warrant, had
Cattle of a great value driven away for the use of the said ejected Priest,
though they were never served with the Warrant.

Yorkshire.
Thomas Aldam, prosecuted in the Common pleas for Tithes by Thomas Rooksbie, a
called Minister of VVarmsworth, who lately had the spoil of his Goods.

James Tennant, Nichol. Row, John Metcalfe, prosecuted in the Chancery for
Tithes.

Henry Bayley, Anthony Wilson, sued in the Exchequer for Tyth.

Richard Robinson, Alexander Hebblethwaite, James Corney, now prisoners in the
Fleet, because for conscience sake they could not swear about Tyths, Jonas
Smith, John Somerson, now prisoners concerning Tithes.

Thomas Aldam, William Ratliffe, Anthony Wilberfosse, William Sikes, Thomas
Scot, William Simpson, Michael Simpson, Gervase Benson, Edward Atkinson, have
been prisoners concerning Tithes.

Lancashire.
William Greenbanck, Ianet Dickenson, Thomas Comin, Thomas Atkinson, James
Tailor, Richard Rooper, Richard Britton, Alexander Rigg, John Burrow, Lawrence
Newton, George Garnet, william Pull, Richard Weaver, John Wayman, William
Wayman. Edward Comin, Gregory Cockerham, sued in the Exchequer for Tithes.

Robert Widder, Thomas Leaper, Robert Stout, Richard Ashburner, Robert Walker,
Richard Mires, Thomas Hill, have been imprisoned concerning Tithes.

Cumberland.
John Dixon, John Fearon, John Gill, Matthew Robinson, James Wilson, William
Richardson, sued in the upper Bench for Tithes.

George Rothery, Richard Williamson, have been prisoners concerning Tithes.

Westmerland.
William Cartnel, Richard Sill, sued in the Exchequer for Tithes.

John Foothergit, William Hebson, Thomas Atkinson, Edward Robinson, Henry Ward,
Thomae Robertson, Thomas Wright, have been prisoners concerning Tithes.

Durham.
Martin Richmond, John Richmond, John Greenwel, Will* Foster, sued in the
Exchequer for Tithes.

John Richmond, Nichollas Pickering, have been prisoners concerning Tithes.

Nottinghamshire.
William Cleater, now in prison in the Fleet, because for conscience sake he
cannot swear about Tyth.

Robert Mawlam, sued in the Exchequer for Tithes.

Glocestershire.
Walter Clement, Reynold Williams, William Watkins, Walter Summers, Thomas
Hill, William Wooley, Thomas Dooding, Elizabeth Dorney Widow, Mawrice Smith,
John Tailor, William Coxe, sued in the Exchequer for Tithes.

Buckinghamshire.
Richark Marks, Walter Mabley, Richard Hunt, Thomas Harvey, sued in the
Exchequer for Tyth.

Suffolk.
George Sherwin, William Wawn, John Smith, John Simpson, sued in the Exchequer
for Tyth.

Bedfordshire.
James Tailor, sued in the Exchequer for Tyth,

Hertfordshire.
John Blindell, sued in the Exchequer for Tyth.

Summersetshire.
Thomas Darley, sued in the Exchequer for Tyth.

Wiltshire.
David Hale, John Joy, and Charles Barret, sued in the Exchequer for Tyth.

Oxfordshire.
Richard Church, imprisoned for Tyth.

Middlesex.
Richard Davies, sued in the Exchequer for Tyth.

Robert Dring, has been imprisoned for Tyth.

John Askew, is sued in Chancery for Tyth.

Kent.
Samuel Fisher, Abiezar Boykin, sued in the Exchequer for Tyth.

Sussex.
Richard Prat, sued in the Exchequer for Tyth.

Leicestershire.
Edward Moggleson the elder, Edward Moggleson the younger, sued in the
Exchequer for Tyth.

Norsolk.
Robert Jacob, sued in the Exchequer for Tyth.

These with diverse others, (whose names may hereafter be published, with the
names of those by whom they are unjustly vexed, if they go on in their
persecution of the Innocent;) are sufferers for Tyth as is aforesaid.

Clerks Wages and Repair of Steeple Houses.
Ri^hard Peacock, had taken from him one wooden Vessel worth eighteen pence,
because he could not pay twelve pence, which Priest Gilpins Clerk demanded for
Wages, though he hired him not.

Thomas Barker, had taken from him one Pan worth one shilling, because he could
not pay six pence, which the said Priests Clerk demanded for his Wages.

John Mark, had taken from him one Pan worth twelve pence, because he could not
pay six pence, which the said Clerk demanded, etc.

John Dixon, had taken from him five Power Dishes and one brass Pot worth
sixteen shillings, or more, because he could not for conscience sake pay ten
shillings, which was demanded of him for Repairs of a Steeple-house.

James Wilson, had taken from him three pewter Platters worth seven shillings.

Mungo Wilson, had taken from him one Platter, worth five shillings.

Richard Whiney, had taken from him two Platters worth three shill.

Anthouy Scrugham, had taken from him one Pot worth two shillings three pence;
because for conscience sake they could not pay money toward repair of the
Steeple-house at Brigham.

William Iackson, had taken from him six pewter Platters, and one pewter Cup
worth nine shillings, because he could not pay money toward repair of a
Steeplehouse at Lonswater.

Thomas Flatcher, had taken from him one pewter platter worth twelve pence,
because he could not pay four pence to the Clerk of Lowswater Steeple-house.

John Tyson, had taken from him one Pewter Platter worth nine pence, because he
could not pay four pence, which the said Clerk demanded.

William Fletcher, For the like, had one pewter Cup taken away from him.

Ioha Pattisen, had taken from him by the Clerk of Boulton, one Pan worth five
shillings six pence.

Concerning Swearing.
Richard Peacock, because for conscience sake he could not swear, was fined at
the County Court by the Sheriffs Officers twenty shillings, for which the
Bayliffe took from him one Mare worth thirty shillings, though he appeared at
the Court, and was ready to do any service he could.

Michael Nicholson, because he could not swear, was fined, at the Earl of
Northumberlands Court, (so called) ten shillings, for which the Bay list took
away one Sack, two Sheets, two Pans, and two pewter Dishes worth seventeen
shill.

William Pearson, because he could not swear being fined ten shillings at the
County Court, had taken from him by the Bailiffs one Cow worth about forty
shill.

The same William Pearson, because he could not swear, was fined at the Earl
of Northumberlands Court, (so called) and the Bailiffs took from him one Mare
and Foal worth three pound.

Matthew Kirkbride, because he could not swear, was fined at the Sheriffs
County Court, for which the Bailiffs took away the very bedding wherein himself
and Wife lay, she being big with child and near to be delivered, and some
Sacks, Yarn, and Corn, which they had provided for her maintenance, worth about
thirty seven shillings, and left them not wherewith to cover themselves in the
midst of winter, and Sir Wilfrid Lawson; (so called) the Sheriff, being
acquainted with it, and asked whether he would own such things to be done, and
to his use, he answered yes, and that he should not expect to be remedied at
his hands; Oh hard hearted and inhumane cruely!

John Peacock, because he could not swear, was fined at the County Court, the
Sheriff being present, twenty shill. for which the Bailiffs took away one Mare
worth thirty shillings.

John Stenton, because he could not swear, was fined ten shillings, at the
called Earl of Northumberlands Court, at Mashdale, by James Pearson Steward,
for which the Bailiff took away two tanned Hides, and half a Bend, worth to be
sold twenty six shill.

Hugh Tickel, because he could not swear, was fined ten shillings at Ullock
Court, for which one Kettle was taken from him worth fourteen shill.

Thomas Piele, because he could not swear, was fined at Cockermouth Court six
shillings right pence, for which a brass Pot, one Pan, and a wooden vessel
worth ten shillings, were taken from him.

Christopher Wandsor, because he could not swear, was fined at Wurkington
Court, twenty shillings, for the use of Patri^ius Carwen called Baronet, for
which his Bailiffs took away one Horse worth three pound ten shill.

William Stamper, because he could not swear at the Sheriffs county Court, was
fined twenty shillings, for which one Mare was taken away for the use of the
said Sheriff, worth three pound ten shillings.

Leonard Scott, because he could not swear, was fined at the Sheriffs Court,
and after he was dead, the Bailiffs took away Pewter, Brass, and Iron for it,
though all his Goods fell much short of paying his debts, which his eldest son
had undertaken to discharge.

The aforesaid Wilfrid Lawson high Sheriff, charged his Bailiffs to return the
Names of those people called Quakers, for Jurers who were to answer at his
Court at I^ell, which they did, and there they fined some ten shillings, some
twenty shillings, some forty shillings, and some other greater sums, as in
particular, Mungo Scott three pound thirteen shillings four pence; And some of
the Landlords threaten them with the forfeiture of their Lands, which they hold
of them by Copy or customary Tennant right, because they say they deny to do
their suit and service; and all this is because for conscience sake they cannot
swear, and trangresse the plain Command of Christ, though any service for the
good of the Country they are willing to perform, and will be faithful without
an oath; and for the keeping of their consciences clear, though in the outward
they be for the most part poor, yet with joy they can suffer the spoiling of
their Goods, and give their backs to the Smiter.

John Fell, Because he could not swear, was fined at Io. Dalstons Court at
Vidale, and had an Ewe and Lamb taken away for it worth five shillings,

Tho. Fell, Because he could not swear, was fined at the said Court, and had an
Ewe and Lamb taken away for it worth 6s. 8d.

Io. Caipe, Because he could not swear, was fined at the said Court, and had a
sheep taken worth four shillings

Tho. Fletcher, Because he could not swear, was fined at Wilfrid Lawsons Manor
Court (who is now the high Sheriff) forty shillings, and for it had thirty one
shillings four pence taken away.

The same the next Court after was fined for not swearing six shillings eight
pence.

He also the next Court following was fined twenty shillings for not swearing:
for these two later fines the said Lawson caused his Bailiffe to take away a
great Kettle* and a Web of white Kerfie worth thirty six shillings.

John Dixon, Because he could not swear, was fined at the said Lawsons Court,
and another time for not appearing when he was in prison for the testimony of a
good conscience, was also fined, and for which he had taken away one brass pot,
and two pewter dishes worth sixteen shillings.

Durham.
Geo. Burdon of Easington, because he could not swear, was fined by the
Sheriff, and had thirteen shillings taken from him. And diverse others for the
same thing were fined in like manner.

Yorkshire.
Richard Robinson, Alexander Hebblethwait, James Corney, Because they could not
for conscience sake swear and give in their answers to the Bill of Complaint of
Richard Atkinson of Garsdale, James Burton of Dent, and James Tompson being for
tithes, were committed prisoners to the Fleet by Robert Nicholas, and others
the called Barons of the Exchequer, where they yet remain in prison.

Nottinghamshire.
William Cleater is now prisoner in the Fleet upon the same account* at the
suit of one Dove Williamson, a called Minister; which said Williamson had one
of his legs shot with a Canon bullet, he being in one of the late Kings
Garrisons.

G. B. his Queries concerning Tithes, etc.
1. When there was no King in Israel every one did that which was right in his
own eyes, Judge. 17 6. Was it so yea or nay?

2. When there was a King in England, did he well in suffering diverse of his
subjects to be imprisoned without any cause showed: And when for their
deliverance they* were brought before his Justices, there to undergo and
receive according to the Laws of the Land, no breach of any Law being proved
against them, and yet they returned back to several prisons without being
charged with any thing to which they might make answer according to the Law:
And were they the Kings friends that advised so to do, yea or nay?

3. Whether did the Parliament well to lay before him in the third year of his
reign in the Petition of Right, that, and other things imposed upon his
subjects, contrary to the laws and their just liberties, as a grievance, and
to desire from him, That all his Officers and Ministers should serve him
according to his laws and statutes of his Realm as they tendered his honor,
and the prosperity of his Kingdom: And did the King well when he said, Let
right be done as is desired, yea or nay?

4. Whether the Statutes of England be a part of the Law of England? And
whether is the Law of England a Rule in it self both for Magistrates and people
to walk by, yea or nay?

5. Whether the Law of England be the higher Power, or the Judges and Lawyers
opinions, which may be gained for money? And whether are the Justices the
Masters of the law or the Ministers of the law?

6. Whether he is subject to the higher power who lives and walks according to
what the Law requires; or he that follows the opinions and inventions of men,
when in plainness the law requires one thing, and their opinions and
inventions are another thing?

7. Whether is he a faithful Minister of the Law, and fit to judge of men's
lives, liberty, and estates, who writes one thing, and mean and does another,
who takes an oath to judge according to the law, and yet quite contrary to the
law commands men's persons to be imprisoned, and their goods to be taken from
them?

8. Whether do the Justices act according to the^r Commissions or Patents, who
pass judgment against the peoples liberties and estates where there is no law
of the Nation to warrant such their judgments: but on the contrary the law of
the Nation says in express words, it shall not be lawful for any so to do?

9. Whether is he the Minister of God yea or nay, that feigneth or suggesteth a
lie, or owneth or joyneth with such as he knows does feign and suggest lies,
to the end they may have a pretense or color to draw people before their
judgment seats (which they call Courts of Equity) which if the lies which is
the foundation of many Bills of Complaint, were taken away, they then had no
color of action in such Courts; neither is there any law of this Nation to
warrant such actions, as is confessed in several of their Bills of Complaints?

10. From whence is that Law, and for what end was it given, that is not
equal? And is that equal which is not iusts, ors equitys which is not lawful?

11. Whether is the Proviso in a statute, a part of the statute, yea or nay? If
nay, why was it inserted? If yea, then they that act contrary to it, are
convinced of it as transgressors.

12. Whether were not the Courts Temporal and the Courts Spiritual two
several Jurisdictions, and so accounted and adjudged by the late Kings and
Parliaments of England? And whether had not the late Kings and Parliaments
power to make laws, and to declare what was law yea or nay? And was it not
declared in express words by the King and Parliament in the 24 Hen. 8. Chap
12. That rights of Tithes, Oblations and Obventions, the knowledge whereof by
the goodness of Princes of this Realm, and by the Laws and Customs of the
same, appertains to the Spiritual Jurisdiction of the Realm.

13. Whether is the Statute of the 2, 3, Edw. 6. Chap. 13. of force yea or nay?
If yea, is it not therein provided and inacted, That if any person do substract
or withdraw any manner of Tithes, Obventions, Profits, Commodities, or other
duties, or any part of them, contrary to the true meaning of the said Act, or
of any other Act heretofore made, that then the party so substracting or
withdrawing the same, may or shall de convented and sued in the Kings
Ecclesiastical Court, by the party from whom the same shall be subtracted or
withdrawn, to the intent the Kings Judge Ecclesiastical shall and may then and
there to hear and determine the same according to the Kings Ecclesiastical
laws, and that it shall not be lawful unto the Parson, Vicar, Proprietory,
Owner, or other their Farmers or Deputy, contrary to this act; to convent or
sue such with-holder of Tithes, Obventions, or other duties aforesaid before
any other Judge than Ecclesi^sticall, yea or nay? If nay, then why are the
people punished as transgressors of that law which is repealed? And if yea,
then why are the People convented and sued for with holding their Tithes, etc
before the temporal Judges, and in the temporal Courts, contrary to the said
Act?

14. Whether does not he or they who give their opinions and make it their
practice to convent and sue men in the temporal Courts of this Nation the
people thereof for substracting and withdrawing their Tithes* Oblations and
Obventions, etc. And say it is lawful for them so to do, give the law the lie.
And are these Ministers of the law who gives the law the ly, who say it shall
be lawful when the law says it shall not be lawful? Are not such unreasonable
men? and do not such go about to make the law of none effect through their
Traditions, and set up for self ends their own opinions and inventions in stead
of the lay, yea or nay?

15. Whether is it not provided in the statute of 32 Hen. 8^ cap. 7. in these
words, viz. Provided always that the last Act shall not extend nor be
expounded to give any remedy, cause of action, or suit in the Courts temporal
against any person or persons which shall refuse or deny to set out his or
their Tithes, or shall detain, withold, or refuse to pay his tithes or
offerings, or any parcel thereof, but that in such cases the person or party
being Ecclesiastical or Lay person, having cause to demand or have the said
tithes or offerings, and thereby wronged or grieved, shall take or have their
remedy for their said tithes o^ offerings; in every such case in the Spiritual
Courts according to the Ordinance of the first part of this Act, and not
otherwise. And do not such whether Ecclesiastical or Lay persons otherwise,
who sue people for tithes and offerings in temporal Courts for the same,
Answer yea or nay?

16. Whether there is any transgression where there is no law? And whether
there is or ought to be any trebble damage adjudged, where and when no tithes
are due? And if there be no law of the Nation to warrant the temporal Judges
to try the right of tithes, the law saying that the trial thereof appertains
to the spiritual Jurisdiction by the laws and customs of the Realm: Then how
can it be lawful for the temporal Judges to give judgment in their temp^rall
Courts for treble damages, or any Jury to find treble damage for not dividing,
setting forth or not paying their prediall tithes, o^ or for taking or carrying
away the same before the tenth part of the same be divided or set forth, when
there is no law of the Nation to authorize them to hear or determine of the
right of tithes who are temporal Judges in their temporal Courts.

17. Whether do such Justices and Juries who act contrary to the aforesaid
statute, or any other, tender the honor and prosperity of the Nation, or serve
the chief Magistrate thereof according to the laws and statutes thereof? And
if not, is not their crime as great as their predecessors, who suffered for
such things? And are not they inexcusable before God and Man, who have
condemned others for so doing, and now do the same things? Answer yea or nay.

Read and understand, Weigh and give advice ye learned Council of the Nation,
as you are called, for according to your deserts will your reward be, whosoever
of you these Queries under your hands in writing shall answer according to
truth, and return to any of the people called Quakers.

WAs there ever such merchandise made of any people since the world began as
these falls teachers have done in our age before mentioned? Was there ever such
oppression and such heavy burdens laid upon any people since the world began as
these false Priests and teachers have done in our age that the Reader may find
before mentioned? Have they not out stripped all the burdens, all the grievous
burdens of the Pharisees which they themselves will not touch with one of their
fingers? Was there ever such devouring, ravening by all the false teachers
since the world began as these do in our age, which take a way the peoples
goods, cattle, Horses, Sheep, Oxen, Platters, Kettles, Plow-geare, and what
they can lay their hands on for a Prophet, spoiling peoples goods, and making
havoc of them; who can but say the measure of iniquity reaches to the full?
Was ever people made a prey upon and devoured by the false teachers in all the
ages past since the world began, as they are by the false teachers in this our
age, which makes a prey upon the people, devours them, and treads upon them,
that are fed, and eats the fat, clothes with the wool? Was ever people so
bitten with, the teeth, and prepared war against since the world began, as they
are in this our age; who cannot put into the mouths of the false teachers,
which brings the people all on heaps, who would pluck the skin off their flesh,
and bite them with their teeth; whiles they put into their mouths they cried
peace unto them, but they are fallen in the night, whose does appear
oppression, violence, and spoiling the goods of people, has not the hearts of
the simple been long deceived by such, and does not the folly of these now
appear unto all men? and are not manifest that have the love of money that
teaches for filthy lucre, who pierce themselves through with many hurtful
lusts, who have the love of money which is the root of all evil; which things
the man of God must fly: Marrk how many prisons have been filled in this
Nation by them for the love of money, yea how many have been prisoned to death,
witness Lancaster, Colchester, York and Exceter, such as are prisoned to death
which the Priests are raging against, was ever Balaam so mad who loved the
wages of unrighteousness, who was in the error, as are the teachers in this
age, who are so greedy of gifts and rewards; nay, if men will not give it them,
they will take it by violence, and summon them up into Courts, upper Bench,
Exchequer, Chancery Common Pleas, to answer before the Barons of the Nation,
and there cause poor men to come up; these Priests some for 4 or 5 shillings,
some for less, two hundred miles poor laboring men, and thus they use them
without any pity or compassion, and if they will not pay them, takes their Pots,
or Kettles, or Platters, Priest sends to take them away, or Plow-gear. Was ever
the like heard in all ages since the world began? Are not these they that makes
the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ chargeable? And are not these things a
shame to all Christians, that their teachers should make such fruits manifest,
nay their Colleges at Cambridge, where they make their Ministers, have caused
some to be cast in prison for not paying them their tithes. Here the mother and
her sons both make havoc; one was prisoned at York till he died for not paying
tithes; prisoned another to death by Priest Shaw, for not paying him tithes.
Now if these things do not shame all Christian Magistrates and Rulers, what
will, that have not a feeling in them with these sufferers? And if this be not
a dishonor to truth and the Gospel, what is? and Christ who sends forth his
teachers freely as they receive so to give. Now if you cannot see that you and
such teachers are contrary to Christ and his Apostles, the God of the world
has blinded your eyes, and you are such as Jeremy speaks of in the horrible
and filthy thing, the Priests bear rule by their means, and the people love to
have it so: but what will you do in the end thereof? Never did so much
nakedness appear in any age you read of, as does in this age among them, which
are not wotthy to have the name of teachers of truth, which generations to come
will be ash^med of since the days of the Apostles in this night of apostasy
and darkness: Has the false teachers got up tithes, yea and of the people will
have treble damage if they will not pay them, by whose means many come to lose
almost their whole estates, having it taken from them for the priests. The
Apostle showed that tithes were taken away, and the command disan^lled by which
they were paid, and the handwriting of Ordinances blotted out.

George Fox.
FINIS.

