Licensed,

November. 22. 1689. Rob. Midgley

LOGIC, OR The KEY of SCIENCES; And the MORAL SCIENCE, OR The Way to be Happy.

The former directing our Understanding how to Reason well of all things; and
the latter guiding our Will to an honest and virtuous Life.

Both very useful to learn French and English.

By Peter Berault.

The Prudent gets knowledge, Pro. 18. 15. For the Price of wisdom is above
Pearls and Rubies, Job 28. 18. London, Printed by Thomas Hodgkin, at the
Authors Expenses. 1690.

LA LOGIQUE, OU La CLEF des SCIENCES; Et la MORALE, OU Le Moyen d'etre Heureux.

La premiere dirigeant notre Entendement pour bien Raisonner de toutes chooses;
and la second conduisant notre Volonte a une Vie honete and vertueuse.

Toutes deux fort utiles pour apprendre le Francois and l'Anglois.

Par Pierre Berault.

Le Prudent acquiert la Science. Pro. 18. 15. Car le prix de la Sagesse est au
dessus des Perles, and Rubis, Job 28. 18. a Londres, Imprimees par Thomas
Hodgkin, aux depens de l'Autheur. 1690.

TO THE Right Honorable CHARLES, Earl of Dorset, and Middlesex, Lord
Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household, etc.
My Lord,
ALL the World does grant our Understanding and Will are the Two chief
Faculties of our Soul; and your Lordship knows better than my self, that as the
Actions of our Understanding, considered as able to be directed to Discourse
well of all things, are the Object of Logic: So the Actions of our Will,
considered as able to be guided to Virtue, are the Object of Moral Philosophy.
For as the whole Logic consists in these three Actions of our Mind, to Think
well, to judge rightly, and to reason clearly: So the whole Moral Science may
be reduced into these three points, to live honestly, to offend no body, and to
render what belongs to every one. Whosoever then knows well how to apprehend
the things presented to his Imagination, to make a sound Judgment of them, and
to draw true consequences from them, he may justly be called a good Logician:
Likewise whosoever knows how to rule his Will, so that he does nothing but just
and virtuous Actions, he does certainly possess the whole of Moral Philosophy.

Your Generosity, my Lord, in receiving kindly my other little Books, obliged
me long since to give your Lordship a small Acknowledgment for your former
Favors; and if I have deferred it unto this day, it is because I had not so
fit a Subject as this to be dedicated to your Lordship, whose Understanding is
extraordinary in Matters belonging to Knowledge, and whose Will is always
inclined to produce virtuous Actions. But in manifesting your Merit, it may be
I betray your Modesty, and perhaps I offend, when I endeavor to please.
Although your Lordship should be angry with me, yet I cannot omit here these
Qualities of Yours, so well known in this Kingdom. For those that have the
Honor to be acquainted with your Lordship, are not ignorant that your Mind is
adorned with curious Notions; and those that had the delight to read your
Writings, do altogether confess, that your Thoughts are rich, that your
Expressions are strong, that your Words are Emphatical, and that you are
Apollo's Favorite. All England knows your Zeal for the truth of Religion, and
for the Laws as they are established in this Kingdom, as also your generous
natural Disposition, which always prevents those that expect Favors from you.
It is well known that you do not confound Appearance with Truth; your
Conscience is not Erroneous; you are an Enemy to all the foppish Devotion of
Rome; and to say all in Two Words, there is nothing in you but what is Solid
and Glorious. Is not the Choice, which Their Majesty's have made of your
Lordship, in trusting you with the most considerable Places of this Kingdom, a
convincing Proof that all I have said is Truth without Flattery?

I conclude this Epistle, humbly entreating your Acceptance of this small Work.
I hope you will receive it kindly, since it is a Subject, which you both
perfectly understand, and much delight in: I hope also your Lordship will be
pleased with my Endeavors to make plain to the meanest Capacity this
troublesome Art of Logic, wherein, as well as in Moral Science, I think I have
done more then has yet been done in either of the Languages, toward the ruling
of Thoughts, Words, and Actions. Pardon this Presumption; Live long and Happy,
and give me leave to publish that I am,

My Lord, Your most Humble, most Obedient, and Devoted Servant PETER BERAULT.

TO THE READER.
HERE is both the Key of Sciences, and the Way to be Happy, which I do present
thee. If thou understandest well this Logic, thou will find a mavelous
facility to get all sorts of Sciences; and if thou put in practice this
Moral Philosophy, thy Soul will be crowned with a great number of Virtues. The
Intelligence of one, and the use of the other will not only make thee to be
esteemed, but also will get thee the Affection of all thy Acquaintance, and the
Happiness that may be hoped in this Life. Judge of the Goodness of this Book by
the Profit thou may receive.

Farewell.
The Chief CONTENTS OF LOGIC.
IS Logic useful, necessary to Men, and the Key of Sciences? What is Logic?
From whence is it derived? What is its Object? How many Actions of our Spirit
are there? How do you call them? and in how many parts is Logic divided? Page
2. to 8.

What is a Term in Logic? how do you divide it, and define every Term? And
what difference do you put between real, mental, and modal distinction? page 8.
to 20

How many Vniversals are there? What is a Gender, Species, Difference, Proper,
and Accident? What is to be different in Specie and number? What is an
Individual, and how many sorts of them are there? page 20. to 34.

What is a Category or Predicament? How many are there? A description of the
Substances Category. page 34. to 40.

What is a Substance? how do you divide it, and which are its Properties? page
40. to 44.

What is a Quantity? how do you divide it, and which are its Properties. page
44. to 56.

What is a Quality? How many sorts of Qualities are there? and which are the
Properties of a Quality. page 56. to 62.

What is a Relation? and which are its Properties? page 62. to 66.

What is Action and Passion? which are their Properties? How do you divide
Action? and what do you mean by these Categories, when, where, Situation and
Habit? page 66. to 68.

How many sorts of Oppositions are there? what difference is it between them?
and in how many ways may one thing be said first, or preceding another? page
68. to 74.

In how many ways is Movement taken? What is Generation and Corruption? What is
Increasing and Diminution? What is Alteration and Transport? page 74. to 78.

What is an Enonciation, or Proposition? How many things are there to be
considered in a Proposition? which are its Principles? page 78. to 80.

What is a Voice, and how do you divide it? What is a Noun, and how do you
divide it? What is a Pronoun and Verb? How many sorts of Propositions are
there? and how do you define them? page 80. to 94.

What is a Division? In how many ways may one thing be divided, and what is
requisite for a good Division? page 94. to 96.

What is a Definition? how many sorts are there; and what is requisite for a
good Definition? page 96. to 100.

What is a Discourse or an Argumentation, and how do you divide it? What is a
Syllogism? how many parts has it, and how do you call them? how many Terms has
it, and how do you call them? page 100. to 108.

Of Modes and Figures: What do you mean by Figure? How many sorts of Modes are
there? What do you mean by these Words, Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferio, etc.
How many Modes are there in the first Figure? how many in the second? and how
many in the third? and how do you distinguish one from another? page 108. to
114.

Examples upon every Mode and Figure; and how many Rules are there to be
observed in these three Figures? page 114. to 124.

Of Imperfect Argumentations: Why do you call them imperfect? What is an
Enthymema, Example, Induction, Dilemma, and Sorites? p. 124. to 130.

What is Wisdom, Intelligence, Demonstration, Science, Faith, Art, Opinion? and
how many sorts of Probable are there? page 130. to 134.

What is the Medium of an Argument? how many Springs or places are there, from
which one may draw a Medium, or reason to prove a Proposition? An Example upon
every Spring or place. page 134. to 148.

Of fallacious Arguments or Sophisms: How many sorts of them are there?
Examples upon each one. page 148. to 160.

What is a Method? Is it a fourth Action of our Spirit? How must we do to
dispose well the things which we have thought upon? how do you divide the
Method, and how must one do to answer well to a Question? page 160. to 166.

ERRATA.
PAge 8. Line 13. begins and ends, read begins or ends. p. 20. l. 25. it
establishes Gender, r. it establishes Proper.

P. 23. L, 4. 8. 17. si je demand lisez si on demand. p. 93. l. 15. lisez
universels, and ligne 17. lisez semblablement. p. 110. ligne derniere lisez
d'autres evec plusieurs. p. 167. lisez ainsi la Morale. p. 241. l. 11.
monasticalle, lisez monastique.

LOGIC, OR The KEY of SCIENCES:

LOGIC, OR The KEY of SCIENCES.
PART I.
Q. IS Logic useful and necessary to Men?

A. Yes certainly, because i^ teaches to discern Truth from Error; to divide
the whole into its proper Parts; to explain a thing, which i^ Dark, and has a
double Sense, by ^ clear Definition; to infer a true Consequence from its
Premises, and to discourse with certainty of all things. Logic is to our
Understanding what Pensil is to a Painter; for, as it is impossible to draw a
Picture well without Pensil, so it is impossible to be a good Scholar without
the assistance of Logic. It Is the Key of all Sciences, for whosoever knows his
Logic well, he finds ^ mavelous facility to enter into all sor^ of Sciences
let them be never so intricate and troublesome; Aristotle, Plato, Thomas
Aquinas, subtle Scotus, and all other great Philosophers are all indebted to it
for their Doctrine and fine Notions: St. Austin calls it The Art of Arts, and
the Science of Sciences, he taught it publicly, and by its means became so
famous, that he is above all other Doctors, as the Eagle flies above all other
Birds.

Q. What is Logic?

A. It is an Art or Science, whereby we learn to reason well, and discourse
shortly of all things, not only to instruct our selves, but also to instruct
others.

Q. Why do you say shortly?

A. To distinguish Logic from Rhetoric, which indeed learns men to discourse
Neatly, but not Succinctly, and Compendiously, as Logic; but more largely, and
delights in the choice of fine Words, and pleasing Sentences. If any one finds
in the beginning some difficulty in reading this Logic, let him not be
dejected, but let him read it all over; and when he begins again to peruse it,
that which seemed at first hard and troublesome, will then appear very easy
and pleasant.

Q. From whence is Logic derived?

A. From the Greek word (...), which signifies Discourse; because it teaches
how to discourse clearly of all things.

Q. Which is the Object of Logic?

A. The Actions of our Spirit, as they can be directed to discourse and reason
well.

Q. How many Actions of the Spirit are there?

A. Three, viz. to conceive, to judge and to reason.

Q. How do you call the First?

A. A Simple conceit or view of a thing presented to our Spirit, without
affirming or denying any thing of it; as for Example, Body, Man, God, Angel,
etc.

Q. How do you call the Second?

A. It is called Proposition, or Enonciation, because we affirm or deny
something of the Object which we thought upon; as for Example, Man is a
reasonable Animal; God is not a Liar, etc.

Q. How do you call the Third?

A. It Is called Discourse, or Ratiocination; because it is an Inference, or
Knowledge, which we draw from one or two Precedent Propositions: As for
Example, this man is rich, therefore he has Friends. Every Animal has a Body,
Peter is an Animal, therefore Peter has a Body.

Q. In how many Parts do you divide Logic?

A. In three; the first part makes mention of the Terms; the second of the
Proposition; and the third of the Argumentation.

Q. What Is that you call Term in Logic?

A. It Is a word that begins and ends an Enonciation, or a Proposition; as for
Example, an Angel is Spiritual; Angel and Spiritual are the Terms, and ( is) is
the band that ties them together, when a Proposition is Affirmative, and
separates them when it is Negative.

Q. How do you call the first Term, or Word?

A. It is called Subject; and the second is named Predicate.

Q. Why do you call one Subject, and the other Predicate?

A. The Subject is so called, because something is attributed unto it; and the
Predicate is so named, because it is attributed to the Subject; as you may see
by these Examples, an Angel is Spiritual; a Man is an Animal, wherein you see
that Angel and Man are Subjects, because Spiritual is attributed to Angel, and
Animal to Man.

Q. How do you divide the Term?

A. Into Universal, Particular, Univocal, Equivocal, Analogical,
Cathegorematick, Syncathegorematick, Absolute, Relative, Connotative, Abstract,
Concret, Simple, Composed, and into a Term of the first and second Intention,
which is called Real, and of Reason.

Q. What is an Universal Term?

A. It Is a word, whose Nature is common unto many; as for Example, Angel, Man,
Tree, etc. Angel signifies a Nature, or Essence, which is common to Raphael,
Gabriel, Michael, and other Angels, and Man signifies an Essence, or Nature
which is common to Peter, Paul, John, etc.

Q. What is a particular Term?

A. It is a word which is not attributed to many, as Aristotle, Plato, Seneca,
Alexander, Caesar, etc.

Q. What is that Term, which you call Univocal, or Synonima?

A. It is a Word, whose Name and Nature are equally in many, and equally
participated of many: As Man, whose Name and Nature are equally found in Peter,
Paul, John, James, etc.

Q. What is that Term which you call Equivocal, or Homonima?

A. It is a word, whose Name, though it be found equally in many, yet its nature
is not equally participated by them, but signifies different things; as this
word Dog, which signifies a terrestrial Animal, a Seafish, and a Star.

Q. What is an Analogical Term?

A. It is a word that expresses one and the same thing in many, but differently
attributed unto them; as this word wholesome, which declares health in Man, in
Physic and Urine, but with this difference, that it is in Man, as in the
Subject of Health; in Physic, as in the Cause; and in Urine, as in the Sign;
because, according as Urine has either good or bad Qualities, it denotes health
or sickness.

Q. What is a Cathegorematick Term?

A. It is a word so called, because it is found amongst the ten Cathegories,
and which of it self signifies something determined; as these words, Substance,
Body, Animal, Man, Peter.

Q. What is a Syncathegorematick Term?

A. It is a word which specifies nothing of it self, but only when it is joined
with another; as all, some, any, none, all signifies nothing determined of it
self, but only when it is joined with another word, as Men.

Q. What is an Absolute Term?

A. It is a word representing an absolute Nature, that is, without any Relation
to another word; as Angel, Man, Body, Tree, etc.

Q. What is a relative Term?

A. It is a word representing a Nature or Essence, as it has a relation to
another; as for Example, Father, Master, King. Father represents a Nature which
denotes a Son; Master represents a Nature that marks a Servant; and King shows
a Nature that declares some Subjects.

Q. What is a Connotative Term?

A. It is a word that denotes a Quality in a Subject; as white, black. These
words do declare a whiteness and blackness in a Subject; as for Example, in a
Wall, or upon the Face.

Q. What is an abstract Term?

A. It is a word which we conceive separated from its Subject; as Whiteness,
Blackness, Wisdom, Justice, etc.

Q. What is a Concret Term?

A. It is a word denoting an Accident, which we conceive joined to its Subject;
as White, Black, Wise, Just.

Q. What difference do you put between a Simple Term, and a Composed one?

A. A Simple Term is expressed by one word, as Man, Body; and a Composed Term
by two, as a Learned Man, a Solid Body; and sometimes we add unto it this
Relative which or that, as a Man which is Learned; a Body that is Solid.

Q. What is a Real Term or of the first Intention?

A. It is a word, which of it self, without the help of the operation of our
Understanding, signifies a real Nature; as Man, Animal; Man of it self
signifies a Reasonable Animal; and Animal without the help of our Understanding
signifies a living sensible Body.

Q. What is a Term of Reason, or of the Second Intention?

A. It is a word which does not belong to the thing, which we speak of, except
it be by the Action of our Spirit; as in this Proposition, Man is an Animal; as
I consider Man, as Subject of this Proposition, and Animal as Predicate:
Subject and Predicate are called Terms of the second Intention, because they do
not belong to Man, and to Animal, unless it be by the Operation of our
Understanding.

Q. What difference do you put between Real, Mental, and Modal distinction?

A. A Real Distinction is between two things really distinct one from another;
that is, when I may think upon one without thinking upon the other; as for
Example, my Brother and Sister are really distinct, because I may think upon
one without thinking upon the other.

Q. What is a Mental distinction?

A. It is that that is found between two things which are in one and the same
Subject; so that we may think upon one, without thinking upon the other; as
when I think upon Gods Mercy, without thinking upon his Justice; this
distinction is called Mental.

Q. What is a Modal distinction?

A. It is that which is found between a Substance and its Modification; so that
I may think upon a Substance; by Example, upon a Stone, without thinking upon
its mode or figure; but I cannot think upon the Figure of a Stone, without
thinking in the same time upon that Stone.

Q. How many Universals are there?

A. There are Five, viz. Gender, Species, Difference, Proper and Accident.

Q. How do you prove it?

A. Because all that belongs to a Subject, is attributed unto it either
Essentially or Accidentially: If Essentially, either it is its whole Essence,
or a part of it only; if it be its whole Essence, we call it Species; if it be
a part expressing the Matter, we call it Gender; and if it be a part declaring
the Form, we call it Difference: But if it be Accidentally attributed to a
Subject, either it is necessary or contingent: If necessary, it establishes
Gender; if contingent, it constitutes Accident.

Q. What is a Gender?

A. It is a word essentially communicated to many things different in Speeie,
or Kind; as Animal, Virtue; Animal is a Gender, because it is essentially
attributed to Men and Beasts; for, if they ask what is a Man, what is a Beast?
I answer, Animal; and Virtue is likewise a Gender, because it is essentially
attributed to all Species of Virtue; for, if they ask, what is Justice, what is
Prudence, what is Temperance? I answer, it is a Virtue.

Q. What Is a Species or Kind?

A. It is a word essentially attributed to many things different in number, as
are all Individual; as for Example, Man is Species, because it is essentially
communicated to Peter, Paul, John, etc. For if they ask, what is Peter, what is
Paul, what is John? I answer, it is a Man.

Note that every Species may be expressed by a word alone, as Spirit, Body, or
by two words, viz. by a Gender and difference joined together, which is called
Definition, as a Substance that is thinking, a Substance which is extended.

Q. What do you mean by different in number?

A. It is a manner of speaking amongst Philosophers, to signify an accidental
difference, which is proper to the Individuals of one and the same Species, or
Kind; as for Example, choose two Men as much like one to another as they can be
in this world, yet you will find in them several Accidents, whereby they shall
differ one from another.

Q. What do you mean by Individual?

A. I mean a singular Nature, that cannot be divided, and has certain
Accidents, which altogether are not found in another; as for Example, Socrates
has that proper, that he is an Athenian, the Son of Sophronisck, a Stoic
Philosopher, having a crooked Nose, and wearing a long Beard.

Q. How many sorts of Individuals are there?

A. Three, viz. Vague or indeterminate, demonstrative, and by Antonomasie, or
Excellency.

Q. What do you mean by a Vague or Indeterminate Individual?

A. I mean a particular thing, which is not determined, and runs amongst
Genders, and Species. I mean a Gender or Species, which have before them a
particular Sign, as some Animal, any Flower, for tho Animal, and Flower be
universal Terms, and Genders, yet when you put before them these words some or
any, they become particular, and are called Vague, or indeterminate Individuals.

Q. What is a demonstrative Individual?

A. It is a Gender, or Species having before them a demonstrative Pronoun. As
for Example, this Body, this Man; for although that word Body be a Gender, and
this word Man a Species; nevertheless when you put before them a demonstrative
Pronoun, they become Particulars, and that is called a demonstrative Individual.

Q. What is an Individual by Antonomasie, or Excellency?

A. It is a word, which, although i^ be universal, yet means a particular
thing: As for Example, the Poet, the Philosopher, the Prince of Eloquence. The
Poet signifies Homer amongst the Grecians, and Virgil amongst the Latins the
Philosopher signifies Aristotle, and the Prince of Eloquence, Cicero.

Q. What is Difference?

A. It is that that constitutes the Sp^cies, and divides the Gender; as the^^
two differences Rational and Irrati^nal; the former constitutes a Man, an^ the
latter a Beast: For when they a^^ what is a Beast? I answer, an irration^^
Animal.

Note, that when you divide Anim^^ in Rational and Irrational, this lat^^^
difference is not (properly speakin^ a difference, but a Negation of t^^
Affirmative and Positive, which ^^ are forced to use, because we know ^^^ the
Positive.

Q. What is a Proper?

A. It is that that receives a recipro^^^ conversion with^^^ its Species, with
expressing its Essence: As for Exam^^^ every man is risible, and every ris^^^^
is a man.

Q. Why do you say, without exp^^^sing its Essence?

A. Because to express the Esse^^^ and Nature of things, that belongs ^^^^ly to
Difference. Mark that oftenti^^^ we use Descriptions instead of Def^^^tions;
that is, we express and de^^^^ things by their Proprieties, because (...) know
not their differences.

Q. How many sorts of Proper are there?

A. Four, the First belongs to one only Species, but not to all its
Individually as to be a Physician, Musician, Philosopher, that belongs to Man
only bu^ not to all Individuals; for all Men and not Physicians, Musicians,
Philosophers, etc.

The Second belongs naturally to a whole Species, but not to it only: A^ for
Example, naturally it belongs to a Man to have two Feet, but that belongs also
to a Bird.

The Third belongs to an only Species, to all its Individuals, but not always;
as to have white Hair, that belongs to Mankind and to all his Individuals, but
not always; that only happens in his old Age.

The Fourth belongs to an only Species, to all its Individuals, and always; as
to be risible, that belongs to Mankind, to all his Individuals, and always;
which is to be understood not of the act of laughing, but of the power; for,
although Man laugh not always, yet he has the faculty of laughing.

Note that this latter Proper is the true Proper, and is called Predicable,
because it takes place amongst the Universals.

Q. What is an Accident?

A. It is that which may be in a Subject, or out of it, without its
destruction; as whiteness, or blackness in a Wall are Accidents, because they
may be in a Wall, or out of it, without its destruction.

Q. How do you divide Accident?

A. Into separable and inseparable: Separable, as fear, coldness, heat in a
Body, whiteness or blackness in a Wall: Inseparable, as the blackness of a
Raven, or the whiteness of a Swan.

Mark that inseparable Accidents are thought to be separable by the Action of
our Understanding, because we may consider the Nature or Essence of a Raven, or
Ethiopian, without considering their Blackness. Objection: The Burning of a
House is an Accident, but the burning of a House cannot be without its
destruction, therefore it is not true that an Accident is that, which may be in
a Subject, and out of it, without its destruction.

A. The burning of a House happens by Accident, I grant it, nevertheless it is
not an Accident, but a Substance; for the burning is nothing but Fire, as it
burns a House or any other matter.

Q. Are Universal real Beings, or only of Reason?

A. Plato, Scotus, and several other Philosophers do believe Universals to be
Essences separated from Individuals, or Singulars: Others say they are real
Essences attributed to many particular Beings, from which they are not
separated but by our Reason. Choose what Opinion is more pleasing to your Fancy,
for I think that Question to be more subtle than necessary.

Q. What is a Cathegory?

A. It is an order of things, as they are set under one of the Ten Sovereign
Genders, called Predicaments by the Latins.

Q. How many Cathegories are there?

A. Ten, viz. Substance, Quantity, Quality, Relation, Action, Passion, when,
where, Situation, and Habit, or manner of being dressed.

Substance, as Angel, Man, Tree. Quantity, as Length, Breadth, Height.
Quality, as Knowledge, Color, Virtue. Relation, as Great, Little. Action, as to
cut, to heat, to love. Passion, as to be cut, Heated, to be Loved. When, as
Yesterday, to Morrow, last Year Where, as at Church, at the Play, in the
School. Situation, as Straight, Crooked, laid down. Habit, as to be Armed, to
be clothed in the French or Italian Mode.

Mark that all things in the World may be related to these Ten sovereign
Genders, which are called Cathegories or Predicaments, because either they are
Substance or Accident: If Substances, they are related to the first Predicament
or Cathegory: If Accidents, they belong either to one or to the other of the
rest.

Note 2. That there is a first and sovereign Gender, which is always a Gender
and never a Species, and that there is an inferior Species, which is always a
Species, and never a Gender, having nothing under it self, but Individuals or
Singulars.

Note 3. That between the Sovereign Gender and low Species, there are
Substances, which are Genders and Species, according as we consider them with a
different respect.

Note 4. That the Gender of the first Cathegory is called Substance, under
which you find Body, Living, Animal, Man, Peter, Paul, John, etc.

Note 5. That there are three Lines in every Cathegorie, one direct or
straight, where things are directly set in order; and the two others are
indirect, oblique, or collateral, whereunto Differences are related, as you may
see by this Example.

A Description of the Cathegory of Substance.
Sovereign Gender.
Substance Corporal as Animals, Plants. Spiritual as Angels, spiritual souls
Body Animated as Horses, Trees. without Soul as Stones, Iron, Lead.
Living Sensible as Animals, Dogs. Insensible as Plants, Herbs.
Animal Reasonable as Man alone. Irrational as Beasts, Dogs, etc.
Low Species Man Individuals Peter, Paul, John.
Note that Privations, as death, blindness, etc. are not to be set in
Cathegories, because they do not signify the Being of things, but only their
Privation. Likewise ficticious and fabulous things, as Chymeras, are to be
removed from them.

Note, 2. That Equivocal Terms, or Homonima, ought to be removed from
Cathegories, because, unless they be distinguished, you cannot assign them any
certain Cathegory.

Note 3. That either things in this world are simple, as Angel, Man, Virtue; or
composed, as a Stone is hard, this Wall is white; and that the simple only are
to be put in Cathegories.

Note 4. That the Syncathegorematick Terms ought to be removed from them,
because of themselves they signify nothing determinately; as all, whosoever,
none, any.

Note 5. That God is not to be put amongst them, because he is Infinite, and
consequently cannot be comprehended amongst Cathegories, which do only
comprehend finite Beings.

Q. What is Substance?

A. It is a Being which subsists by it self, as a Stone, a Horse, a Dog.

Q. How do you divide Substance?

A. In First and Second.

Q. What do you mean by a first Substance?

A. I mean the Individuals or Singular Substances, as Alexander, Caesar, Seneca.

Q. And what do you mean by Second Substances?

A. I mean Universal Substances, as Body, Animal, Man, Dog, Horse.

Q. Which are the Proprieties of Substance?

A. The first and chiefest is not to be in a Subject.

The second is not to be contrary to an other, although it seems to be so
because of its different Qualities; As for Example, Water and Fire are not
contrary one to the other as they are Substances, but only because of their
Qualities.

The Third is not to be more Substance than another; and so we may say that an
Elephant is no more a substance than a Fly, nor an Ant more Substance than a
Mountain, though we may call one bigger than the other.

Nevertheless, (improperly speaking) we may say that the Substances which are
in the lowest place of the Cathegories, are more Substances than the others
which are set higher: So that an Individual or Singular Substance, shall be
called more Substance than a Species; and a Species more Substance than a
Gender, because it receives more Attributions.

The fourth Property of a Substance is to receive contrary Qualities, if not
together, at least with Succession: As for Example, a Man may be now very hot,
and at another time very cold; now in good health, and at another time very
sick, being the same in his Substance; which cannot be found in Accidents
without destroying one another.

Q. What is Quantity?

A. It is an Accident that extends, divides, and measures Corporal Substances.

Q. How do you divide Quantity?

A. Into continued and separated.

Q. What is a continued Quantity?

A. Whose Parts are joined together.

Q. How do you divide the continued Quantity?

A. In that which is permanent, as is a Line, a Superficies and Thickness; and
in Successive, as is Motion and Time.

Q. What is a Line?

A. It is a length without breadth and deepness.

Q. What is a Superficies?

A. It is a breadth with a length without any thickness.

Q. What is Thickness?

A. It is a Quantity that has length, breadth, and deepness.

Note that although these three sorts of Quantity be always one with another, yet
they are formally distinguished, the Definition of one being not the Definition
of the other.

Q. Make me understand by an Example what is a Line, Superficies and Thickness,
or Mathematical Body.

A. A Line is nothing but a Multiplication of Points, and though it cannot be
drawn without length and thickness, yet we must conceive it after the manner of
Mathematicians, that is to say, without any Dimension. As for Example, we must
conceive the distance between the Artick and Antartic^ Pole, or the distance
between London and Bristol, by a Line abstract from al^ length and thickness;
and to conceive well a Superficies, we must conceive a length and breadth
without any thickness: So when we speak of the Superficies of an Acre, we mean
the length and breadth abstracted from the Earth; that which is well
represented by the shadow of a House, or any other Body. And whosoever will
well conceive a Thickness or Mathematical Body, he ought to conceive a Length,
Breadth, and Depth abstracted from its Matter; which is well represenred by a
Workman building a House, or making a Table, or any other thing whatsoever;
for, before he builds a House, he ought to conceive of what length, breadth,
height and deepness he will have it to be; and these Dimensions so conceived
without the Matter, are called a Mathematical Body.

Q. What is a successive Quantity?

A. It is that Quantity whose parts are not permanent; as Time and Place.

Q. What is Time?

A. It is the measure of Moveme^^ and Repose.

Q. How do you divide Time?

A. In past, present, and to come The Time past is no more, the Time t^ come is
not yet, and the present is the only Instant which we do enjoy, an^ it runs and
flies so quickly, that, ^^ soon as we conceive it, then it is quit^ gone, and
is no more. In properl^ speaking, Time is nothing but the fir^^ Movable, that
runs and draws all the Celestial Circles or Spheres, as a Whe^^ of a Watch does
all the others.

Note that the Sun turning with a^^ the other Celestial Spheres, gives lig^^ to
the Earth in Four and twenty hour which make a Civil day; for when is day in
our Hemisphere, then it night in the other; and on the contr^ry, when it is day
in the other Hem^sphere, then it is night in ours.

Note 2. That of Days are Wee^^ composed; of Weeks Months; ^^ Months years, and
the Four Season^ and of Years Ages: So that the things, Moment, Minute, Hour,
Da^ Week, Month, Seasons, Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter, Years, Ages are
called Time, whereby we measure the Duration and Course of Mortal and
Corruptible things.

Q. What do you mean by Olympiades and Lustres?

A. The Olympiades of the Grecian were Composed of five years, and the Lustres
of the Latins of an equal number.

Q. When did the Olympiades and Lustres begin?

A. The Lustres began in the time o^ Servius Tulius King of the Roman^ who gave
an Order that the List of the People should be made every five years And the
Olympiades began in the tw^ and thirtieth Age, reckoning by the^^ Olympiades.

Q. What is Place?

A. It is that Superficies, which touches, and incompasses a Body: A^ for
Example, the inward Superficies ^^ a Tun, that touches and incompasse^ Wine, is
the Place of Wine.

Q. What is a separated Quantity?

A. It is a Quantity, whose parts ar^ not joined together, as a Number an^
Speech.

Q. How do you divide the Number

In Numbering number, as one, two three, four, etc. and in Number numbered, as
two Men, a hundred Horses a thousand Guineas.

Note that here we only speak of the Numbering number, which is Composed of
several Units.

Q. Is Unit a Number?

A. No, but only the beginning of a Number; and because Units, which do compose
a number, are not joined together, but only drawn one near unto another; from
thence it follows that Number is not a joined Quantity, but a separated one. So
is Speech, which is nothing but a Conjunction of Noun, Verb, Adverb,
Preposition, and other Parts of Speech.

Q. Which are the Properties of a Permanent Quantity?

A. Three, the first to be not contrary to another: As for Example, a Line is
not contrary to a Superficies, nor a Superficies to a Body.

The Second is to be no more nor less quantity than another; which is to be
understood of the Essence of Quantity; for as to its Dimensions one may be
greater than another; as a Line may be longer than another.

The third Property of Quantity is to make things equal or unequal, as to
render two Bodies equally or unequally long, broad, and thick.

Objection. Much and Little are contrary one to another, although they
presuppose a Quantity, therefore a Quantity may be contrary to another.

A. Much and Little are contrary, as they are relative, I do grant it, but not
as they are Quantity. So it is of the high and low Place.

Q. What is Quality?

A. It is an Accident that qualifies its Subject, as from Virtue a Man is said
to be vertuons; from Vice vicious; and white from whiteness.

Q. How many sorts of Qualities are there?

A. There are four, which have every one two Branches, viz. Custom and
Disposition; natural Faculty and Feebleness; Passion and passive Quality; Form
and Figure.

Q. What difference do you put between Custom and Disposition?

A. Disposition does differ from Custom, as a Child differs from a Man; for as
a Child grows a Man if he lives a long while, so Disposition is turned into
Custom, if it be very often repeated. Moreover Custom is got by several
precedent Actions, and Disposition by one only: So that when we say a Man is
drunk, we only mean a Disposition to drunkenness; for that may be said of him,
although he has been drunk but once in his Life. But when we say a Man is a
Drunkard, then we mean a Custom, for that cannot be said of a Man, except he
has been drunk several times. This kind of Quality does not only belong to
Men, but also to Beasts.

Q. What difference do you put between natural Faculty and Weakness?

A. Such as, for Example, is found in the Sight of a young and old Man; the
Sight in a young Man is called natural Faculty, and Weakness in an old Man.

Q. What difference do you put between passive Quality and Passion?

A. Passive Quality lasts along while, and Passion does not; as for Example, a
pale Color, which is got either by a long sickness, or by a natural
Indisposition, is called passive Quality; and a paleness, which comes from a
sudden fear, is named Passion: So that to blush and wax pale do signify a
Passion; but to be red and pale denote a passive Quality.

Q. Why do you call them Passive Qualities and Passions?

A. It Is because they bring Passion in their Subject, I mean in our Senses; as
Colors do in the sight; a sound in the Hearing; hot and cold in the Feeling;
sweetness and bitterness in the Taste; pleasant and stinking Odours in the Sense
of smelling.

Q. What difference do you put between Form and Figure?

R. Form is understood of sensible things, and Figure of insensible. By Form we
mean Beauty, which consists in the Disposition, symetry, and fair proportion of
Animals; and by Figure, we mean a Triangle, a round, square, and other Figures.

Q. Which are the Properties of Quality?

A. The first, to be contrary one to another, as Virtue to Vice; black to
white: Nevertheless that is not understood of all Qualities, for Red is not
contrary to Green, nor Blew to Yellow.

The second is to receive more or less; for we may say one Man is more or less
virtuous than another; yet that cannot be said of all Qualities, for we cannot
call one Justice more Justice than another.

The third belongs to every Quality, viz. to render things like or unlike; as
when two Men are equally virtuous, then they are alike; and when one is
Virtuous, and the other not, then they are unlike.

Q. What do you mean by Relative Terms?

A. They are Beings, which have a reciprocal Relation one to another; as a
Master to a Servant; and a Servant to a Master; a Father to a Son; and a Son to
a Father: Double to Simple, and reciprocally simple to double.

Q. Which are the Properties of Relation?

A. Four, the first is to receive more or less; as to be more or less alike;
more or less Virtuous or Friendly. Nevertheless that does not belong to all
Relative Beings; for that which is Simple, in respect of Double, cannot receive
more or less; likewise things that are equal, cannot be more or less equal
without losing their equality.

The second is to be mutually one in another, I mean to take their Being
together; thus we say that a Father cannot be without a Son, nor Preceptor
without a Disciple, which is to be understood in respect of Relation; otherwise
one may be before the other, as a Father is certainly before his Son* but he is
not Father before he has a Son.

The third is to be known one by another; as if I know Peter to be a Father, I
must know him to have a Son.

The fourth is to be reciprocal; as Master has relation to Servant, and
reciprocally Servant to Master.

And to understand well these Relative Terms, we must know that there is a
Foundation, whereupon the Essence of Relative Beings is propped and leaned;
that is, a Foundation which is the Cause of their Relation: As for example,
when two things are said equal, it is because of their Quantity, viz. length,
breadth and thickness; and if they be said to be like, it is in respect of
their Quality, because both are either good or bad, comely or uncomely.

Q. What is Action, and what is Passion?

A. Action is the Agents effect in its Subject, and Passion is the reception of
the Agents effect. So we say that Fire warming Water, works an effect in Water;
and that Water suffers the action of Fire, in receiving its heat. Likewise to
cut, is an Action; and to be cut, is a Passion.

Q. How do you divide Action?

A. In Natural and Artificial; in remaining and transitory. Natural, as Vision;
Artificial, as Edification; Remaining as Raciocination, and Transitory, as
writing.

Q. How many are the Properties of Action and Passion?

A. Two, The first is to receive contrariety, as to heat, and to cool; to be
hot, and to be cold.

The second is to receive more or less; because we may warm or cool more or
less; rejoice and grieve more or less; and love and to be loved more or less.

Q. What signifies the Cathegory When?

A. It signifies the time of a thing's existence; as when dyed King Charles the
Second? the Sixth of February.

Q. What means the Cathegory Where?

A. It denotes the Place; as he dyed at White Hall in his bed.

Q. What signifies Situation?

A. It declares the Posture; as lying down in his bed, lifting up his Eyes unto
Heaven.

Q. How do you divide Posture?

A. In natural, as it is natural to Men to have their face upright to Heaven,
and to Beasts to have it inclined toward the Ground. In artificial, as it is
seen in the Stage Players demeanors and postures; and in violent, as when they
bind and enchain a Prisoner against his own will.

Q. What means the Cathegory Habit?

A. It shows the ornament, or the manner of being clothed; as to be armed, to
be dressed after the French, English, or Turkish Fashion.

Q. How many sorts of oppositions are there?

A. Four, Relative, Contrary, Privative, and Contradictory.

Q. What is a relative opposition?

A. It is that which is found between two relative Terms, as between Father and
Son; Master and Servant.

Q. What is a contrary opposition?

A. It is that which is found between two contrary Terms, as between heat and
coldness; between blackness and whiteness; between vice and virtue.

Note that this opposition is always between two real Terms, which mutually
expel one another.

Q. What is a privative opposition?

A. It is that which is between two words, one of them being real, and the
other privative; as between sight and Blindness; Hearing and Deafness; Light
and Darkness.

Note that in a privative opposition, one Term or the other must of necessity
be found in its natural Subject; as Man of necessity must see or be blind; he
must hear or be deaf.

Q. Why do you say in its natural Subject?

A. Because it should be ridiculous to say that a Stone is blind or deaf, for
it cannot be deprived of that which it never had, nor could have.

Note again, That one of the privative words is not at all times in its
Subject, but only in the time appointed by nature; as it should be very absurd
to call little Puppies blind before the ninth day, being the time appointed to
them by nature to begin to see.

Q. What is a contradictory opposition?

A. It is an Affirmation, and Negation of one and the same thing, in one and
the same place, in one and the same time, and in one and the same Subject; as
to say that Socrates was a Man, and was not a Man; that it is day and not day
in one and the same place, at one and the same time.

Q. In how many ways may one thing be called first, or preceding another?

A. In six, First in respect of Origin and Nature; as a Father is before his
Son, and as the Sun precedes its Light.

Secondly in respect of Time; as youth is before old age.

Thirdly in respect of Number; as one goes before two.

Fourthly in respect of Order: as the Foundation of a House is before the top;
and the Introduction of a Speech is before Narration; and the Confirmation
before the Conclusion.

Fifthly in respect of Dignity; as a King precedes his Subjects.

Sixthly in respect of Place; as a Footboy is before his Master, because he
carries a Link before him.

Q. In how many ways do ye use this word movement or change?

A. In four; If it be made in a Substance, it is called Generation or
Corruption: If it be done in a Quantity, it is called Increasing or Diminution:
If it be made in Quality, it is named Alteration; and if it be done in Place,
it is called Transport.

Q. What is Generation, and what is Corruption?

A. Generation is a Movement from a no Being into a Being; on the contrary,
Corruption is a Movement from a Being into a no Being: As for Example, the Egg
of a Hen is engendered of the Seed of a Cock, and therefore is made what it was
not, passing from a no Being into a Being, and that is called Generation; and
after that the Chicken is engendered from the Egg then the Corruption of the Egg
follows, and so the Egg passes from a Being into a no Being; and that is called
Corruption.

Q. What is Increasing, and what is Diminution?

A. Increasing is a Movement from a less Quantity into a bigger; on the
contrary, Diminution is a Movemen^ from a greater Quantity into a less; as you
may see in natural Bodies tending to their perfection, when they do increase;
and then tending to their end and corruption when they are diminishing.

Q. What is Alteration?

A. It is a Movement, which is done in a Quality, as when a Body from cold
becomes hot; or when a Man from ignorant becomes learned; or from vicious
virtuous.

Q. What is Transport?

A. It is a Movement from one place to another; as when a Body passes from
above Stairs down Stairs, or from below Stairs up Stairs.

Of the Second Part of LOGIC, OR Of the Second Action of our Spirit which is
called Enonciation or Proposition. PART II.
Q. WHat is Enonciation?

A. It is a Proposition, which affirms or denies one thing to belong to
another; as this Lady is handsome; that man has no wit.

Q. How many things are there to be considered in an Enonciation?

A. Two, Its Principles and Species.

Q. How many are the Principles of Enonciation?

A. Three, viz. Its Subject, Predicate, and the Band that joins one to the
other; as God is Just; these two words God and Just are Subject and Predicate,
which are tied by this Verb est.

Note that the Verb serves sometimes both for a Band and Predicate; as in this
Proposition, Caesar triumphs, where the Verb Triumphs is in the place of these
two words, is triumphing.

Q. What is Voice?

A. It is a sound formed by certain Organs, as by the Mouth, Palate, Teeth and
Lungs.

Q. How do you divide it?

A. Into articulate, which may be set down by writing; and in unarticulate,
which cannot be set down by writing, although sometimes it signifies the
Passions of the Soul.

Q. What is a Noun?

A. It is a word of man's Invention, signifying without any difference of time,
and whose parts being separated signify nothing; as this word Angel expresses
a Spiritual Nature, without speaking of a time past, present, or future; and
these Parts An-gel signify nothing.

Note that a Noun is very often imposed to Beings by the Will of Men, and not
according to their Nature; as you may clearly see, because Men call one and the
same thing with several Names: As for Example, God is called Adonai by the
Hebrews, (...) by the Greeks, Deus by the Latins, God by the English, Dieu by
the French, Alla by the Arabians and Turks.

Q. How do you divide a Noun?

A. Into Substantive and Adjective; a Noun Substantive expresses the nature of
a thing, as the Earth, the Sun; and a Noun Adjective expresses the manner,
marking at the same time its Subject, as Good, Just.

Note that the Pronoun takes the place of a Noun: I do not speak here of its
different sorts, because I have declared them in my Grammar.

Q. What is a Verb?

A. It is a word signifying something with difference of time: As for Example,
Nicholas writes: writes does not only show the Action of writing, but also the
present time.

Note, that of a Noun and Verb is made an Enonciation or a Proposition, whose
parts signify something, as God is Just; God and Just do signify something
though they be separated.

Q. Which are the Species of Enonciation, or how do you divide it?

A. Into Singular, Particular, Universal, Affirmative, Negative, Absolute,
Conditional, Necessary, Contingent, Probable, Possible, Impossible, Captious,
Simple, Composed, Definite, Indefinite, Modale, Copulative, Disjunctive,
Relative, Discretive, Exclusive, Exemptive, Comparative, etc.

Q. What is a Singular Enonciation?

A. It is a Proposition having a singular Subject, as Peter is a Man; Cicero is
eloquent.

Q. What is a Particular Enonciation?

A. It is a Proposition, which has an Universal Subject, restrained by a
Particular Sign, as some Men are brutish.

Q. What is an universal Enonciation?

A. It is a Proposition, which has not only an universal Subject, but also a an
universal Sign before it; as all Animals are sensible.

Q. What is an Affirmative Enonciation?

A. It is a Proposition, which attributes one thing to another, as God is Good.

Q. What is a Negative Enonciation?

A. It is a Proposition, which removes one thing from another; as God is not
Cruel.

Q. What is an absolute Enonciation?

A. It is a Proposition having an Absolute Term, that is to say, having no
Relation to another, as Peter is learned; Man is rational.

Q. What is a Conditional Enonciation?

A. It is a Proposition supposing a Condition, as if the Sun shines, it is day.

Q. What is a necessary Enonciation?

A. It is a Proposition which is always true, the other being supposed; as this
Lady is handsome and good, therefore she is lovely.

Q. What is a Contingent, Probable, and Possible Enonciation?

A. It is a Proposition, which does not always follow to be true, although the
other be supposed to be so; as Peter is a Man, therefore he is Valiant and
Generous.

Q. What is an impossible Enonciation?

A. It is a Proposition which is always false, although the other is supposed
to be true; as Peter is a Man, therefore he is insensible.

Q. What is a Captious Enonciation?

A. It is a Proposition that deceives, though it appears to be true, as

What you have bought, you did eat,

You bought raw meat,

Therefore you did eat raw meat.

Q. What is a Simple Enonciation?

A. It is a Proposition only composed of one Subject and one Attribute, as
Peter is honest.

Q. What is a Composed Enonciation?

A. It is a Proposition, having something joined to its Subject or Attribute,
and sometimes to both, as a Man that is honest, is esteemed in the World.

Q. What is a Definite or Determinated Enonciation?

A. It is a Proposition that determinates and specifies, as John is Learned;
this Man is Witty; Alexander was a great Captain.

Q. What is an Infinite, or Indeterminated Enonciation?

A. It is a Proposition which does not determinate, or specify, as
Philosophers are content, Man is just.

Q. What is a Modal Enonciation?

A. It is a Proposition which has one of these words, possible, happening,
impossible, necessary; as it is possible to you to learn French; it happens
unto Men to be rich; it is impossible that a Just Man be damned; It is
necessary tha^ Wicked Men be punished.

There are other Propositions which are Copulative, as Science and Riche^ alone
cannot make a Man happy. Disjonctive, as either a Woman loves or she hates.
Relative, as such is the Life of a Man, such is his Death. Discretive, as
Fortune may take away our Goods but not our heart. Exclusive, as God alone
ought to be loved above all things. Exceptive, as unless you be Learned you
shall not be praised. Comparative, as your Cousin is handsomer than my Sister;
and some others, which I omit here, because they are not of great consequence.

Note that every Proposition is either Affirmative universal, as every honest
Man is esteemed; or universal Negative, as no vicious Man is praised; or
Particular Affirmative, as some Philosophers are contented; or particular
Negative, as some Men are not civil.

Note 2. That there is an Universality without exception, as every Man is
living; all Men dying in the Grace of God are saved; and an Universality with
Exception, as all Men look for their Interest; all young Men are in constant,
that is to be understood commonly.

Note 3. That there are Propositions which are not Universal, but because they
are to be understood de generibus singulorum, and non de singulis generum, that
is of all the Species of a Gender, and not of all the Individuals of those
Species, as that all Animals were saved in the Ark of Noah, because some of all
kinds or species were saved.

Note 4. That there are universal Propositions, although they have not before
them these universal Signs, all, every, no, none; as Man is Reasonable; Virtue
is to be loved: Likewise there are particular Propositions, which have not
before them these particular Signs, certain, some, any; as there are Learned
Men in England; they tell good News; English Men are generous.

Note 5. That when Enonciation is a part of a Syllogism, it is called
Proposition; when it is taken for a doubtful Proposition in a Discourse,
Dispute, or Controversy, then it is called Theme, Thesis, Question, Subject,
Argument: when it may be defended probably, not only by Affirmation, but also
by Negation, it is called Problema; when it is concluded by a Syllogism, or
other Argumentation; it is called Conclusion, Illation, Consequence: And when
it receives different doubtful Interpretations because of its Equivocation, and
fallacy, it is called Sophism, Surprise, Fallacy: And when it is a Proposition
received by all Men, it is called an Axiom, Principle, Maxim.

Q. What is Division?

A. It is that that separates the parts from its whole.

Q. Into how many parts may one thing be divided?

A. Into Five, 1. When we divide a Subject into its integrant Parts, as a Body
into the Head, Arms, Legs, etc. 2. When we divide a natural whole into its
Essential Parts, as a Body into Matter and Form. A Man into Body and Soul. 3.
When we divide a Species into its gender and difference, as a Man into animal
and rational; or a Gender into its Species, as every Substance is a Body or
Spirit; every Animal is a Man or Beast; or a Gender into its differences, as
every Animal is reasonable or deprived of Reason: every Proposition ^^ true or
false. 4. When we divide a common Subject by the opposed Acciden^^ which it is
capable of, as every Star ^^ shining by it self, or by Reflection 5. When we
divide an Accident into it^ several Subjects, as when we divid^ Goods into
Goods of Spirit, of Body, o^ Nature, of Fortune.

Note that a Division, to be good, ought to be whole; that is to say, that the
Members of a Division ought to contain the whole extension of the Thing
divided, as even and odd do contain the whole extension of this Term Number,
every Number being either even or odd. Likewise Man and Beast do contain the
whole extension of this Term Animal; because every Animal is either Man or
Beast.

Q. What is Definition?

A. It is an Expression of the Nature of Beings?

How many sorts are there?

A.Two, one perfect, which is composed of a Gender and Difference, as Man is a
rational Animal; and another imperfect, which is called Description, because it
expresses things by their Properties, Effects and Causes* as Man is a tractable
Animal, capable of Discipline, born for high and excellent things, etc.

Note that three things are necessary for a good Definition, it must be
universal, proper, and clear. So much for the Second Part of Logic.

Of the Third Part of LOGIC, OR Of the Third Action of our Spirit which is
Discourse or Argumentation. PART III.
Q. WHat is Discourse or Argumentation?

A. It is a Speech, where in we conclude something from one two, or more
Propositions, disposed according to the Rules and Precepts o^ Logic.

Q. Why do you say from one, two, ^^ more Propositions?

A. It is because there are Argumentations concluding with a single
Proposition, as an Enthymema; others concluding with two, as a Syllogism; and
others with several, as an Example and Sorites.

Q. How do you divide Argumentation?

A. Into Perfect, as the Syllogism; an^ Imperfect, as the Enthymema, Example,
and Sorites.

Q. What is a Syllogism?

A. It is an Argumentation, wherei^ two Propositions being well disposed, from
thence necessarily follows some other thing, than that which was proposed; as

All men ought to be Virtuous,

My Brother is a Man,

Therefore my Brother ought to be Virtuous.

Q. How many Parts has it?

A. Two, viz. The Antecedent and Conclusion.

Q. What is an Antecedent?

A. They are two Propositions so disposed one with another, and with the
Proposition called Consequence, that it is impossible to grant them to be true,
without consenting in the same time to the truth of the Conclusion; as

Every just Man is loved of God,

My Cousin is a just Man,

Therefore my Cousin is loved of God.

Q. How do you call the first Propotion?

A. It is called Major, because it is more universal than the Second, the
Medium being joined to the great Term or Predicate.

Q. And how do you call the Second?

A. It is called Minor, because it is less extended than the other, the Medium
being joined to the small Term or Subject. These two Propositions are called
Premises, because they are set before the Conclusion.

Q. How many Terms are there in a Syllogism?

A. Three, viz. A small Term, a great Term, and a Medium.

Note, That the small and great Terms are always in the Consequence; and that
the Medium is never found but in the major and minor Proposition.

Note again, That the small Term is called Subject, and the great Predicate.

Q. Why do you call the third Term Medium?

A. It is because it ties and joins the two others in the Conclusion; and to
speak more plain, the Medium is nothing but the Reason, whereby the Attribute
is concluded from the Subject, or the Great Term from the Small: As for
Example, when I will prove and conclude this Lady is amiable, I look for the
Medium, or the Reason why Amiable is attributed to this Lady, and I find that
it is because she is handsome; from whence I form this Argument;

Every Lady which is handsome, is amiable,

This Lady is handsome,

Therefore this Lady is amiable.

Where you see that there are but three Terms, Lady, Amiable, Handsome.

Note that the Terms are often Composed, as I have already declared.

Q. Upon what do you ground this way of proving.

A. Upon these two Maxims. First, all that is said of a Subject universally
taken, is also said of all that is contained under it; as for Example, Animal
is affirmed of all Men, therefore it is also affirmed of Peter and Paul, etc.

Secondly, All that is denied of a Subject universally taken, is also denied of
all that is contained under it; as the Omnipotency is denied from all
Creatures, therefore it is denied also from Angels, Men, Peter, John, and Paul,
etc.

Of the Modes of the Figures.
Q. What do you mean by Figure?

A. I mean the Disposition of the Medium, which, because it cannot be disposed
but in three ways, consequently cannot make but three Figures.

Q. How many Modes are there in the first Figure?

A. Four perfect, declared by these words,

Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferio.

And five imperfect, expressed by these other words,

Baralipton, Celantes, Dabitis, Fapesmo, Frisesomorum.

Q. What do you mean by these words Barbara, Celarent, etc.

A. The first Syllable of each word denotes the Major Proposition; the second
Syllable denotes the Minor, and the third the Consequence. Moreover A.
signifies an universal affirmative Proposition; E signifies an universal
Negative; I a particular Affirmative; and O a particular Negative, as it is
declared by these two Verses.

Asserit a, negat e, verum generaliter ambae,
Asserit i, negat o, sed particulariter ambo.
So that when you make a Syllogism, whose Major, Minor, and Conclusion are
universal affirmative, you must say that it is made in Barbara, which is a
perfect Mode of the first Figure.

Note that the fourth Syllable in this word Baralipton, and the fourth and
fifth in Frisesomorum, is only for the perfection of the Verse.

Q. How many Modes are there in the Second Figure?

A. Four, declared by these words

Cesare, Camestres, Festino, Baroco.

Q. And how many are there in the third Figure?

A. Six, expressed by these words,

Darapti, Felapton, Disamis, Datisi, Bocardo, Ferison.

Q. How do you distinguish the first Figure from the second and the third?

A. By the different Disposition of the Medium with the small and great Terms,
which are called Subject and Predicate, and sometimes named the two Extremes.

Q. How do you place the Medium in the first Figure?

A. It is Subject in the Major Proposition, and Predicate in the Minor; as

Every Man is a Sinner,

Peter is a Man,

Therefore Peter is a Sinner.

Where you see that Man, which is the Medium to prove that Peter is a Sinner,
is Subject in the Major Proposition, and Attribute or Predicate in the Minor.

Q. How do you dispose the Medium in the second Figure?

A. It is Predicate to the other Terms; as

None is loved, that is feared,

Every Tyrant is feared,

Therefore no Tyrant is loved.

Wherein you see that Feared, which is the Medium, is Predicate in the Major
and Minor Proposition.

Q. How do you place the Medium in the third Figure?

A. It is Subject in the Premises, that is in the Major and Minor Proposition;
as

Every Angel is all Spirit,

Every Angel is a Creature,

Therefore some Creature is all Spirit. wherein you see that to prove this
Proposition, some Creature is all Spirit, Angel is Subject in the Major and
Minor.

Q. Give Examples of every Mode in every Figure.

Examples upon the first Figure.
Barbara.
Every Habitude is a Quality, Every Virtue is an Habitude, Therefore every
virtue is a Quality.
Celarent.
No passionate man is content, Every covetous man is passionate, Therefore no
covetous man is content.
Darii. Ferio.
Every Slave is miserable, Diogenes is a Slave, Therefore Diogenes is
miserable. No man stealing is just, Judas steals, Therefore Judas is not just.
Examples upon the second Figure.
Cesare.
None is loved whilst he is feared, Every Tyrant is feared, Therefore no Tyrant
is loved.
Camestres.
All that is profitable is grounded upon Virtue, No dishonest thing is grounded
upon Virtue, Therefore no dishonest thing is profitable.
Festino.
No lawful thing is vicious, Some pleasure is vicious; Therefore some pleasure
is not lawful.
Baroco
All good Historians speak truth, B. does not speak Truth, Therefore B. is no
good Historian.
Examples upon the third Figure.
Darapti.
Every Virtue is to be praised, Every Virtue is an Habitude, Therefore some
Habitude is to be praised.
Felapton.
No vice ought to be praised, Every vice is an Habitude, Therefore some
Habitude ought not to be praised.
Disamis.
Some ignorant Men are admitted to be Judges, Every ignorant man is unjust,
Therefore some unjust men are admitted to be Judges.
Datisi
Every Salamander lives in fire. Some Salamander is Animal, Therefore some
Animal lives in Fire.
Bocardo.
Some Desire is not unruly, Every Desire is an act of will, Therefore some act
of will is not unruly.
Ferison.
No Riches are rejected, Some Riches are pernicious, Therefore some pernicious
things are not rejected.
Examples upon the five imperfect Modes of the first Figure.
Baralipton.
Whosoever is without vice, is free. Every Philosopher is without vice,
Therefore some Man free is a Philosopher.
Celanres
No Slave to his Pleasures is free, Every Covetous man is Slave to his
Pleasures, Therefore no Man free is covetous.
Debitis
Whosoever is Courageous disdains Fortune, Some Philosopher is Courageous,
Therefore some disdaining Fortune is a Philosopher.
Fapesmo.
Every Element is a simple Body, No Sky is Element, Therefore some simple Body
is not a Sky.
Frisesomorum.
Some Thief receives pardon from his King, No Man that receives pardon from his
King shall be punished, Therefore some Thief shall not be punished.
Q. Why do you call these Five Modes imperfect?

A. Because they do not conclude so clearly as the others; but they may be made
perfect in reducing them to the four perfect Modes of the first Figure.

Note that Fapesmo and Frisesomorum ought to be reduced in Ferio.

Q. How many Rules are there to be observed in these three Figures?

A. Seven. First, Every Syllogism ought to have but three Terms; from whence it
appears that this Argument, wherein two Mediums are found, is not good.

All Number is an Accident,

Six Men are a Number,

Therefore six Men are an Accident.

This double Medium is in this word Number, which is taken in the Major for a
numbering Number, and in the Minor for Number numbered.

2. The Medium is never to be found in the Conclusion.

3. The Conclusion follows always the worst of the Propositions; that is, if
one of the Propositions of a Syllogism is Negative, the Conclusion ought to be
so also. Likewise if one of the Propositions is Particular, its Conclusion
ought to be so also.

4. The Conclusion ought to have no more than the Antecedent. By this Rule it
appears that this Argument is not good.

What you have bought you did eat it,

You bought some meat,

Therefore you did eat raw meat.

5. Of two Negative Propositions, we can conclude nothing true; as

No Tree is Animal,

No Man is Tree,

Therefore no Man is Animal.

6. Of two particular Propositions we cannot also conclude any thing true, as

Some Angel is good,

Lucifer is an Angel.

Therefore Lucifer is good.

7. The Conclusion of the third Figure is always particular; so that this
Argument is not good.

Every Virtue is good,

Every Virtue is an Habitude,

Therefore every Habitude is good.

Of Imperfect Argumentations.
Q. Why do you call them imperfect?

A. I do call them imperfect, not as to the matter, which may be as true as the
matter of a Syllogism, but as to the form only, because the form of a
Syllogism, being more exact, and better ordered, persuades much better.

Q. What is an Enthymema?

A. It is an imperfect Syllogism, wbich may be made perfect, in adding to it a
Proposition; as

Peter is a Thief,

Then he ought to be punished.

If you add unto it the Proposition, which is understood, This Enthymema shall
be a Syllogism; as

All Thiefs ought to be punished,

Peter is a Thief,

Therefore Peter is to be punished.

Q. What is a Delemma?

A. It is an Argumentation, that has two parts, one of which we are forced to
consent to; in this manner, Carneades proved to Diogenes that he did not owe
him twenty Crowns, which he had promised him, in case that he could render him
capable to prove all that he would: If I prove well that I owe you nothing,
what reason have you to ask me Twenty Crowns; and if I do not prove it, being
not able to persuade, I owe you nothing.

Q. What is an Induction?

A. It is an Inference, Collection, or Conclusion of an universal thing, by the
Enumeration of its Singulars; as John is mortal, Peter is mortal, Alexander is
mortal, and so all other Individuals, therefore all Men are mortal.

Every man is sensible, a Horse, a Bird, a Serpent, a Fish, etc. are sensible,
therefore every Animal is sensible.

Q. What is an Example?

A. It is a Narration of something either done, or fictitious, fit to prove our
Proposition; as

Every Civil War is pernicious,

Italian War is Civil,

Therefore Italian War is pernicious.

If any one denies the Major of this Syllogism; it must be proved by an Example
of the Grecians, Romans, French, Germans, and other Nations, amongst whom Civil
Wars have been pernicious.

Give an Example of a fictitious thing.

The Woolves being not able to surprise a flock of Sheep, because they were
guarded by several Dogs, made peace with them upon this Condition, that they
should send back their Dogs; the Sheep having consented to their Proposition,
and having sent back their Dogs, presently became the prey of the Woolves. So
it is with the Test of the Church of England: The Church of Rome would make
peace with them, upon that Condition that they would take away their Test,
knowing that as soon as it should be taken away, they would presently become
the Prey of the Church of Rome.

Q. What is a Sorites?

A. It is a heap of Propositions without any medium, which oftentimes having no
connection one with another, have a false Conclusion; as

Continual Fever forces a Man to keep his Bed,

Bed is a place of rest,

Rest is profitable to a Man,

Therefore a continual Fever is profitable to man.

Salt Meat makes one drink often,

To drink osten quenches our thirst,

Therefore salt meat quenches our Thirst.

Q. What is Wisdom?

A. It is a knowledge of Divine and human things; and, in the ordinary way of
speaking, he is wise that is pious and learned.

Q. What is Intelligence?

A. Intelligence, in respect of God, is that simple Notion, which without any
discourse, knows all things; and in respect of Man, it is a knowledge of
certain Propositions, which we perfectly conceive, and without pain; so that it
may be called Demonstration.

Q. What is Demonstration?

A. It is a Proposition so clear and so evident, that it needs not to be
proved; as, The whole is bigger than a part of it; It is impossible to be and
not be: The thing that is not Existent cannot be the cause of it self.

Q. What is Science?

A. It is a clear and certain knowledge of a thing by its proper Cause* as to
know that it is day because the Sun shines; that the Moon is Eclipsed, because
the Earth is found between the Sun and the Moon.

Q. What is Faith?

A. It is a firm persuasion of a dark Truth, grounded upon the Testimony of
some body; as when I believe that there is a City called Rome, because one told
me so; or I believe that there is a Hell, because it is revealed in the holy
Scripture.

Q. What is an Art?

A. Rules directing the Agent in the Production of a sensible and lasting work,
as the Art of Painting in making Pictures. Art is also that which directs an
Action, whereof nothing sensible is remaining, as Singing and Ratiocination; in
this Sense Logic is an Art; it may be called also a Science, because of its
demonstration.

Q. What is the end of an Art?

A. To perfect Nature, or to imitate it.

Q. What is Opinion?

A. It is a doubtful knowledge, grounded upon a probable reason; as to know that
there is a new World in the Moon.

Q. How many sorts of Probables are there?

A. Three: First, when a thing is so oredible, that no body doubts of it, as
that Fathers and Mothers love their Children.

Secondly, when one thing is more credible than another, as that a young
healthy Man shall live longer than an old Man.

The third Probable is of all things which are not repugnant, that is, of all
possible things, on which we make a judgment by some Conjecture, as because the
Clouds are big and dark, we conclude it will rain.

Q. What is Medium?

A. The Medium which we use to prove any Proposition, is nothing, as I have
already said, but the Reason why the Predicate is affirmed or denied of the
Subject; as you may see in this Proposition, My Sister is lovely; Sister is the
Subject, and Lovely the Predicate: Now if you will look for the Medium or
Reason why she is lovely, you will find that it is because she is very handsome;
from whence you may argue thus.

Whosoever is very handsome is lovely,

My Sister is very handsome,

Therefore my Sister is lovely.

Q. How many Springs are there from whence one may draw the Medium?

A. There are Sixteen, and here is an Example of every one.

1. By Definition, a definitione.

Every reasonable Animal is capable of Discipline,

Man is a reasonable Animal,

Therefore Man is capable of Discipline.

Note that what thing soever a Definition belongs to, the thing defined belongs
to it also, and vice versa.

2. By the Enumeration of Parts.

Virtue is divided in Prudence, Justice, Force, and Temperance.

Subtilty is none of those Parts,

Therefore subtilty is not Virtue.

Note, that the whole being supposed, all its parts are supposed also; and on
the contrary, if all the parts of the whole, or one only is taken away, then
the whole ceases to be whole.

Note also, that besides the essential Parts of a whole, there are others
called Integrals, without which the whole cannot subsist; as

A human Body cannot subsist without a head, nor a House without a Foundation;
and others that are but Parcels, or small Pieces, without which the whole may
subsist, though less perfect; as, an Ear, or a Finger belongs to a human Body;
and a little Girder to a House.

3. By Etymology; ab Etymologia.

He that saves Men is a Savior, Jesus Christ saves Men, Therefore Jesus Christ
is a Savior.
Note that there are words which are Primitive, that is to say, not derived
from another word, as Table, Bird, Horse, etc. and others called derivative,
because they are derived from other words; as Doctor, which is derived from
Doctrine; and a Fowler from Fowl, etc.

4. A Conjunctis.

It is a Place or a Spring from whence we draw a Consequence from a concret
word to an abstract one, and vice versa; as

Whosoever loves Justice is Just,

My Brother loves Justice,

Therefore my Brother is Just.

5. By Gender; a Genere.

All the glory of virtue is in Action,

Force is a Virtue,

Therefore all its glory is in Action.

6. By Species, a Specie.

He that possesses Temperance possesses a Virtue,

My Cousin possesses Temperance,

Therefore my Cousin possesses a Virtue.

Note, that an Argument from a Gender to a Species is good by Negation; as

He is not an Animal,

Therefore he is not a Man.

And that an Argument from a Species to a Gender is good by Affirmation; as

He is a Man,

Therefore he is an Animal.

My Brother is just,

Therefore he is virtuous.

7. By Likeness; a Similitudine.

As an Eye covered with a thin Skin cannot see the Beauties of the Body; so a
Spirit buried under the Flesh cannot discern the Excellencies of Virtue.

8. From Dislike, a Dssimili.

Epicuriens do place the whole Felicity of Man in the Pleasures of our Body;
therefore Christians ought to place it in the Pleasures of their Soul.

Note, that these two places are more proper to be used by Poets and Orators,
than by Philosophers.

9. From Opposite, ab Oppositis.

Peace assures the Repose of Men, War disturbs it;

Therefore War is as much worthy of our hatred, as Peace is worthy of our
wishes.

Note that there are Opposites of four sorts, Contrary, Privative, Relative,
and Contradictory, as I have showed already; you may draw Arguments from each
one.

10. From Circonstances, a Circumstantiis.

He went out at Noon, in good and civil Company, without any Arms; therefore he
has not committed this Murder.

11. By Antecedent and Consequent.

This Field has not been reaped,

Therefore it has not been sown.

This Field was not sown,

Therefore it was not reaped.

12. From Repugnant, a Repugnantibus.

He loves him,

Therefore he does not Persecute him.

Note, that Repugnant is that which cannot be attributed to another: So Man,
Angel, Heaven, Fire are Repugnant because one cannot be affirmed of the other.

13. By Causes, a Causis.

Q. How do you divide Causes?

A. In Efficient, Material, Formal, and Final.

Example of the Efficient Cause.

It is day, when the Sun is risen,

The Sun is now risen,

Therefore it is day.

Example of the Material.

That which is Composed of Earth is heavy,

Our Bodies are Composed of Earth,

Therefore our Bodies are heavy.

Example of the Formal.

Every Animal that Reasons is Immortal,

Every Man Reasons,

Therefore every Man is Immortal.

Example of the Final.

Every Creature which is born to serve God ought not to offend him,

Man is born to serve God,

Therefore he ought not to offend him

14. By Effects, ab Effectis.

We ought to avoid that which renders us Infamous.

Vice does render us Infamous,

Therefore we ought to avoid Vice.

Note, that the Cause being supposed, its Effect follows; and the Cause being
taken away, its Effect ceases. That ^^ to be understood of the Formal Cause: As
for Example, Place a Reasonable Soul in a Body, there is a Man; take away the
Soul from his Body, then Man ceases.

15. By Comparison, a Comparatione.

If an Homicide ought to be punished, with great reason a Parricide.

If he that affronts a Magistrate deserves punishment, with greater reason he
that affronts a King.

If Ten thousand Men cannot force: Town, a thousand shall not force it.

16. By Testimony, a Testimonio.

Q. How many sorts of Testimonies are there?

A. There are of two sorts, Divine and Human.

Give an Example of a Divine Testimony.

The Holy Scripture says there is a Paradise,

Therefore there is one.

Give an Example of Human Testimony.

Aristotle says there are four Causes,

Therefore there are no more.

Of Fallacious Arguments, or Sophismes.
As it is not sufficient to a Man, that will fight without any danger, to have
offensive Arms, as a Sword, Pike, Pistol, and Musket; but also he must have
Defensive, as a Buckler, Breastplate and Helmet: Likewise it is not sufficient
to a Man, that will Reason and Discourse well, to know the Precepts how to make
good Arguments, to convince and persuade others; he must also know how to
defend himself from all the surprises and fallacies of his Adversaries.

Q. How many sorts of Fallacious Arguments are there?

A. There are of several sorts, viz. by Equivocation, by Amphibology, by
Division, by Word, and by Consequence or Conclusion.

Q. What is a Fallacious Argument by Equivocation?

A. It is when we make use of a Term that signifies several things; as

Every Dog barks,

A Star is a Dog,

Therefore a Star barks.

Q. What is a Fallacious Argument by Amphibology?

A. It is when the Sense of it is confused and doubtful; as

Aio te, Aeacida, Romanos vincere posse.

By that Verse no body can tell who shall overcome.

Q. What is a Fallacious Argument by Conjunction?

A. It is when we make a false Conjunction of the things which are true being
taken separately, as

Annibal is bad,

Annibal is a Captain,

Therefore Annibal is a bad Captain.

Q. What is a Fallacious Argument by Division?

A. It is when we do attribute unto things divided, that which belongs to them
only whilst they are united; as

Three and four are even and odd numbers,

Three and Four are seven,

Therefore Seven is an even and odd number.

Q. What is a Fallacious Argument by Word?

A. It is when some words signify other things in the Conclusion, than they do
in one of the foregoing Propositions, in passing from one Genus to another; as

What you have bought you did eat,

You have bought some raw Flesh,

Therefore you did eat some raw Flesh.

Q. Give me some Examples of Fallacious Arguments by the Consequence or
Conclusion.

A. We must not make Images to Adore them,

Therefore we must not make Images.

Men must not go to Church to manage business,

Therefore Men must not go to Church.

These Arguments are false, because there is not so much in the Conclusion* as
in the Preceding Proposition.

Who calls thee an Animal, spea^^ truth,

Who calls thee an Ass, calls thee Animal,

Therefore who calls thee an As^ speaks truth.

This Conclusion is not good, because Animal is more extended than an Ass.

Thou do not know what I will as^ thee,

I will ask thee thy Name,

Therefore thou do not know thy Name.

This Conclusion is not good, for though I do not know determinately what thou will ask me, before thou ask it, yet I may know it.

This Slave is thine,

This Slave is a Mother,

Therefore this Slave is thy Mother.

This Conclusion is not good, because these Accidents do belong to their
Subject separatly, and not jointly; and because from two particular
Propositions we can conclude nothing true.

Angel has but two Syllables,

Lucifer is an Angel,

Therefore Lucifer has but two Syllables.

Animal is a Genus,

Man is an Animal,

Therefore Man is a Genus.

These Conclusions are not good, because Man and Animal are taken in one sense
in the Major, and in another sense in the Minor.

These two Pictures are equal in breadth and unequal in length,

Therefore these two Pictures are equal and unequal.

Alexander being drunk is furious,

Alexander being sober is wise,

Therefore Alexander is furious and wise.

These Conclusions are good sub diverso respectu, sed non sub eodem; that is in
a different Sense, but not in the same. Cette fallace s'appelle, Fallacia
Compositionis and Divisionis.

Q. What is a Fallacy a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter?

A. It is when we do absolutely attribute to some body that which only belongs
to him in part; as

An Ethiopian has white Teeth,

Therefore he is white.

Q. What is a Fallacy called petitio Principii, or Begging the Question?

A. It is when we suppose that to be true which is in question; as

The Nature of heavy things is to tend unto the center of the World.

All heavy things do tend unto the Center of the Earth,

Therefore the Center of the Earth is the Center of the World.

Wherein you see a manifest Petition of the Principle in the Major of this
Argument.

Q. What is a Sophisma, called non causa pro causa.

A. When we give for a thing a Reason which is not the true Reason; as

Vessels full of Water break when the Water is frozen, because the Water is
restrained, therefore there is a Vacuum in Nature.

The Vessels do not break because there is a Vacuum in Nature, but because the
Water, being frozen, takes a bigger place than before, which is the Cause why
the Vessels break.

Q. What is a Fallacy called fallacia Accidentis?

A. It is when we bring a Reason without restriction, for a thing which is true
only by Accident; as

There are men that abuse the Holy Scripture,

Therefore we must not read it.

Q. What is Method.

A. It is an Art that teaches how to dispose well what we have considered,
either to discover Truth when we are ignorant of it, or to show it to others
when we already know it.

Q. Is this Method a fourth Action of our Spirit?

A. There are some Authors that will have it to be so: As for me, I do not
believe it, because a Method being nothing but a Ratiocination of our Spirit,
that judges that the things which he has considered before, ought to be so and
so disposed, for the Reasons which he does conceive, consequently ought to be
reduced to the third operation of our Understanding.

Q. How must we do to dispose well the things which we have conceived?

A. We must begin by general and simple things, before we come to particular
and composed; explain what belongs to a Genus, before we pass to its Species;
and divide (as much as it is in our power, and fit to our Subject) the whole
into its proper Parts, and every difficulty into its Cases.

Q. Why do you say, as much as it is in our power, and fit to our Subject?

A. It is because there are many occasions, wherein we cannot, and ought not
strictly to observe all these things, whether because our Spirit is limited, or
because our Subject does not require it; and so Prudence, Judgment and Reason
are very necessary to show us what we must take, and what we must leave.

Q. How is Method divided?

A. Into a Method of Resolution, which is called Analyze; and into a Method of
Composition, which is named Synthese.

Q. What difference do you put between these two Methods?

A. One begins by General things, before it comes to Particulars; and the other
explains Particulars, before it comes to Generals.

Q. What must any one do to answer well to a Question?

A. He must, before he gives his answer, consider it well; and if it contains
an Equivocation, he must distinguish and explain it; otherwise he will never
agree with him that did propose the Question; they shall not understand one
another; they will dispute a long while, and prove nothing.

This small Treatise will be sufficient to whomsoever is desirous to learn
Philosophy.

The End of Logic.
AU Tres Honorable CHARLES, Comte de Dorset, and de Midlesex, Grand Chambellan
de la Maison du Roy, etc.
Mon Seigneur,
TOVT le Monde convient que l'Entendement, and la volonte sont les deux
principales Puissances de notre Ame; and votre Grandeur scait mieux que moy
que, comme les Actions de l'Entendement, entant qu'elles peuvent etre dirigees
a bien raisonner de toutes chooses, sont l'Objet de la Logique; ainsi les
Actions de la volonte entant qu'elle's se peuvent conduire a l' Honetete, and
Bienseance, sont celuy de la Morale. Car comme toute la Logique consiste dans
ces trois Actions de notre Esprit, bien penser, juger Sainement, and raisonner
justement: Ainsi toute la Morale peut etre reduite dans ces trois points,
honetement vivre, n'offencer person, and render a un chacun ce qui luy
appartient. Qui donc Scait bien concevoir les chooses, qui se presentent a son
Imagination, en fair un bon jugement, and en tirer de veritables consequences,
il peut legitimement passer pour un bon Logicien; pareillement qui Scait
tellement conduire sa volonte, qu'il ne pratique rien que des Actions justes,
and vertueuses, celuy la sans aucun doubt possede entierement la Morale.

La Generosite, Mon Seigneur, que vous m'avez fait paroitre en recevant
favorablement mes autres petis Livres, me press depuis long temps de donner a
votre Grandeur quelque legere marque de Reconnoissance; and si j'ay differe
jusqu'a present, e'est que je n'avois pas un Sujet si propre que celuicy pour
etre dedie a votre Grandeur, don't l'Entendement est extraordinaire dans les
chooses qui dependent de l'Intelligence, and don't la volonte est toujours portee
a pratiquer de louables Actions. Mais peutetre qu'en publiant votre Merit, je
trahis votre Modesty, and il se peut fair que j'offence au moment que je
tache de plaire. Quand bien votre Grandeur devroit etre fachee contre moy, je
ne puis pourtant taire ces Qualitez qui sont en elle, and qui sont si connues
dans ce Royaume: Car tous ceux, qui ont l'Honneur de frequenter votre Grandeur,
n'ignorent pas que votre Esprit est orne de belles Connoissances; and ceux qui
ont eu le plaisir de lire vos Ecrits, confessent tous unanimement que vos
Pensees sont riches, que vos Expressions sont fortes, que vos Paroles sont
Emphatiques, and que vous etes le Favory d' Apollon. Toute l' Angleterre
connoit votre Zele pour la verite de la Religion, and pour les Loix etablies
dans ce Royaume, comme aussi votre genereux Naturel, qui toujours previent ceux
qui attendent du Bien de vous. Il est certain que vous ne confondez point
l'apparence avec la Verite; Votre Conscience n'est point erronee; vous etes
Ennemy de toutes les Grimaces de Rome, and, pour tout dire en deux mots, il n'y
a rien en vous qui ne soit Solid, and Glorieux. Le choix, que leurs Majestez
ont fait de votre Grandeur enluy confiant les plus considerables Employs de ce
Royaume, n'est il pas une preuve convaincante que tout ce que j'ay avance est
sans Flaterie, and sans doubt?

Je finis cette Lettre, en vous suppliant humblement d'accepter ce petit
ouvrage. J'espere que vous luy donnerez un bon Accueil, puisque'c est un Sujet
que vous connoissez parfaitement, and au quel vous prenez beaucoup de plaisir;
J'espere aussi que votre Grandeur agreera mes Efforts, pour render a un chacun
ayse ce difficile Art de Logique, dans lequel aussi bien que dans la Morale je
pense avoir plus fait qu'on ayt encor fait dans l'une and l'autre Langue pour
regler les Pensees, les Paroles, and les Actions. Pardonnez ma Hardiesse; Vivez
long temps, and heureux; and permettez moy de publier que je suis,

Mon Seigneur, Votre tres Humble, tres Obeissant, and tres Affectionne
Serviteur PIERRE BERAULT.

A Mon Seigneur, LE COMTE De Dorset, and de Middlesex, etc.
Epigramme.
POur lover un Heroes il faut fair un Volume,
Pour te lover, Dorset, c'est trop peu de ma plume,
Il faut etre un Virgile, ou dumoins un Boileau,
Et pour te peindre il faut d'Appelles le Pinceau.
Ta Bouche a des Appas, and dans son doux Langage
Ne rend pas meme honneur au masque qu'au visage,
Ta Plume a le Secret de marquer de bons verse,
Car Appollon pour toy tient ses Thresors ouverts.
Ton Esprit penetrant par tout se fait passage,
Il est Subtle, and fin, il est Solid, and Sage.
Il scait bien en tout temps fair distinction,
Enter l'Hypocrisie, and la Devotion.
Du Vray d'avec le Faux il scait les differences,
Car il possede a fond les plus belles Sciences,
Et quand il se fait voir suivi de ses Douceurs,
Des Roys and des Sujets il scait gaigner les Coeurs.
P. BERAULT.

SUR Le Jour de la Naissance DU ROY GUILLAUME.
Sonnet.
SOn Astre nous promit, en le donnant au Monde,
Qu'il seroit des Heroes le plus victorieux;
Et qu'ayant triomphe sur la Terre, and sur l'Onde
Il rendroit, comme luy, notre Age glorieux.
Aussi nous fit il voir une ardeur sans second
Pour etablir d'abord la Justice en tous lieux;
Et jamais sa Valeur, en Exploits si feconde,
N'entreprit de dessein qu'elle poursuivit mieux.
Malgre luy, cependant, toujours la Tyranny,
Bien que de mill endroits par luy deja bannie
Dans mill autrestient ferme, and nous menac^ encor.
Mais puisqu'il est enfin, l'Arbitre de l'Europe
Il va justifier son heureux Horoscope,
Et d'un Siecle de Fer nous fair un Siecle d'Or.
F. Br. D. D.

SUR Le meme Jour, a La REINE MARIE.
Sonnet.
CElui, de qui la Naissance
Fait tout l'Eclat de ce Jour,
Vous a fait un mauvais tour,
Chacun en prend Connoissance.
Parmi les jeux and la Dance
J'en ay un pleurer l'Amour,
Et bien du Monde a la Cour
Ne dit pas ce qu'il en pense.
Une Rivale en Faveur
Ose meme de son Coeur
Vous disputer la Victoire;
Et, si vous le trouvez bon,
Je vous apprendray son Nom,
Elle s'appelle la Gloire.
F. Br. D. D.

AU LECTEUR.
VOICY la Clef des Sciences, and le Moyen d'etre Heureux que je te present
tout ensemble. Si tu concois bien cette Logique, tu trouveras une merveilleuse
facilite pour apprendre toutes sorts de Sciences; and si tu pratiques cette
Morale, ton Ame se trouvera couronnee d'un grand nombre de vertus. La
connoissance de l'une, and la Pratique de l'autre te rendront non seulement
estimable, mais encore te gaigneront l'Affection de tous ceux qui te
connoissent, and le Bonheur qu'on peut esperer en cette vie. Juge de la bonte
de ce Livre par le profit que tu en peux recevoir. a Dieu.

LOGIQUE, OU La CLEF des SCIENCES.
PARTY I.
Q. LA Logique est elle utile, et necessaire aux hommes?

R. Ouy, sans doubt, par ce qu'elle enseigne a discerner le vray du faux, a
diviser le tout en ses parties; a expliquer la chose obscure et equivoque par
une claire definition; a inferer une veritable Consequence des Premises, et a
discourir certainement de touttes chooses; la Logique est a notre entendement ce
que le Pinceau est au Peintre; car comme il est impossible de bien peindre sans
Pinceau, aussy est il impossible de devenir fort scavant sans le secours de la
Logique. Elle est la clef des Sciences, car celui qui sait bient sa Logique,
trouve une merveilleuse facilite a entrer en toutes sorts de Sciences,
quelques difficiles qu' else soient; Aristotle, Platon, Thomas d' Aquin, le
Subtle Scot, et tous les autres grands Philosophes luy sont redevables de leur
Doctrine, et belles connoissances. St. Augustine l'appelle l' Art des Arts, est
la Science des Sciences; il l'a publiquement enseignee, et par son moyen s'est
rendu si recommendable, qu'il est par dessus les autres Docteurs, comme l'
Aigle vole par dessus les autres oyseaux.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Logique?

R. C'est un Art, ou une Science parlaquelle nous apprenons a bien et
brievement discourir, et raisonner de touttes chooses tant pour nous Instruire,
que pour instruire les autres.

Q. Pourquoy dites vous brievement?

R. Pour la distinguer de la Rhetorique, qui discourt bien, mais non brievement
comme la Logique, mais beaucoup plus amplement; et qui se plait a rechercher de
belles paroles, et des Sentences bien choisies. Si quelqu' un trouve au
commencement quelque difficulte, en cette Logique, qu' il ne se rebute pas, qu'
il la lise entierement, et quand il recommencera, ce qui luy sembloit difficile
et facheux, luy deviendra fort aise et agreeable?

Q. D'ou est derivee la Logique?

R. Du mot grec (...) qui signify discourse, parce qu'elle apprend a bien
discourir de touttes chooses.

Q. Quel est l'objet de la Logique?

R. Les Actions de notre Esprit, entant qu' else peuvent etre dirigees a bien
raisonner; and discourir.

Q. Combien y a-t-il d' Actions de l' Esprit?

R. Trois, Concevoir, Juger, and raisonner.

Q. Comment appellez vous la premiere.

R. Une simple veue ou Idee d'une chose, qui se present a notre Esprit, sans
en rien affirmer ni nier; par exemple, Corpse, Homme, Dieu, Ange, etc.

Q. Comment appellez vous la Second?

R. Elle S'appelle Proposition, ou Enonciation, parceque nous affirmons ou
nions quelque chose de l'objet que nous avons pense; par Exemple l'homme est un
Animal raisonable, Dieu n'est pas menteur, etc.

Q. Comment appellez vous la troisieme?

R. Elle s'appelle Discourse, ou Ratiocination; parce que c'est une illation, ou
Connoissance que nous tirons d'une, ou de deux propositions precedentes; par
Exemple: cest homme est rich, donc il a des Amiss. Tout Animal a un Corpse,
Pierre est Animal, donc Pierre a un Corpse.

Q. En Combien de parties divisez vous la Logique?

R. En trois; la premiere traite des Terms; la second, de la Proposition; et
la troisieme, de l' Argumentation:

Q. Qu'est ce qu'on appelle term en Logique?

R. C'est ce qui termine l' Enonciation, ou Proposition; par exemple l' Ange
est Spirituel. L' Ange et Spirituel sont les terms, et (est) est le lien, qui
les joint ensemble, quand la Proposition est Affirmative; et les disjoint,
quand elle est Negative.

Q. Comment S' appelle, le premier Term?

R. Il S'appelle Sujet,, et le second se nomme Attribut.

Q. Pourquoy appellez vous l'un Sujet, et l'autre Attribut?

R. Le Sujet est ainsy appelle, parceque quelque chose luy est attribuee; et
Attribut est ainsi nomme, dautanqu' il est attribue au Sujet; ainsi que vous
pouvez voir par ces Exemples; l' Ange est Spirituel, l' homme est Animal; ou
vous voyez qu' Ange, et Homme sont Sujets, parceque Spirituel est attribue a l'
Ange, et Animal a l' Homme.

Q. Comment divisez vous le Term?

R. En Universel, Particulier, Univoque, Equivoque, Analogue, Categorematique,
Syncategorematique, Absolu, Relatif, Connotatif, abstrait, Concret, Simple,
Compose, et en Term de la premiere et second Intention, qu' on appelle reel
et de raison.

Q. Qu' est ce qu' un Term universel?

R. C'est un mot don't la Nature est commune a plusieurs; par Exemple Ange,
Homme, Arbre, etc. Car Ange signify une Nature ou Essence qui est commune a
Raphael, Gabriel, Michael, et autres Anges. Et Homme signify une Essence, ou
Nature qui est commune a Pierre, Jean, Jaques, etc.

Q. Q'est ce qu' un Term particulier?

R. C'est un mot qui ne se communique pas a plusieurs, comme Aristote, Platon,
Seneque, Alexandre, Caesar, etc.

Q. Q'est ce qu' un term univoque, ou Synonime?

R. C'est un mot don't le nom, et la Nature sont egalement en plusieurs, et
egalement participee de plusieurs, comme homme don't le nom et la Nature se
trouvent egalement dans Pierre, Paul, Jean, Jaques, etc.

Q. Qu' est ce qu' un term Equivoque, ou homonyme?

R. C'est un mot don't, quoyque le nom se trouve egalement en plusieurs,
touttefois la Naturen' en est pas egalement participee, mais signify chooses
differentes: Comme ce mot Chien, qui signify un Animal terrestre, un poisson
de mer, et un Astre.

Q. Qu' est ce qu' un term analogue?

R. C'est un mot qui exprime une meme chose, mais differemment communiquee a
plusieurs; comme ce mot sain, qui exprime la sante dans l'homme, dans la
medecin, et dans l'urine, mais avec cette difference qu'il convient a l'homme
comme au sujet de la sante; a la medecin comme a la cause; et a l'urine comme
a son sign; parceque, selonque l'urine a de bonnes ou mauvaises qualitez, elle
denote la Sante ou la malady.

Q. Qu' est ce qu'un term categorematique?

R. C'est un mot qui est ainsi appelle, parcequ' il se trouve parmi les
Categories, et qui de soy signify quelque chose, comme ces mots Substance,
Corpse, Animal, Homme, Pierre.

Q. Qu' est ce qu' un Term Syncategorematique?

R. C'est un mot qui de soy ne determine rien, mais seulement quand il est
joint avec un autre; comme par Exemple, tout, null, quelque, tout ne signify
rien determine de soy meme, mais sulement quand il est joint a un autre mot,
comme Homme.

Q. Qu' est ce qu' un Term absolu?

R. C'est un mot qui represente une Nature absolve, sans la raporter a quelque
chose; comme Ange, Homme, Corpse, Arbre, etc.

Q. Qu' est ce qu' un Term Relatif?

R. C'est un mot qui represente une Nature, ou Essence, entantqu' elle a raport
a quelque chose, comme Pere, Maitre, Roy; car Pere represente une Nature qui
marque un Fills; Maitre represente une Nature pui marque un Serviteur; et Roy
represente une Nature qui denote des Sujets.

Q. Qu' est ce qu' un Term connot atif?

R. C'est un mot qui denote une qualite dans un Sujet, comme blanc, noir; ces
Terms denotent la blancheur et noirceur dans quelque Sujet, comme par exemple
dans une muraille, ou sur le visage.

Q. Qu' est ce qu' un Term abstrait?

R. C'est un mot que nous concevons separe de son sujet, comme noirceur,
blancheur, Sagesse, Justice, etc.

Q. Qu' est ce qu' un Term Concret?

R. C'est un mot qui denote un accident conceu joint a un Sujet, comme Blanc,
Noir, Sage, Just.

Q. Quelle difference mettez vous enter term Simple, et Compose?

R. Le Term Simple s'exprime par un mot, comme Homme, Corpse. Et le Compose par
deux, comme Homme, Scavant, Corpse Solid, et quelquefois on y adjoute le
Relatif qui, comme un homme qui est Scavant, un Corpse qui est Solid.

Q. Qu' est ce qu' un Term reel, ou de la premiere Intention?

R. C'est un mot, qui de soy, sans l'ayde de l'operation de l'entendement
signify une nature reelle, comme Homme, Animal, Homme de soy signify un
Animal raisonable; et Animal sans le secours de notre Esprit signify un Corpse
vivant sensible.

Q. Qu' est ce qu' un Term de Raison, ou de la second Intention?

R. C'est un mot qui ne convient a la chose don't nous parlons, que par l'action
de notre Esprit, comme dans cette Proposition; l'homme est un Animal, entant
que je considere l'homme comme Sujet de cette Proposition, et Animal comme
attribut; Sujet et attribut sont appellez Terms de la second Intention,
parcequ' ils ne conviennent a Homme et a Animal que par notre volonte, et
operation de notre Entendement.

Q. Quelle difference mettez vous enter distinction Reelle, Mentale et Modale?

R. La distinction Reelle est enter deux chooses reellement distinctes l'une de
l'autre; C'est a dire que je puis penser a l'une sans penser a l'autre; par
exemple mon friar, et ma soeur sont reellement distincts, parceque je puis
penser a l'un sans penser a l'autre.

Q. Qu' est ce que distinction Mentale?

R. C'est lorsque, de deux chooses qui sont dans un meme Sujet, nous pouvons
penser a l'une sans penser a l'autre; par exemple, quand je pense a la Justice
de Dieu sans penser a sa misericorde, cette distinction est appellee Mentale.

Q. Qu' est ce que la Modale?

R. C'est celle qni est enter la Substance, et son mode, desorte que je puis
bien penser a la Substance, par Exemple, a une Pierre sans penser a son mode,
ou a sa figure; mais je ne puis penser, a la figure d'une Pierre, sans penser a
la Pierre en meme temps.

Q. Combien y a-t-il d'universaux?

R. Il y en a Cinq; scavoir le Genre, l' Espece, la Difference, le Propre, et
l' Accident.

Q. Comment le prouvez vous?

R. Parceque tout ce qui convient a un Sujet, luy est attribue ou
essentiellement, ou accidentellement. Si essentiellement, ou c'est toutte son
Essence ou une party seulement: Si c'est toutte son Essence, nous l'appellons
Espece. Si C'est une party qui exprime la matiere, nous l'appellons Genre; et
si c'est une party qui exprime la Form, nous l'appellons Difference. Que s'il
convient au Sujet accidentellement; ou il est necessaire, ou contingent. Si
necessaire, il establit le propre, si contingent, il constitue l'Accident.

Q. Qu' est ce que le Genre?

R. C'est un mot qui est communique essentiellement a plusieurs chooses
differentes en Espece, comme Animal, virtue. Animal est un Genre, parcequ' il
est essentiellement attribue a l'homme, et a la Beat, parceque si je demand
qu' est ce qu' un homme, qu' est ce qu' une Beat? Je repond c'est un Animal. Et
virtue est aussi genre, parceque elle convient essentiellement a touttes les
Especes de virtue, car si je demand qu' est ce que Justice, qu' est ce que
Prudence, qu' est ce que Temperance. Je repond c'est une virtue.

Q. Qu' est ce que l' Espece?

R. C'est un mot qui convient essentiellement a plusieurs chooses differentes en
nombre, comme sont les Individus; par Exemple Homme est une Espece, parcequ' il
convient essentiellement a Pierre, Paul, Jean, etc. car si je demand qu' est
ce que Pierre, qu' est ce que Paul, qu' est ce que Jean; Je repond, c'est un
Homme.

Notez que toutte espece peut etre exprimee par un seul nom, comme Esprit,
Corpse, ou par deux mots scavoir par le Genre, et la difference joints ensemble,
ce qu' on appelle definition, comme Substance qui pense; Substance etendue.

Q. Qu' entendez vous par differer en nombre?

R. C'est une maniere de parler parmi les Philosophes, pour signifier une
difference accidentelle, qui est propre aux Individus d'une meme Espece. Par
exemple, choisissez deux hommes les plus semblables du monde, vous trouverez
toujours en eux plusieurs accidents, qui les feront differer l'un de l'autre.

Q. Que veut dire Individu?

R. Il signify une Nature singuliere, qui ne peut etre divisee, et qui a de
certains accidents, qui tous ensemble ne conviennent pas a un autre. Par
exemple, Socrates a cela de propre qu'il est Athenien, Fills de Sophronisque,
Philosophe Stoique, ayant un nez crochu, et portant une barbe longue.

Q. Combien y a-t-il de sorts d'Individus?

R. Trois, Vague, Demonstratif, et par Anthonomase, ou Excell^nce?

Q. Qu' entendez vous par Individu Vague?

R. J'entend une chose particuliere, qui n'est point determinee, et qui court
parmi les Genres et les Especes, ou bien, j'entend un genre, ou une espece,
devant les quels on adjoute un sign particulier. Par exemple, quelque Animal,
quelque Fleur, ^^r quoyqu' Animal, et Fleur soient des ^^rmes universels;
qu'Animal, et Fleur ^^ient Genres, neantmoins quand vous y ^ignez ce mot
(quelque) ils deviennent ^^rticuliers, et sont appellez Individus Va^^es.

Q. Qu' est ce qu'un Individu demon^^^atif?

R. C'est un Genre, ou une Espece a qui (...) adjoute un Pronom demonstratif.
Par ^^emple, ce Corpse, cet homme: Car quoy^^^ ce mot, Corpse, soit genre, et ce
mot ^omme, un Espece; touttefois quand vous y ^^outez un Pronom demonstratif,
ils devi^ent particuliers; ce qu'on appelle Indi^^du demonstratif.

Q. Qu' est ce qu' un Individu par Anto^^ase, ou par Excellence?

R. C'est un mot qui, bien qu'il soit ^^versel, signify pourtant une chose
parti^^^ere. Par exemple, le Poet, le Philoso^^^ le Prince de l' Eloquence Le
Poet ^^^^^fie Homere parmy les Grecs, et Vir^^^ parmi les Latins; le
Philosophe signi^^^ Aristote, et le Prince de l'Eloquence ^^^^ifie Ciceron.

Q. Qu' est ce que la Difference?

R. C'est ce qui establit l'Espece, et divise le Genre: par exemple ces deux
differences raisonable and irraisonable. La premiere establit l'homme, et la
second la Beat; car quand on demand qu'est ce que l'homme; Je repond c'est un
Animal raisonable. Qu' est ce que la Beat? C'est un Animal irraisonable.

Remarquez que, quand vous divisez l'Animal en raisonable and irraisonable,
cette derniere difference n'est pas a proprement parler difference, mais une
negation de difference affirmative, and positive, don't nous sommes contraints
de nous servir, parceque nous ne connoissons pas la positive.

Q Qu' est ce que le Propre?

R. C'est, ce qui recoit une reciproque conversion avec son Espece, sans en
expliquer l essence comme tout homme est risible, and tout risible est homme.

Q. Pourquoy dites vous sans en expliquer l'Essence.

R. Parcequ' il appartient seulement a la difference d'expliquer l'Essence des
chooses. Notez que Souvent nous nous servons de descriptions, aulieu de
definitions, c'est a dire que nous exprimons les chooses par leur proprietez
parceque nous n' en connoissons pas la difference.

Q. Combien y a-t-il de sorts de Propre?

R. Il y en a de quatre sorts; le premier convient actuellement a une seule
Espece, mais non a tous ses Individus; comme a l'homme d'etre Medecin,
Philosophe, Musicien, etc. cela appartient a l'homme seul, mais non a tous ses
Individus, car tous les hommes ne sont pas Medecins, Philosophes, Musiciens.

Le Second convient naturellement a toutte une Espece, mais non a elle seule:
par Exemple, il convient naturellement a tous hommes d'avoir deux pieds, mais
cela convient aussy a l'oyseau.

Le troisi^me convient a une seule Espece, a tous ses Individus, mais non pas
toujours, comme d'avoir les cheveux blancs, cela convient a l'homme, and a tous
ses Individus, mais non pas toujours, car cela arrive seulement en la
vieillesse.

Le quatrieme convient a une seule Espece, a tous ses Individus, and toujours;
comme d'etre risible, cela convient a l'homme, a tous ses Individus, and
toujours; ce qui se doit entendre non de l'acte, mais de la puissance de rire;
car quoyque l'homme ne rye pas toujours, il a pourtant la puissance de rire.

Remarquez que ce dernier Propre est le veritable, and est appelle predicable,
parce qu'il a place parmi les universaux.

Q. Qu'est ce que l'Accident?

R. C'est ce qui peut etre, and n'etre pas dans un Sujet, sans aucunement le
detruire, ou corrompre; comme la blancheur ou noirceur dans une muraille sont
des Accidents, pace qu'ils peuvent etre and n'etre pas dans la muraille, sans
que la muraille soit destruite.

Q. Comment divisez vous l'Accident?

R. En Separable, and Inseparable: Separable, comme la crainte, le froid, la
chaleur d'un Corpse, ou la blancheur d'une muraille: Et Inseparable, comme la
noirceur d'un corbeau, ou la blancheur d'un Cigne.

Remarquez que les Accidents inseparables sont censez separables par l'Action
de l'Entendement, parceque nous pouvons considerer la Nature ou Essence d'un
Corbeau, ou d'un Ethiopien, sans considerer leur noirceur. Objection.
L'Embrasement est un Accident, or l'embrasement ne peut pas etre dans une
maison sans la destruire, donc il n'est pas vray que l'Accident est ce qui peut
etre dans un Sujet and horse du Sujet sans le destruire.

R. L'Embrasement arrive par Accident, il est vray; touttefois il n'est pas un
Accident, mais une Substance; car l'Embrasement n'est rien que le Feu
entantqu'il brule une maison, ou quelqu'autre matiere.

Q. Les universaux sont ils des Etres reels, ou de Raison?

R. Platon, Scot, and plusieurs autres Philosophes croyent que les Universaux
sont des Essences separees des Individus, ou singuliers. D'autres disent qu'ils
sont des Essences reelles, communes a plusieurs etres particuliers, don't else
ne sont distinguees que par notre raison, choisissez quelle Opinion il vous
plaira, car il me semble que cette question est plus subtle que necessaire.

Q. Qu'est ce que Categorie?

R. C'est un certain order des chooses, entantqu'elles sont rangees sous un des
dix genres souverains, que les Latins appellent Predicaments.

Q. Combien y a-t-il de Categories, ou Predicaments?

R, Il y en a dix, Scavor Substance, Quantite, Qualite, Relation, Action,
Passion, Quand, ou, la Situation, and l'Avoir.

Substance, comme Ange, Homme, Arbre. Quantite, comme longueur, largeur,
hauteur. Qualite, comme Doctrine, couleur, virtue. Relation, comme grand, petit.
L'Action, comme couper, echaufer, aimer. La Passion, comme etre Coupe, echaufe,
aim. Quand, comme hier, demain, l'annee passee. ou, come a l'Eglise, a la
comedy, a l'Echole. La Situation, comme droit, courbe, assis, couche. l'Avoir,
comme etre arm, etre vetu a la Francoise ou a l' Italienne.

Remarquez que touttes les chooses, qui sont au monde, se peuvent rapporter a
quelqu' un de ces dix genres souverains, que nous appellons Categories, ou
Predicaments; parceque tout ce qui est au monde est Substance, ou accident; si
Substance, il est raporte au premier Predicament; si Accident, il convient a
quelqu' une des neuf autres Categories.

Remarquez 2. qu'il y a un genre Souverain and premier, qui est toujours genre,
and jamais Espece; and qu'il ya une Espece infime, and derniere, qui est
toujours Espece, and jamais genre, n'ayant sous soy que des Individus, ou
Singuliers.

Remarquez 3o. qu' enter le genre Souverain, and l'Espece infime, il ya des
subalternes, qui sont genres and Especes, selonque vous les considerez
differemment.

Remarquez 4. que le genre du premier Predicament est la Substance, sous qui se
trouve Corpse, vivant, Animal, Homme, Pierre, Paul, Jean, etc.

Remarquez 5. qu' il ya trois lignes en chaque Categorie, l'une direct, ou les
etres sont rangez directement; et les deux autres indirectes, ou collateralles,
ou se rapportent les differences, comme vous pouvez voir par cet Exemple.

Description de la Categorie de Substance.
Genre Souverain.
Substance Corporelle comme Animaux, Plants. Incorporelle comme Anges, ames
spirituelles.
Corpse Anime comme Chevaux Arbres. Inanime comme Pierres, fer, plomb.
Vivant Sensible comme Animaux, chiens. Insensible comme Plants, Herbs.
Animal Raisonable L' homme seul. Irraisonable Les Betes, chi^ns, etc.
Espece Infime Homme Individus Pierre, Paul, Jean.
Notez 1. Que les Privations, comme mort, aveuglement, doivent etre retranchees
des Cathegories, parcequ'elles ne signifient point l'etre des chooses, mais leur
privation; semblablement les chooses feintes and fabuleuses, comme Hydre,
Chymere, en doivent etre separees.

Notez 2. qu'il en faut excepter les homonymes, ou equivoques, parce qu'a moins
qu'ils ne soient distinguez, vous ne pouvez pas leur assigner aucune certain
Categorie.

Remarquez 3. Que de touttes les chooses qui sont au monde les unes sont
simples, comme Ange, Homme, Virtue. Et les autres Composees, comme la Pierre est
dure, l'homme est raisonable, and qu'il n'ya que les simples, qui soient
rangees dans les Categories.

Notez 4. Qu'il en faut retrancher les Syncategoremes, c'est a dire les Terms
qui ne signifient rien d'eux memes, comme tout, quiconque, null, quelque.

Notez 5. qu'il en faut retrancher Dieu, parcequ'etant un etre infini, il ne
peut etre compris dans les Categories, quirenferment seulement des etres finis.

Q Qu'est ce que Substance.

R. C'est un etre qui subsiste par soy meme; comme par Exemple une Pierre, un
cheval, un chien.

Q. Comment divisez vous la Substance?

R. En Premiere, and second.

Q. Qu'entendez vous par premiere Substance?

R. I'entend les Individus, ou Substances singulieres, comme Alexandre, Caesar,
Seneque.

Q. Et qu'entendez vous par les secondes?

R. I'entend les Substances Universelles, comme Corpse, Animal, homme, chien,
cheval.

Q. Quelles sont les Proprietez de la Substance?

R. La premiere and la principale est de n'estre point en aucun Sujet.

2. La Substance n'est point contraire a une autre, quoyqu'elle semble l'etre a
raison de ses qualitez. Par Exemple l'eau, and le feu ne sont point contraires
entant qu'ils sont Suhstance, mais seulement a raison de leurs qualitez.

3. Une Substance n'est pas plus substance qu'une autre; ainsy nous pouvons
dire qu'un Elephant n'est pas plus Substance qu'une mouche; ni une fourmi moins
substance qu'une montaigne, quoyque nous puissions appeller l'un plus gros que
l'autre.

Neantmoins a parler improprement, nous disons que les Substances, qui sont
dans le plus bas order des Categories, sont plus Substances, que les autres qui
sont plus hautes, parce qu'elles recoivent plus d'attributions, desorteque
l'Individu sera plus Substance que l' Espece, and l' Espece plus Substance que
le genre.

4. La Substance peut recevoir des contraires, sinon ensemble, aumoins
successivement: Par exemple, un homme peut etre tantot froid, tantot chaud;
tantot sain and tantot malade, demeurant le meme quant a sa Substance. Ce qui
ne peut arriver aux Accidents, sans qu' ils se detruisent.

Q. Qu' est ce que Quantite?

R. C' est un Accident, qui etend, divise and mesure des Substances
Corporelles.

Q. Comment divis^z vous la Quantite?

R. En continue, and separee.

Q. Qu' est ce que la Quantite continue?

R. C'est celle, don't les Parties sont jointes ensemble.

Q. Comment divisez vous la quantite continue?

R. En permanente, scavoir la Ligne, la Superficie and l'epaisseur; and en
successive, scavoir le mouvement and le Temps.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Ligne?

R. C'est une longueur sans largeur ni profondeur.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Superficie?

R. C'est une largeur avec une longueur sans Epaisseur.

Q. Qu' est ce que l' Epaisseur?

R. C'est une quantite qui a longueur, largeur, and Epaisseur.

Remarquez que quoyque ces trois Especes de quantite ne soient jamais l'une
sans l'autre, neantmoins else sont distinguees formellement, la definition de
l'une n' estant pas la definition de l'autre.

Q. Faites moy comprendre par un Exemple ce que c' est que la Ligne, Superficie
and Epaisseur, ou Corpse mathematique?

R. La Ligne n'est rien qu' une multiplication de points; and quoyqu' elle ne
puisse etre peinte sans quelque largeur and epaisseur, touttefois il la faut
imaginer a la facon des Mathematiciens; c'est a dire sans aucune dimension. Par
exemple, il faut comprendre la distance qu'il ya du Pol Arctique au Pol
Antartique; ou la distance qu'il ya de Londres a Bristol par une ligne
abstraite de toutte largeur and epaisseur. Et pour bien comprendre la
Superficie il faut concevoir une longueur and largeur sans epaisseur. Ainsi
quand nous disons la Superficie d'un Arpent de Terre, nous entendons la
longueur and largeur abstraite de la Terre. Ce qui est bien represente par
l'ombre d'une maison, ou de quelqu' autre Corpse. Et qui conque veut bien
comprendre l'epaisseur, ou Corpse Mathematique, il doit se representer une
longueur, largeur and epaisseur abstraite de toutte matiere; Ce qui est fort
bien represente par un ouvrier qui fait une maison, une Table, ou quelque autre
chose; car avaunt qu'il fasse une maison, il doit concevoir de quelle longueur,
largeur, hauteur, and profondeur il veut qu'elle soit; or ces Dimensions ainsi
conceues horse de la matiere, est ce que nous appellons Corpse Mathematique.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Quantite Successive?

R. C'est celle don't les parties ne sont pas permanentes, comme le Temps, and
le Lieu.

Q. Qu'est ce que le Temps?

R. C'est la mesure du Mouvement, and du Repos.

Q. Comment divisez vous le Temps?

R. En Pass, Present, and Futur: Le pass n'est plus, le futur n'est pas
encore, and le present est l'Instant don't nous jouissons, mais il s'ecoule, and
s'echape si promptement que, desque nous le concevons, a lors il est
entierement pass, and n'est plus. A proprement parler le Temps n'est rien que
le premier Mobile, qui roll, and entraine a prez soy touttes les autres
Spheres celestes, ainsi qu'une seule roue d'un Horloge fait tourner touttes les
autres.

Notez que le soleil roulant avec tous les autres Corpse celestes eclaire la
Terre en vingt quatre heures, qui composent un jour civil; car quand il est
jour en notre Hemisphere, alors il est nuit en l'autre, and au contraire quand
il est jour en l'autre Hemisphere, il est nuit dans le notre.

Notez 2. que des jours sont composees les Semaines; des Semaines, les Mois;
des Mois, les Ans, and les quatre Saisons de l'Annee; and des Ans, les Siecles:
Desorteque ces chooses, Moment, Minute, Heure, Jour, Semaine, Mois, Saisons
Printemps, Ete, Automne, Hyver, Annees, Age, Siecle, sont appellees Temps, par
lequel nous mesurons la duree and le Course des chooses Mortelles, and
Corruptibles.

Q. Qu' entendez vous par Olimpiades, and par Lustres?

R. Les Olimpiades des Grecs etoient composees de cinq Annees, and les Lustres
des Latins de pareil Nombre.

Q. Quand Commencerent les Lustres and Olimpiades?

R. Les Lustres commencerent au temps de Servius Tullius Roy des Romans, qui
Ordonna qu'on fist le denombrement du Peuple de cinq en cinq Ans; and les
Olympiades commencerent le trente deuxieme Siecle a oonter par leurs Olympiades.

Q. Qu'est ce que le Lieu?

R. C'est la Surface, qui touch and environne un Corpse: Par exemple, la
Surface interieure du Tonneau qui touch and environne le vin, est le lieu du
vin.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Quantite disjointe?

R. C'est celle, don't les Parties ne sont point unies ensemble, comme le nombre
and l'oraison.

Q. Comment divisez vous le nombre?

R. En Nombre nombrant, comme un, deux, trois, quatre, etc. and en nombre
nombre, comme deux hommes, cent chevaux, mill guinez.

Remarquez qu'icy nous parlons seulement du nombre nombrant, lequel est compose
de plusieurs unitez.

Q. L'unite est elle nombre?

R. Non, mais seulement le commencement du nombre; or puisque les unitez, don't
le nombre est compose, ne sont point liees ensemble, mais seulement approchees
les unes des autres, il s'ensuit que le Nombre n'est point Quantite conjointe,
mais separee. Ainsi en est il de l'oraison, qui n'est rien qn'une Conjonction
du Nom, du Verb, de l'Adverbe, de la Preposition, and autres Parties
d'oraison.

Q. Quelles sont les Proprietez de la Quantite permanante?

R. Trois, la premiere est, de n'etre point contraire a l'autre: Par exemple la
Ligne n'est point contraire a la Superficie, ni la Superficie au Corpse.

La Second est de n'etre ni plus, ni moins Quantite que l'autre; ce qui se
doit entendre de l'Essence de la Quantite, car quant aux dimensions l'une peut
etre plus grande que l'autre, comme une Ligne plus longue qu'une autre.

La troisieme Propriete de la Quantite est de render les chooses egales ou
inegalles, comme deux Corpse egalement ou inegalement longs, larges, and epais.

Objection. Peu and beaucoup sont contraires, quoyqu'ils presuposent quantite;
donc une quantite peut etre contraire a une autre.

R. Peu and beaucoup sont contraires entantqu'ils sont relatifs, je l'avoue,
mais non entantqu'ils sont quantite; ainsy en est il du lieu haut and du bas.

Q. Qu'estce que Qualite?

R. C'est un Accident qui qualify son Sujet; comme de la Virtue l'homme est
qualify vertueux; du Vice vicieux; de la blancheur blanc.

Q. Combien y a-t-il d'Especes de Qualitez?

R. Il y en a quatre, qui ont chacune deux branches, scavoir l'Habitude and la
Disposition; la Faculte naturelle and Imbecillite; la Passion and la Qualite
passive; la Form and la Figure.

Q. Quelle difference mettez vous enter l'Habitude and la Disposition?

R. La Disposition differe de l'habitude, comme l'Enfant differe de l'age
viril; car comme l'Enfant devient homme, s'il vit long temps; ainsi la
Disposition se turn en habitude, si elle est souvent reiteree. Deplus
l'habitude s'acquiert par plusieurs precedentes Actions, and la Disposition par
une seule. Desorteque, quand nous appellons quelqu'un yvre, nous signifions
seulement la disposition a l'yvrognerie, car cela se peut dire, encorequ'il
n'ayt ete yvre qu'unefois; mais quand nous appellons quelcun yvrogne, alors
nous signifions l'habitude, car cela ne se peut dire d'un homme, amoinsqu'il
n'ayt ete yvre plusieurs fois. Or cette Espece de Qualite ne convient pas
seulement aux hommes mais encore aux Betes.

Q. Quelle difference mettez vous enter la Faculte naturelle, and
l'Imbecillite?

R. Tell qu'elle se trouve, par exemple, dans la veue d'un jeune homme, and
d'un viellard, la veue dans un jeune homme est appellee Faculte naturelle, and
Imbecillite dans un vieillard.

Q. Quelle difference mettez vous enter la Qualite passible, and la Passion?

R. La Qualite passible est permanante, and de longue duree; and la Passion ne
l'est pas: par exemple la couleur bleme, qui vent d'une longue malady, ou
d'une indisposition naturelle, est appellee qualite passible; and la paleur,
qui vient d'une soudaine frayeur, est appellee Passion. Desorteque rougir and
palir signifient une Passion; mais etre rouge and pale denotent une qualite
passible.

Q. Pourquoy les appellez vous Qualitez passibles and Passions?

R. C'est parcequ'elles apportent quelque Passion a leur Sujet, c'est a dire a
quelqu'un des sens: Comme les Couleurs a la veue; le son a l'ouye; le chaud ou
le froid a l'attouchement; la douceur ou l'amertume au gout; les Senteurs ou
puanteurs a l'odorat.

Q. Quelle difference mettez vous enter la Form and la Figure?

R. La Form s'entend des chooses sensibles, and la Figure des insensibles: Par
la Form nous entendons la Beauty, qui gist en la disposition, Symmetrie, and
belle proportion des Animaux; and par la Figure, nous entendons le Triangle, le
rond, le quarre, and autres Figures.

Q. Quelles sont les Proprietez de la Qualite?

R. La premiere, d'estre contraire l'une a l'autre, comme la virtue au vice; le
noir au blanc. Touttefois cela ne s'entend pas de touttes, les Qualitez, car le
rouge n'est pas contraire au verd, ni le bleu au jaune.

La second, de recevoir plus ou moins; car nous pouvons dire qu'un Homme est
plus vertueux qu'un autre: Touttefois cela ne se dit pas de touttes les
qualitez, car nous ne pouvons pas dire qu'une justice est plus justice qu'une
autre.

La troisieme convient a toutte Qualite, scavoir de render les chooses
semblables, ou dissemblables; comme quand deux hommes sont vertueux egalement,
alors ils sont semblables; and quand l'un l'est, and l'autre ne l'est pas,
alors ils sont dissemblables.

Q. Qu'entendez vous par Relatifs?

R. Ce sont des etres qui se rapportent mutuellement l'un a l'autre; comme
Maitre a valet, and valet a Maitre; Pere a Fills, and mutuellement Fills a Pere.
Double a Simple, and simple a double.

Q. Quelles sont les Proprietez de la Relation?

R. Quatre; la premiere est de recevoir plus ou moins; comme plus ou moins
semblable, plus ou moins vertueux ou Amy: Touttefois cela ne convient pas a
tous les Relatifs, car ce qui est simple au respect du double ne le peut etre
ni plus ni moins; dememe ce qui est egal ne le peut etre ni plus ni moins sans
perdre son Egalite.

La Second est que les Relatifs sont mutuellement ensemble; c'est a dire
prennent leur etre ensemble, ainsy nous disons que Pere ne peut etre sans Fills,
ni Precepteur sans Disciple. Ce qui se doit entendre quant a la Relation, car
autrement l'un peut etre devant l'autre, comme le Pere est certainement devant
son Fills, mais il n'est pas Pere avaunt qu'il ayt un Fills.

La troisieme est que les vrayes Relatifs se connoissent l'un par l'autre: par
Example, Si je connois que Pierre est Pere, il faut que je scache qu'il a un
Fills ou plusieurs.

La quatrieme propriete des Relatifs est d'etre reciproque: Par Exemple, Maitre
a relation a Serviteur, and reciproquement Serviteur a Maitre.

Or pour bien entendre ces Relatifs il faut scavoir qu'il y a un Fondement sur
lequel est appuye l'Essence des Relatifs, c'est a dire qui est la Cause de leur
Relation: Par Exemple quand deux chooses sont dites egales; c'est a raison de
leur Quantite; scavoir longueur, largeur, and epaisseur. Et si else sont dites
semblables, c'est a cause de leur Qualite, parceque touttes deux sont bonnes ou
mauvaises, belles, ou laides.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'Action, and qu'est ce que Passion?

R. L'Action est l'Effect de l'Agent a l'egard de son Sujet. Et la Passion est
la Reception de l'Effet de l'Agent. Ainsi nous disons que le Feu; agit contre
l'Eau qu'il echaufe; and que l'Eau patit l'action du Feu, en recevant sa
chaleur. Dememe couper, c'est une action, and etre coupe, c'est une Passion?

Q. Comment divisez vous l'Action?

R. En naturelle, and artificielle; en Immanente, and Passagere. La naturelle,
comme la vision. l'Artificielle, comme l'Edification. l'Immanente, comme le
raisonement; and la Passagere, comme l'Ecriture.

Q. Combien y a-t-il de Proprietez de l'Action and Passion?

R. Deux, la premiere est de recevoir contrariete; comme echaufer and
rafroidir; etre chaud and etre froid.

La second est de recevoir plus ou moins, parcequ'on peut plus ou moins
echaufer ou rafroidir; plus ou moins rejouir ou attrister; and plus ou moins
aymer and etre aim.

Q. Que signify la Categorie Quand?

R. Elle signify le temps de l'Existence d'une chose, comme quand mourut le
Roy Charles second? le 6 de Fevrier.

Q. Que veut dire la Categorie Ou?

R. Elle design le Lieu; comme il mourut dans son Palais, dans son Lict.

Q. Que signify la Situation?

R. Elle declare la Posture, comme couche dans son lict, levant les yeux au
ciel.

Q. Comment divisez vous la Posture?

R. En naturelle, comme aux hommes d'avoir le visage eleve verse le ciel; and
aux Betes d'etre courbez verse la Terre. En Artificielle, comme on void dans les
gestes and postures des Farseurs, and Jacpoudins; and en violente, comme quand
on lie, and enchaine un Prisonier contre sa volonte.

Q. Que veut dire la Categorie de l'habit?

R. Elle exprime l'ornement, ou la maniere d'etre habille; comme etre arm,
etre vetu a la Francoise, a l'Angloise, a la Turque.

Q. Combien y a-t-il de sorts d'oppositions?

R. Quatre, Relatives, Contraires, Privatives, and Contradictoires.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'opposition relative?

R. C'est celle qui est enter deux terms relatifs; comme enter Pere and Fills,
Maitre and Valet.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'opposition contraire?

R. C'est celle qui se trouve, enter deux terms contraires, comme enter la
chaleur and la froidure; enter la blancheur and noirceur; enter le vice and la
virtue.

Notez que cette opposition est toujours enter deux terms reels, qui se
chassent mutuellement.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'opposition privative?

R. C'est celle qui est enter deux terms, don't l'un est reel, and l'autre
privatif; comme enter la veue, and l'aveuglement; l'ouye and la Surdite; la
Lumiere, and les Tenebres.

Notez que dans l'opposition privative il faut que l'un ou l'autre soit de
necessite dans son Sujet naturel, comme il faut de necessite que l'homme voye,
ou qu'il soit aveugle; qu'il oye, ou qu'il soit sourd.

Q Pourquoy dites vous en son Sujet naturel?

R. Parcequ'il seroit ridicule de dire qu'une pierre est aveugle ou sourde, car
elle ne peut pas etre privee de ce qu'elle n'a jamais eu, and ne peut avoir.

Notez encore que l'un des privatifs n'est point dans son Sujet en tout temps,
mais seulement dans le temps determine par la Nature: Par exemple, il seroit
absurd d'appeller les petis chiens aveugles avaunt le 9. Jour, car c'est le
temps que la Nature leurs a determine pour commencer a voir.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'opposition contradictoire?

R. C'est l'affirmation and negation d'une meme chose, dans un meme temps, dans
un meme lieu, and dans un meme Sujet: comme de dire que Socrates a ete homme,
and n'a pas ete homme; qu'il est jour and qu'il n'est pas jour dans un meme
lieu, and dans un meme temps.

Q. En Combien de facons une chose est elle dite premiere qu'une autre?

R. En six facons: Premierement d'origine, ou de nature, comme le Pere est
devant son Fills, and le soleil devant la Lumiere.

Secondement de Temps; comme l'Enfance est devant la Vieillesse.

Tiercement, de Nombre; comme un est devant deux.

En quatrieme lieu d'Ordre; comme le Fondement d'une maison est devant le toit*
and l'Exorde dans une harangue devant la Narration; and la Confirmation devant
la Conclusion.

En cinquieme lieu de Dignite; comme le Roy precede ses Sujets.

Et en sixieme lieu a raison du lieu; comme le Laquais est premier que son
Maitre, parcequ'il port le Flambeau devant luy.

Q. En combien de facons se prend le mouvement, ou changement?

R. En quatre: s'il se fait en la Substance, il s'appelle Generation, ou
Corruption. S'il se fait en la Quantite, il s'appelle Accroissement ou
Diminution. S'il se fait en la Qualite, il est nomme Alteration: and s'il se
fait dans le Lieu, il se nomme Transport.

Q. Qu'estce que Generation, and qu'estce que Corruption?

R. La Generation est un mouvement du non Etre a l'Etre; and au contraire la
Corruption est un mouvement de l'etre au non Etre: Par exemple, l'Oeuf de
poulet est engendre de la Semence du Cocq, and partant il est fait ce qu'il
n'etoit pas, passant du non Etre a l'Etre, ce qui s'appelle Generation; and
apres que de l'oeuf est engendre le poulet, s'ensuit la corruption de l'oeuf,
and ainsy l'oeuf pass de l'Etre au non Etre, ce qui s'appelle Corruption.

Q. Qu'est ce que l'Accroissement, and qu'estce que la Diminution?

R. L'Accroissement est un mouvement d'une moindre Quantite a une plus grande;
aucontraire la Diminution est un mouvement d'une plus grande Quantite a une
moindre; comme il se voit dans les Corpse naturels, lorsque croissants ils
tendent a leur perfection; and puis decroissants tendent a leur fin, and
corruption.

Q. Qu'est ce qu' Alteration?

R. C'est un mouvement qui se fait dans la Qualite; comme quand un Corpse de
froid devient chaud; ou qu'un homme d'ignorant devient scavant, ou de vicieux
devient vertueux.

Q. Qu'est ce que Transport?

R. C'est un changement de Lieu dans un autre; comme quand un Corpse pass du
haut en bas, ou du bas en haut.

De la Second Party de la LOGIQUE, OU De la Second Action de l'Esprit, qui
est l'Enonciation, ou Proposition. PARTY II.
Q. Q Qu'est ce qu'Enonciation?

R. C'est une Proposition qui affirm, ou qui nie une chose d'une autre, comme
par exemple, cete Dame est belle; cet homme n'a point d'Esprit.

Q. Combien y a-t-il de chooses a considerer dans l'Enonciation.

R. Deux, ses Principes, and ses Especes.

Q Combien y a-t-il de Principes de l'Enonciation?

R. Trois, le Sujet, l'Attribut, and la liaison de l'un and de l'autre, comme
Dieu est just, ces deux mots Dieu and just sont Sujet and Attribut, qui sont
liez par le Verb est.

Notez que le Verb sert quelquefois de liaison and d'Attribut, comme dans
cette Proposition, Caesar triumph, ou le Verb triumph tient la place de ces
deux mots est triumphant.

Q. Qu'est ce que la voix?

R. C'est un son qui est form par certains Organes, comme la Bouche, le
Palais, les Dents, les Polmons.

Q. Comment la divisez vous?

R. En articulee, comme celle qui se peut coucher par ecrit; and inarticulee
comme celle qui ne se peut coucher par ecrit, quoyqu'elle signify quelquefois
les passions de l'Ame.

Q. Qu'est ce que le Nom?

R. C'est un mot de l'Invention des hommes, qui signify sans aucune difference
de temps, and don't les Parties separees ne signifient rien; Exemple ce mot Ange
exprime une nature spirituelle sans s'arrester au pass, present, ou futur; and
ces Parties An -- ge ne signifient rien.

Notez que le nom est souvent impose aux chooses par la volonte des hommes, and
non suivant leur Nature, comme il est aise a voir parceque les hommes appellent
une meme chose de diverse noms: Par exemple, Dieu est appelle Adonai par les
Hebreux; (...) par les Grecs; Deus par les Latins; God par les Anglois; Dieu
par les Francois: Alla par les Arabes and par les Turcs.

Q. Comment divisez vous le Nom?

R. En Substantif, and Adjectif: le Substantif signify la chose, comme Terre,
Soleil; and l'Adjectif la maniere, en marquant en meme temps le Sujet, auquel
elle convient comme bon, Just.

Notez que le Pronom tient la place du nom, Je ne parle pas icy de Combien de
sorts il y ena, parceque je l'ay montre dans ma Grammaire.

Q. Qu'est ce que le Verb?

R. C'est un mot qui signify quelque chose avec difference de temps: Exemple,
Nicolas ecrit; ecrit fait voir non seulement l'action d'ecrire, mais encor le
temps present.

Remarquez que du Nom and du Verb se fait l'Enonciation, ou Proposition, don't
les Parties signifient quelque chose; Exemple, Dieu est just Dieu, and Just
signifient quelque chose, quoyque pris separement.

Q. Quelles sont les Especes de l'Enonciation? ou comment la divisez vous?

Q. En Singuliere, Particuliere, Universelle, Affirmative, Negative, Absolve,
Conditionelle, Necessaire, Contingente, Probable, Possible, Impossible,
Sophistique, ou Captieuse, Simple, Composee, Definie, Indefinie, Modale,
Copulative, Disjunctive, Relative, Discretive, Exclusive, Exceptive,
Comparative, etc.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'Enonciation Singuliere?

R. C'est celle don't le Sujet est singulier, comme Pierre est homme; Ciceron
est eloquent.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Particuliere?

R. C'est une Proposition, qui a un Sujet universel restraint par un Sign
particulier; comme quelques hommes sont brutaux.

Q. Qu'est ce que l'Universelle?

R. C'est une Proposition qui a non seulement un Sujet universel, mais a encor
devant soy un sign universel; comme tout Animal est sensible.

Q. Qu'est ce que l'Affirmative?

R. C'est celle qui attribue une chose a une autre; comme Dieu est bon.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Negative?

R. C'est celle qui ote une chose a une autre; comme Dieu n'est pas Cruel.

Q. Qu'est ce que l'Absolue?

R. C'est celle don't le Term est absolu, c'est a dire qu'il ne se raporte pas
a un autre, comme Pierre est scavant: l'Homme est raisonable.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Conditionelle?

R. C'est celle qui suppose une Condition, comme si se soleil luit, donc il est
jour.

Q. Qu'est ce que la necessaire?

R. C'est celle, don't l'une posee, l'autre s'ensuit veritable, comme cette Dame
est belle and bonne, donc elle est aymable.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Contingente, probable and possible?

R. C'est celle, don't l'une posee, l'autre ne s'ensuit pas tonjours; comme
Pierre est homme, donc il est vaillant and Genereux.

Q. Qu'est ce que l'impossible?

R. C'est celle, don't l'une posee, Jamais l'autre ne s'ensuit; comme Pierre est
homme, donc il est insensible.

Q. Qu'est ce que la sophistique, ou captieuse?

R. C'est celle, qui trompe, quoyqu'elle paroisse veritable; comme, Ceque vous
a'vez achete, vous l'avez mange,

Vous avez achete de la chair crew,

Donc vous avez mange de la chair crew.

Q. Qu'est ce que la simple?

R. C'est celle qui n'est composee que d'un seul Sujet, and Attribut; comme
Pierre est honete.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Composee?

R. C'est celle qui a quelque chose de joint a son Sujet, ou Attribut and
quelquefois a tous deux; comme l'homme qui est honete, est estime du Monde.

Q. Qu'est ce que la finie, definie, ou determinee?

R. C'est celle qui determine, ou specify, comme Jean est scavant, cet homme a
de l'Esprit, Alexandre etoit grand Captain.

Q. Qu'est ce que l'infinie, indifinie, ou indeterminee?

R. C'est celle qui ne determine pas; comme l'homme est just, les Philosophes
sont contents.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Modale?

R. C'est celle qui a devant soy l'un de ces mots suivants, possible, advient,
impossible, necessaire; comme il est possible que vous appreniez le Francois.
Il advient que l'homme est rich; il est impossible que le Just soit damn; il
est necessaire que le mechant soit puni.

Il y a d'autres Propositions, qui sont Copulatives, comme la Science, and les
Richesses seules ne peuvent render un homme heureux. Disjonctives, comme ou la
Femme aim, ou elle hait. Relatives, comme tell est la vie d'un homme, tell
est sa mort, Discretives, comme la Fortune peut nous oter les Biens, mais non
le Courage. Exclusives, comme Dieu seul doit etre aim pardessus touttes
chooses. Exceptives, comme amoinsque vous ne soyez scavant, vous ne serez pas
estime. Comparatives, comme votre Cousine est plus belle que ma Soeur; and
quelques autres, que j'omets icy, parcequ'elles ne sont pas de grande
consequence.

Notez que toutte Proposition est universelle Affirmative, comme tout honet
homme est estime; ou universelle Negative, comme null homme vicieux n'est
estime; ou particuliere Affirmative, comme quelques Philosophes sont contents;
ou particuliere Negative, comme quelques hommes sont incivils.

Notez 2. qu'il ya une universalite sans Exception, comme tout homme est
vivant; tout homme mourant en la grace de Dieu sera sauve; and une Universalite
avec exception, comme tous les hommes cherchent leur Interest; tous les jeunes
gens sont inconstants; ce qui se doit entendre pour l'ordinaire.

Notez 3. Qu'il ya des Propositions qui ne sont universelles que parcequ'elles
se doivent entendre de generibus singulorum, and non de singulis generum; c'est
adire de touttes les Especes d'un Genre, and non de tous les Individus de ces
Especes: comme que tous les Animaux furent sauvez dans l'Arche de Noe,
parcequ'il yen a eu quelques uns de chaque espece de sauvez.

Notez 4. Qu'il ya des Propositions universelles, quoyqu'elles n'ayent pas
devant else ces Signs universele tout, chaque, null: comme l'homme est
raisonable: La virtue doit etre aymee. Semblablemt il ya des Propositions
particulieres, qui n'ont pas devant else ces Signs particuliers. Certain,
quelque, comme il ya des hommes scavants en Angleterre, on dit de bonnes
nouvelles; les Anglois sont Genereux.

Notez 5. qu'entantque l'Enonciation est une Party du Syllogism, elle est
appellee Proposition. Entant qu'elle est prise pour une Proposition douteuse,
dans le Discourse, Dispute, ou Controverse, elle est appellee Theme, These,
Question, Sujet, Argument. Entantqu'elle peut etre soutenue probablement, tant
du cote de l'Affirmation que de la Negation, elle est appellee Problem. En^ant
qu'elle est conclue par un Syllogism, ou autre Argumentation, elle est
appellee Conclusion, Illation, Consequence. Entantqu' a cause de son homonyme,
ou autre fallace elle recoit diverses douteuses Interpretations, elle est
appellee, Sophisme, Cavillation, Surprise, fallace; and entantque c'est une
Proposition approuvee de tous les hommes, elle est nommee Axiom, Principe,
Maxim.

Q. Qu'est ce que Division?

R. C'est ce qui separe les parties du tout.

Q. En Combien de facons une chose peut elle etre divisee?

R. En Cinq, premierement quand on divise un Sujet en ses Parties integrantes,
comme le Corpse, en Tete, en Bras, en Iambes, etc. Secondement quand on divise
le tout Phisique en ses Parties essentielles, comme un Corpse en Matiere and en
Form, l'homme en Corpse and en Ame. En troisieme lieu quand on divise l'Espece
en son genre, and en sa difference; comme l'homme en Animal, and Raisonable; le
genre en se Especes, comme toutte Substance est Corpse ou Esprit; tout Animal
est homme, ou Beat; Ou le genre par ses differences, comme tout Animal est
raisonable, ou prive de raison; toutte Proposition est vraye ou fausse. En
quatrieme lieu quand on divise un Sujet commun par les Accidents opposez, don't
il est capable, comme tout Astre est lumineux par soy meme, ou par reflection,
tout Corpse est en mouvement, ou en repos. En cinquieme lieu quand on divise un
Accident en ses diverse Sujets, comme quand nous divisons les Biens en Biens
d'Esprit, de Corpse, de. Nature, and de Fortune.

Notez que la Division, pour etre bonne, doit etre entiere, c'est adire, que
les members de la division doivent comprendre toutte l'etendue du term que
l'on divise; comme pair et impair comprennent toutte l'etendue du term de
nombre, n'y en ayant point qui ne soit pair, ou impair: pareillement Homme and
Beat comprennent toutte l'etendue de ce term Animal, parcequ'il n'y en a point
qui ne soient ou Homme ou Beat.

Q. Qu'est ce que D^finition.

R. C'est une expression de la Nature des chooses.

Q. Combien y a t-il de sorts de definitions?

R. Deux, l'une parfaite qui est composee de Genre and de Difference; comme
l'homme est un Animal raisonnable; and l'a^tre imparfaite, qu'on appelle
Description; parcequ'elle declare les chooses par leurs Proprietez, Effects and
Causes; comme l'homme est un Animal docile, capable de Discipline, ne pour de
grandes chooses, etc.

Notez que trois chooses sont necessaires pour fair une bonne Definition, il
faut qu'elle soit universelle, propre, and claire, Voila ^e qui regard la
Second Party de la Logique.

De la Troisieme Party de la LOGIQUE, OU De la Troisieme Action de l'Esprit,
qui est le Discourse ou Argumentation. PARTY III.
Q. QU'est ce que le Discourse ou Argumentation?

R. C'est une Oraison, dans laquelle on conclud quelque chose d'une ou de
plusieurs Propositions, disposees suivant les Regles, and Precepts de la
Logique.

Q. Pourquoy dites vous d'une ou de plusieurs Propositions?

R. C'est parce qu'il ya des Argumentations, qui concluent avec une seule
Proposition, comme l'Enthymeme; d'autres avec deux, comme le Syllogism;
d'autres avec un plusieurs, comme l'Exemple, and le Sorites.

Q. Comment divisez vous l'Argumentation?

R. En Parfaite, comme le Syllogism; and en Imparfaite, comme l'Enthymeme,
l'Example and Sorites.

Q. Qu'est ce que le Syllogism?

R. C'est une Argumentation, en laquelle deux Propositions etant bien
disposees, il s'ensuit necessairement quelque autre chose que ce qui a ete
propose; comme

Tous les hommes doivent etre vertueux,

Mon Friar est homme,

Donc mon Friar doit etre vertueux.

Q. Combien a-t-il de Parties?

R. Deux, l'Antecedant, and la Consequence.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'Antecedant?

R. Ce sont deux Propositions tellement disposees enter else, and a la
Proposition qui est appellee Consequence, qu'il est impossible de les accorder
comme vrayes, sans consentir en meme temps a la verite de la Consequence; Par
Exemple,

Tout homme just est aim de Dieu,

Mon Cousin est just,

Donc mon Cousin est aim de Dieu.

Q. Comment appellez vous la premiere Proposition?

R. Elle s'appelle majeure, parcequ'elle est plus universelle que la Second,
d'autantque le Moyen est joint, avec le grand Term ou Attribut.

Q. Et comment appellez vous la Second?

R. Elle s' appelle Mineure, parcequ'elle est moins etendue que la premiere;
da'utantque le Moyen est joint avec le petit Term, ou Sujet. Ces deux
Propositions sont aussy appellees Premises, parcequ'elles vont devant la
Conclusion.

Q. Combien y a t-il de Terms dans le Syllogism?

R. Trois, scavoir le petit Term, le grand Term, and le Moyen.

Notez que le petit and grand Term sont toujours en la Consequence; and que le
Moyen ne se trouve jamais que dans la Majeure, and Mineure.

Notez encore que le petit Term s'appelle Sujet and le grand Term Attribut.

Q. Pourquoy appellez vous le troisieme Term Moyen?

R. C'est parce qu'il lie, and conjoint les deux autres en la Conclusion; and
pour parler plus clairement, le Moyen n'est rie^ que la Raison, par laquelle on
conclud l' Attribut du Sujet ou le grand Term du petit; par exemple, quand je
veux prouver, and conclure que cette Dame est aymable, je cherche le Moyen, ou
la raison pourquoy aymable est attribue a cette Dame, and je trouve que c'est
parce qu'elle est belle, d'ou je form ce Syllogism;

Toutte Dame qui est belle est aymable;

Cette Dame est belle,

Donc cette Dame est aymable: Ou vous voyez qu'il n'y a que trois Terms, Dame,
Aimable, Belle.

Notez que souvent les Terms sont composez, comme j'ay deja montre.

Q. Sur quoy fondez vom cette facon de prouver?

R. Sur ces deux Maxims; la premiere que tout ce qui se dit d'un Sujet pris
universellement, se dit aussy de tout ce qui est contenu sous luy: Par exemple,
Animal se dit de tous les hommes, donc il se dit aussy de Pierre and de Paul,
etc.

La Second que tout ce qui se nie d'un Sujet pris universellement, se nie
aussy de tout ce qui est contenu sous luy; comme la toutte puissance se nie de
touttes Creatures, donc elle se nie aussy de l'Ange, de l'homme, de Pierre, de
Jean, de Paul, etc.

Des Modes des Figures.
Q. Qu'entendez vous par Figure?

R. I'entend la Disposition du Moyen, avec le Sujet and l'Attribut, qui,
parcequ'il ne se place qu'en trois manieres, ne peut par consequence fair que
trois Figures.

Q. Combien y a-t il de Modes dans la premiere Figure?

R. Quatre parfaits, exprimez par ces mots,

Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferio.

Et cinq imparfaits exprimez par ces autres mots,

Baralipton, Celantes, Dabitis, Fapesmo, Frisesomorum.

Q. Qu'entendez vous par ces mots Barbara, Celarent, etc.

R. La premiere Syllabe de chaque mot denote la Majeure, la second Syllabe
denote la Mineure, and la troisieme la Consequence. Deplus A signify la
Proposition universelle affirmative; E signify la Proposition universelle
Negative; I la particuliere Affirmative, and O la particuliere Negative, comme
il est marque par ces deux verse.

Asserit a, negat e, verum generaliter ambae,
Asserit i, negat o, sed particulariter ambo.
De sort que quand vous ferez un Syllogism, don't la Majeure, la Mineure, and
la consequence seront universelles affirmatives, il faut dire qu'il est en
Barbara, qui est un mode parfait de la premiere Figure.

Notez que la quatrieme syllabe dans ce mot Baralipton, and la quatrieme and
cinquieme dans Frisesomorum n'est que pour l'accomplissement du verse.

Q. Combien y a-t il de Modes dans la second Figure?

R. Quatre, exprimez par ces mots

Cesare, Camestres, Festino, Baroco.

Q. Et combien y en a-t-il dans la troisieme?

R. Six, exprimez par ces mots

Darapti, Felapton, Disamis, Datisi, Bocardo, Ferison.

Q. Comment distinguez vous la premiere Figure de la Second and de la
troisieme?

R. Par la diverse disposition du Moyen avec le petit and le grand Term, qui
sont appellez Sujet and Attribut, and quelquefois nommez les Extremes.

Q. Comment mettez vous le Moyen dans la premiere Figure?

R. Il est Sujet dans la Majeure, and Attribut dans la Mineure, comme

Tout homme est Pecheur,

Pierre est homme,

Donc Pierre est Pecheur.

on vous voyez que Homme qui est Moyen pour prouver que Pierre est Pecheur, est
Sujet dans la Majeure, and Attribut dans la Mineure.

Q. Comment mettez vous le Moyen dans la second Figure?

R. Il est Attribut aux deux autres Terms; par exemple;

Null n'est aim qui est craint,

Tout Tyran est craint,

Donc null Tyran n'est aim.

ou vous voyez que Craint, qui est le Moyen, est Attribut dans la Majeure, and
Mineure.

Q. Comment mettez vous le Moyen dans la troisieme Figure?

R. Il est Sujet dans les Premises, c'est a dire dans la Majeure and Mineure;
comme

Chaque Ange est tout Esprit,

Chaque Ange est Creature,

Donc quelque Creature est tout Esprit. ou vous voyez que pour prouver cette
Proposition, quelque Creature est tout Esprit, l'Ange est Sujet dans la Majeure
and Mineure.

Q. Donnez des Exemples de chaque Mode en chaque Figure.

Exemples de la premiere Figure.
Barbara.
Toutte habitude est Qualite, Toutte virtue est habitude, Donc toutte virtue est
Qualite.
Celarent.
Null passione n'est content, Tout Avare est passione, Donc null Avare n'est
content.
Darii. Ferio.
Tout Esclave est miserable, Diogenes est Esclave, Donc Diogenes est miserable.
Null derobant n'est just, Judas derobe, Donc Judas n'est pas just.
Exemples de la second Figure.
Cesare.
Null n'est aim qui est craint, Tout Tyran est craint, Donc null Tyran n'est
aim.
Camestres.
Toutte chose utile est fondee sur la virtue, Nulle chose deshonete n'est fondee
sur la virtue, Donc nulle chose deshonete n'est utile.
Festino.
Nulle chose licite n'est vicieuse, Quelque volupte est vicieuse, Donc quelque
volupte n'est pas licite.
Baroco.
Tout bon Historien dit la verite, B. ne dit pas la verite, Donc B. n'est pas
bon Historien.
Examples de la troisieme Figure.
Darapti.
Toutte virtue est louable, Toutte virtue est habitude, Donc quelque habitude est
louable.
Felapton.
Null vice n'est louable, Tout vice est habitude, Done quelque habitude n'est
pas louable.
Disamis.
Quelques ignorants sont admis pour Juges, Tout ignorant est injuste, Donc
quelques injustes sont admis pour Juges,
Datisi.
Toutte Salamandre vit dans le Feu, Quelque Salamandre est Animal, Donc quelque
Animal vit dans le Feu.
Bocardo.
Quelque desir n'est pas deregle, Tout desir est act de volonte, Donc quelque
act de volonte n'est deregle.
Ferison.
Nulles Richesses ne sont rejettees, Quelques Richesses sont domageablese Donc
quelque's chooses domageables ne sont pas rejettees.
Des cinq Modes imparfaits de la premiere Figure.
Baralipton.
Quiconque est exempt de vice, est libre, Tout philosophe est exempt de vice,
Donc quelqu' homme libre est Philosophe.
Celantes.
Null Esclave de ses plaisirs n'est libre, Tout Avare est Esclave de ses
plaifirs, Donc null homme libre n'est Avare.
Dabitis
Quiconque est Courageux meprise la Fortune, Quelque Philosophe est courageux,
Donc quelqu'un me prisant la Fortune est Philosophe.
Fapesmo.
Tout Element est Corpse simple, Null ciel n'est Element, Donc quelque Corpse
simple n'est pas Ciel.
Frisesomorum.
Quelque Laron recoit faveur de son Roy, Null homme qui recoit faveur de son Roy
sera puni, Donc quelque Laron ne sera point puni.
Q. Pourquoy appellez vous ces cinq Modes imparfaits?

R. Parcequ'ils ne concluent pas si clairement que les autres; mais ils peuvent
etre rendus parfaits, en les reduisant aux quatre Modes parfaits de la premiere
Figure.

Notez que Fapesmo and Frisesomorum se doivent reduire en Ferio.

Q. Combien y a-t-il de Regles a observer dans ces trois Figures?

R. Sept; la premiere est que chaque Syllogism ne doit avoir que trois Terms,
d'ou il appert que cet Argument, dans lequel il y a deux Moyens, n'est pas bon.

Tout Nombre est Accident,

Six hommes sont un nombre,

Donc six hommes sont un Accident.

Ce double Moyen est dans le mot Nombre, qu'on prend en la Majeure pour le
nombre nombrant, and en la Mineure pour le nombre nombre.

La Second, le Moyen ne se doit jamais trouver en la Conclusion.

La troisieme; la Conclusion suit toujours la pire des Propositions; c'est a
dire si dans le Sillogisme une des Propositions est Negative, la Conclusion le
doit etre aussy. Pareillement si l'une des Propositions est particuliere, la
conclusion le doit etre aussy.

La quatrieme; La Conclusion ne doit rien avoir deplus que l'Antecedent; par
cette maxim il appert que cet Argument ne vaut rien.

Ceque vous avez achete, vous l'avez mange,

Vous avez achete de la chair,

Donc vous avez mange de la chair crew.

La Cinquieme; De deux Propositions Negatives, on ne peut rien conclure de
vray, exemple

Nul^ Arbre n'est Animal.

Null homme n'est Arbre,

Donc null homme n'est Animal.

La 6. de deux Propositions particulieres on ne peut aussy rien conclure de
vray; comme

Quelque Ange est bon,

Lucifer est Ange,

Donc Lucifer est bon.

La Septieme est que la Conclusion de la ^roisieme Figure est toujours
particuliere; desorteque cet Argument ne vaut rien.

Toutte Virtue est bonne,

Toutte virtue est habitude,

Donc toutte habitude est bonne.

Des Argumentations imparfaites.
Q. Pourquoy les appellez vous imparfaites?

R. Je les apelle imparfaites, non quant a la matiere, qui peut etre aussy
vraye que celle du Syllogism, mais quant a la Form seulement; car la Form du
Syllogism etant plus exact, and mieux reglee persuade beaacoup mieux.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'Enthymeme?

R. C'est un Syllogism imparfait, and qui peut etre rendu parfait en y
adjoutant une Proposition; comme

Pierre est Laron,

Donc il doit etre puni.

Si vous y adjoutez la Proposition qui est sousentendue, l'Enthymeme deviendra
Syllogism, comme

Tous Larons doivent etre punis,

Pierre est Laron,

Donc Pierre doit etre puni.

Q. Qu'est ce que Dilemme?

R. C'est une Argumentation qui a deux Parties, de l'une desquelles on ne peut
se deffendre: En cette facon Carneades prouva a Diogenes qu'il ne luy devoit
pas vingt ecus, qu'il luy avoit promis, au cas qu'il le rendit capable de
prouver tout ce qu'il voudroit. Si je prouve bien que je ne vous dois rien,
quelle raison avez vous de me demander vingt ecus; and si je le prouve mal,
n'etant pas capable de persuader, je ne vous dois rien.

Q. Q'uest ce qu'Induction?

R. C'est une Illation, Collection ou Conclusion d'une chose universelle par le
denombrement des Singuliers; comme

Jean est mortel, Pierre est mortel, Alexandre est mortel, and ainsy des autres
particuliers, donc tous les hommes sont mortels.

Tout homme a sentiment; le Cheval, l'oiseau, le Serpent, le Poisson ont
sentiment, and ainsy des autres; donc tout animal a sentiment.

Q. Qu'est ce que l'Exemple?

R. C'est un recit de quelque chose faite, ou feinte, propre a prouver ce qu'on
propose, donnez une Exemple d'vne chose faite.

Toutte guerre Civil est pernicieuse,

La guerre d'Italie est Civil,

Donc la guerre d'Italie est pernicieuse.

Si quelqu'un nie la Majeure de ce Syllogism il la faudr a prouver par
l'Exemple des Grecs, des Romans, Francois, Allemans, and autres Nations, parmy
les quelles les Guerres Civiles ont ete pernicieuses.

Donnez une Exemple d'une chose feinte.

Les Loups, ne pouvant surprendre les Brebis a cause de la guard des Chiens,
firent paix avec else, a condition qu'elles renvoyroient les Chiens, les
Brebis s'y etant accordees, and ayant renvoye les chiens, else devinrent
bientot la proye des Loups; ainsy en est il du Test de l'Eglise d'Angleterre,
l'Eglise Roman veut fair la paix avec elle, a condition qu'elle otera le
Test, scachant bien que desqu'il sera ote, elle deviendra incontinent la Proye
de l'Eglise Roman.

Q Qu'est ce que Sorites?

R. C'est un Tas de Propositions sans aucun moyen and qui, souvent n'ayant
point de Connection les unes avec les autres, ont une fausse Concluson; comme

La Fievre continue fait garder ^e Lict,

Le Lict est un lieu de Repos,

Le Repos est utile a l'homme

Donc la Fievre continue est utile a l'homme.

La viande fort salee fait bien boire,

Le bien boire fait passer la soif, Donc la viande sallee fait passer la soif.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Sagesse?

R. C'est une connoissance des chooses Divines, and Humaines; and, dans le sens
vulgaire, celuy la est sage, qui est pieux, and scavant.

Q. Qu'est ce que l'Intelligence?

R. L'Intelligence, au respect de Dieu, est une simple Notion, qui, sans aucun
discourse, connoit touttes chooses; and au respect de l'homme c'est une
connoissance de certaines Propositions, que nous concevons parfaitement and
sans peine. Desorteque elle peut etre nommee Demonstration.

Q. Qu'est ce que Demonstration?

R. C'est une Proposition si claire, and evidente d'elle meme, qu'elle n'a pas
besoin d'etre prouvee; comme le Tout est plus grand que sa Party; il est
impossible d'etre and de n'etre pas; le Neant ne peut etre cause de soy meme,
etc.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Science?

R. C'est une connoissance claire and certain d'une chose par sa propre cause;
comme qu'il est jour, parceque le Soleil luit; que la Lune est Eclipsee
parceque la Terre se trouve enter le Soleil and la Lune.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Foy?

R. C'est une ferme persuasion d'une verite obscure, appuyee sur le temoignage
de quelqu'un; comme quand je croy qu'il ya une ville appellee Rome, parcequ'on
me la dit; ou que je croy qu'il y a un Enfer, parceque la Saint Ecriture l'a
revele.

Q. Qu'est ce que l'Art?

R. Ce sont des regles qui dirigent l'Agent dans la Production d'une ouvrage
sensible, and perdurable; comme la Peinture qui fait des Tableaux. L'Art est
encore ce qui dirige une action, don't il ne rest rien de sensible, comme le
Chanter, and le Raisonnement; en ce sens la Logique est un Art; elle est aussy
une Science, parcequ'elle a des Demonstrations.

Q. Qu'elle est la Fin de l'Art?

R. C'est de perfectioner la Nature, ou de l'imiter.

Q. Qu'est ce que l'Opinion?

R. C'est une Connoissance douteuse, fondee sur une raison probable; comme
qu'il y ait un nouveau Monde dans la Lune.

Q. Combien y a-t-il de sorts de probables?

R. Trois: La premiere, quand la chose est si croyable, que Person ne la
revoque en doubt, comme que les Peers and Meres cherissent leurs Enfants.

La Second, quand une chose est plus croyable que l'autre, comme qu'un jeune
homme bien sain, vivra plus long temps qu'un vieillard.

La troisieme est des chooses non repugnantes, c'est a dire de touttes chooses
possibles, desquelles nous jugeons par quelque Conjecture; comme parceque les
nuees sont grosses, and obscures, nous concluons qu'il pleuvra.

Q. Qu'est ce que le Moyen?

R. Le Moyen don't on se sert pour prouver quelque Proposition, n'est autre
chose comme j'ay deja dit que la raison, pour laquelle l'Attribut est dit ou
nie du Sujet; comme vous pouvez voir dans cette Proposition, Ma Soeur est
aymable; Soeur est le Sujet, and Aymable l'Attribut; or si vous voulez chercher
le Medium, ou la raison purquoy elle est aymable, vous trouverez que c'est
parcequ'elle est belle; d'ou vous pouvcz former cet argument.

Toutte fille qui est fort belle est aymable,

Ma Soeur est fort belle,

Donc ma Soeur est aymable.

Q. Combien y a-t-il de Sources d'ou l'on tire le Moyen?

R. Il y en a seize, don't voicy un Exemple de chacune.

1. De la definition.

Tout Animal raisonnable est capable de Discipline,

L'homme est un Animal raisonnable,

Donc l'homme est capable de discipline.

Notez qu'a tout ce que la Definition convient, la chose definie convient
aussy, and vice versa.

2. Du denombrement des Parties.

La Virtue se divise en Prudence, Justice, Force, and Temperance.

La Finesse n'est aucune de ces Parties,

Donc elle n'est pas virtue.

Notez que le Tout pose, touttes les Parties sont aussy posees; and aucontraire
si touttes les Parties, voire une seule est otee alors le Tout n'est plus.

Notez encor que dans le Tout, outre les Parties essentielles, il y en a encor
d'integrantes, sans lesquelles le Tout ne peut subsister; comme

Le Corpse humain ne peut subsister sans Tete, ni la maison sans Fondement; and
d'autres qui ne sont que Parcelles, sans lesquelles le Tout ne laisse pas de
subsister, quoyqu'il soit moins parfait, comme est au Corpse humain une oreille,
ou un doit; and a la Maison une Solive.

3. De l'Etymologie.

Celuy qui sauve les Hommes est Sauveur,

Jesus Christ sauve les Hommes,

Donc Jesus Christ est Sauveur.

Notez qu'il y a des mots qui sont Primitifs, c'est a dire qui ne prennent
point leur Origin d'un autre mot, comme Table, Oyseau, Cheval, etc. and
d'autres derivatifs, qui sont extraits d'autres mots, derivatifs, qui sont
extraits d'autres mots, comme Docteur, qui est tire de Doctrine; and Oyseleur
d'oyseau, etc.

4. Des Conjoints

C'est un lieu d'o^ nous tirons une Consequence du concret a l'abstrait, and
vice versa; par exemple,

Qui aim la Justice est Just^,

Mon Friar aim la Justice,

Donc mon Friar est Just.

5. Du Genre.

Toutte la gloire de la Virtue est dans l'Action,

La Force est une Virtue,

Donc toutte sa gloire est dans l'Action.

6. De l'Espece.

Qui possede la Temperance, possede une Virtue,

Mon Cousin possede la Temperance,

Donc mon Cousin possede une Virtue.

Notez que l'Argument du Genre a l'Espece est bon par Negation; comme

Il n'est pas Animal,

Donc il n'est pas homme.

Et que Celuy de l'Espece au Genre est bon par Affirmation; exemple

Il est homme,

Donc il est Animal.

Mon Friar est just,

Donc il est Vertueux.

7. Des Semblables.

Comme l'oeil charge d'une taye ne voit pas les beautez du Corpse; ainsi un
Esprit enseveli sous la chair ne discern pas les Excellences de la Virtue.

8. Des Dissemblables.

Les Epicuriens mettent toutte la Felicite de l'homme dans les plaisirs du
Corpse; Donc les chretiens la doivent etablir dans ceux de l'Ame.

Notez que ces deux Lieux sont plus propres aux Poets, and Orateurs, qu'aux
Philosophes.

9. Des Opposez.

La Paix assure le Repos de l'homme, la Guerre le trouble;

Donc la Guerre est autant digne de notre haine que la Paix est digne de nos
souhaits.

Remarquez qu'il y a des Opposez de quatre sorts, Contraires, Relatifs,
Privatifs, and Contradictoires, ainsy que j'ay fait voir cy devant; on peut
tirer des Arguments de chacun.

10. Des Adjoints, ou Circonstances.

Il est sorti en plein midy, accompagne de gens de Bien, and sans Arms, Donc
il n'a point commis le Meurtre.

11. Des Antecedants, and Consequents.

Ce champ a ete moissonne,

Donc il a ete seem.

Ce champ n'a pas ete seem,

Donc il ne se peut moissonner.

12. De la Repugnance.

Il le cherit,

Donc il ne le persecute pas.

Notez que Repugnant est ce qui ne se peut attribuer a un autre. Ainsi Homme,
Ange, Ciel, Feu sont repugnants, parceque l'un ne se peut affirmer de l'autre.

13. Des Causes.

Q. Comment se divise la Cause?

R. En Efficiente, Materielle, Formelle, and Finale.

Example de la Cause Efficiente.

Il est jour quand le Soleil est leve,

Le Soleil est maintenant leve,

Donc il est jour.

Exemple de la Materielle.

Ce qui est compose de terre, pese,

Nos Corpse sont composez de terre,

Donc nos Corpse pesent.

Exemple de la Formelle.

Tout Animal qui raisonne, est immortel,

Tout homme raisonne,

Donc tout homme est immortel.

Exemple de la Finale.

Toute Creature qui est nee pour servir Dieu, ne le doit pas offencer,

L'homme est ne pour servir Dieu,

Donc il ne le doit pas offencer.

14. Des Effects.

Nous devons fuir ce qui nous rend infames,

Le vice nous rend infames,

Donc nous devons fuir le vice.

Remarquez que la Cause etant mise, l'effet s'ensuit, and la cause otee,
l'effet cesse. Ce qui se doit entendre de la cause formelle, par exemple,
mettez un Ame raisonable dans un Corpse, voila l'homme; otez l'Ame du Corpse,
l'homme cesse d'etre.

15. De la Comparaison.

Si l'Homicide doit etre puni, a plus forte raison le Parricide.

Si celuy qui s'attaque au Magistrate merit Punition, a plus forte raison celuy
qui s'attaque au Roy.

Si dix mill hommes ne peuvent forcer une place, mill ne la forceront pas.

16. Du Temoignage?

Q. Combien y a-t-il de sorts de Temoignages?

R. Il y en a de deux sorts, Divin and humain.

Donnez un Exemple du Temoignage ^ivin.

La Saint Ecriture dit qu'il y a un Paradis,

Donc il y en a un.

Donnez un Exemple du Temoignage humain.

Aristote dit qu'il y a quatre Causes,

Donc il n'y en a pas davantage.

Des Arguments Captieux, ou Sophismes.
Tout ainsi que pour combatre sans danger, il ne suffit pas d'avoir des Arms
offensives, comme Epee, Pique, Pistolet and Mousquet, mais il faut aussi avoir
des defensives, comme Bouclier, Cuirasse, and Casque: De meme pour bien
raisonner, il ne suffit pas de scavoir tous les Precepts de fair de bons
Arguments, pour convaincre les autres, il faut encore scavoir les moyens de se
deffendre des surprises, and tromperies de nos Adversaires.

Q. Combien y a t-il de sorts d'Arguments Captieux?

R. Il y en a de plusieurs sorts, par Equivocation, par Amphibologie, par
Conjonction, par Division, par Diction, and par Consequence ou Conclusion.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'un Argument Captieux par Equivocation?

R. C'est quand on se sert d'un Term, qui signify plusieurs chooses; comme

Le chien jappe,

Un Astre est un chien,

Donc un Astre jappe.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'un Argument captieux par Amphibologie?

R. C'est quand le sens est douteux, and confus, comme

Aio te, Aeacida, Romanos vincere posse.

On ne peut pas dire par ce verse qui sera victorieux.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'un Argument Captieux par Conjonction?

R. C'est quand nous colligeons une Conjonction fausse des chooses qui sont
vrayes prises separement; comme

Annibal est mauvais,

Annibal est Captain,

Donc Annibal est mauvais Captain.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'un Argument trompeur par Division?

R. C'est quand on attribue aux chooses divisees, ce qui ne leur convient que
pendant leur union; comme

Trois and quatre sont nombre pair and impair,

Trois and quatre sont sept,

Donc Sept est un nombre pair and impair.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'un Argument captieux par Diction?

R. C'est quand les mots Signifient autre chose dans la Conclusion, qu'ils ne
font dans l'une des Propositions precedentes, passant d'un genre a un autre;
comme

Ce que vous avez achete vous l'avez mange,

Vous avez achete de la chair crew,

Donc vous avez mange de la chair crew.

Q. Donnez moy des Exemples des Arguments captieux par la Consequence, ou
Conclusion.

R. Il ne faut point fair d'Images pour les adorer,

Donc il ne faut point fair d'Images.

Il ne faut point aller a l'Eglise pour negocier,

Donc il ne faut point aller a l'Eglise.

Ces Arguments sont faux, parce qu'il n'y a pas tant en la Conclusion, que dans
la Proposition precedente.

Qui te dit etre Animal, dit vray,

Qui te dit etre Asne, te dit Animal,

Donc qui te dit etre Asne, dit vray.

Cette conclusion n'est pas bonne, parcequ'Animal est plus etendu qu'Asne.

Tu ne scais pas ce que je te veux demander,

Je te veux demander ton nom,

Donc tu ne scais pas ton Nom.

Cette Conclusion n'est pas bonne, car quoyque je ne scache pas determinement
ce que tu me veux demander, avantque tu me le demandes, touttefois je le puis
scavoir.

Cette Esclave est tienne,

Cette Esclave est Mere,

Donc cette Esclave est ta Mere.

Cette Conclusion ne vaut rien, d'autan^que ces accidents conviennent au Sujet
separement, mais non conjointement; and parce que de deux Propositions
Particulieres, on ne peut rien conclure de vray.

Ange n'a que deux Syllabes,

Lucifer est Ange.

Donc Lucifer n'a que deux Syllabes.

Animal est Genre,

L'homme est Animal,

Donc l'homme est Genre.

Ces Conclusions ne sont pas bonnes, parcequ' homme and Animal sont pris dans
un sens dans la Majeure, and dans un autre dans la Mineure.

Ces deux Tableaux sont egaux en largeur, and inegaux en longueur,

Donc ces deux Tableaux sont egaux and inegaux,

Alexandre etant yvre est furieux,

Alexandre etant sobre est Sage,

Donc Alexandre est furieux, and sage.

Ces Conclusions sont bonnes, sub diverso respectu, sed non sub eodem. C'est a
dire sous un different respect, mais non sous le meme. Cette fallace s'appelle
fallacia Compositionis and Divisionis.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Fallace a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter?

R. C'est quand on attribue absolument a quelqu'un ce qui ne luy convient qu'en
party, comme

Le More a les dents blanches,

Donc il est blanc.

Q. Qu'est ce que la fallace, qu'on appelle Petitio Principii, ou Petition de
Principe?

Q. C'est quand on suppose pour vray, ce qui est en question; comme

La nature des chooses pesantes est de tender au Center du Monde,

Les chooses pesantes tendent au Center de la Terre,

Donc le Center de la Terre, est le Center du Monde.

Ou vous voyez qu'il ya dans la majeure de cet Argument une manifest petition
de Principe.

Q. Qu'est ce que le Sophisme qu'on apelle non causa pro causa?

R. C'est quand on done une raison pour une chose qui n'en est pas la
veritable raison, comme

Les vases pleins d'eau se fendent a la gelee, Parceque l'eau se ressere, Donc
il ya du vuide dans la Nature.

Les vases ne se fendent pas a cause qu'il y a du vuide, mais parceque l'Eau
etant gelee, occupe plus de place qu'auparavant, ce qui est la cause que les
vases se fendeut.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Fallace, qu'on appelle fallacia Accidentis?

R. C'est lorsqu'on tire une raison sans restriction, de ce qui n'est vray que
par accident; comme

Il ya des Persons qui abusent de la Saint Ecriture,

Donc il ne faut pas la lire.

Q. Qu'est ce que Method?

R. C'est un Art de bien disposer ce que nous avons pense, ou pour decouvrir la
verite, quand nous l'ignorons, ou pour la prouver aux autres, quand nous la
connoissons deja.

Q. Cette Method est elle une quatrieme Action de notre Esprit?

R. Il y a des Autheurs qui le veulent ainsy; pour moy je croy que non,
parceque la Method n'etant qu'un raisonnement de notre Esprit, qui juge que
les chooses qu'il a pense auparavant doivent etre ainsy disposees, pour les
raisons qu'il se form, elle doit etre consequemment reduite a la troisieme
operation de notre Entendement.

Q. Comment faut il fair pour bien disposer les chooses que nous avons pensees?

R. Il faut commencer par les plus generales and les plus simples, avantque
d'en venir aux particulieres, and composees; expliquer ce qui appartient au
Genre, avantque de passer a ses Especes; diviser (autant que l'on peut, and
qu'il est propre a notre Sujet) le tout en ses Parties, and chaque difficulte
en tous ses cas.

Q. Pourquoy dites vous, autantque l'on peut, and qu'il est propre a notre
Sujet?

R. C'est parcequ'il arrive beaucoup de rencontres, ou on ne peut, and on ne
doit pas observer toutes ces chooses a la rigueur; soit a cause que notre Esprit
est borne, soit parceque notre Sujet ne le demand pas; and ainsy la Prudence,
le Jugement, and la Raison sont fort necessaires pour nous fair voir ce qu'il
faut prendre, and ce qu'il faut laisser.

Q. Comment divisez vous la Method?

R. Dans la Method de Resolution, qu'on appelle Analyze, and dans la Method
de Composition, qu'on nomme Synthese.

Q. Quelle difference mettez vous enter ces deux methodes?

R. L'une commence par les chooses generales, avaunt que d'en venir aux
particulieres; and l'autre explique les particulieres avaunt que d'en venir aux
generales.

Q. Comment faut il fair, pour bien repondre a une Question?

R. Il faut, avaunt que d'y repondre, la bien concevoir; and si elle contient
quelque Equivoque, il faut la distinguer, and l'expliquer; autrement vous ne
tomberez jamais d'accord avec celuy qui a propose la question, vous ne vous
entendrez pas l'un l'autre, vous disputerez long temps, and ne prouverez rien.

Ce petit Traite suffira a quiconque est desireux d'apprendre la Philosophy.

Fin de la Logique.
The Chief Contents of Moral Science.
IS Moral Science the way to be happy? From whence is derived this Word Moral?
how do you divide Moral Science? what is its Object and End? Page 166. to 174.

What is a good thing, and how do you divide it? Is Man's Felicity consisting
in the Pleasures of his Body, or in the Goods of Fortune, or in Praise, Honor,
Esteem, Reputation, or in Health? In what does Man's Happiness consist in this
Life? is it possible for him to be happy in this World, and how? page 174. to
190.

What is a Moral Virtue? What difference do you put between a Geometrical and
Arithmetical Proproportion? How must one do to observe this Proportion in the
exercise of Virtue, and to find the middle wherein the Moral Virtue consists?
and what is requisite to render a virtuous Action worthy to be rewarded? page
190. to 200.

Is a bad Action, made by Ignorance, to be excused? and is it to be punished?
What is ignorantia Juris, and ignorantia Facti? What is it requisite in a Moral
Action? and is Deliberation found in all our Actions? page 200. to ^04.

Which is the Subject of Virtues and Vices? How is a Passion made? how many are
there? how do you define them? which are their Causes, Effects, and
Differences? page 204. to 224.

How many Moral Virtues are there? why do you call them Cardinal? What is
Justice? which are its opposite Vices? What difference is it between a
distributive, and commutative Justice? What is Right? and what is the Law of
Talion? p. 224. to 232.

What is that you call a Bond in Law? How do you divide an Obligation? Upon
what is a Civil Bond Grounded? How is a Contract made? What is an Obligation by
Word, by Writing, by Consent? and upon how many ways is grounded a Bond of a
thing equivalent to a Contract? p. 232. to 236.

What is Courage, and which are its opposite Vices? What is Temperance, and
which are its opposite Vices? What is Prudence? how do you divide it? and which
are the Laws established by Jurisprudence? page 236. to 240.

What is a Politic Prudence? What is a Commonwealth? What is to be a Subject
and Magistrate? What is to be required in a Magistrate, and in his Officers?
What is the Duty of a Magistrate and Subject? What is Monarchy, Polyarchy,
Aristocracy, and Democracy? page 240. to 248.

What is Oeconomical Prudence? What is a Family composed of? What is the end of
Marriage? What is the Duty of a Husband toward his Wife, of a Wife toward her
Husband; of Parents toward their Children, of Children toward their Parents;
of Servants toward their Masters, of Masters toward their Servants? What are
those Possessions found in a Family? and how must one do to get Riches and keep
them? What is a Monastical Prudence? What do you mean by a Monastical Life? and
what is the Duty of those Persons that live a single Life? page 248. to 252.

What is Liberality? what is it required in Liberality, and which are its
opposite Vices? p. 252. to 254.

What is Prodigality? What difference do you put between a Prodigal and
Covetous Man? and which is more to be blamed? page 254. to 258.

What is Clemency, Truth, and Lie? and how do you divide a Lie? page 258. to
260.

What is Civility or Courtesy? how much it is necessary among Men, but
especially amongst those that are in Authority, and which are the Effects of
Virtue? page 260. to 262.

What is Amity? how do you divide it? what difference do you put between Love
and Amity? Is Amity necessary among Men? Which are those with whom one ought to
make a Friendship? page 260. to 266.

What is Love? What is Beauty? which is the Sign of a true Love, and which are
its Effects? Why is Love pictured under the Figure of a blind Child, having
Wings and Arrows? Whence comes it, that Parents love more their Children, than
the Children their Parents? and why does a Mother love more tenderly her
Children than a Father? page 266. to 272.

What is Pleasure, and how do you divide it? page 272. to 274.

MORAL SCIENCE, OR The Way to be Happy.
Q. IS Moral Science the way to be Happy?

A. Yes certainly; for as Logic, directing all the Actions of our
Understanding to a good and just reasoning, opens the door to all sorts of
Sciences; so Moral Science, guiding the Actions of our will to Honesty and
Decency, shows us the way to be Happy.

Q. From whence is derived this word Moral?

A. From this Latin word Mores, which signifies Manners, because Moral Science
learns how to direct the Actions of our Soul, to get good Manners.

Q. What do you mean by good Manners?

A. I mean good Habitudes or Customs, as the Custom to be Moderate in eating
and drinking, or the Custom to render what belongs to every one, etc.

Q. How do you get an Habitude or Custom?

A. By the Exercise of frequent Actions.

Q. What is Moral Philosophy?

A. It is a practical Science, that learns how to Rule well our Actions, in
directing them to honesty, that we may live happily in this World.

Q. How do you divide this moral Science.

A. Into Speculative, that teaches general Rules concerning Virtue and
Happiness; and into Practical, which put in use those same Rules and Precepts.

Q. How do you divide the Practical?

A. Into Monastical, Oeconomical, and Politic.

Q. Make me understand this clearly.

A. By Monastical, I do not mean a solitary Life; as that of Hermits, which
have renounced human Society; but this Practical Moral Science that teaches
every one how to Rule his Actions, and direct them to Honesty and Virtue.

By Oeconomical, I mean this Moral Science, which learns every Father and
Mother of a Family, how to Rule well their Children and Servants.

And by Politic, I mean a Moral Philosophy, teaching every Subject how to be a
good and useful Member in a Kingdom, viz. in observing the Laws of his Prince,
and other Magistrates.

Q. What is the Object of Ethics or Moral Science?

A. Human Actions to be directed to honesty and decency.

Q. How do you prove it?

A. I prove it thus, because the Object of a Science is that which is
considered by that Science: Now Ethics or Moral Philosophy consider human
Actions to direct them to honesty and decency, therefore the Object of Moral
Science are human Actions, to be directed to Honesty and Decency: For as the
Object of Physic is natural Body as natural; and the Object of Medicine is
human Body as curable; so the Object of Moral Science are the Actions of Man,
to be directed to Honesty and Decency.

Q. Which is the end of Ethics or Moral Philosophy?

A. The Felicity, or Happiness, that a Man may hope in this Life, whether he be
in a Monastical Life, or Oeconomical, or Civil.

Q. How do you prove it?

A. I prove it thus, because all human Actions as they are directed to Decency
and Honesty, make a Man live happily in this Life, wherefore it follows clearly
that the end of Moral Science is Happiness and Felicity, since it tends to it.

Mark that amongst ends there are some called Principal, and others
subordinate, which are related to others, as the skill of Fighting is related
to War as to its end; the end of War is Peace, the end of Peace is Repose, and
the end of Repose is Felicity, which is the chiefest end. Hence it follows,
that amongst good things there are some desired only for the good that they
have in themselves, as Felicity: And others desired as means to another end, as
Gold, Riches, and Books, which are the Objects of our Desires, because we
consider them as means to arrive to another considerable end, which we look
upon as a very good thing.

Q. What is a good thing?

A. It is that which all the World covets and desires.

Q. How do you divide a good thing?

A. Into Divine, Metaphysick, Natural and Moral.

Q. What is a Divine good?

A. It is that that contains all Graces which God bestows upon us.

Q. What is a Metaphysick good?

A. It is that that receives a reciprocal Conversion with its Being; as every
Good is a Being, and every Being is good; because, as it is a perfect Being in
its nature, so it is good: Wherefore when God in the Creation of the World said
that all things were Good, he did mean a Methaphysick good.

Q. What is a natural good?

A. It is that that is proper and suitable unto natural things, as unto Fire to
burn; unto Birds to fly, and to a Stone to go down, etc.

Q. What is a Moral good?

A. The Virtuous and honest Actions, which are called Virtues.

Q. How do you still divide a good Being?

A. Into a good which is Esseutially Good, and of it self, to wit God; and into
a Good by Participation, which is no other than the Creature.

Q. How do you divide a good thing as it is related to a Man?

A. Into honest, Useful, and Pleasing.

Q. What is an Honest good?

A. It is that whereunto our Appetite is ended, as Science and Virtue.

Q. What is an useful good?

A. It is that which serves us as a mean to attain honesty; as Riches to become
a good Scholar, in supplying with all necessary expenses about matters of
Learning.

Q. What is a delightful good?

A. It is that which is joined with the Possession of the thing desired, as
Honors whereunto we are arrived by our Merits.

Q. How do you divide again a good thing?

A. Into goods of Spirit, as Sciences and Virtues; into goods of Body, as
Health, Strength and Beauty; into goods of Fortune, as Riches, Dignities,
Honors; which are especially called goods of Fortune, because they are subject
to change; and into Sovereign Good, Felicity or Happiness, whose Possession
wholly satisfies our Desires, which Moral Philosophy considers as the last end
of all human Actions.

Q. Is the Felicity or Happiness of Man in this life consisting in the
Pleasures of our Body.

A. No, because the Pleasures of our Body either in drinking or eating, or
Venereal Recreations, vanish almost in a Moment; and if we will take them
without Moderation, they weaken our Body, grieve our Soul, and cause several
Infirmities, yea mortal Distempers; and therefore being not able to satisfy us
wholly, cannot be our Happiness and sovereign Good.

Q. Does it consist in the Goods of Fortune, as Dignities and Riches?

A. No, because all that is desired for another end; Dignities are desired to
command and have authority over others; and Riches are wished for to help us in
our Necessities, to take our Pastimes, and to come to an end of our Designs;
but Happiness or sovereign Good is the last end, whereunto all others are
related and ended. Wherefore the goods of Fortune, viz. Dignities and Riches
cannot be our Sovereign Felicity, because they are not our last end, being
related to others. Moreover Happiness or Sovereign good ought to be free from
all pain, care, and trouble, which is not found with Dignities and Riches;
since we have great pains in their acquisition; great fear in their
conservation; great trouble in their increasing, and great vexation in losing
them: For who is he that, being highly exalted in Dignities, and overflowing in
Riches, does wish for no more? Therefore seeing that no Man is satisfied with
those things, we cannot settle our Happiness in them.

Q. Does it consist in the Praise, Esteem, Honor, or Reputation, which we
receive among Men?

A. No, For Happiness ought to be in him that enjoys it; so that it must not
depend upon another; but Praise, Esteem, Honor, and Reputation depend upon
another; for, as says Aristotle, honor est in honorante, and non in honorato.
Moreover Praise, Esteem, Honor, and Reputation, being wished for another end;
as to have an Authority over others, and command them, they cannot be our
Happiness, since the Happiness of Man ought to be the last end of all things.

Q. Does it consist in Health?

A. No, For although the health of our Body be a Treasure, which we do not know
but by its loss; yet Happiness does not consist therein, both because we desire
health for another end, as for to enjoy Pleasures and Honors; and because a
Man may be unhappy in enjoying a perfect health.

Q. In what then does the Happiness of Man consist in this Life?

A. In the Pleasure proceeding from a continuity of virtuous Actions, joined to
an exemption from all sorts of Miseries; and to an Enjoyment of all sorts of
goods of Mind, of Body, of Nature and Fortune.

Q. Why do you say proceeding from a continuity of virtuous Actions.

A. Because to be perfectly happy in this Life, it is not sufficient to
exercise some particular virtuous Actions, or to live virtuously in a certain
time of our Life, as in our youth, we must be so all our Life time: For,
whosoever once commits Sin, although he comes again into the way of virtue, yet
he receives a grief in his Mind, and a shame for having committed it, which
hinders him to be perfectly happy in this World.

Q. Why do you say joined to an Exemption from all sorts of Miseries, and to
the Enjoyment of all sorts of Goods?

A. Because to be perfectly happy in this World, we must be free from Miseries
and Vexations, during the course of this Life, and enjoy all the Goods of Body,
Soul, and Fortune. We must have the health and strength of Body, which are
seldom separated, proceeding from one and the same cause, viz. from a good
Temper, and a perfect disposition of the Parts of the Body. We must possess
Beauty, which consists in a just Proportion of all the Parts of the Body; in a
fresh Complexion, in a good Grace, in a pleasing Carriage and Behavior, in a
modest Look, in a grave and sweet Countenance, in a composed Visage, and rather
smiling than severe. We must have Riches, for without them what can a Man
undertake, and hope, especially in the Age wherein we live, where all things
are made for Gold sake. And to make it short, we must possess all other Goods
both of Nature and Fortune; and we must enjoy them all our life time; for, he
that should have lived a long while in enjoying all these Goods, if afterward
he should lose them, and fall into Misery, he could not be esteemed perfectly
happy.

Q. Why was not Solon willing we should account no man happy but after his
death?

A. Because the man that lives now enjoying all sorts of Pleasures, Honors and
Riches, may notwithstanding come to a bad and shameful end.

Q. Since there are so many Conditions earnestly required for man's happiness in
this life, is it possible for him to be here perfectly happy?

A. That is not possible, moraliter loquendo (morally speaking) because human
Life beginning by Tears, and continuing in a thousand sorts of miseries,
troubles, cares, and sudden Accidents, and ending with grief, it is very
difficult, and in a moral Sense impossible for him to be perfectly happy in
this Life: Nevertheless, physice loquendo (physically speaking) that is not
impossible; for that may happen when God pleases, for it is in his Power to
make men, all whose Actions, shall be Virtuous, that shall be free from all
Miseries, and shall enjoy all sorts of Goods.

Q. How then can a man be happy in this Life?

A. In enjoying a good Health; in having enough to help him in his Necessities,
and in conforming all his Actions to Honesty and Decency; for in doing so, he
has the Testimony of a good Conscience, an inward satisfaction, a Joy in his
Heart, a Peace, Quietness and Delight in his Soul; an Honor and Esteem of all
his Acquaintance, and a Hope well grounded to enjoy in the other World the
Presence of God, who is his true and sovereign Good.

Q. Why do you say that in doing so, he has a Hope well grounded?

A. Because God has promised Eternal Life, and the enjoyment of his Presence
(which is the sovereign good of man in the other Life,) to them that shall keep
his Commandments; that is, that shall live virtuously, or conform all their
Actions to Honesty and Decency.

Q. What is a moral Virtue?

A. It is, says Aristotle, an Elective Habitude consisting in Mediocrity
determined by Reason, as a prudent Man should determine it.

Q. Why do you call it an Habitude?

A. Because it is got by frequent Actions.

Q. Why do you call it Elective?

A. It is to show, that Virtue does not only depend on our Will, but is also
practiced with Counsel and Deliberation: And by this difference, moral Virtue
is distinguished from Arts and Sciences, which consist in the Understanding.

Q. Why do you say, consisting in Mediocrity?

A. It is to distinguish it from Vice, which, although it be done with
deliberation, as Virtue is, yet does not consist in Mediocrity, but in an
excess or a defect.

Q. Why do you say determined by Reason, as a Prudent man should determine it?

A. Because it ought to be different according to the Circumstances of Time,
Places, and Persons: As for Example, Liberality, which consists in the middle
of Covetousness and Prodigality, ought to be other in a private Man than in a
Magistrate; and other in a poor Citizen than in a rich Gentleman: And even in
respect of one and the same Person, it ought to be different according to
Places, Times and Persons: As for Example, I must give more respect to a
Magistrate when he is sitting to judge, than when he plays in his Garden. I am
to be more devout in the Church than at the Play; and I am bound to be more
charitable toward a poor Man of my Religion, than toward a Heathen, if they
be both in an equal Necessity. From whence it follows, that the Proportion that
ought to be observed in the Practice of Virtue, ought to be Geometrical, and
not Arithmetical.

Q. What difference do you put between an Arithmetical and Geometrical
Proportion?

A. An Arithmetical Proportion considers the equality of Numbers, without
having any respect to the equality of Reasons; and on the contrary a
Geometrical proportion considers the equality of Reasons, without having any
respect to the equality of Numbers: As for example, if I must distribute a
hundred Crowns between four Persons, if I give Five and twenty to each one,
than I observe an Arithmetical Proportion. And if one of them deserves as much
as the three others, and because of his merit I give him Threescore and fifteen
Crowns, and Five and twenty to the three other Persons according to their
merits, then I observe a Geometrical proportion.

Q. How must we do to observe well this Geometrical Proportion in the Practice
of Virtue?

A. We must pray to God to enlighten our understanding; it behooves us to be
very Prudent, but above all to be very pious toward God, and charitable
toward our Neighbor.

Objection. You say that moral Virtue ought to consist in the Mean or
Mediocrity; that seems not to be true, because there are Virtues seeming to
have no Mean, as Justice, Magnificency, Magnaminity, and the Love toward God
and our Neighbor.

A. As for Justice, I answer, that there is a middle to be observed; for excess
in the distribution of Pains is called Rigor and Cruelty; and Defect is named
Favor.

As for Magnificency and Magnanimity, I say that they ought to be ruled by
Reason, (which may be called a Mean or Mediocrity) for it must be according to
Persons, Times, Places, and other Occasions; otherwise Magnificency may pass
for a Folly and Superfluity; and Magnanimity for a Rashness and Temerity.

And as for the Love toward God and our Neighbor, I say that they are Divine
Virtues; whereof it is not here the Question, speaking of Moral ones only;
nevertheless I may say, that excess may be found in the one and the other, for
there may be Superstition in the love of God, and Imprudence in the love
toward our Neighbor, which Imprudence may produce several pernicious Effects:
As for example, if by an excess of Love toward my Neighbor, I bestow all my
goods upon a lewd man, besides that I bring my self into a great inconveniency,
I give likewise an increasing to his Vices.

Q. How must we do that we may find this Middle or Mean, wherein consists moral
Virtue?

A. We must depart from that extremity, which we are naturally more inclined
to, and bend on the other side; as the Gardners do when they will make straight
a young crooked Tree, for then they bend him on the contrary side.

Q. What is required to render a virtuous Action worthy to be rewarded?

A. It ought to be voluntary; for if it be done either by Fear, or Violence, I
mean against our Will, it does deserve no reward, or at least it does not
deserve so much, as when it is done heartily, and with a good will.

So it is concerning a bad Action, done either without consideration, or by
fear, or constraint; for it ought not to be punished, or if it must receive
punishment, it ought to be less than when it is done with Reflection and
Consent.

Q. Is a bad Action, done by Ignorance, to be excused or to be punished?

A. There is an Ignorance Juris, and an Ignorance Facti; the former does not
excuse, and ought to be punished; but the latter excuses, and ought not to be
punished.

Q. Make me understand, What is an Ignorance Juris, and what is an Ignorance
Facti?

A. If any one, after having stolen and killed, should be ignorant it were ill
done, this Ignorance would not excuse him; for he might have asked advice and
counsel; and this is called Ignorantia Juris* But if a Man after having gone a
long Voyage, should return into his own Country, and against his knowledge
should marry his own Sister, this Ignorance should be excused and not be
punished; this Ignorance is called Ignorantia Facti.

Q. When men, being upon the Sea, to save both their Vessels and Life, throw
their Goods into the Waves, is that Action voluntary or constrained?

A. It is both; it is voluntary, because it is done with Reflection, Choice and
Consent; and it is constrained, because they lose their Goods with Repugnancy
and against their Will.

Q. What things are requisite in moral Actions?

A. Will, Deliberation, and Election.

Q. Make me understand that clearly.

A. Our Will, in the end of her Actions, does always propose to her self
something good, either true or apparent, and never an ill thing as ill, but
always under the color and appearance of Good; for what Crime soever is
committed by wicked men, it is always for some end, if not honest, at least
useful or delectable.

Deliberation consults of the Means fit to obtain our end; as a Physician
consults whether it be convenient to let blood or to purge.

And Election, which is an Effect of Consultation, amongst several means before
considered, chooses the fittest, and puts them in practice.

Q. Is Deliberation found in all our Actions?

A. No; it is only found in those that are possible, and are to be done; for we
never saw a Wise man consulting about impossible things, nor about those that
are done, neither about those that happen either by Necessity or by Chance;
because they cannot be changed to our advantage by our Consultation.

Q. Does a man commit vicious Actions v^luntarily?

A. Yes, otherwise Magistrates should not punish Malefactors; and since they
punish them, it is because they did voluntarily commit a Crime. Moreover, if we
have a power to do good Actions voluntarily, by a like reason we have also a
power to do bad.

Q. Which is the Subject of Virtues and Vices?

A. Passions, which are called Motions, or Agitations of the Soul.

Q. Which way comes a Passion? or how is our Soul moved and agitated?

A. Its Object is first considered either true, or at least probable; then
fancied good or bad, and consequently pleasing or unpleasing, and therefore to
be desired or to be avoided; and so our Soul by the mean of animal Spirits is
moved and agitated. From thence it follows, that from the Agitation of our
Soul, proceeding from the knowledge of an Object represented to our outward
Senses, and Imagination, every Passion proceeds.

Q. How many Passions are there?

A. Commonly we reckon Eleven; because either the Object, which we think upon,
is good, and to be desired; or it is bad, and to be avoided. If it be good, it
causes Love, a Desire to obtain it, and a Delight in its Possession; and if it
be bad, it produces a Hatred, Shunning, and Displeasure when it is come. But if
the Object good or bad is considered difficult to be got, or avoided, than it
produces, Hope, Despair, Fear, Boldness and Anger.

Q. Are there any Authors that have reckoned more than Eleven?

A. Yes, Cartesius begins with Admiration, then goes on with Esteem,
Veneration, Contempt, Pride, Humility or Abjection, Love, Hatred, Cupidity or
Desire, Animosity, Boldness, Cowardice, Syntherese, Joy, Sorrow, Envy, Piety,
Complacency, or Delight in himself, Grief, or Repentance, Favor, Gratefulness,
Indignation, Anger, Glory, Shame and Disgust.

Q. Why does Cartesius make such an Enumeration of Passions?

A. Because of the Connection that he has found among them.

Q. Show me that evidently.

A. As soon as we judge an Object to be extraordinary, and new, then we admire
it, and because this may happen before we know whether this Object is
convenient, or no, for that reason Admiration seems to be the first of
Passions. It has no contrary; for, if the Object represented has nothing in it
self extraordinary, we are not moved at it, and we think upon it without
Passion.

After Admiration come Esteem and Veneration, if we do fancy any excellency in
our Object; and Contempt, if we think it to be base and abject. And because the
Object may be in us, and that we may esteem or despise our selves, from thence
proceed Pride, and Humility. And because the Object may be considered good in
our respect, from thence proceeds Love; and if it be considered as being
hurtful, then it causes Hatred. From this consideration of good and evil come
out all other Passions. First of all Desire or Cupidity, which happens when not
only we long for the acquisition of a Good absent, and for the shunning of an
Evil which we think will come to pass; but also when we wish for the
conservation of some Good, or for the absence of some Evil: And when we imagine
that the Good desired may be obtained, from thence proceeds Hope: If we think
that it is hard to be acquired, from thence comes Fear. When we are in a great
Hope to get it, from thence proceeds Assurance or Confidence: And when we think
on the contrary, from thence comes Despair. And because there may be difficulty
in the choice of Means fit to obtain the Good desired, from thence comes Doubt,
or the suspension of our Mind, Animosity or boldness, Pusillanimity or
Cowardice. And when, whithout having first put away the hesitation of our Mind,
we determine our selves to an Action, from thence comes Syntheresis or the Worm
of Conscience. The consideration of a present good causes Joy, and the
consideration of a present Evil brings forth sorrow. But if Good is considered
as belonging to another; and if we fancy him unworthy of it, that causes Envy;
and if it be an Evil, it produces Pity, which, as Envy, is a kind of sorrow.
But because we may consider the Cause of Good and Evil, not only as present,
but also as absent, the Good done by us causes in us an inward Pleasure, which
is the sweetest of all Passions; and on the contrary, the Evil committed by us
produces Grief and Vexation. Moreover, the good done by others produces Favor;
and if we receive this good, it causes Thankfulness or Acknowledgment: And
likewise the Evil committed by others, when it does not concern us, then it
does only produce Indignation; and Anger, if it regards us.

If the Good, which is, or was in us, be related to the Opinion of others, it
causes Glory, and Evil on the contrary produces Shame: And whereas the
continuation of that which is good breeds a filling and glutting, from thence
comes a Disgust One might again mark here as many other different Passions, as
our Soul may differently consider an Object.

Note, that according to Cartesius, all these different Passions may be reduced
unto Six, viz. Admiration, Love, Hatred, Desire, Joy, and Sadness, because all
the others are derived from them.

Q. What is Admiration?

A. It is a sudden occupation of the Soul toward an Object, which seems to be
rare and extraordinary.

Q. What difference is there between Admiration and Astonishment?

A. No other but that Astonishment is an excess of Admiration.

Q. Give the Definition of Love and Hatred.

A. Love is an agitation of the Soul, proceeding from the Motion of the
Spirits, which incites her to join her self willingly with the Objects that
seem to be suitable and convenient; and Hatred is an agitation proceeding from
the Spirits, which induces our Soul to separate her self by consent from the
Objects that appear to her to be hurtful.

Q. What difference do you put between the Love of Concupiscence and the Love
of Benevolence?

A. The Love of Benevolence is when we do wish good to some body without any
mixture of our Interest; and the Love of Concupiscence is when we love any one;
not because of the good Qualities that are in him, but only for the Profit that
we may receive from him.

Q. What difference is there between Amity and Devotion?

A. Amity has a respect unto Men, and Devotion takes commonly God for its
Object; I say commonly, because sometimes it regards also Men and our Country.
Moreover in Amity the Lover prefers himself to the Loved; but in Devotion the
Lover does always prefer to himself its Object loved; so that he does not fear
to die for his Conservation, as it appears by several Examples of Persons that
accepted death willingly to save the Life of their Princes and Countrymen.

Q. What is Desire?

A. It is an agitation of our Soul proceeding from the Spirits, whereby she is
disposed not only to wish for the possession of a Good absent, and for the
conservation of that which is present, but also for the absence of an Evil both
present and to come.

Q. Give me the Definition of Joy.

A. It is a joyful agitation of our Soul in the possession of a good
represented as her own.

Q. What is Sorrow?

A. It is a languishing agitation of our Mind, caused by the Evil which our
Soul represents to her self as her own, by the mean of the Spirits of our Brain.

Q. Which are the Causes of these two different Passions?

A. Joy proceeds from the Opinion of a Good, and Sorrow from that of an Evil.
Nevertheless the one and the other do sometimes proceed from the good or bad
disposition of our Temper.

Q. What is the reason that Joy causes a reddish and Vermillion Color in our
Face.

A. Because Joy opening our Heart, its Blood runs quickly through all the
Veins, and so swelling the parts of our Visage, renders it more fair and
agreeable.

Q. Why does Sorrow commonly render our Visage Pale?

A. Because it shuts up our heart, which is the cause that the Blood running
slowly through our Veins, and growing colder, gives a bleak and whitish color
to our Face.

Q. And why does sorrow sometimes produce a red Color upon our Face?

A. Because it is joined with other Passions, as Love, Desire and Hatred; for
these Passions, heating the Blood, which comes out of the Liver, thrust it into
our Heart, and from thence into our Face, which is the cause that it appears
red.

Q. What is the reason that Shame makes us blush?

A. That comes in part from the Love of our selves, and in part from a Desire
to avoid a present Infamy, which is the cause that the Blood is brought from
our Heart into our Face, and so causes it to grow red.

Q. What difference do you put between Death and Swouning?

A. By Death the heat of our Heart is entirely stifled; and by Swouning it is
so choked that there still remains enough to kindle it again.

Q. From whence proceeds Laughing? (...)

A. That comes from the different representation of Objects to our Imagination?

Q. What is Jealousy?

A. It is a kind of Fear joined to a desire of keeping the enjoyment of a good,
which is the cause that we examine the lightest Causes of suspicion, and take
them for reasons of great consequence.

Q. What is Emulation?

A. It is a kind of Animosity, which does encourage us to undertake things
wherein we hope to succeed, because we see that several others have got a good
success therein.

Q. What is Envy?

A. It is a Vice that is found in a bad natural Disposition, which is the cause
that some Persons are afflicted for the Good that they see coming to others.

I do not speak here of the Definition of the other Passions, because they are
sufficiently explained in the Enumeration here before.

Q. Tell me the number of Moral Virtues.

A. Justice, Courage, Temperance, Prudence, Liberality, Magnificency,
Magnanimity, Clemency, Truth, Civility, Affability, Courtesy, which may be
reduced to the four preceding Virtues called Cardinal.

Q. What difference do you put between these four Virtues?

A. Justice consists in distributing Rewards and Punishments with a Geometrical
Proportion; Courage consists in overcoming Fear; Temperance in moderating the
Pleasures of our Body; and Prudence in directing and ruling all our Actions
according to Time, Persons, and Places.

Q. Why do you call them Cardinal?

A. Because of this word Cardo, which signifies an Hinge, for, as Doors move
upon Hinges, so upon these four Virtues move all other Moral Virtuous Actions.

Q. What is Justice?

A. It is a moral Virtue, whereby we keep Equity both in the distribution of
Rewards and Punishments, and in our dealing and trading: In a word, it is to
render what belongs to every one.

Q. Which are the Vices opposite to Justice?

A. Excess and Defectuosity.

Q. How do you divide Justice?

A. Into distributive and commutative.

Q. What is distributive Justice?

A. It is that Justice that keeps equality according to the Geometrical
Proportion; that is to say, which, in distributing Rewards and Punishments, has
a respect to the Merits of Persons, Time, Place, and other circumstances: As
for Example, he that offends a Magistrate according to distributive Justice,
ought to be more severely punished than he that offends a private Person. And he
that commits an Insolence in a Church during the Divine Service, deserves a
greater Punishment than if he had committed such an Insolence in a Tavern.

Q. What is a commutative Justice?

A. It is that Justice, that keeps an Arithmetical proportion, I mean, that has
no respect but to Quantity, without considering the merit of the Persons: As
for Example, the same sort of Corn and Wine is as much sold to a Magistrate,
and to a Prince, as to a Tradseman and Countryman.

Q. What is Right?

A. Right is an equivocal Word, for sometimes it is taken for an Authority and
Power: Thus we say the Right of Masters over their Servants, when we mean the
Authority and Power; and other times it is taken either for the Laws, which
have a respect to divine things, and then it is called Divine Right; or for the
Laws that have respect to Human and Civil things, and then it is called civil
and human Right. Sometimes it is taken for the natural Right, which is common
to all Animals, as to keep their Lives and little ones; and sometimes for the
Right of Nations, which is common to all Countries, or at least to those that
are wisely Governed, as that an Ambassador may have the Liberty of his Religion
in what Country soever he is sent to.

Q. What is the Law of Talion?

A. It is a Law that orders Punishment equal to the harm done to another. This
was the Law in Moses's time, that ordered a Tooth for a Tooth, and an Eye for
an Eye; and we may say that this is also the Law of the Gospel, since it is
written that we shall be measured with the same measure as we measure others;
and whosoever shall kill with the Sword, shall perish with the Sword.

Q. What is that that you call a Bond in Law?

A. It is an Obligation whereby we are bound to perform what we have promised.

Q. How do you divide an Obligation?

A. Into Natural and Civil; the former binds without forcing, as when one
presents me with Twenty Guineas, then I am bound by the natural Law to be
grateful, but I cannot be forced to it; and the latter binds and forces, if I
do not perform what I am bound to.

Q. Upon what is a Civil Bond grounded.

A. Upon a Contract, or other thing equivalent to a Contract.

Q. How is a Contract made?

A. Either by Word, or by Writing, or by Consent, or by something mentioned in
the Contract, as a thing lent, or committed to another Man's keeping, or pawned,
etc.

Note that we are sometimes bound to render the same thing lent to us, and
sometimes not: As for example, when one lends me his Horse, his Boots, his
Cloak, etc. he intends that the same Horse, Boots, and Cloak be rendered to
him; but when he lends Twenty Crowns, or Twenty Bushels of Corn, he does not
bind that the same be rendered, but only Twenty Crowns, and Twenty Bushels of
Corn as good as those that he has lent.

Note 2. That when a thing is committed to some body for a safer keeping, he is
bound to render it without deceit, and without making use of it; likewise he
that has received something in pawn, ought to render it to him from whom he
has received it, as soon as he pays that which he has pawned it for.

Q. What is an Obligation by word?

A. It is a Bond proceeding from the question of one of the Contractants, and
from the answer of the other; as do you promise to pay so much Money such a
day? and the other answers yes, I do promise.

Q. What is a Bond by Writing?

A. It is when one contracts by written Promises, which are called Bills.

Q. What is an Obligation by Consent?

A. It is when we buy, sell, exchange, etc. It is so called, because it depends
wholly upon the consent of the Contractants, although there be nothing written.

Q. Upon how many ways is grounded a Bond of a thing equivalent to a Contract:

A. Upon three. 1. In doing the business of a Friend absent, without having
order from him; for the Solicitor may repeat all that he has spent upon his
Friends account, and the Friend may ask to be discharged, if he has been
damnified. 2. In being Administrator, for he is bound to his Pupil, and
mutually the Pupil to his Administrator. 3. In holding something in common with
others; for, if one of the Partners spends Money; as for example, to repair a
Ship, he may have an Action against the others, in case they refuse to pay
their part of what he has disbursed.

Q. What is Courage?

A. It is a moral Virtue, which, ruling Fear and Boldness, makes us either to
overcome courageously, or to suffer constantly all the Difficulties that are
found in our commendable designs.

Q. Which are the Vices opposite to this Virtue?

A. Cowardice and Rashness; and as the former is very shameful, so the latter
is very dangerous.

Mark that Boldness and Constancy are Virtues found always with Courage.

Note also that this Virtue is sometime called Heroic, when it is so
extraordinary, that it seems to be above all human Courage; as when Horatius
Cocles maintaini^^ alone upon a Bridge the Effort (...) Army, saved his Country.

Q. What is Temperance?

A. It is a moral Virtue, moderating the Pleasures of our Body, whether they
come from the inward, or from the outward Senses.

Q. Which Vices are opposite to Temperance?

A. One consists in Excess, and the other in Defectuosity.

Note that Piety, Continence, Chastity and Modesty, do commonly accompany
Temperance.

Q. What is Prudence?

A. It is a moral Virtue, which foreseeing the future things that may happen
and not happen, consults, and deliberates with discretion, to the end that we
might not be surprised.

Q. How do you divide Prudence?

A. Into Jurisprudence, and into Politic, Oeconomical, and Monastical Prudence.

Q. What is Jurisprudence?

A. It is a practical Science that teaches how to order the Style or Form of
the Law.

Q. Which are the Laws ordered by Jurisprudence

A. These three principal, to live honestly, to offend no body, and to render
what belongs to every one, wherein consists all moral Philosophy; so that
whosoever keeps those Laws, lives without reproach.

Q. What is Politic Prudence?

A. It is a moral Science, that teaches how to govern prudently a Commonwealth.

Q. What is a Commonwealth?

A. It is a Multitude of Persons having the same Laws, and enjoying the same
Prerogatives and Liberties.

Q. How do you call those Persons?

A. They are called Citizens

Q. What is the Obligation of those Citizens?

A. To love, to defend one another, and to observe the Laws Established among
them.

Q. How do you divide those Citizens?

A. Into Subjects and Magistrates.

Q. What is it to be a Subject?

A. It is to acknowledge an Authority of a Superior in obeying his Laws.

Q. How do you divide Subjects?

A. 1. Into Natural, which are born in the same Country. 2. Into Strangers,
which are admitted to be Natural; that is to say, to be subject to the same
Laws, and to enjoy the same Immunities, as the Natural. 3. Into Noblemen. 4.
Into Learned. 5. Into Merchants. 6. Into Tradesmen. 7. Into Soldiers. 8. Into
Plough-men, Coachmen, etc.

Q. What is it to be a Magistrate?

A. It is to have and exercise Authority over others.

Q. How came it that Magistrates got that Power?

A. Either by the immediate vocation of God, or by the right of War, or by
Succession, or by Election.

Q. What is it to be considered in the Election of a Magistrate or Ruler?

A. His Age, Birth, and the other Qualities of Body and Mind required to
command others.

Q. Which are those Qualities of Body and Mind requisite in a Magistrate or
Ruler?

A. Health of Body, a good Carriage, Gravity, Justice, Clemency mingled with
Severity, but above all Prudence.

Q. What is to be required in the Officers of a Magistrate or Ruler?

A. They ought to be Ingenious, Wise, Learned, Eloquent, Sincere, Honest, Just,
Civil, well-shap'd, and of an Age between Youth and Old age.

Q. What is the Duty of a Magistrate?

A. 1. To take care that the Divine Service be well observed. 2. That the Laws
of the Country be well kept. 3. To punish those that transgress them. 4. To
encourage those that faithfully keep them.

Q. How do you divide a Commonwealth?

A. Into a Monarchy, and Polyarchy?

Q. What is a Monarchy?

A. It is a multitude of People, whose Government is given to one Person.

Q. What is Polyarchy?

A. It is a Commonwealth, whose Government is committed unto many.

Q. How do you divide Polyarchy?

A. Into Aristocracy, and Democracy.

Q. What is Aristocracy?

A. It is a Government which is in the hands of the Noblemen.

Q. What is Democracy?

A. It is a Government, which, by the Votes of the People, is committed by
turns to some Particulars.

Q. How do you call those Places, where live the Inhabitants of a Commonwealth?

A. Either Hamlets, or Boroughs, or Towns, or Cities.

Q. How do you call the chief City of a Commonwealth?

A. It is called Metropolis.

Note that a Commonwealth is called Empire, when it is governed by an Emperor;
and Kingdom, when it is ruled by a King.

Q. What is Oeconmical Prudence?

A. It is a Moral Science, that teaches how to govern prudently a Family.

Q. What is a Family composed of?

A. Of Husband, Wife, Children, Servants, and Goods or Posessions.

Q. What is the end of Marriage?

A. The Society of the Husband with the Wife, to the end that they may be get
Children, and help one another.

Q. What is the Duty of a Husband toward his Wife?

A. He ought to give her a good Example, to love her tenderly, to command her
with respect and civility, to defend her against those that speak ill of her;
to support her Infirmities, and to do what he can to maintain her, and please
her.

Q. What is the Duty of a Wife toward her Husband?

A. She ought to honor and obey him, to support his Faults, to assist him, as
much as she can, in his adversity, to comfort him in his affliction, and not to
be too ^^mptuous in her Garments, and other things belonging to her House.

Q. What is the Duty of Parents toward their Children?

A. They ought to take care of their Education, every one according to their
Ability and Condition, and the Mother, if she can, ought to suckle them.

Q. What is the Duty of Children toward their Parents?

A. To love, honor, and obey them; to take care lest they provoke them, and to
help them when they are grown old and weak.

Q. What is the Duty of Servants toward their Masters?

A. they ought to be obedient, diligent and faithful.

Q. And what is the Duty of Masters toward their Servants?

A. They ought to give them a good Example; to provide for them what is
necessary for their subsistence; to pay them their Wages; and to correct them
when they omit their Duty.

Q. What are those Possessions that are found in a Family?

A. Money, Plate, Household Stuff, Corn, Beer, Wine, Cattle, Gardens, Lands,
Houses, etc.

Q. How must one do to get Possessions and keep them?

A. He must be watchful, diligent, and work according to his Condition, he
ought not to spend above his Revenue, or more than he gets; and he ought to
avoid Play, Taverns, Alehouses, and especially the Company of naughty Women.

Q. What is a monastical Prudence?

A. It is a Moral Science, that teaches every one how to live honestly in a
monastical Life?

Q. What do you mean by a monastical Life?

A. I do not mean the Life of Hermites, that have renounced all human Society,
but I mean a Single Life not yet engaged in Marriage, and free from all public
Offices.

Q. What is the Duty of those Persons?

A. To observe the Laws of God, and of those Countries where they live in.

Q. What is Liberality?

A. It is a Moral Virtue, which, moderating the desire of Riches, produces good
and honest Actions, in doing good to another.

Q. What is required in Liberality?

A. The observance of some Circumstances joined to a singular Prudence, which
is the Guide of all Moral Virtues.

Q. Which are those Circumstances that are to be observed in Liberality?

A. 1. Every one ought to use Liberality according to his means, and he ought
to observe a Geometrical proportion; that is, he ought caeteris paribus, to
give more to an honest poor Man, than to a wicked one. 2. He ought to
distribute his Goods with a good Grace, and speedily, for there are several
Persons that give so late, and with so bad a grace, that they seem to do all
their Actions with regret.

Q. Which are the Vices opposite to this Verrue?

A. Prodigality and Covetousness.

Q. What difference do you put between a Prodigal and Covetous man?

A. A Prodigal distributes his Goods by Vanity, and without Consideration; and
a Covetous retains them under the pretense of Husbandry; a Prodigal Man is
merry and pleasing, and a Covetous is sorrowful and unpleasing.

Q. Who is more to be blamed, the Prodigal or the Covetous?

A. It is the Covetous; because a Prodigal, in spending undiscretly his Goods,
commonly hurts none but himself, and is useful to others; but a Covetous Man is
unprofitable to himself, and to all human Society, when he lives; for if he
does good to any body it is only after his death. I do not speak here of
Magnificency, because it does not differ from Liberality, but because
Magnificency has respect to Kings and Princes, which ought to be magnificent,
in distributing their Goods amongst their Subjects, as the Sea does its Waters
in the Earth to render it fruitful.

Q. What is Magnanimity?

A. It is a moral Virtue, that has sovereign Honors for its Object; wherein it
differs from Ambition that has also Honors for its Object, but considered as
mean.

Note that when these two Virtues are not moderated, they produce several
pernicious Effects.

Q. What is Clemency?

A. It is a moral Virtue, which moderating our Anger, causes us to produce
honest Actions.

Note that Patience and Modesty are Virtues that always accompany Clemency, and
that its opposite Vices are Slowness and Anger.

Q. What is Veracity or Truth?

A. It is a Virtue whereby in our Discourses we say always that which is true,
or think to be so.

Q. Is this Virtue very commendable?

A. It is so commendable amongst Men, that they commonly trust their Goods,
Honor, Affairs, and Life, on them that are endued with this Virtue; and the
Persians did so much esteem it, that they imposed a perpetual silence on them
that had been three times Convicted of a Lie, and did for ever deprive them of
all Public Offices.

Q. What is a Lie?

A. It is a disguising of Truth.

Q. How do you divide Lie?

A. In Malicious, whose End is bad, and tends to the prejudice of others; in
officious, whose end is good, tending to the Profit of others; and in a merry
or jocond one, whose end is a mere Recreation, without bringing neither Damage
nor Profit.

Q. What is Civility, Assability, or Courtesy?

A. It is a moral Virtue, which consists in a kind fashion of speaking to
others, and behaving himself gently amongst honest Companies, whose opposite
Vices are Uncivility, Clownishness, and Jeasting.

Note that this Virtue is necessary amongst all Persons, but especially amongst
those that have the Government of the Affairs of the World; for those that have
any business with them, finding themselves received with civil and fair Words,
conceive a good hope in time to come, although the present be not favorable.
They say that the Emperor Adrian did so much excel in this Virtue, that never
any Person went away from him discontented: And it is reported from Trajan,
that his Friends telling him it was a disparagement to his Majesty to speak
Courteously to every one, answered thus, I will be such toward every private
Person, as I would have an Emperor to be toward me if I was a private Person.

Q. Which are the Effects of Virtue?

A. Three Principal, the First is to render us agreeable unto God; the Second
to give peace, quietness, and satisfaction to our Soul: And the Third to get us
the Affection of all sorts of Persons; for Virtue has that Particular, that it
makes it self to be esteemed even of the wicked.

Q. What is Amity?

A. It is a Conformity of will between two, or several Persons, proceeding from
mutual knowledge of their Virtue and Integrity of Life.

Q. How do you divide Amity?

A. 1. Into Natural, which is common to Animals and Plants; for there are
Animals that naturally love one another, and there are Plants, which feed, and
grow better, being near some other Plants, than being distant from them: and
this kind of Amity is called Sympathy. 2. Into Amity proceeding from the
knowledge we have of the good Qualities of another, which causes a conformity
of Will, and which cannot be got but with a space of time.

Q. What difference do you put between Love and Amity?

A. 1. Love does often proceed from a sudden Passion, and Amity or Friendship
from a long Conversation and Acquaintance. 2. Amity is Reciprocal between
Friends, and Love may be of the side of the Lover, without being mutually
loved. 3. Love is grounded upon Beauty, and Amity upon Goodness. 4. Love is
oftentimes hurtful, and Amity is always useful.

Q. Upon what is Friendship to be grounded, that it may be lasting?

A. It ought to be grounded upon Honesty; for if it be grounded upon Pleasure
or Profit, it is as soon lost as the Pleasure, or hoped Profit ceases.

Q. Is Amity necessary among Men?

A. Yes, for the most Potent have need of Friends to maintain their Grandeur,
and the Weakest to be strengthened. Besides that it is a great pleasure to be
acquainted with a Person to whom we may open our Heart.

Mark that though there be no secret amongst true Friends, yet, because there
is not so great a Friend but may become an Enemy, we must not discover him all
sorts of Secrets, lest one day he should reveal them to our damage, if he
should cease to be a Friend.

Mark 2. That Concord, whereby small things increase, may be found amongst all
the Citizens of a City, and amongst all the Soldiers of an Army, without being
necessary that they should love all one another.

Mark 3. That Society, whereby is oftentimes Amity engendered, does not regard
Honesty for its Object, as does Amity; but rather an acquaintance with Persons
of the same Age, Condition and Trade.

Q. Which are the Persons with whom we may make Acquaintance and Friendship?

A. They ought to be Virtuous, Discreet, and of an equal Condition; otherwise
it is impossible to establish a long and lasting Amity.

Q. What is Love?

A. It is a desire of that which is beautiful, or thought to be so, proceeding
from a pleasure received in looking upon it; whereby Love is different from
Amity, this latter always considering that which is honest?

Q. What is Beauty?

A. The Beauty of the Soul is nothing but a Spiritual Grace, proceeding from a
bright of Virtues; and the Beauty of Body is a good Grace, consisting both in a
fresh Complexion, and in the proportion of the Parts of the Body.

Q. Which is the Sign of a true Love?

A. It is when the Lover not only takes delight in seeing what he loves, but
also greives at its absence; because to take only a delight in seeing a
beautiful Object, it is not a certain Sign of Love, that being common to all
sorts of Persons, we must besides feel a smarting grief at the absence of the
Object loved; for when we love truly, we think always upon the Object loved,
from thence this Proverb is come, viz. That the Soul of a Lover lodges in the
Body of the Person loved.

Q. Which are the Effects of a true Love?

A. It does suddenly change the Manners and Conditions of Lovers; it makes
those that are faint hearted, Bold and Courageous; it awakes those that are
drowsy and sluggish; it renders brisk and merry those that are heavy and
melancholy; it causes the most Covetous to grow liberal, and the most stupid
and clownish to be Civil and Eloquent.

Mark that though we be obliged by Natural, Civil, and Divine Laws to love and
cherish one another, (this being common to all kind of Animals, let them be
never so wild and fierce) yet amongst all Animals, Man is without any doubt the
most Cruel.

Q. Why is Love drawn under the Figure of a little blind Child with Wings and
Arrows?

A. His Wings are to show that he is swift, and that he flies every where, even
amongst the most barbarous Nations: His Arrows make appear, that he assaults,
and, either soon or late, wounds every Heart: He is Pictured blind because of
his Indiscretion, and Prostitution to all sorts of Objects; and he is drawn
like a Child, because he takes away the Judgment of men, rendering them rash and
irrational as are Children.

Q. What is the reason that Parents love more their Children, than Children
their Parents?

A. It is because Children are the Production of their Parents, and because the
Love of Parents being more ancient than the Love of Children, consequently it
grows stronger.

Q. Why does a Mother love more tenderly her Children than a Father?

A. It is because of her certainty that they are her Children, as is declared
by a Poet.

Why Mothers than the Fathers kinder prove,
To their own Children whom they dearly love,
The Mother knows her Child to be her own,
The Father thinks it his, but it is not known.
Q. What is Pleasure?

A. It is a joyful motion of our Soul, proceeding from the consideration or
knowledge of an Object, which is either beautiful or good, or at least thought
to be so.

Q. How do you divide Pleasure?

A. Into Pleasure of Body, and into Pleasure of the Soul. The Pleasure of Body
is either moderate or immoderate, consisting in eating, drinking, and other
Corporal Recreations, which, when they are excessive, do produce several
Infirmities, and other pernicious Effects. The Pleasure of the Soul is that
satisfaction which she receives in the consideration and knowledge of an
Object. This Pleasure does sometimes ravish our Soul, as it happened to St.
Paul, who was ravished unto the Third Heaven.

The End of Moral Science.
MORALE, OU Le Moyen d'etre Heureux.
Q. LA Morale est elle le moyen d'etre Heureux?

R: Ouy certainement; car comme la Logique, conduisant touttes les Actions de
notre Entendement au bon and just raisonnement, ouvre la port a touttes
sorts de Sciences; ain la Morale, dirigeant celles de notre volonte a
l'Honetete and Bienseance, nous montre le moyen d'etre Heureux.

Q: D'ou est derive ce mot Morale?

R. Du mot Latin Mores, qui signify Moeurs; parce que la Morale enseigne a
diriger les Actions de notre Ame, pour acquerir de bonnes Moeurs.

Q. Qu'entendez vous par bonnes Moeurs?

R. J'entend de bonnes Habitudes ou Coutumes, comme la Coutume d'etre modere
dans le boire and le manger, ou la Coutume de render a un chacun ce qui luy
appartient, etc.

Q. Comment s'acquiert l'habitude ou Coutume?

R. Par l'Exercice de frequentes Actions.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Morale, ou Ethique?

R. C'est une Science Pratique, qui enseigne a bien regler nos Actions, en les
dirigeant a l'honetete, a fin de vivre heureusement en cette vie.

Q. Comment divisez vous la Morale?

R. En Speculative, qui enseigne les precepts generaux touchant la virtue and
la Beatitude; and en pratique, qui met en usage ces memes Precepts.

Q. Comment divisez vous la Morale pratique?

R. En Monastique, Oeconomique, and Politic.

Q. Faites moy comprendre cela clairement.

R. Par la monastique, je n'entend pas une vie solitaire, comme celle des
Hermites, qui ont renonce a la Societe human; mais cette Morale pratique; qui
apprend a un chacun a regler ses Actions, and a les diriger a l'honetete and
Virtue.

Par l'Oeconomique j'entend cette Morale qui'enseigne chaque pere and mere de
Famille a bien gouverner ses Enfants and Serviteurs.

Et par la Politic j'entend une Morale, qui enseigne chaque Sujet a etre un
bon and utile Membre de l'Etat, en se conformant aux Loix du Prince, and des
autres Magistrates.

Q. Quel est l'Objet de la Morale?

R. Les Actions humaines entantqu'elles se peuvent regler a l'honetete, and
bienseance.

Q. Comment le prouvez vous?

R. Je le prouve ainsi parceque l'Objet d'une Science est ce qui est considere
par cette Science; or est il que l'Ethique, ou la Morale considere les Actions
humaines pour les diriger a l'honetete and bienseance; donc l'Objet de la
Morale sont les Actions humaines, entantqu'elles peuvent etre dirigees a
l'honetete, and bienseance. Car comme l'objet de la Phisique est le Corpse
naturel entantque naturel, and celuy de la Medecin le Corpse humain entantque
guarrissable; ainsy l'Objet de la Morale sont les Actions de l'homme,
entantqu'elles peuvent etre dirigees a la bienseance and honetete.

Q. Quelle est la Fin de la Morale?

R. La Felicite ou la Beatitude, que l'homme peut esperer en cette vie, soit
qu'il soit en la vie monastique, soit dans l'Oeconomique, soit dans la
Politic.

Q. Comment le prouvez vous?

R. Je le fais voir ainsy, parceque les Actions humaines, entantqu'elles sont
dirigees a la bienseance and honetete, nous faisant vivre heureusement en cette
vie, il s'ensuit clairement que la fin de la Morale, est la Beatitude and
Felicite, puisque c'est a quoy elle tend.

Notez qu'entre les fins il y en a qu'on appelle Principales, and d'autres
subordonnees, qui ont relation a d'autres, comme l'addresse, de combatre est
raportee a la Guerre, comme a sa fin; la fin de la Guerre est la Paix, la fin
de la Paix est le Repos, and la fin du Repos est la Felicite, qui est la
principale fin; d'ou il s'ensuit que parmi les bonnes chooses il y en a qui sont
desirees seulement pour le bien qu'elles ont en else memes, comme est la
Felicite, and d'aures qui sont desirees comme des moyens pour arriver a une
autre fin; comme l'Or, les Richesses, and les Livres, qui sont les Objets de
nos voeux, parceque nous les considerons comme des moyens pour arriver a une
autre fin considerable, que nous envisageons comme un grand Bien.

Q. Qu'est ce que Bien?

R. C'est tout ceque le Monde appete, and desire.

Q. Comment divisez vous le Bien?

R. En Divin, Metaphisique, Phisique, and Moral.

Q. Qu'est ce que bien divin?

R. C'est celuy qui comprend toutes les Graces qui nous sont donnees de Dieu.

Q. Qu'est ce que bien Metaphisique?

R. C'est celuy qui recoit une recipr^que conversion avec son etre; comme tout
bien est un etre, and tout etre est bien, parcequ'entant qu'il est un etre
accompli en sa Nature, il est un bien; c'est pourquoy quand Dieu en la Creation
du Monde dit que toutes chooses etoient bonnes, il entendoit parler du bien
Metaphisique.

Q. Qu'est ce que le bien Phisique?

R. C'est celuy qui est propre and convenable aux chooses naturelles, comme au
Feu de bruler, aux Oyseaux de voler, and a la Pierre de descendre en bas, etc.

Q. Qu'est ce que bien Moral?

R. Les Actions vertueuses and honetes, qu'on appelle Vertus.

Q. Comment divisez vous encor le bien?

R. En bien qui est essentiellement bien and de soy, qui n'est autre que Dieu,
and en bien par participation, qui n'est autre que la Creature.

Q. Comment divisez vous le bien entantqu'il est rapporte a l'homme?

R. En Honete, Utile, and Delectable.

Q. Qu'est ce que bien honete?

R. C'est celuy auquel l'Appetit se termine, comme la Science, and Virtue.

Q. Qu'est ce que bien utile?

R. C'est celuy qui nous sert de moyen pour parvenir a l'honete; comme les
Richesses pour devenir scavant en fournissant a la depence des Etudes.

Q. Et qu'est ce que Bien delectable?

R. C'est celuy qui est conjoint avec la jouissance de la chose desiree, comme
les Honneurs ou nous sommes parvenus par le moyen de nos merits.

Q. Comment divisez vous encor le Bien?

R. En biens d'Esprit, comme les Sciences, and vertus; en biens de Corpse, comme
la Sante, la Force, la Beauty; and en biens de Fortune, comme les Richesses,
les Dignitez, les Honneurs, qui sont particulierement appellez biens de
Fortune, parcequ'ils sont sujets au changement; and en bien Souverain,
Felicite, ou Beatitude, don't la Posession assouvit entierement nos desirs, que
la Morale considere, comme la derniere fin de toutes les Actions humaines.

Q. La Felicite, ou Beatitude, de l'homme en cette vie consiste-t-elle dans les
Plaisirs du Corpse?

R. Non; parceque les Plaisirs du Corpse soit au boire, soit au manger, soit aux
chooses veneriennes passent presqu'en un Moment, and si nous voulons les
continuer sans moderation, ils affoiblissent notre Corpse, attristent notre Ame,
and causent plusieurs Infirmitez and meme des Maladies mortelles, and partant
ne pouvant pas nous Contenter entierement, ne peuvent pas etre notre Beatitude,
ou sou^erain Bien.

Q. Consiste-t-elle dans les Biens de Fortune, comme Dignitez and Richesses?

R. Non, parceque tout cela est desire pour une autre fin; car les Dignitez
sont desirees pour commander, and avoir authorite sur les autres; and les
Richesses sont souhaitees pour subvenir a nos Necessitez, prendre nos Plaisirs,
and venir a bout de nos desseins; or la Beatitude ou souverain bien est la
derniere fin a laquelle toutes les autres se rapportent and se terminent: Donc
les Biens de Fortune, scavoir les Dignitez and Richesses ne peuvent pas etre
notre souverain Bien, puisqu'elles ne sont pas notre derniere fin, car else se
rapportent a d'autres. De plus la Felicite, ou souverain Bien doit etre exempt
de peine, de souci, and inqui^tude, ^e qui ne se trouve pas avec les Richesses
and Dignitez, puisque nous avons de la peine a les acquerir, de la crainte en
les conservant, du trouble a les accroitre, and de la douleur en leur perte.
Car qui est oeluy qui est si eleve en Dignitez, and si regorgeant de Richesses,
qui n'en desire encor davantage? Puis donc qu'on n'est pas satisfait dans ces
chooses icy, on ne peut pas y etablir la Beatitude.

Q. Consiste-t-elle dans la Louange, Estime, Honneur, ou Reputation que nous
recevons parmy les Hommes?

R. Non, Car la Beatitude, doit tellement etre en celuy qui la possede, qu'elle
ne depend point d'autruy; or la Louange, l'Estime, l'Honneur; and la
Reputation dependent d'autruy, car comme dit Aristote, l'honneur est en
l'honorant, and non en l'honore. Deplus la Louange, l'Estime, l'Honneur, and la
Reputation etant desirees pour une autre Fin, comme pour etre en Authorite
audessus de autres, and leur commander, else ne peuvent pas etre la Beatitude,
puisque la Beatitude de l'homme doit etre la derniere fin de touttes chooses.

Q. Consiste-t-elle dans la Sante?

R. Non, Car quoyque la Sante du Corpse soit un thresor, que nous ne
reconnoissons que par sa perte, neantmoins la Beatitude n'y consiste pas, and
parceque nous scuhaitons la Sante pour une autre fin, comme pour jouir des
Plaisirs and Honneurs; and parcequ'un homme peut etre Malheureux en jouissant
d'une parfaite Sante.

Q. En quoy donc consiste la Beatitude de l'homme en cette vie?

R. Dans le plaisir, qui proceed d'une continuite d'Actions verteuuses, jointe
a une exemption de touttes sorts de miseres, and a la jouissance de touttes
sorts de Biens tant de l'Ame que du Corpse, tant de Nature que de Fortune.

Q. Pourquoy dites vous qui proceed d'une continuite d'Actions Vertueuses?

R. C'est que pour etre parfaitement heureux en cette vie, il ne suffit pas de
fair quelque Action vertueuse, ou de vivre vertueux en un certain temps de
notre vie, comme dans la jeunesse, il le faut etre durant tout le temps que
nous vivons; car quiconque commet unefois le peche, encore qu'il se remette au
chemin de la Virtue, recoit toutefois quelque regret en son Ame, and quelque
honte de l'avoir commis, ce qui empeche qu'il ne puisse etre parfaitement
heureux en cette vie.

Q. Pourquoy dites vous jointe a une Exemption de toutes sorts de Miseres, and
a la Jouissance de toutes sorts de Biens?

R. Parceque, pour etre perfaitement heureux en ce Monde, il faut etre exempt
de Miseres and d'Afflictions durant tout le course de cette vie, and jouir de
tous les Biens du Corpse, de l'Ame, and de la Fortune. Il faut avoir la Sante
and la force du Corpse, q^i sont rarement separables; d'autantqu'elles procedent
d'une meme cause, qui est le bon Temperament, and la parfaite disposition des
parties du Corpse. Il faut posseder la Beauty, qui consiste en la just
proportion de toutes les parties du Corpse, dans un Teint Vermeil, dans la bonne
Grace, dans un Maintien agreeable, dans un Regard modeste, dans une grave
Douceur, dans un Visage compose, and plutot riant que severe. Il faut avoir les
Richesses, car sans else que peut on entreprendre, and esperer,
particulierement dans le siecle ou nous sommes, o^ tout se fait pour de l'Or.
Et pour le fair court; Il faut avoir tous les autres Biens, tant de la Nature
que de la Fortune, and il les faut avoir durant tout le course de la vie;
desorteque celuy qui auroit vecu un long temps en jouissant de tous ces Biens,
s'il venoit ensuite a les perdre, and a etre miserable, il ne pouroit pas etre
estime parfaitement heureux.

Q. Pourquoy Solon ne vouloit il pas qu'on estimat aucum homme heureux qu'aprez
sa mort?

R. C'est parceque l'homme, qui vit a present en jouissant des Plaisirs,
Honneurs and Richesses, peut neantmoins avoir une honteuse and mauvaise Fin.

Q. Puisqu'il y a tant de Conditions requises pour la beatitude de l'homme en
cette vie, est il possible qu'il y puisse etre parfaitement heureux?

R. Cela n'est pas possible moralement, parlant, parceque la vie de l'homme
commencant par les pleurs, continuant dans mill sorts de miseres, troubles,
soins, and Accidents inopinez. and finissant par la douleur, il est fort
difficile, and moralement impossible qu'il puisse etre parfaitement heureux en
cette vie: Neantmoins phisiquement parlant cela n'est pas impossible; car cela
peut arriver, lors qu'il plaira a Dieu de l'ordonner ainsy; car Dieu peut fair
des hommes, don't toutes les actions seront vertueuses, qui seront exempts de
toutes miseres, and qui jouiront de toutes sorts de Biens.

Q. Comment est ce donc que l'homme peut etre heureux en cette vie?

R. En jouissant d'une bonne Sante, en ayant suffisamment des biens pour
subvenir a ses Necessitez, and en conformant toutes ses Actions a la Bienseance
and Honetete; car en agissant ainsy, il a le Temoignange d'une bonne
Conscience, une satisfastion interieure, une Joye dans le Coeur, une Paix,
Tranquillite, and Plaisir dans l'Ame, un Honnenr and Estime de tous ceux qui le
connoissent, and une Esperance bien fondee, pour jouir en l'autre vie de la
presence de Dieu, qui en est le veritable, and souverain Bien.

Q. Pourquoy dites vous qu'en agissant ainsy, il a une Esperance bien fondee?

R. C'est parceque Dieu a promis la vie eternelle, and la Jouissance de sa
Presence (qui est le souverain Bien de l'homme en l'autre vie) a ceux qui
garderont ses Commandments, o'est adire, qui vivront ver^^eusement, ou
conformeront leurs Actions ^ la Bienseance and Honetete.

Q. Qu'est ce que virtue morale?

R. C'est, dit Aristote, une Habitude Elective, qui consiste en la Mediocrite
determinee par la Raison, comme un homme prudent le determineroit.

Q. Pourquoy l'appellez vous Habitude?

R. C'est parcequ'elle s'acquiert par la frequentation des Actions.

Q. Pourquoy l'appellez vous Elective?

R. C'est pour fair voir, que la Virtue ne depend pas seulement de la Volonte,
mais aussi qu'elle est exercee avec Conseil and Deliberation, and par cette
difference, la Virtue morale est distinguee des Sciences and des Arts, qui
consistent en l'Entendement.

Q. Pourquoy dites vous qui consiste en la Mediocrite?

R. C'est pour la distinguer du vice, qui, quoyqu'il se pratique avec
deliberation, ainsy que la virtue, ne consiste pas pourtant dans la Mediocrite,
mais dans l'excez ou defectuosite.

Q. Pourquoy dites vous determinee par la raison, comme un homme prudent la
determineroit.

R. C'est parcequ'elle doit etre differente Selon les Circonstances des temps,
des lieux, and des Persons: Par exemple la Liberalite, qui consiste dans le
milieu de l'Avarice and de la Prodigalite, doit etre autre dans un homme prive
que dans un Magistrate, and autre dans un simple Bourgeois, que dans un rich
Gentilhomme; and meme a l'egard d'une meme person, elle doit etre differente
selon les Lieux, les Temps, and les Persons: Par exemple, je dois plus render
de respect au Magistrate quand il est dans son Siege de Justice, que quand il
joue dans son Jardin. Je dois etre plus devot a l'Eglise, qu'a la Comedy; and
je dois etre plus charitable envers un pauvre de ma Religion, qu'envers un
Payen, lorsqu'ils sont dans une egale necessite: D'ou il s'ensuit, que la
Proportion, que l'on doit observer dans l'exercice de la virtue, doit etre
Geometrique and non Arithmetique.

Q. Quelle difference mettez vous enter Proportion Geometrique, and
Arithmetique?

R. La Proportion Arithmetique regard l'Egalite des Nombres, sans avoir egard
a l'Egalite des Raisons; and la Proportion Geometrique au contraire regard
l'Egalite des Raisons sans avoir egard a l'Egalite des Nombres: Par exemple, si
je dois distribuer cent ecus a quatre persons, si je done a chacun vingt
cinq ecus, alors j'observe la Proportion Arithmetique. Et si l'un des quatre
merit autantque les trois autres, and qu'a cause de son merit je luy done
soixante and quinze ecus, and les vingt cinq autres aux trois autres hommes a
Proportion de leur merit, a lors j'observe la Proportion geometrique.

Q. Comment faut il fair pour bien observer cette Proportion geometrique dans
l'exercice de la Virtue?

R. Il faut en demander les lumieres a Dieu; il est besoin d'une grande
prudence, mais sur tout d'une piete envers Diue, and d'un Amor envers le
prochain.

Objection. Vous dites que la Virtue morale doit consister dans un Milieu, ou
Mediocrite; il semble que cela n'est pas veritable, parcequ'il y a des Vertus
qui semblent n'avoir point de milieu, comme la Justice, la Magnificence, la
Magnanimite, and l'Amour ^vers Dieu and le prochain.

R. Quant a la Justice, je repond qu'il ^ a un milieu a observor, car l'excez
dans la distribution des peines est appelle Rigueur and Cruaute; and la
defectuosite est appellee Faveur.

Quant a la Magnificence and Magnanimite, je dis qu'elles doivent etre reglees
au niveau de la raison, (ce que l'on p^ut appeller le Milieu ou mediocrite) car
il faut que ce foit selon les persons, les Temps, les Lieux and autres
Occasions; autrement la Magnificence peut passer en Folly and Superfluite; and
la Magnanimite en Temerite.

Et quant a l'Amour de Dieu and du prochain, je dis que ce sont des vertus
theologales, don't il n'est pas icy question, car nous ne parlons que des
morales; t^utefois je puis dire, que dans l'un and dans l'autre il s'y peut
trouver de l'excez: car dans l'Amour de Dieu il peut y avoir de la
Superstition, and dans celuy du prochain de l'Imprudence, qui peut causer
beaucoup de pernicieux Effects: Par exemple, si par un excez d'Amour envers mon
prochain je done tous mes biens a un debauche, outre que je me mets dans une
grande incommodite, je done encor de l'accroissement a ses Vices.

Q. Comment faut il fair pour trouver ce milieu, ou consiste la Virtue morale?

R. Il faut s'eloigner de l'extremite, a laquelle nous reconnoissons avoir plus
d'inclination naturelle, and pancher de l'autre cote, ainsi que font les
Jardiniers; car quand ils veulent redresser un jeune Arbre tortu, ils le
panchent de l'autre cote.

Q. Qu'est il requis pour render une Action vertueuse digne de recompense?

R. Il faut qu'elle soit volontaire, car si elle est faite par Crainte, ou par
Violence, je veux dire contre notre volonte, elle ne merit point de
recompense, ou pour le moins elle n'en merit pas tant que quand elle est faite
de bon coeur, and de bonne Volonte.

Ainsi en est il d'une mechante action faite sans y penser, ou par Crainte, ou
par Contrainte; car elle ne doit pas etre punie, ou si elle doit recevoir
quelque punition, il faut que ce soit plus legerement que quand elle est faite
avec Reflection, and con sentement.

Q. La mauvaise Action qui se fait par Ignorance est elle excusable, ou doit
elle etre punie?

R. Il y a une Ignorance de droit, and il y a une Ignorance de fait; celle la
n'excuse pas, and par consequent doit etre punie; mais celle cy excuse, and ne
doit pas etre punie.

Q. Faites moy comprendre ce que c'est qu'Ignorance de Droit, and Ignorance de
Fait?

R. Si quelqu'un, aprez avoir derobe and tue, ignoroit que ce fut malfait,
cette Ignorance ne l'exeuseroit pas, and il seroit puni nonobstant son
ignorance, parce qu'il pouvoit avoir recours aux gens de Conseil, and demander
leur advis; and cette ignorance s'appelle Ignorance de Droit, mais si un homme,
aprez avoir fait un long Voyage, revenoit dans le pays, and sans le scavoir
epousoit sa propre Soeur, c^tte Ignorance seroit excusable, and ne seroit pas
punie; and cette ignorance s'appelle ignorance de Fait.

Q. Quand ceux qui sont sur mer, pour sauver leur vaisseau and leur vie,
jettent leurs biens dans les ondes, cette Action la est elle volontaire ou
contrainte?

R. Elle est l'une and l'autre; elle est volontaire, parcequ'elle est faite
avec Reflection, choix and consentement; and elle est contrainte, car c'est avec
Repugnance qu'ils perdent ainsy leurs biens.

Q. Quelles chooses sont requises dans les Actions morales?

R. La Volonte, la Deliberation, and l'Election.

Q. Faites moy voir cela clairement.

R. La volonte, dans la fin de ses Actions se propose toujours pour objet le
bien soit vray, soit apparent, and non jamais le mal entantque mal; mais
toujours sous la couleur and appearance du Bien; car quelque Crime que comettent
les mechants, c'est toujours pour quelque fin, sinon honete, aumoins utile, ou
delectable.

La Deliberation consulte des moyens propres pour arriver a la fin; ainsi un
Medecin consulte s'il est expedient de saigner, ou de purger.

Et l'Election, qui est un eff^t de la Consultation, enter plusieurs moyens
don't on avoit delibere, choisit les plus propres, and les met en pratique.

Q. La Deliberation se trouve-t-elle dans toutes nos Actions?

R. Non, elle se trouve seulement dans celles qui sout possibles, and qui sont
a fair; car on n'a jamais veu un homme bien cense consulter des chooses
impossibles, ni de celles qui sont faites, non plus que des chooses qui arrivent
par necessite, ou fortuitement; parcequ'elles ne peuvent etre changees a notre
advantage par notre Consultation.

Q. L'homme fait il des Actions vicieuses volontairement?

R. Ouy, autrement les Magistrates ne puniroient pas les Malfaiteurs; and
puisqu'ils les punissent, c'est a cause qu'ils ont commis le crime
volontairement. Deplus si nous avons le pouvoir de fair de bonnes Actions
volontairement, pour une meme raison nous en pouvons fair des mauvaises.

Q. Quel est le Sujet des Vertus and des Vices?

R. Ce sont les Passions, qu'on appelle des Motions ou Agitations de l'Ame.

Q. Comment se fait la Passion, ou comment est ce que l'Ame est emeue, and
agitee?

R. L'Objet est premierement considere vray, ou aumoins probable; puis imagine
bon ou mauvais, and consequemment delectable ou facheux, and partant a desirer
ou a fuir, and ainsi l'Ame par le moyen des Esprits animaux se trouve emeue,
and agitee; D'ou il s'ensuit que c'est a l'agitation de l'Ame, procedante de la
Connoissance que nous avons de l'Objet represente a nos sens externes, and a
notre Imagiaation, qu'est rapportee chaque Passion.

Q. Combien y a-t-il de Passions?

R. Ordinairement on en conte Unze; parceque ou l'Objet que l'on considere est
bon and a desirer, ou il est mauvais, and a eviter. S'il est bon, il produit
l'Amour, le Desir de l'acquirir, and le Plaisir en sa jouissance; and s'il est
mauvais, il produit la Hane, la Fuite pour l'eviter, and le Deplaisir lorsqu'il
est arrive. Que si l'Objet bon ou mauvais est considere difficile a acquerir,
ou a eviter a lors il produit l'Esperance, le Desespoir, la Crainte, la
Hardiesse, and la Colere.

Q. Y a-t-il des Autheurs qui en ont conte davantage?

R. Ouy, Des carts commence par l'Admiration, puis continue par l'Estime, la
Veneration, le Mepris, la Superbe, Humilite ou Abjestion, Amor, Haine,
Cupidite ou Desir, Animosite, Hardiesse, Pusillanimite, Syntherese, Joye,
Tristesse, Envy, Pity; Complaisance en soy meme, Douleur ou Repentence,
Faveur, Gratitude, Indignation, Colere, Gloire, Pudeur, Degout.

Q. Pourquoy Des Carts fait il un tell denombrement des Passions?

R. C'est a cause de la connection qu'il a trouve enter else.

Q. Faites moy voir cela clairement.

R. Aussitot que nous Jugeons un Objet etre extraordinaire and nouveau, nous
l'admirons; and parceque cela peut arriver avantque nous connoissions, si cet
objet nous est convenable ou non, pour cette raison l'Admiration semble etre la
premiere des Passions. Elle n'a point de contraire; parceque, si l'objet qui se
present n'a rien en soy d'extraordinaire, nous n'en sommes point excitez, and
nous le considerons sans Passion.

Aprez l'Admiration vient l'Estime, and la Veneration, si nous considerons de
l'excellence dans notre objet; and le mepris, si nous y imaginons de la
Petitesse. Et parceque l'Objet peut etre en nous memes, and que nous pouvons
nous estimer, ou mepriser, dela vient la Superbe, and Humilite, and parceque l
objet peut etre considere comme bon a notre egard, dela naist l'Amour; and s'il
est considere comme nuisible, a lors il produit la Haine. De cette
consideration du Bien and du Mal procedent les autres Passions, and
premierement le Desir ou Cupidite, qui arrive lorsque non seulement on desire
l'acquisition du Bien qui est absent, and la fuite du Mal qu'on croit devoir
arriver, mais encore lors qu'on Souhaite la conservation de quelque Bien, ou
l'absence de quelque Mal. Et lorsque nous nous imaginons que le Bien desire se
peut obtenir, dela vient l'Esperance; si nous pensons que l'acquisition en est
difficile, dela vient la crainte. Lorsque nous avons une grande Esperance de
l'obtenir, dela proceed l'Assuranee, ou Confience: Et quand nous nous
representons le contraire, dela vient le Desespoir. Et parce qu'il peut y avoir
de la difficulte dans le choix des Moyens pour obtenir le Bien desire, de la
vient le Doubt, ou Balancement de notre Esprit, l'Animosite, ou Hardiesse and
Pusillanimite ou Poltronerie. Et lorsque sans avoir mis bas le Doubt, ou
Hesitation d'Esprit, nous nous determinons a quelque action, dela vient la
Synterese, ou Remord de Conscience. La consideration du bien present cause la
Joye, and la consideration du mal present produit la Tristesse. Que si le Bien
est considere comme appartenant a autruy and que nous l'en estimions indigne,
cela cause l'Envie; and si c'est un mal, il produit la Pity, qui, comme
l'Envie, est une espece de Tristesse. Or parceque nous pouvons considerer la
Cause du bien ou du mal tant present qu'absent, le Bien que nous avons fait
nous cause une complaisance interieure, qui est la plus douce de toutes les
passions, and aucontraire le mal que nous avons commis excite la Douleur.
Deplus le Bien, que les autres font, cause la Faveur; and si nous recevons ce
bien, il produit la Gratitude, ou Reconnoissance: Par une semblable raison le
Mal qui est commis par les autres, quand il ne nous touch pas, a lors il
produit seulement l'Indignation; and la Colere, s'il nous regard.

Et si le Bien, qui est, ou a ete en nous, est rapporte a l'Opinion que les
autres en peuvent concevoir, il produit en nous la Gloire; and le mal au
contraire produit la Honte. Et dautantque la Continuation du Bien engendre
rasassiement, de la vient le Degout. On pouroit encor joy marquer autant
d'autres differentes Passions, que l'Ame peut considerer differemment un Objet.

Remarquez, que selon des Carts, toutes ces differentes Passions se peuvent
reduire a Six; scavoir a l'Admiration, Amor, Haine, Desir, Joye, and
Tristesse; parceque toutes les autres en sont derivees.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'Admiration?

R. C'est une soudaine occupation de l'Ame envers un Objet, qui luy semble rare
and extraordinaire.

Q. Quelle difference y a-t-il enter Admiration and Etonnement?

R. Point d'autre, sinonque l'Etonnement est un excez d'Admiration?

Q. Donnez moy la Definition de l'Amour; and de la Haine.

R. L'Amour est une agitation de l'Ame, procedante du mouvement des Esprits,
qui l'incite a se joindre par volente aux Objets qui luy semblent convenables;
and la Haine est une agitation procedante des Esprits, qui incite l'Ame a se
separer par consentement des Objets, qui lui paroissent nuisibles.

Q. Quelle difference mettez vous enter Amor de Concupiscence, and Amor de
Bienveillance?

R. L'Amour de Bienveillance est lorsque nous voulons du bien a quelqu'un sans
^ucun melange des notre Interest; and l'Amour de Concupiscence est, lorsque
nous ai^^ons quelqu'un non a cause des bonnes qua^itez qui sont en luy, mais
seulement pour ^e Profit que nous en pouvons retirer.

Q. Quelle difference y a-t-il enter Amity and Devotion?

R. L'Amitie regard les hommes, and la Devotion a ordinairement Dieu pour
objet; Je dis ordinairement, parceque quelquefois ^lle regard aussi les
hommes, and la Patrie. De ^lus dans l'Amitie l'Amant se prefere a l'aime; mais
dans la Devotion l'Amant prefere ^^ujours a soy meme son Objet aim, ensorte
qu'il ne craint pas de mourir pour sa conservation; ainsy qu'il appert par
plusieurs Exemples de Persons, qui se sont livrees ^ la mort pour conserver
la vie de leurs Princes, and Concitoyens.

Q. Qu'est ce que le Desir?

R. C'est une agitation de l'Ame, pro^edante des Esprits, par laquelle elle est
disposee a souhaiter non seulement la jouis^ance du bien absent, and la
conservation du ^resent, mais encore l'absence du Mal, tant de celuy qui est
present, que de celuy qui ^ut arriver.

Q. Donnez moy la Definition de la Joye?

R. C'est une joyeuse agitation de l'Ame dans la possession d'un Bien, qui luy
est represente comme sien.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Tristesse?

R. C'est une languissante agitation d'Esprit causee par le mal que l'Ame se
represente comme sien par le moyen des Esprits du Cerveau.

Q. Quelles sont les Causes de ces deux differentes Passions?

R. La Joye proceed de l'opinion du bien, and la Tristesse de celle du mal;
neantmoins l'une and l'autre procedent quelquefois de la bonne ou mauvaise
disposition de notre temperament.

Q. D'ou vient que la Joye produit une Couleur rouge and Vermeille sur le
Visage?

R. C'est parceque la Joye ouvrant le Coeur, le sang s'ecoule promptement par
ioutes les Veins, and ainsi enflant les parties du visage, le rend plus serain
and plus agreeable.

Q. D'ou vient que la Tristesse rend ordinairement le visage pale?

R. C'est parcequ'elle resserre le Coeur, ce qui est la cause que le sang
coulant lentement par les veins, and devenant plus froid, done une couleur
pale a notre Visage.

Q. Et d'ou vient qu la Tristesse produit quelquefois une Rougeur sur le
Visage?

R. C'est parcequ'elle se joint a d'autres Passions, comme a l'Amour, au Desir
and a la Haine; car ces Passions, echaufant le sang qui vient du Foye, le
poussent au Coeur, and dela au Visage, ce qui est la cause qu'il paroit rouge.

Q. D'ou vient que la Pudeur ou la Honte nous fait rougir?

R. Cela vient en party de l'Amour de nous memes, and en party du desir
d'eviter une present infamy; ce qui est la Cause que le sang est conduit du
Coeur au Visage, and ainsy le fait rougir.

Q. Quelle difference mettez vous enter la Mort and l'Evanouissement?

R. Dans la mort la chaleur du Coeur est entierement suffoquee; and dans
l'Evanouissement elle est tellement suffoquee, qu'il en rest encor assez pour
la rallumer.

Q. D'ou proceed le Ris? (...)

R. Cela vient de la differente representation des Objets a notre Imagination.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Jalousie?

R. C'est une Espece de crainte jointe a un desir de se conserver la possession
d'un Bien, qui fait qu'on examine les plus petites causes de soupcon, and qu'on
les prend pour des raisons de grande consequence.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'Emulation?

R. C'est une Espece d'Animosite qui nous encourage a entreprendre des chooses,
ou nous esperons reussir, parceque nous avons veu que d'autres y ont eu un bon
succez.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'Envie?

R. C'est un vice qui est dans un mechant naturel, and qui est la cause que
quelques persons s'affligent du bien qu'ils voyent arriver aux autres.

Je ne parle pas icy de la Definition des autres Passions, parcequ'elles sont
suffisament expliquees dans le denombrement que j'en ay fait cy devant.

Q. Dites moy le nombre des Vertus Morales.

R. Justice, Force, Temperance, Prudence, Liberalite, Magnificence,
Magnanimite, Clemence, Verite, Entregeant, Affabilite, ou Courtoisie, qui se
reduisent aux quatre premieres Vertus qu'on appelle Cardinales.

Q. Quelle difference mettez vous enter ces quatre Vertus?

R. La Justice consiste a distribuer a un chacun avec proportion Geometrique
les Recompenses and les Peines; la Force consiste a surmonter la Crainte; la
Temperance a moderer les plaisirs du Corpse; and la Prudence a conduire and
regler toutes nos Actions selon les Temps, les Persons and les Lieux.

Q. Pourquoy appelle-t-on ces vertus Cardinales?

R. C'est a cause du mot Latin Cardo, qui signify Gone, dautantque comme les
Ports roulent sur les gons, ainsi sur ces quatre vertus roulent toutes les
autres Actions morales vertueuses.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Justice?

R. C'est une virtue morale, par laquelle nous gardons l'Equite, en la
distribution des recompenses and des peines, and dans le commerce des biens
externes; en un mot c'est render a un chacun ce qui luy appartient.

Q. Quels sont les vices opposez a la Justice?

R. L'Excez, and la Defectuosite.

Q. Comment divisez vous la Justice?

R. En distributive and commutative.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Justice distributive?

R. C'est celle qui guard l'Egalite selon la proportion Geometrique, c'est a
dire, qui, en distribuant les Recompenses and les Peines, a egard aux merits
des Persons, au Temps, au Lieu, and autres circonstanstances. Par exemple,
celuy qui offense un Magistrate, selon la Justice distributive doit etre plus
severement puni, que celuy qui offense une person privee; and eeluy qui
commet une Insolence dans l'Eglise durant le Service Divin, merit un plus
grand Supplice que s'il avoit commis cette meme Insolence dans un Cabaret.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Justice commutative?

R. C'est celle qui observe la proportion Arithmetique, c'est a dire qui n'a
egard qu'a la Quantite, sans considerer le Merit des Persons. Par exemeple
la meme sort de bled and de vin est vendue autant a un Magistrate, and a un
Prince, qu'a un Artisan and Paysan.

Q. Qu'est ce que le Droit?

R. Le Droit est un mot Equivoque, car quelquefois il se prend pour Authorite
and Puissance, ainsi nous disons le Droit des Maitres sur leurs Seviteurs, pour
dire l'Authorite and puissance. Et d'autrefois il se prend ou pour des Loix qui
regardent les chooses Divines, and a lors il est appelle droit divin; ou pour
des Loix qui regardent les chooses humaines, and civiles, and a lors il est
appelle Droit civil and humain. Quelquefois il se prend, pour le droit naturel,
qui est commun a tous les Animaux, comme de conserver leur vie, and leurs
petis. Et d'autrefois pour le Droit des Nations, qui est commun a toutes
Nations, ou pour le moins a celles qui sont un peu policees, comme qu'un
Ambassadeur ayt Liberte de sa Religion en quelque Pays qu'il soit envoye.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Loy de Talion?

R. C'est une Loy qui port que chacun recoive une peine egale aumal qu'il a
fait a un autre. C'etoit la Loy durant le Temps de Moyse, qui ordonnoit que la
Dent fut arrachee pour la Dent, and l'oeil pour l'oeil Et on peut dire encore
que cette Loy est aussy de l'Evangile; puisqu'il y est ecrit que nous serons
mesurez de la meme mesure que nous mesurons les autres; Et que celuy qui
frapera du Glaive, perira par le Glaive.

Q. Qu'est ce que vous appellez Obligation en Loy?

R. C'est ce par quoy nous sommes obligez d'accomplir ce que nous avons promis.

Q. Comment divisez vous l'Obligation?

R. En Naturelle and Civil; la premiere oblige sans forcer, comme quand
quelqu'un me present Vingt Guinez, a lors je suis oblige par la Loy naturelle
d'etre reconnoissant, mais je ne puis pas y etre force; and la second oblige,
and force, si je n'accomplis pas ce a quoy je suis oblige.

Q. Sur quoy est fondee l'Obligation Civil?

R. Sur un Contract, ou autre chose equivolent a un Contract.

Q. Comment se fait le Contract?

R. Ou par Parole, ou par Ecriture, ou par consentement, ou par quelque chose
mentionee dans le Contract, comme une chose pretee, ou mise en depost, ou en
Gage, etc.

Notez que quelquefois nous sommes obligez de render la meme chose qu'on nous a
pretee, comme par exemple quand quelqu'un me prete son cheval, ses Botes, son
Manteau, etc. Il a intention que le meme cheval, les memes Botes, and le meme
Manteau luy soient rendus; mais quand il prete vingt Ecus, ou vingt boisseaux
de bled, il n'oblige pas qu'on luy rende le meme, mais seulement vingt ecus,
and vingt boisseaux de bled aussy bons que ceux qu'il a prete.

Notez 2. que, quand quelque chose est donnee en Depost a quelqu'un, il est
oblige de le render sans fraud, and sans s'en Servir; pareillement celuy qui a
receu quelque chose en gage, doit la render a celui don't il l'a receue, aussi
tot qu'il pay ce pourquoy il l'a engagee.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'une Obligation par parole?

R. C'est celle qui proceed de la question d'un des Contractants, and de la
Reponce de l'autre, comme promettez vous de payer tant d'argent un tell jour?
and l'autre repond, ouy, je le promets.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'une Obligation par Ecriture?

R. C'est quand on contracte par promesses ecrites, qu'on appelle Cedules.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'Obligation par Consentement?

R. C'est quand on achete, on vend, on exchange, etc. Elle est ainsi appellee,
parcequ'elle depend entierement du Consentement des Contractants, quoyqu'il n'y
ayt rien d'ecrit.

Q. Combien y a-t-il d'Obligations fondees sur une chose equivalente a un
Contract?

R. Trois. 1. En faisant les affairs d'un Amy absent, sans avoir charge de
luy, car le Negotiat^ur peut avoir Action pour repeter tout ce qu'il a depence
au Sujet de son Amy, and l'Amy peut demander d'^tre dedomage s'il a ete mal
(...). 2. En etant Administrateur, car ^^ est oblige a son Pupille, and
mutuellement le Pupille a son Administrateur. 3. Par la Communaute de quelque
chose commune a plusieurs, en la quelle si quelqu'un des asscciez a depence de
l'argent, comme par exemple pour racomoder un Navire, il peut avoir Action
contre les autres, au cas qu'ils refusent de payer leur part de ce qu'il a
debource.

Qu'est ce que la Force?

R. C'est une virtue morale, qui, reglant la Crainte and la Hardiesse, nous fait
resoudre a surmonter courageusement, ou supporter constamment: toutes les
difficultez qui s'opposent a nos louables desseins.

Q. Quels sont les Vices opposez a cette Virtue?

R. La Lachete, and la Temerite; comme la premiere est tres honteuse, aussy la
derniere est tres dangereuse.

Notez que la Hardiesse, and la Constance sont des vertus, qui toujours
accompagnent le Courage.

Notez aussy que cette virtue est quelquefois appellee Herorique, quand elle est
si extraordinaire, qu'elle semble surpasser les Forces humaines, comme quand
Horatius Cocles soutenant seul (...) un Pont l'effort d'une Armee, sauva
(...)is.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Temperance?

R. C'est une virtue morale, qui modere les plaisirs du Corpse soit qu'ils
viennent des sens exterieurs, soit des interieurs.

Q. Quels sont les vices opposez a la Temperance?

R. L'un consiste en l'Excez, and l'autre dans la Defectuosite.

Notez que la Piete, la Continence, la Chastete, and la Modesty accompagnent
ordinairement la Temperance.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Prudence?

R. C'est une virtue morale, qui prevoyant les chooses futures contingentes, en
consulte and en delibere meurement, afinque nour ne soyons pas surpris.

Q. Comment divisez vous la Prudence?

R. En Jurisprudence, and en Prudence Politic, Oeconomique, and Monasticalle.

Q. Qu'est ce que Jurissprudence?

R. C'est une Science pratique, qui enseigne le Style and la Form des Loix.

Q. Quelles sont les Loix que la Jurisprudence ordonne?

R. Ces trois principales, honetement vivre, n'offencer person, and render a
un chacun ce qui luy appartient, en quoy consiste toutte la Philosophy morale;
desorte que celuy, qui guard ces Loix, mean une vie irreprochable.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Prudence Polytique?

R. C'est une Science morale, qui enseigne la maniere de gouverner prudemment
une Republique.

Q. Qu'est ce que Republique?

R. C'est une multitude de Persons, qui ont de memes Loix, and qui jouissent
de memes Privileges.

Q. Comment s'appellent ces Persons?

R. Else s'appellent Citoyens.

Q. A quoy sont obligez les Citoyens?

R. A S'aymer, se deffendre les uns les autres, and a observer les Loix
etablies parmi eux.

Q. Comment divisez vous les Citoyens?

R. En Sujets, and en Magistrates.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'etre Sujet?

R. C'est reconnoitre l'Authorite d'un Superieur en obeissant a ses Loix.

Q. Comment divisez, vous les Sujets?

R. 1. En Naturels, qui sont nez dans un meme Pays. 2. En Estrangers, qui sont
admis pour etre naturels, c'est a dire pour etre Sujets aux memes Loix, and
j^uir des memes Privileges que les Naturels. 3. En Nobles. 4. En Scavants. 5.
En Marchands. 6. En Artisans. 7. En Soldats. 8. En Laboureurs, Carossiers, etc.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'etre Magistrate?

R. C'est avoir, and exercer Authorite sur les autres.

Q. Comment est ce que les Magistrates ont cette Authorite?

R. Ou par la Vocation immediate de Dieu, ou par le Droit de la Guerre, ou par
Succession, ou par Election.

Q. Que doit on considerer dans l'Election d'un Magistrate ou Gouverneur?

R. Son Age, sa Naissance,, and les autres Qualitez de Corpse, and d'esprit
requises pour commander aux autres.

Q. Quelles sont ces Qualitez de Corpse and d'esprit requises dans un Magistrate,
ou Gouverneur?

R. La Sante de Corpse, la bonne grace, la Gravite, la Justice, la Clemence
melee de Severite, mais sur tout la Prudence.

Q. Quelles doivent etre les Officiers d'un Magistrate?

R. Ils doivent etre Ingenieux, Sages, Scavants, Eloquents, Honetes, Justes,
Courtois, bienfaits de Corpse, and d'un age enter la Jeunesse, and la
vieillesse.

Q. Quel est l'Office du Magistrate?

R. 1. De prendre guard que le Service divin soit bien observe. 2. Que les Loix
du Pays soient bien gardees. 3. De punir ceux qui les transgressent. 4.
D'encourager ceux qui les observent fidellement.

Q. Comment divisez vous la Republique?

R. En Monarchy, and en Polyarchie.

Q. Qu'est ce que Monarchy?

R. C'est une multitude de Peuple, don't le gouvernement est done a une seule
Person.

Q. Qu'est ce que Polyarchie?

R. C'est une Republique, don't le Gouvernement est commis a plusieurs.

Q. Comment divisezvous la Polyarchie?

R. En Aristocratie, and en Democratie.

Q. Qu'est ce que Aristocratie?

R. C'est un Gouvernement, qui est enter les mains des Nobles.

Q. Qu'est ce que Democratie?

R. C'est un Gouvernement, qui, par les suffrages du Peuple, est commis
alternativement a quelques Particuliers.

Q. Comment s'appellent les lieux, ou demeurent les Habitants d'une Republique?

R. Ils s'appellent ou Hameaux, ou villages, ou Bourgs, ou villes.

Q. Comment s'appelle la principale ville d'une Republique?

R. Elle se nomme Metropolis.

Remarquez que la Republique est appellee Empire, quand elle est gouvennee par
un Empereur, and Royaume, quand elle est gouvernee par un Roy.

Q. Qu'est ce que Prudence Oeconomique?

R. C'est une Science Morale, qui enseigne la maniere de gouverner prudemment
une Famille.

Q. De quoy est composee une Famille?

R. De Mary, de Femme, d'Enfants, de Serviteurs, and de Biens, ou Posessions.

Q. Quelle est la fin du Marriage?

R. La Societe du Mary and de la Femme, afin d'engendrer des Enfants, and de
s'assister l'un l'autre.

Q. Quel est le Devoir du Mary envers sa Femme?

R. Il doit luy donner un bon exemple, l'aymer tendrement, luy commander ave^
respect and civilite, la deffendre contre ceux qui parlent mal d'elle,
supporter ses Infirmitez, and fair tout ce qu'il peut pour l'entretenir, and
luy plaire.

Q. Quel est le Devoir de la Femme envers son Mary?

R. Elle doit l'honorer, and luy obeir, supporter ses defauts, l'assister
autant qu'elle peut dans son adversite, le consoler en son affliction, and
n'etre point trop somptueuse dans ses habits, and autres chooses qui regardent
le Menage.

Q. Quel est le Devoir des Parents envers leurs Enfants?

R. Ils doivent avoir soin de leur Education, chacun selon leur Pouvoir and
Condition; and la Mere doit les allaicter, si elle peut.

Q. Quel est le Devoir des Enfants envers leurs Parents?

R. Les aymer, les honorer, leur obeir, prendre guard de ne les point facher,
and les assister, quand ils sont devenus vieux, and infirmes.

Q. Quel est le Devoir des Serviteurs envers leurs Maitres?

R. Ils doivent etre obeissants, diligents, and Fidelles.

Q. Quel est le Devoir des Maitres envers leurs Serviteurs?

R. Ils doivent leur donner bon Exemple, pourvoir de ce qui est necessaire pour
leur subsistence; payer leur gages, and les corriger quand ils manquent a leur
devoir.

Q. Quelles sont les Posessions, qui se trouvent dans une Famille?

R. L'Or, l'Argent, les Meubles, le Bled, la Biere, le Vin, les Bestiaux, les
Jardins, les Terres, les Maisons, etc.

Q. Comment faut il fair pour acquerir, and conserver du bien?

R. Il faut etre vigilant, diligent, and travailler chacun selon sa condition;
Il ne faut pas depencer plus qu'on ne gaigne, ou qu'on a de Revenu; and il faut
eviter le Jeu, les Tavernes, and particulierement la Compagnie des Femmes
debauchez.

Q. Qu'est ce que Prudence monastique?

R. C'est une Science morale, qui enseigne un chacun la maniere de vivre
honetement dans la vie monastique.

Q. Qu'entendez vous par vie monastique?

R. Je n'entend pas la Vie des Hermites, qui ont renonce a toute Societe
human, mais J'entend une vie, qui n'est pas encore engagee dans le Marriage,
and qui est exempte de toutes Charges publiques.

Q. Quel est le Devoir de ces Persons?

R. D'observer les Loix de Dieu, and des Pays, ou ils demeurent.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Liberalite?

R. C'est une virtue morale, laquelle, moderant le desir d'avoir des Richesses,
produit de bonnes and honetes Actions en faisant du bien a autruy.

Q. Qu'est il requis dans la Liberalite?

R. L'observance de quelques Circonstances jointe a une singuliere prudence,
qui est la Guide de toutes les Vertus morales.

Q. Quelles sont ces Circonstances qui sont a observer dans la Liberalite.

R. 1. Il faut qu'un chacun use de la Liberalite selon ses Facultez; and qu'il
observe une proportion Geometrique, c'est a dire qu'il en depart plus a un
honet hom ne miserable, qu'a un Geux mechant caeteris paribus. 2. Il faut qu'en
distribuant ses biens il les done de bonne grace, and promptement; car il y a
plusieurs Persons qui donnent si tard, and avec une si mauvaise grace, qu'il
semble que leur Action se fasse avec regret.

Q. Quels sont les Vices opposez a cette Virtue?

R. La Prodigalite, and l'Avarice.

Q. Quelle difference mettez vous enter le Prodigue and l'Avare.

R. Le Prodigue distribue ses biens sans Consideration, and par Vanite, and
l'Avare les retient sous pretexte de menagerie; le Prodigue est joyeux and
agreeable, and l'Avare triste and malplaisant.

Q. Quel est le plus blamable, ou le Prodigue, ou l'Avare?

R. C'est l'Avare; parceque le Prodigue, en depensant indiscretement ses Biens,
ne nuit ordinairement qu'a soy meme, and est utile aux autres; mais l'Avare est
inutile a soy, and a toute la Societe human durant sa vie; parceque s'il fait
du bien a quelqu'un, c'est seulement aprez sa mort. Je ne parle pas icy de la
Magnificence, parcequ'elle ne differe de la Liberalite, qu entant que la
Magnificence regard les Princes and les Roys, qui doivent etre Magnifiques en
distribuant leurs Biens a leurs Sujets, comme la Mer distribue ses eaux a la
Terre pour la render fertile.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Magnanimite?

R. C'est une Virtue morale qui a pour Objet les Honneurs souverains, en quoy
elle differe de l'Ambition, qui a aussy les Honneurs pour Objet, mais
consi^^rez comme mediocres.

Notez que, quand ces deux vertus ne sont pas moderes, else produisent
plusieurs pernicieux Effets.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Clemence?

R. C'est une Virtue morale, qui moderant notre Colere nous fait produire des
Actions honetes.

Notez que la Patience and la Modesty sont des vertus qui accompagnent
toujours la Clemence, and que ses vices opposoz sont la Lenteur and la Colere.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Veracite ou Verite?

R. C'est une virtue, par laquelle dans nos discourse nous disons toujours ce qui
est vray, ou Croyons etre tell.

Q. Cette virtue est elle fort recommendable?

R. Elle est si recommendable parmi les hommes qu'ils confient ordinairement
leurs Biens, leurs Honneurs, leurs Affairs, and leur vie a ceux qui sont douez
de cette virtue. Et les Perses l'estimoient si fort, qu'ils ordonnoient un
perpetuel silence a ceux qu'ils avoient convincu trois fois de mensonge, and
les privoient pour toujours de Charges Publiques.

Q. Qu'est ce que Mensonge?

R. C'est un deguisement de la verite.

Q. Comment se divise le Mensonge?

R. En Malicieux, don't la fin est mauvaise, and tend au prejudice d'autruy; en
Officieux, don't la fin est bonne, and tend a l'utilite d'autruy; and en Joyeux,
don't la fin est un pur divertissement sans apporter damage ni utilite.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'Entregent, Civilite, Affabilite, ou Courtoisie?

R. C'est une Virtue morale qui consiste a parler and a se comporter de bonne
grace parmi les honetes Compagnies, don't les Vices opposez sont l'Incivilite,
ou Rusticite, and la Boufonnerie.

Notez que cette Virtue est necessaire a toutes sorts de Persons, mais
particulierement a ceux qui ont le maniement des Affairs du Monde; car ceux
qui ont affair a eux, se voyant traitez ciuilement, concoivent une bonne
esperance a l'avenir, encore que le present ne leur soit pas favorable. On dit
que l'Empereur Adrian excella si fort dans cette Virtue que jamais Person ne
s'en alla mecontant de luy. Et l'on raporte de Trajan que ses Amiss luy
remontrant qu'il sembloit deroger de sa Majeste en se montrant Affable a tout
le monde, repondit ainsy, Je veux etre tell envers les. Persons privees, que
je desirerois d'^n Empereur envers moy, si j'etois une Person privee.

Q. Quels sont les Effets de la Virtue?

R. Trois Principaux, le premier est de nous render agreables a Dieu: Le Second
de donner a notre Ame une paix, tranquilite and contentement; and le troisieme,
de nous concilier l'Amitie de toutes sorts de Persons; car la Virtue a cela
de particulier, qu'elle se fait meme honorer des mechants.

Q. Qu'est ce qu'Amitie?

R. C'est une conformite de volontez enter deux ou plusieurs persons,
procedante de la mutuelle connoissance qu'ils ont de leur Virtue, and Integrite
moeurs.

Q. Comment divisez vous l'Amitie?

R. 1. En Naturelle, qui est commune aux Animaux, and aux Plants memes; car il
y a des Animaux, qui naturellement s'entre ayment; and il y a des Plants qui
se nourissent, croissent and conservent mieux etant prez d'autres Plants, que
lorsqu'elles en sont eloignees; and cette sort d'Amitie s'appelle Sympathy.
2. En Amity qui proceed d'une connoissance que nous avons des bonnes Qualitez
d'autruy, qui cause une conformite de volontez, and qui ne s'engendre qu'avec
espace de temps.

Q. Quelle difference mettez vous enter l'Amour and l'Amitie.

R. 1. L'Amour proceed souvent d'une soudaine Passion, and l'Amitie d'une
longue Conversation and Connoissance. 2. L'Amitie est reciproque enter les
Amiss, and l'Amour peut etre du Cote de l'Amant sans qu'il soit mutuellement
aim. 3. l'Amour est fond sur la Beauty, and l'Amitie sur la Bonte. 4. L'Amour
est souvent nuisible, and l'Amitie est toujours utile.

Q. Sur quoy doit etre fondee l'Amitie pour etre durable.

R. Elle doit etre fondee sur l'Honetete; car si elle est fondee sur le plaisir
ou utilite, elle se perd aussitot que le plaisir ou utilite esperee cesse.

Q. L'Amitie est elle necessaire parm^ ^es Hommes?

R. Ouy, car les plus puissants ont besoin d'Amis, pour maintenir leur
Grandeur, and les plus foibles pour se fortifier, outre que c'est un grand
plaisir d'avoir quelqu'un avec qui on puisse declarer tout ce qu'on a sur le
Coeur.

Notez que, quoyqu'il n'y ayt rien de secret enter les vrays Amiss, ne antmoins
parcequ'il n'y a point de si grand Amy, qui ne puisse devenir Ennemy, il ne
faut pas luy descouvrir toutes sorts de Secrets, depeurqu'il ne les revele un
jour a notre damage, si l'Amitie est alteree.

Notez. 2. Que la Concord, parla quelle les petites chooses croissent, peut se
trouver enter tous les habitants d'une ville and tous les soldats d'une Armee,
sans qu'il soit necessaire qu'ils s'entrayment tous les uns les autres.

Notez 3. Que la Societe, don't souvent l'Amitie s'engendre, n'a point pour
Objet le bien, and l'honetete, comme l'Amitie; mais plutot une hantise de
persons de meme Aage, de meme Condition and Vacation.

Q. Quelles sont les Persons avec qui on doit fair Amity?

R. Il faut qu'elles soient vertueuses, discretes, and d'egale condition,
autrement il est impossible d'etablir une longue, and durable Amity.

Q. Qu'est ce que l'Amour?

R. C'est un desir de ce qui est beau, ou eru tell, qui proceed du plaisir receu
en le regardant; en quoy l'Amour differe de l'Amitie, qui se propose toujours
ce qui est honete.

Q. Qu'est ce que la Beauty?

R, La Beauty de l'Ame n'est autre chose qu'une grace Spirituelle, qui proceed
de la Splendeur des vertus. Et la Beauty du Corpse est une bonne Grace, qui
consiste dans un Teint vermeil, and dans la Proportion des Parties du Corpse.

Q. Quel est le Sign d'un veritable Amor?

R. C'est lorsque l'Aymant non seulement prend plaisir a voir ce qu'il aim,
mais encore s'afflige grandement en son absence; car de se delecter simplement
a voir un bell Objet, ce n'est pas un certain Sign d'Amour, car cela est commun
a toutes sorts de Persons, il faut encor sentir un regret cuisant de
l'absence de ce qu'on aim; car quand on aim veritablement, on pense toujours
a l'Objet aim; d'ou est venu ce Proverb, que l'Ame de l'Aymant loge dans le
Corpse de la Person aymee.

Q. Quels sont les Effets d'un veritable Amor?

R. Il change soudain les Moeurs and les Humeurs des Amants: Il rend courageux
and hardis ceux qui sont laches; il eveille ceux qui sont endormis; il rend
joyeux le^ plus melancholiques; il rend liberaux les plus avares, and rend
courtois and eloquents les plus rustiques and stupides.

Notez que, quoyque nous soyons obligez par les Loix Naturelle, Civil, and
Divine de nous entraymer tous and cherir, (cela etant commun a toutes les
Especes d'Animaux tant farouches soient ils and sauvages) toutefois enter tous
les Animaux l'homme est sans doubt le plus Cruel.

Q. Pourquoy peint on l'Amour sous la Figure d'un petit Enfant aveugle, qui a
des ailes and des Fleches?

R. Ses Ailes font voir sa legerete, and qu'il vole par tout, meme parmi les
Nations les plus barbares. Ses Fleches montrent qu'il attaque, and bless tot
ou tard tous les Coeurs: Il est depeint aveugle a cause de son Indiscretion,
and de son abandon a toutes sorts d'Objets; and il est peint comme un Enfant,
parcequ'il ote le jugement a l'homme, en le rendant temeraire, and irraisonable
comme un Enfant.

Q. D'ou vient que les Parents aiment plus leurs Enfants, que les Enfants
n'aiment leurs Parents?

R. Cela vient de ce que les Enfants sont la Production des Parents, and de ce
que l'Amour des Parents etant plus ancien que celuy des Enfants, il en devient
consequemment plus fort.

Q. Pourquoy la Mere ayme-t-elle plus tendrement ses Enfants que le Pere?

R. C'est a cause de la Certitude qu'elle a que ce sont ses Enfants, ainsy
qu'un Poet a chante.

L'Enfant est aim de sa Mere,
Plus tendrement que de son Pere,
Parcequ'elle scait qu'il est sien,
Et luy le pense, mais n'en scait rien.
Q. Qu'est ce que Plaisir?

R. C'est une joyeuse motion de l'Ame procedante de la consideration ou
connoissance d'un Objet, qui est beau, ou bon, ou que nous croyons etre tell.

Q. Comment divisez vous le Plaisir?

R. En plaisir du Corpse, and en Plaisir de l'Ame. Le plaisir du Corpse est
regle, ou deregle, consistant dans le boire, dans le manger, and autres
Recreations Corporelles, qui, quand else sont excessives, produisent quantite
de maladies, and autres Effets tres pernicieux. Le plaisir de l'Ame est ce
contentement qu'elle recoit de la consideration, and connoissance d'un Objet;
ce plaisir quelquefois ecstasy notre Ame, ainsy qu'il arriva a St. Paul, qui
fut ravi jusqu'au Troisieme Ciel.

Fin de la Morale.
Advertisement.
IF any Gentleman or Gentlewoman be desirous to learn either French or Latin,
the Author will wait on them. He lives now in Coleman-street, in Gleyn-Alley,
next door to the White-Heart Inn.


