ASILEYS ASILEON, OR THE REGALITY OF JESUS CHRIST King of Zion, Opened,
Vindicated, Advanced, in a Sermon Preached at St. Mary's, Oxon: Jun. 26. 1659.
By EDWARD BENTALL. M. A. of Q. C. C. Minister of the Gospel at Baghurst in
Hant-shire.

Quae veritati operam dat oration, incomposita debet esse and simplex. Sen. Ep.
40. Non sunt contemnenda quasi parva sine quibus magna constare non possunt.
Jerome: ad Laetam. Infinite magis eadem audita quam lecta delectant Quintil.
Multo magis viva vox afficit, nam licet acriora sint quae leges, altius tamen
in animo sedent quae pranuntiatio, vultus, habitus, cestus etiam dicentis
adfigit. Plin. lib. 2. Ep. 4. OXFORD, Printed by A. LICHFIELD, Printer to the
University Anno Dom. 1660.

VIRO ORNATISSIMO ET THEOLOGIAE PROFESSORI LITERATISSIMO, D. JOH. CONANT
ACADEMIAE OXONIENSIS PRO-CANCELLARIO INSIGNISSIMO, HANC CONCIONEM IN TEMPLO
Stae. MARIAE NUPER HABITAM.

D. D. D. Q. ED. BENTALL

To the Reader.
BEing requested by the Author to Preface a few lines unto the ensuing Sermon,
after a serious perusal thereof, I conceive that it abundantly commends it
self, and needs no letters Testimonial. The Argument herein handled touching
the Kingdom of Christ is of the greatest weight and consequence worthiest of
the best study, and strictest disquisition. Amongst variety of opinions the
learned Author discovers much modesty and ingenuity, and does not magisterially
determine from his own private apprehension, but brings all opinions to the
Touchstone of Scripture, and examines all by that infallible Rule. Upon reading
of the whole thou will find (Reader) a gracious, Savoury frame of spirit in the
Author, and practical truths, by him solidly handled, intermixed with good
learning: And (through Gods blessing) if thou read and joynest therewith
prayer and meditation, thou may reap abundance of benefit. The design of the
Author (with whom I have had acquaintance at least 17. years) I am persuaded is
to advance the Kingdom of Christ, to set the Crown on Christ's Head, and to
excite us all to make this subject our great study, and great inquiry. We must
pray that Christ's Kingdom may come, and that he may Rule, and Govern, and
appear yet more glorious in his ordinances. Though I understand not by what I
have read, nor am satisfied in their judgment of late, who plead for a
Personal reign, much less see I any ground for the opinion of the Millenaries
of old: yet that there shall be a more glorious church, and that ordinances
shall be more purely administered, and that greater light shall break forth, I
believe, and in order thereunto wait for the accomplishment of many promises
and Prophesies, whereof in the ensueing Sermon there is a large Catalogue. Our
duty is to pray that the Lord God omnipotent may reign, that the Kingdoms of
the world, may be the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ. I shall not
detain thee from reading this excellent Sermon, but entreat thee to help the
Author by thy prayers, and me also who has prevailed with him to make this of
Public use. And so I wish that thy profitting may appear by what thou read,
thereby the worthy Author may be encouraged to make more of his choice labors
public for thy greater Benefit. I remain.

Magdalen-Hall, Oxon: March 13. 1659/60. Thy Servant for Christ's sake H.
Wilkinson.

CHRIST THE KING of KINGS.
PSALM. 2. 6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Zion.
THAT David was the penman of this Psalm, appears by Act. 4. 25. who by the
mouth of thy servant David have said, why do the Heathen rage? etc. But if you
shall ask me as the Eunuch did Phillip, of another scripture Act. 8. 34. of
whom speaks the Prophet this? of himself or of some other? I must do as
Phillip did, and from this Scripture preach unto you Jesus. Indeed I find three
different opinions of whom David here speaks.

1. The Jews (those professed enemies 1 These. 2 15. 16.
of Jesus Christ) understand it of David, and his kingdom without any relation
to Christ; But this is so clearly confuted out of the whole Psalm, that (as
Junius parell. 91. observes) many of the Jews themselves non ausa sunt
pernegare: for many passages cannot without blasphemy be literally affirmed of
any mere man: as where the Lord calls him his begotten Son, gives him as his
King the whole world for his inheritance, commands all to yield him divine
worship, and to put their trust in him.

2. Others (and those some modern Divines of good note) understand it both of
David and Christ, David and his kingdom, as a type; of Christ and his
kingdom, as the Antitype. Ille typus, his typi veritas. Calvin.

3. But almost all the Fathers (as Ames observes) and many modernes do
conceive that the whole psalm is a prophetical narration, of Christ and his
Kingdom, and that David has in it no reference to himself; and to this I
should rather incline (yet leaving every one to his own judgment) because
though many things may aptly enough be applied to David as he was a type of
Christ, yet some things can by no means agree to him. But we need not contend
about this, seeing those that are of the second opinion acknowledge that it is
meant chiefly and principally of Christ, so Calv. Haec omnia non allegorice sed
vere Christo sunt applicanda. This verse which I have chosen for the subject of
my present discourse, stands in the Psalm as the center in the circumference,
all the other verses are but as lines drawn to and through it: it is the very
pith, heart, and marrow of the whole psalm: In the handling whereof I shall do
as Boaz advised Ruth, chap. 2. 8. not go to glean in another field, but make
as good use as I can of the fruitful Sheafes that lie scartered in the field
of the psalm, both by way of Explication, Confirmation, and Application of the
main proposition that I shall raise from the Text.

In the words we have these parts. The Text Divided.


1. The designment of Jesus Christ to be King. where

1. The designer, I: who is this I? Ans. God the Father, the same that is here
called Jehova and Adonai, the Lord, this one I, this (...)
one God is here opposed against all the power and policy of the whole world,
so Psalm. 110. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord.

2 The designed. Malchi, my King (...) Cujus jussu homines nascuntur, bujus
jussu and reges constituuntur. Iren. l 5. c 24 Qui dat regnu^ coel rum solis
piis regnum terrenum and piis and impiis, sicut ei placet, cui nihil injuste
placet. Aug. de civ. l. 5. c. 21.
with an (...) and Emphasis. All Kings reign by Gods providence. (By me Kings
reign) not all by his special allowance, appointment, and approbation. Hos. 8.
4. They have set up Kings, but not by me, they have made Princes, and I knew it
not. (i. e.) I did not approve of it; and even those lawful powers, that are
ordained by God, are for the particular manner and kind of government, but (...)
the creation, or ordinance of man, 1 Pet. 2. 13. but this King is immediately
set up by God, authorized and approved by him, and of more dignity and absolute
power then all other He has both (...) and (...) Is^. 33. 22. our Judge, our
Lawgiver, and our King. 1. Tim. 1. 17. (...). Jud. v. 25) c. 6. 15. (...). Jud.
v. 4. (...).
Kings, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

3. The manner of designment, nasacti, (...) I have anointed him, with mine
own hand have I powered my holy Oil upon his head, this intimates God the
fathers calling his Son Jesus to, and fitting him with gifts suitable to his
office, anointing him with the Oil of gladness above his fellows, Joh. 6. 27.
sealing him with his Signet, and setting him on his Throne etc.

2. The place or throne where he is designed (...)
to sit and reign, Zion, har Kodshi, my holy hill of Zion; take it literally
and it is that city of David, the Metropolis of the kingdom, the place of Gods
Sanctuary and special residence: Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou city
of God. Psalm. 87. 3.

Some look here to the letter, and expect Christ to come personally, and reign
in Zion as a Monarch, when the Jews shall be called, Romans 11. 15. and v. 23.
What shall receiving of them ((...)) be but life from the dead? v. Bright. on
Dan. 12. 2. and on Rev. 19. 20, 21. Ezekiel. 34. 23, 24. I will save my flock,
and, I will set up one Shepeard over them, and he shall feed them, even my
servant David he shall feed them etc. and I the Lord will be their God, and my
servant David a Prince among them. v. 26. 28, 29, 30. and chap. 37. 20, 22, 24.
I will make them one nation, and one King shall be King to them all, and David
my servant shall be a King over them. Hos. 3. 5. Amos 9. 11. I will raise up
the Tabernacle of David that is fallen, and I will build it up as in the days
of old. Zech. 14. 4. 5. 9. For the Lord shall be King over all the earth. etc.
chap. 2. v. 4.
and that he shall indeed sit upon the throne of his Father David, as Isa. 9.
6, 7. upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom: and chap. 60. tot. and
Luke 1. 32, 33. The Lord God shall give unto him the And David's Throne is not
the hearts of the Saints. Jer. 3. 16, 17, 18. Non enim domus Jacob ad Gentes,
sed Gentes ad domum Jacob accedere debent, si volunt sub hoc rege esse, Chem.
ad l c. Isa. 44. Mic. 4. 2.
throne of his father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for
ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end: And indeed many scriptures
look with a fair aspect this way, though some have corrupted them, with their
false glosses, and humane Jerome in Jer. 23. says thus. Licet non sequamur,
tamen damnare non possumus, quia multi Ecclesiasticorum virorum and Martyrs
ista dixerunt. vid. Mr. Mede on the Revel. ex Just. Mart. Dial. cum Tryphone.
Aug. de Civ. l. 20. c. 7. professes, that if it were held more spiritually and
not so carnally, he saw it tolerable and once held it. Gerhard loc. com. de
consum: seculi lib. 7. page 319 etc. Negari nequit quosdam ex antiquissimis
ecclesiae doctoribus opinionem hanc esse amplexos. etc. and he names many.
additions; but I have no mind now to meddle with controversies, especially of
this nature; I shall therefore say no more of this and the Thousand years, but
what I have heard a Reverend Doctor, Dr. Sibbs, once said to some Divines
disputing of this subject, when (he seeming to be in a slumber) they jogged him
and asked his judgment about it: If (said he) it be a dream, it is a sweet
dream. But there will be no great question if we take Zion mystically for the
Church, which is Gods holy Hill, an Hill for it is eminency, and Holy, because
of his holy ordinances, and people there. Upon this hill is Christ's Throne set,
and herein especially he exercises his regal power, till all his enemies are
made his footstool, and till all the Kingdoms of the world shall become the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. Rev. 11. 15. and till that of Daniel
shall be fullfilled, chap. 2. 34, 35. which he speaks of the stone cut out of
the Mountain, without hands, which brake the great Image in pieces (sc. the
four Monarchies) and the stone that smote the Image became a great Mountain,
and filled the whole earth; and till God shall give him the Heathen for his
Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession, according
to his promise made to him, ver. 8. of this Psalm.

3. Here Is the maintenance of Christ in his Throne (by the same Authority and
Power that set him up) against all opposition, intimated in this particle, Yet.
The Lord is brought in speaking abruptly, and pathetically, manifesting his
indignation and high displeasure against the world of the wicked that are
enemies to Christ his King, and his resolution to stand by him; as if he should
say, Though the world rages, and would un-King, and de-Throne my King whom I
have Anointed, and set upon his Throne, yet he shall Reign and Conquer in
despite of them.

Having thus divided, and opened the terms of my Text, I shall pitch upon this
one Proposition.

Doctr.
That God the Father has anointed, and set up his Son Jesus Christ to be
King; and his Kingdom shall be maintained, and enlarged till it come to its
(...), and perfection, notwithstanding all opposition. In the handling this
Proposition I shall Method propounded
proceed in a plain Method.

1. By Explication. 2. By Demonstration. 3. By Application; and in all I will
keep my self within the bounds of the Psalm.

1. For Explication; and herein we must 1. Explication.
consider, what manner of King, God has designed his Son to be, and what he
has appointed to be the limits of his Kingdom.

The Kingdom of Christ is to be considered under a twofold notion.

1. There Is his Regnum natural: this belongs to Jesus Christ as he is God, and
thus he has equal power and authority with the Father over all the world; and
in this sense we must say to him, as David to God, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11, 12. Thine,
O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory; thine is the Kingdom,
and thou art exalted as head above all.

2. There Is his Regnum donativum (and herein may Christ say, My Father is
greater than I) his dispensatory, oeconomicall Kingdom, which is not by
nature, but by donation and gift, as v. 8. as (...), Mediator.

This distinction our Divines generally maintain against the Socinians, and
others, who hold that Christ has but one Kingdom, which he exercises as
Mediator over his Church, and in some respect over all things; but they will
not yield that Christ as God rules over all, because they deny Christ's
Divinity.

This Mediatory Kingdom of Christ is considered in a twofold state.

1. The first is Providentiall; Christ being as Mediator delegated by his
Father, as Viceroy, and chief Ruler over all persons and things with relation
to his Church (as Joseph by Pharaoh was set over all the Land of Egypt.) So
Mat. 28. 18. says Christ, All power is given to me in heaven and in earth.
Joh. 17. 2. Thou have given him power over all flesh. and Ephesians. 1. 20. He
raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in heavenly places,
far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name
that is named, not only in this world, but in that which is to come, and has
put all things under his feet (quoad judiciariam potestatem, though non quoad
exercitium potestatis) to which place is parallel that in Phil. 2. 9, 10.
Wherefore also God has highly exalted him, and given him a name above every
name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, in
earth, and under the earth, and that every tongue should confess that Jesus
Christ is Lord, etc. And therefore the Apostle styles him the blessed and only
Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6. 15. And in this sense
the Apostle tells us, that he must reign till he has put down all rule, all
authority and power; according to that Dan. 2. 34, 35. and brought al in
subjection to his Regal Scepter.

2. The second state of the Kingdom of Christ as Mediator, is spiritual; and
this is that Sovereignty of Christ whereby as absolute Head and Monarch, he
rules and governes in his Churches over the hearts and consciences of men. This
the Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 1. 21. He gave him to be head over all things to
his Church which is his body.

The power of Christ as King in this spiritual sense is exercised.

1. Upon particular persons, by his Word and Spirit, effectually calling and
converting them to himself, Turning them from Acts 26. 18. Col. 1. 13. Luc 11.
22.
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, delivering them from
the power of darkness, and translating them into his own Kingdom. He is the
(...) that casts the strong man out of his palace, and takes the Throne
himself, makes them a people of willingness in the day of his power, willing
to open to this King of glory, and stoop to his Psalm. 110. 3.
golden Scepter, and to be regulated by his holy Laws, and then guides and
leads them Psalm. 73. 24.
by his counsel in the ways of holiness till he brings them to glory.

2. In his Churches rightly constituted and governed according to the rule of
his word; here Christ is Lord and King, the chief Shepherd and Bishop of
souls, 1 Pet. 2. 25. and the great shepherd of the sheep, Heb. 13. 20. He
walks as chief in the midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks: And here we may
more truly say of him, than the Jews Rev. 2. 1.
of Caesar, We have no King but Christ: the Church is Christ's family, governed
by his own Laws; aliae sunt Leges Caesarum, aliae Christi (says Hierome.)
Christian Governors rule in the Church, not over it; or if in some sense over
the Church, yet not quatenus a Church, but quatenus a Commonwealth (as learned
Salmasius distinguishes) vid. Gillesp. Aar. rod. p. 210.

No power on earth may impose, or continue any way of Worship upon the
consciences of Gods people, which Christ has not prescribed. Moses, though the
greatest Prophet, and wisest Governor in Israel, yet must keep himself close
to the pattern showed him on the Mount, For the building and ordering the
Tabernacle, and the religious Rites of it: and Solomon, though wiser than all
men, is not left to his 1 King. 4. 31.
own wisdom in building the Temple, and regulating the Worship of God there,
but he must have a pattern also, 1 Chronicles. 28. 11, 12, 13. David, the Man of God
gave him a perfect pattern of all that he had by the Spirit. And so has Christ
given in his Gospel to his Substitutes and under-Rulers (at least in respect of
Substantials and Essentials of Worship and Government) a perfect pattern
likewise, which they must hold fast till he come, Rev. 2. 24, 25. He will lay
upon his Church no other burden than what they have already.

This Kingdom of Christ, as spiritual, is as yet shut up in a very narrow
compass: Oh what a little part of the world does Christ as a spiritual King
reign ovet, according to his own Laws and Prescriptions!

1. The Prince of the power of the air, that rules in the hearts of the
children of disobedience, he as God of the world, Lords and Kings it over Jews,
Turks, and Heathens, they are his vassals.

2. The man of sin has exalted himself, and he as God sits in the Temple
of God, and keeps Christ out of his regal Throne, and how many followers has
he?

3. And in that little spot of the world, where this our King sits on his
Throne and rules, how few real Saints and subjects has he? and of them how few
that can agree in one way of serving him? But the time draws near, when the
Angel that has the Key of the bottomless pit shall lay hold on the Dragon
that old serpent, which is the devil and satan, and bind him up, that he
shall deceive the nations no more, etc. Rev. 20. 2. that the ten horns shall
hate the whore, and burn her with fire, Rev. 16. 16. that the water of the
great River Euphrates shall be dried up, that the way of the Kings of the East
may be prepared, Rev. 16. 12. that the Marriage of the Lamb shall come, and his
Wife shall make her self ready, Rev. 19. 7. that the Gentiles shall slow in
abundantly to Zion, the city of the Lord, the holy one of Israel, and the
nation and kingdom that will not serve her (and her king) shall perish, yea
those nations shall be utterly wasted, Is. 60. 12, 14. That there shall be a
glorious resurrection of Churches from their dead condition in Idolatry,
Superstition, and Apostacy, and put into a right and holy frame, when the
temple of God shall be opened in heaven, and there shall be seen in his temple
the Ark of his Testament, Rev. 11. 19. And the Lord shall show his people the
form of his house, and all the Laws and Ordinances thereof, and write it in
their sight, that they may keep the whole form thereof, and all the Ordinances
thereof, and do them, Ezekiel. 43. 11. Then shall the Church enlarge the place of
her tent, and stretch forth the Curtains of her habitations, lengthen her
coards, strengthen her stakes, and break forth on the right hand and on the
left, Isa. 54. 2, 3. Ezekiel. 48. 35.
And then shall the Lord be King over all the earth. In that day there shall be
one Lord, and his Name one, Zech. 14. 9. And the Name of his Metropolis shall
be, Jehovah-Shammah, the Lord is there.

These things in respect of the substance of them I believe and expect, if I
fail in any particular circumstance, I submit to the censure of the Prophets.
If any ask when shall these things be? I answer as Christ did his Disciples in
the like case, Mat. 24. 36. Of the day and hour knows no man: Brightman on
Dan. and Rev. Mede on Rev. Dr. Wilkinson his Sermon coram Parl. on Zech. 1. 19,
20, 21. Mede. Apostasy of the latter times. p. 69. 78. 80.
Yet many learned Divines have given their several guesses, which I will not
undertake to mention in such an auditory, only give me leave to tell you what I
have long since observed in Gerhards Epist. Dedicatory prefixed to the second
part of his Gospel-Harmony: where he makes a collation between Christ and his
Church, and undertakes to demonstrate these five suppositions.

1, That there may, and will be made a comparison between the years of Christ's
life and the Jubilees of the Church.

2. That Christ lived on the earth 33 years and a half.

3. That to every year of Christ's life there is answerable a year of Jubilee of
the Church.

4 That a Jubilee contains 7 weeks of years. ( i. e.) 49 years.

5. That the Jubilees are to take their beginning from the preaching and
Baptism of John; and so makes the Jubilees to end in the year 1670. in quem
annum (says he) fines temporum in Scripturis revelatorum desinunt. But I would
not be wise above what is written, and I remember what our Savior said to his
Disciples, when they propounded that curious question to him, Act. 1. 7. It is
not for you to know the times and seasons, which the Father has put in his own
power. I shall conclude this with what the Anglel said to Daniel chap. 12. 12,
13. Blessed is he that waits, and comes to the 1335 days. but go thy way
till the end, for thou shall rest and stand in the lot at the end of the days.
Thus much for the Explication. Now secondly, I am to demonstrate.

1. Why the Lord has set up Christ to be King. 2. Demonstration.


2. That Christ Jesus this King, has many and great Opposers, and why.

3. That he shall reign and prevail against all oppositions, till his Kingdom
be perfected.

1. Why God the Father has set up Jesus Christ as Mediator to be King? 1.
Reason.


1. God has put this honor upon him as a reward of his obedience to his
father, in taking upon him the great work of Redemption, and abaseing and
humbling himself so low. Phil. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10. He made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and humbled himself to the
death; wherefore God has highly exalted him etc. Reas. 2


2. Indeed it is due to him by the rule of Equity: Judge. 8. 22. what the men of
Israel said to Gideon, Rule thou over us etc. for thou have delivered us from
the hand of Midian; And what Jepthah said to the Elders of Gilead. Judge. 11. 9.
If I fight for you against the children of Ammon, and the Lord deliver them
Aug. in Psalm. 145. 3. Magnus, magnus, magnus nimis volebat dicere quantu^
magnus, and si tota die magnus, magnus diceret, tota die dicens magnus siniret
aliquando, quia siniretur dies, magnitudo illius ante dies, ultra dies, sine
die etc,
into my hand, shall I be your head? It Is but reason that our Savior should be
our King.

3. Because none so fit as he to have the government upon his shoulders; none
but the Lion of the tribe of Judah fit to be entrusted with such power and
employed in this office; none so well qualified as he Isa. 6. 9. See four
excellent qualifications, quatuor (...), or combinations.

1. He is the wounderful Counselor; there is his eminent wisdom. Solomon to
qualify him for his kingdom begs wisdom of God, a wise and understanding
heart, that he might govern his people: behold a greater then Solomon is here;
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge Admirabilis est in nativitate,
consiliarius in praedicatione, Dens in operatione, fortis in Passione, pater
futuri seculi in resurrectione, princeps pacis in perfecta beatitudine.
Bernard. ad Isa. 9. 6. Rev. 4. 8.
are in him; he only can say, I am understanding Prove. 8. 14. The deepest
politician in the world is but a fool to him.

2. The Mighty God; there is unparalleld power and strength; he can say both I
am Understanding, and I am Strength: He is both (...) and (...), whereas all
the power of Men and Angels is bounded to the Sea, Hitherto shall thou go, and
no farther.

3. The everlasting Father. When Joseph. was advanced by Pharaoh he caused it
to be cried before him Ab-rech tender Father. Genesis 41. 43. This our King is our
Father, full of most tender bowels, and an eternal father that will never
leave his people Orphans, I will not leave you (...) vid. Joh. 14. 18.

4. The Prince of Peace, the true King of Salem indeed, he can create peace,
and bring peace out of trouble, Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto
you. Joh. 14 27. and an other manner of peace then the world can give etc. Lay
all these together, and what can be wanting to make him a complete King? Of
whom it may be more. truly said, then it was of Mordecai Esth. 10. 3. He was
seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed.

2. That Christ as King has many and great opposers, and why?

This we have at hand in the three first verses of this Psalm fully set down.
All sorts of men by all kinds of ways fighting against Christ and his Scepter.
Totius mundi est conspiratio.

1. The people rage, ragesshu (...) (...)
those that are without.

2. The people imagine, jehgu, (...) (...)
these within the pale, with continual unwearied care they study to find out
ways to hinder the setting up Christ's rule and government over them.

3. Not only the rude multitude, but the Kings of the earth, and Princes, the
great men and wise Politicians, the Ahitophels, ijthiatzbu, and nosdu (...).
(...)
They combine all their strength, they beat their brains, and join their
hearts, heads, and hands against the Lord, and against his anointed, and all
this to stop the riseing and spreading of Christ's kingdom. The history of the
Scriptures and of the Church in all ages do bear witness to this, nec mirum
aut insolitum est si tumultuetur mundus simulac erigitur Christo solium. Calv.
And what is the reason of all this, hot opposition? v. 3. Let Us break their
bonds, and cast away their cords. They look upon Christ's easy yoke and sight
burden, as bonds and cords, they will not be so tied up and shackled; men had
rather undergo any burden, then have Christ rule over their souls. Christ's
laws are spiritual and oppose their sinful lusts and appetites, and they
cannot endure them. If any man will be my disciple (says Christ) let Mat. 16.
24. Mat. 5. 30.
him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me, Mat. 16. 24. Mat. 5.
30. cut off his right hand, pluck out his right eye, ye are not your own. etc.
Oh! durus hic Sermo, this crosses the hair and will not be swallowed; and
therefore they cry out, as Luke Malunt servire Diabole quam regnare cum
Christo. cui servire regnare est. Bernard. de temp.
9. 14. We will not have this man to rule over us. Not this man but Barabbas;
they will rather choose to be slaves, and drudges to the Devil and lusts, to
Tyrants, to any Lord rather then to the best Lord: so miserably is the blind
world deluded.

3. The Third thing to be demonstrated is, that Jesus Christ shall rule and
reign, and his kingdom shall prevail, till it comes to it is utmost extent and
latitude in despite of all opposition. And this we have abundantly made good
in this Psalm also.

1. More generally, all the imaginations, plottings, contrivements, enterprises
of all these Opposers are but rick, a vain (...)
thing, v. 1. they had better sit still and do nothing; they shall never bring
about what they aim at, they do but swim against the stream, kick against the
pricks, and dash themselves against the rock that will break them in pieces,
shoot up arrows against heaven, that will fall upon their own heads. Isa. 8.
9, 10. Associate your selves all ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces,
gird your selves and ye shall be broken in pieces, take counsel together, and
it shall come to naught, speak the word, and it shall not stand, for God is
with us. This is Gods word against their word.

2. More particularly, look into the Psalm, and you shall see variety of
Arguments to confirm it.

1. Taken from God that has set up Arg. 1.
this King, this opposition is against the Lord and his anointed, they that
resist Christ's government are (...), fighters against God. 1. Cor. 10. 22. Do
we provoke the Lord to jealousy, are we stronger then he? Job. 9. 4. He is wise
in heart and mighty in strength, who has hardened himself against him and
prospered? It was good advice that Gamaliel gave the Council, Act. 5. 28, 39.
Refrain from these men (faith he) and let them alone, for if this counsel or
this work be of men it will come to naught, but if it be of God ye cannot
overthrow it etc. It will be worth the while a little to consider what is added
verses 4. 5.

1. He against whom the world fights sits in heaven, not that he is
circumscribed there, for he fills heaven and earth. but Jer. 23. 24.


1. To show the unparalled inequality between the Opposers, and the Opposed;
the one is an heavenly God, the other poor earth-wormes: if worms did fight
against worms, the stronger worm might overtop the weaker, but alas, what can
a few poor clods of earth do against the Heavenly all-powerfull God, in
comparison of whom the whole world is but as the drop Jsa. 40. 25.
of a bucket, and as a small dust of a balance? Isa. 45. 9. Woe to him that
striveth with his maker, let the potsheard strive with the potsheards of the
earth; but shall the pot fly in the face of the Potter? but no comparison can
reach this insolency.

2. God sits in heaven as the Pilot at the helm, and as the King in his throne;
he can turn about the great ship of the world at his pleasure, and he can
command all hearts, heads, Angels, Men, Devils, yea all creatures are at his
disposure.

3. In Heaven, where he can be infinitely glorious and happy, though he should
hurl all the earth and the inhabitants thereof into their first nothing.

4. In Heaven, and therefore he is above them all and has advantage enough
against Non magnus est Pumilio licet in monte constiterit; Colossus
magnitudinem suam servabit, etiam. si steterit in puteo. Sen. Ep. 76.
them, they cannot reach him though they could heap Mountain upon mountain to
clime up to him, but he can easily reach them; a weak woman once brake the
skull of a King and valiant soldier with a piece of a Millstone cast down upon
him from an high tower, and so can God crush his proudest enemies with the
least instrument of his wrath.

2. He laughes.

1. To show the ridiculous folly of the wicked world that they should be so
miserably foolish and mad as to think they should be able to prevail against
him or to hinder his determinations and purposes, we see with what indignation
great Goliath does scoff at little David when he dared to encounter with such a
Giant, and a man of War; how much more ridiculous were it for a company of
silly Pismires to arm themselves and go out against a great army of Soldiers
or should undertake to storm some strong castle, or well fortified garrison;
would not the Commanders sit still and laugh at this simple attempt and not be
troubled? q. m. etc. Deus quietus e sublimi spectat vesanos hominum motus. Calv.

2. God laughes, to quiet the spirits and cheer the hearts of his people; when
Psalm. 118. 12.
the enemies compass them about like Bees and threaten their ruin; what
comfort is this to think that even then God sits and laughes at them when he
suffers us to weep by them, yea when they laugh among themselves and say, aha!
so would we have it.

3. Verse. 5. God does not only laugh and deride them, but in due time he will
speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure.

2. The Second Argument is taken from Arg. 2.
Christ himself, he comes in and declares; verse. 7, 8, 9.

1. The Fathers decree concerning him, that when he had fully perfected the
work of Redemption, and had manifested his victory over the enemies of our
Salvation, by his Resurrection he should actually reign as King; for of that
day and of that begetting does he here speak, sc. the day of his Resurrection,
and the (...) as the Apostle expounds it Act. 13. 33. In that he raised up
Jesus again, as it is also written in the 2d. Psalm, Thou art my son etc. and
Romans 1. 4. Declared to be the son of God with power, by the Resurrection from
the dead.

2. His promise to him. Orat Christianus and exanditur, orat Christus and non
exauditur. Aug. in Psalm.


1. That upon his asking he would give him the Heathen for his inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the earth, for his possession, the spreading and
enlargment of his kingdom over the world; and as God is immutable in his
decree, so he is faithful in all his promises. Therefore seeing Christ has
been asking the fullfilling of this promise for above 1600 years, certainly it
will not be long ere it be accomplished.

2. His Promise to Christ was that he should have power in his hand, utterly to
crush and spoil all those that shall refuse to stoop to his Scepter.

1. That he should do it, as easily as a man can break a Potters vessel with
aniron rod.

2. Irrecoverably: a vessel of Gold and Silver if brooken in pieces may be
repaired; but a Potters vessel if broken cannot be made up again. Isa. 30. 14.
He shall break it as the breaking of a Potters vessel, that is broken in pieces,
and Jer.. 19. 11. I will this people and this city as one breaks a Potters
vessel that cannot be made whole again.

Thus much for Demonstration. Now.

3. For Application, and in this I shall keep within the same field of the
Psalm also, so far as I may.

1. For Information. Applicat. Use 1. For Information.


1. Wonder not to see such hurliburlies, and stirs, such shakings and
earthquakes, such combustions and tumults every where in these our days; we
must expect far more and greater before our King Jesus shall perfect his
kingdom and make his enemies his footstool. The Devil and his instruments
have in all times raged, and with utmost strength opposed, when Jesus Christ
comes to dispossess Satan, and set up his own throne, q. m. shall all nations
be shaken, When the desire of all nations shall come. Hag. 2. 7. and he that
sits upon the white horse Rev. 6.
shall go forth conquering and to conquer, both the Jews and the Gentiles as
at once; If that in the 12 of Daniel verse. 1. be meant of this time, when
Christ shall take to him his great power and reign, as Rev. 11. 17. see what
the Angel tells him, it shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since
there was a nation, even to that same time and no marvel for the Divill shall
now bestirre himself, having great wrath, because he knows he has but a short
time. Therefore Rev. 12 12.
prepare for trouble.

2. But let me not leave you comfortless, for Christ is such a King which will
never want Subjects, neither shall they want a King, that will take care of
them; Durante Sole sobolescit nomen ejus. Psalm. 72. 17. (as you hove lately
heard learnedly opened and applied in this place in another By Dr. Burt Warden
of Winchester.
tongue) let the world rage, let the Devil roar; this King whom God has set
up upon his holy hill of Zion, shall reign and prosper, and prevail, till his
kingdom attain its (...)). As for persons and places indeed we cannot
determine, when and where he will make his removes, and what cause we have to
fear his withdrawing from us, and the removing of his Candlestick, I need not
say to you, (I hope you are very sensible of it, and will be careful to
prevent it) yet let the hearts of all faithful subjects of this King be
supported with this, he will have a care of them at all times, and in all
places, but of this more by and by. Let not your hearts be troubled.

But the great Use I shall a little more insist upon is that I find in the
Psalm, verse. 10, 11, 12.

An Exhortation to all to come in; and stoop to this King whom God has set up
in Zion, to kiss the Son, and not to stand out in opposition to him any
longer.

Quest. But why is this advice given only to great ones of the world; has this
King none others to be his enemies, but Kings and great ones.

Ans. Yes multitudes, but these are especially called upon to be wise and
instructed.

1. Because the great, wise, and learned ones of the world, are (if graceless
and unsanctified) as the grand enemies of Christ (...). Melior est ejus status
qui famulatur homini, quam qui sua servit cupiditati. August.
Jesus, so, hardliest persuaded and drawn in to put their necks into Christ's
yoke, and to submit to his spiritual government. Neh. 3. 5. The Nobles put not
their necks to the work of their Lord, Jer. 5. 5. I will get me to the great
men, and will speak unto them, for they have known the way of the Lord etc. but
these have altogether broken the yoke and burst the bonds. Joh. 7. 48, 49. Have
any of the Rulers (say they) and of the Pharisees believed in him? take one
place more 1 Cor. 1. 26. 27. Not many wise men after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many noble are called etc. And if we consult with experience, it
will also bear witness to this, who are (for the most part) more desperate
enemies to Jesus Christ, to Religion in its power, to the holy ways, truths,
and strict discipline of Jesus Christ, then such men of great wit, learning,
parts, and power? what dephs and stratagems, and methods of opposition have
they; which others * Ideo deteriores sumus quia meliores esse debemus. Salv. de
Prove. l. 4. Monstrosa res est, gradus summus and animus infimus, seeds prima
and vita ima, Bernard de Consid. lib. 2. Vt divitijs sic vitijs primi. Salv. de
Prove. lib. 7. (...) Rev. 2. 24
of a lower form are not capable of?

1. The Devil is most industrious to get such on his side, these are the Male
of the flock, that will easily draw others after them, thou art worth ten
thousand of us 2 Samuel 18. 3.
say they to David.

2. The abundance of outward prosperity, Ipsis bestijs bestialior est homo
ratione vigens and ratione non vivens. August. Mallet vitam sibi quam vinum
eripi. as Judge. 9. 19. Esse malum inter bonos culmen est pravitatis, esse bonum
inter malos culmen pietatis.
makes them often licentious, whoredom, Wine and new wine take away the heart.
Hos. 4. 11.

3. Flatterers attend them, that will sooth them up in their vices.

4. These great places and parts, swell Non est carbo ita ignitus quin aqua
adfusa extinguatur: sicut contra non est carbo ita madidus quin prunarum acervo
accendatur. Peccandi libidine potentiae suae magnitudinem metiuntur. Impune
quidlibet facere id esse regem putant. (...). Vermis divitiarum superbia est.
August. de Temp.
them with pride, and when Jesurum Deuteronomy. 32. 15. is waxen fat he kicketh, and
says as Pharaoh, Psalm. 49. 20. who is the Lord?

2. Because if great ones are not exempted, Reas. 2.
how much less those of a lower rank.

3. Because if such as these come in and submit to Christ, they may easily
prevail Reas. 3.
with others. The greatest difficulty is in Printing the first sheets of
books.

Well then having thus made way for it, now suffer the word of Exhortation,
which is not mine but the Lords, Kiss the Son? The Son, who is that? Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, the Savior of the world, the King of Zion. And what
is it to Kiss him?

Ans: 1. Kissing is an expression of homage and subjection, So Genesis 41. 40.
Says Pharaoh to Joseph, All my people shall Kiss thee, (i. e.) shall be ruled
by the, and when Samuel had anointed Saul he Kissed him, 1 Samuel 10. 1.

2. It Is an expression of Affection and Love, Vnionem quandam spirituum and
animarum Ames.
prae se fert. It was a custom among Christians in the primitive times, to
kiss one another at their Church meetings, it was Symbolum pacis and amoris.
In a word Just. Mart. Joh. 1. 21. Heb. 5. 9. Psalm. 24 7, 8, 9 1 Cor. 16. 22.
this, to Kiss the Son, is to receive, embrace and submit to the Lord Jesus
Christ, to take him as our only Savior, and sovereign Lord; to love him and
set him up in our hearts above all lusts and creatures, and to be subject in
all things to his holy laws and spiritual government, This is the great duty
God requires of us all; and there be two strong arguments to enforce it,

1 The misery of all Rebels that being invited, and commanded, to partake of
Christ's benefits, and to stoop to his Scepter, persist in an obstinate
refusal, and stiff opposition against him and his government. Least be be
angry, and ye perish in the way of Opposition. If his wrath be kindled but a
little, what then? Oh, that! that! no tongue can speak, no pen can write, no
heart can conceive fully, and to the life, it is veiled because it cannot be
expressed: how much more, if his wrath be broken forth into a flame? Give me
leave to set before you a few Scriptures, which being well weighed may shake
the hearts of Rebels, and cause them to cast down their weapons, and to kiss
the Son: Heb. 2. 1, 2. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation?
1 Pet. 4. 17. What will the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God? two
Questions, not Answers; But positively set down. 2 These. 1. 7, 8. Oh! read and
tremble, so Luke 19. 27. Bring those mine enemies that would not have me to
rule over them, and slay them before my face. Its far more tolerable for
Sodom etc. The furnace shall be heat seven times hotter etc. Therefore if any
of us hitherto have carried it to Christ Gods anointed as those men of Belial,
how shall this man save us? 1 Samuel 10. 27. and they despised him, and brought
him no presents and he has yet held his peace. Oh! let us bethink our selves
in time, and go forth to meet him as Shimei did David, 2. Sam. 19. 18, 19. and
Videte magnum miraculum altus est Deus erigis te and fugit a te, inclinas te,
and descendit ad te; humilia de proximo respicit, ut attollat, superba de long
cognoscit ut deprimat. Aug. in Psalm. 138. 6.
fall down before him, and say as he. Oh! let not my Lord the King impute
iniquity unto me, neither do thou remember that which thy servant has done
perversely against thee; for thy servant does know that I have sinned: and as
Benhadads servants to Ahab 2 King 20. 23. with ropes about our heads, for the
King of Zion is a merciful King to those that will not too much too long abuse
his mercy, and love. If now at last you will open your everlasting gates, Mirum
est quod homines in ferni Supplicia non considerant, aut si considerent non
formidant, cum tamen damones credant and contremiscant.
the King of glory will come in, and pardon and love you, and take you into his
family etc. But tremble to think what will be the issue if ye still will be
resisting God: Oh! let the sinners of Zion be afraid, and let fearfulness
surprise the hypocrites that complement with Christ and give him fair words,
but their hearts are not with him, but against him: however such may brave it
out for a while, yet the time will shortly come when the proudest opposers
shall hide themselves in the dens and in the rocks of of the mountains, and
shall say to the rocks and mountains, fall on us, and hide Non ille omisit
providentia^ aut amisit potentia^, sed patientiam exercet suam dum poenitentiam
expectat tuam. Aug. Currat poenitentia, ne praecurrat sententia, Chrysolog.
Sermon. 167. Mora tarditatem poenae gravitate compensat, qui quo tardius venit
severius percutit. Greg. mor.
us from the face of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb. Rev. 6. 15, 16. When this Lamb shall be turned into a Lion, Woe, Woe,
everlastingly to all such as shall be found Rebels against him. But in the
next place,

2. Blessed, inexpressibly blessed are all they that trust in him, who first
kiss and then trust in him (that is Gods method) elss our trust will be as the
hypocrites trust, a Spiders weeb, Job. 8. 14, 15 He shall lean upon his house,
but it shall not stand, ho shall hold it fast, but it shall not endure) and
this is the second Motive to persuade all to come in and to kiss the Son:
Blessed are all they that trust in him.

2. Blessedness shall be their portion, they shall inherit a blessing. 1 Pet.
3. they are blessed, and they shall be blessed, as Isaac said to Jacob, Thy
blessing is upon thy people, Ps. 3. 8. vid. Ezekiel. 34. 26. I will makethem, and
the places round about my hill a blessing, there shall be showers of blessings,
That blessing which Moses from God gave Joseph, Deuteronomy. 33. 13, etc. shall be the
blessing of every faithful subject of this King of Zion who has heartily
devoted himself to his service. The precious things of Heaven, and he precious
things of the Qui dabit regnum, nonne dabit viaticum? August. Quantumlibet sis
avarus sufficit tibi Deus; etenim vult avaritia terram possidere tota^, adile
and coelu^, plus est qui fecit coelum and terram. August. in Psalm. 55.
earth, and the fulness of both, and the good will of him that dwelt in the
bush: This blessing shall come upon the head of every one of his Joseph's, and
upon the top of the head of him that is separated from his brethren, and loved
with an everlasting love. Even here your King Jesus will make you (...). Naz.
de Pace. Quid tibi videbitur divina, lux cum illam suo locorideris? tum in
tenebris vixisse dices, cu^ totam lucem totus aspexeris, quam nunc per
angustissimas oculorum vias obscur e intueris, and tamen admiraris tam procul.
Sen. Ep. 102. Aliud est secundum opera reddere, aliud propter ipsa opera
reddere. Greg. Neque enim ea rimus otiosi spectatores, sed participes gloriae.
Bern. Gaudium in re, gaudiu^ in spe, gaudium de possessione, gaudium
depromissione, gaudium de praesenti expectatione, gaudium de futura
exhibitione. Bern. de temp. 15.
Kings and Priests to God; Rev. 1. 6. he looks upon you as a chosen
generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people: You have a
potent King and careful Protector, who will take your part, and revenge your
wrongs, whilst you keep close to him and walk in his ways, and when you have
done and suffered for him a while, and overcome by his strength, you shall sit
down with him in his Throne, even as he overcame, and is sat down with his
Father in his throne; this is the portion of their cup, who are the followers
of the Lamb: this is the blessedness of those who kiss the son, and trust
him: they shall not sit under the shadow of a Bramble, but every one under the
shadow of his own Vine, Figtree, and Olive. In a word you that kiss him, shall
be kissed of him; you that embrace him, shall be embraced by him, you that love
him, shall be loved of him, and his Father; you that cordially obey him, shall
be everlastingly saved by him, and rewarded with all that good he has
purchased for, and promised to his people: And what will draw you in, if
neither the danger of ruin, nor the certainty of a blessed reward? I Will trouble
you but with one thing more, and then conclude; and this also, at least by
consequence, arises from the Psalm. See you not here what combinations, and
unions of enemies, there are against this King that God has set up? to hinder
the settlement and enlargment of his kingdom, and is it not then fit, nay
equal and just, that the subjects of this King should join and unite hearts,
heads, and hands, for their King against their common enemy? Shall Herod and
Pilate be made friends to oppose Christ, and shall not Paul and Barnabas unite
to advance Christ? does not our Savior tell us, that a kingdom divided
against it self cannot stand? would then Christ's own subjects so delight in
divisions, and maintain animosities among themselves, if they did seriously
consider how much they did hereby strengthen Satan's and weaken their
Sovereigns Kingdom? what an honor was it for the primitive Christians, when
the heathens could look upon them, and say, Behold, (...) Christ. in Heb. Non
potest conco^rdiam habere cum Christo. qui discors esse voluerit cum Christiano
Aug. Charitas tolerat quos amat, amat quos tolerat. Greg. in Ezech.
how the Christians love one another? and then how was Religion in credit, and
did flourish? but alas! what a shame is it that enemies should see and say:
Behold how these Christians hate one another (and that often for petty
differences) and how is Religion scorned and decayed?

Fathers and Brethren, ought not this to be a lamentation? and what hope have
we to find a remedy for this ruining malady? when those very many Irenicums
that both Press and Pulpit have lately sent forth have proved Polemicums? Oh!
that our reflections in this particular might be serious and our amendment
visible. But perhaps some may say to me, as one once said to Luther in an other
case Abi in cellam and dic miserere nostri, truly I shall willingly obey, and
say as the Psalmist, I will give my self unto prayer, only first give me leave
to Psalm. 109. 4.
mind you of a few Sriptures, and then I have done. 1. Cor. 1. 10. I beseech
you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ that ye all speak the same
thing, and that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. And that of the
same Apostle to the Philipians. chap. 2. 1, 2, 3. If there be any consolation
in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any
bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy that ye be like-minded, having the same
love, being of one accord, of one mind, let nothing be done through strife or
vain glory, etc. I shall shut up all with that high praise of peace and union
Psalm. 133. Behold how good, and how pleasant a thing it is for brethren to
dwell together in unity, it is like the precious ointment on the head, that
ran down on the beara, even Aarons beard, and went down on the skirts of his
garments; as the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the
mountains of Zion, for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for
evermore.

FINIS.

