Lives of the ROMAN EMPERORS From Suetonius to the Fall of the Empire

London Printed for Charles Harper at the Flower de luce over against St.
Dunstans Church in Fleet street. School.

engraved title page

THE LIVES OF THE Roman Emperors FROM DOMITIAN where Suetonius ends, to
Constantine the Great.

Containing Those of NERVA and TRAJAN from Dion Cassius: A Translation of the
six writers of the Augustean History, And Those of DIOCLESIAN, and His
Associates, from Eusebius and Others.

With the Heads of the Emperors in Copper Plates, AND A Chronology Running
through the whole Time, being the Space of two hundred and ten Years.

Dedicated to His Most Sacred Majesty.

By JOHN BERNARD, A. M.

In Two Volumes.

London: Printed for Charles Harper, at the Flower de Luce over against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1693.

TO THE KING.
May it Please Your Most Excellent Majesty;
THESE Histories, Now first Published in the English Language, do most Humbly
beg to Offer themselves to the Royal Patronage of Your Majesty; whereunto they
are Encouraged by this; that in the Originals, to which there are Prefixed the
Imperial Names of Constantine the Great and Dioclesian, They have been
anciently Consecrated unto Princes, the most Glorious, and the most Invincible,
Then, on Earth.

Your Majesty is the Constantine of This Age; and by as Great a Hand, and as
Peculiar a Happiness, and with as Immortal Glory, has Rescued the Liberties of
all Europe; and more especially, the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of this
Church and Nation, as that Emperor did the Primitive Christians from the Powers
of Paganism.

Nor could the Potentates, whose Lives are here Represented, find any where a
more Illustrious Patron, and a Better Judge of their Great Actions, than Your
Majesty. Had Your Majesty swayed the British Scepter in those days, Hadrian and
Severus had visited, as they Then did, Your Coasts; but not to pretend to
Conquests, but to Adore You.

Happy I! That I have this Opportunity of Presenting, with all Humility, a
small Oblation to Your Majesty, as a Mark of my entire Fidelity and Affection
to Your most Sacred Person and Government. The God of Arms has Miraculously
Acted for you against Your Enemies. And may He be pleased to Grant, that Your
Majesty, supported ever by His Hand, may long Continue to Adorn, as You do, the
Gloriousest Crown, joined with the best Church, in the World, by a Reign, which
is so Infinitely Worthy of the One and the Other.

I am, with the most Profound Veneration,

SIR, Your MAJESTY'S Most Humble, Most obedient Servant, and Most Faithful
Subject, John Bernard.

THE PREFACE.
I Hope, it will appear, that there are many things in these Lives of that
great Moment, and which are no where else in the World to be found, that This
Publication of them will not be unacceptable to the Ingenuous Reader. They are
the most Authentic accounts of the Princes of whom they speak, that are Extant
to us at this day. I had almost said, they are the very only Histories which we
have of them. For Victor and Eutropius give us no Better than a few Sketches
upon them. Herodian begins a great deal too late, and ends a great deal too
soon for the Reigns of many of these Princes; and Dion Cassius Concludes his
History with his own Consulship under Alexander Severus. Neither is Herodian.
in what he says, much less the Imperfect Part of Dion Cassius, so Particular
and of that Latitude, as the Method is, that is taken by these Historians: and
therefore whoever would inform himself, or the world, of the Lives and Actions
of these Princes, he Unavoidably comes hither for his Materials; and all that
any of the Moderns have done, or can do, upon the same Subject, is, to gather
from this Stock, and Glean from this Harvest.

This I presume is enough for me to say, to represent at once the Authority,
and the Value of the Augustean Historians. They were Persons, who were Employed
upon what they did by the Command of the Emperors, to whom they Dedicate; and I
take that to be a very good reason to think, that they took all the care they
could of their Performance, and that they had the Reputation in their own Age
of being None of the worst Hands.

Yet it is very certain, that the Originals are strangely Coarse, and
wonderfully Rugged. The Learned Salmasius, Casaubon, and Gruterus, but
especially the two first, have bestowed incredible Pains upon them, to make
them intelligible. The Text, and the Manuscripts out of which the Text has
been Printed, are all so very Vicious. But there is no Necessity, that I should
Publish here, all that I have observed as to those Matters. I must confess, it
has been a Work of no small difficulty to me to Translate them. So obscure and
dark as they are in their own Language, it was almost impossible to make them
shine in another. But yet when I observed, how very much these Lives have been
long wanting to the Public, and no Collections I thought out of them could be
so satisfactory, nor comparable with the Original; I was pleased, that I had
chose the Part that would be the most beneficial to the Reader, although at the
same time it was the most painful to me.

In what manner I have acquitted my self, I must leave it to his Candor, and to
his Goodness to determine. I have endeavored to make both the Language and the
Story so Easy and so Natural, by the Liberty that I take, and which I think is
no more than just, that whilst they are in the Original some of the
difficultest Books in the World, he that Runs may Read them here, and there is
no need of the least Notes to Explain any thing. I have for the most part given
to Places the Modern Names, under which they are now known to us: except when
it is inconsistent with the Modern Geography so to do, or when they are such
Places, as have been long Extinct, and we have no modern Names for them. Nor is
the Reader to be surprised, if he should see the City of Byzantium called
Constantinople, even before Constantine. This is a Solecism in point of time.
But I stand not upon that, when I consider; that howsoever my Authors writ to
the Ages long since past, yet I do translate them to my own.

There is a Question amongst the Critics, but of not much more moment, than
generally the Questions of those Gentlemen are; whether the several Persons, to
whose Names these Lives are attributed as the Authors, were really the Authors
of them or not; and whether Aelius Spartian and Aelius Lampridius be not the
same Person under three Names; because Salmasius says, that in the Palatine
Manuscript, all the Lives of the first Volume, contrary to the Example of other
Manuscripts, and to the received Opinion, are attributed to the Name of
Spartianus. Now, as to this, I need say no more, than that I cannot think, that
Spartianus was the Author of all the first Volume, for this Reason; because the
same Person would never have made so many Repetitions: And so it seems the most
probable to me to be, that each Part was written by the Hand that it pretends
to; but yet all, or however, most of them, written by a common Consent, and
Undertaking of the Authors, one amongst another.

One thing there is, wherein I crave the Liberty farther to speak my Opinion,
as to the Praise of these Authors. The Acts which they have faithfully
extracted out of the Journal of the Senate, and out of the Ulpian Library; the
Bitter Exclamations of the Senate against the Memories of their evil Princes,
and their Applauses of their good Ones; the Letters and Speeches which are
Here, not as in other Historians invented, but all true Originals; These I say,
I think, are such Beauties, as are not to be paralleled out of the best of the
Ancients, that have ever writ the Roman History.

The Lives of Nerva and Trajan, I have translated from the Original Greek of
Dion Cassius: He being the only Historian of the Ancients, that are now extant,
that has them. And it was necessary that those Two Lives should be premised to
the rest, to make the Line of the Roman Emperors perfect, from the end of
Suetonius.

Where the Augustean Historians have themselves ended, I have been obliged to
adjoyn a few Collections of my own, for the Lives of Dioclesian, Maximian,
Constantius and Galerius: Because we have no ancient Originals left us of those
Emperors; and to end with Carinus, it was thought improper, it being no period;
whereas the Addition of those Four, after him, brings down the Account entirely
unto Constantine the Great.

To Regulate the better the whole, I have added a Chronology for the
satisfaction of any who shall be pleased to turn to it.

The Extract out of the Learned Vossius, which follows, prevents me in the
rest, that I might have to offer; it was done to my hand, by an ingenious
Gentleman.

I shall only add, that after I had entirely finished this Translation, I
received a French one, made about thirty Years ago by the Abbe de Villeloin, a
great Writer, who dedicates it to the French King; and, I observe, takes the
Liberty to say, that it is the Tenth Book which he has had the Honor to
dedicate to him. It begins but with Hadrian, and ends with Carinus. I perused
it, and compared Mine with it; and I shall be glad, if this may be something
the better for that Labor.

These Historians have not affected to be eloquent, but they may the more be
depended upon for the Truth.

THE LIVES OF THE Roman Emperors FROM DOMITIAN where SUETONIUS ends, TO
CONSTANTINE the Great.

VOL. I.

THE Lives in Vol. I.
COcceius Nerva, Trajan.
By Dio Cassius. Hadrian, Aelius Verus Caesar.
By Aelius Spartianus. Antoninus Pius, Marcus Antoninus, Verus.
By Jul. Capitolinus. Avidius Cassius, By Volcatius Gallicanus. Commodus, By
Aelius Lampridius. Pertinax, By Julius Capitolinus. Didius Julianus, Severus,
Pescennius Niger.
By Aelius Spartianus. Clodius Albinus, By Julius Capitolinus. Caracalla, Geta,
By Aelius Spartianus. Opilius Macrinus, By Julius Capitolinus. Alexander
Severus, Diadumenus, Heliogabalus.
By Aelius Lampridius.
IMP. NERVA CAES. AVG. GERM. P. M. TR. P.P.P.

portrait of Cocceius Nerva

IMP. CAES. NERVA. TRAIAN. AVG. GRM. P. M.

portrait of Trajan

IMP. CAESAR TRAIANVS HADRIANVS AVG

portrait of Hadrian

ANTONIUS AVG. PIUS P. P. TR. P. II.

portrait of Antoninus Pius

IMP. CAES. M. AVREL. ANTONIUS AVG. P. M.

portrait of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus

L AVR. VERVS AVG. ARM. PARTHICVS. MAX

portrait of Lucius Verus

P: 1 Vol. 1.

THE A. Christi XCVII.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR COCCEIVS NERVA.
BY DIO CASSIUS: Rom: Hist. Lib. 68.
VOL. I.
AFTER the Death of Domitian, the Senate set up Cocceius Nerva to succeed upon
the Throne of the Empire of Rome.

The Statues of Domitian which were of Silver, Domitian' s Statues demolished.
and others which were of Gold, as he had many of both, were out of hatred to
his Memory melted down: A great quantity of Money was made of them, and the
many triumphal Arches were destroyed that had been erected to his Glory.

Nerva remitted the Persecution which was Persecution of the Christians
remitted.
raised against the Christians by Domitian, and pardoned such as stood
Condemned, and recalled home others that were fled. He put to Death all the
Slaves and Servants, who had taken the Advantage of that Reign, by Informing,
to seek the Lives of their Masters. He ordered, that that Rank of People should
not be heard in any Accusation against their Masters at all. He ordered, that
none should be Prosecuted for being either of the Religion of the Christians,
or that of the Jews. But yet as he was a Prince who was slack in his
Government, many Persons were notwithstanding upon the Accusations of
Sycophants condemned, and particularly Suras a Philosopher, was one of this
number.

In fine, the Correction which he took of the ill Ministers of the last Reign,
and the Liberties which he gave in his own, were an occasion that the Mouths of
all the People were opened against one another, till Rome was in a Mutiny;
hereupon Tirenta the Consul said, It is ill when a Prince ties up the People
so, that there is no Liberty of any thing for any one; but yet a Liberty for
every thing for every one is worse than none. Nerva was made sensible of it,
and gave Orders for the time to come, to redress it.

He was Old when he came to the Empire, and very weak and infirm. His Stomach
seldom retained what he eat. He allowed no Moderation of Nerva.
Statues of him to be set up either in Silver or Gold. All the Goods about the
Court, belonging to such as had been injured by Domitian, he restored to the
Owners. He gave Six Hundred Sestertiums to be laid out upon a Purchase of Land
to be divided amongst the Poor of Rome, and he appointed some of the Senators
to buy it, and to make the Distribution. His Coffers being empty, he sold a
great many rich Robes, and Plate, and Furniture both of what was his own before
his elevation, and of the Furniture Royal, several Estates also, and Houses,
and in general, all things, except the Necessaries that he could not be
without. He was not difficult in the Prices for which he sold them. He did a
kindness to many in the Peny-worths that he gave them. He took away diverse
Sacrifices, Races of the Cirque, and other public Shows to save Charges, and
retrench his Expenses as much as he could.

He assured the Senate upon his Oath, That he never would be that Prince who
should spill the Blood of any Senator. Which Oath he kept, notwithstanding the
Conspiracy afterward formed against him, which might well have provoked him to
other Sentiments. He did nothing without the Counsel of the Great Men. He made
several Laws. Amongst the rest, he made a Law, To forbid the Gelding of any one
for an Eunuch; and another, That no body should Marry his Brother's, or his
Sister's Daughter.

He appointed Virginius Rufus to be the Consul Makes Viginius his Colleague.
in conjunction with himself, although Virginius Rufus was one, who when he
commanded in Germany, and had overcome Vindex in the time of Nero, had been
often importuned by the Army to take upon him the Empire, which he refused. In
Honor whereof, it was written afterward upon his Tomb when he died, That
overthrowing Vindex, he had asserted the Empire, not to himself, but to his
Country; whose Service, signifying, he had entirely regarded without any
Ambition in it of his own.

Nerva comported himself in his Reign in that manner, that he sometime said, He
had done nothing to make him think, but that he could resign the Empire, and
lead a private Life again in Safety.

Calphurnius Crassus of the famous Family of the Crassi, had with some others
confederated Conspiracy against him.
in a Plot against him, which he was made acquainted with, to them unknown. He
observed them, and placed them by his own Person at a Show of the Combats of
the Gladiators in the Cirque; where he took up the Weapons, as if it were only
to see if they were sharp, as is usual, and then he gave them out of his Hand
into the Hands of the Conspirators. What think you, says he, will not these do?
Are they not sharp enough? He intended this as a secret Reflection to them of
his knowledge of that Design of theirs, and at the same time he seemed to show
such a Neglect of his Life, as if he did not care though they killed him upon the
place.

The Captain of the Guards under him was Casperius Aelianus, who was the same
before under Domitian. This Officer set the Soldiers against Nerva, and worked
them to a height, that they demanded the Heads of several that were about his
Person, to which Nerva opposed himself so, that stripping bare his Bosom, and
offering it bare to them in a Passion, says he, Take my Life, not theirs.
However, this did not save them, for as many as Casperius Aelianus had marked
out, fell a Sacrifice to the Pleasure of the Guards.

The Age of Nerva was one thing which lost him much Respect. After this Action
of the Guards, he went to the Capitol, and declared He adopts Trajan.
his Adoption of Marcus Ulpius Trajan with a loud Voice thus,

Together with my hearty Wishes for the Prosperity of the Senate and People of
Rome, and that what I do may be Happy to them and my self; I make Marcus Ulpius
Trajan my Son.

Then he created him in the Senate his Caesar, which is the Title of a Person
when he is chosen to succeed in the Empire; and having done this, he wrote to
Trajan, who at that time commanded in Germany, with his own Hand, amongst other
things a Greek Verse out of Homer, (...). by which he seemed to signify, that
he left it to him to do him Justice, and to revenge him of that Mutiny of the
Guards.

Thus Trajan was appointed to succeed to the Empire, even in preference to
Nerva's own Relations; whereof there were some whom he might have so honored,
if he had not been a Man who regarded the Good of the Public above the
Consideration of his Blood. Nor did it incline him the less to what he did, to
know, that Trajan was a Spaniard, neither an Italian, nor of Italian born
Parents; and that no Alien, as he was, had ever possessed the Roman Empire
before. For he considered, That it was the Worth and not the Country of any
one that was the thing, which he ought to respect. After which Nerva died,
having Reigned one Year, four Months, and nine Days: And lived sixty His Death.
five Years, ten Months, and ten Days.

Dio Cassius, Lib. 67.
AS Nerva was a Person of very great Worth and Honor, he was offered the
Empire before Domitian was killed, by the same Party, who to save their Lives,
because they found that they were privately marked out for the Slaughter by
Domitian, made themselves the Masters of the Life of that Prince. He was also
as much under Danger from that Prince, as they, which made him the more easy to
be persuaded to accept their Offer, and to run their hazards. For the
Astrologers, with whom Domitian had advised about the Nativities of Great Men,
had accused Nerva as one that was to be suspected of having an Eye upon the
Empire. And as Domitian put several upon that account to Death, even of Men who
perhaps never flattered themselves with those hopes, so he had put to Death
Nerva, if it had not been for a kinder Astrologer than the rest, who to save
him, said, That it was good to let him alone, in a few days he would die of
himself.

That which above all things deserves to be Proclus his Prognostication.
admired, is, one Larginus Proclus had said publicly in Germany, that upon a
certain a day, which he named, Domitian should die; for which the Governor of
the Province sent him up to Rome, where he was brought before Domitian, and
still he continued to say the same thing. He was condemned for it, and to be
executed the day after that Domitian had outlived the Danger; but Domitian was
killed upon that very day, and Larginus Proclus escaped, and received a Reward
from Nerva of four thousand Crowns.

Aur. Vict. Epitome.
NERVA was born at the City of Narni, which is under the States of the Church
in Italy. Presently after he had accepted the Empire, there was a rumor, that
Domitian was not killed, but living, and was coming to him, which put him into
that Fright, that he changed color, was struck Dumb, and could scarce stand
upon his Feet, till he was assured of the contrary again, and received a
Confirmation of the Death of Domitian.

All the Punishment that he took of the Conspirator Calphurnius Crassus was, he
banished him and his Wife to Taranto in Naples, for which the Senate blamed his
Clemency.

When the Guards demanded the Heads of those who were so dear to him about his
Person, the Passion which he was in was so great, that it cast him into a
Vomiting and Looseness; they were dear to him for this reason, because as they
were those who had taken off Domitian, so they were the Authors of the Election
of himself to the Empire. His Body was interred in the Sepulcher of Augustus.

THE A. Christi XCIX.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Marcus Ulpius Trajan.
BY DIO CASSIUS: Romans Hist. Lib. 68.
TRAJAN, before he was Emperor had a Dream, which seemed to tell him, that the
Senate of Rome had Chose him, and Sealed him, as it were for their own. A
Person in the like Dress and Trajan' s Dream.
Form of one, that in Picture the Senate is represented by, that is, in a Robe
of State guarded with purple, a Vest purled with large Knaps of purple, a Crown
upon his Head, a little elderly, came to him, he dreamed, and with a Seal which
he had in a Ring, sealed him now on the right and now on the left Breast.

He wrote to the Senate after he was declared Emperor, several things with his
own Hand, and amongst the rest, he assured them of this; That the Blood of no
Man, who was an honest Man, should ever be spilt by him, neither should he be
touched in his Fortunes or Honor. He assured them of this upon his Oath, and
not only then, but he repeated the same to them at other times.

He sent for Aelianus Casperius, together with He punishes the old Mutineers.
such of the Soldiers of the Guards, as had mutined against Nerva, as though it
were upon some Business to employ them. But he did not suffer their Crime and
the Murders which they had committed to pass unpunished, for he put them to
Death.

When he came to Rome he altered several things for the greater Good of the
Public, and in the Favor of Persons who had deserved well. He showed himself
particularly careful of the Cities of Italy. He settled Alms and Pensions
toward the Maintenance of Children of poor Families, and did a great deal of
Good of that nature.

Plotina his Empress, at her first entrance His Empress.
into the Imperial Palace at Rome, turned herself upon the Steps to the People
and said, I go in here the same as I would wish my self to come out again; and
through her whole Reign she preserved her esteem with a Conduct which was
without Reproach.

After some stay at Rome, Trajan undertook an Expedition against the People of
Dacia; unto which he was provoked by the Proceedings of that People who had
augmented their Forces, and were become insolent; the Money besides which was
paid to them every Year, and with which the Romans bought their Obedience, was
a Burther, that Trajan was willing to throw off.

Decebalus the King of Dacia was sufficiently The Dacian War.
apprehensive of a War made upon him under the Conduct of a Prince so
formidable. He was sensible that he had another Force, and another Person to
deal with, than when he had overthrown Domitian. For Trajan was a Prince with
whom the Roman State entirely accorded. A Prince that excelled in Justice,
Character of Trajan.
Gallantry and Integrity of Life: Strong; in Body: In the Forty second Year of
his Age when he began his Reign: In the full Maturity of his Mind: Past the
Rashness of Youth, and not yet arrived to any thing of the feebleness of old
Age. He was one, who envied no Man, and disobliged no Man. All such as he found
were really deserving, he esteemed and preferred. The Estates of Men, no less
than their Lives, remained untouched by him. If he spent much Money upon his
Wars, he spent much also to adorn the Times of Peace. This is seen in the
Roads, Ports, and public Edifices which are his, and which are great and
necessary Works. As he was by Nature of a Temper to appear in what he did,
Great and Magnanimous; he rebuilt the Cirque, which was decayed, much larger
than it was before, and more Beautiful. He wrote an Inscription upon it to
signify, that he His Inscription on the Cirque
had done it so, to make it worthy to receive the People of Rome. He desired
rather to be loved than Adored. He was affable to the People, and respectful to
the Senate. All loved him. None dreaded him but the Enemy. He Hunted, he
Feasted with his Ministers, Visited their Offices, Jested with them: Many times
sat amongst them in the fourth Place; came to their Houses without a Guard,
and made his Conversation pleasant. Though he was not one who was studied in all
Parts of Learning, yet he acquitted himself in that respect very well; every
thing he did was Excellent. I know that he was given to love Boys, and to
Drink; and had he been guilty of any thing in either respect that is Base, he
would have been to be blamed. But in Drinking he went not to excess, and as to
his love of the Boys, he forced or injured no one. He loved War; yet when he
had adjusted Affairs, and weakened the Enemy, and increased his Alliances, he
was satisfied. No such thing ever befell him, as is commonly happens to others
that command Armies; that is, for the Soldiers to Mutiny and be Insolent. This
was a Happiness owing to the Excellency of his Conduct, and therefore if the
King of Dacia feared him, it was not without reason.

As he was upon his March against the Enemy, and near the place where they lay,
some body had pretended to cut upon a large Mushroom, which was brought to him,
with words in Latin, signifying, That others of his Allies, and particularly
the Byrrhi, who bordered upon Dacia, advised him to make a Peace with the
Enemy, and retire. But yet this did not hinder, but He fights the Enemy.
he began the Fight, in which many of the Enemy were killed, and many of his
own Men were wounded; to bind up whose Wounds he did not spare to tear his own
Clothes into Rags for Binders to give them; and for others of his Men that were
killed, he built an Altar, and ordered that there should be Sacrifices every
Year offered thereupon in their Honor.

He pursued his Blow, directing his March over the Hills and Mountains from one
to another, not without great danger, till he came up to the Capital City of
Dacia, whilst Lucius employed the Enemy on another side, and killed and took
great Numbers of them.

Then Decebalus sent to Trajan to desire Peace, by some of his chief Officers,
who Decebalus desires Peace.
coming into his Presence, laid down their Arms, and prostrated themselves upon
the Ground before him, and said, That Decebalus did above all things covet the
Honor to come and confer with him in Person, being ready on his Part to
receive all his Commands. But if this was otherwise to be resolved on, he
desired that some Persons might be sent to him with Powers to Treat a Peace.
Suras, and Claudius Livianus, the Captain of the Guards, were sent from Trajan
upon this Subject; who were met by others on the side of Decebalus. But nothing
being concluded, because Decebalus refused to appear, Trajan took his Castles,
and therein his Arms, Artillery and Stores, together with a Roman Standard
which had been lost formerly under Fuscus. A Sister of Decebalus fell at the
same time a Prisoner into the Hands of Maximus; and a strong Town in the
Country was taken by the same. All which coming upon the heels of one another,
Decebalus recollected himself again, and entirely complied Decebalus submits.
with the Conditions that were offered him. He promised to deliver up his Arms,
Artillery, the Artificers that made them, and the Deserters that had run over
to him: To dismantle his Fortresses, retire from the Land that he had taken
from his Neighbors, and have the same Friends and Enemies with the People of
Rome: To entertain no Deserters, and to take no Soldiers into his Service, out
of Places in the Dominions of the Romans; because most of his best Men were
such, as he had enticed into his Service from thence. All which he promised,
against his Mind, and being conducted to an Interview with Trajan, he threw
himself upon the Ground and adored him.

He sent to the Senate of Rome his Ambassadors, to have the same Peace
confirmed from them, that he had made with Trajan. The Ambassadors were
introduced into the Senate, where they laid down their Arms upon the Ground,
and standing before the Senate with their Hands within their Fingers, as if
they were Captives, they spoke in Terms of great Submission to the Senate, who
ratified the Peace, and then they took up their Arms again. Warhel the Capital
City of Dacia received a Garrison of the Romans, and the rest of the Country
being served accordingly, Trajan returned back to Italy.

He was received in Triumph, and the Title Trajan' s Triumph.
of the Conqueror of Dacia was given him, and inserted into his Style. The
Combats of the Gladiators, in which he delighted, and the diversions of the
Stage in which Pylades was one that gained much of his Favor; were celebrated
for his Entertainment. Though he was a Military Prince, he took never the less
Care of the Civil Policy, and minded the Affairs of Peace and Justice. In the
Forum of Augustus, or in the Portico of Livia, or in other Places, he many
times assisted in Person at the Causes which were pleaded there.

In the mean time Decebalus could not persuade Decebalus renews the War.
himself to keep the Conditions of the Peace which he had made. He proceeded to
raise Men, provide Arms, entertain Deserters, re-fortify his Castles, and
invite the Nations that were his Neighbors to join with him, to whom he
represented; That if he was forsaken by them now, their own Ruin was the next
thing to follow. It was easier, and the safest way for them, he said, to
preserve their Liberties, by standing all by one another whilst they might, for
the Common Defense, than it would be to do this after Decebalus was ruined,
which would open a Gap to the Enemy to devour them one by one. Pursuant to
this, he began the War by falling upon such as had appeared against him in the
former War, and by possessing himself of a part of the Country of the Jazyges,
which was upon the Danube toward Dacia.

Hereupon the Senate declared Decebalus again an Enemy, and Trajan without
committing the War to another, went in Person to reduce him a second time. He
marched against him with an Army which Decebalus was in an ill Condition by
fair Force to resist; but by Deceit and Treachery, he was within a Treachery of
Decebalus defeated.
little of effecting that, that he could not by his Arms. He sent Persons under
the notion of Deserters into Moesia to assassine him, as Trajan was always
easy of access; but then more particularly upon the Incidents of the War, any
one was admitted to speak to him. That which disappointed this Design was, one
of the Conspirators was taken up on suspicion and put to the Torture, who
confessed the whole Plot.

There was a Commander of a Legion in the Roman Army of great Skill, and who
had Longinus trapan'd.
often signalized himself in the Wars against Dacia, called Longinus; Decebalus
found means by Treachery to get this Colonel into his hands, and then sent to
Trajan to tell him, That upon Condition the Country as far as the Danube,
might be restored to him, and that Trajan allowed him for the Charges of the
War, he courted his Friendship, and would return Longinus again in safety. To
which Trajan answered in a manner, that was to let him know, that he neither
made a small, nor yet such a high Account of the Life of Longinus, as to buy it
too dear. In the mean time, whilst Decebalus was resolving with himself what
more to do, Longinus found means to procure a quantity of Poison by the help of
a Servant, and he took it in the night and died.

Trajan built a Bridge over the Danube, for Trajan' s Bridge over the Danube.
which I know not how I can sufficiently admire him. The other Works of his are
very Magnificent, but this is above them all. It is a Bridge of Nineteen
Arches, all of square Stone; the Height one Hundred and Fifty Foot above the
Foundation; the Breadth Sixty Foot, and the Distance between each Arch one
Hundred and Seventy Foot. How shall I admire the Charge that this cost, and
which way also it was possible to Found it in a great River, and a difficult
Water which has an ozy Gravel at the bottom, when in the mean time there was
no turning the Stream aside into another Chanel? The River is in other places
double and treble the breadth, that it is here where this Bridge covers it.
Here it is at the straightest, and therefore so much the more fit place for a
Bridge; but yet the Account that I have given, makes it a pretty broad Passage
here also. But that which I would chiefly observe from the Breadth of the River
in this and in other places is, that the broader and the more spacious a Flood
it is as it comes hither, and the broader and the greater Compass that it
challenges as it goes from hence, so much the deeper and the more rapid must it
be where it is straightened in its Course; and this must make it the more
difficult to cover it with a Bridge, where it is so deep and so rapid.
Certainly the Greatness of the Soul of Trajan, shows it self in this Work; though
it be of no use to us now, nor passable. The Peers are yet standing, which look
as if they were only built to show, That nothing is impossible to the Wit of
Man. The reason of Trajan's Building this Bridge was, to pass his Forces with
readiness to the Succor of the Romans on the other side of the Danube, in case
the Barbarians attacked them at a time when the River was frozen up. Hadrian
fearing on the contrary, that the Barbarians might sometime Force the Passage
of this Bridge, and give themselves an easy descent by it into the Country of
Moesia, demolished it, and broke down the Arches.

Trajan passing his Army over the Danube by this Bridge, made rather a safe
than a quick War, and with time and difficulty finished the Conquest of the
Kingdom of Dacia. He signalized his Conduct and his Gallantry His Personal
Valor.
in many things himself. The Soldiers by his Example were encouraged to contemn
Dangers, and acquit themselves with Honor. Amongst the rest a Horseman who was
very much wounded, was brought out of a Fight to the Surgeon to be dressed; but
perceiving that his Life was desperate, and that his Wounds were uncurable, he
quitted the Tent again before his Spirits failed him, and rejoyned the Battle,
and died, fighting with great Bravery.

In fine, Decebalus, after his Capital City Decebalus kills himself.
was lost, and his Country all taken, and himself in danger to be taken, killed
himself. His Head was brought to Rome: Dacia was made a Province of the Empire,
and Trajan planted it with Colonies of Romans. He had hid his Treasure in the
Bed of the River Istrig, not far from Warhel. For he had made his Slaves turn
His hidden Treasure.
the Water aside another way, and into the Channel dig a Pit, in which he
buried a great deal of Gold and Silver, and precious Things that could endure
the Wet, which he covered with a heap of Stones and Earth, and then brought the
River to run over them in its usual Course again. He hid his Robes and other
things of that nature, in Caves of the Earth, by the Hands of the same Slaves,
who when they had done their Work, were killed, because they should say
nothing. But one Bicilu, who was one of his Favorites, knowing the thing, and
being taken Prisoner by Trajan, he discovered all to him, and the buried
Treasure was brought to Light again.

About this time Palmas the Governor of Syria reduced the Stony Arabia under
the Obedience of the Empire of Rome.

After Trajan was returned to Rome, Embassies Trajan returns to Rome.
were sent to him from many Nations of the Barbarians, and amongst the rest
from the Indians. The Public Games and Shows were Celebrated one hundred
twenty and three days together: in which eleven thousand Beasts of all sorts
were killed, and ten thousand Gladiators diverted the People, spilling their
Blood over the Fenns called Auferte Palude in the Campagnia di Roma. He made
Causeways, and built Houses upon the Roads, and built Bridges which were very
Magnificent.

He Called in, and Melted down all the Diminished His Friend Licinius Suras
dies.
Coin. He buried Licinius Suras, when he died, with a Public Funeral, and set
up his Statue: who had attained to be so Rich and so Great, as to Found at his
own Expense a Public School for the Plays and Exercises of the Romans. This
Person, and Trajan, had such a Friendship, and such an Intimacy in one another,
that many times when the Enemies of Suras, who were such as envyed him, had
Accused him to Trajan, Trajan went nevertheless to his House to Sup with him,
Uninvited; and dismissing all his Guards, First he trusted himself to the
Physician of Suras, to do something to his Eyes and Eyebrows; then he trusted
himself to his Barber to shave him; For this was anciently the Custom, as of
all other Romans, so of the Emperors: For Hadrian was the first Emperor that
let his Beard grow unshaved. When this was done, he washed, and went to Supper.
The day after he said to those about him, who were always suggesting something
ill to him of Suras, If Suras had a mind to kill me, he would have done it
Yesterday. This was a great thing in him, to trust his Person in the least with
one, who was pursued with such Accusations. But yet it is more to be admired,
how unalterably he preserved with him his Friendship, and how that nothing was
able to make him believe that ever Suras would hurt him. When first he made him
a Captain of the Guards, which is to be done by a Ceremony of delivering to him
a Sword; he drew the Sword, and as he gave it, he said, Take this Sword to Use
it for me, if my Reign deserve it; or otherwise, to Use it against me.

He set up the Statues of Sossius, Palmas, and Celsus, who were three, that he
had a Favor for before others. He referred the Conspiracies at any time
against him, to the Cognizance of the Senate, by whose Sentence the Offenders
were Punished of which Number was Crassus. He built Libraries for Books. He His
public Works.
set up in his own Forum, a vast Column, partly for a Tomb for himself, when he
dyed, and partly for an Historical Monument of all his Exploits. All the
Ground, on which that Forum stands, was before a Mountainous Earth, which he
dug down as deep as his Column is high, and so built the Forum Level. After
this, He began a War against the Armenians and Parthians; pretending, it was,
because the King of Armenia had received his Crown at the Hands of the King of
Parthia, and not of him; but really it was out of a desire of Glory.

When he came as far as to Athens on this His Parthian Expedition.
Expedition, the Ambassadors of Chosroes the King of Parthia met him; who were
sent to desire a Peace with him, and brought Presents to give him from their
Master. For when Chosroes had received advice of the Preparations of Trajan,
and that Trajan was resolved to second his Words with good Blows, the Fear,
that he was in, obliged him to abate of his Height, and to send to beg, That
he might not be troubled with a War: For he humbly asked the Crown of Armenia
at his Hands, in the behalf of Parthamasiris, his Nephew, the Son of Pacorus,
the late King of Armenia; Exedreas, having, as being neither agreeable to the
Romans nor the Parthians, Abdicated, he said, the Crown again. Trajan refused
to Accept their Presents, and returned no other Answer; than that a Man's
friendship is to be proved by Actions, and not Words; and that when he came
into Syria, he should do all things that were fitting. Persisting in which
Opinion, he took his way through the Lesser Asia, Cilicia, and the rest of the
Provinces, and so came to the City of Seleucia, and from thence to Antioch in
Syria.

As he was at Antioch, Abgarus the King of Courted by the Eastern Kings.
the Osrhoeni in Mesopotamia sent him Presents, and Messages of Friendship. But
being equally in fear of the Romans and the Parthians, and desiring to please
both Sides, he declined for that reason the waiting upon him in person. Others
of the Kings and Governors of the Countries, where he came, met him, brought
him Presents, and amongst the rest, they Presented him with a Horse, that was
taught to Adore; kneeling upon his Forefeet, and bowing his Head to the Ground,
as Trajan stood before him. He accepted all their Presents.

But the behavior of Parthamasiris upon this Behavior of Parthamasiris.
Conjuncture, who had taken upon him the Crown of Armenia, was altogether a
piece of Rashness. First, he wrote a Letter to Trajan, in which he gave himself
the Name of King of Armenia: and receiving no Answer, He writ another, in which
he omitted that Name, and desired that Marcus Junius the Governor of
Cappadocia might be sent to him, as if he intended to mediate something by him.
Trajan sent to him, the Son of that Junius. In the mean time Trajan marched to
the City of Schemsat in Comagena in Syria, and took it without a Blow. Then he
came to Satala, which was the Seat of Anchiolus, the King of the Heniochi, and
the Macheloni. Him he obliged so much, as to make him a Present. Then he came
to the City of Elegia in Armenia, where Parthamasiris met him, and was
received; but the manner thus.

Trajan sat, as in a Council of War, in the His Appearance. before Trajan.
Camp. After Parthamasiris had saluted him, He took the Crown, with which he
came, off of his Head, and prostrated it at the Feet of Trajan, and stood
silent; expecting when Trajan would return to him the Crown again. The Soldiers
seeing this, set up an Huzza, and Congratulated Trajan, as is usual, after a
Victory: For they cried, This was a Victory without a Battle, an unbloody
Victory; to see a King of the House of the Arsacidae, the Son of Pacorus, and
the Nephew of Chosroes King of Parthia, stand before Trajan like a Captive
without a Crown. Parthamasiris amazed at the Noise, and thinking that it was
designed for an Affront to him, and to his ruin, turned himself about in a
Passion to be gone. But as he was so well surrounded that he could not, he
desired, Not to be obliged to speak, what he had to say, in that Crowd. So he
was taken into the Tent of Trajan, to whom there he offered the Propositions
that he had to make; but Trajan was not pleased to consent to them. Then he
threw himself in a Passion out of the Tent, and was retiring through the Camp;
when Trajan sent for him back again, and in the Council of War, where he had
received him at first, he desired him to speak what he had to say Publicly, in
the hearing of the Company; because Persons, who were ignorant of what had
passed betwixt them in Private, should not suggest false Accounts of it, and
misrepresent it to the World. Hearing this, Parthamasiris could not contain
himself longer; but with a great Courage, amongst other things, said, That he
neither had been Conquered, nor taken Prisoner. He came thither His Speech in
the Council of War.
voluntarily, in confidence that no Injury would have been offered to him, and
that he should receive his Kingdom of Trajan, as Tiridates did of Nero. Trajan
answered him, what he saw fitting, and withal told him; That Armenia should be
no bodies Kingdom. It belonged to the Romans, and should receive a Roman
Governor. As for himself, he gave him the liberty to go where he pleased. So
he sent Parthamasiris, He is dismissed.
together with the Parthians that came with him, out of the Country under a
Guard, that he should speak with no one, nor attempt no Novelties; but all the
Armenians that came with him he ordered to abide in their Proper Dwellings, as
being now his own Subjects.

Trajan secured the Country with convenient Garrisons, and came from thence to
the City of Rhoa in Mesopotamia, where he saw Trajan' s Congress with Abgarus.
King Abgarus, whose Seat was there. Abgarus had before sent Presents and
Persons to him often, to Complement him: but sometimes for one, sometimes for
another reason that he pretended, he had not as yet waited upon him himself, as
neither had Manos the Governor of the Arabia next adjoining, nor Sporaces the
Governor of Arthemisia in Mesopotamia. Now the Son of Abgarus, Arbandes, was a
handsome charming Youth, whom Trajan had seen, and could not choose but love for
his beauty. By the persuasion of this Son, and partly by the fear which Abgarus
had of the presence of Trajan, Abgarus met him at his coming to Rhoa, and
excusing himself to him, Trajan received him very well, and admitted him to his
Friendship. His handsome Son was indeed Apology enough for him. He entertained
Trajan at a Banquet, in which he brought in his Son to dance before him after
the Barbarian Mode.

The Senate of Rome, among other things A new Title decreed him.
which they decreed in the honor of these Successes of their Prince, gave him
the Title of Optimus, or the Best of Princes. He always marched on foot at the
Head of all his Army; whom against every Expedition he Reviewed and Furnished;
and sometimes marched them in one manner, sometimes another. If they crossed
the Rivers on Foot, so did he: sometimes he told them a piece of false News,
and acted the part of a Spy amongst them, to make them keep themselves the more
carefully to their Duty, and to be ready and intrepid against every thing. He
took the Cities of Nisibis: and Ecbatana, from the Parthians, upon which he was
Saluted by the Style of Conqueror of the Parthians by the Army. But in none of
all the Titles, that he acquired, did he delight so much as in that of the Best
of Princes: because this was a commendation rather of his own Nature and
Virtues, than of his Arms.

Whilst he Wintered at the City of Antioch A great Earthquake.
in Syria, a dreadful Earthquake happened, which did a great deal of mischief
to many Cities in that Country, but Antioch was in a more particular manner
afflicted with it. There was at that time a great number of Soldiers, and an
extraordinary Concourse of others from all parts in the place, either upon
Business of Law, or upon Embassies, or Trade, or Curiosity: whereby it was so,
That there was no Nation, nor no Province but what had a share in the Calamity,
and all the Roman World suffered in that one City. This Earthquake was preceded
by great Thunders, and unusual Winds: but yet no body suspected from thence the
mischief which followed. First, a mighty Forerunners thereof.
bellowing Noise was heard on a sudden, from the Earth; then followed a Shock
which was was so violent, that it made all the Earth Bounce and Swell. The
Houses Danced: some immediately fell with the Toss, and broke into pieces; some
reeled to and fro like a Ship in the Sea, and took a compass on one side and
the other, and then fell: And the noise of the cracking, and bursting of the
Timber, the Brick, and Stones together, was most dismal. A Dust was raised,
that it was impossible to see any one, or speak, or be heard to speak. Many who
were without their Houses suffered. They were so tossed up, and then down
again, as in a Precipice, and struck against one another: some were wounded,
some killed. Trees were torn up from the Roots. But of the rest, who were
overtaken within their Houses, an infinite number perished; a great many with
the Houses falling upon their Heads; a great many were suffocated under the
Ruins: Others, who were held under the Wood and Stones so, by any part of their
Bodies, that they could not possibly recover themselves, were in the highest
degree miserable: they could not live, and yet they could not soon expire. If,
out of such an infinite number as were overtaken within their Houses, several
escaped with their lives, yet they were generally hurt; their Legs broken, or
their Arms, or their Heads, or they vomited Blood. Pedo the Consul was one of
these, who died soon after. In short, there was no figure of Misery and
Destruction but what was to be seen amongst these People. GOD shook the Earth
for many Days and Nights together. The People were all in a Distraction, and
without Miserable Effects of it.
help to fly to. Whilst some were immediately killed, and buried under the
Ruins, others were starved to death, who were penned up in any void Spaces left
by the Timber, or betwixt Pillars, and in Vaults. After the Earthquake was
ceased, a Person who had the Courage to go presently upon the Ruins, heard the
Voice of a Woman crying. Nor was she alone: the sucking Infant was with her;
and she had kept both her Child and herself alive, with her Milk. They were
dug up and saved: and search was made for others. But they found no body
more alive, besides one Child, which was hanging upon the Breasts of its
Mother, and the Mother dead. When they took the Dead up out of the Ruins, it
was so lamentable a sight, that the living had no Hearts to rejoice so much as
for their own safety; so great was the Calamity which then afflicted Antioch.
Trajan escaped through a Window out of the House where he was, by the help of a
Man who was extraordinarily Tall, and who came and carried him off, but not
without some small Hurts. As the Earthquake continued several days, he kept
himself all that time in the open Air, in the Cirque. The Mountain Lison was so
shook, that the Top of it bowed and burst, and threatened to fall down upon the
Town. Other Mountains fell, and great Waters started up where none was before,
and Streams that had flown before, forsook their Course and vanished.

The Spring being returned, Trajan carried Trajan proceeds in his Expedition.
his Arms into the Country of the Enemy. He furnished himself with Boats for a
Bridge to transport his Forces over the River Tigris, from the Woods about the
City of Nisibis; because the Country upon the Banks of that River affords no
Timber for that purpose. The Boats were all brought from thence to the River
upon Land-Carriages; being built in that manner, that they were to be taken
asunder, and joined again into a Bridge at Pleasure. Which was done; and the
Bridge was laid over the Tigris at the Foot of the Mountain Cardynus; not
without the great annoyance of the Enemy on the other side, who were Posted to
oppose it. To give whom a Diversion, whilst the Bridge was fitting with all
speed, as Trajan had Men and Boats in plenty, he Armed out some Boats with
Archers and other Soldiers, and detached them against the Barbarians. He
detached others to be moving up and down, as it were to try to Land in other
places, which so distracted the Barbarians, and especially they were so
surprised to see such a number of Shipping gotten together in a Country that is
destitute of Wood, that they gave way, and the Roman Army passed the River.

The Roman Army landed in the Country of Adiabene, which is a part of Assyria,
and Assyria was then under the Obedience of the King of Parthia. They took all
Adiabene, and the Towns of Arbela and Gaugamela, where Alexander the Great did
heretofore overthrow Darius. The Barbarians call it Atyria, instead of Assyria,
changing the Letters ss into t. But as the Forces of the Parthians had been
diminished in their Civil-Wars, and still they were at Variance with one
another, there was such a scarcity of the Enemy to make Opposition to the March
of the Romans, that they came up to the City of Babylon.

Here Trajan beheld the Lake of Bitumen, He comes to Babylon.
with which the famous Walls of Babylon were built. It is a sort of a Slime so
Clammy and so Strong, that when it is mixed with Brick and Pebbles, it makes a
Wall that is stronger than any Stone, and Iron it self. He viewed the Mouth of
it, from whence proceeds such a noxious Stench, that it kills all the Beasts,
and all the Birds that are brought within its reach. And certainly did it arise
much higher, to disperse it self far and wide in the Air, it would render the
place Uninhabitable. But it Circulates within it self, and does not exceed its
limits. I have seen such another Lake as this at the City of Hierapolis in the
Lesser Asia, and I made an Experiment of it in Birds; my self being in an Upper
Apartment, from whence I overlooked it. For it is shut up in a sort of a
Cistern, and above it is built a Convenience, where you look down and see the
fatal effects of this Stench in safety. It kills every thing, Living: Men only
excepted, that have been Gelt. I do not understand the reason of this. But I
speak the things that I have seen, as I saw them, and the things that I have
heard, as I heard them.

Trajan was once designing to make a Cut for the River Euphrates upon which
Babylon stands, to fall into the Tigris; that passing his Vessels by that Cut,
out of the First into the other River, he might give himself a Bridge to March
his Army over the Tigris to the Siege of Ctesiphon in Assyria. But when he
understood that the Bed of the Euphrates was much higher than the Bed of the
Tigris, he forbore that design, lest the abundance of the Water running into
the Lower Bed should render the Euphrates unnavigable. So he mounted his
Vessels upon Land-Carriages, and brought them to the Tigris over the little
Straight of Land which is betwixt the two Rivers; and having passed his Army,
and taken the City of Ctesiphon from the Parthians, he Ctesiphon taken.
was Confirmed in the Title of the Conqueror of the Parthians, and the Senate
of Rome decreed, that he should enjoy what Triumphs, and what Festivals for the
Honor of his Victories, soever he pleased.

After he had taken Ctesiphon, his Curiosity His Expedition to the Red Sea.
led him to go on Board his Fleet, and Sail for the Red Sea; which is a Branch
of the Indian Ocean, and called Erythraeum Mare, that is, the Red Sea, from a
King of the Name of Erythrus, who was sometime very Powerful upon it. He took
in his way the Island of Messene, which is in the Tigris, the King whereof was
Athambylus, without any difficulty: only the Winter, the rapidity of the
Tigris, and the Tides of the Ocean were something dangerous. The Town of
Spasinum, belonging to Athambylus, received him well. From thence he came upon
the Ocean, where informing himself in the Nature thereof, and discovering a
Ship that was bound to India, he said, Was I Young, I would certainly make a
Visit to the Indians. He enquired much about them, and their Actions, and
admired the Happiness of Alexander, who had Conquered them, and who had gone so
much further than he. He writ the same to the Senate; But yet at the same time
he was not able, what he had already Conquered to keep. The Senate decreed
Honor done to him by the Senate.
several things in his Honor; and amongst the rest, that in relation to as
many Nations as he pleased, his Successes should be adorned with Triumphs. For
they were more than were known to them, so much as by Name, as they continually
understood by his Accounts. They set up in his Honor a Triumphal Arch in his
own Forum, and the Citizens prepared themselves to go a great way to meet him,
at his return to Rome. But he never came thither; nor was the End of his
Actions suitable to his Beginnings, because what he had Conquered, he lost
again.

In the time that he was Sailing for his Pleasure upon the Indian Ocean, all
his Conquests A general Revolt.
were changed and revolted, and the Garrisons which he had left amongst them
were either turned out or killed. It was nothing but the Fame of the Indian
Ocean which had drawn him thither, together with his Honor for the Memory of
Alexander the Great, to whom he had sometime sacrificed in the House, in which
he dyed at Babylon. But as he met with nothing worthy of that Fame; Fables and
Prospects of Ruins were his only Entertainments.

He was as yet on Board, when the News was brought to him of the revolt of his
Conquests; against whom, he dispatched Lucius and Maximus. Maximus was deseated
and killed. Lucius acquitted himself very well, and amongst other things
recovered the City of Nisibis, Stormed, Plundered, and Burnt the City of Rhoa,
whilst Erycius Clarus, and Julius Alexander took and burnt the City of
Seleucia. In the mean time, fearing lest the Parthians of Ctesiphon should
attempt something, Trajan was willing to oblige them, by giving them, instead
of a Roman Governor, a King of their own. He Assembled, when Trajan gives a
King to the Parthians.
he came to Ctesiphon, all the Romans, and all the Parthians that were there
into a large Plain; and raising himself upon a high Throne, and glorying in the
great Actions that he had done, he appointed Parthamaspates King of the
Parthians, and put the Crown upon him.

Then he came into Arabia, to Reduce Expedition against the Hagarens.
there the People called the Hagarens, who had also Revolted. Their Town is
neither Great nor Rich; but the Country adjoining to it is for the most part a
Desert; without Water, which it seldom has, and then it is naught; without
Wood, and without Forage: all which make it impossible for a great number of
Men to lie long before it, defended as it also is by the heats of the Sun, to
which it is exposed. So it was neither taken by Trajan then, nor by Severus
afterward, though they both made Breaches in part of the Walls. Trajan
disguised himself, and Headed a Body of Horse up to the Walls in Person; but
his Horse returned in an ill Condition to the Camp, and himself escaped very
narrowly: For the Barbarians believing it was he, by his Age and Presence, shot
at him, and killed a Horseman that was next him. It Thundered and Lightened,
Rainbows appeared in the Clouds, Storms of Hail and Wind fell upon the Romans,
when they made their Attacks. The Flies rendered their Victuals and their Drink
nauseous. So Trajan raised the Siege, and fell sick not long after.

About this time the Jews about Cyrene in Jewish Barbarity.
Africa, Commanded by one Andrew, whom they had set up over them, committed
great Slaughters upon both the Romans and Grecians, They Eat their Flesh, made
themselves Garlands of their Guts, washed themselves in their Blood, and
Clothed themselves in their Skins. They sawed many in Two, from the Head, with
Saws. They threw others to Wild Beasts. They forced others to fight till they
killed one another. About two hundred and twenty thousand Persons were
destroyed by this means. They did the like in Egypt, and in the Island of
Cyprus, under the Command of Artemion; where two hundred and forty thousand
Persons more were destroyed. For which reason, it is, that it is forbidden a
Jew to set foot upon that Island; even though by Storm he is driven upon it, he
is to be put to death. At length they were reduced under Obedience Jews quelled.
again, as by others, so particularly by Lucius, who was sent against them by
Trajan.

Trajan was resolved to have carried the War anew into Mesopotamia, if his
sickness, increasing upon him, had not obliged him to set Sail toward Italy,
and to commit to Publius Aelius Hadrian the Command of the Army in Syria. And
now all the Pains that had been taken, and all the Dangers which had been run
by the Romans, in the Conquest of Armenia, the greatest part of Mesopotamia,
and the Parthians, became in vain: for the Parthians turned off King
Parthamespates, of the appointment of Trajan, and betook themselves to be
Governed by their own Measures.

Trajan suspected, in his own mind, that he was poisoned: but others say that
he had been used every year to void Blood downward, and that this Evacuation
had stopped; that he had a Dead Palsy upon him, and was insensible in a part
of his Body, and that he was all over Dropsical. He came as far as to the City
Iclenos, which is otherwise called Trajanople Death of Trajan.
from him, in Cilicia, in the Lesser Asia, and there immediately dyed; having
Reigned nineteen Years, six Months, and fifteen Days.

Dio Cass. lib. 67.
HE had been Consul in Conjunction with Acilius Glabrio, in the Reign of
Domitian, and then received some Omens of his future Reign.

Dio Cass. lib. 69.
HE was a Native of the same Town in Spain with Hadrian, whose Guardian he was,
and to whom he married his Niece. He dyed without Children, and his Ashes were
interred in the Column of his own Work.

Eutrop. Cassiodor. and Victor.
THE Town in Spain, at which Trajan was born, was Old Sevil in the Lower
Andaluzia. He lived sixty three Years, nine Months, and four Days. He was
Proclaimed Emperor at Cologne in Germany. The Height of his Column was one
hundred and forty, or one hundred forty and four Feet. The Younger Pliny, born
at the City of Com^ in the Duchy of Milan, who was a famous Orator and
Historian, flourished in his time, who has left us a Panegyric on this Emperor,
pronounced by him the first day of his Consulship.

THE A. Christi, CXVIII.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Publius Aelius Hadrian.
Written by AELIUS SPARTIANUS: And Addressed to the EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN.
IF we take the Original of the Emperor His Extraction.
Hadrian at the highest, it is to be derived from the Ancient People of the
Marca d' Ancona, and particularly from the Town of Adria in Italy, which was
the Place which his Ancestors were of, before they removed into Spain; where,
as himself says in the Account which he writes of his own Life, they settled in
Sevilla la Viegia, or Old Sevile, in the times of the Scipio's. His more
immediate Descent was from that Family in Spain. Aelius Hadrian Afer was his
Father, who was Cousin-German to the Emperor Trajan. His Mother was Domitia
Paulina, who was Originally of Cadiz. His Sister Paulina married Servianus. His
Wife was Sabina, and his great Grand-father's Grandfather, Marullinus, was the
first of the Family who was a Senator of the City of Rome. He was born at Rome
upon the Nineth of the Calends of February, in the Year when Vespasian and
Titus were the Consuls, which was then the Seventh time of the Consulship of
the first, and the Fifth of that of the other. In the Tenth Year of his Age, he
lost his Father, and received for his Guardians, his Kinsman, Ulpius Trajan,
who had been then a Praetor, and afterward arrived to be Emperor, together
with Caelius Tatianus, a Roman Gentleman.

In his Fifteenth Year after having finished His Studies.
his Greek, unto which his Genius inclined him in that manner, that by some he
was called by the Name of the Little Grecian; he went into Spain, where he
entered immediately into the Army, and was eager of exercising himself in
Hunting, almost to a Fault. Trajan re-called him out of that Country unto Rome
again, where he lived with him as his Son; and it was not long before he was
put into the Commission of the Decemviri. He was removed from thence to be the
Tribune or Colonel of the Second Auxiliary Legion. After that, he was
translated into the Lower Moesia, which was about the latter end of the Reign
of Domitian. In Moesia, he was informed by an Astrologer of the same Presages
concerning him.
thing, as to his future Succession to the Empire, which he had heard, that his
great Uncle Aelius Hadrian, who also was skilled in the Doctrine of Nativities,
had sometime before predicted concerning him. He was sent out of Moesia at the
time that Trajan was adopted by Nerva, with the Congratulations of the Army to
the Emperor, upon the Subject of that Adoption. Nerva translated him into the
Upper Germany, from whence he hastened, upon the News of the Death of Nerva, to
be the first who should bring it unto Trajan. And His Diligence.
although he was by Servianus, his Sister's Husband, who had endeavored to
possess Trajan against him, by telling him of his Expenses, and his Debts, not
only a long time detained, but furnished also with a Carriage that broke by the
way, on purpose to stop his haste: He nevertheless prosecuted his Journey
afterward on Foot with that diligence, that he came up to Trajan before the
Express, which the same Servianus dispatched upon the same occasion. And Trajan
continued to love him, but yet he was not without those Enemies who represented
him to that Prince, who was a Lover of Boys, to be as it were his Rival i^ that
sort of Pleasure. And because he was solicitous in this Conjuncture, to know
what the Inclination of Trajan toward him was, as to his Adopting him to
succeed in the Empire, he consulted his Fortune by Lots, in which he was
answered in certain Verses out of Virgil that favored his desire. Others say,
That he received a Lot of the same nature out of the Verses of the Sibyls. But
that which was a greater Presage to him still than all this, of the Empire unto
which he should succeed, was, an Answer which he received from an Oracle of
Jupiter Nicephorus, which Apollonius Syrus the Platonist has set down in his
Works. In fine, by the interposition of Suras in his Favor, he easily attained
unto a higher Degree than ever of Favor with Trajan, whose Niece by his
Sister's side, he married, which was a Match that was encouraged by Plotina,
and consented unto by Trajan, as Marius Maximus says, at least in some measure.

He was a Questor in the Year when Trajan He is made Questor.
and Articuleius were the Consuls, which was then the Fourth time of the
Consulship of Trajan. In this Office being to recite in the Senate, an Harangue
made by the Emperor to them, and being laughed at for his ill pronunciation of
it, he set himself upon the Study of the Latin in that manner, that he acquired
himself at length the greatest Skill and Eloquence in that Language. After his
Questorship, he was made the Clerk to the Senate. Next he waited upon Trajan to
the War against Dacia; at which time, how intimate he was with him, may be seen
by this; that he says himself, That he indulged to Drinking out of Obedience to
the Pleasure and Methods of Trajan, and this gained him yet greater Favors
from him. He was made a Tribune of the People in And Tribune.
the Year of the Second Consulships of Candidus and Quadratus. In this
Magistracy, it was an Omen (he says) to him of a perpetual Tribunitian Power;
that is, of the Crown, that in wearing the Paenulae, (a sort of Hanging-Coat)
as the Tribunes of the People were used to do in time of Rain, but the Emperors
of that Age never, that Garment had slipped off from him. In the second
Expedition against Dacia, Trajan gave him the Command of the First Legion of
the Name of Minervia, and took him along with him. He distinguished himself
there by a great many fine Actions, insomuch that Trajan presented him with the
same Diamond that himself had been before presented with by Nerva, which served
farther to raise his Hopes. He was a Praetor under the second Consulships of
Suranus and Servianus; at the same time he received from Trajan Forty Thousand
Sesterces toward the Charges of the public Games, with which he treated the
People. After this, being made the Pro-Praetor of the Lower Pannonia, he
bridled the Sarmatae, disciplined the Army, and restrained the Procurators of
the Province from exceeding, as they did, the just Limits of their Power; for
these Services he was made a Consul. In which Magistracy, as soon as it And
Consul.
was understood from Suras, that he was to be adopted by Trajan, he was
accordingly respected by all, who desired to preserve the Favor of their
Prince. After the Death of Suras, his Interest with Trajan did still increase,
because he succeeded into the Office of Suras, to write his Prince's Speeches,
and his Letters as his Secretary; besides all which, he had the Favor of
Plotina, by whose means he was appointed the Lieutenant of Syria, in the time
of the Expedition against Parthia.

The Persons with whom he at this time entertained His Friendships.
a Friendship, were Sossius Pappus and Pletorius Nepos, of the Order of the
Senators; and Tatianus, who was before his Guardian, and Martius Livianus
Turbo, of that of the Gentlemen; Palmas and Celsus had been always his Enemies.
But now those two being fallen into Disgrace upon a Suspicion of a Design to
usurp the Empire. This facilitated the Business of Hadrian's Adoption, so that
being through the Favor of Plotina, created a Consul a second time, he indeed
conceived within himself entire Assurances of that Happiness. It was the
Opinion of many, that he had to this end corrupted also the Servants of Trajan,
and had made very much of the Boys who were Trajan's Paramours, and had
furnished them with Ointments and Washes in the time that he was conversant
about the Court. However that is, the Letters of his He is adopted.
Adoption came to him into Syria, whereof he then was Lieutenant, upon the
Fifth of the Ides of August, which Day he therefore commanded to be celebrated
for a Festival for the same. Upon the Third of the same Ides, he received the
News of the Death of Trajan, he commanded that Day to be celebrated for the
Festival of his accession to the Empire. It had been many times before thought,
that Trajan's Design was to have left Neratius Priscus, and not Hadrian his
Successor; because many of his Friends had agreed with him in Priscus, to whom
he sometimes also had said publicly, If I die, I recommend the Empire to you.
Others say, That Trajan sometime had it in his Thought to die after the Example
of Alexander of Macedonia, without appointing any certain Successor. Again,
others tell us, That it was likewise in his Mind to have sent a Letter to the
Senate, to let them know, that if he died, they themselves should give a Prince
to the Empire of Rome; adding, as from him, some Names only, out of which they
were at their Liberty to choose the Best. Neither do we want those who have
pretended, that the Adoption of Hadrian was a Trick, wrought by the Power of
Plotina, after Trajan was dead, by suppositing a Person to speak the Thing for
Trajan, in a languishing Voice.

However it was, Hadrian possessed himself And possessed of the Empire.
of the Empire, and falling in immediately with the usual Methods of Business,
he desired to secure and establish, as much as possible, the Peace of all
Parts. In the mean time the Nations which Trajan had Conquered, had Revolted.
The Moors were making Incursions upon the Frontier Provinces; the Sarmatae had
declared Open War, the Britains could not be contained under the Roman Power,
Egypt was disturbed with Seditions, and Lycia and Palastine lifted up their
Heads to a Rebellion. Therefore as for all the Countries beyond the Euphrates
and the Tigris, Hadrian even relinquished these by the Example as he said of
Cato, who pronounced the Macedonians a Free People, because they would not be
kept in subjection. And as he had observed, that Parthamaspates, the King of
Parthia, of the Appointment of Trajan, was of no great Consideration amongst
that People, he removed him from thence to be the King over some other
Neighboring Nations. He began his Reign in Clemency, His Clemency.
whereunto he showed a great Regard by this Instance; that having in some of
the first Days of it, had Notice given him by Tatianus, by Letters, of Three
Persons, whom he advised him, that he should put them to Death; who were,
Baebius Macer, the Governor of the City, in case he in the least opposed his
Authority; Laberius Maximus, then in Banishment in an Island, because he was
suspected to aspire at the Empire, and Frugi Crassus; yet nevertheless, he
spared them all Three: For although the Governor of the Island where Crassus
was, did execute him for an Escape which he would have made, with a Design of
fomenting New Disorders, yet was that Execution a thing that was done without
Hadrian's Command. He doubled the usual Donative to the Soldiers, for a good
Presage, to welcome in his Reign. He took away the Government of Mauritania
from Lusius Quietus and dismissed him, because he was one wh^ was suspected to
aim also at the Empire; and when Martius Turbo had finished the Reduction of
the Jews, he appointed him Governor of Mauritania, and to go and repress the
Commotions which were there. He made a Journey out of Antioch to meet and
receive with Respect the Ashes of Trajan, as they were upon the Road, under the
Conduct of Tatianus, Plotina, and Mattidia. And having embarked them in a
Vessel for Rome, and being returned again into Antioch, he constituted Catilius
Severus Governor of Syria, and then came himself to Rome by the way of
Illyricum.

He first sent Letters which were very accurately Honor done to Trajan.
writ to the Senate, to desire, That they should make Trajan a God; to which
the Senate agreed unanimously, and even voted a great many more Things of their
own accord, to his Honor than what Hadrian had mentioned to them. At the same
time, Writing to the Senate, he asked their Pardon, That he had not submitted
his Judgment to them in the Affair of his assuming the Empire, the Occasion
whereof had been this, that he had been saluted Emperor by the Army in Haste,
because the State could not be without a Head to it. The Senate voted him the
same Triumph, which was to have been given unto Trajan. He refused it for
himself, but accepted it for the Image of Trajan to be carried in a Triumphal
Chariot, that that Incomparable Emperor should not be without the Honor which
he so well merited, no not though he was dead. The Title of Pater Patriae, or
Father of his Country, which was Twice offered him, he declined, because it had
(...)n late in the Reign of Augustus ever this Title had been assumed by that
Prince. He remitted to Italy all the Duties which they were to pay him upon his
coming to the Crown, and abated the same to the Provinces, although it was very
well known, that at the same time the Treasury was streightened for Money. Then
receiving Advice of an Insurrection of the Sarmatae, and the Roxolani, he
commanded his Troops into Moesia, and went thither in Person after them. He
preferred Martius Turbo, after he had administered the Government of Mauritania,
to the Presidentship of Pannonia and Dacia. As to the Affair of the Roxolani,
he composed that by a Treaty, and a Peace was established betwixt them and
Hadrian.

He had sometime designed to appoint Nigrinus to be his Successor in the
Empire; but Nigrinus became guilty of a Conspiracy against A Conspiracy against
him.
the Life of Hadrian, which was to be executed as Hadrian assisted at the
Sacrifices: Lusius and many others were in the same Plot with him, which
Hadrian escaping, hereupon Palmas at Terracina, Celsus at Baiae, Nigrinus at
Faenza, Lusius upon the Road, by the Order of the Senate, were all killed. And
because these Executions might be a means of creating an ill Opinion of him in
the Minds of the People, as if it had been, though really it was not, as he says,
by his Will, but by the Will of the Senate, that Four Persons, all of Consular
Dignity, were sacrificed so all together: Hadrian came presently to Rome,
committing Dacia unto the Government of Turbo, whom to add to his Authority, he
had likewise honored with the Title of the Praefecture of Egypt: And at Rome
he caressed the People to stifle the Apprehensions which were there of him,
with a double Largess upon his arrival, His Bounty.
which was over and above a Bounty of three Pieces of Gold a head, which had
been divided amongst them, in his absence before. He acquitted himself before
all the Senate of the Fact that had passed; and as for his own part, he took
his Oath, that he would never punish a Senator, otherwise than according to the
very Sentence of the Senate. He proceeded to ease the particular Towns and
Magistrates of the Charge of the public Post and Carriages, by ordering them
to be maintained out of the Exchequer; in fine, to omit nothing to make himself
to be esteemed, he forgave an infinite number of Debts, which were due to the
Exchequer from private Persons in the City, and all over the Country; as also
he remitted the Arrears of great Sums which were due from the Provinces; the
Bonds and Registers relating whereunto were all burnt in the Forum of Trajan,
for a full Security to every one against those Claims. He suffered it not, that
the Estates of Persons condemned, should be confiscated into his private
Coffers, but ordered them all to be returned into the public Treasury. And as
Trajan had begun to provide for the Support of the poor Infants of both Sexes,
who were not by the Law to be admitted to the general Dole before such an Age,
so Hadrian enlarged that Munificence, and made an Addition to their Pension.
Unto such of the Senators as were reduced, but had not consumed their Fortunes
by their ill Lives and Debauchery* he set out Pensions suitable to their
Quality, and suitable to the Number of the Children which they had; continuing
the same to many to their Deaths. It was not only to his Favorites to whom he
extended his Bounty, but to others he generously gave great Things, to enable
them to acquit themselves in their Offices with Honor. To some necessitous
Women he allowed Pensions toward their Maintenance. The Games of the
Gladiators were exhibited Six Days together, and a Thousand wild Beasts at his
Charge were exposed to be hunted and taken upon the Anniversary of his Birth.

He chose himself out of the principal Persons His Prudence and Moderation.
of the Senate, an Imperial Council. He refused to accept of any other of the
Games of the Cirque, which were decreed in his Honor, than such as those which
were celebrated upon his Birthday. He said many times, both in his Discourse,
and to the Senate, That his Government should be such, that the World should
see, it was the Interest of the People which he minded, and not his own. As he
was three times Consul himself, so he advanced several Thrice to that Dignity:
And for the Honor of a Second Consulship, he bestowed that upon a multitude of
Persons. The Third time that himself was Consul, he officiated it no longer
than Four Months; but yet he often sat in Person in Judgment. He never was
absent from the Senate, when he was either in Town, or nigh the Town upon the
Solemn Days of meeting. He carried the Honor of His Respect for, the Senate.
the Senate so high, and made such a Difficulty of creating Senators, that when
he created Tatianus, who was a Captain of the Guards, and had had all the
Ornaments given him of a Consul; he told him, That he had nothing in his Power
to confer upon him, that was a greater Honor. He did not give leave to those
of the Order of the Knights and Gentlemen, to sit in Judgment either without,
or with him, in a Cause which concerned the Life of a Senator; although until
then, it had been the Custom, that when the Emperor takes the Cognizance of a
Cause in Person, he called not only the Senators, but the Roman Gentlemen unto
his Assistance, and pronounced Sentence according to the Opinions of all
together. In fine, he proceeded even to execrate those Princes who had had a
lesser Consideration for the Senators than they ought. He retained so great a
respect for Servianus, his Sister's Husband, who had been Twice Consul before
him, that he always went out of his Chamber to meet him coming; and he created
him a Consul the Third time, without his solicitations for it; the Honor
whereof was imperfect in nothing but this, that he did not take him to be his
own Colleague in that Third Consulship.

In the mean time, this is yet to be remembered His Imperfections.
of this Prince, that he abandoned a great many Provinces which had been by
Trajan acquired to the Empire; and the Theater which had been built by Trajan
in the Campus Martius, he destroyed, contrary to the desires of all the World.
And certainly these things seemed to be so much the worse, as he knew very well
himself that they were displeasing, and yet he pretended that in doing them, he
accomplished the Orders which had been left him by Trajan. He was willing when
he became weary of the Power of Tatianus, the Captain of the Guards, who had
been formerly his Tutor, to have had him murdered; but that which called him
off from those Thoughts, was, he had already a great deal of ill will upon him,
upon the occasion of the Murder of those Four Consular Persons
beforementioned, the Odium whereof he endeavored to throw upon Tatianus. At
length Tatianus, of his own accord laid down his Commission, which Hadrian
conferred upon Turbo. Similes the other Captain of the Guards, laid down his,
which Hadrian conferred upon Septimius Clarus. Nevertheless those two, Tatianus
and Similes, were Persons who very well might have deserved his utmost Favor.
After this, he went a Progress into His Affability and Complaisance.
Campania, where he endeavored to oblige all Places into which he came, with
the Kindnesses he did them, and the Largesses which he bestowed amongst them;
admitting every where the Gentlemen of Estates and Quality to the Honor of his
Friendship. At Rome he repaired often in Person into the Courts of the Praetors
and the Consuls. He honored his Ministers with his Company at their Houses.
When they were Sick, he visited them Twice or Thrice a Day. He visited some,
when Sick, who were no more than Servants that he had manumitted, Comforting
them in their Infirmities, and Assisting them with his Counsels. He received
his Friends to his Table, and was as Easy always with them, as if he was a
private Man. The Honors which he bestowed upon his Mother-in-Law at her Death,
were the greatest that were possible, in the Games of the Gladiators, which he
exhibited, and in all other Rites, whereby he showed his Duty to her.

Then he went into Gallia, where he signalized He goes into Gaul and Germany.
himself by his great Bounties, and his forwardness to Relieve all Persons that
were in Necessity and Want. From thence he went into Germany, and though he was
one who was a greater Lover of Peace than War, yet here he Exercised the
Soldiers, as if he was immediately making ready for a War. He inculcated to
them the Precepts of Patience, to His demeanor toward the Soldiery.
teach them to be hardy, and to be able to suffer. He gave them in himself a
Model of the Life of a Soldier, visited them in their Tents; Eat and Drank in
Public of the same Provision as they did, that is, Bacon, Cheese, and sower
Wine mixed with Water, after the Examples of Scipio Aemilianus, Metellus, and
his Father Trajan. Were his Commands harder upon them than ordinary, he gave
them Money, or preferred them for their Encouragement. He revived as much as it
was possible the ancient Military Discipline, which through the Negligence of
many Princes his Predecessors, had been going to decay ever since the time of
Augustus. He settled the Order of the Offices, and the Expenses of the Army. He
suffered no one to be absent from the Camp without a just Cause. The Tribunes
of his Creation were such, as whose Merits recommended them to him, and not the
Favor of the Soldiers. He excited all to do their Duty by the Example that he
set in himself. He walked Twenty Miles together on Foot at the Head of them in
his Arms. He put down the use of Arbors, shady Walks, Grotto's, and Bowers in
the Camp. He was dressed many times in a very ordinary Coat, without any thing
of Gold to his Belt, without Jewels to his Clothes or Buckles, and the Hilt of
his Sword scarce of Ivory. He visited the Soldiers when they were Sick in their
little Huts. He marked out the Camps. He made none a Centurion, who was not a
strong Man, and of good Repute: Nor a Tribune, unless he was of such an Age, as
by his Prudence and his Experience to be fit to support the Weight of that
Command. Neither did he permit the Tribunes to make the least unlawful Gain of
the Soldiers; nor any Persons to serve themselves of nice and delicate Things,
which were therefore wholly cashiered the Camp. He examined their Arms and
their Equipages whether Clean and Neat, and amended them as he saw Occasion. He
considered what Age every one was of, because he would have none to serve in
the Field contrary to the ancient Custom, who was either too young to be of a
proper Strength to bear Arms, or too old and past it. He took Care that his
Soldiers were personally always known to him, and he kept an Account how many
of them precisely they were.

He gave himself the Trouble to examine into the State of the Magazines of
Ammunition and Provisions; and whether the Contributions of the Provinces were
well paid, and into the State of the Provinces, that if any thing was amiss any
where, he might supply the Defect. Particularly, he desired to cut off all
superfluous Expenses, and that his Officers should lay out their Money upon
nothing that was of no use. So having modelled his Army to his own Pleasure, he
next set upon an Expedition into Great Britain, where as he corrected a great
many Defaults, so he was the first who made a Wall there, that was His Wall in
Britain.
Fourscore Miles in Length, to serve for a Division betwixt the Barbarians and
the Romans. Septimius Clarus, a Captain of the Guards, and Suetonius
Tranquillus, Secretary of the Dispatches, with others, having conversed without
his Leave, a little more familiarly with the Empress Sabina, than was well
consistent with the Honor of the Court, he turned them out, and put others
into their places. And certainly, he would, as he said, have discharged his
very Empress, as one that he conceived disagreable and ill humored, had be been
but as a private Person. He was not only inquisitive into all that His
Intelligence.
passed in his own Household, but likewise into the Houses of his Neighbors;
insomuch, that by his Spies, he was told of all the secret Actions done amongst
them, whilst they in the mean time never suspected it, nor knew any thing of
it, until himself discovered it. Upon which occasion, it will not be unpleasant
to insert a Passage wherein we may certainly see what a Knowledge he had of a
great many things as to his Neighbors. A Person had received a Letter from his
Wife, in which she told him, That he was so taken up with his Pleasures and the
Baths, that he made no Thoughts of returning again to her Arms. Hadrian was
informed of this by his Spies; so when that Person came to him to desire the
leave of him to retire Home, Hadrian gave him a gentle Rub of his Baths and his
Pleasures. Sir, says the Gentleman, Has my Wife written the same to your
Majesty, that she has written to me? Indeed this Inquisitiveness was thought
to be a very great Fault in Hadrian; all the Amors of the Sparks, and the
Secret Adulteries of the married Ladies he took the Pains to pry into; but
which was worse, he did not keep the Counsel when he had done, of his greatest
Friends.

After having settled the Affairs of Great Britain, he crossed over into
Gallia, where he received Advice of a Sedition in Alexandria in Egypt, arisen
about their God Apis; who having been brought to Light anew, after many Years
that he had been lost, the Dispute in what City he ought to be placed, created
strange Disorders amongst the People, because all of them earnestly contended
to have him. At Nismes in Languedoc, he built a Temple to the Honor of
Plotina, which was an admirable Work. Then he went into Spain, and passed He
arrives in Spain.
the Winter at Tarragona, where at his proper Charge he re-edified the Temple
of Augustus; and having Assembled all the States of Spain together at
Tarragona, he consulted with them with great Prudence and Dexterity in the
Politics, considering their Divisions about the raising of Levies amongst
them. At Tarragona he escaped a very great Danger, and in a manner, which was
not inglorious. As he was walking in a Garden, a Servant belonging to the
Master of the House where he was, ran upon him furiously with a drawn Sword, to
kill him, Hadrian closed with the Man, and took him Prisoner and delivered him
to the Custody of the Guards, who were flocking in to his Assistance. But when
it was plainly seen that the Man was Mad, he sent him to the Physicians to be
cured, and took no more Notice of the Matter. In many Places where the
Barbarians are not separated from the Romans by Rivers, but only by Landmarks,
he made Walls of Earth, supported by Stakes, and strengthened with Pallisadoes
for a Partition betwixt them. He appointed a King over the Germans; he
suppressed the Commotions of the Moors, so that he merited the Honor from the
Senate to have Sacrifices and Solemn Prayers offered for him. The Parthians did
but make a mien or single Motion toward a War, but it was composed again by
one Conference with Hadrian.

After this he came by Sea along the Coast Several other of his Voyages, etc.
of Asia, and the Islands, unto the Province of Achaia, where he was initiated
in the Eleusinian Rites, after the Examples of Hercules, and King Philip. He
was very generous to the Athenians, and presided at their Games. He sailed from
thence to Sicily, where he had the Curiosity to visit the top of the Mountain
Aetna, from thence to view the Rising Sun; how various they say, it appears
there in its Colors, in the Nature of those of the Rainbow. From Sicily he
came home to Rome, and from Rome he crossed the Sea again into Africa, leaving
many Marks of his Liberality upon the Provinces of that Country; so that one
may say, that scarce never has there been a Prince known to Travel over so
much Land, and with so much dispatch as he. He had no sooner returned back to
Rome out of Africa, but he set upon a New Voyage into the East, and took his
way through Athens. The Works which he had begun at Athens, he now finished and
dedicated; amongst the rest, the Temple and the Altar of Jupiter Olympius. In
Asia, as he traveled, he likewise Consecrated Temples there, which abide as so
many Memorials of his Name. Whilst he was in Cappadocia, he admitted a Number
of the People of that Country into the Service of his Army. He invited the
Princes and the Kings of the Dominions where he came, to join in Friendship
with him. Particularly he invited to his Friendship Chosroes the King of
Parthia, to whom he returned his Daughter that Trajan had formerly taken
Captive, promising the same as to a Chair of State, which had been then
likewise taken and carried away in that War. He received those Kings when they
came, so generously, and treated them in that manner, that others who staid
away upon the Account, especially of Pharismanes, who insolently slighted him,
might have an occasion to repent themselves. As he traversed the Provinces, he
punished some Procurators, and some Presidents of them for their Malversations
so severely, that they said, he had a mind certainly to encourage Accusers to
appear against them.

He had a great Displeasure against the People of Antioch, wherefore it was in
his Thoughts to separate Syria from Phoenicia, that Antioch should not be said
to be the Metropolis of so many Cities. The Jews about this time broke into a
War, because they were forbidden to Circumcise themselves. He went upon the
Mountain Lison, which is near Antioch, in the Night, for the Curiosity of
observing from thence the Rising-Sun. Jupiter was worshipped upon that
Mountain, to whom, as Hadrian was Sacrificing there, a violent Storm arose with
Thunder and Lightning, which blasted both the Victim and the Priest. He
traversed Arabia, and came to the City of Pelusium or Belvais in Egypt. The
Tomb of Pompey which is at this City being decayed, he rebuilt it with greater
Magnificence.

As he was sailing upon the Nile, his dear Antinous died, for whom he wept with
all the tenderness, and the weakness of a Woman His Grief for Antinous.
weeping for her Husband. There are several reports about that Youth. Some say
that he devoted himself a Sacrifice for Hadrian. Others, that he was what his
Beauty might probably incite him to be, and the too great Pleasure which
Hadrian took in a Burdash However it was, the Grecians, at the desire of
Hadrian, made a God of him; and we are told of Oracles which have been uttered
by him; but they are rather some supposed Compositions of Hadrian; who was
excellent at Verse, and indeed at all sorts of the Belles Lettres. For he had a
great Hand at Arithmetic, Geometry, and Painting. He understood Music, and
played perfectly well upon many Instruments, and Sung. Loving his Pleasures so
excessively, as he did, he could not but Compose many Poems of his Amors.
Together with which he was a Master in the matter of Arms; had the Military Art
in perfection, and was skilled at the Weapons of the Gladiatours. He was a
Person equally Severe and Pleasant, Affable and Grave; Active and Considerate,
Close and Liberal, Cruel and Merciful, in all things ever various.

He enriched his Friends, though they never did ask him any favor; and to
others upon their asking he denied nothing. But yet he was easy to give ear to
every Tale which was but whispered concerning them. And this was the occasion,
that almost all those whom either he had dearly loved, or whom he had raised to
the highest Honors, were afterward treated by him as Enemies; His Severity
and Injustice.
as was Tatianus, Nepos, and Septimius Clarus. Thus also Eudaemon, who had once
been Privy to all his Counsels, and his Confident in the very Affair of his
aspiring to the Empire, was reduced by him to extreme Beggary. He constrained
Polyaenus and Marcellus to murder themselves. He made the most notorious
defamatory Libels upon Heliodorus. He suffered Tatianus, under a pretense of
his being in a Conspiracy against him, to be Arraigned and Proscribed. He
persecuted Numidius Quadratus, Catilius Severus, and Turbo, very grievously. He
put to death Servianus, his Sisters Husband, when he was in his Ninetieth Year,
only because he would be sure, that he should not outlive him. In fine, he
Persecuted without remission both his Servants and his Soldiers. As ready as he
was at his Compositions, always in Prose and Verse, and skilled in all the
Liberal Arts; he yet laughed at the Public Professors of the Arts, and
triumphed over them; entered many times into Solemn Disputes with all of them
together, and with all the Philosophers; only for the Glory of Composing better
Books, or better Verses than they. He excepted once particularly against a
Word, which was used by Favorinus: who modestly submitting himself to him in
it; but being blamed by his Friends for yielding the Cause so in a Word for
which there was sufficient Authority to be produced out of good Authors;
Favorinus made a very pleasant Jest upon it. Says he, My Friends, you are much
mistaken, if you do not allow me to believe him to be a Learneder Man than us
all, who is the Master of Thirty Legions.

So fond was he of his Glory, as to this Talent, that he writ his own Life, and
afterward gave it to his Servants (that were Scholars) to publish it only
under their Names: Thus the Books under the name of Phlegon, are Hadrians. The
Catachriani are his, which are extremely obscure pieces, in imitation of
Antimachus. The Poet Florus, having written to him, thus, as follows;

Ego nolo Caesar esse,
Ambulare per Britannos,
Scythicas pati Pruinas.
That is,

I desire not to be Caesar,
To Ramble amongst the Britains,
And be starved with the Frosts of Scythia.
He answered him again thus;

Ego nolo Florus esse,
Ambulare per Tabernas,
Latitare per popinas,
Culices pati rotundos.
That is,

I desire not to be Florus,
To Ramble amongst the Taverns,
Skulk about the Eating-Houses,
And be stung to death with Gnats.
He took more delight in the Ancient Writings His Learning.
than the Modern, and was pleased with making Declamations. He preferred Cato
to Cicero, Ennius to Virgil, and Caelius to Salust; the like Judgment he
passed upon Homer and Plato. He pretended to understand Judicial Astrology so
very well, that upon the Calends of January in the Evening he would constantly
set down in Writing, what in the whole ensuing year afterward was to happen to
him; insomuch that in that Year in which he died, he had written a Scheme of
things, as far as to his last hour. But although he gave himself the liberty,
as has been said, to reprehend the Musicians, Tragedians, Comedians,
Grammarians, Rhetoricians, Philosophers, and Orators, and to teize them
perpetually with Questions, yet he preserved a real kindness for them, and
honored them with the marks of his esteem: If he had been the occasion, that
many times they went dissatisfied from him, he said, He however took it ill, if
he saw any body do so. He was more particularly familiar with the Philosophers
Epictetus and Heliodorus, Phavorinus, was much in his favor. And when these
Doctors became by Age unfit any longer for their Professions, he took care of
them, and dismissed them from their Labors, with marks of Honor.

The Enemies which he had in his Private Some particular Liberalities, etc.
Life, he forgave after he was Emperor. To one of them, his Expression was,
after he was Emperor, It is well, you have Escaped me. He gave always Horses,
Mules, Clothes, Money, and all their Equipages to his Officers that he sent into
the Provinces. He often sent his Ministers upon the Feasts of Saturn Presents,
and accepted of others from them again. When he made a Royal Banquent for the
Entertainment of a great number of Persons of the Court and the City, he has
ordered Dishes to be brought up to him from the lowermost Tables, to see
whether they were well used there by the Servants of his Household. His Presents
which he sent at any time to Princes, always exceeded those which they sent to
him: He frequently Bathed in Public, and in the Company of all the World
without distinction: which gave an occasion to a pleasant Passage, which was
this. There was a Veteran Soldier at the Bath, whom he had known in the War,
scrubbing his Back and his Body against the Wall in a Corner, by himself.
Hadrian seeing him, asked him what was his fancy to rub himself so against the
Walls? The Man said, It was, Because he had never a Servant to rub him.
Immediately Hadrian sent him one, and withal gave him an Estate to keep one.
Another day, several other Old Men, in the like manner, were rubbing themselves
against the Wall, in hopes to provoke Hadrian to be as bountiful to them. But
instead of that he ordered them to be called out, and to take their turns to
rub down one another. He was a lover of the Common People, and took a glory in
showing it. Fond of Traveling, and whatever he had read in Books concerning
any part of the Earth, he was willing to learn the truth of it upon the Place.
He endured the Cold and the Weather so hardily, that he never went with his
Head covered. To several Kings of the Countries where he came, he paid a great
deal of respect. The most part of whom entered into Leagues of Friendship with
him; some indeed slighted him. And to many he made great Presents, but no one
Person greater than he did to Pharismanes the King of Iberia; to whom, besides
other things which were Magnificent, he sent fifty Elephants. The Presents in
return, which that King sent to him, were also great. But among the rest he had
sent Tunicks Embroydered in Gold: in derision of which, Hadrian ordered Three
hundred Malefactors to be dressed in the like Tunicks embroydered in Gold,
wherein to fight upon the public Stage the Prizes of the Gladiatours.

When he sat upon Judgment in Person, he took to his assistance not only his
Courtiers and Friends, but the professed Lawyers; especially Juventius Celsus,
Salvius Julianus, Neratius Priscus, and others, who were Men Universally
approved by the Senate. He ordered amongst other things, that no Houses in any
City should in any wise be taken down, for the sake of rebuilding them in
another, or transferring the Materials to another. He granted unto the Children
of Persons proscribed, the twelfth part of the Estates of their Fathers. He
admitted of no informations of High Treason. He refused to stand Heir to such
as he did not know; neither would he accept the Inheritances of those he did,
in case they had Children of their own to enjoy them. Concerning
Treasure-Trouve, his Constitution was; that if the Party had found it in his
own Ground, he should take it to himself; if he found it in another, he should
give a Moiety of it to the Proprietor of that Ground; if he found it upon the
public Ground, he should share it equally with the Exchequer. He made it
unlawful for Masters Some of his Laws.
to put their Slaves to death; and ordered, that Slaves should be Tried and
Condemned by the public Judges as they deserved it. His Law against such as
had consumed their Estates, was, that if they were under their own Authority,
they should be exposed to a public Shame in the Amphitheatre, and then turned
out of the Town. He took away the Private Prisons, for Servants and Slaves,
which had used to be before in the Hands of their Masters. He separated the
Baths for the distinct use of either Sex. If a Master was found killed in his
House, he ordered that not all the Slaves should be put to the Question about
the Murder, but those only who were near enough to have perceived and prevented
it.

The Country of Hetruria nominated him to be their Praetor, and he was so, when
he was Emperor. In like manner he was the Dictator, the Aedilis, and the
Duumvir, that is, the Chief Magistrate so called, of several Towns in Latium.
The City of Naples chose him to be their Demarchus. The City of Sevil in Spain,
and that of Adria in Italy, which were the two Places of the Descent of him and
his Ancestors, chose him to be their Quinquennalis. At Athens he was the
Archon. In almost all the Cities where he came he Built, and gave public
Sports to the People. At Athens he exhibited a Chase in the Stadium, of above a
Thousand Wild Beasts. He never served himself upon these occasions of any
Huntsmen, or Players from the City of Rome. At Rome the Pleasures of the
Festivals, which he Celebrated to the Honor of his Mother-in-Law were
infinite. Amongst the rest he made the People a Largess of Aromatic
Sacrifices: and upon the Festivals to the honor of Trajan he commanded the
several Seats of the Theater to be perfumed with Balm and Saffron. He had Plays
of all sorts acted in the Theater, as anciently. He permitted the Comedians of
the Court to Act in the Plays which were given by private Persons. He exhibited
in the Cirque many wild Beasts, and many times a hundred Lions to be killed at
a time. He often treated the People with Anticks and Masquerades. He often went
to see the Combats of the Gladiators. Amongst the infinite number of Works
which he built in several places, he never caused his own Name to be Engraved
upon any of them, but upon the Temple of Trajan. He re-edified the Pantheon at
Rome, together with the Septa, the Temple of Neptune, a great many Religious
Houses, the Forum of Augustus, and the Bagnio of Agrippa: all which he
Consecrated anew, but still under their Proper, and their Ancient Names. He
built a Bridge over the Tiber, which he called by his own name, together with a
Sepulcher for himself near the Tiber. He translated the Temple of the Goddess
Cybele from the place where it was to another. He did the same to a Colossus
which stood there, where now is the Temple of the City. This was a great and a
laborious Task. It was removed in the Posture in which it was standing; being
raised by the Architect Daetrianus; four and twenty Elephants were Employed
upon it. After he had Re-consecrated this vast Coloss to the Sun, which before
was Consecrated to Nero, whose Head was to it, he proposed to build such
another Monument to the honor of the Moon, by the Hand of the Architect
Apollodorus.

He was most extremely Affable and Courteous in his Discourses which he had
with Persons of low degree; and he hated such as should Envy him a Pleasure
which was so sensible to him, upon the pretense of maintaining the Gravity and
Port of a Prince. At Alexandria, in the Academy, he both proposed several
Questions to be answered by the Professors, and answered others which they
proposed to him. Marius Maximus says, that he was in his own Nature Cruel; but
yet that he did many Pious and obliging things: the reason whereof was his
fear, that he might otherwise have the same Fortune with that which befell
Domitian. Although he did not love Titles and Inscriptions upon his Works, he
however called several Cities, even Carthage it self, and a part of Athens,
together with a multitude of Aqueducts, after his own name. He was the first
who Created the Officer called Advocatus Fisci, that is, Advocate of the
Exchequer. He had a happy Memory, His Memory and Wit.
and admirable Parts. He dictated all his own Speeches, and answered to every
thing himself. There are several of his Jests; being a very pleasant Man in
Conversation. Amongst the rest, this is one: an old Man in Gray Hairs having
asked him something, which he denied him, and coming to ask it again, but with
his Hair tinged first unto a youthful color; says he to him, I have already
denied this thing to your Father. He remembered Persons by their Names so very
well, without the help of a Prompter, that though he had heard them but once,
he presently corrected any one that mistook them. He remembered even the Names
of all the old Soldiers, whom he had disbanded. The Books which he read, though
they were out of the common way, and difficult, he would repeat to you again
almost entirely by heart. At one and the same time, he Writ, Dictated,
hearkened to Discourse, and discoursed himself with his Ministers. He retained
in his mind all the Public Affairs so well, that no diligent Master of a
Family, better knows those of his own House. He loved his Horses and Dogs to
that degree, that he built them Tombs, and writ them Epitaphs. He built a Town,
which he called Adrianotherae, in a certain place, in Moesia; only because he
had hunted with good Success there; at what time he killed a Bear with his own
hand.

He made an exact enquiry always into all things acted by the Presidents of the
Provinces, until he was satisfied in the Truth. He suffered not his Servants,
whom he had Manumitted, to Influence him, nor to be thought to do so. He said,
that it was the easiness of the Princes his Predecessors, which had been the
occasion always of the Vices of those Men. Therefore if any of his pretended to
have gained an Interest in him, he presently punished them. We have an instance
of this Nature, in what he did particularly to one of them, whom he saw out of
a Window walking in the midst betwixt two Senators. It is severe, and yet it
comes something near to a piece of Raillery. He sent one to him, to give him a
Box on the Ear, and to tell him; That it was not for him to walk betwixt two
Senators, to whom he might still be reduced to be a Slave. Of all Dishes of
Meat, his fancy was especially for an Oglio of Pheasants, Brawn, etc. In his
time a Famine, a Plague, and an Earthquake happened. For all which he expiated
the Gods by Sacrifices as much as it was possible; and generously succored the
People and the Cities, that were laid wast by them: There was also an
Inundation of the Tiber. He made several Cities free of Rome, and to others he
remitted their Tribute. No great Expeditions happened under his Reign. His Wars
passed over almost in silence. He was beloved by the Soldiers; because he took
always a great Care of them, and was very bountiful to them. The Parthians were
his steadfast Friends, because he delivered them from the Yoke which Trajan had
imposed upon them. He permitted the Armenians to have a King of their own;
whereas under Trajan they received a Roman Lieutenant. He did not exact of the
Mesopotamians the Tribute which was imposed upon them by Trajan. The Countries
of Albania and Iberia were very affectionate to him: The Kings of the Bactrians
sent their Ambassadors to him, and humbly desired his Friendship.

He oftentimes himself appointed the Persons His Care of the Public.
who should be the Guardians to minors. He took Care of the public Manners, no
less than he did of the Discipline of the Army. He commanded the Senators and
the Roman Gentlemen to appear always in Public in Gowns. Accordingly himself,
when in Italy, went always in a Gown. He received the Senators standing, when
they came to wait upon him at his Banquets. He settled, with the help of the
Magistrates for that purpose, the Expenses, beyond which no one should exceed
in their Feasts; which he reformed according to the ancient Julian Law. He
forbad the Citizens to appear attended with so much heavy Equipages as they
did, coming out of the Country. He suffered not the Baths to be opened before
Two a Clock in the Afternoon, unless it was for the Sick. He was the first of
the Emperors who took of the Knights and Gentlemen to serve him as his
Secretaries. He had a Compassion for such amongst them as were poor, and he
knew were of an innocent Life; as much as on the other hand, he hated a Man who
was grown Rich by Craft. He took great Care to observe the Holy Rites of the
Religion of the Romans: But as for others which were of Foreign Institution, he
slighted them. He officiated in Person as High Priest. He many times had Causes
tried before him at Rome, and in the Provinces; admitting the Consuls, the
Praetors, and some of the best Heads of the Senate to his assistance, as his
Council. He cleansed the Lake Fucinus. He appointed Four Proconsuls for the
Administration of Justice throughout all Italy. At his coming into Africa it
rained, which it not having done in that Country before in five Years; this was
an occasion that he was very dear to that People.

Going always in his Travels in all Parts, with his Head uncovered, and many
times in the greatest Showrs, and the greatest Colds, at last he fell into a
Sickness, which obliged He sickens
him to take to his Bed; and being solicitous about the Person whom he should
make a Choice of for his Successor, his first Thoughts carried him upon
Servianus; but upon a further Consideration, as has been said, he put him to
Death, together with Fuscus, whom he hated upon the account of certain Presages
and Prodigies which had happened, and which might give Fuscus the Encouragement
to dare to hope for the Empire. The like jealousy which he was inclined to
have of Pletorius Nepos, made him, that now he hated him, as much as before he
had loved him. Thus he hated also Terentius Gentianus, and so much the more, as
he knew, that he was beloved by the Senate. In short, he had an aversion to
every one, His Jealousy.
upon whom he looked with an Eye of jealousy, as if they aspired to the Empire
in his place. But still he however stifled all the Motions of that Cruelty
which was in his Heart, till such time as he was brought almost to his last, of
a Flux of Blood at Tivoli; and then he ordered Servianus directly to be put to
Death, pretending he was one who had affected the Empire, having treated the
Servants of the Court with Suppers, and sat himself down in the Chair which is
for the Emperor, and courted the Favor of the Soldiers. Several others at the
same time by his Order, either public or private were put to Death; which is
the less to be admired, because Sabina, his own Consort, died suddenly after,
not without a Suspicion of her being Poisoned by him. In the next place, he
took up a Resolution to adopt Cejonius He adopts Aelius Verus.
Commodus Verus, the Son-in Law of Nigrinus the Conspirator beforementioned;
being a Youth whose Beauty had formerly recommended him to him. So he
accordingly did it, and called him by the Name and Title of Aelius Verus
Caesar, how displeasing soever this was to others. To honor whose Adoption, he
gave the Games of the Cirque to the People, and bestowed upon both the People
and the Soldiers a Free Bounty. He made him a Praetor, and gave him immediately
the Charge of the Province of Pannonia. He created him a Consul, and furnished
his Expenses. He appointed him a second time Consul, till seeing him in so ill
a Condition of Health, as not to be one likely long to live. I have, said he,
depended upon a falling Wall, and the Four Thousand Sesterces are lost, which I
spent upon the People and the Soldiers upon the Adoption of Commodus. And
indeed Commodus was so ill, he was not able so much as to go and return his
Thanks to Hadrian in the Senate, for the Honor which he had done him. And
having taken at last a Dose which happened to be Who dies.
too strong for him, his Illness redoubled, and he fell into a Sleep, in which
he died, the first Day of January; which being a solemn Day for Congratulating
the Emperor upon the New Year, and of making Oblations to the Gods, there was
an Order from Hadrian to put off the Mourning on that Day for his Death.

Aelius Verus Caesar being dead, and Hadrian finding himself still worse, as to
his own Indisposition, He adopts Antoninus
he adopted next Arrius Antoninus, who was afterward called Antoninus the
Pious; that is, he adopted him upon this Condition, that Antoninus should adopt
two others, who were Annius Verus, and Marcus Antoninus: who as they were both
afterward Emperors, were the first Two that sat upon the Throne together, and
reigned in Conjunction with one another. The reason of giving to Arrius
Antoninus the Title of the Pious was, because he showed himself so careful of
his Father-in-Law in his great Years, that he led him by the Hand, as he went
to, or came from the Senate; or according to others, because he was the
Occasion of the Preservation of the Lives of several of the Senators, when
Hadrian was in his Frenzy for killing them; or lastly, because he performed
great Honors to the Memory of Hadrian after his Death. However it is, there
were many who regretted the Adoption of Antoninus, and especially Catilius
Severus, the Governor of Rome; who was diligently paving himself a way to the
Throne, which being discovered, he was deprived of his Place, and another
Person put into it. Hadrian impatient His Impatience in his Sickness.
under the last Pangs of Life, commanded a Servant to run him through with a
Sword. Antoninus being made acquainted with this, went in to him, in Company
with the Officers of the Court, and beseeching him to take his great Sickness,
as it was unavoidable, with more constancy, he was angry at them, and commanded
that the Discoverer of what he had said to the Servant should be put to Death.
But Antoninus saved him, and said, That he should think himself a Parricide, if
he should suffer Hadrian, who had adopted him, to be murdered. Then he made his
last Will, not forgetting therein the Interest of the State. He endeavored,
after he had made his Will, to kill himself with his own Hand. But the Weapon
was wrested from him; and this made him perfectly furious. He commanded a
Physician to give him Poison, who, it is said, chose to kill himself upon the
Place, rather than to Poison his Prince.

About this time, there came a certain Woman, who said, She had been admonished
in a Dream, that she should go and advise Hadrian not to kill himself, because
he would one day recover; which she not observing to do as she was ordered, she
pretended she had been struck blind upon it. However, she said, she was
commanded upon the same Errand again, and told, that when she had done it, and
had kissed the Feet of Hadrian, she should receive her sight; so she did it,
and she received her Sight accordingly, after washing her Eyes in the Water of
the Temple from whence she came. There came out of Pannonia to Hadrian, whilst
he was in a Fever, a Man, who also pretended he had been long blind; who
touching Hadrian, not only received his Sight, but also Hadrian was quitted of
his Fever: that is, says Marius Maximus, These things were all a Fiction, of
the Contrivance of Antoninus, to heal the wounded imagination of Hadrian, and
divert him from murdering himself. Then Hadrian went to Baiae, leaving
Antoninus at Rome to govern: but nothing at that Place doing him good, he sent
for Antoninus to him, and died in his presence at Baiae upon the Sixth Day of
the Ides His Death
of July. A little before his Death, he ordered Servianus, who was Ninety Years
old, as I said, to be killed, only because he should not outlive him, and as he
imagined, gain the Empire. Many others for pretended Offenses he ordered
likewise to be so served; but Antoninus preserved them. Dying, he spoke these
Verses;

Animula vagula, blandula,
Hospes comesque corporis,
Quae nunc abibis in loca?
Pallidula, rigida, nudula,
Nec ut soles dabis jocos.
That is,

My little fluttering flattering Soul,
My Body's constant Guest and Mate
To what gloomy Place do go?
Pale and numm'd, and stripped of all,
No more to jest, as thou have wont.
He was the Author of some Greek Verses of this sort, which were not much
better. He lived Seventy Two Years, Five Months, and Seventeen Days; and
reigned Twenty One Years and Eleven Months. He was tall and well His Personage.
made as to his Person; his Hair naturally Curling; a long Beard, which covered
some Spots which he had upon his Face, and of a robust Constitution. He rid and
walked very well; exercised himself constantly at Arms, and the Javelin; often
hunted, and has killed a Lion with his own hand; his Friends hunted in Company
with him. At his Banquets, he had the divertisements of Tragedies, Comedies,
Dancing, Musicians, Rehearsers, and Poets. He built a House at the City of
Tivoli, which was an extraordinary Structure; and gave the Names of the
Lycaeum, Academia, Prytanaeum, Canopus, Paecile, and Tempe, which are the most
Famous Names of Places abroad, together with others of the Provinces, unto the
several Parts of it; and that he might leave nothing undone to adorn it, he
represented in another Part in Painting, the Infernal Regions. The Signs which
fore-shew'd his Death, were these: As he was in his Prayers His Death
fore-shewed.
on the last Anniversary of his Birth, recommending Antoninus, his Son, to the
Gods, the Lappet of his Robe which he threw over his Head, slipped down of it
self, and left him uncovered. A Ring which had his Effigies cut upon it, fell
in like manner of it self, off his Finger. The Day before that, there came one,
I know not who, scrieking and crying into the Senate; none of the Senate
understood what he said; but yet Hadrian was moved at him, as if he had said
something concerning his Death: Speaking to the Senate, instead of post filii
mei mortem, after the Death of my Son, which he intended to say, he said, post
mortem meam, after my Death. He dreamt that he had asked, and had obtained of
his Father a Potion to make him sleep: Another time, that he was oppressed by a
Lion.

After his Death a great many Persons spoke very hard things against him. The
Senate would have made void his Acts; neither had he been deifyed, but that
Antoninus begged it; who not only did this, but built a Temple to him at
Pozzulo, and instituted in his Honor Games to be celebrated every Five Years,
and appointed him his Priests and Fraternities, with all other things belonging
to the Service of a God. Upon which account it was, as many think at least, and
as I have already intimated, that the Title of the Pious was given to Antoninus.

THE LIFE OF Aelius Verus Caesar.
BY AELIUS SPARTIANUS:
TO THE EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN, AELIUS SPARTIANUS his Slave wishes Health.
AS it is my Design, Sir, humbly to lay at the Feet of your Majesty, who are
the greatest of so many Princes, an Account, not only of those who have sat
upon the Roman Throne before you, as I have already done in the Princes from
Julius Caesar, down unto Hadrina, but of those also who either have been
honored with the Title of Caesar's, or upon any other Account have had the
Reputation to be proposed for the Crown, although they did not afterward
succeed to it. I cannot omit here the Life especially of Aelius Verus Caesar,
who was incorporated into the Royal Family by the adoption of Hadrian, but
enjoyed the Name only of a Caesar, and did not live to be Emperor. And because
there is but little to be said of him, and the Preface ought not to be long in
a such small Narration as this, I immediately proceed.

Cejonius Commodus, or as he is otherwise called Aelius Verus, was adopted by
Hadrian, when the Maladies of that Prince increasing upon him with his Age,
pressed him to appoint his Successor, after his return from his many Travels
about the World. His Life affords us nothing that is more memorable than this,
to wit, His Quality as a Caesar; given him not by a last Will and Testament, as
formerly it The signification of Caesar.
had descended; nor yet was it given him in the manner, in which the Adoption
of Trajan was by Nerva; but so as in our time, Maximianus and Constantius have
been created Caesar's by your Majesty; that is, to signify they are as it were,
the Princes of the Blood, and the appointed Heirs of the Empire. And because it
may be fit that something here should be said concerning the Name of Caesar;
the Opinion of the most Learned about it, is, That he who was the first called
so, was either called Caesar from an Elephant, which in the Language of the
Moors is called Caesa, which he bravely slew in the Field; or because his
Mother dying in her Labor with him, he was Ventre Caeso natus, cut out of her
Belly; or because he was born cum magna Caesarie, with much Hair upon his Head;
or because oculis Caesiis viguerit, he had Gray Eyes, which were bright and
vigorous to a Miracle. However it is, it was certainly a happy Necessity that
was the occasion of a Name so famous, which is like to be as Eterternal as the
World: The person, of whom we at present speak, received it in virtue of his
Adoption by Hadrian. His Father was Cejonius Commodus, whom others call Verus,
others Lucius Aurelius, others Annius. All his His Ancestors. his Wife.
Ancestors were Persons of good Quality, whose Original for the most part was
out of the Country of Hetruria, or the City Faenza. Of which Family we shall
have an occasion to speak more fully hereafter, in the Life of Lucius Aurelius
Cejonius Commodus Verus Antoninus, the Son of this Verus, whom Antoninus the
Pious was commanded to Adopt. For in that Life will be contained every thing
which concerns the Stem of this House, as it gives an account of a Prince who
has a great many more things to be said of him than this here.

So Aelius Verus being Adopted by Hadrian, ^n ^he time, as I have said, that he
was very weak, and was necessarily to think of a Successor, and being
presently made a Praetor upon it, and appointed to be the President of
Pannonia, he was in the next place Created Consul: and in regard that he was
the Person designed for the Empire; he was appointed to be Consul a second
time. A Largess was given to the People upon the occasion of his Adoption, and
three thousand Sestertiums amongst the Soldiers, and the Games of the Cirque
Celebrated; so that nothing was omitted to be done in order to proclaim a
public Joy: and his Interest with Hadrian became His Behavior in his Province.
in fine so great, that he alone obtained from him whatever he desired, upon
the least Letter which he wrote to him. Nor was he wanting to the Province to
which Hadrian preferred him. For although he might not arise to the fame of a
Governour^ of the highest Form; yet he managed his Affairs so well, or rather
so fortunately, that he was esteemed to come up to the next step to that
Character: but on the other Hand he was so sickly and so feeble, that Hadrian
soon repented himself of his Adoption, and perhaps if he could, he would
willingly have removed him again, if he had lived, out of the Royal Family,
because he was often placing his thoughts on others, whom he might admit to the
same. Some, who have been very diligent to Collect the Life of Hadrian, pretend
to say, that Hadrian understood very well the Nativity of Verus; and not so
much approving him for a Person to make an Emperor of, he had Adopted him
rather to serve his Pleasures, and to satisfy a certain Passion which he had
conceived for him: and what upon this occasion was acted betwixt him and Verus,
was kept secret under an Oath. Indeed that Hadrian was really skilful in the
Science of Astrology, is what is so fully attested by Marius Maximus, that he
says, that he Calculated the future Passages of all the days of his own life,
to the very hour in which he dyed.

It is besides certain enough, that Hadrian has many times applied to Verus,
out of Virgil, these words;

Ostendent terris hunc tantum fata, nec ultra
Esse sinent. --
The Fates will, he shall but to the World be shown,
And from its earnest Grasp be hurried soon.
Walking one day in his Garden, he was pleased very much with repeating these
words, and a learned Man being with him, in which sort of Conversation he
delighted, because it was popular, who desired to add, as it is in Virgil,

-- Nimium vobis Romana Propago
Visa potens, superi, propria haec si dona fuissent;
To the Gods the Roman Power would seem too great,
If their own Sway they could perpetuate.
Hadrian replied, that that part of the Character did not consist with the Fate
of Verus; and then he added himself, as follows,

-- Manibus date lilia plenis,
Purpureos spargam flores, animamque nepot is
His saltem accumulem donis, and fungar inani
Munere --
-- Come, hither bring
Handfuls of Lilies, Flowers of purple hew
Upon his baleful Corpse I Will freely strew,
With these poor Gifts I Will please his fleeting Ghost,
Vainly bestowed, alas, on one for ever lost.
Another time he expressed himself concerning him thus, and laughed, I have
Adopted my self a God, and not a Son. Nor was the Event different from the
Horoscope which he had drawn of it: For when Aelius Verus was returned from his
Province, and had provided himself a very fine Oration, which is now Extant;
whether it was of his own Composing, or that his Secretaries, or his
Rhetoricians did it for him, in which, upon the Calends of January he was to
have returned his thanks to Hadrian for the honor which he had done him; he
instead of that died upon His Death.
that very day, and it was forbidden by Hadrian to observe the Mourning for him
then, because of the Vows and the Congratulations intervening, which are the
peculiar business Dedicated to the first day of January.

He was one who passed his time in a course His Character.
of Pleasure, and had been instructed in Letters; but more acceptable unto
Hadrian, at least as some would have it, more for the sake of his Beauty, than
any thing else. He had not been long at the Court. His private life, as it was
not admirable nor much to be commended for his Virtues; so neither was it much
subject to be reproached. He was mindful of the Family into which he was
Adopted. Went always neat and proper in his Dress; had the Mien and Air of a
Prince, an obliging Aspect, a handsome way of expressing himself, ready at the
making of a Verse, and no unfit Person for the Service of the State. Those who
have written his life, have made mention of a great many Pleasures which he His
Pleasures.
delighted in; and which although they are not infamous, yet perhaps he was a
little too much addicted to them. The Oglio of Pheasants, Brawn, etc. which was
Hadrians great Dish, is said to have been of the invention first of Aelius
Verus. And another sort of Pleasure of his invention was this: he made himself
a Bed with four Heads to it; that is to every Quarter of it a Head, with
Curtains all about of fine Network: and strewing it full of the Leaves of
picked Roses, there he lay enjoying his Concubines, and his Company, covered
with a Sheet of Flowers, and perfumed with the Odours of Persia. He had always
the Books of Ovid's Amorum upon the Bed with him, together with Martial the
Epigrammatist, who he said, was his Virgil. And not to omit his other, though
more inconsiderable Actions; he gave his Lackeys and his Courriers Wings to
their Clothes, like so many Cupids; and he called them by the names of the
Winds. One he called Boreas, another Notus, another Aquilo or Circius, and so
of the rest: and he made them run perpetually, and unmercifully. He told his
Wife, when she complained, it is said, to him, of the liberties which he took
with other Women, A Wife was a Name of Honor, but not of Pleasure; you will
give me leave, Madam, to have my Pleasures therefore elsewhere. His Son was
Antoninus Verus; who was Adopted at the same time with Mareus Antoninus; which
two, Verus and Marcus, Reigning in Conjunction afterward with one another, are
they who are called the Duo Augusti, in the Calendars of the Consuls: Some of
which Calendars have taken the Consulships of the Duo Augusti for the Era,
from which they Commence their Accounts of the Consuls.

At the time of his Adoption, Hadrian spent an Infinite deal of Money upon the
Soldiers and the People. But when he saw him so sickly, and so far gone in
health, that he had not the force left to manage a Shield, I have lost, says
he, the four thousand Sestertiums, which I spent upon the Soldiers and the
People: I have leaned my self against a falling Wall, and upon a Man, who is so
far from being able to support the weight of the State, that he is no support
to my self. This it seems he spoke to an Officer of the Household, who repeated
it again, till it came to the Ears of Aelius Verus: who growing every day worse
and worse with the concern to be sensible, that he was so despaired of, Hadrian
turned that Officer for discovering it, out of his place; and was ^illing to
seem to mitigate, what he had said; but this was all one. For in fine, as we
have already said, Lucius Cejonius Commodus Verus Aelius Caesar, for he was
called by all these names, died; and was buried with all the Ceremonies
observed at the Funerals of Princes; Honor done him at his Funerals.
the only Royal honor, which he ever had, being those at his death. Hadrian,
who regretted his death like a good Father, was a long time afterward dubious
upon what he should do: at last he Adopted Antoninus the Pious, as he was
called; upon whom he imposed this condition, that Antoninus should likewise
Adopt Marcus and Verus, and should Marry his Daughter, not to Marcus, but to
Verus. And this was one of the last things he spoke to. He had been used to
say; that a Prince ought to dye sound of mind. Then he grew worse, and the
Complication of his Maladies carried him off.

He had ordered large Statues to be set up in all parts to the honor of Aelius
Verus Caesar, in some Cities and Temples. Also he admitted his Son, whom he had
obliged Antoninus to Adopt, into the Royal Family, as his own Grandson; often
saying, Let the Empire have all that it can of Aelius Verus. Verus the Son
brought no small Luster to the Imperial Family, especially by his Clemency.
This is what I have thought fit to observe concerning Aelius Verus Caesar: whom
I would not omit, because I have made it my resolution to write the History of
all those, who since Julius Caesar, the Emperor, have been either called
Emperors, or Caesar's, or have been Adopted into the Imperial Family, and
Consecrated the Sons or Kinsmen of Emperors, by the name of Caesar's. In which,
though there is no necessity that obliges me to it, as some think, I shall
satisfy, at least, my own Inclinations, whatever I do as to others.

THE Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR ANTONINUS the Prous. Dedicated to the
EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN.
By JULIUS CAPITOLINUS.
TItus Aurelius Fulvius Bononius Antoninus, called the Pious, derived his
Origin by his Father's side, from Nismes in Languedoc. His Grandfather by his
Father's side His Extraction.
was Titus Aurelius Fulvius, who through several other Honors, came to be
twice a Consul, and to be the Governor of the City of Rome. His Father was
Aurelius Fulvius, who was also a Consul, and a Person of great Virtue and
Integrity. His Mother was Arria Fadilla. His Grandmother by his Mother's side,
Bojonia Procilla. His Grandfather by the same side, Arrius Antoninus who was
twice Consul, and a holy virtuous Man; who instead of Congratulating,
compassionated Nerva, to see him advanced to that difficult Station of a
Prince. His Wife's Father was Julius Lupus, a Consul. His Sister, by the same
Venture, was Julia Fadilla. His Wife was Annia Faustina: by whom he had two Sons
and two Daughter. The eldest Daughter married Zamia Syllanus: the younger to
Marcus Antoninus. Antoninus Pius was born at a Seat near Lavinia, in the
Campagna di Roma, upon the thirteenth of the Calends of October, in the
Consulships of Domitian and Cornelius Dolabella; which was then the twelfth
time of the Consulship of Domitian. He was brought up at another Seat, called
Laurium, upon the Aurelian way: where he afterward built a Palace, which has
some remains of it, standing at this day. He passed his Infancy hetwixt his two
Grandfathers, sometimes with the one, and sometimes the other; and being very
dutiful and observant to all his Relations, several of them left their Estates
to him, which made him very Rich.

He was handsome as to his Person, full of His Personage and Conditions.
Wit, of a sweet and courteous Behavior, a generous Countenance, Easy,
Eloquent, and of a polite Literature. He was Sober, a great lover of the
Country and Agriculture; Mild, Bountiful; not coveting other Men's Goods;
Discreet, and all this without Vanity. He was every thing, which is
commendable; and may be very justly compared with Numa Pompilius, according to
the Opinion of most good Men. The Senate conferred upon him Why surnamed the
Pious.
the Title of the Pious, either because he was used to lead by the Hand, in
their sight, his decrepit Father-in-Law to and from the Senate; (though it would,
be rather, an impious thing not to discharge such a Devoir, than it is an
Argument of great Piety to do it;) or because it was he, who had preserved the
lives of those whom Hadrian in his Frenzy had commanded to be murdered; or
because he decreed such infinite and unexpected Honors, to Hadrian his Father,
after his death; or because when Hadrian would have killed himself, he hindered
him from it with all the care he could; or lastly, because he was in his Nature
a most mild Person, and had done nothing that was disoblinging or Cruel in all
his life. He lent out his Money at the small Interest of four per Cent. to
assist the Poor in their Occasions, with that Fortune which he had. He was a
generous Questor; splendid and noble when he was a Praetor, and Consul in
Conjunction with Catilius Severus. He lived for the most part in the Country,
all the time he was a private man; but wherever he was, he was in great renown.
So that when Hadrian committed the Affairs of Italy unto the Administration of
four Proconsuls, he made a choice of him to be one of them, to Govern in that
part where he had the greatest Estate: in which he equally consulted the Honor
and the Repose of this great Person.

He received an Omen of his future Succession to the Empire, in the time of
this his Administration. Omens of his Succession to the Empire.
For amongst the Acclamations which were made to him, as he sat upon the Bench
in the Court, some cried, Auguste, Dii te servent; The Gods save your Majest^
Next he was made the Proconsul of Asia: where he behaved himself so well, that
he alone out-did his Grandfather Arrius Antoninus; the Equity of whose
Government no Person had ever surpassed before. In this Proconsulship he
received another good Omen of his future Reign. The Priests, at the City of
Tralles in Lydia, who according to Custom saluted the Proconsuls upon their
arrival there with an Ave Proconsul, did not say Ave Proconsul to Antoninus,
but Ave Imperator, Hail, O Emperor. At the City Ciziqua upon the Propontis, a
Crown which before stood upon the Head of an Image of a God, was translated
from thence, and found upon a Statue of Antoninus. His Statues throughout all
the Country of Hetruria were covered with swarms of Bees. As he went to Asia,
he lost his eldest Daughter. His Wife, they say; 'was one that contracted a
great many Censures, by the too great Liberties which she allowd herself in her
Life and Conversation; which Antoninus dissembled as much as he could; but not
without some trouble to support her Credit. After his Proconsulship, he lived
ordinarily at Rome: where he was of the Council to Hadrian; and in all things
upon which Hadrian consulted him, he made appear the sweetness of his
Sentiments; and gave his Verdict always on the most mild and merciful side.

The occasion of his Adoption was thus, His Adoption.
When Aelius Verus Caesar died, whom Hadrian had Adopted in order to succeed in
the Empire, a day being appointed for the Senate to Assemble; Antoninus came
amongst the rest, leading and supporting by the Hand his decrepit
Father-in-Law; which was so agreeable a sight, that Hadrian, some say, Adopted
him for that very reason. But yet this could not be all: because Antoninus was
one, who challenged his consideration upon other accounts. For he had always
executed his part in the Government very well, and in his Proconsulship had
approved himself a Person of great Fidelity and Ability. Therefore when Hadrian
had declared to the World that it was his intention to Adopt him, he took a
time to deliberate with himself, whether he should consent to it, or no. This
Condition was imposed upon him; that as Hadrian did Adopt him, so he should
Adopt Marcus Antoninus, who was his Wife's Brother's Son; and Lucius Verus, who
was afterward called Verus Antoninus, the Son of Aelius Verus Caesar who had
been the first Adopted by Hadrian. So Antoninus was Adopted upon the fifth of
the Calends of March; and having thanked Hadrian in the Senate for the great
honor which he had done him; he received the Proconsular and the Tribunitian
Powers upon him, as a Colleague in the Empire with his Father. Then he
presented the Soldiers and the People with a Largess upon this occasion; he
g^ve them besides, what his Father Hadrian promised them. He contributed a
great deal toward the Works of Hadrian. The Tribute which upon the occasion of
his Adoption was presented him by Italy and the Provinces, h^ remitted wholly
to the first, and a Moiety of it to the latter: and he was most religiously
Observant of Hadrian all the time that they afterward lived together.

When Hadrian died at Baiae, Antotinus removed His Behavior when Emperor.
his Relics with all due Respect and Ceremony to Rome: where he laid him in
State in the Gardens of Domitian; and though contrary to the general Opinion,
he caused him to be received as a God. The Senate gave to Faustina, who was the
Consort of Antoninus, the Title of Augusta, which he permitted. To himself they
gave the Title of Pius; he accepted it. He accepted very freely the Statues,
which they likewise decreed to the honor of his deceased Father, Mother,
Grandfathers, and Brothers. He accepted the Games of the Cirque, which were
appointed to Celebrate his Birthday. But other Honors which they offered him
he refused. He hung up a most magnificent Shield to the honor of Hadrian, and
appointed him his Priests. He removed none of those, out of their Places, after
he was Emperor, who had been promoted by Hadrian. He continued the same
Persons Presidents and Governors, seven or nine year's together, if they
deserved it, he was so little given to change. He made many Wars by his
Lieutenants. He overcame the Britains by Lollius Urbicus: who at the same time
repulsed the Barbarians, and built another Wall, which was of Turf, in that
Country, for a Partition betwixt the Roman-Britains and them. He forced the
Moors to sue to him for a Peace; he Germans, the Daci, and several other
Nations. The Jews in their Rebellion were repressed by his Presidents, and his
Commanders. He repressed the rebellious in Achaia and Egypt; and the Alani in
their Attempts were constrained to contain themselves within due Bounds.

He ordered that his Receivers should proceed with all moderation in gathering
the Tribute of the Provinces. If they exceeded their proper limits, he called
them by his Authority to an account; because he was never pleased with a Gain,
by which the Subject was oppressed. He was always willing to hearken to the
Complaints, which were made against his Officers and his Receivers. He moved
the Senate for a full Indemnity for those whom Hadrian had in his Frenzy
condemned to die; because he said, Hadrian himself, had he lived, would have
done it. He mixed the Grandeur and the Majesty of an Emperor with all the
Civility of a Gentleman; which the more added to his Grandeur. His method as to
Business, was, not to pass it through the Hands of others, but to speak to the
Party himself: which disabled the Courtiers from amusing and cheating People
out of their Money, at any time, with empty Pretenses. He paid as great a
respect to the Senate, when Emperor, as he could wish, when he was a Private
Man, it should receive from any other Prince. The Title of Pater Patriae, or
Father of his Country; which the Senate gave him, but which he had declined to
accept in the beginning, he afterward received with a great deal of thanks. In
the third Year of Honor done to
his Reign he lost his Consort Faustina. The Senate Consecrated her a Goddess.
They appointed her a Temple and Priestesses; Games in her honor, and Statues
of Gold and Silver. And Antoninus ordered that her Effigies should be carried
in the Procession always to the Games of the Cirque. He accepted the honor of
having his own Statue set up in Gold, which the Senate had decreed him. He
created Marcus Antoninus from a Quaestor a Consul, at the Prayer of the Senate.
He created Annius Verus, who was afterward called Verus Antoninus, a Quaestor
before the due time by the Law. He Enacted nothing, neither concerning the
Provinces, nor any other Affairs without the advice of his Ministers, and then
he formed his Constitutions according to their Judgments. He permitted himself
to be seen by his Friends, undressed; and sometimes wore within his House,
Clothes like any private Man.

So great was his Diligence, and so entire his His Diligence and Moderation.
Application to Business, that he took a Care of all Persons and all Things, as
particularly as though they were his own. All the Provinces flourished under him:
He put down the Trade of Informers. Never fewer Estates were confiscated: The
only Person proscribed, was Attilius Tatianus, who was convicted of a Design
upon the Empire. For Antoninus forbad the Senate to enquire into his
Accomplices, and continued his Kindness even to his Son, always in all things.
It is true, Priscianus died also, for having favored him: But his Death was
what he voluntarily committed upon himself; and he suffered no more search to
be made into that Conspiracy. The Table of His Frugality.
Antoninus was such, as to be Rich without Extravagance, and Frugal without any
unhandsomeness: His own Servants furnished it: His own Fowlers, Fishers, and
Huntsmen. He exposed the use of his own Bath to the People, gratis; and altered
in nothing from the Customs of his private Life. He subtracted Pensions from
such as he saw did nothing for them to deserve them; because he said, It was
most absurd and cruel, to suffer that a State should be pilled and gnawed by
Persons who contribute nothing to it by their Service, but live in Idleness. He
diminished the Pension of Mesomedes, the Lyrick Poet of Crete. He informed
himself in the Accounts of all the Provinces and their Tribute perfectly well.
He gave his Daughter his Paternal Estate, but yet so, as to hold it of the
Crown. He sold such of the Furniture of the Palace, and all Superfluities, as
had only served for the Luxury of former Emperors; and lived by times,
according to the Season, at his own private Seats. He took no Journeys, but to
go to his own Lands in Campania; because he said, The Retinue of a Prince is
always heavy upon the Country through which he passes, let him be as sparing as
he can. Nevertheless, his Authority was great amongst all Foreign Nations,
whilst he kept himself in repose at Rome, the Heart and Center, as it were, of
the Empire; where by his Expresses, he easily received the News of all Parts.
He continued to give Largesses to the People, and the Soldiers. He made a
charitable Establishment for the Maintenance of certain young Children, whom he
called by the Name of Faustina's Children, in the memory of his Consort. His
Works at this day extant at Rome, are these; His public Works
a Temple to the Honor of Hadriun: The Gracostadium, after a Fire, he rebuilt:
He repaired the Amphitheatre, the Sepulcher of Hadrian, the Temple of Agrippa,
and the Bridge elsewhere called Pons Sublicius over the Tyber: he repaired the
Light-Tower at the Port of Gajetta, and the Harbor at Terracina; as also the
Bagnio at Ostia, the Aqueduct at Antium, and the Temples of Lavinia. He
furnished several Cities with Money, either to make themselves. New Works, or
to restore their Old: He gave to Magistrates and to the S^natours Money, to
enable them the better to discharge their Functions with Honor. He refused the
Inheritances which were left him, where there were Children to enjoy the same.
He never turned a good Officer out of his Place, to put in another: Orphitus
the Governor of the City desired leave to lay his down: Gavius Maximus was
Twenty Years together, the Captain of the Guards under him; a severe Man:
Succeeded afterward by Tatius Maximus. After whose Death he made Two Captains
of the Guards, who were Fabius Repentinus, and Cornelius Victorius: Some said,
That a Mistress of Antoninus was the cause of the Preferment of the first. No
Senator was put to Death under this Prince. Nay, one who had confessed himself
a Parricide, and by the Laws of Nature, deserved not to live, was banished into
a Desert Island, rather than to execute him. He relieved in a Famine, the want
of Corn, Wine and Oil, amongst the People, at the Expense of his own Coffers;
by buying those Commodities up, and giving them to the People for nothing.

The Prodigies, and the Calamities which Calamities in his Reign.
happened in his time were these; the Famine we now mentioned; then the Cirque
fell into ruin; an Earthquake destroyed the Towns of the Island of Rhodes, and
others in Asia, which he rebuilt to admiration; a Fire at Rome consumed Three
Hundred and Forty great Houses, which he rebuilt; a Fire at the City Narbon in
Languedoc; another at Antioch; another in the Forum at Carthage. There was also
an Inundation of the Tyber, and a Blazing-Star appeared. Prodigies.
A Boy was born with Two Heads, and a Woman was delivered of Five Boys at a
Birth. A Snake of a great Magnitude was seen in Arabia, which had devoured one
half of its own Body from the Tail. A Pestilence in Arabia. Four wild Lions in
Arabia came tame to the hand, and suffered themselves to be taken.

Pharasmanes the King of Iberia came to Rome Respect of foreign Princes to him.
to see Antoninus, and paid him a greater Respect than he had done to Hadrian.
He constituted Pacorus King of the Lazi, a People near Iberia. He obliged the
King of Parthia to withdraw his War against Armenia, by only his Letter. King
Abgarus out of the East came to Rome to wait upon him, induced by only the
Authority of his Name. He arbitrated Differences betwixt Kings and Kings. The
King of Parthia desired him to restore the Chair of State which had been
carried away from that Kingdom by Trajan: But this he refused. He restored
Rimethalces unto the Government of the Bosphorani upon the Maeotis, after a
hearing of the Affair betwixt the Procurator there and him. He sent Succors by
the Euxine Sea to the People of Olbiopolis upon the Nieper, to assist them
against the Tartars; and he reduced the Tartars to give Hostages to the
Olbiopolites for the performance of the Conditions of Peace. No Emperor had
ever that Authority, as he, amongst Foreign Nations. He was always a Lover of
Peace, and often used that Sentence of Scipio, That he had rather save one
Subject, than kill a Thousand of the Enemy.

The Senate had decreed, that the Months of September and October should
thenceforth be called Antoninus and Faustinus, in Honor of him and his
Consort: But this Honor he refused. He celebrated the Espousals of his
Daughter Faustina with Marcus Antoninus, so Nobly, that he gave the Soldiers a
great Bounty upon that occasion. He created Verus Antoninus, after his
Questorship, a Consul. He sent for Apollonius the Stoic, as far as from the
City Chalcis in Syria, to educate Marcus Antoninus; and having invited him to
the Court, in order to deliver his Scholar to him, and Apollonius making
Answer, That the Master was not to come to the Scholar, but the Scholar to the
Master; he smiled and said, As if it was easier for Apollonius to come His
Candor.
from Chalcis to Rome, than to come from his Lodgings to the Court. The Avarice
of which Philosopher, he remarked by his acceptance of the Recompenses which
were promised him. Amongst other Arguments of the Piety of Antoninus, this is
one; that as Marcus Antoninus was weeping for the Death of one who had been his
Educator, and the Courtiers would have diverted him from it, as an unsuitable
Ostentation of the Kindness which he had for him, he said to them, Give him
leave to be, as he is, a Man; for neither Philosophy nor an Empire takes our
Natural Affections from us. The Officers of the Provinces in his time, received
from him, not only great Presents, but such as had not been Consuls, he
honored with the Marks of those that had. But if he found them guilty of
Extortion and Bribery, though he restored the Fortunes of Fathers unto the
Children, yet he did it under this Condition; that the Children should restore
to the Provinces all that their Fathers had unjustly stolen from thence. He had
all the Inclinations imaginable to Acts of Grace and Pardon. In the public
Shows which he gave the People, he produced Elephants, Rhinocerots, Crocodiles,
Sea-Horses, Tigers, and all sorts of Beasts from all Parts of the World. He
has exposed a Hundred Lions together at one Show.

His behavior toward his Friends in his Reign, was just the same as before,
when he was a private Person; and neither they, not his Servants, whom he
manumitted, pretended to make any Gain to themselves of their Interest in him;
particularly, he was very strict with the Latter. He was much delighted with
His Recreations.
the Diversions of the Comedians, and in Fishing, Hunting, Walking, and Talking
with his Ministers, to whose Entertainments he went; and sometimes to the
Feasts of the Vintage. He gave Honors and Recompenses in Money, in the
Provinces, to the Rhetoricians and the Philosophers. The Speeches which are
extant under his Name, are said by many to have been of the Composition of
another: but Marius Maximus says they are truly his own. He made Entertainments
for his Friends in particular, and in public. He never Sacrificed by a Proxy,
unless he was Sick. When he desired any Honor for himself or his Sons, he did
all things as a private Candidate in the same Case. He dined with his Ministers
many times at their Houses. He went one time to see the House of Omulus; where
admiring the Porphyry-Pillars which he had, and asking him from whence he
procured them, Omulus said, When you came, Sir, into a Strangers House, you are
to be both Dumb and Deaf. He took this patiently, as he did a great many other
Jests of the same Person.

He made diverse Laws, in which he served His Laws.
himself of the best Lawyers of his time, who were Vinidius Verus, Salvius
Valens, Volusius Metianus, Ulpius Marcellus, and Jabolenus. He put an end to
whatever Seditions in any Part arose; not by Force and Cruelty, but by the
Modesty and the Gravity of his Judgments. He prohibited the burying of the Dead
within the City. He limited the Expenses of the Games of the Gladiators. He
facilitated things for the convenience of Traveling with all the Care he
could. He gave Reasons for every thing he did, either to the Senate or in his
Edicts. He died in his Seventieth Year, but was His Death.
as much lamented, then, as if it had been in the flower of his Age: And the
manner of his Death, they say, was this; he had eaten with great Appetite at
Supper, of the Cheese which is made upon the Alps, but he brought it up again
in the Night, and the next Day was taken with a Fever; the third Day being
worse, he recommended the Empire, and the Care of his Daughter unto Marcus
Antoninus, in the presence of the Court. Then he ordered the Golden Image of
Fortune, which always stands in the Emperor's Bedchamber, to be removed out of
his Room into that of Marcus Antoninus. Then he gave the word to the Tribune,
which was Equanimity; and turning himself as it were to sleep, he died at his
own Seat at Laurium. He was lightheaded in his Fever; at which times, all his
Discourse was concerning the State, and the Kings who had given him an occasion
of Displeasure. He left his Paternal Estate to his Daughter, and Legacies by
his Will to all his Domestics.

He was tall and graceful; but being apt to His Personage.
stoop a little in his old Age, he then wore a pair of Bodice on purpose to
keep himself strait. In a morning, when he grew in years, before he was
visited, he eat a little dry Bread for his Health. He spoke a little broad, but
yet agreeably enough The Senate made him a God, in which all People were
forward to concur with them, because his Goodness, Clemency, Wit, and
Sanctimony were universally esteemed. They decreed him all the Honors which
had ever been bestowed upon the best Princes. They appointed him an Order of
Priests of his own Name, a Temple, and the Honor of the Games of the Cirque.
He was absolutely the only one of all the Emperors who lived without having
ever shed the Blood either of Citizen or Enemy; and as his Reign was attended
with the same Felicity and Goodness, the same Security and Religiousness, with
that of Numa Pompilius, he may very well be put in the Comparison with that
Prince. He reigned Twenty Three Years.

THE A. Christi CLXII.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, The PHILOSOPHER.
BY JULIUS CAPITOLINUS: Addressed to the EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN.
MArcus Antoninus was a Lover of Wisdom, a Philosophical Man all his time, and
the best, as to the Sanctity of his Life, of all the Emperors before him: His
Father was Annius Verus, who died in his Praetorship: His Extraction.
His Grandfather was another Annius Verus, who was twice Consul, and the
Governor of the City of Rome; having been admitted amongst the Patricians by
Vespasian and Titus, when they were Censours. His Uncle by his Father's side
was Annius Libo, a Consul; the Empress Galeria Faustina was his Aunt: his
Mother was Domitia Calvilla, the Daughter of Calvisius Tullus, who was twice
Consul: his Father's Grandfather was Annius Verus, originally of Succubae in
Spain, who was a Praetor and a Senator: his Mother's Grandfather was Catilius
Severus, who was twice Consul, and Governor of Rome: his Grandmother by his
Father's side was Rupilia Faustina the Daughter of Rupilius Bonus, who was a
Consul also.

Marcus Antoninus was born at Rome, upon Mount Caelius, in the Gardens (...)e,
the Sixth of the Calends of May, under the Consulships of his Grandfather and
Augur, which was then the Second Consulship of his Grandfather. His Family, if
we carry it up to the highest, is proved to partake of the Blood of Numa
Pompilius by his Father's side, according to Marius Maximus; and by his
Mother's, to come from Malennius, a King of the ancient Salentini in Naples,
who was the Son of Dasumnus, who built Lopiae. He was brought up where he was
born, and partly in the House of his Grandfather Verus, hard by the Lateran
Palace. He had a Sister who was younger than he, called Annia Cornificia. His
Wife was Annia Faustina, who was his Cousin German by his Mother's side. At
first his Name was Annius Verus, from his Father and his Grandfather. Hadrian
called him Annius Verissimus, because of the Integrity of his Temper. But
afterward he re-assured his first Name again of Annius Verus, because his
Grandfather (his Father dying) adopted him, and educated him.

He was from his first Infancy grave and serious; and after he was out of those
Years in which Children are in the hands of the Women, His Education.
he was delivered to the Tuition of great Masters, who prepared his way for
Philosophy. His Masters to teach him his first Elements of Letters, were
Euphorion the Grammarian, Geminus a Comedian, and Andron, who was both a
Musician and a Geometrician. As these Three were they, who laid the Foundation
for him to (...)eed to all other Learning, so he ever had (...) ^n very great
Respect. His Masters to teach him Grammar were, for the Greek, Alexander; for
the Latin, Trosius Aper, Pollio, and Eutychius Proculus of Sicca in Africa.
His-Masters to teach him Rhetoric, were for the Greek, Annius Marcus, Caninius
Celer, and Herodes Atticus; for the Latin, Fronto Cornelius; amongst all which,
he had a particular Respect for Fronto, and desired the Senate to set up his
Statue; and Proculus he advanced to be a Proconsul. He applied himself
extremely to the Study of Philosophy, whilst he was but yet a Youth. In his
Twelfth Year he entered And Proficiency.
himself amongst the Philosophers, wore their Habit, practiced their
Severities, studied as they did, lay upon the Ground, and was with great
Difficulty persuaded by his Mother to make use of an ordinary Couch. Commodus,
whose Daughter it was designed that he should marry, was another of his
Masters; and also Apollonius a Stoic Philosopher of Chalcis in Syria.

Such was his great Love to the Study of Philosophy, that after his adoption
into the Imperial Family, he went himself to the House of Apollonius to learn
there of him. He likewise went to hear the Dictates of Sextus a Philosopher of
Chaeronea in Beotia, and the Kinsman of Plutarch, as also Junius Rusticus,
Claudius Maximus, and Cinsia Catullus, all Stoics. For the Peripatetick
Philosophy he heard Claudius Severus. Amongst these, he had particularly a
Respect His Respect for his Preceptors.
for Junius Rusticus, and followed him; being one who was not only excellent at
the Stoic Philosophy, but a very understanding Person besides, whether in
Peace or War. With him he communicated all his public and private Counsels: He
saluted him always before he did the Captain of the Guards: He made him twice
Consul, and after his Death, desired the Senate to set up his Statue. He had
that great Honor for his other Masters, that he set up their Images in Gold in
his Closet, and visited their Sepulchers, which he adorned with Crowns, and
Victims, and Flowers. To all this, he studied the Law, in which he heard the
Dictates of Lucius Volusius Metianus. In fine, the Labor and the Travel which
he bestowed in Study, really affected his Health; his excess in it, was the
only Fault of his Youth. He went often to the Declamations at the Public
Schools. His fellow Students, whom he more particularly loved, were Sejus
Fuscianus, and Aufidius Victorinus, of the Senatorian Families: and Baebius
Longus, and Calenus, of the Gentlemen: to whom he was very generous, and such
as he could not for the condition of their lives prefer to Employments, he
enriched by other means.

He was Educated in some sort in the bosom of Hadrian, who called him, as I
have said, Annius Verissimus, and at six years of Age conferred a mark of
Honor upon him, and at eight years of Age, put him into the College of the
Priests of Mars: in which he passed through the several Functions and Offices
of that Order, not without receiving an Omen there of his succession to the
Empire. He put on the Roman, that is, the Man's Gown in his fifteenth year; and
presently the He is Contracted.
Daughter of Lucius Cejonius Commodus was Contracted to him, according to the
last Will of Hadrian. He was left the Governor of Rome, in the interim whilst
the Consuls went to the Sacrifices of the Latinae Feriae upon Mount Alban. In
which honor he acquitted himself to the general Approbation. He released all
his Paternal Estate to his Sister. His Mother would have advised him to divide
it only; but he said, he was contented with the Estate of his Grandfather; and
if she pleased, she also might give his Sister her Estate to make her the
better match for her Husband: He had so much complaisance for others, that he
suffered himself to be persuaded, sometimes against his will, to go either to
the Chases of the Amphitheatre, or the Plays of the Stage, or other Shows. He
learnt Painting, in which his Master was Diognetus. He His Exercises and
Character.
loved the Games of Fencing, Wrestling, Running, Fowling and Hunting, for
Exercise. He played at the Ball. But above all these things the study of
Philosophy gained his Heart; and rendered him perfectly grave and serious. Not
but that yet he was in all respects obliging and courteous to every one;
especially his Friends, and such as were but in the least known to him. So that
he was Reserved without Opiniatrety, Modest without Flatness, and Grave without
Austereness.

This being his Character, when Hadrian, after the death of Aelius Verus Caesar
was to choose some other Person to be his Successor in the Empire, which this
Youth was not Proper for as yet, upon the account of his Age, being then only
eighteen years old; he Adopted Antoninus the Pious, who was Uncle to him, under
a condition that Pius should Adopt Marcus, and that Marcus should Adopt Lucius
Commodus Verus. Marcus received His Adoption.
the News of his Adoption, more with a Consternation, than Joy; and when he was
ordered to be removed into a House of Hadrian's, it was with an unwilling mind,
that he took his leave of that of his Mother. Insomuch that his Servants asking
him, why he came so sad into the Royal Family, he reasoned with them upon the
Evils which are contained in the life of a Prince. Then he began first to be
called, instead of Annius, Marcus Aurelius; because by the Right of his
Adoption he was Translated into the Aurelian Family, that is, into that of
Antoninus Pius. This was in the eighteenth year of his Age, under the Second
Consulship of Antoninus his (now) Father: and the Senate dispensing with him,
as to that Age, at the request of Hadrian he was made a Quaestor. He paid to
all his Relations, after he was Adopted, the same Respects altogether, as
before. He observed his Studies as much, and was as good a Husband of his
Expenses: and he resigned himself wholly both to act, speak, and think,
according to the instructions of his Father.

When Hadrian dyed at Baiae, and Pius was also gone thither to remove his Body
to Rome; Marcus Antoninus was left at Rome to order the Funeral Obsequies of
his Grandfather; and being then Quaestor, he exhibited to the People the Games
of the Gladiatours. Now Hadrian had ordered, when he Adopted Antoninus Pius,
that Pius should Marry his Daughter to Verus the Son of Aelius Verus Caesar,
and that the Daughter of Lucius Cejonius Commodus should Marry Marcus
Antoninus. But Verus was not as yet of an Age for that Daughter. Therefore when
Hadrian was dead, it was thought fit by Pius and his Empress, to break off the
Match of Marcus Antoninus with the Daughter of Commodus, and to Marry their own
Daughter Faustina to him; to which Marcus consented. Hereupon Pius advanced
him, from a Quaestor, to be Consul in Conjunction with himself, and gave him
the Title of Caesar. He made him one of the six Seviri; and honored him with
his presence at his Public Games. He appointed his Apartments in the Court,
and ordered him to be there attended (contrary to his own Inclination) with all
Pomp and Ceremony. He passed him through the Colleges of the Priests, according
to the desire of the Senate. He made him a second time Consul with himself;
when himself entered upon his fourth Consulship. But at the same time that
Marcus was possessed of these high Honors, and assisted at all things which
his Father did in order to be formed to the Government of the Empire, he went
passionately nevertheless to his Studies. He married Faustina, His wife and
Relations.
by whom he had a Daughter. Then the Tribunitian, and the Proconsular Powers
were given him, and the right of a fifth Reference: so that his Interest became
so great, that his Father never easily Promoted any one without him. He was
always the most dutiful to his Father, that it was possible for any one to be;
howsoever some were willing to whisper Pius in the Ear with things against him;
particularly Valerius Omulus; who one day taking notice of Calvilla the Mother
of Marcus, as she was at her Devotions in a Garden before an Image of Apollo,
says he to Pius, That Lady there is now Praying for your death, and for the
Reign of her Son. But this was altogether of no weight with him: because he ^aw
the great Probity of Marcus, and with what Modesty he carried himself under the
Honor of his Ascension to the degree of a Prince.

He was so careful to weigh all things well, to preserve his Reputation, that
in his youthful years he always ordered his Servants to do nothing that was
hard upon any body; and sometimes when Estates were left to him, he refused
them, if he could, to give them to the next of the Family, He lived three and
twenty years together in the Court with his Father, and yet he was every day
beloved more and more; and in all that time he was not absent from him above
two nights. Wherefore when Antoninus Pius came to dye, he called his Ministers
and his Friends about him; and recommended to them all, Marcus, as his
Successor in the Empire. He gave the Tribune the Word, which was Aequanimity,
and immediately he ordered the Golden Image of Fortune, which stood in his
Bedchamber, to be translated into the Bedchamber of Marcus. After the death of
Pius, the Senate constraining He is created Emperor, and Verus his Partner.
Marcus to take the Public Government upon him, he nominated Verus to be his
Partner in the same; declaring him Caesar and Emperor; from which time they
equally began to Reign together, and were the first two Emperors, who sat at
once upon the Throne of Rome. He called himself by the name of Marcus
Antoninus; and he called his Brother Emperor by the name of Verus Antoninus;
to whom he Contracted his Daughter Lucilla For an Act of goodness upon the
occasion of this Conjunction, they enlarged the Charity of their Predecessors,
for the Maintenance of the Children of poor Families, and added other Pensions
to them. From the Senate, after having finished their Affairs there, they both
went together to the Camp of the Guards: where they promised the Soldiers a
Bounty of twenty thousand Sesterces, and to the Officers proportionably, as
usual, upon the occasion of their joint Reigns. They made a magnificent Funeral
for their Father, whom they interred in the Sepulcher of Hadrian. They
proceeded to Consecrate him a God. Each made an Oration in Public in his
Praise; and having appointed him his Order of Priests out of the number of his
Friends, they distinguished them, by calling them after the name of his Family.

Possessed thus of the Empire, they both Their good Government.
comported themselves so well, that none could complain of the loss of the
gentle Reign of Pius. Marullus, the Satirical Poet of that time, had some
flings at them, but he passed unpunished. They concluded the Funeral Obsequies
of their Father, with the Games of the Gladiatours. In the mean time Marcus
gave himself still to Philosophy, and courted the love of the People. But the
felicity and the quiet of their Reigns was interrupted, first by an Inundation
of the Tyber, which was very terrible. It not only carried away several
Buildings of the City, and destroyed a great many Cattle, but it produced a
most grievous Famine: which Calamities were moderated as much as possible by
the Care and the Presence of Marcus and Verus. Then the Parthian Several Wars
begun.
War arose; which Vologesus, the King of that Country, had been hatching under
Pius, but he did not Proclaim it till the Reign of Marcus and Verus; at what
time he attacked Atidius Cornelianus, the Lieutenant of Syria, and put him to
flight. Also a War with the Britains was upon the point of kindling, and the
Catti had already made Incursions into Germany and Rhaetia. So against the
Britains Calphurnius Agricola was sent. Against the Catti, Aufidius Victorinus.
But to the Parthian War the Emperor Verus was appointed to go, with the advice
of the Senate; whilst Marcus tarried at Rome, where the Civil Affairs required
the presence at least of one Emperor. He accompanied Verus as far as to Capu^,
and honored him with a Retinue of Great Men out of the Senate, and Officers
for his Court of all sorts, to be both his Ministers and his Companions with
him in the Expedition. But no sooner was Marcus returned to Rome, but he
received advice, that Verus was sick at Canosa in Naples. He offered his Vows
in the Senate for his Recovery, and then went in all haste to see him there:
and being returned to Rome the second time, he next received an account, that
Verus was safely arrived in Syria; where he passed his time in Sports and
Hunting, and lived at Antioch and the Village of Daphne in the greatest
pleasure, whilst his Generals carried on the Parthian War; in which they had
the Victory of the Enemy. In the mean time Marcus was continually attent upon
the Affairs of the State; and seemed to take the Pleasures of his Brother, as
if he was indifferent to them, or knew nothing of them. He ordered and managed
all things necessary for the War, and yet lived the distance of Rome from it.

The Affairs of Armenia were prosperous, Their Success.
and the City Teflis upon the Araxis was taken by Statius Priscus. Hereupon
both the Emperors were presented with the Title of Conquerours of the
Armenians, which Marcus in modesty first at refused, but afterward accepted.
They were both in like manner, after the War was over, presented with the Title
of Conquerours of the Parthians; and this also Marcus at first refused, but
afterward accepted. The Title of Pater Patriae, or Father of his Country,
which had been offered to Marcus in the absence of Verus, he deferred to meddle
with, till the return of Verus: because he would not assume it, but in
Conjunction with him. In the mean time having Contracted his Daughter Lucilla
in Marriage to him, he presented her richly, and sent her into Syria, in the
midst of the War, attended by his Sister, and Civica, the Uncle of Verus. He
went with her himself, as far as to Brindisi in Naples, and had intended to see
her over the Water, if the Discourses of some, as if he had desired to
Challenge to himself the glory of finishing the War, and upon that account was
for going into Syria, had not called him back to Rome. He writ to the Proconsul
to take care, that she was not interrupted by any in her Journey.

Whilst these things passed, Marcus Antoninus Public Constitutions.
made a Law, which is an extraordinary security to People, in cases concerning
their Freedom; he was the first that contrived it, and it is thus; he ordered
every Roman Citizen, who had a Child born, to enter the name of the Child
before the Treasurers of the Exchequer, within thirty days. In the Provinces he
erected Public Notaries, before whom the same thing should be done upon the
Births there, as before the Treasurers of the Exchequer at Rome: so that when
any Person born in any Province has a Cause in Hand concerning his Freedom, he
has no more to do, than to bring from that Province a Testificate of his
Birth; this corroborated the whole Law concerning Freedoms. He made other Laws
concerning Bankers and Auctions.

In diverse Causes, in which himself especially Great Deference to the Senate.
was concerned, he made the Senate the Judge. He ordered, that Actions, having
reference to the Freedom or Servitude of Persons Defunct, should be brought
within five years from their deaths, or be excluded for ever. No Prince ever
deferred more to the Senate than he. He delegated to several of them, of the
degree of Praetors and Consuls, the decision of many Affairs; only that their
command so far in the Law should be a means to possess them with the greater
Honor. He admitted several of his Relations into the Senate, whom he had made
Aediles or Praetors. He granted to several Senators, that were poor, provided
that it was without reproach, the Offices of Tribunes and Aediles. He made no
one a Senator, unless he had a very good knowledge of him. In this also he
showed his respect to them, that whenever a Senator underwent a Trial for his
life, he heard him first in private, before he tried him in public; and he
suffered none of the Order of the Knights and Gentlemen to assist in such a
Case. He went constantly, as much as possible, to the Senate, though he had
nothing to propose to them, if he was at Rome: but when he had any thing to
propose to them, he came in Person to do it, if it were out of Campagnia. He
often assisted in the Courts of Judicature, till it was night; and never
withdrew out of the Senate till the Consul himself dismissed it. He made the
Senate the Judge in cases of Appeals from the Consuls. He showed himself very
diligent upon all Judiciary matters. He marked out the Law-days in the
Calendar, when Business was to be done, and Causes tried. In the whole year,
they were to the number of two hundred and thirty. He first gave the Praetors a
power to appoint Guardians to Minors, who before were appointed by the
Authority of the Consuls; which he did, to expedite the Actions in that case.

He regulated the excess of the Public Expenses in Feasts and Games. He
interposed against the Trade of Informers; and when he found them false, he
branded them. He contemned the Accusations, which were suggested to him to
enrich his Exchequer. He contrived many things very Prudently relating to the
Public Stores. He made Senators the Curatours to several Cities; to extend so
much the more, the glory of their Order. He relieved the Cities of Italy in a
time of great Famine, with Corn sent from Rome. He looked after every thing,
that concerned the Magazines of Corn. He moderated the Games of the
Gladiatours, all manner of ways. He diminished the Gratuities, given to, or
exacted by the Comedians. He took a great care of the Streets of the City, and
the Highways. He appointed Officers over the Provinces of Italy, for the
Administration of Justice, in the Nature of the Proconsuls, which had been
before appointed by Hadrian. He repeopled Spain, which was exhausted by
continual Levyes, with Colonies from Italy. In which contravening the
Ordinances of Trajan, he expressed himself with great modesty and respect to
the memory of that Prince. He added other Laws concerning the Tax called
Vicessima, the Tutelage of Servants, Maternal Estates, and the succession of
the Children unto them. He ordered, that such Senators, who were Foreigners,
should however buy themselves a fourth of their Estates in Italy. He gave power
to the Curatours of the Towns and the Highways either to punish, or to remit to
the Governor of Rome to be punished, such as exacted more from any Persons,
than what they were justly taxed to. As to the rest, he rather restored the old
Laws, than created new ones. He had Lawyers always with him, by whose Opinion,
and according to whose Forms he gave Sentence in Law, and published his
Ordinances. Particularly Scaevola, was one excellent Lawyer that he much used.

The People lived under him, altogether as Moderation of Antoninus.
in a Free-City. He was extremely well disposed in all things, to deter Persons
from evil, and to invite them to good. He rewarded plentifully, and pardoned
graciously: he made them of ill, good Men; and of good Men, he made them
extraordinary good. He took a Raillery upon these occasions very patiently. One
Veterasinus, who was of an ill Fame, begging an honorable Employment of him,
he advised him to clear himself first from the Censures of the People.
Veterasinus answering, he saw some that were made Praetors, that he had fought
Prizes with upon the Public Stage; the Emperor took it, and said nothing. He
was not forward to punish. If any Praetor had behaved himself in some things
ill, yet he did not turn him out of his Praetorship, but ordered him to remit
his Business entirely into the Hands of his Colleague. He never in his
Judgments favored the Exchequer in a Matter of Gain, when it has been upon
himself to give Sentence. He was firm to himself, and his purpose; and yet his
Resolution was set off with Modesty, especially where he was even obliged to
give repulse. After his Brother was returned a Conqueror from Syria, the Title
of Pater Patria was given to them both. For Marcus had in his absence comported
himself to all the Senators, and all People, well. An Oaken, or which is
otherwise called a Civick Crown, was equally presented to them both; and Verus
desired that Marcus should Triumph with him. He desired that the Sons of Marcus
should be also called Caesar's. But such was the great moderation of Marcus,
that though he joined in the Triumph, in Company with him, he relinquished to
him entirely (when Verus was dead) the Title of the Conqueror of the
Parthians; and styled himself only the Conqueror of the Germans; which was a
Title he had from a War of his own. So they carried the Children of Marcus of
either Sex, in the Triumph with them; even his Virgin-Daughters; and they
beheld the Games which were Celebrated upon the occasion, with their triumphal
Habits upon them. Amongst other remarkable things of the Pity of Marcus, it is
not fit to forget this; that he ordered Feather-beds to be spread under the
Rope-dancers, after an accidental fall of a Boy from the Rope: which is the
reason that we have a Custom of hanging a Net under them at this day.

Whilst the Parthian War was yet on Foot, War with the Marcomanni.
another War kindled with the Marcomanni in Germany: which was suspended a good
while by the Art of the Officers upon the Frontiers, that it should not trouble
us till the Oriental War was over. It was five years from the beginning of that
War, to the return of Verus. At whose return, Marcus declared to the Senate,
that as he had sometime before given them Intimations of a War in Germany, so
it was necessary that now both the Emperors in Person should repair to it. Now
the terror of this Marcomannick War was so great, that Marcus was obliged to
send for Priests from all parts, to dispatch the vast number of Sacrifices,
which were vowed and offered upon this occasion. He Celebrated all the Sacred
Foreign Rites that were ever seen at Rome; and purged the City of Rome all
manner of ways; and Celebrated the Feasts of Lectisternia seven days together.
A Pestilence at the same time prevailed, A great Plague.
which was so great, that the dead were carried off in Carts and Wagons. This
obliged the two Princes to make strict Laws concerning Burials and Sepulchers:
in which they provided, that it should not be at the Liberty of Persons to
build their Sepulchers in what place they pleased; which is still in force at
this day. Many thousands dyed of this Pestilence; several of the Nobility:
whereof the most considerable had their Statues set up by Marcus Antoninus. Who
in his great Clemency took that care of the Common People, that he ordered them
to be buried upon his own Expense. The Marcomanni and their Confederates being
now actually in Arms, and putting all things into Confusion, the two Emperors,
arrayed in their Military Apparel, set forward together upon the Expedition.
Their March had no small effect with it, as soon as they came, but as far as to
Aquileia. For the Kings of the Enemy for the most part not only retreated with
their Men, but put to death the Authors of their Insurrection. The Quadi, whose
King was dead, said that they would not confirm the Person his Successor, who
had been Created in his place, till our Emperors approved him: others sent
Ambassadors to them to ask their Pardon for their disobedience: so that Verus
his Opinion, who had set out much against his will in the beginning, was for
returning back to Rome: especially having lost the Captain of the Guards,
Furius Victorinus, and a part of the Army. But Marcus believing that the
Barbarians dissembled, and that both their Retreat, and the other things which
they did, were only out of a fear of being oppressed with the weight of so
great a Force, he declared himself to be for pursuing the War. Therefore they
marched on, and crossed the Alps, having settled all things in order, for the
safety of Italy and Illyricum. However Verus was urgent for going back to Rome:
to which Marcus at last consented, and that the Senate should have notice given
them of it by Letter. But as they were afterward upon the Road in the Coach
together Verus was Death of Verus.
suddenly taken with an Apoplexy and died.

Marcus was so little affected for his part with those Pleasures, which were
the real Reason of Verus his desire to return to Rome, that he both Read, and
hearkened to any one's Business, and signed Orders whilst he has been at the
shows of the Cirque; which made the People, they say, sometimes pass their
Railleries upon him. Geminas and Agaclytus, two manumitted Servants of Verus,
had a great Influence over their Master. But yet Marcus dissembled, and even
excused the Faults of Verus, though they displeased him never so much. He deified
him after his Death. He provided honorably for his Aunts and his Sisters. He
appointed a great many Sacrifices to his Honor. He appointed his Priests, and
gave him all the other Respects which are paid to the Gods. But as there is no
Prince but is subject to the most outrageous Censure; Marcus was for all this
represented, as if he had either poisoned Verus by a Knife envenomed on one
side, with which he cut a piece of a Sacrifice, and gave Verus the invenomed
part to eat, whilst he reserved the sound to himself, or at least, that he
killed him by his Physician Posidip^us, by letting him Blood unseasonably.

After the Death of Verus, Avidius Cassius revolted from Marcus. Though Marcus
was so indulging to Verus his Relations, and all that belonged to him, that he
did them all the Honors that it was possible. Commodus his Son, Commodus
declared Caesar.
as wicked and profligate as he was, received from him the Title of Caesar, the
Dignity of the Priesthood, the Title of Emperor, a share ^n the Triumph with
him, and the Consulship. At the same time the Father attended the Triumphal
Chariot of the Son on Foot, in the Cirque. Now when Marcus reigned alone after
the Death of Verus, he was much more easy, and more abundant in good Actions
than he could be before, because he was hindered with the Errors of his
Brother. He was one for his own Part, of that Tranquillity of Mind, that he
never changed his Countenance either with Sorrow or Joy; following exactly the
Precepts of the Stoic Philosophy, which he had learnt from all the best
Masters, and which he had diligently collected from all Parts. Hadrian would
have made him his immediate Successor, had not his Minority the^ hindered it.
Nevertheless, he chose him for one, whom he obliged Pius to adopt; that a he
was deserving of the Roman Empire, i^ should sooner or later certainly come to
him.

So he treated the Provinces with a great deal of Moderation and Goodness, and
managed his Affairs happily against the Germans. He went through with the
Marcomannick War End of the Marcomannic War.
than which a greater has not been known in any Age, with a Bravery equally
extraordinary as the Success; and this at a time when a grievous Pestilence
swept away many Thousands of the People and the Army. The Marcomanni, the
Sarmatians, the Vandals, the Quadi, being extinguished by him, he delivered the
Country of Pannonia out of its Servitude; for which he triumphed at Rome, and
his Son Commodus with him, whom he had created Caesar. He had exhausted all his
Coffers upon this War; and because he could not persuade himself to command any
thing from the Provinces to over-charge them, he made an Auction in the Forum
of Trajan of the Goods of his Household. He sold the Vessels of Gold, Crystal
and Myrrh, the Royal Services, Rich Garments of his Wife's which were
embroidered with Gold, and several Jewels which were laid up in the Cabinet of
Hadrian. The Sale continued Two Months, and such a considerable Sum was
produced by it, that having prosecuted the Relics of the Marcomannick War
with it, according to his desire, he gave the Buyers the Liberty to return if
they pleased their Purchases, and take their Money again. But whether they did
or no, he was satisfied, and allowed Gentlemen to have their Tables as splendid
as himself. In the public Shows which he gave the People at his Triumph, he
was so Magnificent, that he exposed a Hundred Lions together, to be shot to
death with Arrows.

Having therefore Reigned to the general Love of all the People, who called him
by the endearing Terms of, sometimes their Brother, sometimes Father, sometimes
Son, as every one's Age was, he died in the Eighteenth Year Death of Antoninu^
of his Empire, and the Sixty First of his Age. The Love of him amongst all the
People appeared on the Day of his interment. Because none thought him then an
Object to be lamented, but assured themselves, that as he had been formed and
lent them by the Gods, so he was returned to the Gods. Before his Funeral was
well finished, a thing which never was known to be done before, nor since, the
Senate and the People in one Body upon the place, pronounced him a Propitious
Deity. This great Man, who was so Excellent himself, and so allied to the Gods,
both in his Life and Death, left a Son, Commodus, who was so ill on the other
hand, that it had been happy he had never had him. Nay, it was a small thing,
that Persons of all Ages, Sexes, Conditions and Dignities, honored Marcus as a
God; for he was judged Sacrilegious, whoever had not his Image in his House, if
his fortune permitted him. To this day in many Families, the Statues of Marcus
Antoninus stand, amongst the Household Deities; and some Persons have firmly and
publicly averred, that he has predicted many future and true thing to them in
Dreams. A Temple was erected to him, and an Order of Priests of his own Name
appointed him, with all other things which to consecrated Persons have ever
been ascribed by Antiquity.

Some say, and it is not unlikely, that Commodus Antoninus his Successor and
his Son, was a sort of an Adulterous Birth, the Story whereof is represented
commonly thus. Faustina Story of the Birth of Commodus.
the Wife of Marcus, and formerly the Daughter of Antoninus Pius, seeing one
Day the Gladiators enter the Amphitheatre, fell in love with one of them to
that degree, that she labored under a long Sickness upon it, till at last she
confessed the Cause to her Husband. Marcus advised with the Magicians, whose
Counsel it was, to put to Death that Gladiator, and that Faustina should wash
her Secrets with his Blood, and then lie with her Husband: This was done, and
her Love cured. But Commodus was born after it, more a Gladiator than a Prince;
because when he was Emperor, he fought almost a Thousand Combats with the
Gladiators, in the public view of the People, as we shall have occasion to say
in his Life. And that which makes this Story the more credible, is, this Son of
so Holy a Father, was a Man of those profligate Manners, that no common
Sword-player, Actor, Baiter of Beasts, nor in fine, no one, though of the sink of
all Shame and Wickedness, was like him. Others say, that he was absolutely a
Bastard; and that Faustina, when she was at the Port of Gajetta, chose herself
there by the Eye, the Seamen generally working naked, what Men she saw were the
best provided, both out of the Seamen and the Gladiators; wherefore Marcus
Antoninus was advised by one, if he would not punish her by Death, to divorce
her. To which he answered, If I divorce my Wife, I must return her her Dower.
But her Dower was the Empire which he had received from her Father, who had
adopted him at the desire of Hadrian. Certainly the Virtue, the Integrity, the
Tranquillity, the Piety of a good Prince, is a thing of that prevalence, that
the ill Character, not so much as of the nearest Relation, can defame him. And
so it was with Marcus Antoninus, who persevering still in his own virtuous way,
and not changing in any thing upon the whispers or calumnies of the People,
neither his Gladiator-Son was a prejudice to him, nor his impure Consort. He is
(as he has ever been) esteemed a God to this Day; and particularly by you, O
most Sacred Emperor Dioclesian, who have a Veneration for him, even above the
rest of your Gods, and are pleased often to say, That you chiefly wish yourself
like him in his Life, and the Clemency which he always exercised; though should
Plato return into the World again, he could not parallel him with all his
Philosophy. The things that passed under Marcus Antoninus, after the Death of
Verus, were these: First, the Body of Verus was brought to Rome, and interred
in the Sepulcher of his Ancestors, and Ver(...) made a God. Then Marcus thanked
the Senate for having Consecrated his Brother, but intimated at the same time,
As if the Counsels by which the Parthians were overcome, had been much owing to
himself; and that now, he would govern as it were upon a new and better
Foundation. The Senate took it in the Sense which Marcus meant, and seemed to
congratulate, that Verus was departed this Life. However, Marcus provided very
honorably for Verus's Sisters, Relations and Servants. Indeed he was very
Curious of his Reputation, and enquired always what every one said of him, and
corrected himself accordingly in such things as they seemed to blame him for,
with reason Going to the War in Germany, he re-married his Daughter to Claudius
Pompeianus, the Eldest Son of a Roman Knight, of a Family of the City of
Antioch, but not of the highest Nobility. He afterward made him Twice Consul,
in consideration that his Daughter was so much his Superior; which Match
however, did neither please her nor her Mother.

The Moors laying waste almost all Spain, he Tumults, etc. quelled.
employed his Lieutenants against them, who reduced them: In Egypt, the Robbers
about the Parts called Bucolia, committing diverse great Disorders, they were
also reduced by Avidius Cassius, who afterward set himself up for the Empire.
About this time Marcus Antoninus, whilst he was at his Retreat at Palestrina,
lost his Son called Verus Caesar, of the Age of Seven Years, by lancing a
Tumor which he had under his Ear. The Mourning for whom was kept but Five
Days, and then he applied himself again to the public Business. It was the
time of the Celebration of the Games of Jupiter, which he would not suffer to
be interrupted by a more solemn Mourning; so he only ordered Statues to be set
up to the Memory of the deceased, and his Image in Gold to be carried in Pomp
in the Cirque, and his Name to be inserted into the Hymn of the Priests of
Mars. In the time of the Pestilence beforementioned, Marcus was especially
diligent to restore the Worship of the Gods. Against the Marcomannick War, he
made Soldiers of Slaves and Gladiators. Others he had who were called
Volunteers. He listed the Robbers of Dalmatia and Dardania. He served himself
of some Troops out of Phrygia, and fought Auxiliaries of the Germans against
the Germans. He used all manner of Diligence to complete his Legions for this
War; and because he would not exact Money upon the Provinces, he made an
Auction, as I said, of the precious Movables of his Household in the Forum of
Trajan; in which, besides Clothes and Plate, he sold the Images and the
Pictures which were of the Hands of the Great Masters. At length, he defeated
the Marcomanni at the Passage of the Danube, and restored their Spoils to the
Provinces.

All the Nations from the Borders of Illyricum The Confederate Nations.
as far as to Gallia, had confederated against us. The Marcomanni, the Narisci,
the Hermunduri, the Quadi, the Suevi, the Sarmatae, the Latringes, and the
Bursi. To these were joined, the Victovali, the Sosives, the Sicobotes, the
Roxolani, the Bastarnae, the Alani, the Pe^cini, the Costoborei, and others.
His other Wars were the Parthian War, and the Britannick War. Now it was with
great Pains and Labor, that he overcame as he did, Nations so stubborn as all
these. The Soldiers followed his Example; the Lieutenant-Generals, and the
Captains of the Guards marched in Person at the Head of their Men; so he
obliged the Marcomanni to surrender themselves, and a great many of them were
transplanted into Italy. But before he went upon any thing of Importance, not
only in War, but in the Civil Affairs, he advised always with his great
Officers. It was always his saying, It is more fitting that he should follow
the Counsel of so many faithful Friends, as they were, than that they all
should follow him who was but one. A great many of the Nobility were killed in
that German or Marcomannick, or rather, that War of a multitude of Nations,
whose Statues he set up in the Forum of Trajan. Therefore his Friends entreated
him often to retire from the Danger and come to Rome: But he persisted in his
own Resolutions, and did not withdraw till all was finished. He changed the
Proconsular Provinces into Consular, and the Consular into Proconsular, or
Praetorian, according as the occasions of the War required. He composed by his
Severity, and the rigor of his Discipline, the Troubles that were arisen in
Burgundy and in Portugal. He sent for Commodus puts on the Gown.
his Son Commodus to the Frontiers of Germany, where he put upon him the Man's
Gown; upon which occasion he gave a Largess to the People, and next he made him
a Consul, although it was before his proper time.

When any Person was at any time proscribed by the Governor of Rome, he did
not at all take the News well. He was always very reserved how he gave away
public Money; which is rather to his Praise than to his Reproach. And yet he
was always disposed to give Money to good Men, toward the Relief of Towns
which were fallen into decay; and where he saw a Necessity for it, he remitted
the Tribute and the Taxes. In his absence he ordered that the public
Divertisements of Rome should be taken care of by such as were the richest to
publish them. This obviated a Discourse which was amongst the People, when he
had carried away the Gladiators to the War, as if he designed to put down those
Sports, and to force all the World to Philosophy. He commanded that the
Stage Players, Tumblers, and those sort of Men should not begin their Shows
upon the Market-days, till later than ordinary, because they should not hinder
the Market. Some talked of some of those sort of Men, being beloved by his
Wife; but he purged himself of all that by his Letters. He forbad the going in
the Town on Some of his Constitutions.
Horseback, or in Coaches. He took away the promiscuous Bagnios, wherein Men
and Women washed together. He moderated the Luxury of the Women, and of the
young Nobility. He rescued the Sacrifices of the God Serapis from that Rabble,
and those Disturbances which annoy them at the City of Belv(...) in Egypt. It
was said, that some, under the pretense of being Philosophers, had that
Interest in him, that they were a prejudice to the public, no less than
private Persons. But of this he purged himself, and showed that it was in no
wise true.

He generally inflicted upon all Crimes a lesser Punishment, than what it was
the Custom to do by the Laws; and yet sometimes against notorious and high
Offenders he continued inexorable. He took the Cognizance himself of the
Capital Causes of Persons of the better Quality, and managed them with all
imaginable Equity. He would reprimand a Praetor that gave Judgment upon too
shor^ a hearing, and order him to try the Cause over again; saying, It is for
the Honor of him who judges for the People, to hearken to the Reasons of the
accused to the last. He observed to do Justice impartially as to Prisoners
taken in War, and he settled infinite Numbers of the Barbarians in the Roman
Territories. When the Enemy had by a Stratagem so shut up his Army that they
could come to no Water, he extorted from Heaven by his Prayers a Storm of Rain
which relieved them, when they were ready to perish with Thirst. He had
designed to erect Marcomannia into a Province, and likewise Sarmatia; and he
had done it, if Avidius Cassius had not rebelled against him Avidius Cassius
rebels.
in the East, who set himself up as Emperor, by an Intrigue, some say of
Faustina, when she began to despair of the long Life of her Husband. Others
say, it was pretended that Marcus was dead, and that Cassius did not set up
himself till after Marcus was declared a God. But however it was, Marcus was
not very much moved at the Defection; neither did he Revenge himself upon the
Wife, or Family, or Friends of Cassius: But Cassius was adjudged an Enemy by
the Senate, and his Estate was confiscated into the public Treasury.

Then leaving the War against the Sarmatae and the Marcomanni, he marched
against Cassius. In the mean time, some at Rome were in a fear, that Cassius in
his absence would have Who is killed.
come thither. But Cassius was presently killed, and his Head brought to the
Emperor, who without rejoicing at his Death ordered the Head to be buried. A
Son of Cassius, called Maecianus, to whom he had committed Alexandria, met with
the same Fate; and the Captain of the Guards that Cassius had made, was also
killed by the Army. He forbad the Senate to take Vengeance upon the Accomplices
of the Defection; desiring, if possible, at the same time, that no Senator
might be put to Death in his Reign, because it should not be polluted with
Blood. He ordered such Persons as were banished, to be recalled. Some few
Centurions lost their Heads. He pardoned the Cities which had complied with
Cassius. He pardoned the Antiochians, who had said several things against
himself, and in Favor of Cassius; from whom, however, he took away their
Shows, their public Conventions, and all sorts of Assemblies, by a strict
Edict; because they were a seditious People, as he intimates in his Speech in
Marius Maximus, which he made to his Ministers upon the Subject of this
Defection. He designed not to see Antioch, when he went into Syria, nor the
City Cyr, or Carin, of which Cassius was.

But however, afterward he went to Antioch. He was at Alexandria, and was very
obliging to that City. He transacted many things with the Kings of those Parts,
who met him, together with the Ambassadors of the Persians, and he established
a Peace with them. He made himself dear to all the Oriental Provinces, and left
the Prints of his Philosophy amongst them, by his weighty Discourse. He acted
the Citizen and the Philosopher in Egypt, in all the Academes, Temples, and
public Places where he came. Though the Alexandrians had said several things
to the Advantage of Cassius, he pardoned them, and left a Daughter of Cassius
with them. After this he lost his Consort Faustina, at a Village called Death
of Faustina.
Halala, at the Foot of the Mountain Taurus, where she died suddenly. He
desired the Senate to make her a Goddess, and give her a Temple; praising her,
though she had labored under such a Censure of Unchastity, which either he
knew nothing of, or at least he dissembled it. Some Alms-Children for whom he
made a Provision, he called by her Name, in her Honor. She had accompanied him
into the Field in the Summer, and therefore had the Title of the Mother of the
Camp. He made the Village a Colony where she died, and erected her a Temple
there; which was afterward re-dedicated to Heliogabalus. At the same time that
he marched against Cassius, he gave no Commands for the killing him, out of his
Clemency. Heliodorus his Son was banished. Others, who banished themselves,
were allowed a part of their Estates. And for the rest of the Children of
Cassius, they enjoyed above a half of their Father's Fortune. His Daughter
Alexandra, and Druncianus her Husband, had their free Liberty of going any
whither. And certainly Marcus Antoninus was sorry for the Death of Cassius;
because, he said, He desired to have passed his Reign, without shedding the
least drop of the Blood of the Senators.

After he had settled the Affairs of the East, he came to Athens; where amongst
other things, he visited the Temple of the Goddess Ceres, to show his
Innocence, because this was solemnly forbidden to wicked Persons; and he was
admitted into the Sacresty all alone. In his return by Sea into Italy, he was
overtaken with a great Storm. At his Landing at Brindisi in Naples, he b(...)h
put on the Roman Gown himself, and commanded the Soldiers to habit themselves
accordingly, who never went in their Soldiers Coats in Italy in his Reign.
Being come to Rome, he triumphed there, and from thence he went to Lavinia. He
made his Son Commodus his Colleague in the Tribunitian Power. He entertained,
the People with a Largess, and extraordinary fine Shows. He reformed many
things in the Civil Policy, and set proper Bounds to the Expenses of the Games
of the Gladiators; having this Sentence of Plato much in his Mouth, Happy the
States where either the Philosophers are the Emperors, or the Emperors are
Philosophers. He matched a Daughter of Bruttius Praesens, who was of the
Consular Dignity, to his Son Commodus: But the Espousals were celebrated
Espousals of Commodus.
with no more than ordinary Magnificence; on which occasion he gave a Largess
to the People. Then he re-assum'd the Old War with the Marcomanni again. For he
had made War with those, and with the Hermunduri, the Sarmatae, and the Quadi,
three Years before together; and now if he had lived but one Year longer, he
had reduced them into Provinces. But he died as he was making his preparations
for that Conquest. Two days before he died, his Officers being admitted into
his Chamber, he gave them to understand that he had as ill an Opinion of his
Son Commodus, as Philip of Macedon had a good Opinion of his Son Alexander;
saying, as Philip did, he was not sorry to dye, since he left behind him such a
Son; but meaning that the Roman Empire would scarce be large enough to hold the
Vices of him; who made it appear already, departing from the Rules of Life,
which his Father had prescribed him, that he was Cruel, The Death of Antoninus.
and Infamous. His death was thus: when he began to be sick, he called his Son
to him, and advised him first of all not to slight the Relics of the War, for
fear that he should seem to betray the Empire. To which Commodus answering,
that he should be obliged for his own safety to be gone from the Army, because
of the Pestilence which raged: he told him again, He might do as he would; but
he desired him rather to tarry, at least a few days, because he would do well
to appear to hold it a little against the Barbarians: After this, he would
neither eat nor drink, because he desired to dye, and this increased his
Distemper. The sixth day he called in his Friends, and discoursing to them
about the Vanity of Humane things, and the Contempt of death, he said, Why are
you sorry for me, when you ought rather to think of the Pestilence which rages,
and of the common death of every one? As they retired from him, he sighed and
said, If you see me no more, I bid you farewell; I go before you. They asked him
to whom he recommended his Son. He said; To all you, if he deserves it, and to
the Gods Immortal. The Army upon the notice of his sickness was very much
troubled; for they loved him dearly. The seventh Day he was worse, and saw none
but his Son: whom he presently dismissed again, for fear he should be infected.
His Son being gone, he threw the Clothes over his Head, as if he went to sleep;
and died that night. Some say, that when he saw that Commodus would prove such
a Man, as afterward he did, he rather wished him dead, than that he should
make another Nero, Caligula, or Domitian, by his Reign.

One thing Marcus Antoninus is blamed for, which is, That he promoted to
several Honors Tertullus, Utilius, Orphitus, and Moderatus, who were his Wife's
great Lovers. He had Licentiousness of Faustina.
surprised Tertullus one day actually at Dinner with her. The Buffoon upon the
Stage gave him a Rub as to this Man, in his own Presence. What, says he to him
that was with him, is the name of that Man, that you say Gallants my Wife; the
other answered, Tullus, Tullus, Tullus. He asked him the same Question again:
says the other, I have told you. By which the Audience plainly saw, that he
meant, that his crying three times Tullus, signified Tertullus. So every body
talked very much of this Spark, and blamed the Patience of Antoninus. Sometime
before his death, and before he went the second time to the Marcomannick War,
he took his Oath in the Capitol, that not one single Senator by his knowledge,
had been put to death. And he said, He should have saved the lives even of the
Rebels with Cassius, if it had been left to him. He was so far from seeking to
enrich himself with the Estate of Proscribed Persons, that he abhorred and
shunned nothing more than the scandal of Covetousness: against which he purges
himself in several Letters. Some pretend to say that he was a Dissembler and
not really of that Sincerity as he seemed to be, or as either Pius or Verus was
of. And again they say, that he too much raised the Pride of the Court, by
estranging his Friends from his Company and his Banquets. He ordered a
Deification for his Parents, and honored the Friends of his Relations with
Statues, though they were Persons that were dead. He did not easily believe
things upon Trust; but gave himself always time enough to find out the truth.
After the death of Faustina, Fabia the Sister of Verus was Ambitious to Marry
him. But he rather chose to content himself with a Concubine, of a Daughter of
a Servant to his late Wife, than over so many Children, which he had, to
superinduce a Step mother.

THE A. Christi CLXII.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR VERUS ANTONINUS.
By JULIUS CAPITOLINUS Addressed to the EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN.
I Know very well, that several Persons who have written the History of the
Actions of Marcus and Verus, have done it in such a method, as to give the
Reader an account of Verus in the first place; following the order not of their
Reigns, but their Deaths. But I have thought it my Duty to give the precedence,
as to this, to Marcus, and to treat of Verus afterward; because Marcus was the
first of the two upon the Throne; and because his survival after the death of
Verus made but a continuation still of the same Reign.

Lucius Cejonius Aelius Commodus Verus Antoninus, who by his Adoption into the
Aelian Family by the Will of Hadrian, was called Aelius, and by his Alliance
with Marcus Antoninus, received the name of Verus Antoninus, was a Prince, whom
we do not reckon in the number of the Best, nor yet on the contrary in the
number of the Worst Princes. For as his Virtues were not abundant, so neither
were his Vices formidable. One thing is, he did not Reign an Independent
Monarch of himself; for he was under Marcus; but yet of an equal Majesty with
him in the Empire; and at the same time he very much differed from him in this,
that he was Licentious in his Manners; and was of an humor that was frank and
open, and could dissemble nothing. His Father was Lucius Aelius Verus, who
formerly had been Adopted by Hadrian, being the first of the Title of a Caesar,
as it is used to denote the Person appointed to be the Successor to the
Empire; and who died in that Quality. His Grandfathers, and Great Grandfathers,
together with many of his other Ancestors, Verus his Birth and Extraction.
had been Consuls. He was born at Rome in the Praetorship of his Father, upon
the eighteenth of the Calends of January, which was heretofore also the
Birthday of the Emperor Nero. His Family by his Father's side was for the most
part out of the Country of Hetruria, and by his Mother's, out of the City
Faenza.

This being his Extraction, he, upon the Adoption of his Father by Hadrian,
came into the Family of that Emperor; continuing wherein after his Father's
death, when Hadrian was pleased, out of his care for the good of Posterity, to
take Antoninus Pius to be his Son, and Marcus Antoninus to be his Grandson; he
not only obliged at the same time the former to Adopt this Verus, but to give
him also his Daughter to Wife: which Daughter was married however to Marcus
Antoninus, and not to Verus, because Verus in respect of his Age was not then
judged proper for her, (as we have said above,) and Verus married Lucilla, the
Daughter of Marcus. He was brought up in the Court. His Master in Grammar, His
Preceptors.
for the Latin, was Scaurinus, the Son of that Scaurus, who was the Grammarian
to Hadrian: For the Greek, he had Telephas, Hephaestion, and Harpocration. His
Masters in the Greek Eloquence were Apollonius, Celer Caninius, and Herodes
Atticus; for the Latin, Cornelius Front^. His Masters in Philosophy were
Apollonius and Sextus: all whom he loved very well, and they loved him; but he
was one, that had little of a natural Genius to Learning. He pleased himself
the most at first in making Verses; and afterward in making Orations. It is
said, he was a better Orator than a Poet; or rather, to speak more properly,
that he was a worse Poet than he was an Orator. Others say, he had the Wits of
his Friends to assist him; and that in those very things of his which are
Extant, whatsoever they are, he served himself of the same. For, they say, he
had several Men of Learning and Eloquence always with him. The Governor of his
Youth was Nicomedes. He was Voluptuous; and showed great gaiety in all sorts of
Pleasures, Sports and Divertisements, which became him but too well. He was
Adopted at the Age of seven years, and was formed upon the Manners and
Authority of Marcus Antoninus. He loved Hunting, Wrestling, and all the
Exercises of Youth; and was as a private Person in the Court no less than three
and twenty years together.

The day that he put on the Roman, that is, the Man's Gown, Antoninus Pius
dedicated a Temple to his Father Aelius Verus, and gave a Bounty to the People.
When he was made Quaestor, and entertained, at his admittance into that Office,
the People, with the Public Games, he took his place in the midst betwixt
Antoninus Pius and Marcus. After his Quaestorship he was presently made Consul,
He is made Consul.
in Conjunction with Sextilius Lateranus. Some years after that he was made a
second time Consul, in Conjunction with Marcus Antoninus: after which, he
continued a long time ^n the Estate of a private Man, and was not adorned with
the same Honors as Marcus was. He did not sit in the Senate, before his
Quaestorship: neither did he accompany so much with the Emperor, as with the
Captain of the Guards; and he had no other name of Honor added to his own more
than this, that he was called the Emperor's Son. He much delighted in the Races
of the Cirque, and in the Games of the Gladiatours; but as his Pleasures and
his Luxury were continually the occasions of his falling into many errors; it
seems, as if he was not retained in the Royal Family by Antoninus Pius, but
upon this account; because Hadrian had commanded him to Adopt him so expressly,
that he called him his own Grandson: and so he retained him, it is supposed,
more to discharge his Trust, than as a mark of his Love. That which he approved
in hi^ was the Simplicity and the Debonaireness of his Temper: he advised him,
as much as he could to form himself upon the Model of his Brother. In fine,
when his Father was dead, his Brother conferred all things upon him, even to
the participation of the Sovereignty; and made him his Colleague, although the
Senate He is made Colleague in the Empire.
had deferred the Empire to himself alone.

Elevated thus to the Empire, and the Tribunitian Power being given him, and
the honor of a Proconsulship, his Brother Marcus Antoninus ordered him to be
called by the name of Verus Antoninus. As a testimony o^ his Sense of so high
Favors, he received Marcus, upon all occasions, with the respect of a
Lieutenant to a Proconsul, or of a President of a Province to the Emperor. He
conformed himself in all things at first with great care to the intentions and
will of Marcus; who at the same time harangued the Soldiers in the name of them
both upon this occasion. But when Verus was gotten into Syria, the great His
Luxury.
liberty which he gave himself in living at his ease; with his lewd Amors, and
the Debaucheries of all sorts, to which he was abandoned, so changed him to
another Man, that he defamed his Reputation. In like manner, after his return
out of Syria he made a perpetual Tavern of the Court; where after having dined
with Marcus, he retired to his own Company, and diverted himself with all sorts
of filthy Persons. He passed whole nights at Game, according to a Custom that
he had learnt in Syria: and to such a degree did he Rival the Vices of
Caligula, Nero, and Vitellius, that he roved up and down in the night amongst
the Taverns and the Stews in disguise; and pleased himself to make Debauches
with the Mob, and to join in their Quarrels; out of which he often however came
off with a black Face: But notwithstanding his Disguises, he was known in the
public Houses where he came; where, at other times, he was for Breaking the
Glasses and other Vessels, and then he paid very well for them. He favored
very much the Green-Coat-Party in the Races run in the Cirque. He had
Gladiators frequently to fight at the Entertainments which he made, and which
he prolonged till midnight; till he fell a sleep upon his Coach, and was taken
up in his Clothes, and carried to Bed. He slept but little, and had an easy
digestion. In the mean time Marcus dissembled all these things, as if he knew
nothing of them, out of Modesty, not to put to shame his Brother.

One Banquet, that he made, is remarkable: he had in the first place twelve
Guests; whereas the known Proverb, as to the number at such a time, is, Septem
convivium, novem convitium; that is, Seven's a Company, Nine is but Noise.
Every one of these had a handsome Boy at his Back to serve him. Every one his
Sewer, and his Dishes to himself, which were of their own choosing. Every one
his fresh Cup of Myrrh, or of the Crystal of Alexandria as often as he drank.
There were also Cups of Gold and Silver, and others set with Jewels. Then they
had Crowns upon their Heads, adorned with golden Labels, and Flowers, such as
for the Season were Rarities. They had their golden Boxes filled with precious
Ointments; and at parting they all had their Caleshes drawn with Mules in
Harness of Silver, presented to them, to carry them home. The whole Treat was
estimated at sixty hundred thousand Sesterces: which when Marcus heard of, he
sighed, and lamented the misfortune of the Public in the Person of his
Brother. After Supper they played at Dice all that night, till it was morning.
And this he did after his return from the Parthian War, to which Marcus had
sent him purposely, that he should not commit those sort of Actions in the
sight of all the World at Rome; thinking besides that Traveling might teach
him frugality, and the dangers of War make him better, and more sober, or at
least teach him to know himself to be an Emperor: but how much the better he
was for it, this Supper alone shows, as well as the rest of his Life.

His love of the Races of the Cirque was such, that he sent and received many
Letters about them, into, and out of the Provinces. When present at them, and
in Company with Marcus, he has suffered several Affronts from the contrary
Party, for his over great Zeal to that to which he sided. He had a Horse called
Swift, whose Image he cut out in Gold, and fed him with Raisins and Almonds, in
the Manger, instead of Corn; covered him with a Cloth of Purple, and ordered
him to be kept in a Room in the Court. When this Horse died, he Erected a
Monument to him upon the Vatican. And it was first in the favor of this Horse,
that they began the Custom of gathering Money for the Winning Horses, in the
way, as it were, of a Praemium. For this Horse was so much beloved; that a
Bushel of pieces of Gold has often been thrown to him by those of his Side in
the Cirque.

When Verus set forward upon his Expedition His negligent Conduct.
to the Parthian War, Marcus accompanied him as far as to Capua. But going on
his way from Capua, he Revelled it so, at all the great Houses where he came,
that he contracted an Illness, and fell Sick at Canosa in Naples, whither
Marcus took a second Journey to visit him there. Certainly many ill and
unhandsome things appear in the Conduct of Verus, which he did during the time
of the War. For when both the Lieutenant of Syria was killed, and the Legions
there were cut off; the Syrians Meditating a Revolt, and the East laid Waste by
the Enemy, then was he passing his time in Hunting in Apuleia. At Corinth and
Athens, he had his Musical Consorts, and Entertainments of Voices and
Instruments. At every Port of note in Asia, Pamphylia, and Cilicia, where he
came, he made a stay to take his Pleasures.

After he was come to Antioch, he followed his Luxuries to excess for his own
part, whilst his Generals carried on the Parthian War; who were Statius
Priscus, Avidius Cassius, and Martius Verus. In four years they went through
Babylon, the Kingdom of Media, and recovered Armenia: which procured to him the
honorable Title of Conqueror of the Armenians, Parthians, and Medes, which
was also Communicated to Marcus at Rome. He passed the Winters in those four
years, at the City of Laodicea; the Summers at the Village of Daphne, and the
rest of the time at Antioch. All the Syrians made a jest of him; and several
Railleries, which they passed upon him upon the Stage in their Plays, are
extant. He admitted his Slaves to be as free with him at all times, as the
Custom is to be upon the Feasts of Saturn. He went, at the solicitation of his
Courtiers, as far as to the Banks of the Euphrates twice; and he came up to
Ephesus to meet his Wife Lucilla, who was sent to him from Marcus her Father.
But his design in this last Journey principally was to prevent Marcus, that he
should not come down with her into Syria, and so detect his ill deportments:
because Marcus had told the Senate, that he would bear his Daughter Company
into Syria. At last, when the War was ended, he appointed Kings over the
respective Kingdoms, and gave the Governments of the Provinces amongst his
Officers: and then returned His return to Rome.
himself to Rome, but much against his inclination, though it was to take the
honor of a Triumph; because to leave Syria, was to leave, as it were, his own
Proper Kingdom. So he came and triumphed in Company with his Brother, and the
Senate consirmed the Titles to him, which he had before received from the Army.

He shaved his Beard (which he had not done before) in Syria, only to pleasure
an ordinary Mistress, that he had gained there; which gave the Syrians an
occasion to say several things upon him. The time of his return to Rome was
unfortunate: for it seemed, as if he brought the Plague with him thither, and
into the Provinces through which he passed. This Plague arose first in the
Country of Babylon; where out of a small golden Coffer, which a Soldier had
plundered in the Temple of Apollo, proceeded, it is said, such a Pestilentious
stench, as spread itself from thence into Parthia, and so over the World. Not
that this was yet a fault of Verus, but of Cassius; who, contrary to his Faith
given, rased the City of Seleucia, after it had received our Forces, as
Friends. At the same time, amongst others, Quadratus, a Writer of the Parthian
War, Vindicates Cassius too against this accusation; and lays the blame upon
the Seleucians themselves, for breaking their Faith with Cassius the first. But
however that is, Verus had so much reverence for Marcus, that he desired to
Communicate to him, upon the day that they triumphed together, the same Titles
and Names of Honor which had been deferred to himself. But yet, after his
return from the Parthian War, he was not altogether so very observant of Marcus
as formerly, suffering his Servants to have too great an influence over him,
and acting in many things by them, without the advice of his Brother. To which
it is to be added, that he brought a His other Vanities.
Company of Mimicks with him out of Syria, as if they had been so many Kings to
adorn his Triumph. The principal of whom called by the name of Paris. Then he
built himself a famous Seat upon the Via Clodia; where he Revelled with great
Luxury for several days together in Company with his Servants, and such of his
chosen Friends, whose presence brought no constraint upon him. He invited
Marcus thither one day to see him; who came, but it was to show to him the
sanctity of his life, which was great and worthy to have been the subject of
his imitation. Marcus tarried with him five days; but employed his time all the
while in continual Business, whilst Verus was either Feasting, or providing for
his Feasts. Another Mimick that he brought with him out of Syria, as a Trophy
of the Parthian War, was one, that he called by the Name of Apolaustus; but his
former Name was Agrippus Memphis. He brought with him besides, for his
diversion, Fiddlers, Pipers, Players, Buffoons, Juglers, and of all those sorts
of Slaves which Syria and Alexandria are so delighted with; that really one
would think by his Captives, that he had been making War, not against Parthia,
but against the Stage.

It was not openly visible to the World, but yet it was privately whispered,
that this diversity of his Life to that of Marcus, with many other things,
occasioned an ill Understanding betwixt them. Especially, this was said upon
the Death of Libo, who was a Cousin German to Marcus, and who had been sent by
him, as his Lieutenant into Syria; where behaving himself more haughtily than a
Senator in that Quality ought to have done, and saying, That be would write to
Marcus to be satisfied, if perhaps he doubted in any thing; Verus could not
take it, that he paid no more Respect to him, who was an Emperor upon the
Place; and after this Libo died suddenly, with almost the Marks of Poison upon
him. From which some thought, that he was poisoned by the hand of Verus. And
though Marcus was not of this Opinion, yet the thing served to increase the
rumor of their disagreement. Geminas and Agaclytus, two Servants of Verus, had
a great Influence over him, as I have already said in the Life of Marcus. He
married the latter to Libo's Widow, although contrary to the desire of Marcus,
who therefore denied his Presence to the Espousals. Codes, and Aelius Laetus or
Electus, were two others of his manumitted Servants: He had more besides, who
were all ill Men enough, and whom Marcus dismissed, after the Death of their
Master; only Aelius Laetus he retained, who afterward was the Author of the
Death of his Son Commodus. In fine, when the German War The German Expedition.
came on, because Marcus neither thought fit to send Verus to it alone, nor yet
to leave him in the Town alone, upon the Account of his great Luxury, they went
both together to it, and came to the City of Aquileia; where Verus did nothing
but divert and enjoy himself, whilst Marcus took upon him the Care of all
things. They crossed the Alps, although this was much against the Inclination
of Verus; and as for what passed afterward betwixt the Ambassadors of the
Barbarians on the one hand, begging Peace, and our Emperors on the other, it
has been already represented sufficiently in the Life of Marcus. So the heat
of the War being over, and Verus urging to return to Aquileia again, because he
longed for the Pleasures of Rome, it was resolved by both to go back to Rome.
But as Verus was in the Coach, not far from the City of Altino, he was taken
suddenly with an Apoplexy; for which, lifting him immediately out of the Coach,
and letting him Blood, they brought him alive unto Altino, where he continued
three Days speechless, and then died. Death of Verus.


There was a Discourse, as if he had been Incestuous with his Wife's Mother,
Faustina; and that Faustina had contrived his Death, by putting Poison in his
Oysters, because the Conversation which he had with the Mother, he discovered
to the Daughter. There was another Story made of his Death, which I have set
down in the Life of Marcus, but which is utterly inconsistent with the Virtue
of that great Man. Others attributed his Death to his own Wife, because he was
a little too indulgent to the Love which he had for Fabia his Sister, whose
Power she could not brook. And certainly there was that great Kindness betwixt
Verus and Fabia, that it was also reported, that they two had consulted
together to kill Marcus; but when this was discovered to Marcus by Agaclytus
the Servant of Verus, Faustina prevented the Murder of Marcus, and she herself
killed Verus.

As to his Person, he was well shaped, with His Personage.
a good Visage, and a Beard, before he shaved, extraordinary long, like a
Barbarian; tall, and a frown upon his Brow that was awful. He had yellow Hair,
which he took a great Care of, and used an Art with Gold Dust, to make it
glitter, and look yellower still. He was a little slow in Speech, a great Lover
of Game, always Luxurious, and in many things a Nero, excepting Cruelty and
Buffoonry. Amongst the rest of his Curious Furniture for his Luxury, he had a
Crystal Cup, that he called Swift, after the Name of his beloved Horse; and it
was of so large a size, it held a Draught indeed more fit for a Horse, than any
thing else. He lived Two and Forty Years, and reigned Eleven, in Conjunction
with his Brother.

His Body was interred in the Sepulcher of Hadrian, where his Father the Caesar
also lies. The Story which I now said, is inconsistent with the Virtue of
Marcus Antoninus is well known, and it is this; That Marcus with a Knife
empoysoned on the one side of it, divided a Piece of a Sacrifice to Verus, and
gave that Part thereof to Verus to eat, which was touched with the Poison;
which is a Crime impossible to be conceived of Marcus, whatever the Life and
Actions of Verus might perhaps deserve. Neither do we leave it in doubt, but
wholly reject it as a false and supposititious thing; being assured, that
excepting your Majesty, O Dioclesian, as yet, since Marcus, Flattery it self
has not been able to form a better and a more accomplished Prince than he.

THE LIFE OF AVIDIVS CASSIVS,
BY VULCATIUS GALLICANUS: Addressed to the EMPEROR DIOLESIAN.
AVidius Cassius, was, as some think, descended His Extraction.
from the Ancient Family of the Cassii; but yet this was only by the side of
his Mother: for his Father was Avidius Severus, who from a private Extraction,
and the Degree of a Centurion, raised himself unto the highest Honors; of whom
Quadratus makes mention in his History; and indeed so much to his Advantage,
that he calls him a great and necessary Man in the State, and who had a great
Interest with the Emperor Marcus Antoninus, in whose Reign he died. This
Cassius, of the Family, I say, of those Cassii, who had conspired against
Julius Caesar, was one that secretly hated a Monarchy, and could scarce endure
the very Name of an Emperor: He said, That no State was so intolerable, as an
Empire, which cannot be put down without another Emperor. In his younger Years,
he had attempted to depose Antoninus Pius. It is true, his Father being a great
and worthy Person, covered him against the Charge of that Ambition, but yet he
was always looked upon as a suspicious Person.

A LETTER of Verus Antoninus concerning him; written to the Emperor Marcus
Antoninus, says thus.
AVidius Cassius has a greedy Eye upon the Empire, at least as I think, and as
some time ago it was known he had, under the Reign of Antonius Pius our Father.
I desire you to take good Notice of him: Every thing we do displeases him. He
grows extraordinary Rich, laughs at us both; calls you a Doting Philosopher,
and me a Luxurious Fool. Consider, what is to be done: I hate not the Man, but
do you see whether it is not ill for you and your Children to keep such a one
in your Army; and one besides that the Soldiers love, and hearken to with
pleasure.


The ANSWER of Marcus Antoninus, concerning Avidius Cassius, was this.
I Have read your Letter, in which you are too apprehensive, than I would have
an Emperor to be, or than suits well with our Reigns: For if the Empire is
allotted to Avidius Cassius by Heaven, we should not be able to cut him off, if
we would: You know the saying of your Grandfather Hadrian, That no Man kills
his Successor. But if it is not so allotted him, he will fall of himself into
the fatal Snare, without our Cruelty. Neither can we make a Man a Criminal, who
is accused by none, and who as you say is beloved by the Army. In Actions of
Treason also, so it is, that even though they are proved upon Men, the World is
apt to think the Sufferer injured; which made your Grandfather Hadrian say, O
the hard Fate of Emperors, who cannot be believed, that they are Usurpt upon,
until they are killed! I chose to name Hadrian for it, rather than Domitian,
who was the first indeed that said so; because when a thing is well said, yet
if it is the saying of a Tyrant, it has not the Authority with it, as it
deserves. Therefore let Avidius Cassius have his own ways, being a good
Officer, Strict and Stout, and of great Use in the State. For as to what you
urge about the taking Care of my Children, if Avidius Cassius shall deserve to
be better beloved than they, and it is expedient for the Public, rather that
he live, than the Children of Marcus Antoninus, let them perish.


This is what Verus and what Marcus Antoninus, severally wrote concerning
Cassius. Now we shall explain in short the Temper and the Manners of this
Person; which is all that can well be known of such, whose Lives, no one
presumes to write to their Advantage, out of Respect to those by whom they were
destroyed; only we shall add something of his assumption of the Empire, and of
his Death. Having in this Design that we are upon, proposed to ourselves to
take in the Histories of all that in any wise have born the Title of Emperors,
whether justly or unjustly, to the end that your Majesty, O Dioclesian, should
have a perfect Account before you, to your own Person, of the Events of the
Empire of Rome. He was a Man of that Variety in his Manners, that now he was
cruel and ill humored, then mild and obliging; now he was very Religious, then
Profane; sometimes he drank hard, then he was as abstemious; sometimes he eat
very much, another time he fasted as much; sometimes he was all for Women, then
he was all for Chastity; so that People were not wanting to call him a
Catiline; and he said, they might call him what they pleased, so he but gained
his Point of the Dialogist; by which Name he meant Marcus Antoninus, who was so
eminently skilled in Philosophy, that going to the War against the Marcomanni;
and every body being in fear for him, lest any thing ill should happen to him,
they desired him before he went, that he would discover to them his Precepts of
Philosophy; which at their Entreaty he did, in Discourses to them, which he
continued three Days together. Besides this, Avidius Cassius was a strict Man
for Military Discipline; insomuch, that he was willing to have himself be
called a Marius.

Now having begun to make mention of his His strict Discipline
Strictness, there are many Instances not to be omitted, in which he showed
himself not so properly to say strict, as he was cruel. For first, if the
Soldiers had taken but the least thing by violence from the People of the
Provinces, he crucified them immediately upon the place, where they committed
the Fact. He had another way of executing them, which was purely of his own
Invention, which was this. A great Stake of Timber was set up, which was
Eighty, or a Hundred Foot high; the condemned were tied to this Stake in Ranks,
from the top to the bottom; at the bottom was a Fire, which burnt some to
Death, whilst others were suffocated with the Smoke, and others were sometimes
frightened to Death. He has ordered Ten in a Body to be chained, and thrown
into a River, or into the Sea together. To Deserters, he many times cut off
their Hands, or their Legs and Thighs; saying, The Example of a Criminal living
in that manner in misery, is of a greater Force, than if he was killed at a
blow. A Party of the Auxiliaries, once in the Army under his Command, had
without his knowledge surprised the Sarmatae, as they were lying carelessly upon
the Banks of the Danube, of whom they killed Three Thousand, and returned to
their Corpse again, with a great Booty. And as it was their Centurions that had
put them upon this Action, the Centurions expected to be rewarded for it;
because with a handful of Men they had killed such a Number of the Enemy,
whilst the Tribunes and the other Officers had neglected the Opportunity that
was offered. But for their Reward, he ordered them to be all taken, and, which
is a thing without Example, crucified like Slaves. He said, It might have
happened, that the Enemy had had a Trick in it, and an Ambuscade, which would
have much reflected upon the Honor of the Roman Name. So a great Mutiny upon
this arising in the Army, he came immediately to them, and said, Kill me, if
you think fit, and add that Fact more to this Corruption of Discipline At which
they were all appeased. He showed he did not fear them; and this made him to be
feared by them: Which added such Strength to the Discipline of the Romans, and
struck such a Regard on the other side into the Enemy, that they came and
begged of the Emperor Antoninus an Hundred Years Peace, having had the
Satisfaction to see those very Persons who had gotten a Victory over them,
condemned to Death, by the Judgment of the Roman General himself; because
without his permission, they had without Orders gained that Victory.

Many more of his Severities upon the Soldiers are to be seen in Aemilius
Parthenianus; he caused them to be beaten with Rods in the Markets, and in the
midst of the Camp; he cut off their Heads, or many times their Hands. He forbad
them to carry any thing with them in an Expedition, beside Bacon, Biscuit, and
Vinegar; which if he found they transgressed, he not a little punished their
Luxury.

A LETTER from the Emperor Marcus Antoninus to the Lieutenant of Syria, says
thus of him.
I Have given the Legions of Syria, which Caesonius Vectilianus says, that he
found all in Hot Baths, dissolved in Luxury, and living in all sorts of
Pleasures, to the Command of Avidius Cassius, and I think, I have not done
amiss. You know him a Man of the Severity and Discipline of the ancient Cassii;
and to speak truly without the Ancient Discipline, the Soldiers cannot be well
governed. You remember that good Verse of the Poet,

Moribus antiquis res stat Romana virilis. That is, the Customs of our
Forefathers, and such Persons as were in those days, are the best Supports of
the Empire of Rome. Do you take care that there be sufficient Provisions laid
up for the said Legions, and if I am not mistaken in Avidius Cassius, he is one
that will not let them be lost.


The ANSWER of the Lieutenant to Marcus Antoninus was this.
IT is well dove, Sir, that your Majesty has preferred Cassius to the Command
of the Legions of Syria. For there is nothing so convenient, a^ a severe sort
of a Man for those Grecianised Soldiers. He will strip them of all their hot
Baths, and shake all their fine Flowers off of their Heads, their Necks, and
their Bosoms. All the necessary Provisions for the Legions are ready, and
nothing will be wanting, so long as they have so good a Commander over them.


Nor were they mistaken in their Judgments which they had of Avidius Cassius.
He immediately commanded the Soldiers to their respective Colors, and
published an Order, that if any one of them was but seen at Daphne, he should
be cashiered. Every Seventh Day he examined their Arms, and Clothes, and
Equipages. He banished all sorts of Pleasures from the Camp, and unless they
corrected their Manners, he assured them, they should pass the Winter there in
their Tents; which certainly had been done, if they had not lived more soberly.
He exercised the whole Body of them every Seventh Day at their Arrows and their
Arms. It was a miserable thing, he said, that Wrestlers, Huntsmen, and
Gladiators should be continually exercised, and not Soldiers; to whom their
Labors are always the less, after they are once accustomed to them. Thus
correcting the Discipline of the Army, and ordering all things well in Armenia,
Arabia, and Egypt, he made himself to be beloved by all the Eastern People,
especially by those of Antioch; insomuch, that that City consented to his
Assumption of the Empire, as Marius Maximus says in the Life of Marcus
Antoninus, who in his Second Book of the same Life says also, that when the
Robbers of the Parts called Bucolia in Egypt, had committed many Disorders
there, which were heavy upon that Kingdom, they were reduced again under
subjection by Cassius.

Now this Cassius set himself up in the East Cassius usurps the Empire.
to be Emperor, some say by an Intrigue of Faustina, who despairing of the long
Life of her Husband Mareus Antoninus, was in a fear, that she alone should not
be able to protect her Infant-Children, and that somebody should come upon the
Throne, who would destroy them. But however this is, to take the Soldiers and
the People off of their Love to Marcus Antoninus, in order to bring them to
consent to himself, Cassius served himself of an Artifice, which was, to give
out, that Marcus was dead, and to qualify the Regret of his Loss, he mentioned
him with the Respect of one made a God. Then as Emperor, he chose himself a
Captain of the Guards, and made one of his Sons Governor of the City of
Alexandria, which Two were afterward both killed by the Army, but it was done
against the Will, and without the Knowledge of Marcus Antoninus; who neither
fell into any Passion to hear of the News of the Rebellion, nor sought his
Revenge upon the Children or Friends of Cassius. The Senate declared him an
Enemy, and confiscated his Estate, which Marcus Antoninus forbidding to be
returned into his proper Coffers, it was paid by the Order of the Senate into
the public Treasury. Some pretended, which struck a Terror into the City, that
in the absence of Antoninus, Avidius Cassius, as he was entirely beloved by
all, excepting the looser sort of People, would come to Rome, and expose it to
Free-Plunder; upon the Account of the Senators especially, who had declared
him an Enemy, and confiscated his Estate. On the other hand, the Love of
Antoninus himself to Cassius, appeared very much in this, that when he was
killed, and every body, unless the Citizens of Antioch were contented at it, he
was not killed by the Command of him; for there is no doubt, but he would have
spared him, if it had been in his Power so to do.

And when his Head was brought to him, Clemency of Antoninus.
he did not rejoice, nor was he elevated at it at all, but on the contrary, he
was very sorry that he was deprived of an occasion to show his Mercy; and said,
He would rather have had him taken alive, to have convinced him of his
Ingratitude, and then saved him. One said, That Antoninus was to blame for
being so favorable to his Enemy, and to his Enemy's Friends and Children, and
all his adherents: Adding, That if Cassius had got the better, what then?
Antoninus answered, We have not so served the Gods, nor so lived, as that it
should be his luck to Conquer us. Upon which he reckoned up all the Princes
that had been killed, and said, That there were Reasons for which they had
deserved it; for scarce ever any good Prince had been either killed or
conquered by an Usurper; for Nero deserved it; Caligula deserved it; Otho and
Vitellius were not fit to reign. He thought as much of Galba for his
Covetousness, and said, That Avarice in an Emperor is a most bitter Fault. In
fine, not Augustus Caesar, nor Trajan, nor Hadrian, nor Antoninus Pius his
Father, could ever be surmounted by the Rebols, though they had many of them; but
it was the Rebels Fate to be destroyed, sometime even without the Knowledge,
and contrary to the Will of those Princes. So he desired the Senate not to
animadvert too severely upon the Accomplices of the defection of Cassius,
wishing that no Senator might be put to Death in his Reign; which gained him
an extraordinary deal of Love. Some few Centurions were punished, and then as
for others who were banished, he ordered them to be re-called and pardoned them.

He pardoned the Antiochians, who had so firmly adhered to the Usurpation of
Cassius, together with other Cities that had assisted him. For though at the
first he was very angry at the former, so as to take away their public Games,
and many other Ornaments of their City, yet he afterward restored them to them
again. He bestowed a Moiety of the Estate of Cassius upon his Sons, and gave
his Daughters the Gold, Silver; and Jewels. Alexandra, who was one of them, and
Druentianus her Husband, had free Power from him to go whither they would, and
lived in the greatest Security, not like the Pledges of an Usurper, but the
Children of a Senator. He forbad the Fortune of their House, so much as to be
cast in their Teeth; and some who were rude to them upon that Account, were by
his Order prosecuted and punished for it.

Here follows a Letter from the Emperor Marcus Antoninus to Faustina his Wife.
VErus formerly wrote the Truth to me concerning Avidius Cassius, when he said,
That he had a greedy Eye upon the Empire. For I suppose you have heard, what
the Expresses bring of him. So come thou to Albano, that we may consider
together of Matters by the Will of the Gods, and fear nothing.


This obviates what Marius Maximus says of Faustina, who desiring to defame
her, makes her accessory to the Usurpation of Cassius. Her Answer in which she
presses him to be very severe was this.

I Will come strait to Albano, to morrow, as you command. However, I now
advise, that if you love your Children, you would prosecute this Rebellion most
severely: And you may assure your. self, that unless you oppress them, they
will you.


Another Letter of Faustina to Marcus Antoninus upon the same Subject.
MY Mother Faustina, in the time of the Defection of Celsus, advised your
Father her Husband Antoninus Pius, that he should first show his kindness to
his own Family, and next to Others. Because he cannot be a good Prince, who
does not take care of his Wife and Children. You see what Age our Son Commodus
is of Pompeianus your Son-in-Law is already Old, and a Stranger. Mind what you
do about Avidius Cassius and his Associates. Do not spare Men, who have not
spared you, and who if they had conquered, would neither have spared me, nor
our Children. I shall follow you in your Journey quickly. I could not come to
Formiae, because our Fadilla is Sick. But though I find you not at Formiae, I
shall overtake you at Capua, which City may do good both to me and our Children
in our Healths. I desire you to dispatch Soteridas the Physician to Formiae. I
cannot trust to Pisitheus; he knows not what Physic to give to a young Girl. I
received your Letter, which you s^nt by Calphurnius, and I shall answer it, if
I stay, by Caecilius the old Eunuch, a trusty Man whom you know, and by whom I
will send you an account by Word of Mouth, what the Wife of Avidius Cassius,
and Son, and Son-in Law, are reported to say of you.


By these Letters, one may see that Faustina was not at all Privy to the
Enterprise of Cassius, upon whom she is so severe. What Antoninus writ to her
again, the following Letter shows us

You, it is true, my Faustina, Advise very well in your love to your Husband
and Children. I have Read your Letter, in which you desire me to prosecute the
Accomplices of Cassius. But yet I shall spare his Children, Son in-Law, and
Wife, and write to the Senate to be Favorable to all the Party. For there is
not any thing that more recommends a Roman Emperor to all the World, than
Clemency. This made Caesar a God. This Consecrated Augustus. This particularly
adorned your Father with the Title of Pious. In a word, if they had gone
according to the judgment of my Advice upon the War, not so much as Cassius
should have been killed. So be then satisfied. The Gods protect me: my Piety is
pleasing to the Gods. I have declared our Pompeianus, Consul for the next year.
This is what Antoninus writ to his Wife.

Now let us see what an Oration, upon this occasion, he sent to the Senate. A
part of it is thus.

Fathers of the Senate; you have now my Sonin Law to be your Consul: I say,
Pompeianus; whose Age had long ago been rewarded with that Office, but that
other extraordinary Men have intervened, to whom it was just to pay the Honor,
that the State has owed them. Now as for what concerns the Defection of
Cassius, I beg and conjure you Fathers of the Senate, that you would continue
to me, nay to your selves, the Character of Piety and Clemency, and let the
Senate put none to death. Let not one member of the Senate be put to death, nor
the blood be spilt of any one that is Noble. Let the banished return, and the
Proscribed receive their Estates. I wish I could raise even the dead to life
again. For Revenge is never good in an Emperor, it appears ill in his own
Cause(...) let it be never so just. You will give a Pardon therefore to the
Children of Avidius Cassius, his Son-in-Law, and his Wife. But why do I say
Pardon, when they have committed nothing? Let them live in safety, knowing that
they live under the Reign of Marcus Antoninus. Let them enjoy the Patrimony of
their Parents, which has in part been already granted to them. Let them have
the Gold, the Silver, and the Wardrobe. Let them be rich. Let them be safe. Let
them have their full Liberty, and in the sight of all People. Let them be as so
many instances of mine, and instances of your Clemency. Nor is this such a
great Grace, Fathers of the Senate, to grant a Pardon to the Wives and Children
of persons Proscribed. I do further desire of you, that such of the Senatorian,
and Equestrian Orders, as have been Accomplices in this Defection, be Protected
also by your Authority from Murder, from Proscription, from Fear, from Infamy,
from Envy, and from all kind of Injury; and that you allow this Honor to my
Reign, that none upon these accounts are killed in it, but who only in the very
Tumults are killed.

This great Clemency of his was followed by the Senate, with these
Acclamations. The Gods preserve Antoninus the Pious, the Gods save Antoninus
the Merciful. O Antoninus the Merciful! the Gods save you. Your Majesty has
refused to do what you very well might have done: we have done but what became
us. Make Commodus, your Son, Emperor with you Strengthen your Race. See that
your Children are safe. No Force can touch a good Reign. We beg the Tribunitian
Power for Commodus Antoninus. We beg the Presence of your Majesty with us. We
Congratulate you for your Philosophy, your Patience, your Learning, your
Nobility, your Innocence. You conquen your Foes. You surmount your Enemies. The
Gods save you.

So the Posterity of Avidius Cassius lived in Safety, and were admitted unto
Honors, till Commodus Antoninus succeeded after the Death of his Father, and
then commanded them all to be burnt alive, as much as if he had surprised them
in the very Act of some Treason.

This then is what we have found concerning Avidius Cassius, who in his Temper
was always various, but more especially propense to Correction and Cruelty: But
yet if he had carried the Empire, he would have been flattered with the Name of
not only of a Gracious, but an Useful, and an Excellent Prince.

A Letter to his Son-in-Law, which he writ in the time, that he acted the
Emperor, is in part as follows.
UNhappy State! How miserably does it suffer under the Power of the Rich, and
Men thirsting to be so? Marcus is an excellent Person truly; who to get himself
the Title of Merciful, suffers those to live, whose Lives he condemns at the
same time! Where is now that Lucius Cassius, whose Name I bear, though I am
unworthy of it? Where is that Marcus Cato, the Censor? Where is all the
Discipline of our Fore fathers, which decayed long ago, but now is not so much
as asked for? Marcus Antoninus Philosophises, and Disputes about Clemency and
the Soul, to Justice and Honesty; and never thinks of the State. You see there
is ^eed of a severe Hand, to reduce things to the Condition they were in in
ancient Times. For my part, I wish to those Presidents of the provinces, all
the Chastisement that they deserve. What can I think them Proconsuls, or think
them Presidents, who live, as if the Provinces were given them by the Senate,
and by Marcus the Emperor, only to be Luxurions in, and to get to be Rich? You
have heard of the Captain of the Guards to our Philosopher. He who three Days
before was a Beggar, and a poor Rat, is now become a rich Man on a sudden. From
whence, I pray, but out of the Bowels of the State, and the Fortunes of the
People of the Provinces? Well, let them be Rich, let them be Wealthy, they will
so much the more enrich the public Coffers. The Gods favor only an honest
Cause, and the Friends of Cassius shall restore the Empire.


This Letter very well shows, what a strict sort of an Emperor Cassius would
have made, if he had reigned.

M. COMMODVS ANTONIUS AVG. PIUS.

portrait of Commodus Antoninus

DIVVS PERT. PIUS PATER.

portrait of Pertinax

IMP. CAES. M. DID. SEVER. IVLIAN. AVG.

portrait of Didius Julianus

L. SEPT. SEV. PERT. AVG. IMP. VIII

portrait of Septimius Severus

D. CLOD. SEPT. ALBIN. CAES.

portrait of Clodius Albinus

M. AVREL. ANTONIUS PIUS AVG. BRIT.

portrait of Caracalla

P. 175. Vol 1

THE Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Commodus Antoninus,
BY AELIUS LAMPRIDIUS: Addressed to the EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN.
AS for what concerns the Family of His Extraction.
Commodus Antoninus, we have spoken sufficiently already upon that Head in the
Life of his Father Marcus. He was born at Lavinia, the Day before the Calends
of September, under the Consulships of his Father and his Uncle. It is said,
his Grandfather by his Mother's side had been formerly born at the same place.
When Faustina was big of him, she dreamt, She should be brought to Bed of two
Serpents, but that one of them was more Fierce than the other. So she was
brought to Bed of Commodus and Antoninus, at one Birth; the latter died at four
Years of Age, and yet the Mathematicians had promised him by his Stars, an
equal Fortune and Life with Commodus.

Marcus Antoninus educated Commodus as well, His Preceptors.
according to his own Precepts, as to those of the great and the best Men.
Onesicritus was his Master in the Greek; Capella Antistius in the Latin, and
Atteius Sanctus in Rhetoric. But as many Masters as he had in the good Arts,
they signified nothing to him; whether the Fault was in his natural Genius, or
in those who had the Conduct of his Youth at the Court. For from a Boy, he was
Naught, Filthy, Cruel, Lewd without Shame; at the same time, Excellent at
things not belonging to the Quality of an Emperor, as Glass-making, Dancing,
Singing, Playing upon the Pipe; a Buffoon, and a Gladiator in Perfection. He
gave an early mark of his Cruelty at Civita Vecchia, in the Twelfth Year of his
Age; when Bathing, and the Water happening, to be a little too hot, he
commanded his Servant to take the Man that attended the Bath, and throw him
into the Furnace: In whose stead, the Servant threw in a Sheep-skin, which he
did, to make him believe, that it was indeed the Bagnio man, by the filthiness
of the Stench. He had the Title of Caesar given him, when a Boy, together with
Verus, a Brother of his; and in his Fourteenth Year, he was entered into the
College of the Priests.

He was declared Prince of the Roman Youth, at the same time that he put on the
Man's, that is, the Roman Gown; before which, he had already given a Largess to
the People. He put on that Gown upon the Nones of July, the Day that Romulus
died, and the Year that Cassius revolted from Marcus Antoninus. He went with
his Father into Syria and Egypt, and returned with him again back to Rome. Then
by a Dispensation of the Law, as to his Age, he was made Consul; and upon the
Fifth of the Calends of December, under the Consulships of Pollio and Aper, he
was declared Emperor He is declared Emperor, A. C. CLXXXI.
in Conjunction with his Father, and triumphed with him; the Senate having
decreed it so to his Honor. He went with his Father to the German War: But as
for such of the Officers of his Court, and of his Attendants, as were Persons
of Virtue, he could never endure them. All the worst sort of Men he gladly kept
in his Service; and if they were removed from him, he was sick till he had them
again. Hence he made a Tavern and His Debauchery.
a Bawdy house continually of the Court, never sparing for Cost or Modesty;
playing at Dice, and hiring the lewd Women of the Town, which were any thing
pretty, to be with him, to make a Sport with in all manner of Debauchery.
Sometimes he went about the Markets with small Wares like a Pedlar; sometimes
he was a Horse-Merchant, sometimes he drove his own Chariots in the Coachmen's
Clothes. He eat and drank with Gladiators, pimped to the Whores with Washes,
and appeared to be born rather for the most infamous uses, than for that Place
unto which Fortune raised him.

He turned off at his coming to the Empire, his Father's old Servants, and his
old Friends. And one day he made an attempt upon the Modesty of a Son of
Salvius Julianus, who was one of his Commanders. But being repulsed, he ever
after stuck upon the skirts of his Father. All the best sort of Men about the
Court were turned away, either in disgrace, or by removing them to other places
which were unworthy of them. The Mimicks represented him, as a Burdash, for
which he presently banished them. He quitted the War which his Father had
almost finished, and granted to the Enemy every thing that they desired, and
then came to Rome; where when he triumphed, he had one Soaterus in the Chariot
with him at his back, to whom he many times turned about, and kissed him
publicly; and so he did in the Cirque. In the Evenings he gave himself the
Liberty to run up and down to the Taverns and the Bawdy-houses; he made Men
Governors of the Provinces, who were either the Companions of his Crimes, or
recommended by as ill as those that were: which brought him so much on the one
hand into the hatred, and on the other into the contempt of the Senate, that he
set himself in Revenge upon the destruction of that great Order.

In fine, the Cruelty of Commodus was a thing that moved Quadratus and Lucilla
to enter into a Conspiracy to kill him, not without the privity of Tarruntinus
Paternus the Captain of the Guards. The care of giving him the fatal Blow, was
committed to Claudius Pompeianus his Kinsman; who going in to him with a
Poniard, prepared for that purpose, as he had his Opportunity to strike, he
broke out first into these Words, The Senate sends you this; whereby detecting
his Design too soon, he A Conspiracy against him defeated.
failed to accomplish it, the Company taking the Part of Commodus. Upon this in
the first place, Pompeianus and Quadratus, were put to Death; then Norbana, and
Norbanus, with Paralius and his Mother; and Lucilla was banished. Another
Reason of Commodus his falling into so great an odium, being upon the Account
of Saoterus, whose Power the People of Rome could not brook; the Captains of
the Guards very civilly drew this Man out of the Court, under the color of
going to assist at some Sacrifice, and as he was returning back again, their
Spies (that they had set) fell upon him, and killed him. This was worse taken
by Commodus, than the Conspiracy that had been formed against himself; and
looking upon Tarruntinus Paternus to be the Author of it, as he was, and privy
also to the intended Assassination of his own Person, he first removed him from
his Place and Power of Captain of the Guards, by the way of doing him the
Honor to make him a Senator, (because these two Places were then inconsistent
with one another) and in a few days after, he charged him, not only with the
said Conspiracy, but with promising his Daughter in marriage to the Son of
Julianus, in order as he pretended, that the Empire should be transferred upon
Julianus. So both Paternus, and His cruel Severity.
Julianus, and Vitruvius Secundus, who was a particular Friend of Paternus, and
who was one of the Secretaries to Commodus, were put to Death. All the House of
the Quintilii were extinguished, except Sextus the Son of Condianus Quintilius
who passed under the notion of being dead. Vitrasia Faustina, Velius Rufus, and
Egnatius Capito were put to Death; the latter of which had been a Consul. The
Consuls Aemilius Junctus, and Attilius Severus were banished, and many others
were severely treated in diverse ways.

Commodus did not so easily appear after this in Public, nor suffer himself to
be spoken with upon any Business, but what was first referred to Perennis; who
knowing very we(...) Perennis. governs all.
the Inclinations of his Master, took the Opportunity which was now in his
hands, to aggrandize his own Person. He persuaded Commodus, that he had nothing
to do, but to pursue his Pleasures, while he took care of the Affairs of the
State, to which Commodus consented without Difficulty. So Commodus (...)ving
with his Three Hundred Concubines, o^ the handsomest he could get of the Ladie^
and the Mistresses of the Town, and with Three Hundred other Bardaccio's which
he had collected indifferently out of the Plebeians and the Gentry by their
Beauties, passed his time in Revels, and in Feasts, and the Baths; sometimes he
butchered the Sacrifices himself, in the stead of the Sacrificator, whose
Office that was; sometimes he fought upon the public Stage with the Gladiators
at Foils, and sometimes at home with own Servants at sharps. Perennis was the
Minister in the mean time that did every thing. Whom he would, he put to Death;
others he plundered. He subverted all the Laws, and whatever he took, he put it
into his own Pocket. As for Commodus, he first ravished, and then killed his
Sister His Incests.
Lucilla. He violated in like manner the rest of his own Sisters, and lay with
a Cousin-German of his Fathers, and gave the Names of his Mother and of his own
Wife to one of his Concubines; which Lady he afterward taking great with
another Man, he turned her off, banished her, and then killed her. Yet he has
other times commanded his own Concubines to be enjoyed by others in his sight;
nor was he without the most scandalous use of Boys. He corrupted himself with
both the Sexes, in every part of his Body, even to his Mouth. Claudius
Pompeianus, whose Son had gone into the Chamber to him with the Poinyard, was
set upon, as if it were by Thieves at this time, and killed. Many other
Senators were, without Law or Judgment upon them, executed, and some rich
Ladies. Others in the Provinces were for their Riches, first falsely accused,
then plundered or killed. And if they wanted a Crime to fasten upon them, it
was enough to say, that they had refused to assign the Inheritance of their
Estates to the Emperor.

The Affairs of Sarmatia about this time passed very well, which Perennis
attributed to the Conduct of his Son there, when indeed the Honor of it was
due to the other Commanders. But at last this Perennis, who was Perennis slain.
so Omnipotent in the Government, having displaced some Senators to put in
others who were of the Equestrian Order, to command in the Army that served in
the War in Great Britain; and the thing being remonstrated against by their
Deputies, he was on a sudden declared an Enemy of the Army, and delivered up to
be torn in pieces by the Soldiers; and Cleander, one of the Officers of the
Bedchamber, was appointed to succeed in his place. Then after the Death of
Perennis and his Son, who was also killed, Commodus rescinded several of his
Acts, as if they had not been done by his Order, and as if he was
reestablishing all things in their first Estate. But he could not hold on this
show and pretense of Repentance above Thirty Days; committing worse things
afterward by the Ministry of Cleander, than he had before by Cleander succeeds
in his Ministry.
that of Perennis. It was in his Ministry only that Cleander had succeeded to
Perennis. For as for his Place of Captain of the Guards, Niger had that, and
possessed it, they say, but six hours. For the Captains of the Guards were
changed daily and hourly; Commodus carrying himself in every thing now, worse
than he had done before. Martius Quartus was Captain of the Guards five Days;
the rest that followed after him, were either retained or put to Death at the
Pleasure of Cleander; by whose Authority, manumitted Slaves were brought into
the Senate, and made Patricians. We had then Five and Twenty Consuls in One
Year, which was never known before. The Governments of all the Provinces were
sold. For Cleander made a Sale of every thing for Money. He re-called what
Exiles he pleased, and put them into Offices, and rescinded the Acts of the
Courts. He prevailed so much over the Weakness of Commodus, that when Byrrhus,
who was Commodus's Sister's Husband, took the Liberty to blame his Ministry,
and to tell Commodus what had been done, he made no more, but charged him with
High Treason in Revenge for it, upon which he put him to Death, and many others
with him, who had stood in the Defense of him. Amongst the rest was Aebutianus
the Captain of the Guards, in whose place Cleander himself succeeded in
Conjunction with Two others of his own nomination; which was the first time
that there were Three Captains of the Guards together, and one of those was a
late Slave made free.

But at length Cleander also met with that end that his Life deserved. For
having by Treachery, and upon false Accusations, condemned and put to Death
Arrius Antoninus, the Proconsul of Asia, in favor of Atallus, at which the
People were so incensed, that Commodus could not sustain the Envy that it had
brought upon him; he was delivered up as a Sacrifice to the People, and
Apolaustus Cleander slain.
and others of his Creatures about the Court, were killed with him. Amongst
other things that he had done, he gave himself the Liberty to use his Master's
own Concubines, by whom he had Children, who after his Death were killed,
together with their Mothers. His Successors were Julianius and Regillus, who
were afterward also killed by Commodus. The same Fate befell Servilius and
Duillius, with all that belonged to them. Then he killed Antius Lupus,
Petronius Mamertinus, Suras, and Antoninus, who was his Sister^s Son by
Mamertinus. Then he put to Death six others at once, who had all been Consuls,
to wit, Allius Fuscus, Celius Felix, Luceius Torquatus, Lartius Euripianus,
Valerius Bassianus, and Pactumeius Magnus, together with all those that
belonged to them. In Asia he put to Death Sulpitius Crassus, the Proconsul;
Julius Proculus, and Claudius Lucanus, a Consul. He put to Death Faustina
Annia, his Father's Cousin-German in Achaia, and an infinite Number of others.
He had marked out Fourteen others ready for the Slaughter, then when his own
time came, and when the Roman Empire with all its Power was no longer able to
sustain his Weight.

Now whilst these things past, the Senate in secret Derision of him, upon his
making his Mother's Gallant a Consul, called him the Commodus flattered by the
Senate.
Pious Commodus; and when he had cut off Perennis, they called him the Happy
Commodus. So this Pious, this Happy Commodus, to add to the many Murders that
he had committed daily, as if he was a New Sylla, contrived and invented a Plot
upon himself, for an occasion still of Murdering more. By flattery they styled
him likewise, Conqueror of the Britains, when the Britains would have set up
an Emperor against him. They called him the Roman Hercules, because he had
slain Wild Beasts in the Amphitheatre at Lavinia; which was a common Exploit
with him. He arrived to that degree of Vanity, that he would have the City of
Rome to be called the Colony of Commodus; which was a thing that he was put
upon amidst his Gallantries with Martia his Mistress. He drove in Person the
Chariots in the Races in the Cirque. He appeared in public in a Dalmatick,
which is an effeminate Habit, and gave the Signal to the Chariots to start.
When he signified his Pleasure to the Senate about New Naming the City of Rome,
Colonia Commodiana, they pretended, not only willingly to accept the
Proposition, but called by derision their own Assembly, the House of Commodus,
and him nothing less than a Hercules and a God.

He once pretended, that he would make a Voyage into Africa; but it was for no
other end, than under that pretense, he might exact Money for his Charges, as
he did, and spent it when he had done, in Feasting and Gaming. He poisoned
Motilenus, a Captain of the Guards with a Fig. He had his Statues set up in the
Habit of a Hercules, and they sacrificed to him as to a God. He observed the
Sacrifices of Isis, His strange Pranks.
insomuch, that he shaved his Head, and bore the Image of Anubis upon his
Shoulders about the City. He obliged the Priests of Bellona, out of a Spirit of
cruelty, really, to cut and slash their Arms; and the Priests of Isis, to beat
their Breasts with Pines, in earnest, till they had almost killed themselves.
As he assisted at the carrying about of the Image of Anubis, he diverted
himself with giving the Priests now and then, a good knock with the Head of it.
Old Men that were lame and weak that they could not walk, he took, and dressed
them up so, that with the Clouts and Patches which he put about them, they
looked like so many Dragons, and then he made it his Sport to shoot them
through with Darts. He polluted the Sacrifices of the Sun with real Homicides;
whereas what at other times is used to be said or acted there of that kind, is
only a Matter of Show.

From an Infant, he was ravenous and dissolute; he debauched all sorts of
Persons that came about him; and if any dared to deride him, he cast them to
the Wild Beasts. He did this to one who had but read to him the Life of
Caligula out of Suetonius, because it appeared, that he and Caligula were born
upon the same day. If any one had happened to say, Would I was dead, he put him
to death at his word, whether he would or no. He was a pernicious Man in his
Jests. He slashed open a fat Man cross the Belly, for the Curiosity to see in
an instant his great Guts. When he had cut off a Leg of any one, he said, He
was now of the Nation of the Monopodii; and when he had cut out an Eye, he
called him Luscinius (a Nightingal) by an allusion to the word Luscus, which
signifies one-eyed. He murdered many in a way of gayety in places up and down;
sometimes because he met them ill dressed, sometimes on the contrary, because
they looked noble and handsome. He was pleased with Men of obscene Names, and
often kissed them. He had one Man with him called Onon, who exceeding in a
private Part, the measure of almost any Animal, he was extremely dear and kind
to him, and preferred him to be the Ruler over the Priests of Hercules Rusticus.

With humane ordure it is said, he defiled often his best Dishes of Meat, and
then pleased himself in drawing in the Company to eat of them. He pusht
Julianus a Captain of the Guards, into a Pond in his Clothes, as he was
waiting; and at another time he commanded him to Dance naked before his
Concubines, playing upon a Cymbal, with his Face disfigured. He seldom was
without all sorts of Beans, Pease and Pulse-meats at his Table, for the benefit
of their provocativeness. He bathed seven or eight times a day, and sometimes
eat in the very Baths. He polluted the Temples of the Gods with Whoredoms, and
Murders; sometimes he pretended to play the Surgeon, and to let Blood: but then
he cut off an Ear, or a Nose, with the Instruments. The Months of the Year were
new-named by his Flatterers, according as he was pleased to have them. August
was called Commodus, September was called August, October was called Hercules,
November was called Invincible, December was called Exuperatorius, and January
Amazonius: which last Title was one that was occasioned by his Concubine
Martia; whom he fell in love with, by seeing her pictured in the dress of an
Amazon; for which reason he sometimes also appeared in the Amphitheatre himself
in an Amazonian Dress. He entered the Lists with the Gladiators, and has been
as much pleased to be huzza'd by the Mob upon those times, as if he had
received a Triumph. He practiced the Weapons in the Common School, where the
Gladiators learn them. Every time that he Fought he ordered it to be entered
upon the Public Records; and in all, it is said, he Fought seven hundred and
thirty five times.

He was created the Caesar, the fourth of the Ides of October, under the
Consulships of Pudens and Pollio. He received the honor of the Title of
Conqueror of the Germans upon the same Ides, in the Consulships of Maximus and
Orphitus. He past into the Colleges of the Priests upon the thirteenth of the
Calends of November, when Piso and Julianus were Consuls. He went into Germany,
the 14. of the Calends of June (which Month he afterward called Aelius) under
the Consulships of the same Persons. He put on the Roman Gown, and was declared
Emperor in Conjunction with his Father, the fifth of the Calends of December,
when Pollio and Aper were Consuls, which was then the second Consulship of
Pollio. He triumphed upon the tenth of the Calends of January, the same Persons
being Consuls. He went his second Journey into Germany, the third of the Nones
of August, when Orphitus and Ruffus were Consuls. And as he was thinking upon a
third Expedition, the Senate and the People of Rome detained him from it.
Together with these things, it is upon Record, that he fought in Public before
his Father died, three hundred sixty and five times. He did it again so often
afterward, and still with success, that he subscribed himself the Conqueror of
a thousand Gladiators. He killed many Thousands of wild Beasts of diverse sorts
with his own hand, amongst the rest Elephants; and this he did often, in the
sight of all the People of Rome.

In all these things as vigorous as he was, His great Strength.
he had yet a Rupture in his Scrotum, so large that one might discern it
through his Silks. Many Verses were made upon him, which Marius Maximus has
Collected with care. His strength in killing the wild Beasts was such, that at
once he has struck an Elephant through with his Spear, and pierced the Horn of a
wild Goat with his Lance, and killed thousands of great wild Beasts, one after
another, at a blow. He came to the Theater and Amphitheatre often in Women's
Clothes, in which he impudently called for Wine, and drank in the sight of all
the Company. It was thus that he past his time, whilst his Lieutenants abroad
overcame the Moors and the Dacae, and composed the Troubles of Pannonia. For
the Provinces of Great Britain, Germany and Dacia, had endeavored to reject
the Yoke of his Empire: but his Lieutenants quieted them. He did not care to
trouble himself so much as His Negligence.
to subscribe his Dispatches. In many of which he used the same form; and in
several of his Letters all that he writ was the word Farewell.

By this sort of Negligence, and with that waste of Provisions together, which
was made by those who were in Power under him, there arose a great scarcity at
Rome, in a year that was not itself unfruitful. So upon this, he put several
that had made that waste, to Death, and Confiscated their Estates. Then he
lessened the Prices of things; but that made the Scarcity still greater. Many
in his time bought off another's Punishment, and purchased their own safety
with Money. He made Money by Commutations of one Punishment for another, and by
the Sepultures of the dead, and by putting to death some in others steads. He
sold the Governments of the Provinces: part of the Money going to those by whom
he sold them, and part to himself: He sold to some Persons the Massacre of
those they hated: and by his example, his Servants made a Sale of the Justice
of the Courts. He did not long continue either Paternus or Perennis, Captains
of the Guards. Neither did any of their Successors, keep in so long as three
entire years under him: because he dispatched them either with Poison, or the
Sword: and with the same facility he changed the Governors of the City of Rome.

He made nothing of putting to death the Officers of his Household, though they
were Men who had been used to advise him in all things. One of them, by name
Electus or Aelius Laetus, perceiving this, resolved to be before Hand with him,
and so engaged with the Party that Conspired to his death. Besides, he had this
Custom with him, that every thing he did, though never so Base, Impure, Cruel,
Gladiator, or Pimp-like, he ordered it to be entered upon the Records of the
City. One day fighting as a Gladiator, and fancying that the People derided
him, he had given Orders to Massacre them all upon the place, and burn the
City: which had been Executed but that the Captain of the Guards deterred him
from it. He has been called six hundred times by the name of Patus, that is,
the name of the Chief of the Gladiators; and triumphed in it.

The Prodigies that attended his Reign, whether Public or Private ones, were
these. A Prodigies in his Reign.
Comet appeared. The Statues of the Gods in the Forum moved their Feet, as if
they had a mind to be gone. An excessive heat of Weather. On the Calends of
January a great darkness on a sudden covered the Cirque. Ominous Birds came in
the night. He removed out of the Palace; because, he said, he could not
possibly sleep there, unto a House upon Mount Caelius. The Temple of Janus
opened of it self, and the Marble Image of Anubis appeared to move. The Brazen
Statue of Hercules, which is at one of the Gates of Rome, Sweat for several
days. An Owl appeared over his Bedchamber, both at Rome and at Lavinia. He
obliged Persons to come to the Games of the Gladiators, not in their Gowns, but
in such other Coats as they ordinarily were at Funerals, and presided at them
himself dressed in Black. His Helmet fell off of his Head twice at the Gate
called the Gate of Death, through which the dead are carried out of the City.

At length, although too too late, Quintus Aelius Laetus the Captain of the
Guards, and Martia, one of the Concubines of Commodus, entered upon a Conspiracy
to kill him. They first gave him Poison; but that operating ineffectually, He
is slain.
they strangled him by the Hands of one with whom he was used to Wrestle for
Exercise.

He was of a just size and shape of Body, a His Personage.
heavy sottish sort of a Look, no fine Discourse, yellow Hair, which he used
Art with to make it still yellower: his Beard he took off himself, for fear of
trusting to a Barber. Both the Senate and the People desired to have him
dragged, and thrown into the Tyber: but Pertinax buried him in the Sepulcher of
Hadrian.

There are no Works of his extant, besides the Baths, which Cleander built in
his name. He did not so much as perfect those of his Father. Where he had cut
his own name upon the Works of others, the Senate erased it again. He set up a
Corn-fleet to Carthage, to be for a relief, in case that other from Alexandria,
and the Corn from thence should chance to fail: upon which he ridiculously
called the City of Carthage, Alexandria Commoda Togata, and this Fleet of his
Commodiana Herculea. He added some Ornaments to the Statue of the Sun, which
were all afterward abolished. In the Place of the Head of Nero, he had put up
his own upon the Body of it, with all his empty Titles at the bottom; not
forgetting that of his Conquests over so many Gladiators, and that of
Amazonius, which he took from his Mistress. All which notwithstanding the
Emperor Severus, who was one that in no wise indeed differed from his name,
made this Prince a God, out of his opposition, as it is supposed, to the
Senate: and he appointed him the same Chief Priest, under the same Title, to
ferve him, that Commodus had provided for himself before he died.

He left behind him three Sisters. The same Emperor Severus ordered the
Anniversary of his Birth to be observed. The Imprecations of the Senate against
him after his death were extraordinary: and because it is fit to know them, I
will set them down out of Marius Maximus, together with the Decree of the
Senate.

Let the Enemy of his Country be degraded of The Senate's Decree upon him.
all his Honors. Let the Parricide be degraded of his Honors. Let the Parricide
be dragged. An Enemy of his Country, a Parricide, a Gladiator, let him Rot upon
the Dunghill. An Enemy of the Gods. A Butcherer of the Senate. An Enemy of the
Gods. A Parricide of the Senate. An Enemy of the Gods. An enemy of the Senate.
A Gladiator, to the Dunghill. He Murdered the Senators, throw him to the
Dunghill; drag hi^ about the Streets. He murdered the Innocent, drag him about
the Streets. An Enemy, a Parricide, that spared not his own Blood, let him be
dragged about the Streets. He who would have murdered your Majesty, let him be
dragged about the Streets Your Majesty was in the same fear with us, in the
same danger with us. Preserve Pertinax, thou most great, most excellent
Jupiter; so we also shall be safe. We Congratulate the Fidelity of the Guards.
We Congratulate the Praetorian Bands. We Congratulate the Roman Armies. We
Congratulate the Piety of the Senate. Let the Parricide be dragged. We beg of
your Majesty, that the Parricide may be dragged. We beg this, that the
Parricide be dragged. Hear us, Caesar; the Delatours to the Lions! Hear us
Caesar; Delators to the Lions! Hear us Caesar, Speratus to the Lions. We
Congratulate the Victory of the People of Rome. We Congratulate the Fidelity of
the Soldiers. We Congratulate the Fidelity of the Guards. We Congratulate the
Praetorian Bands. Down every where with the Enemies Statues. Down every where
with the Parricide's Statues. Down every where with the Gladiator's Statues.
Down with the Statues of the Gladiator and the Parricide. Let the Murderer of
his People be dragged. Let the Parricide of his People be dragged. Down with
the Statues of the Gladiator. Under your Majesty we are safe. Now we are Free;
now we are Secure; and the Delators in fear. Let the Delators be ever in fear,
and we in safety: Degrade them, Cudgel them, cast them to the Lions, Cudgel
them to death.

Let the memory of the Parricide, the Gladiator, be abolished. Let the Statues
of the Parricide, the Gladiator, be taken down. Let the memory of the filthy
Gladiator be abolished. The Gladiator, to the Dunghill. Hear, Caesar, let the
Murderer be dragged about the Streets. Let the Murderer of the Senate be
dragged about the Streets, after the manner of old. He who was Crueller than
Domitian, and Filthier than Nero; thus did, thus let him suffer. Let the
Memories of the Innocent be preserved with Honor. We beseech your Majesty,
restore the Honors of the Innocent. Let the Carcass of the Parricide be dragged
about the Streets. Let the dead Body of the Gladiator be dragged about the
Streets. Let the Carcass of the Gladiator be thrown upon the Dunghill. Ask, ask
us all, if we do not all Judge him to be dragged about the Streets. He who
Murdered all sorts of Persons, let him be dragged about the Streets: that
spared no Age, let him be dragged about the Streets, that spared no Sex, let
him be dragged about the Streets: that spared not his own Blood, let him be
dragged about the Streets. He who Plundered the Temples, let him be dragged
about the Streets: that abolished the last Testaments of the dead, let him be
dragged about the Streets: that robbed the living, let him be dragged about the
Streets. We have been Slaves to his Slaves: He who sold the Lives of his
People, let him be dragged about the Streets: that took the Money, and yet kept
not his faith, let him be dragged about the Streets. He who sold the Senate,
let him be dragged about the Streets: that deprived Children of the Inheritance
of their Fathers, let him be dragged about the Streets: Delators, Informers,
Suborners of false Witnesses, be for ever banished the Senate. Even your
Majesty has been in the same fear with us. You know all things. You have seen
the good, and the bad. You know all things. Amend all things. We have been in
fear for you. O happy we in your Life and Reign! This about the Parricide, is
the Advice, the Judgment, the Decree of us all round. We beg your Presence
among us. The Innocent lie unburied; let the Carcass of the Parricide be
dragged. The Parricide has pulled the very Dead out of their Graves, let the
Carcass of the Parricide be dragged.

But the Body of Commodus being however by Livius Larensis his Servant,
delivered into the hands of Fabius Chilo, the Consul, (...) was privately
buried in the night by the order of Pertinax. Hereupon the Senate exclaimed, By
whose doing is this, that he is Buried? Let the Parricide be taken up again out
of the place where he is, and be dragged. Then Cineius Severus said, He is
Buried against Law: as I say this, as a High Priest, the whole College of the
Priests says the same: And I am further obliged to declare and pronounce, That
as he lived to the destruction of the People and his own shame, his Statues are
every where to be destroyed, destroyed: His Name to be erased out of all the
public and private Monuments, and the Months of the Year to return to be
called by the old Names they had, when first this Pest befell the State.

THE A. Christi CXCIV.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Publius Helvius Pertinax.
BY JULIUS CAPITOLINUS.
PUblius Helvius Pertinax was the Son of His Extraction.
Helvius Successus, who was the Son of a late Slave made free. He had the Name
of Pertinax given him by his Father, from nothing but his wilful and
pertinacious adherence for a long time, to the poor Occupation of his Father,
which was drying and burning of Wood, and making of Charcoal. He was born in a
Village in the Apennine; and at the same time, an Accident happened at his
Birth, which moved his Father to go to an Astrologer to enquire about his
Fortune; who telling him such great and such extraordinary things of him, as
were past his belief, he said, he had but flung away his Money in consulting
him. After he had begun to take to Letters, and had studied Arithmetic and
Greek, and was put into the hands of Sulpitius Apollinaris, he came to be a
Professor of Grammar himself. But making but little Advantage by it, he changed
that course of Life, and by the means of Lollius Avitus, who was his Father's
Patron, and had been a Consul, he got himself made a Centurion. Then he rose to
be a Captain of a Cohort in Syria, which is a Body of Foot of, it may be, Six
Hundred Men; and going Post into Syria in the Reign of Antoninus Pius, without
the Authority of the Emperor's Letters so to do, the President of Syria obliged
him to follow the rest of his Journey, to his Command, on Foot, as far as from
the City of Antioch.

He deserved very well by his Services in the His public Employments.
Parthian War, which made him be translated into Bithynia. Then he commanded a
Part of the Army in Moesia, and afterward in Germany, where his Mother who had
followed him thither died, and her Sepulcher is said to be standing at this
day. From Germany he was removed to be the Governor of Dacia, with a Salary of
Two Hundred Sestertium's; but the Emperor Marcus Antoninus, being made to
suspect him as one that was ambitious of the Empire, he was re-called from that
Government, and was afterward chosen by Claudius Pompeianus, the Son-in-Law of
Marcus Antoninus, to be his Assistant in the Command of the Auxiliaries. He
behaved himself so well, that he was created in the next place a Senator. And
his Innocence appearing, as to the Ambition of which before he was maliciously
accused, for a compensation of that Injury done him, the Emperor made him a
Praetor, and gave him the Command of the First Legion; by the means whereof, he
presently recovered Rhaetia, and the Country of Noricum from the Enemy. This
was so Eminent a Service, that the Emperor made him a Consul; who very often in
public in his Speeches, which it would be too long here to insert, but one of
them is extant in Marius Maximus, commended him both to the Soldiers and the
Senate, and expressed himself before all the World, sorry, that he could not
make him a Captain of the Guards, because of his being a Senator. After the
Rebellion of Cassius was at an end, Pertinax was commanded out of Syria, to the
Defense of the Danube. Next he was made Governor of both the Moesia's, and
then of Dacia; and from his well managing of those Provinces, he gained the
Government of Syria.

Hitherto, that is, to his Government of Syria, he had conducted himself, in a
manner that was altogether unblameable. But after the Death of Marcus
Antoninus, he strangely applied his Care to the amassing of Money; which failed
not to bring upon him the Reproaches of the People. He came a very rich Man
into the Senate; where he first appeared to take his place in Person, in the
time of Commodus, after he had been the Governor of Four Consular Provinces,
and had had the Honor of a Consulship given him in his absence. But it was not
long before Perennis, the great Minister under that Prince, banished him, and
commanded him to retire to the Village, in the State of Genoa, where his Father
had kept his Charcoal-Kiln. So he came, and being there, he bought himself a
great quantity of Land, and surrounded his Father's Kiln, which he left
standing in the same Form as it was before, with an infinite company of fine
Buildings. He resided there three whole Years, in which he past his time in his
old Trade, which he carried on by his Servants. After Perennis was killed,
Commodus took Pertinax into Favor, and ordered him to go into Great Britain.
He went, and repressed the Mutiny of the Forces there, who were for setting up
a New Emperor. They would have set up even Pertinax himself. Nor was it without
much difficulty that he appeased their Seditions. He was almost killed in one
of them, at least he was left among the dead; which he severely resented and
punished. Then he desired leave to be re-called, because he said his Discipline
amongst them had made the Army averse to him. So another Person being appointed
to succeed him, he was first made General of the Provisions, and soon after the
Proconsul of Africa.

During his Proconsulship of Africa, he was, they say, troubled with several
Seditions there also, occasioned by the pretended Prophesies of the Goddess
Caelest is at Carthage. Then he was made the Governor of the City of Rome, in
which place succeeding Fuscianus, who was a most severe Man, and he behaving
himself on the contrary with the greatest mildness and humanity, he pleased
every one, and amongst the rest, Commodus so well, that he He is made Consul,
took him to be Consul in Conjunction with himself; which was then the Seventh
time of the Consulship of Commodus. Then came on the Conspiracy to kill
Commodus, which Pertinax did not reject, when made acquainted with it; and the
thing being done, the Captain of the Guards, and Electus a great Officer of the
Household, came to him, and set him up for the Empire, and carried him to the
Camp. Pertinax harangued the Soldiers, and promised them a Donative. He told
them, how that those Two great Officers had thought him a Person, not unworthy
to be proposed for the Empire, since Commodus was dead; not saying, that
Commodus was killed, but that he was dead of a Sickness only. In fine, Pertinax
And declared Emperor.
was saluted Emperor at the first but by a few. This was the day before the
Calends of January; and he was then above Sixty Years of Age. After this, late
that Night, he came from the Camp to the Senate; and the Chapel of the Senate
not being ready opened for him, he went into the Temple of Concord; where
Claudius Pompeianus, the Son-in-Law of Marcus Antoninus meeting him, and
Complementing him, Pertinax would have persuaded him, to have taken upon him
the Empire; but he refused it, because he saw that Pertinax was already the
Man. Immediately all the Magistracy with the Consuls came to the Senate, and as
soon as they were entered, they declared Pertinax Emperor, though it was then
midnight.

After the Consuls had set forth his Praises in such Speeches as the occasion
required, and that the Senate had also ended their Imprecations against the
Memory of Commodus, Pertinax returned his Solemn Thanks to them. He returned
his Thanks particularly to the Captain of the Guards, by whose means it was,
both that Commodus was cut off, and that himself was raised to be Emperor: And
though it was true, he said, as Falso objected, that the said Captain of the
Guards, and Martia together, had been the Instruments of many of the wicked
Deeds of Commodus, yet he told them, that they were to consider the Necessity
there was of obeying the Orders of that Prince; for otherwise, what they had
done was against their own Inclination. The same day, his Wife Flavia Titiana
was declared Empress. He was the first Emperor that ever received the Title of
Father of his Country, together with the Proconsular, and the Tribunitian
Powers, and the Right of a fourth Reference, the first day of his Reign. Which
thick and sudden accumulation of so many Honors, was looked upon as an Omen but
of a short Reign. Then he went to the Palace, which was void, because Commodus
had been killed in a House upon Mount Caelius, and the Tribune coming to him
the first day for the Watchword, his Word was, Militemus, let us Fight; which
was the same indeed that he had given before under all his Administrations; but
upbraiding by it, as it seemed, the remissness of the times past, the Soldiers
were touched to the Quick, and presently thought of changing the Emperor again.

The same day, being the first of the New Year, he invited the Magistrates, and
the Chief of the Senate to a Banquet, which was an ancient Custom that had been
however omitted by Commodus. The next day as the Statues of Commodus were
thrown down, the Soldiers appeared to be troubled, and so much the more,
because Pertinax had given them again the same Word as before; and War was a
thing not to be admitted, they thought, under an Emperor so old as he. Upon the
Third of the Nones following, though it was the Thanksgiving Day for his
accession to the Empire, they would have drawn Triarius Maternus Lascivius, a
Noble Senator, into the Camp, to have set up him to be Emperor; but he refused
it, and escaped from them, and came to the Court to Pertinax, to assure him of
his Fidelity, and afterward withdrew out of the Town. In the mean time, all
this obliged Pertinax in fear, to confirm to the Soldiers and the Veteranes,
all the Pay, and all the Gifts that had been granted them by Commodus. He also
courted the Senate, and owned himself to receive the Empire at their Hands. He
assured them under his Oath of his innocence from having had any hand in the
malversasation of the last Reign. He re-called such as were in Banishment, and
restored the Memories of others to their Honor, who had been unjustly put to
Death. The Senate conferred the Title of Caesar upon his Son: But as he had not
yet approved the Honor which they had shown to his Wife, so as to this of his
Son; he said, Let it be when he deserves it. And whereas Commodus had added by
his Authority many Persons to the Order of the Praetors, who had never
exercised the Office of a Praetor, and yet he allowed them to take their Places
in common with those that had; Pertinax passed an Edict as to this, to command,
that those who had never exercised the Office of a Praetor, but had received
that Honor only by the Creation of Commodus, should give place to such as had
been Praetors indeed; which brought an odium from many upon him.

He ordered the public Account of the His public Ordinances.
Estates, and the valuation of all Persons to be overlooked, and stated a new.
He ordered severe Punishments to be taken upon Persons that had informed
against others falsely. But yet he was not altogether so severe, as his
Predecessors, with Relation to Persons of Quality, who were brought before him
for any Crime. He made a Law, for the first Will always to stand good, until
another that is Posterior to it is established and received in due Form in its
stead. He declared, that as for himself, he would never enter upon any
Inheritance, which either was devoted to him in Flattery, or by any litigious
Right, or to the prejudice of the Lawful Heirs; using these Words upon the same
occasion, It is better, Fathers of the Senate, that the Crown should be poor,
than that it should get never so much Riches by ill means, and dishonorable
Actions. The Largesses to the Soldiers and the People, which himself, and also
Commodus had promised them, he paid. But yet the Exchequer was so extremely low
at his coming to the Crown, that he declared, he had not found in it above Ten
Sestertiums; so that this obliged him to exact some Payments which Commodus had
imposed, although he had before promised to remit them. Lollianus Gentianus a
Consul, asking him therefore why he broke his Word, he told, him the Reason
was, Necessity. He made an Auction of the Goods belonging to Commodus; ordered
his very Bardaccio's and Concubines to be sold, excepting such of them, as
appeared to have been retained in the Court by him by violence. And of those
which were sold, there were many that afterward redeemed their Fortunes, and
under other Princes arrived as high as to be Senators. The Buffoons and Jesters
of Commodus, such as were Men of obscene Names, he sold, and of the Money that
he made of this Negotiation, which was a great deal, he gave a Bounty to the
Soldiers. He exacted also from the Servants of Commodus, an Account of all
things that their Master had lavishly given them, to enrich them.

The most principal Things in the Auction Auction of Commodus' s Goods.
of the Goods of Commodus were these, Garments of Cloth of Gold, Tunicks,
Cloaks, Hanging-Coats, Dalmaticks, Fringed Vests, Coats of Mail, and others of
other sorts; Arms for the Exercises of the Gladiators, enriched with Jewels and
Gold, vast Herculean Swords; Collars for the Gladiators; Vessels of fine Gold,
Ivory, Silver and Citron; Drinking-Vessels, which were some of them of obscene
Figures; other Vessels belonging to the Arts of the Gladiators; Chariots of a
rare Invention, with the Seats to turn so, as either to decline the Sun, or
take in the Air, as you please; with other things to measure the Way, and show
the Hour; and whatever else was agreeable to the Pleasures of that Prince in
all sorts of Vices.

As for such Servants as had been taken out of private Houses into the Court,
Pertinax restored back those to their proper Masters. He reduced the Table, and
cut off all the prodigious Expenses of Commodus. He contented himself with a
little, and the Example of his Frugality was of great effect upon all things.
In fine, he reduced the Expense of the Household of the Emperor, to a Moiety of
what it was accustomed to be before.

He appointed certain Recompenses for the Soldiers that acquitted themselves
with Honor. The Debts that he contracted on the first occasions of his Reign,
he discharged. He restored the Credit of the Exchequer. He set apart a Sum for
Public Works. He gave Money for the Reparation of the Highways. He paid a
great many Soldiers that had served well, their Arrears. He put the Exchequer,
in a word, in a Condition to discharge its Debts. But whereas there was due to
the Alms-Children of Trajan's Establishment, the Allowances of Nine Years, he
quite sunk that Debt, which was severe, and a great Reflection upon him. It is
true, he was not exempt from the aspersion of Covetousness, in the time he was
a private Man. He had oppressed with Usury his Neighbors upon the Lake di
Sabat^, and had turned them out of their Lands, to extend further the Limits of
his own. He was called really a Money-monger; and many have writ, that he did
sordid things in the Consular Provinces which he governed; they say, that he
sold the Discharges from, and the Commands in the Army. His Parents had little
or no Estate to leave him, and no Inheritances fell to him from others, yet he
was grown a rich Man on a sudden. He restored after he was Emperor, to every
one, the Estates which were taken from them by Commodus, but yet he exacted a
Consideration for it. He came constantly to the Senate, and always reported
some thing or other to them. He showed himself always gracious to all those
that came to pay their Reverences to him, or ask him any Favor. He discharged
some from the Accusations of their Slaves, and avenged the Death of others by
crucifying their Accusers.

Whilst these things pased, Falco the Consul formed a Design against him, out
of an Ambition to set up himself. Pertinax complained in the Senate of it; but
however, forgave him, and begged his impunity of the Senate, whereby Falco
lived in Safety upon his Estate, and his Son was his Heir when he died. Many
indeed said in his behalf, that whatever Design there might have been amongst
others to make him Emperor, he knew nothing of it himself; and that the Slaves
who were his Accusers, did him wrong, and were corrupted, and had not agreed in
their Evidence. But however it is, a worse Faction than this was made against
Pertinax by Laetus, the Captain of the Guards, and those to whom the
Sanctimoniousness of this Prince was offensive. For Laetus had repented himself
of his Services in having advanced him to the Crown, because he had reproved
his Conduct in some things. Nor were the Soldiers without their Resentments,
because Pertinax had put to death several in the Business of Falco, upon the
simple Deposition of one Slave.

Therefore a Party of Three Hundred Soldiers Pertinax slain.
of the Guards, well equipped, assaulted the Palace, and killed him. The same
Day, no Heart was found in the Sacrifice, at which Pertinax had assisted; and
in another, no Liver. Therefore having intended to have gone that Day to the
Athenaeum, to hear the performances of a Poet; but putting it off, because of
the ominousness of the Sacrifices; the Guards that were to attend him, had
Orders to retire to their Camp, when on a sudden they turned upon the Palace,
from whence it was not possible to repel them, nor yet to give Advice to
Pertinax of them in due time: for all the Courtiers regarded him so little,
that they encouraged rather the Soldiers on to the Enterprise. So they
surprised him, as he was giving some Orders about the Affairs of his Household;
and being come up into the Gallery, as far as to a place which is called
Sicily, and the Banqueting-Hall of Jove, as soon as Pertinax knew of it, he
sent Laetus to them: but Laetus avoided them, and went another way, hiding his
Face, and slinked Home. After they were broken in further, Pertinax came forth
to them himself, and be spoke them in a long and a grave Oration which sweetened
them: till one Tausius, one of the Troop of Tongres that served in the Guards,
putting them into a new fre^, darted his Javelin at Pertinax's Breast; who then
Invocating Jupiter the Avenger, threw his Gown over his Head, and the rest fell
upon him, and Stabbed him. Electus died with him, having first killed two of
the Assassines. The other Officers of the Chamber that were about him, fled:
some say that the Soldiers had broken into the Bed Chamber, and that they
killed him there, hiding himself about the Bed.

He was a Venerable old Man, with a long His Personage.
Beard, curling Hair, pretty Gross, his Belly standing a little out, of a
Princely Stature; wanted not Eloquence, but was rather Gracious in his Words
than thought Sincere. He obliged every body in Words, but in Deeds was
illiberal and almost sordid; and particularly in his Entertainments and
Presents. He had as yet made no Change in the Officers that had been put into
the Government by Commodus; expecting the Anniversary of the Birthday of the
City of Rome, (that is the eleventh or twelfth of the Calends of May) because
he designed to date from thence his beginning of all things. And therefore they
say the Officers of the appointment of Commodus, who were afraid to be turned
out, had resolved to kill him in the Baths by that time, if it had not been
done to their Hands before.

Certainly Empire, and all the Honors thereunto His Character.
belonging, made so little an impression upon him, that he always showed
himself greatly displeased with them, and he desired to appear still the same
Man, that he had ever been. He carried himself to the Senate, the most
respectfully in the World. When they Congratulated him, he Complemented them
again, and divided his Discourses to all of them, as if he was but the
Governor of the City of Rome. He would willingly have laid down the Empire,
and have returned to a private life; and he would not suffer his Children to be
brought up in the Court. Indeed he was so saving, and such a lover of Profit,
that he Trafficked at the Lake di Sabato by his Servants, when he was Emperor,
in the same manner, as he did when he was a private Man. Persons who spoke
freely of him, said, he was one that promised Well, but did Nothing. Those of
his own Country, who resorted much to him upon his being made Emperor, obtained
as good as nothing from him, and said the same. Yet he was free to suffer
himself to be presented, with any thing to his advantage. He left a Son and a
Daughter behind him; together with his Wife, who was the Daughter of Flavius
Sulpitianus, whom he made the Governor of Rome in his own place. He did not
much concern himself with the impudicity of his Wife; who in the sight of all
the World entertained for her Lover, a Musician. On the other hand he had for
his Mistress, one Cornificia; to whose love they say he was extremely
abandoned. He was extraordinary strict upon the Servants about the Court: and
this therefore made him be much hated by them.

The signs forerunning his Death were these Signs of his Death.
Three days before he was killed, he thought he saw a Man by reflection in a
Pond, making at him with a Sword. The day that he was killed, it was observed
that the Pupils of his Eyes, as if they were dead, did not represent the Images
of Persons that looked on him: and as he sacrificed in his private Oratory, the
Fire went out; and neither the Heart, nor the Liver were found in the Victims.
Stars very bright, though near the Sun, appeared in the day time some days
before. What himself said of Didius Julianus, was an Omen of the succession to
him of that Person. For Julianus bringing his Kinsman, his Brother's Son to
him, to whom he had promised to give his Daughter in Marriage, he advised the
young Man to observe the Commands of his Uncle, for says he, He is my Colleague
and my Successor: For he had been his Colleague in his Consulship, and had
succeeded him in his Proconsulship: and at last he succeeded him in the Empire
too. The Soldiers and the Courtiers both hated Pertinax. But the People took
his death with Indignation, because they saw he was one, who might have
re-settled all things in the good order as they were of old. The Soldiers that
had killed him, stuck his Head upon a Spear, and brought it through the City
into the Camp. But it was retrieved again, and together with his Body buried in
the Sepulcher of his Wife's Grandfather, by Julianus, with all the honor that
he could do it: only he made no public Harangue upon him, either to the People
or the Senate; but yet when afterward it was his own fate to be in like manner
deserted, and killed, then the Senate and the People did translate Pertinax
into the number of the Gods.

This was done in the time of the Emperor Honors paid to him after.
Severus; when Pertinax having had a very great Character given him by the
Senate, a Royal Funeral was solemnized for him, in which he was represented by
his Effigies, and Severus himself did him the honor to make the Oration in his
praise: loving the memory of him to that degree, that he was pleased to be
called by the Senate by the same name of Pertinax. The Son of Pertinax was made
the Chief Priest to his Father; and the Priests of the Emperor Marcus Antoninus
were appointed, as his Associates. The Games of the Cirque were Celebrated for
his Ascension to the Empire, and the day of his Birth was kept: which last is
remaining still: but the others were afterward laid aside by Severus. He was
born upon the Calends of August, under the Consulships of Verus and Bibulus. He
was killed upon the fifth of the Calends of April, in the Consulships of Falco
and Clarus. He lived sixty six Years, seven Months, and twenty six Days. He
Reigned two Months, and twenty seven days. He gave a Largess to the People of a
hundred Roman Penies a Man: and he had promised another to the Guards of twelve
thousand Sesterces; but he gave them but the half: what he had promised the
Army, was not given them, because his death prevented him. There is a Letter of
his, in the History of his life, written by Marius Maximus, which I have not
thought fit to insert here, because of its too great length, but which is a
certain Proof, that Pertinax was one that had a Horror for the Station of an
Emperor.

THE A Christ. CXCIV.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR DIDIUS JULIANUS.
By AELIUS SPARTIANUS.
Addressed to the EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN.
DIdius Julianus, who succeeded in the His Extraction.
Empire after Pertinax, had for his Great Grandfather, Salvius Julianus; who
was twice Consul, the Governor of the City of Rome, and which rendered him yet
the more remarkable, was that he was a Professor of the Law. His Mother was
called Clara Aemilia; his Father Petronius Didius Severus; his Brothers, Didius
Proculus and Nummius Albinus; his Uncle by his Mother's side, Salvius Julianus;
his Grandfather, by his Fathers side, an Insubrian of Milan: and his Great
Grandfather by his Mothers side was Salvius Julianus, who was of the City
Mahometa in the Kingdom of Tunis. He was brought up by the hand of Domitia
Lucilla, who was the Mother of the Emperor Marcus Antoninus; and by whose
Interest he was first put into the Commission of the Viginti Viri. Then he was
made a Quaestor, although a year His Advancement.
sooner than the Law permitted him in point of age. Then he was made an Aedile
and a Praetor, by the favor of Marcus Antoninus. And after his Praetorship, he
had the Command in Germany of the Twenty Second Legion, called Primigenia.
After that he Governed in Gallia Belgica very well, and very long: where the
Cauchi, a People of Germany, who bordered upon the River of Elbe, making an
Eruption upon him, he resisted them so well with only the tumultuous Forces of
the Province, that he merited by it a Consulship. In like manner he overcame
the Catti. Then he was translated to the Government of Dalmatia; which he very
well maintained against the bordering Enemies. Next he was removed to the Lower
Germany, and after that he was made the General of the Provisions in Italy.

He was once accused by one Severus Clarissimus, a Soldier, of being in a
Conspiracy with Salvius Julianus, against Commodus. But because Commodus had
already put many Senators to death, who were great and powerful Persons, and
because he was willing a while to forbear his further Cruelty, Didius Julianus
was discharged at that time, and his Accuser Condemned; after which he was
remanded again to his Province. Then he had the Government of Bithynia given
him; in which however he came short of that Fame, that he had acquired in his
other Governments. Next he was made a Consul in Conjunction with Pertinax, and
he succeeded to Pertinax in the Proconsulship of Africa; who therefore always
called him his Colleague and his Successor: But this was more especially
remarked to be Ominous, one day when Julianus came with his Kinsman to him,
when Emperor, to be Contracted to a Daughter of Pertinax. For as Pertinax
received him with the respect and kindness that was due; he said to him at the
same time, You, Sir, Are^ my Colleague and my Successor: and presently after
that, followed the death of that Prince. Now he who first put up to be Emperor
after the death of Pertinax, was Sulpitianus, who was then in the Camp of the
Guards. In the mean time the Senate assembled; whither Julianus together with
his Son-in-Law coming, and finding the Doors shut, and the two Tribunes P.
Florianus and Vectius Aper standing at the Door, those two Tribunes began to
persuade him to possess himself of the Empire that was vacant. To which he
answering, that it was already disposed of to another, they nevertheless took
him even against his will, and carried him to the Camp: where they found
Sulpitianus, who was the Governor of Rome, and Son-in-Law to Pertinax,
haranguing the Soldiers in his own favor so strongly, that they refused to
hearken in the least to Julianus, till he had wisely advised them not to make
Choice of one who would Revenge the Murder of Pertinax, who was Father-in-Law
to him; and then they all immediately tacked about to Julianus; who giving it
them under his Hand in Writing, that he would restore the Memory of Commodus,
they proclaimed him, engaging him to bear no displeasure however against
Sulpitianus for the Pretensions which he had made to their Favor.

Then he Chose, by their Advice, Flavius Gentalis, and Tullius Crispinus to be
the Captains of the Guards; and whereas he had promised, that he would give the
Soldiers a Bounty of five and twenty thousand Sesterces, he gave them thirty.
In the Evening, after he had Harangued them according to Custom, he came from
the Camp to the Senate, to whom he entirely referred himself: the Senate
accepted him; and first Enrolled him amongst the Families of the Patricians;
then they declared him Emperor. The Tribunitian Declared Emperor.
and the Proconsular Powers were conferred upon him; and his Wife called Mallia
Scantilla, and his Daughter Didia Clara were honored by them with the Titles
of Empress, and Princess. From the Senate he repaired to the Palace, whither he
took his Wife and Daughter with him; but they went trembling, and against their
wills, as if their minds gave them some secret Presages of an approaching
Destruction. He made Cornelius Repentinus, his Son-in-Law, the Governor of the
City of Rome, in the place of Sulpitian. But in the mean time the Populace bore
to Julianus a Public hatred, as if he would revive the times of Commodus, and
as if he had been the Murderer of Pertinax, because he proposed to amend his
Faults. They pretended to say further, that despising the Frugal Table of
Pertinax, he had from the first day provided himself another that was
Luxurious, full of all sorts of excellent Meats; but this however was false.
For besides that his Table was sufficiently Frugal, he did not Eat at all the
first day, till the Body of Pertinax was buried; and then he did it with a
great Melancholy upon him, and spent all the night afterward sleepless, he was
so concerned for his Friend's death.

The next Morning, as soon as it was light, the Senate and the Gentry coming to
wait upon him at the Palace; he admitted them, and called them all, with a
great deal of Civility, according to every one's Age, his Father, or his Son,
or his Brother. Nevertheless the Populace both in the Forum, and before the
House of the Senate, loaded him with perpetual Reproaches, as if they hoped by
that means to oblige him to lay down the Empire, that he had received at the
Hands of the Soldiers. They threw a Shower of Stones at him; and as he came to
the Senate Cursed him publicly, and Cursed him again as he was at his
Devotions, by which they wished he might never obtain any thing of the Gods. In
the mean time as they threw Stones at him, he only waved his Hand toward them
to Pacify them: and what he said to the Senate was very sweet and prudent. He
thanked them that they had admitted him to Administer, in Conjunction with
them, the Sovereign Power; and for the Honor they had done, not only to
himself, but to his Wife and his Daughter. He accepted from them the Title of
the Father of the Country; but he refused to have his Statue set up in Silver,
which they offered him. Going from the Senate again to the Capitol, the
Populace made a stop to him; till they were forced aside, partly by Blows with
Sword in Hand, and partly by good Words and promises of Money. From thence he
went to the Public Games in the Cirque; where the People Crowding themselves
indifferently into all the Seats, redoubled their outrageous Reproaches against
him; and called aloud upon Pescennius Niger, who was said to have already taken
upon him the quality of the Emperor, to come to the Succor of the City of
Rome; yet all this took he quietly, and appeared to be of an extraordinary
sweet Temper all the time of his Reign. The People inveighed no less bitterly
against the Soldiers, who had killed Pertinax, they said for Money. To
conciliate therefore the favor of these People, several things which Commodus
had well appointed, and Pertinax had abolished, Didius Julianus restored again.
He spoke nothing, neither good nor bad, as to Pertinax himself; which seemed to
several to be very strange; but the only reason, why he was silent of his
Honor, was the fear of the Soldiers, who had killed him.

Now Julianus had no apprehension of any Opposition being made to him on the
side either of the Forces in Great Britain, or those in Illyricum. But fearing
especially those in Syria, which were commanded by Pescennius Niger, he sent a
Centurion thither with Orders to cut him off. Hereupon Pescennius Niger Niger
and Severus revolt.
in Syria, and Septimius Severus in Illyricum, revolted from Julianus with the
Armies under their Commands. Being told of the latter, from whom he had
suspected nothing; he came in Anger to the Senate, and caused him to be
declared an Enemy, and the Soldiers with him, unless they deserted him by such
a day: to whom Messengers were sent at the same time from the Senate, to
persuade them to renounce Severus, and adhere to Julianus. Amonst whom was
Vespronius Candidus, who was a great Senior in the Rank of the Consuls, but
hated of old by the Soldiers, because of his Severities. Valerius Catulinus was
sent in the Quality of Successor to Severus: as if it was an easy thing to be
the Successor of a Man, who had an Army to defend him. Together with these was
sent Aquilius, the Centurion, a known Assassin, who having already murdered
many Senators, might try his Hand once again, and do no less to Severus. In the
mean time Didius Julianus ordered the Guards to be exercised, and their Camp to
be refortified. But as the Soldiers were become idle, and dissolute by being
accustomed to the Luxuries of Rome, it was very much against their wills, that
they were brought to their Arms; insomuch that they hired others for Money to
supply their places, and do their duties in their steads.

Septimius Severus took his march toward the City of Rome, with the Army under
his Command; whilst the People there, every day more both hated and derided
Julianus. Nor was he able to do any good upon the Soldiers of the Guards; and
thinking that Laetus was a Favourer of the Cause of Severus, he ungratefully
commanded him to be killed, who was one that had formerly saved his life from
the Hands of Commodus; and Martia he commanded to be killed with him. But
whilst these things were in passing, Severus possessed himself of the Fleet and
City of Ravenna; and the Ambassadors of the Senate, that had promised this
Succor to Julianus, changed sides, and engaged on the part of Severus. Also
Tullius Crispinus, the Captain of the Guards, who had been sent to make Head
against his Troops, received a defeat, and returned back by Rome. When Julianus
saw all this, he proposed to the Senate, that the Vestal Virgins and all the
Priests, together with the Senate, should march forth to meet the Army of
Severus, Arrayed all in their several Habits, and should conjure and persuade
him fairly to desist his Hostilities. A vain thing indeed, to suppose of an
Army of desperate Soldiers. Therefore Faustinus Quintillus, an Augur, and a
Consul, took the liberty to contradict him in that Proposal; and boldly said,
to which many of the Senators gave their consents; That a Man was not fit to
Command, who could not resist his Adversary by force of Arms. Julianus in great
Anger sent for Soldiers out of the Camp, to force the Senate into a Compliance
with him, or Massacre them upon the place. But neither did this take. For
certainly it was very unreasonable, that when the Senate had adjudged Severus
an Enemy upon the account of Julianus, the same Julianus should turn such a
Butcherer of the Senate. So he came to the Senate with another and a better
Proposal, which was that there might be an Act for the participation of the
Empire betwixt Severus declared Partner in the Empire.
Severus and him, and this was done immediately. Every one now called to mind
an Omen of all this, which came from the Mouth of Julianus himself, when he had
the Empire given him. For when the Consul had said in the name of the Senate, I
order Didius Julianus to be proclaimed Emperor, Julianus prompted and corrected
him thus, say Didius Julianus Severus, that is, because Severus was a third
name which he took from his Grandfather, and Great Grandfather. Some indeed
deny, that there was any such Order of his, as that of murdering the Senate,
who had been so kind to him. But however that is, after passing that Act, he
sent immediately Tullius Crispinus, his Captain of the Guards, to Complement
Severus. He also Created Veturius Macrinus, another Captain of the Guards;
because he understood that Severus had sent Letters to make him one. In the
mean time the People said aloud, and Severus suspected as much, that this Peace
was but a Feint, and that Tullius Crispinus was sent to him rather with private
Orders to kill him. So Severus, with the advice of his Army, chose to be his
declared Enemy, rather than his Partner; and accordingly he writ to a great
many Persons in Rome, his Friends, who secretly received and dispatched his
Orders. As for the rest, Julianus tried all sorts of things by the Magicians,
that could be devised to mitigate the hatred of the People, or to bridle the
Arms of the Enemy. And certainly the Magicians offered such Sacrifices for him
upon this occasion, as were by no means consonant to the Rites of the Romans.
They tried their Charms in Profane Verses, and other Charms which they do with
a Lookingglass: but yet all went ill on the side of Julianus; and all that they
discovered from them was, the coming in of the one, and the departure of the
other Emperor.

As Tullius Crispinus came as far as to meet the Avant-Guards of Severus, he
was killed by his order, in which he followed the advice that was given him by
Julius Laetus. Then Julianus convoked the Senate again, and asked their
Opinions, what more was to be done; but the Senate could not resolve him. He
ordered after that, of his own motion, the Gladiators of Capua to take Arms
under the Command of Lollianus Titianus. He invited Claudius Pompeianus, from
his Retreat at Tarracina, to join with him in the Government, because he had
long commanded Armies, and was the Son-in-Law of an Emperor. But Pompeianus
excused himself, and said, he was an Old Man, and wanted his sight. In the mean
time, the Army of Severus was increased, by Soldiers that came to him out of
the Province of Ombria; and he sent Letters before him to Rome, to order the
Murderers of Pertinax to be secured. So in a little time, Didius Julianus was
abandoned by all the World, and remained in the Court, with only Genialis, one
of his Captains of the Guards, and his Son-in-Law Repentinus with him* The next
thing was to depose He is deposed.
him from the Empire, by the Sentence of the Senate: This was done, and all his
Power abrogated, and Severus immediately declared Emperor in his place.
Afterward it was pretended that he had poisoned himself; but in effect, there
were Persons immediately sent on the part of the Senate, who caused him to be
killed by the hands of a mercenary Soldier, imploring, as he fell, the Faith of
Caesar; that is, Severus. He had given all his Paternal Estate to his Daughter,
and emancipated her upon his Elevation to the And slain.
Empire. But as well her Riches, as her Illustrious Title of Princess, were
soon taken from her again. His Body was delivered by Severus, to Manlia
Scintilla his Wife, and to his Daughter, to be buried; who put it into a Tomb
of his great Grandfather, five Miles from Rome, upon the Via Lavicana, that is,
the Highway, called by that Name.

Now the things condemned in this Prince were these; that he gormandized, that
is, eat to excess, gam'd much, played at the Weapons of the Gladiators; and did
all this, being an Old Man, though he had never before been attached to those
Vices in his Youth; and that he was Proud; but this is not to be believed, for
in his Reign he showed himself the most humble Man in the World; the most
obliging in his Entertainments; the most courteous in his Subscription of
himself in his Letters, and of a most excellent Temper in allowing of the
Liberties of his Friends. He lived Six and Fifty Years and Four Months; and
reigned but Two Months and Five Days. Therefore his great Error was, that he
ought by his absolute Authority to have governed those, whom on the contrary he
made absolute over himself, to govern the State.

THE A. Christi CXCIV.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Septimius Severus, Dedicated to the EMPEROR
DIOCLESIAN.
BY AELIUS SPARTIANUS.
SEVERUS, who enjoyed the Empire after the Death of Didius Julianus, was born
in Africa, at the Town of Napoli His Extraction.
di Barbaria, in the Government of Tripoli. His Father's Name was Geta. His
Ancestors had been Knights of Rome of old Time. His Mother was Fulvia Pia. His
Uncles by his Father's side were Marcus Agrippa and Severus, who had both been
Consuls. His Grandfather by his Father's side was Macer; by his Mother's,
Fulvjus Pius. He was born under the Consulships of Erucius Clarus, and Severus,
which was then the second Consulship of the first, upon the sixth of the Ides
of April. When he was but a Child, and before he had any Tincture of the Latin
and Greek Letters, in which he was afterward so very perfect, he loved to play
altogether at a Sport, in which having Bundles of Rods and Axes carried before
him, and a row of Boys standing about him, he sat himself down as a Judge, and
tried Causes.

In the Eighteenth Year of his Age, he d^clamed in Public. Afterward he came
to Rome to make his Studies; where through the Favor of his Kinsman, Septimius
Severus, who had been twice Consul, he received the Honor of the Emperor
Marcus Antoninus to be He is made a Senator.
created a Senator. Now his Landlord with whom he lodged at Rome, upon his
first coming thither, was at that moment Reading the Life of the Emperor
Hadrian, which he was quick to observe, as an Omen to himself of future
Grandeur. Another Omen that he had, was more parcicularly, as to his Reign,
which was this; being once invited to a Banquet of the Emperor, he came in his
Cloak, when he ought to have come in his Gown; which the Emperor taking Notice
of, he gave him a Gown of his own to put on, which was the same that he wore
when he sat in Judgment. The same Night he dreamt that he sucked the Breasts
of a Wolf, as if he was a Remus or a Romulus. He sat himself down in the
Emperor's Chair, which a Servant had put out of its place, without thinking any
thing of it, nor knowing that this was not permitted. As he was asleep once at
his Lodgings, a Serpent came and had twisted it self about his Head; which the
Servant perceiving, cried out, and he awaked, and the Serpent went from him
again without doing him any hurt.

His Youth was full of Fury and Wildnesses, which were sometimes criminal. He
was arraigned for Adultery, but was acquitted by Didius Julianus, the Proconsul
of Africa, to whom he succeeded in the Charge of that Proconsulship, and was
his Colleague in his Consulship, and again succeeded him in the Empire. He
discharged his Questorship of the City of Rome, very well, into which he was
elected unanimously. Afterward he was chosen a Military Questor, that is,
Play Master, or Commissary to the Army, for the Province of Hispania Boetica.
From thence he went into Africa to receive the Succession to his Father who was
dead there. And whilst he was in Africa, instead of the Province of Boetica, he
was made the Questor for the Island of Sardinia, because the Moors had laid
waste Hispania Boetica. This Administration being over, he was advanced to be
the Proconsul of Africa; in which place a Plebeian of his own Town of Napoli di
Barbaria coming to him, whilst the Rods were carried before him, and presuming
to embrace him, as his old Companion, he ordered him to be taken and well
Cudgelled, with this Inscription over his Head, You who are a Plebeian, have a
care of touching so a Proconsul of the People of Rome. Since which time, the
Custom is for the Proconsuls to go out always in a Coach, whereas before they
walked on Foot. He consulted, being in Africa, with an Astrologer, about his
Fortune, which he was solicitous to know. The Astrologer took the Hour of his
Birth, and observing great things from it, says he to him, Give me your own
Horoscope, and not another Man's: Sever^^ protesting, that it was his own, he
told him of all the things which afterward arrived to him.

By the Favor of the Emperor Marcus Antoninus, he was made a Tribune of the
People, which he discharged with the greatest Exactness, and all the Strictness
that could be desired. Then he married Martia, of whom he says nothing himself,
in his History of his private Life. But after he was Emperor, he set up her
Statues. In the Thirty Second Year of his Age, he was chosen a Praetor, before
a Number of others that were Competitors against him. At the same time, he was
sent into Spain. Upon which he dreamt, that i^ was said to him, that he should
restore the Temple of Augustus at the City of Tarragona, which was falling into
ruin; and the^ that from the top of a very high Mountain, he had a Prospect
given him of a(...) the Earth, but particularly of the City o^ Rome, about
which all the Provinces were joining in a Consort of Harps, Voices, and sweet
Flutes. He gave the People the diversion of the public Shows in his absence.
Then he had the command of the Fourth Legion, called Scythica, which was in
Syria. In his way to which, he went to Athens, for the Curiosity of observing
the Studies and the Rites, the Works, and the Antiquities of that Seat of the
Muses: But because he received some Injuries there from the Athenians, he
became their Enemy; and when he was Emperor, he was willing to avenge himself
of them, by cutting short their Privileges Next he was removed to the Province
of the Lionnois in Gallia, to be the Lieutenant there. And having lost his
Wife, and proposing to marry another, he took the Care first to be informed,
being very well versed in the knowledge of Astrology himself, in the Nativities
of his Mistresses; and as he had heard, that there was a Lady in Syria, who had
found by her Nativity, that she was to be married to a King, he courted her,
and in fine, married her, whose Name His second Marriage
was Julia, by whom he was soon after made a Father.

His Exactness, his Honor, and his great Sobriety, caused him to be so much
beloved amongst the Gauls, as never Person was. He was translated from thence
to the Government of Pannonia, with a Proconsular Power. From Pannonia to
Sicily, which was another Proconsulship; and when he had made his return again
to Rome, he received of his Wife a second Son. Being in Sicily, he was accused
of consulting the Chaldaeans and the Astrologers about his coming to the
Empire, for which he was ordered to be heard before the Captains of the Guards;
who, it then being the time that the Emperor Commodus began to fall into an
universal odium, acquitted him, and crucified the Man that calumniated him. He
was Consul the first time in Conjunction with Apuleius Ruffinus, by the
particular appointment of Commodus. After his Consulship, he continued an
entire Year at Rome, without Employ; and then by the recommendation of Laetus,
he was preferred to the Command of the Army in Germany. He had lived till now
at Rome, in a very little House with one small Plat of Ground to it. But as he
went to take the Possession of this last Charge, he purchased himself a
spacious Villa; where once taking a small Repast together with his little
Infants, and Fruit being brought, his Eldest Son, who was then of the Age of
Five Years, distributed it amongst the Children, his Play. Fellows, so
liberally, that his Father said to him, Not so fast, my Son, you have not the
Riches of a King. The Child of Five Years old, answered, But I shall have. So
being gone to his Command in Germany, he acquitted himself in that sort, that
he raised his Name, which was already ennobled, to a far higher pitch of Glory.

Hitherto he had followed Arms, but in the Quality of a private Person. But now
the News coming that Commodus was killed, and that Didius Julianus, who for the
present was upon the Throne, was universally hated; the German Legions
encouraged him no less than he declined it, to put up for the Empire. They
declared him Emperor upon the Ides of Declared Emperor by the Army.
August; at the same time he gave them a Bounty of Fifty Thousand Sesterces,
which was more than any Prince had ever done before; and having secured the
Provinces which he left at his Back, he hastened his March to Rome. Every one
opened the way to him in all the places where he came. The Armies of Illyricum
and Gallia, swore Fidelity to him. And every where they received him, as the
Avenger of the Murder of Pertinax. In the mean time, Didius Julianus prevailed
with the Senate to declare him an Enemy, and the Senate sent their
Commissioners to his Army to command the Soldiers in their Names to depart from
his Service. It is true, it put him first into a great concern: but afterward
he managed the thing so, that he corrupted those very Commissioners, so that
they spoke to the Soldiers for him, and came over themselves to his side.
Julianus who was soon advertised of a Conduct so extraordinary, obtained then a
Decree of the Senate, in which it was declared, that the Empire should be
participated betwixt himself and Severus: but whether this was with a sincere,
or a treacherous Intention, it is uncertain, because in truth, he had before
sent some known Assassines to him, to kill him; and others, at the same time,
to kill Pescennius Niger, who had also taken up the Empire against him, upon
the Authority of the Forces in Syria. However it was, Severus escaped their
Hands, and writ Letters to the Guards at Rome to abandon and slay Julianus;
which was executed upon him accordingly, as he was in the Court, and Severus
was invited to enter into Rome; who with a Fortune, which has never happened
to any before him, became a Conqueror as it were with a Word, Enters Rome.
and so marched on to Rome at the Head of his Troops.

He kept himself all the while in his Camps and Tents, in his march in Italy,
no less than if he still appeared there with the face of an Enemy. The Senate
deputed a Hundred out of their Body, as their Envoys to compliment and
congratulate him; who came up to him at the City of Teramo in Abruzzo. He
received them when they saluted him, all in Armor, and in the midst of his
armed Troops. The next day all the Domestics of the Court arrived to pay their
Reverences to him. He presented the Envoys of the Senate with seven hundred and
twenty Pieces of Gold, and dismissed them. But yet if they pleased, he welcomed
them to stay and to return to Rome in his Company. Then he immediately made
Flavius Juvenalis the Captain of the Guards, who was one that Julianus had
chosen to be a third Captain of the same under him. In the mean time, the
Trouble was very great at Rome, amongst the Soldiers and the Citizens; because
Severus whom they judged their Enemy, approached to them with a puissant Army.
At the same time the Legions in Syria had set up Pescennius Niger, Emperor;
whose Edicts therefore, and whose Letters to the People or to the Senate,
Severus intercepted, that they should not be read to the one or the other. And
as he judged very well, that it concerned him to secure himself against him, he
sent Heraclius to take in the Country of Bithynia; and Plautianus, to make
himself Master of the Children of Pescennius Niger. Then coming up to the City
of Rome, before he made his entrance into it, he ordered the old Guards there
to appear before him without their Arms, which they did, and he held a Council
of War upon them, and surrounded them with Guards of his own Troops.

In fine, as he made his public Entrance into the City, himself and his
Soldiers, all under their Arms, he took his way strait up to the Capitol. From
the Capitol, he proceeded in the same form to the Palace, with the Banners
which he had taken from the old Guards carried before him, not flying, but
furled, as in mourning. All the City over did the Soldiers spread themselves,
and filled the Temples, the Piazza's, and the Houses of the Court, like so many
Inns. At their Discretion they took all things, without Buying, and threatened
to plunder all the City; so that certainly one may say, the Entrance of Severus
was odious and terrible. The next day he came, accompanied with his Friends,
and a great Guard of his armed Soldiers, to the Senate, where he gave the
Senate an Account of his assumption of the Empire, and complained, that Didius
Julianus had sent Men, who were known Assassines, to him, to kill him. He
obliged them to pass an Act, that it should be unlawful for the Emperor to put
to death a Senator, without taking the advice of the Senate. But whilst he was
there, the Army that had brought him in, demanded of the Senate seditiously ten
thousand Sesterces, after the example of those who had formerly brought in
Augustus Caesar, and had received that Sum. Severus would have repressed them,
but he could not, without sweetning them with Money; which sent them away
pacified. In the next place, in honor of the Memory of Pertinax, he solemnized
a Royal Funeral for him, in which he was represented by his Image; and he
Consecrated him a God, and appointed his Priests. He was willing to be called
Pertinax himself, till the complaints of his Friends made him abolish the name
again, as if it was ominous of a short Reign.

After this he rendered to every one what belonged to him; and he married his
two Daughters, having endowed them well, to Probus and Aetius. To the former of
whom he offered the Government of the City of Rome; but he refused it, and
said, That he thought it less to be the Governor of Rome, than to be the Son in
Law of a Prince. He made both of them Consuls, and gave them great Riches.
Another day he came to the Senate, and made a Proscription of the Friends of
Didius Julianus; such as against whom there were Accusations brought, and
afterward ordered them to be Executed. He heard a great many Causes Pleaded
before him. He severely punished the Magistrates of the Provinces, who stood
accused by their People, if he found the matter of their Accusations proved
against them. He looked so well after the affair of the Magazines of Corn,
which he found in a very low condition, that when he died, he left enough for
seven years to come. He took up an Expedition into the East to establish the
State of Affairs there; not speaking any thing as yet openly of Pescennius
Niger, only he immediately sent some Legions into Africa, for fear that Niger
should possess himself of Alexandria or Carthage by the way of Libya and Egypt,
and so afflict the People of Rome with a want of Corn. He left Domitius Dexter,
Governor of the City of Rome, in the place of Bassus, and within thirty days of
his coming thither, he set out from it again. After His Expedition against
Niger.
he had marched as far as to a place called Saxa Rubra, he had an occasion to
appease a great Sedition which was arisen in his Army upon the subject of their
Encampments. Here his Brother Geta met him; whom he Commanded to do his Duty in
what had been ordered him; but Geta had been full, when he came, of other
Hopes. Here also the Children of Pescennius Niger were brought to him, whom he
received and entertained with the same Kindness, as if they were his own. He
had sent a Legion to secure the Countries of Greece and Thrace, against Niger.
But, notwithstanding that, Niger had already seized upon Byzantium and
pretended to do the same to the City of Heraclia; and having put to death a
great many Persons of his Army, because he suspected them, Severus declared
him, together with Aemilianus, the Proconsul of Asia, an Enemy. Niger invited
Severus to agree to a Participation of the Empire; but this was slighted.
Severus promised him, if he pleased, his Life in Safety: But he would give no
Quarter to Aemilianus; who therefore being beaten soon after upon the Coasts of
the Hellespont by the Captains of Severus, fled first to Cyziqua, and then to
another City, in which he was killed: and the Troops of Niger were also put to
the Niger defeated,
Rout by the same.

Severus with the News of this, sent Letters to the Senate, as though his Work
was done. He fought next in Person with Niger, and killed him by the City of
Cyziqua, and ordered and slain.
his Head to be carried about upon a Spear: whose Children, after this, whom he
had hitherto received with the same kindness as his own, and their Mother, he
banished. Immediately he gave the Senate, by Letter, an account of his Victory;
and he put none to death of the Senators, who had been of the side of Niger,
except only one. He was angry with the City of Antioch; because they had both
made a mock of his Administration of things in the East, and had furnished
Niger with Provisions; so he deprived them of many of their Privileges. He
deprived also the People of Sichem in Palestine, of their Freedom of Rome:
because they had been a long time armed for the service of Niger. He chastised
several other Cities that had followed him; and by the losses and damages which
he made them suffer, he left upon them the marks of his Resentments. After
this, he did a great many things about Arabia. He obliged the Parthians to
yield to him, and the People of the Country of Adiabene, who were all in the
same Interests with Pescennius Niger. Wherefore at his return, he was offered
the honor of Triumph, and was Entitled Conqueror of the Arabians, Adiabenians,
and Parthians; but the Triumph he refused; lest it should be pretended that he
triumphed a for Victory, gained as it were over his own Subjects, and he
refused the Style of Conqueror of the Parthians, not to offend the Parthians
too sensibly.

But no sooner was he returning to Rome from the Civil-War of Pescennius Niger,
but he had the News of another, which he was to Revolt of Clodius Albinus.
sustain against Clodius Albinus, who had revolted in Gallia. This occasioned
him to command the Children of Niger, and their Mother to be put to death. Then
he immediately declared Albinus an Enemy, and all his Adherents, if they had
but written tenderly to him, or answered his Letters. And as he was upon his
way against him, meeting with his eldest Son Bassianus at the Village of Vimy
near Lions, he conferred upon him the Title of Caesar, and called him by the
name of Aurelius Antoninus Bassianus. The reason whereof was, to cut off his
Brother Geta from the hopes which he had conceived of the Empire. And he called
him by the name of Antoninus, either because he had dreamt that an Antoninus
should succeed him, for which reason some say that Geta had had given to
himself the same name; or because Severus himself had sometime formerly been of
a mind to pass out of his own Family into that of Marcus Antoninus. The
Captains of Severus were at first defeated by those of Clodius Albinus; which
cast him into that concern, that he consulted with the Augurs of Pannonia about
his Fortune; who told him that he should be the Conqueror, but yet th(...) his
Adversary should neither fall into h(...) power, neither save himself; and that
h^ should perish by the side of a Water. No^ was it long after this, before
several of the Friends of Albinus abandoned him, and came and presented
themselves before Severus, and others of his Captains were taken Prisoners,
upon whom he exacted a rigorous Chastisement.

After a great many things had past variously on both sides, the Battle of
Tournom near Lions was fought, in which Severus carried the Day Albinus
overthrown.
with the greatest success; only he was once thrown from his Horse, and the
Army believing him to be killed, was just upon the point of making another
Emperor. The Senate had a^ this time read some things, which were in the praise
of Clodius Celsinus, who was of the City of Mahometa in Africa, and the Kinsman
of Albinus: which disobliging Severus, as if they had meant it in the favor of
Albinus himself, and thinking that he could not better revenge ^t upon them,
than by Consecrating Commodus a God; he first of all pronounced him a God
amongst the Army, and then writ the same to the Senate, with a recital of the
Victory, and commanded that the Bodies of the Senators who were killed in the
fight, should ^e left abandoned and unburied. The Body of Albinus being brought
to him, but half dead, he ordered his Head to be cut off, and ^arried to Rome
with the Letters which he writ upon this Subject. He was overcome the ele^enth
day of the Calends of March; his ^ody was exposed before his own Tent till
stunk: Severus rid his Horse over it; and (...)e Horse boggling at it with
horror, he forced ^im on with the Spur. At last he ordered it (...) be thrown
into the River of Rhosne, toge(...)er with those of his Wife and Children.

He put to death after this an infinite num^er His extreme Severity.
of Persons of the Party of Albinus, and amongst the rest, many of the Chief of
Rome, and several Ladies of Quality. All whose ^states were Confiscated, and
returned into ^he Exchequer. He did the same, on this oc^asion, with several of
the Grandees of Spain and Gallia. So that he gave the Soldiers the ^reatest Pay
by this means, that any Prince ^ver did; and to his Children by virtue of this
^roscription he left the most of any Prince at (...)s death. For he had amassed
to himself the ^eatest part of the Gold and Silver that was Gallia, and in all
Spain, and all Italy. He ^as the first that Constituted the Officer of
^rocurator of the Private Affairs of the Emperor; or Keeper of the Privy Purse.
Many others of the Party of Albinus, keeping their Faith to him, which they had
promised, were defeated in Battle, likewise by Severus. The Arabian Legion had
revolted to him. All which aggravated the Revenge of Severus upon the Party; of
whom having killed a great many more, and extinguished the whole Family of the
Albini, he came to Rome in a Choler a^ the People and the Senate: where he
applauded Commodus publicly both to the one and the other: called him a God;
said they were only infamous Persons and Poultrons, to whom be had been
displeasing: you might see, he was evidently furious. Then he discoursed upon
his own Clemency, though of all Men he had been the most Cruel, and had
murdered the Senators following, without any legal Trial, who were all
illustrious Personages: Mu(...)us Secundinus, Asellius Claudianus, Claudius
R^fus, Vitellius Victor, Papius Faustus, Aeli^^ Celsus, Julius Rufus, Lollius
Professus, Aru(...)leius Cornelianus, Antoninus Balbus, Posth(...) Severus,
Sergius Lustratus, Fabius Paulinus, N^nius Gracchus, Mustius Fabianus,
Casperius Agrippinus, Cejonius Albinus, Claudius Sulpit(...)nus, Memmius
Rufinus, Casperius Aemilia(...) Cocceius Verus, Erucius Clarus, L. Stilo,
Cl^di(...) Rufus, Egnatuleius Honoratus, Petronius Junior Festus, Neratianus,
Aurelianus, Materianus, J(...)lianus, and Albinus, of the Family of the
Pescennii; Macrinus, Faustinianus, Julianus, o^ the Family of the Cerellii;
Herennius Nep(...) Sulpitius Canus, Valerius Catulinus, Novius Refus, Claudius
Arabidnus, and Marius Ascellio. Of these, the greatest part wre of the degree
of the Consuls, others Praetors, but all certainly very excellent Men: the
murdering of whom, so many and so illustrious, as they were, made the Africans
admire Severus as a Deity. He charged Cincius Severus with a design to have
Poisoned him, and so likewise put him to death. He threw Narcissus, who had
strangled Commodus, to the Lions. Many of obscure Note and Birth besides he
killed, not to speak of the rest who were taken off by the rights of War.

After all this, being willing to recommend himself to the People, he removed
the Charge of the Post, and the Public Carriages from Private Persons, to lay
it upon the Exchequer. He ordered his Son Bassianus Antoninus, to be Declares
his Son Caesar.
declared Caesar by the Senate, and to wear the Ensigns of Majesty accordingly:
and next of his own absolute Authority, he erected Statu^s to his Father,
Mother, Grandfather, and his first Wife. He conceived such a great disgust
against Plautianus, after knowing his Life, that from an intimate Favorite, he
declared him a public Enemy, and did him the disgrace to throw down his
Statues which before had been placed next to those of the Relations and Allies
of Severus, in all places of the Empire where they were. He remitted the People
of Palestine, the Punishments which (...) had menaced them with in the Cause of
Pescennius Niger. Afterward he received Plau^ianus into favor again, and
banished his Enemies: who entered the City, as it were in Triumph, and went up
to the Capitol; and yet in Process of time, for all that he killed him. He gave
the Man's, or the Roman Gown, to Geta his youngest Son; and married his Eldest
to a Daughter of Plautianus. He made them both Consuls; but Geta, his own
Brother, he killed. Then the Parthian War came on; upon his going to which, he
first treated the People with the Games of the Gladiators, and gave them a
Largess. But still he put to death several Persons, whether for real, or
pretended Causes, whilst these things past. Some because they Rallied upon him;
others because they held their Tongues and said nothing. Some because they had
said, He was an Emperor that had not his name for nothing. A right Pertinax, a
right Severus.

As for the Parthian War, certainly it was The Parthian Expedition.
generally said that Severus affected it out of a desire of Glory, rather than
that he was carried upon it by any necessity. He embarked his Army at the Port
of Brindisi; from whence continuing on his Journey, he came into Syria, where
he prepared himself to make Wa^ upon the Parthians in their own Country, after
he had driven them out of their Footings i^ this. Together with which, by the
advice o^ Plautianus, he hunted after the Relics of the Faction of Pescennius
Niger, and slew the^ without Mercy. Others he slew, pretendin^ that they had
consulted the Astrologers an^ the Diviners concerning his death. Partic^larly
he suspected every one that was but proper to make an Emperor of. Whilst his
Sons were yet little, which was the time for Men to try their Fortunes, either
he heard, that it was said by them, or he imagined, that they said so. But yet
as to some, who were murdered, he excused himself, and denied that it had been
done by his order; and particularly Marius Maximus says, he did it in the Case
of Laetus. His own Sister making him a Visit from the Town of Napoli di
Barbaria, where he was born, had brought her Son along with her: and as she was
one that was scarce able to speak the Latin Tongue, she made the Emperor blush
for her very much: who gave her several rich Presents, and made her Son a
Senator; but when that was done, he ordered her to go back to her own Country
again, and take her Son with her, who soon after died.

The Summer being over, because in those Parts the Winter is the best Season
for War, he entered into the Kingdom of Parthia; and obliging the Enemy to give
way to him, he marched forward, and set himself down before Ctesiphon, which he
took. But as his Soldiers had lived but upon the Roots of the Herbs which they
found, whereby they had contracted great sicknesses, and particularly the Flux,
which hindered their Marches, he satisfied himself with the Conquest which he
had made, having killed a great number of the Enemy, and put to slight their
King, which gained him the Title of Conqueror of the Parthians. His eldest Son
the Caesar Bassionus Antoninus, of thirteen years of Age, was upon this
occasion by the Army proclaimed a Partner in the Empire with his Father; and
his younger Son, Geta Antoninus, was declared at the same time Caesar.
Wherefore Severus gave to the Army a very large Donative, and all the Booty of
the Town of Ctesiphon, according to their desire, which they were become the
Masters of. From thence he returned a Conqueror into Syria. The Senate offered
him the Honor of a Triumph: which he refused, Refuses a Triumph.
be^^^se he could not sit in the Chariot, by reason of the Gout, which
afflicted him. But he permitted his Son to receive it in his Place; to whom the
Senate had decreed a Triumph in relation to the successes over the Jews. For
all things had passed well in Syria, as well as Parthia, under the Conduct of
Severus. In fine, being come to Antioch, he granted to his eldest Son the Roman
Gow^, and appointed him to be Consul with himself. Accordingly they both entered
upon their Consulships in Syria. After which, having gratified the Army with a
Bounty upon that Subject, they took their way to Alexandria.

In this Expedition he made a great many Laws to Establish the Rights of the
People of Palestine. He forbad Men to turn Jews, under a great penalty, and he
made the like Ordinances as to the Christians. He granted to the City of
Alexandria the Privilege of a Senate; besides which he changed their Laws in
several things. He was much pleased with his Voyage into these Parts, to see
the Worship of the God Serapis, and because of the singular strangness of the
Animals, and places which he saw here. He viewed Memphis and Memnon, the
Pyramids and the Labyrinth, with great Care and great Satisfaction.

It would be too tedious to pursue the Life of this Prince in Matters of a
lesser Note. Therefore his diminishing the Power of the Pretorian Guards at
Rome, after Julianus was conquered and killed, and his consecrating Pertinax a
God, contrary to the Will of the Soldiers, were bold and great Actions. He
seems to have deserved the Name of Pertinax, (which once he assumed) not so
much for his Affection to Pertinax the Emperor, as for the austerity of his
manners, and his own pertinaciousness in what he did. As one of the Enemy, who
was taken had cast himself humbly at his Feet, and said to him; Sir, what would
your self have done in my place? He not at all softened with so prudent an
Expression, commanded him to be killed without remorse. He was bent upon
utterly extirpating the Parties that were against him, and almost from no place
did he come off less than Conqueror.

He conquered Abgarus, the King of Persia. His other Successes.
The Arabians yielded themselves under his Obedience. He made the Adiabeni
Tributary to him. He fortified Great Britain, which is the greatest Ornament of
his Reign, with a Trench drawn cross the Island, from the one Ocean to the
other, from whence he received the Title of Conqueror of the Britains. He put
his Native Country of Tripoli into a Condition of the greatest Security, and a
lasting Peace, by subduing those most Warlike Nations, which lie all about it;
for which the Tripolines in return, presented him with Oil and Corn, every Year
in abundance; and gave for that purpose some fruitful Fields for ever to the
People of Rome. As he was of a Temper to be implacable toward such as
transgressed their Duty; so on the other hand, he was of a singular good
Judgment in making Choice of Persons to serve him, who were Men of Fidelity. He
was much addicted to the Studies of Philosophy and Eloquence, and had a desire
to know the rest of the Sciences He was a mortal hater of Robbers. He writ his
own Life himself faithfully, as he was a private Man, and as he Emperor; in
which however, he excuses as much as he can, the Fault of his Cruelty. The
Senate gave this Judgment upon him, that either he ought never to have been
born, or he ought never to die. Because he seemed at once to be too Cruel to
keep, and too useful to lose.

In the mean time, as to his Affairs within his His Wife suspected.
own Family, he was not so very Prudent. For the Virtue of his Wise Julia was
much to be suspected. She was also an Accomplice in a Conspiracy that was
formed against him, yet he spared her, and kept her with him. Whilst he lay
lame of the Gout in his Feet, which retarded the Operations of the War, which
the Army bore impatiently, they had nominated his Son Bassianus, to march as
Emperor at the Head of them. Severus immediately upon this, called a Council of
War, to which, causing himself to be taken up, and carried and placed upon the
Tribunal; and having cited to it all the Tribunes, Centurions, Captains, and
the principal Officers of the Army, that had been the Authors of that Action,
together with his Son; he demanded of them all, Whether they were returned to
their Duty? who all, except his Son, whom he had pardoned, prostrating
themselves before him for mercy; says he, I hope now you are satisfied, it is
the Head that rules, and not the Feet. Another very remarkable Expression of
his, is, being one whom Fortune had raised from a low Birth by several degrees
to the Empire, with the Assistance of Letters, and the Knowledge that he had
acquired in Arms; says he, I have been all things, and all is worth nothing.

He died at York in Great Britain, in an advanced His Deaht.
Age, and the Eighteenth Year of his Reign, of a very violent Malady, the Gout,
after having subdued the Nations which were troublesome to the Repose of that
Country. He left Two Sons, Antoninus Bassianus and Geta, to which latter he
gave the same Name of Antoninus, in Honor of the Emperor Marcus Antoninus. He
was interred in the Sepulcher of Marcus Antoninus, for whom of all the
Emperors, he had that Honor, and held his Memory so dear, that he consecrated
even his Son Commodus Antoninus a God, and thought that for the future, the
Name of Antoninus ought to be inseparable from the Person of the Emperor, as
well as that of Augustus, for ever. The Senate, his Children, and those of his
Family, joined to make a magnificent Funeral for him, and he was likewise
enrolled in the Number of the Gods. The public Works of his that are extant,
are chiefly these; the Septizonium, his Baths, and his Jani. The Judgment that
was passed upon him after his Death was so much the more to his Honor, as his
Son, and those Princes that came after, proved unfortunate to the State; when
all things were abandoned into the Hands of Robbers, that made a Prey of all
the Grandeur and the Riches of the Romans. He was so little curious of fine
Clothes, that his Vest had scarce any Studs of Purple upon it; and over that,
he wore a loose shagged Coat. He eat little, and loved above all things the
Pease, Beans, and Pulse of his own Native Country; he sometimes drank pretty
freely; often quite abstained from flesh. He was handsome as to his Person;
big, with His Personage.
a long Beard; his Hair naturally curled; of an awful Countenance; a sweet
Voice, but something of an African Tone with it to the last. After his Death,
he was more beloved than ever he had been during his Life; because People then
had ceased to envy him, and because they were out of the fear of his Cruelty.

I remember, I have read in Aelius Maurus, the manumitted Servant of Phlegon of
Tralles, that this Prince, when he died, rejoiced infinitely, that he left
behind him two Sons of the Name of Antoninus to succeed in the Empire, and to
be of equal Power with one another, after the Example of the Emperor Antoninus
Pius, who was succeeded at once by Marcus Antoninus and Verus Antoninus, who
yet being the Sons of that Prince but by Adoption; it pleased Severus so much
the more, to think that his two Sons were his own, and derived of his own
Blood; that is, Bassianus Antoninus, whom he had by his first Wife, and Geta
Antoninus, whom he had by Julia. But he was much mistaken in his good hopes as
to them both. The untimely Murder of the one, and the Vices of the other
equally deprived the State of reaping any Good by them.

And really when I have sometime reflected upon this, I have with astonishment
observed, may it please your Majesty O Dioclesian, that seldom any of the great
Men have ever left a good and an useful Son behind them. But either they have
died all without Issue, or if they have had Children, their Children have been
such, that it had been better for their Glory to have left none at all. To
begin with Romulus, he left the World no Children; nor Numa Pompilius, who were
of any Service to the State. What shall I say of Camillus? Had he any Children
like himself? What had Scipio? What had the Cato's, who were all such great
Men? What shall I say of Homer, Demosthenes, Virgil, Salust, Terence, Plautus,
and so many other excellent Persons? What shall I say of Caesar? What shall I
say of Tully? but that it had been much better, that he had left no Children
neither. What shall I say of Augustus himself? who had not a good even adoptive
Son, though he had all the World to choose out of. Trajan was also mistaken in
the Choice that he made of his own Country man, and one of his own Blood. But
to omit any more adoptive Sons for the sake of Antoninus Pius and Marcus
Antoninus, who were Two such Divinities: What had been happier than Marcus
Antoninus, if he had not left Commodus his Heir? what more Glorious than
Septimius Severus, if he had never begotten Bassianus? who murdered his
Brother, for a Crime maliciously invented by himself, and then charged it upon
him who married his Mother-in-Law, who was as good as an own Mother to him, and
in whose Arms he had before killed her Son, his Brother; who killed Papinian,
that Sanctuary, that Treasure of all the Doctrine of the Laws, only because he
would not justify so cruel a Fratricide Therefore in comparison with this Son,
Severus the Father, though he was in all Respects a hard, or rather a cruel
Prince, was accounted Pious, and worthy of the Consecration of a God; who as he
lay on his Deathbed, sent, they say, to this his Son, that Divine Oration in
Salust, of the King Micipsa to his Children. But it was so quite lost upon
Bassianus Antoninus, that he lived long in the hatred of the People, to whom
although he gave a Bounty of those Coats called Caracalla, from whence himself
has the Name of Caracallus; and though he built those Baths of his Name, which
are very Magnificent, yet that Holy and Venerable Style of Antoninus, became
much the less beloved for his sake. He, as we are told, built besides the
Portico which is at Rome, with very great Splendour, in which there are
represented, the memorable Exploits of Severus his Father.

The Signs fore-running the Death of the Signs forerunning his Death.
Emperor Septimius Severus, were these. He dreamt, that he was carried up to
Heaven in a Chariot, drawn by four Eagles, and enriched with precious Stones,
and I know not what large humane Form flying before him: that as he was
elevated in the Air, he displayed the Numbers Eighty Nine, beyond which Age
precisely he did not live; for he was already old, when he came to the Empire.
Then that he continued a long time alone and destitute of help, in a great
Circle by himself, till at last, fearing to fall to Earth again, he saw himself
called by Jupiter, and placed amongst the Antoninusses. One day whilst the
Games of the Cirque were celebrating, as there were three Figures of Victory,
with Palms in their hands placed according to Custom upon the Platform where
the Emperor's Throne is; that in the middle bearing a Globe, on which was
inscribed the Name of Severus, was blown down with a blast of Wind to the
Ground, and there lay. The other, which was inscribed with the Name of Geta,
fell, and was broken to pieces; but that which was inscribed with the Name of
Bassianus stood, but with much ado, and lost its Palm-branch in the Wind. After
he had finished his Wall or Trench in Great Britain, and was returning to the
next Garrison victorious, having hereby assured the Peace of that Country for
ever, he was thinking in his mind, what sort of Omen he should meet with upon
it; a Black-moor who was of the Number of his Soldiers, and who was a famous
Droll, always ready to make some pleasant piece of Rallery, presents himself
before him, with a Crown in his hand made of Cypress; Severus in anger,
commanded him immediately to retire out of his sight, being sensibly touched
with the double ill Omen of his Hew, and the Matter of his Crown. In the mean
time said the Man, Your Majesty has been all Things, and conquered all Things,
no^ be a God. Being afterward returned to the City of York, and going to
discharge his Devotion, he was conducted by a mistake of an Augur, into a
Temple of Bellona, and next the Beasts which were presented to him to
Sacrifice, were black: But he refusing to Sacrifice in that color, retired to
the Palace, and the same black Victims being left neglected by the Priests,
went after him as far as to the Gates of the Palace.

In a great many Cities there are Works His public Works.
which he ordered to be done, which are excellent; but particularly at Rome,
all the public Edifices which were decaying by old Age, and the course of
time, he restored, and which was a great Action in him, without scarce ever
inscribing his own Name upon one of them, but every where continuing upon them
the Names of their ancient Founders. At his Death he left in the public
Stores, Corn to serve for Seven Years to come, at the rate of expending Seventy
Five Thousand Modii a day, whereof each Modius was a Peck and half. And for
Oil, he left such a Quantity, as was sufficient not only for the City of Rome,
but all Italy upon occasion, for Five Years. They say that his last Words were
these; I found the State when I received it, every where in Disturbance. I
leave it in Peace even to the Britains. Old and Lame, as I am, I leave the
Empire firm to my Sons, if they are good: But in a feeble Condition for them,
if they are bad. The last Watchword which he ordered to be given to the
Tribune, was, Laboremus, let us take Pains; as that of Pertinax, the first day
that he was admitted to the Empire, was, Militemus, let us fight. He had
designed a second Royal Image of Fortune to be made and added to that which
always stands in the Emperor's Chambers, and is used to accompany them in all
Places where they go; he desired to leave of those most sacred Figures, to each
of his Sons one. But when he found himself pressed with the approaching hour of
his Death, it is said, he ordered that that Image of Fortune, which there was,
should be carried alternatively into the Chambers of his Two Sons; but
Bassianus Antoninus slighted that Order, even before he had killed his Brother.

His Body was brought from Great Britain to Rome, where it was received with
the greatest Reverence of all the Provinces; though some say, it was only his
Ashes which were brought to Rome, reposed in a little Urn of Gold, which was
interred in the Sepulcher of the Antoninusses; and that the Body was burnt upon
the place where he died. When he built the Septizonium, he had no other Design
in it, but to make appear the Magnificence of his Work, to the Eyes of those,
who particularly should come out of his Native Country of Africa; and if he had
not been prevented, it is supposed, he would have made a stately Intrado from
thence to the Palace Royal; as afterward the Emperor Alexander Severus would
have done, but that the Soothsayers prohibited him, for Reasons in their Art.

THE A Christi CXCIV.
LIFE OF PESCENNIUS NIGER, Dedicated to the EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN.
BY AELIUS SPARTIANUS.
IT is a difficult thing, and such as we rarely see done, to publish to the
World a just Account of Persons who die under the Notion of Rebels and
Usurpers, by being Conquered, and because they are concluded ^o by another
Person's Victory. All the Circumstances of such are scarce ever fully expressed
in the Monuments, and the Annals of the Ancients; for that which is great of
them, and to their Honors, is either generally depraved and turned another
way, or it is suppressed. Neither is there so much Care taken to seek into the
things that concern their Origin and their Lives, as to recount their Ends.
For when they have brought them to that, and told the War, in which they were
overcome, and how they suffered for the boldness of their Attempts, they
persuade themselves they have said enough about them. Thus Pesce^nius His
Extraction.
Niger was, as some say, born of very ordinary, as others, of honorable
Parents; that is, the latter say, that his Father was An(...) Fuscus, his
Mother Lampridia, his Grandfather the Curator of the Town of Aquino; according
to which, his Family was of the Equestrian Order: but yet this is a thing which
(...) this day, others will dispute. His Instruction in Letters was but
indifferent, no more tha^ was his Estate. His manner of Life was moderate; his
Temper hot enough; but particularly of an unbridled Passion to Liberty. H^ was
a long time a Centurion, and afterward through several other Commands in the
Wa^ came to be the General of the Forces (...) Syria, unto which the Emperor
Commodus (...) preferred him, by the Credit and the reco^mendation chiefly of
that very Person, as (...) things went at that time, who afterwar^ strangled
Commodus.

After the Death of Commodus, and the Death also of his Successor Pertinax,
Pescennius Niger set up for the Empire upon the Authority of the same Forces of
Syria; encouraged to it from Rome, where Didius Julianus, who had succeeded to
Pertinax, was so hated by the People, that they publicly cursed him, and threw
Stones at him, and prayed, that the Gods would give them Niger to be their
Prince, and Niger to come to the Succor of the City. Hereupon Julianus sent a
Centurion with Orders to bring him the Head of Niger, which was a very
imprudent Fancy indeed, as if it was such an easy matter for a single
Centurion to make himself the Master of one, who was at the Head of a puissant
Army, and could very well maintain himself. With the same imprudence it was
that he proposed to take off the Head of Severus, after he had already been
declared Emperor, and to send a Man to command in his place. For he had sent
the known Assassine, Aquilius a Centurion, to him to kill him; as if so
powerful a General, was so easily to be killed by a Centurion. But yet all this
was as Judicious, as his pretending to prohibit Severus from the Empire by Law,
because himself was in the prior Possession of it.

In fine, the Inclinations of the People toward He is beloved by the People
Pescennius Niger, and their aversion to Julianus, appeared sufficiently in
this; that whilst Julianus was Entertaining them with the Games of the Cirque;
even then, they called upon the Name of Pescennius Niger, and wished publicly
for his coming to the Succor of the City. Upon which occasion Julianus it is
said pronounced these Words, That if they had him, he would not Reign long over
them, no more than himself. But Severus, he said, might, though he was the most
of all to be hated by every body; which in the event proved true.

Now in the time that Severus was the Lieutenant Befriended by Severus.
of the Province of Lugdunum in Gallia, Pescennius Niger and he had contracted
a very great Friendship with one another; insomuch, that the latter having
acquitted himself in some Actions there with a great deal of Bravery and
Honesty against the Enemy; he rendered himself so perfectly agreeable to
Severus, that Severus recommended him to the Emperor Commodus, and engaged for
him, as a Person that was necessary to be employed in the State. And certainly
he was a very good Soldier, and understood the Discipline of War perfectly
well. He never suffered his Men to extort from their Quarters in the Provinces,
Wood or Oil, or any manner of Service. He never made Gain to himself out of
their Pay; nor when he was a Tribune, did he suffer the other Officers to do
so: And after he was set up to be Emperor, he commanded two Tribunes who were
guilty of making Advantages to themselves out of the Pay of their Soldiers, to
be stoned to Death.

A LETTER of Severus himself, written to Ragonius Celsus the Governor of
Gallia, says thus of him.
IT is a miserable thing, that we cannot imitate Letters in his Favo^r
the Military Discipline of him whom we have overcome in the Field; whereas
your Men do nothing but ramble here and there; the Tribunes are Bathing
themselves at Noon day, Dine nn Taverns, and Lie in Inns; Dance, Drink and
Sing, and call this the only Rule that they have, that they Drink without all
Rule. Certainly, should these Things be, if we had the least Vein of the
Discipline of our Fore fathers in us? First therefore, correct the Tribunes,
and then you will amend the Soldiers; who will no longer stand in fear of you,
if you are in fear of them. You may know this by Pescennius Niger, that the
Soldiers will never be kept to their Duties, unless the Tribunes and the
Captains that are over them, approve themselves before them, good and virtuous
Men.


So much the Emperor Severus owned concerning his Rival Pescennius Niger, of
whom he had gotten the Victory. The Emperor Marcus Antoninus has a Letter to
Cornelius Balbus concerning him, which says thus.

YOU commend Pescennius to me. I know him. For your Predecessor told me, that
he was a brave Man, of an honest Life; and that he was worthy to be promoted to
a higher Station. So I have sent Letters, which are to be read at the Head of
the Troops, wherein I have ordered him the command of a body of Three Hundred
Armenians, One Hundred Sarmatians, and One Thousand of our own Men. It is for
y(...) to tell them, that it is not the Ambition ^f Pescennius, because this is
not consonant with o(...) Principles; but it is his Valor and good Manners,
which has raised him to that place, that (...) Grandfather Hadrian, and my
great Grandfather Trajan did never bestow, but upon Persons of whose Merits
they were most assured.


The Emperor Commodus says thus of the same Person.

Pescennius, I know, he is a Valiant Man; (...) have employed him Twice as a
Tribune, and i^ a little time, I will advance him to be a General, as soon as
the old Age of Aelius Corduenu^ engages him to quit the Service of the State.

These were the Opinions of all Person^ therefore about him. Severus had often
said he would give him his Life with all his heart if he would desist from his
Enterprise. H^ was made Consul by the Emperor Commodus who in that point gave
him the precedenc^ even to Severus, at which Severus was disobliged Severus
says in his own Life, that before that his Sons were come to be of an Age to
succeed him, he had intended when he was sick, if he had died, to appoint
before all others Pescennius Niger, and Clodius Albinus to be his Successors;
though afterward they were both the one and the other his greatest Enemies.
But however, this is an Argument of the good Opinion that once Severus had of
Niger.

If we may believe Severus, Pescennius Niger was a Man ambitious of Glory, of a
Life close and reserved, and of an advanced Age, when ^he invaded the Empire;
from which last Circumstance he takes the Liberty to blame him, as if himself
had come to the Empire much younger; whereas he reigned but Eighteen Years, or
thereabouts, and yet died at the Age of Eighty Nine. At the same time that
Severus sent Heraclius into Bithynia to secure that Country, he sent Fulvius to
go and get into his Custody the Children of Pescennius Niger, who were then in
the Flower of their Youth. He took no notice at all of their Father to the
Senate, but immediately began an Expedition to compose the State of the East.
But withal, he commanded some Legions into Africa, to prevent that Niger should
not possess himself of that Quarter, and thereby afflict the People of Rome
with a want of the Corn from thence. For though the Passage both by Sea and
Land was difficult, yet it did not seem impossible for Niger to do this,
especially if he took his way through the Countries of Egypt and Libya.

In the mean time, Niger was in the possession of Greece, Thracia and
Macedonia, when Severus came against him into the East. He proposed to Severus,
that they might be Partners in the Empire, with one another, but this was
slighted; on the other hand, Severus offered him his Life in Exile, but this
Niger slighted. So whereas he had put to death several illustrious Persons,
Severus declared him, together with Aemilianus, an Enemy. Then the Captains of
Severus engaged first with He is defeated and slain.
Aemilianus, and beat him. After which they en^^ged with Niger himself, over
whom having gotten the Victory, he fled, but mortally wounded; and being taken
by a Lake, which is by the City of Ciziqua, and brought in the Condition that
he was in to Severus, he expired presently after.

His Head was carried about upon a Spear, and sent to Rome; his Sons killed,
his Wife killed, his Estate confiscated, and his whole Family extinguished. But
yet it was not till after the News of the Rebellion of Clodius Albinus, that
all this was done; because till then, the Banishment of his Wife and Children
had contented Severus; who was made much worse, and much more unmerciful, than
he was in this, by the next War he had with Clodius Albinus; for then he slew
an infinite number of Senators, and some called him a(...) African Sylla, some
a Marius, for all that civi^ Blood which he spilt.

Pescennius Niger was very tall, and well made His Personage.
as to his Person; his Hair curling up to his Ears, a Voice so very clear and
strong, that he could make himself to be heard, when he spoke in the Camp, if
the Wind was not against him, a Mile; a modest Countenance, apt to blush;
rather fat than meager; loved a Glass of Wine, eat but little; never lay with
his Wife but to Conception, and then he abstained, which made him when he was
in Gallia, be publicly celebrated for his Chastity. In the Arch of the Gallery
which is in the Gardens of Commodus, we have to this day his Picture done in
Mosaic Work, amongst the great Friends of that Prince, assisting at the
Mysteries of the Goddess Isis. Niger was therefore a very Excellent Soldier, a
Valiant Tribune, a Wise General, an Illustrious Consul; happy in his Affairs at
home and Employments abroad; but an unhappy Emperor. He might have been of
great use to the State, under such a Prince as Severus, if so be that he would
have served on his side. But he was misled by the Counsels of Scevus
Aurelianus, who had contracted his Daughters to his Sons, and who for that
reason had urged him on, to persist, as much as he could, to make the Empire
his own.

We may see how considerable a Man he was by this; that his Authority and his
Credit at the Court was so great, that he writ first to the Emperor Marcus
Antoninus, and afterward to Commodus, when he perceived how much the Provinces
were ruined by making too frequent changes in the Persons who governed them;
that in the first place, no President, or Lieutenant, or Proconsul of His Skill
in Civil Affairs.
a Province should be succeeded by another, before the term of Five Years; that
when that term was expired, the said Magistrates should give an Account, how
they had administered the Power which they had been entrusted with; and then
that no Persons who were not of good Extractions, should be admitted to serve
in those high Offices of State. Besides this, it was a suggestion of his, that
the Assessors attending upon the Governors and other Magistrates of the
Provinces, to assist them in Counsel, should be preferred in their turns unto
the highest Honors; which was observed afterward by the Emperor Severus, and
thenceforward by many others, as appears by the Examples of Paulus and Ulpian,
who had been both Assessors to Papinian, and were both of them afterward,
first employed in the Office of Secretaries, the one for the Dispatches, the
other for the Registers, and then soon after they were made the Captains of the
Guards. It is also from him that no body is an Assessor to a Judge, but in his
own Province; and that no one administers that Charge at Rome, but what is a
Native of the City. He added besides, that there should be Salaries appointed
for certain Counselors, that they might not be a Charge upon those who were
the Assessors, because a Judge (he said) was neither to give nor take any
thing. As for the Soldiers, he was so strict upon those, that when some of them
And Military Discipline.
who were in Garrison upon the Frontiers in Egypt had asked him for some Wine,
he answered, You have the River Nile there, and do you ask me for Wine? And
certainly, the Water of that River is so sweet and so pleasant, that those of
the Country have no desire at all to drink Wine. Others that had been beaten by
the Saracens, murmuring, and being upon the point of a Sedition, saying, We
have had no Wine to drink, we cannot Fight. He answered, For shame, when those
that beat you drink Water! The People of the Province of Palaestine, praying,
that the Tax which was upon their Lands might be abated, because they cried
they were overcharged; he made them Answer, You would have the Tax taken off of
your Lands, but I will tax your very Air that you breath.

During that great Commotion of the State, when there were three Emperors set
up at one and the same time, that is, Septimus Severus, Pescennius Niger, and
Clodius Albinus; the Oracle of Delphos was consulted, which of them would be
the best for the Public to carry it. The Oracle answered in some obscure Words
in Greek, but which were understood to signify, that Niger was the best,
Severus was well enough, and Albinus the worst of the Three. After this, their
Curiosity lead them to ask the Oracle, which of the Three then should be the
Person that should at last carry it; the Answer was to this effect, That the
White and the Black, that is, Albinus and Niger should be killed, and an
African born (which Severus was) should possess the Empire of the World. Then
they asked further, who should succeed that African, the Oracle answered, That
he should be one, who was of the Name of the Pious. Which was not at all
understood, till Bassianus the eldest Son of Severus assumed the Name of
Antoninus, who was the only Person of the Title of the Pious, and then it was
concluded to be meant of Bassianus. Lastly, it was asked, how long a time he,
who of the Three Competitors carried the Empire, should Reign; and the Answer
was to this effect,

In twice ten Ships he will ride the Italian Sea,
Or from that Sail, let one deducted be.
That is, understanding by the Italian Sea, the Roman Commonwealth; it
signified very plainly, that Severus should, as he did, Reign about Ninetten or
Twenty Years.

This is what I humbly present before your Majesty, O Dioclesian, who are the
greatest of Emperors, concerning Pescennius Niger. I have collected it for the
purpose out of several Writings, wherein he comes to be but occasionally
mentioned. For as for the entire Lives of Persons, who either have not actually
reigned, or have not been declared Emperor by the Senate, or perhaps have been
killed before they have established their Fame in the World, it is seldom, as I
said in the beginning, that any body dares to write them. Which is the reason
that we have none of the Life of Vindex, and that we know nothing of the Life
of Piso; nor almost of all those who either have been only adopted to be
Caesar's, and no more, or have been barely saluted Emperors by the Soldiers, and
no more, as Anthony was under Domitian; or by being betimes killed, have
presently ended their Usurpations, and their Lives together. But yet that I may
not seem to omit any thing here, of what relates to this Person, that I can any
where find, the Astrologers made this Remark upon him; that neither living nor
dead, should he fall into the hands of Severus, but that he should perish by
the side of a Water. Some say, Severus himself had said this of him, by his own
Skill in Nativities. Nor was the Prognostication void altogether of Truth, for
he was found half alive, and half dead by a Lake.

He had one day observed some Soldiers in His strict Orders.
an Expedition, drinking out of a Cup of Silver; whereupon he was so strict,
that he commanded that all Silver at such times should be cast out of use, and
that they should drink out of Vessels of Wood; which however, they did not very
well like, because he said, it may possibly be, that the Baggage may fall into
the Power of the Enemy; and he would not have it, that the Barbarians should
find any such opportunity to set themselves off with our Silver, when there are
other things to be carried, which if taken, will give them a less occasion of
Glory. He ordered, that no Man upon an Expedition should drink Wine, but that
all should content themselves upon a day of Battle with Vinegar. He forbad
Bakers to follow the Army, being not willing that the Soldiers should eat any
thing that day but Biscuit. For the stealing of one Pullet, he had ordered Ten
Comerades, that were at the eating of it, though only one of them had stolen it,
to lose their Heads; which had certainly been executed, but that all the Army
interposed for them, in a manner so high, that they were almost in a Mutiny; to
prevent which, he moderated his Sentence, and ordered, that the Ten that had
eaten together of the Theft, should pay to the Countryman the Price of Ten
Pullets, for that One that he had lost. He suffered them not to make Fires to
get themselves any hot Meat, but caused them to be contented with dry Bread on
something that was cold, and set Spies upon them, to see that it was justly
observed. He for bad the Soldiers, when they went to Battle, to keep any Gold
or Silver about them in their Pockets, but to trust it in such safe and public
hands, as should restore it again to them faithfully, after the Battle was
over; or otherwise pay it to their Children, or Wives and Executors, who should
come to demand it; because if any Blow of Fortune should happen, yet he would
have no Booty to fall into the hand of the Enemy All which Orders, by reason of
the dissoluteness of the times of Commodus, gained him then but only so much
the more ill will. For though no Man made an exacter Commander in his time,
than he, yet it redounded rather to his prejudice, till after his Death; when
Envy and Malice being laid aside, such sort of Examples were valued.

Upon every Expedition that he took, he His personal Hardships.
eat himself of the Soldiers Amunition-Bread, and Victuals in public. He never
wore any thing upon his Head to cover him, either against the Sun, or against
the Rain, in which he had no Persons like him. He set before them all an
Example of Industry in himself and his Servants. For he imposed Burdens of
things upon the backs of his Servants, because they should not appear to walk
at their ease, whilst the Soldiers were loaded, which might make them envy
them. He protested in a Speech that he made to them, that as long as he had
been, or should be ever employed in the occasions of War, he should behave
himself as freely with them, as if he was a private Man: having always Marius
and such great Generals as he before his Eyes, and making his Discourses always
of Hannibal and the like. When a certain Person would have recited a Panegyric
before him, upon his being saluted Emperor, he said to him, Write the Praises
of Marius or Hannibal, or some such excellent Captain that is dead; and tell us
what he has done, for us to imitate him in: But to praise the Living is a
Jest, especially Emperors; from whom there are expectatiosn of all things on
the one hand, and fears on the other. They can reward, protect, kill,
proscribe; as for me, I desire only to please while I live; when I am dead,
then praise me.

Above all the Emperors, he loved Augustus, Vespasian, Titus, Trajan, Antoninus
Pius, and Marcus Antoninus. The rest, he said, were either effeminate and
shadows of Emperors, or they were Vipers. He always was particularly pleased
with the Accounts in History of Camillus, Marius, and Quintus Martius
Coriolanus. Being asked what he thought of the Scipio's; he said, They were
rather happy Men, than great Captains; which he proved by their domestic Lives
and their Youths, which were too loose and too easy in the one and the other.
Therefore it is a thing very evident, that if Peseennius Niger had gained, and
peaceably enjoyed the Empire, he was one who would have amended all things,
which Sever^i either could not, or he would not amend; and all this without
Cruelty. He would have done it, on the contrary, with great sweetness, and yet
in a manner becoming a Soldier, and with out that lenity that is foolish and
ridiculous. His House is to be seen at this day at Rome, in the Campus Jovis,
retaining his Name; in which, in one of the Rooms is his Statue, which was set
up by Statius Postumius in the black Marble of Thebes, who had received it from
the King of Thebes, who had caused it to be done to the Life. Upon the Basis
thereof is written an Epigram in Greek to this purpose; Here stands the Great
Niger, the Terror of Egypt, the Allie of Thebes, who had proposed a Golden Age
to all. Kings, Nations, Rome it self loved him. He was dear to the Antoninus'
s, and to the whole Empire. As his Name was Niger, (that is, Black) so we have
fashioned him in Black, that the Statue and the Person should correspond.
Severus would never suffer this Inscription to be erased, although the Captains
of his Guards, and others of his great Officers advised him to it. For, save
he, if Pescennius Niger was so great a Potentate as this makes him, let the
World know what a Man we have conquered; if he was not, let them however think,
that we have conquered such a Man.

It remains, that now I proceed to an Account of Clodius Albinus, who was as it
were the Companion of this Person, both in his Rise and Fall. For they both in
effect, revolted about the same time against Severus, and were both of them
overcome and killed by Severus. But though the Fortune of Clodius Albinus was
much what the same, and ran parallel with this of Pescennius Niger, yet his
Life was sufficiently different.

THE LIFE OF CLODIVS ALBINVS, Dedicated to the EMPEROR Constantine the Great.
BY JULIUS CAPITOLINUS
AFTER the Death of the Emper(...) Pertinax, who was killed by an i^trigue of
Clodius Albinus, these For Persons were proclaimed Empero^ almost at one and
the same time: Did^ Julianus by the Senate at Rome, Septimius S^verus by the
Army in Illyricum, Pescennius Niger in the East, and Clodius Albinus in Gallia.

As for Clodius Albinus, he was, according to Herodian, declared by Severus in
order to make him his Successor, actually a Caesar. But whilst out of their
Envy to one another, the one thought scorn of the other's Reign; and that the
Army in Gallia on the one hand would not endure Severus, nor the Army in
Germany on the other accept of Clodius Albinus, because they were each for
their own Prince; all things in all Parts went to confusion.

Clodius Albinus was of an Honorable Roman His Extraction.
Family, although born of the Town of Mahometa in Africa. And being therefore
originally an African, as well as Severus; he was willing to apply himself to
the Oracle of Del^bi, which we have before mentioned in the Life of Pescennius
Niger; and which said, That ^n African born should possess the Empire of the
World.

But before I shall enter further into the Account of his Life or Death, I
think fit to take ^n here a Passage, which is the thing of the World that
renders him the most Noble. The Emperor Commodus had formerly written a Letter
to him, in which he did him the Ho^our, so long ago, to constitute him a
Caesar. The Letter was this.

The Emperor COMMODUS to Clodius Albinus.
BEsides the other Letters which I have sent to Letter of Commodus, offering
him the Title of Caesar.
you, relating to your Successor, and the public Business; this here is, as
you see, all written with my own Hand; a familiar and domestic Letter; in
which, I give you leave, when ever you shall see occasion, to go to the Army,
and assume to yourself before them the Name and Quality of Caesar. For I hear,
that Septimius Severus, and Nonius Marcus have given ill Accounts of me to
their Soldiers, with design, that they may by that means, pave themselves a way
to the Throne; so when you do this, you shall have free Power, of presenting
the Soldiers with a Donative of three pieces of Gold a Man. Accordingly, I have
sent Letters to my Receivers, which will come to you sealed with the Seal of an
Amazon, that when you have occasion for that Money, you are to deliver to the
said Receivers those Letters, lest otherwise they may not serve you in your
demands of Money belonging to the Treasury. And for some illustrious Mark of
the Majesty of a Prince, f(...) you to receive, you have the leave of wearing ^
Cloak of Scarlet, even in my presence; the Purpl^ you shall have when you shall
come to visit me or to be with me, but without its being enrich'^ with Gold,
because my Great Grandfather Aeliu^ Verus, who died young, used it in this
manner when Hadrian adopted him Caesar.


But however, upon the receipt of this Letter, Clodius Albinus would by no
means offer to take upon him to do what Commodus had appointed him, because he
was afraid of the Odium that Commodus was in, by reason of his Manners, by
which he ruined the State, and dishonored it from day to day, killing the
People with both Hands; and because he was afraid besides of being found some
time or other in the number of those whom he should order to the same Massacre.
In fine, his own Speech, which he made to his Army at the time that they set
him up to be Emperor, takes notice of this; and likewise shows, that his
advancement to the Empire was what was confirmed, or at least was once
pretended to be confirmed by Severus himself, when he called him his Caesar and
his Brother; the Speech was this.

My Fellow Soldiers,
TO show you that it is contrary to my own Inclination, that I am elevated to
the Empire, you cannot have a better Argument of it than this; that I contemned
the offer of Commodus, when that Prince would have created me his Caesar. But I
must obey this day your Will, and the Will of the Emperor Severus. And I doubt
not, but under so Excellent and so Valiant a Prince as he is, the State will be
happily governed.

Nor can it be denied, but that Severus did at first intend, as Marius Maximus
says, if he had died early, to substitute Pescennius Niger, and Clodius Albinus
to be his Successors. But afterward his own Sons growing up, whose Fortunes he
had a desire to make, and envying Albinus the love which he had amongst the
Senators; he changed those Sentiments, and oppressed both Albinus and Niger by
a War, upon which he was more especially urged by the Entreaties of his Wife.
This besides he had done for Albinus, he made him a Consul, which if he had not
believed him to be an extraordinary Person, without doubt he would never have
done; so very careful as he was, in the choice that he made of the public
Officers of the Empire.

But to return to the beginning of his Story, Clodius Albinus was born, as I
said, at the Town of Mahometa; but yet that which made him Honorable in the
Eyes of all who knew him, was, that he derived his Descent from the Roman
Family of the Post humii, and the Albini Cejonii, which is at this day very
Noble, and has been much augmented by the Benefactions of your most excellent
Majesty, O Constantine; and there is reason to believe, that your Majesty will
augment it yet much more, as formerly it received a great increase from the
Emperors Gallienus and the Gordiani. He was born but to a very small Patrimony,
of a Father, who was called Cejonius Post humius, and a Mother called Aurelia
Messalina, to whom he was their first Child. When he was taken from the Birth,
instead of having according to the usual manner of other Children newborn, hi^
Flesh red, he was extreme white, and wa^ therefore called Albinus. And that
this is true, appears by a Letter of his Father sent on purpose to notify it
to Aelius Bassianus, the then Proconsul of Africa; who, as the same Letter
signifies, was a Relation of the Family of the Albini, as well as he.

A LETTER of Cejonius Posthumous, to Aelius Bassianus.
I Had a Son born upon the 7th. of the Calends of December, so white all his
Body over; he was whiter than the very Linen that he was received in. I have
therefore given him the Name of Albinus, and have dedicated him to the Family
of the Albini, which is common to me with you. I wish you to love him, and to
continue, as you do, to love the State, yourself, and us.


He passed all his Infancy in Africa, took his Greek and Latin Learning pretty
well, but had a Martial Heart, and was of a haughty Disposition by Nature.
Amongst the little Boys of his Age, at School, he was often, they say, singing
that Verse of Virgil, Arma amens capio, nec sat rationis in armis. repeating,
especially the first part of it, Arma amens capio, that is, I am for being a
Soldier right or wrong, and come what will. They say, that several things
happened after his Birth, which were so many Omens of his future Omens of his
Advancement.
Greatness. And certainly the same day there was born a Calf as white as Snow,
with Horns upon his Head, of a deep purple; which Horns were a long time
afterward to be seen in the Temple of Apollo at the City of Cumae, where
himself had bestowed them, when he was a Tribune. Enquiring at the same Temple
one day of the Oracle about his Fortune, he was answered in these Verses of
Virgil,

Hic rem Romanam magno turbante tumultu
Sistet eques, sternet, Poenos Gallumque rebellem
Accordingly, it is very true, as to what the latter Verse says of the Gauls,
that Clodius Albinus did subdue many Nations of them. Another Omen was this;
whilst he was a little Infant, a Fisherman happened to take a Tortoise which
was of a very great bigness, and made a present of it to Albinus's Father; who
being a Person of some Learning, and looking upon it as a good Sign, accepted
it, and ordered the Shell of it to be kept, and set apart for the use of his
young Son to wash in; because it was a peculiar Custom in the Imperial Family,
for the young Princes to wash in Shells of Tortoises. It was a rare thing, to
see Eagles in that place, where Clodius Albinus was born; and yet upon the
seventh Day after, which was appointed for the Solemnity of giving him his
Name, seven young Eagles were taken out of a Nest, and brought to the side of
his Cradle; which his Father, not rejecting the good omen, ordered to be well
kept, and that they should take great care of them.

These things therefore, and such others that occurred, were so many assured
Presages of his future Elevation; which are more particularly pursued by Aelius
Cordus; to whom I must refer the Reader, if he shall desire any further
satisfaction.

He betook himself to the Army early in his Youth; and became known to the
Emperors the Antoninusses, by the means of Lollius Serenus, Baebius Maetianus,
and Cejonius Post humianus, who were all related to him. He was some time a
Tribune of Dalmatian Horse. After His Military Preferments.
that he commanded the First and Fourth Legions. He kept the Army in Bithynia,
which next he Commanded, very well to their Duty, in the time of the Rebellion
of Avidius Cassius. The Emperor Commodus translated him from thence into
Gallia, where after having defeated some Nations on the other side of the
Rhine, he gained himself a famous name equally amongst the Romans, and amongst
the Barbarians: insomuch that it moved Commodus, to honor him the more, to
offer him the Title of Caesar, with the leave to present the Soldiers with a
Bounty upon it, and to wear a Cloak of Scarlet in his presence. All which he
prudently, and with great satisfaction declined, as if he suspected, that
Commodus's design was only to find Persons, whom to involve in his own ruin,
and whom to Massacre under some sort of pretense.

He had not served in the Office of an Aedile above ten days, before he was
made a Quaestor, and sent with precipitation to the Army: His Praetorship,
which he passed under the Reign of Commodus, was very famous. For to the usual
Games, with which he entertained the People, Commodus himself added Fights,
both upon the Theater and Amphitheatre. Then the Emperor Severus made him a
Consul; which was done about that time, that he proposed to have called him to
his Succession, in Conjunction with Pes(...)nius Niger.

He was advanced in years, and even older than Pescennius Niger, as Severus
says, when he was set up to be Emperor. The Senat^ had a more than ordinary
kindness for him, because of the Antiquity of his Family. Therefore Severus
having changed his first Sentiments, as to the Honor that he had intended to
Pescennius Niger and him, and resolving to preserve the Empire to his own
Children, and having beaten and killed Pescennius, he in the next place sent
the following Letter to Clodius Albinus, which I have met with in Cordus, in
these Words.

The Emperor Severus to Clodius Albinus, Caesar, his most beloved and dearest
Brother, Greeting.
PEscennius Niger having been vanquished by my Arms, I sent my Letters of it to
Rome, which the Senate, who have the greatest Affection for you, received very
agreeably. I desire you to assist me in the Government of the State with the
same Spirit, by which you make your self to be so beloved; being now become the
Brother of my Soul, and my Brother in the Empire. Bassianus and Geta, salute
you. My Wife Julia salutes you, and presents her recommendations to her Sister.
Pray preserve the Army in their Duty to the State, and to Us, my Soul, my
Dearest, my entirely Beloved.


Now the Persons who were sent with this Letter by Severus, being such as had
the greatest Affection for his Service, so that he knew he could confide in
them; he ordered them to delivered it to Clodius Albinus in Public: but when
they had done, they should say, that Treachery of Severus.
they desired privately to speak to him about some things, which were of the
secrets of the Camp and the Court. And having taken him aside, as if it were
only to deliver what they were charged with, five strong Men of their Retinue,
having Ponyards hid under their Robes, should fall upon him and kill him. And
certainly they did not betray the Confidence imposed in them; nor were wanting
in their Endeavors to execute their Orders. For when they were come to
Albinus, and had given him the Letter, which he Read, and had told him that
they had some other things in particular to discover to him, which were to be
spoken more privately, he took them apart into a long Gallery; but in the mean
time they were so over-careful that no other Persons should follow them,
pretending as if it were out of a fear lest their Message should be discovered,
that Albinus began to suspect something; upon which he immediately caused them
to be seized, and put them to the Question. Who at first denied it; but being
at last forced to yield to the violence of the Torment, they confessed then all
that Severus had given in Charge to them. Wherefore, Albinus being satisfied in
the just suspicion that he had conceived, gathered together a great Army, and
put himself upon his March with them to make War against Severus, and against
his Commanders.

In his first Engagement which he had with the Lieutenants of Severus, Albinus
had certainly the better of it. After which Severus went in Person against him,
having first prevailed with the Senate to adjudge him an Enemy. They fought it
very severely on both sides, in Gallia, not without always a great variety of
Fortune: insomuch that Severus was so concerned at it, that he thought fit to
consult the Opinion of the Augurs; who answered him, as Marius Maximus says,
that Clodius Albinus should indeed fall into his Power, but it should be
neither living nor dead; and it was so. For when the last Battle was fought,
Albinus, after an infinite number of his Men were killed, a great many others
put to flight, and others taken Prisoners, fled himself; and whether it was
that he struck himself through the Body, or whether, as some say, one of his
own Slaves, or some of the Soldiers did it, demanding some acknowledgment from
him of Severus, I cannot say; but he was brought half alive, and half dead to
Severus; which made good the Prediction. He left one Son, or as Maximus says
two; to whom at the first Severus was pleased to show favor; but afterward he
ordered them and their Mother to be killed, and their Bodies to be thrown into
the River. The Head of Albinus was cut off, and carried about upon a Javelin,
and then sent to Rome; accompanied with Letters to the Senate, wherein Severus
insulted them for the Affection which they had a long time born to Albinus, and
for the Honors and Kindnesses that they had shown to his Brother and his
Relations: but especially his Brother. His Body was exposed in its Gore for
several days before the Tent of Severus, till it stunk, and then it was torn
into pieces by Dogs, and thrown into the River.

As for the Manners of Clodius Albinus, they His Temper and Manners.
are represented variously. Severus says, he was deformed with Vices;
Malicious, Lewd, Wicked, Dishonest, Envious, and Luxurious. But it is to be
observed, that it was in the time of the War with him, or after, that he speaks
so ill of him, which makes it the less to be believed. Because before, he
frequently sent Letters to him as his particular Friend, and certainly many
People had a much better Opinion than that of him. Besides, that Severus
himself, had once called him his Caesar, and had set him the first before his
Eyes for his Successor. There are also some Letters of the Emperor Marcus
Antoninus concerning him, Antoninus his good Opinion of him.
which give a great Testimony of his Virtues and Manners. One of which, written
to the Captains of the Guards, it will not be improper, I think, to insert here.

Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, to the Captains of the Guards, Greeting.
I Have committed two Cohorts to the Command of Albinus, of the Family of the
Cejonii; he is an African born, it is true; but he has not many things in him
of that Country, and he is the Son-in-Law of Plautillus. A Man of Experience,
of a serious Life, and Grave in his Manners. I think he will do good in the
Camp. I am sure he will do no hurt. I have doubled his Salary, and quadrupled
his other Allowances: Do you encourage him to signalize his Services; and
assure him he shall be rewarded as he deserves.


Another Letter, which the same Prince writ in the time of Avidius Cassius
concerning him, is this.
THE Fidelity of Albinus is to be commended: who when the Forces in Bithynia
were upon the Revolt, and upon flying over to Avidius Cassius, (as certainly
they had all done, if he had not been with them) was very careful in preserving
them in their Duty. We think therefore that he deserves a Consulship. I shall
accordingly substitute him in the place of Cassius Papirius, who I am told is
so sick, that there is no appearance of his Recovery; But I would not have you
to take notice of it, before he is dead; lest it may come to the Ears either of
Papirius himself, or his Friends; which would not look so well.


These two Letters therefore make it appear that Clodius Albinus was an useful
Person. And certainly his sending of Money toward the restoration of those
Cities, which had been laid waste by Pescennius Niger, is another great
Argument of a Public Spirit, and what had gained him Friends amongst the
Inhabitants there. Aelius Cordus, pretends at the same time to say, that he was
such a Glutton, that particularly he would eat more Fruit at a time, than it is
possible to imagine. He says, that he has eaten, at a Breakfast five hundred
Figs, one hundred Peaches, ten Melons, twenty Bunches of Grapes, a hundred of
the little Birds called Beccafico's or Fig-Peckers, and four hundred Oisters.
But yet he says that he drank but little; in which Severus does not agree with
him: for he tells us that he drank to excess, even in the time of the War. And
whether it was because of this his great drinking, which Severus charges him
with; or because of his Moroseness of Humor, it is said, he never lived well
with his Family: but was very disagreeable to his Wife, and unjust to his
Servants; as well as hard upon the Soldiers. As to which latter, he many times
crucified Centurions, when there has been as good as no occasion given for it.
He beat others often with Rods, and pardoned not the least fault. He was proper
in his Clothes, and as improper in his Repasts; in which he minded nothing but
Abundance. He was a great lover of a Mistress, but not at all of a Bardaccio;
being so far from that, that he severely punished it upon such as were. He was
perfectly well skilled in Agriculture; insomuch that he writ a Book of
Georgicks.

He was as much beloved by the Senate as any Prince ever was: but the great
occasion of it was; their mortal hatred to Severus, which they had against him
upon the account of his Cruelty. Therefore as many of them, as either were, or
such as were but suspected to have been of Albinus's side, he put to death
after the Victory. He ordered the Letters of Albinus to be searched, to
discover his Correspondents: and all that he found whatever, he first caused
them to be declared Enemies by the Senate; then put them without mercy to
death, and Confiscated their Estates into the Treasury.

There is a Letter, which he writ to the Senate, that shows his very Soul, as
to these things; a Copy whereof is as follows.

CAN any thing oblige me more, Fathers of the Senate, than to hear that Albinus
should have your good Opinions, rather than Severus. With great care I have
furnished the State with Corn, and have maintained several Wars for the State,
and have supplied the People of Rome with more Oil than the World scarce ever
beheld: and by my overcoming Pescennius Niger I have delivered you from the
miseries of a Tyranny. Indeed you have made on your part a great return to me
for all this. For here is a Man, who is not only an African as my self, but one
of the poor Town of Mahometa, and only because he pretends to derive his blood
from the Roman Cejonii, you have extolled him so far, that you would have him
to be your Emperor, whilst as yet I am upon the Throne, and my self and my
Children are in safety. Was the noble Senate at a loss I pray, for a Prince
whom you ought to love, and who loves you? Because from this Man you hope
perhaps to be made Consuls, to be made Praetors, and what not, therefore you
have for your better Interests in him conferred Honors upon his Brother. Which
is not to make that return to me, as was formerly done by your Ancestors
against the Faction of Piso; nor as it was lately done to the Emperor Marcus
Antoninus against the Rebellion of Avidius Cassius. But you have preferred a
Man to me, who is a deceiver, who tells you nothing but lies, and does but
impose upon you in the matter of his Nobility. Statilius Corfulenus undoubtedly
must be heard by the Senate to his Motion, that they would please to decree
some Honors to Albinus, and to his Brother. In the mean time I should think,
that that Noble Person had forgot himself, that he did not decree a Triumph for
me in my turn. It troubles me more than all, that so many amongst you should
think that Albinus is to be commended for a Man of Letters, who spent all his
time in Apuleius, and those Ludicrous Pieces, which are no better than some
Ditties of the old Wives.


By this it is to be seen how eager Severus was, and how he always blamed the
Factions both of Pescennius Niger, and of Clodius Albinus; of all which, if any
one desires a more particular account, let him read Marius Maximus for the
Writers in the Latin Tongue, and Herodian for the Greek, who have delivered a^
great many things very faithfully.

Clodius Albinus was Tall, his Hair naturally His Personage.
Curling, full Visaged, but withal so wonderfully fair and clear in Complexion,
that mos^ thought he took the the name of White, that is Albinus, from nothing
else. He had an Effeminate Voice, as shrill almost as an Eunuchs. He had an
easy mien; but yet he was ill to be angered, and worse to be opposed. He was
changeable in his Luxury; for many times he would Drink, and many times again
Abstain. He was perfectly brave for Arms; one may, not improperly, call him the
Catiline of his time. As for what remains, it will not, I think, be amiss to
show how it was that he gained himself Reason of his Popularity.
so much of the love of the Senate. Whilst he Commanded the Army in Great
Britain by the orders of Commodus, a Report came, but yet it was false at that
time, that that Prince was killed; upon which occasion he came to the Head of
the Army, and Harangued them thus.

If the Senate, and the People of Rome had evermore retained their ancient
Empire; and that a State so great had never been submitted to the power of a
single Person, there had been no Vitellius, no Nero, no Domitian, to have
fallen by the Stroke of an Assassine. And then it was during the time of the
Consular Government, that those Families flourished, of the Cejonii, the
Albini, and the Posthumii: of whom your Fathers have many things to say, which
they have heard from their Grandfathers before them. Certainly it was the
Senate that annexed Africa to the Roman Empire. The Senate subdued Gallia and
Spain. The Senate gave Laws to the Provinces of the East. The Senate had often
attempted the Parthians, and had reduced them, if so Covetous a General as
Crassus; had not then been at the Head of the Roman Army. It was when Caesar
was a Senator; that he conquered Great Britain: at least he had not been
declared Dictator then. And how much better had it been for Commodus himself,
if he had stood in fear of the Senate. Their Authority held good, as far as to
the times of Nero; being not afraid to Condemn that sordid and impure Prince,
nor to pronounce their Judgments against him, though he then had the full Power
of Life and Death in his hands. Wherefore, my Fellow Soldiers; I for my part,
who have had the Title of Caesar conferred upon me by Commodus, renounce that
pretension, and the Gods grant that others may do so too. Let the Senate Reign,
and distribute the Provinces. Let the Senate make us Consuls: or why do I say
the Senate? Let your selves, and your Fathers. For your selves will also be
Senators.

This Speech was brought to Rome, whilst Commodus was yet living; who was so
moved by it against the Author, that he presently sent to turn him out, and
gave his Place to Junius Severus, who was one of his Guards. However the Senate
was pleased with the Speech, and as well before as after Commodus was killed,
they honored Albinus in his absence with extraordinary Acclamations; so that
some of them advised Pertinax, to take him for his Colleague in the Empire: in
whose sudden Fall afterward the Authority of this Person was very
considerable; being provoked to it by a turn of Affairs, for the understanding
of which I shall add a Letter of Commodus to his Captains of the Guards,
wherein he signifies his mind as to the killing of Clodius Albinus, thus.

Aurelius Commodus, to the Captains of his Guards, Greeting.
I Suppose you have heard, How that first of all it was pretended, that I by
the Conspiracy of those about me was killed; and then that Clodius Albinus made
an Harangue to my Soldiers upon that occasion, in which he recommends himself
mightily to the Senate, not without a design thereby, as I suppose, of
advancing himself to the Empire. For he that is against the Government of the
Empire by one Prince, and says that it ought wholly to be Governed by the
Senate, seeks but to get the Empire to himself through the favor of the
Senate. Look to him therefore very strictly. For this shows he is a Man to be
avoided as Death; and so are all such who carry on designs to your prejudice.

Now Pertinax, who was advised to choose Albinus for his Partner in the Empire,
and did not do so, falling upon this Letter, published it to bring an Odium
upon the Person that he had thought fit to refuse. In revenge whereof Albinus
sat so close upon his Skirts, that he was the Author of the design against the
life of Pertinax, in favor of the Succession of Didius Julianus.

THE A. Christi CCXII.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Bassianus Antoninus Caracallus.
By AELIUS SPARTIANUS.
THE Emperor Septimius Severus left two Sons, Bassianus and Geta. The first and
eldest had the name given him of Bassianus Antoninus, and was Created a Caesar
by his Father; the other had the name given him of Geta Antoninus, and was
declared a Caesar by the Army. The first succeeded to enjoy the Throne; the
other was quickly adjudged an Enemy, and murdered by his Brother: concerning
whose Ancestors I think it in vain to make any repetition here, because I have
said enough upon that Head, in the account of the Life of their Father.

Bassianus Antoninus was when he was a youth His Character when a Youth.
and under the Tutelage of his Parents, endearing, ingenious, dutiful to them,
obliging to all others, acceptable to the People, and to the Senate, and ready
to offer at any thing to ingratiate himself. He was not slow at his Learning.
He was not sparing of his Bounty. He was not negligent in giving Marks of his
Clemency. If he was present, whenever any condemned Persons were thrown to the
Beasts, he either wept, or turned away his Eyes from the Sight, which was an
extraordinary pleasing thing to the People. When he was a Boy of seven Years
old, and saw another Boy who was his Play-fellow beaten severely for making
profession of the Christian Religion, he was a long time out of humor both
with his own, and with the Boy's Father, and all such as were the occasion of
the Boy's beating. He obtained that the Cities of Antioch and Constantinople
should be restored to their ancient Rights, by his interposition in their
behalf with his Father, under whose displeasure they had fallen, for assisting in
the Rebellion of Pescennius Niger. He con(...)ived a hatred against Plautianus,
because of his Cruelty. If his Parents had presented him with things, as is
usual to do, about the Feast of Saturn, he gave them away again of himself to
either his Masters or his Servants. A(...) which good Qualities made up his
Carriage when a Youth.

But afterward, as he grew more a Man And when a Man.
whether it was by the suggestions of his Father or whether he did it of his
own head, because he thought to equalize himself with Alexander the Great, of
Macedonia, he turned very reserved and grave, and affected such a fierceness in
his Countenance, that many who knew him a Boy, could scarce believe him to be
the same Person. He had always Alexander the Great in his Mouth. He was often
in public Company praising Tiberius and Sylla. He was prouder than his Father,
who was one that was high enough, and he despised his Brother Geta, because of
his great Modesty. Wherefore after the Death of his Father, he came to the Camp
of the Guards, and complained that Geta had been in a Conspiracy against him,
for which he had caused him to be put to death Puts his Brother to death.
in the Palace, and his Body to be immediately burnt. He told them
particularly, that he had designed to poison him, and that he had been
undutiful also to his Mother; concluding, that to engage them to be the more
faithful to himself, he presented them with a Bounty. There was another
encampment at this time, near the City of Albano, where the Murder of Geta was
highly resented; all the Soldiers saying, that as it was to both the Sons of
Severus equally, that they promised Fidelity, so they ought to keep to them
both, refusing to open their Gates; so that Bassianus was a long time in
getting entrance to them, nor could he cool them at last, but with the finest
words and promises of what a prodigious Bounty he would give them, as this way
seldom fails of quieting the Heats of Soldiers. From thence he returned to
Rome, where he came to the Senate in a Cuirass under his Robes, and his
Soldiers in Arms guarding him, whom he placed in Files in the middle betwixt
the Seats, and made his Speech; in which he much complained of the evil designs
of his Brother against his Life, to whom he said, to charge his Memory, and
excuse himself, he had been so kind, and that he had denied him nothing, and
had delivered him from the dangers that he had been in; but instead of having a
due Sense of these Favors, he had attempted his Life, and had not answered his
good Intentions. But yet he uttered all this confusedly, and with such an ill
Grace, that the Senate did not very well accept what he said.

After this Speech, he declared, that it was his pleasure to restore all that
were in exile to the Liberties of their Country again; and then from the Senate
he returned to the Guards, and lay in the Camp. The next day he came to the
Capitol; from the Capitol he repaired to the Palace-Royal, supported by
Papinian and Chilo. In the mean time, those that he had a design to murder, he
bespoke himself the most kindly to. He had observed the Mother of Geta, with
other Women, weeping bitterly, and had it not been that he was restrained with
the Sense, that it would make the Cruelty of his Brother's Murder look much
worse, he was for putting them all to Death. He sent Poison to Laetus, and
obliged him to take it; who, as he was the first of those that had persuaded
him to the Murder of Geta, was the first that fell a Sacrifice to his Ghost. He
afterward often pretended to lament Geta's Death, and killed several that had
been privy to it, and honored his Memory and his Image. He had sent a Present
to one, that was his Cousin-German, an African by Nation, but the day before
that he ordered him to killed; who throwing himself down from a Window to
escape his Persecutors, broke his Leg, but yet had crept to his Wife, where
they took him, and afterward made a very sport of killing him. He put to death
Pompeianus, the His many Cruelties.
Grandson of the Emperor Marcus Antoninus, and the Son of that Pompeianus, to
whom Lucilla married, after the Death of the Emperor Verus, who had made him a
Consul twice, and had entrusted him with the Command of his Armies in all his
Wars. The way which he took to do this Murder, was, he ordered him to be set
upon as it were by Thieves.

Papinian was executed in his presence by the Soldiers, with an Axe; and after
it was done, he said to the Murderer, You ought according to my Order, to have
done it with a Sword. Petronius was killed by his Command before the Temple of
Antoninus Pius, and both the Bodies of the one and the other were dragged about
the Streets, without any regard to humanity. He put to death the Son of
Papinian, who but three days before had treated the City with a magnificent
Show, upon his entrance into the Office of a Questor. An infinite Number of
others were killed upon the same days, who had favored the side of Geta. The
Servants that had waited upon him. In all places, and in the very Baths, were
there Massacres committed upon some as they were at their Suppers; amongst whom
was Sammonicus Severus, who is known by his many Learned Books. Chilo who was
twice Captain of the Guards and Consul, was in the greatest danger, for only
having advised the two Brothers to an agreement with one another. For the
Soldiers had stripped him, and were hurrying him away to the Execution when
further Orders came to spare him. He put to death Helvius Pertinax, for no
other reason, but because he was the Son of an Emperor. He never ceased to
kill, upon some occasion or other, those who had been his Brother's Friends. He
frequently and proudly inveighed both against the Senate and the People, not
forbearing to value himself one day, because he was another Sylla.

Then he went into Gallia, whither he was no sooner come, than he put to death
the Proconsul of the Narbonnoise. He made such a havoc, and such a confusion
amongst the Magistrates of this Province, that he was as much hated, as the
most outrageous Tyrant ever was. Sometimes nevertheless he would disguise his
sanguinary and cruel Nature, and pretend to be gracious. He did a great many
things here against the Rights of the Country, and the People. And then he was
taken with a great sickness, and yet he was afterward very Cruel to those; who
even recovered him. Next His Dacian Expedition.
he prepared himself for an Expedition into the East, and so came into Dacia.
He new great Numbers of the Barbarians about the Country of Rhaetia,
encouraging on his Soldiers, and gratifying them with his Bounty, as if they
were the Soldiers of a Sylla. He suffered not himself to be called indeed by
the Name of any God, as Commodus was, whom they called a Hercules, because of
his killing a Lion, and other Wild Beasts. But having received a Victory over
the Germans, he called himself Germanicus, without any regard to the nearness
of that Name to Germanus, that is, his own Brother whom he had killed. And had
he, he said, overcome the Lucani, he would have been called Lucanicus, although
it is a word which in another Sense, signifies an Action of Dishonor. He put
to death such as had but made Water in the place, where stand the Statues or
the Images of the Emperor; or had taken off the Crowns from the Heads of any
Images to place them elsewhere, or used Amulets about their Necks, for Charms
against Quartan and Tertian Agues. He took his way by Throce, in company with
the Captain of the Guards; and thence crossing the Sea into Asia, his Sail-yard
broke, and he was in danger to be wreckt, had he not gotten into the Pinnace,
and so was taken into a stout Vessel, where the Admiral was that convoyed him.
He often with his Sword in His Strength.
hand, has stood a Combat with Wild-Boars. Once he fought a Lion, of which he
gloried much in his Letters, which he sent to his Friends, and boasted, that he
was arrived to the Power of Hercules.

Coming into Asia, he applied himself to the matter of the War with the
Armenians and Parthians, in which he appointed a General to command, who was of
the same Kidney with himself. He went to Alexandria, where assembling His
Barbarities in Egypt.
the People together in the Schools, he made a sharp Speech to them, and
commanded a draught of the stoutest Men to be made out of them for Recruits, as
he pretended, for his Forces. But when this was done, he put them all to the
Sword, after the Example of Ptolemy Euergetes, the Eighth of that Name, King of
Egypt, who had practiced the like Barbarity. At the same time, upon a signal
given to his Soldiers, they fell every one upon his own Host and murdered him,
and committed a vast slaughter throughout the City of Alexandria. Afterward he
marched against the Parthians, by the Borders of the People called Cadusii, and
the Country of Babylon; and coming to a tumultuary Engagement with them, he let
loose amongst them Wild Beasts; after which he sent his Dispatches about it to
the Senate, to the end, to obtain the Title of Conqueror of the Parthians, as
if he had gotten never so great a Victory. He was preparing himself for another
Campaign, when going from the City of Rhea in Mesopotamia, where he wintered,
to Heren or Charan, to assist at the Worship of the Moon, and by the way,
alighting from his Horse to make Water, he was stabbed the same moment upon the
Eighth of the Ides of April, being his Birthday, and the Festival of Cybele,
by a Conspiracy, which was laid for the purpose by Macrinus the Captain of the
Guards, who invaded the Empire after him. Those who were privy to the same
besides, were Nemesianus, and his Brother Apollinaris, and Rhaetianus who
commanded the second Legion; nor was the design unknown to Martius Agrippa the
Admiral, nor to a great many other principal Officers, who had been brought
into it by the instigation, especially, of one Martial a Centurion.

He was killed in the midway, betwixt the Cities of Rhea and Heren, where he
had an occasion to alight, as I said, from his Horse. The Guards were of the
number of the Conspirators; and so as the Quirry lifted him up to his Horse
again, he struck him into the Body with a Dagger.

Now concerning the Death of Papinian, I Papinian' s Death.
know very well, that it is variously represented by a great many, as if they
did not know the real cause it. However, I think fit to publish what to me
seems to be the Truth, rather than I will be silent upon the Murder of so great
a Person. Papinian, it is said, was one in very great Favor with the Emperor
Septimius Severus, to whom, some add, that he was somewhat akin by his second
Wife. Therefore Severus had recommended unto him the Care of his two Sons, whom
accordingly he exhorted to a good Agreement with one another, and so interposed
against the Murder of Geta. But for this, he, together with the rest who were
Favorers of Geta, was killed by the express Order of Bassianus, who, as some
further add, had desired Papinian to extenuate for him, to the Senate and the
People the death of Geta. But Papinian answered, That it was not so easy to
excuse a Murder, as it was to commit it. They say also that Papinian did
decline to dictate the Speech, in which Bassianus was to inveigh against his
Brother, to the end, to render his own Cause the better in killing him; and
that Papinian said, that, to accuse the Innocent, who had been murdered, was in
the nature of another Murder. But all this however, does not very well agree.
Because it was not for the Captain of the Guards to form the Emperor's
Speeches; and then it is certain that Papinian was for no other reason killed,
but as he was a Fautor of Geta. As the Soldiers were hurrying him away to his
Execution, he said, That he should be very imprudent, who was the Captain of
the Guards after him, if he did not severely revenge the Cruelty that was shown
to his place. Which was afterward done. For Macrinus his Successor, was the
Author of the Death of Bassianus, and was afterward himself made Emperor in
the Camp; whose Son Diadumenus, was immediately new named Antoninus Diadumenus,
to gratify the Soldiers, because the name of an Antoninus was so dear to them.

Bassianus Antoninus Caracallus lived Forty Three Years, and reigned Six. He
was Nobly buried, and left a Son, who was afterward called Varius Antoninus
Heliogabalus; the dear Name of Antoninus being so fixed in the Hearts of Men,
that it was no more to be removed, than that of Augustus from the Person of the
Emperor. He was a Prince of ill manners, and crueller than his too cruel
Father. He eat and drank freely, but was hated by his Servants, and by all the
Men of the Sword, only the Guards. The Works which he left His publie Works.
behind him at Rome were, the famous Baths of his own Name, in which there is
one Room so Curious, that the Architects say, it is altogether inimitable. He
left also a Portico of the Name of his Father, representing the principal
Actions of his Father's Life, with his Wars and Triumphs. He received the Name
of Caracallus from a Garment so called, which he first brought up and gave to
the People of Rome for a Bounty. He repaired the Via Nova, which is below his
Baths, so well, that you will scarce find a Street in Rome, that is fairer than
it. He erected stately Temples in all places to the Honor of the Goddess Isis,
whose Sacrifices he celebrated with much greater Reverence than ever had been
used before at Rome. His Body was interred in the Sepulcher of the Antoninus's,
that the same place should receive his Relics, which had given him that Name.

It is now fit that I should relate how it is said that he came to marry his
Mother-in-Law, Julia; she was very handsome, and as she happened one day in
negligence, to discover her Body a little naked; Ah, Madam, said he to ^er, I
would, if I might. Sir, said she again, If you please, you can; you are an
Emperor, and to give Laws to all the World, and not take them from any. He no
sooner had understood the sense of those Words, but his unbridled Passion led
him to resolve upon the accomplishment of the Crime, and so he really
celebrated those Nuptials with her, which His incestuous Marriage.
were in effect the same, as to take to Wife his own Mother, and to add Incest
with his Mother, to the Murder of his Brother. It will not be improper here to
remark a very picquant thing, which was said of him. As he had ascribed to
himself the Titles in his style of Germanicus, Parthicus, Arabicus, and
Alemannicus, because of his Conquests over the Germans, and those other
Nations; Helvius Pertinax, the Son of the Emperor Pertinax, smiling said, His
Majesty might be pleased to add Geticus Maximus: In which word Geticus, there
is an equivocation, with a double relation to Geta his Brother, whom he had
killed; and with relation to the Goths, called Getae, whom he had overcome in
some running Fights, in his passage into the East.

The Death of Geta was prognosticated by several Prodigies, as we shall show by
and by in his own Life, which follows. In the mean time we shall only observe
farther, that formerly, when the Army had proposed Bassianus Antoninus to march
at the Head of them, in the place of Severus his Father, who was so sick of the
Gout, that he could not well follow the War; Severus was then for putting to
death th(...) his Son Bassianus, if the Captains of the Guards had not
over-persuaded him against it. On the contrary, others say, that the Captains
of the Guards were for punishing Bassianus with Death, but that his Father was
against it; because he was not willing, that the foolish Rashness of a young
Man should be resented so severely, as for his own Father to kill him, when the
Soldiers rather were the great occasions of the Crime. However it is, this most
cruel Prince Bassianus Antoninus Caracallus, who in a word was a Parricide,
Incestuous, an Enemy of his Father, Mother, and Brother, was yet by Macrinus
that killed him, out of fear of the Soldiers, and especially those of the
Guards, after his Death made a God. A Temple was given him, and an Order of
Priests appointed to serve him. Even the Temple of Faustina, built by Marcus
Antoninus at the Foot of the Mountain Taurus, was re-dedicated to him; and his
Son Antoninus Heliogabalus, translated the same again afterward, to either
Jupiter Syrius, or the Sun, or himself, but to which of the Three, I cannot
very well assert.

THE LIFE OF ANTONIUS GETA,
BY AELIUS SPARTIANUS.
Dedicated to the EMPEROR Constantine the Great.
I Am sensible, Sir, that your Majesty, wit^ many others, may perhaps admire,
why I do take in here the Life of Geta Antoni(...) For indeed, I must confess
that there is no^ much to be said of him, because he was ca(...) out of the
World, as soon almost as he came IMP. CAES. P. SEPT. GETA PIUS AVG.

portrait of Publius Septimius Geta IMP. CAES. M. OPEL. SEV. MACRINVS AVG

portrait of Macrinus M OPEL. ANTONIUS DIADVMENIANVS CAES

portrait of Diadumenus IMP. CAES. MAVR. ANTONIUS PIUS AVG.

portrait of Heliogabalus IMP. CAES. MAVR. SEV. ALEXANDER AVG.

portrait of Alexander Severus MAXIMINVS PIUS AVG. GERM.

P. 318. Vol. 1.

portrait of Maximin I upon the Throne as a Partner with his Brother, however I
shall observe, that he had the name of Antoninus given him, no less than his
Brother, by the Order of the Emperor Severus, his Father; and the reason of it,
which I shall premise, before I proceed further, was this. His Father sometime,
had had a Dream, Occasion of his Names.
that he should be succeeded by an Antoninus. Upon which he immediately went to
his Soldiers, and at the head of them gave his eldest Son Bassianus, the name
of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Bassianus. And when he had done this, whether it
was out of his Paternal Affection unto Geta, or whether it was that Julia his
Wife, who knew the Dream, had put him upon it, because Geta should not be
altogether precluded Access to the Empire, he ordered that he also should be
called by the name of Antoninus Geta: and always in his familiar Letters, which
he writ afterward in his absence to his Friends, he said of them both equally,
Salute from me my Antoninusses, my Sons, and my Successors. But yet however all
this Caution of neither the Father, nor the Mother availed any thing. For only
the elder possessed the Empire, who was the first honored with the name
Antoninus.

His other name of Geta was what he had from either his Father's Brother, or
from his Grandfather, whose names were Geta. There were yet other reasons for
the addition of that name of Antoninus, to this of Geta. Severus would have had
it to be a Rule, that all Princes in the time to come should be Entitled
Antonini, in the same manner as they are Augusti. Which was the effect of his
great love to the Emperor Marcus Antoninus, whose Son he was pleased to call
himself, and whose Wisdom and the Precepts of his Philosophy he always
endeavored to imitate. And not only the effect of his love to that Prince, who
was an Antoninus but by Adoption, but of his Love and Honor also to Antoninus
Pius the Successor of Hadrian; by reason, that it was Antoninus Pius, who had
preferred him from a Practicer in the Law to be the Keeper of the Exchequer;
which was a happy Rise to him, and which had opened him the way to those great
Advantages, that afterward he came to attain unto: who thought therefore, that
he could not borrow a name from any Prince better, than from one whose Reign
had been so happy; nor a name more honorable than that, that had already run
through four Emperors. Being skilful in the Doctrine of Astrology, as many of
the Africans generally are, he said one day, because he knew the Nativity of
Geta; I admire, dear Juvenalis, (who was the Captain of the Guards to him) to
think, that my Geta shall be a God, in whose Nativity I see nothing to make him
an Emperor. Nor did his skill at all deceive him; for after Geta had been
killed by his Brother, and his Brother apprehended that he had drawn upon
himself the hatred of a Tyrant by the Crime, he understanding that it would be
sweetened if he did but declare Geta a God, cried, Sit Divus dum not sit Vivus;
Let him be a God, so he is not an Emperor; and so he Consecrated him; by which
the Murderer in some measure retrieved to himself the good Grace of the People
again.

Geta Antoninus, was born at the City of Milan, under the Consulships of
Severus and Vitellius, upon the sixth of the Calends of June. His Mother was
Julia; who was Severus's second Wife, being her whom he had chosen to Marry,
because he had heard, that she had it Good and bad Omens.
in her Nativity to be the Wife of a King; though himself was at that time a
private Person, only in a good Employment in the State. As soon as he was born,
it was told by one that a Hen had laid an Egg in the House, which was of a
Purple color. So the Egg was brought up; but Bassianus taking it in his hands
and letting it fall, like a Child, to the Ground, that it brake, Julia said to
him laughing, You wicked Villain, you have killed your Brother. Severus took
more notice of this Expression at that time, than any other Body: but
afterward all the Company looked upon it as a thing spoken, as it were, by
Inspiration. Another Omen that happened was this: upon the same day, and in the
same hour that Geta was born, a Plebeian of the name of Antoninus, had at his
Farm in the Country a Lamb kidded, with a mark upon his Head of the color of
Purple: and being informed by a Soothsayer, that an Antoninus should succeed to
the Empire after Severus, he very fondly interpreted it of himself; but however
killed the Lamb (in which consisted the sign of the death of Geta) for fear
that the Omen of so high a Fortune should bring him into danger. I would add
one thing more, which the Event made People to interpret to the same purpose;
which is, that when Severus one day Celebrated the Birth of Geta, his Brother
Bassianus killed the Sacrifice himself, in the place of the Priest. A
Circumstance not then considered nor taken notice of; but it was afterward
very well understood, when that Brother had sacrificed his Brother.

Geta, was in his temper a rough sort of a His Personage and Conditions.
Youth; though not to a Fault; handsome, a little eager, a lover of delicious
Wines and good Cheer. There is this Story of him, which is remarkable, when he
was a Boy. His Father the Emperor Severus being for Eradicating wholly the
Parties that opposed him, said once to his Sons, I do but rid you of your
Enemies. So Bassianus advised him to cut them off all Root and Branch; them and
their Children: but Geta asked the question, how many of them they were? His
Father telling him, says he again, Have they Parents and Relations living? Yes.
Then, says he, there will be more People in Rome sorry for your Victory, than
there will be that are glad of it. And certainly Geta's Opinion had carried it,
had not Plautianus the Captain of Guards, and Juvenal who had great interests,
insisted upon the contrary, in hopes of enriching themselves by the
Confiscation of the Estates: which was again seconded by the excessive Cruelty
of Bassianus, who persisting in his first Opinion, and saying, He would have
them all cut off; them and their Children; says Geta to him; You; who spare no
Body, would kill your own Brother. Which, as then spoken, signified nothing:
but afterward it appeared to be a sort of a Prophecy.

He had an excellent Memory to improve himself by what he read in the Ancients,
and by what his Father taught him. His Brother had always hated him; but he was
more beloved by his Mother Julia, than ever Bassianus was by his. He spoke
agreeably, though something Stammering: he was curious in his Dress, to excess:
and whatever was presented him, he applied it to his own Ornament, without
giving it away to any body living. After the Parthian War, at what time his
Father flourished in great glory, as Bassianus was declared a Partner in the
Empire with his Father, so Geta was Created a Caesar, and honored with the
name of Antoninus Geta. It was an usual diversion with him to propose to the
Grammarians, Questions about the several Cries and Voices of Animals, As the
Sheep Bleats, the Swine Grunts, the Dove Coos, the Lion Roars, the Elephant
Brays, the Frog Croaks, the Horse Whinnies, the Ass Brays, the Ox Lows; and to
prove the use of the proper Latin Terms for each, out of the Ancients. He read
much in the Books of Serenus Sammonicus, written to Antoninus. As to the Table,
he took a pleasure to observe an Alphabet; according to which, as every Letter
came on each day in its Course, his Servants that knew it, and were well
skilled in the Arts of eating, provided things of the names, beginning with
that Letter. As for example, for the Letter P. Puddings Plover, Pullet,
Partridge, Peacock, Pig, Piscis, Plumbs, and so upon other days for the other
Letters in order. Which is an Argument that from his Youth he had a gay choice
of things, and was a very pleasant Person.

After he was killed by his Brother, a Party of the Soldiers who had not been
Corrupted, resented his Murder very ill; saying all of them, That they had
promised Fidelity to the two Sons of Severus, and ought to keep it equally to
them both. Accordingly they kept fast the Passes of their Camp; and refused to
give entrance to Bassianus, till he had flattered them up, and had appeased
their Heats by giving them a Bounty, which was vastly great. After this
Papinian, and many others were Massacred, who had either encouraged the good
agreement of the two Brothers, or had appeared to be of the Side of Geta.
Persons of Quality of both the Senatorian and the Equestrian Orders were
Butchered, up and down publicly in the Baths and other places. Papinian died
by the Axe; Bassianus finding fault with the Executioner that he had not done
it with a Sword. In the mean time he was so afraid of his own Person, that he
wore a Coat of Mail under his Purple, when he went to the Senate, to give them
an account of what he did, and of the death of Geta. At which time, as
Faustinus the Praetor repeated the Imperial Style, saying, Sarmaticus Maximus,
and Parthicus Maximus, Titles which Bassianus had gained by his Victories over
the Sarmatae and the Parthians, Helvius Pertinax, the Son of the Emperor of
that name, suggested it to him to say, and add to the rest Geticus Maximus; as
if he meant it, in relation to his Victories over the Goths, who were then
called Getae; but there was an Equivocation in the Word; for it also referred
to the Murder of his Brother Geta. This sunk deep into the Breast of Bassianus,
as it appeared afterward by his putting to death the Author, and not him only,
but those others, as I have said above. More particularly, as to Helvius
Pertinax, he was willing to cut him off, upon the account that he was in the
good esteem of all the World; and then besides he was the Son of an Emperor,
which it self was no very safe Circumstance for a private Person.

The Funeral of Antoninus Geta was so very His solemn Funeral.
Fine, that one would not have thought the same Brother that buried him, had
killed him. He was buried in the Sepulcher of his Ancestors, that is to say, of
Severus his Father, which is upon the Appian way. In fine it is to be observed,
that the Caresses of Antoninus Caracallus Bassianus, were more to be dreaded
than his Frowns. He had an unaccountable Quality with him, to speak the fairest
and the kindliest to those in appearance, whom he resolved to destroy. And
again, it was a Miracle to all to see him lament, as he did, the death of Geta,
as often as his name was mentioned, or his Picture, or his Statue came in
sight. He was therefore a Man of many Windings and Turnings in his Humor; and
this being accompanied with as much Cruelty as if he thirsted after Blood, it
made him, that he would one time Massacre the Friends, another time the Enemies
of Geta, as Fortune offered them to him; so that the loss of Geta, by the same
means, became lamented more and more.

THE A. Christi CCXVIII.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR OPILIUS MACRINUS. Dedicated to the EMPEROR
DIOCLESIAN.
By JULIUS CAPITOLINUS.
WHen Princes, either have not sat very long upon the Roman Throne, or have not
been Persons of any extraordinary Characters before their Accession to it, so
that there is but little to be said of their Reigns, for the shortness of them,
and less perhaps of their private Lives, in which they might never have been
known, if they had not aspired to the Empire; It is not to be admired if their
Memories should sometimes lie buried in obscurity. Therefore for my part, what
I can find, that I do think may be deserving to be committed to Posterity, and
worthy to be reseued out of the accounts of diverse Historians, I shall produce
it to the World; apprehending this to be the Duty of him, who proposes to write
the Lives of others; that is, not to recount every thing that a Man does, but
with Judgment to make a Choice of what is more particularly deserving of
Memory. So that I should think, that Aelius Junius Cordus, who has taken the
Pains to publish the Lives of those Emperors, whom he believes to be more
obscure and less known than others, has not yet acquitted himself of his
Design with the greatest Success. Because as short as he is, he has yet
reported things that are scarce worth the Labor of the Writing them. He
suffers not the least trifles to escape him, as if concerning Trajan, Antoninus
Pius, or Marcus Antoninus, it signifies any thing to know every time that they
went abroad, or how they changed their Habits, and who every Person was that
they preferred, and when; or when they were served with other Via^ds upon their
Table, than ordinary: all which he recounts, and fills his Books with them, and
so makes his History a Tale of a Tub. Whereas, I think, that as for things that
are so cheap, and of no value, no mention at all ought to be made of them;
unless it is, when it is proper to give a Judgment by them of certain
Inclinations, which may be really worth the knowledge; and even then, it is fit
to touch them only in part and to leave the rest to be gathered by the Reader.

After the Death of the Emperor Bassianus Antoninus Caracallus, his Captain of
the Guards, Opilius Macrinus, who had before that been the keeper of his
Privy-Purse, possessed himself of the Empire. A Man of a low Birth, His
Extraction and Character.
not a Gentleman born or bred; full of assurance both in his Humor and his
Looks; sometimes he called himself by the Name of Severus, sometimes Antoninus;
but yet every body hated him, as well the Soldiers, as the People. He engaged
himself immediately in the War with the Parthians, to take away by that means
from the Soldiers the leisure to make Reflections upon him, and so to confirm
his Power, or at least to stop the ill Reports from growing, as much as it was
possible, under which he lay. The Senate indeed willingly accepted him to be
Emperor; but yet it was chiefly, out of their hatred to the memory of Antoninus
Caracallus, in relation to whom they oried out with one Voice, Any body rather
than a Parricide; any Person rather than an incestuous, and an impure Homicide;
any one, rather than a Murderer of the Senate and the People. It may be perhaps
a Matter of some admiration, why Macrinus, having been the Author of the Death
of his Predecessor, who was by Name an Antoninus, should nevertheless order his
Son Diadumenus, to be called Antoninus Diadumenus. Now that which I find upon
the Annals, as to that matter, is this.

The Oracle of the Goddess Coelestis in Carthage, having been consulted by the
Proconsul, about the State of the Empire, and the public Affairs, in the time
of Antoninus Pius, about the Emperors. After other things, she particularly
repeated the Name of Antoninus eight times; whereby it was understood, that the
Emperor Antoninus Pius should Reign eight Years. But when that Prince had
outlived that term, so that if any Faith was to be given to the Oracle,
something else than that was designed by it, which time was to produce. It was
supposed at last to signify, that the number of the Emperors of the Name of
Antoninus, should be eight; and so they are. To wit, Antoninus Pius, the First;
Marcus Antoninus, the Second; Verus Antoninus his Colleague in the Empire, the
Third; Commodus Antoninus, the Fourth; Antoninus Caracallus, the Fifth;
Antoninus Geta, the Sixth; Antoninus Diadumenus, the Seventh; and Antoninus
Heliogabalus, the Eighth. For as for the Two Gordiani, or Severus, or Pertinax,
or Julianus, or Opilius Macrinus, who did all of them sometimes call themselves
Antonini, they are never to be accounted of the number of the true Antonini,
but only those Eight now mentioned, by whom that Name was more retained, than
any of their own. Now Macrinus was willing to give his Son the Name of an
Antoninus, for this reason, because the People should have the less occasion to
suspect, that the late Emperor of that Name had been killed by his Orders; and
because he knew very well, that every one had such an extraordinary Love for
that Name, that unless the Emperor was called Antoninus, they could scarce
think him an Emperor.

After Opilius Macrinus was also killed, and the Senate was assured that Varius
Heliogabalus the Son of Antoninus Caracallus, was declared Emperor by the Army;
then it was, that it was loudly represented in the Senate, what an ignoble
Person Macrinus was. Aurelius Victor Pinnius spoke thus.

Macrinus, a Slave the other day, that drudged His mean Original.
in the servile Offices of the Emperor's Family! a Bougre! a Hireling! He lived
a paltry Life ^^der Commodus. Severus thought him not fit at first for the most
miserable Employments, but turned him out, and banished him into Africa; where
to cover his Infamy, he betook himself to Letters, and came to plead some small
Causes, and to declaim, and at last to be a Justice. Then he was created a
Gentleman, and so at length, arrived to be the Keeper of the Exchequer under
Severus, by the Favor of Festus, who was an infranchised Slave of that Prince.

This relation however, is not so undoubted, but that others give us the Steps
of his Promotion thus. That he was a Gladiator, and had sought in that quality
publicly. Obtaining afterward his Freedom, he went into Africa, where he was
a Notary, and raising himself after that, to be the Keeper of the Emperor's
Exchequer, from thence he succeeded unto the highest Honors. Whilst he was the
Captain of the Guards, he contrived the Death of his Master, with that
dexterity of Intrigue, that it could not be perceived, that he had the least
hand it it. He gained upon a Quirry to give the Blow; what with the Money he
bribed him with, and what with the great Promises that he made him. And then it
was so ordered, that it should be said, that he was killed in a Mutiny of the
Soldiers; because for his murdering his Brother, and the Incest of his marrying
his Mother, he was so odious to them.

But no sooner was this done, but Macrinus Make his Son Caesar.
possessed himself of his place, and made his Son Diadumenus, whom he
immediately called by the Name of Antoninus Diadumenus, his Partner with him in
the same. Then he sent the Body of the deceased to Rome, to be interred in the
Sepulcher of his Ancestors; and commanded his Captain of the Guards, who was
his own late Colleague in that Office, to take care of burying him in all
respects honorably; knowing that the Common People loved him for the Habits
and the Largesses that he had given amongst them.

As he was afraid of a popular Emotion, and that some body should intervene and
hinder his Reign, so he was glad to take the Empire, as it were by surprise;
but yet in the mean time he served himself of that common Artifice to pretend,
that it was against his Inclination. Particularly he was jealous of the Captain
of the Guards, his late Colleague, because some People hoped, that if he had
the Consent but of one Legion, he would not refuse an Opportunity, in which
they would be ready to serve him, out of the hatred they had to Opilius
Macrinus for his ill Life, and for the ignobleness of his Education and Birth.
He took upon himself, as I said, the Name of Severus, though he had no relation
to that Prince; which occasioned a good raillery upon both him and his Son;
Macrinus is a Severus, as Diadumenus is an Antoninus.

Now to put a stop to any Commotion of the Soldiers, he immediately gave a
Bounty, as well to the Legions, as the Guards, which was more than ordinarily
large; and as it is the Custom so to do, his Money supplied the defect of his
Innocence; and what he wanted in one, he made up with the other; by virtue
whereof, he continued in the Empire for some time, although he was a Man of all
manner of Vice. He writ Letters to the Senate, concerning the Murder of
Antoninus Caracallus, in which he styled him a God; protesting as to himself,
that he was innocent, and had known nothing of it; and so he added to the Crime
that he had committed Per^ury, to begin his Reign withal.

It is fit to know, what a sort of an harangue ^t was which he made, when he
writ to the Senate upon this occasion; that we may see ^he Confidence of the
Man, and the Sacrilege with which he commenced his Reign. The Heads of it were
these, done in the joint Names of the Emperors Macrinus and Diadumenus.

We should have been heartily glad, Fathers of His Messages to the Senate.
the Senate, to have had our Sovereign Antoninus yet in safety, and returning
to you in Triumph. We should all have been happy in such a flourishing State of
the Empire, and under a Prince, who was a Successor of the Antonini, and given
us from the Gods. But since this Happiness has not befaln us, by reason of a
Mutiny of the Soldiers, which has deprived us of it, we make you acquainted
with what the Army has done as to us in the first place; and next we with your
Consents, decree an Apotheosis to be given immediately to our late Prince,
whose Murder the Army has thought no Man more worthy to avenge than his own
Captain of the Guards, to whom himself had left it, to chastise the Faction,
had he escaped their hands and lived.

In another place, says he, They have presented me with the Empire, which I
have therefore taken into my Protection; and I shall continue it, if the same
thing be pleasing to you, Fathers of the Senate, which is so pleasing to them,
to whom I have given a Bounty, and done every thing as the Custom is for the
Emperors to do upon these occasions.

Again, My Son Diadumenus, whom you know, the Army has made my Partner in the
Empire, and has not denied him the Name of Antoninus. Indeed, they have done
him a greater Honor by that Name, than by that degree of a Prince; which we
desire may be approved by you, Fathers of the Senate, as a good and happy Omen,
that you shall never want a Prince of a Name which you do so dearly love.
Again, We and all the Army have equally decreed the Honors of a God unto
Antoninus Caracallus. And though we might with the Authority of Emperors
command the same from you, Fathers of the Senate; yet we rather desire you to
do it, and to dedicate to him, two Statues on Horseback, two more standing in
Military Habit, and two others sitting in a Civil one. We dedicate also two
triumphal Statues to the Emperor Severus. All which, Fathers of the Senate, you
will command to be performed, at our earnest Request.

When this was read in the Senate, they took the news of the death of Antoninus
Caracallus very well, and hoping that Opilius Macrinus would maintain the
public Liberty, they first made him a Patrician, who was a Man originally of
no Family, and little known; then they made him High Priest, (a Title annexed
to the Emperors) who sometime before, had been a Clerk to the minor Priests:
And lastly, they voted him the Title of Pious. Nevertheless, at the first, upon
the News of the Death of Caracallus, there was a long silence in the Senate,
because no body dared to be forward to believe it. But it was no sooner
confirmed to them, that he was really killed, but they inveighed against him as
a Tyrant; immediately they conferred the Proconsular and the Tribunitian Powers
upon Macrinus, who accepted from them the Title of the Happy, instead of that
of the Pious, and was pleased that the Name of Antoninus should be confirmed by
them to his Son.

And here I may observe, that this Name which began in a Prince, who was in
reality, as well as by Title Pious, came by degrees, through a number of others
one after another, who impaired its Reputation more and more, to end at last in
a Man so impious, that he was the very scum of the Earth. Marcus Antoninus was
the only Prince after Pius, who adorned it by a Life worthy of it: Verus
Antoninus his Partner, degenerated from it, and Commodus Antoninus even
polluted it. What shall I say of Antoninus Caracallus? Or what of Antoninus
Diadumenus? What shall I say of Antoninus Heliogabalus? But as he was the last
of the Antoninusses, and base born, so he is remembered to have lived in the
greatest impurity.

Opilius Macrinus being thus established in the His Parthian Expedition.
Empire, he made great preparations to continue the War against the Parthians;
and proposed to abolish the infamy of his former Life, and the baseness of his
Birth, by the greatness of his Victories. He engaged the Enemy, as they were
commanded by Artabanus their King, who fought obstinately. But after this, a
Peace being agreed upon, then Macrinus retired to the City of Antioch, where
giving himself up to Luxury, his Legions took a just pretense from thence to
revolt from him to Varius Heliogabalus, who was the reputed Son of Antoninus
Bassianus Caracallus; and who coming with an Army against him, defeated him,
and killed He is slain.
him, after he had reigned but a little more than one Year.

There was a Lady called Moesa, alias Varia, a Phoenician, of the City of
Emissa, the Sister of Julia, the Wife of the Emperor Severus, who after the
Death of Antoninus Caracallus, was banished the Court by Macrinus; but yet she
was allowed to take along with her, all the effects which she had amassed in
the long time of her continuance there. This Lady had two Daughters, called
Semiamira and Mammaea: The first and eldest was the Mother of Varius
Heliogabalus, who was a Priest of the Sun, and had taken the Name of
Heliogabalus, in the Phoenician Language, from the Name of the God that he
worshipped. And being as well by his noble Stature and his Beauty, as by his
Office remarkable to all that came to the Temple, especially the Soldiers, his
Grandmother Moesa, alias Varia, took her opportunity to say to them, that he
was the Son of the Emperor Antoninus Bassianus Caracallus, which from one to
another, came to be made known to all. And as she was herself very rich, and
Heliogabalus very prodigal, she made such Promises to them in his behalf, that
she seduced the Legions to a revolt; who accordingly received him and his
Mother, and their followers into a Garrison by Night, and proclaimed him
Emperor, by the Name of Antoninus, and invested him with the marks of that
Dignity.

When this Account was brought unto Macrinus at Antioch, he admiring at the
boldness of the Woman, which he could not but slight at the same time, sent
Julianus the Captain of his Guards with his Legions to besiege her. But no
sooner did the New Antoninus show himself in Person to those Men, but they were
all so marvellously inclined to love him, that they killed Julianus their
Captain, and passed over in a Body to his side. Then Antoninus Heliogabalus
having formed his Army set himself to march against Macrinus, as Macrinus was
marching against him; and joining Battle, Macrinus was defeated; occasioned by
the Treachery of his own Soldiers, by reason of their Love to Antoninus. So he
fled with some few in company with him, and particularly his Son. But both he
and his Son were afterward pursued and killed in a Village of Bithynia, and
his Head cut off and brought to the Conqueror. And all that his Son had gotten
by the Empire, was his Destiny only to be killed with his Father.

Certainly Macrinus was in the time that he reigned more rigorous, and more
austere than he had ever been before, thereby hoping to suppress the Reports of
all his bypast Actions, and to bury them in oblivion; on the contrary, that
Severity did but open a fresh occasion to People to blame him. Thus he was for
having himself to be called a Severus and a Pertinax: And when the Senate had
given him the Titles of the Happy, and the Pious, he only accepted the first,
and refused the other, which occasioned a Libel to be made upon him, which was
put up in the Forum in Greek and Latin Verse to this purpose; That an old,
ugly, troublesome, sour, and unreasonable Man of a Stage Player (alluding to
his fighting, formerly, as a Gladiator) pretending to be Happy, without being
at the same time Pious, it was a thing unnatural and irrational, for those were
two Virtues not to be separated. An impious Reign will make his Subjects
unhappy, and he who makes his Subjects so, must be unhappy himself. His Temper
and Cruelties.


Macrinus was therefore one of a proud and bloody Mind; he loved to govern with
the arbitrariness of a Soldier; accused the Discipline of former times, and
praised Severus alone, of all the Emperors. He condemned his Soldiers to the
Cross, and always punished them with the punishments of Slaves. In any Mutiny
he generally decimated; sometimes he contented himself to centesimate them;
which last was a peculiar word of his own, when he drew out but every hundredth
Man when to execute, which he accounted a Mercy, he had said, they deserved to
be decimated, or vicesimated. Certainly, it would be too tedious here to
recount all his Cruelties. However, one I will mention, which was not great as
he thought it; and yet it is something worse than the Barbarities of all the
Tyrants that ever were. Two Soldiers were reported to have forced their
Landlord's Maid against her Will, to lie with them, at the same time she was
one that had been debauched long before He hearing of it by his Spies, sent for
them and examined the Matter; and it appearing to be true, he ordered Two vast
great Oxe^ to be opened alive suddenly, and the Men to be stuffed into their
Bellies, there to remain till they died, with only their Heads out, that they
could talk to one another; which was a sort of a Punishment that had nothing
like it then, or in any former times, in the case of Adultery itself. In his
Wars, always indeed, against the Parthians, Armenians, and Arabians, he quitted
himself with equal bravery and success. A Tribune one day having neglected to
appoint the Guard, he dragged His extreme Severity.
him alive and dead in a miserable Condition at a Cart's Tail, all his march.
He revived the Punishment of Mezentius, of tying the living to the dead, for
both to rot together: Therefore it was said by the People in the Cirque, in
favor of his Son Diadumenus, who was a very lovely Youth,

-- dignus, cui pater haud Mezentius esset. It was pity he had a Mezentius for
his Father. He shut up others betwixt four Walls, till they died starving. For
Adultery he always tied the Parties body to body, and burnt them together
alive. Servants that had run from their Masters, he condemned to be made
Gladiators of. Unless Informers proved what they said, he made it Capital to
them; if they did it, they received a Reward in Money, but he dismissed them
with all their Infamy upon them.

He was not a little versed in the Knowledge of the Laws of the Romans,
insomuch, that he made no scruple to supersede all the Rescripts of the ancient
Emperors, to act according to Right, and not according to Rescripts. And it was
a shame, he said, that the Wills of such as Commodus and Caracallus, and others
that were unworthy to be Emperors, should be Laws; when Trajan would not allow
that a Rescript that is written perhaps in favor in one case should be made a
precedent in another; because things ought to be examined by the Rules of good
Sense. He was liberal in his allowances of Bread and Provisions to the Poor,
but sparing in giving Money. Toward his Servants he was so severe, and so
cruel, that they called him instead of Macrinus, Macellinus, from Macellum a
Shambles; because his House, like a Shambles, flowed with the Blood of the
Servants that he killed. He eat and drank very freely, sometimes to excess in
the Evenings. If he had dined at any time more sparingly, in his supper he
would be very profuse. He admitted the Men of Letters to his Table, with whom
talking, he prolonged his Meals.

But as every one called to mind the baseness of his Birth, and former Life,
and on the other hand, observed his Cruelty, which was excessive, and the many
horrid things that he did, which the Soldiers, especially, very well knew, they
were not able longer to endure such a Nuisance upon the Throne, and so they
resolved to rid themselves of him.

There was a Libel once made upon his A Libel upon him.
Son to this purpose. I dreamt I saw a Youth of the Name of Antoninus, who has
a Slave to his Father, his Mother such a Whore, she has had a Hundred, and
asked a Hundred more. From such a Father, such a Mother, let him be a Pius or a
Marcus, he cannot be a Verus Antoninus; alluding to the Emperor of the Name of
Verus, but intending to to say, that he cannot be a true, but only a visionary,
and a Bastard Antoninus. When Macrinus was told this, he answered it in some
Iambics, which they say were very well done; but we have them not, because they
perished with him in the Fray that he was killed in, when all that he had was
plundered by the Soldiers.

The manner of his Death was such as we have represented it before already;
that is, his Army revolting, and carrying all their Inclinations upon Antoninus
Heliogabalus, he fled, and was afterward taken and killed in a Village of
Bithynia; his Attendants all yielding, or otherwise cut in pieces or dispersed
in flight. This made Heliogabalus famous, because he appeared to have revenged
the Death of his Father. So he succeeded to the Empire, and as he certainly
disgraced it afterward with Vices of Luxury, Impurity, Riot, Pride, and
Cruelty, and as he lived an unhappy Life, so he met with the like tragical
Death.

This is what I have discovered concerning Macrinus, out of a great many
Historians that mention him. I humbly present it to your Majesty, O Dioclesian;
being assured, that your Majesty takes a pleasure in viewing the Accounts of
the Emperors of the ancient Times.

THE Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Antoninus Diadumenus.
BY JULIUS CAPITOLINUS.
ANtoninus Diadumenus being but a Youth when the Army created him Emperor,
together with his Father, after the Death of Antoninus Caracallus; his Life
affords us little that is remarkable, more than the Account of his reception of
the Name of Antoninus, and the stupendous Omens that appeared to foretell his
Reign, and also that it was to continue but a short time. For as to the first,
as soon as it was known amongst the Legions, that the fatal Stroke was given to
Antoninus Caracallus, that which was a matter of great trouble to them all, to
observe, was, that they had not another Antoninus to succeed him, as if they
thought that the very Roman Empire was certainly to perish with that Name.
Macrinus hearing this, and fearing, by reason that there were several Relations
of Antoninus Pius that were Captains in the Army, lest the Army might cast
their Inclinations upon some one or other of those, for the Empire; he
immediately put himself at the Head of them, with this Harangue.

You see here, my Fellow Soldiers, my self, and my He is declared an Antoninus
Son Diadumenus. I am well advanced in years, but my Son by the mercy of the
Gods, you will have long to be your Emperor. I understand that there is
remaining amongst you, a great Affection for the Name of Antoninus. Wherefore
since for my own part, according to the Condition of humane Frailty, I have not
much time left me to live, I name this young Son, an Antoninus, with your
Consents, and wish you long to enjoy him.

They cried, The Gods save the Emperor Macrinus. The Gods save Antoninus
Diadumenus. We all beg, that Antoninus Caracallus may be made a God. Then most
Excellent and most Powerful Jupiter, preserve the Lives of Macrinus and
Antoninus. Thou know, O Jupiter, Macrinus is invincible. Thou know, O
Jupiter, Macrinus is inconquerable. Having an Antoninus, we have all things.
The Gods, have given us an Autoninus. Antoninus and his Father merit the Empire.

Macrinus replied, My Fellow Soldiers, we give you a Bounty of three pieces of
Gold, to each of you, upon the occasion of our Accession to the Empire; and for
the Name of Antoninus, five pieces of Gold more, besides your ordinary Pay,
which shall be doubled to you. The Gods grant that this may be done often; for
as much as we now give you this day, we will repeat it to you, every Fifth year
of our Reigns. His Speech to the Army.


After this, Antoninus Diadumenus the young Emperor spoke to them in these
words. I thank you, my Fellow Soldiers, for the Honor of the Empire, and of
the name which you have given me, for it is you that have thought my Father and
me, worthy to be the Emperors of Rome, and to command the State: to the
Government whereof My Father will take the Care not to be wanting, and it shall
be my best endeavors not to be wanting to the Glory of the name of Antoninus.
I am sensible, it is a name in which the Emperors Pius, Marcus, and Verus, have
gone before me: who were Persons, to whom it is a difficult thing to answer
worthily. I can only say, I will do all that is in my power: and in the mean
time, upon the joint occasion of my Reign and my Name, I promise you the same,
as my most honored Father has done; who has but considered you at you
deserve.

The Greek Historian Herodian, has omitted these passages, and speaks
Diadumenus under no higher a quality than a Caesar. However after this
Harangue, a Coin was stamped at Antioch, in the name of Antoninus Diadumenus:
the other, which was to be in the name of Macrinus was deferred, till they had
the express Orders of the Senate; to whom Letters were sent to acquaint them,
with what was past, and with the New Antoninus, who desired their approbation.
And whether it was as some say, because their hatred to Antoninus Caracallus
made them willing to have any other Emperor, rather than him, they accepted of
this Change freely. Had Macrinus lived, he intended to have given to the People
of Rome a Present of some Vestments, after the example of the Donation of
Caracallus: and also to establish a Charity, for the maintenace of the Children
of some Poor Families; whom he intended to call by the name of his Son; to the
end, as his own Words in the Edict are, to render so much the more agreeable
and more recommendable the glory of the name of Antoninus. At the same time, he
says, that he wishes that he was present with the People of Rome; that his Son,
their new Antoninus, might with his own hand distribute a Largess of Corn
amongst them. In the next place he ordered the Colors, and the Standards of
the Antoninusses to be put up in the Camp. He erected the Statues of Antoninus
Bassianus Caracallus, in Gold and Silver; and Celebrated a Festival of seven
days, for the Honor of the name of Antoninus.

Antoninus Diadumenus was certainly one of His Personage.
the beautifullest Youths in the World. He was pretty tall, with bright yellow
Hair, black Eyes, and a pretty long Nose; his Chin perfectly handsome, and a
grace to his whole Face; a full kissing Lip, and then he was naturally Stout,
and proper in his Exercises. When first he was dressed in the Imperial Robes of
Scarlet and Purple, and the other Military Ensigns of the Empire; he shined
like a Star, or as one newly dropped from Heaven, and every body loved him, for
the Charms of his Beauty.

In the next place, as to the Omens which prognosticated Omens of his Reign.
his Reign, they are indeed stupendous. The day that he was born, his Father
over-seeing and examining the Purple Robes of the Emperor in his Office, had
ordered some of them to be brought where his Son Diadumenus was born in two
Hours after. And as some Children that are born, have a skin upon their Heads
in the nature of a Coif, being a natural sort of a Cover upon the Head, which
is afterward taken away by the Midwives; Diadumenus, instead of this had a
perfect Diadem in the place of it, which was a thin, but strong Flesh, made of
a great many Veins and Fibers, like the strings of a Bow, from whence he was
called at first Diadematus; but as he grew up, he was called by the Name of
Diadumenus, from his Grandfather by the side of his Mother; and there is not
much difference betwixt the one Name and the other. At a House of his Father's
in the Country, twelve Lambs were kidded, all of a Wool of the color of
Purple, except one, which was of diverse Colors. The same day that he was born,
an Eagle came and dropped a Ring-Dove into his Cradle as he slept, and retired
without doing him any hurt. Other Doves, from whence the Soothsayers
prognosticated great Riches and Honor, came and made their Nests in his
Father's House. As he was one day walking in the Fields, an Eagle came and took
from off his Head his Cap, and afterward dropped it upon the Head of a Statue of
an Emperor. He was born, not only upon the same day of the Month, but in the
same hour, and almost under the same Constellations, as was the Emperor
Antoninus Pius. Therefore the Astrologers said, That he would be both the Son
of an Emperor, and an Emperor himself. A Woman, who was of his Kindred,
observing that he was born upon the Birthday of that Prince, cried, Let him be
called an Antoninus. But Macrinus was afraid to do that, because it was an
Imperial Name, which none of his Family had ever had; and he thought it was
safer to let it alone, especially, the Report being already put about of the
greatness of his Birth. Another Omen that still more particularly deserves our
observation, is this; as Diadumenus was in his Cradle in a Garden, a Lion that
had broken loose, and was very fierce, came and licked him, and left him
without offering him the least violence; but yet meeting his Nurse, he fell
upon her, and bit her so cruelly, that she died.

This is what has seemed to me to be worthy of memory concerning Antoninus
Diadumenus, whose Life I had even intermixed with the Actions of his Father, but
that my Honor for the Princes of his Name, obliged me to Great Honors paid to
the Name Antoninus.
such a particular Account of him. And certainly, it was a Name so amiable to
these times, that it seems, as if he who was not called an Antoninus, was not
fit to be Emperor. There is a Letter of Opilius Macrinus, in which he declares,
that he glories not so much of his elevation to the Empire, whereof he was the
second Person in rank before, as Captain of the Guards, as of being the Father
of a Son, of the Name of Antoninus, which at that time was so Famous, that not
any Name of the Gods themselves was more. Therefore, said one, It is a thing
void of all Reason, and unsuitable to the Dignity of Commodus, to covet, as he
did, the Name of Hercules, as if that of Antoninus was not Honor enough. For
would he be a God, he could never more eminently be so, than as he was an
Emperor of so excellent a Name? I mention this, in this place, only to show,
how highly the Antoninusses were valued, to have their Names set above the very
Gods. And yet all this was wrought by only the Charms of three Princes of that
Name, whose Wisdom, whose Goodness, and whose Piety consecrated them for ever
to Posterity; that is, Wisdom in the Person of Marcus Antoninus, Goodness in
his Brother Verus, and Piety in the first of the three, Antoninus Pius. I come
now to the Letter which I mentioned of Opilius Macrinus.

Opilius Macrinus, to Nonia Celsa his Wife.
THE Blessing we have received, my dear Wife, is above all Estimation; but
perhaps you may think now, that I speak of the Empire, which is no such great
matter; Fortune bestows that upon unworthy Persons often. I am made the Father
of an Antoninus. Thou art become the Mother of an Antoninus. O happy we! And
Fortunate our House! Now is our Reign happy, and to be highly Renowned. The
Gods, and particularly the good Goddess Juno, whom you Worship, grant, that he
may sustain worthily the merit of his Name; and that I, who am the Father of an
Antoninus, may also appear worthy of that Honor to all the World.


By this Letter we see, how great an Honor he looked upon it to be, that his
Son was received by the Name of an Antoninus. However, this fine Son was
killed, together with his Father, in the Fourteenth Month of their Reigns. And
it is to be observed, that as young and as amiable as he was, he was yet one
that was very severe upon many Persons beyond his Age; witness these two
Letters following, written to his Father and Mother; which as they are Pieces
contributing to this History, so I have thought fit to insert them here.

The Emperor the Son, to the Emperor his Father.
I Am apt to think, Sir, in consequence of my Love and Duty to you, that you
have not been sufficiently careful of your self, in sparing the Accomplices of
the intended Revolt; whether it is because you hope that your Mercy will make
them more your Friends for the future, or because they are your old
Acquaintants, and that therefore you spare them. For first of all, as they are
Persons that have been once exulcerated in their minds against you, they can
never love you again; and then when old Friends forget themselves, so as to
turn Enemies, they make the most cruel Enemies of all Men. To which add, what
the Army cries,

Si te nulla movet tantarum gloria rerum, Virg. Aen. 4. 274.

Ascanium surgentem, and spes haeredis Iuli
Respice; cui regnum Italiae, Romanaque tellus
Debetur -- --
If Thirst of Glory cannot push you on,
Yet pray regard the Fortune of your Son,
To whom Rome's Empire has been destined long.
You must put them to death, if you would expect to live in Safety. For if
those be spared, others will not fail to trouble you as much, according to the
natural viciousness of Mankind.


Now whether himself, or Caelianus his Master in Rhetoric formed this Letter,
it shows what a severe young Man he would have been if he had lived.

The other LETTER to his Mother, was this.
CErtainly, my Father, the Emperor, neither loves you nor himself, to spare, as
he does, his Enemies. Therefore, pray endeavor, that Arabianus, Thuscus, and
Gellius be dispatched, for fear, lest, if occasion serve them, they do not
suffer us to escape them so easily.


These Letters, says Lollius Urbicus, in the History that he has made of his
time, being betrayed to the Soldiers by his Secretary, did Diadumenus the
greatest prejudice, and cost him his Life. For some of them considering that he
was but a Youth, had been at first for saving him, after they had killed his
Father. But when these Letters were produced and He is slain by the Soldiers.
read, then they killed him also; and both their Heads were carried about upon
the top of a Javelin. Then all the Army agreed to set up Varius Antoninus
Heliogabalus, being the reputed Son of Bassianus Antoninus Caracallus. They
say, he was a Priest of the God Heliogabalus; that is, in the Phoenician
Language, the Sun; but certainly the most impure, and the most dissolute Man
upon Earth, and by some Fate, sent entirely to dishonor the Roman Empire. As
there are a great many things to be said of him, I shall reserve my self to
speak of him in his place.

THE A. Christi CCXIX.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Varius Antoninus Heliogabalus. Dedicated to the
EMPEROR Constantine the Great.
BY AELIUS LAMPRIDIUS.
VArius Antoninus Heliogabalus, passed his Life in a manner, which was so very
impure, that I should eternally excuse my self from committing it to Writing;
nor should it be known by my hand, that ever such a Person was the Emperor of
Rome, if we had not had a Caligula, a Nero, and a Vitellius upon the same
Throne before him. But as we see the same Earth produces as well Poisons as
good Grain; and is diversified with things which are some wholesome, and some
hurtful; here Vipers, and there other Creatures, that are tame, and good for
the Life of Man: the prudent Reader will easily make himself an amends for such
prodigious Tyrants, if he pleases but to read the Reigns of Augustus,
Vespasian, Titus, Trajan, Hadrian, A^toninus Pius, and Marcus Antoninus, in
opposition to them. For by the comparison, he will perceive the Judgments of
the Romans upon the one and the other; how that these latter reigned long, and
ended their days at last with natural Deaths. But the others were murdered,
shamefully dragged, branded as Tyrants, their Names thought unworthy so much as
to be mentioned; or not to be mentioned without horror. After the Death of
Macrinus and his Son, the Empire was conferred upon Varius Antoninus
Heliogabalus, for this reason especially, becaused he was the reputed Son of
Bassianus Antoninus Caracallus. He had been Reason of his Names.
before a Priest, either of Jupiter, or the Sun, and had taken to himself the
Name of Antoninus, not only for an Argument of his Birth, but because he knew
that that Name was so very dear to the World, that even the Particide his
Father was loved for its sake. His other Name from his Grandfather Varia, was
Varius. Then he called himself Heliogabalus, from the Name of the God in the
Phoenician Language, whose Priest he was; and when he came to the Empire, he
was declared an Antoninus, and he was the last of the Roman Emperors of that
Name.

His Mother was Semiamira, to whom he was so devoted, that he did nothing in
the Government without her. She in the mean time lived in the manner of an
impudent Courtezan, and pursued her lewdnesses of all sorts in the very Palace.
For as it was under that Character, that formerly Antoninus Caracallus had had
commerce with her, so the promiscuous Issue, her Son, might very well also be
called Varius, if it had been only from thence, who after his Father was
killed, fled, it is said, for fear of Macrinus into the Temple of the God
Heliogabalus, as into an Asylum, and made his Priesthood there his Protection.
But thus much as to his Name; that holy Name of Antoninus, so polluted by this
Man, but which is, however, so venerated by you, Most Sacred Constantine, that
your Majesty has the greatest Honor in the World for the Emperors Antoninus
Pius, and Marcus Antoninus; setting them before you, no less than you do
Constantius and Claudius, for your Royal Imitation; whereby you indeed adopt
the Virtues of the Ancients to be your own, and certainly they very well suit
with the happy Inclinations of your Majesty.

After then, Varius Antoninus Heliogabalus was in the possession of the Empire,
he sent his Accounts of it to Rome, where all the Orders of the Nobility,
Gentry and People being elevated at the Name of an Antoninus, which seemed in
him to be restored, not as it was in Antoninus Diadumenus in Title only, but
also in Blood, because he writ himself the Son of Antoninus Caracallus: There
was great Joy made for him; and this was yet further increased by those good
Apprehensions, which Men generally have of a New Prince, who succeeds after a
Tyrant; and by that great Affection, that they are then prone to express, but
which yet is not lasting, unless where i^ meets with an extraordinary deal of
Virtue for its support, because many indifferent Princes have soon lost it
again. So when the Letter of Heliogabalus was read in the Senate, they received
it with as many Acclamations of Joy and Kindness to him, as on the other hand
they inveighed against Macrinus and his Son. All were willing to declare him
Emperor, and industrious to believe him a worthy Antoninus; as the wishes of
Men are apt to impose upon their Credulity, and what they desire that it should
be true, they love to make themselves believe that it is so. But he was no
sooner come to Rome, to omit the Comes to Rome.
things which he did in the Provinces, but he set up the Worship of his God
Heliogabalus, which he had brought with him out of Syria. He built upon Mount
Palatine, near the Palace, a Temple to him, into which he was altogether for
removing the Image of the great Mother of the Gods, Cybele; the Vestal Fire,
the Palladium, or Image of Pallas; the Sacred Shields, and all the Holy
Utensils of the Romans; not being willing that any other God should be
worshipped at Rome but his own. He said, that he would command the Worship of
the Jews, the Samaritans, and the Christians, to be thither also transferred;
that the Mysteries of all Religions should be contained within the Temple, and
applied to the Honor of Heliogabalus.

The first day afterward that the Senate sat, His Mother sits with the Senate.
he caused his Mother to be admitted as a Member of that Assembly, who was
called in, and came and took her place by the Seats of the Consuls, and was
present at the passing of a Decree of the Senate. Indeed, he is the only Person
of all the Emperors, whose Reign has given us a Senatress; a Woman to come
into the Senate, to act as a Man. He also created a little Senate of Women,
which met on Collis Quirinalis; whose Decrees, assembled under the Direction of
Semiamira, and the Laws that they made concerning the Ladies are very
diverting. They made Laws, What Clothes every one should wear; who should give
place to whom; who salute whom; who go in a Coach; who ride upon a Horse; who
upon an Ass; who go in a Litter, drawn by Mules; who to be drawn by Oxen; who
carried in a Chair, and whether the Chair should be of Leather, or inlaid with
Bone, or Brass, or Ivory, or Damaskt with Silver; and who should wear Gold or
Jewels at their Shoes.

Whilst he wintered in the City of Nicomedia in Bithynia, which was before his
coming to Rome, he carried himself so lewdly there, being carnally entered by
Men, and grunting at the Work, like a Sow that is brimmed, that the Soldiers
soon repented themselves of having conspired against Opilius Macrinus to make
this Person a Prince; and then turned their Thoughts upon Alexander a
Cousin-German of Heliogabalus, whom the Senate had created Caesar upon the
Death of Macrinus. For who indeed could endure to see a Prince more than
bestial, leaving no concavity His Bestiality.
of his Body unpolluted by those he loved. And coming afterward to Rome, he
made it his great Business to be furnished with Men out of all Parts that were
the best provided for his purpose. He had the Comedy of Paris performed in his
Apartments, in which himself acted the part of the Venus, and suddenly his
Clothes falling down to his Heels, and leaving his Body all naked, he put
himself into a Posture fit for his Associates to make their lewd Approaches. He
made himself to be drawn in the figure of a Venus, with a delicate Face, and
all his Body smooth, and thought it the greatest Happiness of his Life to be
tempting and agreeable to the Lusts of more and more Men.

Himself, his Servants, and his Pimps, one His base Government.
with another, made a common Sale of the Degree and Places of Honor, and the
Places of Power and Command. He created any one indifferently a Senator for
Money, without regard to Age, Estate, or Birth. The Military Offices of
Captains, Tribunes and Generals, were sold, as also the Governments of the
Provinces, and the Offices of the Household. Two Coach-men, whom he took out of
the Cirque, that is, Protogenes and Gordius, he made the great Companions of
his Life, and his Privadoes to every thing he did. He took several into the
Court out of both the Theater and the Amphitheatre, where they had been
Players, Charioteers, or Gladiators, only because their Bodies promised him to
the Eye, something filthy that pleased him. He loved a Youth called Hierocles
so, that he used to kiss what it is immodest to name in him, and said, That it
was to celebrate a Game to the Goddess Flora. He committed Incest upon His
Incest and Sacrilege.
a Vestal Nun. He profaned the most Holy Rites and Mysteries of the Romans,
breaking into the Sacristies of their Temples, and carrying all things away
thence into that of his own God. He would have extinguished the perpetual
Vestal Fire. Nor was he only this upon the Religions of the Romans, but all the
World over, he desired to have no other God worshipped but Heliogabalus. He
broke into the Sanctuary of the Temple of the Goddess Vesta, polluted as he
was, with all kind of Filthiness, and his Company as bad and as vicious as he,
to take from thence the inviolable Image of Pallas. He thought that he had
really carried off the Jar which is consecrated to the Temple, and the Rites of
the Goddess Cybele; but only the superior of the Virgins belonging to that
Goddess, had shown him a false one in the room of the true; and finding nothing
in it that was extraordinary, he broke it in pieces. So he also seized upon an
Image of Pallas; which was adorned with Gold; but which he likewise mistook for
the true Palladium, and he placed it in the Temple of his own God. He initiated
himself in the Rites of the Goddess Cybele; and was washed in Bull's Blood;
only to get an opportunity by the means to steal away the Image of that
Goddess, and other Sacred Utensils that are kept altogether locked up. He tossed
his Head and his Hair about, as the Fanatic Priests of that Goddess do,
amongst whom he officiated: every thing that those Priests do, so did he; till
at length, he stole off the Venerable Image of the Mother of the Gods, and
reposed it in the Sacristy of his own God. He Celebrated the Feasts of Adonis,
with all the Mourning and the Tossing the Body, which is used in the worship of
that God in Syria. He imitated Venus, weeping and bewailing his loss; which was
but a presage from himself of his own approaching ruin. All the Gods, he said,
were the Servants of his God; to whom some were his Chamberlains, some his
Ushers, and others, were destined to serve him in all sorts of Offices. He
endeavored to possess himself of the Statue of the Goddess Diana; being the
same Sacred Statue which Orestes had stolen out of her Temple in Scythia
Taurica, and had afterward reposed it in another Temple Dedicated to her at
the City of Laodicea in Asia. The same Orestes built a City of his own Name,
Oresta, upon the Bank of the Hebrus, in the Country of Thrace; which the
Emperor Hadrian ordered to be re-called Hadrianople, from himself, about the
time that he City of Adrianople.
was in his Frenzy, when he commanded so many Senators to be killed: whom
Antoninus on the contrary saving, and afterward bringing them into the Senate,
when every body had thought them dead, he very well deserved to be Entitled, as
he was, the Pious Antoninus: And some allay it gave to that Frenzy of Hadrians,
at that time to tell him; That whilst his Majesty was giving his Name to a
City, it was to be feared that some mad House should take it up.

Antoninus Heliogabalus offered Sacrifices to Cruel Idolatry.
his God, of young and pretty Boys, that were Gentlemen's Sons, whom he
Kidnapped for the purpose over all the Country of Italy, and whose Fathers and
Mothers were yet living. The reason of his choice of such, as whose Fathers and
Mothers were yet living, I cannot understand, unless it was this; to make the
Trouble of their loss so much the more sensible as it reached to both their
Parents, and that their deaths should be accompanied in the Ears of his God,
with a more general Lamentation. He had all sorts of the Diviners, Magicians,
and Priests of the East with him, daily employed in the bloody Works of his
Religion; in which he encouraged them on; thanking the Gods, that he was so
well supplied with the peculiar Friends, as he called them, and Servants of
theirs: and then he pryed himself into the Entrails of the murdered Children;
and discussed the Victims, according to the Rites of the Country, from whence
this Service came.

The Largess with which he Caressed the People, when he entered upon his
Consulship, was not little pieces of Money (of Gold or Silver) cast amongst
them, nor a Collation of Fruits, Wines, and the like; but he gave them Fat
Oxen, Camels, and Asses, to divide amongst them; and Slaves to serve them:
This, he said, was great, and becoming an Emperor, and for the Honor of
Heliogabalus his God.

He was very severe upon the memory of Opilius Macrinus; but yet worse against
his Son for assuming the name of Antoninus: he called him a Pretended, a
Spurious Antoninus; and he could not endure to hear him wel^ spoken of; nay he
obliged some Persons, that writ his Life, to Slander him with things tha^ were
horrid and intolerable. He set up a Public Bath in the Court, which he exposed
to the free use of all the World; the design whereof was only to see, what Men
were the bes^ Provided for his use, and to take them to himself: for those were
the Creatures, in the World, the most in Vogue with him, and great Care was
used to find them out, about all the Town, insomuch as out of the very
Watermen.

In the mean time, the Persons who discovered his Practices the most to the
World, were such especially, as had born him Company i^ the Exercises of his
Lusts, and had been wearied, with his Men, that were so Potent, an^ so filthily
Hung. His death was a thing, begun first to be thought of amongst those of
h(...) own Family. Neither could the Soldiers endure to see such a Pest upon
the Throne, and therefore they all turned their inclinations upon Alexander,
his Cousin German, whom the Senate (as it was said) had Created Caesar at the
death of Macrinus. Aurelius Zoticus Magirus His filthiness with Magirus.
was a very great Favorite unto Heliogabalus. All the Principal Officers of
the Court respected him, as if Magirus was the Husband, and Heliogabalus the
Wife; Magirus the Master, and Heliogabalus the Mistress. But the Master did so
abuse the Tie of the Familiarity which he had with this Mistress, that he made
a Practice by it of really cheating, out of their Money all the World at once.
Some he threatened; some he promised; took Money of all: and coming out from
Heliogabalus, His way was, Sir, I told the Emperor this of you; I heard him say
this of you, (to another.) This will be done about you, (to a third.) And yet
all false; as all these sort of Men do, who when admitted to too great a
Familiarity with Princes, make no scruple to Sacrifice the Reputation of them
to their own advantages: Let the Princes themselves be bad or good, it is the
same; for so long as either through their Folly, or their Innocence, they do
not perceive the Cheat; it is Meat and Drink, and Honor, and Riches to such as
pursue it. Heliogabalus perfectly Married this Man, and lay with him as his
Bride; and his word was, Vigorously, Magirus: not bating him so much as the
time that Magirus was sick of a Dose that had been palmed upon him by an angry
Rival. Then he asked the Philosophers, and the gravest Persons about him,
whether they in their Youths had not done the same thing. Which he expressed in
the lewdest words, for he never spared for those, and acted the Postures upon
his Fingers, without any sense of Shame, to be seen and heard by all the
Company.

He made his infranchised Slaves the Presidents, Lieutenants, and Proconsuls of
the Provinces. The Commands in the Army and all Places of Honor, he polluted
with baseborn and profligate Men. When he kept the Feast of the Vintage, to
which he had invited several of the Nobility and Gentry, and the Company being
reposed, began impudently His h^rrid Immodesty.
to ask first the Gravest of them, one after another, Was be ready for the
Exercises of Venus? They blushing at the Question, he cried; He Blushes, that is
enough, his silence gives consent; and then he told them of his own
Performances, and how he was ready to do all things for his part without
seeking a Veil for his Modesty. The Graver Men blushing still, and saying
nothing, because either their Age or their Honor refuted such Stuff, he
proceeded to apply his Discourses to the young Fry, to whom he uttered all
sorts of filthy Questions; who answering him again such things, as come from
those of their Years: he was mightily diverted, and said, This now is to be
free, and this is the right way of keeping the Feast of the Vintage. There were
those in the Company that were lewd enough, and some too that were old, and in
appearance Philosophers, with their Heads in Caps, who confessed that they did
indeed love the Female Part, and what Men they had that had served them in the
Faculty of Husbands. But I cannot tell whether they did not dissemble, to
ingratiate themselves the more in the favor of Heliogabalus, by the
Correspondence of their Vices unto his.

He preferred one Man to be a Captain of Prefers base Persons.
the Guards, who had been a Public Stage-Dancer at Rome. He made Gordius, a
Coachman, Captain of the Lieutenancy of the City: he made Claudius, a Barber,
the Commissary of the Stores, and to other Places he promoted Men as they
recommended themselves to him by the large size of their Secrets. He made a
Mule-driver a Commissioner of the Tax, called Vicesima, together with a
Postman, a Cook, and a Locksmith. When he came either to the Camp or the
Senate, it was in the Company of his Mother, whose Authority kept him a little
in Countenance, and who was the first Woman, as we have said, that ever had
that access to the Senate, to give her Vote there. At his Banquets he
particularly loved to place by himself, and to Favor, the Bardashes; and took
a great delight to Handle them, and to Provoke their Lusts, though it was
before all the Company.

Whilst these things passed, he conceived a great displeasure against Alexander
his Cousin German, whom before he had Adopted; and yet it was only, because he
would not be as lewd as he. He ordered him to be removed from him; and repented
that he had adopted him, and ordered the Senate to Depose him from the Dignity
and Title of Caesar. But as Alexander was a very excellent Youth, and
acceptable to both the Senate and all the Gentry, and beloved by the Soldiers,
as he approved himself worthy thereof afterward in his Reign, the Senate when
this motion was made to them, was very silent upon it. Then Heliogabalus's Fury
carried him upon the worst His Hate to Alexander Severus.
of Wishes. He set Men expressly to Murder him. In order to which, he retired
himself from the Palace, to the Gardens by the old Temple of Hope; as if he had
designed that Place, in the way of an Omen, that he might succeed in his Hopes
against this so promising, and so necessary a Youth; whom he left behind him,
in the Palace, in Company with his Mother and his Grandmother; and had
commanded that he should be killed there. At the same time he sent Orders to
the Camp to abrogate, amongst them, his Title and Honor of Caesar. He sent
Persons to besmear with Dirt his Statues, which were in the Camp; and to deface
the Inscriptions upon them, as it is done usually to the Statues of Traitors.
He sent to others, that were his Attendants, to engage them by promises of
Rewards and Honor, to kill him by what way soever they pleased; either in the
Bath, or by Poison, or the Sword.

But the Counsels of the Wicked are of no effect against the Innocent. No Body
by any endeavors, could be prevailed with, to the perpetration of a Fact so
Villainous. On the contrary, all his Weapons recoiled against himself; and
those Persons, by whom he aimed to take away Alexander's Life, became the
Masters of his own. All the Soldiers were in a Flame to see the Statues and the
Titles of Alexander besmeared with Dirt. Some made toward the Palace, some
toward the Gardens in which Heliogabalus was; directly to assert the Cause of
Alexander, and to drive away this Impure Man, and in his Heart a Murderer, by
violence from the Throne. Coming to the Palace, they first took a care of the
preservation of the Person of Alexander, and his Mother, and Grandmother; and
sent them to the Camp; whither Semiamira the Mother of Heliogabalus, followed
them on Foot, in a great disquiet for her Son, and to see what she was able to
effect in his Favor. From the Palace, they went to the House where
Heliogabalus was. They found him employed about a Match for a Chariot-Race; but
withal full of expectation of the News, when it should come, that his
Counsin-German was killed. The sudden Noise of the Soldiers frightened him. He
threw himself into a Corner, and by the help of a Curtain hanging over a
Chamber Door, escaped out of their sight. So he dispatched one of the Captains
of the Guards immediately to the Camp to appease the Soldiers there; and
another to sweeten those, that were come into the House. Antiochianus was he
who was employed to the latter: who spoke to them, and upon their Oaths
Conjured them to be satisfied, and entreated them so kindly, that in fine he
prevailed with them (they not being very many in number) to abandon their
Enterprise for that time. As to the other Officer, who was sent to appease the
Camp, the Soldiers there replied to him; that they were willing to forgive
Heliogabalus; provided that he would remove the Impure Men, and the
Charioteers, and Stage Players from his Person, and would betake himself to
Reason: particularly they desired the removal of such as had made use of their
Ministry for a Cloak to Cheat all the World out of their Money. So Hierocles,
Gordius, Murissimus, and two more of his Lewd A Mutiny of the Soldiers appeased.
Favorites; who as ill as he was, made him much worse, by the absolute power
which they had over him, were removed. The Soldiers further desired, that the
Captains of the Guards should take care not to suffer him to lead so ill a life
again; and that Alexander should be preserved in safety from him, and not be
visited by any neither of his Company; because no Taint of their filthiness or
example should reach his imitation. But yet Heliogabalus, not only instantly
redemanded Hierocles, who was one that was most extremely Lewd; but he daily
carried on designs against the life of the young Prince. Upon the Calends of
January, when they both were appointed Consuls together, he refused to appear
with him in the Procession, according to Custom, to the Senate, and the
Capitol: till at last his Grandmother, and his Mother told him, that the
Soldiers were ready to Murder him, unless he agreed better with his Cousin,
German; and then, though it was twelve a Clock, first he put on his Robes, and
marched to the Senate; whither his Mother repaired in a Chair at the same time:
but he would by no means be persuaded to go from thence to the Capitol to
finish the Ceremony, and to perform the accustomed Vows and Rites there. For
all things were done there by the Governor of the City, as in the case of the
absence of both the Consuls.

Nor did he still forbear to prosecute his design against the life of
Alexander. But in the mean time fearing, that after he had killed him, the
Senate would in return cast their thoughts upon another Emperor, he resolved to
be before hand with them, and on a sudden he banished the Senate out of the
City. All The Senate banished.
of them though their Chariots or Servants were wanting, and their Equipages
not in a readiness, were commanded nevertheless immediately to be gone. So they
went; some of them upon Carts, and others by any manner of Conveniences, that
Chance offered to them. Sabinus, who had been a Consul, and one to whom Ulpian
the Lawyer Dedicates his Books, tarrying a little behind the rest, he sent for
a Centurion, and commanded him to kill him. But speaking it something low, and
the Centurion being a little deaf, the Centurion thought that his command had
been to drive him out of the Town by force: which he did, and the mistake saved
Sabinus his life. At the same time he Banished Ulpian, for no other reason, but
because he was an Honest Man, and likewise the Rhetorician Silvinus, who had
been Alexander's Master; and the latter he afterward put to death: but Ulpian
was spared.

But the Soldiers, and especially those of the Guards, knowing what Rods
Heliogabalus was making for their Backs, and observing the grudge that he bore
them, for their last attempt, in which they had rescued Alexander out of his
Hands, resolved upon a Conspiracy with one another, for the deliverance of the
State. Accordingly they fell first upon his Lewd Associates; whom they put to
death in several ways; some by ripping them up, and taking out their Entrails;
some by boring them through the Fundament; that their deaths and His Associates
and himself slain.
their life's should be alike. Next they broke by violence in upon himself; who
fled for shelter into a House of Office. They killed him there; then they
dragged him through the Streets. They added this Despite to his Body that they
threw it into the Kennel; and the Kennel not being big enough for it, they
fastened a weight to it, that it should not float and be afterward found, and
buried, and so cast it from the Aemilian Bridge into the River of Tyber. But
before they threw him into the Tyber, they had dragged him up and down the
Cirque. His Name, that is, that of Antoninus was erased, and nothing but that
of Varius Heliogabalus was left to stand upon the Records, because he had so
much affected, to retain nothing but the Name, to show himself to be the Son of
an Antoninus. They called him after his death, the Tyberine, Dragged, Impure
Heliogabalus, and by many other such Names, upon any occasion of remarking the
Passages of his Reign. Of all the Princes, he was the only one that was both
dragged and thrown into the Kennel, and thrown into the Tyber too. It was what
befell him from the general hatred in which he died, and which Princes by his
Example ought to take great heed how they incur; because, if so be that they
live so, as not to merit the Love of either the Senate, People, or Soldiers;
neither will they be thought to deserve the Honor to be buried. His public
Works were, Hsi public Works.
he built a Temple to his God Heliogabalus, whom some interpret the Sun, some
Jupiter. He repaired the Amphitheatre after a Fire. He carried on the Work of
the Baths, that had been begun by his Father, but which had been left imperfect
for want of some Galleries to them, which therefore this Prince enterprised;
but neither were those brought unto their last perfection till the Reign of
Alexander Severus.

He was the last of the Princes of the Name of Antoninus. And certainly the
Life, the Manners; and the Lewdness of him are so odious, that as the Senate
erased out of the public Records his Name of Antoninus, my self should not
give it him, but for the sake of distinction, and the Laws of History, which
oblige me. His Mother Semiamira was killed with him; a Woman without Honor,
and worthy of such a Son; upon whose account, it was before all things ordained
by the Senate, after his Death, that no Woman for the future should ever be
received a Member there again, and the Head of him by whom this had been done,
contrary to the Sentiments of all the World, they devoted to Hell for it. Many
were the obscenities of his Life, which I think not fit to mention. His Riot in
some things, when a private Man, and in others when Emperor, and what concerns
his Luxury in that kind, I may the better describe. For even in his private
Life, he professed to imitate the Luxury of Apicius; and when Emperor, his
Examples were Nero, Otho, and Vitellius.

He was the first of all private Men, who covered His Luxury in his House.
his Bed with furniture of Cloth of Gold, which he did in virtue of an Act,
that had admitted it of Marcus Antoninus, when that Emperor made an Auction of
all the unnecessary movables of his Household to raise Money for the
Marcomannick War. He garnished his Entertainments throughout the Summer, with
Glasses and things, all of the same color, and the color every day various.
He was the first that furnished his Kitchen with Pots and Pans of Silver,
whereof some were of a hundred pound weight, and ingraved with venereal
Figures. He first brought up the Wines of the infusion of Mastick, Roses, and
other things, which the Luxurious have at this day. For though the Wine of the
infusion of Roses had been invented before, yet he rendered that still more
fragrant by a mixture in it of the Pine. Neither do we read of so many several
mixture of Wines before the time of Heliogabalus, every moment of whose Life
was spent in quest of new Pleasures. He is the first that made a sort of
Saulages of Fish, such as Oysters, Muscles, Lobsters, Crabs, Shrimps. His
Dining Rooms, Tables, Couches, and Galleries where he eat or walked, were
strewed with Roses, Lilies, Violets, Hyacinths, Daffadils, and all sorts of
Flowers. He went not into the Baths, but they were first perfumed with noble
Ointments, or Saffron. The Pallets, upon which he reposed himself at Table,
were of the Skins of Hares, or the Feathers of Partridges, and he often changed
his leaning Pillows for softness. Sometimes he vilified the Senate so, that he
called them Slaves of the long Robe; and the People of Rome, the poor Laborers
of one Field; and slighted the Equestrian Order, as worth nothing. He often
took the Governor of the City, and the Captains of the Guards, to drink with
him after Supper, and spared them not their measure. He had designed, if he had
lived, to appoint a distinct Governor to every Region of the City, in all
fourteen, which was to be a preferment for so many of his Pimps, the filthiest
of Men, and of the basest profession of Life. He had Couches of Massy Silver,
both for his Dining-Rooms and his Chambers. He was served with Dishes
frequently in imitation of the Luxury of Apicius, of the Hoofs of Camels, the
Combs of Cocks cut off from them alive, and the Tongues of Peacocks and
Nightingals; because he said, These are good things against an Epilepsie. He
taught the Court the Dainties of the Intrails of Barbels, the Brains of Red
Tails. the Eggs of Partridges, the Brains of Thrushes and the Heads of Parrets,
Pheasants, and Peacocks. It is to be admired, how he gathered together such a
quantity of the Fins of Barbels, that he had great Dishes and large Plates
served of them, being things as rare as they are useless. And which is
altogether astonishing, he fed his Dogs with the Livers of Geese.

Lions and Leopards, being first disarmed of Other of his immoderate Vanites.
their Claws and Teeth, and taught by Masters to be tame, and to know their
Commands, he had a great delight in. And at the second or third Services, on a
sudden, he called them into the Room to him, where the Company not knowing that
they were disarmed, it was a mighty laughing matter to him to see what a vain
Fright it gave them. He sent Raisins in the Sun to be put into the Mangers to
his Horses. He sed his Lions and his other fierce Beasts, with Parrets and
Pheasants. For ten days together, he had once every day served up to him thirty
of the Meats that are made of the hinder Part of so many Sows newly farrowed.
His Pease were garnished with Grains of Gold. His Lentils with precious Stones,
which matched them. His Beans with Beads of Amber, and his Rice with Pearl.
Pearl was sprinkled amongst his Fish and his Mushrooms, like so much white
Pepper. He sometimes stifled some of his Company at Table, with the vast number
of Violets, and other Flowers, made by a Contrivance to fall upon their Heads.

It is said, that he represented a Fight of Galleys in the Amphitheatre, upon a
Sea all of, Wine, which was let in by the Pipes. At the same time he perfumed
the Seats for the People, with sweet Ointments. He ran a Race of four Chariots
drawn by four Elephants a piece, upon the Vatican, being himself the Driver,
and levelling the ground for the purpose; and another within the Circuit of his
Palace, of as many Camels drawing the Chariots. He once ordered a great
quantity of Serpents to be gathered together for him; so when he had them, he
let them fly suddenly amongst the Company that was assembled in the Cirque at a
public Show, of whom many were bitten, and others put to the scamper to save
themselves. He had some Tunicks so thick beset with Jewels, that he said, He
was even loaded with the eight of his finery. He wore at his Shoes, Jewels of
the Cut of the greatest Artists, which was but thought ridiculous; as if the
fineness of the Stone, and the gravery, signified at the Foot any thing where
it could not be distinguished. He dressed his Head with Jewels, to make him
look more of the Countenance of a Lady. He made great Ponds of Seawater in the
inland Parts at a great distance from the Sea, and filled them with Fish from
the Sea. He had Mountains of Snow in Summer preserved for him, which was
fetched from all Parts. He never would eat Fish near the Sea; but in places at
a very great distance from the Sea, he would be always served with the
Curiosities of the Sea; and treated the very Rusticks there with the soft Roes
of Lampries and Sturgeons.

His Fish was dressed with an Art, that when they were brought upon the Table,
they looked as if they were alive, just taken out of the Water. He bathed and
swam in Ponds of Aromatic Wine, which were filled in an instant for him, and
sprinkled with the Flowers of Roses; himself and all the People drinking of the
Wine of the Ponds, and his Seat in them perfumed with exquisite Nard. For his
Lamps, he had of the Oil of Balm. He never lay with the same Woman twice,
unless it was his Wife. His House was a Bawdy House for all his Company,
Friends and Servants. His Suppers never cost less than one hundred thousand
Sesterces; and sometimes reckoning all things, he (...)ed at the rate of thrice
that Expense. He it did the sumptuous Suppers both of Apicius and the Emperor
Vitellius. His Fishing-Nets were drawn out of the Ponds, by a Yoke of Oxen. He
tied some of his poor Retainers sometimes to a Wheel which went under Water; in
which, giving them a good plunge, and then up again, he said, Those were his
Friends of the Race of Ixion. He paved the Courts before the Palace, with
Lacedamonian and Porphyry Marble, which was also yet in being in our memory,
and but lately taken up and changed. He had designed to give to the City a
large Column, having an ascent within it to the top, where he intended to place
the God Heliogabalus. But though he proposed to fetch the Stone from Thebais in
Egypt, he could not be provided with a Rock that was great enough for his Work.

He many times had an humor, when his His vain Frolicks.
Company was well in drink, to lock them up, and in the Night on a sudden to
send in Lions, Leopards, and Bears (disarmed) into the Room to them; that when
they awaked in the Morning, or which was worse, in the Night, and found
themselves in the same Room with Lions, Bears and Panthers, they were
sometimes, struck dead with the fright. As to others of his Guests of an
inferior Condition, he placed them upon Sacks about the Table, filled only
with Wind, which being let out suddenly, they were thrown down in an instant at
the foot of the Table, with their Meat in their Mouths. When the Players upon
the Stage ^ad sometimes pretended to punish a Man for Adultery, for example
thus and thus, in show; ^e has commanded the said Punishments to ^e literally
executed. He was so kind to the Whores, that he often redeemed them at the
Hands of all such as made a Traffic of them; and paid for their freedom, and
then set them ^t Liberty. He had often Gladiators to fight before him, as he
and his Company were at Table together. He caused a Banquetting-Room to be set
up for him in the Amphi^heatre, where, as he dined, he fed his Eyes with the
Combats of Gladiators, and the Chase ^f Wild Beasts. He was the first of the
Ro^ans that ever wore a Garment of Velvet. He never put on the same Linen
twice; he (...)id, It was for Beggars to wear Linen twice ^ashed. He appeared
in public after Supper ^ftentimes in a Dalmatick, calling himself a Fabius and
a Scipio, when he was in this effeminate Dress, only because those Persons had
sometime worn it in their Youths, which were delicate to a Fault. He picked up
all the Women of Pleasure that he could find about the Cirque, the Playhouse,
the Race, the Baths, and wherever they were; and assembling them all together
in some public House, he made an Harangue to them in the Phrase of my Fellow
Soldiers, as it was a General speaking to his Army, and then he treated upon
the Questions with them concerning the several sorts of Postures and infamous
Pleasures. Next he had the like Conference with all the Pimps and lascivious
Catamites, old and young, that were to be gotten from all Parts. he dressed
himself in the Habit of a Lady, being to meet these, with his Breasts bare; and
having concluded his Speech to them, he promised them for their Encouragement,
as if they were so many old Soldiers that had well served in his Cause, a
Donative of three pieces of Gold each, desiring them to pray to the Gods, to
make him happy in the good increase of their Company.

He commanded his Servants upon a piece of Work which is sufficiently
ridiculous, and yet he did it with promises to them of a Reward for their care
and pains in it, which was this; that they should bring him a thousand pound
weight of Spiders. He had gotten together, at length, by this means, no less
than ten times that weight; from whence he said, it was easy to make a
Judgment of the Greatness of the City of Rome. He sent the Servants of his
Kitchen to some with Vessels, supposed to be full of Provision that he had
presented them with; but when they were opened, they were found full of Frogs,
Scorpions, Serpents and Flies. Dining, or supping he had continually
Chariot-Races run before the Rooms and Galleries, where he was; in which he
obliged old Men, and some of the most honorable too, to mount the Box, for the
greater diversion. He ordered ten thousand Mice, one thousand Weasels, and
another thousand of Rats to be gathered together, and shown to him at once. He
often tantalized his poor Retainers, with Mock-Dinners, done all in Glass, or
Wax, or Ivory, or Earthen Ware; upon their Tables and their Napkins, they had
Services curiously represented in Paintings, all which did not hinder them, but
they might starve for Hunger, and yet none dared to complain of the excellency
of the Feast, but washed, and went away, as if they had dined never so well. He
commanded that out of the public Stores of Corn, which Trajan and Severus had
amassed for the Service of the People of Rome, for seven Years, at a certain
Rate of so much a Year, there should the allowances of two Years, be given to
the Whores, Pimps, and Catamites about the Town; the first Year, to go to as
many of them as lived within; the second, to as many of them as lived without
the Walls of the City.

He had sometimes four great Dogs to draw his Chariot, as well after he was
Emperor as before, when he was at his private Seat in the Country. He appeared
at other times in public, drawn by four great Stags; at other times by Lions;
and then he caused himself to be called the Mother of the Gods: Sometimes
Tigers, and then he named himself Bacchus, whose Chariot is drawn by Tigers;
and at the same time he habited himself as those Deities are represented, whom
he imitated. He had at Rome of the little Dragons of Egypt, as also Sea-horses,
a Crocodile, a Rhinocerot, and of all the strange Beasts of Egypt, that were
capable to be transported. Ostriches were often a part of his Bill of Fare. He
once entertained the principal Persons of the City, upon Seats all made of
Saffron, which was wonderful; and to complement them, he said, It was but Grass
in comparison to what they deserved. He passed the Actions of the Day in the
Night, and those of the Night in the Day; esteeming this as necessary a part of
Luxury, as any thing. In the Evening he rose, and received the Complements of
the Court for that Day; when it was Morning, he went to Bed again. He daily
presented his Favorites with something or other of importance. He suffered no
one scarce to go from him, but he made him a Present, as if it was of a thing
only that he had found, and that he did not value it so much, as to keep it
himself.

His Coaches and his Chariots were gilt, and His extreme Pr^digality.
all covered with Jewels; he scorned such as were but silvered over, or done
with Ivory or Brass. He sometimes caused his Chariot to be drawn by naked,
young, and very handsome Girls; two, or three, or four, or more of a Front; and
as they were all naked, so for the most part was he. He had also this Custom,
to invite to his Banquets eight old Men, all with bald Heads; eight others
blind of one Eye; eight others lame of the Gout; eight others that were Deaf;
eight Blacks; eight others that were so fat, that their Table could scarce hold
them; and then his Fancy was to make himself and the Court merry with them all
round. All the silver Plate that was served at his Banquets, and all the
drinking Cups, and Side-board Vessels, he gave away frankly amongst the
Company, and did this often. Then as a matter of great importance, he proposed
it to the Company, to invent every one some new Rules about Pickles, and
Sawces, and fine Eating; they did so, and he whose Invention was pleasing to
his Palate, received for it a great Reward in a Garment of Silk, which at that
time was a Rarity, and held in great Honor. But he whose Invention had
displeased him, he desired him to eat only always of that Dish, till he should
find a better out. He was always placed himself in a Seat in the midst of
Flowers, and precious Odours. He loved nothing but what he was told, was very
dear; Because, he said, the greatness of the Price raises the Appetite.

He was a perfect Monsieur-Ragou in his House, as also a Perfumer, a Vintner,
and a Pimp, and caused himself to be drawn in Pictures accordingly. At one
Supper he has had the Heads of six hundred Ostriches, for the sake only of the
Brains. Sometimes his Banquet was in this manner. He had two and twenty
Services of all sorts of Viands, whose Names at each Service, which was made in
the order of the Letters of the Alphabet, began all with one and the same
Letter. Then betwixt every Service they washed, and after that, every Man
betook himself to his Mistress; he and his Friends, and they were to swear,
that it was not without an accomplished Pleasure. Another time, his Banquet was
in this manner; he ordered each Service to be made ready at the House of a
several Friend, and as one lived by the Capitol, another upon Mount Palatine,
another at a third place, another upon Mount Caelius, and another on the other
side of the Tyber; the Company all went to every one's House to eat each
Service in order; and then washing at each Service and enjoying their
Mistresses, the whole day was scarce time enough for them to finish one Feast.
Some say, that he built Baths in several Places, and only washed once in them,
and then immediately destroyed them, for fear of accustoming himself to any;
and that he did the same with several Houses and Apartments that he built. But
I am apt to think, that those things and many others, which exceed all belief
are rather imposed upon him by Persons who have been willing entirely to
blacken his memory, only to make him so much the better foil for his Successor.

It is said, that he redeemed one Courtesan, who was very handsome, at the
Price of a Hundred Thousand Sesterces, and afterward honored her, as much, as
if she was a Virgin untouched. One asking him, whilst he was a private Man,
being then so Extravagant, if he did not fear the becoming Poor; he answered,
What can I do better for my self, than to be my own Heir, and the Heir of my
Wife? However, he had Estates demised to him by a great many, in consideration
of his Father. He said that he desired to have no Children, for fear, that it
should make him a good Husband. Instead of Coals, he burnt Frankincense,
Cinnamon, Cassia, and other Indian Sweet-Woods for his Fires, in his Dining
Rooms. He never when a private Man, traveled with less than a Train of sixty
Carnages; which made his Grandmother many times to say of him, that he would
spend all. But when Emperor, he never went but with a Train of six hundred;
saying that the King of Persia, when he travels, employs Ten Thousand Camels;
and Nero had been attended into the Country with Fifteen Hundred Chariots: The
occasion of which great Train of Heliogabalus, was the multitude of his Pimps,
Bawds, Whores, Bardasses, and his filthy Crew of Men and Women, that he had
always with him. Bathing he was always accompanied with Women; whom he most
officiously rubbed and smoothed, and took away their superfluous Hair, with a
depilatory Unguent, made for that purpose; and which, after them, he used to
himself, and took off his Beard with it: and after this, he with a Rasour, with
his own Hand shaved, what cannot modestly be spoken of; the Men also that he
loved, and to whom he subjected his Body in the nature of a Mistress; for the
filthy pleasures that he found in them. He strewed one whole Gallery belonging
to the Baths, all over with the Dust of Gold and Silver; regretting that it
could not be done with Amber too: and this he did often, whithersoever he
stirred out on Foot, if it was but to his Horse, or to his Coach; as the Custom
is, to do it with the finest Sand to the Emperors at this day.

He never wore the same Pair of Shoes twice. It is denied that he ever put on
the same Rings twice. His best Robes he oftentimes tore and slashed in pieces.
He commanded Ships to be sunk in the Port, that were come in from abroad, laden
with Merchandises; saying that this was a mark of a great Spirit. His
Closestools were of Gold; and his Chamber Pots were of Alabaster and Mirth. Had
I, he said, Ever an Heir, I would appoint him such a Governor, as should
oblige him to do all the things that I have done, or shall do. He had also this
Custom with him; that one day, he would have nothing at his Table but
Pheasants, and all his Services should be of the flesh of Pheasants dressed in
several ways. Another day nothing but Pullets. Another day all of one sort of
Fish. Another, of another. Another day all Pork. Another day all O^ riches.
Another day all Herbs; and so of Fruits, and milk Meats, and sweet Meats. He
often said to his Company, that he had provided them Mistresses of
extraordinary Beauty to lie with; as they would find when they went to their
Beds. But he sent them to Bed in the dark, because they should not see their
Faces, till the next Morning; and then, who were they, but old Negroe Women? He
put the same Trick upon them, with Negroe Boys. He laughed so loud in Public,
that sometimes in the Playhouse, no body was heard but only he. He Sung, he
Danced to the sound of the Flute, he sounded the Trumpet, he played upon the
Shepherds Pipe, and touched very well the Organ. He has gone about in one day
to all the Whores of the Cirque, the Playhouse, the Amphitheatre, and all
parts of the City disguised: and giving them, every one, some pieces of Gold in
their Hand; without effecting any with them: says he, Antoninus gives you this,
but tell no body.

He invented certain new ways for his Lusts, in which he out-did the monstrous
Postures of all former times, and all the Conjunctions of Tiberius, Caligula
and Nero. His Fortune was His death foretold.
foretold him by the Priests of Syria, that as he would be a great Profaner of
the means that serve to Generation; so he should one day come to dye by his own
Hands. He believed it, and provided himself therefore for it. For he had
provided himself silken Cords, if necessity was, to Hang himself. He had
provided himself Swords of Gold, if necessity was, to Stab himself. He had
provided himself Poisons, which he carried about him in Emeralds, Jacynths, and
other Precious Stones, if any thing ill happened, that he could no otherwise
avoid, to Poison himself. He had built a very high Tower, with steps to it of
Gold, enriched with precious Stories, from whence to throw himself down
headlong: because he would have his death, he said, to be, as his life was,
sumptuous; there should be a lively Image of Luxury in it; and it should be
said, that no body had dyed so, as he. But all this signified nothing. For he
was killed by a Rabble of He is killed by the Rabble.
For he was killed by a Rabble of Soldiers; and dragged most nastily through
the Streets; and drawn through the Kennel, and at last thrown into the River of
Tyber; with whom ended the Princes of the name of Antoninus. A name, to which
if his Birth, as it was Spurious, was any Title; yet his Life was the last
Disgrace to it, in the sight of all the World.

Your most Sacred Majesty, O Constantine, will perhaps think it strange, with
others; that this Pest, which I have given this account of, was suffered to
Reign so long, as almost three whole years; and that none appeared in the mean
time to rescue out of his Hands the Honor of the Roman Empire: because in the
Reigns of Nero, Caligula, Vitellius, and the rest of the Princes of this stamp,
there never wanted a Man to murder a Tyrant. But above all things, Pardon me if
I have been offensive to your modesty in any of the Passages of so dissolute a
Life: I have willingly suppressed a great many other of his Lewdnesses, because
I could not name them for shame: and as for those, that I have named, as they
are what I have sound amongst diverse Writers, so I have wrapped them up in as
clean a Napkin as I could; remembering very well, what your Majesty is used to
say; That to be an Emperor is a stroke of mere Fortune; which raises sometimes
very Indifferent, and sometimes the Worst of Men to be so: and your Majesty
does very graciously to add to that, That it lies upon the Persons themselves,
whom Fortune has reduced under that necessity of an Empire, to make themselves
worthy of the Place, where they are.

Thus much concerning therefore Varius Antoninus Heliogabalus. It is what I
have collected indifferently out of the Greek and Latin Historians. Your
Majesty's Commands to me, to present you with this Life in its place, after the
others which are antecedent to it, and which your Majesty has accepted, was an
Authority abundant to me to supersede all those thoughts that had otherwise
made me unwilling, and possessed me with a Reluctance to meddle in a thing of
this Nature. I shall now proceed to the Lives of those that follow. The first
of which is, that most excellent Prince, Alexander Severus; who was one of
thirteen years Reign. Then there will be Aurelian, who was another excellent
Prince; and Claudius, of whom, being the Author of your Majesty's Race, I
should be afraid to write the real Truth to you, lest those who have not all
the respect that they ought, for the praises which are due to great Souls,
should pretend that I Flatter, if I did not know, that I should be fully
justified by others in all that I have to say. To these is to be added
Dioclesian, the Father of an Age of Gold; and Maximian, the Father of an Iron
Age, as they commonly call them; with all the rest, to the Person of your
Majesty; whose Reign, I would say, Sir, yours, will be a Subject to employ the
Eloquentest Pens, and happy are they to whom Nature is so kind, to have enabled
them with gifts for so grand a Work. Nor yet are we to omit Licinius, or Marcus
Aurelius Severus, or Maxentius; whose Rights are all devolved upon your
Majesty; and from whose Virtues we ought not to derogate: For though it is the
method of the Generality of Writers to take away from the unsuccessful and the
beaten Side, yet I shall think this an unfit thing to be done, when I consider,
that when I shall have faithfully said all the good of them, that I can find in
our Memoirs to be never so true, yet it will all but make so much the greater
Accession to your Glory.

THE A. Christi CCXXIII.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Aurelius Alexander Severus. Addressed to the
EMPEROR Constantine the Great.
By AELIUS LAMPRIDIUS.
AFter that Pest of an Emperor, Varius Heliogabalus was killed, who had really
nothing of a true Antoninus in him; and therefore as the Senate, by their
Authority, degraded him from that name, and erased it out of the Records, so
neither am I very willing to give it him. Aurelius Alexander Severus his
Cousin-German, who was Born at His Extraction.
the City of Arca Caesarea in Phanicia in Syria, being the Son of Varius
Marcellus by Mammaea, the Sister of Semiamira, the Mother of Heliogabalus,
received the Empire to the general Relief and Comfort of Mankind. He had some
years before been Created Caesar by the Senate, at the time of the death of
Opilius Macrinus; and now the Senate both made him Emperor, and Honors done to
him.
gave him the Title of the Father of the Country, and invested him with the
Tribunitian and Proconsular Powers; and with the right of a fifth Reference,
all in one and the same day. And for fear that such an accumulation of Honors
should seem to be Precipitate, I will here in the first place mention the
Reason, as well why he suffered it on his part, as why the Senate had thought
fit to do it on theirs; because certainly otherwise, it was neither for the
Gravity of the Senate to confer all those things at once; nor for the
Reputation of a good Prince so to accept them. The Army had several times been
guilty of a Practice of making whom they pleased Emperors in a hurry, and
changing them as easily, when they had done; saying, in the defense of
themselves, that they did not know that the Senate had on their part nominated
any Person at all to the Empire. For thus they had set up Pescennius Niger,
Clodius Albinus, and Avidius Cassius; as heretofore they did Julius Vindex, and
Lucius Antonius. Severus was himself set up by them, in one place, about the
same time that Niger was in another, and Albinus in another; and yet then the
Senate had actually appointed Didius Julianus to succeed after Pertinax. And
this thing had occasioned Civil-Wars in the Empire; in which Countrymen against
Countrymen fighting, what were they but Murderers one of another? Upon this
account therefore it was that all expedition was used to invest Alexander
Severus with all the Honors of the Crown immediately, and at once, which he
should otherwise have received successively and in the course of many years.
And this was yet further promoted, by the very great inclination which both the
Senate and the People had toward him, after that Pest, who had not only
dishonored the name of the Antoninusses, but was a shame to all the Roman
Empire. So all the marks of Power, and the Titles of Honor, belonging to the
Crown, were given him with a forwardness, in which every one appeared to have
an Emulation to excel. He was the first of all the Emperors that ever received
so many Royalties all at one time: and indeed his Quality, as he had been
already for some years a Caesar, spoke for him; but yet the honesty of his Life
and Manners did it much more; and it had gained him besides a great esteem,
that Heliogabalus had attempted to kill him, but could not, because of the
Opposition to it of the Soldiers and the Senate. And then that which Crowns
all, is; he approved himself worthy of that Care that the Senate had taken of
his Preservation, worthy of the Affections of the Soldiers, and worthy of the
Sentiments all good Men had to prefer him, as they did, to the Empire.

His Mother being called Mammaea, as I said, he is mentioned by a great many by
the name of Alexander Mammaeus, from her. This Alexander from a Child, was so
instructed in His Education and Masters.
the knowledge of the good Arts concerning the things, as well Civil as
Military, that he willingly suffered not one day to pass, in which he did not
exercise himself in the one or the other. His first Masters, in his Infancy,
for the Elements, were Valerius Cordus, Titus Veturius, and Aurelius Philippus,
a Servant of his Fathers, who has since writ his life. His Master in the
Grammar, was Neon; in Rhetoric, Serapion; and in Philosophy, Stylion: that is,
this was in his own Country, and for the Grecian Learning. At Rome, for the
Latin, his Master in the Grammar was Scaurinus, the Son of the famous Doctor of
that name; in Rhetoric, Julius Frontinus, Baebius Macrinus, and Julius
Granianus; of the latter of which, there are Declamations now extant. But in
the Latin Learning, his Proficiency was not overgreat; as it sufficiently
appears by his Speeches which he made to the Senate; and those others that he
made to the Soldiers and to the People. Nor did he very much love the Latin
Eloquence. But the learned Men in it, he had a great esteem for, and
apprehended their Pens; for he was not willing that they should give him an ill
report in their Writings; therefore he thought them worthy to be By him upon
all occasions; and with every thing that he did, publicly or privately, if
they had not been present at it, he acquainted them himself, and desired them
to be informed carefully of the truth of all things, and accordingly to
represent them to the World.

He renounced the Title of Dominus, that His Modesty and Moderation.
is Lord; and ordered that they should write Letters to him, as to a private
Person, reserving only the name of Emperor. He refused the Jewels, to his
Shoes and his Clothes, which had been worn by Heliogabalus. He went in a White
Vestment, as he is commonly Drawn; and plain, not Embroidered nor Fringed with
Gold; and of the Common Stuffs. He carried himself so frankly with his Friends,
that he often obliged them to sit down by him; and went to their Houses to
their Entertainments without Ceremony; and received them again continually to
his own Table without a formal Invitation. He was to be waited upon, with as
easy Access as a Senator: whereas before in some other Reigns, a Prince would
not suffer himself. to be seen. He was Handsome, His Personage.
as to his Person, and well made, as we see him at this day in his Pictures and
Statues. He had a Cavalier Mien and Stature, his Strength answerable; and he
both knew his Vigor, and took care to preserve it. Some called him the Pious
Alexander, he was so amiable, at least as a good and useful Prince, all the
Earth esteemed him. He drew a Lot at the Temple of Fortune, at the City of
Palestrina, in the time that Heliogabalus waited for his Life, out of Virgil;
which was this, Aen. 6.

-- Siqua fata aspera rumpas,
Tu Marcellus eris. --
Which was as much as to signify; That if he but escaped the present Danger,
that he was in, he would be a glorious Emperor.

The occasion of his Name of Alexander Occasion of his Name.
was from hence. In his Native City of Arca Caesarea in Phaenicia, there was a
Temple Dedicated to Alexander the Great, whither upon the Festival of that
Prince, according to the Custom of the Country, his Father, and Mammaea his
Mother, went to assist at the usual Solemnities. But by accident his Mother
fell into Labor, and was delivered of him in this Temple; so she called him
Alexander: and the day of the Birth of Alexander the Son of Mammaea, is the
same with the day of the Death of Alexander the Great. The Senate offered him,
the name of Antoninus. But he refused it; although he had an Affinity, as well
as Heliogabalus, to the Emperor Antoninus Caracallus; and an Affinity, which
was so much better than his, as it was without the stain of his Bastardise: For
the Emperor Septimius Severus had Married a Noble Lady out of the East, whose
Horoscope, as he had heard it was; That, she should be the Wife of a Prince;
though he was then but in a private Condition. Which Lady's Sister's Daughters,
were one of them the Mother of this Alexander, and the other the Mother of
Varius Heliogabalus. So the two Sons were truly Cousin- Germans to one
another, and equal upon that Foot in their Relation to Antoninus Caracallus.
But it was not only the name of Antoninus which he refused; but the Senate by a
Decree presented him the Title of Alexander the Great, and he refused that also.

Now it will not be amiss here to subjoyn his Speech to the Senate, in which he
excuses his Acceptance of the one and the other Name. Only in the first place
I will report the Senate's Acclamations upon this occasion, out of the Records
of the City, as I find them upon the Day, but one, before the Nones of March;
when the Senate being assembled in the Temple of Concord, and Alexander at
their repeated request dispensing at last with himself to repair to them,
though he knew that their Business was to treat of the Honors which they
designed to give him, they cried as he entered thus;

The Gods save our Innocent Augustus. The Acclamations of the Senate.
Gods save the Emperor Alexander. The Gods have given you to us. The Gods
preserve you. The Gods have delivered you out of the Hands of the Impure. The
Gods Eternalize your Reign. You suffered a great deal under the Impure Tyrant,
Impure and Obscene as he was, you always regretted to see him. The Gods have
Rooted him up. The Gods preserve your Majesty. That Infamous Emperor has
justly been Condemned. Under your Reign we are happy. The State is happy to be
subjected to you. The Infamous Emperor has been dragged for an Example. That
Luxurious Prince is justly punished. The Profaner of all Honor has been
justly Punished. The Immortal Gods give a long Life to your Majesty. The
Judgments of the Gods appear in your Elevation.

Here Alexander gave them thanks; and then they went on again.

Antoninus Alexander, the Gods save you. Antoninus Aurelius, the Gods preserve
you. Antoninus the Pious, the Gods preserve you. We beseech your Majesty to
take the name of Antoninus. To do that Honor to the good Emperors of that
Name, to be called an Antoninus. Purify the Name of the Antoninusses. What
Heliogabalus has Deformed, let your Majesty Purify. Re-establish the Honor
of the Name of the Antoninusses. Let the blood of the Antoninusses know it self
again. Antoninus Marcus has been injured. Let your Majesty Avenge him. Avenge
the injury done to Verus Antoninus. Avenge the injury done to Antoninus
Caracallus; whose Fortitude at least was admirable. Worse than ever was
Commodus, was Heliogabalus only; who really was no Emperor, nor an Antoninus,
nor a Citizen, nor a Senator, nor a Gentleman, nor a Roman. Health and Life
attend your Majesty. The Lives of the Antoninusses attend Alexander, and let
him Prosper. Let him be called an Antoninus, and let him Prosper. Let Antoninus
Consecrate again the Temples of the Antoninusses. Let Antoninus surmount the
Parthians and Persians. Let a Sacred Person receive a Sacred Name. The Gods
preserve you. In you, Antoninus, we have all things: with you, Antoninus, we
have all things:

After these Accclamations, the Emperor took the Liberty to speak thus to them.

Fathers of the Senate,

THis is not the first of my Obligations to you. I am to thank you for the
Honor of my Name of Caesar, which you gave me so long since, and for my Life
which you also have preserved. I thank you, as for the Empire, so for the Style
of Augustus, which you now give me; and for the Pontifical, the Tribunitian,
and the Proconsular Powers; all which by altogether a new Example, you have
liberally conferred upon me in one day.

The Senate replied, and cried;

As your Majesty has accepted these things, so accept the Name of Antoninus.
Let not the Senate, let not the Princes the Antoninusses be unworthy to receive
this favor of your Majesty. The Gods save the Emperor Antoninus. The Gods
preserve you. Let a Coin be made in the Name of Antoninus. Let Antoninus
Consecrate again the Temples of the Antoninusses.

The Emperor resumed his Discourse, and said;

Fathers of the Senate, I earnestly desire you not to engage me to be called to
the necessity of satisfying so great a Name as that is, when my Own, which I
have from my Birth, and which is but a Foreign one, I find is too Burdensome to
me. For so it is with these Great Names, they are Burdens; and not to answer
them, it is as ill as if the Name of Cicero should be born by a Mute, or the
Name of Varro, by a Blockhead, or that of the Pious Metellus by a Villain. And
that the Gods may avert so ill an Omen, who is there that can be pleased to
see, that a Name from whence great Actions are expected, is not sustained in
its Grandeur, by him that bears it; if he is in a Station so to do.

Here the Senate interrupted him, with the like Acclamations as before; and
then he went on.

You know, Gentlemen, to what a height of Glory, or rather to what a Divinity
the Name of Antoninus has been carried in the Persons of four Princes; whose
Piety, whose Learning, whose Innocence, and whose Fortitude, if we consider
them severally; What could be more Religious than Antoninus Pius? What more
knowing than Marcus Antoninus? What more sincere than Verus Antoninus? And what
more Brave and Valorous than Antoninus Caracallus? I am not willing to mention
Commodus Antoninus upon this occasion to you; except it is to say that he was
so much the worse, because with that ill life of his, he yet continued in the
use of the Name of Antoninus. Antoninus Diadumenus, had not time, nor Age to
show himself: an Art of his Father, had put that Name upon him.

Here the Senate broke out into the like Acclamations as before: and then he
said,

But especially you may easily remember, Gentlemen, How things lately went,
when the Filthiest not only of all Men, but Brutes, took it upon him to bear
the Name of Antoninus; who at the same time in Impurity and Luxury outdid Nero,
Vitellius, Commodus, and all their wicked Confederates. You remember, what
Sighs passed at that time, in all Companies of the People and the Gentry: and
how they all cried with one Voice, that this Wretch is not fit to be at all
called an Antoninus. This Pest violates that Holy Name.

Here the Senate replied in these Acclamations.

The Gods Protect us from all the like evils again. We fear them not under your
Reign. We are secure under the Government of your Majesty. Your Majesty is
above all Vice. Your Majesty has surmounted, has vanquished the Temptation of
all such Crimes and Disgraces. You are an Honor to the Name of Antoninus. We
are certain of this; we are well persuaded of it; we presume upon it, without
the fear of ever repenting ourselves: we have approved you from your Youth, and
this day, we are confirmed in our Sentiments.

The Emperor replied again and said,

It is not, Fathers of the Senate, that I apprehend Refuses the Name Antoninus.
my falling at any time into such Vices, that I desire to decline a Name, which
is to all so Venerable; nor yet can I distrust the Merits of my past Life so,
as to be ashamed to take it upon me. But it is in Truth, because in the first
place, I do not delight to assume what is the Name of a strange Family; and
next, because I see very well, that it is to impose too great a burden upon me.

Here the Senate repeated their Acclamations as before. He went on,

For with as much reason as I should take the Name of Antoninus, I might take
that of Trajan too: I might as well take that of Titus: I might as well take
that of Vespasian.

The Senate answered him to this.

Your Majesty is an Augustus, and accepts that Name; so be you also an
Antoninus.

The Emperor said,

I see very well, now, Fathers of the Senate, what it is that moves you to
press this Name upon us. You think, that we may as well be called Antonini,
although it is the Name of another's Family, as all we who succeed to the
Empire are entitled in our Styles Augusti: which we are, because we have an
hereditary Right to be so, as being as it were by Adoption, the Sons of the
first Augustus, who was the Founder of the Empire. The Antoninusses themselves
were called Augusti. Now Antoninus Pius adopted Marcus and Verus, to be his
Sons and Successors. This Adoption made it a Right to them, to take his Name,
which became also hereditary to Commodus, by reason that he was the Son of
Marcus; but without this Right, it was a Trick of his Father, which put the
Name upon Diadumenus. It was affected in the Person of Caracallus, and it was
profaned to the last degree by Heliogabalus.

Here the Senate cried,

The Gods save the Emperor Alexander, our Augustus. We congratulate your
Modesty, your Prudence, your Innocence, your Integrity. This shows us what will
be the excellency of your Reign. We are ravished at it. Your Majesty will
direct the Senate hereafter to make a Choice of the best Princes. Your Majesty
will justify the Judgments of the Senate. The Gods save Alexander, our
Augustus. Let Alexander our Augustus, consecrate the Temples, of the
Antoninusses. Our Caesar, our Augustus, our Emperor, the Gods save you.
Conquer, Prosper, and Reign many Years.

The Emperor resumed himself again, and said,

I understand then, I have obtained from you, Fathers of the Senate, what I
desired. I take this very obligingly, and I give you, and owe you infinite
Thanks. It shall be my endeavor, that my own Name, which I bring with me, the
first of any upon the Throne of Rome, may become such as not to be unworthy to
be coveted by others after me, and to be recommended by the good Opinions of
this most Pious Senate.

Here the Senate cried,

Alexander the Great, the Gods save you. Though your Majesty refused the Name of
Antoninus, receive the Title of the Great. The Gods save Alexander the Great.
They repeated this often.

The Emperor said,

You have offered to me, Gentlemen, in this, a and the Appellation of Great.
thing of a greater difficulty to do, than it was to assume the Name of
Antoninus; to which if I had consented, it might have been attributed to either
my Affinity to the Princes of that Name, or to a mutual Love of the same Name,
upon the same Throne. But why me, to take your Title of Great? What have I yet
done, that is so? If Alexander and Pompey were so called, yet it was after the
great Exploits of the one, and the great Triumphs of the other. Therefore speak
no more of this, my honored Fathers, and rather than suggest to me the Title
of the Great, believe me to be one of yourselves, and you certainly are a
magnificent Assembly.

After this, they repeated the Acclamation, The Gods save Aurelius Alexander
our Augustus, and so ended this matter.

There were several other things done in the Senate, that day. But when the
House had risen, the Emperor returned as it were in Triumph home, with much
more Honor upon him by refusing, than if he had accepted of those supposed
Names. His Firmness to himself in it, and the entire Gravity of his behavior
gave him a Reputation, which every body was sensible of, to observe, that the
whole Senate together was not able to over-persuade one young Man. He
discovered the same Vigor of mind in his Affairs with the Soldiers, and a
wonderful and singular Constancy in correcting their Insolences; so that
although he could not be persuaded by all the solicitations of the Senate, to
receive either the Name of Antoninus, or of Alexander the Great; yet Why called
Severus.
the Soldiers fixed upon him that of Alexander Severus; and this not only
conciliated him a great Respect in his own time, but it will much redound to
his Glory to all Posterity; considering that it is derived purely from his own
Bosom, and it is what his intrinsic Merit and Courage, directed them to give
him. He did not stick indeed to cashier whole Legions at a time, for daring to
mutiny; nor to animadvert very severely upon the Soldiers, that had committed
any thing which but seemed to be unjust, wherein he exceeded the Exactness and
Boldness of all the Princes his predecessors, since the formation of the Empire
under Julius Caesar.

There were some Omens which from his Birth had presignified his future Reign,
which were these. First, the day of his Birth was the Omens of his future Reign.
same with the day of the Death of Alexander the Great; in whose Temple his
Mother was delivered of him, and whose Name he therefore took from thence. Then
the same day that he was born, a Pigeon's Egg of the color of Purple, was
taken, and by a good Woman presented to his Mother; from whence the Soothsayers
said, That he would one day, and it would be quickly too, be an Emperor, but
not that he would reign long. In the mean time, whilst his Mother was delivered
of him in the Temple, a Picture of the Emperor Trajan, which was hanging over
the head of her Bed at home, fell down into the Bed. His Nurse was of the Name
of Olympias; and the Mother of Alexander the Great was of the same. His
Foster-Father was a Countryman, of the Name of Philip, and the Father of
Alexander the Great was the same. Upon the day that he was born, they say,
there appeared a Star of the first magnitude in the Heavens, all the day long
over the City of Arca Caesarea; and the Sun was crowned with a bright Circle
about it, whilst it pointed upon his Father's House. A Laurel in his Father's
Garden which was set by the side of a Peach, in one year had over-topped the
Peach. The Peach being malum Persicum; this, those who pretended to Augury,
said, was an Omen that he should one day Conquer the Persians. The Night before
his Mother was delivered of him, she dreamt she should be brought to Bed of a
little purple-coloured Dragon; and his Father had dreamt at the same time that
he was carried up to the Heavens upon the Wings of the Image of Victory, which
is in the House of the Senate at Rome. He consulted, when he was a Youth, with
a Soothsayer about his Fortune in the way of drawing Lots. The first Lot which
he drew said, That the Empire of the Heavens, the Earth, and the Sea, awaited
him; by which it was easy to understand, that he should one day be Deified.
The second said, That the Empire paramount, awaited him; which was plainly no
other, than the Empire of Rome. Another Lot that he drew, was these Verses of
Virgil, Aen. 6.

Excudent alii spirantia mollius era.
Tu regere imperio populos, Roman, memento:
Hae tibi erunt Arts, pacique imponere morem:
Parcere subjectis, and debellare superbis.
That is, That his Arts should be Government, and the giving of Laws of War and
Peace; and that he should be the Minister of Mercy and Justice to the People.
There were several other signs of his future Grandeur besides all these. He had
a Fire and a Vivacity in his Eyes extraordinary. He looked one down with it,
you could not hold your Eyes against his long. His Mind discovered a Power of
Divination in it very frequently, so that he spoke of things to come, as really
they did. He had a Memory so happy, that none but Acholius, has said, that he
was once prompted or assisted in any thing.

Coming very young to the Empire, he acted altogether in all things with the
Advice of his Mother, as if she had reigned in Conjunction with him. And indeed
show was a good and pious Lady, but covetous, and loved to amass Money to a
fault. He began his Reign with a general purgation of all the Magistrates and
Officers of the promotion of the impure Heliogabalus; being Persons whom that
Prince had preferred to the greatest Dignities out of the very Lees of Mankind.
He cleared the State of them. He purged the Senate and the Order of the Reforms
the Government.
Gentry of them. He purged the Tribes of the City. He turned out all obscene
and infamous Persons from all Places in the Court, in which last, he made such
a Reform, that retained not a Mouth, but what was necessary. Because an
Emperor, he said, was an ill Steward of the People; who out of their Bowels
feeds a Company of unnecessary Mouths, that are useless to the State. He looked
carefully after the Magazines of Provisions, and the administration thereof to
the Soldiers; out of whose allowances, if the Tribunes had made any unlawful
Gain to themselves, he punished it with Death. As for Causes and Matters of
Law, he ordered them first to be well considered in all their Circumstances by
his Ministers, and his Council Learned in the Law, whereof Ulpian was the
Chief; and when they had done, he directed them to make a Report of their
Judgments to him.

He moderated an infinite number of Laws concerning the Rights of the People,
and those of the Exchequer. In which cases he always communicated them with
twenty great Lawyers, besides others who were wise and eloquent Men, to the
number of no less than fifty generally; so that there were as many Votes to a
Constitution of his, as to an Act of the Senate. These Persons spoke admirably
well in his Councils; every one's suffrage was asked, which they writ down one
after another; time being allowed them first to examine things very well, and
to weigh what they had to say, because no one should complain that he had been
obliged to give his Judgment upon such Matters of Importance, without a due
premeditation. Then he had this Custom, that if it was a thing of Right to be
tr(...)ted upon, he called only the Learned and the Eloquent Doctors to speak
to it. But if it was a Military Affair, he sent for the old Officers and
Soldiers, Men skilled in War and Encampments, and the Situation of places; and
together with those he particularly advised with such as understood that
History; of whom he enquired, what had at any time been done in the like
rencounters, by the ancient Emperors, or other great Captains, whether at home
or abroad. If at any time he happened to see a Man who lay under the Character
of having robbed the Province under his Government, he was ready with his
Fingers as it were (says Encolpius, who was one that was very familiar with
him) to pull out his Eyes, he had such a hatred to that baseness. To which
Septimius adds, that although they had not been as yet convicted, yet he had such
an aversion to them, for the Scandal only, that if he saw them by any sudden
Accident, the Commotion he was in, would set him vomiting, and all his Face on
a Fire, and he would not be able to speak for some time. And certainly, as one
called Septimius Arabinus, who had been tried for this, but acquitted in the
Reign of Heliogabalus, came one day in Company with some of the Senators to
salute him, he no sooner saw him, but he cried; O ye supreme Powers! O Jupiter!
O ye immortal Gods! Is Arabinus alive, and a Senator? It may be, he hopes for
the same favor from me, that he had from Heliogabalus. But I am sorry he takes
me to be such a Fool.

The Complement in saluting hi^ was ^ery plain, and by his own Name, Hail
Alexander. If any one had pretended to do, or say any thing that was sweeter
than the Custom was to be, he was sent away as a Flatterer, if the place
permitted it; or he was laughed at sufficiently in case that his Condition did
not make him subject to a greater Affront. He ordered to all the Senators, as
they had saluted him, Chairs to sit down. But he declared to admit none to pay
their Reverences to him in this kind, but Persons of Honesty and good Repute;
forbidding all such as knew themselves to be otherwise, by the common Crier, to
come near him; for if he once discovered them, it should cost them their Lives.
He refused to be adored as Heliogabalus was, after the manner of the Kings of
Persia. The most corrupt Magistrates, he said, always complain the most of
Poverty, thinking by that means to conceal the Crimes of their Briberies and
ill Lives. This he said often, and it was his real Sentiment. To which he added
a known Observation upon this Subject, That he who takes away a great deal, and
gives but a little to Vouchers to speak for him, will however always be safe.

He chose himself one Captain of the Guards, His Deference to the Senate.
and appointed a Governor of the City of Rome entirely by the Advice of the
Senate. He made a second Captain of the Guards, of one who had retired out of
the way, purposely to avoid it; saying, The unwillingness of a Man to accept of
Commands in the State, was the best Recommendation to them. He never created a
Senator without the Concurrence to it of all the Members of that House that
were present; whose Votes were asked round, after Testimonies given of the Life
and Manners of the Party to be chosen, by grave Persons; who if they falsified,
were to be degraded, and cast into the lowest Class of all the People; and
sometimes condemned, as in Cases of Perjury, to lose their Estates, and be
banished for ever without Mercy. He created no Men Senators, but upon great
Recommendations; saying, That a Man ought to be very considerable, th(...) is
worthy to be so advanced; and he never neither advanced the Sons of
infranchised Servants, to be Gentlemen; because he said, The Order of the
Gentry was the Seminary of the Senate.

He was a Prince of that great Temper, that His excellent Temper.
he never suffered his Servants to part with him when once they were placed. He
was so courteous and so gracious to every body, that he visited when sick, his
Friends, of whatever Condition they were. He desired every one to speak their
Sentiments freely to him, and he hearkened to what they said patiently; and
ordered things according to their Advices, as much as in Justice it was
possible. And if any thing by them had not been done so well as it ought, he
convinced them of it, but it was without haughtiness and without bitterness. He
obliged them all to sit down upon Chairs by him, and informed himself always
about the absent. In fine, his Mother Mammaea, and Memmia his Wife, who was the
Daughter of Sulpitius, of the Consular Order, and the Granddaughter of
Catulus, objected to him his too great Civility, and told him, It weakened his
Sovereign Power, and rendered it despicable; to which he answered, That on the
contrary it was the way to live long, and with safety. He passed no day without
doing something that was sweet, obliging and pious; but yet with that measure,
as not to exhaust the public Coffers. Rarely any Estates were confiscated into
the Exchequer in his Time. He remitted the Tribute to several Cities, toward
their public Buildings. He lent Money out of the Exchequer at four in the
hundred. And to a great many poor, he lent them* Money without use, to purchase
themselves Grounds, under the condition of paying the Debt only in the Product.
He added to his Captains of the Guards the Senatorial Dignity, His Care of his
Soldiery.
which had seldom or never at all been done before in other times; because it
was inconsistent then, to be a Captain of the Guards, and a Senator, as Marius
Maximus has often observed. But Alexander Severus was willing that his
Captains of the Guards should be Senators for this reason, because no body
should have the Power to judge a Senator, but who was himself a Senator. He had
the Muster-Rolls of his Armies in all Parts, always in his Cabinet by him; and
when he was alone, he was reviewing their Accounts, Numbers, Actions, Officers,
Stations, and Appointments; so that wherever they were, he had a perfect
knowledge of them, and upon occasion, he mentioned a great many of their Names.
He kept a Register of all such as merited to be considered for their Services.
He refreshed his Memory of things, by looking into his own Memoirs, in which he
set down the dates, and who, and what every one was, and upon whose
recommendation promoted. He assisted the Convoys of the annual Provision of
Corn for the People of Rome in that manner; that whereas Heliogabalus had
dissipated the Stores which were amassed in the Granaries, he re-established
them again at his proper Charge and Expense.

He encouraged the Merchants to come to Rome to Traffic, by allowing to them
great Immunities. The quantity of the Oil, which the Emperor Severus had gained
to the City, but which Heliogabalus had diminished, by putting the Stores into
the hands of Men, corrupted with all sorts of Vice, he entirely reestablished.
He set up a great many Mechanic Works at Rome. He tolerated the Jews, and the
Christians. He deferred so much to the Chief Priests, and to the Quindecimviri,
and the Augurs, in Sacred Things, that after some Causes of that kind had been
heard and determined by himself, he has suffered those Persons to re-examin
them, and to decide them otherwise. Such of the Presidents of the Provinces, as
he found that he should truly esteem, being Men of Integrity and Honor, and
whose Praises, were not directed by a Spirit of Faction, he always took in the
Coach with him abroad, and made them Rich Presents, saying, That as much as
others who are corrupt in their Governments ought to be turned out and
beggered; these deserve to be purchased and enriched. The People of Rome
petitioning him to lower the Prices of Provisions, when they were one time at
an excessive height; he asked what sort of Provisions particularly they were,
that they thought too dear. They answered, Beef and Pork. Now he did not think
fit to fix a cheaper Price upon them immediately, according to the Letter of
their desire; but instead of that, he ordered, that no body should kill a Sow,
Pig, Cow or Heifer, under such an Age prefixed: And by this means, that which
before was eight Pence a Pound, was at length brought down to two Pence.

He hearkened to the Complaints of the Soldiers against their Tribunes, in that
manner, that if he found the Tribunes in a Crime, he punished them according to
the Quality of it, without Favor. He made enquiry about all sorts of Persons
by his secret service Men, whom he continually employed, to others unknown. He
kept his Slaves always in the Clothes of Slaves, his infranchised Men in the
Habits of Free men. He suffered no Eunuchs He slights the Eunuchs.
to be in any Places about himself, but left them to serve his Wife in the
quality of her Slaves. He reduced them to a certain Number, and suffered them
to have to do with nothing in the Court, but the Baths of the Ladies; whereas
Heliogabalus, who was the Slave of these Slaves, had preferred many of them to
great Offices. He took from them even their ancient Privileges; saying, They
were a third Species of humane kind that ought not to be seen or employed
amongst Men, and scarcely neither amongst Women of Honor. One of them
particularly who had pretended to have an Interest in him, and had received of
a Gentleman a hundred pieces of Gold to assist him in something, he crucified
for an Example upon the Highway.

He changed several Praetorian Provinces into the nature of Praesidial
Provinces, and disposed of the Proconsular Provinces according to the will of
the Senate. He forbad the use of mixed Baths at Rome of both Sexes together, as
they had been forbidden formerly under the Reigns of other pious Princes, till
only Heliogabalus had revived them. He suffered not the Tax upon the Pimps,
Whores, and Burdashes to be returned into his own Coffers, but he assigned it
toward the Reparation of the Theater, the Cirque, and the Amphitheatre. He had
sometime had the Thoughts of making a Law against the Burdashes, as the Emperor
Philip afterward did. But he was afraid that it would only occasion more
lewdnesses to be coveted in private, because Mankind run with a greater gust
upon some things when they are denied them; and the prohibition increases the
desire to obtain. He imposed a Tax upon the Drapers, Glass-makers, Tanners,
Locksmiths, Silversmiths, Goldsmiths, and several other Crafts, out of which he
ordered the Baths to be fitted and maintained for the public use of the
People. He furnished the same Baths with Wood and Oil, for the Lamps in the
Night, whereas before they were not used to be opened till Nine in the Morning,
and at Sunset were shut up again.

It is not altogether true, what some Persons have writ, that his Reign was
without Blood. For as the Soldiers had given him the Name of Severus; he made
it appear in the Corrections that he exacted, that he had not that Name for
nothing. He repaired the Works of His public Works.
the ancient Emperors, and added many new ones to them of his own. Amongst
which are the Baths of his Name, hard by those of Nero, which are supplied by
an Aqueduct that carries also his Name at this day. He added thereunto a
Plantation of a Grove, in the place of a private House adjoining, which he
bought, and afterward expressly pulled it down for this purpose. He finished
the Galleries to the Baths of Antoninus Caracallus, and adorned that whole
Work. He first brought up the Alexandrian Work of Building and Paving with two
sorts of Marble together, the Porphyry and the Lacedaemonian; with which he
adorned the Court. He set up several Colossusses in the City, fashioned by the
hand of the most excellent Artists that he could procure from all Parts. He
made a great many Medals with impresses of his Portraiture, some of fine Brass,
but the most of Gold. He forbad Women of an ill Repute, of what Quality soever,
to come to visit his Mother or his Wife. He made many Harangues to the People,
in places about the City, as heretofore the Tribunes and the ancient Consuls
did. He thrice gave the People a Largess, and thrice the Soldiers a Bounty; and
to the Bread and the Corn which he gave to the People in their Largesses, he
added Portions of Flesh.

He brought down the Use of Money to four He reforms the Interest of Money.
in the hundred, at the hands of the Moneychangers, and the Usurers themselves.
As for the Senators in this case, he first of all had ordered that no Senators
should take Use, unless it was some Present in the way of acknowledgment, for
having assisted a poor Friend in his Necessity. But afterward he allowed them
to take a moiety of the Use, which was paid to the Usurers; but then nothing in
the way of a Present at all. He translated the Statues of the great Men from
all parts of the City, into the Forum of Trajan. Paulus and Ulpian were in
singular esteem with him, and the Captains of his Guards; the latter had been
always his Counselor, and both of them Assessors to Papinian. He had built a
Royal Other of hsi public Works.
Structure of his Name, betwixt the Field of Mars and the Bars of Agrippa,
being one hundred Foot in breadth, and one thousand in length, and supported
all by Columns; but however, he could not perfect it, because he was prevented
by his Death. He beautified extremely the Temples of the Egyptian Deities, Isis
and Serapis, furnishing them with Images, and Vessels of the Marble of Delos,
and with all the things belonging to the mystical Ceremonies of that Worship.
He was entirely affectionate and pious toward his Mother Mammaea; insomuch,
that he gave her Name to some Buildings which he added to the Palace at Rome;
as also to a Royal Mansion, and to a Pond which he made at Baiae, where they do
still retain it at this day. In the same place he built other magnificent
Structures, and made Ponds of a prodigious greatness (by letting in the Sea,
when he pleased) in honor of his other relations. The Bridges of Trajan he
repaired almost in all places where they were; some he built New himself, but
for those that he had repaired, he still continued upon them the Name of Trajan.

He was sometime thinking to appoint unto every degree of Men, from Slaves to
the highest Magistrates and Officers of all sorts, a particular Habit, whereby
they should be distinguished; which he said, would be a Bridle, especially upon
all the Slaves, and would keep them also from mixing and confounding themselves
with the Free-People; but Ulpian and Paulus did not approve of this, because,
they said, it would be an occasion of a great deal of Mischief, should Men be
easily disposed to quarrel. So then he judged it was enough, that the Order of
the Gentry should be distinguished from that of the Senators or Nobility, by
the quality of their Gowns; the latter having their Gowns purled with Knaps or
Studs of purple of a larger size, and the others with less. He permitted the
Senators to wear within the City, against the Cold and the Rain, the Paenula,
that is, a Hanging Coat, which otherwise is a Vestment only proper for the
Road; but however, he forbad the Dames to use the like sort of Wear, that is,
Mantles within the City; but upon the Road, they might do, as they pleased.

He had a greater Command of the Eloquence His Seize in Arts.
of the Greek Tongue, than of the Latin; and he made no bad Verse. He loved
Music, and was skilled in the knowledge of Astrology, which was taught and
publicly professed at Rome by his Command. He was also very well versed in the
Science of the Soothsayers, both as to the Entrails of the Sacrifices, and as
to the Flights and Notes of Birds; insomuch, that he outdid in these, the
Biscayners of Spain, and the Augurs of Pannonia. He was a Geometrician; he
painted admirably, he sung very well; but yet never but in the hearing of his
own Domestics. He writ the Lives of the good Princes his predecessors in
Verse; he played well upon the Harp, Flute, and Organ; he sounded well upon the
Trumpet, only he did not make this to appear after he was Emperor. He was the
best at the Exercises of the Body of any of his time; those of Arms he
performed perfectly well; and how great a Captain he was, his Wars leave us no
room to doubt, in which he acquitted himself so happily, and reaped so much
Glory. He was only Thrice pleased to accept the Consulate, and then he always
substituted others to his place with the first opportunity. He was a most
severe Judge against Thieves and Robbers; with, all the rigor imaginable, he
condemned them, and said, That they were ordinarily the occasion of all the
Crimes that were daily committed, and that they were the only Plagues and
Enemies of the State. A certain Clerk once having given in a false breviate to
the Council, he ordered him to be cut into the Sinews of his Fingers, so, as
never to be able to write again, and then to be banished for ever. He set up
Colossusses, and Statues, some on foot, and some on Horseback, to the honor of
the deified Emperors in the Forum of Nerva, with Inscriptions upon Columns of
Brass containing all their memorable Actions, after the Example of the Marble
Statues of the great Men, and the Elogiums of their Lives, which Augustus set
up in the Forum that bears his Name. He desired to appear to derive the Origin
of his Blood from the Romans; for he was ashamed to be called a Syrian; and was
much affronted by that Name, by the People of Antioch, Egypt, and Alexandria,
when once they called him, not only a Syrian, but a High Priest, and a Ruler of
the Synagogue, as if he was a Jew too.

Before I give an account of his Arms and his Military Expeditions, I will here
premise a few things touching his particular Life, and his domestic Affairs.
He had in his private Oratory within the Court; that is, there were indeed two
Oratories there which he used, but this was the His domestic Deportment.
chief, and the holiest, the Images of the several deified Emperors of the best
Note, and the greatest Virtue, together with which he had the Images of other
pious Souls, whom he respected as Gods; and amongst the rest, Apollonius
Thyanaeus; and as a Writer of those times also says, CHRIST, Abraham, Orpheus,
and such others, as likewise the Images of his own Ancestors. Hither therefore
in the morning early, if he had the leisure, he came to perform his Devotions.
But else, if he did not do this, he either took the Air in his Coach, or went a
Fishing, or Hunting, or Walking, according to the quality of the place. After
this, if he had time, he bestowed himself for a good hour, to the care of the
public Affairs, which indeed required so much the less of his attention, as
both the Military and the Civil Affairs were treated amongst his Counselors,
who were Men Holy and Faithful, and were never to be corrupted for Money; so
that their Resolutions finally passed, unless he had offered something himself
that was New. But yet if necessity so required, he was set down to Business in
a morning before it was day, and continued in it many hours, and never thought
the time tedious, nor retired either more to appearance, pleased or displeased,
than he came; his Countenance being always equal, and being of a Soul equally
contented with every thing that passed. He was certainly one of a great
Prudence, which was not to be imposed upon in any thing; for though it were
attempted with never so good a Grace, he discovered it, and obliged the Author
to repent of his Labor.

After his application to the public Business, whatever it was, Military or
Civil, he employed the greatest part of his leisure to Reading. He read the
Greek Books, and amongst the His addiction to Learning.
rest, particularly those of the Commonwealth of Plato. When he read in Latin,
he delighted in nothing more, than the Offices of Cicero, and his Books upon
the same Subject of a Commonwealth. Sometimes he read the Orators and the
Poets, and amongst others particularly, Serenus Sammonicus, who was one that he
had personally known, and had much loved. He was much pleased with the Verse of
Horace. He read very much also the Life of Alexander the Great, whom he
endeavored to imitate; but in whom, he condemned his Drinking, and his Cruelty
toward his Friends; if yet those Imputations upon him are true, because there
are good Authors that do defend him, as to the one and the other, to whom this
Prince gave a great Credit. After Reading, he moderately employed himself in
Exercises of the Body, as Wrestling, Tennis, His bodily Exercises.
Running, or Fencing. Then he was anointed, and afterward put himself into the
Bath, which was seldom or never a Bath of warm Water, but of the natural Waters
of cold Baths, where he continued about an hour, Fasting, he drank about a Pint
and a half of cold Spring Water. Then when he had done with the Bath, he took a
Breakfast upon Bread and Milk, and Eggs and Wine. After this, when the hour of
Dinner was come, he dined. Sometimes he deferred to eat till Supper, but for
the most part he dined. And he was often served with the Oglio, which was the
great Dish of Hadrian, and which Marius Maximus has mentioned in his account
of the Life of that Prince.

In the Afternoon, he bestowed himself constantly to the reading and signing of
Letters and Orders to one part or other, in which he was attended by his
Secretaries, and the Masters of the Requests; whom, if they could not
conveniently stand by reason of their indisposition, he permitted to sit down,
whilst the Clerks read over to him the things that they had writ, to which he
added with his own hand what he thought convenient, and changed some Terms for
others, that he thought were more elegant and more just. After these were
dispatched, he admitted the Company of all his Friends together, and spoke to
them all, but he saw none of them ever alone, but his Captain of the Guards,
and particularly Ulpian, whom he had always had near him, to give him Light in
the knowledge that he professed of the things that concern Law and Justice. If
he admitted any other privately to him, yet it was by the introduction of
Ulpian. Virgil, he said, was the Plato of the Poets. He had the Images of him
and Cicero, in his second or lesser Oratory, together with that of Achilles and
others of other great Men. But for that of Alexander the Great, he had
consecrated him amongst the Gods of his chief Oratory, and the best Persons,
whom he more especially honored there. He never did an Injury to any of his
Friends, nor to any of the Officers of State, or Servants of his Household. He
always deferred the Judgment of particular Affairs to the Captains of the
Guards. And a Captain of the Guards, he said, who has done any thing to
deserve to lose his place, ought rather to be secured and arraigned, than to be
dismissed. If at any time he discharged an Officer, he ordered it to be
accompanied with a Complement, That the State thanked him for his Service. At
the same time he failed not to gratify him in that manner, that he might live
afterward a private Life with Credit. He furnished him with Grounds, Oxen,
Horses, Corn, Iron, Materials to build himself a House, and Marble to adorn it,
and Laborers to assist him; Silver or Gold he seldom gave to any, unless it
was to the Soldiers, saying, It would be a Crime in him, who was the public
Steward of the People, to employ that in superfluities, or upon the Pleasures
of himself or others, which the Provinces had contributed to serve the
Necessities of the State.

He remitted the City of Rome the Duties His Kindness to the City of Rome.
which upon certain accounts they were to pay into the Exchequer, and
particularly the Duty which they were to pay to him, according to Custom, upon
the occasion of his elevation to the Empire. He constituted fourteen Curators
to the several Quarters of the City, out of the Persons of the Consular Order,
whom, together with the Governor of the City, he ordered to take the
Cognizance of the Civil Causes, in such sort, that all of them, or the greater
part, should be present, when any thing was to be done. He distributed all the
Vintners, Victuallers, Regraters, Hosiers, and generally the Persons of all
Crafts, into Companies and Corporations, to whom he appointed Governors and
Officers to judge in the Dispatches that might arise amongst them in the Matter
of their several Crafts and Professions. He never gave to the Players those
Gratuities which other Emperors have done. He made a difficulty to pay them
their Salaries, and he took away from them the rich Clothes which had been
given them by Heliogabalus. His band of Archers or Pensioners, who were a Guard
used for Pomp and Show, more than for Service, he clothed, not with rich, but
yet proper and convenient Habits, without superfluity; nor were his Standards
or other Royal Habiliments rich; saying, It was not for a Prince to seek his
esteem in fine Clothes, but to recommend his Reign by Actions of Virtue and
Bravery. As for himself, he wore the coarse shagged Coats of the Emperor
Septimius Severus, and Wastcoats all plain, with no other embroidery of Gold at
them, and only a single Border of purple.

In his public Entertainments, he knew not Moderation of his public
Entertainments.
what it was to be served in Vessels of Gold. His Cups were ordinary, but
always very neat. All the Silver-service of his Table, never exceeded the
quantity of two hundred Pound in weight. The Dwarfs of either Sex, the Jesters,
the Singers, the Actors, the Mimicks, that had before retained to the Court, he
gave away amongst the People. And for such of them as were of no use, he
ordered them to be sent to places, where they were maintained at the public
Expense, because they should not be troublesome in the way of Beggars. The
Eunuchs whom Heliogabalus had made his great Companions in Lewdness, and had
promoted them to high Offices, he distributed amongst his Ministers, with this
Order, that if for the future they did not return to good Manners, it should be
lawful for them to put them to death without attending the Authority of the
Magistrate. Women of a Licentious Life, of whom he had heard that the number
was prodigious, he ordered to be sold, and the Burdashes banished, with whom
that Pest Heliogabalus had taken his infamous, and abominable Pleasures. Not a
Servant in his time at a public Banquet appeared in a Coat embroidered with
Gold. To his private Table, he admitted either Ulpian, or some other Learned
Men, whose Conversation, he said, was not only a Pleasure to him, but it was
Food to his Mind. At other times, when he eat alone, he had a Book with him
upon the Table, where he read, and generally it was some Greek Book, though he
read also in the Latin Poets. His public Banquets were performed with the same
simplicity as his private Repasts; and no difference but in the greater Number
of the Tables, and the Company; which sometime being excessive, it rather
offended him; saying, It was like Dining in a Playhouse, or in the Cirque.

He took no pleasure to hear the Orators recite Panegyricks, or the Poets
Verses in his own Praise; saying as Pescennius Niger had done, That it was an
idle thing. But Orations or Verses upon the Praise of the great Men amongst the
Ancients, he heard freely, and was very well pleased, when either they had
Alexander the Great for their subject, or some His Respect for Alexander the
Great.
of the excellent Emperors his Predecessors, or of the virtuous Personages of
Rome in the ancient times. He often went to hear the Rhetoricians, and the
Greek and Latin Poets in the public Schools upon such Subjects. He loved to
hear also the eloquent Pleadings of the Advocates at Law, whether before
himself, or before the Governor of the City. It was very agreeable to him to
preside at the public Games; particularly those that are in the Honor of
Alexander the Great. He desired to be retired ordinarily after Dinner, and in
the hour of his Levee. He never saw Persons alone, as I have said, and it was
for this reason, because he had found, that they, to whom he had sometime
granted that favor, had misrepresented their Conversation with him to the
World. Particularly Vetronius Turinus, was one, who had very much abused the
Familiarity, Vetronius Turinus his Folly and Punishment.
which he had treated him with. He dishonored the Empire of Alexander, as of a
Man, that was so stupid and so impertinent, that he governed him which way he
pleased, and made him believe whatever he would; and this he pretended to make
all the World believe, in order only to advance the Credit of his Interest, and
so to Cheat them by the means out of their Money. But at last Alexander
surprised him with this Artifice. He sent a Person to address himself to him
publicly for some thing; but afterward to take him aside, and to pray him to
speak secretly in his favor: who promised him that he would; and afterward
assuring him, that he had done his Business to the Emperor, when really he had
not spoken one word to him about it, and acting the same false part over again
a second time, and all the while exacting and receiving great recompenses for
his Services. The Emperor, who was made acquainted with all that had passed,
caused him to be accused and prosecuted; and proving to him before all the
World, upon Evidence, what Sums he had received, and what empty Promises, and
false Reports he had made to his Client to Cheat him out of the same, he
Condemned him to dye, and the manner of his Execution to be thus; that he
should be tied to a Stake, and there be quite smoaked to death with green Wood
and Stubble; the Common Crier in the mean time Proclaiming his Words were
Smoke, and so he dies with Smoke. For this was not the only Fact of the kind
that he had committed. The Emperor for fear of appearing Cruel, had made a
particular scrutiny into his Life before he Condemned him; and found that he
often had received Money of both sides in Causes, whereof he undertook the
Protection; and had sold the Events of things, in which he had had no part, and
taken Money of all, who had been admitted to the Offices of Praetors, or other
considerable Charges in the State.

With a great Retinue did this Emperor often go to the Public Shows; but he
was extremely His M^ration in his Living and Diet.
sparing of his Liberality to the Actors, and said, That those Public
Charioteers, and Huntsmen of the Cirque, and the Players of the Stage, ought to
be so entertained, as we do the Servants, Huntsmen, Coachmen, and Jesters of
our private Families. In his Repasts he was neither Sumptuous, nor too Frugal:
his Table was neither splendid nor mean; but very proper without any
superfluity. His Carpets, sometimes trimmed with Studs of Purple or Scarlet;
but never of Cloth of Gold; as Heliogabalus had used; and as some say before
him, it had been used by the Emperor Hadrian. In a word, his Table was served
always with great moderation. He indulged himself the most in Fruit. He eat
very heartily, and so did he also drink; but without excess. He washed always
in cold Water, and in the Summer he drank of the Wine of the infusion of Roses;
which was the only thing that he had retained, of all the fine Wines and
Methods of the invention of Heliogabalus.

It is observable, that he was every day served at his Table with a Hare. Now
there is an usual saying with some, that Eating of Hare will make one Fair for
seven days following; as it is signified in that Epigram of Martial which he
writes to a Lady, whom he calls Gellia; who, always, (he says) when she sent
him a Hare, told him, how Fair it would make him for so many days. To which he
replies very severely again upon her; That if it was true, what she said,
certainly she had never eaten of a Hare in her life. (Lib. 5. Ep. 30.) So from
this vulgar conceit, a Poet in the time of Alexander Severus took occasion to
say, in two or three Verses, That as he was a Syrian born, it would be a
Miracle to see him so Fair and so Handsome as he was, if he did not eat Venison
and Hare continually to make him so. The Emperor being told of this by some of
his Friends, it is said, That he returned this answer; That so sorry a Poet was
welcome to think him Handsome from any thing. But he only wished him to eat
upon nothing but Hare, till it had done as much for him; and then he would envy
no body.

After the last service, he drank once to the Health of his Friends, and the
honor of the memory of Alexander the Great. Women he used moderately; and as
for the dishonest Amors of the other Sex, he was so free from them, that as I
have already said, he was sometime thinking to entirely prohibit them by a Law.
He established public Magazines in all the Quarters of the City of Rome;
whither those, who had not Conveniences of their own to lodge their
Provisions, might carry them, and have them lodged there with safety. He added
Public Baths to all the Quarters of the City, where before they were wanting;
many of which retain his name at this day. He built very good Houses to give
them to his Friends; especially such as had lived always without reproach. He
moderated the public Impositions, so that he brought them down to the
thirtieth part of what they were under Heliogabalus. To which purpose he
founded a new Coin of the value of the third part of an Aureus, that is a Crown
of Gold; and could he have moderated the Impositions still more, he would have
founded another new Coin of a Quarter Crown: but when he found that the public
Necessities of the State could not admit a Fall so low, he let that matter
alone. The large Gold Coins of the value of two, three, four, ten, fifty, and
some a hundred Aurei a piece, which Heliogabalus had founded, he ordered to be
suppressed, and melted as Coins which particularly had this inconvenience with
them, they put the Emperor upon occasions of lavishing away more money than
otherwise he would. Because when his money is in lesser pieces, he can moderate
his Bounty better as he pleases.

He seldom wore Silks, and Velvets never; Not sumptuous in his Apparel.
nor allowed them to any in their Salaries; nor gave them in Presents. He
envied the Riches of none. He aided the Poor; especially Gentlemen that he saw
were really decayed, and yet had not brought their misfortune upon themselves
by their Luxury, he always befriended as much as he could: giving them Grounds,
Servants, Cattle, and Utensils for Tillage. He viewed all the Habits himself
that he gave away to others, and often weighed his Gold and his Silver. He gave
to the Soldiers Shoes, Boots, Breeches, Coats and Cloaks. The Alexandrian
Purple which is so exquisite, is so called at this day from him; because it was
his Dier that invented it. Not that Alexander used it neither at all himself;
but it was a fine Wear for the Ladies, and he obliged them to pay well for it.
He often used a Cloak of Scarlet; but yet in Rome, and in the Cities of Italy,
he was always in a Gown. He never put on the Praetexta, nor the Toga Picta,
that is, Robes of State so called, but when he was Consul; and then they were
the common Robes which are preserved for the purpose in the Temple of Jupiter.
Only, when he Sacrificed in the quality of the Sovereign Pontiff, then he put
on also the Praetexta. He loved plain Linen, without Embroidery, with either
Purple or Gold. For the Purple, he said, did but make it rough; whereas the
excellency of Linen is it smoothness: and the Gold made it worse, that is
stiff. His Stockins were always either Linen, or Woollen; and his Breeches
White, not Scarlet; contrary to the Custom of the Emperors before him, whose
Mode had been Scarlet.

The Jewels and the Precious Stones that he had, he sold; and put the money
into the Treasury; saying, it was not for Men, to wear Jewels. He obliged the
Princesses Royal to content themselves with one String of Pearl; some Pendants
for the Ears, one Necklace of Pearl, one Coronet, when they assisted at the
Sacrifices, or Sacrificed themselves; one Gown, Embroidered with Gold, and one
Petticoat with not above six Ounces of Gold. He did himself the Office of a
Censor, upon the Manners of the Age. The Great Men imitated him, and the Ladies
of Quality followed the example of his Wife. He diminished the number of the
Officers of his Household: in which he made such a Reform, that he retained no
more Servants in any of the Offices than necessity required. And therefore
because his Servants were few, and his whole Service of Silver that he had, was
not above two hundred pound weight, when ever he made any public Banquet, he
borrowed both Plate and Servants of his Friends. He never admitted the
Diversions of the Stage Players at his Banquets. He diverted himself the most
in the Aviaries, that he had built in the Court. Where he had Peacocks,
Feasants, Pullets, Ducks, Partridges, and Pigeons. Of the latter particularly,
it is said, that he had to the number of twenty thousand. And because their
Feeding should not be a burden upon the Public Stores, he had Servants that
maintained them out of the Profit that arose from the Eggs, and the young that
they produced.

He often Bathed, both in his own Baths, and in those of the Ancients, in
Company with the People, especially in the Summer, returning from thence to the
Palace in his bathing Habit, with only a Scarlet Cloak thrown over him, to mark
his Dignity. His Running Footmen were always some of his Slaves: saying, a
Freeman ought never to Run, but in the Sacred Games. His Cooks, Fishermen,
Fullers, and Bagnio-men, were His Ordering of his Servants and great Officers.
always also Slaves; into whose places, as they fell, he bought others. There
were in all seven Physicians to the Court under his Reign: the chief of whom
received a more extraordiry allowance. When he appointed any Persons to the
Presidentships of the Provinces, he furnished them according to the Ancient
Custom, as Cicero calls it in his time, with Money and Necessaries, that is, a
President of a Province received in Silver twenty pound weight, eight Mules, a
couple of Horses, two Gowns, one wearing Suit, one bathing Suit, a hundred
pieces of Gold, one Cook, one Coachman; and if he had never a Wife, he was
allowed one Concubine: but then at his return he was obliged to restore again
all the Mules and the Horses; and the Coachman and the Cook, retaining the
rest, if he had comported himself well. But if ill, he was obliged to restore
fourfold; besides the Consequence of being Condemned for Embezelling the
Public Goods and Money, and for cheating the State; and in Actions also of
Recovery, on the part of the particular Persons, by him unjustly used.

The Laws, that he made, are infinite. He permitted all the Senators to have
their Chariots, and their Coaches at Rome, silvered over: believing it to be
for the Honor of the Roman Name, that the Senators of so great a City should
appear abroad in such Equipages. The Consuls, the whole year round, whether the
two first appointed upon the Calends of January, whose names were entered upon
the Records; or the others, the secondary ones, who were appointed every two
Months afterward, were all Nominated and Created by him, with the Advice of
the Senate. He regulated their Expenses; and revived and Reestablished the days
for their Elections, every two Months, in due Order. He ordered that the
Quaestors, at their entrance into their Offices, should make the accustomed
Presents to the People, at their own Expense; and that after their
Quaestorships, they should be raised to be Praetors, and in Consequence to go
to Admininister the Government of the Provinces. He suffered the Officers who
had the Guard of the Coffers of the Treasury, to be furnished with Money to make
their Public Shows to the People out of the said Coffers: but this was to be
done however with great management. He had it sometime in his thoughts, so to
dispose those Public Shows throughout the whole year, that the People should
be entertained with them once in every thirty days. But why he did not do it,
is a thing that remains under the obscurity of silence. Upon the seventh day of
the Week, if he was in Town, he went always for his Devotions to the Capitol.
At other times he went often to the other Temples. He was willing to have built
a Temple His Regard to Christ.
unto Christ; and had a design to receive him into the number of the Gods, as
it was also sometime in the thoughts of Hadrian, it is said, to do; who had
expressly ordered, in all Cities, Temples to be built without Images; which at
this day being left unfinished and unconsecrated are called the Temples of
Hadrian: who had however disposed them for this purpose: but then he was
hindered from proceeding any further by those who having consulted the Affairs
of Religion had found, that all the World would turn Christian, if this thing
was once suffered, and the other Temples would be deserted.

He made very pleasant Railleries; and was of an agreeable Conversation: and he
was kind and gracious in his Entertainments; in which it was permitted to ask
him, whatever one would. He was intent upon the amassing of Money, Prudent in
preserving it; and Ingenious to find it where it was; but however without doing
a prejudice to any. He would not be said to be a Syrian; but boasted himself to
be Originally a Roman, by those from whom he had the Honor to Descend; and
whose Genealogy he drew, in which he shows, that his Family was Descended from
the Marcelli. To the Rhetoricians, Grammarians, Physicians, Soothsayers,
Astrologers, Geometricians, and Architects, he appointed Salaries, and Public
Schools to Teach in, and sent them Scholars, that is, Children of a free
condition, but of little or no Fortunes; for whose Education he allowed them
himself. He deferred a great deal also in the Provinces to the Advocates at
Law, and where he has found, that they have Pleaded Gratis, which a great many
did, he encouraged them, and gratified them. He confirmed the Laws from year to
year, and carefully kept them in his own Person. He went often to take the
Divertisement of the Stage, and had designed to repair the Theater of
Marcellus. To several Cities, that had been defaced by Earthquakes, he allowed
Money out of the Taxes toward the Rebuilding of their Public and Private
Edifices. He never employed but very little Silver upon the Temples, and not
one Leaf of Gold; having always in his Mouth that Verse of Persius, -- In
Sacris quid facit Aurum? That is, What should Gold do in sacred matters?

I come now to speak of his Expeditions of War; which I shall do in their
order: And in the first place I shall observe what his Custom was, as to these,
for things, that were to be held in silence, and others that he discovered. He
never discovered the secret Design; but yet the day that he was to march upon,
was two Months before Proclaimed in a Public Edict in these words; Upon such a
Day, and such an hour I shall depart from this City; and by the help of the
Gods I shall march the first day to such a place; and so he told his several
Stations and Encampments in order; and marked the places, where he was to
receive in Provisions, as far as till he arrived upon the Frontiers of the
Country of the Barbarians: for from thence all things were hushed, and all
marched without the Barbarians being able to know the design of the Roman Army.
It is certain, that he never was deceived in any design that he proposed;
because his Counsels were never sold by his Courtiers; as all things under
Heliogabalus had been by the Eunuchs; who are a sort of Creatures that will be
always Prying into all the Secrets of the Court, to the end to appear to be the
only Persons from whom nothing is hid; that they may obtain by that means what
they desire; whether it is to satisfy their Vanity, or their Avarice. In the
mean time, in his Choice of Persons to His Choice of Public Officers.
be either Governors, or Procurators, or Controllers, or other great Officers
in the Province, he first proposed their names to the People; and desired them,
that if they knew any Crime of which they suspected and charged any of those
Persons to be guilty, he should be put to justify himself by certain Proofs;
or otherwise answer for it, with his Head. For it was not a thing fit, he said,
That the Christians and the Jews should do this for the recommendation of their
Priests, that are proposed to be Ordained; and that it should not be done as to
the Governors of Provinces, unto whom are committed the Fortunes and the Lives
of so many Men.

He appointed Salaries to those that are called Assessours; attending upon the
Governors of the Provinces: but yet he often said, That such Persons especially
ought to be promoted to the Government of the Provinces, who know how to Govern
by themselves, and not by Assessours: adding, that the Men of the Sword have
their Administrations proper to them; and the Men of Letters theirs; and so
every one ought to act according to the knowledge that he has. Treasure that
had been hidden and was found, he gave away amongst such as had found it: only
if it was very much, he added some of his Courtiers to them. He took their
names down in Writing, and refreshed his memory therewith upon any occasion, to
whom he ever His prudent Liberality.
gave any thing: and if he knew some, that had asked him nothing, or very
little, whereby to augment their Fortunes, he spoke to them and said, What is
the matter, that you ask me for nothing? Do you intend to make me your Debtour?
Ask me, for fear I should be reduced to be a private Man again, and then you
should complain of me. What he bestowed by way of Gifts, were Estates of
Malefactors Condemned, excepting the Gold, Silver, and Jewels; for all that was
remitted into the Coffers of the Exchequer. Then he disposed of the Offices in
the Army, and the Governments of the Provinces, and other Civil Offices in the
Provinces: where he changed his Receivers from time to time. Not one of them
accomplished a full year; indeed he hated them, though they might be Men of
Honesty too; because, he said, They were Necessary Evils. As for the
Presidents, Proconsuls, and Generals, he never made those by Favor, or with
the single design to enrich them: but he made them either by the Judgment of
the Senate, or the best of his own.

He disposed his Armies in the time of an Expedition, His Care of his Soldiers.
so that they received their Provisions in the places where they rendevouz'd;
without carrying with them Subsistence for more than seventeen days; unless it
was in the Country of the Enemy, and there he also assisted them with Mules and
Camels; saying, That he desired to look more after his Men, than himself;
because the Public Safety was in them. He visited them (when Sick) in their
Tents; even those of the lowest Ranks; and caused them to be carried upon
Wagons, and to be supplied with all sorts of Necessaries. But if they were too
Sick to Travel, he recommended them to the care of the good Housekeepers, and
the virtuous Women in the Cities and the Villages, where he passed; to whom he
paid the Charges of their looking after, whether they recovered or died.

Ovinius Camillus, a Senator of an Ancient Story of Camillus.
Family, had once the Vanity, being conceited on that account, to think of
Revolting, and setting up himself to be Emperor. Which being Discovered, and
certainly Proved to Alexander Severus, he sent for him to the Court. Telling
him, That he gave him Thanks, that he was so willing to take upon him the Care
of the Empire; how contrary soever it was to the Sentiments of others, that yet
were good Men. So he took him with him to the Senate, and called him his
Colleague. In the mean time Camillus was in the greatest Confusion and Remorse
of Conscience. He received him afterward into the Court; and admitted him to
his Table, and Habited him with the same Imperial Ornaments, or better than his
own. Then the War against the Persians being declared, he asked him if he would
go to it and bear him Company. They began their march together on Foot;
Severus, earnestly inviting him to bear the Fatigue with Patience. But after
five Miles walking, Camillus tired; and then Severus ordered him a Horse. After
two days more march, he was tired again with his Horse; and then Severus put
him upon a Carriage; but yet neither did this make him easy: but whether it
was with Fear, or that he truly desired no more of the Glory that attended
those Travels; he Abdicated the Empire with all his Heart, and would rather
have died than continued in it. Then Severus dismissed him, and sent him under
a Guard, whom he desired to take a care of him, Home, to his own House in the
Country in safety; where he afterward lived a long time; but was at last
killed by the Soldiers, but yet without the Command of the Emperor, who had
altogether gained his Heart, and had treated him with so much Humanity. I know
very well, that this has been thought amongst the Vulgar to have been the
Action of the Emperor Trajan. But since neither Marius Maximus has taken any
notice of it, nor Fabius Marcellinus, nor Aurelius Verus, nor Statius Valens,
who have all of them written the Life of that Prince: And on the contrary,
since Septimius, Acholius, and Encolpius, who have written the Life of
Alexander Severus, and all others that speak of him, have remarked this Action
to be his; I hope that the Authority upon which I also do so, will appear to be
of more Weight and Credit; than vulgar Fame, and any common Rumor of the
People.

He never suffered Offices, to which belonged Power of Life and Death, to be
sold: saying, He that Buys, must necessarily Sell again in his turn. But I
will have no Merchandise made of the Powers of that Nature; should I suffer
them, it would not be in my power to Condemn them. For I should be ashamed to
punish a Man that Sells as he Buys, to make up his Accounts. He made
Ordinances touching the College of the Chief Priests, the Commission of the
Quindecimviri, or fifteen Priests for Religious Affairs, and the College of the
Augurs; which merited to be He favors the Christians.
received in the Senate. The Christians having gotten into the Possession of a
certain Public Place for the Exercise of their Religion, and on the contrary
the Company of the Cooks and Victuallers claiming the same, and pretending that
it of right belonged to them; he decided the matter betwixt them by his
Rescript in these words; It is better rather than to leave a place to the
Cooks, to give it to Men that will Honor God in it, let it be in any manner
whatsoever. The Manner of his Persian Expedition.


With these great Qualities therefore both for Peace and War, this Emperor
entered upon an Expedition against Persia; in which he Comported himself with
that Discipline, and that consideration for the Dignity of the Empire, that it
was said, they were more like so many Senators, than Soldiers that he brought
with him. Wherever the Legions marched, the Tribunes, the Centurions, the
Soldiers were so quiet, so modest, and so beloved for their Discretion; and
then the Presence of their Prince was accompanied with so many excellent
Qualities; that the People of the Provinces considered him as a God. And
certainly the Soldiers loved him, as if he was their Brother or their Son; and
infinitely respected him as their Parent. They were handsomely Clothed, and
nobly Armed: their Cavalry well mounted, and completely Furnished and
Caparisoned: so that to see the Army of Alexander Severus, it was enough to
give one an Ieda of the Grandeur of the Roman Empire. He particularly, with all
his Power, endeavored to appear worthy of the name that he carried, and which
is more, to surpass the Macedonian of the same: and said, That there ought to
be a great difference betwixt Alexander of Rome, and Alexander of Macedon. He
had Companies in his Army, as that Macedonian had, that were a^med with Shields
of Silver, and Shields of Gold. He made a Phalanx, consisting of thirty
thousand Men, whom he called by the name of his Phalangieres; by whose means he
did a great many Noble Exploits in Persia. This Phalanx was composed of Six
Legions, who were all equally well armed, and for their great Services judged
worthy to be all at double Pay after the end of the War of Persia.

The Royal Presents, which were made him, he bestowed upon the Temples; but
Jewels he sold: because he thought it was an Effeminate thing to keep Jewels;
which are neither fit to be given amongst the Soldiers, nor to be worn by a Man
of Bravery. An Ambassador having presented his Wife, the Empress, by him, with
two Unions of a great Weight, and an extraordinary Size, he ordered them to be
sold; but there was no body to be found to come up to the Price. And for fear
that they should draw from the Empress herself, an ill Example, if she used a
thing that was not to be Purchased, he Dedicated them to serve for Pendants to
the Ears of a Statue of Venus. His Protector in his Minority was Ulpian; to
whom his Mother Mammaea was at first averse; but afterward she thanked him,
when she saw that her Son had attained to be so great an Emperor, by following
especially his Counsels, in the Government of himself and the State. And yet
Ulpian labored under the ill will of the Soldiers; and but that the Emperor
defended him, certainly they would often have murdered him in his Presence. In
all his Marches, and all his Expeditions, he dined and supped in Public, with
his Tents open for all the Soldiers to see him, which pleased them well. He eat
the common His strict Discipli^e
Ammunition Bread, and made the Round in every Quarter, and suffered no one
whatsoever to be absent from his Colors. If in Marching any one had but
stepped aside to take the least thing from the Inhabitants of the Country,
wherever it was, he was either beaten with Rods in his presence, or condemned
in a Mulct; or if his Quality had set him above this, he reprimanded him
himself publicly, to make him ashamed, and said, Would you be willing that
this should have been done upon your own Estate, which you do to another's? It
was a great Expression with him at all times, Do not that to another, which you
would not that another should do to you; whether he had heard it from the Jews
or from the Christians, he retained it well, and it was altogether conformable
to his Sentiments. Therefore he ordered it to be proclaimed by the common
Crier, when he corrected any Person. He loved it so, that he made Inscriptions
of it upon his own Palace, and upon the public Works.

Having been told once that a poor old Woman had been outragiously injured by a
Soldier, who was by Trade a Carpenter, he not only cashiered him the Army, but
gave him to be the Woman's Slave, to maintain her ever after, by his Labor.
And though the Soldiers complained of this, he persuaded them all to support
with patience such an Example of Military Discipline, and at the same time he
made them to fear him. His Reign was without Blood in this Sense, that he spilt
not the Blood of any one of the Senators, as the Grecian Historian Herodian
has observed; but yet he showed a great deal of sharpness, and of severity in
his Reign; and especially, he was so rigorous upon the Soldiers, that he often
discarded entire Legions of them at a time; never fearing the Mutineers of his
Army, because he knew that they could say nothing against his Life, nor could
reproach him, that the Tribunes or the Captains under his Authority, had ever
retained any thing of their Pay from them. And when a Soldier is well clothed
and armed, his Belly full, and something in his Purse, then, he said, it is
that he the most fears you; for it is Necessity that reduces Soldiers to all
sorts of Despair. In fine, he ordered the Officers of the Army to be waited
upon by none but Soldiers, whose Number was limited; that is, he ordered, that
there should be four Soldiers to march always before a Tribune, six before a
Commander, and ten before a General.

Now to the end to show you his Severity, An instance of his steady Severity.
and how he carried himself in his Affairs with his Soldiers, it will be
convenient to give you one of of his Harangues that he made to them. When he
was come to the City of Antioch, and had been told one day, that some of the
Soldiers had put themselves into the Baths there with the Women of Pleasure, he
ordered them all to be taken, and laid in Irons. This being known to the Legion
unto which those Soldiers belonged, they were all immediately in a Mutiny. He
called a Council of War, and the Prisoners being all brought before him, and
all the other Soldiers standing round about him in their Arms, he spoke thus;

My Fellow Soldiers,

I Hope, you will be easily persuaded to disallow with me, the things that have
been committed by some of your Comrades. For the Discipline of our Ancestors is
what must necessarily take place here, if we would preserve the State. For when
once that Discipline is lost, then adieu to the Glory of the Roman Name, and
the Roman Empire. Nor is it to be suffered, that Men should take the same
Liberties in my Reign, which lately they did under the Debaucheries which were
committed in the time of the impure Heliogabalus. Shall the Roman Soldiers,
your Comrades, and my Fellow-Companions in Arms and War, Drink, Bath, Whore,
and live in all the soft and luxurious ways of the Greeks, and shall I endure
this long, and those there, shall I not punish them?

With this the Tumult increased, and they set up a Clamor against him. But he
went on and said;

Nay, keep your Clamours to terrify your Enemy in the Field, and bestow them
not in vain upon your Emperor. Certainly your Masters who first taught you
Arms, have told you, that you are to cry out so against the Sarmatians, the
Germans, the Persians your Enemies, and not against him who out of the
Contributions of the Provinces feeds you, and gives you Clothes, and gives you
your Pay. Forbear then that savage Noise, which is only fit for Battle, lest in
a word, and in a breath, this day I break you all, and send you home to your
Houses, scarcely with the Name of Romans. For how deserve ye, to be of the
number of the least of the Common People of Rome, unless you acknowledge the
Right of the Laws of the Roman Empire.

Here they began to grow worse, and to menace him with their Swords. He went on;

Threaten your Enemy, and turn your Arms against those, if you are so Valiant;
me you do not affright with it: and should you kill here a single Man, the
Empire, the Senate will not be wanting to me, the People of Rome will revenge
me.

They still murmuring not the less for this, he cried with a loud voice, I
disband you, be gone, and lay down your Arms.

After these words, they all laying down their Arms, and discharging themselves
of their Military Accountrements, by a wonderful Example, retired every one,
not to the Camp, but up and down to the Inns, which was the first time that he
made it appear what his Severity could do. In fine, his Guards that had
attended upon his Person, took up the Standards that the others had laid down,
and carried them to the Camp, and their Arms were gathered up by the People,
and brought to the Palace. But however, this Legion which he had thus
cashiered, in thirty days afterward, upon Intercession made for them, before
he set forward to engage the Persians, he restored again to the same Rank which
they had held before in the Army; and the Bravery which they in particular
showed upon that occasion, in which they did Wonders, was the great thing that
gained him the Victory. Some of the Officers, in the mean time, he had not
spared to punish with death, because it had been by their negligence, that the
Soldiers had been so debauched with the Pleasures of Daphne, and because they
had not taken the Care that was sufficient to have hindered this Sedition of the
Army.

He marched from the City of Antioch to give Battle to the Persians, well
provided, and with great magnificence. Artaxerxes, the most Potent He defeats
the Persians.
King of Persia, came against him with seven hundred Elephants, one thousand
and eight hundred armed Chariots, and a Body of Horse of many thousands. But
the Victory was on the side of the Roman Emperor, who in the Fight visited the
one and the other Wing, and encouraged the Soldiers, and was often within
Perils himself, and signalized his Valor with his own hand. After which, he
returned again to Antioch, and made his Army rich with the Booty that they
took, and the Depredations that he permitted the Tribunes, the Captains, and
the Soldiers to make upon the Provinces of the Enemy. The Persians then first
began to submit to the Dominion of the Romans. But because the Kings of Persia
think it an Indignity for those that belong to them to be made Slaves, he sent
their Ransoms, and the Prisoners were restored, and the Money given either to
such as had taken them Prisoners, or else put into the Treasury

After this noble Expedition he came to Rome, where he received the honor of a
Triumph, He triumphs.
performed with great Magnificence, and then he made this Speech to the Senate
upon the occasion; which I have taken out of the Journal of the Senate, upon
the seventh day of the Kalends of October.

Fathers of the Senate,

WE have vanquished the Persians, and we have no need of any great Eloquence to
recount the particulars to you. You may please only to know, what their Arms
were, and how well provided they came. They came with seven Hundred Elephants,
and this is the first time that we have ever seen in the Field so great a
Number; and these carried Towers upon their backs full of Archers, and Loads of
Arrows. Three Hundred of these we took, Two Hundred more were killed upon the
place and Eighteen we have brought hither with us. Then they had Eighteen
Hundred Chariots, armed with cutting Scythes. We could have brought with us of
those Chariots Two Hundred, whereof the Beasts were killed. But however, we
thought fit to forbear that, because it is an easy thing to make them
ourselves. We have cut in pieces an Army of a hundred and twenty thousand
Horse; and ten thousand Complete Cuirassiers, with whose Spoils we have armed
our Men. We took a great number of the Persians Prisoners, whom we have sold.
The Country of Mesopotamia, betwixt the two Rivers of Tigris and Euphrates,
which had been so neglected by my Impure Prodecessour, Heliogabalus, we have
Re-conquered and received into our Obedience. We have put the most Potent King
Artaxerxes, as he is entitled; but who is so in effect, as well as by Name, to
flight. The Country of Persia beheld him flying; and in the same place, where
the Romans heretofore in the defeat of Crassus lost their Banners, the Persians
now have left us theirs. You see, Fathers of the Senate, what we have
Achieved; the Subject needs no Eloquence to adorn it. The Army is come home
Rich. None think their Pains too great, that Conquer. It is for you to appoint
Public Thanksgivings to be made upon this occasion; to the end that we may not
seem ungrateful to the Gods for the success of our Arms.

The Acclamations of the Senate followed.

The Gods preserve our Emperor, Alexander, Conqueror of the Persians. We
Congratulate your Majesty, your most great Victory; your Majesty has merited
most truly the Name of Conqueror of the Persians and Parthians. The Gods save
you. We behold your Trophies. We see your Victory. All thanks to our young
Emperor; the Father of his Country; our Sovereign Pontiff. By you we will hope
for Victory over the Germans. By you we will hope for Victory from all Parts.
Your Majesty takes the way to Conquer. You Command the Soldiers. The Senate is
enriched. The Army is enriched. The People of Rome are enriched by your
Majesty.

Then the Senate Adjourning, he went from thence to the Capitol: where having
performed the Sacred Ceremonies, and Dedicated to the Temple of Jupiter some
Armor of the Persians to be hung up there, he spoke to thi^ purpose to the
People.

Citizens and Commons of Rome,

I Have overcome the Persians, and my Ar(...) is returned Rich home with the
Booty that (...) have made. We promise to give you a Larg(...) and to Morrow we
will give you the Gam(...) the Cirque, on the occasion of our Conquests.

This is the account of this Expedition, (...) I have found upon the Annals,
and (...) Works of many Historians. And as for (...) some say, on the contrary,
That He (...) trayed by a Slave, and instead of Conquering Artaxerxes, fled,
for fear of being Conquered himself; or particularly what Herodian says, That
Artaxerxes lost his Army by Famine, Cold, and Sickness; in which Opinion he is
very singular, I leave them to be contradicted by the Judgments of all such as
have Read, and are best acquainted with this History.

After all these things, full of Glory, accompanied by the Senate, the Order of
the Gentry, and all the People, through Crowds of Women and Children on all
sides, and above all the Soldiers Wives; contemplating his Presence and his
Mien, and observing him as he passed with admiration. He marched from the
Capitol to the Palace, on Foot; followed by a Triumphal Chariot, drawn by four
Elephants. He was so born up in the Hands of all People; that he scarce
finished this Space in four Hours, and from all sides they cried, how happy is
Rome in such a Prince. The following day, was spent in the Games of the Cirque,
and the Diversions of the Stage. And then he gave the Poor a Largess; and
Established Pensions for the maintenance of the Children of the Poor, according
to an Example of Antoninus Pius; and in the Honor of his Mother Mammaea, those
Children were called the Children of Mammaea.

The Affairs of the Province of Mauritania His Successes by his Generals.
Tingitana in Barbary had been in the mean time very successful under Furius
Celsus; as were those of the Province of Illyricum under Varius Macrinus, his
Kinsman; and those of Armenia under Junius Palmetus: so that from all places
they sent him Letters, Crowned with Laurels; which being publicly Read to the
Senate and the People, he found himself adorned and saluted by all the Titles
that could appertain to him. Therefore as for Men that had behaved themselves
so well in the Provinces, committed unto their Government, and yet had never
been Consuls, he appointed them the Honor of wearing the same Marks and
Ornaments, as those that had. He put them into Estates, if they were Poor and
advanced in years; and gave them Places in the College of the Priests. He gave
the Captives that he had made of diverse Nations, amongst his Friends; unless
they were of Royal Blood, or of more than Ordinary Quality; and then he Deputed
them to the Services of War, but in no great Posts. The Lands of the Enemy,
which were Conquered upon the Frontiers, were given by his consent amongst the
Officers and Soldiers; under a Condition that their Heirs after them should be
obliged to take to Arms; and that those Lands should never come to Persons of
another Condition; because he said, that the thoughts that they were to defend
their own Estates, would make them fight more freely. He furnished them with
Cattle and Servants, necessary for Tillage; lest either through the want of
Hands, or the Old Age of the Possessors, the said Places should come to be
abandoned again; which he thought would be a thing very shameful.

After these things, forasmuch as he lived in a great love and esteem of the
Senate and the People, they were unwilling to let him go to the War against the
Germans, although they all hoped for Victory from his Arms. Gallia was at this
time incessantly ravaged by the Incursiosn of that People: which was a matter
of great trouble to the State, and to himself; and that which yet increased
their resentments, was, that after the reduction of the Country of Mesopotamia,
and the defeat of the Forces of so great a People as the Persians, the Nation
of the Germans should now menace the Heads of the State, which yet had been
always subject to Emperors, that had not Reigned with so much Glory. So he
enterprised this Voyage by great Marches, and all the Soldiery were very much
pleased with it. But yet meeting again in Gallia with some Mutinous Legions,
which he rejected; and the Gauls being of a Temper to be hot and fierce, and
often troublesome to their Emperors, they could not find themselves disposed to
support a Treatment which was so severe, especially after so soft a Reign as
that of Heliogabalus; And whether that it was they, or Maximin that had set
Assassines upon him, he was killed at a Village called Cecil, in the Province
of Bretagn; not by a consent of all, but by a party of Soldiers, who took their
opportunity to do it, when he had few Persons about him. At the same time they
inveighed outragiously against him and against his Mother; as a Covetous Woman,
earnest to amass Riches; and by whose Counsel he had acted in all things. He
Reigned thirteen years and nine days; and had lived twenty nine years, three
months and seven days, And his Mother Mammaea was killed with him.

The Signs that fore ran his death, were Omens of his Death.
these. Upon the Anniversary of his Birthday, as he assisted at the Sacrifice,
the Beast, which was the Victim, betook itself to its feet, and would have
escaped in its blood: and rushing into the Company, where the Emperor was, it
left some of its blood upon his Robes. A large and old Laurel, at a certain
place where he passed to the War, dyed on a sudden. Three Figtrees, to which
his Tent had been fastened, and which were of those sort, that they call the
Alexandrian Figs, dyed also on a sudden. A Woman, that was a Druid cried after
him in her Language, You may go; but never hope for Victory, nor trust to your
Army. He began an Harangue, that he made to his Soldiers, before he went to
seek the Enemy, with these fatal words; The Emperor Heliogabalus having been
killed. But all these things however he mightily despised; and putting himself
upon his March to meet the Enemy, he was killed at the Place above mentioned.

He had Dined that day, as it was his Custom to do, Publicly, and had eaten of
the common Bread, and Provisions of the Army; nor, when his Tent was searched
and ransackt, was there any thing extraordinary found in it. After Dinner, as
he had reposed himself to Sleep a little, which was about the hour of One, a
Spy of the Conspirators, that belonged to the Guards, had entered into his Tent,
and had found him awake; but every body else asleep: and the Emperor seeing
him, said; What is the matter, my Friend: any News of the Enemy? The Man
withdrew to his Confederates, and spurred them on to the Enterprise, by the
excellency of the Opportunity, which offered itself. So a great number of them
immediately broke in, and cutting off every one they found, they came to the
Emperor, and struck him several times through the Body; of which he died
instantly. Some say, that there was not a word spoken; but only the Soldiers
cried to him, Away with you! Be gone.

Maximin, who succeeded him, and who carried on the War against the Enemy
served himself, for that purpose, of all the Military Preparations of this
Prince. Amongst the rest, especially of all the Auxiliaries of the Armenians,
Mesopotamians, Parthians, and others out of the East; because being excellent
Archers, none were of greater use against the Germans, than they.

His contempt of Death had shown itself not only in that fierceness, with which
he had always humbled the Soldiers; but also in this. That when Thrasybulus an
Astrologer, who was his particular Favorite, had told him; that his Fate was
to dye by the Sword of the Barbarians, he was glad of it, in the Opinion which
he had, that he was like to dye in the Field of Battle; which he thought a
death worthy of an Emperor. Then he argued upon it, and observed, what
excellent Men in all times, have died Violent Deaths, in which number he
recounted the Great Alexander of his own name; Pompey, Julius Caesar,
Demosthenes, Cicero, and other famous Personages; so that he desired no greater
Honor than to die in the Field of Battle. He believed that it would make him
comparable to the Gods. But he mistook the Prediction, for he died not in the
Field of Battle; although it was in the time of a War; and yet died by the
Sword of a Barbarian. For that Spy, who had first broken into his Tent, was a
German, and one that killed him.

The rest of the Army were sensibly touched at his death, and revenged it upon
the Authors of it: and the People of Rome, all the Senate, and all the
Provinces never resented any thing worse. Nor were they less astonished, when
they heard that he was succeeded in the Empire by Maximin, and his Son. Wherein
all the World judged very well the hard necessity of his Destiny; because they
saw a Man raised to his place, who was of no Birth nor Breeding, and whose
gross Rusticity gave them an occasion to apprehend all things. The Senate
Consecrated him a God; and a Monument was Erected to his Memory in Gallia,
whilst his Body was interred in a most Noble Sepulcher at Rome. His Priests
were appointed, as likewise his Festival; which is at this day Celebrated with
great Devotion. But some pretend to say, that the occasion of his Murder was;
because by his Mother's advice he was for quitting the War against the Germans,
and for returning, out of Vanity, with her again into the East. But to say the
truth, I take this to be nothing but a Fiction of the Creatures of Maximin; to
the end, that it should not be thought that so very good an Emperor had been
killed by their Friend, contrary to the Laws of God and Man.

Hitherto the Empire of the People of Rome, has had for the most part Princes,
whose Reigns have been in their duration something considerable. But after
Alexander Severus arose many, who as they had hastily rusht in, so they were as
hastily, one after another, driven away from the Throne again. For some Reigned
half a year: some a year: others perhaps reached to two years: but three is the
most, till we come to those Princes who far extended the bounds of the Empire;
I would say Aurelian, and those that follow; of whose Lives, as much as we can
find to be said hereafter; we shall not fail to write and publish it.

That which is Condemned in Alexander Severus, Faults of Severus.
is; that he denied his Native Country, and would not at all pass for a Syrian;
that he loved Money; was extremely Suspicious; invented many new Taxes; desired
to appear as another Alexander the Great; was too severe upon the Soldiers; and
was too inquisitive into the Affairs of particular Persons. But as for those
who deny, that he had not been Created a Caesar by the Senate, but by the
Soldiers; or that he was the Cousin German of Heliogabalus; they are greatly
mistaken; and to see their error, let them peruse, as we have done, the
Historians of his time; especially Acholius, who is very particular upon him.

Your Majesty, O most Sacred Constantine, is pleased many times to ask; from
whence it comes, that a Stranger and a Syrian did make such an excellent
Prince; when such a great number of others of Roman Blood, and out of the
Provinces of the Empire, that have Reigned, have been Wicked, Impure, Cruel,
Abject, Unjust and Dissolute. I humbly desire therefore your Majesty to
observe, as to this; that according to the Sentiments of good Men, Nature which
is the Common Mother of us all, is sufficient to Act in this sort, and so he
might be Born a good Prince. But besides, he had an Example immediately before
his Eyes, of a very ill Prince that was killed, and after his Death
dishonored; and the fear which is suggested by such a Fate, could not but have
an influence upon him, to make him better. But because these Reasons are a
little remote, and too general, and I am sensible, that I ought to suggest the
Truth to Your Majesty, I shall refer my self to your Royal Goodness, and your
Clemency, in declaring what at least I have read upon this Subject. Your
Majesty remembers very well, what no doubt you have seen in Marius Maximus;
that a State in which the Prince is himself bad, but his Counselors good, is
in a better Condition, and in much greater Safety, than when the Prince is
good, but his Counselors are bad. For certainly one ill Genius may very well
be Amended and Corrected by many, that are good. But a great many, that are all
bad, will never be Corrected by one, let him be never so good. And this is what
was once said by Homullus, unto the Emperor Trajan; where he compared the
Examples of Claudius and Domitian, with one another. Domitian, he said, was a
very ill Prince, but yet he had Counselors that were good. Claudius was not
so ill a Prince as Domitian; but his Counselors were bad. But yet Claudius
was of the two the most hated in his time. And certainly it is always better to
suffer under the weight of one that is bad, than under many.

But to return to my purpose. It is true, that Alexander Severus was a very
excellent Person himself; and was also directed by the good Counsels always of
his Mother, who was a very excellent Woman; which last thing alone is certainly
a great Argument of his goodness. But besides all this; he was served by
Counselors who Character of his Counselors.
were Holy and Venerable Personages: without Malice, without Faction, without
Knavery, without inclination to Evil, without Animosity against the Virtuous;
without Dissoluteness, without Cruelty, without design of Surprising, or
Mocking, or making a Property of their Prince. But full of Integrity,
Venerable, Continent, Religious, lovers of their Prince; they exposed nothing
that he did; nor suffered it in others: they made a secret Gain to themselves
in nothing; they falsified nothing; they Dissembled nothing; they never
betrayed him; and they loved, and advanced his Reputation. Add to this another
thing, that he Banished the Eunuchs from his Counsels, and his Service; as
being the only Creatures who ruin Princes. For it is they, that have put them
upon the living after the Examples of Foreign Nations; and the Mode especially
of the Kings of Persia; that sow Divisions betwixt the best Prince and his
People; that are Spies from side to side; and report an answer contrariwise
often, than it is given, and keep their Prince locked up, and carry all things
so secretly, that he knows nothing. For being but Slaves bought with a Price,
how should we expect better from them? No, said Alexander Severus, My Captains,
Consuls, and Senators, shall never lie at the mercy of Slaves, that are bought
and sold.

I am sensible, Great Sir, of the danger which there is in speaking these
things before an Emperor, who should repose himself in such hands as these, and
should be the Slave of these Slaves. But our Felicity is, that as soon as Your
Majesty had well understood, what Mischiefs these Pests do bring along with
them, and how they Circumvent the Princes whom they serve; You, out of your
Royal Care to the Interests of the State, have reduced them to that pass, that
you suffer them not to continue within your Household; not so much as to be your
Menial Servants.

Another eminent things which Contributed to the Felicity of Alexander Severus,
is this; that he saw no one at the Court alone, unless it was his Captain of
the Guards, and particularly Ulpian. For otherwise he had always Company
present; to the end, to give to no Person whatsoever an opportunity of
representing their Conversation with him falsely to others, nor of speaking ill
of others to him. Especially he did this after the Correction, that he took of
Turinus; who had often vaunted of speaking things to him, which he never did;
and of receiving answers from him, which he never gave him; and this, only to
squeeze Money, and enrich himself by that means out of the Pockets of his
Clients; though at the same time he made a Cully and a Fool of his Master.

To all which we must add, that if Alexander Severus had found, that either his
Counselors or his very Relations had done ill, he punished them; or if the
Obligations of his former Friendship with, or his nearer Alliance to them, did
not suffer him to punish them; yet he sent them from him; and said, The whole
State is dearer to me than these.

Now if your Majesty pleases to know by Name, what Men they were, whom he
called to his Counsels, this is a List of some of them.

Fabius Sabinus, the Son of another famous A List of his Counselors.
Sabinus; a Person of sublime Virtue; and the Cato of his time.

Domitius Ulpian, a most Eminent Professor of the Law.

Antoninus Gordianus, the Son of the Emperor Gordianus, and afterward Emperor
himself, a Person of great merit.

Julius Paulus, a most excellent Professor of the Law.

Claudius Venatus, an Orator of a profound and diffused Eloquence.

Pomponius, an Eminent Professor of the Law.

Alphenus. Africanus. Florentinus. Martianus. Callistratus. Hermogenes.
Venuleius. Triphonius. Maetianus. Celsus. Proculus. Modestinus.

All Professors of the Law, and sometime the Scholars of the most Renowned
Papinian. They all were the Familiar Friends of this Prince; as both Acholius
and Marius Maximus assure us.

Catilius Severus, his Kinsman, a very learned Person.

Aelius Sereni^nus, the most Holy Person of his time.

Quintilius Marcellus, than whom all History does not afford a better Person.

All these therefore, and others, to them suitable, being his Counselors, and
unanimously Conspiring to the good of the State, what could there be done or
imagined to hurt it? It is true, that in the beginning of his Reign, for some
days a multitude of ill Persons, of whom the Court was full at the death of
Heliogabalus, had neglected no means to engage his Affections in their own
favor. But his early Prudence discovered them: He nipt them in the Bud, and
drove them all from him; and then formed himself a Council of such Holy and
Upright Members, that They very much guided him, who was otherwise a Stranger,
and a Syrian, to be that good Prince that he was. Whereas, on the contrary,
those ill Princes, whom your Majesty has observed to have been Romans,
laboring under the misfortune of ill Councils also, that made them yet worse;
we Have them delivered down to us, heavy laden with a Burden of Vices, of those
of their Counselors, and those of their own.

FINIS.
INDEX TO THE First Volume.
A.
ABgarus, Page 12, 25, 100. Abraham, 421. Adiabene, 30. Adonis, 362. Adria, 38.
Adrianotherae, 68. Advocatus Fisci, 68. Aelius Junius Cordus, 328. Aelius
Laetus, 154, 191. Aelius Maurus, 250. Aelius Verus, his Adoption, 72, 84.
Family, 81. Behavior in his Province, 82. Death, 84. Pleasures, 85. Funeral,
87. Aemilianus, 238. Aemilius Parthenianus, 163. Aetna, 57. Albini Cejonii,
288. Alexander M. 33, 422, 427. Alexander Severus, his Extraction, 392.
Honors, ibid. Education, 394. Modesty and Moderation, 395. Personage, ibid.
Names, 396, 405. Speech to the Senate, 399. Government, 408. Deference to the
Senate, 411. Temper, 412. Care of the Soldiery, 413, 440. Works, 416.
Seize in Arts, 419, 422. Domestic Deportment, 421. Exercises, 423.
Ordinances, 425, 431, 435. Table, 429. Apparel, 432. Household, 434. Regard to
CHRIST, 436. Officers, 438. Favors the Christians, 442. Persian Expedition,
442. Discipline, 445, 448. Triumph, 450. Death, 455. Counselors, 461, 463.
Alexandria, 55, 312. Alps, 103. Altiu^, 155. Annia Faustina, 90, 91, 94, 96.
Antinous, 58. Antioch, 58, 136, 238, 306. The Eight Antonini, 330. Antoninus
Pius; his Extraction, 89. Personage and Conditions, 90. Title, 91. Adoption,
93, 73. Diligence and Moderation, 97. Frugality, ibid. Works, 98. Honors, 100.
Candor, 101. Laws, 103. Death, 103. Personage, 104. Recreations, 107. Anubis,
186. Apis, 55. Apollonius St. 101, 144. Apollonius Thyanaeus, 421. Aquilius,
221. Arabia, 19, 34. Arbela, 30. Area Caesarea, 392, 396. Arrius Antoninus, 90,
92, 184. Artaxerxes, 449. Athens, 57, 66, 231. Attidius Cornelianus, 116.
Attilius Tatianus, 97. Aufidius Victorianus, 116. Avidius Cassius; His Revolt,
135, 165. Death, 135. Family, 157. Discipline, 161.
B.
BAbylon, 30. Baiae, 75, 418. Baebius Macer, 45. Bridge over the Danube, 17.
Britain, 44, 54, 95, 116, 185, 201, 247. Byrrbus, 183.
C.
CAelest is, 202, 330. Caesar, 80. Calphurnius Agricola, 116. Calphurnius
Crassus, 4, 8. Canosa, 116. Caracallus; his Character when Boy, and when Man,
306. Kills his Brother, 307. Cruelties, 309. Strength, 311. Expeditions, 310,
312. Barbarity in Egypt, 312. Death, 312. Works, 315. Incestuous Marriage, 316.
Dissimulation, 325. Carthage, 68. Casperius Aelianus, 5, 10. Cassii, 157.
Catachriani, 61. Catilius Severus, 46, 60. Catti, 216. Cauchi, ibid. Celsus,
43, 47. Ceres, 138. Chilo, 308, 310. Chosroes, 22, 57. CHRIST, 421, 436.
Christians, 414. Cicero, 422. Cincius Severus, 243. Cirque, 12. Civita Vecchia,
176. Claudius Pompeianus, 130, 171, 179, 181, 202, 225. Cleander, 182, 184.
Clodius Albinus; his Employments, 241. Name, 284. Extraction, 285. Offered the
Title of Caesar, 286. War with Severus, 294. Character, 295. Death, 295.
Personage, 300. Popularity, 301. Clodius Celsinus, 240. Coins, 431. Cologn, 36.
Coloss. 67. Commodus; his Birth, 128, 175. Espousals, 138. Education, 176.
Debauchery, 177. A Conspiracy against him, 179. Severity, 180. Incests, 181.
Flattered, 185. Pranks, 186. Strength, 189. Negligence, 190. Death and
Personage, 192. The Senate's Decree upon him, 194. Auction of his Goods, 207.
Constantinople, 306. Cornelius Repentinus, 219. Crassus, 45. Ctesiphon, 31, 33,
245. Cybele, 361, 362. Cyprus, 35. Cyziqua, 92.
D.
DAcian War, 11. Daphne, 150, 165. Decebalus, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19. Delphos,
277. Diadumenus named an Antoninus, 345. His Speech, 346. Beauty, 348. Letters,
352. Death, 353. Diana, 362. Didia Clara, 219. Didius Julianus; his Extraction,
215. Preferments, 216. Declared Emperor, 218. Deposed, 225. Killed, ibid.
Dominus, 395. Domitian's Statues demolished, 1.
E.
EArthquake at Antioch, 26. Elegia, 23. Epictetus, 62. Eudaemon, 60. Eunuchs,
415, 426, 462. Euphrates, 31. Eutychius Proculus, 108. Exedrates, 22.
F.
FAbia, 141, 155. Fabius Maximus, 99. Fabius Repentinus, ibid. Falco, 209.
Favorinus, 60, 62. Faustina, 113, 128, 135, 137, 140. Faustinus Quintillus,
223. Flavia Titiana, 203. Flavius Genialis, 218. Flavius Sulpitianus, 212, 217.
Florus, 61. Fortune, 104. Forum of Nerva, 420. Fronto Cornelius, 108. Fucinus,
71. Fuscianus, 202. Fuscus, 71.
G.
GAugamela, 30. Gavius Maximus, 99. Germans, 56. Geta, 237. Geta Antoninus; his
Death, 307. Names, 319. Personage and Conditions, 322. Funeral, 325.
H.
HAdrian; demolishes Trajan's Bridge, 18. Personage, 20, 76. Extraction, 38.
Studies, 39. Diligence, 40. Adoption, 43. Clemency, 45. A Conspiracy against
him, 47. Bounty, 48, 62. Prudence and Moderation, 49. Respect for the Senate,
50. Imperfections, ibid. Affability 51. Discipline, 52. Intelligence, 54. Wall
in Great Britain, ibid. Voyages, 54, 50, 57. Grief for Antinous, 59. Severity
and Injustice, 60. Verses, 61, 76. Learning, 62. Laws, 65. Memory and Wit, 68.
Civil Administration, 70. Sickness, 71, 74. Jealousy, 72. Death, 75. Temples,
436. Hadrianople, 36. Hagarens, 34. Hare, 430. Heliodorus, 60, 62.
Heliogabalus; his Names, 356. Comes to Rome, 358. Makes his Mother a Senatress,
359. Bestiality, 360. Base Government, 360. Incest and Sacrilege, 361. Cruel
Idolatry, 363. Filthiness with Magirus, 365. Horrid Immodesty, 366. Prefers
base Persons, 367. Hatred to Alexander Severus, 368. Banishes the Senate, 371.
Death, 372, 387. Works, 373. Luxury, 374. Immoderate Vanities, 376. Vain
Frolicks, 379. Extreme Prodigality, 382. Helvius Pertinax, 310, 325. Helvius
Successus, 198. Heraclius, 235. Herodian, 300. Hierapolis, 30. Hierocles, 361.
I.
JAzyges, 16. Jews, 34, 46, 95, 246. India, 32, 33. Isis, 186, 275, 418.
Istrig, 19. Julia, 248, 315. Junius Rusticus, 309. Jupiter Nicephorus, 41.
Juventius Celsus, 64.
L.
LArginus Proclus, 7. Laetas, 209, 222, 308. Laurium, 90, 104. Lavinia, 90.
Letters of Verus Antoninus, 158. M. Antoninus, 159, 163, 169, 170, 271, 296,
297. Faustina, 169. Severus, 271, 293, 299. Commodus, 272, 286, 303. Macrinus,
351. Diadumenus, 352. Cejonius Posthumous, 389. Libo, 153. Licinius Suras, 20,
41, 43. Lison, 58. Lollianus Gentianus, 206. Lollius Urbicus, 352. Longinus,
16. Lots, 41, 395. Lucilla, 114, 117, 179, 181. Lucius, 13, 33, 35. Lucius
Quietu, 45, 47.
M.
MAecianus, 135. Macrinus. His Extraction and Character 329, 331. Creates his
Son Caesar, 332. Message to the Senate. 334, Parthian Expedition, 336. Death,
337. Cruelties, 339. A Libel upon him, 342. Magirus, 365. Mallia Scantilla,
218. Mammaea, 337, 392, 455. Marcommanick War, 122, 154. Marcus (Antoninus.)
His Education, 101, 108. Family, 106. Exercises, 111. Adoption, ibid.
Espousals, 113. Good Government, 115. Wars, 116, 122. Laws, 118, 134. Deference
to the Senate, ibid. Moderation, 121. Death, 127, 130. Clemency, 167. Letters,
vid. Letters. Speech, 171. Marius Maximus, 300. Martia, 185, 188, 192, 222.
Martial, 85. Marullus, 115. Maximin, 458. Maximus, 33. Mesomedes, 97. Messene,
32. Months, 188. Motilenus, 186.
N.
NApoli di Barbaria, 227, 229. Narcissus, 243. Neratius Priscus, 44, 64. Nerva
Remits the Persecution of the Christians, 2. Moderation, 3. Adopts Trajan, 5.
Death, 6. Burial, 8. Nigrinus, 47. Nisibis, 33. Nismes, 55, 89.
O.
OLbiopolis, 100. Omens, 77, 92, 212, 228, 253, 290, 321, 348, 406, 456.
Omulus, 103, 113. Ordination of Jewish and Christian Priests, 438. Orpheus,
421. Orphitus, 99. Ovid. 85. Ovinius Camillus, 440.
P.
PAcorus, 100. Paenula, 419. Pallas, 361. Palmas, 19, 43. 47. Papinian, 308,
309, 313. Paris, 360. Parthamasiris, 22, 23. Parthamaspates, 33, 35, 45.
Paulus, 419. Pelusium, 58. Perennis, 180, 182. Pertinax. His Extraction, 198.
Employments, 199. Declared Emperor, 202. Ordinances, 205. Death, 209.
Personage, 210. Character, 211. Honors, 213. Pescennius Niger. His Extraction,
268. Personage, 275. Skill in Civil Affairs, 276. and Military Discipline, 277.
Defeated, 238, 274. Beloved, 269. Personal hardships, 281. Expressions, ibid.
Epitaph, 282. Petronius, 309. Phalanx, 443. Pharismanes, 58, 64. 100. Phlegon,
61. Plague, 123, 151. Plautianus, 235, 243. Plato, 422, 138. Pletorius Nepos,
43, 60, 72. Pliny, 37. Plotina, 10, 43, 44, 56. Pompeianus, 309. Posthumii,
288. Pozzuolo, 77. Priscianus, 97. Probus, 236. Prodigies, 100, 191.
Q.
QUadratus, 158, 179. Quindecim Viri. 414. Quintillii, 180.
R.
REd Sea, 31. Rhoa, 33. Rimethalces. 100. Rome, 185. Rope-Dancing, 122.
Roxolani, 47.
S.
SAbina, 39, 54, 72. Sabinus, 371. Salvius Julianus, 64, 178, 180, 215. Satala,
23. Scaurinus, 394, 144. Scevus Aurelianus, 275. Schemsat, 23. Seleucia, 33.
152. Semiamira, 357, 359, 373. Senate. Acclamations, 177, 397. Act against
Commodus, 194. Act in favor of Severus, 397. Senate of Women, 359. Septimius
Arabinus, 420. Septimius Clarus, 51, 54, 60. Septimus Severus declared Emperor,
221, 233. His Extraction, 227. Advancements, 228. Marriage, 231, 396. Enters
Rome, 234. Expedition against Niger, 237. Against Albinus, 239. Severity, 241,
247. Laws, 246. Refuses a Triumph, 246. Successes, 247. Death, 248. Personage,
250. Works, 254, Treachery, 293. Serapis, 134, 246, 418. Serenus Sammonicus,
310, 422. Servianus, 40, 50, 60. Seville, 36, 39. Sextus, 109, 144. Sichem,
238. Silvinus, 371. Similes, 51. Soaterus, 178, 179. Spasinum, 32. Speeches of
Albinus, 287, 301. Pinnius, 331. Macrinus, 334, 345. Diadumenus, 346. Alexander
Severus, vide Alexander Severus. Of Marcus Antoninus, vide Marcus Antoninus.
Statius Priscus, 150. Suetonius, 54. Sulpitius Apollinaris, 199. Swift, 149,
155.
T.
TArragona, 56, 230. Tarruntinus Paternus, 179, 180. Tatianus, 39, 43, 50, 51,
60. Teflis, 117. Terentius Gentianus, 72. Tertullus, 140. Thrasybulus, 457.
Tigris, 29, 31. Tivoli, 76. Trajan. His Adoption, 5. Dream, 9. Character, 11.
Triumph, 15. Bridge over the Danube, 17. Works, 21. Courted by the Eastern
Kings, 22. Titles, 26. Passes the Tygris, 29. At Babylon, 30. Expedition on the
Red Sea, 31. Death, 36. Deified, 46. Image carried in Triumph, 46. Trajanople,
36. Tralles, 92. Treasure Trouve, 65. Triarius Maternus, 204. Tripoli, 247.
Tullius Crispinus, 218, 222, 224. Turbo, 43, 47, 51, 60. Turinus, 428. Tyber,
115.
V.
VErus (Antoninus) His Birth and Family, 143. Education, 144. Preferments, 145.
Emperor, 146. Luxury. 147. Negligence, 149. Return out of Syria, 151. Vanities,
155. Death, ibid. Personage, ibid. Letter, 158. Vespronius Candidus, 221,
Vesta, 361. Veterasinus, 121. Virgil, 424. Virginius Rufus, 4. Vitruvius
Secundus, 180. Ulpian, 371, 408, 423, 444. Ulpius Marcellus, 103. Volusius
Metianus, 109.
W.
WArhel, 15, 19. Wife, 86.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Charles Harper at the Flower-de-luce,
over against St. Dunstan's-Church in Fleet Street.
THE Life of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. An Heroic Poem:
Dedicated to Her most Sacred Majesty, in Ten Books. Attempted by Samuel Wesley,
M. A. each Book illustrated by necessary Notes, explaining all the more
difficult Matters in the whole History: Also a Prefaratory Discourse concerning
Heroic Poetry. The Second Edition revised by the Author, and improved with the
Addition of a large Map of the Holy Land; and a Table of the Principal Matters;
with Sixty Copper Plates, by the celebrated Hand of W. Faithorne. Folio. The
Second and Third Parts of the Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley. The Second
containing what was written and published by himself in his younger Years,
reprinted together: The Sixth Edition. The Third Part containing his Six Books
of Plants, viz. the First and Second of Herbs, the Third and Fourth of Flowers,
the Fifth and Sixth of Trees; now made English by several Hands, with necessary
Tables to both Parts, and diverse Poems in praise of the Author. Folio.
Resolves: Divine, Moral, Political. With several New Additions in Prose and
Verse. In this Eleventh Edition, References are made to the Poetical Citations
heretofore much wanted. By Owen Felltham Esquire; Folio. Price 12 s. The Works of
the Famous Nicholas Machival, Citizen and Secretary of Florence. Newly and
faithfully Translated into English. Fol. Price 15 s. The Whole Duty of Man,
according to the Law of Nature, by that Famous Civilian Samuel Puffendorf; now
made English. Octavo. Price 3 s. 6 d. Dr. Willis's Practice of Physic, being
the whole Works of that Famous Physician; rendered into English; second Edition,
with Forty Copper Plates. Folio. The Historical and Miscellaneous Tracts of the
Reverend and Learned Peter Heylin, D. D. now collected into one Volume. And an
Account of the Life of the Author, never before published. Folio. The Religion
of Protestants, a Safe way to Salvation; with a Discourse of the Apostolical
Institution of Episcopacy. By W. Chillingworth, M. A. To which in this Edition,
is added his Letter, showing the Reason why he left Popery. Folio. The History
of Q. Elizabeth, by W. Cambden, King at Arms. Fourth Edition. Folio. An
Impartial Collection of the great Affairs of State, from the beginning of the
Scotch Rebellion in the Year 1639. to the Murder of King Charles the First.
Folio. In two Vol. By Dr. Nalson. Dugdale's Monasticon Anglicanum. Folio. In
three Volumes. The History of King Edward II. King of England, and Lord of
Ireland, Folio. Dr. Willis's Practice of Physic. Octavo. With his Treatise of
the Plague Price 7 s. Bishop Usher's Power of the Prince, and the Obedience
required of the Subject, with a large Preface, by Bishop Sanderson. Octavo.
Animadvers. on a Book Entitled, The Theory of the Earth. By Herbert Lord Bishop
of Hereford. A Treatise of Moral and Intellectual Virtues, wherein their Nature
is fully explained, and their Usefulness proved. By J. Hartcliff, B. D. Price 4
s. Contemplations Moral and Divine, in two Parts. By Sir Matthew Hale, Knight,
late Chief Justice of the King's Bench. Octav. Price 5 s. A Voyage to Suratt,
in the Year 1689. giving a large Account of that City, and its Inhabitants, and
of the English Factory there: Likewise a Description of Madera, St. Jago,
Annobon, Cabenda, and Malemba (on the Coast of Africa) St. Helena, Johanna,
Bombay, the City of Muscatt, and its Inhabitants in Arabia Felix, Mocha, and
other Maritim Towns on the Red Sea, the Cape of good Hope, and the Island of
Ascension. By J. Ovington, M. A. Chaplain to His Majesty Octav. Price 6 s. A
plain Method of Christian Devotion; laid down in Discourses, Meditations, and
Prayers, fitted to the various Occasions of a Religious Life: Translated and
Revised from the French of Monsieur Jurieu, the two and twentieth Edition, with
a Preface. By W. Fleetwood, Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty. Price 2 s. 6
d.
THE LIVES OF THE Roman Emperors FROM DOMITIAN where Suetonius ends, to
Constantine the Great.

Containing Those of NERVA and TRAJAN from Dion Cassius: A Translation of the
six Writers of the Augustean History, And Those of DIOCLESIAN, and His
Associates, from Eusebius and Others.

With the Heads of the Emperors in C^^per Plates, AND A Chronology Running
through the whole Time, being the Space of two hundred and ten Years.

Dedicated to His Most Sacred Majesty.

By JOHN BERNARD. A. M.

VOL. II.

London: Printed for Charles Harper, at the Flower de Luce over against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. School.

THE Lives in Vol. II.
MAximine, Father and Son, Gordianus, Father and Son, Gordianus III. Maximus
and Balbinus.
By Jul. Capitolinuus. The Emperors from Gordianus III. to Valerian; A
Supplement. Valerian, Father and Son, Gallienus, Father and Son, The Thirty
Tyrants, Claudius.
By Trebellius Pollio. Aurelian, Tacitus, Florianus, Probus.
By Flavius Vopiscus. Firmus, Saturninus, Proculus, Bonosus.
By Flavius Vopiscus. Carus, Numerianus, Caesar, Carinus.
By Flavius Vopiscus. Dioclesian, Maximian, Constantius Chlorus, Galerius.
By J. Bernard.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Continuation of These Lives from Constantine the Great inclusively down to
Augustulus, under whom that mighty Empire received its Period, is now in Hand,
and will be finished with all Convenient Expedition.

ERRATA in Vol. I.
PAGE 2. line 28. for Tirenta read Fronto. p. 20. l. 7. r. in spilling their
Blood. Over. l. 8. r. di Roma, he p. 81. in the marg. dele his Wife. p. 87. l.
21. r. Cities, Temples also. He. p. 96. in the marg. r. Honor done to his
Wife. p. 125. l. 23. dele Though. p. 147. l. 32. for Coach r. Couch. p. 147. l.
8. dele without Orders, and r. unlawfully. p. 164. l. 4. for virilis r.
virisque p. 222. l. 27. for this r. their. p. 252. l. 11. after him add; p.
280. l. 15. for on r. or. p. 285. l. 17. r. apply to himself. p. 330. l. 9.
dele about the Emperors. p. 339. l. 24. dele when. l. 25. r. when he said they
had deserved. p. 366. l. 15. r. he began.

ERRATA in Vol. II.
PAGE 2. line 30. for Bells read Belts. p. 6. l. 18. r. gave him. p. 18. l. 17.
for see r. secure. p. 22. l. 33. r. Towns. p. 28. l. 5. r. Palace. p. 84. l.
33. r. the Aquaeducts. p. 89. l. 26. r. the Senate's own Power. p. 107. l. 11.
r. devoted, Sir, p. 116. l. 9. r. a sudden. p. 126. l. 6. for Pomilions r.
Pavilions. l. 16. r. of a God. p. 134. l. 7. dele all. p. 136. l. 19. r and in
consort. p. 177. l. 20. r. no small Miracle. p. 299. l. 11. r. that you have
taken. p. 303. l. 16. r. there were three.

THE A. Christi CCXXXVI.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Maximin the First. Addressed to the EMPEROR
Constantine the Great,
BY JULIUS CAPITOLINUS.
VOL. II.
MAXIMIN the First was a Barbarian Born, of a Village of the Province of
Romania, that is, the Ancient Thrace. His Father's His Extraction.
Name was Mecca, his Mother's Hababa: The one a Goth, the other an Alan. Under
the Reign of the Emperor Septimius Severus, he became first a Soldier. Under
the Reign of the Emperor Alexander Severus he Rise and Flourished; insomuch
that he succeeded him in the Empire; and being unwilling, after he was Emperor,
to have it known, that his Father and his Mother were both Barbarians, he
ordered the Names of them, which he had discovered at the beginning, to be as
much as was possible, suppressed again, and concealed from the World.

He was a Shepherd in the beginning of his Youth; and as he grew, he sometimes
even then, was the Champion of the Village of which he was. His First Service
as a Soldier, was amongst the Horse, because of his great size and strength of
Body, which fitted him more especially and cut him out for a Trooper. He
acquitted himself in that Quality to admiration. He was of a Manly Look,
Roughhewn, Fierce, Proud, apt to Contemn; which yet did not hinder him from
being oftentimes Just in what he did. The Occasion which introduced His Rise.
him into the Knowledge of the Emperor Septimius Severus, was this: That
Prince, upon the Birth of Geta his younger Son, appointed a Divertisement of
some Games and Exercises to be performed by the Soldiers, and proposed Prizes
for the Conquerors, in pieces of Silver of fine Bracelets, Collars, and little
Bells. Maximin was as yet a Youth, and could scarce speak the Latin Tongue.
However he took the Courage upon him, in Words which were partly Latin and
partly Thracian, publicly to beg leave of the Emperor, that he might try his
Skill against some who appeared in the Lists, and who were Men of a more than
ordinary Account amongst the Soldiers. Severus admiring him for his Size,
matched him, being a Barbarian, not with the Soldiers, but some of the stoutest
Slaves and Drudges of the Camp; of whom he overcame sixteen one after another:
for which he received as many Praemiums, proportionable to the meanness of the
Combat, that is, they were of an inferior Value to those that were appointed
for the Soldiers; and withal he was ordered to be taken into the Army. Another
day as Severus went to the Camp, he observed Maximin in the Crowd Dancing and
Leaping after the Barbarian way. Severus ordered a Tribune to Reform him,
according to the Discipline of the Romans. Maximin understanding that the
Emperor had spoken of him, and being proud to be taken Notice of, advanced to
the side of the Emperors Horse, and began to Run by him as he Rid. Severus, to
try his Running, gave a loose to his Horse, and took several Rounds, till
fatigued by reason of his Age, and seeing Maximin still keep close by him, You
Thracian, says he to him, can you Wrestle as well as you Run? Sir, says
Maximin, as much as you please. After this Severus dismounted, and ordered some
of the freshest and the strongest Soldiers to be picked out, to Wrestle with
him: Maximin overthrew seven of these one after another, without Breathing; for
which he received the before mentioned Prizes in Silver, and Severus besides,
did him the particular Honor to present His Preferment.
him with a Collar of Gold, and he placed him in his Guards du Corpse, because
he should be always by him. This made Maximin a Remarkable Man, and acquired
him a great Esteem. The Tribunes loved him. His Fellow Soldiers admired him. He
obtained of the Emperor any thing that he desired; who preferred him above the
rest of the Soldiers, though he was as yet a Youth. He excelled all in the
Height and Vastness of his Body, with which he had at the same time a good
Mien; and in the largeness of his Eyes, which were no less Bright and Handsome.
It is certain, that Maximin often drank Eight Amphors of Wine in a day; and eat
either Forty, or as Aelius Cardus says, Sixty pound of Flesh. But he kept
himself wholly from Herbs, and rarely eat any Cold Meats, unless it was, when
he was under a necessity of drinking. He often preserved his Sweat, and
received it into Cups, or a little Vessel for the purpose; so that he could
show you, two or three Quarts of his Sweat at a time.

Under the Reign of Antoninus Caracallus, he long Commanded as a Centurion, and
conducted Parties, and served several other Occasions of the Army. He hated the
succeeding Reign of Opilius Macrinus; because that Prince had been the Author
of the Murder of Antoninus Caracallus, who was the Son of Severus, who was
Maximin's first Master. In this Reign therefore he quitted the Army, and bought
himself an Estate in a Village of Romania, where he was born. There he
continually entertained a Commerce with the Goths. The Goths loved him
entirely, as if he was their own Fellow-Citizen: The Alans did the same, and
brought him, whenever they approached to the Banks of the River, Presents,
which he returned in others to them again. But when Opilius Macrinus, together
with his Son, was killed, and Maximin found that Heliogabalus was preferred to
the Empire, as the Reputed Son of Antoninus Caracallus, Maximin, who was then
of a mature Age, waited upon him with a Complement, That as he had had the
Honor of the good Opinion of his Grandfather the Emperor Severus, so he
wished, he might be so happy as to have his.

Heliogabalus rallied with him in his Impure way, and said, Maximin, Thou have
Tired thy His Reception from Heliogabalus
Sixteen or Twenty, or sometimes Thirty Lusty Soldiers I hear, in Playing and
Wrestling with them; How many Times can thou Perform with a Woman; I warrant
thee, thou can do that Thirty times too. Maximin, not satisfied with this
sort of Reception, would have retired himself into the Country again, but that
the Friends of Heliogabalus detained him, and thought it a Scandal to let the
Bravest Man of the Age go off so, who was another Hercules, another Achilles,
another Ajax, as the People called him. They did him the Honor to Create him a
Tribune; but yet he never attended upon the Person of that most Impure Prince,
nor came to salute him in all the three Years of his Reign; but was always
either moving from place to place upon one specious Occasion or other, or he
pretended himself Sick, that he could not wait upon the Court.

After Heliogabalus was killed, and that Maximin had an Account, that Alexander
Severus And by Alexander Severus.
the Son of Mammaea, was advanced to the Empire, he came to Rome; where he was
received by the New Prince with all the Joy and all the Satisfaction in the
World. Insomuch that he spoke to the Senate of him in these Words: Gentlemen,
Maximin the Tribune is come to me, who could not reconcile himself to the
Service of that Impure Beast my Predecessor. I have given him a Robe
Embroidered with Studs of Gold. His Merit recommanded him to my Father the
Emperor Septimius Severus, and you know the Reputation that he has attained to
since. Immediately he gave the Command of the Fourth Legion, which was one that
himself had raised, and consisted all of young Soldiers; and at the same time
he expressed himself thus:

My very dear and entirely Beloved Maximin, I have not thought fit to Trouble
you with the Command of a Legion of Old Soldiers for this reason; because I
question, whether the Vices of such, being confirmed in them under the Command
of others, are capable of your Amendment. I give you a Legion of Novices, whom
you may bring up your self to your own hand. Mould them, Form them as you
please. It will be a great Service to the State and to me, to teach them their
Arms so, that they may produce many Maximins, that is, many such good Soldiers
as you.

No sooner had Maximin received this Legion, but he began to Exercise them.
Every fifth Day he did the same; and represented with them Fights and the
Taking of Towns. He inspected their Swords, Javelins, Targets, Helmets,
Clothes, and all their Arms and Equipages perpetually, to their very Shoes. He
was as a Father to them. And when some of the other Tribunes pretended to blame
him, saying; Why should you take so much Pains, who are in a Post to be
preferred to be a General when you please? Says he, The Greater I ever am, the
more Pains I shall take still. He Wrestled with his Men himself, and Threw half
a dozen His mighty Strength.
or more of them one after another, though perhaps he was an Old Man grown to
them then: This created him much Envy. One Tribune particularly, who was
Prouder and more Angry than the rest, and of a large Size, and known Gallantry,
said to him; What great Matter is it for a Tribune to Throw his own Soldiers?
Says Maximin, Shall you and I try then our Strength together? The other
consented: But Maximin gave him such a Thrust with his open Hand on his Breast
as he came, that he fell flat upon his Back; and Maximin cried, Come on any
other Tribune that will. Aelius Cordus tells us, that Maximin was such a Vast
Man, that he was Eight Foot and almost a half High. His Hand so big, that his
Wife's Bracelet for her Arm made him but a Ring for his Thumb. These other
things are commonly reported of him, That he could draw a Chariot after him by
his Arms, and move a loaded Litter himself; That if he gave a Horse a Blow on
the Mouth with his Fist, he struck out his Teeth; and if he Kicked him, he
broke his Legs. Hard Stones he squeezed into pieces betwixt his Fingers: The
younger Trees he tore up. Some have called him a second Milo, a Hercules, and
an Antaeus, for his Strength and Vastness.

These things therefore rendering him so He is made a General.
Conspicuous, the Emperor Alexander Severus, who was a great Judge of Persons
of Merit, preferred him to the General Command of his Army, with the universal
Satisfaction of all the Tribunes, Officers, and Men. This was afterward Fatal
to that Prince. All that Army which was grown in a manner unserviceable, under
the Reign of Heliogabalus, Maximin brought to be Disciplined to his own mind.
So that when Alexander Severus was in Gallia, Encamped not far from some Town
there, whether it was that Maximin set the Soldiers upon him, as some say; or
whether it was, the disaffected Tribunes amongst the Gauls, whom Alexander
Severus Disbanded (for he Disbanded whole Legions there, with the same severity
as before he had done in the East) I know not; but a Party of Soldiers broke in
on a sudden upon him, and killed both him and his Mother; and Maximin was
immediately proclaimed Emperor. The Age of Alexander Severus, who was otherwise
an excellent Prince, was one thing that might be liable to create in some
measure a Contempt of him.

Maximin, who never was any thing but a He is proclaimed Emperor.
Soldier, and had not yet been a Senator, was Proclaimed Emperor by the Army,
without any Decree of the Senate; and his Son (of whom hereafter) was given him
to be his Colleague. Now Maximin was always so Wise, that he not only Commanded
his Soldiers by his Authority, but he made them love him very much, by the
Rewards and Advantages that he gave them. He never injured them in their Pay.
He never Mustered Smiths or any sort of Artisans as others do in his Army. He
often took them to Hunt with him. But together with these Virtues, he was so
Cruel, that he was called by all the Names of His Cruelty.
a Cyclops, a Busyris, a Sciron, a Phalaris, a Typhon, and a Gyges. The Senate
dreaded him so, that their Wives and Children made Prayers in the Temples, in
public and in private, that he might never see the City of Rome. They had
heard, how in his method of Reforming the Discipline of the Army, some he
Crucified, some he stuffed into the Bodies of Beasts newly killed, some he cast
alive to Wild Beasts, some he Cudgel'd to death, and all this without
distinction of the Quality of the Person. They feared, he would pretend to
Reform the State the same way: which yet is not a Course for a Prince to take,
who designs to be Loved. But it was Maximin's Persuasion, that the Empire was
not to be held by him without Cruelty. He suspected, that the Nobility would
contemn his Low and Barbarian Birth. He remembered, that he had been slighted at
Rome formerly, even by the Servants of some of the Nobility, who would not
admit him to see them. And as the Consciousness of an Ignoble Mind is of
strange Effect, he thought, that as many as were privy to his Base Original,
would use him accordingly still. All such therefore he Killed, and amongst
those, some that had been his Friends, and had given him often several things
in Charity and Pity to the poor Condition he was in, at his first coming to
Rome. Never was any thing on the Earth crueller than he. He thought himself
almost Immortal; he scarce thought he could be Killed; he confided so much upon
his Strength and the Magnitude of his Body, and his Parts. But, as an Epigram
said, which was made upon him in relation to this, He that cannot be killed by
one, is to be killed by many; As Great as an Elephant is, an Elephant is to be
Killed; As Strong as a Lion is, a Lion is to be Killed; As Strong as a Tiger
is, a Tiger is to be Killed; So he that does not fear to be killed by One Man,
let him have a care however of a Number. This Epigram was repeated by a Mimick
in his presence from the Stage. But being repeated in Greek, which was a
Language which he who was a Thracian and a Barbarian did not understand, and
not being told the true meaning of it, it passed upon him. He retained no
Persons of the Nobility about him. He Reigned like another Spartacus or an
Athenion, with a Court, as it were of Mobb. All the Ministers of Alexander
Severus he put to Death after several ways. He envied the Designs of that
Prince, and his Disposition of things; and the Suspicion which he had of every
one who had served or loved him, provoked Maximin to be more and more Cruel.

This being his way, to Live and Reign like a Fury, he was made yet far more
Cruel and Inhumane by a Conspiracy against him of one A Conspiracy against him
Magnus a Consul, who with a number of Soldiers and Centurions, had laid a
design to Kill him, and to Translate the Empire upon himself. The Manner that
they pretended to take to do it was this: Maximin having made a Bridge to pass
the River into Germany, the Conspirators who were to accompany him, after he
was Landed, were to break the Bridge and Kill him, and cry, he was killed by an
Ambuscade of the Enemy. In the mean time Magnus should take upon him the
Empire. It is true, Maximin, as he perfectly understood the matter of War, was
fond of that War against the Germans: He knew his being a good Soldier was the
occasion that he was made Emperor; and he was ambitious to keep up the
Reputation which he had, and to outshine particularly the Glory of the late
Prince, whom he had Murdered. He kept his Men daily to their Exercises, when he
was Emperor, as he did when he was a Tribune: He put himself in Arms at the
Head of them, and with his Hand and the movements of his Body, taught them a
great many things. But whether or no, that Plot of Magnus to Kill him, was
real, or whether it was a Fiction of Maximin's own, for an opportunity to
increase the matter of his Cruelty, I cannot say. However it was, he put to
Death above four thousand Men upon it, and was not satisfied neither with all
that Blood. He put them all to Death without Informer, without Accuser
appearing against them, without Trial, without any Defense of themselves; and
all their Estates he Confiscated.

The Emperor Alexander Severus had taken into his Army a Body of Auxiliaries of
Parthians, Mesopotamians, and others out of the East, who being excellent
Archers, he judged would be of great Use in the War against the Germans. These
Archers upon the Death of that The Revolt of the Auxiliaries.
Prince, whom they very much loved, Revolted from Maximin, because they would
not be persuaded, but that Maximin had been the Author of this Murder. They set
up Titus Quartinus, who was a Captain of their own, to be their General and
their Emperor. They put upon him the Purple, and adorned him with all the State
of a Person in such a Place. Titus complied with them in it, but it was against
his Will: But being afterward killed in his Tent as he lay asleep by one of
his own Men called Macedon, who envied him only because he was Preferred before
him, and his Head being brought to Maximin, this Defection ceased; and Maximin
at first gave Thanks to Macedon for the Service which he had done him; but
afterward he hated him as a Traitor, and put him to Death. Still this
Defection served to increase the Tyranny of Maximin; as a Beast when he is
Wounded, frets and rages so much the more for it. He passed into Germany with
all his Army: The Moors, Parthians, Mesopotamians, and all those that Alexander
Severus had mustered out of the Countries of the East, marched with him; For
being Light, and the best Archers, none were of greater Use against the Germans
than they. The Preparations of Alexander Severus for this War had been great:
But yet Maximin added such things to them, as rendered them much more Puissant
and more Formidable.

He passed the Rhine, and entering into Germany, His Expedition against the
Germans.
he Burnt the Villages of the Enemy for three or four hundred Miles about. He
drove their Cattle, killed great numbers of the Barbarians, took innumerable
others Prisoners, and made his Army Rich with Plunder. He had certainly reduced
all the Country of Germany under the Obedience of the Romans, but that the
Germans betook themselves to Swim the Rivers and the Lakes, and to seek their
shelter in the Woods. He did a great deal with his own Hand: He had indeed been
cut off in a Lake, in which his Horse stuck fast, and the Enemy surrounded him,
but that his Men came timely up to his Rescue. It was a piece of his Barbarian
Temerity to think, that an Emperor ought always to Fight with his own Hand. He
maintained a sort of a Naval Fight in the Lake, and killed several. So Germany
being conquered, he wrote an Account of it to the Senate and People of Rome, to
this Purpose:

It is impossible, Fathers of the Senate, to express all that we have done: For
400 Miles about we have Burnt the Villages of the Germans, driven away their
Cattle, taken Prisoners, and slain all that opposed us. We maintained a Fight
in a Lake. We had penetrated their Woods, but that the depth of their Lakes
permitted us no passage over to them.

Together with this, he ordered Pictures of this War, as it was, to be drawn
and laid before the Senate, that they might read, as well as hear his Exploits.
Which Pictures after his death the Senate commanded to be taken down and burnt.
Indeed he hated the Senate in his heart, because he imagined that they despised
him. In all his other Engagements, which were many, he came off always
Conqueror, and took great Booties, and many Prisoners. He says in another
Letter which he sent to the Senate, thus:

In so short a time, Fathers of the Senate, I have Fought more Battles than any
of the Ancients ever did. I have brought away as much Booty from the Enemy's
Country, into our own, as exceeds all manner of Expectation; And so many
Captives, that the Dominions of the Empire are scarce sufficient to hold them.

From Germany he came to the City Sirmium He designs upon Sclavonia.
in Sclavonia, intending to make War upon the Sarmatae; and very ambitious he
was to reduce the Northern Parts as far as to the Ocean, unto the Obedience of
the Roman Empire. Which if he had lived, he would have done, says Herodian, who
favors him, out of a Prejudice, it is to be thought, to Alexander Severus. But
when the People of Rome were no longer able to support his Cruelty, because he
revived the Practices of the Informers and false Accusers, Counterfeited Plots
to kill the Innocent, Condemned all that came before him without Mercy, made
Beggars of the richest Men, and raised himself Money upon others Ruins; put to
Death diverse who had been Consuls, and Great Commanders without cause; sent for
them from the utmost Bounds of the Empire, in a Barbarous manner, to appear
before him; kept others in Prison, and omitted nothing in fine, that seemed to
flatter his Cruel Inclinations, they resolved to A universal Revolt.
Revolt. And not the Romans only, but the Forces that were in Africa; because
he was so Cruel upon the Soldiers, Conspired in their Opinions with the Romans,
and made a great and a sudden Revolt, in which they set up Gordianus to be
Emperor, who was the Proconsul of Africa, and a Person of much Worth, in this
manner:

There was a Receiver of the Exchequer in Libya, who in favor of Maximin, to
raise him the more Money, grievously Exacted upon every body; till the People
of the Country, and some of the Soldiers fell upon him and killed him, in
spite of the Opposition of his Party which defended him, and which stood up
for the Honor and the Interests of Maximin. The Proconsul of Africa at this
time, was Gordianus; a Man advanced in Years, but of very great Worth and
Virtue, which made him to be beloved; and one who had been put into that
Command by the Emperor Alexander Severus, with the Concurrence of the Senate.
Now the Party that had killed that Receiver of the Exchequer to Maximin, could
not think themselves in safety after what they had done, unless they proceeded
to some further Measures, which might give a New Turn to the Face of Affairs.
So they came to Gordianus to constitute him Gordian forced to accept the Empire.
Emperor. He threw himself upon the ground, and refused it with all the
Aversion and Earnestness in the World. They drew their Swords upon him, and
presented all their Arms against him to kill him, unless he complied with them,
upon the place; and not only him, but his Son after him, and all his House.
Then he Consented. He accepted the Purple, and was Proclaimed, he and his Son
together as his Colleague, at the Town of Thysdrus. From thence he came to
Carthage, attended with a Body of Guards, and all the Pomp of a Prince. He sent
an Account from Carthage of what had passed to Rome, to the Senate; who
received his Letters with Joy, and acknowledged and Proclaimed him and his Son
Emperors of Rome.

All the Delators that had Pimp'd to Maximin, and all his Friends, particularly
Vitalianus the Captain of the Guards, were hereupon put to death, and Sabinus
the Governor of the City of Rome, was knocked on the head in the Streets. The
Senate at the same time, openly and publicly declared Maximin and his Son
Enemies: They sent Letters into all the Provinces, to call upon them to Assist
to the Common Safety and the Public Liberty: Which Letters were generally
received well; some few Towns continued in their Fidelity to Maximin, and
betrayed the Orders and Persons that were sent to them. In all others, the
Friends, Magistrates, Commanders, Tribunes and Soldiers of Maximin, followed
the Fate of his other Friends at Rome. The Senate's Letter to the Provinces was
this:

To all Proconsuls, Presidents, Lieutenants, Commanders, The Senates Letter.
Tribunes, Magistrates, and to all Cities, Free Towns, Towns, Villages, and
Castles; The Senate and People of Rome, whose Deliverance from the Tyranny of
the most Cruel Maximin is Commenced by the Princes the Gordiani, wish Health
and the same Safety with themselves. By the Favor of the Gods, we have
obtained Gordianus, a Person of the greatest Merit and Virtue, a Senator, and a
Proconsul, to be our Sovereign. We have Proclaimed him. And not him alone, but
his Son in Conjunction with him, who is a Noble Youth, for the greater Security
of the State. It is for you to Concur with Us, to the Common Good and Safety;
to oppose in the mean time the wicked Designs of those that threaten us; and as
for Maximin and his Friends, where ever they are, to pursue them to Death We
have ad^udged him an Enemy, together with his Son.

Now the Act of the Senate for Constituting ^he two Gordiani, the Father and
the Son, Em^erors, passed in this manner: On the 6th. ^f the Calends of June,
the Senate being Assem(...)led in the Temple of Castor and Pollux, Junius
^yllanus the Consul, read the Letter of Gordianus to them, which he had
received out of Africa. The Letter was this.

Fathers of the Senate, It was altogether against my Will, that the People of
this Country, and the Army to whom the preservation of it is committed, have
called me to the Empire. But with an eye to you, I content my self to sustain
that Necessity. It is for you to consider what you will do. For till I receive
the Judgment of the Senate, I shall be uncertain and full of doubt, what course
to take.

As soon as this Letter was read, the Senate Answered it in these Acclamations.

The Gods preserve our Augustus, and our Emperor Gordianus. The Gods give a
happy Reign to your Majesty, who has Delivered us. May your Majesty, who is
our Deliverer, Reign in safety. The State is see in you. We give you all
possible Thanks.

Then the Consul moved the Senate, and said: Fathers of the Senate, what is
your Judgment as to the Maximins? They cried, Enemies, Enemies. The Consul
moved the Senate again, and said, What is your Judgment as to the Friends and
Adherents of Maximin? They cried, Enemies, Enemies! whoever kills them, shall
receive a Praemium.

Then these Acclamations followed: Let the Enemy of the Senate be Crucified.
Let the Enemies of the Senate in all Parts be destroyed. Let the Enemies of the
Senate be burnt Alive. The Gods save our two Emperors the Gordiani! May you
both Live; May you both Reign together in Happiness! We Decree the Praetorship
to Gordianus the Third, the Grandson. We promise a Consulship to the Grandson
of Gordianus. Let the Grandson of Gordianus receive the Title of Caesar. Let
Gordianus the Third, enter upon the Office of a Praetor.

When this Ordinance of the Senate was Rage of Maximin upon the News.
brought to Maximin, he, who was naturally fierce, broke out into such a rage
and passion, you would think him more like a Lion than a Man. He beat himself
against the Wall, and sometimes threw himself upon the ground. He roared
extravagantly, and drew his Sword, as if he would kill the Senate: he tore in
pieces his Royal Clothes, and struck at such as were next him; and if his own
Son had not retired out of his way, they say, he would have pulled out his
Eyes. The reason of his Passion against his Son was this: He had ordered him at
their first entrance to the Empire, to go and live at Rome; which his Son out
of his too great love to his Father, having neglected, Maximin thought, that if
but his Son had been at Rome, the Senate would never have dared to attempt this
Revolt. Whilst he was in this extreme Passion, his Friends carried him to his
Bed. The next day, because he could not otherwise contain himself, nor lay
aside the thoughts of his Resentments, they set him to drown them in Wine;
which he did. The day after he assembled a Council of his Friends, to consider
what was best to be done. They said little; some of them in their hearts
applauded the Act of the Senate. From this Council, he went to his Army; whom
he harangued in a Speech, which was full of Passion against Gordianus and the
Africans that had set him up, and especially against the Senate; and then he
exhorts them to Revenge their common Injuries. The Speech was this:

My Fellow Soldiers, I am to tell you a Thing, His Speech to the Army.
which you will not think to be any News to you, you know the Country so well,
which is this; The Africans have revolted and broken their Faith with me. I
would fain know, when did they ever keep it with any? Gordianus a feeble Old
Man, with one Foot in the Grave, has taken upon him the Empire. And our Holy
Fathers of the Senate, have made his Son Emperor, with him. Those most Holy
Fathers of the Senate! who, as they once Murdered the Thrice Noble Julius
Caesar, so now they have adjudged me an Enemy, at the same time that I am
Fighting for them, and Conquering for them. Nor is it Me only, whom they have
adjudged so, but You and all that are with me. Therefore if you are Men, and
Men of Bravery and Courage, let us march against the Senate and against the
Africans, and you shall have all their Estates amongst you.

Having said this, he gave them a great Bounty, and began to March them toward
Rome. In the mean time Gordianus in Africa having displaced Capellianus from
the Government of the Province of Mauritania, because he was a Friend of
Maximin, Capellianus had put himself upon his defense, and gathered together a
Body of Men against him. Gordianus the Father sent his Son Gordianus to meet
and Fight Capellianus. They Engaged one another with great obstinacy. Gordianus
was killed and lost the Battle: which his Father much lamenting, Young
Gordianus slain.
and knowing that Maximin was very strong, and that on the contrary the
Africans were a People not sufficient for him to trust to, and Old Gordianus
kills himself.
full of Treachery, he, rather than to fall into the hands of Maximin, put an
end to his own days, and Strangled himself.

Capellianus made good use of this Victory. He slew and proscribed all he found
of the Party of Gordianus; he spared none, as if he acted with the very Soul of
Maximin in him. He subverted whole Cities, plundered the Temples, distributed
the Booty of the Temples amongst his Soldiers. He cut in pieces Poor and Rich
together; ingratiating himself much with the Soldiers, that in case Maximin
should dye, himself might have a fair hit for the Empire.

When the News of this was brought to Rome, the Senate being more in fear than
ever upon it, of the Cruelty of Maximin, which upon so much provocation given,
he had Reason, as much as it was his Nature, to exert, they set up Pupienus
Maximus and Clodius Balbinus to be Emperors, together with Gordianus the Third,
a Youth, who was the Grandson of Gordianus the First. So they had three
Emperors to support them against Maximin, at once. The first had been the
Governor of the City of Rome; had passed through many high Offices with
reputation, and was one of great Worth and Note, but not of Birth. As he was of
the severer Life, so was he the most Prudent and most Valorous of all the
three: and therefore both the Senate and Balbinus, his Brother, who was a more
easy Man, committed the War against Maximin to him. He went, Balbinus tarried
at Rome; where there arose intestine Broils and domestic Seditions in a manner
that was more violent, than Balbinus was able to suppress; till the Soldiers of
the Guards cut in pieces several of the People. Gallicanus and Mecaenas were
particularly killed in this Fray, and a great part of the City was burnt.

Maximin was well refreshed, to hear of the death of Gordianus and his Son, and
of the Victory of Capellianus. But when again he received the further News of
the Act of the Senate for the constituting Maximus, Balbinus, and Gordianus
Emperors, he concluded that the Hatred of the Senate to him was Perpetual, and
that they did all really make him a public Enemy; so he was the more violent
to advance his Expedition into Italy: He crossed the Alps, and came to Hemona,
a City which anciently stood in the way to Aquileia. Some say he found this
City empty, and deserted, which he was pleased to see, as if it was, that they
had all ceded to the Power of his Arm. However it was, when he came to Encamp
on the Plain, he could not find Provisions to recruit his Army. For the People
of the Country, according to the Advices that were sent them, had every where
driven their Cattle and their Provisions, and retired within the Town, on
purpose that Maximin and his Army should perish for want of Provisions. This
incensed his Army against him. They did not think to be starved in Italy, but
to be mightily refreshed after their Journey over the Alps. They began first to
murmur within themselves, then to speak some things openly, which he pretending
to revenge upon them, they Mutined still more; but deferred to discover it,
till a convenient time, which presented it self not long after. He advanced to
the City of Aquileia; who shut their Gates against Maximus besieges Aquielia*
him, and were resolved to defend themselves, under the Conduct of Menophilus
and Crispinus, two Officers of the Order of the Consuls, who were sent to them
from the Senate. He offered them Propositions, whereon to Surrender: To which
the People had well nigh consented, but that Menophilus and his Partner
withstood them, and said, That they were assured of Conquering Maximin; because
Apollo, the Tutelar God of the Place, had discovered as much to them by his
Soothsayers. Hence the Party of Maximin, after they were defeated, took
occasion to say, That it was Apollo who fought against them; and the Victory
which was obtained, was not a Victory of Maximus, nor of the Senate, but it was
a Victory of the Gods. At least they pretended to say this for themselves,
because they were ashamed indeed, that so weak and so ill-provided a Place had
held it out against so strong an Army. Maximin passed the River upon a Bridge
of Boats, and began to lay close Siege to it. This Service was hot on both
sides. Maximin and his Son went round the Walls, as near as possible, and
sometimes encouraged on their Men, sometimes made Overtures to those in the
Town. But all did them no great good. Both his Son and he had many Reproaches
thrown upon them, because of the Beauty of the one, and the Cruelty of the
other. At length thinking that it was the Laziness of his Officers, which was
the cause that the Siege was protracted, he put some of those to death, at a
time when he the least should have done it; because it made his Army the more
dissatisfied with him. In the mean time his Army was in a great want of
Provisions: For the Senate had sent Orders to all the Provinces, and to the
Governors of the Ports, that they should suffer no Convoys to pass to him:
They had also sent Praetors and Quaestors to all Towns to keep strong Guards,
and to dispose all manner of things, to his prejudice. So that he who was the
Besieger, suffered the distress of Persons besieged. And it was said, that all
the World conspired to hate him. His Soldiers seeing this, and fearing what
might be the Consequences of it, whose Wives and Children were assembled
together upon the Mountain Albano not far off, they took their opportunity,
when they were at leisure from Action, and whilst Maximin and his Both the
Maximins slain.
Son were reposed in their Tent about Noon, to fall upon them, and kill them.
Their Heads they fixed upon Spears, and showed them to the Garrison of
Aquileia. The Statues and Images that were of Maximin in the Camp, were
immediately defaced and taken down; the Captain of the Guards to him killed,
with others of his particular Friends, and the Heads of both the Father and the
Son were sent to Rome.

This was the End of the two Maximins. An End, just upon the Father, who
deserved it for his Cruelty, as much as it was severe upon the Son, who was a
good Prince. All the Provinces received the News with great joy. But the
Barbarians regreted his loss. His Army submitted: whereof such as were declared
public Enemies, were put to death; the rest were received by the Town of
Aquileia: A great Convoy of Provisions was sent to them into their Camp, which
was almost starving, and the next day they all took the Oath of Fidelity to
Maximus, Balbinus, and Gordianus; Adored Three new Emperors.
before their Images, and acknowledged the two late Gordiani as Gods, who had
lost their Lives in the Cause against Maximin.

It is not easy to express the great Joy that appeared, as the Head of Maximin
was carried through the Country of Italy to Rome. Every body was glad to run to
meet it. The Emperor Maximus was then at Ravenna; where he had raised himself
some Auxiliary Troops of the Germans, and was making Preparations for the War.
But as soon as he received the News, that the Maximins were both killed, and
that their Army had yielded, and sworn Fidelity to him and his Colleagues, he
dismissed those Troops, and immediately writ Letters of the Victory to Rome:
where it produced such an Universal Joy, that every body repaired to the
Altars, Temples, the Chapels and the Religious Houses, to give Thanks unto the
Gods for it. The Emperor Balbinus, who was by nature a Timorous Man, and who
trembled when he but heard the Name of Maximin, offered a Sacrifice of an
hundred Beasts, and ordered the same to be repeated through all the Cities of
Italy. Then Maximus returned to Rome: Coming to the Senate, he Congratulated to
them the Success of his Expedition, and made a Speech. After which he,
Balbinus, and Gordianus, went together to the Court, attended with all the
usual Acclamations of Joy and Victory.

It is fit to know, what a Decree the Senate passed upon this, and what a Day
it was with the People at Rome, when the News arrived of the Death of Maximin.
The Express sent with it from Aquileia, took his way by Ravenna to deliver it
first to the Emperor Maximus, and yet he made such haste by change of Horses,
that he reached Rome in four days, which was never known done before. The two
Emperors Balbinus and Gordianus, with all the People, were then assembled in
the Theater, at the Public Divertisements. Immediately as the Express came
into the Theater, before he could have the time to say any thing, all the
People cried out with great Joy, Maximin is Killed; which was a grateful
Hearing to the Emperors. So the Company rose, and every one went strait to the
Temples and the Chapels, to return their Thanks to the Gods. From thence the
Emperors went to the Senate, which Assembled upon this Occasion, as likewise
did the People; and after the Emperor Balbinus had read to the Senate the
Letter which was arrived from Maximus, the Senate passed this Decree, as
follows.

The Gods Pursue the Enemies of the People of Rome. We return our Thanks to
thee for the same, O most Excellent Jupiter, and to Thee, O Holy Apollo! We
Thank the Emperor Maximus. We Thank Your Majesty's here present, Balbinus and
Gordianus. We Decree Temples to the Honor of the Emperors the Gordiani,
deceased. The Name of Maximin, as it has already been erased out of the
Public Monuments, so now let it be erased out of our Thoughts, and be
forgotten for ever: Let the Head of the Public Enemy be thrown into the River,
and no Man Bury his Body. He that threatened the Senate with Death and Bonds, is
Killed as he deserved. We give our Thanks for it to your most Sacred Majesty's,
Maximus, Balbinus and Gordianus. The Gods Preserve you. We all wish you Victory
over your Enemies. We all desire the Return and Presence of Maximus. The Gods
Save Your Majesty Balbinus. Your Majesty's will be pleased to be the Consuls
this Year.

After this, Cupidius Celerimus said thus.

Having Erased the Name of the Maximins, and Deified the Emperors the Gordiani,
we on the other hand Decree Triumphal Statues, with Elephants, to our present
Princes Maximus, Balbinus, and Gordianus: We Decree them Triumphal Chariots,
Statues on Horseback, and Trophies, upon the Subject of this Victory.

Then the Senate Adjourned. The Emperors retired to the Palaces, and Public
Sacrifices were appointed throughout all the City of Rome.

THE Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Maximin the Second. TO THE EMPEROR
Constantine the Great,
BY JULIUS CAPITOLINUS.
MAXIMIN the Second, or the Younger, and the Son of the foregoing, was a Youth
of that extraordinary Beauty, that generally the Ladies of Wit were in Love
with him: some of them even wished themseves a part in his Caresses, and to
have Children by him. He was so Tall, that had he lived, it is probable, he
would have reached the height of his Father. But he dyed in the Flower of his
Youth, in his one and twentieth Year, or, as some say, in his eighteenth. He
had learned the His Learning and Masters.
Greek and Latin Languages to a Perfection. In the Greek his Master was
Fabilius, who has several Epigrams in the Greek, yet extant; and particularly
some that he made upon the Picture of his Scholar. In the Latin he had the
Grammarian Philemon, Modestinus the Lawyer, and Titianus the Orator. The Father
of which last was he, who has written a Chorography of the Provinces of the
Roman Empire, and was called the Ape of his Age; because he Imitated all
things. He had a Greek Rhetori^ian called Eugenius, who was Famous in his time.
Junia Fadilla, a Daughter of the Family of the Princes, the Antonini, was
Contracted to him; who afterward was Married to Toxotius, a Senator of the
same Family, who dyed after his Praetorship, and has written some Poems, which
we have at this day. The Presents which were given to her by Maximin when he
Contracted her, are particularly recounted by Aelius Cordus. A Locket of nine
great Pearls, a Head set with eleven Emeralds, a Bracelet of four Jacynths,
Garments of Cloth of Gold, and all the Ornaments of Princely Attire, which were
fit for a New Spouse.

As this Maximin was very Beautiful, so he carried a Pride to the highest
degree: he kept himself Sitting, when his Father, as Cruel as he was, many
times rose to Persons of Honor, that came to wait upon him. He was of a gay
Humor, Drank little, but loved good Eating, especially of the wild Creatures
of the Field; the Wild Boar, Duck, Crane, and the like, were his constant
Dishes. Those of the Party of the Emperors Maximus, Balbinus, and Gordianus,
and particularly the Senators, were willing to slander him because of his great
Beauty: Pretending, that it was impossible, that so charming a Gift of the Gods
could be kept incorrupt. So also, when he went about the Walls of Aquileia, in
Company with his Father, to persuade that City to a Surrender. All that they
pretended to object against him, was, the matter of Uncleanness, because of his
tempting Beauty, which however was very far from him. He was so Proper in his
Clothes, that no Lady in the World could be more. He was extremely Obsequious
to such as were of his Father's Friends; that is, so far as to give them what
was in his power, and make them Largesses. But when they paid their Reverences
to him, he received them in a manner, which was again as high. He gave them his
Hand to kiss; he suffered them to kiss his Knees, and sometimes his Feet: which
his Father would never do; who said, The Gods forbid, that any freeborn Man
should lay his Lips to my Feet. Having mentioned his Father, I desire to insert
one pleasant Passage of him. He was, as I have observed before in his Life,
Eight Foot and almost a half high. Therefore his Shoe, or Royal Buskin, was
given by some, to be seen publicly, in a Religious House in a Grove, which is
betwixt the City Aquileia, and a place called Arzia: which Shoe, it is certain,
is bigger by a Foot, than the Measure of any other Man: And hence it is become
a Proverb to say of one, who is of an extraordinary Height, without much Wit,
Caliga Maximini. i. e. He is the Print of Maximin; He treads in his Shoe. But I
return to speak of the Son.

The Emperor Alexander Severus in a Letter to his Mother Mammaea, appears to
have had some thoughts of Matching this Maximin to his own Sister Theoclia. The
Letter was this.

Madam,
I Would propose to you, to Marry your Daughter Theoclia to the younger
Maximin, did not his Father, who is a Commander in our Forces, and I assure you
a very good one, retain something in him, that savours of the Barbarian. I fear
my Sister, who is so acquainted with all the Politeness of the Grecian
Education, will not endure a Father in Law of that Nature. Otherwise, as for
the Youth himself, he is Beautiful and Ingenious, and seems to be bred, and
polished to the Mode of the Grecians too: This is what I think. You may please
to consider with your self, whether you will rather choose to have to be your
Son in-Law Him, or Messala; who is of an Honorable Family, and a very Powerful
Orator, a Learned Man, and who, if I mistake not, would make a good Soldier, if
he was put to the War.


Thus that Prince speaks of the Younger Maximin. I have little more to add
concerning him, besides a Letter of his Father's, expressing the Reasons of his
creating him Emperor in conjunction with himself.

I, says he, have permitted my Son Maximin to be made Emperor together with me,
both out of the Affection which a Father owes to a Son, and also because the
People of Rome and that Ancient Senate may see, and swear, That they never had
a more Beautiful Prince in their lives.

His Coat of Mail was all of Gold, after the Example of the Ptolomies of Egypt.
He had another all of Silver. His Shield was of Gold, enriched with Precious
Stones, and his Javelin of Gold; he had Swords of Silver, and others of Gold He
neglected nothing that could serve to assist his Beauty. His Helmets were set
with Jewels and Embossed. As for what concerns his Pleasures and his Amors,
with which Aelius Cordus asperses him, I must refer the Reader, if he desires
to know them, rather to that Author, than delay my prosecution of the Lives of
the other Princes that follow, in obedience to the Commands which I have
received.

The Omens of his Reign were these: A His Advancement foreshew'd.
Serpent came and twined it self about his Head as he slept. A Vine which he
Planted, produced at the end of the Year large Grapes, of the color of Purple,
and grew to a wonderful greatness. His Shield burnt by being exposed to the
Sun. His Javelin was cleft perfectly in two from the top to the bottom, by
Lightning. Which the Soothsayers remarked as an Omen, that there should arise
Two Emperors upon the Throne of the same House and the same Names, but that
they should not long Reign. When he was under his Master that taught him
Grammar, a Lady his Relation presented him with a Homer in Purple, written in
Characters of Gold. Being invited, when a little Youth, by the Emperor
Alexander Severus to Supper, out of respect to his Father, and wanting the
proper Vest to sit down in, that Prince furnished him with one of his own. As a
Chariot of the Emperor Antoninus Caracallus passed the Streets empty,
immediately he leapt into it, and sat himself down, and was with much ado,
prevailed to come out again. Caracallus was told of it, and withal desired to
have a care of such an Auspicious Boy. Nay, says Caracallus, He is a great way
off of being my Successor: For at that time he was too inferior for that
Matter, by his Quality, as well as his Years.

The Omens of his Death were these: As Presages of his Death.
he and his Father were on their March against the Emperors Maximus, Balbinus,
and Gordianus, a Woman met them with her Hair all disheveled, and in a mournful
figure, crying, The Maximins, the Maximins, the Maximins; as if she meant to
say, Help: But she could speak no more, and dyed. The second days March, at
Night, above a dozen Dogs set up a most miserable Howling about his Tent, and
in the morning were found dead. Five hundred Wolves together entered into the
City of Hemona after him: that is, the same, which upon his arrival was
deserted by all its People. But it would take me up too much time to recite all
the things of this nature. He who is so overcurious to desire to know them, I
would wish him only to read Aelius Cordus, who lets nothing escape him, even to
a Fable. There are no Sepulchers of the Maximins extant. Their Bodies were
thrown into a River, and their Heads burnt in the Field of Mars, with great
Insults and Rejoycings of the People.

I am not however to omit an Observation of Aelius Sabinus. He says, The
Younger Maximin had a Face so fine and so well made, that after his Head was
cut off, as much as it was macerated, blackened and besineared with Gore, any
one might see, that it was the Face of one, who had been an extraordinary
beautiful Person: and therefore when the Head of the Father was carried about
upon a Spear, and great Joy made to see it; People were almost as much on the
contrary troubled, to see the Head of the Son served so too. A Greek Historian
Dexippus adds, that the Son, together with the Captain of the Guards, Anolinus,
was killed in the sight of the Father. Others say, that after the Father had
seen his Son killed before his eyes, he with his own Hand killed himself, to
avoid the Treatment of his Enemies. However that is, we cannot forbear to
remember the extraordinary Firmness of the City of Aquileia to the Interests of
the Senate against the Maximins. They maintained the Siege with that Obstinacy,
that when they Women's Bravery.
wanted Strings for their Bows, they served themselves of the Women's Hair, to
make Strings of: which had been sometime done before by the City of Rome. In
Memory whereof, and to the Honor of the Ladies, the Senate there Dedicated a
Temple to Venus with this Title, Veneri Calvae; To Venus the Bald.

IMP. M. ANT. GORDIANVS AFR. AVG.

portrait of Gordianus I

IMP. CAES. CLOD. PVPIENVS MAXIMUS AVG

portrait of Pupienus

IMP. CAES. D. CAEL BALBINVS AVG.

portrait of Balbinus

IMP. CAES. M. ANT. GORDIANVS AVG.

portrait of Gordianus III

IMP. M. IVL. PHILLIPPVS AVG.

portrait of Philip

IMP. CAES. C. MESSIO DECIO TR. AVG.

portrait of Decius

P. 37. Vol. 11.

THE Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Gordianus the First.
BY JULIUS CAPITOLINUS.
Addressed to the EMPEROR Constantine the Great.
THere were Three Princes of the Name His Extraction.
of Gordianus, according to the Account of the best and faithfullest
Historians. The first of the Three, or Gordianus the Elder, was the Son of
Maecius Marullus, of the Family of the Gracchi, and Ulpia Gordiana, of the
Family of the Emperor Trajan. His Father, Grandfather, and Great Grandfather
had been Consuls. His Wife's Father, and her Grandfather and Great Grandfather
had been Consuls. Himself had been a Consul, and a very Rich and very Powerful
one also. He lived in the House which was formerly Pompey's the Great at Rome;
and he had more Land belonging to him in the Provinces, than any one private
Man besides. After his Consulship, in which the Emperor Alexander Severus was
his Partner, he was made the Proconsul of Africa by an Ordinance of the Senate.

Whilst he was a Youth he writ several His Studies, and Munificence.
Poems, now Extant: in which he offers to outdo at least the Attempts of Cicero
in Poetry upon the same Subjects: And as Virgil writ Aeneids, Statius his
Achilleidos, and Homer Illiads, so Gordianus wrote his Antoniniados; which is a
Poem in Thirty Books, and very Elegant Verse, containing the Lives and Wars,
the Public and Private Actions of the Emperors Antoninus the Pious, and Marcus
Antoninus. Afterward, as he grew, he Declaimed in the Public School upon
Controversies, in the presence of the Emperors themselves. He was very
Magnificent in his Quaestorship. The Year that he was Aedile, he Entertained
the People of Rome at his own expense, Twelve times, with the Public Shows:
that is, once every Month: and sometimes he presented five hundred couple of
Gladiators at a Show, never less than one hundred and fifty. He had a hundred
Wild Beasts of Africa Hunted in one day; another a thousand Bears: his sixth
day is very Memorable. There were two hundred stout Stags Hunted by Britains;
thirty Wild Horses, a hundred Wild Sheep, ten Elks, a hundred Cyprian Bulls,
three hundred Red Barbary Ostriches, thirty Wild Asses, one hundred and fifty
Boars, two hundred Wild Goats, and two hundred Deer. All these he gave in One,
which was his sixth day, to be Hunted, taken and divided amongst the People.
There is a Painting of it yet to be seen, in the House where he lived, of the
Great Pompey: which House was his, and his Father's, and his Grandfather's
before him: but since confiscated in the time of the Emperor Philip.

In his Praetorship he acquitted himself Nobly. After which, he was Consul the
first time in conjunction with the Emperor Antoninus Caracallus, the second
time in conjunction with the Emperor Alexander Severus. He had two Children: a
Son, who was a Consul, and afterward his Colleague in the Empire, who was
killed in the Battle in Africa near Carthage; and a Daughter, called Maecia
Faustina, who married Junius Balbus, who was also a Consul. In his Consulships
he was the most Famous of all of his time: insomuch that the Emperor Caracallus
envied him, and admired sometimes his Robes, sometimes his Shows extremely. He
was the first Private Man of the Romans, that had a Consular Tunick and Gown
Embroidered with Palm-leaves and other Devices in Gold, of his own: Because
before, the Emperors themselves, when Consuls, received those Robes upon solemn
Occasions, either out of the Capitol where they were reposited from time to
time, or out of the Wardrobe of the Court. He gave, by the Emperor's leave, ten
Sicilian Chariot-Horses, and ten others bought out of Cappadocia, to be Run in
the Cirque. So that he rendered himself dear to the Populace, who are always
affected with these things. Aelius Cordus says, that in all the Cities of
Campania, Hetruria, Flaminia, Ombria, and the Picenum, he diverted the People
with the Sports of the Stage, and other Divertisements, upon his own Charges,
for four days together. He writ in Prose the Praises of all the Princes before
him of the Name of Antoninus; which Name he so loved, that when he entered his
Son into the Public Register, before the Keeper of the Exchequer, according to
the Roman Law, it is certain, he called him, Antoninus Gordianus.

After his Consulship he was chosen the Proconsul Made Proconsul of Africa.
of Africa, with the consent of all, who wished well to the Honor of the Reign
of Alexander Severus, in that Country. That Prince has a Letter extant, in
which he returns his Thanks to the Senate for making choice of so Deserving a
Person for that Employment.

You could not do any thing, says he, Fathers of the Senate, which is more
Grateful and more Pleasing to me, than your making Choice of Gordianus to be
the Proconsul of Africa. A Man of Honor and Gallantry, Eloquent, Just,
Continent, Good, and so he goes on.

This shows, how Great a Man he then was. When therefore he came into Africa,
the People Loved him, as they never did any Proconsul before. Some called him a
Scipio, some a Cato, some a Mutius Scaevola, a Rutilius, and a C. Laelius. One
day particularly, says Ju^ius Cordus, as he was Reading in public to them an
Order, from the Emperor his Master, which began with these words, Since the
Proconsulship of the two Scipio's, the People took the Hint from thence to cry,
A New Scipio, a True Scipio, is the Proconsul Gordianus: All Happiness to Him:
And several such Acclamations as these, he heard frequently.

He was as to his Person, of a Roman Height, His Person and Character
with comely gray Hairs, and a stately Visage, rather ruddy than fair, a good
full Face, his Eyes, Mouth and Brow, carried a Majesty. He was pretty big in
the Body. As to his Actions, he was so Moderate, that you can say nothing that
he ever did passionately or immodestly, or to any manner of excess. He loved
his Son and Grandson, his Daughter and his Granddaughter, very entirely, and
according to all the Rules of Duty: He deferred so much to his Wife's Father,
Annius Severus, that, as if he was in the Quality of a begotten Son to him, he
never presumed to Bath in the same Water with him, nor before he was a Praetor,
to sit down in his presence. When he was Consul, he either dwelt with him
always in his House, or if he was at his own, he went to wait upon him, Morning
or Night daily. He Drank little, and Eat less: was proper in his Clothes: loved
Bathing; so that in Summer he Bathed four or five time^ a day, and twice in the
Winter: he Slept very much. If he dined any time abroad with hi^ Friends, he
made no scruple to fall asleep upon the Couches; which any body might se^ was
natural to him, and not caused by any Ebriety or Luxury.

Yet did not this good Life procure him ^ happy End and Death. He who was in
the conduct of himself so Venerable, and was always entertaining himself
sweetly with Plat^ Aristotle, Tully, Virgil, and the rest of the Ancients,
suffered an Exit that was very differen^ from his deserts. As he remained the
Proconsul of Africa in the time of the Cruel and Violent Maximin, after the
decease of his first Master the Emperor Alexander Severus, the Senat^ sent his
Son to him into that Province, in the Quality of a Lieutenant to assist him.
No^ there was a Receiver of Maximin's, who w^ Barbarous upon a great many of
the People o^ the Country, beyond even what Maximin himself would have
suffered. Some he Proscribed, others he put to death; enterprizing many things
beyond his Commission, till at length the Proconsul and the Lieutenant took it
upon them to reprove him. He nevertheless pursuing his Courses, and threatening
with death Persons of the Nobility, and of Consular Dignity, and the Africans
not being able to endure such unwonted and outrageous Injuries, they first of
all joining some of the Soldiers to them, killed this Receiver. Then they began
to think, what they should do next to secure the repose of the Country, and
their own Lives, against the Party of Maximin. And it being the time that
Maximin had rendered himself odious unto all the World, one Mauricius a Captain
of Note amongst the Africans, and a Gentleman of good Birth, assembled a Party
of them together upon his own Grounds, near the City Thysdrus, and putting
himself at the head of them, he Harangued them thus.

Gentlemen and Fellow-Citizens,

I thank the immortal Gods that they have given Speech of Mauricius to the
Africans.
us this necessary occasion of providing for our selves against that furious
Creature Maximin. For since we have killed his Receiver, who was just such
another as himself, there is no safety for us, unless we set up a New Emperor.
We have here a most Noble Person, who is our Proconsul, together with his Son,
a Consul, his Lieutenant. They were both of them threatened with Death by that
Villain of a Receiver. If therefore you will agree with me, we will Constitute
them our Emperors, and Array them with the Purple, and the Ornaments of the
Empire, according to the Laws of the Romans.

The Audience answered, It is Just: It is Just. The Gods save the Emperor
Gordianus. We Welcome His Majesty to the Empire. Be You, Gordianus, our
Emperor, and your Son Reign with you.

Having done this, they went in haste to the Town of Thysdrus, where Gordianus
was. They found the Venerable Old Gentleman reposed upon the Bed, they told him
the Resolution that had brought them thither, and presented him with the
Purple. He threw himself upon the ground, and refused it with all the
earnestness in the World. They took him up from the ground; and at last when
there was no possible remedy for it, nor no other way to avoid the Peril, which
was undoubtedly Great from the Party of Maximin, he suffered He is declared
Emperor.
himself to be proclaimed Emperor.

Now he was of the Age of Eighty Years, and had been the Governor of many
Provinces in his time; and his Actions had ever recommended him so to the
People of Rome, that he was looked upon as one, that altogether deserved the
Empire. After he was Declared, his Party cast down the Statues of Maximin,
broke in pieces his Images, and by common consent erased his Name out of the
Public Monuments. But upon Gordianus they conferred the Title of Gordianus
Africanus; not only because he began his Reign in Africa, but upon the account
of his Relation to the Family of the Scipio's. Some likewise surname both him
and his Son Antonini; others Antonii. However that is, after their Elevation at
the Town of Thysdrus, they came from thence to Carthage, attended with all
Princely Pomp. Gordianus, the Son, who before was the Lieutenant to his Father,
was appointed to be the Prince, that should take the Field and be the General
of the War. An Embassy was dispatched to the Senate at Rome with Letters, to
give an Account of all this: which Letters were very well received by the
Senate, whose President at that time was Valerian, who was afterward himself
Emperor. Private Letters also were sent to their Friends, who were Men of Power
and Quality, to invite them to approve the African Revolution, and to make
themselves more their Friends by contributing their assistances to maintain it.

The Senate received the News of the setting Which is approved by the Senate.
up of two such Emperors against Maximin with so great satisfaction, that they
not only approved of what was done, but made a choice of twenty Persons out of
themselves, amongst whom to divide the Country of Italy, in order to defend it
in the behalf of the Gordiani. Of which number was Maximus and Balbinus, who
after the death of the same Gordiani in Africa, succeeded to the Empire by the
Authority of the Senate. In the mean time, an Embassy from Maximin arrived at
Rome, with the promises of an Abolition of what was passed to his prejudice.
But the Embassy of the Gordiani prevailed above it; from which all the Good was
to be expected, that any one could desire: It promised the Soldiers a great
Bounty, and the People Lands and Largesses: It was a great deal more credited,
than that of Maximin: so that the Senate proceeded thereupon to cut off
Vitalianus, who was the Captain of the Guards to Maximin at Rome. For
Vitalianus was his Creature, and had already shown himself of such another
cruel Disposition as his Master, the further effects whereof they dreaded: and
it is commonly said, That the Method taken to do this, was contrived for the
greater privacy thus.

The Quaestor and some Soldiers with him, who were Bold Men, were sent to
Vitalianus Vitalianus slain.
with Letters, pretended to be arrived for him from Maximin. The Letters were
sealed, as it were with Maximin's Signet. Having delivered them, they told him,
that they had some things to speak to him in private. He took them from the
Company, into a long Gallery: where, as his Eyes were upon the Letters in his
Hand, and as he was expecting to hear what they had to say further, they killed
him; and then persuaded the rest of the Guards, that it was done by the Order
of Maximin himself.

It is fit, that I should give you the Decree of the Senate for Constituting
the two Gordiani Emperors, and the denouncing Maximin an Enemy. An
Extraordinary Assembly of the Senate being called, the Consul attended with the
Praetors, Aediles and Tribunes of the People came to the House. The Governor
of the City of Rome was not with them. He absented himself for Reasons he knew
best: And as he was a Favourer of the Maximins, it was a kindness to the Cause
of the Gordiani, that he did so. The Consul opened the Session with this Speech.

Fathers of the Senate,

The two Gordiani, the Father and the Son, who have both of them been Consuls,
and the one your Proconsul of Africa, the other your Lieutenant, are by a great
Attempt of the Africans, declared Emperors there. Let us now therefore Thank
the Town of Thysdrus, and return our Thanks to our Beloved People of Carthage,
that they have thus delivered us from that Cruel Beast, that Savage Beast,
Maximin. What are you afraid of, Gentlemen? What look you about for? What would
you stagger at? This is the thing you have always wished for. Maximin is an
Enemy. Let the Gods immediately take him off, and give us to know with joy, the
Prudence and the Felicity of Gordianus the Father, and the Constancy and Virtue
of the Son.

After this he read their Letters to them, which were sent to the Senate and to
himself.

Then followed these Acclamations of the Senate.

We give Thanks unto you, O ye Gods. Perfect the Deliverance of us from our
Enemies, which you have begun. We all adjudge Maximin an Enemy. We devote
Maximin and his Son to the Region of Hell. We declare the Gordiani our
Emperors. We acknowledge the Gordiani our Sovereigns. The Gods Preserve the
Emperors who are elected out of the Senate. Let us enjoy our Noble Emperors as
Conquerors. Let us have the Presence of our Emperors at Rome with us. Whoever
kills the Public Enemies, he shall receive a Reward.

Junius Cordus calls this a Tacit Decree of the Senate; but what that means, I
must explain in short; for we have no Example amongst A ^acit Dcree, ^at.
us of it at this day. Only, as when your Majesty calls your Chief Ministers
into your Cabinet, to Consult about Matters that are not immediately to be made
known to all the World, your Ministers are under their Oaths to speak nothing
of them, till such time as the Business is completed; so when any Public
Necessity in Ancient Times pressed the State, as for Instance, an imminent
Danger from the Enemy, which obliged them either to take inferior Measures
perhaps, or, to make an Order which was no sooner to be known, than done, or
that they would not have their Friends nor any body to know any thing of it,
then the Senate assembled themselves in Private, and their Decree was Tacit:
They had no Clerks, no Public Servants, no Assessors present: the Senators did
all, and executed the Offices of the Necessary Men themselves; that nothing
that was done should be betrayed. And in this manner it was, that according to
Junius Cordus, the Decree of the Senate against Maximin passed, to Conceal it
so much the more from Maximin.

But, as there are some Men, who cannot keep a Secret for fear, as it were,
that it should burst them, and who blush that what they know should not be
discovered by themselves, and imagining that they shall be Men of no
Consequence, unless they make it appear that they are entrusted with great
Matters. Maximin, notwithstanding this Secrecy, soon came to the knowledge of
what had passed, and had a Copy of this very Decree sent him, which was never
known to be done before. Hereupon he writ a Letter to Sabinus the Governor of
the City, offended at his absence from the Senate at the time when that Decree
was carried; because as he was a Friend of his, he ought to have been there, to
have opposed it. The Letter was this.

I Have read the late Secret Decree of those Senators of yours at Rome; which
perhaps you, who are the Governor of the City, know nothing of; for neither
was you present at it. I have sent a Copy of it to you, that you may consider
what Measures to take, and how to Conduct your self.


The Emotion which Maximin was in when he received the News of the Revolt of
Africa, and the Concurrence of the Senate to it, was such as cannot be
expressed. He threw himself Extreme Passion of Maximin.
against the Wall; tore his Clothes, drew his Sword as if he could kill all the
World, and seemed absolutely like a Man out of his Wits. His Statues and Images
in the mean time, as he was a declared Enemy, were thrown down; and the Senate
made all the use imaginable of the Power which they had taken into their hands.
The Informers, Calumniators, Receivers, and all those Firebrands of the Party
of Maximin they condemned to death. But this did not satisfy the People; who
dragged them also through the Streets, and threw them into the Kennel. Sabinus
the Governor of the City, who had been a Consul, was then knocked on the head,
and left in the Street dead.

When Maximin had heard of these things, he came presently to his Army, and
harangu'd them to this purpose.

My sworn Fellow Soldiers, you who are engaged in my Fortunes, and who endure
all the Hazards of the War with me, whilst we defend the Honor of the Roman
Name in Germany, and with our Arms maintain the Country of Illyricum against
the Barbarians, I am to acquaint you, that the Africans, who are false to a
Proverb, are now Revolted. They have set up the two Gordiani, Emperors against
me. One of them so Old, that he can scarce rise from his Chair: the other so
weakened with his Debauchery, that he is as feeble, as if he was as Old as his
Father. This is not all. That Worthy Senate at Rome has approved of the Fact
of the Africans; and those for whom, and for whose Children's Good after them,
we carry our Arms, have appointed Twenty Persons of the Order of the Consuls,
to make Head against us in Italy, and have declared us all Enemies. Now that
which I say to you is, Let us play the Men and marc^ forthwith to Rome, and let
us Bravely and Conragiously, as we always do, cut our way through them all.

The Army was not so moved at this Speech, but Maximin perceived a slackness in
their March, and a Backwardness, which he did not relish. So he writ a Letter
to his Son, who was a great way behind, to hasten to him with all speed, for
fear the Soldiers should take the advantage of his Absence to set something on
foot against him. The Letter was this, as it is in Junius Cordus.

THis Express, who is one of my Guards, will tell you, the News that I have
received both from Africa and Rome; and also, how my Army stands affected.
Pray, make all the haste you can to me, for fear of any Attempt that should be
made, as is usual: He whom I have sent, will acquaint you further.


Whilst these things passed, Capelianus in Africa Capelianus' s Opposition in
Africa.
took up Arms against the two Gordiani. He had always been an Enemy to the
Father, before he was Emperor; and being the Governor of Mauritania for
Maximin, and an old Soldier, Gordianus after he was Emperor turned him out:
which provoked him to raise a Body of the Moors, with whom he hastily directed
his March toward Carthage, where all the People with a right Punick
Infidelity, were ready to revolt to him from the Gordiani again. Gordianus the
Father desired however to try the Fortune of a Battle. He sent his Son to fight
Capelianus, and the Party of the Maximins that was with him. The Son was then
of the Age of six and forty Years; younger than Capelianus, and not so
experienced in the matter of War; because he had been more conversant in the
Delights, ordinary to Persons of his Quality, than the Affairs of the Field.
They Engaged. Capelianus, as he was the Bolder and the skilfuller Soldier won
the day, and Gordianus was killed upon the place.

The number of the slain in this Battle on the side of Gordianus was so very
great, that his Body after a long search which was made for The young Gordian
slain, the Elder strangled himself.
it, could no where be distinguished amongst such a prodigious multitude. That
which facilitated the Victory, was, a great Storm, which is seldom seen in
Africa, arose before the Fight, and shattered the Forces of Gordianus so, that
it in a manner disabled them. Gordianus the Father, hearing this, and
considering that his Strength was now small, and Maximin's great, and that
Capelianus was at his Heels; That the Carthaginians were a People rarely true
to their Trust, and there was no more safety for him in Africa; And being
troubled to think, that he should fall alive into the hands of his Enemies, to
avoid that, he took a Cord and strangled himself. This was the End of the two
Co-Emperors of the Name of Gordianus. As the Senate had Recognized them both,
so they afterward Deified them. They Reigned one Year and six Months.

THE Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Gordianus the Second.
BY JULIUS CAPITOLINUS.
GORDIANUS the Second was the Son of the precedent Gordianus the Proconsul of
Africa, and was set up Emperor by the Africans, and by the Senate of Rome at
the same time, and in conjunction with his Father. He was one, whose Ingenuity
and Carriage of himself, gave him as great a Reputation, as did the Honor of
his Birth; by which he was related to the several Noble Families of the
Scipio's, that of Pompey the Great, the Antoninusses, and the Antonies. His
Mother was Fabia Orestilla, a Great Granddaughter of the Emperor M. Aurelius
Antoninus; which was the reason that he was Registered in his Infancy by the
Name of Antoninus Gordianus. But yet Gordianus was the Name which adhered to
him, and which he was commonly called by. He was his Father's first Child.

In his Studies he always followed the best and gravest Opinions. He was very
Handsome, His Character, when young.
of an extraordinary Memory, and a kind and sweet Disposition; insomuch, that
at School, when a Child, if he saw some of the Boys beaten, he could not
forbear to cry for them. His Master was Serenus Sammonicus, who extremely loved
him, and bequeathed to him at his death a Library which consisted of Sixty two
Thousand Books; being the whole Library of another Serenus Sammonicus the
Father, who was put to death under the Emperor Caracalla: The same of which
Treasure of Learning extolled Gordianus to the Heavens, and gave him a great
Name amongst the Ingenious. The Emperor Heliogabalus made him a Quaestor; to
whom he was known, by being a young Man that loved Pleasure; but yet without
Scandal, and without ever bearing part in the infamous Luxury of that Prince.
Alexander Severus made him a Praetor, for the Affairs of the City of Rome: He
discharged himself so well, and gained so great an Esteem, that he presently
after was made a Consul, though his Father had come late to that Honor: After
which, either in the time of the same Alexander Severus, or in that of Maximin,
he was sent into Africa, as Lieutenant to his Father, the then Proconsul there;
where what Fortune befell him, we have already recounted under the Life of his
Father.

He loved Wine; but he always had it Infused, And in his advanced Age.
either with Roses, or Mastick, or Wormwood, or other things, that pleased his
Palate. He eat very little. He had dined and supped, as it were in a moment.
Women he passionately loved. It is said, he kept two and twenty Concubines; by
all which, he had three or four Children a-piece. He was called the Priamus of
his Age, for the multitude of his Issue. In Drollery, instead of Priamus, they
many times called him a Priapus. He spent his time betwixt the Gardens, the
Baths, and the delightful Groves. Nor did his Father Correct him; but often
said, That he would one day die a Great Man. For as freely as he lived, he did
not depart from that Vigor, which was natural to him; nor from the Virtues of
Persons of Honor. He was always amongst the most Illustrious Company, and
ready with the best of his Judgment to serve either the Public, or his Friend.
Therefore the Senate were very glad to Proclaim him Emperor together with his
Father, and placed the Public Hopes in him. He was just in his Dress, beloved
by his Domestics and all that belonged to him. Aelius Cordus says, that he
never would consent to Marry. But on the contrary we are told by Dexippus, that
Gordianus the Third was his Son, who afterward, whilst he was a Youth, was
advanced to the Empire, in conjunction with Maximus and Balbinus.

When his Father some time consulted an Astrologer about the Nativity of him,
it was answered, they say, That he would be both the Son and the Father of an
Emperor, and an Emperor himself. Gordianus laughing at it as a Jest, the
Astrologer showed him his Horoscope, and undertook to prove out of the Books of
the Ancient Masters of the Art of Astrology, that what he said was true. He
told him the Day, the Manner, the Place of the Death of both the First and
Second Gordianus; and justified himself with the greatest obstinacy: All which
Gordianus the Elder reflecting upon, when he saw himself an Emperor, he even
when there was no reason, for him to be afraid of any thing, spoke very often
both of his own and his Son's Death, and applied to his Son those Verses of
Virgil, Ostendent terris hunc tantum, etc. i. e. This Man will only to the
World be shown, lamenting his Condition, that he was not long to live.

We have several Discourses and also Verses of Gordianus the Second, extant,
which at this day are often remembered amongst his Friends. They are not Great,
nor yet Mean; but of a middle Character, and such as bespeak him to have been
an Ingenious Man, of a Luxuriant Wit, and negligent of the Parts that Nature
gave him.

He was a great lover of Fruit and Herbs: In his other Diet he was very
sparing: but he was always eating some New Fruit or other: A great lover of all
Cold things: in the Summer he eat little else. He was Gross, and much inclined
to be Fat, and therefore he the rather chose this Diet, to keep himself down.

This is what I have judged worthy to be remarked, concerning the Second
Gordianus. For as for his domestic Pleasures, and other petty things of no
Observation, which are with so little judgment recollected by Junius Cordus,
let any Person who is desirous to know them, read him; who tells you, how many
Coats and Cloaks every Prince had, what Courtiers, how many Servants; the
knowledge whereof signifies nothing. Nor do I think, that it is the part of an
Historian to trouble himself, but about things which it is either good to
follow, or good to avoid.

I shall only add a Passage, which I find in Vulcatius Terentianus, who has
writ a History of his Time. He says, that Gordianus the First was the Reverse
of Augustus Caesar; he spoke so like him, and he resembled him so much in his
Face and Stature. That the Second Gordianus was very like Pompey the Great. But
as to this, I know not what to say: Because it is denied, that Pompey was Fat
or Gross: And he further says, That Gordianus the Third, whose Statues we have
now extant, resembled the Asiatick Scipio. This I thought was Remarkable and
more for their Honor, than to be wholly passed in silence.

THE A. Christi Ccxxxviii.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Gordianus the Third.
BY JULIUS CAPITOLINUS.
AFter the death of the two preceding Gordiani, as on the one hand the Senate
whom that News had struck with a great Consternation, and put them very much in
fear of Maximin, elected, out of the twenty Persons appointed for the defense
of Italy, Maximus and Clodius Balbinus to be Emperors; so on the other, the
People and the Guards made it their Request, that Gordianu^ the Third, a Youth
of about Eleven, or some say, Thirteen, or as Junius Cordus says, Sixteen Years
of Age, might be created and declared the Caesar, that is, the Person who
should next succeed to the Empire; who therefore accordingly was brought to the
Senate and invested He is declared Emperor.
with that Quality with the usual Solemnity. He was the Grandson of the Emperor
Gordianus the First; but whether by a Daughter, as many say, or by his Son
Gordianus the Second, who died with him in Africa, as Dexippus thinks, I cannot
determine. His Mother Educated him.

Maximus and Balbinus Reigned two Years, and then were killed in a Mutiny of
the Soldiers. The two Maximins were extinct before. So there remaining, without
any Competitor, Gordianus the Third, who had for the two years last past, been
honored with the Quality of the Caesar, the Soldiers, the People, Senate and
all the Country, with great Joy and Alacrity, and with extraordinary
demonstrations of their Affection, agreed to proclaim him Emperor: Loving him
in Memory, and for the Merits of his Grandfather Gordianus the First, and of
his Father, or otherwise his Uncle Gordianus the Second, who both of them took
up Arms for the Senate and the People of Rome against Maximin, and lost their
lives in their service by the Fortune of that War.

It was looked upon as a Sign, That Gordianus the Third would not be a Prince
of a long Reign; that such a great Eclipse of the Sun happened about that time;
that the Day was turned into Night, and you could see to do nothing without
Candles. He entertained the City of Rome with Sports and Pastimes upon his
coming to the Empire; not only the more to ingratiate himself with them, but to
make them also forget the Heats and Divisions which they had had amongst
themselves. Then an Insurrection commenced in Africa, headed by Sabinianus, in
the Year when Venustus and Sabinus were the Consuls. Gordianus Armed the
President of Mauritania against that Revolter: who besieged and reduced him to
that extremity, that all his Party left him, and came and acknowledged their
fault. After this, he commenced a War with Persia, the Emperor himself, which
was his second Consulship, and Pompeianus being then Consuls. The young
Emperor, before he went to that War, married His Father-in-Law.
the Daughter of Mysitheus; who as he was a Person of great Erudition and rare
Eloquence, Gordianus thought him not unworthy to be admitted into his Alliance;
and presently he made him his Captain of the Guards. This strengthened his
Reign. Himself was for his Age very Sage and very Advised: but being also
assisted with the Counsels of so excellent a Father-in-Law, nothing was acted
by him that was puerile or despisable; nor was he made a Property of by the
Eunuchs and Servants of the Court, which he was but too much subject to be
before this Match, whilst he continued under the Regency of his Mother.

We have a Letter of his Father-in-Law written to him, and another from him
written to his Father-in-Law, in which are contained great Marks of the
Reformation of the Times by virtue of the Counsels of Mysitheus. The Letters
are these.

To my Lord and Emperor, my Son, Mysitheus his Father-in-Law and Captain of the
Garuds.
IT is a Pleasure to me to observe the Alteration of the Times, since every
thing was bought and sold by the Eunuchs, and such as pretended themselves to
be Friends, but were really the greatest Enemies to your Majesty. I am glad,
that that Blot is removed from your Reign; Your Majesty is your self also very
glad of it; which I am the more pleased to see, because it shows, that
howsoever badly Affairs have been before managed, the fault was not in you, my
Son. Nor was it to your mind, that the Commands in the Army were disposed of
through the favor of the Eunuchs; or that Persons were denied the Rewards due
to their Services; or that they were either saved for Money and Affection, when
they deserved to die, or put to death, when they deserved to live. It was not
by your fault that the Treasury was exhausted; but all these things lie at the
door of those who were continually Plotting and entering into Cabals to deceive
you; whereby they prevented the Access of Men of Virtue and Honesty to your
Person, prepossessing you against such, and on the contrary, insinuating others
into your favor, as vicious as themselves, through whose and their own Methods
together, they made a Prey of you. The Gods be thanked that your Majesty is
sensible of all this, and that you have taken it into your Consideration to
Reform the State. I am happy in being the Father-in-Law of so good a Prince: A
Prince who examines into, and who will know all things, and who has banished
from him those, by whom before he was made an Auction of, and sold to whosoever
offered most.


The Emperor Gordianus, to Mysitheus, my Father, and my Captain of the Guards.
BUT that the Almighty Gods continue to Protect the Roman Empire, the Slaves,
the Eunuchs, would ere this have even Ruined that and me. I now see very well,
that Faelicio was not a fit Person for the Command of the Guards, which I gave
him; nor Serapammo, to be trusted with the Fourth Legion. I am sensible, not to
reckon up all Particulars, that I have done many things otherwise than in
Prudence I ought; and I thank the Gods, that through your Insinuation, who are
entirely Just and True to me, I understand my Error, and that I know the things
which have been before shut up from me. Maurus imposed upon me, and by a
Confederacy with Gaudianus, Reverendus, and Montanus, at his Witnesses to
confirm what he said in order to win upon my belief, he either commended or
discommended Persons to me as he pleased. My Father, I would desire you to
search into the Truth of things. An Emperor is in a miserable Condition, that
has the Truth hid from him. For since he cannot walk abroad to examine what he
would himself, of necessity he must take up with such as he hears, and what
comes to him upon the Credit of others.


By these two Letters it is easy to see, that this young Prince was much
amended and rectified in his Conduct, by the Advices of Mysitheus. The Gravity
and the Uprightness of that Man had such an influence upon him, that he made
Gordianus Famous, who otherwise might have passed his time in great Obscurity,
without any thing but his Quality to recommend him to Posterity.

An Earthquake happened in the Reign of this Emperor, so terrible, that whole
Cities with their People were swallowed up in it. On which occasion a great
many Sacrifices were celebrated in all Parts of Rome, and generally all over
the World. The Books, says Aelius Cordus, of the Sibyls, were consulted, and
all the Ceremonies being performed that seemed to be prescribed therein, then
this universal Calamity ceased.

After the Earthquake, and in the time of the Consulships of Praetextatus and
Atticus, the Temple of Janus was opened (which was a sign of War Proclaimed)
and Gordianus marched The Persian Expedition.
upon an Expedition against Persia. He took so great an Army with him, and such
a quantity of Riches to support it, that he might easily assure the Victory to
his side. He passed through the Province of Maesia, and so into Thrace, where
he Conquered as he went; and whosoever of the Barbarians disputed his Passage,
he fought them, routed them, and drove them before him. He arrived in Syria and
advanced to the City of Antioch, which was then in the hands of the Persians.
Here he engaged the Enemy in several Battles, in which he had so much the
better, that Sapores the King of Persia, was obliged to retire and leave him to
possess himself of the Cities of Antioch, Heren, and Nisibin, that had all been
reduced before under the Empire of Persia.

Indeed the King of Persia was made so sensible His great Success.
of the Power of the Emperor Gordianus, that though he was provided with great
Forces to stand upon his defense, he voluntarily withdrew his Garrisons out of
our Towns, and left them entire to their Inhabitants, without the least Plunder
or diminishing any thing of their Fortunes. All which was much owing to the
Conduct of Mysitheus. In fine, the Persians, who had made themselves
redoubtable in Italy, retired within their own Kingdom from the Arms of
Gordianus, and all the East submitted to the Obedience of the Empire of Rome.
The Account sent by Gordianus himself to the Senate, of this Expedition, says
thus:

Fathers of the Senate, To add to the Victories which we obtained in our
passage into the East, whereof each merits a Triumph, we have delivered the
Necks of the Antiochians from the Persian Yoke, and have removed from them the
Kings and Laws of Persia. We have reconquer'd Heren, and its Dependences, to
the Roman Empire; and are come up to Nisibis; and if the Gods favor us, we
shall proceed further to Ctesiphon. I write to you in short; Praying for the
good Health of Mysitheus, my Father and my Captain of the Guards, by whose
Conduct and his good disposition of Things, as we have happily transacted this,
so we hope to finish the rest also. It is for you to appoint Public Sacrifices
and Thanksgivings for the same, and to recommend us to the Gods, and return
Thanks to Mysitheus.


When this was read in the Senate, they decreed to Gordianus, to represent him
Triumphing after the Persian Mode, in Chariots drawn with four Elephants. To
Mysitheus they appointed a Chariot with four Horses, a Triumphal Chariot, and
this Inscription, To the Highly Worthy Mysitheus, the Father of Princes,
Captain of the Guards, and the Guardian of the Empire, the Senate and People of
Rome return Thanks. But this Felicity did not continue Death of Mysitheus.
long: Mysitheus dying, whether of Sickness, as some say, or whether he was
taken off by the Arts of Philip, who was made the Captain of the Guards after
him, as most others say, I know not; but he left the Public his Heir, and all
that he had was added to the Stock of the City of Rome. So advantageous had
been the Ministry of this Great Man, that there was no Frontier Town of note,
but what he had furnished with stores of Provision, sufficient to entertain an
Emperor and his Army: There was Vinegar, Corn, Bacon, Barley and His Care of
the Public.
Straw, laid up for a Year. Lesser Towns had Stores, some thirty, some for
forty Days, and two Months. The least provided, were provided for fifteen days.
As he was the Captain of the Guards, he continually examined the Arms of the
Soldiers; he suffered no superannuated Man, nor no Boy to serve, whose
respective Ages excused them: He made the Tour of all the Camps, and viewed
their Trenches himself, and went the Rounds many times in the Night. All loved
him, because he was so equal a Friend to both the Emperor and the Empire. The
Tribunes and the Generals had such regard for him, that they never failed in
their Duties before him, nor disputed his Orders. Philip, who succeeded him in
his Place of Captain of the Guards, for some reasons, apprehended him very
much: and this fear put him upon a contrivance to attempt his Life, which was
thus: Mysithe(...) being ill of a Flux, the Physicians had ordered him a Dose
to stop it: but by the means of Philip, that Dose was exchanged, and a contrary
one given him, which increased his Flux to that degree, that he died.

After his Death, which happened under the Consulships of Arrianus and Papus,
Philip, an Preferment of Philip.
Arabian born, was made the Captain of the Guards. A Man of mean Parentage,
Proud, and not able to contain himself in so high and new a Fortune. He soon
began to form designs to prejudge the Army against the Emperor Gordianus. He
brought them one time into places where there were no Provisions in the
Granaries: Another time, the Vessels, which came charged with Corn for them by
Water, were through his means diverted another way. This he did maliciously to
disgust them against Gordianus: because there had been such vast Stores laid up
by Mysitheus for the use of the Army, that with good Conduct they knew they
could not fail to be supplied; at the same time they did not suspect that
Gordianus was so imposed upon by Philip: who to add yet to their Resentments,
and to blow up the Fire, caused a Rumor to be spread, that Gordianus, being so
very young, was not a Person of Ability sufficient to govern the Empire; and
that it was much better that Philip should be in his place, who understood it,
and how to Command an Army. He corrupted the Principes, who are a Body of the
strongest and the stoutest Men amongst them, to his side; till at length, by
his management he brought it about, that Philip was openly demanded to be made
Emperor; which the Friends of Gordianus immediately opposed to the utmost: but
when the Army was in a condition of starving for want of Provisions, the Empire
was devolved upon Philip; and it was agreed, that He is made Emperor.
he should Reign in conjunction with Gordianus, and should be as it were the
Guardian of the young Prince.

Philip, thus possessed of the Empire, comported himself with so much Pride and
Haughtiness in all things toward Gordianus, that as Gordianus was a Prince who
had come to the Throne with Honor, of a Noble Family, and of a Race of
Princes, his Father and his Grandfather being both Emperors before him, so that
he could not endure the intrusion of a Person of so ignoble an Original as
Philip, he assembled, in the presence of Maecius Gordianus his Kinsman, who was
the Captain of the Guards, the Officers and Soldiers of the Army together, and
complained to them; how ungrateful Philip was for the Kindnesses he had done
him, and he hoped that it would be thought fit, to depose him from the Empire
again. He spoke as much as he could, to that purpose; but after all, the
Faction of Philip prevailed and carried it so against him, that they turned the
Tables upon him, and deposed Gordianus from the Empire. He seeing that his
Credit was not so great as Philip's, demanded that at least the Power should be
equal betwixt them. This was denied. Then he offered to content himself with
retaining the Quality of the Caesar. This was also denied. Then he desired,
that they would not refuse him the Office of the Captain of the Guards. But
this was also denied. His last Prayer was his Life, and to serve Philip as a
Commander in the Army. Philip had almost consented to this; who said nothing
himself, but directed his Party in all things by Nods and private Signs. But
when he considered with himself the Affection which the Senate and People of
Rome, together with all Africa and Syria, and indeed all the Empire had for
Gordianus, as being of a Noble Family, and both the Son and Grandson of an
Emperor, and one that had done great Services to the Empire in the Wars, he
thought that it might one day happen, that the Army by some unforeseen
Accident, might take a fancy to re-inthrone him again, because their present
Animosity, which was upon the occasion of their want of Provisions, was but a
Passion that might not last always; and therefore he ordered him to be carried
out of sight ( Gordianus crying as he went) and to be disrobed of the Purple
and killed; which after a little hesitation was done accordingly, after he had
reigned six Years.

Thus by Blood, and not by Right, did the Emperor Philip raise himself. In the
mean time Argunthis, King of Scythia, ravaged the Kingdoms adjoining to him,
unto which he was encouraged, especially by the death of Mysitheus, by whose
Counsels the Empire had been so well governed before under Gordianus.

Philip, willing to conceal his accession to the Empire by Blood, sent Letters
to Rome with a quite different Account; in which he said, that Gordianus was
dead of a Sickness, and that as for himself, all the Army had elected him
Emperor. The Senate was easily to be deceived in the Truth of things at that
distance. They accepted and proclaimed Philip Emperor, and reposed the deceased
Gordianus in the number of the Gods. He was a handsome, gay, Character of
Gordianus.
amiable Youth, obliging to all, of an agreeable Life, and good Erudition; he
wanted nothing but Age for the Throne. The People and the Senate loved him, and
so also did the Army, before the Faction of Philip, beyond any Prince that they
had ever had yet. All the Soldiers and the Senate, says Cordus, called him
their Son, and all the People called him their Darling. Nor did Philip after he
had killed him, take away his Images, or throw down his Statues, or raze out
his Name: He always gave him the Title of a God, amongst the very Party with
whom he had confederated against him: He seriously honored him; but not
without mixing with his Worship, a great deal of foreign Craft and
Dissimulation.

The House of the Gordiani is standing at His Buildings.
this day. It was very finely beautified by this last Prince. Their Villa or
Country-Seat, is upon the Way that leads to Palestrina, consisting of two
hundred Pillars of four several Orders; fifty of the Marble of Carysto in the
Island of Negrepont, fifty of the Claudian Marble, fifty of that of the City
Synnada in Phrygia, and fifty of that of Numidia, all of the same measure:
There are three Galleries three hundred foot long: The rest is suitable to the
Work, and the Baths such, as no part of the World, except Rome, can parallel.
The Senate decreed this extraordinary privilege to the Family of the Gordiani,
that their Posterity, if they pleased, might for ever be exempted from
Tutelages, Embassies, and all other public Duties. There are no Public
Buildings by this last Prince extant at Rome, besides some Fountains and Baths:
The Baths he built not neither for public, but only private use. He had begun
to build a Royal Structure in the Field of Mars, at the foot of the Mount,
consisting of two Galleries of a thousand foot length each, and the distance of
five hundred foot from one another; the Interspace on either side to be adorned
with Greens, composed of Laurel, Myrtle, and Box; and in the middle a Terrass
of the length of the Galleries, sustained with rows of small Pillars, and
having over head another stately Gallery of five hundred foot. Besides this,
he, with the direction of Mysitheus, had designed to build a Summer Bath, which
should bear his own Name; and also other Baths for the Winter, for the use of
this Place, to render both the Greens, the Galleries, and the whole Work the
more useful. But all these things have since been in the occupation of private
Persons, and are now taken up in their Houses, Gardens, and Tenements.

There was at Rome, in the time of this Emperor, two and thirty Elephants,
whereof two and twenty were of his own sending thither; the other ten were
brought by the Emperor Alexander Severus. Besides these, there were ten Elks,
ten Tygres, sixty tame Lions, thirty tame Leopards, ten Hyaena's, a thousand
couple of Gladiators, who were maintained at the Charge of the Exchequer: One
Seahorse, one Rhinoceros, ten White and Wild Lions, ten Camel-Panthers, twenty
Wild Asses, forty Wild Horses, and an innumerable company of other Beasts of
diverse kinds; all which Gordianus had prepared to adorn his Persian Triumph.
But in this the Public Wish had not its effect. For they were by Philip given
to be hunted and killed at the Secular Games, and the Games of the Cirque;
when, during the Consulship of himself and his Son, he Celebrated the
Anniversary of the Foundation of the City of Rome, which was then arrived to
its Thousandth Year.

That which is upon the Records concerning the Murderers of Julius Caesar, is
observed by Aelius Cordus to have happened, now again, to the Murderers of the
Emperor Gordianus. All those, who embrued their hands in his Blood, who (it is
said) were Nine, after the death of the two Philips, came to kill themselves,
with the same Swords with which they had stabbed him.

This was therefore the Life and End of the three Princes of the Name of
Gordianus. The two first were killed in Africa; the third upon the Borders of
Persia: where, at the Castle of Circessum, which is upon the Euphrates, a
Sepulcher was erected by the Soldiers for him, with this Inscription, written
in both the Greek, Latin, Persian, Hebrew, and Egyptian Languages, that all
the World might read and understand it; To the Honor of the Inscription on his
Tomb.
Emperor Gordianus, Conqueror of the Persians, Conqueror of the Goths,
Conqueror of the Sarmatians, Represser of the Tumults of the Romans, Conqueror
of the Germans, but not the Conqueror of the Philips. For the Philips killed
him: The Alans had sometime also the better of him in a Fight in the Plains of
Philippi in Macedonia. Licinius at the same time, that he set up for the
Empire, it is said, defaced this Sepulcher; because he pretended to derive his
Extraction from the Philips.

All which I have therefore been willing to observe, most Excellent
Constantine, to the end that you should be unacquainted with nothing that might
seem in any wise to be worthy of the knowledge of your Majesty.

THE Lives and Reigns OF THE EMPERORS MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS.
By JULIUS CAPITOLINUS.
AFter the Death of Gordianus the First, and his Son Gordianus the Second in
Africa, which happened in the time that Maximin was marching against Italy, in
a great rage to revenge his own deposition from the Empire, and their elevation
to it in his Place: the Senate full of fears of the Attempts and Fury of so
Cruel an Enemy, assembled themselves in the Temple of Concord, upon the Seventh
of the Calends of July, being the Anniversary of the Games in Honor of Apollo,
to consider what course to take in order to their security against him. Maximus
and Balbinus were then two Persons of the first Note in the Senate, who had
been Consuls; whereof the one, that is, Maximus, excelled in Valor and in
strictness of Discipline; and the other, Balbinus, excelled as much in
Goodness. These two coming into the Senate, and expressing in their very
entrance their concern for the News of the Design of Maximin, the Consul, who
was making a Report to the Senate of some things of another Nature, was
Answered by the Senator of the First Voice thus:

We trouble our selves here about Matters of small Moment, and little better in
comparison than Old Wives Stories, at a time that really challenges the highest
Consideration of the Senate. For what have we to do to Treat now upon the
Repairing of Temples, and the Adorning a Basilica, of the Baths of Titus, and
the Rebuilding the Amphitheatre, when Maximin is at our Heels, whom you with me
have declared an Enemy. The two Gordiani, in whom our Security was, are dead;
nor is there at this present any Remedy for us whereunto to recur. Come,
Gentlemen, appoint who shall be our Emperors. What do you lose Time for? Lest
whilst you perplex your selves every one with your Fears, your rather perish in
those Fears, than by Valor and Bravery seek to effect our Deliverance.

The Senate was in a profound silence, upon this, when Maximus, whose Age as
well as his Merits, and his Valor and Severity of Discipline rendered him most
Illustrious, offering to speak his Opinion the next; which was, that it was
necessary, that there should be two Emperors appointed, who should Govern in
conjunction with one another: Vectius Sabinus of the Family of the Ulpii,
desired the leave of the Consul to be heard, which was granted, and he spoke
thus:

It is certain, Gentlemen, that in Changes that are so sudden as this, there is
nothing like Resolving; and the Counsels, which offer themselves to our
Thoughts, are rather to be immediately executed, than disputed. To what purpose
are many Words, and fine Speeches, where Affairs are so urgent? Let every one
have a care of his own Neck; and think upon his Wife and Children, and the
Estate which he inherits from Ancestors. All which are under imminent danger
from Maximin; whose Nature it is to be Furious, Truculent, Barbarous; but yet
his Cause, which as he thinks, is so Just, will make him still much worse. He
has put himself at the Head of a good Body of Troops, and fixed every where
his Garrisons, and is marching toward Rome; and you in the mean time spend the
day in sitting and Consulting. Without more Words, which there is no need of, a
new Emperor is to be made. Nay, I would say, two ^ew Emperors: one to look
after the Civil Affairs the other to be charged with those of the War. (...) to
reside at Rome, the other to march with (...) Army against the Invaders. I my
self will N(...)ne the Persons. Do you Confirm them, if you please: or if not,
produce better. Maximus and Balbinus. The one so great a Soldier, that he has
ennobled his Birth by the splendour of his Valor; the other a Man of High
Birth, the Lenity of whose Temper, and the Excellency of his Life, which from
his Youth he has bestowed always in Studies and Letters, is of the greatest
Consequence to the State. You have my Opinion, Gentlemen, which is perhaps more
dangerous to my self, than to you: But yet neither is it very safe to you,
unless you make either some other, or these Persons, our Emperors.

The whole House unanimously answered, It is Just: It is Just: We all agree to
the Opinion of Sabinus: Maximus and Balbinus, the Gods save your Majesty's: The
Gods have made you our Emperors: The Gods preserve you. Do you defend the
Senate against the Robbers of the Party of Maximin. We commit the War against
the Robbers to you. Let Maximin, the Public Enemy, with his Son perish. Pursue
the Public Enemy. You are happy in the Judgment of the Senate: The State is
happy in you to sit upon the Throne. What the Senate has deferred to you,
undertake with Courage: What the Senaete has given you, accept it freely.

So with these, and such other Acclamations, Maximus and Balbinus declared
Emperors.
Maximus and Balbinus were constituted Emperors.

From the Senate they went first to the Capitol, and assisted at the Sacrifices
there. Whilst they were at the Capitol, the Populace contradicted the Election
of Maximus, because they feared his Severity; and they desired, that the Infant
Gordianus, Grandson of the Emperor Gordianus the First, of about thirteen Years
of Age, should be made the Caesar. From the Capitol, Maximus and Balbinus went
to the Rostra, which is the Place to Harangue the People in upon the subject of
their Election. As they had done this, the People there, together with some
Soldiers who joined them, cried, We all desire to have Gordianus Caesur. Nor
would they permit the Emperors, who were attended with their Guards, to depart
from thence, to go to the Palace, till this was granted: so that Gordianus was
presently taken and carried into the Senate, and the Senate the same day, which
was a new thing, that they had passed the Act in the favor of Maximus and
Balbinus to be Emperors, Assembled a second time, and passed another Act in the
Gordiaus declared. Caesar.
favor of Gordianus to be the Caesar.

The first Motion, which the two Emperors after their Elevation made to the
Senate, was, That the two Gordiani, who were dead in Africa, should be Deified.
Some say, this Motion was made only for the Father, who had strangled himself.
But as the Son died the honourabler death, by being killed in the Field, I
choose rather to believe the Report of Junius Cordus, in whom I remember that I
have read, that they were both Deified. After this, they conferred the Office
of Governor of the City of Rome upon Vectius Sabinus: who was a Grave Person,
suitable to the Temper of Maximus; and they made Pinarius Valens the Captain of
the Guards.

Before I speak more of their other Actions, I will give you some Account of
their Manners and Families: which is done before me indeed by Junius Cordus,
and by Curious Fortunatianus. The first suffers nothing to escape him: so that
many times he takes in things that are Vile, and not Handsome. The latter has
gone through all this History; and has amassed together several things which
are not to be found elsewhere. But he is so short, that he only touches upon
them. I shall not follow the Method of the one or the other; but rather that of
the Histories of Suetonius Tranquillus and Valerius Marcellinus.

Maximus's Father was one out of the lowest Extraction of Maximus.
Rank of the People; a Coach-maker, or as some say, a Blacksmith; whose Wife's
Name was Prima, by whom he had four other Boys, and four Girls, that all of
them died young. When Maximus was born, an Eagle, they say, dropped into the
Chamber where he was, through some Passage, several pieces of raw Flesh: which
no body daring to meddle with, or touch, out of a scruple of Religion, the
Eagle came and took it away again, and carried it into the next Chapel, which
was dedicated to Jupiter Praestes. This at that time seemed to be a thing of no
consequence; but his coming afterward to the Empire showed, that it was not
done without a cause, and that it was an Omen of his Reign. He passed all his
Infancy in the House of his Uncle Pinarius, his Father's Brother; whom he
raised to the Dignity of the Captain of the Guards, as soon as he was made
Emperor. He employed his time to the study of Grammar, but not much to
Rhetoric; for his inclination was always to Arms and the severe discipline of
War. At length he came to be a Tribune in the Army, and Commanded several
Legions, and after that was made a Praetor. His Charges at his entrance into
his Praetorship, were born by Pescennia Marcellina, who had adopted him, and
maintained him as her own Son. Next, he was made the Proconsul of Bithynia;
from Bithynia he was removed to Greece; and from thence, in the third place, to
be the Proconsul of the Province of Gallia Narbonensis. He was sent, in the
Quality of Lieutenant General, into Illyricum, where he beat the Sarmatae: From
thence he was commanded to the Rhine, where he managed things very happily
against the Germans. Then he was made the Governor of the City of Rome, in
which place he acquitted himself with a great deal of Prudence, Ingenuity and
Exactness. Therefore the Senate, though he was one of a Novel Family, which
without extraordinary Merits must have prevented their Favor, did not forbear
to confer the Empire upon him; confessing, as did all the World, that at time
there was no Person in the Senate more fit to sustain the Name and Dignity of a
Prince, than he.

As to his Person and his Manners, which Person and Manners of Maximus.
are Circumstances, though of the lesser moment, into which People generally
delight to enquire, he was one that Eat much, but Drank very little; and Venery
he extraordinary rarely used. Always of a severe Carriage at home and abroad; a
very grave Look, and a hard Face; so that they epitheted him Maximus the Trist.
He was Tall, Strong, and Healthy in Body: one of no great Complaisance, but
Just, and never guilty to the last of Inhumanity or Unmercifulness toward any.
He always forgave, when he was asked; nor was he ever Angry, but where it
became him so to be. He addicted himself to no Parties: he was steadfast in his
own Judgment, and would never so much trust to the Sentiments of others, as to
his own. The Senate loved him the better for all this, and the People feared
him. Those latter knew the weight of his Censure, being a Subject; and they
thought, that the same rigor would but increase upon him being a Prince.

Balbinus was a Man of a very Noble Race; Character of Balbinus.
had been twice Consul, and the Governor of a multitude of Provinces. He had
been the Governor of Asia, and Africa, and Bithynia, and Galatia, and Pontus,
and Thrace and Gallia, and had headed sometimes Armies. But to say the truth,
his Excellency lay not so much in the Military, as in the Civil Affairs. His
Goodness, his Integrity, and his Modesty, gained him a great deal of love. His
Family was very Ancient; and as he said, derived from Balbus Cornelius
Theophanes; who was made Free of the City of Rome by Pompey the Great, and who
was a Man of the first Note in his own Country, and also a writer of History.
Balbinus was as Tall as Maximus, and Handsome: he loved his Pleasures
extremely, in which he had a great Estate to assist him: for he was left Rich
by his Ancestors; and he had added to that Stock much, by being made the Heir
to several of his Friends. He was famous for his Eloquence; a very good Poet at
a sudden and an extempore Verse. He loved Wine, Women, and good Eating; was
proper in his Dress, and in fine, wanted nothing to render him commendable to
the People. The Senate no less loved him. This as to the general Characters of
Maximus and Balbinus: whom some, as Salust compares Cato and Caesar, so some
think, ought to be compared in this manner. That as Maximus was severe,
Balbinus was sweet: As the one was Firm and Constant, the other was Good. The
one gave away nothing, the other abounded in all things, and was as generous to
all the World with them.

Maximus and Balbinus, being possessed with all the other Royal Honors and
Ensigns of the Empire; that is, having received the Tribunitian Power, the
Proconsular Power and the Sovereign Pontificate upon them; the Title of Fathers
of the Country, was likewise added to them. They entertained the People with
the diversions of the Stage, the Games of the Cirque, and the Combats of the
Gladiators; and then Maximus, after the dispatching his Vows in the Capitol,
was sent to the War against Maximin with a great Army; the Guards continuing
with Balbinus still at Rome. I may here take an occasion to say, in a word,
from whence the Custom comes, That when the Emperors are going to a War, they
first entertain the People with the Combats of Gladiators, and the Chase of
Beasts. Some will have it, That it is an ancient sort of a Sacrifice to
Nemesis, the Goddess of Fortune; to satiate her with Roman Blood in the
beginning; that she may have the less thereof to require in the Engagements
with the Enemy. But that which I take to be the truest, and the most probable
Account of it, is; That the sight of Fights, Blood, Arms, and naked Men
engaging each other, should harden them against they met the Enemy, and
accustom them not to be afraid, nor to shrink at all at Death and Wounds.

The Guards tarrying, as I said, at Rome, whilst Maximus went to the War
against Maximin, there happened such a violent Sedition betwixt the People and
them, that it A Mutin^ at Rome.
came to a War, within the Bowels of the City. The greatest part whereof was
set on fire, the Temples profaned, the Streets all of them polluted with
Blood, and Balbinus with his utmost Lenity was not able to pacify them: to do
which he appeared in public in Person. But he was in danger to be knocked down
with a Stone: some say, that he received a blow with a Club; and he could never
have quieted them, if he had not thought upon producing the young Caesar
Gordianus, whom he took, dressed in his Purple, and set him upon the Shoulders
of one that was very tall, and exposed him to them: who seeing him, both the
People and the Soldiers were so appeased, that for his sake they all returned
again to their former Amity: For never was one of his Years, so much beloved as
he; in Memory particularly of his Father, and his Grandfather, who had laid
down their Lives in the defense of the People of Rome, against Maximin in
Africa. A great Instance of the Gratitude of the Romans.

As Maximus set forwards for the War, the Senate dispatched into all parts of
the Country of Italy Consuls, Praetors, Quaestors, Aediles and Tribunes, to
see, that every City was provided with Corn, Arms, Walls, and Fortifications,
to give Maximin at every turn a Check, and to fatigue him with Sieges one after
another. They ordered all the Provisions to be reaped, and to be brought out of
the Fields into the fortified Towns, that the Public Enemy should find nothing
whereupon to subsist. They sent Orders into all the Provinces, to forbid all
Persons to Assist him, under the penalty of being treated as Enemies. In the
mean time another Mutiny happened at Rome betwixt the City and Guards. The
Emperor Balbinus published his Edicts to suppress them, but without effect. The
Guards betook themselves to their Camp. The People began to besiege them there.
Nor was this Mutiny, in which Thieves and Robbers mixed with the rest, to steal
and plunder what they could, to the ruin of the City, and the loss of a great
deal of Riches, quieted, till the People had gone so far as to cut Aquaeducts
that carried the Water to the Camp.

Whilst these things passed at Rome, the Emperor Maximus was at the City of
Ravenna, making great preparations for the War against Maximin; whom he very
much apprehended, and often said, that he went to fight not against a Man, but
against a Cyclops. But Maximin was so defeated of his Designs before the City
of Aquileia, that his own Men killed him, and both the Heads of him and his Son
were brought to Ravenna to Maximus, who sent them from thence to Rome. The Zeal
of the People of Aquileia for the Cause of the Romans in this Siege was
remarkable. They shaved off the Women's Hair in their necessity, to make Strings
with it for their Bows. The Emperor Balbinus was so overjoyed at the Victory,
who had dreaded the very thoughts of Maximin before, that as soon as his Head
was brought to Rome, he offered a Hecatomb to the Gods; which is a Sacrifice in
this manner: A hundred Altars made of Turf, are set up Offering of a Hecatomb.
all in a place. Upon these Altars are killed a hundred Swine, or a hundred
Sheep. If it is an Imperial Sacrifice, the Victims are a hundred Lions, or a
hundred Eagles, and such like. A Custom which many Emperors have Celebrated;
and it formerly was in use amongst the Grecians, to appease the Gods, in time
especially of a Pestilence.

This being over, Balbinus in the next place with great joy expected the return
of his Brother-Emperor from Ravenna, with his Army and Forces entire, which had
had no occasion to strike a blow. For the People of Aquileia, and only a few
Soldiers with them under the Command of Crispinus and Menophilus, who had been
sent thither from the Senate, had prevented their Work, and defeated the Enemy
without them. Maximus took his way from Ravenna first to Aquileia, to see that
he left all the Country safe, as far as to the Alps; and if there were any
Relics of the Barbarians remaining who had favored Maximin, to reduce them.
In the mean time the Senate deputed twenty of their Body (to wit, four of the
Order of the Consuls, eight Praetors and eight Quaestors) whose Names are set
down by Cordus, to Complement Maximus, and to present him with the Crowns, as
also an Act, in which they had decreed to set up his Statues on Horseback in
Gold. The Emperor Balbinus was disgusted at this, and said, that Maximus had
been put to less trouble than he, who had extinguished the fire of a great
intestine War at home, whilst Maximus enjoyed himself in quiet at Ravenna. But
though this was true, the readiness of Maximus to serve the State in Person in
this War, was so well accepted, that the Victory received was totally imputed
to him; and yet it was got, before he so much as knew any thing of it. The Army
of Maximin, after his death, surrendering themselves to Maximus, he received
them, and marched with great Pomp and a numerous Retinue to Rome. He often said
to that Army, that as for what was past, it ought to be forgotten; and he
presented them a great Donative; and sent their Auxiliaries every one home. But
as when Soldiers have once their minds possessed with a hatred, it is a hard
matter to govern them. These Men repented that they had lost an Emperor, who
was of their own Election, now to be reduced under the Command of those, who
were of the Election of the Senate. They discovered as much in their very
Looks, and sometimes in Words. But when they also heard the reflecting
Acclamations of the Senate upon them, for having adhered so to Maximin, they
became the bitterer against Maximus and Balbinus, and every day bethought
themselves of setting up some other Persons for the Empire, if occasion served.

As Maximus entered into the City of Rome, Reception of Maximus at Rome.
Balbinus, the Senate, and the People came out to meet him, reflecting upon the
Soldiers of the Party of Maximin, in their Public Acclamations. From thence
they conducted him into the Senate: where after some other things of course, it
was said; See the Happiness of Princes, that are chosen by the Wisdom of the
Senate; and on the other hand, see the Fate of those that are chosen by Fools:
Now the Army were they that had first set up Maximin; as the Senate were they
who had chosen Maximus and Balbinus. The Soldiers could not hear this without
being more incensed against the Senate; especially because the Senate
pretended, as it were, to have got a Triumph over them.

Maximus and Balbinus governed in the City of Rome with great Prudence, and to
the equal satisfaction of the Senate and the People. They deferred very much to
the Senate; made excellent and Wise Laws; sat in Person in Judicature, and
admirably ordered all the Military Affairs. Maximus prepared all things for a
War against the Parthians; and Balbinus prepared himself for another against
the Germans; designing to leave the young Caesar, Gordianus, behind them at
Rome. But the discontented Soldiers in the mean time, sought an opportunity to
kill them, but had not yet found any, because they were so well guarded with a
Body of Germans.

Some Differences there were betwixt Maximus Jealousies between the Emperors.
and Balbinus; but they were secret, and such as were rather to be guessed,
than seen Balbinus looked upon Maximus, as an Ignoble Man, of no Birth; and
Maximus spurned at Balbinus again, as a weak Man of no Policy. This gave an
occasion to the Soldiers, that had Wit, to understand, that it was easy to
kill two such Princes, as could not agree betwixt themselves. Whilst therefore
a great many both of the Guards and the Courtiers were diverting themselves at
the Public Games abroad, and the two Emperors were left alone in the Palace,
with only some Germans near them, they Attacked them. The Germans were at a
particular part of the Palace, waiting upon Balbinus. The Storm fell upon
Maximus: who not finding any means to save himself without the succor of the
Germans, sent to Balbinus to desire him to send him a Guard. Balbinus
suspecting a Plot against himself, out of an ambition of Maximus to Reign Sole
Monarch, delayed to send him any so long, that whilst they stood in
contradiction of one another upon that Subject, the Soldiers came upon them
both, and stripped them of their Royal Vestments, and drew them by violence out
of the Palace, and abused them, and cut them, and were hurrying them through
the City into the Camp; when perceiving that the Germans advanced to relieve
them, they killed They are both slain.
them both and left them dead in the Streets. At the same time they took the
young Caesar Gordianus with them into the Camp, whither they retired, and
proclaimed him Emperor, as he was the only Person left at present to be so,
Triumphing and Insulting over the Senate and the People. The Germans having
nothing to do to Fight, after their Masters were killed, betook themselves to
their own Quarter, which they had without the City.

Thus died those two good Emperors, in a manner unworthy of their Virtues and
Actions; for nothing was more Brave than Maximus, and nothing more Sweet than
Balbinus. One may be certain of this, from the Nature of the thing it self: For
when the Election is in their own power, why should they make choice of ill
Princes? They were Men, that had been exercised before in several employments
of Honor and Power. The one had been twice Consul, the other the Governor of
the City of Rome; and both were of an advanced Age when they came to the
Empire, and were beloved by the Senate; and though the People at the first
apprehended the Reign of Maximus, yet finding him more Gracious than they
expected, even those had begun to lay aside their Fears, and to Love him also.

Maximus and Balbinus reigned one Year. Maximin and his Son reigned two, or as
some say, three Years. The House of Balbinus is still to be seen at Rome, a
large and stately Building, possessed by his Family to this day. There is a
great disagreement amongst the Greek and Latin Historians about the Names of
Maximus and Pupienus: which are indeed but two Names for the same Person: But
yet the Greek Historians, as Herodotus and Dexippus, whom I have followed,
never using the Name of Pupienus, and the Latin Historians scarce ever using
the Name of Maximus; but what the one says was done by Maximus, the other
saying it was done by Pupienus, and making Pupienus and Balbinus to be Emperors
together instead of Maximus and Balbinus. To avoid this distraction, we are
only to confide in the Account of Curious Fortunatianus, where he tells us, that
as both the Names understand the same Person, he was called Pupienus, as by his
own Name, and Maximus, as by the Name of his Father. The Letter of Claudius
Julianus, the Consul at that time, in which he Congratulates the Elevation of
him and Balbinus to the Empire, is directed to him by the Name of Pupienus:
which is this.

To their most Sacred and most Invincible Majesty's, Pupienus and Balbinus,
from Claudius Julianus.
YOur Majesty's by the good Appointment of the most Excellent and most Mighty
Jupiter and the Immortal Gods, and by the Judgment of the Senate and the
Consent of all Mankind, having received the Empire, to be by you protected
against the Assaults of the wicked Maximin, and to be Governed according to the
Laws of the Romans, though as yet your Majesty's have not sent unto me your
Advices, yet I could no sooner read the Act of the Senate for that purpose,
which has been transmitted to me by my Brother-Consul Celsus Aelianus, but I
must Congratulate the City of Rome, for whose preservation you have been
Elected: I Congratulate the Senate, to whom, according to the judgment which
they had of your Merits, you have restored their Pristine Dignity: I
Congratulate the Country of Italy, whose defense you in a particular manner
undertake against the devastation of the Enemy. I Congratulate the Provinces,
which the insatiable Avarice of ill Governors have rent and torn in pieces,
they are raised to some hopes of safety, and do wait their deliverance from
you. I Congratulate also the Legions themselves, and the Auxiliaries, who from
all Parts of the World have their Eyes upon you to Adore you, and promise
themselves from you a Reign, worthy of the Roman Empire. There is therefore no
Language so Powerful, there is no Eloquence so Happy, there is no where that
Wit, that is so fruitful, as to express sufficiently the Felicity of the
Public in you: We may judge, what Great things we are to expect from you, by
only the beginnings of your Reigns; in which you have re-established the Roman
Laws, and the course of Justice, which was before abolished: You have made your
selves Examples of Clemency, which had been also forgotten; and you have
secured unto the Subject their Lives, Liberties, Customs, and Properties. These
are things ti is not easy to recount, much less is it to prosecute with that
Dignity th^^ they deserve. For how shall I express the sense of the Duties
which we owe to you, for your having preserved our Lives to us against the
Cutthroats, sent by the proud and bloody Maximin every where into the
Provinces to revenge himself o^ the whole Order of the Senate? Especially, we^^
may my Inferior Parts fall below the Dignity of such a Subject, when I cannot
describe so much as the peculiar Joy of my own Mind, to set those two Persons
raised to be the Emperors of Rome, and the Princes of the whole Race of
Mankind, to whom and to whose Censures I have ever submitted my self, and have
religiously endeavored to approve my Carriage and Actions: And although I may
take a great deal of confidence in the Testimonies which have been give^ given
of me, by the Princes the Predecessors to you, yet it is the Gravity of your.
Judgments which will carry the greatest Weight with me, and in which I shall
choose to Glory. The Gods long continue the Felicity of your Reigns to the
Roman World. As Scipio, the Conqueror of Carthage (it is said) prayed, That the
Gods would preserve the State in the Condition in which it then was, because
there could not be a better; so when I reflect upon you, and upon the
Establishment which you have made of the Empire, which was Tottering, till you
came unto it, I can only pray, that the Gods would preserve the same to you, in
that State, wherein your selves have placed it.


Under these two Princes there was a War betwixt the Carpi, and the People of
Moesia: About the same time commenced the War of the Scythians, and the ruin of
Istria. Dexippus gives great Commendations of Balbinus; he says, that he
resisted the Soldiers, when he was killed, with a Courageous Mind, not fearing
Death; and that he was one, who was well instructed in all things: But as to
Maximus, he does not agree to the Characters which is given him by most other
Grecian Historians.

A SUPPLEMENT OF THE EMPERORS FROM Gordianus the Third, UNTO Valerian the First.
FRom the Death of Gordianus the Third, unto the beginning of the Reign of
Valerian, it is accounted to be about Nine, or at the most Ten Years. In which
short time, these Fifteen following Princes, of whom we have little left upon
History, besides their Names, successively carried and lost the Empire of Rome.

I. Marcus. The Senate, upon the News of the Death of Gordianus, immediately
exerted their own Right, and created Marcus Emperor, according to Zonaras. He
was of their own Order, a Venerable Person, addicted to the study of Wisdom and
Philosophy. But he soon fell sick, and died in the Palace at Rome.

II. Severus Hostilianus. After Marcus, the Senate by their Suffrages,
according to Zonaras also, set up this Prince; who likewise had the fortune to
fall sick soon after, and died.

III. Marcus Julius Philip the Father. This was the Person, who was the Author
of the Murder of Gordianus the Third. He associated his Son with him in the
Empire. His Wife was Marcia Otacilia Severa; who it is thought, was an
occasion, being her self instructed in the Christian Religion, that her Husband
was Favorable to the Christians.

IV. Marcus Julius Philip the Son. He was otherwise called, Caius Julius
Saturninus Philippus. But after his Assumption to the Empire by his Father, he
took the same Names with him. They reigned together five, some say six Years.

V. Jotapianus. This Person set up himself for the Empire in Syria, in the time
of the Philips. But was soon oppressed again, and ended his Pretenses with his
Life.

VI. Marinus. Some call him Publius Carvilius Marinus. He was set Emperor up by
the Legions in Garrison in Pannonia or Maesia, at the same time that Jotapian
made his Pretenses in the East; and was killed soon after.

VII. Meslius Quintus Trajanus Decius the Father. The Army in Illyricum
advanced this Prince in opposition to the Philips. He engaged the Emperor
Philip the Father in a Battle at the City of Verona, and slew him there. Philip
the Son was killed at Rome.

VIII. Decius the Son. He was called Quintus Herennius Etruscus Meslius Decius.
He reigned in conjunction with his Father.

IX. Caius Valens Hostilianus. Some Medals and Ancient Inscriptions mention
him; and he is supposed to have set up himself against the Decii, as did the
two following. But neither the Greek nor the Latin Historians are found to say
any thing of him.

X. Lucius Priscus. He was the President of Macedonia, when he was set up to be
Emperor against the Decii.

XI. Valens Licinianus This is the same, whom Trebellius Pollio makes the
Nineteenth in his Catalogue and Account of the 30 Tyrants. He had much of the
Love of the People.

XII. Caius Vibius Trebonianus Gallus, the Father.

IMP. CAES. C VIBIVS TREBONIANVS GALVS AVG

portrait of Trebonianus Gallus

IMP. CAES. C. VIB. VOLVSIANVS AVG.

portrait of Volusianus

IMP. CAES. AEMILLIANVS P. F. AVG.

portrait of Aemillianus

IMP. C. P. LIC. VALERIANVS AVG.

portrait of Valerian

IMP. C. P. LIC. GALLIENVS AVG.

portrait of Gallienus

IMP. C. M. CASS. LAT. POSTVMVS AVG.

portrait of Postumus

P. 97. Vol. 11

XIII. Vibius Volusianus, his Son. These two succeeded together to the Empire
after the Decii; with whom some join a Third, namely,

XIV. Hostilianus Perpenna. He was preferred to the Empire by the Senate, in
the time that Gallus and his Son were Created by the Army.

XV. Caius Julius Aemilianus. This Prince was Created by the Legions in Maesia;
and after the death of Gallus and his Son, who were killed by their own
Soldiers, he reigned the space of three Months, and governed the Empire with a
deal of Prudence. Then dying of a sickness, he left it vacant to the Emperor
Valerian.

In fine, the History of these Princes, and of the whole Interval from
Gordianus the Third, to Valerian, is inveloped in so much Darkness, that
certainly it is very difficult to find any one place, in which the Ancient
Writers are of any Agreement amongst themselves.

THE A. Christi CCLIV.
EMPEROR Valerian the First.
BY TREBELLIUS POLLIO.
VALERIAN was in the Province of Rhaetia, when the Army set him up to be
Emperor, with the unanimous consent and approbation of the Senate and the
People. He was a Man of an Honorable Birth, the Son of Valerius; and he was
one, who in his time had passed through all the Gradual Offices and Honors of
the State, with great applause, which paved the Way for him to the Throne.

To let you see the Esteem, which the Public Respect of the Senate to him.
had of his Merits, and how well he stood in the opinion of the most Noble
Senate, at the time when he was chosen to be a Censor, I will give you the Act
of the Senate, which passed for his Election.

Upon the sixth of the Kalends of November, the Year in which the two Decii
were the Consuls, the Senate having received from those Princes Letters, in
which they left it to the Senate's Power to appoint a Person to the Place of a
Censor, met for the purpose in the Temple of Castor and Pollux, and the Motion
being made and the Question put, whom they should Choose, instead of waiting to
be asked their Votes severally according to the Custom, they all cried with one
Voice, in the absence of Valerian, who was then in the Field with the Emperors:

The Life of Valerian is a continued Censorship. As his Manners are Better than
all the World besides; so let him be the Judge of the Manners of all the World.
Let him judge of the Crimes of the Senate, who has none of his own: Let him
give Judgment upon our Lives, who leads such a one himself, as nothing can be
objected to it. Valerian has been a Censor from his Infancy. Valerian has all
his Life been a Censor. He is a Prudent, a Modest, a Grave Senator; a Friend to
the Good, an Enemy to Rebellion, an Enemy to all Vice and Wickedness. We all
Accept him to be our Censor. We will all Observe him. A Man of the First
Quality, Noble by Blood, of a Correct Life, and Singular Manners, Eminent in
his Learning, and a perfect Model of Antiquity. This was often repeated, and
then the Senate Adjourned.

When the Emperor Decius had received this Act, which was sent to him from the
Senate, he assembled all those of his Court, and amongst the rest, he ordered
Valerian to be called; and after the Act of the Senate was read to the Company,
he made the following Speech to Valerian.

You are Happy Valerian, in the Judgment Speech of the Emperor to him.
which all the Senate has of you, and in the share that you bear in their
Hearts and Affections. Receive the Office of being a Censor to the whole Roman
World, unto which they have appointed you, and which you alone deserve to bear.
By this you are made a Judge of our Manners. You will Judge, who ought to abide
in the Senate: You will reduce the Equestrian Order unto its Ancient State: You
will prescribe Bounds to the Revenues of all. You will confirm the Tribute
which is raised upon the People. You will take an Account of all Offices in the
Government. You will have the Authority of making Laws, of Judging of the
Orders of the Soldiers, and of having your Eyes upon the Conduct and the
Employs of Arms. You will have the Power of carrying your Judgment to my own
Court, and to the Governors of the Provinces, and the most Eminent Commanders
in my Service. Excepting only the Governor of the City of Rome, the two
Consuls for the Year, the Chief Officer of the Sacrifices, and the Mother of
the Vestal Virgins, provided that she keep her self Incorrupt, there is no
Body, nor no Cause, but will fall under your Sentence. And even those who are
excepted, will labor nevertheless to please you, and to be agreeable in your
sight.

The Reply which Valerian made to the Emperor, was in this manner:

May it please Your most Excellent Majesty, I beseech you, not to tie me to
such a necessity of Judging of the People, the Soldiers, the Senate, and all
the World indeed, the Magistrates of the Provinces, the Tribunes, and the
Generals. These are things, for which your Majesty possesses the Name of an
Emperor; the Censorship revolves upon your self; a private Man cannot perform
it. I beg therefore, that I may be excused from this Honor: Neither my Life,
nor my Assurance makes me suitable for it: The Times also are so repugnant,
that it is the Voice of Mankind, to desire not to see a Censorship of a private
Person of this Nature.

However Valerian acquitted himself in his Censorship with all Equity. I could
produce several other Instances of the Favor, both of the Senate and the
Emperors toward him, if they were not things that are already generally known.
From whence, I would only observe, that it appears, that when Valerian was
afterward called to the Empire, it was not done by a Tumultuary concourse of
the People, nor by a Noise of the Soldiers, but he was chosen justly for his
Merits, and as it were by the Unanimous Voice of Mankind: in which, if every
Person in particular had been to be allowed the power of speaking his Opinion,
they would all have made choice of no other than Valerian.

After Valerian was upon the Throne, no Man acted in the disposition of
Commands and Offices, better, and more justly than he. His Son Gallienus, the
Brother to Valerian the Second, by another Venture, was at the same time made
Caesar, at the request of the People.

In fine, the fatal Overthrow of Valerian and his Captivity that followed it,
makes me almost ashamed to extol him so highly, as he otherwise deserves. For
this Prince marching with a great Force against Persia, and invading that
Kingdom, and being through the Conduct, whether Treacherous or Unfortunate, I
know not, of one of his Officers, on whom he greatly relied, brought into such
Circumstances, that no Force, nor no Military Discipline, could save him, was
Conquered, and fell a Prisoner into the hands of Sapores King of Persia; who
swelled with the success of so glorious Victory, not only proudly detained him,
contrary to the Honor of Arms, but treated him in the Language of a vile and
abject Slave, and some say, condemned him to the infamous Office of making his
Back a Footstool to him to tread upon, whenever he mounted his Horse. However
that is, it is certain, that several of the Neighboring Kings, who had
assisted on the side of Sapores against Valerian in the War, sent Letters
afterward of kind Intercession to Sapores on behalf of the Royal Prisoner,
whereof two or three were as follows:

To Sapores the King of Kings, Belsotus sends Greeting.
IF I could think it possible, that the Romans were to be totally at last
Vanquished, I should Congratulate you upon the Exalted manner, in which you use
your Victory. But as they are a Nation who by the power of Fate, and their own
Virtue together, are of an extraordinary Force in the World, you will do well
to have a care, that your taking into Captivity the Old Emperor, and that too
by a Fraud, does not redound to the Ill of you and your Posterity. You may
please to observe, what great Nations the Romans have, of Enemies, made their
own; and Nations that have often had the advantage of beating them too. It is
certain we have heard, how the Gauls beat them, and set fire to their great
City. But yet the Gauls are now Slaves to the Romans. What! Have not the
Africans Beat them? But yet the Africans now serve the Romans. And not to
instance in Examples, which are of a great distance from us, and therefore the
less known, Mithridates King of Pontus, was once the Master of all Asia. But
yet Mithridates was Conquered, and Asia is now certainly under the Obedience of
the Romans. If you will be advised by me, embrace the Means of Peace, which you
have in your hands, and restore Valerian to his Country again. I Congratulate
your Felicity, provided this altogether, that you know how to use it well.


Balerus, the King of the Cadusii, writ thus.
I Am glad, that the Succors with which we furnished you, are remitted to me
again entire and safe, as I have received them: But I cannot wish you so much
Joy of your carrying into Captivity that Great Prince Valerian, as I should
Congratulate you, if he was Restored again. The Romans are the most dangerous
Enemies for being beaten; Act therefore as it becomes you in Prudence; nor let
Fortune puff you up, which has deceived so many. Valerian has a Son an
Emperor, and a Grandson a Caesar. And what! Has he not all the Roman World on
his side, which will universally rise up against you? Therefore Restore him,
and make a Peace with the Romans; which will also be an Advantage to us, as
well as you.


Artabasdes, the King of Armenia, sent this Letter to Sapores.
I Share with you in the Glory of your Victory. But yet I fear, that you have
not so much Conquered, as sown the Seeds of more and more Wars. The Son of
Valerian, and his Grandson, and the Captains of the Romans, all Gallia, all
Africa, all Spain, all Italy, all the Nations which are in Illyricum, and in
the East and Pontus, that either are the Allies, or the Subjects of the Romans,
will be sure to re-demand the Person of Valerian. So you have a Prisoner of one
Old Man, and in the mean time you render all the Nations of the Earth
implacable Enemies to you, and it may be to us, who sent you our Succors, as
we are your Neighbors, and are always concerned in the Troubles of your State.


Other Nations of the Bactriani, the G(...)gians, the Albanians and the
Tartars, rejected the Applications of Sapores to them, and writ to the Roman
Generals to promise them their assistances, to deliver Valerian out of his
Captivity. Valerian nevertheless remained and died a Prisoner in Persia, at an
advanced Age. His Quarrel was pretty well revenged by Odenatus of Palmyra: who
getting together an Army, asserted the Roman Interest greatly in those Parts;
insomuch that he took the Treasures of the King of Persia, and what those Kings
hold dearer to them than their Treasures, he took his Concubines Prisoners.
Upon which, King Sapores retired himself immediately within his own Kingdom,
and so ended the Persian War.

This is the Story of Valerian the Father; who was 70 Years Old, when he was
with great Applauses first advanced to be Emperor. I come next to Valerian, the
Son.

THE EMPEROR Valerian the Second.
BY TREBELLIUS POLLIO.
VALERIAN the Second was the Son of the precedent Prince, and the Brother of
Gallienus by another Mother. He was Handsome, Modest, and very Ingenious for
his Age; of a Charming Humor and Manners; far different from the dissoluteness
of his said Brother. His Father had made him a Caesar, and Celestinus says,
that his Brother did afterward receive him, as Emperor, in conjunction with
himself.

There is nothing to be remembered of him more, than that he was Nobly born,
very well educated, and that he was miserably killed. He was buried about the
City of Milan, with this Inscription put upon him afterward, by the order of
Claudius; The Emperor Valerian. Some have understood it of Valerian the Father;
as if the Body of him, who was a Prisoner in Persia, had been returned out of
that Country: But that is a mistake, and therefore to prevent it for the
future, I mention it as such here*

I pass on next to the Reign of Gallienus and his Son, called Saloninus
Gallienus; being entirely devoted to your Service, and to the glory of your
Reputation, to which I neither ought nor can refuse any thing.

THE Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR Gallienus the First.
BY TREBELLIUS POLLIO.
FRom whence should I begin the Life of Gallienus, but from the time of the
Captivity of his Father? Who, that is, Valerian the First, being taken and kept
a Prisoner by the King of Persia, though it was a great Affliction to all to
see an Emperor of Rome treated so like a Slave, the Army in the mean time
without a Head, the Generals murmuring, and the Empire in a tottering
condition, especially in the East, yet did Gallienus rather rejoice in the
Misfortune of his Father, and carried himself so negligently, that Macrianus
and Balista, together with the Relics of the Army which they assembled with
them in the East, consulted in fine, whom to set up to be Emperor in opposition
to him. For as for him, his Name was scarce so much as mentioned amongst them.

Macrianus was accounted one of the most knowing Captains of that time, and no
Man fitter for the Government of Affairs than he. Withal he was very Rich, and
one that could supply the public Occasions out of his private Fortunes. His
Sons, Macrianus the Second and Quietus were two stout young Men, who loved the
War, and might be of good Example to the Legions, upon all opportunities, where
the matter of Arms might call them.

Wherefore it was resolved, in preference Several Persons set up for Emperors
to others, to commit the defense of the Empire unto Macrianus and his Sons.
This was in the Year, that Gallienus and Volusianus were the Consuls. Macrianus
gathered himself an Army, and took all the necessary precautions for his
security against his Enemies. He sent Piso, who was one of the chief Persons of
the Senate, into Achaia, to oppress Valens there, who governed that Country
with a Proconsular Power by the appointment of Gallienus. But Valens finding
that Piso came against him, and that there was no other way to save himself,
but by an Absolute Authority, and by setting up himself Emperor, he did so, and
Piso withdrew from thence into Thessalia; whither Valens sent those after him
that killed him. In the mean time Piso had also in Thessaly set up for an
Empire, with the Title of Emperor of Thessalia. After this, Macrianus leaving
his Son Quietus in the East, and the Affairs under him there in a peaceable
Condition, began his Expedition against Gallienus. He came first into the
Lesser Asia, and then into Illyricum. In Illyricum was Aureolus, who pretended
to Reign there; being one that had taken Arms, and the Empire upon him, against
Gallienus. Macrianus had his Son Macrianus with him, and a Body of five and
forty thousand Men. With these he fought the Forces of Aureolus, which were
Commanded by his General Domitian: but Macrianus lost the day, and both he and
his Son were killed, and all their Army surrendered to the Emperor Aureolus.

The News of the death of Macrianus, the Father and Son, coming to Odenatus of
Palmyra in Syria, who had made his pretensions to the Empire of the East from
the Captivity Odenatus attempts the Empire.
of Valerian, Odenatus considering the Remissness of Gallienus on the one hand,
and the Usurpation of Aureolus on the other, and indeed the disturbed Condition
of the whole Empire every where, hastened upon this opportunity with an Army, to
see if he could take the other Son of Macrianus, Quietus, who had been left
behind in the East. This Business was soon concluded by the Treachery of such,
as were about the Person of Quietus: For they, Confederating with Odenatus, and
particularly Balista, the Captain of the Guards, killed the young Man and threw
his Body over the Wall to Odenatus; to whom every one, after that, immediately
submitting, Odenatus be came the Emperor of almost all the East, whilst
Aureolus reigned in Illyricum, and Gallienus reigned at Rome. The City of
Emissa was nigh destroyed by the severity of Balista at this time, and many of
the Inhabitants killed, with the Treasurer and such others of the Party of
Quietus, as had fled for shelter thither.

Odenatus ordered an Account of every thing that had passed, to be faithfully
sent to the Emperor Gallienus at Rome; as if it was in his Cause, that he had
done what he did. Gallienus was pleased with the security, which accrued to him
by the death of Macrianus, and his Sons: But the use that he made of it, was
Dissoluteness of Gallienus.
only to indulge his Lusts and Pleasures the more, which he pursued without the
least regard to the Condition of his Captive Father. He gave the Public the
diversions of the Races of the Cirque, Stage Plays, the Games of Leaping,
Running and Wrestling; a Chase of Wild Beasts, and the Games of the Gladiators;
whereunto he invited the People to assist and be Merry, as upon Days of the
greatest Joy and Triumph. However, several could not but lament the Captivity
of his Father: but Gallienus gloried rather in it; because his Father (he said)
had lost his Crown by I know not what love of Virtue, which he renounced; and
so he solaced himself above measure. It was plain, that he could not endure the
Eye of his Father upon him; and he thought himself happy, that the Old Man with
his Gravity was so far off removed.

About the same time, Aemilian in Egypt Revolted, and set up for himself as
Emperor, and seized upon the Granaries and the Magazines of that Country, till
several Towns there were almost laid under a Famine. Against him Theodotus, a
General of Gallienus, marched, and fought him and took him, and sent him alive
to the Emperor his Master.

Gallienus still persisting in his Sports and his Luxury, and no better looking
after the Public Weal, than a Boy that is made a King in a Play of a Company
of Boys. The Gauls, to whom it is Natural to be Light, and a People that cannot
contain themselves under Princes, which are luxurious and which degenerate from
that Roman Valor, which did at first subject them, called Posthumous to the
Empire; whereunto the Forces of that Province consented, who were very
sensible, and accordingly complained of the slavery of Gallienus to his Lusts.
Against Posthumous, marched Gallienus himself with a Body of Troops. He
besieged Posthumous in the City where he was: But as he was viewing the Walls,
the Gauls distinguished him, and gave him a Wound by the shot of an Arrow.
Posthumous reigned seven Years in Gallia, and asserted that Country bravely
against the Incursions of all the Barbarians round about. The War betwixt
Gallienus and him was long protracted, through a number of Sieges and Battles:
Sometimes the one, sometimes the other carried it: insomuch that Gallienus was
obliged by the difficulties which beset him, to make a Peace with the pretended
Emperor Aureolus, for the better opportunity of opposing Posthumous. To Many
Commotitions and Wars.
these Mischiefs, the Scythians invaded the Province of Bithynia in the Lesser
Asia, and destroyed whole Towns there. They came up to the City of Nicomedia,
and burnt it and grievously laid it waste. Besides which, as if all the World
conspired at once to afflict us, in Sicily there arose as it were a servile
War, by the means of a company of Robbers, that roved up and down, and required
a great deal of pains to suppress them. All these things happened out of a
Contempt of Gallienus: because there is nothing which gives so much Boldness to
the Wicked, nor so much Hopes and Encouragement to the Good, as when either on
the one hand a Good Prince is feared, or on the other a Dissolute Prince is
despised.

Amongst so many Commotions and Wars, an Earthquake in the Year when Gallienus
and A dreadful Earthquake.
Faustinianus were the Consuls, in a violent manner shook the Cities of Asia;
it shook Libya, and the City of Rome, and there was a Darkness for several
days. The roaring of the Earth from beneath, was like the Voice of Thunder from
above. Many Fabrics were consumed in this Earthquake, and their Inhabitants
with them, and others killed with the fright. The Earth opened in abundance of
places, and salt Water came up into the Breaches, and several Cities were
covered with a Flood of Waters. Above all, it did the most mischief in Asia. At
the same time so great a Pestilence raged at Rome, and in the Cities of Achaia,
that five thousand Persons died of it in one day. So the Books of the Sibyls
were Inspected, and the Peace of the Gods begged and sought into, and a
Sacrifice was offered to Jupiter, the Author of Health, according as it was
prescribed by the said Books of the Sibyls. Fortune raged on all sides. Here
the Earth shook and trembled; there it gaped and opened; The many Misfortunes
of the Times.
in other Parts a Pestilence laid us waste; Valerian in the mean time a
Captive, Gallia distracted with the Wars of Posthumous, and the Barbarians; the
East under the Empire of Odenatus, Aureolus the Master of Illyricum, and
Aemilian the Master of Egypt; Thrace taken up betwixt the Goths and Claudius,
who laid waste Macedonia and besieged Thessalonica: No moderate degree of quiet
had we on any side. And all this in a great measure, as I have said, was yet
occasioned by the Contempt, in which Gallienus was with all the World: which he
drew upon himself by his excessive Luxury; and not only that, but he was a Man,
who besides, if he was out of Danger, was fit enough for all kind of
Wickedness. In Achaia, Martianus, with the Forces of Gallienus, Engaged the
Goths, and obliged them to retire. The Scythians, who are another part of the
Goths, at the same time laid waste Asia, and plundered and burnt the Temple of
Diana at Ephesus, the Fame of the Riches whereof is so well known to all the
Earth.

It is a shame almost to say, what Expressions, what Jests, came upon these
occasions from the mouth of Gallienus, when he was told of the Revolt and
Troubles of this and the other Place. Egypt, it was told him, was Revolted: And
what then, says he, cannot we be without the Flax of Egypt? Asia, it was told
him, was laid waste, both by the Earthquakes, and the Scythian Enemy. What
then, says he, cannot we be without Saltpeter? When Gallia was lost to
Posthumous, he laughed and said; Cannot the State be safe, unless we have our
Stuffs from Arras? And so of all Parts of the World, when he had lost them, he
Jested, and was no more concerned, than for his old Clothes, or the loss of any
vile Slave.

And that nothing which is Ill, should be wanting to his Times, the City of
Byzantium, which is the Key of the Hellespont, and famous for its Naval Powers,
was rendered totally desolate by the Soldiers of the same Gallienus, that scarce
any body was left alive in it. There is no Ancient Family to be found now
there, to represent the Nobility and the Antiquity of its former People, but
what perhaps has sprung from some Person or other, who escaped the slaughter,
by being at that time absent on his business, or in the service of the War.

After the Peace with Aureolus, Gallienus, with the assistance of him and
Claudius as his General, who was afterward Emperor, and who is the Head of the
Family of Constantius the Caesar, began the War afresh against Posthumous in
Gallia. Posthumous was assisted with many succors from the Celtae and the
Franks; and being joined by Victorinus, whom he had made Partner with him in
his pretended Empire, he marched to the Battle against Gallienus. They fought
several times with variety of success on both sides. The Victory at last
Posthumous defeated.
fell to Gallienus; who, it is to be owned, had sudden Valor, which came hot
upon him, when he was in a Choler and well provoked.

In this Choler he went next to revenge himself of Byzantium; where he did not
expect to be received within the Walls. But upon Conditions, he was. The day
after, he first disarmed, and then put all the Garrison and Town in cold blood
to the Sword, contrary to his Faith and the Promises that he had made them.
About the same time the Scythians in Asia were beaten by the Valor and the
Conduct of the Roman Commanders there, and obliged to retire from their
Incursions.

Winged with these Successes, Gallienus flew Gallienus his return to Rome.
with great speed to Rome; and Convocating the Senate, he Instituted and
Celebrated his Decennial Games, the Pomp and the Pleasures whereof, were as
Exquisite as they were New. He went to the Capitol, in a Procession of the
Senators in their Robes, the Gentry, the Soldiers clad in White, all the
People, Slaves a very great many, and Women marching before with Wax Tapers and
Lamps in their hands. These were preceded by a hundred white Oxen, yoaked two
and two, with their Horns gilt, and Cloths of Silk thrown over their Backs of
diverse Colors, which made a great Show. In like manner, marched two hundred
pure white Lambs: Ten Elephants, that were then at Rome: One thousand two
hundred Gladiators, pompously dressed in Clothes embroidered with Gold, such as
the Ladies of Quality wear: Two hundred tamed Wild Beasts of several kinds,
very finely adorned; Chariots full of Mimicks, and all sorts of Players; Pugils
fighting, but not with true, but counterfeit Weapons; Drolls playing the
Anticks, and others imitating the Gestures and Looks of the Cyclops, which was
wonderful. All the Streets resounded with Acclamations, and the Plays, and the
Noise. In the midst, amongst the Senators, marched Gallienus himself in a
Triumphal Gown and Tunick, accompanied with all the Priests in their Robes.
There were five hundred Spears of Gold born on each side, one hundred
Standards, the Standards of the Colleges of the Priests, the Arms and Ensigns
of the Temples, and all the Legions. Then went also separate Bodies of Men,
representing Captives of Vanquished Nations: as Goths, Sarmatians, Franks and
Persians; to the number of no less than two hundred in a Body. And with this
Pomp did Gallienus vainly think to elude and put upon the People of Rome; who
nevertheless seeing through the disguise, one Man favored Posthumous, another
Regillianus, another Aureolus, another Aemilian, and another Saturninus, as
they fancied. Great lamentation was made for the Captivity of Valerian, the
Father; and it was admired, that his own Son should leave him so unrevenged,
when strangers and foreign Potentates had been ready to vindicate him. But
nothing of this moved Gallienus, his heart was stupefied with his Pleasures.
All his discourse to those that were about him, was, What have we for Dinner?
What are the Diversions that are prepared to day? What will be the Play to
morrow? What are the Races to be run in the Cirque? The Procession being over,
and the Hecatombs being offered to the Gods, Gallienus returned to the Court,
where there was an Entertainment: which when finished, he appointed the other
days for the public Pastimes. One thing I must not omit, and that is an
unlucky Jest, which was made upon the Procession. Amongst the pretended
Captives, which were ridiculously led in Triumph, there was a Body of supposed
Persians. As this Body was marching, some Drolls, that had a mind to be
pleasant, came in amongst them and sought, and looked all about, and viewed
every ones Face, and wondered, and were very inquisitive; till at last they were
asked, what they would have? and what was it they wanted? Say they, we would
see the Emperor's Father. This coming to the ears of Gallienus, no regard
either to his Father, or to Pity, or his own shame could prevail with him, but
he ordered the Men to be burnt. The People resented their deaths, beyond
expectation, very ill; and the Soldiers worse: who were so troubled, that they
revenged it upon Gallienus himself, not long after.

In the Year that Gallienus and Saturninus Success of Oednatus against the
Persians.
were the Consuls, Odenatus King of the Palmyreni in Syria, whose Valiant
Actions spoke him worthy to be the Emperor of all the East, as indeed he was,
and so he declared himself, because Gallienus minded either nothing, or only
his Luxuries and his Follies, took up the War against Persia, to revenge the
Captivity of Valerian, which was so little regarded by Gallienus his Son. He
presently possessed himself of the Cities of Nisibis and Charrae, by the
Surrender of the Inhabitants, who blamed Gallienus for his Neglect. Yet was not
Odenatus wanting in his Respect to Gallienus neither. He sent the Great Men of
the Persians, whom he took Prisoners, to Rome to him, to give him the
opportunity of insulting over their Misery in their turn: which he did in a
Triumph, though the Victory was not his own, but Odenatus's; and still he
mentioned nothing of his Father; nor upon the report which came of his Death,
but, which proved afterward false, did he Deifie him, till he was constrained
to it. Odenatus advanced to the City of Ctesiphon, and besieged it, with a
multitude of the Persians therein. He laid all the Country about waste, and
killed innumerable of the Enemy. All the Great Men of the Persians out of all
the Provinces flew to this Siege, for the common defense. They Fought. Fortune
was a long time various, and the Victory hard in getting. But however it fell
at last on the side of Odenatus; who as he had no other end in the War, but to
deliver Valerian, so he daily pushed for it, but the Circumstances of Places in
a strange Country, encumbered the good Prince with great difficulties.

Whilst these things passed in Persia, the Scythians broke in into Cappadocia,
which they Ravaged: and having made themselves Masters of some Towns, after the
War was a long time doubtful, they withdrew from thence into Bithynia.
Therefore the Soldiers were at this time for choosing another Person Emperor:
whom when Gallienus could not pacify in his favor, he killed them all, which
was his way, as he did at Byzantium.

As ill as his Affairs on all sides stood, Gallienus prosecuted his Vanities.
He desired to be made a Citizen and President of Athens, and to be admitted to
all the Religious Rites of that place, and to be made one of the number of the
Areopagites. This was a Contempt upon the People of Rome, and the Honors which
he enjoyed from thence; as if he valued it more to be an Areopagite and the
Archon of Athens, than to be the Roman Emperor. It is true, that both Hadrian
and Marcus Antoninus had the curiosity to be initiated in the Eleusinian Rites.
But the Emperor Hadrian was, when he did it, in the height of his prosperity;
and the Emperor Antoninus did not affect it, till after a firm Peace; and both
of them were so well seen in the Greek Learning, that seldom were the
learnedest Doctors there, superior to them, His Skill in the Arts.
in the judgment of the Great Men. It cannot be denied indeed, but Gallienus
was eminent in Oratory, Poetry, and all the Arts. He made an Epithalamium upon
the Marriage of his Brother's Sons, extempore, which was better than a hundred
others, made at the same time by all the Greek and Latin Poets, though they
studied several days upon it, and every one did his best to excel. The
Epithalamium of Gallienus was these three Lines. Taking them by the Hands,

Ite, ite, O pueri; pariter sudate Medullis
Omnibus inter vos: Non murmura vestra Columbae,
Brachia non Hederae, non vincant oscula Conchae.
That is,
Go, go, young Pair; and be your Mutual Loves
Expressed in every Part and Pore: As Doves
In softest Murmurs speak your mighty Bliss,
Like Ivy Twine, and close as Cockles Kiss.
I have not the time to adjoyn the rest of his Verses, nor to speak of his
Prose, which made him shine both amongst the Poets, and the Orators of his Age.
But this is not the Matter. It is one thing to be an Orator or a Poet; and
something else is expected in an Emperor.

One thing Gallienus did, by the advice of his Brother Valerian and his Kinsman
Lucillus, which was extraordinary well done, and was much commended. When he
heard of the Victories of Odenatus over the Persians, and how he had reduced
Nisibin and Charran, and all the Country of Mesopotamia, and was come before
Ctesiphon; the King of Persia put to flight, his Great Men taken Prisoners, and
many of the Enemy killed; Gallienus voluntarily divided the Empire to Odenatus,
and presented him with the Royal Style as his Brother, and ordered Money to be
coined in his Name with a Stamp, of the Persians taken Prisoners. This the
Senate, the City, and People of all Ages, took well. Nor was Gallienus one that
wanted Wit. To give you an Instance or two of it. A Instances of his Wit.
great Bull appearing upon the Sands of the Amphitheatre to be hunted, and the
Man that undertook it, missing his blow at him Ten times, Gallienus sent the
Man a Crown, or Garland, which is a Reward for a Victory: Every body wondered
what was the matter; and thinking it strange, that such a baffled Sportsman
should be Crowned, he ordered it to be proclaimed by the Crier, It is a
difficult thing not to Hit a Bull in Ten times. A Merchant had sold to
Gallienus's Lady, false Glasses for true Jewels. She, when the Cheat was
discovered, called to have the Man punished. Gallienus ordered him to be thrown
to a Lion, to be devoured. But instead of a Lion, a Capon was let out upon him.
The People wondering at so ridiculous an appearance, says Gallienus, He
committed a Cheat, and be has suffered a Cheat, and so he dismissed the Man
again.

Whilst Odenatus was taken up with the Persian War, and Gallienus with his
Follies, the Scythians with a Fleet came and Plundered the City of Heraclia in
Thrace, and returned home with the Booty: but by the way they were beaten in a
Naval Fight, and lost many of their Men also by a Wreck.

Then Odenatus was killed by the Treachery of a Kinsman of his own, and his Son
Herod was killed with him. His other Sons, Herennia^us and Timolaus, being very
young, their Mother Zenobia took upon her the Empire of their Father, and long
governed it: Not effeminately, nor with the expected weakness of her Sex: She
not only understood to reign better than Gallienus, but she was such a Virago,
that many brave and prudent Emperors have come short of her.

After the death of Odenatus, Gallienus undertook the War with Persia himself,
to revenge the Calamity of his Father: This good Action came too late. His
General was Heraclianus: who marching with an Army against the Persians, the
Palmyreni and others of the Easter^ings who were for the Empire of Zenobia met
him, and defeated him so, that he lost all his Army again.

The Scythians in the mean time, by the way of the Euxine and the Danube, made
Descents upon the Roman Territories, and did very much mischief. Gallienus sent
against them Cleodamus and Athenaeus, two Byzantines, to repair the Towns, and
fortify such Places as wanted it. The Barbarians were met with about Pontus,
and defeated: Venerianus defeated them also in a Sea Fight, in which he was
killed himself. Then they Ravaged the City of Cyziqua, and other Places in
Asia, and afterward all Achaia: in which last the Athenians, under the Command
of Dexippus the Historian, beat them, and repulsed them. Then they roved about
the Countries of Epirus, M^cedonia and Baeotia. As they were in Illyricum,
Gallienus with much ado, rowz'd by the Public Evils, came against them, and
luckily slew a great number of them; which put the rest to flight, who
insconsing themselves behind their Carts, escaped by the Mountain Gessaces.
Martianus pursued them, and had several Batte^ with them afterward with
various success* Such of them as reached home, excited all their whole Country
to a Rebellion against the Romans.

The ill Government of Gallienus continuing in a manner insupportable,
Martianus and Heraclianus entered into a Consultation about the disposing the
Empire to another. Claudius above others, was pitched upon, though he was not
then present. He was an extraordinary Man, and so much in every bodies esteem,
that he seemed really to deserve the Empire; and from him it is, that the most
Vigilant Caesar Constantius, derives his Descent. But, inasmuch as they could
not accomplish this design without the cutting off a Pest, who with dancing
after the Play and the Cirque, and following his Pleasures, let the State in
the mean time go to ruin, they contrived to draw him out into the Field,
pretending that Aure^lus, betwixt whom and Gallienus a difference had happened
since their Peace, was coming against him to fight him; and as he was in the
Field, they killed him. He was killed, some Gallienus slain.
say, by the hand of Cecropius, a Colonel of the Dalmatians, who by his Address
and Prudence had much assisted toward the pretensions of Claudius, about
Milan; and his Brother Valerian was also killed with him at the same place;
whom though some deny to have been honored with the Imperial Style, and some
make him a Caesar, and some neither the one nor the other; yet this is certain,
that after the Captivity of his Father, we find in the public Registers a
Note, of the Emperor Valerian' s being a Consul: which can only mean the Son
Valerian. The Soldiers fell into a great Mutiny upon the death of Gallienus,
and cried him up for an Useful, Brave and Powerful Prince, taken off only to
serve private Interests. But, as it is the known way to appease Soldiers, to
give them Money, and great Promises, Martianus, with the advice of others of
the principal Officers, having done this, and given them upon the spot, because
they had Money enough at hand, twenty pieces of Gold a Man, they submitted, and
were satisfied to have Gallienus entered as a Tyrant, upon the Public Records:
And then Claudius, a good and truly Venerable Person, a lover of his Country
and the Laws, and dear to all of worth, acceptable to the Senate, and well
known to the People, took the Empire upon him.

In this manner lived and died Gallienus, who was born to serve his Belly and
his Lusts: Character of Gallienus.
He spent Days and Nights in Drinking and Whoring, without caring what became
of all the State. About thirty Persons in his time set up for Emperors, to the
dishonor of the Roman Name; nay, even Women-Revolte(...) His horrid Luxury.
Governed better than he. In the Spring, to tell you some of his miserable
Devices, he made himself Beds of Roses, and Pomilions of Apple Trees, and all
sorts of Fruits; Grapes he preserved three Years. He had Melons in the depth of
Winter; Sweet Wine all the Ye(...) long: Green Figs and Apples fresh from
t(...) Trees in Months which were out of their proper Season. His Table Linen
was always embroidered with Gold: His Services of Gold set with Jewels. The
Powder for his H(...) was of Gold dust. He often went abroad i^ a Crown
radiated like that of God. At Rom^, where the Emperors appear always in Gowns,
he wore a Purple Cloak, with Buttons of Jewels set in Gold, and a Purple Tunic^
embroidered with Gold. His Belt was beset with Jewels. His Shoes were covered
with Jewels. He Eat in Public. The People h(...) softened and attracted to him
by Largesses. He invited the Ladies to the Feast of his Consulship; who kissed
his Hand, and he presented them with four Pieces of Gold of his Coin. A^ a
great Philosopher Xenophon once said, when he had lost his Son, I knew that
when I beg(...) him, I begat a Mortal; so said Gallienus, when he heard that
his Father was taken Prisoner; I knew my Father was a Mortal: For which Saying
Annius Cornicula vainly commends his Constancy. Going out and coming in, he was
often attended with Music, Voices and Instruments. He Washed in the Summer six
or seven times a day; in the Winter twice or thrice. He drank always in Vessels
of Gold; scorning Glass, because, he said, nothing was commoner than it. He
changed his Wine every time he drank; never at one Meal drank twice of the
same. His Mistresses often sat at the Table with him. A second Table was always
by, of Jesters and all sorts of Mimicks. When he removed to the Gardens
wh(...)h bear his Name, all the Household followed him; who were admitted to Eat
and Bath, and Swim with him: Women also, young and old, handsome or unhandsome,
were often admitted, with whom he jested and diverted himself, whilst the
Empire every where went to ruin at the same time.

He was extremely Cruel however upon the Soldiers; for sometimes he killed
three or four thousand of them together in a day. He ordered a vast great
Coloss to be made of him, in the form of that of the Sun; which was begun, but
when he died, it was left unfinished. He designed to have placed it upon the
Esquiline, holding a Spear, in the hollow of whose Shaft a Child might go up by
steps to the top. He had ordered a Chariot and Horses, in imitation of those of
the Sun, to be made proportionable to this Statue, and to be set upon a vast
Basis. But the Emperors Claudius and Aurelian, who came after, thought all this
foolish. He did also design to continue the Work of the Portico Flaminia, as
far as to Ponte Molle; and to make it with four or five Orders of Pillars. But
it would be tedious to say more of him. Let whoever desires to know any thing
more, go to Palfurius Sural, who has written a Journal of his Life. I shall
proceed to Saloninus Gallienus, his Son. And then I will say something in
short, of the Thirty pretended Emperors, or Tyrants, in particular, who set up
themselves against this Prince.

I must own, I have here studiously pretermitted several things, out of a
respect to his Poster^^y: You know, Sir, very well, what a War a Man many times
raises against himself, who writes of the Ancestors of another: I do not doubt,
but you remember what Tully says in his Hortensius.

Gallienus, with the time that he enjoyed the Empire in conjunction with his
Father, reigned, it is certain, in all Fifteen Years: that is, Six Years in
conjunction with Valerian, who then was taken Prisoner, and Ten afterward, in
which he reigned by himself. I mention this, because some have said, that
Gallienus died in the Ninth or Tenth Year of his Reign. By which, if they mean
the Years that he reigned alone, after the Captivity of his Father, it is true,
that he died in his Ninth Year. But otherwise, those Decennial Games, which we
have spoken of, were celebrated by him in his Tenth Year. And after them, he
overcame the Got^^ or Scythians, made a Peace with Odenatus and Aureolus,
fought against Post humius and Lolli^nus, and did many other things; some to
his Honor, but more to his eternal Shame; he even Raked about the Taverns
always in the Night, and passed the greatest part of his time in the Debauched
Company of Pimps, Players and Poltrons.

Gallienus the Second.
BY TREBELLIUS POLLIO.
THIS Gallienus was the Son of Gallienus the First, and the Grandson of the
Emperor Valerian the First. There is little to be said of him more, than that
he was Nobly born, Educated like a Prince, and at last killed, not upon his own
account, but upon the account of his Father. Some call him Saloninus Gallienus,
because he was born at the City of Salona in Dalmatia; or because his Mother's
Name was Cornelia Salonina Pipara, the Daughter of a Barbarian King; who
whether she was the Wife, or the Mistress of his Father, it is certain, that
she was one that he extremely loved. There is extant to this day in Rome a
Statue, which did stand before the Street of the Sacra Via, but is since taken
into the Temple of Faustina, which has this Inscription upon it, To Gallienus
Junior Saloninus.

Now let us proceed to the Thirty Tyrants, or Pretended Emperors, who set
themselves up in the time of Gallienus the First. I shall be short upon them.
Some were Persons of no small Merit, and did a great deal of good to the
Public. But others of them deserve not much to employ our Time and Pains. And
we have already observed several things concerning them, in the Life foregoing.

The Grandfather Gallienus was a considederable Man in the State in his time.

THE From CCLIV. To CCLXIX.
Thirty Tyrants, OR Pretended EMPERORS, Who set themselves up against Valerian
the First, AND Gallienus the First.
By TREBELLIUS POLLIO.
I Come now, with the Reader's Pardon for the plain and familiar way in which I
write, to those Thirty Pretended Emperors, or Revolters, who set up themselves
for the Empire, in several parts of the World, in opposition to Valerian and
Gallienus. I shall put them all together, and the two Empresses with them; for
not the Men only, but the Women pretended to revolt against Gallienus; and I
shall be the shorter upon them, because I would not repeat the things that have
been already mentioned concerning them, and because some of them were Persons
so obscure, that there is little or no Notice taken, nor any certain Account
given of them, in either the Greek or Latin Historians.

I. CYRIADES.
CYRIADES was one, who first Plundered and then ran away with a great deal of
Gold and Silver from his Father, of the same Name, into Persia: To whom his
Luxury and his ill Manners, had been before a great Affliction; because his
Father was a good old Gentleman, of quite another Life. In Persia he joined and
entered himself into the Service of Sapores the King; whom he stirred up to make
a War upon the Romans. This War was first of all Conducted by Odomastes, a
Persian General, and next by King Sapores in Person. The Cities of Antioch and
Caesarea Philippi were taken. From the latter Cyriades assumed to himself the
Title of Caesar: which afterward was improved into that of Emperor, and all
the East shook at the Terror, or at least the Audaciousness of his Arms. Some
say, that he killed his own Father; others deny it. However it is, when the
Emperor Valerian came to the Persian War against Sapores this Cyriades was
killed by his own Men. His Desertion and Flight, his Parricide and great
Luxury, are the only Memorable things of him.

2. POSTHVMIVS.
POSTHUMOUS was a very Great Man in War, and as Virtuous in Peace; and in all
his Life and Actions of so grave and strict a Behavior, that when Gallienus
established his Son Saloninus Gallienus, a Youth, in the Government of Ga^lia,
he committed him to the care of Posthumi^s as his Guardian, and as one whom he
desired to be the Institutor of his Princely Accom^lishments. Some say, that
Posthumous afterward broke his Trust, and killed Saloninus, as the way to his
own rise to the Government of Ga(...)ia in his place. But it seems to be more
true and more agreeable to the Manners of Posth^mius to believe, that the Gauls
vehemently ha^ing Gallienus the Father, and not enduring to have a Boy over
them, which the Son was, set the Soldiers upon him to kill him, and then made
Posthumous Emperor. All the Army there and all the Gauls embraced with joy the
Government of Posthumous. He behaved himself so well amongst them seven Years,
that he attained the Title of The Restorer of Gallia, whilst Gallienus in the
mean time followed his Luxury and his Riot, and was a slave to the Amors of a
Barbarian Woman. At length Gallienus came against him, and received a Wound
with the shot of an Arrow. The whole Nation of all the Gauls could not but
extremely love him, becaused he delivered them from the power of the German
Invaders, and restored the State of Gallia unto its Pristine security. But yet
as the Gauls are naturally a People fond of Novelties; Posthumous upon the
occasion of his Rigor, was killed through the means of Lollianus, who rebelled
against him; and Lollianus was set up Emperor by the Gauls in his stead. The
Judgment of the Emperor Valerian concerning the Merits of Posthumous, when he
made him the President of Gallia, appears by this Letter.

WE have made Posthumous the Commander on the Quarter beyond the Rhine, and the
President of Gallia. A Man, the fittest for the Temper of that Nation. He will
keep the Camp, the Courts of Judicature, the Tribunals, every particular Person
in Order, and in their proper Rights; and he will maintain his own Dignity. He
is one, whom I do most particularly admire; and in my opinion deserving a Great
Post. I doubt not but you will thank me for him. If I am mistaken in him, you
may assure your selves, there is no where in the World to be found a Person
that I can wholly approve. I have made his Son a Tribune over the Gallia
Narbonensis, who is a Youth, that will ^ne day approve himself worthy of the
Examp^^ of his Father.


3. Posthumous Junior.
THis Posthumous, the Son of the precedent, was made by his Father first a
Caesar, and then Emperor with him; in which Honor he died at the same time
with his Father, in the Rebellion of Lollianus. The only Memorable thing of
him, is, that he was a Master of so much Eloquence, that his Controversial
Declamations are said to be inserted into Quintilian; who is the most Acute
Orator of all the Romans of that kind, as with the least reading in him, any
one will see immediately.

4. LOLLIANVS.
BY the Rebellion of this Person it was, that the Valiant Posthumous was
killed, after he had retrieved and secured the Interest of the Roman Empire in
Gallia, which were in danger to be lost under the Luxury of Gallienus.
Lollianus was a Valiant Man himself: But yet the sense of his Rebellion made
his Authority the less amongst the Gauls. However he was not unprofitable to
the Public: For he not only Reformed several of the Cities of Gallia, but
likewise the Castles, which Posthumous in his seven Years Reign had built upon
the Enemies Country, and which after his death the Germans by a sudden
Irruption plundered and burnt, he rebuilt; and then he was killed by his own
Soldiers, only because they thought him too Assiduous, and put too much Labor
upon them.

Thus first of all Posthumous, then Lollianus, after him Victorinus, then
Tetricus, (to say nothing of Marius) arose to be the Assertors of the Roman
Name in Gallia; I believe they were all given from Heaven for that purpose,
whilst Gallienus with his unheard of Luxury, neglected the State at that rate,
that had the Germans broken out upon us in the same manner in consort with the
Goths and Persians, so that all had conspired to our ruin, this Venerable
Empire of the Romans had received its last period then.

As for all other things, the Lives of both Posthumous and Lollianus are
obscure. Being not Persons of any great matter of Quality, they are chiefly
noted for their Personal Bravery.

5. VICTORINVS.
AFter the death of the Posthumii and Lollianus in Gallia, Victorinus remained
the sole Emperor there; who being a great Soldier, had been before chosen by
Posthumous to be his Colleague, when the Emperor Gallienus with a great Force
came against him from Italy: In which War, assisted with the succors of the
Germans, Posthumous and Victorinus together, fought several Battles with the
Forces of Gallienus; but at last received a defeat. Victorinus was one, that
gave himself very much to corrupt the Soldiers and other Men's Wives, which
proved his destruction: A Clerk to a Troop, whose Wife he had debauched, with a
Party that he made, killed him at the City of Cologne; and his Son, a Youth,
who was just before created a Caesar, was killed with him. Setting aside this
one Vice, Victorinus was a very brave and an excellent Emperor, by many
commended. Julius Aterianus has written this Character of him.

I know no one that ought to be preferred before Victorinus, who reigned in
Gallia sometime after Junius Posthumous. Neither did Trajan excel him in
Bravery, nor M. Antoninus in Clemency, nor Nerva in Gravity, nor Vespasian in
his Care of the Public Money, nor Pertinax or Severus in Military Discipline.
But then his Lust and his extreme passion for the Pleasures of Women, undid all
so again, that People have not dared to record his Virtues, because of that
Vice, for which he justly deserved the end that he had.

He was the Son of Victorina, or Victoria, who was called, The Mother of the
Camp; and who was the Person, that excited one after another Posthumous,
Lollianus, her Son and Grandson Victorinus, and after them Marius and Tetricus,
to assume the Empire of Gallia.

6. Victorinus, Junior.
VICTORINUS the Son, was declared Caesar by his Father, and by his Grandmother
Victoria, but about an hour before his Father was killed, and himself was
killed with him. There is a small Sepulcher of them about Cologne in Marble,
extant; which has this Inscription, Here lie the Two Victorini, Pretended
Emperors of Gallia.

7. MARIUS.
MARIUS, whom Victoria put up after the death of Victorinus, reigned but three
days, and was originally a Smith. What Tully says of a Consul, who enjoyed that
Office no longer than six hours one afternoon; We have had a Consul, says he,
so severe and so strict, that no Man during his Magistracy either dined or
supped or slept; one might also say the like as to this Emperor. He was created
one day, appeared to Reign the next, and was killed upon the Third. Not but
that he was a stout Man, and one that had passed through the several degrees of
Command in the Army, before he came to this, He was the strongest in the Hand
and Fingers, of any one that has been almost ever known. His Veins were more
like strong Cords or Ropes about his Fingers. With one Finger he would hurt as
much, as if you had a blow given with a Cudgel or a Hammer. Some say, he would
only set his fore finger against a Cart, and stop it coming. Betwixt two
Fingers he bruised to pieces hard Stones. A Soldier killed him upon some
disgust, who had formerly been a Workman with him in his Forge; as he struck,
the Man said to him, This Sword is of your own making. I will give you his
Speech which he made to the Army, after he was declared Emperor.

I Know, my Fellow Soldiers, that my former Trade of a Smith, of which all you
yourselves are Witnesses, may be objected against me. But let any Man say what
he will, I desire always to have to do with good Iron, rather then to spend my
days as Gallienus does in Wine, Flowers, Mistresses, and the Taverns, so
unworthily of his Father and his Quality. Let them tell me of my old Trade, so
long as I can reduce Foreign Nations with the effects of it, and make all the
Almains, the Germans, and their Neighbors know, that the Romans are a People
indeed of Iron, and their Swords to be the most dreaded of all things. In the
mean time, I would desire you, Gentlemen, to observe, that you have made a Man
your Prince, who never knew how to handle any thing but a Sword. Which I
therefore take notice of to you, because I know that Gallienus, that Pest, has
nothing to oppose to me, but this.

8. INGENVVS.
IN the Year of the Consulship of Fuscus and Bassus, whilst Gallienus lived the
Life we have already so often mentioned, with his Whores, Players and Pimps,
and depraved the good Parts which he had by nature in him, in a continued
Luxury. Ingenuus, who was then the Governor of Pannonia, was by the
concurrence of that Province, and the Legions which were in Moesia, created
Emperor. And it was very well for the public Good, because it was a time, that
the Sarmatians were so pressing, that there was a necessity of a vigorous
Prince to oppose them, and remedy the public Misery. However, Gallienus, as he
was quick, fierce, furious, vehement and cruel, when necessity required, as
well as profligate and lewd, came against Ingenuus, and in a Battle overcame
him, and killed him. After which, he raged severely against all, as well
Soldiers as Citizens of Moesia. He left no one without a share of his Cruelty,
and in several Towns he killed the whole Male Sex, so that they had not a
Man-Child left alive amongst them. See the following Orders to Celer Verianus.

The EMPEROR Gallienus to Verianus.
IT is not enough to satisfy me, if you kill only such as were in Arms, who
exposed their Lives of themselves to the Fortune of the Battle, and might have
been killed there: All the Male Sex is to be killed, old and young. Whoever
has but wished ill to me, is to be killed. Whoever has spoken ill against me,
against me the Son of Valerian, and the Father and Brother to Princes, let him
be killed. Ingenuus, an Emperor! Cut, Kill, Slay! You see my Mind. I write this
with my own Hand; do you it as I would my self.


Ingennus was a very brave and serviceable Man, and also beloved by the
Soldiers, which wonderfully raises the Courage of such as have an Ambition to
Command. Some have said, that he escaped out of the Fight, and afterward
killed himself, rather than to fall into the cruel Hands of Gallienus.

9. REGILLIANVS.
BY the public Destiny, it was so, in the time of Gallienus, that every one
who could, started up an Emperor. Thus Regillianus in Illyricum, where he
commanded, was advanced by the Assistance of those Moesian Legions, who had
served before on the side of Ingenuus, and upon whose Families, after the
Defeat, Gallienus had exercised an incredible Cruelty.

The Story of the manner of the elevation of Regillianus, is pleasant, and a
sort of a Jest. Some of the Military Men supping with him, says a
Lieutenant-Tribune, From whence think we comes the Name of Regillianus? From
regn^, answers one presently, to reign. Then begins another to derive his Name
Grammatically from Rex, thus; Rex, Regis, Regi, Regulus, Regillus, Regillianus.
Then, says one, Cannot be very well be a King? Says another, Cannot be be our
King? Says a Third, He is a King born; God has given him the Name of one. And
the next day the Chief of the Army in reality set him up to be Emperor.

It cannot be denied but he always approved himself a good Soldier. Gallienus
had before suspected him for his Merits. He was a Dacian by Nation, and
related, it is said, to Decebalus, the once Famous King of Dacia.

Regillianus did several gallant Actions against the Sarmatae; but however, for
fear of the further Fury of Gallienus, he was betrayed to the Roxolani, and
killed.

Claudius, who succeeded to the Empire after Gallienus, and whose Judgment
undoubtedly was of great weight in his time, writ the following Letter to
Regillianus, whilst they were both as yet private Persons, to give him Thanks
for his Care of Illyricum, during the Negligence of Gallienus, where
Regillianus then commanded as General. I met with it in the Archives, and
therefore it is of Authority to be inserted here.

Claudius to Regillian, wishes all Health.
I Congratulate the Happiness of the Public, in having such a Captain as you,
to fight their Batt^ls at this time. Gallienus is happy in you, though he is
one, to whom no body tells the Truth, neither of the Good nor Bad. Bonitus and
Celsus, Two of his Guards, have informed me of your Action at Scupi, in the
Upper Moesia, and how often in one day you have fought, and with what dispatch.
You would be thought to deserve a Triumph, did we live as in the ancient Times.
In short, I would only wish you to be cautious, how you Conquer at this rate,
remembering a certain Person, and the jealousy it may give him. Pray send me
some of the Bows of the Sarmatians, and a Couple of the Soldiers Coats, such as
you have in Illyricum, with Buttons; I have sent you a Couple of ours.


It is to be observed, that Regillianus was one who had not received his
promotion from Gallienus, but from the Emperor Valerian; and that Claudius,
Macrianus, Ingenuus, Posthumous, and Aureolus, were all likewise made
Commanders by Valerian; whose Judgment in the Choice of them was therefore
admirable, and would have been, had he continued upon the Throne, a great
happiness to us; because all these, and all the General Commanders whatever,
that were of his promotion, were Persons so well chosen, that they merited
afterward the Favor and Votes of their Soldiers to be Emperors. And I wish,
that either they could have held it out, and maintained their Empires longer,
or that Gallienus had not reigned so long; it had been much better for the
Liberty of our State. But Fortune was pleased to indulge herself
extraordinarily, to take away, not only Valerian from us, but several others
who would have made us good Princes in his stead, and at the same time to
continue to us a Gallienus longer, than it was certainly fit that such a one
should reign.

10. AVREOLVS.
AUreolus was another Commander of the Forces of the Province of Illyricum, who
in contempt to Gallienus, as all the rest, with the instigation of the
Soldiers, set himself up an Emperor. Against him came Macrianus and his Son
with a considerable Army out of the East, in their way, as they were directing
their March to depose Gallienus. Aureolus corrupted some of this Army to his
side, and fought and slew Macrianus and his Son, so that the rest yielding
afterward, and joining themselves with Aureolus, this additional Force made
Aureolus a Potent Emperor. In vain did Gallienus attempt to reduce him.
Gallienus made a Peace with him, and accepted of his Assistance to oppose
Posthumous in Gallia. After the Death of Gallienus, the Emperor Claudius fought
Aureolus, and slew him at the Bridge, which is called the Bridge of Aureolus at
this day, and there he built him a small Sepulcher, with an Inscription in
Greek upon it, signifying, That the Emperor Claudius having overcome the
powerful Tyrant Aureolus, had given him a Sepulcher, and he would in his
Clemency, have spared his Life, but that the Soldiers refused it, and without
his order killed him. The Bridge he dedicated to him.

II. MACRIANVS.
THE once Famous Senator and Patriot, and afterward the Valiant, but of all at
last, the most unfortunate Emperor Valerian, being taken Prisoner by the
Persians, amongst whom he lived and died in Captivity, and left behind him
Issue unworthy of such a Father; Balista who was Captain of the Guards to him,
and Macrianus a principal Officer of the Army understanding what a Person
Gallienus was, who was also at a great distance from them, and that Aureolus
had already usurped upon him in Illyricum, met and consulted with the Forces
which were with them in the East at their desire; what was to be done as to the
Election of another Emperor in the place of Valerian Maeonius Astyanax was
present in Person at this Council, who says that Balista spoke thus.

My Age, as well as my Inclination, and my Business sets me far from aspiring
to an Empire. I cannot deny but that I should be glad to see a good Prince in
the place of Valerian. But who is there for it, unless it be such a one as you,
Macrianus, who are brave, resolute, honest, tried and approved in the public
Service, and what especially concerns an Emperor to be, Rich. Take you
therefore the Place which is due to your Deserts. You may command my Services
as long as you please, only remember to discharge well the Duty which is
imposed upon you, and then all the Roman World will rejoice to see you made
their Sovereign.

Macrianus answered,

I confess, Balista, it is of consequence to have such a Prince as you have
described; and I should be willing to serve the State, in order to depose that
Pest Gallienus, from the Government of it. But this is not a Work for my Age. I
am Old, I cannot Ride, as I shall be obliged to do for an Example to the
Soldiers. I am one that must be frequently bathing, and must eat well; my
Pleasures and my Riches have taken ^ne off of the usages of a Soldiery Life
long since. You must set up rather, Two or Three stout young Men, who may
distribute themselves unto several parts of the Empire, to restore it again to
its former Splendour, which by the Mis^ortune of Valerian, and the ill Life of
Gal^ineus is at present ruined.

Balista, understanding that he seemed to ^int something about his Sons, who
were ^rave young Men, Macrianus Junior, and Quietus, he replied thus;

We commit the Empire and the Government ^f it to your Prudence. You have Two
brave ^oung Men of your own, Macrianus and Quie^us, who sometime since were
made Tribunes by ^he Emperor Valerian. Take them to be your Colleagues in the
Empire: They cannot be safe, because they are good, under Gallienus.

Macrianus finding that his Meaning had been rightly taken, answered;

I submit, and as to the Soldiers, I will give them a double Pay with my own
Money. Be you Balista, a careful Officer to me, and provide me Provisions in
the places, where it is necessary; and I will make Gallienus, a Man beyond any
thing of a Woman loose and effeminate, to understand the Power of his Fathers
Commanders.

So Macrianus and his Two Sons were with the Consent of all the Troops made
Emperors. The Father, and his Son Macrianus, marched presently against
Gallienus, leaving the Affairs of the East in good order, under the other Son
Quietus. They brought with them an Army of Five and Forty Thousand Men, with
whom they engaged with Aureolus in Illyricum, or upon the borders of Thrace,
but they were beaten, and both of them killed, and Thirty Thousand of their Men
afterward yielded themselves to the Power of Aureolus. Domitian was the
General of Aureolus in this Battle, a very brave and active Soldier, who
derived his Family from the Emperor D^mitian and Domitilla. Not to omit the
Judgment of Valerian, concerning this Macrianus and his Sons, in a Letter which
he sent to the Senate from the Borders of Persia.

I Have entrusted in my absence, whilst I am upon the Persian War, all the
Affairs of the State relating to the Military part to Macrianus. He is faithful
to you, Fathers of the Senate, affectionate to me, and the Soldiery both love
him and fear him. Upon all occasions he will act in concert with the Armies.
Nor are you, Fathers of the Senate, strangers to the bravery of Macrianus from
his beginning to this day. You have known him a Boy in Italy, a Youth in
Gallia, a Man in Thrace, in his full Prime in Africa, an old Man in Illyricum
and Dalmatia; in all which places his Bravery has been approved in several
Battles, in which he has acquitted himself exemplarily well. To this it is to
be added, that he has Sons worthy to be of your Body, and worthy of your
Favor. And so he goes on.


12. Macrianus the Son.
THIS Youth had not been made an Emperor, but only with Respect to the Prudence
of his Father, in whose Hands he was. He was wonderfully Brave for his Age, and
had gained himself by it great Commendations. But what signifies the Fortitude
of any one Man in a Battle? He was overcome and killed by Domitian, together
with his Father. His Mother was a Lady of Quality. His Father had raised
himself to the Empire from the degree of a private Soldier.

13. QVIETVS.
QUietus was a Youth worthy of his Father and his Brother, in conjunction with
whom, as we have said, he was made Emperor, which he also deserved. But when
Odenatus, the King of the Palmyreni, who had pretended to the Empire of the
East from the Captivity of Valerian, heard of the entire defeat of both his
Father and his Brother by Aureolus, he came with a Force against this Youth,
vindicating as it were the Cause of Gallienus, and slew him first, and Balista
soon after him. Yet had Quietus and his Brother lived, they might have done the
State very great Service. Their Family flourishes at this day, and one thing is
very remarkable of it; that it is a Family which has, and has always had such
an Honor for Alexander the Great of Macedonia, that the Men continually wear
his Picture in their Rings, and have it cut upon their Plate; the Women wear it
finely wrought in their Heads, Bracelets, Rings, Gowns, Borders, Mantles, and
all manner of Dresses. The other day, a Gentleman of that Family, Cornelius
Macer, giving an Entertainment in the Temple of Hercules, he had a Gold and
Silver Bowl there, on which in the midst was engraved a Head of Alexander, and
round it was all the History of him, contained in short and pretty Figures,
which every one that had an Honor for that great Man was very Curious to see.
I mention this, because also there is an Opinion, that such as carry about them
such an Image either in Gold or Silver, are divinely assisted in all that they
do.

14. ODENATVS.
ODenatus Prince of the Palmyreni in Syria was the Person that really secured
the Affairs of the East, by his taking up Arms against the Persians, in the
behalf of the captive Emperor Valerian. His Wife Zenobia, and his Sons Herod,
Herennian, and Timolaus accompanied him in that Expedition. He first reduced
under his Power the City of Nisibis, and all Mesopotamia. Then he fought
Sapores King of Persia, and beat him, and put him to flight. He pursued Sapores
and his Children, as far as to the City of Ctesiphon. He took the Concubines of
Sapores Prisoners, and a great deal of Booty. He intended next to direct his
Army against the pretensions of Macrianus, who had set himself up against
Gal^^enus. But Macrianus, with the Son of his own Name, was killed in the
Battle with Aureolus in Illyricum. Then Odenatus fe^ upon the other Son
Quietus, who was left in the East, and him he killed. And after he had composed
in a great measure the State of Affairs in the East, himself and his Son Herod
were likewise killed by Maeonius. I believe that God was angry with the Roman
Empire, in that he did not continue Odenatus longer to us. For certainly
Odenatus and his Lady Zenobia together, had reestablished, not only the East,
but all the parts of the Empire. He was a great Warrior, and he is for ever
Famous besides for an indefatigable Huntsman. For from his Youth he accustomed
himself to the Hunting the Lion, the Leopard, the Bear, and the rest of the
wild Beasts of the Field. He was always in the Woods and upon the Mountains,
enduring the Heat and the Rain, and all the Injuries that ordinarily accompany
that Sport; and this hardened him again for all Weathers which he suffered in
his Wars with Persia. His Lady Zenobia, no less accustomed herself so, that
many say she was as valorous and as indefatigable as he: A Woman the noblest of
all her Sex; and, says C^rnelius Capitolinus, the Beauty too of all the East.

15. HEROD.
HErod, the elder Son of Odenatus; born to him, not by Zenobia, but a former
Wife, concurred with his Father in assuming the Empire of the East. He was a
Man of an extreme delicacy of Life, wholly devoted to the Oriental and the
Grecian Luxury. His Tents were embroidered, his Pavilions done with Gold, and
he had all things after the Persian mode. Odenatus loved him, and indulging him
his Humor, he gave him all the Royal Concubines, the Riches, and the Jewels
that he took from the King of Persia. Zenobia was a right Stepmother to him,
which only the more recommended him to his Father.

16. MAEONIVS.
THis Person was a Cousin-German to the Excellent Odenatus, whom he killed;
drawn to that Fact by nothing but a cursed Envy at the Pleasures of Herod,
though in the mean time he was very lewd himself; so that the Soldiers who had
put him up to be Emperor after Odenatus by a mistake, killed him quickly again,
as he deserved, for his Luxury. Zenobia, some says, favored the Envy of
Maeonius, because she could not endure to see a Step-son, made a Prince, before
the Sons of her own Body.

17. BALISTA.
THE Account about Balista is very various. Some say, Odenatus gave him his
Pardon; yet because he would neither trust to Gallienus, nor Aureolus, nor
Odenatus, he set up himself Emperor. Others say, that he was killed at the
Village of Daphne by Antioch, where he lived a private Life upon an Estate
which he bought there; and again, that he was killed as he lay in his Tent, by
a private Soldier of Odenatus; and again, that he was killed by the Persons
sent by Aureolus to take Quietus, after his defeat and slaughter of his Father
and his Brother. However it is, Balista was a Famous Person, an experienced
Statesman, of great Force in his Counsels, Eminent in his Expeditions, and a
singular Manager of the Quarters and Provisions for the Soldiers. The Emperor
Valerian gave this Character of him to Ragonius Clarus.

The Emperor Valerian to Ragonius Clarus, the Prefect of Illyricum and Gallia.
IN the disposition of the Quarters, and the Provisions of the Soldiers, I
would have you my Kinsman, if you are a good Husband, as I know you are, to
follow the Example of Balista. Do you see, how he makes the thing easy to the
People of the Country? Where there is Forage for the purpose, there he sends
his Horse; where Corn, there he places the Foot. He compels no Man, no Landlord
to find Corn there, where he has it not; nor to feed a Horse, where he cannot.
And it is certainly the best way to take things as they grow upon the place
without charging the Public with Carriages and Expenses. Thus the Province of
Galatia abounds in Corn; Thrace and Illyricum are full of Corn, let the Foot be
quartered there. In Thrace, the Horse also might Winter very well, without
damage to the Inhabitants, because the Fields afford a great deal of Grass: So
where there is plenty of Bacon, or any other Commodities, the best way is, to
raise and to demand the said Commodities from thence. All which are the
Counsels of Balista, who charges only one Commodity upon one Province,
abounding with it, and in the mean time he frees that Province from the
quartering of Soldiers, because those are there, where the Corn and the Grass
most is. This is now become a public Order.


In another Letter, the same Emperor returns his thanks to Balista for all the
good Methods of Government, which he owns himself to have learnt from him.
Particularly he is glad, he says, that by his Counsel he has retrenched all
Persons, which do him no service; that is, to entertain no Supernumerary
Officers in the Court, nor Tribunes or Soldiers in the Army without Employs:
all which he attributes to the Counsels of Balista.

And this is as much as I have met with, that I can rely upon, concerning him.
He is often commended for a good Officer; but little is spoken of him, as an
Emperor.

18. VALENS.
THIS Person, being of great Note and Knowledge both in the Military and the
Civil Affairs, had the Honor to be made by Gallienus the Proconsul of Achaia.
Macrianus very much fearing him, and envying his Merits, knowing him to be his
Enemy, sent Piso against him to kill him. Valens foresaw the danger, and took
the care to provide himself well against it. He had no other way, as he
thought, to escape, but by setting himself up an Emperor, as well as Macrianus
had done. He did so, and escaped the power of Piso. But he was soon after
killed by his own Men.

19. Valens, Senior.
THIS Valens was either Uncle, or Great Uncle to the precedent, and one that
set himself up in the time of the Emperor Decius. It comes into my mind to
mention him here, because of his Relation to, and the parity of his Fortune
with the other: for after he had a few days Reigned in Illyricum, he was killed
also.

20. PISO.
PIso was sent with a Force by Macrianus, to kill Valens, the Eighteenth in
this Catalogue of Tyrants; but finding that Valens was provided against him, he
changed his Course into the Province of Thessaly, and was there by the consent
of a small Party, himself made an Emperor, with the Title of Emperor of
Thessalia. He was a very good and Provident sort of a Man, to a Proverb; so
that he was called in his time the Thrifty Piso; and he was of that Noble
Family of the Piso's, into which Cicero says, to do his own an Honor, he
Married his Daughter Tullia. He was much in the esteem of all the Great Men.
Valens, who sent Ruffians after him into Thessalia, who Murdered him,
confessed, that though he was his Enemy, he knew not what account to give of
that Fact to the Gods, the Infernal Judges, because the Roman Empire had not
then such another Person as Piso. The Senate upon the News of his Death, met
upon the seventh of the Kalends of July, and unanimously decreed the Honors of
a God, with this Elogium, that there never was a better Man, nor one more firm
and constant than he. They decreed him a Triumphal Statue and a Chariot, to be
put up to his Honor. The former is yet to be seen, amongst the others of the
same kind. The latter did sometime stand about the place, where since has been
built the famous Bath of Dioclesian, of eternal, as well as sacred, memory.

21. AEMILIAN.
IT is a Familiar thing with the People of Egypt, to break out, like Madmen,
into the violentest Seditions and Disorders, upon any the slightest occasions.
Often have they for a matter of a Complement neglected, or for a Place in the
Baths, or about the Flesh in their Markets, Herbs, Shoes, and the like, raised
such Commotions, as have hazarded the Ruin of the State, and required an Army
to repress them again. Thus one day a Slave belonging to the Curatour of the
City of Alexandria was killed by a Soldier, for saying, that he had a better
pair of Shoes on his Feet, than that Soldier had. The People hereupon rose,
and made an Assault upon the House of Aemilian, who was the Roman General of
the Province. They came upon him in a furious manner, with Stones and Swords,
and all sorts of Instruments, as is usual in a Sedition. Aemilian had no other
way in fine, to take, but with the consent of the Egyptian Army, who were
willing to it, chiefly because they hated Gallienus, to make himself Absolute,
and set up for an Empire. This he did, with Vigor. He went thorough the
Thebais, and all Egypt, and displayed his Authority over the Barbarians. He
gained himself the Title of the Alexandrian Emperor. But as he was preparing
for an Expedition into India, Gallienus sent Theodotus against him, who took
him and sent him Prisoner to Rome; where he was Strangled in the Prison,
according to an Ancient Custom of putting Captives to death. Gallienus would
have after this, made Egypt a Proconsular Province, and given it to Theodotus;
but the Priests prohibited him, pretending an Inscription upon a golden Column
at Memphis in Egypt, in Letters, saying, that Egypt would then be a Free
People, when the Romans attempted to Govern it by Consuls; and therefore the
Rods of the Consuls were never to enter into Alexandria. Cicero, against
Gabinius, mentions the same Notion in his time: I find it also in Proculus, the
Learned Grammarian, who is of great Authority, when he speaks of Foreign
Countries. So that when Herennius Celsus, your Kinsman, the present Prefect of
Egypt, not contented with the Honor which he has, desired lately to be made a
Consul, he was answered that he asked a thing, that was not to be granted;
because it was contrary to an observation of the Empire.

22. SATVRNINVS.
SAturninus was made a Commander by the Emperor Valerian, and continued so with
great Applause in the Reign of Gallienus; till no longer being able to endure
the Dissoluteness of that latter Prince, and the neglect of his Government, the
Army set him up to be Emperor. He was a Man of singular Prudence and great
Gravity, beloved by all, and very well known for his Victories over the
Barbarians. The same day, that the Soldiers put upon him the Purple, he told
them in a Speech; Gentlemen you have lost a good Captain, to make of him an ill
Prince. He did several things in his Reign which were Brave: but being severe
as to the Discipline of the Soldiers, the same that had raised him, killed him.

23. TETRICVS.
AFter Victorinus and his Son were killed in Gallia, their Mother Victoria
persuaded Tetricus a Senator, who then exercised the Office of a President in
Gallia, and was her Relation, to take upon him the Empire there. Accordingly
she caused him to be Proclaimed, and his Son to be Entitled the Caesar.
Tetricus Reigned long, and performed several things happily; but being beaten
at last by the Emperor Aurelian, and unwilling to give himself further trouble
with a perverse and an insolent Army which he had to Command, he voluntarily
yielded to Aurelian. Aurelian, not being one overmuch inclined to Lenity, led
him in a solemn Triumph, at the same time when he led in Triumph Zenobia, the
Wife of Odenatus, and her two Sons Herennianus and Timolaus. But being
sensible, that this was very severe to be done to a Roman Senator, and one who
had been a Consul, and President of Gallia, he made him, after he had thus
Triumphed over him, the Governor of all the Campagna, Abruzzo, Puglia,
Lucania, Calabria, Hetruria, Ombria, and generally all the Provinces of Italy;
he suffered him not only to live, but to live in the greatest Splendor; and
oftentimes called him by the name of either his Colleague, or his Companion in
Arms, or Emperor.

24. Tetricus, Junior.
THIS Youth, the Son of the other, having been declared Caesar by the Lady
Victoria, was led in Triumph by Aurelian in Company with his Father. He enjoyed
afterward all the Honors of a Senator, and his Estate untouched, and left
the same to his Posterity. My Grandfather has said, that he was acquainted
with him very well, and that no Man was more esteemed either by Aurelian, or
the following Princes, than he. The House of the Tetrici is extant at this day,
and a very fair one upon the Mount Caelius, betwixt two Groves, over against a
Temple of Isi^. You have in it, in Mosaic Work, a draught of the Emperor
Aurelian, holding out to each of these two, over whom he Triumphed, a
Senatorian Robe, to signify his investing them again in that Dignity; and they
holding out to him a Scepter and Crown, as the acknowledgements of his Victory.
At the Dedication of which Piece, they say, that Aurelian did them the Honor
to be present at their Entertainment, at their humble Request.

25. TREBELLIAN.
I Am almost ashamed to recount so many several Upstart Emperors, that all
appeared under the single Reign of Gallienus, and were occasioned by his own
fault: his Luxury deserving no other than to be confronted with them, and yet
his Cruelty was such, that one might very well be afraid to do so too.
Trebellian, amongst the rest, was made a Prince, in the Province of Isauria, by
the Isaurians themselves. Some called him an Arch-Robber; but he gave himself
the Title of an Emperor, and ordered a Medal to be made of him as such, and
appointed his Court in the Castle of the City Isaura. He maintained his Empire
for some time, by the help of the Mountains, and the Fastnesses, in which he
took refuge* But being by Causisoleus an Egyptian, the General of Gallienus,
and the Brother of Theodotus, who had before taken Aemilian Prisoner, drawn
down into the open Field, where he could not avoid the Combat, he was overcome
and killed. Yet could not the Isaurians, for fear of the Cruelty of Gallienus,
be prevailed with afterward upon any terms of Kindness and Humanity to submit.
They have ever since remained as Barbarians: their Country, though in the Heart
of the Roman Empire, is so shut up, and stands as it were a Boundary against
it, defended by its own Natural Limits, more than by its Men: who in truth are
neither skilled in Arms, nor Brave, nor Virtuous, nor Wise and Prudent. But yet
they are secure in only this, that they live in places inaccessible.

26. HERENNIAN.
ODenatus, the Prince of the Palmyreni in Syria, and sometime Emperor of the
East, left at his death his Wife Zenobia and two Sons, Herennianus and
Timolaus: who being very young, Zenobia in their names assumed and governed the
Empire of their Father, longer than it was for the Honor of the Roman Name to
endure in a Woman. She Arrayed those Children in the Purple Habit of the Roman
Emperors, and brought them with her to the Head of her Army, and to the
Assemblies of the People, whither she often went, and Harangued them like a
Man. She was the Dido, the Semiramis, the Cleopatra of her Age. It is a thing
uncertain, what the end was of these her two Sons; whether they were killed by
Aurelian, or whether they died their own deaths. But there are of the Posterity
of Zenobia, living at Rome, in Honor, at this day.

27. TIMOLAVS.
THE Account of Timolaus is, I suppose, the same with that of Herennian, his
Brother. Only in one thing he is distinguished from him; which was his great
Ardour for the Roman Studies; which Timolaus so readily imbibed, that he might
have made, it is said, one of the greatest Orators in his time.

28. CELSVS.
WHilst the parts of Gallia, Thrace, Illyricum, Pontus, and the East were taken
up, and Cantoned into separate Empires by the several Pretenders there, and
Gallienus passed his Life in the mean time amongst the Taverns, Baths, and
Bawdyhouses; the Africans by the instigation of Vibius Passienus their
Proconsul, and Fabius Pompeianus the Commander on the Frontier of Libya, set up
Celsus Emperor, adorning him for the purpose with a Robe of Purple, taken off
of a Statue of the Goddess Caelestis. He had been a Tribune, but lived at this
time a private Life upon his Estate, and was a Man of that Justice, and that
Presence, that he seemed very well to deserve their Choice. But the seventh day
afterward, a Woman, Galliena by Name, a Relation of the Emperor Gallienus,
killed him; so that he had no time to show himself in. His Body was thrown to
the Dogs: His Effigies, was mounted upon a Cross, and Crucified amidst the
Insults of the People, as if it had been Celsus himself in Person. This was a
new Devise of punishing the memory of a Man. The truth is, the City of Sicca
stood out against him, keeping their Faith to Gallienus; and it was those
especially, that urged on this disgrace.

29. ZENOBIA.
TO the last shame of the Reign of Gallienus, and of the Roman Empire under
him, the Women Revolted against him, and managed their Enterprise also
extraordinary well. Zenobia by name, a Foreign Lady, whom we have often already
mentioned; of the Lineage of the Cleopatra's, and the Ptolomey's of Egypt, as
she herself said; the Wife of Odenatus of Palmyra, the Emperor of the East: who
dying, she assumed the Purple, the Crown, and the Authority in his place, in
the name of her Sons, Herennian and Timolaus, being Infants; and she was
accordingly accepted; so that whilst Gallienus lived as he did, and Claudius
was taken up with the War with the Goths, she continued her Reign longer, than
it was otherwise sufferable in one of her Sex. And it was with great difficulty
that she was overcome at last, and carried in Triumph by the Emperor Aurelian;
who being reflected upon by some, for making a Woman a Subject of a War, and a
Triumph, gives this account of her, and thus defends himself in a Letter to the
Senate.

Fathers of the Senate,
I Hear that it is Objected to me, that I have not performed a manly part in
Triumphing over Zenobia. I assure you, those who blame me, would on the
contrary sufficiently commend me, did they know, what a Woman she is. How
Prudent in her Counsels, how Diligent in her Business, how Powerful with her
Soldiers, how Generous when Necessity requires, and how Severe when there is
occasion for Severity. I can say, that it was through her means, that Odenatus
overcame the Persians, and putting to flight King Sapores, advanced his Arms as
far as to the City of Ctesiphon. I can assure you, that this Woman was so great
a Terror to the East, and to the People of Egypt, that neither the Arabians,
nor the Armenians, nor the Saracens dared to move for her. Nor had I preserved
to her, her life, but that I know, that she did great service even by her very
Usurpation; because she kept up and asserted the Bounds of the Empire. Let them
therefore, who are pleased with nothing, take the Poison of their own Tongues
to themselves. If it is not Handsome to have Conquered and Triumphed over a
Woman, what shall I say of the Emperor Claudius, that Good and Venerable
Commander, who had done the same, if he had not been wholly taken up with his
Expeditions against the Goths. He Privately and Prudently suffered her to
Reign, to give himself the greater opportunity of effecting what he was about,
whilst she preserved inviolate the ancient Bounds of the Empire of the East.


This shows what an Opinion Aurelian had of Zenobia.

Zenobia was a Lady of that Chastity, that she never accompanied with her
Husband, more than to attempt a Conception. For after she had lain with him,
she contained, and expected her Terms, to know whether she was with Child: If
she was not, then she gave way to the Repetition. She lived with the Pomp of a
Queen, but much according to the Persian Mode. She was Adored after the manner
of the Kings of Persia, and her manner of Eating was like theirs. But she went
to Harangue her Soldiers, as the Roman Emperors do, with a Helmet upon her
Head, and an Imperial Robe of Purple upon her Back, buttoned with a Jewel, and
Jewels about the Borders, and she showed one Arm many times bare. She was of a
Brown Complexion, Black Eyes which were incomparably lively and glittering, a
Divine Esprit, a most delicate Shape and Presence: her Teeth so bright, one
would think them rather to be Pearls: a Clear and Manly Voice. She had the
Severity of a Tyrant, when necessity required; and all the Clemency of a good
Prince, where there was occasion for her Goodness. Her Generosity was ruled by
Prudence. She managed her Public Treasure with a care beyond the Conduct of
her Sex. She used a Coach, seldom a Litter, but often rode a Horse; and she
walked often on Foot, it is said, three or four Miles together. She was born
with the Tenaciousness of a Spaniard. A sober Woman, yet she made no scruple
frequently to drink with the great Officers of her Army; and also with Persians
and Armenians, whom in her Table she excelled. The Vessels for her Table were
of Gold, beset with Jewels. Eunuchs advanced in years served her; very seldom
Women. She obliged her Sons to speak in Latin; they rarely or hardly at all
spoke Greek. Nor was she altogether ignorant of Latin herself; but her modesty
for fear of not doing it well, forbad her to speak it. She spoke the Egyptian
Language perfectly well. It is said, she had Epitomized the Alexandrian, and
the Oriental Histories, she was so well acquainted in them; and the Roman
History she had Read in the Greek. When therefore she was taken and brought
into the Presence of Aurelian, O Zenobia, said Aurelian to her, why have you
dared to Insult, as you have done, the Emperors of Rome? she answered, I know
you to be an Emperor, who are a Conqueror. But I have not thought Gallienus,
nor Aureolus, or those others to be so; and believing that Victorina might be
such another as my self, I desired, if it was possible, that she and I might
share the Empire betwixt us.

She was led in Solemn Triumph at Rome, in that manner, that nothing ever
appeared more Pompous, and with that Grace, in the Eyes of that City. She
labored under the Burden of her Ornaments. She had such great Jewels upon her,
that though she was a strong Woman, she stopped many times, and cried, she could
not go on for their Weight. Upon her Feet and Hands, she had Chains of Gold;
and about her Neck a Chain of Gold, supported by one of her old Guards, a
Persian. Aurelian gave her her life; which she spent afterward with her
Children at Tivoli, in the Quality, and according to the usage of a Roman
Matron: an Estate was given her there for her support, near the Palace of
Hadrian, and the same carries her name at this day.

30. VICTORINA.
VIctorina, or Victoria, or Vitruvia, was another Lady, who is to be remembered
here, as she was one, who was encouraged to her Enterprises by the ill manners
of Gallienus. She set up both her Son and her Grandson Victorinus to be
Emperors in Gallia, who were afterward killed by the Soldiers. She set up
Posthumous: she set up Lollius; she set up Marius there, who were all first
declared Emperors by the Soldiers, and then after some time, that they reigned
more or less, killed. At last she set up Tetricus, because she would never
forbear to carry on the Masculine part, which she had begun. In Tetricus's
time, she was either killed, or taken off by a Natural Death. She gave herself
the Title of the Mother of the Camp. She had Money both in Brass, Silver, and
Gold Coined for her, at the City of Trier; whereof there are pieces extant at
this day.

I have now finished the number, and given you, Sir, the best account I can,
out of the secret Paths of History, which I have traced on purpose for them, of
these thirty Tyrants. You may please to accept of it, and take my Pains in good
part. It is not so Eloquently, as it is faithfully writ. Because it is not fine
Language, which I pretend to, but the matter of Fact. And what I write, I
dictate to my Servant with that haste, that if you should ask me any thing, I
have scarce a breathing time left me to answer you in.

There were two other Persons, in other Reigns, of this stamp; the one in the
time of Maximin, the other in the Reign of Claudius; whom, as an Appendix, I
shall think fit to produce here, to bring up the Rear of the rest, and so I
shall close this point of History.

1. Titus Quartinus.
TItus, as both Dexippus, Herodian, and all Historians write, was a Tribune of
the Moors, whom Maximin had dismissed from his Service. Some say, he voluntarily
set himself up Emperor for fear of his life afterward, from Maximin: others,
that the Armenian Archers in Maximin's Service, having been disobliged,
compelled Titus against his will to take upon him that Post. However it is, he
was a Man of the first Note for his laudable Services to the State both at home
and abroad. But his Reign was but little happy to him. He reigned six Months,
and then after the discovery of the intended Defection of Magnus, was killed by
his own Soldiers. His Wife was Calphurnia, a Holy and Venerable Woman of the
Family of the Piso's, a Priestess, but once married, and adored by our
Ancestors amongst the best of her Sex. Her Statue is that, which we have yet in
the Temple of Venus, of Stone gilt. She wore in her time Unions, such as
Cleopatra was said to wear; and she had a Charger of twenty Pound weight of
Silver, whereon was Ingraved the History of her Family. This might be too much
perhaps to mention, if it did not naturally come in my way.

2. CENSORINVS.
THE next is Censorinus: a Man, who was very much a Soldier, and of an Ancient
stamp of Honor in the Senate. He had been twice a Consul, twice a Captain of
the Guards, thrice the Governor of the City of Rome, four times a Proconsul,
thrice the Lieutenant of a Province with Consular power, twice a Propraetor,
four times an Aedile, thrice a Questor, besides two extraordinary Commissions
which he had into Persia and Sarmatia. In the Persian War, in the time of the
Emperor Valerian, he received a Wound, of which he halted in one Foot. After
all these Honors, as he lived an old Man upon his Estate, he was taken out by
the Soldiers, and made Emperor, which was under the Reign of the Emperor
Claudius. Those who jested upon him, called him also a Claudius; because of his
halting, from Claudico, to Halt. In seven days afterward, from his Elevation,
the same Persons that had raised him, killed him; they thought he was too
strict, and of too severe a Discipline for them. His Sepulcher stands about the
City of Bologna, where in great Letters are written upon it all his Honors,
concluding with this; Happy in every thing, but an Emperor. His Family, who are
yet Extant, and famous by the name of the Censorini, betook themselves out of a
disgust to Rome, and the Public Affairs, some to the Country of Thrace, and
some into Bithynia. They have a sine House belonging to them in Rome, adjoining
to that of the Flavian Family: It was the House of Titus, the Eleventh Emperor
of the Romans, they say formerly, in his time.

So now I proceed to the Emperor Claudius, with whom I shall join his Brother
Quintillus, and some few things, that relate to that Excellent and Noble
Family. But whatever I shall say of the Life of Claudius; it must be expected
beforehand to fall short of the Merits of so great a Prince.

SALON VALERIANVS CAES.

portrait of Saloninus

DIVO CLAVDIO GOTHICO.

portrait of Claudius Gothicus

IMP. CAES. QVINTILLVS AVG.

portrait of Quintillus

IMP. AVRELIANVS AVG.

portrait of Aurelian

IMP. C. M. CL. TACITUS P. F. AVG.

portrait of Marcus Claudius Tacitus

IMP. C. M. AN. FLORIANVS P. F. AVG.

portrait of Florianus

P. 175. Vol. 11

THE A. Christi CCLXIX.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR CLAUDIUS, Dedicated to the EMPEROR Constantine
the Great.
By TREBELLIUS POLLIO.
IAM happily come to the Emperor Claudius; whose History I shall endeavor to
write with the greater care, because of his Relation to Constantius the Caesar.
Nor can I refuse this piece of Service to the Memory of so great a Prince. For
since I have already given my self the trouble of writing upon those Tumultuary
Reigns, and such Petty Kings as the Thirty foregoing, and upon the Actions also
of Zenobia and Victorina two Women; the Condition of Affairs under the Emperor
Gallienus coming to that pass, that even the Women as well as Men Usurped upon
him; It would be a Crime in me to choose to be silent of a Prince, who was
Great Uncle to Constantius the Caesar, and who by his Bravery overcame the
Goths, and put an end to the public Calamities of the State: who, though not
himself the Author of the Design against Gallienus, yet for the Public Good,
was made an Instrument of our deliverance from that Prodigy of an Emperor; and
had he lived long upon the Throne, he had revived to us by his Virtues; his
Counsels, and his Conduct, the Scipios, and the Camillus, and all those Noble
Romans of Ancient Times.

His Reign was short. But yet the same would have been thought of it, though he
had attained to the greatest Age. Every thing in him was Admirable, every thing
in him was Conspicuous, and to be preferred even before the most Triumphant
Actions of the Ancients. He had the Bravery of Trajan, the Piety of Antoninus,
the Moderation of Augustus, and the Excellencies of all the Great Princes in
that manner, that instead of taking an Example by others, had those Princes
never been, his single Example had been enough for all the World. The Learned
in the matter of Nativities are of an Opinion, that one hundred and twenty
Years is the greatest Age given to a Man to live; and more, they pretend, has
not been permitted to any; only to Moses the Friend of God, as the Books of the
Jews speak, who attained unto one hundred and twenty five Years: And when he
complained that he died, whilst as yet he had all his Senses entire and
vigorous, it was answered him, by I know not what Deity, that no Person was to
live above that Age. Now had Claudius lived to one hundred and twenty Years,
though his Death must have of necessity proceeded at that time, yet would no
body have desired it then, as Tully speaks concerning Scipio, because his Life
was stupendous and admirable. Take him, whether at Home or Abroad, and what is
there, that is Great, that he did not discover? He Loved his Parents, shall I
say? He Loved his Brothers, and this is no Miracle. He Loved his Relations, a
thing which is in our times to be compared unto a Miracle. He Envied no one:
The Wicked he punished. Corrupt Magistrates he openly and publicly Condemned.
He overlooked the Indiscretions of Fools. He made excellent Laws. He was that
Person upon the Throne, that those of his Race have been since Courted to the
Empire by the greatest Princes, and are dear in the best Affections of the
Senate.

I may be thought perhaps to speak this in flattery to Constantius, the Caesar.
But I appeal as well to the Conscience of your Majesty, as to my Manner of
Life, to be my Witness, Whether I have ever thought, or uttered, or acted any
thing at any time, that is of that Nature. I have before my eyes the Emperor
Claudius; whose Life, Probity, and all the Actions of his Reign have given such
a Fame of him to Posterity, that both the Senate and the People of Rome
conferred upon him unparalled Honors, after his Death. A Shield in Gold,
wherein is engraven his Image, was by the Voice of the whole Senate, set up in
his Honor in the House of the Senate, where it is extant at this day. The
People of Rome Honors done to him by the People of Rome,
(which never was done before) at their own expense, set up his Statue of Gold
of the height of ten Foot in the Capitol, before the Temple of the most High
and Excellent Jupiter: In the Public Forum was his Statue in Silver, in a
Triumphal Robe, erected upon a Column, with the Acclamations of all Mankind;
the Silver being of one thousand and five hundred pound weight. As if he had a
prospect of things future, he revived and propagated the Honor of the Family
of the Flavii, of which was Vespasian and Titus, not to mention Domitian,
because he was one unworthy of it. In a short time he finished the War with the
Goths. So that if I must be thought to Flatter, the Senate, the People of Rome,
the Foreign World, and the Provinces are all Flatterers with me. For all Orders
of Men, all Ages, and every City have honored Claudius with Statues, Banners,
Crowns, Shrines, Arches of Triumph, Altars, and Temples.

It is fit for all the World, but especially those who would imitate the
Examples of good Princes to know, with what Acclamations and Affection the
Senate received this Prince: and in the Voice of the Senate, one may see in a
manner the Sense of Mankind. The News came to them of his Elevation, upon the
Ninth of the Kalends of April, which is the Festival of Cybele, whilst they
were in the Chapel of that Goddess. But they could not persuade themselves to
continue longer there, to Celebrate the Duties of the Day. They took their
Robes, and repaired to the Temple of Apollo; where reading the Letters which
were sent to and by the Senate.
them from Claudius, they expressed themselves in his Honor as follows:

The Gods continue Claudius our Emperor to us. This was repeated sixty times.
We have always wished to have Claudius to be our Emperor, or such a one as you.
This was repeated forty times. The State wanted a Claudius to Govern it. This
was repeated forty times. You are a Brother, a Father, a Friend, a Good
Senator, and Truly a Prince. This was repeated eighty times. Avenge us, O
Claudius our Emperor, of Aureolus. This was repeated five times. Avenge us, O
Claudius our Emperor, of the Palmyreni in Syria. This was repeated five times.
Deliver us, O Claudius our Emperor, from the Usurpations of Zenobia and
Victorina. This was repeated seven times. Tetricus has done nothing why we
should Complain of him to your Majesty.

The first Action of Claudius, after his accession to the Empire, was his
Victory over Aureolus, who had made himself the more troublesome, because he
was much in the favor of Gallienus. Claudius fought him, and defeated him, and
published Edicts to the People, and sent Letters to the Senate, wherein he
declared him, upon his refusal still to submit himself, an Usurper. Aureolus
desired a Treaty of Accommodation with him: But He defeats Aureolus.
Claudius was deaf to that Motion, and told him very gravely, that he was not a
Gallienus to be asked such a thing, who might comply with him, because he
feared him. At length Aureolus was killed by the Soldiers at Milan, and
received that End which his Life and Manners deserved. Some Historians
ridiculously endeavor to Commend him. Gallus Antipater calls him a Golden
Emperor; as if he was the better Man, because his Name in the Latin refers to
the word Aurum or Gold. But as that Writer is the Father of Flatterers, and the
Reproach of Historians, so I have often known the Name of Aureolus given to a
Good Gladiator; and your Majesty's Book of the Public Sports has this very
Name in the List of the Names of the Gladiators. But to return to Claudius.

The Goths, that had made a shift to escape home from the Army of Martianus, as
we have said before in the Life of Gallienus I. excited at their arrival, all
the Nations and People of their Confederacy, to fall to make Depredations upon
the Lands of the Empire. So several Nations of the Scythians, the Peuceni, the
Trutungi or Gruthungi, the Ostrogoths, the Virthungi or Vithungi, the Gypides,
the Celtae, and the Heruli, broke in together upon us and laid many places
waste, whilst Claudius was taken up elsewhere. Especially he was so tedious
with the Preparations that he was making for this Gothic War, to conclude the
same effectually, as he ought, that he tried, as it were, the utmost Patience
of the Fates: And yet I think, that this really redounded the more to his
Glory, and made his Conquest the more Illustrious in the Eye of all the World.
Of Vast numbers of the Barbarians
the Enemy, there were three hundred and twenty thousand Fighting Men. Tell me
now, he, who accuses me of Flattery, whether he thinks, that Claudius, who
Conquered all these, is but little to be admired. A Body of three hundred and
twenty thousand Fighting Men! It is an Army for Xerxes. One would think such a
Number Fabulous, the Invention of a Poet. The Enemy were three hundred and
twenty thousand Fighting Men! To which add the Servants, the Families, and the
Carriages following them, and ones Mind will be full of Imaginations of their
drinking up Rivers, and consuming whole Woods, and that the Earth it self
labored under the weight of so much Barbarian Proud Flesh.

The Letter of Claudius to the Senate, which he ordered should be read to the
People, concerning the Enemy, was this: Dictated by himself, and not by his
Secretary.

To the Senate and the People of Rome, the Emperor Claudius.
Fathers of the Senate,
YOU may believe, that I send you the real Truth. The Barbarians that have
broken in upon the Roman Empire, are three hundred and twenty thousand strong.
If it shall be my fortune to overcome them, you will not be Ungrateful to my
Services. But if I overcome them not, you are only to remember, that I Fight
after the Reign of a Gallienus. The whole Empire is spent and exhausted. And I
now shall Fight, after the Loss of Valerianus, and the Revolts of Ingenuus,
Regillianus, Lollianus, Posthumous, Celsus, and a thousand others, that set up
themselves in Contempt of the Emperor Gallienus. I want Shields, Swords, and
Spears for the purpose. The Provinces of Gallia and Spain, which are the
Strength of the Empire, are in the Hands of Tetricus. All our best Archers are
kept from us by a Lady Zenobia; which is a shame to mention. Whatever therefore
we do, it will in our Circumstances be great enough.


But yet the brave Claudius overcame the numerous Enemy, and in a small time
crushed them to pieces: He scarce left any of them The Barbarians defeated.
living to return home. And what is a Shield, I beseech you, hung up in the
Senate; or what is one Statue of Gold, in proportion to the just Reward of so
great a Victory? Says the Poet Ennius of Scipio, O the Statue, which the People
of Rome will make of you, and what a Pillar will they erect, on which to
express your Achievements? But we may say, that It is not Columns, nor
Statues, but the strength of his own Fame, which Immortalizes the ever Renowned
Flavius Valerius Claudius.

The same Enemy had with them besides this, two thousand Sail of Shipping;
which is double the number of all the Grecian and the Macedonian Fleet, that
heretofore went against Troy and the other Cities of Asia. And yet the Fictions
of the Poet have magnified that too: whereas this that I speak of, is the very
Matter of Fact. And can we be said then to Flatter Claudius, who defeated,
oppressed, and cut in pieces a Barbarian Fleet of two thousand Sail, and an
Army of three hundred and twenty thousand Men? All the Carriages and Train that
attended so great a number, he either burnt, or reduced, and made Slaves of the
Families belonging to their Camp: I will give you his own Letter to Junius
Brocchus, the Governor of Illyricum, in which himself relates the Victory.

The Emperor Claudius to Brocchus.
WE have defeated an Army of three hundred and twenty thousand Goths, and we
have destroyed their Shipping, which was two thousand Sail. The Rivers are
covered with Shields, and all the Shores with Swords and Javelins: The Fields
are not to be seen for the Bodies of the dead. No Road is clear of them. A vast
Carriage is left to us. We have taken so many Women Captives, that our
Victorious Army may, every Man of them, have to himself two or three a piece.


I cannot but deplore the Misfortune of the Reign of Gallienus, and the
Condition of the State under six hundred Usurpers, that set up themselves
against him. Had those Soldiers and those Leigions all been safe, which were so
unhappily lost in the several Battles fought betwixt Gallienus and his
Adversaries, what an addition of Strength would it have been to the Empire? It
is to be ascribed to Claudius, that the Honor of the Arms of the Empire was
retrieved after so public a Loss. He had several Battles with the Enemy in the
Province of Moesia, and before the City of Marcianopoli in Bulgaria, and diverse
of their Kings were taken, and Noble Women of diverse Nations, and great numbers
of others perished in the Rivers. The Roman Provinces were filled with Gothic
Slaves, who were employed to Till the Ground. No Town or Quarter but could show
you Goths, acquired by the Triumph of our Arms. What Foreign Barbarian Cattle
did our Ancestors then see? what Sheep? what Horse? All this redounds to the
Glory of Claudius, who at once secured, and infinitely enriched the Empire. His
several Victories.
He fought the Enemy at Byzantium; the People there, as many as had escaped the
bloody Hands of the Soldiers of Gallienus bravely assisting him. He fought them
at the City of Thessalonica in Macedonia, which the Barbarians had laid Siege
to in his absence. He fought them in diverse Countries, and every where beat
them. One would almost think, that he had a Prescience of his future Kinsman
Constantius the Caesar, and that he was settling the Empire in safety for him
against his Reign.

This brings it to my mind to say, that Claudius was indeed foretold by the
Oracles which he consulted, and the Lots that he drew, not only of his own
Elevation, but that others of his Race should come to the Empire after him. He
consulted also about his Brother Quintillus; because he was willing to take him
to be his Colleague in the Empire. But he was answered so, as to signify, that
Quintillus had not long to live. And I have the rather inserted this, because
it shows, that Constantius the Caesar who is of the Blood of Claudius, was
foreseen and prognosticated so long ago as in the Reign of his Great Uncle; and
consequently he is a Person of a Divine Appointment, of an Imperial Family, and
we may hope for many Princes to descend from him: which I presume to offer at
least with all due submission and respect to their Majesty's, Dioclesian and
Maximian, and to Galerius his Brother, to whom I wish all Health.

During the time that Claudius was managing the War against the Goths, the
Palmyreni in Syria under the Arms of Sabas, or Zabdas, and Timagenes, made War
upon the Egyptians. The Egyptians, who are an obstinate and an indefatigable
People in War, defeated them, but with the loss of Probus their General, who
was killed by the Arts of Timagenes. The Egyptians, after this, submitted
themselves all to the Obedience of the Emperor of Rome, and accordingly swore
Fealty to Claudius, though he was not then present with them.

In the Year of the Consulships of Atticianus and Orphitus, the very Heavens
signally assisted the War of Claudius. A great multitude of the Barbarians,
that were yet remaining, had fled for refuge to the Mountain Haemus, and the
adjoining Province in Thrace. But they were so distressed there with a Famine
and a Pestilence, that their own Calamities anticipated the Work of our Arms;
nor would Claudius give them that honor to Conquer them in the Condition they
then were. Thus this fierce War ended, and the Roman Name was eased of those
Terrors with which it was threatened in the beginning. One thing the Truth
obliges me to observe; that such, as think we Flatter, may know that we conceal
nothing, which it is requisite, that a History should publish. Once after a
full Victory that Claudius had received of the Enemy, his Men, grown careless
with the Success, which is apt to disorder the wisest Heads, fell so to
Plunder, that they forgot all thoughts and fears of the Enemy. Therefore a
Party of the Enemy that had fled, returning unexpectedly again upon them,
whilst they were yet engaged wholly in Plundering, cut off of them two
thousand. But as soon as Claudius saw it, he drew up his Troops, and took all
that Party of the Enemy Prisoners, and laid them in Irons, and sent them to
Rome, to be kept for the bloody Purpose of the Fights of the Gladiators. So
Claudius with his good Conduct retrieved that Miscarriage of his Men, or rather
that Blow of Fortune; and the Enemy by their Stratagem only heightened his
Victory, and their own ruin.

In this War the Dalmatick Horse signalized themselves much. Claudius himself
has been sometime thought to derive his Origin from their Country; though
others make him a Trojan, and pretend to bring him down even from Ilus and
Dardanus, the two most Ancient Kings of Troy.

The Enemy had in this War, thrust themselves into the Island of Crete, and
attempted to lay waste that of Cyprus. But their Army every where laboring
under Sickness, they were likewise easily reduced there.

Then, the Gothic War being finished, and the general Sickness raging more and
more, Claudius fell sick of the same and died, and the Death of Claudins.
Heavens received him, to whom his Virtues so particularly allied him.

After his death, his Brother Quintillus with universal Consent ascended the
Empire: Not as if it was by Inheritance; but he was preferred to it for his
deserts. He was so good a Person, and so truly, as I may say, in Virtue, his
Brother's Brother, that he would have been made Emperor, though he had never
had that Relation by Blood. Under him the Barbarians that yet remained, laid
waste the City of Kenkis in Thrace, and attempted Nigeboli in Bulgaria: but
they were defeated and suppressed again by the Valor of those of the Country.
His Reign was so short, that he had not the time to be Master of any great
Action. The Soldiers killed him, Death of Quintillus
as they did Galba and Pertinax, the seventeenth day of his Reign; only because
he was strict upon them, and showed himself a better and more truly a Prince,
than they desired to have him to be. Dexippus indeed does not say so plainly
that he was killed; but only that he'died, without mentioning the manner of his
Death, as if he thought it dubious.

Having given this Account of the Military part of Claudius, I should be
wanting to the Reader, if I did not in the next place observe Extraction and
Family of Claudius.
some few things concerning his Family and Person. He had two Brothers
Quintillus and Crispus. Crispus had a Daughter called Claudia, who was married
to Eutropius, a Noble Trojan by descent, who was the Father of Constantius the
Caesar. Claudius had some Sisters; one of which was called Constantina, married
a Tribune of the Assyrians: but she died young. Concerning the Father and
Ancestors of Claudius, I know little, because most Persons have written
differently about them: Claudius himself was grave in his Manners, of a
singular good Life, extraordinary Chaste and Virtuous. He drank little, eat
quick, was Tall, his Eyes bright and flagrant, a full Visage, and so strong in
the Arms, that he has oftentimes struck out the Teeth of a Horse, or a Mule,
with a blow. He did this once, when he was a young Man, Wrestling with the
strongest there in the Field of Mars, at the Public Exercises of the Soldiers,
the Party with whom he Wrestled, giving him a twist by the Cods, which was
unlawful, Claudius in a passion lift up his Hand, and struck out all his Teeth
at once. The Emperor Decius was then present; who, it not being an Action to be
punished, because it showed both the Bravery and the Modesty of Claudius,
commended him rather publicly for it, and presented him with the Collars and
Bracelets, and ordered him to Wrestle no more, to avoid further occasions of
Quarrel. He left no Children: Quintillus left two, and Crispus, as I said, one
Daughter.

What an opinion the Emperors Valerian, Decius, and Gallienus had of Claudius,
whilst he was their Subject: and the probability that then appeared of his
future Elevation, we may see in these following Letters.

A Letter of the Emperor Valerian to Zosimion the Procurator of the Province of
Syria.
I Have given the Command of the Fifth Legion, called Martia, unto Claudius;
who is an Illyrian born, and a Man of so much Bravery and Honor, that his
Equal is not easily to be found in Ages past. You shall allow him for his
Salary, out of our Granaries every Year, 3000 Bushels of Wheat; 6000 Bushels of
Barley; 2000 Pound of Bacon; 3500 Quarts of Old Wine; 150 Quarts of the best
Oil; 600 Quarts of other Oil; 20 Bushels of Salt; 150 Pound of Wax; Hay, Straw,
Vinegar, Roots, Herbs, as much as he wants: 20 Parcels of Skins (with 10 to
each Parcel) for his Tents; Mules every Year 6; Horses every Year 3; Camels
every Year 10; She-Mules every Year 9; of Wrought Silver every Year 50 Pound
weight; Philips 150, having our Image upon them, yearly; 47 more in Occasional
Presents, and 160 Denieres. Also for Pots, Flaggons, Cups, and other Vessels of
Brass, 22 Pound weight; Officers Coats, 2; Clasps of Silver, gilt, 2: One
Buckle of Gold; one Silver Belt, gilt; one Ring set with two Gems of an Ounce
weight: One Bracelet of 7 Ounces; one Collar of a Pound weight; one Helmet,
overlaid with Gold; two Shields, inlaid with Gold; one Cuirasse, which he shall
restore again; two Herculean Javelins; short Darts, two; Sithes, two;
Hedge-Bills, four: One Cook, whom he shall restore: One Muletier, whom he shall
restore: Two Handsome Women of the Captives, for his Mistresses: One Albe or
White Vest of Silk, trimmed with Purple: One Robe, de Chamber, trimmed alike:
One Secretary, whom he shall restore: One Sewer, whom he shall restore: Cyprian
Table-Bes, two Pair: Linen Vests plain, two: One Gown, which he shall restore:
One Senatorian Robe, which he shall restore: Running Footmen, two: One
Carpenter: One Controller of his Household; One Water-Bayliff; One Fisherman:
One Confectioner. Of Wood every day, a thousand Pound weight, if it is to be
had; or if not, as much as you conveniently can. Of Charcoal, every day four
Pans. One Bagnio-man; and Wood for the Bath; unless he goes into the Public
Baths. And for other things, which for their minuteness cannot be specified
here, you will furnish him with them according to discretion; that is so, as to
give him the things themselves in Specie; and not according to the Value of
them. If any thing of all this cannot be had at any place, let it not be
Accounted, nor the Price of it be allowed in Money. I have particularly
appointed him all this Provision and Equipage, not as a Tribune, but as a
General; because he is a Man, who deserves to have this and greater Honors
shown him.


A Letter of the Emperor Valerian to Ablavius Muraena, the Captain of the
Guards.
CLAUDIUS, of whom you complained, and said, the Senate and the People did the
same, that he was still a Tribune, and not preferred to Command Armies; to
cease your Complaints, is made the General of all the Province of Illyricum. He
has under his Command the Armies of Thrace, Moesia, Dalmatia, Pannonia, and
Dacia. I think him so great a Man, he may expect, that I shall make him a
Consul; and if it is agreeable to his mind, to be so, a Captain of my Guards. I
assure you, I have appointed him as great a Salary, as is allowed to the
Governor of Egypt: And the same Clothes as I give to the Proconsul of Africa,
and as much Money as the Chief Justice of Illyricum receives, and as many
Officers as I allow to my self in every City; whereby all the World may see the
Esteem which I have for him.


A Letter of the Emperor Decius concerning Claudius.

Decius to Messala, the President of Achaia, wishes Health.
AFter some other things, says he, Claudius the Tribune is a very fine Young
Man, a stout Soldier, and a faithful Servant. He is fit for the Service of
either the Camp, or the Senate, or the Court. We have ordered him to the
Streights of Thermopylae, and to take care of the Peloponnese: Knowing no
Person, who can acquit himself better than he, of the Charge which we give him.
You will furnish him with a Draught of 200 of the Dardarian Horse, 100
Cuirassiers, 160 Light Horse, 60 of the Cretian Archers, and 1000 well-Arm'd
Men of the New Recruits; who are very fit to be put under his Command, because
there is no Person that has more Zeal, more Valor, more Prudence than be.


A Letter of the Emperor Gallienus.
NOthing troubles me more, than what you have intimated, That Claudius my
Kinsman and my Friend, is very Angry, upon some Suggestions against me, which
are most of them false. I desire you therefore, my Venustus, as you are
faithful to me, by the means of Gratus and Heremianus, to reconcile him again,
unknown to the Army in Dacia, who are out of Order already, for fear they
should break out worse: I have sent a Present, which you will take care that it
be well Accepted; and not to let him know, that I understand his Resentments,
lest he think me angry at him, and a seeming necessity should oblige him to
betake himself to the last Measures. I have sent him two Cups of Silver of
three Pound weight, set with Precious Stones: Two Cups of Gold of three Pound
weight, set also with Precious Stones: A Basin of Silver of twenty Pound
weight, engraven with clusters of the Berries of Ivy: A Charger of Silver of
thirty Pound weight, wrought in the Vine Leaf: Another great Plate of Silver of
23 Pound weight, wrought in the Ivy Leaf: Another Serving-Dish in Silver of 20
Pound weight, with a Man a Fishing represented upon it: Two Pots of Silver
inlaid with Gold, of the weight of 6 Pound; and other lesser Vessels of Silver,
to the weight of 25 Pound: Ten Egyptian Cups of several sorts of exquisite
Work: Two Cloaks of right Purple, Bordered all about: Sixteen several Vests:
One White Tunick of Silk, wrought with three Ounces of Gold. Three pair of
Buskins of the Parthian Mode: Ten Dalmatian little Girdles: One Cloak of the
Dardanian Mode: One Illvrian Coat: One French Cloak: Two good Thick Ruggs: Four
Spanish Handkerchiefs: 150 Valerian's in Gold, and 300 Salonin's.


To this I shall only add the Judgment of the Senate, and the High Acclamations
which they gave him, whilst yet a Private Person, upon The high Approbation of
him by the Senate.
the News of his Success against the Goths and Scythians in Illyricum, in a
Battle in which he and Martianus Engaged them. They cried,

The most Valiant Claudius, we Salute you; We Congratulate your Bravery and
your Fidelity. We unanimously Decree a Statue to be erected to the Honor of
Claudius. We all desire to have Claudius to be a Consul. He has acted like a
Man, that loves his Country and his Prince. The Ancient Roman Warriors did
thus. You are Happy, Claudius, in the good Opinion of the Princes. We
Congratulate your Virtues, and desire your Promotion. May you Live, and be
beloved by the Emperor.

It would be too long, to go through all the Elogies, which this Great Man
deserved. Only one thing I ought not to forbear to, say more, which is, That
both the Senate and the People Loved him, before his Reign, in his Reign, and
after his Reign; that certainly neither Trajan, nor the Antoninusses, nor any
other former Prince has, in that respect; been so very Happy as he.

THE A. Christi CCLXXI.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR AURELIAN.
Written by FLAVIUS VOPISCUS.
UPON the Festival of the Goddess Cybele, which is a time that with us we know
is very pleasant, and full of all Mirth and Freedom both in our Words and
Actions; the honorable the Governor of the City of Rome, Junius Tiberianus,
Occasion of the Author's writing this Life.
whom I cannot mention but with a particular Respect, took me with him, after
the Ceremony of the Day was over, in his Chariot from the Palace to the Gardens
of Varius; and as his Mind was then at ease, and free from the Cares and the
Thoughts of the public Affairs, he did me the Honor to Entain me with a great
many things, and especially about the Lives of the Roman Emperors. Passing by
the Temple of the Sun, which had been built by the Emperor Aurelian, from whom
Junius Tiberianus derived in part his own Blood and Family, he asked me, what
Person had writ the Life of that Prince; I told him, I had read his History by
some Greek Authors, but never by any Roman. At which he sighed and said,
Amongst the Ancients, not a Thersites nor a Sinon, nor any remarkable, though a
monstrous sort of a Man appeared, but we, know him very well, and his Character
is recorded to Posterity. And shall the Memory of so renowned and so
incomparable a Prince, as Aurelian be forgotten, by whom the whole World was
regained to the Obedience of the Romans? God deliver us from this folly! If I
mistake not, we have a Journal of this Prince by us, and his Wars digested in a
due order of History. I would wish that you would take them and consider them,
and add the things to them that you find relating to his Life. I will promise
to furnish you with that Journal, out of the Ulpian Library. You will see, it
contains almost all things concerning him; because it is a Book in which the
Occurrences of every day, as they happened, were set down by his own especial
Order. So I would desire you to represent him to the World, justly as he was,
to your Power.

I submitted to what the Governor said and commanded me, and I furnished my
self both with the Greek Historians, and all things else necessary to my
purpose, out of which I have compiled according to the best of my Judgment, his
small Treatise which I here desire to make a Present of, Sir, to you. And if
this does not satisfy you, I can only refer you to the Greek Originals, and to
the Journal in the Ulpian Library, which you may be free to examine when you
please.

We had some Discourse, whilst we were in the same Chariot together, concerning
Trebellius Pollio, who has written an Account of all the Emperors, whether of
famous or of obscure Note, from the Two Philips to the Emperor Claudius and his
Brother Quintillus. The Governor said, That Trebellius Pollio had delivered
several things without due care, and others too short. To which I made him
answer, That there is no Writer of History, but what has his Mistakes in one
kind or other. I showed him particularly in what Livy, in what Salust, in what
Cornelius Tacitus, in what Trogus Pompeius are evidently mistaken, and proved
to be so. He agreed with me, and giving me his Hand very pleasantly, said,
Write, as thou will. You may be sure, whatever you say, you lie with good
Company, and no less than the Chief Historians that are so much admired in the
World.

To make no further Preamble then, which Extraction of Aurelian.
would but be impertinent; the Emperor Aurelian was born at the Town of
Sirmium, in the Lower Pannonia or Sclavonia; that is, the generality of Men
place his Birth there. Some give him to the Province of Dacia Ripensis; and one
Author I remember I have read, that makes him to be born in Moesia. As it often
happens in Persons, who raise themselves so from a low Birth, that the true
place of their Nativity is unknown; and in the mean time others are devised or
dissembled for them, which may seem to reflect upon them a greater Honor.
However, it is not a matter of such moment to know of a great Prince where he
was born; as what signalized him, and made him great. Do we admire Plato
because he was born at Athens, or because he was so singular and so illustrious
a Philosopher? Or are Aristotle and Zeno, the less because they were born in
the little Villages of Stagira and Elea? Or is Anacharsis the meaner, because
he was a Scythian born? When the Merits of the Philosophy of all these have
every where raised their Fame to the Heavens.

Aurelian was born of an obscure Family, and mean Parents. He had a great
vivacity of Wit from his first Years. He was remarkably strong of Body, and
never passed a Day, though it was a Holy Day, and a time of public rest,
without exercising himself at the Javelin, the Arrow, and other Arms.
Callicrates Tyrius, who is one of the most Learned Grecian Writers, says, that
the Mother of Aurelian was a Priestess of the Temple of the Sun, in that
Village where she and her Husband lived, and that she had something of the
Power of Divination in her; particularly once reviling the follies of her
Husband, and his low Condition, she said to him, You, the Father of an Emperor!
As if she had a prescience of Aurelian's being hereafter an Emperor; which yet
further he: says, was predicted by many other Tokens. A Serpent came and
incircled Omens of his future Reign.
it self often about the Vessel, in which he was washed; nor would his Mother,
when she saw it, suffer it to be killed, but made much of it; and it escaped
the Attempts that were made by any to kill it. The Emperor then reigning,
having made an Offering to the Temple of the Sun, where Aurelian's Mother was a
Priestess, of a Cloak of Purple, she took it and cut into Swathing Clothes for
her Child. At the same time she had a Calf born of a wonderful bigness, white,
spotted with purple, and upon his Skin, on the one side, was the figure of a
Crown; on the other, the word Ave, that is, Hail; a Salutation given to the
Emperor. The beforementioned Callicrates Tyrius produces many more Omens,
which I shall omit, because I think them superfluous. When Aurelian was sent
Ambassador into Persia, he was presented there with a piece of Plate of the
like sort as the Kings of Persia are used to present to the Roman Emperors, and
upon it was engraved the Sun, in the same form in which he is worshipped in
that Temple, where his Mother was a Priestess. Together with this, the King of
Persia gave him a noble Elephant, which Aurelian presented again to the Emperor
his Master: These, to mention no more, were Omens of his future Grandeur.

He was handsome as to his Person, well His Personage.
made, tall, robust, with a good Grace, and a manly Mien; he eat and drank
freely, rarely had to do with Women, extraordinary strict, a great Master of
Military Discipline, and very desirous to be drawing the Sword. There were two
Aurelians together in the Army, and both of them at the same time Tribunes. The
other was taken Prisoner with the Emperor Valerian by the Persians. The Army
for distinction gave this Aurelian the Nickname of Hand to the Sword, because
he was so quick at it upon all occasions, and he was known by this Name. He did
several great Actions His Actions, whilst a private Man.
whilst he was but in a private Quality. He alone defeated and repulsed the
Sarmatae, in an Irruption which they made into the Province of Illyricum, when
he had with him no more than three hundred Garrison-Men. Theoclius, an
Historian, says, that in the Sarmatian War, Aurelian with his own hand killed
in one day eight and forty; and at several times in all, above nine hundred and
fifty. Songs and Dances were made upon his Exploits, which were sung upon the
Festival Days in public by the Youth, to this purpose:

A Thousand, a Thousand, a Thousand have we cut off; one Man has killed a
Thousand, a Thousand, a Thousand; let him live a Thousand, a Thousand, a
Thousand Years, that has killed a Thousand, a Thousand Enemies.

Whilst he was the Tribune of the sixth Legion, which was at Mentz in Germany,
he gave the Franks such a blow, as they made their Excursions up and down
Gallia, that he killed seven Hundred of them, and took three Hundred others
Prisoners, whom he sold for Slaves. Then this Song was made of him.

A Thousand Franks, a Thousand Sarmatians, ha(...) fallen by our Hand; a
Thousand, a Thousand, a Thousand, a Thousand, a Thousand Persians, ^ext, shall
yield to our Command.

He made himself to be so feared by the Soldiers His strict Discipline
under him, that after he had once with great severity corrected a Fault, none
dared ^o commit it again. He punished the Adul^ery of a Soldier, that had lain
with his Land^ord's Wife, in this unheard of manner. He caused two Trees to be
forcibly bent downward, and to the Heads of them he tied the poor Man's Feet,
and then on a sudden he ^et both the Trees fly up again, which tore him alive
in Two, and part of him was left hanging by the one Tree, and part by the
other: this Thing struck a great Terror into all.

A Letter of Aurelian to his Lieutenant concerning the Discipline which he
would have to be kept among the Soldiers, says thus.
AS you ever hope to be your self a Commander. of a Legion; nay, as you d(...)e
but to preserve your own Life in Safety, bridle the Licentiousness of Soldiers.
Let not a Man steal a Chicken, nor touch a Sheep, nor take away a Grape, nor
waste the Corn, which is another's. Let no Man exact either Oil, or Salt, or
Firing, but be content with his allowance, and let him take his Prey upon the
Enemy, and not force the Tears of the Subjects of the Roman Empire. Let all
their Arms be kept clean and bright, and sharp; and their Shoes and Clothes in
good order, and let them keep Money in their Pockets, and not spend it all at
the Sutlers. Let every Man have his Collar, his Bracelet, and his Ring, and
look after his own Horse, and not sell his Beast's Provision from him, and let
him take care in his turn of the Baggage. Let them all be ready to assist one
another. Let the Physicians take nothing of them for their Cure when sick. Let
them give nothing to the Soothsayer. Let them live virtuously in their
Quarters, and he that creates Disturbances, let him be beaten.


Next follows a Letter of the Emperor Valerian concerning Aurelian. This Letter
lately found in the Ulpian Library, amongst the public Records, and I thought
it proper to be taken as it is.

The Emperor Valerian to Antoninus Gallus the Consul.
YOU blame me in your kind Letter to me, for committing my Son Gallienus,
rather to the care of Posthumous, than to Aurelian; because you think, that
both the Boy and the Army would be the best under the latter, as the severer
Person. But you will not long be of this mind, ^f you consider well, how great
the Severity of Aurelian is. He has too much of it. He is ^xcessive. He is
grievous, which does not agree so well with these present times. I protest
before all the Gods, I was afraid, that if my Son had done any thing amiss, as
Boys are naturally prone ^o do, he would have been too severe upon him for it,
and no more have spared him than another.


There is another Letter of the Emperor Valerian, which is full of the Praises
of Aurelian, and which I have met with amongst the Records of the Governor of
the City of Rome. It is written upon the occasion of Aurelian's coming to Rome,
to appoint his Salary during his stay there.

The Emperor Valerian to Cejonius Albinus the Governor of the City of Rome.
WE should be glad, out of our Love to every individual Person, who is faithf^^
and zealous in the Service of the State, to all^^ them much greater Salaries
than what their plac^ demands; especially, when their Lives render
r^commendable the Honor that they possess. Because there ought to be a Regard,
I think, had to Merit, over and above the Profits of a m(...) Commission. But
the Necessities of the Public^ make it so at present, that I can give to n(...)
out of the Stores of the Empire more than their Order and their Quality
requires. Aurelian (...) a Man of great Capacity and Bravery, whom I have
appointed to inspect and regulate all our Camps and Garrisons. My self, and the
whole Empire, by the common Confession of the whole Army, is so much indebted
to him, that scarce any Presents can be made worthy of him, or to^ great for
his Merit. For is he not in all respect^ Illustrious, and to be compared to the
Corvini, and the Scipio's of former times? He is the Deliverer of Illyricum. He
is a Restorer of Gallia. He is a Commander deserving the Imitation of all the
World. And yet I can add nothing to the acknowledgment which is due to the
Services of so great a Person; besides, what the Condition of the public
Affairs, and the wellgovernment thereof will permit me. You will therefore,
dear Sir, take care to appoint for his ^se, during his abode at Rome, per diem,
sixteen Loaves of the best Bread; forty Loaves ^f the Camp-bread; forty Quarts
of Wine for ^he Table; a couple of Pullets; half a Pig; ^hirty Pounds of Pork;
forty Pounds of Beef; ^ne Quart of the best Oil; one Quart of ^ther Oil; one
Quart of Pickle; Herbs and Roots as much as he wants. And to distinguish ^im,
however, in something extraordinary, you ^ay supply him with Forage for his
Horses, as (...)ng as he stays at Rome. To himself in Mo^ey toward his
Expenses, you shall give every ^ay two Antoninusses in Gold, fifty Philips in
^ilver, and a hundred Penies in Brass. The rest (...)all be supplied by the
Officers of the Treasury.


These things may perhaps by some, be ^hought frivolous, and too light to be
taken ^otice of here; but Curiosity, which neglects nothing, will be my excuse.

Aurelian, at several times commanded diverse Annies; likewise he was Tribune
successively ^o a great many Legions, and he was Lieutenant upon several
occasions, to almost forty Commanders and Tribunes; that is, to command their
Forces for them in their sickness ^r absence. He supplied the Command of ^lpius
Crinitus in his sickness, who was one that derived himself from Trajan, and was
^eally a very brave Man, and much like that Prince. Aurelian and Ulpius
Crinitus have their Pictures both together, set up in the Temple of the Sun.
The Emperor Valerian designed to advance the latter to the degree of a Caesar.
In the place therefore of this Person, Aurelian headed his Army against the
Enemy. He beat the Enemy and re-established the limits of the Empire, and took
a great Booty. He enriched the Province of Thrace with the Cattle, Horses, and
Slaves that he took. He adorned the Palace of Rome with the Trophies of his
Victory. He brought in five hundred Slaves, two thousand Cows, a thousand
Horse, ten thousand Sheep, fifteen thousand Goat^; into one place in the
Country belonging to the Emperor Valerian. Upon which Ulpi(...) Crinitus
publicly thanked Valerian, as he was in the Baths at Byzantium, for the Honor
which his Majesty had done him, by giving him Aurelian to be his Lieutenant,
and at the same time he resolved to adopt Aurelian to be his Son.

The Letter of the Emperor Valerian, wherein he substituted Aurelian in the
place of Ulpius Crinitus, was this.

My dear Aurelian;
WEre there any Person so agreeable to me as you, whom I could substitute to
command in the place of Ulpius Crinitus, I might put his Virtues in competition
with yours upon this occasion. But, do you undertake the War on the side of
Nigeboli, that the Sickness of Crinitus may not create us a prejudice. I do not
ask you to do great things, but what you can; the Army will be at your Command.
You will have three hundred Iturean Archers; six hundred Armenians; one hundred
and fifty Arabians; two hundred Saracens; four hundred Mesopotamians,
Auxiliaries; together with these, you have the Third Legion, and eight hundred
Horse in complete Armor. You will be joined by Hartomundus; Haldegastes,
Hildemundus, and Cariovistus. The necessary Provisions for you are laid ^n by
the Officers in all our Garrisons. You, in ^our great Prudence and Knowledge of
War, will ^ake care to Lodge your Men, Winter or Summer ^n places where they
shall want nothing; and also to find out the Camp of the Enemy, and to ^nform
yourself exactly of the Strength and Num^er of them; and to see that no waste
be made ^f the Wine, Provisions, or Arms, in which consists the Force and
Fortune of any War. By the help of God, I hope for as much Assistance from ^ou,
as if Trajan was living, the Public would from him. Nor are you inferior to
him, into whose Place and Trust I have chosen you. You may expect, that I shall
appoint Ulpius Crinitus and you ^o be Consuls the next Year, from the 11th. of
the Ka^ends of June, in the places of my Son and me. Your Charges shall be born
out of the public Treasury. For it is the fittest thing in the World, to ease
the Circumstances of such Persons as you, who wholly spend themselves, not in
seeking your own Advantage, but in the Service of the State.


Hence we see further, how great a Man Aurelian then was; nor indeed does any
one ascend the Empire in his Age, but who from his Youth, raises himself
gradually toward it by the steps of Virtue.

The Letter concerning the Consulship of Aurelian was this.

The Emperor Valerian unto Aelius Xifidius, the Keeper of the Treasury.
YOU shall give to Aurelian, whom I have made a Consul, toward his exhibition
of the Games of the Cirque, because as great and as deserving a Man as he is in
all Respects, he is poor, three hundred Antoninusses in Gold; three thousand
little Philips in Silver, and fifty thousand Sesterces in Brass; ten Vests of
fine wrought Stuff; twenty Linen Vests of the Egyptian Work; two Pair of the
Cyprian Table Cloths; ten Pieces of African Tapestry; ten Barbary Carpets; a
hundred Hogs, and a hundred Sheep. You shall make a public Entertainment for
the Senators, and the Roman Gentry; and offer to the Gods, two greater and four
lesser Sacrifices.


I have made some mention before of the Design of Ulpius Crinitus to adopt
Aurelian to be his Son. I hope it will neither be improper nor tedious to
insert, for the greater Honor of Aurelian, a more particular account of that
Matter, according as I find (...) the Ninth Book of the Acts of Acholius, wh^
was Master of the Ceremonies to the Emperor Valerian.

This Ceremony was performed at the City Particular Honor done to him by
Valerian.
of Byzantium, where the Emperor Valerian being seated upon a Throne in the
Baths, and the Troops drawn up by him, and the Officers of the Court attending
him, together with Memmius Fuscus, the Consul for the Year; Baebius Macer, the
Captain of the Guards; Quintus Acarius, the President of the East, waiting on
the right Hand of him; and on the left, Amulius Saturninus the General of the
Frontiers against the Scythians, Murentius the Governor of Egypt; Julius
Trypho, the Commander on the Frontiers of the East; Maecius Brundusinus, the
General of the Provisions of the East; Ulpius Crinitus, the General of
Illyricum and Thrace; and Fulvius Boius, the General in Rhaetia. In this great
Appearance the Emperor Valerian expressed himself to Aurelian thus.

The whole Empire gives you thanks, Aurelian, for delivering it from the Power
of the Goths. Through you, we abound with Booty; we abound in Honor, and all
things, by which the Happiness of the Roman Name is increased. I give you
therefore for the Noble Actions which you have done, four Mural Crowns, five
other Crowns of those that are for entering the Enemies Works; two Naval Crowns,
and two Civick Crowns; ten Javelins; four parti-colored Standards; four red
ducal Vests; two Cloaks, such as are worn by the Proconsuls; one Consular Robe;
one triumphal Vest; one triumphal Gown; a Mantle of State, and a Chair of
Ivory; which last, is the Mark of the Dignity of a Consul, for so I appoint you
to be this day; and I shall write to the Senate to send you the Ivory Staff and
the Rods, which are the other Ensigns of that Dignity.

Aurelian, after his Majesty had thus spoke, approached to him and kissed his
Hand, and returned his Thanks to his Majesty in the Words following.

I truly, may it please your most excellent Majesty, have therefore done and
suffered all that has been in my Power, and I have taken all the Pains I could
to serve the States, on purpose that I might oblige it, and at the same time
discharge a good Conscience; the Sense whereof, joined with the Thanks of the
State, is alone a Reward sufficient for me. But your Majesty has done much
more, I give your Majesty thanks for your Goodness, and I accept the Consulship
at your Hands. The Gods grant, and particularly, our assured God the Sun, that
the Senate may judge as kindly of me.

Then all the Company complemented the Emperor, and next Ulpius Crinitus stood
up and said:

May it please your Majesty,

As it was anciently a Custom amongst the best of our Forefathers, to adopt
Persons of Worth and Bravery to be their Sons; thereby, either to continue
their decaying Families, or to add a new Honor to them, by the means of such a
worthy Alliance; which has particularly been done often in my Family, in the
adoption of Ulpius Trajan, by Cocceius Nerva; the adoption of Hadrian, by
Trajan; the adoption of Antoninus by Hadrian, and others since; so it is
likewise my desire at this time, to adopt Aurelian, to be my Son, He is adopted
by Ulpius Crinit^s.
of whom your Majesty in your Wisdom has so much approved, that you have made
him my Lieutenant, and put him in my absence, to command my Army. Your Majesty
may therefore please to order it to pass into a Law, that Aurelian be the Heir
of the Name, Goods, and all the Rights of what kind soever, of me Ulpius
Crinitus, according as your Majesty has been pleased to make him also a Consul
with me.

The Emperor complemented Crinitus in return, and the Adoption of Aurelian was
according to Custom ratified. What a certain Greek Author says, as I remember,
that the Emperor commanded Crinitus to adopt Aurelian, because he was poor, I
must leave to the Reader. I have said, that the Emperor bore the Charge, of the
Games, with which Aurelian entertained the People, at his entrance into his
Consulship; and I did it for this reason especially, to mark the Modesty of the
Expenses of those times, in comparison with the Expenses of others since. For
we have lately seen the Games presented in the Cirque by Furius Placidus upon
his Consulship, in which the Jockies and the Coachmen have had Estates rather
given them, than their proper Wages; Clothes of Silk, fine Linens, Horses; at
which sober Men have been much troubled, because it looks as if the Riches of a
Man, more than his Virtue, had made him a Consul. And perhaps many a one, who
for his Virtue deserves to be a Consul, would be ruined by such an Expense. But
those chaste times are past, and by a popular Ambition which reigns amongst us,
we depart from them every day more and more. But this also I leave to the
Reader.

Aurelian, raised by the Reputation of so many and so great Characters as
these, appeared with so much luster in the Reign of Claudius, that after his
Death and the Death of his Brother Quintillus, he succeeded upon the Throne of
the Empire. There is a great-disagreement in this place in our Histories
concerning the Death of Aurelius, with whom the Emperor Gallienus agreed to a
Peace; as whether he was killed by Aureolan, without, or with the Order and
Consent of Claudius; and whether he was killed by Aurelian, after or before he
came to the Empire? For in all these Questions the Historians, and
particucularly the Greek, differ from one another. However it is, we are very
sure of this, that the Emperor Claudius committed the War against the
Scythians, to the Care of none more than Aurelian. I will give you here the
Letter of Claudius for that purpose.

The Emperor Flavius Claudius to Valerius Aurelian, wishes Health.
OUR Affairs at this time require your accustomed Bravery. Be quick: Why should
you delay? The whole Army is ordered to march under your Conduct. The Goths are
to be attacked, and to be expelled the Country of Thrace. They lie a great many
of them about the Mountains Haemus and Rulla: They do much Mischief, being
returned from the flight, to which you last saw them reduced. All the Forces of
Thrace and Illyricum, and all that Frontier I place under your Hands. Now let
us have a stroke of your wonted Gallantry. My Brother Quintillus will be one
that will join you. I am taken up with other Affairs, so that I entrust this
whole Matter to your Valor. I have sent you ten Horses, two Coats of Mail, and
such things as it is fit you should be provided with against your Fight.


Aurelian fought, and so prosperously defeated the Enemy in several Battles,
that he did great Service to the Empire by it; therefore after the Death of
Claudius, he was by He is declared Emperor by the Army.
the Legions unanimously advanced to take his place. Under the same Reign, he
fought also very bravely with the Suevi, and the Sarmatae, and he gained over
those a most flourishing Victory.

Aurelian soon after he was elevated to the Empire, had a War with the
Marcomanni, who out of Germany making a sudden Irruption into Italy, in which,
by a mistake, he did not take care to front them immediately in the beginning,
whilst he was preparing to charge them behind, they laid waste all the Country
about Milan. However, the Marcomanni were overcome at last; but in the mean
time their Ravages were a matter of great Consternation to all at Rome, where
the People broke out into great Sedition, out of an apprehension that they
should see the Empire torn into pieces again, as it was before in the time of
Gallienus. The Books of the Sibyls, so well known for the public Good done by
them, were upon this occasion consulted; and it was found, that at certain
places there should be Sacrifices used, to stop the Course of the Barbarians;
in Virtue whereof, they would not have the Power to pass further up into the
Country. This was done acordingly with all care; the Barbarians stopped upon it,
and as afterward they were roving up and down in disorder, Aurelian came upon
them and slew them. I The Marcomanni defeated.
will give you the debate of the Senate at this time, concerning the inspecting
the Books of the Sybils.

Upon the third day of the Ides of January, the Senate being assembled, Fulvius
Sabinus the Praetor of the City of Rome spoke thus to them.

Fathers of the Senate,

I Am to acquaint you, that it is the suggestion of the Chief Priests, as well
as it is the Order, by Letter, of the Emperor Aurelian, that the Books of the
Sibyls, in which the Secrets of the Destinies are contained, be now inspected;
in hopes thence to discover by the Holy Will of the Gods, a means of putting an
end to this War. You know very well, that as often as any extraordinary case
arises, it is the Custom always to Inspect those Books; nor have we been
delivered from the Public Evils, which have at any time beset us, but by
following their Order, and by performing such Sacrifices, as we find to be
appointed us there.

Then Ulpius Silanus, whose place it was to give his Opinion the first, stood
up and said;

Fathers of the Senate,

IT is very Late, for us, at this day, to begin to consult about the Safety of
the State; It is very late for us, now to Consult the Books of the Sybils, when
we know not what else to do; like some sick Persons, who send not for the
Physician, but in the greatest extremity; to which yet it is never good to
trust; because all Diseases are the best taken and obviated in the beginning.
You may remember, Gentlemen, that I have often from this place told you, even
then, when first the news came of an Irruption of the Marcomanni, that the
Decrees of the Sibyls ought to be consulted; and that we should serve our
selves of the assistances of Apollo, and keep to the Precepts of the immortal
Gods. But my Motion was rejected, and that too not without a great deal of
reproach from some, who in flattery to Aurelian answered, that under the
Conduct of so brave a Prince, there was no necessity of consulting the Gods; as
if he did not himself revere the Gods, and hope for the success of his Arms
from their immortal Powers. In short, you have heard his Letter, wherein he
begs the Divine assistance, which it is never unworthy the greatest Man to do:
Therefore let the Priests, with all Purity, Cleanness, and Sanctity, prepared
as well in their Minds as Habits for so sacred a Work, immediately repair to
the Temple; and with due Reverence peruse the Holy Books, and examine what is
the eternal will of the Fates; and we, on our parts, shall not be wanting to
perform the Sacrifices, and observe the Solemnity, which the Gods require of
us.

The rest of the Senators in ordor, being asked their Opinions, they all, some
one way, some another declared their Consent, that the Books of the Sibyls
should be consulted, and The Books of the Sibyls Consulted.
the Act past for the Purpose. Then to the Capitol they went; the said Books
were examined; some Verses out of them were pitched upon; then the City of Rome
was Purged by Sacrifice; a Procession was made round the City, and the Suburbs;
the Verses were Sung, and all the Ceremony whatever that was required, was
accordingly performed.

Now the Letter of Aurelian to the Senate, in which he put them upon the
Consulting the same Books, was this.

I Admire, my good Fathers, that you have, so long hesitated about opening the
Books of the Sibyls; as if it was a matter that was referred rather to a
Congregation of Christians, who are the Enemies of our Religion and our Gods,
than to Persons Zealous as you are for the Honor of the one and the other. I
would desire you to set the Priests immediately and religiously about it; that
with the solemn Ceremonies and Rites, which shall there appear to be appointed,
you may assist your Prince, now laboring under great difficulties. Let the
Books be inspected; and what things are therein required to be done, let them
be done. For my part, I shall spare for no Costs. The Captives that I have of
any Nation, and any of the Animals of the noblest kind, belonging to me, I
freely offer for Sacrifices. It is no lessening to a Victory, to be assisted in
it by the Gods. In the times of our Ancestors, diverse Wars have been begun and
ended in this manner. I have writ to the Keeper of the Exchequer to disburse,
whatever the Charge is. You may command thence what Money you think fit; and I
am glad to find, that the Coffers are well provided.


That which was the occasion of all this concern for inspecting the Books of
the Sibyls, was; Aurelian had suffered a great defeat from the Enemy at
Piacenza; and had it not been that after the examination of the said Books, and
the performance of the Sacrifices by them required, the Divine Aid interposed
to Confound and Affright the Barbarians with Visions, Specter, and Prodigies,
which gave Aurelian at length the advantage over them, the Victory in this War
might have been lost to the Romans, and even the Empire in danger to be so too.
For the Barbarians, by the means of the Woods, and the Fastnesses, into which
they threw themselves, were otherwise too subtle for us, and did so annoy us
upon occasion, that we should not have reduced them, upon the single strength
of our Arms.

After the Marcommanick War was ended, Aurelian came to Rome; full of Anger and
Revenge, as he was naturally Fierce of himself, for the Seditions, which had
there been raised in his absence. Though he was otherwise a good Prince, he
suffered his Passions to transport him beyond measure, and to punish some
things Cruelly, which might have been treated with a gentler Hand. He not only
put to His exterme Severity.
death the Authors of those Seditions, but also some noble Senators; against
whom appeared but one vile and wretched Witness; when the matter of the Crime
objected, was of so slight a Nature, that a milder Prince would have contemned
it. In fine, the fame of his Reign which had been hitherto great, and had
justly gained him many Friends, was obscured and wounded by the marks of his
excessive Severity. He began to be feared, rather than loved. Some said, they
hated him; rather than wished his Prosperity; others said that he was indeed a
good Physician, but his Medicines were the bitterest in the World. After these
things therefore, fearing again the mischiefs might be revived, which happened
in the time of Gallienus, he with the Advice of the Senate extended, and new
fortified the Walls of the City of Rome. He did not then extend the Territories
of the City without the Walls; but he did afterward; because this was a
privilege allowed to no Prince to do, but who by his Conquests had added to
the Roman Empire; as did the Emperors Augustus, Trajan, Nero; under which last
particularly the Pontus, Potemoniacus, and the Cottian Alps were subjected to
the Obedience of the Romans.

Having finished what concerned the security and state of the City, and of the
Civil Affairs, he set out from thence upon an Expedition against the Palmyreni
in Syria; where the Lady Zenobia, in the Right of her two Sons, Herennianus and
Timolaus, being Infants, and in Succession to Odenatus her Husband, Reigned as
Queen of the East, and maintained the Revolt of those parts against the Empire.
In his way, in the Countries of Thrace and Illyricum, he fought several
considerable Battles with the Relics of the Goths, and the Barbarians; of
whom he slew five thousand on the other side of the Danube, with Cannabaudes,
their Prince. He passed, by the way of Byzantium, over into Bithynia, in the
Lesser Asia: which Province upon his arrival voluntarily cast off the Yoke of
the Palmyreni, and yielded it self to him. Many, as well of his Expressions as
Actions, are great and famous. It is not possible, nor would I be willing to
recount them all here, because it would be tedious. But yet some few may be
touched upon, which may serve to beget a better understanding of his Virtues
and Manners. Coming to the City of Tyana in Cappadocia, which he found shut
against him, he said in a Passion, I will not leave a Dog in this place. This
made his Soldiers storm it the more violently, in hopes of the Booty; till one
Heraclammon, who was the Governor of it, afraid that he should be killed
amongst the rest, and thinking that he had no other way to save himself,
betrayed his Trust, and suffered the Town to be taken by Treachery. Now
Aurelian did immediately two things, worthy of a Princely mind; in the one of
which he showed an example of his Severity, and in the Examples of his Severity
and Mercy.
other, of Mercy. The first is, he put to death Heraclammon for betraying his
Country. Then, when the Soldiers desired the total destruction of the Town,
according to his saying, that he would not leave a Dog in it, by which they
understood, that they should have all the Plunder of it; It is true, said he, I
have said I would not leave a Dog in this Town, and so kill all the Dogs: but
he saved the People, and forbad the Plunder; which was a great Action, and it
was followed by as great a one of the Army: because they were as much pleased
with the Wit of their Prince, as if he had given them really the Riches of the
City. Concerning Heraclammon, Aurelian writ this Letter.

The Emperor Aurelian to Mallius Chilo.
I Have taken Tyana, and suffered the Man to be killed, by whose, as it were,
good Office I did it. I could not love such a Traitor. I willingly let the
Soldiers kill him: because how could he be faithful to me, who spared not to
betray his own Country? He is the only one of all the Besieged, who has been
so used. I cannot deny but he was Rich. But yet I have given his Estate to his
Children: that none shall pretend to say, that it was to get his Money I killed
him.


The City of Tyana was taken in this manner. Heraclammon betrayed to Aurelian a
private place, where there was a Natural rising of the Ground, by which he
might mount the Walls undiscovered. Aurelian did so; and his Purple
distinguishing him to be the Emperor to the Army without and the People within,
and the People within seeing him upon the Walls, and concluding the Town was
taken, as if the whole Army was with him, they were so surprised, that they
said no more but yielded.

I ought not here to omit a thing, which is to the Honor of the memory of the
Venerable Apollonius, who was a Native of the City of Tyana. Aurelian, it is
said, was seriously sometime thinking and speaking about destroying the place
entirely by Fire and Sword. But as he was going to his Tent, that wise Man of
so known Fame and Authority, an Ancient Philosopher, and a true Friend of the
Gods, Apollonius Tyanaeus, who is himself to be highly Apparition of Apollonius
Tyanaeus.
Celebrated as a God, appeared suddenly to him, in the Form, in which his Image
is in the Temples at this day, and spoke to him these words: Aurelian, Why
should you think of Murdering my poor Countrymen? If you would Reign in Glory,
abstain, Aurelian, from the blood of the Innocent. Aurelian be merciful, if you
would Conquer and live your self. Aurelian knew the Visage of the Venerable
Philosopher again, because he had seen it before in several Temples. He was
very much struck at it, and immediately he returned to a better mind about his
Treatment of the Town, and promised to erect a Temple to Apollonius, and to set
up his Image and Statues. This account is what I have received from grave Men,
and I have also often Read the same my self in the Books of the Ulpian Library;
to which I give the more Credit; because I have a great respect for the Majesty
of Apollonius: than whom, what Man has there ever been more Holy, Venerable,
Illustrious, and Divine? He raised the Dead to Life again. He wrought many
things beyond the power of Mankind, and his Discourses were suitable to his
Actions; which if any Person pleases to know more particularly, let him Read
the Greek Books, that are written of his Life. My self, if I live, and if the
favor of Apollonius will assist me in it, will give the World some short
account at least of the Actions of so great a Person: not that they want the
benefit of my Labor, but that things which are really to be admired, may be
made universally known and famous.

After the taking of Tyana, Aurelian marched toward Antioch; proposing to all
that submitted to him, Indemnity for what was past. At the Village of Daphne,
which is near Antioch, he gave the Enemy a little Blow, and so came to that
City. It is supposed, the Precepts of the Venerable Apollonius had made an
impression upon him; for he used his Victory here with great Humanity and
Clemency. The next Battle was a General one, and for no less than the Empire.
It was fought at the City of Emissa in Phaenicia, against the Queen Zenobia,
and Zabdas her General. Aurelian's Horse were spent, and ready to run, when
some Divine Form suddenly appearing to them, and encouraging them on to the
Charge, they took the Example of the Foot, who all the while stood firm, till
at last they put both Zenobia and Zabdas to flight, and obtained Zenobia' s
Army defeated.
a most accomplished Victory. Emissa readily yielded to the Conqueror; who no
sooner entered into it, but he repaired to the Temple of Heliogabalus, or the
Sun, to acquit himself of his Vows and Devotions, according to his Duty. But as
he was there, the same Divine Form appeared again to him which he had seen
assisting him in the Battle. Wherefore he there founded Temples, and made great
Oblations. He Founded also a Temple to the Sun at Rome, of extraordinary
Magnificence, whereof we shall have an occasion to speak hereafter.

Then he bent his Course against the City of Palmyra, the Capitol of the
Country of the People of the same name, where Zenobia resided; that with the
taking of it, he might put an end to his Labors in this part of the World. The
Syrian Robbers annoyed his Army often in his March, and did him much mischief.
But in the Siege of Palmyra, his Person was so far in danger, that he received
a slight Shot of an Arrow. And the hot Work that he met with, is very plainly
confessed by himself, in a Letter to Mucapor, thus.

THose at Rome deride my Expedition, and cry I make War against a Woman; as if
I had to do with none but Zenobia, and that she opposed me upon her own
Strength. But the case is the same, as if the War was with a Man; and Feminine
Fear, and sense of her Demerits makes her besides so desperate, that she is by
far the worst of Enemies. It cannot be expressed what Showers of Arrows, Darts,
and Stones, she sends us; and how prepared she is for her defense here? There
is no part of the Wall, that is not planted with two or three Batterers. She
throws Fire at us out of her Engines. In fine, she Fights not like a Woman, but
with the Audacity of a Man in Despair. However I trust, that the Gods, who
never have been wanting to our Endeavors, will still assist the Roman Empire.


At length Aurelian, fatigued and weary of so troublesome a Siege, sent a
Letter into the Town to Zenobia to require her to surrender, and he promised
her her life. The Letter was this.

Aurelian, the Emperor of the Roman World, and the Protector of the East, to
Zenobia, and those in Arms with her.
THAT which I require you now to do by my Letter, you ought assuredly to have
done of your own Motion. I order you to Surrender, and I promise you your
Lives, with impunity: You Zenobia, and your Children, shall only be obliged to
lead your Lives there, where I, with the advice of the most Noble Senate, shall
place you. Your Jewels, Silver, Gold, Silks, Horses, and Camels, must be
disposed of to the Exchequer at Rome. The People of this Country of Palmyra
shall be preserved in their Rights.


Zenobia receiving this Letter, wrote him Haughty mind of Zenobia.
back an Answer, which was more Haughty, and more Proud indeed than the
Condition of her Fortune required: But I suppose it might ^e to amuse him. Her
Letter was this.

Zenobia the Queen of the East, to the Emperor Aurelian.
NO Man ever, before you, desired what you do, by a Letter. Bravery is the way
to effect whatever is to be done in War. You propose my Surrender; as if you
can be ignorant, that the Queen Cleopatra chose her Death, rather than to live
in whatever Quality under Augustus. The Succors of the Persians are on their
March to us. We expect them daily. The Saracens are for us. The Armenians are
for us. The Syrian Robbers have beaten your Army, Aurelian, already. What then
will become of you, when that Force arrives, which is expected by us, from all
parts? Doubtless you will change your Countenance, and lay aside that Pride,
with which you now so absolutely Command me to Surrender, as of you were the
Conqueror of the Universe.


Zenobia Dictated this Letter herself in the Syriack Language; Nicomachus says,
that he Translated it out of that Language into the Greek; the other Letter of
Aurelian was sent in the Greek.

Aurelian did not Blush when he read Zenobia's Letter; but he was Angry, and
immediately ordered his Army and his Officers upon a General Assault. He left
nothing undone to reduce her, that could be thought upon by a brave Man. He
Intercepted the Succors, which were sent to her from the Persians. The Saracen
and the Armenian Troops he Beat, and partly by his Address, and partly by the
force of his Arms, he brought them over to his own side. After many Fights,
with great difficulty, he overcame this most Potent Lady at last; who was
making her escape upon Dromedaries into Persia, when Aurelian sent a Party of
Horse after her, and took her Prisoner.

This Victory gave Aurelian the Possession of all the East. He had at once
Zenobia, the Persians, the Armenians, and the Saracens, his Prisoners; in which
he did not a little Pride himself. And then it was, that all those fine The
Spoils of Zenobia.
Vestments beset with Jewels, which we see in the Temple of the Sun at Rome,
those Persian Banners with Dragons, those Persian Tiara's, and a sort of Purple
so fine, that the like has never been since seen in the Roman Empire, were all
taken by Aurelian. You may remember, that there was in the Temple of the most
excellent and most high Jupiter, in the Capitol, a little Cloak of so very fine
a Purple, that when the Matrons and Aurelian himself in Person compared with it
the Purples which he and they wore, it looked with so Divine a Light, that
theirs were but like Ashes to it. Aurelian, and afterward the Emperors Probus
and Dioclesian, especially the latter, with great care sent into Persia Dyers,
on purpose to find out how this Purple was made. But they could not do it. It
is an Indian Vermilion they say, that Dies it, when it is well prepared.

But to the Purpose. Zenobia being taken, all the Army called for Justice upon
her: Aurelian thought it unhandsome to kill a Woman. He put to death several
that had been her Abettors in beginning, making, and continuing the War; but
for her, he reserved her to adorn his Triumph, and to make her a Spectacle to
the Eyes of the People of Rome. Amongst the rest, whom he killed, the
Philosopher Cassius Longinus was much to be lamented. He had been Zenobia's
Master, to teach her Greek: that which provoked Aurelian to cut him off, was,
because he knew, that it was by his Counsel that Zenobia had dictated that
haughty Letter in the Syriack, which has been mentioned here above.

The Peace of the East being Established, Aurelian returned a Conqueror to
Europe. He gained a Victory in his passage over the Carpi: for which the Senate
in his absence would have given him the Title of Carpicus: but it being a word
of an ill, and a diminutive sound, in comparison with those other of Gothicus,
Sarmaticus, Armeniacus, Parthicus, and Adiabenicus; which denoted him Conqueror
of the Goths, Sarmatians, Armenians, Parthians, and part of the Assyrians; he
rejected the Title of Carpicus; and immediately sent the Senate word, that they
might as well call him Carpisculus, as Carpicus; for he liked the one no better
than the other: Carpisculus is Latin for a ssort of a Slipper.

It is rare, and a hard thing for the Syrians to keep their Faith. No sooner
was Aurelian employed about the Affairs of Europe, but the Palmyreni, who were
so very lately, and so The Palmyreni rebel, and are severely handled.
well Beaten, broke out into another Rebellion. They killed Sandarion, whom he
had left Governor of Palmyra, and six hundred Archers, that were in Garrison
with him; designing to set up one Achilleus, a Kinsman of Zenobia, for the
Empire anew. But Aurelian was not so engaged, but immediately upon the news he
quitted Europe, and returned to Palmyra again; where he punished them, shall I
say, as they deserved; or rather to an excess: How severely he used them, he
confesses himself in this Letter.

The Emperor Aurelian to Cerronius Bassus.
WE have had enough of the Blood of the Palmyreni: you shall forbid the
Soldiers to draw their Swords upon them more. We have not spared Women, nor
Infants, nor the Aged, nor the Peasants. So few, as are left, will, I believe,
take warning by such a general Correction. We must spare those, or to whom
shall we leave the Town and Country to be Cultivated? The Temple of the Sun,
which is in that Town, and which the Officers and others of the third Legion
plundered, I would have to be restored to the same condition in which it was.
You will have three hundred pound of Gold out of the Coffers of Zenobia, and
the weight of 1800 pound of Silver, and amongst the Booty, the Jewels and
Precious Stones of the Queen. Out of all these, therefore let the Temple be
well adorned; in which you will do a most grateful service both to the Immortal
Gods, and me; and my self will write to the Senate, to desire them to send a
Priest, to Dedicate the said Temple.


This Letter shows how fully he had satiated his Cruelty upon them.

Securer now therefore of the State of the East, than ever, he returned the
second time back to Europe; and with his accustomed Bravery he defeated all the
Parties of his European Enemies, that came in his way. He was very active about
the Affairs of Thrace, and the Public Good, when one Firmus arose in Egypt;
Firmus quelled.
who, not setting himself up as an Emperor, pretended to make that Province
rather a Free State. Aurelian made no delay to oppose this evil. Nor did his
wonted Success abandon him. For he presently recovered Egypt again.

Gallia continued as yet in its Revolt from the Empire, and in the Hands of
Tetricus: which Aurelian, as he was naturally Fierce, and full of Designs, not
being able with Patience to bear, he turned his Head to the side of the West:
where Tetricus weary of Commanding Tetricus yields.
a Vicious and an Insolent Army, yielded both himself, and his Army frankly to
him.

The Peace of the West did conclude Aurerelian the entire Master of all the
Roman World. Every part of it now was reduced to him; and so he took his way to
the City of Rome, to Celebrate a Solemn Triumph, at once over Zenobia and
Tetricus, that is, the East and the West.

It will not be amiss to know the manner of the Triumph of Aurelian; for it was
a very Noble one. There were three Chariots of Manner of Aurelians Triumph.
State, worthy of the Magnificence of the greatest Kings. The first was the
Chariot of Odenatus, curiously wrought and distinguished with Silver, Gold, and
Jewels. The next was a Chariot of the King of Persia which was equally Fine.
The third was Zenobia's Chariot, which she had made for herself, in hopes to
make her Entrance into the City of Rome with: nor was she mistaken. For she did
so; but it was in the Quality of a Captive, and both her Chariot and she were
led in Triumph. There was a fourth Chariot drawn by four Stags, supposed to be
the Chariot of the King of the Goths. In this Chariot, Aurelian Rode to the
Capitol, to Sacrifice there those Stags, which together with the Chariot, when
he took them, he had vowed to the most excellent and most mighty Jupiter. These
Chariots were preceded by twenty Elephants, and two hundred tamed Wild Beasts
of several kinds, out of the Countries of Libya and Palestine; all which
Aurelian gave afterward away amongst particular Persons. There were four
Tigers. The Chamoises, Elks, and other such Beasts followed in order. There
were eight hundred couple of Gladiators. Then followed the Captives of the
Barbarian Nations; as Ethiopians, Arabians, Indians, Bactrians, Georgians,
Saracens, Persians; every one with their several Offerings: there were also
Goths, Alans, Roxolans, Sarmatians, Franks Sueves, Vandals, and Germans; all
which Captives were chained by the Hand to one another: together with whom were
the chief, that were left alive, of the City of Palmyra; and also a parcel of
Egyptians, because of the late Rebellion in Egypt. There were ten Women
Captives, led in the like manner, in this Procession: they were taken fighting
in Men's Habit amongst the Goths; when many others of them, at the same time
were killed. The Inscription over them, as all these Nations had their several
Names and Inscriptions put up, spoke them to be of the Race of the Amazons.
Then came Tetricus, well dressed in a Scarlet Robe, and a sort of a
Pale-gold-coloured Tunick, and his Breeches of the Mode of the Gauls. By him
marched his Son, whom he had declared Joynt-Emperor with him in Gallia. And
next marched Zenobia. She was adorned with Jewels, and her Chains were of Gold,
with Persons to bear them up. The Crowns of the Vanquished Nations in Gold,
were displayed and carried in the Procession. Then marched the People of Rome,
with all the Standards of the Colleges and the Camps, the Cuirassiers, the
Train of the Court, all the Army, and likewise the Senate; but the Senate was a
little concerned to see one of their own Body, which Tetricus was, led in
Triumph. However it is, all together added much to the magnificence of the
Pomp. It was almost three of the Clock before the Procession to the Capitol was
over; and late before they went from thence to the Court. The next, and the
other days following were spent in the pleasures of the Plays of the Stage, the
Races of the Cirque, the Chases of Wild Beasts, the Fights of the Gladiators,
and the Encounters or Fights of Galleys, in the Amphitheatre, represented
sailing there as upon a Sea.

It is not, I think, to be omitted, what our Histories do often take notice of,
and every one remembers, that when Aurelian set out upon the Oriental War
against Zenobia, he promised to give the People, if he returned a Conqueror,
Crowns of two pound weight. The People willingly understood him of Crowns of
Gold. But Aurelian neither could, nor would be so liberal. He gave them every
one Loaves of the whitest Bread of that weight, made in the form of Crowns;
which he continued all his life, to them and their Children daily. He
distributed also Portions of Pork amongst them, and this is done to this day.

Aurelian made several Laws, which were all Good and Wholesome. He augmented
the Revenues of the Priests: he founded a Temple to the Sun; and set out
Salaries for the support of the Priests that should serve it and for the
Repairs of it, and for its other inferior Ministers.

After these things he went into Gallia, and raised the Siege of the City of
Ausburgh, which the Barbarians had formed. From thence he returned, and came
into Illyricum; where having provided himself with rather a Valiant, than a
Numerous Army, he declared War against the Persians; over whom he had received
a very notable Victory, at the same time that he overcame Zenobia, who was
their Ally. But as he was upon his march to advance his Enterprise, at a Castle
called Caen^phrurium, which is in Romania, betwixt the Cities of Heraclia and
Byzantium, through the Treachery of his Secretary, and by the Hand Death of
Aurelian.
of Mucapour, he was killed.

The occasion of his Murder, and in what manner it was brought about, that a
matter of that Moment may not be concealed, I will tell you in short. It cannot
be denied, but that Aurelian was a Severe, Truculent, and a Sanguinary Prince.
His Severity had transported him so far, as to kill his own Sisters Daughter,
for no great nor sufficient cause neither; which was the first thing that
brought an odium upon him amongst his Friends. As Fate would have it, it
happened, that he had one Mnestheus, to be his Secretary; who, some The Plot
upon him how laid.
say, was his late Slave, made Free. Aurelian, upon I know not what suspicion
of something, had threatened this Man, which made him his Mortal Enemy. For
knowing that his Master neither used to threaten to no purpose, nor to forgive
very easily, where he once threatened, he writ down a List of the Names of such
Persons, as he knew Aurelian had a real distate against; and at the same time
he intermixed it with the Names of others, of whom Aurelian never had the least
suspicion, which should make him hate them, and amongst the rest, he added his
own, to give the greater Credit to his concern for the common safety, in which
himself was involved. When he had done this, he went and read the List to all
those, whose names were there, and told them, that it was what he had privately
found upon Aurelian, and it shows, that Aurelian was resolved to kill them all,
and therefore, if they were Men, they ought to look to their Lives. The one
party, who knew themselves to have contracted Aurelian's anger by what they had
done, were spurred on by their fears to believe the matter and to prevent
Aurelian if they could. The other, who had ever been kind and serviceable to
him, and had deserved no such usage from him, were incensed at his supposed
Ingratitude. So mingling their Complaints and Sorrows together, the one with
the other, they fell upon him suddenly at the place beforementioned upon the
Road, and killed him.

This was the end of the Emperor Aurelian. A Prince, not properly so good, as
his Reign was of use, and necessary to retrieve the Repose of the Empire. When
the matter afterward came to be discovered, how fraudulently the Conspiracy
was procured to kill him, the Persons themselves that had agreed to it, built
him a great Sepulcher, and Dedicated a Temple to him, and set up his Statues,
at the place of his Death: And Mnestheus was tied to a stake, and given to be
devoured by Wild Beasts; which is signified upon the place by Marble Statues of
Mnestheus, done in the Habit in which he was executed, and set up on each side
of the Sepulcher of Aurelian.

The Senate regretted his Death very much, and the People of Rome more; who
commonly said, that Aurelian was the Tutor of the Senate. He reigned six Years,
wanting a few Days; and for his great Actions was deified.

Not to omit any thing, that I meet within History that relates to him; many
say, that Quintillus the Brother of Claudius, who when Death of Quintillus.
the News came to him of the Death of Claudius, was in a Garrison in Italy,
assumed the Empire, upon that News, to succeed his Brother. But when afterward
he found, that Aurelian was chosen Emperor by all the Army, and that when he
harangued against the pretenses of Aurelian to his own Soldiers, they did not
much care to hear him, he cut his Veins himself, and died the Twentieth day of
his Reign.

Aurelian did this Service to the whole Empire; that he purged away all
professed Lewdness, Irreligion and wicked Arts. He cleared it of Factions. His
Justice pursued the false Moniers or Coiners, who to defend themselves, joined
together in a Body, and made a sort of a War, under the encouragement of
Felicissimus a Receiver, within the Walls of Rome. But Aurelian reduced them
with a high hand; it cost him the Lives of seven Thousand of his Soldiers to do
it; upon which occasion he writ this Letter to his Father (by Adoption) Ulpius
Crinitus, who was then the third time Consul.

The Emperor Aurelian to his Father, Ulpius Crinitus.
AS if it is in a manner my Fate, to meet with aggravations of difficulties in
every thing that I enterprise, a Sedition (...) the Walls of Rome has risen to
a very sad (...) (...) Moniers, or false Coiners, at the suggestion of
(...)licissimus, the last of Slaves, whom I made a Receiver of the Exchequer,
pretended to rebel. They are suppressed, but with the loss of Seven Thousand of
my Men killed by them; so that I may see, I have no Victory given me by the
immortal Gods, which does not cost me dear.


Aurelian, though he had made Tetricus a subject of his Triumph, bestowed upon
him afterward the Government of the Province of Lucania in Italy, and
continued his Son in the Senate. The Temple which he built to his particular
Deity, the Sun, was most magnificent. He His public Managements.
extended the Walls of the City of Rome so, that that they were almost fifty
Miles in compass. He was a severe Enemy to Delators and false Accusers of the
Innocent. The public Registers of Proscriptions and Forseitures to the
Exchequer, he ordered for the common Security, to be burnt in the Forum of
Trajan; and he granted an Act of Amnesty, for the past Offenses committed
against the State, the Example whereof was taken from that of the Athenians,
which Cicero mentions in his Philippicks. The Magistrates of the Provinces who
appeared to be guilty of Bribery and Extortion, he severely prosecuted, not
with regard to them, or himself as Soldiers, but he laid upon them greater and
more tormenting Punishments. He bestowed much Gold and Jewels upon the Temple
of the Sun. Seeing the Provinces (...) Illyricum and Moesia laid waste by the
(...)sions of the Barbarians, he withd(...) the Roman Forces and Subjects out
of Dacia, which Trajan had added to the Empire on the other side of the Danube;
and relinquishing a Country that he despaired to keep, he planted the said
Forces and People, in Moesia; and he gave the Name of the Aurelian Dacia, to
that Province that now divides betwixt the Upper and Lower Moesia. It is said,
that he was so cruel, as to charge several Senators with pretended Treasons and
Conspiracies falsely, only to have an occasion to cut them off. Some add, that
it was a Sister's Son, and not a Daughter, which he killed. Others, that he
killed his Sister's Son and Daughter both.

The Senate and the Army, what with the Gravity of the one, and the prudent
Submission of the other, made a great Difficulty of choosing a new Emperor to
fill the Throne, vacant by the Death of Aurelian. The Army referred the choice
to the Senate, because they thought, that they ought to avoid those, who had
been concerned in the Murder of so worthy a Prince. The Senate on the other
hand referred the Choice to the Army, knowing that the Soldiers do not always
take very well those Emperors, that the Senate puts upon them. This was
disputed betwixt them three times, so that for six Months the Roman World was
without an Emperor, and all Persons in the interim continued in their
Governments and Offices, as they were before, excepting that the Senate made
Falconius Probus the Proconsul of Asia, in the place of Aurelius Fuscus. It
will not be unpleasant to see the Letter which the Army wrote to the Senate
upon this subject; it was this.

The Valiant and Victorious Army, to the Senate and People of Rome.
AUrelian our Emperor through the Fraud of one Man, and the surprising Mistake
of a mixture of others, good and bad that were drawn in by him, is killed. You
will please, our good Lords and Fathers, to make Aurelian a God; and to send us
a Person out of your own Body, to be our Prince; whom in your Judgments you
shall think deserves to be so. For we, as concerning those that have either
wilfully or ignorantly been led to commit this Fact, will not suffer any of
them to reign over us.


The Senate met upon the third Day of the Nones of February, and being sat,
Aurelius Gordianus the Consul motion'd them to consider this Letter, which was
arrived from the Army. The Letter was read. The eldest Senator, who was to
deliver his Opinion the first, was Tacitus, who spoke thus. The same who was
afterward by the Consent of all made the Successor to Aurelian.

Fathers of the Senate,

WELL had the immortal Gods consulted the Happiness of the World, had they made
the Persons of good Men invulnerable; that such as meditate base Murder in
their wicked Hearts, could have had no Power to hurt them. Then had we enjoyed
our Emperor Aurelian longer, who was one of the greatest use to our State;
which after the misfortunes of Valerina, and the Luxury of Gallienus, began to
take breath again indeed under the Reign of Claudius; but it had been perfectly
restored to its pristine form by Aurelian, had he lived, because Victory every
where waited upon his Arms. He re-possessed us of Gallia; he delivered Italy
from the Invasion of the Marcomanni; he rescued Ausburgh from the Barbarian
Yoke; he recovered Illyricum and Thrace to the obedience of the Romans; he
recovered the East to our obedience, which was shamefully before oppressed and
held against us by a Woman. The Persians, while yet insulting in the Death of
Valerian, he vanquished, put them to flight, and inslaved them. The Saracens,
the Blemmies, and Auxumitae, the Bactrians, the Seres, the Georgians, the
Albanians, the Armenians, and even the Indians adored him almost as a God upon
Earth. The Capitol is enriched with his Presents, and the things which he
gained from the Barbarian Nations. Fifteen Thousand Pound weight of Gold, of
his Liberality, lies all in one Temple. All the Fanes in Rome shine by his
Gifts. Wherefore, Gentlemen, may I not justly expostulate with the Gods, why
they have permitted the Massacre of such a Prince; unless it is perhaps, that
they would rather have him in their own Number? I for my part vote him a God,
and I presume, that all you will do the same. But as for the Election of
another Emperor, it is a Matter in my Opinion, to be referred back to the Army
again. For unless it were certain that the Person elected by us will be by them
accepted, it will both be dangerous to the elected, and bring an envy upon his
Friends.

The Senate approved the Opinion of Tacitus. But when the Army did persist to
send to them again and again upon the same subject, they came at last to an
Act, which you will see in the Life of Tacitus, whereby they made Tacitus
Emperor.

Aurelian left only a Daughter, of whose Posterity there are some surviving at
Rome at this Day. The late Proconsul of Cilicia, who is of the Name of
Aurelian, and now lives sweetly in the Island of Sicily, a Senator of great
worth, of an excellent Life, and the entire Master of himself, is her Grandson.

What shall I say now to observe, that out of so many Persons, that have sat
upon the Throne of Rome from Augustus down to Dioclesian and Maximian, there
has hitherto been so few, that have been good Princes? The The few good
Emperors of Rome.
good Princes were these; Augustus, Flavius Vespasian, Titus, Cocceius Nerva,
Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus the Pious, Marcus Antoninus, Severus the African,
Alexander. Severus the Son of Mammae^, Claudius and Aurelian. It is true,
Valerian was another good Prince, but he was in all respects so unfortunate,
that he ought to be reckoned apart You see, Sir then, how short the Number of
the good Princes is; so that it was well said by a Jester in the time of
Claudius, that they might all be easily drawn within the Circle of a Ring. On
the contrary, what a Series have we had of ill Princes! For not to mention the
Vitellii, the Caligula's, and the Nero's of former Ages, What do you say to the
Maximins, the Philips, and that unsavory multitude, that dross, that came up
afterward? excepting only the Decii, whose Lives and Manners were comparable
with those of the Ancients.

It may be asked, what it is that debauches Princes, and makes them become so
ill? And truly, my dear Friend, I will tell you. Licentiousness, in the first
place; then the Plenty that surrounds them; then evil Counselors, evil Guards,
greedy Eunuchs, lewd or foolish Courtiers; nor can this last be denied,
Ignorance in the Affairs of the Public. I assure you, I have heard it from my
Father, that the Emperor Dioclesian has said, when he lived privately at
Salona, after his resignation of the Empire, That there is nothing more
difficult than to Reign well. For four or five Persons shall cabal together, to
put upon the Prince, and tell him what is to be done; in the mean time, he who
is shut up at home, penetrates not into the Truth, and is forced to know no
more than they tell him; and so he makes Persons Magistrates and Officers, whom
he ought to avoid, and turns others out, whom he ought to keep. In fine, as
Dioclesian said, for these are also his words, The Good, the Cautious, the Best
Prince that is, is bought and sold. Which I therefore remark, that you may
please, Sir, to observe, that there is therefore not any thing more difficult
than the Art of Reigning well.

Aurelian is many times accounted neither amongst the ill, nor yet amongst the
good Princes, because Clemency, which is the first Honor of a Prince was
wanting to him. His excessive Fierceness was a thing which diminished his
Character with the Emperor Dioclesian; who, as he blamed the asperity of
Maximinian, so he often said of Aurelian in the hearing of Verconius
Herennianus, who was Captain of the Guards to him, that Aurelian ought rather
to have been continued a General, than to have been made a Prince. He said
also, according to Asclepiodotus, that Aurelian once consulted with the Druids
of Gallia, whether the Empire was to descend after him upon his Posterity.
Their Answer was, that the Posterity of Claudius should carry the greatest Name
of any in the Empire. And certainly the Emperor Constantius is one of the Blood
of Claudius, whose Line will one day attain, I doubt not, to that Glory, which
was foretold by the Druids. But I only mention this in the Life of Aurelian,
because the Consultation and the Answer was made by, and to him. It may seem
perhaps wonderful; as it is, I leave it to the Judgment of Posterity.

Aurelian fixed the Tribute to be paid for Farther Character of Aurelian.
ever by Egyp(...) to the City of Rome, in Glass, Paper, Flax, Tow, Corn,
Ointments, and other Merchandises. He had begun to make a Winter-Bath in the
Quarter of the City, which is on the other side of the Tyber, because of their
want of Water there. He had begun a great Work to bear his Name at the City of
Ostia, to the Sea; which was afterward perfected and made into a public Hall
of Justice. He enriched his Friends with moderation; setting them above the
miseries of Poverty, and yet below Envy. A Garment of Velvet he never either
wore himself, or allowed, in the way of their Salaries to any of his Officers.
When his own Lady desired to have one only Gown of Cloth of Gold and Purple, he
denied it, and said, Far be it that we should weigh Gold against Thread;
because a Pound of silken Thread purple dyed, was worth at that time a Pound of
Gold. He had intended to forbid the Gilding of Rooms, and the working of Gold
into Clothes, and the Gilding of Leather, and the Gilding of Silver. He said,
There is a greater Stock of Gold in Nature, than there is of Silver; but the
quantity of the Gold in passing into the several uses which it does, in Leaves
and Thread, and Meltings, perishes more than the Silver, and is more lavished.
As for Vessels and Cups of all Gold, he gave leave that any might use them, who
pleased. Gentlemen, he gave leave to have their Coaches silvered over, which
before were only adorned with Brass and Ivory. He allowed the Gentlewomen to
wear fine Purples, whereas before they went in flowered and mixed colored
Silks, or at the most, something that was only a little near to Purple. He was
the first that suffered the Co^mmon Soldiers to have their Buttons gilt. He was
the first that gave them Linens. For before they had only Russet Coats, which
were adorned with some one, or two, or three, or some five Trimmings. He added
the weight of an Ounce, upon the Fond of the Tribute Egypt, to the Dole at
Rome; in which Charity, in the following Letter he is pleased to glory thus.

The Emperor Aurelian to Flavius Arabianus, the Commissioner of the Stores for
the Public Relief.
AMongst other things, in which by the help of the Gods we have done good to
the Roman State, nothing is to me a greater Pleasure and Honor, than that I
have increased by the addition of an Ounce, the public Dole of the City of
Rome. To make which perpetual, I have accordingly appointed Officers in Egypt
upon the Nile, and others at Rome, to see to the Importation of the Corn from
Egypt. I have built up the Banks of the Tyber. I have dug the Channel
deeper. I have offered my Vows to the Gods, and to Eternity. I have consecrated
these things to the blessed Ceres. It is your Duty now, my good Arabianus, to
take great care that my Orders be not issued in vain. For nothing to me can be
more pleasant, than to see the People of Rome with their Bellies full, and
their wants satisfied.


Together with the Oil, Bread and Pork, which these People received by the
Donations already established, Aurelian was for giving them Wine, for which he
would have made a perpetual Fund by this means. The Country of Hetruria in
Italy on the side of Aurelia, as far as to the Maritim Alps, has large Grounds
which are covered with Woods, but otherwise fruitful enough. Aurelian would
have bought these incultivated Grounds of the Proprietors, as many as were
willing to sell; and he would have employed upon them Numbers of Persons, that
were Captives, who should plant the Mountains with Vines, and the Product,
without paying any thing to the Exchequer, should go entirely to the use of the
People of Rome. An Account was taken of the Expense that this Work would cost,
and what quantity of Wine it would bring in. But either Aurelian was prevented
by Death, before he could go on further with it; or, as some say, he was
diverted again from it by the Captain of the Guards, who was against it, and
said, If we find the People of Rome Wine, it only remains next that we give
them Geese and Chickens. Aurelian in Munificence of Aurelian.
the time that he reigned, thrice caressed that Populace with Largesses. He
gave them Tunicks of several sorts, according to the Fashions of the Provinces
from whence he had them. He gave them of the Linens of Egypt, and other parts
of Africa. He was the first that gave them Handkerchiefs, which at the Public
Shows of the Cirque they express their Applauses and their Acclamations by,
that is, shaking and tossing them over their Heads.

When he was at Rome, he did not love to live always in the Palace; he diverted
himself much in the Gardens of Salust, or those of Domitia. The great Gallery
which is in the Gardens of Salust, consisting of a Thousand Pillars, he
adorned; and every day fatigued himself and his Horses there, for his Health,
which was but indifferent. He caused his Slaves and Servants, when they had
done ill, to be killed or beaten in his sight; either because it kept up
Discipline, and made the Punishment the more exemplary; or, because he loved to
feed his Eyes with the Cruelty. His Maid committing Adultery with one of his
Slaves, he punished her with Death. Other of his Slaves, that committed things
against the Laws, be delivered over to the Authority of the Laws, and the
Public Justice. He was for setting up a sort of a Senate of the Women, or
rather for reviving a Privilege, which the Matrons anciently had of assembling
themselves upon certain occasions. In which Assembly, the Priestesses, that is,
such as were by the Law devoted to the Services of the Gods, had the
pre-eminence. He forbad all Men, the wearing of Red, or Wax colored, or White,
or Green Shoes; leaving it only to the Women to have such. He allowed the
Senators their running Footmen, and the same Livery as himself gave.
Concubines of Women Free born, he forbad. He limited the Number of the Eunuchs,
which the Senators bought, because they were risen to a great Price. He had no
Vessel of Silver in his Household of above Thirty Pound weight. His Eating was
generally of roasted Meat, and red Wine his Drink. When he was sick, he never
made use of a Physician, but cured himself chiefly by abstinence* He gave his
Wife and his Daughter no better Rings than if he had been a private Person. He
gave his Slaves the same Clothes, after he was Emperor, as he did before;
excepting two old Men, Antisthius and Gallio, whom he treated as Gentlemen, and
who after his Death were made Free by the Authority of the Senate. He was
seldom present at the Pleasure of the Cirque^ but he was wonderfully delighted
with Mimicks and Jesters. In fine, Aurelian, excepting in some domestic
Seditions, had a very fortunate time. The People of Rome loved him. The Senate
both loved him, and feared him.

THE A. Christi CCLxxviii.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR TACITUS.
BY FLAVIUS VOPISCUS.
AFter Aurelian, there followed an Interregnum An Interregnum of six Months.
for six whole Months. Not occasioned by any Breach betwixt the Senate of Rome
and the Army; but on the contrary, the Senate deferred the Election of the new
Emperor to the Army, and the Army deferred it again to the Senate, and the
dispute betwixt them was grateful and very handsome. There was, as our Eldest
Annals inform us, formerly an Interregnum after the death of Romulus, in the
Infant-State of the Empire of Rome. But the differences betwixt that
Interregnum and this, are many. For in the former, till such time as a fit
Person was pitched upon to succeed the good Romulus, an Interrex was expressly
from time to time appointed to Govern out of the Senate: which then consisting
of one hundred Members, each Member, whose Health did not disable him, took it
in his course to be the Interrex for three or four, or five days: So the whole
Year and more, that the Interregnum lasted, passed under the Government of the
Senators; who reigned one after another, all of them, from the first to the
last, without distinction, because as they were all of equal Dignity, so they
should all have an equal Taste of the Empire. Likewise during the Government of
the Consuls and the Tribunes of the Soldiers, which last had the Authority, but
only not the Name of Consuls, whenever it happened that the Government was
vacant, an Interrex was appointed to Act, till such time as the Government was
filled again. And though it may be objected to this, That once, at that time,
for the space of four Years, we had no Persons in the Chairs of the Consuls,
nor any Magistrates presiding in the Nature of them; yet I answer, that there
were then Tribunes of the People, endowed with such a Power, that the Emperors
who have enjoyed the same Power since, have thought it one of the brightest
Jewels in their Crown. Nor is it any where averred, that then there was no
Interrex neither who acted besides these Tribunes. Because our most Authentic
Histories say, that when afterward the Consuls were re-continued, it was the
Interrex, who by his Authority summoned the Assemblies of the People to do it;
and therefore there was an Interrex then in the State. So that in this respect
the State of Rome was never so vacant, as it was after the death of Aurelian:
For here there was a perfect Interregnum without any Interrex for six Months;
whereas before the State was never without an Interrex, so much as for two or
three days.

This was a rare and a difficult Conjuncture. It was no less remarkable, if we
observe the perfect Concord of the Army, the profound Peace of the People, and
the venerable Authority of the Senate in all that time. No Usurper started any
where up. The whole World wa^ted the Orders and the Judgment of the Senate, the
Soldiers and the People of Rome: There were no Fears nor Jealousies of one
Person or other. Every one kept to his Devoir, and which is one of the best
Principles in the Conduct of humane Life, in reverence to himself. The
Temperament of Men was admirable, and made the Delay it self happy and worthy
to be for ever remembered; That those who seek after Crowns, may learn, that
Empires ought not to be ravished, but to be deserved.

The occasion and manner of the Delay that was made, was thus. Aurelian, as the
last written Life shows, was killed by the Treason of a wicked Secretary, who,
as Fictions and Falsities go a great way with Soldiers, if they are told them
either in their anger, or many times in their drink (though it is always next
to a madness to believe them) drew in a Party of the Great Men of the Army, by
an Incredulity on their sides, into a Plot with him, to kill him. But all these
Persons being returned to a better Sentiment, and severely consuted of their
Error by the Army, it was begun to be considered, whom next to make Emperor.
The Army, who had used to set up an Emperor in a trice, hated those who had had
a hand in the Murder of Aurelian, and who at the same time were of the Top of
their Body. So they sent to the Senate the Letter which you have in the Life
preceding, wherein they desired that the Senate would, out of their House, make
choice (...) Person to be their Prince. But the Senate kn(...) that the Princes
chosen by them, do not always please the Army, and they remitted the Choice to
the Army again. This was repeated so often in reciprocal Complements from one
to another, that it was six Months before the Senate came to the Election of
Tacitus, which was in the manner as follows.

Upon the 7th. day of the Calends of October, the Senate being met in the Curia
Pompiliana, Velius Cornificius Gordianus the Consul, spoke thus to them:

Fathers of the Senate, What we have often referred to you already, we must now
do it again, to choose an Emperor; without whom, the Army cannot well subsist
longer, and there is a Necessity which obliges us to it besides. For the
Germans have broken into the Quarter on the side of the Rhine, and have
possessed themselves there of Strong, Noble, Rich, and Powerful Cities. And
though there is nothing mentioned of any Motions of the Persians, yet you may
easily imagine, how light the Minds of the Syrians are, when rather than suffer
our Government, which is so Just, they have desired Women to Reign over them.
What shall I say to you of Africa, of Illyricum, of Egypt, and the Armies in
all those Parts? How long do you think can they subsist without an Emperor?
Wherefore, Gentlemen, go now about it, and Name one: Either the Army will
Accept him whom you shall choose, or themselves will choose some other, if they
refuse him.

Tacit(...) ^as the Chief and Prince of the Senate, and to give his Opinion the
first. But as he was going to speak, all the Senate prevented him, and cried;

We Salute Tacitus, our Emperor. The Gods save you. We Choose you. We make you
our Prince; We commit the Care of the State and of the World to you. Take the
Empire, given you by the Authority of the Senate. Your Place, your Life, your
good Intentions deserve it. The Prince of the Senate is very justly to be
created the Sovereign. The Senator of the First Voice is deservedly preferred
to be Emperor. And who is better to Reign, than a Person of Gravity as you are?
Who is better to Govern, than one that is so knowing as you? We think it is an
Happiness and an Excellency in you to be Congratulated, That you have been long
a Private Person. You, who have gone through the Reigns of other Princes, know
how to Reign your self. You know very well how to Command, who have observed
and judged of the Government of others before you.

Tacitus Answered:

I am astonished, Fathers of the Senate, That in the Place of the most Valiant
Aurelian, you are willing to make such an Old Man Emperor. How am I fit, with
these Limbs which you behold, to manage the Dart and the Spear, and to rattle
it in Armor, and to be often riding in exact Form for an Example to the
Soldiers. Scarce can I fulfill the Duties of the Senate; I am hardly able to do
that, to which my particular Place confines me. Consider then more carefully,
what an advanced Age you take out of the Chamber and the Shade, to send it into
Frosts and Heats? Can you believe, that the Army will approve of an Old Man to
be at the Head of them? Think upon some other, who will better answer the
Expectations which you have of him, and let me be contented in a Private Life
with this, That you have unanimously Loved me.

The Senate returned him these Acclamations.

Trajan came pretty Old to the Empire. This was repeated ten times.

And Hadrian came Old to the Empire. This was repeated ten times.

Antoninus the Pious, came an Old Man to the Empire. Repeated ten times.

You remember that of Virgil, Aen. 6.

-- -- Incanaque menta Regis Romani: Or, The Hoary Head of a King of the
Romans. This was repeated ten times.

Who Governs better than a Man of Years? This was repeated ten times.

We make you an Emperor, not a Soldier. This was repeated twenty times.

Give the Word only, and the Soldiers will Fight it out. This was repeated
thirty times.

You are Prudent, and you have a good Brother living with you. This was
repeated ten times.

It is the Head that Governs, and not the Feet, said the Emperor Septimius
Severus. This was repeated thirty times.

We choose you for your Parts of Mind, and not of Body. This was repeated
twenty times.

The Gods save you, our Emperor Tacitus.

Then they went to take the Suffrages of each Senator in particular. The next
to Tacitus was Moecius Falconius Nicomachus, who was of the degree of a Consul.
He being asked his Opinion, discoursed the Senate in these words.

Fathers of the Senate, This most Noble House has ever rightly and prudently
consulted the Good of the State: Nor is there any Nation upon the Earth, from
whom one ought to expect a greater share of solid Wisdom, than from you. But
yet I must say, That of, all the Instances of your Wisdom, there never was a
Determination passed by you, more Grave and more Judicious, than what has been
done in this present Assembly. We have chosen a Person of an advanced Age to be
our Prince, and one who may consult the Good of us all as a Father. Nothing
from him that is immature, that is unadvised, that is ill, is to be feared. We
may promise our selves a Reign of all Sobriety, all Gravity, and as the State
would in a manner have it. For he knows, what a Prince he has always wished to
himself to have; and he cannot give us a different one in his own Person, from
what he has desired to find in another. Certainly if we will reflect upon
those Prodigies of ill Princes of the Ancient Times, I mean the Nero's, the
Heliogabalus's, and the Commodus's, it will appear, that their Crimes were not
more the Vices of the Men, than the Vices of their Age. The Gods defend us from
having Boys to be our Sovereigns, and Children to be called the Fathers of our
Country; who must have Masters to hold their Hands when they Sign their Orders,
and will be invited to make Persons Consuls, by the Sugar-plumbs and the Cakes,
and every Childish Pleasure that is given them. What Reason, I pray, is there
to have an Emperor, who does not know how to take the care of his Reputation?
who does not understand what a State is; that fears his Educator, is Commanded
by his Nurse, and lies under the Magisterial Lash and Terror of the Hands of
his Master? What Consuls, what Commanders, what Magistrates is he like to give
us, when as to the Lives, Merits, Ages, Families and Actions of the Persons
whom he prefers, truly be understands nothing at all of them? But why am I here
drawn to bestow, Gentlemen, so many words upon this subject? Let us rather
Congratulate the choice, which we have made of a Prince, who is a Man of Years,
than to iterate those things that have been beyond measure deplorable to the
Persons that have suffered under them. I give therefore my repeated Thanks to
the Immortal Gods for this Choice. I offer the same likewise in the Name of the
whole State. And to you, Tacitus, our Emperor, I turn my self to beg of you, to
beseech you, to entreat you, generously in the behalf of our Common Country,
that if it shall be the Will of the Fates that you die whilst your own Sons are
yet but young, you would not make those Children Heirs, after you, of the Roman
Empire; nor in such a nature leave this State, this Senate, and the People of
Rome, as if the first was no more than your Villa, and we all your Tenants and
your Slaves. Consider very well, and imitate the Examples of Nerva, Trajan, and
Hadrian. It is a great honor in a dying Prince, to love his Country more than
his Issue.

Tacitus was extremely moved, and the whole Senate struck with this Speech; and
presently they cried, We All, All, say the same; and so the House rose. They
went from thence unto the Field of Mars: where Tacitus having placed himself
upon the Tribunal, Aelius Cesetianus the Governor of the City, spoke thus to a
General Assembly, there met, of all the People:

Gentlemen-Soldiers, and you the good Citizens and Commons of Rome; You have
here the Prince, whom by the consent of all the Roman Armies, the Senate has
made choice of to fill the Throne. The most Noble Tacitus, I say; who, as he
has hitherto assisted by his Suffrages to the good of the Senate, so he is now
chosen to do the same by his Command and Consultations.

The People cried, All Happiness to the Emperor Tacitus. The Gods save your
Majesty, and the like, as usual.

It is not here to be omitted, what several have writ, That Tacitus was in his
absence, and whilst he was in the Campagna, named to be Emperor; which I cannot
deny to be in some His unwillingness to assume the Empire.
measure true. For as soon as the Rumor had broken out, that he was the Person
intended to be Elected, he retired from the Town, and went and kept himself two
Months at Bajae. But they fetched him from thence again, and he was present at
this Act of the Senate, as altogether a private Person, and really did decline
his Elevation. For that no body may think, that I have rashly given Credit to
the Testimony of any either Greek or Latin Writer as to this Matter, there is
in the Ulpian Library in the Sixth Apartment, a Book in Tables of Ivory, in
which this Act of the Senate is registered at large, subscribed by Tacitus
himself in his own hand. It was a long time; a Custom to Register such Acts, as
concerned the Crown, upon Tables of Ivory.

From the Assembly of the People, Tacitus next went to the Camp of the Guards;
where having taken his Place upon a High Tribunal, Maesius Gallicanus the
Captain of the Guards, directed himself to the Soldiers in these words:

My very good Fellow Soldiers, The Senate has given you the Prince whom you
desired. That most Noble House has readily complied with the Will of the Camp.
It is not for me to say more to you, in the presence of the Emperor himself.
Therefore hear him, who is our Master, attentively, whilst he speaks to you.

Then Tacitus spoke thus:

When Trajan came to the Empire, it is true, he was pretty well in Years, and
he was appointed by only one Person neither. But as for my self, in the first
place, you my excellent Fellow Soldiers, who know what Princes you do approve
of, and in the next, the most Honorable the Senate has adjudged me to this
Place. It shall be my care, I will make it my endeavor and my business, to
furnish you, if not with great Achievements, yet at least with Counsels worthy
of you and your Emperor.

He promised them a Bounty and their Pay, according to Custom; and the first
Harangue which he made afterward to the Senate, was this:

Fathers of the Senate, So let me ever in such a manner Govern the Empire, as
that I may appear to owe my Election to you, by whose Advice and Authority I
have resolved to do all things. You will therefore please to Command and to
Enjoin me, what you think to be for the Common good of your selves, the Army,
and the People of Rome. He proceeded in the same Speech to tell them, That he
resolved to set up a Statue of Aurelian in Gold in the Capitol, with others of
Silver, in the House of the Senate, in the Temple of the Sun, and in the Forum
of Trajan. These latter were accordingly Dedicated; but that of Gold was not.
In the same Speech he provided, That if any Person publicly or privately
adulterated Silver with Brass, or Gold with Silver, or Brass with Lead, it
should be Capital, and loss of Estate. Also, that Slaves should not be
Witnesses against the Lives of their Masters; no, not in Cases of Treason. He
obliged all Persons to have Pictures of Aurelian. He ordered a Temple to be
built, where they should set up the Statues of such of the Deified Emperors as
Reigned well; and offer Sacrifices to them, upon their several Anniversaries,
the Birthday of the City of Rome, and the Calends of January. In the same
Speech, he desired the Consuship for his Brother Florianus; but the Senate
could not grant it; because all the Consuls, Ordinary and Extraordinary, that
is, the Consuls for the whole Year and the Consuls for every two Months had
been already appointed by the Senate. Tacitus was much pleased with the liberty
which the Senate took to deny his Brother the Consulship, though himself had
asked it; and said, The Senate knows whom they have made their Prince.

He turned his Estate, which was worth seven Millions of Crowns, over into the
Exchequer; and the ready Money that he had by him, he applied to the Pay of the
Soldiers. He wore the same Clothes as he did when he His public Acts and Orders.
was a Private Man. He put down the Public Bawdy-houses within the City of
Rome; but this could not hold long. He ordered all the Baths to be shut up
before Candlelight, for fear of Disturbances being committed in them in the
Night. He acknowledged Corn. Tacitus, the Roman Historian, as his Relation, and
commanded his Book to be set up in all the Libraries; and for the more careful
preservation of it to Posterity, he ordered it every Year to be Copied over Ten
times, and the Copies to be reposed in the Libraries and in the Cabinets of the
Ingenious. He forbad all Men the wearing of Velvet. He pulled down his late
Dwelling House, and ordered a Public Bath to be built in its place, at his
proper expense. He gave a hundred Columns of the Numidian Marble, of three and
twenty foot each, to the City of Ostia. The Possession which he had in
Mauritania, he Assigned to the Repairs of the Capitol. His Table Plate of
Silver, which he had used in his private Life, he dedicated to the services of
the Feasts, made in the Temples. He granted an Enfranchisement to all his
Slaves that he had at Rome, of both Sexes, under the Number of a Hundred; but
no more, because he would not exceed the stint of the Caninian Law. He lived a
very sober Life; never in a whole day His moderate Diet.
drank a Quart of Wine, and many times not a Pint. One Pullet, a Swine's Cheek,
and Eggs, sufficed for his Dinner, with an abundance of Herbs, and especially
Lettuces, in which he passionately indulged himself; because he said, that that
was a profuseness which purchased him Sleep. He loved the bitterer Herbs;
seldom Bathed, which I believe made him the stronger in his Old Age: Delighted
extraordinarily in the curious-wrought Glasses, and the several sorts thereof,
that are made in Egypt. His Breakfast was never any thing, but a piece of dry
Bread seasoned with Salt, and the like. He was a great Master in Architecture.
He loved fine Marble, and stately Buildings, and Hunting. In fine, his Table
was Coarse, and presented you with no Rarities: Not with a Pheasant, unless it
was upon the Birthday of himself or some of his Relations, and upon
extraordinary Holidays. The Sacrifices, which he had offered in the Temples, he
always redemanded home, and ordered them to be eaten by his Family. He suffered
his Wife to wear no Jewels: He forbad all the wearing of any Embroidery in
Gold: For it was he, who had advised Aurelian to forbid the same, and to forbid
the Gilding of Rooms, and the Gilding of Leather. It would be tedious to
particularize in every thing concerning him, especially after Suetonius
Optatianus, who has written his Life at large. If any Person be so curious to
know more, I refer him thither. As Old as he was, he read the least-written
Hand to a Wonder; and he never intermitted a Night, but he either read or writ
something, excepting the day after the Kalends of a Month, which he looked upon
as Unfortunate.

The great Joy of the Senate, to be re-possessed again of the Right of the
Choice of the Emperor, was such as I cannot forbear to mention, nor is it
scarce ever to be forgotten. They ordered Public Processions to be made upon
it, and every one promised to offer a Hecatomb: They writ of it to their
Friends, and not only to their Friends, but to Strangers abroad; and into the
Provinces, for all their Allies and all Nations to know, that Rome had now
recovered its Ancient State, and now the Senate chose the Emperor, and Reigned
in a manner with him; and made the Laws; and the Kings of the Barbarians were
to supplicate to the Senate, and War and Peace was to be Treated by the
Authority of the Senate. Some of these sort of Letters, for the greater
satisfaction, I will give you here, as follows:

The most Noble Senate of Rome to the Magistracy of Carthage, sends Greeting.
THE Right of Conferring the Empire, and of Nominating and appointing our
Prince, which we pray, that it may ever be Good, Happy, Fortunate and Wholesome
to the Senate and the whole Dominion of Rome, is again returned to us. To us
therefore direct the Reports, which you make of things of great moment. All
Appeals arising from the Proconsuls, and other the ordinary Magistrates, are to
be made to the Governor of the City of Rome. Herein we believe, that also your
Honorable Body has regained its Ancient Dignity: For this is the prime Order
of things, which by being observed in its proper force, will preserve all the
rest in their Rights.


The most Noble Senate of Rome to the Council of the City of Trier.
AS you are and always have been a Free People, we do not doubt, but you are
Happy. The Authority of Creating the Emperor is returned to the Senate:
Together with which it is Decreed, that all Appeals shall be made to the
Governor of the City of Rome.


In the same manner, they writ to the Cities of Antioch, Aquileia, Milan,
Alexandria, Thessalonica, Corinth, and Athens: These were the Public Letters.
The following are Private ones, from particular Senators to their Friends.

Autronius Tiberianus to Autronius Justus, his Father, wishes Health.
My Good Father,
NOW it is for you to come to be present, and give your Suffrage in the Senate;
its Authority being increased to the degree, of which it was in the former
Times. We now make our Princes, Name and Constitute our Emperors. Therefore
pray be careful to recover your Health and come, and bear a part with the
Senate in its Ancient Glory. The Right of Creating the Proconsuls, and ordering
the Proconsular Provinces, is remitted to us; and the Appeals of all
Magistrates and Officers are returned into the hands of the Governor of the
City of Rome.


Claudius Capellianus to Cereius Maecianus, his Uncle, wishes Health.
WHAT we have always so much wished for, we have now gained, good Sir. The
Senate is returned to its Ancient State. We make our Princes, and dispose of
the Governments of the Proconsular Provinces. Thanks to the Roman Army. They
have shown themselves truly Romans, and have restored to us the Power, which
has been ever our due. Leave Baja, and Pozzuoli, and your Retreat there. Come
to the Town, come to the Senate; Rome Flourishes, and so does the whole State.
We now appoint our Emperors. We make our Princes. We, who have begun to make
them, can disallow them too. A word to the Wise is enough.


It would be too long to adjoyn all the Letters of this kind, which I have seen
and read. I only say this, that all the Senators were so elated with Joy for
the return of their Ancient Power, that in their Houses they all slew their
Sacrifices, and exposed their Images, and clothed themselves in White, and
Feasted, as if they thought, that the days of their happy Forefathers were
revived upon them.

All the Murderers of Aurelian, as well the better, as the worse, after Tacitus
was settled in the Empire, he made it his business to put to death;
notwithstanding the baseness of that Murder had been already revenged in the
Execution of Mnestheus, the chief contriver of it. The Barbarians on the side
of the Lake Maeotis, in great numbers made an Eruption. But Tacitus partly by
force, and other means, obliged them to retire.

In fine, the chief Glory of the Reign of Tacitus was in the manner of his
Elevation. For the time that he lived afterward being so short, what liberty
had he for any thing that is Great? So that what Cicero says, That it is more
for our Honor, to have it told, how a Man has managed a Consulship, than how
he came by it, it takes no place here. Tacitus dyed in the sixth Month of his
Reign, some say of a Sickness; some, that he was killed by the Soldiers. It is
certain, that he was oppressed with Factions, and this worked much upon his
Mind and Spirits.

He was both Born, and made Emperor in the Month of September: For which
reason, he had a fancy to change the Name of that Month to his own. His Brother
Florianus succeeded him.

He scarce gave the People of Rome a Largess in all his six Months. His Picture
is drawn in five several Dresses, upon a Table in the House of the Quintilii;
in a Gown, in a Vest, in Armor, in a Cloak, and in a Hunting Habit. The
Presages of his Reign were these. In the Temple of Sylvanus, one in a Fit of
Frenzy, in which the Priests delivered their Oracles, stretching out his Arms,
cried with all his force, The Purple of Tacitus! The Purple of Tacitus! seven
Omens of his Reign and Death
times. A Vine, which used to bring forth white Grapes, the Year that he came
to the Empire, began to bring forth Purple colored Grapes: several other such
things changed to that Color. The Presages of his Death were, That his
Father's Sepulcher flew open of it self; his Mother's Ghost appeared in the
daytime, both to him and to Florianus, just as if she was Living. All the Gods
in the Oratory of his House, whether by an Earthquake or some other accident,
fell down: An Image of Apollo, which he and Florianus Worshipped, was found
laid upon the Bed, without any hand to put it there known. These are things
that a great many mention: But I conclude this Life.

THE A. Christi CCLxxviii.
EMPEROR FLORIANVS.
By FLAVIUS VOPI(...)US.
THere is but little to be said of this Prince more, than that being the
Brother of the Emperor Tacitus, he after his death seized upon the Empire, not
by the Authority of the Senate, but of his own Motion, as if the Empire was to
go to him by Inheritance: though at the same time he knew, that his Brother was
Conjured in the Senate, that when he dyed, he should not bequeath the Empire,
no, not to his own Children.

Florianus had scarce held it two Months, but Florianus slain.
he was killed at the City of Tarsus in Cilicia, by his Soldiers; hearing that
Probus was set up, and that all the Army had declared for him. Indeed Probus
was so great a Man in the matter of War, that as the Army had chose him, so the
Senate wished for him, and the People of Rome made open Acclamations to have
him.

Florianus, though he had otherwise much in him of the Temper of his Brother,
was very different from him in this Ambition, and this Thirst for the Empire.
He was profuse besides, which his Thrifty Brother blamed in him. They both
together reigned so short a time, that they look almost like two Interrexes,
acting betwixt the Reigns of Aurelian and Probus. Their Statues were set up at
Terni, in Ombria, in Marble, thirty Foot high; and likewise their Sepulchers
did sometime stand there upon their own Grounds; but they were afterward
struck down with Thunder and Lightning, and shattered to pieces.

I come in the next place to Probus: a Prince, Conspicuous at home and abroad;
and Commendation of Probus.
in whom are united all those great Excellencies, which Aurelian, Trajan,
Hadrian, the Antonini, Alexander Severus, and Claudius, divided amongst them.
He came to the Empire with the concurrent Judgment of all Men of goodness. He
governed it most happily. He extinguished the Barbarian Nations in their
Incursions, together with diverse Usurpers who would have set themselves up in
his time. He was worthy of his Name: which the People would have imposed upon
him, if it had not been his own by his Birth. Several say he was promised to
the World in the Books of the Sibyls. Had he longer lived, he had left no
Barbarians on the Earth. This Taste of so great a Prince I give you here, lest
as we are daily, hourly, and every moment subject to the stroke of Fate, I may
dye, before I can present you with his whole life: which I shall the less care
now, if I do; because I have satisfied my Ambition, and my great Desire, thus
far, to honor his Memory.

THE A. Christi CCLXXiX.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR PROBUS.
By FLAVIUS VOPISCUS.
IT is very true, what the Historians Salust, Cato, and Gellius have sometime
said; that the Praises of all Men are altogether such, and so raised, as those
please, who describe their Actions to the World* Therefore Alexander the Great
of Maced(...) when he came one day, and saw the Sepulcher of Achilles,
complained and said, Happy Youth who had such a Herald to Proclaim thee!
Meaning Homer, who has set out his Virtues* IMP. ^. PROBVS AVG.

portrait of Probus DIVO CARO PIO

portrait of Carus CARINVS NOBIL. CAES.

portrait of Carinus IMP. C. NVMERIANVS AVG.

portrait of Numerianus IMP. DIOCLETIANVS P. AVG.

P. 272. Vol. 11

portrait of Diocletian and formed his Character, with the utmost force of his
Will. And who, at this time had ever known of the glory of Pompey the Great,
and his three Triumphs for the War of the Pirates, the War of Sertorius, and
the War of Mithridates, and many other Actions which he did, that ennobled him,
if Tully and Livy had not been his Historians to Record his Fame? The Scipio's,
Africanus, Nasica, and all of that Noble Name, had been laid under a perpetual
darkness, and for ever covered with oblivion, but for the Historians that have
arisen to commend them. It would be tedious, neither need I mention all the
Examples, that might be brought of this Nature, which every ones own
observation will furnish him with. You will rather ask me perhaps, my dear
Celsus, why do I take notice of this here? It is truly, because I see here a
Prince, who though the East, West, North and South obeyed his Empire, and all
the parts of the World were reduced into an entire repose by him; and though
neither the Punick Wars, nor Gallia, nor Pontus, nor Spain have produced his
equal, yet his History being unfortunately perished, he is in a manner unknown
for want of Writers to perpetuate him. This however I am not willing to see,
without contributing my Service to redress it; and therefore having to my
power, as I was desired, finished the Life of Aurelian, and to that added those
others of Tacitus and Florianus, I shall not be silent upon the Actions of so
great a Prince as Probus; and if my life serves me, I will also carry on the
History, as far as to Dioclesian and Maximian: not that I pretend to Eloquence,
but only matter of Fact, which I cannot suffer to perish. The Books that I make
use of to this purpose, that I may not in any thing appear to impose upon a
friendship which is so dear to me, Sir, as yours, are those especially in the
Library of Trajan, which is lodged at present in the Baths of Dioclesian, and
the Tiberian Library. Together with which, I have consulted the Registers of
the Scribes of the Porphyry Gallery, and the Acts of the People and the Senate.
And because in the Collecting the History of so great a Prince, the Journal of
Turdulus Gallicanus has very much assisted me, I ought not to be silent of the
obligation which I have to the friendship of that very good and worthy Person.
All therefore that I would declare upon the whole, is this; that it is the
matter of Fact only which I write; which if any one pleases to set out in a
Higher, and a more Eloquent Style afterward, he is welcome. For it has not
been my design to imitate Salust, Livy, Tacitus, Trogu^ Pompeius, or any of
those most Eloquent Historians; but Marius Maximus, Suetonius Tranquillus,
Fabius Marcellinus, Gargilius Martial, Julius Capitolinus, Aelius Lampridius,
and others who have written upon these sort of things, not to say, so
Eloquently, as with a great deal of Truth. For it is my Curiosity to bring to
light the Truth of many unknown and hidden matters concerning our Emperors;
incited by your example, who the more you know, the more still you desire to
know of them.

Without further Preface then, this great and famous Prince Probus, who has
scarce his equal, in the Roman History, was born at the City of Sirmish in
Sclavonia, or the Lower Pannonia. Probus' s Birthplace and Parentage.
His Father was not of so good Quality as his Mother was. His Estate was
indifferent; Affinity not great; however as well in his private Life, as after
he was Emperor, he made his Noble Actions speak for him. Some say, his Father's
name was Maximus; who after he had served very well in the Office of a
Centurion; rise to be a Tribune, and died in Egypt, leaving a Wife, a Daughter,
and this Son. There is one Greek Author, who says, that Probus was a Relation
of the Emperor Claudius, who was a most Excellent and most Noble Prince: which
may perhaps be the more Credited, because I find in the Journal of Turdulus
Gallicanus, that after his death he was buried by Claudia, who was the Daughter
of Crispus, who was the Brother of Claudius. But I leave this to the Reader.

Probus signalized himself so in his Youth, and was so agreeable in his Person
and Manners, How esteemed by Valerian*
that the Emperor Valerian early conferred upon him a Legion, when he was in a
manner Beardless. The same Emperor in a Letter to Gallienus, proposes him to
the imitation of all the Youth: by which, by the way, one may take notice, that
no Man becomes very great in his Age, but who lays down a good Foundation for
it in his first years; and then gathers within himself those Seeds, which
afterward produce the Fruit of Great Actions.

The Emperor Valerian the Father, to the Emperor Gallienus, the Son.
HAving always had a good Opinion of Probus, as young as he is I have made him
a Tribune, following therein both my own Judgment, and that of all others; who
say he is worthy of his Name; that is, as Probus is his Name, so Probity is his
Nature and Character. I have given him the Command of Six Cohorts of the
Saracens, together with the Troops of the Auxiliary Gauls, and that Body of
Persians which Artabasse; the Syrian has submitted to us. I desire you, my
dearest Son, that as I would have this Youth t^ be the Example for all Young
Persons to imitate, you would take that care of him, and receive him with that
respect which his Virtues, his Merits and the Splendor of his Natural Part^ do
deserve.


The Emperor Valerian, to Mulvius Gallicanus the Captain of the Guards.
YOU may wonder perhaps, That I have made a Beardless Youth a Tribune, contrary
to the Constitution of the Emperor Hadrian. But you will soon Cease to do so,
if you consider what a truly deserving Youth Probus is. I never think of him,
but I compare together his Name and his Qualities; they do so justify one
another. If it had not been his name, he might have been entitled Probus,
because of the Probity of his Temper and Actions. You will therefore order that
there be given him, being but of an indifferent Fortune, to make up the
Occasions of his Station, two Russet Tunicks, two French Robes with Clasps, two
Linen Jerkins, one Vessel of Silver of ten pound weight Ingraved; one hundred
Antonine's in Gold, one thousand Aurelian's in Silver, and ten thousand Philips
in Brass. And for his ordinary Pension, ten Pound of Beef, ten Pound of Pork,
ten Pound of the Flesh of the Goat, a Pullet every two days, one Quart of Oil
every two days, ten Quarts of Old Wine every day, with Salt, Herbs, and Wood,
as much as he wants. You shall withal order him the same Quarters, as to the
Tribunes of the Standing Legions.


In the War against the Sarmatae, in which he was a Tribune, he passed the
Danube, and acted with so much bravery so many things, that he was publicly in
a Council of War presented with four Spears; two Crowns, in the form of a
Trench; (being of that sort Praemiums given him.
which are given to such as first enter the Enemies Camp;) one Civick Crown,
four Standards, two Bracelets of Gold, (...) ^n of Gold, and one Piece of Plate
of (...) weight of five Pound. The Civick Crown was given him because he retook
out of the Hands of the Quadi, a Noble Youth, called Valerius Flaccinus, who
was a Relation of the Emperor Valerian. These Praemiums were all delivered to
him by Valerian hims(...), who at the same time raised him to the Command of
the Third Legion, with this Elogium.

My well beloved Probus,
THough it may seem Early, in respect of your Age, that I prefer you to a
Command in the Standing Forces of the Empire, yet in respect of the Actions
done by you, I may rather be thought to have made it later, than I ought.
Receive therefore into your Trust, the Third Noble Legion, which I have never
given before but to a Person of more years, and my self was in Gray Hairs, when
I first was preferred to it. But Age is a thing I have no reason to wait for in
you, whose Bravery is so shining, and your Manners so Charming. I have ordered
three Suits of Clothes to be given you; doubled your Pay, and appointed your
Standard Bearer.


It would be too long a Work, to run through the several Actions of this Great
Man in the Reigns of Valerian, Gallienus, Aurelian, and Claudius, whilst he was
yet in a private Capacity. How often he Scaled the Walls, entered the Enemies
Trenches; how many of them he has killed Hand to Hand, what Presents he
received from the Princes, his Masters, and how he labored by his Service to
promote the good of the State. A Letter of Gallienus speaks thus of him.

The Emperor Gallienus to the Tribunes of the Forces, of the Province of
Illyricum.
ALthough the Fatal Necessity of the Persian War has concluded my Father a
Prisoner in the Hands of the Enemy, yet I have a Kinsman, Aurelius Probus, in
whose Services I can confide with security: That never to be named Tyrant, had
never usurped upon the Empire, if Probus had been Present. Wherefore I desire
you all to obey the Counsels of a Man, who is approved by the Judgment of both
my Father, and the Senate.


Now though Gallienus was a soft Prince, which may seem to lessen the Authority
of what he says; yet it cannot be denied, but let a Prince be never so soft, he
will not however trust himself, but to one, whom he knows to be very well
qualified to serve him. But though we should set aside the Testimony of
Gallienus, what is to be said to that of Aurelian, who delivered over his own,
which was the Tenth, and of all the bravest Legion in the Army, with whom he
had done such great things himself unto Probus, with this Elogium of him.

The Emperor Aurelian to Probus, wishes Health.
THAT you may know, how great an account I make of you, I give into your Hands
my Tenth Legion, which was given to me by the Emperor Claudius. They are Men,
who by a certain Prerogative of Happiness are not accustomed to have other
Commanders, than what afterward are Emperors.


By this one would conclude, that it was in the mind of Aurelian, if he had
died his own death, and had not been killed as he was by surprise, to have made
choice of Probus for his Successor in the Empire too, as well as in his Legion.

Now it would be tedious to adjoyn to this the judgments of the Emperors
Claudius and Tacitus. The latter, it is said, in the Senate when the Empire was
offered to him, declared, that it ought rather to be given to Probus: and the
first Letter, which after he was Emperor, he sent to Probus, was this.

The Emperor Tacitus to Probus.
THE Senate has indeed, with the good will and consent of the Army, made me
the Emperor. But however you are to think, that as we all know, and the Senate
knows your Worth and Abilities, the Burden of the Public Affairs would have
been better reposed upon your Shoulders than mine. Assist me in my Necessities,
and continue as you do to Assert the Interest of the State. All the East is by
our order reposed under your Government: wherefore we have increased your
Salary to five times as much as it was; we have doubled your Military
Ornaments; and appointed you to be the Consul the next year in Conjunction with
my self. Your Merits call for no less at my Hands.


The love of the Soldiers toward Probus was always very great; he again loved
them, and kept them in their Duty, purely by his kindness to them. He
oftentimes had rescued them from the great Cruelty of Aurelian: he visited the
several Maniples, and examined their Clothes and their Shoes; and whatever
Booty was at any time taken, he divided it all amongst them, and reserved
nothing to himsel, but the Darts and the Arms. Amongst other things, whether
taken from the Alans, or some other of those Barbarians I know not; but there
was a Horse, which was neither Handsome nor Large, but the Prisoners said, that
he was so good a Runner, that he would go a hundred Miles a day, and continue
it for eight or ten days together. Every one thought that Probus would have
kept this Beast to himself: but Probus said, that such a Horse was fitter for
one that was for running away, than a brave Man. He ordered the Soldiers to
draw Lots for Him. They writ their Names and put them all into an Urn. Four
that were in the Army; were of the same Name with himself. But he, for his
part, put in no Name. They drew, and the first Name that came up was, Probus.
The four Soldiers of the Name of Probus not agreeing to which of them the Horse
should go, because each Challenged the Lot, he ordered all the Army to draw
again: the Lot that came up the second time was Probus again, and so it was a
third time, and a fourth time. Which was so strange, that all the Army,
together with those of that Name who had drawn the Lots, Dedicated the Horse to
their Commander Probus.

Probus did great things in Africa. He bravely His Vatour.
engaged and overcame the Marmoricans. He came to the City of Carthage, and
cleared that of the Rebels. He fought a single Combat with one Aradion in
Africa, and slew him; and when he had done, because Aradion was an
extraordinary Stout and Resolute Man, he honored him with a great Sepulcher,
which is extant yet, two hundred Foot high from the Ground, built by the
Soldiers; for those he never suffered to be idle. There are of his Works in
several Cities of Egypt, which he built by his Soldiers. He did so many things
upon the River of Nile, that he much promoted the Affairs of the Corn, which is
Imported into Italy in Tribute yearly from Egypt. He built Bridges, Temples,
Portico's, Basilica's, by the Hands of his Soldiers. He opened the Mouths of
Rivers in many places, and drained several Fens, which he fitted for Tillage
and Pasture. He Fought the Palmyreni, who in the behalf of Odenatus and Zenobia
defended Egypt against the Empire. The first time he came off with Success. The
second time, he was a little Rash, and was near being taken. But afterward
recovering his Strength, he reduced Egypt and the greatest part of the East,
unto the Obedience of Aurelian. Since therefore upon the account of so many and
so great Virtues, he shined in the Eyes of the Empire, at the time of the death
of Tacitus, though Florianus immediately pretended to succeed his Brother, yet
all the Oriental Army declared Probus Emperor.

The manner of his Elevation may be something His Elevation to the Empire.
pleasant, which was thus. When the News came of the death of Tacitus, the
Forces in the East were for preventing those in Italy, and also for preventing
the Senate's making the Emperor a second time. The Question was, whom they
should pitch upon. The Tribunes went about the Camp, and discoursed the
Soldiers, Maniple by Maniple, and Battalion by Battalion; Saying, we must have
one, who is a Man of Courage, Goodness, Modesty, Clemency, and Probity. Probity
to be sure, brought up the Rear of all the Virtues, which they desired to find
in him; till repeating the same so often, the whole Army took the Hint, and
unanimously, as if they were Inspired to it, cried a Probus. We Salute Probus
our Sovereign; the Gods save your Majesty. Then they ran and erected a Tribunal
of Turf, and took Probus and proclaimed him Emperor, and put upon him a Cloth
of Purple, which was taken for the purpose from off a Statue in the Temple, and
from thence they carried him to the Palace; he all the while moving against his
will, and drawing back, and often saying to them. Gentlemen, This Unwilling to
take it upon him.
is not Convenient for your selves. You will not do well under me. I cannot
flatter with you.

The first Letter, which he afterward sent to Capito, the Captain of the
Guards, was this.

I have never Coveted the Empire, so I have taken it upon me against my will.
It is a most Invidious thing; and yet it is not free for me to help my self. I
must Act the Person, that the Army has imposed upon me. I beseech you, Capito,
enjoy, as you do, with me the share, and the Command that you have, in the
Interests of the State; and provide Convoys and Provisions, and whatever is
necessary every where for the Soldiers. I, for my part, if you take the care,
that all things be done well, shall be glad to have no other Captain of the
Guards, than you.


The Guards therefore, and the Army in Italy, hearing of the Elevation of
Probus, than whom they knew, that no Person was more deserving, they killed
Florianus, who had pretended Florianus slain.
to take upon him the Crown, as it were by Inheritance; and without more
Disturbance the whole Empire was deferred to him, by the consent of both the
Soldiery and the Senate. For to the latter Probus sent the following Harangue,
which they answered with all the marks possible of Joy and Approbation.

Fathers of the Senate,
IT was very well, and very regularly done the last Year, that the Roman
Emperor was created by your Excellencies, and out of your own Body, who both
are, and always have been, and will in your Posterity ever be the Sovereigns of
the World. I wish that Florianus had waited for the same again from you; and
that he had not Challenged to himself the Empire, as if it was his Inheritance;
or, that he or any other Person had been exalted to it by you. But he having
seized it on his own Head, and the Army having deferred it to us, and punished
upon him an attempt in which he did Usurp, I refer my self wholly to the
Commands of your Excellencies to judge of my Deservings, and to do with me as
you please.


The Senate being met upon the third day of the Nones of February, in the
Temple of Concord, passed the Act in the favor of Probus, in this manner.

The Consul Aelius Scorpianus, said to them.

Gentlemen, You have heard the Letter of Aurelius Valerius Probus. What say you
to it.

They cried, The Gods save the Emperor Probus. We welcome his Majesty to the
Crown. You have been long a worthy, Brave, Just, and Good Commander and
General. As you are an Example to the Army, be an Example to the Empire. The
Gods save you. Reign in Happiness; an Assertor of the State, and a Master of
War, Reign in Happiness. The Gods preserve you and your^ The Senate had already
Chosen you in their minds. You come after Tacitus in respect to the Age which
you are of; but you are before all in all things else. We thank you, that you
have undertaken the Empire. Defend us, defend it. We may well commit our selves
to you, who have already preserved us. A Conqueror of the Franks, Goths,
Sarmathins, Parthians: you are all things, and always have been worthy of the
Empire, worthy of Triumphs. Proceed and Reign in all Happiness.

Then Manlius Statianus, who was the eldest Senator, spoke thus.

Fathers of the Senate,

THanks to the Immortal Gods, and above the rest to the most excellent Jupiter,
who has given us such a Prince, as we have ever wished to enjoy. If we consider
it well, we have no want now of either Aurelian, or Alexander Severus, or the
Antoninusses or Trajan, or Claudius. We have all things, and all their Virtues
in this one Prince. The knowledge of War, Clemency, a good Life, an exemplar of
a Patriot, and Bravery to the highest Perfection. What part of the World is
there, to which he has not made known his Victorious Arms? witness the
Marmoricans in Africa, vanquished by him; witness the Franks, whom he has
overthrown in their own unpassable Fens; witness the Germans and the Almains;
whom how far has he repulsed from the Banks of the Rhine? What shall I say
more of the Sarmatians, the Goths, the Parthians, and all the Country upon the
Euxine? Every where do the Trophies of the Valor of Probus flourish. It would
be too long to tell how many Kings of great Nations has he put to flight? What
Captains has he killed with his own hand? What numbers of Arms has he taken
in his time? The Letters of our Emperors which are upon the Records, show what
Public thanks, he has received from all those for his signal Services. My
good Gods! How many times has be been crowned with the Military rewards? What
Elogiums has he had from the Soldiers? Whilst he was but a Youth, he was a
Tribune of the Auxiliaries; and not long after, he was made the same in the
Roman Legions. Wherefore, thou most excellent and most powerful Jupiter, and
Juno the Queen, and thou Minerva the President of Arts, and thou the Goddess
Concord, and the Goddess Victory, grant ye this Favor to the Senate and People
of Rome, to our Allies, and to Foreign Nations, that Probus may Reign as
Happily, as he has served. I, Gentlemen, with all your Consents, do Decree to
him the Style and Title of our Caesar and our Emperor; and I add thereto the
Proconsular Power, the Honor of the Title of Father of our Country, the
Sovereign Pontificate, the right of a third Reference, and the Tribunitian
Power. They cried, We all, all, say the same; and so the House rise.

Probus having received this Act of the Senate, sent a second Letter to them;
by which he permitted them to Judge of Appeals; to Create the Proconsuls; to
Create Lieutenants with Consular Power, over Legatorian Provinces; and
Presidents with the Power of Praetors; to Confirm and Consecrate by their
Decrees, the Acts which he thought fit to make himself. Then he by several ways
punished as many as were yet alive, of the Murderers of Aurelian; and yet he
did it with more Tenderness, and more Moderation, than either the Army, or
Tacitus had done before. He punished also those who had been the Murderers of
Tacitus. He pardoned the Accomplices of Florianus; because he thought, because
he thought that they followed him not as an Usurper, but as their last Princes
Brother. He accepted the Obedience of all the European Forces, that had made
Florianus Emperor, and killed him when they had done. In the next place he set
out with a Puissant Army for Gallia; which first fell into Confusion upon the
Death of Post humius; but was overrun with the Germans since the death of
Aurelian. He fought there Probus his Successes against the Barbarians.
several great and happy Battles; insomuch that he recovered sixty Noble Cities
which were fallen into the Hands of the Barbarians: He retook all the Prey
beside, and all the Riches which they had sucked out of the People, and vaunted
themselves insolently in: he slew of them, whilst they were roaring up and down
the Country in security, as far as to the Borders of Italy, nigh four hundred
thousand, and the remainder he drove beyond the Rivers of Elbe and Necker. He
took as much Booty from them, as they had before taken from the Romans; besides
which he planted Roman Colonies and Garrisons on the Barbarian Soil, and placed
his Soldiers upon them. He assigned Fields, Barns, Houses and Magazines for all
the Forces, which he fixed on the other side of the Rhine: Heads of the
Barbarians were daily brought to him at the Price of a Crown of Gold a Head:
nor did he forbear his Pursuit of them, till Nine of their Petty Kings of
several Nations came, and threw themselves at his Feet: from whom he first
demanded Hostages, which were presently given: ^hen Corn: Cattle and Sheep:
some say, he commanded them, not to use a Sword again, but to expect the
defense of the Roman Arms, in case they were attacked by any Enemy. But this is
so hard, that I think it cannot be; unless the Conquests of the Romans had been
more extended, and all Germany had been reduced into a Province. However he
severely punished such with the consent of those Roytelets themselves, as
continued to keep back any of the Spoil, which they had taken upon the Roman
Provinces, and did not faithfully return it. He accepted of a Draught of
sixteen thousand Young and Fresh Men out of the Forces of these Barbarians;
which he dispersed into several Provinces of the Empire, and inserted them into
the Legions, and into the Garrisons upon the Frontiers, by about fifty or sixty
in a Legion; saying, That though it is good for the Romans to serve themselves
of the assistances of the Barbarians, yet that assistance ought rather to be
felt, than seen. So having settled the State of Gallia, he sent the following
Letter to the Senate.

Fathers of the Senate,
I Give thanks to the Immortal Gods, that they have approved and justified your
Judgments, in your Choice of me: all that broad and extended Country of
Germany is subjugated. Nine Kings of the several Nations have in the humblest
manner cast themselves at my Feet. Nay rather, I should say, it is at your
Feet. They all now Plow, and Sow for you; and they fight for you against the
rest of your Enemies. You will therefore appoint the Processions and
Thanksgivings to the Gods as usual. Four hundred thousand of the Enemy are
slain; and sixteen thousand others, with their Arms, are come into our Service.
Sixty Noble Cities are recovered out of the Slavery of the Enemy, and all
Gallia is entirely set at Liberty. The Crowns of Gold, which all the Cities of
Gallia have presented me with upon this occasion, I have remitted to you, my
Fathers, to be by your Hands Consecrated to the most Excellent, and most mighty
Jupiter, and the rest of the Immortal Gods and Goddesses. All the Spoil, which
they had taken from us, is retaken, and a great deal more and better to it. The
Fields of Gallia are plowed with the Cattle of the Barbarians, and the German
Beasts yield their Captive Necks to our Yoaks. All their Sheep graze now upon
our Pasture, and their Horse are with our Horse, and our Barns are full with
their Corn. What shall I say more? If we have left the bare Soil perhaps, it is
all: their Goods are all in our Possession. We have been sometime thinking, my
Fathers, to appoint a new President of Germany. But we have deferred it, as yet
to another opportunity, when the Divine Providence shall still further have
prospered our Arms.


From Gallia, he went into Illyricum, In his way to which he so secured and
established the Peace of Rhaetia, as not to leave the least suspi^ion of any
Danger from thence. In Illyri^um, His Conquest of the Sarmatians.
he so severely beat the Sarmatians, and others who had thrust themselves in
there, that ^e easily recovered all the Places and Spoil, which they possessed,
without almost making more War. He carried his Arms into Thrace and Dacia^
where all that Gothic People, affrighted with only the Fame of his Actions,
and seeing the ancient Power of the Empire revived in him, submitted to him,
and became his Friends. Then he went into the East, he took and slew, in his
way, a Robber, of great Power, called Palfrurius; which was a means of the
recovery of all the Province of Isauris in the Lesser Asia, to the Obedience of
the Laws of the Romans. He entered either by force or friendship into the Places
possessed by the Barbarians in that Province; and when he had done, he said, it
was a Country in which, it was easier to drive the Robbers that infested it,
from one place to another, than to extirpate them, and to rid the Country of
them. All the Avenues and Straights he gave to be enjoyed and inhabited by
Veterans, and Superannuated Soldiers, under a Law, that they should send their
Sons to the War at the Age of Eighteen, lest they take to be Robbers, before
they come to be Soldiers.

He reduced unto a peaceable subjection all His Eastern Expedition.
the parts of Pamphylia, and the other Provinces adjoining to Isauria, and so
followed his Journey into the East. He Conquered the Blemmyae, of whom he sent
some Prisoners to Rome, who were a wonderful Spectacle and an Admiration there
to all the People. The Cities of Coptos and Ptolemais in Egypt he took, and
delivered them from the Barbarian Yoke, and adjoined them to the Empire. The
Fame whereof wrought so upon the Persians, that they sent Ambassadors to him,
confessing the fears which they conceived of his Arms, and desiring a Peace. He
received those Ambassadors very proudly, and sent them home with worse
thoughts than they came. He refused the Presents, which they brought him from
the King their Master, and writ thereupon this Letter to Narseus, the Governor
of Armenia, for the King of Persia.

ALL that you have, will be mine; I wonder therefore, that you should think to
gratify me with such a Handful of things. You may please to take to your self
again, what you so much delight in: when we would have them, we know how we
ought to possess our selves of them.


This Letter was a matter of great Consternation to Narseus, especially as it
was accompanied with the News of the taking of the Cities of Coptos and
Ptolemais from the Blemmyae, and the putting those People to the Slaughter; who
before had made themselves a Terror to all their Neighbors.

After the Peace of Persia, Probus returned again into Thrace; where, upon the
Lands of the Roman Empire he planted one hundred thousand of the Bastarnae, who
all kept their Faith with him: but others of the Barbarian Nations, of whom he
transplanted great numbers in like manner, that is, of the Gepidi, the
Grothungi, and the Vandals, all these broke their Faith, and whilst Probus was
employed in the Wars with Saturninus, and those who pretended to Usurp the
Empire from him, they rose, and found a means to overrun almost all parts, by
Sea or Land, to the trouble and the dishonor of the Roman Name; till Probus at
length by several turns set upon them, overcame them, and oppressed them, and
left to few of them the happiness of getting home in safety.

These were his Actions with the Barbarians. His other Troubles were such, as
he suffered from the attempts of particular ambitious Subjects, who were for
setting themselves His intestine Troubles.
up for the Empire: one of whom was Saturninus, who usurped the Empire of the
East, and who engaged Probus in several Battles; till Probus by his known
Gallantry overcame him, and with the same Conquest established such a firm
Peace in the East, that not a Mouse dared to stir more there. The others who
pretended to the Empire in like manner, were Proculus and Bonosus at the City
of Cologne; who challenged to themselves all the Provinces of Britain, Spain,
and Gallia. But the Germans refused to assist them in their Enterprise. The
Arms of Probus prevailed over both these, of whom, as also of Saturninus and
Firmus, a more particular account will follow afterward by themselves. After
this, Probus permitted to all Gallia, Spain, and Pannonia, the liberty of
Planting Vines, and making Wine: he set his own Soldiers upon digging the
Mountain Almus, which is by the City Sirmium in the Lower Pannonia, and he
planted it himself with an excellent Grape.

Coming to Rome, he entertained the People His Return to Rome.
there with the Public Games and Pastimes in a manner which was very
magnificent; besides the Largesses, which he gave amongst them. He Celebrated a
Triumph for his Conquest of the Blemmyae, and the Germans in which he had
Troops, to the number of fifty in a Troop, of Men of all Nations that marched
before him. He gave an Entertainment of a Chase of Beasts in the Cirque, which
was very Generous. The People first Hunted, and then shared the Beasts amongst
them. The manner of it was thus; the whole Cirque was turned into the nature of
a Forest. Great Trees pulled up by the Roots by the Soldiers, were Planted up
and down, on Beams covered with Earth, the Trees green and fresh: and then by
the several Passages which opened into the Cirque, entered a thousand Ostriches,
a thousand Stags, a thousand Boars, a thousand Deer, Evecks, wild Sheep, and
other Herbatick Animals of as many kinds as could be had; all which the
Populace being let in upon them, encountered, and killed, and took every one
what they could. Another day he caused a hundred great Lions to enter into the
Cirque at once, who raised a sort of Thunder with their Roaring. All these were
killed upon the place, and in these Encounters many of the Men, that fought
with the Beasts, by accident have killed one another. Then came forth a hundred
Libyan Leopards, a hundred other Syrian Leopards, a hundred Lionesses, and
three hundred Bears; the sight of all which was not to be said so grateful, as
it was great. Next appeared three hundred couple of Gladiators, amongst which
were several of the Blemmyae, who had been led in Triumph, several Germans and
Sarmatians, and some also of the Robbers that had been taken and brought out of
the Province of Isauria.

After these things, as Probus was preparing for a War with Persia, and was
come, on his way, as far as to the City Sirmium in Sclavoni^, His Death and the
Occasion.
the Soldiers plotted together and killed him. The occasions whereof were
these. First because he never suffered them to lie idle: for he employed them
upon many other Works, besides those of the War, which he finished by their
Hands; and said, that Soldiers ought not to eat the Bread of the Country for
nothing. The next thing was, that he said, that he hoped in a short time he
would make it so, that the State should have no need of Soldiers. Which is a
great saying, and expresses an extraordinary force of Spirit. Have no more need
of Soldiers! Why, what is it but to say, that the Romans shall universally
Reign and Possess all things in safety? Secure of the whole Earth for their
Empire, there shall be no more of making Arms, nor gathering Magazines, nor
Convoying Provisions; the Ox shall be kept for the use of the Plow, and the
Horse for the Services of Peace; an Universal Peace! There shall be no more
Wars, no leading into Captivity; the Laws of the Romans and their Magistrates
shall every where prevail in vigor. My Affection to so excellen an Emperor
would Transport me further, than the Quality of the Style in which I write,
does require or permit. But I shall only add a third thing, which above all
hastened the Fatal End of this Great Man. When he came to Sirmium, desiring to
Fructisie and to Dilate the Borders of the place of his Nativity, he set
several thousands of his Soldiers upon the drayning a Fen; which was to be done
by making a great Fosse to receive the Waters, and exonerate them by an Outlet
into the Sea; and so the Ground might become of use to the People of Sirmium.
The Fatigue of this Piece of Work so enraged the Soldiers, that they assaulted
him; and as he fled for safety into an Iron Tower, which himself had built
there for a Watchtower very high, they killed him in the fifth year of his
Reign: however afterward the Army unanimously built him a lofty Sepulcher,
whereon in Marble was Ingraved this Inscription: Here lies the Emperor Probus;
who was a Prince of true Probity, according to his Name. The Conqueror of all
the Barbarian Nations, and the Conqueror of the Pretenders to the Empire in his
time.

When I compare the Emperor Probus with others of the Roman Princes his
Predecessors, and almost with all our Great Captains of the former time, whose
Fortitude; whose Clemency; whose Prudence; whose extraordinary Actions have
signalized them to Posterity. I am apt to think that this Person was equal to
them, or if I may speak it without envy, he excelled them. In the five years of
his Reign, he finished so many Wars, in so many several parts of the World, and
all in his own Person, that it is a wonderful thing, which way he rendered
himself sufficient for all those occasions. He did many Valiant Actions in
Battle with his own Hand. He formed several famous Commanders. Carus,
Dioclesian, Constantius, Asclepiodotus, Annibalian, Leonides, Cecropius,
Pisonianus, Herennian, Gaudiosus, Ursinian, Herculius, Maximian, and others
whom our Fathers have admired, and of whom some have since approved themselves
good Princes upon the Throne, were All formed by the Discipline of Probus. Now
let any one, who pleases, compare with this the twenty years of the Reigns of
Trajan and Hadrian: let him compare as many of the Antoninusses; or what shall
I say, of the Emperor Augustus, because the years of his Reign are scarce very
well determined? Not to mention all such as have been ill Princes! That famous
Expression alone of Probus, That in a short time there should be no need of
Soldiers, shows his vast design, and what he hoped to have been able to effect.
He feared neither the Barbarians abroad, nor Usurpers at home; he was assured
of his own Conscience. And to what a happiness had we all arrived, if he had
lived to make good his words? to have seen all the Provinces free from Taxes,
no Army to pay, the Roman Treasures abiding Eternal and unexhaustible, nothing
spent by the Prince, nothing taken upon the Subject! Certainly it would have
been a golden Age. We had had no more to do with Camps: no more of the noise of
Arms, nor of the Hammering them: The Soldiers that now disquiet the State with
Civil-War, would have Cultivated the Fields or followed Navigation, or sought
their Employs in the Arts, and no more blood shed! Ye good Gods, in what has
the Roman State offended you so, that have taken from us such an Excellent
Prince. We now run upon Civil-Wars, and Arm Brother against Brother, and the
Son against the Father: but well have our Emperors done to Consecrate Probus a
God, and set up his Image in the Temples, and to Celebrate him in the
Procession to the Games of the Cirque.

The Posterity of Probus, to avoid Odium or His Posterity withdraw from Rome.
Envy, retired from Rome and Public Business, and placed themselves about the
City Verona, and the Lakes di Garda and Como, and those parts. I cannot omit to
observe, that when an Image of Probus at Verona was so struck with Lightning,
that the Robe, in which he was done, changed its Color, the Soothsayers
answered thereupon, that those of his Family should be all of them one day of
great Note in the Senate, and come to be raised unto the highest Honors: which
may perhaps hereafter be; but we see nothing of it as yet.

The Senate received the News of the death of Probus with great displeasure,
and so did the People. But when they heard of the Succession of Carus in his
place, who though he was a good Man, was far distant however from the Merits of
Probus, and had a Son beside, ( Carinus) that had always lived ill; both the
Senate and the People were struck with a horror; because they apprehended the
humor of the Father a little; but his wicked Heir much worse.

This is what we have met with, and have thought worthy to be committed to
future Memory, concerning Probus. It remains, that we give next a short, but a
distinct account of Firmus, Saturninus, Bonosus, and Proculus. Because it was
not fit to mix those four Pretenders to the Empire, together with the account
of this good Prince. Afterward, if my Life serves me, I may undertake the
History of Carus and his Son.

FIRMUS.
IT is very seldom I know, that we find, that any particular Account is given
of such Petit Emperors, as Usurping that Name, have set up themselves in vain
against the Received Prince, in some parts or other of the Roman Empire. The
most that is done is to touch lightly upon them in a word, en Passant, after
the manner with which Suetonius Tranquillus contents himself, who is a very
Correct and very Candid Writer, in relation to Antonius and Vindex. Nor do I
admire at this in such an Historian as Suetonius, to whom it was familiar, to
love Brevity. But why Marius Maximus, who is the most Verbose of all Men, and
who has not forborne to embarass himself with tedious Accounts of things, and
to descend even to Fictions and Fables, to fill up his History; why he has not
been more particular than he is, in his Descriptions of Avidius Cassius,
Claudius Albinus, and Pescennius Niger, who pretended to the Empire, the first
against the Emperor Marcus Antoninus, the others against Septimius Severus, I
do not understand? On the contrary, Trebellius Pollio has thought fit to be so
diligent and so careful in his Collections as to those Princes, whether Good or
Bad, undertaken by him, that he has laid together a separate History of Thirty
Pretenders to the Empire, who set up themselves in, or much about the Times of
the Emperors Gallienus and Valerian. And in imitation of his Example, since I
have already passed through the Trouble of the Reigns of Aurelian, Tacitus,
Florianus, and that great and singular Prince Probus, I am very willing before
I proceed to those of Carus, Numerian, and Carinus, who succeeded the next to
the Empire, not to omit to say something of Firmus, Saturninus, Proculus, and
Bonosus, who set up themselves in the time of the Emperors Probus and Aurelian.

You know, my dear Bassus, what a Dispute we lately had with one, who is a
great lover of History, that is, M. Fonteius; when he said, that Firmus, who
possessed himself of Egypt in the time of Aurelian, was a Robber and not a
Prince. Against which, I, together with me Rufus Celsus, Cejonius Julianus,
Fabius Sosianus, and Severus Archontius, affirmed, that Firmus did both
actually wear the Purple, as a Prince, and had a Coin stamped in his Name,
whereof some Pieces were produced, and also by the Grecian and the Egyptian
Writings it appears, that in the Edicts which he published, he is remarked by
the Title of Emperor. The only Reason which Fonteius had to offer against this,
was; That Aurelian did not say in his Edict, speaking of Firmus, that he had
killed a Tyrant or a Pseudo Emperor, but that he had delivered the State of a
Robber. As if it could be expected, that so Renowned a Prince as Aurelian
should have given him any better Name. Or, as if all great Princes did not call
those Robbers, who Invade their Crowns, and are beaten besides in the Attempt.
Not but that, I remember very well, that in the Life of Aurelian, I have
represented Firmus, as one, who did not pretend to the Purple, as an Emperor.
For I must confess, that when I writ that, it was, because I had not then the
knowledge of all the things concerning him, which I have attained to since. But
to be short;

Firmus was a Native of the City of Seleucia. Several Grecian Writers do give
him to another place indeed; but that is a mistake, into which they are led by
this, that there are three at the same time of the same Name of Firmus; whereof
one was the Governor of Egypt; the other a Proconsul and a General on the
Frontiers of Africa: But this Firmus was a Friend and an Associate of the Lady
Zenobia; for whom he, with the assistance of the Egyptians, took the City of
Alexandria, and was at length happily defeated by Aurelian, and the wonted
bravery of that Prince.

There are many things reported of the Riches of this Firmus. It is said, that
he had the Walls Vast Wealth of Firmus.
of his House Wainscoted with Squares of Glass, fastened by Bitumen, and other
Medicaments. He was the Master of so much of the Manufacture of Paper, that he
often publicly said, he could maintain an entire Army out of only Paper and
Glue. He entertained a great Friendship with the Blemmyae and the Saracens. He
sent Ships of Merchandise oftentimes into India. He had two Elephant's Teeth,
ten Foot long; with which, and two others added to them, Aurelian who took
them, designed to make a Chair, wherein to place a Statue of Jupiter in Gold,
covered with Jewels and a Robe of State, and illustrated with Inscriptions:
Which Statue was to be set up in the Temple of the Sun, and to be entitled,
Jupiter the giver of Good Counsel. But Carinus afterward possessing himself of
those Teeth, made a Present of them to a certain Lady, who used them for the
Feet of a Bed. I say no more, because we of this Age know her; and for
Posterity, it it signifies nothing. But thus that Indian Rarity, which was
Consecrated to the most Excellent and Mighty Jupiter, was by a lewd Prince made
at once the Purchase of a Mistress, and the Scene of the Exercise of her too.

Firmus was of a large Stature, with great His Personage.
and prominent Eyes, frizled Hair, Scars and Wounds on his Face, a blackish
Visage, the rest of his Body fair enough, but Hairy and Bristly; so that a
great many called him a Cyclops. He eat a vast deal of Flesh; some say, a whole
Ostrich in a day. He drunk not much Wine, but very much Water; and was a Man of
a strong Brain and so robust Nerves, that one might allow him to be stronger
than the Gladiator Tritannus in Varro. For he would bear a Smith's Anvil, with
Persons with all their force knocking upon it, upon his Breast, as he lay bent
in his Body backwards, and only resting upon his Hands and Feet, without
touching the ground with his Back. There was once a dispute betwixt him and
some of the Officers of Aurelian about Drinking. Burburus, a most noted
Drinker, and an old Soldier, challenged him to Drink with him. Firmus drank up
two large Vessels full of Wine, and remained all the time after sober. Says
Burburus to him, Why have you not drank up the very Grounds too? You silly
Creature, answered Firmus, no body drinks Earth.

This Firmus therefore assumed to himself the Quality of an Emperor, in
opposition to Aurelian; and maintained the Parts which as yet were remaining to
Zenobia in the East. Aurelian beat him, in his return from Heren in
Mesopotamia. Some say, Firmus afterward Hanged His Defeat and Death.
himself. But this is disproved by the Edict of Aurelian, which he sent to
Rome, together with the Notice of his Victory, which was thus.

The Emperor Aurelian to his most dearly beloved People of Rome, sends
Greeting.
WE have reduced all the Parts of the Roman World whatever, unto a peaceable
subjection to us. Firmus the Egyptian Robber, who was in motion with a Company
of Barbarians, and was gathering up the relics of the Forces of Zenobia, in
short, we have defeated, taken him, and killed him. There is nothing more for
you, my Romans, now to be afraid of. The Tribute of Egypt, which that wicked
Robber had suspended, will now come entire to you. Be you at Concord with the
Senate, and in good Amity with the Gentry, and the Soldiers of the Guards. I
will take care, that nothing shall hurt you. Entertain your selves at the
Pastimes and the Shows of the Cirque. Follow your Pleasures, whilst we are
taken up with the Necessities of the State. Wherefore, my most Excellent
Romans, and so he goe^ on with his Edict.


This, Sir, is what you may know, we have collected, that is worthy of
Remembrance, concerning Firmus. If you would desire to understand further all
the light and frivolou^ things which Aurelius Festivus, a Servant of the
Emperor Aurelian, has written of him, I must refer you to read that Author
your self. I come next to Saturninus, who set up for the Empire against Probus,
in the Parts of the East.

SATURNINUS.
SATURNINUS was by Nation a Frenchman, who are a most Unquiet sort of People,
and always ambitious of setting up for Empire.

This Man, being known to Aurelian to be an excellent Commander, was preferred
by that Emperor to be the General on the Oriental Frontier. At the same time he
wisely commanded him, never to see Egypt. For reflecting, as it is thought,
upon the Nature of the Gauls on the one hand, and of the Egyptians on the
other, he was afraid, that should Saturninus come amongst so troublesome a
People as those of the Egyptians, he might by their Conversation be spurred on
to those Attempts, to which his French Genius it self enough inclined him.

The Egyptians, you know very well, are a Character of the Egyptians.
Ventose, Outrageous, Proud, Injurious sort of People, Loose, Libertines,
lovers of Novelties; they will dare to sing Seditious Songs publicly in the
Streets; Versifiers upon the Persons of their Princes and Magistrates;
Astrologers, Soothsayers, Empiricks, sometimes Christians, sometimes Jews,
always displeased with the present Times, against which they give themselves a
strange Liberty. I would not have any Egyptian to blame me for this Character,
nor think that I write it of my own head; for I will insert here a Letter of
the Emperor Hadrian, which I have met with in the Books of Phlegon, who was a
Servant to him, that fully detects the Lives of the Egyptians.

The Emperor Hadrian unto Servianus the Consul, Greeting.
I Have given my self a perfect Understanding of Egypt; which you, my well
beloved Servianus, did sometime recommend to me. They are a light inconstant
People, always in suspenc^, and changing at every stroke of Fame. Those, who
Worship the God Serapis, are nevertheless Christians; and Men who call
themselves the Bishops of Christ, are Votaries to Serapis too. Then is no Ruler
of the Synagogues of the Jews, no Samaritan, no Presbyter of the Christians, no
Astrologer, no Soothsayer, no Physician, but he Worships Serapis. The Patriarch
himself of Alexandria^ when he comes hither, is by some obliged to adore
Serapis, by others to adore Christ. A sort of Me^ they are, extremely
Seditious, Vain and Injurious: Alexandria it self is Splendid, Rich, and
Fruitful; no body lives Idle in it. Some make Glass, others Paper; others work
on Linen: every on^ appears to be of one Art or other. Not so much a^ the
Gouty, either in Hand or Foot, but are employed, and have something that they
do. The Blin^ are employed. Serapis is a common God to them all. Him the
Christians, the Jews, and Persons of all Nations Worship. I wish that it was a
better governed City. It deserves certainly, by its Populousness and Magnitude,
to hold the Reins of all Egypt. I have granted to this City all things. I have
restored it to its ancient Privileges, and have added new ones to them; for
which they thanked me, whilst I was present with them; but I was no sooner.
departed, but they spoke a thousand things against my Son Aelius Verus, and
what they have said concerning Antinous, I believe you have heard. So I leave
them to their Eggs and Chickens; which how they Hatch, that is in a Dunghill, it
is a shame almost to mention. I have sent you three Egyptian Cups of
changeable Colors, which a Priest of the Temple made a Present of to me. I
dedicate them particularly to you and my Sister: I would have you to use them
upon the Festival Days, and take care that your young Son does not handle them
too roughly and break them.


So the Emperor Aurelian reflecting upon this various and unsteady Temper of
the Egyptians, commanded Saturninus not to come amongst them, to avoid the
consequences which he foresaw, might follow upon it, if he did. In which he was
in the right. For no sooner did the Egyptians see him afterward in Power, in
the time of Probus, but they cried, We make Saturninus Emperor, The Gods save
your Majesty. It is true, he prudently retired presently from Alexandria again,
and went into Palestina. But finding there, that it was not safe for him to
live after this in the Quality of a private Man, he suffered the Soldiers that
were about him to put upon him the Purple, and adore him as Emperor. The Purple
was a Cloak, taken off for the purpose of a Statue of Venus. My Grandfather was
in the Company when he was Adored: I have often heard him speak of it.
Saturninus, he said, wept, and expressed himself thus:

If I may speak it without Arrogance, the Government has lost an useful
Subject. It is certain, I have re-established Gallia. I have recivered Africa
out of the possession of the Moors. I have appeased Spain. But what is this? It
is all lost, and the Merit of it will be abolished by this one Honor, which
you unhappily affect to give me.

The Company that was about him, animating him on to the Enterprise, he said;

You know not, my Friends, what a troublesome thing it is to be a Prince? Drawn
Swords by nothing but a Hair hang over our Heads; every where Poniards and
Darts threaten us. Our Guards, our Companions themselves are feared by us. We
eat not our Meat with pleasure, and we are forced to Wars and Arms, many times,
contrary to our Judgments. Whatever one's Age is, to be sure, it meets with
Reproaches upon the Throne. Is a Man Old? he is disabled, and past Service. Is
he Young? he is Wild and Rash. What shall I say of Probus, who is so
universally Amiable? For whilst you make me Rival to him, to whom I willingly
Cede, and whose Officer I desire rather to be, you draw me into a necessity of
Destruction. I shall have only this Comfort, that I cannot perish alone.

This, says M. Salvidienus, was truly his Speech. Indeed he was one, who had no
small knowledge of Letters. He had studied Rhetoric in Africa, and at Rome he
had frequented the public Academies. To be short, I see some are mistaken
about him, to think, that he was the Saturninus who pretended to the Empire in
the time of Gallienus, whereas this was altogether another Person. This
Saturninus was set up in the time of Probus, and killed against almost the
inclinations of that Prince. For Probus writ several kind Letters to him, and
promised him his Pardon. But the Soldiers who were about him, would not give
him leave to hearken to those Offers. So the Party of Probus, which was sent
against him, besieged Saturninus slain.
him in some Castle in which he was, and killed him in the Action. It would be
tedious to descend to all the particulars of his Stature, his Person, his
Shape, his Eating and Drinking, which others may, that please, trouble
themselves about, though the Example of them scarce signifies any thing. But I
shall proceed to the following Account of Proculus and Bonosus.

PROCULUS.
PROCVLUS was a Native of the City of Albenga, in the Republic of Genoa,
amongst the Maritime Alps; of a Gentleman's His Extraction and Wealth.
Family: but as well himself, as his Ancestors, were great Robbers; so that
what with the Cattle, the Slaves, and such things as he had gotten by that
means, he was very Rich. It is said, that at that time that he took upon him
the Empire, he Armed two thousand of his own Slaves.

He had a Virago to his Wife, who precipitated him into the Madness of putting
up for the Empire. Her Name was at first Viturgia; afterward she was called
Sampson. They had a Son called Herennianus; to whom if Proculus could have
supported himself in his Enterprise but five Years, he said, he would have
secured the Empire after him.

It cannot be denied, but that Proculus was an extraordinary and a very brave
Man; and had always passed his Life under Arms. He had Commanded in the Quality
of a Tribune over several Legions, and had done Actions of great Valor. Not to
omit a pleasant Passage, which he glories in, in the following Letter, which I
had rather give you in his own words, than represent it my self.

Proculus to Maetianus his Kinsman, wishes Health
I Have taken Captive out of the Country of Sarmatia one hundred Virgins. Ten
of which I lay with in one Night. To the best of my power, in fifteen days, I
have made Women of them all.


This is a Ridiculous Action you see, and extremely Libidinous, and yet he
glories in it, and reckons as a fine thing, what was otherwise his Crime.
However, being, notwithstanding his Wickedness and his Lewdness, a considerable
Officer, and one that acquitted himself always with great Courage, the Colony
of Lions in France, who had been severely Treated by the Emperor Aurelian, and
were very much afraid again of Probus, soliciting him to it, he set himself up
to be Emperor. Onesimus says, which I do not remember that I have read in any
one else, That he was made Emperor in Raillery, as it were, first at a Game of
Chess. For being one day at an Entertainment, at Play at Chess, in which he
went out King ten times, one of the Company who wanted not Wit, saluted him
upon it as Emperor, and said, The Gods save your Majesty. And setching him a
piece of Purple, put it upon him, and then Adored him. This gave occasion to
the Company that was privy to it, to join with him, and they went next to gain
the Army, and so set up for the Empire.

Proculus was not a little serviceable to the Gauls. For though he never
fought, but in the way of the Brigundages, which he continually committed, he
gained himself and them some glory over the Germans.

Probus coming against him, and ready to drive him almost out of the World, he
desired to take Refuge in the assistance of the Frank; from whom he pretended
to derive his Original. But as it is familiar with the Franks to break their
Faith, and make no more than a Jest of it, they betrayed him, and so Probus He
is slain.
overcame him and slew him. His Posterity are at this time living at Albenga,
who in raillery will often say, that they neither like being Robbers, nor
Princes. So much concerning Proculus.

BONOSUS.
BONOSUS was of a House of Spain, His Extraction.
but Born in Britain. His Mother a Gaulese or a French Woman. His Father either
a Professor in Rhetoric, as he (the Son) said, or as I have found from others,
a Grammarian; who dying when this his Son was very young, his Mother, who was a
Woman of Wit, educated him and taught him something of Letters.

He served as a Soldier first in the Foot, and afterward in the Horse. He rose
to be a Centurion, then to be a Tribune, and at last to be the General on the
Frontier of Rhaetia.

No Man ever drank like Bonosus. The Emperor Aurelian said often of him. That
His Ability at Drinking.
certainly he was born, not to say to Live, but particularly to live to Drink.
That Emperor however long had him in esteem, because of his experience in the
matter of War. And when any Ambassadors arrived from the Barbarian Nations of
what Parts soever, it was the business of Bonosus to drink with them, till in
their drink he discovered out of them many times their secrets. For Bonosus,
let him drink to what excess he would, was never concerned: But on the
contrary, as Onesimus says in his Life of Probus, he was even the more prudent
and more discreet for drinking. Withal he had this particular Quality with him,
that as much as he drank, it passed from him again. It never was any burden to
his Stomach, or his Belly, or his Bladder.

It happening one time, that the Germans had burnt the Shipping which the
Romans used upon the River Rhine, Bonosus, to avoid the punishment which he
feared for his Neglect in that matter, set up himself Emperor. He supported
himself with that Quality longer than it was well to be expected. He engaged
His Defeat and Death.
the Emperor Probus in a severe Battle: but being overcome, he Hanged himself;
and they Jested upon him, and said, It is a Hogshead, and not a Man, that hangs
here.

He left two Sons, and a Wife. The Sons, Probus forgave. The Wife he was very
obliging to, and allowed her a Pension to her death. For besides, that she was
a Woman, as my Grandfather has said, of Wit and of singular Merit; she was a
Princess of the Royal Blood of the Goths, and one whom the Emperor Aurelian had
purposely married to Bonosus, that through her and him he might the better
penetrate into all the Affairs of the Goths. I will give you here a Letter of
Aurelian written to the Lieutenant of Thrace, concerning that Marriage, and the
Presents which Aurelian gave upon this occasion.

The Emperor Aurelian to Gallio Avitus, Greeting.
I Writ to you in my last, to Assemble the Persons of Quality of the Goths, at
the City of Heracla, for whom I have ordered an Entertainment. For I have a
mind that Hunila shall be Married to Bonosus. You shall present the Bride with
all things, according to the underwritten Order, and you shall Celebrate the
Nuptials out of the Public Money.


The Presents were, Fine Gowns of a Violet Color, of Silk: one of Silk,
embroidered with Gold. Two fine Smocks, and all such other things as are proper
for a Lady of Quality. You shall give her one hundred Philips in Gold, One
thousand Antonines in Silver, and Ten thousand Sesterces in Brass.

This is what I remember, that I have read as to Bonosus. I might have omitted
all these four last Persons, and perhaps no body would have missed them. But
because I would not be wanting in any thing to my Trust, I have taken the care
of intimating as much as I have been able to learn, concerning these also.

The remaining Princes, are Carus, Numerianus and Carinus: For as for
Dioclesian and those that follow, it is fit, that they should be Represented by
a better Pen than mine.

THE A. Christi Cclxxxiii.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR CARUS.
BY FLAVIUS VOPISCUS.
HOW the Power of Fate reigns over the Commonwealth of Rome, and sometimes
raises it to the greatest height, and then humbles it again, and throws it
down as much the other way; the Death of the Emperor Probus is a sufficicient
demonstration. Probus had succeeded to the Empire after Aurelian, by the joint
Voice of the Senate and the People; and whilst the Laws and the Government were
lodged in so just a Hand, we seemed secure, considering that we had now enjoyed
a few good Reigns together of a continued Series of Happiness to relieve the
State, after all the different Calamities, and after so many changes of Fortune
with which it had been tossed and varied in the course of time, in that manner,
that it has suffered almost all the Events which are incident to any Man, by
the Mortality of his Nature.

But by a fatal Passion of the Soldiers, this so acceptable Emperor, Probus,
was cut off; whose loss was so great, that we were no less struck at it, than a
Man in a Fire or in a Shipwreck; and the Public was reduced to that despair,
as that every one feared the Succession of some Domitian, Vitellius or Nero in
his place. It is natural at any time rather to have Fears than Hopes from the
manners of an uncertain Prince: But especially well might a People do so, whose
Wounds were yet green, and who not long since had had one of their Emperors (
Valerian) carried into Captivity; another ( Gallienus) given up to Luxury, and
about Thirty pretended Princes, in the mean time starting up, and rending the
Empire in Pieces by a Civil War, according as every one challenged the
Sovereignty to himself.

If we take a view of the Changes which the Commonwealth of Rome has suffered
from the Foundation of the City, we shall find, that never any People has
flourished more by good Fortune, nor yet labored under worse. Romulus to begin
with him, our true Father, Various Fortune of Rome under different Princes.
who as I may say, begat, founded, constituted, and confirmed this State, had
the singular Happiness above all other Founders to leave a perfect City. Numa
afterward added Triumphs to this City by his victorious Arms, and at the same
time strengthened it with Laws of Religion. So we flourished to the time of
Tarquin the proud; and then a Storm fell upon us, occasioned by the arbitrary
Vices of that King, which we revenged; but it was not without much hazarding
our own Ruin. From thence we passed and increased to the War of the Gauls,
when we were overrun with a Flood of the Enemy, the City of Rome, excepting
only the Capitol taken; and we suffered well nigh more hurt now, than we ever
enjoyed good, since our very Foundation. However, our Commonwealth recovered
itself from this Blow; but yet it was so plagued with the Carthaginian Wars,
and the Terror of King Pyrrhus, that it could not be at any rest for its
miserable Fears. At length, we conquered Carthage, and extended our Empire far
beyond the Seas; the Sense of which Felicity was extenuated to us, by our
Social Discords, and our Civil Wars, under which we spent our time, unto
Augustus Caesar, who repaired the State for us anew, if we may call that yet a
Reparation, which was wrought at the Expense of our Liberty. However it is,
although we were sometime troubled at home, amongst foreign Nations our Name
flourished; and after several ill Emperors that afflicted us, the State lifted
up its Head again under Vespasian. The Happiness of Titus was no sooner enjoyed
than lost; to whom succeeded the cruel Domitian, whose Wounds went deep. Under
Nerva and Trajan, and so to Marcus Antoninus, our Condition was better than
ordinary; but then came the mad and cruel Commodus, and excepting in the Reign
of Septimius Severus, the State received no good from all its Princes, from
thence unto Severus the Son of Mammaea. It would be tedious to recount all the
following History: Valerian was cast out of a Capacity of being enjoyed.
Gallienus afflicted us fifteen Years. Fortune, who loves variety, and is almost
always an Enemy to Virtue; envied Claudius a long Reign; and thus Aurelian,
thus Tacitus, thus Probus were ^ut off and destroyed; that we may see, there ^s
nothing so grateful to Fortune, as to turn things of the most public Nature
and Consequence variously upside down.

But why do I complain of these Matters ^ere, and delay my self upon such
inconstan^ies of the times? I come to the Emp^ror Carus, who was a Prince, as I
may say, of a middle Character; but rather to be placed among the Good, than
the ill ones; and he ^ould have been much better, if he had not ^eft such an
Heir as Carinus.

The Country of the Nativity of Carus is Birthplace of Carus uncertain,
(...) ambiguously reported by a great many, that ^ cannot be precise to
determine, on whose (...)de the Truth lies. Onesimus, who has writ^en the Life
of Probus very carefully, says, (...)at he was both born, and brought up to
Letters at Rome; but that his Parents were of the Province of Illyricum. Fabius
Cyrillianus, who has taken no less Pains about the History of the times of
Carus, Numerianus, and Carinus says, that he was not born at Rome, but in
Illyricum; and not there of Illyrian, but of Carthaginian Parents. Now I
remember I have seen in some Journal, that he was a Milanese born; but by his
Grandfather incorporated into the City of Aquileia. Himself, it cannot be
denied, pretended as if he was of Roman Blood, as the following Letter shows,
which when he was a Proconsul, he writ to his Lieutenant, re-minding him of his
Duty.

Marcus Aurelius Carus the Proconsul of Cilicia, to Junius his Lieutenant.
OUR Ancestors, the great Men amongst the Romans, have observed a Custom in the
creating their Lieutenants, to give the World a Specimen of their own Manners
by those of whom they make Choice to act under them in the Service of the
Government. But yet if this Custom had not been, I had done no otherwise than I
have in my Choice of you. At the same time, I have observed this Custom too,
unless you deceive me. You will please to take care, that you do not make us
different from our Roman Ancestors.


His Speech which he first sent to the Senate, after he was created Emperor,
signifies the same thing. A part if it was thus.

IT may be a Matter of some Joy to you, Fathers of the Senate, that one out of
your own Order, and also of your own Original is preferred to be Emperor. It
shall not be by my means, that Strangers and Foreigners shall make better
Princes, than those who are chosen out of you.


Through the several degrees of Offices in the Army and the Civil List; this
Person came (as the Titles upon his Statues show) to be the Captain of the
Guards to the Emperor Probus; in which Post, he gained himself so much the
Hearts of the Soldiers, that after Probus was killed, they thought him the Man
the most worthy of the Succession. Not that I am insensible, that several have
suspected, that Probus was killed by an Intrigue of Carus. But, as Carus did
constantly and severely revenge ^he Death of that Prince, so neither the
Manners of Carus, nor the Obligations which were said upon him by his Master,
will suffer me to give Credit to such a Suspicion. The Honors which Probus did
him, and the Opinion which he had of him, you may read in this Letter to the
Senate.

The Emperor Probus to his entirely beloved Senate wishes Health.
AMongst other things, he says, happy would it be for our Empire, if we had
many more such Persons to execute the public Offices, as Carus is, or as a
great many also of you. I desire that his Statue, if you please, may be set up
on Horseback, to the Honor of a Man who is comparable to the Ancients; and
also that a House may be built for him at the public Charge; the Marble
whereof shall be provided by me. It is fit, that we should so reward the
Integrity of such a Person. And so he goes on.


In short, not to multiply things of lesser moment, and such as are to be found
elsewhere, as soon as Carus had entered upon the Empire, he with the Consent of
all the Army prosecuted the Design of the Persian War, which had been
enterprised by Probus. To his two Sons Numerianus and Carinus, he gave the
Title and Power of Caesar's; the latter of which, he sent with chosen Persons to
the Government of Gallia. The former, who was a very sweet and ingenious Youth,
he took along with himself. He often afterward repented of sending Carinus
into Gallia; and he would much rather have sent Numerianus, only he was not of
an Age sufficient, because it is a place which especially requires a steady
Governor; for he was displeased with the Manners of Carinus, and complains of
him in a Letter to the Captain of the Guards, insomuch that he really had it
sometimes in his mind, what Onesimus says, to depose him for his ill deserts,
from his Caesarean Dignity again.

Carus served himself of the great Preparations and all the Force of Probus for
the Wars, which he had before him. He dispatched first in great part, that with
the Sarmatians; and then marching against the Persians, without any opposition,
he took the Country of Mesopotamia, and came as far as to the City of
Ctesiphon; whilst the Persians were engaged at home with their domestic
Seditions. This gave him the Title of Conqueror of the Persians. He was in
himself greedy of Glory, but his Captain of the Guards spurred him further on
to it, seeking the Destruction both of him and his Son, because he coveted to
succeed in the Empire after them. So being for extending the progress of his
Arms even beyond Ctesiphon, he marched and died presently after; some say of
Sickness, others, Death of Carus.
that he was struck dead with Thunder and Lightning. It is true, that at that
time, there arose on a sudden such a vast Tempest with dreadful Lightning and
more dreadful Thunder, that several were almost killed with only the Fright.
But as for the real manner of the Death of Carus, the Letter following of
Junius Calphurnius, one of his Secretaries, written to the Governor of the
City of Rome, gives this Account of it.

AS Carus, says he, our truly dear Prince lay sick in his Tent, on a sudden
there arose such a Hurricane and a Strom, that all things darkened, and we
could not discern one another. Then followed Thunder and Lightning, like the
continued falling of fiery Meteors from Heaven, which astonished us so, that we
did not know what we did, nor where we were. However, on a sudden, it was
cried, the Emperor was dead, which happened just after the greatest clap of
Thunder, that had frightened all. The Servants of the Emperor's Bedchamber, in
grief for his Death, set Fire to his Tent. The Flame whereof joined with the
Lightning, occasioned a Discourse, that he was killed with the Lightning. But
as much as I know of the matter, I think it is certain, that it was of his
illness, that he died.


I have the rather inserted this Letter, because it is often said, that by a
certain Power of Fate, the Roman Emperors are restrained from passing beyond
the City of Ctesiphon; and that Carus was for that Reason destroyed by
Lightning, because he offered to transgress that limit. But let timidity cover
it self under what Arts it pleases, the Brave will despise them. The most
excellent Caesar, Maximian, does not, nor will ever think it unpermitted to him
to conquer the Persians, and to penetrate beyond them too; which I am of
Opinion, he will effect, if we be not wanting ourselves to the promised Favor
of the Gods.

There are many things which speak Carus a good Prince, and amongst the rest
this; that presently after he was possessed of the Empire, the Sarmatians who
were grown so insolent upon the Death of Probus, as to menace not only
Illyricum, but Thrace and Italy with an Invasion, these Men he so dereated; and
broke chiefly by his Policy, that in a few days he settled the Security of
Pannonia, killed sixteen Thousand of the Enemy, and took twenty Thousand more
of both Sexes Prisoners.

This I presume, may be enough to say as to Carus.

Let us pass on next to Numerianus: For though Carinus was both the elder
Brother, and the elder Caesar, yet it is necessary to discourse of Numerianus
the first, in as much as he was the nearest at that time to his Father, and
followed his Death; and his Story also is something the more admirable, because
of his Father-in-Law Aper. After him will follow that of Carinus, with whom the
Emperor Dioclesian fought several Battles, and had the Fortune at last to kill
him.

NUMERIANUS, CAESAR.
BY FLAVIUS VOPISCUS.
NUMERIANUS, the Son of Carus, was a Person extremely well disposed, as to his
Manners, and truly worthy of the Empire.

He had a singular Genius for Eloquence, His Parts and Learning.
both in Prose and in Verse. He declaimed in Public, and was the Author of
several things extant, which are Noble in that kind. In Verse he exceeded all
the Poets of his Age. He disputed the Bays with the famous Olympius Nemesianus;
and he as far outdid the Iambicks of Aurelius Apollinaris, as the Sun outshines
every thing else. A Speech which he once sent unto the Senate, was filled with
so much Eloquence, that they Voted him a Statue, to be set up in the Ulpian
Library, not as to a Caesar, but as an Orator. The Inscription was, To
Numerianus Caesar, the most Powerful Orator of his Time.

Accompanying his Father to the Persian War, he created himself a Sickness with
the excessive grief, which he took at his Death; which gave an opportunity to
Arrius Aper, his Father-in-Law, to kill him as he was in a Litter, He is
murdered.
by which Aper designed to mount the Throne himself in his stead. He kept the
Murder private for several days; telling the Soldiers, when they enquired about
his Health, that Numerianus was not to be seen, because he was obliged to keep
out of the Wind and the Sun for his sore Eyes, which he had; till at last the
Body stinking, and the Treachery of Aper not being possible to be longer
concealed, they took him and brought him to the Head of the Army; where after a
great Harangue upon the occasion, and a Tribunal raised, it was proposed, who
should be the just Avenger of the Death of Numerianus, and who the Prince to
succeed to the Throne. All with a Divine Consent cried, Dioclesian, who then
Commanded the Forces of the Household, and had received before already many
Presages of his future Reign.

Dioclesian was a Personage of great Note, politic, well affected to the
State, a lover of his Friends, prepared for all Events as occasion required;
his Counsels always raised, yet never Extravagant nor Impudent, because he
stifled within him the Motions of his unquiet Breast, with an extraordinary
Obstinacy. He mounting the Tribunal, and being proclaimed Emperor, the Question
next was, How Numerianus was Killed? Aper, who had been the Captain of the
Guards, stood by. Dioclesian drew his Sword, and striking it through the Body
of Aper upon the place, said, This is the His Death revenged.
Author of the Death of Numerianus. So Aper was served but as his Actions
deserved. My Grandfather has told me, that he was in the Company, when
Dioclesian killed him with his own Hand; and he said, as Dioclesian made the
Blow, he cried to Aper, Be proud, that you fall by so great a Hand as mine.

It is Matter of Curiosity, and not commonly known, I mean the Story, which is
proper to be told in this place, of a Presage that happened to Dioclesian, of
his Elevation to the Empire. My Grandfather has told me, that he received it
from Dioclesian himself. When Dioclesian served at the City of Tongres in the
Netherlands, where he was then a young Soldier, and in an inferior Post,
talking with a Woman who was a Druid, about his daily Expenses at the Inn in
which he lodged, says she to him, Dioclesian, you are too Covetous, you are too
good a Manager: Dioclesian in jest answered, But I will be Generous when I am
an Emperor. Says she, Dioclesian, you need make no Jest of it: Yes, yes, you
will be an Emperor, but you must first kill a Boar. From that time Dioclesian
always had thoughts in his mind of the Empire, as both Maximian and my
Grandfather knew; to whom he himself told this Story; and laughed at it, but
not a word to any body else. Therefore in Hunting, wherever he could, he always
killed the Boars with his own hand: so when Aurelian, Tacitus, Probus, and
Carus, were all made Emperors before him, says he, I always kill the Boars, but
another runs away with the Dish and the sweet Bit. But when he had killed Aper,
which is a Latin Name for a Boar, Now, says he, at last I have killed the Fatal
Boar. And my Grandfather has said, that Dioclesian declared, that he had no
other reason for killing Aper with his own hand, but to fulfill the Saying of
the Druid, and strengthen himself in the Empire: for otherwise, especially upon
the first day of his Reign, he did not desire to appear so Cruel, if such a
Necessity had not thereunto compelled him.

Now I come to Carinus.

THE A Christi Cclxxxiii.
Life and Reign OF THE EMPEROR CARINUS.
BY FLAVIUS VOPISCUS.
CARINUS was one of the impurest of Men. I am ashamed to repeat, what Onesimus
has written of him. An Adulterer, vicious with Boys whom he frequently
debauched, and passive in an Act which is it self contrary to the Nature of his
Sex.

His Father, going to the Persian War, left him to be the Governor over
Gallia, Italy, Illyricum, Spain, Britain, and Africa, under the Title of a
Caesar, but with the full Power of an Emperor. In this Government he strangely
dishonored himself with enormous Vices and Actions. All the best Persons about
him, His filthy Vices and Luxuries.
he banished; and took and kept others in their room, who were of the worst of
Mankind. He made one of his Porters the Governor of the City of Rome, than
which nothing can be thought nor mentioned, more shameful. The Captain of the
Guards, which he had, he killed, and into his place he put Matronianus, an old
Pimp. His Secretary, another of his Pimps, who was always privy to his Lusts,
and assisted him in them, he made a Consul against the express Orders of the
Emperor his Father. He writ haughty Letters to the Senate; threatened to give
away their Estates amongst the Mob of the City. He married Nine Wives, taking
one and putting away another; several of which he put away big with Child. He
filled the Court with Mimicks, Courtezans, Actresses, Singers and Pimps. He
disdained the signing of Dispatches himself; so that he kept a wretch who was
his Jester, always at Noons, to sign them for him; and many times he played
upon him agreeably for imitating his hand well. He wore Jewels upon his Shoes;
never wore a Button, but what was of a Jewel. His Belt was often set with
Jewels. He never did the Consuls or the great Officers of the State, the Honor
to step to meet them coming. The Lewd were much in his Favor, and always
invited to his Table. He had ordinarily a hundred Pound of Birds, the same of
Fish, and a thousand of Flesh of several sorts at a Meal. He spent a great deal
of Wine. He swam (as I may say) amongst Fruits and Melons. He strewn his
Chambers and his Beds with Roses. His hot water Baths, when he bathed, were no
more than Lukewarm. His cold Baths were of Snow-water. Coming in the Winter to
a place where there was a Spring of very warm Water, as it naturally uses to be
the warmer in the Winter, and the Bath being supplied with the same, says he to
the Waiters, You give me here Woman's Water; which (they say) was one of best
things he ever said. It would be tedious to tell at large the rest of his
Luxuries. Fulvius Asprianus has also already done it: Let the Reader who
desires to know every thing so particularly go to him. The Emperor Carus his
Father, when he heard how he behaved himself, disowned him, and cried, He is
none of mine. And had he lived, he would have deprived him of his Caesarean
Dignity and Power again. Onesimus says, he would have put him to Death, and
advanced Constantius to his place, who was then the President of Dalmatia, and
was afterward made Caesar, than whom no Man was fitter for that Honor.

Carinus, after both his Father and his Brother were dead, and Dioclesian was
set up to be Emperor, gave himself more than ever to Vice and Extravagance, as
if he was now more free, and eased of the Ties of the Examples and domestic
Admonitions of his Family. However, he wanted not the Vigor of mind to
challenge the Empire. He fought for it against Dioclesian several Battles. In
the last He is defeated and slain.
of which, a Town in Maesia, he was conquered and killed.

This was the end of these Three Princes, Carus, Numerian, and Carinus. The
Gods have given to us, since them, the Emperors Dioclesian and Maximian, to
whom they have worthily joined Galerius and Constantius, whereof the former was
born, to deface the ignominy of the Captivity of Valerian, and the other to
restore Gallia to the Obedience of the Romans. These are the four great Princes
of the World, Valiant, Wise, Benign, Generous, of one Sentiment for the Good
and Interests of the State, always reverencing the Senate, Moderate, Friends of
the People, Grave, Good, Religious, and such in fine, as we have ever prayed to
have; whose Lives are severaliy written by Claudius Eusthenius, sometime
Secretary to Dioclesian, which I therefore mention, because I would not that so
great a Work should be expected from me, considering the Difficulty of speaking
upon living Princes, blameless.

One thing yet is very memorable in the Government of the Emperor Carus, and of
his two Sons, Numerian, and Carinus. They adorned the Public Games, with which
they entertained the People before they went to the Persian War, with Shows
altogether new and strange, which we see are painted upon a Gallery in a part
of the Palace, to continue the memory of them to Posterity. There was a
Rope-Dancer, who seemed, as if he moved or Strange Shows made to the People.
flew in the Air; the Cord on which he danced was so very small, you could
scarce see it. Another Man ran upon the edge of a Wall with Dancing Bears at
his Heels. There was a Symphony of a hundred Trumpets, a hundred Haut-Boys, a
hundred Pipes, a hundred Flutes, with Voices to them; a thousand Pantomimes,
who danced all sorts of Anticks; others, that were Wrestlers, Runners, Leapers.
There was an Engine which represented the Burning of Towns, the Flames whereof
taking hold on a part of the Amphitheatre, Dioclesion afterward repaired it,
and made it more Magnificent. Mimicks from all Countries, were provided to be
here. Then there was a sport performed by the Sarmatian Captives of Vaulting
upon Horses, which is as pleasant as any thing in the World. Then there were
those that acted the Cyclopaean Postures; and all these Musicians, Players,
Sports men, and the Grecian Artists had Gold and Silver given them, and
Garments of Silk. I cannot tell how much the People are ingratiated by such
kind of things. But sure I am, that several other good Emperors have made no
great Account of them. Dioclesian, when an Officer commended to him these very
Theatrical and Circensian Games of Carus, replied only, Then Carus had laughing
enough in his time. And when Dioclesian himself exhibited his Games according
to the Custom, he was much more sparing in the Liberty which he took, and in
the Expense which he was at; he said, those Diversions ought to be Chaste and
Modest, considering the presence at least of the Censor.

Now I leave this last Passage to be read by Junius Messala, whom I dare be
free to blame upon this occasion. Because he has spent all his Estate upon
Players, and denied it to his own Heirs. A Gown of his Mother's he gave away to
one, a Coat of his Father's to another; a Garment of his Wife's, of Purple,
embroidered in Gold, on which her Name was wrought, he gave to a Piper, who
triumphs in it, as in a Spoil of the Nobility of the Donor. What shall I say of
the Linens from Egypt? The bright Tyrian and Sydonian Purples, embroidered with
admirable Art and Pains? The fine Stuffs from Arras, the Russets of Canosa, and
other Clothes from Africa? Riches which were never seen upon the Stage before!
I am willing to speak all this to the World, purposely, that the Gentlemen who
give those Public Sports for the future, may be a little ashamed to spend
their Estates, in prejudice to their lawful Heirs, upon such a Company of
Poltrons.

Thus, my honored Friend, you have now the little Present, which I presume to
offer to you, of this History. I have often said, that I pretend not to show
any thing of Eloquence in the writing, but only a Curiosity to preserve and to
relate Matter of Fact. And therefore if any eloquent Hand shall hereafter
please to go over, and better illustrate the Lives of these Princes, and shall
supply himself with Materials for the purpose, out of what I have said, I shall
be very well satisfied. In the mean time, I desire you to be contented with my
Services, and to believe that it was my Choice to write in this manner, without
Disputing whether or no, I was able to have done it better.

THE A. Christi CCLxxxiv
Lives and Reigns OF THE EMPERORS DIOCLESIAN AND MAXIMIAN.
By J. BERNARD.
DIOCLESIAN was born at an obscure His Birthplace and Extraction.
Village called Dioclea in Dalmatia, and his Mother was of the same Name with
the Village. Wherefore before his Elevation he was called Diocles; but being
once set at the Head of the Roman Empire, he gave his Name a turn to the Form
of a Roman Name and called himself Dioclesian.

He was for some time in the beginning of his Youth, a Servant under Anullinus,
a Senator. Then he went into the Army; where by his Diligence, his Bravery, and
his Conduct, he raised himself so, from one Post to another, by degrees, that
after the death of Numerianus, of which he protested he was altogether
Innocent, and after the Revenge, as has been said, which he took upon Aper for
that Murder, He is proclaimed Emperor.
the Army Proclaimed him Emperor.

He accepted the Empire, and the Tribunitian Power was conferred upon him, on
the 11th. of the Kalends of May in the Year of Rome 1036, and of Christ, 284.
Which Year he ordered, by his Sovereign Power, to be made a Public Era, or
Date, from whence to Account the following Times. The Christians used it as far
as to the Reign of Justinian. But upon their score, the same Era is likewise
called the Era of the Martyrs, and with great Reason. For from the first Year
of the Reign of Dioclesian, the Persecution which the He Persecutes the
Christians.
Christians suffered under him, may very well be dated. It is true, his Reign
was not so Unhappy to them, at the first, as it was afterward. But yet no Year
scarce passed, but what was defiled with Christian Blood: which was as the
droppings of Rain before a violent Tempest, and as a Prologue to the dismal
Tragedy that followed after.

Sabinus Julianus, who had set up for the Empire in Italy, after the death of
Carus, was beaten to Dioclesian's hand by Carmus, and slain in the Plains of
Verona. In the next place, Dioclesian having entirely defeated Carinus also, in
Moesia, he then remained the sole Lord of all, and was left to enjoy the whole
Empire to himself, without the least Competitor.

One thing is very New and Unexpected, which is to be observed in the beginning
of this Prince's Reign; which is, That he Pardoned all Persons that had been
engaged on the side of either Carinus, or Julianus. He deprived none of them of
their Fortunes, Fame, or Honors. A Clemency, that after a Civil War, had not
in the Memory of Man been known to have been shown before.

He created Maximian Caesar, and sent him Maximian pacifies Gaul.
with an Army into Gallia, to suppress the Disorders, that were there
occasioned by Amandus and Helianus, being at the head of a Party of Rusticks
and Robbers. Maximian discharged himself well of this Commission. By slight
Skirmishes, which he took his opportunity to make with them, he quieted all
things in Gallia, without any damage to his Army. The Revolters were frightened
with the bare report of his march to them. At the same time, the Franks and the
Saxons annoyed the Quarters of Belgium and Armorica: against whom Carausius was
employed, who repulsed them, and took from them a great deal of Riches and good
Booty; the profit whereof he engrossed to himself, without laying it out for
the good of the Provinces, or returning it, as he ought, into the Public
Treasury. Therefore Carausius was ordered to be seized and put to death. But he
escaped immediately into Great Britain, and gathering together there an Army,
he revolted, and was declared Emperor.

There were now many Wars growing together upon the hands of Dioclesian, which
he knew not, whether he might be able to sustain alone. The Sarmatians made
great impressions upon Pannonia, the Persians Usurped upon the Provinces of the
East, the Allemans and the Burgundians were preparing to break violently into
Gallia, Carausius continued to maintain the Quality of Emperor in Great
Britain. So Dioclesian advanced Maximian from a Caesar, to be Emperor in
conjunction with him: and against the Sarmatians he repaired in Person himself,
to whom having made appear the Power and Glory of his Arms, he passed on from
thence into Armenia, where he br^ke the Force of the Persians, and obliged them
to sue for a Peace. Maximian in the mean time opposed the Motions of the
Barbarians in Gallia, till they even mouldered away of themselves, and were
destroyed by Famine and Pestilence. But yet others of them renewing their
Incursions the next Year, and passing over the Rhine upon the Ice into Gallia,
Maximian had the honor of driving them back to whence they came; and not that
only, but he followed them over the Rhine by a Bridge which he erected, and
laid Germany waste as far as to the Fountains of the Danube. With the like
success Dioclesian being returned out of Armenia, expelled the Goths from
Thrace, and secured the Passage of the River against them by three Forts, which
he built.

Whilst these things passed, Achilleus assumed the Purple upon him, at
Alexandria in Egypt; and likewise a People called the Quinquegentians, or a
Confederacy of five Cities in Africa, were upon the Revolt, and other Wars
threatened from other Parts the Roman Empire. Hereupon Dioclesian and Maximian
gave a Meeting to each other at the City of Milan; where they agreed upon two
Persons, whom to create Caesar's for their assistance; who were Constantius
Constantius and Galerius made Cesars.
Chlorus, and Galerius Maximianus. The first was appointed for the direction of
Gallia and the recovery of Great Britain, the other for the defense of the
Banks of the Isther; whilst Dioclesian charged himself with the Affairs of
Egypt and the East, and Maximian had the care of Italy and of the War of
Africa. All three reverencing Dioclesian as their common Father.

Pursuant to this Distribution, Dioclesian repaired to Egypt, and there
levelled the Cities of the Thebais to the ground.

Constantius expelled Carausius out of Gallia, whither he was then advanced;
but as Carausius by flight, arrived again in Great Britain, he was killed by
one of his own Friends and chief Officers, Alectus, after he had held the
Government of that Province almost seven Years; and Alectus set up himself in
his stead, Against whom Constantius prepared a Fleet in order to attack him at
once by Sea and Land; assisted by Asclepiodotus the Captain of the Guards; who
overcoming Alectus, after he had reigned about three Years, that Victory
finished the Reduction of the Island of Great Britain.

Maximian, passing with his Forces into Africa, easily drove before him the
Quinquegentiani. They fled for shelter into their inaccessible Fastnesses: but
being forced to come to a Battle in the next Season, he Vanquished them, took
them Prisoners, and disposed of them at his discretion.

Likewise Galerius obtained a signal Victory, in his Division, over the
Bastarnae and the Sarmatians; in which Constantine, the Son of Constantius
Chlorus by Helena, so Nobly signalized his Youth, as to take the Sarmatian
General Prisoner, and bring him alive to Galerius.

After this Dioclesian Commanded Galerius out of Pannonia into Egypt, and sent
him to Encounter the Tyrant Achilleus, who was not as yet oppressed there.
Galerius Engaging and overcoming him about Pelusium, or Belvais, Achilleus fled
for refuge into Alexandria; but Galerius followed him and besieged him in
Alexandria; and obliging that City to surrender to him upon discretion in eight
days, by the order of Dioclesian it was demolished, and exposed to free
Plunder, and Achilleus was cast to the Wild Beasts.

The War of Egypt having detained Dioclesian Egypt reduced.
in those Parts no less than six Years, Narses the King of Persia was
encouraged in the mean time to commence a new War in the East, and to make his
Incursions into Mesopotamia and Armenia. Wherefore Dioclesian sent Galerius
away into the East; who came to Antioch with a good Army, and had the better of
Narses in two Battles. But rashly venturing the fortune of a third, on a time
when his Force was become much reduced, he was so well beaten, that he lost
almost entirely all his Men, and with difficulty escaped with his own Life. He
came to Dioclesian; who received him in a manner, which was to let him know,
that he highly resented his Conduct, and he was scarce willing to trust him
with another Army to give him an opportunity to repair his disgrace. However
Galerius obtained the leave to try his Fortune once more against Narses; and
this time he gave the Persians such a rout, that he took the Wife, Sisters, The
Persians totally routed;
and Children of Narses Prisoners, and obliged him to a Peace upon the
Conditions, of returning back to the Romans all the Provinces that he had
Usurped from them, and to take the Tygris for the Boundary of the Roman Empire.

Altogether the same Fortune did Constantius meet with in the East, of being
first overcome by, and then of overcoming the Germans. They passed the Rhine
upon the Ice, and gave him such a blow on a sudden, that he fled wounded to the
next Garrison in that precipitancy and that danger, that the Gates being shut,
he was forced to be haled upon the Walls by a Rope: but yet Rallying again
presently, and engaging the Enemy with some fresh Men and likewise the Germans.
and a fresh Courage, he killed to the number of Sixty thousand of them upon
the place.

These great and repeated Victories elevated the Pride of Dioclesian to a
height, that not contented, neither with the Habit which had been usually worn
by the Roman Emperors, nor with the accustomed Reverences that were paid them,
he decorated his Person with Jewels and Cloth of Gold; he caused his Enameled
Shoes to be kissed, and himself to be Adored, and to be called a God and Lord;
which none of his Predecessors had done, since Caligula and Domitian.

When he triumphed in great Pomp at Rome, in conjunction with Maximian, he
entitled himself Jovius; and Maximian, Herculius: As if himself was a second
Jupiter, and Maximian a second Hercules. He Triumphed over the Goths,
Bastarnae, Quadi, Sarmatians, Egyptians and Persians: Maximian over the
Franks, Allemans, Britains and Mauritanians. And their Triumphal Chariot was
preceded by the Captive Sisters and Children of the King of Persia.

This is what has occurred to me, as to the Military part of the Life of
Dioclesian. For by the loss of the Commentaries of Claudius Eusthenius, his
Secretary, before mentioned by Vopiscus; and by the deplorable loss of other
the like Originals, it is very visible, that a great many Particulars of both
Dioclesian, Maximian, Constantius and Galerius, are wholly buried in Oblivion.

To proceed therefore, to what remains. These two Emperors published an Edict,
which bears date from Alexandria, the day before the Kalends of April, and
which is directed to Julianus the Proconsul of Africa, against the base and
infamous Sect, as it calls them, of the Manichees. They order them to be
entirely extirpated; the Heads and Chieftains of them, together with their
abominable Writings, to be burnt; their Followers to be sent to the Mines, or
otherwise punished with Death; and all their Estates to be confiscated into the
Treasury.

As to the Christians, they published an Edict in the Year 286. whereby they
forbad any Person to be allowed to Buy, or Sell, or Grind, or draw Water, who
refused to burn Incense before the Statues of the Gods. But this Edict The
Edict against the Christians.
touched only, for the present, the Christians who lived at Rome. It is not
understood to have been enjoined to be observed over all the Empire. The Fire
was kindled by degrees: till being continually blown up from the mouths of the
Gentile Priests and the Philosophers and others, who could not persuade
themselves to forego the Trade of the gainful Sacrifices and Idols of the
Gentile Religion; and there never wanting more and more Fuel to feed the Flame,
it came at last to an Universal Conflagration.

The Particulars, it is not for this place to recount. It is sufficient to say,
That it was the most Unmerciful, Inhumane, Dire, Outrageous Scene of Barbarity,
that ever the Sun beheld; and spilt more blood, in a manner, that was to the
last degree base and dishonorable to the Actors, but glorious to the
Sufferers, than had been spilt before in a thousand Wars.

A Legion of Thebaean Soldiers, who had been employed in Syria against the
Persians and Parthians, and by having been used to Winter in Palaestine, had
been brought to embrace the Christian Religion, was in the Year 297, Commanded
out of the East to serve under Maximian in Gallia. The Tribune was Mauricius,
the Standard Bearer Exuperius, and among the rest there was one Candidus, a
Senator. They were a complete Legion of 6666 Stout Men, well appointed. So
Maximian, going to meet the Enemy, commanded the usual Sacrifices to be offered
to the Gods, the whole Army to be purged, and all the Soldiers to burn Incense;
which this Legion, being Christians, refusing, they were decimated once: that
is, every tenth Man drawn out and put to death. But this could not alter their
Principles. They were decimated a second time: but neither so, were they to be
removed from their Religion. Then they were surrounded by the Army, and all
slain in their own Camp, at a Place called Agaunum in Gallia, whither they were
retired, the distance of eight Miles from the Camp of Maximian; but assuring
him, that excusing them their Religion, they were always ready to return unto
his Camp again, and to Act as bravely as any against the Enemy.

It was by the Hands and Labors of the Christian Soldiers, that Maximian
raised those immense Structures of the Baths of Dioclesian at Rome, the Baths
of his own Name at Carthage, the Palace at Aquileia, and the Amphitheatre at
Verona. For he condemned them to any the most servile Offices.

As he assisted, upon the fifteenth of the Kalends of May in the Year 301. at
the Games of the Cirque, the Populace, who knew very well that they could not
do any thing to oblige him more, cried, Let the Christians be cut off: and
repeated it twelve times. May it please your Majesty, let there be no
Christians. They repeated this ten times. Therefore Eugenius Hermogenianus, the
Captain of the Guards, proposed the Matter to the Senate; who resolving it in
the Affirmative, Maximian issued out his Rescript for their Excision, directed
to Venustianus, the day before the Kalends of May.

In the next place, came out the General Edict of Dioclesian, to Abolish the
Assemblies of the Christians in all places wheresoever they were; to raze their
Churches to the ground, to burn their Scriptures, to secure their
Ecclesiastics, to deprive them of all Honors, Offices and Liberties, and by
all the means imaginable to force them to comply to the Worship of the Gods.
Infinite Numbers upon this, in all Parts, perished. In Egypt alone 140000 were
Martyred, and 700000 Banished. Columns were set up over all the Roman Empire in
the Names of Dioclesian and Maximian, and sometimes Dioclesian and Galerius,
vainly boasting, that they had extinguished the Christian Name. Whereas, on the
contrary, they had propagated it, and confirmed it. For the Blood of the
Martyrs was the Seed of the Church; and the Christians surmounted all this with
a Virtue, never to be forgotten, never to be expressed.

Dioclesian himself lived to know, that his Enterprise was impracticable. He
fell into a Melancholy, quitted the Purple which others have so dearly bought,
Created Galerius at Nicomedia Emperor in his stead, and retired for his own
part to the City of Salona in Dalmatia: where after a Private Life of 9 Years,
Death of Dioclesian
he died, some say he Poisoned himself, and the Romans consecrated him a God.
He had reigned 20 Years, and lived to the Age of 68.

Maximian, at the persuasion of Dioclesian, concurred with him in this his last
unprecedented Action. They both Abdicated the Empire in a day. Maximian created
in his stead Constantius Emperor at Milan, and went and lived a Private Life in
the Province of Lucania: Maximian and resumes.
till the Romans persuaded him to resume his Dignity again, in order to
determine a great Quarrel that was arisen betwixt Maxentius his Son, and
Severus the Kinsman of Galerius Maximian endeavored in like manner to have
persuaded Dioclesian to have resumed his former Dignity again also. But
Dioclesian detested it, and said, I wish you could see my Gardens, that I have
Planted with my own hand at Salona: you would never have thought this a thing
to be proposed to me. However Maximian put himself at the Head of an Army, and
went to the Siege of Ravenna; and getting Severus, by Treachery, within his
Power, he slew him; whose Body was interred afterward in the Sepulcher of
Gallienus upon the Appian Way, 9 Miles from Rome. Quitting the Army, when this
Work was done, because he was not overwelcome to Command it longer, he visited
Dioclesian at Salona, and then went into Gallia, where he matched his Daughter
Fausta unto the Emperor Constantine, the Son of Constantius by Helena, who had
succeeded to the Powers of his Father. But yet as he was at Treves, it was
found, that he practiced his Arts upon the Soldiers, with a design, if he
could, to expel Constantine and possess himself of the Empire anew.
Constantine was advertised of it by Fausta; and pursuing him as far as to
Marseilles, he besieged him, took him, and ordered him to be Strangled, and his
Body was interred at His Death
Milan. He had reigned 18 Years, and lived to the Age of 60.

He was born at Sirmish in Sclavonia, of mean Parents. His Wife was Eutropia, a
Syrian Woman, by whom he had Issue Maxentius and Fausta. He was a very Rough,
Stern, and Barbarian-like Man: but a great Soldier, and a faithful Friend to
Dioclesian, and one that had been his old Companion in Arms. And he was
Incontinent, and Treacherous.

THE A. Christi CCCIV.
Lives and Reigns OF THE EMPERORS Flavius Constantius Chlorus, AND Galerius
Maximianus Armentarius.
BY J. BERNARD.
THERE is the less to be spoken of these two Princes in this place, because a
great part of their Actions has been represented already in the Account of the
Emperors foregoing, under whom they served, and who advanced them successively
to the Dignity first of Caesar's, and then of Emperors.

Therefore I shall only here take notice, that at the same time that they were
created Caesar's, they were obliged to put away their Wives, to whom they were
already married; and to remarry, for a Tie of Affinity, into the Families of
Dioclesian and Maximian. Constantius dismissed himself from Helena, by whom he
had had Constantine, who was afterward the Emperor Constantine the Great; and
he remarried to Theodora, who was Daughter-in-Law to Maximian. In like manner
Galerius re-married to Valeria, who was the Daughter of Dioclesian, but she did
not live long with him; and to consecrate her Memory to futurity after her
Death, her Father imposed her Name on a part of Pannonia, which he called the
Province of Valeria; and also he gave her Name to a City situated upon the
Banks of the Danube.

Constantius was the Son of a Daughter of Crispus, who was the Brother of the
Emperor Claudius. He was created the Caesar, properly to Maximian, to whom he
succeeded in the Government of the West; and Galerius was the Caesar properly
to Dioclesian, to whom he succeeded in the Empire of the East. But as
Constantius was a Prince endowed with all the fine and good Qualities in the
World, it is certain that he neither when he was a Caesar, not when Emperor,
dipped his Hands in the Blood of the Christians, which all the other Three
labored to spill with so much greediness. He could not indeed contradict the
Edicts of those about them, but yet he moderated the matter in their Favor as
much as possible, and the Destruction was always the less where he came.
Galerius, one day, urging him on to be as violent upon it as his Brethren, he
published an Order for all Persons to depart his Court, who would not
sacrifice. But such Christians, as for fear, and the advantage of staying in
his Court, complied, he blamed and turned out of it; and such as had chosen
rather to depart, than Sacrifice, he re-called and retained them, saying; He
could not doubt of their Fidelity to him, who were so True to God.

There is this other Passage, that shows the Goodness of Constantius, not to be
omitted. Dioclesian had blamed very much his Negligence, and reproached him
with being a poor Prince, because he had no Money in his Treasury. Constantius
desired the Envoys, who had brought him that Message, only to stay a little,
and they should see more of this matter. In the mean time, he signified his
desire to all his States, to furnish him with Money. They filled his Coffers
immediately, and with a Zeal, in which every one had an emulation to excel.
Then showing to the Envoy of Dioclesian his Riches, he said, His Subjects Money
was all at his Devotion; but he never thought it safer, than when they were the
Keepers of his Treasury.

Galerius was by his Birth a Dacian of mean Parentage. He was called
Armentarius, because at the first in his Youth, he was but a Keeper of Cattle.
His Mother's Name was Romula, from which he took an occasion to call the place
of his Birth Romulianus, and he pretended to say, that his Mother when she
conceived of him, was impregnated by a Dragon. He was of a tyrannical
Disposition, and much addicted to the Magicks. He was particularly bloody upon
the Christians of Nicomedia. But coming to die by a Disease which consumed his
Secret Parts, and rotted out his Eyes, and parted his Flesh from his Bones, he
was so sensible of the Hand of God in it, that he countermanded the
Persecution, and begged the Prayers of the Christians unto God for him.

Whilst the moderate Constantius contented himself with the Administration of
no more than Gallia, Spain and Great Britain, Galerius thought fit to create
two Caesar's, the one to preside over Italy, the other to go into the East, who
were his two Sister's Sons, Flavius Valerius Severus, and Galerius Maximin. In
which Promotion, pretermitting Constantine the Son of Constantius by Helena,
who had all along served under him; and Constantine together with his
Resentments of that, suspecting a Design against his Person, he made his escape
from him, and fled into Great Britain to his Father, who was arrived there out
of Gallia, in order to make War upon the Caledonians and the Picts. His Father
with Joy embraced him, and by the Consent of all the Forces appointed and
declared him his Successor; and presently after that, his Father dying at the
City of York the Eighth of the Kalends of August in the Year Three Hundred and
Six; then commenced the Reign of the Emperor Constantine the Great.

Constantius was Emperor not much above one Year, Galerius reigned about six;
and both had been before thirteen years Caesar's. They finished the vast
Structure of the Baths of Dioclesian, which was a Work from the beginning, of
seven years. Galerius did a great deal of good to the Province of Pannonia, by
cutting down the Woods, and converting them into Fields, and by opening a Mouth
for the Lake Pelso, to fall into the Danube. He created Licinius Emperor in
Conjunction with him, toward the end of his Reign, and set him over Illyricum
and Thrace; being one who was his Countryman, a Dacian, and who had signalized
himself well under him in the Wars of Persia. And then Gallerius died in the
manner which has been said, in the Year three hundred and eleven.

FINIS.
A CHRONOLOGY TO BOTH VOLUMES.
A CHRONOLOGY TO THE First Volume.
Ann. Christi, 96 DOmitian killed, Sept. 18. NERVA.
97 COnspiracy of Calphurnius Crassus against him. Adopteth Trajan. 98 Dies,
Jan. 27.

TRAJAN.
Ann. Christi, 100 THE Dacian War of five Years. 103 His Bridge over the
Danube. 104 Arabia reduced by Palmas. 105 Decebalus the King of Dacia kills
himself. 107 Death of Licinius Suras. 108 The Parthian Expedition. 111
Deposition of Parthamasyris from the Crown of Armenia. 112 Armenia,
Mesopotamia, Assyria conquered. 114 Rebellion of the Jews. The Forum and Column
of Trajan finished. 115 Earthquake at Antioch. 116 Trajan' s Voyage on the
Red Sea. Revolt of his Conquests. 117 Adopteth Hadrian. Dies, Aug 10.

HADRIAN.
Ann. Christi, 118 PAlmas, Celsus, and others killed. 119 He relinquishes the
Conquests of Trajan. 122 Adrianople built. 123 Expedition into Great Britain.
125 At Athens initiated in the Eleusinian Mysteries. 126 Passes into Africa.
127 Again visits Athens. 129 Erects a Tomb to his Horse. 131 Death of
Antinous. 134 Sepulchrum Hadriani built. 136 Adopteth Aelius Verus. 137 Aelius
Verus dies. 138 Hadrian adopteth Antoninus Pius. Dies, July 10.

ANTONINUS PIUS.
Ann. Christi, A. C. 139 ADopteth Marcus Antoninus, Feb. 25. 141 Repairs the
Pons Sublicius at Rome. Death of his Wife Faustina. 144 The Britains reduced by
Lollius Urbicus. 145 The Moors, Germans, Dacians, and Alans reduced. 147
Matches his Daughter to Marcus Antoninus. Apollonius the Philosopher of Chalcis
invited to Rome. 152 An Inundation of the Tyber. 156 Attilius Titianus
proscribed. 161 Death, March 6.

Marcus Antoninus the Philosopher.
Ann. Christi, 161 ASsociates Verus to him in the Empire. The Parthian War of
five Years. 162 Agricola sent into Great Britain. 166 Commodus declared Caesar,
October. 12. 168 A great Pestilence. 169 The Marcomannick War. Death of Verus.
174 Victory over the Quadi and Marcomanni. 175 The Revolt of Cassius. 176 M.
Anton. passes to Athens. 177 Triumphs. Commodus declared his Associate in the
Empire, November 27. 178 Matches Commodus to Crispina. 180 Death, March 16.

COMMODUS.
Ann. Christi, 180 TRriumphs. 181 The Ministry of Perennis. 183 The Britains
reduced by Ulpius Marcellus. 184 Attempt of Pompeianus against the Life of
Commodus. Lucilla, Sister to Commodus put to death. 185 The Baths of Commodus
built. 186 Perennis killed. 187 The Ministry of Cleander. 190 Cleander killed.
Commodus puts his own Head upon the Coloss of the Sun. 192 Acts Hercules.
Death.

PERTINAX.
Ann. Christi, 126 BORN. 167 Defeateth the Germans under the Reign of M.
Antoninus. 193 His Death, March 28.

DIDIUS JULIANUS.
Ann. Christi, 193 DEposed and killed, June --

SEVERUS.
Ann. Christi, 194 DEfeats and slays Pescennius Niger. 196 Victories in the
East. Declares Caracalla Caesar, June 1. 198 Overcomes and kills Albinus.
Declares Caracalla Emperor with him, and Geta Caesar. 200 His Expedition
against Parthia. 202 Edict as to the Christians and Jews. 203 Marries
Caracalla to Plautilla. Triumphs. 205 Plautianus killed. 208 Expedition into
Great Britain. 210 His Wall there built. 211 Death, Febr. 4.

CARACALLA.
Ann. Christi, 212 GETA killed, Febr: 5. And Papinian. 213 His Journey into
Gallia. 214 Banishes the Senate from Rome. 215 Marries his Mother-in-Law. 216
Commits a vast Slaughter in Alexandria. 217 His Death, April 8.

OPILIUS MACRINUS.
Ann. Christi, 218 Concludes a Peace with the Parthians. Overcome, and killed.

HELIOGABALUS.
Ann. Christi, 219 ARrives at Rome. 221 Adopteth Alexander Severus. 222 Death,
March 6.

ALEXANDER SEVERUS.
Ann. Christi, 225 MInistry of Ulpian under him. Finishes the Baths of Commodus
and Caracalla: 226 Ulpian, killed. 230 Expedition against Artaxerxes. 232
Taurinus executed. 233 Cashiers a Legion. 234 Triumphs, Sept. 25. 235 His
Death, March 18.

A CHRONOLOGY TO THE Second Volume.
Ann. Christi, 235 MAximin lays waste Germany. 236 The Gordiani set up in
Africa. 237 Maximus and Balbinus set up by the Senate. Siege of Aquileia. Death
of the Maximins. 238 The Death of Maximus and Balbinus. 240 Revolt of
Sabinianus against Gordianus the Third. 241 The Marriage of Gordianus the
Third. 242 His Expedition into the East. 243 Death of Mysitheus. 244 Gordianus
the Third, Deposed and Killed. 250 The Philips Overcome and Slain. 251 Valerian
Elected Censor, October. 27. Death of the Decii. 252 -- of Gallus and Volusianus.
253 -- of Aemilian. 254 Valerian Associates Gallienus with him in the Empire.
259 Valerian taken Prisoner by the Persians. 260 The Revolts of Macrianus,
Ingenuus, Balista, Valens, Piso, and others of the Thirty Tyrants. 261 262 263
263 Odenatus Absolute in the East. 264 Expedition of Gallienus against
Posthumous. 265 Death of Odenatus. 268 -- of Gallienus, March 21. The Goths,
and other Barbarians lay wast the Roman Empire. 269 Expedition of Claudius
against them. 270 Death of Claudius, Feb. 5. -- of his Brother. 271 The Libri
Sybillini Consulted by the order of Aurelian. 273 Zenobia taken Prisoner by
Aurelian. Tetricus surrenders to him. 274 Aurelian Triumphs. 275 His Death, Jan
29. Tacitus Elected by the Senate, after an Inter-regnum of six Months, Sept.
25. 276 His Death, Apr. 13. Death of Florianus. 277 Expedition of Probus into
Gallia. 278 -- against the Almains. 281 Revolt of Saturninus. 282 Revolts of
Proculus and Bonosus. Death of Probus, Nov. 3. 284 Death of Carus and
Numerianus: Succession of Dioclesian. 285 Carinus Defeated and Slain. Maximian
Created Caesar, and sent into Gallia. 286 Revolt of Carausius. Maximian Created
Emperor. Edict against the Christians. 287 Expedition of Dioclesian into
Armenia. Edict against the Manichees. 288 Germany laid wast by Maximian. The
Goths Repulsed by Dioclesian. Revolts of Achilleus and the Quinquegentiani. 290
Dioclesian and Maximian meet at Milan. 291 Constantius and Galerius Created
Caesar's. 292 Dioclesian in Egypt. Carausius Killed. Revolt of Alectus. 293
Victory of Galerius in Pannonia. 294 Defeat of Achilleus. 295 Great Britain
recovered to the Empire. The Quinquegentiani reduced. 296 Galerius defeated by
the Persians. 297 Regains his Honor. As likewise Constantius. The Thebaean
Legion Massacred. 298 Dioclesian Adored. -- His Baths begun upon. 301
Dioclesian and Maximian Triumph. Rescript of Maximian against the Christians.
302 Edict of Dioclesian against the Christians. 304 Dioclesian and Maximian
Abdicate the Empire. 306 Death of Constantius in Great Britain. Severus and
Maximin Created Caesar's. 307 Maximian takes and slays Severus. The Marriage of
Constantine and Fausta. 309 Death of Maximian. 310 Licinius Created Emperor.
311 Death of Galerius. 313 Death of Dioclesian.

INDEX TO THE Second Volume.
A.
AChilleus, 343, 344. Acholius, 209. Egyptians, 158, 186, 307. Aelius Cordus,
7. Aelius Lampridius, 274. Aelius Sabinus, 35. Aemilian, 97, 112, 158. Era of
the Martyrs, 340. African Revolt, 15. Agaunum, 348. Alans, 5. Alectus, 343.
Alexander Severus, 8, 29. Alexandria, 308, 344. Almus, 294. Amandus, 341.
Annius Severus, 41. Apollo, 23. Apollonius Tyanaeus, 221. Aquiloia 23, 35, 348.
Aradion, 282. Argunthis, 69. Arrius Aper, 329. Asclepiodotus, 341. Aurelian;
his Extraction, 197. Personage, 200. Exploits being a private Man, ibid.
Discipline, 201. Honor done to him, 209. Adoption, 211. Declared Emperor, 213.
His Marcomannick War, 214. Extreme Severity, 218. Severity and Mercy, 220.
Conquests, 221, 223, 229, 230. Triumph, 231. Death, 234. Public Managements,
233, 237. Character, 235, 244. Munificence, 247. Aurelius Apollinaris, 328.
Aureolus, 110, 113, 145, 180. Ausburgh, 234.
B.
BAlbinus; his Character, 81. Declared Emperor, ibid. Jealousy, 88. Death, 89.
Balbus Cornelius Theophanes, 81. Balista, 111, 154. Bastarnae, 293. Blemmyae,
292. Bologna, 173. Bonosus; his Extraction, 312. Ability at Drinking, 313.
Death, ibid. Britain, 344.
C.
CAllicrates Tyrius, 198. Calphurnia, 172. Candidus, 348. Capellianus, 20, 51.
Caracallus, 34. Carausius, 341, 343. Carinus; his Enormous Vices and Luxury,
332, 333. Death 335. Carpi, 228. Carus; his Birth, 321. Esteem with Probus,
324. Persian Expedition, 325. Death, ibid. Victories, 327. Games, 335.
Carthage, 348. Cassius Longinus, 228. Cecropius, 125. Celsus, 165. Censorinus,
173. Christians, 308. Christian Bishops and Presbyters, 308. Cicero, 38.
Circessum, 72. Claudius; his Elevation to the Empire, 124, 125. Elogium, 176.
Honors done to him, 178, 179, 194. Victories, over Aureolus, 180. The
Barbarians, 181, 182, 184. His Death, 187. Family, 188. The Opinion of several
Emperors of him, 189. Claudius Eusthenius, 335. Constantine, 344, 351.
Constantinople, 115, 116. Constantius; his Descent, 124. Presidentship of
Dalmatia, 334. Created Caesar, 334, 343. Reduces Great Britain, 343. Exploits
with the Germans, 345. Created Emperor, 350. Coptos, 292. Cornelius Tacitus,
262. Coyners, 236. Crispinus, 23. Crispus, 188. Ctesiphon, 119, 326. Curious
Fortunatianus, 79. Cyriades, 132.
D.
DAcia, 238. Decii, 96. Dexippus, 124. Diana, 114. Dioclesian; his Character by
Vopiscus, 329. Kills Aper, 330. Reign foretold, ibid. Great Expressions, 243,
336. Name and mean Original, 339. Proclaimed Emperor, 329, 340. Clemency, 341.
Creates Maximian Caesar and Emperor, 342. Pride, 346. Triumph, 346. Baths, 348.
Edict against the Christians, 349. Abdication, ibid. Death, 350. Dioclesian
Persecution, 340, 347, 349. Drinking, 305, 313.
E.
EArthquake, 63, 113, Eclipse, 59. Edict against the Manich^^s, 346. Edict
against the Christians, 347, 349. Emissa, 111, 223. Ennius, 183. Eunuchs, 61.
Exuperius, 348.
F.
FAbilius, 30. Fabius Ciryllianus, 322. Fabius Marcellinus, 274. Fausta, 351.
Firmus; his Revolt, 230, 302, 303. Birth, 303. Vast Wealth, ibid. Personage,
304. Bodily Strength, ibid. Death, 305. Florianus, 261, 2^9. French, 307.
Furius Placidus, 211.
G.
GAlerius; created Caesar, 343. His Military Atchievments, 335, 344. Created
Emperor, 350. Gallienus I. The Revolts under him, 109, 114. His Dissoluteness,
111. Peace with Aure^lus, 113. The Misfortunes of his times, 114 War with
Posthumous, 112, 116. Profound Negligence, 115. Decennial Games, 116.
Epithalamius made by him, 121. His Wit, 122. Death, 125. Character, ibid.
Horrid Luxury, 126. Cruelty, 141. Gallienus II. 129. Gallus Antipater, 180.
Games, 335. Gargilius Martial, 274. Gordianus I. His Extraction, 37. Studies
and Munificence, 38. Proconsul of Africa, 40. Forced to accept the Empire, 16,
44. Death, 52. Person and Character, 57. Gordianus II. His Death, 52. Character
when young, 54. And in his advanced Age, 55. Personage, 57. Gordianus III.
Declared Emperor, 59. Marriage, 60. Persian Expedition, 63. Deposed and Slain,
68, 69. Character, 69. Buildings, 70. Epitaph, 72. Goths, 5, 114, 292.
H.
HAdrian, 308. Hecatomb, 85. Helianus, 341. Heliogabalus, 5. Hemona, 22, 35.
Heraclammon, 220, 221. Heraclianus, 123. Herennian, 164. Herod, 123, 153.
Herodian, 14. Hostilianus, Perpenna, 97.
I.
JEWS, 308. Ingenuus, 140. Interregnum, 239, 250. Jotapiana, 95. Isauria, 163.
Julius Capitolinus, 274. Junius, Cordus, 79. Junius Messala, 337. Junius
Tiberianus, 195.
L.
LEtters of Alexander Severus, 32, 40. Of Aurelian, 167, 202, 217, 221, 224,
225, 229, 237, 246. Of Maximin I. 33, 49. Of Mysitheus, 60, 65. Of Gordianus
III. 62, 64. Of Claudius Julianus, 91. Of Belsotus, 102. Of Balerus, 103. Of
Artabasdes, 104. Of Valerian, 134, 149, 155, 189, 191, 203, 204, 206, 208, 276,
277. Of Gallienus I. 141, 193, 279. Of Claudius, 143, 182, 183, 213. Of Decius,
192. Of Zenobia, 226. Of the Army to the Senate, 239. Of the Senate, 17, 264.
Of Antoninus Tiberianus, 265. Of Claudius Capellianus, 266. Of Tacitus, 281. Of
Probus, 284, 285, 290, 293. Of Hadrian, 308. Licinius, 73. Lollianus, 135.
Lots, 185. Lucius Priscus, 96.
M.
MAcedon, 12. Macrianus, 109, 110, 146, 147, 149. Magnus, 11. Maeonius, 153.
Manichees, 346. Marcia Otacilia Severa, 95. Marcus, 95. Marinus, 96. Marius,
138. Marius Maximus, 274, 301. Martianus, 125. Mauricius, 43. Maxentius, 351.
Maximian. His Character, 335, 351. Created Caesar, 341. Emperor, 342. His
Successes in Gallia, 341, 342. And Africa, 344. Triumph, 346. Massacres the
Thebaean Legion, 347. Works, 348. Edict against the Christians, 349.
Abdication, 350. Treachery, 351. Death, ibid. Maximin I. His Extraction, 1.
Rise, 2. Preferment, 4. Reception from Heliogabalus, 5. And Alexander Severus,
6. Strength of Body, 7. Proclaimed Emperor, 9. Cruelty, 9. Expedition against
the Germans, 13. Rage upon the News of the African Revolt, 19, 49. Besieges
Aquileia, 23. Death, 24. Measure of his Foot, 32. Maximin II. His Beauty, 29,
31, 35. Learning, 30. Pride and Conditions, 31. Death, 24, 35. Maximus.
Declared Emperor, 77. His Extraction, 79. Person and Manners, 80. Reception at
Rome, 87. Death, 89. Memphis, 159. Menophilus, 23. Mnestheus, 234. Moses, 177.
Mutiny, 83. Mysitheus, 60, 65.
N.
NNarses, 345. Nemesis, 83. Nicomachus, 226, 256. Numerianus. His Poetry and
Oratory, 328. Death, 329.
O.
ODenatus, 110, 119, 122, 123, 151. Olympius Nemesianus, 328. Omens, 33, 34,
199, 268. Onesimus, 321.
P.
PAlfrurius, 292. Palfurius Suras, 128. Palmyra, 224, 229. Piso, 109, 157.
Philip I. His Rise, 66. Declared Emperor, 67. Deposes and Kills Gordianus III.
68. Favorable to the Christians, 95. Philip II. 95. Pompey M. 39, 51.
Posthumous, 112, 116, 133, 135. Probus. His Birth and Parentage, 275. Esteem
with several Emperors, 275, 276, 277, 278, 279, 280, 281. The Praemiums given
him, 278. Valor, 282. Elevation to the Empire, 283. Unwillingness to take it,
284. Successes against the Barbarians, 289, 290. 291. Easter Expedition, 292.
Intestine Troubles, 294. Triumph, 295. Death, 296. Elogium, 297, 270. Proculus.
His Extraction and Wealth, 312. Death, 312. Created Emperor, 313. Ptolemais,
292.
Q.
QUietus, 109, 150. Quinquegentiani, 343, 344. Quintillus, 187, 236.
R.
RAvenna 26. Regillianus, 142. Roman Emperors few good, 242. Romania, 1. Rome,
in its Thousandth Year, 72. Various Fortune under different Princes, 320.
S.
SAbinianus, 60. Sabinus, 49. Sabinus Julianus, 340. Salona, 350. Sapores, 64,
102. Saturninus, Tyr. in the time of Gallienus, 160. Saturninus Declared
Emperor, 309, His Sense of the Pe(...)ls of that Station, 308. Death, 294, 309.
Senate. Their Act for Constituting the Gordiani Emperors; and denouncing
Maximin an Enemy, 17, 46. Their Act for Constituing Maximus and Balbinus
Emperos, 77. Their Choice of Valerian to be Censor, 99. Their Acclamations upon
Claudius, 179. Their Debate about the Books of the Sibyls, 214, 215, 216. Their
Act for the Constituting Tacitus Emperor, 253, 254, 255, 256. Their Act in the
favor of Probus, 286. They Vote the Excision of the Chirstians, 349. Senate of
Women, 248. v. Vol. I. Serapis, Serenus Sammonicus, 54. Severus, Caes. 350.
Severus Hostilianus, 95. Sibyls, 63, 114, 214, 215. Sicca, 166. Sirmish, 197.
Speeches of Maximin I. 20, 50. Mauricius, 43. Senator of the first Voice, 75.
Vectius Sabinus, 76. Decius, 100. Valerian, 100, 209, 278. Marius, 139.
Balists, 146. Macrianus, 147, 148. Aurelian, 210. Ulpius Crinitus, 210.
Tacitus, 240, 255, 260. Velius Cornificius Gordianus, 253. Maecius Falconius
Nicomachus, 256. Aelius Cesetianus, 258. Maesius Gallicanus, 259. Manlius
Statianus, 287. Saturninus, 308. Suetonius Optatianus, 263. Suetonius
Tranquillus, 79, 274, 301. Syrians, 229.
T.
TAcit Decree, 48. Tacitus. His Election to the Empire, 254, Unwilling to
assume it, 259. Managements, 261. Moderation and Diet, 262. Death, 267. Terni,
274. Tetricus, 161, 162, 230, 232, 237. Thebais, 343. Thebaean Legion, 347.
Theodotus, 112. Thysdrus, 16, 43: Tiberian Library, 274. Timolaus, 165.
Titianus, 30. Titus Quartinus, 12, 175. Toxotius, 30. Trebellian, 163.
Trebellius Pollio, 197. Trebonianus Gallus, 96. Troy, 183. Tyana, 220.
V.
VAlens Hostilianus, 96. Valens Licinianus, 96. Valens, Tyr. 109, 156, 157.
Valerian I. His great Esteem with the Senate, 98. Censor, 99. Captivity, 102.
Death, 105. Valerian II. 106. Valerius Marcellinus, 79. Vectius Sabinus, 76,
78. Verona, 348. Vibius Volusianus, 97. Victorina, 170. Victorinus, 137, 138.
Vitalianus, 16, 45. Ulpian Library, 196, 222, 259, 274, 328. Ulpius Crinitus,
205. Vulcatius Terentianus, 57.
W.
WOmen's Bravery, 36, 166, 171.
Z.
ZEnobia, 123, 166, 223, 224, 226, 227, 232.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Charles Harper at the Flower-de-luce,
over against St. Dunstan's-Church in Fleet Street.
THE Life of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. An Heroic Poem:
Dedicated to Her most Sacred Majesty, in Ten Books. Attempted by Samuel Wesley,
M. A. each Book illustrated by necessary Notes, explaining all the more
difficult Matters in the whole History: Also a Prefaratory Discourse concerning
Heroic Poetry. The Second Edition revised by the Author, and improved with the
Addition of a large Map of the Holy Land; and a Table of the Principal Matters;
with Sixty Copper Plates, by the celebrated Hand of W. Faithorne. Folio. The
Second and Third Parts of the Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley. The Second
containing what was written and published by himself in his younger Years,
reprinted together: The Sixth Edition. The Third Part containing his Six Books
of Plants, viz. the First and Second of Herbs, the Third and Fourth of Flowers,
the Fifth and Sixth of Trees; now made English by several Hands, with necessary
Tables to both Parts, and diverse Poems in praise of the Author. Folio.
Resolves: Divine, Moral, Political. With several New Additions in Prose and
Verse In this Eleventh Edition, References are made to the Poetical Citations
heretofore much wanted. By Owen Felltham Esquire; Folio. Price 12 s. The Works of
the Famous Nicholas Machival, Citizen and Secretary of Florence. Newly and
faithfully Translated into English. Fol. Price 15 s. The Whole Duty of Man,
according to the Law of Nature, by that Famous Civilian Samuel Puffendorf; now
made English. Octavo. Price 3 s. 6 d. Dr. Willis's Practice of Physic, being
the whole Works of that Famous Physician; rendered into English; second Edition,
with Forty Copper Plates. Folio. The Historical and Miscellaneous Tracts of the
Reverend and Learned Peter Heylin, D. D. now collected into one Volume. And an
Account of the Life of the Author, never before published. Folio. The Religion
of Protestants, a Safe way to Salvation; with a Discourse of the Apostolical
Institution of Episcopacy. By W. Chillingworth, M. A. To which in this Edition,
is added his Letter, showing the Reason why he left Popery. Folio. The History
of Q. Elizabeth, by W. Cambden, King at Arms. Fourth Edition. Folio. An
Impartial Collection of the great Affairs of State, from the beginning of the
Scotch Rebellion in the Year 1639. to the Murder of King Charles the First.
Folio. In two Vol. By Dr. Nalson. Dugdale's Monasticon Anglicanum. Folio. In
three Volumes. The History of King Edward II. King of England, and Lord of
Ireland. Folio. Dr. Willis's Practice of Physic. Octavo. With his Treatise of
the Plague. Price 7 s. Bishop Usher's Power of the Prince, and the Obedience
required of the Subject, with a large Preface, by Bishop Sanderson. Octavo.
Animadvers on a Book Entitled, The Theory of the Earth. By Herbert Lord Bishop
of Hereford. A Treatise of Moral and Intellectual Virtues, wherein their Nature
is fully explained, and their Usefulness proved. By J. Hartcliff, B. D. Price 4
s. Contemplations Moral and Divine, in two Parts. By Sir Matthew Hale, Knight,
late Chief Justice of the King's Bench. Octav. Price 5 s. A Voyage to Suratt,
in the Year 1689. giving a large Account of that City, and its Inhabitants, and
of the English Factory there: Likewise a Description of Madera, St. Jago,
Annobon, Cabenda, and Malemba (on the Coast of Africa) St. Helena, Johanna,
Bombay, the City of Muscatt, and its Inhabitants in Arabia Felix, Mocha, and
other Maritim Towns on the Red Sea, the Cape of good Hope, and the Island of
Ascension. By J. Ovington, M. A. Chaplain to His Majesty. Octav. Price 6 s. A
plain Method of Christian Devotion; laid down in Discourses, Meditations, and
Prayers, fitted to the various Occasions of a Religious Life: Translated and
Revised from the French of Monsieur Jurieu, the two and twentieth Edition, with
a Preface. By W. Fleetwood, Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty. Price 2 s. 6
d.
LAW BOOKS.
THE Reports of Sir Peyton Ventris, Knight, late one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas, in Two Parts. The first, containing select Cases adjudged in the
King's Bench, in the Reing of K. Charles II. The Second Part, containing Choice
Cases, adjudged in the Common Pleas, in the Reign of K. Charles II. and K.
James II. and in the three first Years of his now Majesty K. William and the
late Q. Mary, while he was a Judge in the said Court, with the Pleadings to the
same: with the Allowance and Approbation of the Lord Keeper and all the Judges.
2 Vol. in Fol. Price 1 l. 10 s. The Second Part of Modern Reports, being a
Collection of several special Cases, most of them adjudged in the Court of
Common Pleas in the 26, 27, 28, 29, and 30. Years of the Reign of King Charles
II. when Sir Francis North was Chief Justice of the said Court: to which are
added several select Cases in the Courts of Chancery, King's Bench, and
Exchequer; Carefully Collected by a learned Hand. Printed School. Price 12 s. The
Lord Coke's Reports in English. Folio. Judge Crook's Reports in 3 Vol. the
Third Edition, with References to all the late Reports. Folio. The Lord Coke's
Commentary on Littleton. Folio. -- His Commentary on Magna Charta. Folio. --
His Pleas of the Crown, or the Third Part of the Institutes. Folio. -- His
Jurisdiction of Courts, or Fourth Part of the Institutes. -- His Eleven Reports
in French. Folio. Bulstrode's Reports, with New Referen. Folio. Leonard's
Reports in Four Parts, with New References. Folio. The Year-Books in 10 Vol.
the last Edit. with New Not. and Tables to them all. Folio. The Reports of the
Lord Keeper Littleton, in the time of King Charles I. Folio. The Reports of the
Learned Judge, Sir Henry Hobart, the Fourth Edition corrected and amended.
Folio. Reports in the Court of King's Bench at Westminster, from the 12th. to
the 30th. Year of King Charles II. by Jos. Keble of Gray's Inn, Esquire; in Three
Vol. Folio. Kelway's Reports with New References to all the late Reports.
Folio. Reports of several especial Cases in the Court of Common Pleas, by S.
Carter of the Inner Temple, Esquire; Folio. An Assistance to Justices of the Peace,
for the easier Performance of their Duty, the First Part containing the
particular Clauses of all such Statutes from Magna Charta, until the first of
King James II. that do any ways concern a Justice of Peace; in the other Part,
the whole Office of a Justice of Peace is methodically digested, with the most
approved Presidents under proper Heads, to which is now added a Table for the
ready finding out the Presidents, with a large Table of the matters never
before Printed: By Jos. Keble of Gray's Inn, Esquire. An exact Abridgment of the
Records in the Tower of London, being of great Use for all that are concerned
in Parliamentary Affairs, and Professors of the Laws of this Realm, Collected
by Sir Rob. Cotton, Knight and Baronet. Folio. An exact Abridgment of the Statutes
of K. William and Q. Mary, and of K William III. in Force and Use. Begun by Jo.
Washington of the Middle Temple, Esquire; and since his Death Revised and continued
to the End of the last Session of Parl. Ap. 27. 1696. Oct. Price 4 s. The
Scrivener's Guide, Being choice and approved Forms of Precedents, of all sorts
of Business now in Use and Practice, in a much better method than any yet
printed; being useful for all Gentlemen, but chiefly for those who practice the
Law. Octavo. Price 5 s. Styles's Practical Register, begun in the Reign of K.
Charles I. consisting of Rules, Orders, and principal Observations concerning
the Practice of the Common Law in the Courts of Westmin. particularly the
King's Bench, as well in matters Criminal as Civil; carefully continued down to
this time. The Third Edition. Oct. Price 6 s. An exact Abridgment of all the
Statutes in Form and Use from the beinning of Magna Charta; begun by Edm.
Wingate, and since continued by J. Washington to the Year 1689. In this
Impression many hundred of false References are corrected. Price 7 s. Two
Dialogues in English between a Doctor of Divinity, and a Student of the Laws of
England, of the Grounds of the said Laws, etc. Price 2 s. 6 d. The new Natura
Brevium of the most Reverend Judge Mr. Anthony Fitz-Herbert, Corrected and
Revised. Price 6 s.
THE LIVES OF AELIUS SPARTIANUS, And the other AUTHORS, Composers of the Body
Of the following HISTORY, Extracted from the Second BOOK of Latin Historians of
GERARD VOSSIUS:
AELIUS SPARTIANUS,
THIS Author flourished in the time of the Emperor Dioclesian, to whom he
dedicates the Life of Adrian, as also those of Aelius Verus, of Didius
Julianus, of Severus, and of Pescennius Niger. He has likewise left us the Life
of Antoninus Caracalla, but without any Dedication. As for that of Antoninus
Geta, we find it addressed to Constantinus Augustus. It seems also from the
beginning of the Life of Aelius Verus, as if he had written the Lives of those
Emperors, who reigned before Adrian. And about the latter end of the Life of
that Emperor, he gives us a view of what he had designed, in these words;
Having proposed to my self to write the History of all those, who since the
time of Julius, have b^ (...) called Caesar's, or Augustus, or that have (...)
^rinces adopted, or Natural Sons of the (...)ors, or This relates to their
Apotheosis.
Consecrated as Caesar's Kind(...) But we have no Reason to believe that he
ever finished that Design, since Vopiscus, who lived after him, affirms in the
Life of Aurelian, that the Life of that Prince had never been written by any
one before himself. As to the rest, the Learned Salmasius tells us, that in the
Collection of Spartian' s Works, which he found in the Palatine Library, there
were further attributed to him the Life of Antoninus Pius, and those of
Antoninus the Philosopher, of Verus, of Pertinax, of Clodius Albinus, and of
Macrinus, which are published under the Name of Julius Capitolinus, and also
that of Avid^us Cassius, commonly supposed to be written by Vulcatius
Gallicanus; and moreover, the Lives of Commodus, of Antoninus Diadumenus, of
Heliogabalus, and of Alexander Severus, which are attributed to Lampridius. But
I shall have occasion to speak hereafter of those which are supposed to be
written by Vulcatius and Lampridius. As for the other that go under the Name of
Julius Capitolinus, Vossius had this Opinion of them, viz. that the particular
Collection of Lives, above mentioned, in the Palatine Library, is no sufficient
Reason for us to recede from the commonly received Opinion that Capitolinus was
the Author of them; nor ought we to be at all surprised that we find here as
many Books as there are Lives, nor yet at what Capitolinus himself somewhere
tells us, that he would if he saw it convenient, include the Lives of two or
more Emperors together in one Volume; for in fine, he was not always of the
sa(...) ^ind, having in the beginning designed a (...)lar Book for each Life,
and afterward i(...)d several Lives in one, as is evident from (...)
(...)ginning of the Lives of the Gordiani, whereof we will treat more largely
in the Life of Capitolinus. As for the Style of Spartianus, and the other
Composers of the following History, which we find commonly joined together.
Erasmus has this of them in his Ciceronian. One can find nothing, besides the
Truth of the History, in those Authors that is useful or entertaining; for, to
speak the Truth of them, they retain very little of the Purity of the Latin
Tongue. But here Erasmus is a little too severe, and what Reputation soever he
may have acquired for Learning, and particularly for his Knowledge in the Latin
Tongue, yet in this case, we ought no more to rely on what he says, than on
Horace in the Case of Plautus, or on Quintilian in that of Seneca and some
others, who, notwithstanding their Reflections, have continued to preserve an
inviolable Reputation.

Vulcatius Gallicanus THE S^NATOR.
TO understand how far Vulcatius Gallicanus had engaged himself to give us the
History of the times wherein he lived, we need only have recourse to those
words of his, in the Life of Avidius Cassius, which is the only one he has left
us, viz. I design, says he, to Dioclesian Augustus, to write the Lives of all
those, who, either justly or unjustly, have been styled Emperor, to the end, to
represent as it were at once to your view, all that have arrived to the
Imperial Dignity, or been honored by the Title of Augustus. But it is certain
that he never accomplished that Design, since Vopiscus (as I before mentioned)
tells us, speaking of himself, that he was the first that ever writ the Life of
Aurelian; and we may safely conclude that Vopiscus lived some time after
Vulcatius, since he makes mention of Trebellius Pollio, at the beginning of the
Life of Aurelian, and of Julius Capitolinus, and Aelius Lampridius, at the
beginning of the Life of Probus. But those were all contemporary with
Vulcatius. But it may not be unworthy our observation, that among the ancient
Collections of the Works of Spartian, in the Palatine Library, we find that of
Avidius Cassius, attributed there to him, as the Learned Salmasius has
remarked, who seems inclinable to think that they are one and the same Author,
both by reason of the time wherein he lived, and of the Style, and same Design
of the History; because, as Lampridius relates, he had proposed ^o himself to
write an History of all the Emper(...) ^ho lived since Julius Caesar, who had
been (...)fied by the Title of Caesar's or Augustus, and to make thereof as
many Books, as he should write Lives. Which you may also read in the third
Chapter of the Life of Avidius Cassius; The Lives of all those who had either
justly or unjustly been styled Emperors, as we have already remarked. We may
add to this, that as it is certain that Lampridius never accomplished his
Design, so the Author of the Life of Cassius has also left his imperfect. For
as I have already said, Vopiscus maintains that no one before him had written
the Life of Aurelian, and he has made no mention at all of Vulcatius, when he
had a very fair Opportunity of doing it, where he tells us; That in his
Memoirs, he would content himself to imitate Gargilius Martialis, Julius
Capitolinus, Aelius Lampridius, and others, who, in what they had transmitted
to Posterity, had been more observant of the Truth of the History, than of
elegance of Style. But it may be said, that he also comprehended Vulcatius in
these words, and others, etc. and that he would not express the Name of this
Author, because though he might propose to himself to write of all the
Emperors, yet that might only be perhaps out of some sort of Emulation of
Spartianus, and that there is great probability, he contented himself with only
the Life of Avidius, or perhaps some one more that may be since lost. To this
also may be added, that if this Life of Cassius had not been written by
Vulcatius, how comes it about that it never went under the ^ame of Spartianus,
of Lampridius, or of Ca(...)nus? Or if there had been any Error in the
Manuscripts, it is probable some would have gone under one Name, and some under
another, and yet we find in all the Copies, and all the Editions, the Name of
Vulcatius Gallicanus prefixed to them, which we find no where else; and in that
it is evident, the Copiers were not mistaken.

Julius Capitolinus.
HE has written the Life of Antoninus Pius, and addressed it to the Emperor
Dioclesian; whose Name he makes use of for the Life of Marcus Antoninus the
Philosopher, though none of the Editions have any Dedication prefixed to them. He
ddicates also to Dioclesian the Life of the Emperor Verus; to which, if that be
not rather to be attributed to Spartianus, we may further join the Life of
Pertinax. For the Life which we have under the Name of Claudius Albinus, is
dedicated to the Emperor Constantinus, and not to Dioclesian, as Casaubon
thinks in the beginning of his Notes on Spartian. We have also by him the Life
of Macrinus, and those of the two Maximim, and of the three Gordiani, dedicated
to the same Constantinus. As for those of Maximus and Balbinus, which we have
also under his Name, they are without any Dedication, and as for the rest which
he writ of other Emperors, they are lost. It is evident that he has not carried
on the same Design throughout his Work, of making a particular Book for each
Life, as he proposed at the beginning, but has fallen into another Method, as he
acquaint us himself at the beginning of the Lives of the Gordiani, where he
tells us expressly, that he had changed his mind as to that, and afterward
gives us his reason for so doing.

Aelius Lampridius.
THIS Author is one of those whom Vopiscus pretends to imitate in his Life of
Probus. We have Four Lives done by him, viz. those of Commodus Antoninus, of
Antoninus Diadumenus, of Antoninus Heliogabalus, and of Alexander Severus; the
Two latter whereof are dedicated to Constantinus Augustus. But we have some
reason, to doubt whether Lampridius was the Author of the Life of Alexander
Severus. It is true, it is attributed to him in the Edition of Milan, which is
the first that was ever extant, but that excellent Manuscript of the Palatine
Library, ascribes it to Spartianus, as does also Robertus a Porta of Bolonia.
But that Collection of Spartianus's Works in the Palatinate, whereof Salmasius
speaks, does not only, ascribe this Life to him, but also those of the Three
Antonini, which I have just now mentioned; which if it be true, there will not
one remain for Lampridius. But, be is as it will, we have no Reason to give
more Credit to the Palatine Collection, than to so many other Manuscrips of
Spartianus which have been published. Which notwithstanding if it seem to bear
too much upon those of the contrary Opinion, I shall be willing to persuade my
self that Aelius Spartianus, and Aelius Lampridius were the same Person, it
being east to apply that of Ausonius to the present Case.

Three names are commonly affected by Persons of Quality.

Moreover, besides those three or four Lives, Spartianus writ some other
between them and that of Marcus Antoninus, whereof he makes mention in the
beginning of the Life of Commodus: and yet notwithstanding did not Compose the
Lives of all the Emperors down to Constantinus, or to Dioclesian, as one may
easily guess from the Life of Aurelian written by Vopiscus.

Thus, as far as I see, we may without much difficulty Concede that Aelius
Spartianus, and Aelius Lampridius were the same Person, under three names, as I
have said before. And if this, or both, were of the Family of the Aeliani, from
which the Emperor Adrian also was descended, their Original was illustrious
enough: but this is all very uncertain, and we can draw no satisfactory
Conclusions from it.

Trebellius Pollio.
IN the first Edition of this Author which was at Milan, we find him called
Trevellius, and not Trebellius, according to Aventinus's Correction, in the
second Book of his Annals, where he speaks of Ancient Writers: But that, in the
Opinion of Vossius, was not at all necessary, For among Ancient Inscriptions,
says he, you may find, Trebellius Pelidianus, Trebellius Marinus, Proconsul,
Trebellia Tyche, and such like. We may add that Trebellius is formed from
Trebius, which is very frequently found among the said Inscriptions, as Trebius
Germanus, Trebius Longus, Trebia C. F. Filumena. Nay, as Salmasius remarks,
there are some Ancient Manuscripts to be seen, wherein this very Author is
called Trebius Pollio. Be it as it will, This Pollio, says Flavius Vopiscus in
the Life of Aurelian, Has Composed an History of the Emperors both those that
have rendered themselves famous, and those that have led obscure Lives, down
from the two Philips to Claudius, and his Brother Quintilius. But there remains
of this Authors, neither the Lives of the Philips, nor the Life of Decius, who
succeeded the Philips; neither those of Gallus and Volusianus, who came after
Decius. Also we have only one part left of the Life of Valerianus the Father,
toward the end: but we have that which follows, and also the Life of
Valerianus the Son, the Lives of the two Gallieni, and of the thirty Tyrants
who usurped the Empire in the time of Gallienus.

As to his Book, which he Entitles of the thirty Tyrants, it seems to have a
respect to the thirty Tyrants which Commanded in Athens after Lysander; and
without doubt this Author had a fancy to parallel the Roman Empire with that
State, in having also thirty Tyrants in the time of Valerianus and Gallienus,
because there were several. But he reckons no more than twenty nine, wherefore
to make up the number of thirty he adds Valens to them, who lived before, and
indeed he himself owns that he revolted in the time of Decius. But if we may
exceed the time of Valerianus, and Gallienus, we may add a great many more
besides Valens. Howsoever so small a fault as this scarce deserves Criticizing
upon the Judgment of this Historian: and there is yet less reason to reflect on
him for his admitting two Women into his List of Tyrants, viz. Zenobia and
Victoria: for it is common to denominate things from the Nobler Gender; thus
you see Women admitted into the number of Illustrius Poets, as Sappho and
Corinna; but for this Trebellius excuses himself at the latter end of his Work.
He lived in the time of Constantius Chlorus, Father of Constantinus, as we may
easily Conjecture, since he mentions him in the beginning of the Life of the
Emperor Claudius, Brother of Quintilius. Which agrees very well with what he
says of his Uncles being a Familiar Friend of the young Tetricus one of the
thirty Tyrants.

Vopiscus commends the diligence of this Historian at the beginning of the Life
of Firmus. Furthermore, if we consider the time wherein he lived, his Language
and Style are not unworthy of praise, whereof Gesner in the first Tome of his
Bibliotheca, gives this Encomium, that they are not without both Politeness and
Nicety; but that in some places his Style rises a little too high for History:
and Vossius is of the same Opinion.

Flavius Vopiscus.
THIS Author, a Sicilian Born at Syracuse, has writ the Life of the Emperor
Aurelian, and also of Tacitus, and his Brother Florianus; to which he likewise
adds that of Probus, which he Dedicates to Rufus Celsus, as he calls him in the
Life of Firmus. Afterward he Composed those of the four Tyrants, Firmus,
Saturninus, Proculus and Bonosus, and lastly those of the three Emperors Carus,
Numerianus, and Carinus at once, which is all remains of his; for we have no
Author that attributes any thing else to him. As for the time wherein he lived
we have sufficient Authorities to ascertain it. He tells us himself that his
Uncle was present at that Harangue made when Aper was killed by Dioclesian. In
the Life of Carinus he Celebrates the praises of Dioclesian and Maximinian, of
Galerius and Constantius, and says that each of their Lives was written in so
many particular Books by Claudius Eusthenius, Secretary to Dioclesian: And says
on that very Subject, it must not be Expected that he should do the same,
because it is very dangerous to Write the Histories of Princes while they are
alive. Whence it is Evident that he lived after the time Constantius Chlorus,
Father of Constantinus. And he says in the Life of Aurelian, We have at present
Constantius for our Emperor. But I am apt to think that that was the first Life
he Writ, and that he Composed that of Carinus after the death of Constantius:
for if it be not so, in the room of Constantius we must read the Emperor
Constantinus, or else understand Constantius, Son of the said Constantinus. But
the first of these two Opinions is far the most probable; and certainly, by
those words which we find in the Life of Probus, it is Evident that he Writ
long before that the life of Aurelian, viz. But since no other undertakes it, I
cannot suffer, after having been the only Person that has Writ the Life of
Aurelian (which I did as exactly as I could) and having also Composed the Lives
of Tacitus and Florienus, that that of Probus, and the memory of his glorious
Actions should lie buried in silence. If I live I design also to write all the
Lives of the Princes since his time down to Maximia^ and Dioclesian. Methinks
we have reason to praise, in Vopiscus, besides his Learning, the order which he
always observes, in the recital of what he Writes; which Spartianus,
Capitolinus, and the other Authors of the Imperial History have not took so
much care of, since in the Judgment of several, Affairs therein are far more
Confused. He had likewise proposed to himself to Write the Life of Apollonius
Tyanaeus, whose Sorceries the Gentiles made use of to oppose, and set up
against the true Miracles of Jesus Christ, and in the Life of Aurelian he calls
that Impostor, A Person who had acquired a vast Reputation by his Wisdom, in
the ancient Opinions of the Philosophers, a real Friend of Truth, and worthy of
Divine Honors. And a little after. What Person was ever seen more holy, more
venerable, more possessed of the Opinions of the Ancients, and more Divine
among Men? He restored Life to the Dead, and both spoke, and did many things
above the reach of human Power. But if any one would know more as to the
particulars, let him read those Grecian Authors who have written his Life. From
these words it is easy to guess, what a Rhapsody of Lies we might have
expected from Vopiscus concerning this Person, whom he so much admired, if he
had writ his Life, which he presently after promises in Language which
sufficiently testifies the Veneration he paid to his memory.


