Quis in seculo peccavit enormius Paulo? Quis in religione gravius Petro? illi
tamen per poenitentiam assequuti sunt non solum Ministerium, sed Magisterium
sanctitatis. Nolite ergo ante tempus judicare, quia fortasse quos vos laudatis,
Deus reprehendit, and quos vos reprehenditis, ille laudabit, Primi novissimi,
and novissimi Primi.

Petr. Chrysolog. THE PENITENT DEATH OF A WOEFVLL SINNER. OR, The Penitent
DEATH of JOHN ATHERTON, Late Bishop of Waterford in Ireland.

Who was Executed at DUBLIN the 5. of December, 1640. With some Annotations
upon several passages in it.

As also the SERMON, with some further Enlargements, preached at his Burial.

The second Edition.

By Nicolas Barnard Deane of ARDAGH in IRELAND.

London, Printed by G M. for W. Bladen, and are to be sold by R. Royston in
Ivy-lane, M.DC.XLII.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, JAMES Lord Archbishop of Armagh, Lord
PRIMATE of all IRELAND.
May it please your Grace,
THese little Tractates, as they derive their being from your Graces command;
so (like rivolets to the Sea) do they return to you again. Accept them as
the first fruits of your own Industry upon the Author; who must ever
acknowledge he owes himself also. What Epist. 31.
Paulinus writes to St. Augustine, Os tuam fistulam aquae vivae, and venam
fontis aeterni merito dixerim, cujus desiderio sitivit in te anima mea, and
ubertate tui fluminis inebriari terra mea concupivit, was indeed the cause of
my thirsting also, and the Lodestone that gave me a happy draught in your
service, many years agon out of my native soil into this Kingdom, which, me
thinks, this year by your absence has suffered a great Eclipse, and yet we
cannot grudge the Church in this floting age, such a Steeres man, nor so pious
a Prince, so precious an Earering. That which is related of the forenamed
Father, Eras. in Ep. ad Arc. Toled. an op. August and Possido^. de vit. August.
In ipsa mensa potius disputationem quam opulation^m d^lig^bat.
Mensam habebat hospitibus expositam, sed frugiferis sermonibus, magis quam
exquisitis edulijs opipuram, semper de re quadam frugifera commentabatur, ut
non minus animi convivarum reficerentur quam corpora, is so well known to be
your Graces daily practice, that it needs no further application, the offals
of whose Discourse carefully gathered up, were able to perfect a Divine to
every good work. In a word, Ibid. Quasi Deus voluerit in Augustino tanqua^ in
una tabula vividum quoddam exemplar Episcopi represeatare omnibus virtutum
numeru abselutum, etc.
Erasmus his description of him, by what S. Paul requires in a Bishop, me
thought in the reading ( mutato nomine) it was your own Picture, by which if
others in this age had been drawn, I believe the office had never been so
much as questioned.

The very subjects of both these Discourses were they wrote by whomsoever,
could not but claim an Interest in your Grace. The Conversion of Sinners, by a
Constant Preaching, who (unless a Stranger in Israel) but must acknowledge to
be your Character. Nay, this and much more, is no news to Fred. Spanhemius
Professor of Divinity in Geneva (dubiorum Evangelicorum part tertia) in his
Epistle Dedicatory, largely P. Bertius in tabul. Geograph. Speaking of Dublin
and the College, adds this only, Fameuse pour la presence de Iacobus Vsserius
Theologien honime de gran le crudition and piete, and sur tout celebre par ses
escrits, natif. de Dublin. Joan Seldom, marmor Arundell in editionis causa,
Reverend ss Antistes Jacobus Usserius Archiep Armachanus, vir summa pieta^e,
judicio singulari, usque, ad miraculum doctus, and literis severioribus
promovendis natus, etc I^. Casaubonus, Abrah Scultetus, Cambden: with diverse
others. By which, it is evident, that if some so advanced have miscarried, the
fault has not bin (as the vulgar apprehends) in the soil, but in the seed: Et
hisce commemorandis, nos vel utilitati publicae great ulamur, vel divinae
benignitati gratamur. Vt est enim modestiae, non agnoscere lauds, ita
gratitudinis, non tacere viros, per quos Deus tanta commoda largitur humano
generi.
Strangers, whose large Relation from abroad may prevent any further from home,
only it is no flattery to attest it. Your continued Motto of 1 Cor. 9 16.
Vaemihi si non evangelizavero, both in your Episcopal and Archiepiscopall
seals, is as worthy of memory, as imitation, where that Woe may light I know
not, but surely S. Paul's 2 Cor. 4.8.
reposita est mihi corona, will be your portion. How little your Grace affects
these kind of expressions, I am not now to learn, And for my self, let this
be my plea against any mis-judgings in others, Egregia virtutis exempla veluti
lumen in edito ponenda sunt, ut omnibus praelucea^t, multosq, ad aemulationem
accendant.
Rare examples ought to be set up like Mat 5.15, 16.
lights, where they may be seen; and in the words of S. Paul, I wish it might
be a Romans 11.14.
means to provoke to emulation those which are my flesh, and might save some
of them, Lu. 10.37
Factu similiter, is the only intended moral: Be still the Honor of your
Nation, the sacred first fruits of this College, the Prime light of this our
Israel, where (according to Joshua's wish) you may like the Sun stand still
in the Firmament of our Church, till all the enemies of it, be made its
footestoole. So prays many thousands, and among them, as having most cause,

Your Graces most humble and affectionate Servant N. BARNARD
Drogheda April. 28. 1641.
To the READER.
ACcording to my directions in some circumstances thou have here presented this
pensive Relation finished indeed long agone, but delayed the Press hitherto,
by some unusual miscarriage. Howsoever it falls out to be as seasonable now. A
scandalous ryming Pamphlet lately Printed in the abuse of him, diverse scattered
written papers full of mistakes (some pretended to have their Original from my
self) may likely have come to thy view as mine. Let this vindicate him, and
give thee full satisfaction in both. Had I bin commanded this service sooner,
thou might possibly have had some other useful passages remembered. And had
it not bin in so busy a time, it may be ^t might have appeared more refined.
As it is, for the Matter, believe it to be wholly true, as coming from one,
whom no relation whatsoever can suspect him partial. For the Style, the
plainer it is, the more fitting a Narration, and I have the rather affected it,
that the profit intended might b^ of a further extent. Read it with shunning
these two rocks, Presumption and Despair. The former by the difficulty and
hazar^ thou shall find him laboring in a^ the first, the latter, by that Mercy
he obtained at last, where thou see^ Gods special work, magnify it, any
blessed change in a sinner, rejoyc^ at it, any thing exemplary for the felf, be
not thy own enemy so much as to slight it. Let God have the Glory, thou the
benefit, the Church cleared of scandal, and h^ has his desire, who is

Thine in him, by whom are all thi^^s, N. B.

A Relation of the penitent Death of the said JOHN ATHERTON, Late Bishop of
Waterford: Executed at DUBLIN the fifth day of December, 1640. Written by
Nicolas Barnard Deane of Ardagh in IRELAND.
FOr his Arraignement, though it held long, I heard it not, only his carriage
then is by all condemned, and it is not my intent in the least measure to
excuse it. The subject of this Discourse is only to declare, how afterward he
judged, and 1 Cor. 11.32, 33. S. August. brings in God thus saying from Heaven
to a penitent sinner. Parcamus huic homini, quia ipse sibi non pepercit,
agnescamus, quia ipse agnoscit, conversus est ad puniendum se, convertar and
ego ad liberandum. in Psalm. 84.
condemned himself, and so we trust is not condemned of God. How he deeply
repented and 2 Chro. ^2.20.
cried to Heaven for pardon, whereof he received a rare memorable Testimony, as
we shall hear afterward.

On Saturday in the afternoon being the 28. of November, and the next day
after his Condemnation, I went to see him first, when having had some speech
with him of the Scandal of the Fact, Justice of the Sentence, Misery of his
Condition without Repentance, (of each of which he heard me long with silence)
at length he asked me, if I were sent by any to him, when he understood I was
not, but that I came of my self, he took me by the hand, and replied, I was
very welcome to him, believed I had no other end but his good, that indeed he
had been moved to send for me, but being thus come of my self, he took me as
sent of God. He acknowledged his stupidity and senslesnesse, desired me to take
a further liberty of Speech unto me, to preach the Law to him, to aggravate
his sins by the highest circumstances, that he might grow but sensible of the
flames of Hell: In subjects of this nature we spent near two hours, when I
left him pliable, only with this assurance, that in Peccavi peccatum grande,
turbata est conscientia, sed non perturbabitur, quoniam vulnera Domini
recordabor, non despero, quoniam ubi abundaveru^t delicta, superabundavit. and
gratia. Aug.
Christ his sins were pardonable. His request then was, that I would not
leave the Town, till I left him in better case, that as he had begun, so he
would continue to open himself unto me, and would in all things be ordered by
me, and prayed me to see the end of him; to which I yielded.

As a Preparative to the maine, I advised him to Lay aside all rich Jonah 3 6.
Exodus 33-4. Poenitentes serico and purpura In duti, Christum induere sincere
non possunt. Cypr. Qui Deo appropinquas, non vestiu^ quaere ornamenta, sed
morum. Aug.
clothing, and to put on the meanest he had. To let the Chamber be kept The
light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is, for the eyes to see the Sun,
Eccles. 11.7. The light of the eyes reioyeeth the heart, Prove. 15.30.
dark: To deprive himself of the solace of any Jer. 15.17. I sat alone, etc.
Lam. 3.28. He sits alone and keeps silence, etc. Zach. 1^.12. Every family
apart, etc. Peter went out of the company and wept, Luk 22.62. Quamdiu quis
permistus est turbis, and in multitudine fluctuantium volutatur, non vacat Deo,
nec potest esse sanctus. Origin. Hom. 8. sup. Levit. Johannes in Eten^o
nutritur, Christum expectat in solitudine. S, Chrysostom. compa^es Penitents
remaining still amongst company, to trees by the highway side, whose
fruitseldome comes to maturity, therefore (says he) when thou repentest,
Recede de iva, and planta te in loco secreto, ut nec mundus tecum ^habeat
aliquid commune, nec tu munde, etc. sup. Mat.
company, but such as came to give him spiritual counsel, and so to commit
himself close prisoner to his own thoughts, that if upon necessity any meat
was brought unto him, he should eat it in a solitary way alone; And chiefly to
give himself to fasting, 1 Samuel 12, 16, etc. i^iunium purgat mentem, subiicit
spiritui carnem, cor facit contritum, and humiliatum, conscientiae nebulas
disperdit, Aug. in sermon. de Jeiun. Poenitentia quasi punientia, quod poeniten
do se punit. Hug. de Mist. Eccles.
even to the afflicting of his body, which he had so pampered, as a means to
effect the sorrow of the Soul. To have his Ioh. 19.41. Joseph of Aromathea had
his Sepulcher in his Garden; Miser homo quare omni hora te non disponis, cogita
te iam mortuum, quem sis necessitate moriturum, cogita, qualiter oculi
vertentutin capite, venae rumpentur, cor scindetur, etc.
Coffin made, and brought into his Chamber, which howsoever they were but small
things in themselves, yet altogether were very conducible to a further end, as
he acknowledged afterward. I went to him usually three times a day. To relate
what discourse we had, and what most affected him would be tedious; In sum,
he first entered into a serious and special consideration of all his sins, In
thought, word and deed, of Omission, or Commission, against God, or man, which
he drew out according to the several Commandments, of which they were
breaches, and for his memory by his pen put all into one In Tribunal mentis
asce^de contrate, and reu^ constitue ante te, noli te ponere pos: te, ne Deus
te ponat ante te. Aug. de util. agend pen.
Indictment, wherein he might at once, as in a glass, view the face of his
soul. After this rough draught, that he might be the more astonished, he went
over them again with marginall aggravations, whereby they became exceeding
sinful, by the circumstances of time when, place where, and person against
whom, done against the light of knowledge, often checks of conscience, many
seasonable Admonitions in public and private, notwithstanding the ^pparent
hand of God in several crosses, special mercies, unexpected preservation.
Then he considered with what presumption ^e had sinned, even before Gods face,
though he knew he was by him, and looked on all the while, Hamans aggravation
for Esther, The Thieves condemnation to steal before the Judges eyes. What
hardness of heart after it, though he could not but know God was angry with
him, yet Non dolere quia peccaveris magis Irasci facit Deum, quam illud
peccatum, quod ante perpetraveris. Chrysostom. in Mas.
continued careless whether he were pleased or no: ( such an answer of a
servant in a small matter, would much incense his Master.) Simulata sanctitas
est duplex iniquitas. Aug.
His reproving, and sharp censuring others for the same faults (which must
needs leave him altogether See Romans 2.1, 2, 3, 21, 27, 23
inexcusable, and further bind him over to condemnation.) His often relapses
after vows in sickness, after receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
each of which sins so often See Amos 1 2. For three transgressions and for
four, etc Freque^tet lugens and peccans vix veniam obtinet, nihil prosunt
lachrymae, si replicantur peccata, nihil valet veniam poscere, and denuo
iterate. Aug.
reiterated, added to the heap, as multiplying of the same figures do in
numbers, ( a great Plea against a Rebel being often pardoned.) Upon this in
the next place did he make a stand, in thinking what a miserable condition he
must needs be in, if he should now dye in his sins: viz. A lost and undone
man for ever. He imagined with himself, as if he now saw the day of Judgment
set, heard the Trumpet sounding, the voice crying, Arise ye dead; as if he
Poenitentis est contemplati quid ipse sit, quid intra se, quid extra, quid
infra, quid supra, quid contra, quid ante, quid postea sic, Chrysostom. de symbol.
beheld the graves opening, the earth and sea, like Gods Goal, giving up the
prisoners, our Savior upon the Throne, in flaming fire, both judge, and
witness, Every man's life, and his among the rest, reading before men and
Angels, and in conclusion a final sentence pronouncing upon his body and
soul, Hell accordingly with his wide mouth enlarged to receive him, those
spirits of darkness ready to seize on him, etc.

These thoughts, and the like had their work upon him in some frights and
astonishments, but a spirit of Contrition and Compunction, he complained, was
far from him: How often did I hear him yet crying out, Oh! can you give me
any receipt that will work my heart into tears and sorrow, The eye of his
understanding, he confessed, was sufficiently enlightened, his conscience
smitten, but still his heart, and affections were hardened. All my friends,
says he, as ashamed of me, have forsaken me, But if God withdraw his Grace
from me, what shall I do? And so desired me to speak to any in the Town,
whom I thought would be compassionate of his Condition, to Plenissima
peccatorum obtinctur ablutio, quando totius Ecclesiae una est oration, imo
duoeum vel trium sanctorum pio consensui omnia quae poposcerint Dominus
praestanda promisit, praecipua est ratio utilitatis ubi vigilat cura communis.
Leo.
pray for him, for which he thought there was more cause than for any bodily
sickness. And here by his own experience (whatsoever he had before uttered)
he utterly condemned that doctrine of Free Will naturally in man to any saving
good, that Etsi datum fuisset voluntati, posse state, ne caderet, non tamen re
surgere si caderet, non enim tam facile est exire de fov^a qua^ in eam labi,
Po^es a te deficere, sed teipsum reficere non potes, ille reficit, quite fecit,
Aug. in Psalm. 91. See this subject fully opened, and the ancient doctrine of
the Church declared in the now Lord Primates Answers to the Jesuits Challenge
of Free Will.
though it be in his own power, thus to kill himself, yet it is not to make
himself alive again. How firmly did he now believe Repentance to be the Act.
5.31. 2 Timothy 3.15. A quo ho no habet ut sit, apud illum habet ut been sit,
Conversio non homini, sed Deo fit ascribenda. Aug:
gift of God, that it is he that works the will Phil. 2.13.
and the deed? How happy did he apprehend those that had broken hearts, though
not bound up again with comfort, And how unhappy such, whose hardened hearts
could not repent, though swimming in all earthly contents? And yet herein he
had a door of hope, that his dry soul in time should be watered with this dew
of Heaven, in that God did not give him over with Cain unto despair, but still
he stuck to his first Principle, that mercy was attaineable, his sins
pardonable. The thing he only wanted was Gods act in Zach. 12.10.
pouring upon him that spirit of Grace, and supplication, whereby he might
mourn, and be in bitterness of weeping for them: That there was a Zach. 13.1.
fountain of salvation opened to him for sin and for uncleanness, He saw;
but his case was like the poor impotent man at the Ioh 5.7.
poole of Bethesda, wanted one to put him in; his first supporter in this case
was that of Nehemiah, who desires Neh. 1.11.
to fear thy Name, that of our Savior, You Mat. 11.28.
that are heavy laden, Ioh. 7.37. Rev. 22.17.
and whosoever will, whosoever is a thirst, come; And indeed this was some
change in him, before he was wont to fling the thoughts of grief out of his
mind, did his utmost to put them from him; Now he bewailed their absence, he
grieved that he could not grieve, To be altogether insensible, is very opposite
to the State of Grace, but to be sensible of an Insensiblenesse proceeds from
some already. The fight and sense of sin was some Cum Deus mentem ingreditur,
procul dubio mox poenitentiae gemitus sequatur. Greg.
pledge of a further perfection, at least that God had not given him over unto
death, as Manaohs wife said to her husband, if Judge. 13.23.
the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have shown us thus much, nor
told us such things as these.

In this wrestling with God for repentance, and such a measure of godly sorrow,
that might be Necessaria est poenitentia, quae aut aequet erimina aut excedat.
Hie. 10.^.
proportionable for so great a sinner, was Monday, and part of Tuesday spent by
him: When in the afternoon upon some further discourse, the sore of his soul
being now ripened, burst forth, and his mind being Quia tui plenus non sum ideo
mihi oneti sum. Aug. Conf.
a burden to himself, he unloaded his Conscience to me in some particulars,
but with such a flood of Oration Deum levit, sed lachryma cogit, oration sicca,
est bonum opus, at qua^do per lachrymas irrigatur, est Holocaustu^ pingue.
Greg. in Psalm. 20.
tears, casting himself down to the ground, taking me by the hand, and
desiring me to kneel down by him, and pray for him, that I have never seen
the like, whereas before he could swallow gross acts without trouble, now
only the thoughts of his heart, put him to a most grievous Agony, that
astonished me, and wrung many tears from my self. A good foundation to begin
at the heart. Nolite co^temnere peccata, quia minima, sed timete quia plura;
timenda ruina multitudinis, etsi non magnitudinis, nonne bestiae minutae, si
multae, necant, guttae pluviae flumina implent, and domos deiicient. Aug de
december Chordis. Act. 8.22
evil thoughts and affections howsoever common, yet ought to be of no small
reckoning with us, the first sin of the Devil (being a spirit) could be no
other.

And here it is observable that, as they say, a Pine Apple or a Flint are sooner
broken upon a soft bed, then on a hard floor; Pray if the thought of thy heart
may be forgiven etc.
so the representing unto him, the most compassionate, Exodus 34.6. Psalm. 103.
Jer. 3.12, 13.
merciful Nature of God, willing yet to be friends with him, so apt to
forgive, and forget all injuries, I say, the opening unto him the infinite,
Melius est de misericordia Dei rationem reddere qua^ de austerita te. Chrysostom.
in Mat.
sweet disposition of him, whom he had offended, raised up in him this holy
indignation against himself, and was a means to melt him into an entrance of
this happy condition: Many that never could be Saepe quos flamma non torruit,
quos ferrum non subdidit, bla^dimenta flexerunt. Cassicdo. in Psalm. 119.
moved with threatenings, have been overcome with kindness; It is the Argument
of the Apostle, Romans 12.1. as elsewhere.

And after this by some interruption of other Company, I was compeld to leave
him till late at night, when I found him getting further ground of himself,
and that time was the first I heard him pray, the maine subject being a
sorrowful, large confession of his vileneffe, with deep aggravations,
prevalent arguments for mercy ^ ^^^earty thankfulness for any beginnings of
breakings in him, and sending a Brother willing to bear the burden with him,
which with diverse others were so aptly and fully expressed, and in that latitude,
that as it was beyond my imagination, so it wrought much upon my affection, and
this was the first time he said, he ever felt indeed what belonged to prayer:
He had said one over often as others usually do, but he found a great
difference between that and the ^n oratione multum loqui non est semper multum
precari; hoc enim est fervente cordis intention pulsare, and plerumque plus
gemitibus, quam sermonibus agitur, plus fletu, quam afflatu, Aug: ad Prob.
spirit of prayer, and so we parted for that night.

The next day, he desired we might keep together in the Nature of a solemn
Fast, when no body came to him but my self from nine of the Clock, till
between three and four in the afternoon, which he set apart for the finishing
what he had begun before. Such a countenance of O quam dura sunt ista mihi quae
loquar; quonia^ me psum loquendo ferio Hugo: l^^. de animae.
a perplexed soxle did I never see, as his seemed to me that morning at our
first meeting, so sore had the weight of his sins pressed his feeble
Conscience, that night in a private Audit between God and Himself.

At our entrance, he desired me again to stir up in him a further apprehension
of his wretched Condition, how odious his sins had made him in his sight, with
whom he had now to do, that the nearer he drew to God, the more he might, like
Job 42.6.
Job, abhor himself, to use his own words, J pray (says he) deal truly,
freely and impartially with me. Look not upon me, as one that has had some
honor in the Church (from which J am worthily fallen) but as upon the most
abject, base person in the world; He was resolved to set himself as before Gods
Tribunal, and to power forth his heart fully unto me, the thing he only
desired, was a further spirit of Compunction, that his eyes, might be like
Jeremiahs, I^^. 9.1.
a fountain of tears, to weep day and night: After some such instructions as
he had desired, he fell upon his knees with a most affectionate prayer, in the
acknowledging of Gods Omnipresence and Omniscience, infinite Wisdom and
Justice, etc. praying for a further sense and sorrow for those sins which he
was now about to rip up without any extenuation or concealing, and so set open
his heart indeed in a plenary particular Confession of all his sins he could
remember from his youth till now, [ The heads of which he had for his memory
penned,] but with such Petrum ter negantem amatae restitere lachrymae, non
invenio quid dixerit, sed quod flevit amare; tu simi it er lachrymis dilueculpa
Amb. sup. Luc.
bitter O lachryma humilis, tua potentia, tuu^ regaum tribunal iudicis non
vereris, inimicorum tuorum accusationibus silentium imponis, magis crucias
diabolum, quam paena infernalis, vincis invincibile^, ligas omnipotentem, etc.
Hieron. in Epist.
Tears, such sorrowful sighs, The whole time either upon his knees, Ier.
3.29. He puts his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope, etc.
or prostrating himself upon the ground, as cannot be expressed: Which took so
with me, Cum volumus afflictum quempiam ab ettore suspendere, ordo
consolationis est, ut studeamus prius maerendo cius luctui concordare; dolentem
non potest consolari, qui non concordat doloti, quia eo ipso quod a moerentis
afflictione discrepat, minus ab illo recipitur: Emoliti debet animus, ut
afflicto congruat, congruens inhaereat, inhaerens trahat: ferrum ferro non
coniungitur, si non utrinque liquetur, etc. Gregor. in Moral.
as I never wept more at the loss of my dearest friend: And in Conclusion
after he had thus unlocked [to use his own words] the Magazin of his sinful
soul, [for which his shame was as evident as his grief] he entreated me if I
could discern any true penitency in him, and judged him to be in the state of
Pardon, 2 Cor: 5.19 To us is committed the word of Reconciliation. Vbi
Pater-familias est largus, dispensator non debet esse avarus, si Deus benignus,
quid sacerdos austerus, Chrysostom: in Mat.
To pronounce it to him in Christ's stead, that it would be some comfort to his
Conscience for me to declare so much unto him: But what tears fell on both
sides, how he prayed both before and after, that God would ratify it in
Heaven, and seal it inwardly to his Soul, can scarce be imagined.

Now howsoever he found some present ease in this Nisi a semetipso deficiat, ad
eum qui supra se est, non appropinquat, August.
emptying himself of himself, yet still he grew very jealous, that he was not
yet come to that depth of sorrow requisite for so great a sinner. The fears and
troubles of Francis Spira he wished for, whose life and death he had a great
desire to read, but I thought it not fitting. One thing that troubled him long,
was my weeping with him, gathering from thence, that if an ear-witnesse were so
moved, what should the party himself be plunged into; He began to find already
such Fit pleru^que ut in ipsis piis fletibus gaudii claritas crumpet and men's
suspiriis vegetata, ad inspectionem fulgoris intimi convaleseat, Greg: in Mor.
sweetness in tears for sin, as he was praying like those in the Gospel, John
6.34
Lord evermore give us this bread, Psalm 80.^ The bread of tears. Flotus est
cibus animae, refectio mentis, Cass: in Psalm:
desired there were a Well of such living water in him, that might stream down
his cheeks continually, Frequenter mentem ita allevant fletus, refrigerant
pectus and moestum consolantur, ut est piis fletibus quaedam flendi volun as,
Ambr.
wished that he might be in them wafted over into another world, and till then
not to be wiped from his eyes. After this, many conflicts and doubts assaulted
him, which would be too many to relate; Perplexed he was at the Consideration
of some passages of Humiliation in Ki^: 21 27
Ahab, Acts 24.25
Felix, Matthew: 27.4
Judas, finding that wicked men may cry earnestly for mercy and yet have little
love to God, less to Grace. A passage he read casually of Francis Spira
disturbed him more, viz. That he begged for grace it self, as a bridge to get
to Heaven by. Sometimes he doubted if the time and cause of his return, being
so late, and out of necessity, would be accepted, (according to such
threatenings in Prove. 1.26, 27. and the like.) Seldom did he think of any
passionate fit of mourning, such as David's for 2 Samuel 18.33.
Absalom, but he thought presently it checked him for his sins, to be as
nothing, which being so great, and the issue so miserable, even the loss of
his Soul, he judged should have exceeded them much, both in measure and
continuance. When in these and diverse others he was satisfied, then fears of
another nature rose, viz. That if he were truly getting out of the Devils snare
it could not be, but he should be pursued with further horrors and terrors,
tending to Quide peccatorum venia desperet, negat Deum habero charitatem,
veritatem, potestate^, charitate^ adoptionis, veritatem promissionis,
potestatem remissionis, ergo ex Diabolo, Aug. in Enchyrid. cap. 20.
despair, which he had not felt: In this he was thus satisfied, that
expectation of temptations was a preparation for them, and such the Devil did
not usually set upon: And that if ever he did appear it would be in some
wiles, and at such times as he should least suspect he had a hand in them,
which I verily believe did so fall out in some distractions afterward. The
many Objections, which he not only found, but studied against himself, as it
was a task to clear; so a School to learn much experience in, so cautelous
was he of any Rocks, which in this mist might split him, so suspicious of any
Sands, that might swallow him, so accurate in searching out any secret Leake
within himself, that might sink him; so fearful and full of doubts was he,
till he found himself Anchored upon safe and firm ground, Phil. 2.12.
A blessed fear, a happy trembling. The Story of 2 Chro. 33.11, 12.
Manasses he read often, who beginning to repent in Fetters, as he had now in
prison, was a comfort to him. That of S. Paul to the Corinthians, the 1. Epist.
6. Chap. verse. 9, 10, 11. And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but
ye are sanctified, But ye are justified, etc. was the like.

On Thursday the next Morning he desired to receive the Communion, when I
provided my self with such matter as I conceived fit for him, by way of
preparation, and so with 1 Coral 1.20 33.

As some of the Fathers call the Eucharist, a publik work not a private Mass;
a communion.

1 Cor: 10.16


some others appointed to Communicate with him, he received it with
penitential expressions, and after that was somewhat comforted. He desired me
to stay Dinner with him, as the last set meal he intended in this World. The
magnanimity of the Man I did much admire, his cheerfulness in counting how
many hours he had to live, his solid Counsel to his wife, who [upon his
discourse of death and thankfulness to God for this punishment] fell into a
passion, his comforting of Her that he was upon an advancement; and why should
she be against it? that his sins were not the greater for the shame he was to
suffer, that the only thing to be feared in death, is the guilt of sin, 1 Cor.
15.56
The sting of it, which he hoped was now taken out, that he trusted God, who
had forgiven the sin, would also in time abate the scandal and provide for Her
also, if she could by Psalm 37.3
Faith rely upon him.

That afternoon [the storm in his Conscience being somewhat allayed] we had
many Sicut post vehementes imbres saepe aeris tranquillitas se quitur, ita and
post lachrymarum pluvias mentis serenitas, Chrysostom: supr: Mat.
calm and comfortable discourses of the privileges of Christians, admitted to
be not only John 15.14
servants, friends, but Rom: 8.17
sons of God, Heirs and Coheirs with Christ, called his Love, his Spouse,
said to be Rom: 7 4.
married to him, to have a 1 John 1.3.
fellowship with him, etc. which he desired to have largely declared unto him.
Then was his Coffin brought into his Chamber, [though he was displeased he had
it not long before] it came seasonably, he now looked on it with little
consternation of mind, as on his bed he must sleep in: And yet even then
another thing troubled him, which he feared, was a stupidity, viz. that he
should be no more afraid of death, having also slept quietly the night before;
in which after he was satisfied, yet it fell so out that the next night he was
disquieted, which he took as a punishment for his former desire of troubles and
fears, and so gave it over.

One passage he took special notice of, that the same friend of his, who not
many days before had bin very harsh with him, fearing the party to whom he had
given up himself was too Primordia conversoru^ blandis refovenda sunt modis,
qui sine lenitate erudit, exasperate potius, qua^ corrigere novit, Isidor de
sum bon. cap. 8.
mild, and would not deal roughly enough with him, etc. now visiting him
again, and finding that change in him, wished his soul in his case, and applied
all comforts to him, which coming from the same mouth that had used him so
sharply before, drew many tears of joy from him, and confirmed him; diverse
Divines, with others that came to visit him, did the like, and rejoiced much at
the sight of him. It was S. Augustines practice in reproving the worst of me^,
ut semper vino severitatis admisceat oleum Jenitatis. Such was his Counsel to
an Italian Bishop in Afric, For reducing his drunken charge to sobriety,
Diligenter literis admonuit, ne id faceret acerbius obiurgando, sed lenibus
monitis paulatim inveterato morbo mederetur, Eras. in Ep. ante Op: Aug^ad Arch:
Toled. In the Arc of the Tabernacle, as there was the rod of Aaron, so the pot
of Mannah, Virga correctionis, Manna dulce dinis: Upon which, as that of David
Psalm 23. Thy word is a Rod and a Staff. S. Hierome gives this Counsel to a
Minister, Sit discretio virgae quae feriat, sit consolatio baculi quae
sufientat: As with one hand he must smite with the Rod of the Law, so with the
other he must support with the staff of the Gospel. There are three sorts of
voices [saith a Father] to be used by a Pastor, Alta, tenuis, dulcis, alta ad
surdum, tenuis ad infirmum, dulcis ad morientem. Our Savior cries out with a
loud voice to Lazarus in his grave ( John 11.43.) he comes with a mild, still
voice to Elias, distressed in a cave, (1 Kings 19.12.) He proclaims a sweet
name of mercy to Moses, that lay under his hand in the clift of the Rock (
Exodus 33.22. cap. 34.6.)


That night his prayers were to my admiration [with which his desire was, we
might every time we parted conclude:] It Is known what an excellent faculty he
had naturally, in a ready present expression of what he understood, either in
Ecclesiastical or Civil affairs. Now God had given him another heart, he did
as much excel in spiritual. How desirous he was still to be put upon the
Trial for saving grace, by any signs or discoveries [with which we run
through many] would be impertinent to spend time in.

Naturally he was not apt for tears, but now he was a man of tears; before
given to pride and vainglory, now so Beatus cuius vita excelsa, spiritus
humilis, excelsa Christiani est patria, humilis via.
humble, so thankful for the Counsel of the meanest person, so attentive to
any advise, so open in the abasing and condemning himself to whomsoever came
at him; his very countenance was altered. When he heard of my Lord Deputies
death [who had no long sicknesse] with others who died suddenly, being in
health at his Condemnation, his Application to me was, what cause he had to
bless God it was not so with him, who must undoubtedly then have Impossible
est ut quis hic ventrem, and in coelo mentem impleat, ut de deliciis tra^seat
ad delicias, gaudere cum seculo and regnate cum Christo, Hieron: ad Julian.
sunk down to hell. What thankfulness did he confess, he owed to God and
man for this weeks preparation. Apprehended it as no small token of Gods love
to him, in giving him his portion of Psalm 83.16.

Fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy face, O Lord Ezekiel. 16 63.


shame in this world, as a means to shun it in the world to come, which he once
expressed with such a height of affection, as I wondered at it, believing that
nothing but Schola crucis, schola lucis: The men of this world are often
infoeliciter foelices: Gods children are sometimes foeliciter infoelices; happy
in being unhappy here, August in Psalm 127
this, or the like, would have wrought upon his masterlesse disposition, which
under any other troubles he feared should still have lingered, like Genesis
19.16.
Lot in Sodom, [ready to be fired] till he was hailed out, or like Cattle
within a house and fire about them, yet stir not, till they are drawn out. It
was so with the Israelites, Isa. 42.25. The like he judged of himself. And
herein he was so far from bearing any hatred to such as had prosecuted him,
that he accounted them his best friends, applying the case of Tull: 3. de de
na^: deorum: gludio vomicam eius aperuit, quam medici sanare non poterant:
Multi enim etiam cum o^esse vellour, prosuerunt, and cum prodesse, obsuerunt.
Pheraeus Jason to himself, whom his enemy running through with a sword, opened
an impostume, which the Physicians could not cure. That howsoever his enemies,
as Joseph said of his brethren, might intend his hurt, yet God had turned it to
his good; by this death, they had saved his life; and so he owed them thanks,
acknowledged Gods goodness to him in his sudden surprizall and strict
imprisonment, that as no Council would come unto him, so he was not permitted
to go into the Town to them, by which liberty, it may be some evasions might
have bin contrived for his escape, which would have prooved his everlasting
undoing. That speech of his, Perijssem, si non perijssem* Or that of another
[whom a shipwreck occasioned the being a Phylosopher] Tum* secundis veli^
navigavi, quando naufragium feci, was in substance his often application to
himself. After the L. Deputies death, when the rumor of some hope of a
reprivall came to his ears [by such who thought they did him a good office]
till another governor succeeded, it moved him not, as rather choosing a present
deserved death, than the prolonging of an ignominious life, whereby the scandal
[which he was now most troubled for] would but increase. He did so Esto parvus
in oculis tuis, ut sis magna, in oculis Dei, tanto eris apud Deum pret osiot,
quanto fueris apud te* ipsum despectior, Chrysostom,
abhor himself, that once a thought rising within him to have petitioned to
have been beheaded [for which some Presidents he could have produced] he told
me he answered himself, by himself, with indignation, that a dogs death was
too good for him, and so judged himself to the last; which appeared by this
particular, that he was casting with himself, where he might be buried, so as
to be out of remembrance, wished his grave were in the bottom of the Sea,
where he had deserved to be cast with a Mat: 18.6.
millstone about his neck, for that offense and scandal he had given, The
Churchyard he thought was too much honor for him. And in conclusion, least
his friends being left to themselves, should have procured some better place,
he sent for the Clarke of S. John's, and the verger of Christs-Church [of which
he was once Prebend] to whom I was a witness of his charge, that they should
not suffer him to be buried in that Church or in any ordinary place in the
Churchyard, but appointed it in the furthest corner, where some rubbish was
used to be cast, and where none could be remembered ever to have been buried
before, when with many tears to them he condemned himself, as unworthy of the
Communion of the dead, as now of the living. After this he related unto me in
several discourses, diverse observable passages in his former life, and since
he came into the Castle, tending to the magnifying of Gods Justice and Mercy to
him, some of which he left to my Judgment, if the knowledge of them might be
useful to others. The Paternitas est nobis sacramentum, and imago divinae
paternitatis, ut discat cor humanum in eo principio, quod videt, quid debeat
illi principio, a quo est, and quod non videt, Hugo de sancto victore, l 1. de
Sacram cap. 1. Obs: Levis: 19 3

The mother is put in the first place: In matribus id conside^atur, quanta cum
solitudine nos in utero geslaverint, quanto ^um dolor pepererint, quanto cum
labor infantes aluerim, ^arvulos educaverint, etc. Our Savior himself was
subject ^o his parents, Luc. 2.51. And took a special care for his mothers
maintenance, John 19.26, 27. Upon which S. Hierom excellently. Venerabatur
matrem, cuius ipse crat pater, co^ebat nutricium, quem nutriverat. Nam omnis
actio Christi, in^^ructio Christiani.


dis-respect and neglect of his mother since he came to ability, he
acknowledged, according to the fifth Commandment, to be just that his days
should be shortened. (As his own Exaudiri Deum parentum benedictiones ^irca
morigeros filios, and contra maledictiones, quas attrahunt ^mmorige^i, plurimum
apud iustitiam divinam valere, experi^ntia comprobatum est, exempla sunt pene
innumera.
Father once solemnly passing such a sentence on him and foretelling long
agone, this would be his end, has bin assured me also by one who had it from
an ear-witnesse:) His often, In^umerabilia sunt talia iusta iudicia Dei, quae
omnia, si scire ^uisquam velit, quam varia sint and assidua, arenarum numerum,
^em iam desipiens, and montium pondera scrutari potetit, Am^ian. Maced. Hist.
l. 14.
wishing would he were hanged, if his, or that be so, etc. (which ^n some
protestations fell out to ^e false,) went not in the same justice unobserved.
His once in anger, and by way of revenge scaring his mother, that he would go
hang himself on a common Gallows they rode by, with his horses bridle. This,
howsoever done in his youth, and not meaning, yet he observed Gods justice in
bringing him to it in earnest. Let these be warnings to the living in the like,
His reading of naughty books, [of which he named some, and wished they were
burned] Saene oculas lucidissima pass corparts (...) i^ to^ebras ^rahi^, Fran:
Pe^^^e caecita^e d^a^ 19^,
viewing of immodest pictures, frequenting of Plays, Prove: 23.31 33.

Rom: 13, 13, etc.


Drunkenness, etc. were causes and inticements to these foul facts* Let men
by this example forbear them. About three weeks [as I take it] before the
complaint was put in against him in Parliament, the man who had before bin the
corrupter of him in his youth, whom he had not seen in twenty years before,
came casually out of England into this Kingdom, and visited him; the sight of
whom did so affrigh^ him, as if some Ghost had appeared to him, he said, his
very heart mis-gave him, and his Conscience apprehended him, as some presage,
or messenger of a present vengeance drawing nigh him. His too much zeal and
forwardness, both in introducing and pressing some Church observations, and in
dividing himself from the house of Convocation, Anno 1634. in opposition to the
Articles of Ireland then voted to be received, of purpose to See it condemned,
Gal: 1.10 Jude verse ^6 1 These: 2.4. We are called the salt of the earth ( Mat:
5 1^.) One glosse^^ well, S(...)ches m^r^ ^e found, seasoned, not with flattery
sweetened: Salt was accepted in every Sacrifice, honey in none: No^ sunt qui
m^gis in exen biis esse debeant in hac re quam Principes and Magnates, quibus
nunquam deerant Parasiti, Hi sunt Palatini cane, Fabri laudis, figuli
fal^itatis, qui ut emungant munera, oleo adula^ionis inungant. Alanus de
complauctu naturae.
please some men's persons, who had notwithstanding [with just cause] now
forsaken him, passed not without taking notice of a just hand in it also, and
from which he gave good Counsel to others.

Acknowledged he had at diverse times many sore gripings and checks of Nequ^^ia
ipsa est sui paena, men^ mala conscientiae propriis giratur stim^li^, Chrysostom.
Conscience, which sometimes held him two or three days together; but he had [as
S. Stephen said to the Jewes] Acts 7.51
resisted always the holy Spirit till now. In times of sickness or in any
frights or fears of death, his Conscience would be Vir iniquus and afflictus
conscientia, plus mali patitur, qua^ ille qui in corpore castigatur and flagris
caeditur; Men's scelerati, habet nescio quos carnifices in ternos, Beroaeldas.
a very Hell within him, so that once he had gone so far, as to resolve upon
amendment, had composed in Latin a large Prayer in the confession of his sins,
which he repeated to me, and had at several times used it [he put it into that
language, least any of his servants over-hearing him should understand] and for
a fit made some Reformation, but returned again 2 Pet. 2.21, 12.
Like the Dog to his vomit, and like the Hog washed to the mire. Some
discourses from a Vid: hist: Eccles: Russi^ lr o. c 3. Insignam que^dam
Phylosophum victum fuisse a Christiano illiterato, in Council. Nice^ q Acts
18.^6 Cor: 1.27, 28.
Layman, since he came into the Castle, had some work upon him for the
present, but he had still endeavored to put far from him all thoughts that
might disquiet him, all which he took notice of, as somewhat comfortable to
himself, that Duos filios habet pater, unus dimittitur, and non corripitur,
alter colaphis caeditur, huic eaeso haereditas servatur, ille dimissus, ut
faciat quod vult, exhaereditatus est, stultus ille and imprudens, si attendit
quid pariatur and non attendit, quid illi servetur. Aug. in Psalm. 93
God ever follows such as belong to him with all sorts of means, till he
brings them to Repentance; when mild purges will not work, he Psalm. 78. Psalm
105. Amos 4.
prescribes stronger, when the secret voice of the Conscience within, nor the
Admonitions of the word without will move, then he uses louder cries to awaken
them, Poverty, Disgrace, nay 1 Cor. 5.5.
Destruction of the body, that the soul may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus.

There were many more evident signs of a true change in him, besides what I
have related. His giving satisfaction to any he had wronged even in small
matters. His sending for some that were mean persons, and asking them
forgiveness. Those whom he had prosecuted too bitterly in the high Commission
Court, endeavoring to his uttermost to take off their fines. His care for the
satisfying his smallest debts. His admomonishing many that came unto him, not
to presume by his example to Age poenitentiam du^ sanus es, tum enim securus
et, quia poenitentiam, egisti, cum peccare potuisti; in extrema necessitate
tuae aegritudinis, peccata te dimiserunt, non tu illa. Aug sermon. 36^* Luke
22.33.
differ Repentance, who with much hazard, and difficulty had obtained it. His
good and savoury counsel to my self, I shall not forget, according to that
command given to S. Peter, Mat. 6.3. Let not thy left hand know what thy right
hand does, etc. i. e. as S. Ambrose thy familiar frinds. Eleemosina parva
magnum est opus, majus si latet, qui laudem hominum intuens, dedit fibi, non
pauperi dedit, ant si quid dedit, vendidit, non donavit, pretium estilli
videri; non temper tamen culpa est videri, sed velle videri.
When thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren. For his family, his
resolutions, [if he had lived to have reformed it] that they should have been
Gods servants, or none of his: For himself, his intentions to have given over
all Law businesses, and have wholly employed his time in Preaching, and the
studies of the Scriptures, which he had neglected, I doubt not, but would have
been steadfast, but (says he) now I hope God will give me the knowledge of
these mysteries by some quicker way. His giving some alms to the poor with a
charge to the party, that it might not be known from whence it came, were good
things in him. But more especially it appeared in his pious Letters to his wife
and children, hereunto annexed; the latter of which is most worthy of memory,
as wrote the night before his Execution; in the difference of them somewhat
will appear of his growth in that time. It is scarce to be believed in this
little space, how much he had read in some practical books of our late
Divines, [the being not acquainted with whom before, he much bewayled] in
special that of Doctor Prestons of Gods all sufficiency, and Bishop Downhams
of the Covenant of Grace [ which had been called in] did him much good, his
conversing with M. Fox his book of Martyrs, in viewing the manner of some
godly men's deaths, did much animate him against his own.

The night before it was a wonder to see his resolution in taking leave of his
children, and giving them good counsel, and to one of them the said Letter,
and some hours after his taking his last farewell of his wife, who was the more
passionate, his affectionate and heavenly counsel to her, comforting her, and
instructing her was to my admiration, and in conclusion told her he had wrote a
Letter 2. or. 3. days agon, which she should receive about the time of his
Execution, which if she observed, their next meeting would be in Heaven. Then
late at night he sent for all the servants of the house, gave them each
several admonitions with tears, who all wept, as if they had been his own.
His speech to me, not long before his leaving the Castle is not to be omitted,
viz. It may be, (says he) if they do not bury me till Sunday, you will be
desired to preach then, but J pray, Esse humilem, est molle laudari, qui
appetit, superbus esse convincitur. Aug. Si vere laudabili^ esse cupis, lauds
hominum non requiras H^oron.
speak no good of me, only what may abate the scandal, and be an useful
warning to others, he was willing to. That which he chiefly then requested of
me, as his last, was; As soon as J had seen the end of him, to continue my
endeavors for the good of his, in a present comforting and counselling his
wife and children, whom he prayed might with contentedness make the same
sanctified use, he had done himself.

And now we are drawing nigh the saddest part of the story for his body, but
yet the most comfortable for his soul. His sowing time in tears ye have
heard; now follows his Psalm. 26.6.
reaping in joy, of which some sheaves he carried with him hence, which is the
most memorable thing in the whole Relation.

After he had with great industry and watchfulness obtained some testimony
unto himself of his repentance, and so hope of mercy, all his earnest desire
was, that God would but give him Ps. 86.17.
some token for good, in fealing it now to him, by the comforts, and
Love Tokens of his Spirit. He had read much of that joy 1 Pet: 1.8. Romans 15.13.
unspeakeable and glorious, of the Psalm. 4.6.
Light of Gods countenance, which David valued above all the world, heard much
of the Est gaudiu^ quod non datur impiis, sed iis solu^, qui te gratis colunt,
quorum gaudiu^ tu ipse es; and ipse est be^ta vita, gaudere de te prop^er te*
Aug. Confess.
Consolations, and refreshments of the soul by the inward witness of the
Spirit, but, Oh! how he thirsted the day before his Execution, to have some
taste of them, which would fully arm him against the fear of Death. He said,
he could remember in his Pueritia a puritate Varro. Heb. Bar purus. qui in
adolescentia se demant, ut Deo se seciant, praemium Iohannis Baptistae
expectant, tales efferunt hostiam viventem, and Deo placentem, and immaculatam,
etc. Hug. in lib. de Claust. anim.
youth, before his soul was stained with sin, when he lived for a time in
some conscionable way, in a certain religious family, he had some short
flashes of such sweetness, that was of more worth then all the joy he had
since: He acknowledged he was not worthy of it, and that if God did deny it
him, yet the course he would hold he had began, that he would never give over
begging, till he had some degree, [to use his own words] were it but as
imperfect a sight, as the blind man's in the Gospel, who Mar. 8.24.
saw men walking like trees, and he had a promise, God would not deny his holy
Spirit to those that Luke 11.13.
ask him. And that if he might expect the fulness of joy not many hours
after, why might he not hope to get some first fruits or earnest for the
assurance of it here, and he conceived of all men living he had most need; both
considering what he had been, and what he was to suffer; with this his
thoughts were filled wholly, and for which he desired me to pray with him
often, and to help him with the prayers of others also. And after eleven of the
clock that night, I was witness of a most affectionate prayer of his own,
which a hearer would have thought could not but arise from some apprehension
already, and which made me so confident as to assure him of it.

The next morning [which was the day of his Execution] his first salutation to
me was, Oh! God has heard me about four or five of the clock this morning,
for the space of an hour and a half, I have had that sweetness in my soul,
those refreshments in my heart, that I am not able Iubilum dicitur quado
ineffabile gaudium mente concipitur, quod nec abscondi possit, nec sermonibus
aperiri. Greg.
to express, which he now believed might be well signified by that hidden Rev.
2.17.
Manna, and white stone, which no man knows, but he that receives it, to use
his own words, I had such a weaning from this world, might I have enjoyed all
the contents of it, such a trust and relying upon God, in committing my wife
and Children to his care, such confidence of Gods love, and assurance of
pardon, such a longing to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, such joy and
inward consolation, as if he had been in the suburbs of Heaven already, that
(says he) J felt where my heart lay, that J arose out of my bed, and gave God
thanks and praise upon my knees in the place where J had begged it; and so fell
into abundance of tears, adding, whereas before J wept for sorrow, now I weep
for joy, [of all which diverse others there were witnesses besides my selfe] and
so desired me, who had been a Petitioner with him, to kneel down with others
present, and solemnly give God thanks with him for it, and pray for a
continuance of it to his last; which tears of his, coming from so Hominis
vultus magna hilaritate decoratur, si visceribus sanis, gravamen nullius
sentiat laesionis concientiae.
cheerful a countenance [when we expected the most sadnesse] moved us more
than all before. For confirmation of his said rising out of his bed, his man's
testimony is evident, who coming that morning by break of the day to the
Chamber door, and before he knocked, looking through the keyhole, saw him in
his shirt by his bed side upon his knees for a quarter of an hour, and as
soon as he came in, with a smiling countenance brake out to him into the like
forenamed expressions, what a sweet Psa. 42.10. In the night season, etc. Ps.
77.6. my song in the night, etc.
night he had enjoyed, etc. and adding, if I had been in a slumber, it might
have been a deceit, but I was full waking as now, he seemed to be in such a
rapture, that his servant, as he told me, was astonished at it, expecting then
to have found him most disconsolate, etc.

To another of his friends, [who had told him the night before of that M.
Robert Glover to his friend Austine. M. Fox, page 2555.
known story in the book of Martyrs, of one who after much prayer, wanted
comfort till he saw the stake, who had also desired him [as that Martyrs friend
had done him] whenever he should find any to declare it, were it at the
place of Execution it self.] As soon as he saw him this morning, his first
salute with great exultation was, in the said Martyrs words to his friend, Oh,
he is come! he is come! telling him also what God had done for his soul.

After this we fell into many heavenly discourses concerning the state of the
soul separated from the body, the translation of it out of this world, the
happiness of Heaven, by what we shall be rid of, by what we shall be perfected
in, the company we shall be admitted into, not only to the spirits of just men,
but to the society of glorious Angels, concerning the beatificall vision in the
fruition of Gods presence, the sight of the blessed body of our Savior, etc.
in the thought of which he was much ravished, and fell into a long continued
weeping Gregory alluding to the grant of Caleo to his daughter [ Judge: 1, 15]
In giving her the upper springs and the ne^her, has this speech: Irriguum
inferius accipit anima, cum inferni supplicia flendo pertime seit: Irriguum
superius, quum lachrymis regni coelestis deside^io affligit: istae lachrymae
vinum and deliciae Angelorum: in illis odor vitae, sapor gratiae, gustus
indulgentiae, reconciliationis iucunditas, and serenatae conscientiae suavitas,
in Regist.
from this ground, that he should have offended one that had prepared such
inestimable things for him, which he now thirsted to enjoy.

Then he desired the Prisoners of the Castle might be called together to take
his last leave of them, to whom (as he had done formerly) he would once more
read the Doctor Tailor that famous Martyr took much comfort in a daily using
the Service book all the time of his imprisonment, at his entrance he said the
Letany to the company there, and at his death commended the Book, as the last
token of his love to his dear wife, Master Fox page 1383. The like of Bishop
Ridley, see his habit he walked to the stake in, page 1605.
Morning Service, which I was the more willing to, were it but to profess the
Faith and Religion he dyed in before many witnesses, against the expected
calumny of the adversaries, if any extraordinary good should appear in him at
his last. The Psalms he chose were such as are usually read at Burials, the
lesson the 15. of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, some prayers he
selected out of the Visitation of the sick, the two last prayers at the
Burial, with other passages in it and else where; which with some alterations
and additions, he turned very apt for himself, and so with the like advice he
had given to others, took leave of them. And now, says he, as God has
refreshed my soul, I will a little Poenitentia non tam in abstinentia eiboru^,
qua^ in mortificatione vitioru^ consistit Hieronymus.
refresh my body, the better to enable me to speak at the place of Execution,
which was to be about three hours after, and so called for a little salt-butter
and brown-bread, and the smallest beer, a very little of which he eat, as his
last, cheerfully hoping at night to be invited to the Supper of the Lamb in
another world, when he should need none of these things.

When the time drew nigh, and he heard the noise of the people gathering; for a
quarter of an hour, he told me, his heart began to quiver, and his natural
affection Lachrymae sunt testes naturae, non indices diffidentiae, metus
naturae est, cura pietatis Ambr.
with tears to yern upon his children, which he was pleased still to find
within him, considering that Grace, though it be supernatural, yet does not
dry up nature. St. Peter, even going to Martyrdom, was led whither naturally
he John 21.18
would not. He complained that his former comfort did abate in the strength of
it, but he trusted, that God in whose custody was the Rev. 3.7.
key of the Spirit, whose act it is only to open and shut, had reserved it for
him for that place and time, where he should have most need. Yet not long after
he recovered a great degree of cheerfulness again, repeating the Why art thou
cast down, O my soul ^ etc still trust in God, etc.
last verse in the 42. Psalm (which he had used to read often) and saying now
the Sheriff should be a welcome messenger, and so continued. Some few things
he had about him, he then disposed of, as tokens of remembrance to his
friends; his gloves, staff, girdle, books, about seven or eight of some pious
Devotions, he gave and sent to diverse with his name inscribed: and his last act
after he was pinioned, was the giving me his sealering off his finger, with
such affectionate expressions, as it draws tears from me in the now remembering
it. More I might add, but thus much may suffice to declare his Repentance, and
the fruit of it in the Castle before his Execution.

Now the Sheriff of the County [a Papist] was come to receive him, the two
Sheriffs of the City with a great company of Halberts to assist him. At
Christ-church [according to his desire] told his passing bell, the whole Town
and Castle so thronged, as was never the like seen, that if there had not bin a
Coach allowed him, it would have bin impossible to have gone through. And here
I must not forget the hard usage of the said Sheriff of the County in some
cross passages, which after all this his preparation, might have prooved a
distraction to him, though it did not; his intentions I will not judge, yet
whose instrument he was I may conceive. The night before he had desired the
favor he might not be pinioned till he came to the place of Execution, for
which I went my self betimes that morning to the Lord chief Justice of the
Kings Bench, and Justice Cressey, both of them upon my relation of the change
found in him readily granted it, and sent that command by me to the Sheriff,
but he refused and notwithstanding would have him pinioned in his lodging.
Again, I sent one to the Innes, who presently brought a command to him under
the Lord Chief Justice his hand, with the consent of all the Judges, then
being at Dinner, this also he disobeyed; for his pretense in the security of
his person, one of the Sheriffs of the City offered body for body, and assured
him that with such a guard, and by fitting himself in the Coach with him,
there could be no danger of an escape. For himself (howsoever his friends thus
stirred for him) he was contented, and long before the Sheriff came, told me
he was very sorry he had moved me in any such business, using this speech,
Our Savior carried his Cross in the way, and why should I desire to be freed?
When he had pulled of his mourning gown, he presented a strong black Ribband,
which he had provided of purpose for the more decency, and in case it should
not be thought strong enough, a black girdle was offered or any other, the
Sheriff refused all, and had him bound with a three penny cord, as a common
Rogue, and would have had the hangman, or some other base fellow come in and
done it. Nay he would have had one to sit in the Coach behind him, to have held
him by the cord also, but that the Constable of the Castle would not suffer
him. These things being very suspicious, if not apparent, out of malice [either
in regard of his Religion, Profession, or some private cause] I feared might
have disturbed his charity (as it enraged most of the standers by) but as soon
as I put him in mind of some See pa. 19.
former discourses, that this might be the Devils interrup^ion, and prosecution
of him, in a way unexpected, he apprehended it fully, and so told the Sheriff,
that it moved him not, and that he looked further than him in it, prayed God
to forgive him, and that for his part he did it heartily, and would pray for
him before he left the Chamber. The Sheriff withdrawing, he desired us that
were there to join with him once more in prayer to God, for his special
assistance against all sorts of enemies, that he expected now would beset him
at once. We all kneeled down, but such a powerful, excellent prayer did I
scarce ever hear, so that all both wept and sobb'd with him. And so after some
comfortable speeches to us, and hope that once more before he dyed, he should
have a return of the same measure of comfort, he had enjoyed the last night.
The Sheriff came in again, and received him.

In the Coach rode with him one of the Sheriffs of the City, the sub-Sheriffe
of the County, his own man, and my self. At his entrance he said, This puts me
in mind of Eliahs 2 Kin. 2.11.
Chariot, he was carried to Heaven in. When he saw the throng, says he, J am
made a 1 Cor 4 9.
spectacle to men, but J hope to Angels also, who are attending to receive my
soul. The time he spent there in singing some consolatory parts of Psalms (one
of which was the 23) private ejaculations; now and then speeches to us
concerning the parting of the soul from the body, the carriage of it by the
Angels, the vanity of this world, that his care was near at an end, etc. And to
feed his thoughts with such things as were seasonable, I read now and then some
special comfortable passages, which I had picked out of the Psalms, which he
would gloss upon to his own application. When he came upon the bridge, and
through the curtains of the Coach [for it was closed] he discerned the Gallows
with the people gathered, he said unto me, There is my Mount Calvary, from
which I hope to as:cend to Heaven. When he came to the place of Execution,
there were two things, which might have disturbed him, the one was a fellow got
upon one end of the gallows, deriding him and interrupting him when he began to
speak, whom he answered not, but patiently bore it, and proceeded. The other,
the breaking of his foot-mans head [whom he loved* who had run by the Coach
side, and diligently pressed nigh to attend] by one of the Sheriffs of the
City, unknown, by laying about him to make room, who when he saw him with the
blood running down his face, He bemoaned him only, and desired me that he
might be remooved out of his sight. To which I might add a third, happening in
the conclusion of all, as he was ready to go up, viz. one calling to him about
some papers or leases, whom the very standers by cried down, as very
unseasonable. All which I could easily think the common enemy might have a hand
in to distract him. When there was a silence made, he stood up, and made a
large and an elegant Speech, substantial and sententious, and I know, it was
not framed before, for the matter he had indeed resolved upon, but the form he
put to his present expressions there; I had indeed advised him to pen it, least
the sight of death might then distract him, but his answer was, He would put
his trust in God, who, he hoped, would not fail him in that last act, and was
confident, death would not disturb him.

To relate the speech it self, unless I could remember exactly his own
expressions, would be but a wrong to him, for the matter, it was thus, [which
being so publicly known, I may be the briefer in.] His entrance was somewhat
to this purpose, Gentlemen, my first salutation to you is, God bless you, and
God save you, and I desire you to pray the same for me, J am I think the first
of my profession, that ever came hither to this shameful end, and I pray God I
may be the last: you are come hither to see a Comedy turned into a Tragedy, a
miserable Catastrophe of the life and actions of Man in this world, etc.

Jn sum. He acknowledged the Justice of the Law of Man, as Gods in condemning
him, who, as he had not deserved, so he desired not to live. He observed the
special hand of God throughout the whole business, both in the Witnesses, in
the Jurie, in the Judges, and in Himself.

Witnesses, and Informers, they were such as eat of his bread, came daily as
friends to his Table, some of them were at dinner with him the day before the
complaint was put in against him in Parliament.

Jury, howsoever he believed they were honest Gentlemen, and went according to
their consciences, yet the Evidence was not so clear, but they might have
stuck at it, but he said it was Digitus Dei, [the Justice of which he fully,
and solemnly acknowledged to a friend of his at that instant, he heard the
Jury had returned him guilty, though he denied then [as he did now] the maine
thing in the Indictment, which the Law laid hold of, and which has been since
confirmed by the Confession of his chief accuser at his Execution also, yet in
his own Conscience applauded and magnified Gods Justice in it, and so burnt a
volume of papers, which with a great deal of pains he had wrote out of Law
books in his own defense.

Judges, of whom he said, though some were hot against him, he imputed it
only to their zeal against vice, which did deserve it, yet it could not sink
into him, that in Law he could have been denied his Council, that which he
had pleaded in some errors in the Indictment, he conceived was reason, but Gods
hand was in it, and he most willingly submitted to it, all things in the end
had turned to his good.

Himself; for his chief Accuser, he said he could have sent into England, and
have had him indicted for a hand he had in a stealth there, easily in this time
have out-lawed him, and so his testimony had been void. For the Jury, he could
have excepted against 20. at least, and so howsoever have put it off till the
next Term, before which he might have had other thoughts: the foreman of the
Jury he knew was outlawed also, and these things he conceived, he might have
done lawfully in the pleading what he could for his life, yet omitted them; the
cause (he said) was both the height of his spirit in scorning to stoop to such
poor shifts, and protractions, and the confidence he had there would be no
need, he had trusted ever too much to his own wit and expressions, with which
till now in any thing that ever he had attempted, he had not mis-carried, and
that he should be so infatuated in this business, that so nearly concerned
him, he took it to be Gods hand evidently, which he now not only patiently
yielded to, but with thankfulness embraced.

And thus much he thought fit to speak concerning those things he was justly
condemned for, he confessed there were diverse other heinous sins he had
committed, the declaring of which publicly would rather increase the scandal
he had given, than repair it: And therefore he thought it not requisite; for
those, he said, he had recollected them between God and himself, and had
heartily repented of them, that he had revealed them with a sorrowful spirit
to me there present, to whom he had opened his whole life, from his youth till
now, as to his Ghostly father, without any extenuation, or concealing, and had
received comfort, and for which as God had given repentance, so he trusted
forgiveness. He acknowledged his neglect of public Preaching, and Catechizing
in the Church, private prayers in his family, for which sins of Omission, he
was justly given over to the sins of Commission, for the neglect of the
Commandments of the first Table, let fall into the breach of the second. That
he had come to the Sacrament, and administered it with his sins upon him. His
roving thoughts at divine Service and Sermon, with diverse others, etc. And here
he declared a very observable passage, not many years agone, he had a
dangerous long sickness, when being sensible of the former neglect of his
Pastoral charge, made a solemn See Deuteronomy. 23.21. Numb. 30.2 Eccles. 5.4, 5, 6.

Sunt qaedam quae non vovenies debemus, quaedam etiam quae nisi voverimus, non
debemus, sed postquam ea domino promisimus, necessario reddere constringimur.
Tan^o miserio: es, si Deo fidem fregeris, qua^to beatior si persolveris. Aug.
in Ep. ad Arment. and Paulin.


vow to God, that if he should recover again, he would be diligent both in
Preaching and Catechizing every Sunday. After his recovery, it so fell out,
that the first time he went to Church with an intent to have begun, the
Judges of Assize were at Waterford, and then a thought arose within him, that
if he should now enter upon that practice which he had not used before, it
would be imagined, he did it for fear of them, and so deferring it that day,
never did it afterward. Now Qui ex balneo calent, citius frigescunt, aqua
frigidior esse solet, quae prius caluit; i^a s^eleratiores sunt, qui a pia via
ad implam tra^stulerant. Erasm.
soon after this, he observed, he grew worse than before, and so fell into
those vices, which had brought him to this shameful end, I, says he, Malum
est nobi^ de nobis, quia dimisimus te, dimisi^li nos nobis. Aug. de verb. dom.
sermon. 4^
broke with God, and God withdrew his grace from me, I forsook him, and he
left me to my self, which he applied to others of his Profession, in being
warned by his example. Again, he had then also prayed, that if when he came to
health, he should start back from his vow, God would send some heavier
Judgment upon him, than ever he had yet felt, that might subdue his stubborn
disposition: Little did he then think of this particular, but now he verily
believed, it was the fruit of that wish, and breach, and so gave God thanks for
it, as the only means to bring him home.

He confessed he had been guilty of much overreaching of men, and that if his
estate might be continued to his wife, he had given charge for satisfaction to
be made to a penny: took notice of the Justice of God upon him, who had
formerly so thirsted after a Name and Fame; it was now given him, but a Name of
Infamy, which he desired might rest only upon himself, and not be imputed to
his Profession. He declared that he did heartily forgive all those that had a
hand in his prosecution, and that they should hear him presently pray for
them. And in conclusion, asked me, if I could remember any thing else was fit
for him to declare, and he would do it, who at that instant, not calling to
mind any more, he desired the people to pray for him and with him, that God
would magnify his mercy in forgiving so great a sinner. Then reading three
Psalms very apt for himself, the 38.42.51. he then desired them again to
join with him in prayer, that God would give him a further assurance of the
forgiveness of his sins, by the inward comforts of his Spirit, and assist
him still against the fear of death in this his last act. We all kneeled down
with him, but such a moving prayer did I never hear, never was I compassed
about so with tears, and sobs in my life, not bare weeping, but gushing out of
tears, which flowed from all that heard him: So that the very Papists, and
some Priests I saw, who kneeled down, and wept also; the sum of it was a
Confession, and Aggravation of his sins, a begging of mercy, that his soul
might be bathed in the blood of Christ, a sealing of it to his Conscience by
the comforts of his Spirit, to forgive all that were his enemies in this
business, and to give them repentance that had sinned with him, that his
Penitencie might be a means to abate the scandal, that he might be assisted
against the assaults of Satan, weakness of his corrupt nature, now in this
last act of Death, prayed for a blessing upon his Majesty, and his Dominions,
for his wife and Children, and so commended his soul to God, with a confidence
of a happy change presently, etc. After this he desired me to sing the 116.
Psalm throughout, which for the peoples better joining with him, I read. Not
long after it was begun, he whispered one of his friends that stood by him,
Oh! pray for me, that God do not withdraw his Spirit at this instant, and
presently the tears trickled down his cheeks, with the continuance of which, I
observed him afterward to sing the Psalm throughout, the subject of which
being matter of praise and joy, it might possibly arise from such spiritual
comforts, as he had tasted the night before, and in his prayers had craved
again, which appeared in his undauntednes of spirit, now entering into the
jaws of death; when the Psalm was done, he rose up and said, I think I saw the
Town-clark of Waterford here, if he be, or any other of that Town, I shall
desire them to commend me to my Neighbors there, that I have taken notice that
none of the Romish Church, though differing from me in points of Religion, had
a hand in this complaint against me, though they had as much cause as others,
for which I conceive I owe them thanks.

Another thing is concerning my Burial; It is usual indeed for them of my
Profession to be buried in the Church, but I have given charge to the Nec
aliquid nocet fidelibus negata eorum corporibus sepultura, nec si exhibeatur,
aliquid infidelibus prodest, Aug de cura again: pro mortisis. Quious peccata
dimissa non suut, a sacris locis post mortem adjavari non possunt, Aug decivit:
Dei, ubicunque saepeliamu^ ^o^ magnitefert, Domini est terra and plenitudo
eius, etc. Chrysostom.
contrary, if they will bury me in the Churchyard, it is more then I have
deserved, for my part I would be contented it were in the bottom of the Sea,
where I might never be remembered. And now (says he) I have done, only give me
leave to be at some private prayers with my self, wherein I shall desire you in
your thoughts to join with me, in praying God to assist me at this instant, and
so kneeled down for a little space, as did the company near him also; when he
arose, he said cheerfully, Now I am ready, and took leave of them all that were
near him [whom he knew] man by man, taking them all by the hands, with such
speeches as these, I dread not death, God send us a happy meeting in Heaven, I
am but going before you, the whole company wept abundantly, and my self had
most cause at his last most affectionate expressions. Then he put off his
mourning gown, hat and black cap, and called to his man for his other cap and
Handker-chief. When he was setting foot on the Ladder, he turned with a smiling
countenance toward the Sheriff of the County [who all this time of his prayers
and singing of Psalms had sat by on hors-back with his hat on his head, giving
no reverence at all] and said, Mast. Sheriff, Will you not take leave of your
friends, when you shall never see them again? What? not one word from you all
this while, God forgive you, and J do from my heart, that usage of yours,
which might have distracted me, but did not, I have prayed for you even now;
and so went up the Ladder, who when he saw so many weeping, said again to them,
I thank God I dread not death, and that it proceeded not from a presumption,
but from a present sensible apprehension of Gods-mercy, and an inward peace of
Conscience, and so with a cheerful countenance, looking about him, and seeing
some he knew, whom he had not seen before, bowed to them and bade them
farewell, desired them still to pray for him as long as he had life. I had him
last by the hand, when he was upon the Ladder, and to my admiration, his hand
shook no more then mine. When he was gone as high, as was thought fitting, and
the rope put about his neck, he pinned the handkerchief about his face with his
own hands (the cords with moving his hands being again loosed) and said to the
Hangman, honest friend, when thou art ready, tell me, and I will tell thee,
when I am ready (to whom he than gave some little money he had about him) prayed
the Sheriff he might not be turned off till he spoke again, and when he had
pulled the cap over his face, he said, Lord now let thy servant depart in peace
according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have
prepared for me; commended his soul to God, with diverse the like expressions,
and not long after said, Now I am ready, and from that continued crying, Have
mercy, have mercy, etc. till he was turned off. When he felt the Ladder
stirring he put down his hands and laid hold on the sides of his Cassock, and
so stirred them not to the last, though some of his friends catched him by the
hands, least he should have lifted them up, but I believe it was needles. By
this his penitential, Christian carriage, the hearts of his enemies were
moved, such as hated him in his life, now loved him at his death, and I
believe these many years there has not bin any that left the world with so
many tears and cries of the beholders. When he had hung some 3. quarters of an
hour, he was cut down and put into the same Coach he came in, into which I went
my self, and rode with him to the house, where he was received; which I did
both to feed my thoughts with mortality, in viewing the same body lying dead in
the same place, where some two or three hours before I had seen it with a soul,
in health, and full strength. As also least some lies should have bin raised of
him, by such as have us;ed to do the like.

That night about ten of the clock they buried him at S. John's in an outward
part of the Churchyard, according to his charge, where I did him that last
office also.

About seven or eight of the clock, the Verger of Christs-Church came to my
lodging and told me there was a rumor of a Sermon, and an expectation of my
saying somewhat of him, so much that the Church was filled already to the doors,
with abundance of Papists also, upon this sudden warning I was earnestly
entreated to some short declaration, which according to the time given me
(howsoever I never liked funeral commendations, as usually doing more hurt
than good) I did observe. And now in obedience to such, who may command me,
have further enlarged it, as also the Sermon, with some other seasonable
additions, which the shortness of the warning and latenes of the night would not
then permit. Many Papists [I am informed] were much affected both at what they
heard before from him, and now of him. (One who came casually thither fell into
tears in the very Church, and was converted. And the next morning being Sunday
went to S. Owens Church, heard the service and Sermon, and so continued.)

And thus you have heard at once, a doleful and a joyful relation, hard it is
to judge, which his friends have most cause of. To conclude.

Let not the Papists object this scandal to our Church, least we return them
such foul stories from that Holy Sea, which we have no mind to raise. It Is
true, he did ill, Mat. 5.19.
but do we teach men so to do. A Church ought not to be judged by the lives
of a few Professors, but by the Doctrine professed. And it is a Rule most
advantageous to themselves. There was a Judas amongst the Apostles, that hanged
himself, yet no disparagement to the Apostleship, when he was excluded, Acts 1.
and into his office another chosen. The incestuous person was no more a
scandal to the Church of Corinth, when he was once put away from them. Nay,
their zeal in his Excommunication, tended much to their See 2 Cor. 7. from
verse. 8. to 13.
honor, let his Execution perfectly approve our Church also, to be clear in
this matter.

Melius est propter bonos, malos fevere, quam propter malos bonos contemnere,
melius est malis iniusta praestare, quam bonis subtrahere. Hieron.
And least of all, should those that are of his own Communion be such hateful
birds, as to defile their ownenests, by imputing it as an aspersion to the
whole profession; let him have his last request granted, that the dishonor may
be buried with him, let not the Number. 16.22
sin of this one man, make you wrath with the whole Congregation. 1 King. 24,
17.
I have sinned, says David, and done wickedly; but these sheep what have they
done? [ And indeed the former sort in Luke 16.8.
their generation are wiser in this usually, then the children of Light] When
the Sun is ecclipsed every man's eye is upon it, but little do they observe
it in his glory. Let there be one gross offender in the Ministry, he shall be
ever gazed at; but they remember not the many glorious Martyrs, and unblemished
Preachers, who have shined in that Firmament also. That the miscarriage of one,
should like a cross line be drawn over all the rest, I see little Reason,
less Justice, and least Religion at all in it.

In a word. Object not his life to justify your own, remember our Saviors
distinction for some. Mat. 23.3.
what they bid you do, that observe, but do not after their works; or that of
S. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.1.
Be followers of me, as I am of Christ. Jf you remember his life, forget not
his death; (in the former indeed the rod of Aaron was turned into a Serpent;
but now the Serpent is turned into a rod again) as the one was offensive, so
let the other be useful, as the one made the breach, so let the other repair
it.

It Is true, Tantoc o^ spectius in se, crimen, etc.

Honor Sacerdotalis magna est sublimitas, Ruina, quae de alto est, gravioti
casu colliditur. Ambros. de dign. Sacer.


the Dignity of his Person must needs sink his offense the deeper, The
Scandal of both has increased the Ignominy of his death, the shame of his
death has occasioned his spiritual life: And if God has for given, and
forgotten it in Heaven, why should we upbraid him with it here? The cleerest
Moons have some spots. The best Churches have had some such staynes. Oh! let
the blot of his life be washed out of your memories by the many ^eares at his
death, for which, 2 Cor, 1.3.
Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercy,
and the God of all comfort, to whom be honor and glory for ever.

Amen.
O Poenitentia! quid de te novi referam? omnia ligata tu solvis, omnia clausa
tu reseras, omnia adversa tu mitigas, omnia contrita tu sanas, omnia confusa tu
lucidas, omnia desperata tu animas,

Cyprian de Laud. Poenitent.
The Letter to his Wife.
My dear Wife,
Mark well these last words of him, who these twenty years, and upwards has
been your Husband, and might have so continued much longer by the course of
nature, had not his continued and crying sins, deservedly drawn this
punishment upon him, to be cut off from the living, as unworthy of their
society in this life. I suffer for my wickedness, which I beseech God in his
mercy through Jesus Christ to forgive me. In my suffering, you suffer both in
your credit and estate, and what else soever concerns this world. This
advantage you have of me, I have only left unto me a small time of Repentance,
but you, by Gods grace may have a large time of amendment, which I would have
you improve to the full, and not lose a minute. Turn unto the Lord your God,
with all your heart. Cloth your self with patience and thanksgiving. I doubt
not but God will have mercy on you, and prove a Husband to you, and a Father to
my Children, yea, I doubt not but you shall live with the same happiness, and
greater content, then if I were with you.

Serve him, he will not fail you.

Bring up your Children in the fear of God, that Household which you keep, let
it be the servants of God.

Above all things be diligent in private prayer, make all your needs known unto
the Lord. Undertake nothing which you cannot find in your heart to beg a
blessing for.

Misconster not these my dying advertisements, which proceed (as in the
presence of God) from true affection, that at length I might really give some
supply to my former defaults, and put you in a right way for everlasting
comfort. That though we part in this world, yet we may enjoy a more happy
meeting in Heaven. And after all our afflictions be there partakers of endless
bliss. So prays, and ever shall pray as long as he lives,

Your Husband John Atherton.
December. 1. 1641. Cast not away this paper when you have read it, but keep it
as a Jewel, and peruse it often, as the Legacy of him who can now give no
other.



The Letter to his Children.
My dear Children,
IT was ever my desire to have seen you well preferred, but God thought
otherwise, and my sins would not suffer it, which have not only, sentenced
me to death, but bereaved me of that small worldly blessing, which I purposed
unto you, as a patrimony, and evidence of my fatherly affection. And how now it
will be disposed of, or what share will come to your lot, I leave to God, who,
as he has given you body and soul; so I doubt not but will of his great
goodness provide for your estate. What is left unto me, and cannot be taken
from me, I freely impart and give unto you, not dividing it amongst you by
shares and proportions, but giving each of you the whole, wherein though you
communicate one with another in my blessing and last council, yet each without
wrong to the other, may take and challenge the whole to her self.

First, the blessing of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, light
upon you, give you a true knowledge of his Word, a true fear of his Will, and
a true Faith in his Promises.

Let no day pass over you, wherein you do not call your selves to a reckoning
before you sleep, and make your peace with God for the offenses of that day.

Be constant in private Prayer twice every day at the least, upon your knees,
and God will be a Father unto you.

Do nothing great or small without first craving a blessing from God and
forbear that, upon which you cannot find in your hearts to crave such a
blessing.

Be content with whatsoever God shall afford you, poverty, or riches, take
heed, repine not at his pleasure [who in the end, though it be sometimes
contrary to our sense] works all things for the good of his children.

If you marry, prefer an honest man that fears God, before all other
respects in the world.

Be obedient to your mother; love one another, and live in hope to enjoy again
in Heaven the company of your Father,

Now ready to dye, John Atherton.
December. 4 1640. Cast not away this loose paper, but each of you take a Copy of
it, and preserve it by you as a Jewel all the days of your life.



A SERMON PREACHED AT THE Burial of the said JOHN ATHERTON, The next night
after his Execution, December the fifth, 1640. In St. JOHN'S Church in Dublin
With some other Additions and Enlargements, which the shortness of the
warning, and latenesse of the night, would not then permit, throughout
Applicatory to diverse special passages in the Relation, wherein there are also
some other added, which were before omitted.

By Nicolas Barnard, Deane of Ardagh in IRELAND.

Chrysostom. in Laud. Pauli Homil. 1. Paulus terram and mare circumivit,
peccarorum spinas evellens granaque pietatis ubique semmans, veritatem
reducens, ex hominibus Angelos faciens, etc.

ACTS 2.19. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the
Lord.

London Printed by G. M. 1641.

The Sum of the Doctrines here handled.
The Dignity of Preachers C^^^sts Messengers. whence for themselves, a
necessity of ordination to it. of continuance in^^r.
for the people, a necessity of entertainment of them. of Audience, Obedience
to them.

The duty of Preachers in the General; from whence observed. That Preaching of
all the Acts of the Ministry is the most Apostolical, and if so, the most
Episcopal. And here in (according to a special Confession of a Vow, made, and
broken by this Person) An Exhortation both to Preaching and Catechizing. For
the latter of which Four things advised Shunning Diversities of Catechismes.
Unnecessary Controversies.
Handling these Principles Briefly. Often.

In both condemned Inconstancy, either in the Doctrines delivered. time giving
it over.
The Duties of Preachers in Special Ability to Preach. Perspicuity in their
Preaching. Their lives to be according.
The state of a man Unconverted resembled by a Blindness. Darkness. Slave^y.
The state of Conversion resembled by giving Sight. Light. Liberty.
That the greatest Sinner once converted is capeable of forgiveness. The
joyful happy estate of him who has an assurance of it, in three things, he
has Peace with God. of Conscience. with Death.

And therein of spiritual refreshings.
Throughout Applicatory to the Party.
The Text.
ACT. XXVI. verse. 17. I send thee --

Verse. 18. To open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, from the
power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, etc.


THat there is an eminent 2 Samuel: 3:38
Man this day fallen in Israel by a scandalous and ignominious death, ye al
know, of whom this unwonted confluence of people speaks an expectation of
saying somewhat; For his life, to give the least commendation, would be a
scandal to the Speaker, and yet wholly to conceal his penitency at his death,
would be a wrong both to him, and you the hearers. It was indeed his own
desire, there might be no good spoke of him at all, but (me thinks) that it
self (if there were no more) Laushumana non appeti a recte faciente, sed
subsequi debet recte facientem, ut illi proficiant, qui etiam imitari possu^t,
Aug. de sermon: Domini in monte.
is cause sufficient to speak somewhat, in that short expression being much
included. And commendation if ever is then most seasonable, when it can neither
impute flattery to the one, nor cause a pride in the other. Lauda hominem, sed
post morte^, post consummationem, quando nec laudantem adulatio movet, nec
laudatum tentat elatio, Ambr. in natali, S. Eusebius:
Then may be thought Ibi est laudatio vanitate remota, ubi etiam vi tuperatio
erat ab offen, si^ne secura- Aug.
the less affected, when a dispraise would be the least offensive. And for
that we have done with in the Relation.

This Text fits this present occasion thus: Saint Paul is here sent to preach
the Gospel, such was the end of this our Brothers ordination, but neglected.
Such had bin his solemn vow of latter years, but broken. The persons to whom
he was sent, were such as lived in darkness, under the power of Satan, such to
have bin his life formerly to the Churches scandal is confessed. The effect of
Saint Paul's message is to open their eyes, to turn them unto God, such a
blessed change to have bin lately found in him, has bin made apparent. And if
with these he has obtained the efficacy of the means, why should we bar
him, from attaining the like happiness in the end also, viz. forgiveness of
sins. It Is true he was sent, and like that Mat. 21.30
Son, that said he would go into the vineyard, but went not. Instead of
converting others, he had corrupted them, instead of opening their eyes, he had
shut his own, instead of gayning others out of darkness, he had lived in the
works of darkness himself, instead of turning men from the power of Satan, he
had drawn more subjects to him. Notwithstanding what he was ordained to have
bin an instrument of in others, was by Gods grace in a great measure wrought in
himself; and if conversion, why should not we believe forgiveness, and if
forgiveness blessedness, for Rom: 4.7.
blessed is the man whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered,
etc. The Ocean of Gods mercy is able to swallow Mountains, as well as
Mole-hils, great sins as less, according to the proportion of Repentance.
Saint Paul 1 Timothy: 1.13
a blasphemer yet obtained pardon. The crucifiers of the Lord of life are bad
to be Acts 3.19.
converted, and their sins should be blotted out. It Is true he was at first
moved to it with Fear; so was Heb: 11.7 veritus.
Noah to the saving himself by the Arc. Vide orat. de vita eius per Greg.
presb: and poema eius de vita sua scrip ad popul: Co^sta^tinop. deplorantibus
universis mortem corporis, ipse interitum animimetuebat: Mors ex aqua imminens
salutem ex aqua Baptismi a^teverte^bat.
Gregory* Nazianzen was at first converted to Christianity in a Storm. Our
Savior in the same breath calls his Disciples Friends, Luc: 12.^.
and yet bidds them fear him, for the fear of Hell it self. Apud Deum non
valet mensura tempori^, sed doloris, no^ temporis longitudine, sed affectus
sinceritate poenitudo pe^satur. Latro ille in Cruce non eguit prolixitate
temporis, intra enim unum momentum totius vitae sceleribus absolutus, praecedit
etiam ipsos Apostolos ad Paradisum Chrysostom. Poenitentia no^' mensium cursu
pensatur, sed profunditate luctus, and lachrymarum, qua homo mortificatur,
Isidor: de sum bon.
He came late, so did they that went into the Vineyard at the eleventh Mat:
20.6.
hour. 2 Chronicles: 33 11, 12.
Manasses began in fetters. The Luc: 15.17, 18.
Prodigal Son staid till he was starved and forced. Oh let not your eyes be
evil when Gods is good. Where we find his hand, why should we doubt of his
Seal? if he were turned from the power of Satan in repentance to God, no doubt
but God has turned to him in granting forgiveness.

In the Text you may observe these three parts.

1. St. Paul's mission, J send thee. 2. His Commission in three branches. 1. To
open their eyes. 2. To turn them from darkness to light. 3. From the power of
Satan unto God.
3. The happy fruit of both, That they may receive forgiveness of sins.
The first implies our Dignity. The second our Duty. The third our hearers
benefit. By this our Brother, the first at his arraignement has hin much
disgraced. The second in his life more neglected. And the third at his death,
Gods mercy in him infinitely magnified. From the first, he judged himself
worthy to be degraded. For the second, he had strongly resolved if he had
lived, to have repaired. And the third was in an extraordinary manner to his
conscience sealed. So that the three things which are now to be handled from
the words are these.

1. First, the dignity of Ministers, to be Christ's Messengers, I send thee.

2. Secondly, the chief part of their message, to be Preachers (the sole end of
which, is the converting of men) to open their eyes, to turn, etc.

3. Thirdly, the latitude of Gods mercy even to the worst of men, who by their
preaching shall be converted, though living under the power of Satan, yet shall
receive forgiveness of their sins. In the handling of which ye shall find some
things as seasonable as profitable, and throughout I would be understood to be
equally applicatatory to Bishops, as other inferior Ministers.

1. First, the dignity of Preachers, sent by Christ; their mission is like Mat.
21.25.
St. John's Baptism, not of men, but from Heaven, they may say to their hearers
as Moses to the Israelites, Exodus 3.14.
I am has sent me unto you. And it is observable their Commission is sealed by
the blessed Trinity, First, severally, by the Father, (Matthew. 19. ult.) Pray
the Father that he will send laborers, etc. By the Son (Ephesians. 4.1^.) He gave
some Apostles, some Pastors, some Teachers, etc. By the Holy Ghost (Act.
20.28.) Over whom the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers. Secondly, jointly
(Math. 28.18.) Go, teach all Nations, and baptize them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and accordingly as Saint John
Rev: 1.4, 5.
begins his Revelation with a Salutation from them; So Saint Paul 2 Cor: 13.14
concludes his second Epistle to the Corinthians with a Benediction. Hence
those honorable titles by each of which we deny not, is employed a several
duty also, ( honos and onus) to imply there holiness, 1 Timothy: 6.11 2 Timothy: 3.17.
Men of God; Their vigilance, Heb: 13.7. 2 Timothy: 4.5.
Watchmen, their courage 2 Timothy: 2.3:4
Soldiers, their painfullnesse, Mat: 9.3^
harvest laborers, the care of their flock, John 21.15 16. 1 Pet: 2.25
Shepherds, their wisdom, Acts 20.28
Overseers, their industry, 2 Timothy 26.
Husbandmen, their patience, Mat: 4.19
Fishermen, their tenderness of affection, 1 These: 2.7
Nurses, their love, 1 Cor: ^.15.
Fathers, nay Gall. 4.19
Mothers, their faithfulness 1 Cor: 4.1.
Stewards, their necessary use in preserving and informing of men, Mat: 5.13, ^4
Salt of the Earth, * Light of the world, their dignity, 1 Cor: 4 1. 1 Timothy:
5.17.
Rulers, 2 Cor: 5 ^0
Ambassadors, their eminency Rev: 1.20
Angels, Rev: 22 19
fellow-fervants with them, 2 Cor: 6.1. (...).
Coworkers with God, Christ's Verse before the Text
Witnesses, Ibid. (...), as 2 Cor. 4.1. (...), often in Scripture taken for
such an officer, who has authority to commit one to prison, Mat 5.^5 (...),
etc. And such is our Office spiritually, by excommunication, so to commit
incorrigible sinners, till they repent, 2 Corinthians. 10.6. We have in a
readiness vengeance to execute, etc.
Ministers, nay 2 Corinthians. 8.2^. To be Christi Vicarius is not Antichristian,
but to claim a title of generalis Episcopus, vicarius Domini est* Ambr
Comment, in Epist: Cor. cap. 11.
O vere sal terrae! quo precordia nostra ne possint seculi vanescere errore
condiuntur. O lucerna! digne sapta Candelabrum Ecclesiae p^fita, quae late
Catholicis orbibus lucem effandens, etc. Paul: ad Aug: Epist. 31.
Christ's glory. To the Ministers of the Law indeed pertained Rom: 9.4.
the glory (viz.) of the Arc and Temple, but these are termed the Glory of
Christ himself, typified by them, whose presence made Hag: 7.9.
the glory of the latter Temple, though meaner in building, to exceed the
former. The dignity done to the Priests and Prophets under the Law was much, 2 Chronicles. 22 11.
Jehojada the Priest marries Jehorams daughter the King. See the honorable
terms given by 1 King. 18.7.
Obadiah, (the chief of Ahabs Courtiers) to the Prophet Elijah; and to omit
what we read from good Kings. See 2 King. 13.17.
Joash (a bad one) visits Elisha in his sickness, calling him my Father,
etc. Now by how much the Hebr. 7.22. See 1 Cor. 3.7.8, 9, 10. verse.
Gospel excels the Law, so ought the Ministers to be preferred, as being of a
better Testament, and of a far 1 Cor. 3.7, 8, 9, 10.
more glorious Ministration. Ambassadors are usually respected according to
the Princes they represent. Saint Paul was so received by the Galatians, Gal:
4.13.
As an Angel of God, nay, as Christ Jesus, in whose stead he moved. And think
not this to be any pride in magnifying our calling, Saint Paul surely was no
more ambitious of honor, then he was covetous of a gift, but yet that he might
have some fruit that might abound to their account, for their own sakes no
doubt, he beseeches the 1 These: 5.12
Nihil est in hoc saeculo excellentius sacerdotibus, sublimius Episcopis, si
nomen congruat actioni, and actio respondeat nomini. Si non nomen inane, and
crimen immane.

Ambide dignitate sacerdot.


Thessalonians, To know those that were over them in the Lord, and to esteem
them very highly, etc. A high calling indeed, the Son of God himself despised
it not, and let not the greatest then think his son of too high a birth for
it. It Is no argument, that now they should be made the 1 Cor: 4 13.
Of scouring of the world, because the Apostles were so, that now they should
be driven to work with their own hands (as some it may be would be contented
with) because Asts 18.3,
St. Paul was once put to it by necessity: that now they should have no
respect, because there was so little heretofore given them by infidels. No; ye
have not so learned Christ, and do not ye fill up the measure of your Fathers.
And yet how many are there, who seem to reverence Christ, but like the Jews
mock him in his word and servants, like cursed Cham deriding their Fathers,
till the curse rebound upon their own heads; If like Jeremiah, a Minister deal
truly and impartially, presently Jer: 18.18,
devices are laid for him, a conspiracy to smite him with the tongue, if he
endeavor to dispossess a man of his evil spirit, than like Saul to David, a
dart is thrown at him, nay, Spears and Arrows of reproaches, even bitter
words. If a reproof, then you take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi.

Object. We grant the Apostles to be sent of Christ, but what is that to such
as are ordained in these days?

Ans. The difference is only Vocationis modo, Christ calls Paul immediately by
himself, and he calls Timothy, per media ordinario, as S. Paul speaking to the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus, whom himself had ordained, yet ( Act^ 20.28.)
he tells them, the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers, as his Epistles may be
truly called his writings, as being the Penman, and yet Gods too, who was the
Inditer, and in them guided his hand: So the Messengers of the Church are also
Christ's, who in his name ordain^ no other, then testify they find themselves
See the demands in the book of Ordination, to Deacons, Priests and Bishops, a
serious considetion.
inwardly moved to (...) by his Spirit. See both together in that forenamed
(2 Cor. 8.23. We are the Messengers of the churches, and the glory of Christ,
as the man is called the glory of God (1 Cor. 11.7.) and the woman the glory of
the man. Because as the Moon from the Sun, they each derive their light and
authority from them; so are these so called here, as receiving their dignity
and commission from Christ by the Churches hand, who in this sense confirms
the word of his servants, and is with them to the end of the world, of which
there can be no 1 Cor: 9.2. If I am not an Apostle to others, yet doubtless I
am to you, for the seal of my Apostleship are you in the Lord:
surer Seal, than the assistance of Gods Spirit in converting their hearers.

Hence a twofold instruction for the Preacher and people.

For the Preacher. 1. A necessity of Ordination. Mark. 3.14. None may Heb: 5.4:
take this upon him (be he as wise as Solomon or Daniel) before he be called of
God as Aaron. Rom: 10 15.
How can they preach, i. e. de jure, unless they be sent. God complains of
some Jer: 23, 21
I have not sent them, yet they ran: I have not spoken to them, yet they
prophesied. The Mat: 20.7.
Laborers though able and willing yet went not into the Vineyard till they
were bidden by the Husbandman. They who clime John 10.1
into this Office through the window of their own pride and self-conceit, and
enter not by this door, are rather thieves than shepherds. It Is an observation
some have made of Chemnit. de Ecclesia. De Origin dicunt, cum sine vocatione
se ingessisse in officium docendi, inde factum est, quod in ^ot errores est
prolapsus.
Origin, why he fell into such dangerous errors, though he had an excellent
wit, because he so long neglected orders.

2. A necessity of continuance, if their Mission be from Christ, none can then
give them a Dismiss, but Christ. Have you set your hand to this Plough, there
is no looking back; whatever other employment by man is laid upon you, of this
you cannot be unloaden. There may be indeed some good cause of a remoovall from
a place, even for the same the Colt our Savior sent for was loosened, viz.
when the Lord has elsewhere need of you: but I find no writ of ease in any
place to dispense with the office.

For the People. 1. First, then give them entertainment, the Apostle argues
this case largely. ( Cor. 9.) What amendment soever has bin here of late in
some places, yet still in most, the means of the Levite is like the garments
of David's Servants by Hanun King of Ammon cut off ^y the halfs But let such
con^^der the admonition of Moses, Deuteronomy. 12.19. Take heed to your ^^lves, they
that thus Mal: 3, 8, 9.
rob God, ^o but in conclusion rob them^elvs, as there are in Story di^ers such
observations. Moses ^rayer for Levi is still effectual ^ Chap. 33.11.) Bless
Lord his ^^bstance, and smite through the ^ynes of them that rise against him,
and of them that hate him, that ^^ey rise not again. That distin^tion of three
sorts of Sacrilege by Peter Lumbard, Pet: Lu^bard sent: libr: 3.
is commonly known, Sacrum de sacro, non sacrum de sacro, sacrum de non sacro,
as that of Thomas Secunda secundae qu. ^9. art: 3.
Aquinas, that it may be committed against three, in Personam, in Locum, in
rem. The last of each are alike, in a robbery upon the Churches possessions;
where (in other Countries it has bin consented to, it is now as much repented
of, though too late. Justinian Proximum sacrilegio crimen est quod laesae
Maiestatis dicitur, Leg: 1 digest: ad leg: Jul.
makes it a greater sin than treason. Howsoever thou whi^^ worthily Rom: 2.22.
abhorrest Idols, do not thou commit Sacrilege. You that stand for Christ's
word, do not you cast lots for his coat. Mat: ^7.27
The fish Saint Peter catched, it came up with money in the mouth, and certainly
such as are truly taken by the net of Gods word, will not grudge to supply the
Minister in Temporals, who communicates to him in Spirituals, and what ye yield
let it be willingly, not wrung out by Suits: such as strive with the Priest are
accounted the worst of men by the Prophet ( Hosea 4, 4.) How able and active
this our Brother was in the recoveries of such dues, ye all know, But what a
grief now, his spending so much time in them was, whereby he lost himself, I
know. The regaining of the Churches Rights he thought might be done, but the
gaining of souls, the Rights of Christ purchased by his blood, by no means
should be left undone. Often did he apply to himself that Speech of a Card.
Woolser.
great man at his last. Had he been as diligent to have done God service, as
he had done the King, he had kept the Kings favor still. So had he been as
conversant in the study of the Gospel, for the instruction of Men, as he had
been in the Law, for the settling of Lands, he had not by the Law so deservedly
lost Lands, Body and Estate, and all at once. we are called Fishers, not
Hunters, Fishers of men, not of money, we are pressed for a Spiritual warfare,
and such 2 Timothy 2.4. See what is promised at ordination, and consecration, viz.
To lay aside the study of the world and such like cares, etc.
entangle not themselves with the affairs of this life. Non omnium Epistolis
respondeba^, nisi si quid tractarent ad Religionis pertinens negotium, Et si
rogatus a nonnullis, in temporalibu^ causi, Epist^las dabat, hanc sua^ a
melioribus rebus occupatione^^, tanquam angariam deputabat, and illis
dispositis, tanqua^ a rebus mordacibus, and molestis, animi recursum ad
interiora mortis, and superiora faciebat, suavem semper habens de ijs quae Dei
sunt ^^ocutionem, vel collocutionem Possido, de vita August.
S. Augustines spirit is very worthy of imitation, who was hardly drawn to
answer any Letters, for himself, or others that concerned these worldly
matters, only ready for such whose subject was spiritual. And if at any time
he were necessitated to it, he thought so much loft, and returned from it, as a
prisoner set at liberty. Nay sometimes Vbi aliquid suspicabitur exoriturum
litis, saepe totam causam cesserit adversario, pro magno lucro ducens, si qui
etem animi rei dispendio redemis^et. Erasm in Epist. ad Arch. Tol. aut op.
August. Haec non eo commemoro, quod existimem horum temporum Episcopos ad hanc
imaginem compellendos, sed ut, declarem quaetopere sanctissimi huius praesulis
animus abhorruerit a solitis i^iba ^. Ibid.
Gave up his right, rather than run himself into a Labyrinth of Law
contentions, according to that of our Savior, (Math. 5.40.) The only way the
Devil is sometimes put to, for the stopping of the mouths of able Divines. If
he can but get their hearts to cleave^ to the world in suites, soon cleave^
their tongues to the roofes of their mouths for preaching, and so by a disuse
in time, according to that threatening in the Prophet to the Idol shepherd,
Zach. 11.17
Their arms are dried up, their right eyes utterly darkened, And their right
hands with the Psalmist, forgets their cunning: Their abilities and gifts
perish also. And it is certain (howsoever others have thought the contrary) that
as the interposition of the Earth eclypseth the Moon: So these earthly
employments instead of spiritual, has rather clouded, than added to the glory
of our function.

Secondly, then give them Audience, Obedience: I put them together, as indeed
they should never be severed. First, audience, the denying of which to the
Ambassador of the meanest Prince on Earth is accounted the highest indignity.
Heb. 12.25.
Oh, see then ye refuse not him who speaks from Heaven. Say ever in this sense
with Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.10.
speak Lord, thy servant hears. And when ye do, let it be with Attention,
not to have your mind roving about some other matter, your tongues whispering
in another ear. (A fault this our Brother publicly acknowledged in
himself.) And let it be also with N^n est minas verbum Dei, quam corpus
Christi, and ideo non minus reus qui verbum Dei negligenter audiverit, qua^
ille qui corpus Christi in terram negligentia sua cadere permisit. Aug.
Reverence. Remember it is the voice of God, and not of Man, as one observes of
that speech of John the Baptist, Ego sum vox in deserto. John was the voice,
but God the speaker, as holy men were the penmen of the Scripture, but God the
Inditer, Number. 23.18
Balaam bids Balak arise. Judge. 2.20
Eglon of himself, rose up from his Throne, when Ehud said he had a message
from God to him. If these gave this outward reverence let us add Heb 12.38.
an inward reverence and fear also. Secondly, give them Frustra praecepta Dei
custodiuntur memoria, si non custodiuntur and vita. August. in Psalm. 11^.
Obedience, the former is but the shell, the shadow, this is the Substance.
Many indeed give us the hearing, but very few in that sense it is usually taken
in the Prophets, viz. Quaerit anima verbum, cui co^sentit ad correctione^, cui
imitetur ad virtutem, quo reformetur ad sapientiam, cui conformetur ad decorum,
cui maritetur ad foecunditatem, etc.
Obeying, Remember we are Gods Messengers. Great men's entreaties are commands:
Our commands from God are but entreaties. 2 Cor. 5* ^0.
God does beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead; unheard of, that a
King should Petition to his Subjects; and yet who of you yields? who obeyes?
Historians say, that men's lives were never worse, than when the seven wise men
lived. It would be ill news if it should be so with us, since the long
continuance of the wisdom of the word among us. However, as our Savior, so
may we say unto you also, Joh. 1^, 9, 50.
We have not spoken of our selves, but the Father which has sent us, he gave
us a Commandment, what we should say, and what we should speak, and the word
which we have in Gods Name spoken, and not obeyed, shall rise in judgment
against you at the last day. Object not the disobedience of this particular
Person to palliate your own. Let his self condemnation, prevent yours, his
exhortation to others, be yours. He was a prodigal, but returned, once lost,
but now found, and if the Father have remitted it, let not his Brethren be
offended at it. And so much for the first part of the Text, S. Paul's Mission --
I send thee.

Now the second part of this Text concerns S. Paul's Commission, in a word of
Information, To open their eyes, in a word of Application, To turn them, etc.
(the two necessary parts of a Sermon.) Before you heard our Dignity, now we
will confess out Duty, and it is this latter that must support the former. And
for this, we shall consider it two ways, as it may concern this our Brother.

First, Actively, as being his duty toward others.

Secondly, Passively, as having been effectual in himself.

In the first, I shall but perform the will of the dead, who had intended at
the place of Execution to have made a large Exhortative Speech, to the diligent
performance of his function in PREACHING, and CATECHIZING: but that he thought
few of his Profession would be there, and the Papist^ (who might be the most)
would but deride him, and so omitted it. Only he declared how the neglect of
it, was his greatest grief, and for the breach of his vow, in which he was
persuaded, (as a just punishment) God left him to himself, whereby he came to
this shameful end, for this sin of Omission, he observed Gods Justice in
giving him over to sins of Commission, according to that of the Apostle. (
Romans 1.21, 24, 26.) And as this Subject is seasonable in regard of his
particular, so is it necessary in regard of the times neglect in general. When
Preaching is so undervalued, so flighted, as if it were too mean for the
Dignitaries, and Fathers of our Church, and only left as the refuse of our
Office for the inferior Ministers. And let me not be misunderstood, as if in
the words of S. Paul, Act. 28.19.
I had ought to accuse my Nation, or Profession of: or with Cham had a desire
to discover my Fathers nakedness. No; only let me magnify their Office, and
in this our Brothers stead, incite them unto that, whereby their Dignity with
man here, and their comfort with God hereafter may be continued.

The Sum of the Apostles Commission, you see here is Preaching, which we
shall according to the Text; consider, First in it self. And then its several
parts.

First, in the General, from the Sum of the Apostles Message, observe this,
(viz,) That Preaching and converting the souls of men, of all the Acts of the
Ministry is the most (...),
APOSTOLICAL. For further proof see (1 Timothy 2.7.) both put together. I am
ordained a Preacher, and an Apostle, ^ Teacher of the Gentiles, etc. The very
same words again (2 Timothy 1.11.) in both, see how the Apostleship is supported
on each side with this employment. It Is preferred before the Administration of
Sacraments (1 Cor. 1.17.) Christ sent me not (i. e. not so much) to baptize,
but to preach the Gospel. Nay above Miracles, gifts of tongues, government,
etc. See 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. God has set in the Church first Apostles, secondly
Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healing,
Government, Diversities of Toungs, etc, Now wherein has it so offended, that
lately it should be compelled to take the lowest room.

It Is a speech of Gregory, Censemus eos qui Apostolorum siguram tene^t
praedicare, Gregor.
We account those to bear the Image of the Apostles, who are Preachers. And if
so, why hear we no more of it from him, who boasts his Sea to be only
Apostolical, who has not bin known so far to disparage himself these many
hundred years. The more we draw back in it, the nearer we shall draw to him.
There were some in the R^vel: ^.2.
Church of Ephesus that said they were Apostles and were not. Let this one
thing be their trial, which if admitted, the former would be found a liar.

Now if preaching be the most Apostolical, certainly this conclusion following
must be undeniable, viz. Then the most Episcopal, Apud nos Apostoloru^ locum
tene^t Episcopi, Hieron: Epist. ad Marcel: contra Mon^.
whose Successors they are. For which, who knows not that (in the 1 Timothy 3.
which S. Hierome well calls Speculum Sacerdotij) the prime quality of a Bishop
is to be Verse. 2 Potissima functio praesulum, Erasm.
(...), i. e. not only able and fit, but apt and ready to it. The like Tit.
1.9. Praedicatio est actus principaliffimus Episcopi and proprius.
Thomas Aquinas could say, that preaching was the most principal and proper
act of a Bishop, and accordingly applies Miles, Vinitor, Pastor, Bos,
triturator, Arator, Seminator, Architectus,
eight Titles to them that imply that labor. Nay so proper to a Bishop, that
before S. Augustine^ time it was not Augustino Presbytero, potestatem dedit
Valerius Episcopus coram se in Ecclesia Evangelium praedicandi, and
frequentissime tractandi, contra usum and consuetudinem Africanarum
Ecclesiarum, unde ei (viz. Valerio) nonnulli Episcop^ detra^^bant, Possida: de
vita Aug.
usual for a Presbiter to preach in the presence of a Bishop; at least it was
against the custom of the Africa Church. We read Valerius than Bishop of
Hippo was much censured by other neighboring Bishops, that he should permit S.
Austine, being then but a Presbiter, to preach so often before him, and not to
do it himself, and yet there was some reason for it: Valerius being a Grecian
was not so perfect in the language, as S. Austine was. And Et postea occurrente
and volante huiusmodi fama and bono precedente exemplo, accepta ab Episcopis
potestate, Presbyteri nonnulli, coram, Episcopis, populis tractare coeperun^
verbum Dei, Ib. See a difference betwee^ a Bishop and a Presbyter.
from his example it began first that Presbiters got the honor to preach the
word of God in the Bishops presence. Which former custom howsoever S. Hierome
from another ground pleads much against, as inferring that the Gaudeat
Episcopus iudicio suo, cum tales Christo elegerit sacerd^te^, Hier: de vita
Clerient: ad Nep^t.
Bishop should delight to hear such of his own Election to perform their
office. Yet he acknowledges it to have Pessimae consuetodinis est in quibusdam
Ecclesiis, tacere Presbyteros, and praesentibus Episcopis non loqui, Ibid.
been the custom then also. But to return to S. Augustine; when he was made a
Bishop, did he then give it over? No; then it is said Atque Episcopatu suscepto
multo instantius ac ferventius, malore authoritate, non adhuc in una tantum
regione, sed ubicunque rogatus, venisset, verbum falutis aeternae, alacriter,
and sua^iter, pullulante atque crescente Domini Ecclesia, praedicabat. Paratus
semper reddere poscentibus rationem de fide, etc. Possido: de vita Augustine.
he preached much more then he did before, whersoever he came, whenever
asked. The like of S. Ambrose (by whose In qua urbe (viz. Mediolan) tum
Episcopatu^ administrabat e^imius Ambrosius, verbi Dei Praedicator
frequentissimas, cuiusdis putationibus Augustinus adstans in populo, sensim and
paulatim conversus fuit, Ibid.
frequent Preaching St. Austin himself was converted) the Ep^scopi proptiu^
munus esse docere populu^; eff^gere non possumus officium doce^di, quod nobis
refugientibus imposuit necessitudo, Ambros: ^fficior: lib: 1.
introduction into whose first Sermon after his Election was the affirming this
to be his proper and necessary function. St. Chrysostom calls preaching, Omnium
bonorum summa, and according to his own practice would have a Bishop preach
every day, Episcopum necesse est in singulos dies sementem sacere, ut ipsa
saltem assuetudine doctrinae, sermonem auditorum animi retinere possunt,
Chrysostom. de sacerd: lib. 6.
with whom ye have often cras and heri, as if he were rather a daily Preacher,
than a weekly. S. Hieroms speech a Bishop should be for the Church, as it is said
of Episcopus imitetur Mosen, imitetur and Aaron, quid enim dicitur de iis, quod
non discedunt a Tabernaculo Domini. Duo sunt Pontificis opera, aut a Deo d^scat
legendo, aut populum Dei docet* praedicando, Hier. in Levit.
Moses and Aaron for the Tabernacle, they departed not from it, always either
preaching or studying for it, either with Matthew: 4. verse 18, 21.
Peter and Andrew fishing, or with James and John amending their nets. Well me
thinks, when I read of Saint Paul's charge for this particular to Timothy, the
first Bishop of Ephesus, and not Parochial neither, 1 Timothy 4.1. and a sickly
man too, and in what high terms he gives it. J charge thee before God and the
LORD JESUS CHRIST, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing,
and in his Kingdom, Preach the Word, be instant, etc. It should make many a
man's ear to tingle that has wholly neglected it, the like you have again (
Tim. 6.13.)

For Excuses, if a not being bound to any particular charge be pretended, let
them consider S. Paul's free preaching, which he so much glories in (1 Cor.
9.19) though he were free from all, yet had voluntarily made himself
serviceable to some. It Is possible for some urgent cause, the maintenance out
of one place may be employed for the upholding Gods service in another. Like S.
Paul (2. Cor. 11.8.) who says, he had robbed other Churches taking wages of
them, to do the Corinthians service for it. but to be wholly idle in all places
is Quomodo mercede^ obsequimur, and tame^ operarii nequaqua^ sumusfructus
Ecclesiae in quotidiano stipendio percipimus, and pro Ecclesia in praedicatione
non laboramus. Pensemus quid est sine labor percipire mercodem laboris,
Hieronym
robbery indeed. If employment in government be alleged for an exemption, let
them again think of what S. Paul says of himself ( 2 Cor. 11.28
Upon whom came daily the care of all the Churches) 1 Corinthians. 9.16. Yet
necessity is laid upon me, and we unto me if I preach not the Gospel, and
Paul aged too. If disputing and writing, etc. be produced (as the best) for a
dispensation, let them still remember it was S. Paul's work also, as writing not
a little. So Acts. 19.9. Cap. 9.22, Cap. 8.18.
disputing daily with the Jews and Greeks, Apollo's and Barnabas did the like
with the false Apostles. S. Peter with the false teachers. S. John confutes
Antichristian Doctrine, and for convincing gainsayers none are freed from. See
but what is recorded of Saint Augustine, how many Heretics he had a daily
contention with Arrians, Manichees, Pelagians, Donatists, (one of which was
converted only by a digression in his Sermon) against whom, and of diverse
other subjects he wrote so much, that if all were extant, he that writes his
life says, Tanta ab illo dictata and edita sunt, tantaque in Ecclesia
disputata, adversus diversos Haereticos, conscripta, ex canonicis libils
exposita, utea omnia vix qu^squam studioforum nosse, and pertegere posset.
Possid: in vitd August.
The greatest student would have his fill in reading of them only. Yet
notwithstanding how did he labor in a constant preaching to his last; and the
like might be related of diverse others.

So that no pretense whatsoever can excuse them from the performance of this
function, to what dignity soever advanced, what burden soever traveling
under. I have often wondered at that in Iothams Parable, that when some of the
Trees were desired to rule over the rest, says Jud. 9.9, 11
the Olive, why should I leave my fatness, wherewith by me they honor God and
Man, etc. says the Fig Tree, Why should I leave my sweetness and my good
fruit, etc. and go to be promoted over the Trees? Why should promotion over
Others, make men barren in themselves? Could they not bear rule, and bear
Fruit together? 'Twas but a Parable, and let it be so still without any further
application; Only let none of us having a talent, be like the unprofitable
servant in hiding it.

And in Conclusion, let me be but your remembrancer, of what has been so
solemnly and publicly vowed at Ordination and Consecration, and such a
Profession before many witnesses ought to be of no light esteem. The Ye are
the Lords Messengers, Watchmen, Pastors, Stewards, to teach, to premonish, to
feed, to provide for the Lords family. See book of ordination, in the exhort.
Exhortation to preaching before the receiving the Order of Priesthood, the
Obligatory promises upon demand for it, the Be thou a faithful dispenser of
the word and Sacraments.
words of Ordination it self, The solemn delivery of the Bible with a charge to
preach, this being the sum of the Office, why retain we the name without
executing it? And are not the same with other additions renewed at the
Consecration of a Bishop? as the Epistle, so the choice of the Gospel, for
that occasion, viz. John 21.15
S. Peter charged three times by our Savior, If he loved him feed his Sheep,
his Lambs, had its meaning. The That he may have grace to be evermore ready,
to spread abroad the Gospel, and as a faithful servant to* give Gods family
their meat in due season. See book of consecration.
special prayer at the Consecration tends the same way. The redelivery of the
Bible as before, and opened with a charge again to be diligent in teaching, in
giving heed to Exhortation, and to doctrine, thereby to save himself, and those
that hear him; to be a Shepherd, and not a woolfe; to seek the lost, etc. And
in conclusion, a Prayer that the Spirit may descend upon him for the preaching
of the word; and being earnest in reprooving, beseeching, rebuking, etc. these
surely are too serious to be thus slighted Gal: 6.7.
be not deceived, God is not mocked. Now if any persons thus Ordained and
Consecrated have been negligent in performing, let not the scandal be cast
upon our Church, who you see is very careful in enjoining, and the bonds it
takes for keeping Covenant are the greatest that can be given, the forfeiture
of which will not fail to be called upon at the judgment of the great day. And
so much for the first thing, the neglect of which this our Brother so much
lamented, viz. The fore-noons work in preaching.

There is a second, which he had expressly vowed also and broken, and for
which equally with the former he acknowledged Gods Justice in this punishment,
and that was the neglect of public Catechizing, in a plain and familiar
exposition of the Credenda and agenda, contained in our Church Catechism,
enjoined to be the afternoons work, and it were well, if every Sunday had its
Morning and Evening Sacrifice; its former and latter Rain, Eccles: 11.6,
In the Morning son thy seed; in the Evening withold not thy hand: Of which
duty give me leave to speak a word also, as being a thing of all others the
most necessary, in this ignorant Island; these are the Foundation of Christian
Religion, which as it was St. Paul's glory to have laid it with the Corinthians,
so would it be the glory of this age, to compass the like with this people,
until which be done it must needs be in vain, to proceed to a building of
higher points. And I believe, without any disparagement I may say of the mayor
part of any of our Congregations, as the Apostle of that famous Church of the
Heb. 5.13. See Ambr. upon this place for the necessity of Catechizing
Hebrews, They have more need of milk, than of strong meat. In which if it
were fit for me to direct others of greater experience than my self, I would
advise of these Four things.

First, to shun diversities of Catechismes; for every one to be teaching a
several, as best likes his fancy, is but to distract and confound the people,
if they shall remoove from one Parish to another. What are they, but several
Methods of the same thing in substance? Let us all pitch upon one, and why not
that appointed by Authority?

Secondly, shun intricate and unnecessary Controversies, which as at all times
in common Congregations are unprofitable: So in this exercise the most
unseasonable. That Clause in the Apostles letter from their first general
Council is very imitable in this, Acts 15.28
We think it fit to lay upon you no other burden, than necessary matters,
(...).
vain bablings, foolish questions, and (...).
striving about words, and such kind of needless contentions, St. Paul bids 2 Timothy 2.14, 16. Titus 3.8.
Timothy and Titus avoid, as being to no profit, among which may be reckoned
the filling ignorant peoples cares with questions of Church Discipline, which
does not concern them, and neglect the main. It Is a good rule, every thing is
so far commendable as it may be profitable.

Thirdly, handle these things briefly, without affecting too much latitude.
Acts 20.31
S. Paul had taught his hearers in the compass of three years, the whole
counsel of God both in public and private, and such as shall dwell so long
upon one subject, observe not the custom of the ancient Church. How brief is
S. Augustines Symbolum, S. Ieromes Explanatio fidei ad Damasum and Cyrillum? S.
Cyprians Exposition of the whole Lords prayer, is not near the length of an
ordinary Sermon. It Is true it may be said of each Petition and Commandment, as
the Philosopher says of the Soul, it is (...), a great thing in a little
compass, like a star, little in your eye, but in it self of a large
magnitude: Like a Fountain, narrow at the head, but mighty streams may be
drawn from it, to that Petition, Thy Kingdom come, or thy will be done may be
referred a great part of the body of Divinity (as some de Deo and de regno Dei,
others de Fide and Obedientia make to consist the whole,) but would it not be
very impertinent to draw all thither? And let me add, that length of time,
(howsoever some glory in it) does not always argue the better building, or the
more cost. Salomons Temple was built in seven years, Herod's was forty six
years in building, yet we cannot imagine it to have exceeded Salomons. Nay in
this spiritual building, it may be want of pains that causes a long
tractate, the better things are studied and digested, the more able shall he be
to prune off unnecessary discourses, and to contract his matter into the
narrower room.

Fourthly, handle them often. In the French and some of the Germane Churches,
as the Sun runs his course in the Heaven once a year, so do they run
through those heavenly Principles in the same compass: For which our Canons
have well provided also. An error in some, who think it sufficient to go
through them once in their lives, or a few of them once a year in Lent. No,
people have not such strong memories for spiritual matters, but that we had
need with S. Peter, 2 Pet, 1.12,
To put them in remembrance of these things often, nay always; For some kind
of meats it suffices they are had sometimes of the year in their seasons,
but for Bread there must be a daily provision. It Is so for the soul, for some
points it matters not if they be seldom handled, but for the Principles of the
Catechism they are your necessary food, without which your souls cannot be
nourished unto everlasting life, therefore it is fit that some of them should
be ever sounding in your ears. And for this it self, let it not be thought
too mean, for the Cbiefe of us. You see it is the Office of 1 Cor. 3.10.
a Master Builder; And among the Fathers have we not many introductions to the
Vulgar. Lactantius his Institutions, Cyrill his Catechismes, Clemens
Alexandrinus Paed^gogus, S. Augustines Enchyridion, and his Book de
Catechizandis rudibus and the like, Saint Paul was all things to all, 1 Cor.
9.22.
To the weak he became as weak, that by all means he might save some.

Let me for Conclusion of this, exhort all without exception, unto diligence in
both these particulars, viz. Preaching and Catechizing, which by this our
Brother were so neglected and lamented. Be not slothful in the Lords business
and in the Lords Vineyard, were it no more than the sight of those of the
Romish Clergy in every corner, who travel Sea and Land to make their
Proselites, it should me thinks, be enough to whet our resolutions to be more
industrious: Ye have heard, respect is your due, but those are only 1 Timothy 5.17
worthy of double honor who are (...) laborers in the word and doctrine,
Maintenance is your due, but it is the Luke 10.7
labourer is worthy of his hire. High esteem is your due, (...), but 1 These. 5
13
for your works sake. What is the cause of late, the Calling has fallen into
such Contempt? is it not for not showing your selves 2 Timothy 2.15.
workmen, rightly dividing the word of truth. Why are many of the people like
those Mat. 12 43
dry places in regard of any goodness, which the unclean spirit walks
through, is it not because you for preaching have passed over like Verbi Dei
praecones dicuntur nubes, qui non secus, ae per quasdam nubes, spiritualem
irrigationem hominibus Deus offert. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 107.
clouds and wind without rain? What is the cause so few subject themselves to
Christ's Scepter? Is it not because the sword of his Spirit ( the word) is not
thus drawn out by you? This and the like were the sole Apostolic weapons,
whereby the world was at first subdued. By these arms the Fathers purged it of
Heresies and Schisms, afterward, Non vi, no^ armis, non carceribus, sed solo
gladio spiritus, quod est verbum Dei, tor victorias, tor triumphos paravit
Ecclesiae Christi. Possidon.
not by Pillaring, Imprisoning, Obtaining Imperial Edicts, (as it is said of S.
Augustine) but by preaching. And let no man neither, Zach. 4, 10.
despise the day of small things. S. Ambrose his first Sermon de grano Sinapis
(as appears by the beginning) was preached to a Libenter nos praedicare, and
gratanter opus Dei facere manifestum est. Sed vi demus plures e fr^^ribus
pig^ius ad Ecclesiam convenire: inviti loquimur, and tamen tacere n^n possumus,
Ambros. sermon- 1, de grano Sinapis.
thin auditory. Our Savior was content with one Woman at Samaria. Noah's eight
persons in the Arc were the better auditory, though the whole old world were
the greater, Pretend neither the undecencie of the Church, our Savior preached
out of a Fisher-boate, S. Paul upon the Sands. Where you find dead Carcasses
thither should ye like the Eagles resort. Nay, there is a way whereby all this
enjoined may not seem a burden to us neither. There is a labor of lov^ (the
Apostle speaks of) that will make us love the labor. Jacob because he loved
Rachell though^ his seven years service nothing* What pains do we see some Oh
quam pu^end^m, si delectat labor, ut fera capiatur, and non ut ani^a capiatu^!
Onerosi non sunt lab^^es amantum, nam in eo quod labor amatur, non labor atur.
Aug, de bon. vidui^.
tak^ in hunting, fowling, etc. accompte^ but a sport, because they love it*
How do some toil for the love o^ Money, things momentanie! And shall not our
love to Christ constrain us rather? The compassion to the Souls that are
Christ's, the gain of an immortal crown with Christ, much more inflame us?

And yet there is one thing more behind, which if we will fulfi^ our
Ministry, must not be omitted; which we have also solemnly promised, and that
is, Private admonitions. S. Paul had somewhat to do Act. 20, 10.
from house to house, as well as in the Pulpit. Ambassadors have not done all
in delivering their Embassage publicly upon the day of audience, but there is
much employment also in private Treaties. The Husbandman visits his ground
often after it is sown. It Is the ignorance of some people to be all for the
public, and the neglect of some Ministers to make that their stent. No, you
will find it otherwise in S. Paul's Epistles to Timothy and Titus, and it is a
thing most useful in this Kingdom, where there are so many that hate the
light in public. This was S. Augustines practice too, Docebat ille privatim in
domo, and public in Ecclesia, sacram lectionem adhibebat mensae, unde de
quadam frugisera Co^mentabatur and compertis teru^ opportunitatibus, divinae
legis parts eis inculcabat, and ut speculator Domini, admonebat, praedicans
opportune, importune arguens, etc. Et praecipue operam dans eos instruere qui
essent ico^ei alios docere. Possidon.
he had usually a Chapter read at his Table, upon which he would be Commenting
to his Guests, took all opportunities in private to inculcate what he had
delivered before, and chiefly endeavoring to instruct those, who might be able
to teach others. And this part of our function, the Apostle gives a special
caveat, that it be done with 2 Timothy: 2.25 Iam: 3.13.
meekness of wisdom, or else he may offend as much in admonishing, as the
party who is to be admonished. Pro: 25.11.22 (...)
A word fitly spoken, says Solomon, is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of
Silver, as an Earing of Gold, so is a wise reprover, etc. The word in the
Original is spoken upon its wheeler, which always has the best success,
when it runs upon these four in a right observation of the Manner, Time,
Place and Person.

There was another thing you shall find often lamented by thi^ our Brother
also, which we must not omit, and that was his Inconstancy in what we have
already spoken of. He had runn^ well formerly, but of late yeare^ had slackt
his pace, upon which I was an ear witness of his savoury counsel to others,
by hi^ example, to continue constantly ^ well doing, and not to measure the^^
course according to the pleasure of (...) times. Let me also commend this to
you from him, as the crown of all the former, viz. Constancy. 2 Timothy: ^.14.
Continue in the things thou have been assured of, etc. Titus 5.^.
These things I will that thou affirm constantly, 1 Timothy 4.16.
take heed to thy self, and to the doctrine, and continue in them, were the
admonition of S. Paul to his Sons Timothy and Titus. Let us intend these
things, and intend them 1 Timothy 4.15.
wholly. An over active Spirit that admits as inmates a multitude of other
Offices, to have one foot in the Church, another in the City, and as if he were
a Tripos, a third in the Camp, usually miscaries in all, Qui in omnibus
aliquid, in toto nihil, let every one abide in that whereunto he is called. Romans
12.7, 8.
If in the Ministry, let us wait on our Ministry, he that teaches, on
teaching, he that exhorts on Exhortation, and then may he expect a blessing.
Luke 1.11.
Zacharias received that joyful news of a Son by the Angel, while he was
executing his Priestly office in the Temple. The Cap. 2.8.
Shepherds theirs, while they were attending their flocks by night; the Mat.
4.18.
Disciples were called by our Savior to be Apostles, while they were in their
callings. What work you are set unto, Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord
when he comes shall find so doing.

Some have been inconstant in the doctrine delivered: 'twas Reubens blot (who
lost his dignity) to Genesis 49.4.
be unstable as water, to be like a wave of the Sea, (to which S. James
compares some) turning according to the wind and tide, is not becoming Gods
Messengers, who rather are compared to Isa. 41.18.
rivers, which hold their course, let the wind blow which way it will, Iam.
1.8. (...)
to be double minded, or as the Psalmist Ps. ^2.2. Heb. a heart and a heart.
double hearted is bad, but to be (...) double tongued is worse, much condemned
in Deacons, (1 Timothy 3.8.) and in this sense, it must needs be the more, when
it is in matter of doctrine, to deliver it sometimes one way, sometimes another.
No, as S. Jude v. 3. that doctrine ye have once delivered to the Saints
contend for; If Gal. 2.18.
I build the things which I destroyed (says S. Paul) J make my self a
transgressor. 2 Cor 1.7, 18, 19.

Upon which S. Ambrose id est non aliud agit qua^ scit agendu^, sic
praedicatores, non aliud faciant quam sciant, ut solent adulatores, ne homines
of sendant.


Our word was not yea, and nay, that with me there should be, yea, yea, and
nay, nay, etc. As the Lord who sends us changes not, so his Messengers must
not be changlings neither. The Septuagint translation howsoever highly to be
esteemed, yet by this appears that they were not (...), but led by a private
spirit, in that they changed some things of purpose to please Ptolemy and his
Queen, like the Oracle when King Philip came to enquire of it, the Priests
made it answer according to his humor; But it must not be so with us. The
Rabbis fabulize the Manna had a several taste according to every man's palate.
I know people would feign have it so, in the delivery of this heavenly Manna of
the Word. But if we shall so study to please men, we shall not be the servants
of Christ.

Others are inconstant for the time; have borne fruit, but now are barren; and
yet such as are of Gods planting in his house Ps. 92.14, 15.
bring forth fruit in their old age. Ps. 148.12.
Old men must praise God as well as Children, Joel 2.28. Acts 2.27.
and so accordingly was the Spirit powered out. The two Re. 1^.7.
faithful witnesses, their lives and preaching ended together. Thus was it
with S. Augustine. Verbum Dei usque ad suam ipsam extremam aegritudinem,
alacriter, and sortiter, sana mente, sanoque consili^ in Ecclesia praedicavit;
and vixit annis septuaginta sex, Possidon.
He preached till his last sickness, being then 76. years old. Indeed there
is no doubt a decrepit old age and decay of narurall faculties, must have a
dispensation. God in that case has mercy and not sacrifice, like the Number: 8.26
Levites in the Law discharged from the heaviest burden of their Office at
fifty years. But let us not pretend more weakness then is. Our bodies (make
the most of them we can) must at length fall to dust. Now can they be spent in
a more honorable service then the Ministry? the next degree (I hold) to
Martyrdom? The usual plea is indisposition of body, 1 Timothy: 4.23
Timothy was such a one indeed, had many infirmities; S. Paul loved him
dearly. Yet (though he allowed him a little wine) does not prescribe him
little Preaching. His charge is still the same (2 Epist. 4.1.) and me thinks
strange counsel for a weak man. The Oringe tree, they write, is bearing fruit
all the year long, as some are ripe, so others are still budding. A good Emble
of a Preacher, as he should be weekly sending forth his labors, so providing a
new again; in this sense, like the Mat: 13.52.
Householder, bringing out of his treasure things new and old.

Oh! this constancy in Preaching, and in some constant Method (though it be
the meaner) does more good, then now and then only an elaborate Sermon; like a
constant diet (though it be course fare) nourishes more, then now and then a
feast, when they must fast a long time between. Object not as a discouragement
that thou see no good come of it. Consider See Chrysostom. in Hom. 31.40.
the Physician gives not always his patient over, because he mends not at
first. The Soldier does not raise the Seige, because the City is not taken the
first day. It Is possible, it may be with some of us for many years, as it was
with S. Peter for one night, he had been casting in, but Ioh. 21.3, 6.
taken nothing; yet with him, at our Saviors command we must cast in again.
Nay; the Mar. 4.27.
Kingdom of God (says Christ) is like one sowing, and the seed springs and
grows up, but he knows not how. Thou see no fruit; no more did Elias (though
quick sighted) the seven thousand in Israel: much is lost; 'twas our Saviors
own case, few converted by him, yet never man spoke like him. (...) ^don
Abundance of diseased people compassed Ioh. 5.4.
the poole of Bethesda, but there was but one healed at once, and that at a
certain season too, when an Angel descended. It Is so in these waters of the
Sanctuary, it is well if in a great Congregation one may be converted by the
Sermon. S. Paul knew he should never gain all, and therefore was content, if
he could win but some. Have thou sown, it is not lost neither, if another reap
the fruit after thee, as our Savior to the Disciples, Ioh. 4.38.
others have labored, and you have entered into their labors: be thou ever
with 1 Cor: 3.6-
S. Paul and Apollo, planting or watring, and commit the increase to God that
must give it. Sit praedicator prius orator, quam doctor, magis prodesse populum
pietare orationum, qua facultate oratoris.

Aug. de doctrine. Christ. lib. 4. Aperio^ tuum, sed prius ut aperiatur implora,
Hier-


Pray for the descent of this dew of Heaven whereby it may spring, but if it be
withheld, for thy self, remember the speech of the Prophet, Isa. 49.4. J have
labored in vain, J have spent my strength for naught, yet my judgment is
with the Lord, and my reward with my God; thy reward shall be secundum laborem,
non secundum proventum. If mocks and reproaches befall you, be not troubled,
Vipers will leap upon Paul's hands. Shake them off as he did, no hurt shall
come unto you. Rev: 2:10
Be faithful unto death, and ye shall receive the Crown of life.

And thus having supplied that which this our Brother had desired to have done
himself (though much larger then I had at first intended) concerning the
Commission of preaching in the general, I am now further invited by the Text
to a consideration of the several parts of it also, which are these two, an
Information, to open their eyes; An Exhortation, to turn them from darkness,
etc.

First observe, It is our duty to open the eyes of men, (i. e.) their
understandings for matter of knowledge, as Mal. 2.7. The Priests lips should
preserve knowledge. The Popish Priests do what they can to close the peoples
eyes, it is our profession to clear them. How often to this purpose have ye the
prayer of the Apostle, That the Ephesians: 1.18
eyes of their understandings may be enlightened, that they may Phil: 1.9.
increase in knowledge, and in all Judgment.

From hence then must follow these two requisites in a Preacher.

1. Ability in themselves to open. 2. Perspicuity in a plain open expression
to the people.
First, Ability for matter of learning; how can they open the eyes of others,
when they are blind themselves? Shall we in this sense expect night unto night
to show knowledge. They are called Lights. Now as Si Pastor qui lumen sit
fidei, caeteris sit occaecatior, quantae in populo essent tenebrae peccatorum,
Hier: in 6: Mat:
S. Jerome, if the light which be in the Minister the head be darkness, how
great must the darkness be in the body of the people? They are Leaders, should
not they then know the way themselves? It was an ill case with the Israelites,
Isa 56.10, 11
when their Watchmen were all blind and dumb, Shepherds that did not
understand, etc. and surely those who lay hands on such 1 Timothy: 5.22
are partakers of other men's sins, and ought to bear their judgment. St.
Chrysostom Qui ordina^t indignos iisde^ subiace^t poenis, quibus illi qui
indigni sunt ordinati, si dicunt, se eos ignorasse, ideo gravius crimen
efficitur, quonia^ promoveru^t, quem ignorabant, ista excusatio, fiat accusatio
Chrysostom: in 1 Timothy: 5.
thought it just, they should be both punished alike, notwithstanding any
excuse or mistake in them. The Prophet speaking of such says, Zach: 11.17
Woe to the Idol Shepherd. and the Psalmists description agrees to them, Who
Psalm: 115.5, 7, 8.
have eyes and see not, neither speak they through their throat, and they
that make them are like unto them. Some read it, Vae Pastori nihili, and an
Idol is nothing in the world. (1 Cor. 8.) The Complaint of a Father in his
time may be taken up for some Dioceses now. Curritur in Ecclesiae curas passim
ab omni aetate and ordine doctis pariter and indoctis, tanquam sine cura iam
quisque victurus sit, quum ad curas pervenerit. The calling of the Ministry is
Mysterious; Now if for Pastorale magisteriu^, est Ars artium and regimen
animarum. Hier.
Arts and ordinary trades, men do not take the profession on them till they
have bin some years practiced in them. How much more cause have we to be many
years at the schools of the Prophets, to gain Isa 50.4.
the tongue of the learned, before we assume this 1 Cor: 3.8.
Ministration of the Spirit. That of our Savior is observable, that though he
was able enough at twelve years, yet he preached not till he was Luke 3.23
Cap: 2.42.
thirty, Redemptor noster, cum sit coeli Conditor, Angelorum doctor ante
trice^nale tempus in terra noluit doctor fieri hominu^ perfectae vitae gratiam,
non nisi in perfecta aetate praedicavit, Gregor: super Ezekiel: ho: 2.
by that perfect age (says Gregory) implying the perfection of parts requisite
to that function, being as S. Chrysostom, Onus angelicis humeris formidandum.
What presumption is it the^ (says the same Father) Cur te facis pastorem, cu^
sis ovis, cur capur esse contendis cu^ pes existis, cur exercitu^ ducere
quaeris, cum inter milites adhuc censearis, Ibid.
for men to be ambitious of being Shepherds, when they are scarce sheep? to be
Captains, when they are hardly Christ's soldiers, to guide the Stern before
they know how to handle the Ore? The Apostles were first Disciples before
Doctors, Learners before Leaders. And as our Savior bade them tarry at
Jerusalem, till they should be endowed with power from on high: So it is good
counsel for many to return to the University, till they are better furnished;
and like the wise Virgins, to be sparing in the storing of others with oil,
least they have not enough for themselves, it is good in this as in other
matters, To be swift to hear, but slow to speak, till they be fit for it.
Ahimaaz that was so eager to be sent, and out-ran Cushi, when he came spoke
little to the purpose. And so it is with some hasty spirits for the Ministry,
they that come in after them, like Cushi do their Message more fully. Apes
illa sapiens cum aeris motus suspectos habet, lapillis saepe sublatis per
inania se librat nubila ne leve alaru^ remigium praecipitent flabra ventorum,
Ambr: de Virg: lib: 3
The Bees in tempestious weather (it is S. Ambrose his similitude) use to
balance themselves with little stones, least in their flight they should be
overborne by it, It is good counsel for us in this Kingdom, where we shall
meet, with so many storming Adversaries to gainsay us, we had need to be well
poysed with sound and solid knowledge, least we be carried away with every
wind of Doctrine. For want of this it comes to pass that some feed their
people indeed, but it is with an empty spoone, little or no matter, Vox and
praeterea nihil, like the foolish Virgins lamps, but little Oil. Instead of
polishing the corner stones of the Temple, their doctrine is but daubing with
untempered mortar. A formal outside of preaching, but if it were weiged in
the balance of the Sanctuary, would be found very light, little substance in
it.

2. Perspicuity and plainness in their Sermons; what hope is there of opening
men's understandings, when the matter delivered is closed up from them. It Was S.
Paul's aim 1 Cor: 14.^
to speak words easy to be understood, and so it should be ours also. There
is little difference in speaking in an unknown tongue, and speaking of things
in an unknown style. These strong lines and forced eloquence in so high a
language, does little suite with Gods Oracles, less fit that word that must
save the soul. ( A fault which this our Brother much condemned himself for.)
The Idolatrous Calfe was of Gold, but the Serpent that gave life, was made of
plain brass. The Altar was to be but of Earth, or unpolisht stone.
Types-indeede they were of the mean hue of Christ himself. But they may
resemble the plainness of his word too, which was usually illustrated by
earthly similitudes, rather solid in the matter, then gilded in the style. Our
Savior preached not as he himself was able, but as the people were able to
hear. 1 Cor: 2.1. Upon which S. Ambrose speaks much against that: Vbi non
ratio, no^ virtus, sed verboru^ quaeritur co^positio.
Saint Paul professes he came not in the enticing words of man's wisdom or
excellency of speech. 2 Cor: 2.17
We are not as many (says he) who corrupt the word of God, (...), a Metaphor
from Hucksters. That in the Law Deuteronomy: 22.9,
Thou shall not sow thy vineyards with diverse kinds of seeds, is of force still
in this particular: We must not blend the pure seed of the word, with the
Chafe and Darnell of our own conceits. It Is a good rule, that seeing we are
Christ's Messengers, we should so preach as in our consciences we are persuaded
he would have us, or as we think the Apostles would, if they were present
themselves, whom we do succeed; This were to do it in sincerity, when with
S. Paul, As of God in the sight of God, so speak we in Christ. I wonder with
what face, some can pray before him who is the searcher of the hearts, for the
conversio^ of their hearers by their Sermon, when res ipsa loquitur, there can
be no such meaning in them, but rather their own Qui parvis loquitur sublimia,
curat magis se oste^dere, qua^ auditoribus prodesse.

Greg: in Moral.


applause. Painted glass is the more costly, but plainer is the more
perspicuous, and so the more useful: Men may spend much time to paint and set
out their Sermons, but the plainer the more profitable. The Child thrives more
with the mere milk of the breast, than all other sweet meats whatsoever. And
it is sure the 1 Pet. 2.2. (...).
sincere milk of the word (as S. Peter calls it) drawn out of the two Breasts
of the Church, the Old and New Testament, nourishes more to everlasting life,
then all other Placentia, men-pleasing Oratory whatsoever. Mat: 13.47
The word in the Parable is compared to a Net, the world to the Sea, Men to
Fishes. If we will have the Fish catched, the Net must be spread and unfolded,
and so must the word be explained if we will be Fishers of men. And from this,
let none on the other side collect, as if a rudeness of speech were justified,
the apparrelling this heavenly wisdom in some tattered style. No Eccles. 12.9.
Because the Preacher was wise, He gave good heed, and sought out words, and set
them in order, he sought out fit words, etc. Apta non alta, and certainly it is
the upshot of all learning to distinguish aptly and clearly of that which is
confused, and to illustrate plainly that which is obscure. Some have a faculty
to speak obscurely of a plain subject, as if according to that threatening in
the Prophet, Amos 8.9
They would cause, the Sun to go down at noone. To do Gods work
negligently, ye know is cursed; We must do herein, as David, (1 Chronicles. 29.2.)
who prepared with all his might for the house of God, the Oil in the Lamps of
the Tabernacle must be beaten (Exodus 27.29.) to signify we must beat our
brains in the preparing for the light of the word, not in this sense, to offer
ex tempore unto God that which cost us nothing: No, it ought to be with some
labor and pains. Yet as S. Augustine says well, there is quaedam diligens
negligentia, commendable in a Preacher, neither to have his Phrase too curious,
nor too careless, quae sic ornatum detrahit, ut sordes non contrahit. While
the Temple was in framing in mount Libanus, there was doubtless the use of all
tools, but when it was set up, it is said 1 Kings 6.7
there was not then either Hammer or Axe or any tool of Iron heard in it. It
may be applied to this spiritual building, while the Sermon is in framing in
the study, make use of all Authors, but in the very delivery of it in the
Temple to the people, what needs there the noise of so many names of Fathers
and other Writers, which often drownes the matter it self, and the producing
of Heathen Poets. Me thinks it is like the bringing of the uncircumcised into
Gods house, of all the most unfitting. If thou shall lift up such tools upon
it, (as it is said of the Exo: 20, 25
Altar) thou have polluted it. In a word, so preach, that the hearer may be
convicted, his heart discovered, his tongue confess not that learning, wit, or
eloquence, but 1 Cor: 14*25
That God is in you indeed, that your tongues are touched with a Coal from
Gods Altar. Preaching consists not in flashes and Rhetorical descants, and
such like S. August: Of Homer: dulcissime vanus Confess.
pleasing vanities, but in the power and demonstration of the spirit, in
enlightening the mind, in wounding the Conscience, and healing it again.
Lachrymae auditoru^ lauds tuae sunt, doce^te te in Ecclesia gemitus
suscitetur, ille est Doctor Ecclesiasticus, qui lachrymas non risum movet,
Hieron: ad nepot.
The tears of the people are a Preachers praise, says St. Hierome. The words
of the wise says Solomon are as goades and nails. Dicuntur pungere, non
palpare, says the same Father, not to stroke but to pierce, not to flatter,
but to fright men out of their evil courses, and so much for the first part of
the Commission, To open their eyes.

2. The second part of the Commission, to turn them from darkness to light,
from the power of Satan unto God, no great difference between them: For as
sin is often set out by darkness, so is Satan called the power and the
Prince of darkness. As Grace is often resembled by light, so is God also
called light it self, the Father of light, etc. Howsoever if this be a
Preachers Office to turn others, this conclusion must necessarily follow also,
viz. he must be first turned himself: They must not then be such as live in
the works of darkness, and under the power of Satan themselves. Quomodo potest
praeses Ecclesiae offerre malum de medi^ ejus, qui in delictum simile corruit.
Antiqua liberate peccantem corripere potest, cum tacitus ille sibi respondet,
eadem se admisisse, quae corripit: Hier: in Epist: ad Tit.
What effect can that Ambassador expect, when his actions shall contradict his
treaties? Can he hope to draw others to take the Oath of Allegiance when he
refuses it himself? when our lives do not second our doctrine, we shall but
pull down with one hand, what we build up with the other. He that would have a
Sermon effectual (says a Father) Qui verba Deiloquitur, ex vita sua^
colligar, quid and qualiter dicat, ille loqui veraciter novit, qui prius
benefacere didicit, Greg: sup: Eva^g. Sermo non habet dulcedinem, cum vita
reprobare-mordet conscientia^, Id: Qui maledictus est, quomodo potest
benedicere cu^ in Christi corpore non sunt, quomodo popu^o postunt Christi
corpus tradere* Ide^: Cuius vita despicitur, eius doctrina contemnatur Hier*
Must first read it in himself, He can only speak as he ought, who lives as
he should. What sweetness can there be in that speech to the hearers, when
it is contradicted within the Conscience of the Speaker. They can care but
little for his Counsel who is himself careless of his life. How shall he
bless the people, when he is in a cursed estate himself? How shall he give
the body of Christ to others, who is not a member himself? As neither the
blind nor lame Sacrifice were accepted with God ( Hab. 1.) So are they as
unprofitable with man, the blind in knowledge, the halt in conversation.
Praedicat viv^ voce, qui vita and voce. S. Pau^ bids Timothy be 1 Timothy: 4.12.
Tit: 2.7

1 Pet: 5.3. Tanta debet esse conversatio Pontificis, ^tomnis metus and
egressus and universa eius opera sint exemplaria, and quicquid agat, quicquid
loquitur, doctrina fit populoru^, Hieron.


an example to the Believers in his Conversation. Titus in all things to show
himself a Pattern of good works gravity, etc. S. Peter exhort the Elders to
be examples to the flock, it is the same word in all three, (...), a Metaphor
from a Seal or stamp, to which the people are like the Wax or Paper, who
accordingly receive their Print. St. Ambrose well calls the Ministers life, the
Episcopus ut cu^ctos inspicias, sic cunctorii oculi in illum recipient. Nulli
iamia^ illicitum esse videatur, quod ab Episcopo quasi licitum perpetratur.
Ergo quia ita est, cur te velut tetrum speculum universorum oculis demonstias,
ut non possent obscuritate tua se comptius exornare, Ambr. de degnit sacerdot.
peoples looking-glass according to which they usually dress themselves, as
taking whatsoever he does to be Gospel; now if the glass be false, Si oculus
nequam est, totum corpus tuum tenebi osum est, id est, si Episcopus qui
videbatur Corperi subdito lucem praebere obnubilatur nequitiae caecitate, quid
facient caetera membra, quibus lux adempta est ocu^orum, Amb. ibid.
the eye be evil, how can the whole body but be disordered and full of
darkness? Nay, he ought to fly the very suspicion Tit. 1.6. 1 Timothy 3.7.
Phil. ^.8. Augustinus parum esse iudicaret Episcopi pudicitiam esse integram,
nisi and famam haberet illibatam, nec satis, si suam u^ins famam a sinist^is
i^moribus praestitisset, nisi clericos etiam haberet in egri nominis, Erasm: de
vita August.
of his fame, that he be not so much as accused or ill reported.

His life should be like the land of Goshen Lux gregis, flamma pastoris, Hieros
light, though all the rest of Egypt be dark. Like Gideons fleece wet with
the dew of Heaven, though all the ground about be dry. Gregory well compares
the Preacher to the cock, as in his Message, which is to cry Romans 13.12
with Saint Paul, Nox praecessit, etc. The night is past, the day is at hand:
So in his prepation, Qui prius alis insonat, quam cantus emittat; First, wakes
himself before he wakes others, Sic praedicatores antequam alies movent, se
pri^s in sanctis actionibus exerce^t, se prius excutiant, and tunc alios
sollicitos reidunt, prius sua puniri fieribus curant, and tu^c quae ^iiorum
sunt punieda d^nunciant. Gregor.
So (says he) should a Preacher, first shake off the dust of his own feet,
and then take care to clean others; First moove himself in good works, and
then draw and drive on others; First repent himself, and then denounce a
judgment on them that do not: And for this exemplary innocent life, both in
your selves and families, has it not been seriously charged and solemnly
vowed, both at your Ordination and Consecration, many prayers then made for you
in it, if so be it be yet in vain. And certainly it is a thing most necessary
in this Kingdom, where there are so many that will not hear our words, there
our works must be the Preacher, where they shut their eyes against the light
of the word, there the light of our lives must shine before them. And examples
are the stronger Cords of the two. What we say proverbially of the Plough,
That it thrives best when the Husbandman says not, Ite, but Venite: So it is
with the seed of the word, when the Sower can say with Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 11.1.
Be followers of me, as you see me do, do likewise. The life and doctrine
are like that sign of Castor and Pollux, when they are seen together, are a
presage of a prosperous voyage, when asunder, they portend a dangerous storm.
Si been docueris and been ^ixeris, omnium iudex es: si been docueris and male
vixeris, tui solius. Priore inst^uis populum quomodo debet vivere, postetiore
Deum, quomodo debet te co^demnare, Hier.
if thou live well (says Saint Hierome) thou art as the spiritual man,
judge of all; If thou teach well and live ill, a Judge only of thy self,
and judged of all. By thy teaching thou tells the people how to live, by thy
life thou show God how to condemn thy self. There are some like
Nebuchadnezzars Image, the Head was of Gold, but the Feet of Clay. They have
golden wits, but their conversation is earthly and sensual, Whether that be
true or no that is proverbially said of Tusser, that he wrote excellently well
of Husbandry, but himself was the worst Husband that ever water wet; It Is true
of many in this sense, who can preach very well to save others, but 1 Cor: 9.^*
(...) id ^st, disap^oved, as c. (...). 19, etc. opponitur probo, sicut
pecun^am, prob^^^ v^camu^ mini.
cast away themselves. In a word, let us so teach and so do, that we may e
adulterin^m. Bez^. 1^. Tim: ^, 6
both save our selves, and them that hear us. And Thomas Aquinas makes it a
greater difficulty for a Prelate to be saved, than another man, for this
reason, Quia debet ratione^ reddere de propriis and alienis, Tho. Aquin.
Because he has other men's sins lying upon him, besides his own; and for
the same cause Non temere dico, sed ut affectus sum, and sentio, non arbitr^r
inter sacerdo^es mult^s esse qui salvisia^t, sed multos esse qui per cant,
g^orificemur ali quando apud homines and tamen (...) d^mar ap^d De^m quia
cul^^^que mul^^m ^atur, multum quan^^m no to, and non solum reddituri sint
rationem suor^m d^ (...), ^um, sed and aliorum, Chrysostom. 3. homil^n Act.
Apost* and (...) ^i^erdot. lib 6.
Saint Chrysostom says the like of Ministers also, and that seriously, That
he thought few of them would be saved, both because more is expected from them
than from others, and their sins greater than the sins of others. The
hazard of which Epist. 14 8. ad V^l^r. and Possi^ion in v^^^ August.
Saint Augustine says was the cause he so wept at his Consecration. The like
says Vt nihil Episcopo excellentius, sic nihil mis^ibilius, si de sancta vita
periclitetur, si facerdos in crin^^e ^peatur. de dignit. sacerd
Saint Ambrose, No Office more excellent, and if they fall none more dangerous.
Grancis dignitas sacerdotum, ^ed and grandis ruina, si peccant, non est tanti
genuii ex^elsa tennisse, quam moeroris de sublimioribas corruisse. ^ieron.
A great honor, says Saint Hierom, but* if they sin, a great fall, the one
is not such a joy, as the other a sadness. The nearer we approach to GOD in
our service, the greater is the offense, if we shall run into rebellion. See
the Apostles Argument, Romans 2.21, 22, 23, 24. Thou that teach another,
teach thou not thy self? Thou that Preachest, etc. In the Law it is observed
the measures and weights of the Sanctuary were double to the Common, and so are
the sins of the Officers of GODS Sanctuary that draw nigh to him, double and
treble to the same sins in the Common People. If the Lev. 4.3. It exceeded
those of the common sort, verse. 28 the rulers, 23 equal with the whole
Congregation, verse, 13
Priest anointed did sin, his Offering for expiation, was to be as much as
for the sin of the whole Congregation; So the sins of such as are
consecrated and set apart for GODS service require a deeper measure of
repentance; a greater portion of sorrow, than might suffice for many others, by
how much they are the more scandalous. And has not this of late been the
cause of the contempt of our calling? that the Vulgar (though erroneously) have
argued from the persons to the Offices, according to that of Malac. 7.8.
Because ye have departed out of the way, and corrupted the Covenant of Levi,
therefore have I made you base and contemptible before all the people,
according as you have not kept my ways. A good strict life, needs no other
help to gain respect. Vice usually stands in awe of virtue. See but that
instance in Mark 6.^0
Herod who feared John, and observed him, because he was a just man and a holy,
etc. It Is the prescription of Saint Paul to 1 Timothy 4.12 Tit. 2.15.
Timothy and Titus for it: I speak the more of it in regard the contrary has
been pretended, as the Original of all these stirs. A present lamentable
example we have in this person, the fruit of whose life has been this
ignominious death, both scandalous, both lamented. Yet in this differing, his
life a continual spiritual death, his death a beginning, and a great
progress of a spiritual life. Let him die in your thoughts for his life, But
let him live in your memories by his penitent death, forget the former, and
imitate the latter. And thus we have considered the second part of the Text,
applicatory to this our Brother, as it was to have been his employment toward
others.

A word of it only as it was effectually found in himself; and so we shall
have done with it:

Ye have here a threefold Metaphorical description of the sinful state of
nature before Conversion, and the state of Grace after it.

The former by a 1. Blindness. 2. Darkness. 3. Slavery.
The latter by a 1. Sight. 2. Light. 3. Liberty.


The Division of the former is somewhat like Saint John's Tricotomize, etc.
referring 1 John 2.16
all in the world to the Eye, the Flesh, and Life, according to the usual
distinction of sins, into those of the Heart, Fact, and Custom. The first ex
Ignorantia, the second ex Infirmitate, the third ex Studio. As this sinful
condition by nature is a dead estate, you may Tribus gradibus ad peccatum
pe^venitur, in cord, in facto, in consuetudine, tanquamtres mortes, una quasi
in do^o, altera quasi prolata extra portum, tertia quasi in sepulchro iam
putresceus, Quae tria gene^a mortuorum Dominum suscitasse, quisquis Evangelium
legit, agnoscit, August: sermon: in Mont.
perceive three degrees of it, according to a distinction of Saint Augustines.
The first ( Blindness) is like the man dead in his Bed. The second (
Darkness) put into his Coffin. The third ( Under the power of Satan) laid in
his Grave. Three such our Savior raised to life. Mar. 5.41.
Jairus his daughter in her bed within doors. Lu. 7.14.
The Widow of Naims Son in his Coffin carrying out. John 11.44
And Lazarus putrefying in his Grave; all were miracles, but the last the
greatest. Such several Degrees of sinners is Saint Paul here sent to raise
from the death of sin, to the life of Grace, to the last degree of which (to
magnify GODS mercy the more) was this our Brother fallen, and raised again by
repentance.

1. The first Degree of our wretched estate before Conversion is set out by a
Blindness (to open their eyes, therefore blind before) which indeed is like
his, John 9.1. from our very birth. And yet in many things, this of the Soul
is worse than that of the Body. He that is blind in body is glad of a guide,
these often scorn instruction, the former thinks them happy that see and
desires it, These despise such, and will not see though they might. The one
believes he is blind and laments it. The other thinks he sees well enough,
like the Pharisees, (John 9.41.) The Corporally blind sometimes excel in parts
of the mind, as Memory, etc. But a man spiritually blind, has no good thing
in him at all.

2. The second by a darkness, as the world the first day of the Creation was
empty and void wrapped up in a confused darkness, such is our estate, as we are
borne at first, void of all good ( Romans 7.18.) Darkness in the Understanding,
Confusion in the Affections, and Conscience. And there is some similitude
between them. First a man in Darkness is subject to error, so are such to go
astray, resembled in the lost Lu. 15.
Groate and Sheep. Secondly, subject to John 11.10
stumbling, so are these to dangerous falls and scandals in their lives, till
they slip at last into that Pit of darkness. Thirdly, insensible of any evil
before them. So are these of Hell and damnation, let them be never so often
warned. Fourthly, subject to mistakes, to think they are right when they are
wrong. So are such often strongly conceited, they are in the way to Heaven, and
yet Posting the contrary. Lastly, subject to fears and frights, such is the
Case of those, who live in the works of darkness, they have many horrors and
scarres within their Consciences, especially if they fall into any danger of
death, by sickness, or any other accident, The same which this our Brother
often acknowledged to have been his condition before his Conversion.

3. Thirdly, by a slavery, and the worst of any (omni malo and exitio peior)
under the power or thraldom of Satan (2 Timothy 2.26.) An Emblem of it ye have in
Sampson, who had his eyes first pulled out by the Philistines, and then bound in
fetters, and made to grind in the Prison, it is so expressed, Esaias 42.7* To open
the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prisonhouse. Signified
somewhat by the Jsraelites miserable estate in the Egyptian bondage. They were
in a strange Country, and so the more helpelesse, hopeless. Such is this,
where we are Pilgrims and strangers: the taske-masters may resemble the
buffetings and cruel exactions of our spiritual enemies. Pharaoh commands to
have their children killed in the birth, and so does Satan endeavor daily to
crush the very first motions and beginnings of any spiritual birth in us, like
the Dragon in the Revelation, Rev: 12.4
when he could not murder the Mother, attempted the Child as soon as it was
borne. Sin is in us as in the stream; in Adam as in the Spring; in the
Devil as in the Sea, from whom as all comes, so to whom all that dye in them
must return, And yet heerin as Anselme observes by some Circumstances the
Scholar exceeds the Master, the sins of men may be greater than Satan's Satan
peccat Deo reprobante, ego Deo revocanto, ille obduraturad punientem, ego ad
blandientem, ille peccat co^tra non requirentem se, ego contra morientem^ pro
me, ecce cuius imaginem horrebam, horrorem in multis aspiciome horribiliore^,
Anselm. in lib. de casu Diaboli.
(says he) He sins against GOD reprobating him, Man against GOD recalling
him. He is hardened against the punisher of him, Man against the allurer. He
against one not seeking him, Man against one dying for him.

For the state of grace by Conversion. It Is

1. Set forth here by sight (to open) Corporal miracles are ceased, but behold
a spiritual, the greater remains. If any should question us, whether the word
we preach be CHRIST'S, we may reply as our Savior to the like from John by his
Disciples, Mat. 11.5.
Go, tell him the blind see, the lame walk, etc. My works testify of me.
And indeed it is CHRIST'S work Originally, though instrumentally ours. Elisha
may send his servant, and his staff, but no life to the 2 Kin. 4.3. c
Shunamites Child till he come himself. The Cock may crow twice or thrice,
but Peter remembers not himself Lu. 22.61.
till Christ looks on him. As it is not all the outward light in the Sun will
make a man see if there be wanting the light in the eye within. Nisi intus sit
qui doceat Doctoris, lingua in vacuum laborat, Hieron.
So all outward admonitions avail not, without the seconding of them by his
Spirit. The first thing made in the Creation was light, and so it is in the
regeneration, the lightning of the Conscience, which Solomon calls the Pro. 20
27.
Candle of the LORD, searching all the inward parts of the heart, (and this was
it that gave the first token of spiritual life in this our Brother.)

2. By Light, as Matthew. 4.16. The people that sat in darkness saw great
light, and by it (to omit diverse others) is especially signified Jsa 50.20.
Chap. 58 8.
Comfort, as the contrary is usually meant by darkness.

Observe hence; That Conversion puts a man into a lightsome and cheerful
condition. See Psalm. 97.11. Luke 1.79. Matthew. 9.2. be of good cheer, etc.

Object. It does not seem so, but rather that wicked men have the merriest
lives.

Answ. First, you must not always judge of Mirth by outward laughter, men
sometimes laugh more at a jest than at the news of a Pardon: But they are said
to joy in the latter not in the former.

Secondly, It may be the fault of some Christians like Iud: 4.17.
Sampsons wife to weep all the days of the Feast, like Mary Magdalen
lamenting the loss of Christ, and yet she was talking with him. Men may be in
the estate of joy, and yet not apprehend it. Like Gen: 21.17.
Hagar, though there was a Fountain of Water near her, yet till GOD opened
her eyes to see it cries out for thirst.

Thirdly, if we shall take a survey of this Carnal mirth, we shall find it
not worth the naming. For the brevitie, Job says enough, Job 15.5.
It lasts but for a moment. If like Jonas his Gourd it come up in one night,
it withers the next, usually like that creature the Naturalist speaks off,
which dies the same day it is brought forth. If like the Marygold their hearts
open in mirth at Sunne-rising, they shut again in sadness before it be down.
If it has any light in it, it is like that of a Candle Pro. 24.20*
(as Solomon compares it to) that gives a fair light in a room for the
present, but the least puff of wind puts all out. In the midst of their
jollitie the least frown of a Superior, a thwart of an equal, any affront of
an inferior imbitters all. Only Mordecai's stiff knee, so turns the edge
Esther 5.13.
of Hamans proud heart, that all his honor avayld him nothing. 1 Samuel 25* 37.
Nabal can be merry enough at his drunken feast ore night, but a little ill
news told him in the Morning makes his heart to sink within him like a stone.
While the play lasts the sensualist laughs, when it is done he is in his dumps
again. Whilst the Gamester winnes, he is well pleased, but when the game
once turns, and he has made all away, he is ready to make away himself.
For the fruit of it, tell me you that give your selves to pleasure all the
day, does not a heavy heartedness conclude it in the Evening? Does not
usually such sensual mirth go out like a Candle? leaves the stink of a
snuff behind it, damps and sore griefs within your Consciences. I am sure it
was that which this our Brother often acknowledged, and it had been said by
Solamon before him, Prover. 14.13. In their laughter their heart is sorrowful.
(See the shortness) and the end of their mirth is heaviness, (See the issue:)
One sitly compares it to lightning, which as it is but a Flash and away, so the
fruit of it is but a blast upon the heart, and as after a lightning often
follows a Thunder. So after this flashy mirth, loud cries and tempests in the
Conscience, take one with the other, and in reason it is not worth the having.
But this spiritual joy Prove. 10.22
adds no such sorrow with it, and even though 2 Cor. 6.10
sorrowing, yet always rejoicing, The poor condition of the former, see
Isaiah 24.7, 8. and the magnanimity of the latter, Hab. 3.17. of both which,
having so lately tasted, how savoury have I heard this our Brother thus to
distinguish.

3. Thirdly by a setting at liberty (from the power of Satan) so it is
expressed (Luke 4.18.) to preach deliverance, and setting at liberty them that
were bruised. Before every Lust was a Commander, the Devil General, but now
he is delivered from them all, and out of the heaviest yoke of thraldom, to
the most glorious liberty, even of the sons of God. To ransom, or rescue a
Christian from the slavery of the Turks was ever accounted an honorable act,
but the converting of a sinner from the error of his way, must needs exceed
it. I need not tell you, it is Gods act thus to Psalm. 119.22.
enlarge the heart, it is plain it must be so, if you consider but the strength
of him under whom we are bound, and see how especially it is given to the
blessed Trinity. God the Ioh 6.44.
Father draws, It Is the Chap. 8 36.
Son which makes you free indeed. Where the 2 Cor. 3.17
Spirit of the Lord is, there is a liberty. What little freedom of will we
have naturally to any saving good, this our Brother would sufficiently testify
in himself, See the Relation, page 7.
Who for a long time, (though he wanted no apprehension of his misery)
continued stupid and senseless, heavily complaining for the want of a spirit
of Compunction. Well he was once Pro. 5.22.
held with the Cords of his own sins, 2 Timothy 2.26.
in the snare of the Devil, taken captive of him at his will, but Ps. 124.6.
Blessed be the Lord that has not given him as a prey unto his teeth, his
soul is escaped as a Bird out of the snare of the Fouler, the snare is broken,
and he is delivered.

And now having seen the enlargement of him: Let us in Conclusion take a short
view of the Latitude of Gods mercy to him (which stands always wide open to
penitent sinners,) in the Third and last part of the Text, The happy fruit of
all, in his receiving forgiveness.

For the doctrine hence observeable, that wheresoever there is true repentance
given, there is Quid est peccatum, si cum Domini misericordia conferatur, tela
araneae ventus flat, and disr^mpitur. Deus vult, and peccatum dissol^itur.
Chrysostom. in Psalm. 5.
forgiveness attained. I shall not need to enter into any further
declaration, so many worthy late Divines have so fully opened it, that I should
but light a Candle to the Sun in it. Only let me* say thus much, that if
Saint Paul were the 1 Timothy: 1.16
first upon whom Jesus Christ did show forth all long suffering and mercy for a
Pattern for them that should be hereafter, this our Brother might be a second
in whom GODS mercy has been infinitely magnified. In his own judgment he
censured himself above all former presidents whatsoever, even of Manasses
himself, who he thought had not that knowledge, was not trusted with that
function, and incurred not that scandal. And yet, for this particular, he had
it not only by evident arguments made apparent to him, but also by a rare
measure of spiritual refreshings sealed within him. A high sinner, a deep
repentance. And lo, a large dole of comfort.

And let it not seem so improbable, that so great a sinner upon so humble a
Contrition, should have such an enlightening. Our Savior appeared first to Mar.
16 9.
Mary Magdalene before all others, who had seven Devils cast out of her. Saint
Peter had fowly denied his Master with Oaths and curses, yet after his bitter
weeping our Savior appeared 1 Cor. 15.5.
to him, before he did to the rest; and the Angels gave a more Mar. 16.7.

Fidelior factus est Petrus, postqua^ fidem se perdidisse deflevit, atque ideo
majorem gratiam reperitquam amifit ^mb. in sermon, de vincul.


special charge to tell the blessed news of his Resurrection to him than to
the others. It Is true he was but an Infant for his time, ('it was his own
speech, he reckoned himself but a week old,) now for Infants the Father
sometimes smile more upon them, take them oftener in their Arms, then when they
come to further years. And such is found by experience to be In inchoatione
conversionis, inveniuntur blandimenta dulcedinis, vitam uniuscuiusque conversi,
inchoatio blada permulcet Greg. 14 Moral.
GODS dealing with some of his at their first conversion; when the Ex Egypto
Israelitis exeuntibus a vicino bello per viam terrae Philistim subtrahuntur,
and tranquilitas ostenditur, ne in ipsa teneretudi^ ne tu^bari, etc. Sic prius
suavitatem sentiunt co^versi, pacis quiet nutriuntur, etc, idem Greg.
Israelites were newly delivered out of Egypt, God was more careful at that
instant for their peaceable travel, than afterward. ( Exodus 13.17.) More
mirth was made at the very return of the Prodigal, than had been for the
other brother, that had never so offended. More joy for the return of one lost
sheep, than for the ninety-nine, not gone astray. And if we can be persuaded,
he might reap a full Crop of joy in Heaven, afterward; Why may it not be
believed, he might receive some first fruits, as an earnest, some few hours
before here.

Concerning these spiritual refreshings, some of our practical Divines
observe these particulars. That either they follow some Ad videndum lumen
internae bonitatis, polluta dudum conscientia lachrvmis, debet baptizari, quo
uberius culpa fletur, eo altius agnitio veritatis attingitur, Gregor. in Moral.
deep humiliation (Esaias 66.2.) I will look to him that is of a contrite
spirit, etc. Or as a reward after a Conflict with victory. (Revel. 2.17.) To
him that overcommeth will I give of the hidden Manna, etc. Sometimes it is
accompanied with Satan's malice, like Saint Paul after his revelations, had the
messenger Satan buffeting him, (2 Cor. 12.7.) The effects are some
extraordinary spirit of prayer. (Romans 8.15, 26.) A further abasement of the
party himself, As Job after he had seen GOD, (Chap. 42.5, 6.) an undervaluing
all the things of this world in respect of it, as David (Psalm. 4.7.) A longing
to have that joy in i'ts fullness, like Saint Paul, after his ^aptures, wishing
to be dissolved (Philip. 1.23.) And for the ^ime it is observed usually to be
against some heavy trial, a vi^ticum against the approach of death, or the
like. Now all ^hese were evidently found in him: His sorrow was deep, his
conflicts many, the effects were to my admiration, and the time very
seasonable, being deferred till that very Morning before his execution, (the
cause I believe of his so undaunted a spirit at the sight of it.) Well, you see
how fitly repentance may be termed a (...) Amatitudinem radicis dulcedo po^i
compensa^. Pericula maris spe lucri delectant, Dodorem medicinae, spes salutis
mitigar, Hier. in Mas.
the root is bitter, but the fruit sweet, it is a stormy voyage, but a rich
return, a sharp medicine, but very sovereign. At the entrance it is like our
Saviors draught of Gall, and vinegar, but the conclusion is like the end of
Jonathons rod dipped in a Hony-combe, the end of that man is in peace and joy.
Pour out as many tears upon thy self offering to God, a^ 1 King. 18.34:
Elijah did water the second and third time upon his sacrifice at Mount Carmel,
The fire o^ GODS Spirit shall descend, and lick up those drops into spiritual
joys, and dry up all tears from thine eyes. The Spirit of the Lord may be
well said Genesis 1.2.
to moove upon the face of such waters. These Rivers as they have their head in
Paradise, their spring in Heaven; so they return to Heaven again. This holy
water drawn at this spiritual marriage, will Christ turn into Wine indeed,
give such the Isa. 61.3.
garments of gladness for the spirit of heaviness.

To conclude, how can it be, but a joyful estate, when a Man is assured his
sins are forgiven. If we consider it, in these three things. He has peace
with God. Peace of Conscience. Peace with Death. The two latter, are
consequences of the first.

1. First, he has peace with God, Romans 5.1. They report some Fires nothing
will quench them but Blood. It Is true of the wrath of GOD for sin, nothing
but the blood of Christ can appease. It was Rehoboams speech to the Israelites,
My little finger shall be heavier than my Fathers Ioines. It Is true in this
sense, for sin, the least degree of GODS displeasure, is more than all the
worlds. A Man without this peace, be he decked with Jewels, is but like a fair
Room richly hung, but wants a Roof, who would make choice of it for his
lodging. Such is the man be he never so gorgeously appareld, if he lies yet
open to the revenge of Heaven, whose iniquities are not covered. Let it be the
praise of Italy to be the Garden of the world: It is a Christians happiness,
to be the Garden of God, that the Tree of life is in the midst of him, that God
is at peace with him.

2. He has peace of Conscience. The Earth no outward weight can moove, yet
the stirring of a few unruly vapors within, will make some parts to quake:
There are some men, no outward Crosses can trouble, but the guilt of some
secret sins within has made them Conscientia peccati est formidinis matter.
Ch^yso^t. Nalla paena gravior paena malae co^scientiae.
tremble. The soul of a wicked man is often like a Isa 57.2^.
troubled Sea, or like the Ship in a storm the Disciples were tossed in, but
as soon as CHRIST entered, there was a calm. So as soon as the Conscience is
possessed of CHRIST, there is peace. Some when they are disquieted in their
minds, do as David wished he could do (Psalm. 55.7.) When fearfulness and
horror overwhelmed him, Oh, that J had wings like a Dove, then would J fly
away and be at rest, Go travel, as if they would out-ride the cry of
Conscience which they carry with them. Some send for Music, as Saul for a
Harper when his evil spirit came upon him. Others deal with their
Consciences, that thus arrest them in GODS Name, as some have done with the
Sergeant, make him Drunk, and so Time te ipsum, alium enim potes fugere, te
autem nunquam, fal^^ potun farra, conscientia nunquam.
escape him. These ways and the like had this our Brother tried formerly, but
found no sound peace, till he thus turned to CHRIST, the Prince of it. The
Mariners in that mighty tempest, rowed hard to get the Ship to land, but no
means would do, till Jonas 1.15.
Jonas was cast out, and then presently the Sea ceased from her raging, I have
been a witness of strong tempests raised within his Conscience, when he first
grew sensible, but after he had Conscientia est cordis scientia, est Codex
animi, in quo quotidiana peccata conscribuntur.
disburdn'd it, and out with those pressing sins, in such salt and
overflowing tears, in Confession and Repentance, he soon found the fruit of
that call of our Savior. Mat. 11.23:
Come unto me you that are weary and heavy laden, and J will give you rest.
Having like Noah's Dove strayed from the Arc of CHRIST, he found no rest for
the feet of his Soul, till he returned to CHRIST again. It Is a usual
division of those four sorts of Consciences, a quiet but not (...) good,
neither good nor quiet, (...) good, but not a quiet, both good and quiet. The
two former he had experience of in his life, the two latter near his death,
the misery of the one, and the happiness of the other (which he had so lately
exchanged) how sensibly have I heard him express, apprehending in the deepest
degree of his humiliation, more true content, than in the height of all his
sinful pleasures: Chrysostom calls the Conscience Numisma Dei conscientia,
in solidis Caesar videtur, in conscientia Deus agnoscitur, Chrysostom.
Gods Coin, wherein as the Kings Image is in his, so is Gods instamped in
this. And therefore as we give that which is Cesars to Caesar, so he exhorts, to
give this which is Gods to GOD: and a Conscie^tia bona est te^pl^m Salomonis,
ager benedictionis, hortus deliciarum, auteum declinatorium, arca soederis,
Thesaurus Regis, aula Dei, habitaculum Spiritus, gaudium Angelorum. Hugo de
anima.
good Conscience before GOD and man, it is the richest pearl, the most
invaluable treasure under Heaven, Saint Paul's glory and joy (1 Corinthians. 1.12.
Acts 23.1.)

3. Thirdly, he has peace with Death: 1 Cor. 15.56.
a Be without her sting is more feared then hurtful: It Is so with this, once
freed from the guilt of sin, the 1 Cor. 15.56
sting of it. He that knows he owes nothing, flies not the approach of the
Bayliffe. He that is assured of the blotting out of the handwriting that was
against him needs not to shun the arrest of death. Be it sudden, yet it is not
untimely to him. What a measure of this Christian valor was found in this our
Brother after this spiritual sealing, has been See the Relation, p 67, 68.
manifested before many witnesses, and needs not any repetition here. Only
observe what this blessed change in him, had wrought in others, of him. He once
wept much by himself in private, when the tongues of men with good cause were
open against him in public; Now tears of all sorts are shed for him
publicly, when he had Comforts within himself secretly. He that was hated at
his Condemnation, is loved at his Execution. Such as were grieved at his life,
are comforted at his Death* He began with his own tears, he departs with the
sobs of others. And I doubt not, but what he sowed in tears, he reapes in joy,
what was sealed here on Earth, is ratified in Heaven. From a Death temporal he
is passed to a life eternal: Unto which God of his mercy bring us all, for the
merits of his dear Son. To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all
honor and glory new and evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
Errata in the Relation.
Page 4. marg. l 16. r de via. p. 7. l. 19. r. their prisoners. l. 10. r. h^s
Throne p. 11. l 8 m. r. lenic p. 23 l. 8 m. r. admisceat p. 29. l. 28. m Nam r.
Now.


