A DISSWASIVE FROM ERROR Much INCREASED.

A PERSUASIVE TO ORDER Much DECAYED.

By a Lover of, and Labourer for Truth, Peace, Unity, Unanimity, Uniformity and
Order, Joseph Bentham.

JUDE 3. Earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered to the Saints.

London Printed, and are to be sold by William Thompson, Bookseller in
Harborow, 1669.

THE PREFACE.
TO prevent prejudice in those who shall read these following Discourses of
Error and Order, I think it expedient to premise four following particulars.

Whereas I have made use of many passages Melanc. page 8.
whom and whereof, I confess it, so that I almost may say with Mr. Burton, all
is mine, and none mine; As a good House-wife out of diverse fleeces weaves one
piece of cloth, and as a Be gathers wax and honey out of many flowers, and
makes a new lump; for I in penning this I now publish, I did like him, who out
of diverse gardens gathers a Posie, taking here and there a flower for his own
use in his own house, for a day and then lays it aside, being regardless from
whose garden he had each particular flower. So I gathering many passages out of
Authors for mine own use, for that time intending then to lay them aside,
regarded not much where and of whom I borrowed to make up my Work; for had I
purposed to have done that I now do (by a kind of necessity, and the desire of
some) I had filled my Margent more, as in this Preface, and the concluding
Postscript.

If any say I have mentioned old faults, after the act of Oblivion, Caryl
assures me, That a man may rationally remember the wrong another On Job 11. 16.
has done him, with all the circumstances and passages of it, yet forget it
spiritually: Forget it (says he) so far as to forgive it fully, and then
remember it as much as you will. Thus I have done, and shall do. 2. To do the
work of the day upon the day, I must make mention of some such things, namely,
upon the 30 day of January, to work humiliation in my self and others; and upon
the 29 day of May to stir up my self and others ^o rejoice and give thanks. 3.
But what if there are who justify such their f^rmer ^ffences; must we then be
silent, and so consent that they do well? We must not leave reproving, if men
will not leave sinning. Men indeed deal hardly with us, who impute that as a
fault to us which was our duty to do. Bu^ to convince men of error is a duty;
yea, although men disposed to resist will hardly ever be convinced. And friends
may debate, and not abate of their affection, striving for verity, not m^stery,
seeking for truth, not praise or victory, ^o Mr. Henderson*
as our famous Martyr King Charles says.

3. Some perhaps think I so spe^k, as if most were in those kinds Paul as well
as me, who so writes to the Galatians and Corinthians, blaming only the faulty,
so I blame only, and labor to better the faulty; not that the greatest number
are such; for in my Parish there are who are orderly, and conform^ble to the
Church, yea such who have suffered for their loyalty, and continue loyal; yet
there are others, and Sacra sancta regum Majestas, page 64 Of civ^l Wa^s of
England, ^ag 91. Melanc. ^ag. 610. Page 166. Page 31. Answer to Worc. pape^s, p.
137.
if but two, too many by two, who cannot be excused from those former actings,
of which I. A. says, No persecution that ever was, can parallel this
persecution for impiety, injustice and cruelty. Such who (as Henry Earl of
Monmouth says) are quiet, when they know not how to disquiet others: Such who
(as Mr. Burton says) are ever mending Churches, States, Superiors, mending all
save themselves. Such to whom may be applied a saying of Cardinal Bentivoglio,
writing of the Wars of Flanders, Clemency in Princes serves to little purpose,
when obstinacy and disloyalty of Subjects is thereby made greater. And that of
Curia Politiae, Cruelty may make Subjects miserable, Clemency may make them
criminal. Such of whom Hamondle Strange says, It is cruelty Of prim. devot.
page 164.
to pardon nothing, it is double cruelty to pardon all. Such of whom Mr. Edward
Sparks his saying is verified, Zeal without knowledge, and charity as now
adays, (As they without zeal are like glowworms, having some cold splendour
without heat) blind me^t^l'd horses, so far like the fire of hell, that burn,
and have no ligh^. Such who complain much of sin abounding, and blame Prea^hers
for not preaching more against sin: but if according to the practice of Christ
and the Apostles, they preach against fa^se Prophets in sheeps-cloathing, Mat.
7. 15. against hypocrisy, Mat. 23. against resisting of Authority, Romans 13. to
beware of causers of divisions, Romans 16. 18. not to rest in a form of
god^iness, 2 Timothy 3. 5. not to have itching ears, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. not to
despise dominions, J^de 6. Then they are ready to complain of railing, and
speaking against God's people, and well-affected, and resolve to hear such
Preachers no more, little considering that in so saying they show palpab^y
their own guilt; for I am sure, and dare confidently affirm, That the more
g^d^y and well*affected people are, the further they are from, and the more
they a^hor Hypocr^sie, Disobedience, Rebellion, S^h^sms, F^cti^ns, and such
like, being ^f all m^n the most obedient, sincere ^e^ceable and quiet.

4. If any blame me for mentioning wrongs done to my self, Gregory's mind,
Melanc. p. 328.
whom Mr. B^rton affirms to say, He who cannot bear injuries against himself is
no good man. And being able through Page 4.
God^ mercy to say with Sir Edward Deering, I thank God my heart has never
known the settling of a personal malice; Well knowing, That revenge (as N^cholas
Causin tell us) is proper to weak minds, whereas clemency always resideth Page
^4^.
in a strong spirit. 2. Besides, I c^uld not well avoid it; for al^hough some,
as Strada says, are cured by contempt, yet Medicus Page 7.
Medicatus tells us, It is the method of charity to suffer without retortion in
particular wrongs, but not when Gods glory is in question. Christ pr^yed for
them who persecuted him, wh^pt them who disho^oured his fat^ers house, to
suffer God to be wronged, and not moved, is not charity but luke-warmness and
stupidity. I endeavoring to wipe off the dishonouring of God, and scandalizing
his Gospel, and the Protestant Religion, cast upon it by such men's contemning
and sleighting Gods Ordinances, vilifying his messengers as scandalous and
unprofitable, preferring unwarranted Conventicles before the public worship of
God, and by blemishing the famous Government and Church of England as
unchristian and persecuting, was constrained to mention as I have done. 3. And
in thus doing I imitate a good President, St. Paul, who names in his writings,
especially to the Corinthians his own sufferings, and from them also. For my
self, I was glad I had such a living to lose for so good a cause, and an heart
so willing to part with it. I in so doing finding the truth of a saying
Ministers portion. p. 208.
in Dr. Sclater, Affliction is the best tutor to devotion. And such experiences
of Gods mercies to me and mine, that I was (as all who knew me can testify)
patient, content and cheerful. And since my return, which is eighty ears, I
have not showed the least dislike to those who outed me; and therefore now
being scarce able to go, and shortly to end my pilgrimage, I hope I shall
cherish no such hellish vermin as malice and desire of revenge in my heart, but
endeavor to live with such love and peace, which are the furtherers to that
future love, peace and joy which are for ever.

Should any question why I make so much use of Mr. Ball, and some old
Non-Conformists, of Mr. Bailey and other later Presbyterians, most men without
my telling may conjecture rightly, because such men's sayings will sooner
prevail with those I deal withal, than of the Fathers and other Divines. As
also because men may see the vast difference betwixt them, and those whose so
lowers they pretend to ^e, when in truth they are followers of Mr. Barrow,
Greenwood, ^^d such of the separation, who had Mr. Ball, Mr. Brinsly, etc. old
Non-Conformists, Mr. Edwards, Mr. Bailey, etc. late Presbyterians, their great
opposers.

JAM. 1. 16. Do not err my Beloved Brethren.


THE three last Lords days I preached unto you of conscience; I showed you
what it is, the kinds of it, how it is God's Officer, what its duty is, and
what its rule. That we are not to take all for conscience which pretends to be
so. And since conscience is in every one, and it will live with us for ever,
that we should be careful to have our consciences such, that we and they may
have peace and comfort; and that for this end we should endeavor to have our
consciences enlightened, faithful, lively, and not blind, slothful, dead, or
erroneous; therefore I purpose to show you what it is to err, the danger of
error, and in the words of St. James dissuade you from it; Do not err, etc.

The Apostle having dissuaded from thinking God to be the Author of sin (an
horrid blasphemy) he persuades them Psalm. 119. 176. Isa. 63. 17.
not to err or wander, a Metaphor taken from sheep going astray. Errors are of
two sorts. 1. In practice, going from the Word, the Rule of righteousness,
erring from God's ways. 2. In judgment, going off from the Word as the
standard and measure of truth, which we commonly call error. To make way to
what I intend, I will lay down some few Propositions.

I. Proposition.
The first, That error is common to man, ever since the fall of man. It is
evident how Adam and Eve erred, and how their posterity smart for it is
manifest, yea how their posterity were polluted with error we see in Cain, and
in the old world, for which the Lord sent the Deluge. After which, errors so
abounded, that Languages were confounded, Sodom and Gomorrha turned into ashes.
After the Lord chose Abrah^m and his seed to be his peculiar people, they soon
erred in Egypt, in the Wilderness, and in Canaan, worshipping Calves, and Baal,
yea sacrificing their children to Devils. When our Savior Christ was upon
earth, how often does he check for erring, not knowing the Scriptures? How often
does he confute the errors of the Scribes, Pharisees, and Saduces? What
warnings and caveats does he give to us Mat. 7. 15. Mat. 24. 24. Act. 8. 9, 13,
18. 2 Timothy 2. i7 Rev. 2. 14, 15, 20. 2 Cor. 11. 13. Gal. 3. 1. Phil. 3. 1. Romans
16. 17. Ephesians 4. 14. 1 Timothy 4. 2 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2. 2 Timothy 4. 3
to beware of false Prophets in sheeps clothing, and acquaint us with the
danger of such. After our Saviors ascending into heaven, errors did abound
notwithstanding the pains and piety of the Apostles. Simon Magus bewitched the
people, Elymas also, with Hymineus and Philetus. Some in the Asian Churches
held the doctrine of Balaam, some of the Nicolaitans, and some the filthy
follies of Jezabel. The Corinthians were drawn from the doctrine of the truth
by false Apostles. The Gal^tians bewitched from the truth. The Philippians in
great danger. The Romans staggered with such who caused divisions, and the
Ephesians subject to be carried about with every wind of doctrine. The Apostle
also foretells of swarms of errors which should be, and how men will not endure
sound doctrine, but after their lusts heap to themselves teachers, having
itching ears, turning their ears from the truth, and be turned to fables. Since
which, all ages show how this was fulfilled, for in the first hundred years
after Christ, many gross errors abounded, as the Symoniani of Simon Magus, the
Hyminei of Hymineus and Philetus. The Nazareni so called of the City Nazareth.
See opus Epiphanii de Haresib. Augustine. de Haeresib. Tom. 8.
The Menandriani of Menander, Scholar to Magus. The Ebionites of Ebion whom St.
John confuted. The Nicolaitans of Nicholas one of the seven Deacons. The
Cerinthii of Cerinthus, whom St. John called the firstborn of Satan. The
Saturniani of Saturnus. The Basilidians of Basilides, etc. In the second
century after Christ there sprung up above thirty several sorts, of which
number were the Maritae of Marus, who called themselves perfect, yea more
perfect than Peter and Paul. They denied Christ's taking humane nature, and the
resurrection of the flesh. About this time also arose the Gnostics so called,
because of their excellent knowledge in their own opinions, although but vain.
By others they were called Barbaritae, because of their wickedness and
filthiness. They fancied two souls in each good man, one holy of the substance
of God, the other adventitious, which is in man as in other creatures. They
taught the being of two Gods, the one good, the other evil. That Martyrdom was
not to be undertaken for Christ. They worshipped the Images of Christ, and had
images in as great esteem as Pagans their Gods. In the third Century there
arose about twenty sorts of Heresies, of which I will name two. The Catharists
so called from their sanctity in their own opinion; they gloried of merits, of
their good works; they denied repentance to such who fell through infirmity,
and condemned second marriages as unlawful. The Donatists also of Donatus, who
affirmed the Church of God on earth to be without spot. None to be compelled to
live well. Heretics not to be repressed by Magistrates. That the worthiness of
the Sacrament is from the holiness of him who gives it. That persons baptized
by the Orthodox are to be rebaptized. That killing themselves to avoid
punishment for their errors is Martyrdom. They said the Son was inferior to
the Father, the holy Ghost to the Son, and they boasted of Revelations.

In the fourth Century arose above twenty, of which the Pelagians was one, of
Pelagius, who taught that Adam should have died if he had not sinned. That
Adams sin did hurt only himself. That there is no Original sin. That men have
free will sufficient to do well; and that God gives grace to the merits of
works.

The fifth Century had some, and the sixth brought forth, as some others, so
those grand errors of Mahumetanism and Papism.

Mahumetanism of Mahomet, which has overspread many Kingdoms under the Turk
and other Kings. They deny the being of persons in the Trinity. They say God is
corporeal. That Christ was not God, but a creature, yet a great Prophet. That
Christ did not suffer, nor was not crucified. That the Devil in the end shall
be saved. That Eternal Life consists in bodily pleasures. They observe
Circumcision, Washings, with some other Judaical Ceremonies. They swear by
Creatures, and War for Religion, to which they say men are to be compelled.
They allow of many Wives, and Divorce without cause. They hope to be saved by
works. They deny pardon for ever to them who forsake their Religion. They hold
venial and mortal sins. They pray toward the East, a set number daily, but not
for unbelievers. And they take away the Sacraments ordained by Christ.

Papism arose under Phoca^ the Emperor, and Boniface the third, Popes of Rome.
Luther was born at Isleben in Saxony, Sleidan. Anab.
1483. He when Leo the tenth sent forth pardons, 1516. opposed them. Preaching
in Saxony, there arose Nicolas Stocks, and Thomas Muncer, preaching that goods
should be common. Upon this forty thousand rose in Suevia and Franconia,
plundering and killing; but the Princes arming, took Frantus, executed Muncer,
Phifer, and hundreds more. The City Munster having received the Gospel, John
Bec^ld a Tailor, came from Leyden thither, where keeping Conventicles, in few
months he gets a great party, they obtain freedom for their Religion, and after
grow so strong as to drive all the Protestants out. This John of Leyden is made
King, he gave leave to have many W^ves, himself took fifteen. Being vanquished,
he with Knipperdoling, were tied to a stake, their flesh pulled in pieces with
hot p^ncers; he recanted his errors, Knipperdoling did not, but died like a mad
man. These Anabaptists maintained, as Mr. Paget shows us, ten errors not to be
tolerated in the Church; Four not to be suffered in a Commonwealth, and three
not in a Family, as community of goods, putting away of Wives of a contrary
Religion, and that Christians may have many Wives. Thousands of these perished
in Germany by the sword; and in Queen Eliza^eths time some of them in England
recanted, and some were burnt.

After these arose the Brownists, called Separatists, because Mr. Paget.
they separate from all reformed Churches, then one from another. Robert Brown,
Schoolmaster in Southwark, preached in a gravel-pit near Islington, Mr. Fox
refused to talk with him, Mr. Greenham persuaded him, but could not prevail, so
to little purpose; for he led his company beyond Sea, where (seeing their
divisions) he left them, returned into England, took the Parsonage of a Church
in Northamptonshire and died, as I have been informed, since the beginning of
our late troubles. He and his followers left our Church, as they said, for our
many abominations.

The Barrowists following yet more; they compared our Church to Sodom, Babylon,
Egypt, as Barrow, Brewis, Bois, Rutter, etc.

The Wilkinsonians went a step higher, affirming they were the Apostles, and
denied Communion to all who would not give them that title. Mr. Paget.


The Lemmarists maintained a monster of Heresies. Mahumetanism denying the
Trinity and the eternal Godhead of Christ. Jud^ism affirming Christ to come
shortly to reign on the earth. Papism affirming a mere creature may be
worshipped. Lutheranism maintaining consubstantiation. Anabaptism affirming
that Christ took not flesh of the Virgin Mary. Libertinism holding no visible
Church on earth. Brownism holding separation, separating from all Churches,
excommunicating and cursing on another. Mr. Paget also tells us, that the
beginning of the Independents was thus. Mr. Robinson leaving Norwich in
discontent, became a rigid Brownist, but after by conference with some learned
men, he recanted his opinions, yet derived this his way of Independency to his
separate Congregation at Leyden; and part of that Congregation did carry it to
Plymouth in new England, where the ashes of Independency did break out into a
burning flame. And Mr. B^yly sets down the fruits of Mr. Bailey.
this Independency in new England (in the opinions of some, for I suppose he
speaks not of all, there being amongst them many sober Ministers and
Magistrates, who opposed and overthrew those opinions. And they refusing to own
the late powers, is an Argument of their sobriety. Besides, there has been
great conversion of the Indians, in so much that the Bible is translated and
Printed in their Tongue, as I am informed.) How it places many thousands of
Christians in the condition of Pagans; how it marred the conversion of Pagans
to Christian Religion; how it brought forth the foulest Heresies that ever yet
were heard of in any Protestant Church, to the number of fourscore and eleven.
That their piety seemed singular; their malice was singular against all who
opposed them, especially Orthodox Ministers. That their contempt of Magistrates
was grievous, their errors in opinion did draw on such seditious practices,
which did well near overturn both their Church and State. That their proud
obstinacy against all admonitions was mavelous, that in the midst of their
profession of piety, the prophanity of many of them was great. Of these
particulars he speak largely, and shows his warrant for what he says in many
particulars. In Queen Elizabeth's time, Mr. Barrow, Greenwood, Percy, and some
others were executed. Studly, Billet and Bowly had judgment to be so. The first
Proposition is clearly evident, That men, yea the best of men, are subject to
err (humanum est errare) and have need to be called on not to err; for they who
have most light here, have much darkness in them, and we are more prone to
follow the darkness of our spirits, than the light of Gods Spirit. He who
thinks he cannot err, reckons himself more than a man; for whilst there remains
corruption in the will, the understanding cannot be wholly free from
corruption. The wills, affections, and understandings of Saints on earth have
some corruption remaining in them; as their practice, so their opinions are
soyld and faulty; yea oftentimes good men continue long in error. Jobs friends
did multiply, but not mend their answers; for as it is hard to part Job 21. 34
with an evil practice, so and much more with an ill opinion, etc. error in
opinion, because that reflects on the reputation of the best faculty, the
judgment. And therefore we should be as careful to avoid errors as other vices:
Since a blind eye may be as bad as a lame foot; since a man wanting light is
apt to fall and stumble; and the Apostle shows, that Romans 1. 26.
a vain mind has vain affections.

II. Proposition.
The second Proposition is this. Although many men who know much do greatly
err, yet error and ignorance are of so near kin, that ignorance is usually the
mother of error. An ignorant man may be stubborn and wilful, yet he cannot be
fixed and Mat. 22. 29.
steady, but is doubtful and wavering, yet prone to settle himself in that
which is unsound, so subject to error. If a knowing man does err, it is hard to
convince him; and if he who knows no reason does err, he will not be convinced
by reason. Surely error properly proceeds from ignorance; for he who maintains
either opinion or practice against conscience, is more than in an error. It is
obstinacy when it refers to practice, it is Heresy when it refers to opinion;
for in Heretics errors are usually against light, and such delight in error.

III. Proposition.
He who judges himself to be in the truth, is not to leave the truth because
some call it error; for as we are not to take up errors because some call them
truths, so we are not to let go truths because some call them errors. Good men
should be easily led into the Prove. 22. 23. Isa. 11. 6.
right way, and turn to the truth, but not forced from it, many things being
called errors which are not. A man therefore not convinced (and desirous to be
informed) he is out of the way; nothing said to satisfy conscience, and to
change his jugment; much spoken, but little proved; many reasons in number, all
light in weight, he is not to leave the truth judging it to be so. And men
should be careful not to brand such for errors which are not, or they think to
be so, except, and until they can prove them to be so; which Christ does,
giving reasons, and making good his charge; for invectives do Mat. 23. 13, 14.
etc
no good, discoveries may. We are to make good our charge when we accuse any of
error or heresy, many being falsely accused as we are by Papists, who spread
the livery of Heretics and Schismatics on us. Innocent truths often suffer
under odious imputations. To prove error therefore, we are to be more in
argument than in passion; to condemn things by reasoning, not miscalling.

IV. Proposition.
Although men do usually offend toward such who do err, using bitter speeches
against them they think are in error, yea then when they cannot prove it an
error; as Jobs friends had many hards words against Job, few or no sound
Arguments; it being easier to be angry with an error, than to argue against it,
and men are usually so angry, because they have little reason, they often
having most earnestness against opinions, who have least to say against them.
Moreover, although they who suppose us to be in error do therefore magnify
themselves against us, and in so doing come under the Apostles reproof, they
sinning in Romans 11. 17, 18, 14. 3. 1 Cor. 10. 11.
so doing; 1. Because they forget their own frailties, and how apt they are to
fall (whereas by others failings we should take notice to what we may be
tempted, as by others holy actions we are to learn what we should do) and
because such forget that they have fallen into other sins and errors, if not
the same: Yea, suppose they are freer than is possible Joh. 8. 5.
to be on earth, why should they magnify themselves over others who sin? Does
God so? O no, he pities and spares! Bewail we then their condition, pray for
them, and bless God who has preserved us. It being no easy matter to convince
such who err, error being as binding as truth, not in the name of error, but of
truth, men being in love with their own conceptions, which are as the flesh of
their own minds. And men taking up an opinion, think it a disgrace to lay it
down again; it being also a rare thing to make men yield up their judgments
although misguided. When therefore we deal with erroneous persons, it is good
to follow the Apostles direction, instructing opposers with meekness, 2 Timothy 2.
25.
since gentle dealings will best become disswasives from error; for where the
matter is like to displease, the manner should not be sharp. Bitter pills must
be sugared, that they may go down the better, otherwise men of contrary minds
will think all spoken against them to be out of rage and anger. And other
offenders will better abide sharpness than they; for contrary opinions think
they are in the right, and pride is touchy; whereas other sins fill the soul
with shame, and there is not that boldness to reply; whereas in opin^ons, where
men think they are in the right, we have need to deal gently, lest pride take
prejudice; according therefore to St. Paul's precept, and St. James his
practice, I beseech you brethren do not err.

V. Proposition.
We are to be careful not to live in, or m^intain any error in our selves; and
in our several places we should endeavor to draw others Jam. 5* 19, 20.
from their errors, turning men from the error of their ways. This is a duty,
and needful, since good men are subject to err, Mat. 24. 24.
error being catching, and much comply^ng with our natural thoughts; we being
also to take care of others salvation, one member of the safety of another;
yea, of the meanest in the Hab. 3. 12. 11. 15, 16. Exo. 23. 4.
Church, one spark often occasioning a great flame. It being also an act of
charity to reduce those who go astray, even a straying beast, much more a man
(although usually none are so angry as they who are seduced into opinions by
interest, their sores must not be touched) for to maintain an error is Gal. 4.
15.
a vain thing, nothing being more vain than errors, or false opinions of God,
of the ways of God, and of his dealings. Error is vanity, it is a lie. He
therefore who is in an error 1 John 2. 21.
should be convinced, although some will make a fair cover for a deformed
error, there being no error but some will second; yea, and some men's
consciences when they know not what to say will be talkative, although it is an
ill office to be Orators for our own or others errors, our own or others sinful
practices; considering also how subject man is to err in speech, practice and
judgment. And that men knowing they may err, are in a fairer way to the truth,
than such who think they cannot err, they erring in so thinking, whereas such
are most secured from error who think they may err.

Errors also in doctrine are usually accompanied with errors in life. The gross
profaneness of the Brownists is showed in a Book called the profane Schisms of
the Brownists, and by Mr. Paget, from the testimony of the Dutch Church, and of
the Magistrates of Amsterdam, instancing in Studley, Whitaker, Holder, and
others, yea in Mr. Brown himself, who being reproved for beating his Wife,
said, He did not beat his Wife, but a cursed old Woman.

Moreover, since errors will have the worst at last, they cannot hold out,
truth will prevail; and since such who maintain errors shall not find favor
with God. Jobs friends Job 42. 7.
held an error unknown, and for zeal to God, yet God was angry with them, and
is with such, Mat. 5. 19.

Lastly, Considering that many errors are damnable, mortal, Jam. 5. 19, 20.
deadly; a freeing from them being a freeing from death, our care should be not
to dally with them, there being death in them; as the way of truth is the way
of life, so also to draw others from them, and so procure their conversion and
Act. 4. 12. Joh. 17. 3.
pardon, for none can be saved without Christ. Such who are saved by Christ
must know him, and believe in him, and we must believe in him according to the
tenor of Scripture, the rule of faith, and not err from it.


Joh. 3. 19.
walking against light, be the error but small, the danger is great, if a
walking against light. And gross negligence, or not taking pains to know better
is equivalent to standing out against the light; it arguing a secret fear and
suspicion of the truth. And such men who live and die in less errors about Joh.
3. 20. 2 Pet. 3. 5. 1 Cor. 3. 13.
faith and worship, being willingly ignorant, if they be saved, they may expect
to be saved with much difficulty (by fire) as loss of much comfort, of much
peace, being scorched in spirit, and kept in dark and doubtful ways.

These things thus premised, I will show you what an ererror is, what it is to
err. Error strictly and properly taken, is that which men hold or do out of
ignorance of the truth. It is in practice when we are ignorant of what is
better to be done; it is in opinion when we are ignorant of what is better for
us to believe or hold. Error then is an opinion Mat. 22. 29.
or action swerving from the Rule of Gods Word; when that which is false is
believed to be true, contrary to the mind of him from whom we say we have
received it; as if a man should believe idols to be Gods, because Scripture
calls them so. It is an error when a thing which is false is believed to be
true, because he from whom we received it, thinks it is true: Should a man
think the soul was made of moats, because Lucretius thought so, and we read it
in him. It is an error, When out of another man's writings some true thing is
believed, which he who wrote it did not believe; as to think an Epicure did
place good in continency because he praised it. It is an error. Error is a
wandering or straying Act. 10. 45
from the right way; it is hardly cured, being very prevalent; 2 These. 2. 11.
(...) A scopo aberrare, to swerve from the mark. Gal. 5. 20.
and it is the way to Heresy, although it is not Heresy. Heresy being an
error and more. Heresy must be in some fundamental point or truth; it takes
men off from Christ, or from the foundation of saving knowledge. It is
accompanied with pertinacy and obstinacy, after clear light offered; it is
possible to have an error about some fundamental point, yet be no Heretic.
Heresy makes men take pleasure and delight in it, therefore it is called a
work of the Tit. 3. 10.
flesh, and such are often wounded by themselves, although they will not be
convinced by others. Heresy being an error in judgment* a pertinacy in will,
and a taking delight in it in our affections, so an error, and more; we are the
more careful to take heed of it, since such like tares are sown amongst Gods
wheat, yea while the Apostles lived; and the causes of it still remains;
namely, ignorance of God, pride of heart, self-conceitedness, want of love to
Christ, and his truth; Satan's malice, ambition, covetousness, flattery, and
Gods permitting such still for trial of his; as gold by fire, for the cleerer
confirming of the truth, and for the punishment of the contempt of his truth,
and careless entertainment of 2 These. 2. 11.
his word. It is no wonder then, if after a faithful Pastor there comes a Wolf.


Deuteronomy 13. i, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 11. 19. Jude 3.


2. To make his to contend for the faith. Some are busy to spread errors, that
others may be busy to withstand them, to avoid them. A Cutpurse is like
another man, yet when men are assured such are in the crowd, every one will
look to his purse: So when errors are abroad, every one should take more heed
to himself.

3. God often punishes one sin by another. Men continuing in sins of practice,
God suffers them often to fall into sinful Ezekiel. 14. 7. 2 These. 2. 11.
opinions; false doctrines are fit plagues for false hearts. They who love not
the truth are punished with belief of errors; and such are sore punishments
which are made of sins.

That we may therefore avoid error, Psalm. 25. 9.
Be we humble. John 7. 17.
Be diligent in obeying the Word. Psalm. 119. 113. Tit. 3. 10.
Grow up in love to the affecting of the truth. Take heed of Heretical Books,
and of company with such persons, they being infectious; take heed of
covetousness and ambition, which have made many Heretics, and reject those who
are such.

Timothy, that they are mildly, lovingly, and tenderly to be dealt withal, How
then reject?
Gal. 6. 1.
before he smites. He commands also to restore with meekness; and by so doing
we show our great love to the offender, and imitate St. Paul, who used not the
rod so long as meekness would prevail. Such places therefore as Romans 16. 17. 2.
Joh. 10. are to be understood after admonitions, and good means used for their
reclaiming, which proving vain, they are to be rejected. In regard of
themselves. 1 These. 5. 5.
To work sorrow for their sin. 2 These. 3. 4.
That they may be ashamed. And 2 Cor. 10. 8. 1 Cor. 5. 6. 1 Timothy 5. 20.
to bring them to repentance. So in regard of the Church; that it may appear
she maintains no vile persons; that other members may be free from infection,
and that others may fear. In Romans 16. 12. there is a double duty commanded, To
mark, To avoid. The parties to be avoided are described from the effects,
Divisions and Offenses; they who cause these are to be marked, avoided. The
rule to which they are contrary, the doctrine they had heard, namely of
Salvation, of Christ, which they had learned in that Epistle, or their first
Converters. False teachers then are to be marked, so that we be not deceived by
them, they causing Divisions and Offenses. A watchful eye is to be upon all
such Mat. 7. 14, 15. Phil. 3. 2.
who by their opinions or life cause divisions contrary to the doctrine of
salvation. Divisions and Scandals striking at the ^eart of Religion, and of the
Church. The Apostles reasons to avoid such, are, The one Negative, q. d. you
think they serve Christ, but they do not, not submitting to his will, not
seeking to please him in all things. The other Affirmative, they serve their
own bellies, themselves, their own turns, their profit, ease, maintenance, vain
glory, ambition, carnal affections, they aiming at their own gain and credit,
and not the glory of God.


Hodges answers in a Sermon upon 2 Pet. 2. 2. before the House of Commons,
March 10. 1646. You hear (says he) what the Apostle says, That many have a
form, and yet deny the power of godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 5. The Wolf in the Fable,
that he might not be suspected, but the more easily make his prey of the silly
sheep, put on a skin of theirs, etc.

2. Why (says he) should you think to say, he is an honest Page 58.
or a pious man should be a foolish plea in case of abusing coin, theft,
treason or the like; and yet should be of weight and force in this far greater
business, and more horrid mischief?

2. For their increasing, it is no argument of goodness.

1. The Arrians did so overspread the Church, that it was Miratur mundus se
factum esse Arianum, St. Hierom.
a saying Athanasius against the World (namely of Christians) and the World
against Athanasius.

2. Popery did spread so fast and far, that Papists triumphingly said and do,
Where was your Church before Luther? and they make universality a note of the
Church.

3. Mahumetanism is so spread not only over the Turks dominions See Mr. Fox,
tom. 2. p. 993. See Breerwoods Enquiry of Languages and Religions.
which are large, and many in Europe, Asia and Africa, but in other Kingdoms
and Countries which are not under the Turk, it having spread over Persia,
India, China, Tartaria, etc. Mahomet arose about six hundred years after
Christ, yet he has bewitched so great a part of the World, although his
Alcaron contains such absurdities, which are rather to be laughed at then named.




1. Mr. Paget names about 143. errors and heresies which lately sprung up and
showed themselves, not naming the Quakers, of whom there was no notice when he
did write that Book. Among this swarm he names Papists, praying in an unknown
tongue, holding Transubstantiation, Purgatory, etc. Familists blasphemously
affirming they are Godified with God, Anabaptists affirming Baptism to be the
mark of the Beast, from Antichrist. Antinomians teaching no Law, no sorrow,
such an easy way to heaven, that many follow them (concerning whom Mr. Baxter
says, I do not sit down in Pref. to Inf. Chur. memb.
an Antinomian conceit, that I have nothing to do but express my joy and
thankfulness) Independents pretending to have a model of Government revealed to
them, better than all reformed Churches. Sabbatarians affirming the Jewish
Sabbath is to be kept. Anti-Sabbatarians teaching there is no Sabbath, every
day being a Sabbath to Christians. Thraskites observing many Jewish Ceremonies.
Millenaries believing that Christ shall reign a thousand years on the earth.
Socinians teaching that Christ did not satisfy for sins. Arrians denying
Christ's Deity. Soul-sleepers, Divorcers and others. He dedicates his Book to
the Lord Major, and some chief Citizens of London. He tells them that he had
lived almost fifty years amongst them. He commends their care against the
infection of the Plague; he minds them that the plague of Heresy is greater;
he shows how Antioch was consumed, being a Nursery of Heretics; how Nicomedia
a meeting place for Arrians was swallowed up; how the Anabaptists meeting in
Conventicles surprised Munster; and how hardly Amsterdam escaped them. Then he
gives from Mr. Calvin, he from St. Augustine notes of them: They are great
boasters of their own worth and actions, as Simon Magus and the Gn^sticks. They
are blown up with pride, which drives some to Rome, some to Amsterd^m. They are
deceitful, slanderers, Separatists, in this equalling the Jesuits. They are
treacherously seditious, not preaching peace, but division. They have a show of
austerity and holiness. Then he shows the end of his writing to be to give
warning to well-meaning people to avoid errors, fore-warning them to this end
to beware of private Conventicles, and to keep close to the Ministry of the
Word, and Communion of Saints in the Church.

2. Mr. Baxter says, there are Devils abroad in the shape of Angels of light,
and Wolves within, as sheep without.

3. Mr. Vines in his fast Sermon before the House of Commons, March 10. 1646.
says, Are not the errors which are ^ife amongst us, either by infecting
persons of place and quality, grown into that boldness? or by carrying away
Barnabas also crept into that credit? or by spreading far and wide risen to
that strength? that they do face, if not seem able to put into danger of
routing our common says, public worship, authorized Ministry, long and much
expected and promised reformation. This to the common enemy is the Cape of good
Hope; the sound part are afraid lest the truth should come to beg for poor
quarter, and be led captive, following the chariot of triumphing liberty.

4. Mr. Hodges in his fast Se^mon at the same time and place, says, How sad a
sight is it to behold the spreading of this infection, the shoals that being
perverted follow these pernicious ways? to see how fast these tares thrive,
this leaven spreads, this gangrene frets? The Kingdom looks like a lazar house
or field fought in many places; by reason of this, how many are there of all
ages ensnared by them? The hoary head that is ready to descend to the grave,
and your hopeful spring that seemed to promise life and happiness to the Church
and State. And in his Epistle he says, The Prince of flies has raised such
swarms of flies in every corner of our Land, that many of our Congregations and
Families are miserably fly-blown with heresy and corrupt tenets. Also in his
Sermon he has this passage. Did ever former ages produce more hideous monsters
than we have risen up amongst us in this poor Island? Are there not Arrians,
who -- Valen^inians, who -- Gnostics, who -- The Nazareans opinions. The
Corinthians form, the Carpocratians improbity, and the Christians profession.

5. Mr. Bailey has discovered and numbered swarms of errors and heresies amongst
us, and says that the greatest hazard of the Church this day comes from the
evil of errors, 2 Timothy 2. 17 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2.
it eating up the soul as a gangrene the body, and bringing destruction.

6. The Parliament which was 1646. were so sensible hereof, that they appointed
a Fast to be kept, March 10. for the suppressing and preventing of the growth
and spreading 2 Pet 2. 1. 2 Pet. 2. 2.
of Heresies and Blasphemies, the forenamed Mr. Vines and Mr. Hodges preached
before the House of Commons, their Text in the Margent.

7. Mr. Edw^rds has Book after Book to this purpose, discovering the swarms of
gross errors maintained in our times, to the number of above an hundred and
seventy. He g^ves us a Catalogue of their many blasphemies, of strange passages
in their prayers, and then parallels them with the Donatists in St. Augustines
time. The Donatists complained of persecution, so do these. The Donatists were
violent against those who opposed their way, so are these. Donatists were great
flatterers, extolling their parties for gifts and abilities, so do these.
Donatists condemned that in others, they practiced themselves, so do these.
Donatists were unwilling to have their writings examined by judicious men, but
kept them in the dark; because they cannot agree together or amongst
themselves, because they know not how long they shall be of one mind, and how
far they shall go, because they would not offend their own party, and because
they would not discover their own weakness, so these. The Donatists did much
wrong to Authors, misquoting them, so do these.

He parallels them with Jesuits, affirming that Separatists and Jesuits agree
so, that both send out emissaries to spread their errors; both use pious frauds
to propagate their cause, both infinuate into great men's houses, both are full
of equivocations, saying one thing, meaning another; both are active, restless
spirits, never without plenty and fine designs; both work by instruments
unsuspected, getting their work done by others; both will run great hazards,
being daring to effect their ends.

He parallels them with diverse others, amongst whom, with Julian the Apostate;
as Julian was a scoffer of Christ, of Christians, of Scriptures; so some
Sectaries of Christ, some of the Trinity, some of the Ministry, some of the
O^dinances. Julian was a great enemy to learning, so these. He was a Patron of
toleration, which these seek for.

Then he sets down 28 of their evil practices, of which these are some. They
ascribe all good done, to be by their party. They call themselves the godly,
and well affected. They pretend one thing, and mind another. They strive to
have the Church without Ministers. They would have no Church Government, or if
any with a toleration. Some of them put down all singing of Psalms, and keep on
their hats at prayer. Some of them pretend to miracles, visions, revelations
for their way to confirm their Doctrines. When Books come out confuting them,
they tell the people they are or shall be confuted, and ^nswered to delude the
people. Some of them have strangly abused Bapt^sm, dressing a Cat, and in scorn
and contempt of the Ordinance baptized it. When they print, they give their
Books glorious titles, as Innocence and truth triumphing, The storming of
Antichrist, etc. They will seem to be what they are not, until they have served
their turn, waiting opportunity to make void all they seemed to grant. They are
restless to promote their cause, observing all tempers and humors. They
desperately judge of the estates and actions of all men who are not for them,
unsainting them as fallen from grace. They walk more loosly and at large over
what they did before they turned Sectaries, and in comparison of Presbyterians,
doing He was one.
many things under the name of Christian liberty, which Professors formerly did
not, nor durst do; when they have set to their hands to many things, they have
desired to see the papers, and would not restore them. They upbraid
Presbyterians for former conformity, as time-servers, to make people believe
the Presbyterians are not conscientious, only time-servers, whereas these were
Conformists, forward Episcopal men, thrusting others out, who would not be so,
naming seven; yea, some of the chief of them went further in conformity then
Presbyterians, naming three. Thus he. Although the words of these men show
abundantly the swarming of errors, yet they forget that some of themselves, and
of their party were the parents of these spurious births, by opposing and
destroying the worship of God, and Government of the Church, which whilst
vigorous, did curb and suppress them with good success.

We living therefore when and where errors abound, I desire you not to take it
ill that I use mine endeavor, that neither you nor I may live or die in error,
and as beloved brethren to desire you not to err. I am a man therefore subject
to err, but such a one who desire not to live in any error, but erring to be
reformed. And since you and I do err in somethings, being so contrary in our
opinions, I will show you my grounds, persuading me that I am in the right, and
that it is you, not I that do err. And in doing this I aim at no man's
prejudice. I shall show no passion; although I have been chollerick and
passionate, yet I have been so long a Scholar in Christ's School, as to know my
self, my duty, and not to be overswayed by such corruptions. I beseech you
therefore in meekness, in cool blood, as you and I shall answer at the great
day, the great Judge of the world, to consider conscientiously a few following
particulars.

The First.
I did and do think, I was and am still persuaded, that the taking up of arms
lately amongst us, as for King and Parliament (but indeed against the King) was
unlawful, and a rebellion to be repented of. As many others, so some of you
did, and perhaps still think otherwise, one of us must needs be guilty of a
gross and grievous error. I am confident that I in this err not, since as I
judge, we may not take up arms against a lawful Sovereign, should he be vile,
wicked, unjust, an Idolater; and that ours against whom arms were taken, was
neither. My grounds are, 1. The sacred Scriptures, Exodus 22. 28. Gal. 10 20
Romans 13. 1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 2. 13.
which teach me that we must hold our tongues, much more our hands; yea, and
that we must take heed to our thoughts, and that they are not to be resisted,
because they are God's Ordinance; and so a resisting of them is a resisting of
God. I know they are called the Ordinance of man; and so they are subjectively,
the power being executed by man; objectively, being about the society of man;
finally, because for the singular good of man; and instrumentally, they may be
of man in places where they are elective; yet is the power Gods, originally
they are of God, who appoints that some should govern, some obey, and it is the
Lord who maintains and upholds this Order. I know that some cavilling, are
ready to say, As some such are good, so some are bad; and are bad ones of God?
or how can bad ones be of God? not considering that God gives the Kingdom of
heaven only to the good, but the Kingdoms of the earth to good and bad; and
that the power of the bad is of God, and to be obeyed, although the abuse of
the power where it is abused, is of themselves. Their power therefore causally
is from God, his Ordinance, they are Gods Ministers, and resisters resist
O^dinances, so him.

Also because such who resist are to receive greater loss than of goods, than
of life it self, even damnation. I have seen some answers to Dr. Fearn. The
reasons of some to justify their taking up of arms, (I have them by me) and
the Anticaveliarism to that purpose, being willing to see what could be said;
and their Arguments to justify their doings, that I might join, if the course
was warrantable. But alas, I found much said, little proved, from Scripture.
The peoples rescuing Jonathan is pleaded; whereas it is clear that the 1 Samuel
14. 44, 45.
people drew not into arms of themselves, but at Saul's command; and by a loving
importunity they did hinder the execution of a passionate unlawful command.
Here nothing is to be found but loyalty. David's being against Saul is to as
little purpose. David never resisted, he always fled 1 Samuel 24. 1 Samuel 26.
from place to place, he was never found fighting, resisting, nor hurting, no
not when Saul was in his hands. Nor does the Prophets wishing those with him to
hold the messenger, prove that Kings Officers, therefore themselves may be
resisted; 2 King. 6. 32.
for it is one thing to hold a messenger fast, another to strike, to slay. The
holding is a delaying of the execution, the other shows contempt of the power.
But Elisha, who knew of the messengers coming knew also that the King was sorry
for that command, and was coming to withstand it, as the Text expressly has it.
He in so doing did the Kings will; as if he had said, Hold him but a while,
until the King come, who will have no such thing done. Besides, it might be
said, that all the Kings of Israel, the ten Tribes, were themselves but rebels
against the hause of David. We never read in Scripture that good people did
take up arms 2 Chronicles. 33. 5, etc.
against their Kings, when bad as Saul, Manasses; nor that the Prophets ever
persuaded them against such; and it shows heavy judgments against those who
have rebelled against even bad Kings, as Amnon and others.

2. My second ground is this. Resisting of Kings is against the doctrine and
practice of the primitive times, of the ancient Fathers, Martyrs, and other
holy men, until of late the Jesuits began to flourish, who turned Religion into
policy; and some disorderly reformers, as also certain eminent of the
Presbyterians, as Grotius, who wrote a Book de jure belli and pacis, which did
much hurt in these late times, but it is well answered in a Treatise, called,
Observations concerning the Original of Government; so few misled, have
defended (and weakly) resistance, that Dr. Owen in his Herod and Pilate, could
find but two English Divines leaning that way, when he wrote his Book, which is
not long. And all along the primitive times, they were for obedience, and
against resistance, even of persecutors; as Justin Martyr See for the Judgment
of Antiquity in this point, that excellent Book of the Lord Primate of Ireland,
Dr. Usher, entitled, The power of the Prince, and obedience of Subjects;
published with a learned Preface, by Dr. Sanderson, late Bishop of Lincoln.
to Antonius the Emperor, Theophilus, Bishop of Antioch, Athenagoras in his
Apology to Aurelius do show. Tertullian in his Apology writes to this purpose;
In one night with a few firebrarnds we could be revenged, we want not number of
men nor arms; your houses, your Countries are full of us; and we who take
Martyrdom so gladly, were we fewer, what were we not able to do, if it was more
lawful by our Relig^on to slay than be slain; yea, we could leave you, and so
your places desolate, and subject to enemies. To this purpose he. To this I
will add. There was a Legion called the Theban Legion, consisting of 6666
valiant Christian Soldiers, for refusing to commit idolatry, every tenth man
was executed. One Mauritius taking the rest aside, encouraged them from
Scripture to suffer, not to resist; they were decimated and executed the second
time: Then Exuperius taking into his hands the Ensigns of the Legion, said, to
these arms I provoke you not, but to suffer. And to the Emperor, We are thy
Soldiers, but Gods servants; we owe thee our employment, to him our innocence;
we have our weapons, yet resist not, being willing to die innocent, rather than
to live Traitors, our weapons we cast away; so they were all slain, not one
resisting. And all our strict Divines, until our sad resistance (Dr. Owens two
excepted) as Mr. Dod, on Com. 5. Dr. Tailor on Titus, Mr. Byfield on Peter, Mr.
Parre on Romans, and others were against resistance.

3. My third ground. I found resistance to be against the Judge Jenkins.
Laws of our Nation, which tell us, That to seize the Kings For^s and
Magazines, is high Treason; so to remove his Counselors by arms; likewise to
levy War to alter Religion; to levy War to alter the Law; to counterfeit the
great Seal; to adhere to any State in the Kingdom, but the Kings Majesty; so to
imprison the King until he agree to demands: to imprison the King, to destroy
him, and to depose the King, by the Law are high Treasons.

4. A fourth thing which confirmed me, were the Writings of some men, as Dr.
Fearn, and Mr. Symons, who suffered loss of what was dear to him, rather than
take up arms against the King, showing twelve reasons why he durst not join in
that way. The sum in brief take thus. 1. Then he should assist in many evils.
2. The way was not of God. 3. It destroys the whole Law of God, breaking all
the ten Commandments, showing how, every one particularly. 4. It is
inconsistent with the Gospel. 5. It contradicts the practice of Christianity.
6. It is opposite to the calling of Ministers. 7. It is contrary to common
prudence to go in suspected ways. 8. It dissents from the Rules of Humanity, to
fight against him who so long preserved us. 9. It is against nature it self, to
consent to our own destruction. 10. It is against reason to go in a way in
which all who are gone before us have perished. 11. It is against our Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy. 12. And it brings in and sets up Popery, and Popish
doctrine. For example, 1. The doctrine of resisting Kings is Popery. 2. To
place infallibility of judgment in man, as the Papists in the Pope. These in
the Parliament. 3. Papists believe in the creature, the Church. These in the
Parliament. 4. Papists say faith is not to be kept with Heretics. These with
Malignants. 5. Papists believe it to be meritorious to die in their holy War,
as they call it. These believe the same of those who die for the cause. 6. Both
consent in the doctrines of pious frauds. 7. Papists press the precepts of men.
These the Ordinances of Parliament. 8. Papists would have all to submit to the
Pope. These to the Parliament. 9. Both agree in violence and cruelty; in his
hearing (he says) he heard one say, It was good to assist the Parliament way;
for if the King prevailed we should find favor, if they prevail, we shall have
cruelty. 10. Both have the spirit of Antichrist, causing men to deny the truth
they had learned and professed. 11. And in the point of defamation they are as
dexterous as Papists, for upon a sudden they can do that against a godly
Minister, which the Devil in many years was not able to do, making him seem
scandalous, so odious. Thus he. I know what is pleaded for resistance, and
taking up of arms; namely,

Act. 5. 29.
Dan. 3. 17. 6. 7.
always to obey, by executing their will actively, or by submitting to the
punishment passively. If an Emperor be a Nero or Caligula, what warrant then to
take up arms against such a King against whom envy it self could not fasten any
aspersions?


1 P^ 1. 2.: 3
evil men named? why not demanded that they might be legally punished? Why? The
sequel showed it was against the King himself.

Mr. John Blackleach in his endeavors, Printed 1650. justifies John Goodwin
for justifying the murder of the King, Page 53. and page 54. he affirms, that
they did not take away the life of the King, but of one that had been King, and
hoped so to have been again. And G. W. in his Resp. Anglic. page 32. says,
That the Parliament finding him (the King) the evil Councellor, a settled and
obstinate Tyrant. And page 41. for a Parliament and State to call a Tyrant to
an account, is not unlawful.


Sheba's. And 2 Samuel 20. 12.
the thing commanded lawful. They had neither, who resisted the King.


Nathans to their David's, prayer, flight.


1 Cor. 10. 20. 1 Pet. 4. 12, 13.
to prayers, and patient suffering, according to Scripture.


Romans 13. 5
taking liberty to resist, making inferiors to overruled their superiors, the
subjects their Prince. Nor can there be greater inconveniences in a family, or
a Kingdom, than when there is no obedience but to what seems good in men's own
eyes. Our Savior shows what follows the dividing of a Kingdom against it self.
The self of a Commonwealth is the Ma^k 3. 21
Law thereof (the common surety between Governor and governed.) The self of a
Kingdom is the Religion of a Kingdom. The self of a Church is doctrine and
discipline, the one as the Corn, the other as the Hedge, which like body and
soul must not be divided. Resisting lawful Authority in lawful things, makes
such divisions, brings strange inconveniences. I will conclude this,
propounding five things to your considerations.

1. That the same God who commands children and servants to obey in all things
(which are lawful) their Parents and Masters, commands subjects in all lawful
things to obey Kings, if not more, since such may command both us and ours,
both Parents and Children. An household is a little Commonwealth; and a
Commonwealth is a great household. Governors of houses may and do expect
obedience from their inferiors; so Magistrates from them. We are to do as we
would be done by.

2. That Christian obedience does greatly adorn the Gospel Tit. 2 5, ^0 1 Pet.
2. 15, 16.
of Christ; and by it we do profess an acknowledgment of Gods Ordinance.

3. That we have a great advantage by Government, by Romans 13 4
Governors, they are for our good; whereas Anarchy opens a window to
confusion. Government is for our good natural, that our life and safety may be
preserved; for our Mr. Parre.
good moral, that we may be brought from vice to virtue; for our good civil,
that we may enjoy possessions, and that public honesty may be defended; and
for our spiritual good, having God's worship established. Some perhaps say good
men are molested. But let such know, that good Magistrates are good men's
nourishers; bad are their tryers, so for their good. And if any good men are
punished for good, it comes from the abuse of the power. However it is certain,
Obedience Romans 13. 3
brings praise, is a doing of good, and is a good work in an high degree, Tit.
3. 1, 2. As if the Apostle should say no good work can be expected from him,
who obeys not the Rulers, disobedience to such being an high breach of the
second Table.

4. That great danger hangs over the heads of resisters. A cruel messenger,
calamity, ruin, damnation; not to obey Prove. 17. 11. 24. 21. Romans 13. 2
is resisting, and fighting against God. The murmurings of Israel against Moses
and Aaron were against God, Exodus 16. 8. Hab. 16. 11.

5. That it is the brand and badge of filthy dreamers, and separating seducers
to despise dominions, and to speak evil of dignities, 2 Pet. 2. 18. Jude 8.

I can show you Books to encourage you in that way, but in them all, not one
convincing Scripture; no Law of the Land, nor practice of the Orthodox
Christians, who lived in the purest primitive times; for all these are opposite
to resistance. If therefore in this any of you do still err, consider what you
have done, repent for the same, that God may pardon you, as the King has done.
And that men may not think or say, you would act over the former Tragedy again
had you but opportunity.

The second.
In the year of our Lord, 1661. I printed a little Book containing three short
Treatises, one of the right of Kings, according to Scripture, A defense of
Psalm-singing, And an Essay for orderly hearing; you have them amongst you.
That Essay shows that I or some of you do greatly and grievously err; some in
going elsewhere ordinarily to hear the Word, having it of you preached at home
in your Church; or I in not showing that those who do so (and I think I do
sufficiently prove it) by so doing, are guilty of sin upon sin. As of sin
against God three ways: Against the Church, and Commonwealth, and Laws of
both. Against their own Pastor four ways. Against the Minister they go to hear
four ways. Against the day two ways. Against their common neighbor two
ways. Against their Christian brethren two ways. Against those who dwell in
places where preaching is not two ways. Against themselves four ways. Against
their families three ways. And against the rules of Christianity four ways. I
beseech you in cold blood to consider, That things of this nature are not
matters to be dallied with. If therefore I do not err, the doing of some of you
is grossly evil, and notoriously sinful, you add and heap sin to sin, submit
therefore to the truth maintained. And if your so well improved and rarely
gifted teachers can confute those reasons, and so show that I do err, you shall
find me willing to alter my judgment.

You perhaps think and say I preach unprofitably, one of your articles against
me formerly being thus: He has preached so unprofitably, that three or
fourscore of his Parishioners have been forced to go into the Country to hear
others. And he has forced some to remove their habitations because they could
not profit by Not one.
him. Thus your Article. And when a Committee-man told some of you, that I was
esteemed by the Country a painful Preacher, he was answered, To little
purp^se.


2. In regard of your cause I also preached unprofitably, not furthering, but
hindering of it. This being another of your Articles. He has dissuaded those
who have been willing to lend money, and to put in horses, and to bear arms for
King and Parliament, bringing in proofs of Scripture, and urging the practice
of the primitive times, to pervert the judgment of his Hearers, and to persuade
them rather to suffer than take up arms for the Parliament.

3. If in reg^rd of sanctification and salvation, the less profitable my
preaching was, the more is my grief, and the more your sin and shame. Either I
and hundreds more did then err in being of a contrary opinion, or you in so
articling then, or thinking so now, some absenting themselves wholly, some
often. Had I preached only here, such words and doings would have made me
afraid and ashamed to come into a Pulpit. But before I came hither to dwell at
first, I being accounted a Preacher both here and elsewhere, and after my
settling here adjudged so by many, and those judicious, as their frequent
coming hither, and to other places where I preached did show, until our unhappy
divisions. But when I would not leave praying for Bishops as desired, when I
would not freely contribute to War as requested, nor pay Taxes to foment War,
as enjoined; when I refused to preach up Wars and fighting, and stirred up
people to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, then, and not until then I was an
unprofitable Preacher, unfit to preach, yea to live amongst you, and continue
here. And blessed be God, and I heartily thank you for that kindness in driving
me away, for had I continued, your doings would have made me poor, yea more, my
life uncomfortable; and worst of all, my reputation wholly lost, reporting me a
Malignant, a Delinquent, one rotten at the heart, a no, or an unprofitable
Preacher; yea such, that it was said to a Parliament man, a friend, If your
Worship knew him as well as we, you would not take his part. And in all places
where I came in the troubles, even from such who were contrary minded to me,
and of your way and judgment, I found love to my self, and such liking to my
preaching (the same Sermons I preached here) that I was importuned by many, to
many places in City and Country. And such approbation there was of my
preaching, that I (and others in my condition) being silenced, the Parliament
Clergy, Committee, and some great ones of that way obtained for me freedom and
liberty to preach, having forborne but five weeks; yea such approbation has
been given to my preaching, and to the profitableness of it, by multitudes of
people, no whit inferior to you, nor in no kind; that I bless God I neither
then feared, nor now do fear to come into a Pulpit.

4. If you err, thinking still (as it seems you do) my preaching to be
unprofitable, I desire you to see whether the fault is in my preaching, or in
your selves. I hope you will acknowledge Isaiah to be a profitable Preacher;
his Hearers it appears did not, he complaining, Who has believed our report?
You have I believe the same thoughts of Jeremiah Isa. 53. 1.
and Ezekel; their hearers had not, Jeremiah's telling him he preached falsely,
and that they would not do according to Jer. 43. 2. 44. 16, 17. Ezekiel. 33. 3^.
what he had spoken. And Ezekiels not at all edifying by him, although they
delighted to hear him. Surely you will yield Christ to be a profitable
Preacher, yet many of his Hearers so far from judging so, that they wholly left
him; yea, so Joh. 6. 66. Joh. 6. 67.
many, that he said to some of his followers, Will you also go away? Was the
fault in the Preacher, or in the Corinthians, when one was for Paul, another
for Apollo, another for Cephas? 1 Cor. 1. 1, 2.
Was the blame in the Preacher or Hearers, when they would not endure sound
doctrine, but after their own lusts did heap to themselves Teachers having
itching ears, turning away their ears from the truth, being turned to Fables? 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4.
Was the fault in Manna (that heavenly food) or in the men (a murmuring
generation) when it was loathed? Let people hear without prejudice, with better
affections, and more preparation, and then see if the Word is unprofitable.

5. But if the many hundreds (as well as I) who by word and hand have approved
of me, and of my preaching as not unprofitable, if we all do err, that I am so
unprofitable at Broughton (I desiring your good and profiting) I can God
permitting me, and perhaps will make trial whether some other can profit you,
being assured that I can preach in many places where my preaching will be
esteemed acceptable and profitable.

6. But take heed to your selves; for if we be but the savor of death, we do
our Masters work, we do what we are sent for. And if we cannot give our account
with joy, but 2 Cor. 2. 15. Heb. 13. 17.
with grief, I am sure that will be unprofitable to you. I had thoughts not
once to mention such things, not to show one disliking word or look to such who
endeavored to ruin me and mine; but to prevent greater inconveniences into
which I see some running, imitating St. Paul writing to the Corinthians, I play
the fool in his sense.

The Third.
A third particular in which you and I much differ, is about persecution,
concerning which, you or I do greatly err; some of you complaining of
persecution, and one of your Articles against me being thus. He has been and
still is an enemy to all those that profess the power of godliness in his
Parish, and has persecuted them as far as possibly he could, and estranged
himself from the society of all the faithful and godly Ministers about us, and
upon all occasions would give reproachful speeches against them. Thus your
Article. And I think I was persecuted, and by some of you; and as for your
selves, you yet never knew what it meant. That you or I may come out of this
error, let us first see what persecution is.

Persecution is more than affliction; many afflictions have no persecutions in
them, but every act of persecution has many afflictions in it. Afflictions
many arise from irrational, yea from inanimate creatures; persecution is the
act of a Act. 9 1.
rational creature, reason abused or clouded being the spring of persecution.
One wicked man may vex or afflict another to death, but none are said to be
persecuted but the good; evil men are punished, good men persecuted. And if an
evil man is persecuted, it is because he makes show or profession of goodness.
Persecution in a large sense signifies to trouble; Job 19 22
strictly taken it is the actual opposition of any man for the cause of God,
for righteousness sake, proceeding from an enemy like zeal against his person
or peace; it is mental, when the spirit of man rises up and opposes another;
verbal, when men give hard words and uncharitable censures; and real, mentioned
Mat. 10. 18. To do thus, or to persecute Act. 9. 5.
is exceeding sinful, it opposing another for doing of good, for holding the
truth; yea, it is such a sin as to persecute Christ. And a persecutor is a
great offender, yea one of the greatest sinners. Paul confesses h^mself to
have been a chief offender, because a great persecutor. As it is one of the
highest acts of graces to be persecuted, so it is 1 Timothy 1. 15.
one of the highest acts of wickedness to persecute, it opposing Christ. See
therefore whether you or I were persecutors, or persecuted; it being a matter
of great concernment, even of salvation. I think and affirm that I was
persecuted, which I prove from what I suffered, from the manner how, and the
cause why. See what I suffered, the loss of four loads of goods, of above
seventy sheep, twelve swine, and six kine driven away at one time. And August
the fourth July 15. 1643.
following (not full three weeks) the loss of my living, the gift of it to
another, bearing date that day, although the place was supplied by my care,
until the uncivil and unchristian carriage of some of you forced for bearance.
I lost my reputation so far as credit would be given to malicious and false
reports and accusations, of being a Malignant, an enemy to the cause of God,
yea such a one that all the godly in Broughton refused to hear my preaching,
and went to Northampton (some saying nothing) only to make number, and so to
make me more noted for a vile person; and when some have seemed to
compassionate my condition, then such base back blows; If you knew him as we
do, etc. the manner therefore with all the disgrace and violence that could be.
And why all this? for what cause? I could tell you what some said; I might be
quiet if I would do as you did. I could tell you what some of your great ones
said; I should be quiet if I would take the Covenant. But I neither durst do as
you did, nor take the Covenant. I had taken the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy (and so had many of your leading men) I saw the Word of God, the Laws
of the Land, and the practice of the primitive Church against you, which made
me more willing to suffer than sin, my sufferings being for righteousness sake,
for doing my duty, I am bold to say, and conclude it was I who was persecuted,
and some of you were persecutors.




The Fourth.



2. But suppose from threatening it proceeds to acting, so that you are
punished; then you will do wisely to consider, whether the cause of
suffering-will make it persecution. He who is persecuted takes up Christ's Cross
and follows him, he suffers not as an evil doer. It is sa^d to pull upon 1 Pet.
4. 15
our selves self-created Crosses. It is sa^d to bear the Cross, and not follow
Christ. If our Cross is Christ's, we then suffer for the same cause to bear
witness to the truth. In the same manner patiently, charitably, thankfully, and
for the same end as Christ to take away sin, so we to further mortification,
and be stirred to repentance. How loudly do the Papists cry out of persecution
when they are punished, and do you think justly? How do the Quakers glory much
of their persecution for Christ? yea, and the Donatists, and Priscilianists of
old have defended their Heresies to death, which they counted Martyrdom and
Persecution; yea, the most of men molested for their opinions do the like, all
thinking they suffer for Christ, for righteousness sake, and so conclude they
are persecuted. It is good when we suffer to see for what it is that we suffer;
and so should it be as you fear or fancy for your Meetings. Then consider
seriously and conscionably, whether in so doing you do well or ill, or not
well; Authority languisheth where it is not feared. But if you do well, fear no
persecution, Scripture assuring us that Rulers are not a terror to good works,
(that is, works, the effect for the cause) but to evil works. To understand
Romans 13. 3, 4.
what are good or evil works, we are to know that works are so Theologically
taken; so a good work is that which is done of faith, and of a sincere mind,
for the glory of God; it is ill when not done so. The Magistrate cannot judge
of these, because they are inward; but of good or Mr. Parre.
evil civilly so, which are according to or contrary to the Law divine, humane,
positive, municipal of Kingdoms, Cities and Corporations, whereby the necessary
discipilne of every State is established. Of these he judges. Will thou not be
afraid, do good; namely, obey and resist not. He does not mean the profession
of Christianity, for that was then hated; but such good which was so in the
judgment of the Heathen, a civil, honest conversation agreeable to the Laws of
the State wherein they lived. Then he is the Minister of God, for such men's
good. But if thou do evil, ver. 4. namely, moral or civil evil, contrary to the
Decalogue or positive Law of the place where thou live, fear; for he bears
not the sword in vain, since we must be subject, and their Laws obeyed, not
only for wrath. 1. Of God who is angry with such who resist Authority. 2. But
also of the Magistrate whom we provoke by disobedience justly to punish; but
also for conscience sake; namely, conscience of our brother, it being an
offense to a peaceable and loyal subject to see any to take liberty to break
the Laws of the Magistrates; as of our selves, lest we wound our own
consciences, every soul being bound in conscience to obey his lawful
Magistrates; every part of Gods Law binds conscience. And to obey Magistrates
is part of Gods Law. As we are to render to all theirs, so to Caesar his due;
to Caesar the things which are Caesar's. Well, what says the Magistrate? what
says the Law? Mat 22. 21
Do they allow of your Meetings? Give me leave to tell you how St. Augustine
commends a Law Imperial made against the Donatists, and Schismatics in his
time, which was, That they who separated from the Church, and had private
Conventicles, should be punished with pecuniary mulcts, their Leaders with
banishment, the place wherein they met to be forfeited to the Emperor; they
should have no power to bestow their own Goods by will, nor enjoy any Legacy
bequeathed to them.


Quakers, and who not, object the same of Laws made against them?

2. Is it tolerable that a Statute made upon long deliberation, by so many
wise men, and such in Authority, should be disclaimed for the private opinions
of some novel Divines and unlettered persons?

3. We should be modest, and not think our selves wiser than we are, Romans 12. 3.

4. A good subject examines not what is best, but what is commanded, and
submits to it, it being lawful.

5. If in making Laws every man's fancy was to be regarded, there would be no
end nor order.

6. If men doubt of the lawfulness of things commanded, let them go for
resolution to such who are peaceable, and Prove. 24. 21.
not consult in matters of obedience with such who refuse to obey.

7. In matters doubtful follow the safe Rule, hold that which is certain, leave
that which is uncertain; leave reasoning, and obey the Magistrate that is
certain. It is our duty.

8. Hear reverend Dr. Sibs: who says, The Laws under which we live are
particular determinations of the Law of God, therefore ought to be a Rule unto
us so far as they reach, although Sib's souls conflict, Edition first, fol.
364. page 2. I note the Edition because later Editions have corrupted the
Author; so that what he speaks in general, they restrain to some things of the
second Table.
it be too narrow a Rule to be good, only so far as man's Law guides unto; yet
love being the joint reason and consent of many men, for public good has an
useful guidance of actions that fall under the same, where it
dasheth not against God's Law; what is agreeable to Law, is agreeable to
conscience.


David, Jehosaphat, Josiah, Hezekiah, for the keeping of the Passover, and
order in the service of God; such as of our Kings and Governors for the
observation of the Lord's day, for the hearing and preaching of the Word, with
other such, did and does save souls, and far more than your Meetings; yea, so
much as a thing well and legally done, furthers it more than a thing done
illegally and disobediently. Besides, if all which is taught in your private
Meetings is good and warrantable, yet it is so far from converting, that it
perverts many souls, causing them to judge amiss of wholesome Laws and good
Government, causing them to slight the Ministers of the Gospel, whom they are
to hear and obey, making rents and divisions in the Church, hardening Papists
and profane people in their unwarrantable ways, and making many well-minded
people at a stand, not knowing what to do. And as it is certain that the
commands of such who are in Authority over us, concerning matters of Religion,
tend to the conversion and edification of men; so it is without all doubt, that
disobedience to their lawful commands, in lawful things, tends to the Rom 13. 3.
damnation of souls.




The Law enjoins public Worship, and forbids such private Meetings; you
neglect the public Worship, and extol your private Meetings as the only way;
you condemn the Law as unjust, and commend your so doing as good; whereas the
Law tending to settle, preserve and keep unity, peace, order and concord, must
needs be good. And being so, consider whether such Meetings can be so.

1. Confronting and disobeying lawful Authority.

2. Casting dirt and disgrace upon the face and form of Government, proclaiming
it persecuting and tyrannical, compelling such good people as you would be
accounted, to creep into Barns and Houses, as if you wanted the truth publicly
taught in our public Meetings.

3. Do you not in so doing, condemn our Church as false, if not Antichristian?

4. Do you not condemn all the allowed Clergy, as unprofitable and naught?

5. Do you not neglect and draw others to neglect the public Ordinances of
Christ?

6. Do you not cause people to slight their Teachers, and to question whether
there be such a thing as Religion, and so to turn Atheists?

7. Do you not hereby cause people to think our Laws are but scare-crows, and
our Lawmakers to be such men who regard not what they do, so to undervalue the
one and other?

8. Do you not encourage your Teachers to do that they have no warrant to do
from God or man? For what warrant have they to exercise the Ministerial
function, since the same Authority which enabled them to, disinables them from
preaching. It is the Law which inables us to, and allows us where, and when to
preach; which Law has power to disinable also. To this end see the judgment of
the old Nonconformists, in a Book put forth by Mr. William Rathband, in which
they prove against Separatists, that the Church of England is a true Church,
and that separation from it is unlawful. Amongst many other things they answer
the Separatists objecting against them, their yielding to suspensions and
deprivations, thus. That so long as the Bishops suspend and deprive, according
to the Law of the Land, we account of the action herein, as of the act of the
Church, which we may and ought to reverence and yield unto; if they do
otherwise, we have liberty given us by the same Law to appeal from them.


over the execution of their Ministry at the will of man.

Act. 4. 19, 20.


1. They who inhibited the Apostles were known and professed enemies to the
Gospel.

2. The Apostles were charged not to teach in the name of Christ, nor to
publish any part of the Doctrine of the Gospel; which commandment might be
more hardly yielded unto than this: Our Bishops are not only content that the
Gospel should be preached, but are also Preachers of it themselves.

3. The Apostles received not their calling and authority from men, nor by the
hands of men, but immediately from God himself, and therefore also might not be
restrained or deposed by men -- Whereas we, although we exercise a function
whereof God is the Author, and we also called of God to it; yet are we called
and ordained by the hands and Ministry of men, and may therefore by man be also
deposed and restrained from the exercise of our Ministry. Thus they. See also
Mr. Bals trial of the grounds of separation, a solid work.

9. Do not such Meetings asperse all the penal Laws of the Land, and the
judicial proceedings which have been since the Reformation, against Papists,
Priests and Jesuits, or any other justly suffering for their Religion as acts
of highest injustice?

10. Do they not endeavor the rending and crumbling our Church to nothing?

11. Are they not a menas to fill the Kingdom full of factions and tumults?

12. Yea, and are they not against your so much cried up Covenant, which was to
bring the Church of God in the three Kingdoms to the nearest uniformity in
Religion; whereas you by thus doing, go about to divide and subdivide, not
being ignorant what fruits our Savior shows to come Mat. 12. 25.
from division; saying, A Kingdom divided against it self (political, good Laws
and constitutions, Ecclesiastical, as doctrine and discipline) brings
desolation, probably, and very often. Look but to the Church of Corinth, what
desolations! Their preaching an empty thing, when one for this, anther 1 Cor.
1. 12. 1. Cor. 11. 20.
for that. Their Communions became desolate, and by such means and doings St.
Paul became their enemy, who gave them their very being in faith, and was their
spiritual father. And what desolation such divisions bring with us, is evident;
what casting off your Preachers, their old precepts, and your old practices,
until at length some grow from something to nothing. Is it not so when some
noted for parts and piety long since, a long time talk so Atheistically as to
profess a readiness to hear the one and the other, with a resolution to believe
neither, the one preaching against the other; and that there was never any
sound preaching since Christ's time. Are these good fruits? and would not such
have objected the same against the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself?
false Prophets and Apostles preaching against the true. Christ preaching
against the Scribes and Pharisees, and they affirming him to be a deceiver? And
I dare maintain that what they preach contrary to what we preach in public (if
they do) to be contrary to sound doctrine.




2. The Tree is known by the fruits, and by your such Meetings, we see the
public Ordinances slighted, neglected, contemned.

3. I cannot accuse what is delivered in your Meetings; but if it is contrary
to what we preach in public, it is not good doctrine. And let me tell you,
that John of Leyden infused his dangerous opinions in private Meetings; and how
our Mr. Thrask in public preached sound truths, but in his private Meetings,
he did indoctrinate his followers with his pernicious principles.




2. There are more sins than swearing and drunkenness; who can forget the
swarms of sins in our late Tragedies? and who were actors of many of them in it?

3. For the present. Are not despising of Authority, disobedience Cobbler of
Gloc.
to wholesome Laws, sins? from which are these men free?

4. Blessed be God, although we all are proclaimed to be profane and naught;
yet there are very many as free from idleness, drunkenness, swearing, and such
like vices, and as painful, pious, charitable, and inoffensive as the strictest
in your commanded company.

5. But to be plain with you; All professions whilst kept under, it is their
interest to be orderly; but when these men of late had their liberty, we are
able to prove the profane excesses of some of them, even to public scandal, by
Epicurism, intemperance and uncleanness; to say no more.

For my part I cannot think, but that the respect such who are in Authority
bear to themselves; their care to have their Laws and Religion upholden, their
obedient Clergy not vilified, and people kept from Atheism and rebellion, will
awaken them in time, strictly and by severity, to do that which their clemency
will not do. You cry out much against Popery, yet your doings endeavor to
bring it in, and set it up; it is a Jesuitical plot to sow division amongst us,
to make our Religion odious, and that they may fish in troubled waters. From a
good Author I will tell you a story, which is this. Before our troubles, one
Meridith, an ancient Dr. Nicols.
and learned Jesuit, told one reconciled to the Church of Rome, that in England
they had been long and industrious about the work of conversion, but it went on
slowly, and so would do, until they took a wiser course. Two things there were
that must be done, before they should bring their business to a full effect;
they must first find a way to remove the Bishops and Ministers, in whose rooms
they must bring it so about, that all should have liberty to preach. Then
secondly, they must get down the Common Prayer Book, and suffer every man to
use what prayer he list. And we cannot but remember how far they effected this
in our sad troubles. Besides, if you expect such privilege, why may not they
expect the same? They being Christians, they being subjects, they and some of
you being Recusants; why not they their Mass, as well as you your Meetings?




2. Comparisons are odious, otherwise we could say as St. Paul of the false
Apostles in his time; Are they thus, and so? so are we.

3. The forbidden fruit without doubt was excellent, yet it had been good for
our first Parents to have contented themselves with their allowed Trees and
fruits. Many men's Wives and Diet come short of other men's, yet it is fit their
own should content them.

4. Blessed be God your allowance is large, you may hear every week three
Sermons in an approved way, and none of them to be contemned.

And as for Popish Priests, do you not think the^ will say for their Priests
and Jesuits, the same that you do for your Preachers; you say yours are rarely
gifted men, great Scholars, pious, painful, and what you will more. They will
not conform to the Book of Common Prayer, nor observe the Orders appointed by
the Church of England, they will not assent and consent. They can and will say
the same of theirs. If you say yours will take no Livings, they can say the
same, and add; not Wives neither. If you say that yours live by providence,
going about to do good, they can say theirs have no settled abiding but are
sometimes here and there to promote and spread the Catholic cause, and are
maintained by the peoples bounty.

We acknowledge that we and Papists are Christians, agreeing in many things;
for we and they acknowledge unity in Trinity; but we with them acknowledge no
Queen of heaven to pray unto. We and they acknowledge the Scriptures to be the
Word of God; but we with them make not the Apocrypha Canonical. We with them
make the Word of God the ground of faith; but we with them make not unwritten
traditions of equal authority. We and they agree in admitting doctrinal
traditions agreeing with Scripture, or thence deduced; yea, ritual for order
and decency left to the disposition of the Church, although but of positive and
humane right, they not being childish, nor accounted parts of God's Worship;
nor with opinion of merit, nor burdensome for multitude: But we with them
believe not traditions obtruded as Articles of Religion, grounds of faith, and
parts of God's Worship, they not being deduced from Scripture by inference, nor
expressly commanded, such we reject. We and they receive and believe the three
Creeds; but we with them receive not the Creed of Trent. We and they believe
the true God is to be worshipped in Spirit and truth; we with them believe not
that he is to be worshipped by Images. We and they believe that we are to pray
with fervency and sincerity; but we with them pray not in an unknown tongue. We
and they pray to God; but we with them do not pray to Saints and Angels. We and
they acknowledge Christ to be our Mediator of redemption and intercession; but
we with them do not at all rely upon the intercession and merits of Saints and
Angels. We and they do honor Saints departed; but we with them do not worship
them. We and they do urge to good works; we as necessary effects of justifying
grace, they as causes; we as the way wherein we must walk unto, they as the
meritorious cause of eternal felicity. We with them believe two Sacraments; but
we with them believe not seven. We and they believe a real presence, so in the
Sacrament, that the worthy Communicant really partakes of Christ's body and
blood spiritually; but we with them do not believe that the bread is
transubstantiated into the body and blood of Christ; so that dogs and mice may
eat it. We and they believe there is an heaven and hell; but we with them
believe not Purgatory. Christians therefore they are.




2. Call them Idolaters (I think they are so) and what you please; yet I am
sure as in many things you differ from them: for whereas they make seven
Sacraments, some of you will not make use of two. They ascribe too much to
Sacraments, you too little. They keep too many holidays, some of you keep
none. They are blamed for saying the Lords prayer too often, some of you for
not at all. So, in some things you agree, namely, in Separation and Recusancy.
They forsake our Church as Heretical, some of you as Antichristian, I fear,
since you are come to say our Church and yours.




2. But what one word or syllable is in it savouring of Popery? Is there any
praying to Saints? for the dead? Is there any allowance of merits? of
Purgatory? name any one point of Popery if you can.

3. Whereas you say it was taken out of the Mass Book; who told you so? did you
or they ever see the Mass Book? do you or they know what it is? But admit it is
taken out of it, and that the Mass Book is bad, as it is; Is it the worse? Is
gold refined from dross, wheat cleansed from chaff, at all the worse for the
dross and chaff? As for the Mass, I abhor it, as injurious to the Priesthood of
Christ, to the sacrifice or death of Christ, as an hindrance to an holy life,
and contrary to Gods will, and therefore I am far from defending it. The word
Missa or Mass, by some is derived of Missoth, or Mincha, an Oblation; by some
from the Latins, who used these words, Missus, Missa, etc. The ancient Roman
Idolaters dismissed the people from their sacr^fices with these words; I,
licet, Missa est; Depart, it is permitted, and so the Assembly was dismissed.
And these words are now pronounced, Ite, Missa est (scilicet concio sive
Ecclesi^) signifying a leave given to the company to depart. Let it be what it
will, or come from this or that, we have it not, neither name, nor thing.
Demand of them I desire you, who inform you that our Common Prayer Book is
taken out of the Mass Book, so Popery; If ever they saw and read the Mass Book?
And if they have seen and read it, demand of them then, 1. Whether all the
Mass Book is in our Common Prayer Book? They must say no. 2. Whether all our
Common Prayer Book is in the Mass Book? They must say no. 3. Whether that which
is in our Common Prayer, and in the Mass Book, is good or bad? They cannot but
say it is all good. I am persuaded they can prove none of it to be bad. 4.
Whether it being good, the being of it in the Mass Book, can make it bad? or
whether we are to reject all the good in Popery, as the name of Christian, with
much more?

Mr. William Rathband (who put forth a modest confutation of Separatists agreed
upon long before, as he says, by the joint consent of the godly and learned
Ministers of this Kingdom, who stood out and suffered in the case of
Uniformity. They in it showing the Church of England to be a true Church of
Christ, and therefore separation from it to be unlawful.) He with Mr. Thomas
Langley, Mr. Simeon Ash, Mr. Francis Woodcock, and Mr. George Cross, all so
far as I can conjecture, Non-conformists, put forth a Book of Mr. Jo^n Ball, a
Nonconformist; wherein he writes learnedly and The trial of the grounds of
separation he put forth himself.
piously against Separation; he writes in defense of set forms of prayer, and
that men are not to separate from the Church because of ours. He says, many
are the Objections which are made against set forms of prayers, and
particularly against our Book of Common Prayer; all which I have endeavored
(says he) to answer severally; not because they are of so great weight, but
because I desired to satisfy fully every doubt. And whereas it was objected,
The Common Prayer Book was taken out of the Mass Book. He says, It follows
not that therefore it is a Page 8.
false worship; for many things in the Mass Book are good, a pearl may be found
upon a dunghill. 2. If out of the Mass Book, How comes it to pass then, says
he, that it has those things directly contrary to the Mass Book? He instanceth
in many. Further, he says, It is more proper to say the Mass was taken out of
our Common Prayer; for Page 10.
most things in our Common Prayer were to be found in Liturgies long before the
Mass. The prayers and truths of God taught in that Book, pertain to the Church
as her prerogative; Page 11.
the Church of God may lawfully make claim to those holy things, which
Antichrist has unjustly usurped. Now since I find that erroneous opinions once
entertained are not easily gotten out of the heads and hearts of men, for they
quickly root deep; take strong hold, and cannot easily be pulled up, as we see
in Christ's time. The Pharisees held corrupt opinions about Mat. 15. 2.
working, Mat. 7. 11.
dispencing with childrens obedience, about Mat. 23. 32, 33.
swearing, Luke 15. 12.
fasting, and many errors about the Mat. 5.
Law. Did Christ get these errors out of them? He brought the cleerest light
that ever any did; they for all that lived in darkness. The Sadduces denied the
Mat. 22. 23.
resurrection. Christ labored to convince them, they held their errors in St.
Paul's Act. 23. 8.
time. 1 Timothy 1. 20. 2 Timothy 2. 18.
Hymineus, and Philetus, and Alexander, had rather be delivered to Satan, than
to deliver up their corrupt and damnable opinions, Therefore as all of us
should be careful to take heed what opinions we receive, to this end to try the
spirits, and not take things on trust for the learning, seeming holiness and
worth, or respect we have to any man; but to search and see that they have a
sound bottoming from the Word: So we are not to wonder why the best of God's
messengers cannot take men off from their unwarranted opinions. The Jews retain
their opinion, that neither Elijah nor Christ are come. The Papists retain
their opinions, and will die in their errors rather than embrace the truth. It
will be no strange thing then, if I endeavoring to, I neither do nor can
remove you from your erroneous practices.

1. In vilifying, not coming to, but absenting your selves from the public
prayers of the Church, no not by Scriptures, the testimony of holy Martyrs, the
hatred Papists bear to it, the strictness of the Law under which we live, the
excellency and usefulness of it, nor by the approbation the Reformed Churches
give of it; of all which I have made use but in vain.

2. In not baptizing your children, or baptizing them in an illegal and
irregular way, although I think I have showed sufficient grounds and
authorities, and Mr. Baxters opinion, which is, That they who deny baptism to
their children play the devils part, yea, do herein heinously exceed the Devil.
Some who admire the man, will be his Interpreter, saying, his meaning is, If
they may have them baptized in his way, and then will not, but refuse. Read his
Book of Infant Church Membership through and through, and you shall find no
such limitting to this way or that; he acknowledges ours to be true baptism,
valid, and not to be reiterated. And whereas some who think they know more than
they do, say, It is the duty of parents to have their children baptized,
although it does children no good; such senseless silly speeches show that some
folks bolts are soon shot. It is a duty, and yet does it no good? Do Scriptures
so highly Act. 23. 8. Romans 6. 4. Tit. 3. 4.
commend Baptism as we read, and does it no good? Is it no good to be a member
of Christ's Church, but to be in the same condition with Turks and Pagans?

3. In not coming to the Communion, of which I have spoken often, and at large;
but I see you are resolved notwithstanding. I will entreat you to take notice,
that if your practices are erroneous, as they are, 1. That to be obstinate in
an error is dangerous for man's salvation. The ugliness of obstinacy in error
does appear from the Author of it, who Mat. 5. 19. Mat. 13. 25.
is not God, but the Devil; so obstinate errors, diabolical; and naturally it
produces Heresy or Schism, and is such that St. Paul wished to be cut of. A
mutinous Soldier is Gal* 5. 12.
hanged, when an open enemy has fair quarter. Consider also that errors in the
end bring terrors, such making men like children, hulk on the Sea without
rudder; for in such a condition are such who flote on groundless errors; yea,
errors Ephesians. 4. 14.
make men as bones out of joint, which cost groans to bring them in place
again. Alas! what is a traveller in the night out of the way? how is he
troubled? A Rebel out of the Kings favor, how is he perplexed? erroneous
persons are Travelers out of the way, and as Rebels out of favor.




And that we may not err, take heed of pride which provokes men to errors and
factions. Take heed of prejudice against any thing causelessly. Take heed of
covetousness, Act. 8. 9. Act. 19. 32 Tit. 1. 11.
truths adversary; for some subvert houses for lucre sake; gain persuades many
to maintain errors, that errors may maintain them. And be we careful to this
end constantly to believe what is taught you by the Scripture, and conscionably
to obey what is commanded you by the Church; prov^ded it be not contrary to
Scripture. Be careful to fasten our faith upon Scripture. If Scripture says
it, I will believe Gal. 1. 8.
it. To fasten our charity upon our Mother the Church, and her directions, and
see that we our selves be humble; for whereas many object, all allege
Scripture, we confess it to Mat. 4.
be so: The Devil himself did so; yet it is certain, if we will read the
Scriptures carefully and faithfully, hear the Church charitably, and esteem of
our selves modestly, we shall understand Scriptures sufficiently to keep us
from error.

Once again let me entreat you brethren, not to err with any Master. Some think
they may safely do this or that because of such whom they follow: To them I say
as St. A^gustine of Cyprian; Although there are many things that Cyprian did
excellently teach, yet there are some things wherein Cyprian might have learned
more than he knew: So say I of some men, such shall be my friends, I love them
well for the good service they may do, but I must, and do love the truth
better, since a wise man will not alter an ancient truth for the love he bears
to the Author of any novelty, Gal. 1. 8.
and a good man dare not. For although men are wonderfully pleased with their
own conceits, and their opinions must be the great Monarch, to rule even the
Monarchs of the world, although they suppress truth, to advance falsehoods; yet
they are but like a cumbersom heap of sands; a congested heap of groundless
opinions good for nothing, not worth any thing, only fit to deceive here, and
to destroy hereafter; a fruitles^ heap bearing no other fruit than to abuse our
neighbor, dishonor God, and betray men's souls to Satan; a disagreeing heap
not fast joined together. Errors and falsehoods may for a time be patched
together, like a beggars cloak; but they continue not long united, and an
inconsistent heap; for they who embrace errors, are not long constant, but run
from one absurdity to another: Let me therefore acquaint you how some have
drawn, and do draw well-meaning people into error, being stirred thereunto.

1. Sometimes by covetousness. Paulus Samosetanus expecting preferment from the
Queen of Arabia, fell into such Schisms, which in the end wrought his own
overthrow. Some men finding it an easy thing to live at another man's Table
(although so doing is base to a generous mind) speak often, things to maintain
and please a faction, Tit. 1. 11.

Sometimes by ambition which has often caused contention and separation,
because Arrius could not get the Bishopwrick of Alexand^ia; Donatus of
Carthage; Aerius of Ponts, they became enemies to the Church.

3. Sometimes by intolerable pride working contempt of Authority, the contempt
of which causes separation; and men's self-love is the cause of this contempt.
Self-love as Lib. 14. cap. 18. decivitat. Dei.
St. Augustine says, Is the master builder which builds the City of the
Devil; for when men are so besotted with opinion of themselves, that they think
their own writings to be Gospel, and Pigmaleon-like, fall in love with images
of their own making; they will sooner hazard their lives, than by revoking
their errors impair their reputation. Tell them of general Councels, of many
learned men, they think they all might err sooner than themselves. If you
allege to them the judgment of the ancient Fathers, they are ready to say with
Abailardus, Although all the Fathers thought so, yet I do not think so; Fathers
are but children, Schoolmen Dr. Bois.
(as one says) are but Foolmen in respect of themselves, who can sooner espy
moats in the Fathers eyes, than beams of folly and ignorance in their own eyes.
Tell them of Mr. D^d, Mr. Bolton, Dr. Tailor, and such other (who lived not
long since in our own times) what they taught, how they lived, they can
presently say; such were good men in their times, but now we have new lights,
and are better gifted.

Let me also entreat you to consider what hurt you do, what sad inconveniences
your separations and divisions do bring, how they distract people, so that they
know not what to do. Bartholomew Casanus a Sap^nish Bishop, tells us a story of
a Spanish Priest, desirous to baptize an Indian Noble man; the Indian asked the
Priest, whither the Spaniards dying went? The Priest said, to heaven: The
Indian replied, he would not go whither such cruel people went. There is also a
story of Bernardine Ochin, a man of great learning, who disliking the Church of
Rome; fled to Geneva first, from thence to England, where seeing so many Sects,
all challenging themselves to be true, and each condemning the other, he turned
back to Rome, saying, It was impossible, that they who were so simple, so
way-ward, so obstinate, so full of Sects and dissentions, could be of the true
faith of Christ. Suppose a Pagan should come and say, I would willingly be a
Christian, and seeing such strife and dissentions amongst us; one man saying he
holds the truth; Another says no, but he is in the right, what shall this poor
Pagan do?

And let me desire to know what will please and content you; you extol Mr.
Bolton, he deserved the same (but take heed it be not like the Pharisees
commending the old Prophets, Mat. 23. 29.
your doings being contrary to his preaching and practice) do you follow his
doctrine and example, then we are all agreed, we shall have no such dividings;
you gathered hands against me to cast me out, and to bring in Mr. Basely, you
had your desire (for then you might do what you list) you thought your selves
happy in your change; How long did he please you? were you not then gadders
this way, and that way, to this man, and that man, especially to one whom after
you abhorred, for doing but his duty? were you not then condemned for your
giddy waywardness? For my carriage amongst you, I shame not to own it, and I
challenge envy it self to say the worst it can, when and where I may answer for
my life and doctrine. I am not like to be a burden to you long as a man,
muchless as a Preacher, being so far stricken in age; I having therefore often
used arguments and reasons to diss^vade you from diverse erroneous practices,
and thus far now discharged my duty in showing the danger of error, and wherein
you grossly err, if I err not, (as I am persuaded I do not) and since all such
persuasions are in vain, and prevail not; it being no little grief to me to see
(as some other) so your neglect (to say no worse) of Catechizing and
Communions, for the remedying of which I did formerly complain of one (without
any ill will to the party) hoping that it might do good to him and others; but
only complaining and no more, and keeping off the sentence intended, no good
was thereby done. Now again, out of the love I bear to you, not bearing malice
to the party, or any man's person; nor by respect to my self (since the smaller
the Communions are, and no Catechizing, I have the more ease and less labor.)
And out of the regard I bear to mine own soul, in omitting no lawful means
unattempted to do you good, I am considering whether it will not be my duty,
out of the many refusers of Communions and Catechizing, to single out one who
may be supposed in every respect best able to manage and defend such unwonted
irregularities, that so it may appear whether you have any grounds for such
unwarranted courses; and whether those in authority have power to keep us in
order, and to such necessary duties, since by Sects and Schisms, Sectaries and
Separatists, their ignorance and simplicity, their divisions and obstinacy,
many in our unhappy England are cast down, who were desirous to stand in the
truth of God; many are hindered from being Protestants, and more turned
Recusants; many their hearts so shaken, that Camelion-like, they are capable of
any save the right faith. It being the property of Heretics, as Tertullian
says, to weary the strong, to catch the weak in a snare, and to leave the
middle sort scrupulous. I therefore now resolve no longer by silence and
fitting still, to be accessory to so much hurt; and for this end to make trial
so far forth as I have said, what good I can that way do, some men being forced
with rigor, who will not be refelled with reasons, from their erroneous ways.
As in the Ark there was bread (Manna) for refection, also a rod for correction:
So in the Church of England, the Church of Christ, there is a voice of
consolation to defend the good as with a shield, and a voice of correction to
order the stubborn and disobedient. The Church of Christ therefore according to
St. Augustine, is called the handmaid of the Lord; so the Mistress of her people
to guide and rule her folk, yea and to correct Agust. epist. 50. ad Bonif. de
corig. heret. epist. 48.
them to, when they offend as Sarah did Hagar when she contemned her Mistress. I
believe Hagar thought Sarah dealt hardly with her, whereas she did more
persecute Sarah by her contempt and wicked pride, than Sarah did her by sending
her out of doors. There being also little hopes of being heard or regarded
amongst deaf and self-conceited men, who regard the censures of the Church no
more than a bullet of cork; it is good to try, and see whether they have a rod
(power) and can use it; for every one is not a friend who spares, nor every
one a foe who smites; yea, it is a mercy sometimes to punish, and oftentimes
it is cruelty to spare. Such a Father who spares his servant, killing his son,
will be thought unjust, not merciful; and what can we think of them who spare
those who rend and tear the Church our Mother? Bad men through malice do
unjustly hurt and vex the godly without cause; and good men through love by
discipline do justly correct others for their miscarriages. The discipline of
the Church being as Cyprian says, the preserver of hope, the guide to
salvation, the retainer of faith, and cherisher of godliness. The correcting
voice of discipline often does and may do good to such who will not be moved with
the sweet voice of entreating. St. Augustine says, He who binds a frantic
man, and awakes him who is in a Lethargy, is troublesome to both; yet he loves
and helps both: So to bind men with the cords of justice, that they may not
wrong themselves and others, is a great good; it being also far better to
weaken some by justice, than suffer them to go on to weaken others by faction.




2. Most speak against swearing and drunkenness as gross sins; the other go
under the notion of goodness.

3. Swearers and drunkards deny not our Church to be a true Church, they deny
not the Ordinances; and they might be better wrought upon and reformed, was it
not for our divisions. The other do little less than seek the overthrow of the
Church.

4. I hope I am a friend to no vice, and such an enemy to all, that if any will
bring me as good evidence, and will stand to it, that such and such are
incorrigible swearers and drunkards, as I have that such and such come not to
Communions; if I then endeavor not their amendment by Church Censures (if I
cannot by persuasions) let me be blamed. I intend not to create any just
offense, or real hurt to any man's person; for truly I know not the man living,
or creature breathing to whom I do not heartily wish, grace, mercy and peace.
My desire is to endeavor in this place, to stop the current of opinionists
blown by the spirit of error over many parts of this Land, to the dishonor of
God, and endangering of many a man's salvation, and staggering wellmeaning
people, and drawing them to disobedience, Schism, and Faction. And whilst I am
so doing, and when I have done, I hope to make it appear, that as I never yet
did show the least malice nor discontent to them who formerly sought to ruin
me and mine; so that now I bear not any ill will either to the party, or any
other, but that I do what I do in love; and that if they make trial, they may
truly say of me, as it became a Proverb concerning Archbishop Cranmer; Do my
Lord of Canterbury a shrewd turn, and then you may be sure to have him your
friend for your labor whilst you live.

Thus you and I being men are subject to err, and it being dangerous to live in
error, according to my Office and duty I have declared wherein you err, that I
may not be guilty of the same by my silence. If you can bring me convincing
grounds that I thus differing from you in judgment, and in thus discharging my
duty do err, you shall soon perceive and see that I will not be obstinate in
error. And if what I have said contain convincing arguments to make it clear
that you do err, then I desire the same of you, that you may not obstinately
persist in error; that so both I and you may follow this blessed counsel of the
holy Ghost, by the Apostle Saint James speaking to you and me in these words,
Do not err my beloved brethren.

Preached October 6, 13, 20.
Certain sayings of Mr. Baxter in his Infant-Church-membership.
THe main scope of their endeavors in public and private is to propagate
their opinions, and if they preach any wholesome doctrine, it is usually
subservient to their great design, that the truth may be as sugar to sweeten
their errors, Page 144.
that they may be easier swallowed. They persuade the people that Ministers are
seducers, liars, etc. judge therefore 16.
what good may people expect from Ministers. How has it grieved my spirit to
see and hear men professing to be more godly than others, to make it the
business of their lives to disgrace the Ministers of the Gospel.

When poor people hear those despise the Ministry, that 16.
once were constant hearers -- Sure these men having tried, see some evil in
that way, etc.

O how it stumbleth and drives off the poor ignorant people 145.
from Religion, when they see those that have seemed Religious prove such? And
when they see us at such difference one with another; and when they see so many
Sects and Parties, that they know not which to turn to; They think that all
strictness does tend to this, and so that the godly are but a company of giddy,
proud, unsettled, singular persons, that know not where to step, till they are
besides themselves. O! how are the Papists hardened by this? I have spoken with
some of them that once began to be moderate -- who now upon the observation of
these Sects -- are generally confirmed in their way, and say, Now you may see
what it is to depart from the bosom of the Church -- to make the Scriptures
common, etc. The Episcopal Party are more confirmed in their way by it, and
say, You have mended the matter well, etc. yea, those who were offended at the
Prelates cruelty -- do now think they did well, and that which was needful for
the quenching of this fire, whilst it When? to whom?
was a spark. And many who began to stagger at the Kings late Wars, are now
many thousands of them persuaded of the lawfulness of it, from the miscarriages
of these men. And if report (too probable) do not lie, thousands and And other
grounds.
millions of Papists in all Countries of Europe where they dwell, are confirmed
and hardened in their Religion, by the odious reports that go of the
miscarriages of these men in England. These say they, are your Reformers. And
this is your Reformation. How many thousand Professors of Religion are quite
ruined in their souls, and turned into Monsters rather than Saints? How many
sad, distracted, divided Congregations? What dividing and subdividing, and
subdividing 149.
again, and running from Church to Church, and from opinion to opinion, till
some are at such a loss, that they affirm Christ has no Church, etc.

How many distracted Families in England that were wont to worship God in unity
and joyfulness? One will pray, and the other will not pray with him, because he
is unbaptized; 16.
and a third says Family Duties are not commanded in Scripture. One will sing
praise to God, another scorneth it, as if it were singing of a Jig; and a third
will sing Psalms from the dictate of the Spirit only -- One will be of one
Church, and another of another: Envying and strife has taken place, while
unity and love are laid aside, because that truth is josled out by error.

What a multitude do I know, that are most notorious for 150.
pride, thinking themselves wiser than the ablest Teachers, when they have need
to be chatechised? Some of them run up into the Pulpit to preach, some will not
come in public, are constant Teachers in private, where they vilify the
Ministry, and make poor souls believe, that the Ministers are ignorant of the
truth of God in comparison of them.

I have wondered formerly why St. Paul speaks so much against 151.
Heresies and Schisms, and what made even all the primitive Fathers spend most
of their zeal and painful writings against Heresies and Errors? as does
Ignatius: and almost all, when we in these days were ready to think these to
be scarce sins? But now we begin to know their meaning; and I can say as good
Dadianus, I never knew what Heresy or Schism was till now.

Thus he and abundance more.

A DISSWASIVE FROM ERROR A PERSUASIVE TO ORDER

By a Lover of, and Labourer for Truth, Peace, Unanimity, Uniformity and Order,
Joseph Bentham.

JUDE 3. Earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered to the Saints.

London, Printed by W. R. MDCLXIX.

A Visitation-Sermon PREACHED At Kettering, October. 6, 15. 1666.
1 COR. 14. 40. Let all things be done decently and in order.


MANY enormities and disorders were amongst the Corinthians, incest unpunished
bolstered, not lamented; Lawsuits before Pagans, to the scandal of the
Gosspel; men covered, women uncovered in Divine Service; negligent and unworthy
coming to the Lord's Table; abusing of gifts to vain glory, denying the
resurrection, etc. The Apostle having handled some things concerning matters of
decency, as women's praying covered in token of subjection, and men's praying or
prophesying (namely, being present at praying and prophesying) uncovered in
sign of their superiority. Having also spoken of some things more properly
pertaining to edification, by silencing such who used tongues without
interpretation, and of some things peculiar to order, as to speak by two or
three; in the close he sets down a rule or Canon, by which all must be squared;
a touchstone to try, and a balance to weigh Church-orders, whether they be
right; which they are. In regard of the end, v. 26. when they tend to
edification; and in regard of the manner, when they are done decently and in
order; since all things should be done without confusion of persons, and
proceedings in just and due order; therefore what is in the Church, as it is to
be decent, so it ought to be in order.

Order in the Church of God, is a good and an excellent thing. And it is so,

1. In regard of God, who is a God of order, v. 33. Order proceeds from him,
and from his throne, who also is a lover of it, delighting in it; all loving
their own works, and what conforms to them.

2. In regard of the Church, which in Scripture is called Cant. 4. 12.
a garden enclosed, therefore to kept in order; an Cant. 6. 4.
army with banners, therefore to march, and to be Marshalled in order. And 1 Timothy 5. 15.
Gods house, therefore to be governed and kept in order.

3. In regard of good men who so prized order, That the 1 Chr. 5. 55.
Priests are commended for keeping order. They are 1 Chr. 15. 15.
blamed and punished for not observing order. St. Paul Col. 2. 5.
rejoiced, beholding the order of the Colossians; he 1 Cor. 11. 34.
promised to set things in order at Corinth; he charged Tit. 1. 5.
Titus to do the same at Creet; and himself was persuaded publicly to declare
at Jerusalem his walking according to Act. 21. 24.
order.

4. In the great book of nature there is order; Bees have their Queens, Cranes
have their leader, Locusts their troops; so that order is the beauty of Nature,
the ornament of Art, and honor of the World.

5. From the contrary we may see its excellency, since where order is not kept,
1 Cor. 14. 33.
peace cannot be kept; confusion and peace agree not. Job 10. 22.
Death is evil, and that is without order; in it are no orderly changes of
night, day, heat, cold; nor do men in dying keep order, rich and great men
going first. But rich and poor, young and old, promiscuously die without order;
and Hell, the worst of all, has in it no order; surely then it is a kind of
death to see any disorder, Sleidan. Comment lib. 10. An. 1555.
and a kind of Hell to see all in disorder; yea, popular inequality was so
burdensome to the seditious Anabaptists in their rebellion, that contrary to
their doctrine they made one their Captain, another their King, so seeking to
have order, in their hurly-burly disorders.

6. Yea, such is the excellency of order, that civil order is the beauty of
Kingdoms, spiritual of the Church; that the fabric of the World is upholden by
order; that States and Kingdoms are maintained by it, and without it nothing
can well flourish or prosper. And since it has or should have place in all
things, surely the Church should not be without it; for order and uniformity in
discipline is an hedge to unity and doctrine. And where rules for order are
despised, and every man left to himself, usually so many Citizens, so many
Sects; whereas where all things are done in order, there union in Law, breeds
union in love, uniformity in fashion, uniformity in faith, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4.

But alas! where is our order, when as at Corinth, so with us, one is for Paul,
another for Apollo (and might not any of 1 Cor. 1. 12
these have been acceptable and given content?) Sure this is not agreeable to
order, since St. Paul for their so doing pronounces 1 Cor. 3. 4.
such to be carnal; when some go to private meetings, when they should go to
the public Ordinances; when some go to the Lords Table, more keep away than
come, sure it is neither decent, nor according to order.

Oh, my beloved brethren, for the Lord's sake, a God of order, for the Churches
sake, the household of God to be well ordered; live in peace, be of one mind,
and observe good order. Because many are divided into factions, shall we? must
we needs sin with others? or because disorders are abroad, let us unite at
home, and be orderly. Order is of God, disorder is not so; some must begin to
make up the breaches, and to quench the flames. Oh that we could be the men!
for why should we open the mouths of our adversaries, to reproach our Religion,
as if in it we had no agreement, no order? why should we tear the Church of
Christ into pieces by our disorders? why should we be stumbling blocks to
people, making them at a stand, not knowing what to do, whether to be of this,
or that, or the other, or of no Religion? why should we deprive our selves of
that joy, comfort and good, we might receive by Christian unity and order?

Since therefore God is the Author of good agreement and order, since we are
all of the same family and household of God; since we are fellow members of the
same body, fellow stones of the same building, and fellow soldiers of the same
band; since we have the same Father, God, the same Mother, the Church, the same
enemies, weapons, cause, and expect the same crown; since in Christ's Kingdom
lambs Isa. 11. 6.
and wolves agree. Labor we for peace, and to uphold in this house, in this
Kingdom, fold and family, unity and order. In contentions therefore deal like
neighbors, in State business like subjects, in other men's sins like
Christians, in all humane things as just men; and in all we do be careful to
observe order.

1. That all things may be done decently and in order, lay aside pride,
passion, prejudice and pragmatical dealing in things out of our Calling; for
when mere Mechanics from the anvile, thimble, needle, yea from tinkering and
tapstering, presume to sit in Moses chair, to be dictators and reformers. It is
sure against order, and a cause of much disorder.

2. That all things may be done decently and in order, by no means have a
prejudicate opinion against the Governors of the Church, I mean the Bishops,
they having been therein, in and since the Apostles times; St. James at
Jerusalem, St. Peter at Antioch, St. Mark at Alexandria, etc. And after them
such Worthies of the Church, St. Augustine Bishop of Hippo, Chrysostom of
Constantinople, Ambrose of Millain, Cyprian of Carthage, etc. Fulgentius,
Palladius and Finan, Bishops in Scotland, before Antichrist; three Luther, page
41.
British Bishops at the famous Council of Nice, Aristobulu^ one of the seventy
Disciples, as we are informed, a Bishop in Britain. And of the nine and twenty
Clergy men, Mantyrs in Queen Mary's days, five were Bishops, and one
Archdeacon. Such has been the Government of the Church in and since the
Apostles time; and if some have been faulty, personal faults may not annihilate
needful functions.

3. That all things may be done decently and in order, let us better esteem of
things appointed by our Church for unity, edification and order, and not
causelessly run into factions and fraternities, scandalous to the Gospel,
dangerous to our selves.


Romans 13. 1. Surely then they may make Laws, they being called powers; surely
such receive force from God, they being ordained of God; surely such bind,
since we must be subject, v. 5. and surely violaters sin, since resisters
receive damnation, v. 2.


1. If the thing commanded is simply unlawful, as to worship 1 Timothy ^. 1, 2.
them, commanding things lawful actively, commanding things unlawful passively.

2. You say you are persuaded they are unlawful, this makes them not to be so.
If there is no rule from the word for their unlawfulness, there is no place for
your disobedience, but the command to obey is sufficient warrant to obey. It is
a great mistake to swallow Camels sins, and to scruple at matters indifferent
(not once pretended to be against the word, they being also commanded by
authority, and that such we are to obey) upon no better grounds than such, they
are contrary to our fancy, humor, opinion, or Christian liberty, as pretended;
for Christian liberty consists in freedom from sin, from the curse of the Law,
from the wrath of God, the yoke of Mosaical rites, and an obligation There is a
glorious liberty which is celestial in heaven, Romans 8. 21. On earth there is a
liberty temporal, 1 Cor. 10. 29. This liberty is best when ^ffence is neither
given nor taken. There is a liberty spiritual, Joh. 8. 36. which consists in
deliverance from evil, from sin, from the punishment of the Law, Romans 8. 1.
Col. 3. 13. from the strict observation of the Law, which says; do and live;
freedom in respect of God, to have free access to serve him in the Name of
Christ, Romans 5. 2. To serve him without fear, in righteousness and holiness,
Luke 1. 74. and freedom in respect of the creatures, to use or not to use our
dominion lost by Adam, it being restored by Christ, so that all are ours, 1
Cor. 3. 22. all being pure to the pure, Romans 14. 14. There is also a carnal
liberty to swear, to lie, to slander, to serve God when and how men list, to
shun Gods Ordinances and public Meetings; and this is a liberty stood for by
some, whereas this is no Christian liberty, but a dissolute licentiousness; for
notwithstanding our liberty, we must pay debts, and perform duties, to whom
debts or duties belong.

Scripture mentions a good, a clear, a pure, a purged, a weak, an evil, and a
feared conscience. If the conscience for which men plead liberty, loves
divisions, which God hates, it is but a bad conscience.


of conscience to the things indifferent, as substantials. As for liberty of
conscience, so much desired of some, who know not what they desire, I could
show how John Becold, Nicholas Stock, Mancer and others pleaded for, and
obtained the desired liberty; but having power in their hands, they would not
grant the same to others. And sure we may remember, how some would not grant it
to others, who are now most desirous of it themselves. But who I pray should
have liberty of conscience? Sure I am, it is not agreed upon by those who have
written earnestly for the same. Some would have it granted to all conscientious
men only; but who are they? some not to such who sin against the light of
nature, and reason, and here will be some doubt. And some would have it granted
to all men, in all Nations; whereas if to all, what confusion? if to some only,
what dissension?

Concerning things indifferent, as such things are which I may lawfully do, or
use, as I may forbear from, or drink wine, ale, beer, or water; I may cloth my
self with woollen or linen, I may use the gestures of sitting, standing,
kneeling, so long as I am at liberty; for a Christian is sometimes to moderate
his liberty in the use of things indifferent, of which there are two chief
moderators.

1. General, namely, charity, directing us when and where to use our liberty
(the thing being indifferent to us) this made St. Paul to say, he would eat no
flesh whilst the world stood, rather than offend his brother.

2. Special, as lawful authority abridging a man of this liberty. For example;
It is indifferent for a man to take to, and follow this or that trade, yet the
Magistrate for common good limits this liberty so, that no man shall follow
such a Trade until he have served such a time, nor in a corporation, except or
until he be free of the same. For Merchants to transport commodities is
indifferent. The Magistrate for public good limits this liberty, and forbids
the transporting of some things for a certain time. To ^ate fish, fowl, or
flesh is indifferent. The Magistrate limits so as before. See the rubricks
after the Communion for kneeling at it.
And whereas it is lawful to pray standing or kneeling, to receive the
Communion sitting, standing or kneeling, the Magistrate to maintain uniformity
and order, moderates and limits this liberty, appointing all in public prayer,
and receiving the communion, to use the gesture of kneeling, as most decent,
orderly, religious, and tending to uniformity; which determinations of
authority are to be obeyed because There is a certain ignoto called, they say,
who affirms, that if the Magistrate enjoins, liberty is lost. And when we
reply, grant that and confusion will follow in families, in Kingdoms. To this,
this Ignaro answers; in civil and temporal matters the Magistrate may command,
and we lawfully obey, not in Ecclesiastical and religious; but alas, this
pitiful single umbra either knows not or fo^gets, that the actions of Gods
worship are either essential or circumstantial; essential are principal, as
piety, holiness, or subordinate, as helps to the better performing and
declaring of such worship, as prayer preaching, Sacraments, concerning which we
may consider, That they, as prayer, preaching, Sacraments, are necessarily to
be performed, because instituted of God. 2. Circumnantia^, which show the
manner how they are to be performed, concerning the place, time, gesture, etc.
these are left to the Church, 1 Cor. 11. 24. St. Paul would order such things
when he came, and saw what was convenient, Act. 15. 29. the Church then
enjoined things long since abrogated. Titus must order things in Creet, and St.
Peter enjoins, 1 Pet. 2. 13. to submit to every Ordinance of man; submit
therefore, honor, pay all duties; to every humane Ordinance, humane because
proper to men, and by some humane act, for the Lords sake, namely, under God,
of God, from God; to every, to all Governors, good and bad, in all things
which do not cross Piety and Religion; our obedience is to go so far as their
commission is to command; not to civil causes only, but to religious also; and
wherein their precepts may not be followed, our obedience must be passive. But
whatsoever lawful thing is appointed by the Church, for order and decency, may
with a good conscience, yea ought to be obeyed.
lawful and commanded. And I desire such who think the command of a lawful
thing makes it unlawful, to apply it to your own occasions, as after this
manner; your man may, yea he ought, it is his duty to saddle your horse, and do
any other such thing; but in case you bid him do it, then your command makes it
unlawful. Apply it thus to your selves, and you will see the fondness of such
fancies.

The old Non-Conformists in their modest confutation of Separatists, answering
their objections concerning using stinted commanded prayers, say, The peoples
understanding and memory is better helped by that they are acquainted with,
than with other, page 14. And that it is lawful to use such good forms which
are imposed by authority -- And we ought the rather to do good things that are
agreeable to the Word, when we know them to be also commanded by the Christian
Magistrate, page 15.




2. Weak are to be informed, not to be nourished in their weakness, and wilful
are to be opposed.

3. By obeying you shall offend some, by disobeying you shall offend many; by
obeying you will offend some private persons, by disobeying you shall offend
public. Whether are we to prefer the few or many, the private or public?

15. 9.Things enjoined are such.
Mat. 15. 6. as necessary to salvation. Ours are not so, but only for decency,
common order and uniformity.




2. They who determine cannot, may not be every one; but such whom God has set
over us.

3. And admit some things in our conceits might be amended; is not peace better
than contention about them, they being lawful? who in his wits will pull down a
fair building, because he thinks a tyle does not lie well to his mind?


It is meticulosus numinis timor, as Theophrast has it in his characters; or
as others, Nimia circa sacra Religio.

Superstitiosum est quicquid institutum est ab hominibus, ad sacienda and
colenda idola pertinens, vel ad colendam sicut Deum creaturam partem ve ullam
creaturae vel ad consultationes, and pacta cum daemonibus, etc. Decretal. 2. p.
cause. 26. q. 2. c. illud.


sometimes joined with idolatry, Act. 17. 22. They were more superstitious than
others, worshipping more Heathen God's than others, or were more devout in
Heathen Worship than others. Take superstition for a nimity or overmuchness in
the inward and substantial parts of Religion, so no man can be superstitious,
namely, too much truly religious; no man can pray to the true God too
fervently, or hear his Word too reverently or attentively.




But we are to know that superstition may be as well in placing piety in the
Negative as Affirmative, in not kneeling as kneeling; in abstaining
scrupulously from things commanded, as in using them scrupulously. Negative
precepts are as perfect in forbidding things unlawful, as affirmative in
requiring things necessary, or permitting things lawful. If it is superstition
when men not contented with the prescribed manner of worship, gather together
an heap needlessly; then when men beyond Gods restraint, increase restraints
upon themselves or others to please God, they are thereby superstitious in the
Negative. Col. 2. 21. forbids will worship in Negative observances; Touch not,
taste not, handle not. They therefore who add restraints where God has not, in
so doing may be negatively superstitious, as the Pharisees in not doing some
things on the Sabbath day; and the Philistines not treading upon the threshold
of Dagon. In abstaining therefore from things lawful, as unlawful, there may be
a negative superstition. There is then a superstition positive and negative;
the one, when men count that holy which God never made holy; the other, when
men condemn that which God never condemned, both faulty. It is not for us to
make sins or duties. To make more sins than God made, is a condemning of the
rule as imperfect, as if the Law was not full and exact enough, but needed to
be pieced up by men's fancies; yet so do some, who upon their own will and
sense, without any warrant from the Word, condemn men for using things
indifferent, Romans 14. no where forbidden, and by authority commanded. Take
heed, take heed that our hatred of superstition make us not madheaded, like
some modern Antitrinitarians, who reject the doctrine of the Trinity because
the Pope holds it, or such who will meddle with nothing which in Popery was
polluted.

If things enjoined be not sinful like theirs, Mat. 15. 9. if they are of
things necessary or useful for the time, Act. 15. 28. such do bind the
conscience, and are no violation of it. Christian liberty, a freedom from the
tyranny of sin, the curse of the Law, the yoke of Moses, and the like as before
is a great liberty, which may content, and a precious thing to stand fast in,
but we must not turn it to license, Gal. 5. 13. Although we are free, yet we
must not use our liberty Gal. 5. 1.
as a cloak of maliciousness, but know we are still the servants of God, and
owe him obedience, and to every one of 1 Pet. 2. 16
his commandments, whereof this is one; submit to every 1 Pet. 2. 13.
humane Ordinance for the Lords sake, and by love bound to serve one another,
Gal. 5. 13.

1. Consider the frequent and peremptory charge of submission, of obedience,
Romans 13. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 2. Consider that to despise dominion is very
dangerous, 1 Pet. 2. 10. Jude 8. 3. That vain janglings about indifferents have
much scandalized the Gospel of Christ. 4. And hazarded the loss of God's
Ordinances, and made many deprive themselves woefully of them.
3. Thirdly, Must all things be done decently and in order?

1. Then you must have a Teacher, else where is order? In an house, no Steward
or Governor; in a War, no Director, sure no order.

2. This Teacher must not be any one, not every one; that was Jeroboam's sin,
and of later times a cause of much, of many and sad disorders.

3. This Teacher must have maintenance fitting to his function; so that feeding
the Flock, he may eat of the milk of the flock; for when such are contemned in
regard of poverty, when in regard of it they are scorned, when there is a
ragged Minister, and a rich people, what decency? what order?

4. This Preacher and people must consider they are members of a Church, and
subject to its government, and therefore in all things they are to submit and
obey its lawful Ordinances and injunctions. For instance,

1. Our Church enjoins us to come at the beginning, and stay until the end of
the public Worship of God; and this is agreeable to Scripture, Ezekiel. 46. 10.
Luke 1. 21.

2. The Church enjoins us to pray kneeling, which is agreeable to Scripture
precept, and the practice of the best men, as David, Solomon, Paul, and our
Savior Christ; yet we have some who at the public prayers of the Church, will
not Psalm. 95. 6.
stand with the Pharisee, nor kneel with the Apostle; neither stand as servants
to a Master, nor kneel as subjects before a Prince, but sit as if they were to
bless God, not he them; much less imitate those who with wives and children,
and as is most probable (being they passed through the City) in their better
apparel, and yet in prayer would kneel, although in a most incommodious place,
to wit, the Seashore. Act. 21. 5.
Sure it argues ignorance or arrogance to refuse to kneel in prayer to God, in
which duty no gesture so fitting as kneeling; if possible, if not injurious, if
not hindering edification.

3. The Church enjoynes men to be uncovered in the service of God; and there is
no doubt but that we may testify our reverence to God, as we do to men; nor do
I know of any Church where the Minister is uncovered, and the people covered
(too much in use with us) he being there as God's Ambassador, the people as
they to whom he is sent; he as a Teacher, they to learn. Give me leave to tell
you what an eminent Divine says. He who thinks (says he) he may not be
uncovered out of fear to offend God, may be superstitious, Dr. Nicolson's
answer to Mr. Mathews, page 187.
yea, whilst he speaks against all ceremonies, is ceremonious; and he that
thinks upon no occasion he may cover his head, is ceremonious also; and yet for
his superstition he has a fairer excuse than the other; for the one does it
for the most part out of contempt and perverseness, and in a disobedience to
some higher power; the other ^ut of a kind of necessity, which his present
condition may put him upon (and it is a certain rule, charity dispenceth with
all ceremonies.) The one by it may give ^ccasion to suspect his irreverence;
the worst that can be made of the other, is that he desires to serve his God
with fear and reverence, as judging himself in his presence, before whom he
cannot be t^o vile. The one has no countenance n^r color of any Scripture for
what he d^es, the other looks upon these plain words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.
4. and thinks he is obliged to it, as indeed he is, till the meaning of the
Text ^e otherwise cleared to him. The one is disobedient to higher powers, the
other obedient to the same as he ought; better grounds by far than the other,
who will do, or not do, because he will, or he will be^^use such and such do so.

4. The Church enjoins all Communicants to receive the Communion three times in
the year, of which Easter to be one. A duty of order, yea more; for if not
comers to the Passover were to be cut off, surely God who was so severe Number.
6. 9, 13.
for the neglect of that Sacrament (inferior to the Communion) how severe will
he be think we to the contemners of this so sacred an Ordinance? Since also not
to come is a disobedience to Christ's command (Do this) which is divine. And 1
Cor. 11. 23. St. Paul says, I have received of the Lord that which I delivered
unto you. And v. 26. As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup: Which
as often, implies often, as the Apostles and primitive Christians understood
it; yea, and the not comers neglect the memory of Christ's death (by which we
are redeemed) in his way. They neglect also the communication of Christ's body
and blood, and show themselves none of Christ's Disciples, not obeying him (his
Sheep hearing his voice) in this; nor imitating him (whom we are to follow) who
did eat the Passover, a type of his Passion, as to put an end to it, so to
honor his Ordinance, and to show us our duty, what we are to do; to show his
subjection to the Law, as our pattern and example.

But alas! what are we come unto? whither shall we go? If in some places where
are hundreds of families, and not one hundred to communicate; if some who are
married, if some of thirty, if not forty years of age were never at the
Communion; if in populous places and Congregations the most turn their backs
upon this Ordinance. Is this for edification? is this order?




2. To come unworthily is sinful, not to come may be as great, if not a greater
sin. He who comes does what he is enjoined (although he fail in the manner) and
so may show a neglect; the other who comes not, shows contempt of Christ's
command, Do this; so contempt of the memory of Christ's death, by which we are
redeemed; and shows himself none of Christ's Disciple, and surely contemners
sin fearfully. To neglect to come therefore is a gross sin, where a man in
coming as well prepared as he can, he does his duty, and humbly commits himself
unto God's mercy.

Paul says I must not eat; and if I may not eat with them, then not come to
the 1 Cor. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12.
Lords Table with them.
Cor. 7. 13, 14.) yet I may not in sacred society, and the service of God,
which is his duty and mine, if he be not cast out of the Church by
excommunication. As I am to avoid the least partaking of other men's sins, so am
I bound to the greatest partaking with them in duty; and yet I may eat with
him, if occasionally I be cast upon the same Inn, Ordinary, and Table, etc.

2. Scriptures enjoining separation from wicked men, command to depart or
separate from their ill courses, their sins, not from being with them in Gods
Ordinances. Should a sick man say I will not accompany such who are sick to a
Physician, and be healed; is he not guilty of his own death for so doing?

3. Sure it is an error to imagine that communicating with wicked men is a sin
in the worthy Communicant, or a being polluted by their company, since the
keeping company with them in such sacred meetings, is only an acknowledgement
that they are in the number of them whom Christ came to redeem; and so says
St. Peter. It is only a joining with 2 Pet. 2. 1.
them in Christian profession, and a confederating with them to lead Christian
lives; all which are Christian acts and tokens of humility, unlike the
Pharisee, who condemned and triumphed over the Publican; whereas it would be
better to look more at home to our own ways and works, and leave judging of
others, than to deprive our selves of so sacred an Ordinance for other men's
coming, since St. Paul reproves not the giver, nor the worthy receiver at
Corinth, only the unworthy comer; since upon such grounds of separation, there
will be no resting; and since to forbear, because of other men's unworthiness,
is a newfound groundless fancy; not in our Saviors time, when Judas came, nor
in St. Paul's time, when many came unworthy, 1 Cor. 11.


Luke 18.


Augustine. cont. parm^n. l. 3. c. 2.
it is committed, unless as it often happens, the multitude of offenders, or
the difficulty of the times impede the same.





the Church wherein we live, do imitate Christ.


He did sit; what Christ did not do, we must not do. He did not kneel, what
Christ did we must do. Whosoever reads seriously the Evangelists, will not take
Christ's example as a rule to guide the Church in all circumstances, in
administering and delivering the Eucharist; for must we deliver it upon Maunday
Thursday, in a chamber, not in a Church, only to twelve at once, those only
men, and Clergy men? Must we deliver it to them lying or leaning upon one
another bosom, not in the morning but at night, not fasting but after supper;
and must the deliverer wash the receivers feet?

2. Christ did not make his example our pattern in such circumstances of time,
Communicants gesture, etc. but left his to be guided by his Church in all
matters of comeliness and order. We read of St. Paul's setting things in order,
yea seeming to cross the order of Christ, forbidding the Corinthians to sup
before, 1 Cor. 11. 21. And the Church in St. Augustines time did receive the
Communion fasting, Epist. 18. Chap. 6. he says the whole Church, the world
over, received it fasting; that Christ left the manner of receiving to the
Apostles, that they appointed it to be received fasting, and that the altering
of the receiving of it after supper to take it fasting, was the Ordinance of
the holy Ghost; for the honor of the Sacrament, to have it enter before any
external meat*

Object. Christ did sit, Mat. 26. 20.

Answ. Christ did not sit as we do; but according to the custom of those
Eastern Countries, did administer, as the Passover, so his Supper, lying on
the floor upon couches, Esth. 1. 6. Mr. Beza from Josephus concludes, that they
did lie upon couches, that one lay upon his next fellow, with their feet laid
outward. And the Greek word shows as much, (...), Mat. 26. 20. Macc. 14. 18.
Joh. 13. 23. (...), signifying to sit upon a bed, to take meat after the
ancient custom. And in Luke 22 14. (...), signifying to lie along, to lie down.
The posture was therefore leaning or lying along, not sitting; besides, the
gesture was changed from God's appointment, Exodus 12. 11.

Obj. What Christ did not, we must not do. Christ did not kneel, therefore we
may not.

Answ. Christ did not give it in the morning, nor to Laymen, to no women, not
in a Church. Christ did not give, nor the Apostles receive it standing nor
sitting, as not kneeling, therefore he left such particulars to the wisdom of
the Church to order.


are agreed, since what Christ did and commanded us to do, we must do.

2. What Christ did not we must not do; what, not baptize? not communicate with
women? What Christ did we must do; what, take after Supper? with a Lamb? only
with twelve?

3: Some things Christ did as God, some as Mediator, some as man; and as man he
did many things necessary for us to follow him; and he did some actions as man
indifferent, left free, not for our imitaion.

4. Churches who understand the duty and gestures used by Christ, better than
such objectors, leave all Churches to their liberty (not particular members in
them to theirs) and hence it is that some take it standing, some kneeling, and
some as the Church of Poland, either standing or kneeling, but not allowing
sitting, because the wicked Arrians receive it sitting, as implying their
equality with Christ as man, or at least derogatory from his divinity as God.
Our Rubric shows there is no adoration of the Elements; and it is manifest
that adoration came not in amongst the Papists, until after Transubstantiation,
which came in about 1215. and adoration about 1226. nor did Honorius appoint
adoration to be used in the act of receiving, but at the elevation, and when
carried about. I pray suppose a Malefactor may have his pardon sealed, with
many privileges to boot, provided he will take it upon his knees, not else,
and he will rather die than take it so, because some take it on horseback,
others sitting, would not men condemn his stubbornne^s, and say he justly
perished? Apply it I pray.

Oh my beloved brethren, shall we deprive our selves of this sign to present,
this seal to confirm, and this means to convey Christ and his benefits to us,
for we know not what, for an harmless gesture, savouring of humility in our
selves, and obedience to Governors, which Mr. Beza calls a showing Epist. 12.
opusc. tom. 3. page 2^0
of holy Christian adoration. Is this our thankfulness to God for planting us
in the most flourishing Church in the world? Is this our respect we bear to our
first Reformers, who sealed the Reformation with their blood, and to such who
have happily defended it? Is this the care and love we have to our selves, to
quarrel at and deprive our selves of God's Ordinances for an harmless gesture?
Is the Communion a badge of Christianity, and shall we be ashamed of
Christianity, so of Christ? Is it a means to feed and nourish our souls
spiritually, and shall we slight it as not needing such nourishment? Are we to
receive, to testify our thankfulness for the death of Christ, for which we can
never be sufficiently thankful, and shall we think much to do it? Is our coming
to the Lord's Table to testify our Communion with God, with Christ, with his
Spirit and Church, and to increase the same, that we may live more in unity,
love and concord, and shall we neglect it?

5. The Church enjoins all to come to the prayers of the Church, decently and
in order. And this is agreeable to all reformed Churches who have their forms.
To the ancient Church of the Jews, meeting solemnly at their hours of prayers,
and to the directions of God, Numb. 6. 23. Deuteronomy. 26. 3, 5. Mr. Calvin has his
reasons for set forms in public; an help for the weak, to keep uniformity,
etc. In Epist. ad Protector. Angliae.
yet alas, we have with us who say, they are abominable, stumbling blocks,
walking with crutches, etc. yet such were appointed by God and our Savior, and
used by the Prophets and Apostles. Consider whether is better, to pray with
consideration or without? whether he does best who deliberates, or he who does
not? whether we can pray beter than Scripture prayers? Although we may enlarge
and vary them, to make them more particular and pertinent to our personal
occasions. Whether he who prays devoutly the Lord's prayer, does not pray with
the Spirit, since Christ's Spirit taught it? whether it is not as fit to offer
ex tempore preaching to the people, as ex tempore prayer to God? See Mr. Durel,
page 64, 184.
And as for the prayers of our Church, we have the approbation of the Reformed
Churches. And I have read, that Gilbertus a German propounds ours for a sample
of the forms of the ancient Church. We have also the approbation of an Army of
Martyrs. Mr. Sanders in a Sermon affirms, that the service set forth by King
Edward was good, because according to God's Word, and the order of the
primitive Church. Dr. Tailor says, that that book was so fully perfected
according to the Rules of Christian Religion, that no Cristian conscience could
be offended with any thing therein contained. Bishop Ridley a little before his
Martyrdom, hearing that Mr. Knox did fault the Common Prayer Book, said; Alas,
that brother Knox could not bear with our Common Prayer; a man of parts and wit
as he is, may produce popular arguments against it, yet I suppose he cannot be
able soundly by the Word of God to disprove any part of it. When he who was
called Protector sent a command to look to Alehouses, and Readers of the
Common Prayer, Mr. Gatford, since Doctor of Divinity, a sequestered Divine, sent
to him and his Parliament House a tart rebuke in print for joining the
Common Prayer with Alehouses, and a bold challenge, requesting that all might
be commanded to object what they could against it, promising that he and some
few of his sequestered Brethren would make good: That that Book is absolutely
the best and freest from exception that ever saw light in the Christian world;
and that it is none of the weakest forts the Church has against Popery and
Errors. John Careless in his examination before Dr. Martin (it is only in the
first Edition of the Book of Martyrs, which is in one volume) says, That same
Book which is so consonant and agreeable to the Word of God, being set forth by
common authority, both of the King that dead is (Edward 6.) and of the whole
Parliament House, ought not to be despised by me or any other private man,
under pain of Gods curse, high displeasure and damnation except they repent.


Weston Prolocutor in the Convocation house in Queen Mary's reign, made a
bitter invective against it. In whose reign also Papists articled against some
of the Martyrs for using of it; for being present when it was used, Archbishop
Cranmer affirmed, that he with Peter Martyr, and some few more would defend the
Book of Common Prayer against all Papists in the world (for of a long time they
only were the opposers of it) and Papists now so abhor it, that they are to
(and will) lose two parts of three of their rents rather than hear it, and yet
Popery? Fie, besides, what one Popish thing is in it? Is there prayer to Saints
or Angels? Is there prayer to the dead, or in an unknown tongue? Is there any
allowance of Purgatory, of Merit? Is it not directed against all the material
points of Popery, so that if it was observed, it was impossible Popery should
come into England.


Jupiter was unlawful; to God is required. St. Paul borrowed of Pagans, Act.
12. 28. Tit. 3. 12. The Pope defends the Trinity, shall we therefore deny it?
The Devils and Pagans believe on God, so do we.

There has not been, nor can be a greater cause of triumph to the Papists, nor
cleerer vindication of their innocence in suffering so much in their estates
for absenting themselves from our service, than such doings of some
Protestants, who make the use of that service scandalous, and so great a crime:
Upon this advantage given, what may the Papists say? how may they plead? I pray
judge and consider. And take heed lest in calling that Popery which is not, you
bring it in, by taking away such Bull-warks which should keep it out. And I
beseech you brethren do not flatter your selves, by saying, the Martyrs had not
such gifts as you, nor such lights as you have.

1. As for gifts, they were so gifted as to seal the Gospel Mr. Fox Preface to
the Works of Mr. Tyndal, says, Albeit increasing of learning, of Tongues, and
Sciences, with quickness of wit in youth, and others does marvellously shoot
up, as it is to be seen to the sufficient furnishing of Christ's Church; yet so
it happens, I cannot tell how, the farther I look back into those former
times of Tyndal, Frith, and other like, more simplicity, with true zeal, with
humble modesty I see, with less corruption of affections in them -- In opening
of Scriptures, what truth, what soundness can a man require more, or what more
is to be said than is found in Tyndal, etc. The same is the judgment of the
Learned and witty Prefacer to the Treatise, called the Book-Fish, (containing
certain Treatises of John Frith the Martyr, taken out of a Cod-fishes belly in
Cambridge Market, Anno 1626. and after published. The Author of that notable
Preface is thought to have been Dr. Thomas Goad of Haddenham, one of our five
Divines that were at the Synod of Dort. This Author says also, He knows not
how, but he finds a better spirit, more vivacity, and efficacy in the writings
of the first Reformers, than in the more accurate labors of these of our times.

For new lights, hear the judgment of the old Non-Conformists. Opinions now
embraced as new truths and lights, are no other for substance, but the old
errors and dotages of Barrow and Greenwood long since published by them, and by
the godly opposed; so that like rusty weapons they are newly furbished, and
being but the same metals and materials, are cast into a new mold, with an
addition of some things more of the same sort.


with their blood, as to confute their adversaries, and defend the truth. And
Mr. Fox says, that Hadley (a Town of Tradesmen, where Dr. Tailor (that great
admirer of, and commender of the Book of Common Prayer) lived, was like an
University for knowledge.

2. And as for your new lights. Did S. Paul hold nothing back, but declare all
the counsel of God? Act. 20. 27. Did he pronounce him accursed who preached any
other doctrine? Gal. 1. 8. and command Timothy to keep the commandment until
Christ's appearing, 1 Timothy 6. 14. and must we now look for new lights? I cannot
imagine that the holy Ghost should give Timothy as solemn a charge as was ever
given to mortal man, to observe the rules given, until Christ's coming, and new
lights to be expected; yet many pretend much to new lights, and new ways, and
gaze upon them; so that as some gazing upon ignis fatuus, lose their way, and
fall into ditches; so these men stare so much upon their new lights, that they
cannot find the way to God's house; and they lose the true light which has
shined, and does in the Church of God. But whence come these new lights? If
from Scripture we had them before; if not from Scripture, they are false and
deceitful lights. Great is the wantonness of many, in greeting new opinions and
Opinionists, as if former truths were sapless, yet truth is always
flourishing, although too many are even sick of new opinions. The Friars had
formed a new Gospel, and called it the everlasting Gospel, they cried it up to
be worthier than the Gospel of Christ, as much as the Sun is more perfect than
the Moon, the kernel than the shell; this continued about thirty years with
little reproof; it was openly read and expounded in Paris, 1235. but 1256. it
was opposed by the Parisian Doctors, and burnt; as ignis fatuus, is a vanishing
Meteor; so these new lights will I believe vanish and fade, as did the Friars
Evange^ium aeternum.

6. The Church enjoins Godfathers and Godmothers at Infant Baptism. They are
at Geneva. They are commended by Mr. Perkins in his cases of conscience, and
they were constantly in the primitive times. Tertullian mentions them as
agreeable to the custom of the Church; in which custom there is nothing evil,
or dishonest; it proceeds from charity, it makes for the edification of the
Church, and it tends to the profit of the child. Junius and Tremelius derive it
from, Isa. 8. 2. But what need we seek the beginning of an Ordinance so good,
tending to so much piety? Infants are baptized into the faith and bosom of the
Church, which therefore requires certain persons, honest and pious, to
undertake to see what is promised to be performed, and to take care for the
religious education of children; which were it rightly observed, how
flourishing a Church should we have.





Tim. 3. 5. yet is not true Religion at all the worse.







1. I beseech you all to take heed you stand not against order, Applicat.
and so sin in disobeying lawful authority, reproaching Peter de Moulin, Epist.
36. quotes Beza, saying many things may, yea and must be born with, which are
not rightly enjoined; for spiritual liberty lies not in the outward act, but
in the intention and belief. If a thing in it self be enjoined to us, it must
neither be obeyed in the act, nor assented to in the understanding and the
will. But if the thing be indifferent in it self, and yet seem in the j^dgment
inconvenient, we may and must do it, and neither wrong our liberty, nor our
conscience; for in such cases our actions are limited, although our
consciences be free; and the superior power may bind us in soro exteriori, and
leave us free in soro interiori, wherein Christian liberty lies; and cites a
place in Calvin's Instit. lib. 4. cap 20. Artic. 1. spiritual liberty and
political bondage will stand well together -- And let not the consequence
trouble you, as long as the thing commanded is lawful in it self, we are not
answerable of the consequence that may follow, but they who command it. And we
who move in the orb of obedience, must quietly follow the motions of the
high^r sphere of authority. To push against it, inconsiderately under pretense
of God's service, is dashing the second Table against the first, and breaking
both; and cites Beza, Epist. 24. saying, That man abuses Christian liberty, or
rather is sold under sin, who will not with a free will obey in the Lord his
Magistrates or Superiors, and seeks not to edify the consciences of his
Brethren.
the Church as if it imposed things unlawful, disturbing the peace of the
Church, advantaging Papists, our discords being their music, scandalizing the
Gospel, and hindering the edification of our brethren, as they do who think it
Religion enough to speak against lawful established order.

2. My Brethren of the Clergy, we preach for edification, for order. See we,
that our selves be not disorderly in our lives. It was said of Origin (and may
of many more) that his teaching and living were alike. Sure it is a blessed
thing, when Ministers lives put not their words to the blush, as when much
heavenly doctrine sounds from them in peoples ears, and there is little in the
preachers heart; when there is holiness in the Preachers Books, but none in
their bosoms. Preachers should show themselves patterns of the rules they
prescribe, it being an excellent commendation when Preachers lives are
Commentaries of their doctrine; when their exemplary Sermons consist of living
words, or words translated into works. For as Jovinian the Emperor said to the
Orthodox and Arrian Bishops, I cannot judge of your doctrine, but I can judge
of your lives; I can see who is most peaceable and innocent. So we cannot but
know, that people can better judge of our doings, than of our doctrine; and are
sooner led to evil by the one, than to good by the other. You know who says,
What have thou to do to take my Covenant in thy mouth, and hate to be
reformed? Thou who teach another, teach thou not thy self? And you know
who pronounces such to be inexcusable? Psa. 50. 16 Romans 2. 21 Romans 2. 1.
Sure it will be an heavy sentence to hear, Out of thine own mouth I will
condemn thee; we therefore who preach against sin, see we draw not men to sin
by our bad examples; be not we negligent in reading, preaching, catechizing,
administering the Sacraments, etc. Be not we vain and vicious in our lives, but
careful to walk decently and in order.

3. Churchwardens, you are chosen to reform disorders, to see all things to be
done decently and in order; and to bind you hereunto you have an oath, a strong
and sacred tie, yea, such that God will be a swift witness against, and will
Mal. 3. 3. Zech. 5. 4.
send a curse to consume the house of the false swearer. Take heed what you do;
If you know in your Parishes such who will not come to Communions, to the
Prayers of the Church, to nothing done there at all; who will not have their
children baptized, nor their children and servants catechized, etc. and you
regard not such things; surely you are regardless of your oaths, and of order.

4. And I humbly pray you, by whose authority we are here assembled, to make it
appear that you come hither to have all things done decently and in order. Some
(I hope slanderously) say you come hither for money; but I presume and persuade
my self, you come seriously to reform men's manners. Some ignorantly say, you
have no power, you can do nothing. That you have power this meeting shows, you
calling us hither, and I hope for some good end. Let your power and authority I
beseech you be exercised as St. Paul's was, 2 Cor. 10. 8. for edification; That
it may appear we live in a flourishing Christian Church, where good Laws are,
and they well observed and executed; where Religion is professed and practiced,
where the youth are catechized, and principeled in Religion; where the
Sacraments are duly and orderly administered, where the houses of God are
solemnly frequented, where Schisms and Factions are discountenanced, where vice
is punished, and virtue encouraged, where men's lives are reformed so; that
obedience to Governors, charity and righteousness to men, may and do appear,
and according to this Scripture Canon; all things are done decently and in
order.

The POSTSCRIPT.
I Reading in Mr. Howel, Engl. speaking thus; I that have Englands Tears, page
2.
been accounted the Queen of Isles, the darling of Nature, and Neptunes minion;
I that have been styled by the character of the first Daughter of the Church,
that have converted eight several Nations; I that made the morning beams of
Christianity shine upon Scotland, upon Ireland, and a good part of France; I
that did irradiate Denmark, Swedland, and Norway, with the light thereof; I
that brought the Saxons, with other Germans high and low, from Paganism to the
knowledge of the Cospel; I that had the first Christian King that ever was
(Lucius) and the first reformed King (the eight Henry) to reign over me; I out
of whose bowels sprung the first Christian Emperor that ever was, Constantine;
I that had five several Kings, viz. John King of France, David King of
Scotland, Peter King of Bohemia, and two Irish Kings my captives, in less than
one year; I under whose Banner that great Emperor Maximilian took it an honor
to serve in person, and receive pay from me -- I that did so abound with
Bullion, etc. Behold, behold I am now become the object of pity to some, of
scorn to others, of laughter to all people, my children abroad are driven to
disavow me for fear of being jeered, they dare not own me their Mother upon the
Rialto of Venice, the Borle of Auspurge, the New-bridge of Paris, the Cambios
of Spain, or upon the Quoys of Holland, for fear of being bafled and hooted at,
I reading in Mr. Vines, what we had been, a people His last Sermon, March 10.
1646.
of as powerful godliness as any in the world; that practical divinity was
improved to a great height of clearness and sweetness, and his lamenting our
miserable declination (in the same Sermon) from the life and power of
godliness, which is come to pass within these few years, so that our
practicals, our inward and close ways of walking with God in faith and love,
are sublimed into fancies and vapors, into fumes of new opinions, and which is
worst of all, we take this Dropsy to be growth, and conceive our selves more
spiritual Page 56.
and refined, because more airy and notional. Liberty of Religions is become
the golden calf of the times -- And Page 2.
the Ministers are laid low in order to a twofold liberty; the one of
prophesying, every one to set up Trade who is Page 23.
able; and liberty of lusts and ways of looseness. I considering In his Fast
Sermon March 10 1646.
what Mr. Hodges says, we have long enjoyed as clear light, and as full
discoveries of fundamental truths as any Church; others have lighted their
Tapers more at our flame, than we at theirs; our Church once the great eyesore
to Heretics, envy of Papists, refuge of Orthodox, glorious for Doctrine, a
praise in the earth, the Mother of many Stars of the first magnitude, faithful
Martyrs, famous Confessors, and innumerable souls in Heaven, etc. and yet after
his preaching, in his Epistle he says, the Prince of flies has raised such
swarms of flies in every corner of our Land, that many of our Congregations and
Families are miserably fly blown with Heresies, and corrupt Tenets. I
re^^mbring some passages in Sir Edward Deerings Speeches October. 23. page 23.
in Parliament, at the beginning of it, saying, if we let forth the Government
into a lose liberty for all Religions, we shall have none. Libertinism will
beget Atheism, -- a little after, Men upon whose merit, let my credit stand or
fall in this House, complain with grief of heart to see their now infected
sheep, after long pastoral, vigilance, and faithful Ministry to run and
straggle from them more in these ten Nov. 20. page 98.
months, than in twenty years before; -- in another he says, there is at
present such an all-daring liberty, such a lewd licentiousness, for all men's
venting their several senses (senseless senses) in Matters of Religion, as never
was in any Age, or any Nation until this Parliament was met together. Thus the
Church of England, once the glory of the Reformed Religion is miserably torn
and distracted, so that you can hardly say which is the Church of England, etc.
These show what we have lost, and what we have found. And I living in the best
times that ever England had, and seeing what I see, cannot but wish with
Jeremy, That my eyes were a Jer. 9. 1, 2.
fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night; for the divisions and
destractions in England; I now seeing the truth of Mr. Burtons saying,
superstition will run along like a Murrain Melanch. page 606.
in Cattle, scab on sheep, nulla scabies superstitione scabiosior: He who is
bit of a Mad dog, bites others, and all in the end become mad either out of
affection of novelty, simplicity, blind zeal, hope, and fear the giddy headed
multitude will embrace it: So he. Mahomet was but a poor Orphan, he Mr.
Alexand. Rosse History of the World p. 109.
married his Mistress Chediga, whom he made believe, that his falling sickness
proceeded from the sight of Angels which appeared to him: yet he was the
beginner of the Mahumetans, which are so multiplied, some following Alli, some
Endocar, some Acmar, and some Ozimen, Mahomets successors, whose followers are
subdivided into seventy two Melanc. p. 582. Englished by Sir Rob. Stapelton.
sorts, as Leo Affricanus reports, says Mr. Burton, and also that Poland is a
receptacle for all Religions. No marvel then if Fabianus Strada calls heresy
the School of Pride, and affirms that for a man to be an Heretic and a good
subject is impossible, and says, it is with less difficulty kept out, than
shut up. And sad experience does fully demonstrate how errors and heresies
swarm amongst us: so that Mr. Saltm^^sh in his groans for liberty pleads,
Whether an hundred and fourscore Opinions are more to be cast into the face of
Religion, Groans, p. 13. l. 1. c. 2. p. 15.
than six hundred in the days of Nazianzen; and a little after because of our
many Opinions and divisions, he cries out, where is the Church now? not in the
Assembly (says he) they are but consulting how to build the Church, not in the
Presbytery, for that is a Church unbuilt as yet, not among the Parishes, they
are not Scripture Congregations, as Smectymnus says, where is the Church of
England? Dr. Field of the Church, will tell you Mr. Saltmarsh, That there are
some who profess the truth described by the Son of God, but not wholly and
entirely as Heretics, some who profess the whole saving truth, but not in
Unity, as Schismatics; Some who profess the whole truth in unity, not in
sincerity and singleness of a good and sanctified mind, as hypocrites and
wicked men outwardly; Some who profess the whole saving truth in unity and
simplicity of a sanctified and good heart, and I hope you will say they are the
Church, not excluding the other from the visible Church, a net, a field etc.
The old Non-conformists in a book set forth by Mr. William Rathband, will show
you that the Church of England as formerly established, was the true Church of
Christ, and that you should not separate from it. Mr. Ball a Nonconformist
writing against Can a Separatist, Page 75.
shows you that the Church of England is a true Church of Christ, a people in
Covenant with Christ, to whom he has committed his heavenly Oracles and Seals
of the Covenant, etc. and in the second Chapter he shows the Church of England
governed by Bishops, to be the true Church of Page 79.
Christ. Sir Edward Deering in one of his Speec^^s to the like purpose, saying,
I am bold to forbid any man from this Page 125.
house for 1600 years and upward, to name any one age, nay any one year wherein
Episcopacy was out of date in Christendom: in another Speech he says, I am
none of those men that 1600 years after my Savior came to plant his Church,
will consent to give a new Rule, a new invented Government to his Church, never
known until this age; yet Mr. Howel tells us, that the holy Titles of Bishops
and Page 138.
Priests are grown odious amongst poor Sciolists, who scarce In his addition
Letters, p. 5. In Vind. of King chapter 1. p. 49.
know the notions of things: And we have amongst us as Mr. Symonds says, such
who love strife; and although they have already offered most wrong, yet still
are most full of clamours; and as another says, who cry out much against the
Pope, to whom they do better service than they are aware, so that he says, it
is a thousand pities that our Sectaries Regum Sacr. Sancto Majest. by J. A.
pretending such zeal against Popery, who no less maliciously than confidently
rub upon sound Protestants the aspersions of Popery and malignancy, do join
with the worst of Papists, in the worst at least, in the most pernicious
Doctrine Page 70.
of Papists. At the beginning of (as in) our troubles His Majesty's Declaration
of Aug. 12. 1642. shows us Page 18.
that nothing was discountenanced and reproached, but a dutiful regard to us
(i. e. the King) and our honor, and a sober esteem and application to the Laws
of the kingdom, and may it not prove so again, if not prevented? and so be more
advantage to run the contrary course, if a good conscience ^. A. Reg. Sac. San.
Maj. to the Reader.
could allow as one says; for if the conforming obedient Clergy must lie under
the lash of being profane and scandalous, and the irregular and disobedient
accounted and cried up for the pious, powerful, and precious men, was Mr.
Burton now alive, he might better say than when he wrote thus. What father
after a while will be so improvident Mel. p. 126.
to bring up his sons to his great charge, to necessary beggary? what Christian
will be so irreligious as to bring up his sons in that course of life which by
all probability and necessity will entail on him symony and perjury, for he
might now add scorn and contempt if he be an obedient son of the Church; for
what in regard of pretended conscience to that Idol Covenant, which Lil^urn
calls the makebate, persecuting, soul-destroying, Englands dividing, and
undoing Engl. Birthright, p. 29
Covenant? what in regard of the boldness of some-daring people; and the
connivence of some in Authority it had been better for conscientious subjects,
that some Laws had not been made, than that being made their obedience to them,
should be their disgrace: and the disobedience of others to them, their honor
and dignity. I know that some men's natures are easiest cured by lenities, and
that if violence be offered they will struggle, they being easier led than
driven, but it is not so with all, for since his Majesty's happy Restoration,
some now daring people began to be tractable and orderly, but feeling the reins
of Government somewhat loose, like unruly horses, they get the bit into their
teeth, they kick, and think to run away with, and throw their Rider. Amongst
certain passages I have read in the reign of King James, this I remember, he
who deceives Regum Sacr. Sanc. Majest.
me once it is his fault, but if twice it is my fault. What these men have done
cannot be forgotten, if it is, let J. A. remember them, that the best of Kings
in whom malice it self, how quick-sighted soever, could not find any thing
blameworthy, except it be a crime to be too good, and transcendently clement,
forced to flee, his Royal Consort necessitated to flee beyond sea, the Royal
family divided one from another, his Revenue seized, his forts and holds Curia
Politiae.
employed to destroy him, and another speaking to them thus, you have violated
all sorts of right in the person of your King, you have raised a war against
him, you have often assaulted and imprisoned him, you have abused the
confidence Page 12.
he had in you, and destroyed him with great cruelty and insolency; when such
men have acted so vigorously against the Lords anointed, and some of them not
so wary as their fellows say, they cannot repent; and are such of whom Mr. Edw.
Sparks writing of Primitive devotion, says, This Page 106.
stolid disobedient age contemns their devotions, and are so P^^e 53.
immodest as to grudge God the hat and the knee, whatcan we hope for from such
men? we may remember the moral of the Country-mans snake which would take away
life from him who preserved hers, and not forget that of the young man's beloved
Cat turned into a Maid, which soon showed again her cattish disposition, having
an opportunity by the sight of a Mouse. Some think (I wish they be mistaken)
that in regard of the speech and carriage of some, that they have a second part
to act after the same, or a more doleful tune; however it cannot but be good
with the snake in the fable (who thought her self not secure in that house
wherein the great hatchet was, which had almost slain her) not to give too much
credit to such who have formerly dealt as they have done, error being
obstinate, and making men so. Religio Medici shows the obstinacy of the Jews in
all fortunes, that the persecution of 1500 years has but confirmed them in
Page 49.
their errors, that they have already endured whatsoever may be inflicted, and
have suffered abundance, even to the condemnation of their enemies; and
concludes persecution to be a bad and indirect way to plant Religion. It is so,
but means must be used to preserve Religion, that we loose it not. Society of
Saints, p. 29. p. 244. in an Assize Sermon.
Some I suppose will blame me for writing thus now, having formerly pleaded for
Puritans, I own what I have written, and wish these were such, for which I and
Mr. Bolton plead for; namely practicing Protestants, loyal to Princes, obedient
to Laws, just, pious, charitable, laboring to be in truth what they seem to
be; we plead not for factious, irregular, disorderly followers of Barrow and
Greenwood, the old Puritans being their great opposers; I judging with Mr.
Howel, that the itching of scriblers is the scab of the times, Page 62.
purposed no publication of these notes, which made me careless in naming of my
Authors, but considering that Nicholas Causin had learned to regard the works
of the worst Writers, and not to censure them; and seeing the flame to increase
at home and abroad; and those who have much water in their deep wells, and
buckets to vent it lie in a sleep, I have presumed with my pitcher to show mine
endeavor to stop and extinguish this fire of error; some perhaps impute it to
dotage, I being well-near such years which are labor and sorrow, and scarce
able to go with Crutches; let men think as they please, my desire is to cure
error, and to procure order; for which end I will conclude with a passage in
Mr. Vines forenamed Sermon, which is this. If conscience Page 60.
be warrant for practices and opinions, and liberty of conscience be a
sufficient license to vent or act them; I cannot see but the judicatories
either of Church or State may shut up their shop, and be resolved into the
judicatorie of every man's private conscience; and put the case, that the
Magistrate should conceive himself bound in conscience to draw forth his
Authority against false teachers, and their damnable heresies, and (upon that
supposed error) should challenge a liberty of judging, as we do of acting,
would our liberty give us any ease so long as he had his? and were it not
better for him to judge, and for us to walk by a known Rule? and if we should
say that his liberty of judging is unlawful, it is as easy for him to say, our
liberty of Preaching or professing errors is so too.

FINIS.

