Guil: Faith^rne fe:

Hen. Do: Carry Baro de Leppington Comes Monmouthensis, et Honmi: Ord: Balniae
Eques.



HISTORICAL RELATIONS OF THE United Provinces and OF FLANDERS, Written
Originally in Italian By Cardinal BENTIVOGLIO: And now Rendered into ENGLISH By
the Right Honorable HENRY Earl of MONMOUTH.

LONDON, Printed for HVMPHREY MOSELEY and are to be ^old at his shop at the
sign of the Princes Arm in Saint Paul's Churchyard, 1652.

A TABLE of all the Chapters of the Relations of Cardinal BENTIVOGLIO.
The Chapters of the First Book.
1 HOw many the United Provinces of the Low Countries are in number, and how
situated. page 1 2 The condition of the Country 2 3 The natural condition of
the People ib. 4 The Form of their Government, and first the form of the
Government of each Province in particular 3 5 The Form of the Government of the
General Union 7 6 Their Forces; and first of their force by land 10 7 Of their
Maretine Forces 12 8 Of their Incomes, and expenses of the Union 15
The Chapters of the Second Book.
1 AN Introduction briefly describing the Wars of Flanders; the Duchess of
Parma is made Regent of Flanders. 17 2 The Distastes, and the nature of the
Prince of Orange 18 3 The Duke of Alva succeeds the Duchess of Parma 20 4
Flanders is wholly altered, a great part thereof does rise; and the War is
kindled ib. 5 The Duke of Alva departs; the Commendador Magior of Castile
succeeds him and dies 22 5 The Council of State takes the Government upon them
24 6 Don John of Austria comes unexpectedly into Flanders, and soon dies 25 7
The Prince of Parma succeeds Don John; the Rebels choose the Duke of Alanzon for
their new Prince; the Prince of Orange is hurt with a Musket Shot 27 8 The
Rebels are reduced into great straits; Alanzon withdrawes into France; and not
long after the Prince of Orange is slain 28 9 The Rebels remain in their first
Pertenacity: the Duke of Parma Dies 29 10 Three Governors in the space of three
years, succeed in the Government of Flanders: to wit, Count Mansfielt,
Archduke Ernestus, and Count Fuentes 30 11 The Government passes into the
hands of Cardinal Archduke Albertus; who marrying the King of Spains
Daughter, Goes into Spain: Cardinal Andrea d' Austria, remains in his place 31
12 Archduke Albertus, and the Infanta Isabella, come to Elanders: the
Archduke is routed, and wounded at Newport 32 13 Marquess Spinola brings
Forces from Italy: the Army is put into his hands: and finally the War is
suspended by a Truce for twelve years 33
The Chapters of the Third Book.
1 A Discourse upon the Person of Count Maurice of Nasssaw 36 2 Diverse other
particulars touching Count Maurice his Person are touched upon 38 3 Who be the
United Provinces greatest Enemies 40 4 Who be their greatest Friends: and first
of their Friendship with France 41 5 Of their Friendship with England 43 6 Of
their Friendship with other Princes 44 7 It Is Argued whether this new
Commonwealth of the United Provinces be like to last or no? 45 8 The begun
Argument of Discourse is ended, and with it the Relation 48 The Relation of
Flanders; to wit: of the Provinces which yet remain under the Obedience of
their Highnesses, the Archdukes Albertus and his wife the Infanta Isabella
The First Part.
1 OF the Archdukes their Nature, and Customs 52 2 of the condition of those
States which they possess 54 3 Of their Court 58 4 Of their Officers, and
Servants 59 5 What Intelligence the Archdukes hold with their neighbors 62 6
Of the Army which the King of Spain maintains in Flanders. 63
The Second Part.
1 OF the State of Religion in those Provinces which yet are under the
Obedience of the Archdukes 68 2 Of the State of Religion in Holland, and in
the other United Provinces 74 3 Of the State of Religion in England 77 4 Of the
State of Religion in Scotland 83 5 Of the State of Religion in Ireland 84
In this present Treatise these following Relations are contained.
1 THe Relation of the United Provinces of Flanders, by which name of Flanders
(which is commonly used to signify the Provinces of the Lower Germany) in all
the Relations of this Volumn, are understood the Provinces of the Low
Countries, which were formerly all in one entire Body, subject to the House of
Burgony; and afterward passed into the hands of the House of Austria 1 2 The
Relation of Flanders; to wit, of those Provinces which remains yet under the
obedience of their Highnesses, the Archdukes Albertus, and Isabella his wife,
Infanta of Spain 51 3 A short Relation of Denmark 86 4 A short Relation of the
Hugonots of France 89 5 A Relation of the Treaty of Truce in Flanders 95 6 A
Relation of the Commotions which followed in Flanders upon occasion of the
differences between the Elector of Brandenburg, and the Duke of Neoburg,
touching the Inheritance of the House of Cleves 129 7 A Relation of the Prince
of Conde his flying from France 151
A RELATION OF THE United Provinces OF FLANDERS, Written by the Cardinal
Bentivoglio.
BOOK 1.
CAP. 1.
The Number of the United Provinces, and their situation.
THe United Provinces of Flanders are in number seven; to wit, the Dukedom of
Ghelderland, the Counties of Holland, and of Zealand; and the Lordships of
Utricht, Friesland, Overisel, and Groninghen. These Provinces are environed for
the most part by the Ocean Sea. Zealand is distinguished into several Islands;
Holland is a Peninsula; and the others are cut through by many rivers: the
greatest and most navigable whereof are the Reyne and the Mause: The Reyne,
which at its entrance into the Province of Gelderland with one of its greatest
Branches is called the Wael, before it goes out from thence, joins with the
Mause. These two rivers are hardly well wedded together here, when presently
parting one from another, they form an Island of a large Circuit, they join
together again; then confounding their names together with their Channels, they
enlarge and extend themselves into large Gulfes; and watering Holland and
Zealand by many spacious inlets, they at last disgorge and lose themselves in
the Ocean. Zealand, Holland, Friesland, and Groninghen are played upon by the
Sea toward the North; then turning toward the East, the same Provinces of
Groninghen, and Ghelderland, border upon Germany. Toward the South and West
the same Province of Ghelderland confines upon the State of Cleves, and the
Country of Liege; and Holland and Zealand join on the same side with the
Countyes of Flanders and Dukedom of Brabant; under the Province of Ghelderland
is comprehended the County of Zutfen, which is one of the 17 Provinces, whereof
the Body of the Low Countries was formerly framed, when the said Countries were
joined together in one: yet do not the United Provinces enjoy whole
Ghelderland, a certain proportion whereof is in the Archdukes possession; but
to countervail this, they likewise extend their dominions into the Provinces of
Brabant and Flanders. That part of the Country which the United Provinces
enjoy in Brabant and Flanders, is held by them under the name of the General
Union of the whole seven Provinces.

CHAP. II.
The Quality or Condition of the united Provinces.
THE United Provinces abound almost with all things, through the accommodation
of the Sea and Rivers. That which of themselves they chiefly abound in, is,
Fish, Pasture, and Cattle; neither is it almost to be expressed what quantity of
Butter and Cheese they send abroad to other parts, and reserve for their own
proper use: Their situation is exceeding low, subject to Winds, Moisture, and
Rain; and their Inhabitants may be said to live enclosed by water: Holland and
Zealand are the lowest, and most infested by the Sea, the force and violence
whereof is withstood and held in, by large high Rampires of Earth, built up
with great Stones, Raftures of Wood, and other tenacious and condence
Materials, where occasion requires: in Holland more particularly, they
endeavor to keep the Country dry by great store of Wind-mills, and other
Artificial Engines; yet the greatest part thereof lies under the water in the
Winter Season; so as you would think that the land were then swallowed up by
the Sea: the said Provinces are very well peopled, especially, Holland wherein
Trafick is the most frequent, and the Concourse of Forraigners greatest. They
have in them great store of great Cities, and handsome Towns, the chiefest
whereof are Nininghem in Ghelderland; in Holland, Amsterdam; in Zealand,
Midleburgh; in the Province of Utricht, the City Utricht, in Friesland,
Lewrden; Deventer, in Overisel; and in Groninghen, a City called by the said
name.

CHAP. III.
The Natural Qualities or Conditions of the People of the united Provinces.
THE Men of these Countries are for the most part of a large Stature, of a
handsome and fair aspect, and strong and able of body; their minds are no less
vigorous then are their bodies, which is seen by the so long and pertenacious
resistance, which has been by them made to the Spanish Forces; They are of an
open and pleasant Nature; very industrious, and much given to Traffic; very
apt for all Arts, especially such as are Manual, and Mechanical, they love
liberty above measure, and therefore are most tenacious of their Privileges;
and hence it is that they are apt to be jealous and easy to alteration; and
their double flexibility made use of as a means by him who excited the troubles
in these our times in Flanders, made them without much difficulty afterward
rebel, both against the Catholic Church, and against their natural Prince. The
first flame of this Combustion broke forth in Zealand, and therefore this is
the most obstinate of all the other Provinces, in her hatred to the Church and
Spain. Hence was kindled that great fire of War which for the space of almost
one whole half age, could never be extinguished, till at last it was rather
smothered up then quenched with the Truce which was concluded for twelve years;
at the first some of the aforesaid Provinces united themselves with but small
Forces, and the first band of Unity was only between Holland and Zealand, which
flanked by Rivers and by the Sea, and having an unalterable obstinacy, added to
the natural strength of their situation, might easily even with a very few
handfuls of earth, make good their party against a vast Monarchy; afterward,
as the War continued, other Provinces suffering themselves also to be corrupted
by the licentiousness of heresy and out of a desire to reduce themselves to a
Free Government, the Union already begun gathered strength, till at last the
seven above said Provinces did formally confederate themselves; and openly
denying all obedience to their Prince, they declared themselves by their own
proper authority to be free, absolute, and sovereign; they took up Arms at
first under pretense of the violation of their Privileges; and have since
fought for the conservation of their usurped Liberty; till with the managing of
Articles, it was agreed upon by the Truce, that they may repute themselves for
Free Provinces, and the Catholic King and the Archdukes may hold them
notwithstanding as subjected Provinces.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Government of the United Provinces; and first how each of them is
Governed in particular.
BEfore the United Provinces made any insurrection, or reduced themselves to
the condition of Free Commonwealths, their Government was the same with that,
which as yet is observed in those other Provinces which are under the
Archdukes. Each of their Governments was composed of Three several Forms joined
in one: to wit, Monarchy, Aristocrasie, and Democrasie: but so tempered as the
most sublime part consisted in the person of the Prince: and the Optimati, and
popularity did also retain their part in a moderate proportion. Their States
(by which name of States is understood the Body of each Province which they
represent) were framed most commonly of three Orders of Personages:
Ecclesiastics; the better sort of Nobility, and Citizens together with the
Inhabitants of the best Towns. The Eclesiasticks were for the most part Abbots
of several Monastical Orders, and their Monasteries were usually in the
Country; and unless it were in their intervening upon occasions in the
resolutions of the States when general meetings were had, they had little to do
in the administration of Public Affairs, the Nobles did also usually dwell in
their Castles, and Country Territories, and the principal Offices of every
Province were exercised by them. And the Cities divided generally into 3 sorts
of persons, to wit, into some few Gentlemen of a middle condition, into the
better sort of Citizens, and into the meaner People, were governed according to
their Privileges and ancient Customs, like unto so many little and particular
Republics; and their government was so framed, as the chief Magistracy of
every place being in the hand of personages of most respect, yet the other two
inferior degrees of persons, did participate proportionably in the supreme
Magistracy.

The assembling of the General States of all the Provinces, as also those of
every particular Province, the nominating of their Governors; the renewing the
chief Magistrate of every City every year; the providing for Offices which
were enjoyed by the Nobility of the Country; the conferring of other Offices
of Judicature upon men of the long Robe which are distributed in every
Province, together with many other prerogatives depended upon the supreme
authority of the Prince; which, as I have said, made the Prince to have the
most supreme and eminent place in Government. The Prince and people did then
hold together jointly after this manner; The Prince contenting himself with a
power not altogether absolute, and the People with a limited Liberty; their
government being just such as is between the Head and the Members in a man's
body. The same Prince had three chief Councels, which served for eyes to all
the Provinces by him governed; to wit, a Council of State, a Council of
Revennue, and a Privy Council. In the first, the most important public
affairs were handled; in the second, the Prince his patrimony, and the moneys
contributed by the Provinces; and in the third, matters of justice depending
upon the supreme Authority of the said Prince. And thus the Prince and People
seemed to vye in the cementing and uniting themselves as it were with the bonds
of Free Will, whereby to cause the most pleasant and proportioned harmony whith
could be desired in the aforesaid government. Thus were the United Provinces
governed before the insurrection: Now I will show how they are governed at the
present.

Monarchy being extinguished in them all, the States in each Province do
succeed in that supreme Authority which formerly did reside in the Prince. And
the States which in most of the Provinces did before consist of three degrees
of personages, do now consist in all of them, only of the Nobility and Cities;
Heresy having totally extinguished the Order of Ecclesiastics, save only in
the Province of Utricht, which did for a long time belong to Ecclesiastical
Princes, so as there is some shadow of this Order yet observed in their
meetings of the States, wherein some Chapters of Canons do concur part
Heretics, part Catholics, who are notwithstanding tolerated in that City.
Thus of a Government which was chiefly Monarchical, the United Provinces are
become a Government partly Aristocraticall, partly Democraticall, according as
some one of these Governments has the greatest influence in them. Yet in
almost every one of these Provinces, the two forms are tempered together, and
some beams of Monarchy may be said to appear, by reason of the particular
privileges which are granted by the Provinces to their Governors, on whom many
things now depend (as shall be shown in due place) which did first relate unto
the supreme authority of the Prince.

Let us now consider the Government of every particular Province apart, that we
may consider afterward how the union of them altogether is governed. And
because Holland does much surpass all the other Provinces in the number of
Cities, in the multitude of Inhabitants, in Opulency, and in Traffic, let us
see in particular how this Province is governed; for then some short
Observations will serve to be made of the rest. The Prince of Orange was
Governor of Holland, Zealand, and Utricht, when the insurrection in Flanders
first arose, which was at first begun, and afterward obstinatly maintained by
the first two of those Provinces; and because the same Prince of Orange was the
first contriver thereof, that he might the more easily compass his ambitious
ends, he propounded two things in particular: The one, to beat down the
Nobility as much as might be, which might prove great obstacles to his design:
And the other, to work it so, as not any one in Holland should be uninvolved in
the same Insurrection: he therefore under various pretenses made the people
jealous of the Nobility: And on the other side did so handle the matter, that
whereas formerly there was only six Cities in Holland, which went together
with the Nobles, in forming the States of the Province, they were increased to
much a greater number. The spetious pretense whereof was, that for the more
easy maintaining of Arms in the common Cause which was now in hand, it was
necessary that all the chief Towns in Holland should particularly communicate
in the Government; but the true and more hidden end was, to the end that every
part of the Province might by its own proper engagement make the Insurrection
the more universal. So then, these six Cities (for by this name I will term
indifferently those Cities and pri^cipall Towns which concur to make up the
States of every Province) were increased to the number of eighteen. The first
were these, Dort, Harlem, Delfe, Leyden, Amsterdam, and Der-Goude: and the
twelve others which were afterward added were, Roterdam, Gorchom, Schedam,
Schonhoven, the Brill, Al^mar, Horn, Encusen, Edam, Manac^am, Medemblick and
Purmerent. So as of these eighteen Cities, and of the order of the Nobility,
the States of Holland are at this hour composed: Neither does the whole order
of Nobility share a greater part therein, then does every single and particular
City.

I will now tell you how every particular City is governed: First, the chief
managing of affairs consists in a Council composed of a certain prefixed number
of persons; they have afterward a chief Magistrate, and others of lesser
condition. The persons of the Council are seldom changed, but the Magistrates
are altered every year. All the Magistates are chosen out of the number of this
Council. The greatest is usually composed of one or two Burgamasters, some
Sheriffs, one Scout master, one Treasurer, and one or two Pensioners. Thus are
the persons called which intervene in the chiefest Magistracies. The
Burgamasters part is to look unto such things as chiefly concern the government
of the Cities, and their Territories. The Sheriffs together with the
Scoutmaster deal in the administration of Justice, both Civil and Criminal.
The Treasurer manageth the public moneys; and the Pensioners are Doctors of
the Law, and are verst in City business, and serve for Council to the chief
Magistrate. The other lesser Magistrates depend upon the greater, and have
cognizance of diverse things belonging to the government of every City. This is
briefly the form wherewith the Cities in Holland are generally governed.

The Council of Justice is the same that it was in the former government: To
this Council the civil causes of every City have their address by way of
appeal, and it comprehends also the Province of Zealand; in criminal causes
no appeal is allowed, the absolute authority of determinating, residing in the
chief Magistracies of every City, and because formely a new appeal was allowed
from the Provincial Council of Holland, as also from almost all the other
Provinces of Flanders to a supreme Council, constituted in the City of Malines;
instead thereof the said two Provinces have erected a supreme Tribunal in
Holland, which they call the High Council; to which appeals are made from the
Provincial Councels both of Holland and Zealand: Here are final judgments
given, no place being left for any farther appeal, save that sometimes a review
of the cause is allowed, wherein some Judges are added. And thus much may serve
for the course of Justice.

In such resolutions which are to be put on concerning the most important
public affairs which appertain to the common interest of all Holland, the
Assembly of the States of the Province must be called; which States, as has
been formerly said, are made up of the Nobility, and Cities, and Represent the
whole body of the Province: The Nobles are but few, and their power as small:
The Cities which intervene in the Assembly are those already named, and for
Deputies in their name, there are usually sent thither one of the Burgamasters,
together with one Pensioner; the Nobles making likewise their deputation
according to their wont. The States meet usually three or four times the year,
more or less according as occasion requires; when they are met they treat and
resolve upon such things as are taken into debate; and then of so many Cities
one only as it were is framed, and they are no longer then divided members,
but one united body, bound and fastened together by the tie of public good and
the rule of reason; and it is seldom seen but that what is agreed upon by the
major part is yielded unto by the lesser; else force would not avail them,
since they are all equal in Liberty. The degree of the Nobility have the first
rank, and then the Deputies of Cities take their places, according to their
several degrees. The Assembly being ended, the Sovereign Decrees thereof are
executed by a permanent and constant Council, newly instituted in this
alteration of Government, which represents the body of the said Assembly. This
Council is composed of Deputies, which are likewise voted thither by both the
orders of the Nobility and Cities; and these Deputies are changed from time to
time. The public moneys which are contributed by the Provinces are therein
handled, and the care thereof is to propound reasons to the Nobles and Cities
for the convocation of the Assembly, as also the calling and reducing of it
together.

After this Holland has a Governor of the entire Province, who enjoyes very
great prerogatives both of honor and Authority; the managing of the Militia
depends on him, and whatsoever appertains to the ^afety of the Province;
without his approbation the States of the Province resolve upon nothing of
importance; and in the distribution of many Offices the States nominate three
persons, and he choseth one of-those three which he pleases: he may also remit
the punishment of faults committed; he changes and renueth every year the
chief Magistrates of every City; and to this purpose double the the most
important Privileges which the Governor enjoys, which together with many
others makes him be very much respected and honored in this new form of
Government in Holland: so as of one of the Princes Officers which he had wont
to be in the former Government, he is now instead of him, made head of the
Province: but yet a Head subordinate to the supream-authority of the States,
which represent now as I have said, that supreme Eminency which did first
consist in the person of the Prince; This in brief is the Government of the
Province of Holland.

The same Form almost is followed by the other Provinces; in some
notwithstanding the number of the Cities is greater, in some lesser, which
concur with the Nobility, to frame the States of the Province. And the popular
multitude is in some greater in the Government of the Cities, in some less.
Every Province has its particular Council of Justice, as in former times, to
which Council only in Civil affairs appeals are made from sentences given in
the Magistracy of Citys, both in Holland and Zealand, as has been said.
Affairs receive their final determination in this Council, unles it be in
point of review, as in the high Council of Holland and Zealand. Every Province
does likewise acknowledge a Governor, though many times one and the same
Governor exercises this Charge in diverse Provinces; as Count Mauris of Nassaw
succeeded to his Father the Prince of Orange, in the Government of Holland,
Zealand and Utricht, to whom the Government of Overisel is since added, and
Count William of the said Family is Governor of Friesland and Groninghen; and
this may suffice for what concerns the particular Government of every Province.

CHAP. V.
The Government of the whole Union.
AFter having considered every one of the United Provinces apart, as divided
Members, I come now to the Government of them United all together in one Body.
The Body of the Union consists chiefly in the great Assembly of the States
General of the whole seven Provinces. This great Assembly represents the
Sovereignty of the Union, and retains now the same eminency over them all, as
the Prince did in the former Government: This Assembly is composed of the
particular States of each Province: So as the particular States are formed of
two sorts of Persons, of the Noble men of the Country, and of the Deputies of
Cities; just so the General Assembly of the whole Union is of the same nature
with the particular Assemblies of each particular Province, and is composed of
the same two degrees of personages: as often then as any new occasion arises
wherein great affairs are to be treated of which concern the common interest of
the Union, the great Assembly is called; the Summons being given out, each
Province sends its Deputies, and send more or less in number, as best pleases
each Province. Of these Deputies the General Assembly is formed, and is divided
into as many Votes, as the Union is divided into Provinces; the Votes being
numbered according to the number of the Provinces, and not according to the
multitude of the Deputies: The great Assembly being met, they fall upon such
resolutions as appertain to the common Interest of the whole Union; as of War,
Peace, Truce, of making new confederacies, or of dissolving such as are already
made; of laying on new Impositions, or taking off such as are already laid on:
and other such like important affairs, all which have respect to the General
Union.

To pitch upon such resolutions, it is requisite that the seven Votes of the
seven Provinces do concur; and because the Interest of one does not always
agree with the Interest of another; hence it is that they usually proceed very
slowly in all businesses; and some time that is contradicted by some one
Province, which is unanimously agreed upon by all the rest, each of them being
desirous to depend with equal liberty upon its proper member or Vote, as all
of them with equal commodity depend upon the entire Body: but because in
disputes obstinacy does sometimes prevail over reason; in such cases, the
Deputies of such Provinces as are of one and the same mind, are wont to choose
some of themselves whom they send to the Province whose Deputies differ from
the great Assembly, thus to endeavor to make them join in their Votes with the
rest; and thus opiniatracy at last yields to reason. Thus was Zealand drawn to
give way unto the Truce, to which it appeared to be too obstinately averse.
Upon occasions then of the highest importance, the great Assembly of the Union
is usually called, as has been said; and in the resolving upon any thing, the
Votes of the seven Provinces must all agree.

This great Assembly is notwithstanding but very seldom called; it bears with
it too much of business, for thereupon all the whole Provinces must not only
move, but even all the best Cities, and best qualified noblemen that are in
them. It is said that in the last great Assembly at Berghen-ap-Zone, when the
Truce was concluded, the Deputies which met there were in number 800.

And because it is requisite that there be a continual standing Power which may
execute what has been resolved upon by the great Assembly, the States General
of the seven Provinces have unanimously settled a firm and constant Council
which does represent the great Assembly, and keeps it continually in being,
upon the authority whereof the execution of the Sovereign decrees of the great
Assembly does depend.

This Council consists of Deputies which are from time to time sent by the
Provinces: Besides the Authority of executing the Sovereign decrees of the
great Assembly, the same Council does expedite the weightiest affairs wherein
the Interest of the whole Union is from time to time concerned: and if it shall
so fall out that the great Assembly of the States General be to be called for
any new extraordinary business of great consequence, this Council draws up
the motives and sends them to the particular States of every Province, to the
end that preparation may be had in every one of them requisite for the General
convocation of them all. The Authority of this Council is very great; it is
called the Council of the States General: and it is distinguished into seven
Votes, as the great Assembly which is by it represented, is distinguished into
seven Provinces.

One of the Deputies is head of this Council by the name of President, and to
the end that the prerogative of every Province may be equal, the Presidents
are weekly changed, beginning with those Provinces which are prime in dignity,
and which are followed by the rest.

To boot with the Council of the States General, the United Provinces have
three Councels apart, one of State, one of the Treasury, another of the
Admiralty which, depends upon the Union, and which are subordinate to the
Council of the States General; the power of the Council of State is also
great; on it depends the execution of things belonging to the War, and the
disposing of moneys which are disposed of by the Union in land Service; all
Military affairs even of the Army are likewise ordered by the said Council;
and the General in occasions of War is always attended by some of the said
Council, to see that his undertakings be managed by their joint Authority,
who do then represent the Supreme Authority of the Union; besides matters
belonging to War, the said Council has its part in the most important
Affairs, being as it were a Senate which always intervenes in the Resolutions of
highest nature, which are handled in the Council of the States General. The
Council of State is composed of Deputies who intervene there in the name of
each Province, and the Governors of Provinces have therein a place also.

Into the Council of the Treasury such moneys are brought as are contributed
by every Province for the Occurrences of the whole Union; and this Council is
likewise framed of Deputies of the said Union.

The Council of the Admiralty has cognizance of Maretine affairs, and through
it does pass the moneys which the United Provinces receive by their incomes by
Sea, the body of this Council is divided into six members, four of which are
distributed in Holland, one in Zealand, and one in Friesland, and these members
are likewise Deputies sent thither from each Province: all the Deputies who
intervene in these Councels which depend upon the body of the whole Union, are
frequently changed, and each Province alters them according to their particular
Governments.

The same general Union has also a supreme head in the managing of their Arms
by land and Sea, which command at this present is executed by Count Mauris of
Nassaw, who succeeded his Father the Prince of Orange therein, as he did in
being Governor of the abovenamed Provinces.

This in brief is the form of Government which is now observed in the
Commonwealth of the general Union of the United Provinces, in which form it may
be observed, that as every Province has endeavored to vary as little as may
be from the former Government, so the whole Union has had the same respect. To
this purpose the same chief Councels are retained which were formerly observed
for the dispatch of affairs which did appertain to the Common Interest of the
whole Low Countries, except only the Privy Council, whose affairs is now
handled in occurrent businesses by the Council of the States* General; and
for what belongs to the Admiralty, the Council by reason of the multitude of
Maratine affairs which continually occur in the United Provinces, has rather
been added unto, then instituted anew; for at all times the Princes of the Low
Countries have had an Admiral, who together with many other Officers did as
then form as it were a Council for Sea affairs.

These Councels which depend upon the general Union, do usually reside in the
Hague in Holland, except only the Council of the Admiralty, which is divided
into many members, and through several Provinces as has been said. The Hague
is an open Village, but which for situation, the resort of People, and
exquisit buildings, may be compared to most of the noblest and most delightful
Cities. The Counts of Holland did anciently reside in the Hague; and in the
Palace built by the said Counts, the abovementioned Councels meet. The fitness
of Holland's situation, as also of this Palace, and the laying of the first
and strongest roots of the rebellion there has occasioned the Prerogative of
being the place of public Councels, and affairs to that Province.

By the preceding narration you may see what the present Government of the
whole United Provinces in common is, and that the joint Government of them
altogether holds great proportion and correspondence with the several
Government of each one of them. The Cities and Nobles are as it were the
Mussels which shape out the Member of each Province, and the Provinces are as
members whereof the body of the whole Union is composed; the particular States
of every particular Province hold the Sovereignty thereof; and the States
General retain the Sovereign Eminency of the Union; the particular States
consist of Noblemen and Cities, as also do the States General. The Assembly of
the particular States of each Province meet upon great affairs; and the
Assembly of the States General of the whole Union upon affairs of greater
importancy, as the particular States of every Province are still kept on foot
in the Council which depends thereon; so is the great Assembly of the Union in
the Council of the States General which represents the whole Body. Every
Province has a Supreme Head, and the whole Union a Head of great Eminency. By
this conformity, and mutual knots of Government, the United Provinces are tied
together and jointly concur in what concerns the common Interest.

CHAP. VI.
The Landforces of the United Provinces.
LEt us now consider the strength of the United Provinces; first therefore as
by land, then by Sea; in what concerns the land, the strength of their Country,
the condition of their Towns, the abundance of ammunition for War, the quality
and number of their Soldiers may aptly be taken into consideration. First the
strength of the United Provinces cannot be imagined to be greater then it is.
They are secured on many parts by the Sea; and within land, the Mause and the
Rheine distinguished into several branches, together with the Ysel, and many
other Rivers serve them for Bulwarks in many other parts. Zealand in particular
is divided into many Islands, so as by reason of its situation it may be said
to be Impenetrable. Holland is likewise almost unaccessable on all sides, in
respect of the many large Channels, and Arms of the Sea, which do so many
several ways divide it, and incompass it; and generally the situation of all
the other Provinces is low and spungie; full of channels and rivers, and very
hard to be wonn into.

But their Towns are no less strong then is their Country; all the Towns upon
their Frontiers are strongly munited, particularly those which lie toward the
Archdukes Country, where their jealousies are greatest. And to begin with
Sluse in the Province of Flanders; this is a place which is thought almost
untakable, as well for the strength of its situation, which is altogether
amongst Marshes and low Channels, as having all the higher parts thereof very
well fortified with outward Earth-works where the Trenches may be opened. In
Brabant they have the strong Fort of Lillo, almost within sight of Antwerp.
They have Berghen-ap-Zone, Breda, Gatrinburg, Heusden, Grave, and the strong
Hold of Crevecoeur, all of them places strongly munited both by Nature and Art.
On that side of Ghelderland which looks toward Brabant, and in that part
thereof which is within the Archdukes Dominions, the Low Countries have
likewise many strong Holds, and particularly the Fort of Saint Andrews, near
Balduke in the Island of Bomell, and not far off that of Worden, Niminghen, and
Schincks Scence; to boot that on that side of Ghelderland, the Rheine and Mause
make the entrance very difficult. More inward the said Provinces have generally
many strong places, both by situation and Art; nor is it almost to be expressed
what diligence they use in the managing of their Towns and Forts.

For what concerns warlick ammunition, all the strong Holds and Towns of the
United Provinces are abundantly well provided; they have great store of
Artillery every where, and of all other Provisions necessary for War, of
Engines, and all sorts of warlick Instruments; great likewise is their Provision
of Victuals every where; and it is seldom or never seen that they lose any place
for want, either of victuals or ammunition, which are particularly extracted
out of Holland and Zealand, and cannot with greater accommodation be
distributed, being conveyed in boats by water to every place, and where rivers
are wanting, their default is made good by channels cut out by hand, of which
the whole Country is full, and as it were linked together.

As for the condition and number of their Soldiers; their Militia is composed
of partly homebred Soldiers, partly forreiners; their Country is not great
enough to furnish them with Soldiers sufficient in number for their occasions,
nor are all their people equally adapted for the Militia profession. Those of
Holland and Zealand are not good at land-Service; the other Provinces breed
Soldiers good enough both for horse and foot; but by sea the Hollanders and
Zealanders bear away the bell, not only among all those of the Northern
Nations, but even throughout the whole World. The greatest Nerve of their
proper Militia consists in the Soldiers of their own Country which lie most
within land; but the strongest and most solid nerve of their Army consists in
the number and condition of their foreign Forces. Since the first beginning of
the War of Flanders, and that the United Provinces began to be favored by
France and England, they have always had great store of Soldiers from each of
these Kingdoms; yea even since the Truce they have a great strength of foot
from France, England and Scotland, and to boot with the Soldiers of these
Nations, they take into pay a great number of German foot. The United Provinces
may at this time have in their Army about 6000 Frenchmen, 4000 whereof are
maintained by the Crown of France under two field Marshals, the other 2000 are
mingled amongst those of the other Nations. The English may be about 3000, the
Scots 2000, and the Germans 3000: All the rest of their foot consists of their
own Soldierie, by this account we may judge that the United Provinces maintain
now since the Truce 20000 foot, and 2500 horse; to boot with the 4000
forementioned French foot, which together with 200 horse are still maintained
by the Crown of France: By reason of their continual jealousies of the
Spaniard, they have not any ways lesned their foreign forces, though the Truce
be made, and have cashiered but few of their own men. Of forreinors, the French
are much commended for their valor; next the English, and after them the
Scots; the Germans are naturally slow, but well governed, and very useful for
ma^uall works which happen howerly in their Armies; and as for the People
themselves of the United Provinces, they lean more to the nature of the Dutch,
then of forreinors, and this may suffice for their Strength by Land.

CHAP. VII.
Of their Maretine Forces.
FOur considerations may also be had concerning their Forces by Sea. The
quantity of their Vessels; the abundance of all things necessary to furnish
them, the number of their Mariners, and their Skill in Navigation.

To begin with the number of their Vessels, by common judgment it is esteemed
to be as great as almost that of all Europe besides. The number of ships which
people the arms of the Sea, the Bays and Havens of Holland and Zealand is
almost infinite; besides there are very many in the Marratine parts of
Friesland; but their number is greatest in Holland, and more in Amsterdam then
in any other City of that Province. It will not be amiss to say something here
in particular of Amsterdam: On the more Northern parts of Holland the Sea,
after having made its way through more then one obstacle by land, and made
several breaches, washes Holland again in its most shut-up parts, and makes
there a large Gulf which in their language is called Zuyderzee the Sea dividing
it self from this greater gulf into many lesser, which are all Navigable for
any Vessel how great soever, comes at last to shut it self up, and as it were
to hide it self within land in a deep channel, upon whose banks the City
extends it self; the Walls whereof are not only washed by the Sea, but the said
Sea passes through the City, in many Channels by which lesser Barks do
commodiously convey from the greater all sorts of Merchandise which are carried
into the Warehouses and Magazins of the City, the greater Vissels ride within
sight of the Walls, which are so many and stand so thick, as their Masts and
Sails do bound the sight of the lookers on: so many ships fraught with all
sorts of Merchandise come from all parts of the World, to meet and inglobe
themselves as it were in Amsterdam; so as that Town may in these days be
esteemed the most frequented and Merchantlike, not only of Europe, but even of
the whole world. This City is grown to thi^ greatness and Opulency by reason of
the War; though commence did formerly flourish there very much, the War has
much diminished the Traffic of Antwerp, and has afforded occasion to the
Hollanders and Zealanders to Traffic into the Indies; so as these are the
reasons of the so great growth of Amsterdam. In former time Antwerp was the
staple Town of Merchandise of all Europe, and Lisbon was the like for those
that come from the Indies; but since the War, Amsterdam has as it were
monopolized all the Merchandising both of Europe and the Indies; and has
almost quite undone both Antwerp and Lisbon; by reason whereof the concourse of
vessels to that is city very great: Roterdam is held the next place for
traffic in Holland. Here are likewise at all times great store of shipping,
and many ships are here built, it being one of the chiefest Arsenals of
Holland: near to Roterdam lies Dort drowned as it were in a large channel of
the Sea, a City whereunto many ships do also continually resort. Near to
Amsterdam upon the same Gulf of Zuyde^zee which has been spoken of, many other
good Towns lie frequented by great and numerous Vessels, but especially
Enchusen, a place famous for building of shipping: many other Towns of Holland
by reason of the Arms of the Sea, are very full of ships; and because Holland
is environed almost every where by the Sea, and that the water stands there in
many places, because many Rivers run through it, and the Channels therein cut
by hand, which always are very full of Vessels; some have wittily said that
there are more houses in Holland on the water then in the land: as for the
shipping in Zealand, great store are built there likewise, and specially
belonging to the City of Midleburg, which is the chief City of that Province.
Flushing is likewise a very famous Po^^ Town in Zealand; and because this Town
lies more forward in the Sea then Midleburg, it may be termed the Gate which
opens and shuts up the entrance into Zealand: In this Haven there are therefore
always many Vessels, and hither come those first, which come for Zealand. Many
ships likewise are set out from Friesland, and particularly from Harlinghem, a
famous Haven which looks toward Holland.

The great abundance of all things necessary for them, is answerable to this
their store of shipping: and that which is the greatest wonder is, that Holland
which abounds most in all these things, does not produce almost any of them
from within her self: there does not grow any corn of whatsoever sort in
Holland; yet Europe has not a more plentifulf Granary: No flax grows in
Holland, yet from thence does issue an infinite deal of linen cloth: no wool
comes from Holland, yet is there great store of cloth made there: There are no
woods in Holland, yet this Province builds more ships then almost all Europe
besides: Holland abounds within it self with cattle, with fish, and all things
made of milk; which being salted, and great provision made thereof, their ships
are plentifully provided therewith: like provision is likewise made of all
other sorts of Victuals necessary for life, of cloth for wearing, of sail
clothes for sailing, and of all things else which belong to Navigation; so as
there is not only nothing wanting in the United Provinces of what is necessary
for setting forth whatsoever number of ships, but a great superaboundance
thereof.

Then for the number of Mariners, who are the animated Instruments of
Navigation, they yield not in number to the other unanima^e necessaries. The
People of Holland and Zealand do generally betake themselves to one of two
professions, either to Merchandising or Seafaring; and because both these
Provinces are very full of Inhabitants, especially Holland, there are enough
left for Sea affairs. All the Inhabitants of Zealand except those of Midleburg,
are Mariners; their number is infinite in Amsterdam, as in the most Merchant
Towns which are situated on the Sea; and in this Province the Rivers and
Channels may be said to be the habitations of these sort of men; to which in
nature and in profession an infinite number of Fishermen do correspond.

But after all this, how great and how miraculous is their Skill in Navigation?
The People of those parts are naturally more adicted to sea, then to land
Affairs. The very Children suck in the precepts of Navigation with their
Mothers milk; and every house in Holland and Zealand may be said to be a School
thereof: when they have run over the more neighboring seas in their younger
years, being grown more strong, they betake themselves to plough up the farther
deeps, till by their continual Navigation having measured every Angle of the
Ocean, they dare venture even upon the taming of the fury or tempest thereof.

There is no Climate, Star, nor wind which they are not well acquainted with:
They are bred up in these sorts of Labors and sufferings; and triumphing, as
it were, over even Nature it self, contrary to the Laws thereof they join
together the farthest distant Seas; carry the one Pole to the other, and making
one Hemisphere of two, they join together, not only in Commerce, but as it
were in one place, the farthest remote Nations of the Earth. Thus by their so
many singular successes in Sea-affairs, especially by their Navigation in the
Indies, but chiefly by the attempt which the Hollanders and Zealanders made,
not many years ago, toward the Northern parts of the Frosen sea, their
renown is grown so great throughout the whole World, as they may be said to
have clouded the glory of all other Nations. These People did not apply
themselves in former times in sailing to the Indies; the Spaniard did not
permit them so to do, till the War was commenced; and after it was begun,
they being suffered notwithstanding to frequent the Spanish Seas, they were
contented with this near and moderate gain, rather then to adventure upon vast
and immoderate Traffic, which was to be fetched from new Seas, and from new
and unknown Winds. The Rebels of Holland were afterward forbidden by the
Spaniards to come near any of their Ports. Irritated therefore by despair of
losing at once the Commerce with Spain, and their share of that of the Indies,
the Hollanders and Zealanders resolved to venture of themselves into those so
remote parts. Nor did they make any long delay: They furnished out some few
ships at first, and putting to Sea; made toward the South, and then turning
toward the East, they with much courage ended so long and toylsome a Voyage.

This their first Adventure did not notwithstanding prove very fortunate, nor
much gainful to them: but having much better success in their after-Voyages,
they in a short time rendered those Seas so familiar to their People, that they
go now to the East Indies with as much ease, as if they went for Pastime from
one of their own Ports to another. But this so great a daring ended not here:
nor were they contented to have addressed their Designs to the commerce of the
Indies. After they had found out this new way of Traffic, and after having
brought by many Voyages an inestimable Treasure of Spicery into Holland, to the
great prejudice of the Crown of Spain, they had courage enough oftentimes to
insult over the Portugals in those Seas, and even to besiege them within those
Towns and Cities which had been by them alone for so many years peacefully
possessed. They likewise have sailed into the West Indies, but they cannot as yet
get any admittance there, meeting with greater difficulties and more obstacles,
for that it is almost totally populated with Spanish Colonies; yet had not the
Truce insued, they had designed to have raised new Forces that they might get
footing there likewise; to the end that they might continually infest those
Seas, and the firm land; and have a narrower watch upon the Spanish Fleet,
which if it should at any time fall into their hands, the Spaniards would
thereby assuredly receive a greater blow then they have done at any time
before: by what has been said, it may be comprehended how great the strength
of the United Provinces is by Sea, and what advantages they are likely to make
thereby upon all occasions.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Revenue, and Expenses of the United Provinces.
IT now remains that we see what moneys the United Provinces receive, and how
they lay them out; it is commonly judged that in time of War, according to the
greater or lesser occasions of expense, they contribute one year with another
eight millions of Florins, for the service of their general Union, which
amounts to the sum of 3200000 Crowns, at the rate of five shillings a Crown, in
this common disbursement every Province contributed its particular proportion,
according to the utmost of their abilities, unless it were some moneys which by
the way of common hostility in the time of War was gathered in common from the
whole Union: All hostility being now at an end by the Truce, this kind of Tax
does likewise cease. In time of War also, because all the Ports of Flanders
were continually besieged by the Ships of the United Provinces, all Foreign
Merchandise were unloaded in Holland and in Zealand, to the great profit of
those two Provinces in particular, and to the great advantage of the General
Union: Whereas now the Seas being open, much Merchandise will certainly be
hereafter brought into the Ports of Flanders: The Union has not now almost any
income by the way of common disbursement; and therefore the moneys which the
United Provinces contribute for the expense of the whole Union, consist in what
is raised severally from every one of them.

The United Provinces raise almost all their moneys by way of impositions;
which to say truth are so great there, as they cannot well be greater; but the
People bear them patiently! Their Liberty could not long endure without Arms,
nor their arms without stipends, nor their stipends without impositions; and
the United Provinces will always so apprehend the Power of Spain, as they will
easily be persuaded to be always prepared for War, that so they may the
easilyer evade all new hazards.

The moneys which are raised in common from the said Provinces, are contributed
as has bin said, according to the possible abilities of each of them. Holland
which is the greatest and richest of all the rest, contributes the one half of
the whole: next to Holland, Zealand is Taxed heavier then any of the other six;
and the other concur with their convenient proportions: For example sake; of a
hundred Holland furnishes fifty; Zealand about twenty; Friesland twelve; and
the rest with very little difference the remainder.

The moneys must needs be very great which the United Provinces spend in their
common interest, their Country being considered, which is but of a small
circuit; besides every Province reserves a proportion for several occasions of
their own; but Traffic makes good what is wanting in Land; and the
commodiousness of the Sea, supplies their narrowness of ground; and the
industry of the Inhabitants, the defects of Nature. They manage their moneys to
the best advantage, their Army which may be said to exhaust the whole, is paid
with many limitations; in paying of the Soldiery they account forty days to the
month, so as their Military year falls very short in months. The United
Provinces use not those entertainments, nor those advantages of Pay which are
used in the King of Spains Army; so as their sallary being limited, they are
well paid, and their Soldiers do not mutiny; and consequently they are not
subject to such disorder of Muteny, as the Spaniards are, by which the Crown of
Spain has been greatly indammaged. All the moneys of the General Union are
laid out as has been said, in the maintenance of their Militia; and it is
thought that the United Provinces in time of Truce do disburse therein 2800000
crowns a year.

The said Provinces are much indebted to France and England for moneys which
they have received from those two Crowns upon several occasions in time of War;
and they also upon the same Terms owe great sums upon Interest to diverse
Merchants of their own Country.

Every Province apart has their particular Revenues, as also their particular
expenses: Holland, Zealand and Friesland, are at great expense in maintaining
their Banks and Channels, that they may keep their Country as dry and passable
as they can; but Holland and Zealand are particularly at great Charges in
keeping out the Sea, which does oftentimes strangely indammage them; the Ocean
appears more angry and more tempestuous on that shore then in any other part of
Europe; and there you would believe the Sea and Land to be at greater variance
then any where else, and that there the two Elements showed their greatest
enmity one to another.

THE RELATION OF THE United Provinces OF FLANDERS, Written by the Cardinal
Bentivoglio. BOOK II.
CAP. I.
An Introduction briefly describing the War of Flanders. Madam de Parma is made
Regent of Flanders.
WHat has been said may suffice for what concerns the Country, People,
Government, Strength, Incomes; and Expenses of the United Provinces. I will now
tell you how their Militia is Governed: Count Mauris of Nassaw is General of
all their Soldiery; but being to speak of this Commander, who is at this time
of so high esteem, it is requisite, to the end that I may the more clearly set
down his Actions, that in the first place I treat of those of his Father the
Prince of Orange, who has been so much heard and spoken of in this our Age; to
the which I am likewise invited by a particular desire I have by representing
the Nature, Actions, and death of this Prince; to give you a breviat of the
beginnings, chief events, and end of this last so long and memorable War of the
Low Countries:

The House of Nassaw has its original, and still keeps its chief root in
Germany, and is accounted one of the antientest, and most noble of those parts.
Out of* Germany came William (so was the Prince of Orange called) into Flanders
when he was yet but a child, and was received into the Service of the Emperor
Charles the fifth, by whose particular favor, rather then by any necessary
proximity of blood, he afterward remained heir of the House of Schalloune; and
of a bare Count of Nassaw (being enriched with much wealth) came likewise by
this succession to inherit the Principality of Orange in France: He together
with this, acquired greater Fortunes from the Emperor: afterward when Charles
went to spend the rest of his days privately in Spain, and his Son King Philip
staid for a while in Flanders, Orange continued still in great favor with the
King: Philip was likewise afterward to return for Spain, so as it was
necessary to think upon some one who might supply his place in the Government
of Flanders: Two Princesses were chiefly in nomination thereunto; the one
Christierna Duchess Dowager of Lorrain; the other Margaret, wife to Octavius
Fernese, Duke of Parma; the first being Niece by the sisters side to the
Emperor, the other his natural daughter. Christierna was much desired by the
Nobility of the Country, as she who by the neighborhood of Lorrain was well
known in Flanders, and who by reason of the conformity of those two Countries
was likely to be more gracious in her Government, and more conformable
generally to the Pallat of the Dutch; and the peace which chiefly by her means
had but a little before been concluded in Cambrey, was yet fresh in their
memory; and the Prince of Orange was of all others chiefly for the choice of
Christierna; for he had some hope to marry a daughter of hers, by which means
he did aspire to be the Arbitror and Moderator of her Government.

On the other side, the Kings officers of State were more for Margaret; 'twas
thought she would be more affectionate to the Kings affairs then Christierna,
to whom they gave the title of a French woman, and thought her more interested
in the Crown of France, in respect of Lorrain: Whereas Margaret, in respect of
her nearer relation to the blood Royal, by reason of so many interests of the
Family of the Fernesees in Italy, with the Crown of Spain, and for that
Alexander her only son was then intended for the Kings Court, as a pledge of
greater dependancy, was held to be wholly for the Spanish Faction. At last the
considerations which made for Margaret prevailed; whereupon she was chosen, and
declared to be Regent of Flanders, and to that purpose was sent for from Italy.

CHAP. II.
The Prince of Orange his Distasts, and Nature: The first alterations in
Flanders arise, and are quieted.
THe Prince of Orange being netled by this Election, An. 1559.
was afterward stung to the quick, with the obstacle which he met withal in
his pretended Marriage with the Duchess of Lorain's daughter. The King did not
like that one so great in Flanders, should yet become greater by this near
leaning stock of Lorrain: and that instead of such aliance as might become a
Subject, he should be raised to an aliance so near the King himself: nor had
the Prince of Orange such a stroke in the Government afterward with the
Regent, as he willingly would have had; he therefore grew wroth within, and had
a great desire to try some novelty, and therewithal to open his way to more
eminent Fortune amongst the general innovations. The Prince of Orange was in
great esteem with the Dutch; and truly he was a man of very great parts: Of a
strong body, constant mind, flowing tongue, and good at counsel; he was very
dextrous, and wonderful vigilant; but these virtues were counterpoised with
much greater vices: There was no faithfulness in him, no goodness, no shame to
do evil; his religion was only outward; he was of an unquiet mind, and
greatly ambitious; nor was there ever any who knew better how to wind people
by deceit, nor how better to clothe his own ends with zeal to the Public.

The King being returned or Spain, the first jealousy given by the Prince of
Orange, was his Marrying of Anne daughter to Maurice, Elector of saxony, who
was a Lutheran. Returning from Germany with his new wife to Brussels, he met
not with much difficulty in ordering his pre-meditated revolutions. The people
of Flanders were then much stirred up, and all the three orders of which the
body of the Provinces were framed, were almost equally agrieved. The
Ecclesiastic, by a new erection of Episcopacy which resulted to the great
dishonor of the Monastical Abbots, in whom the highest degree of Ecclesiastics
did before consist: The order of the Nobility, because they saw they were
forever to be deprived of the presence of their natural Prince, and to fall
into the Government of a Forraigner, wher^in the too great and too Imperious
authority which the Cardinal Granville held with the Regent, appeared to them
to be in particular too intolerable: The Popular order; for that the people of
Flanders being accustomed to live in much liberty, and many of them being there
upon fallen into the licentiousness of Heresy, they could not endure the new
rigor of the public edicts, against such as were infected, which rigor was
termed by the hateful title of the Spanish Inquisition.

The nobles were they who first blew the cole in public, which till then went
secretly creeping on; and the first flame was hindled by Meyn here (...), by a
licensious petition, which he and Count Lod^vick, brother to the Prince of
Orange, accompanied by a great many others of the Nobility, presented to the
Regent: They instanced therein with peremptory words, for moderation in the
regal edicts, and that all use of the Inquisition should be taken away: this
licentiousness of the Nobility, was the birth of a popular commotion which
insued not long after. A number of the base ^^ort of people gathered together
in diverse places, but chiefly in An^werp, who grew so bold, as impudently ^o
violate Churches, beat down Altars, break Images, and to introduce that Heresy
bare faced, which till then had hiddenly, and in secret been the cause of the
evils; which were not notwithstanding then so great, but that sufficient
remedies were (...) for them* The Regent applied at first (...) medicines as
the time administered; and afterward taking courage, she compelled Valenciennes
by force to return to their due obedience. She entered her self, in person also,
armed into Antwrep, and reduced it and many other Cities into their former rule
of Government.

The first commotions in Flanders seemed to be as soon extinguished, as raised,
when news was brought that the Kings anger was rekindled against the Dutch, and
that the Duke of Alva was chosen to put his rigor in execution. The Prince o^
Orange had always temporised with the Regent; but when he heard that the Duke
of Alva was on his march, and drew near, he openly discovered his mind, and
retired into Germany, together with his brother Lodovick: He thought it now no
longer time to temporise: he considered he might do so whilst he had to do with
a Regent, who was a woman, and in the power of Dutch forces; but what security
could he hope for from so great a Commander, as was the Duke of Alva, who came
to execute the Kings orders in the head of a Foreign Army, with his sword in
his hand; what suspicions might he think his former actions had occasioned? and
how many had he indeed given? And he feigned his fears to be the greater, that
he might stir up greater desire of Revolutions; resolving then not to wait
the arrival of the Dukes Forces, he withdrew to the parts which lay nearest
Germany, that he might there wait the time which might recall him to those
innovations wherewith Flanders was threatened.

CHAP III.
The Duke of Alva succeeds the Dutchese of Parma; An. 1567.
Flanders is in a rage, great part thereof do rise, and the War is kindled.
THe Duke of Alva entered the Low Countries the year 1567, bringing with him a
powerful Army, all of them being almost Spaniards; more powerful in valor then
umber of men. He took upon him the Government; his first intentions were to
secure such of the Nobility and Cities as he most suspected; he therefore
forthwith imprisoned Count Egm^nt, and Count Hern, together with many others of
the Nobility of that Country; and prepared heavy yoaks of Citadels for many
Cities, which were of greatest consideration, either for their situation or
for their Inhabitants: the first and chiefest was that of Antwerp, and to the
yoke of Citadels, he added the bridle of armed Garrisons.

These so rigorous Foundations of Government being laid by the Duke, it
remained to see what commotions might thereby be made as well within as without
Flanders; there were great dangers both within and without. From France to boot
with the wonted jealousies which the Spaniards received from this
neighborhood, they had reason then to doubt the faction of the Heretics, who
with very great Forces kept that Kingdom then infested and troubled. The Queen
of England conspiring likewise with the Hugonets of France, had the same
design of fomenting the Heresy and Rebellion of the Low Countries, and to do
what in her lay to bereave the Spaniard quite of them, to the end that her
Kingdom might be free from the neighborhood of this suspected power. Such
Heretical Princes of Germany as were nearest, affrighted by the example of the
Dutch, and apprehending least the slavery which was introduced upon those of
Flanders, might be extended even into Germany, did readily agree in the same
thoughts and Councels; these were the dangers from abroad; but those at home
were of no less importance, for that the Dutch differing from the Spaniards so
much in Climat, in Customs and in Laws, and that Nation being so incensed
against this by reason of what had happened of new, it was plainly seen, that
the Dutch would only for bear rising till they might have occasion of
discovering themselves. The first dangers arose from without; the Prince of
Orange and his brother Lodovick, were retired as has been said into Germany;
neither were they then idle. Their Family was greatly allyde and adhered unto
in those parts, and they wonn easy belief to their reigned and specious
pretenses, wherewith under the title of the common good, they colored their
departure from Flanders, and their private ends: it was not long ere they took
up Arms* and Lodovick was the first who carried the War into Friesland, wherein
he proved very fortunate: Count Are^berg who was sent against him by the Duke
of Alva with great Forces was routed, and himself slain in battle: The Duke
being hereat moved, resolved to go himself in person to fight, and drive out
Lodovick; having first caused the heads of Count Egmont and Count Horn to be
stricken off at B^ussels; the Army was instantly on its march, and speedily led
into Friesland; where the Dukes arrival, fight and victory, was one and the
same things; so as Lodovick being defeated, and made to fly, he retired again
to Germany.

But the Prince of Orange had again prepared a more important war against the
Duke: He not long after entered the Country with a powerful Army which he had
raised in Germany; which being increased by Hugonot Forces from France, after
he had in vain labored to get some men from Liege, he staid in Brabant, hoping
assuredly to raise some insurrections thereabouts, and to get footing in some
chief City; but for that time he failed in his design; for he found the Duke
of Alva on his Front, who having the art of incamping and conquering without
the expense of blood, did in a short time drive him out of the Country. The
Duke returned in triumph into Brussels: and if he had been pleased after the
punishments he had inflicted within the Town, and the Victories he had brought
from abroad, to have temporized and mitigated the rigor of his Government,
there had been great hopes that the affairs of Germany might have been
accommodaed in some convenient manner, and the signs thereof grew already
greater by a general pardon sent from the King; when the Duke being inexorable,
would not revoke the resolution he had taken of laying some new and
unaccustomed Impositions upon all the goods, as well moveable as immovable,
which were in the Country. The Dutch thought it then too hard that they should
not only undergo, but that themselves should nourish the slavery, which by so
many several ways the Duke of Alva would introduce amongst them; who till that
time were wont to live without almost any grievances, and to be governed as
Free men. The risings in the Low Countries being then become inevitable, the
first thunder thereof was heard in Zealand: Then Holland beginning to move, and
many of the Cities which were situated on the confines of France, the People
flew out into fury every where, and ran to take up Arms. Lodovick took the City
of Mous, one of the chiefest which lay toward France; and his brother the
Prince of Orange prepared the mean while to enter the Country a second time,
with as powerful an Army as was the first.

The Duke of Alva, environed with so many difficulties, and floating between
the importance and diversity of resolutions, whether he were to sease upon
Holland and Zealand, which by reason of the sea were the Provinces of greatest
consideration; or those Cities situate upon the confines of France, which were
exposed to the danger they were threatened with by the Hagonets of that Kingdom;
at last the greatest being that which was to be feared from France, prevailed
He then made his son Frederick encamp with the flower of his Army about Mons;
and he himself came thither afterward together with the Duke of Medina Celi,
who was come not long before by Sea from Spain, to succeed him in the
Government. The Siege began luckely; the succors of the French Hugonots were
routed and discomfeited on the one side; and it was ended with like success,
the other succor which was brought from Germany by the Prince of Orange, being
likewise repulsed and brought into great straits; but though Orange could not
relieve Mons, yet did not his entrance into the Country prove altogether
uneffectuall: for before he attempted to relieve that Town, he had taken
Rur^monde in Ghelderland, Malines, and many other Towns; and this his second
breaking in, had caused great commotions amongst the People; he afterward
retired, not having men enough to keep the field; and having soon lo^all that
he had wonn, he withdrew himself, rather in a fugitive then conquered posture
into Holland, wherein and in Zealand, by the advantage of the Sea, and Rivers,
together with the pertenaciousness of those people, and the Au^hority which he
had there as Governor of both those Provinces, he laid the chief seat of the
War, and of his designs.

The whole body of the Insurrection and of the War being then reduced into
Holland and Zealand, very memorable actions happened in both those Provinces.
In Zealand the succoor which was brought by Christopher Mandragones, one of,
the most cried up Commanders of the Spanish Nation at that time; to the besieged
of Turgoes, were the most remarkable actions of war, which we read of either in
ancient or modern History; He with a strength of Spaniards, and Soldiers of
some other Nations, at a low ebb passed over an Arm of the Sea six miles broad,
and after having valiantly overcome a^ the difficulties of the contrary party,
which were judged not to be possibly overcome he at last to his great glory
brought in the relief in Holland, besides other successes, the siege of Harlem
was very famous; it was eight months in dispute whether the constancy of the
besiegers or the besieged would prove the greater; but those within the Town
yielded at the last, and underwent such punishments, as a fatal memory
remained ever after in Holland, both of this success, and of the Duke of Alva,
whose Government soon after ended.

CHAP. IV.
The Duke of Alva's departure; he is succeeded by the Commendador Maggior of
Castile, who dies.
THe Duke of Medina being astonished to see the aff^irs of Flanders in so
turbulent a condition, refused the Government thereof. Don Luis de Rechusens
was then Governor of Milan, he was Commendador Maggior of Castil^, and great
was the opinion of his valor. The King commanded him to succeed the Duke of
Alva, who at his first entrance into Flanders, resolved by the moderation of
his Government, to make the Duke of Alva's rigidness be forgotten; but as
wounds ill cured at first, usually become uncurable, so, so many and so putrid,
were the humors whereof the insurrection of the Low Countries were composed, as
hardly any cure could be applied thereunto. Neither swords, nor lenetives could
any longer avail. The pertenaciousness and daring of the Rebels growing still
greater, it behooved the Commendador to try whether he could tame them by the
sword or no; the events were various; but those at sea, or in the rivers by the
Spanish against the Maretine forces of Holland and Zealand, proved unfortunate
to the Spaniard, so as ere long the Commendador saw himself quite bereft of
those two Provinces.

These losses were in part restored by the rout which was given near M^ck in
Ghelderland to Count Lodovick; who together with his brother Henry, and
Christopher Count Palatin of Rheine, was entered the County again with some
German Forces; his Army was routed; and he, his brother and Christopher all
three slain, to the great honor of the Spanish Commanders, to whom so important
a Victory cost the loss of but very little blood; but they reaped but little
good thereby, by reason of the mutiny which not long after brake out amongst
the Spanish Soldiers for want of pay: After the battle at Mock, the memorable
siege of Leyden in Holland succeeded: The Spaniards had already brought them
within the Town into great straits, when they found themselves without, to be
in very great danger. The Hollander took a desperate advice to relieve Leyden by
cutting many rivers into one, whereby they drowned a great part of the Country,
and so at last relieved the Town by water, which they could not do by land; and
the City was freed from the siege, the besiegers becoming the besieged, and
many of them perished in the waters.

There were some hopes at this time of putting an end to their troubles by some
fair accommodation. The Emperor Radulphus appeared therein, who sent
Ambassadors to Flanders to this end; but this endeavor proved quickly vain, the
Hollanders and their adherents being become too contumacious, and suffering
themselves to be too easily carried away by the Prince of Orange his artifices,
whereby he wrought so, as those just conditions of Peace propounded on the King
of Spains behalf were not admitted of. They consisted chiefly of two points;
that the Rebels should return to their due obedience to their King, and that
they should restore the Roman Catholic Religion into its former condition.
Upon these conditions, the King offered to satisfy the rebels in all the other
principal concernments, as in taking away all foreiners; in taking away all
garrisons and Impositions, and in restoring them to their Privileges and former
government. The rebels did not openly deny obedience to the King; but that they
might not return unto their allegiance, propounded difficulties not to be
answered nor overcome, and for what concerned their Religion, they went about
to justify their old intentions by various pretenses; particularly by
affirming that Holland and Zealand would be in a great measure unpeopled, if
all they were to go from thence who wereof the reformed Religion, as they
termed it. All Treaties of peace being thus suddenly cut off, the War continued
on all sides, and it was innobled in particular by two new enterprises of the
Spaniards in Zealand, like to that first of Mand^agones: The Spaniard did thus,
not only in despite of nature, but even of their enemies, keep footing in
Holland and in Zealand, where in a few days the Commendador died of a Violent
Fever.

CHAP V.
The Council of State takes the Government upon them.
THe Commendador being dead, the Council of State took upon them the
administration, but little good was to be expected from the dividing of that
Authority into many, which was united into one alone; and the fidelity of
diverse of the Council began already to be apparently corrupted, and it was
soon known that they joined in the conspiracy with the Prince of Orange; by
means of the said Prince, some of the chief of the Council who stood firmly
for the King and Spanish Interest, were quickly made Prisoners,; whereupon the
Council turned all their resolutions, to enforce the Spaniards to quit the
Low-Conntreys; to boot with the first dislike which the Dutch had in general of
the Spaniards; those of the Council made use of a new pretense, that they
might with the greater resolution prosecute their designs: which was, that the
Spaniards had made themselves masters of the Town of Alosto, in the very
Province of Flanders, after a great many of them had again mutinied with danger
of much prejudice to the Country thereby. They were then by public
declaration of the whole Council, all of them proclaimed Rebels; and the
people in all parts rose up in Arms against them; upon the same pretense they
betook themselves to besiege the best Forts which were guarded by the
Spaniards; and unless it were the Ci^adell of Antwerp, all their Forts fell
into the hands of the Dutch, who had joined their Forces together to that
purpose.

Another practice of importancy yet remained to end the business, wherein the
Prince of Orange used his utmost skill* which was, That all the Provinces of
the Low Countries should be reconciled in one, and to join together with
Holland and Zealand, and that they should all unanimously provide for the
common Interest. The Deputies of all the Provinces except, Luxembourg, etc.
convened together to this purpose in Gaunt, which is the chiefest City of
Flanders, and concluded the peace which went afterward by the name of Gaunt.
The chief Articles thereof were, that all Forreiners were to be driven out by
the Common Arms; that they should endeavor to get the King to restore them to
their first Government; that for what concerns Religion, except Holland and
Zealand, all the other Provinces should suffer no other Religion to be
exercised in them save what was Roman Catholic; and that the results of
matters of Religion in those two particular Provinces, should be reserved to be
determined by the States General, which were to meet as soon as might be. The
Prince of Orange thought it impossible that the King of Spain should approve of
this peace, and therefore firmly believed that all the other Provinces would
very speedily join in the same Insurrection with Holland and Zealand.

The Spaniards this mean while met together from many parts, and resolving to
be roundly revenged of the Dutch, who had declared them to be Rebels, and
exposed them as it were to a public and general slaughter, went toward the
Citadell of Antwerp. They rested very few hours of the day, and were very
weary when they came thither, notwithstanding without taking any manner of
rest, they with one accord resolved either to die, or sup that very night in
Antwerp; they made no long delay: they marched out of the Citadell in good
order to the number of about 3000. and gave on with such resolution and force
upon the Enemies trenches, who in great numbers besieged the Citadel on that
^ide which lay toward the Town, as the breaking through them and making them
fly, was one and the same action, and effected as soon as begun. The Spaniards
sufficiently glutted with the blood of their Enemies, went presently to sack
the City, wherein they spent three whole days, and which was the occasion of
those great miseries, and calamities which might satisfy the hatred, revenge,
lust and avarice of the prevailing side.

CHAP. VI.
Don John of Austria comes unexpectedly into Flanders, and dies suddenly.
THe Affairs of Flanders stood thus, An. 1577.
When news came that Don John of Austria, natural brother to the King was
unexpectedly arrived in the Loyl Country of Luxemburg; his arrival did
strangely stagger all those that were desirous of novelty, but especially the
Prince of Orange; he saw that Don John being of the blood Royal, having wonn so
great renown in Spain in the War against the Moors, and in the memmorable Naval
fight of Lepanto, being besides of a quick wit, and attracting demeanor; he saw
I say that by his means, the Low Countries might easily be reduced into a
peaceable condition, which did not correspond with Orange his ends; his first
endeavor therefore was, to keep Don John from being admitted to have the
Government; and he hoped to effect it, for that he thought he would never
consent to the peace of Gaunt: but here his hopes failed him, by reason of the
agreement made between Don John and the Provincial States in Marchia, a Town
in Luxemb^rg, wherein he approved of the peace of Gaunt, and all the Spaniards
and other Forreiners were forthwith sent away, except some Dutch who wanted
their pay.

After this agreement at Marchia, Don John was received with great pomp and
rejoicing into Brussels; but the quiet which was hereupon hoped for, lasted but
for awhile; it was not to be believed that Don John would have again betaken
himself to force, he not having any Arms, and being absolutely in the hands of
the Dutch; yet such was the cunning used by the Prince of Orange, partly by
cavelling at the Articles of Agreement of Marchia, and partly in laying the
delay of not dispatching away the Germans, which he could not so suddenly do
for want of pay, to Don John's default, as the said Don John found himself
presently to be much suspected, and in danger of inevitable treacheries against
his person. The Lady Margaret of Vallois Queen of Navarr, went casually at this
time to the Bath of the Spaw; Don John would not let the so opportune an
occasion, but departing from Brussels under pretense of Complement to the
Queen, he possessed himself at unawares of the Castle of Namures, a City which
confines upon the Country of Luxemburg on that side which lies toward France,
and there secured himself; yet many were then of opinion, that this resolution
of making himself master of that Castle was cunningly infused into Don John by
the Prince of Orange himself, to make him thereby the more suspicious, and so
the affairs might the easilyer return to their former troubles; nor did this
his design prove vain. This was interpreted a declaring of War, whereupon the
whole Country fell again into commotion on a sudden, and arms were again taken
up on all sides, and the Foreign Forces which were already dismissed by the King
returning speedily from Italy, the battle of Geblurs, near unto Namures not
long after ensued, where Don John with little more then a thousand Foot and a
thousand Horse (whilst the rest of his Forces, were hastening to the place of
Battle) did miraculously defeat the Dutch Army which consisted of sixteen
thousand foot, and three thousand horse, yet did not Orange for all this desist
from pursuing his designs: he was already seated in place of supreme authority
by the rebels by whom with unwonted demonstrations of honor he was in a
triumphant manner received first in Antwerp, and then in Brussels, Orange after
this defeat; had recours to his subtlest stratagems; Germany, England and
France, being much affrighted by the Spanish Forces, he drew down a great Army
from Germany, led on by John Cassimer Palatin, wherein the Queen of England
assisted with great sums of money, and made many French Forces move under the
Duke of Allasonne, who was brother to the King of France, and whom the Rebels
received under the title of their Protector; and that unwonted Novelties might
not be wanting in this Insurrection, the Archduke Matthias, Nephew to the King
of Spain, was privily come a little before from Vienna, moved thereunto by a
youthful spirit of ambition, by the mere authority of the rebels, and of the
Prince of Orange, who was assigned unto him for his Lieutenant; he had taken
upon him the Title of Governor for the King, of the Provinces of Flanders, and
was prepared to lead on the Enemies Forces against Don John, who was indeed the
true Governor. This mean while Don John had got into a very great strength near
unto Man^res, resolving to dissolve this cloud of Forces which overhung him on
all sides, and thus to get the greater glory by getting the victory without
fighting; as happily fell out not long after; but he died first, and so was too
soon bereaft of the fruit of the first victory already gotten, and of this
second so well ordered. Don John dyed of a few days sickness, not without
suspicion of being poisoned. He was a Prince worthy to have lived longer, and
to have longer tried whether he could with his sword have cut off the Hydraes
head of the rebellion of Flanders, which after became invincible.

The Rebels Forces disbanding soon after for want of pay, Cassimers Forces
returned to Germany, and another thing happ'nd afterward much to the advantage
of the Kings affairs: which was, that the Walloun^ Provinces, when they had
discovered the Prince of Orange his perfidious ends and those of the rest of
the Rebels, which were, totally to withdraw themselves from the obedience of
the King of Spain, and of the Catholic Church, they framed a faction apart
(whereat the Prince of Orange stormed, and did in vain endeavor to hinder it)
under the name of Malcontents, whereby they signified that they were but ill
satisfied, yet would not be Rebels, either to the King or Church.

CHAP VII.
The Prince of Parma succeeds Don John; the Rebels receive the Duke of
Alanzonne for their new Prince: the Prince of Orange is wounded by a
musket shot.
THis mean while the Prince of Parma succeeded Don John in the Government of
Flanders; An. 1578.
who let not slip any good occasion; but making use of the division which he
found amongst the enemies themselves, and getting the better of them at first
by the weapons of their own discords, he easily gained the faction of the
Malcontents, and also came to agreement with the Walloune Provinces: This so
advantageous Treaty being so luckely succeeded, and the Prince having suddenly
furnished himself of the valiant Catholic Forces of the Country, the
resolution which was made with the consent of the same Provinces, of fetching
back the Spaniards, and other Forreiners, which the Prince in order to the
agreement was enforced to send the second time out of the Country succeeded
likewise fortunately. He had at the same time valiantly besieged and taken the
City of Mastrick, whereby he secured himself of the pass from Germany, and the
mean time was ordering an Army for other enterprises; at this time likewise a
new Negotiation of peace was in Treaty in Cullen, wherein the Popes Nuntio,
some Imperial Ambassadors of the Prince of Castlevetrano, on the King of Spains
behalf, and some Deputies in the name of those Provinces which joined in the
Insurrection, did intervene; some tolerable composition of the affairs in
Flanders was desired in Spain, regard being always had to the Catholic
Religion and to the Regal Authority; but all their diligence proved at last
vain: so many were the difficulties which were met withal in the Treaty, and
so inestricable had the Prince of Orange made them by his usual cunning.

The Treaty at Cullen proving vain, the King thought he could now no longer
forbear the last demonstration of his just anger against the Prince of Orange;
he proclaimed him to be guilty of high Treason, the Head and Author of the
rebellion in the Low Countries, the public bane and chief Author of all the
Evils; the Prince of Orange hereat incensed, flew presently to desperate
Councels; and laying aside the first pretended color of the War which was that
they fought not against the King, but against the pride and tyranny of the
Spaniards, as he and those that sided with him termed it, he began barefaced to
deny obedience to the King, and easily induced his followers to do the like,
and to provide themselves of a new Prince. The Duke of Alanzon was thought the
fittest of all others for this purpose, out of hopes that they might engage the
King of France in the Dukes Interest: whereupon the Duke was received into
Antwerp, and with public solemnity sworn Prince of the Low Countries. Orange
had no particular affection to the French; but he endeavored and hoped to keep
up the Rebellion of Flanders by means of the French Forces, and to handle the
business so, as the Dutch growing at last weary of the French, and despairing
of ever being pardoned by the Spaniard, they might come to frame a Free
Government, whereof he might be the Moderator and Arbitror: in which variety of
successes, if more favored by Fortune, he could not get to be made absolute
Prince of all the Revolted Provinces, he hoped that he might yet prove to be so
in Holland and in Zealand; two strong and powerful Provinces, infected with
Heresy already, and which now acknowledged no other Authority then his. These
were the ends to which it was thought Orange his blind Ambition did tend; the
joyful presages of Alansonne the new Prince did this mean while forbode no good
to his hopes; for at the same time a bold Bischayard came to him, and within
his own House discharged a Musket at his head. He was cured of this wound, but
this foretold another of the like sort, which not long after was the occasion
of his death.

CHAP. VIII.
The Rebels are brought into great straits. Alanzonne withdraws into France,
and soon after the Pr. of Orange is slain.
THis mean while the Affairs of the Rebels grew worse and worse, An. 1582.
and those on the Kings behalf went on still prosperously. The Archduke
Matthias had lost all his hopes a good while before; so as he was forced to
return into Germany with no great Reputation. Alanzon was likewise weary of the
Dutch, and the Dutch of him: Neither could the Duke bear with the indignity of
the Conditions, whereby he became rather to receive Laws, then to give them in
such form of Government as was prescribed him; nor yet could the Dutch tolerate
that the French aids should correspond so badly with the promises made by the
Duke. The Duke was the first that began to stir; He endeavored to take Antwerp
by force, and to establish his Principality by Arms: Some of his People had
already entered the City, and began to pillage it; but the People betaking
themselves to their Arms, the French were presently driven out with no less
slaughter then dishonor: Nor was it possible, for all that the Prince of Orange
could do, (who thought the present alteration not yet ripe enough for his ends)
that the Dutch could be brought to forgo the ill will which they had conceived
against the French; so as ere long the Duke was necessitated to return for
France, without any reputation or hope, and his people abased and but ill
treated.

The Prince of Orange after these affairs had shut himself up in Holland, with
his mind wholly bent to find out some fuel whereby to keep alive the fire of
Rebellion, which was already so well kindled; when at once the blow came, which
cut both his Designs and his Life short. He that wounded him was a Burgonian,
and the wound was given by a Pistol, which he desperately discharged at his
Head. This happened at Delfe, where the Prince of Orange then was, who dyed
almost presently upon it, not being able to speak a word. This was the end of
William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, in the 52. year of his Age. A man who
without doubt might have been numbered amongst the famousest of our Times, if
resting contented with his own so considerable Fortune, he had not by violence
and illegal means endeavored to raise himself to a greater. He dyed reputed
an Heretic; and which is more, not thought to have any Religion at all in him.
He professed Liberty of Religion and Government, that he might the better
invegle the People, and under the name of Liberty oppress it the more; Those
that sided most with him, were the Hollanders and Zealanders; and his chiefest
Authority lay in those two Provinces; which was so great, as he appeared rather
to be Prince thereof then Governor; and 'twas said, that they had resolved to
choose him for their Prince.

CHAP. IX.
The Rebels continue in their first Obstinacy; The Duke of PARMA dies.
THe Rebels were astonished and much confused by the Prince of Orange his
death; and 'twas thought then that the whole Fabric of Rebellion would fall to
the Ground, the Architecture failing; but the foundations thereof were already
too deeply laid: which that they might be the more firm and stable, there
wanted not Princes, who jealous of the too near Neighborhood of the Spaniard,
brought such materials as were needful. The pertenacity of the Rebels
increasing thus, rather then diminishing by the Prince of Orange's death, they
were so far from listening to any thing that might tend to a reconciliation, as
they resolved to continue the War even to the last Gasp, rather then ever to
return to be under the command of Spain. The first thing they did after the
Prince of Orange his death, was to honor his memory with solemn Pomp and
Obsequies. And presently substituted Count Maurice, his Son, in his Fathers
Honors and Titles, believing firmly that he would prove true Heir and
Successor to his Father, as well in his affection to them, as in his hatred to
the Crown of Spain. Prince Maurice was then a Youth of Sixteen years old; and
therefore Count Hollack was given unto him for his Lieutenant in the War: who
afterward by marrying a Sister of his, became his Brother-in-Law.

The King of Spains Forces were this mean while Victorious in all places:
Tornay, Odenard, Ypre, Dankerk, Newport, and many other Towns of importance in
Flanders and other parts, were recovered by the Prince of Parma; the City of
Groninghen, and many other Towns toward Friesland were already returned to the
Kings obedience; and the Catholic Forces had made good progress on all sides.
Only Antwerp made resistance, and did a little retard them: but the difficulty
of the siege of Antwerp made for the Prince his Glory, since the greater the
Obstacles were which he met withal in managing the siege, his valor appeared
to be the greater in reducing it at the last. He mastered the River of Schelde
with his famous Stecata: He with great Military worth, hindered Relief from
being brought to the Town by any other way; and frustrated the mighty Machines
of a great Ship, and certain Boats with Fire-workes, which with an ill Omen
they termed, The Wars end, for they made no long Resistance afterward. This
memorable Siege lasted almost a whole year. By reason of the danger that
Antwerp was in; Gaunt, Bruges and Malines, were already fallen into the Prince
his hands; so as the Rebels were never in so bad a Condition as then; nor the
Kings Affairs in greater Reputation.

The Rebels were afterward reinheartned by the Queen of Englands protection,
who craftily endeavoring to oppress those her neighbors, which she boasted to
assist as oppressed, sent the Earl of Lester over with a whole Army to assist
them, and wrought her self into their Government and Towns, whereof some in the
most important scituations of Holland and Zealand were delivered up unto her as
cautiona^y. Her daring increased together with her ambition, upon the unhappie
success which befell a Fleet at Sea, which the King of Spain had sent against
her Kingdom; but the Dutch Rebels began quickly to be weary of the English
yoke; and it was not long till being glutted and grown jealous of Lester and
his Government, they took from him the mannaging of those Arms, and forced him
to return to Engand, to the Queens no little indignation.

Count Mauris was this mean while increased in years, and together with his
years the opinion of his valor increased; so as the whole care of the War was
committed to him: Mauris from that time began to grow famou^ in the Military
profession. He with great celerity wonn almost the whole Country which the
Spaniards possessed beyond the Rheine, from whence 'twas always easier then from
any other part, to penetrate even into the very bowels of the Enemies, more
particularly in Holland, the chief seat of their Rebellion. Thus the Spaniards,
whilst they busy themselves too much in the Civil wars of France, receive
these important losses in their own Provinces of Flanders. The Duke of Parma
(for so he was now become by reason of his Fathers death) resisted as much as
he could) his going into France; but he must obey the Kings Orders, which were
sent unto him too possitively from Spain: In the first passage the Duke
relieved Paris, and in the second Roan, in both which succors he wonn great
Fame; and whilst he prepared to return a third time into France, he died at
Arras: He was indeed so valiant, and so cry'd-up a Commander, as through him
chiefly the Forces of our times may pass for glorious, and by his means vie
with the famousest of any other age.

CHAP. X.
Three Governors succeed in the space of three years in the Government of
Flanders, to wit, Count Mansfielt, the Archduke Ernestus, and Count Fuentes.
THe Duke of Parma being dead, the Government remained in Count Peter Ernestus
Mantsfielt; he had exercised the place in the Dukes two first goings into
France, and held it one year after, chiefly by the Autho^ity and Council of
Count Fuentes, who upon the Dukes death was come from Spain into Flanders; but
the Government remained not long in him: The Kings affairs suffered then great
prejudice, many of his Soldiers mutenyed, forgoing all obedience and respect to
their Commanders and discipline, remained so corrupted, as continual mutinies
did ensue almost always afterward in the A^my, to the Kings so great damage,
as he was oftentimes more harmed by his own Forces, then by his Enemies.
Hereupon Count Mauris took occasion to besiege Saint Getringberg, and begirt it
with so strong fortifications, as the King lost all hopes of driving him from
thence, or of relieving the besieged.

The Government which provisionally was exercised by Count Mansfielt was
afterward confirmed absolutely in the Archduke Ernestus, who whilst he thought
rather to remedy the disorders he found in the Kings affairs, then to gain
upon the enemy, died before the first year of his Government was fully ended:
in which time Mauris continuing his advancing, took the City of Groni^gben, and
did thereby the better establish what he had wonn beyond the Rheine. Another
part of the Catholic Army did then again muteny, and the Kings Soldiers from
being the chastisers of Rebels becoming as it were Rebels themselves; they were
not ashamed to maintain their muteny even with the borderds of the Enemy, till
such time as they were largely paid.

Hereupon Count Fuentes took the Government into his hands, and valor and
success seemed in him to be at strife; he turned the Kings Forces toward
France, the better to secure that Frontier: he valiantly routed the French in
the battle at Dorlan, and soon after took Cambrey by siege; driving out
Baliguye a French man, who of Governor had made himself Master of the City.

CHAP. XI.
The Government passes into the hands of the Cardinal Archduke Albertus, who
marrying the King of Spains daughter, goes into Spain. Cardinal Andrea of
Austria remains in his Place.
THe Cardinal Archduke Albertus was this mean while come from Spain, An. 1569.
to take upon him the Government of the Low Countries, and the fame of the
great Forces which he brought with him from Spain and Italy, brought terror
into Flanders before they arived there themselves: He came Governor and Prince
of the Low Countries; Governor, if subduing the Rebels, he should again reduce
them in obedience to the Crown of Spain: and Prince, if this success proving
desperate, it were requisite to seperat Flanders from that Crown, and put it
under a Prince apart, who by inhabiting there, and by giving the People a Dutch
descent, might the easilyer by fair means reunite those Provinces, and reduce
them to a conformable obedience; but this at that time was kept private amongst
the Arcana Regia.

The War grew now hot between the Kings of France and Spain; and the French
Forces were chiefly turned against Flanders; so as at the Cardinals arivall he
was necessitated to carry his Forces toward Picardy, wherein he had great good
success; for he presently took two places of great importance; Callis and Ards,
almost underneath the King of France his nose, neither did his progress end
here. He suddenly after turned his Arms upon the Dutch Rebels, and took from
them the Town of Hulst, a very strong place in Flanders; the next year, Amyens
the Prime City of all Picardy was taken by the Spaniards, who whilst they
endeavor in vain to keep it, and turn their Forces upon France, Count Mauris
makes great progress in Flanders; he took Reimburg, and made himself Master of
that so convenient Pass upon the Rheine; then marching with his Army in all
diligence toward Friesland he suddenly sat down before Groll, and took it,
together with Oldensall, and Linghen, and put the Rebels in possession of the
whole Country on that side the Rheine.

The separation of the Low Countries from the Crown of Spain was already
published, by the marriage established by the King between the Archduke
Albertus, and the Infanta Issabella, his eldest daughter; to which daughter of
his he gave the Low Countries for her portion; which the King was at last
resolved to do, when he found the resistance of the Rebels in Flanders to grow
every day greater and greater: hereupon the Archduke being become the Kings son
in Law, and having so great a portion given him, began to buckle the closer to
a peace which was then in Treaty in Flanders with the King of France; hoping by
the friendship of so powerful a neighborhood, the easilyer to reduce the
Rebels to his obedience; and the desired peace insued. The Archduke parting
from thence to bring the Infanta from Spain, heard the news of his Father in
Laws death before he saw his wife.

Cardinal Andrea of Austria remained in this intrim Governor of Flanders, and
the Admiral of Arragon had the chief command in War. The Spanish Forces were
never greater in Flanders then they were at this time, but it availed them but
little; they only recovered Remburg, and on the contrary, the disorders of the
Kings Army grew to be so great by being made to winter by violence and rapine
upon diverse newtrall Countries about the Rheine, as all that part of Germany
grew into great indignation, even to the taking up of Arms. Cardinal Andrea
ended his Government, having undertaken two things; the one in vain, which was
the endeavoring to take Bomale, together with all that Island between the
Vahall and the Mause, and the other wherein he succeeded, which was the making
of a great Fort, which by his name was called the Fort of Saint Adrea, in an
opportune place on the lower part of the Island, whereby he might the easilyer
enjoy the passage and other commodities of that River.

CHAP. XII.
The two new Princes come into Flanders; The Archduke is routed, and wounded at
Newport.
IN this interim the two new Princes were arrived in Flanders, An. 1599.
and had drawn upon them the eyes of all Europe, which stood expecting how they
should be received, and what face their new Principality would put on. They
were received with much applause and great expressions of joy by the obedient
Provinces; but the rebellious appeared more pertenacious then ever, they
prepared with all their might for War; giving out, that the Spaniards by an
issuless marriage, did craftily lay bates to make them return to the yoke of
Spain; and that the Archduke begirt with Spanish Council and Forces, had
nothing of Governor in him, more then the appearing Title of a Prince; they
were already come to the number of the Seven Provinces which was spoken of at
the beginning, and had a good while before taken upon them the Title of the
United Provinces, they therefore utterly refused all mention of peace; even the
very endeavors of those Ambassadors which were sent to that purpose first from
the obedient Provinces, and then from the Emperor.

The Treaty of peace which began at this time to be handled between the King of
Spains Ministers of State, and those of the Archdukes on the one side (this was
the Title which the two new Princes had taken in common) with those of the
Queen of England on the other side, proved likewise vain; and many other
difficulties were hereunto added, which forebode an ill augury to the new
Principality of the Archdukes* Great scarcity of money; new mutenies amongst
the Soldiers; very great dearth in the Country; and for hight of indignity, an
infamous treachery committed by the Garrison of the Fort of St Andrea, who sold
that place unto the Rebels; neither was it long after that the Archduke
received a rout at the battle of Newport; which was caused as well by the
rashness of his Commanders, as by the valor of the Enemy. Maurice had landed
his Army upon the seacoast of Flanders, and had suffered it to advance too far
into the Archdukes Country under vain hopes of getting; so as he could not
keep o^ land for want of victuals; but was enforced to retreat in great
confusion by sea. The Archdukes Commanders impatient to expect this secure
opportunity of imbarking, set upon the Enemies in their own Quarters, and
precipitated themselves into the Rout which they received; wherein the Archduke
was wounded and well nigh taken: It was then seen, as it has been in many
former conflicts, what Armed despair can do; for the Rebels dispairing of ever
imbarking themselves without winning the battle, fought with incredible heat
and courage; neither could Maurice have made better use of tha^ occasion;
causing the Ships to fall off from the land, and putting his Soldiers in
excellent order; he showed them that now they must either overcome or die; so
they overcame, and that place was made famous by that memorable success.

The Archduke after this so great blow, was comforted by the fidelity which his
new people showed unto him, and with the aid which they brought him; and he
suffering himself to be persuaded by their Instances prepared to besiege
Ostend; which was the only place of all Flanders that remained in the Rebels
power, and which till then was held a desperate undertaking, by reason it was
impossible to keep it from being relieved by Sea. Prince Maurice this mean
while had again besieged and taken Reimburg; then carrying his siege suddenly
to Balduke in Brabant, he thought thereby to divert the Archduke from besieging
Ostend; but the enemies failing in taking of Balduke, having done their very
utmost, and gathered together the greatest Army that they were ever Masters of,
they resolved to use all possible means to make the Archduke rise from before
Ostend.

CHAP. XIII.
Marquis Spinola brings Forces from Italy; the Army is put into his hands; and
the War at last ends with a Truce for Twelve years.
THe Archdukes affairs met with very great difficulties when Marquess Spinola
arived in Flanders with a strength of 8000 Italian foot. An. 1602.
This succor kept the Enemies from bringing their Army to raise the siege of
Ostend, and kept off the most important losses wherewith the Archdukes were
threatened, but it was not sufficient to withstand them all; for Prince, Maurice
besieged and took Graves, one of the most consideble places in all Brabant.
This mean while the siege of Ostend continued: and Frederick Spinola, brother
to the Marquess, had in a manner besieged it by Sea, with a Squadron of Galleys
brought from Spain, whereby the Enemies would not have been a little
indammaged, had not Frederick whilst he fought valiantly in a bickering at Sea
been so soon slain. The siege at Ostend had already continued so long as the
besiegers began to despair of ever taking it; the situation of the place, the
cunning and courage of the besieged had made that place be generally held
impregnable, when the undertaking was affigned over to the Marquess Spinolo, he
fully satisfied expectation, his diligence was such, and so much did he despise
all dangers, as the besiegers at last found themselves necessitated to yield;
for they wanted ground within, though never succor without; the Town was
surrendered after three years siege; and certainly it was one of the most famous
sieges that has been heard of at any time, and the Town was as stoutly and
gallantly defended; by Spinola's egregious actions in this success, 'twas seen
what might be expected from him hereafter in greater enterprises.

Prince Maurice was not idle this mean while, he had again besieged Balduke,
and not able to compass that design, he afterward besieged Sluice in Flanders,
intending either to raise the siege of Ostend by this nearer diversion, or to
counterpoise the loss of that place by taking of the other; he failed in the
first, but very luckely obtained the other, which was a business of very great
importance; for the situation, strength, and every other considerable
circumstance of Ostend were paraleld in Sluice; which was taken within a few
days, and without the loss of any blood; whereas the taking of Ostend cost so
much time, so much money, and so much blood: here ended the Enemies proceedings
till the Truce; which was afterward agreed upon: all that was gotten in the
interim was on the Catholics behalf. The Command of the Army being given to
Marquess Spinola, together with the charge of Camp-Master-Generall of the Army,
he carried it home into the Enemies Country, having first taken the Pass upon
the Rhei^e, together with two Forts, the one on the one side, the other on the
other side thereof, he took Oldensell, Linghen, and Groll in Friesland, and
made the passage upon the Rheine the better, by the recovery of Reinburg:
passing suddenly from thence to the relief of Groll which was besieged by
Prince Maurice, he wonn it, as it may be said, a second time, and more
gloriously then at first, causing Maurice shamefully to retreat, and before his
retreat to refuse the battle which he offered him.

Spinola had proposed unto himself things far beyond this: he hoped to have
entered farther into the Enemies Country, and passing over rivers to make
himself Master of Utricht; a City of great consequence, and there to plant the
War in the very Gates of Holland, and in the bowels of the Enemy; but the
natural strength of their scituations, a new muteny which happened in the Army,
and an infinite number of other difficulties hindered him from making further
advancements, and at last instructed him better how weighty a business it was
to go about to quell the Rebellion of Flanders by force, wherefore 'twas better
to think how the differences might be agreed by Peace. The Enemies were already
grown to bold, as they had many years before carried the War by Sea (where they
were strongest) home even to the very doors of the Spaniards. They had infested
the coasts of Spain, and had wrought themselves by sundry navigations into the
East Indies, and were plotting to do the like in the West Indies: so as the
damage which the Crown of Spain received in the former, was so great, and what
they had reason to apprehend in the other of so great consideration, as they
did necessarily require some remedy, which was, that by compounding the
affairs of Flanders; the affairs of the Indies might likewise be compounded:
Peace was therefore again endeavored, but proved at first but in vain; and at
last after a very long Treaty, and wherein mighty difficulties were met
withal, a Truce of twelve years was concluded between them. The Enemies would
never give way to any commencement of the business, which was at first had by a
suspension of Arms, neither would they confirm the conclusion of the Truce
which insued, till it were declared in the very first place, An. 1607.
that the suspension was at first had, and the Truce at last concluded with
them, as with people of free Provinces, to the which neither the King of Spain,
nor yet the Archdukes had any pretense at all: and this was the first Article
of the Agreement: the chiefest of the others were, That during the Truce all
manner of hostility should cease on each side: That this mean while, each of
the Parties should peacefully enjoy what they did at the present possess: An.
1609.
That in this interim no new Fortifications should be made by either side: That
Commerce might be free throughout the whole Country as it was before the War:
That it might be free to Traffic every where, save that out of Europe the
Inhabitants of the United Provinces were not to negotiat in Countries belonging
to the Crown of Spain. By which words, without nominating the Indies, 'twas
pretended that their People should be excluded from those parts of the Indies
which were subject to the King of Spain. These were the most essential
Articles; to boot with many others concerning matters of Justice, and the
restitution of Goods.

Thus was the Truce concluded, and thus was the War of Flanders which could not
be wholly extinguished, hushed for a while.

A War so long and full of so many and so famous accidents, as thereby, beyond
all others of our times, the memory of our age will be innobled to Posterity;
and it may be truly said, that Flanders in this present age has been as a
Military Scene in Europe, which for forty years together, till the conclusion
of the Truce, has exposed to the Theater of the Universe all the Novelties,
and most memorable spectacles which were ever seen in any preceding War, or
shall ever be seen in any that shall ensue.

THE RELATION OF THE UNITED PROVINCES OF FLANDERS. Made by Cardinal
BENTIVOGLIO. BOOK III.
CHAP. I.
Discourse upon the Person of Count Maurice.
NOw to return to where I left off, in the beginning of the last Book; Count
Maurice of Nassaw, governs the Forces of the United Provinces by Sea and Land;
and having had the Command thereof with so much reputation in the time of War,
he exercises the same authority now in the time of Truce; and doubtlesly he
deserves the Fame which he has wonn of being one of the greatest Commanders of
this our present age. He is Master of the Military profession, no less by Art,
then by experience: he is especially well verst in the Mathematiques, which he
has particularly studied, and keeps always some one with him who is very
skillful in this Science. He is chiefly esteemed in two parts of the Militia;
in training of men, and in Fortification: in all his Sieges his Fortifications
have commonly proved impregnable: and to him is chiefly attributed the
Introducing of those in our times which are used without the Trenches, whereby
places are now a days much longer defended then they were in former times: As
for Training, he is likewise very good thereat, and has always kept that Art
in practice: yea now that there is no War, he often makes all the neighboring
Garrisons be drawn forth together before the Hague, and he himself forms them
into several bodies, to exercise the Soldiers; and has caused the same
exercise to be used once every week in all the Garrisons of the United
Provinces.

What Count Maurice his undertakings have been may be gathered by the short
narration which has been made. In some, to say the truth, it has been wished
that he had been more forward and willing to fight; and their number is not
few, who more freely have given him the name of irresolute, and fearful: they
have said that it was merely inevitable necessity which made him join battle
with the Archduke at Newport; that not to hazard himself in a fight, he did not
relieve Reinburg, as he easily might have done, when Marquess Spinola besieged
it; and that his fear was apparent when he ^ose from before Groll, shunning to
encounter the same Spinola, whose Forces were far inferior to his. It Is
certain, that Henry the fourth, King of France, who was always a severe
censuror of the Military actions of Flanders, spoke not much honorably of Count
Maurice, for not having relieved Reinburg, and for rising from before Groll,
and he would often say, that the said Count was not to be called a great
Soldier because he used to fight only amongst dikes and rivers, not ever
endeavoring an Encounter in open field: but men do so differ in their
judgments, as some blame those actions which others account praiseworthy; and
there is nothing more usual then to hear the greatest Commanders termed
fearful, instead of being esteemed wary: remiss instead of, circumspect; and
but bad mean soldiers, instead of skillful in matters of War; consideration
ought also to be had, who makes the War, where it is made, and who maintains
it; according to which considerations it must be confessed, that no man could
have been found out fitter then Count Maurice for the affairs of the United
Provinces, more corresponding with the condition of their people and Countries.
By his so cautious Governing their War so long, and by his making so good use
of their banks, rivers, and other advantages of nature, he has withstood the
Torrents of so many Nations, who have fallen down into Flanders to fight in the
behalf of the Crown of Spain; he has consumed the inexhaustable gold of their
Indies; he has made use of the so many mutinies amongst the Spaniards; and by
his safe and circumspect waging of War, he has at last procured a Truce to the
United Provinces, which has turned to their great advantage and establishment.
But say he had showed himself more ready to have fallen upon more hazardous and
generous resolutions; it was not in his power to do so. He had always in his
Army with him some Deputies who represented the Union of the Provinces; which
Union having always held as one of the most important maxims of Government, to
make use of well digested and wary Councels, the said Deputies upon all
occasions, left more Authority in Count Maurice to execute, then to resolve
upon their undertakings; and out of this reason he has chiefly justified
himself, when by any of his Military Actions he has incurred the spoken of
imputation. But on the other side it cannot be denied that together with his
own valor, Count Maurice had great good fortune, in his gaining so great a
reputation in War, he governed an Army which was well paid, and well provided
of all things; always befriended by rivers and banks; and he never had any
muteny in his Army, nor any of those competitions or brawles betwixt Nation and
Nation, which so often happened in the Catholic Camp; and especially between
the Spaniards and Italians, to the great prejudice of their undertakings: so as
amongst other advantages he has always had the Reins of Discipline free in
his hands, without which an Army is nothing else then a wood of weapons full of
all disorder. To what has been touched concerning Count Maurice his
backwardness, it may be added that his slowness and remissness in actions of
these present times may appear to be the greater, by how much the like of
Marquess Spinola have been the more quick and resolute: and truly to weigh
well the proceedings of the one and the other of them in Military affairs, you
would say that Maurice had been one of Fabius his Scholars, and Spinola one of
Cesars. The one having almost ever shunned, and the other ever sought after
fighting; the one showing himself to be a delayer, not only by nature, but by
choosing his advantage; and the other wholly intent through courage and
forwardness, to make the events on his side advantageous.

CHAP. II.
Diverse other particulars concerning Count Maurice his Person are touched upon.
PRince Maurice his reputation is very great (as has been said) in the United
Provinces; yet without all doubt 'twas greater during the time of War, then it
is now that weapons are laid down; he used all the means he might at first to
hinder always of coming to an accommodation, and afterward that no resolution
might be taken of Peace, or Truce: but he could never keep the Treaty off, nor
hinder that either by the one or the other way weapons might be laid aside. By
the present Government, the other chief Heads for the managing of Civil affairs
took Authority upon them; and having since kept it, and still the more
established it, since the Truce, the Authority of Arms has been weakened and
lessened through idleness: the chiefest and most esteemed of these at the
present is John Barnevelt, Advocat of Holland, and the usual Deputy of the
same Province in the Council of the States General of the whole Union;
Barnevelt was he who assisted chiefly in the negotiation of Truce; and by him
Count Maurice was then counterpoised, as he still is; his experience being
great in Public Affairs, and the practice and Authority which he has
particularly got in that Government very great.

Count Maurice, to boot with his superintendency of Arms, is also the chief
Head in the Civil Government of the United Provinces: being the Governor of
four Provinces, as has been said; and Count William the Governor of Friesland
and Groninghen, as also Ernestus Governor of Ghelderland, having dependancy on
him, as General of the Armies. Count William, Count Ernestus, Count Henry, and
Count John, all of them of the house of Nassaw, are now in the service of the
United Provinces: The first two are Cousens, the third brother, and the last
also kinsman to Count Maurice: Count William has always held the principal
place in the Army next to Count Maurice; a Gentleman of great experience and
valor, and has supplied the place of Lieutenant General of the Army. Count
Ernestus is Camp-Master. General, and is esteemed likewise a man of great
Valor, and capable if occasion should require, of Governing the whole Army.
Count Henry is Maurice his brother by the Fathers side; he is General of the
Horse; and though he be but a young man of 26 years of age, he has given Good
trial of himself in all occasions of War which have been presented. Count John
is a bare Captain of Horse, Count Maurice is the head of all those of Nassaw;
neither can it be said how great the respect is which they bear, and reverence
which they use unto him; All of them receive great pay from the United
Provinces. Count Maurice in respect of so many Offices, may be thought to
receive about two hundred thousand florins yearly, which comes to twenty
thousand pound sterling; wherein is to be comprehended 25000 florins, amounting
to 2500 pound, which the Provinces since the Truce have given by way of
remuneration to him and his heirs for ever. Count William receives four
thousand pound sterling yearly, Count Er^estus three thousand; Count Henry as
much; and Count John the ordinary pay of a Captain of Horse.

Count Maurice resides for the most part in the Hague in Holland; and lives in
the same Palace, wherein the Councels of the States General of the United
Provinces do meet: very great is the obsequie which the whole People show unto
him: and for outward show, you would rather take him to be the Prince of those
Provinces, then Head of their Military and Civil Government. He keeps great
correspondency with the neighboring Kings, and the Protestant Princes of
Germany; and is greatly esteemed and honored in all those parts; but even to
the remotest parts of the Indies, and into all those Southern and Eastern
Countries is his fame carried, by the Navigation of the Hollanders and
Zealanders, who have often shown his Picture, as victorious at Newport,
magnifying at once the renown of their Commander, and the fame of their own
Commonwealth.

Count Maurice is very rich; he is said to have great store of money, and that
he has above a million of Gold in ready Cash; which is not much to be wondered
at; he having always received very great pay from the United Provinces, and
gotten notable emoluments, as well by means of so many places which he took
during the War, as by the so much gain which the Hollanders and Zealanders have
wonn by their Navigation at Sea: he has shared deep in their acquisitions by
Land as General of their Army, and of their gettings by Sea, as being their
chief Admiral. He is Lord of Flushing and of Fervere in Zealand, and of Graves
in Brabant, good and considerable Towns; and of other places of less
importancy: He is now about 45 years old; he has no wife, nor seemed he yet to
have ever any inclination to marry. His chief kindred are the Prince Elector
Palatine in Germany, and the Duke of Bullion in France. The first is the son of
a sister of his by the Fathers side, and the other husband to another sister of
his by the Fathers side also.

It is doubted by many whether Count Maurice did ever aspire to make himself
Prince of the United Provinces or not. On the one side, the love and reverence
which the People bore to his Father; the occasion of a new and unstable
Government; his so long command over their Armies, and that, with so great
Authority, and his Props from without, have made it be often believed that he
was not content to rest in his present limitated Fortune. On the other side,
the United Provinces being so continually well satisfied with his Government;
his way of demeaning himself, which was not after a popular fashion, as was his
Fathers, but rather Stately and proud; and his endeavor rather to lay up, then
to spend money, fearing that foreign Princes might peradventure not be well
pleased that the United Provinces should return to be governed by one man only,
are considerations which have made it be believed that he had no mind to
provoke Fortune, nor to aproach near those precipices which usually border upon
so immoderate desires. Perhaps he with more secret wisdom, did expect those
conjunctures of time, which either did not afterward ensue, or are already
past. The United Provinces do every day better the grounds of their Government,
and love Liberty too well; which after so long agitation, and so many Tempests,
is at last brought home into their havens: Peace now rules; all noise of War is
at an end; and the Authority of other Chiefteyns will every day grow greater,
upon whom the chief administration of public Affairs is to depend, and it may
be believed that they will never see the Authority of any one man grow too high.

CHAP. III.
What the greatest enmities of the United Provinces be.
BY what has been said it may easily be comprehended what the greatest
Friendships be, and what the greatest enmities of the United Provinces with
foreign Princes; but I will treat more particularly hereof as in its proper
place. Their Enmity will certainly be always greatest with the Pope, and the
King of Spain, both which they have so highly offended: their double rebellion
did at first arise against these two Princes, and has indammaged them the
most; by depriving the Catholic Church of its ancient Patrimony of so many of
the Faithful; and the King of Spain of those Dominions which do belong by so
just a Title to the House of Austria. Therefore they will always by all
possible means that they can, endeavor to beat down the Catholic Religion
both within, and without their Territories: To the which though they be much
moved by the mere licensciousness of Heresy, yet will the consideration of the
so much more appugning the King of Spains cause, incite them the more
thereunto. At the beginning of the Rebellion they embraced Heresy, to alienate
their people the more from the Spaniards, and that they might the better form a
Government, which even in the point of Religion might be directly opposite to
that of the Crown of Spain; so as they will seek to establish their present
Form by Heresy; and by this tie, to fasten better the foreign Intelligence
which they hold with all the Enemies to the Catholic Church, to boot with the
means they use to those Princes which oppose the Spanish Power and do endeavor
to acounterpoise thereunto. It Is seen how many and how perverse their designs
have been to introduce their Sect in other parts; they have sailed even to the
Indies, and by their Traffic have infected those parts with their Heresy; and
at home Calvinisme does chiefly rule amongst them, which is the worst of all
Sects, and that which above all others makes subjects revolt against their
Princes: yet diverse other sects are tolerated amongst them, and also many
Catholics, particularly in Holland; but the Catholics are wholly deba^'d the
exercise of their Religion; and are likewise much oppressed in other things; not
so much for being Catholics, as for being accounted either well disposed, or at
least not so ill affected toward the Spaniards, as the Heretics amongst them
are. It Is apparent then that the United Provinces have been moved in a great
part to wage and maintain War against the Catholic Church, that they might
maintain it likewise more effectually by their Forces against the Crown of
Spain. And for what remains, it is not to be doubted, but that by all the most
pernicious ways of State that may be, they will endeavor all the prejudice
they can to that Crown.

Their tallent is alike evil against the Archduke Albertus and his wife the
Infanta Donna Isabella, who are now Princes of the Lowcountreys; for they never
made any difference between the Interest of the King of Spain, and that of the
Archdukes, since they saw them come into Flanders with so little hope of issue.

It Is no doubt that they will always show the like aversion to the other
Princes in Germany which are of the House of Austria; and that they will
readily join upon all occasions with the rivals, or enemies of that House; as
is seen in the fresh occasion of the Archduke Leopolds entrance into Iuliers;
which place they had the boldness to sit down before, despising all Imperial
Majesty, and all the Emperors Authority.

They have no occasion of friendship or disfriendship with the King of Polonia;
unless it be their dislike of that Kings greatness and felicity, who is so
zealous for the Catholic Faith, and so desirous to propagate it: they
therefore together with the King of England have aided Duke Charles in Swethland
against him; and certainly are not well pleased with those his progresses which
he has made, and daily increases in Muscovia: yet the opportunity of the Port
of Dantsick, frequented by the ships of Holland and Zealand, may in some sort
make the United Provinces desirous of his friendship.

CHAP. IV.
Of the friendship which the United Provinces hold; and first of that with the
Crown of France.
THe greatest friendships which the United Provinces have had, and do still
hold, is with France and England: they have had their chief prop and
maintenance from these two Kingdoms. The Duke of Alanson entered, as has been
said, more then once into Flanders with whole Armies; and 'twas always thought
that under color of his youthful spirit, blamed in appearance by the Kings
his Brothers, Charles the ninth, and Henry the third of France, he carried on in
common (though secretly) both his and their ends: which were that by his means
the States of Flanders might be severed from the Crown of Spain. Those designs
in the behalf of France being at the same time as it were vanished, and
conceived, and that Kingdom being involved in so many and so long civil
discords, the rebellion was for many years chiefly maintained by forces from
England: and the Queen making use to her advantage, of the evils as well of her
confederates the Dutch, as of those of the Spaniards her enemies; she sent the
Earl of Lester at that time into Holland with an entire Army, and demanded
Flushing, and the Ramakins in Holland, and the Brill in Zealand, which are the
chief Maretine keys of both those Provinces, to be assigned over to her as
cautionary Towns, and to be garisoned by the English.

Great were the aids which King Henry the fourth of France did continually
afford to the United Provinces, when he had once compounded and quieted the
affairs of his own Kingdom; and since the Queen of Englands death, his
Authority and belief amongst them did so increase, as being chiefly persuaded
and almost constrained thereunto by his endeavors, they first were induced to
treat, and then to conclude the Truce with the Spaniards.

In this last peace of friendship of the King of France, they saw
notwithstanding that many designs lay hid, which caused great suspicions in
them. 'Twas said that the King of France began after the example of the King of
England to make it be understood, that he would likewise have some Towns
delivered up into his hands, in change for those moneys and aids which he
furnished them withal for the maintenance of their War; whereupon those
Provinces grew into such jealousy, as it was held for certain that this was
one of the chiefest reasons which induced them to think of agreement: yet the
King held always the same authority and confidence with them as before; till
the last commotions of France falling out, after the Prince of Condes flight,
and the King preparing to take the field with a powerful Army, the United
Provinces began to have new apprehensions of his ways. The King had Written
into Holland to the Dowager Princess of Orange whose husband was slain, that
upon the occasion of his Armies approach in those parts, he would come privately
to the Hague, where he would be her household Guest. At this news, though sent
but by the way of Jest, the United Provinces grew very apprehensive. They
feared that if the King should come, he in so happy a conjuncture, would
practice some design of his own which might tend to their prejudice; and
especially that he should endeavor to be chosen their Protector: A Title which
might seem to taste of favor, but when narrowlier looked into, full of
suspicion; so great Princes seldom using to take upon them such protections,
unless it be to give Laws to those that they protect; and how could they have
withstood the desires of so great a Prince in their own homes, and with so
great Forces it in their Country, and upon their Frontiers? by reason of their
being freed from these suspicions. it may be thought that the United Provinces
were less sorry for his death, which in other respects proved a very grievous
loss to them.

They do now notwithstanding receive the same signs of friendship from the
Queen Regent, which they did from the King her husband: and it is to be believed
that for the time to come, good correspondency will always be had between the
Crown of France, and the United Provinces. The French, because the severing of
the United Provinces from the King of Spain, makes so much for them; and the
other that by the favor of France they may keep themselves still the better
from the Spanish Empire: yet would not the French that the united Provinces
should arrive at such a greatness of power as they aspire unto; for so the
whole Low Countries might turn into one Heretical Commonwealth, as they lately
were under one only Catholic Prince: Their power would then doubtlesly be no
less dreadful by land, then it is now by sea. But of all other their
neighbors the French ought chiefly to apprehend this, by the boldness which
would grow in their Hugonots in France by the increase of these Heretic Forces
in Flanders. Whereupon it is thought, that the King of France was in this
respect chiefly induced to be so servent in endeavoring the Truce; that he
might leave the Spanish Forces, and the Forces of the united Provinces so
equally counterpoised in Flanders, as that France might receive no prejudice
from either side: And it is not unknown what troubles have often befalne that
Kingdom from thence. First when the Princes of the House of Burgony governed
Flanders; and since, after that those Provinces, with so many other Kingdoms
and Dominions came under the House of Austria.

The late King of France maintained at his own cost two Brigades of Foot and
200 Horse, as has been said: and still permitted his Subjects to fight in
their service, and did moreover in time of War, yearly assist them with large
sums of money. The same people keep now in their Service, and are maintained as
at first at the charge of that Crown. There are many other French likewise
under their pay: and for all things else the same confederacy is kept on both
parts, as was in the time of the late King.

CHAP. V.
Of the friendship which the United Provinces hold with the King of England.
GReat Friendship and Intelligence was held between the Queen of England and
the United Provinces, as has been said, after the death of the Duke of
Alanson, and that the civil wars fell out in France, the Queen of England may
be said to have been their only supporter. And though the jealousies were great
which the United Provinces had of that Queen in the Earl of Lesters time, yet
when they were freed of that Earls Government, their suspicions began to grow
less. And the same correspondency was held on both sides as was before. The
Queen furnished them with their best foot, the English having always been the
best foot Soldiers of their Army: They contracted almost all the debts which
they owe the Crown of England in the Queens time; then when being reduced to so
great a want of Forces, she sent them over not only men, but moneys to pay them.

The Queens ends in fomenting the rebels of Flanders were chiefly two. The one,
her own particular, which was, to increase the Heresy amongst her neighbors,
the more to secure her own falling off from the Church of Rome. In the other
she shared with the French, which was to sever the States of Flanders from the
Crown of Spain, and more particularly the Maretine Provinces, as it fell out
afterward. And doubtlesly if the Spaniards had peacefully inloy'd the Low
Countries, both England and Ireland would have had reason to be afraid of them;
lying in the midst between the Maretine Forces of Spain on the one side, and
the so great and many Forces of Flanders on the other side.

The United Provinces had likewise two ends in their friendship with England;
the one to be assisted in their revolt from the Crown of Spain, and the other
to make use of the near neighboring Heresy of England, the better to
strengthen their new Sects, and by that means to resist the Spaniards the more
easily: the respect of Traffic has also made this friendship be much desired
by both sides: the Commerce is very great which the City of London holds with
Amsterdam, Midleburg, and with all the other Towns of Holland and Zealand: and
the Hollanders likewise reap great advantage by their fishing in the English
Seas.

The Authority and Intelligence which the Queen held with the United Provinces,
was then as we have seen, very great: who was by them esteemed a Lady of a very
high spirit, and of a masculine and warlike Government. After the Queens death,
the late King of France his Authority increased so much amongst them, as the
King of England was, and is yet but little esteemed of by them; yet he even
after peace made with the King of Spain, has granted such men to the United
Provinces as they stand in need of, as the Queen formerly did, with change only
of some outward appearances for the better satisfaction of the Spaniards. The
Governors of the United Provinces speak of this King in terms of small respect;
and seeing him so adicted to hunting, and to his book, especially to such as
treat of controversy; they say a private condition would better become him then
that of a Prince, and that he is fitter to be a Preacher then a King. But
though they speak but meanly of his person, yet they much prize the
neighborhood and opportunity of his Kingdoms, and have still continued the same
prerogative to the Ambassador of England, which was granted in the Earl of
Lesters time, which is, that he is to have a place and Vote in their Council
of State. They keep the same confederacy with the King of England as they did
with the late Queen, and the same is renewed by the King with them.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Friendship which the United Provinces have with other Princes.
THe King of Denmark and the united Provinces are good friends, which they are
reciprocally invited to by the neighborhood of their Country. This Vicinity
is very commodious for the Hollanders in respect of their fishing, and building
of ships, which are made out of the woods wherewith Norway may be said to be
covered: for what remains, the united Provinces have received but little good
in their occasions from Denmark, either in money or men. This King is Master of
very large Territories, but so buried in winter and ice, as his forces are but
small though his circuit be so large.

They maintain good correspondency with the Heretic Princes of Germany,
especially with the Calvinists: of which the chiefest are the Prince Elector
Palatine of Rheine, and the Elector of Brandenburg; as for the Service of
Brandenburg, it is seen in the difference of the States of Cleves and Guliers.
And the last Palatine when he died, in token of his confidence, left his sons
to their Government and protection: their conformity in Sect, and more
particularly in their aversion to the house of Austria, together with the
neerness of their Countries, has easily wrought, and will as easily preserve
friendship between them: the German Princes are notwithstanding for the most
part not over abounding in moneys, so as the help which the United Provinces
received from thence, in their late War did presently vanish. Now that they are
grown so strong, they may rather assist their friends on that side, then look
for any relief from them, unless it be for the raising of some men if they
shall have occasion for them; as has been seen in the behalf of Brandenburg at
the Siege of Guliers; which was chiefly begun and ended by their Forces.

In Italy, the United Provinces have begun some Intelligence with the State of
Venice; when the Truce was concluded they sent an extraordinary Ambassador to
Venice; and received another the like from the Republic. And affairs stand yet
thus between them; but it is to be believed, that through Traffic, and worldly
interest, this correspondency will grow greater.

The United Provinces have likewise now begun to introduce Traffic and
friendship in the Turks Dominions, the Hollanders after the Truce, began to
Traffic in Siria: and have since been drawn on by the good entertainment they
find amongst the Turks, and by their own gain, to continue Commerce in those
parts: and that they may establish it the better for the good of their whole
Countries, the United Provinces have now resolved to send over one that shall
be Resident at Constantinople.

CHAP. VII.
Whether this new Commonwealth of the United Provinces be like to last or no.
NOthing is more fallacious, then to judge of Futurety: It may not
notwithstanding peradventure be displeasing to him who shall read this my
Relation, if I argue here at last with as much brevity as so dubious a business
may permit, whether this new Commonwealth of the United Provinces be likely to
last or not. There are many considerations which make for the duration thereof.
And first, what is more natural to mankind, or of more power with them then the
love of Liberty? Of all Nations of the world, the Northern people of Europe
have always seemed most desirous thereof; and chiefly those of Flanders. In the
time of the Emperor Vespatian, how famous was the ancient Insurrection of the
Batavians, which is so nobly described by Tacitus. There was no talk of
bereaving them of that Liberty which they enjoyed: notwithstanding, thinking
that they lived in slavery whilst they tolerated the pride and violence which
the Roman State ministers did in various manner use in those parts, they grew
to disdain, and from disdain to rebel, and from rebellion to down right war:
They wanted not in those days a Claudius Civilis, who played the Prince of
Orange his part in those troubles. By him, first his Battavians, and afterward
diverse neighboring Countries were incited to take up Arms, till such time as
all arms and contumacy being laid aside, those people remained in their ancient
dependency and friendship with the Romans; and the Romans on their side
withheld from all rigor and violence which might provoke them again to revolt.

The Hollanders that now are, (who were those ancient Batavians) and the other
United Provinces, boast that their ancient Liberty and practiced Form of
Government, discends from these. They confess that they have always had one
eminent Chiefteyn, Head, or Governor, but such a one as has been always
subject to the Laws, and Sovereign Empire of the Commonwealth, which were from
time to time exercised with very little difference by the Provincial Orders.
That the title of these heads were afterward more modernly changed, but that
the degree of the Commonwealth was not diminished with this alteration of
Titles, but kept still its supreme Authority, whilst Holland, Zeala^d, and the
rest of the Provinces of the Low Countries remained severed under their own
peculiar Earls and Lords: That when the House of the Princes of Burgony came
afterward to Govern those Countries, their Government was much altered in many
things, the highborn blood and Kingly haughtiness of that House, not enduring
to depend upon the Laws and Commonwealth: That the Princes of the House of
Austria did much less accommodate themselves to this moderation. That the
Emperor, Charles the fifth, after having gotten new worlds under this Empire,
and King Philip his son after having inherited them with the rest of so great a
Monarchy, they disdained to be limited in their Commands over their Subjects:
whereupon they did not only not give way that the Low Countries should continue
in their former Government, but by force, and violence altered their Laws, took
from them their Immunities, made them so many Collonies to the Spaniard, and
laid heavy yokes of Tribute, and Cittadels upon them. That from hence the
ancient Battavians are risen up again, and have taken up Arms against the
Monarchy of Spain, as their forefathers did against the Roman Empire. That
these have been no less fortunate then those others; since now they preserve
the Liberty which they did enjoy, and have now recovered that which they had
almost lost. Holland is full of the Story of these successes, as also all the
other United Provinces. The desire of Liberty being then so natural to all
people, and chiefly to the people of Flanders, it is easily to be believed that
the United Provinces will use all the means they can, to preserve themselves in
their present Form of Government, and still establish this their new form of a
Free Commonwealth.

To boot with the love of Liberty, the Government of the United Provinces is
now so well and firmly grounded, as their Commonwealth is likely thereby to
subsist along time; far distant and forced changes which are made from one Form
of Government to another clean contrary, are usually dangerous: But the passage
which the United Provinces have made from the Government which they used before
the War, to that which they now enjoy after the Truce, it cannot be said that
they have altered their past form, into another clean contrary, but that they
have only altered it in part: their ancient Laws are kept alive, and every
Province and City is Governed almost as they were formerly; only the Prince his
Sovereignty rests now in the Orders of every Province, and the Eminency of the
Head, remains with the Governor of the same Province. How great then is the
concord which ties and binds the United Provinces together? How great are their
own Forces, and the Friendship which they hold with Foreign Princes? Concord
will keep their minds well disposed, and keep off all occasions of Domestic
Tumults. Their own Forces are such as may be thought sufficient to withstand
such danger as may befall them from abroad; and say they were not of themselves
able to do it, it may be believed that they would be supplied by those very
Foreign aids which have joined with them in the whole course of the last War.

By these reasons which have been alleged, it may then be conjectured, that
this new Commonwealth is likely every day to grow more solid, and better
established, to be of long subsistence, yea that with time it continually grow
the greater and more powerful, like that of the Switzers: and how great is the
conformity between these? The Switzers revolted at first with very small
Forces: They were inflamed with the love of Liberty; the mountainous
scituations fought for them till such time as the other more potent Cantons,
joined with the former which were weaker: and at last their Commonwealth came
to be so established, as it is not only become durable, but even formidable
upon many occasions to diverse Princes. Just so the Insurrection of the United
Provinces had its rise from the two Provinces of Holland and of Zealand only;
the people were thereunto provoked by the love of Liberty, by the advantage of
the sea, rivers, and other weapons of nature, they made their chiefest
resistance at first: afterward their affairs went on more prosperously by the
joining of other Provinces, and the assistance of neighboring Princes: till at
last this their new power is come to that pass, as that they may be said to
give the Law to others at sea, and not to be likely to receive it from others
by land: there Government is also like that of the Switzers. Though this be
rather better then the other by being more uniform, and by the easier joining
of the particular Members of every Province, with the whole body of the General
Union.

But on the other side, many reasons may be alleged why this new Commonwealth
should not be durable. First, for what concerns the love of Liberty; in lieu
thereof we see that the benefit which people receive by obedience, is succeeded;
who from time to time have submitted themselves almost every where to the
Empire of some one. It Is true, at first all Kings were Heads of the people, and
not Kings; of Commonwealths and not of Kingdoms. But afterward Custom has so
prevailed, as people have been disposed and accustomed to the habit of entire
obedience: just as a plant, or humane body we see are accustomed to live in
other earth, and under other Climats, which differ from their own natural ones.
Who would now persuade themselves, that the leaning toward Liberty could be of
force enough to move a desire in the people of Spain, France, and other parts,
of returning to their ancient Forms of their former more free Governments,
whereof they have not only lost the desire, but even the memory. It cannot be
denied notwithstanding, but that in the more Northern parts of Europe, there
are yet freer Forms of Government. The King of England cannot do many things
without his Parliament; nor the Princes of the Low Countries, without the
consent of the Provinces which are under them. The King of Denmarks power is
yet more limited; so is the King of Polands; and the Princes of Germanies
Authority is much restrained: But it must be granted that the Authority of the
Supreme Head in all these Governments has ever been, and still is very great:
Wherein the peoples obedience to their Prince is so ancient, as they can endure
no other Government then that of one alone. It may then also be imagined, that
the United Provinces must necessarily incline, out of their habit of ancient
obedience, to suffer themselves to be Governed by some one only man; but in
that Form of Government notwithstanding which they were wont formerly to enjoy,
and which may correspond with their ancient institions and Customs. To which
Form when those Provinces shall see themselves invited by any oportune
conjuncture, it may be thought that they might easily return to their ancient
obsequie and obedience to that Prince, which time and occasion shall council
them to receive.

In answer to that the present Government differs not much from what it
formerly was, it may be said, that the alteration is such, as from it many
others of greater importance may be expected. The Government is too much
altered in the so great Authority which Count Maurice holds in them: too much
in the Burden of so many Grievances and Garrisons; and lastly too much in the
power of some of the Provinces which do almost Lord it over the rest. And hence
it is that the Concord between the United Provinces, is not effectually such as
it appears outwardly to be.

Some of them are not well pleased with the so great Eminency which Count
Maurice possesses amongst some others of them. Holland is envied by them all,
by reason of its great opulency. In particular, there are almost continual
Jars between Holland and Zealand: Some of them complain very much that they are
oppressed with the same Grievances and Garrisons since the Truce, as they were in
the time of War: and Holland by its not complaining thereof, makes the rest
quarrel the more with it, and with those that Govern there, who seem chiefly to
sustain themselves, by the reputation and support of the Holland Forces: To
boot with these diversities of Interest, how much does the difference of so
many and so various sects withstand the Union of their minds: many, and in many
things disagreeing, are the Sects into which the People of the United Provinces
are divided; besides the very many Catholics which are there; and how can
their own Forces be sufficient for their defense, when they draw not together?
since it may so fall out, that such Foreign Princes as now side with them,
growing hereafter to better Intelligence with the Crown of Spain, perhaps will
not, or hindered by their own necessities, cannot hereafter assist the United
Provinces. Out of all these disquisitions it may then be gathered, that this
new Commonwealth is not likely to continue in its present condition, but that
it will rather fail therein shortly, and be again reduced at last to the
Government of one only.

CHAP. VIII.
The end of the preceding Discourse, and of the Relation.
SUppose now that the United Provinces were inclined to submit themselves again
to the Government of one alone; let us see who this Prince may likelyest be,
and by what means it may be hoped that they may be brought to submit themselves
to him: In the past troubles of Flanders, the Rebels necessitated thereunto,
fled for protection first to the French, and then to the English; but the new
Principality of Alanzon vanished almost as soon as it had any being; and the
Queen of England laying aside her hopes of Domination, was afterward content
with the Power of advising. Orange his hopes and cus'nages were cut short by
death; and Count Maurice wants either courage or opportunity to advance his
Fortune. So as it is not to be believed that the United Provinces will ever
subject themselves either to the French or English, or to Count Maurice: then
next to the House of Burgony, the Low Countries with justest Title will fall
into the hands of the House of Austria.

It is thought by the gravest personages, and the best experienced in the
Affairs of Flanders, that the United Provinces may return to be under the House
of Austria by two several ways. The one, by appointing out unto them once again
a Prince of that blood, who may succeed the Archdukes instead of Issue. The
other, by endeavoring to induce the said Provinces by such means as shall be
thought best fitting, to return under the obedience of the Crown of Spain, in
case the King after the death of the Archdukes, shall not incline to cut the
United Provinces off again from the Crown of Spain.

The first of these two ways is thought the likelyest to succeed; and it is seen
that necessity did at last teach Philip the second, when all other remedies
proving desperate, he was brought to make use of this, though he could not
prevail in so doing by reason of the Archdukes sterillity: This remedy will
then consist in the King of Spains resolving to Institute one of his own sons
for heir to the Archdukes, which son by some fitting marriage may establish
perpetual succession of Princes of that Country in Flanders! Thus it might be
hoped that the people of the United Provinces might be incited to love this
mentioned Issue, as those from whom Dutch Successors might hereafter proceed,
and that from this love, an inclination to obedience might ensue, and finally
Intigrall obedience.

It Is likely that the French would assist herein, to the end that they might be
for ever rid of the neighborhood and hazard of the Spanish Forces on that side
of their Kingdom which lies open toward Flanders, and the better to ^eucure
their Country from the vicinity and danger of the Heretics in the Low
Countries: Since by the reuniting of those Countries under a Catholic Prince,
they might have reason to hope that the Catholic Religion would be raised up
again in those parts where it is now under hatches, and cousequently the
Intelligence which the Heretics of the United Provinces, with those of the
Kingdom of France would be at an end. Amongst the English these respects would
be more counterpoised: on the one side they would willingly see the Low
Countries wholly alienated from the Crown of Spain; for those reasons as have
been said before; but on the other side they would not be pleased to see this
so potent and near neighborhood of Heresy fail.

The second way, which would consist in using such means as were most
conducible to make the United Provinces submit themselves again to the Crown of
Spain, is generally judged to be harder to effect then the former, and may
briefly be reduced to two heads, either of working upon the inclination of the
said Provinces, or of endeavoring to subjugate them again by Force. It has
already been seen how much Philip the second labored both these ways, and yet
got no good thereby. As amongst the Elements some agree, and some are of a
contrary nature, so among those people in Europe which are under the Monarchy
of Spain, some are of a temper conformable to the Spanish Nation, and some of a
clean repugnant habit. Their Government is easilyer received, and their Customs
embraced in Italy; whereas in Flanders the repugnancy almost in all things
between the Inhabitants there and the Spaniards, was a chief cause of the first
Insurrection, and then of the War, and has at last occasioned the falling off
of many of the Provinces: so as to say truth, there is small hopes that the
United Provinces will ever submit themselves to the obedience of the Crown of
Spain, out of their own inclination: In case then that success be to be
dispair'd of by this way, it will remain that all hopes are to be placed in
bringing them to their former obedience by force of arms. Doubtlesly a
dangerous and difficult way; as forty years experience has shown: if the war
be to commence again when the Truce shall end, will the Spaniards have better
soldiers, or better Commanders? Will their Princes prove better? or will they
meet with more favorable conjvncture of times then formerly? Spain will never
have better Commanders, nor more flourishing Armies then they have had till now
in Flanders. 'Twill never have a wiser Prince then Philip the second; nor will
it ever meet with times more oportune, then those were when its Enemies in
Flanders were brought so low, and when at the same time they were so little
fomented by Foreign Forces: It is rather to be feared that in such a case the
Enemy might get advantage, being grown proud, by their so great past
prosperity; and made secure that for the time to come the wonted strength of
their Country will never fail them, nor their peoples first obstinacy, nor the
already experienced forwardness of their confederate Princes, in a^^isting them
upon all occa^ions against the Crown of Spain: so as it may be greatly doubted,
that if they should fall to War again, things would go worse with the Spaniard,
and that instead of getting, they would receive new losses. And unless it were
for this doubt, why was the Truce so much desired by the Spaniards? But the
mean while the Truce will afford Spain time maturely to weigh what will be most
advantageous for that Crown, as well touching the Kings appointment of a son of
his to succeed as heir to the Archdukes, in manner as has been said; as
concerning what resolution is to be taken, either of prolonging the Truce, or
making a firm peace, or of laying aside all further thought of agreement, and
breaking out into war again; they are all of them businesses of such importance
and weight, as will very well require long and mature consultation; but above
all, that our chief consultations be had with God, who gives and takes away
Kingdoms; changes and alters them as he pleases, and makes humane wisdom often
times prove most blind, when it appears to be quickest ^ighted.

THE RELATION OF FLANDERS.
(To wit) Of those Two Provinces which remain still under the Obedience of the
Archdukes, ALBERTUS and his wife ISABELLA, Infanta of SPAIN.
Wherein also Relation is made of the Religion professed in the United Provinces.
Of the State of Religion in ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND.
Written by the Cardinal Bentivoglio in his time of being Nuntio at the same
Archdukes Court; and sent to Rome to the Cardinal Burghese, Nephew to Pope
^aulus Quintus; Dated April 6. 1613.
THe matters of Negotiation, which are treated by the Nuntios of the Apostolic
sea, are either ecclesiastical or temporal: the first are proper for the
Nuntio, as the chief person who represents the Apostolic Ministers; and the
second appertains unto him also in respect of his common condition with the
other Ambassadors of Secular Princes. That you may therefore have a full and
perfect knowledge of the most Important affairs which fall under the particular
cognizance of the Nuntio for Flanders: 'Twill be needful to reduce them to the
two forementioned heads. Observing the same order; I will divide this present
Relation into two parts: In the first I will treat of temporal Negotiations;
in the other of such as are Ecclesiastical; and I will treat first of the
first, that I may render the knowledge of the other the more clear.

In Temporalities I will keep my self to some distinct heads; in representing
the nature of the Archduke and the Infanta his wife, the condition of their
States; the form of their Court; what Officers they make use of; and what
Intelligence they hold with neighboring Princes; and at last I will say
something concerning the Army which the King of Spain maintains in Flanders.

In matters ecclesiastical I will observe the like Order; I will reduce them
to some particular Heads; and when I shall have first related the present
condition of Religion in those Provinces of Flanders as are Catholic, and
continue under the obedience of the aforesaid Princes, I will pass to show the
State thereof in Holland and the other Heretical United Provinces, which are
now wholly divided from the former; for that the Churchmen which are in those
parts are under the same Nuntioship: and I will conclude the Relation in
setting down all that belongs to the same Head, in the Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland; since all Affairs of Religion which occur in those
Kingdoms, fall likewise under the same Nuntiature.

To begin the said order, I will first treat of the nature and custom of the
Archdukes, by which Title (as it is commonly used in these Provinces) the
husband and wife are equally understood; and then I will pass on to those other
heads which are contained in the first part.

CHAP. I.
Of the Natures and Customs of the Archdukes.
THe Archduke Albertus is low of stature, his complexion partly San guine,
partly Phlegmatic; as are generally almost all the Austrian Princes; his face
white, his hair light colored, and his lineaments very noble: he has an
Austrian mouth, and his complexion is rather tender then strong; he is troubled
with the Gout; he had wont to be but seldom troubled therewithal; but of late
his Fits come oftener and are more painful: he is not subject to any other
indisposition of health; nor can it be said how regular he is in his diet: at
this present he is 54 years old: and thus much for the habit and temperature of
his body. For what concerns his mind he is a Prince of singular virtue; and
first it cannot be said how pious, and religious he is; nor how great the zeal
and respect is which he shows outwardly toward Divine Worship, and sacred
things: In all his Demeanors, you may read a rare integrity, and appearing
bashfulness; wherein he may be an Example not only to all Princes, but even to
every private man; he is a great lover of Justice, and keeps great moderation in
all things; he is grave in his actions, and of so composed and equal temper in
them all, as he is never seen to vary the least title from himself: he speaks
but little; according to the mode of the Austrian Princes; and slowly according
to his natural Custom: He is Master of five Languages, his own mother tongue
which is Dutch, Spanish, Latin, Italian, and French: he speaks and uses the
three first, and understands the other two very well: he is knowing in diverse
sorts of Learning, which he got whilst he was Cardinal; and does particularly
study the Mathematics: In matters of business he is indefatigable, and his
chiefest delight lies in business; giving audience seeeral hours every day,
both morning and evening with incredible attention and goodness: he is
wonderful secret, and makes as little discovery by his looks as by his words;
you can never read any commotion of mind in her face, which is always equal
and serene; he is of a constant nature, as he has showed in his patient
bearing with so many adversities as have befalne him in the late Wars: He
suffers in the common opinion by being irresolute and slow; and certainly he is
better for peace then war: which commonly requires Council and resolution at
the same time; and cannot admit of so harmonious and equal order in actions,
as the Archduke uses. This his so slow proceeding and with such gravity,
arises partly from the natural temperature of his body, but much more from
his having lived so long in Spain, where he formed Customs to the Idea of those
of King Philip the second, whom he set before him for his example in all
things; nor was that so grave and well weighed manner of proceeding to be
blamed in the King, as being according to the Government and nature of the
Spaniard; nor had the King ever any occasion of altering that his usual way of
living in time of peace with the different way of proceeding which is requisite
in war; but Flanders requires a Prince more affable, and tractable, and the
wars there more efficacious and more resolute actions, then are those of the
Archduke. For what concerns the way of Government in Spain, he did very well
to imitate King Philip, but for what concerns Flanders, and the managing of
Arms, he might have done much better to have taken his Father, the Emperor
Charles the fifth for his example; who knew very well how to temper his
proceedings, and accommodate them to the so many and differing natures of
People whereof the body of his Empire did consist. The Dutch seem rather to
reverence, then to love the Archduke; they reverence him for his so many
virtues, but do not greatly love him, because he never was communicable with
the People, as they desired he should be. This his so great Retiredness and
Gravity, is accompanied with an high punctuality of Majestical state; which he
will have kept up, and which to say truth, is not so generally approved of upon
all occasions. But it is no wonder if amongst the Harmony of so many egregious
parts there be some dissonance, or discords of humane affections. For all
things else, the Archduke is endued with excellent qualities, and deserves to
be recorded to posterity for one of the greatest and most considerable Princes
which our Age has afforded.

But the Infanta Donna Isabella, his wife, of whom I am now to speak, is no
less worthy to be recorded to posterity. Her complexion, wherein blood and
phlegm do likewise predominate, is very like her husbands. She is higher of
stature then most women are, and in these her present years she still keeps
that Majestical beauty in her eyes and countenance, which was thought in her
youth to exceed all others. She is graceful in all her actions, and a certain
benignity appears throughout all her behavior, accompanied with Greatness,
which violently draws unto her the love of all men; she is now about forty six
years old; in perfect health; she is given to exercise, and is a great friend
to Hunting, and field pastimes. Sometimes she her self on horseback will Hound
her Hawk, and Govern the Chase. As for her gifts of mind, she is undoubtedly
one of the gallantest and most signilized Princesses that ever lived, and
represents unto the life in all Princely virtues, that famous Isabella, her
Progenetrix, whose name she bears, and from whose blood she is descended.

It is not to be expressed how gracious and affable she is; how liberal and
magnanimous; how just; but chiefly how Pious and Religious. Her zeal unto the
Church is very great; nor has she any more servent desire then to see it
flourish every where, especially in those Heretical Provinces of Flanders,
where formerly the Piety of her Predecessors did shine no less, then in these
others which do faithfully stand still for the Catholic Religion. Such is the
modesty and retiredness of her Ladies, as you would say they lived in a
Monastery, not a Court. And yet on the other side, you shall not see a Court
fuller of Majesty, and more jolly then hers, in all occurrences which may
arise, either in Turnements, Hunting, or other Recreations, which are used in
Princes Courts. Her mind is truly Heroical, and above the reach of adverse
fortune, as was particularly seen in the Archdukes ill luck at Newport. Upon
which occasion it might often times be doubted, whether her constancy was greater
when she first heard that the Battle was lost, or when she heard that the
Archduke was taken, or at the third advertisement that he was at liberty, but
sorely wounded. She has left the Government of those States which were her
Dowry, to the Archduke, being willing to dis-robe her self thereof to the end
that business might be the speedilier dispatched by passing through the hands of
only one; and that the greater her husbands authority was, the people might
bear the greater respect unto him. But notwithstanding the Archduke does not
any thing which he does not first fully communicate to her; but advises with
her in all things, and receives great help from her sublime wit, which nature
has endued her withal, and from the singular experience which she got in so
high and famous a School of Wisdom as was that of her glorious Father King
philip. But the Archduke does this likewise, as moved thereunto by the love
which they mutually bear one to another, which does equal, if not exceed all
example of matrimonial affection. It appears almost incredible, that there can
be such an uniformity of thoughts and will in two several persons; no discord
being ever observed to be between them in any thing whatsoever, as if there
were but one soul in both their bodies. In all these things the Infanta is in
particular highly to be commended; who being Princess of these Countries,
having in her a masculine spirit, yea, even a greater resolution then the
Archduke; is notwithstanding pleased to submit her self so strictly to the
Laws of Matrimony, as she is content with the very bare Title of a Wife. And
doubtlesly she is generally much more beloved then her Husband, and is of far
more amiable conditions; for she is exceeding affable in her conversation with
all people, and has extraordinary indowments of nature, which wins the very
souls of all men. So as in the common opinion a better tempered Principality
could not be desired, if the virtues of the Infanta and the Archduke being
joined together, some particular defect wherein that Husband is wanting, might
be supplied by some particular perfection wherein the Wife does superabound.

CHAP. II.
Of the condition of those States which the Archduke possesses.
THE Archdukes States in the Low Countries which after the Truce keeps still
in their obedience to them; as also in the Province of the Country of Burgony
are in number ten. To wit, the Dukedom of Brabant, Ghelders, Lucemburg, and
Limburg; the Counties of Flanders, Hennault, Artois, and Namures; the Lordship
of Malines; and the Marquisit of the holy Empire. But at this time the last is
comprehended under Brabant; and Flanders is divided into three Provinces; into
the Province of Flanders it self; into that of Torney, with the Territory of
Ternesis; and into the Province of the great Town of Silla, together with the
two other Towns of Duay, and Orciers. To these Provinces is added the City of
Cambrey, with the Territory of Cambresis on the side of France. The County of
Burgony was afterward given in portion by Philip the second King of Spain, to
his daughter the Infanta, together with the Provinces of Flanders.

All these Provinces are generally very fertile, and set wine aside (whereof
howsoever Burg^^y produces great store) they abound in all things necessary
for human life. They abound most in Cattle and whitmeats. The Country is for
the most part very pleasing, and the Fields are covered over almost all the
whole year with gladsome Pasturage; and the Spring for many months together
does wantonnize it there; the Summer in Flanders, being but as the Spring in
Italy; The cold there may rather be said to be long then sharp, which is
easily mastered without their Stoves; the people for the most part are of a
fair aspect, very white skinn'd, and of as candid a disposition. Their
conversation is pleasant, they are greatly given to liberty, and stick close to
their privileges, and ancient institutions.

The Government of the aforesaid People and Provinces is of three sorts;
Monarchical, Optimatical, and Popular. The Monarchical government consists in
the persons of the Archdukes; that of the Optemati in the two Orders or States
of the Churchmen and Nobility; and the Popular in the like of the Cities and
Villages, (as they are here called) wherein for the most part none but the
common sort of People divided into their several occupations, do inhabit. The
Monastical Abbots whereof the greatest part of Ecclesiastics in every
Province, does consist; inhabiting usually in their Monasteries, out of the
Cities, and the Nobility in their Country habitations.

The States of every Province consists of these three sorts of persons, over
which the Prince keeps his particular Prerogatives. So as these three forenamed
Orders cannot by their own proper authority call together the States of the
Province; the doing whereof depends always on the Prince; who upon any occasion
either of his own, or of the Province, calls them together, and propounds unto
them the business; to which every Order gives their Answer; and without the
consent of all the three Orders, the Prince cannot of himself determine any
thing. In this point his will is bounded by the will of the people; who
sometimes absolutely deny what he demands of them, and will maintain their
ancient privileges of being entreated to what they give way unto, and will
enjoy a subjection mixed with liberty.

The States General of all the Provinces is formed of the particular States of
every Province; the particular States meet together every year once; in which
meeting little or nothing is now adays handled, but the renewing of the consent
of the three Orders for the continuation of the supply which every Province
uses to contribute toward the Prince his maintenance. But the Convocation of
the States General is very seldom had; this being a great Body to govern, and
usual suspected by the authority and greatness of the Prince. Nor did they
ever meet in all the time of the Archdukes, save at the very first, which was
that they might confirm the resignation which King Philip the second made of
those Provinces to his daughter the Infanta.

For what concerns Justice; civil affairs come first to be handled by the
Magistrates of Cities, when the people of the same City are concerned therein;
and afterward pass by way of Appeal to the Provincial Councels, which are in
every Province. But the causes of the Nobility and Titulati are first argued in
the Provincial Councels, from the sentence whereof, all causes are generally
carried by Appeal to the Supreme Council erected at Malines; except the
Provinces of Brabent, Gheldars, and Henn^ult, where causes receive their final
determination. In criminal affairs, the Magistrates of Towns and Cities give
sentence, who in this case have absolute power over their inhabitants; but
judgment in criminal affairs wherein the Nobility or Titulati be concerned, is
reserved to the Provincial Council; and this in short, is the Government in
general of the Archdukes Provinces.

The Arch Dukes have three chief Conncels for the dispatch of such business as
depend upon their own particular authority. The Council of State, the Privy
Council, and the Council of the Treasury. The Council of State was anciently of
great esteem. Affairs of greatest weight were therein handled and resolved, and
the chiefest Lords of Flanders were wont to be admitted thereinto; but now
there remains nothing but the shadow or bare title thereof. The last
revolutions occasioned, and do still produce great suspicions, and made it
appear, that secrets are not secure when known to so many. Yet at this very
time, the prime Lords of the Country do covet a place in that Council; and some
Ecclesiastical person of highest esteem, has still been placed therein. But
the Privy Council keeps its ancient repute. All causes of Justice, or grace
which depend upon the Supreme Authority of the Archdukes, are therein treated
of; and the Counselors are usually seven, the President being therein
comprehended, and some one Ecclesiastical person. The Council of the Financies
or Treasury, manage the Archdukes Moneys, which come in most from the
Provincial contributions; and some part from the Archdukes patrimonial estate,
and some imposition of Taxes. The Archdukes Revenues or Incomes are then of
three sorts: The first and greatest part consists in contributions, and is laid
out in the maintenance of such Garrisons as are requisite in many Frontiers of
those Provinces; one part only excepted, which together with the Kings money is
employed in payment of the Armies Horse. The moneys which come in by the other
two ways, go toward the maintenance of the Archdukes house, and other their
extraordinary expenses which daily occur. The Provincial contributions may come
to about 200000 Florins a month, or twenty thousand pound sterling: in the time
of war they came to 20005. pounds a month, but are now reduced to the
aforesaid sum. The other two sorts of Incomes may rise to about sixty thousand
Florins, or six thousand pounds a month; The Archdukes get but little from
their patrimonial estates, because they are already almost all engaged; neither
do they get much by their Imposition of Taxes, the whole Country being almost
free from them by virtue of their privileges.

The Province of Flanders is greatest, and richest, and consequently
contributes much more then the others do. Brabant comes in the next place,
which is likewise a plentiful Province, and of large extent: the Provinces of
Artois, and Henault, contribute almost a like with it, and that of Silla but
little less. There is not much difference amongst the others; for though the
circuit of the Dukedom of Lucemburg be large, it is not very vvealthy; and as
for the Dukedom of Ghelders or Ghelderland, which is one of the greatest and
richest Provinces of Flanders, the Archdukes possess but one fourth part
thereof, the other three remaining under the Dominion of the United Provinces.
No Relief at all comes from Burgouy, by way of Subsidy. Yet the Archdukes
receive a considerable Revenue from thence, from the salt which is made in that
Province; and somewhat also from some Patrimonial estate, which they have
therein. So as we may make account, that all the Archdukes Revenues in the
whole, come to 20008 pounds sterling a month.

All the Archdukes Provinces are very well peopled. Brabant, Ghelderland and
Flanders, and seated lowest, and abound most in Rivers, and consequently in
Traffic; but the rest are more given to Arms, particularly those which coast
upon France; which are Burgony and the Walloan Provinces; under which name is
understood Artois, Hennault, Namure, Limburg, and that part of Lucemburg, which
looks toward France: the City of Cambrey, and Country of Cambresis, being
likewise therein comprehended. These are the Provinces which confine upon
France; the others border some upon Germany, and some upon the United
Provinces; and only Flanders joins upon the Sea.

The Archdukes Militia consist of six hundred Curassiers, and one thousand two
hundred of the Guard, which are divided into diverse companies under the Lords
of the chiefest Provinces; and they consist also in the men of those Garrisons
which are maintained upon diverse Frontiers as has been touched upon before.
Those of the Curassiers and Guard are notwithstanding kept in standing pay, but
only their names enrolled; neither do they enjoy any thing thereby, in time of
peace but some exemptions and prerogatives of small importance. In time of war
they receive such pay as was assigned them when this Militia was first formed;
which was wont to be held in great esteem, being almost wholly composed of
Gentry; but at this time it consists altogether of the baser sort of people,
and is in all things else much fallen from its former repute; These are the
proper Forces of the Archdukes, to boot with those which upon occasion may be
raised out of their own Territories, which commonly produce Warlike men.

The Archdukes Forces which have any relation to pay, are but weak, for their
Revenue is but small, and such as cannot any ways supply expenses; so as many
of their places are not so munited as were needful; and if they were besieged,
it is to be feared they might easily be lost; but in all Kingdoms and great
Dominions the expenses are generally greater then are the Revenues wherewith to
maintain them, and the expenses of Flanders, by reason of the so many years
war, and so very expensive, have been so excessive, as they have not only
exhausted the Archdukes own Revenues, and treasury, and reduced themselves and
their Countries still to greater necessities, but they have likewise consumed
the King of Spains Treasury, and left the body of so potent and great a
Monarchy languishing and exhausted.

CHAP. III.
Of the Archdukes Court.
THE Archdukes Court is framed according to the manner of the other Austrian
Princes; who have generally instituted their Courts in imitation of that of the
house of Burgony in former times. The chief Officers are these three; the Lord
high Steward; the Master of the Horse; and the Groom of the Stool. Under the
Lord high Steward is comprehended 4 other Stewards of the House. Under the
Master of the Horse 4 Querries; and all the other Gentlemen of the chamber Which
attend upon the Archdukes person are under the Groom of the Stool. Upon these
Offices many other Orders of inferior persons do depend. The Carvers, Cuppers,
and Suers, together with almost all the other household Officers are subordinate
to the Lord high Steward. As are the pages and all that belong unto the Stables
to the Master of the Horse; and those that attend upon the Archdukes Bed
chamber, to the Groom of the Stool.

These three are the chiefest Offices, and have no dependency one upon another;
and therefore they all three strive for Prerogative; though in the common
opinion, the office of Lord high Steward be the greatest. He has liberty to
enter at all hours into the Archdukes, and also into the Infanta's most
private Lodgings: He has the chief command of the Family, and has a
particular place in all public Audiences; and in the Chapel at Divine
Service. Other Stewards depend chiefly upon the service of the Infanta. With
her the first Lady of her Bed chamber has the first place, and under her are
the other Ladies and women servants. The place of chief Chaplain is also a
place of great esteem, as also those of the Captains of the Guard. Which Guards
are of three sorts. One of Archers, one of Halberdiers, and one of Lances and
Harquebusses, And this last is the Guard which the Archduke has, as General
of the King of Spains Army. These which I have named are the chiefest and
principallest Offices of the Archdukes Court; there be also a great many
inferior Offices.

Count Agnover one of the prime Gentlemen of Spain, and a man of great desert,
is at this time Lord high Steward. It is not many months since the Archdukes
honored him with this place; he having been many years Groom of the Stool;
which place he still keeps, as also that of Captain of the Guard of Lances and
Harquebusses. The place of Master of the Horse is at this present void, by the
death of the Count Soldre, Knight of the Golden Fleece, who did enjoy it. Den
Piedro de Tolledo is chief Chaplain; who was Ambassador from the Archdukes in
the Court of Rome.

Baron Barbanson is Captain of the Archers, and Count Frederig de Berg Captain
of the Halberdiers* both of them Gentlemen of the best rank in those parts. The
Infanta's chief Lady of her Bedchamber, is the Lady Schacencourt, who went
from France into Spain to wait upon Queen Isabella, the Infanta's Mother. She
is now very old, so as by reason of her great age her place is in many things
officiated by her Niece the Lady Katherina Livia; who is a Lady of excellent
parts, and much esteemed in Court: but by her own place the Lady Katherine is
Cup Bearer to the Infanta; who is waited upon at the Table by her Ladies as the
Archduke is by the Gentlemen of the Chamber; both of them using to eat
together both at Noon and Night.

The Ladies, as also the Gentlemen of the Chamber are all of them principal
personages, some of them having the Title of Princes, and being Knights of the
Golden Fleece: so as the Archdukes Court, for what belongs to the service of
their own persons, and generally in all things else may v^e with any other the
most flourishing and splendid Court in Christendom.

Their Court is the more innobled by the usual residence of the Popes Nuncio,
and of diverse Princes Ambassadors, and Ministers of State; there are three who
receive the entertainment of Ambassadors; they of Spain, France, and England:
though he of France is not styled by his King, with the Title of Ambassador,
that he may give precedence to him of Spain, as is used in the Court of
Flanders.

The Archduke speaks to all Ambassadors, as also to all other Lords of how
great quality soever they be in the third person, except they be such as are or
may be Grandees of Spain, and to those he gives the Title of Signoria. But the
Infanta uses (...) Vos generally to all, and follows the Kingly style of
Spain, in all things. The Arch Dukes imitate the customs of that Court,
likewise in the service in their Chapel, and in the celebration of their
public Feasts. And it may be said in general, that both these Courts walk in
the same steps, unless it be that the Court of Brussels may seem in some sort
more pleasing and delightful by reason of the Freedom of the Country, and by
the intercourse of so many Nations which by reason of the Army are usually seen
there. And in this point the Court of Flanders may doubtesly be said to exceed
all those of Europe.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Arch Dukes Ministers of State.
I Now come to the Arch Dukes Affairs, and to the Officers who do manage them.
Their Affairs are of two sorts; the first concerns themselves; the other have
respect to the Crown of Spain. The first are managed by Dutch Ministers, the
second by Spanish: For their own Affairs, these are they who deal chiefly
therein. In the Affairs of that Country, the Auditour Lewis Verreychen, their
first Secretary of State; in Foreign correspondencies philip Prats Secretary of
State also; for matter of Moneys, Count Ester, of the house of M^^er ^ncy,
chief Treasurer and Councellor of State; and in matters of Justice, at present
in default of the President, the Counselor Massio, and the Councellor Pequio,
both of them of the Privy Council. The Auditor Verreychen, is a man of
excellent parts: He has been employed in great Affairs, particularly upon the
occasion of the last peace between France and England, and of the Truce
concluded in Flanders; so as experience accompanies his other good parts.
Philip P^a^s is commended for his integrity and diligence. Count Ester
professes to be spiritually given, and liberal, and by these two means has
wrought himself into a good opinion with the Archdukes, and has gotten into
Authority. Councellor Massio is a man of rare candor and singular goodness.
Councellor piqu^o is a man of dispatch, and very able in the managing of
public affairs; and having won credit in France, where he was Ambassador for
some years from the Archdukes, he is employed as well in politic as judicial
affairs. In such occasions as fall out in Germany, the Secretary Antonio
Suares, is made use of, a Dutch man by birth, and one of the Archdukes ancient
servants.

For those things which do respect the King of Spains interest in the Provinces
of Flanders, these are likewise committed chiefly to the Archdukes care, out
of two respects* The one by reason of the Archdukes being General of the Kings
Army here; and the other, for that the same Archduke and the Infanta his wife
(their marriage proving steril) are as it were Feoffees in trust in those
States, which are after their decease to fall unto the crown of Spain again: so
as executing the place rather of Governors then of Princes of Flanders, they
therefore are very careful of the Kings interest, as he who is to be their next
successor. But to speak more particularly of those the Kings Agents who are
subordinate to the Archdukes; the weight of the Spanish affairs lies chiefly
now upon three, the Marquisse Ambrosius Spinola, the Secretary John Mancicidor,
and the Archdukes confessor; which confessor though he depend chiefly upon the
Archduke, yet being by birth a Spaniard, and a man of great experience and
abilities, he is employed in all affairs which do most import the King of Spain.

Marquisse Spinola's authority in this court is exceeding great. Five of the
chiefest honors which the crown of Spain can bestow are in a short time
conferred on him. He is of the Order of the Golden Fleece; he is one of the
Kings Council of State; he is Superintendent General of all the Kings moneys
which are laid out in Flanders; he is Camp-Master General, with the title
likewise of Governor of the Army; and finally, in this his last journey into
Spain, he has received the honor of a Grandee. It Is now 11 years since the
Marquisse led those Italian forces into Flanders, which were first to have
served his bother Fredericks designs; he being dead, the Marquess succeeded in
the same designs, to advance his Fortune by the Military way in Flanders,
neglecting the pursuit of civil honors in Genua. Being egged on thus by these
designs, which were occasioned chiefly by the emulation which was between him
and Prince Doria, in their native country of Genua, he brought 8000 foot with
him into Flanders, who came absolutely under his command. Being thus become a
General before he could well be said to be a soldier, he soon after with equal
forwardness ran into great reputation. Whereunto the taking of Oftend gave him
the first rise. The two Fields of Friesland followed after, in both which the
Marquisse showed great vigilance and valor, and knew very well how to supply
the want of experience which he could not purchase in so short a time with
every other proof of Military Government. He afterward labored with incredible
industry and wisdom in bringing the difficult practices of the Truce to an
end; which lasted above two years; and which made it appear how excellent he
was at the managing of the most difficult enterprises both military and civil.
He is a very vigilant Minister, and is so indefatigable in matter of business,
as though he weary all men, he is never weary himself. In him there are many
actions which seem contrary within themselves.

On the one side he undertakes all things which he takes in hand with great
servency; and treats of them afterward with extraordinary study and patience:
Business seems to be to him a pastime; yet no man minds his business more then
he, or is more intent therein: He seems to them who consider the splendid
living in his house, to be given to Luxury; yet no man is more indifferent in
all things which concerns his own person; he eats and drinks not minding it:
his rest is not to rest; and especially when he is in the head of an Army, he
shows himself no less their chief in bearing with hard ships, then in
commanding over them; in ^ine, he is a Minister of singular valor and
understanding; very advised in his Councels, very tractable in his comportment,
and very upright in the administration of public affairs: It cannot be said
how averse he has always been to self-interest, and has appeared so much the
closser handed in managing the Kings moneys, as he has been the more liberal
of his own in his excessive expenses. His Authority (as I have said) is very
great in this Court: All the most important affairs of the Army pass through
his hands; and in all other the greatest affairs of State, he has likewise
always the principal part.

Great is the Authority likewise of Secretary Mancicidor; he was secretary of
the Army, when the Arch Duke being as then still Cardinal, came first to be
Governor of these Countries, and has from that time to this, discharged that
place with great praise and integrity; he is come out of the discipline of Don
John d' Ideachez, a very famous Officer; and he has always and still does
prefess to have his chief de pendency upon him. Mancicidor showed his
integrity, and how far he was from self-interest, when the Truce was made; in
the mannaging and conclusion whereof there was not a Spaniard but himself: for
setting aside all by-respect of self-profit, he never rested from such Offices
which made most for the Public service: and no doubt but that for what
concerned himself, no man lost more by the Truce then he; for whereas in the
time of War his place was worth ten or twelve thousand Crowns a year, now in
the time of Truce it is hardly worth three thousand Crowns a year: He is austeer
in his looks and behavior; of a very composed nature; one that ruminats more
then he speaks; but professes great truth in what he says; and this his so
clear proceeding, has wonn him great credit and authority with the Archduke;
though he shuns the making of it appear as much as he can: and so by refusing
all company, and concourse, he is become the more fixed, by how much the less
appearance he makes: He is an Officer very well esteemed of here, as also in
Spain, in witness whereof the King made him of late one of his chief Council
of War.

But the Archdukes Confessor has no lesser share in what concerns the Spanish
Interest in Flanders. II Padre Maestro Fra Inego di Brizaela, of the Dominican
Order, executes this place; he was placed therein by Philip the second, when
the Archduke came to the Government of these Provinces; at which time Fra
Inego for his eminency in Divinity, was Regent thereof in Rome: so as he has
been now about 17 years in Flanders, and has still continued the same place to
the great satisfaction of. the Archduke, and applause of all others: And
though by reason of this his place, he has no particular employment, save what
belongs to the ruling of the Arch^Dukes conscience; it may notwithstanding be
said, that his is as it were a supreme Tribunal, whether affairs of all
natures are brought. And the Arch Duke who as has been said, imitates the
actions of Philip the second in all things as much as he may, and who conforms
himself generally to the mode of the Court of Spain, has easily suffered this
man to come by authority, for that great is the authority which the Kings of
Spains Confessors usually have; and for that this man is known to be very
capable of all manner of business: But his authority is particularly increased
since those two Journeys which three years ago he made into Spain; by one of
which he wrought the King of Spain and his Counselors to give way unto the
Truce; and by the other, that such assignement of moneys as was requisite should
be established Now, since the last Voyage, and after his having seen and been
conversant in so many affairs, the Archduke has made him one of the Council
of State: By this occasion the Confessor has likewise left a great opinion of
himself in the Court of Spain; and from that time to this it is thought that he
may be employed by the King himself and so come to greater preferments: and
certainly he cannot be (...) quallified for the managing of public affairs. No
man can better understand a business, nor represent it better: he pleases by
his a^spect, persuades by his learning, moves by his piety; and his Religious
Cloister-parts, joined to his civil worldly ones, in my opinion no King can
desire a more noble and perfect Christian Councellor. It was necessary that I
should a little expatiat my self upon these Three Officers, as those which are
the Three Chiefest of this Court.

CHAP. V.
What Intelligence the Archdukes hold with their Neighbors.
THe Kingdoms and States which do neighbor upon the Archdukes Provinces are
these: On the south the Kingdom of France, on the west that of England; on the
north the United Provinces; and toward the east, their Country joins upon
the states of many German Princes: upon those of Cleves and Juliers, of
Trevers, Cullen, Leidge, and they confince also on the side of France, for a
long space upon Lorain; on which side the County of Burgony is parted from all
the other Provinces.

There are general jealousies between the Archdukes and these their
neighbors, not out of any considerations of the Archdukes own persons, but
for such as concern the King of Spain, as their successor.

In former times when the Low Countries were in the possession of the House of
Burgony, they had wont to balance the Forces of their confining Princes,
according to the times, now in one sort, now in another: and commonly the Dukes
of Burgony, and Kings of England joined together to counterpoise the greatness
of the Kings of France: who on the contrary, had always the Kings of Scotland
for their adherents: but when the House of Austria grew to so great a height,
the face of the Affairs of Europe began to alter; and the Princes
correspondencies altered together with their Interests. The Forces of Europe
being then weighed, and put into the scales; the French liked not their being
environed by the States of the Crown of Spain by the way of the Pirenean
Mountains; by Flanders, by the Fleets of the Mediteranean, and Ocean Sea.

The English were afraid to see themselves begirt, and as it were placed
between the arms of the Spanish Empire by reason of the same Fleets of the
Ocean, which might be maintained in Spain and in Flanders: and generally all
the German Princes, but especially the Heretics liked not to be flanked by so
great a Power. All the neighbors did therefore join together in endeavoring
to cut off Flanders from the Crown of Spain; and to their forces of Arms, the
like of Heresy were joined; the new Sects whereof could not be so well secured
in these northern Countries, being to contend with so great a power as was that
of the seventeen Catholic Provinces of the Low Countries joined together under
the obedience of the King of Spain.

The War of Flanders broke forth then at first fomented by these external
Aids, and by the same means did still continue, till the fire thereof was
rather sweep'd up then quenched by the twelve years Truce: and if the
neighbors have not prevailed in cutting off the whole Low Countries from the
Crown of Spain; yet have they seen many Members severed from it, and that Crown
deprived in a great part, of his former vast Empire upon the sea.

And how has it rejoiced them since, to see this new Commonwealth of the
United Provinces, reduced into a fixed and vigorous Body, make head against it?
a Commonwealth compounded of Rebels and Heretics: the soul of whose present
Government is Lib^ety; and whose desire of enjoying it will still increase, by
their assuefaction thereunto. The King of Spain being then to succeed unto the
Archdukes, the forenamed neighboring Jealousies keep yet alive; and will be
much greater, when the King shall be possessed of these Provinces.

At the present, since the Truce, better correspondency is held with all the
neighbors, then was in time of the former War; which whilst it lasted,
France and England never ceased furnishing the United Provinces with such
Assistance as they needed.

It is to be imagined that better Intelligence may better be held in particular
between Spain and France, by reason of the double marriage which is contracted
between the two Crowns. Though it may also be doubted, that this Intelligence
may be regulated more by the consideration of Interest, then by that of Blood.

And doubtlesly it is not to be believed that the French by reason of this
alliance with the Crown of Spain, will disert them with whom they are joined in
their particular friendship and confederacy with the United Provinces. The
Examples fresh in memory of the late Kings of France, and the last King of
Spain, may sufficiently show by their past alliances, what may hereafter be
expected from the like: so as the most which at this present conjuncture of
time, the Archdukes, and King of Spain can expect from the French, is that
they will interpose themselves as occasion shall require in friendly Offices,
either in prolonging the present Truce, or in turning it into a secure and
lasting Peace.

Thus far the conjunction of the two Crowns may be believed to prove
advantageous for the Affairs of Flanders: whereas on the contrary it may be
held for certain, that the French will appear openly against the Spaniards if
upon any other conjuncture of time they shall go about to subjugate the United
Provinces again by Force.

But the Neighborhood with the King of England is, and ever will be more
jealous. The Rebellion of Flanders was chiefly favored by Forces from England
in Queen Elizabeth's days; and the now King James Treads in the Queens steps, in
his succession to that Kingdom: and is much the more pertenacious therein, and
more inveterate in his hatred to the Catholic Church, by his having made
himself supreme Head of the Church of England, not only by Title, but more by
his Doctrine and Learning. He has endeavored, and still will endeavor as
much as lies in the King of Englands power, to prejudice the Affairs of
Flanders, that he may thereby also wound the Catholic Church, which was the
end likewise of the late Queen. He is likewise most jealouse of the Spanish
Forces in Flanders; as well by the Example of what the late King of Spain
endeavored against the aforesaid Queen from those parts; as for that Flanders
is the safest refuge which those Catholics have who withdraw or fly from his
Kingdoms: so as to boot with the suspicions which the French have always
received and given in the Neighborhood of Flanders, those of Heresy are added
in the English, which consequently make the Rent greater between these
Countries, and those which are under the King of England.

The Archdukes are chiefly jealous of the Neighborhood of the United
Provinces; and though Arms be laid aside by reason of the Truce; yet the
jealousies on both sides continue still the greater: which will turn again (as
may be believed) to the taking up of Arms, when the Truce shall be expired. The
United Provinces nourish their people as much as they can, in fear of the King
of Spain, which is considered more by them in the persons of the Archdukes,
then by any of the Neighboring Princes; and this they endeavor now no less
then before, to the end that their people may so much the willinger concur to
the maintenance of such Forces as they do still keep on foot since the Truce,
in great numbers by heavy Impositions.

Thus they live in perpetual jealousy of the Archdukes, and Crown of Spain:
but they occasion likewise no less jealousies on their behalfs out of so many
and so known considerations: nor is is to be doubted, but that upon occasion of
this Free Commerce, they will by all secret ways endeavor both to corrupt the
Loyalty and contaminate the Religion of these yet obedient Provinces.

The neighborhood between the Heretical States of Germany and those of the
Archdukes, is likewise suspicious, and will be now much the more since the
Dukedoms of Cleves and Juliers are fallen into the hands of Heretic Princes:
from which parts the rebellion of Flanders was always likewise fomented; and by
the example of what is past, the Heretics will assuredly govern themselves in
the future: and it may be believed that on the contrary the forces of Spain
will do what in them lies to their prejudice.

The conformity of Catholic Religion has occasioned the better correspondency
between the States of Flanders and the Archbishopricks of Cullen and Trevers,
and the Bishopric of Liege. Though sometimes these Forces by reason of the
irremediable necessity of War, have not been able to forbear using some
violences upon the aforementioned Countries.

Lorrain has escaped the best of any; and consequently the neighborhood on
that side has stood and stands still upon better terms then any other: and
truly Spain has wont to make great esteem of the alliance of the Dukes of
Lorrain with their King, and of the Commodity which they thereby receive in
passing such of the Kings Forces as come from Italy into Flanders, through that
Country.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Army which the King of Spain maintains in Flanders.
TRUCE is a suspension of Arms, and a certain medium between war and peace; but
though this affair of Flanders had been an absolute peace, and not a Truce, for
a determinat time, yet must an Army still have been maintained here; these
Countries being environed with suspicious neighbors, and by reason of homebred
dangers which some evil humors even of these very Provinces might produce. The
Army was then only lessened here, after the Truce was agreed on, and 'twas
resolved, to cashier such who upon occasion might be readiest to be raised
again, and to keep such in pay, as would be more difficult to be listed
hereafter. All the Dutch foot were dismissed, unless it were some few, which
shall be mentioned hereafter; and the Spaniards, Italians, Burgonians, and
Irish, together with a select number of the antientest Wallouns; and because
Spain was exhausted of moneys, and Flanders much more, it was determined that
for the lessening of so great expenses, a strength of Soldiery should be kept
on foot, as should only be sufficient upon all occasions, to withstand the
first shock, till such time as new Forces might be raised; and thus the army
was then reduced to about 12000 foot, and 1600 horse, all choice men.

There are three Brigadoes of Spaniards, two of Italians, one of Burgonians,
one of Irish, and three of Wallouns; and 18 Companies of horse, distinguished
into Launciers, Curassiers, and Harchebugers; eleven under Spanish Captains,
four under Italians, and there under-Captains of these parts: to these are
added some choice Companies of Spanish foot, together with some Dutch, as has
been said; and a very small addition of such English and Scotch Catholics as
were received of late years into the Army, after the peace made with the King
of England. The Spanish foot may in all be about 4500; the Italians 2000, the
Irish 1000; the Burgonians 800, the Wallouns 2000 the Germans about 300, and
the English and Scots 200: the horse are mixed of Spaniards, Italians, Wallouns,
and others of this Country, which amount in all to about 1600 horse, as has
been said; there are besides a certain requisite number of Officers for the
Artillery, maintained, but these since the Truce are but very few; to all these
sort of people is added many Trattenuti, entertained persons about the
Archdukes person, and many other Tranenuti about the Army; both of which are
thus termed, because they are paid apart, and are not comprehended within the
ordinary body of the foot and horse: This is shortly the Soldiery which is
maintained now by the King of Spain in Flanders, all which are paid with his
moneys, except such horse as the Archdukes do pay, as has been said before.

This Army is like a great Animal which lives in continual voracity; so as it
needs much food to maintain it in requisite vigor. The provision of moneys
which for this end is sent from Spain is 90 thousand crowns a month 70000
whereof is spent in payment of the Army; and the rest upon other occasions. The
expense of the Artillery is now very little; and generally all that was
needful for field-service in the time of War: an Army drawn into the field may
be said to be a portable City, governed by Military Laws, and environed every
where with Iron walls; and therefore at such a time requires all those things
which is requisite for a walled City; whence it is that expenses in time of war
must needs be excessive. They are now much moderated by the Truce; for where
the King paid in the last war, whereof Marquess Spinola was General, 300000
crowns a month, he pays no more now then what has been said, and the
Archdukes proportionably have much lessened theirs.

Very many are the Officers which are requisite for a well-governed Army; of
which many are more for the pen then sword; of these the Secretary of the Army
is in greatest esteem; and next him the Muster-master-general, and then the
Pay-master-General, and the Tellers; all which Officers have their
underofficers. Then the Justice which is used as well in causes civil as
criminal, is administered by an Auditor-General, accompanied with diverse others,
who are likewise subordinate to him.

But the chief Commanders who have the Government of the Army, are the
Camp-Master-General, the General of the Horse, and the General of the
Artillery; in the Body of Foot, the Camp-masters with such Officers as depend
upon them, follow next after; in the Body of horse, the Lieutenant General, the
Commissary General, and the Captains of horse with their inferior Officers; and
in the body of the Artillery the Lieutenants, and those who are called
Gentlemen of the Artillery; together with those of inferior place who belong to
that Office: There are likewise two Church-Ministers in the Army, the
Viccar-general, upon whom depend such Church men who are employed in such
spiritual functions as do occur; and the Administrator of the Kings Hospital,
which is continually maintained in the Army for the cure of diseased and
wounded Soldiers.

All the Nations whereof this Army is composed have at all times given great
testimony of their valor: continual emulation has been between the Spaniards
and Italians; the Spaniard always pretend to superiority over the Italian; and
the Italian to equallity with the Spaniard. And the contension between these
two Nations, has sometimes produced dangerous disorders, and disturbed diverse
good successes which in several occasions were very hopeful. The Soldiery are
now distributed into Garrisons, and almost all of them upon the Frontiers; and
their Commanders are generally ancient and experienced Soldiers; but by reason
of the so many years war, and through the so many mutenies which have happened,
the Discipline wherein the Army had wont to flourish is much corrupted. Of late
years there are few soldiers who have not their wives; and between women and
the love of their children, of necssity Military vigor must fail and grow
less: nothing more then this has reduced the Soldiery into poverty; poverty
has been the chiefest cause of mutenies; and nothing has more corrupted the
Discipline, and more indammag'd the Kings affairs then mutenies; which thro^gh
these disorders has suffered almost as much by their own Forces, as by those
of the Enemy; but as in humane bodies the older they grow, the longer they do
languish; so this Army of Flanders by so long a war, has felt the infirmities
of age, and the defects thereof; and nothing has been judged better for the
cure thereof then rest, which the Truce has now caused these Countries to
enjoy.

And this may suffice for what concerns Temporal Affairs, as I proposed unto my
self at first. Now I will proceed to the Ecclesiastical, which are proper to
the Nuntios, as they represent the Apostolic Ministers.

The Second PART of the RELATION of FLANDERS.
I Ought to account it a great happiness to me, that I have been a servant to
the Apostolic Sea in Flanders, in this employment of Nuntio, which by reason
of its so many particular circumstances, is to be esteemed so remarkable. I
have negotiated here between two of the greatest Princes of Christendom; in one
of the prime Courts of Europe; in one of the gallantest Countries that can be
seen; in a public School of the noblest actions that can be undertaken. These
Countries (as has been said) are environed by France, England, the United
Provinces, and Germany: and such is the relation between the affairs of Spain
and these of Flanders, as both of them may be said to join in one common and
reciprocal Government. These Countries do every day entertain and transmit
great store, and great variety of public affairs: no considerable alteration
can happen amongst the neighbors; which has not some reflection here; nor can
there any thing of importancy arise here, whereof the neighbors do not
partake. In these six years now near at an end, since I came to Flanders, great
affairs have happened in these parts: The Treaty of Truce endured two years,
which began to be handled at my first arrival; and this business was so long in
contriving, by reason of the difficulties that were met withal, in ripening
and dissipating the humors which so long a war had aggregated.

Almost presently after the Truce, two great commotions arose; the one through
the affairs of Cleves and Juliers, when the succession of that House failed;
the other by the Prince of Cunde's flying from France, who was received into
protection in these Provinces by the King of Spain, and the Archdukes: and as
long as Henry the 4th King of France lived there was still danger, that for the
one or the other of these, and finally for them both, bitter war was to arise
in these parts; nor did the Heretics for all this lose their forwardness in
the affairs of Cleves and Juliers: they took the Town of Juliers by force, and
threatened Cullen; so as it behooved Flanders to oppose her Forces to their
threats, and so that City was secured: but for all this the Heretics did not
forbear, nor yet afterward, to raise up innovations on that side by the
alteration of Government which they changed in Aquisgrane, and by the
fortifying of Mulen, which they did much to the prejudice of Cullen.

On the behalf of England; at my first coming hither, the Earl of Tirone's
flying from Ireland happened, who was received in Flanders, whereat the King of
England was much offended; and the said King continued still in his suspicions,
that some of the English Catholics who were conspirators in the
gunpowder-treason, were secured here in Flanders; and in the war which the same
King has made with his Army of books come forth under his own name, against
the authority of the Church of Rome, the first blows were felt here, and here
it was requisite that the first defense should be made.

But very Tragical have the events been which have happened in Germany, since I
came into Flanders; which have all had relation to this Archduke, by reason of
his nearness of blood, and other interest with the two brothers which took up
arms one against another, representing scenes and spectacles so full of horror.
In the first commotions the Emperor Radulphus was almost driven out of Prague,
and in the second, almost taken in the Castle; bereaved in the first of a great
part of his Territories, and almost of all of them in the last. The only name
of Emperor remained to him, that death might bereave him of some one of his
past glories.

The Electors after this showed a great alienation to the succession of King
Matthias. Neither were the doubts small that in such a crisis of time the
Heretics would molest the new Election of the Emperor by force of Arms. And
that particularly they were to conspire with the United Provinces of Flanders
in these their designs. So as it behooved to use all possible endeavor and
industry to induce the Electors to favor King Matthias, to the end that the
Universal Tranquillity might not be altered; in which it may be truly said that
no body labored more on this side, then the Archduke Alber^us. He first was
very earnest in procuring the general quiet; and then doubled his diligence in
the new Election. First, in the behalf of his brother, and then in keeping
himself from being chosen. And perhaps his diligence in the latter was more
necessary then in the former: by the declared disposition which the Electors
showed toward him, who were already inclined to keep the Empire in the house
of Austria, but not as yet, to have King Matthias to succeed. Which action of
the Archdukes in endeavoring all those means to shun the Empire, which
might have been used to obtain it, deserves to be for ever recorded to
posterity; so well did he know how to govern his own opinion with such
moderation and judgment, knowing what was best for the common welfare of
Germany, and the particular good of his own house. The general joy of Matthias
being chosen Emperor was afterward so much the greater, by how much greater
the fears were that his succession might prove turbulent and dangerous. And
thus at the present do the public Affairs in these Northern parts of Europe
enjoy this Calm. In my time then have the above mentioned occurrences happened
both here at home, and here abouts; in which, together with an infinite number
of other Affairs of very great consequence Flanders has had her share, and
has made her neighbors taste thereof.

But of all others I have ever esteemed it my greatest good fortune, to have
had this place conferred upon me in a time when a suspension of Arms was agreed
upon for some months, and was afterward established by a Truce for twelve
years. I hereby saw a large Field opened unto me to come by a full knowledge of
the Ecclesiastical Affairs in this Country, which is under the Nunciature of
Flanders, and to endeavor some cure for the parts as they may be termed of
this body, which the inveterate indisposition of so long a War had left
infirm and weak. There was hardly any memory left of the Apostolic Nuncio's
visitations, through the impediment which the noise of War had given to these
Ecclesiastical Functions. Great also were the evils which Heresy had produced
in the past calamity of these Provinces. A great many Churches ruined; famous
Monasteries destroyed; the peoples Religion in many places corrupted; the
Discipline of the Catholic Clergy in sundry sorts disordered; and a thousand
other sad footsteps, and deplorable Records of the fury thereof being left. I
could then acquaint Rome fully with the estate of Ecclesiastical Affairs on one
side; and on the other side apply such remedies here upon the very places
themselves, as could proceed from my weakness, by making many journies in
visiting personally all these Provinces, which remain under the Archdukes
obedience.

And because the Truce had made way for free commerce in the United Provinces,
which are likewise under this Nunciature, I had great convenience also, to
inform my self fully what the condition of the Catholic Religion was in them.
I first acquainted Rome with all things needful; neither did my labor prove
afterward fruitless which through divine blessing, I employed in preserving
those Relics of Religion which yet remain in the abovenamed Provinces. By
means of this Truce likewise, I had the better opportunity to discover the
state of Religion in the King of Englands Dominions, and to provide for many
things tending to the benefit of such Catholics as are there; whose Affairs
have likewise great relation to the Nunciature of Flanders. And these are the
Ecclesiastical Affairs about which till now I have employed my time.
Re-assuming then the order which I spoke of at first, I will treat of each head
in the manner which I have proposed; that is, first of the state of Religion in
these Provinces of the Archdukes, and then of the state thereof in Holland and
the other United Provinces; and lastly, I will show you the condition thereof
in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

CHAP. I.
Of the state of Religion in the Archdukes Provinces.
THE Government of the Ecclesiastical Affairs in the 17 Provinces of the Low
Countries, did anciently depend upon four only Bishops. On the Bishops of
Cambrey, of Utricht, of Tornay, and of Arras. Only one part of Brabant, and one
part likewise of Lucemburg* and almost the whole Country of Limburg, were under
the Bishopric of Liege, and on the same Country of Lucemburg, almost all the
other Bishoprics which do surround it, did extend themselves; as Mets and
Trevers on the side of Germany, Tul, and Ver^une towads France, and Lorrain;
but the Countries near unto Flanders, being in a great part overrun with
heresy, and the evil thereof being crept even hither, King Philip the second
obtained of Pope Paul the fourth, that new Bishoprics should be erected, the
easilier to hinder those evils which was feared from without, and also to
remedy those which began to operate in these Countries. The new Erection was
this. Cambrey and Utricht, which were before but bare Bishoprics, were made
Arch-Bishopricks; and the Archbishopric of the City of Malines, was founded a
new. The new Bishoprics were these; Nimigham in Ghelderland, Harlem in
Holland, Middleburg in Zealand, Deventer in Overisell, Leverden in Friesland,
and Groninghen in the Province of that Name. These together with the
Archbishopric of Utricht were erected in the Countries which are at present
under the United Provinces; and are now since the rebellion and the last war
extinct. The others were Antwerp and Balduke, in the Dukedom of Brabant,
Ruremont in Ghelderland; Gaunt, Bruges, and Ipri in Flanders; Saint Omers in
Artois; and Namures in the County of Namures: The first fix were placed under
the Archbishopric of Malines; and the other two together with that of Turney
and Arras, under the Archbishopric of Cambrey. There are then two
Arch-Bishopricks, and ten Bishoprics, in those Provinces which remain under
the obedience of the Archdukes.

The abovenamed Churches are generally poor; except that of Cambrey, which is
of an ancient and noble foundation: the Churches of Torney and Arras are nobly
enough endowed, both their foundations being very ancient: So as in these three
of Cambrey, T^rney and Arras, Divine Service is exercised with much dignity and
splendour. The other Bishoprics have but small Incomes, and therefore most of
them want Seminaries. The beginnings of a Seminary were laid some years ago in
Antwerp; and it may be hoped that by little and little it may have farther
progress. Another is lately founded in Malines, and is already in very good
condition: another is begun in S. Omer. Gaunt, Bruges, Ipri, Bal^uke, and
Ruremond have none; and have but little hopes ever to have any, for want of
necessary commodities. The Churches of Cambrey, Torney, Arras, and Namures,
have no Semina^ies apart; but maintain one between them all in the University
of Doway; where according to the power of each of them, they maintain a
proportionable number of Students: But of all other Cities, two good Seminaries
if it were possible to have their Foundations laid, would be very useful in
Antwerp, and in Gaunt. These are the two Cities of all the Archdukes Provinces
which are most infected with heresy. Antwerp chiefly by reason of Traffic,
which from the very first opened the Gates to the mingling, and corruption of
Sects, together with the Traffiquers who introduced them. A good Seminary would
in particular be of great use and advantage to this Diocese: and though there
has always been need thereof, yet now more then ever, for that since the Truce
a good part thereof is under the Temporal Dominion of the United Provinces.
Which though they promised under their hands to the late King of France, not to
meddle with the exercise of the Catholic Religion in those parts, which are
under the Spiritual Government of the Bishopric of Antwerp; yet their Heretic
Ministers do every day endeavor novelties, and go about as much as in them lies
to spread abroad the infection of their Sects in those parts. Gaunt is likewise
a Merchandising City, having three Rivers which run through the midst of it,
and are of great convenience for Traffic. But to boot with the contagion of
the neighboring Sectaries, the people of Gaunt have willingly suffered
themselves to be poisoned with the Licentiousness of Liberty.

In former times those of Gaunt were always somewhat contumacious and
licentious against their Princes: and have since showed the like aversion
against the ancient Religion: So as a great part of this City is infected with
Heresy; and certainly it would be a great advantage as well to the City as to
the Diocese, if there were a good Seminary there. Bruges and Ipri are either
wholly free from Heresy, or but little infected therewithal; and their
Diocese are like unto them. Balduke is a very Catholic City, but some parts
of the Diocese is not altogether so. Ruremond is a very poor Church; almost
not at all endowed; the people within the Town are well enough affected, but
without, they are somewhat infected. The City of Malines is very clear from
Heresy. Some parts of the Diocese are notwithstanding polluted, particularly
Brussels, a Town of large Circuit, and for concourse of people much greater
then Malines it self. The Cities of Cambrey, Arras, Saint Omers, and Namures,
together with their Diocese are generally very constant in the Catholic
Religion.

Torney even since the first commotions in Flanders suffered it self to be
involved in the contagion of Heresy, as also Valenciana, a large Town, and of
great Traffic; it is under the Spiritual Jurisdiction of the Archbishopric
of Cambrey; except one part thereof which is subject to the Bishopric of
Torney. So as in both these places the seeds of Heresy remain yet: But the
Heretics dare not discover themselves in any of the said places, neither by
giving any scandal, nor by doing any unlawful act in Religion, which may be
known; concerning which the Magistrates, and Churchmen are very vigilant; but
chiefly the Archdukes themselves; who are as diligent therein as can be
desired, not only by the example of their own extraordinary zeal, but by means
of their Supreme Authority.

All the abovenamed Churches are provided with indifferent good Ministers, and
generally with good Clergy within the Cities. Good Curats are likewise provided
for the Diocese; and except it be in the Provinces of Brabant, Flanders, and
Ghelderland, the Country is well enough provided of them. In those three
Provinces there is great scarcity of them, because the Flemmish Tongue is only
used there; so as the other Provinces cannot supply their needs. But in all the
others the French Tongue is used, and by reason of a Seminary which they have
in common amongst them, in the University of Doway, they may provide Curats for
such Churches as have need of them.

This University serves chiefly for the Students of the Walloen Provinces, and
for the others that lie more inward, where they speak French, as in the
Provinces of Torney and Silla. But for those parts of the Country where they
speak Dutch, the University of Lorain serves for the same purpose. These two
Universities are in the Archdukes Provinces; that of Lorain is very ancient,
and keeps still in great reputation; that of Doway was built by Philip the
second for the better service of the neighboring Provinces, but Lorain is far
beyond it for the concourse of Scholars, Eminency of Professors, and for
Foundations of many Colleges wherewith it is beautified.

These two Universities show great reverence and obsequiousness toward the
holy See; and particular care is had in each of them, for putting the Council
of Trent in practice, they being very zealous in preserving the purity of the
Catholic Faith. The Bishops and Curats in their several Offices do
particularly labor that the Council be put in practice; and as for the secular
Ecclesiastical Order there is not therein much to be added. Residencies are
there observed, and incompatibilies forborne; and all other Ecclesiastical
Functions are generally exercised according to the Decrees of the Council, and
they daily reform their customs.

But as for the regular Order, to say truth the excess of liberty in the
Monasteries, especially in those of women, and more particular in those of the
Nuns of Saint Benedict, and Saint Bernard, is very great. The Council was never
admitted of amongst them; nor is it to be hoped that it ever will be, because
the chief Monastery as well of Women as of Men are for the most part in
Campania; so as it would be too difficult a business to reduce them to strict
Cloister observancy; Moreover they are taught to receive in strangers, either
through the visits of Friends, or for the convenience of Travelers. And
although the Guests of the Nuns Monasteries are placed without the Cloistures,
yet this is done with too much familiarity of Secular conversation.

This is the ancient custom of the Country; and truly but few scandalls are
observed to ensue hereupon; for liberty it self serves for a remedy to liberty;
by the so great and usual custom of conversation; and for that the people of
these parts are but little given to sensuality, and extraordinarily candid in
their behaviors. Very free is likewise the form of living, which is here
observed in several Chapters of the Canons, whereof there are three; all of an
ancient Foundation. One in Mons, another in Nivella, and another in Mabuosa.
Their Institution is to serve in the Quire at Divine Service, as do other
Canonists; and they wear a very grave Church habit: For what remains, they live
dispersed in diverse houses in those towns where the Chapters are erected, and
here they are clothed as Seculars are; they receive all manner of visits, they
dance and rejoice, and except it be the Title, they retain almost nothing of
Ecclesiastical persons: So as one would say, whatsoever is Sacred in the
Church, were utterly profane when out of it. All these she Canons are of the
chief Families of Flanders: They all of them do usually mary afterward; and
those who will not mary live in perpetual chastity, continuing their Function;
and in the same freedom as formerly; and yet they do thus defend their
chastity, merely with the weapons of natural goodness and modesty. As if they
were enclosed within the Walls of the severest and most unaccessible cloisters.
So much does the good natures of some prevail over severe Laws in many others.

But to return to the Monkly Order; the liberty thereof, as I have said, is
great; and 'twill be very hard to work a reformation therein out of the
abovesaid reasons. The Archdukes themselves inflamed with a desire to see the
Ecclesiastical Government set in a good way, have much endeavored that the
Monasteries might be more strictly kept, but sufficient remedies to remove the
difficulties could never be found. They forbear not notwithstanding to apply
all such remedies as they are able to work this effect; and without doubt they
are of great use: For they nominate according to the Apostolical Indulgence,
which they enjoy, such persons for Abbots and Abbesses who are thought do best
deserve those places.

There are many, and generally many rich Monasteries in these countries; in
particular the Order of Saint Benedict, Saint Bernard, and the White Friars.
The Abbots, and Abbesses have their Lodgings apart in the Monasteries, as also
their Table and Revenues; and do enjoy little less then a free propriety of
their goods: And regular Government (as has been said) is much relaxt amongst
them. The mendicant Orders keep indifferent good Discipline; and particularly
the Franciscan Friars, after having introduced into them some convents of the
Recollectia. Now that the Reformed Carmelites are likewise entered into these
Provinces, the Discipline of the Covents of ancient Foundation, may perhaps in
time also grow better, as it is no more then needs. Those of the Order of Saint
Austine behave themselves well enough, but the Dominicans much better. Two
other Orders of Votaries have of late greatly flourisht in Flanders; the
Capushins and Jesuists, both which Orders have been admitted into all the
Cities and principal places; and the good cannot be greater, then that which is
gathered particularly from the Jesuists; by their institution of instructing
youth in learning and piety. And this may suffice for what concerns the state
of Religion in the Catholic Provinces of Flanders.

CHAP. II.
Of the state of Religion in Holland, and the other United Provinces.
IT will be necessary now to seek out the remainder of Catholics, who have
continued in the United Provinces after the late war; amidst the darkness and
errors of heresy. At the same instant almost that by their rebellion they flew
from the King of Spains obedience, they likewise parted from the obedience of
the Catholic Church. The first that took up arms against the crown of Spain,
were Holland and Zealand, as also the first that flew from the Catholic
Church. The rebellion spread abroad afterward in the other Provinces, and they
served for example one to another in making the Government of them all equal.
They imitated one another likewise in embracing Heresy, out of a design to
oppose the Catholic Religion professed by the Spaniards, and by this means, to
strengthen the separation from their Empire the more, So as in the uniting of
the Provinces, their government past wholly into the hands of the Heretics.
And what was first done by Holland and Zealand, was done likewise by the other
five Provinces, which from time to time joined with them. I will now acquaint
you with the condition of the Catholic Religion in these very Provinces; but I
judge it first requisite briefly to give you an account of their Heresies.

The abovenamed Provinces have admitted of many sects. But the sect which
reigns generally amongst them, is Calvinisme; and of this sect are they who
govern. The United Provinces chose rather to apply themselves to this, then to
any other, because their rebellion was chiefly maintained by the arms of
Calvinists; which were continually poured into them from France, England and
Germany. Thus making religion serve the interest of State, according to the
custom of other Heretics, the United Provinces did all of them embrace
Calvinisme; and would have it to be chiefly exercised amongst them; and that
the Catholic religion, which had for so many years flourished amongst them,
should for as much as in them lay, be wholly suppressed. They have also many
Lutherans mingled amongst them, who are the remainders of that general deluge
of Lutheranisme, which at the first over-flowed almost all Germany, and the
neighboring Countries. Great likewise is the number of Anabaptists, and some
Davidists.

Puritans are likewise there permitted; who are the most rigid Calvinists, who
will not acknowledge any Authority in their Political Magistrates over the
Government of their Heretical Ministers. And these are all English Puritans,
who by occasion of commerce frequent Holland and the rest of the United
Provinces. These are the Sects wherewith the people of these parts are
contaminated in point of religion.

Yet no public exercise is permitted amongst them but Calvinisme; nor is there
any other Doctrine permitted to be taught in their Schools. All other Sects are
suffered in private families; which may notwithstanding be termed public, for
they are preached in spacious places, capable of all concourse.

The greatest number of Heretics are Calvinists, who are dispersed throughout
all their Provinces, and their Government is alike in each of them. The
greatest part of Anabaptists are in Friesland, and in the farthest Northern
parts of Holland. Friesland is also chiefly infected with Davidists. The most
Lutherans are in the City and Province of Groninghen; part of them remaining
likewise in Amsterdam, by reason of Traffic. The English Puritans are almost
all of them likewise out of the same respect in Amsterdam; and some of them by
occasion of Merchandising live in Middleburg; So then in all parts, and in
every corner of the United Provinces, the barkings and howlings of so many
Sectarists may be heard; who do notwithstanding all join in opposing the
Catholics, though there be great divisions and differences between themselves;
even as ravenous Beasts laying aside their rankor amongst themselves, join in
turing it unanimously to prey upon the milder.

I will now treat as briefly as may be of the Catholics; whereof there be
great remainders left in the United Provinces, though the same persecutions
which were at first begun against them continue still. But they have not been,
nor are they yet so rigorous by much as in England, and in other countries, for
the aforesaid Provinces are not permitted by the form of their government to
use such rigor; and having been always so much busied amongst forain arms, they
might apprehend some domestic tumults, if they should have proceeded with too
much violence against the catholics; good numbers whereof are still amongst the^
to boot that their government having much of popular in it, and all of them
applying themselves to traffic; the correspondency in merchandising and in
alliances has always been very great between the Heretics and Catholics: So
as the vicinity of blood has caused love between many of them; and the
occasion of Merchandising has coupled together the interests of diverse others;
and by these means the Catholic Religion has found some tolerable
connivancy, in the concealed and as it were stolen exercise thereof, wherein it
was necessary to be restrained in those parts.

Most of the Catholieks in these parts are in Holland: The meaner sort of
people are most corrupted; and those Foraigners who when the rebellion of
Flanders first began fled from these Catholic Provinces to the united ones,
that they might live the more Licentiously in Heresy. There are many
Catholics yet remaining in the Province of Utricht, and particularly in the
City of Utricht, as likewise in Ghelderland, and in the Province and City of
Groninghen; there are many likewise in Overisell, and Friesland; but very few
in Zealand; the difficulty and dangers of exercising the Catholic Faith being
much greater there then in any of the other aforesaid Provinces. In former
times a particular addiction to Divine Worship, and Sacred things did abound in
all of them; great were the number of Temples and Monasteries in all parts; and
the peoples piety generally very great. And the natural candidnesse of their
manners was also accompanied with the pure candor of Religion; and women were
very much given to Cloister lives.

The Secular Priests and Religious Votaries who live in these parts are
maintained by the charity of such Catholics as live in the United Provinces,
and by such means as they receive from abroad. There be many Secular Priests
amongst them; but few Votaries. The Secular Priests Supply the place of Curats
amongst Catholics in the places where they live. The most of them as also of
the Votaries, are in Holland; there being many Catholics in that Province, and
the commerce more frequent; next unto Holland most Catholics and Priests live
in the Province of Utricht; Utricht having been long a City of Ecclesiastical
Principality, and the people therein having been much inclined to the Catholic
Religion, and much given to sacred things. There are but few Priests in the
other Provinces; partly, because their number is not sufficient to serve for
all places; and partly, because they proceed more rigorously against them in
the other Provinces, then in Holland and Utricht.

All these Priests depend upon the Government of an Apostolical Vicar, who was
lately instituted with subordination to the Nuncio of Flanders; and for his
greater authority, and that he might execute the Office of an Ordinary in those
Provinces, the Title of Archbishop of Philippi was afterward given him. He
therefore runs over thither sometimes, exercising his charge in such sort as he
may; but the settled Residency of the present Vicar is in Cullen; where by his
means particularly, a Seminary of Students, most part of which are Hollanders,
is to very good purpose erected. This Seminary is chiefly maintained by the
alms of the Catholics in Holland, and other United Provinces. And the Scholars
there study Religion and humane Learning. From thence they are sent to the
University of Loven, to study Theology; and are daily sent from thence into
these Provinces to husband the Catholic Faith. The Votaries have their
particular Heads on whom they depend.

Diverse dissentions and disputes have oftentime past between the Secular
Priest, and the Votaries. The Priests have never been so willing as they ought
to have been that Votaries should enter amongst them, and have many times
complained, that their Faculty was too much enlarged in the administration of
Spiritual Affairs; as do the Votaries on the other side, that the Priests
have many times opposed them. So as upon these and some other occasions,
divisions have sometimes fallen out between them. But they live now together in
concord, their past differences being in a good part composed: By means whereof
the Heretics have sometimes war^'d more against our cause, then by the weapons
of their own Sects. Heresy then reigns in the United Provinces in manner as
has been said; and on the contrary the Catholic Religion groans under heavy
yoaks amongst them. But by Gods assistance these groans and miserable
afflictions of Catholics will one day also cease: For it has been observed in
all Ages, that the true Church has ever flourisht most, when she has been
most oppressed by her Enemies. And on the other side all Heresy has been ever
seen to burst in pieces, and perish through its own venom, when it has ceased
to vomit it out.

CHAP. III.
Of the state of Religion in England.
LET us now consider in what condition the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland are in point of Religion: And first, for England; it is known and
acknowledged, that the Catholic Religion did not flourish more in any part of
Europe, then in that Kingdom, till Henry the eighth his Apostasy. No Prince
whatsoever had purchased more Fame for his zeal to the good of the Church, then
the said Henry, by the gallant works, whereby he endeavored to maintain the
Popedom against the Forces of other Princes in diverse troubles in Italy; nor
in defending the Catholic Religion against the Heresy of Luther, and the
Princes who adhered to him therein, in the commotion occasioned thereby in
Germany. His Book of the seven Sacraments, which he composed and published
likewise then against Luthers self, was a particular example of singular Piety;
nor did he think any thing added more to his greatness then the title which
Leo the 10th conferred upon him of Defendor of the Faith. How he came afterward
to dote upon Anne of Bullen, and how having first vented his hatred against the
Pope, he afterward separated himself wholly from the Catholic Church, and
growing still more perverse, did at last endeavor to suppress that religion
which he had so gloriously defended before, are things sufficiently known; and
which will always be the most to be lamented and fatal, which can be represented
upon a Catholic Theater.

But though Heresy took firm root in England in Henry's time, yet was there no
settled form of the exercise thereof there. King Edward the sixth a Prince
within age succeeding him; Zuinglius his Doctrine was chiefly embraced. The
Catholic religion may be said presently after to receive new life again, and
to be again slain in Queen Mary's succession to the Crown, and her so soon
death. After the which, Queen Elizabeth coming to succeed her in that
Kingdom; that form of Heresy was confirmed which was called Parliamentarian;
the Parliament having interposed its Authority therein, to the end that that
might be the only Religion received in all parts of her Dominions. In the chief
Dogma's Calvin was followed; whose sect began then to rise, and increased every
day; and in the outward Government the first form of Catholic worship was
retained: Episcopacy being continued, together with almost all the rest of the
secular Clergy in former times: the antient^ Ecclesiastical maintenance was
left to the Bishops and the rest of the Heretical Clergy: as for the regular
Orders, they were long before quite abolished, and all Monasteries either
ruined, or turned together with their Revenues totally to profane uses.

This form of Government which was introduced in England in the Queens time, is
since maintained by the now King. The sect of Pro^estant Calvinists reigns now
there, called as I have said, Parlementarian. The English Protestants are also
called by another name Anglo calvinisti, viz. English Calvinists; to
distinguish them from those of France, and of other parts, where Calvinisme is
followed in its more rigid and pure form, as it was taught at first, and which
has been since so largely diffused by the Church of Geneva: together with the
Protestant Calvinists, there are also many direct Calvinists in England, whom
they call Puritans; both these sects do agree in almost all their Dogmata: but
they differ in many things touching Government and exterior rites. The
Protestants retain the ancient degrees of the same Ecclesiastical dignities
and offices, on which the spiritual Government did depend in the time of the
Catholic Religon. The Puritans on the contrary, throw away all supereminency
of degrees, and all conformity of ministry with the Catholic Church, and will
have the antientest and fittest amongst them to have the only care of spiritual
matters amongst them; they do wholly deny the Kings Primacy in spiritual
affairs; whereas the Protestants acknowledge the King to be the supreme Head of
the Church of England, as they term it; thus these two sects do justle in many
things; but the Protestant Profession is that which reigns. Archbishops,
Bishops, and next them the inferior Clergy of Deacons, Archdeacons, Curats,
and others, are subordinate to the Kings supreme spiritual Government. There
are only two Archbishops in England; the one of Canterbury, the other of York;
and 25 Bishops; three of which only are under the Archbishopric of York; and
all the rest depend upon Canterbury: the Archbishop whereof keeps the title of
Metropolitan, and is as it were the Kings right hand in the mannaging of
spiritual affairs.

It cannot be doubted but that this King that now is, is an Heretic by his
true, stif, inward persuasion; nay by his learning, and by his pretending in
particular to great eminency in Ecclesiastical affairs, he has drunk so deep
of heresy, as not content to be fervent therein in his very heart, he has
pleased by the tongues of his own books to profess himself publicly
throughout all Europe to be a learned professer thereof, and cunning
controvertist therein; but it is true that, upon diverse occasions it may
clearly appear, that he is not fully satisfied with the present form of Heresy
in England: certainly if he were able, he would alter many things both in the
essence of Tenants, and in the exterior part of Government: he spends most of
his time in discoursing upon these matters of Religion; and delights chiefly to
entertain himself therewith: he speaks, he disputes every day thereof; and
feeds himself continually with the diverse pr^ises, which are abundantly given
him, by those who usually dispute of purpose to be overcome: But he would never
be able to alter the present form of heretical practice in England, which has
been so long received and practiced by the public Anthority and Laws of the
Kingdom: the King will then follow the Sect which predominates, and endeavor
to propagate it since he cannot alter it.

The talk is various concerning the Queen his wife, according to her various
proceeding in matter of Religion: before she went from Scotland she gave
evident signs of being inclined to be a Catholic; and increased them when she
came to England; for it was constantly believed that at her first coming into
that Kingdom upon the occasion of a dangerous childbed of hers, she used the
Ecclesiastical Sacraments: and her being always willing to read Catholic
books, her seeming to reverence relics, her wearing them many times about
her; and her treating with more familiarity and confidence with diverse
Catholic Ladies, who usually did most frequent her Court have always been
reasons which have pleaded for this opinion: and as far as her inclination
leads her, it seems that undoubtedly she is to be esteemed a Catholic; at
least it may be almost absolutely affirmed, that she sides not with heresy;
for she never professed Lutheranism^e after she once quitted her native Country
of Denmark, where that Heresy reigns; nor yet Calvinisme either in Scotland
or in England; being seldom or never present at the preaching of any of those
Heretic Ministers; nor never at the Lords Supper as it is used by the
Calvinists: but on the other side she is so given to festivals and dancing, and
to all pleasant pastimes, and is of so easy and voluble a nature, as the
opinion of her being a Catholic, can only be grounded upon the uncerertain
aforesaid conjectures: she still proceeds with this ambiguity, and the opinion
of others touching her conscience in religion is alike dubious.

As for the succeeding Prince it is to be feared that he may prove a great
Heretic by those signs which of his own instinct he hitherto gives in matter
of Religion. To boot that the King has not been wanting, nor is yet so, in
using all possible means of confirming his son in Heresy; nay he oftentimes
has, and still does serve him as well in place of a Tutor, as of a Father; for
he would if it were possible, have his son to succeed him as well in his wisdom
and learning, as in his Kingdom.

Concerning the Nobility of England, all that is to be said in point of
Heresy, is this, That the chiefest of the Nobility, unless it be some very
few, who partly openly, partly in secret are Catholics, are generally all of
them protestants, and conform themselves to the Kings pleasure: of the meaner
sort, of nobility, or of the gentry, the most are likewise Protestants, many of
them Puritans, and very few professed Catholics; but of this sort of nobility
many of them are in their hearts Catholics, though in outward appearance they
seem to be Heretics, that they may save their estates, and be capable of the
honors of the Kingdom. The meaner sort of people are likewise part of them
Protestants, part Puritans; and the Citizens are generally all of them infected
with Heresy: so as the greatest sort of Catholics of that condition are such
as live in Villages, and in the Country: and this may suffice to be said with
as much brevity as may be, touching the condition of Heresy in England.

I come now to the Catholic Religion: and that you may first clearly
understand the Catholics of that Kingdom, we must distinguish them; some in
England are declared Catholics; whom they term recusants, because they refuse
to go to the Heretic Churches; paying such pecuniary mulcts as are imposed
upon those who follow not their Heresy; others there are who live Catholickly
in that Kingdom, but in secret, not paying any penalties; making therein use of
the favor of great personages, and of their own industery; and others there
are who are Catholics by manifest inclination; but who that they may not lose
their Estates and Honors, seem outwardly to be Heretics: great likewise is the
number of those in England, who are indifferent in point of Religion, and have
no particular sense thereof, but are of all beliefs, and follow only a large
moral faith; and many of these certainly would choose rather to profess the
Catholic Religion, then any whatsoever Heresy; so as to number up the
declared Heretics, and who with true fervor and intension do adhere to Heresy
in England, it is thought (according as it may be conjectured at large) that
they will not exceed the fifth part of the Inhabitants of that Kingdom; but on
the contrary, if you will consider the two first sorts of Catholics, they will
hardly make the thirtieth part of the Kingdom; there being but few who live
professed Catholics under the rigor of the penalties; and those not being many
who can live Catholickly in secret, under the protection of great men, or by
their own industery, so as the greatest number will prove those who under a
large and improper signification, would be called Catholics, taking the
intention for the deed; and those who make no profession at all of any
particular Faith, but who if they were to follow any, would ratherest incline
to the Catholic Religion; the first of these two sorts are called in England
Schismatics, and the other Politicians.

But howsoever, the number of the two first sorts of Catholics must be
esteemed great; which may be gathered by the number of secular and regular
Priests, who exercise spiritual affairs amongst them, by so numerous missions:
nor is it to be understood that every Catholic Family has its own particular
Priest allotted to it: for this will hardly fall to the share of every thirty
houses; the Priests being necessitated to fly from one house to another, to
shun the storms of continual persecutions; as also to dispense their spiritual
functions now in one Family, now in another, that they may be aiding to as many
Catholics as they can. This Argument derived from the number of Priests, and
the Ministry which is by them exercised, as has been touched upon, may make it
appear what the number of Catholics are in that Kingdom: great must their zeal
and constancy be likewise, to continue as they do in the ancient Faith amidst
so many dangers and penalties. This fervor and this zeal is particularly seen
in women, and most in the most noble; they take the Priests most into their
care; they watch most how to keep them out of danger; and they read Catholic
books more then do the men; and are more verst in disputing controversies with
the Heretics: but it is true that women may do all these things more boldly
then men, for they escape punishment more easily; yet not long since the King
has much extended his rigor, even to women.

The spiritual Government of Catholics in England depends then upon the
number of secular, and regular Priests which are within the Kingdom: who keep
in diverse parts, according to the greater or lesser need of Catholics. The
secular Clergy is governed by one head who is over them all by the title of
Archpriest; and this Archpriest has under him some assistants, who from
diverse sides with proportioned Authority over the other mere Priests, help him
to govern. The Votaries or regular, have likewise their superiors, upon whose
appointment their particular mission does depend; which do consist principally
in those of the Benedictans, and Jesuits. The Arch-Priests Authority over the
Glergy which is under him, is wholly reduced to exhortation, admonition, and
reprehension: using for his last means and punishment to suspend such as are
incorrigable, from their spiritual faculties, or utterly to deprive them of
them: no more rigorous nor better ordered discipline then this can be admitted
of amidst so many obstacles as are in all parts met withal at this time in the
exercise of the Catholic Faith in England.

There are very many learned and zealous men in this secular Clergy, who partly
by composing Books, partly by the blood of Martyrdom, do gloriously maintain
the Catholic Faith in England; the Clergy-Priests come from forth those
Semenaries which to that purpose are instituted out of the Kingdom in other
Provinces, there are two of them here in Flanders; one in Saint Homers, which
is governed very accuratly by the Father-Jesuits, wherein are many gallant
young youths; and another in Doway, under the Government of a President, and
consisting of the chiefest Priests of the Clergy: The Students of the first are
all youths, and when they have finished their course in humanity in Saint
Omers, they are then sent to the English Seminary in Rome, or else in those
other three which are founded in Spain, to wit; in Valiadelid, in Sevill, and
in Madrid; to employ their study in Philosophy and in Divinity, under the care
of the same Jesuits; those of the second (though that of Doway was first
founded) are of more mature age, and in their own college read the graver
studies of Philosophy, and Divinity. These Seminaries are then as military
quarters, where spiritual Soldiers learn their Discipline wherewith to defend
the Catholic cause in England; here they are trained and formed, and pass from
these quarters to make good so hard and dangerous and undertaking, as to fight
so potent adversaries, who because they ground themselves upon an unjust and
wicked cause, do use the more force and violence; but they use no less deceit,
and confide no less in these deceitful weapons, then in those wherewith they
oppugn our cause with open War. These deceits and cus'nages are diversely
practiced by them; but particularly in their having endeavored sundry ways to
nourish those divisions which of late years have begun to arise, between the
secular Priests, and Votaries, and to excite also new ones by the new invented
Oath of Allegiance. There is already convenient remedy taken for the former;
but the dangerous effects which the Oath has begotten, do not as yet cease,
nor is it to be hoped that they will do soon.

The Inventers of this new Engine against the Catholic Religion, propounded
two chief ends therein unto themselves: The one that the King might have matter
whereon to proceed with yet more rigorous persecution then formerly, against
the Estates and persons of Catholics; it being judged that many of them would
refuse to take this Oath, wherein he that is to take it, must in Heretical
terms deny all Pontifical authority, under whatsoever interpretation or form
over the temporal affairs of Princes: The other to cause a new occasion of
contension between the Catholic Clergy; it being held for certain that there
would not be wanting some amongst the Clergy, who either for fear of
punishment, or through luke warmness inReligion, would be induced to take the
Oath, and persuade others to do so too; nor have they failed in the former; for
many Catholics since then have been punished with imprisonment, and
confiscation fo Goods, for their constancy in refusing to take the Oath, and
many for this cause do daily incur punishment. And as for the second
consideration, they have likewise prevailed so far as to see some Priests, and
some Votaries who have admitted of the aforesaid Oath, and who straying still
further out of the way, have gone about to maintain, that it is not repugnant to
the Catholic Faith. But there are but very few who have yet yielded to the
Oath, and those also of the less Zealous, and who are least esteemed of for
their learning and goodness. All the rest of the Clergy have showed, and still
do show themselves much averse unto it, as do generally all Votaries: and many
of both sorts, with strength of Learning, and undaunted courage, despising even
death it self amidst a thousand sufferings; have publicly confuted it, and
thereby won singular praise in the Church, and much worship amongst the
Catholics in those parts.

Amidst these new storms, to boot with the continuance of the former, does the
Catholic cause float at this present in England. The Queen was more greedy of
blood; and therefore the sufferings of Priests and Votaries were more frequent
in her days. In this Kings time, they strive chiefly to macerate them as much
as may be with long imprisonment, and to cause the Secular Catholics pine more
then ever by depriving them of their Estates, endeavoring thus to work their
ends by a flow and incurable disease: some are also proceeded against even to
death it self; to the end that to their other calamities; that chiefest, even
death, may not be wanting, and these ^ighest sorts of punishments which are
used against Priests and Votaries are very horrid; their life being taken away
by member and member before death ceise upon the whole body: and
notwithstanding, amidst confiscations, imprisonments, death, and so many other
miseries and sore persecutions, the Catholic Faith is still preserved, and
does rather increase then decrease in England. And as fire is most intence when
most shut up, so the lively zeal of Catholics in that Kingdom is the more
inflamed, and strengthened by how much greater the obstacles have been which it
has met withal in not being able to manifest and enlarge it self.

CHAP. IV.
Of the State of Religion in Scotland.
I Will now briefly dispatch what remains to be represented concerning the
State of Religion in Scotland and Ireland. The King of Egland was born a
Catholic. Queen Mary, a Princess very zealous in the Catholic Faith, and who
showed her self to be so by her constancy in enduring so long imprisonment in
England, and even death at last (Queen Elizabeth causing her to be beheaded)
was his mother: the King remained an Infant in Scotland; and falling into the
Heretics hands, he easily with his milk drunk in the poison of Heresy; and
bent his most tender years under the precepts and pleasure of those who had the
charge of his childhood; amongst which in particular one George Bowhannon was
his Tutor; a famous Latin Poet and a no less famous follower of Calvin: so as
the Catholic Reliin a short time, began almost to be quite suppressed in that
Kingdom: and Calvin's Sect, on a suden like a Torrent overran all places, all
Bishoprics were extinct, and their goods made the Crowns; and the new
Heretical Government was reduced to the strictest and exactest form of
Calvinisme; which has still continued and does still continue in Scotland; but
the King out of a particular end which he has of reducing the Kingdoms of
England and Scotland into one body; and by this means to make his Authority
greater in the Scotch Parliament, thinks now to restore the Bishops of Scotland
to their ancient Bishoprics; which when he should have done, he would make the
Heresy of those his two Kingdoms more conformable, and by this means so much
the more facilitate the designed Union in other things also.

And doubtlesly the Kingly power would be greater in Scotland by the
readmission of Bishops; for then they would make a particular member in
Parliament; and by the entire dependancy which they should have upon the King,
he might upon all occasions be sure of their Votes; but this is a business
which is thought will meet with many difficulties, the Puritan Sect having
taken too firm root generally throughout the whole Kingdom of Scotland, and
particularly in the Cities, who profess, as has been said, the rigidest Laws
of Calvinisme.

During the Catholics time, there were two Archbishopricks in Scotland; the
one of Saint Andrew, and the other of Glasco; and eleven Bishoprics, eight of
which were under the first Archbishopric, and three under the second.

As for the Catholic Religion, the condition thereof is deplorable in
Scotland; of the chief Lords, there are but some very few that are Catholics;
and but few amongst the Gentry; the greatest number whereof are of those, who
are Catholics in wardly, but dare not declare themselves for fear of
punishment: all the rest of the Kingdom are Heretics; only the more
rusticall People are less infected with Heresy; but also more ignorant in
whatsoever concerns Religion, that fervor was never found amongst the Scots in
endeavoring that the Catholic Faith might be preserved in Scotland, as has
been seen, and is seen in the English, in her behalf in England; and generally
the Scots are not much given to Ecclesiastical profession; but to say truth,
they have had but little help of accommodation therein; for except it be some
few youths who are maintained in the Scotch Seminary at Rome, and in another of
the same Nation here in Doway; no other assistance is given to the Catholics
in Scotland for having of Priests, whereof there are very few at this time in
that Kingdom.

CHAP. V.
Of the State of Religion in Ireland.
BUt look how much the Catholic Vineyard wants workmen in Scotland; so much
the more does Ireland abound in them. The people of that Kingdom are generally
Catholics, and almost all of them profess themselves such. Those rigorous Laws
against Catholics, which were so many years ago established by Authority of
Parliament, have not yet had place there. The Irish are by nature strangely
simple and rude, and very stif in adhering to their ancient customs: they
cannot be naturally more devout, then what they appear to be, toward the Holy
Sea: nor by their natural instinct more averse to the name of English: So as if
they have not been able to shun the violence by which they were also
constrained to receive the Sect which reigns in England, yet they have always
retained the ancient Religion as far as the calamity of the times would give
them leave. That Kingdom is then generally all Catholic; only in Cities, and
most in such as are of most Traffic; some of the Inhabitants are infected with
Heresy; but yet in a very small number in respect of the Catholics, who in
the very same places may oppose themselves to the Heretics.

Throughout the Country, all the people are Catholics, though they live in a
great deal of ignorance: of the principal Noble men you will hardly find four
that are Heretics, and the same may be said of the gentry in those parts.
There being so many Catholics in Ireland, and their zeal being so great
toward the ancient Faith, it has been easy for them to preserve a great
number of secular Priests and Votaries in their Country, who might cultevate
it: The latter of these are almost all of them Franciscans, to whom are added
some Jesuists, and some other Votaries of Saint Dominick, and Saint Bernards
Orders.

But the Fransciscan Order has particularly been always held in great esteem
in Ireland, and many of this Order go now in many places in their own habits,
and keep the use of singing and Chorus, and the form of an ordained Government:
Very great likewise is the number of Secular Priests; though to say truth,
greater Hability and Learning were to be desired in many of them; sacred Orders
having been conferred upon many in Ireland, who were not requisitely qualified.
The best are those who have been bred up in Seminaries abroad, which are
erected in diverse places for this Nation; one in Doway, one in Bordeaux in
France, one in Lisbon, in Portugal, and another in Salimanca in Spain.

There are four Arch-Bishopricks in Ireland; that of Armagh, of Dublin, of
Cassels, and of Toumount; and twenty eight Bishoprics; nine of which depend
upon the first Archbishopric; four upon the second; nine upon the third, and
six upon the fourth. All these Arch-Bishopricks, and Bishoprics, are in the
Heretics hands. Diverse Catholic Priests have notwithstanding the title of the
Arch-bishopricks. But unless it be he of Casels, all the other titulary
Archbishops are at this time upon sundry occasions out of Ireland; so as all
the secular ecclesiastical government in Ireland, is now in the hands of diverse
general Vicars, who are partly constituted in their Archbishopricks, by the
Archbishops now absent, and some have had the same charge in other Bishoprics
conferred upon them directly from the Apostolic See; and the Votaries have
likewise their Superiors apart.

And this may suffice for what concerns the matters of Religion in these
Catholic, and Heretical Provinces of Flanders; and in the Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland. Here then will I end my present Relation;
humbly praying God that he will for ever preserve the ancient Faith in these
Catholic Provinces of Flanders, and speedily restore it to the Heretical ones.
That he will please to inspire the King of England with such a sense of
Religion, as many of his Catholic Predecessors did live and die in. That
particularly he may make him therein like to his Mother Queen Mary; who is
become more glorious by her crown of Martyrdom, then by that which she wore as
Queen; That he and all his Subjects professing thus the true religion, the due
worship of God may be fully restored amongst them, that the former honor may
be restored to the Altars; to the Church the ancient devotion; and that
reverence to the Pope of Rome; Supreme Head of the Church, which for so many
former Ages was rendered to him in those Kingdoms.

A Brief Relation of DENMARK sent to ROME, in a Letter by Cardinal Bentivoglio,
in time of his Nunciature in FLANDERS, to Cardinal Burghese Nephew, to Pope
Paulus Quintus.
THE last Month of October, the King of Spain, and these illustrious
Archdukes, sent a Dutch Gentleman called Signi^ur di Faen Ambassador from
hence in all their names to Denmark, to condole with him for the death of his
wife. His Majesty and their Highnesses willingly embraced this occasion to
renew their friendship with that King, and to knit the knot of Amity the closer
between them for the future. The Ambassador was entertained by the King with
extraordinary honor. He gave him the precedence in all places, and upon all
other occasions evidence how great a value he put upon this favor conferred
upon him by so great a King, and by these Princes so near allied to him in
blood. The Ambassador returned to Brussels; and I desired him that he would
make me a distinct Narration of that Kings particular person, of his court,
Dominions, of their Government, of the Heresy that rules there, and of his
correspondency with other Princes. And having made a breviat thereof, I thought
it a thing which might not prove disadvantageous to the interests of the
Apostolic See; nor unpleasing to our Lord the Pope, nor to your self, if I
should acquaint you with what then came to my knowledge. They may rather prove
so much the more curious and considerable, by how much they are the less known
or valued in these parts by reason of the far remoteness of the Countries.

The King of Denmark is a Prince of a gallant aspect, of a well proportioned
stature, of a very strong complexion, and greatly given to bodily exercise. He
is now thirty five years old; and by his wife who was sister to the now Elector
of Brandenburg, has three sons living, and some daughters that are dead. He
has but one brother, and three sisters, who are all married. One to the King of
England, another to the Duke of Brunswick, and another now a Widow, who was
wife to the late Elector of Saxony. As for his gifts of Mind; they are many,
and very remarkable. He is a Prince of a great wit, quick and ready at action:
So as you would hardly believe he were born under so cold and sluggish a climat
as is that of his Territories; for the most part horridly frozen; he is
esteemed to be a warrior; and in the present war between him and the King of
Swethland, he has alway^ showed a generous mind, and great abilities to
command in war. He is well read in humanity; he is a great Master of the Latin
Tongue, and delights much to speak it; and uses very often to write in that
Language to his Brother in Law the King of England. He speaks Dutch and French
well; and seems to understand Spanish and Italian; he breeds up the Prince his
son likewise in the knowledge of Languages, who is now about nine years of age,
and made him upon occasion of this Embassy, write a Letter in Latin to the
young Prince of Spain, with offers of much friendship, and in terms of great
observancy and respect. And thus much for the kings own person, and those of
his Family.

The Court of Denmark, hardly deserves the name of a Kings Court. The state and
gallantry of other Courts of Europe, has not as yet gotten into those remote
parts, where their manners are between clownish and simple; for building,
housholdstuffe, number of attendants, and court splendour, the King of Denmark,
is rather to be numbered amongst the petty Princes, then great Kings; and he
himself is of a very familiar nature, far from the ostentation of greatness.
He often times goes from one place to another, waited on by only one or two
servants; and behaves himself with great familiarity in private Gentlemen's
houses; laying aside not only the person of a King, but even of a great man.
Wherein he himself says he has some particular design; as to show his
confidence in his Nobility, and to reign with love, and not by Force in the
hearts of his people.

The King of Denmark has very large Dominions, their vast circuit being
considered; but of no great consideration, the greatest part of them being
almost everlastingly frozen toward the Pool, and nothing but Woods and huge
Mountains in Noraway. Besides his two Kingdoms of Denmark and Noraway, he is
Master of other Countries, and Islands of large circuit, which are seated so
far Northernly, as in some parts they have almost half a years day, and
afterward as much night. The best, most inhabited, and fertillest parts of his
Territories, is in his Kingdom of Denmark* and all that which lies nearest
Germany. His Dominions abound not much in Traffic; but the Incomes are great
which he receives from those who must necessarily pass through the Strait of
Copenhaghen, which is called the Sound. Copenhaghen is the City wherein usually
he resides. Here must all such Ships stay which Traffic in the Baltic Sea;
and the Cities that lie thereon: every Vessel that passes by there, pays a
double rose noble English, besides some other tax which they pay for their
Merchandise, which are transported from place to place. He raises a great sum
of Moneys by this Passage, which is the greatest part of his Revenue. He
likewise receives much pro^it by the Transportation of Cattle out of his
Countries, wherein they abound very much, and produce very large ones. Great
quantity of Timber for the building of Ships, and particularly for Masts and
Sail-yards, is likewise extracted out of his Woods of Noraway, whereof he makes
advantage; with all this his whole Revenue is not thought to exceed one Million
of Gold.

The Government of the King of Denmarks States, though it be composed of a
Monarchical Form, depend chiefliest upon the Optemati; The Nobility bearing a
great sway in those parts; the King can resolve nothing of importancy without
them; the administration of justice depends chiefly upon them; and the King
must proceed with them rather by entreaty, then command. In ^ine, the King is
rather Head then King; and the Nobles are rather Freemen then Subjects. The
common people have no share in Government; as for his Forces, they chiefly
consist by Sea, he not having any considerable Land Militia; and in his present
war against the Swedes, the greatest part of his Army are Foraigners; as Dutch,
English, and Scots. The Danes are ablest at Sea, that Kingdom having Islands
on many parts of it; and consequently the Inhabitants having great occasion to
accustom themselves to Maretin affaairs. The king entertains ordinarily
between 50 and 60 great ships, all of them abundantly provided for whatsoever
belongs to Maretin Affairs, and he himself much delights in the study of
Navigation.

The Heresy professed by the King of Denmark is Lutheranisme. His Country fell
into the contagion of this malady, when Germany was first infected
therewithal: and though this Heresy of Luthers begot so many other Sects, and
so various afterward; and that that of Calvin in particular be so much
diffused; yet never would the Kings of Denmark change the first Sect which they
embraced; in which resolution the present King has showed himself more
steadfast, then the rest; The King of England has often labored to persuade
him to Calvinism; and though not in that rigid form as is taught at Geneva, and
as is practiced in France and in other parts, but clad in those exterior
Rites, and accompanied with that form of Government, as it is now practiced in
England; yet all his endeavors have still proved vain; for the King of Denmark
would never be brought to alter his first Heresy; but rather when he has
sometimes suspected that some of his subjects have inclined to Calvinisme, he
has deprived them of all manner of Government, and has been very severe in
keeping that Heresy from being introduced into his Dominions.

The greatest friendship and correspondency which the King of Denmark holds
with Forain Princes, is with the King of England, a reciprocal communication of
all weightiest Affairs passing between them. But by how much the King of
England is greater and more powerful then the King of Denmark, so much the
greater respect does the latter show to the former. The King of Denmark went
himself in person some years ago to visist the King of England; and before
and since has held the same observancy toward him; and has kept a special
good Intelligence with the Queen his Sister. He kept always good correspondency
with the late Duke of Saxony, who was likewise his Brother in Law; and does the
like now with the Duke of Brunswick. There is not so good an understanding now
as has been formerly between him and the United Provinces of Flanders; those
Provinces behaving themselves, as he says since the Truce, and since they took
upon them the pretended title of United Provinces, with too much pride and
arrogance; to boot that they seemed to favor the King of Sweden more th^n him
in the abovesaid war. He likewise complains much that the United Provinces
since the Truce, have begun to question the Imposition laid upon the passing
the Zound, pretending that their Ships ought either not to pay at all, or at
least be in some part eased therein. He seems to be a friend to the King of
Poland, especially now that both their Interests are conformable in the war
which both of them made upon Duke Charles, who was Uncle to the King of
Polonia, Usurper to his first kingdom of Swethland. He likewise holds good
correspondency with the Emperor; endeavoring to keep fair with the Empire,
upon which, part of his Dominions descends toward the confines of Germany. His
kindness is not such with the Elector of Brandenburg, whose sister he married,
as so ^ear a relation of alliance would require; the house of Brandenburg o^ing
very near joined to the United Provinces, and the Elector having seemed to
adhere more to the said Provinces, then to him in the mentioned distastes. He
has no particular interest of Friendship nor enmity with these Archdukes,
with the king of Spain, nor the king of France; yet the Forces of his Country
assisted France against the crown of Spain, in the past revolutions between
those two Crowns. And hence it is peradventure, that the Catholic king, and
these Archdukes, endeavor now to gain this present king, that they may sever
him from the United Provinces upon any new occasions of troubles that may arise
here in Flanders. Dated from Brussels the second of Feb. 1613.

A Short RELATION of the Hugonots in FRANCE, sent to ROME from the Cardinal
Bentevoglio, in the time of his being Nuncio with Lewis the thirteenth King of
FRANCE, to Cardinal Burghesse, Nephew to Pope Paul the fifth, the seventh of
November 1619. upon occasion of a general Assembly made then by the Hugonots at
Louden in FRANCE.
THE Heresy of our times began in France, in the time of Francis the first; it
increased, but as it were in secret under Henry the second; broke forth in
public, and got strength in the tender years of Francis the second; and then
increased mightily, and overrun the whole Kingdom in the Infancy of Charles the
9th. It did neither increase nor decrease much in the Reign of Henry the third.
The Catholic Religion was rather endammaged then advantaged upon occasion of
Catholic League. And finally, Henry the fourth, after having come to the Crown
by force of Arms; weary of war, and desirous to secure himself the better by
the way of peace, did really establish the liberty of conscience, and gave way
to other great advantages in favor of the Hugonots of that kingdom; whereinto
Heresy did first chiefly enter through Faction, and has since been maintained
by Faction. Nor is it to be doubted but that under pretense of liberty of
conscience the Hugonots have introduced a separation from the State.

This separation appears in two sorts: the one in what respects matter of
Religion, and the other in what directly concerns the State. In the first the
Hugonots have already formed an entire government apart: to the tolleration
whereof, through the calamity of times 'twas requisite that diverse kingly
edicts should concur. In the second it appears that their end is the same;
which is to establish likewise a popular politic government apart, which may
be as contrary to the temporal Monarchy of kings, as the other is to the
spiritual Monarchy of the Church.

Both these governments consist in the gathering together of multitudes: and to
speak first of that of their Churches, they have their meetings of every
particular Church apart; and of more Churches together, then of those of an
entire Province; and lastly, of as many as are in the whole kingdom. The first
are termed Consistories, the second Colloquies, the third Provincial, and the
last National Synods.

The Consistories are composed of Ministers, Elders, and Deacons. They are more
or less in number, according as the Churches are greater or less. The
Ministers duty is to preach, and the chief Functions of every Church are
officiated by them. The Elders do superintend in many things which respect
Discipline; and the Deacons distribute the Alms. The Consistories sit every
week once, or oftener upon occasions; most voices carry it in the resolving of
any affairs; which are either such as respect the profession of faith, or
Ecclesiastical government; in those which concern the profession of faith,
nothing can be resolved of without the consent of the National Synod; but in
what concerns Discipline, when the Consistory cannot resolve of it self, it
advises with the neighboring Churches by way of Colloquies, and Provincial
Synods; wherefore the Colloquies meet every three months, or at least twice a
year; and the Provincial Synods every year once or twice.

The Colloquies are composed of four, six, or more Churches; and Provincial
Synods are likewise proportionably formed of diverse Colloquies. Thus then are
Affairs managed; from Consistories to Colloquies; from Colloquies to Provincial
Synods, and finally, from Provincial to National Synods; which meet usually
once every two years: one Minister, and one Elder go usually from Consistories
to Colloquies; and the like number of the Churches of each Colloquy, to
Provincial Synods: but from a whole Provincial Synod but two or three
Ministers, and as many Elders are sent to the National Synod: to the end that
the number be not too great of those that must intervene therein.

In every Colloquy a Minister does preside or sits in the Chair, whose part it
is to propound the business; and it is so ordered as that some times one
church, sometimes another does precede; which is not done only in Colloquies,
but also in Provincial and National Synods; that equality may be observed;
which is the point chiefly driven at in all Affairs. In Consistories, voices
are counted according to the Persons, but in Colloquies, and Provincial and
National Synods, the voices are counted according to the number of churches,
and not according to the persons; for whether they be more or less that
represent one church, they all make but one voice of that church in National
Synods, the convocation depends sometimes upon one, sometimes upon another
Province. And they are called sometimes in one, sometimes in another Province;
according to the conjuncture of times, and the occasion of affairs.

In dividing the Provinces of the kingdom, the Hugonots have not observed the
usual order of dividing them; but have made many of one; and one of many;
according as the kingdom is more or less corrupted with Heresy in the
several parts thereof. The most infected Provinces lie beyond the River of
Loire, which divides France as it were through the middle; and of those more
particularly, Poictou, Saint Onge, Guien, Languedock, and Dolfeny; at this time
then France is divided by the Hugonots, into sixteen Provinces; and according
to this number are Deputies sent to the National Synods, which consist only
of Ministers; and to the General Politic Assemblies, which consist of three
sorts of persons, as shall be more particularly showed elsewhere.

The Provinces which are divided by them in Form aforesaid are these; The Isle
of France, Burgony, Normandy, Britanny, Anjou, Berry, Poictou, Saint Onge,
Rochel, the lower Guyen, the upper Languedock, with the upper Guyen, the lower
Languedock, the Sevene, and the Vivarese, (which are likewise two parts, in
Languedock) Dolpheny, and Province. In which division you see that four
Provinces are made out of Languedock, out of Guien one and an half; and Rochel
which is but one only city, goes for a whole Province. Yet this is only
observed in the General Politic Assemblies; for in the National Synods Rochel
is numbered only for one single church. The country of Bearn is likewise joined
in Union with the aforesaid Provinces, but with certain particular advantages;
the Kings Edicts in favor of the Catholic Religion, and the restitution of
Ecclesiastical goods, not having yet been admitted of there.

All the Hugonots churches in the aforesaid Provinces may amount to about seven
hundred; and accounting one church with another, you may allow two Ministers to
every church. Calvin's Doctrine is professed in all of them; and to shun the
multiplicity and confusion of sects, Calvinisme is the only Sect which is
permitted in France. And as for the number of Hugonots, estimation is made that
of fifteen Million of Inhabitants which are in France, there is one Million and
better of Hugonots. And thus much for what belongs to the Government of
Hugonots in matter of Religion.

As for the other point of the separation of Government in things which respect
the State; it is clearly seen that the Hugonots conspire to make a popular
Commonwealth Government, which may be directly opposite to Monarchy. At first
they had certain places of safety granted them to free them from suspicion of
having any violence used toward them in matter of Religion. They were likewise
suffered to Summon once in three year a General Political Assembly to name
some Deputies, two of which were to reside constantly at the Court, to manage
the affairs of their whole Body; and to endeavor the execution of the Regal
edicts, according to the tenure thereof. But abusing still more and more their
sovereigns clemency and goodness, they have so altered the face of affairs, as
their first palliated pretenses of liberty of conscience, is now seen to be by
them turned into designs of absolute liberty of Government; and all matters of
Religion, into apparent practices of Faction.

This has been more evidently seen since the death of Henry the fourth; Father
to the now King. For in this Kings minority, the Hugonots making use of so
favorable a conjuncture, have of themselves introduced Cerutes into France,
according to the custom of the Germane Liberty. They have made their Councels
in every Province, permanent and settled, according to the use of the United
Provinces of Flandsrs. And finally, they have begun to call by their own
authority, and oftener then at first, their general Political Assemblies. In all
which things it is evidently seen that their end is to form a particular
assembly of Deputies of their whole Body, wch^ may likewise be firm and stable,
and wch^ may continually represent the same body in Union and Sovereignty,
which would be a mere instituting of a Supreme Council like to that of the
States General of the United Provinces of Flanders; by which Council the
Sovereignty of their Union is still represented and kept alive.

The Hugonots Political Government consists then in the assembling of
multitudes together, as does the government of their Churches in manner
afore^aid. In every Province they have a Council composed of three sorts of
persons: Gentlemen, Ministers, and people of a third condition; and this
Council is changed every three years: In this Council their politic Affairs
as they happen from time to time, are handled; and in this Assembly the Gentry
precedes the Ministers; as on the contrary, Ministers precede the Gentry in
Ecclesiastical Assemblies; when it may so fall out that any of the Nobility
may Intervene there out of some requisite occasion.

But if the business be of great Importance, so as it can receive no
resolution from any one Province, the Province interessed has recourse unto
the Circuit, and assembles the neighboring Provinces which belong to that
Circuit; and if the Importancy be such as that circuit cannot resolve it, they
call another Circuit into their aid, and so another till they come to the
general Convocation of the whole Assembly, when the business is of such
consequence as that it is to be handled and resolved on by the Interposition
and Authority of the whole body of the Hugenots.

There are but three Circuits; every of which comprehends under it a certain
number of Provinces; and the Hugonots have introduced these Circuits, that they
may the sooner assemble now one part, now another of the Provinces according to
their need, and yet so much the sooner if the General Assembly be requisite. As
was particularly seen this year in the business of Bearn; upon occasion
whereof the Hugenots went first from Circuit to Circuit, and afterward
assembled together twice in a General Assembly; first, at Ortes, in the same
Country of Bearn, and the second time at Rochel.

In the calling together, and keeping of their Political Assemblies, they
observe the same order as they do in their Ecclesiastical meetings, as well in
constituting a President, as in the plurality of voices, and in keeping an
exact equality; so as no one Province can have any Prerogative over another.
When the time of the General Assembly is come, whether it be called by the
kings permission, or by the Hugonots themselves; in the Councels of each
Province the particular Affairs of that Province are first discust. Then each
of them send their Deputies (of the three above said Orders) to the General
Assembly; where with common Authority of the whole body, such resolves are made
as are requisite, as well in respect of every Province, as of their whole Body.

But in the former Assemblies, wherein due form was observed, the Hugonots did
only, as they were permitted, choose their Deputies for three years, till the
time of the new General Assembly.

To this purpose they chose six persons, out of which the king chose two: and
this Deputation being made, and their Demands in a few days agreed upon which
they were to make unto the king, they quickly were dispatched, and ended the
Assembly.

Now of late they seem to pretend to name only two deputies, at least not to
consent to any save two such as they like best, to the end that the King may be
as it were excluded from having any share in their deputations: they will have
no time prefixed them to make their demands, neither will they depart, or end
their Assembly, till they have answer, and be satisfied in their demands: and
hence it is, that the Hugonots not thinking themselves secure by reason of
these their contumatious proceedings, in the place where the Assembly had wont
to meet, (for the place was likewise to be chosen by the King) they have of
themselves and their own free will removed it to some other place, where they
thought they might be with more safety, and finally when they could do no more,
they have brought it to Rochell, which is their new imagined Cartharge of
France; where they hope or rather dream to found with a formidable power both
by land and sea, their already designed future Commonwealth; but which is now
indeed their chief Sanctuary, where they plot a thousand mischiefs every day
against the King and Church, and least fear to be punished.

The General Political Assemblies are permitted by the King to the Hugonots,
from three years to three, when they are had as they ought to be and to the
aforesaid ends: it seems now consequently that they are tacitly permitted to
assemble themselves firt together in every Province, that each of them may send
their Deputies to the General Assembly: all the rest exceeds the Kings
permission, nay contrary to the Orders and express Authority of the King. They
have a great many Towns in diverse parts of the Kingdom, which from time to time
upon certain limitatious, the King has given into their possession, to seucure
them the more from any violence that may be offered them in matter of Religion,
which are therefore called places of safety; to these others have since been
added, which are called matremoniall Towns, as married after a manner to the
former, and depending upon their Garrisons; no Garrisons being assigned to
these martimoniall Towns. On this side the Loire the Hugonots have but very few
Towns; but on the other side they have great store, with greater or lesser
Garrisons, according to the quality of the Towns, and persons who command
therein; they receive moneys from the King to pay the said Garrisons, which may
amount to 60000 pound sterling a year: though all these Towns of security in
time of peace, have either no Garrisons at all, or but very weak ones; the
Governors thereof turning then their pay into their particular purses: they
likewise receive 20000 pound sterling a year by name of an aid, to maintain
their Ministers; but but little of this falls to the Ministers share, it being
usually laid out in other expenses, which regard the Hugonots pollitick ends;
they themselves bearing the greatest burden in maintaining of their Ministers,
by public contributions, of what may suffice to that purpose: and to boot with
these common sums given to the whole body of the Hugonots, the Kings gives
about 30000 pound in several pensions amongst them.

The King has the naming of all the Governors of all their places of security;
but they must be Hugonots: Rochell is not notwithstanding any of their Towns of
security, nor is there any Governor placed there by the King: Rochell has a
particular Government by it self, after the manner almost of a Free
Commonwealth; so as it h^rdly acknowledges any Regal authority: and that it
may acknowledge it less, and so grow to greater liberty, it joined at first,
and still continues to do so more and more with the Hugonot Faction. But though
Rochell be none of their Towns of security, yet is it one of the Hugonots
chiest strengths; so strong is the situation of it both by Sea and land; so
strong both by Art and Nature, and so abundantly furnished with all things
needful to make a powerful and long defense.

By the way of Rochell they keep continual correspondency with England; by the
way of Sedan, a strong Town belonging to the Duke of ^ullion; they keep the
like with Germany, and the United Provinces of Flanders; and they will now keep
better correspondency with the Prince of Orange, he having of late succeeded
his brother in that Principality, who was a Catholic; but their closest
intelligence is in Geneva; by means of which City they likewise hold
intelligence with the Heretic Cantons of the Switzers; and more particularly
with that of Bearn, which is the strongest, and lies nearest to Geneva. For
what remains, their Towns of security are more for noise then strength, being
all of them almost but of small consideration; so as few of them in time of War
would be able to maintain a siege: In time of trouble they raise their best
soldiers from the mountainous parts of Sevene in Languedock; and gather moneys
now by way of contribution amongst themselves, by reprisals of the Kings
Revenues, and by all other means which use to make way to the disorders and
confusion of Civil War. Their peremptoriness and perpetual plottings makes
them strong: But above all things they make advantage of the discords and
commotions which often arise amongst the Catholics in France, never losing any
opportunity which makes against the Crown, either of receiving the turbulent
Catholics into their Faction, or in joining with them.

The chiefest amongst the Hugonots at this time are the Dukes of Bullion, Roan,
Tremoullie, and Seugh; the Marshall Diguieres, Monsieur de Schatillion, and
Monsieur de la Force; Roan is Governor of Poictou; Diguieres the Kings
Lieutenant in Dolpheny, but with such Authority as he may rather be called
Prince of that Province, then the Kings Lieutenant; La Force is Governor of the
Country of Bearn; and the rest though they have no particular Government of
Provinces, are yet highly esteemed of out of many other considerations. Bullion
and Diguiers, for their age, experience and valor, are men highly valued; yet
Bullion is held to be false, and one not to be tru^ted in; whereas Diguieres
has always had the repute of generous and faithful. There are continually
jealousies between these great ones; and ambition bears them often to designs
wherewith the rest are not well pleased; so as the rest of the Hugonots do not
confide much in them: but these jealousies are particularly fomented by the
Ministers, as well in the great ones against the people, as in the people
against the great on^s, to make their own Ministerial Faction the greater. And
this may serve for the second point.

It may then be granted by what has been said, that Heresy has introduced in
France a separation of State; and that the Hugonot Faction aspires directly to
the Government of a Commonwealth, and designs to compass it by the ruin of
the Church and Monarchy; but God at last confounds the wicked, and his right
hand always fights and overcomes in the behalf of the righteous: so as it is
not to be doubted but that the Church and Monarchy will be preserved, and the
Hugonot Faction consequently extinguished: nay it is to be hoped, that the
present King by Divine Providence is preserved (according as his father has
foretold to many) to this triumph. Diguieres is decrepid; Bullion old and
infirm; the other great ones are always at ods between themselves: that mad
fervor of conscience so radicated at first in the Hugonots, grows every day
less and less in them; and unless it be among the meaner sort of people, who
are most deceived, the sense of Religion appears already to be wholly turned to
Faction in almost all the rest; which Faction may be said to be divided into
three parts, rather then to but one: the Nobility makes one, the People
another, and the Ministers a third; and who shall well consider them, will
find that the Hugonots strength never had; nor never is like to have any
strong foundation within themselves: out of which reasons it may be judged that
these Hydraes heads of Impiety, and Rebellion, will at last be cut off; and
that this present King to the great honor of his name, and to the Immortal
glory of God, is he who is to be the queller of this Monster. On the contrary,
the King is in the prime flower of his age; and is already known to be a great
lover of Piety and Justice; yea that beyond the expectation of his age, his
chief aim is to succeed his predecessor Saint Lewis, as well in worth as in
name. The Princes of the blood and all the other Princes are now Catholics; as
are also almost all the other chiefest Lords: the Parliaments are Catholic;
the Cities and chiefest Towns Catholic; and the Ecclesiastical Order grows
every day better in manners, learning and discipline: and lastly it is to
believed that France after so many ages of an United Government, will never
consent to the authority of any other then that of the ancient Catholic
Church, and to that of her ancient and Sovereign Monarchy.

A RELATION of the TREATY of the TRUCE in FLANDERS, which was concluded in
Antwerp, the ninth of April 1609.
Written by Cardinal Bentivoglio in the time of his being Nuntio with their
Highnesses, the Archdukes, ALBERTUS and ISABELLA Infanta of Spain.
The first Book of the Truce of Flanders.
THE Treaty of the Truce of Flanders made of late between Philip the third King
of Spain; together with the Archdukes, Albertus and Isabella, and the States
General of the United Provinces of these Countries, may doubtlesly be numbered
amongst the most memorable, affairs of our time. If we consider the time
therein employed, it was above two years; if the Princes who intervened
therein, all the chiefest of Europe had therein their share; if the
difficulties which were to be overcome, there were never any greater met
withal in any negotiation: and lastly, if we will consider the effects which
insued thereupon, nothing could be of more importance to the public affairs of
Christendom, then the 12 years cessation of those arms, which had so long
troubled almost whole Europe with the bitter Wars of Flanders: It was my
fortune to be present at so important an affair, at the beginning of my
Nuntioship, the endeavors therein were already begun when I came to Brussels;
and some notice was likewise taken thereof at Rome before I parted from that
Court; wherefore I received strict Orders from the Pope both by word of mouth,
and instructions, that I should watch very narrowly over whatsoever should
ensue upon so weighty occurrances, and particularly over such occasions as
might arise upon such a conjuncture, of any ways bettering the state of the
Catholic Religion in the United Provinces. Thus my Princes commands, the Duty
of my employment, and the very business it self which had drawn upon it the
eyes of all Europe, made me the more dilligent in observing what had already
been done therein. I came to Flanders, (as I have said) at their commencing,
when the overture had been made by a suspension of Arms for some months: and
endeavoring to be as well informed as I could; I took short notes of what
discourses past therein between my self, and Ambassadors of foreign Princes, and
the other chief Officers of the Court of Flanders; I found that (taking the
narrative a little higher) that the beginning and progress thereof till my
arrival was thus.

Marquess Spinola having the Command of the Catholic Army given him, after the
taking of Ostend; the Spaniards labored very much to get into the heart of the
Enemies Country. Their designs were to get some safe pass over the Rheine;
and when they should have got footing on the other side, to endeavor
afterward to pass over the Isell, and to carry the War into the very heart of
Holland. To this end Spinola after having raised the Forts over the Rheine at
Rurort, and possessed himself of that passage in the former of the two fields
before the Truce; had then advanced farther toward the Province of Friesland,
and taken Linghen a strong hold, and Oldensell, a town near Linghen; and in the
last field had divided his Army into two parts; had again encamped himself with
one of them beyond the Rhein, using all his might to pass the Isell, and betake
himself to the taking in of some important place; and that the Count Buquoy had
endeavored with the other part to pass over the Vahall, and to take Niminghen,
a town which commanded that river a great way; but the climat of Flanders being
naturally moist and rainy, the summer that year did so abound in continual
showrs, as by reason of the overflowing of the Rivers, it was impossible either
for Spinola to pass over the Isell, or Buquoy the Vahall, and the enemy had so
fortified the banks on their side, to^ether with all those Frontiers, as though
the heavens had not fought for them, their own forces, and fortifications would
have much impeled the ends which the Spaniards had propounded unto themselves;
Spinola despairing to compass his forenamed designs; after having taken Groll,
a very considerable place; and having made Buquoy join with him had besieged
and taken Renberg; and thus by means of this place, which is of great
importance, had made himself master of another passage over the Rhein, much
better then that which he had first got. These were the Spaniards conditions
and designs; and these were Spinolas undertakings in the two last fields
wherein he governed; and doubtless the events thereof would have bin of great
moment, though very far short of the conceived hopes: for respect being had to
the so great preparations, the enemies fear would have bin greater then the blow
it self would have bin unto them: and in Spain it was thought impossible to
continue such an excessive provision of moneys as was that which was disburst,
which was 300000 crowns a month; though double that expense was not since able
to hinder the Army from mutinying when the siege of Renberg was hardly ended, a
thing whereat Spinola was much afflicted; and which made him the more take
those things into consideration, which some of the gravest and best experienced
Counselors or officers had already often times done both in Spain and Flanders,
touching the difficulties and dangers which the war of Flanders carried with
it; and the undertaking to subdue the enemy by force of Arms. They discoursed
thus amongst themselves. That all the good they had reaped by 40 years war was,
their having made the enemy the more strong; more resolute to defend their
usurpt liberty; more firm in the union which they had established amongst
themselves; and better united to the foreign Princes who sided with them: That
Nature's self might be said to have fought always for them, by their bulwarks
of sea and rivers, and their strong scituations in all others parts; and that
where nature was wanting, there industry together with their so many well
munited places did make amends: that their power by land was very great in all
things else; and their power at sea so great, as that the crown of Spain had
bin much indamag'd thereby, even in the East Indies, and was in danger of being
yet a greater sufferer by them in the West Indies also: what a mass of strength
(on the other side) and money must it cost the K. to maintain the war of
Flanders; that doubtlesly his Empire was very large, but much disunited;
Flanders, the most disunited member of the whole body of his dominions both by
sea and land; that the sea was blocked up by the enemies ships; that their
passage by land did depend upon many Princes, which always caused great
difficulties in their sending of aid, and destroyed their men more by their
marches then by their bick'rings: then, how many corruptions and disorders had
bin rooted in their army? and how could they be remedied during the war, they
being the effects which so long a war had inevitably produced? that insted of
obedience, strife reigned amongst the nations; that there were now more wives
then soldiers, more mutinys then years; that their own forces were almost as
dangerous to them as those of their enemies: and mutenies gowing so familiar,
now of one, now of another nation, and often times of many nations at once, what
a sad day would that be, when the whole army should mutiny together? a day which
would bring the K. affairs in Flanders to their utmost danger, as also the cause
of the catholic religion; for the defense whereof the war at first was chiefly
made, and has been so long maintained by the Spanish side. If then by so many
reasons and so long experience, war against the enemy were to be esteemed so
fruitless, is it not better (said they) to come to some fair agreement with
them? is it not better to order our Army anew, and in the mean time to get
strength, and laying down arms, except what with time would make most to the
Spanish advantage? Arms being laid down, the King of France already grown old,
might in this interim die, and with him that assistance might chance to cease,
which was subministred to the enemy by a Prince of such power and repute: that
after his death the affairs of France might peradventure change face, their
King being so young: the like might be expected in the affairs of England,
their King being a new King, and a Scotch man; but ill looked on by that
Kingdom; the enemy having likewise received considerable succors from Scotland:
and in case any of these things should happen, how much would the affairs of
Spain be bettered? but above all it was to be hoped that even peace it self
might turn to a secret war against the enemy: that the fear of the Spanish
Forces was the bond which fastened their Union closest; so as this fear ceasing
through the enjoyment of quiet, some domestic evil might arise amongst them,
which might break the Union; and some opportunity in favor of the King and
Archdukes, of regaining some of the rebellious Provinces by underhand
dealing, and of subjugating the others afterward by force.

These reasons were doubtlesly very weighty, and of great consideration, and
had been often times argued in Spain; whereupon the King had at last resolved
that if he could not effect his ends by arms, all possible means should be used
to come by some convenient Treaty of agreement with the enemy in Flanders: and
the affairs of Flanders may be said to depend totally upon the King: For the
marriage between the Archduke and the Kings sister, proving barren, and the
Provinces of Flanders being consequently to return unto the King again, he had
therefore chiefly maintained the war with his Forces, and consequently all
Treaties of agreement were chiefly to depend upon his authority. The Archduke
inclined likewise very much to bring things to some accommodation; he being a
Prince naturally given to love his quiet, and full of years and experience,
might comprehend better then any other the dangerous consequences which the war
of Flanders brought with it: but it was very hard to find out a way how to
treat of accommodation. A while since the enemy seemed to be quite averse unto
any such treaty; and still swelling with prosperity and succes, they resolved
never to listen to any whatsoever treaty, till such time as the K. and
Archdukes should first publicly declare that they treated with them as with
free Provinces and States, unto the which the K. nor Archdukes made no claim or
pretense whatsoever: wherein the Archduke found great repugnancy in himself,
and foresaw the like in the King. He thought that to declare those now to be a
free people, against whom they had fought as against rebels, would be to
confess that their former war had bin unjust; and that to seem so willing now
to put an end unto it, would be likewise a declaring that they were no longer
able to maintain it; what honor should they lose herein? how could they with
credit treat of peace or truce with their own rebels; and how dangerous a
president would it be, to make liberty the reward of rebellion? for such an
example in favor of those Provinces which had rebelled, would be an invitation
to such as kept yet their obedience, to do the like.

This preparation of the affairs of Flanders was in the beginning of the year
1607. Father John Neyen a Franciscan Friar, was then at Brussels; he was born
at Antwerp, and after having taken upon him that religious he had staid a while
in Spain, to pass the course of his studies there, and by that reason was well
acquainted with the affairs of that Court. He returned from thence to Flanders,
and being become Commissary General of his Order in those parts, he kept very
much at Brussels: He was very religious, of an eloquent tongue, very well
fitted to the nature of his Country, and therefore as well acceptable in private
discourse as in the Pulpit; and much versed in the negotiations of the age. The
Commissary had some acquaintance in Holland; and by chance a Holland Merchant
who was a friend of his was then in Brussels: This Merchant was very inward
with diverse of the chiefest that sat at the Helm in the United Provinces: The
Archduke being at private Council with Spinola and some others of the Kings
Officers in Flanders, 'twas thought expedient that the Commissary should
dispose the Merchant to go to the Hague in Holland to endeavor some new
Overture of Treaty. The Merchant went* but he found no ear would be given
thereunto, till the abovesaid Declaration of their being free States were
granted, and that this should precede all other things. The Archduke was
sencible of the aforesaid repugnancies in condescending thereunto; yet all the
former considerations being again weighed, it was at last judged, that it was
best to yield to the present necessity, and that all means should be used to
procure a cessation of Arms, and to enter into a Treaty of accommodation.

If the Treaty should have good success, the success would sufficiently applaud
the Treaty; if it should not succeed well, but that they must be forced to
continue the war; the making of such a verbal Declaration would not import
much: 'Twas added, that to declare that they treated with the United Provinces,
as with free States unto which the King and Archdukes laid no pretension, was
always to be understood by way of supposition, to wit; as if they were free,
not signifying a true and legitimate liberty; which they by their rebellion
could never justly come by, nor justly enjoy: which being so manifest, neither
did the King nor the Archdukes lose any right which they formerly had to the
United Provinces, though they should make a Declaration thus limited.

Sudden advertisement was sent to Spain of what had been discovered by the
Merchants means; and all things were again represented unto the King, which
were thought likelyest to induce him to give way, that some treaty of agreement
might be had with the United Provinces, in such manner as has been said. The
reasons which prevailed in Flanders, did so likewise in Spain, in persuading
the King to give way to the Treaty which was desired. Whereupon the Archduke
resolved to send the Commissary General in person, into Holland, to endeavor
once more some fairer way of commencing a Treaty, and to yield at last, if
there were no remedy, to what the United Provinces pretended unto. The
Commissary took his journey about the end of February; and being come to the
Hague, he soon perceived there was no hopes of ever being heard in any thing
whatsoever, unless the abovesaid Declaration should precede: whereupon being
admitted into the Council of the States General, which is the supreme
magistracy by which the whole body of those Provinces is represented: he opened
himself thus unto them.

That the Archduke Albertus, and the Arch-Dutches the Infanta his wife, had
always desired to see the Lowcountrys once free from Civil wars; that so many
and so bitter calamities of war, might be turned to the enjoyment of a happy
Peace. That Peace was the end of War; which not being to be had but by the way
of Treaty; they did consent on their side that the Declaration of Liberty which
they knew the United Provinces do pretend unto should precede; that it became
all good Princes to endeavor all means whereby to cause quiet unto their
people, and that to justify this their so just and religious end to the world,
they had willingly descended now to an overture of treaty; and to second the
success thereof would be as willing to do any thing that might tend to the good
of the weal-publick. This Proposition being well discust in the Council of the
States General, they thought that whatsoever could be desired, made then for
the advantage of the Low Countries; whereupon they resolved to accept of the
offer: and before the Commissary departed, a suspension of Arms for eight
months was agreed upon, which was to begin the next May; and it was likewise
concluded that the Treaty should begin the next September. The Commissary went
from Holland with this answer. Not long after the Archdukes declared by a
particular Edict or Proclamation, that they came to suspension of Arms with the
United Provinces, as with Free Provinces and States, unto which they did not
lay any pretense; the States General did also the like on their side: the
Commissary did likewise promise that the King of Spain should by the Archdukes
procurement ratify the same within three months: and he did likewise desire in
the names of the Archdukes, that the States would inhibit all hostility by
sea, promising that the Archdukes would oblige themselves that the King of
Spain should do the same: to the which the States after some difficulties
condescended: all this was afterward published by the United Provinces to
their people with great demonstrations of joy; and they gave an account thereof
to their confederate Princes; but more particularly to the King of France and
King of England; from both of which, Ambassadors were forthwith sent to
congratulate with them. The affairs of Flanders were at this pass when I came
to Brussels, which was on Saint Laurence his eve, 1607. it cannot be expressed
how all men on all sides did rejoice, in expectation of what the event would
prove. Soon after my coming to Brussels the Kings ratification came; to procure
the which, as also to give a more particular account of what had past, the
Archduke had dispatched away Commissary Neyen: The ratification came in
general terms; and so penned, as it was to be doubted the United Provinces would
not allow of it: yet Lewis Verreychen, chief Secretary of State to the
Archdukes was suddenly sent with it into Holland. The United Provinces showed
strange arrogance in these Negotiations; and particularly a great suspicion of
being overreach'd by the Spaniards; whence it was to be believed that they
would interpret all that should come from that side in the worst sense.

You have heard what the number and Government of the United Provinces are, and
how they are seated. How Holland and Zealand are seated in the bosom of the
sea, and the other five lie more inwards into the land; these therefore did
more willingly give way unto the Treaty at the first, and did afterward appear
more inclined to continue it. The principal and Fundamental Law of their Union
is, That in resolutions apertaining to the common interest, the Votes of all of
them must equally agree; so as their businesses proceed but slowly; they being
to be treated of apart in every several Province, and alike uniform consent to
be gathered from them all by long and tedious persuasions, as their liberty is
in all of them alike; The kings ratification being then sundry times consulted
on, and with great jealousies, these difficulties were objected by the United
Provinces. That the Ratification came in general terms; that it did not
contain the essential clause touching their liberty; but that the King still
styled the Archdukes Princes of the Low Countries; that the King writ himself,
I the King, as he used to do to his own Vassals; that it was written in
ordinary Paper, and not in Parchment; as is usually done in things of great
importance: and finally, that it was sealed with a little seal, and not with a
great one; as it ought to have been. Verreychin being afterward sent for in,
these difficulties were propounded unto him and exaggerated rather in an
insolent then free manner: and it was at last concluded, that the United
Provinces would by no means accept of the Ratification in manner as it was by
him presented.

The common peoples madness is always very great, but more when they are
smiled upon by Fortune. They are full of arrogance, and rashness, in time of
Prosperity; and as base and abject in Ad^versity: So as a multitude must either
not be treated with at all, or these alternate defects must be patiently born
withal. Verreychin used therefore such dissimulation as was requisite; and
endeavored to remove their suspicions. He assured them that such a
ratification would not have been sent from Spain, did not the King intend to
make it good; that his intentions were excellent, and that he did vie therein
with the Archdukes; he prayed them to allow time for another to come; that he
did again promise in the name of the Archdukes to cause another ratification
be sent in the same form as was by them desired. The resolution put on in
Holland was; that the Archdukes should procure a new ratification to be sent
from Spain within six weeks, which should contain word for word the same
Declaration of Freedom, which the Archdukes had made in their Instrument;
that it should be written in Latin, French, or Dutch, and should be subscribed
by the King, with his own name; and to the end that no more errors might be run
into, the form thereof was given to Verreychin in all the three Languages.

Father Neyen was this mean while returned from the Court; he acquainted them
how hard it was to procure the King to send the former ratification, though in
general terms; yet he affirmed that he did verily hope that a second would
come in particular terms. The Spaniards knowing what necessity there was to
commence a treaty thus with the United Provinces; since no other way would be
admitted of. The Archdukes did again signify this necessity; so as not long
after the second ratification came from Spain, but it was so penned, as 'twas
feared the United Provinces would raise new scruples in admitting it; it
contained the pretended declaration of liberty; and all the other clauses that
were desired. But in the conclusion this was added by the King; that if the
matters of Religion should not be agreed upon as well as the other points, his
ratification should signify nothing; and affairs should still continue in
their former posture. It was also written in Spanish, subscribed as usually, I
the King; and in all things else according to the former manner. Yet it was
believed that these last rubs would easily be removed, by the example of the
Kings having done the same in the two peaces which were lately concluded with
the King of France, and King of England. The other difficulty touching the new
added clause, was thought the greater. And that word Religion seemed to be
immaturely put in; since it might raise jealousies in the United Provinces; as
if it were already determined in Spain to make Propositions against the liberty
of their Government, and against that Declaration which the King at the same
time made in form aforesaid. The Commissary and Verreychin were sent both
together with this second ratification into Holland; who in the presenting
thereof, made large professions to the States General again, of the great good
inclinations of the King and Archdukes toward the common good, and how
desirous they were particularly of the low countries welfare.

The States took time to give their answer; and after much consultation, their
answer according to their wonted arrogance, was thus: That the Kings
ratification was not answerable to the form which they desired; and that
amongst other things the new added clause could not be allowed of: since the
King knew very well, as did also the Arch Dukes, that the United Provinces were
free Provinces, and would always be so, though no agreement were made. That
notwithstanding the States would acquaint every Province with the ratification,
and would within six weeks make their resolution known: But with this
protestation, that they intended not that by virtue of such a ratification any
thing should be propounded which might tend to the prejudice of the freedom of
their Government, in case that the Treaty went on.

This answer being given, the Commissary and Verreychin returned to Brussels.
Whilst affairs were thus negotiated in Flanders, diverse interests, passions and
ends were upon this occasion discovered to be not only in the neighboring
Princes, but almost in all the Princes of Europe. In Germany, the Emperor
Rodulphus the second, pretended that no Treaty of agreement could be made in
Flanders without his participation and consent; taking for granted, that the
low countries did depend upon the Empire; and therefore no separation could be
made therein without his authority: Wherefore he had written some Letters to
this purpose to the Catholic King, the Archduke, and to the United Provinces.

The King and Archduke answered him in general terms; as did also the United
Provinces; save only that they added a long justification of their cause, and
of their war against the Spaniard till the present. Neither was there any more
news heard of the Emperor in the whole progress of the Treaty. But Henry the
fourth of France, was not so negligent in the consideration of these passages.
He had sent Ambassadors upon this occasion at the first in Holland; the truest
and most intrinsecal end whereof was, that he might have a share in what was to
be done, and specially to cause jealousy in the Spaniards, and by this means
to induce them to make use of him, and to make him Arbitrator in the
differences.

The King of France was then in his chiefest greatness and prosperity: and
enjoyed his kingdom in perfect peace and honor; after having arrived thereat
through many difficulties, all which he had overcome with incredible constancy
and valor. He considered the Affairs in Flanders, after several manners; on
one side he could have wished that the War might continue, and that thereby the
affairs of Spain might still be impaired, even till at last they might lose
whole Flanders. On the other side he saw himself well stricken in years; his
children very young; and that in case he should fail, fresh troubles might in a
short time arise in his kingdom, which might chiefly be fomented by the
Spanish Forces of Flanders; that the disorders of those Forces were not so
many, but that if the War should continue, very necessity would force them to
find out a remedy; nor the danger of their losses such as might not be evaded
by the power of so great a Monarch; which made him desire to see Flanders
without War, and and the Spaniards without Forces so near at hand. Neither did
he like that the United Provinces who were already become so formidably at
Sea, might by their growing too great be as dreadful at Land. For the Heretics
of his kingdom could from no part else be better fomented to rebel. The King
amidst these various considerations had his eye fixed upon these passages of
Flanders, and because his authority was very great in the United Provinces, he
believed they would never come to any accommodation with the Spaniards without
his consent.

At the first he seemed to be averse to the affairs in hand; though to say
truth, he did not well know what he had best to do: but he did this of
purpose to enforce the Spaniards to put the Negotiations into his hands. Great
dexterity and cunning was requisite to the leading on of these designs. He
therefore chose for this so important affair the President Iannine; a man of
great experience and abilities; and one who was then chieflyest employed by him
in State affairs. He sent Monsieur de Rosse along with Iannine (who was sen^
extraordinary Ambassador into Flanders) to continue afterward his ordinary
Ambassador in the United Provinces. Having both of them exercised their Offices
in the entrance into the affairs spoken of, they staid in Holland; Iannine did
diligently observe the whole carriages, and wrought himself every day more and
more into the affairs, which still increased the jealousy of the King of Spain
and the ArchDukes; who then began to see clearly, that it behoved them to have
recourse to the King of France his mediation; who already had complained to the
Commissary General in his return to Flanders, that the King of Spain, and the
Archdukes had proceeded so far without his knowledge in the aforesaid
business. Almost the like passions and artifices appeared in James the first,
King of England, who was newly come to that Crown. The same reasons appeared in
him for desiring the continuance of the war in Flanders, as did in the King of
France: for the King of England being strong at sea, and confiding in the
strength of all his Kingdoms situation, as also in the conformity of his ends
with those of the United Provinces in favoring heresy, he could not much fear
their Forces; though they should grow greater. He was the more secure likewise
by having Flushing and the Ramechins in Zealand, and the Brill in Holland, sea
Towns of great Importance in his hands; as pawned for moneys lent by Queen
Elizabeth to the United Provinces; and for that their chiefest strength
consisted in English and Scottish soldiers, who were in their Army. He foresaw
he should have greater cause to be jealous of the Spaniards, if being free from
the war of Flanders, they might endeavor to molest him in any part of his
Dominions: especially in Ireland, an Island which is almost wholly Catholic,
well-affected to them, and much disaffected to England.

Out of these reasons it was believed, that the King of England desired the War
in Flanders might continue. But being a great lover of Quiet, and much given to
Hunting, and to his Book, and wholly fix^ in warring by writings with the
Church, it was therefore judged he would not at last, show himself totally
averse to see the affairs of Flanders in some sort pacified. To boot that not
being able for scarcity of Moneys to give any considerable succor to the United
Provinces, his power would be but small in persuading or counselling the
continuance of war, since he could not much assist it by his Forces. Yet it
very much Imported those Provinces to preserve his friendship, were it only
that they might raise soldiers out of his Kingdom. Wherefore they entertained
his Ambassadors which were sent into Holland at the beginning of this
Negotiation with very much respect, and trea^^d with them with all confidency.

The King of Englands end in sending of them was almost the same as was that of
the King of France: To wit, that he likewise would have a share in the
business which was in hand, and to enforce the Spaniards to make use of him
likewise therein. The King of Denmark sent likewise Ambassadors to Holland; as
also the Prince Elector Palatin, the Elector of Brandenburgh, the Lantgrave of
Hesse, and other German Heretic Princes; who all of them seemed to show their
good affections toward the United Provinces in so important an occasion. These
businesses which were thus begun grew very hot in Holland: every thing was in
motion, and great was the expectation what the United Provinces would resolve,
as well touching the second ratification come from Spain, as also whether they
would continue or break the Treaty. But of all others Count Mourice of Nassaws
thoughts were most busied at this time. His Father the Prince of Orange being
dead, he being yet but a youth of sixteen years of age, had got into all his
Fathers Military and Civil employments, with the great good will and
approbation of the United Provinces. And increasing no less in valor, then in
years, after so many enterprises and prosperous successes, his authority grew
daily greater amongst them. He had won it by Arms, and he thought he could
best preserve it by Arms. And by means of the public trouble of war, he hoped
some favorable conjuncture might the easilier be opened unto him, of making
himself one day Prince of those Provinces.

It is not to be doubted, but that his ambition carried him thus high; for his
Father was very near attaining thereunto; and his own deserts being added to
his Fathers, his hopes ought rather to be augmented then diminished. To boot
with the Supreme Government of the Army, he had succeeded his Father in the
Civil Administration of Holland, Zealand, Utricht, and Overisel. His brother
Count Henry, General of the Horse of the United Provincees, and the Counts
William and Earnestus, the one of them Governor of Friesland and Groninghe^,
and the other Governor of Ghelderland, were all of them of his House, and
depended on him almost in all things, so as the whole government of the United
Provinces, as well Military as Civil, may be said to be in his hands: and his
Domestic power was the greater by his great friendship and alliance with
Forain Princes. The Negotiation in hand made nothing at all for his present
condition, nor for that which peradventure he had an intention to raise up unto
himself. And say he had a mind to have hindered it at the beginning; what
color, or what pretense had he so to do? Since the United Provinces in the
Proposal made by the Archdukes for a Treaty, had gotten all that they desired;
when the first ratification which came therefore from Spain, proved vain,
Mourice began to hope well in the breach of the begun Negotiation: and by
occasion thereof augmented the common jealousies. He enlarged himself very much
and with great fervency in calling to mind their late good successes; so many
mischiefs, cruelties, and Horrible Inhumanities committed as he affirmed, by
the Spaniards, together with many other things* to make all manner of Treaties
with them suspicious, and to increase the hatred which those of the United
Provinces always bore to that Nation. And though the second ratification was
come in very ample manner, yet did not he go less in continuing to do the
same, hoping to make this second appear likewise faulty in many things. The
time drew near of giving their resolution therein; concerning which they had
had many meetings; at last, one day when the Council of the States General was
fuller then usual by reason of the importancy of the business, it is said Count
Maurice spoke thus:

How much (most worthy Deputies) I have always desired the prosperity of our
Republic, all my precedent actions which have made me appear no less my
Father competitor, then his son, in her service, may sufficiently manifest. I
have not labored less then did my Father, in always procuring the common
good; and if he lost his life in the public cause; I have exposed my self to
no less dangers in the defense thereof; and certainly it would have redounded
much more to my honor and glory to have dyed amidst Arms, then it did to him
to perish by the hand of that base and detestable Paracide, who so unworthily
slew him. None therefore should more rejoice then I, to hear our Provinces
declared to be free States, even by our enemies themselves, did I not think
that all these proceedings were but couzenages, whereby more easily to draw our
Liberties again into their Subjection. I apprehended this even from the
beginning of these practices; so that, as I have hitherto ever aborred them, so
do I now abhor them more then ever, and think it now more necessary then ever
to break them wholly off, and to throw back this second ratification with the
same resoluteness as we did the former. How many tricks, and how many cheats
the Spaniards have always used in their like treaties; is too well known to us
all. But what need we look after past-times? Has not the like been seen, and
is not seen in these present negotiations? The first ratification came in
general terms, nor did it contain any thing of ratification but the bare name.
The second is come since, which is likewise so defective, as in my opinion it
ought in no way to be accepted. Do you perceive how the King would have it
sent in the Spanish Tongue? a Tongue unknown to us, the true meaning and
efficacy whereof we do not understand? Do you observe how he uses the same
subscription as he uses to his Vassals? Not having changed any of the other
things excepted against. And the addition of the last clause, does it not
evidently enough show his pretensions that it shall wholly depend upon his will
whether we shall be free or no? As if from the time that the Duke d'Alba, (that
Fury and Firebrand of all the troubles of Flanders) and after him the other
Governors had bereft their Country of its privileges, brought forain
colonies thereinto, put the whole country of fire and sword, and given sentence
themselves against our liberties, and we had not known how to defend it by our
unconquered Forces? We then are free whether the King declare us to be so or
no. And our pretense to this declaration is, because it is due to us from all
the world, and due to us by him absolutely, without any conditional limitation
of ensuing agreement as he pretends in the additional clause; so as it is now
too well seen that the Spaniards treat with their wonted frauds; and that they
would pretend they can never lose by any whatsoever accord that should ensue;
the right which they presume to have over our Provinces; that they may
afterward expect new opportunies to oppress them again; it may then be
granted, that it is not any public respect, but their own particular necessity
which induces them now to come to agreement with us. The necessity I say of
their disorders, which doubtlesly are so many and so great, as we may expect
their utter losing of Flanders. What darkness, what obscurity is it then that
does possess our senses? or what hoodwink and untimely wisdom is it which
teaches us to intermit and slacken the course of our victories, whence they are
nearest and most certain? their army is in very great confusi^on, without any
discipline, without any obedience; corrupted by perpetual Mutenies: And if the
war continue, we shall doubtlesly see the whole body of the Soldiery Muteny,
and then their whole Country will rise. How great a part thereof does there
already abound in our sense? We on the other side have a flourishing Army, well
disciplined, well paid, and well provided of all things. We have the assistance
of France, of England, and of the greatest part of Germany. We maintain a
Cause, then which none can be more just; nor can there be more constancy be
desired in our Peoples wills to defend it: To these our advantages by Land, our
other progresses at Sea do fully correspond What greater blow could the
Spaniards receive from us, then that which we have given them in the
East Indies? What will the other prove which we are preparing for them likewise
in the West? To this end, to boot with the public forces, particular Companies
of the richest Merchants of all our Provinces are appointed: so as when we shall
get footing there, to what straits and hazards shall we reduce the Spanish
Fleet? On the contrary side, how much both public and private advantages, how
much honor and glory shall our Comonwealth receive thereby? Our having gone
round the Sea where ever the Sun shines, with so many and so illustrious
navigations, and having made our names so famous by so many and so glorious
Victories, will be the most memorable things spoken of by our Posterity in
after Ages. The fear of losing the Indies, is that which chiefly causes the
Spaniards to com to some accommodation with us. Who will then persuade us to
let slip these so propitious opportunities which now offer themselves unto us,
and see them turned peradventure hereafter to their advantage? True Victory
lies in the making good use thereof. Which not being done, the too late remedy
of repentance serves but in little stead. We ought by all means possible
endeavor not to fall into such errors; and not suffer our selves to be deceived
by the false names of repose and peace, and other specious alluring pretenses.
These are the means wherewith those lull people asleep, whom they intend
afterward to oppress. No Lethargy is more mortal then a Peace, which is to
prove worse then war it self. Our people this mean while will grow unsinewed by
idleness. We shall lose those friends which our wars have purchased to our
cause. But the worst of all evils will lie in the secret venom of discord,
which the enemy will in this interim endeavor to introduce amongst us; and
this sort of Plague will be sooner radicated amongst us them driven out. Thus
by means of rest more fatal far then arms, our Commonwealth would fall into
the greatest misfortunes, and the Spaniards by their machinations quietly enjoy
what hitherto they have not been able to do with their Armies in the Fields.
But I never was an Orator; and as a Soldier me thinks I have spoken more then I
need upon such an occasion. Nor can I deny but that my particular passions sway
me in what concerns the common good, which is now in hand; which may
notwithstanding all of them be reduced to the implacable hatred I bear those,
who are our implacable enemies; and hope to make their power more formidable to
others, by the ruin of our Republic.

The Authority of so great a man assisted by so many and so forcible reasons,
prevailed very much with the hearers. John Barnevelt, Advocate General of the
Province of Holland, and one of her Deputies in this present Council, was one
of those who did most favor the things which were now in Treaty. His Authority
was very great not only in Holland, but even throughout the whole Union; in
the service whereof he had ever had the chiefest employments, and had therein
continually faithfully discharged his trust. So as his credit was such at this
time with the Union, and his estimation so great, as he drew commonly most men
to adhere to him in all his opinions. He desired to see Count Mawrice his power
lessened, to the end that the common liberty might be the more secure both at
home and abroad: though this his emulation cost him afterward his life: For
not many years after Mawrice his Faction prevailed so far, as for diverse faults
laid to his charge, (were they true or false) he was publicly beheaded in
Holland. When Mawrice had ended his discourse, Barnevelt, still resolved to
defend the contrary opinion, spoke thus:

Of so many acts egregious (most worthy Deputies) which the Prince of Orange, of
ever happy memory, did, and which have been since continued by the Illustrious
Count Mawrice, the worthy son of so gallant a Father, in service of our
Commonwealth, this is one of the fruits we reap, that every one may freely
speak his mind in this council, for what concerns the common good; and if it
were ever requisite so to do, the nature of the business in hand does now
require it. He has certainly showed great gravity and wisdom in what he has
said: But since the more weighty the affairs are, so much more necessary it is
to have them maturely debated, I hope it will not be displeasing, if I allege
all those reasons to the contrary as may be considered in so important an
affair. We shall differ in our opinions, but not in our end; which is the like
in us all, to endeavor all the advantage and stability which we can to this
our Commonwealth. The Illustrious Count did, if I be not deceived, urge two
points chiefly. The one, that the Spaniards do not proceed with sincerity in
these negotiations; and the other, that it is mere necessity which makes them
now seek to come to some agreement with us, that they may hereafter find some
more favorable opportunity to oppress us. As for the first, I hope that none
will deny, but for what concerns the affairs now in hand, we have hitherto
obtained all that we have demanded of the Archdukes. It Is true that afterward,
the King of Spains first ratification was faulty, and as such a one, was justly
by us refused: but to speak truly, I do not think this second such a one as
ought to be rejected; the defects whereof being well considered, do more
transgress against the circumstances, then the essence of the ratification
which we demand. The essence lies in this; that the King should acknowledge our
Provinces to be free, and that he should declare he has no pretense or claim
thereunto; this, this second ratification does fully contain, as does also the
first Declaration made by the Archdukes. And in fine, it is the very same
which we did desire, except it be in the diversity of Language, and in some
other petty things of small importance, and in the last clause added by the
King. Faults which in my opinion cannot be held any ways essential. First, how
can it be doubted but that the true sense and meaning of the Spanish tongue
must be understood by us? Here, where the frequent commerce of so many of our
Cities with all the Principal Cities of Europe, makes all Languages common and
known? To boot that the Archdukes Deputies affirm and give it under their
hands that it is in the same Language, with the same Subscription, and alike in
all other things to the ratifications of peace between the Crown of Spain, and
those of France, and England. Ought we to pretend to more then what was then
done to two so great Kings? The greater difficulty would lie in the additionall
clause, if it were not evidently known that it were to be understood, though it
were not expressed; since how can it be denied, but that if no agreement should
be made both parties would continue in their former rights? To wit, the
Spaniards in what is grounded upon violence; and we in what is grounded upon
so known Justice. But say the Spaniards after some agreement made, should
pretend a Title of right over us, tell me I pray you, wherein could our affairs
be therein prejudiced? Should they peradventure, be Judges in such a cause? In
such a case recourse must be had to the Tribunal of the whole world; and each
party to the favor of their friends; or rather to the Tribunal of Arms, where
Armies pronounce sentence, and for the most part the justice of the cause gives
the victory. It imports but little then whether their ends be sincere or
fradulent in case of agreement: for then they cannot opporess us by their
forces. We must above all things endeavor to secure our selves from this
danger, which necessarily consists in one of two remedies; either in continuing
the w^^ out of hope that their necessity will daily grow greater; or else in
ending it by some accommodation, after which our affairs might be better
secured. And from hence I come to the second point. I deny not but that their
present disorders and necessities are great; but I cannot think them past
remedy so far, but that if the war endure the Spaniards may find sufficient
forces to do it. I for my part find the Monarchy of Spain to be the same thing
that it has always been, during the whole course of this war; nay rather
increased in this interim by the addition of the Kingdom of Portugal, and of
the East Indies, which depend thereupon. I find it to be very strong both at
land and sea: Where has the formidableness of their forces been better seen
then here in Flanders? What other power has at any time maintained so long, so
far distant, so hard and so expencive a war? And shall we believe that the
Spaniards cannot still maintain it? and that they are not likey to find a
remedy for their disorders in these parts; and for any hazard they may run in
the East Indies? the very necessity of making war, will doubtlesly furnish them
with means enough to continue it. So then we are again engaged in war; in a new
and more obstinate war then the former: and what security can we have that
fortune will always favor us? we have likewise our necessities; and if they be
at present great amongst the Spaniards, remember I pray you that they have been
greater amongst us: and that all humane things being subject to alteration, and
the events of war usually very uncertain; the times may prove propitious again
to them, and averse to us. Do not we know how much our war depends upon the
aids from France and England? May not the King of France die? Is he not already
very old? may not the Kingdom afterward alter? and shall not we then be
deprived of all succor from thence? Do not we likewise know upon what fickle
terms the affairs of England stand? The King being a Scotch man, a stranger in
that Kingdom, and therie being many other occasions which may cause some fear
of alterat^on on his side? how much would the affairs of Spain be bettered by
any of these accedents? how much worse would ours be? We ought then to be
taught by all reason, and by all the rules of good Government, not to let slip
this happy conjuncture of coming to some good agreement with the Spaniards.
Fortune is flitting, inconstant, disdainful, and exceeding apt to be provoked:
It Is now the time to know how to lay hold of her: So as my opinion is, that by
all means we ought to accept of this ratification come from Spain, and proceed
on to some Treaty of agreement: I confess it is not always in the power of man
to enjoy the happiness of peace; but I verily believe it is now in our power to
shun the dangers of war; which in my opinion ought by all means to be
endeavored: and certainly we may hope for great advantages from the Spaniards
by this accommodation which they do so much desire to make with these our
Provinces in this their present necessity: As all Pylots prefix the haven for
their end, all travelers their Country, and all motion rest; so all war has
peace for its end, wherein consists man's chiefest happiness; and shall the war
of Flanders be the only thing which shall never have an end? and shall all our
most advantageous successes, depend always upon the so uncertain events of war?
We shall be free from these uncertainties, and from so many dangers which
troubles bring with them, by reducing our selves at last to a quiet condition:
we shall then much better re-order the Government of every of our particular
Provinces, and of the entire body of the Union, when we shall be in a quiet
condition: This our Commonwealth will then break forth from out the duskishness
and horror of Arms: which how wonderful a fight will it be, and what
unacustomed praises will it produce in the Theater of the Universe? when it
shall be seen how our Provinces do unite themselves in one body; with what sort
of Laws and Magistracy they conspire together; how unwounded the Liberties of
each of them remain, and how uninjur'd it passes through every one of them, as
through so many veins to the entire body of their general Union. We shall have
Ambassadors sent to congratulate with us from all parts; who will return rather
envying then rejoicing at this our so great felicity. We shall pay the debts we
have contracted abroad: we shall ease our selves of those we have here amongst
our selves; and we shall in, rich our treasury, by taking off so many and so
grievous expenses: Our people shall then know that they are truly free, when
they shall enjoy Liberty without any contestation: and being once got into such
a condition, what need we fear to be at any time reduced under the yoke of that
proud, cruel, and Tyrannical Spanish Government.

Barnevels was list'ned unto with much attention: and the reasons alleged by
him, appeared to be so weighty and wisely grounded, as after some other
consultations, it was at last resolved on by the States General, that they
would accept of the ratification: yet there was much ado before Zealand could
be brought to join in this Vote, so absolute Authority had Count Maurice in
that Province; whereof he was not only Governor, but had a great estate there,
and enjoyed such prerogatives, as he appeared rather to be Prince then Governor
of that Country. The Archdukes were then acquainted with this the States
Generals resolution, and 'twas almost in the same words which were used in the
answer which was first given to the Commissary and Verreychin when they brought
the ratification into Holland. And because the term for suspension of arms was
already expired, it was by both sides prorogued, and continued to be so from
time to time in new terms, till the end of the Treaty, which was after
concluded. I thought good to incert this in this place, to shun the tedious
repetition of the same things sundry times. Now all the eyes of Flanders were
fixed upon what Deputies the Archdukes would choose to send, according to the
first agreement, into Holland. The greatest weight of the Spanish affairs which
were agitated in Flanders lay upon the Marquess Spinola, Camp-master-general of
the Army, and upon Manchichidor the Spanish Secretary of War; and as for the
Archdukes business, John Richardotto, President of the Privy Council, and
Verreychin so often named before, were chiefly trusted therewith. These four were
chosen for Deputies, and Father N^yen was added for a fifth, as one who had
hitherto had a great hand in the business. Marquess Spinola was ^lready got
into great Authority by reason of his so many Employments and Trusts. He was
Camp-master-general and Governor of the Army; Administrator, or Play Master
General of the Kings moneys: of the Council of State in Spain; and through his
hands all the Kings affairs in Flanders, as has been said, did chiefly pass:
and the Archduke likewise seemed to put much confidence in him. Indeed a
States man of singular judgment and valor, of incredible vigilancie and
industry in the managing of whatsoever business either Military or Civil; and
endowed with so many other gallant parts, as he had reason to be esteemed one
of the greatest Statesmen that the Crown of Spain has had these many years.
The Secretary Mancicidor was likewise highly esteemed of, for his long
experience in the affairs of Flanders: for he had been Secretary of war, even
from the time that the Archduke whilst he was yet Cardinal, was come to the
Government of those Provinces. In the affairs which belonged properly to the
Archdukes: The President Richardetto was no less esteemed of; he had for a
long time been the man chiefly employed in affairs of greates importance by the
Duke of Parma, and other Governors: and the Archduke, being made Prince of the
Lowcountreys, chose him particularly to employ in making the last peace with
France, and the like with the King of England; so as almost all the important
business of the Country passed through his hands. Verreychin was likewise
present at the making of the two abovenamed Peaces, and had long before
exercised the place of first Secretary of State, and was always held a man of
great wisdom and integrity. Enough has already been said of the Commissary
General and of his indowments. But when the Spaniards who were in Flanders,
understood who the Deputies were, and that they were to go to the enemies own
homes to treat of agreement with them, it is not to be believed how much they
stormed, and how much they complained of the Archdukes in particular.

Are the affairs of Spain (said they) come to so low an ebb, that our King must
abase himself thus? has so much time, blood and treasure been spent against
the traitorous rebels to bring things to this end? That the affairs of Spain
were now in as glorious a condition as ever, but that there wanted fitting
instruments in Flanders to ma^nage them: That tthe Archduke had always showed
himself to be better at peace then at war, and that now that he saw himself not
likely to have any children, his only desire was to spend the remainder of his
days in peace and quietness: that it was impossible so great a Monarchy should
be without a war; nay it was to be desired that it should always have an Army
in the fields for its service. And what other more fitting Theater could there
be found for the seat of its Arms then Flanders? a place so Opulent and so much
extent? and placed in the midst of Spains chiefest enemies and maligners? that
if the war could not be always to plentifully maintained, their forces might be
lesened, and conssequently their expenses: that thus the vigor of so great a
Monarchy might be preserved even to eternity.

The Spaniards broke forth into these complaints, and sent them from Flanders
into Spain; but to no purpose: for it was then seen, as also during the whole
Treaty, that the King and the Archduke did always jump in their opinions: And
as for the Deputies going into Holland; without all doubt it might seem in all
appearance no ways to agree with the Kings, and Archdukes dignity: but the
form of the Government of the United Provinces considered, no other manner of
negotiation could well be had; for their Deputies were so many, that
Commissions of bounded, and so many sendings to and fro, as they were enforced
to make orders: to receive new orders, and new Consents from every Province,
which if it had been to be done out of their own Country, the Treaty would
never have had an end: and though afterward, as you shall hear, it was
concluded in Antwerp; 'twas because all things were already disgested, so as
they went thither as it may be said, to a business already concluded. The
Deputies departed about the end of January 1608; and being come into the United
Provinces, they were received by the Governors of their Frontier Towns with all
honor, and bravely lodged in all places. They came to the Hague the first of
February; and were met half a league without the Town by Count Maurice of
Nassaw accompanied by the other Counts of his House, and all the chief men of
those parts.

The Second BOOK of the TREATY of the TRUCE of FLANDERS.
HOLLAND is the greatest, richest, and best peopled Province of all the United
seven: nay it so far exceeds all the rest, as it furnishes half the moneys
which are issued out by the whole seven Provinces. It is made by the sea, and
sundry rivers a Peninsola, it is in compassed on many sides by the sea, cut
through in many parts by rivers: many channels cut by hand join with these
rivers, and there by many lakes within it: so as it may be doubted whether it
consist more of land or water. Besides, it does so abound with shipping of all
sorts, as it may likewise be questioned, whether the number of moveable
Habitations on water, or of Houses fixed on land be the greater. This Province
is full of Cities, and of a great many lesser Towns. Amsterdam is its chiefest
City, and here is the greatest Traffic, not only of Holland it self, but
lamost of the whole North: of all its Towns Hague is the principal, an open
Village; but so large, so well peopled, and so delitious as it may compare with
many Cities. Here did the Counts of Holland formerly build a Palace for
themselves to live in, which the United Provinces do now make use of for the
meeting of their Councels which depend upon the Union. Here likewise the
Council of the States General do meet almost every day; wherein things of
greatest importance are agitated and resolved by the Deputies of the whole
seven Provinces. The chief affairs of the whole Union are then handled in the
Hague; and here staid the Catholic Deputies to give a beginning to the Treaty:
Before they arrived, the United Provinces had likewise chosen their Deputies;
one was chosen for every Province, and two of the best of blood amongst them,
in the common name of them all. And these were Count William of Nassaw, full
Cousin German to Count Maurice, and Min here Bredrode: for Holland, Barnevelt
was named, and by him the business on the behalf of the United Provinces was
chiefly to be agitated. At their first meeting, nothing was done but the
producing of the credential Letters on all sides: they then began to discuss
affairs with an intention to come to a perpetual peace if it were possible.
The United Provinces offered one Article in the first place, wherein they
pretended, that the King of Spain and the Archdukes, should acknowledge them
to be absolutely Free States, and should at large renounce all right or claim
which might be pretended unto by them or any of their successors, to, or over
those Provinces, with an obligation not to make use of their Arms or Titles, or
whatsoever other appearance. This last addition appeared too arrogant to the
Catholic Deputies, who complained very much thereof to the Ambassadors of
France and of England, with whom from the beginning they had had communication
in what concerned the Treaty: alleging,

That it was an usual thing amongst Princes, still to retain the Title of
States or Kingdoms, though they were lost, or but pretended to, whereof there
was examples in the greatest Kings of Christendom. That the Catholic King,
styled himself King of Jerusalem, and Duke of Burgony; the King of France,
King of Navar; and that the King of England did still keep the Title of King of
France: That the United Provinces would be they alone who would introduce new
Laws in the world, and not content to pass from rebellion into liberty, would
pretend, as it were by usurpation to such and so rash advantages: in fine, that
this was a cause common to all Princes* and wherein they were all by this one
act injured.

The answer which the Catholic Deputies gave hereunto was, that they had no
Authority to admit of the Article in manner as was desired: That they would
acquaint the Archdukes therewith, and expect their Answer; but the Ambassadors
thought these their complaints to be artificials, they imagined that the
Catholic Deputies meant to indeer the said renuntiation as much as they might;
that they might the easilyer induce the United Provinces to give way on their
parts in other things, in which opinion they were confirmed by the Answer which
came from Brussels, which was, that the Archdukes would consent to the Article
in the same manner as it was propounded, if the United Provinces by
acknowledgement of so great a benefit, would in lieu thereof abstain from their
sailing into the Indies. The United Provinces seemed to be as much moved by
this answer; and their Deputies made equal complaints thereof to the
Ambassadors of their confederate Kings and Princes.

What do the King of Spain and the Archdukes grant (said they) more then what
the United Provinces do already possess? that what should be granted by the
King and Archdukes was nothing but wind, and a bare Title; whereas if the
United Provinces should give over their sailing to the Indies, they should
deprive themselves of the principal and most important part of their Traffic.
That they had begun and would continue that their Navigation, which by the Laws
of Nature, and right of Nations is allowed to all men. That some other thing
might be thought upon which in this point might give reciprocal satisfaction
to both sides: But that they should exclude themselves from sailing into the
Indies, was neither to be thought on nor hoped for: and why ought not the
spoils of that new world be common to all? That it was of that immence
vastness, as more thereof was undiscovered* then discovered as yet: and that
the right of the occupiers in those parts, differed only in the better knowing
how to manage what they possess.

Both parties argued this point touching the East Indies with great stifness
and pertenacity; nor would the Catholic Deputies ever discede from their first
answer. At last the Deputies of the United Provinces made three Propositions:
The first, that according to the nature of all peaces, Commerce might be free
both by sea and land to both parties. The second, that for the space of seven
years, the United Provinces might continue their Navigation to the Indies, and
that one year before the expiration of those seven years some new composition
might be made. The third, that upon the insuance of peace, and due observation
of all things on this side the line, the United Provinces might at their own
peril continue their Navigation on the other side. The Catholic Deputies were
not pleased either with the first or the third propositions. Not with the
first, because it left the United Provinces absolutely free to Traffic in the
Indies: Not with the third, because they saw a peace mixed with hostility was
not likely to last. They did not appear to be totally averse from the second,
so as they would now agree, that when those seven years should be ended, the
United Provinces should for ever forbear from their Navigation to the Indies.
To this their Deputies would by no means consent; this point of the Indies was
much stood upon, and the difficulties thereof enlarged by the particular
Company of Merchants in the United Provinces which Traffic into those parts.
The Company was chiefly composed of the Merchants of Amsterdam, and of
Midleburgh: and one was sent in the name of that Company to the Hague, to show
how great the gain was which they made by their Trafficking in the East Indies,
and how much the continuation thereof did import in other respects.

They alleged that they had already introduced commerce in sundry parts of
those Countries; that many were the friendships and confederations which they
had established there; and that those seas were already frequented by above 150
of their Vessels, and by above 8000 of their Mariners and Soldiers; that great
was the gain of particular men, and the advantage no less which the public
received thereby: that to keep so many of the baser sort of people employed who
would be always troublesome, when at quiet, what was it but to purge the
Republic of so much ill blood, ready to grow corrupt? That the Navigation of
the United Provinces into the Indies had already made Lisbon groan; that the
Merchant Towns of the Portugueses in those parts went to wrack; and that their
ships were seen to go and come much possessed with fear and apprehension: and
were enforced to be at much greater expense then formerly, for they had wont
not to be greatly vigilant in that their Voyage, not meeting with any
contestation, save from the Seas and wind.

These and many other considerations were represented by the Company to keep
the United Provinces from consenting to the Spaniards demands touching the
Indies: So as both parties adhering to their opinions, nothing was done
therein. The Catholic Deputies resolved therefore to send Father Neyen into
Spain to acquaint the King with what past; and particularly to receive Orders
for what they should do concerning the Indies; having first declared to the
oother Deputies that they had no Commission to conclude any thing in that
business. They told them also, how that the Commissary should be back within
two months; whereupon he suddenly took his journey for Spain: and I to shun the
tedious prolixity of the less important affairs, will here mention only things
of greater moment, wherein their differences consisted. The King of Spain and
the Archdukes, to show their ingenuity, and the more to honest all conclusion
of agreement, desired that the exercise of Religion might be left free
throughout all the United Provinces: toward which I had not been wanting, but
particularly before the Deputies went for Holland; had pressed the Archdukes
much therein: and certainly the United Provinces should by all Rules of good
Government, of their own accord have endeavored to give the Catholics, who
were in no small numbers amongst them, satisfaction: but the hatred to the
Catholic Reli^ion prevailing on the one side with the leading Heretics, and
the suspicion that this was the more to oblige the Catholics which were
amongst them, to the Spaniards on the other side it was to be believed they
would not consent to any thing in favor of the Catholics. The second chief
point, was that which concerned commerce: The United Provinces would have had
it absolutely Free; and the King and Archdukes would have the Indies excepted,
and desired that many insufferable Taxes might be taken off, to which the
Merchandises were subject in Zealand, which were necessarily to pass from
thence to Antwerp, and which every day much les^ened the Traffic of that City.
The other chiefest affairs consisted in the exchange which was to be made of
diverse Towns and other places, which the one side were Masters of, in the
others Country; in the adjusting of confines; in contributions which were paid
in several parts by those whose habitations confined on both sides, to free
themselves from Military incursions: in the restitution of goods confiscated in
the time of War: and in other the like things of Justice. They treated
sometimes of one of these, sometimes of another, but very leasurely; for great
difficulties were met withal in all of them, without coming to any resolution.
The point of exchange of places, was in particular much argued: The United
Provinces were possessed of Sluice in the Province of Flanders, together with the
Island Cassant, which is but of small circuit, but commodious for the unlading
of goods; having in it some Forts.

They likewise were Masters of Breda, Bergen-ap zone, and saint Gettringberg,
all of them strongly situated both by Nature and Art in Brabrant; together
with some lesser places, fortified likewise.

On the contrary the Archdukes had Linghen, Groll, and Oldensell beyond the
Rheine toward Friesland: Linghen is a very strong Hold, and the other two,
places of good consideration. The Arch Dukes would have desired to have changed
these three places, with those which the United Provinces had in Brabant and
Flanders.

And because that which was possessed by the United Provinces, was much the
greater and better part, it was thought that the Archduke to make the change
more equal, would willingly have quitted unto them all the rest which they
were masters of in Ghelderland, or at least the greatest part thereof. Long
dispute was had upon this Article, but to no purpose; for it was not possible
ever to agree upon it. And with the same difficulties and prolixity they
proceeded likewise in the other Affairs. This mean while the time was expired
wherein the Commissary was to return from Spain; who did not only not appear,
but not any news was heard of him: whereupon the United Provinces grew very
jealous, and their Deputies began publicly to complain thereof. The King of
France was all this while very attentive upon the proceedings in Holland; and
to make the Spaniards the more jealous, he was easily persuaded upon this
occasion to make a new League with the United Provinces. The Contents whereof
was, That in case the Peace now in Treaty should succeed, the King of France
should be bound to assist the United Provinces with 10000 paid Soldiers, to
make the Spaniards the better keep it: And that they on the other side should
give the King of France 5000 paid Foot in case the Spaniards should make War
upon him. The Spanish and Flemish Ambassadors which were at Paris, quarreled
with the King hereupon; but he justified it with diverse pretenses, and showed
how that the King of Spain and the Archdukes should rather be beholding to him
therein, as a business which might the easilyer facilitate the Peace of
Flanders which was in Treaty. These artifices were not unknown in Spain, and it
was every day better seen, that no agreement would ever be made with the United
Provinces, without the King of France his Interposition and Authority. To the
end then that he might obtain his mediation upon this occasion, the King of
Spain resolved though upon other pretenses, to send Don Piedro de Tolledo, one
of the chief Lords of Spain, into France.

And this was thought then the fitter to be done, because the King of France at
the same time had sent for President Iannines to Paris; with whom advising upon
the Affairs of Holland, and the King resolving upon the aforementioned things
which might make him desire to see she affairs of Flanders settled; he sent him
suddenly to the Hague. But ^annines grew quickly to despair of seeing any
Peace concluded. He found the business more perplexed with difficulties then
before, and the minds of both Parties more exasperated. The United Provinces
could not tolerate the Spaniards slowness; for the Commissary did not appear at
all, nor was there any news heard of what he had done in Spain. Whereupon
^h^ir Deputies resolved to know directly the King of Spains final intention
touching the Indies, which when they should not know, presently to break off
the Treaty; and this they pressed upon the Catholic deputies with much instancy,
who made them this Answer:

That the King desired a happy end of the begun Treaty, and that he would at
last condescend to that renunciation which they desired, and in manner as was
by them propounded: But that on the other side, he expected that in requital
of so important an Affair, they should forbear going to the Indies; and that
moreover they should permit liberty of conscience to the Catholics within
their Provinces. That the Commissary was already dispatched from the Court with
this answer; and that they had already received orders to acquaint them the
United Provinces therewithal.

This Answer quite overthrew all hopes of Peace. The United Provinces had put
on an unalterable Resolution neither to abandon the Indies, nor yet to admit
the Catholic Religion amongst them. Whereupon having heard this, they in
Writing did presently declare the Treaty broken, and presented the Writing to
the Catholic Deputies. The Treaty of Peace being thus fallen to the ground, it
remained to see whether they might the easilyer compass a long Truce. The King
of England had all this while seemed rather averse then otherwise to the
Negotiation in Holland; and having the same ends which the King of France had,
to raise Jealousy in the Spaniard, as has been said, he also made use of the
same means. In im^tation of the King of France, and almost after the same
manner, he had at this time made also a new League with the United Provinces;
and though his Authority was nothing near so great with them, yet was it such,
as it might much impede the proceedings of the new Treaty for a long Truce: And
he had already complained to the Spanish and Flemish Ambassadors who were
resident in England, that the King of Spain had sent Don Piedro de Tolledo to
Paris, putting thereby so great an esteem upon the King of France, and that he
had made no manner of Address at all to him. For these respects the King of
Spain resolved to send likewise Don Fernando Girone who was then in Flanders,
and who was one of the chiefest Commanders in his Army to the King of England;
who seemed to be very well satisfied therewith; and made large promises to
intercede for the continuing of the Negotiation in Holland, being thereunto
persuaded by his natural Addiction to peace, as also for the aforesaid
Reasons. Before the Catholic Deputies departed from Holland, the Ambassadors
of France and England began to set again on foot this new Treaty of a long
Truce: Insomuch as the Ambassadors meeting one day, Iannines in the name of
both the Kings made this ensuing Proposition in the Council of the States
General:

That both their Kings had always considered the Affairs of the United
Provinces, as their own particular concernment, having maintained them all this
while as such by their Councels, and defended them by their Forces; but that
the end of War must be Peace; That to this purpose the United Provinces had
been assisted by both of them; and that both of them were therefore much
troubled to see the Treaty of Peace which was begun, thus broken: and that they
thinking it howsoever much better for the united Provinces to enjoy a
commodious and honorable Quiet, then to return to the former difficulties and
dangers of war; were pleased to propound unto them by their Ambassadors
jointly, a long Truce instead of Peace. That notwithstanding in this Truce, in
the first place, and before all other things, it should be declared both by the
King of Spain and by the Archdukes, that it was made with the United Provinces
as with free Provinces and States, unto which they unade no pretense at all;
and that they should be left Free in point of their Navigation to the Indies.
That both their Kings did believe that the United Provinces might be content
with a Truce which was to bring with it such important advantages for them; and
not only these but peradventure some others also. That greater difficulties
were to be feared on the other part; but in case the war were to continue by
reason of the Spaniards fault, the Forces of the United Provinces would be
thereby the more justified, and both their Kings still the more obliged to
maintain their Cause.

The States General took time to advise upon the whole with their Provinces.
The Ambassadors with like conformity applied themselves to the Catholic
Deputies, who having lost all hopes of peace, did very much desire to come to
some other accommodation, or composition: So they willingly listened to this new
proposal of a long Truce; though they thought many difficulties would be met
withal in Spain touching the form thereof: They promised the Ambassadors
notwithstanding to use all the diligence they could to overcome them: and
having received assurances from the Ambassadors that they would do all good
offices for the continuation of the Treaty, and especially from Iannines, on
whose means and Authority they did chiefly rely, they at last went from the
Hague, after having been 8 months entertained there, and went to Brussels. The
Negotiation of the Truce lying then chiefly on Iannines hand, he did all all he
could to persuade the United Provinces to allow of it, in the same manner as
had been propounded by him and the English Emba^bassadors. Those Provinces
seemed well inclined in general toward the Truce, though they wanted not some
amongst them who would have had the King of Spain and the Archdukes make the
same renunciation in the Treaty of Truce as they pretended unto in that of
peace; but the wiser and more moderate men amongst them considered that this
would be too unjust a pretention, due regard being had to the difference
between a Truce and a Peace, This difficulty proceeded chiefly from Zealand,
and was Fauter'd by Count Maurice by reason of his abovesaid power in that
Province, and the almost absolute dependancy which Maldereo the particular
Deputy of Zealand had upon him. Maldereo had been a menuall servant of the late
Prince of Orange, and to say truth, the Interests of Zealand did accord with
Count Maurice his particular ends; for the Traffic and wealth of that Province
was greatly increased by the war; the choice Mariners who had served and did
as yet serve in the voyages to the Indies, were likewise Zealanders; and next
unto Holland, certainly this was the chiefest and most considerable of all the
United Provinces.

The same difficulties, out of the same reasons were insisted upon by the City
of Amsterdam in Holland: but it was thought, that at last the rest of that
Province would prevail over the particular opposition of that City, in a
favorable acceptance of the Truce; which Zealand did still pertenatiously
resist: And Maldereo very zealous in the Cause, endeavored to make those words
suspected, wherein the king of Spain and the Archdukes were to denounce the
United Provinces to be free States, in form abovesaid. Whereupon one day that
this Clause was treated on, he with great fervency broke forth into these words:

Are we Free men, or still Subjects? If we be Freemen, why ought we not to be
publicly acknowledged for such? shall it depend upon the Spaniards to allow us
what sort of liberty they please, now that they cannot impose that slavery upon
us which they would? to wit, a Liberty more servile then our former servitude;
since it must depend upon the interpretation of their own words? Do not we know
what interpretation they have already given to those words? Do not we know
that they take them in such a sense as does not take from them any pretended
right to our Provinces? At this rate we shall get nothing more by this long
Truce, then what was had in the bare suspension of Arms: And yet this Truce
shall rather look like a Peace; and it may so fall out, as by often
Prolongation, it may at last be insensibly turned into the nature of a Peace.
Then, as in the Treaty of Peace we did pretend in the first place, That that
absolute abnegation should be made by the King of Spain, and the Archdukes
which is now Treated of; so ought we still to pretend unto it, and in that form
which may clearlyest declare our Provinces to be Free and Sovereign. Shall not
he acknowledge them, when all the rest of the whole world Treats with them as
such? To what corner of the Earth, or of the Sea is it that the Fame of their
Liberty, together with the fame of their Forces is not flown? Let the Spaniards
then do the like, or let al Treaties be broken. That necessity which inforces
them to come to agreement with us, will likewise compel them to do it in this
manner. So since we would make no greater advantage of this their necessity,
with our swords in our hands, as we ought, and peradventure might have done, we
shall at least come by it by this contestation of Treaty, in such manner as the
victory of words can most promise.

These reasons against the abovenamed clause, and many others against the Truce
in general, were exagerated by Maldereo, or rather through his mouth by Count
Maurice, who labored by all other means, and used all his industry that this
Treaty of Truce might prove vain, as the other of peace had done; the same
things were scattered abroad by his followers, giving out many printed papers
to this purpose, not owned by any: they seemed to distrust the foreign
Ambassadors, and 'twas whispered that though the two Kings advised to Truce,
yet for their own self-interest they would not totally forbear assisting the
United Provinces though contrary to their Council, they should reassume their
Arms; that howsoever it was requisite to return to Arms, since it was
undoubtedly to be believed, that the present necessities being over, the
Spaniards would no longer observe the Truce: That in the mean while, the people
of the United Provinces, cheated by the abusive names of Peace and Quiet, would
lose their former vigor and constancy? That they would hardly be brought to
contribute those moneys afterward, for the war, which at first they did so
willingly part withal: And that all these would be seeds to produce pernicious
discords amongst their Provinces. Lastly, they concluded, That though the
Spaniards should observe the Truce, it would be requisite howsoever to keep
their Frontiers still we looked unto; The which being so many, and the
Jealousies on all sides being now likely to prove so great, the expense in time
of Truce would be well nigh as much as in the time of War. How much better
would it then be to continue the War, and not to lose the present occasions
which did all of them so smile upon them, and frown upon the Spaniards? Affairs
leaned already toward discord, and the Zealander Deputies threatened openly a
separation from the rest of the Provinces, if contrary to the form of common
Government, the rest would resolve upon Truce without the particular consent of
Zealand. Iannines loitred now no more, but judging this a fitting occasion to
show his experience, and force of his advices, one day when their contestations
grew highest, it is said he spoke to the Deputies of the United Provinces in
this manner.

Neither did my King ever think (worthy Deputies) that so long contestations
could have had place here amongst you in so great an Union; nor did I ever
believe that such distrust were to be found here, as some of you seem to have
of my behavior. I will speak of mine own, leaving the English Ambassadors
either to justify themselves, or make their just complaints. For what concerns
my endeavors, I will only say, Execution is the only share I have therein. So
as to mistrust them, will be much more to offend my King then me. And to say
truth, what greater injury can he receive then this? He having always showed
himself so partial to your Commonwealth, as he has almost never made any
difference between the Interests of his own Kingdom, and of your Commonwealth.
When he was hardly yet come unto the Crown, and had hardly, after so many
Domestic and Foreign oppositions, settled his own affairs, the first thing he
did was to assist your Provinces. From that time to this he has not been
wanting in ayding you with Moneys, Men, and Counsel; and to make your Cause
appear the juster in all other respects, by his owning it. Doubtlesly he
pretended to assist a Just Cause: but the justest Actions do not always prove
the most useful. Nay these of yours might have been thought the more
dangerous, by how much their power is the greater, who take themselves to be
offended. The liberty of your Provinces may be said to have sailed into the
Haven, chiefly by the sails of his Favor. And because we cannot now establish
it upon the Anchor of Peace, my King endeavors at least to fasten it upon the
Anchor of Truce, which may prove as advantageous to you. Let us then consider
whether such an Agreement may be truly advantageous to your Affairs: Which when
it shall be known, as I hope it will, sinister discourses will then soon cease;
which if they do not, it will appear at least, That they proceed from
particular passions, vayled over with the semblance of Public good. The
business is then touching the making of a long Truce; and whether the chiefest
endeavor ought to be, That your Provinces should be therein clearly
acknowledged to be Free. We Ambassadors think the clause by us propounded
sufficient to that purpose: That the king of Spain and Archdukes should declare
that they made Truce with your Provinces as with free Provinces and States,
unto which they make no pretense at all. But there are some amongst you who
differ from us in opinion, thinking it to be too Genericall and Dubious; and
who would have the King of Spain and Archdukes make the same absolute
renunciation now, as was pretended unto when there was a Treaty of Peace. I
cannot notwithstanding part from my first opinion; for it appears to me, that
to boot with the difference that there is between a Peace and a Truce, this
Declaration may be thought to make more for your liberty then the other. Tell
me I pray you! have not you always declared That you have taken up Arms
against your Prince, enforced thereto by necessity? And that the war on your
side could not be more just, because it could not be more necessary? and by the
same reason have you not set your Provinces at Liberty by your own Authority?
Then if you pretend upon so good grounds to be free, what need you now that the
King of Spain and the Archdukes should make these renouncings? Do not you
see, that such like renouncings of right, would presuppose it to be more
manifest on their behalf? and that i^ such a case much more should be confessed
by you, then granted by them? do not you know that they can grant nothing to
the prejudice of their successors? Kingdoms cannot otherwise make any contract,
nor kings make any alienable part therein? and since they give the Laws to
others* they must likewise in this behalf receive it from their Crowns. How
much better is it then that your Provinces be declared by the king and the
Archdukes to be free by a general clause, and that the agreement which is now
spoken of, may follow with this presupposition of your Liberty, without making
it doubtful by any other kind of clauses, insted of making it more clear?
this form is not only sufficient, but best. And if it be not sufficient with
the contrary party; think you that if the Spaniards would not observe the Truce
for some other ends of theirs, they would ask your opinion first before they
would break it? and that they would first argue whether they have any right
over you, or no? This is the custom of private suits, not of public Causes;
The controversies whereof are at last reduced to Field-forces, where he that
overcomes has the Right, and no account of the Victory is given.

So as you need not care what interpretation the contrary party will give to
those words wherewith they do acknowledge you to be free. That which imports
you, is, That your people hold themselves to be confessed to be free by those
words, and not to be made so. And that the Princes your friends understand them
in the same sense. So as if it be needful to fall to arms again, your People
may be more ready then ever to reassume them, and that your Friends may show
themselves more disposed then ever to favor your cause. But it is too well
known how much more easy it is to use constancy in troubles, then moderation
in prosperity. Tell me I beseech you, those who are the most zealous amongst
you, when did they ever think that the king of Spain and the Archdukes were to
condescend to Treaties so advantageous for your Provinces? and will you lose
this so happy occasion? shall vain shadows prevail more with you then
essential reasons? shall seditious Papers which are every where scatterd
abroad, be of more validity amongst you then the sincere and wise Counsels of
two Kings who are so affectionate unto your Cause. Now is the time then to
resolve upon, and to embrace this agreement which is now offered. Do you see
how the Swissers have fared? take them for your example. And by the similitude
of their affairs and yours, hope for the like success. The Swissers took up
arms at first against their Princes, not being able longer to undergo the
grievances of their Government: nor were they above two or three Cantons at the
beginning, and those the weakest amongst them; but their People gasping for
Liberty, and defending it with equal vigor both of body and mind, they made
invincible oppositions to their Enemies Forces; till being unconquerable by the
forces of the other Cantons, and the strength of their own Alpester situation,
their Enemies despaired of ever subjugating them. At last they ceased fighting,
and from tottering agreements they came to a firm and continual peace. And who
will now dispute the Swissers Liberty? why may not your Provinces hope for the
like success? the severity of the Spanish Government made Holland and Zealand
take up arms at first; their People valiantly withstood their Enemies: The
Sea, Rivers, and the strength of their Natural situation fought for them; your
other Provinces came in afterward unto them; and all made such resistance to
the contrary Forces, as there is not any example to be had of so long a war.
The successes have bin various; but at last they have proved so propitious to
you, as a Treaty of accommodation was sought for by your Enemies; and now we
are upon the point of a long Truce: which if it succeed, will doubtlesly prove
very advantageous for your affairs, and will easily be hereafter renewed upon
the same advantages, or turned into a perpetual peace, which may prove yet
better for you. That which I have hitherto said, seems to me to be sufficiently
clear.

In fine, there will be no doubt of your Liberty by this Clause, which is
propounded: Nor is it less to be doubted that a Truce will be more
advantageous for you, then unnecessitated to subject your selves to the
uncertain events of a new war. Fortune is generally seen to have too great a
sway in war; and that mocking at humane arrogance, she too often makes the more
powerful give way unto the weaker; and Losses ensue where Victories were
expected. To witness which, and pass by so many other examples; What more
memorable president can you have thereof, then what so lately befell here
before your own Eyes in the Archdukes own person at N^wp^rt? where insted of
being Victor, as it was assuredly hoped, he was overcome, wounded, and very
near being taken prisoner.

By means of this Truce you will escape so many and so dangerous uncertainties
of war; you will in the interim establish your Government the better; you will
ease your people of their disbursements; you will continue your former Traffic
into the Indies; and you shall finally see an end of those hateful titles of
Perfidiousness and Rebellion, which has hitherto bin given by a great many in
the world to your motions and proceedings in arms. And who can doubt but your
Provinces will hereafter willingly concur in such Expenses as shall be
needful, since they will be so easy in comparison of what they have been? and
so much the more willingly, by how much men do more naturally desire to enjoy
quiet, then to live in troubles: and by how much Liberty is the sweeter, after
having made trial of servitude.

And surely it is to be believed that those to whom the government of your
people shall be committed, will use the same care and vigilance in the
administration of public affairs in time of truce, as they have prudently done
hitherto in the time of war: their chiefest care will be still more to
establish the present concord, which is the soul which gives life unto the
body, and the heart which maintains it: and and hence proceeds that miraculous
temper which of many makes but one, and of but one many; but yet such as
whether they be severed or conjoined do always conspire to the same end. Thus
your affairs being well ordered within your selves, you shall have little need to
fear foreign dangers: and thus your Truce being at last turned into peace (as
it is to be hoped it will be) my King shall see the same success in your affairs
as he has seen in his own, and whereby his kingdom is now made happy: to wit,
after war peace, after troubles rest, and after the sacking and burning of
Towns, and all the orher miseries of Arms, the commodity, security, and
felicity of quiet and peace.

The Majesty and presence of the King of France himself; seemed to break forth
in the President Iannines countenance and words. He afterward gave what he had
spoken more fully in writing, to the end that the people might come to the
better knowledge thereof, and that they might the easilyer effect the agreement
which was in Treaty.

The like offices were done by the Ambassadors of England, and to overcome
fully the pertenacy of the Zealanders, it was resolved that Deputies should be
sent into Zealand in the name of the six other Provinces, to induce that
Province to conformity with the rest: which after much difficulty was at last
effected, and all of them concurring now in the same resolution; the
Ambassadors began again to labor to overcome the difficulties in dispute.
Continual correspondency was had by Letters between Iannines and Richardetto;
so as the negotiation of what was needful past between them; but the King of
Spain needed no less laboring to be brought to give way to the Truce: news was
sent to Spain of the Proposition made by the Ambassadors of France and England,
and of the new Negotiation introduced by their means.

The King would have been well enough pleased with the Truce, had it been
according to usual form, and all things left in the same terms on both sides,
as they were at present; but to declare the United Provinces to be altogether
free, and to suffer them in express words to traffic in the Indies, seemed to
put too great a difference between the present Treaty, and ordinary Truces: yet
'twas seen that 'twas impossible ever to come to any accommodation without this
Declaration of Liberty; and that if the United Provinces had stood so
absolutely upon it before they would be brought to a bare suspension of Arms
for a few months, they would now be much more resolute in it, in a Truce which
was to endure for many years.

The Archdukes, who saw the difficulties and dangers of the war in case it
should be continued, at a nearer distance, were easilyer induced to give way to
the Proposal made by the Ambassadors; and Iannines both by word of mouth, and
by Letters, had endeavored to persuade the Catholic Deputies, that to declare
they made Truce with the United Provinces as with free Provinces and States
unto which the King and the Archdukes made no pretense at all, did not any
ways prejudice, the right which the King or Archdukes might pretend to have
over them. He had showed how that it was a general Declaration; that the word
(as) bore with it a sense of similitude, and not of propriety: That in the
declaring of one man's being friends with another, 'twas never said I hold him
as a friend; that the adding in the last words, not to pretend unto any thing,
had reference to the ambiguity of the former words: And finally that such a
Declaration could not admit of any interpretation, save only during the time of
the Truce.

That then the King and the Archdukes ought to be content to make it; since it
was involved in words which might satisfy both parties.

First, The unskilful multitude of the United Provinces, for the outward
appearance of their pretended Liberty; them the King and the Archdukes; for
the true substance which was retained in them of leaving their former right
still unhurt. Then opening himself more freely, Iannines said; My King in such
a case, would not make any difficulty in granting this Declaration; for if the
United Provinces when they shall betake themselves to Arms shall not have
better Canons and Muskets; words and interpretations will avail them but a
little.

In this manner, and by these wary and wily ways, Iannines as a good mediator,
endeavored to draw both sides to a Truce; to which the Archdukes were easily
persuaded, and endeavored to bring the King to be so likewise; showing that by
this, neither they nor the King should do any thing more, then what was yielded
unto at the first suspension of Arms; much repugnancy did notwithstanding
appear in the King. 'Twas thought in Spain that the Clause wherewith the United
Provinces were to be declared Free States, though it were limited, would
generally be interpreted in favor of their Liberty; and that when they should
have got their desires in that behalf, the King would not obtain leave for the
exercise of the Catholic Religion in their Country, which he was resolved to
have by way of interchange; and moreover if the Article concerning the Indies
should be condescended unto, how much would the King be thereby damnified? how
much reputation would he thereby lose? To which difficulties the Archdukes
replied, showing that when the King resolved to have the abovesaid requital,
'twas only to be understood, if the peace should be concluded; and that the
King and the Archdukes having absolutely renounced all their right, the united
Provinces were absolutely free; that the present negotiation of the Truce did
differ very much; by which the King nor the Archdukes could not lose any piece
of their former right, that it was not to be doubted but that a clause so
general and so limitated, would be interpreted rather in favor of them, then
of the contrary party. That the Ambassadors themselves thought so; as also
diverse of the Inhabitants of the United Provinces, who were against the Truce,
as that which would be no whit more advantageous for them, then was the bare
suspension of Arms. And as for the point of the Indies, they seemed to have
hopes to end it so, as it should be no considerable prejudice to the King.

These reasons were not taken as fully satisfactory in Spain; but on the other
side, the King did very much desire the Truce, and that the so great, and so
unnecessary expenses of Flanders should cease. The Duke of Lerma was then in
great authority with the King; and having gotten the sole power over the King
by such arts as were available in peace, he was unwilling to share it with them
who might gain it by such means as war affords: which made him from the very
beginning very earnest in endeavoring the negotiation: and he did now no less
labor that it might come to some good event of agreement; the same desires
were known to be in the Archduke; who therefore resolved to send his Confessor
to the Court of Spain, to answer all the difficulties which were insisted on in
Spain, the which was thought necessary also to put an end to so long a
negotiation, wherein above two years had already been spent; which had so tired
the two mediating Kings, as they began already to protest that they would
meddle no more therein, if it were not all the more speedily ended.

Father Inico di Brazuela, of the Order of the Dominicans, was the Archdukes
Confessor, a very learned and upright man, and one who had been long
experienced in the affairs of Flanders: so as men hoped well of him, and of his
fidelity, that he might reconcile affairs with the King and State-Officers, he
being a Spaniard, a Votary, and of a very noble Family, and commendable life.
He was particularly to take all scruples from the King in the point of
pretending by way of interchange the exercise of the Catholic profession in
the time of Truce, whereof he was to press the necessity even for the Cause
of Religion it self. By representing, That if they should return to Arms again,
manifest hazard would yet be run of losing more then formerly on the King and
the Archdukes behalf in Flanders, and consequently of quite losing the
Catholic Religion in the yet obedient Provinces, instead of regaining it in
those that were revolted. The business was all this while put on by the two
Kings Ambassadors: but because to negotiate by way of Letters was long and
tedious, the Ambassadors minded the Catholic Deputies who had been in Holland,
that it would make more for the purpose to have the meeting in Antwerp, to end
those difficulties which yet remained concerning the negotiation. This
Proposition was willingly listened unto by the Archdukes; whereupon the
Ambassadors, and the Catholic Deputies, met in Antwerp in the beginning of
February 1609. The greatest difficulty was touching the point of the Indies.
The Ambassadors had always assured the United Provinces, that in the Truce they
should be permitted to Traffic thither; and they therefore desired that that
Article might be laid down in clear and express words. On the contrary the
Catholic Deputies desired that if it should be impossible to come to a Truce
without condescending to that point, it might at least be understood by tacit
circumlocutions, then by nominating the Indies expressly.

They desired also howsoever, that the United Provinces should forbear from
coming into or from trafficking in those parts of the Indies, which were
already under the Crown of Spain. At last after much arguing this point was
agreed upon, and was couched in such terms as both the United Provinces, and
the Catholic Deputies were satisfied therewith: for the name of the Indies was
left out, and the said Provinces were forbidden entering into the Kings
Countries in those parts: And Richardetto had wont afterward to say, that this
Article was so obscure, as he himself did not understand it: much disputation
was likewise had upon the Article of Contributions: 'twas said that the United
Provinces received every year 300000 Crowns of Contribution money, which was a
great help to their expenses. The Archdukes did not receive near so much; but
because these moneys were all raised by hostility, it was thought a thing too
repugnant to the public tranquillity which was endeavored, that this kind of
Hostile proceedings should be continued in times of quiet: so as the United
Provinces were at last persuaded, that all contributions of both sides should
be laid down. On the contrary 'twas necessary to yield to the pretention moved
by them, that the precincts which did appertain to such Towns as were enjoyed
both on this and on that side, should be restored to the said Towns. Touching
which point little or nothing returned to the Archdukes hands, whereas large
boundeurs were restored to the Towns of Breda, and Berghenap zone, together
with some others in Brabant which were in the possession of the United
Provinces? yet the Archdukes did so far prevail, and my endeavors were also
so earnest therein, as the exercise of the Catholic Religion only was left in
those precincts, as it was before. To the which the United Provinces obliged
themselves apart, being promised by Iannins and Rossi his Colleague, who gave it
them under their hands, that the King of France should oblige himself to see it
performed. Touching the point of exchange of Towns, there was no means of
accommodation therein to be found; so as it was resolved that each party should
still enjoy what they did possess at the present: nor would the United
Provinces ever suffer themselves to be persuaded in the point of taking away
the Taxes and other impediments to which those vessels were liable in Zealand
which passed through the Scheld to come to Antwerp, whereby that City was much
indamaged, as has been said. This business was referred to be propounded and
examined in a friendly manner after the Truce should be concluded. And the
Archdukes hoped by the benefit of the Truce, the better to accommodate their
own Ports in Flanders, into which much merchandise was to be brought, which in
time of war went necessarily into Holland and Zealand; because their Havens
were continually blocked up by many of the United Provinces men of war.

These were the chief points on which the Ambassadors of France and England
treated with the Marquess Spinola, and the other Catholic Deputies in Antwerp:
the Catholic Deputies endeavoring to proceed as slowly as might be, that the
Archdukes Confessor might have time to negotiate in Spain, and to send away
the resolution which was expected from thence; which not long after came; and
was the same in sum which the Archdukes had desired, and the Confessor by the
reasons alleged by him, had persuaded the King unto: great consultations were
had notwithstanding before this determination, both in the Counsel of State,
and amongst the gravest and learned Ecclesiastics of Spain: for the King
would be fully satisfied in all those affairs which were to be considered in so
important a business, before he would suffer it to be brought to a conclusion.

The Confessor himself returned soon after; so as the affairs being fitted by
all parties for an agreement, the two Kings Ambassadors, who after the
negotiation at Antwerp, were gone to give an account of the whole business to
the United Provinces, thought it fitting to return again to that City, and to
bring thither the same Deputies of the United Provinces, who were first
employed in negotiating the business in Holland; which was approved of by the
Archdukes, and at the same time the Catholic Deputies returned thither
likewise, amongst which was Commissary Neyen, who was then returned from Spain.

The United Provinces thought this to be the business of highest nature, and of
greatest importancy which had befalne them since their withdrawing themselves
from the obedience of the Crown of Spain, and therefore it was judged necessary
that it should be concluded by the authority of the whole body of the great
Assembly representing the General Union; and that the Assembly should consist
of as many Deputies, as could be gathered together upon so great an Occurrency.
The Town of Berghen-ap-zone was made choice of to this purpose, situated not
many leagues from Antwerp. Here the great Assembly met, and 'twas said that the
Deputies were eight hundred in number. The Deputies of both sides, together
with the two Kings Ambassadors, met every day in Antwerp, in the public Palace
of that City. From whence whatsoever past from time to time was sent to
Brussels to the Archdukes, and to the United Provinces in Berghen-ap-zone, and
resolutions were suddenly taken. When all points were then adjusted, after so
many and so long obstructions, a Truce for twelve years was established and
concluded on the ninth of April in the year of our Lord one thousand six
hundred and nine, betwixt both parties: The Articles were eight and thirty. In
the first it was declared, that the Archdukes made Truce with the United
Provinces as with Free States and Provinces, unto which they did not make any
pretense at all; and they obliged themselves that the King of Spain should
ratefie the same Declaration, together with all the rest, which was afterward
done in such manner as was requisite. The other chief Articles contained the
affairs of chiefest importance, as has been showed above; and in the rest
diverse resolutions were contained, touching the affairs of Justice; and
concerning rather particular then public Interests.

Thus did this Negotiation of Flanders end at last; the Issue whereof was so
long expected throughout all Europe.

And truly at this Truce, as if it had been at an universal Quiet, all Europe
seemed to rejoice, which had seen for so many years, and amidst so many fatal
and dreadful spectacles, the blood of all her Nations run upon the Theater of
Flanders.

A RELATION OF THE COMMOTIONS Which happened in FLANDERS In the year 1616.
By reason of the United Provinces taking the Town and Castle of Iuliers. And
what Negotiations were afterward had to accord the Differences between the
ELECTOR of Brandenburg, and the Duke of Newburg upon their pretended succession
to the state of the House of Cleves.
WIlliam, Duke of Cleves dying about the end of March, in the year 1609. and
the Male line of that Family failing in him, diverse Princes of Germany laid
presently claim to the Inheritance of his estate, by the right which lay in the
Female line. William had had four Sisters married into Germany; The first to
the Duke of Prussia; The second to the Duke of Newburg; The third to the Duke
Zweeburg; and the fourth to the Marqesse of Burgantz. The first died before
William, and left one Daughter behind him, who was afterward married to the
Elector Marquesle of Brandenburg; and therefore William being dead, the Elector
pretended that the right to that estate fell to his wife, by the mothers side;
and that his wives mother as she who was the eldest, was to be preferred before
all the other sisters. Newburg made use of the same pretense of eldership; and
said, that his wife, being the eldest sister living, should succeed in the
first place: The other two pretended that all the four sisters had equal right
to the succession, and that therefore the Inheritance was to be divided into
four equal parts. To both which these four Princes, the Duke of Saxony moved an
ancient pretense of his, and the Duke of Nevers made another claim; Brandenburg
and Newburg took possession presently; though somewhat withstood by the
deceased Dukes Vassals, who desired it might first be declared by the way of
Justice, to whom the succession did lawfully appertain: But the Emperor proved
a much greater obstacle herein; for he pretended, that the Inheritance should
be in him, by way of sequestration, till it should be legally declared who
should be Heir. In this respect he, first by threats, and afterward by sending
Archduke Leopold to Iuliers to see the sequestration made, endeavored to take
the possession from Brandenburg, and Newburg; in whose behalf the Kings of
France and England, the United Provinces of Flanders, and diverse other Princes
of Germany did appear; by whose means an agreement was made between the two
Dukes, that they should equally possess those Countries till the main cause
should be decided. The Emperors threats proved therefore vain, and vain the
means used by Leopold in his name; for those two Princes, assisted by a
powerful succor from France, England, and the United Provinces; Leopold was
enforced to forgo Iuliers, and to quit those Territories. It was not discovered
that the King of Spain, or the Archduke Albertus did any ways incline to
meddle in the aforesaid differences; so as Leoplod could have no succor from
Flanders. Only they did resolve, not to permit that the United Provinces should
make any advantage within those parts, by any whatsoever pretense: And because
they, the United Provinces had caused some jealousies that they would keep the
Town of Iuliers, which was fallen to Brandenburg, and Newburg chiefly by the
means of their Soldiers, in whom those Dukes greatest strength did consist in
this succor; therefore in case of such a novelty, the Archduke and Spaniards
had secretly resolved to do the like in some other part of those Countries;
hoping that one noveltie might serve to cure another, and that then by an
enterchangable restitution of the possessed Towns, their wonted new-tralitie in
those parts might be continued, and the controverted succession might be
decided in its proper Tribunal of the Empire. But the United Provinces did not
at that time make the apprehended invasion: So as the two Princes continuing
their former entire possession, all things on all sides were then reduced to a
quiet condition. The Elector of Brandenburg had from the very first sent one of
his Brothers, and Duke Newburg, his eldest son, to take by agreement the
forenamed Possession, and both of them jointly to govern those Countries: Their
incomes were equal, equal their Garrisons, and they shared alike in the
administration of government: For what concerned Religion, 'twas left in its
former condition; in the public exercise the Catholic Religion did generally
prevail; but in many parts the number of Heretics was the greater, who were
most of them Lutherans, and Calvinists. Brandenburg was a Calvinist, and
Newburg a Lutheran. For all this they kept both of them most commonly in
Dosseldorp, a Town situated upon the Rhine, wherein the Dukes of Cleves did
usually reside; nay, they lived both of them in the very Castle of Dosseldorp,
following their several Sects, and for all other things, they administered
Justice in common: but in fine the saying is true; That a Kingdom will admit of
no Companions: This correspondencie did not long continue between these two
Princes; small jealousies began at first to creep in; then greater suspicions
grew up; and at last they broke into open discord. Each of them endeavored
particular adherencie, and to make their own sect greater at home, and to have
potent friends abroad: For what concerned foreign friendship, Brandenburg had
the better at first; for the United Provinces inclined manifestly toward him
as well in respect of Religion, as having also formerly held very good
friendship and correspondencie with his house: Wherefore Newburgs Son, knowing
that he should always have need of potent friends abroad, and being formerly
sufficiently inclined to turn Catholic, did the more dispose himself to join
with the Catholic party in ^ermany; which he clearly testified by his
marrying with the Duke of Bavaria's daughter: Being married, though he did not
at first suddenly declare himself, he was presently held for a Catholic by the
contrary faction; The Heretics grew very jealous to see Newburg so near allied
to the house of Bavaria and to see that he had the Elector of Cullen, who was
the Duke of Bavaria's brother so near his neighbor; and many Commodities of
his Electorship, and of his Bishopric of Liege so near at hand; both of which
did confine upon a great part of the late Duke of Cleves estate. They did
moreover consider, that the Duke of Bavaria, to boot with his being one of the
chiefest Princes of Germany, and one of the most zealous for the Catholic
Religion; he together with the Elector of Mentz was head of the Catholic
league, made but a few years before; and he himself alone head of the forces,
if there should be any occasion to use them: so as they thought, that he to
boot with his own peculiar forces, might easily by his means make his son in
law Newburg be assisted by the forces of the whole league. But these were not
the jealousies which did most vex the Heretics: that which troubled them most
was, that the match between Newburg and Bavaria was made by the intervening,
and authority of the King of Spain and Archduke Albertus; and that therefore
upon all occasions Newburgs interest was likely to be favored by the
neighboring forces of Flanders. Newburg, on the otherside did not only suspect
the forces of the United Provinces, but those of England and of the Heretical
league of Germany, which was not long before made in opposition of the
Catholic league: As for France, 'twas doubtful to which side it would incline;
but 'twas at last concluded that it would either stand Newtral, or that if the
King of Spain should move, the French would withstand the Spaniards. This was
the condition of the affairs of Cleves and Iuliers both at home and abroad, in
the beginning of the year 1614. The Elector of Brandenburgs Brother was dead a
little before this; so as he had seen his eldest son, a youth of above eighteen
years of age, upon whom his Mothers right was to descend, to be in his place;
who tarried a while in the Town of Wesell, and then went to the Town of Cleves,
from whence the whole Dukedom has its name: and on the other side, the
Palatine of Newburg, (for so was the Duke and Duchess of Newburgs eldest son
called) continued his residencie in Dosseldorp. Brandenburgs son had many
counselors placed above him, for his Governors; but he was chiefly guided in
all things by the advice and authority of the United Provinces. The Palatine
of Newburg did himself undergo the burden of all the business which did
occur, which he showed himself very capable of, as well by reason of the
maturitie of his years, as for many other excellent indowments both of body and
mind: the Jelousies and discords both of Brandenburg, and Newburgs side were
already apparent to all men: and because it was impossible but that some
important alteration must needs happen, all the eyes of the Northern parts were
bent upon the affairs of the Cleves and Iuliers, and great expectation was had
on all sides of what would befall: the mean while the spring came on; in which
time the Palatine of Newburg met with the Elector of Cullen, and tarried some
days with him; which occasioned a new and greater suspicion amongst the
Brandenburgians; nor did the Marquess himself any longer delay Innovations: He
and his men, favored by the Souldierie which were in the United Provinces
nearest Garrisons, endeavored to surprise, and to make himself absolute master
of the Town of Dosseldorp, at a time when Newburg was not there: but being
discovered by them that were within, he failed in his enterprise. Newburg was
hereat mightily moved; and the neighbors no less: amongst which the Archduke,
considering particularly, that if the two forenamed Princes should take up
Arms, it would be a business of great consequence, and that from every least
sparkle which was thereby to be raised, some important fire of combustion,
might break forth, and be enlarged thereabouts; he therefore resolved on his
side to use all possible means, that some remedy might be found out whereby the
differences might be composed. He writ to both the Princes, exhorting them to
agreement, and declared that both himself and the King of Spain would bend
their forces against him of the two who should first offer at any noveltie: He
writ thus to both of them that he might not appear partial to either of them:
He likewise dealt with the United Provinces, to the end that they might
endeavor the preservation of Peace between the two Princes: He likewise
desired the Queen Regent of France, that she would interpose her authority
with the two Princes, to the same purpose. And Lastly, he endeavored an
assembly of diverse Deputies, not only in the name of Brandenburg, and Newburg,
but of other Princes also, who should play the part of Mediators, either to
establish the former agreement better between them, or to renew another which
might be more satisfactorie to them both. The United Provinces seemed to desire
peace between the two Princes; which they signified to the Archduke by way of
Answer: and gave the like answer to the instances made unto them by the Queen
of France, at the Archdukes persuasions: Adding moreover, that if necessity
should enforce them to take up Arms, they would resolve on nothing before they
had acquainted her Majesty with it: All which things were imparted to the
Archduke, both by the Ambassador of Flanders, who was at Paris, and by the
French Ambassador who was at Brussels. Notwithstanding all this, the Archduke
and the Spaniards, doubted that the Queen of France her intercession ( France
it self being then full of troubles) would not be of sufficient authority with
the United Provinces, to detain them within requisite terms; neither were their
doubts vain: Not many days after news was brought of another Innovation made
by Brandenburg, much greater then that of Dosseldorp, and fomented by the
United Provinces more openly then was the other. Garrisons (as I have told you
before) were placed in the name of both the Princes, and in equal numbers,
where it was necessary to place them: the chiefest was put in the Town and
Castle of Iuliers; the Governor of which Town and Castle was one who had
served in the Army of the United Provinces, and who did much depend upon Count
Maurice, General of their Army. Brandenburg under pretense of fear (which was
likewise his color for attempting to surprise Dosseldorp) that Newburg had
designed to drive out Brandenburgs part of the Garrison, and make himself
absolute master of Iuliers, resolved to make himself master of it; which about
the beginning of May he effected in this manner. Brandenburgs soldiers took up
Arms one night, and easily drove out Newburgs men, who were surprised at
unawares, and when they were dispersed both out of the Town and Castle; and
suspicions upon suspicions being pretended by the Governor, he suddenly
brought in, at first a small number of Soldiers out of the nearest Garrisons
of the Low Countries, and afterward a strength of above 2000 Foot, together
with some Horse, all of them belonging to the United Provinces; who did honest
this their action with a specious pretense. They said that the coming of their
Forces into Iuliers. was only to preserve the public Peace, which the two
Princes would by their Arms violate: that Brandenburgs men should likewise be
put out of Iuliers; and that they would keep the Town and Castle as deposited
in their hands, till the two Princes should come to a better agreement. This
noveltie happening, Newburg resolved to meet with it by another, though not of
such concernment. He presently possessed himself wholly of the Town of
Dosseldorp, and began presently to raise some Fortifications there. Dosseldorp
lies upon the banks of the Rhine; it is a little Town, but pleasant by reason
of its situation, and particularly on the Castle side, which answers upon the
sight of the river. The Castle is not Fortified, but serves rather for a
dwelling house then for a strong hold; whereas the Town of Iuliers is greater,
and is fortified by a Castle built after the modern fashion, with some Royal
Bulwarks; it commands a fertile and large Country, extended in a spacious
plain, which is called the Dukedom of Iuliers, taking its name from the Town:
the seat thereof is important, for it lies between Cullen, Liege, and the
Frontiers of those Provinces of Flanders which are next Germany: so as it may
be said to be one of the chiefest Ports on that side toward Germany: and 'twas
thought a business of great moment, that the United Provinces should be entered
Iuliers: and being considered as it related to the affairs of Flanders, it was
a manifest advantage to the United Provinces, and consequently a great
prejudice to the Archduke and to the Spaniards: and by it also the reputation
of the Archduke, and of the Crown of Spain was too foully blemished: the
Spaniards which were in Flanders said with much indgnation:

Was it not sufficient for the United Provinces to have made a Truce, almost
wholly after their own will, and to have used such insolences both during the
Treaty and since, but that now they must invade newtral Countries in an
hostile manner? and therein violate the public faith? without any the least
claim of particular right? what did there remain for them more to do now,
unless it were to erect a Tribunal in Holland, whereby to give Law to the
whole North? since arrogating unto themselves, as it were, the sole Arbitrament
over the Controversy of Cleves and Iuliers, they pretended to dispose of it at
their pleasure; or else to usurp it themselves, and take the Country into
their own possession.

But these were but the least complaints the Spaniards made; they complained
much more upon the Archduke, and against the Truce made by him not many years
before, to the so great prejudice of the affairs of Spain, as they did always
generally think.

That these were the egregious fruits which were gotten by the Truce: to wit,
the loss of reputation (the soul of Empire) to the Crown of Spain; the Truce
being made to the so much vilification thereof; and so many reformations being
since made in the Army, with such exquisit parsimony, as if the Army were a
private family, and the King, a Merchant, not a King; and the Province of
Flanders, in the midst of Spain, and not environed on all sides by that Courts
greatest enemies: that as soon as the Truce was concluded, the King of France
had forthwith taken upon him the boldness, proudly to threaten Flanders with
his Forces, and to bring it into those dangers, from which it could not
otherwise have been freed, but by the almost manifest miracle of his sudden
death; but that for all this, the French, the English, the United Provinces,
and the Heretics of Germany had not laid aside their daring; since all of
them, after having jointly assisted Brandenburg and Newburg forcibly to take
entire possession of the States of Cleves and Iuliers it behoved Archduke
Leopold shamefully to quit those parts: that the Heretics had since threatened
Cullen; had taken away the government of Aquisgrane from the Catholics;
Fortified Mulen in the face of Cullen; and had in diverse other sorts insulted
over the Catholics in those parts: and what wonder was it that such
insolences should be done by them? since the Arms of Flanders, whilome the
Terror of Heretics, were since the Truce grown so weak, as that they were
become a scorn, and laughingstock amongst them; that if the maintaining of a
flourishing Army in Flanders was too expensive, they might be limited
elsewhere, to supply these more important Forces: that the Crown of Spain, was
to reap Gold and Jewels from the Indies; from other kingdoms ostentation, and a
long series of Title; and soldiers and arms from Flanders, her magazine
thereof.

Thus did the Spaniards complain aloud and with military freedom; and truly it
is not to be denied but that after the Truce, the affairs of Flanders were
reduced to too great a diminution of Forces: the Catholic Army did not then
exceed 8000 Foot and 1200 Horse, whereas the United Provinces did still
maintain in theirs above 20000 Foot and 2500 Horse; to boot with the 4000 Foot
and 200 Horse, all of them French, which were paid by the Crown of France: For
though the Truce was judged necessary out of very many and weighty reasons;
yet was there no reason why Flanders should be afterward left so weak, as that
its own weakness should invite the enemies of the Crown of Spain, and of the
Catholic Religion, to new and rash designs: How greatly insolent the United
Provinces were in possessing themselves of Iuliers, and how much prejudice did
thereby ensue to the Provinces of Flanders, was sufficiently known by the
Archduke, and by those Spanish officers, who next to him guided the Affairs of
Flanders. He therefore resolved to send speedy advertisment to the King of what
the United Provinces had done, advising him not to endure it: He hinted for
remedy, the taking up of Arms, as it was first agreed on, when they apprehended
the like proceedings, as has been said; not intermitting howsoever the way of
negotiating not only by the means of the Queen of France, but also of the King
of England, by whose means it was to be endeavored that the United Provinces
should quit Iuliers, and should leave affairs in their former condition: and
because it was necessary to recruit the Army lustily both with Foot and Horse,
when there should be occasion of drawing it out into the field; the Archduke
desired the King, that he would send suddenly 400000 crowns into Flanders to
this purpose: it cannot be said how strangely Spain was moved at this invasion
of Iuliers: so as the Archdukes advice was presently approved of: and it was
credibly believed that the moneys desired should be presently provided. The
Archduke the mean while entered into diverse negotiations: the United Provinces
seemed to desire, that the Deputies of Brandenburg and Newburg, together with
those of the Elector of Cullen, and their own should meet in Wessell, as also
the ordinary Agents of France and England who were with the two Princes; to the
end that they might see whether any better agreement then the former might be
made by an amicable way between the two Princes. The Archduke therefore
resolved to send some one in his behalf likewise to Wessell, and to this
purpose he chose the Count Octavius Viscount. Newburg in particular had pressed
the Archduke very much to do this; but the conference at Wessell may be almost
said to have been ended before it was begun: for the United Provinces, as if
they would imperiously give laws to the negotiation, propounded, that Newburg
should first put the affairs of Dosseldorp into their former condition, and
that afterward they would think upon some expedient for those of Iuliers, so
as should be satisfactory to all parties, which Newburg denied to do, saying
that in all reason the affairs of Iuliers and of Dosseldorp should be put into
their former condition at one and the same time: So as Count Octavius hearing
presently after his departure from Brussels, that the Treaty at Wessell was
broken off, instead of going thither he went to Cleves, where the Elector of
Brandenburgs son was: and mediated very much with him in the Archdukes name to
bring him to agreement with Newburg; the answers he received were general: He
then went to do the like with Newburg, who justified his actions by the
violence of the contrary party: and because not many days before he had made
public profession of the Catholic faith, he recommended his affairs with much
efficacy to the Archduke, desiring him to interpose his authority that they
might be taken into protection likewise by the King of Spain: the endeavors at
Wessell proving vain, the Archduke renewed his former applications to the Queen
of France, as also with the King of England, to the end that both of them might
procure the United Provinces to forgo Iuliers; to the which the Queen seemed to
be very willing, saying, she would send some one of purpose to see some remedy
taken; the King of England showed likewise the same intentions and readiness:
But as Princes actions are usually full of jealousies; the Queen of France not
appearing so forward, after many days in her performances, as she was in her
promises, they grew suspicious of the proceedings of the French: in fine it was
doubted that the business of Iuliers was done either at first with their
knowledge, or afterward by their approbation: 'Twas considered what the United
Provices had written to the Queen; that they would do nothing in this affair,
before they had communicated it to the French: but the consideration was yet
more weighty, that according to the nature of their government, so straightly
bound in correspondencie with the two Crowns of France and England, it could
not almost be possible that they should of themselves fall upon so bold an
action. The French Ambassador at Brussels did notwithstanding constantly
affirm, that the Queen knew nothing of the novelty of Iuliers, but that France
was mightily displeased thereat; and that it was not to be doubted but that
the Queen would find out some remedy for it; that she had forborne sending the
forementioned Express into Holland, and to Treat with the two Princess,
because she hoped for some good issue from the conference at Wessell; but that
proving otherwise, they were now to expect what she had promised. This mean
while some provision of moneys were heard of from Spain; two hundred thousand
Crowns were sent at the present, and great hopes were given that the other
200000. should follow presently, and yet a greater sum; the Summer was
already well advanced, neither was any news yet heard of the coming of any one
from France, nor that there was any intention of sending any; so without any
further expectation from France, the Archduke without any more delay, resolved
to augment the Army, and to raise new men. He determined to raise 6000.
Almains, and 7000. Walloons, and that a levy should be made thorowout all the
Provinces of Flanders of 1300. horse, distinguished into Curassiers, and
Harqubusiers the ancient Soldiers were, as has been said, about 8000. foot,
and 1200. horse. The Archdukes resolution was, that being to march forth with
the Army, all the old Militia should be drawn out, and so many of the new men
as might make up a Body of 18000. foot, and of 2400. horse, and that the rest
of the new men should remain to guard the Frontiers, and to supply the
Garrisons. Newburg was very solicitous that the Army should be put together,
for fear lest he might be driven out of Dosseldorp by the United Provinces.
He also raised men, to do the which the Duke of Bavaria assisted him with
moneys, and in secret the Catholic League, and after he had declared himself
to be a Catholic, the Pope had likewise put on a resolution in Rome to assist
him with moneys, which were to be contributed as his part in general to the
same League in case of war; and to this purpose I used my best endeavors. The
King of England seemed at that time to be again desirous to interpose in the
accommodation of the affairs of Iuliers, and had destined to send over Sir
Henry Wotten extraordinary Ambassador into Holland to this purpose; and before
he sent, he made this proposition by him: That in the first place Iuliers
should be deposited into the hands of some that were Newters: And for this he
nominated three: Philip Prince of Orange, Maurice Lantsgrave of Hessen, and the
Prince of Hennault* The first a Catholic, the last two Heretics. The Archduke
would have agreed upon the first, but could not approve of the other two,
because they depended too much upon the Heretic faction of Germany. But in
France, were it either that they did not approve of the Proposition, or of the
choice of the Persons, or that they would not give this advantage in the
business to the King of England, no resolution at all was taken to insist upon
this way; only the Queen continued to assure the Archduke, that she would
suddenly send some express into Holland, and that in the mean while she would
not omit to use such means as were requisite by her Ambassador in Ordinary, to
make the United Provinces quit Iuliers. In fine, all that the Queen Regent, or
the King of England could effect by their Intercession, was no more but this;
That the United Provinces did again declare, that they did not enter into
Iuliers, to appropriate it to themselves, but to keep the two Princes from
breaking forth into more dangerous disorders, that they were ready to leave it
as soon as the two Princes should be agreed; not in the main cause, (which
might prove a business of too great length) but in the point of possession,
which might quickly be adjusted: that they believed this their Declaration
would be approved of both in France and in England; and that they should be
exceeding glad that by the means and Authority of the two Crowns such an
agreement might be the sooner made.

This Declaration of the United Provinces seemed very justifiable to the French
Ambassador at Brussels; and that on the contrary the Archduke was too hot in
his proceedings, and in his resolving with the Spaniards to make so great a
preparation of Arms. They affirmed that Businesses were not brought to a head
or ripeness by violence, but by patience, that the United Provinces were
naturally slow in their resolutions, by reason of their form of Government,
which was composed of multitudes, that some one was suddenly to come from
France for the accommodation of the affairs of Iuliers, which the Queen would
use all possible means to effect. On the contrary, that Forces did provoke
Forces; wherein Fortune did bear a much greater sway then counsel; that it was
to be believed that the United Provinces would quickly be stirring with their
Forces, when they should see the King of Spain and the Archduke begin to move
with theirs, so as the one of them drawing up to hinder the others designs,
what could the success prove, but that the Truce being broken through the
default of the Archduke, and the Spaniards, a new war were to be begun in
Flanders.

He afterward treated with the Archduke about this Declaration of the United
Provinces, and did the best offices he could to suspend the taking up of Arms;
but the Archduke was no ways satisfied with such a Declaration; but rather
grew the more jealous; he thought that the United Provinces would spin out the
business, that they might not quit Iuliers; and that the agreement touching
possession between the two Princes, though severed from the principal cause,
would be a business of very great length. Marquess Spinola had likewise the
same suspicions, who was Camp-Master-Generall of the Catholic Army, and the
Chief Minister of State that the King of Spain had in Flanders; he therefore
still egged on the Archduke to raise men, and to take to the Field as soon as
all necessaries could be had. So as the Archduke keeping constant to his former
resolution, would not listen to what the French Ambassador could say, and to
the English Agent (the Ambassador in Ordinary for England not being then at
Brussels) who strengthened his reasons, by assuring him, that when the
extraordinary Ambassador should come from his King into Holland, the Affairs
of Iuliers would be accommodated; he answered in resolute terms, That he would
not suspend his resolutions the space of one hour, till the United Provinces
should have quitted Iuliers. The affairs of Spain were chiefly managed (as
has been said) by Marquess Spinola, and therefore he took upon him the care
of raising new men, and of providing for all other things necessary. He was
naturally very vigilant, and ever bent himself wholly to the affairs in hand,
so as the new Foot and Horse were quickly raised, and provision taken for what
else was necessary to put the Army together. Mastrick was designed for the
rendezvous of the Army; a City situated with a stone bridge over the Mote
toward the confines of the Country of Iuliers, and but eight hours good march
distant from the Town of Iuliers: it was now about the beginning of August, and
without any longer delay, the Army began to march toward Mastrick, with orders
to be in that City by the twentieth of that month, and twelve piece of Cannon
were sent thither. This mean while the United Provinces, when they saw these
the Archdukes and King of Spains proceedings, had brought in 3000 Foot into
Iuliers, so as with their men that were there before, ^twas judged that they
had 4000 Foot in the Town and 300 Horse: they had likewise with great diligence
fortified the Town, and provided it with victuals and warlike Ammunition;
which were all of them signs that they would maintain it gallantly, in case
the Catholic Army should draw up toward it: they had not as yet moved any
other men, but stood only narrowly observing, which way the Catholic Army
would take, that they might assemble themselves, and bend vvhither it was
most fitting: But as for what enterprise the Catholic Army was to fall upon;
(the true design being then kept very secret) the Governors of the United
Provinces were not only doubtful, and generally all the Heretics, but even the
very Court of Flanders were uncertain; to besiege Iuliers, which was the cause
of the quarrel, it was thought it would be a difficult undertaking, the Town
being so well provided of all things; and 'twas no question, but that the
United Provinces would either endeavor to relieve it, or would make some other
diversion on the side of Flanders: to boot that to go against the forces of
those very Provinces, would be an absolute breach of Truce; to which it was
known that the Archduke was utterly averse: and therefore there were but few
that thought that the Army would turn toward Iuliers: others guessed more
narrowly at what did indeed ensue; that the Catholic Army was either to march
against Aquisgrane, and to take the government of that City from the Heretics,
who had with violence bereft the Catholics of it; or else against the very
Countries of Iuliers and Cleves, to possess themselves of some part thereof,
and thus to counterpoise the former invasion of the United Provinces. The two
last resolutions were both of them taken: and because the first was against
Aquisgrane, it is requisite that taking my rise a little higher, I acquaint you
briefly with the reason which moved the Archduke to undertake that enterprise.
The City of Aquisgrane is subject to the Empire; and is numbered amongst one of
the ancientest, and noblest of all Germany. The Catholic Religion did formerly
flourish very much there, till in these later times the greatest part of her
inhabitants fell into Luthers heresy, and many into that of Calvin. The
government thereof kept still notwithstanding in the hands of Catholics; which
according to the custom of the Free Towns of Germany, consists chiefly in a
Magistracy, whereof two Burgomasters are the Heads: but lately in the year
1610. the Heretics rising with greater violence then formerly against the
Catholics, they took the Magistracy from them, giving afterward no respect
to other new commands which came forth in favor of the Catholics: they were
manifestly favored in these their insolences, particularly by the United
Provinces, and by the Prince Elector Palatine: by the United Provinces, that
they might have that neighboring City the more adherent to them; by the Prince
Elector Palatine out of the same reason: for in the vacancy of the Emperor
Rodolphus, he administering that part wherein Aquisgane is, had confirmed the
new heretical Magistracy in possession, and desired to see it so continued.
The Emperor had made the Archduke Albertus, and the Elector of Cullen his
Trustees to see these his last mandates executed; which they would gladly have
done in an amicable way, and not by violence: diverse endeavors and diverse
diligences were had to this purpose, but all in vain: for the heretics would
not listen to reason, and they seemed not to fear Force: but growing every day
more insolent, they had under various pretenses brought a Garrison of 600 Dutch
Foot into Aquisgrane, saying that they were Brandenburgs soldiers, when indeed
they belonged to the United Provinces as most men thought. This was the
condition of Aquisgrane at that time when the Catholic Army was marching
toward their Rendezvous; at which conjuncture of time three Ambassadors from
the three Ecclesiastical Electors came to Brussels to treat upon diverse things
which concerned the Catholic league of those parts. And because every one
thought that they came chiefly for the affairs of Iuliers, this common belief
was of great advantage to what the Catholic Army did afterward undertake: as
soon then as the Army was ready to march into the field, it came to Mastrick at
the time appointed. The government thereof in the Archdukes absence belonged to
the Marquess Spinola, so he together with the other chief Commanders met on the
twentieth of August at the same place. I thought it might very well become me,
after having done what belonged to my charge in the former negotiations, to be
also upon this occasion in the camp, (and it was approved of at Rome that I
should do so) judging that it would be a greater terror to the heretics, and
more honorable for the Pope and the Catholic cause if that the Popes Nuntio
should be seen to be in that Army. The Marquess of Gualdalutz, who was
Ambassador from the King of Spain in Flanders, resolved to be there likewise,
and therefore both of us went together from Brussels, and accompanied Spinola
afterward: we were lodged all three together at Mastrick, where we staid two
days, till such time as the whole Army had past over the Mose; into our lodging
came usually all the chief commanders of the Army; amongst which those of
greatest esteem of the Spanish Nation, both for Nobility of blood and opinion
of valor, were Don Luis de Velasco; Don Fernando Girone, and Don Inego di
Borgia, and of the Dutch; Count Bucquoi, and Count Henry di Berg. Don Luis was
General of the Horse, being come to that degree from being General of the
Artillery, and had been for a long time Camp-master of the Infantry. Don
Fernando had likewise for many years discharged the place of Camp-master,
together with greater commands apart, and going afterward into Spain, he was
by the King made one of the supreme Council of War, and was returned again from
that Court with great honor to the Army in Flanders. Don Inego di Borgia was
then Camp-master also; and Governor of the Castle of Antwerp, which is the
most important government, and of greatest trust which is given in Flanders:
But he was chiefly commended for his singular skill in Fortification and
Training, which are two so necessary points in Militia. Count Eucquoi was then
General of the Artillery, who had first for many years been Camp-master of the
Walloon Infantry; but being by reason of his known experience called some few
years before to be governor of the Emperors forces in Germany, he was not at
that time in the Army. Count Henry di Berg was then likewise highly esteemed
for his Soldiery, and specially for what concerned Horse, wherein he had had
sundry chief Commands, and had always given proofs of better deserts. The rest
of the Colonels and Camp-Masters of other Nations were all of them men of very
good esteem in matter of war: But the Count Emden was in particular much
valued amongst them: He was a Dutch Colonel, come of one of the chiefest
Houses of that part of Germany which lies toward Flanders; and whose birth was
always well accompanied with Valor. Diverse were the opinions, as has been
said, concerning the motion of the Catholic Forces: but it was not as yet
known what resolution they would put on; so good is secrecy; and so
religiously ought Princes to observe it. The unknown resolutions being now to
be put in execution, and being to be made known by the very execution it
self, Spinola thought it fitting to communicate the whole, first to the chief
Commanders, and others of best respect, which he did thus by word of mouth.

So many and so great (my most noble Companions) have the Insolences of the
Heretics been, and the novelty of them in these parts, as it has at last
been requisite to remedy them by Force; and to begin with this last of Iuliers;
what other greater could there be, or more rash? The United Provinces having
had the boldness to Invade Newtrall Countries; and to do that now in time of
Truce, which was never done before in the heat of war: the great zeal, that
is, the great care, which they show to have to the Public, has made them
enter Iuliers. ^ust such pretense as made them rebel against their Prince, and
still perfidiously maintain the same rebellion. The King and Archduke are then
justly incenst by such an action; to rescent the which, they have recruited
their Army with new Soldiers, which Army is now met here at Mastrick; but
before we fall upon the affairs of Iuliers, Aquisgrane being so near, we
ought to turn our Forces against it, so to chastise the Heretics of that
City, according to the Deputation which the Archduke and Elector of Cullen have
thereof from the Emperor. It is sufficiently known to all men, how
affrontedly, and with how much scorn to the Imperial Mandats, they have dared
to usurp the Magistracy of that City, which was first in Catholic hands; so
as in all reason, so unjust a violence must be redrest by a just Force: And
this is that which ought first to be done: we will suddenly pass from thence
to the throwing down of the Fortification of Mulen, which ought also to be done
by the Archduke in the Emperors Name. Since Brandenburg would never obey the
Imperial Mandat procured by the City of Cullen to this end, we will at the
same time enter the Country of Cleves and Iuliers, and possess our selves of
what we can there, as the United Provinces have done in the Town and Castle of
Iuliers, and as they would have done in other parts, had they not been hindered
by the marching of our Forces. Though in the similitude of success, the
diversity of counsels will appear. For theirs would be, not to go any more
out of Iuliers, whereas we shall be ready to restore all the places which we
shall possess our selves of, to necessitate the United Provinces to do the
like, and leave the Affairs of those Countries in their former condition. These
are for the present the Kings and the Archdukes resolutions, which I have
thought good thus briefly to acquaint you with; and this the order which is
therein to be observed. It now remains that we see what the effects will be;
and we may believe that there will be no difficulty at all in them, only this
present Expedition may prove displeasing unto us in this behalf, that we shall
have the Keys of Aquisgrane presented us before they be demanded; and that for
our pastime we shall see the Fortification of Mulen slighted; and all the rest
of our endeavors follow. All which things will prove but sport and pastime;
we having formerly been wont to march with the enemy on our Flanck; and to
place and finish our sieges with the enemy in our face. We shall not now march
with any Forces to withstand us; and say that the United Provinces shall move
after us, (as it may be believed they will) shall we not have gained so much
time, as our principal designs shall not possibly meet with any disturbance?
So as having such advantage over our enemies, the United Provinces and
Brandenburg will be forced to suffer the controverted Countries to return into
their first condition. They will be enforced hereafter to abstain from
Novelties and Usurpations: and lastly, the controversy concerning that
Country will of necessity (as it is just it should) be ended by the ordinary
way of the Empires Tribunal. Fraud is not always favored by justice; but the
perfidious are often times punished by their own perfidiousnesse. Thus by securing
our Catholic neighbors, we shall likewise render our own Princes safety the
more secure; and thus the world by this new occurrencie shall see, that the
King and Archduke do never move their Forces, but when necessitated either by
just defense to maintain their own, or to free others from unjust oppression.

Spinola spoke thus; and his discourse was suddenly by the Commanders spread
abroad among the Soldiers, who were all very much joyed thereat. Spinola went
from Mastrick on the 22. of August, and was the same day in the Army; wherein,
in all were 2500. Spaniards with 800. Irish, under three Camp-Masters, which
were Don Inico di Borgia, Simon Autanes, and Don John di Menestis: 3000. Dutch,
under their Colonel, the Count of Embden: 1700. Burgonians under the Baron of
Balanson their Camp-Master: and 9000. Walloons under three Camp-Masters, the
Count Ostrat, the Signior della Moteria, and the Signior di Golesin. These were
all Foot, wherein was wanting a Brigado of 2000. Italian Foot, under the
Camp-Master Marcillo del Giadice, who were lodged near the Rhine, and who had
orders not to stir, it being intended that they should be set on work in those
parts. To this purpose 7. Companies of Horse were likewise left there abouts;
and 18 other Companies came to Mastrick. The Camp then consisted of 18000 Foot,
and 2500. Horse, with 12. pieces of Cannon, besides the Italiar Foot, and 700.
Horse, which came all to their rendezvous the said day in a large field,
between Mastrick and Aquisgrane, where the Parado was made. A stately sight in
truth, and worthy to be frequently seen, i^ the Forces which Christians so
often turn against themselves, were more jointly turned against the enemies to
the Name of Christ. The Army moved from the rendezvous in this order, toward
Aquisgrane. Dor Lewis di Falasco, General of the Horse, marched before the
Foot with 600. Horse, the Foot followed after in four Bodies, one after
another. In the first were the Spanish Foot, with four piece of Artillery in
their Front. In the second, the Dutch and Burgonians jointly. In the third
6000. Walloons with the rest of the Artillery; and in the last, the other 3000.
Walloons; after which came 600. Horse, which closed up the Army in the rear.
The other 600. Horse were gone with Bartholomew Sanchius, Lieutenant General
of the Horse, before the Army moved, to possess a Pass whereby they might
hinder the succor which perchance might be sent from Iuliers to the Heretics
of Aquisgrane; which City is not above four easy hours march from Iuliers; but
no succor was sent them neither from thence nor yet from any other part. There
was not above two hours march from the rendezvous to Aquisgrane; so as the same
day all the Army was quartered about it. Aquisgrane is a City of a large
circuit, and lies almost wholly in a plain, save that in one part the earth
rises. It is environed with a Wall of ancient structure not any ways
fortified. In the upper side it is commanded by certain little Hills, within a
musket shot of the Walls, so as the Cann^^ may at pleasure play upon the
houses. It was generally thought that there being no more Soldiers there but
those 600. Foot, which I spoke of before* and the people not being accustomed
to Arms, the City Gates would be suddenly thrown open: But the Heretics
continuing their contumacy, and being fomented in particular by one of the
Burgomasters, who had been a chief Instrument of the violence used to the
Catholics; they would first hear what Propositions should be made unto them,
by the Elector of Cullen, and the Archdukes Deputies; who entering the next
morning into the City, they acquainted them with what Commission their Princes
had from the Emperor, and desired that it might be effected. The Magistracy
took time to Answer, and deferred to give their Answer longer then they should
have done. Spinola wondered at this delay, so as he sent Count Henry de Berg
into the City, to exhort the Magistracy presently to obey, for otherwise their
Cannon should forthwith make entrance for them; and to make his threats the
more terrible, he gave present order for the planting of some pieces upon one
of those Hills which did most command the City. At last at three days end the
Heretics were reduced to obedience, and sent forth the 600. Foot which they
had within, so as the government was quickly put into the hands of Catholics.
And to secure the Catholic party, which was far inferior to the Heretical,
a Garrison of 1200. Dutch, of the Count Emdens Regiment were left in Aquisgrane.
The Heretics feared lest the City should have been sacked by the Army: But
Spinola had strict command from the Archduke at his departure from Brussels,
not to suffer any such thing to be done. So as neither did the Soldiers enter
the Town, nor did any other disorder ensue. At this time, after so long delay,
it was at last resolved in France, that Monsieur di Rifugie one of the chiefest
Counselors of that Court should be sent into Holland: But upon the Armies
meeting at the rendezvous. The English Ambassador was already arrived in
Holland, and by the English Agent in Brussels, did forthwith very much press
the Archduke, that he would cause the further proceeding of Arms to cease,
giving assured hopes that the United Provinces would accept of the Proposition
made by his King of depositing Iuliers into Neutrall hands: To which the
Archduke would by no means consent. Soon after the United Provinces declared
that they did accept of the King of Englands Proposition; and that for the
manner of doing it, they would refer themselves to the Ambassadors of France
and of England, who were then with them: the English Agent did therefore with
much fervency urge his former desire; and the French Ambassador joined with
him therein: but the Archduke being encouraged by the success at Aquisgrane,
answered them; that he desired the depositing might first be done; and that he
would then presently stop the further proceeding of the Army: otherwise that he
would never consent thereunto upon bare promises; so as without any further
loss of time, Spinola after he had reduced the affairs of Aquisgrane according
to his desire, entered presently into the Country of Iuliers; and marched with
his Army against the Town of Duren, which is one of the chiefest of that
Country: Those of the Town received in a Garrison of 600 Dutch, without any
contradiction, as did some other Towns of small importance near Duren: at which
time the Italians had possessed themselves of Orsoi; a place of important
situation upon the Rhine: and they had already begun to throw a bridge of boats
over the same River, at Remburg. Spinola marched that way, and in few days
march brought the Army thither; and whilst the Army were upon their march, he
went on the other side the Rhine to make a visit to the Duke of Newburg (the
Palatine was now called Duke, his Father being just then dead) and his duchess,
who were then at Dosseldorp: at the same time, the fortification at Mulen was
thrown down without any obstacle, to the great joy of those of Cullen. The
Catholic Army past the River at Remburg, and turned suddenly upon Wessell, a
Town which lies a little lower upon the same River: in former times the City of
Wessell was comprised under the Dukedom of Cleves; but for many years of late,
licentiousness increasing with heresy, it became almost wholly free, and was
governed as are the Hans Towns of Germany; so as since then they have
acknowledged the Dukes of Cleves rather as their protectors then as their
Princes. The Inhabitants are almost all Calvinists, and therefore have chiefly
combined with the heretics of those parts, who profess the same sect, and
particularly with the United Provinces: from whom they have received most
encouragement both by their Forces, and by the neighborhood of their
frontiers: the seat of Wessell is exceeding considerable, for on the one side
it commands the Rhine, and on the other the Lippa, a River which falls into the
Rhine: The Town is of a good circuit, and sufficiently fortified on one side;
full of Inhabitants, given much to traffic, and so abounding in all things as
it furnishes the neighboring parts with all necessaries. The inhabitants of
Wessell were much astonished, and affrighted when they saw the Army draw near
it; they did not expect that the Flanders forces would reflect upon them, for
they persuaded themselves, that their Town should be dealt withal likewise as
Newtral, and as one of the Hans Towns of Germany. They had therefore formerly
refused to receive a garrison offered them by the United Provinces; who having
gathered many of their men together upon those frontieres, and when the
Catholic Army drew near unto it, had offered to succor Wessell, yea, and if
need should be, to take openly upon them their protection: and doubtesly if
Wessell had taken in any garrison of the United Provinces, Spinola would never
have accosted it: for his orders from the Archduke were, not to wage war with
any of the forces of the United Provinces, nor to give no occasion of the
breach of Truce. The Catholic Army did soon begirt the Town on all sides,
which seeming at first to make some resistance, and having made many shot out
of the Town and killed some of the Catholic Army, forced Spinola to open his
Trenches, and plant his battery on the suburbs side: which when they began to
play, the inhabitants finding they were not able to defend themselves, and that
all succor was excluded from them, they resolved at the end of four days to
yield upon some conditions; the chief article whereof was, that when the United
Provinces should restore the Town and Castle of Iuliers, the Town of Wessell
should likewise be restored to its former condition Spinola advanced no further
with his Army: his men were already too much diminished by reason of many
garrisons which he had placed in sundry parts, and was still placing on both
sides of the Rhine, so as he would not place any as he might have done in
Emerick and Res, two good Towns upon the Rhine, and near Wessell: whereupon
Count Maurice losing no opportunity, and having with him 14000 Foot and 3000
Horse in the neighboring parts, suddenly possessed himself of those two Towns,
and afterward of many other lesser ones in the same controverted Countries, on
each side the Rhine: He had likewise received strict commission from the United
Provinces not to meddle with the King of Spains nor the Archdukes Forces, to
the end that all occasion of the breach of Truce might be likewise shunned on
their sides; so as it was very observable that in these movings or Forces, the
Soldiers of the one Army did not hinder the others proceedings, but often times
met one with another and proceeded friendly together; and he who came first
took first possession without any manner of disturbance. Spinola took up his
quarters near Wessel, and Count Maurice his near Res, within two hours march
one of another; and the Duke of Newburg and his men which were 4000 Foot and
400 Horse, joined with Spinola, as did also seven hundred of Brandenburgs
Horse, and a Regiment of Foot of the Prince Elector Palatine with Maurice. It
cannot be said what commotion the taking of Wessell caused in France, in
England, in Germany, and amongst all the heretics; for fear lest the Spaniards
out of various pretenses might appropriate unto themselves a purchase of such
concernment. Monsieur De Refuge was this mean while come to Brussels, and
going immediately with the Lieger French Ambassador to Gaunt, where the
Archduke and the Infanta his Wife, then were; the first proposition which he
made was, that a suspension of Arms might be had on all sides, to the which
the Archduke answered, that he might go to Holland, and make the motion first
there. Refuge before his departure would have had the Archduke promise to give
way thereunto on his side, but could not get him so to do: yet the Archduke
showed some good inclinations thereunto, and told Refuge, that he should be
glad such a Treaty for suspension of Arms might be had, as had already been
motioned between Spinola and Maurice; which did not take effect by reason of
diverse difficulties that were therein met withal; nor was there any further
talk of suspension: wherefore as soon as Refuge was gone from Gaunt and come
to Holland, he and the English Ambassador were of opinion, that the readiest
way to reconcile the two Princes was, that they two Ambassadors should go to
the Armies, and endeavor that a conference between deputies might be had in
some fitting place thereabouts, by whose means the desired accommodation might
be had. To this purpose Refuge and Wotton went to the Armies, and having spoken
with Brandenburg and Newburg, with Spinola and Maurice, they agreed upon a
conference in Santen, a Town within the Dukedom of Cleves, near the Rhine, but
on the contrary side, and almost equally distant from the one and the other
Camp, Here met Refuge on the behalf of the King of France, and the French
Ambassador who was resident in Holland; Wotton and the English Lieger
Ambassador resident in Holland likewise, on the behalf of the King of England;
Pietro Pecquio Chancellor of Brabant, and the Counselor Wiscer for the
Archduke; Three Deputies for the Elector of Cullen; Seven for the seven United
Provinces; Two for the Elector Palatine; the which two did likewise represent
the Union of all the heretic League of Germany: Three for Brandenburg, and
three for Newburg. The conference began in the beginning of October: The chief
drift of the French and English Ambassadors, and the heretics Deputies was,
that this new agreement should relate to the former, which by procurement of
the late King of France, of the King of England, of the United Provinces, and
of the other Princes of the heretical League of Germany insued between the Duke
of Brandenburg and Duke of Newburg, as was shown at first: and therefore those
Ambassadors and Deputies began to proceed jointly in the conference, leaving
out the Deputies of the Elector of Cullen, and of the Archduke: yet Refuge and
Wotton acquainted these others with all that was done, and endeavored, in all
other demenour to appear, as Mediators, not as parties; their chiefest
diffidence was notwithstanding in the Archdukes deputies, out of the aim they
had that when this new agreement should be made, it might not be acknowledged
as from the Authority of the King of Spain and of the Archduke. These were the
jealousies which were had at the beginning of the conference: it was not
doubted by any of the Ambassadors or Deputies, but that the too great
communion in all things to which the two Princes were necessitated by the
former agreement had been the chief cause of dissension between them;
therefore care was had in this new agreement which was in Treaty, to make such
a division as each of them should enjoy severally half of the pretended states;
and that except it were their Titles and some other things of common use, they
should in all the rest be wholly divided one from another: one of the chief
difficulties lay in the Town of Iuliers, because that being munited by a good
Castle, 'twas thought that Town might be advantageous to him to whose share it
should fall: it was therefore propounded that the Castle should be dismantled
on the side toward the Town; or else that Iuliers should remain in the hands
of the United Provinces, and Wessell in the Archdukes hand, and both of these
to be restored when the differences should be decided between the two Princes:
and as for the main division, it was propounded, that one of the two Princes
should divide, and the other should choose; or else that each of them should
possess his several half for six months, and then change halves for other six
months, and that this course should be still continued: As concerning the
dismantling of Iuliers, the Embasdours of France and England, together with the
Deputies of the United Provinces, and other heretics, inclined more to this
proposal then to leave that Town in possession of the United Provinces, to the
end that Wessell might not remain in the King of Spain, and Archdukes hands:
and for what concerned the main division, Newburg would have willingly accepted
of the first proposal, which certainly was the justest, and likeliest to
endure: but Brandenburg seemed to be more inclined to the second, to which the
Deputies of the United Provinces did likewise stick very closely. To say truth,
such a bargain appeared very strange, for it might easily be foreseen, what
confusion it would bring with it: it was long disputed between the Ambassadors
and Deputies upon this point; and the chiefest contention was between Refuge
and Pecchi^: who because he had been Ambassador in ordinary from the Archduke,
in in France, and knew how much the French did favor the United Provinces, did
therefore oppose Refuge stiffly when occasion served: at last the opiniatrecy of
Brandenburg, and of the United Provinces was such, as they drew over the
Ambassadors to prefer the second proposal of alternate possession, before the
first of each Princes contenting himself with the half of the state apart.
Spinola did presently acquaint the Archduke herewith, to whom for this purpose
he sent the Count Octavio Viscount, when being sent a little before into Spain,
was now returned with a new supply of 300000 crowns, and was come to the Army
to treat with Spinola. The Archduke desired very much to see the two Princes
accorded; that Arms should be laid down, and that all danger of breaking the
Truce might cease; the which was greatly likewise desired in Spain, as Viscount
related: but on the other side the Archduke was much averse to the second
proposal, thinking that by it the accommodation would not last long; and that
by this means the discord between the two Princes would rather be deferred then
ended. The Spanish ministers of state were likewise very averse thereunto, and
of all the rest the Ambassador did much press the Archduke, that the King
might be fully advertised, and that his will might be known, before the
businesses in treaty should be fully concluded: The Archdukes resolution
hereupon was, to send Viscount back again to the Army with directions to
Spinola, to endeavor that the conference might be drawn out in length as long
as possibly he could, that he might have time to advise thereof first in Spain;
which if it could not be done, he then left it to him to do upon the place what
time and necessity should counsel: and because this was no better then to leave
him a large liberty to agree; the Spaniards stormed cruelly, and chiefly that
Wessells should be restored, and so great a purchase be lost which neither cost
money, blood, nor expense of time, without the Kings knowledge: whereupon the
Ambassador resolved to dispatch away a messenger speedily to Spain, and writ
thus by him to the King.

How much the getting of Wessell concerns your Majesty's affairs in Flanders,
the sorrow of your enemies do sufficiently manifest: they are much displeased
to see your Majesty's Ensigns in the most important seat of the whole Rhine;
and that that should be your Majesty's magazine of Arms in Flanders, which you
may at any time upon any occurrence draw from thence and remove whither your
Majesty's own occasions, or those of your Queens, which are never severed from
yours, shall most require in these parts: then since there cannot be a greater
purchase, great consideration ought to be had before your Majesty deprive your
self of it. The Archduke, and some other of your Majesty's ministers of state,
fear that if Wessell be not suddenly restored, the Truce with the United
Provinces will break: and I and many other of my opinion believe that they will
rather the more willingly continue it, out of hopes they may get Wessell from
you by way of Treaty; for they see it is vain to think of getting it by force,
and that then the Truce would be broken with much more advantage to your
Majesty then to them: But if Wessell be restored, and that be done which is so
much desired by the United Provinces, and by your Majesty's greatest enemies;
what security can there be had that the Provinces themselves will not endeavor
the same invasion? is not the example of Iuliers fresh in memory? and of how
much greater importance will this be unto them then that? Iuliers is not seated
upon their Frontiers; whereas Wessell lies upon their principal Ports: Will
your Majesty know the true and right intentions of themselves, and of their
friends: They have embraced (as your Majesty shall understand by another
Letter of mine) as the final agreement between Brandenburg and Newburg, an
overture, whence confusion, and not quiet is to be expected between them; not
peace in those parts, but greater troubles then before: nor do they this with
any other intention, but that the United Provinces may have better opportunity
hereafter, to effect that to their own advantage in the future troubles, which
they have so shamefully dared to do in the past troubles: yet for all this I am
not against the surrendering of Wessell, when it may stand with other more
important respects: but I would have it to be done, as also the agreement at
Santen to be concluded, when your Majesty shall be fully acquainted with the
whole proceedings, and when they shall have your consent thereunto, and not
before. All times will serve for losses, but not for acquisitions: nay, when
occasion is not laid hold of, she escapes, and often times faces about and proves
adverse: those happy successes which have insued, are chiefly due to your
Majesty's most glorious Forces. And now that Justice and Fortune seem to
contend which of them shall favor them most; your Majesty will certainly so
husband this propitiousnesse, as that your wonted wisdom may likewise therein
be admired.

These were the contents of the Letter; but before Viscounts return to the
Army, it being every day more clearly seen what disorders would arise from the
point of alternate possession, another way was found out, and finally
concluded, which was: that as equal a division as might be, being made of the
controverted states, and the lots being cast, he of the two Princes should
choose first, whose Lot should be first drawn: and because they had already
agreed upon the other less considerable points, they came at last to agree the
whole capitulation; the substance whereof was this: that the Soldiers which
were introduced into whatsoever part of the said Countries should immediately
be drawn from thence: that the two Princes should engage themselves, not to put
any Town of the said Countries into any whatsoever third hand; that all
Fortifications made by eitherside since May last should be demolished; that al
those who were either gone out, or driven out of those Countries, should be
restored to their goods, offices and benefices: that all the innovations which
had been made either in the Church or state, should be reordered: that the two
Princes should reside each of them severally in the division that should fall
unto him; provided that the said Countries should be thus divided: To wit, the
Dukedom of Cleves, the Countries of Marca, and of Ravensburg, the Lordship of
Ravesten, and some other Lordships and feudatories in Brabant, and in Flanders,
on the one part; and on the other, the Dukedomes of Iuliers, and of Berg, with
all their dependencies. That each of the Princes should have that part of those
dominions, which should fall to his share by casting lots: and that each of
them should govern their proportion in the common name: that the offices and
benefices of the said Countries should be bestowed by those two Princes, being
disposed of Alternately each of them their month about, accordingly as they
should fall; and that the public revenues should be equally divided between
them.

All which things the Princes were to engage themselves by promise, and in the
word of a Prince to keep inviolably. These Articles were subscribed by the
Ambassadors of France and England, by the deputies of the Elector Palatine of
Rhine, and by those of the United Provinces; all which bound their Kings,
Princes, and Superiors to see the agreement made good; and this was subscribed
only by the Ambassadors and above said Deputies, because as I have said, they
pretended that the present agreement should have relation to the former, which
was made by the two Princes by the authority and intercession of the same
Crowns, and the prenominated Heretic Potentates. Brandenburg, and Newburg did
afterward subscribe and ratify the capitulation, and obliged themselves to
observe them: The agreement being thus concluded, the first Article which was
to be put in execution, was to draw the Armies out of those Countries: 'Twas
thought necessary that the removing them from thence should be done with such
cautiousnesse, as there should be no occasion of future leavying of Forces,
through any such novelties as had before happened: Whereupon a treaty was had
between Spinola and Count Maurice, whereby each of them should oblige
themselves expressly in writing to bring in no more forces in time to come, nor
to endeavor any invasion in those Countries; which writing was afterward to
be ratified by the King of Spain and the Archduke on the one side, and by the
United Provinces on the other side; but there arose presently diverse
difficulties about the form of the words. Spinola desired the declaration might
be free and absolute; Maurice would have it only refer to the agreement at
Santen; which Spinola thought not convenient, because the Archdukes Deputies
were not suffered to subscribe unto the agreement: some days were spent about
the form of this Declaration: and the Ambassadors labored very much to
contrive it so as it might satisfy all parties, but still the difficulties
grew the greater, the more they strove to overcome them. ^Twas now December,
and the Ambassadors growing weary of these new delays which arose in the
execution of the Agreement, resolved to be gone: when the messenger who was
sent to Madrid by the Spanish Ambassador who was at Brussels, returned from
thence to the Catholic Camp, who brought peremptory commission that the
agreement at Santen should not be fully concluded, without the Kings privity,
and that in the mean while VVessell should not be restored, and that the state
of affairs should continue in their present condition; at this man's arrival
there was a stay made of all things. The Ambassadors much incensed, would
tarry no longer, but departed suddenly for Holland: and the other Deputies
returned to their own homes. Maurice distributed his Army into diverse parts;
and Spinola did the like: leaving 3000 Foot in Wessell, part Spaniards, part
Walloons, and 300 Horse, with a Fort on their flank on the other side of the
Rhine. Spinola returned afterward to Brussels, whither Duke Newburg resolved
likewise to come, to thank the Archduke for the favors he had received from
him, and to speak with him at nearer distance of his affairs: a little before
the conclusion of the Treaty at Santen, Count Zalleren was come to the
Catholic Camp, who was sent from the Emperor to the Archduke to endeavor
that the agreement might not be concluded any ways to the prejudice of the
Imperial Authority or Interest: Matthias would have had it ordered so, as that
the controverted Countries of Cleves and Iuliers, might rest in him by way of
sequestration, till the main cause should be decided: And he likewise desired
that no agreement might in any means be made between Brandenburg and Newburg,
to the prejudice of the Duke of Saxony. Count Zoleren pressed very much upon
these two points. He came afterward to Brussels, at the same time that Newburg
resolved to go thither, and did in person renew his desires with the Archduke
so much the more, for that he had the fitter occasion to do so, by reason that
the affairs between Brandenb^rg and Newburg were at a stay. When Newburg and
Spinola were come to Brussels, the Archduke desirous fully to justify in
Spain whatsoever had been done on his behalf, gave a particular account unto
the King of all that was treated on, and concluded at Santen, and of the
difficulties which arose afterward between Maurice and Spinola about the
withdrawing of their Forces, all that he added was rather to show his
rescenting what the Ambassador had written, to justify what he himself had
done.

Your Majesty's (said he) may then happily comprehend that it was not possible
to hinder the agreement, since the issue thereof depended upon those who did
subscribe it. The resolution of entering upon, and of restoring, was at first
taken, as your Majesty very well knows by your knowledge and consent, nor can
the particular promise be denied, which was made to restore Wessell when
Iuliers should be^ restored. And who can doubt but that to go against it, will
produc^ great jealousies in France, in England, in the United Provinces, and in
all the rest of the Heretical League in Germany? and that all those that are
interressed will not by all means possible endeavor the execution thereof?
suspicions do not always end in suspicions: But the fire o^ public evils
beginning thus to creep, does at last break forth into high flames of Troubles.
In brief, whether will your Majesty have the Truce continue, and have Wessell
restored; or will you have it broken, which may easily be done by keeping
possession of Wessell? I cannot think your Majesty can so far undervalue
those reasons which induced you to lay down Arms, as that you will be now
induced to reassume them without apparent necessity. For what concerns us, I do
not find our affairs much bettered yet: nor do I esteem the acquisition of
Wessell to be of so great Importance, as that for it Flanders be to be again
involved in a more bitter war then was the former. This restitution is
particularly due to the Tribunal of public Faith, and those actions may be
esteemed very advantageous which by the sole end of Justice, shall also
compass the end of profit May your Majesty be pleased to consider the good
success that we have had. How well are the affairs of Aquisgrane, and Mulen
settled? How well are the Duke of Newburgs affairs restablisht? and the
Catholic cause, which must always be equally the Austrian cause, remains in
all other points, in much better condition hereabouts then does the Heretical
Faction. We must then make good use of these successes; which does not lie in
going about immaturely to atchieve greater. Fortune is variable; she is gone
when we least think on^t, and huggs her self when she makes the greatest of
Mortals the greatest laughing stocks.

The Archduke wrote concisely thus unto the King; and exhorted him with much
efficacy, that he would give way to the things as they, were agitated and
concluded. It was two months before any answer came from the King, who would
well weigh the resolution which was to be taken in so important an affair. And
at last his answer was this; That the agreement at Santen should be put in
execution, that Wessell, and all the other places possessed should be restored,
when the United Provinces should do the like; with such security, as there
should be no more cause of fear, of their making hereafter any new invasion in
the Countries of Cleves and Iuliers. As soon as this answer was come, the Duke
of Newburg went from Brussels to Germany, to take possession of his
Patrimoniall estate: and as for the execution of what was concluded on in
Santen he left the disposal thereof, and of his interest there^in freely to
the Archduke. He had stayed about some two months in Brussels, in which time
he oft-times discoursed at large, with me about his affairs: and seemed to be
much bound to the Pope, who had so affectionately assisted him; and in all
other things showed such wisdom and piety, as the winning of such a Prince, at
that time over to the Catholic cause, particularly in Germany, was to be
really esteemed a great purchase to the universal cause of the Church. Diverse
negotiations were at this time had between him and Count Zoleren; Zoleren would
have had him to have cast himself freely upon the Emperors Judgment in the
cause of the controverted states; and that he should have received the
Electour of Saxony for his companion in the possession of those Countries, that
so he might the easier drive out Brandenburg, who openly declared his
con^umacy against the Emperor. Newburg seemed willing to submit himself to the
Imperial Judgment, but upon condition that his present affairs might not be
impaired by the uncertainty of future hopes. The Arch^duke had received full
Authority from the Emperor to agree those motions made by Zoleren; but he
thought it fitting to see first what the issue of the agreement at Santen would
be: wherefore though Newburg went away, Zoleren stayed at Brussels; and the
Archduke began suddenly after the resolution was come from Spain, to set on
foot the endeavoring a promise of not introducing any Forces for the future,
under whatsoever pretense into the controverted Countries of Cleves and
Iuliers, not between Spinola and Maurice, but between himself and the United
Provinces. Many months were herein consumed with much prolixity; for the
negotiation proceeded very slowly, which was to be managed by Letters,
sometime^ by the way of France, sometimes by the way of England, sometimes by
the way of Holland. Many were the difficulties, none of which could ever be
overcome. That which pleased one party, raised jealousy in the other. The
United Provinces following Count Maurice his first sense, would that this
promise should have reference to the agreement at Santen: and the Archduke
seconded therein by Spinola, said that was not fitting to be done. They
discoursed of referring this promise to the two Kings of France and of England,
without any mention of the agreement at Santen, but hereunto did the Count
Zoleren oppose himself, pretending that they should first address themselves
to the Emperor. Thus amidst these contestations, and other pertinacious
niceties of words, all Treaties finally ceased; and Count Zoleren, after having
tarried six months at Brussels, returned likewise toward Germany: This mean
while the Spanish Forces remain in the states of Cleves and Iuliers on the one
side, and on the other those of the United Provinces: and it is to be believed
they may tarry there a good while: as far as the exterior Title goes,
Brandenburg and Newburg enjoy and do possess the government: but in states he
who has the power, has the possession: and petty Princes may learn by this
new example, not easily to call in greater Potentates to their assistance.

The Relation of the Flight of HENRY of BURBONE Prince of CONDE, from France:
First Prince of the Blood. And of what happened till his return to PARIS.
FRANCE did enjoy Peace and Quiet in an high degree in the latter years of the
reign of Henry the fourth, An. 1609.
one of the greatest and most memorable Kings that that Kingdom ever had: when
unexpectedly about the end of the year 1609. there arose a sad accident, which
presently disordered all things, and ended at last in the Kings death. Henry
had won great glory in War so long, as being first an Heretic, and then a
Catholic, he was compelled to use his Forces against his Domestic and
Foreign Enemies, who withstood his access to that Crown; which when he was
arrived at, and had laid down his arms both at home and abroad, he afterward
purchased no less glory by making France flourish for many years in great
peace and prosperity; so that his praise was noised over the whole world; and
'twas generally held, that of a long time there had not been a King of a
clearer renown and who was better parted for government either in Peace or War:
His fame seemed only to be a little clouded by his having appeared to be, and
by his being still too much given to the pleasures of love; so as he might be
said to be therein a rival to Alexander, and Caesar; as well as he was to both
of them in unvanquisht military valor: he was married to Mary of Medicis, a
Princess very virtuous, beautiful, and fruitful: yet this so strait a tie
could not suffice to bridle this his domineering passion: but commonly glutted
with that delight which he enjoyed without contest, he did not forbear to
contract new loves, and to pass from one to another according as he met with
new objects to kindle new desires. A little before his death there appeared at
Court a rare beauty, who had drawn upon her all the eyes of the Court, and
those of the King more then all the rest.

This beautiful Lady was Margaret of Memerancy, daughter to the Constable of
France. The King from first likings grew so passionately to love her, as not
able to conceal his flame, it broke forth in many outward demonstrations, till
every body took notice of it. The Prince of Conde was cousin to the King; who
in his youth being born and bred up an heretic, did afterward embrace the
Catholic Faith: and because none other of the blood royal was so near a kin
unto the King, all the Parliaments of France had acknowledged Conde as lawful
successor to the Crown, before the King had married his second wife and had
children by her. The King having made sure his own succession, Conde remained
first Prince of the blood: A place of great prerogative in France, and which
bore great consequences with it: they began already to think of a wife for him,
and the aforenamed Margaret, the Constables daughter was judged to be fittest
consort for him. Conde was then about 22 years old, and he was not ignorant of
the Kings new affection: but thinking his marrying of Margaret would be a
sufficient remedy to make the King bridle his passion, the marriage proceeded,
and the wedding was solemnly celebrated; but he soon found he was deceived. The
greater the obstacles grew on Margarets behalf, the greater grew the Kings
heat: He for a while concealed his fire, which growing the more intense by
being kept in, it at last broke forth into high towering flames. Finding he was
no longer able to make resistance, he went about by diverse means and practices
to compass his desires: Conde watched him; and being full of thoughts, he at
last imagined that the best means to save his honor was to remove his wife
from the Court; whereupon he carried her to a house of his some leagues distant
from Paris toward Picardy: when the King knew this, he was highly moved;
hatred was suddenly joined unto his love; so as first under colorable
pretenses, and afterward by down right threats he made Conde be told, who came
often by starts to Paris, that he should do well to bring his wife to Court:
and in the mean time not being able to bear with her absence any longer, he (as
it was commonly reported) disguised, and accompanied but by a few, one day rid
many leagues to see her in a certain place where she was to hunt, Conde feigned
to be willing to do what the King desired, and to this end seemed as if he went
to fetch his wife, but with a firm resolution in secret, to carry her out of
France: nor was he long in doing it. All things necessary being prepared for
his flight rather then for his departure; he and his wife with two of her women
went into a Coach of eight horses, and being followed only by three or four of
his most trusty servants, and some pacing horses he went unexpectedly toward
the Frontiers of Flanders on the side of Artoise, which was the nearest part of
those Countries: when the Coach-horses were tired; he and his wife got upon the
pacing geldings. The hazard of his honor did not only add wings to Conde's
haste, but even the hazard of his life, which the Kings anger called to his
mind; so as he never stayed till he came to Landresie, a considerable Town on
the Frontiers of Artoise, where he thought he might with safety tarry a while:
he suddenly sent a Gentleman of his from thence, to acquaint Archduke Albertus
with what had befallen him, who was then for his recreation at Marimonte, with
the Infanta his wife: a place situated toward the Frontiers of France; and
desired that he might have leave to come unto him himself in person. The
Archduke feared lest the King of France might be hereat offended, so as in
civil terms he refused to receive him: and also let him understand that he
would not suffer him to tarry within his territories, through the which he
might notwithstanding freely pass, if he would go unto any other part. Conde
not being suffered to tarry in the Archdukes states, went presently to Iuliers,
where then the Archduke Leopold was, being sent thither by the Emperor, about
the differences that happened about the succession of the Dukedom of Cleves, the
Duke whereof was dead without children: from hence he past to Cullen, and had
from thence according to the ancient freedom of the Imperial Towns, a safe
conduct to bring him thither. This was the occasion, and this the success of
the Prince of Conde's flight. But the King of France understanding the Prince
of Conde's resolution, and being very much incensed against him, gave forth
many orders immediately that he should be followed with all possible speed, and
taken: he was not only mad to see the Princess so far removed from Court, but
for that he knew this action of the Prince, might occasion many dangerous
novelties to his Kingdom, his own great age considered, and the tender years of
his children. The King agitated by so fierce and potent passions, had used all
diligence that Conde might be overtaken, and detained: amongst others he had
dispatched away Monsieur du Pralin, one of the Captains of his guard, with
orders, that if he could not reach him, he should forthwith go to the Archduke,
toward whose Frontiers 'twas imagined he was gone: and that he should use all
the means he could to make him be detained. Pralin, and all the others, failing
in their hopes of overtaking him; Pralin accompanied with the French
Ambassador then at Brussels, went to acquaint the Archduke with the Kings
desires: they made many complaints against the Prince, and spoke bitter things;
they said:

That his suspicions of any danger to his wives honor, were false and feigned;
as were also all other fears by which he seemed to cloak his flying from
France; saying, how could he expect any violence from the King? a Prince no
ways given thereunto, and who was not likely to use it to his cousin: that it
was rather his ambition and ligeretie, instigated by bad advice, which had made
him take so strange and so unexpected a resolution: which could tend to nothing
else but to disturb France with some novelty plotted to this end: that
therefore the King did promise unto himself out of his neighborhood, and
always professed friendship to the Archduke, that he would cause Conde be
detained, in case he should be in Flanders; and that he would by all means
facilitate his return to France: that they did both of them entreat this favor
from him in their Kings name with much earnestness: that he should consider
what the event of this might be: and lastly, that he should remember, that such
incounters were never so appropriated to one only Prince, but that their
example might reach unto others.

The Archdukes answer was, That he conceived he had fulfilled his part to the
King, by his not receiving the Prince: that it had not been just to deny a
Prince of his condition, passage through his Country: that he was already gone
elsewhere; but that if by any intercession of his he could persuade him to
return for France, he was ready to do it, and to show how much he desired the
Kings satisfaction in particular, and the public peace of his Kingdom.

The Prince of Orange was at this time in his Town of Breda, not far from
Antwerp, with the Princess his wife, who was sister to Conde: he therefore
came with his wife presently to Brussels being by Conde desired so to do; who
that he might go the sooner to Cullen took a nearer way, and had caused the
Princess his wife to come to Brussels, that she might entertain her self there
with her sister till some other resolution were taken. The Princess of Conde
was then 16 years old; and her beauty was judged by all men to be answerable to
the fore-running fame thereof: she was very fair; her eyes full of sweetness,
very becoming in her speech, and in all her gestures; she owed all the
commendations of her beauty naturally to its self, for she did not help it
with any womanly art: Soon after the Archduke and the Infanta returned to
Brussels; the Archduke did immediately visit her, and the Infanta made her many
courteous offers: in this interim of time, the chief state ministers of Spain,
who had not been with the Archduke at Merimonte, had heard what had past
between him and the Prince of Conde there. They thought the Archduke had done
ignobly in not suffering the Prince to tarry in Flanders, and in seeming so
willing to satisfy the King of France: but Spinola seemed chiefly to be hereat
scandalized, who did manage the Spanish affairs in Flanders, principally: He
could not endure that the Archduke should let slip so fair an occasion of
making some advantage of the King of France his troubles. He said:

That the Archduke had no reason to fear that the King of France would have
taken up Arms against him for permitting Conde to live in safety in Flanders:
that to fight in open field with armed Troops, was no other matter then to fall
on Stags in a Forest, as that King knew better then all others. 'Twas
therefore to be thought that rather then to break into open war, he would have
endeavored to have regained Conde into France, and to have regained some hopes
of his Mistrisse by Treaty: nay, it was rather to be believed that if Conde
had been protected in Flanders, the endeavor of his reconciliation might have
produced many advantageous effects, as well in facilitating the interchangeable
match between the two Crowns, whereof diverse overtures had already been made,
as in many other respects which might concern their good, and jointly the good
of all Christendom: that suspicion had its power even amongst Princes, and did
often times prevail with them more then friendship; but that in whatsoever manner
the Prince of Conde should have been detained in the Catholic Kings and
Archdukes hands, there could not have been a fairer nor a fitter occasion wished
for whereby to bridle the King of France his immoderate desires: that he had
made himself Arbitrator of the Truce lately made in Flanders; that the
differences touching the succession of the House of Cleves did at this time
depend upon his Arbitrament; that he would take upon him the title of being the
general Arbitrator of Europe, and exercise the Authority thereof: and what
authority was less tolerable then to impede so great and so just Princes as
were the King of Spain and the Archduke from the just privilege of protecting
the oppressed? especially such a one as the Prince of Conde? oppressed by such a
one as he? whereas he, since the last peace made with the Catholic King, had
given Protection in France to Anthony Peers, an officer who had been very
unfaithful to the Crown of Spain; and had not only protected him, but given him
a stipend, and did him all possible honor even in the face of his Court: of
how different a quality was Conde? How different his cause? and how could he
better justify his flying from France? which (let the King say what he
pleased) was occasioned out of mere necessity of saving his honor, and of
securing his very life.

Marquess Spinola, together with all the rest of the Spanish officers broke
forth into such like complaints as these; and not herewithall content, they
endeavored by all means they could to imprint the same sense in the Archduke,
who was a very moderate Prince; and who having not many months before wrastled
through many difficulties, in the Truce of Flanders to purchase peace, would
not give occasion of beginning a new and more heavy war with the King of
France: but on the other side the Archdukes interest did so depend upon the
King of Spains concernments, as he at last suffered himself to be persuaded by
the aforenamed reasons: Conde was then invited to come to Brussels by an
express messenger sent by Marquess Spinola, with letters from himself and
from the Catholic Ambassador; and the pretense was this: Villeroy, chief
Secretary of state to the King of France, had told the Ambassador of Flanders
woe was resident at Paris, that the King was very much offended, that Pralin,
and his Ambassador resident at Brussels, could not be permitted to see Conde,
to give him such advice as was fitting, and whereby he might peradventure have
been persuaded to have returned to France. The King himself afterward told the
Ambassador as much, declaring that he would have been very well pleased if
Conde might have been made to return. The Archduke hereupon pretending to
cause Conde to come, to the end that the French ministers of State might speak
with him, and endeavor an accommodation between him and the King, offering
himself to be ready to do the like, he gave way that Conde should be invited to
come to Brussels in manner aforesaid; where he arrived about the end of
December 1609. He lighted at the Prince of Orange his house, and was
accompanied by the Catholic Ambassador, and by all the chief Lords of the
Court, when he made his first address to the Archduke and the Infanta, who
received him with much civility, and with such honor as his quality required.
This meanwhile the Answer which was expected concerning his person, was come
from Spain; which was this: That he might be permitted to live safely in
Flanders, that the King took him into his protection, and that he should enjoy
it with all favorable advantages. At his first coming to Brussels there was no
discourse at all had of his reconciliation with the King of France; for the
Kings Ambassador had not as yet had any particular Commission concerning it,
to boot that it was thought the King would send an Extraordinary Ambassador
about it. But Conde encouraged by the Answer from Spain, sought so much the
more to justify his coming from France, he gave two Letters particularly to
me; the one of which he writ to the Pope, the other to Cardinal Burghese, the
Popes Nephew. The contents of them were:

That moved thereunto out of the danger of his life and honor, he was
enforced to flee from France, and that he recommended his affairs to the Popes
protection, and the Cardinals Mediation.

It was thought that he really had just occasion to forgo France; but for what
he said touching the violence prepared to be used against him by the King, and
that his life was in danger, it was not generally credited. For every one knew
that the King never dealt in his love affairs, but by usual ways: and amongst
all his virtues he was famous for none more then his clemency. I sent away the
Letters; but I did not omit to tell him what became me, both for his, and for
the public good. I had first likewise done such offices with the Archduke,
and the Spanish State Ministers tending to concord and peace, as I thought
fittest upon such an occurrence; which I did afterward often reiterate* by
particular orders from the Pope. I found the Archduke much disposed to work an
accommodation, between the Prince and the King; and he seemed to hope to effect
it; Judging amongst other reasons, that Conde out of the natural facility of
the Truth, would be as easily persuaded to return to France, as he was to come
from thence. The Spanish Statesmen seemed likewise very desirous to
accommodate Conde: But it was known that neither they nor the Archduke would
be displeased, if the Treaty might meet with some difficulty; in such a manner
notwithstanding, as that the King of France might thereby be involved in some
domestique troubles, and that the affairs abroad might not break out into open
war. As for the form of the accommodation, Conde declared publicly that he
would never trust himself integrally and freely in the Kings hands. He
propounded, that to the end his abode in France might be void of all danger,
the King might assign unto him some particular Town in Guiena, (of which
Province he was Governor) which might be farthest distant from Paris, and
the nearest that might be to the Frontiers of Spain. He afterward altered
his opinion, and was afraid of any condition which might oblige him to tarry
in France. He spoke of retiring himself into some neutrall Town of Germany, or
Italy: he seemed as if he would go into Spain; and finally he pitched upon no
certain course: Such doubts and such confusions appeared to him in whatsoever
settlement.

But the King of France his thoughts were much otherwise. He would that the
Prince of Conde should remit himself freely into his hands: being first assured
that he would forgive him all his faults. The King resolved to send the
Marquess de la Coure, one of the valiantest and most esteemed Subjects of all
France, to the Archduke, to propound this accommodation. When the Marquess
was come to Brussels, he in his first Audience, exaggerated what good turns the
King had done unto the Prince and then fell mightily to blame Condees actions,
and largely to justify those of the Kings. He told the Archduke.

That the only way to work Condees accommodation, was for him to return into
France, and to put himself wholly into the Kings hands; who would not only
sincerely pardon him, but in all benign manner receive him, and restore him to
his former favor: That he therefore desired the Archduke to persuade Conde
thereunto; which if he should seem averse unto, the King would believe for
certain, that the Archduke had made him leave France; since he had suffered
him to return to Flanders, out of an intention only of bringing him by his
means to an easier accommodation with the King.

This was the first passage between la Coure and the Archduke. To which he at
the first was answered but in generals; yet full of efficacious offers, whereby
the Archduke did again promise to do what he could to bring Conde to an
accommodation. But la Coure said in more direct terms to others, that the
Prince was received into Flanders upon express condition, that in case his
affairs should not be agreed with the King, he was to be made to go from
thence by the Archduke, and that this was no more then what the Ambassador of
Flanders had told the King at Paris. He afterward spoke of this condition
openly to the Archduke; who denied it, and said: that he had made Conde return
into Flanders merely to afford the French ministers of State means to Treat
with him, and to endeavor his reconciliation with the King, as he himself
would likewise have done without making any condition.

The Archduke wondered to hear the French speak after this manner; and thought
it not less strange to be desired by la Coure, in the Kings name, that if
Conde should be made to quit Flanders, his wife should notwithstanding be
detained there, and should be sent back to the Constable her Father, and to
Madame d' Angulesme her Aunt, by whom the Princess was brought up after her
Mothers death, who had left her very young. But the meaning of this was soon
discerned: Wherefore the Archduke and the Infanta did constantly withstand it;
answering that they would never dispose of the Princess otherwise then as the
Prince her Husband should please. During this time many overtures were made
touching Condees affairs, and the Prince of Orange, his brother in law labored
particularly therein. At last, Conde seemed to be content to withdraw himself
into some neutrall City either in Germany, or Italy, provided he might enjoy
the entertainment he received in France, which was 40000 Crowns a year. But la
Coure stood more firm then ever to his former proposition, and said;

That the King was not to capitulate with any of his Vassals, nor to consent
that the Prince of Conde should prescribe laws unto him. That therefore he
should do well to return to France, and to put himself into the Kings hands,
which if he would do, he might be sure never to hear of any thing that was
past. He said moreover, that Condees living in Germany or in Italy, were to
leave him dependant upon the Spaniard. What occasions would they thereby take
to nourish his unquietness? Would not this be to leave him as it were
deposited amongst them, whereby to trouble the King now, or France* when the
King should be dead? That therefore the King would neither live with these
suspicions, nor leave such occasion of trouble to his Kingdom when he should be
dead. That he was resolved to know, and that suddenly what would become of
Conde; and that if it should appear the Spaniards would make use of him to
those ends, the King had determined to prevent those evils which should be
prepared against France, by making Spain first sensible of the like, as much as
in him lay.

The Marquess de la Coure mixed these threats amongst his friendly mediations:
He was of himself highly spirited, and full of warlike thoughts, which were
mightily supplied in him, by the great height and reputation which the King of
France was then in. ^ut Conde would by no means hear of returning into France.
He thought not any whatsoever security safe for him to escape out of the Kings
hands. ^f he should once come within them. Orange was likewise of the same
opinion: who to make the French persuade the King to be content with the
proposition of the Prince his Brother in laws, abiding in some neutrall Town
of Germany, or Italy, showed that it would be much better to do so, then by
making the Prince despair, necessitate him consequently to throw himself wholly
upon the Spaniards. But it was impossible to make the French move any such
thing to the King. They yielded only that the Archduke might do it by his
Ambassador; who found great repugnancy in the King, and that he would never
condescend thereunto, nor ever accept of any thing, but the Prince his putting
himself freely into the Kings hands. The which the Prince was as resolute not
to do. This was the public Negotiation: But the French labored at the same
time, much more in another secret affair; which was, that they might find some
means how to steal away the Princess privately, and carry her into France. A
strange undertaking, and certainly very hard to compass: but notwithstanding
it was generally noised, and believed in Flanders. And I, affirming nothing for
certain, will only say what the public fame in that point was; which proves
notwithstanding a false witness in humain affairs; and often times fains
malignant inventions, and makes them be too easily believed by malignant
hearers. There appeared but little love between the Prince and Princess; were
it either by reason of the difference of their natures, or because she was not
well pleased to be brought out of France: or that peradventure there wanted
not some who thinking to please the King, endeavored to keep them at odds.
Wherefore without any delay, as soon as la Coure was come to Brussels, the
Princess was secretly set upon in private, to suffer her self to be conveyed
away into France. She was much in suspense, to hear of such a proposal on the
one side, she was not much satisfied with the Prince: she abhorred to be in the
Spaniards hands; she was not well pleased with the Court of Flanders, as too
much differing from that of France: she mightily desired to be with her
Father and Aunt, who by very kind Letters appeared to desire the like. But on
the other side, to part thus with her Husband; to suffer her self to be stolen
away in secret; to go away with so much danger of being brought back: and to
expose the success thereof to such variety of judgment as would be thereby
soon occasioned, were all of them reasons which might make her very unresolute
what to do. After having a while wavered between these ambiguities; overcome at
last by her still increasing desire of returning to France, she consented to
suffer her self to be carried thither, out of her Fathers and her Aunts often
instigations, and pressing her to return to Paris. The design of the French
was, to steal her by night privately out of Brussels, and to advance so far
toward the nearest consines of France, as when they should be discovered they
could not be overtaken. But many things were to be prepared before they could
execute this their design. They must either scale the walls of the City, or
make holes through it: they must have pacing Horses in Brussels, and in sundry
stages between it and France, to set the Princess on; and at the same stages
have horsemen who might oppose such as should come from Brussels to stay her.
There was therefore many difficulties in the business; and great foresight was
to be had to prevent them; so as it was impossible it should be carried so
secretly, but that it must be smelt. Count Buckquoye was the first that
discovered it, General of the Artillery in Flanders, who suddenly acquainted
the Archduke and Spinola with it. And taking into consideration what course was
best to be taken to frustrate the design; it was thought fittest, without
making of any noise, under some color, or other to bring the Princess into
the Palace to be near the Infanta. The Archduke and Spanish Off^cers took
their pretense from those dislikes which were observed between her and the
Prince her Husband, and carried the business so, as that the Prince himself
should make the motion. To the which he was easily persuaded; having a short
promise both from the Archduke and the Infanta, not to suffer his wife to
depart from them without his knowledge. It was thought the Princess her self
would be content to be with the Infanta; as well out of the little satisfaction
she seemed to receive in the Prince her Husbands company; as out of hope that
when her Husband should be gone, she might the easilier obtain her liberty, and
return to France. Out of these hopes she was content to be brought^ near the
Infanta, till she saw what the event would be of the Prince his business.
The Marquess de la Coure was likewise herewith content; but did not
notwithstanding forgo his plot of stealing the Princess out of Flanders. He
saw that if this business had been well handled, it might soon have been done,
and would have been a great shame to the Spaniards, and a lively resentment of
that distaste which his King had taken against them. Whereas it would be a hard
matter to get the Princess out of the Palace when she should once be there.
This was the crafty proceeding of the one and the other party, each hoping to
delude the other. The day was now at hand wherein the Princess was to be
received into the Palace, and the French were not yet in readiness to effect
their design: So as to gain some delay of time they had recourse to this
remedy. They thought (though they were therein deceived) that Marquess Spinola
was in love with the Princess: amongst other things she danced admirably well,
and took much delight therein, wherefore they made her pray Spinola to prevail
so far with the Archduke and the Prince her husband, as that her coming to live
in the Palace might be put off for three or four days: feigning that she very
much desired first to see an intertainment and mask which was to be made in the
Prince of Orange his house, and where Spinola's self was to bring the music,
as the custom of France and Flanders is: but Spinola perceived the concealed
cunning, and in as handsome terms as might be, made it so difficult a
business, as the Princess grew out of all hope of procuring the mentioned
delay. The French were troubled at this answer; but it withheld them not from
their design: it was on a Sabbath day the 13 of February, the year 1610. and
the next Lords day 'twas thought for certain that the Princess was to come to
the Palace: whereupon the French ordering their affairs the best they could,
resolved however to venture upon the business that very night: and lest the
Prince by lying with her (though he did so but very seldom) might disturb the
plot, they made her counterfeit to be sick the night before. The French
Ambassadors Lady, who was of the plot, kept still by her: La Coure likewise,
and the French Ambassador were not long absent from her; and all of them stood
longing that the day might pass over, which preceded the desired hour of the
succeeding night. This mean while Count Buckquoi advertised the Archduke how
all things passed: Conde knew not as yet of any thing that has been said; for
the Archduke hoping that the plot would fall of its self by the Princess her
coming to the Palace, had not acquainted him with it, that he might not afford
him any occasion of divulging it, and consequently of irritating the King of
France with further distastes: but seeing affairs thus far advanced, he thought
it good that Spinola should communicate the whole business to Conde, as he
did: and counseled him to desire the Archduke that he would set a certain
number of his own horse-guard* that night to guard the Prince of Orange his
house* Conde was amazed to hear of this, and forthwith went to the Archduke,
who gave speedy order for the desired guard: Conde entering hereupon into new
suspicions, it is not to be said how much he was troubled: and not able to
contain himself, he was not well come from the Archduke, when he began to
divulge it in the outer rooms; so as it was suddenly known every where; he did
not speak, he rather exclaimed against the King; against la Coure, and the
French Ambassador in ordinary; taking on, and afflicting himself as if his
wife had already been taken away; and as if she were already at Paris. The news
was by this time come to the Princess her chamber, where la Coure was together
with the French Ambassador, and diverse other Frenchmen; the trouble which
they were all in, to hear this, was no less then what appeared in Conde when
he was in the Palace; since they saw the plot was discovered; the present
advice was to deny it if need should be, and by complaining, to prevent
complaints; wherewith la Coure and the Ambassador in ordinary went instantly
from the Prince of Orange his house, leaving the Princess much perplexed: to
whom Conde being returned, and having laid aside his former fear, he together
with Orange and the Spanish officers seemed to lay all the blame upon the
French, and that they had treacherously plotted to convey away the Princess by
violence: it cannot be said what concourse of people flockt presently to Orange
his house: and what confusion and noise there was that night in Brussels: the
guard which the Archduke had granted unto Conde, came armed into Orange his
house: and 500 more armed Townsmen which Orange had procured from the supreme
Magistrate of the City; so as the horror of so many arms increased by that of
the night, together with the novelty of the business it self, brought almost
all the rest of the people thither, and bred one of the greatest tumults that
was ever known in Brussels: and 'twas given out by a popular voice, and
believed, that the King of France was himself in person at the City gates to
carry away the Princess by force. But to return to la Coure, and the
Ambassador in ordinary, as soon as they were gone from Orange his house, and
saw so great a tumult, they resolved to go immediately to the Archduke, and to
complain mightily of him concerning what was divulged, of the above said plot.
They said:

That all was invented by the Prince of Conde, the more still to honest his
flying from France, and for other ambitious ends of his own: that it might
easily be conceived the Princess could not be conveyed away to France in the
air; so as to effect her carrying away many horsemen, must of necessity have
been laid by the way between Brussels and the confines of France: she must
necessarily be conveyed out of a house, full of company: the walls of the City
must either have been scaled, or had holes made through them; and many other
things must have been provided for; and above all things impenetrable secrecy;
which preparations if they should have been made, how should not the news
thereof been brought to Brussels, as well of the people that must have been
sent from France, as of some of the so many provisions which must have been
made? how was it to be believed that the Princess, a Lady of tender years, so
tenderly brought up, could travel two long days journey from Brussels, to the
nearest parts of France, so speedily as she should not be overtaken? that by
all these reasons it did clearly appear, that the business was not only not
ever plotted, but never dreamed of, which was to be imagined totally
infeasable: that fraud abhors the light; and that therefore this was composed
by night, the better to mask it over with darkness: that Conde was the
Architect thereof, assisted by some Officer of Flanders, ill-minded toward
France: and since by this calumnious invention, the Princess was so much
scandalized in her honor, and their Kings reputation so much at stake, they
desired the Archduke that the truth might be made to appear, to the end that
proportionable resentment might be had. The Archdukes answer was.

That he had thought such a plot to be very unlikely; but that on the other
side Conde was very confident in his affirming it to be true; that he had been
so earnest in desiring to have a Guard in the Prince of Orange his house, as he
could not deny it him; that he was sorry to see businesses proceed to this
height; that he hoped the truth of the fact would at last be made manifest;
and that it would not prove any cause of spot unto the Princess, nor of
offense unto the King.

The Archduke, with such a fained answer dispatched away the Ambassadors, who
continuing their complaints, dispersed them every where abroad; especially
against Marquess Spinola, upon whose advise they saw Conde did very much rely
in all things. The common opinion was, that the French had really an intention
to carry away the Princess in manner aforesaid; and though the doing it would
have proved very difficult, yet was it not held to be impossible. Her chamber
lay upon a garden near the street; the City wall might easily have been bored
through, or else been scaled; and so they might have past over the ditch, which
was dry on that side, without any difficulty; so as the Princess being
advanced 6. or 7. hours by night, on good and swift Horses, there would have
been but little hope of over-taking her: in which time one Post being sent
after another, such a number of Horse would have suddenly been sent forth from
the nearest Frontiers of France, as might have sufficed to withstand any Forces
which might have come from Brussels to stop the Princess.

These were the reasons which made for the Spaniards side, to prove that she
might be stolen away. But whatsoever the truth was in a business which amidst
such contrary passions could hardly be found out. The Princess was brought the
very next day into the Palace, attended by a very great many. As joyful as
this day appeared to the Spaniards, it seemed as sad to the French; who thought
that the Princess was brought as a Prisoner, and as in Triumph; and the King
of France his passions taken and led captive after her. Many Posts were
forthwith dispatched away to the King, to give him notice of all these
proceedings: vvhereat the King being strangely exasperated, thinking that no
more negotiations were now to be had in Condees affairs, but that it was
better to affright him with threats, he writ him a Letter of credence to
believe what la Coure should say unto him. The which as soon as la Coure had
given him, he told him in succinct and resolute terms.

That the King to show his goodness to him, did again propound unto him his
return to France, and the putting of himself freely into his hands; that he
assured him again of a plenary pardon for all that was past; if he did not
suddenly accept of this offer, the King did from that time forward declare him
guilty of High Treason; for that he contrary to the laws of France had dared
to go out of the Kingdom without the Kings permission, and had so many other
ways offended the King, contrary to the laws of consanguinity.

Conde took time to answer, and his answer was:

That he had left France to save his honor and his life; and that necessity
quitted him of any fault: that he was ready to return if any offer should be
made him whereby he might live there in safety; that he would live and dye
faithful to the King. But that when the King should stray from all the ways
of justice, and should proceed against him by the ways of Violence, he took
all such acts as should be done against his person to be Null, and Invalid.

All things being thus much imbittered; the Prince of Conde growing more
jealous of his life, if he should stay in Brussels, a place much frequented by
Forreyners, and too near France, resolved to quit Flanders. He had his choice
of two ways to go; either toward Spain by Sea, taking ship at Dunkerk, or
toward Italy, by the way of Germany: both these were full of difficulties. In
that of the sea, he must rely upon the winds, which might peradventure either
throw his ship upon Holland, or England, or upon France it self: and it was no
less dangerous to give upon Holland or England, by reason of the near
correspondency that was between France and them. And in his passage by land,
he ran^ many more dangers; being to pass through so many, and so differen^
Countries, in many whereof Conde could in no ways be safe. All doubts being
weighed, it was at last resolved that he should go by Germany into Italy, and
should tarry at Millan, with Count Fuentes, who was Governor of that Town
then, till some other course should be taken in Spain touching his affairs. He
took his journey about the end of February* and all care was had for his
departure with what secrecy might be; his journey succeeded so well, as in a
few days he came to Millan, where he was honorably received by Count Fuentes.
Marquess de la Coure tarried not long after he was gone: La Cour's Embassy
proving vain, and Conde being absolutely past into the Spaniards hands, every
bodies eyes were upon what the King of France would do; no man doubted but that
he was mightily vexed, and might think,

Was this the fruit of his past victories? that a young man, the next of kin
unto him, who ought to be at his beck, should in this manner, and upon these
pretenses, forgo France, and put himself into the Spaniards protection? become
the means of disturbing his present quiet, and the peace which he desired to
leave his children to enjoy? What accident could be a greater blemish to his
honor, and more lessen his Authority then this? Against which why should he
not now think that others in France might to the like, and that his enemies
abroad might rise against him? that Kingdoms were preserved by reputation;
which was as well their strongest support in peace, as their chiefest safety in
time of war. When once they grow despised, they are either subject to foreign
Invasions, or home Troubles; and many times to both at once. 'Twas therefore
now no longer time to loyter; and since Conde would not be entreated to return
to France, he must now be forced to do it; and be made repent his having
committed so great faults, and the Spaniards their having assisted him therein.

These passions seemed to be plainly read in the Kings countenance; and no
less visible was his desire of having the Princess back again at Paris. So as
so great and potent an agitation of mind being considered, many thought he
would maker war upon Flanders, and have the United Provinces joined with him;
and that the Archduke and Spaniards, would through fear be for^'d at last to
restore Conde and the Princess unto him, which they had denied to do by a
friendly way. But on the other side the graver and wiser sort of men could not
be thus persuaded: They judged that the King of France, being now 58 years old
would first very well weigh the dangers, which might ensue by his making a War
at those years; and having so young children, the eldest of which was not past
nine years old.

How sad times (said they) will those prove, wherein he himself failing, shall
leave his heir in so tender years, to inherit a War? under the government of a
woman? all things being doubtful abroad and wavering at home? had not he been
so forward in endeavoring the Truce of Flanders, that he might see his
neighbors at peace when he should die? what piece of folly and of blindness
would it then be, to make the War now his own, which he had strove to quench
amongst others? 'twas not to be esteemed an easy matter to set upon, and to
endanger the Provinces of Flanders; Provinces provided of a veteran Army;
fortified on the Frontiers by strong Towns, and by Rivers: inhabited by a
warlike people, and naturally enemies to the very name of France: that it was
not so likely neither, as some would persuade themselves, that the United
Provinces would join in the same designs with the King, since the same ends
which made them desire the Truce, would make them likewise desire the
continuance of it: that the violentest passions were commonly soonest over:
'twas therefore to be believed, that when the King should be free of these his
so ardent desires, he would give ear to more circumspect advice, and endeavor
rather to work an accommodation in Conde's affairs by way of good
correspondencie with the Spaniards. It would indeed be a gallant and a
memorable action, if the King violently gone in love now in his old age, should
set all France on fire, and put all Europe in commotion for a woman.

Thus did men discourse of the King of France, when Conde was gone from
Flanders: and doubtlesly it was the common opinion that these later reasons
would have outweighed the former; but men find themselves often times deceived
even when they think themselves vvisest. When God has once decreed in his
secret wisdom, that some great alteration shall happen amongst us here below
for our punishment, he first of all bereaves Princes of counsel; and suffering
them to fall from the love of the weal public, or common good, into the like
of their own blind private wills, he makes themselves the instruments as well of
their own peculiar ruin, as of the general misfortune of other men. Thus the
more ardent resolutions prevailing over the vvisest in the King of France, he
resolved to raise a new Army, and took for his pretense, that he would assist
the Elector of Brandenburg, and the Pallatine of Newburg in their possession of
the states of Cleves and Iuliers. The Emperor Rodolphus, as I touched upon at
the beginning, had sent the Archduke Leopold the year before to Iuliers; to the
end that he might take those states into sequestration in the Emperors name,
which as depending upon the Empire, the Emperor judged that of right they
should be deposited in his hands, till the cause was juridically decided.
Leopold stayed therefore in Iuliers; a good Town and strengthened by a good
Castle; and for that he feared to be driven out from thence by the aforesaid
two Princes, who were openly favored by the United Previnces, he had raised
some number of Soldiers from the time that he first entered into the Town. He
being a Prince of the house of Austria, a gallant young man, having begun to
raise men, and his possibility of being favored by the forces of Flanders,
were reasons which raised jealousies not only in Brandenburg and in Newburg,
but even in the United Provinces, and in the King of France, that his coming
thither was not without the knowledge and counsel of the Spaniards: They
seemed to apprehend lest the Spaniards under the Emperors name, might cover
some of their own designs which might prove either to put Leopold in
possession of the states of the late Duke of Cleves, or under some pretense to
enter thereinto themselves: Whereupon the King and the United Provinces had
resolved the next spring to assist Brandenburg and Newburg, and to drive
Leopold not only out of Iuliers, but out of all those parts. The affairs of
Iuliers were at this pass when the Prince of Conde went from Flanders to
Italy: The King of France thought better therefore to make use of this pretense
to raise an Army, then by openly intimating War to the King of Spain and the
Archduke, afford them opportunity to provide by time, and the easilier to
resist his forces, which at that time were very great; his large Kingdom was
then in full peace, and therefore abounded wonderfully in all things; and the
glory he had won in War, had got him so great a power in peace, as it is not
known that every any King had more. The Nobility* Parliaments, and all the
other Orders strove who should be most at his beck; and that which was most to
be wondered at was, that it was not well known vvhither he were more beloved
or feared by his subjects: and the French being by nature quick, and the
Gentry generally given to Arms, it might be believed, that the King would find
as much readiness in them to take up Arms as he could desire: he made no
delay; he sent forthwith many Commissions into diverse Countries to raise men,
to provide Ammunition, victuals and what else was necessary to make up a potent
Army. France was in a short time full of armed men, and all things were ready
for motion: to boot with the soldiery which were raised in France, the King
gave order for raising a good number of Swissers: And out of his Treasury,
(which was thought to contain above five Millions of gold, and was not as yet
touched) great quantity of money was drawn to make the speedier provisions.
But the Archduke and Spinola held that the King of France had some other end in
these his preparations: they thought that by these threats the King would the
more enforce his practices, which he still continued in Brussels of re-having
the Princess; and that losing all hope at last of regaining her, he would
reduce so great a preparation, to so many men only as should be needful to send
to the succor of Brandenburg and Newburg; in prosecution of the aforesaid
practice, Monsieur de Preau was newly come from France in the name of the
Constable, and Madam d' Angulesme: but he brought with him likewise Letters
from the King to the Archduke of such eager contents, as he was rather taken to
be sent from the King himself then from the Constable and Madam d Angulesme:
These were his desires to the Archduke; That the Queen of France her Coronation
being shortly to be solemnized, the Constable and Madam d Angulesme desired
that the Princess might be at it to serve the Queen upon this so solemn
occasion her self in person; that they did both of them likewise desire to have
the Princess with them to assist her in endeavoring a divorce between her and
her husband, who had carried her out of France against her will; offended her
highly at Brussels; placed her by force with the Infanta; and deprived her of
that liberty which by all laws was allowed to every private woman, in case of
divorce, much more to so eminent a Princess. These were the principal reasons
alleged by Preau, to persuade the Archduke and the Infanta to permit the
Princess to return to France. Answer was made, that the Princess came into
their Palace of her own accord; that the Prince her husband had placed her
there, and la Coure himself had agreed thereunto: That though she were with
them, the divorce and all things conducing thereunto might be treated of; and
finally that they had engaged their word unto her husband not to deliver her up
into any ones hands but his own; so as it did not consist with their honor to
falsify their promise. Preau replied, that the Archduke and Infanta could not
do it, because it was against all Laws of justice: that the rule of all Laws
and Tribunals was, that the wife who was evilly entreated by her husband,
should have free liberty to be parted from him, and to go whither she pleased
to sue out her Divorce: that he did believe the Princess should not want this
liberty though she tarried with the Infanta; but that she her self did desire
rather to be with her Father and Aunt, and in her own friends hands, that so
she might the better govern her affairs; that this could not be denied her; and
lastly, that the King of France would never endure, as long as he had any
Forces to command, that she should receive so open an outrage. The Archduke
excused himself chiefly upon his tie of Honor, and desired that some way of
accommodation might be thought on; that if any way could be found out whereby
with safety to his and his wives honor, the Princess might return to France,
he would willingly accept of it; but the French would admit of nothing, but
that the Princess should be freely restored to her Father and her Aunt; and
pressed the Archduke the more hereunto, for that they found him wavering: The
Archduke was at last contented, to make it be propounded to the French, that
when it should be declared by any competent way that the Princess should be
wholy left to her own liberty, he and the Infanta would be contented to let
her go whither she pleased; by these words, [competent vvay] the Archduke
seemed to understand the Pope: who should determine this point either by himself
at Rome, or by either of his Nuntios in France, or in Flanders: which would
suddenly be decided one way or other; since this was not to enter upon the
merits of the cause of Divorce, but only to resolve where the Princess should
in the mean while be: yet would not the French admit of this neither; they
doubted the length of time; and they considered the Archduke as one in a manner
not at his own command, the Spaniards having too great an interest in all his
affairs and counsels; and particularly the Marquess Spinola, whom they did
very much distrust.

But it was now time for the Archduke and Spinolasts to think of somewhat else
then treaty by words; The Swissers began already to fall down into France; and
all provisions formerly spoken of with all diligence prepared. The flour of the
Nobility of France could not be more forward to take up Arms and follow the
Kings person; who though he sometimes varied in publishing the form of his
going, was still resolute to go. He told the Ambassadors of Spain and
Flanders, that he would go himself in person to assist his friends, and to put
them into their due possession of the states of Cleves and Iuliers: upon other
occasions, he would let himself be freely understood, that he would go himself
to free the Princess out of Prison: and to revenge the wrong which the King of
Spain and Archduke had done him in taking the Prince of Conde into their
protection. The Archduke was advertised of all this, by his own Ambassador
resident at Paris, and by the King of Spains Ambassador. He therefore thought
it no longer time to delay making such provisions as was thought necessary to
oppose the King of France, if he should really resolve to turn his Forces upon
Flanders. His Army was at this time very much diminished; for presently after
the Truce all the Dutch were cashiered, many of the Walloons, and a great part
of the Horse: which was done to lessen the expense, which had been so excessive
in so long a War: so as the King of Spain and the Archduke had not then above
10000 Foot and 1500 Horse; all of them notwithstanding old and expert
soldiers: The scarcity of money was likewise very great; so as the Archduke
and Spaniards were in a great straight, being of necessity to raise 12000
Foot, and 2000 Horse; and having no money to do it. The Archdukes first
resolution was to send Don Fernando Girone into Spain, one of the chief Spanish
Commanders in all the Army, to persuade the King to send 400000 Crowns
immediately into Flanders, whereby to raise the aforesaid Forces, and for other
Provisions which were to be made, against the King of France his preparations;
and in the mean while, with such moneys as could be come by, they began to
raisemen. 'Twas resolved that there should 6000 Dutch be raised, 6000 Walloons,
and for the present only 600 Harquebuziers on Horseback, which sort of Horse
they wanted, all their other Horse being either Launcers or Curaziers; the
Archdukes intention was to make use of all the old soldiers in the field, and
to set the new men to guard the Frontiers; which because they required good
Garrisons both toward France, and toward the United Provinces; 'twas thought
that the Spanish field Army could not exceed 12 or 14 thousand Foot, and 2500
Horse; as for the King of Fance his Army, 'twas esteemed to be, 30000 Foot,
part Swissers and part French, and 5000 Horse: The Royal Cornet being therein
comprehended, which in France is called the White Cornet, which the flower of
the French Nobility use to bring up behind when the King himself is in person
in the Field: affairs were hastened every day more and more on the Kings side,
and great store of Victuals, Ammunition for War and Artillery began to be sent
to those Frontiers of Campagnie and Piccardy which lay toward Flanders: and
the Town of Schallone was designed for the Rendezvous of the French Army. This
was the state of affairs in the end of April, 1610. at which time the same
King, to boot with the preparation of his own Forces, held strait Intelligence
with the King of England, and the United Provinces, to make them likewise move
against Flanders. He was of great Authority with the United Provinces, and
maintained at his own cost 4000. French Foot, and 200. Horse in their Army; so
as he thought to draw them easily over to side with his designs; and to
induce the King of England thereunto also out of hopes of gaining something
thereby himself. And not content with these managements of affairs against
Flanders, he stirred up others in Italy by the Duke of Savoy (who was then
greatly alienated from the Spaniards) and the Commonwealth of Venice to make
some commotion on that side also against the State of Millan. But his ends in
Italy ended not here. He thought that the very occasion of so many Forces on
foot at once against the King of Spain, might invite the Pope to think upon the
Kingdom of Naples; and to incite also all others on all sides* who were jealous
of so great a power, to endeavor to bring it lower. Neither did he despair of
carrying his victorious Forces in this conjuncture, into Germany, and to find
his name in so great renown there also, and such the correspondency of his
Friends, as that he might take the Empire from the House of Austria. So was he
set on at the same time by hatred against the Prince, and love to the
Princess; but especially by the fiercest of Enemies, the too great Felicity
which he found himself to be in. But his chiefest design at this time was
upon Flanders; and the whole body of his Forces met upon the Frontiers: So as
the Archduke and the Spaniards began very much to fear the Affairs of Flanders;
doubting lest by so many and so hotly pursued practices against the Crown of
Spain, the Forces of that Monarchy might be diverted elsewhere, so as not to
be able well to supply the particular needs of Flanders. To which it was also
to be added, that Spain was at this time in great commotion, by reason of the
expulsion of the Moors out of all the King of Spains Kingdoms. The Archduke and
the Spaniards did notwithstanding hope, that the United Provinces (whose Forces
were very considerable) would not be brought, without any necessity of their
own, to break the Truce, but they would only assist the King with some of
their men, which would notwithstanding be a reinforcement of great Importance,
by reason of the condition of their Soldiery, which was very choice, and long
Verst in Arms. As for the King of England, they thought they needed not fear
him at all, nor that he was to adhere unto the King of France his designs: as
well by reason of his natural addiction to peace and quiet, as for the
scarcity of money which he was in, and that he would be jealous of the King of
France his growing any greater. For the other practices in Italy, and in
Germany, the Archduke and the Spaniards did not much regard it. So as all the
danger being reduced into Flanders, and it being clearly seen that the tempest
of the French Forces was to fall there, the Archduke and the Spaniards made
what provision they could to withstand them. At this time, Answers came very
hot from Spain, which promised the desired moneys should be suddenly sent, and
all things else that was needful, not only to withstand the King of France,
but even to carry the war home into his own Kingdom: Whereupon the Archduke
being encouraged, hastened the raising of new men, and resolved to take into the
Flanders Army a thousand of Archduke Leopolds Horse, and 1500. of his Foot:
which Leopold for want of money could not maintain. He had appointed at the
same time Filippeville, a Town in the County Namure, toward the Frontiers of
Champaigne for his place of Muster; and resolved to go himself into the Field,
if the King of France should do so^ The 17. day of May was already appointed
for the Archduke to be in the Town of Namures, near Filippeville, at which time
the Army should be brought to the place of Muster, or Rendezvous.

Monsier de Preau forbear not all this while to continue his Negotiations at
Brussels; at which time the Princes seemed to live much discontented, and
openly called the Archdukes Palace her Prison. And she her self in writing
declared unto them, that she ought by the way of right and just^ce be set at
liberty. She would be some whole days, and not suffer her self to be seen by
any one; and endeavored by all possible demonstrations to show how highly she
was displeased to be detained in that manner in Brussels. But the King of
France appearing more resolute then ever in his design of war; and declaring
however, that he would in his own Person succor Brandenburg, and Newburg, he
had some new discourse with the Ambassador of Flanders at Paris, and moved him
that he might have leave to pass through Luxenburg: With which motion the
Ambassador suddenly acquainted the Archduke. The Kings pretense was not
unknown; and 'twas thought that the two Princes themselves would be very
jealous, to see so many French in Arms, and the King himself in Person, in
their Country; lest that by such a succor, they might become a prey to the
succourer. So as the Archduke esteeming that this was rather a first intimation
of War, and that whether the King should be permitted, or denied to pass,
would be a point of great importance: He thought much upon it,; whereupon
several consultations were had between him and his chief Commanders, as well
concerning this point, as how the War against the King should be governed.
There were at this time two men chiefly esteemed in the Flanders Army. The one
a Spaniard, Don Luis di Valasco, General of the Horse; and the other a Dutch
man, Count Buckquoi, General of the Artillery: both which had formerly past
with much commendation through all the inferior Charges of the Militia. As
they were one day in Council what to resolve in things of so high concernment,
Valasco desirous that his opinion should be clearly known, and that particular
notice might be taken thereof in Spain, spoke thus;

When I consider, (most powerful Prince) our affairs in Flanders, compared
with those of the King of France, I find ours so short of his, as it is now
more time then ever, to be cautious and secure in our Councels. We all agree
in one supposition, that your Highness cannot have above 12 or 14 thousand
Foot, and 2500. Horse; an Army which though it consist almost all of old
Soldiers, yet in my opinion it ought not to be thought sufficient to Face the
King of France his Army, which will have twice our numbers in it. No doubt his
Foot will not compare with ours; but so great an advantage in number is too
considerable. And then if the French Horse be usually better then those of all
other Nations, how much better will they prove now then our Cavallery? since to
boot with their odds of number, theirs will be made up of the prime Nobility of
France, who in this present occasion will wait upon the Kings Person. And how
much will the Kings new men be encouraged and strengthened by the old
Soldiers of the United Provinces, who certainly will assist his Forces against
ours, either by a Bravado, or in breaking the Truce with us, in this so
opportune conjuncture. It is therefore my opinion that by all means that may
be we should shun incountring the King of France, and all occasions of giving
him Battle: and consequently my Vote shall go, that he be permitted to pass
through Luxenburg, since our affairs stand so now as we cannot hinder him. And
as for the form of warring, since in my judgment we are to keep our selves
upon the Defense, my counsel shall be, that our Army may move from
Filippeville, our place of Muster, toward that part as the King of France his
Army shall move, and that we may always coast him on this side the Mause.
Thus making use of the River, as of a large and deep Ditch; and of her Banks as
of a firm and invincible Rampiere, it shall not be in the Kings power to
assault us: and on the other side, it will be in our power to keep him from
entering into the best and chiefest parts of these Provinces. And if the King
shall this mean while make himself Master of the Field on that side the River,
he will find but few places on that side to make himself Master of, and he
shall find those few so united, as in taking them he shall lose much time, and
many soldiers, which will suffice to break the first violence of his Army.
Thus putting out selves in this strong and secure posture of Defense, we shall
fight without fighting, and we shall without danger, overcome this first
dangerous motion of the King of France his Forces. The mean while powerful
Aids will come to us from Spain both of men and money* and this meanwhile also
the French Forces which shall be turned against these Provinces may be weakened
by many diversions, whilst we may make ours descend from the Pirenean
mountains against France, and prejudice him by our Fleets in the Mediterranean
Sea, and in the Ocean; and may cause some inward Commotion in that Kingdom. The
French (as all men know) are born to Novelties; and seek out troubles no less
then others shun them, which they are ready to throw amongst Forreiners, but
more amongst themselves. To this purpose, if easy matter might have been
formerly hoped for out of their natural unquietness, how much easilier will
it be found now that the Prince of Conde is gone from them, and is in our
hands? How great commotion of tumults will the sudden setting up of this great
ensign there cause? nor can they be more justly excited. Let them make trial
of fire at their own homes, who will kindle it in other folks houses. And all
the evil that over-hang the assailed, let it fall on the heads of the
assaylers. Lo, thus we are happily past from the Defense to the Offense, so to
make the King of France repent his rash undertaking of so unjust a War* And
unless he be more blind in matter of Government, then what he appears to be
in his amors, we will make him aware of the difference of overcoming weak
Women, and working them to his desires, and of taking up Arms against such
Forces as are those of my King, and Yours, which together do make so Formidable
a Power. The King of France might remember your Highness Victories, when clad
in Purple, and still a Cardinal, you made such important progress against him
in his own Kingdom. I hope they will be no less that you shall make upon this
present occasion, after you shall have sustained the first brunts, at which
the French are only good. They will easily be withstood, in my opinion, in
the manner I have said; and all things turning afterward to our advantage,
new glory shall be added to your Highness, new reputation to the affairs of
Spain, more safety to those of Flanders, and infinite honor and satisfaction
to us Soldiers, by such prosperous success, as shall arise from this War.

Buckquoy spoke thus to the contrary: If those remedies (most illustrious
Prince) which in these present necessities of Flanders ought to be expected
from Spain, were as easily to be effected as it is easy to discourse of them, I
should likewise be of the same opinion of standing now upon the defensive part
with the King of France: but I cannot believe, that such aids as we at present
stand in need of here, can come from Spain either in so short a time, or in so
great a measure as has been supposed: So many years experience may have taught
us, that by reason of the great distance of space, Counsel, and then succors
much more, do most commonly come from thence hither when it is too late; and that
by reason likewise of the so immmense bulk of that so divided Monarchy, the
provisions destined for Flanders are always very weak when they do come, being
diverted by the so many members whereof the body is composed: we may then fear
that upon this immergent occasion, provisions from those parts may meet with
the wonted obstructions; nay, with more then usual. The Indian Fleet is not yet
expected these many months: whole Spain, is now in commotion by reason of the
expulsion of the Moors; and the taking up of Arms which the Duke of Savoy
threatens in Malta, is likewise a business of great consideration: so as these
are all immediate diversions, and which undoubtedly make for the King of France
his advantage; whereas those which have been thought upon for the affairs of
Flanders are all of them doubtful, and depend upon future success: Wherefore I
am of opinion, that it will be hard to hope for such supplies from Spain, as
will suffice to maintain the new Forces which are by us now added to the old:
It must therefore be granted, that if your Highness shall suffer the King of
France his Army to join with the Veteran Soldiery of the United Provinces,
the King must of a sudden become so potent, as that he will be absolute master
of the Field, not only on that side, but even on this side the Mause. For why
may not he pass over the River either at the Bridge of the Town of Hue, in the
Neutral Country of Liege, or in some other part, without being hindered by us?
may he not then get in hither, go whither he pleases, and do what he will? And
though the United Provinces were not before inclined to break into open War
against these Countries, is it not to be feared, that invited by so fair an
occasion, they may do it now? will not our affairs be then brought to the last
point of despair? it is a known saying, That in extreme evils, we are to have
recourse to extreme remedies; the sword heals those wounds which lenitives
cannot do; and to despise dangers, proves sometimes the best way to escape
them. I am then of opinion, that the present condition of the affairs of
Flanders being considered, it is necessary to put on hazardous and bold
resolutions, since without manifest loss of all these Provinces, circumspect
and cautious counsels cannot be admitted of. I think you ought resolutely to
deny the King of France, his passage through Luxenburg; that as he moves his
Army toward your Frontiers you shall move yours toward his, and go to meet
him, and hinder him from meeting with the Veteran Sou^d^ers of the United
Provinces. I must confess this resolution has likewise its dangers; but the
others me thinks are greater and more apparent: The hazards of this, depend
upon the event, which in Battles is always doubtful: nor can it be denied, but
that the King of France is a gallant Commander, and that he will have with him
all the flower of his Nobility on Horseback; yet if on the otherside we shall
consider our men, bred up amongst Arms; so long and so well disciplined;
accustomed every day to action and Battles: and who shall have your self in the
head for their Commander; why should we not hope that our Army should have the
better of the King of France his Army? my hopes are not a whit the less for
their being more in number: it is not numbers, but worth; not confusion, but
order: not the first onset, but the constant fighting, which gets the victory:
our squadrons of Foot will be satiated with blood in killing the Swissers, who
will be they alone who will make any resistance: they will easily put to flight
the French Foot, and will so enhearten our Horse as we may also hope to be
victors on that side; so you shall see (as I hope) the War begun and ended at
the same time: and so you shall see a new place made famous in these Countries,
which peradventure may not give place to that of St. Quintaine, Gravelin, and
Dorlan, all of them famous for the defeats which they in former times have
given to the French, thereby winning so much honor to our Flanders Armies. And
it may so fall out, that the King of France, when he shall see our men march so
resolutely against his; may alter his mind from assailing these states, and may
be brought more patiently to endure those fiery onsets which he is cause of
unto himself by his so ill governed inward passions. Thus without any danger
you shall have ended a War, before it be well begun; and may afterward put on
such resolves as may be most convenient for your own affairs, for the affairs
of Spain, for the public service of Christendom, and for the particular good
of your people.

The reasons alleged by each of these great Commanders were certainly of very
great weight: on the one side, if the King of France should be suffered to join
with the Ancient Souldierie of the United Provinces, the affairs of Flanders
would be in very great danger: and on the other side, to adventure that Army
suddenly in a Battle, wherein the only hopes of supporting them lay, was
likewise a dangerous resolution. Marquess Spinola seemed to lean to the second
proposition; were it either that Buckquois reasons prevailed more with him; or
that, that counsel, which was the bolder appear^d to him the most necessary:
he appeared very desirous to be seen in so glorious a Theater, as that would
be, where a Battle should be given to so great a Prince, and so famous a
Commander as was the King of France: to boot that he had received many disastes
from the French, in their practices concerning the Princess of Conde; which
peradventure moved a greater desire in him to fight them. The Pope at this time
labored very much by Fatherly admonitions; and earnest entreaties to induce
the Princes interessed in this so great commotion, to preserve their former
friendship: and to this purpose he had particularly destined two Nuntios in
extraordinary; the one the Archbishop of Nazaret to be sent to the Court of
France, and the other the Archbishop of Chieri to be sent to the Court of
Spain.

When amidst so great perturbations, and ambiguitie of affairs, certain news
came to Brussels that the King of France was slain; the manner thus: Whilston
the 14 of May he was in his Coach in the streets of Paris, viewing the
Triumphant Arches which were prepared for the stately Coronation of his Queen;
he was murdered by the hand of a base mean Catiff, who making himself master of
the Kings life, by resolving desperately to lose his own, gave him two deadly
wounds in the flank with a long Knife. A miserable death indeed; so great a
King falling by so base hands, and in the nick of time when his greatness was
grown to that height, as France seemed not great enough to prescribe bounds
thereunto: Which may serve for an instruction to Princes, and amongst them, the
most powerful, to let them know, that miseries are mixed with their felicity,
and that on the Theater of Humane Tragedies, they often make the most fatal and
saddest Scenes.

The King of France being dead, the Prince of Conde returned Post into
Flanders: and on a sudden the face of affairs was altered. The French-mens heat
was allaied; the Spaniards were very desirous to make use of this so propitious
occasion, and to march on with their Army: But at last peaceable counsels
prevailed; and very good intelligence and correspondencie was held between
them, the Archduke, and the Queen Regent, Mother to the young King. The Prince
of Conde was still troubled with many cogitations: he pretended, as first
Prince of the Blood, the chief government of the Kingdom did of right appertain
to him, during the Kings minority: and pretended also that after his Father in
laws death, the office of Lord high Constable of France did belong to him: But
it would have caused great jealousies to have put him into that office, and
much more to have put the Kingdom into his hands; so as he at last ceased from
both these pretenses, and satisfied himself with other hopes, to have full
contentment given him in other things at his return to France. The Archdukes
were then in Merimont, and with them the Princess of Conde; who altering
likewise with the alteration of affairs seemed already desirous to be
reconciled to her Husband, and willing to return with him into France: Conde
went quickly to Merimont to do his respects to the Archdukes, by whom he was
received with like civilities as formerly; and he on his side acknowledged his
great obligations to them for their having so greatly favored his affairs. He
did the like to the Spanish State ministers; and these his first complements
being over, he returned to Brussels* where he stayed awhile with the Prince of
Orange; and then returned to Merimont, to go for France: He did not as yet see
his Wife; but their reconciliation was soon after made in France: and she very
well deserved his love, by her bearing of Chrildren to him, and no less by
her vvorth. The Constable her Father sent the Countess of Overgne (a daughter
of his also, but by another Venture) to Merimont to bring the Princess from
Flanders, and to thank the Archdukes for their having kept her with them. The
Queen sent also Monsieur de la Bar to the same place to visit the Prince, and
to invite him to come to Paris; and every day great many of the chief men of
France came to see him, and offer him their service. Three days after Conde
went away, and was met by his own Mother upon the Frontiers of France; and
being every where incountred and embraced by diverse of the Nobility, he at
last, being followed by an infinite concourse of people, entered Paris.

In which revolution of several affairs, fortune showing how she is pleased to
sport her self daily with new spectacles of humane varieties; it may suffer a
dispute, whether the manner of the Prince his departure from France was more
unfortunate, or the like of his return fortunate: He departed a Fugitive, in
manifest danger of being taken, and living long in misery, and in the horror
of Imprisonment: He returned not long after as in Triumph, with such
prerogatives of Honor and of Authority, as he might seem rather to be King
then First Prince of the Blood Royal.

FINIS.
A TABLE of the chiefest things contained in the RELATIONS.
AQuisgrane, and the description thereof page 142 Agent from England in
Brussels, and his Proposals, ibid Ayds given by Hen. the 4th to the United
Provinces in time of War 43 Amsterdam described 12 Antwerp sacked 25 Antonio
Zuarez 60 Anabaptists 75 Archduke Leopold sent to Iuliers by the Emperor 130
Archduke Albertus of a Cardinal made Governor of Flanders 31. The happy
beginning of his Government. Ibid. He marries the Infants Isabella 32. Is
routed and wounded at Newport. 33. He besieges Ostend. ib. 34. His bodily
qualities. 52. His gifts of mind. ib. He endeavors to imitate King Philip. ib.
He inclines to a composition with the United Provinces. 98. Employs Father
Neyen to introduce a Treaty. ib. 99. His opinion in the Prince of Condes
affairs 156. His endeavors to make peace between Brandeuburg and Newburg. 132.
He and the Spanish Officers are much moved touching the novelty of Iuliers.
134. He makes the Gatholick King condescend to the Treaty at Santen 150
Archdukes; how gallantly they are served. 58. Upon what Princes they confine,
and what intelligence they hold with them. 62 Archduke Ernestus Governor of
Flanders 30 Archduke Matthias goes secretly into Flanders 26. Takes upon him
the title of Kingly Governor. ib. Returns to Germany 28 Authority of the
Archpriest in England 81 Arch-Bishopricks and Bishoprics in England 78 Arch
bishoprics and Bishoprics which were in Scotland 83. Of Ireland 84 Articles
of the Truce of Flanders 35 Assembly of the particular States in Holland for
what cause called 7 The General Politic Assembly of the Hugonots in France,
how permitted then 91. The Catholic Army enters Iuliers
B
Battle of Newport 33 Brandenburg is jealous of Newburg 132 He breaks forth
into Novelties. ib. makes himself Master of Iuliers 133 Bruges 69 Brussels 70
Books written by the King of England against the Popes Authority 66
C
CAlvinists rule in the United Provinces 74 Calvinists of England ib.
Calvinisme only permitted in France 91 Capitulation at Santen, by what Deputies
subscribed 148 Chief Head of the Forces of the General Union 9 Chapters of
Shee-Cannons, and their Institution 73 Chief of the secular Clergy in England
by the name of Archpriest 81 Cardinal Granvel 19 Cardinal Andrea d' Austria
Governor of Flanders 32 Builds a great Fort ib. Catholics, how many in the
United Provinces 73 Catholics of England, how distinguished 80, etc.
Christiern Duchess Dowager of Lorain 18 Clergy Secular in Flanders 70 The
Company of the Holland Merchants do all they can to keep up Trading into the
Indies 114 Comparison between Count Maurice and Marquess Spinola 37 Conferences
of the Hugonots in France 90 Conferences and Provincial Synods of the
Hugonots, when Assembled ib. Conclusion of the Truce of Flanders 127 Conformity
between the Government of the Switzers and the United Provinces 47 Consistories
of the Hugonots in France 90 The Council which resembles the Body of the
Assembly of the particular States in Holland 6 The Council of Deputies
representing the Great Assembly General of the United Provinces, and its
Authority 8 The Council of State of the United Provinces, and its Authority
ib. The Council of State in Flanders enters upon the Government after the death
of the Commendador General 24 it resolves to drive out the Spaniards ib. The
Supreme Council of Malines 56 Particular Councels near the persons of the Arch.
Dukes ib. The particular Council of the Hugonots of France in every Province 91
Count Maurice 17 Substituted in his Fathers place 29 Wins many places in
Flanders 31 His prudence and Military worth 33 one of the greatest Commanders
in our times 36 The judgment that Henry the 4th gave of him 37 The best
Commander the United Provinces could have had ib. What Estate and Lordships he
holds 39 His age and Kindred ib. Whether he had any Design to make himself
Sovereign of the United Provinces ib. He tries all ways that the Truce may not
go on ^19 Count de Fuentes takes on him the Government of Flanders 31 Routs the
French at Dorlam. ib. Count Lodovick of Nassaw routeth the Count of Aremberg 21
Is defeated and slain at Mooch 23 Count Mansfielt Governs Flanders: a great
part of his soldiers mutiny 31 Count of Zolleren, Ambassador extraordinary from
the Emperor to the Archduke 148 The Countess of Auvergne sent to re-conduct
the Princess of Conde to Paris 172 The Court of Flanders like to that of Spain
59 The Crown of Spain receives great damages from the Rebels in the Indies 35
D
THe Davidists 75 Denmark 87 Deacons among the Hugonots in France 90 The
Declaration of Liberty claimed by the United Provinces, how interpreted by the
Archduke and the Spaniards 98 Deputies for the Archdukes to be sent into
Holland, who they were 110 Deputies for the United Provinat the Treaty for the
Truce, who they were 112 An arrogant Proposal made by them at the first
meeting 113 What Deputies were at the Treaty of Santen 148 Differences between
Spinola and Count Maurice, upon the Article of removing the Soldiery out of the
State of Cleves 149 Discord between the secular Priests and the regular in the
United Provinces, and upon what occasions 76 Discord between the secular
Clergy, and the Jesuits in England 81 Don John of Austria^ enters Flanders 25
He approves of the Peace of Gaunt ib. He seizes on the Castle of Namour ib. He
dies 26 Duke of Alanzon received by the Rebels for their Protector 26 Would
make himself their Prince 27 Returns into France 28 Duke of Alva chosen
Governor of Flanders 19 He enters the Low Countries with a potent Army 20 He
begins his Government with rigor ib. He causes Egmont and Horn to be
beheaded 21 He routeth Count Lodovick of Nassaw in Friesland ib. He drives the
Prince of Orange out of Flanders 22 He defeateth the French Hugonots succors
ib. he leaves Flanders ibid Duke of Medina Celi refuses the Government of
Flanders ib.
E
ELders amongst the Hugonots of France 90 Electors of the Empire alien'd from
King Matthias 67 The English, what ends they had in somenting the Rebellion of
Flanders 43 Suspected by the Catholic Provinces of Flanders 64 Ambassadors of
England and France jointly propose the Truce to the United Provinces 117 they
offer to make an agreement between Brandenburg and Newburg 146 The two Kings
Ambassadors and the Catholic Deputies go to Antwerp 127 The Expenses of the
Archdukes exceed their Revenues 57 How unmeasurable those of the Wars in
Flanders are grown ib Expenses of the Catholic King and Archdukes in time of
Truce 64
F
THe Faction of the Malcontents in Flanders 26 Frederick Spinola Commands a
Squadron of Galleys in the Flemmish Seas 34 Is slain in fight ib The Flemmings
neither wholly Free, nor wholly subject 55 Friar Inigo di Brizuela, a
Dominican, Confessor to the Archduke 61 The Arguments he was to make use of in
the Spanish Court, for overcoming the difficulties of the Treaty concerning a
Truce 125 The Fortification of Mulen demolished 143 The mighty Fortifications
of the United Provinces 96
G
THe Gantois 69 The Governor of Holland and his Authority 6 The Governors of
the Cautionary Towns in France, of what condition they are 94 The particular
Government of every one of the United Provinces 5 Ecclesiastical Government in
Flanders heretofore 68 Government spiritual of Catholics in England 84
Government of the States possessed by the King of Denmark 87 Politic
Government of the Hugonots of France 91 The Great Assembly of the United
Provinces, when it uses to be called 7
H
THe Hague in Holland and its Prerogatives 9 Henry the 4th King of France, what
end he had in endeavoring the Truce of Flanders 42 His Interests in Flanders
102 He is in very great Authority amongst the United Provinces 103 Henry the
8th King of England 67 How he fell into Apostasy ib. Heresy how it got into
France 89 Heretics in the Archdukes Provinces 70 High Council in Holland
Holland how Governed 4 The administration of Justice there 6 Holland and
Zealand the first Provinces that rebelled 74 Hollanders and Zealanders how they
applied themselves to Navigation into the Indies 14 Why they could never get
into the West Indies ib. House of Cleves, when it failed 129 House of Nassaw,
and its original 17 House of Burgundy 46 Anciently united with the Kings of
England 62 Hugonots of France, and their Ecclesiastical Government 89 the
division of their Provinces 90 Their Government in matters of State 91 Their
end to bring themselves to the Soveraignry ibid. Their Cautionary Towns 93 at
what charges they maintain their Garrisons ib. What intelligence they hold out
of France 94 Heretics in France how many there may be 91
I
THe Infanta of Flanders, and her personal qualities 53 She imitated the Great
Isabella of Castile ib. A Princess of admirable constancy ib. bred up in
State Affairs by her Father King Philip 54 The Interests that will keep France
and the Low-Countrys in good correspondency 42 Intimation by the Marquess of
Course, the King of France his name to the Prince of Conde 157 Irish in a
manner all Catholics 84
K
THe King of Spain is resolved that some overture of accommodation shall be
made in Flanders 98 Is of the same opinion with the Archduke, for a Treaty
with the United Provinces ib. How much he was troubled at the Invasion of
Iuliers 135 The King of France and his Interests in Flanders 102 One of the
greatest Kings that ever France had 151 Takes diverse courses for the overtaking
of Conde 153 Demands passage through Luxemburg 168 Is lamentably murdered 171
The King of England, what Heresy he follows 77 His end concerning the War in
Flanders 103 He endeavors to make his Mediation necessary to the Spuniards for
the advancing of the accommodation in Flanders 117 The King of Denmark, his
qualities of body and mind 86 His Revenue 87 What Heresy he professes 88
What correspondence he holds with other Princes ib
L
LEague between the King of France and the United Provinces 116 A Letter from
the Spanish Ambassador in Brussels to the Catholic King 146 Liberty of
Conscience, how brought into France 89 Lewis Verreychin 59 Lutherans in the
United Provinces 75
M
Marquess Spinola 33 Is made Camp-master-general 34 Makes Count Maurice rise
from the siege of Groll ib. when he came into Flanders, and upon what occasion
60 His singular qualities ib. Of very great authority in Flanders 61 provides
with wonderful speed, all that is necessary for the Army 137 Margaret Duchess
of Parma, Bastard-Daughter to the Emperor Charles the fifth, made Governess of
Flanders, 18 Ministers of the Hugonots of France, and their Office, 90
N
NEwburg takes in Dosseldorp 133 turns Catholic 135 Is very urgent for the
Archdukes Army to draw out 136 a Prince of great piety and prudence 150
Nobility of England, how to be considered in point of Religion 79 Names of the
Provinces in France according to the division made by the Hugonots 91 The
Nuntioship of Flanders what consequence it is of 66 The Nuntio of Flanders,
what he observed concerning the managing of the Truce 96 He was in the
Catholic Army, and upon what occasion 139 What Offices he did in the affairs
of Conde 155
O
OAth of Allegiance in England 81 The Opinion of Barnevelt prevails before that
of Count Maurice 110 Sundry opinions whether the K. of France would take up
arms against Flanders or not 162 Orations of Count Maurice 105 Of Barnevelt 107
of John Maldereo 118 of President Iannine 120 of Don Lewis di Valasco 168 of
Count Bucquoi 169 of Marquess Spinola 140 Ostend yielded to Marquess Spinola 34
P
THe Peace of Gaunt, and what it contains 24 Princes pretending to the house of
Cleves 129 Prince of Conde, nephew to the K. of France, first Prince of the
blood 152 married Margaret of Monmorancy ib. resolves to remove her from the
Court, and flies with her into Flanders ib. goes to Colen 153 is invited to
Brussels 154 Writes to Rome in justification of himself 155 after the Kings
death is raised to higher thoughts 171, 172 Prince of Orange father to Count
Maurice 18 his nature and qualities 19 takes to wife Ann of Saxony ib. he
enters Flanders with a new Army 21 retires into Holland ib. is wounded 28 is
slain ib. Prince of Parma Governor of Flanders gains the Malcontents 27
besieges Antwerp 29 Diverse Princes troubled to hear of the Overtures for a
Truce in Flanders 102 United Provinces what pretense they made for their rising
3 how governed before ib. with what Princes they are most at ods, and with whom
they hold best correspondence 40 begin to suspect the King of France 42 their
intelligence with the Heretical Princes of Germany 44 they have begun some
with the Turk 45 whether their new Commonwealth be likely to last ib. their
present Government defective 47 if they were inclinable to be governed by a
Monarch again, what Prince it is likely they would submit to 48 what
Declaration they claimed before they would come to any Treaty of accommodation
98 they accept of the proposal made by Father Neyen 100 they make great
rejoicing at the Declaration of Liberty ib. their description and Government
ib. Priests secular and regular in the United Provinces 66 how they frequent
Holland ib. Priests secular and regular in England, how they officiate amongst
the Catholics there 80
Q
QUeen Mary of England, and her Zeal for Religion 83 Queen Elizabeth of England
protects a new the rebels of Flanders 29 How she became (...) Heretic 67
R
Catholic Religion in the United Provinces 67 how much it flourished in
England, till H^nry the 8th fell from the Church ib. Rochell 93 Its privileges
and strength 94
S
SCotland 83 How much the Catholic Religion is oppressed there ib. Sect of
Calvin in the United Provinces 74 Parliamentary in England 77 Protestant in
England 78 Seminaries for Gatholick Missions into England 83 The memorable
Siege of Leyden 23 Spaniards, Declared Rebels by the Council of State in
Flanders 24 They resolve to be revenged ib. They engage a new in France, and
surprise Amiens 31 Their indignation at the going of the Catholic Deputies
into Holland 111 The States General of the United Provinces meet to conclude
the Truce 127 States of every Province in the Low Countries, whereof composed 3
States of the Archdukes, of what Provinces they consist 54 Supplication of the
Nobles presented to the Duchess of Parma 19
T
TYron, flying out of Ireland is entertained in Flanders 66 The Treaty of Colen
for accommodating the affairs of Flanders 27 Treaty of the Truce in Flanders 95
V
THe Vicar Apostolical in the United Provinces 66 Victory of Don John at
Geblours 26 Universities of Doway and Lovain how Catholic, and how much
devoted to the Holy See 70 University of Leyden in Holland 66
VV
VVEsel, its Situation and Government 143 Those of Wesel their amazement and
affright ib. Why they refused to take in the Soldiers of the United Provinces
ib.
FINIS.

