A Letter of Dr. Bernards to a Friend of his at COURT.
SIR,
HAving heard by some of my Friends, that there is a misapprehension of me at
Court by such as know me not, because of my acquaintance with Oliver Cromwell, I
have (by their advice) thought it expedient for my own vindication to declare
both my Sufferings by him for his Majesty's cause in Ireland, and the
continuance of them in England, and that the fruits of my frequent visiting
him, was reaped by others, and not by my self, in being an Instrument of
Preserving the Lives and Estates, and Releiving the Distresses of such as had
suffered for his Majesty, which was my continued agencie, even for strangers,
as those that had been known to me, of each of which some are here mentioned.
Whereunto (with the like advice) I have added a brief relation of my
Sufferings, (being so variously reported) in the Storm of Drogheda and after
it, an. 1649. with a satisfaction in some particulars misunderstood, as to the
Office of Almoner, which herewith I have sent unto you, and do commit it to
your prudence, as there shall be occasion. I omit my Sufferings in the Seige of
Drogheda, an. 1641. by the Irish Rebels 4. months, the whole narration of
which, was by special order published, wherein their scandal in relation to his
Majesty's Royal Father of blessed memory, was sufficiently vindicated for which
(being an. 1647. taken by a party of them) I hardly escaped death,

A Brief Relation of Dr. Bernards Sufferings for his Majesty, and of his
preserving the Lives and Estates, and Releiving the necessities of many of his
fellow Sufferers, both in England and Ireland.
I. His Sufferings in Ireland.
WHen Drogheda was taken by the Army, under the Command of the Lord Marquess of
Ormond, The Doctor was Instrumental with the Mayor of the Town, to the
Proclaiming his Majesty, and attended the Lord of Enchiquin at that Solemnity,
and immediately went to the Church, and observed the public Prayers for his
Majesty, and shortly after preached a Thanksgiving Sermon for it.

After that he waited upon the Lord Leiutennant at his Camp before Dublyn, who
afterward coming to Drogheda was a further witness of the Doctors constancy
to his Majesty, and when his Lordship was called away, upon Oliver Cromwells
landing, the Doctor being the Minister of the place, and having his family
there, could not desert them, but was left there behind, though by his friends
(especially Sir Robert Byron, apprehending his danger) he was advised to be
gone.

When that Town was Stormed and all that bare Arms in it ^ut to the sword, the
Doctor could gain no Protection (though many others had) but was left to the
mercy of the Soldiers, so as all he had was taken from him, and himself
designed to Death, by many that had vowed it, though by Gods special mercy he
was preserved, too large to be inserted here.

After this he was turned out of his Benefice at Drogheda, and Sent for up to
Dublyn as a Delinquent; and there committed by Cromwell himself in the open
streets, in the midst of his officers, with menaces of Death for his promoting
of the Kings service as before said, and was close prisoner 17 days, and upon
security was confined within the City of Dublyn for 6 months after.

One special charge against him then, was his continuance of the use of the
Book of Common Prayer, in his Church to the last, notwithstanding the
Inhibition sent to him by Colonel Michael Jones, who thereupon stopped all the
payments which had been allowed him.

His Concio ad Clerum, when he took his degree of Doctor at Dublyn, 1642. was
then remembered against him, wherein he had at larg declared, that the taking up
of Arms then against his Majesty's Royal Father of blessed memory, was
unlawful, according to the Text, (Romans 13.2.) whereupon a relief intended him
out of England, was stopped by the Commissioners of Parliament then in Dublyn.

II. His Sufferings in England.
THough he were permitted by Cromwell to preach at Greys-Inne, yet he was
rendered incapable of any other Benefice, when by the joint desire of the
Parishoners of St. Martins in the Fields, he was invited thither, and had
several other offers.

And when the Earl of Bridgewater had bestowed upon him a living worth 400
pound a year, and he was legally inducted to it, yet upon Cromwells testimony
of his proclaiming his Majesty, as aforesaid, he could not be permitted to
enjoy it.

III. His endeavors to preserve many of the Lives and Estates, of such as have
suffered for his Majesty.
SIr Maurice Eustace, and about five or six others, who were eminent in the
Kings service, being committed together prisoners at Chester, their release
both as to England and Ireland, were obtained by him, their acknowledgment of
which he has under all their hands in one paper.

He obtained a pardon for Sir Robert Byron, when he was condemned to dye by
Hewson at Dublin.

He procured the like for the Lord Grandison. He obtained an order for Major
Perkins, to be restored to his Estate in Ireland.

And for his service to the Lady Marchioness of Ormond at her coming out of
France, when She was remanded back gain, he humbly submits to her Ladyships own
testimony.

He procured about 300 l. for Sir Henry Tuchborn, after he had with his Lady
and family attended long in vain, and was in despair of any; and obtained for
him several orders, touching his estate in Ireland, and the like for Sir
Francis Willowby with many others.

When a barbarous and cruel order was made against the Episcopal Clergy to
their utter undoing; he did boldly deliver his sense of it, and prevailed with
the late Primate of Ireland to come to Town of purpose, in hope that his
Authority might have prevailed with Cromwell, and others to revoke it: and for
three weeks together, attended upon his Graces endeavors therein though it
proved ineffectuall; and when there was an offer for a contribution for them
throughout England, (so as they might have Cromwells license for it;) the Dr.
improved his utmost interest to obtain it, and petitioned for them in his own
name, and put his hand to it, he delivered their remonstrance or petition: and
what else was penned by others for that end (which has been since published)
was delivered to Oliver Cromwell by his hand.

He obtained several letters of recommendation, for persons in Ireland (as the
now Bishop of Kilmore and others) and orders for keeping in and restoring
Ministers (as Mr. Hunt of Chester and others) to their Benefices and Estates in
England and was a constant Agent for them: and though his endeavors were not
always answered with a desired effect, yet his trouble was the same; and the
charge in letters, and returns in those solicitations was not small. Some
being cast into prison ( as Sir Thomas Armstrong who was a long time in the
Gate House) he solicited their business to his utmost endeavor for their
release: others condemned to dye, he did the like for their pardon or reprivall.

IV. His Relief of those who suffered in their Estates and Liberty, for his
Majestty, which was the cause of his acceptance of the Almoners place, that he
might be serviceable to that end. He disbursed
TO Dr. Bromrigg the late Bishop of Exeter (the receipts of which are ready to
be produced) 150 l. To the late Lord (...) is ready to be produced) 250 l. To a
Lord of Ireland, 10 l. To a Bishop of Ireland (for a debt compounded for) 15 l.
To the ^ame Bishop in his extreme poverty at several times, 20 l. To a Dean of
Ireland 8 l. To Mr. Durant a Sequestered Minister (who had 10 children) 6 l. To
a Captain, who was at Drogheda when it was stormed, and now in Virginia 20 l.
To Dennis Sheriden (who coming from Brussels, was conceived to have been
employed into Ireland upon his Majesty's service) 8 l. To a Captain who had
been faithful to the Lord Leivetenant in Ireland, being poor, at several times
30 l. To many other distressed Persons, Ministers, Widows, and others of
quality relating unto Ireland, who are unwilling to have their names mentioned,
50 l. To diverse Sequestered Ministers, and others of quality, as meaner
persons, in their several distresses in England 40 l. To John Allen, the Lord
Primates old servant, 8 l. To a person of some Eminency, upon the complaining
of his poverty, the Doctor (having then no money) gave him a Deputation for
receiving the Almoners dues, in 2 or 3 Counties, without account. He had once
prepared 60 l. for his Majesty's Servants, but Cromwrl at that instant time
sent for him, and commanded him to give so much to the Jews, and accordingly 40
l. was paid to Manasses Ben-Israel whose receipt he has, and Cromwell took the
other 20 l. from him, pretending to pay it himself. Besides what he gave to
some Germans, and other Outlandish persons, commended unto him, as to a Turk,
baptized by Mr. Gunning, for clothes 8 l. 60 l.
About a year before Oliver Cromwells death, he was complained of, for giving
what he had received as Almoner to disaffected persons, and thereupon was
called to an account: which he (knowing the danger of) deferring, he had been
(...) Cromwell had lived a month longer.

In a word, he laid up nothing for himself (out of it) as he might have done,
being without account, but by the losses he has suffered, and the many suites
wherein he has been engaged, while he had the office, and since it was taken
from him, he is the worse by 300 l.

V. In Relation to the Lord Primate of Ireland, he has been further
serviceable as follows.
The transcribing of a great Manuscript which had been his 50 years study,
(worthy of Dedication to his Majesty) which was so interlin'd that it could not
else be Printed, Laid out, and engaged for it -- 40 l.

He was at great labor and expense in the constant solicitation and receipt of
his Pension; which for one quarter only was paid at the rate of 400 p. and
after at 160 p. a year, as also for what was promised after his death to his,
which through the iniquity of the times was not performed, who used this fraud,
in calling that a grant, which was only signed, but not suffered to be sealed.

The Dr. preached his Funeral Sermon, buried him according to the book of
Common Prayer, and obtained 200 l. to defray the charges of the Funeral.

VI. In further Manifestation of his Integrity.
As he ever used freedom of speech to Cromwell in defense of Episcopacy, and
the sequestered Clergy both in public and private, so he never altered his
habit, though it caused him many affronts from the Phanatick party: and being
once prevailed with to preach at the Cockpit, where were diverse of his
Council and other grand Enemies to his Majesty, he took his Text out of the 1.
Tim. 3. In the last days, etc. men shall be traitors, etc. Having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof.

A Bishop had once consecrated a Chapel, according to the usual form: the
Ministers in the Diocese combined in a Petition against him, the Dr.
interceded, and so ordered the business, that he was dismissed and heard no
more of it.

He omits the gratuities, he gave to such as did assist him in the obtaining of
diverse suites for those that were distressed, and even to the meaner servants,
for some seasonable admittance for those ends; and the long attendance till 11
a clock at night, taking a lodging frequently there abouts, upon such
occasions, often to the hazard of his health and life, in cold and unseasonable
weather, all which he would have given over l^^g before, being every way
displeasing to him, by the hatred of the Army, and the Ministers there
attending, but that it was the request of diverse distressed persons to
continue it.

When the Army and City of London were at difference, (under the Committee of
Safety) before General Monck appeared, he had prevailed with a principal
person for the uniting of both, and Proclaiming of his Majesty in London, upon
his undertaking to have procured their pardon, and it was once so far proceeded
in, that he was preparing to go beyond Seas for that end.

His often free and faithful discourse with the L. General Monk himself, in
relation to his Majesty, when his actions were variously interpreted, he
submits to his Testimony.

For these nine years past at Grayes-Inne he has according to the Book of
Common Prayer celebrated the Communion, and did the like elsewhere. In
Baptism, Marriages, Burialls, etc. never using any other.

And the employing his endeavors in some tracts published for an accommodation
betwixt the Episcopal and Presbyterian parties, has been in order to his
Majesty's service, and the Church, wherein he is still ready to spend himself.

The Rectifying of some misapprehensions of him, concerning the Office of
Almoner.
THe Dr. was not absolutely made Almoner by Oliver Cromwell, but only joined
in the Patent with Dr. French his Brother in Law (by which what little interest
was intended for him, does easily appear) and he dying a quarter of a year
after, it fell to the Dr. as surviver; which was taken notice of then as a
Providence of being by it put in a capacity of doing good to those as had
suffered in the like cause with himself, and was desired by such to accept of
it for that end, and now there was so little trust put in him, that when any
thing of value fell, Cromwell took it to himself.

I. In special the estate of William Tombs found a Fellon of himself (which was
the greatest that fell in his time) the whole was by a special order from
Cromwell taken from him, and put into the hands of Major Worseley, who took it
up accordingly, and what little of it came to his hands, an account of it was
made to him;

He is the worse by a 100 p. by the losses and charges he has been at, about
that one business, which are not yet satisfied; and is now disturbed upon that
surmise of receiving, in several suites to his great molestation.

II. There has been a business which has occasioned much discourse to his
great injury concerning one Mr. Barkley who was found a Felon of himself, and
so clearly by several depositions, that the like can scarce be paralel'd: yet
an other inquisition was ordered without any insufficiency found in the first,
and in that manner which has no president that his Council knows of.

The whole narration of the proceedings in it, are too long to be here
inserted, the Dr. has, and does still suffer much injury by the adverse
parties free discourse of him in it, some of whom he very much honors which
increases his grief, only this will be his justification with those that are
strangers to him and the Case; that he has and does offer it to any just,
prudent, uninteressed persons whatsoever, and will bind himself to stand to his
or their Arbitrament: the denial of which argues some diffidence they have of
theirs, and he is assured by his Council, the first inquisition stands yet firm
in Law, and so his Majesty's Title to the estate: which he only defends, and
lays it down at his Majesty's feet.

A brief Relation of that Bloody Storm at Drogheda, in Ireland, and the Doctors
Sufferings by Oliver Cromwell in it, and after it, with his Preservation.
THe 3d of September 1649, was the first day Oliver Cromwell came before it, in
making any attempt to that end; he had a 11 thousand Horse and Foot, completely
provided, the Town had 3500. two days he battered, upon the second day about
five of the clock in the afternoon, he assaulted it, but received a repulse;
yet returning again took it: the word was given throughout his Army, no
quarter; the Mill mount where the Governor Sir Arthur Aston was with about 300
men, was yielded upon promise of quarter, but as soon as it was possessed by
them, all were put to the Sword^ when the Town was fully taken, the Doctors
House was one of the first the Soldiers fell upon, but by the strength of it
could not enter; The Mayor of the Town, and diverse other of the Principal men
that were Protestants to the number of about 30 came into it for refuge.

There came 5 or 6 who were sent from a principal Officer, (the Doctors former
acquaintance) under a pretense of a guard for his house, but had a Command from
him, as soon as they were entered to kill him, (which an earwitnesse has since
assured him of;) the Dr. denying to open the door to them, one of them
discharged a Musket Bullet at him: it passed through the door, and only fired
the skin of one of his fingers leaving a spot upon it, which burned 4 or 5
days after, and did him no more hurt.

Then a Cornet of a Troop of horse, came to his releife, and pretending he had
order from the General to take care of that house, the Soldiers withdrew, and
so at a Backdoor he brought in his Quartermaster, whom he left to secure him.
About a quarter of an hour after, another Troop of Horse came to the window and
demanded the opening of the door. The Quartermaster and himself with an old
servant left with him, (for he had sent his Wife and Children out of Town)
stood close together, and told them it was the Ministers House, and all therein
were Protestants, as soon as they heard the D. named, and his voice, one of
them discharged his Pistol at him, wherein being a brace of Bullets with the
one the Quartermaster was shot quite through the Body, and dyed in the place,
and the other shot his servant through the throat, but recovered; the Dr. was
only untouched. After this he made a stand at another place, and seeing the
Soldiers, breaking in at a low window, he went up to his Study, where his said
friends were making great Lamentation, expecting present death, they all
kneeled down, and commended their souls to God. No sooner had the Dr. begun,
but in comes the Soldiers, and interrupts them, threatening them with Bullets,
but it pleased God they were so mollified that they only took all they had
about them, and fell upon the spoil of the house. In the midst of these
confusions comes one Colonel Ewres (whom the Dr. had not seen in 16 years
before, and knew not of his being there) and took up his house for his
quarters, turned the Soldiers out, and made the doors fast for himself.

Not long after came Colonel Hewson, and told the Dr. he had orders to blow up
the Steeple (which stood between the quier and the Body of the Church) where
about threescore men were run up for refuge, but the three Barrells of Powder
which he caused to be put under it for that end, blew up only the body of the
Church, and the next night Hewson caused the seats of the Church to be broken
up, and made a great pile of them under the Steeple, which firing, it took the
lofts wherein five great Bells hung, and from thence it flamed up to the top,
and so at once Men, and Bells, and Roof came all down together, the most
hideous sight and terrible cry, that ever he was witness of at once.

The next day the Colonel that had saved the Drs. life comes to him, and tells
him he was very sharply checked for it, by the General and many of the
Officers, and that he must yet expect to dye, that no Protection could be had
for him; which was confirmed unto him by others also, whereupon diverse that
came to see him took their leaves as never to see him again, and the number of
the dead bodies (with which the Churchyard and Streets were filled already)
daily increasing, even in cool blood to the number of 3500 gave him little
hope of the contrary: that which at present repreived him, was Col. Ewres
sending two of his Officers which were wounded to lie there.

Then was the Proclaiming of his Majesty, inciting and encouraging of the Army,
and what else might savor ill with the Soldiers, mustered up against him.

The next day Oliver Cromwell, with many of his Officers, came to the Doctors
house, began with aspersing his Ordination as Popish, then the late Arch Bishop
of Armagh, from whom he had received it, then his Majesty's Title, and the
Doctors Praying for him came into discourse: the disputes of which with diverse
other Subjects, which lasted about three quarters of an hour, would be
impertinent to be related here, but when he found the Dr. to be of that
judgment he had heard, he left him without any assurance of life, only gave
order to the Governor to have him sent up to Dublyn as a Prisoner. When he
came there, it so fell out, that he met Cromwell himself, with his officers in
the streets, where, after great Menaces that he would make him an Example, and
expressly threatening him with pronouncing the sentence of death upon him,
committed him to prison: as he was carried away, beside the votes of all the
officers against him, Hugh Peeters fell most upon him, who (as was affirmed
then) had blamed Cromwell for saving of his life so long.

Seaventeen days he was close prisoner, and afterward upon Bonds confined six
months within the City, and after that sent for up to the Army at Clonmel,
permitted to come then with Cromwell into England, where to himself he never
varied in any discourse in the said Subjects, from what he had said to him at
the first sight of him.

Thus far his sufferings in that storm, and his Deliverance.

Some Articles Objected against the Doctor, while he was a Prisoner in Dublyn.
I THat he had refused to obey Col. Michael Jones his order, for the forbearing
the use of Common Prayer, in his Church at Drogheda. II. That he had Preached a
Thanksgiving Sermon, for the taking of the Town of Drogheda, by the Lord of
Inchiquin, under the Command of the Lord Marquess of Ormond. III. That he
saluted one Col. Trenchard, with great joy the Town was taken, accordingly for
the King. IV. That he moved the Mayor of the Town to come in his Scarlet to the
proclaming of the King, and that he attended at it himself, and went
immediately to the Church, and observed the Book of Common Prayer, and in
special those prayers for him. V. His Praying for the Lord Marquess of Ormond,
as Lord Leiutenant of Ireland, then beseiging of Dublyn. VI. His praying for a
Confusion upon Oliver Cromwells Army while he was beseiging Drogheda. VII. His
withdrawing of some Commanders and Soldiers, from the service of the
Parliament, and in special the speeches of one of their Captains upon his death
bed produced, in complaining of the Doctor to that purpose. VIII. That he was
with he Lord Marquess of Ormond at his Camp before Dublyn. IX. That he refused
to go with the Parliament Army, out of the Town of Drogheda, but staid with
the Lord of Inchiquin and his party in it, attended the Lord Marquess of
Ormond, when he came back to it, the keeping of a Fast, and Preaching before
him, and praying accordingly for a good success upon his designs. X. That he
had employed his parts, (to use the very words as it was written to him)
against the Saints, and that Interest which the Lord Jesus is now bringing
forth into the world.
And thus he has been compelled against his own disposition to reckon up those
things which else he had not so much as mentioned, he having in all this done
and suffered but that which was his duty to do.

FINIS.

