A Second TESTIMONY CONCERNING Oaths and Swearing; IN Answer to a Book
entitled, The Case of the Quakers relating to Oaths stated by J. S. OR An
Appendix to a Book written in the Year 1668. in Answer to Allan Smallwood (D.
D. as he styles himself.) Wherein is fully cleared the Command of Christ, and
Practice of the Apostles concerning Swearing, from the Corrupt Glosses, Limited
Sense and Meaning of J. S.

By Gervase Benson.

Again, ye have heard that it has been said of old Time, then shall not
forswear thy self, but shall perform thine Oaths to the Lord; But I say unto
you, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is the Throne of God, neither
by the Earth, etc. but let your Yea be Yea, and Nay Nay; for whatsoever is more
then these comes of Evil,

Mat. 5. 33, 34, 35. But above all Things, my Brethren, Swear not, neither by
Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath; but let your Yea be
Yea, and your Nay Nay, lest you fall into Condemnation.

Jam. 5. 12. Printed in the Year 1675.

A Second TESTIMONY CONCERNING Oaths and Swearing, etc.
READER,
I Having in the Year 1668. given forth a true Testimony concerning Oaths and
Swearing, and therein cleared the Command of Christ, Mat. 5. 34. etc. Swear not
at all, etc. And the Apostle James. Jam. 5. 12. Above all Things my Brethren
swear not, etc. from the corrupt Glosses, limited Sense and Meanings of Allan
Smallwood, etc. as in and by the said Testimony, printed in the Year aforesaid,
does and may appear, unto which I neither received Answer nor Reply; but now of
late, viz. in this present Year 1674. there came to my Hands a Book, entitled,
The Case of the Quakers, relating to Oaths stated, by one J. S. as its said,
wherein he first has asserted, Sect. 1. That Christians of the highest Rank
and greatest Proficiency, may lawfully in some Cases confirm the Truth with an
Oath, and that they so may do, he pretends to prove from the Practice and
Example of the Apostle Paul, who both knew the Mind of Christ, and served God
in the Spirit in the Gospel of his Son, and yet as J. S. pretends, did
frequently confirm what he asserted in such like Forms of sacred Oaths as
these, viz. God is my Witness, Romans 1. 9. I say the Truth in Christ, I lie not,
my Conscience bearing me Witness in the Holy Ghost, Romans 9. 1. I call God for a
Record upon my Soul, 2 Cor. 1. 23. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ
knows that I lie not, 2 Cor. 11. 37. together with Gal. 1. 20. Phil. 1. 8. 1
These. 2. 10. Ye are Witnesses and God also; and that these Forms of Speech are
sacred Oaths, is manifest; aith J. S. from Genesis 31. 50, 53. where Jacob and
Laban are said to swear in these Form of Words. So God is Witness between thee
and me, etc. To which for Answer I say, That these Forms of Speech used by the
Apostle, and by Jacob and Laban, viz. So God is Witness between thee and me;
God is my Witness, etc. are of themselves (without the Addition of somewhat
more, as an outward Sign or Pledge) neither Oath or Swearing, which Addition of
somewhat more, as an outward Sign or Pledge, was that which then gave the
Denomination of an Oath or Swearing unto the Forms of Speech formerly used in
Witness-bearing, before any Oath or Swearing was; for it is evident from the
Practice of the holy Men of God, as it is recorded in the Scriptures of Truth,
that there was and is a Diversity or Difference (worthy of Observation for the
better clearing of my Affirmation in this Particular) between an Oath or
Swearing and witness-bearing; and that the holy Men of God did put a Difference
betwixt Swearing and Witness-bearing, is evident from the Scriptures, which
will the more clearly appear, if it be observed, that Witness-bearing was, and
the Name of God was used in Witness-bearing before any Oath or Swearing was;
for before the Fall there was neither Oath or Swearing, and yet Eve before the
Fall did in Witness-Bearing use the Name of God, when she in Answer to the
Serpents Question, said, Yea, God has said, ye shall not eat, etc. Genesis 3. 3.
And Sarah after the Fall, and before any sacred Oath or Swearing was, used the
like Form of Speech as Laban did in the Place beforementioned, when she said
to Abraham, The Lord judge between thee and me, Genesis 16. 5. from which
Scriptures it is evident, that Witness-bearing was before any Oath or Swearing;
and also, that the Name of God was used in Witness-bearing before any Swearing
was; so that which was before any sacred Oath or Swearing was of it self, is
neither Oath or Swearing, without the Addition of somewhat more as aforesaid.
And it is further evident by the Scriptures Testimony, that the holy Men of God
in Causes where no Oath or Swearing was required by the Law, did in
VVitness-bearing call God to witness, and used Attestations of the Name of God,
when they did not swear at all; as for Instances, Moses called Heaven and Earth
to Record, Deuteronomy. 24. 26. Deuteronomy. 30. 19. Job said, My Witness is in Heaven and my
Record is on high, Job 16. 19. And the People of Israel speaking to Jeremy,
said, The Lord be Witness of Truth and Faith betwixt us, Jer. 42. 5. The
Prophet Micha also said, Hear all ye People, hearken thou Earth and all that
therein is, and let the Lord God be Witness against you, Mich. 1. 2. And the
Prophet Malachy told the Priests and People of Jerusalem and Judah, That the
Lord God had been a Witness between them and the Wife of their Youth, Mal. 2.
14. From all which Testimonies it is evident, that the Servants of the Lord
upon urgent Occasions, where no Oath was required by the Law, did in
VVitness-bearing call God to VVitness, and used Attestations of the Name of God
in their VVitness-bearing, when they did not swear at all; and for the further
manifesting of that Part of my Affirmation, viz. That the Forms of Speech used
by Jacob and Laban, and by the Apostle and others, beforementioned, of
themselves, without adding of somewhat more, as an outward Sign or Pledge, are
neither Oaths or Swearing. It is worthy of Observation, that where mention is
made of an Oath or Swearing in the Scriptures of Truth, there is also mention
made of some outward Sign or Pledge, which was added to the Forms of Speech by
them used, which somewhat more being added, was that which gave the
Denomination of an Oath or Swearing to the Forms of Speech, without which
Addition of somewhat more then Yea and Nay, as a Sign or Pledge, the Forms of
Speech of themselves was neither Legal Oath or Swearing; as for Example, Genesis
31. 44. to ver. 54. It is said, Come let us make a Covenant, I and thou, which
may be a Witness between thee and me; then took Jacob a Stone, and set it up as
a Pillar; and Jacob said to his Brethren, gather Stones, and they brought
Stones, and made a Heap; and Laban said, this Heap is Witness between me and
thee, there is no Man with us, behold God is Witness between me and thee:
Moreover, Laban said to Jacob, Behold this Heap, and behold the Pillar, the
Heap shall be Witness, and the Pillar shall be Witness, and the God of Abraham,
etc. be Judge between us; but Jacob swear by the Fear of his Father Isaac. The
like Example we find, Genesis 21. 27. to 31. Genesis 24. 2, 3. where Abraham caused
his Servant to put his Hand under his Thigh, and to swear, etc. The like we
read, Genesis 47. 29, 31. where Israel called his Son Joseph to put his Hand under
his Thigh, and said, Swear unto me, and he swear unto him, etc. From all which
Examples it is evident, That there was an Addition (of somewhat more as an
outward Sign or Pledge) to the Forms of Speech by the Men of God used, which
was that that gave to the Form of Words the Denomination of an Oath or
Swearing, without which Addition of somewhat more, as an outward Sign or
Pledge; the Words, God is Witness, etc. of themselves neither were nor are
either Legal Oath or Swearing, or so intended, or accepted by the holy Men of
God, mentioned in the Scriptures of Truth; Conform hereunto is the daily
Practice observed in the Courts of Judicature in this and other Nations, when
and where any Oath or Swearing is required in VVitness-bearing; so that the
laying aside of an Oath or Swearing in VVitness-bearing, is not the destroying
of VVitness-bearing, but the reducing it unto its Original Purity and
Simplicity, as it was in the Beginning, before any Oath or Swearing was: And
now by what is before-said it is evident, that the Forms of Speech used by
Laban and Jacob in their Day, and the Forms of Speech used by the Apostle Paul
in his Day, and now used by the People of God called Quakers in their
Witness-bearing, in and of themselves, neither were nor are any Legal Oath or
Swearing, without the Addition of somewhat more, as an outward Sign or Pledge,
which Addition being more then Yea and Nay, is therefore in Obedience to the
Command of Christ denied, the Original Ground or Cause thereof in Man being
Evil; and therefore Christians in Christ Jesus, and in the Faith of him, may
not do Evil, knowing that no Good can come to any by doing Evil. And for
further Answer I say, That it is evident from the Scriptures Testimony, that
the Apostle Paul, as he was made an able Minister of the New Testament, not of
the Letter, but of the Spirit; so also he was a Witness of those Things which
he had received of Christ, and of the Things which he had seen, Acts 26. 16.
and having learned of the Spirit of God to put a Difference between Names and
Things that differ, and so between an Oath or Swearing, that was temporary, and
might be shaken, and true Witness-bearing, which was Eternal, and therefore was
and is to abide in the House of God forever: And therefore in his Testimony for
God, and of the Truth of what he writ and declared to the Churches of Christ,
in his Witness-bearing did (as the People of God had in all Ages done before)
upon Occasion of great Concern, call God to Witness, or appeal to the Witness
of God in Men, concerning the Truth of what he writ unto them, or declared
among them; and so by Manifestation of the Truth, he commended himself to every
Man's Conscience in the Sight of God, 2 Cor. 4. 2. without observing any set
Form of Words, or adding of any outward Sign or Pledge, whereby it might be
distinguished from Witness bearing, and known to be an Oath; for how could the
Apostle, who was dead to the Law, by which an Oath or Swearing in some Cases
was required, live in the frequent Practice of Swearing, contrary to the
Command of Christ in the Gospel, Swear not at all, etc. and yet have the
Testimony of the Spirit of God, that he served God in the Spirit, in the Gospel
of his Son, and not in the Oldness of the Letter? Romans 7. 2. 2 Cor. 1. 23. For
if he had frequently confirmed his Sayings with an Oath, he had been a common
Swearer, which would rather have weakened then confirmed his Testimony amongst
the Saints of God, because the Saints of God do give little more Credit to a
common Swearer then to a Liar: Moreover if the Apostle had frequently sworn,
then had he not walked according to the Rule of the Gospel, but according to
the Law in the Letter, because it is evident, that there is no Command of
Christ in the Gospel for any Man in any Case to swear, or to confirm their
Sayings with an Oath; but on the contrray, an express Command of Christ, I say
unto you, Swear not at all: Now these Things being so, as before is said, I may
conclude, That there being no Example, Command or Precept in the Gospel of
Christ, for any of the Disciples of Christ Jesus to confirm the Truth of their
Sayings with an Oath, that therefore no Christian in Christ Jesus is obliged
to swear at all, and that therefore J. S. is blameworthy in asserting, that
the Apostle Paul did frequently confirm what he asserted with an Oath; and that
the Quakers do actually swear, even then when they say, they cannot swear. And
now I proceed to his second Argument, where he says,

Arg. 2. That without the Interposition of an Oath, it is impossible in many
Cases, that Justice can be administered according to the Rule of the Gospel; and
he instances in one Case for all, Exodus 22. 20, 21. If a Man deliver to his
Neighbor an Ox, or Ass, or Sheep to keep, and it dye, or be hurt, or driven
away, no Man seeing it; then shall an Oath of the Lord be between them both,
that he has not put his Hand to his Neighbors Goods, and the Owner of it
shall accept thereof, and he shall not make it good; it is the Righteous God's
Will, that Justice be administered in this and the like Cases; but in such Cases
(says J. S.) it cannot be determined according to the Evangelical Rule, who
shall bear the Loss, without the Interposition of an Oath; for if the Man's
bare Word be taken for the Proof of his Innocence, the Controversy will be
decided by one only Witness, directly against Christ's Precepts, Mat. 18. 16.
That in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every Word may be established;
therefore (says J. S.) the guiltless Party in such Cases must in Vindication
of his Innocence take in God to witness with him, that so the Matter may be
decided by two Witnesses at least, etc.

For Answer to all which I first do say, That J. S. in asserting, that without
the Interposition of an Oath, it is impossible in such Cases, that Justice can
be administered according to the Rule of the Gospel, has not only endeavored
to pervert the Rule of the Gospel, but also to confound an Oath and
Witness-bearing, intimating by his Assertion, as if no true Witness ever was or
could be born without the Interposition of an Oath; the contrary whereof is
evident from Christ's Precept in the Place by J. S. mentioned, where Christ
says, That by the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every Word is to be
established, without any mention of an Oath or Swearing; which Precept of
Christ is consonant to that Precept of his, Mat. 5. 34. etc. Swear not at all,
etc. And that Witness bearing was before any Oath was, is evident from what is
before said in Answer to his first Argument, and was also used by the holy Men
of God in all Ages, without the Interposition of an Oath, save only in such
Cases where an Oath was required by the Law or first Covenant.

Secondly, I for further Answer say, That as in an Oath under the Law, the Lord
was called to Witness with the innocent Party; so under the Gospel, in
Witness-bearing the Name of God, or God himself is called to Witness, as where
the Apostle Paul says, God is my Witness; I call God for a Record upon my
Soul, etc. By which Appeals unto God in Witness-bearing (without an Oath) the
Power and Omnisciency of almighty God is acknowledged, in discerning whether
Truth be spoken, and in punishing them that bear false Witness, as much as
under the Law in Cases where an Oath was required; and the Liar is excluded the
Kingdom of Heaven as well as the false Swearer: So that according to Christ's
Precept, by the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every Word and every Ca^e may
be established under the Gospel, without any obstructing of Justice, or
patronizing of Injustice; and yet in such Case the Party's bare Word is not
taken, nor his Witness, being true, single; for as the Apostle said, Romans 8. 6.
The Spirit it self (which is the greater Witness) bears Witness with Man's
Spirit; and so God is VVitness for the Innocent Party, and with him, and has a
Witness for him in Men's Consciences; and therefore Swearing or the
Interposition of an ^ath in such Cases, is so far from being a necessary Duty
under the Gospel, as it amounts to be a Transgression of the Law of Christ to
all ^is Disciples, Mat. 5. 34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all, etc. And
now I proceed to his third Argument, wherein he asserts,

Arg. 3. That the Spirit of Christ in the Old Testament in the Prophets, did
commend Swearing by God, as that which was to be the Practice of his Elect
Servants in the Christian Church, after his Rejection of the Jews, and choosing
the Gentiles, etc. and for the Proof of his Assumption he quotes Isa 65. 15.
And ye shall leave your Name for a Curse to my Chosen that is (says J. S.) the
People that God shall choose from among the Gentiles, shall use your Name (the
Name of a Jew) in Execration, when they have a Mind to denounce a Curse, etc.
parallel (says J. S.) to that of Jer. 29. 22. Of them shall be taken up a Curse
by all the Captivity of Judah; etc. saying, the Lord make thee like Ahab and
Zedekiah (two false Prophets) he that blesses himself in the Earth, shall
bless himself in the God of Truth, and he that swears in the Earth, shall
swear by the God of Truth, etc.

Answer, First, I do deny his Assumption, that the Spirit of the Lord did so
commend Swearing as a Practice to continue in the Christian Church amongst
Christ's Disciples, Jews or Gentiles. Secondly, I say, that the Scriptures by
J. S. quoted do no more prove Swearing then Cursing, to be lawful under the
Gospel, which for J. S. or any other to affirm, is to preach another Doctrine
then Christ and his Apostles preached, as is evident from Mat. 5. 42, 43. where
Christ said, That it has been said, thou shall love thy Neighbor, and hate
thine Enemy; but I say unto you, love your Enemies, bless them that curse you.
And the Apostle Paul, Romans 12. 14. says, Bless them that persecute you, bless
and curse not. Luke 6. 28. Bless them that curse you, and pray for them that
despightfully use you. And Christ says, Mat. 5. 34. etc. But I say unto you,
Swear not at all. And the Apostle, Jam. 5. 12. says; Above all Things my
Brethren swear not, etc. So that J. S. having transgressed the Doctrine of
Christ, and brought another Doctrine, is not to be received, neither bid God
speed, according to 2 John 9. 10. And J. S. his Error and false Conclusion is
further apparent, in that he restrains that to the Nature of the Worship of
God, which is spiritual and Eternal, unto the Act or Performance, which at the
Time of giving forth of that Prophecy, was (with Respect to those external
shadowy Things) by Nature temporary and changeable; for many of the Prophecies
were given forth by figurative and dark Shadows of Christ, who was and is the
Substance; and therefore by Blessing and Swearing under the Law, was meant (as
they had Reference to the Gospel Times) the praising God, confessing to him,
and worshipping him in Spirit and in Truth, according to the Gospel of his Son,
viz. in Newness of the Spirit, and not in the Oldness of the Letter. And as to
that Scripture, Jer. 29. 22. it is evident from the Text it self, that it was
the People of the Captivity of Judah (and not the Gentile-Converts) that were
Captives in Babel, that were to take up that Curse, after their Return, against
Ahab and Zedekiah, which had prophesied Lies unto them in the Name of the Lord;
therefore let J. S. beware: So that from these two Texts of Scripture there is
no Ground for any of the Disciples of Christ to swear by the God of Truth,
contrary to the Command of Christ, who is their only Lawgiver in Matters of
Faith and Worship; for in Christ, the great Prophet, all Signs Prophecies and
Miracles were to meet, and be by him dispensed according to the Will of God.
And now I proceed to J. S' s fourth Argument, which is as he says,

Arg. 4. That that which the Spirit of Christ, that was in the Prophets,
foretold should be done in the Time of the Gospel by the Lord's People, as an
Evidence of their Conversion to the Lord, may lawfully be done by Christians:
But the Spirit of Christ (says J. S.) which was in the Prophets foretold, that
in the Times of the Gospel the Lord's People should swear by his Name, as an
Evidence of their Conversion to the Lord; therefore (says J. S.) a Christian
may lawfully swear by the Lord's Name.

To which for Answer I say, That J. S. in affirming that the Spirit of Christ
in the Prophets foretold, that in the Times of the Gospel the Lord's People
should swear by his Name, as an Evidence of their Conversion to the Lord, has
in so affirming opposed the Doctrine of the Apostles and Ministers of Christ,
and in so doing has manifested himself to be no Minister of the Spirit of
Christ, nor of the Gospel; for its evident, that the Apostles and Ministers of
Christ, who were able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of
the Spirit, did testify, That whosoever should call on the Name of the Lord,
should be saved, Acts 2. 10. and the End of their Care and Pains in preaching
and writing was, That People (whether Jews or Gentiles) should believe that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that in believing (and not by
swearing) they might have Life through his Name, John 20. 31. And the Apostle
Paul testified, That he that confesses with his Mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shall believe in his Heart that God raised him from the Dead, shall be saved;
for with the Heart Man believes unto Righteousness, and with the Tongue
confesses unto Salvation, Romans 10. 9, 10, 11, 12. And when the Eunuch asked
Philip, what hindered him to be baptized; Philip said unto him, If thou
believe with all thy Heart, thou may; and the Eunuch answered and said
(but did not swear) I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God; and
thereupon Philip did baptize him, Acts 8. 36, 37, 38. And when the Keeper of
the Prison said unto Paul and Sylas, Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? they
said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved and thy House,
Acts 16. 30, 31. So that the Eunuch and the Keeper of the Prison confessing
their Belief in Christ the Son of God, was all the outward Evidence that the
Apostles required of their Conversion unto God. And Peter said, Acts 10. 43.
That unto Christ all the Prophets did bear witness, that through his Name all
that believe (mark, it is not said, all that swear) shall receive Remission of
Sins. And those that were pricked in their Hearts when they heard Peter's
Sermon, said unto Peter and the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what
shall we do? to whom Peter answering said, Repent, and be baptized every one of
you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of Sins, and ye shall
receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost, Acts. 2. 37. and Acts 13. 38, 39. It is
said, That the Apostle preached through the Name of Christ the Forgiveness of
Sins, and that by him all that believe are justified from all Things, from
which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses. So that although by the
Law of Moses those who were under it (and in Cases where an Oath was by the Law
required) could not be freed from an Oath; yet by the Law of Christ, and the
Power of the Endless Life, Heb. 7. 6. all the Disciples of Christ are freed and
justified by Christ from all Oaths and Swearing under the Gospel: And by
confessing Christ to be the Son of God, and believing in him, we receive
Christ, and by receiving of him, he dwells in us, and we in him, in whom God
is well pleased to accept of us, and in whom, after that we believe, we are
sealed with the Spirit of Promise, which is the Evidence and Earnest of our
Inheritance, according to Ephesians. 1. 6, 13, 14. without any Oath or Swearing: So
that we have a Cloud of Witness; that the Apostles and Ministers of Christ did
not require of any Converts, Jew or Gentile, any Oath or swearing, as an
Evidence of their Conversion unto God; but that they should confess that Jesus
Christ was the Son of God, and repent and believe the Gospel, and thereupon
(without any Oath or swearing) they were baptized, and received the Promise of
God, which is the Holy Ghost: Now these Things being so, I do therefore deny J.
S. his Assumption and Conclusion.

But J. S. further says, That the Lord swear by himself, etc. that unto him
every Knee shall bow, and every Tongue shall swear, Isa. 45. 23. and also
says, that this Prophecy is to receive its Accomplishment in Gospel Tim^s, and
that swearing to the Lord is here prophesied of, as that Divine Service and
Homage, by the performing whereof Gentile- Converts were to declare their
owning of, and Conversion to the true God, etc. And for further Proof (as he
says) he quotes Isa. 19. 18. etc. In that Day shall five Cities of the Land of
Egypt speak the Language of Canaan, and swear to the Lord of Hosts; there shall
be an Altar to the Lord in the midst of the Land of Egypt, and a Pillar to the
Lord at the Borders thereof, and it shall be for a Sign and for a Witness unto
the Lord of Hosts in the Land of Egypt; for they shall cry unto the Lord, and
he shall send them a Savior; and the Lord shall be known unto Egypt, and the
Egyptians shall know the Lord in that Day, and shall do Sacr^fice and Oblation;
yea, they shall vow a Vow unto the Lord, and perform it, and he shall be
entreated of them, and shall heal them, etc.

For Answer to all which I say, That the carnal Man, as the carnal Jew, looks
for the fulfilling of the Letter, but the spiritual Man looks for the Spirit;
for the Christians Laws and Privileges under the Gospel are all spiritual, and
so are their Ordinances; now J. S. being carnally-minded, cannot discern the
Things of the Spirit, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. But
instead of distinguishing aright between the Ordinances under the Law and the
Ordinances under the Gospel, between an Oath and VVitness-bearing, has
confounded them together; and though he read Moses and the Prophets, yet it is
evident by his Assirmations aforesaid, that he knows not the Voice of God
that spoke in the Prophets, no more then those mentioned Acts 13. 27. and being
unlearned in the School of Christ, has rendered the Prophets Words literally,
which the Apostle Paul, who was a Minister of the Spirit, renders spiritually,
as is evident from Romans 14. 9, 10. As I live, says the Lord, every Knee shall
bow to me, and every Tongue shall confess to God, And Phil. 2 10, 11. it is
said, That at the Name of Jesus every Knee shall bow, both of Things in Heaven,
and Things in Earth, and Things under the Earth, and that every Tongue shall
confess (mark, it is not said swear) that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the
Glory of God the Father. From which scriptures it is evident, that as that
Promise or Prophecy, Isa, 45. 23. had Relation to Gospel. Times, so it had
Relation to Gospel. Worship, which is in Newness of Spirit, by confessing to
God and Christ, and by believing in Christ, and not by swearing, according to
the Oldness of the Letter, which does further appear from Christ's own Words,
Mat. 10. 32. But I say unto you, whosoever shall confess me before Men, him
will I confess before my Heavenly Father; so also Romans 10. 9, 10. So that it is
evident, that Confession under the Gospel is answerable to Swearing under the
Law; for by confessing to God, and appealing to him in Witness. bearing, his
Power and Omniscience is as much acknowledged, in discerning whether Truth be
spoken in Witness-bearing under the Gospel, as it was under the Law by wearing,
for though the Form which was shadowy changed, yet the Worship it self, which
was the Substance, remains; and therefore if Times and Dispensations be
rightly discerned, the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament do agree. And as
for that Text of Scripture quoted by J. S. out of Isa. 19. 18. In that Day
shall five Cities in the Land of Egypt speak the Language of Canaan, and swear,
etc. Answer, This Scripture has not Reference to all the People of the
Gentiles, as is evident from the Words themselves, which only speaks of five
Cities in Egypt, whereas the Gentiles inhabited many Nations; neither does it
altogether relate to Gospel Times, when the whole People, called the Gentiles
were to be received as the People of God, but is rather a Prophecy of the
joining of the People that inhabited those Cities in Egypt unto the Jews, and
owning of their Worship, by speaking their Language, by swearing to the Lord of
Hosts, and bringing their Sacrifices to the Altar of the Lord, after the Manner
of the Jews, who before were Strangers to the Worship of the true God, and
that by so doing, it should be a Sign and a VVitness unto the Lord of Hosts of
their Conversion unto him; for these Prophecies had a double Intendment and
Accomplishment, viz. One in the material Temple, under the first Covenant,
another in the spiritual Temple, the Church under the Gospel or New Covenant;
for it is evident, that before the Coming of the Messiah, there was an
Association of some of the Gentiles unto the Church of the Jews; for after the
rebuilding of the Temple, and before the Death of Christ, there was a Number of
Proselites out of diverse Nations, both for that by Reason of the many
Dispersions of the Jews in the Captivity, and their Commerce with other
Nations, their Customs and Religion were more commonly known, and because these
times were to be as a Preparative to the general Calling of the Gentiles: It is
also evident, that upon the good Escape of the Jews in Babylon, many turned to
their Religion; and the Scriptures show to us several Examples, Esther 8. 17.
Acts 2. 10. Mat. 23. 15. yea, the Pharisees took Pride in converting others to
Judaism; so that these Prophecies did not only imply a general Conversion of
the Gentiles simply, so as to exclude the Particular in the mean Time.
Therefore as the Prophesies aforesaid had a double Meaning, so also they had a
double Accomplishment, the one in the material Temple under the Law, during
which Dispensation, he that blessed himself in the Earth, should bless himself
in the God of Truth; and he that did swear in the Earth, should swear by the
God of Truth; under which Dispensation there was also an Altar, Sacrifices and
Oblations, etc. The other in the spiritual Temple, the Church under the Gospel,
under which the true Worshippers do worship the Father in Spirit and Truth,
John 4. 22. By praising God in the Spirit, and confessing unto his Name,
believing in Christ Jesus, and witnessing the Truth according to Christ's
Command, let your Yea be Yea, and Nay Nay; for when these Prophecies were given
sorth, the Gospel Worship was not then fully revealed; see 1 Pet. 11, 12. And
therefore as the Prophecies had Relation to the Time before Christ's
Sufferings, they had then Relation to the Worship which was then required and
practiced under the Law; but when the Law was changed, there was then also a
Change of those External Rites and Shadowy Things, viz. Cursing, Swearing,
Altars, Sacrifices, Oblations, etc. which were not of the Essence and Substance
of the true Worship of God, although the true Worship of God changed not; and
it is evident Dan. 9. 26. 27, 28 where it is said, That the Messiah shall
confirm the Covenant with many for one Week, and in the midst of the Week he
shall cause the Sacrifices and the Oblations to cease; for in Christ all Signs
had their Accomplishment; for the Apostle says, Signs are not for them that
believe, but for them that believe not, 1 Cor. ^4. 22. So that J. S. from these
Prophecies might as well conclude, that Christians in Gospel Times ought to
have Altars, offer Sacrifices and Oblations, as the Jews had and did under the
Law, as that Christians may lawfully swear; but Christians in Christ Jesus do
believe and know, that those Sacrifices in which there is a Remembrance again
of Sins, the Lord under the New Testament has not required, and that in
Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices for Sia the Lord has no Pleasure; for all those
ca^nal Ordinances were imposed (as says the Apostle) only until the Time of
Reformation; see Heb. 9. 10. Heb. 10. 3, 4, etc. So that we having a positive
Command from Jesus Christ, viz. swear not at all, etc, Mat. ^. 34. and that
from the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every Word is to be established; and
there being no Command from Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the New Testament,
who is the Christians only Law giver, Lawmakers and Prince, in Matters of Faith
and Worship, we are not bound as Christians to the Observation of any Command
that comes either from Moses or any other, that is not our Lawmakers and
Master; and it is observable, that one of the most solemn Laws contained in the
two Tables, viz. that which ordained the seventh Day to be kept Holy Day, unto
which is adjoined an unchangeable Reason, namely, because God rested that Day,
when he had made the visible World; yet this Law is annulled and abrogated
amongst all Christians, even from the Beginning of Christianity, for Want of
Ratification of it from our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, who is our Lawmakers
and Prince: And therefore Christians in Christ Jesus, and in the Faith of him,
having no Command or Example from Christ to swear in any case, I do conclude,
that Swearing in the Time of the Gospel is no Evidence of the Conversion of
(...) People unto God, neither is Swearing by the Lord of Hosts that pure
Language and undefiled Religion, which was at the first revealed unto Adam in
Paradise; for it is evident, that Swearing has defiled many, but pure Religion
and true Witness-bearing never did defile any: But how should a better Account
of divine Mysteries be expected from J. S. that knows so little of them, as his
Writings do plainly show: And now I proceed to his 5th and last Argument in the
first Section of his said Book.

Arg. 5. That the holiest Christian may lawfully and laudably do that, which by
the Spirit of Christ, that spoke in the Prophets, has made the doing thereof
in Gospel Times the Condition of God's accepting them for his People: But the
Spirit of Christ (says J. S.) in the Prophets has made Men's learning to swear
by his Name such a Condition, as upon the fulfilling thereof, he will number
Men among his Disciples, account them his People that do, and root out and
utterly destroy them that do not learn to swear by his Name; Therefore (says
J. S.) the holiest Christian may lawfully swear by God's Name: And for Proof of
his said Assertion he quotes Jer. 12. 16. And it shall come to pass, that if
they will diligently learn the Ways of my People, to swear by my Name, the
Lord lives, as they taught my People to swear by Baal, then shall they be
built in the midst of my People; but if they will not obey, I will utterly
pluck up and destroy that Nation, says the Lord: And J. S. further says, That
this Prophecy relates to the Time of the Gospel, for it is directed to the
Gentiles.

To which for Answer I say, That the Lord under the first Testament, when the
Church multiplied unto a Nation, and by continuance among the Idolatrous
Egyptians, grew corrupt in Religion and Manners, the Lord instituted diverse and
sundry carnal Rites and Ceremonies, which were Shadows of good Things then to
come, to continue until the Time of Reformation, Heb. 9. 1. to ver. 1^. And
amongst others an Oath or Swearing was added to Witness-bearing, which they had
transgressed, as it is written, The Law was added because of Transgression,
until the Seed came, Gal. 3. 19. And therefore during the first Testament, in
which Time this Prophecy was given forth, the Worship of God being then
accompanied with those carnal Rites, was by those carnal Rites often called,
not that Swearing or any other carnal Rite of themselves were the Worship of
God, but as they were joined and accompanied with that which was the Worship of
God, or to that in and by which God was purely worshipped, before those carnal
Rites were added for a Time only; for it is evident, that before the Fall the
Lord was purely worshipped without the Use of any carnal Rite or Figure; and
therefore although Swearing be only mentioned in that Prophecy, yet it was but
so mentioned or put for an Example, and not so to be understood, as that
Swearing, being of it self but a carnal Rite or Command, did include or exclude
all other Acts of the Worship of God, or that by Swearing only, without the
observing the essential Part or Acts of God's Worship, the Lord would account
the Gentile-Converts for his People, and number them amongst his Disciples;
which Thing being rightly considered, will make Way for the better
Understanding of those Prophecies before mentioned; and the Time being
considered when they were given forth, and the Occasion of giving them forth,
will much conduce to the Discovery of the Mind of the Lord concerning the
fulfilling of them: Now it is evident from Jer. 12. 16. that Swearing by the
Lord was not all that was intended by the Lord for the Gentiles to obey him in,
but is only put for an Example or an Instance, as is employed in the Words going
before, viz. If they will diligently learn the Ways of my People; for the
Ways and Worship of God's People then was not Swearing only; for the Lord had
given his People Israel many other Precepts, unto all which he had required
their Obedience, as well as Swearing by his Name, which was but required in
some Cases only, and not generally in all Cases, and at all Times, as the
essential Worship of God was; so that Swearing by the Name of the Lord was not
the only Condition. as upon fu^filling thereof, the Lord would number them
amongst his People; and it does also appear by that Part of the Promise annexed
to the Performance of the Condition, viz. Then shall they be built in the midst
of my People; what People? Answer, The People of the Jews after their Return
out of Egypt and Babylon, where they (when the Prophecy was given forth) were
Captives: And it is also evident from Jer. 12. and Zach. 2. 11, 12. That this
Prophecy was given forth by Way of Consolation to the afflicted Estate of the
Jews, and that upon a threefold Consideration, viz. 1. In that the Lord
promised to bring them out of their Captivity. 2. In that he promised his
special Presence and Abode with them, Zech. 2. 10. And 3. In that many
Forreiners of other Nations round about should be won over to join with them,
Zech. 2. 11. And many Nations shall be joined unto the Lord in that Day; In
what Day? Answer, Doubtless in that Day when the Lord should return them out of
their Captivity, and that they had rebuilded the Temple, and that all Things
were established until Christ's Death; for the Text speaks not simply of the
Nations, but many Nations, not implying a general Conversion of the Gentiles;
for if it should be understood only of the general Conversion of the Gentiles
(as J. S. supposes) to the Gospel, then how could this make for the present
Comfort of the Jews, who were always stiff in the Maintenance of Moses's Rites
and Ceremonies; all which (as well as Swearing) with the Temple and State of
the Jews, were to be taken away by Christ at the general Conversion of the
Gentiles; for (as before has been said) it is evident, that before the coming
of the Messiah, there was an Association of many Gentiles unto the Church of
the Jews, as may appear in my Answer to the fourth Argument: So that this
Prophecy did not only (if at all) relate to the general Conversion of the
Gentiles in Gospel Times, so as to exclude the Particular in the mean Time; for
the Prophecy relating to the present Comfort of the Jews, must have Relation to
the material Temple, according to God's Promise, Zech 2. 10. etc. That they
should have Aid in the building of the material Temple from Strangers afar of,
partly by the Gentiles that were Converts, and joined with the Jews in their
Religion, and partly by their Brethren that resided in Babylon; for it is said,
Zech. 2. 11, 12. That many Nations shall be joined to the Lord in that Day, and
shall be the Lord's People, and that the Lord would dwell in the midst of them,
and the Lord shall inherit Judah his Portion in the Holy Land, and shall choose
Jerusalem again; which was accomplished, at the least in Part, when the
material Temple was rebuilded, and the City of Jerusalem; and if the Prophecy
had any Relation to the spiritual Temple, the Church under the Gospel, when all
both near and far off, both Jew and Gentile came together, as living Stones to
build the Temple, whereof Christ was the Foundation, and his Ordinances were
the Worship then, and so far forth the Prophecy must have Relation unto
Gospel Ordinances, and not to Swearing or any other carnal Rite, which were but
Shadows of the good Things that then were to come, which being come, the carnal
Ordinances and Rites were by God's Ordination to cease: So that notwithstanding
J. S's Affirmation aforesaid, it both was and is not only possible, but
reasonable, that this Prophecy should have Relation to the Time before Christ's
Death, in Reference to the Accomplishment thereof, as aforesaid, there being,
as it is said, 500 Years between the Return of the Jews out of Babylon after
the Captivity, and the Death of Christ; for it is written, The Lord was never
slack in performing his Promises, in no Age leaving himself without Witness:
And therefore although Swearing by the Name of God was mentioned, it being then
a carnal Ordinance or Rite, annexed to the Worship of God under the first
Testament, until the Time of Reformation, by Way of Example, not that the
whole Worship of God, under the first Testament, consisted in Swearing, but is
there put only for an Example, the rest of the Worship and Service of the Lord
under that Testament being intended, yet it does not follow, that Swearing or
any other carnal Ordinance was to be in Gospel Times only, or any Condition, by
the observing or performing of which the Gentiles were to be ingrafted into
Christ; for the Law being changed, there was also a Change of those Conditions
required by the Law; for the Law gave Life upon Condition of perfect Obedience
in all Things; the Gospel gives Life upon Condition of Repentance and believing
in Christ Jesus, who says, Swear not at all, etc. And therefore J S. his
affirming (That except Swearing be added to the Worship of God under the
Gospel, all other Ways of confessing and worshipping the true God, all other
Acts of Invocation of God, are not serious enough to put People in a Capacity
of finding Acceptance with the Lord, or accepting of them as sincere Disciples,
or ingrafting them into the Evangelical Church) which his Affirmation is so
contrary to the Doctrine of Christ and of his Apostles and Ministers, as that I
do believe, that J. S. is the first that ever adventured upon such an erroneous
assertion; for it is manifest, that neither Christ Jesus or any of his Apostles
or any Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, ever taught or preached any such
Doctrine; but on the contrary taught and preached Faith and Repentance as the
only condition under the Gospel to put people in a capacity of finding
acceptance with the Lord, and being saved, as may appear from these Scriptures
following with many others, viz. Mark 1. 14, 15. where it is said, that Jesus
came to Galilee preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, and said, the time
is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at hand, repent and believe the Gospel,
and John 8. 24. Christ said unto the Jews (who doutless were Swearers) except
that ye believe that I am he, ye shall dye in your Sins; and Joh. 3. 15, 16.
I'ts said that whosoever believes in Christ shall not perish but have Eternal
Life; for God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son that
whosoever believes in him should not perish but have Everlasting Life. And
Paul and Silas said to the Jailer (who asked them, saying, Sirs what shall I do
to be saved) believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved and all
thine house, Acts 16. 30, 31. See Romans 10. 9, to ver. 14. and Acts 13. 38, 39.
Paul said, Be it known unto you Men and Brethren, that through this Man is
preached unto you the Forgiveness of Sins, and by him all that believe are
justified from all Things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of
Moses. By which Scripture it is evident, that although the Gentiles that joined
themselves unto the Jews Religion before Christ's Death, could not be exempted
from Swearing (in such Cases where Swearing was required by the Law of Moses)
yet after Christ was come in the Flesh, and had given forth that Command, Swear
not at all, etc. not only the Gentiles, but the Jews also that believed in
Christ, were by Christ Jesus, the Mediator of the New Testament, freed from all
Swearing, and from all other carnal Rites and Commands required by the Law of
Moses they were freed after Christ's Death: Now these Scriptures being true, it
is evident, that Swearing by the Name of the Lord is no Condition under the
Gospel, upon the Performance whereof any People, either Jew or Gentile, were
admitted or retained as Members of the Church of Christ under the Gospel: And
therefore the not learning to swear by the Name of God, or refusing to swear at
all, does not all render People under the Gospel obnoxious to the Dint of God's
fearful Doom, as J. S. has presumptuously and erroneously asserted: And now
having answered the Subject Matter in Reference to Swearing contained in J. S.
his five Arguments aforesaid. I do conclude, That Oaths are no
Gospel Ordinances, and that therefore Christians in Christ Jesus, and in the
Faith of him, are not obliged in Witness-bearing now in Gospel Times, by or
from any Command or Example in the Old Testament to swear at all, and that
Christ being their only Lawmakers and great Prophet, whom to hear and obey in
all Things, God the Father has commanded all Men without Respect of Persons;
it does follow, that all Christ's Disciples ought to obey his Command, Mat. 5.
34. etc. But I say unto you, swear not at all, etc. And I do further say, that
all that hear the Voice of Christ, and have his Word abiding in them, do
witness Acceptance in him, Ephesians. 1. 6. without Oath or Swearing. And all they
that are in him that is true, they according to the Example of the holy Men of
God in all Ages, and according to the Example of the Apostle Paul (in Matters
of great Concern) in Witness-bearing do and may call God to witness, or appeal
to the Witness of God, who searches and knows all Hearts, concerning the Truth
of their Testimony, that so by the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every Word
may be established, according to Christ's Command, Mat. 18 16. which Appeal to
the Witness of God simply of it self, without the Addition of somewhat more,
neither was nor is either any Legal Oath or Swearing, which somewhat more being
added to Witness-bearing, is that which does give unto it the Denomination of
an Oath or Swearing, as may appear from the Examples beforementioned, and as
the daily Practice in the Courts of Judicature do prove: So that if a true
Difference were put by Men (as the Spirit of the Lord does put a Difference)
between Matters and Things that do differ, the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament do agree; but when and where Matters and Things that do differ (as
Swearing and Witness bearing do differ) are confounded together, as J. S. has
confounded Swearing and Witness bearing, as if no Witness-bearing could be
without an Oath or Swearing; and the old carnal Rites and Ordinances, which
were temporary, he has confounded with the Ordinances and Worship of God under
the New Testament, which are spiritual and eternal: And therefore, and for that
J. S. has asserted Doctrines and Conclusions contrary to the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles and Ministers of the New Testament, his Doctrines and
Conclusions are to be rejected by all Christ's Disciples; and the Doctrines and
Commands of Christ and his Apostles and Ministers are to be received and
obeyed. And as for the Matters contained in the second Section of his said
Book, they are fully answered in my former Testmiony concerning Oaths and
Swearing, etc. printed in the Year 1668. and also in a Book. entitled, The
Case of the Qnakers concerning Oaths defended as Evangelical, etc. printed in
this present Year 1674. And as for the Matters contained in J. S's third
Section of his Book aforesaid, they are also fully answered in the said Book,
printed 1674.

Written forth in the 7th Month, 1674. Ger. Benson.

THE END.

